 Review
Effects of Chromosomal Sex and
Hormonal Influences on Shaping Sex
Differences in Brain and Behavior:
Lessons From Cases of Disorders of Sex
Development
Matthew S. Bramble, Allen Lipson, Neerja Vashist, and Eric Vilain*
Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles,
Los Angeles, California
Sex differences in brain development and postnatal
behavior are determined largely by genetic sex and in
utero gonadal hormone secretions. In humans however,
determining the weight that each of these factors contrib-
utes remains a challenge because social influences
should also be considered. Cases of disorders of sex
development (DSD) provide unique insight into how muta-
tions in genes responsible for gonadal formation can per-
turb the subsequent developmental hormonal milieu and
elicit changes in normal human brain maturation. Specific
forms of DSDs such as complete androgen insensitivity
syndrome (CAIS), congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH),
and 5a-reductase deficiency syndrome have variable
effects between males and females, and the develop-
mental outcomes of such conditions are largely depen-
dent on sex chromosome composition. Medical and
psychological works focused on CAH, CAIS, and 5a-
reductase deficiency have helped form the foundation for
understanding the roles of genetic and hormonal factors
necessary for guiding human brain development. Here
we highlight how the three aforementioned DSDs contrib-
ute to brain and behavioral phenotypes that can uniquely
affect 46,XY and 46,XX individuals in dramatically different
fashions.
V
C 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
Key words: chromosomal sex; hormonal influences; sex
differences; disorders of sex development
Research investigating the role that hormones and
genetics play in guiding sexual differentiation and behav-
ior in rodents has been extensively reviewed elsewhere
(Arnold, 2009; Ngun et al., 2011). Strong evidence from
such studies suggests that testosterone, either directly or
indirectly, is responsible for organizing male-typical fea-
tures, including gender role behavior, sexual orientation,
and perhaps gender identity. Evidence provided from the
rodent model has laid the groundwork for our under-
standing of how in utero hormonal milieu and chromo-
somal composition influence brain development and
contribute to generating observed sex differences. Unfor-
tunately, similar research in humans in adequate depth is
lacking from a biological standpoint. Investigating sex dif-
ferences in human brain structure and cognitive develop-
ment is challenging because humans are a socially
influenced species, making it difficult to tease apart the
effects of environmental influences from biological contri-
butions. Studying unique cases of DSDs when chromo-
somal composition and hormonal alterations are present
has greatly improved our understanding of biological fac-
tors that contribute to sex differences within the human
brain, from cognitive to structural. Here, we review and
highlight how specific disorders of sex development
SIGNIFICANCE
Sex differences in the brain and behavior of humans have been iden-
tified on numerous measures. The cause of these sex differences has
been associated with chromosomal constitution and circulating hor-
mones, such as estrogen and testosterone. Research on individuals
with DSD has improved the scientific community’s understanding of
the potential contributions of the X and Y chromosomes as well as
the role of gonadal hormone secretions in generating these differ-
ences. This Review highlights research that has expanded our under-
standing of the origins of specific sex differences observed in humans,
such as sexual orientation, gender identity and cognitive performance.
*Correspondence to: Eric Vilain, Department of Human Genetics, David
Geffen School of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, CA 90095. E-mail: evilain@ucla.edu
Received 1 April 2016; Revised 30 May 2016; Accepted 20 June 2016
Published online 7 November 2016 in Wiley Online Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com). DOI: 10.1002/jnr.23832
V
C 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
Journal of Neuroscience Research 95:65–74 (2017)
 (DSD) have improved our understanding of the origins of
certain sex differences within the brain, including gender
role and identity, sexual orientation, cognitive abilities,
and actual structural variations that correspond to gender
differences in humans.
ETIOLOGY OF CONGENITAL ADRENAL
HYPERPLASIA, COMPLETE ANDROGEN
INSENSITIVITY SYNDROME, AND
5a-REDUCTASE DEFICIENCY
Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is the most
common condition that contributes to incidences of
ambiguous genitalia in 46,XX newborns. It is a recessive
autosomal disorder that affects approximately 1 in 15,000
live births worldwide (Therrell, 2001; Merke and Born-
stein, 2005). Ninety-five percent of known CAH cases
result from mutations in the CYP21A2 gene on chromo-
some 6, encoding the 21-hydroxylase (21-OH) enzyme
(Merke and Bornstein, 2005). Mutations in 21-OH gen-
erate two types of classical CAH: simple virilizing and the
more severe form known as salt-wasting. By virtue of the
mutation, many steroid hormone precursors within the
adrenals become elevated due to improper metabolism
into
the
necessary
glucocorticoids,
namely,
cortisol
(White and Speiser, 2000). In addition to causing a corti-
sol and aldosterone deficiency, some of the hormone pre-
cursors are shuttled into the androgen synthesis pathway,
leading to increased levels of testosterone in both XX and
XY fetuses (Speiser and White, 2003; Ghayee and
Auchus, 2007). As a result of CAH, female patients are
often born with various degrees of genital virilization,
typically consisting of a partially fused rugated labia
majora, a common urogenital sinus and clitoromegaly—
providing an early diagnostic sign of CAH in XX patients
(Speiser and White, 2003; Witchel and Azziz, 2011).
46,XY patients have minor to unnoticeable physical signs
of the condition at birth, with the exception of some cases
of hyperpigmentation of the genitals, and above average
penile growth. The subtle nature of the clinical presenta-
tions in males results in a lower frequency of initial CAH
diagnosis and subsequently higher death rates for salt-
wasting cases (Therrell, 2001; Witchel and Azziz, 2011).
With regard to treatment, both XX and XY CAH
patients are supplemented with lifelong mineralocorticoid
and glucocorticoid replacement therapies in the forms of
fludrocortisone and hydrocortisone to supplement their
cortisol deficiency and reduce the overproduction of hor-
mone precursors (Merke and Bornstein, 2005). Preven-
tion of female genital virilization in the unborn fetus can
be achieved by administering the steroid dexamethasone
to the pregnant mother. This practice is quite controver-
sial because the therapy must begin before fetus sex is
determined, thereby exposing seven of eight unaffected
fetuses to DEX treatment, with potential unknown
side effects on the developing brain (Heland et al., 2015;
Fig. 1).
Complete Androgen Insensitivity Syndrome
Complete androgen insensitivity syndrome (CAIS)
is the most common disorder of sex development,
causing sex reversal exclusively on a 46,XY chromo-
somal background. The prevalence of this disorder
among live births worldwide is estimated to range
between 1:20,000 and 1:99,000 (Boehmer et al., 2001;
Mongan et al., 2015). Ninety-five percent of all CAIS
cases can be explained by inactivating mutations of the
androgen receptor (AR) gene (Audi et al., 2010; Mon-
gan et al., 2015). Over 500 mutations in AR have
been associated with CAIS, the majority occurring
within either the DNA-binding domain (DBD) or the
ligand-binding domain (LBD), rendering the protein
inactive (Matias et al., 2000; Gottlieb et al., 2012; Shao
et al., 2015). 46,XY patients born with CAIS are uni-
versally assigned as females at birth, as a result of the
outward female phenotypic appearance of the genitalia.
The diagnosis often occurs during pubertal years when
patients present with primary amenorrhea, because of
the lack of internal female structures. Individuals with
CAIS have a blind-ending vagina, absent ovaries, ingui-
nal testes, and no uterus, because of the regression of
M€
ullerian structures via AMH secretion by the testes
(Mongan
et
al.,
2015).
If
inguinal
testes
are
not
removed before puberty, there is often normal breast
development resulting from the high levels of circulat-
ing testosterone which is locally aromatized into active
estrogens, stimulating breast growth. If gonads have
been resected prior to puberty, estradiol supplementa-
tion is often administered to bring the 46,XY CAIS
patients into the normal female range of the given hor-
mone (Mongan et al., 2015; Fig. 1).
5a-Reductase Deficiency
First identified in 1974, this DSD is an autosomal
recessive condition caused by mutations within the
SRD5A2 gene located on chromosome 2 and manifests
as phenotypically hypomasculinized genitals in 46,XY
individuals (Imperato-McGinley et al., 1974; Jenkins
et al., 1992). This is a very rare disorder, with most
documented cases occurring in areas of the world with
high
rates
of
consanguine
mating,
including
the
Dominican Republic, the islands of New Guinea, and
areas of the Middle East such as Turkey and Iraq
(Imperato-McGinley et al., 1991; al-Attia, 1997; Can
et al., 1998; Sobel and Imperato-McGinley, 2004; Di
Marco et al., 2013). SRD5A2 encodes a steroid 5a-
reductase-2 enzyme, which is responsible for converting
testosterone into the more potent and developmentally
necessary form, dihydrotestosterone (DHT). DHT is
critical for the masculinization of genital tissue and aids
in proper penile growth and prostate development
(Jenkins et al., 1992; Imperato-McGinley and Zhu,
2002). Because of the improper conversion of testoster-
one into DHT, 46,XY individuals born with this con-
dition present with undescended inguinal testes, normal
internal male structures, and a reduction in prostate size
66
Bramble et al.
Journal of Neuroscience Research
 (Imperato-McGinley and Zhu, 2002). Externally how-
ever, this mutation leads to various degrees of genital
ambiguity, appearing as complete female to nearly that
of typical male infants. Those with genital ambiguity
often present with a bifid scrotum, enlarged clitoris,
blind vagina pouch, and various severities of hypospadi-
as (Imperato-McGinley and Zhu, 2002). During teen-
age years, the undescended testes begin to secrete high
levels of testosterone and trigger male puberty, charac-
terized by the deepening of the voice, increased muscle
mass, and increased height. In addition, there can be a
dramatic increase in the growth of the phallus and
occasional descent of the testes into the scrotal region
(Imperato-McGinley and Zhu, 2002; Fig. 1).
SEXUAL BEHAVIORS AND GENDER
IDENTITY
Two of the largest measurable sex differences observed
between humans are gender identity and sexual orienta-
tion (Hines, 2005). Deciphering what brings about these
differences is a subject of much debate; however, many in
the scientific community believe them to be mediated in
part by sex chromosomes and more directly by gonadal
hormone secretions in utero. The theory of brain organiza-
tion arose from mid-twentieth century works, in which it
was observed that administering testosterone to female
rodents during a critical period for fetal brain organization
brought about lifelong sexual and behavioral shifts (Phoe-
nix et al., 1959). Work in humans addressing this subject
Fig. 1. Medical overview of CAH, CAIS, and 5a-reductase deficiency.
Chromosomal Sex and Hormonal Influences on Sex Differences
67
Journal of Neuroscience Research
 is much more limited compared with studies in other
mammals. Cases of DSDs provide us with unique insights
into determining if and how male sex hormones are capa-
ble of establishing these sex differences with regard to sex-
ual orientation and gender identity.
A study conducted by The Williams Institute of
UCLA using large data sets from Western societies,
showed that roughly 3.5% of the general population with-
in the United States identified as having nonheterosexual
orientation, and roughly 8.2% were determined to have
had experienced same-sex encounters (Gates, 2011).
Numerous studies have assessed the prevalence of nonhet-
erosexual behaviors among 46,XX women with CAH
from various regions of the world. This condition is the
closest mimic of rodent studies that address the role of
early androgen exposure and variations seen in adult
behavior. Generally speaking, it has been found in the
majority of studies that nonheterosexual behaviors are
increased in women with CAH, typically compared with
their unaffected female relatives or appropriate controls. A
study conducted by Zucker et al. (1996) focusing on the
most severe salt-wasting form of CAH, as well as the
milder simple virilizing form, showed that approximately
27% of women with CAH had bisexual/homosexual sex-
ual fantasies. Only 3.3% of individuals in the study had
had actual nonheterosexual partners, which was not sig-
nificantly different from controls (Zucker et al., 1996). A
more recent study from France showed similar findings;
the authors identified within their CAH cohort (individu-
als with varying degrees of genital virilization as measured
on the Prader scale) that 20% exhibited bisexual and
homosexual fantasies, and only 5.8% had opposite-sex
partners (Gastaud et al., 2007) . Nonheterosexual behav-
iors and fantasies among women with CAH have been
identified at varying percentage levels, as highlighted in
an exhaustive account of such studies compiled by
Meyer-Bahlburg and colleagues (2008). In contrast how-
ever, other studies on the topic have also shown no differ-
ences in sexual orientation (Lev-Ran, 1974; Kuhnle et al.,
1995), but some critics of these works have determined
that the sample sizes in certain studies were too under-
powered to detect a difference (Meyer-Bahlburg et al.,
2008). In a large CAH cohort, it was again revealed that
women with CAH show more homosexual and bisexual
behaviors, as measured by their sexual fantasies and actual
sex partners. The study also successfully demonstrated that
the level of nonheterosexual tendencies increased with
the severity of the condition, a correlation associated with
the level of in utero androgen exposure. Within the study
cohort, it was found that 47% of patients with the salt-
wasting form of the condition experienced bisexual or
homosexual fantasies, 33% for those with the simple viril-
izing form, and surprisingly 24% for those with the non-
classical form of CAH (Meyer-Bahlburg et al., 2008).
Biologically, it appears that in utero androgen exposure on
an XX background most significantly affects sexual fanta-
sies in women with CAH more than directly altering
their actual sexual orientation as measured by sexual part-
ners, which may be influenced by additional constraints.
These findings provide a strong argument for biological
influences on eliciting such outcomes; however, these
studies do not eliminate the possibility of social and other
psychological contributions for these observations, as
reviewed by Rebecca Jordan-Young (2012).
In addition to sexual orientation, gender identity
(one’s internal sense of being male or female, independent
of gonadal sex) has also been a topic of investigation in
cases of DSD. Among the compiled studies that have
focused on 46,XX CAH and gender identity, it was
found that the vast majority (95%) of patients who were
assigned to the female gender were satisfied and nondys-
phoric in adulthood (Dessens et al., 2005). However, 5%
of CAH females exhibited gender dysphoria and/or iden-
tified as the male gender, as reviewed by Dessens and
others (2005). This 5% of dysphoric CAH females is far
above the estimated average of 0.3% of adults who identi-
fy as transgender within Western societies, specifically the
United States (Gates, 2011). In instances in which 46,XX
CAH individuals were assigned to the male gender at
birth, a small sampled study showed that 12% of cases
experienced gender dysphoria and associated themselves
with the female gender (Dessens et al., 2005). However,
later studies assessing outcomes in severely virilized
46,XX cases who were assigned as males at birth led to
different conclusions about satisfaction of male gender
assignment and identity (Lee et al., 2010). In a small study
population of 12 46,XX CAH cases who were initially
assigned as males, it was found that 10 persisted in the
assigned gender and lived male-typical and satisfying lives.
Two of the male-assigned individuals within the study
that were adolescently reassigned to the female gender
subsequently reassigned themselves back to the male gen-
der in adulthood (Lee and Houk, 2010; Lee et al., 2010).
Unlike results of studies examining sexual orientation,
dysphoria in gender identity was correlated with neither
the severity of the CAH condition nor the degree of gen-
ital virilization, demonstrating that genital appearance at
birth is not the best predictor for gender outcomes in
cases of 46,XX DSD (Berenbaum and Bailey, 2003). Col-
lectively, these data demonstrate that we have yet to fully
understand gender identity determinants in CAH individ-
uals, and the general population for that matter, from a
strictly biological perspective. It is however, apparent that
androgen exposure on XX genetic backgrounds can
increase instances of dissatisfactions with one’s gender
assignment at rates far above estimated percentages found
within general populations.
Some of the most convincing evidence linking tes-
tosterone to establishing male gender identity and sexual
preference comes from work focused on individuals with
CAIS and those with 5a-reductase deficiencies. When
assessing sexual orientation in cases of CAIS, it has been
shown that 46,XY women are almost always exclusively
heterosexual, preferring male sex partners, in addition to
experiencing heterosexual fantasies and interests (Wis-
niewski et al., 2000; Hines et al., 2003a). During adoles-
cent
years,
CAIS
women
reported
feeling
100%
heterosexual, and a minority (n 5 1) in a particular study
68
Bramble et al.
Journal of Neuroscience Research
 stated same-sex attraction but only in adulthood. This
occurrence, as the authors note, may be influenced by
causes other than their inability to respond to androgens
during development (Wisniewski et al., 2000). In con-
trast, recent literature has begun to challenge this strongly
established view of nearly exclusive heterosexual behav-
iors in women with CAIS. A recent report by Brunner
and colleagues (2016) indicated that 46,XY women com-
pared with other females with infertility conditions
showed increased tendencies of nonheterosexual prefer-
ence and behavior, evidence that is out of line with previ-
ously established views of fully heterosexual outcomes in
women with CAIS. These findings, although limited to a
small sample size (n 5 11 CAIS), raise an interesting topic
for further investigation that could identify additional
influences guiding sexual preference and perhaps identity
in 46,XY women, aside from their inability to respond to
male-sex hormone.
Using a more scientifically unbiased approach to
assess sexual response, and perhaps orientation in women
with CAIS, a recent study focused on neural activation in
response to viewing sexual images. Supporting the notion
of predominantly heterosexual feelings in CAIS, it was
found that women with this condition more closely
resembled 46,XX heterosexual females than 46,XY males
(Hamann et al., 2014). Functional MRI (fMRI) scans
revealed that both 46,XY women with CAIS and 46,XX
women had decreased amygdala activation when viewing
nude male images or couples engaging in coitus. The
results of this study were the first to establish that the
brains of CAIS women more functionally resembled those
of typical females, further indicating that testosterone
responsiveness (and not the Y chromosome) is the most
likely driver for establishing gynephilic preference and
androphilic-typical brain activation toward sexual stimuli
in humans (Hamann et al., 2014).
With regard to gender identity, 46,XY women with
CAIS almost always report feeling comfortable in their
female assignment, as shown by their typical female
responses to assessments measuring psychosocial traits
(Hines et al., 2003a). A thorough review of CAIS studies
identified that, among the 156 individuals assessed in the
research, no instances of male-gender identity were
reported (Mazur, 2005). These findings add strength to
the biological notion that hormonal response influences
male gender identity more than chromosomal composi-
tion. Once again however, recent reports have begun to
suggest that this theory is not as concrete as previously
thought. A growing body of literature and case reports
has identified gender dysphoria and cross-gender feelings
in CAIS individuals at rates higher than have been estab-
lished (Kulshreshtha et al., 2009; T’Sjoen et al., 2011;
Brunner et al., 2016). The role of social and initial medi-
cal decisions associated with CAIS cases may be a contrib-
uting factor in these results because, as stated by Tom
Mazur, “the best predictor of adult gender identity in
CAIS, PAIS (partial androgen insensitivity syndrome) and
micropenis is initial gender assignment” (Mazur, 2005).
In addition to CAIS, research focused on the under-
studied and rare 5a-reductase deficiency syndrome has
also helped expand the role of testosterone in establishing
sex differences with regard to sexual orientation and gen-
der identity in humans. Individuals affected with this con-
dition are typically reared as girls; however, during the
pubertal years when testosterone secretions from the testes
are elevated and male puberty ensues, the vast majority
change initial gender assignment (Sobel and Imperato-
McGinley, 2004). This outcome in persons with 5a-
reductase deficiency appears to be worldwide and not
necessarily a product of specific social influences; gender
role and identity changes have been reported in cases
from the Mediterranean, Middle East, Caribbean, Africa,
and New Guinea (al-Attia et al., 1987; al-Attia, 1996,
1997; Sobel and Imperato-McGinley, 2004). After change
in gender role and gender identity, these 46,XY individu-
als typically lead heterosexual lives, preferring female part-
ners, despite having been initially reared as females
themselves (Sobel and Imperato-McGinley, 2004). This
gender switch in individuals during male puberty raises
the notion that, despite insufficient DHT production nec-
essary for typical male genitalia development, the organi-
zational effects on the brain were established and able to
influence a male gender role and eventually identity,
which seem to become solidified upon pubertal testoster-
one surges. 5a-Reductase deficiency is an unusual cir-
cumstance
in
which
teasing
apart
the
effects
of
environmental influence and biology becomes extremely
difficult. The activational effects of testosterone at puberty
coupled with likely in utero organization do appear to be
factors in establishing the change in gender role and iden-
tity. However, the physical change that also ensues during
the transition cannot be ruled out as another contributing
factor for the observed change.
HIGHLIGHTS OF COGNITIVE SEX
DIFFERENCES AND INTERPRETATION
FROM CASES OF DSD
Sex differences with regard to cognitive traits have been
extensively studied by numerous groups and have identi-
fied several measures in which males and females show
large deviations in mental task abilities. These sex differ-
ences have been attributed to chromosomal effects (Ngun
et al., 2011), hormonal effects (McCarthy, 2010), and
social influences (Jordan-Young, 2012). Regardless of the
reason, cognitive differences between men and women
are detected in the vast majority of studies. Cases of DSD
again provide a unique platform to assess the possible con-
tributing factors responsible for generating sex differences
because studies in individuals with CAH and CAIS have
established unique hormonal and chromosomal influen-
ces. Spatial awareness and mental rotation ability reveal
the strongest cognitive difference between men and
women, with males outperforming females (Geiser, 2007;
Voyer et al., 1995).
Spatial task assessments in cases of DSD are focused
predominantly on individuals with CAH and, to a more
Chromosomal Sex and Hormonal Influences on Sex Differences
69
Journal of Neuroscience Research
 limited extent, CAIS. 46,XX females with CAH, on
average outperform their unaffected, matched controls on
mental rotation tasks and spatial relations tests (Hampson,
1998; Berenbaum et al., 2012; Hampson and Rovet,
2015). Studies of this nature have also showd that girls
with CAH vs. their matched controls exhibit no enhance-
ment in spatial ability, adding to the uncertainty regarding
androgen’s influence on increasing spatial awareness on an
XX background (Hines et al., 2003b). Some of these
inconsistencies in the data may be attributed to variations
between subtypes of CAH as opposed to an inaccurate
determination of enhancements in spatial ability. It was
found that spatial task enhancements show the strongest
effect in girls with the severe salt-wasting form of CAH,
whereas those individuals with the simple virilizing form
of the condition did not show a statistically significant dif-
ference (Hampson and Rovet, 2015). In comparison,
46,XY males with CAH appear to be demasculinized on
these features and perform worse than their matched con-
trols on both measures (Hines et al., 2003b; Berenbaum
et al., 2012). These findings are quite interesting; they
allude to the possibility that high in utero androgen expo-
sure generates different cognitive outcomes depending on
sex chromosome complement. Males with CAH a priori
would be expected to perform at least equally well as
opposed to underperform control males if the effect was
due to excess testosterone. There may be both an optimal
time and an optimal level of testosterone exposure during
development that enhances such abilities, and if these lev-
els too high in utero it may generate these observed out-
comes in males with CAH.
Recently, individuals with CAIS were assessed with
both traditional rotation tests and fMRI studies to deter-
mine how their brains responded to rotation tasks com-
pared with non-CAIS males and females. It was found
that 46,XY CAIS women were slower to determine the
correct response in rotation test assessments than their
46,XY male counterparts (van Hemmen et al., 2016). On
neuroimaging, CAIS individuals were more similar to
control women, showing less inferior parietal lobe activa-
tion during rotation tasks than they were to 46,XY males
(van Hemmen et al., 2016). This study is quite remarkable
in thats it demonstrates a strong role of androgenic influ-
ences on establishing mental rotation abilities on an XY
background, even though males with CAH (elevated T
levels) perform worse than controls. Again, these findings
suggest that timing and dose of testosterone during devel-
opment may be critical to establishing or enhancing spe-
cific cognitive traits in humans. CAH individuals have
more confounding long-term health factors, whereas with
CAIS these additional variables are minimized. Thus, this
leaves the testosterone responses in the brain as the most
reasonable explanation for the observed spatial perfor-
mance differences. To the best of our knowledge, no spa-
tial performance examinations have been conducted on
individuals with 5a-reductase deficiency.
Another cognitive task in which mild sex differences
arise is the ability to target objects using hand–eye coordi-
nation, another male-typical feature (Watson and Kimura,
1991). In studies focusing on this trait, it was found that
46,XX CAH females were able to target both darts and
ball throwing more accurately than their control counter-
parts (Hines et al., 2003b; Collaer et al., 2009). In males
with CAH, this trait seems to be unaffected, insofar as
both controls and affected individuals were statistically
insignificantly different from one another in targeting
abilities (Hines et al., 2003b; Collaer et al., 2009). It
appears again that an in utero androgenic influence on an
XX genetic background allows enhanced targeting coor-
dination during adolescences and adulthood. This feature,
unlike spatial ability, does not appear to be sensitive to
the dose or timing of testosterone during development;
CAH males did not underperform their controls on these
measures. This is another trait that has yet to be examined
in individuals with CAIS and 5a-reductase deficiency.
Such work would greatly improve our understanding of
androgenic and sex chromosome influence on shaping
specific cognitive sex differences within the human brain.
Additional cognitive traits that have been assessed
and show sex differences include male-dominant tasks
involving spatial perception, maze navigation, mathemat-
ics, and various mechanical skills and female-dominant
tasks involving working memory and verbal fluency (Col-
laer and Hines, 1995; Woolley et al., 2010; Halpern,
2012). Many of these traits have been assessed in XX and
XY CAH cases; however, the cognitive differences that
show the strongest sex and androgen influence are the
highlighted spatial and targeting abilities. The works con-
ducted in cases of DSD have helped expand our under-
standing of the influence of testosterone on both XX and
XY genetic backgrounds with regard to altering spatial
abilities and hand–eye coordination. These works have
also demonstrated that the effect most likely is hormonally
influenced because CAIS individuals, despite being XY,
cannot respond to androgen and therefore have spatial
and cognitive traits resembling those of XX females.
Brain Structural Variations in DSD Cases
Unlike research focused on sexual behavior and
cognitive differences, surprisingly little work has focused
on the structural variations of the brain as a result of
DSD. A small but growing body of literature has
addressed this topic, mostly in individuals with CAH.
Early work established that both 46,XY males and 46,XX
females with 21-hydroxylase deficiency exhibited signifi-
cantly smaller amygdala volumes than age-matched con-
trols, and the amygdala is a known sexually dimorphic
brain structure (Goldstein et al., 2001; Merke et al.,
2003). It was found that, regardless of age, girls with
CAH exhibited a bilateral reduction in amygdala volume,
whereas CAH-affected males in the study had a 20% uni-
lateral reduction in only the left amygdala, which is also
the same reduction percentage for the left amygdala in
CAH females. Increases of amygdala volumes over human
development have been observed in males, which are
thought to arise from androgenic stimulation (Giedd
et al., 1997). Interestingly, it was found that, in 46,XY
70
Bramble et al.
Journal of Neuroscience Research
 boys with CAH, this increase with developmental age
was present only in the right, seemingly unaffected amyg-
dala, whereas XY controls in the study group followed
previously established bilateral size increases (Merke et al.,
2003). The exact causes of these brain anomalies are still
being addressed; however, there seems to be a clear sex
difference in response. Males and females with similar
imbalances as a result of CAH show different patterns of
amygdala reductions. A study focusing primarily on
46,XX non-CAH individuals taking long-term cortico-
steroid replacement therapies also identified a 20% reduc-
tion in the left amygdala volume and an 11% reduction in
right hemisphere amygdala (Brown et al., 2008). Collec-
tively these findings indicate that the reduced amygdala
volume most likely is due to an imbalance of glucocorti-
coids rather than excess androgens during development
because amygdala size is actually reduced in CAH patients
despite high levels of in utero testosterone, whereas
healthy male controls show increases in volume of the
amygdala via androgen stimulation. These findings, how-
ever, do not offer a direct biological mechanistic explana-
tion for observations of reductions in brain regions but
support the idea that imbalances in glucocorticoids and
other steroids are the likely causative agents.
White-Matter Abnormalities
Another brain structural metric that has been
assessed in XX and XY individuals with CAH is abnor-
malities in white matter distributions. MRI studies of
adult patients with salt-wasting, simple virilizing, and
even nonclassical congenital adrenal hyperplasia have
established white matter hyperintensities in various brain
regions (Sinforiani et al., 1994; Nass et al., 1997; Kaga
et al., 2013; Mnif et al., 2013; Winfeld et al., 2013). Areas
of the brain that seem to be most frequently affected in
CAH patients are the periventricular regions and areas of
the cerebellum and the corpus callosum. Incidences of
temporal lobe atrophy have also been documented from
MRI studies of CAH patients (Nass et al., 1997; Mnif
et al., 2013). The vast majority of cases assessed showing
abnormalities in white matter across brain regions scored
within the normal ranges of neurological function, indi-
cating that, despite these differences, the effect does not
seem to impair proper brain functioning. These studies
have all identified subclinical white matter variations, but
the etiology and results of such findings remains unclear.
It has been hypothesized that the logical causes of these
outcomes results from hormonal imbalances during devel-
opment, long-term glucocorticoid replacement therapies
after birth, and even the genetic mutation itself. It has also
been proposed that the imbalance of hormones during
development contributes to improper oligodendrocyte
differentiation and improper myelination (Bergamaschi
et al., 2006). In addition to adult studies, there have been
several documented cases of newborns with CAH exhib-
iting white matter anomalies (Kaga et al., 2013; Winfeld
et al., 2013). Although it does appear that replacement
therapies over a long time frame may affect white matter,
findings in newborns with CAH raise the notion that
long-term glucocorticoid replacement therapies may not
be the sole explanation for the disturbances in white mat-
ter. Investigating these unusual findings in more detail
will allow a better understanding of the role that gluco-
corticoids or lack thereof has in shaping the structure of
the developing male and female brain. Currently, howev-
er, the exact cause and mechanism behind these results
remain speculative.
CONCLUSIONS
Research focused on cases of DSD have helped the scien-
tific community better understand the interplay between
gonadal hormones and sex chromosome complement
with regard to generating some of the sex differences
observed in humans. These works have shed light on the
likelihood that testosterone exposure, as opposed to sex
chromosomes, is a larger contributing factor for guiding
one’s sexual orientation and to a lesser extent gender
identity. We see that 46,XX CAH individuals that have
been exposed to in utero testosterone experience a greater
degree of dissatisfaction in gender assignment in addition
to above-average levels of homosexual and bisexual fanta-
sies, a proxy for sexual preference. As previously men-
tioned, other variables are present in CAH cases such as
life-long medical interventions and psychosocial con-
founds. These variables may constitute an environmental
factor that, when coupled with biological predispositions,
generates variations in sexual orientation and gender iden-
tity. That sexual orientation is determined solely by in
utero hormonal milieu is unlikely. We see that the vast
majority of CAH women, despite having been exposed
to above-average levels of testosterone, identify as hetero-
sexual as measured by both partners and sexual fantasies.
The science of sexual orientation is still weakly under-
stood at the mechanistic level; however, considerable
amounts of research have proposed many possibilities for
the causes of same-sex attraction (LeVay, 2012; Bailey
et al., 2016).
The strongest evidence that adds support for the
influence of testosterone in structuring gender identity
comes from the work focused on 46,XY CAIS, in which
nearly all individuals researched indicate feelings typical of
female gender. In addition to self-reports and clinical
evaluations, recent fMRI studies have also demonstrated
that CAIS women not only feel female but also neurolog-
ically respond more similarly to 46,XX women than to
46,XY men when observing sexual images. However,
new studies are continually emerging suggesting that gen-
der identity and sexual orientation in individuals with
CAIS are not as clear as once thought, and the rates of
nonheterosexual and gender dysphoria may be much
higher than currently stated. In addition to CAH and
CAIS, 5a-reductase deficiencies have also demonstrated
the strong role of testosterone’s ability to organize the
human brain hormonally and influence adult gender iden-
tity and behavior. If early in utero exposure had no influ-
ence
in
guiding
brain
gender,
we
would
expect
Chromosomal Sex and Hormonal Influences on Sex Differences
71
Journal of Neuroscience Research
 considerable difficulty with the female-to-male transition
observed in pubertal years in those with 5a-reductase
deficiency. What we observe, however, is that an over-
whelming majority of individuals with this condition
comfortably transitioned into the new gender role at
puberty, a worldwide observation occurring throughout
many different types of social environments. Despite the
convincing findings for the role of testosterone in gener-
ating these observations, the influence of social and other
environmental variables are also factors that require
consideration.
Cognitive Conclusions
Studying cases of DSDs has also provided insight
into some of the biological parameters that generate sex
differences in cognitive abilities such as visuospatial
awareness and targeting ability. From studies with 46,XX
CAH individuals it has been well established that in utero
androgen exposure seems to enhance the ability to men-
tally rotate objects as well as improving hand–eye coordi-
nation during targeting tasks. This trait appears to be
dependent on sex chromosome complement in addition
to hormone exposure, insofar as 46,XY males with CAH
actually perform worse than their matched controls,
which is unexpected given the fact that CAH males
would have equal or elevated levels of circulating testos-
terone. This raises the notion, as mentioned above, that
proper timing and dosage are also likely to be important
for enhancing such abilities and that simply having above-
average levels of testosterone during development would
not generate a “super-male.” CAIS provides another
insight into this matter, demonstrating that the ability to
respond to testosterone on an XY background is critical
to establishing baseline spatial performance abilities. fMRI
studies demonstrate that 46,XY CAIS had less inferior
parietal lobe neuroactivation when performing spatial
rotation tasks, a feature that resembles 46,XX females
more than control genetic males. These fMRI studies on
CAIS individuals once again minimize social influences
and allow for a more unbiased assessment of the require-
ment for testosterone over genetic composition for shap-
ing these cognitive performance sex differences.
Structural Conclusions
From the MRI studies that have been conducted in
patients with CAH, it is clear that DSDs affect more than
gonadal development. As highlighted, the central nervous
system is highly sensitive to various hormones, and imbal-
ances of these can greatly affect downstream behavior as
well as overall brain structure. Variations in amygdala vol-
ume seem to be present in some individuals with CAH;
however the effect is different depending on sex chromo-
some composition. Specifically, 46,XY males with CAH
show unilateral reductions in the left amygdala, whereas
46,XX females with CAH show bilateral reductions in
overall volume. Alterations in amygdala volume seem to
be consistent with long-term glucocorticoid replacement
therapies because findings for non-CAH patients on such
hormone regiments also show amygdala abnormalities.
The documentations of white matter irregularities seem
to be unaffected by chromosomal sex and to cause similar
variations in both males and females with CAH. The
explanations for these results are not agreed upon, and
more research will be needed before causations can be
associated
with
the
unusual
white
matter
findings.
Although limited, these discoveries have opened a new
area for potential investigation focusing on the role of
glucocorticoid influences in the developing brain in addi-
tion to the more frequently studied gonadal hormonal
contributions.
Unfortunately,
no
extensive
structural
studies have been conducted in patients with CAIS or
5a-reductase
deficiencies.
These
findings
would
be
invaluable in determining the direct effect of testosterone
on the structures that in MRI studies have shown altera-
tions in CAH. Future work focusing on outcomes in
individuals with DSD will continue to aid in deciphering
the contributions of chromosomal sex and hormones to
shaping the sexually dimorphic human brain.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT
The authors have no conflicts of interest that would have
any bearing on the topics discussed in this Review.
ROLE OF AUTHORS
MSB was the primary contributor to this article, conduct-
ing the literature review and manuscript preparation. AL
prepared the graphic designs, and both AL and NV
assisted in the literature review and manuscript prepara-
tion. EV guided the topics of discussion and oversaw the
finalization of the Review.
REFERENCES
al-Attia HM. 1996. Gender identity and role in a pedigree of Arabs with
intersex due to 5 alpha reductase-2 deficiency. Psychoneuroendocrinol-
ogy 21:651–657.
al-Attia HM. 1997. Male pseudohermaphroditism due to 5 alpha-
reductase-2 deficiency in an Arab kindred. Postgrad Med J 73:802–807.
al-Attia HM, Kazin S, George S. 1987. 5a-Reductase deficiency in two
Omani siblings. Emirates Med J 5:236–242.
Arnold AP. 2009. The organizational-activational hypothesis as the foun-
dation for a unified theory of sexual differentiation of all mammalian
tissues. Horm Behav 55:570–578.
Audi L, Fernandez-Cancio M, Carrascosa A, Andaluz P, Toran N, Piro
C, Vilaro E, Vicens-Calvet E, Gussinye M, Albisu MA, Yeste D,
Clemente M, Hernandez de la Calle I, Del Campo M, Vendrell T,
Blanco A, Martinez-Mora J, Granada ML, Salinas I, Forn J, Calaf J,
Angerri O, Martinez-Sopena MJ, Del Valle J, Garcia E, Gracia-
Bouthelier R, Lapunzina P, Mayayo E, Labarta JI, Lledo G, Sanchez
Del Pozo J, Arroyo J, Perez-Aytes A, Beneyto M, Segura A, Borras V,
Gabau E, Caimari M, Rodriguez A, Martinez-Aedo MJ, Carrera M,
Castano L, Andrade M, Bermudez de la Vega JA. 2010. Novel (60%)
and recurrent (40%) androgen receptor gene mutations in a series of 59
patients with a 46,XY disorder of sex development. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 95:1876–1888.
Bailey JM, Vasey PL, Diamond LM, Breedlove SM, Vilain E, Epprecht
M. 2016. Sexual orientation, controversy, and science. Psychol Sci
Public Interest 17:45–101.
72
Bramble et al.
Journal of Neuroscience Research
 Berenbaum SA, Bailey JM. 2003. Effects on gender identity of prenatal
androgens and genital appearance: evidence from girls with congenital
adrenal hyperplasia. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 88:1102–1106.
Berenbaum SA, Bryk KL, Beltz AM. 2012. Early androgen effects on
spatial and mechanical abilities: evidence from congenital adrenal hyper-
plasia. Behav Neurosci 126:86–96.
Bergamaschi R, Livieri C, Uggetti C, Candeloro E, Egitto MG,
Pichiecchio A, Cosi V, Bastianello S. 2006. Brain white matter impair-
ment in congenital adrenal hyperplasia. Arch Neurol 63:413–416.
Boehmer AL, Brinkmann O, Bruggenwirth H, van Assendelft C, Otten
BJ, Verleun-Mooijman MC, Niermeijer MF, Brunner HG, Rouwe
CW, Waelkens JJ, Oostdijk W, Kleijer WJ, van der Kwast TH, de
Vroede MA, Drop SL. 2001. Genotype versus phenotype in families
with androgen insensitivity syndrome. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 86:
4151–4160.
Brown ES, Woolston DJ, Frol AB. 2008. Amygdala volume in patients
receiving chronic corticosteroid therapy. Biol Psychiatry 63:705–709.
Brunner F, Fliegner M, Krupp K, Rall K, Brucker S, Richter-Appelt H.
2016. Gender role, gender identity and sexual orientation in CAIS
(“XY-women”) compared with subfertile and infertile 46,XX women.
J Sex Res 53:109–124.
Can S, Zhu YS, Cai LQ, Ling Q, Katz MD, Akgun S, Shackleton CH,
Imperato-McGinley J. 1998. The identification of 5 alpha-reductase-2
and 17 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-3 gene defects in male pseu-
dohermaphrodites from a Turkish kindred. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
83:560–569.
Collaer ML, Hines M. 1995. Human behavioral sex differences: a role
for gonadal hormones during early development? Psychol Bull 118:55–
107.
Collaer ML, Brook CG, Conway GS, Hindmarsh PC, Hines M. 2009.
Motor development in individuals with congenital adrenal hyperplasia:
strength, targeting, and fine motor skill. Psychoneuroendocrinology 34:
249–258.
Dessens AB, Slijper FM, Drop SL. 2005. Gender dysphoria and gender
change in chromosomal females with congenital adrenal hyperplasia.
Arch Sex Behav 34:389–397.
Di Marco C, Bulotta AL, Varetti C, Dosa L, Michelucci A, Baldinotti F,
Meucci D, Castagnini C, Lo Rizzo C, Di Maggio G, Simi P, Mari F,
Bertelloni S, Renieri A, Messina M. 2013. Ambiguous external genita-
lia due to defect of 5-alpha-reductase in seven Iraqi patients: prevalence
of a novel mutation. Gene 526:490–493.
Gastaud F, Bouvattier C, Duranteau L, Brauner R, Thibaud E, Kutten F,
Bougneres P. 2007. Impaired sexual and reproductive outcomes in
women with classical forms of congenital adrenal hyperplasia. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 92:1391–1396.
Gates GJ. 2011. How many people are lesbian, gay, bisexual, and trans-
gender? Los Angeles: The Williams Institute.
Geiser C, Lehmann W, Eid M. 2007. A note on sex differences in men-
tal rotation in different age groups. Intelligence 36:556–563.
Ghayee HK, Auchus RJ. 2007. Basic concepts and recent developments
in human steroid hormone biosynthesis. Rev Endocrine Metab Disord
8:289–300.
Giedd JN, Castellanos FX, Rajapakse JC, Vaituzis AC, Rapoport JL.
1997. Sexual dimorphism of the developing human brain. Prog Neuro-
psychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 21:1185–1201.
Goldstein JM, Seidman LJ, Horton NJ, Makris N, Kennedy DN,
Caviness VS Jr, Faraone SV, Tsuang MT. 2001. Normal sexual dimor-
phism of the adult human brain assessed by in vivo magnetic resonance
imaging. Cereb Cortex 11:490–497.
Gottlieb B, Beitel LK, Nadarajah A, Paliouras M, Trifiro M. 2012. The
androgen receptor gene mutations database: 2012 update. Hum Mutat
33:887–894.
Halpern D. 2012. Sex differences in cognitive abilities. New York: Psy-
chology Press.
Hamann S, Stevens J, Vick JH, Bryk K, Quigley CA, Berenbaum SA,
Wallen K. 2014. Brain responses to sexual images in 46,XY women
with complete androgen insensitivity syndrome are female-typical.
Horm Behav 66:724–730.
Hampson E, Rovet JF. 2015. Spatial function in adolescents and young
adults with congenital adrenal hyperplasia: clinical phenotype and impli-
cations for the androgen hypothesis. Psychoneuroendocrinology 54:
60–70.
Hampson E, Rovet JF, Altmann D. 1998. Spatial resoning in children
with congenital adrenal hyperplasis due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency.
Dev Neuropsychol 14:299–320.
Heland S, Hewitt JK, McGillivray G, Walker SP. 2015. Preventing
female virilisation in congenital adrenal hyperplasia: the controversial
role of antenatal dexamethasone. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 56:225–
232.
Hines M. 2005. Brain gender. New York: Oxford University Press.
Hines M, Ahmed SF, Hughes IA. 2003a. Psychological outcomes and
gender-related development in complete androgen insensitivity syn-
drome. Arch Sex Behav 32:93–101.
Hines M, Fane BA, Pasterski VL, Mathews GA, Conway GS, Brook C.
2003b. Spatial abilities following prenatal androgen abnormality: target-
ing and mental rotations performance in individuals with congenital
adrenal hyperplasia. Psychoneuroendocrinology 28:1010–1026.
Imperato-McGinley J, Zhu YS. 2002. Androgens and male physiology
the syndrome of 5alpha-reductase-2 deficiency. Mol Cell Endocrinol
198:51–59.
Imperato-McGinley J, Guerrero L, Gautier T, Peterson RE. 1974. Ste-
roid 5alpha-reductase deficiency in man: an inherited form of male
pseudohermaphroditism. Science 186:1213–1215.
Imperato-McGinley J, Miller M, Wilson JD, Peterson RE, Shackleton C,
Gajdusek DC. 1991. A cluster of male pseudohermaphrodites with 5
alpha-reductase deficiency in Papua New Guinea. Clin Endocrinol 34:
293–298.
Jenkins EP, Andersson S, Imperato-McGinley J, Wilson JD, Russell DW.
1992. Genetic and pharmacological evidence for more than one human
steroid 5 alpha-reductase. J Clin Invest 89:293–300.
Jordan-Young RM. 2012. Hormones, context, and “brain gender”: a
review of evidence from congenital adrenal hyperplasia. Soc Sci Med
74:1738–1744.
Kaga A, Saito-Hakoda A, Uematsu M, Kamimura M, Kanno J, Kure S,
Fujiwara I. 2013. Brain white matter abnormality in a newborn infant
with congenital adrenal hyperplasia. Clin Pediatr Endocrinol 22:77–81.
Kuhnle U, Bullinger M, Schwarz HP. 1995. The quality of life in adult
female patients with congenital adrenal hyperplasia: a comprehensive
study of the impact of genital malformations and chronic disease on
female patients life. Eur J Pediatr 154:708–716.
Kulshreshtha B, Philibert P, Eunice M, Khandelwal SK, Mehta M,
Audran F, Paris F, Sultan C, Ammini AC. 2009. Apparent male gender
identity in a patient with complete androgen insensitivity syndrome.
Arch Sex Behav 38:873–875.
Lee PA, Houk CP. 2010. Review of outcome information in 46,XX
patients with congenital adrenal hyperplasia assigned/reared male: what
does it say about gender assignment? Int J Pediatr Endocrinol 2010:
982025.
Lee PA, Houk CP, Husmann DA. 2010. Should male gender assignment
be considered in the markedly virilized patient with 46,XX and con-
genital adrenal hyperplasia? J Urol 184(Suppl 4):1786–1792.
Lev-Ran A. 1974. Sexuality and educational levels of women with the
late-treated adrenogenital syndrome. Arch Sex Behav 3:27–32.
LeVay S. 2012. Gay, straight, and the reason why. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Matias PM, Donner P, Coelho R, Thomaz M, Peixoto C, Macedo S,
Otto N, Joschko S, Scholz P, Wegg A, Basler S, Schafer M, Egner U,
Carrondo MA. 2000. Structural evidence for ligand specificity in the
Chromosomal Sex and Hormonal Influences on Sex Differences
73
Journal of Neuroscience Research
 binding domain of the human androgen receptor. Implications for path-
ogenic gene mutations. J Biol Chem 275:26164–26171.
Mazur T. 2005. Gender dysphoria and gender change in androgen insen-
sitivity or micropenis. Arch Sex Behav 34:411–421.
McCarthy MM. 2010. How it’s made: organisational effects of hormones
on the developing brain. J Neuroendocrinol 22:736–742.
Merke DP, Bornstein SR. 2005. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia. Lancet
365:2125–2136.
Merke DP, Fields JD, Keil MF, Vaituzis AC, Chrousos GP, Giedd JN.
2003.
Children
with
classic
congenital
adrenal
hyperplasia
have
decreased amygdala volume: potential prenatal and postnatal hormonal
effects. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 88:1760–1765.
Meyer-Bahlburg HF, Dolezal C, Baker SW, New MI. 2008. Sexual ori-
entation in women with classical or non-classical congenital adrenal
hyperplasia as a function of degree of prenatal androgen excess. Arch
Sex Behav 37:85–99.
Mnif MF, Kamoun M, Mnif F, Charfi N, Kallel N, Rekik N, Naceur
BB, Fourati H, Daoud E, Mnif Z, Sfar MH, Younes-Mhenni S, Sfar
MT, Hachicha M, Abid M. 2013. Brain magnetic resonance imaging
findings in adult patients with congenital adrenal hyperplasia: increased
frequency of white matter impairment and temporal lobe structures dys-
genesis. Indian J Endocrinol Metab 17:121–127.
Mongan NP, Tadokoro-Cuccaro R, Bunch T, Hughes IA. 2015. Androgen
insensitivity syndrome. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab 29:569–580.
Nass R, Heier L, Moshang T, Oberfield S, George A, New MI, Speiser
PW. 1997. Magnetic resonance imaging in the congenital adrenal
hyperplasia population: increased frequency of white-matter abnormali-
ties and temporal lobe atrophy. J Child Neurol 12:181–186.
Ngun TC, Ghahramani N, Sanchez FJ, Bocklandt S, Vilain E. 2011. The
genetics of sex differences in brain and behavior. Front Neuroendocri-
nol 32:227–246.
Phoenix CH, Goy RW, Gerall AA, Young WC. 1959. Organizing action
of prenatally administered testosterone propionate on the tissues mediating
mating behavior in the female guinea pig. Endocrinology 65:369–382.
Shao J, Hou J, Li B, Li D, Zhang N, Wang X. 2015. Different types of
androgen receptor mutations in patients with complete androgen insen-
sitivity syndrome. Intractable Rare Dis Res 4:54–59.
Sinforiani E, Livieri C, Mauri M, Bisio P, Sibilla L, Chiesa L, Martelli A.
1994. Cognitive and neuroradiological findings in congenital adrenal
hyperplasia. Psychoneuroendocrinology 19:55–64.
Sobel V, Imperato-McGinley J. 2004. Gender identity in XY intersexual-
ity. Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin North Am 13:609–622, viii.
Speiser PW, White PC. 2003. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia. N Engl J
Med 349:776–788.
T’Sjoen G, De Cuypere G, Monstrey S, Hoebeke P, Freedman FK,
Appari M, Holterhus PM, Van Borsel J, Cools M. 2011. Male gender
identity in complete androgen insensitivity syndrome. Arch Sex Behav
40:635–638.
Therrell BL. 2001. Newborn screening for congenital adrenal hyperplasia.
Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 30:15–30.
van Hemmen J, Veltman DJ, Hoekzema E, Cohen-Kettenis PT, Dessens
AB, Bakker J. 2016. Neural activation during mental rotation in com-
plete androgen insensitivity syndrome: the influence of sex hormones
and sex chromosomes. Cereb Cortex 26:1036–1045.
Voyer D, Voyer S, Bryden MP. 1995. Magnitude of sex differences in
spatial abilities: a meta-analysis and consideration of critical variables.
Psychol Bull 117:250–270.
Watson NV, Kimura D. 1991. Nontrivial sex differences in throwing and
intercepting: Relation to psychometrically-defined spatial functions.
Personality Indiv Differ 12:375–385.
White PC, Speiser PW. 2000. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 21-
hydroxylase deficiency. Endocr Rev 21:245–291.
Winfeld M, Patel P, Shah B, Nass R, Milla S. 2013. Early occurrence of
cerebral white matter abnormality detected in a neonate with salt-
wasting congenital adrenal hyperplasia. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab 26:
13–17.
Wisniewski
AB,
Migeon
CJ,
Meyer-Bahlburg
HF,
Gearhart
JP,
Berkovitz GD, Brown TR, Money J. 2000. Complete androgen insen-
sitivity syndrome: long-term medical, surgical, and psychosexual out-
come. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 85:2664–2669.
Witchel SF, Azziz R. 2011. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia. J Pediatr
Adolesc Gynecol 24:116–126.
Woolley DG, Vermaercke B, Op de Beeck H, Wagemans J, Gantois I,
D’Hooge R, Swinnen SP, Wenderoth N. 2010. Sex differences in
human virtual water maze performance: novel measures reveal the rela-
tive contribution of directional responding and spatial knowledge.
Behav Brain Res 208:408–414.
Zucker KJ, Bradley SJ, Oliver G, Blake J, Fleming S, Hood J. 1996. Psy-
chosexual development of women with congenital adrenal hyperplasia.
Horm Behav 30:300–318.
74
Bramble et al.
Journal of Neuroscience Research
