 The Science of Obesity Management: An Endocrine
Society Scientific Statement
George A. Bray,1 William E. Heisel,2 Ashkan Afshin,2 Michael D. Jensen,3 William H. Dietz,4
Michael Long,4 Robert F. Kushner,5 Stephen R. Daniels,6 Thomas A. Wadden,7 Adam G. Tsai,8
Frank B. Hu,9 John M. Jakicic,10 Donna H. Ryan,1 Bruce M. Wolfe,11 and Thomas H. Inge12,13
ABSTRACT The prevalence of obesity, measured by body mass index, has risen to unacceptable levels in both
men and women in the United States and worldwide with resultant hazardous health implications. Genetic,
environmental, and behavioral factors influence the development of obesity, and both the general public and
health professionals stigmatize those who suffer from the disease. Obesity is associated with and contributes to
a shortened life span, type 2 diabetes mellitus, cardiovascular disease, some cancers, kidney disease, obstructive
sleep apnea, gout, osteoarthritis, and hepatobiliary disease, among others. Weight loss reduces all of these
diseases in a dose-related manner—the more weight lost, the better the outcome. The phenotype of
“medically healthy obesity” appears to be a transient state that progresses over time to an unhealthy
phenotype, especially in children and adolescents. Weight loss is best achieved by reducing energy intake and
increasing energy expenditure. Programs that are effective for weight loss include peer-reviewed and approved
lifestyle modification programs, diets, commercial weight-loss programs, exercise programs, medications, and
surgery. Over-the-counter herbal preparations that some patients use to treat obesity have limited, if any, data
documenting their efficacy or safety, and there are few regulatory requirements. Weight regain is expected in
all patients, especially when treatment is discontinued. When making treatment decisions, clinicians should
consider body fat distribution and individual health risks in addition to body mass index. (Endocrine Reviews
39: 79 – 132, 2018)
INTRODUCTION
What’s past is prologue
Headwinds in the management of
obesity
DEFINING OBESITY
Introduction
Limitations of the BMI
Adults
Children
Are there metabolically healthy obese
people?
Adults
Children
Age and obesity
Adults
Children
PREVENTION OF OBESITY
Strategies for preventing obesity in
pregnancy
Strategies aimed at children
Early care and education
Schools
Strategies aimed at adults: worksites
Strategies for preventing obesity aimed
at the entire population
Food
Increasing physical activity
OBESITY AND DISEASE
Obesity and risk of death
The mechanism of obesity-associated
morbidity
Type 2 diabetes mellitus
Cancer
Myocardial infarction
Heart failure and the obesity paradox
Hypertension and stroke
Obstructive sleep apnea
Hepatobiliary disease
Gallbladder disease
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
Gout and osteoarthritis
Gout
Osteoarthritis
Effects of obesity during pregnancy
DIET, EXERCISE, AND LIFESTYLE IN
MANAGING OBESITY
Diet in managing obesity—food is more
than calories
Introduction
Very low–calorie diets
Carbohydrate subtypes,
low-carbohydrate diets, and
sugar-sweetened beverages
Dietary fat, energy density, and
low-fat diets
Low–glycemic index diets
High-protein diets
Mediterranean-style diets
Balanced-deficit diets
Comparison of diets with different
macronutrient composition
Commercial programs for weight loss
Maintenance of long-term weight loss
Future considerations/summary
Exercise in managing obesity
Introduction
Genetic factors of physical activity
Resistance vs aerobic exercise
Vigorous vs moderate exercise
ISSN Print: 0163-769X
ISSN Online: 1945-7189
Printed: in USA
Copyright © 2018
Endocrine Society
Received: 1 December 2017
Accepted: 2 December 2017
First Published Online:
6 March 2018
AFFILIATIONS
1Department of Clinical Obesity,
Pennington Biomedical Research
Center, Louisiana State University,
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 70808
2Institute of Health Metrics
and Evaluation University of
Washington, Seattle, Washington
98195
3Department of Medicine, Mayo
Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota
55905
4Redstone Global Center for
Prevention and Wellness, Milken
Institute School of Public Health,
George Washington University,
Washington, District of Columbia
20052
5Northwestern Feinberg School of
Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60611
6Department of Pediatrics,
University of Colorado Children
Hospital, Denver, Colorado 80218
7Department of Psychiatry,
University of Pennsylvania
Perelman School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104
8Kaiser Permanente Colorado,
Denver, Colorado 80111
9Department of Nutrition and
Epidemiology, Harvard T.H. Chan
School of Public Health, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115
10University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15260
11Oregon Health and Science
University, Portland, Oregon
97239
12Department of Surgery,
University of Colorado Denver,
Aurora, Colorado 80045
13Children’s Hospital Colorado,
Aurora, Colorado 80045
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00253
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
79
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Physical activity declines with age
Sedentary behavior
Treatment of patients who are
overweight or obese using exercise
with and without diet
BEHAVIORAL THERAPY IN MANAGING
OBESITY
Lifestyle methods
Self-monitoring
Stimulus control
Goal setting
Problem solving
Short-term efficacy
New developments in the delivery of
behavioral treatment
Telephone-delivered programs
Digitally-delivered programs
MEDICATION IN MANAGING OBESITY
Early history
More recent drug development:
continuing difficulties
Medications approved by the FDA for
treating obesity
Orlistat
Lorcaserin
Liraglutide
PHEN/TPM ER
Naltrexone/bupropion combination
Comparison of medications approved
for chronic weight management
Drugs approved by the FDA for
short-term treatment of patients with
obesity
Phentermine
Efficacy of phentermine
Safety of phentermine
Best practices for medications approved
for weight management
Medicating the patient for other
chronic conditions who is also
overweight or obese
What is the current status of clinical
adoption of medications for chronic
weight management?
Dietary supplements, over-the-counter
products, and other treatments with
unproven efficacy and unknown safety
Drug targets
SURGERY IN MANAGING OBESITY
Introduction
Sleeve gastrectomy
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass
Laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding
Biliopancreatic diversion with (or
without) duodenal switch
Vagal blockade
Gastrointestinal endoscopic
interventions or devices
Liposuction
Indications for bariatric surgery
Criteria for bariatric surgery
Preoperative assessment
Outcomes of bariatric surgery
Safety
Weight loss
Related outcomes/remission of T2DM
Bariatric/metabolic surgery in
adolescents
WHERE DO WE GO FROM HERE?
Introduction
What’s past is prologue
S
ome would say that the obesity epidemic began
in the s, but history provides a broader view
(–). Evidence of obesity in humans can be found in
primitive art that dates back to the Paleolithic age ().
Two thousand five hundred years ago, Hippocrates
cautioned that sudden death is more common in those
who are naturally fat than lean ().
In , the English physician Malcolm Fle-
myng wrote that obesity can be called a disease,
because it obstructs the free exercise of the animal
functions and can shorten life (). In , William
Wadd (Secretary of the Royal College of Surgeons
in London) stated that the increase of wealth and
the refinement of modern times may have banished
plague and pestilence, but it has introduced ner-
vous disorders and increased the frequency of
corpulence ().
Modern concepts of the pathophysiology of obesity
date back to the end of the th century when Antoine
Lavoisier established that life was synonymous with
oxidation (). More than  years later, Atwater and
Rosa () applied the laws of thermodynamics to hu-
man beings, and during the th century, researchers
discovered that hypothalamic tumors and tumors of
the pituitary gland could cause obesity (–).
Obesity treatments date as far back as Hippocrates,
who recommended lifestyle changes to obese patients
(, ). Two thousand years later, William Banting
(an undertaker living in London in the th century)
wrote one of the first “popular” diet books ().
“Drug” therapies can be traced back at least to the
th century when Hisdai ibn Shaprut cured “Sancho
the Fat” of obesity using theriac—a mixture of more
than  ingredients ().
The first English language texts dealing with
obesity treatment were published in  and 
and recommended chamomile soap and vinegar, as
well as other remedies (, , ).
By the beginning of the th century, doctors were
using a number of medications for treating obesity
(e.g., thyroid extract, dinitrophenol, and amphet-
amine), often with unfortunate outcomes ().
The discovery of leptin in  () (a peptide
produced in adipose tissue) marks the beginning of the
“molecular era” for obesity. People who are deficient in
this peptide become massively obese. Leptin replacement
therapy completely reverses obesity for these individuals.
However, leptin treatment has proven ineffective in the
typical obese patient who is not leptin deficient.
Rapid advances in basic science related to main-
taining an appropriate amount of body fat have
provided insights into potential treatments for obesity.
This newer understanding of the regulation of food
intake and body weight provides the basis for promising
future developments (, ).
Headwinds in the management of obesity
Despite progress in understanding obesity, advance-
ments in the clinical management of the disease
struggle against several headwinds.
First, obesity is a stigmatized condition. The
general public and health professionals often respond
negatively to overweight persons, which can negatively
affect treatment ().
Second, the desire for the cosmetic effects of weight
loss often far exceeds the desire for the health benefits
associated with reducing weight (–). This may
80
Bray et al
Management of Obesity
Endocrine Reviews, April 2018, 39(2):79–132
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 well account for the fact that there are more women
seeking help in managing obesity than men, even
though the health issues related to obesity are similar
between the sexes (–).
Although a modest % to % weight loss has
proven health benefits, it often does not provide the
cosmetic benefit that patients are looking for. This
results in a mismatch between the patient’s goals for
weight loss and what diet and exercise can realistically
achieve (). The same is true with surgical approaches
to weight loss; patients often value the appearance of
lost weight much more than the health benefits (, ,
–).
This stigma of obesity as a cosmetic issue vs
a health issue also affects how the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) reviews drugs that
manage weight loss. The FDA holds antiobesity
drugs to a higher standard of review than other
drugs, requiring that the risks from these medica-
tions be very low compared with drugs of other
classes ().
Finally, the lack of reimbursement by health in-
surers has resulted in poor sales of drug therapies for
obesity, which only further dampens the pharma-
ceutical industry’s interest in developing drug thera-
pies for obesity ().
Defining Obesity
Introduction
Historically, the medical community defined excess
weight and its associated health consequences using
population-based anthropometric measurements,
(i.e., sex-specific body weight and height using life
insurance tables) (, ). However, these data only
represented insured individuals based on norma-
tive standards without considering adiposity, and
clinicians eventually abandoned these tables in
favor of body mass index (BMI), which is a mea-
sure of body weight adjusted for height [weight
(kg)/height (m)].
The National Institutes of Health and the World
Health Organization have both adopted BMI as a cri-
terion for defining obesity (, ). This made in-
terpretation simpler, eliminated the need for sex-specific
height/weight tables, and provided a measurement that
is better correlated with other estimates of adiposity.
The measurement is based on the observation that
body weight is proportional to the squared height in
adults with normal body frames. In adults, classifi-
cation systems () and obesity guidelines (, )
define healthy body weight as a BMI between . and
. kg/m, overweight between . and . kg/m,
and obesity $ kg/m. In children and adoles-
cents, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) BMI-for-age growth charts
define overweight as a BMI at or above the th
percentile of standard weight and obesity as a BMI
above the th percentile of standard weight.
BMI provides the most useful population-level
measurement of overweight and obesity, and nu-
merous large population studies across multiple
continents have demonstrated its utility as an estimate
of risk (–). Additionally, current assessment and
management guidelines from the United States,
Canada, and Europe recommend measuring BMI as
a first screening step in evaluating adult and pediatric
patients for obesity (, –).
Overweight and obesity are worldwide problems ()
that affect . million Americans or .% of the
adult population. The most recent data from the  to
 U.S. National Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey indicate that obesity (defined as BMI $  kg/m)
affects ~.% of men and .% of women in the United
States (). Among children and adolescents aged  to 
years, the prevalence of obesity in  to  was .%
(). Fig.  shows the percentage of U.S. men and women
categorized as overweight, obese, or extremely obese
between  and . The category of extreme obesity
(BMI .  kg/m) shows the greatest proportional
change and is the most difficult group to effectively treat
without surgery.
Among adult men, the prevalence of obesity is:
Hispanic, .%; black, .%; white, .%; and Asian,
.%. In women, the prevalence of obesity is: black,
.%; Hispanic, .%; white, .%; and Asian,
.%. In children and adolescents, .% of - to
-year-olds are obese, with males and females equally
affected (). The prevalence of obesity among chil-
dren and adolescents is: Hispanic, .%; black, .%;
white, .%; and Asian, .% ().
© 2018 Endocrine Reviews  ENDOCRINE SOCIETY
1960-
1962
1971-
1974
1976-
1980
1988-
1994
1999-
2000
2003-
2004
2007-
2008
2011-
2012
10
0
20
30
40
50
Overweight
Overweight
Obesity
Obesity
Extreme obesity
Extreme obesity
Percent
Men
Women
Figure 1. Trends in the United States for adults with obesity or overweight, 1960–1962 to
2011–2012 (48).
81
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00253
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Limitations of the BMI
Adults
Although research had demonstrated the utility of
BMI in assessing population-based mortality and
disease-specific morbidity, there are two major limi-
tations in using BMI alone to diagnose obesity in an
individual.
The first is the inability of BMI to distinguish
weight associated with muscle vs fat.
Population studies have demonstrated a high
specificity of using BMI cutoff values to diagnose
obesity but low sensitivity to identify adiposity, thus
missing approximately half of people with excess fat
(). This is particularly concerning in the elderly
population, where a reduced lean body mass (sarco-
penia) might be misclassified as a healthy BMI ().
Dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry or air displacement
plethysmography are both accurate methods to assess
lean body mass and body fat, but they are expensive
and thus impractical for routine clinical application.
Using bioelectric impedance to measure body
water provides a relatively inexpensive measure of
body fat mass vs fat-free mass (as body fat contains
more water). However, this method has large in-
terindividual variations, suggesting that this method
may be insufficient for estimating individual body fat
mass and fat-free mass ().
BMI also does not distinguish body fat distribution,
a known determinant of metabolic risk. Measuring fat
distribution helps identify higher risk individuals, because
increased visceral fat predicts the development of the
metabolic syndrome, type  diabetes mellitus (TDM),
and total and cardiovascular mortality risk better than
total body fat alone (–). Several anthropometric
techniques are available to estimate the distribution of
body fat, such as waist circumference alone, the ratio of
waist circumference divided by hip circumference (waist-
to-hip ratio ([WHR]), and the ratio of waist circum-
ference divided by height (waist-to-height ratio). These
measures have been associated with the risk of de-
veloping heart disease, TDM, and other chronic
problems associated with obesity (, ). Combining
waist circumference with BMI provides a way to in-
corporate weight distribution into measures of obesity.
Studies have demonstrated a strong link between waist
circumference and BMI for both cardiovascular disease
(CVD) and TDM (, ). Waist circumference is most
useful in individuals with a BMI of # kg/m ().
However, despite its promise, most clinicians only use
BMI and not waist circumference as a gauge of risk from
obesity. Beyond recommending annual BMI and waist
circumference testing, the American Association of
Clinical Endocrinologists also recommends evaluating
other potential associated events ().
Genetic factors are involved in the relationship of
waist circumference to risk of CVD or TDM. A
polygenic risk score for increased WHR adjusted for
BMI was significantly associated with adverse car-
diometabolic traits and higher risks for both TDM
and coronary heart disease (). A  standard de-
viation increase in WHR adjusted for BMI was as-
sociated with a % higher risk of TDM (odds ratio,
. [% confidence interval (CI), . to .]) and
a % higher risk of coronary heart disease [odds ratio,
. (% CI, . to .)].
Children
There has also been concern about the association
between obesity and visceral or central adiposity
among children and adolescents, which has led to
suggestions for using waist circumference in pediatric
patients as well (). However, there are many issues
with the implementation of this in routine pediatric
practice, such as lack of standardized definitions of
waist circumference and the inability of waist cir-
cumference to add much to the strong association
between BMI and comorbidity in children (). If
clinicians are going to use waist circumference to help
define obesity in children, it is likely that we will need
population-based percentile values, similar to those for
BMI (–).
Because of these limitations, BMI has also emerged as
the most useful approach in children . years of age ().
Are there metabolically healthy people
with obesity?
Adults
In cross-sectional studies, many individuals with
obesity do not manifest “associated” comorbidities,
such as prediabetes, dyslipidemia, hypertension, or
other comorbidities (). These individuals often have
a predominantly lower body fat distribution and
normal insulin regulation of adipose tissue lipolysis
(, ). The phenotype “metabolically healthy obe-
sity” (MHO) meets the standard BMI cutoff point for
obesity ($ kg/m) but does not have other elements
of the metabolic syndrome, such as insulin resistance
(, ). They have lower levels of visceral and ectopic
fat, less liver steatosis (), and a lower degree of
systemic inflammation. Among the  studies iden-
tified by Rey-L´
opez et al. (), there were  definitions
of metabolic health that relied on four criteria: blood
pressure (BP), high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cho-
lesterol, triglycerides, and plasma glucose. BMI $
 kg m was the main criterion for obesity. In this
group of studies, the prevalence of MHO ranged
between % and % (, –).
Whereas short-term cross-sectional studies suggest
that MHO men and women are not at increased risk of
CVD, longitudinal studies suggest that this phenotype
may not be benign, and that this group is at higher risk
for increased carotid artery intima-media thickness,
coronary calcification, impaired vasoreactivity, and/or
other cardiovascular events, as well as all-cause
82
Bray et al
Management of Obesity
Endocrine Reviews, April 2018, 39(2):79–132
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 mortality (, –). Therefore, clinicians should
view MHO as a transient or intermediary state that
may progress over time to an unhealthy phenotype in
many people. Cardiorespiratory fitness is one factor
related to MHO. Research has shown that cardio-
respiratory fitness lowers the risk of all-cause
mortality for metabolically unhealthy individuals
with obesity and those with and without the MHO
phenotype (–), suggesting that the inclusion of
cardiorespiratory fitness along with BMI and waist
circumference may improve the assessment of risk
status. Several systems are available for evaluating
and staging obesity when assessing risk (–).
Increasing physical activity might thus be a valuable
recommendation for individuals with MHO. Ad-
ditionally, clinicians should observe these in-
dividuals for the risk of developing cardiometabolic
disease (–).
Children
There also has been interest in whether children and
adolescents can be obese but metabolically healthy.
Some pediatric patients with obesity, even some with
severe obesity, have few metabolic or clinical abnor-
malities (). However, the presence of obesity tends to
track from childhood to adolescence and on to
adulthood. Thus, there is a high likelihood that a child
with obesity will become an obese adult, often with the
severity of obesity increasing over time with ongoing
weight gain. This makes it likely that children and
adolescents with obesity, even when metabolically
healthy at presentation, will develop associated dis-
eases over time.
Age and obesity
Adults
The current guidelines for assessing obesity among
adults do not consider age as an independent criterion.
However, there are physiological and functional
changes that occur among the aging population that
may confound the interpretation of BMI and risk
estimates in older people. Body composition changes
associated with aging include sarcopenia, reduced
bone mineral density, and the accumulation of visceral
fat; BMI alone will not detect these changes (). BMI
values associated with the lowest relative mortality are
slightly higher in older than in younger adults, which is
often misinterpreted to suggest that obesity is not as
harmful in the elderly. BMI may be a less appropriate
index in the elderly because of sarcopenia (). Centrally
located fat (waist circumference) and relative loss of fat-
free mass may become more important than BMI in
determining the health risk associated with obesity in
the elderly (). The importance of loss of muscle mass
was clearly shown in the Health ABC Study where older
adults with greater thigh muscle loss had a higher risk of
mortality compared with those with preserved thigh
muscle, which suggests that efforts should be made to
“conserve” muscle mass in old age ().
Children
During childhood and adolescence, there are sub-
stantial changes in growth, body composition, and
pubertal status. During periods of rapid growth,
weight and height may be somewhat mismatched, with
weight gain preceding growth in height. However, in
the past three decades, children are often gaining
weight at a pace much faster than what could be
considered healthy or normal.
Another critical period is the time when growth in
height ceases and caloric requirements decrease. If
calorie intake does not adjust, weight gain is the likely
result.
Furthermore, adolescence is a time of relative in-
sulin resistance (). Because of this insulin resistance,
adolescents who are obese become more susceptible to
the development of TDM.
Prevention of Obesity
Recent trends suggest that we are making some
progress in the prevention and control of the obesity
epidemic using several strategies outlined below. First,
the prevalence of obesity among - to -year-old
children has decreased significantly since  to
 (). Second, it has plateaued among - to
-year-olds (). In contrast, however, obesity has
continued to increase in adult women ().
Strategies for preventing obesity in pregnancy
Three systematic reviews relating weight gain during
pregnancy and pregnancy outcomes found that dietary
interventions reduced gestational weight gain and the
risks of preeclampsia, hypertension, and shoulder
dystocia in infants. No differences occurred in the
incidence of small-for-gestational-age infants as a re-
sult of these treatments (–).
A  Cochrane review found that diet, exercise,
or both reduced excessive gestational weight gain by an
average of %. Dietary interventions—including low
glycemic index diets, supervised or unsupervised ex-
ercise programs, and diet combined with exercise—all
had comparable effects. Maternal hypertension was
reduced, but preeclampsia was not. No differences
were found between intervention and control groups
in the risk of preterm births or macrosomia. However,
a % reduction in macrosomia occurred among
women who were overweight or had obesity. Newborn
respiratory distress syndrome was also decreased in the
intervention groups among mothers who were either
overweight or obese (). Maternal consumption of
sugar-sweetened beverages, similar to maternal smok-
ing, may also have long-term detrimental effects on
their offspring. Gillman et al. () reported that at an
“A 2015 Cochrane review
found that diet, exercise, or
both reduced excessive
gestational weight gain by an
average of 20%.”
83
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00253
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 average age of . years children of mothers who
consumed two or more servings per day during the
second trimester of pregnancy were both fatter and
heavier. This provides an additional important piece of
information to provide to the pregnant woman.
Strategies aimed at children
The two most important settings for the prevention of
obesity in children and adolescents are early care and
education (ECE) and schools. Children spend a lot of
time in these settings, where there are great oppor-
tunities for instilling positive behaviors regarding
nutrition and physical activity.
Early care and education
Although millions of young children are enrolled in ECE,
there are only a few intervention studies on preventing or
mitigating obesity in these settings (). One of these
studies is the Romp and Chomp Intervention conducted
in Australia. This study used multiple ECE and com-
munity interventions directed at children  to  years of
age. The interventions included logical and proven targets
for weight control, such as reducing sugar-sweetened
drinks and energy-dense foods, increasing fruit and
vegetable intake and active play, and reducing television
time. The study reported significant reductions in obesity
prevalence in - and .-year-old children compared with
children who did not receive the interventions ().
Because of the immense impact that policy and
environmental changes in ECE could have on child-
hood obesity, widespread efforts are underway to de-
velop and incorporate standards and programs to
increase physical activity and improve diets in ECE
settings (). One such program is the U.S. Department
of Agriculture’s Child and Adult Care Food Program,
which helps child care institutions provide nutritious
foods that contribute to the wellness, healthy growth,
and development of young children ().
Schools
A recent Cochrane meta-analysis of  studies (in-
cluding , children) () found beneficial effects
of a number of components of school-based in-
terventions. These included: school curricula that
incorporate healthy eating, physical activity, and
body image; increased sessions for physical activity and
the development of fundamental movement skills
throughout the school week; improvements in the nu-
tritional quality of the food that schools supply; envi-
ronments and cultural practices that support children
eating healthier foods and being active throughout each
day; support for teachers and other staff to implement
health promotion strategies and activities (e.g., pro-
fessional development, capacity building activities); and
parental support and home activities that encourage
children to be more active, eat more nutritious foods, and
spend less time in screen-based activities (). Beneficial
effects were most notable in children  to  years old.
A number of long-term studies lasting $ months
provide more specific information on the effects of
school-based interventions. We summarized these in
Table  (–).
Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) have shown
that the reduction or elimination of sugar-sweetened
drinks (often through the substitution of calorie-free
beverages) has effectively reduced rates of weight gain
in children and adolescents (). These observations
are consistent with the association between re-
ductions in sugar-sweetened drinks and both the
decrease in the prevalence of obesity in - to -year-
old US children and the plateau in the prevalence of
obesity in - to -year-old US children. The absence
of a significant effect in several of these studies may
indicate that a significant caloric deficit relative to the
control condition was not established or sustained
().
Compared with efforts in specific settings, clinical
interventions aimed at prevention have had limited
impact ().
Strategies aimed at adults: worksites
In , the Center for Disease Control’s Task Force
on Community Preventive Services concluded that
worksite health promotion programs that improved
physical activity and/or nutrition were effective in
reducing body weight and BMI (). Studies were
limited to those with at least  months of follow-up. A
pooled effect of nine RCTs found a weight decrease of
. kg, and a pooled effect of six RCTs found a de-
crease of . BMI units (). Most of the studies
combined informational and behavioral strategies to
influence diet and physical activity; fewer studies
modified the work environment (e.g., cafeteria, ex-
ercise facilities) to promote healthy choices. Recent
efforts to reduce sugar-sweetened drink consumption
in hospitals have effectively used labeling and choice
architecture as environmental strategies to reduce
sugar-sweetened drink consumption (, ).
Strategies for preventing obesity aimed at the
entire population
Population-based messages aimed at the public con-
cerning food and exercise require individual com-
mitment if they are to be effective (). If individuals
follow the advice in the message, this strategy would be
sufficient to overcome the epidemic of obesity. However,
positive nutritional messages are often dwarfed by al-
ternative messages urging consumption of less healthful
foods, and the built environment is often a barrier to
healthful exercise behaviors.
One approach might be to re-engineer the built
environment to displace car use with physically active
transportation options (such as walking and biking)
and increase the number of accessible healthful food
options (). A systematic review by Papas et al. ()
identified  studies that examined the association
84
Bray et al
Management of Obesity
Endocrine Reviews, April 2018, 39(2):79–132
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 between obesity and the numbers of outlets for
physical activity and food,  of which were cross-
sectional. Seventeen of these studies found a sig-
nificant relationship between the built environment
(food outlets or physical activity opportunities) and
the risk of obesity. The number of recreational
facilities and likelihood of overweight in adolescents
were significantly related. However, few studies have
examined the impact of changes in the built envi-
ronment with changes in the prevalence of obesity.
One exception is a study of the impact of housing
changes among people living in poverty. Moving from
a high-poverty neighborhood to a neighborhood of lower
poverty was associated with a reduced prevalence of severe
obesity ().
Use of public transit has also been associated with
increased levels of physical activity (). For example,
the implementation of a light rail system in Charlotte,
North Carolina, was associated with a higher odds of
meeting the daily physical activity requirement and
a lower BMI (). Neighborhood walkability appears
to have much the same effect ().
Table 1. Long-Term Studies or Preventive Interventions in Children and Adolescents
Reference
Sample
Design
Results
Epstein et al., 2001 (102)
26 children
12-mo RCT
1.1% decrease in overweight prevalence with
increased fruits and vegetables vs 2.4% with
decreased fat and sugar
6–11 y old
Increased fruits and vegetables vs
decreased fat and sugar
Differences not significant
James et al., 2004 (103)
644 children
1-y intervention; classrooms randomized
to reduce sugar drink consumption
No significant difference in BMI z-score
7–11 y old
Ebbeling et al., 2012 (104)
224 overweight or obese
adolescents; mean age
15 y
RCT
Significantly lower rates of weight gain in
intervention group
Sugar-free drinks and behavior modification
vs untreated control
de Ruyter et al., 2012 (105)
641 children
18-mo RCT
Significantly lower rates of weight gain among
group receiving sugar-free drinks
5–12 y old
Sugar-free drinks vs drinks containing
sugar at lunch
Sallis et al., 2009 (106)
995 4th and 5th grade
students
PE taught by PE instructor or teacher
vs control
Some fitness measures improved in girls
No significant differences in changes in skinfolds
Caballero et al., 2003 (107)
1704 Native American
children 8–11 y old
3-y study randomized by schools to
control or intervention (41 schools);
No significant difference in body composition
or PA
changes in dietary intake, increased
PA, classroom curriculum changes,
family involvement
Gortmaker et al., 1999 (108)
1295 6th–7th grade
students
2-y RCT with five intervention and
five control schools
Decreased prevalence of obesity in girls
Decreased TV, decreased fat and
increased fruit and vegetable
intakes, and PA
Plachta-Danielzek et al.,
2011 (109)
240 intervention and 952
nonintervention
children
Nutrition intervention delivered within
schools and daily running games vs
controls
No significant difference in increases in overweight
between intervention and control students in
8-y follow-up
Mean age 6 y old
Significant decreases in BMI z-scores with upper
income students
Sahota et al., 2001 (110)
636 children, 7–11 y old
Randomized by school. Teacher training,
changes in school meals, and
development of school actions plans
to promote healthy eating and PA
No significant differences in BMI in intervention
compared with control schools
314 intervention
322 control
Abbreviations: PA, physical activity; PE, physical education; RCT, randomized controlled trial; TV, television.
85
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00253
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Food
Faith et al. () concluded that manipulating the ease
of food access and/or restricting access to certain foods
might influence food purchases, consumption, and
possibly weight change, although this requires further
research. In contrast, the food industry favors the
hypothesis that obesity results from reduced levels of
physical activity and strongly supports providing more
places for people to exercise and more healthful food
alternatives as a strategy to help overcome the obesity
problem (, ). However, the expense of healthy
food items and limited access to healthful foods in
many lower income communities pose significant
challenges. To address access to healthful food options,
the Healthy Food Financing Initiative introduced
supermarkets to underserved communities. However,
this did not increase the consumption of healthful
foods (). Ideally, improved access needs to be
accompanied by pricing and promotion strategies to
increase consumption of more healthful products.
Some of the strategies for introducing healthful
food options include introducing farmer’s markets,
subsidizing the availability of fresh fruits and vege-
tables to school children, lowering the cost of fruits
and vegetables while increasing the price of high-fat or
high-sugar foods in school or worksite cafeterias, and/
or changing marketing strategies. These strategies, for
the most part, increase fruit and vegetable con-
sumption (–). Importantly, however, note that
addressing fruit and vegetable consumption alone
might not be enough, as the impact of fruit and
vegetable consumption on obesity prevention is un-
certain. However, increased fruit and vegetable con-
sumption does confer significant health benefits. Diets
high in fruits and vegetables and low in fat and sugar
lowered BP across the range of salt intake in in-
dividuals who were maintaining their body weight
(, ).
Taxation provides another strategy to reduce
consumption of less healthful products by increasing
their price. Smed et al. () has shown that among
Europeans, increasing the tax or reducing the subsidies
on unhealthful items and reducing the tax on healthful
items through the value-added tax system could shift
consumption toward healthier foods (). Because of
their contribution to obesity, taxation of sugar-
sweetened drinks has become a major focus in the
United States. Although many municipalities have
imposed sales taxes on sugar-sweetened drinks, this
approach is less effective than an excise tax, which
increases the price of the product on the shelf. In ,
Berkeley, California, passed a sugar drink tax of $.
per ounce. A study of sugar-sweetened drinks in that
city
reported
that
consumption
in
low-income
neighborhoods (compared with two neighboring
communities) declined by % and water consump-
tion increased by % (). In January of ,
Mexico imposed an excise tax of  peso per liter on
sugar-sweetened beverages. Colchero et al. () re-
ported that purchases of these taxed beverages de-
creased .% in  and .% in , yielding an
average reduction of .% during the study period.
Whether this translates into improvements in health
outcome is currently unknown.
Increasing physical activity
As indicated above, physical activity levels in both
children and adults have declined substantially.
Helping incorporate exercise into how people get from
where they live to where they learn, work, shop, play,
and pray has become a prominent strategy to reverse
this trend. Table  lists  strategies that the CDC’s
Guide for Community Preventive Services identified
for increasing physical activity ().
The CDC has also released a convenient guide that
focuses on how to implement these strategies ().
China provides an interesting example of how ur-
banization and improved incomes reduces physical ac-
tivity (, ). As recently as  years ago, the bicycle
was a major mode of transport for Chinese. Since then,
the automobile has relegated bicycles to museums.
Obesity and Disease
Obesity and risk of death
For many illnesses related to obesity, there is a cur-
vilinear increase in risk as a function of weight (Fig. )
(). The Global Burden of Disease project ()
reported this relationship between BMI and all-cause
mortality in  prospective studies that included .
million people with a median follow-up of . years.
Nearly  million subjects who survived  years were
free of chronic diseases at recruitment. There was
a clear J-shaped relationship between the BMI of the
, who died and all-cause mortality. The lowest
Table 2. Evidence-Based Recommendations To Increase
Physical Activity in Communities
Community-wide campaigns to promote physical activity
Point of decision prompts for stair use
Individually adapted health behavior change programs
Enhanced school-based physical education
Social support in community settings
Creation of or enhanced access to places for physical activity
combined with informational outreach activities
Street-scale urban design and land-use policies
Community-scale urban design and land-use policies
Active transport to school
Transportation and travel policies and practices
86
Bray et al
Management of Obesity
Endocrine Reviews, April 2018, 39(2):79–132
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 mortality was with a BMI of . to . kg/m. Below
this (BMI, . to . kg/ m), mortality significantly
increased by % [hazard ratio (HR), .]. In the
individuals with a BMI of . to . kg/m, all-cause
mortality increased by % (HR, .), and with a BMI
of . to . kg/m, it increased by % (HR, .).
For grade- obesity (BMI . to ,. kg/m), all-
cause mortality increased by % (HR, .), and for
grade- obesity (BMI, . to ,. kg/m), it in-
creased by % (HR, .). For those with grade-
obesity (BMI, . to ,. kg/m), all-cause mortality
rose by % (HR, .). For each  BMI unit increase,
total mortality rose by %, mortality from chronic
kidney disease rose by %, and mortality from TDM
rose by % ().
Just as weight gain can increase the risk of mor-
tality, weight loss can reduce the risk of mortality in
obese individuals. The results from the Swedish Obese
Subjects Study (which compared long-term follow-up
of obese patients after surgical intervention for obesity
with a matched but unoperated control group) showed
a % reduction in overall mortality after . years
(). Individuals in the Look AHEAD trial had
a similar outcome after a median follow-up of .
years. Those who lost at least % of their body weight
in the first year of the study had a % lower risk of the
primary CVD outcome [HR, . (% CI, . to
.); P = .] and a % reduced risk of the sec-
ondary outcome [HR, . (% CI, . to .); P =
.] compared with individuals who were weight
stable or gained weight. Participants in the intensive
lifestyle intervention group who lost at least % of
their body weight had a % lower risk of the primary
CVD outcome [HR, . (% CI, . to .); P =
.] and a % lower risk of the secondary CVD
outcome [HR, . (% CI, . to .); P = .]
compared with the control group ().
The mechanism of obesity-associated morbidity
The effects of obesity on the body appear to be me-
diated by several major pathways. Fig.  shows how
obesity as a disease process might lead to a variety of
other diseases ().
A variety of types of adipose tissue dysfunction clearly
play a role in the genesis of many obesity-related diseases.
These include impairments in adipocyte storage and
release of fatty acids, overproduction or underproduction
of “adipokines” and cytokines (), hormonal conver-
sion, and the adverse mechanical effects of greater tissue
mass.
The pathology of obesity is closely linked with body
fat distribution. Upper body/visceral or ectopic fat
accumulation is a much better predictor of insulin
resistance, dyslipidemia, and such than total fat.
Visceral fat is considered one of the “ectopic” fat
depots, along with hepatic, intramyocellular, in-
tramuscular, and pericardial fat. Humans with the
ability to respond to excess energy intake by recruiting
new, healthy subcutaneous adipocytes are relatively
protected from many of the metabolic consequences
of obesity. Those without this ability will store excess
fat in ectopic depots, including liver, visceral fat, and
muscle (). This is supported by the finding that
larger subcutaneous fat cells are associated with more
accumulation of visceral fat during overfeeding, be-
cause they cannot expand to store more fat ().
One study reported that the predisposition for
TDM was associated with impaired recruitment of
new adipose cells to store excess lipids in subcutaneous
adipose tissue (). Another study reported that
adults who develop more leg adipocytes in response to
overfeeding have a lesser increase in abdominal
subcutaneous adipose size (). Fabbrini et al. ()
showed that those with MHO are resistant to the
adverse metabolic effects of moderate weight gain,
whereas metabolically unhealthy people are predis-
posed to such adverse effects. These authors concluded
that increased adipose tissue capacity for lipogenesis
might help protect people with MHO from weight
gain–induced metabolic dysfunction, at least with
modest weight gain during shorter periods of time.
In addition to the known toxic effects of excess
fatty acids, abnormalities in the hormonal function of
adipose tissue may contribute to metabolic disease.
Adiponectin is the most abundant peptide produced
by adipose tissue (). It improves insulin sensitivity
and vascular function. Adiponectin concentrations are
inversely related to adipocyte size and visceral fat mass.
In contrast, most adipokines are secreted in larger
quantities as fat cells increase in size.
Researchers have discovered a large number of
adipokines, but their exact role in disease is often
unknown. The angiotensinogen produced by adipose
tissue is a precursor for angiotensin, which can con-
tribute to the risk for hypertension. Additionally, the
aromatase enzymes in adipose tissue can convert
sterols (androstenedione) to estrogen, which may
explain the greater risk of breast and endometrial
cancer in women with obesity, particularly post-
menopausal women with obesity where estrogens
derived from fat are their principal source of estrogens
().
Type 2 diabetes mellitus
There is overwhelming evidence that BMI, central
adiposity, and the increase in body weight predict future
TDM (). A meta-analysis of prospective studies
provided evidence that as upper body adiposity in-
creases, both the risk of the metabolic syndrome and of
developing TDM also increase (). The duration of
obesity in younger compared with older individuals is
also associated with a greater risk for TDM ().
Weight gain in adult life increases the risk of developing
TDM, particularly in the age range  to  years ().
The duration of increased body weight is also a risk
factor for TDM. For a given level of excess BMI-years
87
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00253
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 in the National Longitudinal Survey, younger in-
dividuals compared with older ones (and Hispanic and
black compared with white individuals) had a higher
risk of developing TDM ().
Weight loss is clearly beneficial in reducing the risk
of converting to diabetes. In the Diabetes Prevention
Program, a median weight loss of .% during . years
reduced the risk of converting from prediabetes to
diabetes by % (). Similarly, bariatric surgery has
repeatedly reversed diabetes to normal glucose tol-
erance (–).
Cancer
Certain forms of cancer are significantly increased in
individuals who are overweight (, ). Males face
increased risk for neoplasms of the colon, rectum, and
prostate. In women, cancers of the reproductive sys-
tem, including breast (), endometrium (), and
gallbladder, are more common. Women who gained
 kg or more after age  were at increased risk of
breast cancer (RR . P , .). Women who
gained  kg or more after menopause were also at
increased risk for breast cancer compared with women
whose weight remained stable. Women who lost and
maintained $ kg and who did not use post-
menopausal hormones were at lower risk than those
who maintained weight (RR, .) ().
Breast cancer is not only related to total body fat
but also may have a more important relationship to
central body fat (). This relationship to body fat
may also help explain why breast cancer risk is in-
creased at age  in women in the highest vs the lowest
quartile of BMI (). Circulating, unconjugated es-
tradiol may mediate the relationship between in-
creased body fat and breast cancer (), as well as the
relationship between increased body fat and the risk of
endometrial cancer ().
Myocardial infarction
Many studies show that as BMI increases, there is an
increased risk for heart disease (, ) and heart
failure (). Data from the Nurses’ Health Study
indicate that the risk for U.S. women developing
coronary artery disease is increased .-fold with
a BMI .  kg/m compared with women with
a BMI ,  kg/m (). A BMI of  to , kg/m
increases the relative risk to .. Weight gain also
strongly affects this risk at any initial BMI. That is, at
all levels of initial BMI (and within BMI categories)
there was a graded increase in risk of heart disease with
increasing waist circumference. Similarly, within waist
circumference categories there was an increased risk of
heart disease with increasing BMI (). Major risk of
CVD was increased % for each . kg/m increase in
BMI among  British men ().
Central adiposity, as reflected in waist circumfer-
ence, is also a strong predictor of the risk for CVD
(). When increased central adiposity is added to
other components of the metabolic syndrome, the
prediction is even higher. Using the National Health
and Examination Survey data, Janssen et al. ()
showed that BMI predicted the risk of the metabolic
syndrome in men. However, when BMI is adjusted for
waist circumference as a continuous variable, waist
circumference accounted for essentially all of the risk
for the metabolic syndrome. In a meta-analysis in-
cluding  studies, indices of abdominal obesity (in-
cluding WHR and waist circumference) were better
discriminators than BMI of cardiovascular risk factors,
including TDM, hypertension, and dyslipidemia
().
Both atrial fibrillation (, ) and congestive
heart failure (, ) have a higher risk in subjects
who are overweight. In the Multi-Ethnic Study of
Atherosclerosis, the risk of congestive heart failure in
obesity was associated with elevated levels of in-
flammatory markers (interleukin- and C-reactive
protein) and albuminuria ().
Heart failure and the obesity paradox
Obesity increases the risk of heart failure, yet some
studies have found that elevated BMI may improve
survival in individuals who already have congestive
heart failure, a phenomenon called “the obesity par-
adox” (–). This appears to contradict the
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
0.5
1.0
2.0
4.0
8.0
Hazard ratio
Women
Studies
Men
Men
Women
157
141
Participants
913174
2743371
Deaths
115328
264657
HR per 5 kg/m2
1.51 (1.46–1.56)
1.30 (1.26–1.33)
Mean body-mass index (kg/m2)
Figure 2. BMI and all-cause mortality. Vertical bars are 95% CI. The Global Mortality Collaboration,
2016 (142).
88
Bray et al
Management of Obesity
Endocrine Reviews, April 2018, 39(2):79–132
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 curvilinear relationship of BMI to body weight (,
–, ).
One possible explanation is “selection bias.” This
occurs when studies select individuals as higher risk
because they are identified after the disease develops
rather than before. A simple way to eliminate this bias
is to match the start of exposure to the start of follow-
up. The same is true regarding the effect of obesity on
the risk of mortality (, –). Alternatively, the
obesity paradox may reflect some capacity of the in-
dividual with obesity to overcome cardiovascular risk.
Still another explanation for this paradox may be the
difference between what BMI tells us and what the
underlying fat distribution is doing. In a recent study,
Padwal et al. () found that BMI and body fat have
different predictive values for cardiovascular risk. If fat
is the culprit, then measuring BMI may lead to an
erroneous conclusion ().
Hypertension and stroke
Hypertension is a global public health problem.
Roughly  billion people worldwide are estimated to
have clinically significant elevations in BP (), with
~ million of them in the United States (). Hy-
pertension is the most important of  risk factors for
worldwide risk of coronary heart disease, stroke, renal
disease, and all-cause mortality (). Furthermore,
antihypertensive therapy results in reductions of in-
cidence of stroke, myocardial infarction, and heart
failure ().
Among hypertensive individuals who reduced their
BP levels following a successful weight-loss in-
tervention, those who maintained weight loss also
maintained lower BP levels, and those who regained
weight returned to their baseline BP levels (). In
a meta-analysis of  studies, Neter et al. () found
that weight loss averaging . kg after diet and/or
exercise programs reduced BP by ./. mm Hg
(systolic BP/diastolic BP). The studies with weight
losses . kg showed larger decreases in BP than those
with less weight loss.
Obstructive sleep apnea
In contrast to the relatively benign effects of excess
weight on most components of respiratory function,
overweight predisposes to obstructive sleep apnea
Figure 3. A schematic model of the intermediary mechanisms for dyslipidemia, insulin resistance, T2DM, heart disease, hypertension,
some forms of cancer, OSA, NAFLD, and osteoarthritis.
Subcutaneous
fat expansion
Further subcutaneous
fat expansion
Expansion of ectopic
(visceral) adipose stores
Heart
Islets
Muscle
Liver
Dysfunctional
subcutaneous fat
Hypertension
Reduced insulin
secretion
Peripheral insulin
resistance
Additional positive 
fat balance
Positive fat balance
Constitutional limit to 
subcutaneous fat expansion
Contractile
dysfunction
Dyslipidemia 
increased CRP
Increased glucose
production
Increased 
pharyngeal fat
Increased 
body mass
Increased 
estradiol
Increased 
vascular volume
Increased cytokine release
Decreased adiponectin release
Increased angiotensinogen
Increased FFA release
Decreased TG storage
Healthy body composition
Breast/Endometrial
cancer
Osteoarthritis
Sleep apnea
Diabetes mellitus
© 2018 Endocrine Reviews ENDOCRINE SOCIETY
or
Ectopic lipids
Increase portal FFA
and IL6
89
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00253
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 (OSA), which can be severe and life-threatening ().
OSA is more common in men than women. An in-
creased snoring index and increased maximal noc-
turnal sound intensity are characteristic. Nocturnal
oxygen saturation is significantly reduced (). A
study of obese patients with diabetes using poly-
somnography showed that .% of the participants
had moderate OSA, and .% had the severe form.
Waist circumference was significantly related to the
presence of OSA, and severe OSA was most likely in
individuals with a higher BMI (). Independently of
obesity, OSA is associated with features of the met-
abolic syndrome, including hypertension, TDM, and
increased cardiovascular risk, possibly mediated by
stress responses and hypoxia. Excess daytime sleepi-
ness is an important consequence and can be a risk for
driving and other tasks that require alertness ().
Hepatobiliary disease
Gallbladder disease
Obesity is associated with an increased risk of gall-
bladder disease. In a meta-analysis of gallbladder
disease and obesity, Aune et al. () reported that the
risk of gallbladder disease increased even within
normal BMI ranges. For each -unit increase in BMI,
the relative risk of gallbladder disease increased %.
For a  cm increase in waist circumference, the in-
crease in relative risk was %.
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
Fatty liver disease is often associated with obesity ().
Excess liver fat without inflammation/hepatocellular
injury is called nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD),
which may progress to nonalcoholic steatohepatitis
(NASH) and eventually cirrhosis. The diagnosis of
NAFLD requires evidence of excess liver fat in the
absence of secondary causes. NASH is diagnosed when
there is evidence of hepatocellular injury (most often in
the context of fatty liver) and is of greater concern
because it poses a genuine risk of progression to fibrosis,
cirrhosis, greater risk for hepatocellular carcinoma, and
cirrhosis-related liver failure.
The prevalence of NAFLD ranges from % to %,
depending on the diagnostic approaches and pop-
ulations studied. The estimated prevalence of NASH is
% to %. Both liver fat and fibrosis were increased as
a function of time in nonhuman primates fed a high-
fructose diet vs nonhuman primates without the
added fructose ().
NAFLD is considered by some to be the hepatic
manifestation of the metabolic syndrome (). Fatty
liver is extremely common in patients undergoing
bariatric surgery (prevalence % to %). The
prevalence of fatty liver in the United States has been
increasing steadily from  to  with obesity as
an independent predictor (). In a meta-analysis of
 studies ( of which were prospective), Li et al. ()
found that obesity produced a .-fold increased risk
of developing NAFLD. Moreover, there was a dose
response to rising BMI, with the relative risk increasing
. for each  unit increase in BMI. Another meta-
analysis () found that for each  unit increase in
waist circumference, the odds ratio of NAFLD in-
creased ., and for each  unit increase in BMI, the
odds ratio increased .. The prevalence is greater in
Hispanic than white populations and less in blacks
than whites. NAFLD and NASH are also more
common in persons with TDM.
Gout and osteoarthritis
Gout
Aune et al. () reported on the relationship of BMI
to the risk of gout in  prospective studies that in-
cluded , cases of gout among a population of
, (median follow-up of . years). The sum-
mary relative risk for a -unit increment in BMI was
. for all studies combined (% CI, . to .).
The summary relative risk per -unit increase in BMI
was . for men (% CI, . to .) and . for
women (% CI, . to .). The relative risks were
., ., ., and . for persons with a BMI of ,
, , and  kg/m, respectively, compared with
persons with a BMI of  kg/m. The study also as-
sociated increased risk with BMI in young adulthood,
WHR, and weight gain from age  to  to midlife,
but the analyses included few studies.
Osteoarthritis
Osteoarthritis is likewise significantly increased in
individuals who are overweight or obese. The osteo-
arthritis that develops in the knees and ankles may be
directly related to the trauma associated with the
degree of excess body weight (). However, the
increased osteoarthritis in non–weight-bearing joints
suggests that some components of the excess weight
may alter cartilage and bone metabolism independent
of weight bearing. Increased rates of osteoarthritis
account for a significant component of the cost of
overweight and for the associated disability ().
Okoro et al. () found that class- obesity (BMI .
 kg/m) was associated with survey-reported dis-
ability among individuals . years of age who re-
ported arthritis, as well as those who did not report
arthritis.
Effects of obesity during pregnancy
A narrative analysis of  reviews on pregnancy in
women with obesity () showed that gestational
diabetes, preeclampsia, gestational hypertension, de-
pression,
instrumental
and
cesarean
birth,
and
surgical-site infection are more likely to occur in
pregnant women with obesity compared with women
with a healthy weight. Obesity in pregnancy is also
linked to greater risk of preterm birth, large-for-
90
Bray et al
Management of Obesity
Endocrine Reviews, April 2018, 39(2):79–132
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 gestational-age
babies,
fetal
defects,
congenital
anomalies, and perinatal death. Additionally, breast-
feeding initiation rates are lower, and there is greater
risk of early breastfeeding cessation in women with
obesity compared with healthy-weight women.
Diet, Exercise, and Lifestyle in
Managing Obesity
Diet in managing obesity—food is more
than calories
Introduction
The idea that single food items or diets are able to
promote and maintain weight loss has stimulated
numerous studies to investigate different proportions
of dietary fat, protein, or carbohydrates as weight-loss
diets () (Table ). Underlying all of these dietary
approaches, however, is the fact that to lose weight,
energy balance must be negative. Although calories are
the essential component of energy balance, and re-
ducing them is important for weight loss, food consists
of more than calories. When choosing a diet, it is
important to select foods that you enjoy and substitute
lower calorie healthy foods that can improve the
quality of your diet. Macronutrient composition aside,
a reduction of energy intake is still an essential
component of the effectiveness of any diet. In the
Diabetes Prevention Program, calorie reduction was
the major predictor of weight loss (). Reduced
intake in fat was the second predictor, and physical
activity was only an important predictor when the
calorie intake was unchanged ().
A calorie deficit of  kcal/d produces a weekly
deficit of ~ kcal, which is roughly equivalent to the
energy in  pound (. kg) of fat tissue (). Al-
though this calculation would predict linear weight
loss, weight loss is not linear; it is curvilinear. At the
initial stage, weight loss tends to be more rapid, and
then slows until it reaches a plateau (–). The
initial reduction of calorie intake initiates a number of
compensatory mechanisms, which tend to drive food
intake up and reduce weight loss (–).
Several factors contribute to the different patterns of
response during weight loss. The first is the initial rate of
weight loss (). In the Look AHEAD trial, a multicenter
clinical trial in individuals with diabetes, those in the
highest tertile of initial weight loss in the first  months
had nearly twice as much weight loss at  and  years
compared with those in the lowest tertile of weight loss in
the first  months. This could be explained by the fact
that adherence to any dietary program is critical to
successful weight loss (, –).
Genetic variation can also influence weight loss, as
can the biological response to different diets (, ).
In both the Diabetes Prevention Program (, )
and the Preventing Overweight Using Novel Dietary
Strategies (POUNDS Lost) Study (–), in-
dividuals with the A genotype of the fat mass and
obesity-associated (FTO) gene had greater weight loss
when assigned the high-protein diets but not when
eating the low-protein diets (). Another analysis,
which examined eight clinical trials in overweight or
adults with obesity, reported that the FTO genotype
did not modify the response to diet (). Using
genetic profiles may thus be of value in the future for
developing personalized dietary regimens for man-
aging obesity, but more evidence is needed for any
clinical applications.
Very low–calorie diets
We define very low-calorie diets (VLCDs) as those
having an energy level between  and  kcal/d. In
a review comparing low-calorie diets with VLCDs,
Tsai and Wadden () reported that VLCDs pro-
duced significantly greater short-term weight loss
(.%) than did low-calorie diets (.%) but similar
longer-term weight loss.
Carbohydrate subtypes, low-carbohydrate diets,
and sugar-sweetened beverages
Carbohydrates, such as sugar or high-fructose corn
syrup, create additional challenges to a weight-loss
diet, because added sugar in beverages provides extra
energy with reduced satiety, thus increasing the total
energy intake ().
In a meta-analysis, Nordmann et al. () found that
weight loss was greater at  months with low-
carbohydrate diets (defined as carbohydrate intake
of , g/d) but not at  months (compared with other
diets). In a meta-analysis of longer trials by Tobias et al.
(), interventions with similar intensity led to a sig-
nificantly greater weight loss of . kg on the low-
carbohydrate diets. This is in line with a meta-analysis by
Bueno et al. (), which showed a greater weight loss of
. kg with very low–carbohydrate ketogenic diets.
Although both are statistically significant, the absolute
difference in weight loss was quite small (~ kg weight
reduction in a -kg individual). These studies over the
long term are hindered by the participants’ lack of ad-
herence to the prescribed dietary regimens.
To circumvent the problem of variable effects of
dietary protein in evaluating low-carbohydrate and
low-fat diets (), Hall and Guo () performed
a meta-analysis of isocaloric low-carbohydrate/high-fat
diets vs high-carbohydrate/low-fat diets where protein
consumption was held constant. This analysis included
 studies ( subjects total), which provided all food to
the subjects. Dietary carbohydrate ranged from % to
% and dietary fat from % to % of total energy intake.
There was a small but significant  kcal/d weighted
mean energy expenditure difference favoring the low-fat/
high-carbohydrate diets (not shown) and a small but
significant  g/d weighted mean body fat difference
favoring the low-fat/high-carbohydrate diets (Fig. )
“Genetic variation can also
influence weight loss, as can
the biological response to
different diets.”
91
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00253
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Table 3. A Comparison of Various Diet Programs and Eating Plans to a Typical American Diet
Type of Diet
Example
General Dietary
Characteristics
Comments
AHA/ACC/TOS Evaluation
and Others
Typical American
diet
Carb: 50%
Low in fruits and vegetables, dairy,
and whole grains
Protein: 15%
High in saturated fat and unrefined
carbohydrates
Fat: 35%
Average of 2200 kcal/d
Balanced-nutrient,
moderate-calorie
approach
DASH Diet or diet based
on MyPyramid food guide.
Commercial diet plans
such as: Diet Center,
Jenny Craig, Nutrisystem,
Physician’s Weight Loss,
Shapedown Pediatric
Program, Weight Watchers,
Setpoint, Sonoma,
Volumetrics
Carb: 55%–60%
Based on set pattern of selections
from food lists using regular
grocery store foods or
prepackaged foods supplemented
by fresh food items
Meta-analysis showing DASH
approach better than
control or healthy diets
(weight mean difference
0.87–1.5 kg).
Protein: 15%–20%
Low in saturated fat and ample in
fruits, vegetables, and fiber
Fat: 20%–30%
Recommended reasonable weight-
loss goal of 0.5–2.0 pounds/wk
Usually 1200-1800 kcal/d
Prepackaged plans may limit
food choices
Most recommend exercise plan
Many encourage dietary record
keeping
Some offer weight-maintenance
plans/support
Low- and very low–fat,
high-carbohydrate
approach
Ornish Diet (Eat More, Weigh
Less), Pritikin Diet, T-factor
Diet, Choose to Lose Diet,
Fit or Fat Diet
Carb: 65%
Long-term compliance with some
plans may be difficult because of
low level of fat
Same weight loss at 6 mo
comparing 30% fat to .
40% fat; strength of
evidence: moderate
Protein: 10%–20%
Diet can be low in calcium
Fat: #10%–19%
Some plans restrict healthful foods
(seafood, low-fat dairy, poultry)
Limited intake of animal
protein, nuts, seeds,
other fats
Some encourage exercise and stress
management techniques
Low energy density
Volumetrics Diet
Carb: 55%
Four food categories:
More weight loss at 6 mo
with low energy-dense
diet; strength of evidence:
RCT
Protein: 10%–25%
(1) Very low density—nonstarchy
fruits and vegetables, nonfat milk,
broth-based soups
Fat: 20%–35%
(2) Low density—starchy fruits/
vegetables, grains, breakfast cereal,
low-fat meats, and mixed dishes
Focus on fruits, vegetables,
and soups
(3) Medium density—meat,
cheese, pizza, fries, dressings,
bread, and such
(4) High density—desserts, nuts,
butter, oils
Focus on categories 1 and 2, some
from 3, minimum from 4
(Continued)
92
Bray et al
Management of Obesity
Endocrine Reviews, April 2018, 39(2):79–132
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Table 3. Continued
Type of Diet
Example
General Dietary
Characteristics
Comments
AHA/ACC/TOS Evaluation
and Others
Portion controlled
Use of meal replacements
both liquid and solid
meals
Weight loss at 1 year in Look
AHEAD trial related to
frequency of consuming
portion-control meals
Mediterranean-
style diets
Carb: 35%–40%
Eat primarily plant-based foods (fruits,
vegetables, whole grains, legumes,
and nuts)
Protein: 12%–20%
Healthy oils instead of saturated fats
Fat: 40%–50%
Limit red meat to a few times a month
Approximately 25%–30%
of energy from
monounsaturated fat
Eat fish and poultry at least twice
a week
Red wine in moderation, for individuals
who choose to drink alcohol
Be active and enjoy meals with
family and friends
Low-carbohydrate,
high-protein,
high-fat approach
Atkins New Diet Revolution,
Protein Power Diet, Stillman
Diet (The Doctor’s Quick
Weight Loss Diet),
Carbohydrate Addict’s
Diet, Scarsdale Diet
Carb: #20%
Promote quick weight loss (much is
water loss rather than fat loss)
Same weight loss at 6 mo
comparing ,30 g/d vs
55% Carb–15% protein
or 40% Carb and 30%
protein
Protein: 25%–40%
Ketosis causes loss of appetite
Strength of evidence: low
Fat: $55%–65%
Can be too high in saturated fat
Strictly limits carbohydrates
to ,100–125 g/d
Low in carbohydrates, vitamins,
minerals, and fiber
Not practical for long term because of
rigid diet or restricted food choices
Higher protein,
moderate-
carbohydrate,
moderate-fat
approach
The Zone Diet, Sugar Busters
Diet, South Beach Diet
Carb: 40%–50%
Diet rigid and difficult to maintain
Same weight loss at 6 mo
comparing 25%–30% vs
15% protein; strength
of evidence: high
Protein: 25%–40%
Enough carbohydrates to avoid ketosis
Fat: 30%–40%
Low in carbohydrates; can be low in
vitamins and minerals
Glycemic load
The Glycemic-Load
Diet—Rob Thompson
Carb: 40% to .55%
Focus on low-glycemic-load foods
Same weight loss at 6 mo
comparing high vs low
glycemic load; strength
of evidence: low
Protein: 15%–30%
Fat: 30%
Low-sugar or non–
sugar-sweetened
beverages
Not really a diet but just
a call to reduce sugar-
sweetened beverages
intake as a preventive
strategy
No recommendation other
than to reduce/remove
sugar-sweetened
beverages from your
overall diet plan
Meta-analyses show that consumption
of sugar-sweetened beverages is
related to risk of obesity, T2DM,
and heart disease
Weight loss less in adolescents
comparing artificial vs sugar-
sweetened drinks; strength
of evidence: RCT comparing
artificial sweetener vs
sugar-sweetened beverages
Novelty diets
Immune Power Diet,
Rotation Diet, Cabbage
Soup Diet, Beverly Hills
Diet, Dr. Phil Diet
Most promote certain
foods, or combinations
of foods, or nutrients as
having allegedly magical
qualities
No scientific basis for recommendations
(Continued)
93
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00253
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 (). This analysis does not support the concept of
a metabolic advantage for lower carbohydrate, higher fat
diets, suggesting that any benefits of such diets probably
involve differences in energy intake.
Dietary fat, energy density, and low-fat diets
For decades, dietary recommendations for weight loss
have emphasized a reduction in fat intake because of its
high-energy content ( kcal/g) compared with carbo-
hydrates ( kcal/g) (). A meta-analysis of six trials
reported no significant differences between low-fat diets
( to  g/d or % of total energy) vs other weight-loss
diets in terms of sustained weight loss ().
A recent systematic review and meta-analysis
compared
the
effects
of
low-fat
interventions
(,% total fat) vs other dietary interventions on
long-term ($ year) weight changes. It found that
when the groups differed by .% fat content, the
higher fat interventions led to slightly greater weight
loss and better adherence, although the magnitude of
the differences in weight loss was small (). The
important message is that “adherence” rather than
a specific diet is the important ingredient in success.
Another strategy for reducing energy density
(besides reducing dietary fat intake) is to substitute
foods with higher water content. One trial has com-
pared a reduced-fat diet to a diet with extra fruits and
vegetables with lower energy density. In this trial, the
addition of fruits and vegetables led to greater weight
loss compared with lowering fat only (). Diets with
a higher intake of fruits and vegetables evolved into the
Volumetrics diet (). The efficacy of the Volumetrics
diet warrants further investigation.
Low–glycemic index diets
The glycemic index is based on the rise in blood glucose
in response to test foods (, ). A meta-analysis by
Thomas et al. () reported a significant but small
difference in weight loss of . kg that favored low–
glycemic index diets. Additionally, both total and low-
density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol fell more with
low–glycemic index diets. The long-term effects of
low–glycemic index diets warrant further evaluation.
Fasting glucose may provide a clue to dietary se-
lection. Hjorth et al. () have reported that in-
dividuals
with
higher
fasting
glucose
who
are
prediabetic may respond better to a lower glycemic
index diet with more fiber and whole grain.
High-protein diets
A -year study comparing % and % protein diets
as part of a % fat diet (, ) reported that weight
loss during  weeks was substantially greater with the
higher protein diet, and that this result was maintained
up to  weeks but not at  weeks.
A meta-analysis of energy-restricted, high-protein/
low-fat diets compared with standard-protein/low-fat
diets showed that the high-protein diet was better at
reducing body weight (2. kg; % CI, 2.
to 2. kg), fat mass (2. kg; % CI, 2.
to 2. kg), and triglycerides (2. mmol/L; %
CI, 2. to 2. mmol/L) and resulted in less of
a decrease in fat-free mass (. kg; % CI, . to
. kg) and resting energy expenditure (. kJ/d; %
CI, . to . kJ/d) (). In the intent-to-treat
analysis of the POUNDS Lost Study (), which
compared % and % protein diets, there was no dif-
ference in weight loss between these diets. However, those
who adhered to a higher protein diet lost more weight.
When this study used urinary nitrogen loss as a measure of
protein intake, those with the greater increase in protein
intake lost significantly more weight ().
Mediterranean-style diets
Mediterranean-style diets are characterized by
enhanced consumption of olive oil, nuts, whole
Table 3. Continued
Type of Diet
Example
General Dietary
Characteristics
Comments
AHA/ACC/TOS Evaluation
and Others
Very low–calorie
diets
Health Management
Resources Program,
Medifast Diet, Optifast
Diet
,800 kcal/d
Requires medical supervision
For clients with BMI $ 30 or
BMI $ 27 with other risk factors
May be difficult to transition to
regular meals
Weight-loss online
diets
Cyberdiet, Dietwatch, eDiets,
Nutrio.com
Meal plans and other
tools available online
Recommend reasonable weight
loss of 0.5–2.0 pounds/wk
Most encourage exercise
Some offer weight-maintenance
plans/support
Abbreviations: AHA, American Heart Association; ACC, American College of Cardiology; Carb, carbohydrate; RCT, randomized controlled trial; TOS, The Obesity Society.
94
Bray et al
Management of Obesity
Endocrine Reviews, April 2018, 39(2):79–132
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 grain, fruits, and vegetables. In diabetic in-
dividuals,
the
Mediterranean
diet
produced
a greater weight loss during  years than did a low-
fat diet (). Another meta-analysis () re-
ported that Mediterranean diets reduced body
weight . kg compared with low-fat diets. The
Prevenci´
on con Dieta Mediterr´
anea (PREDIMED)
study from Spain showed that consumption of
a high-fat Mediterranean diet (.% calorie from
fat) resulted in a . kg weight loss (P = .) and
a . cm waist circumference reduction (P = .)
vs a comparison diet (.% calorie from fat)
during . years of follow-up ().
Balanced-deficit diets
Diets with a reduced content of carbohydrates, pro-
teins, and fat (so-called “balanced-deficit diets”) have
been widely used in managing obesity. In a meta-
analysis, Avenell et al. () reported that intervention
diets with an average deficit of  kcal/d led to
a weight loss of . kg compared with controls, and
the weight-loss effect lasted up to  years.
In a -month intervention, the daily use of
a commercially available portion-control plate was
effective in promoting weight loss among patients with
obesity and TDM when compared with a usual-care
dietary group. A meta-analysis of six studies using
meal replacements showed more weight loss than low-
calorie diets at  months (). Data from another trial
showed that portion control can increase diet quality
while maintaining significant weight loss during
 months ().
Comparison of diets with different
macronutrient composition
Several RCTs have compared diets head-to-head (,
, , , ). We summarize these in Table  (,
, –). These studies show improvements in
hemoglobin Ac (HbAc) in patients with TDM and
improvements in triglycerides and HDL cholesterol in
-100
-50
0
50
100
Pooled WMD
Smith et al 2000
Kahlhofer et al 2014
Galgani et al 2010
Goldberg et al 1998
McDvitt et al 2000
Rumpler et al 1991
Eckel et al 2006
Shepard et al 2001
Golay et al 1996
Astrup et al 1994
Roy et al 1998
Schrauwen et al 1997
Treuth et al 2003
Horton et al 1995
Bogardus et al 1981
VerboeketVan et al 1994
Yang et al 1976
Hall et al 2015
Davy et al 2001
Hall et al 2016
-15.48
-39.34
-39.31
-3.30
-31.16
21.43
-2.14
-22.49
-13.36
-6.32
-13.39
34.07
-49.28
-44.57
-7.14
-4.77
-12.76
-35.89
4.64
-14.11
-16.36
WMD in body fat (g/d)
Favors low CHO diet
Favors low fat diet
ES (g/d)
-11.10
-23.45
-33.32
9.57
-26.71
86.43
14.47
-19.01
-10.18
3.35
-10.90
65.82
-22.24
-36.11
91.85
-1.55
-8.35
-27.26
19.66
-10.59
-15.21
-19.85
-55.24
-45.29
-16.17
-35.60
-43.57
-18.75
-25.97
-16.54
-15.99
-15.89
2.32
-76.32
-53.04
-106.1
-8.00
-17.16
-44.52
-10.38
-17.64
-17.50
20
1.5
11
2.3
19
.09
1.4
32
38
4.1
62
.38
.53
5.4
.04
37
20
5.2
1.7
31
LCL (g/d)
UCL (g/d)
Weight (%)
Figure 4. Weight loss comparing isocaloric low-carbohydrate/high-fat and high-carbohydrate/low-fat diets where meals were provided
and protein consumption was the same. 95% horizontal CI. CHO, carbohydrate; ES, effect size; LCL, lower confidence limit; UCL, upper
confidence limit; WMD, weighted mean difference. See Hall and Guo, 2017 (235).
95
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00253
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Table 4. Weight Losses from Randomized Controlled Trials That Compared Diets With Varying Macronutrient Compositions
Study
No., Sex, and
Completers
No. of Lifestyle
Sessions
Provided
Dietary Intervention
Weight
Change
Month
Comments/Other Results
Bazzano et al.,
2014 (256)
148, 88% F, 80%
completed
10
Low Carb (,40 g/d)
26.5 kga
12
Participants without CVD or diabetes;
low carbohydrate diet group had
greater decrease in body fat and
triglycerides and greater increase in
HDL cholesterol than did the
low-fat group. C-reactive protein
and 10-Year Framingham Risk Score
improved more in low-carbohydrate
group. No difference in BP response.
Low-fat group had lower protein
intake than in the low-carbohydrate
group.
Low fat (,30% fat)
22.6 kgb
Dansinger et al.,
2005 (216)
160, 51% F, 58%
completed
4
Atkins (Low Carb)
22.1 kga
12
All patients had hypertension, dyslipidemia,
and/or fasting hyperglycemia.
Zone (30% fat)
23.2 kga
Weight loss was associated with level of
adherence.
Weight Watchers
(Low calorie)
23.0 kga
Each diet decreased LDL/HDL ratio.
Ornish (10% fat)
23.3 kga
There were no significant effects on BP or
blood glucose at 12 mo.
Das et al., 2007
(257)
34, % F unknown,
85% completed
52
Low glycemic load
27.8%a
12
Triglycerides and total, HDL, and LDL
cholesterol decreased in both groups.
High glycemic load
28.0%a
Fabricatore et al.,
2011 (258)
79, 80% F, 63%
completed
30
Low glycemic load
24.5%a
9
All patients had T2DM.
Low fat
26.4%a
There were larger reductions in HbA1c in
the low–glycemic load group.
Foster et al., 2003
(259)
63, 68% F, 59%
completed
3
Low carbohydrate
(high protein, high fat)
24.4%a
12
HDL cholesterol increased more in the
low-carbohydrate group, and
triglycerides were lower only in the
low-carbohydrate group.
Conventional (high
carbohydrate, low fat)
22.5%a
Diastolic BP decreased in both groups.
Area under the insulin curve decreased in
both groups.
Foster et al., 2010
(260)
307, 68% F, 63%
completed
38
Low carbohydrate
26.3 kga
24
HDL cholesterol increased more in the
low-carbohydrate group.
Low fat
27.4 kga
Gardner et al., 2007
A to Z Study
(254)
311, 100% F, 80%
completed
8
Atkins (low carb)
24.7 kga
12
Increase in HDL cholesterol was larger
in the Atkins than in the Ornish
group. Triglyceride levels decreased
more in the Atkins than in the Zone
group.
Zone (30% fat)
21.6 kgb
There were no differences in insulin or
blood glucose between groups.
LEARN (calorie restricted)
22.2 kga,b
Systolic BP decreased more in Atkins than in
all other groups.
Ornish (,10% fat)
22.6 kga,b
Diastolic BP decreased more in Atkins group
than in Ornish group.
(Continued)
96
Bray et al
Management of Obesity
Endocrine Reviews, April 2018, 39(2):79–132
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Table 4. Continued
Study
No., Sex, and
Completers
No. of Lifestyle
Sessions
Provided
Dietary Intervention
Weight
Change
Month
Comments/Other Results
Sacks et al., 2009
POUNDS Lost
Study (218)
811, 64% F, 80%
completed
66
Low fat, average protein
(highest carbohydrate)
22.9 kga
24
LDL cholesterol decreased significantly
more in lowest fat/highest carbohydrate
group than in highest fat/lowest
carbohydrate groups.
Low fat, high protein
23.8 kga
HDL cholesterol increased more with
lowest carbohydrate than with the
highest carbohydrate diet.
High fat, average protein
23.1 kga
All diets decreased triglyceride levels
similarly.
High fat, high protein
(lowest carbohydrate)
23.5 kga
All diets, except the highest carbohydrate
diet, decreased fasting insulin (greater
decrease in the high-protein vs
average-protein diets).
Shai et al., 2008
DIRECT Study
(255)
322, 14% F, 85%
completed
24
Low fat
22.9 kga
24
No significant change in LDL cholesterol
in any group.
Mediterranean
24.4 kgb
HDL cholesterol increased in all groups,
significantly more in the low-
carbohydrate than low-fat group.
Low carbohydrate
24.7 kgb
Triglyceride levels decreased more
in the low-carbohydrate than in
the low-fat group.
In diabetic patients, only the
Mediterranean diet group had
a decrease in fasting glucose.
Insulin decreased in all groups for both
diabetic and nondiabetic patients.
All groups had a significant decrease
in BP.
Adiponectin levels increased and leptin
levels decreased in all groups.
Stern et al.,
2004 (261)
132, 17% F, 66%
completed
15
Low carbohydrate
25.1 kga
12
Triglyceride levels decreased more in the
low-carbohydrate group than in the
low-fat group.
Conventional (low fat)
23.1 kga
HDL cholesterol decreased less in the
low-carbohydrate group than in the
low-fat group.
Changes in total and LDL cholesterol were
not significant between groups.
Yancy et al.,
2004 (262)
120, 76% F, 66%
completed
9
Low-fat diet
26.5%a
6
All patients were hyperlipidemic.
Low-carbohydrate, ketogenic
diet with nutritional
supplements
212.9%b
Triglycerides decreased more and HDL
cholesterol increased more in the
low-carbohydrate group.
Different letters (in superscript) indicate statistically significant differences (P # 0.05) in weight loss between groups.
Abbreviations: MR, meal replacements; VLDL, very low–density lipoprotein.
97
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00253
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 the groups assigned to the low-carbohydrate diet arms.
One trial randomized  individuals with obesity to one
of four popular diets, including the Atkins diet (), The
Ornish diet (), the Weight Watchers diet (), and
the Zone diet (). At the end of  months, each
diet produced similar weight losses (~ kg). Adher-
ence to the diets was the single most important
criterion of success in these trials. In one study, a low-
fat diet was compared with a low-carbohydrate diet
(Atkins diet) and a Mediterranean-style diet ().
Compared with the low-fat diet, individuals assigned
to the Mediterranean diet and low-carbohydrate diet
had significantly greater weight loss and maintenance
by  months (). In a meta-analysis of numerous
popular diets that included  unique trials, low-
carbohydrate diets performed equally with low-fat
diets after  months, with the low-carbohydrate diets
resulting in . kg of weight loss (% CI, . to . kg)
compared with . kg of weight loss in the low-fat diet
groups (% CI, . to . kg) ().
The POUNDS Lost Study (the largest trial ex-
amining macronutrient composition and weight
loss) randomized participants to one of four diets,
with % of patients providing data on body weight
at the end of  years. The diets were: () % fat/%
protein; () % fat/% protein; () % fat/%
protein; or () % fat/% protein. The foods in all
four diets were the same, although they differed in
quantity. At the end of  months,  months, and 
years, the weight loss was similar for all four diets
(); however, those who achieved the largest
increase in protein intake lost more weight ().
The similarity of the mean weight loss in all four diet
groups obscures the wide range of individual weight
losses shown in Fig.  (). The data from
the POUNDS Lost Study are consistent with the
recommendations of the American College of
Cardiology/American
Heart
Association/Obesity
Society Guideline for the Management of Over-
weight and Obesity in Adults, which states that “a
variety of dietary approaches can produce weight
loss in overweight and obese adults, and that the
choice should be based on the patient’s preferences
and health status” ().
-30
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
Weight change (kg)
0
5
10
15
20
25
Individuals
Red: Adherers to fat & protein month 6 weight changes
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
Weight change (kg)
0
5
10
15
Individuals
Purple: Adherers to fat & protein month 6 weight changes
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
Weight change (kg)
0
5
10
15
20
Individuals
Blue: Adherers to fat & protein month 6 weight changes
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
Weight change (kg)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Individuals
Gold: Adherers to fat & protein month 6 weight changes
(a)
(c)
(d)
(b)
Panel (a) (n = 38) is the adequate-protein/low-fat group (15% protein, 20% fat, diet, 65% carbohydrate); Panel (b) (n = 43) is the 
high-protein/low-fat group (25% protein, 20% fat, 55% carbohydrate); Panel (c) (n = 28) is the high-protein/low-fat group (15% protein, 
40% fat, 45% carbohydrate), and Panel (d) (n = 30) is the high-protein/high-fat group (25% protein, 40% fat, 35% carbohydrate).
Figure 5. Weight change from baseline to 6 months for each individual participant in the four dietary assignment groups ranked from
the largest loser on the left to the most weight gain on the right. (a) (n = 38) Adequate-protein/low-fat group (15% protein, 20% fat,
65% carbohydrate); (b) (n = 43) high-protein/low-fat group (25% protein, 20% fat, 55% carbohydrate); (c) (n = 28) high-protein/low-fat
group (15% protein, 40% fat, 45% carbohydrate); (d) (n = 30) high-protein/high-fat group (25% protein, 40% fat, 35% carbohydrate).
98
Bray et al
Management of Obesity
Endocrine Reviews, April 2018, 39(2):79–132
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Commercial programs for weight loss
In a meta-analysis, Gudzune et al. () reported that
the Weight Watchers diet resulted in at least a .%
greater weight loss than those assigned to control/
education after  months. The Jenny Craig diet
resulted in a .% greater weight loss during a -
month period vs groups receiving control/education
and counseling. The Nutrisystem diet resulted in
a .% greater weight loss at  months vs control/
education and counseling. VLCDs (Health Manage-
ment Resources, Medifast, and Optifast) resulted in
a .% greater short-term weight loss than counseling,
and the weight-loss effect lasted up to  months. The
Atkins diet (not technically a commercial program, but
one with affiliated diet products) resulted in .% to
.% greater weight loss at  months compared with
counseling (). The differences in the amount of
weight loss among various commercial diets were
relatively small, and the long-term effects of these diets
on weight control and chronic disease risk are still
unclear.
Maintenance of long-term weight loss
As previously discussed and illustrated in the Diabetes
Prevention Program (, ) and the Look AHEAD
trial (), maintaining weight loss is a challenge.
One study (, ) assigned participants to
weight loss with a VLCD for  weeks before ran-
domizing them to either a control diet or study diet
supplemented with . g/d of protein. At the end of
 months, the group receiving the protein supplement
(to bring protein to % of total energy) had a %
reduction in body-weight regain.
Data from the Women’s Health Initiative indicate
that reducing dietary fat intake may be of value for
long-term weight maintenance (, ). The study
reported that body weight in the low-fat diet group
and the control-diet group was similar after an average
of . years of follow-up (). However, those who
maintained the lowest quintile of fat intake were . kg
lighter compared with those in the top quintile of fat
intake, who were . kg heavier after  years. A recent
comprehensive meta-analysis indicated that long-term
effects of low-fat diets on body weight depended on
the intensity of intervention in the comparison group.
When compared with other dietary interventions of
similar intensity, evidence from RCTs does not sup-
port low-fat diets over other dietary interventions
().
The National Weight Control Registry identifies
additional strategies for maintaining weight loss (),
which include engaging in higher levels of physical
activity (e.g.,  to  min/wk), eating a low-fat, low-
calorie diet ( to  kcal/d for women), and
weighing themselves frequently (once a week or more)
(, ).
Prediction of weight gain may also be related to the
ability to metabolize carbohydrates. Subjects who had
a higher positive carbohydrate balance on day , were
inactive, and ate an isocaloric high-carbohydrate diet
gained less fat mass during a -year follow-up period
().
Future considerations/summary
Diets with many different macronutrient composi-
tions can result in short-term weight loss. However,
weight loss reaches a plateau within the first  to
 months. After that, weight is regained and often
returns to baseline by  to  years.
Maintenance of long-term weight loss is strongly
influenced by the ability to adhere to the dietary
program. Behavioral support can significantly improve
outcomes. There are variations among individuals in
the response to each diet, which are larger than the
difference in mean weight loss between comparison
diets. Clinicians should consider genetic differences
regarding dietary response to weight loss, as person-
alized dietary regimens might improve the efficacy of
long-term weight-loss regimens.
Current data indicate that some (but not all) in-
dividuals can achieve modest long-term weight loss
with any one of the diets evaluated herein. Additional
research is needed to identify optimal diets for weight
control and long-term health, which should extend
beyond macronutrient composition and examine
food quality and overall dietary patterns, as well as
factors that can improve long-term compliance. The
Nurses Health Study and Health Professionals
Follow-up Study reported that improving diet quality
was associated with less weight gain, especially in
younger women or individuals who are overweight
().
Exercise in managing obesity
Introduction
There is a significant body of evidence supporting the
effect of physical activity in both short-term and long-
term weight loss in adults (, , –).
The main components of energy expenditure (by
order of magnitude) are resting energy expenditure,
physical activity, and the thermic effect of food.
Resting energy expenditure is the amount of energy
required for a -hour period by the body during
resting conditions. Physical activity is composed of
both nonexercise activity thermogenesis and ther-
mogenesis due to volitional activity of muscle groups.
The thermic effect of food is the amount of energy
(above the resting rate) used for processing and storing
food.
Energy expenditure from physical activity is di-
rectly related to body weight. However, it is unclear to
what extent reductions in energy expenditure from
physical activity relate to the epidemic of obesity that
has developed during the last  years. Most mea-
surements of energy expenditure are not precise or
99
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00253
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 easy to use. Therefore, reliable longitudinal data are
lacking.
Two recent studies have concluded that the current
epidemic of obesity is more the result of an increase of
energy intake than a decrease in energy expenditure
(–), but this is not the universal opinion ().
Genetic factors of physical activity
There is an important genetic component associated
with the extent to which individuals engage in physical
activity (). In a study examining regular exercise
among identical and fraternal twins that included both
same and opposite sex pairs, environmental factors
shared by children at age  accounted for % to %
of sports participation, whereas genetic differences
provided almost no contribution. By age  to  the
genetic influences represented % of the variance in
the level of participation in sports, and by age  to ,
genetic factors accounted for almost all (%) of the
differences in participation in sports (, ).
Resistance vs aerobic exercise
Although most research on the effects of physical
activity on body weight has focused on aerobic types of
physical activity, there is also evidence suggesting that
resistance exercise may have some effect on weight
loss. Resistance exercise may influence body weight by
increasing lean body mass, which will result in an
increase in resting metabolic rate. Resistance exercise
also improves one’s strength, which may result in more
free-living physical activity and thus increased total
daily energy expenditure (). However, the vast
majority of data indicate that resistance exercise only
results in minimal reductions in body weight or body
fatness (–).
Vigorous vs moderate exercise
A study of . adults from the U.S. National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey showed
that greater physical activity was associated with
a lower BMI (). This relationship only existed with
moderate- to vigorous-intensity physical activity and
not with low-intensity physical activity. These data
imply that there is an intensity threshold of physical
activity that is necessary to affect body weight and
prevent excessive weight gain.
Physical activity declines with age
Despite the benefit of physical activity in weight loss,
physical activity appears to decline during adolescence
and remains low in most adults (, ). In a lon-
gitudinal study of adolescent girls, the level of activity
declined in both black and white girls each year during
adolescence. By age , black girls engaged in almost
no spontaneous physical activity and white girls only
engaged in very modest amounts of spontaneous
physical activity (). We do not have a comparable
study in adolescent males.
Sedentary behavior
There is keen interest in the influence of sedentary
behavior on a variety of health-related outcomes,
including overweight and obesity. Energy expenditure
in occupational activities has declined by ~ kcal/
d since  in the United States, and this reduction in
energy expenditure accounts for a significant portion
of the increase in mean U.S. body weights for women
and men since  ().
Much of the early literature in this area focused on
the association between television viewing as an in-
dicator of sedentary behavior and the risk of obesity.
Television viewing is positively associated with the risk
of gaining weight and the development of obesity (,
).
Treatment of patients who are overweight or obese
using exercise with and without diet
Studies on obesity have evaluated exercise as a sole
treatment, in combination with diets, and as a way to
maintain weight loss. ¨
Ostman et al. () performed
a Medline search for studies related to physical exercise
and overweight and identified six relevant RCTs. Five
had a treatment interval of  months, and all had
a dropout rate of ,%. Table  (–) has been
adapted from this study with the addition of two
newer trials, one  months long and one  months
long. The effects from diet are significantly greater
than those from exercise, but increasing physical ac-
tivity may have important benefits on improving BP
and cardiometabolic risk factors.
Behavioral Therapy in Managing Obesity
Behavioral modifications and/or lifestyle interventions
have been an important part of weight-loss programs
for more than half a century (–). Data from two
large RCTs, the Look AHEAD trial and the Diabetes
Prevention Program, support the efficacy of these
approaches. These studies are the gold standard and
are notable for the frequency of contact, the emphasis
on individualizing therapy, and the long-term em-
phasis on maintaining weight loss. Fig.  shows data
from the Look AHEAD trial. The best outcomes are
with frequent, face-to-face interventions. However,
incorporating this in primary care is challenging.
In a meta-analysis of behavioral weight-loss pro-
grams, LeBlanc et al. () reported a mean weight loss
of 2. kg (% CI, 2. to 2. kg) favoring the
behavioral strategy, but the range of mean values was
quite large (2. to 2. kg).
Lifestyle interventions may also be effective for
preventing weight regain (, ). Patients who
participated in group sessions every other week for
 year after weight reduction maintained  kg of their
. kg end-of-treatment weight loss (). The most
successful patients monitor their weight frequently
100
Bray et al
Management of Obesity
Endocrine Reviews, April 2018, 39(2):79–132
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 and respond quickly to small increases in weight ().
This can be daily or several times a week, but some
daily variation (2. to . kg) is to be expected from
fluctuations in body water.
Lifestyle methods
Self-monitoring
Self-monitoring involves recording the type and
amount of foods and beverages consumed, along with
their calorie content and weight gain. Self-monitoring
helps patients identify their eating patterns (including
times and places associated with consumption) and
also helps patients select targets for reducing calorie
intake () (Table ).
Stimulus control
Techniques of stimulus control teach patients to
manage external cues, such as the sight or smell of
food, as well as times, places, and events associated
with eating (, ). By decreasing exposure to
problem foods, patients are less likely to overeat.
Goal setting
Goal setting helps patients make objective, measurable
changes in eating, activity, and related behaviors (,
). They are guided in setting specific targets for
calorie intake, minutes of physical activity, and fre-
quency of self-monitoring.
Problem solving
Problem solving teaches patients to analyze chal-
lenges they have in adhering to their diet and ac-
tivity prescriptions (, , ). Patients learn to
identify a number of possible solutions to the
problem, pick the most promising one, and then
implement it. They learn to identify cognitive dis-
tortions (e.g., “I will never be able to lose weight
because I ate that dessert”) and to replace them with
rational responses (e.g., “One hundred fifty calories
of cake is not going to hinder my weight loss,
particularly if I walk after dinner”) (). It is im-
portant for patients to remember that the 
calories needs to be “subtracted” in the future either
with exercise or by reducing intake of some other
carbohydrate/fat-containing foods.
Short-term efficacy
The structured behavioral programs, as described
above, produce an average loss of  to  kg in the first
 months but with great variability. Some lose no
weight; others lose .%. Seven to  kg weight loss is
generally equivalent to a reduction of % to % of
initial weight, because  kg is the average weight for
patients in many studies (, ). Patients require
a high-intensity intervention to achieve these losses;
lower intensity treatment is not as effective ().
Approximately % to % of patients achieve a $%
reduction in initial weight, a criterion for clinically
meaningful weight loss (). Individuals with the best
attendance and greatest consistency in keeping self-
monitoring records achieve the largest weight losses
().
New developments in the delivery of
behavioral treatment
Telephone-delivered programs
Sherwood et al. () demonstrated that during a -
month period, patients who received  intervention
session phone calls lost an average of . kg; those who
received  intervention calls lost . kg, and those
who were self-directed lost . kg. Appel et al. ()
reported that a group that received weekly telephone
coaching for  months, an Internet program for re-
cording food intake and physical activity, and monthly
coaching for an additional  months lost a mean of
. kg at  months. The weight loss was generally well
maintained at  months (. kg) and was not sig-
nificantly different than what another group achieved
using an intensive in-person intervention (. kg at
 months) ().
Perri et al. () demonstrated that women who
were enrolled in extended-care programs that included
problem-solving counseling delivered in  biweekly
sessions via telephone or face-to-face regained only
. kg in  year of treatment, vs . kg for those in
a newsletter-only group.
Several studies that used structured dietary in-
terventions (i.e., meal replacements and/or portion-
controlled entrees) reported roughly equivalent weight
losses when the same behavioral intervention was
delivered in person or by telephone (–).
Digitally-delivered programs
Tate et al. () demonstrated that patients who were
provided with a directory of Internet resources for
weight management and also received  weekly
lessons over  months via e-mail (where patients
submitted their food and activity records online and
received online feedback from an interventionist) lost
. kg vs patients who only received the directory. In
a -year follow-up study, Tate et al. () demon-
strated that patients assigned to a low-intensity In-
ternet intervention with the addition of weekly
behavioral counseling lost . kg, whereas those re-
ceiving only the low-intensity Internet intervention
lost . kg.
Harvey-Berino et al. () compared the same
-session intervention provided either via Internet
or on site. In  months, the on-site program resulted
in . kg weight loss vs . kg for the Internet-only
group.
These studies underscore the importance of patients
keeping records of their food intake and physical activity
and receiving feedback from a trained interventionist.
“By decreasing exposure to
problem foods, patients are
less likely to overeat.”
101
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00253
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Table 5. Clinical Trials of Exercise in Individuals Who Are Overweight or Obese
Authors
Inclusion Criteria
Intervention Groups
Duration
No. Patients/
No. Follow-up
Results
Comments
Wood et al.,
1988 (297)
Men 120%–160%
overweight
(1) Diet (21 kg/wk); fat
reduced by 30%
1 year
(1) 51/42
(1) BW 27.2 kg
TG and HDL cholesterol
improved
(2) Individual instruction (21
kg/wk); exercise (60%–80%
of maximal physical
capacity, 40–50 min, three
to four times per week)
(2) 52/47
Fat 25.9 kg
Diet and physical activity
yield the same reduction
in weight and fat at the
same negative calorie balance
(3) Control
(3) 52/42
(2) BW 24.0 kg
Fat 24.2 kg
(3) BW +0.6 kg
Fat 20.3 kg
Wing et al.,
1988 (298)
Women: 30–60 y with
T2DM; .20% above
ideal weight
(1) Diet (21000 kcal/d) +
walking (3 miles, three
times per week)
12 mo
(1) 12
(1) BW 27.9 kg
HbA1C was reduced and
medications were
reduced in groups 1 and 2
(2) Free diet + walking
(3 miles, four times
per week)
(2) 15
(2) BW 27.9 kg
(3) Diet + stretching
(3) 13
(3) BW 23.8 kg
Wood et al.,
1991 (299)
Men and women:
25–49 y; overweight
120%–160%
(1) Diet (moderate reduction
of energy, fat, cholesterol)
Bottom of
form
(1) 87/71
Men:
BP decreased in groups 1 and 2
(both men and
women)
(2) Diet (as above) + exercise
(60%–80% of maximal
physical capacity, 25-45 min,
three times per week)
(2) 90/81
(1) BW 25.1 kg
Cholesterol decreased in
groups 1 and 2 (women)
(3) Control
(3) 87/79
(2) BW 28.7 kg
HDL cholesterol increased
in group 2 (both men and
women)
(3) BW +1.7 kg
TG decreased in group 2
(men)
Women:
(1) BW 24.2 kg
(2) BW 25.5 kg
(3) BW +1.3 kg
Svendsen et al.,
1994 (300)
Women: 49-58 y;
BMI 25–42 kg/m2
(1) Diet (4.2 MJ/d =
1000 kcal/d)
2 wk with
6 mo
follow-up
(1) 51/47
12 wk:
TG decreased and
(2) Diet (as above) + exercise
(submaximal aerobics and
body building)
(2) 49/47
(1) BW 26.6 kg
HDL cholesterol increased
(3) Control
(3) 21/16
(2) BW 210.9 kg
There was no effect from
physical activity
(3) BW 0.0 kg
6 mo:
(1) BW 28.0 kg
(2) BW 28.0 kg
(3) BW 0.0 kg
(Continued)
102
Bray et al
Management of Obesity
Endocrine Reviews, April 2018, 39(2):79–132
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Table 5. Continued
Authors
Inclusion Criteria
Intervention Groups
Duration
No. Patients/
No. Follow-up
Results
Comments
Pritchard et al.,
1997 (301)
Men: overweight mean
BMI 29 kg/m2
(1) Diet (2500 kcal/d) +
low fat
12 mo
66/60
(1) BW 26.3 kg
Diet was “self-controlled”
(2) Exercise (65%–75% of
maximal physical capacity,
45 min, three to seven
times per week)
(2) BW 22.6 kg
(3) Control
(3) BW +0.9 kg
Irwin et al.,
2003 (302)
Overweight nonsmoking
postmenopausal
women age 50–75 y
with a BMI . 25 kg/m2
or BMI 24–25 and
body fat . 33% by
DXA who were
sedentary at baseline
(,60 min/wk of
moderate to vigorous
activity) and maximal
oxygen uptake of
,25 mL/kg/min
(1) Exercise [at least 45 min,
moderate intensity, 5 d/wk,
12 mo (months 1–3 they
attended three sessions
per week; months 4–12
they attended one session
per week)]
12 mo
(1) 87/84
(1) 3 mo:
Participants were advised
to maintain usual diet
(2) Stretching (weekly sessions
of 45 min for 12 mo)
(2) 86/86
BW 20.5
Weight loss was related
to degree of exercise
12 mo:
BW 21.3 kg
Fat 21.4 kg
VAT 28.5 cm2
(2) 3 mo:
BW 0.0 kg
12 mo:
BW 0.1 kg
Fat 20.1 kg
VAT 0.1 cm2
Donnelly et al.,
2003 (303)
Overweight men and
women age 17–36 y
with a BMI of
25.0–34.9 kg/m2
(1) Exercise (400 kcal/d, 5 d/wk
with walking on a treadmill
at 55%–70% of maximal
physical capacity uptake)
16 mo of
verified
exercise
(1) 87/41
(1) Men
Exercise produced weight
loss in men and prevented
weight gain in women
(2) Control
(2) 44/33
BW 25.2 kg
Fat 24.9 kg
VAT 222.4 cm2
Women
BW +0.4 kg
(1) Fat 20.2 kg
VAT 23.2 cm2
(2) Men
BW 20.5 kg
Fat 20.7 kg
VAT 26.3 cm2
(Continued)
103
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00253
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Educational instruction (i.e., information) alone is not
sufficient to induce clinically meaningful weight loss.
These studies also suggest that the most successful
Internet programs are those in which therapists provide
weekly e-mail feedback to patients. However, on-site
behavioral programs still provide better results ().
The reduced efficacy of Internet programs, how-
ever, is offset by the potentially greater accessibility and
affordability of this approach, compared with tradi-
tional behavioral treatment.
Despite their popularity, little is known about the
effectiveness of smart-phone applications for weight
management. A recent study that compared usual
primary care with or without the MyFitnessPal
application revealed essentially no weight-loss dif-
ference between the two approaches during  months
().
Medication in Managing Obesity
Early history
Medications for managing obesity have a long and
checkered history (). Treatment in the th century
included soap (, ) and vinegar mixed with
a number of purgatives (). Some treatments also
used tobacco, a strategy people still use today to
prevent weight gain.
Table 5. Continued
Authors
Inclusion Criteria
Intervention Groups
Duration
No. Patients/
No. Follow-up
Results
Comments
Women
BW +2.9 kg
Fat +2.0 kg
VAT +3.1 cm2
Slentz et al.,
2004 (304)
Men and women age
40–60 y and BMI of
25–35 kg/m2 and mild
to moderate lipid
abnormalities
(1) Exercise [high amount/
vigorous intensity,
calorically equivalent to
~20 miles (32.0 km) of
jogging per week at
65%–80% maximal
physical capacity]
8 mo of
observed
exercise
(1) 44/17
(1) BW 23.5 kg
Subjects were counseled not
to change diets and
encouraged to maintain
body weight.
(2) Exercise [low amount/
vigorous intensity,
equivalent to ~12 miles
(19.2 km) of jogging per
week at 65%–80%]
(2) 52/24
Fat 4.9 kg
(3) Exercise [low amount/
moderate intensity,
equivalent to ~12 miles
(19.2 km) of walking per
week at 40%–55%]
(3) 42/14
Waist 23.4 cm
(4) Control
(4) 44/7
(2) BW 21.1 kg
Fat 22.6 kg
Waist 21.4 cm
(3) BW 21.3 kg
Fat 22.0 kg
Waist 21.1 cm
(4) BW 1.1 kg
Fat 0.5 kg
Waist 0.8 cm
Abbreviations: BW, body weight; DXA, dual x-ray absorptiometry; TG, triglyceride; VAT, visceral adipose tissue.
Adapted and updated from ¨
Ostman et al., 2004 (296).
104
Bray et al
Management of Obesity
Endocrine Reviews, April 2018, 39(2):79–132
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 In the late th and early to mid-th century,
three major groups of medications came into use:
thyroid hormone, dinitrophenol, and amphet-
amine. Clinicians prescribed both thyroid extract
and dinitrophenol (a product of the aniline
dye industry) until negative side effects became
evident ().
Amphetamine became popular after  when
Nathanson () noted that  of  patients treated
with amphetamine for narcolepsy had marked loss of
appetite and weight. However, the abuse potential of
amphetamines soon became apparent (), and cli-
nicians stopped prescribing them as a way to manage
obesity.
Aminorex, another member of the amphetamine-
like group, emerged in Austria and Switzerland in
, but it was removed from the market in  due
to associated pulmonary hypertension (). Table 
lists several drugs for obesity management that were
associated with significant detrimental side effects
().
From the end of World War II through , there
was considerable research on monoaminergic drugs.
Researchers discovered that injecting norepinephrine
into the central nervous system of experimental ani-
mals reduced food intake and activated thermogenesis.
This resulted in a search for thermogenic drugs that
could work through monoaminergic receptors.
During this period, researchers also synthesized
many derivatives of amphetamine for treating obesity
(), along with serotonergic drugs and multiple
monoamine reuptake inhibitors.
More recent drug development:
continuing difficulties
The discovery of leptin in  () marks the be-
ginning of modern approaches to identifying drugs for
treating obesity. Leptin is a peptide made primarily in
adipose tissue. Its absence is associated with massive
obesity in animals and human beings. Treatment with
leptin reverses the obesity caused by leptin deficiency,
indicating that there is a clear-cut molecular–genetic
mechanism and a highly effective treatment of at least
one type of obesity. However, because leptin failed to
show adequate weight loss in obese persons who are
not leptin deficient, trials were stopped (, ). The
discovery of leptin opened a flood of research to
discover new treatments, some of which were with-
drawn from the market due to health risks ().
Medications approved by the FDA for
treating obesity
In Table  () we list medications that are FDA
approved for weight management in patients with
obesity and divide them into two groups. First are the
agents approved for long-term treatment of obesity.
These include orlistat, lorcaserin, liraglutide, the
combination of phentermine/topiramate extended
release (PHEN/TPM ER), and the combination of
naltrexone and bupropion sustained release (SR).
The second group consists of older, sympatho-
mimetic drugs that are FDA approved for short-term
use, usually considered , weeks. The FDA did not
use modern standards to evaluate these “short-term”
medications for safety and efficacy. The FDA approved
them using only data from small, short-term studies,
and there are no cardiovascular outcome studies for
these agents.
Importantly, note that in all the clinical trials eval-
uating these agents, the drug-vs-placebo study also in-
cluded lifestyle interventions, such as diet and/or exercise,
which contribute to the overall weight loss reported.
Also important to note, these drugs are all con-
traindicated for pregnant women, as is weight loss per
se. Because weight loss can increase fertility, all women
in a weight-management program that use medica-
tions should be cautioned about the need for con-
traception. If pregnancy does occur while a patient is
taking any of these medications, the patient should
immediately stop the medication and contact a med-
ical professional.
Listed below are brief assessments of these drugs’
action, efficacy, and safety. More detailed information
is in Figs.  () and  and Table .
Orlistat
Orlistat is a potent and selective inhibitor of pancreatic
lipase that reduces intestinal digestion of fat. One
clinical trial resulted in weight loss of % of body
weight at  year, compared with ~.% in the placebo
© 2018 Endocrine Reviews  ENDOCRINE SOCIETY
Years
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Percent reduction in initial weight
–10
-6
-8
-4
-2
0
DSE
ILI
P < 0.001 for comparisons at all years
-2.1%
-4.7%
Abbreviations: DSE, diabetes support and education; ILI, intensive lifestyle intervention
Figure 6. Mean (6SE) weight losses during 8 years for participants randomly assigned to an
intensive lifestyle intervention or diabetes support and education (usual-care group). Differences
between groups were significant (P , 0.001) at all years. DSE, diabetes support and education; ILI,
intensive lifestyle intervention.
105
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00253
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 group () (Fig. ). Another study achieved a weight
loss of % compared with % in the placebo-treated
group and a reduction of % in the development of
TDM in patients who had impaired glucose tolerance
(). In a meta-analysis of  studies using orlistat
(Table ), the maximal weight loss (by modeling)
was 2. kg, and half the maximal effect occurred by
. weeks ().
Orlistat is the only medication the FDA approved
for weight management in adolescents with obesity
(). Adherence to orlistat use falls off rapidly after
initial prescription (). Orlistat can cause small but
significant decreases in fat-soluble vitamins, and cli-
nicians should advise patients to take vitamin sup-
plements. Rare cases of severe liver injury have been
reported with patients taking orlistat. A causal re-
lationship has not been established, but patients who
take orlistat should contact their health care provider if
itching, jaundice, pale color stools, or anorexia develop
().
Lorcaserin
Lorcaserin selectively targets the serotonin-c re-
ceptors to reduce food intake (), but it has low
affinity for the serotonin-b receptors on heart valves.
The three clinical studies that provided the data for
lorcaserin’s approval reported modest weight loss (see
Fig.  for one of these trials). In a meta-analysis of five
studies using lorcaserin (Table ), the maximal weight
loss (by modeling) was 2. kg, and half the maximal
effect occurred by . weeks (). They also showed
improvements in cardiovascular risk factors (–).
In preclinical toxicology studies in rats, there were
more brain and mammary tumors. This may reflect
the fact that the drug does not reach the high con-
centrations in the central nervous system of human
beings that is does in rats ().
Liraglutide
Liraglutide is a GLP- agonist that has a % ho-
mology to GLP-. The molecular change extends the
circulating half-life from  to  minutes to  hours.
Clinicians prescribe this drug in combination with
a reduced-calorie diet and increased physical activity
for chronic weight management in adult patients with
an initial BMI of . kg/m or in adult patients with
a BMI of . kg/m who have TDM, hypertension,
or dyslipidemia.
One study () that administered daily sub-
cutaneous injections of liraglutide at ., ., ., or
. mg produced mean weight losses of ., ., .,
and . kg, respectively, after  year of treatment,
compared with a loss of . kg in the placebo-treated
group and . kg in the orlistat-treated comparator
group. Another larger trial reported that after
 weeks, liraglutide reduced body weight by . kg
Table 6. Key Components of Comprehensive Behavioral Weight-Loss Interventions to Achieve a 7% to 10% Weight Loss
Component
Weight Loss
Weight-Loss Maintenance
Frequency and duration of treatment
contact
• Weekly contact, in person or by telephone, for
20–26 wk (Internet/e-mail contact yields smaller
weight loss)
• Every-other-week contact for 52 wk (or longer)
• Group or individual contact
• (Monthly contact likely adequate)
• Group or individual contact
Dietary prescription
• Low-calorie diet (1200-1500 kcal for those ,250 pounds;
1500–1800 kcal for those $250 pounds
• Consumption of a hypocaloric diet to maintain
reduced body weight
• Typical macronutrient composition: #30% fat (#7%
saturated fat), 15%–25% protein, remainder from
carbohydrate (diet composition based on individual
needs or preferences)
• Typical macronutrient composition similar to that
for weight loss
Physical activity prescription
• 180 min/wk of moderately vigorous aerobic activity
(e.g., brisk walking), strength training also desirable
• 200-300 min/wk of moderately vigorous aerobic
activity (e.g., brisk walking), strength training also
desirable
Behavior therapy prescription
• Daily monitoring of food intake and physical activity
by use of paper or electronic diaries
• Occasional to daily monitoring of food intake and
physical activity by use of similar diaries
• Weekly monitoring of weight
• Twice weekly to daily monitoring of weight
• Structured curriculum of behavior change (e.g., Diabetes
Prevention Program)
• Curriculum of behavior change, including relapse
prevention and individualized problem solving
• Regular feedback from an interventionist
• Periodic feedback from an interventionist
106
Bray et al
Management of Obesity
Endocrine Reviews, April 2018, 39(2):79–132
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 compared with . kg in the placebo-treated group (on
average) () (see Fig. ). In another trial (), those
receiving liraglutide for weight maintenance (after
initially losing weight from a low-calorie diet) lost an
additional . kg compared with no additional weight
loss in the placebo group. Furthermore, only about
half of the placebo group was able to maintain the
weight they lost due to diet. In a meta-analysis of three
studies using liraglutide (Table ), the maximal weight
loss (by modeling) was 2. kg, and half the maximal
effect occurred by . weeks ().
Liraglutide is contraindicated in people with
a family history of medullary thyroid carcinoma or
multiple endocrine neoplasia syndrome type . Cli-
nicians should not prescribe liraglutide for patients
with a history of pancreatitis and should discontinue
liraglutide if acute pancreatitis develops. If weight loss
does not exceed % by  weeks, patients should stop
taking liraglutide. Two cardiovascular outcome trials
studied liraglutide (. mg/d) () and the long-acting
version, semaglutide (. or . mg weekly) (). In
patients with TDM, liraglutide lowered the rate of the
first occurrence of death from cardiovascular causes,
nonfatal myocardial infarction, or nonfatal stroke
(). Semaglutide lowered the rate of cardiovascular
death, nonfatal myocardial infarction, or nonfatal
stroke ().
PHEN/TPM ER
PHEN/TPM ER has lower doses of phentermine than
clinicians usually prescribe for phentermine alone.
Phentermine acts to reduce appetite through in-
creasing norepinephrine in the hypothalamus. Top-
iramate may reduce appetite through its effect on
GABA receptors.
Two clinical studies (, ) provided the efficacy
and safety data for the approval of PHEN/TPM ER
() (see Fig.  for one of these trials). The patients in
these two studies had higher risk profiles due to excess
weight. PHEN/TPM ER produced weight losses of
.% and .% with the middle and high doses, re-
spectively, compared with .% in the placebo group.
This weight loss is larger than observed in clinical trials
with single drugs (). In a meta-analysis of six
studies using phentermine/topiramate (Table ), the
maximal weight loss (by modeling) was . kg, and
Table 7. Some Medications Used in the Past for Managing Body Weight That Were Withdrawn or Are Not Approved in the
United States
Drug
Year Introduced or
Withdrawn
Comments
Thyroid
1892
Mimics endogenous thyroxine/triiodothyronine
Associated with tachycardia and increase in metabolic rate
Dinitrophenol
1932
Uncouples oxidative phosphorylation
Associated with cataracts, neuropathy, and death
Amphetamine
1937
Noradrenergic-dopaminergic drug
Associated with recreational abuse and pulmonary hypertension
Aminorex
1965
Noradrenergic drug
Associated with pulmonary hypertension
Fenfluramine,
dexfenfluramine
1997
Serotonergic drugs
Both associated with cardiac valvulopathy and primary pulmonary
hypertension
Phenylpropanolamine
1998
Noradrenergic agonist
Associated with strokes and cardiovascular deaths
Ephedra alkaloids
2003
Noradrenergic drugs
Associated with heart attacks, strokes, and death
Rimonabant
2008
Cannabinoid receptor antagonist
Associated with depression and suicidality
Sibutramine
2010
Norepinephrine-serotonin reuptake inhibitor
Associated with elevated BP and death
107
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00253
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 half the maximal effect occurred by . weeks (some
of which was related to the titration schedule) ().
Improvements in BP, glycemic measures, HDL
cholesterol, and triglycerides occurred with both the
recommended and the top doses of the medication in
these trials (, ). Improvements in risk factors
were related to the amount of weight loss. In patients
with OSA, this combination reduced the severity of
symptoms ().
Taking topiramate in the first trimester of preg-
nancy may increase risk of cleft lip/cleft palate in
infants. Therefore, clinicians must inform women of
childbearing potential of this risk and conduct
a pregnancy test before prescribing PHEN/TPM ER.
Glaucoma is a rare side effect of topiramate, and the
drug is contraindicated in glaucoma. PHEN/TPM ER
is also contraindicated in hyperthyroidism within
 days of treatment with monoamine oxidase in-
hibitors and in patients with hypersensitivity to any of
the ingredients in the medication. Topiramate is
a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor that often produces tin-
gling in the fingers and may change the taste for car-
bonated beverages. Other potential issues include risk of
kidney stones (associated with topiramate) and increased
heart rate in patients susceptible to phentermine.
Naltrexone/bupropion combination
Bupropion is approved as a single agent for depression
and for smoking cessation. It reduces food intake by
acting on adrenergic and dopaminergic receptors in
the hypothalamus. It has a modest effect on weight
loss. Bupropion stimulates the pro-opiomelanocortin
neurons in the hypothalamus to produce pro-
opiomelanocortin, which is further processed to
Table 8. Drugs Approved by the FDA for Managing Patients With Obesity
Generic Name (Year of Approval)
Trade Name(s)
Dosage
DEA Schedule
Pancreatic lipase inhibitors FDA approved for long-term use
Orlistat (1999)
Xenical
120 mg, three times daily before meals
Not scheduled
Orlistat (2007)
Alli (over-the-counter)
60 mg three times daily before meals
Not scheduled
Serotinin-2C receptor agonists FDA approved for long-term use
Lorcaserin (2012)
Belviq
10 mg, two times daily or 20 mg/d
IV
Glucagon-like peptide-1 agonists FDA approved for long-term use
Liraglutide (2015)
Saxenda
3 mg/d: begin at 0.6 mg/d for week 1 and increase by
0.6 mg/d each week to reach 3 mg/d at week 4
Not scheduled
Combination drugs FDA approved for long-term use
PHEN/TPM ER (2012)
Qsymia
3.75 mg/23 mg
IV
7.5 mg/46 mg
11.25 mg/69 mg
15 mg/92 mg
Naltrexone SR/bupropion SR (2014)
Contrave
8 mg/32 mg tablets: one in AM for week 1, one in AM and one
in PM for week 2, two in AM and one in PM for week 3,
two in AM and two in PM for week 4
Not scheduled
Noradrenergic drugs FDA approved for short-term use
Diethylpropion (1959)
Tenuate
25 mg, three times daily
IV
Tenuate dospan
75 mg, every morning
Phentermine (1959)
Adipex and many others
15–30 mg/d
IV
Benzphetamine (1960)
Didrex
25–50 mg, three times daily
III
Phendimetrazine (1959)
Bontril
17.5–70 mg, three times daily
III
Prelu-2
105 mg/d
Abbreviation: DEA, Drug Enforcement Agency.
See Bray and Ryan, 2012 (330).
108
Bray et al
Management of Obesity
Endocrine Reviews, April 2018, 39(2):79–132
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 produce both a-melanocyte stimulating hormone
(which reduces food intake) and b-endorphin (which
stimulates feeding). Naltrexone blocks this effect of
b-endorphin, thus allowing the inhibitory effects of
a-melanocyte stimulating hormone to reduce food
intake by acting on the melanocortin- receptor
system ().
Three studies of the combination drug naltrexone/
bupropion provided the basis for its approval.
In one study (), weight loss at  weeks was .%
for a lower dose of naltrexone/bupropion ( mg per day/
 mg per day) and .% for a higher dose ( mg per
day/ mg per day), compared with placebo. Treatment
also improved waist circumference, fasting glucose,
fasting insulin, homeostasis assessment model of insulin
resistance (HOMA-IR), and HDL cholesterol, but there
was a transient increase in BP.
In a second study that included an intensive be-
havioral modification program (), weight loss at
 weeks was about % for naltrexone/bupropion
( mg per day/ mg per day) vs about .%
(Fig. ) for placebo. The study also reported significant
improvements in weight, waist circumference, insulin,
homeostatic model assessment of insulin resistance,
HDL cholesterol, triglycerides, and quality of life.
In a third study, weight loss at week  was .%
with naltrexone/bupropion ( mg per day/ mg per
day) compared with .% with placebo (). As in
the other studies, there were improvements in
cardiometabolic risk markers, weight-related quality of
life, and control of eating.
Finally, naltrexone/bupropion use in patients with
TDM resulted in significantly greater weight re-
duction (.% vs .% in the placebo group) and
significantly greater reductions in HbAc (2.
vs 2.%; P , .) (). There was also im-
provement in triglycerides and HDL cholesterol
compared with placebo.
Efficacy of weight loss with the naltrexone/
bupropion combination at  year is higher than lor-
caserin but not as high as PHEN/TPM ER and is
associated with improvements in risk factors (, ,
). In a meta-analysis of six studies using naltrexone/
bupropion (Table ), the maximal weight loss (by
modeling) was 2. kg, and half the maximal effect
occurred by . weeks (probably related to the ti-
tration schedule) ().
Because bupropion increases pulse and both
bupropion and naltrexone increase BP, an ongoing
study is examining cardiovascular outcomes ().
Comparison of medications approved for chronic
weight management
There are no head-to-head comparisons of these
medications. However, there is an analysis of  RCTs
of weight-loss medications that included trials with
orlistat, lorcaserin, liraglutide, naltrexone/bupropion,
and PHEN/TPM ER. The inclusion criteria and
Figure 7. Diagram of the sites within the central nervous system where medications can have their effects. See Apovian et al., 2015
(331).
Receptors:
Stimulating
Inhibitory
D1
D2
CTR
DAT
CCK1R
CCK
LepR
LepR
Leptin
Leptin
LepR
NPY
NPY
NPY
NPY/AGRP
POMC/CART
MCH1R
GLP1R
GLP1R
5HT2c
AGRP
AGRP
Y4R
Y2R
Y1R
GHSR
Y1/Y5R
MC3/4R
CRH
TRH
MC3/4R
Y1/Y5R
ORX
MCH
© 2018 Endocrine Reviews  ENDOCRINE SOCIETY
Nucleus accumbens neuron
Dopamine
Amylin
GLP1
Anorexigenic signaling
Anorexigenic signaling
Orexigenic signaling
Dopaminergic
neuron
GABAergic
neuron
Serotonergic
neuron
Vagal afferents
Dorsal
vagal
complex
Serotonin
Arcuate
nucleus
Bupropion
Naltrexone
Lorcaserin HCl
Topiramate
Pramlintide
Metreleptin
Phentermine
Exenalide, Liraglutide
Paraventricular
     nucleus
Lateral
     hypothalamic area
109
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00253
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 background lifestyle interventions differed across
studies, so we must interpret results with caution.
Attrition rates were % to % across these trials. All
five agents were associated with significantly greater
weight loss at  year than placebo. Collectively, these
studies reported a weight loss of .% in % of patients
treated with placebo, % of patients treated with orlistat,
% of patients treated with lorcaserin, % of patients
treated with naltrexone/bupropion SR, % of patients
treated with liraglutide, and % of patients treated with
PHEN/TPM ER. The highest odds ratio for treatment-
related discontinuation of the trial was with liraglutide
and naltrexone/bupropion ().
Drugs approved by the FDA for short-term
treatment of patients with obesity
We group the sympathomimetic drugs benzphet-
amine, diethylpropion, phendimetrazine, and phen-
termine together, because they are noradrenergic
drugs that the FDA tested and approved before .
The U.S. Drug Enforcement Agency classifies phen-
termine and diethylpropion as schedule IV drugs and
benzphetamine and phendimetrazine as schedule III
drugs. This regulatory classification indicates the
government’s idea that these drugs have the potential
for abuse, although this potential appears to be low
(). These drugs are approved for only a “few weeks”
(usually  weeks).
Phentermine
Efficacy of phentermine. The FDA approved
phentermine as a single agent in , and it remains
the most commonly prescribed drug for weight loss in
the United States (). There are few current data to
evaluate its long-term efficacy.
A -month study of phentermine reported that 
mg/d resulted in .% weight loss at  months
compared with .% for placebo (). In another
Figure 8. Randomized controlled trial data showing weight loss with orlistat, lorcaserin, liraglutide, phentermine/topiramate, and
naltrexone/bupropion. NB, naltrexone/bupropion; Phen, phentermine; SE, standard error; SR, sustained release; tid, three times a day;
Top, topiramate.
 
Placebo tid
Abbreviations: NB, naltrexone/bupropion; Phen, phentermine; SE, standard error; SR, sustained release; tid, three times a day; Top, topiramate
Orlistat 120 mg tid
Placebo
Phen 7.5 + Top 46 mg
Phen 15.0 + Top 82.0 mg
Weeks of treatment
Orlistat
Phentermine/Topiramate
Naltrexone/Bupropion
Lorcaserin
Liraglutide
Weight loss (%)
0
3
18
24
32
40
48
68
-10
-14
-12
-10
0
-2
-4
SB
Mildly hypocaloric
diet
DB
Weight maintenance
(eucaloric) diet
© 2018 Endocrine Reviews  ENDOCRINE SOCIETY
Percent change in body weight (±SE)
-4
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
70
80
90 100 110
60
-12
-10
-8
0
-2
Placebo lifestyle
Liraglutide lifestyle
-6
Weeks of treatment
Weight loss (kg)
-4
0
8
24
16
32 40 48 56 64
80 88 96104
72
-12
-10
-8
0
-2
-6
Weight change (%)
-5
0 4
16
12
8
20 24 28 32 36
44 48 52 56
40
-15
-10
0
Placebo
Cross-over
Continuous
Placebo
NB 16
NB 32
Weeks of treatment
Weight loss (%)
-4
-6
-2
0
16
8
24
32
48
56
40
-15
-8
0
Weeks
-6
-8
Week
110
Bray et al
Management of Obesity
Endocrine Reviews, April 2018, 39(2):79–132
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 -month study of phentermine, weight loss was .%
for phentermine at . mg/d and .% for phenter-
mine at  mg/d compared with .% for the placebo
group (). Finally, a study from Korea () re-
ported that after  weeks, mean weight loss for
phentermine was . 6 . kg vs . 6 . kg for
placebo patients. Weight loss with phentermine may
not be greatly enhanced by increasing doses beyond
 mg ().
Safety of phentermine. Phentermine is part of
a group of drugs called sympathomimetic drugs. These
drugs produce central excitation, manifested as dry
mouth, insomnia, or nervousness. This effect is most
obvious shortly after the drug is started and wanes
substantially with continued use. Sympathomimetic
drugs may also increase heart rate and BP. The pre-
scribing information usually recommends that the
drugs not be given to individuals with a history of
CVD (–).
Lacking good quantitative measures of the effects
of sympathomimetic drugs on heart rate and pulse, we
recommend caution in prescribing drugs in this group.
According to the Endocrine Society Guidelines (),
clinicians should not prescribe sympathomimetic
drugs to persons with a history of CVD and elevated
BP.
Best practices for medications approved for
weight management
The  American Heart Association/American
College of Cardiology/The Obesity Society “guide-
line for the management of overweight and obesity
in adults” () and the  Endocrine Society
clinical practice guideline on obesity pharmaco-
therapy () both agree that clinicians may con-
sider prescribing weight-reducing drug therapies for
patients who: () struggle to achieve weight goals, ()
meet label indications (BMI .  kg/m or BMI .
 kg/m with comorbidity), and () need to lose
weight for health reasons (such as osteoarthritis,
prediabetes, fatty liver, or other conditions). Fur-
thermore, the American Association of Clinical
Endocrinologists/American College of Endocrinol-
ogy “comprehensive clinical practice guidelines for
medical care of patients with obesity” from 
() indicate that clinicians may consider phar-
macotherapy as a first-line treatment of weight
reduction if patients present with one or more se-
vere comorbidities and would benefit from weight
loss of $%. Those guidelines do not require that
patients fail lifestyle therapy before clinicians pre-
scribe medications.
Medicating the patient for other chronic conditions
who is also overweight or obese
For patients who are overweight or obese, the 
Endocrine Society clinical practice guidelines on
obesity pharmacotherapy () recommended that
providers consider body weight when prescribing
medications for other chronic health conditions, so
that at-risk patients can avoid medications that pro-
mote weight gain. The guideline recommends that
patients use medications that are weight neutral or
associated with weight loss.
In managing patients with obesity, the guideline
also advises that providers review medications at every
visit and discuss weight effects with patients, so that
patients at risk for weight gain can share in the de-
cision process when choosing medications. Addi-
tionally, the guideline cautions against prescribing
medications known to be associated with weight loss if
they have no proven beneficial effect on the patient’s
other identified health issues ().
What is the current status of clinical adoption of
medications for chronic weight management?
According to the Awareness, Care and Treatment in
Obesity Management study (), there are a number
of misconceptions regarding obesity shared by pro-
viders and patients alike, specifically that obesity is not
a disease, that patients have the primary responsibility
for their problem and for its treatment, that prevention
is more important than treatment, and that the risks of
treatment should be low.
Table 9. Weight Loss Associated With Use of Orlistat, Lorcaserin, Liraglutide, Topiramate/Phentermine, and
Naltrexone/Bupropion
Drug/Placebo
No. of Trials
Maximal Weight
Loss (kg)
Weeks to Half Maximal
Weight Loss (wk)
Drop Rate (%)
Orlistat
31
26.65
35.4
29.0
Lorcaserin
5
25.39
19.3
40.9
Liraglutide
3
27.68
12.7
24.3
Topiramate/phentermine
6
215.6
29.8
34.9
Naltrexone/bupropion
6
213.2
35.2
49.1
Placebo
51
22.71
12.3
Maximal weight loss is the
modeled maximal effect and
does not contain the placebo
effect.
Data are from Dong et al., 2017
(334).
111
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00253
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Table 10. Complementary and Over-the-Counter Products Used for Weight Loss
Ingredient
Proposed Mechanism of
Action
Evidence of Efficacy
Safety Concerns
Chromium
Increases lean muscle mass;
promotes fat loss; and reduces
food intake, hunger levels, and
fat cravings
Several clinical trials of varying
methodological quality
No safety concerns reported at recommended
intakes (25-45 mg/d for adults)
Research findings: minimal effect
on body weight and body fat
Reported adverse effects: headache, watery stools,
constipation, weakness, vertigo, nausea, vomiting,
and urticaria (hives)
b-Hydroxy b-methylbutyrate
Metabolite of leucine, produced
in 0.3 g/d, but taken in doses
of 30–60 g/d
Used in conditions of muscle
wasting and to augment
muscle in athletes
In humans, no reported adverse in young adults or
older adults when b-Hydroxy b-methylbutyrate
is taken in doses of 3 g/d for up to 1 y
b-Hydroxy b-methylbutyrate
supplementation can preserve
lean muscle mass in older adults
(according to a 2015 meta-
analysis)
Pyruvate
Increases lipolysis and energy
expenditure
Few clinical trials of weak
methodological quality
Few safety concerns reported
Research findings: possible minimal
effect on body weight and body
fat
Reported adverse effects: diarrhea, gas, bloating,
and (possibly) decreased HDL levels
Conjugated linoleic acid
Promotes apoptosis in adipose
tissue
Several clinical trials
Few safety concerns reported
Research findings: minimal effect
on body weight and body fat
Reported adverse effects: abdominal discomfort
and pain, constipation, diarrhea, loose stools,
dyspepsia, and (possibly) adverse effects on
blood lipid profiles
Calcium
Increases lipolysis and fat
accumulation, decreases fat
absorption
Several large clinical trials
No safety concerns reported at recommended
intakes (1000-1200 mg/d for adults)
Research findings: no effect on body
weight, weight loss, or prevention
of weight gain based on clinical
trials
Reported adverse effects: constipation, kidney
stones, and interference with zinc and iron
absorption at intakes .2000–2500 mg for adults
Green tea (Camellia sinensis)
and green tea extract
Increases energy expenditure
and fat oxidation
Several clinical trials of good
methodological quality studied
green tea catechins with and
without caffeine
No safety concerns reported when used as a
beverage
Reduces lipogenesis and fat
absorption
Research findings: possible modest
effect on body weight
Contains caffeine
Some safety concerns reported for
green tea extract
Reported adverse effects (for green tea extract):
constipation, abdominal discomfort,
nausea, increased BP, liver damage
Green coffee bean extract
(Coffea aribica, Coffea
canephora, Coffea robusta)
Inhibits fat accumulation
Few clinical trials, all of poor
methodological quality
Few safety concerns reported but
not rigorously studied
Modulates glucose metabolism
Research findings: possible modest
effect on body weight
Contains caffeine
Reported adverse effects: headache and
urinary tract infections
(Continued)
112
Bray et al
Management of Obesity
Endocrine Reviews, April 2018, 39(2):79–132
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Table 10. Continued
Ingredient
Proposed Mechanism of
Action
Evidence of Efficacy
Safety Concerns
Caffeine (as added caffeine
or from guarana, kola nut,
yerba mate, or other herbs)
Stimulates central nervous system
Short-term clinical trials of
combination products
Safety concerns not usually reported at doses
,400 mg/d for adults, significant safety
concerns at higher doses
Increases thermogenesis and
fat oxidation
Research findings: possible modest
effect on body weight or
decreased weight gain over time
Reported adverse effects: nervousness,
jitteriness, vomiting, and tachycardia
Forskolin (Plectranthus
barbatus)
Activates the enzyme adenylyl cyclase
One clinical trial
Forskolin should be used with caution or avoided
altogether in women who are pregnant
Increases intracellular levels of
cyclic adenosine monophosphate
Research findings: oral ingestion
of forskolin (250 mg of 10%
forskolin extract twice a day)
for a 12-wk period was shown
to favorably alter body
composition while concurrently
increasing bone mass and serum
free testosterone levels in
overweight and obese men
Fucoxanthin
Increases energy expenditure
and fatty acid oxidation
Studied only in combination with
pomegranate seed oil in one trial
in humans
No safety concerns reported but not rigorously
studied
Suppresses adipocyte differentiation
and lipid accumulation
Research findings: insufficient
research to draw firm conclusions
Reported adverse effects: none known
Hydroxycitric acid (Garcinia
cambogia)
Inhibits lipogenesis
Several short-term clinical trials of
varying methodological quality
Few safety concerns reported
Suppresses food intake
Research findings: little to no effect
on body weight
Reported adverse effects: headache, nausea,
upper respiratory tract symptoms, and
gastrointestinal symptoms
Yohimbe (Pausinystalia
yohimbe, yohimbine)
Has hyperadrenergic effects
Very little research on yohimbe
for weight loss
Significant safety concerns reported
Research findings: no effect on
body weight; insufficient research
to draw firm conclusions
Reported adverse effects: headache, anxiety,
agitation, hypertension, and tachycardia
Hoodia (Hoodia gordonii)
Suppresses appetite
Very little published research
in humans
Some safety concerns reported, increases heart
rate and BP
Reduces food intake
Research findings: no effect on
energy intake or body weight
based on results from one study
Reported adverse effects: headache, dizziness,
nausea, and vomiting
Raspberry ketone
Alters lipid metabolism
Studied only in combination with
other ingredients
No safety concerns reported but not rigorously
studied
Research findings: insufficient
research to draw firm conclusions
Reported adverse effects: none known
Guar gum
Acts as bulking agent in gut, delays
gastric emptying
Several clinical trials of good
methodological quality
Few safety concerns reported with currently
available formulations
Increases feelings of satiety
Research findings: no effect on
body weight
Reported adverse effects: abdominal pain, flatulence,
diarrhea, nausea, and cramps
Bitter orange (synephrine)
Increases energy expenditure
and lipolysis
Small clinical trials of poor
methodological quality
Some safety concerns reported
Acts as a mild appetite suppressant
Research findings: possible effect
on resting metabolic rate and
energy expenditure; inconclusive
effects on weight loss
Reported adverse effects: chest pain, anxiety,
and increased BP and heart rate
(Continued)
113
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00253
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 At present, the FDA has approved nine agents (five
for long-term use and four for short-term use). For
newer drugs, the time since approval of these medi-
cations is too short to know whether and how they will
be used. However, older data (which predate the
current medication landscape) indicate there are some
serious concerns about how diet medications are used,
such as: patients using prescription weight-loss pills
who do not meet the BMI criterion for these medi-
cations; family, friends, and other nonphysicians
providing medications; the use of nonprescription diet
products; using pills after they were withdrawn from
the market; low -year persistent use rates; and co-
using narcotic and antidepressants (, , , ).
Dietary supplements, over-the-counter products,
and other treatments with unproven efficacy and
unknown safety
The Dietary Supplement Health Education Act of
 provided the framework for an expansion in the
use of non–FDA-approved, over-the-counter products
in the United States billed as “dietary supplements.” As
a result, there has been a proliferation in the use of
these products.
This legislation helped undercut the credibility of
legitimate weight-management practices by allowing
the promotion of agents that are often unsafe, in-
effective, and have unproven health claims. As long as
the claim is not for disease treatment per se, and
products are generally recognized as safe, they can be
promoted for health claims. These agents are regulated
by the U.S. Federal Trade Commission but not by the
FDA, and thus they do not undergo the rigorous
testing and review exercised by the FDA when it
approves pharmaceutical preparations for patients
who are overweight or obese.
Blanck et al. () reported that .% of adults
(.% of women and .% of men) have used
a weight-loss supplement, and .% have used one in
the past year (.% of women and .% of men).
Almost % (.%) used them for $ months.
Pillitteri et al. () reported that females, the
young, the less educated, and those with lower in-
comes are more likely to use these products. Many
respondents thought that dietary supplements are
safer than prescription drugs, and many overestimated
the degree of regulatory screening of these products.
Clinicians should be aware and knowledgeable
about these products when they begin discussing
weight management with patients, since patients have
likely taken them or may currently be taking them.
Table  () provides a list of herbal and comple-
mentary medications and treatments that claim to im-
prove weight loss. Evidence to support the effectiveness
for weight loss or the safety of these preparations is
usually nonexistent. Moreover, variability in the com-
position of these products adds an additional uncertainty
to their use. We thus think that the public would be better
served if the dietary supplements were held to a higher
standard and were overseen by the FDA.
Drug targets
Effective drugs to treat obesity have been slow to arise,
but efforts are still underway to develop novel, ef-
fective, and transformative medications that would
have the effect on treating obesity that statins had for
high cholesterol or thiazides had for hypertension
().
Table 10. Continued
Ingredient
Proposed Mechanism of
Action
Evidence of Efficacy
Safety Concerns
Chitosan
Binds dietary fat in the digestive
tract
Small clinical trials, mostly of
poor methodological quality
Few safety concerns reported, could cause
allergic reactions
Research findings: minimal effect
on body weight
Reported adverse effects: flatulence, bloating,
constipation, indigestion, nausea, and heartburn
Glucomannan
Increases feelings of
satiety and fullness
Several clinical trials of varying
methodological quality, mostly
focused on effects on lipid and
blood glucose levels
Significant safety concerns reported with
tablet forms, which might cause esophageal
obstructions, but few safety concerns with
other forms
Prolongs gastric emptying time
Research findings: little to no
effect on body weight
Reported adverse effects: loose stools, flatulence,
diarrhea, constipation, and abdominal discomfort
White kidney bean (Phaseolus
vulgaris)
Interferes with breakdown
and absorption of carbohydrates
by acting as a “starch blocker”
Several clinical trials of varying
methodological quality
Few safety concerns reported
Research findings: possible modest
effect on body weight and body
fat
Reported adverse effects: headache, soft
stools, flatulence, and constipation
See National Institutes of Health, Office of Dietary Supplements, 2015 (365).
114
Bray et al
Management of Obesity
Endocrine Reviews, April 2018, 39(2):79–132
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Surgery in Managing Obesity
Introduction
Surgical strategies (including the use of medical devices)
for the purpose of inducing and maintaining clinically
significant weight loss have emerged and evolved during
the last  years. Surgeons performed ~, bariatric
procedures in  in the United States.
Sleeve gastrectomy (SG) is the most common
procedure (.%), followed by Roux-en-Y gastric
bypass (RYGB), .%; laparoscopic adjustable gastric
banding (LAGB), .%; biliopancreatic diversion with
or without duodenal switch, .%; and revision and
others, .% (). SG and RYGB together are the
most popular procedures (%), whereas LAGB has
become less popular due to poor long-term results. We
list the three most common surgical procedures in Fig.
 ().
Evidence now indicates that that some of these
bariatric procedures (which were intended to either
physically limit the ingestion of food or produce
malabsorption of energy-containing nutrients) actu-
ally produce durable weight loss and health benefits by
altering metabolic processes, reducing appetite, and
inducing satiety early after meal ingestion.
Sleeve gastrectomy
In SG, surgeons use a linear cutting stapler to make
a narrow gastric tube along the lesser curvature of the
stomach and remove the remaining % to % of the
gastric body and fundus (, ).
The lack of gastrojejunal anastomosis has theoretic
benefits, such as reducing the risk of micronutrient
deficiencies and peptic ulcer disease. Although some
restriction of food intake may occur, gastric emptying
is accelerated.
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass
RYGB refers to procedures in which a small (~ to
 mL) gastric pouch is created just distal to the
gastroesophageal junction with a stapling device. Most
of the stomach is therefore disconnected (but not
excised) from the alimentary stream.
The small gastric pouch is the restrictive compo-
nent of this procedure. RYGB permits ingested food to
pass directly from the esophagus through the small
stomach pouch and proceed directly into the jejunum,
with little or no gastric or duodenal phase of digestion,
because food never enters the body of the stomach or
the duodenum.
RYGB became a predominant weight-loss pro-
cedure in the s and is used worldwide today. The
development and demonstration of the safety and
efficacy of minimally invasive (laparoscopic) tech-
niques, the recognition of severe obesity as a disease,
and the health benefits of bariatric surgery have led to
a progressive increase in the number of gastric bypass
procedures performed (, , , ).
Laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding
LAGB constricts the upper stomach by placing
a mechanical device encircling the stomach just
(a)
(b)
(c)
Pouch
Adjustable band
Duodenum
Stomach
Stomach
Pouch
Esophagus
Esophagus
Small
intestine
Access port
Pylorus
Gastric 
“sleeve”
Resected
stomach
© 2018 Endocrine Reviews
ENDOCRINE SOCIETY
Figure 9. The three most commonly performed bariatric surgical operations. (a) The laparoscopic gastric band is placed around the
upper stomach to restrict the transit of ingested food. (b) Laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy involves separation of the greater curvature
from the omentum and splenic attachments. (c) RYGB involves the rearrangement of the alimentary canal, such that injected food
bypasses most of the stomach, all of the duodenum, and a portion of the proximal jejunum. See Nielsen et al., 2014 (368).
115
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00253
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 beyond the gastroesophageal junction, thus creating
a small ( to  mL) pouch. The tightness of the band
is adjusted by inflating a linear balloon fixed within the
wall of the band. The balloon is connected to a sub-
cutaneous port, so clinicians can tighten the band via
a relatively simple percutaneous injection procedure.
The band is intended to reduce the amount of food
consumed ().
Biliopancreatic diversion with (or without)
duodenal switch
Biliopancreatic diversion with or without duodenal
switch is a complex procedure in which ~% of the
body of the stomach is resected, creating a tubular
stomach (SG) based on the lesser curvature of the
stomach. An anastomosis between the proximal du-
odenum and bypassed intestine creates a degree of
malabsorption of nutrients. This procedure is in-
frequently performed because of a relatively high
incidence of short-term and long-term complications,
including micronutrient deficiencies ().
Vagal blockade
In this procedure, leads are placed about the vagal
trunks at the diaphragm to produce intermittent vagal
blockade. Weight loss occurs by reducing appetite and
inducing early satiety. The intermittent blockade is
designed to avoid the neural adaptation that occurred
with truncal vagatomy for peptic ulcer disease. Weight
loss, although modest, is superior to sham-treated
controls yet less successful than conventional surgi-
cal procedures, such as SG and gastric bypass ().
Despite a better safety profile than adjustable banding,
intermittent vagal blockade has limited efficacy. This
coupled with adverse events make it a less desirable
intervention for resolving obesity and associated
comorbidities ().
Gastrointestinal endoscopic interventions
or devices
Several devices, placed either by gastrointestinal en-
doscopy or suturing procedures, have become avail-
able. The FDA approved two gastric balloons in 
and another in . Clinicians can fill the Orbera
intragastric balloon system with  to  mL of
saline. The ReShape integrated dual balloon system
contains two connected, saline-filled balloons. In 
the FDA approved the Obalon balloon system, which
expands with air after insertion. Technical improve-
ments to these devices have resulted in a favorable
safety profile (). The present protocol requires
removal of the intragastric balloon  to  months after
placement, which is a limitation to the long-term
efficacy of this intervention. The balloon can be
replaced for those who regain weight (). In August
, the FDA sent a letter to health care providers
noting seven deaths associated with liquid-filled
intragastric balloon systems used to treat obesity.
Four of the reports involved the Orbera intragastric
balloon system and one with the ReShape integrated
dual balloon system. Two earlier deaths were also
noted.
Researchers have also developed a specially
designed percutaneous gastrostomy tube and ap-
paratus, called the AspireAssist device, that allows
patients to directly remove ingested food from the
stomach (). After  year with this device, patients
lost .% compared with .% in the control group.
This aspiration technique requires available facili-
ties to discard the aspirated food and is not for
everyone.
Additionally, endoscopic placement of a duodenal–
jejunal luminal sleeve is under evaluation (). In
Median and interquartile range (observed)
Group trajectory (modeled)
Roux-en-Y Gastric Bypass
Group 5 (n = 103, 6.0%)
Group 4 (n = 408, 23.8%)
Group 3 (n = 796, 46.5%)
Group 2 (n = 368, 21.5%)
Group 1 (n = 36, 2.1%)
© 2018 Endocrine Reviews  ENDOCRINE SOCIETY
Years of follow-up
0
0.5
1
2
Years of follow-up
2
3
Percent  weight change
Percent  weight change
-55
-35
-45
-50
-40
-30
-10
-20
-25
-15
5
-5
0
Laparoscopic Adjustable Gastric Band
Group 5 (n = 24, 4.0%)
Group 4 (n = 7, 1.2%)
Group 3 (n = 82, 13.5%)
Group 2 (n = 379, 62.4%)
Group 1 (n = 115, 18.9.%)
0
0.5
1
3
-55
-35
-45
-50
-40
-30
-10
-20
-25
-15
5
-5
0
Figure 10. (a) Percentage weight trajectories. See Courcoulas et al., 2013 (383). (b) Percentage of
participants in the intensive lifestyle intervention and diabetes support and education groups who
achieved different categorical weight losses at year 8. See Look AHEAD Research Group, 2014 (271).
116
Bray et al
Management of Obesity
Endocrine Reviews, April 2018, 39(2):79–132
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 a study that examined endoscopic ablation of duodenal
mucosa to enhance glycemic control of TDM (),
reduction of HbAc persisted  months after ablation.
Liposuction
Liposuction (also known as lipoplasty or suction-
assisted lipectomy) is the most common esthetic pro-
cedure performed in the United States, with .,
cases performed annually (). Although not generally
considered to be a bariatric procedure, clinicians
remove and contour subcutaneous fat by aspiration
after injecting physiologic saline. As techniques have
improved, it is now possible to remove significant
amounts of subcutaneous adipose tissue without af-
fecting the amount of visceral fat. In a study to examine
the effects of this procedure, Klein et al. () studied
seven diabetic women who were overweight and eight
women with normal glucose tolerance that were
overweight before and after liposuction. One week after
assessing insulin sensitivity, the subjects underwent
large volume tumescent liposuction, which consists of
removing . L of aspirate injected into the fat beneath
the skin. There was a significant loss of subcutaneous
fat, but no change in the visceral fat. Subjects were
reassessed  to  weeks after the surgery. The non-
diabetic women lost . kg of body weight and . kg of
body fat, which reduced body fat by .%. The diabetic
women had a similar response with a weight loss of
. kg, a reduction in body fat of . kg, and a re-
duction in percentage fat of .%. Waist circumference
was also significantly reduced. Despite these signif-
icant reductions in body fat, there were no changes in
BP, lipids, or cytokines (tumor necrosis factor-a,
interleukin-), or C-reactive protein. There was also
no improvement in insulin sensitivity, suggesting that
removal of subcutaneous adipose tissue without
reducing ectopic fat depots has little influence on the
risk factors related to being overweight.
Indications for bariatric surgery
Criteria for bariatric surgery
The National Institutes of Health Consensus Panel in
 established the initial criteria for surgical in-
terventions for obesity (). The panel concluded that
individuals with BMI $  kg/m with a related
comorbidity or BMI $  kg/m were appropriate
candidates for bariatric surgery. An additional crite-
rion was failure of medical treatment to accomplish
sustained weight loss. These criteria have been variably
interpreted for many years but have remained es-
sentially unchanged until the present.
In evaluating the outcome for any procedure, we
need criteria for “successful” treatment. Weight loss is
highly variable with all interventions. For example,
intense lifestyle interventions in the Look AHEAD
trial produced an average of .% weight loss at  year
and ~% at  years. However, this average covers
considerable variability. In this study, the bottom %
of participants lost ,% of their body weight in
contrast to the top % who lost  kg (Fig. b) ().
During active weight loss after surgery, BP decreases
to a point where antihypertensive drugs may be dis-
continued. In addition, the requirement for hypoglyce-
mic medications in patients with TDM may also be
diminished or discontinued. However, after weight sta-
bilization, the results are less clear, as hypertension
commonly reoccurs. Additionally, if weight is regained,
comorbidities that were present at baseline may reap-
pear. As a result, the question of what constitutes
“successful medical therapy” is open to interpretation.
Therefore, additional criteria for surgical interventions
should include an understanding of operative risk and
the ability to manage obesity and comorbid disease after
surgery.
A recent joint statement by international diabetes
organizations has indicated that bariatric or metabolic
surgery procedures are a consideration for patients
with poorly controlled TDM and a BMI of  to
 kg/m (). The Endocrine Society has also re-
leased pediatric guidelines for bariatric surgery ().
Preoperative assessment
Preoperative assessment of potential bariatric surgical
candidates includes confirming the patient’s un-
derstanding of the basic procedure(s) proposed and
what he or she needs to do to help make the treatment
successful. It also includes determining the patient’s
dedication and motivation to make the behavioral
changes necessary for a satisfactory outcome. Fig. 
() contains a flowchart for managing bariatric
patients with obesity.
The patient must also understand the risks asso-
ciated with the procedure, and clinicians need to assess
all related comorbid conditions and manage these
conditions preoperatively. At a minimum, clinicians
© 2018 Endocrine Reviews  ENDOCRINE SOCIETY
>0%
≥5%
≥10%
≥15%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
73.6%
60.8%
50.3%
35.7%
26.9%
17.2%
11.0%
7.0%
Percentage of participants at year 8
Percent reduction in initial weight
Intensive lifestyle intervention (ILI)
Diabetes support and education (DSE)
Figure 10. (Continued)
117
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00253
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 should meet standard guidelines for cancer screening,
given the increased risk for common cancers in those
with obesity (including breast and colon cancers).
Clinicians should also identify and correct micro-
nutrient deficiencies.
Many centers require preoperative weight loss,
which may decrease the risk of perioperative medical
complications of anesthesia and abdominal surgery.
However, the role of preoperative weight loss in de-
termining longer term outcomes (such as weight loss
beyond  year) has not been demonstrated.
Outcomes of bariatric surgery
Safety
There is little or no disagreement about the benefits of
weight loss among individuals with severe obesity,
particularly those with comorbid conditions. These
benefits, however, must be considered in the context of
potential surgical complications. A population-based
study in  reported % mortality after RYGB ().
In response, the bariatric surgical community enacted
several changes to improve safety. This included
identifying the importance of surgeon experience and
the experience of the particular surgical center; the
establishment of pathways, care protocols, and
quality initiatives; and the incorporation of all these
aspects of care into the Metabolic and Bariatric
Surgery Accreditation and Quality Improvement
Program administered by the American Society for
Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery and the American
College of Surgeons.
The addition of laparoscopic procedures also
contributed to improved safety. Recently, the Longi-
tudinal Assessment of Bariatric Surgery (LABORA-
TORIES) (a multicenter bariatric surgery research
consortium funded by the National Institutes of
Health) reported a -day overall bariatric surgery
mortality rate of .%. For laparoscopic RYGB, it
reported a -day mortality rate of .% ().
A serious complication occurred in .% of all
patients. Factors that predicted a major complication
include high BMI, extreme OSA, inability to walk 
feet, and a history of deep vein thrombosis. Other
studies have reported different risk profiles. Studies
consistently report that the experience of both the
surgeon and the surgical center are predictors of safety
().
Mid-term and longer term complications have
been well described, although determining their in-
cidence is limited by a progressively greater number of
patients lost to follow-up (). These include, but are
not limited to, intestinal obstruction, marginal ulcer,
ventral hernia, and gallstones. Metabolic complica-
tions reported include nephrolithiasis, osteoporosis,
and hypoglycemia. Mineral and vitamin deficiencies
and weight regain are reported in variable numbers of
patients. Micronutrient deficiencies following gastric
bypass include: iron, % to %; calcium/vitamin D,
% to %; vitamin B, % to %; copper, % to
Figure 11. Obesity management flow. Summarized from the 2013 AHA/ACC/TOS guideline for the management of overweight and
obesity in adults (39). * refers to comorbid conditions. Reproduced with permission from Beamish et al., 2016 (384).
Primary assessment
Intervention
Follow-up
Determine readiness 
for lifestyle changes and
establish weight 
loss goals
BMI ≥30 or ≥25 with
comorbid disease*
BMI:
a: ≥25 and <27
b: ≥30 or ≥27 
with comorbid disease*
c: ≥40 or ≥35 
with comorbid disease* 
Advice on weight gain 
avoidance and treatment of 
any identified risk factors
Follow-up and weight-
loss maintenance with 
medical management of 
CV risk factors and 
obesity-related
comorbidities 
High-intensity comprehensive
lifestyle intervention treating 
CV risk factors and 
comorbidities
Weight loss 5% and 
sufficient health 
improvements
Continue intensive
medical management
of CV risk factors and
obesity-related 
comorbidities and
consider escalation
of treatment
Offer referral to specialist 
bariatric surgical MDT for 
evaluation as an adjunct to 
lifestyle intervention
Consider pharmacotherapy 
as an adjunct to lifestyle 
intervention
Not ready
Ready
c
b
a
Abbreviations: CV, cardiovascular; MDT, multidisciplinary team.
© 2018 Endocrine Reviews  ENDOCRINE SOCIETY
Yes
Yes
No
No
118
Bray et al
Management of Obesity
Endocrine Reviews, April 2018, 39(2):79–132
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 %; and thiamine, ,% (). Established guidelines
recommend routine nutrient supplementation to in-
clude multivitamins, vitamin B, iron, minerals, cal-
cium, and vitamin D (, ).
Perioperative complications specific to LAGB are
less frequent, with near zero mortality. Longer term
complications, however, continue to occur at a rate of
~% per year. These longer term complications include
erosion of the gastric wall by the band and slippage or
herniation of the body of the stomach, thereby creating
obstructions within the band. Inadequate weight loss is
the most common cause of LAGB failure. Compli-
cations following other device placement procedures
occur but are infrequent and generally less severe.
However, there is a tradeoff between reduced com-
plication rates and the severity of complications vs
efficacy of weight loss.
In summary, both perioperative and longer term
complications occur after all bariatric surgical procedures.
Multiple steps have been taken in recent years to reduce
perioperative mortality and serious complications. Pro-
spective data collection, analysis, and reporting to indi-
vidual centers through the accreditation program will
continue to identify complications and stimulate ap-
propriate quality improvement initiatives.
Weight loss
The high degree of variability of weight loss following
all
interventions
(including
intense
lifestyle
in-
tervention, medications, and virtually all bariatric
surgical procedures) speaks to the complexity of severe
obesity (Fig. a and b). We can define obesity in
terms of excess weight represented by BMI. However,
the genetic, behavioral, and environmental factors that
underlie excessive weight gain in life are exceedingly
complex and variable.
The same factors influence variability observed in
the weight-loss phenotypes following surgery. After
RYGB, for example, the LABORATORIES Consor-
tium reported patterns of similar and rapid weight loss
among patients  months after surgery by stratifying
weight loss into five separate trajectories, ranging from
% to % total body weight loss  years after surgery
() (Fig. a). These weight-loss trajectories persist
through  years ().
Weight loss following LAGB is similarly variable,
but only one-half of the total body weight loss seen
with RYGB is seen after LAGB (on average). Thus,
the commonly reported mean weight loss among
populations undergoing bariatric surgery is of limited
use for predicting results for individuals who are
contemplating surgical treatment.
There have been many efforts to identify pre-
operative clinical predictors of postoperative weight
loss. However, although research has established some
statistical correlations, the extent of the variability
explained by a number of clinical covariates has been
disappointing ().
The single best predictors of sustained post-
operative weight loss (identified by the LABORA-
TORIES Consortium) are postoperative eating and
lifestyle behaviors. Specifically, subjects who self-
monitor (e.g., frequent weighing), avoid eating when
full, and who avoid snacking between meals appear to
experience the greatest weight loss (). The weight
loss following RYGB, compared with interventions
other than surgery (Fig. a and b), demonstrates
that even the poorest weight loss following gastric
bypass is comparable to the best reported weight loss
for nonsurgical interventions (). A third study
found changes from baseline after  years in the
surgical groups were superior to the changes seen with
medical therapy. Body weight decreased % with
gastric bypass, % with SG, and % with drug
therapies (). We must interpret these outcomes
with the caveat that the requirement for surgical in-
tervention is the failure of patients to accomplish
sustained weight loss via other means, thereby creating
a selected population.
Related outcomes/remission of T2DM
The remarkable remission of TDM following RYGB
has generated much interest given the prevalence of
TDM and the severity of this disease (, )
(Table ) (, ).
Analysis of the data from the LABORATORIES
Consortium has demonstrated that both weight loss
and the neuroendocrine effects specific to gastric
bypass contribute to the remission of TDM ().
The durability of the remission in many participants
was sustained through year  ().
The Swedish Obese Subjects study reported that
~% of gastric bypass patients who were in TDM
remission at year  had recurrence by year  ().
Weight loss in these groups is shown in Fig. . Gastric
banding was the predominant procedure in the
Swedish Obese Subjects trial. This suggests that
maintaining weight loss, as well as the incretin
stimulation associated with RYGB, contributes to the
durability of the remission. Reports of TDM re-
mission among patients with considerably less severe
Table 11. Weight Loss and Reversal of Diabetes Mellitus
after Metabolic/Bariatric Surgery
Procedure
Excess Weight
Loss (%)
Resolution of
T2DM (%)
Gastric banding
46.2
56.7
Gastroplasty
55.5
79.7
RYGB
59.7
80.3
Biliopancreatic
diversion
63.6
95.1
Including data from Buchwald
et al., 2009 (396) and Bray, 2011
(397).
119
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00253
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 obesity (BMI  to  kg/m) have led to several RCTs
in this patient population ().
Most recently, SG has taken a dominant place in
the spectrum of procedures used for weight loss
worldwide (, ). Although the weight loss and
TDM remission following SG appear to be slightly
less than that following gastric bypass, lower peri-
operative complication rates, shorter lengths of stay,
and lower costs have made SG an attractive bariatric
surgical procedure (, ). The mechanism and
durability of this improved glycemic control, including
the role of diet-induced weight loss, have not been
determined ().
Overall, there is considerable evidence favoring
RYGB, LAGB, and now SG as superior methods for
controlling or inducing remission of TDM, vs in-
tense medical treatment (). As a result, the term
“metabolic” surgery has become popular. The con-
cept that clinicians should consider surgical in-
tervention for patients with poorly controlled TDM
and patient with less severe obesity (class I) with
TDM (rather than having BMI be the primary
indication for surgery) has gained widespread in-
ternational support (). Remission of dyslipidemia
is also seen in most patients following effective
surgical weight loss, whereas remission of hyper-
tension is less frequent.
Bariatric/metabolic surgery in adolescents
Owing to the lack of effectiveness of nonsurgical
options for treating severe obesity in young patients
and the demonstrated safety and efficacy of bariatric
surgery in adults, clinicians increasingly use surgical
procedures to induce weight loss in selected adoles-
cents with severe obesity. The rationale for and ex-
pectation of bariatric treatment in adolescents are to
provide significant and durable weight reduction,
correct existing health problems, and prevent expected
comorbidities in those at risk.
Lifestyle modification and even pharmacotherapy
in adolescents with severe obesity are associated with
unsatisfactory outcomes, and any weight reduction
seen may not be sustained. Conversely, growing evi-
dence indicates that surgery results in % to %
weight reduction in severely obese adolescents. In the
Teen-LABORATORIES study, SG and RYGB were the
most commonly performed procedures in adolescents,
and -year outcomes demonstrated a similar weight
loss of nearly % for these procedures ().
The lower complexity of SG and the lower theo-
retical risk of at least some micronutrient deficiencies
associated with RYGB make SG an attractive option
for most adolescents, despite fewer published studies
of SG in adolescent age groups.
In , investigators in the United States ()
and Sweden () simultaneously reported long-term
outcomes for weight loss and comorbidities in ado-
lescents who underwent RYGB. Eight-year (United
States) and -year (Sweden) post-RYGB surgery
follow-up assessments indicated % and % BMI
reductions, respectively. Both research groups docu-
mented important improvements in health.
In the U.S. study, remission of TDM occurred in
% (n = ). The study did not report any incident
TDM during the  years. The study also reported
dyslipidemia remission in % (n = ) and inci-
dent dyslipidemia in four of eight subjects who did not
have dyslipidemia at baseline. The study reported
hypertension remission in % (n = ) and incident
hypertension in only % ( of ) participants
without hypertension at baseline.
The Swedish study reported similar health im-
provements, with remission of comorbid conditions in
% to % of participants. The study reported re-
mission of TDM in  of  participants, disturbed
glucose homeostasis in  of , dyslipidemia in  of
, elevated BP in  of , inflammation (high-
sensitivity C-reactive protein $  mg/L) in  of
, and elevated liver enzymes in  of  participants.
Both studies also reported long-term nutritional
effects. The U.S. study reported mild anemia in %
(n = ), hyperparathyroidism in % (n = ), and low
vitamin B levels in % (n = ) at long-term follow-
up. At  years in the Swedish study, % ( of ) had
vitamin D (-hydroxy vitamin D) insufficiency (,
nmol/L) and % ( of ) had low ferritin and/or
© 2018 Endocrine Reviews  ENDOCRINE SOCIETY
Years of follow-up
10
GBP
VBG
Banding
Control
GBP
VBG
Banding
Number examined
Control
265
1369
376
2037
209
1086
333
1490
184
967
284
1242
180
1007
284
1267
37
489
150
556
13
82
50
176
0
1
2
3
4
6
8
15
20
Percent  weight change
-35
-30
-25
-20
-5
-10
-15
5
0
Figure 12. Mean weight change percentages from baseline for controls and the three surgery
groups during 20 years in the Swedish obese subjects study. Data shown for controls obtaining
usual care and for surgery patients obtaining banding, vertically banded gastroplasty, or
gastric bypass at baseline. Percentage weight changes from the baseline examination and
onward are based on data available on 1 July 2011. Error bars represent 95% CIs. Vertical error
bars represent SEM. GBP, gastric bypass; VBG, vertically banded gastroplasty. See Sj¨
ostr¨
om
et al., 2012 (393).
120
Bray et al
Management of Obesity
Endocrine Reviews, April 2018, 39(2):79–132
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 iron levels. The prevalence of anemia rose from % (
of ) to % ( of ), and % had low vitamin B
levels.
In summary, the two long-term, prospective
studies demonstrate excellent durability of weight loss
and response of comorbidities for adolescents who
have RYGB surgery. These studies also reported the
typical nutritional consequences of RYGB that we see
in studies in adults, and this must be taken into
consideration when counseling patients about long-
term risks of RYGB.
Current expert opinion recommends that clinicians
should use criteria similar to those used for adults when
selecting adolescents for weight-loss surgery (, ).
Surgery is generally recommended for adolescents with
a BMI $  kg/m and a weight-related comorbid
condition or impairment in quality of life. It is also
recommended for those with a BMI of $ kg/m with
significant current comorbidities, such as TDM, dysli-
pidemia, OSA, hypertension, NASH, or pseudotumor
cerebri (, ).
Where Do We Go From Here?
In this Endocrine Society Scientific statement titled
“The Science of Obesity Management: An Endocrine
Society Scientific Statement,” we have documented the
rising prevalence of obesity in both men and women in
the United States and worldwide with resultant haz-
ardous health implications. The prevalence of obesity
is correlated with income disparity both between
developed countries and between the states of the
United States ().
Obesity results in part from environmental and
behavioral factors, and both the public and health
care professionals alike stigmatize the condition.
The opportunity to move from a neighborhood with
a high level of poverty to one with a lower level of
poverty was associated with modest but potentially
important reductions in the prevalence of extreme
obesity and diabetes (), supporting the re-
lationship between income inequality and obesity.
Because the prevalence of obesity has strong social
and environmental components, this may provide
a basis for future approaches. The study by
Christakis and Fowler () showed that “friends” of
an individual with obesity were more likely to also
be obese.
Obesity is lower when there are more oppor-
tunities for physical activity as part of everyday life,
as shown by the slower rise in obesity among more
active individuals during  years (). Sleep time
is a modifiable behavior, and the observation that
preschool-aged children with early weekday bed-
times were one-half as likely as children with late
bedtimes to be obese as adolescents offers further
opportunities for intervention in the environment
(). These observations may provide the potential
for more effective preventive strategies utilizing
social engineering.
Genetic factors also play a role. Recently, in-
sufficiency in the gene TRIM was shown to produce
polyphenic obesity in both mice and humans. In this
setting, both lean and obese phenotypes can arise from
identical genotypes through dysregulation of an
imprinted gene network (). This finding and other
genetic research into the mechanisms behind obesity
may provide new genetic strategies for helping this
segment of the population.
The hazards of obesity are many, including
a shortened life span, TDM, CVD, some cancers,
kidney disease, OSA, gout, osteoarthritis, and hep-
atobiliary disease, among others. As might be expected,
weight loss reduces all of these diseases in a dose-
related manner.
The phenotype of MHO appears to be a transient
state that progresses over time to an unhealthy phe-
notype, especially in children and adolescents. Un-
derstanding in more detail how complications of
obesity develop will provide new opportunities for
prevention of these negative outcomes.
Of particular interest are reports that two diabetes
medications (liraglutide and empagliflozin) (, )
also produce weight loss and are cardioprotective.
Particularly striking is the fact that these two drugs
reduce cardiovascular death to a greater extent than
statins. This opens a whole new paradigm for man-
aging patients with obesity and diabetes in relationship
to their complications.
One of the unexplained issues in all treatment
strategies is the marked variability in response of any
form of treatment of obesity. Efforts to understand the
biological basis of this variability may provide new
insights into its treatment. The POUNDS Lost Study
population of  individuals randomized to one of
four diets (% vs % fat and % vs % protein) has
provided many genetic clues to help us better un-
derstand factors that modulate dietary response (,
). The ability to combine several measures to
predict responses to environmental factors may ex-
pand the option for personalized medicine. An algo-
rithm that integrates blood parameters, dietary habits,
anthropometrics, physical activity, and gut microbiota
measured in a sample cohort () showed that these
factors accurately predict personalized postprandial
glycemic response to real-life meals. Similar strategies
might well be developed for obesity. Many genes affect
the response to diets, opening the possibility of
“personalized medicine” for managing obesity.
The
public commonly
uses over-the-counter
herbal preparations to manage obesity, but evidence
documenting their efficacy or safety is usually absent.
We think that the public would be well served by more
regulatory requirements regarding sale and use of
these products.
121
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00253
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 We can expect to see weight regain in all patients
when they discontinue obesity treatments. When
making treatment decisions, clinicians should consider
body fat distribution and individual health risks in
addition to BMI. Because all treatments have con-
siderable variability in their outcome, it is important to
know when to stop treatment as well as when to begin.
Surgical strategies have demonstrated greater weight
loss that outlasts other treatment options.
As the knowledge base underpinning obesity con-
tinues to expand, the options for treating patients with
obesity should also expand, offering hope for future
conquest of this problem. One fascinating new strategy is
the combination of peptides acting on receptors in the
gastrointestinal track into a single molecule acting on two
or more receptors, called coagonists and triagonists.
Using glucagon-like peptide-, glucagon, and glucose-
insulin peptide as the background for these molecules,
peptides have been shown to enhance weight loss and the
decline in glucose, opening a fascinating new horizon
(, ).
Finally, improved techniques for modulating food
transit through the gastrointestinal track and its ab-
sorption also offer new strategies for dealing with the
devastating epidemic posed by obesity. It is clear that
food is more than calories and that dietary choices and
diet quality play a role in long-term weight change
(), and this provides other opportunities for public
health programs. The so-called “obesogens” in the
food supply offer another opportunity for making the
food supply less likely to contribute to obesity ().
Control of obesity is the most important public health
strategy for the prevention of diabetes and its dev-
astating consequences. With all of these opportunities
on the horizon, we are optimistic about the future of
treatment and prevention of obesity.
References
1.
Bray GA. Obesity: historical development of sci-
entific and cultural ideas. Int J Obes. 1990;14(11):
909–926.
2.
Bray G. Battle of the Bulge: A History of Obesity Research.
Philadelphia, PA: Dorrance Publishing; 2007.
3.
Gilman S. Obesity: The Biography. Oxford, U.K.:
Oxford University Press; 2010.
4.
Angeli W. Die Venus von willendorf. Vienna, Austria:
Edition Wien; 1989.
5.
Hippocrates. Oeuvres Compl`
etes: Traduction Nouvelle
Avec le Texte Grec en Regard, Collationn´
e sur les
Manuscrits et Toutes les ´
Editions; Accompagn´
ee d’une ...
Suivie d’une Table G´
en´
erale. Paris, France: J.B. Bailliere;
1839.
6.
Flemyng M. A Discourse on the Nature, Causes, and
Cure of Corpulency. Illustrated by a Remarkable Case.
Read Before the Royal Society November 1757.
London, England: L. Davis and C. Reymers; 1760.
7.
Wadd W. Cursory Remarks on Corpulence; or Obesity
Considered as a Disease: With a Critical Examination
of Ancient and Modern Opinion, Relative to Its Causes
and cure. London: J. Callow; 1816.
8.
Lavoisier AL. Trait´
e ´
El´
ementaire de Chimie: Pr´
esent´
e
dans un Ordre Nouveau et d’Apr`
es les D´
ecouvertes
Modernes: Avec Figures. Paris, France: Cuchet; 1789.
9.
Atwater WO, Rosa EB. A new respiration calo-
rimeter and experiments on the conservation of
energy in the human body, II. Phys Rev Ser I. 1899;9:
214–251.
10.
Cushing H. The pituitary body and its disorders.
Clinical states produced by disorders of the hy-
pophysis cerebri. Am J Med Sci. 1912;144(6):891.
11.
Babinski M. Tumeur du corps pituitaire sans
acrom´
egalie et avec de d´
eveloppement des organes
g´
enitaux. Rev Neurol. 1900;8:531–533.
12.
Fr¨
ohlich A. Ein Fall von Tumor der Hypophysis cerebri
ohne Akromegalie. Wiener Klin Rdsch; 1901:883–886.
13.
Precope J. Hippocrates on Diet and Hygiene. London,
England: Zeno; 1952.
14.
Foxcroft L. Calories and Corsets: A History of Dieting
Over 2000 Years. London, U.K.: Profile Books; 2011.
15.
Banting W. Letter on corpulence, addressed to the
public. 1869. Obes Res. 1993;1(2):153–163.
16.
R¨
ossner S. Sancho the Fat: King of Le´
on, Spain. Obes
Rev. 2011;12(11):995.
17.
Short T. Discourse Concerning the Causes and Effects
of Corpulency: Together With the Method for Its
Prevention and Cure. 2nd ed. London, England:
J. Roberts; 1727.
18.
Bonetus T. Sepulchretum, Sive Anatomia Practica, ex
Cadaveribus Morbo Denatis, Proponens Historias
Omnium
Humani
Corporis
Affectum.
Geneva,
Switzerland: Sumptibus Cramer & Perachon; 1700.
19.
Colman E. Dinitrophenol and obesity: an early
twentieth-century regulatory dilemma. Regul Toxicol
Pharmacol. 2007;48(2):115–117.
20.
Zhang Y, Proenca R, Maffei M, Barone M, Leopold L,
Friedman JM. Positional cloning of the mouse obese
gene and its human homologue. Nature. 1994;
372(6505):425–432.
21.
Schwartz L, ed. Preface. The Cambridge Companion
to Paradise Lost. New York, NY: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press; 2014:xi–xiv.
22.
Schwartz MW, Seeley RJ, Zeltser LM, Drewnowski A,
Ravussin E, Redman LM, Leibel RL. Obesity path-
ogenesis: an Endocrine Society scientific statement.
Endocr Rev. 2017;38(4):267–296.
23.
Puhl RM, Latner JD. Stigma, obesity, and the health
of the nation’s children. Psychol Bull. 2007;133(4):
557–580.
24.
Linn´
e Y, Hemmingsson E, Adolfsson B, Ramsten J,
R¨
ossner
S.
Patient
expectations
of
obesity
treatment-the experience from a day-care unit. Int J
Obes Relat Metab Disord. 2002;26(5):739–741.
25.
Kaly P, Orellana S, Torrella T, Takagishi C, Saff-Koche
L, Murr MM. Unrealistic weight loss expectations in
candidates for bariatric surgery. Surg Obes Relat Dis.
2008;4(1):6–10.
26.
Dutton GR, Perri MG, Stine CC, Goble M, Van
Vessem N. Comparison of physician weight loss
goals for obese male and female patients. Prev Med.
2010;50(4):186–188.
27.
Haddock CK, Poston WSC, Dill PL, Foreyt JP, Ericsson
M. Pharmacotherapy for obesity: a quantitative
analysis of four decades of published randomized
clinical trials. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord. 2002;
26(2):262–273.
28.
Lee MD, Somerville EM, Kennett GA, Dourish CT,
Clifton PG. Reduced hypophagic effects of d-fen-
fluramine and the 5-HT2C receptor agonist mCPP in
5-HT1B receptor knockout mice. Psychopharma-
cology (Berl). 2004;176(1):39–49.
29.
Heal DJ, Gosden J, Smith SL. A review of late-stage
CNS drug candidates for the treatment of obesity.
Int J Obes. 2013;37(1):107–117.
30.
Foster GD, Wadden TA, Vogt RA, Brewer G. What is
a reasonable weight loss? Patients’ expectations and
evaluations
of
obesity
treatment
outcomes.
J Consult Clin Psychol. 1997;65(1):79–85.
31.
Smiertka JK, MacPherson BH. Bariatric surgery
postoperative behavioral change: The importance
of ongoing assessment and teaching. Obes Surg.
1995;5(3):337–340.
32.
Rabner JG, Greenstein RJ. Obesity surgery: expec-
tation and reality. Int J Obes. 1991;15(12):841–845.
33.
Wee CC, Jones DB, Davis RB, Bourland AC, Hamel
MB. Understanding patients’ value of weight loss
and expectations for bariatric surgery. Obes Surg.
2006;16(4):496–500.
34.
Weintraub M, Bray GA. Drug treatment of obesity.
Med Clin North Am. 1989;73(1):237–249.
35.
Bolen SD, Clark JM, Richards TM, Shore AD,
Goodwin SM, Weiner JP. Trends in and patterns of
obesity reduction medication use in an insured
cohort. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2010;18(1):206–209.
36.
Harrison GG. Height-weight tables. Ann Intern Med.
1985;103(6, Pt 2):989–994.
37.
Bray GA, Greenway FL, Molitch ME, Dahms WT,
Atkinson RL, Hamilton K. Use of anthropometric
measures to assess weight loss. Am J Clin Nutr. 1978;
31(5):769–773.
38.
Obesity: preventing and managing the global epi-
demic. Report of a WHO consultation. World Health
Organ Tech Rep Ser. 2000;894:i–xii, 1–253.
39.
Jensen MD, Ryan DH, Apovian CM, Ard JD,
Comuzzie AG, Donato KA, Hu FB, Hubbard VS,
Jakicic JM, Kushner RF, Loria CM, Millen BE, Nonas
CA, Pi-Sunyer FX, Stevens J, Stevens VJ, Wadden TA,
Wolfe BM, Yanovski SZ, Jordan HS, Kendall KA, Lux
LJ, Mentor-Marcel R, Morgan LC, Trisolini MG,
Wnek J, Anderson JL, Halperin JL, Albert NM,
122
Bray et al
Management of Obesity
Endocrine Reviews, April 2018, 39(2):79–132
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Bozkurt B, Brindis RG, Curtis LH, DeMets D,
Hochman JS, Kovacs RJ, Ohman EM, Pressler SJ,
Sellke FW, Shen WK, Smith SC, Jr, Tomaselli GF;
American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines
Obesity Society. 2013 AHA/ACC/TOS guideline for
the management of overweight and obesity in
adults: a report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force
on Practice Guidelines and The Obesity Society.
Circulation. 2014;129(25, Suppl 2):S102–S138.
40.
Clinical guidelines on the identification, evaluation,
and treatment of overweight and obesity in adults:
executive summary. Expert Panel on the Identifi-
cation, Evaluation, and Treatment of Overweight in
Adults. Am J Clin Nutr. 1998;68(4):899–917.
41.
Whitlock G, Lewington S, Sherliker P, Clarke R,
Emberson J, Halsey J, Qizilbash N, Collins R, Peto R;
Prospective Studies Collaboration. Body-mass index
and cause-specific mortality in 900 000 adults:
collaborative analyses of 57 prospective studies.
Lancet. 2009;373(9669):1083–1096.
42.
GBD 2015 Disease and Injury Incidence and Prev-
alence Collaborators. Global, regional, and national
incidence, prevalence, and years lived with disability
for 310 diseases and injuries, 1990–2015: a system-
atic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study
2015. Lancet. 2016;388(10053):1545–1602.
43.
Berrington de Gonzalez A, Hartge P, Cerhan JR, Flint
AJ, Hannan L, MacInnis RJ, Moore SC, Tobias GS,
Anton-Culver H, Freeman LB, Beeson WL, Clipp SL,
English DR, Folsom AR, Freedman DM, Giles G,
Hakansson N, Henderson KD, Hoffman-Bolton J,
Hoppin JA, Koenig KL, Lee IM, Linet MS, Park Y,
Pocobelli G, Schatzkin A, Sesso HD, Weiderpass E,
Willcox BJ, Wolk A, Zeleniuch-Jacquotte A, Willett
WC, Thun MJ. Body-mass index and mortality
among 1.46 million white adults. N Engl J Med. 2010;
363(23):2211–2219.
44.
Yumuk V, Tsigos C, Fried M, Schindler K, Busetto L,
Micic D, Toplak H; Obesity Management Task
Force of the European Association for the Study of
Obesity. European guidelines for obesity manage-
ment in adults. Obes Facts. 2015;8(6):402–424.
45.
Lau DCW, Douketis JD, Morrison KM, Hramiak IM,
Sharma AM, Ur E; Obesity Canada Clinical Practice
Guidelines Expert Panel. 2006 Canadian clinical
practice guidelines on the management and pre-
vention of obesity in adults and children [sum-
mary]. CMAJ. 2007;176(8):S1–S13.
46.
Barlow SE; Expert Committee. Expert committee
recommendations regarding the prevention, as-
sessment, and treatment of child and adolescent
overweight and obesity: summary report. Pediatrics.
2007;120(Suppl 4):S164–S192.
47.
Flegal KM, Kruszon-Moran D, Carroll MD, Fryar CD,
Ogden CL. Trends in obesity among adults in the
united states, 2005 to 2014. JAMA. 2016;315(21):
2284–2291.
48.
Fryar C. Prevalence of overweight, obesity, and
extreme obesity among adults: United States,
trends 1960–1962 through 2009–2010. Available at:
https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hestat/obesity_
adult_09_10/obesity_adult_09_10.pdf. Accessed
4 April 2017.
49.
Okorodudu
DO,
Jumean
MF,
Montori
VM,
Romero-Corral A, Somers VK, Erwin PJ, Lopez-
Jimenez F. Diagnostic performance of body mass
index to identify obesity as defined by body adi-
posity: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J
Obes. 2010;34(5):791–799.
50.
Romero-Corral A, Somers VK, Sierra-Johnson J,
Thomas RJ, Collazo-Clavell ML, Korinek J, Allison
TG, Batsis JA, Sert-Kuniyoshi FH, Lopez-Jimenez F.
Accuracy of body mass index in diagnosing obesity
in the adult general population. Int J Obes. 2008;
32(6):959–966.
51.
Berstad P, Randby A, Seim Ekeland G, Ulveland H,
Omland T, Almendingen K. Body fat and fat-free
mass measured by bioelectric impedance spec-
troscopy and dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry in
obese and non-obese adults. Br J Nutr. 2012;107(8):
1192–1200.
52.
Despr´
es JP. Body fat distribution and risk of car-
diovascular disease: an update. Circulation. 2012;
126(10):1301–1313.
53.
Matsuzawa Y, Funahashi T, Nakamura T. The
concept of metabolic syndrome: contribution of
visceral
fat
accumulation
and
its
molecular
mechanism. J Atheroscler Thromb. 2011;18(8):
629–639.
54.
Sahakyan KR, Somers VK, Rodriguez-Escudero JP,
Hodge DO, Carter RE, Sochor O, Coutinho T, Jensen
MD, Roger VL, Singh P, Lopez-Jimenez F. Normal-
weight central obesity: implications for total and
cardiovascular mortality. Ann Intern Med. 2015;
163(11):827–835.
55.
Vague J. The degree of masculine differentiation of
obesities: a factor determining predisposition to
diabetes, atherosclerosis, gout, and uric calculous
disease. 1956. Obes Res. 1996;4(2):204–212.
56.
Pouliot M-C, Despr´
es J-P, Lemieux S, Moorjani S,
Bouchard C, Tremblay A, Nadeau A, Lupien PJ.
Waist circumference and abdominal sagittal di-
ameter: best simple anthropometric indexes of
abdominal visceral adipose tissue accumulation
and related cardiovascular risk in men and women.
Am J Cardiol. 1994;73(7):460–468.
57.
Lean MEJ, Han TS, Morrison CE. Waist circumfer-
ence as a measure for indicating need for weight
management. BMJ. 1995;311(6998):158–161.
58.
Balkau B, Deanfield JE, Despr´
es JP, Bassand JP, Fox
KAA, Smith SC, Jr, Barter P, Tan CE, Van Gaal L,
Wittchen HU, Massien C, Haffner SM. International
Day for the Evaluation of Abdominal Obesity
(IDEA): a study of waist circumference, cardiovas-
cular disease, and diabetes mellitus in 168,000
primary care patients in 63 countries. Circulation.
2007;116(17):1942–1951.
59.
Cerhan JR, Moore SC, Jacobs EJ, Kitahara CM,
Rosenberg PS, Adami H-O, Ebbert JO, English DR,
Gapstur SM, Giles GG, Horn-Ross PL, Park Y, Patel
AV, Robien K, Weiderpass E, Willett WC, Wolk A,
Zeleniuch-Jacquotte A, Hartge P, Bernstein L,
Berrington de Gonzalez A. A pooled analysis of
waist circumference and mortality in 650,000
adults. Mayo Clin Proc. 2014;89(3):335–345.
60.
Garvey WT, Mechanick JI, Brett EM, Garber AJ,
Hurley DL, Jastreboff AM, Nadolsky K, Pessah-Pollack
R, Plodkowski R. American Association of Clinical
Endocrinologists and American College of Endocri-
nology comprehensive clinical practice guidelines for
medical care of patients with obesity. Executive
summary. Complete guidelines available at https://
www.aace.com/publications/guidelines. Endocr Pract.
2016;22(7):842–884.
61.
Emdin CA, Khera AV, Natarajan P, Klarin D, Zekavat
SM, Hsiao AJ, Kathiresan S. Genetic association of
waist-to-hip ratio with cardiometabolic traits, type
2 diabetes, and coronary heart disease. JAMA. 2017;
317(6):626–634.
62.
Styne DM, Arslanian SA, Connor EL, Farooqi IS,
Murad MH, Silverstein JH, Yanovski JA. Pediatric
obesity-assessment, treatment, and prevention: An
Endocrine Society clinical practice guideline. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 2017;102(3):709–757.
63.
Sardinha LB, Santos DA, Silva AM, Grøntved A,
Andersen LB, Ekelund U. A comparison between
BMI, waist circumference, and waist-to-height ratio
for identifying cardio-metabolic risk in children and
adolescents. PLoS One. 2016;11(2):e0149351.
64.
Ogden CL, Kuczmarski RJ, Flegal KM, Mei Z, Guo S,
Wei R, Grummer-Strawn LM, Curtin LR, Roche AF,
Johnson CL. Centers for disease control and pre-
vention 2000 growth charts for the united states:
improvements to the 1977 national center for
health statistics version. Pediatrics. 2002;109(1):
45–60.
65.
Kahn HS, Imperatore G, Cheng YJ. A population-
based comparison of BMI percentiles and waist-to-
height ratio for identifying cardiovascular risk in
youth. J Pediatr. 2005;146(4):482–488.
66.
Roy SM, Spivack JG, Faith MS, Chesi A, Mitchell JA,
Kelly A, Grant SFA, McCormack SE, Zemel BS. Infant
BMI or weight-for-length and obesity risk in early
childhood. Pediatrics. 2016;137(5):e20153492.
67.
Wildman RP, Muntner P, Reynolds K, McGinn AP,
Rajpathak S, Wylie-Rosett J, Sowers MR. The obese
without cardiometabolic risk factor clustering and
the normal weight with cardiometabolic risk factor
clustering: prevalence and correlates of 2 pheno-
types
among
the
US
population
(NHANES
1999–2004).
Arch
Intern
Med.
2008;168(15):
1617–1624.
68.
Jensen MD. Role of body fat distribution and the
metabolic complications of obesity. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab. 2008;93(11, Suppl 1):S57–S63.
69.
Stefan N, H¨
aring HU, Hu FB, Schulze MB. Meta-
bolically healthy obesity: epidemiology, mecha-
nisms, and clinical implications. Lancet Diabetes
Endocrinol. 2013;1(2):152–162.
70.
Roberson LL, Aneni EC, Maziak W, Agatston A,
Feldman T, Rouseff M, Tran T, Blaha MJ, Santos RD,
Sposito A, Al-Mallah MH, Blankstein R, Budoff MJ,
Nasir K. Beyond BMI: the “metabolically healthy
obese” phenotype & its association with clinical/
subclinical cardiovascular disease and all-cause
mortality—a
systematic
review.
BMC
Public
Health. 2014;14(1):14.
71.
Camhi SM, Katzmarzyk PT. Differences in body
composition between metabolically healthy obese
and metabolically abnormal obese adults. Int J Obes.
2014;38(8):1142–1145.
72.
Rey-L´
opez JP, de Rezende LF, Pastor-Valero M, Tess
BH. The prevalence of metabolically healthy obesity:
a systematic review and critical evaluation of the
definitions used. Obes Rev. 2014;15(10):781–790.
73.
van Vliet-Ostaptchouk JV, Nuotio M-L, Slagter
SN, Doiron D, Fischer K, Foco L, Gaye A, G¨
ogele
M, Heier M, Hiekkalinna T, Joensuu A, Newby C,
Pang C, Partinen E, Reischl E, Schwienbacher C,
Tammesoo M-L, Swertz MA, Burton P, Ferretti V,
Fortier I, Giepmans L, Harris JR, Hillege HL,
Holmen J, Jula A, Kootstra-Ros JE, Kvaløy K,
Holmen TL, M¨
annist¨
o S, Metspalu A, Midthjell K,
Murtagh MJ, Peters A, Pramstaller PP, Saaristo T,
Salomaa V, Stolk RP, Uusitupa M, van der Harst P,
van der Klauw MM, Waldenberger M, Perola M,
Wolffenbuttel BHR. The prevalence of metabolic
syndrome and metabolically healthy obesity in
Europe: a collaborative analysis of ten large co-
hort studies. BMC Endocr Disord. 2014;14(1):9.
74.
Stefan N, Kantartzis K, Machann J, Schick F, Thamer
C, Rittig K, Balletshofer B, Machicao F, Fritsche A,
H¨
aring H-U. Identification and characterization of
metabolically benign obesity in humans. Obstet
Gynecol Surv. 2009;64(1):30–31.
75.
Kramer CK, Zinman B, Retnakaran R. Are meta-
bolically healthy overweight and obesity benign
conditions?: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
Ann Intern Med. 2013;159(11):758–769.
123
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00253
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 76.
Bell JA, Hamer M, Sabia S, Singh-Manoux A, Batty
GD, Kivimaki M. The natural course of healthy
obesity over 20 years. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015;65(1):
101–102.
77.
Eckel N, Meidtner K, Kalle-Uhlmann T, Stefan N,
Schulze MB. Metabolically healthy obesity and
cardiovascular events: a systematic review and
meta-analysis.
Eur
J
Prev
Cardiol.
2016;23(9):
956–966.
78.
Hwang YC, Hayashi T, Fujimoto WY, Kahn SE,
Leonetti DL, McNeely MJ, Boyko EJ. Visceral ab-
dominal fat accumulation predicts the conversion
of metabolically healthy obese subjects to an un-
healthy
phenotype.
Int
J
Obes.
2015;39(9):
1365–1370.
79.
Jae SY, Franklin B, Choi Y-H, Fernhall B. Metaboli-
cally healthy obesity and carotid intima-media
thickness:
effects
of
cardiorespiratory
fitness.
Mayo Clin Proc. 2015;90(9):1217–1224.
80.
Ortega FB, Lee DC, Katzmarzyk PT, Ruiz JR, Sui X,
Church TS, Blair SN. The intriguing metabolically
healthy
but
obese
phenotype:
cardiovascular
prognosis and role of fitness. Eur Heart J. 2013;34(5):
389–397.
81.
Ricketts TA, Sui X, Lavie CJ, Blair SN, Ross R. Ad-
dition of cardiorespiratory fitness within an obesity
risk classification model identifies men at increased
risk of all-cause mortality. Am J Med. 2016;129(5):
536.e13–536.e20.
82.
McAuley PA, Blaha MJ, Keteyian SJ, Brawner CA, Al
Rifai M, Dardari ZA, Ehrman JK, Al-Mallah MH.
Fitness, fatness, and mortality: the FIT (Henry Ford
exercise testing) project. Am J Med. 2016;129(9):
960–965.e1.
83.
Daniels SR. The consequences of childhood over-
weight and obesity. Future Child. 2006;16(1):47–67.
84.
Villareal DT, Apovian CM, Kushner RF, Klein S;
American Society for Nutrition; NAASO, The
Obesity Society. Obesity in older adults: technical
review and position statement of the American
Society for Nutrition and NAASO, The Obesity
Society. Obes Res. 2005;13(11):1849–1863.
85.
National Clinical Guideline Centre (U.K.). Obesity:
Identification, Assessment and Management of
Overweight and Obesity in Children, Young People
and Adults. Partial Update of cg43. London, U.K.:
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence
(U.K.); 2014.
86.
Sharma AM, Kushner RF. A proposed clinical
staging system for obesity. Int J Obes. 2009;33(3):
289–295.
87.
Han TS, Tajar A, Lean ME. Obesity and weight
management in the elderly. Br Med Bull. 2011;97(1):
169–196.
88.
Zamboni M, Mazzali G, Zoico E, Harris TB, Meigs JB,
Di Francesco V, Fantin F, Bissoli L, Bosello O. Health
consequences of obesity in the elderly: a review of
four unresolved questions. Int J Obes. 2005;29(9):
1011–1029.
89.
Santanasto AJ, Goodpaster BH, Kritchevsky SB,
Miljkovic I, Satterfield S, Schwartz AV, Cummings
SR, Boudreau RM, Harris TB, Newman AB. Body
composition remodeling and mortality: the health
aging and body composition study. J Gerontol A Biol
Sci Med Sci. 2017;72(4):513–519.
90.
Kelly LA, Lane CJ, Weigensberg MJ, Toledo-Corral
CM, Goran MI. Pubertal changes of insulin sensi-
tivity, acute insulin response, and b-cell function in
overweight Latino youth. J Pediatr. 2011;158(3):
442–446.
91.
Dietz WH, Economos CD. Progress in the control
of childhood obesity. Pediatrics. 2015;135(3):
e559–e561.
92.
Thangaratinam S, Rogozi´
nska E, Jolly K, Glinkowski
S, Duda W, Borowiack E, Roseboom T, Tomlinson J,
Walczak J, Kunz R, Mol BW, Coomarasamy A, Khan
KS. Interventions to reduce or prevent obesity in
pregnant women: a systematic review. Health
Technol Assess. 2012;16(31):iii–iv, 1–191.
93.
Thangaratinam S, Rogozinska E, Jolly K, Glinkowski
S, Roseboom T, Tomlinson JW, Kunz R, Mol BW,
Coomarasamy A, Khan KS. Effects of interventions
in pregnancy on maternal weight and obstetric
outcomes: meta-analysis of randomised evidence.
BMJ. 2012;344:e2088.
94.
Tanentsapf I, Heitmann BL, Adegboye ARA. Sys-
tematic review of clinical trials on dietary in-
terventions to prevent excessive weight gain during
pregnancy among normal weight, overweight and
obese women. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth. 2011;
11(1):81.
95.
Muktabhant B, Lawrie TA, Lumbiganon P, Laopaiboon
M. Diet or Exercise, or Both, for Preventing Excessive
Weight Gain in Pregnancy. Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews. Wiley-Blackwell; 2015.
96.
Gillman MW, Rifas-Shiman SL, Fernandez-Barres S,
Kleinman K, Taveras EM, Oken E. Beverage intake
during pregnancy and childhood adiposity. Pedi-
atrics. 2017;140(2):e20170031.
97.
Larson N, Ward DS, Neelon SB, Story M. What role
can child-care settings play in obesity prevention? A
review of the evidence and call for research efforts.
J Am Diet Assoc. 2011;111(9):1343–1362.
98.
de Silva-Sanigorski AM, Bell AC, Kremer P, Nichols
M, Crellin M, Smith M, Sharp S, de Groot F,
Carpenter L, Boak R, Robertson N, Swinburn BA.
Reducing obesity in early childhood: results from
Romp & Chomp, an Australian community-wide
intervention program. Am J Clin Nutr. 2010;91(4):
831–840.
99.
Evaluating obesity prevention efforts: what have we
learned? Available at: https://publichealth.gwu.edu/
sites/default/files/downloads/Redstone-Center/
Evaluating Obesity Prevention Efforts What
Have We Learned.pdf. Accessed 31 July 2016.
100. United States Department of Agriculture Food and
Nutrition Services. Child and adult care food pro-
gram. Available at: https://www.fns.usda.gov/cacfp/
child-and-adult-care-food-program.
Accessed
12
March 2017.
101. Waters E, de Silva-Sanigorski A, Hall BJ, Brown T,
Campbell KJ, Gao Y, Armstrong R, Prosser L,
Summerbell
CD.
Interventions
for
preventing
obesity in children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2011; (12):CD001871.
102. Epstein LH, Gordy CC, Raynor HA, Beddome M,
Kilanowski CK, Paluch R. Increasing fruit and veg-
etable intake and decreasing fat and sugar intake in
families at risk for childhood obesity. Obes Res. 2001;
9(3):171–178.
103. James J, Thomas P, Cavan D, Kerr D. Preventing
childhood obesity by reducing consumption of
carbonated drinks: cluster randomised controlled
trial. BMJ. 2004;328(7450):1237.
104. Ebbeling CB, Feldman HA, Chomitz VR, Antonelli
TA, Gortmaker SL, Osganian SK, Ludwig DS. A
randomized trial of sugar-sweetened beverages and
adolescent body weight. N Engl J Med. 2012;367(15):
1407–1416.
105. de Ruyter JC, Olthof MR, Seidell JC, Katan MB. A trial
of sugar-free or sugar-sweetened beverages and
body weight in children. N Engl J Med. 2012;367(15):
1397–1406.
106. Sallis JF, Glanz K. Physical activity and food envi-
ronments: solutions to the obesity epidemic. Mil-
bank Q. 2009;87(1):123–154.
107. Caballero B, Clay T, Davis SM, Ethelbah B, Rock BH,
Lohman T, Norman J, Story M, Stone EJ, Stephenson
L, Stevens J; Pathways Study Research Group.
Pathways: a school-based, randomized controlled
trial for the prevention of obesity in American
Indian schoolchildren. Am J Clin Nutr. 2003;78(5):
1030–1038.
108. Gortmaker SL, Peterson K, Wiecha J, Sobol AM,
Dixit S, Fox MK, Laird N. Reducing obesity via
a
school-based
interdisciplinary
intervention
among youth: Planet Health. Arch Pediatr Adolesc
Med. 1999;153(4):409–418.
109. Plachta-Danielzik S, Landsberg B, Lange D, Seiberl J,
M¨
uller MJ. Eight-year follow-up of school-based
intervention on childhood overweight—the Kiel
Obesity Prevention Study. Obes Facts. 2011;4(1):
35–43.
110. Sahota P, Rudolf MC, Dixey R, Hill AJ, Barth JH, Cade
J. Randomised controlled trial of primary school
based intervention to reduce risk factors for obesity.
BMJ. 2001;323(7320):1029–1032.
111. Malik VS, Pan A, Willett WC, Hu FB. Sugar-
sweetened beverages and weight gain in children
and adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Am J Clin Nutr. 2013;98(4):1084–1102.
112. Dietz WH, Gortmaker SL. New strategies to pri-
oritize nutrition, physical activity, and obesity in-
terventions. Am J Prev Med. 2016;51(5):e145–e150.
113. Kamath CC, Vickers KS, Ehrlich A, McGovern L,
Johnson J, Singhal V, Paulo R, Hettinger A, Erwin PJ,
Montori
VM.
Clinical
review:
behavioral
in-
terventions to prevent childhood obesity: a sys-
tematic review and metaanalyses of randomized
trials.
J
Clin
Endocrinol
Metab.
2008;93(12):
4606–4615.
114. Task Force on Community Preventive Services. A
recommendation to improve employee weight
status through worksite health promotion pro-
grams targeting nutrition, physical activity, or both.
Am J Prev Med. 2009;37(4):358–359.
115. Anderson LM, Quinn TA, Glanz K, Ramirez G,
Kahwati LC, Johnson DB, Buchanan LR, Archer WR,
Chattopadhyay S, Kalra GP, Katz DL; Task Force on
Community Preventive Services. The effectiveness
of worksite nutrition and physical activity in-
terventions for controlling employee overweight
and obesity: a systematic review. Am J Prev Med.
2009;37(4):340–357.
116. Thorndike AN, Sonnenberg L, Riis J, Barraclough S,
Levy DE. A 2-phase labeling and choice architecture
intervention to improve healthy food and beverage
choices. Am J Public Health. 2012;102(3):527–533.
117. Boston Public Health Commission. Healthy bever-
ages. Available at: http://www.bphc.org/whatwedo/
healthy-eating-active-living/healthy-beverages/Pages/
Healthy-Beverages.aspx. Accessed 7 February 2014.
118. Jeffery RW, French SA. Preventing weight gain in
adults: the pound of prevention study. Am J Public
Health. 1999;89(5):747–751.
119. Papas MA, Alberg AJ, Ewing R, Helzlsouer KJ, Gary
TL, Klassen AC. The built environment and obesity.
Epidemiol Rev. 2007;29(1):129–143.
120. Ludwig J, Sanbonmatsu L, Gennetian L, Adam E,
Duncan GJ, Katz LF, Kessler RC, Kling JR, Lindau ST,
Whitaker RC, McDade TW. Neighborhoods, obe-
sity, and diabetes—a randomized social experiment.
N Engl J Med. 2011;365(16):1509–1519.
121. Besser LM, Dannenberg AL. Walking to public
transit: steps to help meet physical activity rec-
ommendations. Am J Prev Med. 2005;29(4):273–280.
122. MacDonald JM, Stokes RJ, Cohen DA, Kofner A,
Ridgeway GK. The effect of light rail transit on body
mass index and physical activity. Am J Prev Med.
2010;39(2):105–112.
124
Bray et al
Management of Obesity
Endocrine Reviews, April 2018, 39(2):79–132
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 123. Creatore MI, Glazier RH, Moineddin R, Fazli GS,
Johns A, Gozdyra P, Matheson FI, Kaufman-Shriqui
V, Rosella LC, Manuel DG, Booth GL. Association of
neighborhood walkability with change in over-
weight, obesity, and diabetes. JAMA. 2016;315(20):
2211–2220.
124. Faith MS, Fontaine KR, Baskin ML, Allison DB.
Toward the reduction of population obesity:
macrolevel
environmental
approaches
to
the
problems of food, eating, and obesity. Psychol Bull.
2007;133(2):205–226.
125. James W, Gill T. Prevention of obesity. In: Bray GA,
Bouchard C, eds. Handbook of Obesity: Clinical Ap-
plications. 3rd ed. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press; 2008:
157–175.
126. Dubowitz T, Ghosh-Dastidar M, Cohen DA, Beck-
man R, Steiner ED, Hunter GP, Fl´
orez KR, Huang C,
Vaughan CA, Sloan JC, Zenk SN, Cummins S, Collins
RL. Diet and perceptions change with supermarket
introduction in a food desert, but not because of
supermarket use. Health Aff (Millwood). 2015;34(11):
1858–1868.
127. Sacks FM, Svetkey LP, Vollmer WM, Appel LJ, Bray
GA, Harsha D, Obarzanek E, Conlin PR, Miller ER III,
Simons-Morton DG, Karanja N, Lin P-H, Aickin M,
Most-Windhauser MM, Moore TJ, Proschan MA,
Cutler JA; DASH-Sodium Collaborative Research
Group. Effects on blood pressure of reduced dietary
sodium and the Dietary Approaches to Stop Hy-
pertension (DASH) diet. N Engl J Med. 2001;344(1):
3–10.
128. Kennedy BM, Paeratakul S, Ryan DH, Bray GA.
Socioeconomic status and health disparity in the
United States. J Hum Behav Soc Environ. 2007;
15(2–3):13–23.
129. Glanz K, Yaroch AL. Strategies for increasing fruit
and vegetable intake in grocery stores and com-
munities: policy, pricing, and environmental change.
Prev Med. 2004;39(Suppl 2):S75–S80.
130. Glanz K, Hoelscher D. Increasing fruit and vegetable
intake by changing environments, policy and
pricing: restaurant-based research, strategies, and
recommendations. Prev Med. 2004;39(Suppl 2):
S88–S93.
131. Buzby M. Evaluation of the USDA fruit and vegetable
program: report to congress. Available at: https://www.
ers.usda.gov/webdocs/publications/efan03006/30826_
efan03006_002.pdf. Accessed 8 January 2018.
132. French SA, Wechsler H. School-based research and
initiatives: fruit and vegetable environment, policy,
and pricing workshop. Prev Med. 2004;39(Suppl 2):
S101–S107.
133. Appel LJ, Clark JM, Yeh H-C, Wang N-Y, Coughlin
JW, Daumit G, Miller ER III, Dalcin A, Jerome GJ,
Geller S, Noronha G, Pozefsky T, Charleston J,
Reynolds JB, Durkin N, Rubin RR, Louis TA, Brancati
FL. Comparative effectiveness of weight-loss in-
terventions in clinical practice. N Engl J Med. 2011;
365(21):1959–1968.
134. Smed S, Jensen JD, Denver S. Socio-economic
characteristics and the effect of taxation as
a health policy instrument. Food Policy. 2007;
32(5–6):624–639.
135. Brownell KD, Farley T, Willett WC, Popkin BM,
Chaloupka FJ, Thompson JW, Ludwig DS. The public
health and economic benefits of taxing sugar-
sweetened beverages. N Engl J Med. 2009;361(16):
1599–1605.
136. Falbe J, Thompson HR, Becker CM, Rojas N,
McCulloch CE, Madsen KA. Impact of the Berkeley
excise tax on sugar-sweetened beverage con-
sumption.
Am
J
Public
Health.
2016;106(10):
1865–1871.
137. Colchero MA, Rivera-Dommarco J, Popkin BM, Ng
SW. In Mexico, evidence of sustained consumer
response two years after implementing a sugar-
sweetened beverage tax. Health Aff (Millwood). 2017;
36(3):564–571.
138. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Envi-
ronmental and policy approaches to increase
physical activity: creation of or enhanced access to
places for physical activity combined with in-
formational outreach activities. Available at: http://
www.thecommunityguide.org/pa/environmental-
policy/improvingaccess.html. Accessed 5 April 2015.
139. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Strategies to Prevent Obesity and Other Chronic
Diseases: The CDC Guide to Strategies to Increase
Physical Activity in the Community. Atlanta, GA: U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services; 2011.
140. Zhai F, Wang H, Du S, He Y, Wang Z, Ge K, Popkin
BM. Prospective study on nutrition transition in
China. Nutr Rev. 2009;67(Suppl 1):S56–S61.
141. Monda KL, Adair LS, Zhai F, Popkin BM. Longitu-
dinal relationships between occupational and do-
mestic physical activity patterns and body weight in
China. Eur J Clin Nutr. 2008;62(11):1318–1325.
142. Di Angelantonio E, Bhupathiraju ShN, Wormser D,
Gao P, Kaptoge S, Berrington de Gonzalez A, Cairns
BJ, Huxley R, Jackson ChL, Joshy G, Lewington S,
Manson JE, Murphy N, Patel AV, Samet JM,
Woodward M, Zheng W, Zhou M, Bansal N,
Barricarte A, Carter B, Cerhan JR, Smith GD, Fang X,
Franco OH, Green J, Halsey J, Hildebrand JS, Jung KJ,
Korda RJ, McLerran DF, Moore SC, O’Keeffe LM,
Paige E, Ramond A, Reeves GK, Rolland B, Sacerdote
C, Sattar N, Sofianopoulou E, Stevens J, Thun M,
Ueshima H, Yang L, Yun YD, Willeit P, Banks E, Beral
V, Chen Zh, Gapstur SM, Gunter MJ, Hartge P, Jee
SH, Lam TH, Peto R, Potter JD, Willett WC,
Thompson SG, Danesh J, Hu FB; The Global
Mortality Collaboration. Body-mass index and
all-cause
mortality:
individual-participant-data
meta-analysis of 239 prospective studies in four
continents. Lancet. 2016;388:776–786.
143. Sj¨
ostr¨
om L, Narbro K, Sj¨
ostr¨
om CD, Karason K,
Larsson B, Wedel H, Lystig T, Sullivan M, Bouchard C,
Carlsson B, Bengtsson C, Dahlgren S, Gummesson A,
Jacobson P, Karlsson J, Lindroos A-K, L¨
onroth H,
N¨
aslund I, Olbers T, Stenl¨
of K, Torgerson J, ˚
Agren G,
Carlsson LMS; Swedish Obese Subjects Study. Ef-
fects of bariatric surgery on mortality in Swedish
obese subjects. N Engl J Med. 2007;357(8):741–752.
144. Gregg EW, Jakicic JM, Blackburn G, Bloomquist P,
Bray GA, Clark JM, Coday M, Curtis JM, Egan C,
Evans M, Foreyt J, Foster G, Hazuda HP, Hill JO,
Horton ES, Hubbard VS, Jeffery RW, Johnson KC,
Kitabchi AE, Knowler WC, Kriska A, Lang W, Lewis
CE, Montez MG, Nathan DM, Neiberg RH, Patricio J,
Peters A, Pi-Sunyer X, Pownall H, Redmon B,
Regensteiner J, Rejeski J, Ribisl PM, Safford M,
Stewart K, Trence D, Wadden TA, Wing RR,
Yanovski SZ; Look AHEAD Research Group. As-
sociation of the magnitude of weight loss and
changes in physical fitness with long-term cardio-
vascular disease outcomes in overweight or obese
people with type 2 diabetes: a post-hoc analysis of
the Look AHEAD randomised clinical trial. Lancet
Diabetes Endocrinol. 2016;4(11):913–921.
145. Heymsfield SB, Wadden TA. Mechanisms, patho-
physiology, and management of obesity. N Engl J
Med. 2017;376(3):254–266.
146. Halberg N, Wernstedt-Asterholm I, Scherer PE. The
adipocyte as an endocrine cell. Endocrinol Metab
Clin North Am. 2008;37(3):753–768, x–xi.
147. Danforth E, Jr. Failure of adipocyte differentiation
causes type II diabetes mellitus? Nat Genet. 2000;
26(1):13.
148. Bray GA, Redman LM, de Jonge L, Rood J, Smith SR.
Effect of three levels of dietary protein on metabolic
phenotype of healthy individuals with 8 weeks of
overfeeding. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2016;101(7):
2836–2843.
149. Arner P, Arner E, Hammarstedt A, Smith U. Genetic
predisposition for type 2 diabetes, but not for
overweight/obesity, is associated with a restricted
adipogenesis. PLoS One. 2011;6(4):e18284.
150. Tchoukalova YD, Votruba SB, Tchkonia T, Giorgadze
N, Kirkland JL, Jensen MD. Regional differences in
cellular mechanisms of adipose tissue gain with
overfeeding. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2010;107(42):
18226–18231.
151. Fabbrini E, Yoshino J, Yoshino M, Magkos F,
Tiemann Luecking C, Samovski D, Fraterrigo G,
Okunade AL, Patterson BW, Klein S. Metabolically
normal obese people are protected from adverse
effects following weight gain. J Clin Invest. 2015;
125(2):787–795.
152. Wang ZV, Scherer PE. Adiponectin, the past two
decades. J Mol Cell Biol. 2016;8(2):93–100.
153. Hvidtfeldt UA, Gunter MJ, Lange T, Chlebowski RT,
Lane D, Farhat GN, Freiberg MS, Keiding N, Lee JS,
Prentice R, Tjønneland A, Vitolins MZ, Wassertheil-
Smoller S, Strickler HD, Rod NH. Quantifying me-
diating effects of endogenous estrogen and insulin
in the relation between obesity, alcohol con-
sumption, and breast cancer. Cancer Epidemiol
Biomarkers Prev. 2012;21(7):1203–1212.
154. DeFronzo RA, Ferrannini E, Groop L, Henry RR,
Herman WH, Holst JJ, Hu FB, Kahn CR, Raz I,
Shulman GI, Simonson DC, Testa MA, Weiss R. Type
2 diabetes mellitus. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2015;1:
15019.
155. Galassi A, Reynolds K, He J. Metabolic syndrome
and risk of cardiovascular disease: a meta-analysis.
Am J Med. 2006;119(10):812–819.
156. Sasai H, Sairenchi T, Iso H, Irie F, Otaka E, Tanaka K,
Ota H, Muto T. Relationship between obesity and
incident diabetes in middle-aged and older Japa-
nese adults: the Ibaraki Prefectural Health Study.
Mayo Clin Proc. 2010;85(1):36–40.
157. Wang Y, Rimm EB, Stampfer MJ, Willett WC, Hu FB.
Comparison of abdominal adiposity and overall
obesity in predicting risk of type 2 diabetes among
men. Am J Clin Nutr. 2005;81(3):555–563.
158. Knowler WC, Fowler SE, Hamman RF, Christophi
CA, Hoffman HJ, Brenneman AT, Brown-Friday JO,
Goldberg R, Venditti E, Nathan DM; Diabetes
Prevention
Program
Research
Group.
10-year
follow-up of diabetes incidence and weight loss in
the Diabetes Prevention Program Outcomes Study.
Lancet. 2009;374(9702):1677–1686.
159. Purnell JQ, Selzer F, Wahed AS, Pender J, Pories W,
Pomp A, Dakin G, Mitchell J, Garcia L, Staten MA,
McCloskey C, Cummings DE, Flum DR, Courcoulas
A, Wolfe BM. Type 2 diabetes remission rates after
laparoscopic gastric bypass and gastric banding:
results of the longitudinal assessment of bariatric
surgery study. Diabetes Care. 2016;39(7):1101–1107.
160. Sj¨
ostr¨
om L, Lindroos A-K, Peltonen M, Torgerson J,
Bouchard C, Carlsson B, Dahlgren S, Larsson B,
Narbro K, Sj¨
ostr¨
om CD, Sullivan M, Wedel H;
Swedish Obese Subjects Study Scientific Group.
Lifestyle, diabetes, and cardiovascular risk factors 10
years after bariatric surgery. N Engl J Med. 2004;
351(26):2683–2693.
161. Schauer PR, Bhatt DL, Kirwan JP, Wolski K, Aminian
A, Brethauer SA, Navaneethan SD, Singh RP, Pothier
CE, Nissen SE, Kashyap SR; STAMPEDE Investigators.
125
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00253
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Bariatric surgery versus intensive medical therapy
for diabetes—5-year outcomes. N Engl J Med. 2017;
376(7):641–651.
162. Brawer R, Brisbon N, Plumb J. Obesity and cancer.
Prim Care. 2009;36(3):509–531.
163. Calle EE, Rodriguez C, Walker-Thurmond K, Thun
MJ. Overweight, obesity, and mortality from cancer
in a prospectively studied cohort of U.S. adults.
N Engl J Med. 2003;348(17):1625–1638.
164. Rosner B, Eliassen AH, Toriola AT, Hankinson SE,
Willett WC, Natarajan L, Colditz GA. Short-term
weight gain and breast cancer risk by hormone
receptor classification among pre- and post-
menopausal women. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2015;
150(3):643–653.
165. Aune D, Navarro Rosenblatt DA, Chan DSM,
Vingeliene S, Abar L, Vieira AR, Greenwood DC,
Bandera EV, Norat T. Anthropometric factors and
endometrial cancer risk: a systematic review and
dose-response meta-analysis of prospective studies.
Ann Oncol. 2015;26(8):1635–1648.
166. Eliassen AH, Colditz GA, Rosner B, Willett WC,
Hankinson SE. Adult weight change and risk of
postmenopausal breast cancer. JAMA. 2006;296(2):
193–201.
167. van Kruijsdijk RCM, van der Wall E, Visseren FLJ.
Obesity and cancer: the role of dysfunctional adi-
pose tissue. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2009;
18(10):2569–2578.
168. Sweeney C, Blair CK, Anderson KE, Lazovich D,
Folsom AR. Risk factors for breast cancer in elderly
women. Am J Epidemiol. 2004;160(9):868–875.
169. Schairer C, Fuhrman BJ, Boyd-Morin J, Genkinger JM,
Gail MH, Hoover RN, Ziegler RG. Quantifying the
role of circulating unconjugated estradiol in me-
diating the body mass index-breast cancer associ-
ation. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2016;25(1):
105–113.
170. Kenchaiah S, Evans JC, Levy D, Wilson PWF, Ben-
jamin EJ, Larson MG, Kannel WB, Vasan RS. Obesity
and the risk of heart failure. N Engl J Med. 2002;
347(5):305–313.
171. Canoy D, Cairns BJ, Balkwill A, Wright FL, Green J,
Reeves G, Beral V; Million Women Study Collab-
orators. Body mass index and incident coronary
heart disease in women: a population-based pro-
spective study. BMC Med. 2013;11(1):87.
172. Aune D, Sen A, Prasad M, Norat T, Janszky I, Tonstad
S, Romundstad P, Vatten LJ. BMI and all cause
mortality: systematic review and non-linear dose-
response meta-analysis of 230 cohort studies with
3.74 million deaths among 30.3 million participants.
BMJ. 2016;353:i2156.
173. Flint AJ, Hu FB, Glynn RJ, Caspard H, Manson JE,
Willett WC, Rimm EB. Excess weight and the risk of
incident coronary heart disease among men and
women. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2010;18(2):377–383.
174. Emberson JR, Whincup PH, Morris RW, Wanna-
methee SG, Shaper AG. Lifestyle and cardiovascular
disease in middle-aged British men: the effect of
adjusting for within-person variation. Eur Heart J.
2005;26(17):1774–1782.
175. Janssen I, Katzmarzyk PT, Ross R. Waist circum-
ference and not body mass index explains obesity-
related health risk. Am J Clin Nutr. 2004;79(3):
379–384.
176. Lee CMY, Huxley RR, Wildman RP, Woodward M.
Indices of abdominal obesity are better discrimi-
nators of cardiovascular risk factors than BMI:
a meta-analysis. J Clin Epidemiol. 2008;61(7):646–653.
177. Wang TJ, Parise H, Levy D, D’Agostino RB, Sr, Wolf
PA, Vasan RS, Benjamin EJ. Obesity and the risk of
new-onset atrial fibrillation. JAMA. 2004;292(20):
2471–2477.
178. Tsang TSM, Barnes ME, Miyasaka Y, Cha SS, Bailey
KR, Verzosa GC, Seward JB, Gersh BJ. Obesity as a risk
factor for the progression of paroxysmal to per-
manent atrial fibrillation: a longitudinal cohort
study of 21 years. Eur Heart J. 2008;29(18):
2227–2233.
179. Aune D, Sen A, Norat T, Janszky I, Romundstad P,
Tonstad S, Vatten LJ. Body mass index, abdominal
fatness, and heart failure incidence and mortality:
a systematic review and dose-response meta-
analysis of prospective studies. Circulation. 2016;
133(7):639–649.
180. Bahrami H, Bluemke DA, Kronmal R, Bertoni AG,
Lloyd-Jones DM, Shahar E, Szklo M, Lima JAC. Novel
metabolic risk factors for incident heart failure and
their relationship with obesity: the MESA (Multi-
Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis) study. J Am Coll
Cardiol. 2008;51(18):1775–1783.
181. Lavie CJ, Milani RV, Artham SM, Patel DA, Ventura
HO. The obesity paradox, weight loss, and coronary
disease. Am J Med. 2009;122(12):1106–1114.
182. Lavie CJ, Sharma A, Alpert MA, De Schutter A,
Lopez-Jimenez F, Milani RV, Ventura HO. Update
on obesity and obesity paradox in heart failure. Prog
Cardiovasc Dis. 2016;58(4):393–400.
183. Lavie CJ, Arena R, Alpert MA, Milani RV, Ventura
HO. Management of cardiovascular diseases in
patients with obesity. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2018;15(1):
45–56.
184. Lajous M, Banack HR, Kaufman JS, Hern´
an MA.
Should patients with chronic disease be told to gain
weight? The obesity paradox and selection bias. Am
J Med. 2015;128(4):334–336.
185. Adams KF, Schatzkin A, Harris TB, Kipnis V, Mouw
T, Ballard-Barbash R, Hollenbeck A, Leitzmann MF.
Overweight, obesity, and mortality in a large pro-
spective cohort of persons 50 to 71 years old. N Engl
J Med. 2006;355(8):763–778.
186. Srikanthan P, Karlamangla AS. Muscle mass index as
a predictor of longevity in older adults. Am J Med.
2014;127(6):547–553.
187. Padwal R, Leslie WD, Lix LM, Majumdar SR. Re-
lationship among body fat percentage, body mass
index, and all-cause mortality. Ann Intern Med. 2016;
164(8):532–541.
188. World Health Organization. World health statistics
2015.
Available
at:
http://www.who.int/gho/
publications/world_health_statistics/2015/en/.
Accessed March 2017.
189. Nwankwo T, Yoon SS, Burt V, Gu Q. Hypertension
among adults in the united states: National health
and nutrition examination survey, 2011–2012.
NCHS Data Brief. 2013;2013(133):1–8.
190. Ettehad D, Emdin CA, Kiran A, Anderson SG,
Callender T, Emberson J, Chalmers J, Rodgers A,
Rahimi K. Blood pressure lowering for prevention of
cardiovascular disease and death: a systematic re-
view and meta-analysis. Lancet. 2016;387(10022):
957–967.
191. Stevens VJ, Obarzanek E, Cook NR, Lee IM, Appel LJ,
Smith West D, Milas NC, Mattfeldt-Beman M,
Belden L, Bragg C, Millstone M, Raczynski J, Brewer
A, Singh B, Cohen J; Trials for the Hypertension
Prevention Research Group. Long-term weight loss
and changes in blood pressure: results of the Trials
of Hypertension Prevention, phase II. Ann Intern
Med. 2001;134(1):1–11.
192. Neter JE, Stam BE, Kok FJ, Grobbee DE, Geleijnse JM.
Influence of weight reduction on blood pressure:
a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.
Hypertension. 2003;42(5):878–884.
193. Coccagna G, Pollini A, Provini F. Cardiovascular
disorders and obstructive sleep apnea syndrome.
Clin Exp Hypertens. 2006;28(3–4):217–224.
194. Young T, Peppard PE, Taheri S. Excess weight and
sleep-disordered breathing. J Appl Physiol (1985).
2005;99(4):1592–1599.
195. Foster GD, Sanders MH, Millman R, Zammit G,
Borradaile KE, Newman AB, Wadden TA, Kelley D,
Wing RR, Sunyer FX, Darcey V, Kuna ST; Sleep
AHEAD Research Group. Obstructive sleep apnea
among obese patients with type 2 diabetes. Di-
abetes Care. 2009;32(6):1017–1019.
196. Clark JM. The epidemiology of nonalcoholic fatty
liver disease in adults. J Clin Gastroenterol. 2006;
40(Suppl 1):S5–S10.
197. Cydylo MA, Davis AT, Kavanagh K. Fatty liver
promotes fibrosis in monkeys consuming high
fructose. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2017;25(2):290–293.
198. Than NN, Newsome PN. A concise review of non-
alcoholic fatty liver disease. Atherosclerosis. 2015;
239(1):192–202.
199. Younossi ZM, Stepanova M, Afendy M, Fang Y,
Younossi Y, Mir H, Srishord M. Changes in the
prevalence of the most common causes of chronic
liver diseases in the United States from 1988 to
2008. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2011;9(6):524–530.e1.
200. Li L, Gan Y, Li W, Wu C, Lu Z. Overweight, obesity
and the risk of gallbladder and extrahepatic bile
duct cancers: a meta-analysis of observational
studies.
Obesity
(Silver
Spring).
2016;24(8):
1786–1802.
201. Pang Q, Zhang JY, Song SD, Qu K, Xu XS, Liu SS, Liu
C. Central obesity and nonalcoholic fatty liver
disease risk after adjusting for body mass index.
World J Gastroenterol. 2015;21(5):1650–1662.
202. Aune D, Norat T, Vatten LJ. Body mass index and
the risk of gout: a systematic review and dose-
response meta-analysis of prospective studies. Eur J
Nutr. 2014;53(8):1591–1601.
203. Felson DT, Anderson JJ, Naimark A, Walker AM,
Meenan RF. Obesity and knee osteoarthritis. The
Framingham Study. Ann Intern Med. 1988;109(1):
18–24.
204. Okoro CA, Hootman JM, Strine TW, Balluz LS,
Mokdad AH. Disability, arthritis, and body weight
among adults 45 years and older. Obes Res. 2004;
12(5):854–861.
205. Marchi J, Berg M, Dencker A, Olander EK, Begley C.
Risks associated with obesity in pregnancy, for the
mother and baby: a systematic review of reviews.
Obes Rev. 2015;16(8):621–638.
206. Bray GA, Siri-Tarino PW. The role of macronutrient
content in the diet for weight management.
Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am. 2016;45(3):
581–604.
207. Hamman RF, Wing RR, Edelstein SL, Lachin JM, Bray
GA, Delahanty L, Hoskin M, Kriska AM, Mayer-Davis
EJ, Pi-Sunyer X, Regensteiner J, Venditti B, Wylie-
Rosett J. Effect of weight loss with lifestyle in-
tervention on risk of diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2006;
29(9):2102–2107.
208. Antonetti VW. The equations governing weight
change in human beings. Am J Clin Nutr. 1973;26(1):
64–71.
209. Thomas DM, Gonzalez MC, Pereira AZ, Redman
LM, Heymsfield SB. Time to correctly predict the
amount of weight loss with dieting. J Acad Nutr Diet.
2014;114(6):857–861.
210. Thomas DM, Weedermann M, Fuemmeler BF,
Martin CK, Dhurandhar NV, Bredlau C, Heymsfield
SB, Ravussin E, Bouchard C. Dynamic model pre-
dicting overweight, obesity, and extreme obesity
prevalence trends. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2014;22(2):
590–597.
211. Hall KD, Sacks G, Chandramohan D, Chow CC,
Wang
YC,
Gortmaker
SL,
Swinburn
BA.
126
Bray et al
Management of Obesity
Endocrine Reviews, April 2018, 39(2):79–132
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Quantification of the effect of energy imbalance on
bodyweight. Lancet. 2011;378(9793):826–837.
212. Sumithran P, Prendergast LA, Delbridge E, Purcell K,
Shulkes A, Kriketos A, Proietto J. Long-term per-
sistence of hormonal adaptations to weight loss.
N Engl J Med. 2011;365(17):1597–1604.
213. Hron BM, Ebbeling CB, Feldman HA, Ludwig DS.
Hepatic, adipocyte, enteric and pancreatic hor-
mones: response to dietary macronutrient com-
position and relationship with metabolism. Nutr
Metab (Lond). 2017;14(1):44.
214. Gavrieli A, Mantzoros CS. Novel molecules regu-
lating energy homeostasis: physiology and regula-
tion by macronutrient intake and weight loss.
Endocrinol Metab (Seoul). 2016;31(3):361–372.
215. Espeland MA, Bray GA, Neiberg R, Rejeski WJ,
Knowler WC, Lang W, Cheskin LJ, Williamson D,
Lewis CB, Wing R; Look Ahead Study Group. De-
scribing patterns of weight changes using principal
components analysis: results from the Action for
Health in Diabetes (Look AHEAD) research group.
Ann Epidemiol. 2009;19(10):701–710.
216. Dansinger ML, Gleason JA, Griffith JL, Selker HP,
Schaefer EJ. Comparison of the Atkins, Ornish,
Weight Watchers, and Zone diets for weight loss
and heart disease risk reduction: a randomized trial.
JAMA. 2005;293(1):43–53.
217. Alhassan S, Kim S, Bersamin A, King AC, Gardner
CD. Dietary adherence and weight loss success
among overweight women: results from the A TO Z
weight loss study. Int J Obes. 2008;32(6):985–991.
218. Sacks FM, Bray GA, Carey VJ, Smith SR, Ryan DH,
Anton SD, McManus K, Champagne CM, Bishop
LM, Laranjo N, Leboff MS, Rood JC, de Jonge L,
Greenway FL, Loria CM, Obarzanek E, Williamson
DA. Comparison of weight-loss diets with different
compositions of fat, protein, and carbohydrates.
N Engl J Med. 2009;360(9):859–873.
219. Delahanty LM, Pan Q, Jablonski KA, Watson KE,
McCaffery JM, Shuldiner A, Kahn SE, Knowler WC,
Florez JC, Franks PW; Diabetes Prevention Program
Research Group. Genetic predictors of weight loss
and weight regain after intensive lifestyle modifi-
cation, metformin treatment, or standard care in
the Diabetes Prevention Program. Diabetes Care.
2012;35(2):363–366.
220. Papandonatos GD, Pan Q, Pajewski NM, Delahanty
LM, Peter I, Erar B, Ahmad S, Harden M, Chen L,
Fontanillas P, Wagenknecht LE, Kahn SE, Wing RR,
Jablonski KA, Huggins GS, Knowler WC, Florez JC,
McCaffery JM, Franks PW; Diabetes Prevention
Program and the Look AHEAD Research Groups.
Genetic predisposition to weight loss and regain
with lifestyle intervention: analyses from the di-
abetes prevention program and the look ahead
randomized controlled trials. Diabetes. 2015;64(12):
4312–4321.
221. Qi Q, Bray GA, Hu FB, Sacks FM, Qi L. Weight-loss
diets
modify
glucose-dependent
insulinotropic
polypeptide receptor rs2287019 genotype effects
on changes in body weight, fasting glucose, and
insulin resistance: the Preventing Overweight Using
Novel Dietary Strategies trial. Am J Clin Nutr. 2012;
95(2):506–513.
222. Zhang X, Qi Q, Zhang C, Smith SR, Hu FB, Sacks FM,
Bray GA, Qi L. FTO genotype and 2-year change in
body composition and fat distribution in response
to weight-loss diets: the POUNDS LOST Trial. Di-
abetes. 2012;61(11):3005–3011.
223. Zhang X, Qi Q, Bray GA, Hu FB, Sacks FM, Qi L.
APOA5 genotype modulates 2-y changes in lipid
profile in response to weight-loss diet intervention:
the Pounds Lost Trial. Am J Clin Nutr. 2012;96(4):
917–922.
224. Qi Q, Xu M, Wu H, Liang L, Champagne CM, Bray
GA, Sacks FM, Qi L. IRS1 genotype modulates
metabolic syndrome reversion in response to 2-year
weight-loss diet intervention: the POUNDS LOST
trial. Diabetes Care. 2013;36(11):3442–3447.
225. Xu M, Qi Q, Liang J, Bray GA, Hu FB, Sacks FM, Qi L.
Genetic determinant for amino acid metabolites
and changes in body weight and insulin re-
sistance in response to weight-loss diets: the
Preventing Overweight Using Novel Dietary
Strategies (POUNDS LOST) trial. Circulation.
2013;127(12):1283–1289.
226. Mirzaei K, Xu M, Qi Q, de Jonge L, Bray GA, Sacks F,
Qi L. Variants in glucose- and circadian rhythm-
related genes affect the response of energy ex-
penditure to weight-loss diets: the POUNDS LOST
Trial. Am J Clin Nutr. 2014;99(2):392–399.
227. Zheng Y, Huang T, Zhang X, Rood J, Bray GA, Sacks
FM, Qi L. Dietary fat modifies the effects of fto
genotype on changes in insulin sensitivity. J Nutr.
2015;145(5):977–982.
228. Livingstone KM, Celis-Morales C, Papandonatos
GD, Erar B, Florez JC, Jablonski KA, Razquin C, Marti
A, Heianza Y, Huang T, Sacks FM, Svendstrup M, Sui
X, Church TS, J¨
a¨
askel¨
ainen T, Lindstr¨
om J, Tuomilehto
J, Uusitupa M, Rankinen T, Saris WH, Hansen T,
Pedersen O, Astrup A, Sørensen TI, Qi L, Bray GA,
Martinez-Gonzalez MA, Martinez JA, Franks PW,
McCaffery JM, Lara J, Mathers JC. FTO genotype and
weight loss: systematic review and meta-analysis of
9563 individual participant data from eight rand-
omised controlled trials. BMJ. 2016;354:i4707.
229. Tsai AG, Wadden TA. The evolution of very-low-
calorie diets: an update and meta-analysis. Obesity
(Silver Spring). 2006;14(8):1283–1293.
230. Bray GA, Popkin BM. Dietary sugar and body
weight: have we reached a crisis in the epidemic of
obesity and diabetes?: health be damned! Pour on
the sugar. Diabetes Care. 2014;37(4):950–956.
231. Nordmann AJ, Nordmann A, Briel M, Keller U,
Yancy WS, Jr, Brehm BJ, Bucher HC. Effects of low-
carbohydrate vs low-fat diets on weight loss and
cardiovascular risk factors: a meta-analysis of ran-
domized controlled trials. Arch Intern Med. 2006;
166(3):285–293.
232. Tobias DK, Chen M, Manson JE, Ludwig DS, Willett
W, Hu FB. Effect of low-fat diet interventions versus
other diet interventions on long-term weight
change in adults: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2015;3(12):
968–979.
233. Bueno NB, de Melo ISV, de Oliveira SL, da Rocha
Ataide T. Very-low-carbohydrate ketogenic diet v.
low-fat diet for long-term weight loss: a meta-
analysis of randomised controlled trials. Br J Nutr.
2013;110(7):1178–1187.
234. Bray GA, Smith SR, de Jonge L, Xie H, Rood J, Martin
CK, Most M, Brock C, Mancuso S, Redman LM.
Effect of dietary protein content on weight gain,
energy expenditure, and body composition during
overeating: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA.
2012;307(1):47–55.
235. Hall KD, Guo J. Obesity energetics: body weight
regulation and the effects of diet composition.
Gastroenterology. 2017;152(7):1718–1727.e3.
236. Astrup A, Grunwald GK, Melanson EL, Saris WHM,
Hill JO. The role of low-fat diets in body weight
control: a meta-analysis of ad libitum dietary in-
tervention studies. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord.
2000;24(12):1545–1552.
237. Pirozzo S, Summerbell C, Cameron C, Glasziou P.
Should we recommend low-fat diets for obesity?
Obes Rev. 2003;4(2):83–90.
238. Ello-Martin JA, Roe LS, Ledikwe JH, Beach AM, Rolls
BJ. Dietary energy density in the treatment of
obesity: a year-long trial comparing 2 weight-loss
diets. Am J Clin Nutr. 2007;85(6):1465–1477.
239. Rolls BJ, Barnett RA. Volumetrics. A Systematic
Lifetime Approach to Eating. Proven Methods for
Satisfying Hunger. Increase Food Volume Without
Gaining Weight. Sound Recipes and Menus for
Weight Loss. New York, NY: Harper-Collins, Inc;2000.
240. Ebbeling CB, Leidig MM, Sinclair KB, Hangen JP,
Ludwig DS. A reduced-glycemic load diet in the
treatment of adolescent obesity. Arch Pediatr
Adolesc Med. 2003;157(8):773–779.
241. Ebbeling CB, Leidig MM, Feldman HA, Lovesky MM,
Ludwig DS. Effects of a low-glycemic load vs low-fat
diet in obese young adults: a randomized trial.
JAMA. 2007;297(19):2092–2102.
242. Thomas DE, Elliott EJ, Baur L. Low glycaemic index
or low glycaemic load diets for overweight and
obesity. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007; (3):
CD005105.
243. Hjorth MF, Ritz C, Blaak EE, Saris WH, Langin D,
Poulsen SK, Larsen TM, Sørensen TI, Zohar Y, Astrup
A. Pretreatment fasting plasma glucose and insulin
modify dietary weight loss success: results from 3
randomized clinical trials. Am J Clin Nutr. 2017;
106(2):499–505.
244. Skov AR, Toubro S, Rønn B, Holm L, Astrup A.
Randomized trial on protein vs carbohydrate in ad
libitum fat reduced diet for the treatment of
obesity. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord. 1999;23(5):
528–536.
245. Due A, Toubro S, Skov AR, Astrup A. Effect of
normal-fat diets, either medium or high in protein,
on body weight in overweight subjects: a rando-
mised 1-year trial. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord.
2004;28(10):1283–1290.
246. Wycherley TP, Moran LJ, Clifton PM, Noakes M,
Brinkworth GD. Effects of energy-restricted high-
protein, low-fat compared with standard-protein,
low-fat diets: a meta-analysis of randomized con-
trolled trials. Am J Clin Nutr. 2012;96(6):1281–1298.
247. Bray GA, Ryan DH, Johnson W, Champagne CM,
Johnson CM, Rood J, Williamson DA, Sacks FM.
Markers of dietary protein intake are associated
with successful weight loss in the POUNDS Lost
trial. Clin Obes. 2017;7(3):166–175.
248. Esposito K, Ida Maiorino M, Ciotola M, Di Palo C,
Scognamiglio P, Gicchino M, Petrizzo M, Saccomanno
F, Beneduce F, Ceriello A, Giugliano D. Effects of
a Mediterranean-style diet on the need for anti-
hyperglycemic drug therapy in patients with newly
diagnosed type 2 diabetes: a randomized trial. Obstet
Gynecol Surv. 2010;65(6):379–380.
249. Nordmann AJ, Suter-Zimmermann K, Bucher HC,
Shai I, Tuttle KR, Estruch R, Briel M. Meta-analysis
comparing Mediterranean to low-fat diets for
modification of cardiovascular risk factors. Am J
Med. 2011;124(9):841–851.e2.
250. Estruch R, Mart´
ınez-Gonz´
alez MA, Corella D, Salas-
Salvad´
o J, Fit´
o M, Chiva-Blanch G, Fiol M, G´
omez-
Gracia E, Ar´
os F, Lapetra J, Serra-Majem L, Pint´
o X,
Buil-Cosiales P, Sorl´
ı JV, Muñoz MA, Basora-Gallis´
a J,
Lamuela-Ravent´
os
RM,
Serra-Mir
M,
Ros
E;
PREDIMED Study Investigators. Effect of a high-fat
Mediterranean diet on bodyweight and waist cir-
cumference: a prespecified secondary outcomes
analysis of the PREDIMED randomised controlled
trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2016;4(8):666–676.
251. Avenell A, Broom J, Brown TJ, Poobalan A, Aucott L,
Stearns SC, Smith WC, Jung RT, Campbell MK,
Grant AM. Systematic review of the long-term
effects and economic consequences of treat-
ments for obesity and implications for health
127
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00253
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 improvement. Health Technol Assess. 2004;8(21):
iii–iv, 1–182.
252. Heymsfield SB, van Mierlo CAJ, van der Knaap HCM,
Heo M, Frier HI. Weight management using a meal
replacement strategy: meta and pooling analysis
from six studies. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord. 2003;
27(5):537–549.
253. Ptomey LT, Willis EA, Goetz JR, Lee J, Szabo-Reed
AN, Sullivan DK, Donnelly JE. Portion-controlled
meals provide increases in diet quality during
weight loss and maintenance. J Hum Nutr Diet. 2016;
29(2):209–216.
254. Gardner CD, Kiazand A, Alhassan S, Kim S, Stafford
RS, Balise RR, Kraemer HC, King AC. Comparison of
the Atkins, Zone, Ornish, and LEARN diets for
change in weight and related risk factors among
overweight premenopausal women: the A TO Z
Weight Loss Study: a randomized trial. JAMA. 2007;
297(9):969–977.
255. Shai I, Schwarzfuchs D, Henkin Y, Shahar DR,
Witkow S, Greenberg I, Golan R, Fraser D, Bolotin A,
Vardi H, Tangi-Rozental O, Zuk-Ramot R, Sarusi B,
Brickner D, Schwartz Z, Sheiner E, Marko R, Katorza
E, Thiery J, Fiedler GM, Bl¨
uher M, Stumvoll M,
Stampfer MJ; Dietary Intervention Randomized
Controlled Trial (DIRECT) Group. Weight loss with
a low-carbohydrate, Mediterranean, or low-fat diet.
N Engl J Med. 2008;359(3):229–241.
256. Bazzano LA, Hu T, Reynolds K, Yao L, Bunol C, Liu Y,
Chen CS, Klag MJ, Whelton PK, He J. Effects of low-
carbohydrate and low-fat diets: a randomized trial.
Ann Intern Med. 2014;161(5):309–318.
257. Das SK, Gilhooly CH, Golden JK, Pittas AG, Fuss PJ,
Cheatham RA, Tyler S, Tsay M, McCrory MA,
Lichtenstein AH, Dallal GE, Dutta C, Bhapkar MV,
Delany JP, Saltzman E, Roberts SB. Long-term effects
of 2 energy-restricted diets differing in glycemic
load on dietary adherence, body composition, and
metabolism in CALERIE: a 1-y randomized con-
trolled trial. Am J Clin Nutr. 2007;85(4):1023–1030.
258. Fabricatore AN, Wadden TA, Ebbeling CB, Thomas
JG, Stallings VA, Schwartz S, Ludwig DS. Targeting
dietary fat or glycemic load in the treatment of
obesity and type 2 diabetes: a randomized con-
trolled trial. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2011;92(1):
37–45.
259. Foster GD, Wyatt HR, Hill JO, McGuckin BG, Brill C,
Mohammed BS, Szapary PO, Rader DJ, Edman JS,
Klein S. A randomized trial of a low-carbohydrate
diet for obesity. N Engl J Med. 2003;348(21):
2082–2090.
260. Foster GD, Wyatt HR, Hill JO, Makris AP, Rosenbaum
DL, Brill C, Stein RI, Mohammed BS, Miller B, Rader DJ,
Zemel B, Wadden TA, Tenhave T, Newcomb CW,
Klein S. Weight and metabolic outcomes after 2 years
on a low-carbohydrate versus low-fat diet: a ran-
domized trial. Ann Intern Med. 2010;153(3):147–157.
261. Stern L, Iqbal N, Seshadri P, Chicano KL, Daily DA,
McGrory J, Williams M, Gracely EJ, Samaha FF. The
effects of low-carbohydrate versus conventional
weight loss diets in severely obese adults: one-year
follow-up of a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med.
2004;140(10):778–785.
262. Yancy WS, Jr, Olsen MK, Guyton JR, Bakst RP,
Westman EC. A low-carbohydrate, ketogenic diet
versus a low-fat diet to treat obesity and hyper-
lipidemia: a randomized, controlled trial. Ann Intern
Med. 2004;140(10):769–777.
263. Atkins R. Dr. Atkins’ Diet Revolution: The High Calorie
Way to Stay Thin Forever. New York, NY: David
McKay; 1972.
264. Ornish D. What if Americans ate less fat? JAMA.
1992;267(3):362, author reply 363–364.
265. Nidetch J. The Story of Weight Watchers. New York,
NY: New American Library; 1972.
266. Sears B. The Zone: A Revolutionary Life Plan to Put
Your Body in Total Balance for Permanent Weight
Loss. New York, NY: HarperCollins Publishers; 1995.
267. Johnston BC, Kanters S, Bandayrel K, Wu P, Naji F,
Siemieniuk RA, Ball GD, Busse JW, Thorlund K,
Guyatt G, Jansen JP, Mills EJ. Comparison of weight
loss among named diet programs in overweight
and obese adults: a meta-analysis. JAMA. 2014;
312(9):923–933.
268. National Institutes of Health. Pounds lost study.
Available
at:
https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/
resources/heart/other-pounds-lost.
Accessed
31
January 2017.
269. Gudzune KA, Doshi RS, Mehta AK, Chaudhry ZW,
Jacobs DK, Vakil RM, Lee CJ, Bleich SN, Clark JM.
Efficacy of commercial weight-loss programs: an
updated systematic review. Ann Intern Med. 2015;
162(7):501–512.
270. Venditti EM, Bray GA, Carrion-Petersen ML,
Delahanty LM, Edelstein SL, Hamman RF, Hoskin MA,
Knowler WC, Ma Y; Diabetes Prevention Program
Research Group. First versus repeat treatment with
a lifestyle intervention program: attendance and
weight loss outcomes. Int J Obes. 2008;32(10):
1537–1544.
271. Look AHEAD Research Group. Eight-year weight
losses with an intensive lifestyle intervention: the
look AHEAD study. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2014;
22(1):5–13.
272. Westerterp-Plantenga MS, Lejeune MPGM, Nijs I,
van Ooijen M, Kovacs EMR. High protein intake
sustains weight maintenance after body weight loss
in humans. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord. 2004;28(1):
57–64.
273. Larsen TM, Dalskov S-M, van Baak M, Jebb SA,
Papadaki A, Pfeiffer AFH, Martinez JA, Handjieva-
Darlenska T, Kuneˇ
sov´
a M, Pihlsg˚
ard M, Stender S,
Holst C, Saris WHM, Astrup A; Diet, Obesity, and
Genes (Diogenes) Project. Diets with high or low
protein content and glycemic index for weight-loss
maintenance.
N
Engl
J
Med.
2010;363(22):
2102–2113.
274. Howard BV, Manson JE, Stefanick ML, Beresford SA,
Frank G, Jones B, Rodabough RJ, Snetselaar L,
Thomson C, Tinker L, Vitolins M, Prentice R. Low-fat
dietary pattern and weight change over 7 years: the
Women’s Health Initiative Dietary Modification
Trial. JAMA. 2006;295(1):39–49.
275. Hooper L, Abdelhamid A, Moore HJ, Douthwaite W,
Skeaff CM, Summerbell CD. Effect of reducing total
fat intake on body weight: systematic review and
meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials and
cohort studies. BMJ. 2012;345:e7666.
276. Wing RR, Hill JO. Successful weight loss mainte-
nance. Annu Rev Nutr. 2001;21(1):323–341.
277. Wing RR, Tate DF, Gorin AA, Raynor HA, Fava JL. A
self-regulation program for maintenance of weight
loss. N Engl J Med. 2006;355(15):1563–1571.
278. Steinberg DM, Tate DF, Bennett GG, Ennett S,
Samuel-Hodge C, Ward DS. The efficacy of a daily
self-weighing weight loss intervention using smart
scales and e-mail. Obesity. 2013;21(9):1789–1797.
279. Eckel RH, Hernandez TL, Bell ML, Weil KM, Shepard
TY, Grunwald GK, Sharp TA, Francis CC, Hill JO.
Carbohydrate balance predicts weight and fat gain
in adults. Am J Clin Nutr. 2006;83(4):803–808.
280. Fung TT, Pan A, Hou T, Chiuve SE, Tobias DK,
Mozaffarian D, Willett WC, Hu FB. Long-term
change in diet quality is associated with body
weight change in men and women. J Nutr. 2015;
145(8):1850–1856.
281. Bray GA. From farm to fat cell: why aren’t we all fat?
Metabolism. 2015;64(3):349–353.
282. Westerterp KR, Speakman JR. Physical activity en-
ergy expenditure has not declined since the 1980s
and matches energy expenditures of wild mammals.
Int J Obes. 2008;32(8):1256–1263.
283. Swinburn B, Sacks G, Ravussin E. Increased food
energy supply is more than sufficient to explain the
US epidemic of obesity. Am J Clin Nutr. 2009;90(6):
1453–1456.
284. Stubbe JH, Boomsma DI, De Geus EJ. Sports par-
ticipation during adolescence: a shift from envi-
ronmental to genetic factors. Med Sci Sports Exerc.
2005;37(4):563–570.
285. Samaras K, Kelly PJ, Chiano MN, Spector TD,
Campbell LV. Genetic and environmental in-
fluences on total-body and central abdominal fat:
the effect of physical activity in female twins. Ann
Intern Med. 1999;130(11):873–882.
286. Donnelly JE, Blair SN, Jakicic JM, Manore MM,
Rankin JW, Smith BK; American College of Sports
Medicine. American College of Sports Medicine
position stand. Appropriate physical activity in-
tervention strategies for weight loss and prevention
of weight regain for adults. Med Sci Sports Exerc.
2009;41(2):459–471.
287. Swift DL, Johannsen NM, Lavie CJ, Earnest CP,
Church TS. The role of exercise and physical activity
in weight loss and maintenance. Prog Cardiovasc Dis.
2014;56(4):441–447.
288. US Department of Health and Human Services.
Physical activity guidelines advisory committee
report
2008.
Available
at:
https://health.gov/
paguidelines/guidelines/. Accessed 10 March 2017.
289. Fan JX, Brown BB, Hanson H, Kowaleski-Jones L,
Smith KR, Zick CD. Moderate to vigorous physical
activity and weight outcomes: does every minute
count? Am J Health Promot. 2013;28(1):41–49.
290. Kimm SY, Glynn NW, Kriska AM, Fitzgerald SL,
Aaron DJ, Similo SL, McMahon RP, Barton BA.
Longitudinal changes in physical activity in a biracial
cohort during adolescence. Med Sci Sports Exerc.
2000;32(8):1445–1454.
291. DeLany JP, Bray GA, Harsha DW, Volaufova J. Energy
expenditure in African American and white boys
and girls in a 2-y follow-up of the Baton Rouge
Children’s Study. Am J Clin Nutr. 2004;79(2):
268–273.
292. Kimm SY, Glynn NW, Kriska AM, Barton BA,
Kronsberg SS, Daniels SR, Crawford PB, Sabry ZI, Liu
K. Decline in physical activity in black girls and white
girls during adolescence. N Engl J Med. 2002;347(10):
709–715.
293. Church TS, Thomas DM, Tudor-Locke C, Katz-
marzyk PT, Earnest CP, Rodarte RQ, Martin CK, Blair
SN, Bouchard C. Trends over 5 decades in U.S.
occupation-related physical activity and their as-
sociations with obesity. PLoS One. 2011;6(5):e19657.
294. Ball K, Brown W, Crawford D. Who does not gain
weight? Prevalence and predictors of weight
maintenance in young women. Int J Obes Relat
Metab Disord. 2002;26(12):1570–1578.
295. Hu FB, Li TY, Colditz GA, Willett WC, Manson JE.
Television watching and other sedentary behaviors
in relation to risk of obesity and type 2 diabetes
mellitus in women. JAMA. 2003;289(14):1785–1791.
296. ¨
Ostman M, Britton E, Jonsson E. Physical exercise. In:
¨
Ostman M, Britton E, Jonsson E, eds. Treating and
Preventing Obesity. Weinheim, Germany: Wiley-
VCH Verlag; 2004:142–143.
297. Wood PD, Stefanick ML, Dreon DM, Frey-Hewitt B,
Garay SC, Williams PT, Superko HR, Fortmann SP,
Albers JJ, Vranizan KM, Ellsworth NM, Terry RB,
Haskell
WL.
Changes
in
plasma
lipids
and
128
Bray et al
Management of Obesity
Endocrine Reviews, April 2018, 39(2):79–132
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 lipoproteins in overweight men during weight loss
through dieting as compared with exercise. N Engl J
Med. 1988;319(18):1173–1179.
298. Wing RR, Epstein LH, Paternostro-Bayles M, Kriska
A, Nowalk MP, Gooding W. Exercise in a behav-
ioural weight control programme for obese patients
with type 2 (non-insulin-dependent) diabetes.
Diabetologia. 1988;31(12):902–909.
299. Wood PD, Stefanick ML, Williams PT, Haskell WL.
The effects on plasma lipoproteins of a prudent
weight-reducing diet, with or without exercise, in
overweight men and women. N Engl J Med. 1991;
325(7):461–466.
300. Svendsen OL, Hassager C, Christiansen C. Six months’
follow-up on exercise added to a short-term diet in
overweight postmenopausal women—effects on body
composition, resting metabolic rate, cardiovascular risk
factors and bone. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord. 1994;
18(10):692–698.
301. Pritchard JE, Nowson CA, Wark JD. A worksite
program for overweight middle-aged men achieves
lesser weight loss with exercise than with dietary
change. J Am Diet Assoc. 1997;97(1):37–42.
302. Irwin ML, Yasui Y, Ulrich CM, Bowen D, Rudolph RE,
Schwartz RS, Yukawa M, Aiello E, Potter JD,
McTiernan A. Effect of exercise on total and intra-
abdominal body fat in postmenopausal women:
a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2003;289(3):
323–330.
303. Donnelly JE, Hill JO, Jacobsen DJ, Potteiger J, Sullivan
DK, Johnson SL, Hellan K, Hise M, Fennessey PV,
Sonko B, Sharp T, Jakicic JM, Blair SN, Tran ZV, Mayo
M, Gibson C, Washburn RA. Effects of a 16-month
randomized controlled exercise trial on body
weight and composition in young, overweight men
and women: the Midwest Exercise Trial. Arch Intern
Med. 2003;163(11):1343–1350.
304. Slentz CA, Duscha BD, Johnson JL, Ketchum K,
Aiken LB, Samsa GP, Houmard JA, Bales CW, Kraus
WE. Effects of the amount of exercise on body
weight, body composition, and measures of central
obesity: STRRIDE—a randomized controlled study.
Arch Intern Med. 2004;164(1):31–39.
305. Bray GA, Fr¨
uhbeck G, Ryan DH, Wilding JP. Man-
agement
of
obesity.
Lancet.
2016;387(10031):
1947–1956.
306. Jensen MD, Ryan DH, Donato KA, Apovian CM, Ard
JD, Comuzzie AG, Hu FB, Hubbard VS, Jakicic JM,
Kushner RF; American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association Task Force on Prac-
tice Guidelines, Obesity Expert Panel, 2013. Exec-
utive
summary:
guidelines
(2013)
for
the
management of overweight and obesity in adults:
a report of the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association Task Force on Practice
Guidelines and the Obesity Society published by
the Obesity Society and American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force
on Practice Guidelines. Based on a systematic re-
view from the The Obesity Expert Panel, 2013.
Obesity (Silver Spring). 2014;22(Suppl 2):S5–S39.
307. Wadden TA, Webb VL, Moran CH, Bailer BA.
Lifestyle
modification
for
obesity:
new
de-
velopments in diet, physical activity, and behavior
therapy. Circulation. 2012;125(9):1157–1170.
308. LeBlanc ES, O’Connor E, Whitlock EP, Patnode CD,
Kapka T. Effectiveness of primary care-relevant
treatments for obesity in adults: a systematic evi-
dence review for the U.S. Preventive Services Task
Force. Ann Intern Med. 2011;155(7):434–447.
309. Perri MG, Shapiro RM, Ludwig WW, Twentyman
CT, McAdoo WG. Maintenance strategies for the
treatment of obesity: an evaluation of relapse
prevention training and posttreatment contact by
mail and telephone. J Consult Clin Psychol. 1984;
52(3):404–413.
310. Alamuddin N, Wadden TA. Behavioral treatment of
the patient with obesity. Endocrinol Metab Clin
North Am. 2016;45(3):565–580.
311. Jakicic JM, Marcus BH, Gallagher KI, Napolitano M,
Lang W. Effect of exercise duration and intensity on
weight loss in overweight, sedentary women:
a randomized trial. JAMA. 2003;290(10):1323–1330.
312. Wadden TA, Vogt RA, Andersen RE, Bartlett SJ,
Foster GD, Kuehnel RH, Wilk J, Weinstock R,
Buckenmeyer P, Berkowitz RI, Steen SN. Exercise in
the treatment of obesity: effects of four in-
terventions on body composition, resting energy
expenditure, appetite, and mood. J Consult Clin
Psychol. 1997;65(2):269–277.
313. Sherwood NE, Jeffery RW, Welsh EM, Vanwormer J,
Hotop AM. The drop it at last study: six-month
results of a phone-based weight loss trial. Am J
Health Promot. 2010;24(6):378–383.
314. Perri MG, Limacher MC, Durning PE, Janicke DM,
Lutes LD, Bobroff LB, Dale MS, Daniels MJ, Radcliff
TA, Martin AD. Extended-care programs for weight
management in rural communities: the treatment
of obesity in underserved rural settings (TOURS)
randomized trial. Arch Intern Med. 2008;168(21):
2347–2354.
315. Donnelly JE, Smith BK, Dunn L, Mayo MM, Jacobsen
DJ, Stewart EE, Gibson C, Sullivan DK. Comparison
of a phone vs clinic approach to achieve 10% weight
loss. Int J Obes. 2007;31(8):1270–1276.
316. Donnelly JE, Goetz J, Gibson C, Sullivan DK, Lee R,
Smith BK, Lambourne K, Mayo MS, Hunt S, Lee JH,
Honas JJ, Washburn RA. Equivalent weight loss for
weight management programs delivered by phone
and clinic. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2013;21(10):
1951–1959.
317. Rock CL, Flatt SW, Sherwood NE, Karanja N, Pakiz B,
Thomson CA. Effect of a free prepared meal and
incentivized weight loss program on weight loss
and weight loss maintenance in obese and over-
weight women: a randomized controlled trial.
JAMA. 2010;304(16):1803–1810.
318. Tate DF, Wing RR, Winett RA. Using Internet
technology to deliver a behavioral weight loss
program. JAMA. 2001;285(9):1172–1177.
319. Harvey-Berino J, West D, Krukowski R, Prewitt E,
VanBiervliet A, Ashikaga T, Skelly J. Internet de-
livered behavioral obesity treatment. Prev Med.
2010;51(2):123–128.
320. Knowler WC, Hamman RF, Edelstein SL, Barrett-
Connor E, Ehrmann DA, Walker EA, Fowler SE,
Nathan DM, Kahn SE; Diabetes Prevention Program
Research Group. Prevention of type 2 diabetes with
troglitazone in the Diabetes Prevention Program.
Diabetes. 2005;54(4):1150–1156.
321. Svetkey LP, Batch BC, Lin P-H, Intille SS, Corsino L,
Tyson CC, Bosworth HB, Grambow SC, Voils C, Loria
C, Gallis JA, Schwager J, Bennett GG. Cell phone
intervention for you (CITY): a randomized, con-
trolled trial of behavioral weight loss intervention
for young adults using mobile technology. Obesity
(Silver Spring). 2015;23(11):2133–2141.
322. Bray GA, Greenway FL. Pharmacological treatment
of the overweight patient. Pharmacol Rev. 2007;
59(2):151–184.
323. Nathanson MH. The central action of betaami-
nopropylbenzene (benzedrine): clinical observa-
tions. J Am Med Assoc. 1937;108(7):528–531.
324. Kasant O. The Amphetamines: Toxicity and Addic-
tion. Ontario, Canada: Alcoholism and Drug Ad-
diction Research Foundation of Ontario; 1966.
325. Fishman AP. Aminorex to fen/phen: an epidemic
foretold. Circulation. 1999;99(1):156–161.
326. Bray GA, Hollander P, Klein S, Kushner R, Levy B,
Fitchet M, Perry BH. A 6-month randomized,
placebo-controlled, dose-ranging trial of topiramate
for weight loss in obesity. Obes Res. 2003;11(6):
722–733.
327. Heil GC, Ross ST. Agents affecting appetite. Annu
Rep Med Chem. 1973;(8):42–51.
328. Heymsfield SB, Greenberg AS, Fujioka K, Dixon RM,
Kushner R, Hunt T, Lubina JA, Patane J, Self B, Hunt
P, McCamish M. Recombinant leptin for weight loss
in obese and lean adults: a randomized, controlled,
dose-escalation trial. JAMA. 1999;282(16):1568–1575.
329. Ravussin E, Smith SR, Mitchell JA, Shringarpure R,
Shan K, Maier H, Koda JE, Weyer C. Enhanced
weight loss with pramlintide/metreleptin: an in-
tegrated neurohormonal approach to obesity
pharmacotherapy. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2009;
17(9):1736–1743.
330. Bray GA, Ryan DH. Medical therapy for the patient
with obesity. Circulation. 2012;125(13):1695–1703.
331. Apovian CM, Aronne LJ, Bessesen DH, McDonnell
ME, Murad MH, Pagotto U, Ryan DH, Still CD;
Endocrine Society. Pharmacological management of
obesity: an Endocrine Society clinical practice
guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015;100(2):
342–362.
332. Sj¨
ostr¨
om L, Rissanen A, Andersen T, Boldrin M,
Golay A, Koppeschaar HP, Krempf M; European
Multicentre Orlistat Study Group. Randomised
placebo-controlled trial of orlistat for weight loss
and prevention of weight regain in obese patients.
Lancet. 1998;352(9123):167–172.
333. Torgerson JS, Hauptman J, Boldrin MN, Sj¨
ostr¨
om L.
XENical in the prevention of diabetes in obese
subjects (XENDOS) study: a randomized study of
orlistat as an adjunct to lifestyle changes for the
prevention of type 2 diabetes in obese patients.
Diabetes Care. 2004;27(1):155–161.
334. Dong Z, Xu L, Lv Y, Zheng Q, Li L. Comparative
efficacy of five long-term weight loss drugs:
quantitative information for medication guidelines.
Obes Rev. 2017;18(12):1377–1383.
335. Rucker D, Padwal R, Li SK, Curioni C, Lau DCW. Long
term pharmacotherapy for obesity and overweight:
updated
meta-analysis.
BMJ.
2007;335(7631):
1194–1199.
336. Padwal R, Kezouh A, Levine M, Etminan M. Long-
term persistence with orlistat and sibutramine in
a population-based cohort. Int J Obes. 2007;31(10):
1567–1570.
337. Halford JCG, Harrold JA, Boyland EJ, Lawton CL,
Blundell JE. Serotonergic drugs: effects on appetite
expression and use for the treatment of obesity.
Drugs. 2007;67(1):27–55.
338. Smith SR, Weissman NJ, Anderson CM, Sanchez M,
Chuang E, Stubbe S, Bays H, Shanahan WR; Be-
havioral Modification and Lorcaserin for Over-
weight and Obesity Management (BLOOM) Study
Group. Multicenter, placebo-controlled trial of
lorcaserin for weight management. N Engl J Med.
2010;363(3):245–256.
339. Fidler MC, Sanchez M, Raether B, Weissman NJ,
Smith SR, Shanahan WR, Anderson CM; BLOSSOM
Clinical Trial Group. A one-year randomized trial of
lorcaserin for weight loss in obese and overweight
adults: the BLOSSOM trial. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
2011;96(10):3067–3077.
340. O’Neil PM, Smith SR, Weissman NJ, Fidler MC,
Sanchez M, Zhang J, Raether B, Anderson CM,
Shanahan WR. Randomized placebo-controlled
clinical trial of lorcaserin for weight loss in type 2
diabetes mellitus: the BLOOM-DM study. Obesity
(Silver Spring). 2012;20(7):1426–1436.
129
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00253
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 341. Food and Drug Administration. FDA briefing in-
formation: meeting of the endocrinologic and metabolic
drugs advisory committee. Available at: http://www.fda.
gov/downloads/AdvisoryCommittees/Committees-
MeetingMaterials/Drugs/Endocrinologicand-
MetabolicDrugsAdvisoryCommittee/UCM303198.pdf.
Accessed 8 January 2018.
342. Astrup A, Carraro R, Finer N, Harper A, Kunesova M,
Lean ME, Niskanen L, Rasmussen MF, Rissanen A,
R¨
ossner S, Savolainen MJ, Van Gaal L; NN8022-1807
Investigators. Safety, tolerability and sustained
weight loss over 2 years with the once-daily human
GLP-1 analog, liraglutide. Int J Obes. 2012;36(6):
843–854.
343. Pi-Sunyer X, Astrup A, Fujioka K, Greenway F,
Halpern A, Krempf M, Lau DCW, le Roux CW,
Violante Ortiz R, Jensen CB, Wilding JPH; SCALE
Obesity
and
Prediabetes
NN8022-1839
Study
Group. A randomized, controlled trial of 3.0 mg of
liraglutide in weight management. N Engl J Med.
2015;373(1):11–22.
344. Wadden TA, Hollander P, Klein S, Niswender K,
Woo V, Hale PM, Aronne L; NN8022-1923 In-
vestigators. Weight maintenance and additional
weight loss with liraglutide after low-calorie-diet-
induced weight loss: the SCALE Maintenance
randomized
study.
Int
J
Obes.
2013;37(11):
1443–1451.
345. Marso SP, Daniels GH, Brown-Frandsen K, Kristensen
P, Mann JF, Nauck MA, Nissen SE, Pocock S, Poulter
NR, Ravn LS, Steinberg WM, Stockner M, Zinman B,
Bergenstal RM, Buse JB; LEADER Steering Committee;
LEADER Trial Investigators. Liraglutide and cardio-
vascular outcomes in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med.
2016;375(4):311–322.
346. Marso SP, Bain SC, Consoli A, Eliaschewitz FG, J´
odar
E, Leiter LA, Lingvay I, Rosenstock J, Seufert J, Warren
ML, Woo V, Hansen O, Holst AG, Pettersson J,
Vilsbøll T; SUSTAIN-6 Investigators. Semaglutide
and cardiovascular outcomes in patients with
type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2016;375(19):
1834–1844.
347. Gadde KM, Allison DB, Ryan DH, Peterson CA,
Troupin B, Schwiers ML, Day WW. Effects of low-
dose, controlled-release, phentermine plus top-
iramate combination on weight and associated
comorbidities in overweight and obese adults
(CONQUER): a randomised, placebo-controlled,
phase 3 trial. Lancet. 2011;377(9774):1341–1352.
348. Allison DB, Gadde KM, Garvey WT, Peterson CA,
Schwiers ML, Najarian T, Tam PY, Troupin B, Day
WW. Controlled-release phentermine/topiramate
in severely obese adults: a randomized controlled
trial (EQUIP). Obesity (Silver Spring). 2012;20(2):
330–342.
349. Garvey WT, Ryan DH, Look M, Gadde KM, Allison
DB, Peterson CA, Schwiers M, Day WW, Bowden
CH. Two-year sustained weight loss and metabolic
benefits
with
controlled-release
phentermine/
topiramate in obese and overweight adults (SE-
QUEL): a randomized, placebo-controlled, phase 3
extension study. Am J Clin Nutr. 2012;95(2):297–308.
350. Hendricks EJ, Rothman RB, Greenway FL. How
physician obesity specialists use drugs to treat
obesity. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2009;17(9):1730–1735.
351. Greenway FL, Fujioka K, Plodkowski RA, Mudaliar S,
Guttadauria M, Erickson J, Kim DD, Dunayevich E;
COR-I Study Group. Effect of naltrexone plus
bupropion on weight loss in overweight and obese
adults (COR-I): a multicentre, randomised, double-
blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet. 2010;
376(9741):595–605.
352. Wadden TA, Foreyt JP, Foster GD, Hill JO, Klein S,
O’Neil PM, Perri MG, Pi-Sunyer FX, Rock CL,
Erickson JS, Maier HN, Kim DD, Dunayevich E.
Weight loss with naltrexone SR/bupropion SR
combination therapy as an adjunct to behavior
modification: the COR-BMOD trial. Obesity (Silver
Spring). 2011;19(1):110–120.
353. Apovian CM, Aronne L, Rubino D, Still C, Wyatt H,
Burns C, Kim D, Dunayevich E; COR-II Study Group.
A randomized, phase 3 trial of naltrexone SR/
bupropion SR on weight and obesity-related risk
factors (COR-II). Obesity (Silver Spring). 2013;21(5):
935–943.
354. Hollander P, Gupta AK, Plodkowski R, Greenway F,
Bays H, Burns C, Klassen P, Fujioka K; COR-Diabetes
Study Group. Effects of naltrexone sustained-
release/bupropion sustained-release combination
therapy on body weight and glycemic parameters in
overweight and obese patients with type 2 diabetes.
Diabetes Care. 2013;36(12):4022–4029.
355. Ali KF, Shukla AP, Aronne LJ. Bupropion-SR plus
naltrexone-SR
for
the
treatment
of
mild-to-
moderate obesity. Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol.
2016;9(1):27–34.
356. Khera R, Murad MH, Chandar AK, Dulai PS, Wang Z,
Prokop LJ, Loomba R, Camilleri M, Singh S. Asso-
ciation of pharmacological treatments for obesity
with weight loss and adverse events: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. JAMA. 2016;315(22):
2424–2434.
357. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. New drug
applications 22580: Vi-0521 qnexa (phentermine/
topiramate). Available at: https://www.fda.gov/
downloads/AdvisoryCommittees/CommitteesMeeting-
Materials/Drugs/EndocrinologicandMetabolicDrugs-
AdvisoryCommittee/UCM292315.pdf. Accessed 15
June 2017.
358. Kang JG, Park CY, Kang JH, Park YW, Park SW.
Randomized controlled trial to investigate the ef-
fects of a newly developed formulation of phen-
termine
diffuse-controlled
release
for
obesity.
Diabetes Obes Metab. 2010;12(10):876–882.
359. Addy C, Jumes P, Rosko K, Li S, Li H, Maes A,
Johnson-Levonas AO, Chodakewitz J, Stoch SA,
Wagner JA. Pharmacokinetics, safety, and tolera-
bility of phentermine in healthy participants re-
ceiving taranabant, a novel cannabinoid-1 receptor
(CB1R) inverse agonist. J Clin Pharmacol. 2009;
49(10):1228–1238.
360. Kim KK, Cho H-J, Kang H-C, Youn B-B, Lee K-R.
Effects on weight reduction and safety of short-
term phentermine administration in Korean obese
people. Yonsei Med J. 2006;47(5):614–625.
361. Blanck HM, Khan LK, Serdula MK. Prescription
weight loss pill use among Americans: patterns
of pill use and lessons learned from the fen-
phen market withdrawal. Prev Med. 2004;39(6):
1243–1248.
362. Hampp C, Kang EM, Borders-Hemphill V. Use of
prescription antiobesity drugs in the United States.
Pharmacotherapy. 2013;33(12):1299–1307.
363. Blanck HM, Serdula MK, Gillespie C, Galuska DA,
Sharpe PA, Conway JM, Khan LK, Ainsworth BE. Use
of nonprescription dietary supplements for weight
loss is common among Americans. J Am Diet Assoc.
2007;107(3):441–447.
364. Pillitteri JL, Shiffman S, Rohay JM, Harkins AM,
Burton SL, Wadden TA. Use of dietary supplements
for weight loss in the United States: results of
a national survey. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2008;16(4):
790–796.
365. National Institutes of Health Office of Dietary
Supplements. Dietary supplements for weight
loss. https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/WeightLoss-
HealthProfessional/. Accessed 31 January 2016.
366. George M, Rajaram M, Shanmugam E. New and
emerging
drug
molecules
against
obesity.
J Cardiovasc Pharmacol Ther. 2014;19(1):65–76.
367. Ponce J, DeMaria EJ, Nguyen NT, Hutter M, Sudan R,
Morton JM. American Society for Metabolic and
Bariatric Surgery estimation of bariatric surgery
procedures in 2015 and surgeon workforce in the
United States. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2016;12(9):
1637–1639.
368. Nielsen S, Svane MS, Bojsen-Møller KN, Madsbad S.
Effects of bariatric surgery on weight loss and
quality of life. Anaplastology. 2014;3:136.
369. Gagner M, Rogula T. Laparoscopic reoperative
sleeve gastrectomy for poor weight loss after bil-
iopancreatic diversion with duodenal switch. Obes
Surg. 2003;13(4):649–654.
370. Zundel N. Laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy: Tech-
nique and outcomes. In: Nguyen NT, Blackstone RP,
Morton JM, Ponce J, Rosenthal R, eds. American
Society for Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery: Textbook
of Bariatric Surgery. Vol. 1. New York, NY: Springer;
2015:205–210.
371. Nguyen NT, Goldman C, Rosenquist CJ, Arango A,
Cole CJ, Lee SJ, Wolfe BM. Laparoscopic versus open
gastric bypass: a randomized study of outcomes,
quality of life, and costs. Ann Surg. 2001;234(3):
279–289.
372. DeMaria EJ, Pate V, Warthen M, Winegar DA.
Baseline data from American Society for Metabolic
and Bariatric Surgery-designated bariatric surgery
centers of excellence using the bariatric outcomes
longitudinal database. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2010;6(4):
347–355.
373. O’Brien PE, Dixon JB. Lap-band: outcomes and re-
sults. J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A. 2003;13(4):
265–270.
374. Shikora SA, Wolfe BM, Apovian CM, Anvari M,
Sarwer DB, Gibbons RD, Ikramuddin S, Miller CJ,
Knudson MB, Tweden KS, Sarr MG, Billington CJ.
Sustained weight loss with vagal nerve blockade but
not with sham: 18-month results of the recharge
trial. J Obes. 2015;2015:365604.
375. Shikora SA, Bergenstal R, Bessler M, Brody F, Foster
G, Frank A, Gold M, Klein S, Kushner R, Sarwer DB.
Implantable gastric stimulation for the treatment of
clinically severe obesity: results of the SHAPE trial.
Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2009;5(1):31–37.
376. Saber AA, Shoar S, Almadani MW, Zundel N,
Alkuwari MJ, Bashah MM, Rosenthal RJ. Efficacy of
first-time intragastric balloon in weight loss: a sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis of randomized
controlled trials. Obes Surg. 2017;27(2):277–287.
377. Mion F, Ibrahim M, Marjoux S, Ponchon T,
Dugardeyn S, Roman S, Deviere J. Swallowable
Obalon® gastric balloons as an aid for weight loss:
a pilot feasibility study. Obes Surg. 2013;23(5):
730–733.
378. Klein S, Kinney J, Jeejeebhoy K, Alpers D, Hellerstein
M, Murray M, Twomey P. Nutrition support in
clinical practice: review of published data and
recommendations for future research directions.
Clin Nutr. 1997;16(4):193–218.
379. Gersin KS, Keller JE, Stefanidis D, Simms CS, Abraham
DD, Deal SE, Kuwada TS, Heniford BT. Duodenal-
jejunal bypass sleeve: a totally endoscopic device for
the treatment of morbid obesity. Surg Innov. 2007;
14(4):275–278.
380. Rajagopalan H, Cherrington AD, Thompson CC,
Kaplan LM, Rubino F, Mingrone G, Becerra P,
Rodriguez P, Vignolo P, Caplan J, Rodriguez L, Galvao
Neto MP. Endoscopic duodenal mucosal resurfac-
ing for the treatment of type 2 diabetes: 6-month
interim analysis from the first-in-human proof-of-
130
Bray et al
Management of Obesity
Endocrine Reviews, April 2018, 39(2):79–132
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 concept
study.
Diabetes
Care.
2016;39(12):
2254–2261.
381. Klein S, Fontana L, Young VL, Coggan AR, Kilo C,
Patterson BW, Mohammed BS. Absence of an effect
of liposuction on insulin action and risk factors for
coronary heart disease. N Engl J Med. 2004;350(25):
2549–2557.
382. Gastrointestinal surgery for severe obesity con-
sensus
statement.
Nutrition
Today
1991;26:
32–35.
383. Courcoulas AP, Christian NJ, Belle SH, Berk PD,
Flum DR, Garcia L, Horlick M, Kalarchian MA,
King WC, Mitchell JE, Patterson EJ, Pender JR,
Pomp A, Pories WJ, Thirlby RC, Yanovski SZ,
Wolfe BM; Longitudinal Assessment of Bariatric
Surgery (LABS) Consortium. Weight change and
health outcomes at 3 years after bariatric surgery
among individuals with severe obesity. JAMA.
2013;310(22):2416–2425.
384. Beamish AJ, Olbers T, Kelly AS, Inge TH. Cardio-
vascular effects of bariatric surgery. Nature Rev
Cardiol 2016;13(12):730–743.
385. Flum DR, Salem L, Elrod JA, Dellinger EP, Cheadle A,
Chan L. Early mortality among Medicare benefi-
ciaries undergoing bariatric surgical procedures.
JAMA. 2005;294(15):1903–1908.
386. Smith MD, Patterson E, Wahed AS, Belle SH, Bessler
M, Courcoulas AP, Flum D, Halpin V, Mitchell JE,
Pomp A, Pories WJ, Wolfe B. Relationship between
surgeon volume and adverse outcomes after RYGB
in Longitudinal Assessment of Bariatric Surgery
(LABS) study. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2010;6(2):
118–125.
387. Puzziferri N, Roshek TB III, Mayo HG, Gallagher R,
Belle SH, Livingston EH. Long-term follow-up after
bariatric surgery: a systematic review. JAMA. 2014;
312(9):934–942.
388. Wolfe BM, Kvach E, Eckel RH. Treatment of obesity:
weight loss and bariatric surgery. Circ Res. 2016;
118(11):1844–1855.
389. Gletsu-Miller N, Wright BN. Mineral malnutrition
following bariatric surgery. Adv Nutr. 2013;4(5):
506–517.
390. Mechanick JI, Youdim A, Jones DB, Garvey WT,
Hurley DL, McMahon MM, Heinberg LJ, Kushner R,
Adams TD, Shikora S, Dixon JB, Brethauer S. Clinical
practice guidelines for the perioperative nutritional,
metabolic, and nonsurgical support of the bariatric
surgery patient—2013 update: cosponsored by
American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists,
The Obesity Society, and American Society for
Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery. Obesity (Silver
Spring). 2013;21(Suppl 1):S1–S27.
391. Courcoulas AP, Christian NJ, O’Rourke RW, Dakin G,
Patchen Dellinger E, Flum DR, Melissa Kalarchian
PD, Mitchell JE, Patterson E, Pomp A, Pories WJ,
Spaniolas K, Steffen K, Wolfe BM, Belle SH. Pre-
operative factors and 3-year weight change in the
Longitudinal Assessment of Bariatric Surgery (LABS)
consortium.
Surg
Obes
Relat
Dis.
2015;11(5):
1109–1118.
392. Mitchell JE, Christian NJ, Flum DR, Pomp A, Pories
WJ, Wolfe BM, Courcoulas AP, Belle SH. Post-
operative behavioral variables and weight change 3
years after bariatric surgery. JAMA Surg. 2016;151(8):
752–757.
393. Sj¨
ostr¨
om L. Review of the key results from the
Swedish Obese Subjects (SOS) trial
a prospective
controlled intervention study of bariatric surgery.
J Intern Med. 2013;273(3):219–234.
394. Pories WJ, Swanson MS, MacDonald KG, Long SB,
Morris PG, Brown BM, Barakat HA, deRamon RA,
Israel G, Dolezal JM, Dohm L. Who would have
thought it? An operation proves to be the most
effective therapy for adult-onset diabetes mellitus.
Ann Surg. 1995;222(3):339–350.
395. Mingrone G, Panunzi S, De Gaetano A, Guidone C,
Iaconelli A, Nanni G, Castagneto M, Bornstein S,
Rubino F. Bariatric-metabolic surgery versus con-
ventional medical treatment in obese patients with
type 2 diabetes: 5 year follow-up of an open-label,
single-centre, randomised controlled trial. Lancet.
2015;386(9997):964–973.
396. Buchwald H, Estok R, Fahrbach K, Banel D, Jensen
MD, Pories WJ, Bantle JP, Sledge I. Weight and
type 2 diabetes after bariatric surgery: systematic
review and meta-analysis. Am J Med. 2009;122(3):
248–256.
397. Bray GA. A Guide to Obesity and the Metabolic
Syndrome: Origins and Treatment. New York, NY:
CRC Press; 2011:265.
398. Laferr`
ere B, Heshka S, Wang K, Khan Y, McGinty J,
Teixeira J, Hart AB, Olivan B. Incretin levels and effect
are markedly enhanced 1 month after Roux-en-Y
gastric bypass surgery in obese patients with type 2
diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2007;30(7):1709–1716.
399. Michalsky M, Reichard K, Inge T, Pratt J, Lenders
C; American Society for Metabolic and Bariatric
Surgery.
ASMBS
pediatric
committee
best
practice guidelines. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2012;
8(1):1–7.
400. Sieber P, Gass M, Kern B, Peters T, Slawik M, Peterli R.
Five-year results of laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy.
Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2014;10(2):243–249.
401. Schauer PR, Bhatt DL, Kirwan JP, Wolski K, Brethauer
SA, Navaneethan SD, Aminian A, Pothier CE, Kim
ESH, Nissen SE, Kashyap SR; STAMPEDE In-
vestigators. Bariatric surgery versus intensive med-
ical therapy for diabetes—3-year outcomes. N Engl J
Med. 2014;370(21):2002–2013.
402. Inge TH, Courcoulas AP, Jenkins TM, Michalsky MP,
Helmrath MA, Brandt ML, Harmon CM, Zeller MH,
Chen MK, Xanthakos SA, Horlick M, Buncher CR;
Teen-LABS Consortium. Weight loss and health
status 3 years after bariatric surgery in adolescents.
N Engl J Med. 2016;374(2):113–123.
403. Inge TH, Jenkins TM, Xanthakos SA, Dixon JB,
Daniels SR, Zeller MH, Helmrath MA. Long-term
outcomes of bariatric surgery in adolescents with
severe obesity (FABS-5+): a prospective follow-up
analysis.
Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2017;5(3):
165–173.
404. Olbers T, Beamish AJ, Gronowitz E, Flodmark C-E,
Dahlgren J, Bruze G, Ekbom K, Friberg P, G¨
othberg
G, J¨
arvholm K, Karlsson J, M˚
arild S, Neovius M,
Peltonen M, Marcus C. Laparoscopic Roux-en-Y
gastric bypass in adolescents with severe obesity
(AMOS): a prospective, 5-year, Swedish nationwide
study. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2017;5(3):
174–183.
405. Pratt JSA, Lenders CM, Dionne EA, Hoppin AG, Hsu
GLK, Inge TH, Lawlor DF, Marino MF, Meyers AF,
Rosenblum JL, Sanchez VM. Best practice updates
for pediatric/adolescent weight loss surgery. Obesity
(Silver Spring). 2009;17(5):901–910.
406. Pickett K, Wilkinson RP. The Spirit Level: Why
Greater Equality Makes Societies Stronger. New York,
NY: Bloomsbury Press; 2011.
407. Christakis NA, Fowler JH. The spread of obesity in
a large social network over 32 years. N Engl J Med.
2007;357(4):370–379.
408. Anderson SE, Andridge R, Whitaker RC. Bedtime in
preschool-aged children and risk for adolescent
obesity. J Pediatr. 2016;176:17–22.
409. Dalgaard K, Landgraf K, Heyne S, Lempradl A,
Longinotto J, Gossens K, Ruf M, Orthofer M,
Strogantsev R, Selvaraj M, Lu TT, Casas E, Teperino R,
Surani MA, Zvetkova I, Rimmington D, Tung YCL,
Lam B, Larder R, Yeo GS, O’Rahilly S, Vavouri T,
Whitelaw E, Penninger JM, Jenuwein T, Cheung C-L,
Ferguson-Smith AC, Coll AP, K¨
orner A, Pospisilik JA.
Trim28 haploinsufficiency triggers bi-stable epige-
netic obesity. Cell. 2016;164(3):353–364.
410. Zinman B, Wanner C, Lachin JM, Fitchett D,
Bluhmki E, Hantel S, Mattheus M, Devins T,
Johansen OE, Woerle HJ, Broedl UC, Inzucchi SE;
EMPA-REG OUTCOME Investigators. Empagli-
flozin, cardiovascular outcomes, and mortality in
type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2015;373(22):
2117–2128.
411. Huang T, Zheng Y, Hruby A, Williamson DA, Bray
GA, Shen Y, Sacks FM, Qi L. Dietary protein modifies
the effect of the MC4R genotype on 2-year changes
in appetite and food craving: the POUNDS Lost
Trial. J Nutr. 2017;147(3):439–444.
412. Zeevi D, Korem T, Zmora N, Israeli D, Rothschild D,
Weinberger A, Ben-Yacov O, Lador D, Avnit-Sagi T,
Lotan-Pompan M, Suez J, Mahdi JA, Matot E, Malka
G, Kosower N, Rein M, Zilberman-Schapira G,
Dohnalov´
a L, Pevsner-Fischer M, Bikovsky R, Halpern
Z, Elinav E, Segal E. Personalized nutrition by pre-
diction of glycemic responses. Cell. 2015;163(5):
1079–1094.
413. M¨
uller TD, Finan B, Clemmensen C, DiMarchi RD,
Tsch¨
op MH. The new biology and pharmacology of
glucagon. Physiol Rev. 2017;97(2):721–766.
414. Tsch¨
op MH, Finan B, Clemmensen C, Gelfanov V,
Perez-Tilve D, M¨
uller TD, DiMarchi RD. Unim-
olecular polypharmacy for treatment of diabetes
and obesity. Cell Metab. 2016;24(1):51–62.
415. Mozaffarian D. Dietary and policy priorities for
cardiovascular
disease,
diabetes,
and
obesity:
a comprehensive review. Circulation. 2016;133(2):
187–225.
416. Janesick AS, Blumberg B. Obesogens: an emerging
threat to public health. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2016;
214(5):559–565.
Acknowledgments
We acknowledge science writer Eric A. Vohr for his con-
tribution to this scientific statement.
Financial Support:
Work on this paper was supported
in part by Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation Grant
OPP1070441 to A.A., National Institutes of Health Grants
DK40484 and DK45343 to M.D.J., and by National Institutes
of Health Grant DK046200 to F.B.H.
Correspondence and Reprint Requests:
George A. Bray,
MD, Pennington Biomedical Research Center, Louisiana State
University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 70808. E-mail: george.
bray@pbrc.edu.
Disclaimer Statement:
The Endocrine Society develops
scientific statements to be of assistance to clinicians by
providing guidance and recommendations for particular
areas of practice. One should not consider this scientific
statement inclusive of all proper approaches or methods or
exclusive of others. It cannot guarantee any specific outcome,
nor does it establish a standard of care. It is not intended to
dictate the treatment of a particular patient. Health care
providers must make treatment decisions based on their best
judgment and each patient’s individual circumstances, needs,
and preferences. The Endocrine Society makes no warranty,
express or implied, regarding this scientific statement and
specifically excludes any warranties of merchantability and
fitness for a particular use or purpose. The Endocrine Society
shall not be liable for direct, indirect, special, incidental, or
consequential damages related to the use of the information
contained herein.
Disclosure Summary:
G.B. is on the Herbalife Nutrition
Advisory Council, is a consultant to Medifast, and is a con-
sultant to Novo Nordisk. M.D.J. serves as a consultant to
131
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00253
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Novo Nordisk, Merck, and Jannsen, serves on the advisory
board of Weight Watchers International, and serves on the
board of directors of the Partnership for a Healthier America.
R.F.K. serves on the advisory board to Novo Nordisk, Weight
Watchers, Retrofit, and Zafgen. S.R.D. serves as a consultant
for Sanofi and is on the Data Monitoring Committee for
Novo Nordisk. T.A.W. serves on advisory boards for Novo
Nordisk, Nutrisystem, and Weight Watchers, and has re-
ceived grant support on behalf of the University of Penn-
sylvania from Eisai Pharmaceutical, Novo Nordisk, and
Weight Watchers. F.B.H. receives research support from
Metagenics
and
the
California
Walnut
Commission.
J.M.J. reports personal fees from Weight Watchers In-
ternational for serving on the Scientific Advisory Board. D.H.R.
serves as consultant to Novo Nordisk, Orexigen, Janssen,
Merck, Astra Xenica, and KVK Tech, serves as speaker for
Novo Nordisk, Orexigen, Eisai, and Kwang Dong, and has an
equity position in Scientific Intake and Gila Therapeutics. The
remaining authors have nothing to disclose.
Abbreviations
BMI, body mass index; BP, blood pressure; CDC, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention; CI, confidence interval; CVD,
cardiovascular disease; ECE, early care and education; ER,
extended release; FDA, Food and Drug Administration;
HbA1c, hemoglobin A1c; HDL, high-density lipoprotein; HR,
hazard ratio; LAGB, laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding;
LDL, low-density lipoprotein; MHO, metabolically healthy
obesity; NAFLD, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease; NASH,
nonalcoholic steatohepatitis; OSA, obstructive sleep apnea;
PHEN/TPM ER, phentermine/topiramate extended release;
RCT, randomized controlled trial; RYGB, Roux-en-Y gastric
bypass; SG, sleeve gastrectomy; SR, sustained release; T2DM,
type 2 diabetes mellitus; VLCD, very low–calorie diet; WHR,
waist-to-hip ratio.
132
Bray et al
Management of Obesity
Endocrine Reviews, April 2018, 39(2):79–132
SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/2/79/4922247 by guest on 02 June 2019
