  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Alzheimer’s disease is now the third leading cause of 
death in the United States, following only cardio-
vascular 
disease 
and 
cancer 
[1]. 
 
There 
are 
approximately 5.2 million Americans with AD, but this 
estimate ignores the many young Americans destined to 
develop AD during their lifetimes: given the lifetime 
risk of approximately 15% when including all ApoE 
genotypes, as many as 45 million of the 318 million 
Americans now living may develop AD during their 
lifetimes if no prevention is instituted [2].  
 
 
                                                          Research Paper 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Effective treatment of Alzheimer’s disease has been 
lacking, but recently a novel programmatic approach 
involving metabolic enhancement was described, with 
promising anecdotal results [3].  This treatment is 
based on connectomic studies [4] and previous 
transgenic findings [5] as well as epidemiological 
studies of various monotherapeutic components of the 
overall program [6].  The approach is personalized, 
responsive to suboptimal metabolic parameters that 
reflect a network imbalance in synaptic establishment 
and maintenance vs. reorganization, and progressive in  
 www.impactaging.com
      AGING, June 2016, Vol 8 No 6
Reversal of cognitive decline in Alzheimer’s disease
 
Dale E. Bredesen1,2, Edwin C. Amos3, Jonathan Canick4, Mary Ackerley5, Cyrus Raji6, Milan Fiala7, 
and Jamila Ahdidan8 
 
1Easton Laboratories for Neurodegenerative Disease Research, Department of Neurology, University of California, 
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA 
2Buck Institute for Research on Aging, Novato, CA 94945, USA 
3Department of Neurology, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA 
4Memory Clinic, California Pacific Medical Center, San Francisco, CA 94115, USA 
5Private Practice of Psychiatry, Tucson, AZ 85718, USA  
6Department of Radiology, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA 
7Department of Surgery, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA 
8Brainreader, Horsens, Denmark 
 
Key words: neurodegeneration, cognition, biomarkers, dementia, neuropsychology, imaging, Alzheimer’s disease, 
Apolipoprotein E 
Received: 04/12/16; Accepted: 05/30/16; Published: 06/12/16 
Correspondence to: Dale E. Bredesen, MD;  E‐mail:  dbredesen@buckinstitute.org 
 
Abstract: Alzheimer’s disease is one of the most significant healthcare problems nationally and globally.  Recently, the
first description of the reversal of cognitive decline in patients with early Alzheimer’s disease or its precursors, MCI (mild
cognitive impairment) and SCI (subjective cognitive impairment), was published [1].  The therapeutic approach used was
programmatic and personalized rather than monotherapeutic and invariant, and was dubbed metabolic enhancement for
neurodegeneration (MEND).  Patients who had had to discontinue work were able to return to work, and those struggling
at work were able to improve their performance.  The patients, their spouses, and their co‐workers all reported clear
improvements.  Here we report the results from quantitative MRI and neuropsychological testing in ten patients with
cognitive decline, nine ApoE4+ (five homozygous and four heterozygous) and one ApoE4‐, who were treated with the
MEND protocol for 5‐24 months.  The magnitude of the improvement is unprecedented, providing additional objective
evidence that this programmatic approach to cognitive decline is highly effective.  These results have far‐reaching
implications for the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease, MCI, and SCI; for personalized programs that may enhance
pharmaceutical efficacy; and for personal identification of ApoE genotype.     
 
 
 
www.impactaging.com 
 
 
 
            1250                                        AGING, June 2016, Vol. 8 No.6 
 that continued optimization is sought through iterative 
treatment and metabolic characterization.  
 
Here we report the initial follow-up of ten patients who 
were treated with this metabolic programmatics 
approach.  One patient had well documented mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI), with a strongly positive 
amyloid-PET (positron emission tomography) scan, 
positive FDG-PET scan (fluorodeoxyglucose PET scan), 
abnormal neuropsychological testing, and hippocampal 
volume reduced to 17th percentile; after 10 months on 
the MEND protocol, his hippocampal volume had 
increased to 75th percentile, in association with a reversal 
of cognitive decline.  Another patient had well 
documented early Alzheimer’s disease, with a positive 
FDG-PET 
scan 
and 
markedly 
abnormal 
neuro-
psychological testing.  After 22 months on the MEND 
protocol, he showed marked improvement in his 
neuropsychological testing, with some improvements 
reaching three standard deviations from his earlier 
testing.   
 
The initial results for these patients show greater 
improvements than have been reported for other 
patients treated for Alzheimer’s disease.  The results 
provide further support for the suggestion that such a 
comprehensive approach [3] to treat early Alzheimer’s 
disease and its precursors, MCI and SCI, is effective.  
The results also support the need for a large-scale, 
personalized clinical trial using this protocol. 
 
RESULTS 
 
Case studies 
 
Patient 1.  A 66-year-old professional man presented 
with what he described as “senior moments” (for 
example, forgetting where his keys were or forgetting 
appointments) of two-years duration, and difficulty 
performing his work.  There was a positive family history 
of dementia in both parents.  He was an ApoE4 
heterozygote (3/4), his amyloid PET scan was markedly 
positive, and his fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) PET scan 
showed temporoparietal reduced glucose utilization 
indicative of Alzheimer’s disease.  An MRI showed 
hippocampal volume at only 17th percentile for his age.  
His neuropsychological testing was compatible with a 
diagnosis of MCI.  His hs-CRP was 9.9mg/l, albumin: 
globulin ratio was 1.6, homocysteine 15.1μmol/l, fasting 
glucose 96mg/dl, hemoglobin A1c 5.5%, fasting insulin 
32mIU/l, 25-hydroxychole-calciferol 21ng/ml, TSH 
2.21mIU/l, and testosterone 264ng/dl.   
 
He began the MEND protocol [3], lost 18 pounds, and 
after three months his wife reported that his memory 
had improved.  He noted that his work came more 
easily to him.  However, after five months, he 
discontinued 
the 
majority 
of 
the 
program 
for 
approximately three weeks.  His wife came home to 
find his car in the driveway, idling with the keys in the 
ignition, while he was inside the house, working and 
unaware that he had left the car idling in the driveway.  
He re-initiated the program, and had no further such 
episodes.   
 
After 10 months on the program, he returned for a 
follow-up MRI, which was subjected to volumetric 
analyses by both Neuroquant [7] and Neuroreader [8] 
programs.  The former indicated an increase in 
hippocampal volume from 17th percentile to 75th 
percentile, with an associated absolute increase in 
hippocampal volume of 11.7%.  The Neuroreader 
program showed an absolute increase from 7.65cc to 
8.3cc, which represents an 8.5% absolute increase in 
size.  The associated Z-scores were -4.6 and +1.6, 
respectively, disclosing an increase from <5th percentile 
to the 90th percentile.  Thus although the Neuroquant 
and Neuroreader analyses differed somewhat in the 
amplitude of the effect detected, they were in agreement 
that a relatively large magnitude increase in hippo-
campal volume had occurred. 
 
Follow-up 
metabolic 
analysis 
also 
disclosed 
improvement, with hs-CRP having decreased from 
9.9mg/l to 3mg/l, fasting insulin having decreased from 
32mIU/l to 8mIU/l, homocysteine having decreased 
from 15.1μmol/l to 8μmol/l, and 25-hydroxychole-
calciferol having increased from 21ng/ml to 40ng/ml.  
See Table 1 for a summary of the responses of all 
patients to the treatment program.    
 
Comment: 
This 
patient 
had 
well 
documented 
Alzheimer’s disease, with a strongly positive amyloid 
PET scan, characteristic FDG PET scan, abnormal 
neuropsychological studies, positive family history, 
ApoE4-positive (3/4) genotype, and hippocampal 
volume of 17th percentile.  During his 10 months on the 
MEND protocol, he interrupted his otherwise good 
compliance once, and this was associated with an 
episode of memory loss, in which he failed to remember 
that he had left his car in the driveway while he was 
working in his house.  He returned to the protocol at 
that time, and after 10 months in total, he demonstrated 
not only a marked symptomatic improvement (which 
had begun after approximately three months on the 
protocol), but also a dramatic increase in hippocampal 
volume.  More modest hippocampal volumetric 
increases have been described with exercise [9] and 
with a brain-training program [10], but to our 
knowledge the magnitude of hippocampal volume 
 
 
www.impactaging.com 
 
 
 
            1251                                        AGING, June 2016, Vol. 8 No.6 
 increase that occurred with this patient has not been 
reported previously.  
 
Patient 2.  This is a follow-up on patient 2 from a 
previous publication [3].  A 69-year-old entrepreneur and 
professional man presented with 11 years of slowly 
progressive memory loss, which had accelerated over the 
past one to two years.  In 2002, at the age of 58, he had 
been unable to recall the combination of the lock on his 
locker, and he felt that this was out of the ordinary for 
him.  In 2003, he had an FDG PET scan, which was read 
as showing a pattern typical for early Alzheimer’s 
disease, with reduced glucose utilization in the 
parietotemporal cortices bilaterally and left > right 
temporal lobes, but preserved utilization in the frontal 
lobes, occipital cortices, and basal ganglia.  In 2003, 
2007, and 2013, he had quantitative neuropsychological 
testing, which showed a  reduction  in  CVLT  (California  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Verbal Learning Test), a Stroop color test at 16th 
percentile, and auditory delayed memory at 13th 
percentile.  In 2013, he was found to be heterozygous for 
ApoE4 (3/4).  He noted that he had progressive difficulty 
recognizing the faces at work (prosopagnosia), and had to 
have his assistants prompt him with the daily schedule.  
He also recalled an event during which he was several 
chapters into a book before he finally realized that it was 
a book he had read previously.  In addition, he lost an 
ability he had had for most of his life: the ability to add 
columns of numbers rapidly in his head.  
 
He was advised that, given his status as an Alzheimer’s 
disease patient and his clear progression, as well as his 
poor performance on the 2013 test, he should begin to 
“get his affairs in order.”  His business was in the 
process of being shut down due to his inability to 
continue work. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 1. Patient responses to the MEND treatment protocol [3]. 
 
Patient 
Diagnosis 
ApoE Genotype 
Treatment Outcome1 
66yoM 
MCI, type 1 (inflammatory) 
3/4 
Marked subjective 
improvement, hippocampal 
volume increase 17th->75th 
%ile  
69yoM 
AD, type 2 (atrophic) 
3/4 
Marked subjective 
improvement, quantitative 
neuropsychological testing 
improvement 
49yoF 
MCI, type 2 (and possibly 
type 3 (toxic)) 
4/4 
Marked subjective 
improvement, 
neuropsychological testing 
improvement 
49yoF 
MCI, type 2 
2/4 
Marked subjective 
improvement, 
neuropsychological testing 
improvement 
55yoF 
MCI, type 2 
4/4 
Marked subjective 
improvement, 
neuropsychological testing 
improvement 
74yoM 
AD, type 1 
4/4 
Subjective improvement, 
MMSE 23->30 
62yoM 
AD, type 1.5 (glycotoxic) 
4/4 
Subjective improvement, 
MMSE 22->29 
68yoM 
MCI, type 1.5 
3/4 
Subjective improvement, 
neuropsychological testing 
improvement 
54yoF 
AD, type 3 
3/3 
Clear subjective 
improvement, MoCA 19->21 
54yoF 
MCI, type 2 
4/4 
Subjective improvement, 
neuropsychological testing 
improvement 
1See text for details of treatment outcome. 
 
 
www.impactaging.com 
 
 
 
            1252                                        AGING, June 2016, Vol. 8 No.6 
 His laboratory values included a homocysteine of 18 
μmol/l, 
CRP 
<0.5mg/l, 
25-hydroxycholecalciferol 
28ng/ml, hemoglobin A1c 5.4%, serum zinc 78mcg/dl, 
serum copper 120mcg/dl, copper:zinc ratio of 1.54, 
ceruloplasmin 
25mg/dl, 
pregnenolone 
6ng/dl, 
testosterone 610ng/dl, albumin:globulin ratio of 1.3, 
cholesterol 165mg/dl (on atorvastatin), HDL 92mg/dl, 
LDL 64mg/dl, triglycerides 47mg/dl, AM cortisol 
14mcg/dl, free T3 3.02pg/ml, free T4 1.27ng/l, TSH 
0.58mIU/l, and BMI 24.9.  
 
He began on the MEND therapeutic program, and after 
six months, his wife, co-workers, and he all noted 
improvement.  He lost 10 pounds. He was able to 
recognize faces at work unlike before, was able to 
remember his daily schedule, and was able to function 
at work without difficulty.  He was also noted to be 
quicker with his responses.  His life-long ability to add 
columns of numbers rapidly in his head, which he had 
lost during his progressive cognitive decline, returned.  
His wife pointed out that, although he had clearly 
shown improvement, the more striking effect was that 
he had been accelerating in his decline over the prior 
year or two, and this had been completely halted.  
 
After 22 months on the program, he returned for follow-
up quantitative neuropsychological testing, which 
revealed marked improvement: his CVLT-IIB had 
increased from 3rd percentile to 84th percentile (3 
standard deviations), total recognized hits from <1st 
percentile to 50th percentile, CVLT-II from 54th 
percentile to 96th percentile, auditory delayed memory 
from 13th percentile to 79th percentile, reverse digit span 
from 24th percentile to 74th percentile, and processing 
speed from 93rd percentile to 98th percentile.  His 
business, which had been in the process of termination, 
was reinvigorated, and a new site was added to the 
previous sites of operation.   
 
Comment: 
This 
patient 
had 
well-documented 
Alzheimer’s disease, with an ApoE4-positive genotype, 
characteristic 
FDG-PET 
scan, 
characteristic 
abnormalities on neuropsychological testing, well 
documented 
decline 
on 
longitudinal 
quantitative 
neuropsychological 
testing, 
and 
progression 
of 
symptoms.  After two years on the protocol, his 
symptoms and neuropsychological testing improved 
markedly.  The neuropsychologist who performed and 
evaluated his testing pointed out that his improvement 
was beyond that which had been observed in the 
neuropsychologist’s 30 years of practice. 
 
Patient 3.  A woman late in her fifth decade began to 
note episodes of forgetfulness, such as returning home 
from shopping without the items she had purchased.  
She also placed household items in the wrong locations 
repeatedly, 
and 
frequently 
failed 
to 
recognize 
previously familiar faces.  She had difficulty 
remembering which side of the road on which to drive.  
A male cousin had developed Alzheimer’s disease in his 
fifth decade.  She was found to be an ApoE4 
homozygote.  On-line cognitive evaluation showed her 
to be at the 35th percentile for her age, despite her 
having been an excellent student earlier in her life. 
 
She began various parts of the MEND protocol, and 
slowly added protocol features over several months.  
She began to note improvement, and her on-line 
cognitive evaluation improved to the 98th percentile, 
where it has remained to the current time, with her 
having been on the protocol for 3.5 years.  
 
Comment: This patient showed early but definite 
cognitive decline, documented by on-line quantitative 
cognitive testing.  Her marked improvement has now 
been sustained for 3.5 years.  As described for patient 3 
in a previous report [3], her improvement was iterative, 
with continued optimization over several months.  
 
Patient 4.  A 49-year-old woman noted progressive 
difficulty with word finding, and noted that her 
vocabulary had become more limited.  She also began 
to feel unsure about her navigation during driving.  She 
also complained of difficulty with facial recognition 
(prosopagnosia).  Her recall was affected, and she 
described the requirement of “more energy” for recall of 
events.  She had difficulty with remembering scheduled 
events.  She also noted that her clarity and sharpness 
were reduced, leading to difficulties assisting her 
children with schoolwork.  She had difficulty with 
complex 
conversations, 
and 
with 
reading 
comprehension.  She also lost the ability she had had to 
speak two foreign languages. 
 
Her family history was positive for Alzheimer’s disease 
in her father, and her ApoE genotype was 2/4.  Her MRI 
was read as normal, but volumetrics were not included.  
She underwent quantitative neuropsychological testing 
at a major university center, and was told that she was 
in the early stages of cognitive decline and therefore 
ineligible for the Alzheimer’s prevention program, since 
she was already too late in the disease course for 
prevention.  Her homocysteine was 10μM, hs-CRP 
0.6mg/l, hemoglobin A1c 5.2%, fasting insulin 7mIU/l, 
TSH 1.6mIU/l, and 25-hydroxycholecalciferol 35ng/ml. 
 
She began on the MEND protocol, and over the next 
several months she noted a clear improvement in recall, 
reading, navigating, vocabulary, mental clarity, and 
facial recognition.  Her foreign language abilities 
 
 
www.impactaging.com 
 
 
 
            1253                                        AGING, June 2016, Vol. 8 No.6 
 returned.  Nine months after her initial neuro-
psychological testing, the testing was repeated at the 
same university site, and she was told that she no longer 
showed evidence of cognitive decline.  Immediate and 
delayed recall, as well as semantic knowledge, 
executive function, and processing speed, had all shown 
improvement.  
 
Comment:  This patient had typical early amnestic MCI, 
which reverted over several months, resulting in a 
normal neuropsychological examination after nine 
months.  She remains asymptomatic after one year on 
the program.  
 
Patient 5.  A 55-year-old woman presented with 
memory concerns of two-years duration.  She had a 
positive family history of dementia in an aunt and a 
grandmother.  She was an ApoE4 homozygote and a 
TOMM40 homozygote (G/G). 
 
She experienced difficulties with word recall several 
times a day, either being unable to recall the word at all 
or substituting the wrong word in its place.  For 
example, she would say a word like "tweezers" when 
she meant to say "tongs" (semantic paraphasic errors).  
She also experienced an increase in spelling errors as 
she typed on her computer.  As a professional writer 
and editor with a master's degree in English, she found 
these issues very troubling.  She often lost her train of 
thought while speaking, requiring her to ask others what 
she had just said.  In addition, she would misplace items 
and forget why she had walked into a room.  She would 
also forget some things her husband had told her or 
asked her to do. 
 
She began the MEND protocol, and after four months 
her husband reported that her memory had improved.  
She noted that her word recall was as good as it had 
ever been, and she was no longer experiencing an 
increase in spelling errors.  She also reported that she 
rarely lost her train of thought, but if she went off on a 
tangent or if someone interrupted her, that issue might 
return.  However, if she paused and gave herself a few 
seconds, she could find her way back to her original 
train of thought without asking for help.  In addition, 
she no longer forgot why she had entered a room, and 
only rarely misplaced items. 
 
Her primary care provider noted that, in her 
professional opinion, her cognition had returned to 
normal after four months on the protocol, and an on-line 
cognitive test (CNS Vital Signs), performed prior to the 
start of the protocol and then again after five months on 
the protocol, confirmed this opinion: her overall 
cognitive assessment (neurocognitive index) had 
increased from 16th percentile to 73rd percentile; 
composite memory from 1st percentile to 61st percentile; 
verbal memory from 3rd percentile to 93rd percentile; 
visual memory from 5th percentile to 14th percentile; 
executive function from 14th percentile to 58th 
percentile; and processing speed from 37th percentile to 
81st percentile.  Improvement had occurred in all sub-
tests. 
 
Comment:  This patient is homozygous for ApoE4, and 
presented with amnestic MCI.  She showed a clear 
response, both subjectively and objectively, to the 
metabolic protocol, and has sustained improvement 
over seven months.  
 
Patient 6.  A 74-year-old attorney presented with a 
five-year history of memory loss and word-finding 
difficulty.  His family history was positive for dementia 
in his mother, beginning at the age of 75 years.  He had 
been evaluated at an Alzheimer’s disease center at the 
onset of his memory loss, and was found to be 
ApoE4/4, with MRI showing ventricular enlargement 
and temporal lobe atrophy, right > left, and FDG-PET 
showing reduced glucose utilization in the temporal 
lobes and the precuneus, compatible with Alzheimer’s 
disease.  Neuropsychological testing was compatible 
with a diagnosis of amnestic MCI.  He was treated with 
donepezil, 
memantine, 
and 
intravenous 
immunoglobulin, and his MMSE fell from 27 to 23 over 
three years.  He noted no improvement with the 
treatment. 
 
He began the MEND protocol, and after six months, his 
MFI (phagocytosis index) was measured at 1260, with 
normal being >500 and most Alzheimer’s patients 
scoring <500 [11, 12].  His MMSE was 29.  He returned 
three months later, his MMSE was 30, and his MFI was 
1210.  He then returned three months after that, 
complaining that he had taken a trip, gone off much of 
the protocol, come under stress, and he felt that his 
memory had declined.  His MFI at that visit had 
dropped to 230, a typical score for a patient with 
Alzheimer’s disease, and his MMSE was 28.  He was 
placed back on the protocol, and returned two months 
later, with MFI of 1100 and MMSE of 30.  Over the 
ensuing 12 months, his MFI remained >1000 and his 
MMSE remained at 30. 
 
Comment: This patient, homozygous for ApoE4/4, had 
a typical amnestic presentation and well documented 
Alzheimer’s 
disease, 
unresponsive 
to 
donepezil, 
memantine, and intravenous immunoglobulin.  His 
MMSE improved to a perfect 30 on the metabolic 
protocol, where it has remained for over one year.  His 
longitudinal MFI supports the notion that MFI may 
 
 
www.impactaging.com 
 
 
 
            1254                                        AGING, June 2016, Vol. 8 No.6 
 provide 
a 
“real 
time” 
method 
for 
following 
inflammatory/metabolic status, given the marked 
reduction when off the protocol with return to normal 
when he re-initiated the protocol. 
 
Patient 7.  A 57-year-old man began to have difficulty 
with memory and in work performance as a computer 
programmer, leading to dismissal from his job.  Over 
the next five years his cognition continued to decline, he 
developed navigational difficulties, had difficulty with 
attention and multi-tasking, and became quieter and less 
self-assured.  He had been a superb guitarist, and he lost 
both the chord progression memory and the nuance in 
his playing.  Family history was positive for dementia in 
his mother, in her ninth decade.  Evaluation by a 
neurologist included an unremarkable brain MRI 
without volumetrics, and he was placed on Aricept, 
which he discontinued after two months.  
 
Seven years after his symptom onset, he was again 
evaluated, and found to be homozygous for ApoE4.  An 
FDG PET scan was strongly suggestive of Alzheimer’s 
disease, with reductions in glucose utilization in the 
temporal, parietal, posterior cingulate, and frontal 
regions, with some asymmetry.  He scored 22/30 on the 
mini-mental state examination, having lost points for 
failing to know the date or day, location, and failing 
tasks of attention and short-term recall.  His BMI was 
23. 
 
A diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease was made.  His 
laboratory evaluation included an hs-CRP of 0.2mg/l, 
homocysteine 9.5μmol/l, albumin:globulin ratio of 1.6, 
hemoglobin A1c 5.7%, fasting insulin 4.9mIU/l, free T3 
2.8pg/ml, free T4 1.3ng/l, TSH 2.1mIU/l, testosterone 
281ng/dl, pregnenolone 44ng/dl, 25-hydroxychole-
calciferol 38ng/ml, total cholesterol 145mg/dl (on 
atorvastatin), RBC magnesium 4.7mg/dl, serum copper 
93mcg/dl, serum zinc 76mcg/dl, copper:zinc ratio 1.22, 
and AM cortisol 6.8mcg/dl.  His Cyrex Array 2 was 
positive for gastrointestinal hyperpermeability, Cyrex 
Array 3 (for gluten sensitivity) was negative, and Cyrex 
Array 20 (for blood-brain barrier disruption) was 
negative.    
 
He was placed on the MEND protocol, and his MMSE 
increased to 26 after four months, and to 29 after 10 
months.  His wife noticed clear improvement in his 
memory and navigation.  His guitar skills improved, 
both his chord progressions and the nuances of his 
playing, such that he was able to play several pieces for 
the neurologist. 
 
Comment: 
This 
patient 
had 
well 
documented 
Alzheimer’s disease, with a characteristic presentation, 
characteristic 
FDG-PET 
scan, 
and 
an 
ApoE4 
homozygous genotype.  For the seven years prior to 
beginning the MEND protocol, his cognition declined, 
again in keeping with the diagnosis of Alzheimer’s 
disease.  Therefore, the chance that his MMSE 
improved from 22 to 26 and then to 29 over the 10 
months on the protocol, as a random event unrelated to 
the MEND protocol, is slim.  Although a score of 29 on 
the MMSE is within the normal range, both the patient 
and his wife recognize that subjectively he has not 
returned 
completely 
to 
normal, 
and 
continued 
optimization of his metabolic status is ongoing.    
 
Patient 8.  A 68-year-old business executive presented 
with a five-year history of progressive memory loss, 
forcing him to retire from his company.  He had 
difficulty navigating while driving, as well.  Family 
history was positive in his mother.  He underwent 
amyloid PET imaging, which was positive.  His ApoE 
genotype was 3/4. 
 
After six months on the MEND protocol, his BMI 
improved from 27.7 to 24.6, and his hemoglobin A1c 
improved from 5.9% to 5.7%.  Both he and his family 
noted improvement in memory and navigation.  His 
improvement 
was 
documented 
by 
on-line 
neuropsychological testing (Brain HQ), which showed 
increase from 0 (baseline) to 2221, which represented 
52nd percentile for his age. 
 
Comment:  This patient had typical Alzheimer’s disease 
with mnemonic and visuospatial deficits, progressive 
course, positive family history, ApoE4 heterozygosity, 
and a positive amyloid PET scan.  He responded to 
treatment with an improvement in BMI, reduction in 
hemoglobin A1c, symptomatic improvements in both 
memory and navigation, and objective improvement in 
on-line neuropsychological testing. 
 
Patient 9. This is a follow-up description of a patient 
presented in a previous publication [13].  A 50-year-old 
woman developed depression following a hysterectomy.  
She received hormone replacement therapy, but the 
depression continued.  At the age of 54, she began to 
have word-finding difficulty, disorientation, difficulty 
driving, 
difficulty 
following 
recipes 
and 
other 
instructions, and memory complaints, and these 
problems progressed.  She became quieter and slower to 
respond.  Her depression deepened when her son left 
home.   
 
She underwent neuropsychological testing, which 
disclosed frontal, temporal, and parietal abnormalities.  
A PET scan was typical for Alzheimer’s disease, with 
temporoparietal decreases in glucose utilization as well 
 
 
www.impactaging.com 
 
 
 
            1255                                        AGING,
  June 2016, Vol. 8 No.6 
 as a modest frontal decrease.  She was placed on 
duloxetine, 
which 
reduced 
her 
depression, 
and 
donepezil, which improved her cognition.  However, 
she continued to decline. 
 
At the age of 57, she was again evaluated.  Her ApoE 
genotype was 3/3, MoCA was 19/30, BMI was 18, hs-
CRP 0.2mg/l, homocysteine 8μM, fasting insulin 
4.2uIU/ml, hemoglobin A1c 5.1%, free T3 2.1pg/ml, 
free T4 1.33ng/dl, reverse T3 23ng/dl, fT3:rT3 9, TSH 
1.16uIU/ml, progesterone 0.3ng/ml, AM cortisol 
7.2mcg/dl, 
pregnenolone 
19ng/dl, 
25-
hydroxycholecalciferol 
37ng/ml, 
vitamin 
B12 
799pg/ml, alpha-tocopherol 12.5mg/l, zinc 82mcg/l, 
copper 99mcg/l, copper:zinc ratio 1.2, ceruloplasmin 
20mg/dl, total cholesterol 221mg/dl, HDL cholesterol 
67mg/dl, non- HDL cholesterol 167mg/dl, triglycerides 
82mg/dl, urinary mercury:creatinine < 2.8, Lyme 
antibodies 
negative, 
C4a 
5547ng/ml, 
TGF-β1 
7037pg/ml, and VEGF (vascular endothelial growth 
factor) 56pg/ml (normal range 31-86pg/ml).  VIP 
(vasoactive intestinal peptide) was not evaluated.  HLA-
DR/DQ was 13-6-52A (mycotoxin sensitive) and 15-6-
51 (Borrelia sensitive).  MARCoNS (multiple-
antibiotic-resistant coagulase-negative Staph) culture 
was negative.  Anti-thyroglobulin antibodies were 
strongly positive at 2076IU/ml (normal range 0-
0.9IU/ml) and anti-thyroid peroxidase antibodies 
positive at 58IU/ml (normal range 0-34IU/ml). 
 
She was placed on the MEND protocol, and intranasal 
VIP (vasoactive intestinal peptide) was administered.  
After three months, she showed improvement.  She was 
able to babysit her grandchildren.  She was able to 
follow written and verbal instructions without any 
problems, which had not been possible prior to 
treatment.  She was able to read and remember 
overnight, and discuss her reading with her husband, 
which she had not been able to do prior to treatment.  
She also routinely remembered events of the previous 
day, which had not occurred in the few years prior to 
treatment.  She had a follow-up MoCA test, and scored 
21/30.  
 
Comment: This patient had progressed beyond MCI to 
Alzheimer’s disease, well documented by characteristic 
PET scan abnormalities, neuropsychological testing 
deficits, and progression.  Despite an initial subjective 
response to donepezil, she continued to decline and 
displayed significant impairment.  She was diagnosed 
with type 3 Alzheimer’s disease [13, 14], and laboratory 
data supported this diagnosis with characteristic HLA-
DR/DQ and abnormal C4a and TGF-β1, as well as anti-
thyroglobulin antibodies and anti-thyroid peroxidase 
antibodies, although MARCoNS culture was negative.  
After three months of therapy, she showed clear 
subjective 
improvement 
and 
modest 
objective 
improvement.  Her previous three years of relentless 
decline argued against the possibility that the 
improvement was random and unrelated to her 
treatment.  
 
Patient 10.  A 54-year-old woman presented with a 
two-year history of memory loss.  She noted that she 
did not retain new information the way she formerly 
had, she had to re-read information a number of times to 
remember 
it, 
especially 
technical 
or 
scientific 
information, and noted that her reading speed had 
decreased.  She also noted a reduction in vocabulary, 
word-finding problems, and repeated use of the same 
word instead of using synonyms.  She also noted 
increased difficulty with grammar and spelling, as well 
as loss of names of friends and of famous people.  Her 
writing declined, her typographical errors increased, and 
she had difficulty remembering passwords.  She had 
increasing difficulty driving, organizing, and with her 
motivation.  Activities of daily living were preserved. 
 
Her ApoE genotype was 4/4, homocysteine 7.5μmol/l, 
hs-CRP 
0.26mg/l, 
albumin:globulin 
ratio 
2.0, 
hemoglobin A1c 5.3%, fasting insulin 2.7mIU/l, fasting 
glucose 81mg/dl, alpha-tocopherol 18.3mg/l, and 25-
hydroxycholecalciferol 188ng/ml.   
 
On-line 
quantitative 
neuropsychological 
testing 
disclosed a composite memory score at the 32nd 
percentile, visual memory at 10th percentile, and verbal 
memory at 73rd percentile.  This testing was repeated 
after four months on the protocol, at which time the 
composite memory score was at the 61st percentile, 
visual memory score at the 25th percentile, and verbal 
memory score at the 84th percentile. 
 
Comment:  This person, who is homozygous for the 
ApoE ε4 allele, demonstrated both subjective and 
objective evidence of cognitive decline, with preserved 
activities of daily living, and thus would fit best with a 
diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment.  After four 
months on the protocol, repeat on-line quantitative 
neuropsychological testing revealed improvements in 
visual 
and 
verbal 
memory. 
 
Although 
these 
improvements were relatively modest, they are in 
contrast to the natural history of progressive decline in 
cognition 
for 
MCI 
associated 
with 
ApoE4 
homozygosity.   
 
DISCUSSION 
 
These observations provide further support for the 
previously reported finding that the personalized 
 
 
www.impactaging.com 
 
 
 
            1256                                        AGING, June 2016, Vol. 8 No.6 
 protocol for metabolic enhancement (note that the 
metabolic evaluation included parameters shown to 
affect Alzheimer's disease pathophysiology, such as 
homocysteine [15], glucose [16], and inflammation 
[17], as well as numerous others as previously described 
[3]) in Alzheimer’s disease leads to the reversal of 
cognitive decline in at least some patients with early 
Alzheimer’s disease or its precursors, MCI (mild 
cognitive impairment) and SCI (subjective cognitive 
impairment).  To our knowledge, the magnitude of the 
improvements documented in patients 1 and 2 is 
unequaled in previous reports: in patient 1, the increase 
in hippocampal volume from 17th percentile to 75th 
percentile 
supports 
the 
marked 
symptomatic 
improvement that he (and others) achieved on the 
protocol.  In patient 2, quantitative neuropsychological 
testing demonstrated improvements of up to three 
standard deviations (CVLT-IIB, from 3rd percentile to 
84th percentile), with multiple tests all showing marked 
improvements.  These findings complement and support 
the marked subjective improvement already published 
for this patient [3].   
 
It is noteworthy that these patients met criteria for 
Alzheimer’s disease or MCI prior to treatment, but 
failed to meet criteria for either Alzheimer’s disease or 
MCI following treatment—i.e., following treatment, 
most had returned to the normal range for their 
cognitive testing.  Furthermore, as noted in the initial 
description 
of 
the 
protocol 
used 
here 
[3], 
discontinuation of the protocol was associated with 
cognitive decline (here, in patient 1).  It is not yet 
known for how many months or years the marked 
improvements 
will 
be 
sustained, 
but 
loss 
of 
improvement in patients maintaining the protocol has 
not yet been observed, and follow-ups of up to four 
years have now occurred.   
     
The hippocampal volumetric increase observed for 
patient 1 does not discriminate between the possibility 
that synaptic number increased, or glial cell number or 
volume increased, or endogenous stem cell survival 
increased, or neuronal cell number or volume increased, 
or the vascular compartment increased, or some 
combination of these possibilities.  This volumetric 
increase, and the marked symptomatic improvement 
that accompanied it, raises the question of whether it is 
possible that the patient’s diagnosis of mild cognitive 
impairment associated with Alzheimer’s disease was 
incorrect.  However, the diagnostic evaluation makes 
this possibility extremely unlikely:  given the strong 
family history of dementia, the ApoE4 heterozygosity, 
markedly positive amyloid PET scan, the FDG-PET 
scan characteristic of Alzheimer’s disease with reduced 
glucose utilization in a temporoparietal distribution, the 
abnormal neuropsychological testing, and the MRI 
showing hippocampal volume at 17th percentile for age, 
the possibility that the underlying pathological process 
was something other than Alzheimer’s disease is 
remote.  Thus it would be expected that hippocampal 
volume would decrease over time, and that cognitive 
decline would occur.  Therefore, the likelihood that his 
improvement was random and unrelated to the 
intervention is extremely low.  
 
Similarly, for patient 2, it is highly unlikely that the 
diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease was incorrect: the 
ApoE4-positive genotype, the FDG-PET scan typical of 
Alzheimer’s disease with temporoparietal reduction in 
glucose utilization, the pattern and severity of 
quantitative neuropsychological abnormalities, and the 
well documented progressive nature of the deficits all 
provide strong support for the diagnosis of Alzheimer’s 
disease.  Furthermore, the severity of the abnormalities 
documented by the quantitative neuropsychological 
assessment was also compatible with the diagnosis of 
Alzheimer’s disease.  The variations that may occur 
when different examiners perform the same set of 
quantitative neuropsychological tests is an obvious 
concern when there is a significant change in the results 
of the tests in one subject.  However, in this case, the 
same examiner performed the same set of tests in each 
instance, arguing against the possibility that the major 
improvement observed was simply the result of 
examiner-related variability.  The magnitude of the 
improvement also argued against this possibility.  
 
In each of these cases, obvious subjective improvement, 
noted by the patient, his/her significant other, and 
his/her co-workers, was accompanied by clear, 
quantitated, objective improvement.  In the cases of 
patients 1 and 2, the improvement was of a magnitude 
not reported previously for patients with Alzheimer’s 
disease.  None of the 10 patients exhibited the cognitive 
decline that is characteristic of Alzheimer’s disease, and 
the improvement experienced by all 10 has been 
sustained, with the longest time on the program being 
four years.   
 
It has been claimed that there is nothing that will 
prevent, 
delay, 
or 
reverse 
Alzheimer’s 
disease 
(www.nih.gov/news-events/news- releases/independent- 
panel-finds-insufficient-evidence-support-preventive-
measures-alzheimers-disease).  Therefore, it is typically 
recommended 
that 
the 
ApoE 
genotype, 
which 
represents the most important genetic risk factor for 
Alzheimer’s disease, not be evaluated in asymptomatic 
individuals, and many physicians do not evaluate ApoE 
genotype even in symptomatic patients.  However, the 
examples described here complement and extend 
 
 
www.impactaging.com 
 
 
 
            1257                                        AGING, June 2016, Vol. 8 No.6 
 previously published data that argue that these claims 
are no longer valid.  Thus, given the success of the 
therapeutic regimen used with these patients, it may be 
appropriate to evaluate the ApoE genotype as part of 
prevention and early reversal of symptoms.  Given the 
approximately 
75 
million 
Americans 
who 
are 
heterozygous for the ApoE ε4 allele, and the 
approximately seven million Americans who are 
homozygous, 
early 
identification 
and 
treatment 
(presymptomatic or symptomatic) could potentially 
have a major impact on the prevalence of Alzheimer’s 
disease-mediated cognitive decline.      
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
I thank Dr. Rammohan Rao, Dr. Aida Lasheen 
Bredesen, and Dr. Alexei Kurakin for discussions, and 
Ms. Rowena Abulencia for preparing the manuscript. 
 
Funding 
 
I am grateful for support from James and Phyllis 
Easton, 
the 
NIH 
(AG16570, 
AG034427 
and 
AG036975), the Mary S. Easton Center for Alzheimer’s 
Disease Research at UCLA, the Douglas and Ellen 
Rosenberg Foundation, the Stephen D. Bechtel, Jr. 
Foundation, the Joseph Drown Foundation, the 
Alzheimer’s Association, the Accelerate Fund, the Buck 
Institute and Marin Community Foundation, the 
Michael and Catherine Podell Fund, Mr. Craig Johnson, 
Mr. Allan Bortel, Mr. Wright Robinson, Mr. Jeffrey 
Lipton, Mr. Lawrence Dingus, and Ms. Michaela Hoag. 
 
Conflict of interest statement 
 
The author of this manuscript declares no conflict of 
interest. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
1. James BD, Leurgans SE, Hebert LE, Scherr PA, Yaffe K and 
Bennett DA. Contribution of Alzheimer disease to mortality in 
the United States. Neurology. 2014; 82:1045‐50. 
2. Seshadri S, Drachman DA and Lippa CF. Apolipoprotein E 
epsilon 4 allele and the lifetime risk of Alzheimer's disease. What 
physicians know, and what they should know. Arch Neurol. 
1995; 52:1074‐79. 
3. Bredesen  DE. Reversal of cognitive decline: A novel 
therapeutic program. Aging (Albany NY). 2014; 6:707‐17. doi: 
10.18632/aging.100690. 
4. Kurakin A and Bredesen DE. Dynamic self‐guiding analysis of 
Alzheimer's disease. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:14092‐14122. doi: 
10.18632/oncotarget.4221. 
5. Galvan V, Gorostiza OF, Banwait S, Ataie M, Logvinova AV, 
Sitaraman S, Carlson E, Sagi SA, Chevallier N, Jin K, Greenberg DA 
and Bredesen DE. Reversal of Alzheimer's‐like pathology and 
behavior in human APP transgenic mice by mutation of Asp664. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006; 103:7130‐35. 
6. Bredesen DE, John, V. Next generation therapeutics for 
Alzheimer's disease. EMBO Mol Med. 2013; 5:795‐98. 
7. Ross DE, Ochs, A.L., Seabaugh, J., Henshaw, T. NeuroQuant® 
revealed hippocampal atrophy in a patient with traumatic brain 
injury. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neuroscience. 2012; 24:1:33. 
8. Ahdidan J, Raji CA, DeYoe EA, Mathis J, Noe KO, Rimestad J, 
Kjeldsen TK, Mosegaard J, Becker JT and Lopez O. Quantitative 
Neuroimaging Software for Clinical Assessment of Hippocampal 
Volumes on MR Imaging. J Alzheimers Dis. 2015; 49:723‐32. 
9. Erickson KI, Voss MW, Prakash RS, Basak C, Szabo A, Chaddock 
L, Kim JS, Heo S, Alves H, White SM, Wojcicki TR, Mailey E, Vieira 
VJ, et al. Exercise training increases size of hippocampus and 
improves memory. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011; 108:3017‐22. 
10. Fotuhi M, Lubinski B, Trullinger M, Hausterman N, Riloff T, 
Hadadi M, Raji CA. A  personalized 12‐week "Brain Fitness 
Program" for improving cognitive function and increasing the 
volume of hippocampus in elderly with mild cognitive 
impairement.  The Journal of Prevention of Alzheimer's Disease. 
2016. 
11. Fiala M, Lin J, Ringman J, Kermani‐Arab V, Tsao G, Patel A, 
Lossinsky AS, Graves MC, Gustavson A, Sayre J, Sofroni E, Suarez 
T, Chiappelli F, et al. Ineffective phagocytosis of amyloid‐beta by 
macrophages of Alzheimer's disease patients. J Alzheimers Dis. 
2005; 7:221‐232; 255‐62. 
12. Masoumi A, Goldenson B, Ghirmai S, Avagyan H, Zaghi J, 
Abel K, Zheng X, Espinosa‐Jeffrey A, Mahanian M, Liu PT, 
Hewison M, Mizwickie M, Cashman J, et al. 1alpha,25‐
dihydroxyvitamin D3 interacts with curcuminoids to stimulate 
amyloid‐beta clearance by macrophages of Alzheimer's disease 
patients. J Alzheimers Dis. 2009; 17:703‐17. 
13. Bredesen DE. Metabolic profiling distinguishes three 
subtypes of Alzheimer's disease. Aging (Albany NY). 2015; 7:595‐
600. doi: 10.18632/aging.100801. 
14. Bredesen DE. Inhalational Alzheimer's disease: an 
unrecognized ‐ and treatable ‐ epidemic. Aging (Albany NY). 
2016; 8:304‐13. doi: 10.18632/aging.100896. 
15. Hooshmand B, Solomon A, Kareholt I, Leiviska J, Rusanen M, 
Ahtiluoto S, Winblad B, Laatikainen T, Soininen H and Kivipelto 
M. Homocysteine and holotranscobalamin and the risk of 
Alzheimer disease: a longitudinal study. Neurology. 2010; 
75:1408‐14. 
16. Yang Y, Wu Y, Zhang S and Song W. High glucose promotes 
Abeta production by inhibiting APP degradation. PLoS One. 
2013; 8:69824. 
17. Calsolaro V and Edison P. Neuroinflammation in Alzheimer's 
disease: Current evidence and future directions. Alzheimers 
Dement. 2016; 12:719‐32. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
www.impactaging.com 
 
 
 
            1258                                        AGING, June 2016, Vol. 8 No.6 
