 March 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 44
1
Review
published: 13 March 2018
doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2018.00044
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
Edited by: 
Stefan Borgwardt, 
 
University of Basel, Switzerland
Reviewed by: 
Miriam Goebel-Stengel, 
 
HELIOS Klinik Zerbst, Germany 
 
Juergen Drewe, 
University Hospital of Basel, 
Switzerland
*Correspondence:
Gregor Hasler 
gregor.hasler@upd.unibe.ch, 
 
g.hasler@bluewin.ch
†These authors have contributed 
equally to this work.
Specialty section: 
This article was submitted to 
Psychosomatic Medicine, 
 
a section of the journal 
Frontiers in Psychiatry
Received: 28 July 2017
Accepted: 01 February 2018
Published: 13 March 2018
Citation: 
Breit S, Kupferberg A, Rogler G and 
Hasler G (2018) Vagus Nerve as 
Modulator of the Brain–Gut Axis in 
Psychiatric 
and Inflammatory Disorders. 
Front. Psychiatry 9:44. 
doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2018.00044
vagus Nerve as Modulator of the 
Brain–Gut Axis in Psychiatric  
and inflammatory Disorders
Sigrid Breit1†, Aleksandra Kupferberg1†, Gerhard Rogler 2 and Gregor Hasler1*
1 
Division of Molecular Psychiatry, Translational Research Center, University Hospital of Psychiatry, University of Bern, Bern, 
Switzerland, 2 
Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
The vagus nerve represents the main component of the parasympathetic nervous 
 
system, which oversees a vast array of crucial bodily functions, including control of 
mood, immune response, digestion, and heart rate. It establishes one of the connections 
between the brain and the gastrointestinal tract and sends information about the state of 
the inner organs to the brain via afferent fibers. In this review article, we discuss various 
functions of the vagus nerve which make it an attractive target in treating psychiatric 
and gastrointestinal disorders. There is preliminary evidence that vagus nerve stimulation 
is a promising add-on treatment for treatment-refractory depression, posttraumatic 
stress disorder, and inflammatory bowel disease. Treatments that target the vagus nerve 
increase the vagal tone and inhibit cytokine production. Both are important mechanism 
of resiliency. The stimulation of vagal afferent fibers in the gut influences monoaminergic 
brain systems in the brain stem that play crucial roles in major psychiatric conditions, 
such as mood and anxiety disorders. In line, there is preliminary evidence for gut bacteria 
to have beneficial effect on mood and anxiety, partly by affecting the activity of the vagus 
nerve. Since, the vagal tone is correlated with capacity to regulate stress responses 
and can be influenced by breathing, its increase through meditation and yoga likely 
contribute to resilience and the mitigation of mood and anxiety symptoms.
Keywords: depression, PTSD, vagus nerve stimulation, nutrition, probiotics, yoga, meditation, inflammatory 
bowel disease
iNTRODUCTiON
The bidirectional communication between the brain and the gastrointestinal tract, the so-called 
“brain–gut axis,” is based on a complex system, including the vagus nerve, but also sympathetic (e.g., 
via the prevertebral ganglia), endocrine, immune, and humoral links as well as the influence of gut 
microbiota in order to regulate gastrointestinal homeostasis and to connect emotional and cognitive 
areas of the brain with gut functions (1). The ENS produces more than 30 neurotransmitters and has 
more neurons than the spine. Hormones and peptides that the ENS releases into the blood circula-
tion cross the blood–brain barrier (e.g., ghrelin) and can act synergistically with the vagus nerve, 
for example to regulate food intake and appetite (2). The brain–gut axis is becoming increasingly 
important as a therapeutic target for gastrointestinal and psychiatric disorders, such as inflammatory 
bowel disease (IBD) (3), depression (4), and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) (5). The gut is an 
important control center of the immune system and the vagus nerve has immunomodulatory proper-
ties (6). As a result, this nerve plays important roles in the relationship between the gut, the brain, and 
 FiGURe 1 | Overview over the basic anatomy and functions of the vagus nerve.
2
Breit et al.
Vagus Nerve in Psychiatry, Nutrition, Inflammation
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
March 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 44
inflammation. There are new treatment options for modulating 
the brain–gut axis, for example, vagus nerve stimulation (VNS) 
and meditation techniques. These treatments have been shown 
to be beneficial in mood and anxiety disorders (7–9), but also 
in other conditions associated with increased inflammation (10). 
 
In particular, gut-directed hypnotherapy was shown to be effective 
in both, irritable bowel syndrome and IBD (11, 12). Finally, the 
vagus nerve also represents an important link between nutrition 
and psychiatric, neurological and inflammatory diseases.
BASiC ANATOMY OF THe vAGUS NeRve
The vagus nerve carries an extensive range of signals from diges-
tive system and organs to the brain and vice versa. It is the tenth 
cranial nerve, extending from its origin in the brainstem through 
the neck and the thorax down to the abdomen. Because of its long 
path through the human body, it has also been described as the 
“wanderer nerve” (13).
The vagus nerve exits from the medulla oblongata in the 
groove between the olive and the inferior cerebellar peduncle, 
leaving the skull through the middle compartment of the jugular 
foramen. In the neck, the vagus nerve provides required inner-
vation to most of the muscles of the pharynx and larynx, which 
are responsible for swallowing and vocalization. In the thorax, 
it provides the main parasympathetic supply to the heart and 
stimulates a reduction in the heart rate. In the intestines, the 
vagus nerve regulates the contraction of smooth muscles and 
glandular secretion. Preganglionic neurons of vagal efferent 
fibers emerge from the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus nerve 
located in the medulla, and innervate the muscular and mucosal 
layers of the gut both in the lamina propria and in the mus-
cularis externa (14). The celiac branch supplies the intestine 
from proximal duodenum to the distal part of the descending 
colon (15, 16). The abdominal vagal afferents, include mucosal 
mechanoreceptors, chemoreceptors, and tension receptors 
in the esophagus, stomach, and proximal small intestine, and 
sensory endings in the liver and pancreas. The sensory afferent 
cell bodies are located in nodose ganglia and send information 
to the nucleus tractus solitarii (NTS) (see Figure 1). The NTS 
projects, the vagal sensory information to several regions of the 
CNS, such as the locus coeruleus (LC), the rostral ventrolateral 
medulla, the amygdala, and the thalamus (14).
The vagus nerve is responsible for the regulation of internal 
organ functions, such as digestion, heart rate, and respiratory 
rate, as well as vasomotor activity, and certain reflex actions, such 
as coughing, sneezing, swallowing, and vomiting (17). Its activa-
tion leads to the release of acetylcholine (ACh) at the synaptic 
junction with secreting cells, intrinsic nervous fibers, and smooth 
muscles (18). ACh binds to nicotinic and muscarinic receptors 
and stimulates muscle contractions in the parasympathetic nerv-
ous system.
Animal studies have demonstrated a remarkable regeneration 
capacity of the vagus nerve. For example, subdiaphragmatic 
vagotomy induced transient withdrawal and restoration of cen-
tral vagal afferents as well as synaptic plasticity in the NTS (19). 
Further, the regeneration of vagal afferents in rats can be reached 
 3
Breit et al.
Vagus Nerve in Psychiatry, Nutrition, Inflammation
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
March 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 44
18 weeks after subdiaphragmatic vagotomy (20), even though the 
efferent reinnervation of the gastrointestinal tract is not restored 
even after 45 weeks (21).
FUNCTiONS OF THe vAGUS NeRve
The Role of vagus in the Functions  
of the Autonomic Nervous System
Alongside the sympathetic nervous system and the enteric nerv-
ous system (ENS), the parasympathetic nervous system represents 
one of the three branches of the autonomic nervous system.
The definition of the sympathetic and parasympathetic nerv-
ous systems is primarily anatomical. The vagus nerve is the main 
contributor of the parasympathetic nervous system. Other three 
parasympathetic cranial nerves are the nervus oculomotorius, the 
nervus facialis, and the nervus glossopharyngeus.
The most important function of the vagus nerve is afferent, 
bringing information of the inner organs, such as gut, liver, heart, 
and lungs to the brain. This suggests that the inner organs are 
major sources of sensory information to the brain. The gut as the 
largest surface toward the outer world and might, therefore, be a 
particularly important sensory organ.
Historically, the vagus has been studied as an efferent nerve 
and as an antagonist of the sympathetic nervous system. Most 
organs receive parasympathetic efferents through the vagus 
nerve and sympathetic efferents through the splanchnic nerves. 
Together with the sympathetic nervous systems, the parasym-
pathetic nervous system is responsible for the regulation of 
vegetative functions by acting in opposition to each other (22). 
The parasympathetic innervation causes a dilatation of blood 
vessels and bronchioles and a stimulation of salivary glands. 
 
On the contrary, the sympathetic innervation leads to a constric-
tion of blood vessels, a dilatation of bronchioles, an increase in 
heart rate, and a constriction of intestinal and urinary sphincters. 
In the gastrointestinal tract, the activation of the parasympathetic 
nervous system increases bowel motility and glandular secretion. 
In contrast to it, the sympathetic activity leads to a reduction of 
intestinal activity and a reduction of blood flow to the gut, allow-
ing a higher blood flow to the heart and the muscles, when the 
individual faces existential stress.
The ENS arises from neural crest cells of the primarily vagal 
origin and consists of a nerve plexus embedded in the intestinal 
wall, extending across the whole gastrointestinal tract from 
the esophagus to the anus. It is estimated that the human ENS 
contains about 100–500 million neurons. This is the largest accu-
mulation of nerve cells in the human body (23–25). Since the ENS 
is similar to the brain regarding structure, function, and chemical 
coding, it has been described as “the second brain” or “the brain 
within the gut” (26). It consists of two ganglionated plexuses—the 
submucosal plexus, which regulates gastrointestinal blood flow 
and controls the epithelial cell functions and secretion and the 
myenteric plexus, which mainly regulates the relaxation and con-
traction of the intestinal wall (23). The ENS serves as intestinal 
barrier and regulates the major enteric processes, such as immune 
response, detecting nutrients, motility, microvascular circulation, 
and epithelial secretion of fluids, ions, and bioactive peptides (27). 
There clearly is “communication” between the vagal nerve and the 
ENS, and the main transmitter is cholinergic activation through 
nicotinic receptors (24). Interaction of ENS and the vagal nerve 
as a part of the CNS leads to a bidirectional flow of information. 
On the other hand, the ENS in the small and large bowel also is 
able to function quite independent of vagal control as it contains 
full reflex circuits, including sensory neurons and motor neurons. 
They regulate muscle activity and motility, fluid fluxes, mucosal 
blood flow, and also mucosal barrier function. ENS neurons are 
also in close contact to cells of the adaptive and innate immune 
system and regulate their functions and activities. Aging and 
cell loss in the ENS are associated with complaints, such as 
constipation, incontinence, and evacuation disorders. The loss of 
the ENS in the small and large intestine may be life threatening 
(Hirschsprung’s disease; intestinal pseudo-obstruction), whereas 
as loss of the vagal nerve in these areas is not.
vagus Nerve as a Link between  
the Central and eNS
The connection between the CNS and the ENS, also referred 
to as the brain–gut axis enables the bidirectional connection 
between the brain and the gastrointestinal tract. It is responsible 
for monitoring the physiological homeostasis and connecting 
the emotional and cognitive areas of the brain with peripheral 
intestinal functions, such as immune activation, intestinal per-
meability, enteric reflex, and enteroendocrine signaling (1). This 
brain–gut axis, includes the brain, the spinal cord, the autonomic 
nervous system (sympathetic, parasympathetic, and ENS), and 
the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis (1). The vagal 
efferents send the signals “down” from brain to gut through effer-
ent fibers, which account for 10–20% of all fibers and the vagal 
afferents “up” from the intestinal wall to the brain accounting 
for 80–90% of all fibers (28) (see Figure 1). The vagal afferent 
pathways are involved in the activation/regulation of the HPA 
axis (29), which coordinates the adaptive responses of the organ-
ism to stressors of any kind (30). Environmental stress, as well 
as elevated systemic proinflammatory cytokines, activates the 
HPA axis through secretion of the corticotropin-releasing factor 
(CRF) from the hypothalamus (31). The CRF release stimulates 
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) secretion from pituitary 
gland. This stimulation, in turn, leads to cortisol release from the 
adrenal glands. Cortisol is a major stress hormone that affects 
many human organs, including the brain, bones, muscles, and 
body fat.
Both neural (vagus) and hormonal (HPA axis) lines of com-
munication combine to allow brain to influence the activities 
of intestinal functional effector cells, such as immune cells, 
epithelial cells, enteric neurons, smooth muscle cells, interstitial 
cells of Cajal, and enterochromaffin cells (32). These cells, on the 
other hand, are under the influence of the gut microbiota. The 
gut microbiota has an important impact on the brain–gut axis 
interacting not only locally with intestinal cells and ENS, but also 
by directly influencing neuroendocrine and metabolic systems 
(33). Emerging data support the role of microbiota in influencing 
anxiety and depressive-like behaviors (34). Studies conducted on 
germ-free animals demonstrated that microbiota influence stress 
 4
Breit et al.
Vagus Nerve in Psychiatry, Nutrition, Inflammation
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
March 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 44
reactivity and anxiety-like behavior and regulate the set point 
for HPA activity. Thus, these animals generally show a decreased 
anxiety (35) and an increased stress response with augmented 
levels of ACTH and cortisol (36).
In case of food intake, vagal afferents innervating the gastro-
intestinal tract provide a rapid and discrete account of digest-
ible food as well as circulating and stored fuels, while vagal 
efferents together with the hormonal mechanisms codetermine 
the rate of nutrient absorption, storage, and mobilization (37). 
Histological and electrophysiological evidence indicates that 
visceral afferent endings of the vagus nerve in the intestine 
express a diverse array of chemical and mechanosensitive 
receptors. These receptors are targets of gut hormones and 
regulatory peptides that are released from enteroendocrine 
cells of the gastrointestinal system in response to nutrients, by 
distension of the stomach and by neuronal signals (38). They 
influence the control of food intake and regulation of satiety, 
gastric emptying and energy balance (39) by transmitting 
signals arising from the upper gut to the nucleus of the solitary 
tract in the brain (40). Most of these hormones, such as peptide 
cholecystokinin (CCK), ghrelin, and leptin are sensitive to the 
nutrient content in the gut and are involved in regulating short-
term feelings of hunger and satiety (41).
Cholecystokinin regulates gastrointestinal functions, includ-
ing inhibition of gastric emptying and food intake through 
activation of CCK-1 receptors on vagal afferent fibers innervat-
ing the gut (42). In addition, CCK is important for secretion 
of pancreatic fluid and producing gastric acid, contracting the 
gallbladder, decreasing gastric emptying, and facilitating diges-
tion (43). Saturated fat, long-chain fatty acids, amino acids, and 
small peptides that result from protein digestion stimulate the 
release of CCK from the small intestine (44). There are various 
biologically active forms of CCK, classified according to the num-
ber of amino acids they contain, i.e., CCK-5, CCK-8, CCK-22, 
and CCK-33 (45). In neurons, CCK-8 is always the predominat-
ing form, whereas the endocrine gut cells contain a mixture of 
small and larger CCK peptides of which CCK-33 or CCK-22 
often predominate (42). In rats, both long- and short-chain fatty 
acids from food activate jejunal vagal afferent nerve fibers, but 
do so by distinct mechanisms (46). Short-chain fatty acids, such 
as butyric acid have a direct effect on vagal afferent terminals 
while the long-chain fatty acids activate vagal afferents via a 
CCK-dependent mechanism. Exogenous administration of CCK 
appears to inhibit endogenous CCK secretion (47). CCK is also 
present in enteric vagal afferent neurons, in cerebral cortex, in 
the thalamus, hypothalamus, basal ganglia, and dorsal hindbrain, 
and functions as a neurotransmitter (45). It directly activates 
vagal afferent terminals in the NTS by increasing calcium release 
(48). Further, there is evidence that CCK can activate neurons in 
the hindbrain and intestinal myenteric plexus (a plexus which 
provides motor innervation to both layers of the muscular layer 
of the gut), in rats and that vagotomy or capsaicin treatment 
results in an attenuation of CCK-induced Fos expression (a type 
of a proto-oncogene) in the brain (43). There is also substantial 
evidence that elevated levels of CCK induce feelings of anxiety 
(49). Therefore, CCK is used as a challenge agent to model anxiety 
disorders in humans and animals (50).
Ghrelin is another hormone released into circulation from 
the stomach and plays a key role in stimulating food intake by 
inhibiting vagal afferent firing (51). Circulating ghrelin levels are 
increased by fasting and fall after a meal (52). Central or peripheral 
administration of acylated ghrelin to rats acutely stimulates food 
intake and growth hormone release, and chronic administration 
causes weight gain (53). The action of ghrelin’s on feeding is 
abolished or attenuated in rats that have undergone vagotomy or 
treatment with capsaicin, a specific afferent neurotoxin (54, 55). 
In humans, intravenous infusion or subcutaneous injection 
increases both feelings of hunger and food intake, since ghrelin 
suppresses insulin release (56). Therefore, it is not surprising that 
secretion is disturbed in obesity and insulin resistance (57).
Leptin receptors have also been identified in the vagus nerve. 
Studies in rodents clearly indicate that leptin and CCK interact 
synergistically to induce short-term inhibition of food intake 
and long-term reduction of body weight (40). The epithelial cells 
that respond to both ghrelin and leptin are located near the vagal 
mucosal endings and modulate the activity of vagal afferents, act-
ing in concert to regulate food intake (58, 59). After fasting and 
diet-induced obesity in mice, leptin loses its potentiating effect on 
vagal mucosal afferents (59).
The gastrointestinal tract is the key interface between food and 
the human body and can sense basic tastes in much the same 
way as the tongue, through the use of similar G-protein-coupled 
taste receptors (60). Different taste qualities induce the release of 
different gastric peptides. Bitter taste receptors can be considered 
as potential targets to reduce hunger by stimulating the release of 
CCK (61). Further, activation of bitter taste receptors stimulates 
ghrelin secretion (62) and, therefore, affects the vagus nerve.
vagus Nerve as Modulator of intestinal 
immune Homeostasis
The gastrointestinal tract is constantly confronted with food 
antigens, possible pathogens, and symbiotic intestinal microbiota 
that present a risk factor for intestinal inflammation (63). It is 
highly innervated by vagal fibers that connect the CNS with the 
intestinal immune system, making vagus a major component, 
the neuroendocrine-immune axis. This axis is involved in coor-
dinated neural, behavioral, and endocrine responses, important 
for the first-line defense against inflammation (64). For example, 
in response to pathogens and other injurious stimuli, tumor-
necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), a cytokine, is produced by acti-
vated macrophages, dendritic cells, and other cells in the mucosa 
(3, 65). Together with prostaglandins and interferons, TNF-α 
is an important mediator of local and systemic inflammation 
and increases cause the cardinal clinical signs of inflammation, 
including heat, swelling, pain, and redness (66, 67). Counter-
regulatory mechanisms, such as immunologically competent 
cells and anti-inflammatory cytokines normally limit the acute 
inflammatory response and prevent the spread of inflammatory 
mediators into the bloodstream. Further, there is a “hard-wired” 
connection between the nervous and immune system functions 
as an anti-inflammatory mechanism. The dorsal vagal complex, 
comprising the sensory nuclei of the solitary tract, the area 
postrema, and the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus, responds 
 5
Breit et al.
Vagus Nerve in Psychiatry, Nutrition, Inflammation
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
March 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 44
to increased circulating amounts of TNF-α by altering motor 
activity in the vagus nerve (68).
The anti-inflammatory capacities of the vagus nerve are medi-
ated through three different pathways (18). The first pathway 
is the HPA axis, which has been described above. The second 
pathway is the splenic sympathetic anti-inflammatory pathway, 
where the vagus nerve stimulates the splenic sympathetic nerve. 
Norepinephrine (NE) (noradrenaline) released at the distal end 
of the splenic nerve links to the β2 adrenergic receptor of splenic 
lymphocytes that release ACh. Finally, ACh inhibits the release of 
TNF-α by spleen macrophages through α-7-nicotinic ACh recep-
tors. The last pathway, called the cholinergic anti-inflammatory 
pathway (CAIP), is mediated through vagal efferent fibers that 
synapse onto enteric neurons, which in turn release ACh at 
the synaptic junction with macrophages (18). ACh binds to 
α-7-nicotinic ACh receptors of those macrophages to inhibit 
the TNF-α (69). Compared to the HPA axis, the CAIP has some 
unique properties, such as a high speed of neural conductance, 
which enables an immediate modulatory input to the affected 
region of inflammation (70). Therefore, the CAIP plays a crucial 
role in the intestinal immune response and homeostasis, and 
presents a highly interesting target for the development of novel 
treatments for inflammatory diseases related to the gut immune 
system (6, 18).
The inflammation-sensing and inflammation-suppressing 
functions outlined above provide the principal components of the 
inflammatory reflex (71). The appearance of pathogenic organ-
isms activates innate immune cells that release cytokines. These 
in turn activate sensory fibers that ascend in the vagus nerve 
to synapse in the nucleus tractus solitarius. Increased efferent 
signals in the vagus nerve suppress peripheral cytokine release 
through macrophage nicotinic receptors and the CAIP. Thus, 
experimental activation of the CAIP by direct electrical stimula-
tion of the efferent vagus nerve inhibits the synthesis of TNF-α 
in liver, spleen, and heart, and attenuates serum concentrations 
of TNF-α (72, 73).
vAGUS NeRve STiMULATiON
Vagus nerve stimulation is a medical treatment that is routinely 
used in the treatment of epilepsy and other neurological condi-
tions. VNS studies are not just clinically, but also scientifically 
informative regarding the role of the vagus nerve in health and 
disease.
Device and Method
Vagus nerve stimulation works by applying electrical impulses 
to the vagus nerve. The stimulation of the vagus nerve can be 
performed in two different ways: a direct invasive stimulation, 
which is currently the most frequent application and an indirect 
transcutaneous non-invasive stimulation. Invasive VNS (iVNS) 
requires the surgical implantation of a small pulse generator 
subcutaneously in the left thoracic region. Electrodes are attached 
to the left cervical vagus nerve and are connected to the pulse 
generator by a lead, which is tunneled under the skin. The 
generator delivers intermittent electrical impulses through the 
vagus nerve to the brain (74). It is postulated that these electri-
cal impulses exert antiepileptic (75), antidepressive (76), and 
anti-inflammatory effects by altering the excitability of nerve 
cells. In contrast to iVNS, transcutaneous VNS (tVNS) allows 
for a non-invasive stimulation of the vagus nerve without any 
surgical procedure. Here, the stimulator is usually attached to the 
auricular concha via ear clips and delivers electrical impulses at 
the subcutaneous course of the afferent auricular branch of the 
vagus nerve (77). A pilot study that examined the application of 
VNS in 60 patients with treatment-resistant depressive disorder 
showed a significant clinical improvement in 30–37% of patients 
and a high tolerability (78). Five years later, the stimulation of 
the vagus nerve for the treatment of refractory depression was 
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) (79). 
Since then, the safety and efficacy of VNS in depression has been 
demonstrated in numerous observational studies as can be seen 
below. In contrast, there is no randomized, placebo-control clini-
cal trial that reliably demonstrates antidepressant effects of VNS.
The Neural Mechanism of vNS
The mechanism by which VNS may benefit patients nonrespon-
sive to conventional antidepressants is unclear, with further 
research needed to clarify this (80). Functional neuroimaging 
studies have confirmed that VNS alters the activity of many 
cortical and subcortical regions (81). Through direct or indi-
rect anatomic connections via the NTS, the vagus nerve has 
structural connections with several mood regulating limbic and 
cortical brain areas (82). Thus, in chronic VNS for depression, 
PET scans showed a decline in resting brain activity in the 
ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC), which projects to the 
amygdala and other brain regions modulating emotion (83). VNS 
results in chemical changes in monoamine metabolism in these 
regions possibly resulting in antidepressant action (84, 85). The 
relationship between monoamine and antidepressant action has 
been shown by various types of evidence. All drugs that increase 
monoamines—serotonin (5-HT), NE, or dopamine (DA)—in the 
synaptic cleft have antidepressant properties (86). Accordingly, 
depletion of monoamines induces depressive symptoms in indi-
viduals who have an increased risk of depression (87).
Chronic VNS influences the concentration of 5-HT, NE, and 
DA in the brain and in the cerebrospinal fluid (88). In rats, it has 
been shown that VNS treatments induce large time-dependent 
increases in basal neuronal firing in the brainstem nuclei for 
serotonin in the dorsal raphe nucleus (89). Thus, chronic VNS 
was associated with increased extracellular levels of serotonin in 
the dorsal raphe (90).
Several lines of evidence suggest that NE is a neurotransmitter 
of major importance in the pathophysiology and treatment of 
depressive disorders (91). Thus, experimental depletion of NE in 
the brain led to a return of depressive symptoms after successful 
treatment with NE antidepressant drugs (91). The LC contains 
the largest population of noradrenergic neurons in the brain and 
receives projections from NTS, which, in turn, receives afferent 
input from the vagus nerve (92). Thus, VNS leads to an enhance-
ment of the firing activity of NE neurons (93), and consequently, 
an increase in the firing activity of serotonin neurons (94). Thus, 
VNS was shown to increase the NE concentration in the prefrontal 
 6
Breit et al.
Vagus Nerve in Psychiatry, Nutrition, Inflammation
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
March 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 44
cortex (95). The pharmacologic destruction of noradrenergic 
neurons resulted in the loss of antidepressant VNS effects (96).
In case of DA, it has been shown that the short-term effects 
(14 days) (94) and the long-term effects (12 months) (97) of VNS 
in treatment of resistant major depression may lead to brainstem 
dopaminergic activation. DA is a catecholamine that to a large 
extent is synthesized in the gut and plays a crucial role in the 
reward system in the brain (98).
Further, beneficial effects of VNS might be exerted through 
a monoamine-independent way. Thus, VNS treatments might 
result in dynamic changes of monoamine metabolites in the hip-
pocampus (93) and several studies reported the influence of VNS 
on hippocampal neurogenesis (99, 100). This process has been 
regarded as a key biological process indispensable for maintain-
ing the normal mood (101).
Serotonin is also an important neurotransmitter in the gut that 
can stimulate peristalsis and induce nausea and vomiting by acti-
vating the vagus nerve. In addition, it is essential for the regulation 
of vital functions, such as appetite and sleep, and contributes to 
feelings of well-being. To 95%, it is produced by enterochromaffin 
cells, a type of neuroendocrine cell which reside alongside the 
epithelium lining the lumen of the digestive tract (102). Serotonin 
is released from enterochromaffin cells in response to mechani-
cal or chemical stimulation of the gastrointestinal tract which 
leads to activation of 5-HT3 receptors on the terminals of vagal 
afferents (103). 5-HT3 receptors are also present on the soma of 
vagal afferent neurons, including gastrointestinal vagal afferent 
neurons, where they can be activated by circulating 5-HT. The 
central terminals of vagal afferents also exhibit 5-HT3 receptors 
that function to increase glutamatergic synaptic transmission to 
second order neurons of the nucleus tractus solitarius within the 
brainstem. As a result, interactions between the vagus nerve and 
serotonin systems in the gut and in the brain appear to play an 
important role in the treatment of psychiatric conditions.
vAGUS-ReLATeD TReATMeNT  
OF DePReSSiON
Basic Pathophysiology of Depression
Major depressive disorder ranks among the leading mental health 
causes of the global burden of disease (104). With a lifetime 
prevalence of 1.0% (Czech Republic) to 16.9% (US) (105), the cost 
of depression poses a significant economic burden to our society 
(106). The pathophysiology of depression is complex and includes 
social environmental stress factors; genetic and biological pro-
cesses, such as the overdrive of the HPA axis, inflammation (31), 
and disturbances in monamine neurotransmission as described 
above (91). For example, a lack of the amino acid tryptophan, 
which is a precursor to serotonin, can induce depressive symp-
toms, such as depressed mood, sadness, and hopelessness (86).
The overdrive of the HPA axis is most consistently seen in sub-
jects with more severe (i.e., melancholic or psychotic) depression, 
when the cortisol feedback inhibitory mechanisms are impaired, 
contributing to cytokine oversecretion (107). It has been shown 
that chronic exposure to elevated inflammatory cytokines can 
lead to depression (108). This might be explained by the fact that 
cytokine overexpression leads to a reduction of serotonin levels 
(109). In line with that, treatment with anti-inflammatory agents 
has the potential to reduce depressive symptoms (110). In line, 
IBD are important risk factor for mood and anxiety disorders 
(111), and these psychiatric conditions increase the risk of exac-
erbation of IBD (112).
vNS in Depression
A European multicenter study demonstrated a positive effect of 
VNS on depressive symptoms, in patients with treatment-resist-
ant depression (113). The application of VNS over a period of 
3 months resulted in a response rate of 37% and a remission rate 
of 17%. After 1 year of treatment, the response rate reached 53% 
and the remission rate reached 33%. A meta analysis that com-
pared the application of VNS to the usual treatment in depressed 
patients showed a response rate of approximately 50% in the acute 
phase of the disease and a long-term remission rate of 20% after 
2 years of treatment (114). Several other studies also demonstrated 
an increasing long-term benefit of VNS in recurrent treatment-
resistant depression (84, 85, 115). Further, a 5-year prospective 
observational study which compared the effects of treatment as 
usual and VNS as adjunctive treatment with treatment as usual 
only in treatment-resistant depression, showed a better clinical 
outcome and a higher remission rate in the VNS group (116). This 
was even the case in patients with comorbid depression and anxi-
ety who are frequent non-responders in trials on antidepressant 
drugs. It is important to note that all these studies were open-label 
and did not use a randomized, placebo-controlled study design.
Patients with depression have elevated plasma and cerebro-
spinal fluid concentrations of proinflammatory cytokines. The 
benefit of VNS in depression might be due to the inhibitory 
action on the production of proinflammatory cytokines (117) and 
marked peripheral increases in anti-inflammatory circulating 
cytokines (118). Further, improvement after VNS was associated 
with altered secretion of CRH, thus preventing the overdrive the 
HPA axis (119). Altered CRH production and secretion might 
result from a direct stimulatory effect, transmitted from the vagus 
nerve through the NTS to the paraventricular nucleus of the 
hypothalamus. Finally, VNS has been shown to inhibit peripheral 
blood production of TNF-α which is increased in clinical depres-
sion (10).
influence of Nutrition Depressive 
Symptoms
The gut microbiota is the potential key modulator of the immune 
(120) and the nervous systems (121). Targeting it could lead to 
a greater improvement in the emotional symptoms of patients 
suffering from depression or anxiety. There is growing evidence 
that nutritional components, such as probiotics (122, 123), gluten 
(124), as well as drugs, such as anti-oxidative agents (125) and anti-
biotics (126), have a high impact on vagus nerve activity through 
the interaction with the gut microbiota and that this effect varies 
greatly between individuals. Indeed, animal studies have provided 
evidence that microbiota communication with the brain involves 
the vagus nerve and this interaction can lead to mediating effects 
on the brain and subsequently, behavior (127). For example, 
 7
Breit et al.
Vagus Nerve in Psychiatry, Nutrition, Inflammation
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
March 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 44
Lactobacillus-species have received tremendous attention due 
to their use as probiotics and their health-promoting properties 
(128). Bravo et al. (129) demonstrated that chronic treatment of 
mice with Lactobacillus rhamnosus (strain JB-1) caused a reduc-
tion in stress-induced corticosterone levels and in anxiety-like and 
depression-like behavior (129). It has been shown that chronic 
treatment with L. rhamnosus (JB-1) induced region-dependent 
alterations in GABA(B1b) mRNA in the brain with increases 
in cortical regions (cingulate and prelimbic) and concomitant 
reductions in expression in the hippocampus, amygdala, and LC. 
In addition, L. rhamnosus (JB-1) reduced GABA(Aα2) mRNA 
expression in the prefrontal cortex and amygdala, but increased 
GABA(Aα2) in the hippocampus (129), which counteracts the 
typical pathogenesis of depressive symptoms: lack of prefrontal 
control and overactivity of subcortical, anxiogenic brain regions. 
Importantly, L. rhamnosus (JB-1) reduced stress-induced cor-
ticosterone and anxiety- and depression-related behavior. This 
is not surprising, since alterations in central GABA receptor 
expression are implicated in the pathogenesis of anxiety and 
depression (130, 131). The antidepressive and anxiolytic effects of 
L. rhamnosus were not observed in vagotomized mice, identifying 
the vagus as a major modulatory constitutive communication 
pathway between the bacteria exposed to the gut and the brain 
(129). In line with that, in a model of chronic colitis associated to 
anxiety-like behavior, the anxiolytic effect obtained with a treat-
ment with Bifidobacterium longum, was absent in mice that were 
vagotomized before the induction of colitis (132).
In humans, psychobiotics, a class of probiotics with anti-
inflammatory effects might be useful to treat patients with 
psychiatric disorders due to their antidepressive and anxiolytic 
effects (133). Differences in the composition of the gut microbiota 
in patients with depression compared with healthy individuals 
have been demonstrated (134). Importantly, the fecal samples 
pooled from five patients with depression transferred into germ-
free mice, resulted in depressive-like behavior.
influence of Relaxation Techniques  
on Depressive Symptoms
It has been shown that self-generated positive emotions via 
loving-kindness meditation lead to an increase in positive emo-
tions relative to the control group, an effect moderated by baseline 
vagal tone (135). In turn, increased positive emotions produced 
increases in vagal tone, which is probably mediated by increased 
perceptions of social connections. Individuals suffering from 
depression, anxiety, and chronic pain have benefited from regular 
mindfulness meditation training, demonstrating a remarkable 
improvement in symptom severity (9).
Controlled studies have found yoga-based interventions to 
be effective in treating depression ranging from mild depressive 
symptoms to major depressive disorder (MDD) (136). Some yoga 
practices can directly stimulate the vagus nerve, by increasing the 
vagal tone leading to an improvement of autonomic regulation, 
cognitive functions, and mood (137) and stress coping (138). The 
proposed neurophysiological mechanisms for the success of yoga-
based therapies in alleviating depressive symptoms suggest that 
yoga breathing induces increased vagal tone (139). Many studies 
demonstrate the effects of yogic breathing on brain function 
and physiologic parameters. Thus, Sudarshan Kriya Yoga (SKY), 
a breathing-based meditative technique, stimulates the vagus 
nerve and exerts numerous autonomic effects, including changes 
in heart rate, improved cognition, and improved bowel function 
(140). During SKY, a sequence of breathing techniques of differ-
ent frequencies, intensities, lengths, and with end-inspiratory and 
end-expiratory holds creates varied stimuli from multiple visceral 
afferents, sensory receptors, and baroreceptors. These probably 
influence diverse vagal fibers, which in turn induce physiologic 
changes in organs, and influence the limbic system (140). A 
recent study showed that even patients who did not respond to 
antidepressants showed a significant reduction of depressive and 
anxiety symptoms compared to the control group after receiving 
an adjunctive intervention with SKY for 8 weeks (141).
Iyengar yoga has been shown to decreased depressive symp-
toms in subjects with depression (142). Iyengar yoga is associated 
with increased HRV, supporting the hypothesis that yoga breath-
ing and postures work in part by increasing parasympathetic 
 
tone (143).
vAGUS-ReLATeD TReATMeNT OF PTSD
Pathophysiology of PTSD
Posttraumatic stress disorder is an anxiety disorder that can 
develop after trauma and is characterized by experiencing intru-
sive memories, flashbacks, hypervigilance, nightmares, social 
 
avoidance, and social dysfunctions (144). It has a lifetime 
prevalence of 8.3% using the definition for DSM-5 (145). The 
symptoms of PTSD can be classified into four clusters: intrusion 
symptoms, avoidance behavior, cognitive and affective alterations, 
and changes in arousal and reactivity (146). People who suffer 
from PTSD tend to live as though under a permanent threat. 
They exhibit fight and flight behavior or a perpetual behavioral 
shutdown and dissociation, with no possibility of reaching a calm 
state and developing positive social interactions. Over time, these 
maladaptive autonomic responses lead to the development of an 
increased risk for psychiatric comorbidities, such as addiction 
and cardiovascular diseases (147).
Posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms are partly mediated 
by the vagus nerve. There is evidence for diminished parasym-
pathetic activity in PTSD, indicating an autonomic imbalance 
(148). The vagal control of heart rate via the myelinated vagal 
fibers varies with respiration. Thus, the vagal influence on the 
heart can be evaluated by quantifying the amplitude of rhythmic 
fluctuations in heart rate—respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA). 
 
A recent study has demonstrated a reduced resting RSA in vet-
erans with PTSD (149). Further, patients with PTSD have been 
shown to have lower high-frequency heart rate variability than 
healthy controls (150).
Continuous expression of emotional symptoms to conditioned 
cues despite the absence of additional trauma is one of the many 
hallmarks of PTSD. Behavioral therapies employed to treat PTSD 
rely on helping the patient to gradually reduce her/his fear of this 
cue over time. Thus, exposure-based therapies are considered the 
gold standard of treatment for PTSD (151). The goal of exposure-
based therapies is to replace conditioned associations of the 
trauma with new, more appropriate associations which compete 
 8
Breit et al.
Vagus Nerve in Psychiatry, Nutrition, Inflammation
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
March 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 44
with fearful associations. Studies have shown that PTSD patients 
exhibit deficient extinction recall along with dysfunctional acti-
vation of the fear extinction network (152, 153). This network 
includes the vmPFC, the amygdala, and the hippocampus. It is 
highly important for the contextual retrieval of fear memories 
after extinction (154).
Posttraumatic stress disorder symptom severity and structural 
abnormalities in the anterior hippocampus and centromedial 
amygdala have been associated (155). There is evidence for 
increased activation of the amygdala in humans and rodents dur-
ing conditioned fear (156). The amygdala and the vmPFC have 
reciprocal synaptic connections (157). Indeed, under conditions 
of uncertainty and threat, the PFC can become hypoactive leading 
to a failure to inhibit overactivity of the amygdala with emergence 
of PTSD symptoms, such as hyperarousal and re-experiencing 
(158). Further, in response to stressful stimuli as fearful faces, 
patients with PTSD showed a higher activation of the basolat-
eral amygdala during unconscious face processing compared 
to healthy controls as well as patients with panic disorder and 
generalized anxiety disorder (159).
The hippocampus is also a crucial component of the fear circuit 
and implicated in the pathophysiology of PTSD. Patients with 
PTSD show a reduced hippocampal volume that is associated 
with symptom severity (160). The hippocampus is a key structure 
in episodic memory and spatial context encoding. Hippocampal 
damage leads to deficits in context encoding in humans as well 
as rodents. The neural circuit consisting of the hippocampus, 
amygdala, and vmPFC is highly important for the contextual 
retrieval of fear memories after extinction (154). Impairment 
of hippocampal functioning, resulting dysfunctional context 
generalization in patients with PTSD, might cause patients to 
re-experience trauma-related symptoms (161).
vNS in PTSD
Vagus nerve stimulation has shown promise as therapeutic 
option in treatment-resistant anxiety disorders, including PTSD 
(8). Chronic VNS has been shown to reduce anxiety in rats (96) 
and improve scores on the Hamilton Anxiety Scale in patients 
suffering from treatment-resistant depression (8). When stimu-
lated, the vagus nerve sends signals to the NTS (162) and the NTS 
sends direct projections to the amygdala and the hypothalamus. 
Further, VNS increases the release of NE in basolateral amygdala 
(163) as well as the hippocampus and cortex (93). NE infusion 
in the amygdala results in better extinction learning (164). Thus, 
VNS could be a good tool to increase extinction retention. For 
example, in rats, extinction paired with VNS treatment can lead 
to remission of fear and improvements in PTSD-like symptoms 
(151). Further, VNS paired with extinction learning facilitates the 
plasticity between the infralimbic medial prefrontal cortex and 
the basolateral complex of the amygdala to facilitate extinction 
of conditioned fear responses (165). Additionally, VNS may also 
enhance extinction by inhibiting activity of the sympathetic nerv-
ous system (119). It is possible that an immediate VNS-induced 
reduction in anxiety contributes to VNS-driven extinction by 
interfering with the sympathetic response to the CS, thus break-
ing the association of the CS with fear. However, there is need for 
randomized controlled trials to approve these observations.
One of the most consistent neurophysiological effects of 
VNS is decreasing the hippocampal activity, possibly through 
enhancement of GABAergic signaling (166). As described above, 
the hippocampus is a crucial component of the fear circuit, since 
it is a key structure in episodic memory and spatial context 
encoding. Decreased hippocampal activity after VNS has been 
reported in a number of other studies in other conditions such as 
depression (77, 167) or schizophrenia (168).
Positive influence of Nutritive 
Components on PTSD
Emerging research suggests that probiotics may have the 
potential to decrease stress-induced inflammatory responses, 
as well as associated symptoms. An exploratory study that 
investigated the microbiome of patients with PTSD and 
trauma exposed controls revealed a decreased existence of 
three bacteria strains in patients with PTSD: Actinobacteria, 
Lentisphaerae, and Verrucomicrobia that were associated with 
higher PTDS symptom scores. These bacteria are important 
for immune regulation and their decreased abundance could 
have contributed to a dysregulation of the immune system and 
development of PTSD symptoms (169). A study using a murine 
model of PTSD (170) has demonstrated that immunization 
with a heat-killed preparation of the immunoregulatory bac-
terium Mycobacterium vaccae (NCTC 11659) induced a more 
proactive behavioral response to a psychosocial stressor (171). 
Studies performed in healthy volunteers have shown that the 
administration of different probiotics were associated with an 
improved well-being (172–174), as well as a decrease in anxiety 
and psychological distress (174, 175). These findings are all 
preliminary. There is an urgent need for well-designed, double-
blind, placebo-controlled clinical trials aimed at determining 
the effect of bacterial supplements and controlled changes in 
diet on psychological symptoms and cognitive functions in 
patients with PTSD.
Positive influence of Meditation  
and Yoga on PTSD
There is clinical evidence for the efficacy of mindfulness-based 
stress reduction (MBSR) in the treatment of PTSD (176–178). 
During MBSR, slow breathing and long exhalation phases lead to 
an increase in parasympathetic tone (179). In addition, clinical 
studies have demonstrated the effectiveness of yoga as a thera-
peutic intervention for PTSD and dissociation through a down-
regulation of the stress response (180–182). Yoga practices also 
decreased symptoms in PSTD after natural disasters (183, 184). 
Yoga-responsive anxiety disorders, including PTSD, go together 
with low HRV and low GABA activity (139). The interactions of 
the PFC, hippocampus, and amygdala in conjunction with inputs 
from the autonomous nervous system and GABA system provide 
a network through which yoga-based practices may decrease 
symptoms (185). There are indications that impaired extinction 
of conditioned fear in PTSD is associated with decreased vmPFC 
control over amygdala activity (157). PFC activation associated 
with increased parasympathetic activity during yoga could 
improve inhibitory control over the amygdala via PFC GABA 
 9
Breit et al.
Vagus Nerve in Psychiatry, Nutrition, Inflammation
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
March 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 44
projections, decreasing amygdala overactivity, and reducing 
PTSD symptoms.
vAGUS-ReLATeD TReATMeNT  
iN iNFLAMMATORY DiSeASe
Pathophysiology iBD
Inflammatory bowel disease comprises mainly two disorders: 
ulcerative colitis (UC) and Crohn’s disease (CD) (186). The hall-
mark of IBD is chronic, uncontrolled inflammation of the intes-
tinal mucosa. Symptoms are characterized by abdominal pain, 
diarrhea, fever, weight loss, and extraintestinal (skin, eyes, joints) 
manifestations. In CD, the predominant symptoms are diarrhea, 
abdominal pain, and weight loss, whereas in UC diarrhea is the 
main symptom, often accompanied by rectal bleeding (187).
Inflammatory bowel disease affects about 1.5 million persons 
in the USA and 2.2 million in Europe (188), and about 20% of 
IBD patients have a positive family history (189). In addition, 
industrialization led to marked increases in IBD prevalence rates 
in Asia (190). There is increasing evidence that environmental 
risk factors, including infections, Western diet and food addi-
tives, air and water pollution, drugs (antibiotics, hormones), and 
psychosocial stress work in concert with genetic factors (more 
than 250 genetics factors have been consistently identified) in 
the pathogenesis of IBD, finally leading to an abnormal immune 
response to microbial exposure (191, 192). What distinguishes 
IBD from inflammatory responses seen in the normal gut is an 
inability to downregulate inflammatory responses, like it hap-
pens when intestine becomes inflamed in response to a potential 
pathogen. Thus, in individuals with IBD inflammation is not 
downregulated, the mucosal immune system remains chronically 
activated, and the intestine remains chronically inflamed (191). 
During inflammation, proinflammatory cytokines (IL-1β, IL-6, 
TNF-α) released from the intestinal mucosa activate VN afferents 
that terminate in the NTS (188), then relaying visceral informa-
tion to activate the HPA axis. Moreover, an anti-inflammatory 
role of vagus efferents through the CAIP has been reported (188). 
As stated earlier, ACh released at the distal end of VN efferents 
decreases the production of proinflammatory cytokines, such as 
TNF-α (188). The overexpression of the TNF-α may present a 
curical step in the development of IBD (193).
vNS in iBD
Vagus nerve stimulation attenuates the systemic inflammatory 
response to endotoxin (73) and intestinal inflammation (194). 
The VNs also indirectly modulates immune activity of the spleen 
through connections with the splenic sympathetic nerve (13). 
In rats with colonic inflammation, the 3 h long daily VNS for a 
period of 5 days led to a reduction in inflammatory markers and 
an improvement in symptoms of colitis (195).
Vagus nerve stimulation should be of interest in other inflam-
matory diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis, another TNF-α-
mediated disease. In patients with rheumatoid arthritis, a study 
that demonstrated an improvement of symptoms in the early and 
late stages of the disease through 1–4 min of VNS daily (10). This 
study was also the first to show that VNS inhibits the production 
of TNF-α and other cytokines in humans by stimulating the 
inflammatory reflex, leading to an improvement of symptom 
severity. These data argue for an anti-inflammatory role of the 
vagus nerve and provide potential therapeutic applications for 
patients with IBDs (18, 195, 196).
Positive influence of Nutritive 
Components on iBD
Mechanistically, the role that inflammation plays in the onset and 
perpetuation of psychiatric symptoms has garnered increased 
attention (197). The increase of dysfunctional immunological 
responses in modern urban societies are posited to be at least 
in part associated with reduced exposure to commensal and 
environmental microorganisms that normally prime immu-
noregulatory circuits and suppress inappropriate inflammation 
(198). The intestinal bacterial flora is thought to be an important 
factor in the development and recurrence of IBD and various 
attempts have been made to modify the flora with probiotics. 
In animals with experimental colitis orally or rectally admin-
istered lactobacilli have yielded improvements. For example, 
Lactobacillus plantarum 299V prevented the onset of disease 
and reduced established colitis (199). Further, a multispecies 
probiotic (VSL#3) given to mice with established colitis normal-
ized gut barrier function, reduced proinflammatory cytokines, 
and lessened histological disease (200). In humans, Lactobacillus 
casei GG improved symptoms in children with moderately 
active CD (201). In addition, a combination of probiotics with 
Saccharomyces boulardii, Lactobacillus, and VSL#3 showed slight 
improvements of CD symptoms (202). These data are preliminary 
and need confirmation by future studies. So far, no probiotic 
treatments have been officially recommended for the treatment 
of CD (203).
In UC, there is reliable evidence for VSL#3 to be beneficial 
in the treatment of mildly active pouchitis (204). E. coli Nissle, 
part of VSL#3, may be as effective as the drug mesalamine in 
maintaining remission (205).
Positive influence of Hypnotherapy, 
Meditation, and Yoga in iBD
An increasing number of studies have shown benefits with 
relaxation-related treatment of IBD. For example, a randomized 
controlled trial of a relaxation-training intervention compared to 
a control group has shown decrease in pain as well as decreased 
anxiety levels and improvements in quality of life (206). Also 
mindfulness-based therapy (207), a comprehensive mind-body 
 
program (208), meditation (209), mind-body alternative 
approaches (210), yoga (211), and relaxation response-based 
mind-body interventions (212) have shown to be beneficial for 
IBD patients. In addition, hypnotherapy, which increases vagal 
tone (213), has been effective in the treatment of IBD (12).
CONCLUSiON
The interaction between the gut and the brain is based on a 
complex system that includes not only neural but also endocrine, 
immune, and humoral links.
 10
Breit et al.
Vagus Nerve in Psychiatry, Nutrition, Inflammation
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
March 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 44
The vagus nerve is an essential part of the brain–gut axis and 
plays an important role in the modulation of inflammation, the 
maintenance of intestinal homeostasis, and the regulation of food 
intake, satiety, and energy homeostasis. An interaction between 
nutrition and the vagus nerve is well known, and vagal tone can 
influence food intake and weight gain.
Moreover, the vagus nerve plays an important role in the 
pathogenesis of psychiatric disorders, obesity as well as other 
stress-induced and inflammatory diseases.
Vagus nerve stimulation and several meditation techniques 
demonstrate that modulating the vagus nerve has a therapeu-
tic effect, mainly due to its relaxing and anti-inflammatory 
properties.
Extinction paired with VNS is more rapid than extinction 
paired with sham stimulation. As it is currently approved by the 
Federal FDA for depression and seizure prevention, VNS is a 
readily available and promising adjunct to exposure therapy for 
the treatment of severe anxiety disorders.
Vagus nerve stimulation is an effective anticonvulsant device 
and has shown in observational studies antidepressant effects in 
chronic treatment-resistant depression. Because the vagus nerve 
sends information to brain regions is important in the stress 
response (LC, orbitofrontal cortex, insula, hippocampus, and 
amygdala), this pathway might be involved in perceiving or mani-
festing various somatic and cognitive symptoms that characterize 
stress-related disorders.
Psychotropic drugs, such as serotonin reuptake inhibitors, 
have effects on both the brain and the gastrointestinal tract and 
consequently should be understood as modulators of the brain–
gut axis.
Research investigating the interaction between nutritive 
factors, somatic factors, such as heart rate, psychological and 
pharmacological treatments, and vagal activity has the potential 
to lead to integrative treatment options that incorporate VNS, 
nutritional approaches, drugs, and psychological interventions, 
such as mindfulness-based approaches, which can be tailored to 
the needs of the individual patient.
AUTHOR CONTRiBUTiONS
SB, AK and GR reviewed literature and wrote this paper. GH 
outlined structure of this paper, reviewed literature, and wrote 
this paper.
ACKNOwLeDGMeNTS
The authors gratefully acknowledge Sarah Steinau for her contri-
butions to this article.
FUNDiNG
This work was supported by the University of Bern.
ReFeReNCeS
1. Carabotti M, Scirocco A, Maselli MA, Severi C. The gut-brain axis: interac-
tions between enteric microbiota, central and enteric nervous systems. Ann 
Gastroenterol (2015) 28:203–9. 
2. Hagemann D, Meier JJ, Gallwitz B, Schmidt WE. [Appetite regulation by 
ghrelin – a novel neuro-endocrine gastric peptide hormone in the gut-brain-
axis]. Z Gastroenterol (2003) 41:929–36. doi:10.1055/s-2003-41853 
3. Bonaz B, Sinniger V, Pellissier S. Vagus nerve stimulation: a new promis-
ing therapeutic tool in inflammatory bowel disease. J Intern Med (2017) 
282:46–63. doi:10.1111/joim.12611 
4. Evrensel A, Ceylan ME. The gut-brain axis: the missing link in depression. 
Clin Psychopharmacol Neurosci (2015) 13:239–44. doi:10.9758/cpn.2015. 
13.3.239 
5. Leclercq S, Forsythe P, Bienenstock J. Posttraumatic stress disorder: does 
the gut microbiome hold the key? Can J Psychiatry (2016) 61:204–13. 
doi:10.1177/0706743716635535 
6. Goverse G, Stakenborg M, Matteoli G. The intestinal cholinergic anti- 
inflammatory pathway. J Physiol (2016) 594:5771–80. doi:10.1113/JP271537 
7. Berry D. Host-compound foraging by intestinal microbiota revealed by 
 
single-cell stable isotope probing. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2013) 110: 
4720–5. doi:10.1073/pnas.1219247110 
8. George MS, Ward HE, Ninan PT, Pollack M, Nahas Z, Anderson B, et al. 
A pilot study of vagus nerve stimulation (VNS) for treatment-resistant 
anxiety disorders. Brain Stimulat (2008) 1:112–21. doi:10.1016/j.brs.2008. 
02.001 
9. Rod K. Observing the effects of mindfulness-based meditation on anxiety 
and depression in chronic pain patients. Psychiatr Danub (2015) 27(Suppl 
1):S209–11. 
10. Koopman FA, Chavan SS, Miljko S, Grazio S, Sokolovic S, Schuurman PR, 
et al. Vagus nerve stimulation inhibits cytokine production and attenuates 
disease severity in rheumatoid arthritis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2016) 
113:8284–9. doi:10.1073/pnas.1605635113 
11. Moser G. The role of hypnotherapy for the treatment of inflammatory bowel 
diseases. Expert Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol (2014) 8:601–6. doi:10.1586/174
74124.2014.917955 
12. Peters SL, Muir JG, Gibson PR. Review article: gut-directed hypnotherapy 
in the management of irritable bowel syndrome and inflammatory bowel 
disease. Aliment Pharmacol Ther (2015) 41:1104–15. doi:10.1111/apt.13202 
13. Rosas-Ballina M, Olofsson PS, Ochani M, Valdés-Ferrer SI, Levine YA, 
Reardon C, et al. Acetylcholine-synthesizing T cells relay neural signals in a 
vagus nerve circuit. Science (2011) 334:98–101. doi:10.1126/science.1209985 
14. Berthoud HR, Neuhuber WL. Functional and chemical anatomy of 
the afferent vagal system. Auton Neurosci (2000) 85:1–17. doi:10.1016/
S1566-0702(00)00215-0 
15. Mukudai S, Sugiyama Y, Hisa Y. Dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus. 
Neuroanatomy and Neurophysiology of the Larynx. Tokyo: Springer (2016). 
p. 97–102.
16. Wang F-B, Powley TL. Vagal innervation of intestines: afferent pathways 
mapped with new en bloc horseradish peroxidase adaptation. Cell Tissue Res 
(2007) 329:221–30. doi:10.1007/s00441-007-0413-7 
17. Babic T, Browning KN. The role of vagal neurocircuits in the regulation 
of nausea and vomiting. Eur J Pharmacol (2014) 722:38–47. doi:10.1016/j.
ejphar.2013.08.047 
18. Bonaz B, Sinniger V, Pellissier S. Anti-inflammatory properties of the vagus 
nerve: potential therapeutic implications of vagus nerve stimulation. J Physiol 
(2016) 594:5781–90. doi:10.1113/JP271539 
19. Peters JH, Gallaher ZR, Ryu V
, Czaja K. Withdrawal and restoration of central 
vagal afferents within the dorsal vagal complex following subdiaphragmatic 
vagotomy. J Comp Neurol (2013) 521:3584–99. doi:10.1002/cne.23374 
20. Phillips RJ, Baronowsky EA, Powley TL. Regenerating vagal afferents 
reinnervate gastrointestinal tract smooth muscle of the rat. J Comp Neurol 
(2000) 421:325–46. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1096-9861(20000605)421:3<325:: 
AID-CNE3>3.0.CO;2-9 
21. Phillips RJ, Baronowsky EA, Powley TL. Long-term regeneration of abdom-
inal vagus: efferents fail while afferents succeed. J Comp Neurol (2003) 
455:222–37. doi:10.1002/cne.10470 
22. Browning KN, Travagli RA. Central nervous system control of gastrointes-
tinal motility and secretion and modulation of gastrointestinal functions. 
Compr Physiol (2014) 4:1339–68. doi:10.1002/cphy.c130055 
23. Furness JB, Callaghan BP, Rivera LR, Cho H-J. The enteric nervous system 
and gastrointestinal innervation: integrated local and central control. 
 11
Breit et al.
Vagus Nerve in Psychiatry, Nutrition, Inflammation
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
March 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 44
Microbial Endocrinology: The Microbiota-Gut-Brain Axis in Health and 
Disease Advances in Experimental Medicine and Biology. New York, NY: 
Springer (2014). p. 39–71.
24. Schemann M. Control of gastrointestinal motility by the “gut brain” – the 
enteric nervous system. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr (2005) 41(Suppl 1):S4–6. 
doi:10.1097/01.scs.0000180285.51365.55 
25. Schemann M, Neunlist M. The human enteric nervous system. 
Neurogastroenterol Motil (2004) 16(Suppl 1):55–9. doi:10.1111/j.1743-3150. 
2004.00476.x 
26. Goldstein A, Hofstra R, Burns A. Building a brain in the gut: development 
of the enteric nervous system. Clin Genet (2013) 83:307–16. doi:10.1111/
cge.12054 
27. Furness JB. Integrated neural and endocrine control of gastrointestinal 
function. The Enteric Nervous System Advances in Experimental Medicine 
and Biology. Cham: Springer (2016). p. 159–73.
28. Tubbs RS, Rizk E, Shoja MM, Loukas M, Barbaro N, Spinner RJ. Nerves and 
Nerve Injuries: Vol 1: History, Embryology, Anatomy, Imaging, and Diagnostics. 
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Academic Press (2015).
29. Howland RH. Vagus nerve stimulation. Curr Behav Neurosci Rep (2014) 
1:64–73. doi:10.1007/s40473-014-0010-5 
30. Tsigos C, Chrousos GP. Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, neuroendo-
crine factors and stress. J Psychosom Res (2002) 53:865–71. doi:10.1016/
S0022-3999(02)00429-4 
31. Pariante CM, Lightman SL. The HPA axis in major depression: classical the-
ories and new developments. Trends Neurosci (2008) 31:464–8. doi:10.1016/j.
tins.2008.06.006 
32. Mayer EA, Savidge T, Shulman RJ. Brain gut microbiome interactions 
and functional bowel disorders. Gastroenterology (2014) 146:1500–12. 
doi:10.1053/j.gastro.2014.02.037 
33. Gacias M, Gaspari S, Santos P-MG, Tamburini S, Andrade M, Zhang F, et al. 
Microbiota-driven transcriptional changes in prefrontal cortex override 
genetic differences in social behavior. Elife (2016) 5:e13442. doi:10.7554/
eLife.13442 
34. Foster JA, McVey Neufeld K-A. Gut-brain axis: how the microbiome 
influences anxiety and depression. Trends Neurosci (2013) 36:305–12. 
doi:10.1016/j.tins.2013.01.005 
35. Neufeld K-AM, Kang N, Bienenstock J, Foster JA. Effects of intestinal 
microbiota on anxiety-like behavior. Commun Integr Biol (2011) 4:492–4. 
doi:10.4161/cib.4.4.15702 
36. Sudo N, Chida Y, Aiba Y, Sonoda J, Oyama N, Yu X-N, et al. Postnatal 
microbial colonization programs the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal 
system for stress response in mice. J Physiol (2004) 558:263–75. doi:10.1113/
jphysiol.2004.063388 
37. Berthoud H-R. Vagal and hormonal gut-brain communication: from 
satiation to satisfaction. Neurogastroenterol Motil (2008) 20(Suppl 1):64–72. 
doi:10.1111/j.1365-2982.2008.01104.x 
38. Bewick GA. Bowels control brain: gut hormones and obesity. Biochem Med 
(Zagreb) (2012) 22:283–97. doi:10.11613/BM.2012.032 
39. Berthoud H-R. The vagus nerve, food intake and obesity. Regul Pept (2008) 
149:15–25. doi:10.1016/j.regpep.2007.08.024 
40. Owyang C, Heldsinger A. Vagal control of satiety and hormonal regulation 
of appetite. J Neurogastroenterol Motil (2011) 17:338–48. doi:10.5056/
jnm.2011.17.4.338 
41. Badman MK, Flier JS. The gut and energy balance: visceral allies in the 
obesity wars. Science (2005) 307:1909–14. doi:10.1126/science.1109951 
42. Rehfeld JF, Bungaard JR, Friis-Hansen L, Goetze JP. On the tissue-specific 
processing of procholecystokinin in the brain and gut – a short review. 
J Physiol Pharmacol (2003) 54(Suppl 4):73–9. 
43. Sayegh AI, Ritter RC. Vagus nerve participates in CCK-induced Fos expres-
sion in hindbrain but not myenteric plexus. Brain Res (2000) 878:155–62. 
doi:10.1016/S0006-8993(00)02731-1 
44. Tanaka T, Katsuma S, Adachi T, Koshimizu T, Hirasawa A, Tsujimoto G. 
Free fatty acids induce cholecystokinin secretion through GPR120. Naunyn 
Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol (2008) 377:523–7. doi:10.1007/s00210- 
007-0200-8 
45. Little TJ, Horowitz M, Feinle-Bisset C. Role of cholecystokinin in appe-
tite control and body weight regulation. Obes Rev (2005) 6:297–306. 
doi:10.1111/j.1467-789X.2005.00212.x 
46. Lal S, Kirkup AJ, Brunsden AM, Thompson DG, Grundy D. Vagal 
afferent responses to fatty acids of different chain length in the rat. Am 
J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol (2001) 281:G907–15. doi:10.1152/
ajpgi.2001.281.4.G907 
47. MacIntosh CG, Morley JE, Wishart J, Morris H, Jansen JB, Horowitz M, 
et al. Effect of exogenous cholecystokinin (CCK)-8 on food intake and 
plasma CCK, leptin, and insulin concentrations in older and young adults: 
evidence for increased CCK activity as a cause of the anorexia of aging. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab (2001) 86:5830–7. doi:10.1210/jcem.86.12.8107 
48. Rogers RC, Hermann GE. Mechanisms of action of CCK to activate 
central vagal afferent terminals. Peptides (2008) 29:1716–25. doi:10.1016/j.
peptides.2008.06.023 
49. Skibicka KP, Dickson SL. Enteroendocrine hormones – central effects 
on behavior. Curr Opin Pharmacol (2013) 13:977–82. doi:10.1016/j.
coph.2013.09.004 
50. Harro J. CCK and NPY as anti-anxiety treatment targets: promises, pitfalls, and 
strategies. Amino Acids (2006) 31:215–30. doi:10.1007/s00726-006-0334-x 
51. Klok MD, Jakobsdottir S, Drent ML. The role of leptin and ghrelin in the 
regulation of food intake and body weight in humans: a review. Obes Rev 
(2007) 8:21–34. doi:10.1111/j.1467-789X.2006.00270.x 
52. Murphy KG, Bloom SR. Gut hormones and the regulation of energy homeo-
stasis. Nature (2006) 444:854–9. doi:10.1038/nature05484 
53. Tschöp M, Smiley DL, Heiman ML. Ghrelin induces adiposity in rodents. 
Nature (2000) 407:908–13. doi:10.1038/35038090 
54. Date Y. The vagus nerve and ghrelin function. Central Functions of the 
 
Ghrelin Receptor: The Receptors. New York, NY: Springer (2014). p. 53–61.
55. Date Y. Ghrelin and the vagus nerve. Methods Enzymol (2012) 514:261–9. 
doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-381272-8.00016-7 
56. Wren AM, Seal LJ, Cohen MA, Brynes AE, Frost GS, Murphy KG, et al. 
Ghrelin enhances appetite and increases food intake in humans. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab (2001) 86:5992. doi:10.1210/jcem.86.12.8111 
57. Alamri BN, Shin K, Chappe V, Anini Y. The role of ghrelin in the regula-
tion of glucose homeostasis. Horm Mol Biol Clin Investig (2016) 26:3–11. 
doi:10.1515/hmbci-2016-0018 
58. Kentish S, Li H, Philp LK, O’Donnell TA, Isaacs NJ, Young RL, et al. Diet-
induced adaptation of vagal afferent function. J Physiol (2012) 590:209–21. 
doi:10.1113/jphysiol.2011.222158 
59. Kentish SJ, O’Donnell TA, Isaacs NJ, Young RL, Li H, Harrington AM, et al. 
Gastric vagal afferent modulation by leptin is influenced by food intake 
status. J Physiol (2013) 591:1921–34. doi:10.1113/jphysiol.2012.247577 
60. Depoortere I. Taste receptors of the gut: emerging roles in health and disease. 
Gut (2014) 63:179–90. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2013-305112 
61. Jeon T-I, Seo Y-K, Osborne TF. Gut bitter taste receptor signalling induces 
ABCB1 through a mechanism involving CCK. Biochem J (2011) 438:33–7. 
doi:10.1042/BJ20110009 
62. Janssen S, Laermans J, Verhulst P-J, Thijs T, Tack J, Depoortere I. Bitter taste 
receptors and α-gustducin regulate the secretion of ghrelin with functional 
effects on food intake and gastric emptying. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2011) 
108:2094–9. doi:10.1073/pnas.1011508108 
63. Becker C, Neurath MF, Wirtz S. The intestinal microbiota in inflammatory 
bowel disease. ILAR J (2015) 56:192–204. doi:10.1093/ilar/ilv030 
64. Sundman E, Olofsson PS. Neural control of the immune system. Adv Physiol 
Educ (2014) 38:135–9. doi:10.1152/advan.00094.2013 
65. Tracey KJ. The inflammatory reflex. Nature (2002) 420:nature01321. 
doi:10.1038/nature01321 
66. Bradley JR. TNF-mediated inflammatory disease. J Pathol (2008) 214:149–60. 
doi:10.1002/path.2287 
67. Rogler G. Resolution of inflammation in inflammatory bowel disease. 
Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol (2017) 2:521–30. doi:10.1016/S2468-1253(17) 
30031-6 
68. Goehler LE, Gaykema RP, Hansen MK, Anderson K, Maier SF, Watkins LR. 
Vagal immune-to-brain communication: a visceral chemosensory pathway. 
Auton Neurosci (2000) 85:49–59. doi:10.1016/S1566-0702(00)00219-8 
69. Tracey KJ. Reflex control of immunity. Nat Rev Immunol (2009) 9:418–28. 
doi:10.1038/nri2566 
70. Browning KN, Verheijden S, Boeckxstaens GE. The vagus nerve in appetite 
regulation, mood, and intestinal inflammation. Gastroenterology (2017) 
152:730–44. doi:10.1053/j.gastro.2016.10.046 
 12
Breit et al.
Vagus Nerve in Psychiatry, Nutrition, Inflammation
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
March 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 44
71. Pavlov VA, Tracey KJ. The vagus nerve and the inflammatory reflex – linking 
immunity and metabolism. Nat Rev Endocrinol (2012) 8:743–54. doi:10.1038/
nrendo.2012.189 
72. Bernik TR, Friedman SG, Ochani M, DiRaimo R, Ulloa L, Yang H, et al. 
Pharmacological stimulation of the cholinergic antiinflammatory pathway. 
J Exp Med (2002) 195:781–8. doi:10.1084/jem.20011714 
73. Borovikova LV, Ivanova S, Zhang M, Yang H, Botchkina GI, Watkins LR, et al. 
Vagus nerve stimulation attenuates the systemic inflammatory response to 
endotoxin. Nature (2000) 405:458–62. doi:10.1038/35013070 
74. Bajbouj M, Merkl A, Schlaepfer TE, Frick C, Zobel A, Maier W, et al. Two-year 
outcome of vagus nerve stimulation in treatment-resistant depression. J Clin 
Psychopharmacol (2010) 30:273–81. doi:10.1097/JCP.0b013e3181db8831 
75. Fornai F, Ruffoli R, Giorgi FS, Paparelli A. The role of locus coeruleus in 
the antiepileptic activity induced by vagus nerve stimulation. Eur J Neurosci 
(2011) 33:2169–78. doi:10.1111/j.1460-9568.2011.07707.x 
76. Sackeim HA, Brannan SK, Rush AJ, George MS, Marangell LB, Allen J. 
 
Durability of antidepressant response to vagus nerve stimulation (VNS). Int 
J Neuropsychopharmacol (2007) 10:817–26. doi:10.1017/S1461145706007425 
77. Rong P, Liu J, Wang L, Liu R, Fang J-L, Zhao J, et al. Effect of transcuta-
neous auricular vagus nerve stimulation on major depressive disorder: a 
nonrandomized controlled pilot study. J Affect Disord (2016) 195:172–9. 
doi:10.1016/j.jad.2016.02.031 
78. Sackeim HA, Rush AJ, George MS, Marangell LB, Husain MM, Nahas Z, 
et al. Vagus nerve stimulation (VNSTM) for treatment-resistant depression: 
efficacy, side effects, and predictors of outcome. Neuropsychopharmacology 
(2001) 25:713. doi:10.1016/S0893-133X(01)00271-8 
79. Daban C, Martinez-Aran A, Cruz N, Vieta E. Safety and efficacy of vagus 
nerve stimulation in treatment-resistant depression. A systematic review. 
J Affect Disord (2008) 110:1–15. doi:10.1016/j.jad.2008.02.012 
80. Carreno FR, Frazer A. Vagal nerve stimulation for treatment-resistant depres-
sion. Neurotherapeutics (2017) 14:716–27. doi:10.1007/s13311-017-0537-8 
81. Chae J-H, Nahas Z, Lomarev M, Denslow S, Lorberbaum JP, Bohning DE, 
et al. A review of functional neuroimaging studies of vagus nerve stimulation 
(VNS). J Psychiatr Res (2003) 37:443–55. doi:10.1016/S0022-3956(03)00074-8 
82. Nemeroff CB, Mayberg HS, Krahl SE, McNamara J, Frazer A, Henry TR, 
et al. VNS therapy in treatment-resistant depression: clinical evidence and 
putative neurobiological mechanisms. Neuropsychopharmacology (2006) 
31:1345–55. doi:10.1038/sj.npp.1301082 
83. Pardo JV, Sheikh SA, Schwindt GC, Lee JT, Kuskowski MA, Surerus C, 
et al. Chronic vagus nerve stimulation for treatment-resistant depression 
decreases resting ventromedial prefrontal glucose metabolism. Neuroimage 
(2008) 42:879–89. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.04.267 
84. George MS, Rush AJ, Marangell LB, Sackeim HA, Brannan SK, Davis SM, 
et al. A one-year comparison of vagus nerve stimulation with treatment as 
usual for treatment-resistant depression. Biol Psychiatry (2005) 58:364–73. 
doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2005.07.028 
85. Rush AJ, Marangell LB, Sackeim HA, George MS, Brannan SK, Davis SM, 
 
et al. Vagus nerve stimulation for treatment-resistant depression: a ran-
domized, controlled acute phase trial. Biol Psychiatry (2005) 58:347–54. 
doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2005.05.025 
86. Homan P, Neumeister A, Nugent AC, Charney DS, Drevets WC, Hasler G. 
Serotonin versus catecholamine deficiency: behavioral and neural effects 
of experimental depletion in remitted depression. Transl Psychiatry (2015) 
5:e532. doi:10.1038/tp.2015.25 
87. Hasler G. Pathophysiology of depression: do we have any solid evidence 
of interest to clinicians? World Psychiatry (2010) 9:155–61. doi:10.1002/ 
j.2051-5545.2010.tb00298.x 
88. Carpenter LL, Moreno FA, Kling MA, Anderson GM, Regenold WT, 
Labiner DM, et al. Effect of vagus nerve stimulation on cerebrospinal fluid 
monoamine metabolites, norepinephrine, and gamma-aminobutyric acid 
concentrations in depressed patients. Biol Psychiatry (2004) 56:418–26. 
doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2004.06.025 
89. Dorr AE, Debonnel G. Effect of vagus nerve stimulation on serotonergic 
and noradrenergic transmission. J Pharmacol Exp Ther (2006) 318:890–8. 
doi:10.1124/jpet.106.104166 
90. Manta S, El Mansari M, Debonnel G, Blier P. Electrophysiological and 
neurochemical effects of long-term vagus nerve stimulation on the rat 
monoaminergic systems. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol (2013) 16:459–70. 
doi:10.1017/S1461145712000387 
91. Moret C, Briley M. The importance of norepinephrine in depression. 
Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat (2011) 7:9–13. doi:10.2147/NDT.S19619 
92. Pisapia J, Baltuch G. Vagus nerve stimulation. In: Hamani C, Holtzheimer P, 
Lozano AM, Mayberg H, editors. Neuromodulation in Psychiatry. John Wiley 
& Sons, Ltd (2016). p. 325–34.
93. Roosevelt RW, Smith DC, Clough RW, Jensen RA, Browning RA. Increased 
extracellular concentrations of norepinephrine in cortex and hippocampus 
following vagus nerve stimulation in the rat. Brain Res (2006) 1119:124–32. 
doi:10.1016/j.brainres.2006.08.04 
94. Manta S, Dong J, Debonnel G, Blier P. Enhancement of the function of rat 
serotonin and norepinephrine neurons by sustained vagus nerve stimulation. 
J Psychiatry Neurosci (2009) 34:272–80. doi:10.1503/jpn.090175 
95. Follesa P, Biggio F, Gorini G, Caria S, Talani G, Dazzi L, et al. Vagus nerve 
stimulation increases norepinephrine concentration and the gene expres-
sion of BDNF and bFGF in the rat brain. Brain Res (2007) 1179:28–34. 
doi:10.1016/j.brainres.2007.08.045 
96. Furmaga H, Shah A, Frazer A. Serotonergic and noradrenergic pathways are 
required for the anxiolytic-like and antidepressant-like behavioral effects of 
repeated vagal nerve stimulation in rats. Biol Psychiatry (2011) 70:937–45. 
doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2011.07.020 
97. Conway CR, Chibnall JT, Gebara MA, Price JL, Snyder AZ, Mintun MA, 
et al. Association of cerebral metabolic activity changes with vagus nerve 
stimulation antidepressant response in treatment-resistant depression. Brain 
Stimul (2013) 6:788–97. doi:10.1016/j.brs.2012.11.006 
98. de Araujo IE, Ferreira JG, Tellez LA, Ren X, Yeckel CW. The gut–brain 
dopamine axis: a regulatory system for caloric intake. Physiol Behav (2012) 
106:394–9. doi:10.1016/j.physbeh.2012.02.026 
99. Kumaria A, Tolias CM. Is there a role for vagus nerve stimulation therapy 
as a treatment of traumatic brain injury? Br J Neurosurg (2012) 26:316–20. 
 
doi:10.3109/02688697.2012.663517 
100. Revesz D, Tjernstrom M, Ben-Menachem E, Thorlin T. Effects of vagus nerve 
stimulation on rat hippocampal progenitor proliferation. Exp Neurol (2008) 
214:259–65. doi:10.1016/j.expneurol.2008.08.012 
101. Yuan T-F, Li J, Ding F, Arias-Carrion O. Evidence of adult neurogenesis 
in non-human primates and human. Cell Tissue Res (2014) 358:17–23. 
doi:10.1007/s00441-014-1980-z 
102. Bellono NW, Bayrer JR, Leitch DB, Castro J, Zhang C, O’Donnell TA, et al. 
Enterochromaffin cells are gut chemosensors that couple to sensory neural 
pathways. Cell (2017) 170:185–98.e. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2017.05.034 
103. Browning KN. Role of central vagal 5-HT3 receptors in gastrointestinal 
physiology and pathophysiology. Front Neurosci (2015) 9:413. doi:10.3389/
fnins.2015.00413 
104. Ferrari AJ, Charlson FJ, Norman RE, Patten SB, Freedman G, 
 
Murray CJL, et al. Burden of depressive disorders by country, sex, age, and 
year: findings from the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. PLoS Med 
(2013) 10:e1001547. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1001547 
105. Kessler RC, Bromet EJ. The epidemiology of depression across cultures. 
Annu Rev Public Health (2013) 34:119–38. doi:10.1146/annurev-publhealth- 
031912-114409 
106. Sobocki P, Jönsson B, Angst J, Rehnberg C. Cost of depression in Europe. 
J Ment Health Policy Econ (2006) 9:87–98. 
107. Jeon SW, Kim YK. Neuroinflammation and cytokine abnormality in major 
depression: cause or consequence in that illness? World J Psychiatry (2016) 
6:283–93. doi:10.5498/wjp.v6.i3.283 
108. Felger JC, Lotrich FE. Inflammatory cytokines in depression: neurobiological 
mechanisms and therapeutic implications. Neuroscience (2013) 246:199–229. 
doi:10.1016/j.neuroscience.2013.04.060 
109. Schiepers OJG, Wichers MC, Maes M. Cytokines and major depression. 
Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry (2005) 29:201–17. doi:10.1016/j.
pnpbp.2004.11.003 
110. Müller N, Schwarz MJ, Dehning S, Douhe A, Cerovecki A, Goldstein-Müller B, 
 
et al. The cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor celecoxib has therapeutic effects in 
major depression: results of a double-blind, randomized, placebo con-
trolled, add-on pilot study to reboxetine. Mol Psychiatry (2006) 11:680–4. 
doi:10.1038/sj.mp.4001805 
 13
Breit et al.
Vagus Nerve in Psychiatry, Nutrition, Inflammation
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
March 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 44
111. Byrne G, Rosenfeld G, Leung Y, Qian H, Raudzus J, Nunez C, et al. Prevalence 
of anxiety and depression in patients with inflammatory bowel disease. Can 
J Gastroenterol Hepatol (2017) 2017:6496727. doi:10.1155/2017/6496727 
112. Cámara RJA, Schoepfer AM, Pittet V, Begré S, von Känel R; Swiss 
Inflammatory Bowel Disease Cohort Study (SIBDCS) Group. Mood and 
nonmood components of perceived stress and exacerbation of Crohn’s 
disease. Inflamm Bowel Dis (2011) 17:2358–65. doi:10.1002/ibd.21623 
113. Schlaepfer TE, Frick C, Zobel A, Maier W, Heuser I, Bajbouj M, et al. Vagus 
nerve stimulation for depression: efficacy and safety in a European study. 
Psychol Med (2008) 38:651–61. doi:10.1017/S0033291707001924 
114. Berry SM, Broglio K, Bunker M, Jayewardene A, Olin B, Rush AJ. A patient-
level meta-analysis of studies evaluating vagus nerve stimulation therapy 
for treatment-resistant depression. Med Devices (Auckl) (2013) 6:17–35. 
doi:10.2147/MDER.S41017 
115. Nahas Z, Marangell LB, Husain MM, Rush AJ, Sackeim HA, Lisanby SH, 
 
et al. Two-year outcome of vagus nerve stimulation (VNS) for treatment of 
major depressive episodes. J Clin Psychiatry (2005) 66:1097–104. doi:10.4088/
JCP.v66n0902 
116. Aaronson ST, Sears P, Ruvuna F, Bunker M, Conway CR, Dougherty DD, et al. 
A 5-year observational study of patients with treatment-resistant depression 
treated with vagus nerve stimulation or treatment as usual: comparison 
of response, remission, and suicidality. Am J Psychiatry (2017) 174:640–8. 
doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.2017.16010034 
117. Suarez EC, Krishnan RR, Lewis JG. The relation of severity of depressive 
symptoms to monocyte-associated proinflammatory cytokines and chemok-
ines in apparently healthy men. Psychosom Med (2003) 65:362–8. doi:10.1097/ 
01.PSY.0000035719.79068.2B 
118. Corcoran C, Connor TJ, O’Keane V, Garland MR. The effects of vagus nerve 
stimulation on pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines in humans: a preliminary 
report. Neuroimmunomodulation (2005) 12:307–9. doi:10.1159/000087109 
119. O’Keane V, Dinan TG, Scott L, Corcoran C. Changes in hypothalamic–
pituitary–adrenal axis measures after vagus nerve stimulation therapy 
in chronic depression. Biol Psychiatry (2005) 58:963–8. doi:10.1016/j.
biopsych.2005.04.049 
120. Cerf-Bensussan N, Gaboriau-Routhiau V. The immune system and the gut 
microbiota: friends or foes? Nat Rev Immunol (2010) 10:nri2850. doi:10.1038/
nri2850 
121. Principi N, Esposito S. Gut microbiota and central nervous system develop-
ment. J Infect (2016) 73:536–46. doi:10.1016/j.jinf.2016.09.010 
122. Hemarajata P, Versalovic J. Effects of probiotics on gut microbiota: mecha-
nisms of intestinal immunomodulation and neuromodulation. Therap Adv 
Gastroenterol (2013) 6:39–51. doi:10.1177/1756283X12459294 
123. Sánchez B, Delgado S, Blanco-Míguez A, Lourenço A, Gueimonde M, 
Margolles A. Probiotics, gut microbiota, and their influence on host health 
and disease. Mol Nutr Food Res (2017) 61. doi:10.1002/mnfr.201600240 
124. Sanz Y. Microbiome and gluten. Ann Nutr Metab (2015) 67(Suppl 2):28–41. 
doi:10.1159/000440991 
125. Cai J, Zhang L, Jones RA, Correll JB, Hatzakis E, Smith PB, et al. Antioxidant 
drug tempol promotes functional metabolic changes in the gut microbiota. 
J Proteome Res (2016) 15:563–71. doi:10.1021/acs.jproteome.5b00957 
126. Lange K, Buerger M, Stallmach A, Bruns T. Effects of antibiotics on gut 
microbiota. Dig Dis (2016) 34:260–8. doi:10.1159/000443360 
127. Alcock J, Maley CC, Aktipis CA. Is eating behavior manipulated by the gas-
trointestinal microbiota? Evolutionary pressures and potential mechanisms. 
BioEssays (2014) 36:940–9. doi:10.1002/bies.201400071 
128. Walter J. Ecological role of lactobacilli in the gastrointestinal tract: impli-
cations for fundamental and biomedical research. Appl Environ Microbiol 
(2008) 74:4985–96. doi:10.1128/AEM.00753-08 
129. Bravo JA, Forsythe P, Chew MV, Escaravage E, Savignac HM, Dinan TG, et al. 
Ingestion of Lactobacillus strain regulates emotional behavior and central 
GABA receptor expression in a mouse via the vagus nerve. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A (2011) 108:16050–5. doi:10.1073/pnas.1102999108 
130. Hasler G, Nugent AC, Carlson PJ, Carson RE, Geraci M, Drevets WC. 
Altered cerebral gamma-aminobutyric acid type A-benzodiazepine recep-
tor binding in panic disorder determined by [11C]flumazenil positron 
emission tomography. Arch Gen Psychiatry (2008) 65:1166–75. doi:10.1001/
archpsyc.65.10.1166 
131. Hasler G, van der Veen JW, Geraci M, Shen J, Pine D, Drevets WC. Prefrontal 
cortical gamma-aminobutyric acid levels in panic disorder determined by 
proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Biol Psychiatry (2009) 65:273–5. 
doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2008.06.023 
132. Bercik P, Denou E, Collins J, Jackson W, Lu J, Jury J, et al. The intestinal micro-
biota affect central levels of brain-derived neurotropic factor and behavior 
in mice. Gastroenterology (2011) 141:.e1–3. doi:10.1053/j.gastro.2011.04.052 
133. Dinan TG, Stanton C, Cryan JF. Psychobiotics: a novel class of psychotropic. 
Biol Psychiatry (2013) 74:720–6. doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2013.05.001 
134. Zheng P, Zeng B, Zhou C, Liu M, Fang Z, Xu X, et al. Gut microbiome remod-
eling induces depressive-like behaviors through a pathway mediated by the 
host’s metabolism. Mol Psychiatry (2016) 21:786–96. doi:10.1038/mp.2016.44 
135. Kok BE, Coffey KA, Cohn MA, Catalino LI, Vacharkulksemsuk T, Algoe SB, 
et al. How positive emotions build physical health: perceived positive social 
connections account for the upward spiral between positive emotions and 
vagal tone. Psychol Sci (2013) 24:1123–32. doi:10.1177/0956797612470827 
136. Pilkington K, Kirkwood G, Rampes H, Richardson J. Yoga for depression: 
the research evidence. J Affect Disord (2005) 89:13–24. doi:10.1016/j.
jad.2005.08.013 
137. Tyagi A, Cohen M. Yoga and heart rate variability: a comprehensive review 
of the literature. Int J Yoga (2016) 9:97–113. doi:10.4103/0973-6131.183712 
138. Chu I-H, Wu W-L, Lin I-M, Chang Y-K, Lin Y-J, Yang P-C. Effects of yoga 
on heart rate variability and depressive symptoms in women: a randomized 
controlled trial. J Altern Complement Med (2017) 23:310–6. doi:10.1089/
acm.2016.0135 
139. Streeter CC, Gerbarg PL, Saper RB, Ciraulo DA, Brown RP. Effects of yoga 
on the autonomic nervous system, gamma-aminobutyric-acid, and allostasis 
in epilepsy, depression, and post-traumatic stress disorder. Med Hypotheses 
(2012) 78:571–9. doi:10.1016/j.mehy.2012.01.021 
140. Zope S, Zope R. Sudarshan Kriya yoga: breathing for health. Int J Yoga (2013) 
6:4–10. doi:10.4103/0973-6131.105935 
141. Sharma A, Barrett MS, Cucchiara AJ, Gooneratne NS, Thase ME. A 
breathing-based meditation intervention for patients with major depressive 
disorder following inadequate response to antidepressants: a randomized 
pilot study. J Clin Psychiatry (2017) 78:e59–63. doi:10.4088/JCP.16m10819 
142. Woolery A, Myers H, Sternlieb B, Zeltzer L. A yoga intervention for young 
adults with elevated symptoms of depression. Altern Ther Health Med (2004) 
10:60–3. 
143. Khattab K, Khattab AA, Ortak J, Richardt G, Bonnemeier H. Iyengar yoga 
increases cardiac parasympathetic nervous modulation among healthy 
yoga practitioners. Evid Based Complement Altern Med (2007) 4:511–7. 
doi:10.1093/ecam/nem087 
144. Hasler G. Can the neuroeconomics revolution revolutionize psychiatry? 
Neurosci Biobehav Rev (2012) 36:64–78. doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev.2011.04.011 
145. Kilpatrick DG, Resnick HS, Milanak ME, Miller MW, Keyes KM, 
 
Friedman MJ. National estimates of exposure to traumatic events and PTSD 
prevalence using DSM-IV and DSM-5 criteria. J Trauma Stress (2013) 
26:537–47. doi:10.1002/jts.21848 
146. Zoellner LA, Bedard-Gilligan MA, Jun JJ, Marks LH, Garcia NM. The 
evolving construct of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD): DSM-5 criteria 
changes and legal implications. Psychol Inj Law (2013) 6:277–89. doi:10.1007/
s12207-013-9175-6 
147. Williamson JB, Porges EC, Lamb DG, Porges SW. Maladaptive autonomic 
regulation in PTSD accelerates physiological aging. Front Psychol (2014) 
5:1571. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2014.01571 
148. Agorastos A, Boel JA, Heppner PS, Hager T, Moeller-Bertram T, Haji U, 
 
et al. Diminished vagal activity and blunted diurnal variation of heart 
rate dynamics in posttraumatic stress disorder. Stress (2013) 16:300–10. 
 
doi:10.3109/10253890.2012.751369 
149. Grupe D, Wielgosz J, Nitschke J, Davidson R. 15. respiratory sinus arrhythmia 
and ventromedial prefrontal function in veterans with posttraumatic stress 
symptoms. Biol Psychiatry (2017) 81:S7. doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2017.02.026 
150. Chang H-A, Chang C-C, Tzeng N-S, Kuo TB, Lu R-B, Huang S-Y. Decreased 
cardiac vagal control in drug-naïve patients with posttraumatic stress disor-
der. Psychiatry Investig (2013) 10:121–30. doi:10.4306/pi.2013.10.2.121 
151. Noble LJ, Gonzalez IJ, Meruva VB, Callahan KA, Belfort BD, Ramanathan KR, 
 
et al. Effects of vagus nerve stimulation on extinction of conditioned fear 
 14
Breit et al.
Vagus Nerve in Psychiatry, Nutrition, Inflammation
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
March 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 44
and post-traumatic stress disorder symptoms in rats. Transl Psychiatry (2017) 
7:e1217. doi:10.1038/tp.2017.191 
152. Hayes JP, Hayes SM, Mikedis AM. Quantitative meta-analysis of neural 
activity in posttraumatic stress disorder. Biol Mood Anxiety Disord (2012) 
2:9. doi:10.1186/2045-5380-2-9 
153. Marin M-F, Camprodon JA, Dougherty DD, Milad MR. Device-based brain 
stimulation to augment fear extinction: implications for PTSD treatment and 
beyond. Depress Anxiety (2014) 31:269–78. doi:10.1002/da.22252 
154. Maren S, Phan KL, Liberzon I. The contextual brain: implications for fear 
conditioning, extinction and psychopathology. Nat Rev Neurosci (2013) 
14:417–28. doi:10.1038/nrn3492 
155. Akiki TJ, Averill CL, Wrocklage KM, Schweinsburg B, Scott JC, Martini B, 
et al. The association of PTSD symptom severity with localized hippocampus 
and amygdala abnormalities. Chronic Stress (Thousand Oaks) (2017) 1. 
156. Pape H-C, Pare D. Plastic synaptic networks of the amygdala for the acqui-
sition, expression, and extinction of conditioned fear. Physiol Rev (2010) 
90:419–63. doi:10.1152/physrev.00037.2009 
157. Marek R, Strobel C, Bredy TW, Sah P. The amygdala and medial prefrontal 
cortex: partners in the fear circuit. J Physiol (2013) 591:2381–91. doi:10.1113/
jphysiol.2012.248575 
158. Thayer JF, Sternberg E. Beyond heart rate variability: vagal regulation of 
allostatic systems. Ann N Y Acad Sci (2006) 1088:361–72. doi:10.1196/
annals.1366.014 
159. Neumeister P, Feldker K, Heitmann CY, Buff C, Brinkmann L, Bruchmann M, 
 
et al. Specific amygdala response to masked fearful faces in post- 
traumatic stress relative to other anxiety disorders. Psychol Med (2017):1–11. 
doi:10.1017/S0033291717002513 
160. Nelson MD, Tumpap AM. Posttraumatic stress disorder symptom severity 
is associated with left hippocampal volume reduction: a meta-analytic study. 
CNS Spectr (2017) 22:363–72. doi:10.1017/S1092852916000833 
161. Levy-Gigi E, Szabo C, Richter-Levin G, Kéri S. Reduced hippocampal volume 
is associated with overgeneralization of negative context in individuals with 
PTSD. Neuropsychology (2015) 29:151–61. doi:10.1037/neu0000131 
162. George MS, Sackeim HA, Rush AJ, Marangell LB, Nahas Z, Husain MM, 
et al. Vagus nerve stimulation: a new tool for brain research and therapy. Biol 
Psychiatry (2000) 47:287–95. doi:10.1016/S0006-3223(99)00308-X 
163. Hassert DL, Miyashita T, Williams CL. The effects of peripheral vagal 
nerve stimulation at a memory-modulating intensity on norepinephrine 
output in the basolateral amygdala. Behav Neurosci (2004) 118:79–88. 
doi:10.1037/0735-7044.118.1.79 
164. Berlau DJ, McGaugh JL. Enhancement of extinction memory consolidation: 
the role of the noradrenergic and GABAergic systems within the basolat-
eral amygdala. Neurobiol Learn Mem (2006) 86:123–32. doi:10.1016/j.
nlm.2005.12.008 
165. Peña DF, Childs JE, Willett S, Vital A, McIntyre CK, Kroener S. Vagus 
nerve stimulation enhances extinction of conditioned fear and modulates 
plasticity in the pathway from the ventromedial prefrontal cortex to the 
amygdala. Front Behav Neurosci (2014) 8:327. doi:10.3389/fnbeh.2014. 
00327 
166. Capone F, Assenza G, Di Pino G, Musumeci G, Ranieri F, Florio L, et al. 
The effect of transcutaneous vagus nerve stimulation on cortical excit-
ability. J Neural Transm (Vienna) (2015) 122:679–85. doi:10.1007/s00702- 
014-1299-7 
167. Zobel A, Joe A, Freymann N, Clusmann H, Schramm J, Reinhardt M, 
et al. Changes in regional cerebral blood flow by therapeutic vagus nerve 
stimulation in depression: an exploratory approach. Psychiatry Res (2005) 
139:165–79. doi:10.1016/j.pscychresns.2005.02.010 
168. Perez SM, Carreno FR, Frazer A, Lodge DJ. Vagal nerve stimulation reverses 
aberrant dopamine system function in the methylazoxymethanol acetate 
rodent model of schizophrenia. J Neurosci (2014) 34:9261–7. doi:10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.0588-14.2014 
169. Hemmings SMJ, Malan-Müller S, van den Heuvel LL, Demmitt BA, 
Stanislawski MA, Smith DG, et al. The microbiome in posttraumatic stress 
disorder and trauma-exposed controls: an exploratory study. Psychosom Med 
(2017) 79:936–46. doi:10.1097/PSY.0000000000000512 
170. Reber SO, Langgartner D, Foertsch S, Postolache TT, Brenner LA, Guendel H, 
 
et al. Chronic subordinate colony housing paradigm: a mouse model for 
mechanisms of PTSD vulnerability, targeted prevention, and treatment-2016 
Curt Richter Award Paper. Psychoneuroendocrinology (2016) 74:221–30. 
doi:10.1016/j.psyneuen.2016.08.031 
171. Reber SO, Siebler PH, Donner NC, Morton JT, Smith DG, Kopelman JM, 
et al. Immunization with a heat-killed preparation of the environmental 
bacterium Mycobacterium vaccae promotes stress resilience in mice. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci U S A (2016) 113:E3130–9. doi:10.1073/pnas.1600324113 
172. Huang R, Wang K, Hu J. Effect of probiotics on depression: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Nutrients (2016) 
8:E483. doi:10.3390/nu8080483 
173. Pirbaglou M, Katz J, de Souza RJ, Stearns JC, Motamed M, Ritvo P. Probiotic 
supplementation can positively affect anxiety and depressive symptoms: 
 
a systematic review of randomized controlled trials. Nutr Res (2016) 36: 
889–98. doi:10.1016/j.nutres.2016.06.009 
174. Wallace CJK, Milev R. The effects of probiotics on depressive symptoms in 
humans: a systematic review. Ann Gen Psychiatry (2017) 16. doi:10.1186/
s12991-017-0138-2 
175. McKean J, Naug H, Nikbakht E, Amiet B, Colson N. Probiotics and sub-
clinical psychological symptoms in healthy participants: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis. J Altern Complement Med (2017) 23:249–58. doi:10.1089/
acm.2016.0023 
176. Earley MD, Chesney MA, Frye J, Greene PA, Berman B, Kimbrough E. 
Mindfulness intervention for child abuse survivors: a 2.5-year follow-up. 
J Clin Psychol (2014) 70:933–41. doi:10.1002/jclp.22102 
177. Kearney DJ, McDermott K, Malte C, Martinez M, Simpson TL. Association 
of participation in a mindfulness program with measures of PTSD, depres-
sion and quality of life in a veteran sample. J Clin Psychol (2012) 68:101–16. 
doi:10.1002/jclp.20853 
178. Stephenson KR, Simpson TL, Martinez ME, Kearney DJ. Changes in mind-
fulness and posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms among veterans enrolled 
in mindfulness-based stress reduction. J Clin Psychol (2017) 73:201–17. 
doi:10.1002/jclp.22323 
179. Krygier JR, Heathers JAJ, Shahrestani S, Abbott M, Gross JJ, Kemp AH. 
Mindfulness meditation, well-being, and heart rate variability: a prelim-
inary investigation into the impact of intensive Vipassana meditation. Int 
J Psychophysiol (2013) 89:305–13. doi:10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2013.06.017 
180. Hilton L, Maher AR, Colaiaco B, Apaydin E, Sorbero ME, Booth M, et al. 
Meditation for posttraumatic stress: systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Psychol Trauma (2017) 9:453–60. doi:10.1037/tra0000180 
181. Luo Q. Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli secretes a highly conserved 
mucin-degrading metalloprotease to effectively engage intestinal epithelial 
cells. Infect Immun (2014) 82:509–21. doi:10.1128/IAI.01106-13 
182. Price M, Spinazzola J, Musicaro R, Turner J, Suvak M, Emerson D, et al. 
Effectiveness of an extended yoga treatment for women with chronic 
posttraumatic stress disorder. J Altern Complement Med (2017) 23:300–9. 
doi:10.1089/acm.2015.0266 
183. Descilo T, Vedamurtachar A, Gerbarg PL, Nagaraja D, Gangadhar BN, 
Damodaran B, et al. Effects of a yoga breath intervention alone and in 
combination with an exposure therapy for post-traumatic stress disorder and 
depression in survivors of the 2004 South-East Asia tsunami. Acta Psychiatr 
Scand (2010) 121:289–300. doi:10.1111/j.1600-0447.2009.01466.x 
184. Telles S, Singh N, Joshi M, Balkrishna A. Post traumatic stress symptoms and 
heart rate variability in Bihar flood survivors following yoga: a randomized 
controlled study. BMC Psychiatry (2010) 10:18. doi:10.1186/1471-244X-10-18 
185. Sack M, Hopper JW, Lamprecht F. Low respiratory sinus arrhythmia and 
prolonged psychophysiological arousal in posttraumatic stress disorder: 
heart rate dynamics and individual differences in arousal regulation. Biol 
Psychiatry (2004) 55:284–90. doi:10.1016/S0006-3223(03)00677-2 
186. Norouzinia M, Chaleshi V, Alizadeh AHM, Zali MR. Biomarkers in inflam-
matory bowel diseases: insight into diagnosis, prognosis and treatment. 
Gastroenterol Hepatol Bed Bench (2017) 10:155–67. 
187. Jonkers D, Stockbrügger R. Probiotics and inflammatory bowel disease. 
 
J R Soc Med (2003) 96:167–71. doi:10.1177/014107680309600403 
188. Bonaz B, Sinniger V, Pellissier S. The vagus nerve in the neuro-immune axis: 
implications in the pathology of the gastrointestinal tract. Front Immunol 
(2017) 8:1452. doi:10.3389/fimmu.2017.01452 
189. Yamamoto-Furusho JK, Fonseca-Camarillo G. Genetic markers associated 
with clinical outcomes in patients with inflammatory bowel disease. Inflamm 
Bowel Dis (2015) 21:2683–95. doi:10.1097/MIB.0000000000000500 
 15
Breit et al.
Vagus Nerve in Psychiatry, Nutrition, Inflammation
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
March 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 44
190. Kaplan GG, Ng SC. Understanding and preventing the global increase 
of inflammatory bowel disease. Gastroenterology (2017) 152:313.e–21.e. 
doi:10.1053/j.gastro.2016.10.020 
191. Fonseca-Camarillo G, Yamamoto-Furusho JK. Immunoregulatory path-
ways involved in inflammatory bowel disease. Inflamm Bowel Dis (2015) 
21:2188–93. doi:10.1097/MIB.0000000000000477 
192. Rogler G, Vavricka S. Exposome in IBD: recent insights in environmental 
factors that influence the onset and course of IBD. Inflamm Bowel Dis (2015) 
21:400–8. doi:10.1097/MIB.0000000000000229 
193. Nourian M, Chaleshi V, Pishkar L, Azimzadeh P, Baradaran Ghavami S, 
Balaii H, et al. Evaluation of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α mRNA expres-
sion level and the rs1799964 polymorphism of the TNF-α gene in peripheral 
mononuclear cells of patients with inflammatory bowel diseases. Biomed Rep 
(2017) 6:698–702. doi:10.3892/br.2017.908 
194. de Jonge WJ, van der Zanden EP, The FO, Bijlsma MF, van Westerloo DJ, 
Bennink RJ, et al. Stimulation of the vagus nerve attenuates macrophage 
activation by activating the Jak2-STAT3 signaling pathway. Nat Immunol 
(2005) 6:844–51. doi:10.1038/ni1229 
195. Meregnani J, Clarençon D, Vivier M, Peinnequin A, Mouret C, Sinniger V, 
et al. Anti-inflammatory effect of vagus nerve stimulation in a rat model of 
inflammatory bowel disease. Auton Neurosci (2011) 160:82–9. doi:10.1016/j.
autneu.2010.10.007 
196. Marshall R, Taylor I, Lahr C, Abell TL, Espinoza I, Gupta NK, et al. 
Bioelectrical stimulation for the reduction of inflammation in inflammatory 
bowel disease. Clin Med Insights Gastroenterol (2015) 8:55–9. doi:10.4137/
CGast.S31779 
197. Miller AH, Raison CL. Are anti-inflammatory therapies viable treatments for 
psychiatric disorders? Where the rubber meets the road. JAMA Psychiatry 
(2015) 72:527–8. doi:10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2015.22 
198. Lowry CA, Smith DG, Siebler PH, Schmidt D, Stamper CE, Hassell JE, 
et al. The microbiota, immunoregulation, and mental health: implications 
for public health. Curr Environ Health Rep (2016) 3:270–86. doi:10.1007/
s40572-016-0100-5 
199. Schultz M, Veltkamp C, Dieleman LA, Grenther WB, Wyrick PB, 
 
Tonkonogy SL, et al. Lactobacillus plantarum 299V in the treatment and 
prevention of spontaneous colitis in interleukin-10-deficient mice. Inflamm 
Bowel Dis (2002) 8:71–80. doi:10.1097/00054725-200203000-00001 
200. Madsen KL. Inflammatory bowel disease: lessons from the IL-10 gene- 
deficient mouse. Clin Investig Med (2001) 24:250–7. 
201. Gupta P, Andrew H, Kirschner BS, Guandalini S. Is Lactobacillus GG 
helpful in children with Crohn’s disease? Results of a preliminary, open- 
label study. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr (2000) 31:453–7. doi:10.1097/ 
00005176-200010000-00024 
202. Ganji-Arjenaki M, Rafieian-Kopaei M. Probiotics are a good choice in 
remission of inflammatory bowel diseases: a meta analysis and systematic 
review. J Cell Physiol (2018) 233:2091–103. doi:10.1002/jcp.25911 
203. Gomollón F, Dignass A, Annese V, Tilg H, Van Assche G, Lindsay JO, et al. 
3rd European evidence-based consensus on the diagnosis and management 
of Crohn’s disease 2016: part 1: diagnosis and medical management. J Crohns 
Colitis (2017) 11:3–25. doi:10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjw168 
204. Magro F, Gionchetti P, Eliakim R, Ardizzone S, Armuzzi A, Barreiro-de 
Acosta M, et al. Third European evidence-based consensus on diagnosis 
and management of ulcerative colitis. Part 1: definitions, diagnosis, extra- 
intestinal manifestations, pregnancy, cancer surveillance, surgery, and 
ileo-anal pouch disorders. J Crohns Colitis (2017) 11:649–70. doi:10.1093/
ecco-jcc/jjx008 
205. Currò D, Ianiro G, Pecere S, Bibbò S, Cammarota G. Probiotics, fibre and 
herbal medicinal products for functional and inflammatory bowel disorders. 
Br J Pharmacol (2017) 174:1426–49. doi:10.1111/bph.13632 
206. Mizrahi MC, Reicher-Atir R, Levy S, Haramati S, Wengrower D, Israeli E, 
 
et al. Effects of guided imagery with relaxation training on anxiety and 
 
quality of life among patients with inflammatory bowel disease. Psychol 
Health (2012) 27:1463–79. doi:10.1080/08870446.2012.691169 
207. Berrill JW, Sadlier M, Hood K, Green JT. Mindfulness-based therapy for 
inflammatory bowel disease patients with functional abdominal symptoms 
or high perceived stress levels. J Crohns Colitis (2014) 8:945–55. doi:10.1016/j.
crohns.2014.01.018 
208. Dossett ML, Korzenik JR, Baim M, Denninger JW, Mehta DH. A case report 
of improvement in Crohn’s disease-related symptoms following participation 
in a comprehensive mind-body program. Glob Adv Health Med (2016) 
5:122–5. doi:10.7453/gahmj.2015.118 
209. Gerbarg PL, Jacob VE, Stevens L, Bosworth BP, Chabouni F, DeFilippis EM, 
et al. The effect of breathing, movement, and meditation on psychological 
and physical symptoms and inflammatory biomarkers in inflammatory 
bowel disease: a randomized controlled trial. Inflamm Bowel Dis (2015) 
21:2886–96. doi:10.1097/MIB.0000000000000568 
210. Cotton S, Humenay Roberts Y, Tsevat J, Britto MT, Succop P, McGrady ME, 
et al. Mind-body complementary alternative medicine use and quality of life 
in adolescents with inflammatory bowel disease. Inflamm Bowel Dis (2010) 
16:501–6. doi:10.1002/ibd.21045 
211. Cramer H, Schäfer M, Schöls M, Köcke J, Elsenbruch S, Lauche R, et al. 
Randomised clinical trial: yoga vs written self-care advice for ulcerative 
colitis. Aliment Pharmacol Ther (2017) 45:1379–89. doi:10.1111/apt. 
14062 
212. Kuo B, Bhasin M, Jacquart J, Scult MA, Slipp L, Riklin EIK, et al. Genomic and 
clinical effects associated with a relaxation response mind-body intervention 
in patients with irritable bowel syndrome and inflammatory bowel disease. 
PLoS One (2015) 10:e0123861. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0123861 
213. DeBenedittis G, Cigada M, Bianchi A, Signorini MG, Cerutti S. Autonomic 
changes during hypnosis: a heart rate variability power spectrum analysis as 
a marker of sympatho-vagal balance. Int J Clin Exp Hypn (1994) 42:140–52. 
doi:10.1080/00207149408409347 
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was con-
ducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be 
construed as a potential conflict of interest.
The reviewer JD and handling editor declared their shared affiliation.
Copyright © 2018 Breit, Kupferberg, Rogler and Hasler. This is an open-access 
article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License 
(CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, 
provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner are credited and that the 
original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic 
practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply 
with these terms.
