 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / September 16, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 36 
981
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
On September 13, 2016, this report was posted as an MMWR 
Early Release on the MMWR website (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr).
On July 12, 2016, the Utah Department of Health (UDOH) 
was notified by a clinician caring for an adult (patient A) who 
was evaluated for fever, rash, and conjunctivitis that began on 
July 1. Patient A had not traveled to an area with ongoing Zika 
virus transmission; had not had sexual contact with a person 
who recently traveled; and had not received a blood transfusion, 
organ transplant, or mosquito bites (1). Patient A provided 
care over several days to an elderly male family contact (the 
index patient) who contracted Zika virus abroad. The index 
patient developed septic shock with multiple organ failure 
and died in the hospital on June 25, 2016. The index patient’s 
blood specimen obtained 2 days before his death had a level of 
viremia approximately 100,000 times higher than the average 
level reported in persons infected with Zika virus (2). Zika 
virus infection was diagnosed in patient A by real-time reverse 
transcription–polymerase chain reaction (rRT-PCR) testing 
on a urine specimen collected 7 days after symptom onset. In 
addition, a serum specimen collected 11 days after symptom 
onset, after patient A’s symptoms had resolved, was positive for 
antibodies to Zika virus by Zika immunoglobulin M (IgM) 
capture enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (MAC-ELISA) 
and had neutralizing antibodies detected by plaque-reduction 
neutralization testing (PRNT). Working with Salt Lake and 
Davis County Health Departments, UDOH requested assis-
tance from CDC with an investigation to determine patient 
A’s exposures and determine a probable source of infection.
The investigation consisted of four components: 1) an epi-
demiologic evaluation of family contacts of the index patient, 
2) a serosurvey of health care workers who provided direct 
care to the index patient before his death, 3) a community 
serosurvey around the locations where the index patient had 
resided, and 4) active vector surveillance near the residences 
of the index patient and patient A. For the purpose of this 
investigation, a family contact was defined as a person who 
resided in the same household as the index patient or had 
direct contact with his body fluids (i.e., tears, conjunctival 
discharge, saliva, vomitus, urine, or stool) during the period 
when he was most likely viremic, including a few days before 
his illness onset and until his death.
Nineteen family contacts, including patient A, were identi-
fied and interviewed, and provided blood or urine specimens 
for testing. Thirteen family contacts reported hugging and 
kissing the index patient’s face. Five family contacts reported 
being present while the index patient’s stool, urine, or vomitus 
was being cleaned. Patient A reported hugging and kissing the 
index patient, in a similar fashion to other family contacts, and 
assisted hospital personnel in holding the index patient while 
his stool was being cleaned, but did not have direct contact 
with stool. Other than patient A, all family contacts were 
negative for Zika virus infection by rRT-PCR or MAC-ELISA 
on specimens obtained roughly 2–3 weeks after last exposure.
Health care workers who provided care to the index patient 
and residents living within a 200-meter radius of the two 
homes where the index patient resided before becoming 
hospitalized were interviewed to assess risk factors for Zika 
virus infection and were offered Zika virus testing. As of 
August 22, 86 health care worker contacts have been identified 
and interviewed to assess types of patient interactions and to 
quantify level of exposure to the index patient’s body fluids. 
A total of 238 households were approached, and all available 
and consenting household members were interviewed using 
a standardized questionnaire about risk factors for mosquito-
borne transmission. All health care workers and community 
members who provided blood specimens are being tested 
for Zika virus IgM antibodies using a MAC-ELISA. Urine 
specimens were also collected from any persons who reported 
Zika virus-like symptoms in the 14 days before their interview. 
Testing is incomplete, but as of August 22 it has not revealed 
any persons with Zika virus infections.
Local mosquito abatement districts worked in collaboration 
with vector entomologists from CDC to conduct larval and adult 
mosquito surveillance near the index patient’s and patient A’s 
residences. Door-to-door surveys around neighborhood homes 
were conducted and a variety of mosquito traps (e.g., Biogents 
Sentinel, gravid, light traps baited with carbon dioxide, and ovit-
raps) were deployed. Larval specimens obtained in the field were 
reared to the adult stage for identification. Adult mosquitoes are 
in the process of being identified and tested for Zika virus RNA 
by rRT-PCR, but no Aedes aegypti or Aedes albopictus mosquitoes 
have been identified as part of this investigation.
Preliminary Findings from an Investigation of Zika Virus Infection in a Patient 
with No Known Risk Factors — Utah, 2016
Carolyn Brent1,2; Angela Dunn, MD3; Harry Savage, PhD4; Ary Faraji, PhD5; Mike Rubin, MD6; Ilene Risk, MPA1; Wendy Garcia7; 
Margaret Cortese, MD8; Shannon Novosad, MD9; Elisabeth Raquel Krow-Lucal, PhD4; Jacqueline Crain2,3; Mary Hill, MPH1; Annette Atkinson, MS10; 
 
Dallin Peterson3; Kimberly Christensen10; Melissa Dimond, MPH3; J. Erin Staples, MD4; Allyn Nakashima, MD3
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
982 
MMWR / September 16, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 36
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
It remains unclear how patient A was infected; however patient 
A was known to have had close contact (i.e. kissing and touch-
ing) with the index patient while the index patient’s viral load 
was found to be very high. Although it is not certain that these 
types of close contact were the source of transmission, family 
contacts should be aware that blood and body fluids of severely 
ill patients might be infectious. Given recognition of high levels 
of viremia during illness, it is essential that health care work-
ers continue to apply standard precautions while caring for all 
patients, including those who might have Zika virus disease (3).
Acknowledgments
Jeanmarie Mayer, MD, Sankar Swaminathan, MD, University 
of Utah Hospital; Dagmar Vitek, MD, Tara Brunatti, MSN-PH, 
Andrea Price, RN, Andrew Dibb, MPH, Salt Lake County Health 
Department, Utah; Bryan Burk, Utah Public Health Laboratory; 
Greg White, PhD, Salt Lake City Mosquito Abatement District, 
Utah; Ryan Lusty, Magna Mosquito Abatement District, Utah; Brian 
Hougaard, Eric Gardner, MSc, South Salt Lake Valley Mosquito 
Abatement District, Utah; Gary Hatch, Mosquito Abatement 
District Davis, Utah; Bryan Christensen, PhD; Scott Fridkin, MD, 
Marvin Godsey, Jr., MS, Susan Hills, MBBS, Nina Johnson, Amy 
Lambert, PhD, Kathy Seiber, MS, Ian Williams, MD; the Emergency 
Operation Center’s Zika Virus Response, CDC.
 1Salt Lake County Health Department, Salt Lake City, Utah; 2Public Health 
Associates Program Office, The Office for State, Tribal, Local and Territorial 
Support, CDC; 3Utah Department of Health; 4Division of Vector-Borne 
Diseases, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, 
CDC; 5Salt Lake City Mosquito Abatement District, Salt Lake City, Utah; 
6University of Utah Hospital, Salt Lake City, Utah; 7Davis County Health 
Department, Clearfield, Utah; 8Division Of Viral Diseases, National Center 
For Immunization And Respiratory Diseases, CDC; 9Division of Healthcare 
Quality Promotion, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious 
Diseases, CDC; 10Utah Public Health Laboratory, Taylorsville, Utah.
Corresponding author: Carolyn Brent, cbrent@slco.org, 385-468-3918.
References
1. CDC. Zika virus transmission and risks. Atlanta, GA: US Department 
of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/zika/
transmission/index.html
2. Lanciotti RS, Kosoy OL, Laven JJ, et al. Genetic and serologic properties 
of Zika virus associated with an epidemic, Yap State, Micronesia, 2007. 
Emerg Infect Dis 2008;14:1232–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/
eid1408.080287
3. CDC. 2007 guideline for isolation precautions: preventing transmission 
of infectious agents in healthcare settings. Atlanta, GA: US Department 
of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2007. http://www.cdc.gov/hicpa
c/2007IP/2007isolationPrecautions.html
