 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Best Practices for the Diagnosis and Evaluation
of Infants With Robin Sequence
A Clinical Consensus Report
Corstiaan C. Breugem, MD, PhD; Kelly N. Evans, MD; Christian F. Poets, MD, PhD; Sunjay Suri, MDS, MOrthRCS;
Arnaud Picard, MD, PhD; Charles Filip, MD, PhD; Emma C. Paes, MD, PhD; Felicity V. Mehendale, MS, FRCS(Plast);
Howard M. Saal, MD; Hanneke Basart, MD, PhD; Jyotsna Murthy, MD; Koen F. M. Joosten, MD, PhD;
Lucienne Speleman, MD; Marcus V. M. Collares, MD, PhD; Marie-José H. van den Boogaard, MD, PhD;
Marvick Muradin, MD, DMD, PhD; Maud Els-Marie Andersson, PhD; Mikihiko Kogo, DDS, PhD; Peter G. Farlie, PhD;
Peter Don Griot, MD, PhD; Peter A. Mossey, BDS, PhD; Rona Slator, DPhil, FRCS, FRCS(Plast);
Veronique Abadie, MD, PhD; Paul Hong, MD
IMPORTANCE Robin sequence (RS) is a congenital condition characterized by micrognathia,
glossoptosis, and upper airway obstruction. Currently, no consensus exists regarding the
diagnosis and evaluation of children with RS. An international, multidisciplinary consensus
group was formed to begin to overcome this limitation.
OBJECTIVE To report a consensus-derived set of best practices for the diagnosis and
evaluation of infants with RS as a starting point for defining standards and management.
EVIDENCE REVIEW Based on a literature review and expert opinion, a clinical consensus
report was generated.
FINDINGS Because RS can occur as an isolated condition or as part of a syndrome or
multiple-anomaly disorder, the diagnostic process for each newborn may differ. Micrognathia
is hypothesized as the initiating event, but the diagnosis of micrognathia is subjective.
Glossoptosis and upper airway compromise complete the primary characteristics of RS. It can
be difficult to judge the severity of tongue base airway obstruction, and the possibility of
multilevel obstruction exists. The initial assessment of the clinical features and severity of
respiratory distress is important and has practical implications. Signs of upper airway
obstruction can be intermittent and are more likely to be present when the infant is asleep.
Therefore, sleep studies are recommended. Feeding problems are common and may be
exacerbated by the presence of a cleft palate. The clinical features and their severity can vary
widely and ultimately dictate the required investigations and treatments.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE Agreed-on recommendations for the initial evaluation of RS
and clinical descriptors are provided in this consensus report. Researchers and clinicians will
ideally use uniform definitions and comparable assessments. Prospective studies and the
standard application of validated assessments are needed to build an evidence base guiding
standards of care for infants and children with RS.
JAMA Pediatr. doi:10.1001/jamapediatrics.2016.0796
Published online July 18, 2016.
Supplemental content at
jamapediatrics.com
Author Affiliations: Author
affiliations are listed at the end of this
article.
Corresponding Author: Kelly N.
Evans, MD, Seattle Children’
s
Craniofacial Center, Department of
Pediatrics, University of Washington,
4800 Sandpoint Way NE, OB 9.520,
Seattle, WA 98105
(knevans@uw.edu).
Clinical Review & Education
Special Communication
(Reprinted)
E1
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://archpedi.jamanetwork.com/ by a University of California - San Diego User  on 07/19/2016
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
C
urrently, no consensus exists regarding the diagnosis or
evaluation of a newborn with Robin sequence (RS), a con-
genitalconditionoccurringinapproximately1in8500live
births.1 The literature addressing RS has focused on the experience
of single centers based on study-specific definitions. Multidisci-
plinary collaboration and prospective studies using similar defini-
tions are required to advance care in RS. To further this goal, an in-
ternational consensus meeting was convened in Utrecht, the
Netherlands,fromOctober31toNovember1,2014,atwhich145par-
ticipants from 24 countries attended. An expert panel was con-
venedtodevelopaRSclinicalconsensusreport(CCR)basedonsyn-
thesisofavailableliteratureandexpertopinion.Theobjectiveofthis
article is to report the resulting consensus-derived set of best prac-
tices for the diagnosis and evaluation of children with RS as a start-
ing point for defining standards and management.
Methods
The CCR was developed after the completion of 7 predetermined
steps.Theseincluded(1)evaluationofthesuitabilityofRSforaCCR,
(2) panel selection and recruitment, (3) vetting of potential con-
flicts of interest, (4) a panel meeting to determine the CCR scope
and focus, (5) a systematic literature review and generation of the
CCR, (6) iterative revision of the CCR based on survey results, and
(7) CCR review and agreement.
Determination of RS as the Topic of a Consensus Report,
Panel Recruitment, and Vetting
RobinsequencewasconsideredasapossiblesubjectofaCCRbased
on discussions at a craniofacial meeting in 2013 (12th International
CongressonCleftLip/PalateandRelatedCraniofacialAnomalies;May
10,2013;Orlando;Florida).Theconsensusleadership(C.C.B.,K.N.E.,
andP.H.)developedapanelofinternationalconsensusmeetingfac-
ulty, with a strategic aim to cultivate participation from the perti-
nent specialty groups. The panel membership was surveyed to
generate an agenda and specific objectives. Endorsements for the
meeting were obtained from numerous societies and associations
(http://www.robinsequence.nl/home.html). The panel, selected
based on clinical and research expertise focusing on RS, contained
representativesfrompediatrics(K.N.E.andV.A.),sleepmedicine(K
.F.M.J.), neonatology (C.F.P.), genetics (H.M.S., M.H.V., and M.E
.A.), plastic surgery (C.C.B., C.F., J.M., P.D.G., R.S., F.V.M., E.P., A.P.,
H.B.,andM.V.C.),otolaryngology(P.H.andL.S.),maxillofacialsurgery
(M.M. and M.K.), developmental biology (P.G.F.), dentistry, and
orthodontics(S.S.andP.A.M.).Allmemberswerevettedbythepanel
chair (C.C.B.), and no conflicts of interest were identified.
Literature Review and Determination of the Scope
of the Consensus Report
Theexpertpaneldefinedthescopeandcurrentcontroversiesindi-
agnosing and evaluating children with RS during the international
consensusmeeting.Aimingtobuildareportthatwouldidentifygaps
in evidence and prioritize clinical focus areas in RS care, the panel
assembledtopic-specificsubgroups.Thestepwisedevelopmentof
each report included a systematic literature review to identify up-
to-dateevidencefocusedonthedesignatedtopic.Thesetopicareas
weredeliberatedbythemultidisciplinarysubgroupsattheinterna-
tional consensus meeting and subsequently used as the frame-
work for developing the CCR.
Generation of Consensus Document
After the international consensus meeting, the panel divided into
6 groups, each with a designated group leader. The topics, agreed
on by all conference attendees, included (1) micrognathia (M.M.),
(2) glossoptosis (P.H.), (3) airway obstruction (K.F.M.J.), (4) feed-
ingproblems(V.A.),(5)cleftpalate(R.S.),and(6)etiology(H.M.S.).
The CCR was developed using software (http://www.projectplace
.com)thatallowedeachgrouptocollaborateandworkconcurrently.
Therespectivegroupsdevisedinitialdrafts.Theentiremembership
was then invited to provide comments and suggestions. Three
members(C.C.B.,K.N.E.,andP.H.)integratedalldocumentsintoone
CCR.Allmembersweregivenanotheropportunitytoreviewandedit
the manuscript and make suggestions.
Clinical Consensus Report
Definition of RS
Consensuswasreachedthatmicrognathiaistheprimarycharacter-
isticofRS.Othermandatorydiagnosticcharacteristicsincludeglos-
soptosis and airway obstruction. Cleft palate is considered a com-
mon and additional feature. It was agreed on that management for
all newborns with RS begins with assessing and treating airway ob-
struction (Table 1).
Micrognathia
Definition of Micrognathia
Severalattemptshavebeenmadetodefinemicrognathia.Acepha-
lometry protocol by Pruzansky and Richmond2 investigates man-
dibular size and craniofacial growth in patients with RS. However,
the limited 2-dimensional nature of these images and the difficulty
in accurately positioning and immobilizing the awake infant that is
required to obtain precise cephalograms reduce the usefulness of
this method. Computed tomography (CT) can generate 3-dimen-
sional reconstructed images; however, the additional risks of radia-
tion exposure during infancy and the lack of normative CT data are
shortcomings. Hence, for most clinicians, the diagnosis of micro-
gnathia is largely subjective. The literature is ambiguous in regard
to catch-up mandibular growth in infancy.3-7 Studies8,9 show that
Key Points
Question What are the agreed-on clinical features of and
evaluations for infants and children with Robin sequence?
Findings In this consensus report and review, an international,
multidisciplinary panel of clinical experts agreed that the diagnosis
of Robin sequence can be made in children with micrognathia,
glossoptosis, and upper airway obstruction. Gaps in evidence in
this uncommon condition have limited advances in care and
outcomes assessments in children with Robin sequence.
Meaning Using uniform definitions and comparable assessments
of the functional and phenotypic features has a global application
and the potential to improve care and outcomes in this fragile
population with Robin sequence.
Clinical Review & Education Special Communication
Consensus Recommendation for Management of Infants With Robin Sequence
E2
JAMA Pediatrics
Published online July 18, 2016
(Reprinted)
jamapediatrics.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://archpedi.jamanetwork.com/ by a University of California - San Diego User  on 07/19/2016
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
the micrognathic mandible in children with RS is small and retrog-
nathic throughout childhood and adolescence, with characteristic
morphological features, including deficiencies in the mandibular
bodyandramallengths,moreopengonialangle,andposteriorlyin-
clined chin. Many individuals with RS also have upper jaw hypopla-
sia.MandibularmorphologyandpositioninRSvarybasedonthespe-
cific diagnosis, the existence of mandibular hypodontia, and the
presence of associated syndromes.8,10
Assessment of Micrognathia
The objective evaluation of micrognathia varies depending on the
severity of clinical findings and available investigative and treat-
ment options. Mandibular size can be assessed using multiple mo-
dalities, including low-dose multisection CT, cone beam CT, lateral
cephalograms, plaster casts, 3-dimensional photography, and di-
rect measurements with rulers and calipers. Access to these mo-
dalities varies, and no criterion standard method exists to diag-
nose, characterize, and monitor micrognathia. The optimal tool to
measure micrognathia during childhood should be widely avail-
able,reproducible,andcost-effective.TheJawIndexisasimple,in-
person measure that may fulfill some of these requirements
(Figure).11TheadvantagesoftheJawIndexareitssimplicity,usabil-
ity, and potential application to early screening and characteriza-
tionofmicrognathiainnewborns.However,theJawIndexmaynot
reflect functional airway compromise, and validation of this tool in
multiple populations is needed before adoption.12,13
Glossoptosis
Definition of Glossoptosis
Glossoptosis is a dynamic clinical entity defined as displacement of
the tongue base into the oropharynx and hypopharynx. The de-
greeofglossoptosisandresultantupperairwayobstructioncanvary.
Inseverecases,thechildwillhaveinspiratorystertororstridorwith
increasedrespiratoryeffort,possiblyaccompaniedbyapneaandcya-
noticepisodes.Childrenwithmildglossoptosismaymaintainanad-
equateairwaywhenawake,suckingonapacifier,orcryingbuthave
a heightened risk for sleep-disordered breathing (SDB).14 It is un-
clear whether the size of the tongue is consistent across the phe-
notypic spectrum of RS, and there is no definitive correlation be-
tweenthedegreeofmicrognathiaandseverityofglossoptosis.15The
findings of an electromyography study16 also suggest the presence
of abnormal neuromuscular tone of the tongue in RS.
Table 1. Assessment of Diagnostic Features in Infants With Robin Sequencea
Variable
Micrognathia
Glossoptosis
Upper Airway Obstruction
Initial assessment
Physical examination
Physical examination
Physical examination
Descriptors
Mandibular hypoplasia, overjet
or MMD, and Jaw Index
Tongue tip position, base of
tongue position
Stertor or stridor, increased work
of breathing (supine)
Additional
assessments
2-Dimensional and
3-dimensional photographs
Intraoral photographs,
endoscopy
Gas exchange, sleep study
Descriptors
Facial angles
Intraoral crowding, level of
airway narrowing
Desaturations and carbon dioxide
retention, elevated apnea indexes
(obstructive, mixed, and central),
and growth velocity
Abbreviation:
MMD, maxillomandibular
discrepancy.
a The Jaw Index is shown in the
Figure. Images of glossoptosis are
shown in eFigure 1 in the
Supplement, and images of upper
airway obstruction are shown in
eFigure 2 in the Supplement.
Figure. The Jaw Index
Lateral view of jaw index
B
Anterior view of jaw index
A
t
t
sn
pg
U
L
A, Using a measurement tape, the
distance from tragus (t) to tragus is
measured through subnasal (sn) and
through pogonion (pg), producing
upper arch distance (U) and lower
arch distance (L) measurements,
respectively. B, With a micrometer
depth gauge (or tongue depressor),
the anteroposterior distance
between the alveolar processes of
the upper and lower jaw (overbite) is
measured. The Jaw Index is
calculated using the following
formula: Overbite × (Upper
Arch / Lower Arch). Published with
permission from Ingrid Jansen
(University Medical Center Utrecht,
Utrecht, the Netherlands).
Consensus Recommendation for Management of Infants With Robin Sequence
Special Communication Clinical Review & Education
jamapediatrics.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Pediatrics
Published online July 18, 2016
E3
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://archpedi.jamanetwork.com/ by a University of California - San Diego User  on 07/19/2016
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Assessment of Glossoptosis
Intraoral examination of the infant with glossoptosis may reveal a
minimallyvisible,posteriorlypositionedtongue,occasionallypulled
up into a palatal cleft (eFigure 1 in the Supplement). While no crite-
rion standard test exists to diagnose glossoptosis, at minimum, en-
doscopy allows for visualization of the tongue position in the oral
cavity and oropharynx. Although some physicians prefer a tran-
soral approach with a flexible endoscope, nasopharyngolaryngos-
copy may be required to obtain a holistic view of the oropharyn-
geal region. Endoscopy can identify additional levels of airway
narrowing other than at the tongue base, which is essential for de-
termining optimal management.17 There are reports of using endo-
scopic images to further localize and categorize the oropharyngeal
obstruction and to grade the severity of airway compromise.18,19
However,thistechniqueisdifficulttoreproduceinthecrying,awake
infant, and small endoscopes produce less optimal image resolu-
tion. Also, respiratory problems primarily occur when a child with
RS is relaxed or sleeping, especially when positioned supine. Dur-
ing nasopharyngolaryngoscopy, the awake child is often agitated,
resultinginmusculartension,andtheendoscopiccharacteristicsmay
not mimic the crucial moments when obstruction occurs. Radio-
graphicstudiesareconsideredtobeoflimitedvalueandarenotrou-
tinelyusedtodiagnoseglossoptosis.Newerdynamicimagingtech-
niques,suchascinemagneticresonanceimagingandmultidetector
CT, can better delineate and quantify the degree of obstruction at
varioussitesintheupperairwaybutarenotuniversallyavailableand
require the patient to be cooperative or intubated.20,21
Respiratory Problems Due to Upper Airway Obstruction
Definition of Respiratory Problems
GlossoptosisistheprimarycauseofrespiratoryproblemsinRS(eFig-
ure 2 in the Supplement), although multiple factors will influence a
child’
srespiratorystatus.Associatedwithconsiderablemorbiditiesaf-
fectinghealth,growth,anddevelopment,therecognitionandtreat-
ment of respiratory problems are essential.22-26 The spectrum of re-
spiratorycompromiseinRSisbroad.Sleep-disorderedbreathingisa
complexphenomenonofupperairwaydysfunctionduringsleepand
is characterized by snoring or increased respiratory effort due to up-
per airway resistance and pharyngeal collapsibility. Obstructive SDB
includesaspectrumofclinicalentities,includingprimarysnoring,up-
perairwayresistancesyndrome,obstructivehypoventilation,andob-
structive sleep apnea (OSA) syndrome.
Assessment of Respiratory Problems
The respiratory assessment in RS begins immediately after birth, al-
thoughsymptomsofrespiratorycompromisemaydevelopovertime.
Theintermittentnatureofupperairwayobstructionmayleadtoade-
lay in diagnosis and referral to a specialized team. While infants with
life-threatening respiratory distress require direct respiratory sup-
port, most infants with RS can be observed clinically. Clinical signs of
respiratory compromise in infants with RS include stertor or stridor,
labored breathing, diaphoresis, apnea, and restlessness and can be
assessed during sleep, in wakefulness, and with feeding.27,28 Posi-
tioning the child in a prone or lateral decubitus position will help to
determinewhetherairwayobstructioncanbelessened.Ajawthrust
maneuver pulls the tongue forward and is a tool that helps to illus-
trate airway obstruction localized to the tongue base. Additional air-
way-affected manifestations include feeding difficulties, aspiration,
and poor weight gain. Growth in children with RS may be reduced in
earlychildhoodrelativetostandardgrowthcurvesandcounterparts
with isolated cleft palate.29-32 Poor growth may be a sign of chronic
airwayobstructionandincreasedenergyexpendituresduetogreater
workofbreathingandfeedingchallenges.33,34Thepresentation,tim-
ing, and severity of airway obstruction vary in RS, and reassessment
of respiratory function and growth is crucial.
Objective tools can help to identify and quantify airway ob-
struction in RS. Carbon dioxide retention and hypoxemia are sug-
gestive of more severe respiratory compromise. Although criteria
to assess the degree of respiratory involvement in RS have been
proposed,35,36nowidelyacceptedstandardsexist.Polysomnogra-
phy (PSG) or polygraphy can quantify airway obstruction and iden-
tifycomorbidities,suchascentralapnea.37Centerswithefficientac-
cess to quality sleep studies likely detect a higher burden of SDB. A
3-tiered approach to decision making regarding PSG in infants with
RS may be used. First, if no respiratory symptoms in the supine po-
sition during sleep and wakefulness are observed by an experi-
enced clinician over an adequate duration of time, PSG may not be
mandatory. Second, if any signs of respiratory distress are present
in a patient with RS, referral to a specialized center with experience
inairwayassessments,includingPSG,willoptimizetimelycare.Third,
if severe obstructive breathing necessitating immediate respira-
torysupportispresent,urgenttreatmentshouldbestarted,andPSG
maynotbefeasible.Whilesleepstudiesoffervaluablediagnosticuse-
fulness and some centers advocate for polygraphy or PSG in all in-
fants with RS, limited access prevents global acceptance.
PSG, Polygraphy, and Oximetry
Polygraphy or PSG performed for at least 4 to 6 hours with at least
3 hours of sleep allows adequate sleep assessment in infants with
RS. Overnight PSG requires specialized equipment and personnel
in a sleep laboratory. Polygraphy includes a measurement of body
position, actigraphy, nasal flow, thoracic and abdominal belts, oxy-
gen saturation, transcutaneous carbon dioxide, and video or nurs-
ing staff observation. Scoring respiratory events during sleep is
guided by the American Academy of Sleep Medicine.38 The num-
bers of mixed, obstructive, and central apneas and hypopneas per
houroftotalsleeptimearerecordedandcanbeexpressedasanAp-
nea-Hypopnea Index or Mixed Obstructive Apnea Index.39 Diag-
nostic thresholds for OSA in infants and young children remain de-
bated,andvariouscutoffvalueshavebeenreportedinRS(Table2).
Multiple authors used only the number and depth of desaturations
todescribetheseverityofrespiratorydistress,andinconsistentcri-
teriawereappliedforthoseusingPSG.Oximetrymaybespecificfor
detecting OSA, but it is not sensitive for detecting airway obstruc-
tion and OSA.51 Future algorithms stratifying respiratory severity in
RS will likely take into account the physical examination, gas ex-
change abnormalities, PSG results, feeding problems, and growth.
Cleft Palate
Definition of Cleft Palate
Cleft palate in individuals with RS is traditionally described as being
U-shaped.Clinically,thisfindingisnotalwaysthecase.Currentpub-
licationsarecontradictoryaboutwhetherthecleftinRSismoreex-
tensive than the non-RS cleft palate, and existing studies have not
sufficiently explored links between cleft shape and clinical
severity.32,52-54
Clinical Review & Education Special Communication
Consensus Recommendation for Management of Infants With Robin Sequence
E4
JAMA Pediatrics
Published online July 18, 2016
(Reprinted)
jamapediatrics.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://archpedi.jamanetwork.com/ by a University of California - San Diego User  on 07/19/2016
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Assessment of Cleft Palate
Theextentofcleftpalatecanbedocumentedinseveralways.Char-
acterizationofthecleftwidth,length,extent,andshapecanbeper-
formedusingvariouscleftclassificationschemes(Table3).Whether
different aspects of the cleft influence either the degree of airway
obstruction in the neonatal period or long-term speech develop-
ment is unknown. Some evidence suggests that the cleft palate ex-
tent affects speech outcomes.56,58
Feeding Problems
Definition of Feeding Problems
A spectrum of feeding problems in RS exists, which can be catego-
rizedintoprolongedfeedingtimes,reducedoralintake,unsafeoral
feeding, and precipitation of respiratory compromise.59 We pro-
pose that feeding disorders in infants with RS can be defined as the
inability to take in adequate oral feeds efficiently to support nor-
mal growth (eg, >30 minutes with 1 bottle feed) or oral feeding that
potentiates airway or respiratory compromise (eg, worsening air-
way obstruction and aspiration).
Successful feeding depends on a chain of complex, rhythmi-
cally coordinated, successive movements: suction is followed by
swallowing,intermittedbybreathing.Factorscontributingtofeed-
ingproblemsinRSincludetheanatomictongueposition,upperair-
wayobstruction,oropharyngealdysfunction,andweaksuckingme-
chanics,compoundedbynasalregurgitationanddifficultygenerating
adequate negative intraoral pressure with palatal clefting.60 In ad-
dition,centralorneuromotordisabilitiesmayaffectsuckingandswal-
lowingcoordination,61andfeedingimpairmentisanticipatedinchil-
dren with RS and specific syndromes and genetic conditions.60
Aspiration can result from discoordinated suck-swallow-breath or
primaryswallowingdysfunction.12,62Tachypneaandincreasedwork
ofbreathingnegativelyaffectfeedingmechanicsandpotentiategas-
troesophagealreflux.Reflux-inducedsecretionproductionandair-
way inflammation disrupt the feeding-respiratory balance. Feed-
ing problems may worsen during the first weeks of life and tend to
improve from 4 months through the first year of life.
Assessment of Feeding Problems
Given the association with failure to thrive, swallowing dysfunction,
and developmental delays, the recognition and treatment of feed-
ing problems in RS are priorities. A clinical feeding assessment per-
formedbyexperiencedhealthcareprofessionalsinthefirstdaysand
weeksoflifewillincludeevaluationsof(1)qualityofbottlefeedingand
feedingtime,(2)effectoffeedingonrespiratorystatus,and(3)qual-
ity of weight gain and growth (expressed as the standard deviation
forweightorweightgain).Complementaryfeedinginvestigationscan
helpdiagnoseswallowingproblemsandguidetherapeuticinterven-
tions.Fiber-opticendoscopicevaluation,videofluoroscopy,swallow-
ing electromyography, and esophageal manometry have been de-
scribed; however, there is no consensus regarding the validity and
interpretation of these investigations in infants with RS.61-64 Infant
feeding specialists are valuable in delineating unique feeding prob-
lems.Itisessentialtodefinefeedingproblemstogetherwithparents
and feeding experts as early as possible.
Etiological Diagnosis
Thorough assessment by a pediatrician and a clinical geneticist is
advised for all children with suspected RS, with reassessment
because a syndrome may become apparent at a later age. When
patients have a co-occurring syndrome, such as Stickler syn-
drome, RS with Stickler syndrome is an appropriate diagnostic
description. Because RS occurs as an isolated condition or as part
of a syndrome or multiple-anomaly disorder, the diagnostic pro-
cess in each context differs. Micrognathia is the hypothesized ini-
tiating event in RS.65 However, micrognathia may be caused by
multiple different etiologies. The OMIM catalog66 lists 483
genetic disorders in which micrognathia is a clinical component,
Table 2. Overview of Criteria for Respiratory Compromise and
Obstructive Sleep Apnea in Infants With Robin Sequence
Source
Oximetry Criteria
van den Elzen et al,30
2001
Repeated SaO2 <90%
Wagener et al,40 2003
SaO2 <90% saturation for >5% of 24 h or SaO2 <80%
Breugem et al,41 2008
SaO2 <93% for >5% total sleep time
Pradel et al,42 2009
Repeated cyanotic episodes and respiratory adaption
disorder
Baciliero et al,43 2011
Single SaO2 value <80% during sleeping, feeding, or
wakefulness
Rogers et al,44 2011
SaO2 consistently <90%
Abel et al,45 2012
Mild is 3 clusters of desaturation with at least 3 dips
<90%, moderate is 3 dips <85%, and severe is 3 dips
<80%
Source
Polysomnography Measure and Criteria
Monasterio et al,46 2002
Apnea: 5 episodes of apnea >10 s/h
Bravo et al,23 2005
ORDI: >5 events per hour
Buchenau et al,39 2007
MOAI: significant is >3 events per hour
Muntz et al,47 2008
RDI: 1 to 5 events per hour is mild, >5 to 15 is
moderate, and >15 is severe
MacLean et al,48 2008
RDI: 1 to 5 events per hour is mild, >5 to <10 is
moderate, ≥10 is severe
Anderson et al,22 2011
OAHI: 1 to <5 events per hour is mild, 5 to 10 is
moderate, ≥10 is severe
Poets and Bacher,49
2011
MOAI: ≥3 events per hour
van Lieshout et al,50
2014
OAHI: 1 to 5 events per hour is mild, >5 to 24 is
moderate, and >24 is severe
Abbreviations: MOAI, Mixed Obstructive Apnea Index; OAHI, Obstructive
Apnea-Hypopnea Index; ORDI, Obstructive Respiratory Distress Index; RDI,
Respiratory Distress Index; SaO2, arterial oxygen saturation.
Table 3. Cleft Palate Classifications
Classification by Jensen et al55
0 Submucous cleft palate
1 Soft palate only
2 Soft palate and less than one-third hard palate
3 Soft palate and greater than one-third but less than two-thirds hard
palate
4 Complete: soft and hard to incisive foramen
LAHSHAL code
Length: from Randall et al56
Measurements of the extent of the cleft at the time of surgery
Minimum to be measured: width at hard or soft palate junction with
calipers at the time of surgery, both soft-tissue width and bony width
For investigation: methods by Godbout et al54 and Filho et al57
Shape: U-shaped or V-shaped
Photograph at the time of palate repair (with mirror)
Impression and model
Abbreviation: LAHSHAL indicates lip (right), alveolus (right), hard palate, soft
palate, hard palate, alveolus (left), lip (lip).
Consensus Recommendation for Management of Infants With Robin Sequence
Special Communication Clinical Review & Education
jamapediatrics.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Pediatrics
Published online July 18, 2016
E5
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://archpedi.jamanetwork.com/ by a University of California - San Diego User  on 07/19/2016
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
and POSSUMweb lists 1080 genetic and teratogenic disorders
with micrognathia.67 The presence of additional anomalies sug-
gests the possibility of an associated syndrome. In one series of
117 individuals with RS, 48% had isolated RS, 35% had identifiable
syndromes, and 17% had RS presumed to be caused by a unique
or unidentified syndrome.68 In a 2012 analysis of genetic diagno-
ses in 125 patients with RS, 58% had associated syndromes, most
commonly Stickler and Marshall syndromes.67 Provision of a
genetic diagnosis to a child and family has substantial effect on
long-term management, including surveillance recommenda-
tions, perioperative precautions, and additional health care
needs. Table 4 summarizes the comprehensive examination and
assessments of etiology for infants with RS. In addition, an echo-
cardiogram is recommended if 22q11.2 deletion is suspected or if
there is a murmur, with brain magnetic resonance imaging if there
is abnormal muscle tone, fetal akinesia, arthrogryposis, or micro-
cephaly, as well as skeletal radiographs for any child with RS who
is suspected to have a skeletal dysplasia. Radiographs of the
scapula, ribs, and long bones may help identify anomalies associ-
ated with genetic lesions around the SOX9 gene.69,70 Ultimately,
it may not be possible to advance the diagnosis beyond the con-
cept of RS plus, in which the affected individual has RS with 1 or
more additional anomalies that do not constitute a recognizable
syndrome.
Summary and Future Directions
This CCR provides the basis and framework for the minimum as-
sessment that is recommended for children with RS based on the
opinionsofacarefullychosenexpertpanel.Futureconsensusmeet-
ingswillfocusonmeasuringoutcomesandidentifyingplatformsfor
collaboration.Infrastructuredevelopmentforstandardizeddatacol-
lectionandsharingisneededtobuildtheevidencebasethatwillin-
form future clinical practice guidelines.
Micrognathia
Currently,thediagnosisofmicrognathiaislargelysubjective,andfu-
ture studies should be conducted to define objective parameters.
Reference guides for “normal”mandibular dimensions within vari-
ous age, sex, and racial/ethnic groups have the potential for clinical
application,maybeusefulinmonitoringfacialgrowth,andwillhelp
answer clinically important questions regarding the severity of the
smallmandibleandmandibularcatch-upgrowthinchildrenwithRS.
Glossoptosis
Acarefulphysicalexaminationwithendoscopyisnecessarytomake
the definitive diagnosis of glossoptosis. Currently, there are no ob-
jective parameters to describe glossoptosis severity. Future re-
searchshouldaddress4questions.First,isthetonguesize,anatomy,
and attachment to the mandible normal in children with RS? Sec-
ond, is the tongue malposition related to poor neuromuscular con-
trol? Third, what is the role of newer dynamic imaging modalities in
theworkupofglossoptosis?Fourth,arethereothercontributingfea-
tures, such as increased intrathoracic negative pressure?
Respiratory Problems
No widely accepted criteria exist to classify respiratory compro-
mise in infants with RS. There is a scarcity of data concerning long-
term follow-up after airway treatment. Treatment efficacy is mea-
surablewhenthesameevaluationmethodsareusedbeforeandafter
aninterventioninsimilarpopulations.Inprinciple,treatmentshould
be guided by clinical symptoms and available tests. Centers treat-
ing patients with RS will ideally have access to comprehensive re-
spiratory evaluations, including overnight laboratory PSG. Simple,
accessibletoolsthatreliablydiagnoserespiratoryproblemsinRSin
theclinicalandhomesettingswillbeuseful.Homerespiratorypolyg-
raphy in children may be a promising diagnostic tool.71 Telemoni-
toring and wearable home monitoring recorders warrant further
study. Ideally, the tools and decision-making thresholds will be in-
tegrated into a respiratory treatment algorithm.
Cleft Palate
Clearphenotypicdescriptionofthecleftpalateshouldbecollected
for all infants with RS. Collection of photographs or dental models
can allow for independent blind assessment of the cleft and ad-
dress reliability limitations. Cleft phenotypic information will help
determinewhich,ifany,methodsofdescribingtheextentofthecleft
are most predictive of outcome.
Feeding Problems
Integration of parents’perception of feeding challenges and suc-
cess will be useful in evaluating feeding in RS. Feeding assessments
will ideally measure phenotype, oropharyngeal function, and stan-
dardfeedingoutcomes.Evaluationstoconsiderwitharesearchpro-
gram include systematic assessment of feeding behaviors in
infancy,72cervicalauscultationduringfeeding,esophagealmanom-
etry, and swallowing electromyography.
Table 4. Comprehensive Assessment of the Etiology of Robin Sequence
Complete medical
history and
maternal health
history
Focus attention on any teratogenic exposures,
including medications, tobacco, and alcohol
3-Generation family
history (pedigree)
Establish any history of similarly affected individuals,
infant death, eye or vision problems, intellectual
disabilities and developmental delays, and mode of
inheritance if possible
Physical
examination of the
child
Include growth parameters, comprehensive
dysmorphology assessment, and skeletal evaluation
looking for skeletal dysplasias (eTable in the
Supplement)
Physical assessment
of both parents
performed by a
clinical geneticist
May identify microform cleft features, bifid uvula,
micrognathia, or other features of a specific syndrome
with variable phenotypic expression
Ophthalmologic
examination
Check for the ocular features of Stickler syndrome
during the neonatal period and 6 to 12 mo later
in all infants with Robin sequence
Cytogenetic and/or
molecular genetic
investigations
Are recommended for children with Robin sequence
and other congenital anomalies. Chromosomal
disorders are common in children with multiple
congenital anomalies, for whom chromosomal analysis
or single-nucleotide polymorphism microarray is
indicated. Although 22q11.2 deletion syndrome is an
uncommon
cause of Robin sequence, testing for 22q11.2
microdeletion can be considered, particularly in the
presence of cardiac or renal anomalies, dysphagia, or
hypocalcemia. Genetic testing for Stickler syndrome
targeting the collagen genes (COL2A1, COL11A1,
COL11A2, COL9A1, COL9A2, COL9A3) can be
performed.
Longitudinal
follow-up by a
clinical geneticist
Identify syndromic diagnoses that may become
apparent later in childhood
Clinical Review & Education Special Communication
Consensus Recommendation for Management of Infants With Robin Sequence
E6
JAMA Pediatrics
Published online July 18, 2016
(Reprinted)
jamapediatrics.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://archpedi.jamanetwork.com/ by a University of California - San Diego User  on 07/19/2016
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Etiological Diagnosis
Therearethousandsofsingle-genedisorders,manyofwhichareex-
ceedingly rare or possibly unique. While making a genetic diagno-
sisischallengingformanyinfantswithRS,next-generationsequenc-
ing technologies allow for identification of rare disorders and may
be informative in RS.73 Clinical whole-exome sequencing has led to
the diagnoses in up to one-third of individuals who had not re-
ceived a diagnosis with other methods and will continue to be
applied in research settings.74,75
Conclusions
The diagnosis of RS can be made in children when there is micro-
gnathia, glossoptosis, and upper airway obstruction. Using uni-
formdefinitionsandcomparableassessmentsofthefunctionaland
phenotypic features is a necessary first step in creating an evi-
dencebase.Prospectivestudiesandthestandardapplicationofvali-
dated assessments will be necessary to guide standards and best
practices for infants and children with RS. Research defining objec-
tiveparametersonhowwedescribeandcomparethesecriteriawill
fill a large gap. Well-designed, prospective studies should also con-
sider (1) engagement of parent stakeholders and (2) development
of data standards for phenotypic, functional, and clinical descrip-
tions. Comprehensive phenotypic and genetic investigations com-
bined with a systematic severity classification have the potential to
both guide care and facilitate outcome studies needed to advance
careinRS.Collaborationwillbeessentialtotheprogressinthisrare
yet important condition with lifelong effects on health and quality
of life.
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Accepted for Publication: March 17, 2016.
Published Online: July 18, 2016.
doi:10.1001/jamapediatrics.2016.0796.
Author Affiliations: Department of Pediatric
Plastic Surgery, Wilhelmina Children’
s Hospital,
University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, the
Netherlands (Breugem, Paes); Seattle Children’
s
Craniofacial Center, Department of Pediatrics,
University of Washington, Seattle (Evans);
Department of Neonatology, University Hospital,
Tübingen, Germany (Poets); Faculty of Dentistry,
University of Toronto and The Hospital for Sick
Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada (Suri); Division
of Plastic and Maxillofacial Surgery, Necker
Children’
s Hospital, Paris, France (Picard);
Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery,
Oslo University Hospital, Rikshospitalet, Oslo,
Norway (Filip); Cleft Lip and Palate Service,
University of Edinburgh, Royal Hospital for Sick
Children, Edinburgh, Scotland (Mehendale);
Division of Human Genetics, Department of
Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of
Medicine, Cincinnati Children’
s Hospital Medical
Center, Cincinnati, Ohio (Saal); Division of Plastic
Surgery, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands (Basart); Cleft and Craniofacial Center,
Department of Plastic Surgery, Sri Ramachandra
University, Chennai, India (Murthy); Department of
Pediatric Intensive Care, Erasmus Medical Center,
Sophia Children’
s Hospital, Rotterdam, the
Netherlands (Joosten); Division of Ear, Nose and
Throat Surgery, Wilhelmina Children’
s Hospital,
University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, the
Netherlands (Speleman); Department of Plastic and
Craniomaxillofacial Surgery, Hospital de Clínicas de
Porto Alegre, Rio Grande do Sul Federal University,
Porto Alegre, Brazil (Collares); Department of
Clinical Genetics, Wilhelmina Children’
s Hospital,
University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, the
Netherlands (van den Boogaard); Department of
Maxillofacial Surgery, Wilhelmina Children’
s
Hospital, University Medical Centre Utrecht,
Utrecht, the Netherlands (Muradin); Department of
Orthodontics, Dental Faculty, University of Oslo,
Oslo, Norway (Andersson); Oslo Cleft Team,
Department of Plastic Surgery, Oslo University
Hospital, Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway (Andersson);
Division of Maxillofacial Surgery, Osaka University
Cleft Palate Center, Osaka, Japan (Kogo); Murdoch
Childrens Research Institute, Department of
Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Royal
Children’
s Hospital, Parkville, Australia (Farlie);
Department of Plastic, Reconstructive and Hand
Surgery, Vrije Universiteit University Medical
Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands (Don Griot);
Dundee University Dental School, Dundee,
Scotland (Mossey); West Midlands Cleft Service,
Birmingham Children’
s Hospital, Birmingham,
England (Slator); Department of General Pediatrics,
National Referral Center for Pierre Robin Sequence,
Necker Hospital, Paris Descartes University, Paris,
France (Abadie); Division of Otolaryngology,
Department of Surgery, Izaak Walton Killam Health
Centre, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia,
Canada (Hong).
Author Contributions: Dr Hong had full access to
all the data in the study and takes responsibility for
the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the
data analysis. Drs Breugem and Evans are co–first
authors.
Study concept and design: Breugem, Evans, Hong.
Drafting of the manuscript: All authors.
Administrative, technical, or material support: All
authors.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: None reported.
Funding/Support: No funding was obtained for
this study. Nederlandse Organisatie voor
Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek/Zorg-Onderzoek
Nederland funding was obtained for the
international consensus meeting.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: The funding source
had no role in the design and conduct of the study;
collection, management, analysis, and
interpretation of the data; preparation, review, or
approval of the manuscript; and decision to submit
the manuscript for publication.
Additional Contributions: We acknowledge all of
the attendees of the first Robin sequence
international consensus meeting and the
community of Robin sequence researchers, whose
valuable voices are appreciated.
REFERENCES
1. Vatlach S, Maas C, Poets CF. Birth prevalence and
initial treatment of Robin sequence in Germany:
a prospective epidemiologic study. Orphanet J Rare
Dis. 2014;9:9.
2. Pruzansky S, Richmond JB. Growth of mandible
in infants with micrognathia: clinical implications.
AMA Am J Dis Child. 1954;88(1):29-42.
3. Figueroa AA, Glupker TJ, Fitz MG, BeGole EA.
Mandible, tongue, and airway in Pierre Robin
sequence: a longitudinal cephalometric study. Cleft
Palate Craniofac J. 1991;28(4):425-434.
4. Amaratunga NA. A comparative clinical study of
Pierre Robin syndrome and isolated cleft palate. Br
J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 1989;27(6):451-458.
5. Hermann NV, Kreiborg S, Darvann TA, Jensen
BL, Dahl E, Bolund S. Early craniofacial morphology
and growth in children with nonsyndromic Robin
Sequence. Cleft Palate Craniofac J. 2003;40(2):131-
143.
6. Hermann NV, Kreiborg S, Darvann TA, Jensen
BL, Dahl E, Bolund S. Craniofacial morphology and
growth comparisons in children with Robin
Sequence, isolated cleft palate, and unilateral
complete cleft lip and palate. Cleft Palate Craniofac
J. 2003;40(4):373-396.
7. Eriksen J, Hermann NV, Darvann TA, Kreiborg S.
Early postnatal development of the mandible in
children with isolated cleft palate and children with
nonsyndromic Robin sequence. Cleft Palate
Craniofac J. 2006;43(2):160-167.
8. Suri S, Ross RB, Tompson BD. Mandibular
morphology and growth with and without
hypodontia in subjects with Pierre Robin sequence.
Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop. 2006;130(1):37-46.
9. Suri S, Ross RB, Tompson BD. Craniofacial
morphology and adolescent facial growth in Pierre
Robin sequence. Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop.
2010;137(6):763-774.
10. Rogers GF, Lim AA, Mulliken JB, Padwa BL.
Effect of a syndromic diagnosis on mandibular size
and sagittal position in Robin sequence. J Oral
Maxillofac Surg. 2009;67(11):2323-2331.
11. van der Haven I, Mulder JW, van der Wal KG,
Hage JJ, de Lange-de Klerk ES, Haumann TJ. The
jaw index: new guide defining micrognathia in
newborns. Cleft Palate Craniofac J. 1997;34(3):240-
241.
12. Abadie V, Morisseau-Durand MP, Beyler C,
Manach Y, Couly G. Brainstem dysfunction:
a possible neuroembryological pathogenesis of
isolated Pierre Robin sequence. Eur J Pediatr. 2002;
161(5):275-280.
13. Vegter F, Hage JJ, Mulder JW. Pierre Robin
syndrome: mandibular growth during the first year
of life. Ann Plast Surg. 1999;42(2):154-157.
Consensus Recommendation for Management of Infants With Robin Sequence
Special Communication Clinical Review & Education
jamapediatrics.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Pediatrics
Published online July 18, 2016
E7
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://archpedi.jamanetwork.com/ by a University of California - San Diego User  on 07/19/2016
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
14. MacLean JE, Fitzsimons D, Fitzgerald DA,
Waters KA. The spectrum of sleep-disordered
breathing symptoms and respiratory events in
infants with cleft lip and/or palate. Arch Dis Child.
2012;97(12):1058-1063.
15. Hong P, Kearns D. Airway characteristics of
infants with Pierre Robin sequence who undergo
mandibular distraction osteogenesis. Ear Nose
Throat J. 2015;94(8):E25-E29.
16. Baudon JJ, Renault F, Goutet JM, et al. Motor
dysfunction of the upper digestive tract in Pierre
Robin sequence as assessed by sucking-swallowing
electromyography and esophageal manometry.
J Pediatr. 2002;140(6):719-723.
17. Hong P. A clinical narrative review of
mandibular distraction osteogenesis in neonates
with Pierre Robin sequence. Int J Pediatr
Otorhinolaryngol. 2011;75(8):985-991.
18. Sher AE. Mechanisms of airway obstruction in
Robin sequence: implications for treatment. Cleft
Palate Craniofac J. 1992;29(3):224-231.
19. Soares D, Folbe AJ, Yoo G, Badr MS, Rowley JA,
Lin HS. Drug-induced sleep endoscopy vs awake
Müller’
s maneuver in the diagnosis of severe upper
airway obstruction. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg.
2013;148(1):151-156.
20. Slaats MA, Van Hoorenbeeck K, Van Eyck A,
et al. Upper airway imaging in pediatric obstructive
sleep apnea syndrome. Sleep Med Rev. 2015;21:59-71.
21. Cheung T, Oberoi S. Three dimensional
assessment of the pharyngeal airway in individuals
with non-syndromic cleft lip and palate. PLoS One.
2012;7(8):e43405. doi:10.1371/journal.pone
.0043405.
22. Anderson IC, Sedaghat AR, McGinley BM,
Redett RJ, Boss EF, Ishman SL. Prevalence and
severity of obstructive sleep apnea and snoring in
infants with Pierre Robin sequence. Cleft Palate
Craniofac J. 2011;48(5):614-618.
23. Bravo G, Ysunza A, Arrieta J, Pamplona MC.
Videonasopharyngoscopy is useful for identifying
children with Pierre Robin sequence and severe
obstructive sleep apnea. Int J Pediatr
Otorhinolaryngol. 2005;69(1):27-33.
24. Gilhooly JT, Smith JD, Howell LL, Deschaine BL,
Richey SL. Bedside polysomnography as an adjunct
in the management of infants with Robin sequence.
Plast Reconstr Surg. 1993;92(1):23-27.
25. Spicuzza L, Leonardi S, La Rosa M. Pediatric
sleep apnea: early onset of the “
syndrome”? Sleep
Med Rev. 2009;13(2):111-122.
26. Wilson AC, Moore DJ, Moore MH, Martin AJ,
Staugas RE, Kennedy JD. Late presentation of
upper airway obstruction in Pierre Robin sequence.
Arch Dis Child. 2000;83(5):435-438.
27. Kahn A, Groswasser J, Sottiaux M, et al. Clinical
symptoms associated with brief obstructive sleep
apnea in normal infants. Sleep. 1993;16(5):409-413.
28. Leiberman A, Tal A, Brama I, Sofer S.
Obstructive sleep apnea in young infants. Int J
Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 1988;16(1):39-44.
29. Becker M, Svensson H, Källén B. Birth weight,
body length, and cranial circumference in newborns
with cleft lip or palate. Cleft Palate Craniofac J.
1998;35(3):255-261.
30. van den Elzen AP, Semmekrot BA, Bongers EM,
Huygen PL, Marres HA. Diagnosis and treatment of
the Pierre Robin sequence: results of a
retrospective clinical study and review of the
literature. Eur J Pediatr. 2001;160(1):47-53.
31. Marques IL, Bettiol H, de Souza L, Barbieri MA,
Bachega MI. Longitudinal study of the growth of
infants with isolated Robin sequence considered
being severe cases. Acta Paediatr. 2008;97(3):371-
375.
32. Filip C, Feragen KB, Lemvik JS, et al.
Multidisciplinary aspects of 104 patients with Pierre
Robin sequence. Cleft Palate Craniofac J. 2015;52
(6):732-742.
33. Daniel M, Bailey S, Walker K, et al. Airway,
feeding and growth in infants with Robin sequence
and sleep apnoea. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol.
2013;77(4):499-503.
34. Maas C, Poets CF. Initial treatment and early
weight gain of children with Robin Sequence in
Germany: a prospective epidemiological study. Arch
Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed. 2014;99(6):F491-F494.
35. Cole A, Lynch P, Slator R. A new grading of
Pierre Robin sequence. Cleft Palate Craniofac J.
2008;45(6):603-606.
36. Shen W, Jie C, Chen J, Zou J, Ji Y. Mandibular
distraction osteogenesis to relieve Pierre Robin
severe airway obstruction in neonates: indication
and operation. J Craniofac Surg. 2009;20(suppl 2):
1812-1816.
37. DeHaan KL, Seton C, Fitzgerald DA, Waters KA,
MacLean JE. Polysomnography for the diagnosis of
sleep disordered breathing in children under 2
years of age. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2015;50(12):1346-
1353.
38. Berry RB, Brooks R, Gamaldo CE, et al. The
AASM Manual for the Scoring of Sleep and
Associated Events: Rules, Terminology and Technical
Specifications. Vol 2.2. Darien, IL: American
Academy of Sleep Medicine; 2015.
39. Buchenau W, Urschitz MS, Sautermeister J,
et al. A randomized clinical trial of a new
orthodontic appliance to improve upper airway
obstruction in infants with Pierre Robin sequence.
J Pediatr. 2007;151(2):145-149.
40. Wagener S, Rayatt SS, Tatman AJ, Gornall P,
Slator R. Management of infants with Pierre Robin
sequence. Cleft Palate Craniofac J. 2003;40(2):
180-185.
41. Breugem CC, Olesen PR, Fitzpatrick DG,
Courtemanche DJ. Subperiosteal release of the
floor of the mouth in airway management in Pierre
Robin sequence. J Craniofac Surg. 2008;19(3):609-
615.
42. Pradel W, Lauer G, Dinger J, Eckelt U.
Mandibular traction: an alternative treatment in
infants with Pierre Robin sequence. J Oral
Maxillofac Surg. 2009;67(10):2232-2237.
43. Baciliero U, Spanio di Spilimbergo S, Riga M,
Padula E. Respiratory distress in Pierre Robin
sequence: an experience with mandible traction by
wires. Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2011;40(5):464-470.
44. Rogers GF, Murthy AS, LaBrie RA, Mulliken JB.
The GILLS score, part I: patient selection for
tongue-lip adhesion in Robin sequence. Plast
Reconstr Surg. 2011;128(1):243-251.
45. Abel F, Bajaj Y, Wyatt M, Wallis C. The
successful use of the nasopharyngeal airway in
Pierre Robin sequence: an 11-year experience. Arch
Dis Child. 2012;97(4):331-334.
46. Monasterio FO, Drucker M, Molina F, Ysunza A.
Distraction osteogenesis in Pierre Robin sequence
and related respiratory problems in children.
J Craniofac Surg. 2002;13(1):79-83.
47. Muntz H, Wilson M, Park A, Smith M, Grimmer
JF. Sleep disordered breathing and obstructive
sleep apnea in the cleft population. Laryngoscope.
2008;118(2):348-353.
48. MacLean JE, Fitzsimons D, Hayward P, Waters
KA, Fitzgerald DA. The identification of children
with cleft palate and sleep disordered breathing
using a referral system. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2008;43
(3):245-250.
49. Poets CF, Bacher M. Treatment of upper airway
obstruction and feeding problems in Robin-like
phenotype. J Pediatr. 2011;159(6):887-892.
50. van Lieshout MJ, Joosten KF, Hoeve HL,
Mathijssen IM, Koudstaal MJ, Wolvius EB.
Unravelling Robin sequence: considerations of
diagnosis and treatment. Laryngoscope. 2014;124
(5):E203-E209. doi:10.1002/lary.24437.
51. Marcus CL, Brooks LJ, Draper KA, et al;
American Academy of Pediatrics. Diagnosis and
management of childhood obstructive sleep apnea
syndrome. Pediatrics. 2012;130(3):576-584.
52. Andersson EM, Sandvik L, Abyholm F, Semb G.
Clefts of the secondary palate referred to the Oslo
Cleft Team: epidemiology and cleft severity in 994
individuals. Cleft Palate Craniofac J. 2010;47(4):
335-342.
53. Genisca AE, Frías JL, Broussard CS, et al;
National Birth Defects Prevention Study. Orofacial
clefts in the National Birth Defects Prevention
Study, 1997-2004. Am J Med Genet A. 2009;149A
(6):1149-1158.
54. Godbout A, Leclerc JE, Arteau-Gauthier I,
Leclerc LD. Isolated versus Pierre Robin sequence
cleft palates: are they different? Cleft Palate
Craniofac J. 2014;51(4):406-411.
55. Jensen BL, Kreiborg S, Dahl E, Fogh-Andersen
P. Cleft lip and palate in Denmark, 1976-1981:
epidemiology, variability, and early somatic
development. Cleft Palate J. 1988;25(3):258-269.
56. Randall P, LaRossa D, McWilliams BJ, Cohen M,
Solot C, Jawad AF. Palatal length in cleft palate as a
predictor of speech outcome. Plast Reconstr Surg.
2000;106(6):1254-1259.
57. Filho FR, Collares MV, Pinto R. Comparing three
palatoplasty techniques to elongate the soft palate:
a morphometric study. Rev Soc Bras Cir
Craniomaxilofac. 2008;11:55.
58. Mahoney MH, Swan MC, Fisher DM.
Prospective analysis of presurgical risk factors for
outcomes in primary palatoplasty. Plast Reconstr Surg.
2013;132(1):165-171.
59. de Vries IA, Breugem CC, van der Heul AM,
Eijkemans MJ, Kon M, Mink van der Molen AB.
Prevalence of feeding disorders in children with
cleft palate only: a retrospective study. Clin Oral
Investig. 2014;18(5):1507-1515.
60. Miller CK. Feeding issues and interventions in
infants and children with clefts and craniofacial
syndromes. Semin Speech Lang. 2011;32(2):115-126.
61. Baujat G, Faure C, Zaouche A, Viarme F, Couly
G, Abadie V. Oroesophageal motor disorders in
Pierre Robin syndrome. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr.
2001;32(3):297-302.
Clinical Review & Education Special Communication
Consensus Recommendation for Management of Infants With Robin Sequence
E8
JAMA Pediatrics
Published online July 18, 2016
(Reprinted)
jamapediatrics.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://archpedi.jamanetwork.com/ by a University of California - San Diego User  on 07/19/2016
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
62. Renault F, Flores-Guevara R, Soupre V, Vazquez
MP, Baudon JJ. Neurophysiological brainstem
investigations in isolated Pierre Robin sequence.
Early Hum Dev. 2000;58(2):141-152.
63. Marques IL, Prado-Oliveira R, Leirião VH, Jorge
JC, de Souza L. Clinical and fiberoptic endoscopic
evaluation of swallowing in Robin sequence treated
with nasopharyngeal intubation: the importance of
feeding facilitating techniques. Cleft Palate
Craniofac J. 2010;47(5):523-529.
64. Pinheiro Neto CD, Alonso N, Sennes LU,
Goldenberg DC, Santoro PP. Polysomnography
evaluation and swallowing endoscopy of patients
with Pierre Robin sequence. Braz J Otorhinolaryngol.
2009;75(6):852-856.
65. Robin P. A fall of the base of the tongue
considered as a new cause of nasopharyngeal
respiratory impairment: Pierre Robin sequence, a
translation. 1923. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1994;93(6):
1301-1303.
66. OMIM. Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man.
http://omim.org/. Updated 2015. Accessed
September 9, 2015.
67. Izumi K, Konczal LL, Mitchell AL, Jones MC.
Underlying genetic diagnosis of Pierre Robin
sequence: retrospective chart review at two
children’
s hospitals and a systematic literature
review. J Pediatr. 2012;160(4):645-650.e2. doi:10
.1016/j.jpeds.2011.09.021.
68. Holder-Espinasse M, Abadie V, Cormier-Daire
V, et al. Pierre Robin sequence: a series of 117
consecutive cases. J Pediatr. 2001;139(4):588-590.
69. Gordon CT, Tan TY, Benko S, Fitzpatrick D,
Lyonnet S, Farlie PG. Long-range regulation at the
SOX9 locus in development and disease. J Med Genet.
2009;46(10):649-656.
70. Fukami M, Tsuchiya T, Takada S, et al. Complex
genomic rearrangement in the SOX9 5′ region in a
patient with Pierre Robin sequence and hypoplastic
left scapula. Am J Med Genet A. 2012;158A(7):1529-
1534.
71. Alonso-Álvarez ML, Terán-Santos J, Ordax
Carbajo E, et al. Reliability of home respiratory
polygraphy for the diagnosis of sleep apnea in
children. Chest. 2015;147(4):1020-1028.
72. Llewellyn CH, van Jaarsveld CH, Johnson L,
Carnell S, Wardle J. Development and factor
structure of the Baby Eating Behaviour
Questionnaire in the Gemini birth cohort. Appetite.
2011;57(2):388-396.
73. Biesecker LG, Green RC. Diagnostic clinical
genome and exome sequencing. N Engl J Med.
2014;370(25):2418-2425.
74. Yang Y, Muzny DM, Xia F, et al. Molecular
findings among patients referred for clinical
whole-exome sequencing. JAMA. 2014;312(18):
1870-1879.
75. Biesecker LG, Biesecker BB. An approach to
pediatric exome and genome sequencing. Curr Opin
Pediatr. 2014;26(6):639-645.
Consensus Recommendation for Management of Infants With Robin Sequence
Special Communication Clinical Review & Education
jamapediatrics.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Pediatrics
Published online July 18, 2016
E9
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://archpedi.jamanetwork.com/ by a University of California - San Diego User  on 07/19/2016
