 https://doi.org/10.1177/1529100618760521
Psychological Science in the
Public Interest
2017, Vol. 18(3) 149 
–207
© The Author(s) 2018
Reprints and permissions: 
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/1529100618760521
www.psychologicalscience.org/PSPI
One of the great public-health achievements of the 20th 
century is vaccination against infectious diseases. It saves 
millions of lives and billions of dollars annually (Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC], 1999). Vac-
cination schedules have expanded steadily over the years 
as effective vaccines have increased in number. This 
success has produced strong public support for child-
hood vaccination (Gellin, Maibach, & Marcuse, 2000).
In this context, it is perplexing to some that vaccine 
providers and programs face substantial headwinds. 
Uptake is highly variable across vaccines. Most infants 
get their recommended vaccines in most countries, 
even as many adults and health-care providers routinely 
skip the seasonal-influenza vaccine. The benefits that 
760521 PPIXXX10.1177/1529100618760521Brewer et al.Psychology of Vaccination
research-article2018
Corresponding Author:
Noel T. Brewer, 325 Rosenau Hall, CB7440, Department of Health 
Behavior, Gillings School of Global Public Health, University of North 
Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599 
E-mail: ntb@unc.edu
Increasing Vaccination: Putting  
Psychological Science Into Action
Noel T. Brewer1,2, Gretchen B. Chapman3, Alexander J. Rothman4, 
Julie Leask5,6, and Allison Kempe7,8,9
1Department of Health Behavior, Gillings School of Global Public Health, University of North Carolina; 
2Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina; 3Department of Social and Decision 
Sciences, Carnegie Mellon University; 4Department of Psychology, University of Minnesota; 5Faculty of Nursing 
and Midwifery, University of Sydney; 6Faculty of Medicine, University of Sydney; 7Adult and Child Consortium 
for Health Outcomes Research and Delivery Science (ACCORDS), University of Colorado School of Medicine; 
8Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus; and 9Department of Pediatrics, 
Children’s Hospital Colorado, Aurora, Colorado
Summary
Vaccination is one of the great achievements of the 20th century, yet persistent public-health problems include 
inadequate, delayed, and unstable vaccination uptake. Psychology offers three general propositions for understanding 
and intervening to increase uptake where vaccines are available and affordable. The first proposition is that thoughts 
and feelings can motivate getting vaccinated. Hundreds of studies have shown that risk beliefs and anticipated regret 
about infectious disease correlate reliably with getting vaccinated; low confidence in vaccine effectiveness and concern 
about safety correlate reliably with not getting vaccinated. We were surprised to find that few randomized trials have 
successfully changed what people think and feel about vaccines, and those few that succeeded were minimally effective 
in increasing uptake. The second proposition is that social processes can motivate getting vaccinated. Substantial 
research has shown that social norms are associated with vaccination, but few interventions examined whether 
normative messages increase vaccination uptake. Many experimental studies have relied on hypothetical scenarios 
to demonstrate that altruism and free riding (i.e., taking advantage of the protection provided by others) can affect 
intended behavior, but few randomized trials have tested strategies to change social processes to increase vaccination 
uptake. The third proposition is that interventions can facilitate vaccination directly by leveraging, but not trying to 
change, what people think and feel. These interventions are by far the most plentiful and effective in the literature. 
To increase vaccine uptake, these interventions build on existing favorable intentions by facilitating action (through 
reminders, prompts, and primes) and reducing barriers (through logistics and healthy defaults); these interventions also 
shape behavior (through incentives, sanctions, and requirements). Although identification of principles for changing 
thoughts and feelings to motivate vaccination is a work in progress, psychological principles can now inform the 
design of systems and policies to directly facilitate action.
Keywords
vaccination, risk perception, affect, social processes, default, intervention, public health
 150 
Brewer et al.
accrue from vaccination individually and collectively 
are contingent on individuals’ behaviors, and thus the 
public-health benefits are established or threatened by 
the behavior of individuals. The success of vaccination 
programs has left people largely unaware of, and 
unconcerned about, diseases they have never seen and 
heard little about. Vaccination regularly generates con-
troversy in traditional and social media, often because 
of unsubstantiated safety concerns (e.g., Dunn, Leask, 
Zhou, Mandl, & Coiera, 2015). Program managers and 
providers lack evidence-based tools for effectively 
addressing the resulting dips in the public’s confidence 
in vaccination. In these many ways, advances in vac-
cinology fall prey to the behavioral puzzle of variable 
vaccine uptake.
Psychology offers insight into why people engage in 
health behaviors, including vaccination. However, the 
empirical findings that can inform and constrain psy-
chological theories about vaccination appear in discon-
nected literatures across psychology, public health, 
medicine, nursing, sociology, and behavioral econom-
ics. We sought to integrate this scattered literature and 
to better understand how the findings inform and 
constrain psychological theories when applied to 
vaccination.
Psychological theories offer three general proposi-
tions for understanding and increasing vaccination. The 
first proposition is that thoughts and feelings motivate 
getting vaccinated, yet the veracity of this claim is not 
well established. For instance, it makes intuitive sense 
that people get vaccinated because they feel at risk. 
But is this true? And if so, do interventions that can 
increase risk perceptions lead to higher rates of vac-
cination? A second proposition is that the social con-
text of vaccination has a large impact on uptake. A 
new mother in a parenting group, who hears that her 
peers are getting vaccines for their children, might 
become more inclined to do the same. But do studies 
support this intuition? A third proposition is that it is 
possible to use psychological principles to increase 
vaccination directly without modifying people’s 
thoughts, feelings, or social experiences. For instance, 
structuring the decision to get vaccinated as the default 
behavioral option is promising, but we do not know 
which forms of defaults are most effective and under 
what conditions.
Our review examines the evidence for, and implica-
tions of, these three general propositions by examining 
psychological principles as applied to understanding 
and increasing vaccination coverage. We consider these 
issues in contexts where vaccines are generally avail-
able and affordable (Thomson, Robinson, & Vallée-
Tourangeau, 2016) because, under those circumstances, 
psychological processes have the most opportunity to 
exert an influence. Supply-side issues that affect vac-
cination coverage in many countries are important but 
are not the focus of our review (Zaffran et al., 2013).
The first section of our article situates vaccination in 
a public-health context. The following sections examine 
the evidence for the three psychological propositions 
about vaccination and their implications for interven-
tion strategies for increasing uptake. Section 2 reviews 
what people think and feel about vaccination and impli-
cations for behavior; Section 3 examines social pro-
cesses in the context of vaccination; and Section 4 
examines approaches to changing vaccination behavior 
directly. The final section summarizes which of these 
psychological propositions have the greatest potential 
to increase vaccination coverage and how and when 
to deploy interventions based on them. In particular, 
we conclude that the most effective current methods 
for facilitating vaccination intervene on behavior 
directly, rather than attempting to change what people 
think and feel or their social context.
To show how psychological science can offer new 
insights into vaccination behavior, the sections that fol-
low apply the three general psychological propositions 
(thoughts/feelings, social processes, directly affecting 
behavior) to understanding how provider recommenda-
tion may exert its effects. Provider recommendation is 
a strong motivator for getting a vaccination. For exam-
ple, in one study, 38% of adolescent boys received a 
human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine if their parents 
received a provider recommendation, but only 2% 
received the vaccine if the parents did not receive a 
recommendation (Reiter, Gilkey, & Brewer, 2013; Reiter, 
McRee, et al., 2013). The impact of provider recom-
mendation holds true across all vaccines studied 
(Pandolfi et al., 2012; Wiley & Leask, 2013). Although 
many of the relevant studies are cross-sectional and rely 
on patient self-report, they suggest that provider recom-
mendation can be a potent intervention, and some 
approaches, such as presumptive recommendations, are 
even more effective than standard recommendations 
(Brewer et al., 2017). Developing a better understanding 
of why and when provider recommendations increase 
vaccination could make them more effective.
Researchers in the field of vaccination have offered 
frameworks to organize and make sense of this 
research and identify new directions for intervention 
(e.g., Dubé et al., 2013; Kaufman et al., 2017; Nowak, 
LaVail, Kennedy, & Sheedy, 2013), but looking at influ-
ences on vaccination behavior from a psychological 
perspective can offer useful insights. Studies com-
monly evaluate complex, multicomponent interven-
tions and show that they are effective at increasing 
vaccination (e.g., Briss et al., 2000; Rashid et al., 2016). 
Thinking about the psychological processes at play 
 Psychology of Vaccination 
151
can shed new light on the intervention components 
likely to be most effective and why and when they are 
effective. Our goal is to examine key psychological 
factors that shape vaccination uptake and offer prom-
ise for intervention to increase vaccination coverage, 
but we do not cover all forces that shape vaccine-
related thoughts and actions.
Section 1: Vaccination and Public Health
To orient readers, we review the basics of vaccination, 
identify the three main problems facing vaccination, 
and discuss the role of vaccination activists.
Vaccine “basics”
Vaccines protect against infection by viruses and bac-
teria by mimicking an infection in order to activate the 
body’s natural immunity. Most childhood vaccines 
require multiple doses to produce strong immunity to 
disease and may require periodic booster doses to 
counteract waning immunity over time. Seasonal-
influenza vaccine requires an annual dose because the 
circulating pathogens change year to year. Some vac-
cines require only a single dose, especially those for 
older adults. Vaccination protects the person vaccinated 
and others around them by reducing the spread of 
disease. An additional benefit to society can accrue if 
sufficient herd immunity develops. This happens when 
enough people are vaccinated that the pathogen cannot 
reproduce. The threshold required for herd immunity 
varies by disease, but it typically ranges between 80% 
and 90% vaccination of the population (Doherty, Buchy, 
Standaert, Giaquinto, & Prado-Cohrs, 2016; Fine, 1993). 
The failure of herd immunity as a result of vaccine 
coverage falling below a threshold can trigger out-
breaks that tie up significant resources and can lead to 
disease and sometimes death.
Routine vaccination of infants, children, and adults 
prevents around 2 to 3 million deaths every year in 
developed and in developing countries, according to 
World Health Organization (WHO; 2013) estimates. 
Elimination of smallpox through vaccination accounts 
for the majority of these lives saved, and ongoing rou-
tine vaccination programs account for the rest. Vaccines 
are cost-effective because of the value assigned to 
reductions in morbidity and mortality (Ozawa, Mirelman, 
Stack, Walker, & Levine, 2012). The seasonal-influenza 
vaccine even provides cost savings because it reduces 
the need for sick care and missed days of work as a 
result of illness. (Peasah, Azziz-Baumgartner, Breese, 
Meltzer, & Widdowson, 2013). The seasonal-influenza 
vaccine saves about $117 for every dose delivered to 
older adults in the United States (Nichol, Margolis, 
Wuorenma, & Von Sternberg, 1994), although other 
estimates are lower; data are unavailable for low-
income countries. Given that vaccines are both effective 
and cost-effective, the Gates Foundation declared 2011 
to 2020 to be the “Decade of Vaccines” to maximize 
their impact. The World Health Organization and its 
194 member states followed with a global plan to extent 
the “benefits of immunization to all people, regardless 
of where they are born, who they are, or where they 
live” (WHO, 2013, p. 5).
The substantial value offered by vaccination has led 
to guidelines for routine delivery of vaccines from 
birth to old age. An inspection of vaccination sched-
ules (Fig. 1) shows most vaccines are used in the first 
months of life, when surrogates such as a parent and 
health-care provider make these decisions. Between 
birth and 18 months, babies get as many as 10 vaccines 
(e.g., hepatitis B, polio, rotavirus) with additional 
doses up to age 6. Many countries recommend that 
adolescents receive a booster vaccine—Dtap, dTpa, 
or Tdap—for diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis 
(whooping cough; the “a” indicates that the pertussis 
component of the vaccine is acellular) as well as men-
ingitis and HPV vaccines (both of which require multiple 
doses). High-income countries typically recommend the 
seasonal-influenza vaccine for people from 6 months 
through adulthood. Vaccines recommended for older 
adults are also available, including shingles, pneumo-
coccus, and seasonal-influenza vaccines.
The varied number and purpose of vaccines across 
the life span creates a rich behavioral ecosystem to 
which psychological science can contribute important 
new insights. Vaccination achieves its promised benefits 
only when most individuals behave according to vac-
cination recommendations. The impact of different psy-
chological principles may depend, in part, on the 
specific vaccine, its schedule, and the larger clinical 
and social context of vaccination. For example, adop-
tion of HPV vaccines in the United States was hampered 
by its initial licensure and marketing for adolescent girls 
but not boys; confusion about HPV infection, the HPV 
vaccine, and sexual activity; outrage over early industry 
efforts to promote legislation requiring the vaccine in 
all 50 states (Colgrove, Abiola, & Mello, 2010); and the 
transformation of these energies into an unease about 
the vaccine among parents. These contextual issues 
slowed adoption of HPV vaccines, which created a 
problem that persists to this day despite voluminous 
data showing that the vaccine is highly effective and 
safe (Gee, Weinbaum, Sukumaran, & Markowitz, 2016). 
In contrast, two other vaccines for adolescents licensed 
the year before the HPV vaccine—Tdap booster and 
meningitis—have already met national coverage goals 
(Reagan-Steiner et al., 2016), and a new pneumococcal 
 152 
Vaccine
Birth
1 mo
2 mos
4 mos
6 mos
9 mos
12 mos
15 mos
18 mos
19–23 
mos
2–3 yrs
4–6 yrs
7–10 yrs
11–12 yrs 13–15 yrs
16 yrs
17–18 yrs
Hepatitis B1 (HepB)
Rotavirus2  (RV) RV1 (2-dose
series); RV5 (3-dose series)
Diphtheria, tetanus, & acellular
pertussis3 (DTaP: <7 yrs)
Haemophilus influenzae type b4
(Hib)
Pneumococcal conjugate5
(PCV13)
Inactivated poliovirus6
(IPV: <18 yrs)
Influenza7 (IIV)
Measles, mumps, rubella8 (MMR)
Varicella9 (VAR)
Hepatitis A10 (HepA)
Meningococcal11 (MenACWY-D
≥9 mos; MenACWY-CRM ≥2 mos)
Tetanus, diphtheria, & acellular
pertussis13 (Tdap: ≥7 yrs)
Human papillomavirus14 (HPV)
Meningococcal B12
Pneumococcal polysaccharide5
(PPSV23)
See footnote 11
See footnote 
14
Annual vaccination (IIV) 1 or 2 doses
See footnote 5
Tdap
See 
footnote 2
2-dose series, See footnote 10
4th dose
3rd or 4th dose,
See footnote 4
4th dose
4th dose
5th dose
3rd dose
3rd dose
2nd dose 
2nd dose 
1st dose
1st dose
See 
footnote 4
2nd dose 
1st dose
2nd dose 
2nd dose 
2nd dose 
2nd dose 
1st dose
2nd dose 
1st dose
3rd dose
3rd dose
2nd dose 
1st dose
1st dose
1st dose
1st dose
Annual vaccination (IIV) 1 dose only
See footnote 8
See footnote 12
No recommendation
Range of recommended ages 
for certain high-risk groups
Range of recommended 
ages for all children
Range of recommended ages 
for catch-up immunization
Range of recommended ages for non-high-risk 
groups that may receive vaccine, subject to 
individual clinical decision making
a
Fig. 1. Recommended immunization schedules from (a) the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2018) and (b) the World Health Organization (2017). For footnote 
definitions, please see source.
 153
Summary of WHO Position Papers - Recommendations for Routine Immunization
Antigen
Children
Adolescents
Adults
Considerations
Recommendations for all immunization programmes
BCG
1 dose
Exceptions HIV
Hepatitis B
3–4 doses
(see footnote for schedule options)
3 doses (for high-risk groups if not previously immunized)
(see footnote)
Birth dose
Premature and low birth weight
Co-administration and combination vaccine
Definition high-risk
Polio
3–4 doses (at least one dose of IPV)
with DTP
bOPV birth dose
Type of vaccine
Transmission and importation risk criteria
DTP-containing vaccine
3 doses
2 Boosters 12–23 months 
(DTP-containing vaccine) 
and 4–7 years (Td)
1 Booster 9–15 yrs (Td)
Delayed/interrupted schedule
Combination vaccine
Maternal immunization
Haemophilus
influenzae type b
Option 1
3 doses, with DTP
Single dose if > 12 months of age
Not recommended for children > 5 years old
Delayed/interrupted schedule
Co-administration and combination vaccine
Option 2
2 or 3 doses, with booster at least 6
months after last dose
Pneumococcal
(Conjugate)
Option 1
3 doses, with DTP
Vaccine options
Initiate before 6 months of age
Co-administration
HIV+ and preterm neonates booster
Option 2
2 doses before 6 months of age, plus
booster dose at 9–15 months of age
Rotavirus
Rotarix: 2 doses with DTP
RotaTeq: 3 doses with DTP
Vaccine options
Not recommended if > 24 months old
Measles
2 doses
Combination vaccine; 
HIV early vaccination;
Pregnancy
Rubella
1 dose (see footnote)
1 dose (adolescent girls and/or child bearing aged women if not 
previously vaccinated; see footnote)
Achieve and sustain 80% coverage
Combination vaccine and Co-administration 
Pregnancy
HPV
2 doses (females)
Target 9–14-year-old girls; Multi-age cohort vaccination;  
Pregnancy Older age groups ≥ 15 years 3 doses
HIV and immunocompromised
(updated: March 2017)
b
Fig. 1. (continued)
 154 
Brewer et al.
vaccine for infants, licensed the year after the HPV vac-
cine, has also been rapidly adopted (Harriman et al., 
2011). Thus, efforts to use psychological insights to 
promote vaccination are unlikely to be a one-size fits 
all endeavor. For this reason, we next consider in 
greater detail the meaning of vaccination as a behavior 
and the challenges facing uptake.
Vaccination behaviors
Getting vaccinated is a behavior that appears simple 
but is actually the result of a complex series of behav-
iors, all of which are contingent on an interlocking 
system of people, funding, policies, and permissions 
(Table 1). Children and adults go to a provider to get 
vaccinated, the provider is employed by a clinic or 
program, and funding comes through policies estab-
lished by legislators or perhaps insurers or even non-
governmental organizations. Each of these actors has 
different goals and resources, and each can take many 
actions that support or undermine vaccination. Studying 
vaccination means also studying a myriad of underlying 
behaviors by these various actors. Thus, “vaccination 
behavior” can be as different as a Pakistani mother who 
walks 2 hours to a larger town to get her child vacci-
nated or a World Health Organization advisory group 
meeting in Geneva to review evidence and recommend 
a schedule for routine vaccination.
We will generally focus on vaccine uptake by indi-
viduals, which across a population is called vaccination 
coverage. High coverage is important because it creates 
direct benefits for vaccinated individuals and indirect 
benefits for their communities. Coverage is high and 
steady for childhood vaccination and is rising for new 
vaccines, including those for adolescents. Vaccine cov-
erage is often above 90% for individual vaccines deliv-
ered during childhood in high-income countries, and 
it is even higher for some individual vaccines. For 
example, in 2016, 86% of children worldwide received 
at least one dose of a measles vaccine, and coverage 
was highest (94%) in the Americas and Europe (Casey 
et al., 2016).
Coverage is inextricably tied to how people access 
vaccination and health care. People may get vaccines 
by active seeking, sometimes called demand, or through 
passive acceptance. The importance of actively seeking 
versus passively accepting them may vary by country 
and by the person’s age. In high-income countries, hos-
pitals routinely offer vaccines for babies when they are 
born, then during routine visits in pediatric or other 
primary-care settings, and later sometimes through their 
schools. Teens receive vaccines in school or during rou-
tine medical care, but fewer teens than children have 
routine medical visits (Ziv, Boulet, & Slap, 1999). Adults 
more often receive vaccines opportunistically when 
they see a provider for other health-care services, and 
Table 1. Examples of Behaviors That Lead to Increased Vaccination
Agent
Behavior example
Adult, parent
Keep personal records of received and recommended vaccines
Make appointment for vaccination
Accept vaccine offered by health-care provider
Sign consent to vaccination at school
Request vaccination at a pharmacy
Provider
Stock all recommended vaccines at site of care
Recommend vaccination to patients at all types of visits
Enact standing orders for vaccination
Record vaccines in electronic health record
Record vaccines in regional immunization registry
Complete training requirements and attend continuing education
Employer
Host vaccination clinics that offer convenient, free vaccines to employees
Promote vaccination to employees
Regional immunization 
program manager
Manage the supply of vaccines
Coordinate quality improvement visits to providers
Sponsor mass-vaccination clinics in schools
Conduct communication campaigns
Manage crisis communication
Legislator
Require vaccination to attend school or college or to access government services or payments
Fund vaccination program schedules
Purchase vaccines
Regulate and support program implementation, including service delivery and vaccine-safety systems
Evaluate programs
Pledge contributions to global vaccination initiatives
 Psychology of Vaccination 
155
preventive services vie for limited time during these visits 
(Yarnall, Pollak, Østbye, Krause, & Michener, 2003). 
Thus, in high-income countries, accepting offers of vac-
cination is especially important for children for whom a 
vaccine is routinely offered, whereas active seeking may 
be more important for vaccination of teens and adults 
for whom vaccine is less routinely offered. In contrast, 
in low- and middle-income countries, parents must often 
actively seek out vaccination regardless of age, and the 
impact of practical barriers (e.g., transportation, oppor-
tunity costs) can be magnified (Hickler, MacDonald, 
Senouci, & Schuh, 2017). In low- and middle-income 
countries, encouraging active demand for vaccination is 
often the key consideration.
Even as vaccination is common and widely accepted, 
vaccination programs face challenges. All countries that 
are asked about such challenges report them, including 
countries with low, moderate, and high incomes (H. J. 
Larson, Jarrett, Eckersberger, Smith, & Paterson, 2014). 
We next review three key problems with vaccine uptake 
in the areas of coverage adequacy, timeliness, and 
robustness (Table 2).
Inadequacy. One problem is inadequacy, which we 
define as vaccination coverage that falls below a stated 
vaccination goal. For example, the United States has 
established Healthy People 2020, a set of objectives for 
health behaviors, including coverage targets for various 
vaccines. Coverage can be problematically low for peo-
ple who face substantial barriers or actively refuse vac-
cination (Omer, Salmon, Orenstein, DeHart, & Halsey, 
2009; Rainey et al., 2011). The relative contribution of 
these barriers depends on the country and the health-
care system in place there. Receipt of the complete set of 
recommended childhood vaccines is suboptimal in most 
countries. More than a quarter of 19- to 35-month olds in 
the United States do not have all recommended vaccines 
(Hill, Elam-Evans, Yankey, Singleton, & Dietz, 2016). Vac-
cine coverage for adolescents and adults is lower still 
(CDC, 2016). Older adults do the best of any age group 
on uptake of the seasonal-influenza vaccine, but less than 
a third get the new shingles vaccine in the United States 
(W. W. Williams et al., 2017), in part because insurance 
coverage for the vaccine is spotty and, although only 
doctors can prescribe it, doses are available primarily at 
pharmacies.
Health-care providers regularly come into contact 
with people who are old, sick, or have compromised 
immune systems. Carrying infectious diseases such as 
influenza or hepatitis to these groups can be deadly. 
Health-care workers in 11 European countries have 
seasonal-influenza vaccination coverage below 30% 
 
(P. R. Blank, Schwenkglenks, & Szucs, 2009). Coverage 
also varies by role and setting. In the United States, 
seasonal-influenza vaccination coverage is above 90% 
for workers in hospitals, 80% in outpatient care, and 
below 70% in long-term care (Black et al., 2016).
Explicit refusal of vaccines when offered can lead 
to low coverage, as can inaction, such as not going to 
a provider or ignoring vaccination campaigns. Some 
U.S. parents (6%–25%) have refused one or more vac-
cines for their children (Gilkey, McRee, et al., 2016; 
Gilkey, Reiter, et al., 2016; Gust, Darling, Kennedy, & 
Schwartz, 2008; P. J. Smith et al., 2011). A large minority 
of parents who initially refuse a vaccine agree to it later 
(Dempsey et al., 2011; Kornides, McRee, & Gilkey, in 
press). Actively refusing all vaccines is rare, typically 
around 1% to 2% in high-income countries (Beard, Hull, 
Leask, Dey, & McIntyre, 2016; Dempsey et al., 2011; 
Hill, Elam-Evans, Yankey, Singleton, & Dietz, 2016; 
Samad et al., 2006; P. J. Smith et al., 2011). Refusal of 
all vaccines is more common among White children 
with older, university-educated mothers living in higher 
income households (Samad et al., 2006; P. J. Smith et al., 
2011). Vaccine refusal explains a substantial proportion 
of measles cases and some pertussis cases (Phadke, 
Bednarczyk, Salmon, & Omer, 2016), although this may 
vary by country, depending on access to vaccination.
Delay. Another problem is delay, which we define as 
receiving a vaccination after the recommended age. Low 
coverage reflects both individuals who will never be vac-
cinated and those for whom vaccination is delayed but 
eventually occurs. Like low coverage, delay can be the 
result of a deliberate choice, passive inaction, or forces 
external to the individual, such as a vaccine shortage. 
Over a third of U.S. infants remain undervaccinated for 6 
months or longer past the recommended age (Luman 
et al., 2005). A quarter of U.S. parents report having 
delayed one or more vaccines for young children (Gilkey, 
McRee, et al., 2016). Some parents spread out doses 
according to alternative schedules for reasons that include 
concerns about pain or safety (Dempsey et al., 2011; Gust 
et al., 2008). Young children whose parents intentionally 
delay one or more vaccinations are more likely to remain 
undervaccinated (Smith, Humiston, Parnell, Vannice, & 
Salmon, 2010). Many physicians (40%) report that difficult 
interactions with parents about spreading out of vaccines 
Table 2. Problems With Vaccination Uptake
Problem
Description
Inadequate coverage
Not meeting goal for vaccination 
coverage
Delay
Vaccination after the recommended 
age
Instability
Sudden drop in vaccination coverage 
after vaccine-safety scare
 156 
Brewer et al.
decreases their job satisfaction (Kempe, O’Leary, et al., 
2015). However, providers are also a source of delay. For 
example, some providers recommend delaying the HPV 
vaccine or other vaccines (Gilkey, Malo, Shah, Hall, & 
Brewer, 2015). Timeliness is also a problem in low- and 
middle-income countries, in part because of challenges 
related to supply (Akmatov & Mikolajczyk, 2012).
Claims of rising vaccine refusal or delay are com-
monplace in the research literature, but the data are 
largely indirect (Cooper, Larson, & Katz, 2008; Omer 
et al., 2009). The most direct example is that refusal of 
HPV vaccination for adolescents increased by 10 per-
centage points over 4 years (Gilkey, Calo, Marciniak, & 
Brewer, 2017). However, this conclusion relies on com-
paring coverage estimates made using different meth-
ods. Requested exemptions from school requirements 
for vaccination have also increased in the United States 
(Gowda & Dempsey, 2013; Omer, Richards, Ward, & 
Bednarczyk, 2012; P. J. Smith et al., 2017), although 
studies do not show contemporaneous drops in vac-
cination. In Australia, registered objection to vaccina-
tion remained stable between 1999 and 2015 (Beard 
et al., 2016). “Shot limiting” (having two or fewer vac-
cines at a doctor’s visit before the age of 9 months) 
increased over a 3-year period and was associated with 
more medical visits and fewer vaccine doses delivered 
(Robison, Groom, & Young, 2012). Undervaccination 
among 2-year-olds increased over a 4-year period in a 
study of eight U.S. managed care organizations (Glanz 
et al., 2013), although national data did not show cor-
responding decreases. The number of pediatricians who 
experienced a parent’s refusal of vaccines went up by 13 
percentage points over 7 years in the United States 
(Hough-Telford et al., 2016). Refusal of required child-
hood vaccines experienced a small increase (0.5%) in the 
first 2 years of a national U.S. study but was flat in the 
final years of the study (Omer, Porter, Allen, Salmon, & 
Bednarczyk, 2017). In sum, we are unaware of compel-
ling evidence of substantially increased refusal and delay, 
and recent U.S. data suggest that refusal may be stable.
Instability. A third problem is instability, which we 
define as a sudden drop in coverage, often as a result of 
a vaccine-safety scare. Although instability also has some 
overlap with low coverage, the emphasis is on reductions 
in coverage over a relatively short time. For example, in 
Japan, unconfirmed reports of safety issues facing the 
HPV vaccine surfaced in the media (Hanley, Yoshioka, 
Ito, & Kishi, 2015). Within 2 months, Japan’s government 
removed a proactive recommendation for the HPV vac-
cine, which caused uptake to plunge from around 70% to 
less than 1%. Denmark and Ireland have also seen large 
declines in HPV vaccination following the lobbying of 
groups of parents formed through a shared belief about 
the role of the vaccine in any health problems their chil-
dren experienced. Italy had a substantial drop in sea-
sonal-influenza vaccination after a safety scare (Rosselli, 
Martini, Bragazzi, & Watad, 2017). Given that safety 
scares emerge with regularity, national vaccination pro-
grams need practical advice about what they can do to 
prepare for specific, unanticipated vaccine-safety scares 
and to maximize the robustness of uptake.
Citizen activism
One of the factors affecting vaccination uptake, particu-
larly during safety scares, is the activism of citizens. It 
is important to distinguish between citizen activism and 
vaccination behavior, a distinction media coverage 
often misses. Refusing vaccines does not make one an 
antivaccination activist. Furthermore, the small numbers 
of activists mean that their own vaccination choices 
have minimal direct impact on vaccination coverage 
overall. Rather, they can influence the behavior of poli-
cymakers, social networks, and individuals through 
messages and activism. We review below what is known 
about antivaccination activists, and then we review the 
more recent provaccination movement.
Antivaccination activism has existed in some form for 
more than 200 years (Wolfe & Sharp, 2002). Radical 
antivaccine groups assert that vaccines are unsafe and 
ineffective; reformist groups accept some aspects of vac-
cination but call for better vaccine testing or compensa-
tion for adverse events that occur after vaccination 
(Hobson-West, 2007). Health conditions that the groups 
have attributed to vaccines include autism in children 
and autoimmune disorders in adolescents, even though 
research findings invariably do not support a connection 
to vaccination (Maglione et al., 2014). For example, in 
the Philippines and, more recently, in Kenya, activists 
spread unsubstantiated theories that tetanus toxoid vac-
cine is subversively used to control fertility (H. Larson, 
2014; Mandlhate & Heinonen, 2014). Some have sug-
gested that personal-injury lawyers have contributed 
financially to antivaccination activism to create an envi-
ronment supportive of claims and litigation (Deer, 2011). 
Physicians supporting alternative vaccination schedules 
or spreading out doses can reinforce activists’ stances 
that vaccines are problematic (Sears, 2011).
Radical antivaccine activists use four tactics. They 
skew the science, shift their hypotheses, censor dissent-
ing opinions, and attack critics with personal insults 
and lawsuits (Kata, 2010). For example, antivaccine 
health concerns evolve as old theories are sufficiently 
refuted (e.g., vaccines and sudden infant death syn-
drome), and new theories gain currency and new cham-
pions (e.g., vaccines and autism; Leask, Chapman, & 
Cooper Robbins, 2010). New vaccines bring the 
 Psychology of Vaccination 
157
possibility for attributions to existing diseases with 
uncertain etiology (e.g., the HPV vaccine and unsup-
ported links to autoimmune disorders).
When and how antivaccination activism affects indi-
vidual behavior is poorly understood, but we suspect 
that the effect is nonlinear. The instability in uptake of 
some vaccines in countries is likely due in part to lack 
of political will among authorities in the face of public 
outcry. In the 1970s, antivaccine activists contributed 
to the erosion of pertussis programs in Australia, Ire-
land, Italy, Japan, the Russian Federation, Sweden, the 
United Kingdom, and the former West Germany 
(Gangarosa et al., 1998; Poland & Jacobson, 2001). After 
considerable morbidity and mortality, these eight coun-
tries reinstated their pertussis vaccination programs. 
Recent experiences in Japan, Italy, Denmark, and India 
are also illustrative of the outsized influence that anti-
vaccination activists can have on vaccination coverage 
by influencing policymakers and providers.
In the simplest terms, antivaccination activists tell a 
good story, whereas messages from official sources 
tend to be factual, cryptic, and forgettable (Downs, de 
Bruin, & Fischhoff, 2008; Reyna, 2012). Antivaccine 
messages often use first-person testimony by alleged 
victims or their parents to describe specific and vivid 
health harms, harnessing the known psychological find-
ing that anecdotes about one person are often more 
influential than statistics about large populations 
(Borgida & Nisbett, 1977; Kogut & Ritov, 2005). The 
messages sometimes co-opt expert authority, for exam-
ple by sourcing whistle-blower doctors and scientists 
who claim a vast cover-up of information by pharma-
ceutical companies conspiring with governments (Leask 
& Chapman, 1998). The stories elicit emotions such as 
anger, fear, and regret, as well as medical mistrust, an 
approach that may build on risk judgments’ large emo-
tional component (Loewenstein, Weber, Hsee, & Welch, 
2001). As a result, antivaccine messages are interesting, 
memorable, and in demand. Antivaccine websites are 
of lower quality (K. E. Wiley, Steffens, Berry, & Leask, 
2017), yet they appear prominently in search-engine 
results (L. Y. Fu, Zook, Spoehr-Labutta, Hu, & Joseph, 
2016). Little research is available on how to counter 
antivaccine messages. Section 2 reviews this issue in 
greater detail, in the Interventions to Increase Confi-
dence subsection.
The relatively recent emergence of provaccine activ-
ists has yet to be the focus of research; we offer several 
observations based on our understanding of this area. 
Advocates in favor of vaccination have typically been 
health-care providers or scientists until the recent 
emergence of provaccination activists. Examples 
include groups of citizens who rally on social media 
to counteract the presence of antivaccination activists 
and parents affected by the loss or illness of a child 
from a vaccine-preventable disease who become orga-
nized campaigners. Some provaccination activists 
lobby for stricter vaccination laws or the funding of a 
new vaccine program. Many countries have national 
and regional provaccine coalitions. In the United 
States, these coalitions exist in many states and nation-
ally, funded by the federal government and nongov-
ernmental organizations. These organizations are 
typically networks of vaccination professionals and 
other stakeholders and have funding that precludes 
political advocacy. Very little is known about the dis-
tribution, characteristics, and impacts of such provac-
cine actors and networks.
Conclusion
In summary, routine vaccination involves many people 
and around 20 vaccines, delivered in different settings, 
to people of different ages who have different resources 
and access to medical care. Vaccination behavior can 
be affected by the behaviors of providers, employers, 
immunization managers, legislators and other organiza-
tions. The action of getting a vaccine is the behavior 
our article generally focuses on. Vaccination problems 
include inadequate coverage of vaccines among chil-
dren, adolescents, and adults; delaying beyond the rec-
ommended age; and sudden drops in vaccination 
coverage in the face of safety scares. Active refusal is 
not the main concern for most vaccines; delaying or 
spreading out vaccination is more of a concern, espe-
cially in high-income countries. Inadequate active 
demand in low- and middle-income countries is also a 
problem. Activist efforts are attention grabbing and can 
occasionally have a large impact on vaccine coverage 
in a nation, primarily by influencing policy, but antivac-
cination advocates themselves represent a very small 
proportion of unvaccinated people.
Given the incredible impact and value of vaccination, 
its underuse in countries where it is available and 
affordable is an avoidable tragedy. This ongoing crisis 
motivates the focus of our article on understanding why 
people get vaccinated and why they do not. Psychology 
can help to address vaccination problems related to 
coverage, timeliness, and robustness. In the next sec-
tions of our article, we examine these problems from 
three different psychological perspectives: how people 
think and feel, social processes, and facilitating behav-
ior directly. The sections (a) examine theoretical and 
conceptual frames for analyzing vaccination problems, 
(b) review correlational evidence, and then (c) consider 
interventions based on these theories.
 158 
Brewer et al.
Section 2: What People Think and Feel
Being motivated to get vaccinated is in many ways the 
result of deliberation by individuals. It makes sense 
then that substantial research has explored how 
thoughts and feelings inform people’s motivation to get 
vaccinated. One general area of investigation is how 
people view the infectious disease (the hazard). This 
research includes risk appraisals such as perceived risk 
and worry. Another general area of investigation is how 
people react to vaccination itself (the behavior). This 
research involves confidence, which includes measures 
such as perceived vaccine effectiveness and concern 
about side effects. We review the key findings from 
these and related areas and, at the end of this section, 
apply them to the question of why physician recom-
mendation is so effective.
We see risk appraisals, confidence, motivation, and 
behavior as distinct and separable constructs. These dis-
tinctions and their causal ordering are similar to several 
theories of behavior such as the theory of planned 
behavior and the theory of reasoned action (Fishbein & 
Ajzen, 2010). Furthermore, the models suggest that risk 
appraisals and confidence in vaccination can increase 
motivation to get vaccinated, which in turn leads to 
increased vaccination (Fig. 2). We examine each of these 
constructs below.
Appraisals of risk
One way to think about motivators of vaccination is to 
imagine people as rational actors, pursuing best out-
comes for themselves and those close to them. Thus, 
to understand vaccination and other health behaviors, 
psychologists first looked to utility models developed 
by economists. These models propose that people 
make decisions by thinking about potential conse-
quences. People appraise both how likely and how 
bad (or good) the consequences would be and opt 
for the action that leads to the best future. These 
intuitions about maximizing expected utility animate 
many of the key models of health behavior (Weinstein, 
1993), including the health-belief model ( Janz & 
Becker, 1984), the theory of planned behavior and 
theory of reasoned action (Fishbein & Ajzen, 2010), and 
protection-motivation theory (Rogers, 1975). These 
models identify appraisals of disease risk as key moti-
vators of behavior.
Risk appraisals as correlates of vaccination. In the 
context of vaccination, risk appraisals focus on the infec-
tious agent and the harm it can cause. Widely studied risk 
appraisals include perceived likelihood (how likely a per-
son is to get infected) and perceived severity (how bad 
the infection would be). Meta-analyses have shown that 
both these risk beliefs are associated with vaccination 
behavior (Brewer, Chapman, et al., 2007) and other heath 
behaviors (Floyd, Prentice-Dunn, & Rogers, 2000; Harrison, 
Mullen, & Green, 1992). Across 12 studies, people who 
perceived higher likelihood of harm (r = .26) were more 
likely to receive a vaccination. Likewise, among people 
with higher perceived severity of harm, vaccination was 
more likely, although the association was smaller (r = 
.16 across 32 studies). Some researchers suggest per-
ceived vulnerability (feeling personally susceptible) is 
separate and distinct from beliefs about likelihood or 
severity. This belief is also associated with receiving a 
vaccination (r = .24 across 15 studies; Brewer, Chapman, 
et al., 2007).
Research on risk appraisals has also focused on 
anticipated regret, the expectation that an unpleasant 
outcome will lead a person to wish they had made a 
different decision (Sandberg & Conner, 2008). Research-
ers have proposed that anticipated regret is a primary 
motivator of receiving a vaccination. A recent meta-
analysis largely supported this speculation (Brewer, 
DeFrank, & Gilkey, 2016). Anticipating that one would 
regret a decision not to get vaccinated was associated 
with receiving a vaccination (r = .27) in 18 studies. 
Anticipated regret stood out as a stronger predictor of 
intentions than other types of anticipated affect (e.g., 
anticipated guilt). Anticipated regret was also generally 
a stronger predictor of intentions and behavior than 
other risk appraisals, such as perceived likelihood, per-
ceived severity, and worry (Brewer et al., 2016). This 
may be because the construct captures a combination 
of affect and cognition or because anticipated regret 
taps a natural process of imagining the consequences 
of a vaccination decision.
Disease Risk 
Appraisal
Vaccination
(or Refusal, 
Delay)
Motivation
(or 
Hesitancy)
Vaccine 
Confidence
+
+
+
+
–
Fig. 2. Thoughts and feelings that influence vaccination. Risk 
appraisals include perceived risk, worry, anticipated regret, and fear. 
Confidence includes positive and negative attitudes toward vaccina-
tion and attitudes toward vaccination providers and systems. Moti-
vation includes intentions, hesitancy, willingness, and acceptability. 
Vaccination behavior includes uptake, delay, and refusal. Associa-
tions are positive (+) or negative (–).
 Psychology of Vaccination 
159
Another conceptualization of risk appraisal is a lack 
of concern about vaccine-preventable diseases (H. J. 
Larson et al., 2014). As advances in vaccine develop-
ment make vaccinations more effective, fewer people 
have personal experiences with the diseases. It is 
unclear whether this lack of experience lowers per-
ceived risk or mutes affective reactions to the disease. 
Furthermore, because some vaccines, such as the 
seasonal-influenza vaccine, are repeated periodically 
(Gierisch, Reiter, Rimer, & Brewer, 2010), people receive 
ongoing feedback from past vaccination behavior and 
its consequences (or lack thereof). Not receiving a vac-
cination and experiencing no repercussions can rein-
force the decision not to get vaccinated in the future 
(Kahn & Luce, 2006). Low concern remains an under-
studied area in part because no standard measure exists 
and studies to capture the phenomenon are difficult 
and costly to conduct. Disease outbreaks due to low 
vaccination can increase uptake immediately thereafter 
(Oster, 2016).
An empirical approach is to look at how different 
risk appraisals intercorrelate. Such an approach led to 
the tri-risk model, which identifies three correlated risk 
components, each of which has unique predictive value 
with respect to health behaviors (Ferrer, Klein, 
Persoskie, Avishai-Yitshak, & Sheeran, 2016). The first 
component is deliberative risk, which includes likeli-
hood beliefs, such as beliefs about chance, probability 
and risk. A second component is experiential risk, 
which includes susceptibility beliefs, vividness, and gut-
level impressions. These first two components corre-
spond loosely to the constructs of perceived likelihood 
and perceived vulnerability described previously. As 
reviewed above, these beliefs are associated with 
receipt of various vaccines among many different 
populations.
A third component of the tri-risk model is affective 
risk, which includes worry, anxiety, and fear. Worry 
motivates people to get vaccinated. People are more 
likely to get the seasonal-influenza vaccine if they 
worry about getting the flu or expect that getting vac-
cinated would make them worry less (Chapman & 
Coups, 2006; Weinstein et al., 2007). The finding holds 
in various populations such as healthy adults, asthmatic 
children, pregnant women, and gay and bisexual men 
(Gorman, Brewer, Wang, & Chambers, 2012; Reiter, 
McRee, Katz, & Paskett, 2015; Szilagyi, Rodewald, 
Savageau, Yoos, & Doane, 1992; Tucker Edmonds, 
Coleman, Armstrong, & Shea, 2011) and with various 
vaccines, such as the seasonal-influenza vaccine, the 
HPV vaccine, and the pandemic influenza vaccine 
(Bish, Yardley, Nicoll, & Michie, 2011; Setbon & Raude, 
2010). Few studies have examined the role of fear of 
infection or disease as a motivator of vaccination, and 
there has yet to be a meta-analytic assessment of the 
role of affect in motivating vaccination.
Risk reappraisal as a correlate of vaccination. A 
perennial question is whether new vaccines, by making 
people feel protected and thus less at risk, encourage 
people to “spend” that risk surplus on unhealthy patterns 
of behavior. This phenomenon, sometimes called risk 
compensation, disinhibition, or licensing, is especially 
problematic when vaccines are imperfectly effective and 
people overestimate the protection they receive. For 
example, getting the Lyme disease vaccine (which is no 
longer on the market but was ~70% effective) could con-
fer a false sense of security and prompt a drop-off in 
protective behavior. A study with U.S. adults found that 
Lyme disease vaccination indeed reduced perceived like-
lihood of infection, but it did not reduce self-protective 
behavior such as checking for ticks after being outdoors 
(Brewer, Cuite, Herrington, & Weinstein, 2007). Likewise, 
many studies have found that girls and women who have 
received the HPV vaccine are not more likely to engage in 
sexual behavior, become pregnant, or get sexually trans-
mitted infections compared with those who have not 
received the vaccine (Bednarczyk, Davis, Ault, Orenstein, 
& Omer, 2012; Liddon, Leichliter, & Markowitz, 2012). If 
anything, those who received the HPV vaccine were more 
likely to use condoms when having sex (Liddon et al., 
2012). Evidence for licensing effects in moral behavior 
suggests the effect is small at best (Blanken, van de Ven, 
& Zeelenberg, 2015). Thus, disinhibition as a result of vac-
cination is unlikely.
Interventions to increase risk appraisals. Although 
ample evidence points to a correlation between risk 
appraisals and vaccination, few intervention studies pro-
vide evidence for a causal link. A handful of interven-
tions that have successfully changed risk appraisals have 
increased vaccination coverage (Sheeran, Harris, & Epton, 
2014). Across five studies of tetanus and influenza vacci-
nation that successfully changed risk appraisals (includ-
ing perceived likelihood, perceived severity, and negative 
affect), the pooled effect size was d = 0.33, a moderate-
sized intervention effect. No intervention studies isolating 
the effect of changes in anticipated regret on vaccination 
have been published. However, a recent national televi-
sion campaign in the United States played on anticipated 
regret to motivate parents to get the HPV vaccine for 
their adolescent children, and studies have used interven-
tions theorized to harness anticipated regret to motivate 
other health behaviors, such as weight loss (Volpp et al., 
2008).
Research on various health behaviors has found that 
fear-appeal interventions are generally effective in 
changing behavior and are especially effective when 
 160 
Brewer et al.
people experience both heightened fear and a feel-
ing of efficacy for taking action to ameliorate the 
threat (Tannenbaum et al., 2015). Reviews have not 
identified studies showing that fear communication 
increases vaccination coverage (Tannenbaum et al., 
2015). For example, in a classic study, eliciting fear 
increased intention to receive a tetanus vaccination but 
did not affect actual vaccination uptake (Leventhal, 
Singer, & Jones, 1965).
However, fear communication can elicit anger and 
other forms of message reactance (Brehm, 1966; Hall 
et al., 2016, 2017). Those reactions are associated with 
having less intention of and not getting vaccinated 
(Betsch & Böhm, 2016; Leventhal et al., 1965). Thus, 
fear communication may increase intentions to get vac-
cinated, whereas anger toward the message may under-
mine its impact.
Summary of risk appraisal research. Risk appraisal 
research has yielded strong evidence for correlates of 
vaccination. Of particular interest is that anticipated 
regret is likely the risk appraisal with the strongest cor-
relation to vaccination behavior. However, the area has 
yielded few insights into how to increase vaccine uptake, 
in part because vaccination interventions based primarily 
on risk appraisals are few. More than 50 years have 
passed since the first small trial used a fear appeal to 
motivate vaccination (Leventhal et al., 1965), yet we are 
aware of few experiments that have pursued this ques-
tion in the interim (e.g., Ordoñana, González-Javier, 
Espín-López, & Gómez-Amor, 2009).
Confidence
Separate from perceived risk of harm, health-behavior 
theories also focus on beliefs about protective action. 
These behavioral beliefs show up, for example, in the 
health-belief model as perceived benefits ( Janz & 
Becker, 1984) and in the theory of planned behavior 
and theory of reasoned action as attitudes (Fishbein & 
Ajzen, 2010). As applied to vaccination, some refer to 
behavioral attitudes as confidence. Definitions are 
somewhat imprecise but generally include beliefs that 
vaccines work, are safe, and are part of a trustworthy 
medical system. Confidence in this sense includes vac-
cination attitudes and overlaps with faith and trust in 
vaccines. Public-health experts have prioritized confi-
dence in vaccines because of the impact that vaccine 
scares have had on policy, national programs, primary 
care, and patient well-being as noted in Section 1.
Measurement of confidence. Understanding how best 
to measure vaccine confidence is a priority globally. It is 
an important indicator of success in meeting objectives in 
the WHO (2013) Global Vaccine Action Plan. Their pro-
posed indicators include “percentage of countries that 
have assessed (or measured) confidence in vaccination at 
subnational level” and “percentage of un- and under-
vaccinated in whom lack of confidence was a factor that 
influenced their decision” (WHO, 2013, p. 92). The 
National Vaccine Advisory Committee in the United States 
has also recognized the importance of vaccine confidence 
surveillance (National Vaccine Advisory Committee, 2015). 
For this reason, we address the issue of measuring confi-
dence in some depth.
One way to think about vaccine confidence is as a 
nested set of beliefs and attitudes. A United States gov-
ernment working group defined vaccine confidence as 
the trust that parents and providers have in recom-
mended vaccines, providers who give vaccines, and 
processes that leads to vaccine licensure and national 
vaccination schedules (National Vaccine Advisory Com-
mittee, 2015). European researchers have similarly 
argued that confidence suggests “trust in the vaccine 
(the product), trust in the vaccinator or other health 
professional (the provider), and trust in those who 
make the decisions about vaccine provision (the poli-
cymaker)” (H. J. Larson, Schulz, Tucker, and Smith 2015, 
screen 2). We focus here mostly on thoughts and feel-
ings about vaccines, leaving a more extensive discus-
sion of trust in providers to Section 3.
Scales for measuring vaccine confidence typically 
have subscales for vaccine benefit (e.g., perceived effec-
tiveness), vaccine harm (e.g., side effects, safety), and 
sometimes trust in providers. A large number of vaccine 
confidence measures exist for specific vaccines. For 
example, a confidence scale specific to the HPV vaccine 
is the Carolina HPV Immunization Belief and Attitude 
Scale (CHIAS; McRee, Brewer, Reiter, Gottlieb, & Smith, 
2010). The 16-item scale includes subscales labeled 
“effectiveness,” “harms,” “uncertainty,” and “barriers.” A 
17-item scale for influenza vaccine confidence, vali-
dated in three countries, has subscales for “influenza 
perceptions,” “influenza vaccine perceptions,” “trust in 
vaccine stakeholders,” and “social influence” (Wheelock, 
Miraldo, Thomson, Vincent, & Sevdalis, 2017).
Relatively few scales exist to measure attitudes 
toward vaccines in general. One scale, the Vaccination 
Confidence Scale, has eight items that assess vaccine 
“benefits,” “harms,” and “trust in healthcare provider” 
(Gilkey et al., 2014). A four-item short form consists 
of the perceived benefits subscale and performs as well 
as the entire scale, suggesting that harms and trust 
beliefs may be less important in these scales (Gilkey, 
Reiter, et al., 2016). The scale’s psychometric properties 
have been favorably evaluated with national probabil-
ity samples containing a total of 18,977 U.S. parents of 
young children and adolescents. Another scale, the 
 Psychology of Vaccination 
161
Parent Attitudes About Childhood Vaccines, has 15 
items that assess “safety/efficacy,” “general attitudes,” 
and “behavior” (Opel et al., 2011, 2013). The scale’s 
psychometric properties have been evaluated with a 
convenience sample of 437 U.S. parents of young 
children.
Some researchers have used single-item measures or 
multiple items analyzed individually. A consortium 
based in the United Kingdom used four items (efficacy, 
safety, importance, and religious beliefs). The measures 
of perceived vaccine effectiveness, safety, and impor-
tance were highly correlated. In their survey of 65,819 
individuals in 67 countries, vaccine confidence was 
quite high overall (H. J. Larson et al., 2016). The lowest 
endorsement of vaccines as being safe was in European 
countries, especially in France. Across the countries, 
confidence was higher in high-income countries and 
in countries with lower mean education; at the level of 
respondents, confidence was higher among those with 
higher incomes and education.
Finally, some researchers are working on ways to 
assess vaccine confidence using traditional and social-
media indicators. The Vaccine Sentimeter uses natural-
language processing to analyze data from mainstream 
media sources and Twitter (Bahk et al., 2016). Others 
have used machine learning to characterize vaccine 
sentiment of online posts, including Twitter (Dunn 
et al., 2015). In sum, (a) the field has many measures 
of confidence, (b) measuring positive and negative atti-
tudes toward vaccination is necessary, and (c) measur-
ing confidence in specific vaccines adds predictive 
power beyond general vaccine confidence.
Confidence as correlate of behavior. Confidence is 
associated with vaccine uptake (Schmid, Rauber, Betsch, 
Lidolt, & Denker, 2017), including in numerous prospec-
tive studies, but the conditions that strengthen or weaken 
the association are not yet well understood. In the con-
text of seasonal-influenza vaccination, a systematic 
review found that uptake was associated with higher per-
ceived effectiveness in all 17 studies that assessed the 
construct (Chapman & Coups, 1999a). In the context of 
HPV vaccination, perceived effectiveness has been asso-
ciated with uptake in some studies but not others (e.g., 
Brewer et al., 2011; Gilkey et al., 2017; Reiter, McRee, 
et al., 2013; Reiter, Brewer, Gottlieb, McRee, & Smith, 
2009). Studies have shown mixed findings for an associa-
tion between vaccination and perceived harms and rela-
tively few associations with trust in providers (Gilkey, 
McRee, et al., 2016; Gilkey, Reiter, et al., 2016). Many 
confidence studies have used patient or parent self-
report of vaccination behavior, but some have used large 
national probability samples with confirmation of vacci-
nation by clinic records and have reached similar 
conclusions (Gilkey, McRee, et al., 2016; Gilkey, Reiter, 
et al., 2016).
Interventions to increase confidence. Interventions 
appear to be able to increase vaccine confidence, but the 
impact of increased confidence on uptake is unknown. A 
randomized controlled trial (RCT) in Pakistan found that 
discussion groups increased positive attitudes toward 
childhood vaccination (R. Amin et al., 1997). The trial 
also found increased uptake for two of three children’s 
vaccines, although no mediation analysis was performed. 
A systematic review found that educational interventions 
(including brochures, pamphlets, and posters) increased 
vaccination confidence in 8 of 15 studies (Sadaf, Richards, 
Glanz, Salmon, & Omer, 2013); none of the studies 
assessed impact of confidence on vaccine uptake.
Other studies of educational interventions found 
little or no effect on vaccination. A Cochrane review 
concluded that face-to-face educational interventions 
had uncertain effects on vaccination (Kaufman et al., 
2013). Systematic reviews for the CDC’s Community 
Guide to Preventive Services said evidence was insuf-
ficient to recommend education programs that were 
community wide (which may include small or mass 
media, person-to-person interactions, and community 
mobilization) or clinic-based client education. A sys-
tematic review of community-focused interventions 
identified two trials in low-income countries (Saeterdal, 
Lewin, Austvoll-Dahlgren, Glenton, & Munabi-Babigumira, 
2014). An RCT in India found that public meetings and 
leaflet distribution increased the number of children 
who had received at least one vaccination and increased 
tetanus vaccination among pregnant women (Pandey, 
Sehgal, Riboud, Levine, & Goyal, 2007). Neither clinic-
based nor community-wide education has been shown 
to be effective in increasing vaccination, according to 
systematic reviews (Community Preventive Services Task 
Force, 2015).
Several studies conducted since these reviews were 
published show the heterogeneity of study designs and 
findings. An educational effort using a video and writ-
ten information in primary-care clinics targeted parents 
with low vaccine confidence (S. E. Williams et al., 
2013). The intervention increased positive attitudes 
about vaccination but not did not increase vaccine 
uptake. An online experiment showed that providing 
information about vaccine safety and efficacy can have 
unpredictable effects on concerns about vaccination 
and may even increase such concerns in some circum-
stances (Nyhan, Reifler, Richey, & Freed, 2014). Another 
online experiment found that, in terms of increasing 
vaccine confidence, correcting autism myths was inef-
fective but describing the disease risk that vaccination 
can address was effective (Horne, Powell, Hummel, & 
 162 
Brewer et al.
Holyoak, 2015). Finally, a series of experiments showed 
that strong statements that vaccines do not cause risk 
can backfire and actually increase concerns about vac-
cine harm, but only when the source of the information 
is a pharmaceutical company (Betsch & Sachse, 2013).
Effective interventions targeting people low in con-
fidence do not yet exist. For example, no evidence has 
established a best practice for providers to address 
parents’ concerns and questions about vaccination. Sev-
eral suggested approaches based on communication 
skills taught in medical curricula have the general for-
mat of eliciting parents’ concerns, acknowledging them 
without judgment, providing information, and recom-
mending vaccination (Silverman, Kurtz, & Draper, 2005; 
Table 3). Perhaps the earliest such approach is the CASE 
method (Table 3) developed by Singer, a vaccine advo-
cate (Public Health Live!, 2010). Despite being widely 
disseminated, the CASE method 
has not been the sub-
ject of empirical research. The related EASE approach 
was one part of a communication training that increased 
vaccine uptake, but the evaluation did not isolate 
whether EASE itself was effective (Brewer et al., 2017). 
The ask-acknowledge-advise approach was ineffective 
in changing parent vaccine confidence in a trial that 
trained providers (Henrikson et al., 2015).
Research from cognitive and social psychology sug-
gests several important steps to counteract misinforma-
tion that may be useful when addressing vaccination 
myths (Lewandowsky, Ecker, Seifert, Schwarz, & Cook, 
2012). First, understand people’s mental models of vac-
cination (Downs et al., 2008), identify how the rumor 
fills a gap in the model, and offer an alternative expla-
nation. Second, use repeated statements to counteract 
the misinformation, but avoid repeating the incorrect 
statement, which can make it seem familiar and true. 
Third, emphasize what is true to avoid a familiarity 
backfire effect that further entrenches the myth in peo-
ple’s minds. Fourth, warn listeners before sharing a 
myth to make them less likely to be influenced by it. 
Fifth, use materials that are engaging, simple, and in 
plain language. As Lewandowski and colleagues (2012) 
stated, “If the myth is simpler and more compelling 
than your debunking, it will be cognitively more attrac-
tive, and you will risk an overkill backfire effect” 
 
(p. 123). Sixth, consider whether your material might 
threaten closely held values of your audience. If it 
might, focus on potential benefits instead of risks and 
harms, consider using self-affirmation (Sherman, Nelson, 
& Steele, 2000), and consider using approaches that 
change behavior directly without challenging people’s 
values (see Section 4).
Perhaps the most important advice is to instill an 
accurate understanding of vaccination to before people 
develop false beliefs that, once established, can be dif-
ficult to correct (Jolley & Douglas, 2017). Useful insights 
come from fuzzy-trace theory (Blalock & Reyna, 2016; 
Reyna, 2008) which suggest that aiding the creation of 
meaning (i.e., gist) allows people to remember and later 
take action on the information (Reyna, 2012). Antivac-
cine messages often impart a memorable idea (or gist) 
and use emotion to add meaning to their “facts” (Reyna, 
2012). The use of first-person narratives in antivaccine 
messaging may be another reason for its potency 
(Winterbottom, Bekker, Conner, & Mooney, 2008, but 
see Bekker et al., 2013). To have impact, official com-
munications about vaccines should have a clear take-
home message, tell a memorable story, and elicit feeling 
(Shelby & Ernst, 2013).
Table 3. Structured Approaches for Clinicians to Address Vaccination Concerns
Method
Components
Evidence
CASE
Corroborate: acknowledge parent’s concerns 
without judgment
About me: describe own vaccination expertise
Science: explain the relevant scientific findings
Explain/advise: explain why the science 
suggests the patient should be vaccinated and 
recommend vaccination.
None. (Approach described in Public Health 
Live!, 2010)
EASE
Elicit parent’s main concern
Acknowledge parent’s concern without judgment
Share commitment to vaccination
Explain the science
Parent vaccination confidence not assessed. 
Increase in vaccination not attributable to 
EASE. (Brewer et al., 2017)
Ask, Acknowledge, Advise
Ask parent for concerns
Acknowledge parent concerns without judgment
Advise/educate about diseases and vaccine’s 
benefits and risks, recommend vaccination, 
and end with plan of action
Not effective in increasing parent 
vaccination confidence. Vaccination not 
assessed. (Henrikson et al., 2015)
 Psychology of Vaccination 
163
Summary of confidence research. A great deal of 
research on vaccine confidence has accumulated without 
yielding insights for increasing vaccination coverage. 
Many dozens of confidence measures exist, and they 
often correlate with vaccine uptake. Yet we do not know 
how to reliably increase vaccine confidence. Interven-
tions to increase confidence through persuasion and edu-
cation have had no appreciable or reliable effect on 
vaccination coverage. Despite the international fascination 
with vaccine confidence, the direct impact of increased 
confidence on vaccine uptake is unknown.
Vaccination motivation and hesitancy
We conceptualize motivation as wanting to get vacci-
nated or being open to it. Motivation includes the over-
lapping constructs of intention, willingness, acceptability, 
and hesitancy. Thus, hesitancy is a motivational state of 
being conflicted about or opposed to getting vaccinated. 
We specifically define hesitancy as not including past 
vaccination or refusal. As others have noted, past 
research has had an imprecise definition of vaccination 
hesitancy; some definitions have included attitudes, con-
fidence, delay, and refusal (Bedford et al., 2017), a lack 
of precision that has hindered progress in research 
(Peretti-Watel, Larson, Ward, Schulz, & Verger, 2015).
People demonstrate a range of motivation for being 
vaccinated: (a) asking for vaccination when providers 
do not raise the issue, (b) being open to receiving a 
vaccination when presented with the idea but not being 
especially proactive, (c) having a passive hesitancy, (d) 
being initially resistant to vaccination but open to 
persuasion; and (e) being steadfastly opposed to some 
or all vaccines (Benin, Wisler-Scher, Colson, Shapiro, & 
Holmboe, 2006; Gust et al., 2005; Cooper Robbins, Bernard, 
McCaffery, Brotherton, & Skinner, 2010). A study of U.S. 
parents identified the prevalence of five groups in rela-
tion to vaccine acceptance: “immunization advocates,” 
strongly in favor of vaccines (33% of adults); “go along 
to get alongs” (26%); “health advocates,” generally 
trusting of doctors and to some extent vaccines (25%); 
“fencesitters” (13%); and “worrieds” (2.6%; Gust et al., 
2005). Benin et al. (2006) described people who (a) 
accept or do not question vaccines, (b) accept vaccines 
but have concerns, (c) delay or reject some vaccines, 
or (d) reject all vaccines. Cooper Robbins et al. (2010) 
proposed a two-axis taxonomy, with engagement (pas-
sive and active) on one axis and vaccination behavior 
(vaccinated or not) on the other axis. Most people who 
have not gotten vaccinated did so passively (Pearce, 
Marshall, Bedford, & Lynch, 2015; Samad et al., 2006). 
As noted in Section 1, a very small proportion of peo-
ple express ardent opposition to childhood vaccination 
in the form of refusal of all vaccines (1%–2%).
Public-health authorities identify vaccine hesitancy 
as an important problem, but few immunization manag-
ers for national programs identify it as area for concern 
(Dubé, Gagnon, Nickels, Jeram, & Schuster, 2014; Omer 
et al., 2009). We are unaware of direct evidence show-
ing that hesitancy has become more common.
Motivation as correlate of behavior. Motivation is 
associated with a broad range of behaviors, both those 
related to health and those unrelated (for a review of 
systematic reviews, see Webb & Sheeran, 2006). The 
association is reliable and large (d = 1.47). For example, 
among parents who intended to get the HPV vaccine for 
their adolescent daughters, 38% did so in the next year 
compared with 10% who did not intend to get their 
daughters vaccinated (Brewer et al., 2011). However, a 
sizable gap exists between intentions and behavior 
(Sheeran, 2002). Although many parents in the example 
above intended to have their daughters vaccinated and 
did so, the majority of parents did not act on their favor-
able intentions (Brewer et al., 2011). The example illus-
trates a common finding of asymmetry in the link between 
intentions and behavior, sometimes called literal incon-
sistency (Fishbein & Ajzen, 2010). Among parents who 
did not intend to have their children vaccinated, 90% met 
those intentions; in contrast, among parents who did 
intend to have their children vaccinated, only 38% did so 
(Brewer et al., 2011; DiBonaventura & Chapman, 2005). 
Inaction is an easier goal to meet.
People have many ideas of actions they want to take 
to be healthier, but they often do not follow through. 
A large literature has examined conditions that under-
mine the association of intentions and behavior 
(Sheeran & Webb, 2016; Webb & Sheeran, 2006), includ-
ing such barriers as vaccine shortages (Brewer et al., 
2011; DiBonaventura & Chapman, 2005) and logistical 
obstacles (Witteman, Chipenda Dansokho, et al., 2015). 
For example, during the shortage of seasonal-influenza 
vaccine in 2004–2005, many people who attempted to 
get vaccinated were turned away. Intentions assessed 
in the fall of 2004 were associated with later vaccine 
uptake among those not turned away, but the two vari-
ables were unassociated among those who had been 
turned away at least once (Brewer et al., 2011). Other 
moderators include the stability of one’s intentions over 
time, with stronger associations for people with more 
stable intentions (DiBonaventura & Chapman, 2005).
Motivation interventions. Interventions can address 
hesitancy in several different ways. First, an intervention 
can be designed to increase motivation to be vaccinated. 
Interventions that successfully increase intentions reliably 
increase many health behaviors (Sheeran & Webb, 2016; 
Webb & Sheeran, 2006). Many studies have successfully 
 164 
Brewer et al.
increased people’s intentions to get vaccinated. We are 
aware of no studies demonstrating that increasing inten-
tions or reducing hesitancy increases vaccination coverage 
(Jarrett et al., 2015; Webb & Sheeran, 2006). Researchers 
have proposed motivational interviewing as a way to 
address vaccination hesitancy (Leask et al., 2012). Com-
munication skills that are part of this approach focus on 
working with resistance, identifying motivation to be 
vaccinated, and evoking and reinforcing change talk 
(Miller & Rollnick, 2013). Motivational interviewing is 
effective in many contexts (Rubak, Sandbæk, Lauritzen, 
& Christensen, 2005), but studies do not yet show that it 
increases vaccination coverage. An RCT of motivational 
interviewing in a pediatric clinic showed an increase in 
HPV vaccination that was not statistically significant (51% 
vs. 56%; Joseph et al., 2016), and an uncontrolled study 
of the technique did not increase vaccination uptake in a 
community pharmacy but did increase readiness for two 
of five vaccines examined (Brackett, Butler, & Chapman, 
2015). Challenges to routine use of motivational inter-
viewing include the length of training (a median of 9 hr), 
although briefer trainings are in development (Lundahl 
et al., 2013). In addition, vaccination is but one of many 
issues to cover in medical visits; such visits last only 18 
min on average for adults in the United States (Olson 
et al., 2004), but even very brief motivational interviews 
take 10 to 20 min (Lundahl et al., 2013).
Second, an intervention can target a group of parents 
with a known motivation profile (e.g., hesitant). No 
published interventions designed to target hesitant par-
ents have led to an increase in vaccination coverage 
(Sadaf et al., 2013; S. E. Williams, 2014), although some 
targeted interventions have changed intentions, which 
the authors interpret as a proxy for behavior. Third, 
interventions can focus on parents who intend to have 
their children vaccinated and try to close the intention-
behavior gap (Sheeran & Webb, 2016; Webb & Sheeran, 
2006). Interventions to increase the correspondence of 
intentions and behavior include minimizing logistical 
barriers and addressing implementation intentions, 
which we discuss in a later section on changing behav-
ior directly (Section 4).
Other topics related to thoughts  
and feelings
Decision aids. To help patients make informed health-
care choices, decision aids describe treatment options’ ben-
efits and harms, often including numerical estimates of their 
likelihood or magnitude; guide people to clarify the value 
they place on those benefits and harms; and encourage peo-
ple to make a choice (Stacey et al., 2017). Decision aids were 
originally developed for situations with clinical equipoise— 
that is, situations in which options are available, but no 
single option is best, given the best evidence. The absence 
of a best action for a population makes a “best” decision one 
that is based solely on the preferences of the individual 
patient. Decision aids address the general call for more 
informed and participatory health-care interactions.
We suggest that it is inappropriate to offer vaccina-
tion decision aids as part of routine clinical practice 
with all patients. Vaccination is not a situation of clinical 
equipoise: Evidence strongly favors vaccination, 
national recommendations clearly indicate who should 
be vaccinated, and the option to not be vaccinated 
affects people beyond the individual decider. In the 
context of patients who have already expressed vac-
cination hesitancy, decision aids could be a helpful 
adjunct to communication from health-care providers.
Studies of decision aids have not tested them specifi-
cally in hesitant populations. However, RCTs with gen-
eral populations show limited effects on vaccine uptake 
but positive effects on intentions and attitudes. In an 
RCT with pregnant women in New Zealand, a decision 
aid about the measles-mumps-rubella (MMR) vaccine did 
not increase women’s self-reported vaccination of their 
infants (Wroe, Turner, & Owens, 2005), but it did increase 
their intentions to vaccinate and vaccination timeliness; 
it also reduced anxiety about vaccination. In an RCT with 
parents in the United Kingdom, an online decision aid 
did not increase MMR vaccination; uptake was 100% in 
the intervention group and 99% in the usual-care group 
(Shourie et al., 2013). However, the decision aid reduced 
people’s internal conflict about the decision. In a pre-
post uncontrolled study in Australia, an evaluation of an 
earlier version of the United Kingdom decision aid found 
increased positive parental attitudes toward MMR vac-
cination (Wallace, Leask, & Trevena, 2006). In an RCT 
with parents in the United States, giving risk information 
and an online values-clarification exercise did not 
increase parental self-report of having their children vac-
cinated against seasonal influenza in the 6 months after 
the exercise (Witteman, Chipenda Dansokho, et al., 
2015). The intervention increased parents’ intentions to 
have their children vaccinated, especially among parents 
hesitant to do so. In an RCT in the United States, a 
decision-support tool increased the number of physi-
cians who themselves got hepatitis B vaccine or screen-
ing (Clancy, Cebul, & Williams, 1988). In an RCT, a 
decision aid led to more positive HPV vaccination atti-
tudes, but the study did not assess behavior (Kennedy, 
Sapsis, Stokley, Curtis, & Gust, 2011). In an RCT with 
health-care personnel in Canada, a decision aid improved 
“confidence” and reduced uncertainty but did not 
increase intention to get the seasonal-influenza vaccine 
(Chambers et al., 2012).
In summary, one trial has shown that decision aids 
increase vaccination uptake and several others have not; 
 Psychology of Vaccination 
165
one showed increased vaccination intentions and another 
increased timeliness. Although studies have observed 
increased knowledge and satisfaction and reduced deci-
sional conflict in the limited evaluation of vaccination 
decision aids to date, the importance of these outcomes 
for increasing vaccination coverage is unclear. Some of 
the trials had relatively small samples (~100) and thus 
were underpowered to detect even modest differences. 
Moreover, the limited samples precluded examining 
whether decision aids were more effective for people 
who are hesitant about vaccination (but see Witteman, 
Dansokho, et al., 2015). The many limitations of the 
studies make any conclusion tentative.
Past behavior as correlate of vaccination. Having 
received a vaccination in the past is a reliable predictor 
of receiving a vaccination in the future. Having received 
an influenza vaccine strongly correlates with getting the 
vaccine in a subsequent year (Chapman & Coups, 1999a; 
Schmid et al., 2017). Receiving one recommended vac-
cine is associated with being more likely to receive other 
recommended vaccines (Kessels et al., 2012), an insight 
that is useful in the context of new vaccines and pan-
demics (Bish et al., 2011). The pattern holds across par-
ents and children (Robison & Osborn, 2017). Although 
past behavior is an important correlate, the past behavior 
itself can be the result of various psychological mecha-
nisms, several of which we discussed earlier, as well as 
structural factors. In other words, past behavior should 
reflect people’s thoughts and feelings about vaccination 
to the extent that these constructs explain why people 
got vaccinated in the past (Weinstein, 2007). This means 
that it may be more productive to study and intervene in 
the psychological antecedents of vaccination.
Irrationality. Much of the material in this section on 
thoughts and feelings about vaccination presumes that 
people are rational creatures who thoughtfully seek out 
information and then impartially and accurately make 
sense of it. However, people’s busy lives mean that they 
cannot spend limitless time seeking out all possible infor-
mation; information is overly abundant even for the 
casual seeker, and making sense of it all can require 
more cognitive capacity than people have at any one 
time. One result is that people take mental shortcuts, 
called heuristics. These generally save time and effort but 
also lead to predictable irrational errors, called biases 
(Tversky & Kahneman, 1974).
One such bias is the omission bias, a preference for 
inaction even when taking action is substantially more 
beneficial (Ritov & Baron, 1990, 1999). In the context 
of vaccination, people give disproportionate weight to 
harms of receiving a vaccination and dismiss harms that 
accrue from not receiving a vaccination. For example, 
when a hypothetical scenario attributed symptoms to 
a vaccine adverse event rather than to a disease, parents 
said that symptoms would be more severe and last 
longer (Brown et al., 2010). Exhibiting the omission 
bias is associated with lower parent willingness to have 
their children get the pertussis vaccine (Asch et al., 
1994) and with lower vaccination coverage (Meszaros 
et al., 1996). Likewise, seasonal-influenza vaccination 
is less common among healthy adults who showed the 
omission bias (DiBonaventura & Chapman, 2008). Some 
have hypothesized that the omission bias may be a 
marker for negative attitudes toward vaccination or 
anticipated regret (Connolly & Reb, 2003). To date, the 
omission bias has not been the target of interventions 
to increase vaccination uptake.
Another bias that may affect vaccination is the confir-
mation bias, the tendency to seek out or overweight infor-
mation that is consistent with one’s original hypothesis 
(Klayman, 1995). This tendency to favor one’s original 
position and to find evidence consistent with that view 
may help to explain why those opposed to vaccination 
maintain that position despite the sound evidence pre-
sented to them by others. A classic study (Lord, Ross, & 
Lepper, 1979) demonstrated that presenting evidence does 
not cause individuals to bring their beliefs more in line 
with the evidence but instead causes them to hold their 
original beliefs more strongly. Presenting the same evi-
dence to two groups with polarized views does not bring 
their viewpoints closer together but actually increases the 
polarization between the groups. Cultural cognitions that 
reflect strongly held moral values shape beliefs about 
some vaccines, making those beliefs difficult to change 
(Kahan, 2013; Kahan, Jenkins-Smith, & Braman, 2011). 
In the words of a vaccine-hesitant person in an online 
discussion who rejected evidence of vaccine safety, “The 
science is tainted by bias. Do some more reading” 
(Rodriguez, 2016).
Other thoughts and feelings. This section reviews re 
search 
on thoughts and feelings most commonly studied in the 
context of vaccination. We acknowledge that this focus on 
some constructs but not others is somewhat artificial, 
excluding, for example, values and self-efficacy (A. B. 
Amin et al., 2017). Many of these other constructs are cor-
related with vaccination (Bish et al., 2011). However, to 
our knowledge, none has been the basis of effective inter-
ventions and thus would not meaningfully change this sec-
tion’s main conclusions.
Health-care providers vaccinating themselves. A goal 
for many health-care organizations is full vaccine cov-
erage of their staff, but few reach this goal without 
extensive interventions that often include requirements 
for vaccination (see Section 4). Health-care workers’ 
 166 
Brewer et al.
reasons for receiving or not receiving a vaccination are 
similar to those of the general population (Capolongo, 
Dibonaventura, & Chapman, 2006). Research suggests that 
the same psychology that motivates the general public to 
get vaccination also motivates health-care providers, includ-
ing risk appraisals and vaccine confidence (Corace et al., 
2016; Herzog et al., 2013).
Conclusion
Thoughts and feelings are not currently a reliable basis 
for interventions to increase vaccination. Risk appraisals 
and confidence may be productive bases for future 
interventions, but the literature has more gaps than 
answers at this point, as we noted earlier. Increasing 
fear of harm is known to increase health behaviors, but 
the facilitating and constraining conditions in the con-
text of vaccination are not well understood. Interven-
tions have increased people’s confidence and intentions, 
but the impact on actual vaccination behavior is not 
known.
Correlational studies show that what people think and 
feel motivates their vaccination behavior, generally in 
line with the model in Figure 2. Risk appraisals include 
thinking (perceived likelihood, perceived severity, sus-
ceptibility/gist), feeling (fear), and amalgams of the two 
(anticipated regret, worry). Of the risk appraisals, antici-
pated regret has the strongest association with vaccina-
tion behavior, but its causal role is unclear. Likewise, 
many varieties of confidence exist, and it is easy to 
measure confidence. With respect to confidence, atti-
tudes regarding whether vaccination is safe or harmful 
are more closely tied to vaccination behavior than trust 
in providers or the health-care system. Research on con-
fidence is not yet synthesized to identify whether some 
aspects of vaccine safety and vaccine harm are more 
motivating than others. Appraisals of risk and vaccine 
confidence are associated with greater motivation, which 
in turn is associated with being more likely to get vac-
cinated. The recursive paths in Figure 2 also have some 
support; the literature shows that being vaccinated lowers 
perceived risk. Confidence may similarly be the result of 
experiences with vaccination (e.g., Schuler, Reiter, Smith, 
& Brewer, 2011), but this pathway has been little studied. 
Prospective studies are needed in this area given the sub-
stantial interest from policymakers and practitioners.
The literature has generally not considered whether 
risk appraisals and confidence are epiphenomena 
(Brewer, Weinstein, Cuite, & Herrington, 2004). Risk 
appraisals and confidence may be the result of vaccina-
tion or other processes that correlate with vaccination. 
For example, perceived likelihood and severity of 
vaccine-preventable disease are measurable in surveys, 
but survey answers could arise from some more 
fundamental sense of threat that could be gist-like or 
affective in nature. The sense of threat could motivate 
behavior and at the same time inform appraisals of risk 
and in this way create a spurious correlation of risk 
appraisals and vaccination. Above all, the sense of 
threat could motivate behavior even in the absence of 
perceptions of likelihood or severity. Evidence has 
accumulated in other areas suggesting that affect may 
sometimes cause, and at other times result from, risk 
appraisals (Kiviniemi et al., 2017).
Just as the relationship between perceived risk and 
vaccination behavior can be bidirectional (i.e., risk per-
ceptions guiding behavior, and behavior updating beliefs 
about risk), so too are risk perceptions and vaccination 
behavior affected by the behaviors and beliefs of the 
larger social group. As we discuss in more depth in Sec-
tion 3, others’ vaccination-related beliefs and behavior—
especially close others—can affect an individual’s risk 
for infection, risk appraisals, and vaccination confidence 
and hence that individual’s vaccination behavior.
Provider recommendations. Although health-care pro-
vi 
der recommendations are influential, psychological sci-
ence has not yet fully explained why they motivate 
vaccination uptake. Any of the mechanisms described in 
this section on thoughts and feelings can provide reason-
able explanations. If a provider recommends HPV vacci-
nation, it may cause people to see the hazards as more 
likely and severe or to see themselves as more suscepti-
ble. A recommendation could increase beliefs in the vac-
cine’s safety and reduce concerns about harm. Any of 
these changes would presumably increase motivation to 
get a vaccination. Presumptive announcements that a 
child is due for vaccination may be the most potent form 
of provider recommendation (Brewer et al., 2017; Opel 
et al., 2015), as we discuss in Section 4.
Providers must address parents’ vaccination ques-
tions and concerns many times a day, yet no evidence-
based practice exists for doing so effectively. Most 
currently suggested approaches involve some element 
of acknowledging patients’ concerns as a first step (see 
Table 3). Self-affirmation and motivational interviewing 
techniques were developed specifically to address this 
sort of problem (Leask et al., 2012), and at least one 
intervention has used motivational interviewing as part 
of a multicomponent trial to increase vaccination uptake 
(A. F. Dempsey, personal communication, May 14, 
2017). Psychological research on reactance, debunking 
myths, and resistance to new information offers addi-
tional insights for such interventions (Hall et al., 2016, 
2017; Lewandowsky et al., 2012).
Up to this point, we have focused on the psychology 
of the individual. However, people are social creatures 
whose thoughts and feelings also bear on their social 
 Psychology of Vaccination 
167
context. We next turn to understanding how such social 
processes affect vaccination.
Section 3: Social Processes
Vaccination is an inherently social activity because it 
takes place in the context of human interactions, and 
receiving a vaccination (or not) affects the health of oth-
ers. In this section, we examine the influence of social 
interactions, from simple dyads to complex population 
networks and strategic behavior, on vaccination (see Fig. 
3). The first theme in this section is social dyads, such 
as the relationship between patient and provider. Patients 
most often obtain vaccinations from their health-care 
providers, and consequently the trust relationship 
between providers and patients is paramount. Effective 
providers recommend vaccination to their patients, and 
the way in which providers and patients interact has 
critical implications for vaccination adherence. Another 
important social dyad is parents and children. Because 
the majority of vaccinations are on the pediatric sched-
ule, parents make decisions about vaccinating their chil-
dren more often than people directly decide to vaccinate 
themselves. Consequently, the caretaking relationship 
between parents and children is a potentially important 
influence on vaccination choices.
The second theme in this section is social networks, 
which play an important role in vaccination attitudes 
and behavior. Individuals may confer with family mem-
bers, friends, and members of their social network 
about vaccination attitudes, making vaccination deci-
sions a part of their social identity. The third theme in 
this section is social norms. People tend to fit their 
actions to the behavior and expectations of others, and 
vaccination is no exception. Thus, the norms they per-
ceive can be influential. Health providers’ own vaccina-
tion behavior, and how they propagate social norms 
about vaccination among their colleagues, is important 
because their own vaccination protects patients from 
infection.
The fourth theme in this section is vaccination stra-
tegic behavior. Vaccination affects health at the popula-
tion level because it protects the unvaccinated through 
herd immunity. As a result, strategic motivations to 
shield others from infection (i.e., altruism) can drive 
vaccination behavior, and the temptation to take advan-
tage of the protection provided by others (i.e., free rid-
ing) can deter vaccination. These four themes, which 
we explore below, show how studying vaccination in a 
social context is a key part of understanding the patterns 
of when people do and do not receive a vaccination.
Social dyads
Provider-patient dyads. Most vaccination decisions 
take place in the context of a relationship. Patients typi-
cally receive vaccinations from a physician, nurse, or 
pharmacist. People consistently rate these three profes-
sions among the highest for honesty and ethical stan-
dards (Gallup, 2016). Trust is a key component of vaccine 
confidence (Gilkey et al., 2014); however, variation in 
trust of health-care providers does not appear to explain 
variation in vaccination coverage (Gilkey, McRee, et al., 
2016; Gilkey, Reiter, et al., 2016). Thus, it is not clear that 
trust in providers is the reason that provider recommen-
dations of vaccination are so influential: Patients who 
feel less trust are not any less likely to get vaccinated. 
Trust in government bodies who set vaccination sched-
ules and recommendations may be a more important 
determinant of vaccination uptake, or at least motivation. 
Indeed, trust in government predicts H1N1 vaccination 
(Freimuth, Musa, Hilyard, Quinn, & Kim, 2014), and trust 
in the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) predicts 
stated willingness to take antiviral medication (Quinn, 
Hilyard, Castaneda-Angarita, & Freimuth, 2015).
Surrogate decision making. Parents and other surro-
gates decide, with providers’ advice, whether minors will 
receive vaccinations because laws often prevent minors 
from giving consent. As offspring enter adolescence, they 
Social
Network
(Homophily)
Social Norms
Social Strategizing
(e.g., Altruism, 
Free-Riding
Vaccination
(or Refusal, Delay)
Contagion
Fig. 3. Social processes that influence vaccination. The gray circle shows the social phe-
nomenon, and the boxes show person-level constructs.
 168 
Brewer et al.
become more involved in vaccination decisions. Half of 
teens play some role in decisions to get the HPV vaccine, 
and by age 17, a quarter make the decision on their own 
(McRee, Reiter, & Brewer, 2010). Even so, many teens are 
uncomfortable making vaccination decisions without 
consulting their parents (Kennedy, Stokley, Curtis, & 
Gust, 2012). Some parents see vaccination decisions as 
an opportunity to increase children’s involvement in their 
health-care decisions as they grow into adulthood. 
Although many interventions target parents or other care-
givers, we know little about how interventions differently 
affect people who are deciding about vaccines for them-
selves or others.
In studies of families, adolescents and their parents 
have quite similar attitudes about HPV vaccination 
(Moss, Reiter, & Brewer, 2015; Vietri, Li, Galvani, & 
Chapman, 2012). It would be difficult to examine agree-
ment in vaccination attitudes between parents and 
younger children, but the data from adolescents sug-
gests that parents provide a good proxy for their chil-
dren’s vaccination preferences.
Research on decision making in general has demon-
strated that being in the surrogate role can alter prefer-
ences. People value the future consequences of health 
decisions (e.g., disease prevention) similarly whether 
they make the decisions for themselves or for someone 
else (Cairns & van der Pol, 1999). Some evidence shows 
that people are more risk averse when making deci-
sions for others than when deciding for themselves 
(Roszkowski & Snelbecker, 1990). In addition, surro-
gates tend to choose more aggressive treatment for 
others than the patients would choose for themselves, 
an overtreatment bias (Fagerlin, Ditto, Danks, Houts, & 
Smucker, 2001). Surrogates’ greater risk aversion and 
greater interest in treatment compared with people 
choosing for themselves could explain why parents are 
more positive about vaccinating their adolescent chil-
dren against HPV than the children are about getting 
vaccinated (Vietri et al., 2012). Thus, the many vaccina-
tion decisions that parents make on behalf of their 
children are of no small importance.
Other dyads. Multiple aspects of family relationships 
may shape vaccination behavior. For example, dynamics 
within a couple have important influences on health 
behavior; the behavior of one person influences the health 
behavior of the other (Lewis et al., 2006). Classic studies 
have shown that individuals imitate the behavior of those 
around them (Bandura, 1971), suggesting that individuals 
may imitate the vaccination behavior of others. Thus, one 
family member may encourage vaccination among others 
through example, recommendation, or by scheduling vac-
cination appointments for other family members.
Social networks
A social network is a web of relations and interactions 
between people. Vaccinators tend to know and associ-
ate with other vaccinators, and nonvaccinators tend to 
know and associate with other nonvaccinators (Onnela 
et al., 2016). This clustering of vaccination attitudes can 
be explained in terms of social-network theory.
Social-network theory posits that a person’s place in 
a social network predicts the degree to which that per-
son and other network members influence one anoth-
er’s beliefs and behavior. That is, a person who is 
centrally located in the network will be more heavily 
influenced by others and also have a larger influence 
on others than a person with sparser network connec-
tions (Centola, 2015).
People tend to self-select with whom they associ-
ate—a concept called homophily. Homophily is a cor-
relational phenomenon in which, for a variety of 
reasons, including self-selection, people cluster in 
physical and social space on the basis of similarity. 
Furthermore, influence tends to travel across net-
works—called contagion (Mcpherson, Smith-Lovin, & 
Cook, 2001). In contrast to homophily, contagion is an 
explicitly causal process whereby influence passes 
through social networks. Through these two processes 
of homophily and contagion, network members tend 
to have characteristics that are similar to those of their 
close contacts (Christakis & Fowler, 2013).
Of particular importance to public health is that net-
work connections spread both information and infec-
tion, and thus location with the network puts people 
at risk for disease. Someone with high degree centrality 
is connected to many other network members and thus 
is in a key position to be a superspreader of an infec-
tious disease (Wasserman & Faust, 1994). For example, 
an individual with a more central location in the net-
work will catch an infectious disease earlier on average 
than someone with a more peripheral position 
(Christakis & Fowler, 2010). Someone with high close-
ness centrality has short communication paths through 
the network to other agents and is thus in a key posi-
tion to spread vaccination information, as is someone 
with high information centrality, which is a measure 
of all network paths originating from a specific actor 
(Wasserman & Faust, 1994). Thus, a person’s place in 
the network contributes to the spread of an epidemic 
in multiple ways.
Correlational evidence. Correlational studies demon-
strate that individuals with similar health characteristics tend 
to cluster together in a network. Thus, for example, smokers 
tend to associate with other smokers and nonsmokers with 
 Psychology of Vaccination 
169
other nonsmokers. Furthermore, when one smoker quits, 
other network contacts are more likely to quit than they 
otherwise would have been (Christakis & Fowler, 2008). 
However, with correlational data, it is not possible to fully 
disentangle whether homophily or contagion is the source 
of these effects (Shalizi & Thomas, 2011). Few observational 
studies have examined homophily and contagion related to 
vaccination in social networks, although some have demon-
strated geographical clustering of undervaccinated children 
(Lieu, Ray, Klein, Chung, & Kulldorff, 2015).
Modeling simulations, often built using observational 
data, support the conclusion that clustering exacerbates 
disease spread. Nonrandom mixing of individuals in a 
network can explain why disease outbreaks occur even 
when the level of immunity exceeds the herd-immunity 
threshold that would be needed to prevent progression 
of an epidemic under the assumption of random mixing 
(Glasser, Feng, Omer, Smith, & Rodewald, 2016). One 
modeling analysis of social networks demonstrated that 
homophily in social networks—individuals with similar 
vaccination views clustering together—results in pock-
ets of disease susceptibility and increased likelihood of 
disease outbreak (Salathé & Bonhoeffer, 2008). A simi-
lar analysis (Eames, 2009) demonstrated that clustering 
of parents’ vaccination opinions results in clustering of 
unvaccinated children and hence more disease out-
breaks. This result is sensitive to both the extent of 
parents’ opinion clustering and the overlap between 
the parents’ and children’s networks (e.g., parents who 
share opinions have children who interact). A final 
modeling article (F. Fu, Rosenbloom, Wang, & Nowak, 
2011) demonstrates that imitating others within a social 
network can result in low vaccination coverage, under 
certain assumptions, because individuals end up imitat-
ing successful free riders. The role of free riding is 
discussed in a later section.
The spread of infectious disease requires physical 
contact or proximity, often a result of ongoing geo-
graphical clustering of people but also a result of travel 
and migration. In contrast, the spread of ideas does not 
require physical proximity and can occur via in-person 
conversation, distance communication, media, and 
social media. Thus, the networks that spread disease 
may only partially overlap the networks that spread 
vaccination information. Studies have found marked 
clustering of sentiment about vaccination in social-
media conversations about vaccination (Dunn et al., 
2015). Indeed, such conversations can be tracked as an 
indicator of social-network support for vaccination 
(Bahk et al., 2016; Centola, 2013).
Social contagion and disease contagion can interact 
when the social network and geographical cluster over-
lap (Bauch & Galvani, 2013). For example, a highly 
connected node in the social network (e.g., a celebrity) 
could spread suggestions that vaccines are risky, 
resulting in the spread of beliefs and an associated 
decrease in the number of people who get vaccinated 
(social contagion). Consequently, an infectious disease 
could spread easily through the network (disease con-
tagion), which may in turn prompt individuals to get 
vaccinated (Bauch & Galvani, 2013).
Experimental network studies. Correlational evidence 
 
from real-world behaviors such as smoking leaves open 
the question of whether clustering of similar people is 
solely the result of homophily or also results from conta-
gion. Experimental evidence indicates that health behav-
ior does indeed spread through social networks via 
contagion (Centola, 2010). In an ambitious online exper-
iment, more than 1,500 participants were randomly 
assigned to one of two network structures that allowed 
them to interact virtually with other participants. Investi-
gators observed the spread across the network of a spe-
cific health-relevant behavior: registering for an online 
health forum. Specified seed nodes in the network sent 
messages to their neighbors encouraging them to regis-
ter, which initiated the behavior in the network. The 
investigators then observed how the actual participants 
in the study continued to spread the behavioral recom-
mendation (and the actual behavior) across the network. 
One network structure—the clustered lattice, which had 
a high level of clustering in which each node’s neighbors 
were linked to one another—led to wider diffusion than 
the other network structure (random or “unstructured” 
network; Centola, 2010). A similar study demonstrated 
that homophily increases adoption of the new health 
behavior (Centola, 2011). In this study, 700 online partici-
pants were randomly assigned to either a homophilous 
network or an unstructured network. In the homophilous 
network, participants were clustered by individual char-
acteristics (e.g., gender, age, body mass index). A few 
seed nodes in each network initiated use of a diet diary, 
and investigators observed the spread of this behavior 
across the network. The spread was faster in the homoph-
ilous network. These studies indicate that social networks 
do indeed have a causal effect on health behavior via 
contagion and that homophily amplifies that contagion 
effect.
Network studies on vaccination. Although carefully 
controlled network experiments have not examined vac-
cination behavior, Centola’s work suggests that vaccina-
tion attitude and behavior spread causally through social 
networks. Network homophily and contagion help to 
explain why negative attitudes toward vaccination cluster 
geographically. Although parents with strong principled 
objections to childhood vaccinations make up a tiny 
fraction of the population, they tend to live near other 
like-minded families and associate with them socially 
(Beard et al., 2016; Onnela et al., 2016). The geographical 
 170 
Brewer et al.
clustering is important because it can contribute to the 
spread of infectious disease (Glasser et al., 2016; Ndeffo-
Mbah et al., 2012). Communities with a sizable number of 
vaccine refusers will lack herd immunity; consequently, if 
an infectious disease is introduced, it can spread easily 
among the community.
Methodological issues. Studies on health social net-
works face some challenging methodological issues. In 
some studies of social networks, the participants self-
report on the vaccination attitudes or other characteristics 
of their network members (e.g., Brunson, 2013; Nyhan, 
Reifler, & Richey, 2012), whereas in others, the behavior 
of each network member is objectively assessed (Christakis 
& Fowler, 2008). In other studies, the structure of the 
social network is experimentally controlled, and the 
behavior of each network node is objectively measured 
(Centola, 2010, 2011). The latter method provides more 
experimental control but less realism (for a discussion of 
methodological strengths and weaknesses in social-
network studies, see Centola, 2013).
The evidence supports the existence of homophily 
and contagion as two distinct sources of clustering in 
networks, although data are spotty in the specific area 
of vaccination. Because homophily is a correlational 
phenomenon whereas contagion is a causal process, 
evidence for contagion is difficult to obtain outside of 
experiments in which the behavior of target nodes is 
manipulated (e.g., Centola, 2010). Little is known about 
the psychological mechanisms for contagion, but social 
norms are one candidate explanation.
Social norms
Social norms, the tacit rules that members of a group 
implicitly recognize and that affect their decisions and 
behavior, are one influence that spreads across net-
works. The focus theory of normative conduct (Cialdini, 
Kallgren, & Reno, 1991) identifies two types of social 
norms. Descriptive norms indicate the behavior of rel-
evant others and inform behavior by example. Injunctive 
norms represent how important others would like one 
to behave, and they influence behavior via informal 
reinforcements or punishments. Experimentally manipu-
lated social-norm interventions affect behaviors such as 
littering (Kallgren, Reno, & Cialdini, 2000), hotel towel 
reuse (Goldstein, Cialdini, & Griskevicius, 2008), and 
energy conservation (Nolan, Schultz, Cialdini, Goldstein, 
& Griskevicius, 2008). For example, a descriptive social-
norm intervention in which hotel guests learned that 
75% of the other guests reuse their towels during their 
stay increased towel reuse (Goldstein et al., 2008).
One limitation of social-norm interventions is that 
when a behavior is uncommon, publicizing that descrip-
tive norm will not encourage the behavior (Blanton, 
Köblitz, & McCaul, 2008). For example, the message 
“Many past visitors have removed petrified wood from 
the park, changing the natural state of the Petrified 
Forest” conveys the descriptive norm of the negative 
behavior (removing petrified wood) and consequently 
encourages that behavior. It would be more effective 
to use a positive descriptive-norm message, such as 
“The vast majority of past visitors have left the petrified 
wood in the park, preserving the natural state of the 
Petrified Forest.” If that is not possible, then an 
injunctive-norm message is preferable, such as “Please 
don’t remove the petrified wood from the park, in order 
to preserve the natural state of the Petrified Forest.” In 
a field study, this injunctive message was more effective 
at preventing theft than the negative descriptive mes-
sage, and the positive descriptive message was inter-
mediate (Cialdini et al., 2006).
Social-norm correlational studies. A large number 
of correlational studies have linked vaccination to norms. 
Many of these correlational studies use the theory-of-
reasoned-action and theory-of-planned-behavior para-
digm to examine the association between subjective 
norms and vaccination intentions. In the theory of planned 
behavior, subjective norms are assessed as ratings of the 
extent to which people important to the participant want 
him or her to get vaccinated and thus correspond to 
injunctive norms. Several studies show cross-sectional 
correlations between injunctive norms and vaccination 
intentions or behavior. For example, Juraskova et al. (2012) 
demonstrated that subjective norms were correlated with 
intentions to get vaccinated against HPV. Gerend and 
Shepherd (2012) found an association between subjective 
norms and HPV vaccination behavior.
Studies also show a correlation between vaccination 
and perceived injunctive norms. In one, college stu-
dents’ support for vaccination in their social networks 
predicted their intentions to receive an H1N1 vaccine 
(Nyhan et al., 2012). In a study by Brunson (2013), 
parents self-reported their vaccination decisions and 
the vaccination attitudes of members of their social 
networks. Parents who did not meet the recommended 
vaccination schedule believed that a larger fraction of 
their social network recommended nonvaccination. 
This predicted decisions better than demographic char-
acteristics of the parents themselves. Health-care work-
ers were more likely to get vaccinated against H1N1 if 
they reported being encouraged by family or coworkers 
to do so (Stokes & Ismail, 2011).
Social-norm-intervention studies. Unlike the field 
studies employing social-norm interventions to modify 
hotel towel-reuse behavior or petrified-wood collection, 
no intervention studies in vaccination have tested the 
effects of a theoretically pure social-norm manipulation 
 Psychology of Vaccination 
171
on uptake. Nevertheless, the lessons from findings out-
side vaccination are applicable to the design of vaccina-
tion campaigns. For example, in fall 2015, Rite Aid 
pharmacies launched an advertising campaign to pro-
mote influenza vaccination that said “Get your flu shot 
today because 63% of your friends didn’t.” This message 
was presumably designed to encourage vaccination by 
emphasizing that the infection risk was high because of 
the large number of unvaccinated individuals with which 
one has contact. In contrast, the descriptive norm 
research, such as the petrified-wood study, would sug-
gest that this message might actually drive vaccination 
coverage down (“if very few others are getting vacci-
nated, then I won’t either”). Indeed, a laboratory experi-
ment varied the characteristics of a hypothetical vaccine 
(Hershey, Asch, Thumasathit, Meszaros, & Waters, 1994) 
to allow examination of the impact of perceived descrip-
tive norms, what the authors called “bandwagoning.” Par-
ticipants were more likely to say they would get 
vaccinated when many others were already getting vac-
cinated. The Rite Aid campaign was designed to counter 
the motive to free ride (“Because so few others are vac-
cinated, I can’t free ride and thus need to get vaccinated”). 
However, the Hershey et al. (1994) experiment findings 
suggest that bandwagoning is the primary behavioral 
factor. Consequently, the Rite Aid message may have 
been ill-conceived and ineffective. Their campaign was 
short-lived.
A few vaccination field studies have used multifac-
eted interventions that have social-norm components, 
suggesting that social norms could have a powerful 
influence on vaccination behavior. Health-care workers 
at a Swiss hospital who received the influenza vaccine 
were given a badge to wear that read “I am vaccinated 
against influenza to protect you.” (Iten, Bonfillon, 
Bouvard, Siegrist, & Pittet, 2013). Nonvaccinated health-
care workers were required to wear a face-mask during 
the seasonal influenza epidemic period and to wear a 
badge that read “I wear a mask to protect you.” In the 
year that this policy was introduced, vaccination cover-
age increased to 37%, compared with 21% to 29% in 
the decade before the intervention.
Note that this study did not use a traditional descrip-
tive or injunctive social-norm message. Instead, the 
badges had the potential to make salient the descriptive 
social norm, because health-care workers could easily 
see how many of their coworkers had been vaccinated. 
However, this could backfire and reduce vaccination 
coverage if the norm revealed that few people got vac-
cinated. In addition, it is likely that the badges set up 
an injunctive social norm. Finally, because the badge 
messages were visible to patients, they took on the role 
of norm-enforcers. Any health-care worker who was 
not wearing a vaccination badge could be negatively 
evaluated by patients.
In another study (Riphagen-Dalhuisen et al., 2013), 
similar badges with prosocial messages were used as 
part of a large multimodal intervention to promote 
influenza vaccination among hospital health-care work-
ers. Those in the intervention condition received a mul-
tifaceted program that included education and 
testimonials from role models. In addition, vaccinated 
health-care workers in the intervention group received 
pins that said “deliberately vaccinated for you.” The 
vaccination rate was 20% in the control group com-
pared with 32% in the intervention group. The multi-
faceted nature of the intervention likely contributed to 
its efficacy but also limits conclusions about which 
aspects of the intervention were effective. It is possible 
to speculate, however, that the use of the pins created 
a descriptive and injunctive norm, as described above. 
Note that the pins used in this intervention also high-
light the prosocial motivation for getting vaccinated 
(protecting patients). As discussed in the next subsec-
tion, prosocial motives on their own, apart from norms, 
may drive people to get vaccinated. Indeed, previous 
research has indicated that prosocial messages affect 
other behaviors of health-care workers, such as hand 
washing (Grant & Hofmann, 2011).
Because individuals learn about descriptive social 
norms, in part, by observing the behavior of others, it 
should be possible to change social norms by suffi-
ciently changing the behavior of the group. Thus, group 
behavior changed by another intervention strategy 
(e.g., incentives; see Section 4) could set a new group 
norm and thus serve to perpetuate the effect of the 
initial intervention. Examining the potential interdepen-
dence of different intervention strategies, in particular, 
as they unfold over time, is an important topic for future 
research.
Strategic behavior and social 
preferences
Social norms arise as external influences (e.g., what 
others think of me) and as internal motivations (e.g., 
what is right or good) that arise from calculations about 
vaccination as a social behavior. Vaccination protects a 
person’s unvaccinated primary contacts as well as her 
or his secondary contacts (the people her or his con-
tacts know). This external benefit can give rise to the 
motivation of altruism, the desire to help others without 
expectation of personal benefit. It can also give rise to 
the motivation of free riding, intentionally benefitting 
from others’ action without contributing.
As explained earlier, herd immunity occurs when a 
critical portion of a community is vaccinated against a 
contagious disease (usually > 90%); most members of 
the community are protected against that disease even 
if they have not been vaccinated because the spread of 
 172 
Brewer et al.
contagious disease is contained. Certain individuals 
cannot be vaccinated and depend on the protection 
provided by the vaccination of those around them, 
known as cocooning. For example, in the United States, 
infants are not routinely immunized against measles 
until after 12 months of age. However, infants younger 
than 12 months are susceptible to infection and severe 
complications if exposed to measles. For example, of 
the 125 people infected with measles during the 
January 2015 measles outbreak at two Disney theme 
parks in the United States, 12 were infants too young 
to be vaccinated (Zipprich et al., 2015). Of the 11 
children infected with measles during the February 
2008 San Diego outbreak, 3 were infants younger than 
12 months, and 1 of these was hospitalized (Hassidim 
et al., 2008).
Because of herd immunity, vaccination produces 
positive externalities—it results in benefits to people 
beyond the person vaccinated. One group that benefits 
from the vaccination of others is older adults. The 
seasonal-influenza vaccine is effective for younger 
adults, but it may provide little or no benefit to older 
adults because the immune response to the vaccine 
decreases with age (Osterholm, Kelley, Sommer, & 
Belongia, 2012). In addition, although hospitalizations 
and deaths from influenza are particularly high among 
older adults and infants (N. M. Smith et al., 2006; W. W. 
Thompson et al., 2003), children of all ages and young 
adults are disproportionately responsible for spreading 
the infections (Brownstein, Kleinman, & Mandl, 2005). 
Because the population primarily spreading infections 
only partially overlaps with the population suffering 
the most severe consequences of getting infected, a 
surprising conclusion is that older adults can be more 
effectively protected by vaccinating their younger con-
tacts than by vaccinating the older adults directly 
(Halloran & Longini, 2006; Monto, Davenport, Napier, 
& Francis, 1968). However, modeling shows that, to 
achieve this population-optimal outcome, younger con-
tacts would need to be vaccinated at rates higher than 
self-interest alone would indicate (Galvani, Reluga, & 
Chapman, 2007). To minimize mortality across the pop-
ulation, school-age children and young adults (who are 
disproportionately responsible for spreading influenza 
to others) would need to be vaccinated, even though 
they experience fewer and less severe health harms 
than older adults. Vaccination among the young thereby 
provides indirect protection of older adults as well as 
people who cannot be vaccinated, such as patients 
undergoing treatment for cancer and others with com-
promised immune systems.
Game theory offers a theoretical lens through which 
one can analyze vaccination behavior (Bauch & Earn, 
2004). Originating from economics, Game Theory con-
cerns the behavior of rational agents whose interactions 
with one another determine the benefits and harms to 
one another. Consequently, each agent’s decision affects 
not only his individual payout but also the payouts of 
others, and it is necessary to predict the behavior of 
other agents to plan one’s own best response. Within 
this framework, vaccination decisions are a type of 
social dilemma in which the choice to be vaccinated 
increases the public good by conferring herd immunity, 
and the choice not to be vaccinated represents free 
riding on others’ vaccinations. This framework would 
suggest that, without vaccine requirements, vaccination 
coverage might fail to reach levels sufficiently high to 
achieve herd immunity, a topic further discussed in 
Sections 4 and 5.
A classic economic prediction in game theory is that 
agents will free ride (not get vaccinated) when doing 
so maximizes their individual payout. Behavioral varia-
tions of game theory (Camerer & Fehr, 2006) allow for 
agents to have social preferences—that is, preferences 
that depend on the outcome of others. Under social 
preferences, an agent may get vaccinated to confer a 
benefit to contacts by preventing the spread of infec-
tious disease. This analysis, derived from game theory 
(Bauch & Earn, 2004), raises questions about whether 
patients and health-care workers understand the con-
cept of herd immunity and use it as a motivation for 
their vaccination decisions—either as a reason not to 
get vaccinated (because they can free ride) or as a 
reason to get vaccinated (because they can altruistically 
confer a benefit to others).
Observational evidence. Are people motivated to get 
vaccinated because of the benefit that vaccination con-
fers to others? They sometimes say that they are. Patients 
and health-care workers both sometimes give prosocial 
reasons as a retrospective rationale when asked why they 
got vaccinated. A systematic review found that 30% to 
60% of parents agree that community benefit was an 
important reason for getting their children vaccinated 
(Quadri-Sheriff et al., 2012). Qualitative analyses of a par-
ents’ online chat room (Skea, Entwistle, Watt, & Russell, 
2008) and parents’ focus groups (Leask, Chapman, Hawe, 
& Burgess, 2006) revealed that some parents do sponta-
neously name herd immunity and protection of others as 
a motivation to vaccinate their children. In a question-
naire study, health-care workers self-reported that self-
interest and protecting patients were their first and 
second most important reasons, respectively, for getting 
vaccinated against influenza (Hakim, Gaur, & McCullers, 
2011). Other studies with health-care workers show simi-
lar findings of altruistic motives (Bautista, Vila, Uso, 
Tellez, & Zanon, 2006; Christini, Shutt, & Byers, 2007).
Hypothetical-scenario studies. Hypothetical scenarios 
provide experimental control, allowing a test of whether 
 Psychology of Vaccination 
173
benefit to others affects judgments about vaccination. 
Several hypothetical-scenario studies have explored the 
respective roles of altruism and free riding as motivations 
for vaccination. A classic study described earlier varied 
whether the vaccine hypothetically protected only the 
self or also prevented transmission to others. The study 
also varied the proportion of the population that was 
vaccinated (Hershey et al., 1994). Although this design 
allowed examination of the impact of perceived descrip-
tive norms, it also examined the impact of opportunities 
to free ride (the more people who get vaccinated, the 
less benefit I get from getting vaccinated), and the goal to 
act altruistically (the fewer people who get vaccinated, the 
more I can benefit others by getting vaccinated myself). 
Participants’ vaccination-intention ratings showed evi-
dence of both altruism and free riding. As mentioned 
above, however, the largest effect was bandwagoning: Par-
ticipants were more likely to get vaccinated when many 
others were already doing so.
In a hypothetical scenario study somewhat similar 
to the Hershey et al. study (Betsch, Böhm, & Korn, 
2013), participants read scenarios that varied the infor-
mation given about herd immunity. When the individual 
benefit of herd immunity was communicated, intentions 
to get vaccinated were lower. However, communicating 
the social benefit of vaccination reduced this tendency. 
These results, which are similar to findings outside the 
vaccination literature (Grant & Hofmann, 2011), suggest 
that the tendency to free ride on the vaccination of 
others can be reduced by communicating the social 
benefit that vaccination provides.
Increasing people’s understanding of herd immunity 
could increase vaccination coverage (because people 
understand the opportunity for altruistic vaccination) 
or decrease vaccination coverage (because the oppor-
tunity for free riding becomes clear). In a scenario 
study, Betsch, Böhm, Korn, and Holtmann (2017) found 
that explicitly communicating the role of herd immunity 
increased people’s intention to get vaccinated, espe-
cially among participants from Western, individualist 
cultures. In Eastern, collectivist cultures, intention to 
get vaccinated was high even without the herd-immunity 
communication. In another scenario study that showed 
an altruistic motivation for vaccination (Vietri et al., 
2012), participants responded to scenarios that varied 
the percentage of the population that was already 
immune to the infectious disease. As long as partici-
pants learned that they themselves were at no risk of 
infection, then their stated likelihood of getting vacci-
nated increased as the percentage of the population 
that was immune decreased—indicating that more indi-
viduals would benefit from the protection provided by 
participants’ own vaccination.
Böhm, Betsch, Korn, and Holtmann (2016) explored 
prosocial motivation for health-care-worker vaccination 
in a hypothetical scenario study. American and Korean 
community members responded to a scenario in which 
they played the role of a health-care worker who could 
get vaccinated at a cost to themselves; however, if 
enough other health-care workers got vaccinated, 
patients would benefit. Vaccination responses in this 
prosocial scenario were higher among participants in 
Korea (a collectivist culture) than among participants 
in the United States (an individualist culture), and this 
difference was mediated by viewing vaccination as a 
social act. This study suggests that vaccination among 
health-care workers might be increased by promoting 
collectivist values and the view that vaccination is a 
social rather than individual behavior.
These scenario studies indicate that social prefer-
ences for altruism or for free riding may influence vac-
cination decisions. Furthermore, reinforcing altruistic 
motives may offset free riding. Although the hypotheti-
cal scenario studies in this subsection provide experi-
mental control, they do not allow observation of actual 
vaccination behavior. Thus, it is unclear how these 
results would generalize to real-world settings.
Laboratory game studies. In hypothetical-scenario 
studies, the main limitation is that participants’ responses 
have no real consequences (although research shows 
that preferences are frequently similar with and without 
consequences). Laboratory games offer a solution by 
providing real consequences for decisions—albeit mon-
etary and not health consequences. In one such labora-
tory experiment (Chapman et al., 2012), participants 
engaged in an interactive strategic task in which they had 
to decide whether to spend points to get vaccinated. Par-
ticipants were randomly assigned to age roles: For those 
in the “young” role, vaccination was more effective, in 
terms of both reducing individual risk of infection and 
contributing to herd immunity; for those in the “old” role, 
getting the flu resulted in a more severe point penalty. 
When the individual’s point total determined payment for 
being in the study, participants behaved in accordance 
with the self-interested prediction from game theory, 
with fewer “young” players than “old” players getting vac-
cinated. In contrast, when participants were paid accord-
ing to the group’s point total, they behaved in accordance 
with the group optimum solution, with more “young” 
players than “old” players getting vaccinated. The results 
from this laboratory task suggest that, if the incentives are 
set correctly, young people may be willing to get vacci-
nated prosocially to protect older adults. Thus, for exam-
ple, young people may be willing to get vaccinated if it 
is clear that their vaccination will benefit their grandpar-
ents and this is an outcome they value.
Böhm, Betsch, and Korn (2017) used a similar labo-
ratory vaccination-game paradigm and found that par-
ticipants with prosocial (rather than proself) preferences 
 174 
Brewer et al.
were more likely to get vaccinated in the laboratory 
game, and this effect was strongest among those with 
a positive attitude toward vaccination. The hypothetical 
scenarios and laboratory-game studies described thus 
far in this section did not assess actual vaccination 
behavior. Consequently, they can examine altruism and 
free riding in hypothetical vaccination judgments or in 
laboratory choices that have monetary consequences, 
but these results may not translate to actual vaccination 
decisions.
Correlational studies of vaccination and intentions. 
Several studies have examined whether measures of altru-
istic motives correlated with self-reports of actual vaccina-
tion behavior or intentions to vaccinate. Patients’ per 
ception 
of the likelihood of becoming infected and their percep-
tion of the likelihood of infecting others each predict 
unique variance in actual influenza vaccination decisions. 
However risk to self is much more strongly predictive of 
receiving a vaccination than is risk to others, at a 3:1 ratio 
(Shim, Chapman, Townsend, & Galvani, 2012). Thus, to 
the extent that the relationship between vaccination 
behavior and perceived likelihood of infecting others 
captures altruistic motives, we can say that altruism is 
associated with actually getting vaccinated but plays a 
minor role relative to self-interest motives. This study 
was correlational and did not demonstrate a causal 
link between changes in altruistic motives and getting 
vaccinated.
Vaccinating boys against HPV has a notable prosocial 
benefit: It protects the vaccinated boys themselves from 
HPV-related cancers such as anal and penile cancer, 
and it also protects the boys’ future sexual partners 
from six HPV-related cancers. Polonijo, Carpiano, Reiter, 
and Brewer (2016) found that male teenagers were 
more willing to get the HPV vaccine if they found it 
important that the vaccine could protect their future 
romantic partners. Parents of the teens who held the 
same belief were also more willing to get them HPV 
vaccine. Furthermore, these prosocial attitudes medi-
ated the relationship between race and willingness to 
get vaccinated, such that Blacks and Hispanics (vs. 
Whites) had more prosocial attitudes, and these atti-
tudes were associated, in turn, with higher willingness 
to get vaccinated. Additional analyses found that per-
ceived benefit to the son, benefit to his future sexual 
partners, and benefit to the community were all associ-
ated with parents’ willingness to allow the vaccination 
and the sons’ willingness to get vaccinated (Moss et al., 
2015). However, in analyses adjusting for all three 
beliefs, only protecting the partner was associated with 
willingness.
In another study, young men gave higher ratings of 
hypothetical willingness to receive HPV vaccine if they 
received information on both the benefits to self of 
vaccination as well as the altruistic benefits to future 
sexual partners compared with (a) receiving either of 
these pieces of information in isolation or (b) receiving 
neither piece of information (a control condition; 
Bonafide & Vanable, 2015). This study shows a benefit 
of two pieces versus one piece of information but not 
necessarily a special role for information on the altru-
istic benefits of vaccination per se. In contrast, mes-
sages emphasizing the social benefits of the MMR 
vaccine (relative to comparison messages that omit this 
information) do not increase the intentions of parents 
to get their infant children vaccinated (Hendrix et al., 
2014).
One might expect that health-care workers would 
be particularly motivated by the prosocial benefits of 
vaccination. For one thing, health-care workers’ contact 
patterns increase the risk of contracting infectious dis-
eases such as influenza or hepatitis A from patients and 
of transmitting the infection unknowingly to other 
patients. In addition, health-care workers presumably 
have a professional duty to care for patients and protect 
them from adverse health outcomes, and vaccination 
provides one route to do that. The evidence indicates, 
however, that health-care workers’ vaccination deci-
sions are not any more motivated by prosocial concerns 
than are those of other decision makers (Betsch, 2014). 
A survey study found that health-care workers had 
higher influenza vaccination coverage than non–health-
care workers, but not because of prosocial concerns 
for patients (Capolongo et al., 2006). The health-care 
workers perceived a higher risk of infection; had easier 
access to the vaccine, more knowledge about the vac-
cine, and stronger pro-Western medical beliefs; and 
perceived stronger social influence to get vaccinated.
One study examined whether measures of free-riding 
motives correlated with self-reports of previous vacci-
nation behavior. Free-riding motives were higher among 
parents who had not gotten the pertussis vaccine for 
their children (Meszaros et al., 1996).
Intervention studies. In an online study, participants 
read a prosocial message (about someone who died from 
the flu because his contacts had not been vaccinated), a 
control message, or no message (Li, Taylor, Atkins, Chapman, 
& Galvani, 2016). The prosocial message increased proso-
cial motives, as measured by willingness to donate to an 
unrelated cause. Prosocial motives in turn were associ-
ated with stated intention to get vaccinated against influ-
enza. The prosocial and control messages did not differ 
in their effect on vaccination intention, however, and 
this study did not show an effect on actual vaccination 
behavior.
In one of the few studies to examine the effect of 
prosocial motives on actual vaccination behavior 
(Rothan-Tondeur et al., 2010), health-care workers were 
 Psychology of Vaccination 
175
randomized by ward into two conditions; in one, they 
received a vaccination-message intervention, and in the 
other, a control condition, they received no message. 
The message stated that vaccination of health-care 
workers against influenza benefits patients. The inter-
vention did not affect vaccination coverage, which was 
equivalent in the two conditions. The messages were 
delivered via a 2-hour optional information session that 
health-care workers attended, which may not have been 
a sufficiently engaging mechanism for delivering the 
intervention.
A campaign to increase influenza vaccination cover-
age among health-care workers by emphasizing the 
prosocial benefits of vaccination to family members and 
patients had no impact on vaccine uptake (Llupià et al., 
2013). Note that in this study, unlike the badge studies 
described earlier, the prosocial messaging did not have 
a public-accountability component, which may help to 
explain the null effect.
Vaccination coverage among health-care workers is 
often too low, and they are not sufficiently motivated to 
get vaccinated out of concern for patient safety (Lam, 
Chambers, MacDougall, & McCarthy, 2010). This has 
prompted some health-care facilities—particularly aca-
demic hospitals in the United States—to institute annual 
influenza vaccination requirements for health-care work-
ers. Such requirements, sometimes called mandates, 
communicate a clear injunctive norm that the hospital 
management views staff vaccination as a priority. The 
requirements may also circumvent individual motives for 
vaccination, a topic we return to in Section 4.
Conclusion
Social networks and social norms have powerful influ-
ences on health behavior, and some evidence shows 
that these results extend to vaccination. The social-
network literature includes some compelling correla-
tional analyses of large data sets and elegant field 
experiments, but none of these studies examined vac-
cination behavior. However, several network models 
have modeled idealized vaccination behavior under 
various conditions. Likewise, the intervention studies 
that provide a clean view of the role of social norms 
have not examined vaccination, although more multi-
faceted intervention studies have done so. Studies of 
vaccination interventions that employ social norms are 
a clear avenue for future research.
The current literature suggests that free-riding and 
altruism motivations may influence people’s vaccination 
decisions. The vast majority of studies exploring pro-
social motives for vaccination have used hypothetical 
scenarios, laboratory tasks, or ratings of vaccination 
intentions. Very few have examined prosocial motives 
in actual vaccination behavior. Few studies observe 
actual vaccination behavior and manipulate altruistic 
or free-riding motives. Furthermore, no studies have 
compellingly shown that interventions increase vaccina-
tion coverage by enhancing prosocial motives. Although 
these theoretical factors predict behavior in other 
domains, evidence is required to establish that link in 
the domain of vaccination. Future research can explore 
whether vaccination can be enhanced through interven-
tions that encourage social preferences and altruistic 
motives.
Provider recommendations. The social processes ex 
plo-
red in this section provide one class of explanation for 
why provider recommendations are so strongly associ-
ated with patient vaccination behavior. In network termi-
nology, providers are likely to be centrally located in their 
networks, positioned to influence a large number of peo-
ple through contagion. Homophily effects on social net-
works may result in providers being connected to patients 
who are the most likely to get vaccinated. For example, 
providers who strongly recommend vaccination attract 
patients with positive vaccination attitudes (Mergler et al., 
2013), even as vaccine-hesitant and vaccine-refusing 
patients often seek out different providers and comple-
mentary and alternative medicines (Frass et al., 2012). 
Consequently, the strong association between provider 
recommendation and patient vaccination may be due in 
part to patient self-selection rather than to a direct causal 
effect of the recommendation on behavior.
Another reason for the influential role of provider 
recommendations is that providers can create and com-
municate injunctive social norms by indicating to their 
patients, either through explicit recommendations or 
implicit cues, that they expect patients to get vacci-
nated. Their recommendations can also communicate 
descriptive social norms by implying that most other 
patients get vaccinated or that vaccination is what most 
previous patients have chosen.
Social media. Social media has become an important 
force in organizing people in social space. Surprisingly 
little is known about how social media affects vaccination-
related attitudes and behavior (Betsch et al., 2012). Theo-
ries reviewed in this section on social processes make 
interesting predictions—for example, that when people 
opposed to vaccination connect on social media (homoph-
ily), it should further polarize their opinions (contagion; 
Witteman & Zikmund-Fisher, 2012). Illustrating the value 
of mining social media for vaccination research, Salathé 
and Khandelwal (2011) coded 300,000 Twitter messages 
for sentiments about the H1N1 vaccine and found that 
sentiments expressed on Twitter in each geographical 
region corresponded to vaccination coverage. They also 
 176 
Brewer et al.
found homophily in the social network. Broniatowski, 
Hilyard, and Dredze (2016) examined news articles about 
the Disneyland measles epidemic and predicted which 
ones would be shared on Facebook. The articles most 
likely to be shared and most widely shared contained a 
take-home message (or easily identified gist), shedding 
light on a psychological construct that is key to informa-
tion transmission across a network.
Social media likely magnifies the effects of homoph-
ily found in other manifestations of social networks, 
because social media increases the ease of finding like-
minded people. To the extent that homophily amplifies 
contagion effects in social networks, social media 
would thus also magnify contagion, consequently 
increasing the polarization of vaccination views. As a 
result of these enhanced social network dynamics and 
the speed with which information spreads through 
social media, social media could serve as the catalyst 
for a rapid meltdown of the vaccination system and the 
loss of confidence built up over many years.
Personal stories are some of the most penetrating 
content spread on social media. The benefits of narra-
tive storytelling favored by antivaccination activists are 
widely discussed yet poorly quantified (Betsch, 
Renkewitz, & Haase, 2013; Bruine de Bruin, Wallin, 
Parker, Strough, & Hanmer, 2017). As mentioned in 
Section 2, a large body of research in psychological 
science has demonstrated that anecdotes and personal 
stories are more influential than base rates and statistics 
(e.g., Fagerlin, Wang, & Ubel, 2005). Little research has 
examined what exactly makes antivaccine efforts spe-
cifically effective; instead, research has focused on pro-
vaccine messages. Recently, provaccination efforts have 
tried narrative approaches. For example, the U.S. 
National HPV Vaccination roundtable recently created 
a series of videos with survivors of HPV-related cancers. 
The Someone You Love documentary (Lumiere, Hefti, & 
Staurulakis, 2014) follows the stories of five women 
with cervical cancer, including two who die from the 
disease. No data are available on how these personal 
stories affect vaccination behavior, which is an impor-
tant opportunity for future research.
Priorities for future research include examining the 
spread of rumors compared with the spread of credible 
information on social media and how social media 
affects vaccination attitudes and behavior (Reiter et al., 
in press). Opportunities for intervention include social-
media studies that expose people to social networks 
with provaccination views. Other avenues for further 
exploration include examining how citizen activists can 
use social media to build support for vaccination. 
Finally, social media has helped antivaccination activists 
to find one another and to spread their message. Under-
standing the nature of these messages, and helping 
provaccination activists to use similar methods, is an 
important opportunity. Research on the effects of 
exposing people to social-media information that is at 
odds with their existing beliefs would be an interesting 
avenue of investigation. In the near future, the social-
network and social-norm effects reviewed in this sec-
tion are likely to play out on social media at least as 
much as in interactions that occur in-person.
Section 4: Changing Behavior Directly
Understanding how to change people’s thoughts and 
feelings to motivate them to get vaccinated has received 
substantial attention. This makes sense given that provi-
sion of vaccines requires consent, or at least nonrefusal. 
It is also increasingly clear that vaccine deliberation is 
just one part of the story. People who say they are 
favorably inclined often fail to turn that confidence into 
actually receiving a vaccination. At the same time, poli-
cies can lead people to be vaccinated beyond any 
effects of their thoughts and feelings. We now turn to 
individual and situational factors that regulate the rela-
tion between what people think and feel about vaccines 
and their behavior. In line with this emphasis, this sec-
tion focuses primarily on experimental tests of interven-
tion strategies designed to promote vaccination behavior 
directly, bypassing any attempt to change what people 
think and feel.
This section examines three broad groupings of 
intervention strategies. First, we examine how to close 
the intention-behavior gap, present when people hold 
favorable vaccination intentions yet fail to act (Sheeran, 
2002; Sheeran & Webb, 2016). A variety of strategies 
have emerged to bridge the intention-behavior gap by 
building on people’s favorable intentions (Fig. 4); these 
strategies include keeping favorable intentions in mind 
through reminders, prompts, and primes and reducing 
barriers through logistics and healthy defaults. We con-
sider whether these strategies can, or have the potential 
to, help people translate their intentions to be vacci-
nated into action.
Second, we examine the effectiveness of strategies 
designed to shape people’s behavior without relying 
on their beliefs about vaccination. We focus on strate-
gies that make salient a new set of outcomes through 
the use of programs that tie incentives or sanctions to 
vaccination behavior and strategies that minimize 
opportunities for deliberation by requiring vaccination 
to obtain a desired outcome (e.g., access to education 
or employment). These strategies are particularly inter-
esting given that they may prove to be an effective way 
to lead people with ambivalent or unfavorable thoughts 
and feelings to get vaccinated.
Third, we consider new directions in research that 
could inform the development of new strategies to 
change behavior directly. Some processes that guide 
 Psychology of Vaccination 
177
vaccination behavior operate automatically or outside 
of conscious awareness (Bargh, 2006; Wood & Neal, 
2016). In many behavioral domains, public-health pro-
grams have directed considerable effort to help people 
develop healthy routines such that the desired behavior 
occurs automatically in response to cues or reminders 
in the situation (Marteau, Hollands, & Fletcher, 2012; 
Rothman et al., 2015). For instance, people develop 
routines to exercise before work each day or to take 
their medications every evening. In some cases, the 
routines become habits, such as putting on a seatbelt 
after entering a car without having to think about it. We 
consider the implications of whether getting vaccinated 
can become a behavioral routine and how to render 
aspects of the underlying behavioral process routine.
In addition to the explicit evaluations that people 
report regarding a behavior, they may hold favorable 
or unfavorable implicit evaluations regarding that 
behavior (Gawronski & Bodenhausen, 2006). Exploring 
the nature and impact of people’s implicit evaluations 
may offer new insights. For example, people’s implicit 
evaluation of unhealthy behaviors (e.g., smoking, drink-
ing, and drug use) are more favorable than their explicit 
evaluations, which, in turn, mitigates their stated inten-
tions to reduce an unhealthy behavior (Sheeran, Gollwitzer, 
& Bargh, 2013). This section applies these ideas to vac-
cination where such application is promising.
Building on favorable intentions  
to get vaccinated
People failing to act on their favorable intentions is a 
common challenge across a range of health domains 
(Sheeran & Webb, 2016), including vaccination (Brewer 
et al., 2011; DiBonaventura & Chapman, 2005). Research-
ers have identified two broad explanations for the 
intention-behavior gap. First, a person’s plan to get 
vaccinated may be forgotten or fail to come to mind, 
even when an opportunity to act is available. Second, 
barriers can emerge that make translating vaccine inten-
tions into action difficult or at least inconvenient. In 
the subsections that follow, we examine these two 
classes of explanations with a particular focus on strate-
gies that could increase the likelihood that people con-
sistently act on their intentions to be vaccinated. Given 
the challenges associated with changing people’s beliefs 
about vaccination, strategies that can maximize the 
impact of people’s preexisting favorable beliefs may be 
particularly valuable.
Keeping favorable intentions on people’s minds. 
Life’s many obligations and distractions may crowd out 
intentions to be vaccinated. As a result, planning may not 
receive the attention it needs. People who are not vacci-
nated as a result of passivity or inaction may find them-
selves in this state (Robbins et al., 2010). We consider three 
intervention strategies designed to increase the likelihood 
that people will keep their favorable intentions in mind: 
reminder/recall systems, presumptive vaccine recommen-
dations, and primes such as implementation intentions.
Reminder/recall systems. Reminders are for people who 
are due for vaccination (e.g., “Flu season has arrived—
Remember that it’s time for your flu shot”). Reminders 
can bring to mind intentions to be vaccinated as well 
as serve as a cue to action that it is now time to get 
vaccinated. Recalls are reminders for people who are 
overdue for vaccination. Modes for delivering reminder/
recalls include e-mails, postcards, letters, text messages, 
and phone calls.
Several meta-analyses and systematic reviews have 
found that systems that provide reminders or recalls 
increase vaccination coverage (e.g., Briss et al., 2000; 
Groom et al., 2015; Jacobson Vann & Szilagyi, 2018; 
Stone et al., 2002; Szilagyi et al., 2000). Reviews of 
reminder/recall systems have found them to be effective 
across populations, types of vaccinations, and mode of 
delivery (Briss et al., 2000; Jacobson Vann & Szilagyi, 
2018). Despite evidence regarding their effectiveness, 
implementation of these systems is poor; providers 
grapple with competing demands, including urgent 
patient needs, limited financial resources, and low orga-
nizational capacity (Pereira et al., 2012; Saville et al., 
2011; Suh et al., 2012). Even in regions with vaccination 
registries that give greater capacity to automate remind-
ers, providers implement them variably. Researchers 
and health agencies have directed considerable effort 
toward delineating the strategies and resources needed 
to facilitate the implementation of reminder/recall sys-
tems and where to situate those systems (e.g., Kempe 
et al., 2013, 2015).
Identifying modifiable facets of reminder/recall may 
help increase their impact. Reminder/recall systems are 
Shape Behavior
Build on Favorable Intentions
• Keep Vaccination on People’s Minds
   With Reminders, Prompts, Primes
• Reduce Barriers With Logistics or
   Behavioral Defaults
• Provide Incentives
• Implement Sanctions
• Require Vaccination
Intention
(or Hesitancy)
Vaccination
(or Refusal,
Delay)
Fig. 4. Influencing vaccination directly, without changing thoughts 
and feelings.
 178 
Brewer et al.
likely to be more powerful when it is easier for people 
to act (i.e., to act on their favorable intentions) in 
response to the reminder. Telephone-based systems that 
allow people to schedule an appointment when they 
receive the reminder are the most effective mode for 
delivering reminders (Jacobson Vann & Szilagyi, 2018), 
and allowing people to choose the method for contact-
ing them increases the impact on vaccination coverage 
(Kempe et al., 2016). People are more responsive to a 
reminder/recall that comes from a source that is familiar 
and trusted (Kempe et al., 2013), but reminder/recalls 
are most effective when a centralized infrastructure 
such as the regional health department manages them 
and includes the endorsement by the patient’s practice 
(Kempe, Saville, et al., 2015). With regard to content, 
the message should clearly state that it is time to get 
vaccinated and provide information about how to take 
action (Hawe, McKenzie, & Scurry, 1998). However, 
patient privacy laws may limit how specific such mes-
sages can be, depending on mode of delivery. Finally, 
it is not clear whether reminders and recalls elicit dif-
ferent psychological responses (e.g., a recall may 
remind recipients that someone is monitoring their 
behavior and knows they are late).
Presumptive announcements. Another approach to 
helping people keep their favorable intentions in mind is 
the use of presumptive provider recommendations. Con-
siderable evidence shows that provider recommenda-
tions increase vaccination coverage (Kempe et al., 2016; 
Schmid et al., 2017; Wheelock, Thomson, & Sevdalis, 
2013). Even more powerful are presumptive announce-
ments that frame the opportunity to be vaccinated as 
the default option (e.g., “Your son is due for vaccines 
against meningitis, HPV cancers, and whooping cough. 
We’ll give them at the end of the visit.”). Although provid-
ers routinely use presumptive recommendations in many 
aspects of care, such as ordering tests and prescribing 
medicines, they typically do not use them for vaccina-
tion (Moss, Reiter, Rimer, & Brewer, 2016; Opel et al., 
2013; Sturm et al., 2017). Several observational studies 
have reported that patients are more likely to agree to 
be vaccinated when the provider’s recommendation 
takes the form of an announcement that assumes readi-
ness for the vaccination (Moss et al., 2016; Opel et al., 
2013, 2015). Although promising, these observational 
findings could mean that physicians more often use a 
presumptive announcement style with parents who are 
already inclined to have their children vaccinated. More 
convincingly, one randomized trial found that training 
vaccine-prescribing physicians to structure their vaccine 
recommendations as presumptive announcements led to 
higher rates of HPV vaccination for 11- and 12-year-olds 
(Brewer et al., 2017). Further research is needed to deter-
mine the degree to which variability in a person’s vaccine 
hesitancy modifies the effectiveness of this strategy.
Why is this strategy effective? A physician recom-
mending vaccination can cue people who are positively 
inclined toward vaccination to take action. By framing 
vaccines as routine care, presumptive announcements 
speed the decision process for people with positive 
vaccination intentions. For people who are hesitant or 
opposed to vaccination, the process will slow down, 
allowing them to ask questions and the provider to ease 
their concerns. For people who have received vaccines 
in the past, presumptive recommendations may cue a 
general inclination toward vaccination (e.g., “I usually 
get vaccines, and so I’ll keep doing it”). Finally, pre-
sumptive recommendations may more clearly commu-
nicate the clinicians’ endorsement of the vaccine, an 
injunctive norm as discussed in Section 3.
Priming. A third approach to help people keep their 
favorable intentions in mind involves strategies that 
prime people’s existing intentions regarding the vaccine 
or that formalize plans for acting on their intentions. Hav-
ing people merely report on their attitudes and intentions 
about a health behavior can increase subsequent behav-
ioral performance, a finding called the question-behavior 
effect and the mere-measurement effect (Dholakia, 2010; 
Wilding et al., 2016). In the context of vaccination, 
Conner, Godin, Norman, and Sheeran (2011) randomized 
health-care workers to take a survey on their seasonal-
flu-vaccine attitudes and intentions. These workers were 
more likely to get the vaccine than workers who were not 
sent the survey (42% vs. 36%). Moreover, among workers 
who completed the survey, those who reported favorable 
cognitions regarding the vaccine were more likely to get 
vaccinated than those with less favorable cognitions. The 
researchers replicated the mere-measurement effect in an 
RCT with patients in a general medicine clinic, although 
the effect was small (77% vs. 75%; Conner et al., 2017). 
Research suggests that mere measurement amplifies 
underlying intention (Morwitz & Fitzsimons, 2004). Thus, 
a person planning not to get vaccinated would become 
even less likely to do so after a mere-measurement inter-
vention, and the overall impact of such an intervention 
across the population would depend on the percentage 
of people who did and did not intend to get vaccinated.
Another strategy that can help people keep their 
favorable intentions in mind is to have them formulate 
implementation intentions or if-then plans that delin-
eate what they need to do and when to fulfill their 
intentions (Gollwitzer & Sheeran, 2006). Forming an 
if-then plan helps people develop a mental link between 
a situation and the desired response, which, in turn, 
increases the likelihood that people will perform the 
desired action when the opportunity emerges. An 
 Psychology of Vaccination 
179
if-then plan might take the form of “If I receive a notice 
about a flu-shot clinic, then I will immediately schedule 
an appointment.” Implementation intention interven-
tions can have a substantial impact on behavior (overall 
d = 0.65 (Adriaanse, Vinkers, De Ridder, Hox, & De Wit, 
2011; Bélanger-Gravel, Godin, & Amireault, 2013; Gollwitzer 
& Sheeran, 2006).
A large implementation-intentions RCT that prompted 
employees at a U.S. firm to specify a date and a time 
for their next influenza vaccination increased vaccina-
tion coverage (from 33% to 37%; Milkman, Beshears, 
Choi, Laibson, & Madrian, 2011), but having people 
specify the date alone had no effect. Likewise, in an 
implementation-intentions trial, Dutch men who have 
sex with men were instructed to indicate where, when, 
and how they would make an appointment, and hepa-
titis B vaccination increased from 9% to 21% (Vet, de 
Wit, & Das, 2014). The intervention excluded people 
who intended to not get vaccinated, and its impact was 
equally strong among people with weak and strong 
intentions. However, people with strong intentions 
were more likely to form complete if-then plans, which, 
in turn, was correlated with getting a vaccination. 
Finally, forming implementation intentions (specifying 
what, where, and when) led to higher seasonal-influenza 
vaccination among Thai adults (84% vs. 90%), a difference 
that was not statistically significant in this underpowered 
quasi-experiment (Payaprom, Bennett, Alabaster, & 
Tantipong, 2011). One plausible mechanism to explain 
the impact of implementation intentions is an improve-
ment in prospective memory (Chen et al., 2015). Like 
the mere-measurement effect, implementation inten-
tions are designed to help people to act rather than 
change their intentions. Consistent with this premise, 
studies in other behavioral domains show that imple-
mentation intentions increase behavior by eliciting 
higher rates of action from individuals who hold favor-
able attitudes or intentions toward the behavior (Sheeran, 
Webb, & Gollwitzer, 2005).
Reducing barriers. Even when people’s intentions to 
get vaccinated are at the top of their minds and not for-
gotten, they may not lead to behavior because barriers—
real or perceived—may emerge that make taking action 
difficult (Gerend, Shepherd, & Shepherd, 2013; Kimmel, 
Timko Burns, Wolfe, & Zimmerman, 2007). Situational 
barriers include lack of transport, inadequate maternity 
leave or childcare, multiple competing priorities, incon-
venient clinic opening times, service or vaccine cost, or 
lack of vaccine availability (Falagas & Zarkadoulia, 2008; 
Hollmeyer, Hayden, Poland, & Buchholz, 2009; Holman 
et al., 2014). Their health-care provider may recommend a 
delay in vaccination because of a sick child or may not take 
opportunities to vaccinate at sick visits (Smith, Marcuse, 
Seward, Zhao, & Orenstein, 2015). Language barriers as well 
as disabilities (e.g., deafness) can make it difficult for people 
to interact with care systems or obtain information, poten-
tially leaving them unaware that a vaccination is due 
(Fiscella, Franks, Doescher, & Saver, 2002; McKee, Barnett, 
Block, & Pearson, 2011). Finally, some people may expe-
rience judgment or discrimination from providers (Trivedi 
& Ayanian, 2006; but see Hausmann, Jeong, Bost & Ibrahim, 
2008) or fear that vaccination will be painful (Falagas & 
Zarkadoulia, 2008; E. Mills, Jadad, Ross, & Wilson, 2005). 
Taken together, these factors can impede action, creating a 
gap between people’s inclination to be vaccinated and 
their behavior. Logistical strategies that can blunt the 
effect of these barriers should enable people to act on 
their favorable intentions, thereby increasing vaccination 
coverage.
On-site vaccination. Provision of free seasonal-influenza 
vaccine clinics at schools, workplaces, or community 
centers addresses barriers related to cost and access. On-
site vaccination increases seasonal-influenza vaccination 
(Briss et al., 2000), but this approach is more difficult to 
implement for other vaccines (e.g., Hayes et al., 2013; 
Watson, Shaw, Molchanoff, & McInnes, 2009). Even when 
vaccines are available on site for no cost, vaccination cov-
erage can remain modest, even among those who express 
favorable intentions to get vaccinated. It would seem that 
when people want to be vaccinated, they are surprisingly 
slow to commit to a specific time to do so. This tendency 
may be exacerbated as a result of choice overload when 
clinics offer a large array of dates and times for vaccina-
tion (Scheibehenne et al., 2010; Schwartz, 2004).
Defaults. Given the challenges people face in turn-
ing their intentions into action, researchers have started 
to test strategies that reframe the decision process in 
ways that might make action easier or, at least, might 
make people perceive it to be easier (Li & Chapman, 
2013). One important aspect of the decision process is 
whether performing the behavior is construed as the 
default response. In settings without strong norms or 
requirements, the default state is not being vaccinated. 
Being vaccinated requires one to schedule an appoint-
ment or specify a time and place (i.e., it is an opt-in 
choice). An intriguing approach is to reframe vaccination 
as an opt-out choice, where the default response is to 
obtain the vaccine. This is what may be happening when 
clinical recommendations regarding vaccination during a 
clinic visit take the form of a presumptive announcement 
(Brewer et al., 2017; Moss et al., 2016; Opel et al., 2013, 
2015). It may also be the reason why standing orders for 
vaccination are a highly effective method for increasing 
vaccination coverage (Community Preventive Services 
Task Force, 2016a). Standing orders authorize nurses, 
 180 
Brewer et al.
pharmacists, and other health-care personnel to assess a 
client’s immunization status and administer vaccinations 
according to a previously approved protocol, without the 
need to interact with or receive a direct order from the 
attending physician at the time of vaccination. Standing 
orders may create a similar presumptive expectation of 
vaccination in which the process is aborted only if the 
parent or patient asks to speak to a provider or expresses 
concerns regarding vaccination.
Note that health-care providers may also benefit from 
systems that make it easier for them to act on their 
intention to vaccinate their patients. Providers random-
ized to use of a modified electronic health record that 
made them actively accept or cancel an order for 
seasonal-influenza vaccine had higher vaccination 
orders and coverage than those who used a standard 
electronic health record (Patel et al., 2017). In this case, 
the default involved having to make a choice about 
whether to order the vaccine. However, electronic-
records prompts can be misunderstood and become 
ineffective over time as providers tire of seeing them 
or receive too many prompts (Szilagyi et al., 2015; 
Zazove et al., 2017).
Other strategies can frame getting vaccinated as the 
default option. One lab study among U.S. participants 
used hypothetical vaccination behavior, and the 
researchers found that framing seasonal-influenza vac-
cination as an opt-out choice elicited greater interest 
in the vaccine than an opt-in choice; however, the find-
ing was not present among Korean participants (Böhm 
et al., 2016). Another online lab experiment using hypo-
thetical vaccination behavior found parents had greater 
interest in the HPV vaccine for their sons when it was 
provided with two other vaccines than when provided 
on its own, what the authors described as a “soft 
default” (Reiter, McRee, Pepper, & Brewer, 2012). How-
ever, another manipulation of a “hard default” (whether 
the son’s school automatically gave the vaccine) found 
that the opt-out condition elicited less interest in vac-
cination. One explanation for the unexpected finding 
is a default rejection because of a perceived limitation 
in choice (Jachimowicz, Duncan, Weber, & Johnson, 
2017), consistent with reactance (Brehm, 1966).
In a field RCT, Chapman, Li, Leventhal, and Leventhal 
(2016) explored whether automatically scheduling peo-
ple for seasonal-influenza vaccination would increase 
uptake. Specifically, outpatients were randomly assigned 
to receive one of two letters about the clinic (in a third 
condition, participants received no letter). In the opt-in 
condition, which reflected the clinic’s current commu-
nication strategy, patients received a letter about the 
availability of seasonal-influenza vaccination and could 
schedule an appointment in the weeks following deliv-
ery of the letter. In the opt-out condition, people 
received a similar letter that provided a prescheduled 
vaccination appointment at the clinic during the weeks 
following delivery of the letter, with an option to 
change or cancel the appointment. People in the opt-
out condition were more likely to be vaccinated than 
those in the opt-in condition (16% vs. 5%), according 
to their medical records. The provision of an appoint-
ment rendered getting the vaccine the default state and 
created a commitment to being vaccinated at a given 
date and time. Although some people needed to change 
the prescheduled appointment, this approach meant 
that people did not need to take the time and effort to 
schedule an initial appointment, eliminating a real bar-
rier, albeit modest, to action. A previous RCT showed 
similar results (45% vs. 33%; Chapman, Li, Colby, & 
Yoon, 2010). An RCT with health-care workers found 
an effect of similar size (28% vs. 16%) for default 
appointment scheduling, but it was not statistically sig-
nificant, possibly because of insufficient power 
(Lehmann, Chapman, Franssen, Kok, & Ruiter, 2016).
Reframing vaccination as the default behavioral 
response has intriguing promise as a strategy to address 
the intention-behavior gap. One might hypothesize that 
providing a prescheduled appointment would be most 
effective if targeted toward individuals who already 
hold a favorable attitude and intention toward the vac-
cine, although this was not examined by Chapman et al. 
(2016). Moreover, this approach could be integrated 
into a reminder/recall system in which people were not 
only informed that they were due for a vaccine that 
they had received previously but also were given a 
prespecified appointment for the vaccination.
Shaping the behavior
Among strategies that do not try to change thoughts or 
feelings about vaccination, an alternative to focusing 
on helping people act on their intentions is to focus on 
behavior. One class of strategies is designed to provide 
people with an additional set of reasons to get vacci-
nated. Specifically, incentive programs can provide 
either rewards or penalties that are contingent on peo-
ple’s vaccination behavior. The reward or penalty is 
devised to make it worth the person’s while to get 
vaccinated without changing their beliefs about the 
vaccine. The second class of strategies is designed to 
sidestep people’s beliefs about the vaccine by minimiz-
ing or restricting the degree of choice people have 
about their vaccination behavior. This approach primar-
ily involves the imposition of vaccination requirements 
that determine access to work, school, or area of resi-
dency. In the following subsections, we examine the 
effect these two alternative approaches have on vac-
cination behavior as well as potential downstream 
 Psychology of Vaccination 
181
implications for how they might influence people’s 
thoughts and feelings about vaccines.
Incentives and sanctions. Incentive and sanction pro-
grams have emerged as a potential strategy for shifting 
people’s analysis of the costs and benefits of engaging in 
a desired pattern of behavior. Incentive programs pro-
vide people with monetary or nonmonetary rewards 
contingent on the performance of a specified behavior 
(e.g., being vaccinated), whereas sanction programs 
enact monetary or nonmonetary penalties contingent on 
the failure to perform the behavior (for overviews, see 
Giles, Robalino, McColl, Sniehotta, & Adams, 2014; Kane, 
Johnson, Town, & Butler, 2004).
Given this framework, incentives and sanctions offer 
the most practical value in contexts in which people 
are not engaging in the desired behavior at a sufficient 
rate. A key feature of these programs is that they target 
a set of outcomes that are distinct from the thoughts 
and feelings about vaccination that are traditionally 
targeted by intervention programs. Thus, this interven-
tion strategy can be effective without having to change 
people’s underlying thoughts and feelings about the 
vaccine.
To date, programs for vaccinations have either pro-
vided an incentive (e.g., a cash payment) for engaging 
in the behavior or have implemented a sanction by 
limiting an existing benefit for failing to engage in a 
behavior (e.g., reducing a government payment). How-
ever, the overwhelming majority of the programs pro-
vide an incentive for obtaining a vaccine; thus, this will 
be the primary focus of this section.
Incentive programs have focused primarily on pro-
moting childhood vaccination (e.g., Banerjee, Duflo, 
Latif, Glennerster, & Kothari, 2010; Bond, Davie, Carlin, 
Lester, & Nolan, 2002; Browngoehl, Kennedy, Krotki, & 
Mainzer, 1997; Kerpelman, Connell, & Gunn, 2000; 
Mantzari, Vogt, & Marteau, 2015; Minkovitz et al., 1999) 
and influenza vaccination for adults (e.g., Bronchetti, 
Huffman, & Magenheim, 2015; Moran, Nelson, Wofford, 
Velez, & Case, 1996). However, incentives have also 
been used to promote hepatitis B vaccine in adult sub-
populations (e.g., injection drug users: Seal, 2003; Topp 
et al., 2013; Weaver et al., 2014). The reviews of incen-
tives diverge in their recommendations: Some assert 
that this approach is an effective strategy for promoting 
vaccination (Community Preventive Services Task 
Force, 2015, 2016a, 2016b); others contend that the 
evidence for effectiveness is inconclusive (Adams et al., 
2015). A consistent theme across these reviews is the 
heterogeneity in the nature and quality of the underly-
ing studies, which makes it difficult to draw any strong 
conclusions regarding this intervention strategy. For 
instance, many tests of incentive programs have been 
conducted in combination with other intervention strat-
egies, making it difficult to isolate the effect of the 
incentive. Furthermore, the incentives used in these 
programs vary considerably in size, by whether they 
are monetary or nonmonetary, and by whether they 
provide a fixed reward or variable reward (e.g., a lot-
tery ticket). Currently, investigators have little guidance 
regarding how to set the magnitude of the incentive, 
whether it matters if the reward is fixed or variable, or 
whether the reward should involve monetary or non-
monetary outcomes. A more thorough understanding 
of how features of the program affect people’s behav-
ioral decisions could help policymakers optimize incen-
tives to make them more effective and efficient (Burns 
et al., 2012).
Only a small number of programs have tested the 
effect of introducing a sanction for not receiving a vac-
cination. In these cases, the focus has been on child-
hood vaccination programs, and the sanction involved 
a reduction in the financial support that families would 
otherwise receive from the government. Thus, the 
potential adverse outcome is the absence of a benefit 
rather than the imposition of an additional cost. 
Although Kerpelman et al. (2000) found that the poten-
tial loss of benefits led to higher rates of compliance 
with childhood vaccination schedules, Minkovitz et al. 
(1999) found that a similarly structured program had 
no effect on vaccination coverage. The introduction of 
a system to link vaccination requirements and certain 
exemptions to receipt of government payments was 
associated with increased vaccination coverage in Aus-
tralia (Lawrence, MacIntyre, Hull, & McIntyre, 2004). 
The questions raised regarding incentive-based reward 
programs are relevant here as well. For instance, 
whether the proposed sanction is sufficiently averse to 
motivate the behavior requires careful consideration. 
To date, no study has tested the effectiveness of a pro-
gram in which the sanction involved imposing an addi-
tional cost for failing to be vaccinated, which might be 
experienced as a more aversive outcome.
Moving forward, analyses of incentive-program 
effectiveness should also consider the broader conse-
quences of linking an incentive to vaccination behavior. 
A prevailing concern regarding incentive programs is 
that they have the potential to undermine people’s 
intrinsic motivation for the incentivized behavior. To 
date, this has not been shown to be an issue when using 
incentives to motivate healthy behavior (Promberger & 
Marteau, 2013). Given that incentive programs are not 
designed to change how people think and feel about 
vaccines, there is little reason to believe that providing 
an incentive for one vaccine will increase the likelihood 
 182 
Brewer et al.
that people will obtain other vaccines. In fact, if anything, 
it may alter what people expect to receive in exchange 
for being vaccinated, making them less responsive to 
calls for vaccinations that do not provide incentives.
Consideration should also be given to what the 
implementation of an incentive program for vaccination 
might inadvertently communicate about vaccines 
(Connelly, Certo, Ireland, & Reutzel, 2011). On the one 
hand, an incentive program may affirm the importance 
of vaccination. People may think that paying people to 
take action or penalizing them for inaction signals the 
value of this behavior. On the other hand, the program 
may signal that presently people are not choosing to 
perform the behavior, creating or reinforcing the impres-
sion that obtaining the vaccine is not normative (Section 
3). Moreover, the observation that people need to be paid 
(or potentially penalized) in order to agree to be vacci-
nated could be taken to imply that the case for vaccina-
tion, on its own, is not sufficient to motivate action. These 
latter inferences may serve to undermine people’s interest 
in the vaccine (Gneezy, Meier, & Rey-Biel, 2011).
An interesting question is for whom an incentive 
program might be most effective. Given that an incen-
tive is designed to improve people’s cost-benefit analy-
sis of performing the behavior, it may provide limited 
added value when offered to people who already hold 
favorable beliefs about the vaccine. However, it seems 
well suited for people with ambivalent or unfavorable 
beliefs about the vaccine because the incentive serves 
as a counterweight to these beliefs. For instance, 
Bronchetti et al. (2015) observed that providing an incen-
tive for getting the seasonal-influenza vaccine had a 
more pronounced effect on the behavior of students who 
had not gotten the vaccine in the prior year.
Finally, the acceptability and feasibility of implement-
ing an incentive program to promote vaccination are 
important considerations. Several studies have observed 
that people express discomfort with the notion of pay-
ing people to take care of their health (Adams et al., 
2015). Regarding feasibility, incentive programs are 
likely to be viable only within care systems that have 
the resources to cover the costs of the incentive. Health-
care systems could also build incentives into quality-
metrics programs. Finally, checklists are available for 
thinking through how to make incentive programs 
acceptable and effective (Glasziou et al., 2012).
Requirements. Another strategy to shape behavior is 
creating requirements that share some qualities with 
defaults and sanctions. Requirements clearly set vaccina-
tion as a default and impose a sanction or penalty on 
those who want to opt out. Some jurisdictions have poli-
cies that require vaccination as a precondition for access 
to resources or activities tied to school or work or, in 
some cases, even residency. In this manner, vaccination 
requirements are similar in structure to sanction pro-
grams that impose penalties for failing to take action. 
Most requirements are instantiated through legal action 
by national or regional governments, although some 
come from employers and providers. All have exemp-
tions for people medically contraindicated for vaccina-
tion, and some provide other exemptions relating to 
personal beliefs or religion. The level of difficulty in 
attaining these exemptions varies.
Requirements also vary considerably between juris-
dictions. Australia requires parents to have their chil-
dren fully vaccinated or to have obtained an approved 
exemption (medical or otherwise). The personal-belief 
or so-called conscientious-objection option was 
removed from the eligible exemptions in 2016 (Leask 
& Danchin, 2017). Some Australian states have vaccina-
tion requirements for childcare entry, not for school 
attendance, but legislation enables exclusion of unvac-
cinated children during an outbreak in both school and 
childcare. Other countries, such as Slovenia, have highly 
comprehensive programs, including requiring vaccina-
tion against nine diseases; people can submit medical-
exemption requests to a committee. Philosophical 
exemptions are not allowed, and failure to comply 
results in a fine (Walkinshaw, 2011). Other countries 
have more modest or disease-specific immunization 
requirements. Belgium, for example, requires polio vac-
cination but has not had to enforce the policy because 
of extremely high rates of vaccination (Walkinshaw, 
2011). In 2017, Italy began requiring 12 vaccines. The 
World Health Organization currently has no official rec-
ommendation on vaccination requirements.
The United States requires immigrants to have 14 
vaccines but requires no vaccines of travelers and tem-
porary visitors. People infected while outside the United 
States are responsible for most domestic measles cases 
(CDC, 2011). All U.S. states require evidence of vaccina-
tion against at least some diseases as a condition of 
school entry or access to childcare (Barraza, Schmit, & 
Hoss, 2017), but states vary considerably in the vaccines 
that they require and ages or grade levels to which the 
policies apply. All U.S. states grant medical exemptions, 
which are for individuals who have a medical condition 
that is a contraindication to a vaccine. Forty-eight U.S. 
states and the District of Columbia offer religious 
exemptions from school vaccine requirements 
(Diekema, 2014; Yang & Silverman, 2015), and 20 U.S. 
states allow philosophical or religious exemptions, 
which often require only that an individual declare a 
personal belief opposing vaccination. Only three U.S. 
states, West Virginia, Mississippi, and California, have 
laws specifically excluding religious or philosophical 
exemptions from vaccination requirements.
 Psychology of Vaccination 
183
Vaccination requirements can also be policies that pri-
vate institutions enact. Most U.S. universities require vac-
cination in some form and limit exemptions (Noesekabel 
& Fenick, 2017). Hospitals may require workers to receive 
certain vaccines as a condition of employment. Physicians 
may also enforce a form of requirement by refusing to 
treat children who do not get recommended vaccines 
(Flanagan-Klygis, Sharp, & Frader, 2005).
Effectiveness of requirements. Vaccination requirements 
 
are effective in increasing coverage for the targeted vac-
cines (Community Preventive Services Task Force, 2016b; 
Lee & Robinson, 2016; Lytras, Kopsachilis, Mouratidou, 
Papamichail, & Bonovas, 2016) and may have spillover 
effects for nontargeted vaccines (Moss, Reiter, Truong, 
Rimer, & Brewer, 2016). Studies of school vaccination 
requirements in the United States have consistently found 
that when policies allow for philosophical and religious 
exemptions, vaccination coverage is lower than when 
such exemptions are not allowed (N. R. Blank, Caplan, 
& Constable, 2013; Feikin et al., 2000; Omer et al., 2006, 
2008; Safi et al., 2012; J. W. Thompson et al., 2007). Mak-
ing exemptions more difficult to obtain, such as by requir-
ing a doctor’s permission or requiring counselling, can 
limit their use (Omer et al., 2018). As would be expected, 
people with vaccine exemptions are more likely to con-
tract vaccine-preventable diseases such as measles, with 
estimates of 22 to 35 times greater risk compared with 
vaccinated people (CDC, 2004; Salmon et al., 1999), and 
pertussis, with estimates of 6 times greater risk compared 
with vaccinated people (Feikin et al., 2000; Imdad et al., 
2013). Reviews of outbreaks have observed that many 
affected children had exemptions or were unvaccinated 
for religious or philosophical reasons and that local area 
exemption rates are positively associated with measles 
outbreaks (CDC, 1997, 2013; Zipprich et al., 2015) and 
pertussis outbreaks (Atwell et al., 2013; Feikin et al., 
2000; Imdad et al., 2013; Matthias et al., 2014; Omer et al., 
2006, 2008). For example, in a review of U.S. measles 
outbreaks, 42% of cases for which data were available 
involved a person with a nonmedical exemption (Phadke 
et al., 2016).
Requirements for seasonal-influenza vaccination 
have also been implemented in workplaces, primarily 
those in health care. In the United States, some states 
have instituted policies that require health-care workers 
to be vaccinated, but these policies are quite heteroge-
neous (Stewart & Cox, 2013). Reviews indicate that 
requirements are an effective strategy for increasing 
vaccination coverage among health-care workers (Pitts, 
Maruthur, Millar, Perl, & Segal, 2014) and can be more 
effective than other strategies. That requirements are 
often necessary to reach high vaccination coverage 
among health-care workers is testimony to the chal-
lenges that vaccination-promotion programs face.
When to adopt more restrictive requirements. Require-
ments can be highly effective, but depending on the 
prevailing reasons for undervaccination in a popula-
tion, it may be sufficient or more advisable to apply 
other less coercive measures. We review several issues 
related to adopting requirements, but conclusions for 
any jurisdiction require a careful consideration of the 
potential effects (Leask & Danchin, 2017; Opel et al., 
2017).
Some argue that vaccine requirements for the general 
public are best used when vaccination coverage is very 
high and most other interventions have been deployed. 
The problem of sticky social norms means that man-
dates that stray too far from existing behavior may be 
rejected (Kahan, 2000). This reaction may be particu-
larly likely to emerge among people who hold ambiva-
lent or unfavorable beliefs about vaccination (Betsch 
& Böhm, 2016). Confidence in the safety and effective-
ness of vaccination will also need to be high (Opel 
et al., 2017). People who feel their freedom to act has 
been curtailed may react with anger (Brehm, 1966), 
reject the vaccine requirement, and become more sus-
ceptible to antivaccination messages. In two U.S. juris-
dictions with laws that require HPV vaccination for 
school entry, people frequently opt out. This makes the 
laws ineffective and can also reduce uptake of other 
vaccines for adolescents, perhaps because people learn 
the behavior of rejecting vaccines (Moss et al., 2016). 
This finding may reflect the specific complexities 
around the HPV vaccine. Requirements for other ado-
lescent vaccines increased uptake of those vaccines as 
well as the HPV vaccine (Moss et al., 2016).
Requirements can provide an opportunity for people 
to engage with their health-care provider or system, 
which can increase the likelihood that they will obtain 
other vaccines (Moss et al., 2016). However, the imposi-
tion of financial penalties and policies that limit access 
to care systems could also reduce some families’ access 
to care. Adoption of requirements should take this into 
account along with complex array of other practical 
and ethical issues (National Vaccine Advisory Commit-
tee, 2008), a review of which is beyond the scope of 
this work (Colgrove, 2006; Verweij & Dawson, 2004). 
One final practical issue is that implementing new vac-
cine requirements and restricting existing exemptions 
generate substantial media attention, and often contro-
versy, and can use up the time of vaccination-program 
staff. It is important to assess the political will to 
weather resistance and resources within the vaccination 
program to address critics.
 184 
Brewer et al.
Emerging perspectives
Vaccination as a routinized behavior. A key ele-
ment of initiatives designed to improve people’s health is 
that they rely on people initiating changes in their behav-
ior (e.g., diet, physical activity, substance use) and main-
taining those changes. Yet, the development of strategies 
that can elicit sustained changes in behavior has proven 
challenging (Rothman, Baldwin, Hertel, & Fuglestad, 
2011; Rothman, Sheeran, & Wood, 2009). However, some 
people can maintain the behavior over time, and for 
them, the behavior becomes a routinized response to a 
cue or condition in the environment (Wood & Neal, 
2016; Wood & Rünger, 2016). In some cases, routinized, 
repeated behaviors seem to occur with little conscious 
thought (e.g., putting on your seatbelt every time you 
drive a car), whereas in other cases, completing the 
behavior may take conscious thought, but the initial 
sequence of action is triggered by cues in the environ-
ment (e.g., seeing athletic shoes next to the bed in the 
morning can prompt people to exercise).
To be up to date with the recommended vaccine 
schedule, people must receive a large number of vac-
cinations, which may require multiple doses or annual 
repetition. Successfully navigating this complex set of 
behaviors can be challenging, yet some people regu-
larly obtain all of the vaccines available to them. People 
who successfully obtain all, or nearly all, available vac-
cines may have turned vaccination into a routinized, 
repeated behavior (Gierisch et al., 2010) that takes lim-
ited deliberation.
Consistent with the view that regular vaccination can 
become routinized, people’s vaccination behavior 
shows consistency. In particular, prior vaccination 
behavior is one of the strongest predictors of future 
uptake of the same vaccine or another vaccine for one-
self and one’s children (Schmid et al., 2017). Although 
the predictive value of prior vaccination behavior would 
suggest that people have the potential to develop a 
vaccination routine, several aspects of vaccination 
behavior are likely make it difficult for a routine to 
emerge. First, vaccination is not fully under one’s own 
control; one must receive the vaccine from a provider. 
Second, the time period between vaccination events is 
highly variable and in many cases can be quite long, 
which may make it difficult to form a consistent routine. 
Third, a routine is more likely to develop when a 
behavior is repeated under similar conditions (e.g., run-
ning first thing in the morning on every weekday). 
However, the conditions under which vaccinations are 
obtained are often heterogeneous and vary in their 
timing, setting, and provider; this is particularly likely 
across different types of vaccines because one might 
get a seasonal-influenza vaccine at work but a shingles 
vaccine in a doctor’s office.
The observation that prior vaccination behavior is a 
strong predictor of subsequent vaccination may offer 
important insights into the factors that regulate this 
behavior and have the potential to support the develop-
ment of a vaccination routine. A history of prior vac-
cination behavior may be a marker for individual-level 
factors that support vaccination, such as the beliefs that 
underlie vaccine confidence, trust in the health care 
system, and a perception of vaccination as the norma-
tive behavioral response. A prior history may also be a 
marker for the presence of structural factors that sup-
port vaccination, such as the availability of resources 
or services provided through one’s workplace or health 
care system. Thus, consistent vaccination behavior may 
represent the persistent presence of factors that support 
vaccination behavior each time the opportunity arises.
To the extent that prior vaccination history serves as 
a marker for the presence or absence of these support-
ive conditions, it may provide an opportunity for inves-
tigators to deploy intervention resources more 
effectively and efficiently. People who do not have a 
history of vaccinations may need to be persuaded of 
the value of a given vaccine and thus are more respon-
sive to intervention strategies that provide information 
about, or explanations for, vaccination. On the other 
hand, people with a history of prior vaccinations may 
not need to be convinced about the value of vaccina-
tion, and thus it would be sufficient to rely on interven-
tion strategies that provide reminders or put in place 
structural changes that make it easier to access vaccina-
tion services.
Leveraging the effect of implicit or nonconscious 
beliefs on vaccination. Research on the psychological 
determinants of vaccination behavior has focused almost 
exclusively on the explicit (conscious) thoughts and feel-
ings that people report regarding vaccination (e.g., 
appraisals of risk, confidence in vaccination). This focus 
on conscious thoughts and feelings is consistent with 
prevailing models of health behavior (Conner & Norman, 
2015; Rothman & Salovey, 2007), and compelling evi-
dence shows that experimentally elicited changes in con-
scious thoughts and feelings can elicit changes in 
behavior (e.g., Sheeran et al., 2016, 2014). Yet because 
the observed magnitude of these effects have proven 
modest, investigators have begun to explore the hypoth-
esis that people also hold implicit (or nonconscious) 
thoughts and feelings about behavior that may affect 
their behavioral decisions (Marteau et al., 2012; Sheeran 
et al., 2016; Sheeran et al., 2013). As noted earlier, these 
implicit thoughts and feelings are associated in memory 
with the behavior, but they are not readily available to 
conscious awareness.
Research on implicit processes has focused on the 
determinants of addictive or hedonic behaviors such as 
 Psychology of Vaccination 
185
smoking, drinking, drug use, and unhealthy dietary 
choices (see Sheeran & Bosch, 2016). This work has 
been guided by the premise that people may explicitly 
report that they hold unfavorable thoughts or feelings 
toward cigarettes, beer, or doughnuts, but at the same 
time hold implicit thoughts or feelings that are more 
favorable. Moreover, under certain conditions (e.g., 
times of stress, reductions in executive function or self-
control), these implicit beliefs can have a more pro-
nounced influence on behavior (Strack & Deutsch, 
2004).
A similar discrepancy may exist between people’s 
explicit and implicit thoughts and feelings about vac-
cination. People’s explicit thoughts and feelings may 
indicate a favorable evaluation of vaccination, whereas 
their implicit thoughts and feelings may reveal a more 
unfavorable or ambivalent evaluation of the behavior. 
For people whose thoughts and feelings are marked by 
this discrepancy, their favorable (explicit) thoughts and 
feelings should guide their behavior when they have 
sufficient time and mental energy to make decisions. 
However, their more unfavorable (implicit) thoughts 
and feelings should guide their behavior when they are 
under stress or other conditions that constrain the time 
and energy they can direct toward their decisions. This 
pattern of predictions might help elucidate the factors 
that underlie inconsistencies in people’s vaccination 
behavior over time. Formative research is needed to 
examine people’s implicit and explicit thoughts and 
feelings regarding vaccination, their relation to each 
other, and the conditions under which they are predic-
tive of vaccination behavior.
If evidence emerges in support of the predicted, dif-
ferential influence of implicit and explicit thoughts and 
feelings on vaccination behavior, investigators may 
want to pursue the development of strategies that can 
mitigate the adverse effect of people’s implicit thoughts 
and feelings. These strategies could take one of two 
approaches. One would be to develop strategies that 
support the activation and use of people’s (more favor-
able) explicit thoughts and feelings about vaccination, 
especially when they are under stress or are grappling 
with multiple demands on their time. Another would 
be to develop strategies that inhibit the influence of 
implicit thoughts and feelings on vaccination behavior. 
For example, the formation of if-then plans to promote 
the use of deliberation in situations in which people 
might typically react impulsively has been shown to 
reduce the predictive effect of implicit attitudes on 
behavior (Webb, Sheeran, & Pepper, 2012). In either 
case, these approaches should increase the likelihood 
that people’s vaccination behavior is more likely to be 
consistent with their (favorable) explicit beliefs regard-
ing the vaccine.
Conclusion
Interventions to encourage vaccination are remarkably 
effective when they intervene on behavior directly with-
out trying to change individuals’ thoughts and feelings 
about vaccination or the social context in which vaccina-
tion occurs. Vaccinating is often a passive act, even in 
high-income countries (Robbins et al., 2010). For exam-
ple, in Australia, which has 93% vaccination coverage 
for children under age 5, passive undervaccination 
accounted for ~60% of the undervaccinated, and the 
remaining ~40% was probably due to active undervac-
cination (Beard et al., 2016). Strategies designed to facili-
tate or prompt action have considerable potential.
One cluster of strategies that bridges the gap between 
positive intention and behavior are promising. They are 
likely to be effective with people who have favorable 
vaccination intentions. Strategies to close the intention-
behavior gap include reminders, primes, defaults, and 
implementation intentions. The observation that people 
fail to act on their favorable intentions is but one exam-
ple of situations in which people’s actions are out of 
sync with their beliefs. In some situations, people take 
action despite holding ambivalent or unfavorable 
beliefs about a behavior. To date, the prevailing way to 
engage with people who hold ambivalent or unfavor-
able beliefs about a vaccine is to try and change how 
they think and feel about the vaccine. Several taxono-
mies of vaccination behavior identify a group of indi-
viduals as “reluctant but persuadable” (Benin et al., 
2006; Gust et al., 2005). Yet, as noted earlier, persuasive 
communications can be challenging to implement and 
are limited in their effectiveness.
Another cluster of strategies focuses more on the 
behavior. These strategies may increase vaccination 
among people with a range of intentions. Strategies that 
focus on the behavior include incentives, sanctions, and 
requirements. Research is needed to establish whether 
these approaches are effective for people who are 
opposed to vaccination or have ambivalent attitudes 
about vaccination. Several strategies in this section 
frame or reframe vaccination behavior as the default 
behavioral response. Strategies that target individual-
level or structural factors that support this conceptual-
ization may prove to be a valuable way to help people 
transform vaccination into a routinized, repeated 
behavior.
Provider recommendations. Consistent with the dis-
cussions in previous sections, health-care provider recom-
mendations are strongly associated with vaccination behavior. 
Physician recommendations may be effective because they 
serve as a cue to action, but several additional factors may 
contribute to their effectiveness. First, to the extent that the 
 186 
Brewer et al.
recommendation can be acted on immediately, it sidesteps 
several of the logistical challenges associated with obtain-
ing the vaccine (e.g., scheduling an appointment; making 
arrangements to get to the clinic). Second, a recommenda-
tion from a health-care provider may affirm or augment 
people’s perceptions of the value and safety of the vaccine. 
Third, with the recommendation, the health-care provider 
may lead the patient to construe vaccination as the default.
Provider recommendations are especially effective 
when they take the form of presumptive announce-
ments. Such recommendations may be successful, at 
least in part, because of their direct effect on patient 
behavior. Specifically, they have the potential to make 
vaccination the default response or to serve as a strong 
prime or reminder that activates the favorable intentions 
patients already have. Whether recommendations are 
beneficial for all patients may depend on why physician 
recommendations are effective. For example, if recom-
mendations increase vaccination coverage because they 
serve as a reminder or cue to action, they should be 
effective for people who already hold favorable atti-
tudes or intentions regarding the vaccine but may show 
limited benefit for people with unsure or ambivalent 
attitudes or intentions. If recommendations instead 
increase vaccination coverage because they increase 
confidence or communicate a social norm, they may 
be particularly effective when directed toward people 
who are unsure or ambivalent regarding the vaccine.
The most promising avenues for policy implementa-
tion come from the literature reviewed in this section. 
Improving vaccination coverage is likely to necessitate 
some combination of reminders, defaults, incentives, 
and requirements, and other similar programs.
Section 5: Leveraging the Psychology 
of Vaccination
Our review of the psychology of vaccination is orga-
nized around three themes. People’s thoughts and feel-
ings about vaccines are consistently associated with 
vaccination behavior, but intervention strategies 
designed to change thoughts and feelings to increase 
vaccination have a surprisingly limited impact or rest 
on a surprisingly weak evidence base. Experimental 
evidence about how to influence thoughts and feelings 
about vaccination is also sparse. Likewise, although 
vaccination occurs in a social context and social-norm 
interventions have proven effective in influencing other 
behaviors, intervention strategies that target these social 
processes do not yet have a proven track record of 
facilitating vaccination (e.g., Bronchetti et al., 2015). In 
contrast, the strongest evidence for increasing vaccina-
tion comes from intervention strategies designed to build 
on already favorable intentions and directly shape 
behavior.
What should policymakers, immunization managers, 
and vaccination providers do with the insights offered 
by our review? This final section of our article sum-
marizes our findings and considers their application to 
vaccination policies and programs. We begin by outlin-
ing some limitations of our review and of the literature; 
summarize the main psychological principles and their 
effect on vaccination; apply these interventions to the 
three pressing problems in vaccination (inadequate 
coverage, delay, and instability); and offer directions 
for further research. Although recommendations for 
how to increase vaccination are common (Politi, Jones, 
& Philpott, 2017), we argue that such recommendations 
will have the greatest impact if they take into account 
psychological theory and behavioral findings.
Scope of evidence
Readers may come to our article looking for the magic 
trick that will dramatically increase vaccination uptake. 
None exists. Although many interventions fail, and those 
that work typically have small effects, this process is a 
normal part of science; the field is still young. With strong 
caveats stated, many of the approaches we describe are 
complementary and can be rolled out together or by 
starting with interventions that are least costly or least 
likely to elicit pushback. Implementing multiple strategies 
is likely to produce the largest effect. This premise sug-
gests new research on how to integrate approaches and 
whether particular combinations are more effective under 
specific conditions.
Our review builds on a solid foundation of theories 
from psychological and behavioral science, although 
many theoretical mechanisms have never been tested 
in the domain of vaccination. Nevertheless, the findings 
we review are based on high-quality studies of vaccina-
tion behavior. We offer several caveats to people look-
ing to use our review to inform policy and practice. 
First, this is a narrative review focused on conceptual 
themes and their empirical support. We relied on sys-
tematic reviews where possible, conducting additional 
reviews of the supporting studies, and we conducted 
a series of new reviews across several literatures. We 
do not claim to have located every study on a topic. 
That said, the main assertions of our article are firmly 
grounded in theory and multiple streams of evidence.
Second, in some areas, the available evidence is lim-
ited in quality or quantity, or the most compelling evi-
dence concerns behaviors other than vaccination. 
Furthermore, the large majority of studies of vaccination 
are cross-sectional, so it is difficult to make inferences 
 Psychology of Vaccination 
187
about the causal effect of beliefs on behavior. Evalua-
tions of interventions have focused primarily on out-
comes, and attention to specifying the mechanism 
underlying the effect has been limited. Many interven-
tions are composed of multiple components, but their 
evaluations were not designed to isolate the effective-
ness of specific strategies. Much of the relevant research 
comes from the United States or Europe, where specific 
programmatic and funding contexts may limit the gen-
eralizability of some findings to other settings. We 
attempt to identify these shortcomings in our summary 
of findings in Table 4. Increasingly, researchers are 
conducting cross-continent studies that have found that, 
for example, vaccine acceptance is generally high (Sun-
daram et al., 2016), challenges to vaccine confidence 
are global (H. J. Larson & Schulz, 2015), motivators of 
vaccination are surprisingly similar across countries 
(Kwong, Pang, Choi, & Wong, 2010), the influence of 
some social factors on vaccination varies across cultures 
(Böhm et al., 2016), and interventions to increase vac-
cine demand result in improved vaccine coverage in 
low- and middle-income countries (Johri et al., 2015).
Third, our review focuses on contexts in which vac-
cines are available and affordable because this is where 
psychological science may have the most to offer. Even 
theoretically sound and empirically supported interven-
tions should be applied to vaccination programs with 
care. An intervention should be the right match for the 
problem, grounded first in an understanding of barriers 
facing a population and the suitability of that interven-
tion to the context. If, for example, the main reason for 
a region’s low vaccine coverage is that services are not 
readily accessible or that cost is a barrier, requirements 
with sanctions would be inappropriate.
General psychological principles
The literature supports three general psychological 
principles that motivate getting a vaccination, but all 
do not apply equally to efforts to increase vaccination 
coverage. One principle is that what people think and 
feel motivates whether they choose to be vaccinated. 
These constructs include risk appraisals, such as per-
ceived risk and fear of the infectious agent, as well 
as confidence in vaccination. Despite the widely dem-
onstrated correlation of thoughts and feelings with 
vaccination behavior, the intervention strategies cur-
rently used to modify what people think and feel are 
minimally effective or unreliable in increasing vac-
cination. Communication is an essential element of 
vaccination programs, and the alternative of not com-
municating about vaccination is likely to end badly. 
However, the literature shows that most of the recom-
mended messages about vaccines that have been put 
forward by major relevant clinical organizations have 
a striking lack of evidence regarding their effect on 
vaccination coverage. We suspect that the poor per-
formance of communication interventions reflects a 
reliance on a generally weak intervention approach 
that is grounded on interventionists’ misplaced con-
fidence that facts are persuasive and an underestima-
tion of the impact of affect-eliciting messages such as 
personal testimonials.
A second principle is that social processes such as 
contagion, social norms, altruism, and free riding also 
motivate vaccination behavior. A sizable literature of 
correlational studies or experiments using hypothetical 
scenarios or laboratory paradigms points to the influ-
ence of social networks and social preferences on 
health behavior. However, few field studies of actual 
vaccination behavior have examined whether interven-
tions that change social processes affect vaccination 
coverage. We see this area as promising for future inter-
vention development.
A third principle is that the most potent ways to 
increase vaccination coverage rely on changing behav-
ior directly. This finding is in some ways unexpected 
because vaccination typically involves some degree of 
deliberation and choice. One approach to changing 
behavior directly is to build on people’s favorable inten-
tions to get vaccinated, for the most part without chang-
ing what they think, feel, or experience socially. These 
interventions include reminders, defaults, and planning 
prompts. Another approach to changing behavior 
directly is to shape behavior through incentives, sanc-
tions, and requirements, again without trying to change 
what people think, feel, or experience socially. The 
findings on incentives and requirements are robust 
across various health behaviors and many are well-
developed for use with vaccination, including in low-
and middle-income countries.
What implications do these findings have for psy-
chological science? Vaccination represents a set of 
behaviors in an applied setting and thus is not the 
domain of any single psychological theory. As we have 
summarized, the current evidence indicates that inter-
ventions designed to change thoughts and feelings are 
less effective at altering vaccination behavior than those 
targeting behavior directly. It is difficult to say whether 
this finding has implications for the psychological pro-
cesses that drive vaccination behavior (i.e., that behav-
ior is less driven by cognition and attitudes than we 
might initially believe) or reflects more the particular 
interventions that have been tried and the difficulty of 
changing strongly held vaccination values. Social pro-
cesses appear to be a promising avenue for vaccination 
behavior change, and yet few intervention studies in 
this area have been conducted. Thus, vaccination offers 
a relevant high-stakes test bed for psychological 
theory.
 188 
Brewer et al.
Table 4. Likely Impact of Interventions to Increase Vaccination Coverage Based on Available Evidence
Article 
section
Intervention
Likely 
impact
Especially effective when...
Amount of 
evidence
Amount of causal 
evidence
Any 
behavior
Vacc
Vacc
Vacc in 
LMICs
2
Messages that increase 
disease risk 
appraisals

People have low disease-risk appraisals or 
have become complacent about disease 
risk
2
2
1
1
2
Education campaigns 
that increase 
confidence

People have low confidence that 
vaccination is effective and safe
2
2
1
1
2
Decision aids

People initially do not agree to vaccination 
because they have questions
2
1
1
0
2
Motivational 
interviewing

People initially express ambivalence about 
vaccination
2
1
1
0
3
Descriptive norm 
messages

People are unsure or misunderstand what 
others are doing
2
2
0
0
3
Social network 
interventions that 
build on contagion

People are at least minimally connected to 
a social network
2
0
0
0
3
Messages that change 
altruism or free-
riding beliefs

People have low altruism or high free-
riding motivation
2
2
0
0
2, 3, 4
Healthcare provider 
recommendations

People have favorable, ambivalent, or 
unfavorable intentions
2
2
2
0
4
Presumptive health-
care provider 
recommendations

People have favorable or ambivalent 
intentions
2
1
1
0
4
Reminders and recalls

People have favorable intentions but do 
not get vaccinated
2
2
2
1
4
Implementation-
intention 
interventions

People have favorable intentions but do 
not get vaccinated
2
1
1
1
4
Mere-measurement 
interventions

People have favorable intentions but do 
not get vaccinated
2
1
1
0
4
On-site vaccination

People have favorable intentions but do 
not get vaccinated
2
2
2
2
4
Default appointments

People have favorable intentions but do 
not get vaccinated
2
1
1
0
4
Incentives

People have favorable, ambivalent, or 
unfavorable intentions
2
2
2
2
4
Vaccination 
requirements

Vaccination rates are already high; most 
people affected by requirement support 
it
2
2
1
0
Note: Vacc = vaccination coverage; LMICs = low- or middle-income countries;  = little or no impact;  = modest impact;  = substantial impact;  
0 = no evidence; 1 = some evidence; 2 = substantial evidence. Conclusions about evidence are based on consensus among authors who considered 
the available evidence, including the number of available studies, evidence for causal association, the quality of the studies, and the size of the 
effect. See the relevant section of the article for more information on the interventions.
The three principles that we present in this review 
may be more related to one another than the current 
evidence indicates. Interventions that act on behavior 
directly are the most effective at eliciting behavior 
change. A sizable enough behavior change on a group 
scale, however, would alter the descriptive norm. The 
shift in social norms may perpetuate the behavior 
change and may also lead to changes in thoughts and 
feelings. This potential feedback cascade is an interest-
ing area for future research.
The psychological mechanisms we reviewed have 
other implications as well. For example, future research 
 Psychology of Vaccination 
189
is needed to uncover the mechanisms underlying the 
potent effects of health-care-provider vaccine recom-
mendations. Our taxonomy suggests that recommenda-
tions may change patients’ risk appraisals or vaccine 
confidence, they may communicate an injunctive norm 
supporting vaccination, or they may serve as a cue to 
action. All of these are plausible explanations. However, 
the lack of process-oriented research in this area leaves 
this as an intriguing open question. Given the large 
impact of recommendations, an important area for 
future research is to identify effective means for encour-
aging providers to recommend vaccination to their 
patients.
Addressing the three main vaccination 
problems
As we have noted, our review identified numerous 
interventions that build on insights from psychological 
science to address persistent problems facing vaccina-
tion. Our review can be useful for programs that have 
limited budgets, that have a reasonable understanding 
of the barriers to uptake, and that must prioritize a 
limited set of interventions. These constraints necessi-
tate that programs usually must select only one or a 
few interventions to implement. In addition, the APEASE 
criteria specify six areas to consider when developing 
interventions: affordability, practicability, effectiveness 
and cost effectiveness, acceptability, side effects/safety, 
and equity (Michie, Atkins, & West, 2014).
Researchers have proposed that the most relevant 
psychological principles to apply and the most suitable 
interventions to implement will depend on the particular 
vaccination problem. The four-C model (complacency, 
convenience, confidence, and costs) suggests tailoring 
the intervention to the needs of the population (Betsch 
et al., 2015). For people who are complacent, the model 
suggests that the goal is to increase perceived risk and 
confidence, establish social norms, and emphasize altru-
istic motives. For people low in confidence, the goal is 
to debunk myths. For people facing problems of conve-
nience, the goal is to reduce barriers, strengthen self-
control, and increase confidence. Finally, for people 
inclined to calculate the costs and benefits of receiving 
a vaccination, the goal is to increase risk appraisals, 
debunk myths, stress social benefit and add incentives.
We suggest a somewhat simpler heuristic of consid-
ering people’s inclination toward getting vaccinated. 
Choice of intervention and its likely effect may vary 
depending on whether people are favorable to, ambiva-
lent about, or opposed to vaccination. We use this 
premise to make recommendations in Table 4 for when 
a particular strategy might be especially effective. For 
example, when people have positive intentions but do 
not always follow through, we can support those inten-
tions with reminders, implementation intentions, and 
healthy defaults. Even when people are ambivalent, we 
can shape behavior with incentives and requirements 
if the context is suitable. By delineating how an inter-
vention strategy is designed to work, researchers are 
better able to make recommendations regarding the 
conditions under which a specific strategy will be most 
effective (Sheeran, Klein, & Rothman, 2017). For 
instance, health-care-provider recommendation would 
appear to be a particularly powerful intervention strat-
egy, but our limited understanding of the mechanisms 
through which it works constrains our ability to specify 
when this strategy will be maximally effective.
Increasing coverage. Most intervention approaches that 
 
we suggest are suitable for people inclined toward or 
perhaps ambivalent about getting vaccinated. One of the 
most promising tools for addressing low overage is the 
use of health-care-provider recommendations because 
they are so strongly associated with vaccination, but the 
specific approach to recommendations matters. Physi-
cians should use presumptive announcements about vac-
cination at the outset, reserving open-ended conversations 
for addressing questions if parents raise them. Other 
tools that may be effective in raising coverage are those 
reviewed in Section 4 for closing the intention-behavior 
gap, such as the use of reminders and recalls or removing 
barriers to vaccination by providing standing orders. Har-
nessing social processes is an intriguing potential tool 
that merits exploration but remains poorly understood. 
Building provaccination descriptive and injunctive social 
norms among vaccine recipients and health-care profes-
sionals may increase coverage.
For people disinclined to get vaccinated, approaches 
include respectful engagement, such as offering deci-
sion aids and using motivational interviewing. Neither 
approach has evidence showing that it can increase 
vaccination coverage, but both build on the principle 
of patient empowerment, which may be meaningful for 
people whose opposition to vaccination is likely to 
generate disapproval from health-care providers. Like-
wise, self-affirmation can make people more receptive 
to risk communication (Harris & Epton, 2009; McQueen 
& Klein, 2006). Vaccination requirements are increas-
ingly popular for childhood and adolescent vaccines, 
but they are not yet in place for adults other than 
health-care workers. Requirements may also be most 
practical if used only after most other approaches have 
been exhausted.
Interventions that address thoughts and feelings may 
offer a small impact, such as communication campaigns 
focused on vaccine effectiveness, vaccine safety, and 
the harms of not getting vaccinated, with the goal of 
 190 
Brewer et al.
increasing motivation. We suspect that their impact is 
most meaningful in early phases of a program or for 
rollout of a new vaccine, when awareness of a vaccine 
is low, and when the campaign can reach people who 
are already most inclined to get vaccinated. Some data 
suggest that educational campaigns may be effective in 
low- and middle-income countries but not in high-
income countries (Harvey, Reissland, & Mason, 2015).
Very few evidence-based methods are available to 
aid clinicians in convincing hesitant parents and patients 
to get vaccinated. Surveys of primary-care providers 
demonstrate their frustration in perceiving that what 
they are currently doing is not very effective (Kempe, 
O’Leary, et al., 2015). Clearly, to better address the 
concerns of parent and patients about vaccines, provid-
ers need more evidence-based tools and vaccination 
programs need more evidence-based interventions that 
are practical in primary care, given time and resource 
constraints. Some of the methods that show promise in 
other medical contexts (e.g., motivational interviewing) 
may be difficult to incorporate into clinical practice 
given the amount of time required for training and use 
(Lundahl et al., 2013; Söderlund, Madson, Rubak, & 
Nilsen, 2011).
Increasing timeliness. Even when parents have their 
children fully vaccinated, they may delay or spread out 
the vaccines such that the child does not complete the 
entire vaccination schedule by the recommended age. 
School requirements increase timeliness. Because parents 
who delay but do not refuse vaccination presumably have 
reasonably favorable vaccination intentions, reminders and 
recalls may be quite effective with this group. Default auto-
matic appointments are also effective at bringing patients 
in at the desired time.
Establishing a social norm for timely vaccination may 
be promising, although little evidence is yet available 
to show how such an approach might work. Social-
marketing efforts may be useful, especially if led by 
vaccine advocates who can counter the promotion of 
delay by health-care providers (e.g., the author of a 
popular parenting book; see Sears, 2011). As with 
encouraging vaccine uptake, communication is likely 
to be a weak tool. However, national campaigns could 
reinforce social-promotion efforts. If so, they should 
emphasize the risks of waiting to get vaccinated. Of 
course, one-on-one counseling by health providers 
remains an option, as does use of decision aids, which 
reduced delay in one trial.
Increasing robustness of vaccine coverage. In the 
past century, vaccination has eradicated one human dis-
ease (smallpox), and two others are close to eradication 
(polio and guinea worm). At the same time, three other 
disease-eradication programs experienced setbacks, in 
part because of the erosion or collapse of support from 
policymakers and challenges to vaccine confidence 
(Taylor, 2009). Understanding why policymakers adopt 
effective policies and maintain their support is an area 
with little evidence. It is likely that policymakers and 
everyday citizens are subject to similar psychological 
processes.
Vaccination takes place within a larger system of 
healthy policy, industry production, government over-
sight, and program delivery. Vaccination of individuals 
is important, as is support for national vaccine policies. 
Such public support can lead to stable vaccination cov-
erage and make the national vaccination system more 
resilient when facing vaccine scares or spikes in anti-
vaccination sentiment. Although risk appraisals and 
confidence are weak motivators of behavior, they may 
be important for generating and maintaining support 
of vaccination policies and programs (Petrescu, Hollands, 
Couturier, Ng, & Marteau, 2016). So while public educa-
tion and communication efforts are weak interventions 
when targeted toward behavior, they may be useful 
when all else fails, and they may generate support for 
vaccination policies and programs and may be especially 
important during a safety scare. Other potentially viable 
approaches rely on social processes by strengthening 
vaccination social norms and developing provaccination 
activist networks. Other key areas for future research 
include developing methods for intervening through 
social media to address vaccination concerns, thereby 
increasing the robustness of vaccine coverage.
Conclusion
Vaccination is one of public health’s greatest achieve-
ments, saving millions of lives each year. Support for 
vaccination is high, especially for children, yet vaccina-
tion programs face persistent challenges. The interven-
tions we identified, through analyzing the psychological 
processes involved and reviewing the evidence, can aid 
policymakers and program managers as they work to 
improve vaccination coverage. Our review suggests 
why and for whom they are likely to be most effective. 
A local program manager may be faced with a small 
budget for improving vaccination coverage, and devel-
oping a leaflet may be an attractive option, but it is 
unlikely to offer any actual improvement in vaccination 
coverage. In contrast, changes to systems and policies 
may provide more substantial and enduring changes. 
At the same time, vaccination provides a high-stakes, 
real-world test bed for evaluating a broad array of theo-
ries in psychological science. An understanding of the 
 Psychology of Vaccination 
191
psychology behind vaccination behavior can inform 
both theoretical development and facilitation of 
evidence-based vaccination policy and practice.
Acknowledgments
We thank Valerie Reyna for giving us the idea to write this 
article. We thank Meagan Robichaud and Jennifer Spencer 
for their help with the manuscript and Rodney Atkins for his 
extensive editorial support.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
N. T. Brewer has served on paid advisory boards for Merck 
and FDA, and he has received research grants related to vac-
cination from Merck, GSK, Pfizer, and CDC. J. Leask has 
received consultancy funds from the European Office of the 
World Health Organization. The remaining authors declare 
that they have no conflicts of interest with respect to the 
authorship or the publication of this article.
References
Adams, J., Bateman, B., Becker, F., Cresswell, T., Flynn, D., 
McNaughton, R., . . . Wigham, S. (2015). Effectiveness and 
acceptability of parental financial incentives and quasi-
mandatory schemes for increasing uptake of vaccina-
tions in preschool children: Systematic review, qualitative 
study and discrete choice experiment. Health Technology 
Assessment, 19, Article 94. doi:10.3310/hta19940
Adriaanse, M. A., Vinkers, C. D. W., De Ridder, D. T. D., 
Hox, J. J., & De Wit, J. B. F. (2011). Do implementation 
intentions help to eat a healthy diet? A systematic review 
and meta-analysis of the empirical evidence. Appetite, 56, 
183–193. doi:10.1016/j.appet.2010.10.012
Akmatov, M. K., & Mikolajczyk, R. T. (2012). Timeliness of 
childhood vaccinations in 31 low and middle-income 
countries. Journal of Epidemiology and Community 
Health, 66(7), Article e14. doi:10.1136/jech.2010.124651
Amin, A. B., Bednarczyk, R. A., Ray, C. E., Melchiori, K. J., Graham, 
J., Huntsinger, J. R., & Omer, S. B. (2017). Association 
of moral values with vaccine hesitancy. Nature Human 
Behaviour, 1(12), 873–880. doi:10.1038/s41562-017-0256-5
Amin, R., Li, Y., Ansari, N. M., Omer, K., Baloch, M., Foster, 
 
A. H., . . . Soberanis, J. L. (1997). NGO-promoted women’s 
credit program, immunization coverage, and child mor-
tality in rural Bangladesh. Women & Health, 25, 71–87. 
doi:10.1300/J013v25n01_05
Asch, D. A., Baron, J., Hershey, J. C., Kunreuther, H., 
Meszaros, J., Ritov, I., & Spranca, M. (1994). Omission 
bias and pertussis vaccination. Medical Decision Making, 
14, 118–123. doi:10.1177/0272989X9401400204
Atwell, J. E., Van Otterloo, J., Zipprich, J., Winter, K., Harriman, 
K., Salmon, D. A., . . . Omer, S. B. (2013). Nonmedical 
vaccine exemptions and pertussis in California, 2010. 
Pediatrics, 132, 624–630. doi:10.1542/peds.2013-0878
Bahk, C. Y., Cumming, M., Paushter, L., Madoff, L. C., 
Thomson, A., & Brownstein, J. S. (2016). Publicly avail-
able online tool facilitates real-time monitoring of vaccine 
conversations and sentiments. Health Affairs, 35, 341–
347. doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2015.1092.
Bandura, A. E. (1971). Psychological modeling: Conflicting 
theories. Piscataway, NJ: Transaction Publishers.
Banerjee, A. V., Duflo, E., Latif, A., Glennerster, R., & Kothari, 
D. (2010). Improving immunisation coverage in rural India: 
Clustered randomised controlled evaluation of immuni-
sation campaigns with and without incentives. British 
Medical Journal, 340, Article c2220. doi:10.1136/bmj.c2220
Barraza, L., Schmit, C., & Hoss, A. (2017). The latest in vaccine 
policies: Selected issues in school vaccinations, health-
care worker vaccinations, and pharmacist vaccination 
authority laws. 
The Journal of Law, Medicine & Ethics, 
45(1 
Suppl.), 16–19. doi:10.1177/1073110517703307
Bargh, J. A. (2006). What have we been priming all these 
years? On the development, mechanisms, and ecology of 
nonconscious social behavior. European Journal of Social 
Psychology, 36, 147–168. doi:10.1002/ejsp.336
Bauch, C. T., & Earn, D. J. D. (2004). Vaccination and the theory 
of games. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
USA, 101, 13391–13394. doi:10.1073/pnas.0403823101
Bauch, C. T., & Galvani, A. P. (2013). Social and biological con-
tagions. Science, 342, 47–49. doi:10.1126/science.1244492
Bautista, D., Vila, B., Uso, R., Tellez, M., & Zanon, V. (2006). 
Predisposing, reinforcing, and enabling factors influenc-
ing influenza vaccination acceptance among healthcare 
workers. Infection Control and Hospital Epidemiology, 27, 
73–77. doi:10.1086/499148
Beard, F. H., Hull, B. P., Leask, J., Dey, A., & McIntyre, P. B.  
(2016). Trends and patterns in vaccination objection, 
Australia, 2002–2013. The Medical Journal of Australia, 
204, 275. doi:10.5694/mja15.01226
Bedford, H., Attwell, K., Danchin, M., Marshall, H., Corben, P., & 
Leask, J. (2017). Vaccine hesitancy, refusal and access barri-
ers: The need for clarity in terminology. Vaccine. Advance 
online publication. doi:10.1016/J.VACCINE.2017.08.004
Bednarczyk, R. A., Davis, R., Ault, K., Orenstein, W., & 
Omer, S. B. (2012). Sexual activity-related outcomes after 
human papillomavirus vaccination of 11- to 12-year-olds. 
Pediatrics, 130, 798–805. doi:10.1542/peds.2012-1516
Bekker, H. L., Winterbottom, A. E., Butow, P., Dillard, A. J., 
Feldman-Stewart, D., Fowler, F. J., . . . Volk, R. J. (2013). 
Do personal stories make patient decision aids more 
effective? A critical review of theory and evidence. BMC 
Medical Informatics and Decision Making, 13(Suppl 2), 
Article S9. doi:10.1186/1472-6947-13-S2-S9
Bélanger-Gravel, A., Godin, G., & Amireault, S. (2013). A 
meta-analytic review of the effect of implementation 
intentions on physical activity. Health Psychology Review, 
7, 23–54. doi:10.1080/17437199.2011.560095
Benin, A. L., Wisler-Scher, D. J., Colson, E., Shapiro, E. D., & 
Holmboe, E. S. (2006). Qualitative analysis of mothers’ deci-
sion-making about vaccines for infants: The importance of 
trust. Pediatrics, 117, 1532–1541. doi:10.1542/peds.2005-1728
Betsch, C. (2014). Overcoming healthcare workers vaccine 
refusal—competition between egoism and altruism. 
Eurosurveilliance, 19, Article 20979. doi:10.2807/1560-
7917.ES2014.19.48.20979
 192 
Brewer et al.
Betsch, C., & Böhm, R. (2016). Detrimental effects of intro-
ducing partial compulsory vaccination: Experimental 
evidence. The European Journal of Public Health, 26, 
378–381. doi:10.1093/eurpub/ckv154
Betsch, C., Böhm, R., & Chapman, G. B. (2015). Using behav-
ioral insights to increase vaccination policy effectiveness. 
Policy Insights From the Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 
2, 61–73. doi:10.1177/2372732215600716
Betsch, C., Böhm, R., & Korn, L. (2013). Inviting free-riders 
or appealing to prosocial behavior? Game-theoretical 
reflections on communicating herd immunity in vaccine 
advocacy. Health Psychology, 32, 978–985. doi:10.1037/
a0031590
Betsch, C., Böhm, R., Korn, L., & Holtmann, C. (2017). On 
the benefits of explaining herd immunity in vaccine advo-
cacy. Nature Human Behaviour, 1, Article 56. doi:10.1038/
s41562-017-0056
Betsch, C., Brewer, N. T., Brocard, P., Davies, P., Gaissmaier, 
W., Haase, N., . . . Stryk, M. (2012). Opportunities and 
challenges of Web 2.0 for vaccination decisions. Vaccine, 
30, 3727–3733. doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2012.02.025
Betsch, C., Renkewitz, F., & Haase, N. (2013). Effect of nar-
rative reports about vaccine adverse events and bias-
awareness disclaimers on vaccine decisions: A simulation 
of an online patient social network. Medical Decision 
Making, 33, 14–25. doi:10.1177/0272989X12452342
Betsch, C., & Sachse, K. (2013). Debunking vaccination myths: 
Strong risk negations can increase perceived vaccina-
tion risks. Health Psychology, 32, 146–155. doi:10.1037/
a0027387.
Bish, A., Yardley, L., Nicoll, A., & Michie, S. (2011). Factors 
associated with uptake of vaccination against pandemic 
influenza: A systematic review. Vaccine, 29, 6472–6484. 
doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2011.06.107
Black, C. L., Yue, X., Ball, S. W., Donahue, S. M. A., Izrael, D., 
de Perio, M. A., . . . Greby, S. M. (2016). Influenza vac-
cination coverage among health care personnel—United 
States, 2015–16 influenza season. MMWR Morbidity and 
Mortality Weekly Report, 65, 1026–1031. doi:10.15585/
mmwr.mm6538a2
Blalock, S. J., & Reyna, V. F. (2016). Using fuzzy-trace theory 
to understand and improve health judgments, decisions, 
and behaviors: A literature review. Health Psychology, 35, 
781-792. doi:10.1037/hea0000384
Blank, N. R., Caplan, A. L., & Constable, C. (2013). Exempting 
schoolchildren from immunizations: States with few bar-
riers had highest rates of nonmedical exemptions. Health 
Affairs, 32, 1282–1290. doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2013.0239
Blank, P. R., Schwenkglenks, M., & Szucs, T. D. (2009). 
Vaccination coverage rates in eleven European coun-
tries during two consecutive influenza seasons. Journal 
of Infection, 58, 446–458. doi:10.1016/j.jinf.2009.04.001.
Blanken, I., van de Ven, N., & Zeelenberg, M. (2015). A 
meta-analytic review of moral licensing. Personality and 
Social Psychology Bulletin, 41, 540–558. doi:10.1177/ 
0146167215572134.
Blanton, H., Köblitz, A., & McCaul, K. D. (2008). Misperceptions 
about norm misperceptions: Descriptive, injunctive, 
and affective ‘social norming’ efforts to change health 
behaviors. Social & Personality Psychology Compass, 2, 
1379–1399. doi:10.1111/j.1751-9004.2008.00107.x
Böhm, R., Betsch, C., & Korn, L. (2017). Selfish-rational non-
vaccination: Experimental evidence from an interac-
tive vaccination game. Journal of Economic Behavior & 
Organization, 131, 183–195.
Böhm, R., Betsch, C., Korn, L., & Holtmann, C. (2016). 
Exploring and promoting prosocial vaccination: A cross-
cultural experiment on vaccination of health care per-
sonnel. BioMed Research International, 2016, Article 
6870984. doi:10.1155/2016/6870984
Bonafide, K. E., & Vanable, P. A. (2015). Male human pap-
illomavirus vaccine acceptance is enhanced by a brief 
intervention that emphasizes both male-specific vaccine 
benefits and altruistic motives. Sexually Transmitted 
Diseases, 42, 76–80. doi:10.1097/OLQ.0000000000000226
Bond, L., Davie, G., Carlin, J. B., Lester, R., & Nolan, T. 
(2002). Infectious disease: Increases in vaccination cover-
age for children in child care, 1997 to 2000: An evaluation 
of the impact of government incentives and initiatives. 
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Public Health, 26, 
58–64. doi:10.1111/j.1467-842X.2002.tb00272.x
Borgida, E., & Nisbett, R. E. (1977). The differential 
impact of abstract vs. concrete information on deci-
sions. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 7, 258–271. 
doi:10.1111/j.1559-1816.1977.tb00750.x
Brackett, A., Butler, M., & Chapman, L. (2015). Using moti-
vational interviewing in the community pharmacy to 
increase adult immunization readiness: A pilot evalua-
tion. Journal of the American Pharmacists Association, 
55, 182–186. doi:10.1331/JAPhA.2015.14120
Brehm, J. W. (1966). A theory of psychological reactance. 
Oxford, England: Academic Press.
Brewer, N. T., Chapman, G. B., Gibbons, F. X., Gerrard, M., 
McCaul, K. D., & Weinstein, N. D. (2007). Meta-analysis 
of the relationship between risk perception and health 
behavior: The example of vaccination. Health Psychology, 
26, 136–145. doi:10.1037/0278-6133.26.2.136
Brewer, N. T., Cuite, C. L., Herrington, J. E., & Weinstein, N. D. 
 
(2007). Risk compensation and vaccination: Can getting 
vaccinated cause people to engage in risky behaviors? 
Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 34, 95–99. doi:10.1007/
BF02879925
Brewer, N. T., DeFrank, J. T., & Gilkey, M. B. (2016). Anticipated 
regret and health behavior: A meta-analysis. Health 
Psychology, 35, 1264–1275. doi:10.1037/hea0000294
Brewer, N. T., Gottlieb, S. L., Reiter, P. L., McRee, A.-L., Liddon, 
N., Markowitz, L., & Smith, J. S. (2011). Longitudinal 
predictors of human papillomavirus vaccine initiation 
among adolescent girls in a high-risk geographic area. 
Sexually Transmitted Diseases, 38, 197–204. doi:10.1097/
OLQ.0b013e3181f12dbf
Brewer, N. T., Hall, M. E., Malo, T. L., Gilkey, M. B., Quinn, 
B., & Lathren, C. (2017). Announcements versus con-
versations to improve HPV vaccination coverage: A 
randomized trial. Pediatrics, 139(1), Article e20161764. 
doi:10.1542/peds.2016-1764
Brewer, N. T., Weinstein, N. D., Cuite, C. L., & Herrington, 
J. E. (2004). Risk perceptions and their relation to risk 
 Psychology of Vaccination 
193
behavior. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 27(7), 125–130. 
doi:10.1207/s15324796abm2702_7
Briss, P. A., Rodewald, L. E., Hinman, A. R., Shefer, A. M., 
Strikas, R. A., Bernier, R. R., . . . Williams, S. M. (2000). 
Reviews of evidence regarding interventions to improve 
vaccination coverage in children, adolescents, and adults. 
American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 18(Suppl. 1), 
97–140. doi:10.1016/S0749-3797(99)00118-X
Bronchetti, E. T., Huffman, D. B., & Magenheim, E. (2015). 
Attention, intentions, and follow-through in preventive 
health behavior: Field experimental evidence on flu vacci-
nation. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 
116, 270–291. doi:10.1016/j.jebo.2015.04.003
Broniatowski, D. A., Hilyard, K. M., & Dredze, M. (2016). 
Effective vaccine communication during the Disneyland 
measles outbreak. Vaccine, 34, 3225–3228. doi:10.1016/j 
.vaccine.2016.04.044
Brown, K. F., Kroll, J. S., Hudson, M. J., Ramsay, M., Green, 
J., Long, S. J., . . . Sevdalis, N. (2010). Factors underlying 
parental decisions about combination childhood vaccina-
tions including MMR: A systematic review. Vaccine, 28, 
4235–4248. doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2010.04.052
Browngoehl, K., Kennedy, K., Krotki, K., & Mainzer, H. 
(1997). Increasing immunization: A Medicaid managed 
care model. Pediatrics, 99(1), Article e4. doi:10.1542/
peds.99.1.e4
Brownstein, J. S., Kleinman, K. P
., & Mandl, K. D. (2005). Identifying 
pediatric age groups for influenza vaccination using a real-
time regional surveillance system. American Journal of 
Epidemiology, 162, 686–693. doi:10.1093/aje/kwi257
Bruine de Bruin, W., Wallin, A., Parker, A. M., Strough, J., 
 
& Hanmer, J. (2017). Effects of anti-versus pro-vaccine 
narratives on responses by recipients varying in numer-
acy: A cross-sectional survey-based experiment. Medical 
Decision Making, 37, 860–870. doi:10.1177/0272989X 
17704858
Brunson, E. K. (2013). The impact of social networks on par-
ents’ vaccination decisions. Pediatrics, 131, 1397–1407. 
doi:10.1542/peds.2012-2452
Burns, R. J., Donovan, A. S., Ackermann, R. T., Finch, E. A., 
 
Rothman, A. J., & Jeffery, R. W. (2012). A theoretically 
grounded systematic review of material incentives for 
weight loss: Implications for interventions. Annals of 
Behavioral Medicine, 44, 375–388. doi:10.1007/s12160-
012-9403-4
Cairns, J., & van der Pol, M. (1999). Do people value their 
own future health differently from others’ future health? 
Medical Decision Making, 19, 466–472. doi:10.1177/027
2989X9901900414
Camerer, C. F., & Fehr, E. (2006). When does “economic 
man” dominate social behavior? Science, 311, 47–52. 
doi:10.1126/science.1110600
Capolongo, M. J., Dibonaventura, M. D., & Chapman, G. B. 
(2006). Physician vaccinate thyself: Why influenza vacci-
nation rates are higher among clinicians than among non-
clinicians. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 31, 288–296. 
doi:10.1207/s15324796abm3103_11
Casey, R. M., Dumolard, L., Danovaro-Holliday, M. C., Gacic-
Dobo, M., Diallo, M. S., Hampton, L. M., & Wallace, A. S.  
(2016). Global Routine vaccination coverage, 2015. 
MMWR Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 66(45), 
1270–1273. doi:10.15585/mmwr.mm6545a5
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (1997). 
Measles outbreak—Southwestern Utah, 1996. MMWR 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 46(33), 766–769. 
Retrieved from https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/
mmwrhtml/00049048.htm
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (1999). Ten great 
public health achievements—United States, 1900-1999. 
MMWR Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 48(12), 
241–243. Retrieved from https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/
preview/mmwrhtml/00056796.htm
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2004). Brief 
report: Imported measles case associated with non-
medical vaccine exemption—Iowa, March 2004. MMWR 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 53, 244–246. 
Retrieved from https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/
mmwrhtml/mm5311a6.htm
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2011). Measles: 
United States, January–May 20, 2011. MMWR Morbidity 
and Mortality Weekly Report, 60(20), 666–668. Retrieved 
from https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/
mm6020a7.htm
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2013). Two mea-
sles outbreaks after importation—Utah, March–June 2011. 
MMWR Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 62(12), 
222–225. Retrieved from https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/
preview/mmwrhtml/mm6212a2.htm
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2016). Flu vac-
cination coverage, United States, 2015-16 influenza sea-
son. Retrieved from https://www.cdc.gov/flu/fluvaxview/
coverage-1516estimates.htm
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2018). 
Recommended immunization schedule for children and 
adolescents aged 18 years or younger, United States, 2018. 
Retrieved from https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/schedules/
hcp/imz/child-adolescent.html
Centola, D. (2010). The spread of behavior in an online 
social network experiment. Science, 329, 1194–1197. 
doi:10.1126/science.1185231
Centola, D. (2011). An experimental study of homophily in 
the adoption of health behavior. Science, 334, 1269–1272. 
doi:10.1126/science.1207055
Centola, D. (2013). Social media and the science of health 
behavior. Circulation, 127, 2135–2144. doi:10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.112.101816
Centola, D. (2015). The social origins of networks and dif-
fusion. American Journal of Sociology, 120, 1295–1338. 
doi:10.1086/681275
Chambers, L. W., Wilson, K., Hawken, S., Puxty, J., Crowe, 
L., Lam, P.-P., . . . McCarthy, A. E. (2012). Impact of the 
Ottawa Influenza Decision Aid on healthcare personnel’s 
influenza immunization decision: A randomized trial. The 
Journal of Hospital Infection, 82, 194–202. doi:10.1016/j 
.jhin.2012.08.003
Chapman, G. B., & Coups, E. J. (1999a). Predictors of influ-
enza vaccine acceptance among healthy adults. Preventive 
Medicine, 29, 249–262. doi:10.1006/pmed.1999.0535
 194 
Brewer et al.
Chapman, G. B., & Coups, E. J. (1999b). Time preferences and 
preventive health behavior: Acceptance of the influenza vac-
cine. Medical Decision Making, 19, 307–314. doi:10.1177/ 
0272989X9901900309
Chapman, G. B., & Coups, E. J. (2006). Emotions and 
preventive health behavior: Worry, regret, and influ-
enza vaccination. Health Psychology, 25, 82–90. doi: 
10.1037/0278-6133.25.1.82
Chapman, G. B., Li, M., Colby, H., & Yoon, H. (2010). Opting 
in vs opting out of influenza vaccination. Journal of the 
American Medical Association, 304, 43–44. doi:10.1001/
jama.2010.892
Chapman, G. B., Li, M., Leventhal, H., & Leventhal, E. A. 
(2016). Default clinic appointments promote influ-
enza vaccination uptake without a displacement effect. 
Behavioral Science & Policy, 2, 40–50. doi:10.1353/
bsp.2016.0014
Chapman, G. B., Li, M., Vietri, J., Ibuka, Y., Thomas, D., Yoon, 
H., & Galvani, A. P. (2012). Using game theory to examine 
incentives in influenza vaccination behavior. Psychological 
Science, 23, 1008–1015. doi:10.1177/0956797612437606
Chen, X., Wang, Y., Liu, L., Cui, J., Gan, M., Shum, D. H. K., 
 
& Chan, R. C. K. (2015). The effect of implementation 
intention on prospective memory: A systematic and meta- 
analytic review. Psychiatry Research, 226, 14–22. doi:10 
.1016/j.psychres.2015.01.011
Christakis, N. A., & Fowler, J. H. (2008). The collective dynam-
ics of smoking in a large social network. New England 
Journal of Medicine, 358, 2249–2258. doi:10.1056/
NEJMsa0706154
Christakis, N. A., & Fowler, J. H. (2010). Social network sensors 
for early detection of contagious outbreaks. PLOS ONE, 
5(9), Article e12948. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0012948
Christakis, N. A., & Fowler, J. H. (2013). Social contagion 
theory: Examining dynamic social networks and human 
behavior. Statistics in Medicine, 32, 556–577. doi:10.1002/
sim.5408
Christini, A. B., Shutt, K. A., & Byers, K. E. (2007). Influenza 
vaccination rates and motivators among healthcare 
worker groups. Infection Control & Hospital Epidemiology, 
28, 171–177. doi:10.1086/511796
Cialdini, R. B., Demaine, L. J., Sagarin, B. J., Barrett, D. W., 
Rhoads, K., & Winter, P. L. (2006). Managing social 
norms for persuasive impact. Social Influence, 1, 3–15. 
doi:10.1080/15534510500181459
Cialdini, R. B., Kallgren, C. A., & Reno, R. R. (1991). A focus 
theory of normative conduct: A theoretical refinement and 
reevaluation of the role of norms in human behavior. In 
M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psy-
chology (Vol. 24, pp. 201–234) San Diego, CA: Academic 
Press.
Clancy, C. M., Cebul, R. D., & Williams, S. V. (1988). Guiding 
individual decisions: A randomized, controlled trial of 
decision analysis. The American Journal of Medicine, 84, 
283–288. doi:10.1016/0002-9343(88)90426-3
Colgrove, J. (2006). The ethics and politics of compulsory 
HPV vaccination. New England Journal of Medicine, 355, 
2389–2391. doi:10.1056/NEJMp068248
Colgrove, J., Abiola, S., & Mello, M. M. (2010). HPV vacci-
nation mandates—Lawmaking amid political and scien-
tific controversy. New England Journal of Medicine, 363, 
785–791. doi:10.1056/NEJMsr1003547
Community Preventive Services Task Force. (2015). Increasing 
appropriate vaccination: Provider education when used 
alone. Task Force finding and rationale statement. 
Retrieved from https://www.thecommunityguide.org/
sites/default/files/assets/Vaccination-Provider-Education-
Alone.pdf
Community Preventive Services Task Force. (2016a). 
Increasing appropriate vaccination: Standing orders. Task 
Force finding and rationale statement. Retrieved from 
https://www.thecommunityguide.org/sites/default/files/
assets/Vaccination-Standing-Orders.pdf
Community Preventive Services Task Force. (2016b). 
Increasing appropriate vaccination: Vaccination require-
ments for child care, school, and college attendance. Task 
Force finding and rationale statement. Retrieved from 
https://www.thecommunityguide.org/sites/default/files/
assets/Vaccination-Requirements-for-Attendance_1.pdf
Connelly, B. L., Certo, S. T., Ireland, R. D., & Reutzel, C. R. 
(2011). Signaling theory: A review and assessment. Journal 
of Management, 37, 39–67. doi:10.1177/0149206310388419
Conner, M., Godin, G., Norman, P., & Sheeran, P. (2011). 
Using the question-behavior effect to promote disease 
prevention behaviors: Two randomized controlled trials. 
Health Psychology, 30, 300–309. doi:10.1037/a0023036
Conner, M., & Norman, P. (2015). Predicting and changing 
health behaviour: Research and practice with social cog-
nition models (3rd ed.). Milton Keynes, England: Open 
University Press.
Conner, M., Sandberg, T., Nekitsing, C., Hutter, R., Wood, 
C., Jackson, C., . . . Sheeran, P. (2017). Varying cogni-
tive targets and response rates to enhance the question-
behaviour effect: An 8-arm randomized controlled trial on 
influenza vaccination uptake. Social Science & Medicine, 
180, 135–142. doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2017.03.037.
Connolly, T., & Reb, J. (2003). Omission bias in vaccination 
decisions: Where’s the “omission”? Where’s the “bias”? 
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 
91, 186–202. doi:10.1016/S0749-5978(03)00057-8
Cooper, L. Z., Larson, H. J., & Katz, S. L. (2008). Protecting 
public trust in immunization. Pediatrics, 122, 149–153. 
doi:10.1542/peds.2008-0987
Cooper Robbins, S. C., Bernard, D., McCaffery, K., Brotherton, 
J. M. L., & Skinner, S. R. (2010). “I just signed”: Factors 
influencing decision-making for school-based HPV vacci-
nation of adolescent girls. Health Psychology, 29, 618–625. 
doi:10.1037/a0021449
Corace, K. M., Srigley, J. A., Hargadon, D. P., Yu, D., 
MacDonald, T. K., Fabrigar, L. R., & Garber, G. E. (2016). 
Using behavior change frameworks to improve healthcare 
worker influenza vaccination rates: A systematic review. 
Vaccine, 34, 3235–3242. doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2016.04.071
Deer, B. (2011). How the vaccine crisis was meant to make 
money. British Medical Journal, 342, Article c5258. 
doi:10.1136/bmj.c5258
 Psychology of Vaccination 
195
Dempsey, A. F., Schaffer, S., Singer, D., Butchart, A., Davis, M., 
 
& Freed, G. L. (2011). Alternative vaccination schedule 
preferences among parents of young children. Pediatrics, 
128, 848–856. doi:10.1542/peds.2011-0400
Dholakia, U. M. (2010). A critical review of question–behavior 
effect research. In N. K. Malhotra (Ed.), Review of mar-
keting research (Vol. 7, pp. 145–197). Bingley, England: 
Emerald. doi:10.1108/S1548-6435(2010)0000007009
DiBonaventura, M. D., & Chapman, G. B. (2005). Moderators of 
the intention–behavior relationship in influenza vaccina-
tions: Intention stability and unforeseen barriers. Psychology 
& Health, 20, 761–774. doi:10.1080/14768320500183368
DiBonaventura, M. D., & Chapman, G. B. (2008). Do decision 
biases predict bad decisions? Omission bias, naturalness 
bias, and influenza vaccination. Medical Decision Making, 
28, 532–539. doi:10.1177/0272989X08315250
Diekema, D. S. (2014). Personal belief exemptions from 
school vaccination requirements. Annual Review of 
Public Health, 35, 275–292. doi:10.1146/annurev-publ 
health-032013-182452
Doherty, M., Buchy, P., Standaert, B., Giaquinto, C., & 
Prado-Cohrs, D. (2016). Vaccine impact: Benefits for 
human health. Vaccine, 34, 6707–6714. doi:10.1016/j 
.vaccine.2016.10.025
Downs, J. S., de Bruin, W. B., & Fischhoff, B. (2008). Parents’ 
vaccination comprehension and decisions. Vaccine, 26, 
1595–1607. doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2008.01.011
Dubé, E., Gagnon, D., Nickels, E., Jeram, S., & Schuster, 
M. (2014). Mapping vaccine hesitancy—country-specific 
characteristics of a global phenomenon. Vaccine, 32, 
6649–6654. doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2014.09.039
Dubé, E., Laberge, C., Guay, M., Bramadat, P., Roy, R., & 
Bettinger, J. A. (2013). Vaccine hesitancy. Human Vaccines 
& Immunotherapeutics, 9, 1763–1773. doi:10.4161/hv.24657
Dunn, A. G., Leask, J., Zhou, X., Mandl, K. D., & Coiera, E. 
(2015). Associations between exposure to and expres-
sion of negative opinions about human papillomavi-
rus vaccines on social media: An observational study. 
Journal of Medical Internet Research, 17(6), Article e144. 
doi:10.2196/jmir.4343
Eames, K. T. D. (2009). Networks of influence and infec-
tion: Parental choices and childhood disease. Journal 
of the Royal Society Interface, 6, 811–814. doi:10.1098/
rsif.2009.0085
Fagerlin, A., Ditto, P. H., Danks, J. H., Houts, R. M., & 
Smucker, W. D. (2001). Projection in surrogate deci-
sions about life-sustaining medical treatments. Health 
Psychology, 20, 166–175. doi:10.1037/0278-6133.20.3.166
Fagerlin, A., Wang, C., & Ubel, P. A. (2005). Reducing the 
influence of anecdotal reasoning on people’s health 
care decisions: Is a picture worth a thousand statistics? 
Medical Decision Making, 25, 398–405. doi:10.1177/027
2989X05278931
Falagas, M. E., & Zarkadoulia, E. (2008). Factors associ-
ated with suboptimal compliance to vaccinations in 
children in developed countries: A systematic review. 
Current Medical Research and Opinion, 24, 1719–1741. 
doi:10.1185/03007990802085692
Feikin, D. R., Lezotte, D. C., Hamman, R. F., Salmon, D. A., 
 
Chen, R. T., & Hoffman, R. E. (2000). Individual and 
community risks of measles and pertussis associated 
with personal exemptions to immunization. Journal 
of the American Medical Association, 284, 3145–3150. 
doi:10.1001/jama.284.24.3145
Ferrer, R. A., Klein, W. M. P., Persoskie, A., Avishai-Yitshak, A., 
 
& Sheeran, P. (2016). The tripartite model of risk per-
ception (TRIRISK): Distinguishing deliberative, affective, 
and experiential components of perceived risk. Annals 
of Behavioral Medicine, 50, 653–663. doi:10.1007/s12160-
016-9790-z
Fine, P. E. (1993). Herd immunity: History, theory, practice. 
Epidemiologic Reviews, 15, 265–302.
Fiscella, K., Franks, P., Doescher, M. P., & Saver, B. G. (2002). 
Disparities in health care by race, ethnicity, and language 
among the insured: Findings from a national sample. 
Medical Care, 40, 52–59. Retrieved from http://journals.lww 
.com/lww-medicalcare/Abstract/2002/01000/Disparities_
in_Health_Care_by_Race,_Ethnicity,_and.7.aspx
Fishbein, M., & Ajzen, I. (2010). Predicting and changing 
behavior: The reasoned action approach. New York, NY: 
Taylor & Francis.
Flanagan-Klygis, E. A., Sharp, L., & Frader, J. E. (2005). 
Dismissing the family who refuses vaccines: A study of 
pediatrician attitudes. Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent 
Medicine, 159, 929–934. doi:10.1001/archpedi.159.10.929
Floyd, D. L., Prentice-Dunn, S., & Rogers, R. W. (2000). A 
meta-analysis of research on protection motivation the-
ory. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 30, 407–429. 
doi:10.1111/j.1559-1816.2000.tb02323.x
Frass, M., Strassl, R. P., Friehs, H., Müllner, M., Kundi, M., & 
Kaye, A. D. (2012). Use and acceptance of complementary 
and alternative medicine among the general population 
and medical personnel: A systematic review. The Ochsner 
Journal, 12(1), 45–56. Retrieved from https://www.ncbi 
.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3307506/
Freimuth, V. S., Musa, D., Hilyard, K., Quinn, S. C., & Kim, K. 
 
(2014). Trust during the early stages of the 2009 H1N1 
pandemic. Journal of Health Communication, 19, 321–
339. doi:10.1080/10810730.2013.811323
Fu, F., Rosenbloom, D. I., Wang, L., & Nowak, M. A. (2011). 
Imitation dynamics of vaccination behaviour on social 
networks. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological 
Sciences, 278, 42–49. doi:10.1098/rspb.2010.1107
Fu, L. Y., Zook, K., Spoehr-Labutta, Z., Hu, P., & Joseph, J. G. 
 
(2016). Search engine ranking, Quality, and content of 
web pages that are critical versus noncritical of human 
papillomavirus vaccine. Journal of Adolescent Health, 58, 
33–39. doi:10.1016/j.jadohealth.2015.09.016
Gallup. (2016). Honesty/ethics in professions. Retrieved from 
http://www.gallup.com/poll/1654/honesty-ethics-profes 
sions.aspx
Galvani, A. P., Reluga, T. C., & Chapman, G. B. (2007). Long-
standing influenza vaccination policy is in accord with 
individual self-interest but not with the utilitarian opti-
mum. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
USA, 104, 5692–5697. doi:10.1073/pnas.0606774104
 196 
Brewer et al.
Gangarosa, E. J., Galazka, A. M., Wolfe, C. R., Phillips, L. M., 
 
Gangarosa, R. E., Miller, E., & Chen, R. T. (1998). Impact 
of anti-vaccine movements on pertussis control: The 
untold story. The Lancet, 351, 356–61. doi:10.1016/S0140-
6736(97)04334-1
Gawronski, B., & Bodenhausen, G. V. (2006). Associative 
and propositional processes in evaluation: An integra-
tive review of implicit and explicit attitude change. 
Psychological Bulletin, 132, 692–731. doi:10.1037/0033-
2909.132.5.692
Gee, J., Weinbaum, C., Sukumaran, L., & Markowitz, L. E. 
(2016). Quadrivalent HPV vaccine safety review and 
safety monitoring plans for nine-valent HPV vaccine in the 
United States. Human Vaccines & Immunotherapeutics, 
12, 1406–1417. doi:10.1080/21645515.2016.1168952
Gellin, B. G., Maibach, E. W., & Marcuse, E. K. (2000). Do 
parents understand immunizations? A national tele-
phone survey. Pediatrics, 106, 1097–1102. doi:10.1542/
peds.106.5.1097
Gerend, M. A., & Shepherd, J. E. (2012). Predicting human 
papillomavirus vaccine uptake in young adult women: 
Comparing the health belief model and theory of planned 
behavior. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 44, 171–180. 
doi:10.1007/s12160-012-9366-5
Gerend, M. A., Shepherd, M. A., & Shepherd, J. E. (2013). 
The multidimensional nature of perceived barriers: Global 
versus practical barriers to HPV vaccination. Health 
Psychology, 32, 361–369. doi:10.1037/a0026248
Gierisch, J. M., Reiter, P. L., Rimer, B. K., & Brewer, N. T. 
(2010). Standard definitions of adherence for infrequent 
yet repeated health behaviors. American Journal of Health 
Behavior, 34, 669–679. doi:10.1038/nsmb.2010
Giles, E. L., Robalino, S., McColl, E., Sniehotta, F. F., & Adams, 
J. (2014). The effectiveness of financial incentives for 
health behaviour change: Systematic review and meta-
analysis. PLOS ONE, 9(3), Article e90347. doi:10.1371/
journal.pone.0090347
Gilkey, M. B., Calo, W. A., Marciniak, M. W., & Brewer, N. T. 
(2017). Parents who refuse or delay HPV vaccine: Differences 
in vaccination behavior, beliefs, and clinical communication 
preferences. Human Vaccines and Immunotherapeutics, 13, 
680–686. doi:10.1080/21645515.2016.1247134
Gilkey, M. B., Magnus, B. E., Reiter, P. L., McRee, A.-L., 
Dempsey, A. F., & Brewer, N. T. (2014). The vaccina-
tion confidence scale: A brief measure of parents’ vac-
cination beliefs. Vaccine, 32, 6259–6265. doi:10.1016/j 
.vaccine.2014.09.007
Gilkey, M. B., Malo, T. L., Shah, P. D., Hall, M. E., & Brewer, 
N. T. (2015). Quality of physician communication about 
human papillomavirus vaccine: Findings from a national 
survey. Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers & Prevention, 
24, 1673–1679. doi:10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-15-0326
Gilkey, M. B., McRee, A. L., Magnus, B. E., Reiter, P. L., 
Dempsey, A. F., & Brewer, N. T. (2016). Vaccination 
confidence and parental refusal/delay of early childhood 
vaccines. PLOS ONE, 11(7), Article e0159087. doi:10.1371/
journal.pone.0159087
Gilkey, M. B., Reiter, P. L., Magnus, B. E., McRee, A.-L., 
Dempsey, A. F., & Brewer, N. T. (2016). Validation of the 
Vaccination Confidence Scale: A brief measure to identify 
parents at risk for refusing adolescent vaccines. Academic 
Pediatrics, 16, 42–49. doi:10.1016/j.acap.2015.06.007
Glanz, J. M., Newcomer, S. R., Narwaney, K. J., Hambidge, 
S. J., Daley, M. F., Wagner, N. M., . . . Weintraub, E. S. 
(2013). A population-based cohort study of undervaccina-
tion in 8 managed care organizations across the United 
States. JAMA Pediatrics, 167, 274–281. doi:10.1001/jama 
pediatrics.2013.502
Glasser, J. W., Feng, Z., Omer, S. B., Smith, P. J., & Rodewald, 
L. E. (2016). The effect of heterogeneity in uptake of the 
measles, mumps, and rubella vaccine on the potential 
for outbreaks of measles: A modelling study. The Lancet 
Infectious Diseases, 16, 599–605. doi:10.1016/S1473-
3099(16)00004-9
Glasziou, P. P., Buchan, H., Del Mar, C., Doust, J., Harris, M., 
Knight, R., . . . Stockwell, A. (2012). When financial incen-
tives do more good than harm: A checklist. British Medical 
Journal, 345, Article e5047. doi:10.1136/bmj.e5047
Gneezy, U., Meier, S., & Rey-Biel, P. (2011). When and why 
incentives (don’t) work to modify behavior. Journal 
of Economic Perspectives, 25, 191–210. doi:10.1257/
jep.25.4.191
Goldstein, N. J., Cialdini, R. B., & Griskevicius, V. (2008). 
A room with a viewpoint: Using social norms to moti-
vate environmental conservation in hotels. Journal of 
Consumer Research, 35, 472–482. doi:10.1086/586910
Gollwitzer, P. M., & Sheeran, P. (2006). Implementation 
intentions and goal achievement: A meta-analysis of 
effects and processes. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances 
in experimental social psychology (Vol. 38, pp. 69–119). 
doi:10.1016/S0065-2601(06)38002-1
Gorman, J. R., Brewer, N. T., Wang, J. B., & Chambers, C. D.  
(2012). Theory-based predictors of influenza vaccina-
tion among pregnant women. Vaccine, 31, 213–218. 
doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2012.10.064
Gowda, C., & Dempsey, A. F. (2013). The rise (and fall?) 
of parental vaccine hesitancy. Human Vaccines and 
Immunotherapeutics, 9, 1755–1762. doi:10.4161/hv.25085
Grant, A. M., & Hofmann, D. A. (2011). It’s not all about me: 
Motivating hand hygiene among health care profession-
als by focusing on patients. Psychological Science, 22, 
1494–1499. doi:10.1177/0956797611419172
Groom, H., Hopkins, D. P., Pabst, L. J., Murphy Morgan, J., 
Patel, M., Calonge, N., . . . Zucker, J. (2015). Immunization 
information systems to increase vaccination rates. Journal 
of Public Health Management and Practice, 21, 227–248. 
doi:10.1097/PHH.0000000000000069
Gust, D. A., Brown, C., Sheedy, K., Hibbs, B., Weaver, 
D., & Nowak, G. (2005). Immunization attitudes and 
beliefs among parents: Beyond a dichotomous perspec-
tive. American Journal of Health Behavior, 29, 81–92. 
doi:10.5993/AJHB.29.1.7
Gust, D. A., Darling, N., Kennedy, A., & Schwartz, B. (2008). 
Parents with doubts about vaccines: Which vaccines 
and reasons why. Pediatrics, 122, 718–725. doi:10.1542/
peds.2007-0538
Hakim, H., Gaur, A. H., & McCullers, J. A. (2011). Motivating 
factors for high rates of influenza vaccination among 
 Psychology of Vaccination 
197
healthcare workers. Vaccine, 29, 5963–5969. doi:10.1016/j 
.vaccine.2011.06.041
Hall, M. G., Sheeran, P., Noar, S. M., Ribisl, K. M., Bach, L. E., 
 
& Brewer, N. T. (2016). Reactance to Health Warnings 
Scale: Development and validation. Annals of Behavioral 
Medicine, 50, 736–750. doi:10.1007/s12160-016-9799-3
Hall, M. G., Sheeran, P., Noar, S. M., Ribisl, K. M., Boynton, M. H., 
 
& Brewer, N. T. (2017). A brief measure of reactance 
to health warnings. Journal of Behavioral Medicine, 40, 
520–529. doi:10.1007/s10865-016-9821-z
Halloran, M. E., & Longini Jr., I. M. (2006). Community studies 
for vaccinating schoolchildren against influenza. Science, 
311, 615–161.
Hanley, S. J. B., Yoshioka, E., Ito, Y., & Kishi, R. (2015). 
HPV vaccination crisis in Japan. The Lancet, 385, 2571. 
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(15)61152-7
Harriman, K., Thomas, T. N., Kolasa, M., Cullen, K., Pabst, 
L., Shefer, A., . . . Link-Gelles, R. (2011). Invasive pneu-
mococcal disease and 13-valent pneumococcal conju-
gate vaccine (PCV13) coverage among children aged 
≤59 months—Selected U.S. regions, 2010–2011. MMWR 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 60, 1477–1481. 
Retrieved from https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/
mmwrhtml/mm6043a2.htm
Harris, P. R., & Epton, T. (2009). The impact of self-affirmation 
on health cognition, health behaviour and other health-
related responses: A narrative review. Social & Personality 
Psychology Compass, 3, 962–978. doi:10.1111/j.1751-
9004.2009.00233.x
Harrison, J. A., Mullen, P. D., & Green, L. W. (1992). A meta-anal-
ysis of studies of the Health Belief Model with adults. Health 
Education Research, 7, 107–116. doi:10.1093/her/7.1.107
Harvey, H., Reissland, N., & Mason, J. (2015). Parental 
reminder, recall and educational interventions to improve 
early childhood immunisation uptake: A systematic review 
and meta-analysis. Vaccine, 33, 2862–2880. doi:10.1016/j 
.vaccine.2015.04.085
Hassidim, A., Waters-Montijo, K., Wooten, W., Sawyer, M., 
Sidelinger, D., Harriman, K., . . . Seward, J. (2008). 
Outbreak of measles—San Diego, California, January–
February 2008. MMWR Morbidity and Mortality Weekly 
Report, 57(8), 203–206. Retrieved from https://www.cdc 
.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5708a3.htm
Hawe, P., McKenzie, N., & Scurry, R. (1998). Randomised 
controlled trial of the use of a modified postal reminder 
card on the uptake of measles vaccination. Archives of 
Disease in Childhood, 79, 136–140.
Hausmann, L. R., Jeong, K., Bost, J. E., & Ibrahim, S. A. 
(2008). Perceived discrimination in health care and use 
of preventive health services. Journal of General Internal 
Medicine, 23, 1679–1684. doi:10.1007/s11606-008-0730-x
Hayes, K. A., Entzel, P., Berger, W., Caskey, R. N., Shlay, J. C., 
 
Stubbs, B. W., . . . Brewer, N. T. (2013). Early lessons 
learned from extramural school programs that offer 
HPV vaccine. The Journal of School Health, 83, 119–126. 
doi:10.1111/josh.12007
Hendrix, K. S., Finnell, S. M. E., Zimet, G. D., Sturm, L. A., 
Lane, K. A., & Downs, S. M. (2014). Vaccine message fram-
ing and parents’ intent to immunize their infants for MMR. 
Pediatrics, 134, 675–683. doi:10.1542/peds.2013-4077
Henrikson, N. B., Opel, D. J., Grothaus, L., Nelson, J., Scrol, 
A., Dunn, J., . . . Grossman, D. C. (2015). Physician com-
munication training and parental vaccine hesitancy: A 
randomized trial. Pediatrics, 136, 70–79. doi:10.1542/
peds.2014-3199
Hershey, J. C., Asch, D. A., Thumasathit, T., Meszaros, J., & 
Waters, V. V. (1994). The roles of altruism, free riding, and 
bandwagoning in vaccination decisions. Organizational 
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 59, 177–187. 
doi:10.1006/obhd.1994.1055
Herzog, R., Álvarez-Pasquin, M. J., Díaz, C., Del Barrio, J. L., 
Estrada, J. M., & Gil, Á. (2013). Are healthcare workers’ 
intentions to vaccinate related to their knowledge, beliefs 
and attitudes? A systematic review. BMC Public Health, 
13, Article 154. doi:10.1186/1471-2458-13-154
Hickler, B., MacDonald, N. E., Senouci, K., & Schuh, H. B. 
(2017). Efforts to monitor global progress on individual 
and community demand for immunization: Development 
of definitions and indicators for the Global Vaccine Action 
Plan Strategic Objective 2. Vaccine, 35, 3515–3519. 
doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2017.04.056
Hill, H. A., Elam-Evans, L. D., Yankey, D., Singleton, J. A., 
& Dietz, V. (2016). Vaccination coverage among chil-
dren aged 19–35 months—United States, 2015. MMWR 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 65, 1065–1071. 
doi:10.15585/mmwr.mm6539a4
Hobson-West, P. (2007). “Trusting blindly can be the biggest 
risk of all”: Organised resistance to childhood vaccina-
tion in the UK. Sociology of Health & Illness, 29, 198–215. 
doi:10.1111/j.1467-9566.2007.00544.x
Hollmeyer, H. G., Hayden, F., Poland, G., & Buchholz, 
U. (2009). Influenza vaccination of health care work-
ers in hospitals—A review of studies on attitudes and 
predictors. Vaccine, 27, 3935–3944. doi:10.1016/j.vac 
cine.2009.03.056
Holman, D. M., Benard, V., Roland, K. B., Watson, M., Liddon, 
N., & Stokley, S. (2014). Barriers to human papillomavirus 
vaccination among US adolescents. JAMA Pediatrics, 168, 
76–82. doi:10.1001/jamapediatrics.2013.2752
Horne, Z., Powell, D., Hummel, J. E., & Holyoak, K. J. (2015). 
Countering antivaccination attitudes. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, USA, 112, 10321–10324. 
doi:10.1073/pnas.1504019112
Hough-Telford, C., Kimberlin, D. W., Aban, I., Hitchcock, 
W. P., Almquist, J., Kratz, R., & O’Connor, K. G. (2016). 
Vaccine delays, refusals, and patient dismissals: A survey 
of pediatricians. Pediatrics, 138(3), Article e20162127. 
doi:10.1542/peds.2016-2127
Imdad, A., Tserenpuntsag, B., Blog, D. S., Halsey, N. A., 
Easton, D. E., & Shaw, J. (2013). Religious exemptions 
for immunization and risk of pertussis in New York 
State, 2000–2011. Pediatrics, 132, 34–43. doi:10.1542/
peds.2012-3449
Iten, A., Bonfillon, C., Bouvard, T., Siegrist, C.-A., & Pittet, D. 
 
(2013). P037: Nosocomial influenza prevention using 
multi-modal intervention strategies: 20-years of experi-
ence. Antimicrobial Resistance and Infection Control, 
2(Suppl. 1), Article P37. doi:10.1186/2047-2994-2-S1-P37
Jachimowicz, J. M., Duncan, S., Weber, E. U., & Johnson, E. J. 
 
(2017). When and why defaults influence decisions: A 
 198 
Brewer et al.
meta-analysis of default effects. Social Science Research 
Network. doi:10.2139/ssrn.2727301
Jacobson Vann, J. C., & Szilagyi, P. (2018). Patient reminder 
and recall interventions to improve immunization 
rates. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, (3). 
doi:10.1002/14651858.CD003941.pub3
Janz, N. K., & Becker, M. H. (1984). The Health Belief Model: 
A decade later. Health Education Quarterly, 11, 1–47. 
doi:10.1177/109019818401100101
Jarrett, C., Wilson, R., O’Leary, M., Eckersberger, E., Larson, 
H. J., Eskola, J., . . . Schuster, M. (2015). Strategies for 
addressing vaccine hesitancy—a systematic review. 
Vaccine, 33, 4180–4190. doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2015.04.040
Johri, M., Perez, M. C., Arsenault, C., Sharma, J. K., Pai, N. P., 
 
Pahwa, S., & Sylvestre, M.-P. (2015). Strategies to increase 
the demand for childhood vaccination in low- and mid-
dle-income countries: A systematic review and meta-
analysis. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 93, 
339–346C. doi:10.2471/BLT.14.146951
Jolley, D., & Douglas, K. M. (2017). Prevention is better than 
cure: Addressing anti-vaccine conspiracy theories. Journal 
of Applied Social Psychology, 47, 459–469. doi:10.1111/
jasp.12453
Joseph, N. P., Bernstein, J., Pelton, S., Belizaire, M., Goff, 
G., Horanieh, N., & Freund, K. M. (2016). Brief client-
centered motivational and behavioral intervention to pro-
mote HPV vaccination in a hard-to-reach population: A 
pilot randomized controlled trial. Clinical Pediatrics, 55, 
851–859. doi:10.1177/0009922815616244
Juraskova, I., O’Brien, M., Mullan, B., Bari, R., Laidsaar-Powell, 
R., & McCaffery, K. (2012). HPV vaccination and the effect 
of information framing on intentions and behaviour: An 
application of the theory of planned behaviour and moral 
norm. International Journal of Behavioral Medicine, 19, 
518–525. doi:10.1007/s12529-011-9182-5
Kahan, D. M. (2000). Gentle nudges vs. hard shoves: Solving 
the sticky norms problem. The University of Chicago Law 
Review, 67, 607–645. doi:10.2307/1600336
Kahan, D. M. (2013). A risky science communication envi-
ronment for vaccines. 
Science, 
342, 53–54. doi:10.1126/
science.1245724
Kahan, D. M., Jenkins-Smith, H., & Braman, D. (2011). Cultural 
cognition of scientific consensus. Journal of Risk Research, 
14, 147–174. doi:10.1080/13669877.2010.511246
Kahn, B. E., & Luce, M. F. (2006). Repeated-Adherence 
Protection Model: “I’m OK, and it’s a hassle.” Journal 
of Public Policy & Marketing, 25, 79–89. doi:10.1509/
jppm.25.1.79
Kallgren, C. A., Reno, R. R., & Cialdini, R. B. (2000). A focus 
theory of normative conduct: When norms do and do 
not affect behavior. Personality and Social Psychology 
Bulletin, 26, 1002–1012. doi:10.1177/01461672002610009
Kane, R. L., Johnson, P. E., Town, R. J., & Butler, M. (2004). A 
structured review of the effect of economic incentives on con-
sumers’ preventive behavior. American Journal of Preventive 
Medicine, 27, 327–352. doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2004.07.002
Kata, A. (2010). A postmodern Pandora’s box: Anti-vaccination 
misinformation on the Internet. Vaccine, 28, 1709–1716. 
doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2009.12.022
Kaufman, J., Ames, H., Bosch-Capblanch, X., Cartier, Y., Cliff, 
J., Glenton, C., . . . Hill, S. (2017). The comprehensive 
‘Communicate to Vaccinate’ taxonomy of communica-
tion interventions for childhood vaccination in routine 
and campaign contexts. BMC Public Health, 17, 423. 
doi:10.1186/s12889-017-4320-x
Kaufman, J., Synnot, A., Ryan, R., Hill, S., Horey, D., Willis, 
N., . . . Robinson, P. (2013). Face to face interventions 
for informing or educating parents about early childhood 
vaccination. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 
(5). doi:10.1002/14651858.CD010038.pub2
Kempe, A., O’Leary, S. T., Kennedy, A., Crane, L. A., Allison, 
M. A., Beaty, B. L., . . . Stokley, S. (2015). Physician 
response to parental requests to spread out the recom-
mended vaccine schedule. Pediatrics, 135, 666–677. 
doi:10.1542/peds.2014-3474
Kempe, A., O’Leary, S. T., Shoup, J. A., Stokley, S., Lockhart, 
S., Furniss, A., . . . Daley, M. F. (2016). Parental choice 
of recall method for HPV vaccination: A pragmatic 
trial. Pediatrics, 137(3), Article e20152857. doi:10.1542/
peds.2015-2857
Kempe, A., Saville, A., Dickinson, L. M., Eisert, S., Reynolds, 
J., Herrero, D., . . . Calonge, N. (2013). Population-based 
versus practice-based recall for childhood immunizations: 
A randomized controlled comparative effectiveness trial. 
American Journal of Public Health, 103, 1116–1123. 
doi:10.2105/AJPH.2012.301035
Kempe, A., Saville, A. W., Dickinson, L. M., Beaty, B., Eisert, 
S., Gurfinkel, D., . . . Herlihy, R. (2015). Collaborative 
centralized reminder/recall notification to increase immu-
nization rates among young children. JAMA Pediatrics, 
169, 365. doi:10.1001/jamapediatrics.2014.3670
Kennedy, A., Sapsis, K. F., Stokley, S., Curtis, C. R., & Gust, D. 
(2011). Parental attitudes toward human papillomavirus 
vaccination: Evaluation of an educational intervention, 
2008. Journal of Health Communication, 16, 300–313. 
doi:10.1080/10810730.2010.532296
Kennedy, A., Stokley, S., Curtis, C. R., & Gust, D. (2012). 
Limited awareness of vaccines recommended for adoles-
cents and other results from two national consumer health 
surveys in the United States. Journal of Adolescent Health, 
50, 198–200. doi:10.1016/J.JADOHEALTH.2011.04.017
Kerpelman, L. C., Connell, D. B., & Gunn, W. J. (2000). 
Effect of a monetary sanction on immunization rates of 
recipients of aid to families with dependent children. 
Journal of the American Medical Association, 284, 53–59. 
doi:10.1001/jama.284.1.53
Kessels, S. J. M., Marshall, H. S., Watson, M., Braunack-Mayer, 
A. J., Reuzel, R., & Tooher, R. L. (2012). Factors associ-
ated with HPV vaccine uptake in teenage girls: A sys-
tematic review. Vaccine, 30, 3546–3556. doi:10.1016/j 
.vaccine.2012.03.063
Kimmel, S. R., Timko Burns, I., Wolfe, R. M., & Zimmerman, 
R. K. (2007). Addressing immunization barriers, benefits, 
and risks. Journal of Family Practice, 56(2), S61–S69.
Kiviniemi, M. T., Ellis, E. M., Hall, M. G., Moss, J. L., Lillie, 
S. E., Brewer, N. T., & Klein, W. M. P. (2017). Mediation, 
moderation, and context: Understanding complex rela-
tions among cognition, affect, and health behaviour. 
 Psychology of Vaccination 
199
Psychology & Health, 33, 98–116. doi:10.1080/08870446 
.2017.1324973
Klayman, J. (1995). Varieties of confirmation bias. In J. 
Busemeyer, R. Hastie, & D. L. Medin, Psychology of learn-
ing and motivation (Vol. 32; pp. 385–418). doi:10.1016/
S0079-7421(08)60315-1
Kogut, T., & Ritov, I. (2005). The “identified victim” effect: 
An identified group, or just a single individual? Journal 
of Behavioral Decision Making, 18, 157–167.
Kornides, M. L., McRee, A.-L., & Gilkey, M. B. (in press). 
Parents who decline HPV vaccination: Who later accepts 
and why? Academic Pediatrics.
Kwong, E. W., Pang, S. M., Choi, P., & Wong, T. K. (2010). 
Influenza vaccine preference and uptake among older 
people in nine countries. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 
66, 2297–2308. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2648.2010.05397.x
Lam, P.-P., Chambers, L. W., MacDougall, D. M. P., & 
McCarthy, A. E. (2010). Seasonal influenza vaccination 
campaigns for health care personnel: Systematic review. 
Canadian Medical Association Journal, 182, E542–E548. 
doi:10.1503/cmaj.091304
Larson, H. (2014, November 20). Old rumors resurface: 
The tetanus vaccine story. Retrieved from the Vaccine 
Confidence Project website at http://www.vaccinecon 
fidence.org/old-rumours-resurface-the-tetanus-vaccine-
story/
Larson, H. J., de Figueiredo, A., Xiahong, Z., Schulz, W. 
S., Verger, P., Johnston, I. G., . . . Jones, N. S. (2016). 
The state of vaccine confidence 2016: Global insights 
through a 67-country survey. EBioMedicine, 12, 295–301. 
doi:10.1016/j.ebiom.2016.08.042
Larson, H. J., Jarrett, C., Eckersberger, E., Smith, D. M. D., 
& Paterson, P. (2014). Understanding vaccine hesitancy 
around vaccines and vaccination from a global perspec-
tive: A systematic review of published literature, 2007-2012. 
Vaccine, 32, 2150–2159. doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2014.01.081
Larson, H. J., & Schulz, W. (2015). The state of vaccine con-
fidence 2015. Retrieved from the Vaccine Confidence 
Project website at http://www.vaccineconfidence.org/
The-State-of-Vaccine-Confidence-2015.pdf
Larson, H. J., Schulz, W. S., Tucker, J. D., & Smith, D. M. D.  
(2015). Measuring vaccine confidence: Introducing 
a global vaccine confidence index. PLOS Currents 
Outbreaks. doi:10.1371/currents.outbreaks.ce0f6177b 
c97332602a8e3fe7d7f7cc4
Lawrence, G. L., MacIntyre, C. R., Hull, B. P., & McIntyre, P. B. 
 
(2004). Effectiveness of the linkage of child care and 
maternity payments to childhood immunisation. Vaccine, 
22, 2345–2350. doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2003.10.038
Leask, J. A., & Chapman, S. (1998). An attempt to swindle 
nature: Press anti-immunisation reportage 1993-1997. 
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Public Health, 
22, 17–26. Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/9599848
Leask, J., Chapman, S., & Cooper Robbins, S. C. (2010). “All 
manner of ills”: The features of serious diseases attributed 
to vaccination. Vaccine, 28, 3066–3070. doi:10.1016/j.vac 
cine.2009.10.042
Leask, J., Chapman, S., Hawe, P., & Burgess, M. (2006). What 
maintains parental support for vaccination when chal-
lenged by anti-vaccination messages? A qualitative study. 
Vaccine, 24, 7238–7245. doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2006.05.010
Leask, J., & Danchin, M. (2017). Imposing penalties for vaccine 
rejection requires strong scrutiny. Journal of Paediatrics 
and Child Health, 53, 439–444. doi:10.1111/jpc.13472
Leask, J., Kinnersley, P., Jackson, C., Cheater, F., Bedford, H., 
& Rowles, G. (2012). Communicating with parents about 
vaccination: A framework for health professionals. BMC 
Pediatrics, 12, Article 154. doi:10.1186/1471-2431-12-154
Lee, C., & Robinson, J. L. (2016). Systematic review of the 
effect of immunization mandates on uptake of routine 
childhood immunizations. Journal of Infection, 72, 659–
666. doi:10.1016/j.jinf.2016.04.002
Lehmann, B. A., Chapman, G. B., Franssen, F. M. E., Kok, G., 
& Ruiter, R. A. C. (2016). Changing the default to pro-
mote influenza vaccination among health care workers. 
Vaccine, 34, 1389–1392. doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2016.01.046
Leventhal, H., Singer, R., & Jones, S. (1965). Effects of fear 
and specificity of recommendation upon attitudes and 
behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
2, 20–29. doi:10.1037/h0022089
Lewandowsky, S., Ecker, U. K. H., Seifert, C. M., Schwarz, 
N., & Cook, J. (2012). Misinformation and its correction. 
Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 13, 106–131. 
doi:10.1177/1529100612451018
Lewis, M. A., McBride, C. M., Pollak, K. I., Puleo, E., Butterfield, 
R. M., & Emmons, K. M. (2006). Understanding health 
behavior change among couples: An interdependence and 
communal coping approach. Social Science and Medicine, 
62, 1369–1380. doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2005.08.006
Li, M., & Chapman, G. B. (2013). Nudge to health: Harnessing 
decision research to promote health behavior. Social & 
Personality Psychology Compass, 7, 187–198. doi:10.1111/
spc3.12019
Li, M., Taylor, E. G., Atkins, K. E., Chapman, G. B., & 
Galvani, A. P. (2016). Stimulating influenza vaccination 
via prosocial motives. PLOS ONE, 11(7), Article e0159780. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0159780
Liddon, N. C., Leichliter, J. S., & Markowitz, L. E. (2012). 
Human papillomavirus vaccine and sexual behav-
ior among adolescent and young women. American 
Journal of Preventive Medicine, 42, 44–52. doi:10.1016/j 
.amepre.2011.09.024
Lieu, T. A., Ray, G. T., Klein, N. P., Chung, C., & Kulldorff, 
M. (2015). Geographic clusters in underimmunization and 
vaccine refusal. Pediatrics, 135, 280–289. doi:10.1542/
peds.2014-2715
Llupià, A., Mena, G., Olivé, V., Quesada, S., Aldea, M., Sequera, 
V. G., . . . Trilla, A. (2013). Evaluating influenza vaccina-
tion campaigns beyond coverage: A before-after study 
among health care workers. American Journal of Infection 
Control, 41, 674–678. doi:10.1016/j.ajic.2013.04.006
Loewenstein, G. F., Weber, E. U., Hsee, C. K., & Welch, 
N. (2001). Risk as feelings. Psychological Bulletin, 127, 
267–286. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.127.2.267
Lord, C. G., Ross, L., & Lepper, M. R. (1979). Biased assimi-
lation and attitude polarization: The effects of prior 
theories on subsequently considered evidence. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 37, 2098–2109. 
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.37.11.2098
 200 
Brewer et al.
Luman, E. T., Barker, L. E., Shaw, K. M., McCauley, M. M., 
Buehler, J. W., & Pickering, L. K. (2005). Timeliness of 
childhood vaccinations in the United States. Journal 
of the American Medical Association, 293, 1204–1211. 
doi:10.1001/jama.293.10.1204
Lumiere, F. (Director & Producer) Hefti, M. (Writer & 
Producer) Staurulakis, C. (Producer). (2014). Someone you 
love [DVD]. United States: Lumiere Media, Inc. Retrieved 
from https://www.hpvepidemic.com
Lundahl, B., Moleni, T., Burke, B. L., Butters, R., Tollefson, 
D., Butler, C., & Rollnick, S. (2013). Motivational inter-
viewing in medical care settings: A systematic review 
and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Patient 
Education and Counseling, 93, 157–168. doi:10.1016/j 
.pec.2013.07.012
Lytras, T., Kopsachilis, F., Mouratidou, E., Papamichail, D., 
& Bonovas, S. (2016). Interventions to increase seasonal 
influenza vaccine coverage in healthcare workers: A 
systematic review and meta-regression analysis. Human 
Vaccines & Immunotherapeutics, 12, 671–681. doi:10.10
80/21645515.2015.1106656
Maglione, M. A., Das, L., Raaen, L., Smith, A., Chari, R., 
Newberry, S., . . . Gidengil, C. (2014). Safety of vac-
cines used for routine immunization of US children: A 
systematic review. Pediatrics, 134, 325–337. doi:10.1542/
peds.2014-1079
Mandlhate, C., & Heinonen, P. (2014). Statement from WHO 
and UNICEF on the tetanus vaccine in Kenya. Retrieved 
from http://who.insomnation.com/sites/default/files/pdf/
who-unicef-joint-tt-statement.pdf
Mantzari, E., Vogt, F., & Marteau, T. M. (2015). Financial 
incentives for increasing uptake of HPV vaccinations: 
A randomized controlled trial. Health Psychology, 34, 
160–171. doi:10.1037/hea0000088
Marteau, T. M., Hollands, G. J., & Fletcher, P. C. (2012). 
Changing human behavior to prevent disease: The impor-
tance of targeting automatic processes. Science, 337, 
1492–1495. doi:10.1126/science.1226918
Matthias, J., Dusek, C., Pritchard, P. S., Rutledge, L., Kinchen, 
P., & Lander, M. (2014). Notes from the field: Outbreak of 
pertussis in a school and religious community averse to 
health care and vaccinations—Columbia County, Florida, 
2013. MMWR Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 63, 
655. Retrieved from https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/pre 
view/mmwrhtml/mm6330a3.htm
McKee, M. M., Barnett, S. L., Block, R. C., & Pearson, T. A. 
(2011). Impact of communication on preventive services 
among deaf American Sign Language users. American 
Journal of Preventive Medicine, 41, 75–79. doi:10.1016/j 
.amepre.2011.03.004
McPherson, M., Smith-Lovin, L., & Cook, J. M. (2001). Birds 
of a feather: Homophily in social networks. Annual 
Review of Sociology, 27, 415–444. doi:10.1146/annurev 
.soc.27.1.415
McQueen, A., & Klein, W. M. P. (2006). Experimental manipu-
lations of self-affirmation: A systematic review. Self and 
Identity, 5, 289–354. doi:10.1080/15298860600805325
McRee, A.-L., Brewer, N. T., Reiter, P. L., Gottlieb, S. L., 
& Smith, J. S. (2010). The Carolina HPV immuniza-
tion attitudes and beliefs scale (CHIAS): Scale devel-
opment and associations with intentions to vaccinate. 
Sexually Transmitted Diseases, 37, 234–239. doi:10.1097/
OLQ.0b013e3181c37e15
McRee, A.-L., Reiter, P. L., & Brewer, N. T. (2010). Vaccinating 
adolescent girls against human papillomavirus—Who 
decides? Preventive Medicine, 50, 213–214. doi:10.1016/j 
.ypmed.2010.02.001
Mergler, M. J., Omer, S. B., Pan, W. K. Y., Navar-Boggan, 
A. M., Orenstein, W., Marcuse, E. K., . . . Salmon, D. A. 
(2013). Association of vaccine-related attitudes and beliefs 
between parents and health care providers. Vaccine, 31, 
4591–4595. doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2013.07.039
Meszaros, J. R., Asch, D. A., Baron, J., Hershey, J. C., 
Kunreuther, H., & Schwartz-Buzaglo, J. (1996). Cognitive 
processes and the decisions of some parents to forego 
pertussis vaccination for their children. Journal of 
Clinical Epidemiology, 49, 697–703. doi:10.1016/0895-
4356(96)00007-8
Michie, S., Atkins, L., & West, R. (2014). The behaviour change 
wheel book: A guide to designing interventions. London, 
England: Silverback.
Milkman, K. L., Beshears, J., Choi, J. J., Laibson, D., & Madrian, 
B. C. (2011). Using implementation intentions prompts to 
enhance influenza vaccination rates. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, USA, 108, 10415–10420. 
doi:10.1073/pnas.1103170108
Miller, W. R., & Rollnick, S. (2013). Motivational interview-
ing: Helping people change (3rd ed.). New York, NY: 
Guilford Press.
Mills, E., Jadad, A. R., Ross, C., & Wilson, K. (2005). Systematic 
review of qualitative studies exploring parental beliefs and 
attitudes toward childhood vaccination identifies common 
barriers to vaccination. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology, 
58, 1081–1088. doi:10.1016/j.jclinepi.2005.09.002
Minkovitz, C., Holt, E., Hughart, N., Hou, W., Thomas, L., 
Dini, E., & Guyer, B. (1999). The effect of parental mon-
etary sanctions on the vaccination status of young chil-
dren. Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine, 153, 
1242–1247. doi:10.1001/archpedi.153.12.1242
Monto, A. S., Davenport, F. M., Napier, J. A., & Francis, T. 
(1968). Effect of vaccination of a school-age population 
upon the course of an A2/Hong Kong influenza epidemic. 
Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 41, 537–542.
Moran, W. P., Nelson, K., Wofford, J. L., Velez, R., & Case, 
L. D. (1996). Increasing influenza immunization among 
high-risk patients: Education or financial incentive? The 
American Journal of Medicine, 101, 612–620. doi:10.1016/
S0002-9343(96)00327-0
Morwitz, V. G., & Fitzsimons, G. J. (2004). The mere-mea-
surement effect: Why does measuring intentions change 
actual behavior? Journal of Consumer Psychology, 14(1–
2), 64–74. doi:10.1207/s15327663jcp1401&2_8
Moss, J. L., Reiter, P. L., & Brewer, N. T. (2015). HPV vac-
cine for teen boys: Dyadic analysis of parents’ and sons’ 
beliefs and willingness. Preventive Medicine, 78, 65–71. 
doi:10.1016/j.ypmed.2015.07.002
Moss, J. L., Reiter, P. L., Rimer, B. K., & Brewer, N. T. (2016). 
Collaborative patient-provider communication and uptake 
 Psychology of Vaccination 
201
of adolescent vaccines. Social Science and Medicine, 159, 
100–107. doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2016.04.030
Moss, J. L., Reiter, P. L., Truong, Y. K., Rimer, B. K., & Brewer, 
N. T. (2016). School entry requirements and coverage 
of nontargeted adolescent vaccines. Pediatrics, 138(6), 
Article e20161414. doi:10.1542/peds.2016-1414
National Vaccine Advisory Committee. (2008). Mandates for 
adolescent immunizations. American Journal of Preventive 
Medicine, 35, 145–151. doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2008.03.033
National Vaccine Advisory Committee. (2015). Assessing the 
State of vaccine confidence in the United States. Reports 
and Recommendations Public Health Reports, 130, 573–
595. Retrieved from https://www.hhs.gov/sites/default/
files/nvpo/nvac/reports/nvac-vaccine-confidence-public-
health-report-2015.pdf
Ndeffo-Mbah, M. L., Liu, J., Bauch, C. T., Tekel, Y. I., Medlock, 
J., Meyers, L. A., & Galvani, A. P. (2012). The impact 
of imitation on vaccination behavior in social contact 
networks. PLOS Computational Biology, 8(4), Article 
e1002469. doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002469
Nichol, K. L., Margolis, K. L., Wuorenma, J., & Von Sternberg, 
T. (1994). The efficacy and cost effectiveness of vaccina-
tion against influenza among elderly persons living in 
the community. New England Journal of Medicine, 331, 
778–784. doi:10.1056/NEJM199409223311206
Noesekabel, A., & Fenick, A. M. (2017). Immunization 
requirements of the top 200 universities: Implications 
for vaccine-hesitant families. Vaccine, 35, 3661–3665. 
doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2017.05.038
Nolan, J. M., Schultz, P. W., Cialdini, R. B., Goldstein, N. J., 
& Griskevicius, V. (2008). Normative social influence is 
underdetected. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
34, 913–923. doi:10.1177/0146167208316691
Nowak, G. J., LaVail, K., Kennedy, A., & Sheedy, K. (2013). 
Insights from public health: A framework for understand-
ing and fostering vaccine acceptance. In A. Chatterjee 
(Ed.), Vaccinophobia and vaccine controversies of the 21st 
century (pp. 459–479). doi:10.1007/978-1-4614-7438-8_25
Nyhan, B., Reifler, J., & Richey, S. (2012). The role of social 
networks in influenza vaccine attitudes and intentions 
among college students in the Southeastern United States. 
Journal of Adolescent Health, 51, 302–304. doi:10.1016/j 
.jadohealth.2012.02.014
Nyhan, B., Reifler, J., Richey, S., & Freed, G. L. (2014). 
Effective messages in vaccine promotion: A random-
ized trial. Pediatrics, 133(4), e835–e842. doi:10.1542/
peds.2013-2365
Olson, L. M., Inkelas, M., Halfon, N., Schuster, M. A., 
O’Connor, K. G., & Mistry, R. (2004). Overview of the 
content of health supervision for young children: Reports 
from parents and pediatricians. Pediatrics, 113, 1907–
1916. Retrieved from http://pediatrics.aappublications 
.org/cgi/reprint/113/Supplement_5/1907?ck=nck
Omer, S. B., Allen, K., Chang, D. H., Guterman, L. B., 
Bednarczyk, R. A., Jordan, A., . . . Salmon, D. A. (2018). 
Exemptions from mandatory immunization after legally 
mandated parental counseling. Pediatrics, 141(1), Article 
e20172364. doi:10.1542/peds.2017-2364
Omer, S. B., Enger, K. S., Moulton, L. H., Halsey, N. A., 
Stokley, S., & Salmon, D. A. (2008). Geographic cluster-
ing of nonmedical exemptions to school immunization 
requirements and associations with geographic cluster-
ing of pertussis. American Journal of Epidemiology, 168, 
1389–1396. doi:10.1093/aje/kwn263
Omer, S. B., Pan, W. K. Y., Halsey, N. A., Stokley, S., Moulton, 
L. H., Navar, A. M., . . . Salmon, D. A. (2006). Nonmedical 
exemptions to school immunization requirements. Journal 
of the American Medical Association, 296, 1757–1763. 
doi:10.1001/jama.296.14.1757
Omer, S. B., Porter, R. M., Allen, K., Salmon, D. A., & 
Bednarczyk, R. A. (2017). Trends in kindergarten rates 
of vaccine exemption and state-level policy, 2011–2016. 
Open Forum Infectious Diseases, 5(2), Article ofx244. 
doi:10.1093/ofid/ofx244
Omer, S. B., Richards, J. L., Ward, M., & Bednarczyk, R. A.  
(2012). Vaccination policies and rates of exemption from 
 
immunization, 2005–2011. New England Journal of Med-
icine, 367, 1170–1171. doi:10.1056/NEJMc1209037
Omer, S. B., Salmon, D. A., Orenstein, W. A., DeHart, M. P., 
& Halsey, N. (2009). Vaccine refusal, mandatory immu-
nization, and the risks of vaccine-preventable diseases. 
New England Journal of Medicine, 360, 1981–1988. 
doi:10.1056/NEJMsa0806477
Onnela, J. P., Landon, B. E., Kahn, A. L., Ahmed, D., Verma, 
H., O’Malley, A. J., . . . Christakis, N. A. (2016). Polio 
vaccine hesitancy in the networks and neighborhoods 
of Malegaon, India. Social Science and Medicine, 153, 
99–106. doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2016.01.024
Opel, D. J., Heritage, J., Taylor, J. A., Mangione-Smith, R., 
Salas, H. S., DeVere, V., . . . Robinson, J. D. (2013). 
The architecture of provider-parent vaccine discussions 
at health supervision visits. Pediatrics, 132, 1037–1046. 
doi:10.1542/peds.2013-2037
Opel, D. J., Mangione-Smith, R., Robinson, J. D., Heritage, J., 
DeVere, V., Salas, H. S., . . . Taylor, J. A. (2015). The influence 
of provider communication behaviors on parental vaccine 
acceptance and visit experience. American Journal of Public 
Health, 105, 1998–2004. doi:10.2105/AJPH.2014.302425
Opel, D. J., Schwartz, J. L., Omer, S. B., Silverman, R., Duchin, 
J., Kodish, E., . . . Orenstein, W. (2017). Achieving an 
optimal childhood vaccine policy. JAMA Pediatrics, 171, 
893–896. doi:10.1001/jamapediatrics.2017.1868
Opel, D. J., Taylor, J. A., Mangione-Smith, R., Solomon, C., 
Zhao, C., Catz, S., & Martin, D. (2011). Validity and reli-
ability of a survey to identify vaccine-hesitant parents. 
Vaccine, 29, 6598–6605. doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2011.06.115
Opel, D. J., Taylor, J. A., Zhou, C., Catz, S., Myaing, M., & 
Mangione-Smith, R. (2013). The relationship between par-
ent attitudes about childhood vaccines survey scores and 
future child immunization status. JAMA Pediatrics, 167, 
1065. doi:10.1001/jamapediatrics.2013.2483
Ordoñana, J. R., González-Javier, F., Espín-López, L., & 
Gómez-Amor, J. (2009). Self-report and psychophysi-
ological responses to fear appeals. Human Comm 
un 
- 
ication Research, 35, 195–220. doi:10.1111/j.1468-2958 
.2009.01344.x
 202 
Brewer et al.
Oster, E. (2016). Does disease cause vaccination? Disease out-
breaks and vaccination response (NBER Working Paper 
No. 22464). Retrieved from http://www.nber.org/papers/
w22464
Osterholm, M. T., Kelley, N. S., Sommer, A., & Belongia, E. A. 
(2012). Efficacy and effectiveness of influenza vaccines: A 
systematic review and meta-analysis. The Lancet Infectious 
Diseases, 12, 36–44. doi:10.1016/S1473-3099(11)70295-X
Ozawa, S., Mirelman, A., Stack, M. L., Walker, D. G., & Levine, 
O. S. (2012). Cost-effectiveness and economic benefits 
of vaccines in low- and middle-income countries: A sys-
tematic review. Vaccine, 31, 96–108. doi:10.1016/j.vac 
cine.2012.10.103
Pandey, P., Sehgal, A. R., Riboud, M., Levine, D., & Goyal, 
M. (2007). Informing resource-poor populations and the 
delivery of entitled health and social services in rural 
India. Journal of the American Medical Association, 298, 
1867. doi:10.1001/jama.298.16.1867
Pandolfi, E., Marino, M. G., Carloni, E., Romano, M., Gesualdo, 
F., Borgia, P., . . . Tozzi, A. E. (2012). The effect of physi-
cian’s recommendation on seasonal influenza immuniza-
tion in children with chronic diseases. BMC Public Health, 
12, 984. doi:10.1186/1471-2458-12-984
Patel, M. S., Volpp, K. G., Small, D. S., Wynne, C., Zhu, 
J., Yang, L., . . . Day, S. C. (2017). Using active choice 
within the electronic health record to increase influenza 
vaccination rates. Journal of General Internal Medicine, 
32, 790–795. doi:10.1007/s11606-017-4046-6
Payaprom, Y., Bennett, P., Alabaster, E., & Tantipong, H. 
(2011). Using the Health Action Process Approach and 
implementation intentions to increase flu vaccine uptake 
in high risk Thai individuals: A controlled before-after trial. 
Health Psychology, 30, 492–500. doi:10.1037/a0023580
Pearce, A., Marshall, H., Bedford, H., & Lynch, J. (2015). 
Barriers to childhood immunisation: Findings from the 
Longitudinal Study of Australian Children. Vaccine, 33, 
3377–3383. doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2015.04.089
Peasah, S. K., Azziz-Baumgartner, E., Breese, J., Meltzer, M. I., 
 
& Widdowson, M.-A. (2013). Influenza cost and cost-
effectiveness studies globally—a review. Vaccine, 31, 
5339–5348. doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2013.09.013
Pereira, J. A., Quach, S., Heidebrecht, C. L., Quan, S. D., 
Kolbe, F., & Finkelstein, M., . . . Public Health Agency of 
Canada/Canadian Institutes of Health Research Influenza 
Research Network (PCIRN) Vaccine Coverage Theme 
Group. (2012). Barriers to the use of reminder/recall inter-
ventions for immunizations: A systematic review. BMC 
Medical Informatics and Decision Making, 12, Article 145. 
doi:10.1186/1472-6947-12-145
Peretti-Watel, P., Larson, H. J., Ward, J. K., Schulz, W. S., & 
Verger, P. (2015). Vaccine hesitancy: Clarifying a theoreti-
cal framework for an ambiguous notion. PLOS Currents 
Outbreaks, 7. doi:10.1371/currents.outbreaks.6844c80ff9
f5b273f34c91f71b7fc289
Petrescu, D. C., Hollands, G. J., Couturier, D.-L., Ng, Y.-L., 
& Marteau, T. M. (2016). Public acceptability in the UK 
and USA of nudging to reduce obesity: The example 
of reducing sugar-sweetened beverages consumption. 
PLOS ONE, 11(6), Article e0155995. doi:10.1371/journal 
.pone.0155995
Phadke, V. K., Bednarczyk, R. A., Salmon, D. A., & Omer, 
S. B. (2016). Association between vaccine refusal and 
vaccine-preventable diseases in the United States. Journal 
of the American Medical Association, 315, 1149–1158. 
doi:10.1001/jama.2016.1353
Pitts, S. I., Maruthur, N. M., Millar, K. R., Perl, T. M., & Segal, 
J. (2014). A systematic review of mandatory influenza 
vaccination in healthcare personnel. American Journal 
of Preventive Medicine, 47, 330–340. doi:10.1016/j 
.amepre.2014.05.035
Poland, G. A., & Jacobson, R. M. (2001). Understanding those 
who do not understand: A brief review of the anti-vaccine 
movement. Vaccine, 19, 2440–2445. doi:10.1016/S0264-
410X(00)00469-2
Politi, M. C., Jones, K. M., & Philpott, S. E. (2017). The role 
of patient engagement in addressing parents’ perceptions 
about immunizations. Journal of the American Medical 
Association, 132, 237–238. doi:10.1001/jama.2017.7168
Polonijo, A. N., Carpiano, R. M., Reiter, P. L., & Brewer, 
N. T. (2016). Socioeconomic and racial-ethnic dispari-
ties in prosocial health attitudes: The case of human 
papillomavirus (HPV) vaccination for adolescent males. 
Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 57, 390–406. 
doi:10.1177/0022146516660344
Promberger, M., & Marteau, T. M. (2013). When do financial 
incentives reduce intrinsic motivation? Comparing behav-
iors studied in psychological and economic literatures. 
Health Psychology, 32, 950–957. doi:10.1037/a0032727
Public Health Live! (2010, December 9). Making the CASE for 
vaccine safety: A new model for communicating with par-
ents [video recording]. School of Public Health, University 
at Albany, State University of New York. Retrieved from 
https://vimeo.com/36486181
Quadri-Sheriff, M., Hendrix, K. S., Downs, S. M., Sturm, L. A., 
Zimet, G. D., & Finnell, S. M. E. (2012). The role of herd 
immunity in parents’ decision to vaccinate children: A 
systematic review. Pediatrics, 130, 522–530. doi:10.1542/
peds.2012-0140
Quinn, S. C., Hilyard, K., Castaneda-Angarita, N., & Freimuth, 
V. S. (2015). Public acceptance of peramivir during the 
2009 H1N1 influenza pandemic: Implications for other 
drugs or vaccines under emergency use authorizations. 
Disaster Medicine and Public Health Preparedness, 9, 
166–174. doi:10.1017/dmp.2014.156
Rainey, J. J., Watkins, M., Ryman, T. K., Sandhu, P., Bo, A., & 
Banerjee, K. (2011). Reasons related to non-vaccination 
and under-vaccination of children in low and middle 
income countries: Findings from a systematic review of 
the published literature, 1999–2009. Vaccine, 29, 8215–
8221. doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2011.08.096
Rashid, H., Yin, J. K., Ward, K., King, C., Seale, H., & Booy, R. 
(2016). Assessing interventions to improve influenza vac-
cine uptake among health care workers. Health Affairs, 
35, 284–292. doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2015.1087
Reagan-Steiner, S., Yankey, D., Jeyarajah, J., Elam-Evans, L. D., 
 
Curtis, C. R., MacNeil, J., . . . Singleton, J. A. (2016). 
National, regional, state, and selected local area vaccina-
tion coverage among adolescents aged 13–17 years—
United States, 2015. MMWR Morbidity and Mortality Weekly 
Report, 65, 850–858. doi:10.15585/mmwr.mm6533a4
 Psychology of Vaccination 
203
Reiter, P. L., Brewer, N. T., Gottlieb, S. L., McRee, A.-L., & Smith, 
J. S. (2009). Parents’ health beliefs and HPV vaccination 
of their adolescent daughters. Social Science & Medicine, 
69, 475–480. doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2009.05.024
Reiter, P. L., Gerend, M. A., Gilkey, M. B., Perkins, R. B., 
Saslow, D., Stokley, S., . . . Brewer, N. T. (in press). 
Advancing HPV vaccine delivery: 12 priority research 
gaps. Academic Pediatrics.
Reiter, P. L., Gilkey, M. B., & Brewer, N. T. (2013). HPV 
vaccination among adolescent males: Results from the 
National Immunization Survey-Teen. Vaccine, 31, 2816–
2821. doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2013.04.010
Reiter, P. L., McRee, A.-L., Katz, M. L., & Paskett, E. D. (2015). 
Human papillomavirus vaccination among young adult 
gay and bisexual men in the United States. American 
Journal of Public Health, 105, 96–102. doi:10.2105/
AJPH.2014.302095
Reiter, P. L., McRee, A.-L., Pepper, J. K., & Brewer, N. T. 
(2012). Default policies and parents’ consent for school-
located HPV vaccination. Journal of Behavioral Medicine, 
35, 651–657. doi:10.1007/s10865-012-9397-1
Reiter, P. L., McRee, A.-L., Pepper, J. K., Gilkey, M. B., 
Galbraith, K. V., & Brewer, N. T. (2013). Longitudinal 
predictors of human papillomavirus vaccination among 
a national sample of adolescent males. American 
Journal of Public Health, 103, 1419–1427. doi:10.2105/
AJPH.2012.301189
Reyna, V. F. (2008). A theory of medical decision making and 
health: Fuzzy-trace theory. Medical Decision Making, 28, 
850–865. doi:10.1177/0272989X08327066
Reyna, V. F. (2012). Risk perception and communication in 
vaccination decisions: A fuzzy-trace theory approach. 
Vaccine, 30, 3790–3797. doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2011.11.070
Riphagen-Dalhuisen, J., Burgerhof, J. G., Frijstein, G., van der 
Geest-Blankert, A. D., Danhof-Pont, M. B., de Jager, H. J., 
 
. . . Hak, E. (2013). Hospital-based cluster randomised 
controlled trial to assess effects of a multi-faceted pro-
gramme on influenza vaccine coverage among hospi-
tal healthcare workers and nosocomial influenza in the 
Netherlands, 2009 to 2011. Eurosurveillance, 18, 20512. 
doi:10.2807/1560-7917.ES2013.18.26.20512
Ritov, I., & Baron, J. (1990). Reluctance to vaccinate: Omission 
bias and ambiguity. Journal of Behavioral Decision 
Making, 3, 263–277. doi:10.1002/bdm.3960030404
Ritov, I., & Baron, J. (1999). Protected values and omission 
bias. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision 
Processes, 79, 79–94. Retrieved from http://www.ideali 
brary.com
Robison, S. G., Groom, H., & Young, C. (2012). Frequency of 
alternative immunization schedule use in a metropolitan 
area. Pediatrics, 130, 32–38. doi:10.1542/peds.2011-3154
Robison, S. G., & Osborn, A. W. (2017). The concordance of 
parent and child immunization. Pediatrics, 139(5), Article 
e20162883. doi:10.1542/peds.2016-2883
Rodriguez, N. J. (2016). Vaccine-hesitant justifications: “Too 
Many, Too Soon,” narrative persuasion, and the confla-
tion of expertise. Global Qualitative Nursing Research, 3, 
1–10. doi:10.1177/2333393616663304
Rogers, R. W. (1975). A protection motivation theory of fear 
appeals and attitude change. The Journal of Psychology, 
91, 93–114. doi:10.1080/00223980.1975.9915803.
Rosselli, R., Martini, M., Bragazzi, N. L., & Watad, A. (2017). 
The public health impact of the so-called “Fluad Effect” 
on the 2014/2015 influenza vaccination campaign in 
Italy: Ethical implications for health-care workers and 
health communication practitioners. In G. Donelli (Ed.), 
Advances in experimental medicine and biology (Vol. 7, 
pp. 125–134). doi:10.1007/5584_2017_39
Roszkowski, M. J., & Snelbecker, G. E. (1990). Effects of 
“framing” on measures of risk tolerance: Financial plan-
ners are not immune. Journal of Behavioral Economics, 
19, 237–246. doi:10.1016/0090-5720(90)90029-7
Rothan-Tondeur, M., Filali-Zegzouti, Y., Belmin, J., Lejeune, 
B., Golmard, J.-L., De Wazières, B., . . . Gavazzi, G. 
(2010). Assessment of healthcare worker influenza vac-
cination program in French geriatric wards: A cluster-ran-
domized controlled trial. Aging Clinical and Experimental 
Research, 22, 450–455. doi:10.3275/6708
Rothman, A. J., Baldwin, A., Hertel, A., & Fuglestad, P. (2011). 
Self-regulation and behavior change: Disentangling behav-
ioral initiation and behavioral maintenance: Research, 
theory, and applications. In K. Vohs & R. Baumeister 
(Eds.), The handbook of self-regulation: Research, theory, 
and applications (2nd ed., pp. 106–122). New York, NY: 
Guilford Press.
Rothman, A. J., Gollwitzer, P. M., Grant, A. M., Neal, D. T., 
Sheeran, P., & Wood, W. (2015). Hale and hearty poli-
cies: How psychological science can create and maintain 
healthy habits. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 10, 
701–705. doi:10.1177/1745691615598515
Rothman, A. J., & Salovey, P. (2007). The reciprocal rela-
tion between principles and practice: Social psychology 
and health behavior: Handbook of basic principles. In 
A. Kruglanski & E. T. Higgins (Eds.), Social psychology: 
Handbook of basic principles (2nd ed., pp. 826–849). New 
York, NY: Guilford Press.
Rothman, A. J., Sheeran, P., & Wood, W. (2009). Reflective 
and automatic processes in the initiation and mainte-
nance of dietary change. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 
38(Suppl. 1), S4–S17. doi:10.1007/s12160-009-9118-3
Rubak, S., Sandbæk, A., Lauritzen, T., & Christensen, B. (2005). 
Motivational interviewing: A systematic review and meta-
analysis. British Journal of General Practice, 55, 305–312. 
Retrieved from http://bjgp.org/content/55/513/305.short
Sadaf, A., Richards, J. L., Glanz, J., Salmon, D. A., & Omer, S. B. 
(2013). A systematic review of interventions for reducing 
parental vaccine refusal and vaccine hesitancy. Vaccine, 
31, 4293–4304. doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2013.07.013
Saeterdal, I., Lewin, S., Austvoll-Dahlgren, A., Glenton, C., 
& Munabi-Babigumira, S. (2014). Interventions aimed 
at communities to inform and/or educate about early 
childhood vaccination. Cochrane Database of Systematic 
Reviews. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD010232.pub2
Safi, H., Wheeler, J. G., Reeve, G. R., Ochoa, E., Romero, J. R., 
 
Hopkins, R., . . . Jacobs, R. F. (2012). Vaccine policy 
and Arkansas childhood immunization exemptions. 
 204 
Brewer et al.
American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 42, 602–605. 
doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2012.02.022
Salathé, M., & Bonhoeffer, S. (2008). The effect of opin-
ion clustering on disease outbreaks. Journal of the Royal 
Society Interface, 5, 1505–1508. doi:10.1098/rsif.2008.0271
Salathé, M., & Khandelwal, S. (2011). Assessing vaccination 
sentiments with online social media: Implications for infec-
tious disease dynamics and control. PLOS Computational 
Biology, 7(10), Article e1002199. doi:10.1371/journal 
.pcbi.1002199
Salmon, D. A., Haber, M., Gangarosa, E. J., Phillips, L., Smith, 
N. J., & Chen, R. T. (1999). Health consequences of reli-
gious and philosophical exemptions from immunization 
laws. Journal of the American Medical Association, 282, 
47–53. doi:10.1001/jama.282.1.47
Samad, L., Tate, A. R., Dezateux, C., Peckham, C., Butler, N., 
& Bedford, H. (2006). Differences in risk factors for partial 
and no immunisation in the first year of life: Prospective 
cohort study. BMJ, 332, 1312–1313. doi:10.1136/bmj 
.332.7553.1312
Sandberg, T., & Conner, M. (2008). Anticipated regret as an 
additional predictor in the theory of planned behaviour: 
A meta-analysis. The British Journal of Social Psychology, 
47, 589–606. doi:10.1348/014466607X258704
Saville, A. W., Albright, K., Nowels, C., Barnard, J., Daley, M. F., 
 
Stokley, S., . . . Kempe, A. (2011). Getting under the hood: 
Exploring issues that affect provider-based recall using an 
immunization information system. Academic Pediatrics, 
11, 44–49. doi:10.1016/j.acap.2010.12.009
Scheibehenne, B., Greifeneder, R., Todd, P. M., Joop, van 
der P., Michael, B., & R., L. D. (2010). Can there ever be 
too many options? A meta-analytic review of choice over-
load. Journal of Consumer Research, 37, 409–425. doi:10 
.1086/651235
Schmid, P., Rauber, D., Betsch, C., Lidolt, G., & Denker, 
M.-L. (2017). Barriers of influenza vaccination intention 
and behavior - A systematic review of influenza vaccine 
hesitancy, 2005-2016. PLOS ONE, 12(1), Article e0170550. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0170550
Schuler, C. L., Reiter, P. L., Smith, J. S., & Brewer, N. T. (2011). 
Human papillomavirus vaccine and behavioural disin-
hibition. Sexually Transmitted Infections, 87, 349–353. 
doi:10.1136/sti.2010.048017
Schwartz, B. (2004). The paradox of choice: Why more is less. 
New York, NY: Harper Collins Publishers.
Seal, K. (2003). A randomized controlled trial of monetary 
incentives vs. outreach to enhance adherence to the hepa-
titis B vaccine series among injection drug users. Drug 
and Alcohol Dependence, 71, 127–131. doi:10.1016/S0376-
8716(03)00074-7
Sears, R. W. (2011). The vaccine book: Making the right deci-
sion for your child (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Little, Brown.
Setbon, M., & Raude, J. (2010). Factors in vaccination inten-
tion against the pandemic influenza A/H1N1. European 
Journal of Public Health, 20, 490–494. doi:10.1093/eur 
pub/ckq054
Shalizi, C. R., & Thomas, A. C. (2011). Homophily and con-
tagion are generically confounded in observational social 
network studies. Sociological Methods & Research, 40, 
211–239. doi:10.1177/0049124111404820
Sheeran, P. (2002). Intention—behavior relations: A con-
ceptual and empirical review. European Review of Social 
Psychology, 12, 1–36. doi:10.1080/14792772143000003
Sheeran, P., & Bosch, J. A. (Eds.). (2016). Implicit processes 
in health psychology [Special issue]. Health Psychology, 
35(8). Retrieved from http://psycnet.apa.org/journals/
hea/35/8/
Sheeran, P., Bosch, J. A., Crombez, G., Hall, P. A., Harris, J. L., 
 
Papies, E. K., & Wiers, R. W. (2016). Implicit processes 
in health psychology: Diversity and promise. Health 
Psychology, 35, 761–766. doi:10.1037/hea0000409
Sheeran, P., Gollwitzer, P. M., & Bargh, J. A. (2013). 
Nonconscious processes and health. Health Psychology, 
32, 460–473. doi:10.1037/a0029203
Sheeran, P., Harris, P. R., & Epton, T. (2014). Does heightening 
risk appraisals change people’s intentions and behavior? 
A meta-analysis of experimental studies. Psychological 
Bulletin, 140, 511–543. doi:10.1037/a0033065
Sheeran, P., Klein, W. M. P., & Rothman, A. J. (2017). Health 
behavior change: Moving from observation to inter-
vention. Annual Review of Psychology, 68, 573–600. 
doi:10.1146/annurev-psych-010416-044007
Sheeran, P., & Webb, T. L. (2016). The intention-behavior gap. 
Social & Personality Psychology Compass, 10, 503–518. 
doi:10.1111/spc3.12265
Sheeran, P., Webb, T. L., & Gollwitzer, P. M. (2005). The 
interplay between goal intentions and implementation 
intentions. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 31, 
87–98. doi:10.1177/0146167204271308
Shelby, A., & Ernst, K. (2013). Story and science. Human 
Vaccines & Immunotherapeutics, 9, 1795–1801. doi: 
10.4161/hv.24828
Sherman, D. A. K., Nelson, L. D., & Steele, C. M. (2000). Do 
messages about health risks threaten the self? Increasing 
the acceptance of threatening health messages via self-
affirmation. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
26, 1046–1058. doi:10.1177/01461672002611003
Shim, E., Chapman, G. B., Townsend, J. P., & Galvani, A. P. 
(2012). The influence of altruism on influenza vaccina-
tion decisions. Journal of the Royal Society Interface, 9, 
2234–2243. doi:10.1098/rsif.2012.0115
Shourie, S., Jackson, C., Cheater, F. M., Bekker, H. L., Edlin, 
R., Tubeuf, S., . . . Hammond, L. (2013). A cluster ran-
domised controlled trial of a web based decision aid to 
support parents’ decisions about their child’s measles 
mumps and rubella (MMR) vaccination. Vaccine, 31, 
6003–6010. doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2013.10.025
Silverman, J., Kurtz, S., & Draper, J. (2005). Skills for com-
municating with patients (2nd ed.). Oxford, England: 
Radcliffe Publishing.
Skea, Z. C., Entwistle, V. A., Watt, I., & Russell, E. (2008). 
“Avoiding harm to others” considerations in relation to 
parental measles, mumps and rubella (MMR) vaccina-
tion discussions—an analysis of an online chat forum. 
Social Science & Medicine, 67, 1382–1390. doi:10.1016/j 
.socscimed.2008.07.006
Smith, N. M., Bresee, J. S., Shay, D. K., Uyeki, T. M., Cox, 
N. J., & Strikas, R. A. (2006). Prevention and control of 
influenza: Recommendations of the Advisory Committee 
on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR Morbidity 
 Psychology of Vaccination 
205
and Mortality Weekly Report, 55(RR10), 1–42. Retrieved 
from https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/
rr5510a1.htm
Smith, P. J., Humiston, S. G., Marcuse, E. K., Zhao, Z., Dorell, 
C. G., Howes, C., & Hibbs, B. (2011). Parental delay or 
refusal of vaccine doses, childhood vaccination coverage 
at 24 months of age, and the Health Belief Model. Public 
Health Reports, 126(Suppl. 2), 135–146. doi:10.1177/003
33549111260S215
Smith, P. J., Humiston, S. G., Parnell, T., Vannice, K. S., & 
Salmon, D. A. (2010). The association between intentional 
delay of vaccine administration and timely childhood vac-
cination coverage. Public Health Reports, 125, 534–541. 
doi:10.1177/003335491012500408
Smith, P. J., Marcuse, E. K., Seward, J. F., Zhao, Z., & 
Orenstein, W. A. (2015). Children and adolescents unvac-
cinated against measles: Geographic clustering, parents’ 
beliefs, and missed opportunities. Public Health Reports, 
130, 485–504. doi:10.1177/003335491513000512
Smith, P. J., Shaw, J., Seither, R., Lopez, A., Hill, H. A., 
Underwood, M., . . . Orenstein, W. A. (2017). Vaccine 
exemptions and the kindergarten vaccination cov-
erage gap. Vaccine, 35, 5346–5351. doi:10.1016/J 
.VACCINE.2017.08.036
Söderlund, L. L., Madson, M. B., Rubak, S., & Nilsen, P. (2011). 
A systematic review of motivational interviewing training 
for general health care practitioners. Patient Education 
and Counseling, 84, 16–26. doi:10.1016/j.pec.2010.06.025
Stacey, D., Légaré, F., Lewis, K., Barry, M. J., Bennett, C. L., 
 
Eden, K. B., . . . Trevena, L. (2017). Decision aids for 
people facing health treatment or screening decisions. 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 4. doi:10.1002/ 
14651858.CD001431.pub5
Stewart, A. M., & Cox, M. A. (2013). State law and influ-
enza vaccination of health care personnel. Vaccine, 31, 
827–832. doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2012.11.063
Stokes, S., & Ismail, K. (2011). Uptake of the H1N1 vac-
cine by maternity staff at a university hospital in the UK. 
International Journal of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, 112, 
247. doi:10.1016/j.ijgo.2010.10.009
Stone, E. G., Morton, S. C., Hulscher, M. E., Maglione, M. A., 
Roth, E. A., Grimshaw, J. M., . . . Shekelle, P. G. (2002). 
Interventions that increase Use of adult immunization and 
cancer screening services. Annals of Internal Medicine, 
136, 641. doi:10.7326/0003-4819-136-9-200205070-00006
Strack, F., & Deutsch, R. (2004). Reflective and impul-
sive determinants of social behavior. Personality and 
Social Psychology Review, 8, 220–247. doi:10.1207/
s15327957pspr0803_1
Sturm, L., Donahue, K., Kasting, M., Kulkarni, A., Brewer, N. T., 
 
& Zimet, G. D. (2017). Pediatrician-parent conversations 
about human papillomavirus vaccination: An analysis 
of audio recordings. Journal of Adolescent Health, 61, 
246–251. doi:10.1016/j.jadohealth.2017.02.006
Suh, C. A., Saville, A., Daley, M. F., Glazner, J. E., Barrow, 
J., Stokley, S., . . . Kempe, A. (2012). Effectiveness and 
net cost of reminder/recall for adolescent immunizations. 
Pediatrics, 129, e1437–e1445. doi:10.1542/peds.2011-1714
Sundaram, N., Schaetti, C., Merten, S., Schindler, C., Ali, S. M., 
Nyambedha, E. O., . . . Weiss, M. G. (2016). Sociocultural 
determinants of anticipated oral cholera vaccine acceptance 
in three African settings: A meta-analytic approach. BMC 
Public Health, 16, Article 36. doi:10.1186/s12889-016-2710-0
Szilagyi, P. G., Bordley, C., Vann, J. C., Chelminski, A., Kraus, 
R. M., Margolis, P. A., & Rodewald, L. E. (2000). Effect 
of patient reminder/recall interventions on immuniza-
tion rates: A review. Journal of the American Medical 
Association, 284, 1820–1827. doi:10.1001/jama.284.14.1820
Szilagyi, P. G., Rodewald, L. E., Savageau, J., Yoos, L., & 
Doane, C. (1992). Improving influenza vaccination rates in 
children with asthma: A test of a computerized reminder 
system and an analysis of factors predicting vaccination 
compliance. Pediatrics, 90, 871–875. Retrieved from 
http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/90/6/871
Szilagyi, P. G., Serwint, J. R., Humiston, S. G., Rand, C. M., 
Schaffer, S., Vincelli, P., . . . Curtis, C. R. (2015). Effect 
of provider prompts on adolescent immunization rates: 
A randomized trial. Academic Pediatrics, 15, 149–57. 
doi:10.1016/j.acap.2014.10.006
Tannenbaum, M. B., Hepler, J., Zimmerman, R. S., Saul, L., 
Jacobs, S., Wilson, K., & Albarracín, D. (2015). Appealing 
to fear: A meta-analysis of fear appeal effectiveness 
and theories. Psychological Bulletin, 141, 1178–1204. 
doi:10.1037/a0039729.
Taylor, S. (2009). Political epidemiology: Strengthening 
socio-political analysis for mass immunisation—lessons 
from the smallpox and polio programmes. Global Public 
Health, 4, 546–560. doi:10.1080/17441690701727850
Thompson, J. W., Tyson, S., Card-Higginson, P., Jacobs, R. F., 
 
Wheeler, J. G., Simpson, P., . . . Salmon, D. A. (2007). 
Impact of addition of philosophical exemptions on child-
hood immunization rates. American Journal of Preventive 
Medicine, 32, 194–201. doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2006.10.014
Thompson, W. W., Shay, D. K., Weintraub, E., Brammer, L., 
Cox, N., Anderson, L. J., & Fukada, K. (2003). Mortality 
associated with influenza and respiratory syncytial virus 
in the United States. Journal of the American Medical 
Association, 289, 179–186. doi:10.1001/jama.289.2.179
Thomson, A., Robinson, K., & Vallée-Tourangeau, G. (2016). 
The 5As: A practical taxonomy for the determinants of 
vaccine uptake. Vaccine, 34, 1018–1024. doi:10.1016/j 
.vaccine.2015.11.065
Topp, L., Day, C. A., Wand, H., Deacon, R. M., van Beek, I., 
Haber, P. S., . . . Maher, L. (2013). A randomised con-
trolled trial of financial incentives to increase hepatitis B 
vaccination completion among people who inject drugs in 
Australia. Preventive Medicine, 57, 297–303. doi:10.1016/j 
.ypmed.2013.04.013
Trivedi, A. N., & Ayanian, J. Z. (2006). Perceived discrimi-
nation and use of preventive health services. 
Journal 
of General Internal Medicine, 
21, 553–558 doi:10.1111/
j.1525-1497.2006.00413.x
Tucker Edmonds, B. M., Coleman, J., Armstrong, K., & Shea, 
J. A. (2011). Risk perceptions, worry, or distrust: What 
drives pregnant women’s decisions to accept the H1N1 
vaccine? Maternal and Child Health Journal, 15, 1203–
1209. doi:10.1007/s10995-010-0693-5
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under uncer-
tainty: Heuristics and biases. Science, 185, 1124–1131. 
doi:10.1126/science.185.4157.1124
 206 
Brewer et al.
Verweij, M., & Dawson, A. (2004). Ethical principles for col-
lective immunisation programmes. Vaccine, 22, 3122–
3126. doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2004.01.062
Vet, R., de Wit, J. B. F., & Das, E. (2014). The role of imple-
mentation intention formation in promoting hepatitis 
B vaccination uptake among men who have sex with 
men. International Journal of STD & AIDS, 25, 122–129. 
doi:10.1177/0956462413495012
Vietri, J. T., Li, M., Galvani, A. P., & Chapman, G. B. (2012). 
Vaccinating to help ourselves and others. Medical Decision 
Making, 32, 447–458. doi:10.1177/0272989X11427762
Volpp, K. G., John, L. K., Troxel, A. B., Norton, L., Fassbender, 
J., & Loewenstein, G. (2008). Financial incentive-based 
approaches for weight loss: A randomized trial. Journal 
of the American Medical Association, 300, 2631–2637. 
doi:10.1001/jama.2008.804
Walkinshaw, E. (2011). Mandatory vaccinations: The interna-
tional landscape. Canadian Medical Association Journal, 
183, E1167–E1168. doi:10.1503/cmaj.109-3993
Wallace, C., Leask, J., & Trevena, L. J. (2006). Effects of a web 
based decision aid on parental attitudes to MMR vaccina-
tion: A before and after study. British Medical Journal, 
332, 146–149. doi:10.1136/bmj.38678.681840.68
Wasserman, S., & Faust, K. (1994). Social network analysis: 
Methods and applications (Structural). New York, NY: 
Cambridge University Press.
Watson, M., Shaw, D., Molchanoff, L., & McInnes, C. (2009). 
Challenges, lessons learned and results following the 
implementation of a human papilloma virus school vac-
cination program in South Australia. Australian and 
New Zealand Journal of Public Health, 33, 365–370. 
doi:10.1111/j.1753-6405.2009.00409.x
Weaver, T., Metrebian, N., Hellier, J., Pilling, S., Charles, V., 
Little, N., . . . Strang, J. (2014). Use of contingency man-
agement incentives to improve completion of hepatitis 
B vaccination in people undergoing treatment for heroin 
dependence: A cluster randomised trial. The Lancet, 384, 
153–163. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(14)60196-3
Webb, T. L., & Sheeran, P. (2006). Does changing behavioral 
intentions engender behavior change? A meta-analysis of 
the experimental evidence. Psychological Bulletin, 132, 
249–268. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.132.2.249
Webb, T. L., Sheeran, P., & Pepper, J. (2012). Gaining control 
over responses to implicit attitude tests: Implementation 
intentions engender fast responses on attitude-incongru-
ent trials. The British Journal of Social Psychology, 51, 
13–32. doi:10.1348/014466610X532192
Weinstein, N. D. (1993). Testing four competing theories of 
health-protective behavior. Health Psychology, 12, 324–
333. doi:10.1037/0278-6133.12.4.324
Weinstein, N. D. (2007). Misleading tests of health behav-
ior theories. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 33, 1–10. 
doi:10.1207/s15324796abm3301_1
Weinstein, N. D., Kwitel, A., McCaul, K. D., Magnan, R. E., 
Gerrard, M., & Gibbons, F. X. (2007). Risk perceptions: 
Assessment and relationship to influenza vaccination. Health 
Psychology, 26, 146–151. doi:10.1037/0278-6133.26.2.146
Wheelock, A., Miraldo, M., Thomson, A., Vincent, C., & 
Sevdalis, N. (2017). Evaluating the importance of policy 
amenable factors in explaining influenza vaccination: 
A cross-sectional multinational study. BMJ Open, 7(7), 
Article e014668. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014668
Wheelock, A., Thomson, A., & Sevdalis, N. (2013). Social and 
psychological factors underlying adult vaccination behav-
ior: Lessons from seasonal influenza vaccination in the 
US and the UK. Expert Review of Vaccines, 12, 893–901. 
doi:10.1586/14760584.2013.814841
Wilding, S., Conner, M., Sandberg, T., Prestwich, A., Lawton, 
R., Wood, C., . . . Sheeran, P. (2016). The question-behav-
iour effect: A theoretical and methodological review and 
meta-analysis. European Review of Social Psychology, 27, 
196–230. doi:10.1080/10463283.2016.1245940
Wiley, K. E., & Leask, J. (2013). Respiratory vaccine uptake 
during pregnancy. The Lancet Respiratory Medicine, 1, 
9–11. doi:10.1016/S2213-2600(13)70024-9.
Wiley, K. E., Steffens, M., Berry, N., & Leask, J. (2017). An 
audit of the quality of online immunisation information 
available to Australian parents. BMC Public Health, 17(1), 
Article 76. doi:10.1186/s12889-016-3933-9
Williams, S. E. (2014). What are the factors that contribute 
to parental vaccine-hesitancy and what can we do about 
it? Human Vaccines and Immunotherapeutics, 10, 2584–
2596. doi:10.4161/hv.28596
Williams, S. E., Rothman, R. L., Offit, P. A., Schaffner, W., 
Sullivan, M., & Edwards, K. M. (2013). A randomized trial 
to increase acceptance of childhood vaccines by vaccine-
hesitant parents: A pilot study. Academic Pediatrics, 13, 
475–480. doi:10.1016/j.acap.2013.03.011
Williams, W. W., Lu, P.-J., O’Halloran, A., Kim, D. K., 
Grohskopf, L. A., Pilishvili, T., . . . Fiebelkorn, A. P. 
(2017). Surveillance of vaccination coverage among adult 
populations—United States, 2015. MMWR Surveillance 
Summaries, 66(11), 1–28. doi:10.15585/mmwr.ss6611a1
Winterbottom, A., Bekker, H. L., Conner, M., & Mooney, 
A. (2008). Does narrative information bias individ-
ual’s decision making? A systematic review. Social 
Science & Medicine, 67, 2079–2088. doi:10.1016/j.socs 
cimed.2008.09.037
Witteman, H. O., Chipenda Dansokho, S., Exe, N., Dupuis, 
A., Provencher, T., & Zikmund-Fisher, B. J. (2015). Risk 
communication, values clarification, and vaccination 
decisions. Risk Analysis, 35, 1801–1819. doi:10.1111/
risa.12418
Witteman, H. O., Dansokho, S. C., Colquhoun, H., Coulter, A., 
Dugas, M., Fagerlin, A., . . . Witteman, W. (2015). User-
centered design and the development of patient decision 
aids: Protocol for a systematic review. Systematic Reviews, 
4, 11. doi:10.1186/2046-4053-4-11
Witteman, H. O., & Zikmund-Fisher, B. J. (2012). The defining 
characteristics of Web 2.0 and their potential influence in 
the online vaccination debate. Vaccine, 30, 3734–3740. 
doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2011.12.039
Wolfe, R. M., & Sharp, L. K. (2002). Anti-vaccinationists 
past and present. British Medical Journal, 325, 430–432. 
doi:10.1136/bmj.325.7361.430
Wood, W., & Neal, D. T. (2016). 
Healthy through habit: 
Interventions for initiating and 
maintaining health behav-
ior change. Behavioral Science & Policy, 2(1), 89–103.
 Psychology of Vaccination 
207
Wood, W., & Rünger, D. (2016). Psychology of habit. Annual 
Review of Psychology, 67, 289–314. doi:10.1146/annurev-
psych-122414-033417
World Health Organization. (2013). Global vaccine 
action plan 2011-2020. Geneva, Switzerland: WHO 
Press. Retrieved from http://www.who.int/iris/bitstr
eam/10665/78141/1/9789241504980_eng.pdf
World Health Organization. (2017). Table 1: Summary of WHO 
position papers—Recommendations for routine immuni-
zation. Retrieved from http://www.who.int/immuniza 
tion/policy/Immunization_routine_table1.pdf
Wroe, A. L., Turner, N., & Owens, R. G. (2005). Evaluation 
of a decision-making aid for parents regarding child-
hood immunizations. Health Psychology, 24, 539–547. 
doi:10.1037/0278-6133.24.6.539
Yang, Y. T., & Silverman, R. D. (2015). Legislative prescrip-
tions for controlling nonmedical vaccine exemptions. 
Journal of the American Medical Association, 313, 247–
248. doi:10.1001/jama.2014.16286
Yarnall, K. S. H., Pollak, K. I., Østbye, T., Krause, K. M., & 
Michener, J. L. (2003). Primary care: Is there enough time 
for prevention? American Journal of Public Health, 93, 
635–641. doi:10.2105/AJPH.93.4.635
Zaffran, M., Vandelaer, J., Kristensen, D., Melgaard, B., 
Yadav, P., Antwi-Agyei, K. O., & Lasher, H. (2013). 
The imperative for stronger vaccine supply and logis-
tics systems. Vaccine, 31, B73–B80. doi:10.1016/j.vac 
cine.2012.11.036
Zazove, P., McKee, M., Schleicher, L., Green, L., Kileny, P., Rapai, 
M., & Mulhem, E. (2017). To act or not to act: Responses 
to electronic health record prompts by family medicine 
clinicians. Journal of the American Medical Informatics 
Association, 24, 275–280. doi:10.1093/jamia/ocw178
Zipprich, J., Winter, K., Hacker, J., Dongxiang, X., Watt, J., 
& Harriman, K. (2015). Measles outbreak—California, 
December 2014–February 2015. MMWR Morbidity and 
Mortality Weekly Report, 64(6), 153–154. Retrieved 
from https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/
mm6406a5.htm?s_cid=mm6406a5_w
Ziv, A., Boulet, J. R., & Slap, G. B. (1999). Utilization of 
physician offices by adolescents in the United States. 
Pediatrics, 104, 35–42. doi:10.1542/peds.104.1.35
