 https://doi.org/10.1177/1363459318769465
Health
 
1 
–18
© The Author(s) 2018
Reprints and permissions: 
 
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/1363459318769465
journals.sagepub.com/home/hea
The daily digital practice  
as a form of self-care: Using 
photography for everyday  
well-being
Liz Brewster 
Lancaster University, UK
Andrew M Cox 
The University of Sheffield, UK
Abstract
Interest in the connection between involvement in digital communities and well-being 
has increased as these communities become more commonplace. Specific models of 
interaction that affect well-being have emerged; here, we examine one of those models, 
termed ‘digital daily practice’. Digital daily practices involve a commitment to doing one 
thing – exercise, photography and writing – every day and sharing it online. Participants 
in these practices agree that they provide an unexpected benefit of improving well-
being. This article makes an in-depth examination of one digital daily practice, photo-
a-day, using a practice theory framework to understand the affordances it offers for 
well-being. We engage with the literature on well-being and self-care, critiquing its 
presentation of well-being as an individual trait. We present data from an ethnographic 
study including interviews and observations to highlight how photo-a-day as a practice 
functions as self-care and how communities are formed around it. Photo-a-day is not 
a simple and uncomplicated practice; rather it is the complex affordances and variance 
within the practice that relate it to well-being. We conclude that this practice has multi-
faceted benefits for improving well-being.
Keywords
creativity, online community, photography, self-care, well-being
Corresponding author:
Liz Brewster, Lancaster Medical School, Faculty of Health & Medicine, Furness College, Lancaster 
University, Lancaster LA1 4YG, UK. 
Email: e.brewster@lancaster.ac.uk
769465 HEA0010.1177/1363459318769465HealthBrewster and Cox
research-article2018
Article
 2 
Health 00(0)
Background
Digital daily practices, such as sharing a photo online every day for a year, are an 
increasingly familiar Internet phenomenon. These practices involve conducting a task 
or activity on a daily basis, and sharing it online with a community who are doing the 
same. Digital daily practices are innovative social networking movements, connect-
ing interaction online with changes in real world behaviour. Various different activi-
ties can be adopted and built into a ‘daily digital’ pattern; examples include exercise 
(yoga or running), drawing, writing or taking a photograph. The commitment can be 
short-term (a monthly challenge, for example, National Novel Writing Month 
(NaNoRiMo), in which people aim to write 50,000 words of a novel in a month), 
medium-term (a year-long project, for example, a 365 photo project) or long-term 
(continuing indefinitely). On the surface, these practices present a simple formula for 
making a positive change and getting into the habit of doing something new. However, 
when people participate in them, the practices are experienced as more complex and 
contain unexpected challenges and benefits. One benefit frequently discussed by par-
ticipants is that of improved well-being.
The overt aim of such practices is typically not to improve well-being, but those 
participating report that involvement does have this effect. In this way, digital daily 
practices operate outside a medico-cultural paradigm, but their effects can still be 
understood within a context of health behaviour change (Broom et al., 2012). Like 
many health behaviour change interventions, the public commitment to involvement 
– in this case sharing on the Internet – is integral to this practice (Holman et al., 2017). 
For many people, making oneself accountable through a public commitment is central 
to what makes it a shared experience. The pledge to do something on a daily basis is 
also critical to establishing a new way of doing, thinking or being. The aim is to make 
a positive change: to establish a new exercise routine, make time to write that novel 
and to be creative more often. However, as established in the literature on health 
behaviour change, making a sustained and meaningful change to thought and action is 
not a simple task (Cohn and Lynch, 2017). Viewing it as such ignores the complex 
relationships between practices, in which practices are deeply embedded in a wider 
nexus of other practices (Shove et al., 2012).
Using photo-a-day as an exemplar, the purpose of this article is to explore how people 
use a digital daily practice to enhance their well-being. Here the commitment is appar-
ently simple: to take one photograph every day and to post it online. However, unpacking 
this practice and examining the affordances it offers to those who participate in it will 
reveal that it is complex and versatile. The complexity of choices (of photo theme, tex-
tual annotation and how the practice is carried through as a routine) means that photo-a-
day is characterised by wide variation. Much research has been done on photography 
blogs and social networking, and photo-a-day aligns to some previously established 
ideas around connectivity and communication when sharing images online (Van Dijck, 
2013; Hand, 2012). What makes photo-a-day different is some of the common factors it 
shares with other daily digital practices, including their effect on well-being. The public 
commitment to sharing one photograph provides an opportunity for daily interaction. 
Taking a photograph links with other offline activities, such as walking and observing, 
 Brewster and Cox 
3
that encourage a mindful engagement with the world. As this article will show, those who 
participate in photo-a-day identify a connection with improved well-being linked to this 
mindfulness. Self-care, community interaction and the potential for reminiscence were 
components of the practice that improved well-being. Photo-a-day practices have previ-
ously been examined as a form of reflection (Piper-Wright, 2013) and learning (Barton, 
2012), but the relationship with well-being has not been fully theorised.
The article presents data drawn from an ethnographic study, which used online obser-
vations and interviews to investigate how people practised photo-a-day and threaded it 
through their daily routines. We take a practice theory approach to examine what consti-
tutes photo-a-day, its emergence, relation to other practices and embedding in daily life. 
In doing so, we consider notions of self-care and engage with current debates which 
consider the nature of well-being. We move away from top-down impositions of a narra-
tive of self-improvement and towards a conceptualisation of living well, or a self-con-
structed model of well-being. Our interest in photo-a-day is as a socio-cultural practice, 
not a psychological intervention, and while we draw on some of the literature around 
positive psychology, this is not central to our approach.
We chose photo-a-day practices as they are well-established and exhibit sustainabil-
ity. While many participants in the research study began with something akin to a 365 
project, taking one photograph every day for a year, there are examples of people taking 
and sharing a photograph every day for over 10 years. Blipfoto, a key photo-a-day site, 
has been running for over a decade and has around 4000 active users. The dedicated 
website 365project.org claims to have more than 160,000 members, and Instagram has 
over 1.5 million photos tagged #365 and #365project. These figures show that this is a 
popular social phenomena. More broadly, looking at other daily digital practices, over 
480,000 were involved in NaNoRiMo in 2015, and 30 day yoga challenges on YouTube 
attract over 2 million views.
Conceptualising well-being
Well-being is a multi-faceted term, which has been described as elusive to define and 
‘undeniably complex’ (Dodge et al., 2012: 229). Often conflated with other concepts 
such as life satisfaction, happiness or resilience, there are many models which try to 
outline what affects an individual’s well-being (Dolan et al., 2008; Graham, 2011). These 
models examine what is required to have good well-being, often including characteris-
tics like engagement, meaning, relationships and accomplishments as well as relevant 
skills and capabilities (Nussbaum, 2005; Seligman, 2011; Seligman and Csikszentmihalyi, 
2000). However, one shortcoming of these models is their location of the capacity for 
well-being solely in the individual. Cieslik (2017) refers to this as ‘fail[ing] to capture 
the relational nature of well-being and how often it emerges collectively, rooted in differ-
ent domains in life as well as through our biographies’ (pp. 67–68). Well-being is thus 
not a universal concept that can be quantitatively measured; it is experienced in relation 
to others and is not a static concept, in that it can change over time (Blanchflower and 
Oswald, 2008).
For the purposes of this article, we take a broad definition of well-being. We are not 
concerned with making a categorical statement of what well-being ‘is’. Instead we use 
 4 
Health 00(0)
the term as a conceptual tool that highlights what is understood by the individual (their 
account of well-being) in relation to their social context, experiences and functioning. By 
using well-being as a concept, we are trying to move away from an understanding of 
mental health within a medical model and towards ideas of everyday well-being. 
Avoiding a medicalising discourse was important to our use of the term. Within the 
research, we did not want to define the concept for participants, instead asking for their 
own understanding of the term and then locating this within our knowledge of the dis-
courses available to discuss well-being, including a medico-cultural paradigm. Building 
on research that examines experiences and interactions over time to reflect on levels of 
well-being (Bell et al., 2015), we similarly followed people and their photo-a-day prac-
tices to understand their relationship with well-being.
Taking a broad definition of well-being with relational and social concerns at its cen-
tre also allows for a critique of its uses in wider discourses. The tension between personal 
empowerment to affect well-being and the accompanying responsibility placed on the 
individual is reflected in the literature on health consumership (Harris et al., 2010) and 
fundamentally sits at the heart of debates around subjective experiences, agency and 
structure (Blackman et al., 2008). The co-option of individualised accounts of well-being 
by political agendas has led to fierce criticisms of well-being and related concepts like 
resilience. Our recognition that these terms have been ‘colonised by particular dis-
courses’ (DeVerteuil and Golubchikov, 2016: 145) – in particular, the discourse of neo-
liberalism – allows for their use in a more holistic way, moving beyond economic and 
psychological conceptualisations and towards a social understanding of well-being, 
linked to the politics and ethics of care. In maintaining an awareness that perceptions of 
well-being occur within a social milieu and context in which actors both draw on and 
reproduce social structures, we shift from an account in which ‘attitudes, behaviours and 
choices’ are replaced by the ‘habitual dimensions of interaction shaped by culture’ 
(Holman et al., 2017: 5). An acceptance that this cannot be depoliticised is helpful in 
framing our position here.
Models of self-care
Within the health sector, self-care is typically associated with the self-management of 
long-term physical health or mental health conditions. There are two main framings of 
self-care: the first views self-care positively around a less paternalistic agenda that 
empowers patients (e.g. Barlow et al., 2002) and the second sees it more negatively as a 
potential replacement for service provision and a negation of responsibility for care (see 
Cullen, 2005; Fox and Ward, 2006; Rimke, 2000). More recently, self-care has been 
popularly adopted as a term to describe non-medical activities conducted with an aware-
ness that to be empowered to act (and in particular, to activism) requires a level of inner 
resolve or resilience. Drawing again on Broom et al.’s (2012) construction of a medico-
cultural paradigm, action is shaped by framing these techniques as an essential element 
of good mental health and well-being. This framing places self-care closer to the first 
anti-paternalistic discourse but resists a fully medicalised narrative and locates it within 
a paradigm of daily living. In this way, as will be shown in the results, photo-a-day per-
formed as self-care for participants.
 Brewster and Cox 
5
Using practice theory to understand photo-a-day
Pink et al. (2016) highlight the challenges of researching practices which contain ele-
ments of experiences, relationships and social worlds, all which are not tangible but are 
integral to interpreting the practice. One aim of practice theory is to look at processes and 
interactions that exist in everyday human life and to consider how they interrelate. This 
needs to be achieved with an awareness that individuals act within established teleo-
affective structures and within a social unit of inquiry that is beyond the individual 
(Spaargaren et al., 2016). Practice theory centres on its use of a flat ontology and confla-
tion of human and non-human actors, in common with Actor-Network Theory (ANT) 
and post-ANT complexity theory. Shove et al. (2012) identify three component parts of 
a practice: meanings, competences and materials. Meanings are the aspirations and ideas 
around a practice; competencies are the skills and knowhow required to achieve it, 
including what Reckwitz (2014) terms as ‘background knowledge’ and materials are the 
physical objects that are needed to do it (Shove et al., 2012: 14). Here we use ‘meanings’ 
as per Shove et al.’s (2012) interpretation but also as a shorthand for a broader practice 
theory–led conceptualisation of common understandings. The meanings that people 
ascribe to elements of their practice are an amalgamation of their bodily and mental acts, 
understood within socially available discourses of what it is to do or say. These meanings 
are not always reflexive or rational and are always materially mediated (Schatzki et al., 
2000). Practice theory’s focus on configurations, or assemblages, provides a useful tool 
to look at the interlinked ‘bundles’ of activities and helps to explain the rhythm of prac-
tices – the ebb and flow of their use – which is particularly relevant for digital daily 
practices. Practice theory also encourages a focus on the emergence and persistence of 
practices, enabling consideration of how people were recruited to them, and how they 
maintain them and integrate them into their everyday life (Spaargaren et al., 2016).
Methods
Based on our use of practice theory as a theoretical framework, we took an ethnographic 
approach to data collection. Interviews were used to elicit many aspects of practices, 
especially when rooted in discussion of details of processes. Observation captured the 
detail of what people do and often forget to mention or see as too trivial to talk about and 
placed the practice as the central unit of analysis rather than the individual. Descriptive 
statistics of interactions and subjects were collected to analyse how each individual pho-
tograph had a role to play within the longitudinal photo-a-day practice. These methods 
of data collection produced a robust account of what participants did and how they expe-
rienced it. Without the observations, the interview data collected would not have given 
as much of a rich picture of how participants used photo-a-day within their lives. Taking 
this methodological approach helped to draw attention to how the practice had become 
ordinary, everyday activity for participants.
Recruitment
Participants were recruited via an open invitation shared on social media, including via 
the ‘friends of Blipfoto’ Facebook page with over 6000 followers. A total of 33 people 
 6 
Health 00(0)
responded via social media or email. Three potential participants were excluded because 
they were not currently engaged in the practice. All others were provided with further 
information about the research. The first eight respondents to provide written informed 
consent were selected as a convenience sample. Review of the gender, age and website 
use showed that those selected to participate provided a fair representation of those who 
had initially responded to the call to participate (Table 1). Two participants disclosed a 
mental health diagnosis in initial recruitment, but this was not a criterion for inclusion or 
exclusion in the study.
Ethical procedures
A University Research Ethics Committee gave ethical approval for the research. For 
ethical reasons, the participants were asked to include details about their involvement 
in the research project on their profile or in comments online, giving those who had 
not consented an opportunity to ask questions or opt out of being a part of the obser-
vation. Identifiable details about other photo-a-day users who had not consented were 
not recorded, though regular patterns of interactions with consenting participants 
were observed.
Data collection and analysis
Participants were shadowed online by an observer for 2 months (within the period of 
October 2016–February 2017), who recorded what photographs they took, what text was 
added and how they interacted with others on the photo-a-day site. Observations were 
conducted weekly, and an observation framework was used to highlight areas of interest. 
The two observers had fortnightly analytical debriefs, in which experiences were com-
pared and ‘sensitising concepts’ (Charmaz, 2006) were added to future observations. At 
the end of the 2-month period, the observer who had not been shadowing a participant 
conducted a further overview observation of the previous 2 months (a ‘counter-observa-
tion’ – see Figure 1) to triangulate perspectives and provide an element of inter-observer 
reliability (Gobo, 2008; Hammersley and Atkinson, 2007). All observation field-notes 
and debriefs were audio-recorded and transcribed.
Table 1. Participant characteristics.
Participant
Gender
Approx. age
Geographic location
Platform
Length of project
Participant 1
Male
20
Wales
Instagram
>6 
years
Participant 2
Male
50
England
Blipfoto
>2 
years
Participant 3
Male
40
England
Flickr
1 
year
Participant 4
Female
60
England
Blipfoto
>8 
years
Participant 5
Female
50
Scotland
Blipfoto
>7 
years
Participant 6
Female
50
United Kingdom (other)
Blipfoto
>2 
years
Participant 7
Male
40
Scotland
Blipfoto
>6 
years
Participant 8
Male
50
Switzerland
Blipfoto
>2 
years
 Brewster and Cox 
7
Figure 1. Typical observation timeline pattern for each participant.
 8 
Health 00(0)
At the end of the observation period, all eight participants consented to a semi-struc-
tured telephone interview that focussed on the meaning of their photo-a-day practice and 
experiences of conducting it. All interviews were audio-recorded and fully transcribed. 
Interview questions reviewed everyday activity in practice with participants. Stanczak 
(2007) emphasises how this shifts the locus of meaning away from the subject of the 
photograph for the observer, which could be seen as empirically objective, towards a 
recognition that a photograph does not just have one meaning but instead should be seen 
as a tool to tell multiple narratives.
Data analysis was based on the constant comparative method (Charmaz, 2006). Using 
the ethnographic observations and interview data, initial open codes were generated with 
close attention paid to the aim to keep the practice as a unit of analysis. These initial 
codes were then organised into thematic categories, which provided a framework for 
processing all data using QSR NVivo 10 software. Key thematic categories included 
purposes/functions of the photograph, community activity, relationship with daily rou-
tine and connection with other practices. Both observers contributed to the analysis in 
audio-recorded debriefs, in which analytical concepts were discussed, and these debriefs 
were used as a further source of data. In drawing together the analysis, thematic catego-
ries were then further developed using a structure of materials, competencies and mean-
ings to highlight how photo-a-day constituted a practice in relation to other practices 
observed in the ethnography and described by the participants in interview.
Results
Materials, competencies and meanings for photo-a-day
If the aim of practice theory is to focus on the emergence and persistence of practices, 
examining how they are integrated into everyday life, then photo-a-day presents a par-
ticularly interesting subject for examination. Many people who conduct the practice start 
out doing a defined 365 project – one photo per day for a year. Sometimes, the availabil-
ity of materials (wanting to use a new digital camera) or a desire to gain new competen-
cies (to learn to take better photographs) opened up this practice as a possibility. However, 
it was the meaning afforded to these practices and their linkage to other practices (leav-
ing the house, mindfulness and community interaction) that enabled the persistence of 
the practice and was seen to have an impact on well-being.
In photo-a-day practices, the material structures that need to be in place are: the device 
used to take the photograph (camera, tablet, camera phone, etc.); the website used to host the 
photographs, which also provides affordances to write about the photograph and interact 
with other photographs and the referent of the photograph itself – the subject, object or signi-
fier that the person is representing in the photograph. Although these structures needed to be 
in place, participants used them flexibly, some taking a photograph and writing a long, 
directly connected text and others writing minimal text or leaving the connection between 
the text and image implied. The competences required are the ability to take photographs, to 
upload them to the site, to write about and share them and to engage with others who partici-
pate in the practice. The meanings, as defined above, are multiple, varied and integrated into 
other practices. These meanings are, it can be argued, what sustained the practice.
 Brewster and Cox 
9
Research participants could identify an initial aim of taking part in photo-a-day, which 
had developed as they had continued with the practice. These motivations were quite 
diverse and not typically initially connected with improving well-being. For some par-
ticipants a change in life circumstances, such as going to university, taking time out from 
work or retirement, prompted a desire to document their days:
I […] stopped working, not retiring, but I took time out. During this time out, I thought, ‘OK, 
how shall I record my days; I want to be much more mindful about how I spend my time now’. 
Because I didn’t have the company, the corporate structure anymore, for a certain period, and 
that’s why I started basically doing it. (Participant 08)
This quote demonstrates one of the ways that photo-a-day is different to other 
photoblogs or projects: it implies that photo-a-day meets an identified need for 
structure. Changes in personal circumstances that are seen within the literature to 
potentially have a negative impact on well-being, such as increasing loneliness or 
isolation, were seen to be mitigated by involvement in the practice and its associ-
ated community.
Some participants spoke about how the practice unexpectedly became integrated into 
daily life. In an interview with participant 07, the internalisation of this practice became 
very clear as the interviewer referred to the photo project:
It’s funny, because you talk about it as ‘the project’ … To think of it in the terms that it has 
become such an engrained part of what I do every day that I don’t even think of it as being, ‘Oh, 
that’s my Blip project’; it’s something more fundamental. (Participant 07)
The description of photo-a-day as ‘something more fundamental’ demonstrates that 
the affordances of the practice had extended beyond the initially articulated meanings. 
The sustainability of a practice, according to Shove et al. (2012), rests on its ability to 
provide ‘internal rewards’ for participants, have a symbolic anchoring or significance 
(i.e. it can be identified with a previously understood meaning or practice) and to be con-
nected to other practices. Looking at photo-a-day from the perspective of those undertak-
ing it shows that though the internal reward is often the taking of a ‘good’ photograph, it 
is anchored in concepts like keeping a diary or record. Participants identified walking 
and getting outside, mindfulness, seeking different experiences, reflecting on daily life 
and community interaction as linked practices.
Photo-a-day as self-care
Photographs had meanings and functions within the practice that related to their compe-
tencies and material structures, demonstrating the complex assemblage of the practice. 
This complexity was also where benefits for well-being were identified by participants. 
Participant 03 identified his use of photography as a form of self-care:
Photography has been quite good for me over the years because I think it forces me to look at 
the world again. And also there’s a postural thing. If you’re only looking down, when you’re 
depressed and hunched over, it encourages you to look up or at least squat down and look at 
 10 
Health 00(0)
something different and to stop and smell the flowers … So I find it to be a very versatile self-
care technique. (Participant 03)
This embodied activity, mediated by the camera, helped the participant to develop an 
account of the practice having a positive effect on well-being. Other participants 
expressed similar sentiments. They presented diverse practices within photo-a-day that 
went beyond the capturing of an image:
It’s really good to be able to take that five minutes every day to do something slightly creative, 
which I enjoy doing and I think is good for well-being. It’s positive in that it gives me something 
to look for. Like I was saying earlier, with looking for novel experiences. I think that’s very 
good for someone’s well-being. So there’s a lot that does contribute to it. (Participant 01)
Participating in the practice was renewing and refreshing. Taking a moment to be 
mindful and looking for something different or unusual in the day were seen as positive 
well-being benefits of the practice:
[My job] was a very highly stressful role … Oh, God. There were some days when I’d almost 
not stopped to breathe, you know what I mean … And just the thought: oh wait a moment, no, 
I’ll stop and take a photograph of this insect sitting on my computer or something. Just taking 
a moment is very salutary I think. (Participant 05)
It’s a starting point that you say, ‘OK, let’s be mindful of what I’m doing and what is happening’. 
What it does to you then is what I’ve noticed, you develop curiosity. You are much more aware 
of what you do and why you do it, because in the evening, you are telling the others what 
you’ve done, why you’ve done it, somehow. (Participant 08)
This approach, mediated by the photo-a-day framework, affected other practices. As 
part of the observation data, each photograph was classified according to subject and 
location. Many photographs were taken outside; for example, for participant 07, 76% 
photographs were exterior, often on a local beach or seafront. The idea that the natural 
environment has ‘salutogenic’ or health-giving benefits is widely discussed in the litera-
ture on therapeutic landscapes (Bell et al., 2015; Gesler, 2005). Going beyond this idea 
of therapeutic landscapes, Bell et al. (2015) usefully talk about therapeutic experiences. 
The task of conducting photo-a-day led people to take more exercise (e.g. going for a 
walk to get a photograph), engage with their environment (natural and urban) and gave a 
sense of purpose, competence and achievement:
It encourages me out of the house sometimes when I could just sit on my backside with a 
cup of tea. I’ll think maybe I’ll take a walk down on to the seafront and before I know it 
I’m two miles along the coast. And that could be something that I wouldn’t do if I hadn’t 
an object. When I go out for a walk I like to have an object in mind and I’ve always got the 
camera. It’s like having a dog, you know, you don’t look odd if you’ve got a camera or a 
dog. (Participant 04)
Having the material object of the camera as a justification for seeking well-being–
promoting activities was a positive aspect of the practice. Mindfulness and engagement 
 Brewster and Cox 
11
with the world could be seen in participants’ photographs and the text around them as 
well as their narratives about the images.
Photo-a-day as community practice
For many participants, this form of self-care was not an individualistic pursuit. A com-
munity of mutuality and support formed around this daily contact positioned around 
photography. For example, participant 02 spoke about finding support through sharing 
his photo narrative during his wife’s illness and recovery. Participant 07 also spoke about 
how the practice of sharing photographs and talking through his grief was helpful fol-
lowing his mother’s death a few years earlier. This connection between a creative prac-
tice and an online community is central to photo-a-day and builds on Crawford et al.’s 
(2013) concept of mutual recovery.
Much has been written about user-generated content, social networking sites and 
online communities, and drawing on this theoretical basis underpins understanding here 
(Dijck, 2013; Thumin, 2012). Community can be seen as a form of locality; a neighbour-
hood where people with similar mindsets come together, using the proximity of shared 
interests rather than the proximity of location as the basis. The notion of community was 
relevant for all participants, but its meaning was diverse. Within concepts of self-care 
and well-being, participants discussed how online contact helped them to manage loneli-
ness and connect with established offline networks (family and friends) and also to meet 
new people with shared interests. The encouragement to connect on a daily basis, pro-
vided by the structure of photo-a-day, was about taking a moment for the self, as described 
above, but also sharing this moment with others. Several participants had taken early 
retirement and found that the contact established via photo-a-day replaced some of the 
daily office chatter that they missed:
There’s the banter in the workshop or the office or the place where you work. There’s 
dealing with different people’s days… if somebody has had a bad day they talk about it. You 
have that experience of sharing your day with other people and hearing other people’s news. 
When you’re not doing that anymore either you’re retired or you’re working in a solitary 
environment then you don’t have that experience. And perhaps [photo-a-day] offers that … 
Because I’m having conversations with people that I would perhaps have had in the 
workplace. (Participant 02)
This view was also echoed in participant 04’s perspective on her interactions with 
other people:
If it was just a photo site putting a picture up and a title I would probably have dropped out 
within a month or two. But it was the conversations. That’s when you realised that it was 
something different and that was possibly at least as important as the photograph that you were 
taking. It could be a rubbish photograph but if somebody commented on it, it made it worthwhile. 
(Participant 04)
Within the practice, an idea of mutuality is included: the practice did not just depend 
on taking your own photograph or on commenting on other people’s photographs, it was 
 12 
Health 00(0)
usually a reciprocal practice when it was seen to have an impact on well-being. However, 
participant 06 also discussed the negative impact this need for reciprocity had had on her 
well-being at one point in the past:
At one point it became a real focus for me … You think I want to get so many likes and then 
you realise ‘actually calm down. It’s just blip[foto]. It’s just a bit of fun’. […] And I found it 
really hard actually, with all the commenting on other people’s journals. Because that’s a big 
part of it as well and it can take up an awful lot of time to look at everybody’s things every day. 
So I didn’t want that to be my focus all the time. (Participant 06)
Being open and sharing photographs and narratives was integral to photo-a-day for 
many of the participants, and this contributed to its persistence over time. Building a 
genuine connection with other people required honesty and what participants perceived 
to be an authentic self-presentation. This openness was not always intimate. Meanings 
could be hidden, or understood only by the photographer and not visible to the audience, 
within the pictures or the text around them, and a beautiful photograph could represent a 
terrible day. But the invitation to share someone else’s experience was a crucial draw in 
embedding the practice and its relationship to well-being.
Community did not hold the same meaning or relevance for all participants, though 
the element of public commitment always seemed to be central. Participant 01 discussed 
how he had started out doing a 365 project for himself, storing the photographs but only 
sharing some of them for many years, then decided that he would move his photographs 
into an open online site and use the practice to stay in touch with family and friends. 
During the 2 months we observed his photographs, 282 different Instagram users had 
interactions (likes or comments) with participant 01’s photographs. Some of this interac-
tion, it was confirmed in interview, was with family and friends who used photo-a-day as 
a method of keeping in touch.
Another participant, 03, used his photo-a-day practice differently again: he did not 
write about his photographs and gave each a number not a title. When he described his 
practice, it centred on being a personal challenge but it was still important to make this 
commitment public and to share photographs. Within his practice, he did also sometimes 
share a photograph with a broader audience, adding it to a popular Flickr daily group:
But that was one of the photos which was genuinely I think – not a beautiful photo – I would 
tell you I consider all of these to be snaps. I took them with a phone. But that was one where 
actually people will enjoy that. People will take something from that. People will think, you 
know, I should get my camera out and take another picture today. So for me that was one that I 
think really I wanted to share. (Participant 03)
This sharing was a form of co-creating well-being in an online community setting. 
For most participants, the community was formed via a hybrid of photograph and text, 
and (unlike participant 03) the interactions played a central role in establishing the prac-
tice as a persistent one:
Connections with other people and sharing things, and so being able to put things out there and 
then get a response back. And it can be some surprising people, as well, it’s almost like having 
 Brewster and Cox 
13
a personal conversation but with a lot of people at once, that sounds a bit odd. I’ve found you 
can be saying these things and then different people will react back to them. And yeah, it gives 
a sense of connection, which helps well-being. (Participant 07)
In this way, community engagement was formed via the interrelated elements of the 
practice, and sometimes the text was unrelated to the photograph and generated conver-
sation. Both participant 02 and participant 07 sometimes talked about politics and wider 
issues that were unrelated or loosely related to the photograph itself. For participant 05, 
who broke her arm during the observation period, the photographs needed to be explained 
using the text, and the reaction from the community rested on their ability to follow this 
narrative and tolerate a series of what participant 05 called ‘boring pictures’ while her 
activity was limited.
Rather than the photographs standing alone, the text was used to provide personal 
narratives, reminiscences and explanations of repeated images (taken of the same place 
or item at different times of the year) that demonstrated why the photograph had been 
chosen. Often, as participant 04 implies above, the photograph did not have to be ‘techni-
cally excellent’ to be interesting or to provoke conversation. However, technical excel-
lence was still a goal for some participants in the research. Participant 06, for example, 
spoke about the enjoyment she got from this aspect of her photography and how being 
on the ‘popular’ page of Blipfoto (which provided access to photographs that had been 
‘most liked’ recently) provided recognition for the improvements that she had made. 
Looking back on photographs provided another aspect of the practice that could be used 
for well-being.
Photo-a-day as reminiscence and reflection
Back (2015) argues for the examination of everyday life and practices with a recognition 
of the temporality within life. His work on the seasonal rhythm of daily life resonates 
with this exploration of photo-a-day, as one of the key aspects is its temporality. The 
daily nature of the practice motivates continuation, but also provides an opportunity to 
look back over previous days.
Reflection in photo-a-day has been explored in part in Piper-Wright’s (2013) work. 
She examined how Blipfoto users used their photographs to document, examine and 
adopt a reflexive attitude towards themselves. Building on this understanding, we 
observe that participants in this research spoke about the connection between reflection 
and well-being. In an interview, participant 03 emphasised the complexity of this reflec-
tion. During the observation period, he had undergone a personal crisis and though he 
kept going with his photo-a-day practice, he found this tough. In discussion, he found 
that though looking back reminded him of this difficult time, it also helped him to reflect 
on change. He had survived the darkest days, and there were elements of light and colour 
in his photographs, giving moments of brightness:
As I reflect on this, it was probably an opportunity to perhaps add some colour to some of those 
days which were dark or to show that those days, many of them had good things in them. 
However bad I felt at the time they had something. Every day has got something … It’s to find 
the good thing in the day for me. (Participant 03)
 14 
Health 00(0)
Reminiscence could be a reminder of recent events, an opportunity to look back over 
the previous month or year or seen as a record for the more distant future; all were seen 
as having an effect on well-being. Participant 01 currently benefitted from looking back 
over his photographs, whereas for participant 08, the aim was a record for the future:
If I’m ever feeling down or something it’s nice to be able to scroll back and see good memories. 
You know, the photos I’ve taken will have a positive memory attached to it even if it’s something 
as simple as I had a really lovely half an hour for lunch sitting outside the [location] and was 
feeling really relaxed. (Participant 01)
I do it more for a time when I really will have forgotten about what I did and then it’s kind of 
new again. [Interviewer] So you can see yourself looking back over it in years to come? [08] 
Yes. I’m now at the age of 50 plus, so I probably have about 7,000 days to live, I want to be 
mindful about it. If you talk about 20 years or 25 years, it sounds a lot, but when you convert 
them to days, it becomes much more time-driven: you spend every day once, so it makes me 
mindful, and I know that at some point of time, I will get old, and then I want to look at it. 
(Participant 08)
These three meanings of photo-a-day – as self-care, community practice and reminis-
cence and reflection – connected it with well-being and demonstrated why it was embed-
ded as a practice.
Discussion
Photo-a-day presents an example of what Pink et al. (2016) refers to as ‘accompaniment’ 
or ‘co-presence’; the way that an object (in this case, a camera) is available to a person 
at all times and affects their experience of everyday life. The concept frames the idea of 
digital devices or objects being ubiquitous or permanently present. We take this further 
to suggest that in this case, it is not only the digital technology that accompanies but the 
ethos of the practice of photo-a-day itself. With an aim to take one photograph per day, 
the practice is co-present with the person as they go about their daily routine. Photo-a-
day practices vary, showing how people used the fixed framework of photo-a-day in 
different ways to address their needs. Gauntlett (2011) positioned the tools that are avail-
able to people to be creative (such as a camera) within a context in which they do not 
have a fixed or predetermined meaning; instead they are an open opportunity.
Photo-a-day practices perform interlinked online functions enabling social network-
ing and sharing user-generated content (Van Dijck, 2013). Photo-a-day’s primary pur-
pose is to generate user content in the form of photographs, but the shape of the practice 
enables social networking and connects it, for participants, to the experience of improved 
well-being. Within the literature on online communities, much has been written on the 
role of identity and kinship. Chayko (2002) refers to these ideas of online community as 
sociomental bonds; those friendships that are not located in real life but provide a sense 
of connection across distance and time, creating community. Self-presentation and reci-
procity are critical concepts here, with an expectation that participants had to present 
their photographs to enable them to play an active part in others’ lives (Gauntlett, 2011; 
Thumin, 2012).
 Brewster and Cox 
15
Managing the perceived demands of the community was important to ensure a 
positive, not negative, impact on well-being. However for most of the participants, 
alliances or social bonds were formed beyond the photographs; photographs were 
‘mediated dialogues’ which developed the community (Gómez Cruz and Ardèvol, 
2013).
Connecting these ideas of online community with well-being moves the discussion of 
practice away from an individualised context of self-care and towards a notion of a 
dynamic and mutual practice. This understanding of self-care practices draws on similar 
arguments to DeVerteuil and Golubchikov’s (2016) reframing of resilience as an active, 
dynamic and sustaining awareness, rather than as static and individual. Photo-a-day can 
be seen to engage with this in three ways. First, it creates a community space, or ‘com-
mons’, in which reciprocity and empathy are key. In itself, the posting of photographs 
becomes a community and also a resource for the community to draw on. Second, it 
encourages social relationships and builds relational capacity for well-being. Rather than 
being an individualistic process, there is the potential for well-being to be enhanced col-
lectively in an empathetic context. And third, it is spatial, in that it encourages explora-
tion of space and engagement with the ‘real world’ in its construction. Photographs need 
a subject, and for many of the participants in this research, that subject was to be found 
in a wider context of community and nature.
For some participants, this was reflected in the community that formed around these 
photographs – the office chatter and everyday interaction connected with them. For oth-
ers, it was much more about the challenge to the self and the discipline of taking a pho-
tograph every day. Highlighting these differing aspects demonstrates the complexity of 
the practice, with elements that people assemble in a way that is useful to them. However, 
this impact on well-being was not universally positive, with some participants some-
times discussing feeling overwhelmed by the community.
One of Cieslik’s (2017: 44) critiques of positive psychology, drawing on Furedi 
(2004), Davies (2015) and other critics of a ‘therapy culture’, is that it offers ‘superficial 
tips that fail to support genuine well-being’. Using our earlier discussion of self-care, we 
should clarify that it is not our intention here to suggest that the daily digital practice – 
and in particular photo-a-day – should be positioned as one of these ‘superficial tips’. If 
the complexity of practices is ignored, there is a danger that their potential value as a 
practice is negated. Here, participants self-identified the rich diversity of the practice that 
led them to consider it as self-care. While this demonstrates the value of everyday, small-
scale activities for this group, it is not to say that these activities are available and valu-
able to all as an ‘off-the-shelf’ intervention for health behaviour change.
Strengths and limitations
Using ethnographic observations supported by in-depth interviews allowed both under-
standing of practices and exploration of their meaning to participants. Though this article 
uses a small self-selected sample of participants, its findings are supported by a previous 
study with different participants (Cox and Brewster, 2018). However, it is only repre-
sentative of the experiences of participants who already identified with the idea that 
photo-a-day did have an impact on their well-being. Further research should explore 
 16 
Health 00(0)
‘failed’ projects, in which the practice was discontinued, to understand its meaning for 
others. There is also scope to examine the impact of other daily digital practices using a 
similar methodological approach.
Participants in this study talked about photo-a-day as empowering. Yet, we would 
need much more data about the context of these individuals’ lives to fully understand 
how their expectations around well-being are socially constructed and how this 
shaped their experience. There are questions to ask around the equity of access to 
photo-a-day as a practice that need further research. While the smartphone has 
brought the technical requirements of photo-a-day to many, there is a sense in which 
the cultural and temporal resources to use photography in such reflective ways do 
not seem to be accessible to all. There are also questions to ask around the way that 
the sites hosting photo-a-day use participants’ labour and data, though this was not 
something that troubled participants.
Examining the patterning of photo-a-day as a practice has enabled us to look at the 
influence that online communities can have in encouraging adherence to establishing a 
new behaviour. This may provide further insights into the design of new health behav-
iour change interventions. The flexibility of the model and the data provided here about 
how different users shape the practice for themselves rather than taking a ‘one-size-fits-
all’ approach enables consideration of personalised preventive health-related activity. In 
particular, as exercise is already established as a daily digital practice, health behaviour 
change interventions related to increasing physical activity may be informed by the find-
ings of this study.
Conclusion
We have positioned photo-a-day as a practice that supports improved well-being but do 
not mean this positioning to be read as a simplistic, mechanical intervention. Instead, we 
look at the practice within a revised schema for understanding well-being, in which 
small, person-led interventions may have a role to play in the preventive well-being 
agenda. Rather than saying that photo-a-day can be prescribed to improve well-being, by 
looking at it within the wider sphere of everyday life and via the lens of practice theory, 
we can think about the interlinked and complex nature of the practice. Its affect arises 
from the way people come to attach meaning to it and connect it to other practices. By 
definition, this is an active process of meaning making, in which a new conceptualisation 
of well-being emerges.
The well-being benefits associated with photo-a-day may be paralleled in other daily 
digital practices, suggesting that there is scope to consider transferable theoretical and 
practical outcomes of this research.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank all participants for their contributions.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship,and/
or publication of this article.
 Brewster and Cox 
17
Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research, authorship, and/
or publication of this article:This work was supported by a Lancaster University Early Career 
Internal Grant.
ORCID iDs
Liz Brewster 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3604-2897
Andrew M Cox 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2587-245X
References
Back L (2015) Why everyday life matters: Class, community and making life livable. Sociology 
49(5): 820–836.
Barlow J, Wright C, Sheasby J, et al. (2002) Self-management approaches for people with chronic 
conditions: A review. Patient Education and Counseling 48(2): 177–187.
Barton D (2012) Participation, deliberate learning and discourses of learning online. Language 
and Education 26(2): 139–150.
Bell SL, Phoenix C, Lovell R, et al. (2015) Seeking everyday wellbeing: The coast as a therapeutic 
landscape. Social Science & Medicine 142: 56–67.
Blackman L, Cromby J, Hook D, et al. (2008) Creating subjectivities. Subjectivity 22(1): 1–27.
Blanchflower DG and Oswald AJ (2008) Is well-being U-shaped over the life cycle? Social 
Science & Medicine 66(8): 1733–1749.
Broom A, Meurk C, Adams J, et al. (2012) My health, my responsibility? Complementary medi-
cine and self (health) care. Journal of Sociology 50(4): 515–530.
Charmaz K (2006) Constructing Grounded Theory: A Practical Guide through Qualitative 
Analysis. London: SAGE.
Chayko M (2002) Connecting: How We Form Social Bonds and Communities in the Internet Age. 
Albany, NY : State University of New York Press.
Cieslik M (2017) The Happiness Riddle and the Quest for a Good Life. Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan.
Cohn S and Lynch R (2017) Falling into a routine: From habits to situated practices. Sociology of 
Health & Illness 39(8): 1398–1411.
Cox AM and Brewster L (2018) Photo-a-day: A digital photographic practice and its impact on 
wellbeing. Photographies 11: 113–129.
Crawford P, Lewis L, Brown B, et al. (2013) Creative practice as mutual recovery in mental health. 
Mental Health Review Journal 18(2): 55–64.
Cullen R (2005) Empowering patients through health information literacy training. Health 
Education 54(4): 231–244.
Davies W (2015) The Happiness Industry: How the Government and Big Business Sold Us Well-
Being. Brooklyn, NY: Verso Books.
DeVerteuil G and Golubchikov O (2016) Can resilience be redeemed? Resilience as a metaphor 
for change, not against change. City 20(1): 143–151.
Dodge R, Daly A, Huyton J, et al. (2012) The challenge of defining wellbeing. International 
Journal of Wellbeing 2(3): 222–235.
Dolan P, Peasgood T and White M (2008) Do we really know what makes us happy? A review 
of the economic literature on the factors associated with subjective well-being. Journal of 
Economic Psychology 29(1): 94–122.
Fox NJ and Ward KJ (2006) Health identities: From expert patient to resisting consumer. Health 
10(4): 461–479.
 18 
Health 00(0)
Furedi F (2004) Therapy Culture: Cultivating Vulnerability in an Uncertain Age. London: 
Routledge.
Gauntlett D (2011) Making Is Connecting. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Gesler W (2005) Therapeutic landscapes: An evolving theme. Health & Place 11(4): 295–297.
Gobo G (2008) Doing Ethnography. Los Angeles, CA: SAGE.
Gómez Cruz E and Ardèvol E (2013) Some ethnographic notes on a Flickr group. Photographies 
6(1): 35–44.
Graham C (2011) The Pursuit of Happiness: An Economy of Well-Being. Washington, DC: 
Brookings Institution Press.
Hammersley M and Atkinson P (2007) Ethnography: Principles in Practice. 3rd ed. London: Routledge.
Hand M (2012) Ubiquitous Photography. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Harris R, Wathen CN and Wyatt S (2010) Configuring Health Consumers: Health Work and the 
Imperative of Personal Responsibility. Houndsmill: Palgrave Macmillan.
Holman D, Lynch R and Reeves A (2017) How do health behaviour interventions take account 
of social context? A literature trend and co-citation analysis. Health: An Interdisciplinary 
Journal for the Social Study of Health, Illness and Medicine. Epub ahead of print 23 March. 
DOI: 10.1177/1363459317695630.
Nussbaum MC (2005) Wellbeing, contracts and capabilities. In: Manderson L (ed.) Rethinking 
Wellbeing. Perth, WA, Australia: API Network, pp. 27–44.
Pink S, Horst HA, Postill J, et al. (2016) Digital Ethnography: Principles and Practice. London: SAGE.
Piper-Wright T (2013) That’s the story of my life…daily photography as reflexive practice. In: 
Miller R, Carson J and Wilkie T (eds) The Reflexive Photographer. Edinburgh: Museumsetc, 
pp. 214–251.
Reckwitz A (2014) Toward a theory of social practices a development in culturalist theorizing 
5(2): 243–263.
Rimke HM (2000) Governing citizens through self-help literature. Cultural Studies 14(1): 61–78.
Schatzki TR, Knorr-Cetina K and Von Savigny E (2000) The Practice Turn in Contemporary 
Theory. New York : Routledge.
Seligman MEP (2011) Flourish: A New Understanding of Happiness and Well-Being and How to 
Achieve Them. Boston, MA: Nicholas Brealey Publishing.
Seligman MEP and Csikszentmihalyi M (2000) Positive psychology: An introduction. American 
Psychologist 55: 5–14.
Shove E, Pantzar M and Watson MT (2012) The Dynamics of Social Practice: Everyday Life and 
How It Changes. London : SAGE.
Spaargaren G, Weenink D and Lamers M (eds) (2016) Practice Theory and Research: Exploring 
the Dynamics of Social Life. London: Routledge.
Stanczak GC (ed.) (2007) Visual Research Methods: Image, Society, and Representation. Los 
Angeles, CA: SAGE.
Thumin N (2012) Self-Representation and Digital Culture. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Van Dijck J (2013) The Culture of Connectivity: A Critical History of Social Media. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Author biographies
Liz Brewster is a lecturer at Lancaster Medical School, Lancaster University. Her research focusses 
on lived experiences of mental health and well-being and particularly on how creative activities 
such as reading may affect mental health.
Andrew M Cox is a senior lecturer at the Information School, University of Sheffield. He is a Director 
of Postgraduate Research for the School and is a coordinator of their Digital Societies Research Group. 
His research interests include the social impact of social media and online community.
