  
Antimicrobial stewardship across 47 South African hospitals: an 
implementation study 
Adrian J Brink, MDa, , Angeliki P Messina, BPharmb, Charles Feldman, DSCc, Guy A Richards, 
PhDc, Piet J Becker, PhDd, Debra A Goff, PhDe, Karri A Bauer, PhDe, Dilip Nathwani, MBChBf, 
Dena van den Bergh, PhDb, on behalf of the Netcare Antimicrobial Stewardship Study 
Alliance 
a Ampath National Laboratory Services, Milpark Hospital, Johannesburg, South Africa 
b Department of Quality Leadership, Netcare Hospitals, Johannesburg, South Africa 
c Faculty of Health Sciences, University of the Witwatersrand and Charlotte Maxeke Johannesburg Academic 
Hospital, Johannesburg, South Africa 
d Research Office, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Pretoria, Pretoria, South Africa 
e Department of Pharmacy, The Ohio State University, Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, OH, USA 
f Ninewells Hospital and Medical School, Dundee, Scotland, UK 
 
*Correspondence to: 
Dr Adrian J Brink, Ampath National Laboratory Services, Milpark Hospital, Parktown, 2193, Johannesburg, 
South Africa 
brinka@ampath.co.za 
 
Summary 
Background 
The available data on antimicrobial stewardship programmes in Africa are scarce. The aims 
of this study were to assess the implementation of an antimicrobial stewardship programme 
in a setting with limited infectious disease resources. 
Methods 
We implemented a pharmacist-driven, prospective audit and feedback strategy for 
antimicrobial stewardship on the basis of a range of improvement science and behavioural 
principles across a diverse group of urban and rural private hospitals in South Africa. The 
study had a pre-implementation phase, during which a survey of baseline stewardship 
activities was done. Thereafter, a stepwise implementation phase was initiated directed 
towards auditing process measures to reduce consumption of antibiotics (prolonged 
duration, multiple antibiotics, and redundant antibiotic coverage), followed by a post-
1
  
implementation phase once the model was embedded in each hospital. The effect on 
consumption was assessed with the WHO index of defined daily doses per 100 patient–days, 
and the primary outcome (change in antibiotic consumption between phases) was assessed 
with a linear mixed-effects regression model. 
Findings 
We implemented and assessed the antimicrobial stewardship programme between Oct 1, 
2009, and Sept 30, 2014. 116 662 patients receiving antibiotics at 47 hospitals during 104 
weeks of standardised measurement and feedback, were reviewed, with 7934 interventions 
by pharmacists recorded for the five targeted measures, suggesting that almost one in 15 
prescriptions required intervention. 3116 (39%) of 7934 pharmacist interventions were of 
an excessive duration. The antimicrobial stewardship programme led to a reduction in mean 
antibiotic defined daily doses per 100 patient–days from 101·38 (95% CI 93·05–109·72) in 
the pre-implementation phase to 83·04 (74·87–91·22) in the post-implementation phase 
(p<0·0001). 
Interpretation 
Health-care facilities with limited infectious diseases expertise can achieve substantial 
returns through pharmacist-led antimicrobial stewardship programmes and by focusing on 
basic interventions. 
Funding 
None. 
 
Introduction 
In September, 2015, the Center for Disease Dynamics, Economics & Policy published a 
report into the state of the world's antibiotics,1 citing evidence that the overall effectiveness 
of antibiotics has been decreasing globally and calling for strong antibiotic stewardship in its 
broadest sense—specifically the reduction of antibiotic overuse in human beings. A 
Cochrane meta-analysis2 confirmed that interventions to reduce excessive prescription of 
antibiotics to inpatients can reduce antimicrobial resistance and improve microbiological 
and clinical outcomes. However, few studies provide data about the key interventional 
components and the effectiveness of antimicrobial stewardship programmes in resource-
limited settings.2 ;  3 A global survey4 of stewardship activities revealed that only 14% of 
respondents in Africa and 53% in Asia had any form of antimicrobial stewardship 
programme in place.4 
Although many methods of improving prescribing practice have been studied, one of the 
core strategies is the use of prospective audits and feedback.2; 3; 5 ;  6 In this approach, 
investigators review current antimicrobial use and make recommendations with regard to 
appropriateness in terms of several predefined measurements, all of which can be 
2
  
implemented in health-care facilities irrespective of size.2; 3 ;  6 The most obtainable targets in 
low-resource settings are unknown. However, limitation of duration of antibiotic use and 
use of multiple concurrent antibiotics, including redundant coverage, might represent such 
targets.6; 7; 8 ;  9 
In South Africa, the main barriers to implementation of antimicrobial stewardship 
programmes in almost all public and private hospitals have been inadequate infectious 
diseases expertise and resources; additionally, in large hospital networks, the geographical 
distribution of these institutions has also hindered implementation. The aim of this study 
was to assess the reduction of overall antibiotic consumption across a diverse group of 47 
urban and rural hospitals in South Africa through the implementation of an antimicrobial 
stewardship strategy that uses existing resources. 
 
Methods 
Study design 
In this study, an antimicrobial stewardship programme was implemented in 47 private 
hospitals operated by Netcare (Johannesburg, South Africa) in seven of the nine South 
African provinces. The study had three phases. The first phase was the pre-implementation 
phase, done before formal introduction of the antimicrobial stewardship programme model, 
followed by an implementation phase and a post-implementation phase. 
Research in context 
Evidence before this study 
We searched PubMed and Google Scholar for reports published in English between inception and Sept 1, 2015, 
using the terms “antibiotic or antimicrobial stewardship”, “pharmacist or specialized pharmacists”, “audit and 
feedback“ AND “antibiotic or antimicrobial stewardship”, “resource limited”, “multicentre”, “sustainability”. 
We identified additional studies from the authors' personal reference lists and reference lists from articles that 
were retrieved, including two systematic reviews of 126 eligible interventions. We excluded studies that did 
not describe antibiotic stewardship interventions in inpatients, did not have complete key intervention and 
outcome components, involved surgical prophylaxis, or did not refer to pharmacists. A global survey of reports 
of antimicrobial stewardship programmes in hospitals in resource-limited circumstances revealed that data on 
efficacy is sparse and a systematic review published in 2014 revealed that few data were available on 
outcomes or on key interventional components. Notably, until 2013, no systematic evidence on sustainability 
or applicability on a wider scale was available. Additionally, the search revealed three other important facts for 
consideration regarding stewardship interventions. First, the impact of audit in conjunction with feedback to 
enable self-monitoring as a stewardship strategy—particularly when it includes both goals and action plans—is 
underestimated. This is supported by a Cochrane review. Second, of all the eligible antimicrobial stewardship 
programme studies included in the two systematic reviews referred to earlier, only Weinberg and colleagues 
reported the use of a quality improvement model, specifically an intervention to reduce infections in women 
undergoing caesarean section in Colombia. Finally, there is a need for alternative stewardship models that use 
available organisational infrastructure that is not necessarily dependent on or driven by clinical microbiology 
or infectious disease specialties. 
 
3
  
Added value of this study 
Our antimicrobial stewardship model, as shown by a sustained reduction (18·1%) in antibiotic consumption in 
the group as a whole, suggests that successful antimicrobial stewardship programmes can be implemented in 
a range of geographical and socioeconomic settings by health-care workers without infectious diseases 
training; that skills beyond infectious diseases are crucial in initiating and maintaining an antimicrobial 
stewardship programme; that by applying the so-called Pareto principle or Law of the Vital Few (derived from 
economic theory and implying that 80% of outcomes result from only 20% of potential causes) to antimicrobial 
stewardship programmes and thus focusing initially on a vital few interventions such as excessive antibiotic 
duration (>7 or >14 days) or prescription of antibiotics with overlapping or duplicate spectra, organisations can 
yield substantial returns with the least effort; and that an alternative model for stewardship, dependent on 
local context and resources, can become embedded within existing systems, a key goal that is often not 
achieved by many other programmes. 
Implications 
The implications of the present evidence for antimicrobial stewardship programmes in resource-constrained 
settings are that to accelerate change the incorporation of contemporary improvement methods and 
behaviour change principles into a model might represent a core paradigm in which to practise stewardship. In 
this scenario, we should not underestimate the role of the non-infectious diseases pharmacist in promoting 
interdisciplinary engagement in stewardship programmes in hospitals or across health systems. 
The private hospitals had 9424 registered beds, which included 1601 intensive care and 
high-care beds. By contrast with the 64 pharmacists employed at the hospitals, the 4295 
doctors are not their direct employees and are self-employed. The study covered a 5-year 
period between Oct 1, 2009, and Oct 1, 2014. 
The model was approved by the executive management and ethical approval was obtained 
from Pharma-ethics, Johannesburg (registration number 150711996). 
Antimicrobial stewardship model 
The antimicrobial stewardship programme was implemented using an adaptation of the 
Institute for Healthcare Improvement Model10 and the Breakthrough Series Collaborative11 
under the guidance of the Netcare quality improvement director (figure 1). Briefly, initial 
training sessions detailing the five process measures that would be audited by the 
pharmacists (panel 1) were provided through face-to-face regional learning sessions with 
doctors; hospital, pharmacy, and nursing managers; and clinical staff, including infection 
prevention practitioners from each of the hospitals (learning session 1). Thereafter, in 
accordance with the Breakthrough Series model, each pharmacist was required to do an 
implementation process in their hospital by auditing the five measures in inpatients on 
antibiotics, either in a stepwise manner or all at once. 
4
  
 
Figure 1. Netcare antimicrobial stewardship Breakthrough Series Collaborative model for group-wide 
implementation and monitoring process (47 hospitals) 
*Provide initial training for the five process measures through regional workshops. †Quality 
improvement director and project manager host shared learning sessions with participating 
institutions every 6–8 weeks initially and then as required, once the model is entrenched, either via 
national teleconferencing with pharmacists and pharmacy managers or via regional or hospital 
workshops (pending the need for on-site assistance). ‡Pharmacists audit the process measures either 
in a stepwise manner or by adopting all five at once; similarly implementation could occur in the 
hospital as a whole or initially in intensive care and high-care units, followed by wards pending time 
and resources. §Pharmacists record interventions on a standardised template every week and submit 
to a project manager every month. ¶Project manager provides intensive support via email, telephone 
consultations, regional workshops, and face-to-face site visits, if needed. 
 
Panel 1. Definition of the process measures* 
Cultures not done before commencement of empirical antibiotics 
Patients started on empirical antibiotics and no cultures done within 48 h before or on initiation of treatment. 
More than 7 days of antibiotic treatment 
Prolonged duration of treatment (continued for 8–14 days [inclusive])—ie, antibiotic treatment duration 
exceeded the length deemed appropriate for effective treatment of that particular infection according to local 
guidelines. 
 
5
  
 
More than 14 days of antibiotic treatment 
Prolonged duration of treatment (continued beyond 14 days)—ie, antibiotic treatment duration exceeded the 
length deemed appropriate for effective treatment of that particular infection according to local guidelines. 
More than four antibiotics at the same time 
The unintentional† overprescribing and concurrent systemic use of four or more antimicrobials in a given 
patient on the same calendar day for at least 2 consecutive days. 
Concurrent double or redundant antibiotic coverage‡ 
The intentional§ concurrent administration of two or more antibiotics with overlapping or duplicate spectra in 
terms of Gram-negative, Gram-positive, and anaerobic cover, on the same calendar day for at least 2 
consecutive days. Redundant coverage can be subdivided into three categories. First, redundant Gram-
negative coverage: defined as the concurrent administration of two or more of any of the following drugs in or 
between groups: cephalosporins (cefuroxime, ceftriaxone, ceftazidime, cefotaxime, and cefepime), 
fluoroquinolones (ciprofloxacin and levofloxacin), β-lactam plus β-lactamase-inhibitor combinations 
(amoxicillin/clavulanate and piperacillin/tazobactam), aminoglycosides (amikacin, gentamycin, and 
tobramycin), carbapenems (meropenem, ertapenem, doripenem, and imipenem), and tigecycline. Second, 
redundant Gram-positive coverage: defined as the concurrent administration of two or more of any of the 
following drugs in or between groups: β-lactams (amoxicillin, amoxicillin-clavulanate, cefazolin, and cloxacillin), 
tigecycline, clindamycin, linezolid, and glycopeptides (vancomycin and teicoplanin). Third, redundant anaerobe 
coverage: defined as the concurrent administration of two or more of any of the following drugs in or between 
groups: metronidazole, β-lactam plus β-lactamase-inhibitor combinations (amoxicillin/clavulanate and 
piperacillin/tazobactam), carbapenems (meropenem, ertapenem, doripenem, and imipenem), moxifloxacin, 
clindamycin, cefoxitin, and tigecycline. 
Subsequently, learning cycles hosted by the quality improvement director and an 
antimicrobial stewardship programme project manager were held every 6–8 weeks initially, 
and then as needed once the model was entrenched, either via national teleconferencing 
with pharmacists and pharmacy managers or through face-to-face hospital (pending the 
need for on-site assistance) and regional workshops. In between these learning sessions, 
support was provided by the project manager. After obtaining permission from the front-
line doctors, pharmacists recorded interventions weekly on standardised templates, which 
were submitted monthly via email to the project manager who in turn provided monthly 
feedback (improvements in compliance with the measures or otherwise), including 
antibiotic consumption data and individualised goals to the pharmacists and their managers 
of eachs institution. The pharmacists would then provide feedback on the progress of 
implementation and changes in antibiotic consumption to doctors, hospital management, 
and the antimicrobial stewardship programme committees, including infection prevention 
practitioners of each hospital. The quality improvement director and project manager 
obtained additional input from doctors during subsequent 12 monthly, face-to-face regional 
learning sessions. 
Antimicrobial stewardship interventions 
We chose the five process measures on the basis of a previous survey of private and public 
hospitals in South Africa, in which excessive antibiotic consumption was found to include 
6
  
prolonged duration, multiple concurrent antibiotics, and redundant coverage.9 The quality 
improvement director and local experts defined the measures according to local and 
international guidelines and best practice adapted to the South Africa setting (panel 1).9; 
12 ;  13 For all interventions, pharmacists consulted the doctor before changes were made. 
This consultation was done verbally or by written or mobile phone messages. Only systemic 
(parenteral and oral) antibiotic use was audited. Exclusions from pharmacist audit included 
surgical prophylaxis; disorders requiring protracted antibiotics such as infective 
endocarditis, osteomyelitis, and septic arthritis; and treatment regimens in which multiple 
antibiotics were used for prophylaxis or treatment of Pneumocystis jirovecii, mycobacteria, 
Clostridium difficile, or combination treatment for carbapenemase-producing 
Enterobacteriaceae, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Acinetobacter baumanii, and Staphylococcus 
aureus. 
Procedures 
The pre-implementation phase involved a quantitative, non-uniform survey of stewardship 
activities, in which hospitals were requested to provide monthly details of stewardship 
activities, if any, to the quality improvement director who monitored such activities 
including individual hospital and overall group antibiotic consumption. During this period, 
the quality improvement director recruited pharmacists by means of a “call for champions” 
for those who wanted to develop stewardship skills. No incentives to participate were 
provided. 
In the implementation phase, the model was introduced in a stepwise manner under 
executive group order and direction. The key components that were crucial to the 
implementation of the model are described earlier and summarised in panel 2. We chose an 
arbitrary conservative 10% reduction in overall group antibiotic consumption on the basis of 
high pre-implementation consumption and in view of that many hospitals were being 
introduced to an antimicrobial stewardship programme for the first time. 
 
 
Panel 2. Key components of implementing the antimicrobial stewardship model 
 
• Formalise measurable goals for the hospital group (quality improvement director). The aim was to achieve at 
least a 10% reduction in antibiotic consumption and implement the antimicrobial stewardship programme in 
33% or more of the institutions at 6 months, 66% of the institutions at 12 months, and 100% of the institutions 
(n=47) at 24 months. 
• Form antimicrobial stewardship programme committees (consisting of hospital, pharmacy, and nursing 
managers; pharmacists; infection prevention practitioners; doctors; and, if available, clinical microbiologists) 
and consult with prescribers to ensure endorsement of the antimicrobial stewardship programme. 
• Mandate so-called protected pharmacist stewardship time to do antibiotic audit rounds. 
• Audit the five process measures (panel 1) either in a stepwise manner or all five at once. 
• Develop and launch (through regional training workshops) a toolkit consisting of a standardised template 
using Microsoft Excel to facilitate uniform process measurement and data recording. 
• Record the pharmacist's interventions every week for all inpatients on antibiotics either initially in the 
intensive care and high-care units and thereafter in selected wards or in all units at once. 
• Submit data every month to an antimicrobial stewardship programme project manager via email.* 
7
  
• Provide feedback to the pharmacists regarding progress of implementation, improvements (or otherwise) in 
the five measures, and antibiotic consumption delivered in both written (monthly emails) and verbal format 
during learning cycles. 
• Concurrently, define and provide individualised hospital implementation progress, process improvement, 
and antibiotic consumption goals on the basis of historical trends. 
• Regular (every 1–3 months) verbal and written feedback to doctors, hospital managers, and the antimicrobial 
stewardship programme committees, including infection prevention practitioners, of each hospital. 
• Adapt action plans following hospital self-monitoring according to how many of the targeted interventions 
had been implemented, what improvements had taken place, and what the effect on individual hospital 
antibiotic consumption had been. 
• Stimulate further improvement by providing feedback on the progress of the antimicrobial stewardship 
programme and its effects on compliance with the measures and antibiotic consumption via monthly emails to 
all hospitals in the form of comparative tables and graphs.† 
The post-implementation phase commenced with the completion of the implementation 
phase and an audit of all of the process measures in place in all units of each hospital. In this 
phase, monthly submission of data to the project manager for group-wide monitoring was 
made compulsory as part of the performance management assessments. Learning cycles 
every 6–8 weeks via teleconferences and on-site face-to-face meetings (pending need for 
support) were continued in this phase. Regular feedback and individualised process 
improvement and consumption goals were also continuously provided during this phase to 
facilitate adaptation of hospital action plans following self-monitoring. To stimulate further 
improvements, the project manager provided feedback to all hospitals on their compliance 
with the measures and the subsequent effect on antibiotic consumption by means of 
comparative tables (47 hospitals) and multiple graphs (47 hospitals). 
We calculated hospital and group antibiotic consumption from hospital dispensing data 
using WHO's Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical index; the primary parameter was defined 
daily doses (DDDs) per 100 patient–days. Additionally, we analysed 104 weeks of 
standardised data for the five measures, for each hospital. We calculated all percentages 
relative to the number of patients seen on pharmacy rounds. We calculated the percentage 
of patients using the number of patients in whom the targeted interventions had been 
implemented as the numerator and the number of patients on antibiotics as the 
denominator. The project manager measured improvements in the five process measures 
according to the run chart rules described by Langley and colleagues10 and Perla and 
colleagues,14 and feedback was provided as described previously (figure 1, panel 2). 
Statistical analysis 
For the primary analysis, we assessed change in antibiotic consumption between pre-
implementation and post-implementation of the antimicrobial stewardship programme. We 
compared monthly DDD per 100 patient–days for the 16 months' pre-implementation phase 
with that for the 20 months' post-implementation phase. Data collection, within each of the 
47 participating hospitals, was prospective and at fixed-time intervals. We used a linear 
mixed-effects regression model to assess the relation between the response variable (DDD 
per 100 patient–days) and the fixed-effects (pre-implementation and post-implementation), 
time, and their interaction. We specified hospitals as the random-effects component with 
an intercept and time as a covariate, using an independent covariance structure. We did 
testing at the 0·05 level of significance. 
8
  
For the secondary analysis, we described the progression with implementation of the model 
and the improvement in antibiotic consumption during the 60 month study period in three 
phases (pre-implementation, implementation, and post-implementation of the 
antimicrobial stewardship programme). We fit a linear piecewise regression with nodes at 
16·5 and 40·5 months to monthly DDD per 100 patient–days to quantify the rate of change 
in monthly antibiotic consumption during these three phases. We used a linear mixed-
effects regression model to assess the relation between the response variable (monthly 
DDD per 100 patient days) and the fixed-effect time, reparameterised to the three phases. 
We specified hospitals as a random-effects component with an intercept, reparameterised 
times as covariates, and used an independent covariate structure. 
We recorded standardised measurement of the five measures targeted for improvement, 
aggregated for the group of hospitals, for 104 weeks and graphically illustrated the data 
using local polynomial smoothing. We applied the default bandwidth, determined by Stata 
Release 13 statistical software, to each intervention (5·129 for no cultures done before 
empirical treatment; 5·749 for antibiotic treatment duration of more than 7 days; 4·531 for 
more than 14 days of antibiotic treatment; 5·126 for patients on four or more antibiotics; 
and 6·324 for concurrent redundant antibiotic cover). 
Role of the funding source 
There was no funding source for this study. The quality improvement director, the project 
manager, and all authors had full access to all the data in the study and the corresponding 
author had final responsibility for the decision to submit for publication. 
 
Results 
Figure 2 displays the mean monthly antibiotic consumption (DDDs per 100 patient–days) 
during the three phases of the stewardship model. 
9
  
 
 
Figure 2. Longitudinal cohort survey of mean antibiotic consumption for three phases of the Netcare 
antimicrobial stewardship model 
The entire study took place between Oct 10, 2009, and Sept 30, 2014, in 47 hospitals. Mean antibiotic 
consumption is measured in defined daily doses (DDDs) per 100 patient days. 
 
During the pre-implementation phase (Oct 1, 2009, to Jan 31, 2011), no stewardship 
activities were practised in 41 (87%) of the 47 hospitals. In six of the hospitals (13%), 
stewardship consisted of one or more of the following: occasional multidisciplinary rounds 
(n=4) or irregular didactic lectures (n=5), or both, and prospective audit and feedback 
rounds (n=2) including inconsistent use of antibiotic prescription charts (n=2). None of the 
hospitals had local antibiotic policies or guidelines. Hospital managers were not involved, 
antimicrobial stewardship programme committees did not exist, and reporting and feedback 
of data were haphazard. Measurement of antibiotic data showed stagnant or increasing 
consumption (figure 2). The overall mean consumption of antibiotics was 101·38 DDD per 
100 patient–days (95% CI 93·05–109·72). 
During the implementation phase (Feb 1, 2011, to Jan 31, 2013), we revised goals to 
increase implementation and to reduce individual hospital consumption throughout 31 
learning cycles. By September, 2011, 17 (36%) of the 47 hospitals had implemented the 
model and by February, 2012, 32 (68%) were doing the targeted stewardship interventions. 
A staggered approach to implementation of the five interventions took place and by 
September, 2012, 40 of the hospitals (85%) were auditing all five. 
By the post-implementation phase (Feb 1, 2013, to Sept 30, 2014), the model had been 
embedded in pharmacist practice, with daily auditing of the five targets for improvement, 
10
  
 
becoming the routine standard of care for inpatients receiving antibiotics. 22 learning cycles 
were held and benchmarking, by means of comparative tables and multiple graphs 
describing the success or otherwise of each hospital or region, led to competitiveness, 
particularly among pharmacists and doctors. Mean consumption during this phase was 
83·04 DDD per 100 patient–days (95% CI 74·87–91·22). 
During 104 weeks of standardised measurement, 116 662 patients on antibiotics were 
reviewed with 7934 interventions recorded for the five targeted variables, suggesting that 
one in 14·7 prescriptions required an intervention. As depicted in the table, the greatest 
improvement was seen in the duration of treatment. 
Table. Proportion of patients needing pharmacist interventions for each of the five targeted areas of 
improvement 
 
 
Pharmacist interventions (N=7934) 
Cultures not done before commencement of empirical antibiotics 2971 (37%) 
More than 7 days of antibiotic treatment* 
2615 (33%) 
More than 14 days of antibiotic treatment* 
501 (6%) 
More than four antibiotics at the same time 
739 (9%) 
Concurrent double or redundant antibiotic coverage 
1108 (14%) 
*Collectively prolonged duration represented the majority of pharmacist interventions (3116 [39%] of 
7934). 
In the primary analysis, the linear mixed-effect regression model detected a significant 
(p<0·0001) reduction of 18·34 (95% CI 15·92–20·76) in mean DDD per 100 patient–days 
after implementation of the antimicrobial stewardship programme. The interaction 
between the fixed effects and time was also significant (p=0·004), as shown by the different 
slopes in figure 3. 
 
Figure 3. Predicted mean antibiotic consumption for the pre-implementation and post-
implementation phases. Mean antibiotic consumption is measured in defined daily doses (DDDs) per 
100 patient–days. More detail is available in the appendix. 
11
  
 
By contrast with the implementation phase, in which the rapid reduction in monthly 
antibiotic consumption was significant (β2 −0·559; p<0·0001), the rate of change during the 
pre-implementation phase was not significant (β1 0·064; p=0·622), and during the post-
implementation phase the change in DDD per 100 patient–days per month was slower (β3–
0·203; p=0·054; appendix). Figure 4 shows the polynomial smoothed plots for the five main 
areas targeted for improvement. Limited pharmacist intervention was necessary or required 
after 60–72 weeks and this was sustained until the end of the study (Figure 2 ;  Figure 4). 
 
 
Figure 4. Local polynomial smoothed curves for the five parameters targeted for improvement (weeks 
1–104). More detail is available in the appendix. 
 
Discussion 
This multicentre antimicrobial stewardship initiative, led by non-specialised pharmacists, 
reduced antimicrobial prescribing across a large network of urban and rural hospitals in an 
infectious diseases resource-limited setting. The significant overall reduction in antibiotic 
DDD per 100 patient–days (of 18·1%, 95% CI 15·71–20·4) confirmed that antimicrobial 
stewardship is possible despite most hospitals never having practised stewardship before, 
the wide geographical distribution, the large number of hospitals involved, and the 
necessity to coordinate the interventions throughout all the hospitals simultaneously. 
Very few data are available for the implementation of antimicrobial stewardship 
programmes on the African continent.4 A study15 from an academic teaching hospital in 
South Africa introduced an antibiotic prescription chart and a weekly stewardship ward 
round that led to a 19·6% reduction in consumption. This programme required intensive 
infectious diseases resource input and is not representative of present infectious diseases 
resourcing in South African hospitals. An alternative model, in which doctors, pharmacists, 
and nurses without specialised training in infectious diseases, and other health-care 
12
  
 
providers such as infection prevention practitioners, lead and support the delivery of 
stewardship activity is perhaps more relevant. This view is exemplified by the effect of 
another pharmacist-driven process improvement intervention in the same hospitals, which 
resulted in a significant change in the timing of administration (“hang-time”) of intravenous 
antimicrobials in more than 32 000 patients.16 The increasing role of pharmacist-led 
antimicrobial stewardship activities has also been substantiated by implementation in 
English hospitals.17 The creation of such alternative models for stewardship that can be 
embedded within existing systems is dependent on local context and resources and is key to 
success across diverse settings.18 
Our study findings support the creation of alternative models to decrease antibiotic 
overprescribing as a possible approach in South African hospitals. Although some people 
might question the applicability of our findings to the public sector where most of the 
population in South Africa receive health care, we would contend that, despite insufficient 
infectious diseases expertise, this model could be valuable in view of the similar 
documented overprescribing practices.9 Successful implementation of the model would 
require commitment from organisational leadership and tailoring of systems and resources 
to support the key role of pharmacists in the monitoring, implementation, and feedback 
process. The crucial role of the development and use of a range of behavioural and 
improvement science skills beyond those of infectious diseases and microbiology16; 19 ;  20 
cannot be underestimated if sustainable success is to be achieved. Our study findings 
suggests that this antimicrobial stewardship model not only had an effect during the 
implementation phase but also a sustained benefit once the process was embedded within 
the existing system. 
The study has several limitations. First, we did not record patient outcomes as a means of 
defining the success of the model. Although the optimum measure of the success of an 
antimicrobial stewardship programme includes the assessment of both process and 
outcome, comparison of DDDs of one hospital or region with another was an important 
stimulus to quality improvement, particularly among doctors and pharmacists, for whom 
comparisons had the potential to trigger change. Second, we did not have knowledge of the 
patient location, such as whether they were in an intensive care unit or not, and therefore 
we could not determine in which environment the model had the biggest effect. However, 
our aim was merely to implement the antimicrobial stewardship programme model in all 
participating hospitals. Nonetheless, data about patient location are now being recorded in 
the study hospitals where the antimicrobial stewardship programme is ongoing. Third, the 
low-hanging fruit concept used in this study represented only the most basic interventions, 
but their implementation could nevertheless make a difference.7 
One of these interventions was to ensure that cultures were taken before initiation of 
empirical antibiotics, a practice that is poorly performed in South Africa and elsewhere.9 ;  21 
Although not a target in the present study, increased compliance with this intervention 
facilitates de-escalation and reassessment of treatment.13 ;  22 In a survey9 in South African 
ICUs, antibiotic duration was inappropriate in 53·2% of patients in the public sector and 
81·7% of patients in the private sector. As such, excessive duration unsurprisingly 
represented most (39%) of our pharmacist interventions. In support of the choice of this 
intervention, several studies have shown that a shorter duration of antibiotic treatment is 
13
  
 
equivalent to the traditional longer durations.13 We made the decision to restrict the 
number of concurrently administered antimicrobials mainly because previous treatments 
are not necessarily discontinued on initiation of a new antibiotic. 
Unnecessary combinations of antibiotics with overlapping spectra also represent a form of 
overprescribing. Redundant antibiotic combinations, used mainly for Gram-positive and 
anaerobic organisms, constitute a substantial proportion of antimicrobial regimens.12 The 
reasons for this overprescribing are unclear although a potential explanation is that many 
prescribers provide broad coverage “to get it right the first time” without the requisite 
knowledge of the overlapping spectra of activity. In our experience, redundant 
combinations are an easy target for stewardship because they are fairly straightforward to 
identify without time-intensive audits. 
Future research should investigate the behavioural determinants that influence local 
antibiotic prescribing practices and whether compliance with antimicrobial stewardship 
programme measures would be enhanced by including the prescribing doctors in the design 
of more complex pharmacist-driven interventions. This inclusion might be of particular 
importance in settings where doctors are not employed by the hospitals. Additionally, as 
shown recently in a systematic review,23 sparse information is available on the financial 
impact and cost-effectiveness of stewardship interventions in different resource settings—
potentially a promising topic for research. 
In conclusion, although the implementation of a successful antimicrobial stewardship 
programme is a challenge in any health-care setting, non-academic and rural hospitals 
present unique challenges. We believe stewardship should be approached by means of a 
stepwise implementation of process improvement initiatives and principles targeted to 
institutional needs. By focusing on the so-called vital few (interventions),24 health-care 
facilities with limited resources and infectious diseases and microbiology expertise can have 
a substantial effect on antibiotic use with less effort, while embedding antimicrobial 
stewardship practices within existing resource structures and systems. This focus on key 
interventions ensures sustainability and provides a platform for targeting more complex 
stewardship interventions in the future. 
Contributors 
DvdB conceived and designed the study. AJB, DAG, and DN did the scientific literature 
search. DvdB and APM prepared the data. AJB, APM, DN, and DvdB did the analysis. PJB did 
the statistical analysis. All authors interpreted the data, wrote the report, and approved the 
final version. 
Declaration of interests 
We declare no competing interests. 
 
 
14
  
 
Acknowledgements 
We acknowledge the invaluable contribution of all antimicrobial stewardship programme 
committees; doctors; clinical microbiologists; pharmacists; nurses, including infection 
prevention practitioners; hospital, nursing, and pharmacy managers; and other members of 
the Netcare Antimicrobial Stewardship Study Alliance. We thank the head office executives 
for supporting the antimicrobial stewardship programme. We acknowledge Carl Lombard 
(Biostatistics Unit, South African Medical Research Council, Cape Town) for his valuable 
contribution, comments, and insights in the data analysis. 
 
References 
1 Gelband H, Miller-Petrie M, Pant S, et al. The state of the world’s antibiotics, 2015 
http://cddep.org/publications/state_worlds_ antibiotics_2015 (accessed Nov 21, 2015). 
2 Davey P, Brown E, Charani E, et al. Interventions to improve antibiotic prescribing practices 
for hospital inpatients. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013; 4: CD003543. 
3 Wagner B, Filice GA, Drekonja D, et al. Antimicrobial stewardship programs in inpatient 
hospital settings: a systematic review. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2014; 35: 1209–28. 
4 Howard P, Pulcini C, Levy Hara G, et al. An international cross-sectional survey of 
antimicrobial stewardship programmes in hospitals. J Antimicrob Chemother 2015; 70: 
1245–55. 
5 Chung GW, Wu JE, Yeo CL, Chan D, Hsu LY. Antimicrobial stewardship. A review of 
prospective audit and feedback systems and an objective evaluation of outcomes. Virulence 
2013; 4: 151–57. 
6 LaRocco A Jr. Concurrent antibiotic review programs—a role for infectious diseases 
specialists at small community hospitals. Clin Infect Dis 2003; 37: 742–43. 
7 Goff  DA, Bauer KA, Reed EE, Stevenson KB, Taylor JJ, West JE. Is the “low-hanging fruit” 
worth picking for antimicrobial stewardship programs? Clin Infect Dis 2012; 55: 587–92. 
8 Brink AJ, Feldman C, Richards GA, Moolman J, Senekal M. Emergence of extensive drug 
resistance among Gram-negative bacilli in South Africa looms nearer. S Afr Med J 2008; 98: 
586–92. 
9 Paruk F, Richards G, Scribante J, Bhagwanjee S, Mer M, Perrie H. Antibiotic prescription 
practices and their relationship to outcome in South African intensive care units: fi ndings of 
the Prevalence of Infection in South Africa Intensive Care Units (PISA) study. S Afr Med J 
2012; 102: 613–16. 
15
  
 
10 Langley GL, Moen R, Nolan KM, Nolan TW, Norman CL, Provost LP. The improvement 
guide: a practical approach to enhancing organizational performance, 2nd edn. San 
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass Publishers, 2009. 
11 IHI. The Breakthrough Series: IHI’s collaborative model for achieving breakthrough 
improvement. IHI innovation series white paper. Boston, MA: Institute for Healthcare 
Improvement, 2003. 
12 Glowacki RC, Schwartz DN, Itokazu GS, Wisniewski MF, Kieszkowski P, Weinstein RA. 
Antibiotic combinations with redundant antimicrobial spectra: clinical epidemiology and 
pilot intervention of computer-assisted surveillance. Clin Infect Dis 2003; 37: 59–64. 
13 Bartlett JG, Gilbert DN, Spellberg B. Seven ways to preserve the miracle of antibiotics. Clin 
Infect Dis 2013; 56: 1445–50. 
14 Perla R, Provost L, Murray S. The run chart: a simple analytical tool for learning from 
variation in healthcare processes. BMJ Qual Saf 2011; 20: 46–51. 
15 Boyles TH, Whitelaw A, Bamford C, et al. Antibiotic stewardship ward rounds and a 
dedicated prescription chart reduce antibiotic consumption and pharmacy costs without aff 
ecting inpatient mortality or re admission rates. PLoS One 2013; 8: e79747. 
16 Messina AP, van den Bergh D, Goff  DA. Antimicrobial stewardship with pharmacist 
intervention improves timeliness of antimicrobials across thirty-three hospitals in South 
Africa. Infect Dis Ther 2015; 4: S5–14. 
17 Wickens HJ, Farrell S, Ashiru-Oredope DAI, Jacklin A, Holmes A. The increasing role of 
pharmacists in antimicrobial stewardship in English hospitals. J Antimicrob Chemother 2013; 
68: 2675–81. 
18 Charani E, Holmes AH. Antimicrobial stewardship programmes: the need for wider 
engagement. BMJ Qual Saf 2013; 22: 885–87. 
19 Cosgrove SE, Hermsen ED, Rybak MJ, File TM, Parker SK, Barlam TF. Guidance for the 
knowledge and skills required for antimicrobial stewardship leaders. Infect Control Hosp 
Epidemiol 2014; 35: 1444–51. 
20 Davey P, Peden C, Charani E, et al. Time for action—improving the design and reporting of 
behaviour change interventions for antimicrobial stewardship in hospitals: early fi ndings 
from a systematic review. Int J Antimicrob Agents 2015; 45: 203–12. 
21 Braykov NP, Morgan DJ, Schweizer ML, et al. Assessment of empirical antibiotic therapy 
optimisation in six hospitals: an observational cohort study. Lancet Infect Dis 2014; 14: 
1220–27. 
22 Masterton RG. Antibiotic de-escalation. Crit Care Clin 2011; 27: 149–62. 
16
  
23 Dik JH, Vemer P, Friedrich AW, et al. Financial evaluations of antibiotic stewardship 
programs—a systematic review. Front Microbiol 2015: 6: 317. 
24 Hamilton KW, Fishman NO. Antimicrobial stewardship interventions. Thinking inside and 
outside the box. Infect Dis Clin North Am 2014; 28: 301–13. 
Notes 
* Netcare Antimicrobial Stewardship Study Alliance members are given in the appendix
* For all process measures, doctors were consulted before any changes were effected.
† We defined unintentional prescribing errors by doctors as inadvertent prescription of 
multiple antibiotics, incomplete knowledge of the patient's antimicrobial regimen (eg, 
multiple doctors' prescriptions for the same patient), or failure to discontinue previous 
treatments on initiation of a new antibiotic.12 
‡ In consultation with the doctor, ascertainment of the clinical indications for each episode 
was necessary to determine the appropriateness of the potentially redundant antibiotic 
combination. 
§ We defined intentional prescribing errors by doctors as antibiotic combinations prescribed
with intended overlap but which, according to local best practice and guidelines, are 
insufficiently proven or provide likely clinical benefit.12 
* In the post-implementation phase, submission of monthly data to the project manager
was compulsory. 
† Comparative graphs and tables were introduced in the post-implementation phase (n=47). 
17
 Figure 5: Piecewise linear regression of monthly antibiotic DDDs/100 patient days over 60 
months 
DDD: Defined daily doses 
β1, β2, β3: Rate of change in monthly antibiotic consumption in pre-implementation, implementation and 
post-implementation phases 
The scatter displays monthly mean DDDs, whilst the piecewise linear regression line was obtained using the 
full dataset 
75 
80 
85 
90 
95 
100 
105 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
Month 
DDD/100 patient days 
β1 = + 0.064; p= 0.622 
β2 = _ 0.559; p< 0.0001 
β3 = _ 0.203; p= 0.054 
Supplementary material
18
 Figure 6: Individual graphs displaying data points and 95% CI of local polynomial 
smoothed curves for the five process measures targeted for improvement 
00 
22 
44 
66 
88 
00 
1010 2020 3030 4040 5050 6060 7070 8080 9090 100100 
110110 
Weeks of standardized measurement 
95% CI 
Duration of antibiotics >7 days 
00 
22 
44 
66 
88 
00 
1010 2020 3030 4040 5050 6060 7070 8080 9090 100100 
110110 
Weeks of standardized measurement 
95%CI 
% Patients/week 
No cultures performed prior to empirical treatment
% Patients/week 
19
 0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
110 
95% CI 
Patients on ≥ 4 antibiotics 
Weeks of standardized measurement 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
110 
95% CI 
Concurrent redundant (double) coverage 
Weeks of standardized measurement 
% Patients/week 
% Patients/week 
20
 CI: Confidence interval 
Netcare Antimicrobial Stewardship Study Alliance (NASSA) 
Antimicrobial Stewardship Working Group Leadership 
 (A Messina, D van den Bergh, I Jenkinson, K Swart, L Devenish, L Vieira, N Singh, T Bester, V Gokool- Sewram). 
Clinical Microbiologists 
 (A. Esterhuysen, AK. Peer, B. Jordan, B. Prinsloo, C. Bamford, C. Corcoran, C. Moore, C. Soldin, C.Govind, E. 
Hoosien, E. Silberbauer, F. Botha, GJJ. Moolman, HCJ. van Rensburg, I. Zietsman, J. Coetzee, J. Du Bruyn, J. 
Smit, J. Trussler, J. van Greune, JD. Deetlefs, K. Moodley, L. Marcus, L. Nutt, M. Botha, M. Mennen, M. 
Moodley, M. Myburg, M. Passman, M. van Rensburg, N. Janse van Rensburg, PA. Ekermans, R. Bohmer, R. 
Gandy, R. Writes, RF Botha, S. Budavari, S. Khan, S. Martin, S. Miller, S Sithole, T. Marshall, T. Moeletsi, T. 
Vanmali, W. Lowman, X. Poswa).  
Hospital ASP Committees 
Netcare Akasia hospital (A. Marais*, A Nadarajah, BJ Mphahlele*, C Coetzee, CT Kuzwayo*, G Lukhele, GJM 
Wolmarans*, H Tladi*, J Pretorius, M Mchenga* M Tshabalala); Netcare Alberlito hospital (A Maharaj, A 
Naidoo*, I Lander*, J Voerman*, L Lekha*, M Abraham,  S Maharaj, S Nayager, U Maharaj); Netcare Bell street 
hospital (A Moosa, A Lombard, B Welgemoed, C Samb, M Motsoane); Netcare Blaauwberg hospital (A 
Coetzee,  A Kistan*,C O’Brien, D Truter, K Barnard*, N Barnes, S Ninham, T Kotze*, W Chaaban*); Netcare 
Bougainville hospital (C Coetzee, L Joubert, N van den Heever, R de Kok, T Palane); Netcare Christiaan Barnard 
hospital (A Wilbers, C Tilney, E Gaertner*, E Steyn*, G Kantor*, J O’Brien*, M Leadsom, M Raff*, N 
Schlapoberskry*, O Thanning*, M Griesel, P Budnik*, R van Dyk*, S Lison*, V Cilliers); Netcare Clinton hospital 
(D. Demopolous*, E Abrahams, E Human, M Myburgh, S Mhlongo, S Persotam); Netcare Cuyler hospital (A van 
den Bergh*, C Beckley, E Musoke*,  F Sirkhotte,  K Schutte, R van Wyk, W Kurten); Netcare Femina hospital (C 
Erasmus, C. Schuman*, G Jones, J Breedt, J de Wit*, I Mulder*, L Hamilton, L van Tonder, M Kriel, N Bagwan*, V 
Naidoo*); Netcare Ferncrest hospital (A Schoembee, C Stassen, M van der Walt, N Jumna, L Lethuli); Netcare 
Garden City hospital (A Seedat*, D Mokwele*, J Sandows, L Singh*, M Kharodia, N Moshesh*, P du Toit*, R 
Naidoo*, S Mckaw,  V Booysen, Z Birkenstock); Netcare Greenacres hospital (A Bothma, B Stamps, C Naested,  
G Heuff, L Stone, M Kambale*, M Langehoven*, S Cullis); Netcare Jakaranda hospital (L Jacobs, L Kirsten*, L 
Roets, M Laubscher, P Botha, W van den Bergh); Netcare Kingsway hospital (A Demetriou, B Lehnerdt, M 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
110 
95% CI 
Duration of antibiotics for >14 days 
Weeks of standardized measurement 
% Patients/week 
21
 Abdool-Gaffar*, M Amod, S Thompson, Z Randeree); Kokstad private hospital (B Craig, H Groeneveld*, K Smith, 
M Craig, M Ngubo, P Fynn); Netcare Kroon hospital (B van Graan*, C Brink*, E Parkin, J Rood*, M Claasen, M 
Grobler, S le Roux, T Hugo); Netcare Krugersdorp hospital (A Moosa, A Saaiman, C de Hoog*, C Samb, C 
Wehrstedt, G Brand*, H Vermooten*, L Maimani, M Motsoane); Netcare Kuils River hospital (C Bezuidenhoudt, 
C Stephanus, D Plekker*, J de Wet*, L Jannetjies , M Gal, N Daniels, S van Wyk); Netcare Linksfield hospital (C 
Els*, D Verweerd, E Cutler, E Bock, I Hunt*, J Sochen*, M Erasmus, M Hockman*, S Kolman); Netcare Linmed 
hospital (A Abrahams, A Berry, C Dubert*, D de Bruin*, DL Bruce*, I Joubert*, I van Rensburg, M du Plessis*, M 
van der Merwe, P Marais*, Q Koen*, SG Smit*, S Jacobs, S Sheik*); Netcare Margate hospital (A Flowerday, C 
Potgieter, J Gopiechand, L Mortlock, R Ferreira); Netcare Milpark hospital (A Gillis, C Bodika-Caninda, H 
Geertsema, H Pahad*, J Moloisi, K Boffard*, M Sussman*, P Williams*,  R Saloojee,  R van der Watt, S Hoosain, S 
Sallie, W Smith); Netcare Montana hospital (AG Burger*, Adele Colyn, A van der Westhuizen, D Slabbert, J 
Koning*, L Hardy*, L Johnson-Loots*, R Bosman, R Dhilraj, RE Zeelie*); Netcare Moot hospital (C Wessels*, E 
Read, JA Myburgh*, M Nkala, M. Vermeulen, P Botha, T Bezuidenhout, T Venter); Netcare Mulbarton hospital 
(A Pienaar, A Wessels, D Somwe*, M Khoza, N Koen, N Nkosi, T Chacko*); Netcare N1 City hospital (A 
Potgieter*, A van Wyk, J Jacobs*, K van der Walt,  L Blom, M Kielblock, M vd Walt, R Brown, , Z Els*); Netcare 
N17 hospital (A Joubert, A Schutte, A Stone, A Zambakides*, JJ vd Merwe*,  P Naicker, U Mahomed); Netcare 
Olivedale hospital (A Savvidou*, B Welman, F Skosana*, G Bartman, G Fotheringham*, K Smith, L Fourie, M 
Weideman); Netcare Parklands hospital (A Kalpee*, F Salie, HI Rajput*, K Naidoo, L Sitharam, M van Staden, RN 
Nadar*, S Khoosal); Netcare Parklane hospital (C Venter, D Legari, G Mngola, M Janse v Rensburg, N Stoykova*, 
R Butler); Pelenomi Private hospital (A Modise, E Hugo, K Mvila, S Masalla, W Japtha, Y Williamson,); Port 
Alfred hospital (A Rex, F Sirkotte, J Houston, M Stiglingh, V Mutle); Netcare Pretoria East hospital (B Rood, C 
Beukes, C Kaalsen, D Kruger, E Pavkovich, J Morare, T Dinwoodie, W Sieling*, Y Hurwitz); Netcare Rand hospital 
(A Angwin, A Carrim*, C Mabuza, C Venter, G Mngola, JCL Mbuyamba*, P Ngewu); Netcare Rehabilitation 
hospital (A Bester, E du Preez, M van Vuuren, S Chothia, V Wilson*); Netcare Rosebank hospital (A Kala, A 
Kreusch*, B Levy*, D Chetty, G Cox*, G Lorge*, G Smith,  L Bossert, L Francis, V Chathury*); Settlers hospital (A 
Rex, F Sirkotte, M Norden, V Mutle); Netcare St. Anne’s hospital (A Ballim, A Norman, B Cullis*, L Joubert, N 
Naidoo, S Singh); Netcare St. Augustine’s hospital (A Dorning*, B Collins, B Kara, D Chunnilall, F Moola, I 
Abdulla*,  J Pieterse, K Naidoo, L Kalideen*, S Akoojee*, Y Moosa*); Netcare Sunninghill hospital (A Bornman, B 
Hewitt, D Campbell*, H Ebrahim, K Mey, L Fingleson*, N Conrad, P Louw);  Netcare Sunward Park hospital (A 
Petrova*, B Kleyn, C Scheepers, D Subrayen, FN Schutte*, F van der Westhuisen*, H Joubert, J du Plessis, JHS 
Beetge*, PS Fourie*, S Naidu, V Diab*); Netcare The Bay hospital (H Venter, J Samjowan, P Mahadeo, P van de 
Walt*, R Visagie, T Adams); UCT Private Academic hospital (A Barendse, C Smith,  L Shield, M Miller*, T Ferger); 
Netcare Umhlanga hospital (K Chetty*, K Viljoen, M van Heerden, , N Banwari, P Moodley, S Rohit, S Uys); 
Netcare Union hospital (A Kok*, A Stavrides*, A Verwey, B Botha*, D Barnes*, E Abrahams, E van der Merwe, H 
Swart, J Goosen*, L Barros, M Scop*, N vd Westhuizen, P Dlakane*, T Moledi*); Netcare Unitas hospital (A 
Esterhuizen, B van Niekerk, D du Plessis, EJ Joseph*, G Herselman, H van Lill, I Rossouw, JHJ van Rensburg*,  
JLW de Jager*, L Bosenberg*, MA van Dyk*, NA Lourens*, R Jordaan, S van Vuuren); Netcare Universitas 
hospital (A Booyens , E Janse van Rensburg, H Coetzer*, H Jacobs*, L Botha, M van der Merwe, SP Grobler*, TJ 
Ramanamane); Netcare Vaalpark hospital (C Whelan, E van Zyl, K Jansen van Vuuren, L Scheepers, N Koen); 
Netcare Waterfall City hospital (B Mahala*, MA Nabbie, N Ndlovu, S Khoza, S Singh, R Kuhne) 
* Doctors
22
