 https://doi.org/10.1177/0269216317705102
Palliative Medicine
2018, Vol. 32(1) 23 
–35
© The Author(s) 2017
Reprints and permissions: 
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/0269216317705102
journals.sagepub.com/home/pmj
Recommendations to reduce  
inequalities for LGBT people  
facing advanced illness: ACCESSCare 
national qualitative interview study
Katherine Bristowe1, Matthew Hodson2, Bee Wee3,  
Kathryn Almack4, Katherine Johnson5, Barbara A Daveson1, 
Jonathan Koffman1, Linda McEnhill6 and Richard Harding1
Abstract
Background: Lesbian, gay, bisexual and/or trans (LGBT) people have higher risk of certain life-limiting illnesses and unmet needs in advanced 
illness and bereavement. ACCESSCare is the first national study to examine in depth the experiences of LGBT people facing advanced illness.
Aim: To explore health-care experiences of LGBT people facing advanced illness to elicit views regarding sharing identity (sexual 
orientation/gender history), accessing services, discrimination/exclusion and best-practice examples.
Design: Semi-structured in-depth qualitative interviews analysed using thematic analysis.
Setting/participants: In total, 40 LGBT people from across the United Kingdom facing advanced illness: cancer (n 
= 
21), non-cancer 
(n 
= 
16) and both a cancer and a non-cancer conditions (n 
= 
3).
Results: In total, five main themes emerged: (1) person-centred care needs that may require additional/different consideration for 
LGBT people (including different social support structures and additional legal concerns), (2) service level or interactional (created in 
the consultation) barriers/stressors (including heteronormative assumptions and homophobic/transphobic behaviours), (3) invisible 
barriers/stressors (including the historical context of pathology/criminalisation, fears and experiences of discrimination) and (4) service 
level or interactional facilitators (including acknowledging and including partners in critical discussions). These all shape (5) individuals’ 
preferences for disclosing identity. Prior experiences of discrimination or violence, in response to disclosure, were carried into future 
care interactions and heightened with the frailty of advanced illness.
Conclusion: Despite recent legislative change, experiences of discrimination and exclusion in health care persist for LGBT people. 
Ten recommendations, for health-care professionals and services/institutions, are made from the data. These are simple, low cost and 
offer potential gains in access to, and outcomes of, care for LGBT people.
Keywords
Sexual orientation, gender history, advanced illness, bereavement, qualitative, inequalities
1 
King’s College London, Cicely Saunders Institute, Department of 
Palliative Care, Policy & Rehabilitation, UK
2GMFA, London, UK
3 
Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
4 
Nottingham Centre for the Advancement of Research into Supportive, 
Palliative and End-of-Life Care, The University of Nottingham, 
Nottingham, UK
5School of Applied Social Science, University of Brighton, Brighton, UK
6St. Joseph’s Hospice, London, UK
Corresponding author:
Katherine Bristowe, King’s College London, Cicely Saunders Institute, 
Department of Palliative Care, Policy & Rehabilitation, Bessemer Road, 
London SE5 9PJ, UK. 
Email: Katherine.bristowe@kcl.ac.uk
705102 PMJ0010.1177/0269216317705102Palliative MedicineBristowe et al.
research-article2017
Original Article
What is already known about the topic?
•
•
People who identify as lesbian, gay, bisexual and/or trans (LGBT) have an increased risk of certain life-limiting illnesses.
•
•
Despite recent legislative change and policy recommendations to improve care, LGBT people continue to experience 
discrimination and exclusion in health-care settings.
•
•
Previous studies have identified unmet health and bereavement care needs for LGBT people.
•
•
However, outside of the context of HIV, no previous studies have examined these experiences from the perspectives of 
LGBT people facing advanced illness, and it is unclear how best to improve care.
 24 
Palliative Medicine 32(1)
Introduction
Lesbian, gay, bisexual and/or trans (LGBT) people have spe-
cific health-care needs. Lesbian women and gay men have 
greater all-cause mortality than heterosexual people.1 LGBT 
people have a higher risk of certain cancers,2–7 are less likely 
to attend for routine screening8,9 and more likely to present 
with more advanced disease. LGBT people have higher rates 
of mental illness10 and risk behaviours (drinking, smoking 
and drug use) that are linked to discrimination.11,12
In recent years, there have been a series of legislative 
changes in the United Kingdom to support the rights of 
LGBT people. These have included, but are not limited to, 
the Civil Partnership Act (2004), the Gender Recognition 
Act (2004), the Equality Act (2010) and Same-Sex 
Marriage (2014). Globally, an increasing number of coun-
tries recognise same-sex unions; however, many countries 
offer no legal protection, and particularly across Africa 
and Asia, criminalisation and persecution for LGBT peo-
ple remain a reality. Despite policy initiatives to improve 
health care for LGBT people,13–16 discrimination within 
health and social care services remains common.17 LGBT 
people describe heterosexual and/or cisgender (where 
gender identity corresponds with birth sex) biased envi-
ronments, inadequate support and failure to involve part-
ners in critical health decisions.18 Indeed, a recent 
international survey found implicit preferences for hetero-
sexual people versus gay and lesbian people by hetero-
sexual health-care providers.19 LGBT people describe 
additional challenges in bereavement, including lack of 
acknowledgement of their loss, additional legal issues, 
exclusion of ‘chosen family’ as part of the unit of care and 
the continued shadow of HIV/AIDS.20
Previous negative health-care experiences and health 
disparities for LGBT people impact on their access to care 
and timely treatment,8,21 resulting in worse health-care 
experiences and poorer general health.22 Furthermore, if a 
couple have felt unable to disclose their relationship, the 
bereaved partner’s needs may not be recognised, resulting 
in prolonged or disenfranchised grief,23 poor bereavement 
outcomes20 and increased mortality risk.24
LGBT people represent a significant minority. 
Conservative UK estimates suggest 5%–7% of the popu-
lation identify as LGB25 and 1% as trans,26 although fears 
of disclosure are associated with persistent underreport-
ing. Health disparities and discrimination for LGBT peo-
ple must end,27,28 but evidence to inform this change is 
limited.
When facing advanced illness, there is a need for per-
son-centred care, to ensure preferences and priorities for 
care and decision-making are met. When an individual 
has one or more conditions that result in a decline in 
general health and deterioration in function, which will 
continue until the end of life, this can be described as 
advanced illness.29 Care within the context of advanced 
illness requires a person-centred approach, with effec-
tive and open communication with the patient and those 
close to them throughout their illness. Although previous 
studies have explored discrimination in health care for 
LGBT people, to our knowledge, no previous studies 
have examined these inequalities through the experience 
of LGBT people facing advanced illness, not limited to 
HIV/AIDS. This study aimed to explore health-care 
experiences of LGBT people facing advanced illness to 
elicit: views regarding sharing identity (sexual orienta-
tion/gender history); experiences of accessing services, 
discrimination and exclusion; and examples of best prac-
tice, to generate recommendations to improve care.
What this paper adds?
•
•
ACCESSCare was the first study with the aim of examining these inequalities in depth from the perspectives of LGBT 
people facing advanced illness, not limited to HIV/AIDS.
•
•
LGBT participants described barriers to accessing care, in the context of advanced illness, at multiple levels: internalised; 
interactional (in clinical encounters) and service level.
•
•
While basic clinical needs of comfort and being pain free are common to all individuals facing advanced illness, for our 
trans participants, there were additional clinical considerations.
•
•
LGBT people also face further stressors at societal levels, increased isolation and family estrangements and additional 
legal concerns.
•
•
We also identified facilitators to good care at a service and interactional level, including overtly acknowledging and 
including partners in critical decisions.
Implications for practice, theory or policy
•
•
There is a need for focused efforts to improve care experiences for LGBT people through public health strategies to 
address issues in accessing care and training and education, to address deficits in care delivery.
•
•
Ten recommendations for individual health-care professionals and services or institutions are made from the data. 
These 
are simple, low cost and grounded in the evidence and offer potential gains in access to, and outcomes of, care for LGBT 
people.
 Bristowe et al. 
25
Methods
We conducted a national in-depth qualitative interview 
study.
Recruitment
People who identified as LGBT and were facing advanced 
illness were recruited to the study. This included individu-
als facing advanced illness themselves, informal carers 
(partners, friends and family) and bereaved information 
carers. The decision to include current and bereaved infor-
mal carers was guided by the ethos of palliative care to 
support the individual, and those close to them, through 
advanced illness and into bereavement. This would enable 
a more thorough understanding of the experience of 
advanced illness for LGBT people.
Inclusion criteria: ⩾18 years; identified as LGBT; fac-
ing advanced illness and potentially in the last year of life 
(defined as ‘no’ in response to the surprise question, 
‘Would you be surprised if this person died with 
12 months?’, in conjunction with general indicators of 
decline and specific clinical indicators related to their con-
dition30); or current/bereaved unpaid caregiver of LGBT 
person facing advanced illness.
Exclusion criteria: too unwell/distressed to complete 
interview; unable to give informed consent. To minimise 
distress in the acute post-bereavement period, individuals 
were not approached about the study until >4 months post 
bereavement (in line with previous post-bereavement 
research31,32). Where bereaved individuals self-referred to 
the study before 4 months, they were encouraged to con-
sider delaying the interview, unless they expressed a clear 
preference to share their experiences. On these occasions, 
the interview was scheduled in line with their wishes.
Participants were recruited through six UK palliative 
care teams (three hospital and three hospice) and nation-
ally through social/print media and LGBT community net-
works. LGBT individuals facing advanced illness who had 
shared their LGBT identity with the palliative care team 
were invited to participate. For media/community recruit-
ment, individuals self-referred in response to adverts. 
Media/community recruitment was used to give the oppor-
tunity to participate in the study to individuals who may 
not feel comfortable to share their identity with their 
health-care teams and to enable recruitment across the 
United Kingdom in urban and rural settings. Individuals 
were purposively sampled by sexual orientation, gender 
identity, age and illness (cancer/non-cancer). For lesbian 
and gay participants, recruitment continued until data satu-
ration was achieved33 (no new themes emerging from the 
data). Due to smaller number of people identifying as 
bisexual and trans, data saturation was not expected. 
Interviews occurred in the participant’s chosen location: 
home (n = 26), hospital/hospice (n = 9), public spaces (cafe, 
library, park and hotel lobby; n = 4) or by telephone (n = 1).
Interviews
The semi-structured interview schedule was guided by a 
systematic literature review,18 project advisory group and 
LGBT charity partners. Interviews commenced with demo-
graphic questions (age, sexual orientation, gender identity 
and relationship status). Participants were then invited to 
share their narrative, from illness onset to present day. The 
interviewer (K.B.) used prompts and probes to elicit further 
information about care settings, teams and current/future 
care needs. The interviews also explored the following: 
experiences/views regarding disclosing identity to health-
care professionals, involvement of partners in consulta-
tions, support structures (biological/non-biological family 
and friends), barriers to accessing care and recommenda-
tions for health-care professional training. Interviews were 
digitally audio recorded and transcribed verbatim, with 
allocation of pseudonyms to preserve anonymity. A reflex-
ive diary was completed to record key emergent themes; 
contextual information; and personal and/or methodologi-
cal reflections, which shaped subsequent interviews.
Analysis
Interviews were analysed (K.B./R.H.) using inductive the-
matic analysis, in five stages: familiarisation, coding, 
theme development, defining themes and reporting. 
Analysis was informed by theories of palliative care (spe-
cifically consideration of the four holistic domains of pal-
liative care: physical, psychological, social and spiritual),34 
although themes were derived from the data. A re-iterant 
process of discussing areas of agreement and disagreement 
was used, with particular attention paid to cases where 
emerging themes contradicted more common ideas. 
Themes were reviewed by the project steering group, 
including LGBT charity partners. Recommendations for 
practice were generated from the data. Analysis was sup-
ported using NVivo (V.10), and reporting was in line with 
the guidelines from the consolidated criteria for reporting 
qualitative studies (COREQ).35
Results
Participants
In total, 40 LGBT people from across the United Kingdom 
(Figure 1) were recruited (n = 21 referred by clinical team 
and n = 19 self-referred to study) and interviewed 
(November 2014–January 2016). Participants were facing 
advanced illness themselves (n = 20) or current (n = 6) or 
bereaved (n = 14) unpaid caregivers of an LGBT person 
with advanced illness.
Participants self-identified as gay (n = 19), homosexual 
(n = 1), gay and intersex (n = 1), lesbian (n = 14), bisexual 
(n = 2), lesbian and trans (n = 2) and friend of a trans woman 
(n = 1). Participants described experiences related to 
 26 
Palliative Medicine 32(1)
cancer (n = 21), non-cancer conditions (n = 16) and both 
cancer and non-cancer conditions (n = 3). In total, 34 par-
ticipants were White British, 4 White Other, 1 Black 
British and 1 African-Caribbean (see Table 1). Median age 
was 59 years (range: 27–94 years). Median interview dura-
tion was 73 min (range: 19–152 min).
Findings
Overview. Five broad themes emerged from the inter-
views regarding the experience of receiving care for 
LGBT individuals facing advanced illness (see Figure 2): 
(1) LGBT people with advanced illness may have care 
needs that require additional or different consideration. (2) 
Also, in clinical encounters, their experience may be nega-
tively affected by interactional (created in the encounter) 
and service-level barriers and stressors. (3) Additionally, 
LGBT people may experience internalised or invisible 
barriers and stressors which may not emerge, or may not 
be apparent, within the encounter. (4) Their experiences 
can also be positively affected by interactional and ser-
vice-level facilitators. (5) However, fears and/or experi-
ences of discrimination, stemming from the legacy of 
discrimination and lack of legal protection, shape prefer-
ences for identity disclosure. Awareness of these potential 
barriers, and how they may shape care experiences and 
access to services, is dependent on the knowledge and atti-
tudes of health-care professionals. Health and social care 
professionals must be trained to anticipate these potential 
barriers that shape access to, and experiences of, services. 
Each theme is described in detail below, with example 
quotes from the verbatim transcripts.
Person-centred care
Clinical needs. Participants described the universal 
needs of individuals facing advanced illness, irrespective 
of sexual orientation or gender identity: comfort, safety 
and being pain free:
I think it’s no different. Because in every relationship, 
everybody has their role … and to know where the resources 
are within that relationship, that is more important than 
actually trying to look inside a box called lesbian, gay, 
transsexual, and saying, ‘Right, what do I pick out of that 
box?’ It’s about what’s outside of that box in terms of 
healthcare. What does everybody want? We want to be 
healthy. We want to be happy. We want to be content. We want 
to be comfortable. We want to be pain-free. We want all the 
things that everybody else who is a mammal, feeling thing, 
wants. (Elaine, aged 61, bisexual woman, bereaved partner of 
lesbian woman who died of cancer)
Figure 1. Recruitment to the ACCESSCare study.
 Bristowe et al. 
27
While participants recognised these commonalities, 
they also highlighted the importance of person-centred 
care addressing their needs and preferences. Importantly, 
participants did not suggest their needs required LGBT 
bespoke services but that health-care professionals may 
need to think carefully, and perhaps a little differently, to 
ensure equity in care delivery. For example, the trans par-
ticipants described additional clinical considerations 
related to their gender history, specifically interactions 
between treatments provided by the gender clinic and 
those for their illness. Both trans women interviewed were 
living with lung conditions and had experienced refusal of 
gender confirmation surgery (i.e. surgery to bring physical 
characteristics more in line with gender identity) due to 
their illnesses and associated anaesthetic risk:
I may be getting towards end-stage, I may be life-limited. I’m 
not terminal in my eyes, and I’m not ready to die. I want my 
surgery first, and I was hanging on in there; my surgery before 
I died. It was important to me to be buried as a woman, not 
half and half, you know, with the physical side of it. (Louise, 
aged 51, trans woman living with lung disease)
However, these interactions also impacted in the 
reverse, with hormone therapies affecting their lung 
health. Discussions which required individuals to priori-
tise, and ultimately choose between, treatments to pre-
serve their health or gender identity were unique to our 
trans participants:
Taking oestrogen increases the risk of blood clots. So now 
I’ve got these blood clots, I had a conversation with a 
consultant. The logical thing to do is to stop taking them to 
reduce the risk to a minimum for the future. So then we had to 
talk about how important it was psychologically, and I said 
that I think it is very important. I mean if someone said, ‘Your 
heart will stop in 10 minutes if you don’t stop taking them’, 
I’d stop, but I had to work with the gender clinic people and 
they said there is an elevation of the risk but it’s acceptable. 
It’s easy for somebody else to say it’s acceptable, I know, but, 
so we carried on. (Bridget, aged 68, trans woman living with 
lung disease)
Social needs and support structures. Participants also 
described additional needs related to their support struc-
tures. Many described isolation or family estrangements, 
heightened in bereavement:
The prognosis was shattering frankly. There is a slightly 
different dynamic between two women who had never even 
considered having a family as it really ‘wasn’t done’. You’re 
perhaps bound up in each other rather more to the exclusion 
of others. (Nicola, aged 68, bereaved partner of lesbian 
woman who died of cancer)
Those in same-sex relationships described lack of rec-
ognition of their bereavement from their social network 
and wider society:
It feels that society doesn’t validate the loss of a civil partner 
quite as much as they would understand and validate the loss 
of a husband. It’s more complicated, and a lot of people don’t 
have the imagination to understand that it’s the same kind of 
relationship … Before I would have said I was civil partnered 
Table 1. Participant characteristics.
Participant type
  
LGBT person living with advanced illness 
themselves
20
 Unpaid caregiver (partner)
5
 Unpaid caregiver (friend)
1
 Bereaved unpaid caregiver (partner)
13
 Bereaved unpaid caregiver (friend)
1
Identity: sexual orientation and/or gender history (self-
described)
 Gay man
19
 Homosexual man
1
 Gay intersex man
1
 Lesbian woman
14
 Bisexual woman
2
 Trans lesbian woman
2
 Friend of trans woman
1
Ethnicity (self-described)
  
White British (including White English and White 
Scottish)
34
  
White Other (African, American, Australian and 
New Zealand)
4
 Black British
1
 African-Caribbean
1
Diagnoses
  
Cancer: including lung, prostate, myeloma, bowel, 
ovarian, breast, cervical, transitional cell, head and 
neck, liver, pancreatic and endometrial
21
  
Non-cancer: including lung disease (interstitial lung 
disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and 
pulmonary fibrosis), neurological conditions (motor 
neurone disease, Parkinson’s, dementia, cerebellar 
ataxia and brain tumour), HIV and renal failure
16
 Living with both cancer and non-cancer conditions
3
Age
 20s, 30s, 40s
7
 50s, 60s
27
 70s, 80s, 90s
6
Location – referred to study by local palliative care team
 Greater London
21
Location – self-referred to the study
 Greater London
6
 South West
3
 South East
3
 Midlands
2
 North of England
3
 Wales
1
 Scotland
1
LGBT: lesbian, gay, bisexual and/or trans.
 28 
Palliative Medicine 32(1)
but now I was civil partnered, but now what am I? I am a gay 
widow. That’s not normal … You know? So that’s quite 
isolating. Because that’s quite, it’s a bit weird a bit unique, 
which I don’t particularly like. But that’s how it is. Yeah, I 
don’t think we are quite there yet you know. We’ve come a 
long way but society is not quite there yet. They don’t have 
the language for it yet. (Rebecca, aged 38, bereaved partner of 
bisexual woman who died of cancer)
This was compounded by society’s lack of language 
to describe that loss. One participant expressed uncer-
tainty as to whether to describe herself as a widow and 
her access to the social resources and expectations that 
accompany that descriptor. Participants also described 
the double taboo of bereavement and same-sex relation-
ships, with acquaintances less likely to broach the sub-
ject of their loss:
I do think there is a difference, you can’t be as open. But then 
having experienced the death of my father years ago, it’s 
death that people struggle with, and if you then add a layer 
about somebody’s sexuality, I think that makes it even more 
complicated for people because they’re not sure how to 
respond. (Melanie, aged 54, bereaved partner of a lesbian 
woman who died of cancer)
Our bereaved bisexual participants also described addi-
tional challenges in bereavement, particularly the internal 
struggle of redefining oneself as bisexual, after the loss of 
long-term same-sex partner:
I think my relationship has been the calmest, most content 
chunk of my life. So losing that has thrown me back into a 
kind of chaos state, where I’m now having to redefine who I 
am as a bisexual woman, and not taking into account any of 
the other experiences that I’ve had. I’m having to define 
myself, and I find that really difficult. But until I know that, 
I’m just living day to day and coping with what I need to 
cope with, which is a lot. (Elaine, aged 61, bisexual woman, 
bereaved partner of lesbian woman who died of cancer)
Legal concerns. Lack of recognition of relationships was 
also described regarding legal issues. LGB participants in 
relationships, but not civil partnered/married, recounted 
concerns regarding recognition as next-of-kin and involve-
ment in decisions:
We’re not in a formal partnership at the moment, for a variety 
of reasons that’s not happening in the near future but 
((2 second pause)) and of course being in a formal partnership 
and being able to wave your papers is the easiest and quickest 
way of being recognised as next of kin and err ((4 second 
pause)) and ((sigh)) and we’ve got to work on that but 
 
I suspect that straight couples don’t actually have to wave 
their marriage lines. (Carol, aged 70, partner of lesbian 
woman living with cancer and lung disease)
Additional concerns for trans participants related to 
acquisition of a gender recognition certificate to legally 
recognise their gender and importantly for their gender 
to be correctly identified on their death certificate and in 
Figure 2. LGBT experiences when facing advanced illness: considerations for the clinical encounter.
 Bristowe et al. 
29
memoriam. For those facing advanced illness, there was 
concern that the certificate would not be acquired in 
time:
Not everybody applies for the Gender Recognition Certificate 
… They don’t necessarily feel the need for it … [but] you 
can’t have a death certificate in the right name. (Anna, friend 
of a trans woman living with lung disease)
Interactional or service-level barriers and stressors
Interactional. Participants also described interactional 
stressors created in the consultation with health-care pro-
fessionals, varying from heteronormative assumptions or 
insensitivity, to overt homophobic or transphobic behav-
iours. Many described heteronormative assumptions from 
health-care professionals, which, although not necessar-
ily distressing, created a distance between the patient and 
health-care professional:
It’s usually been … if they’re sort of getting background … 
They don’t ask you about your sexuality, they ask about 
your heterosexuality, umm, do you have children? … or, 
which is, you know, is not, is not an offence. Do you have 
children. It’s a simple question. But it, it, creates that tiny 
little bit of distance … Which is saying, I’m heterosexual 
and I wonder what your experience of heterosexuality is … 
And it’s perfectly fair, perfectly, it’s not, it doesn’t offend 
me or anything like that. But it says I’m different … 
((10 second pause)) Basically it’s, it’s referring to sexuality 
as sexuality when in fact it’s heterosexuality … and it’s 
speaking in ways that assume that you already share that 
sexuality, rather than coming at the topic with an open 
mind that you might be gay. (Andrew, aged 67, gay man 
living with cancer)
More overt homophobic behaviours, included refusal to 
acknowledge the relationship with a same-sex partner:
There was complete lack of recognition. The consultant even, 
on the tenth or twentieth time of being told I was his partner 
still referred to me as his brother. (James, aged 35, partner of 
gay man living with a neurological condition)
These experiences were damaging for the patient and 
their partner, creating unnecessary additional stress. 
Others experienced lack of recognition of the nature, 
depth and duration of the relationship by health-care 
professionals:
I’ll tell you one other thing that was a fright and really 
offended me was had a had a visiting chap from the hospice 
um and he was, he was doing the first home visit. And he was 
a Locum and he sort of breezed in up the stairs and I was there 
as Grace had asked me to be, um and he asked something and 
I answered him and he said ‘no, you tell me’ he said ‘never 
mind the hangers on’ and I just thought ‘hangers on’ ((laughs)) 
‘you don’t have a clue!’ (Nicola, aged 68, bereaved partner of 
lesbian woman who died of cancer)
Such experiences were particularly challenging when 
discussing emotive issues such as prognosis:
He totally ignored me. It was as though I wasn’t there really 
… [later in the interview] … I think the word ‘include’ is the 
key word, is to keep the partners included in what’s going on 
… like that neurosurgeon totally sort of didn’t connect with 
the fact that we were a couple, as he might have done if we 
were a husband and wife. He was oblivious to the whole 
thing. It’s seeing that we are a couple and remembering the 
fact that we might have been … You know, we’ve been 
together for 24 years, which is a lot more than a lot of 
marriages last and it’s being included in the decisions and 
what’s going to happen and what’s happening next. (Michael, 
aged 59, partner of gay man with a neurological condition)
One trans participant also shared experiences of 
transphobic behaviours including a clinician’s refusal to 
use the appropriate pronoun:
Two, three, probably three occasions where somebody has 
used the wrong pronoun … I think culturally it was probably 
a difficult, concept for him to grasp … I think he read that I 
wasn’t taking [my health] seriously … but I was trying to 
basically say, ‘Look I’m distracting myself from this because 
it’s worrying me’ … and then he called me ‘Mr’ or referred to 
me as ‘Mr’ to his underlings around the bed … And I took 
exception to it …, he did it again, and I thought, I, just don’t 
care anymore. So launched at him telling I didn’t think his 
qualities as, his interpersonal skills were any good. (Bridget, 
aged 68, trans woman living with lung disease)
The other trans participant described insensitivity 
regarding disclosure of her identity in an open ward set-
ting. This was very distressing at a time when she already 
felt vulnerable and was entirely avoidable:
I’ve been in resus where I didn’t know if I was going to 
survive the event or not … where it has ten bays with ten 
patients, just with curtains. And you can hear every 
conversation … Some doctors have said to me, ‘How long 
have you been transgendered for?’ And everybody has heard. 
As much as I can’t breathe, I’m like, ‘What the fuck?’ And 
I’m lying there like, ‘I don’t want to be talking about this’. Do 
you know what I mean? And they’ve got no right to say that 
out loud in front of all the other patients. (Louise, aged 51, 
trans woman living with lung disease)
Service level. Participants also described barriers at a 
service level relating to availability of support services and 
choice of care settings. They described a lack of LGBT 
friendly support services or being unaware what might be 
available to them:
Not knowing what’s out there … how do I know what question 
to ask? … That’s the difficulty that I have … if somebody 
came up to and said, ‘Right, OK, XYZ that’s what you’ve got 
in front of you’ … Then I can start asking the right questions 
 30 
Palliative Medicine 32(1)
… and I finish up spending an hour of somebody’s time just 
trying to work out what’s good for me. Because nobody’s told 
me what’s out there. Nobody’s bothered to sit down and really 
talk about what’s going on and what’s out there what sort of 
support groups are out there. Umm, I’ve had to sort of muddle 
my way through, just to find out things. (Edward, aged 64, 
gay man living with HIV and cancer)
Negative reactions from other people attending the ser-
vice were also a concern, with participants describing a 
reluctance to attend care and support services unless 
explicitly made aware that the service is LGBT friendly:
If somebody had actually rung me, rather than it just coming 
in the post, and said, ‘Look Fiona, this is what this group does, 
this is how it works. You might find this helpful. If you would 
like to go I’ll be there to meet you and I’ll just come in with 
you on that first one, it will be fine. The person who is leading 
it will know that you are in there and that you are in a same 
sex relationship’. If I’d had that sort of security because 
otherwise that sense of, ‘Oh God, I’ve got to go through this 
again. I’ve got to come out again. How are people going to 
treat me?’ It’s tiring. When you are so low and so vulnerable 
it’s that risk versus benefit equation. (Fiona, aged 53, bereaved 
partner of lesbian woman who died of cancer)
However, for many, sexual identity or gender history 
was not the only, or most important, identifier when choos-
ing support groups or care settings, reflecting the multidi-
mensionality of identity:
I longed to be in a support group, and I asked the hospice if 
there were any, and they said no. I said, ‘Has anybody just lost 
a partner young?’ and they said, ‘No. They’re all old’. Again, 
I don’t think it would have mattered to me that it was a gay 
support group, but what was lacking were people who’d lost 
their partners young. (Rebecca, aged 38, bereaved partner of 
bisexual woman who died of cancer)
One participant spoke about this in terms of meeting 
the needs of her and her partner’s Jewish and lesbian 
identities:
That’s an issue for us as Jewish women as its going to be you 
know, as lesbian women … And you know, choosing that and 
because … there are Jewish erm sheltered housing schemes 
… It’s got a very good reputation but it is mainly run by the, 
not the erm Hassidic community by certainly by the reasonably 
orthodox … community. Of which we are not a part. (Marie, 
aged 59, lesbian woman living with cancer and lung disease)
For many older participants, fear of discrimination in 
care settings was an overwhelming concern. This forced 
them to consider concealing their identity or to avoid insti-
tutional care settings entirely. This strongly influenced 
care preferences; many individuals had previously spent 
years concealing their identity and were reluctant to return 
to that hidden life:
I really don’t want to go into a place where, you know, I’m the 
only gay guy … it would be so nice to be in place where you 
know, I could reminisce about ex-partners. (David, aged 62, 
gay man living with a neurological condition)
Our trans participants also described fears regarding the 
provision of intimate care. Due to the nature of care ser-
vices, often those receiving care at home would not know 
who would be attending until they arrived, creating an 
ongoing sense of fear and anticipation associated with 
disclosure:
It’s the humiliation of the personal care because there is a care 
thing that goes from social worker to care team. And I’ve been 
fearful that girls are going to walk in here who hadn’t been 
pre-warned about … when I hadn’t had the genital surgery … 
And I feel hurt because I’m aware that in the background 
some sort of process is happening without my knowledge, 
without my acceptance. I haven’t been involved in a discussion 
… But then would it have done any good if I had been 
involved in the discussion? Because it might cause more 
anxiety, being part of the process … Does that make sense? … 
Yes, so it’s not a win-win; it’s a lose-lose. And either way you 
become anxious. (Louise, aged 51, trans woman living with 
lung disease)
Internalised or invisible barriers and stressors. Participants 
shared personal or historical experiences of homophobia 
or transphobia that travelled with them during their illness 
and shaped their preferences for disclosing their identity 
with health-care professionals. For some, experiences 
spanned decades from a period when their relationships 
were illegal. Exploration of relationships by health-care 
professionals needs to be undertaken mindful of these 
potential experiences of fear, stigma and isolation:
I don’t have a partner. I looked after my mother for 30 years. I 
sacrificed one for another … The only great thing I did in my 
life was to see her life through, to a peaceful sleep, calm and 
happiness, and comfort. I’m proud of that. But myself 
((4 second pause)) as they say there are no happy endings … 
Life is like that. You learn to live with it … It happened only 
once. ((4 second pause)) and he died … we were lovers in the 
army when he was 27 and I was 24. And we were, about a 
year I suppose, 18 months. It was deep. But circumstance 
happened after the war, I was in hospital for 3 years, he went 
his way, he married. Two years ago when he must have been 
90 something, I phoned him up. And his wife answered the 
phone and I said ‘is James there?’ she said ‘he’s dying’ I said 
‘give him my love if he remembers me’ she said ‘he will’. It’s 
the luck of the draw. I’ve been incredibly happy, I’ve been 
intensely happy all my life. I’ve been positive till now. (Ian, 
aged 94, gay man living with cancer)
Many had previously experienced homophobic or 
transphobic negativity, discrimination or violence in response 
to disclosure. These fears continued to be carried with them 
but were heightened with the frailty of advanced illness:
 Bristowe et al. 
31
I am more nervous around men and I am more frightened 
since I have transitioned because I am not sure if they are 
going to abuse me, attack me. I am more fearful of physical 
assault than anything. Because of my COPD, and I live with 
oxygen, and I know that I cannot run and I cannot move, I am 
not able to fight or fly. So I am more wary, does that make 
sense? (Louise, aged 51, trans woman living with lung 
disease)
Such deep-rooted fears also impacted upon individual’s 
ability to show intimacy or affection with their partner in 
care settings, even when their partner was critically ill or 
dying:
I would say that I felt more self-conscious … We felt way 
more self-conscious being a gay couple on a ward that was 
open with other people from the public. We were much more 
relaxed when he had his own room, which he often did. I 
don’t necessarily think that was because anyone said anything 
to us while we were on a ward but it’s still something that 
you’re … I don’t think we necessarily compromised our 
relationship but we wouldn’t have probably been as openly 
expressive to each other with the curtain drawn … I never 
really necessarily felt that that was to do with the staff. It was 
more to do with … just life, just how things are, that even 
though we’ve moved on a lot there are still people that don’t 
really … It’s just difficult to know … I don’t have an example 
of anyone being outwardly homophobic on a ward but you’re 
just more conscious of it as a gay couple on a very big, open 
ward. (Gary, aged 39, bereaved partner of gay man who died 
of cancer)
Interactional or service-level facilitators
Interactional. Participants also described occasions 
where they felt well supported by health-care profes-
sionals; their identity was recognised, acknowledged and 
respected. They shared examples where these were facili-
tated interactionally, through discussions with health-care 
professionals:
Expect to be treated equitably … expect to be treated as a 
couple … There’s something about having the confidence for 
it not to be an issue, because you don’t want to have to deal 
with that as an extra worry, as an extra concern, as something 
that inhibits anybody asking questions, or getting the right 
kind of answers. (Pauline, aged 63, bereaved partner of 
bisexual woman who died of cancer)
Simple ways that respect and acknowledgement were 
achieved interactively included asking about the partner, 
overtly acknowledging the nature and importance of their 
relationship:
I was absent once, because I was doing a course of my own at 
the time, running in tandem with what was going on at home. 
I needed to be at college to do a presentation, and I couldn’t 
be there for one of her appointments. The surgeon asked 
where I was and why I wasn’t there, and that kind of thing. So 
yes, it was noticed when I wasn’t there. (Elaine, aged 61, 
bisexual woman and bereaved partner of lesbian woman who 
died of cancer)
Health-care professionals’ overt recognition of the 
depth and duration of the relationship, and the need for 
intimacy and closeness, was also central to positive 
experiences:
I think one of them even lifted up the duvet and said, I think 
now is the time to, you know kind of be with her and I cuddled. 
I there I was in bed with her with three healthcare professionals 
… It was very comfortable to do that. And that was very 
intimate thing to be a part of or to share with somebody else. 
(Rebecca, aged 38, bereaved partner of bisexual woman who 
died of cancer)
Service level. Service-level facilitators of good care 
included LGBT visibility, for example, health-care insti-
tutions partnering with LGBT organisations to commu-
nicate a visible message of acceptance and support. One 
participant described the positive experience she had when 
choosing a care home for her partner, reinforced by clear 
LGBT visibility within the institution:
She also got the company to get the OLGA- Older Lesbian 
and Gay something or other, which I’d never heard of … As a 
logo on the back of their brochure … So as to say, ‘We’re gay-
friendly’, sort of thing … I think that, just having that as a sort 
of logo is a signal, isn’t it? You know, it’s a bit like, if you’re 
looking at hotels, you can google ‘gay-friendly hotels’, for 
example. (Trisha, aged 60, bereaved partner of lesbian woman 
who died of a neurological condition)
Knowledge of local LGBT friendly support services 
was also recognised as important, enabling professionals 
to signpost individuals towards support in line with their 
preferences for disclosure and LGBT community engage-
ment. Participants described the critical importance of 
clarity from the care institution on its stance towards dis-
crimination and how it would respond. Such clear mes-
sages empowered individuals to feel confident that they 
would be treated equitably and respectfully:
The world has changed so much … but I am sure there are 
still lesbians who are uncomfortable and not confident … 
and it’s about how do you reassure them that, it’s fine you 
are going to be treated the same, just be open because we’ve 
made sure that the professionals are going to have a problem 
with that … Um, and if you do have a problem, then this is 
who you talk to, to get it sorted. If you not brave enough to 
challenge someone, because not everybody is. (Pauline, 
aged 63, bereaved partner of bisexual woman who died of 
cancer)
Diverse preferences for disclosure and exploration of 
 
identity. Preferences regarding identity disclosure were 
 32 
Palliative Medicine 32(1)
diverse, shaped by interviewees’ personal, and histori-
cal, experiences. Some participants admitted collusion 
with heteronormative assumptions to avoid potential 
negativity or a constant ‘risk assessment’ around 
disclosure:
Somebody of my age … my longer experience is one of … 
hiding my sexuality, and not acknowledging that in a formal 
way … so there is always at the back of your, well certainly 
at the back of my mind … there is always a concern that 
somebody will be negative about you. Make judgement 
about you … so you spend a lot of energy trying to work out 
at what point in the conversation do you actually 
acknowledge and do you state your sexuality … It is not 
usually about the individual per se, it is about the risk 
assessment around that. (Fiona, aged 53, bereaved partner of 
lesbian woman who died of cancer)
Others remained fearful how disclosure would influ-
ence care, reluctant to share identity, regardless of how the 
request was framed:
Every single time I see someone who is going to be 
delivering a service to me. I wonder whether I should 
pretend otherwise in case it affects the service I get. So yes, 
it does affect me. (David, aged 62, gay man living with a 
neurological condition)
Some were more circumspect, sharing only where they 
felt it was pertinent to their care:
If it’s pertinent to reveal, I will reveal, definitely … I don’t 
mind being asked directly as long as, if I detected it’s more 
personal curiosity I will use the ‘Mind your own business’ 
response, or err, ‘Why do you need to know?’. Is there’s a 
reason for why you need to know then you need to know. 
(John, aged 52, gay man living with HIV and lung disease)
Others had spent many years closeted, unable to share 
their identity. For them, disclosure was critical and affirm-
ing, central to ensuring that health-care professionals 
understood who they were and who mattered to them:
Well to be recognised that I’m gay, to be understood that I’m 
gay. And I’ve got feelings about being gay. I umm, I like to be 
accepted. (Keith, aged 68, gay man living with cancer)
Irrespective of identity, or preferences for disclosure, 
participants described the universal importance of recog-
nising that everyone deserves person-centred care, aligned 
to their needs:
I don’t think your sexuality should be an issue at all within a 
healthcare setting, because humanity is so diverse. Whatever 
your personal thoughts, you’re in a profession to treat people. 
No matter what they are. Your prejudices should never come 
into it. If they do, then it’s time for a change of profession. 
(Neil, aged 54, gay intersex man living with renal failure)
Discussion
This was the first study which sought to explore in depth 
the health-care experiences of LGBT people facing 
advanced illness, not limited to HIV/AIDS. We identi-
fied barriers to accessing care at multiple levels: inter-
nalised, interactional and service level. While basic 
clinical needs of LGB people are common to everyone 
facing advanced illness, for trans people, there are addi-
tional clinical considerations. LGBT people may also 
face further societal stressors, increased isolation and 
family estrangements and legal concerns, all contribut-
ing to additional stress at a time of increased vulnera-
bility. We also identified facilitators to good care at a 
service and interactional level.
Previous theories, including Bronfenbrenner’s36 eco-
logical systems theory, have considered how environmen-
tal factors may influence an individual’s development and 
experiences. The ecological systems theory considers how 
the groups and institutions with which an individual may 
come into contact directly (Microsystem) or indirectly 
(Exosystem), the culture (Macrosystem) and changes over 
time (Chronosystem) may influence that individual. Our 
data expand this with an additional dimension, highlight-
ing invisible barriers, internalised by the individual, which 
result from multiple homophobic and/or transphobic expe-
riences across all of the systems.
Over recent years, there has been significant legislative 
change supporting the rights of LGBT people37–39 across 
Europe and the United States. However, societal and atti-
tudinal change remains behind legal reform, and globally, 
particularly across Africa and Asia, persecution remains 
common.40 Despite policy recommendations to improve 
health care for LGBT people,13–15 discrimination and inad-
equate care persist.22,41 Such practices reduce or delay 
access to health care at critical points, causing LGBT peo-
ple to rely on their own health knowledge,42 rather than 
seeking professional care. This jeopardises the health of 
LGBT individuals, causing them to suffer unnecessarily.
Public health approaches are needed to meet the needs 
of LGBT people facing advanced illness, working with 
communities and local and national networks. Advanced 
illness and bereavement create social and psychological 
challenges,43 and LGBT individuals experience additional 
stressors.18,20 However, such challenges are amenable to 
public health strategies: health promotion to address delays 
in accessing care, public education, community engage-
ment and partnerships with LGBT organisations. Such 
approaches increase societal support, positively impacting 
on social morbidities associated with bereavement by 
addressing the root causes of isolation and stigma.43
Alongside public health approaches, there is also a need 
to improve clinical care delivery and reduce the potential 
for anxiety and fear of discrimination at a time of extreme 
vulnerability. Ten simple, low-cost recommendations to 
improve care for LGBT people facing advanced illness 
 Bristowe et al. 
33
have been generated from the interviews (see Table 2). 
These recommendations include service-level signifiers 
 
of inclusion, including partnerships with LGBT organisa-
tions, increased visibility of the LGBT community in 
materials and images and embedding education on LGBT 
needs and experiences into core training on discrimination 
and diversity. This must focus on not only skills in deliver-
ing person-centred care but also knowledge and attitudes, 
promoting cultural sensitivity and addressing sources of 
discrimination.19,28 Additionally, health-care professionals 
need to reflect on their own attitudes and behaviours. 
Simple changes to practice could markedly improve care 
experiences for LGBT people, including avoiding hetero-
sexually framed, assumption-laden, questions; sensitivity 
in exploration of identity; careful exploration of intimate 
relationships; and explicit inclusion of partners or signifi-
cant others.
Strengths and limitations
This study has a number of strengths. This was the first 
national study which sought to examine health inequali-
ties through the experiences of LGBT people facing 
advanced illness. Recruitment nationally through media 
and community networks44 enabled us to reach individu-
als who may not have felt comfortable to share their iden-
tity with their health-care teams but wanted to participate 
in this research study. Although we failed to recruit 
within Northern Ireland, we were able to reach rural and 
urban locations across the United Kingdom, unlike 
many LGBT health-care studies that have focused on 
cities with strong LGBT communities. Through media 
recruitment, it was not necessary to rely on snowball 
sampling, which limits transferability of studies due to 
homogeneous samples. Our methods also enabled maxi-
mum variation sampling with a breadth of ages, LGBT 
identities and illnesses. Finally, working with LGBT 
charity partners (GMFA/HERO) throughout this study, 
we have ensured the project design, and outputs have 
remained grounded in the needs of the populations.
Our study did have some limitations. Despite focused 
attempts to promote the study with bisexual and trans net-
works, we had lower recruitment and did not achieve data 
saturation within these groups. We were also unable to 
recruit any trans men; however, many studies fail to 
recruit at all within the bisexual and trans communities. 
Additionally, despite promotion within Black, Asian and 
Minority Ethnic (BAME) LGBT groups, the majority of 
our participants were White British (34/40).
Future research
Collaborative health-care research with LGBT communi-
ties is increasing; however, many aspects remain under-
researched.45 There is a need for research focusing on 
person-centred outcomes of LGBT people facing advanced 
illness, and bereavement, to help clinicians proactively 
identify those with acute needs, inform service develop-
ment and improve care experiences. Additionally, further 
research exploring how best to make reference to sexual 
orientation and gender history in clinical assessment would 
help manage communication concerns and inform training 
and development.
Conclusion
Discrimination experienced by LGBT people facing 
advanced illness is unjust and at odds with legislation. 
Focused efforts are needed to improve care experiences for 
LGBT people through public health strategies to address 
issues in accessing care, and training and education, to 
address deficits in care delivery, focusing on knowledge, 
skills and attitudes of health-care professionals. However, 
this study also identified 10 simple, low-cost recommen-
dations for individuals, services and institutions, to 
improve care for LGBT people facing advanced illness. 
Finally, through working collaboratively with LGBT 
communities to promote visibility and partnership, we 
can enact a culture shift by increasing expectations for 
person-centred care and improving care delivery.
Table 2. Ten recommendations to improve care for LGBT people facing advanced illness.
Individual level
Avoid using heterosexually framed or assumption-laden language
Demonstrate sensitivity in exploration of sexual orientation or gender history
Respect individuals’ preferences regarding disclosure of sexual identity or gender history
Carefully explore intimate relationships and significant others, including biological and 
chosen family (friends)
Explicitly include partners and/or significant others in discussions
Service/institutional level
Make clear statement of policies and procedures related to discrimination
Include content regarding LGBT communities in training on diversity and discrimination
Increase LGBT visibility in materials (in written content and images)
Provide explicit markers of inclusion (e.g. rainbow lanyards or pin badges)
Initiate partnerships and/or engagement with LGBT community groups
LGBT: lesbian, gay, bisexual and/or trans.
 34 
Palliative Medicine 32(1)
Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support 
for the research, authorship and/or publication of this article: 
Recruitment maps were produced using ArcGIS v10.1 (ESRI). 
This work was supported by the Marie Curie Research Grants 
Scheme, grant MCCC-RP-14-A17159.
Declaration of conflicting interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with 
respect to the research, authorship and/or publication of this 
article.
Ethical approval
Ethical approval for the study was granted by the UK National 
Research Ethics Service (Committee: London – Camberwell St 
Giles 14/LO/1148), and all procedures followed were in accord-
ance with Declaration of Helsinki. All participants were given an 
information sheet about the study, a minimum of 24 h to consider 
participation and had an opportunity to ask questions.
Informed consent
All participants gave informed consent before the interview. 
Anonymity of respondents was protected by the use of pseudo-
nyms for all names of people, places and institutions.
References
 1. Cochran S, Bjorkenstam C and Mays V. Sexual orienta-
tion and all-cause mortality among US adults aged 18 to 
59 years, 2001-2011. Am J Public Health 2016; 106: 918–
920.
 2. Dibble S, Roberts S and Nussey B. Comparing breast can-
cer risk between lesbians and their heterosexual sisters. 
Womens Health Issues 2004; 14: 60–68.
 3. Brown J and Tracy J. Lesbians and cancer: an overlooked 
health disparity. Cancer Causes Control 2008; 10: 1009–
1020.
 4. D’Souza G, Wiley D, Li X, et al. Incidence and epidemiol-
ogy of anal cancer in the multicenter AIDS cohort study. J 
Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 2008; 48: 491–499.
 5. Katz M, Hessol N, Buchbinder S, et al. Temporal trends of 
opportunistic infections and malignancies in homosexual 
men with AIDS. J Infect Dis 1994; 170: 198–202.
 6. Clements-Nolle K, Marx R, Guzman R, et al. HIV preva-
lence risk behaviors health care use and mental health status 
of transgender persons: implications for public health inter-
vention. Am J Public Health 2001; 91: 915–921.
 7. Feldman J and Goldberg J. Transgender primary medical 
care. Int J Transgenderism 2007; 2007: 3–34.
 8. Clark M, Landers S, Linde R, et al. The GLBT Health 
Access Project: a state-funded effort to improve access to 
care. Am J Public Health 2001; 91: 895–896.
 9. Stein G and Bonuck K. Physician-patient relationships 
among the lesbian and gay community. J Gay Lesb Med 
Assoc 2001; 5: 87–93.
 
10. Chakraborty A, McManus S, Brugha T, et al. Mental 
health of the non-heterosexual population of England. Br J 
Psychiatry 2011; 198: 143–148.
 
11. Mayer K, Bradford J, Makadon H, et al. Sexual and gender 
minority health: what we know and what needs to be done. 
Am J Public Health 2008; 98: 989–995.
 
12. McCabe S, Hughes T, Bostwick W, et al. Sexual orienta-
tion, substance use behaviors and substance dependence in 
the United States. Addiction 2009; 104: 1333–1345.
 
13. National End Of Life Care Programme. The route to success 
in end of life care – achieving quality in acute hospitals, 
2010, 
http://www.leedspalliativecare.co.uk/wp-content/
uploads/2014/05/rts_acute___final_20100830.pdf
 
14. Department of Health DOH. Bereavement: a guide for 
transsexual, transgender people and their loved ones. 
London: Department of Health, 2007.
 
15. Department of Health and Human Services. Healthy people 
2010: understanding and improving health. Washington, 
DC: Department of Health and Human Services, 2007.
 
16. Department of Health. Sexual orientation: a practical guide 
for the NHS. London: Department of Health, 2009.
 
17. Care Quality Commission. A different ending: addressing 
inequalities in end of life care. London: CQC, 2016.
 
18. Harding R, Epiphaniou E and Chidgey-Clark J. Needs, expe-
riences, and preferences of sexual minorities for end-of-life 
care and palliative care: a systematic review. J Palliat Med 
2012; 15: 602–611.
 
19. Sabin J, Riskand R and Nosek B. Health care providers’ 
implicit and explicit attitudes toward lesbian women and 
gay men. Am J Public Health 2015; 105: 1831–1841.
 
20. Bristowe K, Marshall S and Harding R. The bereavement 
experiences of lesbian, gay, bisexual and/or trans* people who 
have lost a partner: a systematic review, thematic synthesis and 
modelling of the literature. Palliat Med 2016; 30: 730–744.
 
21. Sinding C, Barnoff L and Grassau P. Homophobia and het-
erosexism in cancer care: the experiences of lesbians. Can J 
Nurs Res 2004; 36: 170–188.
 
22. Elliott M, Kanouse D, Burkhart Q, et al. Sexual minorities 
in England have poorer health and worse health care experi-
ences: a national survey. J Gen Intern Med 2015; 30: 9–16.
 
23. Doka KE. Disenfranchised grief: new directions, challenges, 
and strategies for practice. Champaign, IL: Research Press, 
2002.
 
24. Elwert F and Christakis N. The effect of widowhood on 
mortality by the causes of death of both spouses. Am J 
Public Health 2008; 98: 2092–2098.
 
25. Department of Trade and Industry. Final regulatory impact 
assessment: civil partnership act 2004. London: Department 
of Trade and Industry, 2003.
 
26. Gender Identity Research and Education Society (GIRES), 
https://www.gires.org.uk/whatwedo.
 
27. The Lancet. Meeting the unique health-care needs of 
LGBTQ people. Lancet 2016; 387: 95.
 
28. Garrison N and Ibanez G. Attitudes of health care providers 
toward LGBT patients: the need for cultural sensitivity. Am 
J Public Health 2016; 106: 570.
 
29. The Coalition to Transform Advanced Care. The CTAC: 
what is advanced illness? ’s-Hertogenbosch: CTAC.
 
30. Thomas K; Prognostic indicator guidance (PIG). The gold 
standards framework centre in end of life care CIC. 4th 
ed., 
2011, 
http://www.goldstandardsframework.org.uk/
cd-content/uploads/files/General%20Files/Prognostic%20
Indicator%20Guidance%20October%202011.pdf
 Bristowe et al. 
35
 
31. Gomes B, McCrone P, Hall S, et al. Variations in the 
quality and costs of end-of-life care, preferences and pal-
liative outcomes for cancer patients by place of death: the 
QUALYCARE study. BMC Cancer 2010; 10: 400.
 
32. Costantini M, Beccaro M and Merlo F; ISDOC Study 
Group. The last three months of life of Italian cancer 
patients. Methods, sample characteristics and response 
rate of the Italian Survey of the Dying of Cancer (ISDOC). 
Palliat Med 2005; 19: 628–38.
 
33. Charmaz K. Constructing grounded theory: a practical 
guide through qualitative analysis. London: Sage, 2006.
 
34. World Health Organization. WHO definition of palliative 
care. Geneva: WHO, http://www.who.int/cancer/palliative/
definition/en/.
 
35. Tong A, Sainsbury P and Craig J. Consolidated criteria for 
reporting qualitative research (COREQ): a 32 item check-
list for interviews and focus groups. Int J Qual Health Care 
2007; 19: 349–357.
 
36. Bronfenbrenner U. Ecological models of human develop-
ment. In: Gauvain M and Cole M (eds) Readings on the 
development of children. New York: W.H. Freeman, 1994, 
pp. 37–43.
 
37. European Union. Treaty on the functioning of the European 
Union. Brussels: European Union, 2007.
 
38. The Equality Act. http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/ 
2010/15/contents, 2010.
 
39. Constitution of the United States. Equality protection clause 
of the fourteenth amendment, 2015, https://www.law.cor-
nell.edu/wex/equal_protection
 
40. Hunt J, Bristowe K, Chidyamatare S, et al. ‘They will be 
afraid to touch you’. LGBTI people and sex workers’ expe-
riences of accessing healthcare in Zimbabwe: an in-depth 
qualitative study. BMJ Global Health, 2: e000168. DOI: 
10.1136/bmjgh-2016-000168
 
41. Curie M. ‘Hiding who I am’: the reality of end of life care 
for LGBT people, 2016, https://www.mariecurie.org.uk/
globalassets/media/documents/policy/policy-publications/
june-2016/reality-end-of-life-care-lgbt-people.pdf
 
42. Johnson M and Nemeth L. Addressing health disparities 
of lesbian and bisexual women: a grounded theory study. 
Womens Health Issues 2014; 24: 635–640.
 
43. Public Health England. Public health approaches to end of 
life care: a toolkit. London: Public Health England and The 
National Council for Palliative Care, 2013.
 
44. Marie Curie BK Blog. Improving care for lesbian, gay, 
bisexual and trans* people at the end of life, 2015, https://
www.mariecurie.org.uk/blog/improving-care-for-lesbian-
gay-bisexual-and-trans-people-at-the-end-of-life/48689
 
45. Stall R, Matthews D, Friedman M, et al. The continuing 
development of health disparities research on lesbian, gay, 
bisexual, and transgender individuals. Am J Public Health 
2016; 106: 787–789.
