 rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org
Research
Cite this article: Brocklehurst RJ, Schachner ER,
Sellers WI. 2018 Vertebral morphometrics
and lung structure in non-avian dinosaurs. R. Soc.
open sci. 5: 180983.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rsos.180983
Received: 18 June 2018
Accepted: 24 September 2018
Subject Category:
Biology (whole organism)
Subject Areas:
palaeontology/evolution
Keywords:
lung morphology, respiration, archosauria,
axial skeleton, dinosauriformes
Author for correspondence:
Robert J. Brocklehurst
e-mail: robert.brocklehurst@manchester.ac.uk
Electronic supplementary material is available
online at https://dx.doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.
c.4261361.
Vertebral morphometrics
and lung structure in
non-avian dinosaurs
Robert J. Brocklehurst1, Emma R. Schachner2
and William I. Sellers1
1School of Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK
2Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, School of Medicine, Louisiana State University
Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA
RJB, 0000-0002-3017-6838; WIS, 0000-0002-2913-5406
The lung-air sac system of modern birds is unique among
vertebrates. However, debate surrounds whether an avian-
style lung is restricted to birds or first appeared in their
dinosaurian ancestors, as common osteological correlates for
the respiratory system offer limited information on the lungs
themselves. Here, we shed light on these issues by using
axial morphology as a direct osteological correlate of lung
structure, and quantifying vertebral shape using geometric
morphometrics in birds, crocodilians and a wide range of
dinosaurian taxa. Although fully avian lungs were a rather late
innovation, we quantitatively show that non-avian dinosaurs
and basal dinosauriforms possessed bird-like costovertebral
joints and a furrowed thoracic ceiling. This would have
immobilized the lung’s dorsal surface, a structural prerequisite
for a thinned blood-gas barrier and increased gas exchange
potential. This could have permitted high levels of aerobic and
metabolic activity in dinosaurs, even in the hypoxic conditions
of the Mesozoic, contributing to their successful radiation.
1. Introduction
The respiratory system of non-avian dinosaurs has been the topic of
considerable study over the years, both in an attempt to shed light
on the biology of now extinct members of the Dinosauria, and in
order to understand the origins and evolution of the highly
derived lung-air sac system of modern birds [1–7]. Unfortunately,
reconstructions of the dinosaur respiratory system based on
phylogenetic bracketing are problematic, due to the disparity in
lung morphology, physiology and ventilatory mechanics of their
closest living relatives, birds and crocodilians [8–18]. Therefore,
additional information from osteological correlates is needed.
Postcranial skeletal pneumaticity (PSP: invasion of the bone by
respiratory diverticula), is an osteological correlate commonly
& 2018 The Authors. Published by the Royal Society under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/, which permits
unrestricted use, provided the original author and source are credited.
 used to reconstruct the presence of air sacs [3,6,19–25], but this only provides indirect information about
the structure of the lungs themselves. As the lungs are the primary site of gas exchange in terrestrial
vertebrates [26,27], reconstructing their anatomy and structure is essential for estimating key
physiological parameters in fossil organisms [2,28]. The anatomy of the vertebrae, ribs and
costovertebral joints has been proposed as an osteological correlate of lung structure [4,5]. In extant
sauropsids, the dorsal surface of the lungs is directly adjacent to—and often attaches to—the vertebral
bodies and rib heads. The dorsal region of the lung often has a denser concentration of gas-
exchanging parenchyma, and a strong attachment to the body wall helps to prevent collapse [29–31].
Although overall axial morphology is also correlated with posture and locomotion [32,33], the
anatomy of the costovertebral joint specifically relates directly to the gross morphology of the dorsal
surface lung, and can be used as an osteological correlate to reconstruct lung structure in fossil taxa [4,5].
Both birds and crocodilians share bicapitate ribs, with two articulations to the vertebral column at the
costovertebral joint—the rib capitulum with the vertebral parapophysis and the rib tuberculum with
the vertebral diapophysis [34,35]. Differences in the anatomy of the joint between birds and crocodilians
are associated with differences in the structure and mechanics of the lungs. In crocodilians, the anterior-
most thoracic vertebrae have the parapophyses located on the vertebral centra, and the diapophyses are
positioned on the distal ends of the transverse processes. From the third thoracic vertebra, the
parapophysis begins to migrate onto the transverse process towards the diapophysis, and eventually
the two articulations fuse and disappear [15]. This shift in the position of the parapophysis results in a
reduction of the tuberculum, and combined with the broad and thin transverse processes, provides
a smooth thoracic ceiling (figure 1) [4,5], which may facilitate antero-posterior motion of the viscera and
mobile, compliant lungs during ventilation via the hepatic piston mechanism [5,15,36].
In birds, the parapophysis is located on the centrum for the entire dorsal series, and so the ribs are all
strongly forked with a distinct capitulum and tuberculum. This creates a furrowed thoracic ceiling, where
(a)
(c)
(d)
(b)
(e)
( f )
s
Figure 1. Anatomy of the lung and thorax of extant archosaurs. (a) Dorsal view of the lungs and trachea of a hatchling American
alligator (Alligator mississippiensis) generated from microCT. (b) Lungs of a hatchling A. mississippiensis in association with the
vertebral column and dorsal ribs in left anterolateral view. (c) Interior of the thoracic cavity of A. mississippiensis with all
viscera removed. (d) Dorsal view of the gas-exchanging lungs of the African grey parrot (Psittacus erithacus) (no air sacs are
shown). (e) Lungs of P. erithacus in association with the vertebral column and dorsal ribs in left anterolateral view. (f ) Interior
of the thoracic cavity of the ostrich (Struthio camelus) with all viscera removed. Segmented surface models in (a,b,d,e)
generated in the visualization programme Avizo 7.1 from microCT DICOM data of inflated lungs in situ. Abbreviation: s, costal
sulci. Images not to scale.
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org
R. Soc. open sci. 5: 180983
2
 the dorsal surface of the lungs is deeply incised by the rib capitulae (figure 1); 20–33% of the lung tissue
may lie between the rib heads [8,37]. Further, this immobilizes the lung’s dorsal surface providing
structural support for the lung as a whole, which experiences very little change in volume during
breathing [38] and is practically rigid overall [8,13]. This immobility is considered a prerequisite for
the extreme subdivision of the parabronchi and thinning of the blood-gas barrier [13,39,40].
Rib and vertebral morphology have been thoroughly described in dinosauriforms [4,5], but these
descriptions are purely qualitative in nature. This lack of quantitative data means that currently, it is
difficult to rigorously test hypotheses on the respiratory morphology of fossil archosaurs based on
differences in the axial skeleton, particularly those that are subtle, or divergent from the avian or
crocodilian anatomy. Additionally, a quantitative approach should yield finer detail in the differences
between specific fossil groups, allowing for a clearer analysis of the progression of the evolution of the
respiratory system along the avian stem. Based upon the anatomy observed in extant taxa, extinct
individuals with a more bird-like ‘furrowed’ thoracic ceiling can be parsimoniously reconstructed as
having a stronger attachment between the lungs and the axial skeleton, which would be indicative of
a more heterogeneous distribution of gas-exchanging parenchyma, with a densely partitioned dorsal
region, and a more sac-like ventral region [5,29,31].
In order to address these issues, we conducted a geometric morphometric analysis of dorsal vertebral
morphology (figure 2) in a range of archosaur taxa, including extant birds and crocodilians, as well as
fossil dinosauriforms. This allows us to test the hypothesis that basal dinosauriforms had vertebral
(and hence, lung) morphologies intermediate between birds and crocodilians as proposed by
Schachner et al. [4,5]. We also hypothesize that there is a phylogenetic progression towards a more
‘bird-like’ condition, in terms of the structure and mechanics of the respiratory system (as evidenced
by the morphology of the axial skeleton) beginning with basal dinosauriforms to crown group Aves.
Ultimately this information should enable us to further refine our understanding of the morphology
of the extinct dinosauriform lung, and the progression towards the fully avian-like respiratory system,
with an immobilized gas-exchanging lung, and completely decoupled flexible ventilator air sacs.
2. Material and methods
Descriptions of the skeletal and pulmonary anatomy of birds and crocodilians are widely available in the
literature [4,7,8,10,35,42–44]. For the lung models in figure 1, CT data were obtained from one hatchling
Alligator mississippiensis and one Psittacus erithacus. The hatchling Alligator specimen was harvested from
the Rockerfeller Wildlife Sanctuary for purposes unrelated to this study. Both the hatchling Alligator and
Crocodylus
Struthio
Allosaurus
(b)
(a)
(c)
(d)
Figure 2. The diapophysis, parapophysis and other vertebral landmarks. (a–c) The six anterior-most dorsal vertebrae of (a) the
extant crocodilian Crocodylus americanus (UMZC R6062), (b) the extant bird Struthio camelus (NMS 1879.85.9) and (c) the extinct
theropod Allosaurus fragilis (Madsen, 1976 [41]) showing the positions of the parapophysis (pink) and the diapophysis (blue).
(d) Landmarks used to quantify vertebral shape variation in archosaurs, shown on the first dorsal vertebra of Crocodylus
americanus (UMZC R6062). For detailed descriptions of each landmark, see the electronic supplementary material.
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org
R. Soc. open sci. 5: 180983
3
 Psittacus specimens had the trachea cannulated, inflated with a syringe and sealed. The thorax was
scanned with the lungs inflated, using a Scanco mCT 40 at the Louisiana State University School of
Veterinary Medicine (0.036–0.097 mm; 55 kVp 145 mA). The three-dimensional (3D) digital models
were segmented with a Wacom Intuos Pro pen tablet in the scientific visualization programme Avizo
v. 7.1 (https://www.fei.com/software/amira-avizo/).
For the morphometric analyses, the complete dorsal vertebral series of selected crocodilian and bird
taxa was digitized either via surface scanning or computed tomography (CT) scanning. CT data were
obtained for one subadult Alligator mississippiensis, which was scanned previously as part of an
unrelated study, and one Caiman crocodilus. The Caiman specimen was intubated with plastic tubing,
the lungs were artificially inflated via a 60 cc syringe and sealed with a stopcock prior to scanning.
Scanning took place at the University of Utah Medical Center in South Jordan using a 164 slice dual
energy Siemens SOMATOM Definition CT unit (slice thickness: 0.6–1 mm; 120 kVp 120, 200 mA).
Three-dimensional digital models of the vertebrae were segmented in Avizo 8.0. All other specimens
were surface scanned using a HP David SL3 structured light scanner. Individual scans were aligned
and merged in David Software v. 5.0, to produce three-dimensional models of each vertebra. The
extant dataset consists of the complete (or near-complete) dorsal series of four crocodilian taxa and 29
non-passerine birds, with a range of locomotor modes and body-forms. For a complete list of extant
taxa used (see the electronic supplementary material, Methods).
For the fossil taxa, measurements were based on images and figures taken from the literature, as well as
some observations of original material in museum collections. Vertebral series were sampled from
Theropoda (four taxa), Sauropoda (three taxa) and the three main clades of Ornithischia (Thyreophora,
Marginocephalia and Ornithopoda) (eight taxa) [5], as well as one non-dinosaurian dinosauriform,
Silesaurus opolensis [45,46]. Taxa were chosen based on whether or not individual vertebrae could be
seen in the required anterior view required for landmarking, and with ideally complete dorsal vertebral
series. For a full list of the fossil taxa used in this study, as well as the appropriate references (see the
electronic supplementary material, Methods).
Morphological variation of the dorsal vertebrae was quantified based on two-dimensional landmarks
placed on vertebrae in anterior view (figure 2). Although three-dimensional analyses are increasingly
common, two-dimensional analyses may be more applicable to fossil data which are often crushed or
flattened [47], and overall shape variation between species captured by the landmarks is almost always
greater than the discrepancies introduced by using two-dimensional morphometrics to represent three-
dimensional structures [48]. As outlined above, the taxonomic sample covered a range of major clades
of crocodilians, birds and non-avian dinosaurs, as well as various different body forms and locomotor
styles within birds. In anterior view, the centrum, neural arch, parapophysis and diapophysis are all
visible and identifiable using landmarks, which are homologous across archosaurs. As the vertebrae in
this sample are approximately bilaterally symmetric, only the left side of each vertebra was digitized.
If the left side was damaged or missing, specimens were mirrored as appropriate.
The landmark scheme used here is based on Head & Polly [47], with some modifications based on
Bo
¨hmer et al. [49]; the 11 landmarks capture the height and width of the centrum, the height of the
neural arch and neural spine, size and position of the prezygapophyses and the placement of the
diapophysis and parapophysis (figure 2); the position of the parapophysis and diapophysis serving as
our proxy for the ‘furrowedness’ of the thoracic ceiling. Detailed descriptions of each landmark are
provided in the electronic supplementary material, Methods.
Landmarks were collected using tpsDIG 32 [50], and imported into R [51], where they were analysed
using geomorph [52]. Landmark data were superimposed using a Procrustes alignment to remove the
effects of size, translation and orientation. Significance of differences between mean shapes for each
major taxonomic grouping was assessed via a Procrustes ANOVA. A principal components analysis
(PCA) was carried out for initial data visualization, and shape graphs showing the positive and
negative extremes of the PC axes were also generated in geomorph [52]. Landmark data, in the form of
.txt files, are available in the electronic supplementary material.
As well as the PCA, a linear discriminant analysis (LDA) was carried out in R using the MASS package
[53]. This uses additional a priori information, increasing the chances of finding differences between
groups. The extant dataset was split into three groups based on the descriptions of Schachner et al. [4,5]
(i) birds, which all have a furrowed thoracic ceiling, forked ribs and the parapophysis on the vertebral
centrum, (ii) anterior crocodilian vertebrae which create a furrowed thoracic ceiling, have forked ribs,
and where the parapophysis lies on the vertebral centrum, and (iii) more posterior crocodilian vertebrae
which create a smooth thoracic ceiling, with unforked ribs and where the parapophysis has migrated
onto the transverse process. This LDA function was then used to classify fossil taxa into one of these
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org
R. Soc. open sci. 5: 180983
4
 three categories. When predicting the classifications of fossils, posterior probabilities for each assignment
were generated using ‘leave-one-out’ cross-validation in order to test the statistical robustness of each
classification. The linear discriminant scores for both extant and extinct taxa were used to make
morphospace plots similar to those generated by the PCA.
The linear discriminant scores from LD1, which separated vertebrae based on a smooth versus
furrowed thoracic ceiling, were then used as a quantitative measure of the strength of rib forking
(which in turn served as a proxy for dorsal lung immobility, and gross lung surface structure). LD1
scores were plotted against vertebral position to visualize changes in costovertebral joint anatomy
along the vertebral column. Finally, an informal super-tree was assembled [54–56], and within-
column variation in LD1 scores was compared across different phylogenetic groups in order to
visualize when a furrowed thoracic ceiling appeared in the evolution of archosaurs.
3. Results
3.1. Measuring vertebral morphology
A Procrustes ANOVA showed significant differences between the mean vertebral shapes of all major
taxonomic
groups
(nAves ¼ 164,
nCrocodylia¼ 57,
nSilesaurus¼ 16,
nOrnithischia¼ 69,
nSauropoda¼ 30,
nTheropoda¼ 30; F ¼ 64.497; p , 0.05 in all cases) (electronic supplementary material, table S1). When
examining effect sizes, fossil taxa were generally more similar to birds than to crocodilians, although
ornithischians were equally distant from both (electronic supplementary material, table S1). A
vertebral morphospace plot, derived from a principal components analysis (PCA), including the whole
dataset, is presented in figure 3. The first PC axis accounts for 38.73% of the variation in the sample
and roughly separates dinosaurs, particularly ornithischians, from extant archosaurs. High values of
PC1 are associated with a relatively narrow centrum, proximally positioned parapophysis and short
transverse process sharply angled to the horizontal. Conversely, lower values of PC1 show wide
centra, distally placed parapophyses, and long, flat transverse processes. PC2, on other hand, accounts
for 27.5% of the variation in the sample and seems to distinguish vertebrae which create a furrowed
thoracic ceiling—birds, some dinosaurs and the anterior-most vertebrae in crocodilians—from those
which create a smooth thoracic ceiling—crocodilian mid- and posterior-thoracic and lumbar vertebrae
(figure 3). High values of PC2 are associated with a parapophysis located on the centrum and short
transverse processes. Conversely, lower values of PC2 have the parapophysis located on the transverse
process, as well as long transverse processes (figure 3).
3.2. Measuring costovertebral joint positioning
A second Procrustes ANOVA showed significant differences between the mean shapes for each of the three
categories used in the LDA (nbird_furrowed ¼ 164, ncroc_furrowed¼ 10, ncroc_smooth¼ 47; bird_furrowed–
croc_furrowed, p ¼ 0.018; bird_furrowed–croc_smooth, p ¼ 0.002; croc_furrowed–croc_smooth, p ¼
0.02). However, there was a much smaller effect size between the two furrowed groups than between
either of these and the smooth group (bird_furrowed–croc_furrowed, Z ¼ 2.69164; bird_furrowed–
croc_smooth, Z ¼ 17.30133; croc_furrowed–croc_smooth, Z ¼ 10.41833).
The LDA was generally successful at assigning correct categories to the extant dataset. Bird vertebrae
were correctly classified 100% of the time, and posterior crocodilian vertebrae, which created a smooth
thoracic ceiling, were correctly classified approximately 98% of the time. Anterior crocodilian vertebrae,
which created a furrowed thoracic ceiling, were classified correctly 70% of the time. Almost all
dinosauriform vertebrae were classified along with either birds or crocodilian vertebrae with the
parapophysis on the centrum, with high posterior probabilities. The full results from the LDA are
available in electronic supplementary material, table S2.
In the morphospace based on the linear discriminant scores from the LDA, LD1 explained 95% of the
shape variation between groups (figure 4). This was effectively an axis of how far the diapophysis and
parapophysis were separated and how furrowed or smooth the thoracic ceiling was, combining
elements of PCs 1 and 2 from the PCA (figures 3 and 4). LD1 was dominated by the position of the
parapophysis relative to the diapophysis, as well as the length of the transverse processes; low values of
LD1 are associated with a parapophysis positioned on the centrum, and short transverse processes.
High scores for LD1, on the other hand, are associated with a parapophysis located on the transverse
process, close to the diapophysis and long transverse processes (figure 4). LD2 accounted for the
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org
R. Soc. open sci. 5: 180983
5
 remaining 5% of the variation, and is associated with the morphology of the prezygopophyses, neural arch
and angle of the transverse processes to the horizontal.
3.3. Intra-columnar variation in the thoracic ceiling
Variation in smoothness of the thoracic ceiling along the vertebral column (represented by the LD1 score)
is shown in figure 5. Birds retain low values (i.e. furrowed thoracic ceiling) throughout the dorsal series.
Aves
Crocodylia
Ornithischia
Sauropoda
PC1 (38.73%)
PC2 
PC2 (27.49%)
Silesaurus
Silesaurus
Aves
Crocodylia
Aves
Crocodylia
Sauropoda
Aves
Crocodylia
Theropoda
Theropoda
Aves
Crocodylia
Ornithischia
0.2
–0.2
–0.4
–0.2
–0.2
–0.2
0.2
0
PC2 
–0.2
0.2
0
–0.2
0.2
0
–0.2
0.2
0
0.2
0
–0.4
PC1 
–0.2
0.2
0
–0.4
PC1 
PC1 
PC1 
–0.2
0.2
0
–0.4
–0.2
0.2
0
–0.4
0.2
0
0
(e)
(b)
(a)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3. Principal components analysis. (a) Vertebral morphospace produced by PCA of the entire dataset. Shape graphs represent
extremes of each PC axis. (b–e) Vertebrae from individual fossil groups compared with extant groups. Each point represents one
vertebra. Taxa colour coded by taxonomic group.
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org
R. Soc. open sci. 5: 180983
6
 In crocodilians, LD1 values are low in the anterior-most vertebrae, but then there is a sharp increase in
LD1 values and the thoracic ceiling becomes substantially smoother at the 3rd/4th dorsal vertebra,
corresponding to 20–25% along the dorsal series in these taxa. In most dinosauriform taxa, the
thoracic ceiling is furrowed anteriorly (low values along LD1), and although there is a general trend
towards increased LD1 scores posteriorly, none of the fossil taxa reach the same very high LD1 values
seen in crocodilians.
3.4. Evolutionary variation in the thoracic ceiling
Phylogenetic variability in vertebral morphology and costovertebral joint anatomy—again, represented by
LD1 score—is shown in figure 6. Crocodilians show the greatest range of morphological variation along the
vertebral column, and their mean vertebral shapes have the highest scores along the first LD axis.
Individual avian taxa show much less within-column variation (probably due in part to their lower
dorsal vertebral counts), although there is still considerable variation between different genera. All birds
LD2 (4.52%)
LD1
LD2
LD2
Aves
Crocodylia
Ornithischia
Sauropoda
Silesaurus
Theropoda
–5
5
10
LD1 (95.48%)
0
–5.0
–2.5
0
2.5
–6
–2.5
0
2.5
5.0
–4
–2
2
0
0
10
5
0
10
5
LD1
LD1
LD1
0
–5
–6
–4
–2
0
2
–6
–4
–2
0
2
10
5
0
–5
10
5
Aves
Crocodylia
Ornithischia
Theropoda
Aves
Crocodylia
Sauropoda
Aves
Crocodylia
Silesaurus
Aves
Crocodylia
(e)
(b)
(a)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4. Linear discriminant analysis. (a) Vertebral morphospace produced using LDA. Linear discriminant scores are generated
using the extant dataset; then, the linear discriminant scores are used to estimate the position of fossil taxa in this space.
Shape graphs represent extremes of each LD axis. (b–e) Vertebrae from individual fossil groups compared with extant groups.
Each point represents one vertebra. Taxa colour coded by taxonomic group.
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org
R. Soc. open sci. 5: 180983
7
 have low mean LD1 scores. Many dinosauriform taxa fall within the range of variation seen in modern
birds, particularly theropods, and all dinosauriforms have mean values below those of crocodilians.
4. Discussion
This analysis builds on previous qualitative studies on the archosaurian respiratory system and axial
skeleton [4,5]. Our methods clearly separate extant birds and crocodilians as these two groups plot
out distinctly in the PCA and the Procrustes ANOVA found significantly different group means. The
LDA easily discriminated between vertebrae which produced a ‘furrowed’ or ‘smooth’ thoracic ceiling.
Two main aspects of vertebral morphology, the length of the transverse processes and the relative
positions of the diapophysis and parapophysis, have been previously identified as major correlates of
lung structure and ventilation mechanics in archosaurs [4,5,15,16]. Both of these features strongly
loaded the first two PC axes of the PCA (figure 3), as well as the first (and major) axis of the LDA
(figure 4). Birds have short transverse processes and the parapophysis remains on the centrum,
creating a furrowed thoracic ceiling in articulation with the ribs, which have a distinct capitulum and
percentage vertebral column
Aves
Silesaurus
Ornithischia
smooth ceiling
furrowed ceiling
smooth ceiling
furrowed ceiling
Crocodylia
5
0
0
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
–5
0
LD1 score
5
10
–5
0
LD1 score
5
10
10
vertebral number
15
Theropoda
Sauropoda
(b)
(a)
Figure 5. Shape variation along the vertebral column. (a) Vertebral number plotted against the linear discriminant 1 score. (b)
Same, but with vertebral number normalized according to the total number of dorsal vertebrae in each taxon. Taxa colour
coded by taxonomic group.
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org
R. Soc. open sci. 5: 180983
8
 tuberculum (associated with the ventral parapophysis). In crocodilians, the anterior vertebrae are similar
to birds—short transverse processes and parapophysis on the centrum—and indeed, this resulted in
some overlap between birds and crocodilians in the PCA (figure 3). However, in the more posterior
vertebrae, the parapophysis migrates onto the transverse processes and the transverse processes
themselves are relatively long and flat (figures 3 and 4); combined with the reduction in the rib
tuberculum associated with the parapophysis’ migration, this creates a smooth thoracic ceiling.
By precisely quantifying the relative position of the costovertebral joint as an osteological correlate, we
aimed to provide a more detailed, fine-scale comparison of the lung structure of different dinosauriform
groups. However, we found limited evidence to support a phylogenetic progression towards an
increasingly ‘furrowed’ thoracic ceiling and a more bird-like lung structure, as all dinosaurian taxa
showed osteological correlates of dorsally immobile lungs. Although the initial PCA and Procrustes
ANOVA showed that fossil dinosauriforms occupied different regions of vertebral morphospace from
extant groups, they are all still characterized by a distinct separation of the parapophysis and
diapophysis—the parapophysis being placed ventral and substantially medial to the diapophysis, even
if it has migrated away from the vertebral centrum. In line with this, most dinosauriform taxa plotted
more closely towards the ‘furrowed’ end of the first LD axis, and the LDA classed most dinosaurs as
having vertebrae which would create a ‘furrowed’ thoracic ceiling, with high posterior probabilities.
Despite gross morphological differences, extant birds and crocodilians do share many pulmonary
characteristics, including major components of their bronchial tree, and patterns of airflow within the
lung [17,44,57]. Based on extant phylogenetic bracketing, we might assume that fossil archosaurs had
furrowed ceiling
–5
0
5
10
LD1 score
smooth ceiling
Aves
Crocodylomorpha
Dinosauromorpha
Ornithischia
Sauropoda
Theropoda
Gavialis
Crocodylus
Alligator
Caiman
Silesaurus
Ankylosaurus
Huayangosaurus
Stegosaurus
Buceros
Bucorvus
Ramphastos
Calyptorhynchus
Cariama
Bubo
Aquila
Pandion
Sagittarius
Balaeniceps
Ardea
Ciconia
Fulmarus
Diomedea
Aptenodytes
Thalasseus
Haematopus
Centropus
Otis
Tauraco
Podargus
Anser
Coroscoba
Chauna
Dromaius
Apteryx
Rhea
Struthio
Deinonychus
Tyrannosaurus
Allosaurus
Sinraptor
Apatosaurus
Diplodocus
Camarasaurus
Kritosaurus
Iguanodon
Dryosaurus
Styracosaurus
Triceratops
Fregata
Figure 6. Shape variation across phylogeny. An informal supertree of the taxa used in this study, with the range and mean of the
linear discriminant 1 scores for the whole vertebral column plotted for each taxon in the phylogeny. Taxa colour coded by taxonomic
group. The red band represents the range of values seen in extant birds.
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org
R. Soc. open sci. 5: 180983
9
 a heterogeneously partitioned lung, with a less mobile antero-dorsal region containing more of the
respiratory parenchyma, and a more compliant, saccular ventral region, which probably served a
primarily ventilatory role [7,17]. Extant phylogenetic bracketing also suggests that the lungs were
supported by a post-pulmonary septum (PPS), with the body divided into a pleural and peritoneal
cavity [58]. However, the results of our morphometric analysis indicate that the common ancestor of
Dinosauria possessed a lung which was immobilized across the whole of the dorsal surface, implying
more extreme partitioning and regionalization of gas exchange and ventilator functions. This also
suggests the presence and increased role of an intracoelomic septum, which would support the
saccular portion of the lung during ventilation and prevent collapse during exhalation [58].
Whether
the
more
extreme
partitioning
of
the
respiratory system
implied
here
in
basal
dinosauriforms represents an ancestral condition for Ornithodira, or maybe even for Archosauria,
remains unclear. Pterosaurs, the ornithodiran outgroup to dinosauriforms, have been reconstructed as
having an avian-style respiratory system based on the presence of unambiguous PSP and inferred air
sacs [59,60]. Their costovertebral morphology has been described as ‘crocodilian-like’, as the
parapophysis migrates dorsally to lie on or at the base of the transverse process, and it has been
suggested that pterosaurs therefore had more compliant, more homogeneous lungs [61]. However,
the parapophysis also migrates dorsally towards the transverse process in many dinosaurian taxa,
and our results showed greater similarity between dinosaurs and birds rather than dinosaurs and
crocodilians. Further quantitative studies focusing on pterosaurs are clearly needed.
The sister taxon to Archosauria, the lepidosaurs, generally have compliant lungs, and are considered
to have a ‘smooth’ thoracic ceiling [5]. However, lepidosaurs also lack transverse processes, and the
diapophysis and parapophysis are fused into a single joint, the synapophysis [5,34]. Additionally, the
pulmonary anatomy and ventilator mechanics are extremely diverse across the various groups, with
some having complex lungs that are dorsally attached to the body wall (e.g. varanids) and others
possessing more simplified mobile lungs (e.g. teiids) [30,58]. Therefore, further osteological correlates
need to be identified to investigate pulmonary evolution in lepidosaurs.
We now proceed to reconstruct the evolution of the respiratory system through the evolution of
dinosauriforms. Beginning at the base of the tree, the reconstructions of Silesaurus [46] represent the
most complete dorsal series known from a non-dinosaurian dinosauriform. Generally, Silesaurus
vertebrae had low LD1 scores, with the more anterior vertebrae falling within the range of values
seen in extant birds (figures 5 and 6). Only in the posterior half of the ribcage is there an increase in
LD1 scores, but these are well below the values seen in the posterior ribcage of crocodilians (figure 5).
All vertebrae in Silesaurus were classed as creating a ‘furrowed’ thoracic ceiling by the LDA, with high
posterior probabilities. The vertebral anatomy of Silesaurus combined with the morphology of the ribs,
which possess a clearly separated tuberculum and capitulum [5,46], would have produced a furrowed
thoracic ceiling. This, in turn, indicates that Silesaurus had a heterogeneously partitioned lung, with an
immobile dorsal region that probably contained most of the gas exchange tissue and vasculature.
Previous descriptive work on the vertebral anatomy of ornithischians noted that they, of all the non-
avian dinosaurs, most closely resembled crocodilians, particularly in the position of the parapophosis
[5]. This character is variable among Ornithischia, as some taxa have the parapophysis on the neural
arch, but in others it may be positioned at the base of the transverse process or on the transverse process
itself [5]. The ornithischian vertebrae included in our sample had the parapophysis ventral to the
diapophysis, and it never fully migrated to the distal end of transverse processes. As a result, in our
analysis, most ornithischians had relatively low LD1 scores, and were generally classed as having
‘forked’ ribs by the LDA. Nevertheless, certain ornithischian taxa were picked out by the LDA as
showing crocodilian traits in their vertebral morphology; both Stegosaurus and Triceratops had vertebrae
classified as creating a ‘smooth’ thoracic ceiling. However, the LD1 scores were still much lower than
those seen in crocodilians. In a variety of small-bodied ornithischian taxa, the diapophysis and
parapophysis sometimes fuse into a single facet in the posterior-most dorsals [62–64]. However, even in
taxa such as this, ornithischians retain distinct bicapitate dorsal ribs along all (or at least most) of their
dorsal series, and so would also have had a furrowed thoracic ceiling. Ornithischians, therefore,
generally show evidence of a dorsally immobile lung, and even the specific exceptions discussed above
still show less dorsal mobility and a more furrowed thoracic ceiling than in extant crocodilians,
especially when considering the morphology of both the vertebrae and ribs.
Both non-dinosaurian dinosauriforms and ornithischian dinosaurs lack unambiguous evidence of
PSP and so it is difficult to make inferences about the non-gas-exchanging regions of the lung in these
groups. However, Butler et al. [25] do raise the possibility of non-invasive respiratory diverticula, and
possibly air sacs, being present in both Silesaurus and ornithischians, as an ancestral feature of
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org
R. Soc. open sci. 5: 180983
10
 Ornithodira. The cervical and anterior dorsal vertebrae of Silesaurus, as well as some ornithischians,
possess strongly developed laminae and deep fossae [25,46] and there are similarities in the
distribution and development of these ‘ambiguous’ pneumatic features (i.e. features possibly
associated with respiratory diverticula) and unambiguous features found in other taxa [25]. The
‘common pattern’ of pneumaticity in extant birds has PSP limited to the cervical and anterior dorsal
vertebrae [65], and this is also where the first unambiguous evidence of PSP occurs in pterosaurs,
sauropods
and
theropods
[6,25].
This
provides
support
for
the
features
in
Silesaurus
and
ornithischians being potentially associated with respiratory diverticula, although this still requires
further testing, e.g. using newly identified histological correlates for bone and air sac associations [66].
Descriptions of preserved sauropod ribcage elements show the separation of the diapophysis and
parapophysis, and the consistently forked ribs [5]. This is supported by the results of this analysis,
where the sauropod taxa examined had generally low scores on LD1, and fit broadly within the range
of values seen in extant birds (figures 5 and 6); indeed, Apatosaurus and Diplodocus fit entirely within
this range. Additionally, all sauropod vertebrae were classified as creating a ‘furrowed’ thoracic ceiling
in the LDA, apart from a few vertebrae in Camarasaurus. Basal sauropodomorphs (prosauropods) have
been previously described as having a distinct parapophysis and diapophysis, as well as short
transverse processes [5]; the parapophysis is on the neural arch in middle and posterior dorsals, and
though it does not usually merge with the diapophysis, it can be positioned just anteroventral to it on
the posterior-most dorsals. The first four ribs were strongly forked, and while this was followed by a
gradual reduction in the tuberculum, all ribs remain bicapitate [5]. Therefore, the overall picture of
respiratory evolution in both basal sauropodomorphs and sauropods is that they all possessed a well-
separated diapophysis and parapophysis, bicapitate ribs, a furrowed thoracic ceiling, and the dorsal
surfaces of the lung were immobilized by the adjacent ribs and vertebrae.
Theropods have been previously described as having the most ‘distinctly avian’ axial morphology
[4,5]. The taxa included in this study included one taxon from most of the main clades of
Theropoda—Tetanurae, Coelurosauria and Maniraptora. There was no observable trend towards an
increasingly avian vertebral structure moving crown-wards towards birds; however, more specimens
from a broader phylogenetic range of taxa are required to properly evaluate any specific trends in this
group. Theropods have a very separate parapophysis and diapophysis for the entire vertebral series
[5], and showed low LD1 scores as a result (figures 4 and 5). All theropods had vertebrae classified as
creating a ‘furrowed’ thoracic ceiling in the LDA, and all taxa fell within the range of LD1 values seen
in extant birds (figures 5 and 6). Although not included in this analysis, descriptions of more basal
theropods, e.g. the abelisauroid Majungatholus note separate parapophysis and diapophysis, and ribs
with a distinct capitulum and tuberculum [5,67]. These results support the reconstruction of a dorsally
immobilized lung in non-avian theropods.
In both sauropods and theropods, the presence and distribution of PSP has been widely used to infer
the presence of bird-like air sacs, and imply the presence of a bird-like lung [3,24,68,69]. Respiratory
diverticula originating from specific air sacs pneumatize specific regions of the skeleton adjacent to
the skeleton [20]. Whereas older accounts suggested that diverticula from the cervical air sacs and
lungs can extend from the all the way down to the pelvic region [70], these findings could not be
replicated [20]. Some juvenile birds exhibit a ‘pneumatic hiatus’, or a gap in the pneumatization of the
vertebral column indicative of an anterior and posterior centre of pneumatization [71,72]. Although
absent in the most basal members of each clade [6,73], there are several examples of this, and similar
‘pneumatic diminutions’ (a reduction in the extent of pneumatization), in the fossil record of both
sauropodomorphs [24,69,73,74] and theropods [3,23,75]. This indicates that the diverticula responsible
for pneumatizing the axial skeleton originated from multiple sources, further suggesting the presence
of air sacs.
However, in addition to their associations with respiratory diverticula, avian air sacs have strict
embryological and topological distinctions from the homologous ‘saccular regions’ of the crocodilian
lung [17]. In birds the air sacs are projections of the lung, separated from it by the horizontal and
oblique septa, a relationship laid down early on in development when the air sac primordia invade
the PPS, splitting it into two distinct septa [76,77]; by contrast, in other sauropsids, including
crocodilians, lung development occurs along the pleural aspect of the PPS, so that the saccular regions
are not projections from the rest of the lung, and the whole lung has a smooth outer contour [17].
Therefore, in order to say a fossil taxon truly possessed air sacs requires additional evidence of a
bipartite PPS. The patterns and distribution of pneumaticity observed in fossils could also be
explained by pulmonary diverticula emerging from the anterior and posterior saccular regions of a
heterogeneous, ventrally flexible lung not bounded by horizontal and oblique septa. This would be
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org
R. Soc. open sci. 5: 180983
11
 a transitional stage towards the avian condition, but is not a fully decoupled exchanger and ventilator (i.e.
immobilized lung and flexible air sacs) as seen in extant birds.
It is possible that some more derived theropods did have a fully decoupled lung and air sacs, with the
immobile lung supported ventrally by a bipartite PPS, as in birds. This has been speculated based on the
presence of well-developed hypapophyses in maniraptoran theropods [58]. The hypapophyses act as
attachment sites for the median fibres of the horizontal and oblique septa [8], and so are a potential
osteological correlate for the avian bipartite PPS. The presence of this bipartite PPS would have
provided additional structural support for a rigid immobile lung, and physically separated the gas-
exchanging regions from the air sacs, completing the division of the respiratory system into a
functionally discrete exchanger and ventilator, as seen in extant birds [58]. This remains somewhat
speculative, however, as the hypapophyses are also present in crocodilians, and in both birds and
crocodilians serve as an attachment for the longus colli muscles [78,79].
It should also be noted in discussions of PSP that respiratory diverticula themselves have not been
shown to serve any respiratory function, beyond providing evidence of air sac-like structures [80]. In
extant birds, increased PSP beyond the cervicothoracic region is generally associated with increasing
body mass [65]. In theropod dinosaurs, increased PSP has also been observed in large-bodied taxa [6]
further suggesting its main role was in mass reduction. The prevalence of PSP in sauropods, which
are almost all uniformly large [24,81], and pterosaurs which need to reduce mass for flight [59,60],
also suggests a role in mass reduction.
Therefore, we propose the following scenario for the evolution of the dinosauriform respiratory
system (figure 7). A dorsally immobile lung, strongly partitioned into gas-exchanging and ventilatory
regions, which may have been associated with non-invasive diverticula, was present in the immediate
ancestors of dinosauriforms [25] (figure 7). In sauropods and theropods respiratory diverticula became
invasive, associated with the presence of unambiguous PSP. This was presumably as a means of body
mass reduction, as an adaptation to large body size [6,24] (figure 7). The distribution of PSP suggests
that these taxa possessed anteriorly and posteriorly positioned flexible air sacs, or at least saccular
regions of the lung. In more derived maniraptoran theropods, the body size threshold at which
increased PSP evolved was reduced, possibly as an adaptation to high metabolic rates [6], and the
presence of well-developed hypapophyses on the dorsal vertebrae may indicate the presence of an
avian, bipartite PPS, and a fully decoupled immobilized lung and flexible air sacs [58] (figure 7).
Recently, major reorganizations have been proposed for the dinosaurian tree, with the traditional
Saurischia–Ornithischia split rejected in favour of the ‘Ornithoscelida’ hypothesis, where theropods
and ornithischians are sister taxa, to the exclusion of sauropodomorphs [82,83]. While this has major
implications for the evolution of some dinosaurian characters, it is unlikely to alter our conclusions on
respiratory evolution a great deal. Our results support the presence of a bird-like, highly partitioned
Archosauria
Ornithodira
Dinosauria
Ornithischia
"Prosauropoda"
Sauropoda
"Basal" theropods
Crocodylomorpha
Pterosauria
C
Majungatholus
Allosaurus
Tyrannosaurus
Velociraptor
Aves
Silesaurus
O
no pneumatic features
(no evidence for diverticula)
unambiguous pneumatic features
(evidence for diverticula)
1. Unidirectionally ventilated, heterogeneously partitioned lungs supported by 
    post-pulmonary septum
2. Possible origin of non-invasive air sac system
3. Dorsally immobilized lungs, possible thinning of blood-gas barrier
4. Pneumatic hiatus, evidence of anterior and posterior air sacs
6. Immobile lungs, thinned blood-gas barrier
6.
4.
4.
4.
3.
2.
1.
5. Well-developed hypapophyses, possible bipartite post-pulmonary septum
5.
potentially pneumatic features
(suggestive of diverticula)
Figure 7. Evolution of the archosaur respiratory system. A phylogeny of Archosauria, showing key modifications to the respiratory
system associated with the evolution of the avian lung-air sac system.
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org
R. Soc. open sci. 5: 180983
12
 lung in all dinosaurs—and even non-dinosaurian dinosauriforms—before the three major clades of
dinosaurs split from one another (figure 7). Also, although often thought of as a shared saurischian
character, the evolution of unambiguous PSP and a pneumatic hiatus occurred independently in
sauropods and theropods (figure 7).
The anatomy of the costovertebral joint in non-avian dinosaurs provides information not only on the
structure of the lungs, but also on how they were potentially ventilated. The morphology of the vertebrae
in crocodilians is suggested to correlate with hepatic piston breathing [4]. Experimental fluoroscopy data
clearly show the anteroposterior motion of the viscera and the displacement of the lung’s posterior
border [15,36]; the smooth thoracic ceiling is hypothesized to facilitate this motion [4]. This is also
associated with vertebrae with very high LD1 scores (figures 4–6). Birds, by contrast, have a furrowed
thoracic ceiling which contributes to the immobility of the volume-constant avian lung, which is
ventilated by compliant ‘extra-pulmonary’ air sacs via costosternal pumping [5,7]. It has been
previously suggested that some dinosaurs ventilated their lungs using either a hepatic piston mode of
breathing, or a similar ‘visceral pump’ driven by rotation of the pelvic bones [1,5]. However, there is
no evidence that any of the fossil taxa analysed in this study possessed the associated smooth thoracic
ceiling to facilitate the anterior–posterior translation of the viscera associated with the hepatic piston
mechanism. All extinct taxa had low LD1 scores, and almost all of the species analysed had ‘forked’
ribs associated with a furrowed thoracic ceiling and a dorsally immobile lung, which suggests that
dinosaur taxa ventilated their respiratory system using costal aspiration [7,84] and perhaps a
secondary mechanism associated with the gastralia or pelvic girdle [85,86]. Although some dinosaurs
had their vertebral ribs fused to the vertebral column (e.g. Ankylosaurus) the major drivers of
ventilation in extant archosaurs seem to be the sternal ribs, which would have remained mobile, and
thus costal aspiration would still have been feasible [7,27].
Our findings have significant palaeobiological implications. The evolution of avian endothermy, and
whether or not non-avian dinosaurs possessed similar levels of metabolism, has been a topic of
considerable debate, and much of this has focused on whether the dinosaurian respiratory system was
capable of sustaining such levels of metabolism [1–3]. Our results show dinosaurs had dorsally
immobile, heterogeneously partitioned lungs, which could have supported high concentrations of gas-
exchanging parenchyma [29] and potentially a thinned blood-gas barrier [5,87]. Recent studies have
asserted that dinosaurs had high, or at least intermediate, levels of metabolism [88,89] and our results
suggest that the dinosaurian respiratory system was capable of sustaining metabolic rates such as
these. The dorsally immobile parabronchial lung structure of dinosaurs (and other archosaurs) would
have been particularly advantageous in the Mesozoic, which is considered to have been a period of
relative hypoxia compared with both modern day and with the preceding Permian [90,91], as the
avian parabronchial lung is more efficient at extracting O2 under hypoxic conditions compared with
the mammalian bronchoalveolar lung [92]. Although models of active competitive replacement of
synapsids by dinosaurs have long been rejected [93], dinosaurs along with other archosaurs still
probably had adaptations—the anatomy of the respiratory system being one [87,90,91]—which gave
them an advantage in the aftermath of the end-Permian mass extinction [94].
5. Conclusion
In extant archosaurs, birds and crocodilians, the morphology of the dorsal vertebrae, and in particular that
of the costovertebral joint, is very different and this reflects differences in the dorsal surfaces and structure
of the adjacent lungs. Whereas crocodilians have a smooth thoracic ceiling and compliant lungs, birds
possess a furrowed thoracic ceiling resulting in complete immobilization of the gas-exchanging regions
of the lung. With this new analysis, we quantitatively show that all non-avian dinosaurs possessed
costovertebral joints more similar in structure to birds than to crocodilians, and are reconstructed to
have a dorsally immobilized, heterogeneously partition lung. The evolution of the dorsally immobilized
lung ventilated by functionally decoupled air sacs, was a major evolutionary innovation along the avian
stem. The relative volume constancy of the gas-exchanging portion of the avian lung is a prerequisite
for the thinning of the blood-gas barrier, and extreme subdivision of the parabronchi. Similar
pulmonary modifications would have provided dinosaurs with more efficient means of oxygen uptake
relative to other vertebrates during the environmentally hypoxic conditions which pervaded much of
the Mesozoic, thus potentially contributing to their radiation and dominance over terrestrial ecosystems.
Data accessibility. Landmarks, classifier data and the R code necessary to replicate the major findings of this analysis (the
PCA, Procrustes ANOVA and LDA) are available in the electronic supplementary material of this paper.
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org
R. Soc. open sci. 5: 180983
13
 Authors’ contributions. All authors conceived and designed the study. E.R.S. performed CT scanning and produced the
reconstructions in figure 1. R.J.B. performed surface structured light scanning, other data collection and
morphometric analyses. R.J.B. wrote the paper. All authors critically reviewed and revised drafts of the paper.
Competing interests. We declare we have no competing interests.
Funding. R.J.B. was supported by a studentship at the University of Manchester as part of a UK Biotechnology and
Biological Sciences Research Council Doctoral Training Partnership (BB/M011208/1). E.R.S. was supported by the
Association of Avian Veterinarians.
Acknowledgements. We thank Z. Timmons and R. McGowan (NMS), M. Lowe, J. Head and M. Brooke (UMZC), J. Cooper
and J. White (BMNH), R. O’Leary, M. Norrell and C. Mehling (AMNH), C. Norris and D. Brinkman (YPM) for
curatorial assistance and specimen access. T. O’Mahoney provided scanning support, and T. Puschel assisted with
the morphometric analysis. Thanks to R. Elsey, P. Gignac and A. Watanabe for providing the hatchling alligator,
D. Conner for the spectacled caiman, and M. S. Echols DVM (the Grey Parrot Anatomy Project) for the African
grey parrot specimen. We thank E. Prondvai, P. Barrett and two anonymous reviewers for comments on previous
versions of this paper. Thanks to M. McNulty for access to the microCT at Louisiana State University. The
members of the Interdisciplinary Centre for Ancient Life, based at the University of Manchester, were the source of
many helpful discussions.
References
1.
Ruben JA, Sasso CD, Geist NR, Hillenius WJ,
Jones TD, Signore M. 1999 Pulmonary function
and metabolic physiology of theropod
dinosaurs. Science 283, 514–516. (doi:10.1126/
science.283.5401.514)
2.
Hicks JW, Farmer CG. 1999 Gas exchange
potential in reptilian lungs: implications for the
dinosaur–avian connection. Respir. Physiol.
117, 73–83. (doi:10.1016/S0034-
5687(99)00060-2)
3.
O’Connor PM, Claessens LPAM. 2005 Basic avian
pulmonary design and flow-through ventilation
in non-avian theropod dinosaurs. Nature 436,
253–256. (doi:10.1038/nature03716)
4.
Schachner ER, Lyson TR, Dodson P. 2009
Evolution of the respiratory system in nonavian
theropods: evidence from rib and vertebral
morphology. Anat. Rec. Adv. Integr. Anat. Evol.
Biol. 292, 1501–1513. (doi:10.1002/ar.20989)
5.
Schachner ER, Farmer CG, McDonald AT, Dodson
P. 2011 Evolution of the dinosauriform respiratory
apparatus: new evidence from the postcranial
axial skeleton. Anat. Rec. Adv. Integr. Anat. Evol.
Biol. 294, 1532–1547. (doi:10.1002/ar.21439)
6.
Benson RBJ, Butler RJ, Carrano MT, O’Connor PM.
2012 Air-filled postcranial bones in theropod
dinosaurs: physiological implications and the
‘reptile’–bird transition. Biol. Rev. 87, 168–193.
(doi:10.1111/j.1469-185X.2011.00190.x)
7.
Claessens L. 2015 Anatomical transformations and
respiratory innovations of the archosaur trunk. In
Great transformations in vertebrate evolution (eds
KP Dial, NH Shubin, EL Brainerd), pp. 91–106.
Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press.
8.
Duncker H-R. 1972 Structure of avian lungs.
Respir. Physiol. 14, 44–63. (doi:10.1016/0034-
5687(72)90016-3)
9.
Scheid P, Piiper J. 1972 Cross-current gas
exchange in avian lungs: effects of reversed
parabronchial air flow in ducks. Respir. Physiol.
16, 304–312. (doi:10.1016/0034-
5687(72)90060-6)
10.
Perry SF. 1988 Functional morphology of the
lungs of the Nile crocodile, Crocodylus niloticus:
non-respiratory parameters. J. Exp. Biol. 134,
99–117.
11.
Farmer CG, Carrier DR. 2000 Pelvic aspiration in
the American alligator (Alligator
mississippiensis). J. Exp. Biol. 203, 1679–1687.
12.
Claessens LPAM. 2004 Archosaurian respiration
and the pelvic girdle aspiration breathing of
crocodyliforms. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B 271,
1461–1465. (doi:10.1098/rspb.2004.2743)
13.
Maina JN. 2006 Development, structure, and
function of a novel respiratory organ, the
lung-air sac system of birds: to go where no
other vertebrate has gone. Biol. Rev. 81,
545–579. (doi:10.1111/j.1469-185X.2006.
tb00218.x)
14.
Uriona TJ, Farmer CG. 2008 Recruitment of the
diaphragmaticus, ischiopubis and other
respiratory muscles to control pitch and roll in
the American alligator (Alligator
mississippiensis). J. Exp. Biol. 211, 1141–1147.
(doi:10.1242/jeb.015339)
15.
Claessens LPAM. 2009 A cineradiographic study
of lung ventilation in Alligator mississippiensis.
J. Exp. Zool. Part Ecol. Genet. Physiol. 311A,
563–585. (doi:10.1002/jez.530)
16.
Claessens LPAM. 2009 The skeletal kinematics of
lung ventilation in three basal bird taxa (emu,
tinamou, and guinea fowl). J. Exp. Zool. Part
Ecol. Genet. Physiol. 311A, 586–599. (doi:10.
1002/jez.501)
17.
Schachner ER, Hutchinson JR, Farmer C. 2013
Pulmonary anatomy in the Nile crocodile and
the evolution of unidirectional airflow in
Archosauria. PeerJ 1, e60. (doi:10.7717/peerj.60)
18.
Maina JN. 2017 Functional design of the mature
avian respiratory system. In The biology of the
avian respiratory system (ed. JN Maina),
pp. 191–218. Cham, Switzerland: Springer
International Publishing.
19.
O’Connor PM. 2004 Pulmonary pneumaticity in
the postcranial skeleton of extant Aves: a case
study examining Anseriformes. J. Morphol. 261,
141–161. (doi:10.1002/jmor.10190)
20.
O’Connor PM. 2006 Postcranial pneumaticity: an
evaluation of soft-tissue influences on the
postcranial skeleton and the reconstruction of
pulmonary anatomy in archosaurs. J. Morphol.
267, 1199–1226. (doi:10.1002/jmor.10470)
21.
Wedel MJ. 2006 Origin of postcranial skeletal
pneumaticity in dinosaurs. Integr. Zool. 1,
80–85. (doi:10.1111/j.1749-4877.2006.00019.x)
22.
Wedel M. 2007 What pneumaticity tells us
about ‘prosauropods’, and vice versa. Special
Papers in Palaeontology 77, 207–222.
23.
Sereno PC, Martinez RN, Wilson JA, Varricchio DJ,
Alcober OA, Larsson HCE. 2008 Evidence for avian
intrathoracic air sacs in a new predatory dinosaur
from Argentina. PLoS ONE 3, e3303. (doi:10.
1371/journal.pone.0003303)
24.
Wedel MJ. 2009 Evidence for bird-like air sacs in
saurischian dinosaurs. J. Exp. Zool. Part Ecol.
Genet. Physiol. 311A, 611–628. (doi:10.1002/
jez.513)
25.
Butler RJ, Barrett PM, Gower DJ. 2012
Reassessment of the evidence for postcranial
skeletal pneumaticity in Triassic archosaurs, and
the early evolution of the avian respiratory
system. PLoS ONE 7, e34094. (doi:10.1371/
journal.pone.0034094)
26.
Duncker H-R. 2004 Vertebrate lungs: structure,
topography and mechanics: a comparative
perspective of the progressive integration of
respiratory system, locomotor apparatus and
ontogenetic development. Respir. Physiol.
Neurobiol. 144, 111–124. (doi:10.1016/j.resp.
2004.07.020)
27.
Brainerd EL. 2015 Major transformations in
vertebrate breathing mechanisms. In Great
transformations in vertebrate evolution (eds KP
Dial, NH Shubin, EL Brainerd), pp. 47–62.
Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press.
28.
Perry SF, Christian A, Breuer T, Pajor N, Codd JR.
2009 Implications of an avian-style respiratory
system for gigantism in sauropod dinosaurs.
J. Exp. Zool. Part Ecol. Genet. Physiol. 311A,
600–610. (doi:10.1002/jez.517)
29.
Perry SF, Duncker H-R. 1980 Interrelationship of
static mechanical factors and anatomical
structure in lung evolution. J. Comp. Physiol.
138, 321–334. (doi:10.1007/BF00691567)
30.
Perry SF, Duncker H-R. 1978 Lung architecture,
volume and static mechanics in five species of
lizards. Respir. Physiol. 34, 61–81. (doi:10.
1016/0034-5687(78)90049-X)
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org
R. Soc. open sci. 5: 180983
14
 31.
Perry SF, Reuter C. 1999 Hypothetical lung
structure of Brachiosaurus (Dinosauria:
Sauropoda) based on functional constraints.
Foss. Rec. 2, 75–79. (doi:10.5194/fr-2-75-1999)
32.
Frey E. 1988 Anatomie des Korperstammes von
Alligator mississippiensis Daudin. Stuttgarter
Beitra
¨ge zur Naturkunde, Serie A 424, 1–106.
33.
Molnar JL, Pierce SE, Bhullar B-AS, Turner AH,
Hutchinson JR. 2015 Morphological and
functional changes in the vertebral column with
increasing aquatic adaptation in
crocodylomorphs. R. Soc. open sci. 2, 150439.
(doi:10.1098/rsos.150439)
34.
Hoffstetter R, Gasc J-P. 1969 Vertebrae and ribs
of modern reptiles. Biol. Reptil. 1, 201–310.
35.
Baumel JJ, Witmer LM. 1993 Osteologia. In
Handbook of avian anatomy: nomina anatomica
avium (ed. JJ Baumel), pp. 45–132.
Cambridge, MA: Nuttall Ornithological Club.
36.
Brocklehurst RJ, Moritz S, Codd J, Sellers WI,
Brainerd EL. 2017 Rib kinematics during lung
ventilation in the American alligator (Alligator
mississippiensis): an XROMM analysis. J. Exp.
Biol. 220, 3181–3190. (doi:10.1242/jeb.
156166)
37.
Maina JN, Nathaniel C. 2001 A qualitative
and quantitative study of the lung of an
ostrich, Struthio camelus. J. Exp. Biol. 204,
2313–2330.
38.
Jones JH, Effmann EL, Schmidt-Nielsen K. 1985
Lung volume changes during respiration in
ducks. Respir. Physiol. 59, 15–25. (doi:10.1016/
0034-5687(85)90014-3)
39.
Maina JN, West JB. 2005 Thin and strong! The
bioengineering dilemma in the structural and
functional design of the blood-gas barrier.
Physiol. Rev. 85, 811–844. (doi:10.1152/
physrev.00022.2004)
40.
Maina JN. 2007 Spectacularly robust! Tensegrity
principle explains the mechanical strength of
the avian lung. Respir. Physiol. Neurobiol. 155,
1–10. (doi:10.1016/j.resp.2006.05.005)
41.
Madsen Jr JH. 1976 Allosaurus fragilis: a revised
osteology. Utah Geological and Mining Survey
Bulletin 109, 1–163.
42.
Mook CC et al. 1921 Notes on the postcranial
skeleton in the Crocodilia. Bulletin of the AMNH
44, article 8. (http://digitallibrary.amnh.org/
handle/2246/1730)
43.
Shufeldt RW. 1909 Osteology of birds. New York
State Museum Bulletin 130, 1–445.
44.
Farmer CG. 2015 Similarity of crocodilian and
avian lungs indicates unidirectional flow is
ancestral for archosaurs. Integr. Comp. Biol. 55,
962–971. (doi:10.1093/icb/icv078)
45.
Dzik J. 2003 A beaked herbivorous archosaur
with dinosaur affinities from the early Late
Triassic of Poland. J. Vertebr. Paleontol. 23,
556–574. (doi:10.1671/A1097)
46.
Piechowski R, Dzik J. 2010 The axial skeleton of
Silesaurus opolensis. J. Vertebr. Paleontol. 30,
1127–1141. (doi:10.1080/02724634.2010.
483547)
47.
Head JJ, Polly PD. 2015 Evolution of the snake
body form reveals homoplasy in amniote Hox
gene function. Nature 520, 86–89. (doi:10.
1038/nature14042)
48.
Cardini A. 2014 Missing the third dimension in
geometric morphometrics: how to assess if 2D
images really are a good proxy for 3D
structures? Hystrix Ital. J. Mammal. 25, 73–81.
(doi:10.4404/hystrix-25.2-10993)
49.
Bo
¨hmer C, Rauhut OWM, Wo
¨rheide G. 2015
Correlation between Hox code and vertebral
morphology in archosaurs. Proc. R. Soc. B 282,
20150077. (doi:10.1098/rspb.2015.0077)
50.
Rohlf FJ. 2001 TPSDig2: a program for landmark
development and analysis. See http://life.bio.
sunysb.edu/morph.
51.
R Core Team. 2014 R: A language and
environment for statistical computing. Vienna,
Austria: R Foundation for Statistical Computing.
See http://www.R-project.org/.
52.
Adams DC, Ota
´rola-Castillo E. 2013 geomorph:
an R package for the collection and analysis of
geometric morphometric shape data. Methods
Ecol. Evol. 4, 393–399. (doi:10.1111/2041-
210X.12035)
53.
Venables WN, Ripley BD. 2002 Modern applied
statistics with S. 4th edn. New York, NY: Springer
54.
Man Z, Yishu W, Peng Y, Xiaobing W. 2011
Crocodilian phylogeny inferred from twelve
mitochondrial protein-coding genes, with new
complete mitochondrial genomic sequences for
Crocodylus acutus and Crocodylus novaeguineae.
Mol. Phylogenet. Evol. 60, 62–67. (doi:10.1016/
j.ympev.2011.03.029)
55.
Benton M. 2014 Vertebrate palaeontology.
Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons.
56.
Prum RO, Berv JS, Dornburg A, Field DJ,
Townsend JP, Lemmon EM, Lemmon AR. 2015
A comprehensive phylogeny of birds (Aves)
using targeted next-generation DNA
sequencing. Nature 526, 569–573. (doi:10.
1038/nature15697)
57.
Farmer CG, Sanders K. 2010 Unidirectional
airflow in the lungs of alligators. Science 327,
338–340. (doi:10.1126/science.1180219)
58.
Klein W, Owerkowicz T. 2006 Function of
intracoelomic septa in lung ventilation of
amniotes: lessons from lizards. Physiol.
Biochem. Zool. 79, 1019–1032. (doi:10.
1086/507656)
59.
Claessens LPAM, O’Connor PM, Unwin DM. 2009
Respiratory evolution facilitated the origin of
pterosaur flight and aerial gigantism. PLoS ONE
4, e4497. (doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0004497)
60.
Butler RJ, Barrett PM, Gower DJ. 2009
Postcranial skeletal pneumaticity and air-sacs in
the earliest pterosaurs. Biol. Lett. 5, 557–560.
(doi:10.1098/rsbl.2009.0139)
61.
Geist NR, Hillenius WJ, Frey E, Jones TD, Elgin
RA. 2014 Breathing in a box: constraints on
lung ventilation in giant pterosaurs. Anat. Rec.
297, 2233–2253. (doi:10.1002/ar.22839)
62.
Galton PM. 1974 The ornitheschian dinosaur
Hypsilophodon from the Wealdon of the Isle of
Wight. Bulletin of the British Museum (Natural
History), Geology 25, 1–152.
63.
Galton PM. 1981 Dryosaurus, a
hypsilophodontid dinosaur from the upper
Jurassic of North America and Africa postcranial
skeleton. Pala
¨ontol. Z. 55, 271–312. (doi:10.
1007/BF02988144)
64.
Santa Luca AP. 1980 The postcranial skeleton of
Heterodontosaurus tucki (Reptilia, Ornithischia)
from the Stromberg of South Africa. Annals of
the South African Museum 79, 159–211.
65.
O’Connor PM. 2009 Evolution of archosaurian
body plans: skeletal adaptations of an
air-sac-based breathing apparatus in birds
and other archosaurs. J. Exp. Zool. Part Ecol.
Genet. Physiol. 311A, 629–646. (doi:10.
1002/jez.548)
66.
Lambertz M, Bertozzo F, Sander PM. 2018 Bone
histological correlates for air sacs and their
implications for understanding the origin of the
dinosaurian respiratory system. Biol. Lett. 14,
20170514. (doi:10.1098/rsbl.2017.0514)
67.
O’Connor PM. 2007 The postcranial axial
skeleton of Majungasaurus crenatissimus
(Theropoda: Abelisauridae) from the late
cretaceous of madagascar. J. Vertebr. Paleontol.
27, 127–162. (doi:10.1671/0272-
4634(2007)27[127:TPASOM]2.0.CO;2)
68.
Britt BB, Makovicky PJ, Gauthier J, Bonde N.
1998 Postcranial pneumatization in
Archaeopteryx. Nature 395, 374–376. (doi:10.
1038/26469)
69.
Wedel MJ. 2003 Vertebral pneumaticity, air sacs,
and the physiology of sauropod dinosaurs.
Paleobiology 29, 243–255. (doi:10.1666/0094-
8373(2003)029,0243:VPASAT.2.0.CO;2)
70.
Cover MS. 1953 Gross and microscopic anatomy
of the respiratory system of the turkey. III. The
air sacs. Am. J. Vet. Res. 14, 239–245.
71.
King AS. 1957 The aerated bones of Gallus
domesticus. Cells Tissues Organs 31, 220–230.
(doi:10.1159/000141282)
72.
Hogg DA. 1984 The development of
pneumatisation in the postcranial skeleton of
the domestic fowl. J. Anat. 139, 105.
73.
Yates AM, Wedel MJ, Bonnan MF. 2012 The
early evolution of postcranial skeletal
pneumaticity in sauropodomorph dinosaurs.
Acta Palaeontol. Pol. 57, 85–100. (doi:10.4202/
app.2010.0075)
74.
Melstrom KM, D’emic MD, Chure D, Wilson JA.
2016 A juvenile sauropod dinosaur from the
Late Jurassic of Utah, U.S.A., presents further
evidence of an avian style air-sac system.
J. Vertebr. Paleontol. 36, e1111898. (doi:10.
1080/02724634.2016.1111898)
75.
Watanabe A, Gold MEL, Brusatte SL, Benson
RBJ, Choiniere J, Davidson A, Norell MA. 2015
Vertebral pneumaticity in the ornithomimosaur
Archaeornithomimus (Dinosauria: Theropoda)
revealed by computed tomography imaging and
reappraisal of axial pneumaticity in
Ornithomimosauria. PLoS ONE 10, e0145168.
(doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0145168)
76.
Poole M. 1909 The development of the
subdivisions of the pleuroperitoneal cavity in
birds. In Proc. of the Zoological Society of
London, pp. 210–235. Wiley Online Library.
(https://zslpublications.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/full/10.1111/j.1096-3642.1909.tb01866.x)
77.
Duncker H-R. 1978 Development of the avian
respiratory and circulatory systems. In
Respiratory function in birds, adult and
embryonic, pp. 260–273. Berlin, Germany:
Springer.
78.
Gasc J-P. 1981 Axial musculature. Biol. Reptil.
11, 355–435.
79.
Baumel JJ. 1993 Handbook of avian anatomy:
nomina anatomica avium. Cambridge, MA:
Nuttall Ornithological Club.
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org
R. Soc. open sci. 5: 180983
15
 80.
Farmer CG. 2006 On the origin of avian air sacs.
Respir. Physiol. Neurobiol. 154, 89–106.
(doi:10.1016/j.resp.2006.04.014)
81.
Sander PM. 2013 An evolutionary cascade
model for sauropod dinosaur gigantism:
overview, update and tests. PLoS ONE 8,
e78573. (doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0078573)
82.
Baron MG, Norman DB, Barrett PM. 2017 A new
hypothesis of dinosaur relationships and early
dinosaur evolution. Nature 543, 501–506.
(doi:10.1038/nature21700)
83.
Parry LA, Baron MG, Vinther J. 2017 Multiple
optimality criteria support Ornithoscelida. R. Soc.
open sci. 4, 170833. (doi:10.1098/rsos.170833)
84.
Codd JR, Manning PL, Norell MA, Perry SF. 2008
Avian-like breathing mechanics in maniraptoran
dinosaurs. Proc. R. Soc. B 275, 157–161.
(doi:10.1098/rspb.2007.1233)
85.
Carrier DR, Farmer CG. 2000 The evolution of
pelvic aspiration in archosaurs. Paleobiology 26,
271–293. (doi:10.1666/0094-8373(2000)026
,0271:TEOPAI.2.0.CO;2)
86.
Claessens LPAM. 2004 Dinosaur gastralia; origin,
morphology, and function. J. Vertebr. Paleontol.
24, 89–106. (doi:10.1671/A1116-8)
87.
Farmer CG. 2010 The provenance of alveolar
and parabronchial lungs: insights from
paleoecology and the discovery of
cardiogenic, unidirectional airflow in the
American alligator (Alligator mississippiensis).
Physiol. Biochem. Zool. 83, 561–575. (doi:10.
1086/605335)
88.
Grady JM, Enquist BJ, Dettweiler-Robinson E,
Wright NA, Smith FA. 2014 Evidence for
mesothermy in dinosaurs. Science 344,
1268–1272. (doi:10.1126/science.1253143)
89.
Legendre LJ, Gue
´nard G, Botha-Brink J, Cubo J.
2016 Palaeohistological evidence for ancestral
high metabolic rate in archosaurs. Syst. Biol. 65,
989–996. (doi:10.1093/sysbio/syw033)
90.
Ward P. 2006 Out of thin air: dinosaurs, birds,
and Earth’s ancient atmosphere. Washington,
DC: Joseph Henry Publishers.
91.
Berner RA, VandenBrooks JM, Ward PD. 2007
Oxygen and evolution. Science 316, 557–558.
(doi:10.1126/science.1142654)
92.
Scheid P, Piiper J. 1987 Gas exchange and
transport. Bird Respir. 1, 98–129.
93.
Benton MJ. 1983 Dinosaur success in the Triassic:
a noncompetitive ecological model. Q. Rev. Biol.
58, 29–55. (doi:10.1086/413056)
94.
Benton MJ, Forth J, Langer MC. 2014 Models for
the rise of the dinosaurs. Curr. Biol. 24,
R87–R95. (doi:10.1016/j.cub.2013.11.063)
rsos.royalsocietypublishing.org
R. Soc. open sci. 5: 180983
16
