 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / July 29, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 29 
745
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
On July 25, 2016, this report was posted as an MMWR Early 
Release on the MMWR website (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr).
Zika virus has been identified as a cause of congenital micro-
cephaly and other serious brain defects (1). CDC issued interim 
guidance for the prevention of sexual transmission of Zika 
virus on February 5, 2016, with an initial update on April 1, 
2016 (2). The following recommendations apply to all men 
and women who have traveled to or reside in areas with active 
Zika virus transmission* and their sex partners. The recom-
mendations in this report replace those previously issued and 
are now updated to reduce the risk for sexual transmission of 
Zika virus from both men and women to their sex partners. 
This guidance defines potential sexual exposure to Zika virus 
as having had sex with a person who has traveled to or lives in 
an area with active Zika virus transmission when the sexual 
contact did not include a barrier to protect against infection. 
Such barriers include male or female condoms for vaginal 
or anal sex and other barriers for oral sex.† Sexual exposure 
includes vaginal sex, anal sex, oral sex, or other activities that 
might expose a sex partner to genital secretions.§ This guid-
ance will be updated as more information becomes available.
As of July 20, 2016, 15 cases of Zika virus infection transmit-
ted by sexual contact had been reported in the United States.¶ 
Sexually transmitted Zika virus infection has also been reported 
in other countries (3). In published reports, the longest interval 
after symptom onset that sexual transmission from a man might 
have occurred was 32–41 days (4). Using real-time reverse 
transcription–polymerase chain reaction (rRT-PCR), which 
detects viral RNA but is not necessarily a measure of infectiv-
ity, Zika virus RNA has been detected in semen up to 93 days 
after symptom onset (5). In addition, one report describes an 
asymptomatically infected man with Zika virus RNA detected 
by rRT-PCR in his semen 39 days following departure from a 
Zika virus-affected area and who might have sexually transmit-
ted Zika virus to his partner (6). In most cases, serial semen 
specimens were not collected until Zika virus RNA was no 
longer detectable so that the precise duration and pattern of 
infectious Zika virus in semen remain unknown. Zika virus 
also has been transmitted from a symptomatically infected 
woman to a male sex partner (7), and Zika virus RNA has been 
detected in vaginal fluids 3 days after symptom onset and in 
cervical mucus up to 11 days after symptom onset (8). For sex 
partners of infected women, Zika virus might be transmitted 
through exposure to vaginal secretions or menstrual blood. 
Sexual transmission of infections, including those caused by 
other viruses, is reduced by consistent and correct use of bar-
riers to protect against infection.
With this update, CDC is expanding its existing recommen-
dations to cover all pregnant couples, which includes pregnant 
women with female sex partners. This guidance also describes 
what other couples (those who are not pregnant or planning 
to become pregnant) can do to reduce the risk for Zika virus 
transmission. CDC’s recommendations for couples planning 
to become pregnant have been published separately (9).
Updated Recommendations
Recommendations for pregnant couples. Zika virus 
infection is of particular concern during pregnancy. Pregnant 
women with sex partners (male or female) who live in or who 
have traveled to an area with active Zika virus transmission 
should consistently and correctly use barriers against infec-
tion during sex or abstain from sex for the duration of the 
pregnancy. These recommendations reduce the risk for sexual 
transmission of Zika virus during pregnancy, which could have 
adverse fetal effects. Pregnant women should discuss with their 
health care provider their own and their sex partner’s history of 
having been in areas with active Zika virus transmission and 
history of illness consistent with Zika virus disease**; provid-
ers can consult CDC’s guidance for evaluation and testing of 
pregnant women (10).
Recommendations for couples who are not pregnant and 
are not planning to become pregnant. Several factors could 
influence a couple’s level of concern about sexual transmission 
of Zika virus. The risk for acquiring mosquito-borne Zika virus 
infection in areas with active transmission depends on the 
duration and extent of exposure to infected mosquitoes and 
Update: Interim Guidance for Prevention of Sexual Transmission 
of Zika Virus — United States, July 2016
John T. Brooks, MD1; Allison Friedman, MS2; Rachel E. Kachur, MPH2; Michael LaFlam1; Philip J. Peters, MD2; Denise J. Jamieson, MD3
* http://www.cdc.gov/zika/geo/index.html.
† Barrier methods to protect against infection include male or female condoms for 
vaginal or anal sex, male condoms for oral sex (mouth-to-penis), and male condoms 
cut to create a flat barrier or dental dams for oral sex (mouth-to-vagina).
§ For the purpose of these guidelines, sex is specifically defined as vaginal sex 
(penis-to vagina sex), anal sex (penis-to-anus sex), oral sex (mouth-to-penis sex 
or mouth-to-vagina sex), and the sharing of sex toys.
¶ http://www.cdc.gov/zika/geo/united-states.html.
 
** Clinical illness consistent with Zika virus disease includes one or more of the 
following signs or symptoms: acute onset of fever, maculopapular rash, 
arthralgia, or conjunctivitis.
Please note: Updated guidance has been published. To view the update, please click here.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
746 
MMWR / July 29, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 29
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
the steps taken to prevent mosquito bites.†† According to cur-
rently available information, most Zika virus infections appear 
to be asymptomatic, and when illness does occur, it is usually 
mild, with symptoms lasting from several days to a week; severe 
disease requiring hospitalization is uncommon (11).
Men and women who want to reduce the risk for sexual 
transmission of Zika virus should use barrier methods against 
infection consistently and correctly during sex or abstain from 
sex when one sex partner has traveled to or lives in an area with 
active Zika virus transmission. Based on expert opinion and on 
limited but evolving information about the sexual transmission 
of Zika virus, the recommended duration of consistent use 
of a barrier method against infection or abstinence from sex 
depends on whether the sex partner has confirmed infection or 
clinical illness consistent with Zika virus disease and whether 
the sex partner is male or female (Box). The rationale for these 
time frames has been published previously (9).
Couples who do not desire pregnancy should use available 
strategies to prevent unintended pregnancy and might consider 
multiple options, including (in addition to condoms, the only 
method that protects against both pregnancy and sexual trans-
mission of Zika virus) use of the most effective contraceptive 
methods that can be used correctly and consistently (9,12). In 
addition, couples should be advised that correct and consistent 
use of barrier methods against infection, such as condoms, 
reduces the risk for other sexually transmitted infections.
Zika Virus Testing and Sexual Transmission
At present, Zika virus testing for the assessment of risk for 
sexual transmission is of uncertain value, because current 
understanding of the duration and pattern of shedding of 
Zika virus in the male and female genitourinary tract is lim-
ited. Therefore, testing of specimens to assess risk for sexual 
transmission is currently not recommended.
Zika virus testing is recommended for persons who have had 
possible sexual exposure to Zika virus and who develop signs 
or symptoms consistent with Zika virus disease.§§ All pregnant 
women should be tested if they have had possible exposure to 
Zika virus, including sexual exposure (9,10). CDC urges health 
care providers to report to local and state health departments 
all cases of Zika virus disease, including those suspected to 
have occurred by sexual transmission.
 1Division of HIV/AIDS Prevention, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral 
Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, CDC; 2Division of STD Prevention, 
National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, 
CDC; 3Division of Reproductive Health, National Center for Chronic Disease 
Prevention and Health Promotion, CDC.
Corresponding author: John T. Brooks, zud4@cdc.gov, 404-639-3894.
BOX. Recommendations for prevention of sexual transmission of 
Zika virus for couples in which one or both partners have traveled 
to or reside in an area with active Zika virus transmission
Couples in which a woman is pregnant
• Couples in which a woman is pregnant should use 
barrier methods against infection consistently and 
correctly or abstain from sex for the duration of the 
pregnancy.
Couples who are not pregnant and are not planning 
to become pregnant*
• Couples in which a partner had confirmed Zika virus 
infection or clinical illness consistent with Zika virus 
disease should consider using barrier methods against 
infection consistently and correctly or abstain from sex 
as follows:
 
– Men with Zika virus infection for at least 6 months 
after onset of illness;
 
– Women with Zika virus infection for at least 
8 weeks after onset of illness.
• Couples in areas without active Zika transmission in 
which one partner traveled to or resides in an area with 
active Zika virus transmission but did not develop 
symptoms of Zika virus disease should consider using 
barrier methods against infection or abstaining from sex 
for at least 8 weeks after that partner departed the Zika-
affected area.
• Couples who reside in an area with active Zika virus 
transmission might consider using barrier methods 
against infection or abstaining from sex while active 
transmission persists.
* Couples who do not desire pregnancy should use the most effective 
contraceptive methods that can be used correctly and consistently in 
addition to barrier methods to protect against infections, such as condoms, 
which reduce the risk for both sexual transmission of Zika and other 
sexually transmitted infections. Couples planning conception might have 
multiple factors to consider, which are discussed in more detail in the 
following: Petersen EE, Polen KN, Meaney-Delman D, et al. Update: 
interim guidance for health care providers caring for women of 
reproductive age with possible Zika virus exposure—United States, 2016. 
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2016;65:315–22.
 
†† http://www.cdc.gov/zika/prevention.
 
§§ http://www.cdc.gov/zika/hc-providers/diagnostic.html.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / July 29, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 29 
747
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
References
 1. Rasmussen SA, Jamieson DJ, Honein MA, Petersen LR. Zika virus and 
birth defects—reviewing the evidence for causality. N Engl J Med 
2016;374:1981–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMsr1604338
 2. Oster AM, Russell K, Stryker JE, et al. Update: interim guidance for 
prevention of sexual transmission of Zika virus—United States, 2016. 
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2016;65:323–5. http://dx.doi.
org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6512e3
 3. World Health Organization. Prevention of sexual transmission of Zika 
virus: interim guidance update. June 7, 2016. Geneva, Switzerland: 
World Health Organization; 2016. http://apps.who.int/iris/
bitstream/10665/204421/1/WHO_ZIKV_MOC_16.1_eng.pdf?ua=1
 4. Turmel JM, Abgueguen P
, Hubert B, et al. Late sexual transmission of 
Zika virus related to persistence in the semen. Lancet 2016;387:2501. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(16)30775-9
 5. Mansuy J, Pasquier C, Daudin M, et al. Zika virus in semen of a patient 
returning from a non-epidemic area. Lancet Infect Dis 2016;16:894–5. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(16)30153-0
 6. Fréour T, Mirallié S, Hubert B, et al. Sexual transmission of Zika virus 
in an entirely asymptomatic couple returning from a Zika epidemic area, 
France, April 2016. Euro Surveill 2016;21(23).
 7. Davidson A, Slavinski S, Komoto K, Rakeman J, Weiss D. Suspected 
female-to-male sexual transmission of Zika virus—New York City, 2016. 
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2016;65:716–7. http://dx.doi.
org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6528e2
 8. Prisant N, Bujan L, Benichou H, et al. Zika virus in the female genital 
tract. Lancet Infect Dis 2016. Epub July 11, 2016. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/S1473-3099(16)30193-1
 9. Petersen EE, Polen KN, Meaney-Delman D, et al. Update: interim 
guidance for health care providers caring for women of reproductive age 
with possible Zika virus exposure—United States, 2016. MMWR Morb 
Mortal Wkly Rep 2016;65:315–22.
 
10. Oduyebo T, Igbinosa I, Petersen EE, et al. Update: interim guidance for 
health care providers caring for pregnant women with possible Zika virus 
exposure—United States, July 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2016. Epub July 25, 2016.
 
11. Duffy MR, Chen TH, Hancock WT, et al. Zika virus outbreak on Yap 
Island, Federated States of Micronesia. N Engl J Med 2009;360:2536–43. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa0805715
 
12. CDC. Reproductive health: contraception. Atlanta GA: US Department 
of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/
reproductivehealth/unintendedpregnancy/contraception.htm
