 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / September 2, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 34 
915
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
On August 26, 2016, this report was posted as an MMWR 
Early Release on the MMWR website (http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr). 
In June 2016, the Maryland Department of Health and 
Mental Hygiene (DHMH) was notified of a nonpregnant 
woman who sought treatment for a subjective fever and an 
itchy rash, which was described as maculopapular by her pro-
vider. Laboratory testing at the Maryland DHMH Laboratories 
Administration confirmed Zika virus infection. Case investi-
gation revealed that the woman had not traveled to a region 
with ongoing transmission of Zika virus, but did have sexual 
contact with a male partner who had recently traveled to the 
Dominican Republic. The male partner reported exposure 
to mosquitoes while traveling, but no symptoms consistent 
with Zika virus infection either before or after returning to 
the United States. The woman reported no other sex partners 
during the 14 days before onset of her symptoms and no receipt 
of blood products or organ transplants.
The couple reported having had condomless vaginal inter-
course twice after the man’s return from the Dominican 
Republic and before the woman’s symptom onset, approxi-
mately 10 days (day 10) and 14 days (day 14) after the man’s 
return. The man also reported that he received fellatio from 
the woman during their sexual encounter on day 14. On 
day 16 (2 and 6 days after the episodes of condomless vaginal 
intercourse) the woman developed symptoms of Zika virus 
infection, including fever and rash. On day 19 (3 days after 
symptom onset) she sought medical care; the provider sus-
pected Zika virus infection, and serum and urine specimens 
were collected. Flavivirus and chikungunya virus tests were per-
formed at the Maryland DHMH Laboratories Administration. 
Zika virus RNA was detected in urine, but not in serum, by 
real-time reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction 
(rRT-PCR) using a test based on an assay developed at CDC 
(1). Serum rRT-PCR testing for dengue virus and chikungunya 
virus was negative. Serologic testing was negative for Zika virus 
immunoglobulin M (IgM) antibodies using the CDC Zika 
IgM antibody capture enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
(Zika MAC-ELISA) and negative for dengue virus and chikun-
gunya virus IgM antibodies using InBios ELISA kits (InBios 
International, Inc., Seattle, Washington). Confirmatory sero-
logic testing at the CDC Arbovirus Diagnostic Laboratory 
was equivocal for Zika virus IgM antibodies using the Zika 
MAC-ELISA. Plaque-reduction neutralization tests (PRNTs) 
performed at the CDC Arbovirus Diagnostic Laboratory con-
firmed a recent Zika virus infection. Convalescent serologic 
testing performed at the Maryland DHMH Laboratories 
Administration on day 56 (40 days after symptom onset) was 
equivocal for Zika virus IgM antibodies using the CDC Zika 
MAC-ELISA and negative for dengue virus and chikungu-
nya virus IgM antibodies using InBios ELISA kits. PRNTs 
performed at the CDC Arbovirus Diagnostic Laboratory 
confirmed a recent, unspecified flavivirus infection.
The woman’s male sex partner was interviewed on day 26 
after his return to the United States. He reported that he had 
no symptoms consistent with Zika virus infection (i.e., fever, 
rash, conjunctivitis, or arthralgias) either during his travel or 
since his return, and he did not have any of the following other 
symptoms: myalgias, chills, eye pain, oral ulcers, genital ulcers, 
anal ulcers, hematospermia, hematuria, dysuria, and prostate 
pain. He reported feeling tired, which he attributed to having 
recently traveled. Serum, plasma, and urine specimens were 
collected from him on day 29, at which time he reported no 
new symptoms. Zika virus rRT-PCR testing performed at the 
Maryland DHMH Laboratories Administration was nega-
tive on serum and plasma and equivocal on urine. Serologic 
testing was positive for Zika virus IgM antibodies using the 
CDC Zika MAC-ELISA and positive for dengue virus IgM 
antibodies using an InBios ELISA kit. PRNTs performed at 
the CDC Arbovirus Diagnostic Laboratory confirmed a recent, 
unspecified flavivirus infection. Semen collected on day 31 had 
no detectable Zika virus RNA by rRT-PCR testing performed 
at the Maryland DHMH Laboratories Administration.
To date, only one other case has been reported in which a 
man without symptoms might have sexually transmitted Zika 
virus to his female partner (2). However, in that reported 
case, both the man and the woman had traveled to a country 
with ongoing Zika virus transmission where they were likely 
exposed to mosquitoes. In that case, although the detection of 
Zika virus RNA in the woman’s serum and urine by rRT-PCR 
39 days after return from travel suggested sexual transmission 
from her male partner, it could not be ruled out that she had 
been infected from a mosquito bite during travel and had a 
longer than average incubation period or a prolonged period 
of viremia. No cases of sexual transmission of Zika virus from 
an asymptomatic man returning from travel to an area with 
active Zika transmission to his female sex partner who did 
Likely Sexual Transmission of Zika Virus from a Man with No Symptoms  
of Infection — Maryland, 2016
Richard B. Brooks, MD1,2; Maria Paz Carlos, PhD3; Robert A. Myers, PhD3; Mary Grace White, MPH4; Tanya Bobo-Lenoci, MS4; Debra Aplan, MSN5; 
David Blythe, MD2; Katherine A. Feldman, DVM2
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
916 
MMWR / September 2, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 34
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
not travel have been reported. Absence of Zika virus symp-
toms in persons returning from areas with ongoing Zika virus 
transmission might not preclude sexual transmission of Zika 
virus to their sex partners. Ongoing surveillance is needed to 
determine the risk for sexual transmission of Zika virus infec-
tion from asymptomatic persons. The findings in this report 
indicate that it might be appropriate to consider persons who 
have condomless sex with partners returning from areas with 
ongoing Zika virus transmission as exposed to Zika virus, 
regardless of whether the returning traveler reports symptoms 
of Zika virus infection. Providers should request Zika virus 
testing for any patients with illness compatible with Zika virus 
disease who have had sexual exposure without barrier devices 
to prevent infections to a partner who traveled to an area with 
active Zika virus transmission (3). Such patients should also be 
reported to local or state health departments (4,5).
Current recommendations for the prevention of sexual trans-
mission of Zika virus in returning travelers differ depending on 
whether the returning traveler is symptomatic and on whether 
the couple is planning to become pregnant (3,6). Couples in 
areas without active Zika transmission with circumstances in 
which one partner traveled to an area with active Zika virus 
transmission but did not develop symptoms of Zika virus 
disease should wait at least 8 weeks after the partner who 
traveled returned from the Zika-affected area before attempt-
ing conception, regardless of the sex of the traveler. Men 
with a diagnosis of Zika virus infection should wait at least 
6 months before attempting conception, and women with a 
diagnosis of Zika virus infection should wait at least 8 weeks 
before attempting conception. Health care providers should 
counsel couples that correct and consistent use of condoms 
reduces the risk for sexually transmitted diseases and discuss 
the use of the most effective contraceptive methods that can 
be used correctly and consistently (6). Couples who do not 
desire pregnancy should consider abstaining from sex or using 
the most effective contraceptive methods that can be used cor-
rectly and consistently in addition to barrier methods, such as 
condoms, which reduce the risk for sexual transmission of Zika 
virus and other sexually transmitted infections (3). As more is 
learned about the incidence and duration of seminal shedding 
of Zika virus in infected men, recommendations to prevent 
sexual transmission of Zika virus will be updated if needed.
  1Epidemic Intelligence Service, Division of Scientific Education and Professional 
Development, CDC; 2Prevention and Health Promotion Administration, 
Maryland Department of Health and Mental Hygiene; 3Maryland Department 
of Health and Mental Hygiene Laboratories Administration; 4Baltimore City 
Health Department, Maryland; 5Montgomery County Department of Health 
and Human Services, Maryland
Corresponding author: Richard B. Brooks, richard.brooks@maryland.gov, 
410-767-7395.
References
1. Lanciotti RS, Kosoy OL, Laven JJ, et al. Genetic and serologic properties 
of Zika virus associated with an epidemic, Yap State, Micronesia, 2007. 
Emerg Infect Dis 2008;14:1232–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/
eid1408.080287
2. Fréour T, Mirallié S, Hubert B, et al. Sexual transmission of Zika virus 
in an entirely asymptomatic couple returning from a Zika epidemic area, 
France, April 2016. Euro Surveill 2016;21:30254. http://dx.doi.
org/10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2016.21.23.30254
3. Brooks JT, Friedman A, Kachur RE, LaFlam M, Peters PJ, Jamieson DJ. 
Update: interim guidance for prevention of sexual transmission of Zika 
virus—United States, July 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2016;65:745–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6529e2
4. Oster AM, Russell K, Stryker JE, et al. Update: interim guidance for 
prevention of sexual transmission of Zika virus—United States, 2016. 
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2016;65:323–5. http://dx.doi.
org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6512e3
5. Davidson A, Slavinski S, Komoto K, Rakeman J, Weiss D. Suspected 
female-to-male sexual transmission of Zika virus—New York City, 2016. 
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2016;65:716–7. http://dx.doi.
org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6528e2
6. Petersen EE, Polen KN, Meaney-Delman D, et al. Update: interim 
guidance for health care providers caring for women of reproductive age 
with possible Zika virus exposure—United States, 2016. MMWR Morb 
Mortal Wkly Rep 2016;65:315–22. http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.
mm6512e2
