 Human Primary Liver Cancer -derived Organoid Cultures for 
disease modelling and drug screening
Laura Broutier1, Gianmarco Mastrogiovanni#1,3, Monique M.A. Verstegen#2, Hayley E. 
Francies#4, Lena Morrill Gavarró3, Charles R Bradshaw1, George E Allen1, Robert Arnes-
Benito1, Olga Sidorova1, Marcia P. Gaspersz2, Nikitas Georgakopoulos5, Bon-Kyoung Koo3, 
Sabine Dietmann3, Susan E. Davies6, Raaj K. Praseedom7, Ruby Lieshout2, Jan N. M. 
IJzermans2, Stephen J Wigmore8, Kourosh Saeb-Parsy5, Mathew J. Garnett4, Luc J.W. van 
der Laan2, and Meritxell Huch1,3,9,*
(1)The Wellcome Trust/CRUK Gurdon Institute, University of Cambridge, UK (2)Department of 
Surgery, Erasmus MC-University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands (3)Wellcome Trust - 
Medical Research Council Stem Cell Institute, University of Cambridge, UK (4)Wellcome Trust 
Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, UK (5)Department of Surgery, 
University of Cambridge and NIHR Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre, Cambridge, UK 
(6)Department of Histopathology, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, 
Cambridge, UK (7)Department of Hepato Pancreato Biliary Surgery, Cambridge University 
Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, UK (8)Department of Clinical Surgery, Royal 
Infirmary of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK (9)Department of Physiology, Development and 
Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
# These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract
Human liver cancer research currently lacks in vitro models that faithfully recapitulate the 
pathophysiology of the original tumour. We recently described a novel, near-physiological 
organoid culture system, where primary human healthy liver cells form long-term expanding 
organoids that retain liver tissue function and genetic stability. Here, we extend this culture system 
to the propagation of primary liver cancer (PLC) organoids from three of the most common PLC 
subtypes: hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), cholangiocarcinoma (CC) and combined HCC/CC 
(CHC) tumours. PLC-derived organoid cultures preserve the histological architecture, gene 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
*correspondence: m.huch@gurdon.cam.ac.uk. 
Author Contributions
L.B., designed and performed experiments and interpreted results. G.M., performed experiments and interpreted results. R.A-B. and 
O.S. performed experiments. L.M.G., C.R.B., G.E.A. and S.D. performed bioinformatic analyses. S.E.D., performed the 
histopathology diagnosis. M.M.A.V., M.P.G, R.L., J.N.M.I.J., S.J.W, R.K.P., N.G. and K.S.P., provided patient material and interpreted 
clinical data. K.S.P., performed the kidney capsule transplants. H.E.F. and M.J.G. performed the drug screening, interpreted the results 
and wrote this section of the manuscript. M.H. conceived and designed the project, designed and performed experiments and 
interpreted results. M.H. and L.B. wrote the manuscript. All authors commented on the manuscript.
Competing Financial Interests
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Europe PMC Funders Group
Author Manuscript
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Med. 2017 December ; 23(12): 1424–1435. doi:10.1038/nm.4438.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 expression and genomic landscape of the original tumour, allowing discrimination between 
different tumour tissues and subtypes, even after long term expansion in culture in the same 
medium conditions. Xenograft studies demonstrate that the tumourogenic potential, histological 
features and metastatic properties of PLC-derived organoids are preserved in vivo. PLC-derived 
organoids are amenable for biomarker identification and drug screening testing and lead to the 
identification of the ERK inhibitor SCH772984 as a potential therapeutic agent for primary liver 
cancer. We thus demonstrate the wide-ranging biomedical utilities of PLC-derived organoid 
models in furthering the understanding of liver cancer biology and in developing personalized 
medicine approaches for the disease.
Primary liver cancer (PLC) is the second most lethal malignancy worldwide, with incidence 
rates rising, mainly due to an increase in associated risk factors like diabetes or obesity1,2. 
The majority of all PLC are classified into either hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) or 
cholangiocarcinoma (CC)3. There is also a combined hepatocellular-cholangiocarcinoma 
(CHC) subtype, which accounts for 0.4 to 14.2% of all PLCs4. Albeit HCC and CC are 
easily distinguishable by their histological appearance2,5, genetic and transcriptional 
landscapes6, with CHC sharing features of both7, PLC is overall a complex entity, which 
renders each case of the disease unique and in need of personalized treatment.
The development of effective treatments for liver cancer has been hindered by the shortage 
of reproducible human models to assess the efficacy of candidate therapeutic agents8. 
Historically, preclinical models have mainly consisted of genetically engineered mouse 
models or human tumour-derived cell lines propagated in either 2D-culture or as xenografts 
in mice8–10. While 2D-culture has allowed pioneering advances in cancer biology, it fails to 
recapitulate critical features of a growing tumour in vivo11, specially the 3D organization. In 
addition, CCs have proven difficult to propagate in vitro12,13.
Recent reports of culture systems of primary, non-transformed tissues growing as 3D 
structures, termed organoids, accurately recapitulate tissue architecture and function. Thus 
retinal, cerebral, kidney, intestinal and stomach organoids (among others)14 have already 
been generated from pluripotent stem cells for the study of human development and disease. 
In addition, organoids are promising disease models not only for understanding the biology 
but also for testing drug efficacy in vitro, before moving to animal models15. Accordingly, 
mouse and human cancer organoids have recently been established for colon16–19, 
pancreas17,20 and prostate21 tumours, but not, thus far, from liver tumours.
Based on our previous work in mouse liver and pancreas organoid cultures22–23, we 
recently showed that organoid cultures derived from human liver donor/healthy tissues could 
be expanded long-term in vitro while preserving most of their liver functionality and genetic 
stability over time24. Here, we demonstrate the proof-of-concept that liver organoid cultures 
also recapitulate human primary liver cancer in vitro. Hence, we have successfully 
established organoid cultures from 8 PLC patients, encompassing three of the most common 
subtypes of PLC3: HCC, CC and CHC. PLC-derived organoids recapitulate the histological 
architecture, expression profile, genomic landscape and in vivo tumourigenesis of the 
parental tumour, even after long-term expansion in culture. In addition, we demonstrate the 
utility of PLC-derived organoids for identifying genes with prognostic value for PLC and 
Broutier et al.
Page 2
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 potential novel therapeutic targets, thus opening up opportunities for drug testing and 
advances in personalized medicine approaches.
Results
Liver cancer organoids maintain the features of the parental tumour after long-term in vitro 
expansion
We have recently established culture conditions for the long-term expansion of human cells 
derived from liver donor/healthy tissues24,25. Here, we sought to selectively expand tumour 
cells from human PLC tissue by optimizing our established human liver expansion protocol. 
Surgically resected liver tumour tissue was obtained from untreated PLC patients who had 
no history of viral-meditated hepatitis. Specimens (~1cm3 tissue) from the 3 main PLC 
subtypes were obtained and each individual sample was split into 4 parts that were either 
processed for organoid derivation, histological diagnostic, genomic or transcriptomic 
analyses (Fig. 1a-b). We observed that normal/healthy contaminating tissue within the 
samples gave rise to organoids that would quickly outcompete the tumour-derived organoids, 
presumably due to differences in genetic stability, as previously suggested19. Therefore, to 
avoid the growth of healthy contaminating organoids, we modified our derivation protocol 
by (i) increasing the timing of tissue digestion, which reduced the yield of healthy 
contaminants; (ii) changing the starting culture conditions using, in addition of the classical 
isolation medium24,25, a newly defined PLC-derived organoids isolation medium consisting 
in the classical isolation medium24,25 without R-spondin-1, Noggin and Wnt3a but 
supplemented with Dexamethasone and Rho-kinase inhibitor for at least 2 weeks (Fig. 1c) 
and (iii) closely monitoring the developing organoid structures. Particularly, for all the 
samples in the manuscript we cultured half of the cell suspension in classical isolation 
medium and the other half in our tumouroid specific isolation medium, to ensure growth of 
the cultures (Supplementary Fig. 1 & methods). At the first passage all cultures (healthy and 
tumour, irrespective of their subtype-of-origin) were transferred to our previously defined 
“human healthy liver-derived organoids expansion medium”24,25 and expanded and 
maintained in this medium.
Using this novel protocol, we successfully established human PLC-derived organoids from 8 
different PLC patients, including poorly differentiated to moderate/well differentiated HCC 
(n=3) and CC (n=3), and combined HCC/CC (CHC; n=2) (Fig. 1, Supplementary Fig. 2a 
and Supplementary Table 1). We found a strong correlation between the derivation success 
rate (establishment) and the proliferation index of the original tumour. Thus, the efficiency 
of establishment of organoid cultures was 100% for those samples derived from tumours that 
contained > 5% proliferating cells (n=3 for HCC; n=2 for CHC and n=3 for CC), while we 
did not succeed in deriving organoids from very well differentiated lesions, with <5% 
proliferative cells in the original samples (n=8 for HCC and n=1 for CC), in agreement with 
the histological grading of early HCCs5 (Supplementary Fig. 2b-g and Supplementary Table 
1).
PLC-derived organoids (termed “tumouroids” henceforth) from all 3 different subtypes 
expanded long-term (~1year) in culture, with a consistent passaging ratio of 1:3-1:4 every 
7-10 days. HCC-2, though, stopped growing after ~1 month, due to fibroblasts outcompeting 
Broutier et al.
Page 3
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 the tumouroids growth, which precluded any downstream analysis. Therefore, we have 
performed all the downstream analysis on the remaining 7 lines and corresponding patient’s 
tissues (HCC-1 and -3; CHC-1-2 and CC-1-3) (Fig. 1d and Supplementary Fig. 2h).
At the histological level, tumouroids presented patient-specific heterogeneous morphologies 
ranging from solid/compact structures (HCC and CHC) to more irregularly-shaped cyst-like 
structures (CC) in contrast to the ordered, homogeneous, cyst-like hollow structure of 
healthy liver-derived organoids (Fig. 1b and SupplementaryFig. 2a). These morphological 
features allowed individual samples to be distinguished from each other, both within and 
between subtypes, even at late passage and after having been cultured for months in the 
same conditions.
We then sought to determine whether the 3D-tumouroids would retain the histological 
features of the patient tumour tissue. Healthy liver-derived organoids form single-layered 
epithelial structures that transition into a pseudo-stratified epithelium upon differentiation 
(see ref 24 for details). In contrast, the tumouroids exhibited a very different histological and 
cellular architecture, which recapitulated the histological features of the patient’s tissue and 
tumour subtype. Thus, HCC and CHC tumouroids exhibited a solid, filled 3D structure with 
HCCs, but not CHCs, also forming pseudoglandular rosettes, typical of HCC3,7. Similarly, 
CC tumouroids exhibited extensive glandular domains with carcinoma cells invading the 
lumen and growing in cribriform structures, as observed in the patient’s tissue (Fig. 1b and 
Supplementary Fig. 2a).
Detailed histological and marker analysis of all the patient’s tumour tissues revealed that our 
cultures derived from a moderate/well differentiated HCC (HCC-1; AFP+/HepPar1+), a 
poorly differentiated HCC (HCC-3; AFP+/HepPar1-), a classical combined (CHC-1; AFP±/
HepPar1+/EpCAM+/mucin+), a combined with stem cell features (CHC-2; AFP+/
HepPar1+/EpCAM+/mucin-) and poorly to moderate/well differentiated CCs (CC-1-3; 
HepPar1-/EpCAM+) (Fig. 2a-b, Supplementary Fig. 3a-c and Supplementary Table 1)26. 
Subsequent analysis of these subtype-specific markers in the tumouroids revealed that these 
express the diagnostic markers of their parental tissues, even after long-term expansion in 
culture in the same culture conditions. Thus, EpCAM, was highly expressed in all CCs 
(CC-1-3) and CHCs (CHC-1-2) tumouroids and corresponding patients’ tissues, but absent 
on HCCs tumouroids and tissues (Fig. 2c and Supplementary Fig.3b). Likewise, AFP a well-
established marker for HCCs and a subset of CHCs27, but not expressed in CCs3,5,28–29, 
was highly expressed in both HCCs and CHC-2 tumouroids, in agreement with the 
expression pattern of the original patient’s tissue (Fig. 2c and Supplementary Table 1). 
Remarkably, SALL4 described for a subset of poorly differentiated HCCs30–31 and 
CHCs32 was only present in HCC-3 and CHC-2, both in tumouroids and matching tissues 
(Supplementary Fig. 3d).
Overall, these results demonstrate that liver tumouroids both recapitulated and retained the 
histological characteristics and marker expression of the original tumour tissue and subtype, 
even after long-term expansion in culture, in the same culture conditions.
Broutier et al.
Page 4
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Primary Liver Cancer-derived organoid cultures recapitulate the expression profile of the 
corresponding tissue-of-origin and tumour subtype
The gene expression patterns of PLC subtypes (HCC, CC and CHC) have been extensively 
studied33–34. Therefore, to further characterize our tumouroid cultures we compared their 
expression profiles to the corresponding parental tissues using genome-wide transcriptomic 
(RNAseq) analysis. Healthy liver-derived organoid lines and corresponding tissues were 
used as additional controls.
Relative transcript abundance (transcripts per million, RPKM) of 15,648 gene transcripts 
was determined. Principal component analysis (PCA) analysis indicated that both technical 
and biological replicates per patient were almost identical (Supplementary Fig. 4a-b and 
Supplementary Dataset 1). Therefore, we present the data per patient as average of all these 
replicates. A first hierarchical clustering analysis comparing the gene expression profiles of 
our tissue samples with publically available TCGA PLC cohorts (344 HCC and 31 CC 
samples) confirmed that the samples used in this study are representative of the overall 
population of primary liver cancer (Supplementary Fig. 4c and Supplementary Dataset 1). 
Then, we compared the expression profiles of these parental tissues to the corresponding 
tumouroid lines. Gene expression correlation analysis indicated that each tumouroid line 
correlated to its corresponding tissue-of-origin but not with the other subtypes (Fig. 3a). 
Along the same line, organoids and tissue samples grouped by subtype on the PC2 
component, while the PC1 component accounted for the variance between tissues and 
tumour-derived organoids. Classical HCC/hepatocyte markers35 such as AFP or APOH and 
CC/ductal markers36 such as KRT7, were amongst the genes that contributed the most to the 
variance in the PC2 component (Fig. 3b and Supplementary Dataset 1).
When evaluating specific tumoural/differentiation markers, we found that the tumouroids’ 
expression profiles resembled the corresponding matching tissues and subtype 
(Supplementary Fig 4d). Notably, we found the HCC markers (AFP and GPC3) and 
hepatocyte markers (ALB, TTR, APOA1, APOE) to be highly expressed in our HCC 
tumouroids and matching tissue while CC/ductal markers were amongst the most 
downregulated. Reciprocally, CC markers such as EPCAM, KRT19 or S100A112,37,38–39 
were highly expressed in our CC lines and tissues, while HCC markers were not expressed 
or strongly downregulated. The CHC lines shared the expression pattern of both, as expected 
(Fig. 2b-c, Fig. 3b-c, Supplementary Fig. 3b, Supplementary Fig. 4d and Supplementary Fig. 
5a-b), and Supplementary Dataset 1). Remarkably, the expression pattern was also retained 
in a patient-specific manner even within each subtype. For instance, MUC5B was expressed 
only in CHC-1 but not in CHC-2 organoids, in agreement with the corresponding patient’s 
tissue (Supplementary Dataset 1 and Supplementary Fig. 3c), whereas AFP was expressed in 
CHC-2 but not CHC-1 in concordance with the AFP values in serum of these patients at the 
moment of resection (compare Fig. 2c and Supplementary Table 1).
These results were confirmed by global analysis using Gene-Set-Enrichment-Analysis 
(GSEA) of the tumouroid lines and their corresponding parental tissues against 159 
published cancer gene-sets (Fig. 3d and Supplementary Datasets 2 and 3). Thus, for both 
HCC lines and corresponding tissues, HCC gene-sets were the most significantly positively 
enriched, with HCC-1 associated to gene-sets describing HCC with hepatocyte 
Broutier et al.
Page 5
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 differentiation features while HCC-3 significantly associated with a proliferative HCC 
subclass and a KRT19 positive subclass gene-sets in agreement with the differentiation 
status of the patient’s original tissue. Conversely, for all CC tumouroids and matching 
tissues, CC gene-sets were the most significantly positively enriched whereas HCC specific 
gene-sets were significantly down-regulated, as expected. Similarly, the CHC expression 
profiles were negatively correlated with HCC-differentiation gene-sets but positively 
correlated with progenitor/stem cell, proliferation and/or poor prognosis gene-sets (Fig. 3d, 
Supplementary Fig. 5c-d and Supplementary Dataset 2 and 3).
Subsequent analyses confirmed the RNAseq results, with HCC but not CC tumouroids 
exhibiting hepatocyte differentiation features (ALB and HNF4a expression, Albumin 
secretion, and production of bile acid in the medium (the later for HCC-1)) (Supplementary 
Fig. 5b, e-f). In contrast, KRT19, marker for CC, CHC tumours2,27 and a subset of 
HCCs26, was highly expressed in all CC (CC-1-3), in both CHC (CHC-1-2) and in HCC-3 
derived tumouroids, but undetectable in HCC-1, in agreement with the histological subtype, 
expression pattern and gene signature of the patient’s tumour tissue (Supplementary Fig. 5a-
b and d). Moreover, KRT7, a well-established marker for CCs37, was only expressed in the 
CC-derived organoids and corresponding tissues (Supplementary Fig. 5f).
These results demonstrate that the PLC-derived organoid culture system faithfully 
recapitulates and maintains the transcriptomic alterations present in the individual patient’s 
tumour subtype. Since the different tumour subtypes were all maintained in the same culture 
conditions these results suggest that their tumour signature is intrinsic to the cancer 
population, and is not significantly modified by the culture conditions.
Tumouroid/Organoid cultures enable the identification of potential prognostic biomarkers 
for primary liver cancer
We next sought to investigate if the tumouroid culture system could represent a valuable 
resource to identify novel genes involved in PLC and/or novel potential PLC biomarkers, a 
use not previously described for any patient-derived organoid system. For that, we defined a 
“tumouroid signature” list by comparing the similarities between the transcriptomes of all 
tumouroid lines to healthy liver-derived organoid lines. Notably, within the top 30 most 
upregulated genes we found 19 genes already reported to be markers/overexpressed in PLC, 
13 of which were already associated to poor-prognosis, while the remaining 11 genes had 
never been associated to PLC (Fig. 3e and Supplementary Dataset 1).
We then performed an in-depth analysis of these top 30 genes by determining their 
expression pattern and prognostic value in cohorts of primary liver cancer patients and 
healthy individuals from publically available TCGA databases (for HCC: 374 HCC patients 
and 50 healthy individuals; for CC: 31 CC patients and 8 healthy individuals). Notably, 29 of 
the top 30 genes were significantly (p≤0.01) overexpressed in cancer patients vs healthy 
individuals for both cohorts. Importantly, from the 11 novel genes never associated before to 
liver cancer, 4 exhibited poor survival prognosis when overexpressed: C19ORF48, UBE2S 
and DTYMK (for HCC) and C1QBP (for CC). Of note, STMN1, previously associated to 
HCC but not CC40, also predicted poor survival in the CC-cohort (Fig. 3f-h and 
Supplementary Dataset 1). Therefore, these results demonstrate that growing primary liver 
Broutier et al.
Page 6
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 cancer as tumouroids preserves the tumour-cell features at a level that allows identifying 
new genes with a prognostic value and that could potentially be used as prognostic 
biomarkers for primary liver cancer.
Liver tumouroids retain the genetic alterations present in the original tumour tissue
PLCs typically present with a high degree of aneuploidy, several copy number changes, 
somatic mutations and epigenetic alterations6. All the lines that we expanded in culture 
(HCC, n=2; CHC, n=2; CC, n=3) exhibited multiple chromosomal aberrations consisting of 
both gains and/or losses of chromosome numbers (Fig. 4a-b). This was in stark contrast to 
healthy liver-derived organoids that stably maintained diploid chromosome numbers in 
culture, in agreement with our previous observations24,41. To determine whether the 
different tumouroid lines retain the parent tumour’s mutational landscape, we performed 
whole exome sequencing (WES) analysis of each line expanded for short (<2 months, early 
passage) or extended (>4 months, late passage) periods in culture and compared the results 
to the corresponding parent tumour.
We generated ~19 Gb exome DNA sequence data from each sample. When comparing the 
global variant profile, we observed that, on average, ~92% of the variants in the patient’s 
tissue were retained in the corresponding early tumouroid cultures (<2months), and >80% 
even after months of expansion (Fig. 4c). Similarly, the analysis of the proportion of exonic 
variations for both patient’s tissue and corresponding cultures confirmed that both, single 
nucleotide variants (SNVs) and Indels in the original tissue, are well retained in culture. 
Also, the distribution of base substitutions for both tissues and tumouroids revealed an over-
representation of the T>C/A>G and C>T/G>A transversion, in agreement with the 
mutational spectrum described for CCs and HCCs42–43 (Fig. 4d-e). Of note, we did not find 
significant bias between transcribed and untranscribed strands (Supplementary Fig. 6a).
Since we lacked matched germline (normal/non-tumour) mutational data, in order to select 
for cancer related variants we filtered for variants present in COSMIC and excluded 
polymorphisms by using publically available databases following the guidelines described in 
ref 44 (see methods). The majority of all the cancer-related somatic variants present in the 
patient’s original tissue were retained in the corresponding tumouroid cultures (~84%). In 
fact, <16% (in average) were lost between tissue and early tumouroids, thus suggesting that 
the cultures represent the tumour genetic landscape of the original patient, with little bias of 
tumouroids cells harbouring specific mutations (~0.5 % in average) (Fig. 4f). The total 
number of deleterious mutations that could impact protein function ranges from 70 to 294, in 
agreement with published mutational burdens for HCC and CC tumours42,45 
(Supplementary Fig. 6b, Supplementary Dataset 4).
Next-generation sequencing studies have created a detailed map of the genetic alterations 
present in liver cancer and its subtypes6. In agreement with this mutational spectrum, 
HCC-1 line and corresponding patient tissue exhibited missense mutations in CTNNB1 (Fig. 
4g and Supplementary Dataset 4), consistently with their significant enrichment in CTNNB1 
mutated liver cancer gene-set found in the gene GSEA (Fig. 3d) and their elevated levels of 
Wnt target genes (Supplementary Dataset 1). CHC-2 line harboured a TP53 frameshift 
variant (L206fs). Also, we identified an activating mutation in KRAS (KRASG12D) in CC-1 
Broutier et al.
Page 7
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 and CHC-1 tumouroid lines and matching tissues, but not in the HCC lines, in agreement 
with the significant enrichment in EGF activated gene-set for those lines (Supplementary 
Fig. 6c)46. We also found nonsense mutations and a disruptive deletion in the chromatin 
remodelling genes ARID1A (HCC-3 and CC-1) and ARID2 (HCC-3), in agreement with 
previous reports where both genes are altered in all subtypes of PLC47–48 (Fig. 4g, and 
Supplementary Dataset 4). As expected, all lines were devoid of mutations in MAPK1 and 
MAPK3 (ERK1 and ERK2 respectively), as described for PLC45.
Therefore, these results indicate that the PLC tumouroid culture system retained the 
mutational landscape of the original tumour tissue and faithfully retained the tumour subtype 
specific mutations present in the original sample from which where derived.
Tumouroids recapitulate the histology of the parental tumour and show metastatic 
potential in vivo
To determine whether tumouroids also recapitulate the features of a human primary liver 
tumour in vivo, we transplanted CC (CC-1-3 lines) and HCC-1 long-term expanded 
tumouroids under the skin of immunocompromised mice. Healthy liver-derived organoids 
were used as controls (Fig. 5a). We found tumour outgrowths in the animals engrafted with 
CC-1_O (29/29), CC-2_O (8/8) and HCC-1_O (24/34), but not when injected with healthy 
liver-derived organoids (Healthy-1_O) (Fig. 5b and Supplementary Fig. 7a-b). The CC-
derived tumours exhibited a strong stromal reaction with CC-1_O tumours forming glands 
with proliferative cells growing in cribriform structures (Fig. 5c Supplementary Fig. 7c, and 
CC-2_O exhibiting a more differentiated phenotype (Supplementary Fig. 7 d), reminiscent 
of the corresponding patient’s tumour tissue. Similarly, HCC-1_O derived tumours grew as a 
solid mass with proliferative cells (Supplementary Fig. 7c) and exhibited pseudoglandular 
rosettes, as in the patient’s tissue (Fig. 5d). Secondary tumouroids derived from these 
xenografted tumours exhibited similar chromosome counts and were morphologically and 
histologically indistinguishable from their parental line (Supplementary Fig. 7e-f). Hence, 
this indicated that even after long-term expansion in vitro and transplantation in vivo, 
expanding primary liver tumours in organoid culture, stably preserves the histological 
architecture of the parent tumour.
Primary liver cancer has been reported to metastasize primarily to the lung and portal lymph 
nodes49. To determine whether our tumouroid models would faithfully recapitulate liver 
cancer metastatic phenotype, we injected CC-1_O, derived from a patient with history of 
metastasis, into the kidney capsule of NSG mice. As expected, 100% of the injected mice 
developed tumours that resembled the original patient tissue (Fig. 5b and e). More 
importantly, in 7 out of 9 injected mice we found lung metastases, in agreement with the 
patient’s diagnostic at the moment of resection (Supplementary Table 1), while, as expected, 
healthy liver-derived organoids (Healthy-1_O) did not generate any metastases (Fig. 5b and 
f, Supplementary Fig. 7 g-h)
Overall, these results establish that primary liver cancer-derived organoids accurately model 
the histological and metastatic features of their parent tumours in vivo, even after long-term 
expansion in culture.
Broutier et al.
Page 8
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Liver tumouroids allow the identification of patient-specific drug sensitivities and uncover 
ERK as a potential target for primary liver cancer
We performed proof-of-concept drug sensitivity testing in 6 of the PLC tumouroids lines 
(HCC-1; HCC-3; CHC-1,-2; CC-1,-2) to evaluate their use to identify patient-specific 
sensitivities and as a platform to inform drug development. As an initial prioritization step, 
for each tumouroid line we tested their sensitivity to 29 anti-cancer compounds, including 
drugs in clinical use or development. Tumouroids were treated with a dilution series of each 
compound for 6 days, before measuring cell viability50. Drug sensitivity was represented by 
the area under the dose response curve (AUC) and by the half-maximal inhibitory 
concentration (IC50) (Fig. 6a-c and Supplementary Dataset 5). The assay was conducted 
with technical replicates and two biological replicates per tumouroid were independently 
screened. There was a positive correlation of biological AUC replicates (Rp = 0.79) and IC50 
replicates (Rp = 0.73) across the dataset. CC-2 was insensitive to all compounds and so was 
excluded from further analyses.
From our initial prioritization screen, we confirmed drug sensitivity for a subset of 
compounds using a tumouroid formation assay, thus validating our screening method. We 
selected clinically relevant compounds where differential sensitivity was observed across the 
tumouroid panel; namely Taselisib, Gemcitabine, AZD8931, SCH772984 and Dasatanib 
(Fig. 6c-d). Overall, a good agreement between the screening and validation results was 
observed (Supplementary Fig. 8a). For instance, Taselisib resulted in a growth inhibitory 
effect in 5 of 6 tumouroids while Dasatinib suppressed tumouroid formation only in CC-1 
cells, both results in agreement with our screening results. An exception was for CC-1 line 
with AZD8931, where we observed a variable sensitivity between biological replicates in the 
prioritization screen (Fig. 6 c-d, Supplementary Fig. 8a).
Overall, tumouroids were resistant to the majority of the compounds, with an IC50 greater 
than the maximum screening concentration, although we detected interesting sensitivity to 
several compounds demonstrating a correlation between some drug sensitivities and 
mutational profiles in the tumouroid lines. For instance, HCC-1 harbouring mutations in 
CTNNB1 gene, was resistant to the porcupine inhibitor LGK974, whereas CC-1, Wnt-
dependant tumour (Fig.1c), was sensitive (Fig. 6a-c). Moreover, EGFR-family inhibition 
with AZD8931 restricted tumouroid formation in HCC-1 cells (wild-type for KRAS), 
whereas the other lines, and notably CC-1 and CHC-1 (KRAS mutants) were resistant. 
Interestingly we also observed tumouroid sensitivity to Gemcitabine, which is used 
clinically for the treatment of PLC patients (Fig. 6a-c).
Of particular interest was the substantial inhibition of tumouroid formation following 
inhibition of ERK1/2 by SCH772984 in HCC1-3, CC-1 and CHC-1 cells (Fig. 6a-d and 
Supplementary Fig. 8a). SCH772984, which selectively inhibited ERK-phosphorylation in 
HCC-1 and CC-1 tumouroids (Supplementary Fig. 8b), was effective in lines that were 
insensitive to the BRAF and/or MEK inhibitors in our screen (Dabrafenib and Trametinib) 
(Fig. 6c). The reason for this difference is unclear, although ERK inhibitors have 
demonstrated activity in cells with acquired BRAF and MEK inhibitor-resistance51.
Broutier et al.
Page 9
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 We note that clinical trials exploring the effect of specific ERK inhibitors for PLC have not 
been reported thus far. Hence, to further investigate the potential of ERK1/2 inhibition for 
PLC, we tested the efficacy of SCH772984 to inhibit tumour growth in vivo. For that, CC-1 
and HCC-1-derived tumouroids were transplanted subcutaneously into NSG mice and, when 
tumours reached ~100mm3, those were injected intra-tumourally with either SCH772984 or 
the vehicle. Remarkably, 2-7 days after the first injection we observed a significant reduction 
in tumour growth, which lasted for the remainder of the experiment (Fig. 6e and 
Supplementary Fig. 8c). Histological analysis revealed that the tumour mass was necrotic 
and that the majority of the cells were apoptotic (Fig. 6f-g and Supplementary Fig. 8d). 
Western blot analysis confirmed that SCH772984 also in vivo selectively inhibited ERK-
phosphorylation in CC-1 tumours (Supplementary Fig. 8e). Thus, in aggregate, our proof-of-
concept study demonstrates the application of PLC tumouroids for in vitro and in vivo drug 
testing, and provides initial evidence that ERK inhibition could have a beneficial therapeutic 
effect on a subset of HCC and CC patients.
Overall, these results indicate that by faithfully retaining the histological, transcriptomic and 
genomic landscape of their parent tumour, tumouroid cultures facilitate the prediction of 
drug sensitivity/resistance in a patient-specific manner. Therefore, they provide an important 
new resource for liver cancer research, opening up new avenues for biomarker discovery and 
drug testing.
Discussion
The advent of 3D culture systems has made it possible to partially recapitulate the 
complexity and function of mammalian tissue in vitro, by forming structures that resemble 
an adult organ in culture and which have been termed “organoids”14. We recently have 
demonstrated that gastric, pancreatic and hepatic organoid cultures derived from adult 
tissues self-renew and differentiate in vitro, into the corresponding cell types of the tissue-
of–origin14–15.
Here, we demonstrate the proof-of-concept that primary liver cancer (PLC) tissue grown as 
organoid cultures (here termed tumouroid) faithfully models the genetic complexity of 
human PLC in vitro. We successfully established cultures from tumours derived from 8 PLC 
patients representing the three most common subtypes of PLC3: HCC, CC and CHC. In 
contrast to any liver cancer cell line grown in 2D, PLC-derived organoids recapitulate the 
histological architecture and expression profiles of the corresponding parent tumour, even 
after long-term expansion in the same culture conditions for all subtypes or upon 
transplantation into mice. Notably, they also retain the specific differences between patients 
as well as between tumour subtypes. We have exploited this aspect here to demonstrate the 
proof-of-concept that tumour-derived organoid cultures could represent a valuable resource 
for biomarker discovery, especially for prognostic markers, an application not previously 
reported for any organoid culture system. We report C19ORF48, UBE2S, DTYMK (for 
HCC) and C1QBP and STMN1 (for CC) as all novel genes associated to poor prognosis for 
primary liver cancer. Further studies, though, will be necessary to prove their utility as 
prognostic or their relevance as predictive biomarkers and/or their potential direct 
Broutier et al.
Page 10
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 involvement in the progression of the disease. These results open up novel opportunities in 
using tumour-derived organoids for tumour marker discovery.
A unique and important feature of the tumouroids is that they maintain the mutational 
landscape of the original patient’s tumour, even after long-term expansion in culture. This is 
vastly different to existing 2D cell lines, which albeit they cover the major driver mutations 
observed in many cancer sub-types52, no longer present the patient-specific signature and 
genetic landscape of the original tumours from whence they were derived, exemplified by 
the frequent acquisition of mutations in TP53 in such cell lines53. The reasons for these 
differences are unknown, but it is feasible to speculate that the cell-matrix interactions may 
play an important role. In fact, embedding primary tumoural epithelial cells within an 
extracellular matrix (ECM) enables the cells to interpret the environment and self-assemble 
into structures which acquire tissue patterning, as it occurs during development and 
organogenesis. Also, the cell-matrix interactions established in 3D could prevent anoikis-
apoptosis due to detachment from the matrix54- of those tumoural cells that have not 
acquired yet all the mutations to survive in a ECM-free milieu, thus facilitating the 
maintenance of heterogeneous, non-selected populations within the culture. In that line, our 
results indicate that if selection of specific tumoural cells exist in the cultures, this might 
have a minor effect at the population level, as we found that tumouroids harbour >92% of 
the SNVs present in the original tissue.
The reproduction of parent tumour genetic aberrations in a culture setting makes tumouroid 
lines a potentially valuable resource in screening drug sensitivity/resistance, identifying 
novel players in primary liver cancer, or even novel therapeutics as part of a personalized 
medicine approach. Our results validate such an approach by (1) demonstrating a correlation 
between some drug sensitivities and the mutational profile in the tumouroid lines and (2) the 
de novo identification of the ERK inhibitor SCH772984 as a potential novel therapeutic 
agent for PLC. Future studies aiming at validating the efficacy of ERK inhibition in a bigger 
collection of tumouroid lines will be required, though, to confirm its therapeutic value for 
liver cancer.
The lack of immune system and stromal components, though, represents a limitation of the 
culture system, especially when aiming at studying tumour cell-stroma/immune interactions. 
In that regard, patient derived xenografts (PDXs) have proven useful models for human 
cancer, including liver cancer13,55, as they also retain tumour histopathology, including 
tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes and the stromal component, and global gene expression and 
methylation profiles of the patient’s malignant epithelial cells56. However, PDXs suffer 
from a low engraftment rate, especially CCs (5.8% engraftment efficiency as reported by 
Cavalloni et al.,13), have a long engraftment period (often several months), are expensive 
and time-consuming, and are not tractable for large-scale drug sensitivity testing56. 
Therefore, we believe that the PLC-derived organoid cultures we present here are 
complementary and alternative models to liver cancer PDXs. Furthermore, they are suitable 
for large-scale drug testing, and in a timescale that makes it potentially compatible with 
personalized medicine approaches.
Broutier et al.
Page 11
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 In conclusion, the PLC-derived organoids that we present here fulfil all the criteria of a 
reliable in vitro cancer model, recapitulating all the features of three of the most common 
subtypes of liver tumours, from histological architecture to genetic and transcriptomic traits, 
and are amenable as a platform for drug screening. With a short timescale from 
establishment to drug testing, this novel in vitro primary liver cancer system thus makes 
hitherto inaccessible possibilities for predicting patient-specific drug responses and creating 
personalized/à la carte therapies into a reality.
Online Methods
General experimental approaches
No samples, mice or data points were excluded from the reported analyses. Detailed 
information on experimental design and reagents is available through the accompanying Life 
Sciences Reporting Summary and Supplementary Dataset 6. Raw data used to generate 
figures are provided in Datasets 1-6 and Source data files 1 and 2.
Human specimens
Liver tumour specimen (~1-4 cm3) were obtained from resection performed at Erasmus 
Medical Center Rotterdam (MEC-2013-143), Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Trust 
(REC: 15/LO/0753 - Approval by NRES Committee London – Westminster) and The Royal 
Infirmary Hospital Edinburgh (REC: 15/ES/0097) on patients who had no history of viral-
meditated hepatitis (excluded under Institutional safety guidelines). Handling and processing 
of samples was performed according to HTA guidelines. Healthy liver resections (~1cm3) 
were obtained during liver transplantation performed at the Erasmus Medical Center, 
Rotterdam MEC-2014-060 and at the Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Trust REC: 
15/EE/0152. The Cambridge samples were provided by the Cambridge Biorepository for 
Translational Medicine (CBTM). All patients provided informed consent. Samples were 
procured and the study was conducted under Institutional Review Board approval prior to 
tissue acquisition. Samples were confirmed to be tumour or normal based on 
histopathological assessment. The diagnosis of each case was confirmed on routine 
hematoxylin and eosin-stained slides by an independent histopathologist. For each tumour 
specimen, samples were split into 4 parts and processed for histology, RNA and DNA 
isolation, or dissociated and processed for organoid culture.
Isolation and Culture of human liver healthy and tumoural organoids
Healthy liver-derived organoids were isolated and cultured using our previously described 
method24,25 while tumour-derived organoids (tumouroids) were isolated by adapting this 
method as follows. Briefly, ¼ of the patient-derived or healthy donor specimen (~0.25 to 
1cm3) was minced and incubated at 37°C with the digestion solution. Incubation was 
performed for 30min-1h for healthy donor tissue (as described in ref 24) while for patient-
derived tissue digestion was left for 2-5 hours to overnight (O/N) according to the degree of 
liver fibrosis, which was evaluated in a patient-specific basis by visual inspection under a 
stereomicroscope as well as according to the resistance of the tissue to be minced. For 
patient-derived tissue, after 2-5h digestion, the digestion preparation was visually inspected 
and either digestion was stopped or, if a significant part of the original tissue was still under-
Broutier et al.
Page 12
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 digested (>50% of starting material, depending on the fibrotic status of the tissue), the 
preparation was left o/n at 37°C in the digestion solution, in order to get a good yield of 
tumoural cells. This increase in the digestion times compared to healthy tissue (>2h-o/n) 
facilitated reducing the number of viable healthy contaminating duct cells. In all cases, the 
digestion was stopped once no pieces of tissue were left, and the suspension was then 
filtered through a 100µm nylon cell strainer and spun 5 min at 300-400G. The pellet was 
washed in cold Advanced DMEM/F12 (GIBCO) then mixed with BME (Basement 
Membrane Extract, Type 2, Pathclear). 2.000-5.000 cells were seeded per well in a 24-multi-
well plate. After BME had solidified, half of the wells obtained for each sample were 
cultured in the classical human liver organoid isolation medium (Advanced DMEM/F12 
supplemented with 1% Penicillin/Streptomycin, 1% Glutamax, 10 mM HEPES, 1:50 B27 
supplement (without Vitamin A), 1:100 N2 supplement, 1.25mM n-Acetyl-L-cysteine, 10% 
(vol/vol) Rspo-1 conditioned medium, 30% (vol/vol) Wnt3a conditioned medium, 10mM 
nicotinamide, 10nM recombinant human [Leu15]-Gastrin I, 50ng/ml recombinant human 
EGF, 100ng/ml recombinant human FGF10, 25ng/ml recombinant human HGF, 10μM 
Forskolin, 5μM A8301, 25ng/ml Noggin and 10μM Y27632 as described in ref 24). The 
other half were cultured in a tumouroid specific isolation medium (classical human liver 
organoid isolation medium without Noggin, Rspo-1 and Wnt3a conditioned media but 
supplemented with 3nM Dexamethasone (Sigma Aldrich). Thus, the tumoroid isolation 
medium contained: Advanced DMEM/F12 supplemented with 1% Penicillin/Streptomycin, 
1% Glutamax, 10 mM HEPES, 1:50 B27 supplement (without Vitamin A), 1:100 N2 
supplement, 1.25mM n-Acetyl-L-cysteine, 10mM nicotinamide, 10nM recombinant human 
[Leu15]-Gastrin I, 50ng/ml recombinant human EGF, 100ng/ml recombinant human FGF10, 
25ng/ml recombinant human HGF, 10μM Forskolin, 5μM A8301, 10μM Y27632 and 3nM 
Dexamethasone). It is important to always culture half of the sample in classical isolation 
medium and half in our tumouroid specific isolation medium, to ensure growth of the 
cultures. For instance, CC-1 patient material only grew in classical isolation medium 
because it requires Rspo-1 to grow. For this line, though, we enriched for the tumouroids by 
hand-picking out contaminating healthy organoids (as described in Supplementary Fig. 1).
After isolation medium was changed twice a week. For healthy-donor derived organoids, 
isolation medium was changed to “human healthy liver-derived organoids expansion 
medium” after 1-week in culture (see composition below). For tumouroids, isolation 
medium (classical or tumouroid specific) was maintained until the first split. For tumouroid 
culture establishment, after 2-3 weeks in culture (depending on the sample) the growing 
structures were visually inspected and, if required, contaminating healthy organoids were 
hand-picked to prevent these from outgrowing the tumouroid structures. Upon attainment of 
dense culture (healthy liver-derived organoids (1-2 weeks after isolation) and tumour-derived 
organoids (2-3 weeks after isolation) were passaged by mechanical dissociation into small 
fragments via trituration with a glass Pasteur pipet, and transferred to fresh matrix in the 
previously defined “human healthy liver-derived organoids expansion medium”24,25 : 
Advanced DMEM/F12 supplemented with 1% Penicillin/Streptomycin, 1% Glutamax, 10 
mM HEPES, 1:50 B27 supplement (without Vitamin A), 1:100 N2 supplement, 1.25mM n-
Acetyl-L-cysteine, 10% (vol/vol) Rspo-1 conditioned medium, 10mM nicotinamide, 10nM 
recombinant human [Leu15]-Gastrin I, 50ng/ml recombinant human EGF, 100ng/ml 
Broutier et al.
Page 13
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 recombinant human FGF10, 25ng/ml recombinant human HGF, 10μM Forskolin and 5μM 
A83-01)24. Expansion medium was changed twice a week and cultures were split upon 
attainment of dense culture.
All cultures were tested every month for mycoplasma using the ‘PCR Mycoplasma Test kit 
I/C’ kit from Promega in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.
To prepare frozen stocks, organoid cultures were dissociated and mixed with recovery cell 
culture freezing medium (GIBCO) and frozen following standard procedures. When 
required, the cultures were thawed using standard thawing procedures and cultured as 
described above. For the 3-4 days (organoids) or first 2 weeks (tumouroids) after thawing, 
the culture medium was supplemented with Y-27632 (10μM). Organoid pictures were taken 
with either a Leica M80 stereoscope and Leica MC170 HD camera or with an inverted 
microscope Leica DMIL and Leica DFC 450C camera.
Histology and staining
Tissues and organoids were fixed for 24 or 0.5 hours respectively, in 10% neutral buffered 
formalin (Sigma), at room temperature, and then embedded in paraffin as follows: briefly, 
tissues were processed through a graded ethanol series followed by xylene, and then 
embedded in paraffin, cut at 5μm and stained (H&E and immunohistological staining). For 
immunofluorescence experiments fixed organoids were rehydrated with PBS following 
formalin fixation. For immunohistological staining, paraffin slides were deparaffinised and 
subjected to antigen retrieval using citrate sodium solution pH=6. To reduce background 
nonspecific staining, and permeabilise the sample, slides were incubated with a 3% BSA, 
0.5% Triton in TBS solution for 1 hour. Primary antibodies (listed in the Supplementary 
Dataset 6) were then applied at appropriate dilutions for overnight at 4°C (see 
Supplementary Dataset 6 for details). Endogenous peroxidase activity was blocked for 15 
min in a 3% hydrogen peroxide/methanol buffer. Detection of bound antibody was 
accomplished with the BrightVision Ultimate kit (Immunologic). Briefly, slides were 
washed in TBS and incubated with a secondary antibody-HRP conjugate for 1 hour at room 
temperature and finally developed with 3,3′-diaminobenzidine (DAB) for 5 min, 
counterstained with haematoxylin, and mounted with DPX (Sigma). Slides were also stained 
in the absence of primary antibodies to evaluate nonspecific secondary antibody reactions. 
For TUNEL assay, Click-iT Plus TUNEL kit (Molecular Probes, Life technologies) was 
used in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Pictures were taken with a Leica 
microscope DM 4000 microscope and DFC 450 camera (Leica). For whole mount 
immunofluorescence staining, organoids were processed as described in 23,24 25. Briefly, 
organoids were incubated over 2 to 3 nights at 4°C, washed in PBS, and revealed by 
incubation with a secondary antibody conjugated to a fluorophore. Nuclei were stained with 
Hoechst33342 (Molecular Probes, Life technologies). Confocal images were captured on a 
Leica SP5 inverted confocal microscope (Leica).
Ki67 index
Each tumour slide stained for Ki67 was manually scanned with a microscope at ×10 
objective, and the area of greatest Ki67 positivity (hot spot) was selected for photographing. 
Broutier et al.
Page 14
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 At least 1000 total tumoural cells were counted on a total of 2 independently stained slides 
per patient. Pictures were taken with a Leica microscope DM 4000 microscope and DFC 
450 camera (Leica) and Ki67-negative and -positive were then counted using ImageJ “cell 
counter” plugin. Light brown or pale staining nuclei were ignored during counting.
Karyotyping
Karyotyping was performed as previously described 24. Briefly, cultures were incubated 
with 0.1ug/ml Karyomax Colcemid (Gibco). After 24 hours, organoids were harvested and 
dissociated using TrypLE (Gibco). Cells were incubated with KCL 0.0075M hypotonic 
solution for 10 min, fixed in methanol:acetic acid (3:1) and dropped on a microscope slide 
for visualization. Nuclei were mounted and stained using Vectashield with DAPI (Vector 
Labs). A minimum of 15 metaphases per sample were counted.
Sequencing and analysis
For both RNA-Sequencing (RNASeq) and Whole-Exome Sequencing (WES), low quality 
reads were filtered (<Q20) followed by trimming of low quality bases from the ends of the 
reads (<Q20). Adaptors were also removed using cutadapt.
RNA-Sequencing—RNA was isolated from organoids using RNeasy mini kit (Qiagen) 
following manufacturer's instructions. RNA libraries were prepared for sequencing using the 
Smartseq2 method. RNA sequencing was performed using Illumina HiSeq sequencer (50bp 
single-end reads and 10-20 million reads were generated for each sample). Reads were 
aligned with Tophat (v2.1.0)57 to the GRCh38.82 genome, using the corresponding gtf file 
for exon positions. Counts were generated using featureCounts (v1.5.0-p1)58. Only protein-
coding genes, lincRNAs, processed transcripts and misc RNA were kept for further study. 
Normalised counts were created using DESeq259 and RPKMs using edgeR's function 
[edgeR]. The technical and biological replicates (different passages) were merged. Healthy 
growing in expansion and differentiation medium and corresponding tissues were used as 
additional controls.
To assess concordance of tissues with organoids genes were filtered and the Pearson’s 
correlation coefficient was calculated pairwise between tissues and organoids. The 
correlation matrix was then z-scored. The principal components for several subgroups of the 
samples were calculated from the normalised DESeq counts, and the first two (PC1, PC2) 
were plotted. We then analysed the top 100 genes with highest loadings across PC2, which 
separated the samples by subtype. Functional analysis was split across the three subtypes, 
and genes were excluded in each unless healthy or tumour samples had RPKM values 
greater than 1. To generate a statistic for tumoural tissue samples, the log2 fold change (FC) 
of each tumoural tissue was divided by the mean of the healthy tissues. To generate a 
statistic for HCC tumouroid samples, two log2 fold changes (FC) were calculated: the first 
was HCC organoid divided by the mean of healthy liver-derived organoid and the second 
was HCC tissue divided by the mean of the healthy tissues. Then the mean or minimum was 
then taken of these two ratios, whichever had a lower absolute value. The same statistic was 
generated for CHC and CC tumouroids using the mean healthy tissue instead of healthy 
liver-derived organoid as a baseline for the first fold change. These statistics were then used 
Broutier et al.
Page 15
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 for pre-ranked gene set enrichment analysis using GSEA software (http://
www.broadinstitute.org/gsea/)60. 159 gene sets were used for running the GSEA. These 
gene sets were obtained after curation of the publically available C2 MSigDB collection for 
“LIV”, “HEPT” and “STEM” key words and completed by available liver cancer gene set 
described in literature (see Supplementary Dataset 2 and 3) in order to select a relevant list 
of gene sets associated with liver cancer and stemness. 1,000 permutations were used to 
calculate p-value. A tumouroid signature was identified by finding genes with the highest FC 
when dividing the minimum expression value, in RPKMs, over all tumouroid samples by the 
mean of the expression of healthy liver-derived organoids in differentiation medium. Several 
aspects of the genes defining the tumouroids' signatures were annotated: the description of 
their corresponding proteins was downloaded from Uniprot61, and their relevance to disease 
by retrieving the Disease Ontology terms (using the R package dnet v1.0.1062).
WES—DNA from tumour tissue and matched tumouroid lines was extracted using DNeasy 
Blood & Tissue Kit (Qiagen) according to manufacturers' protocol. Point mutations and 
short indels were called in a procedure composed of several steps as follows: (i) Reads were 
aligned to the UCSC hg38 genome using Bowtie2 (v2.2.6)63 and the output was 
preprocessed for variant calling by marking duplicates with Picard (v1.113) (http://
broadinstitute.github.io/picard/) followed by Indel realignment with the GATK toolkit 
(v3.7)64. SNPs and Indels were called with Varscan (v.2.3)65. (ii) We identified and selected 
the variants with the following parameters: base quality ≥15 (Phred score), read depth ≥15 
and annotated by SNPEff66 as not “intergenic”. (iii) We removed variants on alternate 
haplotypes. (iv) Analysis was then split between patients. For each, there were 3 samples, 
the tissue and the corresponding tumouroids expanded for <2months (early) or >4months 
(late). If a variant was called in the ‘early’ sample, a variant was added in the tissue if its 
pileup showed evidence of the same variant at that position. Moreover if a variant was called 
in the ‘late’ sample, a variant was added in the tissue and early sample if their pileup both 
showed evidence of the same variant at that position. Fig. 4c-e and Supplementary Fig. 5a 
are based on this final list of variants. To assess concordance, overlaps of variants found in 
tissue and early and late tumouroids were calculated within and between cancer types using 
GATK (v3.7). The mutation spectrum was examined in each sample in both non-transcribed 
and transcribed strands and then summarized by representing the average proportion across 
all samples. A cancer-related set of variants was defined by adding the following filtering 
steps: (v) To filter out polymorphisms and non-damaging variants we exclude variants which 
had reads supporting variations ≥ 2 in our sequenced healthy samples (Healthy-1_Tissue and 
_Organoid; Healthy-2_Organoid) and / or were included in dbSNP (common _ no _ known _ 
medical _ impact _ 20170801.vcf)67 and / or with a frequency >0.01 in ExAC database68. 
To select for cancer related variants we then (vi) filter for the variants present in COSMIC 
(v76)69, and (vii) synonymous and intronic variants were filtered out. The variant positions 
with their associated effects were annotated with SnpEff66. Resultant variants were used for 
the Fig. 4f. (viii) Finally, we selected the mutations that were highly predicted to impair the 
function of the corresponding encoded proteins by filtering for coding mutations and using 
SIFT70) to predict the deleterious (SIFT score <0.05) impact of missense and structural 
variants. A summary of the concordant (tissue/early/late) coding variants obtained per 
Broutier et al.
Page 16
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 patient is provided in Supplementary Dataset 4 and this final list of variants was used for 
Supplementary Fig. 6b and Fig. 5g.
Accession Numbers
All RNA-seq and WES data are available at Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) under 
accession number GSE84073.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE84073
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) analyses
We used public available data generated by the TCGA Research Network: http://
cancergenome.nih.gov/ to perform hierachical clustering and survival outcome analyses. 
FPKMs were downloaded from the Genomic Data Commons Data Portal (GDC), using 
GDC’s API, for the projects TCGA-LIHC (374 tumoral samples (ICD-O-3 number=C22.0) 
and 50 normal control samples) and TCGA-CHOL (31 tumoral samples (ICD-O-3 
number=C22.1) and 8 normal control samples).
For the hierarchical clustering our sequencing data was processed according to the GDC 
mRNA quantification analysis pipeline to obtain FPKM values comparable with the ones 
from the TCGA-cohorts. The hierarchical clustering used the Euclidean distances between 
samples based on the top 500 expressed genes and was performed using hclust in R and 
plotted using the dendextend R package71. Healthy, not annotated for the stage of the 
disease and recurrent disease samples were excluded from the analysis.
For the survival analysis we examined the expression of the top 30 genes of the tumouroid 
signature, in both TCGA-LIHC and TCGA-CHOL cohorts. From the FPKM values of 
tumoral and control samples we generated base R boxplots (R’s default boxplot code) and 
assess the significance between both group by unpaired two-tailed t-test. Survival plots were 
created using the R package TCGAbiolinks (v2.2.10)72 and by splitting, per gene, the 
tumour samples into high- and low-expression groups. The median of all samples was used 
as the threshold and significance for differences between the two groups was assessed by 
log-rank test.
Quantitative RT-PCR
Total RNA was extracted from organoid cultures or freshly isolated tissues using RNeasy 
mini kit (Qiagen) in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. cDNA was 
synthesized using 0.5μg of total RNA and a M-MLV Reverse Transcriptase kit (Promega). 
cDNA was amplified with iTaq™ Universal SYBR Green Supermix (BioRad) and using 
gene-specific primers described in Supplementary Dataset 6). All targets were amplified (40 
cycles) on a CFX96 Touch Real-Time PCR Detection System (Biorad). Data were analyzed 
using BioRad CFX manager. Expression levels were normalized to the expression of the 
housekeeping gene HPRT.
Broutier et al.
Page 17
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Functional in vitro studies
Functional studies were performed in collected supernatant or in whole organoids. To assess 
albumin production, culture medium was collected 1 week after the last medium change and 
albumin levels were assessed using an Albumin ELISA kit (Assay Pro) according to 
manufacturer’s instructions. Values were corrected for time and cell number. Concentration 
of total bile acid was established using a Total Bile Assay kit (Cell Biolabs, inc.) according 
to manufacturer’s instructions on supernatant obtained after sonication of whole organoids 
in PBS.
Organoid formation Assay
To assess the organoid formation efficiency in classical vs tumouroid isolation medium, 
pictures of all full drops of BME obtained per patient were photographed using a Leica M80 
stereoscope 2-3 weeks after isolation (depending on the sample) and all viable tumouroid 
structures were counted.
For the drug sensitivity assays, organoids were dissociated into 2-5 cell clumps by 
enzymatic dissociation with TrypLE (Life Technologies). Then, cell viability assays were 
conducted by plating 500 clumps per well of a 48-well cell culture plate in 250μl of 
expansion medium supplemented with 0.5 μM Gemcitabine (Actavis), or 5 μM of AZD8931 
(Selleckchem), or 10μM of SCH772984 (Selleckchem) or 2μM Dasatinib (Selleckchem) or 
10μM of Taselisib (Selleckchem) or 3μM of IWP2 (Sigma Aldrich) or 1μM of Gefitinib 
(Selleckchem) or vehicle (DMSO) control. All conditions were supplemented with Rho 
kinase inhibitor Y-27632 (Sigma-Aldrich). The concentration selected for each compound 
was based on the cell viability data from our laboratory, the results from the screening or the 
literature. Medium was changed 3 times a week for 3 weeks. Viable cells were assessed by 
their ability to generate organoid de novo. Representative pictures of the viability result were 
taken 2-3 weeks after starting the treatment. All cell viability experiments were conducted in 
triplicate in at least two independent experiments (biological replicates = different passages).
Drug screening
Organoid viability assays were conducted as previously described19,50. Briefly, 8µl of 
~7mg/ml BME-2 was dispensed in to 384-well microplates and allowed to polymerize. 
Organoids were mechanically dissociated by pipetting before being resuspended in 2% 
matrigel/growth media (15.000-20.000 organoids/ml) and dispensed into 384-well plates. 
The following day a concentration dilution series of each compound was dispensed using 
liquid handling robotics and cell viability assayed using CellTiter-Glo® (Promega) following 
6 days of drug incubation. An experimental concentration range was calculated for each 
compound using a 7-point half-log dilution series of the highest maximal concentration. The 
maximal concentration of each compound can be found in Supplementary Dataset 5. Screens 
were performed in technical (same screening run) and biological duplicates (different 
passage), and all screening plates were subjected to stringent quality control measures and a 
Z-factor score comparing negative and positive control wells was calculated. Dose–response 
curves were fitted to the luminescent signal intensities utilizing a method previously 
described73. Variation in replicates was greater than similar screens performed in colorectal 
tumouroids and was likely due to the large size of HCC tumouroids leading to uneven 
Broutier et al.
Page 18
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 distribution in screening wells19,50. Compound and screening concentrations are provided 
in Supplementary Dataset 5. The range of concentrations selected for each compound was 
based on in vitro data of concentrations inhibiting relevant target activity and cell viability 
based on data from our laboratory or literature.
Mouse xenograft studies
All mouse experiments have been regulated under the Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act 
1986 Amendment Regulations 2012 following ethical review by the University of 
Cambridge Animal Welfare and Ethical Review Body (AWERB) and have been performed 
in accordance to the Home Office license awarded to M.H. For subcutaneous grafts, 1 
million cells suspensions were prepared in PBS-0.1%BSA (CC and healthy liver-derived 
organoid lines) or in Advanced DMEM/F12 (GIBCO) 1% glycosil (ESI-BIO) further 
supplemented with 50 ng/ml each of HGF and VEGF (HCC and healthy liver-derived 
organoid lines) and were injected into both flanks of male NSG-NOD scid gamma mice 
(Charles River). Visible tumours developed in approximately 2–4 weeks (CC organoid lines) 
and 4-6 months (HCC-1 organoid line). Mice were culled when the tumour reached limit 
end-point (size or ulceration). For kidney capsule graft, cell line suspensions were prepared 
in Advanced DMEM/F12 (GIBCO) with BME2 (7mg/ml) and 500.000 cells were implanted 
under the renal capsule of NSG mice. These mice were then culled at different time point 
(0.5, 1, 2 and 3 month) and kidney and lung tissues were harvested to assess the growth and 
the metastatic potential of the grafted cells.
To assess the efficiency of the ERK inhibitor SCH772984 in vivo mice with established 
subcutaneous tumours were randomized to drug treatment by splitting size-matched tumours 
in two groups (SCH772984/vehicle). Treatments (SCH772984 at 2 mg/kg, or an equal 
volume of vehicle (25%DMSO-30%PEG300 in DD water) were administered by 
intratumoural injection twice daily for 15 (CC-1 tumouroid line) or 20 (HCC-1 tumouroid 
line) days. Tumour sizes were measured 3 times a week after the first week of treatment 
using a caliper and volumes were calculated by applying the formula v = 0.5 × L × w × h, 
where v is volume, L is length, w is width and h is height. Investigators performing tumour 
measurements were blinded to treatment groups. Histological analyses of the tumours from 
both CC-1 and HCC-1 lines were performed at 24 and 25 days after treatment initiation 
respectively.
Western blot assay
Cell lysate for Western blotting were prepared from (i) ice-cold PBS washed tumouroids (to 
remove the basement matrix) grown for 24 hours in expansion medium supplemented with 
10μM of SCH772984 (Selleckchem), or 5 μM of AZD8931 (Selleckchem) or equal volume 
of vehicle (DMSO) and from (ii) CC-1 xenografted tumours, 6 hours after intratumoural 
injection of 2mg/kg of SCH772984 (Selleckchem) or equal volume of vehicle. Lysates were 
made in ice-cold buffer consisting of 50mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 150mM NaCl, 2mM EDTA, 
50mM NaF, 1% triton, 1% NP-40. 0.1% SDS, 0.5% Na-deoxycholate, supplemented with 
1mM sodium orthovanadate and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) (15min on ice for the 
cells and 30min on ice for the tissues). Protein lysates were cleared by microcentrifugation 
at 10.000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C and the supernatants aliquoted and stored at −20°C. 
Broutier et al.
Page 19
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Equivalent amounts of protein from each sample were separated on 10% SDS-PAGE gels 
and then transferred by electroblotting onto nitrocellulose membranes. Membranes were 
then blocked in in PBS-0.1% Tween-5% BSA and immunoblotted with the following 
antibodies overnight at 4°C: ERK (1/2000), P-ERK (1/3000) (Cell signalling). After 
washing 3 times in PBS-0.1% Tween, the membranes were incubated for 1h at room 
temperature with anti-rabbit horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated secondary antibodies 
(1:10.000; abcam). Antibody-protein complexes were visualised using ECL Prime Western 
Blotting Detection Reagent (GE Healthcare).
Statistical Analyses
All summary data are presented as mean ± SD or representative images of at least 2 
independent experiments. All statistical analyses were performed in R and GraphPad Prism 
software (GraphPad 7.0). Sample size (n) values used for statistical analyses are provided in 
the relevant figures and supplementary figures. Individual data point are graphed or can be 
found in Source data files. Tests for differences between two groups were performed using 
Mann-Whitney’s two-tailed test, Student's two-tailed unpaired t-test or log-rank test as 
specified in the figure legends. When using t-test we assumed normality and equal 
distribution of variance between the different groups. No data points were excluded from the 
statistical analyses. Significance was set at FDR ≤ 0.25 (for GSEA) and p-value ≤ 0.05 (for 
all other experiments).
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgements
M.H. is a Wellcome Trust Sir Henry Dale Fellow and is jointly funded by the Wellcome Trust and the Royal 
Society (104151/Z/14/Z). L.B. is supported by an EMBO Postdoctoral fellowship (EMBO ALTF 794-2014) and 
Marie-Curie Postdoctoral fellowship (Grant 656193_H2020-MSCA-IF-2014). G.M. was supported by a Marie 
Curie Initial Training Network (Marie Curie ITN WntsApp 608180) and a H2020 LSMF4LIFE grant 
(ECH2020-668350). This work was funded by an NC3Rs International prize, a Beit Prize, a Cambridge Cancer 
Center-pump priming award (CRUK-RG83267) and, partially, by a NC3Rs project grant (NC/R001162/1), all of 
them awarded to M.H. Work at the L.J.W.v.d.L lab was funded by the research program InnoSysTox, [project 
number 114027003], by the Netherlands Organisation for Health Research and Development (ZonMw) and part of 
the research program financed by the Dutch Digestive Foundation [MLDS-Diagnostics project number D16-26]. 
Work in the MJG lab is funded by the Wellcome Trust (102696), Stand Up To Cancer (SU2C-AACRDT1213), and 
Cancer Research UK (C44943/A22536).
We thank Dr Clare Pacini for help with the clustering analysis of the HCC and CC TCGA-cohorts and the samples 
used in this study. We also thank Ms Cora Olpe and Mr Nicholas Hircq for help in the early phases of the project, 
Dr Chris Hindley for editorial assistance, The Gurdon Institute facilities for help with imaging and animal care, Dr. 
Sylviane Moss, Dr Maike Paramor and Dr Joaquin Martinez for assistance with sequencing analysis and Dr Asif 
Jah (Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Trust) and Dr Jeroen de Jonge (Erasmus Rotterdam Center) for 
facilitating recruitment of patients. Finally, M.H. would like to thank Prof Brigid Hogan (Chapel Hill) and Prof 
Magdalena Zernicka-Goetz (University of Cambridge) for helpful discussions and critical comments.
References
1. Bosch FX, Ribes J, Díaz M, Cléries R. Primary liver cancer: Worldwide incidence and trends. 
Gastroenterology. 2004; 127:S5–S16. [PubMed: 15508102] 
2. Bridgewater J. Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma. 
Journal of Hepatology. 2014; 60:1268–1289. [PubMed: 24681130] 
Broutier et al.
Page 20
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 3. Hirohashi, S., et al. Tumours of the Liver and Intrahepatic Bile Ducts. World Health Organization 
Classification of Tumours. Stanley, R.Hamilton, MD.Lauri, A., Aaltonen, MD., PhD, editors. 
IARCPress; 69372 Lyon France: 2000. 
4. Lee SD, et al. Clinicopathological features and prognosis of combined hepatocellular carcinoma and 
cholangiocarcinoma after surgery. Hepatobiliary Pancreat Dis Int. 2014; 13:594–601. [PubMed: 
25475861] 
5. International Consensus Group for Hepatocellular, N. Pathologic diagnosis of early hepatocellular 
carcinoma: A report of the international consensus group for hepatocellular neoplasia. Hepatology. 
2009; 49:658–664. [PubMed: 19177576] 
6. Marquardt JU, Andersen JB. Liver cancer oncogenomics: opportunities and dilemmas for clinical 
applications. Hepatic oncology. 2015; 2:79–93. [PubMed: 26257864] 
7. Wang A-Q, et al. Combined hepatocellular cholangiocarcinoma: Controversies to be addressed. 
World Journal of Gastroenterology. 2016; 22:4459–4465. [PubMed: 27182157] 
8. Sharma SV, Haber DA, Settleman J. Cell line-based platforms to evaluate the therapeutic efficacy of 
candidate anticancer agents. Nat Rev Cancer. 2010; 10:241–253. [PubMed: 20300105] 
9. De Minicis S, et al. Liver carcinogenesis: Rodent models of hepatocarcinoma and 
cholangiocarcinoma. Digestive and Liver Disease. 2013; 45:450–459. [PubMed: 23177172] 
10. Oikawa T, et al. Model of fibrolamellar hepatocellular carcinomas reveals striking enrichment in 
cancer stem cells. Nature Communications. 2015; 6:8070.
11. Shamir ER, Ewald AJ. Three-dimensional organotypic culture: experimental models of 
mammalian biology and disease. Nature reviews Molecular cell biology. 2014; 15:647–664. 
[PubMed: 25237826] 
12. Ku JL, et al. Establishment and characterisation of six human biliary tract cancer cell lines. British 
Journal of Cancer. 2002; 87:187–193. [PubMed: 12107841] 
13. Cavalloni G, et al. Establishment and characterization of a human intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma 
cell line derived from an Italian patient. Tumour Biology. 2016; 37:4041–4052. [PubMed: 
26486326] 
14. Huch M, Koo B-K. Modeling mouse and human development using organoid cultures. 
Development. 2015; 142:3113–3125. [PubMed: 26395140] 
15. Hindley CJ, Cordero-Espinoza L, Huch M. Organoids from adult liver and pancreas: Stem cell 
biology and biomedical utility. Developmental Biology. 
16. Crespo M, et al. Colonic organoids derived from human induced pluripotent stem cells for 
modeling colorectal cancer and drug testing. Nat Med. 2017; 23:878–884. [PubMed: 28628110] 
17. Li X, et al. Oncogenic transformation of diverse gastrointestinal tissues in primary organoid 
culture. Nature medicine. 2014; 20:769–777.
18. Sato T, et al. Long-term Expansion of Epithelial Organoids From Human Colon, Adenoma, 
Adenocarcinoma, and Barrett's Epithelium. Gastroenterology. 2011; 141:1762–1772. [PubMed: 
21889923] 
19. van de Wetering M, et al. Prospective derivation of a living organoid biobank of colorectal cancer 
patients. Cell. 2015; 161:933–945. [PubMed: 25957691] 
20. Boj SF, et al. Organoid Models of Human and Mouse Ductal Pancreatic Cancer. Cell. 2015; 
160:324–338. [PubMed: 25557080] 
21. Gao D, et al. Organoid Cultures Derived from Patients with Advanced Prostate Cancer. Cell. 2014; 
159:176–187. [PubMed: 25201530] 
22. Huch M, et al. Unlimited in vitro expansion of adult bi-potent pancreas progenitors through the 
Lgr5/R-spondin axis. The EMBO Journal. 2013; 32:2708–2721. [PubMed: 24045232] 
23. Huch M, et al. In vitro expansion of single Lgr5+ liver stem cells induced by Wnt-driven 
regeneration. Nature. 2013; 494:247–250. [PubMed: 23354049] 
24. Huch M, et al. Long-Term Culture of Genome-Stable Bipotent Stem Cells from Adult Human 
Liver. Cell. 2015; 160:299–312. [PubMed: 25533785] 
25. Broutier L, et al. Culture and establishment of self-renewing human and mouse adult liver and 
pancreas 3D organoids and their genetic manipulation. Nat Protoc. 2016; 11:1724–1743. 
[PubMed: 27560176] 
Broutier et al.
Page 21
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 26. Brunt EM, P V, Sempoux C, Theise ND. Biphenotypic (hepatobiliary) primary liver carcinomas: 
the work in progress. Hepatic Oncology. 2015; 2:18.
27. Zhang F, et al. Combined hepatocellular cholangiocarcinoma originating from hepatic progenitor 
cells: immunohistochemical and double-fluorescence immunostaining evidence. Histopathology. 
2008; 52:224–232. [PubMed: 18184271] 
28. Zhao Y-J, Ju Q, Li G-C. Tumor markers for hepatocellular carcinoma. Molecular and Clinical 
Oncology. 2013; 1:593–598. [PubMed: 24649215] 
29. Ohguchi S, et al. Expression of α-fetoprotein and albumin genes in human hepatocellular 
carcinomas: Limitations in the application of the genes for targeting human hepatocellular 
carcinoma in gene therapy. Hepatology. 1998; 27:599–607. [PubMed: 9462663] 
30. Yakaboski E, Jares A, Ma Y. Stem cell gene SALL4 in aggressive hepatocellular carcinoma: a 
cancer stem cell-specific target? Hepatology. 2014; 60:419–421. [PubMed: 24327209] 
31. Yong KJ, et al. Oncofetal gene SALL4 in aggressive hepatocellular carcinoma. N Engl J Med. 
2013; 368:2266–2276. [PubMed: 23758232] 
32. Moeini A, et al. Mixed hepatocellular cholangiocarcinoma tumors: Cholangiolocellular carcinoma 
is a distinct molecular entity. J Hepatol. 2017; 66:952–961. [PubMed: 28126467] 
33. Shibata T, Aburatani H. Exploration of liver cancer genomes. Nature Reviews Gastroenterology & 
Hepatology. 2014; 11:340–349. [PubMed: 24473361] 
34. Woo HG, et al. Identification of a cholangiocarcinoma-like gene expression trait in hepatocellular 
carcinoma. Cancer research. 2010; 70:3034–3041. [PubMed: 20395200] 
35. Kalinich M, et al. An RNA-based signature enables high specificity detection of circulating tumor 
cells in hepatocellular carcinoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2017; 114:1123–1128. [PubMed: 
28096363] 
36. Kamlua S, et al. A novel TFF2 splice variant (ΔEX2TFF2) correlates with longer overall survival 
time in cholangiocarcinoma. Oncology Reports. 2012; 27:1207–1212. [PubMed: 22159958] 
37. Banales JM, et al. Expert consensus document: Cholangiocarcinoma: current knowledge and future 
perspectives consensus statement from the European Network for the Study of 
Cholangiocarcinoma (ENS-CCA). Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2016; 13:261–280. [PubMed: 
27095655] 
38. Kraiklang R, et al. A novel predictive equation for potential diagnosis of cholangiocarcinoma. 
PLoS One. 2014; 9:e89337. [PubMed: 24586698] 
39. Andersen JB, et al. Genomic and genetic characterization of cholangiocarcinoma identifies 
therapeutic targets for tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Gastroenterology. 2012; 142:1021–1031 e1015. 
[PubMed: 22178589] 
40. Hsieh SY, et al. Stathmin1 overexpression associated with polyploidy, tumor-cell invasion, early 
recurrence, and poor prognosis in human hepatoma. Mol Carcinog. 2010; 49:476–487. [PubMed: 
20232364] 
41. Blokzijl F, et al. Tissue-specific mutation accumulation in human adult stem cells during life. 
Nature. 2016; 538:260–264. [PubMed: 27698416] 
42. Zou S, et al. Mutational landscape of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma. Nat Commun. 2014; 
5:5696. [PubMed: 25526346] 
43. Totoki Y, et al. High-resolution characterization of a hepatocellular carcinoma genome. Nat Genet. 
2011; 43:464–469. [PubMed: 21499249] 
44. Li MM, et al. Standards and Guidelines for the Interpretation and Reporting of Sequence Variants 
in Cancer: A Joint Consensus Recommendation of the Association for Molecular Pathology, 
American Society of Clinical Oncology, and College of American Pathologists. J Mol Diagn. 
2017; 19:4–23. [PubMed: 27993330] 
45. Schulze K, et al. Exome sequencing of hepatocellular carcinomas identifies new mutational 
signatures and potential therapeutic targets. Nat Genet. 2015; 47:505–511. [PubMed: 25822088] 
46. Borlak J, Meier T, Halter R, Spanel R, Spanel-Borowski K. Epidermal growth factor-induced 
hepatocellular carcinoma: gene expression profiles in precursor lesions, early stage and solitary 
tumours. Oncogene. 2005; 24:1809–1819. [PubMed: 15674348] 
Broutier et al.
Page 22
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 47. Jiao Y, et al. Exome sequencing identifies frequent inactivating mutations in BAP1, ARID1A and 
PBRM1 in intrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas. Nat Genet. 2013; 45:1470–1473. [PubMed: 
24185509] 
48. Li M, et al. Inactivating mutations of the chromatin remodeling gene ARID2 in hepatocellular 
carcinoma. Nat Genet. 2011; 43:828–829. [PubMed: 21822264] 
49. Lee YT, Geer DA. Primary liver cancer: pattern of metastasis. J Surg Oncol. 1987; 36:26–31. 
[PubMed: 3041113] 
50. Francies HE, Barthorpe A, McLaren-Douglas A, Barendt WJ, Garnett MJ. Drug Sensitivity Assays 
of Human Cancer Organoid Cultures. Methods Mol Biol. 2016
51. Morris EJ, et al. Discovery of a novel ERK inhibitor with activity in models of acquired resistance 
to BRAF and MEK inhibitors. Cancer Discov. 2013; 3:742–750. [PubMed: 23614898] 
52. Iorio F, et al. A Landscape of Pharmacogenomic Interactions in Cancer. Cell. 2016; 166:740–754. 
[PubMed: 27397505] 
53. Drexler HG, et al. p53 alterations in human leukemia-lymphoma cell lines: in vitroartifact or 
prerequisite for cell immortalization? Leukemia. 2000; 14:198–206. [PubMed: 10637496] 
54. Frisch SM, Schaller M, Cieply B. Mechanisms that link the oncogenic epithelial–mesenchymal 
transition to suppression of anoikis. Journal of Cell Science. 2013; 126:21–29. [PubMed: 
23516327] 
55. Gu Q, et al. Genomic characterization of a large panel of patient-derived hepatocellular carcinoma 
xenograft tumor models for preclinical development. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:20160–20176. [PubMed: 
26062443] 
56. Hidalgo M, et al. Patient-derived xenograft models: an emerging platform for translational cancer 
research. Cancer Discov. 2014; 4:998–1013. [PubMed: 25185190] 
57. Trapnell C, Pachter L, Salzberg SL. TopHat: discovering splice junctions with RNA-Seq. 
Bioinformatics. 2009; 25:1105–1111. [PubMed: 19289445] 
58. Liao Y, Smyth GK, Shi W. featureCounts: an efficient general purpose program for assigning 
sequence reads to genomic features. Bioinformatics. 2014; 30:923–930. [PubMed: 24227677] 
59. Love MI, Huber W, Anders S. Moderated estimation of fold change and dispersion for RNA-seq 
data with DESeq2. Genome Biol. 2014; 15:550. [PubMed: 25516281] 
60. Subramanian A, et al. Gene set enrichment analysis: a knowledge-based approach for interpreting 
genome-wide expression profiles. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005; 102:15545–15550. [PubMed: 
16199517] 
61. The UniProt, C. UniProt: the universal protein knowledgebase. Nucleic Acids Res. 2017; 
45:D158–D169. [PubMed: 27899622] 
62. Fang H, Gough J. The 'dnet' approach promotes emerging research on cancer patient survival. 
Genome Med. 2014; 6:64. [PubMed: 25246945] 
63. Langmead B, Salzberg SL. Fast gapped-read alignment with Bowtie 2. Nat Methods. 2012; 9:357–
359. [PubMed: 22388286] 
64. McKenna A, et al. The Genome Analysis Toolkit: a MapReduce framework for analyzing next-
generation DNA sequencing data. Genome Res. 2010; 20:1297–1303. [PubMed: 20644199] 
65. Koboldt DC, et al. VarScan: variant detection in massively parallel sequencing of individual and 
pooled samples. Bioinformatics. 2009; 25:2283–2285. [PubMed: 19542151] 
66. Cingolani P, et al. A program for annotating and predicting the effects of single nucleotide 
polymorphisms, SnpEff: SNPs in the genome of Drosophila melanogaster strain w1118; iso-2; 
iso-3. Fly (Austin). 2012; 6:80–92. [PubMed: 22728672] 
67. Sherry ST, et al. dbSNP: the NCBI database of genetic variation. Nucleic Acids Res. 2001; 
29:308–311. [PubMed: 11125122] 
68. Lek M, et al. Analysis of protein-coding genetic variation in 60,706 humans. Nature. 2016; 
536:285–291. [PubMed: 27535533] 
69. Forbes SA, et al. COSMIC: exploring the world's knowledge of somatic mutations in human 
cancer. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015; 43:D805–811. [PubMed: 25355519] 
70. Sim NL, et al. SIFT web server: predicting effects of amino acid substitutions on proteins. Nucleic 
Acids Res. 2012; 40:W452–457. [PubMed: 22689647] 
Broutier et al.
Page 23
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 71. Galili T. dendextend: An R package for visualizing, adjusting and comparing trees of hierarchical 
clustering. Bioinformatics. 2015; 31:3718–20. [PubMed: 26209431] 
72. Colaprico A, et al. TCGAbiolinks: an R/Bioconductor package for integrative analysis of TCGA 
data. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016; 44:e71. [PubMed: 26704973] 
73. Vis DJ, et al. Multilevel models improve precision and speed of IC50 estimates. 
Pharmacogenomics. 2016; 17:691–700. [PubMed: 27180993] 
Broutier et al.
Page 24
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 1. Patient-derived primary liver cancer organoid cultures expand long-term in vitro while 
preserving the histological architecture of the tumour subtype they derived from.
(a) Experimental design. Healthy (donor-derived) liver tissues, moderate/well differentiated 
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), combined hepatocellular-cholangiocarcinoma (CHC) and 
cholangiocarcinoma samples (CC) were obtained from patients undergoing surgery 
(patient’s information detailed in Supplementary Table 1) and were processed as described 
in Methods and Supplementary Fig. 1. (b) Representative H&E staining of healthy liver 
tissue and primary tumours (top row), and corresponding brightfield microscopy images 
Broutier et al.
Page 25
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 (middle row) and H&E histological analysis of the organoid lines derived from these 
(bottom row). Note that, while healthy liver-derived organoids (left) grew as single layered 
epithelium of ductal-like cells surrounding a central lumen (*, duct; L, lumen), tumour-
derived organoids (tumouroids; right) formed compacted structures that resembled the 
corresponding tumour-of-origin. HCC-1 tumouroids, like their parental tissue, exhibit 
pseudoglandular rosettes (arrowheads), a hallmark of HCC. CC-1 tumouroids present a 
glandular lumen, similar to the patient’s tumour (top row). Scale bars, middle row 100µm; 
top and bottom rows, 50µm. Brightfield and H&E pictures from other lines are provided in 
Supplementary Fig. 2. (c) Organoid formation efficiency in classical human healthy liver 
isolation medium24-25 and tumouroid specific isolation medium (classical human healthy 
liver isolation medium without Rspo-1, Noggin and Wnt3a and 3nM Dexamethasone - see 
methods and Supplementary Fig. 1 for details). Graph represents the mean±SD of the 
organoid formation efficiency in tumouroid IM relative to the one in classical IM. Individual 
data points are shown (circle). Significant differences between the classical and tumouroid 
IM groups were observed. **, p-value<0.001 (t-test, two-tailed). (d) Expansion potential of 
tumouroid cultures established and their correlation to the expansion of healthy-tissue 
derived organoids. Arrow, continuous expansion. Dot, passage.
Broutier et al.
Page 26
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 2. Immunohistochemistry analyses reveal that the PLC tumouroids retain expression 
patterns of the distinct subtype of the original tissue they derived from, even after long-term 
expansion in culture.
(a) Schematic representation of the multiple subtypes of primary liver cancers (PLC). (b) 
IHC assays on the PLC tissues including hepatocyte/HCC marker (HepPar1) and ductal/CC 
marker (EpCAM). Scale bar, 125 μm. Dashed red square indicates focal staining. (c) 
Immunofluorescent analysis for the HCC marker AFP (red) and the ductal/CC marker 
EpCAM (green), on tumouroids expanded in culture for at least 3 months. Nuclei were 
counterstained with Hoechst33342 (blue). Scale bar, 30µm.
Broutier et al.
Page 27
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 3. Tumouroids recapitulate the expression profiles of the specific tissue of origin.
(a) Correlation heat map between PLC-tissue (_T) and paired PLC-derived organoid line 
(_O) expression profiles’ after at least >2 months expansion in culture. (b) Principal 
component analysis (PCA) showing samples plotted in 2 dimensions using their projections 
onto the first two principal components (PC1 and PC2). Each data point represents one 
sample (circle, tumouroid; triangle, tissue). PC1 is strongly correlated with the type of 
sample (tumouroids vs tissue) whereas PC2 defines the 3 different PLC subtypes (HCC, red; 
CHC, brown; and CC, green). Representative examples from the top-100 genes with highest 
Broutier et al.
Page 28
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 loadings across PC2 are shown. (c) Heat map analysis of the log2 RPKM values (raw z-
scored) of selected genes found highly expressed (red) in HCC and/or CHC and/or CC 
tumouroids. Top left column indicates whether the indicated genes are markers of HCC/
Hepatocyte/Fetal liver/CC/Ductal or liver progenitor markers. (d) Heat-map indicating 
representative gene-sets significantly (False discovery rate (FDR)<25%) UPregulated 
(purple) and DOWNregulated (green) in the tumouroid lines and paired tissues after 
performing gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) comparing their gene signatures to 159 
curated gene-sets associated with liver cancer and stem cell (representative plots are shown 
in Supplementary Fig. 5). Full list of gene-sets and significantly enriched gene-sets can be 
found in Supplementary Dataset 2 and 3. (e) Schematic of the tumouroid signature. Venn 
diagram overlapping the upregulated genes in each tumouroid line compared to healthy 
organoids. (f) Table summarizing the results of the gene expression (OE, overexpression) 
and outcome prediction (KM, Kaplan-Meier) analyses for the top 25-genes of the tumouroid 
signature using publically available TCGA cohorts. The table details the p-values obtained 
(OE, two-sided t-test ; KM, log-rank test). Statistical significance (p-value≤0.05) is denoted 
by yellow color. Values for the top 30-genes can be found in Supplementary Dataset 1. 
TCGA-HCC, 374 tumour/50 normal samples; TCGA-CC, 31 tumour/8 normal samples. (g) 
Expression of STMN1, C1QBP and C19orf48 in tumour and normal tissues in the TCGA-
HCC and/or CC cohorts. Center line, median; box plot, interquartile range (IQR); whiskers, 
range (minimum to maximum). (h) Kaplan-Meier analyses of the TCGA-HCC and/or 
TCGA-CC cohorts based on the expression level of the indicated genes in the cohorts 
samples.
Broutier et al.
Page 29
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 4. Tumouroids preserve the genetic alterations from the original tumour
(a) Ploidy analysis of tumouroid cultures expanded for at least 2 months in culture. Results 
are expressed as % of ploidy per number of metaphases counted (at least 21 total). Healthy-
derived organoids were used as control. A minimum of two independent experiments were 
performed. (b) Representative images of organoid metaphases used for the ploidy analysis. 
Scale bar, 10µm. (c-e) Whole exome sequencing analysis of patient's tumour tissues and 
corresponding tumouroid cultures expanded for < 2 months (early passage) or >4 months 
(late passage) in culture. All variants identified in all samples (21 total; 7 patients with 3 
Broutier et al.
Page 30
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 samples each (Tissue/early organoid/late organoid) were used for the global analyses after 
filtering for quality control as detailed in methods). (c) Correlation heat-map between the 
variants identified in PLC-tissues (_T) and PLC-tumouroids (_O). (d) Proportions of exonic 
variants across the samples, the 6 types of SNVs and the Indels are represented. (e) 
Percentage of the 6 types of SNVs averaged across all samples. Graph represents mean±SD. 
(f-g) A cancer-related set of variants (f) and variants predicted to impair protein function 
(SIFT score <0.05 filter) (g) were identified as described in methods. (f) Bar plots indicate 
the concordance (%) between the cancer-related variants identified in the tumour-of-origin 
and the corresponding tumouroids expanded for short term in culture. (g) Damaging coding 
mutations found in genes already described mutated in liver cancer (Full list is found in 
Supplementary Dataset 4, spread sheet 15 details the references). The type of mutation is 
indicated in the legend. _T, tissue; _O, organoid.
Broutier et al.
Page 31
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 5. In vivo growth and metastatic potential of PLC tumouroids
(a) Experimental design. PLC tumouroids or Healthy liver-derived organoids expanded for 
>3 months in culture were transplanted subcutaneously (SC) or under the kidney capsule 
(Kid.Cap.) of immunocompromised NSG mice and analysed for the presence of tumour 
growth and metastasis following grafting. (b) Tables summarizing the number of cells, site 
of engraftment and analysis of tumour and lung metastasis. No tumour lesions were found in 
any of the mice injected with Healthy-1 organoids. (c-d) Representative H&E staining of 
CC-1 (c) and HCC-1 (d) tumouroids transplanted subcutaneously (top) into NSG mice and 
corresponding patient’s tumour sample (bottom). (c) Note that the grafted CC-1 tumouroid 
tissue (top) recapitulates the histo-architecture of the patient’s original tumour (bottom) 
including the extensive desmoplastic reaction (arrowheads). Scale bars, left 125µm, right 
62.5µm. (d) Note that the grafted HCC-1 tumouroid tissue recapitulates the histo-
Broutier et al.
Page 32
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 architecture of the patient’s original tumour (bottom) including the pseudoglandullar 
rosettes, hallmark of HCC-1 original sample (dashed circle). Scale bars, left 125µm, right 
62.5µm. (e) Representative H&E (left) and KRT19 (right) immunohistochemistry analyses 
of CC-1 tumouroids transplanted under the kidney capsule of NSG mice. Scale bar, 125µm. 
(f) Lung metastases derived from CC-1 tumouroids transplanted under the kidney capsule 
(right panels) were identified using a human specific KRT19 antibody. No metastases were 
found in the lungs of mice injected with Healthy-1 organoids (left panels). Scale bars, 
500µm, magnifications 125µm.
Broutier et al.
Page 33
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 6. PLC tumouroid lines as a platform for drug screening and validation of actionable 
therapeutic targets.
(a) Scatterplot of 1-AUC (Area Under the Curve) values from two biological replicates 
(different passages) of the drug screening data, highlighting drugs (red) having a potential 
effect on viability (AUC >0.15 for at least 1 of the two replicates) in the indicated tumouroid 
lines. Each data point is the 1-AUC value for a given drug in a particular tumouroid line. (b) 
Dose-response curves after 6 days treatment with Gemcitabine, Nutlin-3a, LGK974 and 
SCH772984 generated from the luminescent signal intensities. Data displayed are average of 
Broutier et al.
Page 34
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 the technical and biological replicates. (c) Summary of the different compounds used in the 
drug screening, the associated pathway and nominal targets and the screen results 
represented as a summary of the 1-AUC and IC50 data generated for the different tumouroid 
lines. Red, IC50 within the screen concentration range (detailed in methods); Dense dotted 
pattern, 1-AUC>0.15 and dose response; scattered dotted pattern, 1-AUC>0.15 and 
sensitivity at highest concentration only (Supplementary Dataset 5). Compounds highlighted 
in yellow were selected for further validation. (d) Effects on viability of indicated 
compounds using an organoid formation assay (detailed in methods). Red square, no viable 
cells; orange square, intermediate sensitivity; no square, resistant. Scale bar, 500μm. (e) In 
vivo activity of the ERKi (SCH772984) in CC-1_O tumouroids grafted subcutaneously in 
NSG mice. Mice were treated with drug/vehicle twice daily for 20 days (n=5 in 2mg/kg of 
SCH772984 group, n=8 in vehicle group). *, p-value<0.01; **, p-value<0.002 (Mann 
Whitney test, two-tailed). Results are shown as percentage of the tumour volume relative to 
day 0 (mean ±SD). (f-g) Histological analysis of the antitumor efficacy of SCH772984 on 
CC-1_O tumours was assessed 24 days after starting the treatment. Representative (f) H&E 
and (g) TUNEL staining performed on tissue sections from CC-1_O tumours treated with 
either vehicle (left) or SCH772984 (right). Representative images from 2 independent 
experiments are shown. Scale bar, 125μm (H&E) and 25μm (TUNEL).
Broutier et al.
Page 35
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 13.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
