 CONTEMPORARY
ISSUES
Lawrence W. Brown, MD
Peter Camfield, MD,
FRCPC
Melissa Capers, MA
Greg Cascino, MD
Mary Ciccarelli, MD
Claudio M. de Gusmao,
MD
Stephen M. Downs, MD
Annette Majnemer, PhD,
FCAHS
Amy Brin Miller, MSN
Christina SanInocencio,
MS
Rebecca Schultz, PhD
Anne Tilton, MD
Annick Winokur, BS
Mary Zupanc, MD
Correspondence to
Dr. Brown:
brownla@email.chop.edu
Supplemental data
at Neurology.org
The neurologist’s role in supporting
transition to adult health care
A consensus statement
ABSTRACT
The child neurologist has a critical role in planning and coordinating the successful transition from
the pediatric to adult health care system for youth with neurologic conditions. Leadership in
appropriately planning a youth’s transition and in care coordination among health care, educa-
tional, vocational, and community services providers may assist in preventing gaps in care,
delayed entry into the adult care system, and/or health crises for their adolescent patients. Youth
whose neurologic conditions result in cognitive or physical disability and their families may need
additional support during this transition, given the legal and financial considerations that may be
required. Eight common principles that define the child neurologist’s role in a successful transition
process have been outlined by a multidisciplinary panel convened by the Child Neurology Foun-
dation are introduced and described. The authors of this consensus statement recognize the
current paucity of evidence for successful transition models and outline areas for future
consideration. Neurology® 2016;87:835–840
The child neurologist has a critical role in planning and coordinating the successful transition of
youth with neurologic conditions from the pediatric to adult health care system. Appropriate
leadership and planning of a youth’s transition, and care coordination among health care,
educational, vocational, and community services providers, may assist in preventing gaps in
care, which otherwise may result in a youth running out of medication or delaying entry into the
adult medical system through failure to make or keep appointments. Preventable health crises
may develop, for which no clear medical specialist has been identified to provide care. Youth
whose neurologic conditions result in cognitive or physical disability and their families may need
additional support to address the particular legal and financial considerations of the transition
they face.
Barriers to successful transition have been identified1–3 and ample evidence demonstrates that
many youth, particularly those with special needs, continue to receive insufficient transition
planning.4–7 Several models of transition support have been developed and are beginning to be
tested, although the available evidence remains insufficient to identify the best models.5,8–12
In acknowledgment of this clinical reality, and in response to the 2011 clinical guideline of
the American Academy of Pediatrics/American Academy of Family Physicians/American
College of Physicians “supporting the healthcare transition from adolescence to adulthood in
the medical home,” in which specialty providers were called to develop a framework for their
population’s unique needs,13 the Child Neurology Foundation convened a multidisciplinary
panel of experts in 2014 to develop this guideline. The authors of this consensus statement
recognize the current paucity of evidence for successful transition models, and so propose 8
common principles that should be incorporated in any transition model, and which define the
child neurologist’s role and responsibilities throughout the transition process. Future areas of
From The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia (L.W.B.); Dalhousie University (P.C.); independent medical writer (M. Capers); Mayo Clinic
(G.C.); Indiana University School of Medicine (M. Ciccarelli, S.M.D.); Brigham and Women’s Hospital (C.M.d.G.); McGill University (A.M.);
Child Neurology Foundation (A.B.M.); Lennox Gastaut Syndrome Foundation (C.S.); Texas Children’s Hospital (R.S.); Louisiana State University
Health Sciences (A.T.); patient advocate (A.W.); and Children’s Hospital of Orange County (M.Z.).
An expanded version of the consensus statement, including vignettes highlighting the broad applicability of the recommendations over a variety of
neurologic disorders of childhood, can be found on the Neurology® Web site at Neurology.org.
Go to Neurology.org for full disclosures. Funding information and disclosures deemed relevant by the authors, if any, are provided at the end of the article.
© 2016 American Academy of Neurology
835
ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 consideration are also included. The consensus
statement was endorsed by the American
Academy of Neurology on July 28, 2015,
the Child Neurology Society on May 8,
2015, and the American Academy of Pediat-
rics on October 21, 2015.
METHODS The Neurology Transition Consensus Panel, an
interdisciplinary
team
including
child
neurologists,
child
neurology nurses, adult neurologists, rehabilitation specialists,
patients, and family members of neurology patients, worked
more than 24 months in developing the consensus statement.
A medical informatician and a medical writer assisted. The
medical informatician guided the panel in language choices that
would facilitate the transfer of the common principles into the
functionality of an electronic health record.
A member of the panel conducted a literature review of the
PubMed/MEDLINE and EMBASE databases preferentially con-
centrated on papers published within the last 10 years and
focused primarily on neurologic disorders. Older papers and book
chapters that were seminal or relevant to transition in general
were also included from bibliographies of the research identified
in the first round search. These findings were presented to the full
panel, which then discussed their interpretations of the identified
research, as well as their own expert opinion. The consensus pa-
per’s findings stem from such discussions, which subsequently
underwent peer review by expert external groups.
COMMON PRINCIPLES
1. The child neurology team discusses with the youth
and caregiver(s) the expectation of the future tran-
sition to the adult health care system. This discus-
sion should be initiated early and documented no
later than the youth’s 13th birthday.
The literature supports introducing the concept
of transition as early as feasible, and no later than
age 12.13–15 Early discussion allows youth and care-
givers time to understand the need for transition to
adult health care, and provides sufficient time for the
neurology team to meet overlapping goals, such as
increasing knowledge of the neurologic condition,
building mastery of self-management and self-
advocacy skills, adapting to changes during puberty,
and learning about developmentally appropriate
models of care.16
Specific areas of concern in transition that should
be introduced at this discussion include the following:
anticipation of future meetings targeted at transition,
private sessions between the youth and health care pro-
vider, the importance of shifting to adult providers, the
differing health care needs of adults, health insurance
retention, and the expectation that the youth will even-
tually assume responsibility for managing his or her
health care needs to the extent possible.
Brochures and handouts summarizing these points
may be offered to youth and caregivers. A key
component of the health care transition process is
the existence of an office transition policy outlining
the practice’s approach to health care transition,
including the age and process at which youth shift
to an adult model of care.13
The panel encourages the development of clear,
explicit, written transition policies in brochures,
handouts, and accessible Web-based information for
youth and caregivers in language appropriate to the
population served by the practice.
2. The child neurology team assures that an assessment
of the youth’s self-management skills begins at age 12
and continues on an annual basis. These assessments
should be documented in the medical record and
communicated to other health care providers.
Self-management of a medical condition, at a mini-
mum, includes a youth’s understanding of his or her
condition and any related limitations, knowledge
about and responsibility for his or her own care plan
and the need to make informed decisions, and the
importance of self-advocacy. A youth’s eventual ability
to manage his or her condition in adulthood is central
to independent living and employment. Youth should
be encouraged to assume responsibility commensurate
with their capabilities. Research into youth capacity to
consent to research and treatment suggests that these
capabilities are feasible to assess by 12 years of age.17–19
Youth with intellectual disabilities should not be
excluded from this process, as many may be able to
develop limited self-management skills. In particular,
individuals with mild intellectual disability may be able
to exert some decision-making capacity,20,21 and can
often become responsible for knowing their diagnosis,
taking medication independently, and participating in
their care.
In cases of a severe static or progressive encephalop-
athy in which self-management skills do not change,
annual reassessment of the youth may not be as neces-
sary. Attention to the caregivers’ ability to manage
evolving care demands is advisable in such cases.
A variety of checklists that evaluate self-management
skills have been proposed and are in use in different
transition programs, according to practice setting and
conditions being treated.8,22–25
3. The child neurology team engages each youth and
his or her caregiver(s) in phased transition planning,
patient education, and transfer readiness at least
annually at scheduled visits, beginning at age 13
years. Yearly planning sessions address (1) the
youth’s medical condition; (2) current medications
and potential side effects; (3) signs and symptoms of
concern; (4) genetic counseling and reproductive
implications of the condition; (5) issues of puberty
and sexuality; (6) driving, alcohol and substance use,
836
Neurology 87
August 23, 2016
ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 and other risks; and (7) emotional/psychological
concerns and wellness.
The child neurology team continues to discuss the
eventual transfer to adult health care at least annually.
Ideally, these conversations are separate from regu-
larly scheduled clinical care visits to allow for ade-
quate time and clear expectations.26 If a dedicated
transition appointment is not possible, the discussion
should be held during nonacute visits. A validated
assessment of transition readiness may be used to
inform the discussions and planning to be engaged
each year.22,27 Such a validated tool is the Transition
Readiness Assessment Questionnaire.27
4. The child neurology team (1) initiates discussion
by age 14 years with the caregivers regarding the
youth’s expected legal competency (whether there is
a need for legal guardianship and powers of attorney),
and (2) documents an assessment (including an assess-
ment of typical decision-making capacity and legal
competency) in the medical record. If the youth’s
expected legal competency is unclear, an assessment
of that capacity should be made annually. The team
supports interventions to maximize the youth’s
decision-making ability and assists the caregiver(s) in
addressing the legal implications of the assessment.
Some youth with cognitive limitations will require
legal guardianship and powers of attorney to be estab-
lished, preferably as soon as they reach the age of
majority in their state. The process of establishing legal
guardianship can be expensive, complicated, and time-
consuming; in some cases, requiring as long as 2 years.
By addressing the need for guardianship by, at the lat-
est, age 14, the child neurology team can assist the
youth and caregiver in coping with the reality of intel-
lectual disability and navigating the legal system before
the youth reaches the state’s age of majority. Social
workers, child life specialists, and other community-
based support services may be helpful throughout the
guardianship process.
In cases in which expected legal competency is
unclear, annual reevaluation of that capacity should
be made and supported by formal psychological or
neuropsychological assessment.
5. By age 14, the child neurology team assures a tran-
sition plan that meets the comprehensive needs of
the youth is developed in collaboration with the
youth, caregiver(s), other health care providers,
school personnel, vocational professionals, commu-
nity services providers, and legal services (as needed).
The plan addresses health care finance and legal
concerns, primary care, other specialty care, educa-
tion to employment, housing, and community serv-
ices. The child neurology team reviews and assures
the adequacy of the transition plan annually.
Ideally, all children will have a pediatrician or family
practitioner, acting as a medical home, to coordinate
and maintain the comprehensive transition plan. It
usually makes sense to transition from all pediatric sub-
specialists to adult care at the same time; this is most
likely to be achieved when the various pediatric health
care providers plan together. A pediatrician or family
practitioner, acting as a medical home, may coordinate
and maintain the comprehensive transition plan. The
comprehensive transition plan should identify the
youth’s goals, and should clearly identify the steps nec-
essary to achieve these goals, as well as potential barriers
or obstacles to these goals, and youth and family
strengths that can be built on in the process of transi-
tion. Institutional/legal transitions should be identified
and their implications summarized.
The child neurology team has 3 primary responsibil-
ities toward the comprehensive transition plan: (1) assur-
ing that an appropriate plan exists, that it is cocreated
with the youth and family, and that it is appropriately
comprehensive and patient-centered; (2) identifying
the professional(s) with primary responsibility for over-
seeing and updating the entire transition plan; and (3)
providing and updating the neurologic component to
this plan—including the “transfer packet” (see common
principles 6 and 7, below).
Preparation of the transfer packet is the responsibil-
ity of the primary care physician or designated special-
ist; the transfer packet is primarily used for care
coordination and communication between physicians.
In addition, in the hands of the youth, the transfer
packet may serve to help him or her better understand
the neurologic condition and/or more efficiently com-
municate with other providers, whether emergency
department physicians or new consultants.
6. The child neurology team develops and verifies the
neurologic component of the transition plan of
care and updates it annually.
The neurologic component of the transition plan
should include the following: a specific summary of
all health care issues; a summary of the youth’s goals
and preferences for adult service requirements; the
planned timing of the transition to an adult provider
of neurologic care (established in collaboration with the
youth and caregiver); any necessary additional testing
or assessments to be completed before transfer; current
assessment of the youth’s understanding of his or her
neurologic diagnosis and management (including prog-
nosis and any reproductive implications of the diagno-
sis); and emergency plans and the youth’s advanced
plan of care (e.g., medical power of attorney, living
will, do not resuscitate order). For those with profound
cognitive disability, plans for establishing guardianship
are also included.
Neurology 87
August 23, 2016
837
ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 7. The child neurology team, in collaboration with
the youth and caregiver(s), identifies an appropri-
ate adult provider(s) for the neurologic condition
(s) before the anticipated time of transfer. The
child neurology team coordinates the transfer uti-
lizing the transfer packet.
One of the central challenges in the medical transi-
tion of youth with neurologic conditions is the identi-
fication of an appropriate adult provider.3,16,28,29
Barriers include adult provider’s discomfort in accept-
ing intellectually and/or behaviorally challenged youth,
patients with rare childhood-onset disorders, and those
with inadequate health insurance coverage.3 Some
youth with neurologic conditions may be transferred
to providers who are not neurologists, including pri-
mary care providers, physiatrists, and/or psychiatrists.
In these cases, the child neurologist might assure the
adult primary care provider of continued availability
for consultation as needed. Disease-specific centers or
outpatient clinics are another option for adult health
care, although these tend to be available only in larger
cities.9
When an adult health care provider is identified,
the child neurology team should forward a medical
transfer packet that includes the transition plan and
a medical summary, which should include documen-
tation of the underlying etiology; previous drug trials,
treatments, and diagnostic evaluations; notable past
procedures; current medications and laboratory re-
sults; and protocol for emergency care. An updated
copy of this document should be routinely provided
to the youth and caregiver.
The time preceding transfer of care is fraught
with high rates of anxiety by transitioning youth
and their parents30; identifying an adult provider
1 to 2 years in advance of the actual transfer may
help to reduce this stress. Before the actual transfer
of care, successful transition models have included
preliminary visits with the adult provider or joint
pediatric–adult transition clinics.10–12,31 Some prac-
tices encourage the use of a transition coordinator11;
adult primary care providers, especially med-peds
physicians, can also serve as valuable resources
during the transition process.
If an adult health care provider is not identified
before the planned time or age for transfer or transfer
is delayed because of extenuating circumstances such
as an acute event, the child neurology team is responsible
for continuing to assure the youth receives adequate care.
8. The child neurology team directly communicates
with the appropriate, identified adult provider(s) to
ensure that the identified provider agrees to accept
the patient and an appointment is made and kept.
The child neurology team documents the youth’s
transfer into the medical record.
The child neurology team is responsible for con-
firming that the transfer has been completed and
adult care is established. Adult health care providers
may be more open to accepting patients with neuro-
logic conditions if they are assured of direct access to
the pediatric provider should questions arise.
Note. There are some youth with neurologic disor-
ders who are not expected to live into adulthood.
Transition to an adult health care provider may
not be appropriate in these unusual cases, although child
neurologists may still adapt their practice with these pa-
tients to maximize skills such as self-management and
independence. Conversely, some children are treated
by adult neurologists; a pediatric-friendly, family-based
approach should evolve to an adult model as the
patients achieve maturity. In both of these cases, the
common principles may help to identify areas of focus
for such adaptation.
AREAS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH The literature on
transition remains limited, particularly for children living
with neurologic disease. The goals and optimal outcomes
for transition are often not well defined, precluding
objective assessments of the efficacy of transition support
and/or evaluation of different models of transition sup-
port. Possible metrics for assessment include the rate of
appointment completion and follow-up in the adult
setting, patient and family satisfaction with transition
and the new provider, stable or improved neurologic
condition, adherence to care plans, decreased
emergency utilization, rate of “bounce back” to
pediatric providers, and improved quality of life.
The extent to which these metrics might differ by
patient condition, payer, geography, and other
variables is also of interest.
CONCLUSION The members of the panel believe
that the common principles outlined in this report
are realistic, applicable to the broad spectrum of pedi-
atric neurologic diagnoses, feasible in a wide range of
practice settings, and likely to make a real difference
in the lives of our patients. Subsequent development
of transition toolkits and templates specific to neurol-
ogy, as well as definitive research about transition for
youth with neurologic disorders, will assist in imple-
mentation of these common principles.
An expanded version of the consensus statement,
including vignettes highlighting the broad applicabil-
ity of the recommendations over a variety of neuro-
logic disorders of childhood, can be found on the
Neurology® Web site at Neurology.org.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Lawrence W. Brown: drafting/revising the manuscript, study concept or
design, analysis or interpretation of data, accepts responsibility for con-
duct of research and will give final approval, study supervision. Peter
R. Camfield: drafting/revising the manuscript, study concept or design,
838
Neurology 87
August 23, 2016
ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 analysis or interpretation of data, accepts responsibility for conduct of
research and will give final approval. Melissa Capers: drafting/revising
the manuscript, accepts responsibility for conduct of research and will
give final approval. Greg Cascino: drafting/revising the manuscript, study
concept or design, analysis or interpretation of data, accepts responsibility
for conduct of research and will give final approval, acquisition of data.
Mary Ciccarelli: drafting/revising the manuscript, study concept or
design, analysis or interpretation of data, accepts responsibility for con-
duct of research and will give final approval. Claudio de Gusmao: draft-
ing/revising the manuscript, analysis or interpretation of data, accepts
responsibility for conduct of research and will give final approval, acqui-
sition of data, performed literature review. Stephen Downs: drafting/
revising the manuscript, study concept or design, analysis or interpre-
tation of data, accepts responsibility for conduct of research and will
give final approval. Annette Majnemer: drafting/revising the manu-
script, study concept or design, analysis or interpretation of data, ac-
cepts responsibility for conduct of research and will give final
approval. Amy Brin Miller: drafting/revising the manuscript, accepts
responsibility for conduct of research and will give final approval.
Christina SanInocencio: drafting/revising the manuscript, accepts
responsibility for conduct of research and will give final approval. Re-
becca Schultz: drafting/revising the manuscript, accepts responsibility
for conduct of research and will give final approval. Anne Tilton: draft-
ing/revising the manuscript, study concept or design, accepts responsi-
bility for conduct of research and will give final approval. Annick
Winokur: drafting/revising the manuscript, accepts responsibility for
conduct of research and will give final approval. Mary Zupanc: draft-
ing/revising the manuscript, accepts responsibility for conduct of
research and will give final approval, study supervision.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors thank the following professional and advocacy organizations
for serving as reviewers: American Academy of Cerebral Palsy and Devel-
opmental Medicine, American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychia-
try, American Academy of Neurology, American Academy of Pediatrics,
Association of Child Neurology Nurses, Child Neurology Society, Epi-
lepsy Foundation of America, Family Voices, Lennox-Gastaut Syndrome
Foundation, National Association of Pediatric Nurse Practitioners,
National Organization for Rare Disorders, Society for Adolescent Health
& Medicine, Society of General Internal Medicine Transition Task Force,
and Tuberous Sclerosis Alliance.
STUDY FUNDING
This project was funded in part by a sponsorship from Eisai Inc. All content
was solely developed by Child Neurology Foundation’s expert author panel.
DISCLOSURE
L. Brown reports no disclosures relevant to the manuscript. P. Camfield
has received a speakers honorarium from Biocodex. M. Capers reports no
disclosures relevant to the manuscript. G. Cascino serves as associate edi-
tor for Neurology®, is an investigator in the Human Epilepsy Project,
receives technology royalties from Mayo Medical Ventures (high fre-
quency nerve stimulation to treat lower back pain, Nervo), and receives
honoraria from the American Academy of Neurology and American Epi-
lepsy Society. M. Ciccarelli, C. de Gusmao, S. Downs, A. Majnemer, and
A. Miller report no disclosures relevant to the manuscript. C. SanIno-
cencio served as a consultant for Eisai Inc.’s Living with LGS Web site
and educational video, and serves as a consultant for Lundbeck’s LGS
Workgroup. R. Schultz has no disclosures relevant to this manuscript.
Dr. Schultz receives royalties from UpToDate on the topic of Rett Syn-
drome and salary support from HRSA grant 13-244, State and Regional
Approaches to Improving Access to Services for Children and Youth with
Epilepsy. A. Tilton is a consultant for Ipsen pharmaceuticals. Dr. Tilton
administers botulinum toxin in her clinical practice (35% effort). Dr. Tilton
has a patent in conjunction with LSUHSC on the use of botulinum toxin
in refractory acne. There are royalties associated with the patent through
LSUHSC. A. Winokur and M. Zupanc report no disclosures relevant to the
manuscript. Go to Neurology.org for full disclosures.
Received December 14, 2015. Accepted in final form May 17, 2016.
REFERENCES
1.
Lariviere-Bastien D, Bell E, Majnemer A, Shevell M,
Racine E. Perspectives of young adults with cerebral palsy
on transitioning from pediatric to adult healthcare systems.
Semin Pediatr Neurol 2013;20:154–159.
2.
Cheak-Zamora N, Farmer J, Mayfield W, et al. Health
care transition services for youth with autism spectrum
disorders. Rehabil Psychol 2014;59:340–348.
3.
Oskoui M, Wolfson C. Treatment comfort of adult neu-
rologists in childhood onset conditions. Can J Neurol Sci
2012;39:202–205.
4.
McManus MA, Pollack LR, Cooley WC, et al. Current
status of transition preparation among youth with special
needs in the United States. Pediatrics 2013;131:1090–1097.
5.
Woodward JF, Swigonski NL, Ciccarelli MR. Assessing
the health, functional characteristics, and health needs of
youth attending a noncategorical transition support pro-
gram. J Adolesc Health 2012;51:272–278.
6.
Bindels-de Heus K, van Staa A, van Vliet I, Ewals FV,
Hilberink SR. Transferring young people with profound
intellectual and multiple disabilities from pediatric to adult
medical care: parents’ experiences and recommendations.
Intellect Dev Disabil 2013;51:176–189.
7.
Shogren KA, Plotner AJ. Transition planning for students
with intellectual disability, autism, or other disabilities:
data from the National Longitudinal Transition Study–
2. Intellect Dev Disabil 2012;50:16–30.
8.
Jurasek L, Ray L, Quigley D. Development and imple-
mentation of an adolescent epilepsy transition clinic.
J Neurosci Nurs 2010;42:181–189.
9.
Van Lierde A, Menni F, Bedeschi MF, et al. Healthcare
transition in patients with rare genetic disorders with and
without developmental disability: neurofibromatosis 1 and
Williams–Beuren syndrome. Am J Med Genet A 2013;
161A:1666–1674.
10.
Rutishauser C, Sawyer SM, Ambresin AE. Transition of
young people with chronic conditions: a cross-sectional
study of patient perceptions before and after transfer from
pediatric to adult health care. Eur J Pediatr 2014;173:
1067–1074.
11.
Annunziato RA, Baisley MC, Arrato N, et al. Strangers
headed to a strange land? A pilot study of using a transition
coordinator to improve transfer from pediatric to adult
services. J Pediatr 2013;163:1628–1633.
12.
Carrizosa J, An I, Appleton R, Camfield P, Von Moers A.
Models for transition clinics. Epilepsia 2014;55(suppl 3):
46–51.
13.
Cooley WC, Sagerman PJ. Supporting the health care
transition from adolescence to adulthood in the medical
home. Pediatrics 2011;128:182–200.
14.
Robb A, Findling RL. Challenges in the transition of care
for adolescents with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disor-
der. Postgrad Med 2013;125:131–140.
15.
Lemly DC, Weitzman ER, O’Hare K. Advancing health-
care transitions in the medical home: Tools for providers,
families and adolescents with special healthcare needs.
Curr Opin Pediatr 2013;25:439–446.
16.
Reiss JG, Gibson RW, Walker LR. Health care transition:
youth, family, and provider perspectives. Pediatrics 2005;
115:112–120.
17.
Hein IM, Troost PW, Lindeboom R, de Vries MC,
Zwaan CM, Lindauer RJL. Assessing children’s compe-
tence to consent in research by a standardized tool: a val-
idity study. BMC Pediatr 2012;12:156.
Neurology 87
August 23, 2016
839
ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 18.
Bolt I, van Summeren MJH. Competence assessment
in minors, illustrated by the case of bariatric surgery for
morbidly obese children. Best Pract Res Clin Gastroenter-
ol 2014;28:293–302.
19.
Hein IM, Troost PW, Lindeboom R, et al. Accuracy of
the MacArthur Competence Assessment Tool for Clinical
Research (MacCAT-CR) for measuring children’s compe-
tence to consent to clinical research. JAMA Pediatr 2014;
168:1147–1153.
20.
Wong JG, Clare CH, Holland AJ, Watson PC, Gunn M.
The capacity of people with a “mental disability” to make
a health care decision. Psychol Med 2000;30:295–306.
21.
Suto WM, Clare CH, Holland AJ, Watson PC. Capacity to
make financial decisions among people with mild intellec-
tual disabilities. J Intellect Disabil Res 2005;49:199–209.
22.
Sawicki GS, Lukens-bull K, Yin X, et al. Measuring the
transition readiness of youth with special healthcare needs:
validation of the TRAQ—Transition Readiness Assess-
ment Questionnaire. J Pediatr Psychol 2011;36:160–171.
23.
Moynihan M, Saewyc E, Whitehouse S, Paone M,
McPherson G. Assessing readiness for transition from pae-
diatric to adult health care: revision and psychometric
evaluation of the Am I ON TRAC for Adult Care ques-
tionnaire. J Adv Nurs 2015;71:1324–1335.
24.
Schrans DG, Abbott D, Peay HL, et al. Transition in
Duchenne muscular dystrophy: an expert meeting report
and description of transition needs in an emergent patient
population. Neuromuscul Disord 2013;23:283–286.
25.
Camfield CS, Berg A, Stephani U, Wirrell EC. Transition
issues for benign epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes, non-
lesional focal epilepsy in otherwise normal children, child-
hood absence epilepsy, and juvenile myoclonic epilepsy.
Epilepsia 2014;55(suppl 3):16–20.
26.
Davies H, Rennick J, Majnemer A. Transition from pedi-
atric to adult health care for young adults with neurolog-
ical disorders: parental perspectives. Can J Neurosci Nurs
2011;33:32–39.
27.
Wood DL, Sawicki GS, Miller MD, et al. The Transition
Readiness Assessment Questionnaire (TRAQ): its factor struc-
ture, reliability, and validity. Acad Pediatr 2014;14:415–422.
28.
Brown LW, Roach ES. Outgrowing the child neurologist:
facing the challenges of transition. JAMA Neurol 2013;70:
496–497.
29.
Nabbout R, Camfield P. Bringing the transition of epi-
lepsy care from children to adults out of the shadows.
Epilepsia 2014;55(suppl 3):52–53.
30.
Bloom SR, Kuhlthau K, Van Cleave J, Knapp AA,
Newacheck P, Perrin JM. Health care transition for youth with
special health care needs. J Adolesc Health 2012;51:213–219.
31.
Camfield P, Camfield C. Transition to adult care for chil-
dren with chronic neurological disorders. Ann Neurol
2011;69:437–444.
840
Neurology 87
August 23, 2016
ª 2016 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 DOI 10.1212/WNL.0000000000002965
2016;87;835-840 Published Online before print July 27, 2016
Neurology 
Lawrence W. Brown, Peter Camfield, Melissa Capers, et al. 
statement
The neurologist's role in supporting transition to adult health care: A consensus
This information is current as of July 27, 2016
Services
Updated Information &
 
http://n.neurology.org/content/87/8/835.full
including high resolution figures, can be found at:
Supplementary Material
 
965.DC1
http://n.neurology.org/content/suppl/2016/07/27/WNL.0000000000002
Supplementary material can be found at: 
References
 
http://n.neurology.org/content/87/8/835.full#ref-list-1
This article cites 31 articles, 3 of which you can access for free at: 
Citations
 
http://n.neurology.org/content/87/8/835.full##otherarticles
This article has been cited by 1 HighWire-hosted articles: 
Subspecialty Collections
 
http://n.neurology.org/cgi/collection/models_of_care
Models of care
 
http://n.neurology.org/cgi/collection/all_practice_management
All Practice Management
 
http://n.neurology.org/cgi/collection/all_clinical_neurology
All Clinical Neurology
following collection(s): 
This article, along with others on similar topics, appears in the
  
Permissions & Licensing
 
http://www.neurology.org/about/about_the_journal#permissions
its entirety can be found online at:
Information about reproducing this article in parts (figures,tables) or in
  
Reprints
 
http://n.neurology.org/subscribers/advertise
Information about ordering reprints can be found online:
rights reserved. Print ISSN: 0028-3878. Online ISSN: 1526-632X.
1951, it is now a weekly with 48 issues per year. Copyright © 2016 American Academy of Neurology. All 
® is the official journal of the American Academy of Neurology. Published continuously since
Neurology 
