 Transmission of the gut microbiota: spreading of health
Hilary P. Browne1, B. Anne Neville1, Samuel C. Forster1,2,3, and Trevor D. Lawley1
1Host–Microbiota Interactions Laboratory, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, 
Cambridgeshire CB10 1SA, UK
2Centre for Innate Immunity and Infectious Diseases, Hudson Institute of Medical Research, 
Clayton, Victoria 3168, Australia
3Department of Molecular and Translational Sciences, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, 
Australia
Abstract
Transmission of commensal intestinal bacteria between humans could promote health by 
establishing, maintaining and replenishing microbial diversity in the microbiota of an individual. 
Unlike pathogens, the routes of transmission for commensal bacteria remain unappreciated and 
poorly understood, despite the likely commonalities between both. Consequently, broad infection 
control measures that are designed to prevent pathogen transmission and infection, such as 
oversanitation and the overuse of antibiotics, may inadvertently affect human health by altering 
normal commensal transmission. In this Review, we discuss the mechanisms and factors that 
influence host-to-host transmission of the intestinal microbiota and examine how a better 
understanding of these processes will identify new approaches to nurture and restore transmission 
routes that are used by beneficial bacteria.
The human intestinal microbiota is one of the most densely populated microbial 
communities known to exist1. This community has important metabolic and protective roles 
in human health through metabolizing indigestible carbohydrates, producing vitamins, 
preventing infection by pathogenic bacteria and modulating host immune responses2. 
Bacteria form the majority of the microbial biomass in the human gastrointestinal 
microbiota and they carry out the majority of the metabolic activities2,3. Most of the 
bacteria in the gastrointestinal tract reside in the large intestine, with the rest found primarily 
in the small intestine and stomach4. The majority of these bacteria belong to two main phyla 
— the Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes. These phyla, together with the Proteobacteria, 
Actinobacteria, Synergistetes and Fusobacteria, contain almost all of the bacterial species 
found in the human gastrointestinal tract5–7. Most of these species are obligate anaerobes; 
however, the extent of aerotolerance varies among species in the Actinobacteria and 
Proteobacteria phyla8,9. Despite their abundance in the human gastrointestinal tract, these 
Correspondence to T.D.L. tl2@sanger.ac.uk. 
Competing interests statement 
The authors declare no competing interests.
Publisher’s note 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Europe PMC Funders Group
Author Manuscript
Nat Rev Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Rev Microbiol. 2017 September ; 15(9): 531–543. doi:10.1038/nrmicro.2017.50.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 species represent only a small subset of all of the bacterial taxa on Earth10. Furthermore, 
many of these bacterial taxa are not found replicating outside of the intestinal environment, 
which reflects their adaptation to this specific niche11,12.
The factors that determine the optimal microbial community of an individual at any point in 
time are varied and include age, host genetics, diet and the local environment. Therefore, a 
core ‘healthy’ microbiota that is common to all individuals does not exist. Furthermore, the 
distinction between health-associated commensal bacteria and harmful pathogenic bacteria 
is not always clear, as some bacterial species can promote health or cause disease depending 
on the specific strain or their location in the body. For example, Bacteroides fragilis 
produces immunomodulatory capsular polysaccharides that stimulate the production of anti-
inflammatory cytokines. If this bacterium translocates from the intestine to the peritoneum, 
then the capsular polysaccharides can cause inflammation, which results in the formation of 
an abscess13. Abscesses can be considered as beneficial to the host by limiting the spread of 
disease; however, if left untreated they can cause obstructions and further bacterial 
dissemination if ruptured14. Depending on the strain and the virulence factors that are 
present, Escherichia coli is either considered to be a normal commensal of the intestinal 
microbiota or a pathogen15. Similarly, the gastric bacterium Helicobacter pylori is 
associated with an increase in the incidence of peptic ulcers and stomach cancer, but a 
decreased incidence of oesophageal cancer16. In general, we consider a diverse microbiota 
that is abundant in beneficial species, such as members of the Bacteroidaceae, 
Ruminococcaceae and Lachnospiraceae families in the Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes phyla, 
and with few pathobionts, such as many members of the Proteobacteria phylum, indicative of 
a healthy state17.
The presence of the intestinal microbiota in the human gut is the result of extensive 
immigration and competition that continues throughout life. Facultative anaerobic bacteria 
initially colonize the gastrointestinal tract at birth and during the first three years of life. 
However, these bacteria are gradually replaced by obligate anaerobes as the gastrointestinal 
tract becomes more anaerobic and the infant transitions to a solid food diet18,19. The 
colonization success of these health-associated commensal bacteria is attributable to their 
ability to spread and to be maintained in human populations20. Thus, transmission is an 
essential feature of the human microbiota that relies on the strategies used by bacteria to exit 
from one host (donor) and stably colonize another (recipient) (FIG. 1). The ubiquitous and 
sometimes exclusive presence of this select group of enteric bacteria in human populations 
demonstrates the existence of host-adapted colonization processes and refined co-evolved 
transmission networks2,11,12.
Several fundamental questions that concern the transmission of the intestinal microbiota 
remain unanswered. How have strictly anaerobic bacteria been transmitted between humans 
Peritoneum 
A membrane that lines the abdominal cavity and provides a supportive role to internal body organs, including those of the 
gastrointestinal tract.
Pathobionts 
Members of the commensal microbiota that may become pathogenic under certain circumstances.
Facultative anaerobic bacteria 
Species that can grow and survive in aerobic and anaerobic conditions.
Browne et al.
Page 2
Nat Rev Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 over time to allow co-evolution to occur? In addition, how have changes in Western 
lifestyles during the past several decades affected the co-evolved transmission networks? At 
a practical level, how do we study and monitor commensal transmission so that we can 
preserve and nurture commensal routes of transmission to improve human health? In this 
Review, we discuss the routes and mechanisms that enable the intestinal microbiota to be 
transmitted between hosts and we describe how studies of pathogen transmission can 
provide a framework to study commensal transmission. We discuss the reservoirs of the 
intestinal microbiota and provide examples of how human activities are influencing its 
transmission. In addition, we outline the factors that can perturb our intestinal microbiota 
and the approaches that we can take to restore the microbiota to promote health. We 
conclude by reflecting on how modern human health regimes may be adversely affecting the 
transmission of health-promoting intestinal bacteria.
Routes of transmission
Most of our knowledge on the transmission mechanisms used by intestinal bacteria is 
derived from the study of pathogen transmission; this provides a conceptual framework to 
begin to understand commensal transmission21. Both commensal and pathogenic intestinal 
bacteria are primarily transmitted between hosts through the faecal–oral route. Commensal 
intestinal bacteria can also be transmitted through the vaginal–oral route at birth and through 
breast milk in early life. The transmission routes of commensal and pathogenic bacteria are 
distinguished largely by the colonization strategy that is used once inside the host. 
Commensal bacteria provide health benefits to the host that are a result of their colonization, 
whereas, depending on their virulence and infectious dose, pathogen colonization can cause 
disease.
Shared transmission routes of commensal and pathogenic intestinal bacteria
The first step in a typical transmission route for an intestinal pathogen is the shedding of the 
bacterium from the host in faecal matter, which is followed by changes in bacterial 
metabolism or cellular architecture to maximize survival in the external environment. The 
pathogen must then persist in the external environment, possibly by using reservoirs, such as 
animals, the built environment, water sources or food chains, to increase the likelihood of 
entering a new susceptible host. Once the bacterium has successfully persisted in the 
external aerobic environment and has been ingested by a new host, it must colonize 
otherwise it will rapidly transit through the gut. Colonization includes passage through the 
stomach, the establishment of a niche in the intestinal environment, the use of available 
nutrients, and replication to a level that will ensure stability and survival (FIG. 1). A newly 
colonized host can then become a donor for the onward transmission of that bacterium. The 
colonizing species will encounter competition from the resident microbiota, and this 
colonization resistance has important roles in preventing invasion by pathogenic bacteria and 
in maintaining intestinal homeostasis4. The resident microbiota can compete directly through 
Infectious dose 
The minimum number of bacteria required to cause an infection in a host.
Colonization resistance 
The capacity of the resident microbiota to prevent the establishment of new species within the community, particularly the 
establishment of pathogens. Colonization resistance is a feature of a stable health-associated microbiota.
Browne et al.
Page 3
Nat Rev Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 the use of available nutrients or by the secretion of toxins that target neighbouring bacteria, 
as has been demonstrated for B. fragilis4,22. In addition to competition between bacterial 
species, the metabolism of available dietary substrates can facilitate cross-feeding between 
species, thus promoting cooperation and the colonization of competing species3,23,24.
It is likely that intestinal commensal bacteria use the same, or similar, strategies to those 
used by pathogenic bacteria to transmit between hosts. Recent evidence indicates that many 
of the survival mechanisms and environmental reservoirs are also common between 
pathogenic and commensal bacteria. Moreover, colonization factors, such as flagella and 
fimbriae, are also shared; these appendages are not unique to pathogens and are also a 
feature of commensal intestinal bacteria, including Roseburia spp. and Bifidobacterium spp.
25,26. Last, sequence-based studies of pathogen transmission networks have revealed that 
bacteria can disseminate both locally and globally through their human hosts, which 
indicates that the transmission of commensal bacteria is not spatially restricted27,28.
Distinguishing the routes of transmission of commensal and pathogenic intestinal 
bacteria
Despite the similarities mentioned above, there are substantial differences between the 
mechanisms used by intestinal pathogens and commensal bacteria to transmit. Depending on 
the colonizing dose, host susceptibility and environment, a pathogen can exist in a low-level 
asymptomatic state or can induce a high-level symptomatic super-shedding state in the host29. 
The low-level asymptomatic state is typically associated with relatively little perturbation of 
the intestinal microbiota and lower levels of transmission, thus rendering the host a silent 
carrier of potential pathogens. Bacteria such as enteropathogenic E. coli, Vibrio cholerae and 
Clostridium difficile use virulence factors, such as toxins, during pathogenesis to maximize 
their colonization, despite causing severe inflammatory symptoms and intestinal disease. 
The host can restrict pathogen colonization through the secretion of antimicrobial peptides, 
such as neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL), which prevents microbial 
siderophores from binding to essential iron30. However, some pathogens can circumvent this 
response by producing modified siderophores, such as salmochelins, that are not bound by 
NGAL15. Any resulting intestinal disease typically results in substantial perturbation and 
instability in the commensal microbiota, which often results in diarrhoea that may promote 
rapid pathogen dispersal and transmission at the expense of commensal colonization and 
host health. Therefore, one distinction between pathogen and commensal colonization in this 
context is that pathogenic bacteria use a host-derived inflammation state to spread, whereas 
Homeostasis 
A stable state. The overall maintenance of precise conditions in the microbiota that promote colonization resistance, even when 
subjected to external perturbations or stresses.
Colonizing dose 
The minimum number of bacteria required to stably colonize a new host.
Super-shedding state 
A host state, typically associated with infection by pathogens, that results in the release of numerous bacteria or spores into the 
external environment.
Antimicrobial peptides 
A diverse range of proteins that are secreted by the host as a defence mechanism against pathogens or by microorganisms to target 
other microorganisms in close proximity.
Siderophores 
Low-molecular-weight, iron-chelating agents that are secreted by bacteria and fungi to acquire iron from the surrounding environment.
Browne et al.
Page 4
Nat Rev Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 commensals do not, and therefore either decrease in number or are lost during 
dysbiosis31,32.
Host selection of commensal bacteria
There is emerging evidence that hosts preferentially select communities of commensal 
bacteria through the modulation of the intestinal environment by a combination of host 
genetics and immune responses. Variation in genetic profiles between individuals is known 
to alter many aspects of health and disease, and it is now clear that it may also influence the 
composition of commensal bacterial communities. Despite initial studies that concluded that 
human genetics does not substantially contribute to determining the bacterial species 
acquired 19,33, recent studies have identified the presence of bacterial species that are 
associated with specific genetic polymorphisms, including abundant health-associated 
Faecalibacterium spp.34,35. It has also been demonstrated that specific genes influence 
bacterial colonization. For example, expression of the fucosyltransferase 2 (FUT2) gene 
results in the presentation of fucosylated substrates on intestinal epithelial cells, thus 
enhancing the recruitment of particular species of commensal bacteria to the epithelium and 
protecting against the translocation of pathogenic bacteria36,37. The association between 
host genetics and the community composition of the microbiota remains poorly understood; 
however, it is now evident that host genetics may have an essential role in determining the 
optimal microbiota community for promoting health.
In addition to host genetics, the host immune system can distinguish between commensal 
and pathogenic bacteria to elicit different downstream signalling responses, through innate 
immune receptors, such as Toll-like receptors and nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-like 
receptors (NOD-like receptors). The recognition of commensal bacteria generally promotes 
intestinal homeostasis, whereas the recognition of pathogens results in a pro-inflammatory 
response38. Studies in genetically modified mouse models have shown that the absence of 
caspase 3 and caspase 4, which are involved in cell apoptosis and inflammatory responses, 
can also substantially alter the composition of the microbiota and disease susceptibility39. 
Host-derived antimicrobial peptides that are produced as part of a pro-inflammatory 
response to pathogens have been shown to specifically recognize pathogen 
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) structures and do not bind to LPS on commensal bacteria, owing 
to an altered charge on the commensal cell surface that prevents binding40. These results 
demonstrate that host selection of the composition of the microbiota could be determined 
Dysbiosis 
A low-diversity microbiota with reduced colonization resistance that is typically associated with inflammation and outgrowth of 
facultative anaerobic Proteobacteria and pathogens.
Fucosylated 
The attachment of a fucose molecule to a protein. Fucosylation of epithelial cells by the host can provide a protective role through the 
subsequent recruitment of commensal bacteria.
Toll-like receptors 
A family of transmembrane protein receptors, characterized by the presence of a Toll and interleukin-1 receptor (TIR) domain, that 
recognize specific microorganism-associated molecular patterns and initiate an immune response.
Nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-like receptors 
(NOD-like receptors). A family of intracellular protein receptors that recognize microorganism-associated molecular patterns and 
initiate an immune response.
Browne et al.
Page 5
Nat Rev Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 through host genetic background or induced in response to the presence of pathogens or 
commensals.
Host behaviours, such as dietary choices, may also determine the composition of the 
intestinal microbiota. This selection commences at birth. The presence of indigestible human 
milk oligosaccharides in breast milk promotes the expansion of commensal species, in 
particular Bifidobacterium spp., which have a wide range of glycoside hydrolases that can 
degrade these complex sugars before metabolizing them41,42. By importing human milk 
oligosaccharides into the bacterial cell before degrading them, Bifidobacterium spp. also 
limit nutrient availability to any pathogens that may be present in the intestinal 
environment41,42. The composition of the microbiota in adults can also vary substantially 
with diet. For example, the prevalence of Ruminococcus bromii is known to increase in 
people who consume diets that are high in resistant starches43,44. Taken together, it is clear 
that the combination of host genetics, responses to bacterial stimuli and environmental 
factors, such as diet, determines the current and optimal microbiota for an individual.
Survival in the environment
Once excreted from the body in faeces, intestinal bacteria must tolerate the local 
environment to enter and colonize a new host (FIG. 1). Environmental stresses include the 
toxic effects of atmospheric oxygen, ultraviolet radiation, a lack of nutrients, adverse 
temperatures and desiccation. Bacteria have evolved various strategies, such as a reduction or 
changes in metabolism, and, for some taxa, the development of a protective structure, such 
as a spore, to remain viable during environmental stress. These strategies are essential to 
ensure that commensals survive and are successfully transmitted to a new host (FIG. 2a).
Sporulation
Specific members of the Firmicutes phylum produce resilient, metabolically dormant 
structures known as spores that are typically, but not exclusively, produced during 
environmental stress. Spore integrity and fecundity are maintained by the binding of DNA to 
small acid-soluble proteins in the spore core, which is surrounded by several durable 
proteinaceous layers that have low permeability and high levels of peptidoglycan45. When 
more favourable environmental conditions are encountered, the spore germinates, which 
leads to the re-formation of a vegetative cell46. Intestinal spore-forming bacteria potentially 
represent up to 30% of the microbial abundance in the gut and are found in several 
intestinal-associated bacterial families, including the Lachnospiraceae, Ruminococcaceae, 
Clostridiaceae and the Peptostreptococcaceae47 (FIG. 2b). Many intestinal spore-forming 
bacteria are known to promote homeostasis through the induction of immunomodulatory 
regulatory T cells48. By resisting external environmental stresses, intestinal spores facilitate 
host-to-host transmission through space and time (FIG. 3). Moreover, by germinating after 
exposure to in vivo signals, such as intestinal bile acids, spore-forming bacteria are present 
Desiccation 
The process of liquid removal or drying out, which is usually deleterious to a bacterial cell.
Vegetative cell 
The form of a bacterial cell that reproduces through binary fission.
Browne et al.
Page 6
Nat Rev Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 in a vegetative state and are able to colonize the host47. Last, the induction of sporulation 
may not be restricted to a stress response. For example, under normal conditions, in the 
absence of an environmental stress, C. difficile continuously produces spores at a low rate, 
which are able to persist by adhering to intestinal epithelial cells and mucin49,50. If spores 
of commensal intestinal bacteria could similarly persist and germinate in response to host-
derived cues, this would promote colonization resistance by ensuring that the diversity of the 
community is maintained. Therefore, the formation of spores permits inter-host 
transmission, intra-host persistence and potentially contributes to the overall diversity of the 
intestinal microbiota.
Aerotolerance
Once shed by the host, intestinal bacteria in a vegetative state show varying levels of 
tolerance to atmospheric oxygen8,9,47,51–53 (Supplementary information S1 (table)). The 
damaging effects of oxygen in bacterial cells are due to the generation of reactive oxygen 
species (ROS), which damage DNA and proteins, and interfere with essential metabolic 
processes54. Aerobic bacteria and facultative anaerobic bacteria have evolved mechanisms to 
avoid and repair the damage caused by ROS, including antioxidant enzymes such as 
catalases, peroxidases or superoxide dismutase8,54. In a vegetative state, obligate anaerobic 
bacteria are typically sensitive to oxygen and may die within minutes of exposure47. 
Nevertheless, mechanisms to counter oxygen stress exist, even in these obligate anaerobes. 
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii relies on an extracellular flavin–thiol electron shuttle to grow in 
the presence of oxygen, which enables its survival in the oxygenated zone at the gut 
mucosa55. This oxygenated zone ensures that gut epithelial cells are protected from the 
majority of anaerobic bacteria in the lumen that could compromise the integrity of the 
epithelial cells56,57. The extracellular flavin–thiol electron shuttle may also promote the 
survival of F. prausnitzii when it is exposed to atmospheric oxygen in the presence of the 
antioxidants inulin, cysteine and riboflavin55,58. Other abundant intestinal bacteria, such as 
Roseburia spp., can only survive for a few minutes when exposed to atmospheric oxygen 
concentrations (Supplementary information S1 (table)). We hypothesize that Roseburia spp. 
either use a currently unknown survival mechanism or are extremely efficient at colonization 
and can readily become established in new hosts to which they are in close proximity.
Viable but non-culturable dormancy
A viable but non-culturable (VBNC) state is a form of bacterial dormancy that is not reliant 
on the formation of specialized resistant structures, but that typically involves a decrease in 
metabolic activity and the generation of a strengthened cell wall that is achieved through 
modifications to its peptidoglycan structure. An increase or, more typically, a decrease in 
cell size has also been reported59,60. These strategies all function to help bacteria withstand 
environmental stresses and preserve DNA integrity59–61. Similar to sporulation, the VBNC 
Aerobic bacteria 
Species that can only grow and survive in the presence of oxygen.
Obligate anaerobic bacteria 
Species that can only grow and survive in the absence of oxygen.
Flavin–thiol electron shuttle 
A process that involves the transfer of electrons to oxygen through riboflavin and thiol, which enables survival and growth in the 
presence of oxygen.
Browne et al.
Page 7
Nat Rev Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 state is reversible through the removal of the inducing stress (for example, nutrient limitation 
or extreme temperature) or following exposure to growth stimulants, such as amino acids for 
E. coli or contact with intestinal cells for V. cholerae59,62. Similar to spores, VBNC 
bacteria can remain dormant for long periods of time. For example, Vibrio fluvialis from 
marine sediment was successfully cultured after 6 years of dormancy following the addition 
of nutrients63. The majority of VBNC bacteria that have been identified thus far are human-
associated pathogens, including E. coli, Enterococcus faecium, V. cholerae, Salmonella 
enterica subsp. enterica serovar Typhimurium and Mycobacterium tuberculosis59,64,65. 
Genetic and phenotypic characterization of the VBNC state remains technically challenging, 
because the stimuli that are required to induce or culture bacteria from this dormant state are 
largely unknown or are difficult to simulate in a laboratory66. As VBNC dormancy is found 
in phylogenetically diverse bacterial species, it may be widespread in the intestinal 
microbiota and could be used as a strategy by non-spore-forming oxygen-sensitive 
commensal bacteria to survive in the environment until they are acquired by a new host. 
However, whether the VBNC state is induced in members of the commensal microbiota 
remains to be determined.
Reservoirs of commensal bacteria
Humans are the main reservoir of commensal intestinal bacteria, with transmission occurring 
readily between individuals. In addition, food, water, the environment and animals may 
contain microbial communities that could contribute to the human intestinal microbiota.
People
Childbirth is the first major life event in which the transmission of bacteria and colonization 
occur. Depending on the mode of delivery, either the birth canal of the mother, or the 
hospital environment and the skin of the mother provide the initial inoculum of bacteria for 
the infant67,68. Faecal–oral transmission could also occur during vaginal delivery, which 
would enable the immediate transmission of members of the intestinal microbiota to 
neonates at birth67. Compared with neonates that are born vaginally, it is thought that the 
composition of the microbiota of infants that are born by caesarean section may be more 
analogous to the skin microbiota than the vaginal microbiota in the early days of life68. 
Despite this, by six weeks, differences in the infant microbiota are determined by the body 
site and not the mode of delivery, which indicates that microbial convergence occurs early in 
life69. Evidently, there is no doubt that bacteria that can only be transmitted during vaginal 
delivery would be unable to colonize infants who are born by caesarean section. If no 
attempt is made to colonize infants who are born by caesarean section with these species, 
then, over generations, these species may be lost from the microbiota70. This decrease in 
diversity may have important health implications, as highlighted by reports that have 
associated immune disorders, such as asthma and allergies, in adult life with the abnormal 
development of the infant intestinal microbiota70,71. After childbirth, inter-host 
transmission of intestinal bacteria continues, as shown by people who live in the same home 
sharing more species in common with each other than non-residents19,72–74. The 
transmission rate of a bacterial species is affected by the number of hosts, their level of 
contact and their proximity to each other, as well as by the inherent colonization resistance 
Browne et al.
Page 8
Nat Rev Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 of the microbiota in each individual, which is largely affected by age. A healthy adult has a 
broadly stable and resilient intestinal microbiota compared with an infant whose intestinal 
microbiota is still developing72,75.
Outside of family units, the effects of social interactions on the acquisition of the microbiota 
in large groups are best understood in non-human primates76,77. Similar to humans, these 
are social animals that live and interact with each other in defined communities, and the 
composition of their intestinal microbiotas are influenced by the interactions of the social 
group. The higher the incidence of social interaction between individuals the more similar 
the composition of their intestinal microbiota, with species diversity increasing 
accordingly76,77. The prevalence of anaerobic non-spore forming bacteria in baboons was 
associated with close social interactions between grooming pairs76. Although humans do 
not engage in social grooming, we physically interact through socially acceptable activities 
such as hand shaking, hugging and kissing, the frequency and intimacy of which increase as 
an individual interacts with a close family member or friend compared with a stranger. Thus, 
there is likely to be several social and cultural factors that contribute to the transmission of 
our intestinal microbiota.
Food
Although the microbiota of an individual is largely structured and influenced by their diet, 
the microorganisms that are carried in food can also contribute to the intestinal 
microbiota78. From early life, infants acquire up to 8 × 106 bacteria daily, including 
intestinal-associated bacteria, through breast milk79–81. The mechanism by which intestinal 
bacteria translocate from the gut to the breast is unknown; however, an entero–mammary 
pathway that is facilitated by phagocytes that sample the gut lumen and subsequently 
translocate to the breast through the bloodstream has been proposed82–84. Studies of 
various foods by culture-based methods have estimated that adults consume between 106 
and 109 microorganisms daily85. Although most of the bacteria that are ingested do not 
survive transit through the stomach, those that do are not thought to colonize the 
gastrointestinal tract long-term86. The diversity of the microbiota that is acquired through 
food is dependent on diet85,87; therefore, food provides a source of both exogenous 
bacterial species and genes for the resident microbiota to acquire through horizontal gene 
transfer88.
Probiotic bacteria, typically Bifidobacterium spp. and Lactobacillus spp., can be used in an 
attempt to promote health and have been shown to alleviate the symptoms of several 
illnesses, including infectious diarrhoea and atopic eczema89–91. The long-term 
colonization efficiency of most probiotic bacterial species is variable 92, 93; therefore, 
regular ingestion of probiotics is required to make a substantial long-term contribution to 
Social grooming 
Cleaning and grooming carried out by animals, particularly primates, on other individuals in their community, which has hygienic and 
social roles.
Horizontal gene transfer 
The transfer of genetic material between different strains or species that occurs independently of vertical transmission during 
replication.
Probiotics 
Live microorganisms that when administered in adequate amounts confer a health benefit to the host.
Browne et al.
Page 9
Nat Rev Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 health81,94. However, stable gut colonization by Bifidobacterium longum six months after 
ingestion has been observed, which was attributed to the presence of an unoccupied niche 
that was vacated by a species that has similar carbohydrate-metabolizing capabilities95. 
Overall, the variability in probiotic efficacy, coupled with host-specific responses to 
probiotics, means that the health benefits of ingesting these bacteria are not fully understood 
or predictable96,97.
Water
Water is a major environmental reservoir for several intestinal bacterial pathogens, such as 
Shigella flexneri, Shigella sonnei and V. cholerae, which can cause debilitating 
gastrointestinal disease98. However, little is known about the fate or the effect that 
commensal intestinal microorganisms that are found in water have on human health. The 
identification of bacteria in drinking water has primarily focused on pathogens, especially 
readily detectable indicator microorganisms, such as E. coli; however, the distinction between 
commensal and pathogenic strains of this species is not always made99. Despite an 
emphasis on pathogen detection, sequence-based culture-independent approaches have 
identified human-associated Blautia spp. in rivers100. Thus, it is clear that these species are 
transmitted through water; however, after the appropriate water treatment procedures, any 
strictly anaerobic non-spore-forming intestinal bacteria are likely to be killed, and these 
bacteria are therefore expected to have a low transmissibility and colonization potential. 
Nevertheless, the full extent of the transmission of commensal intestinal bacteria through 
water is currently unknown.
Animals
For most people, pets are the main source of animal-derived microbiota. The microbiotas of 
dogs and cats include taxa that are also found in the human microbiota; for example, genera 
such as Roseburia, Faecalibacterium, Bacteroides, Prevotella and Ruminoccocus101,102. 
Farm animals are an additional source of bacteria. Analysis of the porcine intestinal 
microbiota has revealed similarities in taxonomic groups and functional capabilities with the 
human intestinal microbiota103,104. Several human-associated pathogens, such as 
Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica serovar Enteritidis, Campylobacter jejuni, 
enteropathogenic E. coli and C. difficile 105–107, are transmitted between animals and 
humans; therefore, the potential for animals to transmit commensal species of bacteria is 
plausible. The treatment of animals that are to be used as food with antibiotics has also been 
linked to the acquisition of antibiotic-resistant strains of bacteria in humans108,109. This 
highlights the need to recognize that human health can be influenced through various diverse 
sources that are not directly connected to our own personal health decisions.
Built environment
Both buildings and transport systems adsorb our microbiota, which creates opportunities for 
microbial transmission across vast spatial areas and diverse human populations110–113. 
Indicator microorganisms 
Microorganisms that are used to assay hygiene levels of foods or water, in which the quantity of the microorganisms present is 
inversely related to the quality or hygiene level of the product being tested.
Browne et al.
Page 10
Nat Rev Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Humans are one of the main sources of indoor airborne bacteria that can spread through 
ventilation systems114. Outdoor air can also enter a building passively110,115. Once 
bacteria become airborne (for example, through flushing a toilet or using a shower), viable 
bacteria can disperse around a room116,117. In the built environment, the greatest density of 
human-associated bacteria will probably be found in bathrooms. Bacteria are abundant on 
surfaces that have been touched by human hands, on toilet seats or on floors118,119. Skin-
associated bacteria are the most dominant species on bathroom surfaces; however, a high 
proportion of intestinal-associated bacteria have also been found, such as members of the 
Bacteroidaceae, Prevotellaceae, Ruminococcaceae and Lachnospiraceae families. The 
presence of these intestinal-associated bacteria, together with poor hand-washing 
procedures, provides a reservoir for bacteria in the built environment that have the potential 
to transmit to humans120.
A limitation of most of the studies on bacteria in the built environment is the lack of 
distinction between viable bacteria that have the potential to successfully colonize a new 
host and non-viable bacteria, which do not. It is estimated that only 1–10% of bacterial cells 
that are detected by culture-independent methods are viable121. Although culture-based 
methods can detect the viability of bacterial cells, the bacteria obtained will be an 
underrepresentation of the overall diversity in the sample121,122. Knowledge of the 
influence of the built environment on the transmission of the intestinal microbiota is 
currently incomplete, but as research in this discipline increases its influence and importance 
will become more apparent114.
Microbiota perturbation and restoration
Throughout life, our microbiota experiences perturbations that can alter or damage its 
composition and functions86,123–126. Nevertheless, on the basis of current DNA 
sequencing and analysis technologies, the composition of the microbiota in an individual is 
largely stable once established127,128. This observation raises important questions about 
microbiota perturbation, restoration and, ultimately, microbial transmission. How is a 
depleted microbiota restored following perturbation? How can we promote recolonization by 
specific health-associated microorganisms instead of pathogens? To help answer these 
questions, tools are required that enable the precise tracking of bacterial strain movements 
and restoration once transmission is blocked (BOX 1).
Depending on the extent of the perturbation in the microbiota, and subsequent exposure to 
bacteria, the composition of the microbiota may be restored to a similar state or assume a 
new stable state that is composed of different bacterial species129. Therefore, a perturbation 
in the community will provide an opportunity for an externally derived bacterium to 
establish itself by reducing or eliminating competition from a resident species that occupies 
the same niche and requires the same nutrients95,130. Factors that affect microbiota 
perturbation are varied and range from antibiotic use, infection with a pathogen, a change in 
diet or travel18,86,123,131. Changes in the composition of the microbiota have mostly been 
studied at the individual level; however, there is increasing evidence that suggests that 
changes in Western lifestyles and diet are altering the intestinal microbiota at larger 
population levels. Recently, it was observed that many traditional rural hunter–gatherer 
Browne et al.
Page 11
Nat Rev Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 societies and agrarian groups that follow non-Western social behaviours and do not 
commonly use antibiotics or disinfectants have a more diverse intestinal microbiota that 
includes bacterial species that are now absent from the intestinal microbiota of developed 
world populations132,133.
Any perturbation in an individual that eliminates certain bacterial species, or selects for 
some at the expense of other species, will prevent further onward transmission to other 
hosts70,134. If the perturbation happens at the population level then the effects may be 
compounded at a larger scale. For example, the consumption of a high-fat low-fibre diet, 
which is typical of Western populations, has been shown to cause the extinction of intestinal 
bacteria in mice if the diet is consumed over several generations134. Similarly, the use of 
antibiotics can negatively affect the diversity of intestinal bacteria, with repeated use 
preventing the restoration of the microbiota124. Although antibiotics and disinfection 
measures are essential for disease control and a high-calorie diet has greatly decreased 
undernutrititon in Western societies; in this context, these changes may result in the 
indiscriminate elimination of commensal species, which could affect the diversity of the 
microbiota and microbial transmission70,135. Indeed, a study in which the intestinal 
microbiotas of individuals who resided in either the United States or traditional agrarian 
societies in Papua New Guinea were compared attributed a lower α-diversity within, and 
higher β-diversity between, individuals in the United States cohort to decreased inter-host 
microbial transmission136.
In addition to the observed decrease in the diversity of the intestinal microbiota in Western 
societies, an increase in autoimmune and allergic diseases in the developed world has been 
observed70,137,138. Originally termed the ‘hygiene hypothesis’, there is increasing 
evidence in humans and animal models that exposure to microorganisms early in life 
promotes the maturation of the immune system and decreases the incidence of autoimmune-
related diseases137,139–141. Consistent with this hypothesis, the use of antibiotics in 
childhood has been associated with an increased likelihood of developing paediatric 
inflammatory bowel disease and a predisposition to asthma and obesity in later life124,142. 
These examples illustrate the importance of efficient microbial transmission networks and 
the potential effect on human health when they fail.
Direct interventions currently provide the most immediate solution to establish or restore a 
diverse and beneficially functional microbiota across all age groups. Recent interventions in 
this area have included swabbing neonates born by caesarean section with gauze that has 
been pre-incubated in the vagina of the mother to mimic the natural transmission of the 
vaginal microbiota to the child143. In adults who are susceptible to recurrent infections with 
C. difficile, faecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) from a healthy donor has proven 
extremely effective at resolving such infections144 (BOX 2). As the number of human gut 
Undernutrition 
A situation whereby an individual does not consume enough nutrients, which can have adverse effects on health.
α-diversity 
The ecological diversity at a single site, as measured by the number of different species and their abundance.
β-diversity 
A measure of the difference in ecological diversity between different sites.
Browne et al.
Page 12
Nat Rev Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 commensal species that have been isolated and archived as pure cultures continues to 
increase47,145–147, the development of live biotherapeutics (BOX 2) for the treatment of 
disorders other than C. difficile infection will become feasible. Next-generation probiotics 
and functional foods that make use of the numerous diverse beneficial bacteria other than the 
widely used Lactobacillus spp. and Bifidobacterium spp., could potentially provide health 
benefits to individuals and to the wider interconnected human population. The cumulative 
potential impact of this new field of biotherapeutics and functional foods is immense, 
particularly as the health effect of the intestinal microbiota extends beyond intestinal 
diseases to immune development and our general well-being2.
At a broader level, changes in living practices can promote the transmission of, and 
colonization by, health-associated commensals at the expense of pathogen colonization. A 
course of broad-spectrum antibiotics to treat a gastrointestinal infection also eliminates 
many beneficial commensals, thus rendering the microbiota-deficient host susceptible to 
infections with other pathogens131,148. Indeed, narrow-spectrum antibiotics, or 
antimicrobials that have specific targets, such as bacteriocins or phage therapies, are 
desirable and under development as alternatives to treatment with broad-spectrum 
antibiotics149. The effects of antibacterial hygiene products and hand sanitizers on the 
intestinal microbiota are unclear and require further study150; however, efforts to use them 
more selectively may reduce the depletion of commensal bacteria. Hygiene practices 
currently act to decrease the total number of bacteria on a surface or individual, whereas a 
more targeted approach that specifically removes pathogenic microorganisms should be 
given greater consideration151. We anticipate that with more research we should be able to 
outline new approaches to safely preserve and nurture the transmission of commensal 
bacteria while maintaining protection from pathogens.
Conclusions and future perspectives
The factors that influence our intestinal microbiota are becoming more apparent, partly 
owing to technological advances in microbiology, genomics and bioinformatics, and partly 
owing to the realization that assembling and maintaining a healthy intestinal microbiota may 
depend not only on our diet, lifestyle choices and general health but also on the microbiota 
and the health of others. The health status of the donors that we acquire our microbiota from 
may affect the composition of our own intestinal microbiota. In theory, donors that have the 
greatest diversity of commensal bacteria in the highest numbers are most likely to replenish 
the depleted microbiota of potential recipients (FIG. 4). Suboptimal donors were once 
healthy donors, but antibiotic exposure or other disease conditions caused a decrease in the 
diversity of the intestinal microbiota. The microbiota of suboptimal donors may potentially 
include higher levels of pathogens, which may be transmitted at a higher frequency than in 
healthy donors.
In this Review, we propose the concept of ‘spreading health through our microbiota’ as a 
basis to nurture, preserve and restore our microbiota to promote health. Given the potential 
Functional foods 
Foods that contain additional elements to promote health, such as probiotics, prebiotics, vitamins or minerals.
Browne et al.
Page 13
Nat Rev Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 for long-term consequences for health at all stages of life, we suggest that a greater 
understanding of the transmission of commensal microbiota should become a public health 
priority. We also advocate for lifestyle choices that promote the transmission of beneficial 
bacteria between individuals as a means to preserve and restore health. Traditionally, the 
study of bacterial transmission networks has focused on pathogens because restricting 
pathogen transmission is important for preventing the spread of disease. The tools and 
knowledge that we have acquired from these efforts can also be applied to the study of 
intestinal commensal transmission. The challenge moving forward will be to apply this 
knowledge to demonstrate and validate the hypothesis that commensal bacteria spread 
health.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank A. Zhu for critical reading of the manuscript during preparation. H.P.B. is funded through a 
Medical Research Council (MRC) grant (PF451), B.A.N. is funded through a Wellcome Trust grant (098051), 
S.C.F. is funded through an Australian National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) grant (1091097). 
Work in the Lawley laboratory is supported through a MRC grant (PF451) and a Wellcome Trust grant (098051).
References
1. Whitman WB, Coleman DC, Wiebe WJ. Prokaryotes: the unseen majority. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 
1998; 95:6578–6583. [PubMed: 9618454] 
2. Sekirov I, Russell SL, Antunes LCM, Finlay BB. Gut microbiota in health and disease. Physiol Rev. 
2010; 90:859–904. [PubMed: 20664075] 
3. Louis P, Hold GL, Flint HJ. The gut microbiota, bacterial metabolites and colorectal cancer. Nat Rev 
Microbiol. 2014; 12:661–672. [PubMed: 25198138] 
4. Lawley TD, Walker AW. Intestinal colonization resistance. Immunology. 2013; 138:1–11. [PubMed: 
23240815] 
5. Human Microbiome Project Consortium. Structure, function and diversity of the healthy human 
microbiome. Nature. 2012; 486:207–214. [PubMed: 22699609] [This landmark study 
characterizes the microbiota across different human body sites.]
6. Rajilić-Stojanović M, de Vos WM. The first 1000 cultured species of the human gastrointestinal 
microbiota. FEMS Microbiol Rev. 2014; 38:996–1047. [PubMed: 24861948] [This study provides 
a detailed description and phylogeny of more than 1,000 cultured species from the intestinal 
microbiota.]
7. Eckburg PB. Diversity of the human intestinal microbial flora. Science. 2005; 308:1635–1638. 
[PubMed: 15831718] 
8. Rolfe RD, Hentges DJ, Campbell BJ, Barrett JT. Factors related to the oxygen tolerance of 
anaerobic bacteria. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1978; 36:306–313. [PubMed: 697363] 
9. Andriantsoanirina V, Allano S, Butel MJ, Aires J. Tolerance of Bifidobacterium human isolates to 
bile, acid and oxygen. Anaerobe. 2013; 21:39–42. [PubMed: 23598280] 
10. Hug LA, et al. A new view of the tree of life. Nat Microbiol. 2016; 1:16048. [PubMed: 27572647] 
11. Ley RE, Lozupone CA, Hamady M, Knight R, Gordon JI. Worlds within worlds: evolution of the 
vertebrate gut microbiota. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2008; 6:776–788. [PubMed: 18794915] 
12. Meehan CJ, Beiko RGA. Phylogenomic view of ecological specialization in the Lachnospiraceae, a 
family of digestive tract-associated bacteria. Genome Biol Evol. 2014; 6:703–713. [PubMed: 
24625961] 
Browne et al.
Page 14
Nat Rev Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 13. Surana NK, Kasper DL. The yin yang of bacterial polysaccharides: lessons learned from B. fragilis 
PSA. Immunol Rev. 2012; 245:13–26. [PubMed: 22168411] 
14. Wexler HM. Bacteroides: the good, the bad, and the nitty-gritty. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2007; 20:593–
621. [PubMed: 17934076] 
15. Kamada N, Chen GY, Inohara N, Núñez G. Control of pathogens and pathobionts by the gut 
microbiota. Nat Immunol. 2013; 14:685–690. [PubMed: 23778796] 
16. Chow W-H, et al. An inverse relation between cagA+ strains of Helicobacter pylori infection and 
risk of esophageal and gastric cardia adenocarcinoma. Cancer Res. 1998; 58:588–590. [PubMed: 
9485003] 
17. Petersen C, Round JL. Defining dysbiosis and its influence on host immunity and disease. Cell 
Microbiol. 2014; 16:1024–1033. [PubMed: 24798552] 
18. Koenig JE, et al. Succession of microbial consortia in the developing infant gut microbiome. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci USA. 2010; 108:4578–4585. [PubMed: 20668239] 
19. Yatsunenko T, et al. Human gut microbiome viewed across age and geography. Nature. 2012; 
486:222–227. [PubMed: 22699611] 
20. Falkow S. Who speaks for the microbes? Emerg Infect Dis. 1998; 4:495–497. [PubMed: 9716983] 
21. Falkow S. What is a pathogen? ASM News. 1997; 63:359–365.
22. Wexler AG, et al. Human symbionts inject and neutralize antibacterial toxins to persist in the gut. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2016; 113:3639–3644. [PubMed: 26957597] 
23. Duncan SH, Louis P, Flint HJ. Lactate-utilizing bacteria, isolated from human feces, that produce 
butyrate as a major fermentation product. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2004; 70:5810–5817. 
[PubMed: 15466518] 
24. Rakoff-Nahoum S, Foster KR, Comstock LE. The evolution of cooperation within the gut 
microbiota. Nature. 2016; 533:255–259. [PubMed: 27111508] 
25. Turroni F, et al. Expression of sortase-dependent pili of Bifidobacterium bifidum PRL2010 in 
response to environmental gut conditions. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2014; 357:23–33. [PubMed: 
24947069] 
26. Neville BA, et al. Pro-inflammatory flagellin proteins of prevalent motile commensal bacteria are 
variably abundant in the intestinal microbiome of elderly humans. PLoS ONE. 2013; 8:e68919. 
[PubMed: 23935906] 
27. He M, et al. Emergence and global spread of epidemic healthcare-associated Clostridium difficile. 
Nat Genet. 2013; 45:109–113. [PubMed: 23222960] 
28. Harris SR, et al. Evolution of MRSA during hospital transmission and intercontinental spread. 
Science. 2010; 327:469–474. [PubMed: 20093474] 
29. Chase-Topping M, Gally D, Low C, Matthews L, Woolhouse M. Super-shedding and the link 
between human infection and livestock carriage of Escherichia coli O157. Nat Rev Microbiol. 
2008; 6:904–912. [PubMed: 19008890] 
30. Flo TH, et al. Lipocalin 2 mediates an innate immune response to bacterial infection by 
sequestrating iron. Nature. 2004; 432:917–921. [PubMed: 15531878] 
31. Stecher B, et al. Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium exploits inflammation to compete with 
the intestinal microbiota. PLoS Biol. 2007; 5:2177–2189. [PubMed: 17760501] 
32. Rivera-Chávez F, et al. Depletion of butyrate-producing clostridia from the gut microbiota drives 
an aerobic luminal expansion of Salmonella. Cell Host Microbe. 2016; 19:443–454. [PubMed: 
27078066] 
33. Turnbaugh PJ, et al. A core gut microbiome in obese and lean twins. Nature. 2008; 457:480–484. 
[PubMed: 19043404] 
34. Goodrich JK, et al. Human genetics shape the gut microbiome. Cell. 2014; 159:789–799. 
[PubMed: 25417156] 
35. Turpin W, et al. Association of host genome with intestinal microbial composition in a large 
healthy cohort. Nat Genet. 2016; 48:1413–1417. [PubMed: 27694960] 
36. Pham TA, et al. Epithelial IL-22RA1-mediated fucosylation promotes intestinal colonization 
resistance to an opportunistic pathogen. Cell Host Microbe. 2014; 16:504–516. [PubMed: 
25263220] 
Browne et al.
Page 15
Nat Rev Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 37. Bry L, Falk PG, Midtvedt T, Gordon JIA. Model of host–microbial interactions in an open 
mammalian ecosystem. Science. 1996; 273:1380–1383. [PubMed: 8703071] 
38. Rakoff-Nahoum S, Paglino J, Eslami-Varzaneh F, Edberg S, Medzhitov R. Recognition of 
commensal microflora by Toll-like receptors is required for intestinal homeostasis. Cell. 2004; 
118:229–241. [PubMed: 15260992] 
39. Brinkman BM, et al. Gut microbiota affects sensitivity to acute DSS-induced colitis independently 
of host genotype. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2013; 19:2560–2567. [PubMed: 24105395] 
40. Cullen TW, et al. Gut microbiota. Antimicrobial peptide resistance mediates resilience of 
prominent gut commensals during inflammation. Science. 2015; 347:170–175. [PubMed: 
25574022] 
41. Sela DA, et al. The genome sequence of Bifidobacterium longum subsp. infantis reveals 
adaptations for milk utilization within the infant microbiome. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2008; 
105:18964–18969. [PubMed: 19033196] 
42. Charbonneau MR, et al. A microbial perspective of human developmental biology. Nature. 2016; 
535:48–55. [PubMed: 27383979] 
43. Walker AW, et al. Dominant and diet-responsive groups of bacteria within the human colonic 
microbiota. ISME J. 2010; 5:220–230. [PubMed: 20686513] 
44. Flint HJ, Scott KP, Louis P, Duncan SH. The role of the gut microbiota in nutrition and health. Nat 
Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2012; 9:577–589. [PubMed: 22945443] 
45. Setlow P. I will survive: DNA protection in bacterial spores. Trends Microbiol. 2007; 15:172–180. 
[PubMed: 17336071] 
46. Errington J. Regulation of endospore formation in Bacillus subtilis. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2003; 
1:117–126. [PubMed: 15035041] 
47. Browne HP, et al. Culturing of ‘unculturable’ human microbiota reveals novel taxa and extensive 
sporulation. Nature. 2016; 533:543–546. [PubMed: 27144353] 
48. Atarashi K, et al. Treg induction by a rationally selected mixture of Clostridia strains from the 
human microbiota. Nature. 2013; 500:232–236. [PubMed: 23842501] [This study shows that a 
selection of chloroform-resistant bacteria from human faeces can induce regulatory T cells in 
mice and have potential therapeutic properties through the alleviation of colitis in mice.]
49. Janoir C, et al. Adaptive strategies and pathogenesis of Clostridium difficile from in vivo 
transcriptomics. Infect Immun. 2013; 81:3757–3769. [PubMed: 23897605] 
50. Mora-Uribe P, et al. Characterization of the adherence of Clostridium difficile spores: the integrity 
of the outermost layer affects adherence properties of spores of the epidemic strain R20291 to 
components of the intestinal mucosa. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2016; 6:99. [PubMed: 
27713865] 
51. Duncan SH, et al. Proposal of Roseburia faecis sp. nov., Roseburia hominis sp. nov. and Roseburia 
inulinivorans sp. nov., based on isolates from human faeces. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol. 2006; 
56:2437–2441. [PubMed: 17012576] 
52. Flint HJ, Duncan SH, Scott KP, Louis P. Interactions and competition within the microbial 
community of the human colon: links between diet and health. Environ Microbiol. 2007; 9:1101–
1111. [PubMed: 17472627] 
53. Tally FP, Stewart PR, Sutter VL, Rosenblatt JE. Oxygen tolerance of fresh clinical anaerobic 
bacteria. J Clin Microbiol. 1975; 1:161–164. [PubMed: 1176601] 
54. Miller RA, Britigan BE. Role of oxidants in microbial pathophysiology. Clin Microbiol Rev. 1997; 
10:1–18. [PubMed: 8993856] 
55. Khan MT, et al. The gut anaerobe Faecalibacterium prausnitzii uses an extracellular electron 
shuttle to grow at oxic–anoxic interphases. ISME J. 2012; 6:1578–1585. [PubMed: 22357539] 
56. Donaldson GP, Lee SM, Mazmanian SK. Gut biogeography of the bacterial microbiota. Nat Rev 
Microbiol. 2016; 14:20–32. [PubMed: 26499895] 
57. Albenberg L, et al. Correlation between intraluminal oxygen gradient and radial partitioning of 
intestinal microbiota. Gastroenterology. 2014; 147:1055–1063.e8. [PubMed: 25046162] 
58. Khan MT, van Dijl JM, Harmsen HJM. Antioxidants keep the potentially probiotic but highly 
oxygen-sensitive human gut bacterium Faecalibacterium prausnitzii alive at ambient air. PLoS 
ONE. 2014; 9:e96097. [PubMed: 24798051] 
Browne et al.
Page 16
Nat Rev Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 59. Li L, Mendis N, Trigui H, Oliver JD, Faucher SP. The importance of the viable but non-culturable 
state in human bacterial pathogens. Front Microbiol. 2014; 5:258. [PubMed: 24917854] 
60. Signoretto C, Lleo MM, Tafi MC, Canepari P. Cell wall chemical composition of Enterococcus 
faecalis in the viable but nonculturable state. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2000; 66:1953–1959. 
[PubMed: 10788366] 
61. Rittershaus ES, Baek S-H, Sassetti CM. The normalcy of dormancy: common themes in microbial 
quiescence. Cell Host Microbe. 2013; 13:643–651. [PubMed: 23768489] 
62. Senoh M, et al. Conversion of viable but nonculturable Vibrio cholerae to the culturable state by 
co-culture with eukaryotic cells. Microbiol Immunol. 2010; 54:502–507. [PubMed: 20840148] 
63. Amel BK, Amine B, Amina B. Survival of Vibrio fluvialis in seawater under starvation conditions. 
Microbiol Res. 2008; 163:323–328. [PubMed: 16870413] 
64. Xu HS, et al. Survival and viability of nonculturable Escherichia coli and Vibrio cholerae in the 
estuarine and marine environment. Microb Ecol. 1982; 8:313–323. [PubMed: 24226049] 
65. Gupte AR, De Rezende CL, Joseph SW. Induction and resuscitation of viable but nonculturable 
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium DT104. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2003; 69:6669–6675. 
[PubMed: 14602627] 
66. Dworkin J, Shah IM. Exit from dormancy in microbial organisms. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2010; 
8:890–896. [PubMed: 20972452] 
67. Backhed F, et al. Dynamics and stabilization of the human gut microbiome during the first year of 
life. Cell Host Microbe. 2015; 17:690–703. [PubMed: 25974306] 
68. Dominguez-Bello MG, et al. Delivery mode shapes the acquisition and structure of the initial 
microbiota across multiple body habitats in newborns. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2010; 
107:11971–11975. [PubMed: 20566857] 
69. Chu DM, et al. Maturation of the infant microbiome community structure and function across 
multiple body sites and in relation to mode of delivery. Nat Med. 2017; 23:314–326. [PubMed: 
28112736] 
70. Blaser MJ, Falkow S. What are the consequences of the disappearing human microbiota? Nat Rev 
Microbiol. 2009; 7:887–894. [PubMed: 19898491] [This perspective proposes that changes in 
human ecology can compromise the composition of the human microbiota with associated 
negative effects on human health.]
71. Arrieta MC, Stiemsma LT, Amenyogbe N, Brown EM, Finlay B. The intestinal microbiome in 
early life: health and disease. Front Immunol. 2014; 5:427. [PubMed: 25250028] 
72. Schloss PD, Iverson KD, Petrosino JF, Schloss SJ. The dynamics of a family’s gut microbiota 
reveal variations on a theme. Microbiome. 2014; 2:25. [PubMed: 25061514] 
73. Song SJ, et al. Cohabiting family members share microbiota with one another and with their dogs. 
eLife. 2013; 2:e00458. [PubMed: 23599893] 
74. Nayfach S, Rodriguez-Mueller B, Garud N, Pollard KS. An integrated metagenomics pipeline for 
strain profiling reveals novel patterns of bacterial transmission and biogeography. Genome Res. 
2016; 26:1612–1625. [PubMed: 27803195] [In this study, a SNP-based metagenomic pipeline is 
developed to demonstrate mother-to-infant vertical transmission, with early-colonizing 
bacteria being predominately non-spore forming and late-colonizing bacteria being 
predominately spore-forming, which indicates temporal environmental survival by spore-
forming bacteria.]
75. Faith JJ, Colombel J-F, Gordon JI. Identifying strains that contribute to complex diseases through 
the study of microbial inheritance. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2015; 112:633–640. [PubMed: 
25576328] 
76. Tung J, et al. Social networks predict gut microbiome composition in wild baboons. eLife. 2015; 
4:e05224.
77. Moeller AH, et al. Social behavior shapes the chimpanzee pan-microbiome. Sci Adv. 2016; 
2:e1500997. [PubMed: 26824072] 
78. De Filippo C, et al. Impact of diet in shaping gut microbiota revealed by a comparative study in 
children from Europe and rural Africa. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2010; 107:14691–14696. 
[PubMed: 20679230] 
Browne et al.
Page 17
Nat Rev Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 79. Heikkila MP, Saris PEJ. Inhibition of Staphylococcus aureus by the commensal bacteria of human 
milk. J Appl Microbiol. 2003; 95:471–478. [PubMed: 12911694] 
80. Fernandez L, et al. The human milk microbiota: origin and potential roles in health and disease. 
Pharmacol Res. 2013; 69:1–10. [PubMed: 22974824] 
81. Derrien M, van Hylckama Vlieg JE. Fate, activity, and impact of ingested bacteria within the 
human gut microbiota. Trends Microbiol. 2015; 23:354–366. [PubMed: 25840765] 
82. Jost T, Lacroix C, Braegger CP, Rochat F, Chassard C. Vertical mother–neonate transfer of 
maternal gut bacteria via breastfeeding. Environ Microbiol. 2014; 16:2891–2904. [PubMed: 
24033881] 
83. Vazquez-Torres A, et al. Extraintestinal dissemination of Salmonella by CD18-expressing 
phagocytes. Nature. 1999; 401:804–808. [PubMed: 10548107] 
84. Martin R, et al. The commensal microflora of human milk: new perspectives for food 
bacteriotherapy and probiotics. Trends Food Sci Technol. 2004; 15:121–127.
85. Lang JM, Eisen JA, Zivkovic AM. The microbes we eat: abundance and taxonomy of microbes 
consumed in a day’s worth of meals for three diet types. PeerJ. 2014; 2:e659. [PubMed: 
25538865] 
86. David LA, et al. Diet rapidly and reproducibly alters the human gut microbiome. Nature. 2014; 
505:559–563. [PubMed: 24336217] 
87. Leff JW, Fierer N. Bacterial communities associated with the surfaces of fresh fruits and 
vegetables. PLoS ONE. 2013; 8:e59310. [PubMed: 23544058] 
88. Brito IL, et al. Mobile genes in the human microbiome are structured from global to individual 
scales. Nature. 2016; 535:435–439. [PubMed: 27409808] 
89. Kalliomaki M, et al. Probiotics in primary prevention of atopic disease: a randomised placebo-
controlled trial. Lancet. 2001; 357:1076–1079. [PubMed: 11297958] 
90. Allen SJ, Martinez EG, Gregorio GV, Dans LF. Probiotics for treating acute infectious diarrhoea. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010; 11:CD003048.
91. Hill C, et al. Expert consensus document: the International Scientific Association for Probiotics 
and Prebiotics consensus statement on the scope and appropriate use of the term probiotic. Nat 
Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2014; 11:506–514. [PubMed: 24912386] 
92. Malinen E, et al. PCR-ELISAII: analysis of Bifidobacterium populations in human faecal samples 
from a consumption trial with Bifidobacterium lactis Bb-12 and a galacto-oligosaccharide 
preparation. Syst Appl Microbiol. 2002; 25:249–258. [PubMed: 12353880] 
93. Charbonneau D, Gibb RD, Quigley EM. Fecal excretion of Bifidobacterium infantis 35624 and 
changes in fecal microbiota after eight weeks of oral supplementation with encapsulated probiotic. 
Gut Microbes. 2013; 4:201–211. [PubMed: 23549409] 
94. McNulty NP, et al. The impact of a consortium of fermented milk strains on the gut microbiome of 
gnotobiotic mice and monozygotic twins. Sci Transl Med. 2011; 3:106ra106.
95. Maldonado-Gómez MX, et al. Stable engraftment of Bifidobacterium longum AH1206 in the 
human gut depends on individualized features of the resident microbiome. Cell Host Microbe. 
2016; 20:515–526. [PubMed: 27693307] 
96. Reid G, et al. Responders and non-responders to probiotic interventions: how can we improve the 
odds? Gut Microbes. 2010; 1:200–204. [PubMed: 21637034] 
97. Sanders ME, et al. An update on the use and investigation of probiotics in health and disease. Gut. 
2013; 62:787–796. [PubMed: 23474420] 
98. Natchu UC, Bhatnagar S. Diarrhoea in children: identifying the cause and burden. Lancet. 2013; 
382:184–186. [PubMed: 23680351] 
99. Tallon P, Magajna B, Lofranco C, Leung KT. Microbial indicators of faecal contamination in 
water: a current perspective. Water Air Soil Poll. 2005; 166:139–166.
100. Koskey AM, et al. Blautia and Prevotella sequences distinguish human and animal fecal pollution 
in Brazil surface waters. Environ Microbiol Rep. 2014; 6:696–704. [PubMed: 25360571] 
101. Handl S, Dowd SE, Garcia-Mazcorro JF, Steiner JM, Suchodolski JS. Massive parallel 16S rRNA 
gene pyrosequencing reveals highly diverse fecal bacterial and fungal communities in healthy 
dogs and cats. FEMS Microbiol Ecol. 2011; 76:301–310. [PubMed: 21261668] 
Browne et al.
Page 18
Nat Rev Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 102. Hand D, Wallis C, Colyer A, Penn CW. Pyrosequencing the canine faecal microbiota: breadth and 
depth of biodiversity. PLoS ONE. 2013; 8:e53115. [PubMed: 23382835] 
103. Lamendella R, Domingo JW, Ghosh S, Martinson J, Oerther DB. Comparative fecal 
metagenomics unveils unique functional capacity of the swine gut. BMC Microbiol. 2011; 
11:103. [PubMed: 21575148] 
104. Ley RE, et al. Evolution of mammals and their gut microbes. Science. 2008; 320:1647–1651. 
[PubMed: 18497261] 
105. Moller-Stray J, et al. Two outbreaks of diarrhoea in nurseries in Norway after farm visits, April to 
May 2009. Euro Surveill. 2012; 17:20321. [PubMed: 23231858] 
106. Toro M, et al. Whole-genome sequencing analysis of Salmonella enterica serovar Enteritidis 
isolates in Chile provides insights into possible transmission between gulls, poultry, and humans. 
Appl Environ Microbiol. 2016; 82:6223–6232. [PubMed: 27520817] 
107. Knetsch CW, et al. Whole genome sequencing reveals potential spread of Clostridium difficile 
between humans and farm animals in the Netherlands, 2002 to 2011. Euro Surveill. 2014; 
19:20954. [PubMed: 25411691] 
108. Iovine NM, Blaser MJ. Antibiotics in animal feed and spread of resistant Campylobacter from 
poultry to humans. Emerg Infect Dis. 2004; 10:1158–1189. [PubMed: 15224671] 
109. Gupta A, et al. Antimicrobial resistance among Campylobacter strains, United States, 1997– 
2001. Emerg Infect Dis. 2004; 10:1102–1109. [PubMed: 15207064] 
110. Dunn RR, Fierer N, Henley JB, Leff JW, Menninger HL. Home life: factors structuring the 
bacterial diversity found within and between homes. PLoS ONE. 2013; 8:e64133. [PubMed: 
23717552] 
111. Lax S, et al. Longitudinal analysis of microbial interaction between humans and the indoor 
environment. Science. 2014; 345:1048–1052. [PubMed: 25170151] 
112. Meadow JF, et al. Bacterial communities on classroom surfaces vary with human contact. 
Microbiome. 2014; 2:7. [PubMed: 24602274] 
113. Hsu T, et al. Urban transit system microbial communities differ by surface type and interaction 
with humans and the environment. mSystems. 2016; 1:e00018–16. [PubMed: 27822528] 
114. Kelley ST, Gilbert JA. Studying the microbiology of the indoor environment. Genome Biol. 2013; 
14:202. [PubMed: 23514020] 
115. Kembel SW, et al. Architectural design influences the diversity and structure of the built 
environment microbiome. ISME J. 2012; 6:1469–1479. [PubMed: 22278670] 
116. Barker J, Jones MV. The potential spread of infection caused by aerosol contamination of surfaces 
after flushing a domestic toilet. J Appl Microbiol. 2005; 99:339–347. [PubMed: 16033465] 
117. Perkins SD, Mayfield J, Fraser V, Angenent LT. Potentially pathogenic bacteria in shower water 
and air of a stem cell transplant unit. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2009; 75:5363–5372. [PubMed: 
19581474] 
118. Flores GE, et al. Microbial biogeography of public restroom surfaces. PLoS ONE. 2011; 
6:e28132. [PubMed: 22132229] 
119. Gibbons SM, et al. Ecological succession and viability of human-associated microbiota on 
restroom surfaces. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2015; 81:765–773. [PubMed: 25398865] 
120. Snelling AM, Saville T, Stevens D, Beggs CB. Comparative evaluation of the hygienic efficacy of 
an ultra-rapid hand dryer versus conventional warm air hand dryers. J Appl Microbiol. 2010; 
110:19–26. [PubMed: 20887403] 
121. Vaishampayan P, et al. New perspectives on viable microbial communities in low-biomass 
cleanroom environments. ISME J. 2013; 7:312–324. [PubMed: 23051695] 
122. Tsai FC, Macher JM. Concentrations of airborne culturable bacteria in 100 large US office 
buildings from the BASE study. Indoor Air. 2005; 15:71–81. [PubMed: 15910532] 
123. David LA, et al. Host lifestyle affects human microbiota on daily timescales. Genome Biol. 2014; 
15:R89. [PubMed: 25146375] 
124. Korpela K, et al. Intestinal microbiome is related to lifetime antibiotic use in Finnish pre-school 
children. Nat Commun. 2016; 7:10410. [PubMed: 26811868] 
Browne et al.
Page 19
Nat Rev Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 125. Claesson MJ, et al. Gut microbiota composition correlates with diet and health in the elderly. 
Nature. 2012; 488:178–184. [PubMed: 22797518] 
126. Lozupone CA, Stombaugh JI, Gordon JI, Jansson JK, Knight R. Diversity, stability and resilience 
of the human gut microbiota. Nature. 2012; 489:220–230. [PubMed: 22972295] 
127. Faith JJ, et al. The long-term stability of the human gut microbiota. Science. 2013; 341:1237439. 
[PubMed: 23828941] 
128. Schloissnig S, et al. Genomic variation landscape of the human gut microbiome. Nature. 2012; 
493:45–50. [PubMed: 23222524] 
129. Costello EK, Stagaman K, Dethlefsen L, Bohannan BJ, Relman DA. The application of 
ecological theory toward an understanding of the human microbiome. Science. 2012; 336:1255–
1262. [PubMed: 22674335] [This review uses ecological metacommunity theory to provide a 
framework to understand how the intestinal microbiota is assembled and to predict how it 
responds to disturbances.]
130. Lee SM, et al. Bacterial colonization factors control specificity and stability of the gut microbiota. 
Nature. 2013; 501:426–429. [PubMed: 23955152] 
131. Lawley TD, et al. Targeted restoration of the intestinal microbiota with a simple, defined 
bacteriotherapy resolves relapsing Clostridium difficile disease in mice. PLoS Pathog. 2012; 
8:e1002995. [PubMed: 23133377] 
132. Clemente JC, et al. The microbiome of uncontacted Amerindians. Sci Adv. 2015; 1:e1500183. 
[PubMed: 26229982] 
133. Obregon-Tito AJ, et al. Subsistence strategies in traditional societies distinguish gut microbiomes. 
Nat Commun. 2015; 6:6505. [PubMed: 25807110] 
134. Sonnenburg ED, et al. Diet-induced extinctions in the gut microbiota compound over generations. 
Nature. 2016; 529:212–215. [PubMed: 26762459] 
135. Blaser MJ. Antibiotic use and its consequences for the normal microbiome. Science. 2016; 
352:544–545. [PubMed: 27126037] 
136. Martinez I, et al. The gut microbiota of rural Papua New Guineans: composition, diversity 
patterns, and ecological processes. Cell Rep. 2015; 11:527–538. [PubMed: 25892234] 
137. Strachan DP. Hay fever, hygiene, and household size. BMJ. 1989; 299:1259–1260. [PubMed: 
2513902] [ Supporting the hygiene hypothesis, this study describes lower rates of hay fever 
and eczema in large families, which is associated with reduced hygiene among siblings in 
larger families. ]
138. Beasley R. Worldwide variation in prevalence of symptoms of asthma, allergic 
rhinoconjunctivitis, and atopic eczema: ISAAC. Lancet. 1998; 351:1225–1232. [PubMed: 
9643741] 
139. Stiemsma L, Reynolds L, Turvey S, Finlay B. The hygiene hypothesis: current perspectives and 
future therapies. Immunotargets Ther. 2015; 4:143–157. [PubMed: 27471720] 
140. Gomez de Aguero M, et al. The maternal microbiota drives early postnatal innate immune 
development. Science. 2016; 351:1296–1302. [PubMed: 26989247] 
141. Blaser MJ. Who are we? Indigenous microbes and the ecology of human diseases. EMBO Rep. 
2006; 7:956–960. [PubMed: 17016449] 
142. Shaw SY, Blanchard JF, Bernstein CN. Association between the use of antibiotics in the first year 
of life and pediatric inflammatory bowel disease. Am J Gastroenterol. 2010; 105:2687–2692. 
[PubMed: 20940708] 
143. Dominguez-Bello MG, et al. Partial restoration of the microbiota of cesarean-born infants via 
vaginal microbial transfer. Nat Med. 2016; 22:250–253. [PubMed: 26828196] 
144. van Nood E, et al. Duodenal infusion of donor feces for recurrent Clostridium difficile. N Engl J 
Med. 2013; 368:407–415. [PubMed: 23323867] [ This study demonstrates the efficacy of 
faecal microbiota transplants to resolve C. difficile infection in a controlled clinical trial in 
humans. ]
145. Lagier J-C, et al. Culture of previously uncultured members of the human gut microbiota by 
culturomics. Nat Microbiol. 2016; 1:16203. [PubMed: 27819657] 
Browne et al.
Page 20
Nat Rev Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 146. Rettedal EA, Gumpert H, Sommer MOA. Cultivation-based multiplex phenotyping of human gut 
microbiota allows targeted recovery of previously uncultured bacteria. Nat Commun. 2014; 
5:4714. [PubMed: 25163406] 
147. Lau JT, et al. Capturing the diversity of the human gut microbiota through culture-enriched 
molecular profiling. Genome Med. 2016; 8:72. [PubMed: 27363992] 
148. Buffie CG, et al. Precision microbiome reconstitution restores bile acid mediated resistance to 
Clostridium difficile. Nature. 2014; 517:205–208. [PubMed: 25337874] [ This study shows that 
a single bacterial species, Clostridium scindens, can promote resistance to infection with C. 
difficile in a mouse model through the synthesis of secondary bile acids that are inhibitory 
to this species, thus demonstrating the potential of defined bacteria-based therapies for the 
treatment of intestinal-associated disease. ]
149. Czaplewski L, et al. Alternatives to antibiotics — a pipeline portfolio review. Lancet Infect Dis. 
2016; 16:239–251. [PubMed: 26795692] 
150. Yee AL, Gilbert JA. Microbiome. Is triclosan harming your microbiome? Science. 2016; 
353:348–349. [PubMed: 27463658] 
151. Vandegrift R, et al. Cleanliness in context: reconciling hygiene with a modern microbial 
perspective. bioRxiv. 2016; Preprint at. doi: 10.1101/095745
152. Falkow S. Molecular Koch’s postulates applied to bacterial pathogenicity — a personal 
recollection 15 years later. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2004; 2:67–72. [PubMed: 15035010] 
153. Parkhill J, Wren BW. Bacterial epidemiology and biology — lessons from genome sequencing. 
Genome Biol. 2011; 12:230. [PubMed: 22027015] 
154. Brito IL, Alm EJ. Tracking strains in the microbiome: insights from metagenomics and models. 
Front Microbiol. 2016; 7:712. [PubMed: 27242733] 
155. Walker AW, Duncan SH, Louis P, Flint HJ. Phylogeny, culturing, and metagenomics of the human 
gut microbiota. Trends Microbiol. 2014; 22:267–274. [PubMed: 24698744] [ This review 
highlights the importance of a multidisciplinary approach that combines metagenomic 
sequencing, bioinformatics and culturing to study the human intestinal microbiota. ]
156. Li SS, et al. Durable coexistence of donor and recipient strains after fecal microbiota 
transplantation. Science. 2016; 352:586–589. [PubMed: 27126044] 
157. Subramanian S, et al. Persistent gut microbiota immaturity in malnourished Bangladeshi children. 
Nature. 2014; 510:417–421. [PubMed: 24896187] 
158. Lax S, Nagler CR, Gilbert JA. Our interface with the built environment: immunity and the indoor 
microbiota. Trends Immunol. 2015; 36:121–123. [PubMed: 25754179] 
159. Forster SC, et al. HPMCD: the database of human microbial communities from metagenomic 
datasets and microbial reference genomes. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015; 44:D604–D609. [PubMed: 
26578596] 
160. Rupnik M, Wilcox MH, Gerding DN. Clostridium difficile infection: new developments in 
epidemiology and pathogenesis. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2009; 7:526–536. [PubMed: 19528959] 
161. Gough E, Shaikh H, Manges AR. Systematic review of intestinal microbiota transplantation (fecal 
bacteriotherapy) for recurrent Clostridium difficile infection. Clin Infect Dis. 2011; 53:994–1002. 
[PubMed: 22002980] 
162. Vyas D, Aekka A, Vyas A. Fecal transplant policy and legislation. World J Gastroenterol. 2015; 
21:6–11. [PubMed: 25574076] 
163. Petrof EO, et al. Stool substitute transplant therapy for the eradication of Clostridium difficile 
infection: ‘RePOOPulating’ the gut. Microbiome. 2013; 1:3. [PubMed: 24467987] 
164. Allegretti JR, Hamilton MJ. Restoring the gut microbiome for the treatment of inflammatory 
bowel diseases. World J Gastroenterol. 2014; 20:3468–3474. [PubMed: 24707129] 
165. Olle B. Medicines from microbiota. Nat Biotechnol. 2013; 31:309–315. [PubMed: 23563425] 
166. Tvede M, Rask-Madsen J. Bacteriotherapy for chronic relapsing Clostridium difficile diarrhoea in 
six patients. Lancet. 1989; 1:1156–1160. [PubMed: 2566734] 
167. Jalanka J, et al. Long-term effects on luminal and mucosal microbiota and commonly acquired 
taxa in faecal microbiota transplantation for recurrent Clostridium difficile infection. BMC Med. 
2016; 14:155. [PubMed: 27724956] 
Browne et al.
Page 21
Nat Rev Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Box 1
Methods to investigate human microbiota transmission
To understand the importance, extent and the mechanisms of microbiota transmission, 
researchers will need to borrow concepts and use tools from the field of host–pathogen 
interactions. For example, mechanistic studies on host–pathogen interactions have relied 
on the ability of researchers to culture and genetically modify a pathogen, and on in vitro 
and in vivo models to test hypotheses using ‘molecular Koch’s postulates’ (REF. 152). 
Furthermore, genomic epidemiology tools that can distinguish between pathogenic 
strains and enable pathogens to be tracked at strain-level resolution as they persist, evolve 
and transmit within human populations could be applied to similar studies of gut 
commensals28,153,154. The recent renaissance in anaerobic bacterial culturing has 
provided an opportunity to develop methods to study the transmission of the human 
microbiota through the isolation, purification and sequencing of the majority of the 
species of gut bacteria47,145–147,155. We are now in a position to construct a molecular 
biology toolbox for the genetic manipulation of unstudied commensals, to explore the 
molecular basis of how these bacteria promote health and are transmitted in human 
populations. Gnotobiotic mouse models and rodents that have a human microbiota are 
also valuable resources, as they provide a tractable system that can monitor microbiota 
dynamics, such as examining the effects of different diets on the composition of the 
microbiota over time134.
The availability of reference genome databases that contain accurate de novo assemblies 
of previously uncultured, and therefore largely uncharacterized, bacterial species is 
essential for understanding microbial transmission within human populations. The 
potential for metagenomics to resolve microbial community structures beyond the species 
level74,156 and across taxonomic kingdoms, means that it is a particularly useful 
approach for the study of microbiota transmission between individuals. Microbial 
profiling also enables the identification of marker bacterial species or strains that are 
predictive of diseases such as inflammatory disorders or malnutrition125,157. When 
combined with large-scale sampling by the public (citizen science), this technology 
enables the monitoring of health-associated and disease-associated bacterial species in 
populations158. Investment in tools, resources and expertise to promote metagenomics as 
an alternative to 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing for microbial community profiling 
is therefore worthwhile. User-friendly and/or open-source software and pipelines for 
analysing metagenomics data are needed and are becoming available as the use of 
metagenomics to study microbial communities gains support among microbiota 
researchers74,159.
Browne et al.
Page 22
Nat Rev Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Box 2
Artificial transmission: faecal microbiota transplantation to treat disease
Chronic pathological imbalances in the composition of the intestinal microbiota 
(dysbiosis) are associated with a range of clinical symptoms, diseases and poorly 
understood syndromes. Therefore, methods for effective microbiota replacement, 
restoration and manipulation are at the forefront of translational research in this field. 
Much of the pioneering microbiota transplantation work has focused on developing 
treatments for recurrent Clostridium difficile infection (CDI). Individuals are particularly 
susceptible to CDI after perturbation of their commensal microbiota, typically following 
a course of antibiotics160. In cases in which antibiotic treatment fails and CDI recurs, 
faecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) provides another treatment option144. During 
FMT, stool from a healthy individual is collected and screened for known pathogens 
before being transferred to a patient. Despite its unpleasant nature and lack of 
standardization, FMT has proven extremely efficacious for the prevention of recurrent 
CDI, with reported success rates of >80%, which has prompted the establishment of stool 
banks, clinical guidelines and regulation for FMT in Europe and the United 
States144,161–163.
Nevertheless, owing to the inherent variation in microbial species among healthy donors, 
universal standardization of FMT is challenging. Issues such as optimal donor selection 
and methods for stool collection, pathogen screening, processing, storage and therapeutic 
administration have therefore stimulated the development of more standardized 
alternatives162,164. Chief among these are ‘live biotherapeutics’, which are biological 
products that contain viable defined mixtures of microorganisms that are intended for the 
prophylactic and therapeutic treatment of disease165. With promising proof-of-concept 
results in mouse models and humans, and the increase in commercial activity to develop 
such medicines, the development of live biotherapeutics for the treatment of CDI remains 
an active area of research131,148,166.
The successes of FMT and live biotherapeutics are largely attributed to the restoration of 
a healthy and functional gut microbiota in individuals who have severe dysbiosis131,167. 
A feature of FMT in particular is the substantial and sudden restorative shift in the 
microbiota, which would never be achievable through natural transmission alone. Post-
FMT, the microbiota profile of the recipient often has a remarkable similarity to the 
microbiota profile of the donor167. Moreover, strains that originate from the donor can 
coexist with conspecific strains of the recipient months after FMT156. Thus, the 
transplanted microbiota may restore health by reintroducing bacterial taxa that were 
absent from the recipient before FMT, supporting the expansion of the recipient’s own 
commensal taxa and eventually re-establishing an optimal microbial community that is 
suited to their genetics, diet and lifestyle.
Browne et al.
Page 23
Nat Rev Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 1. Transmission of pathogenic and commensal intestinal bacteria.
Intestinal pathogens and commensal bacteria use similar mechanisms to transmit between 
hosts. Egestion from the host in faecal matter is the first stage in transmission (step 1). To 
promote dispersal and subsequent ingestion by a new host, pathogens may induce diarrhoea 
in the donor. Once in the external environment, survival mechanisms, such as aerotolerance, 
viable but non-culturable dormancy and sporulation, are used by these predominately 
anaerobic bacteria to survive and transmit. Environmental reservoirs, such as people, food, 
animals and the built environment, will function as a source or sink for transmission (step 2). 
Once ingested by a new host (step 3), the bacterium transits to the intestines (step 4). 
Competition from the resident microbiota can prevent colonization (step 5, see colonization 
resistance); however, bacteria can colonize if a niche is unoccupied (step 5, see no 
colonization resistance). The restoration of bacterial species functions to maintain 
colonization resistance and promote the diversity of health-associated bacteria in the gut. 
Pathogens can overcome colonization resistance through the induction of the expression of 
virulence factors, such as toxins, which can lead to inflammation and perturb the resident 
microbiota (step 5, see pathogens). Metabolism of nutrients and replication promote 
persistence and support further replication and subsequent onward transmission as the 
recipient now becomes a donor.
Browne et al.
Page 24
Nat Rev Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 2. Environmental survival mechanisms and sporulation transmission dynamics of the 
intestinal microbiota.
a | Environmental survival mechanisms. Sporulation is a feature of specific members of the 
Firmicutes phylum and involves a series of well-defined stages that incorporate a complete 
structural remodelling of the bacterial cell to form a resilient spore. Aerotolerance through 
the degradation of harmful reactive oxygen species (ROS) that can accumulate in the 
bacterial cell is primarily, but not exclusively, a feature of aerobic bacteria. Presented is a 
simplified representation of the key elements. The viable but non-culturable state includes 
Browne et al.
Page 25
Nat Rev Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 some morphological changes, but the extent and characteristics of this phenotype in the 
intestinal microbiota are unknown. b | Representative cladogram of the main human 
intestinal microbiota families and their associated sporulation ability. Internal clade colours 
represent different taxonomic families. Family names are presented, with the phylum that 
the family belongs to indicated by a letter in brackets: P, Proteobacteria; B, Bacteroidetes; A, 
Actinobacteria and F, Firmicutes. The most abundant families that have the greatest known 
metabolic outputs in the intestinal microbiota are the Bacteroidaceae, Ruminococcaceae and 
Lachnospiraceae families. The circle that surrounds the cladogram indicates known 
sporulation ability. Not all bacterial species in a taxon that contains spore-forming species 
have been demonstrated to form spores.
Browne et al.
Page 26
Nat Rev Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 3. Inter-host transmission dynamics of spore-forming and non-spore-forming intestinal 
bacteria.
A hypothetical model to explain the different transmission dynamics of spore-forming and 
non-spore-forming bacteria. Owing to their resistance to environmental stresses and 
aerotolerance, spore-forming bacteria are not as spatially and temporally restricted during 
transmission as non-spore-forming bacteria. For individuals who are in regular contact with, 
and close proximity to, each other (for example, co-residents) both spore-forming bacteria 
and non-spore-forming bacteria can transmit with the same efficiency. However, as spatial 
and temporal distances increase, non-spore-forming oxygen-sensitive bacteria will become 
restricted in their ability to transmit until eventually transmission will not be possible. As 
spore-forming bacteria can remain viable for extended periods of time in external aerobic 
environments, they are not reliant on close contact between individuals to transmit. For 
example, spores that are shed by an individual can potentially be acquired by another 
individual weeks later.
Browne et al.
Page 27
Nat Rev Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 4. Transmission of commensal intestinal bacteria is influenced by donor health status.
Healthy donors who have no history of intestinal disorders or recent antibiotic treatment will 
typically have a diverse intestinal microbiota that exhibits high colonization resistance. 
Healthy donors are optimal donors of commensal microorganisms because they will 
regularly contribute health-associated bacteria to their environment. Conversely, donors who 
have lower levels of commensal diversity, decreased colonization resistance and a higher 
proportion of pathogenic bacteria are not considered optimal donors. These suboptimal and 
unsuitable donors would be more likely to shed pathogenic bacteria into the external 
environment that are not beneficial to human health. The signature species that categorize 
donors in this model are not comprehensive and are included on the basis of current research 
in the field. IBD, inflammatory bowel disease; IBS, irritable bowel syndrome. Figure is 
adapted with permission from REF.4, Wiley.
Browne et al.
Page 28
Nat Rev Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
