 FOOD ACCEPTANCE AND NUTRITION IN INFANTS AND YOUNG CHILDREN (H COULTHARD, SECTION EDITOR)
Baby-Led Weaning: The Evidence to Date
Amy Brown1 & Sara Wyn Jones1 & Hannah Rowan1
Published online: 29 April 2017
# The Author(s) 2017. This article is an open access publication
Abstract
Purpose of Review Infants are traditionally introduced to solid
foods using spoon-feeding of specially prepared infant foods.
Recent Findings However, over the last 10–15 years, an alter-
native approach termed ‘baby-led weaning’ has grown in pop-
ularity. This approach involves allowing infants to self-feed
family foods, encouraging the infant to set the pace and intake
of the meal. Proponents of the approach believe it promotes
healthy eating behaviour and weight gain trajectories, and
evidence is starting to build surrounding the method. This
review brings together all empirical evidence to date examin-
ing behaviours associated with the approach, its outcomes and
confounding factors.
Summary Overall, although there is limited evidence suggest-
ing that a baby-led approach may encourage positive out-
comes, limitations of the data leave these conclusions weak.
Further research is needed, particularly to explore pathways to
impact and understand the approach in different contexts and
populations.
Keywords Baby-led weaning . Weaning . Introduction solid
foods . Complementary feeding . Responsive feeding .
Infant-led .Breastfeeding .Maternal .Infant .Weight .Eating
behaviour .Appetitecontrol .Maternalfeedingstyle .Nutrient
intake . Energy regulation . Choking
Introduction
Over the last century, tradition has been to introduce infants to
solid foods using spoon-feeding of specially prepared infant
foods [1]. Current World Health Organisation guidance rec-
ommend that infants are initially offered smoothly blended
foods, progressing in texture as the infant until by 12 months,
infants should be eating family foods. Finger foods, e.g. whole
foods, are recommended from 8 months, but alongside purees,
rather than as the main diet [2]. This is echoed in national
infant feeding guidance around the globe, although timing of
finger foods vary. In the UK for example, the Department of
Health recommend finger foods from the start of introducing
complementary foods (https://www.nhs.uk/start4life/first-
foods) whilst in New Zealand babies can be offered finger
foods from 7 months(http://www.health.govt.nz/your-health/
pregnancy-and-kids/first-year/6-12-months/feeding-your-
baby).
However, over the last 10–15 years, an alternative ap-
proach known as ‘baby-led weaning’ has grown in popularity.
Here, instead of blending special foods, infants are allowed to
self-feed family foods in their whole form. The emphasis is on
allowing infants to choose what, and how much, they eat and
for the infant to be part of family mealtimes [3]. Although in
reality this approach is likely what mothers did for millennia
before the introduction of specially prepared foods, baby-led
weaning represents an alternative to the modern, industry-
driven infant feeding culture [4].
This article is part of the Topical Collection on Food Acceptance and
Nutrition in Infants and Young Children
* Amy Brown
a.e.brown@swansea.ac.uk
Sara Wyn Jones
360052@swansea.ac.uk
Hannah Rowan
750451@swansea.ac.uk
1
Department of Public Health, Policy and Social Sciences, Swansea
University, 136 Haldane Building, Singleton Park, Swansea SA2
8PP, UK
Curr Nutr Rep (2017) 6:148–156
DOI 10.1007/s13668-017-0201-2
 Part of this growth may be explained by the World Health
Organisation raising the guidance in 2003 as to when infants
should be introduced to solid foods to 6 months old [2]. Prior
to this, infants were given solid foods at around 4 months but
physiologically, the experience of introducing solids to a 4-
month-old is very different to a 6-month-old. Naylor and
Morrow examine how, at around 6 months, the majority of
infants develop the skills needed to self-feed, including being
able to sit up unsupported, bring food to their mouth, chew
and swallow food [5]. Few infants at 4 months old would be
able to do this; hence, pureeing and spoon-feeding was a ne-
cessity. This change however opened the opportunity for more
infants to have solely whole foods from the start of weaning.
Tracing the emergence of baby-led weaning through initial
discussion of the approach in publications and in online par-
enting forums, it is apparent that the method started to gain
momentum from around 2001 [6]. Following the publication
of Rapley’s global selling ‘baby-led weaning book’ in 2008
[3], growing numbers of families started to follow the ap-
proach. Estimates of current numbers following the approach
are difficult to make, as no official population data has been
collected on uptake of this style of complementary feeding.
However, Google returns just under one million results for
‘baby-led weaning’ [accessed 08/12/2016] with a range of
groups on social media.
Proponents of baby-led weaning have always suggested
that the method offers a range of benefits to babies, from better
appetite control, to a wider diet and even motor skill develop-
ment. Initially these suggestions came from anecdotal experi-
ence in practice, followed by small-scale observational studies
by Rapley herself for her MSc thesis [7]. Given (A) the
established literature on the importance of responsive feeding
[8], (B) understanding of the importance of early experiences
on the development of long-term eating behaviour and weight
gain trajectories [9] and (C) possible (albeit not conclusive)
protection of delayed introduction of solids for a healthy
weight, [10] it is logical that a method that encourages this
may lead to healthier outcomes. However, to offer evidenced
based guidelines, and provide professional support to new
parents, an empirical evidence base must establish this, ideally
distinguishing which elements of the approach are effective.
The aim of this review was therefore to establish the evi-
dence underpinning the baby-led approach so far, identify
limitations and explore the need for future research in this
area.
Search Methods
A review of the literature was performed, searching Web of
Science, PubMed, Medline and Google Scholar for papers and
theses of any date up to and including 05/12/2016. Search
terms included baby-led weaning (including baby-led spel-
lings), finger foods, self-feeding, family foods, responsive
feeding and infant-led. To be included, papers had to (a) be
original data as against commentary, (b) be published in
English and (c) published in a developed nation to avoid ‘in
order to discriminate from countries with a lower standard of
living and poorer health status which would complicate the
cross-country comparisons of infant feeding practice’ [11].
Postgraduate theses were included as many report findings
from one ongoing key study.
Types of Data Examined
Table 1 summarises the papers found. The majority of data
clusters around two research groups in the UK and New
Zealand. Two further studies were identified from the USA
and Canada. All research papers were published between
2010 and 2016. The majority of papers identified used self-
report questionnaire or interview data. One paper used
existing cohort data to explore occurrence of self-feeding.
Five papers were identified relating to a single randomised
controlled trial which examined outcomes of the method. The
Baby-Led Introduction to SolidS (BLISS) trial allocated
mothers to either standard care or modified baby-led ap-
proach. Those in the modified group were encouraged to al-
low their baby to self-feed but were educated as to the impor-
tance of providing iron-rich and energy-dense foods and foods
that posed a low choking risk. The primary outcome of the
study is the impact of approach upon BMI at 12 months, but
other outcome measures include measurements of diet quality,
energy and nutrient intake, developmental skills, choking risk
and parental acceptability of BLWas an approach. This trial is
ongoing and these data are being collected by anthropometric
measures, questionnaires and blood serum testing [28].
From these data, several key data themes emerged:
Is It a Feasible Approach?
Baby-led weaning requires infants to be able to self-feed suc-
cessfully enough to maintain sufficient energy and nutrient
intake. Although Naylor and Morrow [5] present a rationale
for infants being able to self-feed at around 6 months of age,
there is little data examining ability to do so. It should how-
ever be noted that no empirical data exists on efficacy of
spoon-feeding and the UK Department of Health do recom-
mend finger foods from the start of weaning [3].
To examine this, one paper used data from the Gateshead
Millennium study cohort to retrospectively examine the per-
centage of infants who were reported to have grasped food
with their hands. For those aged 4–6 months, 68% had
reached out for food, 85% at 6–7 months and 96% at 7–
8 months. However, the authors note that this may be an
underestimation as it relied on infants being offered the op-
portunity. Conversely, it may represent an overestimation if
Curr Nutr Rep (2017) 6:148–156
149
 Table 1
Overview of study methodologies included in review
Authors
Type of data
Infant age
range
Weaning type
Number of participants
Definition of baby-led
weaning
Outcome measures
Brown and Lee
[12•]
Maternal self-report
questionnaire
6–12 months
Baby-led versus
traditional
655 mothers
Proportion of pureed foods and
spoon-feeding (BLW = 10%
or less)
Comparison between BLW and traditional: demographic
background of mother, timing of introduction to solid foods,
type of first solids, weaning experience
Brown and Lee
[13]
Maternal self-report
questionnaire
6–12 months
Baby-led versus
traditional
652 mothers
Proportion of pureed foods and
spoon-feeding (BLW = 10%
or less)
Maternal child-feeding style
Brown and Lee
[14]
Maternal interview
12–18 months Baby-led only
36 mothers
Self-defined
Experience of following a baby-led approach. Perceived benefits
and negatives
Rowan and Harris
[15]
Two 3-day diet diaries
6–9 months
Baby-led only
10 parents
Self-defined, parents required to
read Rapley BLW book
Changes, if any, in parental diet after implementing BLW;
description of foods offered to infants; similarity in parental
and infant diets
Cameron et al. [16] Maternal self-report
questionnaire
6–12 months
Baby-led versus
traditional
199 mothers
Adherent BLW: infant
mostly/always self-fed;
self-identified BLW <50%
spoon-feeding; parent-led
>50% spoon-feeding
Comparison between weaning groups: demographic
information; parental attitudes and experiences of
complementary feeding; types of foods offered
Cameron et al. [16] Practitioner and
maternal interviews
8–24 months
Baby-led only
31 Healthcare professionals;
20 mothers
Self-defined
Knowledge, attitudes and perceived benefits and concerns of
healthcare professionals; experiences of mothers using BLW
Townsend and
Pitchford [17]
Parental self-report
questionnaire
20–78 months Baby-led versus
traditional
155 parents
Self-defined
Comparison between BLW and traditional: demographic
background; infant feeding, weaning style; child’s food
preferences and exposure; BMI
Arden and Abbott
[18]
Maternal self-report
questionnaire
9–15 months
Baby-led only
15 parents
Self-defined
Experience of following a baby-led approach; perceived benefits
and practical issues; timing of introduction to solid foods
Brown and Lee
[19]
Maternal self-report
questionnaire
18–24 months Baby-led versus
traditional
298 mothers
Proportion of pureed foods and
spoon-feeding (BLW = 10%
or less)
Maternal demographic information; maternal feeding style;
child eating behaviour; child and maternal BMI
Brown [20•]
Maternal self-report
questionnaire
6–12 months
Baby-led versus
traditional
604 mothers
Proportion of pureed foods and
spoon-feeding (BLW = 10%
or less)
Comparison between BLW and traditional: demographic
background; maternal BMI; weaning style; maternal eating
behaviour and personality
D’Andrea et al.
2016 [21]
Healthcare providers
and maternal
self-report
questionnaires
Not stated
Baby-led only
33 Healthcare
providers; 65 mothers
Self-defined
Knowledge, attitudes and perceived benefits and concerns of
healthcare professionals; experiences and opinions of mothers
using BLW
BLISS study papers
Cameron, et al.
[22]
Parental interviews and 3-day diet diary
or iron questionnaire
<6–9 months
Baby-led and
BLISS only
23 infants
9 BLW
14 BLISS
Parents chose self-defined BLW
or BLISS (modified BLW)
group
Comparison between self-defined BLW and BLISS: maternal
demographic information, high choking risk foods, high
energy foods, iron containing foods
Erickson [23••]
Infant feeding questionnaire and
weighed diet record
7 months
Baby-led
(BLISS)
versus
traditional
202 infants
101 BLISS
(BLW)
101
traditional
Randomised to either BLISS
(BLW) or control (traditional)
Adherence to BLISS protocol, food group intake, nutrient intake
Morison et al. [24]
Parental feeding questionnaire and
weighed diet record
6–8 months
Baby-led
versus
traditional
51 infants
18 full BLW
7 partial BLW
26 traditional
Self-defined
Comparison between BLW and traditional: food, nutrient and
family meal intakes, feeding behaviours
150
Curr Nutr Rep (2017) 6:148–156
 parents’ judgements of ‘readiness’ are incorrect, especially at
the younger age range of 4–6 months. However, it is likely
that if parents were unsure of whether they should give finger
foods, were anxious about suitability or simply did not want
to, the infant would not have been given the opportunity. The
paper concluded that most infants should be capable of self-
feeding by around 6 months, although this may be delayed
amongst children with failure to thrive, feeding difficulties or
sensory sensitivity [27].
How do Baby-Led and Traditional Methods Differ?
Timing of Introduction to Solids
Following a baby-led approach is associated with a later in-
troduction of solid foods, e.g. [12•, 26, 29]. It is unclear as to
whether those who choose to follow the method would have
naturally delayed introduction, or whether choosing to follow
the method necessitates a later introduction due to physiolog-
ical readiness. However, in the BLISS trial, two thirds of those
assigned to the baby-led group delayed introduction until
6 months old, compared to only 18% of the usual care group,
suggesting that a decision (or direction) to follow the approach
may lead to delayed introduction [23••]. As a very early intro-
duction to solids (before 4 months) is a possible risk factor for
overweight, with a weaker suggestion that introduction before
6 months may also increase risk [10], any study examining
outcome of weaning approach must control for timing of
introduction.
First Foods
Baby-led infants are more likely to have had a whole food at
their first food and for this to be a food from the family diet
[12•, 16]. If the first food was a pureed food, it was more likely
to be home made rather than a product purchased. Baby-led
infants were significantly less likely to be given baby rice
[12•].
Milk Feeding
Mothers who follow a baby-led approach are more likely to
have initiated breastfeeding at birth, continued breastfeeding
for longer and to currently be breastfeeding at the time of
study [12•, 17]. Potentially, mothers who breastfeed may be
more likely to baby-led wean. However, when randomised in
the BLISS trial, the baby-led group breastfed for a mean du-
ration of 21.7 weeks compared to 17.3 weeks for those in the
standard group, suggesting a baby-led approach may be pro-
tective or encouraging of breastfeeding [23••]. However, baby-
led weaning is not exclusively associated with breastfeeding;
mothers who formula feed also follow the approach [3, 6, 30].
Table 1 (continued)
Authors
Type of data
Infant age
range
Weaning type
Number of participants
Definition of baby-led
weaning
Outcome measures
Fangupo et al. [25]
Maternal report in five questionnaires
0–12 months
Baby-led
(BLISS)
versus
traditional
206 infants
105 BLISS
(BLW)—
95
completed
101
tradition-
al—89
completed
Randomised to either BLISS
(BLW) or control (traditional)
Comparison between BLWand traditional: gagging and choking
incidents, types of foods offered
Papers not directly investigating BLW
Arden [26]
Maternal online questionnaire
6 months
All
105 mothers
Self-defined
Factors associated with timing of weaning
Maternal demographic information
Wright et al. [27]
Maternal self-report questionnaire and
finger feeding diary
4–>8 months
All
510 infants
Not studied directly
Demographic and developmental information, timing of first
reaching out for food, timing of first finger foods
Moore et al. [28]
Parental online questionnaire
N/A, babies had
been weaned
All
3607 parents
Self-defined
Factors associated with timing of weaning
Curr Nutr Rep (2017) 6:148–156
151
 Breastfeeding mothers are more likely to adopt a responsive
feeding style during infancy [31], during weaning [13] and as
toddlers [32]. Moreover, a longer breastfeeding duration has
been associated with lower risk of overweight [33], reduced
fussiness [34], a slower rate of eating [35] and better appetite
control [14]. It is therefore important that breastfeeding dura-
tion is controlled for in research examining its outcomes, due
to both its effect and association with a generalised responsive
feeding styles (see next section).
A Responsive Feeding Style
A central element of the baby-led approach is allowing the
infant to self-feed. This would naturally encourage a respon-
sive maternal feeding style low in control. This was confirmed
in one longitudinal study that used a modified version of the
child-feeding questionnaire at 6–12 [36] and 18–24 [-
19] months to measure maternal pressure to eat, restriction,
concern for child weight and monitoring. At both stage,
mothers who followed a baby-led approach were lower in
each of these, adopting a more responsive feeding style, com-
pared to those following a traditional approach.
Is there a Difference in Diet Consumed?
Data concerning actual nutrient intake according to weaning
approach is sparse. This may be in part due to the particular
difficulty in accurately measuring baby’s intake in baby-led
weaning because self-feeding is an exploratory, less contained
and often messy process. However, the perceived impact of
weaning approach upon nutrients consumed is a key theme
throughout interviews with parents and practitioners.
Notably, parents typically perceive the baby-led approach
to have a positive impact upon diet, whilst practitioners per-
ceive it as a risk. For example, in qualitative research explor-
ing the perceived benefits of a baby-led approach amongst
mothers who followed the method, all four papers [18, 21,
37, 38] highlight that mothers believe the method to increase
variety of foods and nutrients consumed. Meanwhile, Brown
and Lee [37] report that mothers who followed baby-led
weaning noted that their health professional was against the
method or did not understand it, meaning that they were un-
able to get professional advice from their health visitor. In a
Canadian study, less than half of health professionals (48.5%)
noted that they were prepared to support their method in their
own practice, because of their concerns around choking,
growth faltering and iron intake. This was compared to all
mothers being happy to recommend the approach to others
[21]. Similar results emerged from a study exploring health
practitioners’ perceptions of baby-led weaning in New
Zealand. Although benefits were noted, practitioners held
concerns around faltering growth due to low energy density
foods being offered and potential lack of early self-feeding
skill [38].
Foods Offered
Two studies have examined whether infants are offered family
foods or those made specifically for infants. As noted above,
infants following a baby-led diet are reported to be more likely
to eat family foods rather than specially prepared infant foods
and join in family meal times [12••, 16]. However, one study
exploring the diets of families following a baby-led approach
found that infants were offered only 57% of the same food as
their parents, although ate with their parents on 85% of occa-
sions [15].
Consuming family foods may carry the risk that infants
consume foods that are unsuitable, e.g. being too high in so-
dium content or a choking hazard. However, in interviews
with mothers who had followed a baby-led approach, Brown
and Lee [37] found that mothers reported modifying their
family diet to suit the baby-led infant. Conversely, a small-
scale pilot study of families following the baby-led weaning
approach compared family food intake pre- and post-weaning
to explore whether parents diet (and therefore food offered to
the infant) changed in macro- and micronutrient content, but
found that there was no significant change. Moreover, analysis
of diet diaries found that adults’ diets were higher in sodium
and saturated fat content than both UK and USA guidelines
[15]. Potentially, infants may be exposed to nutrients that are
less suitable than typical pre-prepared weaning foods, but fur-
ther research is needed to establish this.
Nutrient Intake
In terms of actual nutrient intake, only the BLISS study has
examined this [28]. Using a 3-day weighed food record, the
nutrients consumed were compared between the two groups
for infants ages 7 months (n = 147; BLISS n = 76, control
n = 71). Infants in the BLISS group were more likely to con-
sume ‘meat’, ‘cow’s milk or dairy products’ and ‘sweet foods’
but were, surprisingly, also more likely to consume ‘powdered
infant cereal’. Meanwhile, the usual care group were signifi-
cantly more likely to eat ‘ready-to-eat commercial infant
foods’. No differences were found between the groups for
consumption of ‘fruit and fruit juice’, ‘vegetables’ and ‘bread,
pasta, rice and low sugar cereals’ [23••].
For overall macronutrient intake, there were no significant
differences between the groups. Infants from both groups con-
sumed 10% of energy intake from protein, 45% from fat and
45% from carbohydrates. However, when data was analysed
excluding milk feeds, infants in the BLISS group consumed
significantly more protein and fat. This may be because the
inclusion of protein-rich food at every meal was encouraged
as part of the BLISS intervention. For mineral intake, infants
152
Curr Nutr Rep (2017) 6:148–156
 in the BLISS group consumed higher levels of sodium, sele-
nium and lower levels of vitamin A. Infants in the BLISS
group consumed more than double that of the usual care group
[23••]. However, it is possible that the baby-led data is less
accurate given the difficulty of measuring actual consumption
(versus amount squashed, dropped and smeared), although
this is also an inherent issue to spoon-feeding which is not
necessarily neat.
Low iron consumption is often cited as a concern for in-
fants being introduced to solid foods. In a pilot of the BLISS
trial, mothers who were planning to follow a baby-led ap-
proach were assigned to simply follow their own version of
BLW, or to the BLISS group with its emphasis on iron-rich
and energy-dense foods, such as red meat or an iron-fortified
infant cereal. Compared to the BLW group, the BLISS group
had a higher introduction of iron-containing foods in the first
week of introduction of solid foods, and offered more portions
of such food at 6 months (2.4 versus 0.8 portions a day) [22].
Energy Intake
Again, only the BLISS trial has examined energy intake
through using food diaries to calculate infant intake.
Comparison of intake at 7 months [23••] and 12 months [24]
found no significant difference in energy intake between the
two groups.
Is there an Impact on Eating Behaviour?
In the interview studies with parents and practitioners
discussed above, a similar pattern emerged as for nutrient
intake as to how the baby-led approach was perceived to im-
pact future eating behaviour. Mothers who followed the ap-
proach perceive that it promotes positive eating behaviour for
infants, in terms of reduced fussiness and better appetite con-
trol [18, 21, 37, 38]. Conversely, although professionals be-
lieve that the approach might promote healthier eating behav-
iours, they typically add a proviso regarding concern for suf-
ficient intake [21, 38].
Food Preferences
One longitudinal study has examined perceived fussiness of
infants weaned using traditional or baby-led approaches using
the Child Eating Behaviour Questionnaire [39]. This found
that infants who had followed a baby-led approach were less
likely to be rated by their mother as fussy eaters at 18–
24 months. However, when maternal child-feeding style
(e.g. responsive feeding) was taken into account, the differ-
ence was no longer significant [19]. The data also relied on
maternal self-report.
Two studies have explored food preferences amongst in-
fants who have followed a baby-led approach. One examined
reported differences in food preference at 12 months old, find-
ing no difference between baby-led and traditional weaned
groups [24]. In another study, the food preferences of pre-
school children who had been weaned using a baby-led or
traditional approach were examined through parental self-re-
port. Infants weaned using a baby-led approach had a prefer-
ence for carbohydrates whilst those in the traditional group
had a preference for sweet foods [17]. However, this study
relied on retrospective recall of weaning approach over a 2
to 3-year period. Differences were also only marginally
significant.
Eating Behaviour
The longitudinal study above also examined maternal reported
infant food responsivity (e.g. eating in response to food being
present) and satiety responsivenes [39] (e.g. ability to stop
eating when full). The study found that those who had follow-
ed a baby-led approach were significantly more likely to be
rated at 18–24 months as less food responsive and more sati-
ety responsive, suggesting better appetite control [19].
However, again it must be noted that this data was based on
self-report. Longitudinal research is needed to follow up the
longer-term trajectory of infants based on early weaning
styles.
Is there an Impact upon Weight?
In the longitudinal study stated above, no differences in
weight were seen at birth or 6 months. However, infants
who followed a traditional weaning approach were signifi-
cantly heavier at 18–24 months compared to those following
a baby-led approach, independently of birth weight, maternal
weight, breastfeeding duration and maternal child-feeding
style. Mean weight, in kilogrammes, of infants in the SW
group was 12.86 (SD 3.73) compared with 11.79 (SD 3.53)
in the BLW group. A difference in weight category was also
seen. For those who had followed a baby-led approach, 86.5%
were of normal weight, 8.1% overweight and 5.4% under-
weight. In comparison, 78.3% of those who had followed a
traditional approach were normal weight, 19.2% overweight
and 2.5% underweight. A significant difference was found for
overweight between the two groups [19]. However, all
weights were self-reported and the weaning group was self-
selected leading to possible external factors playing a role.
Weight data was also collected in the study above that
explored preschool children’s diet according to weaning ap-
proach. Overall, mean weight of those who had followed a
baby-led approach was significantly less than those who had
followed a traditional approach. In fact, the incidence of
Curr Nutr Rep (2017) 6:148–156
153
 underweight and overweight (as against obesity) was higher
amongst the BLW group, although numbers who fell into this
category were very small. The majority of children were a
healthy weight (BLW 81% and traditional 84%) [17].
However, a number of participants self-reported infant weight
in this study and breastfeeding duration was not controlled for.
The BLISS trial used anthropometric measurements at 6, 7,
8, 9 and 12 months to compare differences between the two
weaning groups. No child experienced growth faltering, but
32 infants experienced non-clinical slow growth. However,
this was not significantly different between the two groups.
It is important to note that the BLISS study participants were
encouraged to include a high-energy food at each meal, which
may have attenuated the risk of growth faltering. No data on
wider weight measures has yet been reported [25].
Is the Approach Safe?
Both the New Zealand and Canadian studies exploring health
professionals’ attitudes towards baby-led weaning highlighted
concerns regarding perceived choking risk. Work with parents
reflects a different attitude. Parents following the method ei-
ther report no concerns about choking [38] or those who were
wary of choking at the beginning of the process reported be-
coming more relaxed and confident with experience [37].
In terms of choking frequency, this is a difficult behaviour
to measure accurately. Data has to rely on self-identification of
choking (as against gagging) and self-report. One study ex-
amining rates in New Zealand found no difference in choking
incidences between groups [16], which was supported in the
larger-scale BLISS trial work [25]. However, the BLISS data
noted that choking occurred at least once in all weaning
groups at a rate of 35% of infants. At 7 months, 52% had been
offered foods that posed a choking risk and 95% at 12 months.
However, there was no difference in this between weaning
groups. Foods that were commonly choked on in both these
studies included apple slices, crackers and sausages.
What are the Limitations of the Data?
Self-Report
As noted, a key limitation is that much of the data described
above is based on self-report, or perceptions of mothers who
have followed the method. Data may be inaccurate (e.g.
weight) or there may be reporting bias given that mothers
are supporters amongst a method that has received criticism
from others. Food diaries can also be open to inaccuracies and
socially desirable reporting.
Self Selection
The majority of studies that examine differences in mothers
who follow a baby-led versus traditional approach tend to find
that mothers who follow a baby-led approach have a higher
level of education and/or age compared to those following a
traditional approach [12, 38], although this is not conclusive
across all studies.
There are also differences outside of demographic
background that may affect outcomes. One study showed
that following a baby-led approach was associated with
lower maternal restrained eating and lower anxiety
[20•]—factors that are associated with a positive eating
style and lower likelihood of overweight in older children.
Higher maternal restraint is associated with increased
child overeating [40] and child overweight [41] although
not every study is conclusive [42]. Meanwhile, anxiety is
associated with a more controlling feeding style [43].
Maternal wider anxiety, eating behaviour and control
may affect willingness to allow self-feeding and regula-
tion or raise concerns over choking risk, ruling out the
option of a baby-led approach. It is important that further
research considers wider parental interactions outside of
weaning approach.
Furthermore, it is also possible that outcomes are based
on infants’ temperaments who suited a baby-led approach.
It is likely that less ‘settled’ babies are less likely to fol-
low a baby-led approach, given in part that babies who
are perceived as less settled, i.e. crying, wakeful at night,
are more likely to have early solids [44]. Likewise, infants
who are perceived as over- or underweight are more likely
to receive solid foods early [45], which in turn is associ-
ated with risk of later overweight [10]. Mothers of these
infants are unlikely to follow a baby-led approach, but
these infants are also more likely to have more negative
long-term eating difficulties. It should be noted here then
that babies’ baseline temperament should be considered as
a factor in determining early and long-term eating behav-
iours, both in and of itself, and in relation to the domino
effect on feeding style and maternal level of control.
Given these issues, the question also therefore arises as
to whether parents can be randomised to follow the meth-
od. In the BLISS study, where mothers were randomised
to either a baby-led or standard care approach, adherence
to approach was monitored. At 7 months, 64% of the
baby-led group were classified as ‘adherent’ to the prin-
ciples of BLW. In comparison, 11% of the standard care
group had adopted a baby-led approach [23••]. The 36%
that were classified as non-adherent in the baby-led group
followed an approach that was mostly baby-led but did
not stick to all elements rigidly, e.g. some parental feeding
or altered textures to foods. However, this occurred at a
much lower level than those in the usual care group.
154
Curr Nutr Rep (2017) 6:148–156
 Definition of Baby-Led Weaning Used
Finally, the definition of a baby-led approach is itself not clear.
Different research studies have approached the classification in
different ways. Some have simply asked parents whether they
self define as following the approach. Data from two studies has
suggested this may not be accurate. In the Canadian study, some
mothers who identified as BLW still offered pureed foods [21]
whereas in New Zealand [16], 21% of mothers who identified
as baby-led were not ‘adherent’, e.g. they used purees and
spoon-feeding. Conversely, one group of studies has asked par-
ents how frequently they use spoon-feeding and puree use,
using a cut off of 10% or less of the time in both categories to
define as baby-led [12•, 13, 19]. Consensus of a research defi-
nition would be useful, or indeed research to examine what
degree of spoon or puree feeding has an impact, or whether it
is indeed self-feeding that is the causal pathway (as against
responsive feeding itself for example).
What do We Now Need to Know?
Ultimately, we know that many of the key tenets of a baby-led
approach, e.g. delayed weaning, responsive feeding and ex-
posure to a range of foods, are important building blocks of
healthy eating behaviour and weight gain trajectories. Indeed,
responsive feeding is one of the key approaches to developing
a healthy eating behaviour in later life [9] and is recognised as
a critical element of the introduction of solid foods by the
World Health Organisation [46]. However, at present, it is
unclear as to whether a baby-led approach affects outcomes
independently of these factors. Indeed, Sachs [47] questions
whether the baby-led approach deserves recognition as a de-
fining approach. Potentially, all that differs in terms of the
baby-led approach and weaning guidelines is the absence of
any spoon-feeding or pureeing of food. Further research is
needed to unpick the most important elements of the approach
in order to enable clearer advice to be given to new parents.
Conclusions
Despite significant numbers of interest in the baby-led
weaning approach, further evidence is still needed to explore
its potential impact upon nutrient and energy intake, and as a
consequence child weight and eating behaviour. Initial re-
search, particularly that exploring the experiences of those
who have successfully followed it, has suggested that the ap-
proach may foster the development of positive eating behav-
iour and potentially weight gain, but further large-scale rigor-
ous is now needed to understand this. It is also critical that we
understand the baby-led approach in context, across different
populations and interpretations of the approach.
Compliance with Ethical Standards
Conflict of Interest
Amy Brown, Sara Wyn Jones and Hannah Rowan
declare they have no conflict of interest.
Human and Animal Rights and Informed Consent
This article does
not contain any studies with human or animal subjects performed by any
of the authors.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appro-
priate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the
Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.
References
Papers of particular interest, published recently, have been
highlighted as:
• Of importance
•• Of major importance
1.
Jones S. A history of baby-led weaning: the evolution of comple-
mentary feeding trends. Journal of Health Visiting. 2016;4(10):
524–30.
2.
World Health Organization, UNICEF. Global strategy for infant and
young child feeding. World Health Organization; 2003.
3.• Rapley G, Murkett T. Baby-led weaning: Helping your baby to love
good food. Random House; 2008. This book overviews the baby-
led weaning approach and examines its development. It pro-
vides an excellent overview and is the key text that many par-
ents read.
4.
Palmer G. Complementary feeding: nutrition, culture and politics.
Pinter & Martin Publishers; 2011.
5.• Naylor, A.; Morrow, A. Developmental readiness of normal full
term infants to progress from exclusive breastfeeding to the intro-
duction of complementary foods: reviews of the relevant literature
concerning infant immunologic, gastrointestinal, oral motor and
maternal reproductive and lactational development. Academy for
Educational Development: Washington DC, USA, 2001. This is a
review paper examining the critical issue of developmental
readiness for solid foods which examines the match between
infants external ability to self-feed and internal readiness to
digest solid foods.
6.
Rapley G. Baby-led weaning: the theory and evidence behind the
approach. Journal of Health Visiting. 2015;3(3):144–51.
7.
Rapley G. Can babies initiate and direct the weaning process?
(Interprofessional health and community studies; care of the
breastfeeding mother and child MSc). Kent: Canterbury Christ
Church University College; 2003.
8.
Ventura AK, Birch LL. Does parenting affect children’s eating and
weight status? Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act. 2008;5(1):1.
9.
Schwartz C, Scholtens PA, Lalanne A, Weenen H, Nicklaus S.
Development of healthy eating habits early in life. Review of recent
evidence and selected guidelines. Appetite. 2011;57:796–807.
10.
Moorcroft KE, Marshall JL, McCormick FM. Association between
timing of introducing solid foods and obesity in infancy and child-
hood: a systematic review. Maternal & child nutrition. 2011;7(1):3–26.
11.•• Cameron SL, Heath AL, Taylor RW. How feasible is baby-led
weaning as an approach to infant feeding? A review of the evi-
dence. Nutrients. 2012;(4, 11):1575–609. This review papers
Curr Nutr Rep (2017) 6:148–156
155
 examines evidence underpinning the different elements of a
baby-led approach, e.g. ability to self-feed, delaying solids until
6 months and exclusive breastfeeding until 6 months
12.• Brown A, Lee M. A descriptive study investigating the use and
nature of baby-led weaning in a UK sample of mothers. Maternal
& child nutrition. 2011;7(1):34–47. This was the first empirical
paper published to examine behaviours and factors associated
with a baby-led style. It examines differences between those
following a baby-led or traditional approach in terms of feeding
style, timing and food choices
13.
Brown A, Lee M. Maternal child-feeding style during the weaning
period: association with infant weight and maternal eating style. Eat
Behav. 2011;12(2):108–11.
14.
Brown A, Lee M. Breastfeeding during the first year promotes
satiety responsiveness in children aged 18–24 months. Pediatric
obesity. 2012;7(5):382–90.
15.
Rowan H, Harris C. Baby-led weaning and the family diet. A pilot
study. Appetite. 2012;58(3):1046–9.
16.
Cameron SL, Taylor RW, Heath AL. Parent-led or baby-led?
Associations between complementary feeding practices and
health-related behaviours in a survey of New Zealand families.
BMJ Open. 2013;3(12):e003946.
17.
Townsend E, Pitchford NJ. Baby knows best? The impact of
weaning style on food preferences and body mass index in early
childhood in a case–controlled sample. BMJ Open. 2012;2(1):
e000298.
18.
Arden MA, Abbott RL. Experiences of baby-led weaning: trust,
control and renegotiation. Maternal & child nutrition. 2015;11(4):
829–44.
19.
Brown A, Lee MD. Early influences on child satiety-responsive-
ness: the role of weaning style. Pediatric obesity. 2015;10(1):57–66.
20.• Brown A. Differences in eating behaviour, well-being and person-
ality between mothers following baby-led vs. traditional weaning
styles. Matern Child Nutr. 2015. This paper highlights that
mothers who choose to adopt a baby-led approach may be
different in background to those adopting a traditional ap-
proach. This difference in background might affect outcomes,
indicating it is important to consider maternal background and
wider feeding approach when examining the impact of a baby-
led style.
21.
D’Andrea E, Jenkins K, Mathews M, Roebothan B. Baby-led
weaning: a preliminary investigation. Can J Diet Pract Res.
2016;77(2):72–7.
22.
Cameron SL, Taylor RW, Heath AL. Development and pilot testing
of baby-led introduction to SolidS-a version of baby-led weaning
modified to address concerns about iron deficiency, growth falter-
ing and choking. BMC Pediatr. 2015;15(1):1.
23.•• Erickson LW. A Baby-Led approach to complementary feeding:
adherence and infant food and nutrient intakes at seven months of
age (Doctoral dissertation, University of Otago) (2015). This paper
examines initial findings of the first randomized controlled trial
that randomized parents to a baby-led or usual care approach.
It examines adherence to group and intake of infants according
to group.
24.
Morison BJ, Taylor RW, Haszard JJ, Schramm CJ, Erickson LW,
Fangupo LJ, Fleming EA, Luciano A, Heath AL. How different are
baby-led weaning and conventional complementary feeding? A
cross-sectional study of infants aged 6–8 months. BMJ Open.
2016;6(5):e010665.
25.
Fangupo LJ, Heath AL, Williams SM, Williams LW, Morison BJ,
Fleming EA, Taylor BJ, Wheeler BJ, Taylor RW. A baby-led ap-
proach to eating solids and risk of choking. Pediatrics. 2016;19:
e20160772.
26.
Arden MA. Conflicting influences on UK mothers’ decisions to
introduce solid foods to their infants. Maternal & child nutrition.
2010;6(2):159–73.
27.
Wright CM, Cameron K, Tsiaka M, Parkinson KN. Is baby-led
weaning feasible? When do babies first reach out for and eat finger
foods? Maternal & child nutrition. 2011;7(1):27–33.
28.
Daniels L, Heath AL, Williams SM, Cameron SL, Fleming EA,
Taylor BJ, Wheeler BJ, Gibson RS, Taylor RW. Baby-Led
Introduction to SolidS (BLISS) study: a randomised controlled trial
of a baby-led approach to complementary feeding. BMC Pediatr.
2015;15(1):179.
29.
Moore, A.P.; Milligan, P.; Goff, L.M. An online survey of knowl-
edge of the weaning guidelines, advice from health visitors and
other factors that influence weaning timing in UK mothers.
Matern. Child Nutr. 2012
30.
Rapley G, Forste R, Cameron S, Brown A, Wright C. Baby-led
weaning a new frontier? ICAN: Infant Child Adolesc Nutr. 2015:
1941406415575931.
31.
Brown A, Lee M. Breastfeeding is associated with a maternal feed-
ing style low in control from birth. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e54229.
32.
Farrow C, Blissett J. Breast-feeding, maternal feeding practices and
mealtime negativity at one year. Appetite. 2006;46(1):49–56.
33.
Amir LH, Donath S. A systematic review of maternal obesity and
breastfeeding intention, initiation and duration. BMC pregnancy
and childbirth. 2007;7(1):1.
34.
Shim JE, Kim J, Mathai RA, STRONG Kids Research Team.
Associations of infant feeding practices and picky eating behaviors
of preschool children. J Am Diet Assoc. 2011;111(9):1363–8.
35.
Rogers SL, Blissett J. Breastfeeding duration and its relation to
weight gain, eating behaviours and positive maternal feeding prac-
tices in infancy. Appetite. 2017;108:399–406.
36.
Brown A, Lee M. Maternal control of child feeding during the
weaning period: differences between mothers following a baby-
led or standard weaning approach. Matern Child Health J.
2011;15(8):1265–71.
37.
Brown A, Lee M. An exploration of experiences of mothers follow-
ing a baby-led weaning style: developmental readiness for comple-
mentary foods. Maternal & child nutrition. 2013;9(2):233–43.
38.
Cameron SL, Heath AL, Taylor RW. Healthcare professionals’ and
mothers’ knowledge of, attitudes to and experiences with, baby-led
weaning: a content analysis study. BMJ Open. 2012;2(6):e001542.
39.
Carnell S, Wardle J. Measuring behavioural susceptibility to obesi-
ty: validation of the child eating behaviour questionnaire. Appetite.
2007;48(1):104–13.
40.
Rodgers RF, Paxton SJ, Massey R, Campbell KJ, Wertheim EH,
Skouteris H, Gibbons K. Maternal feeding practices predict weight
gain and obesogenic eating behaviors in young children: a prospec-
tive study. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act. 2013;10(1):1.
41.
Ogden J, Reynolds R, Smith A. Expanding the concept of parental
control: a role for overt and covert control in children’s snacking
behaviour? Appetite. 2006;47(1):100–6.
42.
Haycraft EL, Blissett JM. Maternal and paternal controlling feeding
practices: reliability and relationships with BMI. Obesity.
2008;16(7):1552–8.
43.
Farrow CV, Blissett JM. Is maternal psychopathology related to
obesigenic feeding practices at 1 year? Obes Res. 2005;13(11):
1999–2005.
44.
Wasser H, Bentley M, Borja J, Goldman BD, Thompson A, Slining
M, et al. Infants perceived as ‘fussy’ are more likely to receive
complementary foods before 4 months. Pediatrics. 2011;127(2):
229–37.
45.
Brown A, Rowan H. Maternal and infant factors associated with
reasons for introducing solid foods. Matern Child Nutr. 2015.
46.
World Health Organization, World Health Organization.
Complementary feeding: report of the global consultation, and
summary of guiding principles for complementary feeding of the
breastfed child.
47.
Sachs M. Baby-led weaning and current UK recommendations–are
they compatible? Maternal & child nutrition. 2011;7(1):1–2.
156
Curr Nutr Rep (2017) 6:148–156
