 1
Brown F, Vahidassr D. BMJ Case Rep 2018. doi:10.1136/bcr-2017-222892
Case RepoRt
The man that lost (part of) his mind
Finlay Brown,1 Djamil Vahidassr2
Unusual association of diseases/symptoms
To cite: Brown F, 
Vahidassr D. BMJ Case 
Rep published online First: 
[please include Day Month 
Year]. doi:10.1136/bcr-2017-
222892
1General practice, Northern 
Ireland Medical and Dental 
training agency, Belfast, UK
2Care of the elderly and stroke, 
antrim area Hospital, antrim, Co 
antrim, UK
Correspondence to
Dr Finlay Brown,  
 
finlaybrown@ 
googlemail. 
com
accepted 6 February 2018
Summary
an 84-year-old man presented to the emergency 
department following recurrent falls over several 
weeks and onset of new left-sided weakness. Ct of 
the brain revealed a large air cavity (pneumatocoele) 
in the right frontal lobe thought to be secondary to 
an ethmoidal osteoma communicating through the 
cribriform plate allowing air to be forced into the 
skull under pressure. subsequent MRI confirmed these 
findings and also revealed a small focal area of acute 
infarction in the adjacent corpus callosum. the patient 
had a prolonged hospital stay, declined neurosurgical 
intervention and was discharged home on secondary 
stroke prevention.
BaCkground
Falls and/or loss of balance are relatively common 
in the elderly. There is generally a lower threshold 
for imaging when these symptoms are associated 
with unilateral weakness. Stroke can be multifac-
torial in its aetiology. Pneumocephalus is not an 
uncommon complication of ENT (ear, nose and 
throat) and neurosurgical procedures. In this age 
group arteriosclerotic/embolic disease is the most 
common cause; however, rare causes must also be 
considered.
CaSe preSenTaTion
An 84-year-old man was referred to the emergency 
department by his general practitioner having been 
complaining of recurrent falls and feeling unsteady 
over several months. He then developed a 3-day 
history of left-sided arm and leg weakness. There 
was no confusion, facial weakness, visual or speech 
disturbance, and he was feeling otherwise well. His 
medical history included glaucoma, meningitis (25 
years ago) and nasal polypectomy many years ago. 
Regular medications were atorvastatin and Hylo-
Forte, timolol and bimatoprost eye-drops. He was 
otherwise fit and well, independent with physical 
activities of daily living  (PADLs) and lived at home 
with his wife and two sons. He was a non-smoker 
and drank alcohol rarely.
Central nervous system (CNS) examination 
revealed normal range of eye movements, visual 
fields, speech and swallow. Peripheral nervous 
system (PNS) examination revealed 4/5 power 
in the left upper and lower limbs with normal 
tone, power, sensation, coordination and reflexes 
including plantar response.
inveSTigaTionS
Routine blood testing detected no abnormality.
CT of the brain showed a large (9 
cm) air-filled 
cavity within the right frontal lobe with dystrophic 
calcification/osseous nodularity of the cribriform 
plate and paranasal sinuses. This was felt to be a 
pneumatocoele with some local mass effect and 
distortion of the frontal horn of the right lateral 
ventricle, effacement of surrounding sulci but no 
significant midline shift or oedema (figure 1).
MRI of the head helped confirm the presence 
of pneumatocoele within the right frontal lobe 
extending from the cribriform plate, as well as a 
large osteoma within the ethmoidal air cells with 
minimal mass effect, likely to be of a chronic nature 
(figure 2).
There was a small focal area of acute ischaemia 
with restricted diffusion to the right side of corpus 
callosum. Other than a small right vertebral artery, 
normal intracranial vascular flow voids were 
demonstrated (figure 3).
Ultrasound scan  (USS) Doppler of the carotid 
arteries was normal.
differenTial diagnoSeS
 
►
pneumatocoele—the most likely diagnosis 
radiologically, specially given history of sinus 
disease
 
►
neoplasm
 
►
developmental/congenital lesion (no previous 
imaging available).
TreaTmenT
The patient underwent a period of observation 
and rehabilitation. Following discussion with the 
neurosurgical team, he was offered surgery which 
would have involved a frontal craniotomy and 
suture repair of the dural defect after evacuation 
of the pressurised air cavity as well as excision of 
the osteoma performed by ENT. The patient made 
an informed decision not to proceed with surgery 
given risks and benefits.
ouTCome and follow-up
The inpatient stay was prolonged by a lower 
respiratory tract infection. The patient was 
commenced on secondary stroke prevention and 
was advised to reattend in the event of worsening 
symptoms. The left-sided weakness was noted to 
have resolved on follow-up 12 weeks later and he 
remained well.
diSCuSSion
Pneumatocoeles within the brain (pneumoceph-
alus) are seen in variable degrees of frequency in 
craniofacial injuries, infections (sinuses, otitis) and 
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://casereports.bmj.com/
BMJ Case Reports: first published as 10.1136/bcr-2017-222892 on 27 February 2018. Downloaded from 
 2
Brown F, Vahidassr D. BMJ Case Rep 2018. doi:10.1136/bcr-2017-222892
unusual association of diseases/symptoms
postsurgery for skull base tumours (100% of craniotomy cases 
in one report).1 2
A small number of reported cases have been associated with 
history of ENT pathology, usually an osteoma,3 causing erosion 
through the cribriform plate and forcing air under pressure 
into the brain by creating a ‘one-way valve’ effect. This often 
causes the pneumatocoele to grow insidiously over weeks to 
months. Sometimes it can be precipitated by a more acute event, 
for example, following a bout of sneezing or coughing. It is a 
rarely reported complication of frontal sinus osteoma.4 5
Clinical presentation of a pneumocephalus can range from 
an asymptomatic incidental finding to presentation with 
headache, agitation, delirium, seizure, decreased mental 
status as well as focal neurological deficits depending on the 
location.6 These common, often non-specific symptoms are 
not infrequently encountered in primary care or accident and 
emergency (A&E) consultation but would not commonly be 
attributed to a pneumocephalus unless aided by clinical suspi-
cion and/or neuroimaging.
Although CT of the brain is usually the first imaging 
modality, diffusion-weighted MRI is the preferred imaging of 
choice to demonstrate cerebral ischaemia/infarction invisible 
on CT brain  (CTB), as was the case with our patient. Pneu-
mocephalus has been reported as a rare cause of stroke.7 CT 
or magnetic resonance angiogram would have been helpful to 
differentiate between tension pneumocephalus causing arterial 
obstruction with secondary ischaemia and arterial thrombosis.
Surgical management would require a dual approach, with 
the neurosurgical team evacuating the pressurised cavity and 
repairing the dural defect together and with ENT removing 
figure 1 CT showing osteoma in paranasal sinus causing defect 
resulting in right pneumatocoele.
figure 2 Sagittal view MRI showing right frontal air-filled cavity.
figure 3 Diffusion-weighted MRI showing area of acute infarction.
learning points
 
► A pneumatocoele is a pressurised air-filled cavity that when 
found in the brain can be termed a tension pneumocephalus.
 
► An erosion by an osteoma (common benign bone tumour) 
through the cribriform plate allowed air to gradually be 
pushed under pressure into the right frontal lobe causing 
resultant mass effect.
 
► Cerebral infarction may have been due to this pressure effect, 
and a CT angiogram would aid diagnosis.
 
► Management requires discussion with neurosurgical and ear, 
nose and throat teams to repair the defect as well as the 
cause, and understanding that conservative treatment is not 
without its risks.
 
► When assessing patients presenting to primary or secondary 
care with new onset of neurological symptoms, one should 
have a low threshold for imaging to help distinguish between 
common and rare causes.
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://casereports.bmj.com/
BMJ Case Reports: first published as 10.1136/bcr-2017-222892 on 27 February 2018. Downloaded from 
 3
Brown F, Vahidassr D. BMJ Case Rep 2018. doi:10.1136/bcr-2017-222892
unusual association of diseases/symptoms
the offending osteoma to reduce the chance of recurrence. 
Conservative management with observation (as in our case) 
has been documented in some cases, with improvement in 
symptoms over time, but can also lead to worsening of symp-
toms or ascending infection (eg, ventriculitis).8 There were no 
plans for surveillance imaging in our patient as he completely 
refused surgery.
Contributors FB was personally involved with the care of the patient described 
in this case report. FB discussed the case at length with DV (stroke specialist), who 
helped with the construct of this case report, reviewing several drafts including 
relevant radiological figures.
Competing interests None declared.
patient consent obtained.
provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
© BMJ publishing Group Ltd (unless otherwise stated in the text of the article) 
2018. all rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless otherwise expressly 
granted.
RefeRences
 
1 eljamel Ms, Foy pM. post-traumatic CsF fistulae, the case for surgical repair. Br J 
Neurosurg 1990;4:479–83.
 
2 satapathy GC, Dash HH. tension pneumocephalus after neurosurgery in the supine 
position. Br J Anaesth 2000;84:115–7.
 
3 Rappaport JM, attia eL. pneumocephalus in frontal sinus osteoma: a case report. J 
Otolaryngol 1994;23:430–6.
 
4 Lehmer LM, Kissel p, Ragsdale BD. Frontal sinus osteoma with osteoblastoma-like 
histology and associated intracranial pneumatocele. Head Neck Pathol 2012;6:384–8.
 
5 Hackenbroch C, Kleinagel U, Hossfeld B. tension pneumocephalus due to an osteoma 
of the frontal sinus. Dtsch Arztebl Int 2017;114:534.
 
6 Kankane VK, Jaiswal G, Gupta tK. posttraumatic delayed tension pneumocephalus: 
Rare case with review of literature. Asian J Neurosurg 2016;11:343–7.
 
7 Bramley DC, Ghosh s. tension pneumocephalus attributable to an ethmoid 
osteoma presenting as a stroke in evolution: an unusual presentation. Emerg Med J 
2001;18:317–8.
 
8 Kwon J, Rha HK, park HK, et al. proper management of posttraumatic tension 
pneumocephalus. Korean J Neurotrauma 2017;13:158–61.
Copyright 2018 BMJ publishing Group. all rights reserved. For permission to reuse any of this content visit
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.
BMJ Case Report Fellows may re-use this article for personal use and teaching without any further permission.
Become a Fellow of BMJ Case Reports today and you can:
 
► submit as many cases as you like
 
► enjoy fast sympathetic peer review and rapid publication of accepted articles
 
► access all the published articles
 
► Re-use any of the published material for personal use and teaching without further permission
For information on Institutional Fellowships contact consortiasales@bmjgroup.com
Visit casereports.bmj.com for more articles like this and to become a Fellow
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://casereports.bmj.com/
BMJ Case Reports: first published as 10.1136/bcr-2017-222892 on 27 February 2018. Downloaded from 
