 Psychological Science
2017, Vol. 28(1) 92 
–103
© The Author(s) 2016
Reprints and permissions: 
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/0956797616674999
journals.sagepub.com/home/pss
Research Article
Economic inequality in the United States is at historically 
high levels (Saez & Zucman, 2014). Income inequality is 
associated with a variety of problems, including reduced 
interpersonal trust, increased violent crime, and short-
ened life expectancy (Wilkinson & Pickett, 2009). The 
majority of Americans say they would prefer a more equi-
table distribution of wealth (Norton & Ariely, 2011), yet 
many vote against public assistance programs aimed at 
reducing inequality (Bartels, 2005; Gilens, 1999). Identify-
ing the factors that influence the distribution of resources 
in societies is an important problem across the social sci-
ences. Understanding the psychological mechanisms that 
link such societal-level factors to individual preferences 
about redistribution is a critical problem for psychologi-
cal science.
An influential macroeconomic model suggests that as 
inequality increases, a greater share of the population has 
income below the mean income level, and, as a result, 
demand for redistribution should rise (e.g., Meltzer & 
Richard, 1981). However, demand for redistribution in 
the United States has remained relatively stable despite 
rising inequality (e.g., Ashok, Kuziemko, & Washington, 
2015; Kuziemko, Norton, Saez, & Stantcheva, 2015). One 
often-suggested reason for this finding is that people may 
oppose redistribution if they believe it will benefit racial 
minorities (Harell, Soroka, & Iyengar, in press; Lee & 
Roemer, 2006).
674999 PSSXXX10.1177/0956797616674999Brown-Iannuzzi et al.Mental Representations of Welfare Recipients
research-article2016
Corresponding Authors:
Jazmin L. Brown-Iannuzzi, University of Kentucky–Psychology, 207 K 
Kastle Hall, 107 Funkhouser Dr., Lexington, KY 40506 
E-mail: jazmin.bi@uky.edu
B. Keith Payne, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill–Psychology, 
312 Davie Hall, 235 E. Cameron Ave., Chapel Hill, NC 27599 
E-mail: payne@unc.edu
The Relationship Between Mental 
Representations of Welfare Recipients  
and Attitudes Toward Welfare
Jazmin L. Brown-Iannuzzi1, Ron Dotsch2, Erin Cooley3,  
and B. Keith Payne4
1Department of Psychology, University of Kentucky; 2Department of Psychology,  
Utrecht University; 3Department of Psychology, Colgate University; and 4Department  
of Psychology and Neuroscience, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Abstract
Scholars have argued that opposition to welfare is, in part, driven by stereotypes of African Americans. This argument 
assumes that when individuals think about welfare, they spontaneously think about Black recipients. We investigated 
people’s mental representations of welfare recipients. In Studies 1 and 2, we used a perceptual task to visually 
estimate participants’ mental representations of welfare recipients. Compared with the average non-welfare-recipient 
image, the average welfare-recipient image was perceived (by a separate sample) as more African American and more 
representative of stereotypes associated with welfare recipients and African Americans. In Study 3, participants were 
asked to determine whether they supported giving welfare benefits to the people pictured in the average welfare-
recipient and non-welfare-recipient images generated in Study 2. Participants were less supportive of giving welfare 
benefits to the person shown in the welfare-recipient image than to the person shown in the non-welfare-recipient 
image. The results suggest that mental images of welfare recipients may bias attitudes toward welfare policies.
Keywords
stereotyped attitudes, socioeconomic status, social cognition, open data, open materials
Received 4/4/16; Revision accepted 9/28/16
 Mental Representations of Welfare Recipients 
93
Citizens may oppose welfare programs for many rea-
sons, but researchers have long suspected that racial 
biases may inform attitudes toward them (e.g., Edsall & 
Edsall, 1991; Fox, 2004; Gilens, 1996, 1999; Lee & Roemer, 
2006; Peffley, Hurwitz, & Sniderman, 1997). Racial atti-
tudes are consistently associated with attitudes toward 
welfare (Gilens, 1995; Peffley et al., 1997; Sears & Cirin, 
1985; Wetts & Willer, 2015). The notion that racial atti-
tudes guide welfare preferences is based on the assump-
tion that when individuals think about welfare, they 
spontaneously think about “undeserving” (e.g., lazy, 
incompetent) African American recipients. This psycho-
logical leap has been assumed, but never directly tested.
In one of the few experimental studies to investigate 
the link between race and welfare attitudes, participants 
were randomly assigned to learn about a Black or White 
mother receiving public assistance (Gilens, 1996). The 
correlation between negative impressions of the welfare 
recipient and opposition to welfare was almost twice as 
strong when the recipient was Black as when she was 
White. This experiment demonstrates that racial attitudes 
become more relevant for welfare attitudes when the 
recipient is explicitly identified as Black rather than 
White. It remains unclear, however, what kind of repre-
sentations people spontaneously access when they think 
about welfare recipients.
African Americans make up 32% of recipients of Tem-
porary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF), but only 
13% of the general population (U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services, 2012). Despite this overrep-
resentation, more than two thirds of TANF recipients are 
not African American. White Americans make up another 
32% of TANF recipients, and Hispanic Americans another 
30%. A statistically accurate representation of the “typi-
cal” beneficiary would presumably look like a multiracial 
composite with approximately equal representation of all 
three groups. However, stereotypes are influenced not 
only by statistical base rates, but also by a variety of cog-
nitive processes, emotions, and ideological motivations 
(Hamilton, 2015; Hilton & von Hippel, 1996). In the 
research reported here, we asked whether participants’ 
representations of welfare recipients depicted Black 
recipients, and whether those representations contrib-
uted to attitudes opposing redistributive policies.
Using a procedure to visually estimate participants’ 
mental representations, we tested three specific hypoth-
eses. First, we hypothesized that mental representations 
of the typical welfare recipient would depict a Black 
recipient. Second, we hypothesized that when the aggre-
gated images of a typical welfare recipient and a typical 
non–welfare recipient were shown to a second group of 
participants, they would be less supportive of awarding 
welfare benefits to the typical welfare recipient. Third, 
we hypothesized that to the extent that the person 
depicted in the welfare-recipient image was perceived as 
Black, that person would also be stereotyped as unde-
serving of assistance, and that deservingness would in 
turn predict the level of support for awarding welfare 
benefits to him or her.
Study 1 and Study 2
We report Studies 1 and 2 together because Study 2 was 
a close replication of Study 1. These studies were both 
conducted in two phases: the image-generation phase 
and the image-rating phase. In the image-generation 
phase, participants completed a reverse-correlation task, 
which allowed us to generate visualizations of their men-
tal images of welfare recipients and non–welfare recipi-
ents (Dotsch & Todorov, 2012; Dotsch, Wigboldus, 
Langner, & van Knippenberg, 2008; Imhoff & Dotsch, 
2013; Imhoff, Woelki, Hanke, & Dotsch, 2013; Krosch & 
Amodio, 2014; Mangini & Biederman, 2004). We began 
with a single face, which was a morphed composite of a 
White woman, a Black woman, a White man, and a Black 
man (see Fig. 1). Then, we added random visual noise to 
this base face to create many variants. Participants were 
presented with pairs of the faces and selected from each 
pair the face that looked more like a welfare recipient. 
We did not mention race in any way, so that any effects 
of race could emerge spontaneously from participants’ 
mental images.
In Study 1, participants chose the image in each pair 
that looked more like “a welfare recipient.” By superim-
posing the selected images, we constructed an average 
representation of welfare recipients. The unselected 
images were superimposed to create a non-welfare-
recipient composite image for comparison. In Study 2, 
participants in one group selected the image that looked 
more like a welfare recipient, whereas participants in 
another group selected the image that looked more like 
someone who did not receive welfare. The images 
Base Image
Stimuli
Fig. 1. The base image used in the reverse-correlation task and three 
examples of the stimuli presented to participants.
 94 
Brown-Iannuzzi et al.
selected by the former group were superimposed to cre-
ate an average representation of welfare recipients, and 
the images selected by the latter group were superim-
posed to create an average representation of non–welfare 
recipients. This procedure allowed us to approximate 
participants’ mental representations because images 
selected as looking like welfare recipients shared com-
mon features with participants’ imagined welfare recipi-
ent, and images selected as looking like non–welfare 
recipients shared common features with participants’ 
imagined non–welfare recipient. Aggregating images 
amplified the features they shared with participants’ men-
tal representations and reduced the random variation in 
unshared features.
Although other implicit measures assess associations 
between semantic categories (e.g., the Implicit Associa-
tion Test; Greenwald, McGhee, & Schwartz, 1998) or 
spontaneous affective and semantic responses to stimuli 
(e.g., the affect misattribution procedure; Payne, Cheng, 
Govorun, & Stewart, 2005), those methods do not cap-
ture participants’ mental imagery. The advantage of using 
a reverse-correlation procedure was that this data-driven 
method allowed us to infer perceivers’ internal visual 
representation of welfare recipients. Participants could 
generate images that varied orthogonally on multiple 
dimensions, so that, for example, gender could vary 
independently of race, emotional expression, and other 
physiognomy. To the extent that features occurred 
together, this covariation reflected features of the partici-
pants’ representations rather than constraints of the 
paradigm.
In the image-rating phase, a new sample of partici-
pants rated the images constructed from the responses of 
the original samples. The new participants did not know 
how the images were generated, and welfare was not 
mentioned.
Method
Image-generation phase
Study 1: participants and procedure. We recruited 118 
American participants (92 women, 26 men) from the par-
ticipant pool in an introductory psychology course. They 
participated in exchange for course credit. The racial-
ethnic composition of the sample was as follows: 61.3% 
White, 17.6% Asian, 16.0% Black, and 4.2% Hispanic. The 
average age was 19.04 years (SD = 2.68). The median 
income was between $75,001 and $100,000 annually.
The stimuli used in the reverse-correlation task were all 
generated from the same base face. This base face was cre-
ated by morphing together four images: an image of an 
African American male, an image of an African American 
female, an image of a White American male, and an image 
of a White American female. Then, noise was superimposed 
on the base face. The noise consisted of superimposed trun-
cated 2-cycle sinusoid patches in all combinations of six 
orientations (0°, 30°, 60°, 90°, 120°, and 150°), five spatial 
scales (2, 4, 8, 16, and 32 patches per image), and two 
phases (0, π/2), with random contrasts.
Participants completed 400 trials of the reverse-correlation 
 
task. On each trial, two stimuli were presented side by 
side, and participants were instructed to select the stimulus 
that most resembled a welfare recipient. One stimulus in 
each pair had a particular noise pattern superimposed on 
the base face, and the other stimulus had the exact oppo-
site (the negative) noise pattern superimposed on the base 
face. As did Dotsch and Todorov (2012), we used opposite 
noise patterns to maximize the differences between the 
two images in each pair and to simplify data analysis. The 
pairs of stimuli were presented in random order.
After participants completed the reverse-correlation task, 
they were asked about their attitudes toward welfare (ques-
tions taken from Gilens, 1996). Finally, participants reported 
their age, gender, income, level of education, political-party 
affiliation, political ideology, and race-ethnicity. Because 
we created average images—averaged across responses 
and across participants—these demographic measures are 
not relevant for our main hypothesis, but were collected in 
order to characterize the sample.
Study 2: participants and procedure. We recruited 
238 participants (125 women, 113 men) from Amazon 
Mechanical Turk. The racial-ethnic composition of the 
sample was as follows: 76.5% White, 10.1% Asian, 8.0% 
Black, and 5.4% other races or ethnicities. The average 
age was 36.51 years (SD = 11.94). The median income 
was between $25,001 and $50,000.
Participants were randomly assigned to either the wel-
fare-recipient or the non-welfare-recipient condition. The 
welfare-recipient condition was an exact replication of 
Study 1. In the non-welfare-recipient condition, partici-
pants were asked to “decide which photo looks most like 
someone who does NOT receive welfare (that is, some-
one who supports him/herself without receiving wel-
fare).” Participants in both conditions completed 400 
trials of the reverse-correlation task. The stimuli were the 
same stimuli used in Study 1. Again, participants were 
then asked about their attitudes toward welfare (Gilens, 
1996) and responded to some demographic questions 
that were collected in order to characterize the sample.
Image processing. Using the R package rcicr 0.3.0 
(Dotsch, 2015), we computed an average welfare-recipient 
image and an average non-welfare-recipient image. For 
Study 1, the average welfare-recipient image was created 
by superimposing on the base face the average of the 
noise patterns of all selected images across all participants. 
The average non-welfare-recipient image was created by 
 Mental Representations of Welfare Recipients 
95
superimposing on the base face the average of the noise 
patterns of all nonselected images across all participants. 
The resulting average images are displayed in the top row 
of Figure 2. For Study 2, the average welfare-recipient 
image was created by superimposing on the base face the 
average of the noise patterns of all selected images across 
all participants in the welfare-recipient condition. The 
average non-welfare-recipient image was created by 
superimposing on the base face the average of the noise 
patterns of all selected images across all participants in the 
non-welfare-recipient condition. The resulting average 
images of the welfare recipient and nonrecipient are dis-
played in the bottom row of Figure 2.
Image-rating phase. To quantify the properties of 
these images, we asked separate samples, blind to the 
way the images were created, to rate the images. Raters 
in each study were randomly assigned to rate either fea-
tures related to the face’s appearance (i.e., race, gender, 
likeability, attractiveness, and happiness) or traits related 
to deservingness (e.g., laziness, competence, humanness, 
agency). We chose to measure these sets of features sep-
arately so that participants did not perceive a connection 
between the appearance features (especially race) and 
deservingness-related traits.
Given this mixed design, we needed at least 90 partici-
pants in each condition (180 total for each study) to have 
adequate power (.80) to detect a small effect ( 
f = .15; 
G*Power software; Faul, Erdfelder, Buchner, & Lang, 
2009). An attention check was included as the first ques-
tion in both studies because past research suggests that 
such attention checks can improve data quality (Oppen-
heimer, Meyvis, & Davidenko, 2009). Participants rated 
the images generated by the original samples without 
knowing anything about how those images were gener-
ated. Nothing about welfare was mentioned to 
participants.
Participants were told they would rate a few images 
on a series of dimensions. Four of the images were filler 
items (stimuli used in the image-generation phase) so 
that the comparison between the two images of interest 
would not be salient to participants. The order in which 
the critical images were presented was counterbalanced 
to avoid order effects. In the appearance-rating condi-
tion, participants rated each image on race (1 = definitely 
African American, 6 = definitely White American), gen-
der (1 = definitely male, 6 = definitely female; reverse-
coded), likeability (1 = extremely unlikeable, 6 = extremely 
likeable), attractiveness (1 = extremely unattractive, 6 = 
extremely attractive), and happiness (1 = extremely 
unhappy, 6 = extremely happy).
In the deservingness-rating condition, participants 
rated each image on humanness (1 = extremely inhu-
man, 6 = extremely human), laziness (1 = extremely 
hardworking, 6 = extremely lazy; reverse-coded), and 
hostility (1 = extremely gentle, 6 = extremely hostile; 
reverse-coded). We also asked participants to rate each 
image on agency, experience, and competence. We used 
items from Gray, Gray, and Wegner (2007) to assess 
agency and experience. For agency, we asked partici-
pants to rate how the person depicted compared with 
the average person in ability to plan, exert self-control, 
act morally, and remember things (1 = much less capable, 
6 = much more capable). Responses to these four items 
were averaged together to create an index of agency. For 
experience, we asked participants to rate how the person 
depicted compared with the average person in ability to 
feel pain, pleasure, fear, and joy (1 = much less capable, 
6 = much more capable). Responses to these four items 
were averaged together to create an index of experience. 
Two more items measured the degree to which the per-
son seemed competent (1 = extremely incompetent, 6 = 
extremely competent) and intelligent (1 = extremely unin-
telligent, 6 = extremely intelligent). Responses to these 
two items were averaged together to form an index of 
competence. Finally, participants answered demographic 
Study 1 Average Images
Study 2 Average Images
Average
Welfare Recipient
Average
Non–Welfare Recipient
Average
Welfare Recipient
Average
Non–Welfare Recipient
Fig. 2. The average classification images generated in Study 1 (top) 
and Study 2 (bottom).
 96 
Brown-Iannuzzi et al.
questions, including questions about their gender, age, 
and race-ethnicity.
Study 1 participants. Participants (N = 230) were 
recruited from Amazon Mechanical Turk. We excluded 24 
participants from analyses because they failed the atten-
tion check.1 The final sample included 206 participants 
(83 women, 122 men, 1 person who did not report gen-
der). The racial-ethnic composition of the sample was 
as follows: 79.6% White, 6.8% Black, 5.3% Hispanic, and 
8.3% “other” or multiracial. The average age was 33.28 
years (SD = 11.56), and the median income was between 
$35,000 and $39,999.
Study 2 participants. Participants (N = 237) were 
recruited from Amazon Mechanical Turk. We excluded 
28 participants from analyses because they failed the 
attention check. The final sample included 87 men, 112 
women, and 10 individuals who did not report their gen-
der. The racial-ethnic composition of the sample was as 
follows: 78.9% White, 9.1% Hispanic, 5.3% Black, and 
6.7% “other.” The average age was 38.46 years (SD = 
13.91), and the median income was between $35,000 and 
$39,999.
Results
Study 1: image-rating results. First, we investigated 
whether ratings of the welfare-recipient image differed 
from ratings of the non-welfare-recipient image. Figure 3 
presents the means and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) 
for the 11 ratings of these two images (see Table S1 in the 
Supplemental Material available online for the specific 
values, as well as effect sizes). As predicted by our pri-
mary hypothesis for this study, participants rated the 
welfare-recipient image as appearing significantly more 
Female
Unlikeable
Unhappy
Unattractive
Low Experience
Low Agency
Inhuman
Hostile
Incompetent
Lazy
African American
1
2
3
4
5
6
Welfare Recipient
Non–Welfare Recipient
White American
Hardworking
Competent
Gentle
Human
High Agency
High Experience
Attractive
Happy
Likeable
Male
Fig. 3. Mean ratings of the critical images in Study 1. Error bars represent 95% confidence 
intervals.
 Mental Representations of Welfare Recipients 
97
African American (less White) than the non-welfare-
recipient image.
We also investigated the stereotypes associated with 
the images. Given stereotypes depicting African Ameri-
cans as undeserving of public assistance and research 
suggesting that African Americans are sometimes dehu-
manized (e.g., Goff, Eberhardt, Williams, & Jackson, 
2008), we hypothesized that the person depicted in the 
welfare-recipient image would be rated as lazier, more 
incompetent, more hostile, and less human than the per-
son depicted in the non-welfare-recipient image. Results 
were consistent with these predictions. Further, partici-
pants rated the person depicted in the welfare-recipient 
image as less agentic and as having less experience than 
the person depicted in the non-welfare-recipient image. 
We explored whether there was a general valence effect 
and found that, indeed, participants rated the welfare-
recipient image as less attractive, less happy, and less 
likeable than the non-welfare-recipient image. We also 
explored whether the welfare-recipient image would be 
considered more or less feminine than the non-welfare-
recipient image, but we found that participants rated the 
welfare-recipient image as more feminine. However, both 
images were rated as more male than female overall. 
These results suggest that, although the participants rat-
ing the images knew nothing about how they were cre-
ated or what they had to do with welfare, attributes 
stereotypically associated with welfare recipients were 
apparent in the images.
Study 2: image-rating results. Again, we investigated 
whether ratings of the welfare-recipient image differed 
from ratings of the non-welfare-recipient image. Figure 4 
presents the means and 95% CIs for the 11 ratings of the 
two images (see Table S2 in the Supplemental Material for 
specific values, as well as effect sizes). As hypothesized, 
Female
Unlikeable
Unhappy
Unattractive
Low Experience
Low Agency
Inhuman
Hostile
Incompetent
Lazy
African American
1
2
3
4
5
6
White American
Hardworking
Competent
Gentle
Human
High Agency
High Experience
Attractive
Happy
Likeable
Male
Welfare Recipient
Non–Welfare Recipient
Fig. 4. Mean ratings of the critical images in Study 2. Error bars represent 95% confidence 
intervals.
 98 
Brown-Iannuzzi et al.
the welfare-recipient image was rated as more representa-
tive of African Americans than was the non-welfare- 
recipient image. Also as predicted, the person depicted in 
the welfare-recipient image was rated as lazier, more 
incompetent, and more hostile than the person depicted 
in the non-welfare-recipient image. Additionally, the per-
son depicted in the welfare-recipient image was perceived 
to be less human, to be less agentic, and to have less 
mental experience than the person depicted in the 
 
non-welfare-recipient image. Finally, we found that the 
welfare-recipient image was rated as less attractive, happy, 
likeable, and masculine than the non-welfare-recipient 
image. Overall, these findings consistently replicated the 
effects in Study 1: When people imagine welfare recipi-
ents, they tend to imagine an African American who 
appears lazy and incompetent.
Relationship between the images generated in 
Study 1 and Study 2. Visual inspection of the images 
generated in the two studies shows that they were very 
similar. To objectively measure their similarity, we exam-
ined the correlations between the lightness values for 
each pixel across the four images (see Table 1). The 
images were first masked with an oval shape so that the 
correlations would primarily reflect the face area of the 
images. As expected, the welfare-recipient images were 
positively correlated across Studies 1 and 2. The non-
welfare-recipient images were also positively correlated 
across the studies. The positive correlation between the 
non-welfare-recipient images suggests that the anti-image 
created in Study 1 was similar to the average image cre-
ated in the non-welfare-recipient condition in Study 2, 
even though the images were created using different 
decision tasks. Finally, the welfare-recipient image from 
Study 2 was negatively correlated with the non-welfare-
recipient images from Study 2 and Study 1. (Note that 
 
the welfare-recipient and non-welfare-recipient images 
within Study 1 were correlated −1.0 because they were 
anti-images of each other; this redundancy does not 
apply in Study 2 because the recipient and nonrecipient 
images were generated from separate samples). These 
correlations confirm that the images generated were 
highly similar across the two studies.
Discussion
Face images were generated by samples of participants 
who heard no mention of race. Those images were then 
rated by new samples who heard no mention of welfare. 
And yet, the images revealed significant relationships 
between representations of welfare recipients and racial 
categories. Overall, these findings suggest that when 
individuals think about welfare recipients, they tend to 
imagine an African American who appears, to naive 
observers, to be relatively lazy and incompetent. Com-
pared with the people depicted in the non-welfare- 
recipient images, those depicted in the welfare-recipient 
images appeared to be less human, to be less agentic, 
and to have less mental experience. The welfare-recipient 
images also appeared relatively unhappy, unattractive, 
and unlikeable. These data suggest that race and negative 
stereotypes are integrally linked to mental representa-
tions of welfare recipients. However, we did not test 
whether mental images of a typical welfare recipient 
affect attitudes toward welfare. We investigated this ques-
tion in Study 3.
Study 3
In our third study, we used a within-subjects experimen-
tal design to investigate whether the average welfare-
recipient and non-welfare-recipient images generated in 
Study 2 would influence participants’ support for award-
ing or withholding welfare benefits. Participants were 
asked to view the two images and to rate their support 
for giving the pictured persons welfare benefits.2 We 
hypothesized that participants would be more supportive 
of giving welfare benefits to the person depicted in the 
average non-welfare-recipient image than to the person 
depicted in the average welfare-recipient image. Given 
Table 1. Correlation Among the Pixels of the Images Generated in Studies 1 and 2
Study and image
Study 1
Study 2
Welfare 
recipient
Non–welfare 
recipient
Welfare 
recipient
Non–welfare 
recipient
Study 1
 
 Welfare recipient
—
 
 Non–welfare recipient
−1.00
—
 
Study 2
 
 Welfare recipient
 0.55
−0.55
—
 
 Non–welfare recipient
−0.57
 0.57
−0.71
—
Note: None of the 95% confidence intervals for these correlations included zero.
 Mental Representations of Welfare Recipients 
99
this within-subjects design, we needed at least 90 partici-
pants to have adequate power (.80) to detect a small 
effect ( 
f = .15; G*Power software; Faul et al., 2009).
Method
Participants (N = 229; 91 men, 124 women, 1 participant 
who reported “other,” 13 participants who did not report 
gender) were recruited from Amazon Mechanical Turk. 
The racial-ethnic composition of the sample was as fol-
lows: 79.9% White, 5.7% Hispanic, 5.7% Asian, 3.1% 
Black, and 5.6% “other.” The average age was 39.66 years 
(SD = 13.14), and the median income was between 
$50,000 and $59,999.
Participants were told that they would see a series of 
“fuzzy” images of real people. The blurry nature of the 
images was explained by telling participants that the 
images looked distorted because they were composites of 
photos of people who had applied for government wel-
fare programs. Participants were told that some of the 
applicants turned out to be responsible recipients of wel-
fare benefits, whereas others were irresponsible recipients 
of the benefits. Then, participants were asked to make a 
series of judgments about each image. They were given no 
indication whether each image was supposedly a compos-
ite of responsible or irresponsible welfare recipients. The 
images presented were the average welfare-recipient and 
non-welfare-recipient images generated in Study 2 and 
four filler images (the same filler images used in Study 1 
and 2), which were included so that the comparison 
between the two images of interest would not be salient.
Participants rated each image on perceived race (1 = 
definitely African American, 6 = definitely White Ameri-
can). We measured perceived deservingness by asking 
participants to rate each image on the degree to which 
the pictured person seemed competent (1 = extremely 
unintelligent, 6 = extremely intelligent) and hardworking 
(1 = extremely lazy, 6 = extremely hardworking), the 
extent to which the pictured person seemed responsible 
(1 = extremely irresponsible, 6 = extremely responsible), 
and the extent to which they believed the pictured per-
son would use food stamps responsibly (1 = definitely 
would not use responsibly, 6 = definitely would use 
responsibly) and would use cash assistance responsibly 
(1 = definitely would not use responsibly, 6 = definitely 
would use responsibly). Finally, participants were asked 
how much they would support giving the pictured per-
son food stamps (1 = completely unsupportive, 6 = com-
pletely supportive) and cash assistance (1 = completely 
unsupportive, 6 = completely supportive). Participants 
also answered demographic questions, including ques-
tions about their gender, age, and race-ethnicity.
For exploratory purposes, participants completed 
three measures we expected might be associated with 
the predicted effects. One measure assessed participants’ 
attitudes toward welfare (Gilens, 1996). The second 
 
measure assessed participants’ perceptions of increasing 
diversity in America (Craig & Richeson, 2014; Wetts & 
Willer, 2015). The third measure assessed the degree to 
which participants thought welfare was for racial minori-
ties. The findings for these measures are presented in the 
Supplemental Material.
Results
Figure 5 presents the means and 95% CIs for the ratings 
of the two critical images (see Table S3 in the Supple-
mental Material for specific values, as well as effect sizes). 
First, we investigated whether the results for perceived 
race, competence, and work ethic replicated the findings 
of the previous studies and found that they did. The wel-
fare-recipient image was rated as significantly more Afri-
can American than the non-welfare-recipient image. 
Additionally, the person depicted in the welfare-recipient 
image was rated as less competent and hardworking than 
the person depicted in the non-welfare-recipient image.
Next, we tested our two primary hypotheses for Study 
3. As predicted, the person depicted in the welfare- 
recipient image was rated as less responsible (generally), 
and less responsible with food stamps and cash assistance, 
than the person depicted in the non-welfare-recipient 
image. Additionally, as hypothesized, participants were 
less supportive of giving food stamps and cash assistance 
to the person depicted in the welfare-recipient image than 
to the person depicted in the non-welfare-recipient image. 
Overall, the results from this experiment suggest that peo-
ple’s mental images of welfare recipients can have a causal 
influence on their attitudes toward welfare.
Finally, we investigated the associations among differ-
ences in perceived race of the images, perceived deserv-
ingness of the people depicted, and support for giving 
those people welfare benefits (see Table 2; all differences 
were calculated by subtracting the rating for the welfare-
recipient image from the rating for the non-welfare- 
recipient image). The difference in the perceived race of 
the images was significantly associated with the difference 
in perceived deservingness and support. If race stereotypes 
tie mental images of welfare recipients to perceptions of 
deservingness, then we would expect perceived race to 
mediate the effect of the images on perceived deserving-
ness. Moreover, if deservingness links race to support for 
providing welfare benefits, then we would expect the 
association between perceived race and support for pro-
viding welfare to be mediated by deservingness.
To test this predicted pattern, we used a two-condition 
within-participants statistical mediation analysis with 
10,000 bootstraps (MEMORE macro; Montoya & Hayes, 
2016). The stereotype variables (perceived competence, 
 100 
Brown-Iannuzzi et al.
responsibility, and work ethic) were averaged together to 
create one index of deservingness. Then, the variables 
were entered into the model in their raw-scale form 
 
(Montoya & Hayes, 2016). Results of the mediation analy-
sis are displayed in Figure 6. The indirect effect of the 
two-mediator sequential pattern was significant, as indi-
cated by the fact the 95% CI did not include zero, b = 0.96, 
95% CI = [0.41, 1.60]. This finding is consistent with the 
hypothesis that perceived race of the image informed per-
ception of deservingness, which in turn was the more 
proximal predictor of support for giving welfare benefits.
The mediation model simultaneously tested two alter-
native single-mediator pathways. First, it tested whether 
the effect of the image on support for welfare was medi-
ated by perceived race alone. The indirect effect was not 
significant, b = −0.04, 95% CI = [−0.46, 0.36]. Second, the 
model tested whether the effect of the image on support 
for welfare was mediated by perceived deservingness 
alone. Because stereotypes of Black Americans and ste-
reotypes of welfare recipients overlap, it was possible that 
perceptions of deservingness could explain the observed 
effects independently of race. However, this indirect 
effect was also not significant, b = −0.01, 95% CI = [−0.57, 
0.48].
General Discussion
We have reported evidence that people’s mental images 
of welfare recipients tend to look African American and 
to be associated with traits suggesting that they are unde-
serving of government assistance. First, participants 
chose images that they believed looked like welfare 
Unsupportive of Giving Food Stamps
Unsupportive of Giving Cash Assistance
Irresponsible With Food Stamps
Irresponsible With Cash Assistance
Irresponsible
Lazy
Incompetent
African American
1
2
3
4
5
6
White American
Competent
Hardworking
Responsible
Responsible With Cash Assistance
Responsible With Food Stamps
Supportive of Giving Cash Assistance
Supportive of Giving Food Stamps
Welfare Recipient
Non–Welfare Recipient
Fig. 5. Mean ratings of the critical images in Study 3. Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals.
Table 2. Results From Study 3: Correlational Analysis of Rating 
Differences Between the Welfare-Recipient and Non-Welfare-
Recipient Images
Rating
Perceived 
race
Perceived 
deservingness
Perceived deservingness
.25
—
Support for giving welfare benefits
.20 
.81
Note: None of the 95% confidence intervals for these correlations included 
zero.
 Mental Representations of Welfare Recipients 
101
recipients. Then, separate samples of participants per-
ceived images aggregated from the selected images to 
depict African Americans who were lazy, incompetent, 
and inhuman (relative to aggregated images of non– 
welfare recipients). Finally, when new participants con-
sidered giving welfare benefits to the people depicted in 
the images, the qualities of those mental images influ-
enced their support for awarding benefits.
These findings are consistent with previous research 
suggesting that opposition to welfare is associated 
with negative attitudes toward African Americans 
(Gilens, 1995, 1996, 1999) and that these attitudes are 
more negative in areas with higher proportions of Afri-
can Americans in the local population (Luttmer, 2001). 
Our results extend those findings by suggesting that 
mental representations of welfare recipients may be a 
subtle psychological mechanism linking racial bias 
with support for giving welfare benefits to individuals 
in need.
The samples whose responses were the basis for the 
constructed images of welfare recipients were blind to 
our hypothesis that the images of the recipients would 
look more African American than the images of the non-
recipients, and the samples rating the images were blind 
to our hypothesis that people would be less supportive 
of awarding welfare benefits to the images of the typical 
welfare recipient than to the images of the typical non–
welfare recipient. This is important because the images of 
welfare recipients generated from participants’ responses 
could have appeared to be images of competent and 
hardworking African Americans. Or they could have 
appeared to be images of undeserving Whites. Yet the 
average image of a welfare recipient was rated as depict-
ing an undeserving African American. The merging of 
race and these stereotypes of deservingness emerged 
spontaneously from the participants’ representations.
Limitations and future directions
This research used convenience samples, which leaves 
open questions about how broadly the effects generalize 
to other populations. Although online samples recruited 
through Mechanical Turk tend to be more diverse than 
American college samples, they still do not reflect the 
diversity of the United States (Buhrmester, Kwang, & 
Gosling, 2011). Future research should investigate mental 
representations of welfare recipients in representative 
samples. Future research should also investigate how 
mental images of specific subtypes of welfare recipients 
differ. Many people distinguish, for example, between 
the deserving poor and the undeserving poor. Peffley et 
al. (1997) found that when African American welfare 
recipients were described as hardworking (as opposed to 
lazy), participants had more positive attitudes toward 
welfare. Do such subtypes reduce the influence of race, 
or simply serve as a proxy for different race stereotypes? 
That is, if people are asked to imagine hardworking wel-
fare recipients, will their mental images look more White 
than African American?
Conclusion
The distribution of resources presents a fundamental 
question facing citizens in democracies. Even though the 
level of economic inequality is reaching historically high 
levels in the United States, citizens tend to oppose redis-
tributive policies (e.g., Gilens, 1995; Harell et al., in 
press). Citizens’ mental representations of the people 
who benefit from redistribution may help explain why. 
These representations may contribute to growing eco-
nomic inequality because they trigger group-based dis-
tinctions in the mind of some citizens when they think 
about the optimal distributions of resources.
Image
Perceived Race
Support for
Giving Benefits
b = 0.59*
b′ = –0.33, p = .12  
Perceived
Deservingness
b = 0.27*
b = –0.01, p = .86
b = –0.01, p = .97
b = 3.88*
b = 0.91*
Fig. 6. Two-mediator sequential model depicting the relationship between support for giving welfare 
benefits and image type (1 = non–welfare recipient, 0 = welfare recipient), as mediated by perceived 
race (Mediator 1: higher numbers = more White) and deservingness (Mediator 2: higher numbers = more 
deserving). Asterisks indicate significant coefficients (*p ≤ .001).
 102 
Brown-Iannuzzi et al.
Action Editor
Bill von Hippel served as action editor for this article.
Author Contributions
J. L. Brown-Iannuzzi and B. K. Payne developed the study con-
cept. All the authors contributed to the study design. Testing 
and data collection were performed by J. L. Brown-Iannuzzi 
and B. K. Payne. J. L. Brown-Iannuzzi performed the data anal-
ysis and interpretation under the supervision of R. Dotsch, E. 
Cooley, and B. K. Payne. J. L. Brown-Iannuzzi drafted the man-
uscript, and R. Dotsch, E. Cooley, and B. K. Payne provided 
critical revisions. All the authors approved the final version of 
the manuscript for submission.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The authors declared that they had no conflicts of interest with 
respect to their authorship or the publication of this article.
Supplemental Material 
Additional supporting information can be found at http://pss 
.sagepub.com/content/by/supplemental-data
Open Practices
All data and materials have been made publicly available at 
figshare and can be accessed at https://dx.doi.org/10.6084/
m9.figshare.c.3468495.v2. The complete Open Practices Disclo-
sure for this article can be found at http://pss.sagepub.com/
content/by/supplemental-data. This article has received badges 
for Open Data and Open Materials. More information about the 
Open Practices badges can be found at https://osf.io/tvyxz/
wiki/1.%20View%20the%20Badges/ and http://pss.sagepub.com/ 
content/25/1/3.full.
Notes
1. Results of Study 1 and Study 2 were not substantively dif-
ferent when all participants, including the ones who failed the 
attention check, were included in the analyses.
2. This study was replicated with the average images created 
in Study 1. However, in the replication study, we did not ask 
participants to rate the perceived race of the average welfare-
recipient and non-welfare-recipient images. Overall, the results 
of this replication study were similar to the results of Study 3. 
For a detailed description of the method and results of the rep-
lication study, see the Supplemental Material.
References
Ashok, V., Kuziemko, I., & Washington, E. (2015). Support for 
redistribution in an age of rising inequality: New stylized 
facts and some tentative explanations (Brookings Papers on 
Economic Activity). Retrieved from https://www.brookings 
.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/2015a_ashok.pdf
Bartels, L. M. (2005). Homer gets a tax cut: Inequality and pub-
lic policy in the American mind. Perspectives on Politics, 3, 
15–31.
Buhrmester, M., Kwang, T., & Gosling, S. D. (2011). Amazon’s 
Mechanical Turk: A new source of inexpensive, yet high-
quality, data? Perspectives on Psychological Science, 6, 3–5.
Craig, M. A., & Richeson, J. A. (2014). On the precipice of a 
“majority-minority” America: Perceived status threat from 
the racial demographic shift affects White Americans’ politi-
cal ideology. Psychological Science, 25, 1189–1197.
Dotsch, R. (2015). rcicr: Reverse-correlation image-classification 
toolbox [R package Version 0.3.0]. Retrieved from https://
CRAN.R-project.org/package=rcicr
Dotsch, R., & Todorov, A. (2012). Reverse correlating social 
face perception. Social Psychological & Personality Science, 
3, 562–571.
Dotsch, R., Wigboldus, D. H. J., Langner, O., & van Knippenberg, 
A. (2008). Ethnic out-group faces are biased in the preju-
diced mind. Psychological Science, 19, 978–980.
Edsall, T. B., & Edsall, M. D. (1991). Chain reaction: The impact 
of race, rights, and taxes on American politics. New York, 
NY: W. W. Norton.
Faul, F., Erdfelder, E., Buchner, A., & Lang, A.-G. (2009). 
Statistical power analyses using G*Power 3.1: Tests for 
correlation and regression analyses. Behavior Research 
Methods, 41, 1149–1160.
Fox, C. (2004). The changing color of welfare? How Whites’ 
attitudes toward Latinos influence support for welfare. 
American Journal of Sociology, 110, 580–625.
Gilens, M. (1995). Racial attitudes and opposition to welfare. 
Journal of Politics, 57, 994–1014.
Gilens, M. (1996). “Race coding” and White opposition to wel-
fare. American Political Science Review, 90, 593–604.
Gilens, M. (1999). Why Americans hate welfare: Race, media, 
and the politics of antipoverty policy. Chicago, IL: University 
of Chicago Press.
Goff, P. A., Eberhardt, J. L., Williams, M., & Jackson, M. C. 
(2008). Not yet human: Implicit knowledge, historical 
dehumanization, and contemporary consequences. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 94, 292–306.
Gray, H. M., Gray, K., & Wegner, D. M. (2007). Dimensions of 
mind perception. Science, 315, 619.
Greenwald, A. G., McGhee, D. E., & Schwartz, J. L. K. (1998). 
Measuring individual differences in implicit cognition: The 
implicit association test. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 74, 1464–1480.
Hamilton, D. L. (Ed.). (2015). Cognitive processes in stereotyping 
and intergroup behavior. New York, NY: Psychology Press.
Harell, A., Soroka, S., & Iyengar, S. (in press). Race, prejudice 
and attitudes toward redistribution: A comparative experi-
mental approach. European Journal of Political Research.
Hilton, J. L., & von Hippel, W. (1996). Stereotypes. Annual 
Review of Psychology, 47, 237–271.
Imhoff, R., & Dotsch, R. (2013). Do we look like me or like 
us? Visual projection as self- or ingroup-projection. Social 
Cognition, 31, 806–816.
Imhoff, R., Woelki, J., Hanke, S., & Dotsch, R. (2013). Warmth 
and competence in your face! Visual encoding of stereotype 
 Mental Representations of Welfare Recipients 
103
content. Frontiers in Psychology, 4, Article 386. doi:10.3389/
fpsyg.2013.00386
Krosch, A. R., & Amodio, D. M. (2014). Economic scarcity 
alters the perception of race. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, USA, 111, 9079–9084.
Kuziemko, I., Norton, M. I., Saez, E., & Stantcheva, S. (2015). 
How elastic are preferences for redistribution? Evidence 
from randomized survey experiments. American Economic 
Review, 105, 1478–1508.
Lee, W., & Roemer, J. R. (2006). Racism and redistribution in the 
United States: A solution to the problem of American excep-
tionalism. Journal of Public Economics, 90, 1027–1052.
Luttmer, E. P. (2001). Group loyalty and the taste redistribution. 
Journal of Political Economy, 109, 500–528.
Mangini, M. C., & Biederman, I. (2004). Making the ineffable 
explicit: Estimating the information employed for face clas-
sification. Cognitive Science, 28, 209–226.
Meltzer, A. H., & Richard, S. F. (1981). A rational theory of 
the size of government. Journal of Political Economy, 89, 
914–927.
Montoya, A. K., & Hayes, A. F. (2016). Two-condition within-
participant statistical mediation analysis: A path-analytic 
framework. Psychological Methods. Advance online publi-
cation. doi:10.1037/met0000086
Norton, M. I., & Ariely, D. (2011). Building a better America—
one wealth quintile at a time. Perspectives on Psychological 
Science, 6, 9–12.
Oppenheimer, D. M., Meyvis, T., & Davidenko, N. (2009). 
Instructional manipulation checks: Detecting satisficing to 
increase statistical power. Journal of Experimental Social 
Psychology, 45, 867–872.
Payne, B. K., Cheng, C. M., Govorun, O., & Stewart, B. (2005). 
An inkblot for attitudes: Affect misattribution as implicit 
measurement. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
89, 277–293.
Peffley, M., Hurwitz, J., & Sniderman, P. M. (1997). Racial ste-
reotypes and Whites’ political views of Blacks in the con-
text of welfare and crime. American Journal of Political 
Science, 41, 30–60.
Saez, E., & Zucman, G. (2014). Wealth inequality in the United 
States since 1913: Evidence from capitalized income tax 
data (NBER Working Paper Series). Retrieved from http://
gabriel-zucman.eu/files/SaezZucman2014.pdf
Sears, D. O., & Cirin, J. (1985). Tax revolt: Something for nothing 
in California. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2012). 
Characteristics and financial circumstances of TANF recip-
ients, fiscal year 2010. Retrieved from http://www.acf.hhs 
.gov/ofa/resource/character/fy2010/fy2010-chap10-ys-final
Wetts, R., & Willer, R. (2015). Anxiety and austerity: A group 
position account of White Americans’ opposition to wel-
fare. Manuscript in preparation.
Wilkinson, R., & Pickett, K. (2009). The spirit level: Why greater 
equality makes societies stronger. New York, NY: Bloomsbury.
