 Clinical Infectious Diseases
Pain Management in People with HIV • CID 2017:65 (15 November) • e1
2017 HIVMA of IDSA Clinical Practice Guideline for the 
Management of Chronic Pain in Patients Living With HIV
R. Douglas Bruce,1 Jessica Merlin,2 Paula J. Lum,3 Ebtesam Ahmed,4 Carla Alexander,5 Amanda H. Corbett,6 Kathleen Foley,7 Kate Leonard,8  
Glenn Jordan Treisman,9 and Peter Selwyn10
1Department of Medicine, Cornell Scott-Hill Health Center and Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut; 2Divisions of Infectious Diseases and Gerontology, Geriatrics and Palliative Care, University 
of Alabama at Birmingham; 3Division of HIV, Infectious Disease, and Global Medicine, University of California San Francisco; 4St. Johns University College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences, 
Metropolitan Jewish Health System Institute for Innovation in Palliative Care, New York; 5University of Maryland School of Medicine, Institute of Human Virology, Baltimore; 6 Eshelman School 
of Pharmacy, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill; 7Attending Neurologist Emeritus, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York; 8Division of Neuroscience and Clinical Pharmacology, 
Cornell University, New York, New York; 9Division of HIV Medicine, Johns Hopkins Medical Center, Baltimore, Maryland; and 10Department of Family and Social Medicine, Montefiore Medical 
Center, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York
Pain has always been an important part of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) disease and its experience for patients. In this 
guideline, we review the types of chronic pain commonly seen among persons living with HIV (PLWH) and review the limited evi-
dence base for treatment of chronic noncancer pain in this population. We also review the management of chronic pain in special 
populations of PLWH, including persons with substance use and mental health disorders. Finally, a general review of possible phar-
macokinetic interactions is included to assist the HIV clinician in the treatment of chronic pain in this population.
It is important to realize that guidelines cannot always account for individual variation among patients. They are not intended to 
supplant physician judgment with respect to particular patients or special clinical situations. The Infectious Diseases Society of 
American considers adherence to these guidelines to be voluntary, with the ultimate determination regarding their application to be 
made by the physician in the light of each patient’s individual circumstances.
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Summarized below are the recommendations made in the 
new guidelines for chronic pain in patients living with HIV 
(PLWH). The Panel followed a process used in the development 
of other IDSA guidelines that included a systematic weighting 
of the strength of recommendation and quality of evidence 
using the GRADE (Grading of Recommendations Assessment, 
Development and Evaluation) system (Figure 1) [1-5]. A 
detailed description of the methods, background, and evidence 
summaries that support each of the recommendations can be 
found in the full text of the guidelines.
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR MANAGEMENT AND 
TREATMENT OF PERSONS LIVING WITH HUMAN 
IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS AND CHRONIC PAIN
I. What is the recommended approach to screening and ini-
tial assessment for chronic pain in persons living with human 
immunodeficiency virus?
Recommendations
1. 
All PLWH should receive, at minimum, the following 
standardized screening for chronic pain: How much bodily 
pain have you had during the last week? (none, very mild, 
mild, moderate, severe, very severe) and Do you have bod-
ily pain that has lasted for more than 3 months? (strong, 
low). Remark: A response of moderate pain or more dur-
ing the last week combined with bodily pain for more than 
3 months can be considered a positive screen result.
2. 
For persons who screen positive for chronic pain, an initial 
assessment should take a biopsychosocial approach that 
includes an evaluation of the pain’s onset and duration, 
intensity and character, exacerbating and alleviating factors, 
past and current treatments, underlying or co-occurring dis-
orders and conditions, and the effect of pain on physical and 
psychological function. This should be followed by a phys-
ical examination, psychosocial evaluation, and diagnostic 
workup to determine the potential cause of the pain (strong, 
very low). Remark: A multidimensional instrument such as 
the brief pain inventory (BPI) or the 3-item patient health 
questionnaire (PEG; used to assess average pain intensity [P], 
interference with enjoyment of life [E], and interference with 
general activity [G]) can be used for pain assessments.
3. 
Medical providers should monitor the treatment of 
chronic pain in PLWH, with periodic assessment of pro-
gress on achieving functional goals and documentation of 
pain intensity, quality of life, adverse events, and adher-
ent vs aberrant behaviors (strong, very low). Remark: 
Reassessments should be conducted at regular intervals and 
after each change or initiation in therapy has had an ade-
quate amount of time to take effect.
Clinical Infectious Diseases®  2017;65(10):e1–37
I D S A  G U I D E L I N E
© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious Diseases Society 
of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.
DOI: 10.1093/cid/cix636
Received 13 July 2017; editorial decision 15 July 2017; accepted 19 July 2017.
Correspondence: R. D. Bruce, Cornell Scott-Hill Health Center, Yale University, 428 Columbus 
Avenue, New Haven, CT 06519 (robert.bruce@yale.edu).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/10/e1/4157299 by guest on 02 June 2019
 e2 • CID 2017:65 (15 November) • Bruce et al
II. 
What is the recommended general approach to 
the management of persons living with human 
immunodeficiency virus and chronic pain?
Recommendations
4. 
HIV medical providers should develop and participate in 
interdisciplinary teams to care for patients with complex 
chronic pain and especially for patients with co-occurring 
substance use or psychiatric disorders (strong, very low).
5. 
For patients whose chronic pain is controlled, any new 
report of pain should be carefully investigated and may 
require added treatments or adjustments in the dose of 
pain medications while the new problem is being evalu-
ated (strong, high). Remark: Providers should clearly doc-
ument the new symptom and consult, if possible, with a 
provider experienced with pain management in PLWH or 
with a pain specialist.
III. What is the recommended therapeutic approach to chronic 
pain in persons with human immunodeficiency virus at the end 
of life?
Recommendations
6. 
As PLWH age, their pain experience may change as other 
age-related and HIV-related comorbidities develop. It is 
recommended that the clinician address these changes in 
pain experience in the context of this disease progression 
(strong, moderate).
7. 
Critical to maintaining pain control, it is recommended 
that medical providers and an integrated multidisciplinary 
team engage in frequent communication with the patient 
and the patient’s support system (eg, family, caregiver) 
(strong, low). Remark: Communications should occur at a 
health literacy level appropriate for the patient and patient’s 
support system. It may be necessary to schedule longer 
appointment times to allow both patients and providers to 
establish and clarify the goals of care.
8. 
Consultation with a palliative care specialist to assist with 
pain management and nonpain symptoms and to address 
goals of care is recommended (strong, low).
9. 
Patients with advanced illness require a support system 
beyond the clinic, and timely referrals for palliative or hos-
pice care are recommended. The primary care provider 
must remain in communication with the patient and fam-
ily through the end of life to ensure accurate continuity 
and to preclude a sense of abandonment (strong, low).
IV. What are the recommended nonpharmacological treat-
ments for chronic pain in persons living with human 
immunodeficiency virus?
Recommendations
10. Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is recommended for 
chronic pain management (strong, moderate). Remark: 
CBT promotes patient acceptance of responsibility for change 
and the development of adaptive behaviors (eg, exercise) 
while addressing maladaptive behaviors (eg, avoiding exer-
cise due to fears of pain).
11. Yoga is recommended for the treatment of chronic neck/
back pain, headache, rheumatoid arthritis, and general 
musculoskeletal pain (strong, moderate).
12. Physical and occupational therapy are recommended for 
chronic pain (strong, low).
13. Hypnosis is recommended for neuropathic pain (strong, 
low).
14. Clinicians might consider a trial of acupuncture for chronic 
pain (weak, moderate). Values and preferences: This recom-
mendation places a relatively high value on the reduction of 
symptoms and few undesirable effects. Remark: Evidence to 
date is available only for acupuncture in the absence of ami-
triptyline and among PLWH with poorer health in the era 
before highly active antiretroviral therapy.
V. What are the recommended pharmacological treatments 
for chronic neuropathic pain in persons living with human 
immunodeficiency virus?
Nonopioid Recommendations
15. Early initiation of antiretroviral therapy is recommended 
for the prevention and treatment of HIV-associated distal 
symmetric polyneuropathy (strong, low).
16. Gabapentin is recommended as a first-line oral pharmacolog-
ical treatment of chronic HIV-associated neuropathic pain 
(strong, moderate). Remark: A typical adult regimen will titrate 
to 2400 mg per day in divided doses. Evidence also supports 
that gabapentin improves sleep scores; somnolence was reported 
by 80% of patients who received gabapentin (strong, low).
a. If patients have an inadequate response to gabapentin, 
clinicians might consider a trial of serotonin-norepi-
nephrine reuptake inhibitors based on their effective-
ness in the general population (weak, moderate).
b. If patients have an inadequate response to gabapentin, 
clinicians might consider a trial of tricyclic antidepres-
sants (weak, moderate).
c. If patients have an inadequate response to gabapen-
tin, clinicians might consider a trial of pregabalin 
for patients with post-herpetic neuralgia (weak, 
moderate).
17. Capsaicin is recommended as a topical treatment for the 
management of chronic HIV-associated peripheral neu-
ropathic pain (strong, high). Remark: A single 30-minute 
application of an 8% dermal patch or cream administered at 
the site of pain can provide pain relief for at least 12 weeks. 
Erythema and pain are common side effects for which a 
60-minute application of 4% lidocaine can be applied and 
wiped off before applying capsaicin (strong, high).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/10/e1/4157299 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Pain Management in People with HIV • CID 2017:65 (15 November) • e3
18. Medical cannabis may be an effective treatment in appro-
priate patients (weak, moderate). Values and preferences: 
This recommendation places a relatively high value on the 
reduction of symptoms and a relatively low value on the 
legal implication of medical cannabis possession. Remark: 
Current evidence suggests medical cannabis may be more 
effective for patients with a history of prior cannabis use; the 
potential benefits of a trial of cannabis need to be balanced 
with the potential risks of neuropsychiatric adverse effects 
at higher doses, the harmful effects of smoked forms of can-
nabis in patients with preexisting severe lung disease, and 
addiction risk to patients with cannabis use disorder.
19. We recommend alpha lipoic acid (ALA) for the manage-
ment of chronic HIV-associated peripheral neuropathic 
pain (strong, low). Values and preferences: This recommen-
dation places a high value on providing tolerable medications 
that may be of some benefit in patients with difficult-to-treat 
neuropathic pain. Remark: Studies in patients with HIV are 
lacking; however, there is a growing body of literature of the 
benefits of ALA in patients with diabetic neuropathy.
20. We recommend against using lamotrigine to relieve HIV-
associated neuropathic pain (strong, moderate). Values 
and preferences: This recommendation places a relatively 
high value on the discontinuation of neurotoxic agents and 
on minimizing the incidence of lamotrigine-associated rash 
and places a relatively low value on the reduction in pain 
symptoms found in an earlier randomized controlled trial 
by the same authors. Remark: A benefit was only seen in 
patients currently receiving neurotoxic antiretroviral ther-
apy (ART), and we recommend discontinuing all neurotoxic 
ART.
Use of Opioids
21. For PLWH, opioid analgesics should not be prescribed as a 
first-line agent for the long-term management of chronic 
neuropathic pain (strong, moderate). Values and prefer-
ences: This recommendation places a relatively high value on 
the potential risk of pronociception through the upregulation 
of specific chemokine receptors, cognitive impairment, res-
piratory depression, endocrine and immunological changes, 
and misuse and addiction.
22. Clinicians may consider a time-limited trial of opioid 
analgesics for patients who do not respond to first-line 
therapies and who report moderate to severe pain. As a 
second- or third-line treatment for chronic neuropathic 
pain, a typical adult regimen should start with the smallest 
effective dose and combine short- and long-acting opioids 
(weak, low). Remark: When opioids are appropriate, a com-
bination regimen of morphine and gabapentin should be 
considered in patients with neuropathic pain for their possi-
ble additive effects and lower individual doses required of the 
2 medications when combined.
V. What are the recommended nonopioid pharmacologic treat-
ments for chronic nonneuropathic pain in persons living with 
human immunodeficiency virus?
Recommendations
23. Acetaminophen and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs) are recommended as first-line agents for the 
treatment of musculoskeletal pain (strong, high). Remark: 
Acetaminophen has fewer side effects than NSAIDs. Studies 
typically used 4 g/day dosing of acetaminophen; lower dosing 
is recommended for patients with liver disease. Compared 
to traditional NSAIDs, COX-2 NSAIDs are associated with 
decreased risk of gastrointestinal side effects but increased 
cardiovascular risk.
VI. What are the recommended opioid pharmacological treat-
ments for chronic nonneuropathic pain in persons living with 
human immunodeficiency virus?
Recommendations
24. Patients who do not respond to first-line therapies and 
who report moderate to severe pain and functional 
impairment can be considered for a time-limited trial 
of opioid analgesics (weak, low). Values and preferences: 
This recommendation places a relatively high value on 
safer opioid prescribing. The potential benefits of opioid 
analgesics need to be balanced with the potential risks of 
adverse events, misuse, diversion, and addiction. Remark: 
As a second- or third-line treatment for chronic nonneuro-
pathic pain, a typical adult regimen should start with the 
smallest effective dose, combining short- and long-acting 
opioids.
25. Tramadol taken for up to 3 months may decrease pain 
and improve stiffness, function, and overall well-being 
in patients with osteoarthritis (weak, moderate). Remark: 
The range of tramadol dosing studied is 37.5 mg (combined 
with 325 mg of acetaminophen) once daily to 400 mg in 
divided doses.
VII. What is the recommended approach for assessing the 
likelihood of developing the negative, unintended conse-
quences of opioid treatment (eg, misuse, substance use dis-
order, or possible diversion) in persons living with human 
immunodeficiency virus?
Recommendations
26. Providers should assess all patients for the possible risk of 
developing the negative, unintended consequences of opi-
oid treatment (eg, misuse, diversion, addiction) prior to 
prescribing opioid analgesics for the treatment of chronic 
pain (strong, low). Remark: A trial of opioid analgesics for 
the treatment of moderate-to-severe chronic pain may be 
reasonable only when the potential benefits of chronic opioid 
therapy for pain severity, physical function, and quality of 
life outweigh its potential harms.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/10/e1/4157299 by guest on 02 June 2019
 e4 • CID 2017:65 (15 November) • Bruce et al
VIII. What is the recommended approach to safeguard per-
sons living with human immunodeficiency virus against harm 
while undergoing the treatment of chronic pain with opioid 
analgesics?
Recommendations
27. Routine monitoring of patients prescribed opioid analge-
sics for the management of chronic pain is recommended 
(strong, very low). Remark: Opioid treatment agreements, 
urine drug testing (UDT), pill counts, and prescription drug 
monitoring programs are commonly used tools to safeguard 
against harms.
28. An “opioid patient–provider agreement (PPA)” is rec-
ommended as a tool for shared decision making with all 
patients before receiving opioid analgesics for chronic 
pain (strong, low). Remark: PPAs consist of 2 components: 
informed consent and a plan of care. When a patient’s behav-
ior is inconsistent with the PPA, the provider must carefully 
consider a broad differential diagnosis.
29. The provider should understand the clinical uses and lim-
itations of UDT, including test characteristics, indications 
for confirmatory testing, and the differential diagnosis of 
abnormal results (strong, low). Remark: UDT results should 
never be used in isolation to discharge patients from care. 
Rather, results should be used in combination with other 
clinical data for periodic evaluation of the current treatment 
plan and to support a clinical decision to safely continue opi-
oid therapy.
IX. What are the recommended methods to minimize adverse 
effects from chronic opioid therapy in persons living with 
human immunodeficiency virus?
Recommendations
30. Controlled substances should be stored safely away from 
individuals at risk of misuse and/or overdose; family mem-
bers should be educated on the medications and signs of 
overdose, and the poison control number should be read-
ily visible (strong, low).
31. Clinicians should teach patients and their caregivers about 
opioid overdose and the use of naloxone to reverse over-
dose; a naloxone rescue kit should be readily available 
(strong, moderate).
32. Patient education is recommended to help patients avoid 
adverse events related to pharmacological interactions 
(strong, low).
33. Providers should be knowledgeable about common phar-
macological interactions and be prepared to identify 
and manage those drug–drug interactions (strong, low). 
Providers should follow patients closely when interactions 
are likely (strong, low).
X. What is the recommended approach to prescribing con-
trolled substances for the management of chronic pain to 
persons living with human immunodeficiency virus with a his-
tory of substance use disorder?
Recommendations
34. Persons with a history of a substance use disorder or addic-
tion should be carefully evaluated and risk stratified in 
the same manner as all other PLWH with chronic pain 
(strong, low). Values and preferences: This recommenda-
tion places a high value on clinical strategies that neutral-
ize bias and reduce stigma in the care of all PLWH and the 
possibility of behavior change over time. Remark: A patient’s 
history of addiction or substance use disorder is not an abso-
lute contraindication to receiving controlled substances for 
the management of chronic pain. A risk–benefit framework 
that views controlled substances as medications with unique 
risks to every patient (“a universal precautions approach”) 
should be applied uniformly to help providers make fair 
and informed clinical decisions about controlled substance 
prescribing.
35. Persons with a history of addiction for whom the risks 
currently outweigh the benefits of a controlled substance 
prescription should have their chronic pain reasonably 
managed by other therapies and should receive emotional 
support, close monitoring and reassessment, and linkages 
to addiction treatment and mental health services as indi-
cated (strong, low). Values and preferences: This recommen-
dation places a high value on access to pain management as 
a fundamental human right with an underlying principle 
that every person deserves to have his or her pain reasonably 
managed by adequately trained healthcare professionals and 
that every medical provider has a duty to listen to and rea-
sonably respond to a patient’s report of pain.
XI. What are the recommended approaches to the pharmaco-
logical management of chronic pain in persons living with 
human immunodeficiency virus who are on methadone for the 
treatment of opioid use disorder?
Recommendations
36. A signed release for the exchange of health information 
between the provider and the opioid treatment program 
(OTP) is recommended prior to any controlled substance 
prescribing (strong, low). Remark: Ongoing communica-
tion with the OPT is essential when there are 2 controlled 
substance prescribers. Sharing information about a patient’s 
progress in recovery is an important component of the assess-
ment and periodic monitoring of a pain treatment’s risks and 
benefits, for example, whether to pursue a trial of or to con-
tinue or discontinue opioid analgesic therapy.
37. Initial screening with electrocardiogram to identify heart 
rate corrected QT (QTc) prolongation for all patients on 
methadone is recommended, with interval follow-up with 
dose changes. This is especially helpful if the patient is also 
prescribed other medications that may additively prolong 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/10/e1/4157299 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Pain Management in People with HIV • CID 2017:65 (15 November) • e5
the QTc (eg, certain psychotropics, fluconazole, mac-
rolides, potassium-lowering agents) (strong, low).
38. The splitting of methadone into 6- to 8-hour doses is rec-
ommended in order to lengthen the active analgesic effects 
of methadone with the goal of continuous pain control 
(strong, low). Remark: Some OTPs may be able to offer a 
split-dose methadone regimen for patients. Alternatively, the 
medical provider may need to prescribe the remaining daily 
doses: 5%–10% of the current methadone dose should be 
added, usually as an afternoon and evening dose for a total 
10%–20% increase over the regular dose for the treatment of 
opioid use disorder (strong, very low).
39. If prescribing additional methadone is not possible (eg, 
OTP policy, high baseline methadone dose, prolonged QTc 
intervals, high risk of diversion, the patient is new to or 
poorly adherent to the OTP), then an additional medica-
tion may be recommended for chronic pain management 
depending on the etiology of the pain (eg, gabapentin for 
neuropathic pain, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs for 
musculoskeletal pain, or an additional opioid) (weak, low).
40. Acute exacerbations in pain or “breakthrough pain” should 
be treated with small amounts of short-acting opioid anal-
gesics in patients at low risk for opioid misuse (strong, 
low). Remark: Providers and patients should agree on the 
number of pills that will be dispensed for breakthrough pain, 
their frequency of use, and the expected duration of this 
treatment.
XII. What are the recommended approaches to the pharma-
cological management of chronic pain in persons living with 
human immunodeficiency virus who are on buprenorphine for 
the treatment of opioid use disorders?
Recommendations
41. Clinicians should use adjuvant therapy appropriate to the 
pain syndrome for mild-to-moderate breakthrough pain 
(strong, moderate). Remark: These adjuvants include, but 
are not limited to, nonpharmacologic treatments, steroids, 
nonopioid analgesics, and topical agents. (See section on 
“nonopioids” for treatment of chronic neuropathic and non-
neuropathic pain.)
42. Based on expert opinion, the clinician should increase the 
dosage of buprenorphine in divided does as an initial step 
in the management of chronic pain (strong, very low). 
Remark: Dosing ranges of 4–16 mg divided into 8-hour doses 
have shown benefit in patients with chronic noncancer pain.
43. Based on expert opinion, clinician’s might switch from 
buprenorphine/naloxone to buprenorphine transdermal 
formulation alone (weak, very low).
44. We recommend that if a maximal dose of buprenorphine 
is reached, an additional long-acting potent opioid such 
as fentanyl, morphine, or hydromorphone should be tried 
(strong, low).
45. If usual doses of an additional opioid are ineffective for 
improving chronic pain, we recommend a closely moni-
tored trial of higher doses of an additional opioid (strong, 
moderate). Remark: Buprenorphine’s high binding affinity 
for the μ-opioid receptor may prevent the lower doses of 
other opioids from accessing the μ-opioid receptor.
46. For patients on buprenorphine maintenance with inade-
quate analgesia despite the above-mentioned strategies, we 
recommend transitioning the patient from buprenorphine 
to methadone maintenance (strong, very low).
XIII. What are the recommended instruments for screening 
common mental health disorders in persons living with human 
immunodeficiency virus with chronic pain?
Recommendations
47. Clinicians should fully review a patient’s baseline men-
tal health status for modifiable factors that can impact 
successful pain management (strong, low). Remark: 
Potentially modifiable factors include self-esteem and cop-
ing skills; recent major loss or grief; unhealthy substance 
use; history of violence or lack of safety in the home; mood 
disorders; and history of serious mental illness or suicidal 
ideation.
48. All patients should be screened for depression with the 
following 2 questions: During the past 2 weeks have you 
often been bothered by feeling down, depressed, or hope-
less? During the past 2 weeks have you been bothered by 
little interest or pleasure in doing things? (strong, high). 
Remark: If the patient answers in the affirmative to either 
question, a follow-up question regarding help should be 
asked: Is this something with which you would like help?
49. The patient health questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9), which is in 
the public domain, is recommended as a screening tool in 
clinical settings without access to trained mental health 
professionals as it can be used to diagnose depression 
(strong, high). Remark: Psychiatric follow-up for a result 
that is ≥10 (88% sensitivity and 88% specificity for major 
depression) is recommended, and the clinical site should 
have a policy for referrals for more in-depth evaluation of 
these issues.
50. All patients should be screened for comorbid neurocogni-
tive disorders prior to and during use of long-term opioid 
therapy (strong, low). Remark: Questions administered to 
elicit cognitive complaints in the Swiss HIV Cohort study 
(eg, frequent memory loss; feeling slower when reasoning, 
planning activities, or solving problems; and difficulties pay-
ing attention) detected, but have not been tested as screening 
questions in the clinical setting.
51. It is recommended that all patients with chronic pain have 
a full neuropsychiatric evaluation with history, physical, 
and use of the HIV dementia scale or an equivalent to doc-
ument baseline capacity (strong, high).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/10/e1/4157299 by guest on 02 June 2019
 e6 • CID 2017:65 (15 November) • Bruce et al
INTRODUCTION
Epidemiology and Definitions
Chronic pain remains a significant problem in persons living 
with human immunodeficiency virus (PLWH) and is associ-
ated with psychological and functional morbidity, even in the 
absence of advanced disease complications. Depending on the 
study, current prevalence estimates of chronic pain in PLWH 
ranges from 39% to 85% [6–13]. Pain is the second most com-
mon symptom in ambulatory settings where HIV disease is 
treated. Nearly half of that pain is neuropathic due to injury 
to the central or peripheral nervous systems from direct viral 
infection, infection with secondary pathogens, or side effects 
of medications [6, 14]. Many other etiologies for neuropathic 
pain exist outside of HIV-related conditions (eg, syphilis, alco-
hol use disorders, nutritional deficiencies, diabetes mellitus, 
thyroid dysfunction, kidney disease, and multiple myeloma). 
Nonneuropathic pain, such as nociceptive pain, in PLWH is 
caused by tissue injury as a result of inflammation (eg, autoim-
mune responses), infection (eg, bacteria, other viruses, tuber-
culosis), or neoplasia (eg, lymphoma or sarcoma). Historically, 
pain among PLWH has been undertreated, particularly among 
women, persons with low socioeconomic status, and persons 
who inject drugs [15–17]. In this context, those who treat 
patients with HIV (ie, providers) must be familiar with the 
evaluation and management of chronic pain. Although chronic 
pain management is recognized as a specialty discipline within 
medicine, many patients lack access to specialized pain man-
agement services and must rely on their HIV clinical providers 
to initially evaluate and address their chronic pain needs. Just as 
with cancer patients, pain management is an essential compo-
nent of overall disease management for PLWH [18].
Pain is comprised of sensory and affective components; that 
is, pain is a sensory experience that is emotionally distressing 
and aversive, and pain ranges from unpleasant to intolerable. 
Although some persons tolerate high levels of the sensory or 
nociceptive element of pain without emotional distress, others 
experience overwhelming distress to modest nociceptive stim-
ulation. Pain is one of the great medical challenges, as it can 
profoundly interfere with function and disable the people who 
experience it.
Acute pain is caused by several neuronal mechanisms, 
including receptors that mechanically sense tissue disruption 
and heat as well as the local release of transmitters at the site of 
injury that stimulate receptors to transmit pain signals. These 
mechanisms have complex interactions and mutual regulatory 
signaling that make nociception one of the most integrated sen-
sory experiences studied. The pain system synapses at the level 
of the dorsal root and in the spinal column, having recurrent 
connections that cross the midline. Pain signals converge on the 
thalamus and are then relayed to higher centers in the cortex 
where the conscious experience of pain is generated. This inter-
pretation of the peripheral impulse within the larger physical 
and psychosocial context of the individual may result in pain of 
varying degrees and dimensions. In other words, pain is much 
more than a simple electrical impulse generated in the periph-
ery that is transmitted to the brain with a known effect. The 
same signal in different individuals will produce different sen-
sations of pain, because that signal must be interpreted within 
the larger context of the biopsychosocial factors that influence 
pain (see Foundational Principles of Chronic Pain Management 
regarding the biopsychosocial model of pain management).
With chronic pain, in distinction from acute pain, the imme-
diate sensory and emotional response to injury gives way to a 
complex series of changes as stimulation continues (see the sec-
tion on Types of Pain below). Nociception changes over time. 
Chronic pain may represent ongoing injury or an upregulation 
of the sensory system such that, in the absence of injury, the 
nociceptive signals continue. The patient cannot consciously 
tell the difference between these 2 states.
Although PLWH may experience novel types of injury due 
to HIV-related inflammation and infection, their pain does not 
essentially differ from acute pain due to other causes. Pain that 
is predominantly inflammatory will typically respond to inhi-
bition of inflammation with steroids and nonsteroidal antiin-
flammatory medications. Other injuries respond to analgesic 
medications, such as acetaminophen, which ameliorate the 
central experience of pain, and to opioids, which diminish the 
affective response at lower doses and block the sensory ele-
ments of pain at higher doses (although both effects can occur 
at all doses).
Management discussed in these guidelines is directed at 
promoting well-being and engaging PLWH appropriately in 
the treatments and rehabilitation interventions, which are sup-
ported in the literature for chronic, noncancer pain. There are 
large limitations in the literature on the management of chronic 
pain, including few studies conducted in PLWH, heterogene-
ous diagnostic criteria, and high rates of placebo responses that 
potentially obscure beneficial treatments. Recommendations 
for the detailed treatment of acute pain are beyond the scope 
of this guideline but have been extensively reviewed in other 
guidelines [19, 20]. Persons living with HIV and malignant pain 
should be managed according to cancer pain guidelines.
Types of Pain
Chronic pain or pain that lasts longer than 3–6 months persists 
beyond the typical period of direct tissue injury and repair. The 
pathophysiology of chronic pain in most conditions is not well 
understood but is an area of active investigation. Many chronic 
pain syndromes are associated with substantial functional and 
structural changes, or plasticity, in the central nervous system, 
resulting from altered sensory and nerve function (eg, upregu-
lation of nociception) at every level of the nervous system [21, 
22]. Both afferent and efferent signals can be altered, including 
sympathetic nervous system activation, hormonal regulation, 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/10/e1/4157299 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Pain Management in People with HIV • CID 2017:65 (15 November) • e7
and stress-axis signals [23]. Many forms of pain are the result 
of denervation rather than overstimulation. This deprivation 
of coherent sensory information can result in the production 
of pain that conveys incorrect messages. On functional imag-
ing studies in persons with chronic pain, even with different 
pain locations and etiologies, a group of cortical and subcortical 
brain regions referred to as the “pain matrix” often show abnor-
malities, and changes in the motor and sensory homunculus 
also are seen [22]. In addition, disuse of painful body parts may 
result in pain upregulation, so that over time the pain prevents 
activity and the lack of activity increases the pain. Within the 
types of chronic pain syndromes, model subtypes of pain have 
been described and are receiving research attention. The 2 most 
common types of pain found in PLWH are neuropathic and 
nonneuropathic (most specifically, musculoskeletal) [24–26]. 
While all of the varied types of chronic pain that PLWH may 
experience cannot be covered in sufficient detail here, a brief 
description of some of them follows. The reader is referred 
to the evidence summaries below and the associated litera-
ture for a more in-depth review of the treatment for particular 
syndromes.
Musculoskeletal Pain
Musculoskeletal pain, especially osteoarthritis and nonspecific 
low back pain (ie, low back pain that cannot be linked to a spe-
cific etiology), is common among PLWH, [24]. However, few 
studies have addressed the treatment of musculoskeletal pain 
in PLWH. Until such studies are conducted, the recommended 
management of chronic musculoskeletal pain in PLWH is the 
same as for persons living without HIV. The reader is referred 
to the extensive reviews and guidelines that have been written 
by Chou and others on the evaluation and treatment of mus-
culoskeletal pain in the general population for more detailed 
information [19, 27–32].
Neuropathic Pain
Neuropathic pain is common in patients with ongoing nerve 
injury from diabetes, inflammation, toxins, and infectious 
agents such as HIV [33, 34]. Peripheral sensory neuropathic 
pain is described as a “cold burning pain” (ie, dysesthetic pain) in 
a glove-and-stocking distribution that starts distally, with lower 
extremities more affected than upper extremities. Typically there 
is an increased painful response to light touch (ie, allodynia) that 
correlates with mostly small nerve fiber pathology.
HIV-associated neuropathic pain has a prevalence of 
between 13% and >50% and is comprised of at least 2 often 
coexisting and clinically indistinguishable distal sensory pol-
yneuropathies associated with HIV disease itself and associ-
ated with antiretroviral treatment (ART) [35–38]. A significant 
association between plasma HIV-1 RNA levels and severity of 
HIV-associated distal symmetrical polyneuropathy has been 
observed in numerous cohort studies [39–41]. Neuropathic 
pain associated with the older nucleoside analogues, stavudine, 
didanosine, and zalcitabine, has been attributed to mitochon-
drial toxicity, although other mechanisms such as chemokine 
receptors also may be involved [42, 43]. Neuropathic pain in 
PLWH also can occur in the setting of alcohol use disorders, 
syphilis, isoniazid treatment, vitamin deficiencies (vitamin B6, 
B12, folate), thyroid dysfunction, multiple myeloma, and dia-
betes mellitus, which has been increasing in prevalence among 
PLWH. Post-herpetic neuralgia, a complication of varicella zos-
ter infection, is another form of neuropathic pain frequently 
encountered in the HIV clinic. It can be incapacitating in 
patients with advanced HIV disease.
Denervation Pain
Phantom limb pain is a model for denervation pain in which 
the pain is experienced at a site localized to the missing body 
part. Interruption of nociceptors has been shown to result in 
chronic pain in some cases. This “pathological pain” occurs in 
the absence of ongoing injury. Although the mechanism is still 
unclear, new data suggest that phantom limb pain may result 
from exaggerated input from the dorsal root ganglia that used 
to innervate the limb [44].
Complex Regional Pain Syndrome
Complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS), also called sym-
pathetically maintained pain, causalgia, or reflex sympathetic 
dystrophy (RSD), usually follows an injury, often minor, and 
is described as excruciating and made worse by touch or stim-
ulation. The pain gradually increases in intensity and size in 
the affected limb, sometimes spreading to the contralateral 
limb. Sympathetic dysregulation is proposed to play a role 
[45]. Little is known about its prevalence, but the condition 
has been reported in PLWH [46]. CRPS can be associated with 
hair loss, tissue changes, and skin discoloration at the site of the 
pain. Although some pain syndromes have noticeable placebo 
response rates, in a recent 2015 systematic review, CRPS did 
not have noticeable placebo analgesia except at very early time 
points (eg, 15 to 30 minutes) [47]. The reader is referred to a 
review by Freedman and colleagues for more information about 
this type of pain [48].
A variety of central pain syndromes, including those asso-
ciated with direct spinal cord, thalamic, or cortical injury and/
or interruption of pain pathways in the brain, are rarely seen in 
PLWH and are reviewed elsewhere [49, 50].
Fibromyalgia (Systemic Exertion Intolerance Disease, Myalgic 
Encephalopathy)
Fibromyalgia, or chronic fatigue syndrome, renamed myalgic 
encephalopathy (ME), and proposed renaming as “systemic 
exertion intolerance disease” by the Institute of Medicine 
(IOM) in 2015, is a serious, complex, multisystem disease; it is a 
controversial diagnosis that remains poorly described. ME has 
been reported as fibromyalgia in PLWH and can severely affect 
quality of life and function [51]. A multidisciplinary team with 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/10/e1/4157299 by guest on 02 June 2019
 e8 • CID 2017:65 (15 November) • Bruce et al
a rehabilitative approach has been recommended for manag-
ing this condition; however, high placebo responses and lack of 
diagnostic clarity have made clear treatment recommendations 
for this condition difficult [52]. Many authors have included 
these syndromes under the rubric of chronic noncancer pain, 
but are not addressed in this guideline. The reader is referred 
to the 2015 IOM report for additional information about this 
type of pain [53].
Foundational Principles in Chronic Pain Management
At the outset of any discussion on chronic pain in PLWH, it is 
paramount to assert that the chronic pain be initially assessed 
in the same manner as chronic pain in persons without HIV.
Regardless of HIV status, the experience of unaddressed 
chronic pain is demoralizing, decreases quality of life and func-
tion, and disrupts treatment adherence for health conditions, 
such as HIV. At the conclusion of the 13th World Congress 
on Pain in 2010, the International Association for the Study 
of Pain adopted a declaration that access to pain management, 
which includes assessment and treatment, is a fundamental 
human right [54]. Underlying this declaration is the principle 
that every medical provider has a duty to listen to and reason-
ably respond to a patient’s report of pain, and every person 
deserves to have his or her pain reasonably managed by ade-
quately trained healthcare professionals [55]. In keeping with 
the international right to pain management, the World Health 
Organization’s 19th List of Essential Medicines (those that sat-
isfy the priority healthcare needs of the population) includes 
the following analgesics: aspirin, ibuprofen, acetaminophen, 
codeine, and morphine. Methadone and buprenorphine, which 
can be used for the treatment of opioid use disorders as well as 
chronic pain, are also listed.
Barriers to adequate pain management have been attributed 
to cultural, societal, religious, and political attitudes, including 
the acceptance of torture, as well as biomedical models of dis-
ease that focus on pathophysiology instead of quality of life [55].
The biopsychosocial model of medicine is an important con-
ceptual framework for understanding, assessing, and effectively 
managing chronic pain [56]. This model emphasizes the multi-
dimensional nature of chronic pain, which includes not only the 
structural pathophysiology of nociception but also the dynamic 
interplay of a patient’s thoughts, emotions, behaviors, and socio-
cultural influences [57, 58]. Because chronic pain’s relationship to 
affective distress states and functional limitations are key features, 
comprehensive interdisciplinary programs that use a biopsycho-
social approach aim to increase self-management of pain, improve 
pain-coping resources, reduce pain-related disability, and reduce 
emotional stress. Clinically effective and cost-effective programs 
typically rely on teams that consist of primary care providers and 
nurses, physical and occupational therapists, psychologists, psy-
chiatrists, and case managers [59]. Multimodal treatments com-
bine analgesics, physical therapy, and behavioral and psychological 
therapy. Rather than seeking to eliminate the locus of pain, the 
interdisciplinary team addresses biological, behavioral, and social 
factors to achieve functional restoration [58].
Empathy and patient-centered communication skills are 
essential to the management of chronic problems in any patient 
population. At the individual provider level, a therapeutic 
relationship with the patient is a fundamental component of 
chronic pain management. A large body of literature stresses 
the importance of patient beliefs about the future successful 
control of the pain and the medical provider’s role as a part-
ner in addressing the pain. The medical provider can build a 
therapeutic partnership with the patient using behaviors that 
build trust and demonstrate acceptance, such as reflective lis-
tening, believing a patient’s expression of pain, and regularly 
recording detailed historical information and the results of 
assessments for each pain described. Recognizing that pain is 
subjective, verbal acknowledgment of a patient’s experiences 
is known to be helpful when patients encounter difficult prob-
lems. Understanding how pain impacts a patient’s daily life is 
an important step toward being able to address the symptom. 
Summarizing and clarifying “next steps” also helps to reassure 
the patient that together you are actively addressing the issue.
Medical providers should clarify and document the presence 
of specific HIV-related pain syndromes to guide future pain 
management, discuss the full management strategy with the 
patient, manage expectations about the effectiveness of various 
pain management strategies, and document the discussion in 
the medical record.
Medical providers should understand the basic concepts of 
pain management, including when specific treatments should 
be recommended, their potential risks and benefits, and the 
adverse drug reactions and drug–drug interactions that can 
occur when pharmacotherapies are prescribed. Medical pro-
viders should maintain a nonjudgmental perspective and broad 
differential diagnosis when managing unexpected patient 
behaviors. For example, the phenomenon of “pseudo-addic-
tion” (see evidence summary for recommendation 26 below) 
may explain the behavior of patients who appear to be hoarding 
their medications or requesting early refills.
Pain is exacerbated by other psychosocial variables such as 
stressful events that include, but are not limited to, depression, 
a history of sexual abuse, trauma, and post-traumatic stress 
disorder [60]. Appropriate screening and treatment for these 
factors are a requisite for the success of a comprehensive treat-
ment plan for chronic pain. All chronic pain patients should be 
screened for unhealthy substance use. If identified, their pain 
management may require consultation with and concomitant 
treatment from an addiction specialist. Higher complexity and 
co-occurring disorders, however, should not delay the primary 
HIV provider’s systematic evaluation and treatment of chronic 
pain symptoms. A systematic, general approach is described 
below in recommendations 1 and 2.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/10/e1/4157299 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Pain Management in People with HIV • CID 2017:65 (15 November) • e9
The presence of chronic pain is not a contraindication to the 
initiation of ART. Although poor ART adherence has been doc-
umented in patients with severe neuropathic pain [61], univer-
sal ART is the standard of care, and the treatment of chronic 
pain is critical to improvement of quality of life and medication 
adherence [55, 62–66]. Furthermore, ART may improve neu-
ropathic pain as there is an association between plasma HIV-1 
RNA concentration and the severity of neuropathic pain [67].
Drug–drug interactions of varying clinical significance exist 
between all ART classes and opioid analgesics, such as metha-
done, buprenorphine, meperidine, and fentanyl. Opioid analge-
sic requires closer monitoring in PLWH on ART [68].
Summarized below are the panel’s recommendations for the 
evaluation and management of chronic, nonmalignant pain in 
PLWH.
METHODOLOGY
Practice Guidelines
“Practice guidelines are systematically developed statements 
to assist practitioners and patients in making decisions about 
appropriate health care for specific clinical circumstances” [69]. 
Attributes of good guidelines include validity, reliability, repro-
ducibility, clinical applicability, clinical flexibility, clarity, multi-
disciplinary process, review of evidence, and documentation [69].
Panel Composition
The Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) Standards 
and Practice Guidelines Committee (SPGC) collaborated with 
partner organizations to convene a panel of 10 experts in HIV, 
pain, pharmacology, psychiatry, palliative care, and addiction 
medicine with a goal of developing recommendations for clini-
cal practice for this complex patient population. The panel rep-
resented diverse geographic areas, pediatric and adult healthcare 
providers, and several specialties and organizations including 
the HIV Medical Association (HIVMA), the American Society 
of Addiction Medicine (ASAM), the Association for Medical 
Education and Research on Substance Abuse (AMERSA), 
and the American Academy of Hospice Palliative Medicine 
(AAHPM).
Process Overview and Consensus Development Based on 
Evidence
Panel subgroups reviewed the initial literature search, selected 
references, evaluated evidence, drafted recommendations, and 
summarized the evidence for each section. The evidence eval-
uation process was based on the IDSA Handbook on Clinical 
Practice Guideline Development, which involves a systematic 
weighting of the quality of evidence and the grade of recom-
mendation using the GRADE system (Figure 1) [1–4, 70, 71].
Drafts were circulated among panel members for com-
mentary. The drafts were discussed on 10 occasions by tel-
econference or in-person meeting. Feedback from 3 external 
peer reviewers and endorsing organizations was obtained and 
used to modify the document. The guideline was reviewed 
and endorsed by representatives of the American Academy of 
Hospice Palliative Medicine (AAHPM) and the HIV Medical 
Association (HIVMA). The guideline was also reviewed and 
approved by the IDSA SPGC and the Board of Directors (BOD).
Literature Review and Analysis
The authors of this guideline performed a review of the liter-
ature by examining the treatment of chronic noncancer pain 
in patients with HIV. The search, for the period from 1966 to 
2016, included Ovid, PubMed, Medline, and Google Scholar 
for articles that contained HIV and 1 or more of the following 
terms: neuropathic pain, chronic pain, substance use, urine tox-
icology, substance use disorder, mental illness, depression, and 
pain treatment.
Guideline and Conflict of Interest
All panel members complied with IDSA policy on conflict of 
interest, which requires disclosure of any financial or other 
interest that might be construed as constituting an actual, 
potential, or apparent conflict. They were provided IDSA’s 
conflict of interest disclosure statement and asked to identify 
ties to companies that develop products that might be affected 
by promulgation of the guideline. Information was requested 
regarding employment, consultancies, stock ownership, hono-
raria, research funding, expert testimony, and membership on 
company advisory committees. The panel decided on a case-by-
case basis whether a conflict should limit member participation. 
Potential conflicts are listed in the Acknowledgments section.
Revision Dates
At annual intervals, the panel chair, SPGC liaison advisor, and 
SPGC chair will determine the need for guideline revisions by 
reviewing current literature. If necessary, the entire panel will 
be reconvened. When appropriate, the panel will recommend 
revisions to the IDSA SPGC, board, and other collaborating 
organizations for review and approval.
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR MANAGEMENT AND 
TREATMENT OF PERSONS LIVING WITH HUMAN 
IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS AND CHRONIC PAIN
I. What is the recommended approach to screening and ini-
tial assessment for chronic pain in persons living with human 
immunodeficiency virus?
Recommendations
1. 
All PLWH should receive, at minimum, the following 
standardized screening for chronic pain: How much 
bodily pain have you had during the last week? (none, 
very mild, mild, moderate, severe, very severe) and 
Do you have bodily pain that has lasted for more than 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/10/e1/4157299 by guest on 02 June 2019
 e10 • CID 2017:65 (15 November) • Bruce et al
3 months? (strong, low). Remark: A response of moderate 
pain or more during the last week combined with bodily 
pain for more than 3 months can be considered a positive 
screen result.
2. 
For persons who screen positive for chronic pain, an initial 
assessment should take a biopsychosocial approach that 
includes an evaluation of the pain’s onset and duration, 
intensity and character, exacerbating and alleviating fac-
tors, past and current treatments, underlying or co-occur-
ring disorders and conditions, and the effect of pain on 
physical and psychological function. This should be fol-
lowed by a physical examination, psychosocial evaluation, 
and diagnostic workup to determine the potential cause of 
the pain (strong, very low). Remark: A multidimensional 
instrument such as the brief pain inventory (BPI) or the 
3-item patient health questionnaire (PEG; used to assess 
average pain intensity [P], interference with enjoyment of 
life [E], and interference with general activity [G]) can be 
used for pain assessments.
3. 
Medical providers should monitor the treatment of 
chronic pain in PLWH, with periodic assessment of pro-
gress on achieving functional goals and documentation of 
pain intensity, quality of life, adverse events, and adher-
ent vs aberrant behaviors (strong, very low). Remark: 
Reassessments should be conducted at regular intervals and 
after each change or initiation in therapy has had an ade-
quate amount of time to take effect.
Evidence Summary
Screening all patients for pain in a systematic fashion is recom-
mended. Although a specific screening measure in HIV clin-
ical settings has not been validated, Landmark and colleagues 
evaluated 2 screening questions (see Recommendation 1) in 
6419 patients in the general population of which 3364 (52%) 
completed all assessments. Those 2 questions had a sensitivity 
of 80% and specificity of 90% to establish chronic pain when 
patients report at least moderate pain in the last week and 
report they have had pain lasting more than 6 months [72].
Figure 1. Approach and implications to rating the quality of evidence and strength of recommendations using the GRADE (grading of recommendations assessment, 
development, and evaluation) methodology (unrestricted use of the figure granted by the US GRADE Network).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/10/e1/4157299 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Pain Management in People with HIV • CID 2017:65 (15 November) • e11
When a patient screens positive for chronic pain, the initial 
evaluation should focus not only on ascertaining the etiology 
and collecting a detailed history of the intensity and charac-
ter of the pain, with intensity measured using a pain scale or a 
visual analog scale, but also on pain-related interference with 
function [73]. Since pain is subjective, it is important to listen 
to and accept the patient-described symptoms and to ask about 
other symptoms or unpleasant experiences associated with the 
pain (eg, fatigue, nausea, anxiety, depression). The pain’s impact 
on physical and emotional function, such as activities of daily 
living (eg, an inability to walk a block due to leg pain), or mood 
may affect a patient’s quality of life more than the pain’s severity 
[74]. In addition, PLWH often have multiple types and locations 
of pain, each of which should be addressed. Because persons 
with advanced HIV disease may have many different symptoms 
of pain, this comprehensive history is particularly important, as 
the symptom may be the key to diagnosing the etiology.
The BPI is a multidimensional pain assessment tool that is 
widely used in part or as a whole at pain specialty clinics and in 
HIV research [16, 75, 76]. Another commonly used pain assess-
ment tool is the McGill pain questionnaire. Both tools, however, 
are time consuming and may be impractical for assessing pain 
in busy HIV clinical settings [77, 78]. The ultra-brief, 3-item 
PEG is used to assess average pain intensity (P), interference 
with enjoyment of life (E), and interference with general activ-
ity (G) in the past week using 3 visual analog scales [79]. The 
PEG was comparable to the BPI in initial validation studies 
conducted with veterans and primary care patients with chronic 
pain. Due to its brevity, the PEG may be easier to implement in 
a busy HIV clinical practice.
As in the evaluation of any clinical problem, chronic pain 
requires focused physical and psychosocial examinations and 
diagnostic testing as indicated. Only after the initial pain assess-
ment is conducted, can a treatment plan be developed in collab-
oration with the patient. Reassessments should be conducted at 
regular intervals and after an adequate period of time for each 
change or initiation in therapy to take effect.
II. 
What is the recommended general approach to 
the management of persons living with human 
immunodeficiency virus and chronic pain?
Recommendations
4. 
HIV medical providers should develop and participate 
in interdisciplinary teams to care for patients with com-
plex chronic pain and especially for patients with co-oc-
curring substance use or psychiatric disorders (strong, 
very low).
5. 
For patients whose chronic pain is controlled, any new 
report of pain should be carefully investigated and may 
require added treatments or adjustments in the dose of 
pain medications while the new problem is being evaluated 
(strong, high). Remark: Providers should clearly document 
the new symptom and consult, if possible, with a provider 
experienced with pain management in PLWH or with a pain 
specialist.
Evidence Summary
As with other chronic diseases, chronic pain management 
requires repeated evaluations over time. A holistic, multimodal 
approach that involves a comprehensive interdisciplinary 
team is recommended for all persons with chronic pain. This 
approach may include patient education on the neurophysiol-
ogy of pain, physical therapy, occupational therapy, and behav-
ioral therapy [80]. While physical therapy is often prescribed 
for individuals with pain, the multifactorial nature of many 
pain syndromes complicates referral to physical therapy and its 
outcomes.
The goal of treatment is to restore function. When patients 
understand the pathophysiology of their pain, they are better 
able to manage their pain and to understand the goals of pain 
management. In a small randomized, controlled trial, Moseley 
and colleagues found that education on pain neurophysiology 
improved physical performance and pain cognitions in patients 
with chronic low back pain and suggested that this kind of 
patient education be included in a wider pain management 
approach. However, the sample size was small and the patients 
were not identified as having HIV [81].
Pain assessments should focus on achieving functional goals, 
decreasing pain severity, improving quality of life, and identi-
fying and addressing any treatment-related adverse events or 
behaviors (eg, adherent vs aberrant) that alter the risk–benefit 
of the treatment.
A new report of pain by a patient being treated for chronic 
pain must be reevaluated. Common misconceptions by provid-
ers are that an existing chronic pain treatment is sufficient to 
ameliorate a new pain symptom or that addition of an opioid 
analgesic to an existing regimen will cause respiratory depres-
sion. For the patient whose pain was previously controlled with 
an opioid, a new pain may raise fears that a patient has developed 
an opioid addiction [82]. Healthcare providers should deter-
mine whether a new painful symptom is related to worsening 
of current pathology or the development of new pathology (eg, 
new opportunistic infection, an adverse event related to other 
medications, or another comorbid condition) [83]; is related to 
failure of a current analgesic, such as “end-of-dose failure” or 
when a patient develops tolerance to an opioid and requires an 
increase in overall dose; the new pain is not responsive to the 
current treatment and the patient requires management with 
a more effective approach; or whether an intercurrent event in 
the patient’s life has interfered with the patient’s usual ability to 
self-manage pain. In this latter case, it may be helpful to have 
the patient discuss the life event further with a behavioral health 
specialist (eg, social worker) or a nurse to review both the event 
and its impact on the pain [82].
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/10/e1/4157299 by guest on 02 June 2019
 e12 • CID 2017:65 (15 November) • Bruce et al
III. What is the recommended therapeutic approach to chronic 
pain in persons with human immunodeficiency virus at the end 
of life?
Recommendations
6. 
As PLWH age, their pain experience may change as other 
age-related and HIV-related comorbidities develop. It is 
recommended that the clinician address these changes in 
pain experience in the context of this disease progression 
(strong, moderate).
7. 
Critical to maintaining pain control, it is recommended 
that medical providers and an integrated multidisciplinary 
team engage in frequent communication with the patient 
and the patient’s support system (eg, family, caregiver) 
(strong, low). Remark: Communications should occur at a 
health literacy level appropriate for the patient and patient’s 
support system. It may be necessary to schedule longer 
appointment times to allow both patients and providers to 
establish and clarify the goals of care.
8. 
Consultation with a palliative care specialist to assist with 
pain management and nonpain symptoms and to address 
goals of care is recommended (strong, low).
9. 
Patients with advanced illness require a support system 
beyond the clinic, and timely referrals for palliative or hos-
pice care are recommended. The primary care provider 
must remain in communication with the patient and fam-
ily through the end of life to ensure accurate continuity 
and to preclude a sense of abandonment (strong, low).
Evidence Summary
While HIV mortality has decreased dramatically with effec-
tive antiretroviral therapy, other serious comorbidities such as 
cancers, end-stage liver disease (often due to untreated chronic 
viral hepatitis), and tuberculosis still claim the lives of PLWH in 
many countries [84]. Patients with advanced disease are likely 
to be aware of their own deteriorating status and look to the 
primary HIV team for overall direction of care and clarification 
regarding changes in prognosis. Pain control is often impacted 
by psychosocial and spiritual concerns of the patient and his/
her support system. When patients exhibit signs of clinical dete-
rioration, regardless of the etiology, it is useful to review the 
expected goals and outcomes of ongoing care with the patient 
[85]. This is an ideal time for a family meeting that involves 
other members of the clinical team such as nurses and social 
workers to ensure uniformity of the goals of care [86]. This is 
also the time to review health power of attorney for the patient, 
update physician orders for life-sustaining treatment, and doc-
ument these clearly in the patient’s medical record. Consider 
referring the patient for social work or legal assistance in mak-
ing an advance directive. Provider support throughout the 
course of the disease is meaningful for both the patient and his/
her support system, and effective communication can prevent 
unnecessary hospital admissions.
Patients with chronic pain and a deteriorating clinical status 
may have specific needs such as changing transportation modes 
and increased frequency of medical visits. If the patient’s dis-
ease process and/or pain are no longer controllable, it may be 
prudent to involve a palliative care team. Factors that impact 
effective referral include planning and timing of referrals, inter-
professional variations in perceptions and reasons for delayed 
or difficult referrals, and cross-disciplinary communication 
[87]. The patient and family may benefit from alternative ther-
apies such as music therapy, massage, or hypnosis that can be 
applied in the home [88, 89]. If there is a history of past addic-
tion, staff should be educated about appropriate pain treatment 
in the context of addiction in order to prevent the undertreat-
ment of pain, which may be caused by a fear of fueling or rekin-
dling addictive behaviors [90].
Pain management guidelines should be followed regardless 
of the patient’s prognosis [91]. If the primary physician has 
cared for the patient over time, the patient and family will be 
reassured if that provider remains involved. Recognition of 
the provider’s need to have positive closure with the patient is 
also important. Such communication might include an appre-
ciation for the opportunity to care for the patient, which can 
be shared by recalling an event or interaction that allows the 
patient to know that she or he has made an impact on the pro-
vider’s practice. Unexamined emotions can lead to provider 
burnout and depression that, if unaddressed, could compro-
mise patient care [92–94]. Additionally, other staff members 
should be encouraged to share a story about the patient dur-
ing a staff meeting. This will assist staff in coping with a sense 
of loss when the patient is no longer attending appointments 
regularly.
IV. What are the recommended nonpharmacological treat-
ments for chronic pain in persons living with human 
immunodeficiency virus?
Recommendations
10. Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is recommended for 
chronic pain management (strong, moderate). Remark: 
CBT promotes patient acceptance of responsibility for change 
and the development of adaptive behaviors (eg, exercise) 
while addressing maladaptive behaviors (eg, avoiding exer-
cise due to fears of pain).
11. Yoga is recommended for the treatment of chronic neck/
back pain, headache, rheumatoid arthritis, and general 
musculoskeletal pain (strong, moderate).
12. Physical and occupational therapy are recommended for 
chronic pain (strong, low).
13. Hypnosis is recommended for neuropathic pain (strong, 
low).
14. Clinicians might consider a trial of acupuncture for chronic 
pain (weak, moderate). Values and preferences: This recom-
mendation places a relatively high value on the reduction of 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/10/e1/4157299 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Pain Management in People with HIV • CID 2017:65 (15 November) • e13
symptoms and few undesirable effects. Remark: Evidence to 
date is available only for acupuncture in the absence of ami-
triptyline and among PLWH with poorer health in the era 
before highly active antiretroviral therapy.
Evidence Summary
Many nonpharmacological treatments that address different 
types of chronic pain have been examined, although most stud-
ies were conducted in persons without HIV. We discuss treat-
ments for which an evidence base has been established in the 
general population.
CBT is a form of psychotherapy that helps individuals to 
consider the accuracy and usefulness of their thoughts in order 
to change behaviors. This is done by identifying and correcting 
maladaptive thoughts and cognitive distortions [95]. CBT for 
chronic pain promotes an individual’s acceptance of respon-
sibility for change and the development of adaptive behaviors 
(eg, engagement in physical activity), while addressing their 
maladaptive counterparts (eg, avoiding physical activity due to 
fear of pain or reinjury) [96, 97]. Additionally, CBT can be used 
to develop coping strategies for anxiety related to current pain 
and/or the development of new or exacerbated pain over time.
Pain self-management (PSM) programs are CBT-based inter-
ventions that foster the development of behaviors that focus 
on the self-management of pain rather than its cognitive and 
behavioral components. PSM interventions have been devel-
oped for specific chronic pain syndromes, including low back 
pain, arthritis, and fibromyalgia. Despite the diversity of these 
pain conditions, protocols are often similar and address behav-
iors that are important in all chronic pain conditions. Numerous 
randomized, controlled trials (RCTs) and metaanalyses of effec-
tive PSM interventions in HIV-negative populations have been 
published [98–101].
Chronic pain psycho-education is a common component of 
PSM interventions. It is widely accepted as an important aspect 
of early patient-centered chronic pain discussions [102]. The 
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration 
recommends that the following information be included in 
such discussions: the nature of chronic pain as a chronic dis-
ease, which may have periods of improvement and periods of 
worsening; reasonable treatment expectations; discussion of 
the importance of both pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic 
treatment components; risks and benefits of any treatments 
prescribed; and how to safely take medications when they are 
prescribed.
There have been 2 small CBT-based chronic pain intervention 
studies in individuals with HIV. One consisted of a single-arm 
psychologist-administered CBT intervention in HIV-infected 
individuals with any chronic pain diagnosis; the study demon-
strated modest effects on pain and functional outcomes [103]. 
An earlier randomized trial that was focused on peripheral 
neuropathy showed greater improvement in individuals who 
received CBT than in those who received supportive psycho-
therapy [104]. Although both studies were conducted in PLWH, 
neither was tailored to PLWH and both studies suffered from 
poor adherence. Neither intervention has undergone further 
investigation.
Yoga has also been shown to improve the quality of life in 
PLWH with pain [105]. In a randomized, controlled open-la-
bel study, 61 healthy PLWH performed Sudarshan Kriya yoga 
or received the standard of care. Individuals in the yoga arm 
performed yoga once a week for 12 weeks. The validated World 
Health Organization Quality of Life-HIV Brief tool was used to 
assess quality of life [105]. This tool examines 6 domains, includ-
ing a physical domain that contains pain, physical botheration, 
daily energy, and sleep. The overall quality of life increased by 
6% (P = .016) and the physical domain increased by 12% (P = 
.004). The researchers were unable to determine the proportion 
of improvement in the physical domain related to pain relief 
vs change in physical botheration, daily energy, or sleep [105].
Several studies, including 2 metaanalyses, have evaluated 
yoga’s impact on pain in a variety of patient populations, includ-
ing PLWH. One metaanalysis of 16 studies found that yoga 
interventions had a positive impact on pain control in people 
without HIV with a variety of disease states, including chronic 
low back pain, migraine, and neck pain, as well as associated 
pain, anxiety, depression, and functional disability [106]. Twelve 
of these studies were randomized. The visual analog scale (VAS) 
was the most common tool used to assess the outcome varia-
ble of interest. For all pertinent outcome data, a standardized 
mean difference (SMD) and standard errors (SEs) were used 
to demonstrate the effects of yoga. An SMD less than 0 indi-
cated superiority of the intervention group, with SMD less than 
−0.5 as clinically relevant. The range of SMD among all studies 
was −0.20 to −1.34, with an estimated overall treatment effect 
at SMD = −0.74 (P < .0001). A subsection of the metaanalysis 
looked at studies that used the VAS as the primary outcome. 
This subsection had a weighted mean difference of 12 mm on a 
100-mm scale (P < .001). Two additional RCTs were published 
in 2013 subsequent to the metaanalysis that also showed a ben-
efit of yoga for neck pain [107, 108].
There is some preliminary evidence for the use of hypno-
sis in treating neuropathic pain in PLWH, as well as chronic 
widespread pain and chronic low back pain in persons without 
HIV [109–111]. Dorfman and colleagues studied hypnosis in 36 
PLWH with distal sensory polyneuropathy (HIV-DSP) [109]. 
The patients were given instructions and CDs for performing 
self-hypnosis. They were allowed to continue their previously 
prescribed pain management regimens and were evaluated on 
proper technique, difficulties with the process, and meeting 
patient-specific goals from hypnosis. Patients were evaluated 3 
times at 3-week intervals before and after hypnosis. They were 
administered the short-form McGill pain questionnaire. Scores 
decreased from 17.8 to 13.2 (P < .001). Seventy-two percent of 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/10/e1/4157299 by guest on 02 June 2019
 e14 • CID 2017:65 (15 November) • Bruce et al
patients had improved pain scores (mean pain reduction was 
44% in these patients). There was no difference in pain scores 
between patients who were taking pain medications and those 
who were not, and there was no improvement in pain in patients 
with anxiety. Study limitations included lack of a control group 
that received the standard of care without hypnosis and the fact 
that it was an unblinded study. Additionally, the long-term ben-
efits of hypnosis are unclear after 7 weeks.
Five studies have examined acupuncture to improve pain 
control in PLWH. Shlay conducted a multisite RCT of struc-
tured acupuncture, amitriptyline, or both compared with pla-
cebo in the era before highly active antiretroviral therapy and 
found no effect of acupuncture in reducing pain from HIV-
related peripheral neuropathy. However, the authors did not 
account for significant interactions between the 2 interventions. 
As a result, the raw data were reanalyzed by 1 of the original 
authors and reported in 2 publications. The first publication 
examined 125 patients randomized to standardized acupunc-
ture vs control points, amitriptyline (75 mg/d) vs placebo pill, 
or both for 14 weeks and were crossed in a 2 × 2 factorial design 
[112]. The main outcomes for the analysis were pain intensity 
and global pain relief at 6 and 14 weeks, attrition during the 
study, and mortality within 2 years of study completion. This 
analysis revealed that acupuncture and amitriptyline worked 
independently to reduce pain. Acupuncture had a greater effect 
in the absence of amitriptyline. Adverse events may be associ-
ated with a combination of the 2 treatments, as evidenced by 
a 10% mortality rate in acupuncture alone and 52.9% in acu-
puncture combined with amitriptyline. However, the original 
study was conducted in the era before effective combination 
antiretroviral therapy (ART). The second publication examined 
114 men with HIV-associated lower extremity peripheral neu-
ropathy and showed that acupuncture had a moderate effect 
on improving pain relief when compared to sham acupuncture 
[113]. However, acupuncture was no more effective than sham 
acupuncture in reducing pain intensity over the 14-week treat-
ment period for all patients, regardless of treatment condition. 
This lack of effect is likely due to large declines in pain intensity 
in both groups over the course of the study. Acupuncture, how-
ever, was associated with significantly lower attrition and mor-
tality rates, the latter especially in patients with poorer health 
assessed using the Karnofsky scale.
Anastasi and colleagues randomized 50 PLWH with a mod-
erate level of DSP pain to acupuncture with moxibustion (Acu/
Moxa) or sham acupuncture with placebo moxibustion (con-
trol) in 12 sessions over 6 weeks in a participant-and-evalua-
tor–blinded clinical trial [114]. The benefit of Acu/Moxa was 
superior to control at the first follow-up visit 3 weeks after the 
cessation of treatment (P < .05), and a trend toward superiority 
at the second and third follow-up visits was retained (P < .10).
Two small observational studies examined acupunc-
ture in PLWH with neuropathy. The first study was a pre-/
post-treatment case series of 21 PLWH who were enrolled for 
10 acupuncture treatments over 5 weeks [113]. The authors 
reported improvements in subjective pain related to peripheral 
neuropathy. The second study was an uncontrolled, observa-
tional study in 11 PLWH with ART-induced neuropathy [115]. 
Noninvasive skin electrodes were placed on leg acupuncture 
points, and low-voltage current was passed for 20 minutes daily 
for 30 days. The authors reported significant improvements 
between pre- and post-intervention assessments in function 
by Medical Outcomes Study-HIV questionnaire and on tibial 
H-reflex measurements from the right calf muscle.
V. What are the recommended pharmacological treatments 
for chronic neuropathic pain in persons living with human 
immunodeficiency virus?
Nonopioid Recommendations
15. Early initiation of antiretroviral therapy is recommended 
for the prevention and treatment of HIV-associated distal 
symmetric polyneuropathy (strong, low).
16. Gabapentin is recommended as a first-line oral pharmaco-
logical treatment of chronic HIV-associated neuropathic 
pain (strong, moderate). Remark: A typical adult regimen 
will titrate to 2400 mg per day in divided doses. Evidence 
also supports that gabapentin improves sleep scores; somno-
lence was reported by 80% of patients who received gabap-
entin (strong, low).
a. If patients have an inadequate response to gabapentin, 
clinicians might consider a trial of serotonin-no-
radrenaline reuptake inhibitors based on their effec-
tiveness in the general population (weak, moderate).
b. If patients have an inadequate response to gabapentin, 
clinicians might consider a trial of tricyclic antidepres-
sants (weak, moderate).
c. If patients have an inadequate response to gabapen-
tin, clinicians might consider a trial of pregabalin 
for patients with post-herpetic neuralgia (weak, 
moderate).
17. Capsaicin is recommended as a topical treatment for the 
management of chronic HIV-associated peripheral neu-
ropathic pain (strong, high). Remark: A single 30-minute 
application of an 8% dermal patch or cream administered at 
the site of pain can provide pain relief for at least 12 weeks. 
Erythema and pain are common side effects for which a 
60-minute application of 4% lidocaine can be applied and 
wiped off before applying capsaicin (strong, high).
18. Medical cannabis may be an effective treatment in appro-
priate patients (weak, moderate). Values and preferences: 
This recommendation places a relatively high value on the 
reduction of symptoms and a relatively low value on the 
legal implication of medical cannabis possession. Remark: 
Current evidence suggests medical cannabis may be more 
effective for patients with a history of prior cannabis use; the 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/10/e1/4157299 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Pain Management in People with HIV • CID 2017:65 (15 November) • e15
potential benefits of a trial of cannabis need to be balanced 
with the potential risks of neuropsychiatric adverse effects 
at higher doses, the harmful effects of smoked forms of can-
nabis in patients with preexisting severe lung disease, and 
addiction risk to patients with cannabis use disorder.
19. We recommend alpha lipoic acid (ALA) for the manage-
ment of chronic HIV-associated peripheral neuropathic 
pain (strong, low). Values and preferences: This recommen-
dation places a high value on providing tolerable medications 
that may be of some benefit in patients with difficult-to-treat 
neuropathic pain. Remark: Studies in patients with HIV are 
lacking; however, there is a growing body of literature of the 
benefits of ALA in patients with diabetic neuropathy.
20. We recommend against using lamotrigine to relieve HIV-
associated neuropathic pain (strong, moderate). Values 
and preferences: This recommendation places a relatively 
high value on the discontinuation of neurotoxic agents and 
on minimizing the incidence of lamotrigine-associated rash 
and places a relatively low value on the reduction in pain 
symptoms found in an earlier randomized controlled trial 
by the same authors. Remark: A benefit was only seen in 
patients currently receiving neurotoxic antiretroviral ther-
apy (ART), and we recommend discontinuing all neurotoxic 
ART.
Evidence Summary
In the era of less neurotoxic ART, early initiation of ART is rec-
ommended to decrease the risk of developing HIV-associated 
distal symmetric peripheral neuropathy (HIV-DSP). In longitu-
dinal cohort studies conducted throughout the HIV epidemic, 
an association of HIV-DSP with more advanced HIV disease 
has been observed [40, 41], and the incidence of HIV-DSP has 
decreased since effective combination ART was introduced [35]. 
In the Multicenter AIDS Cohort Study, in which 1604 PLWH 
were followed over a 10-year period (1985–1995), individuals 
with HIV RNA >10 000 copies/mL had a 2.3-fold (P = .008) 
greater hazard of sensory neuropathy than those with <500 cop-
ies/mL [40]. In the HIV Outpatient Study, a retrospective, lon-
gitudinal cohort analysis of 2515 persons of which 329 (13.1%) 
received a diagnosis of HIV-DSP between 1992 and 2003, non-
medication-related risk factors for HIV-DSP were age >40 years 
(adjusted odds ratio [aOR], 1.17), diabetes mellitus (aOR, 1.79), 
white race (aOR, 1.33), nadir CD4(+) T lymphocyte count <50 
cells/mm3 (aOR, 1.64), CD4(+) T lymphocyte count 50–199 
cells/mm3 (aOR, 1.40), and initial viral load >10 000 copies/mL 
(aOR, 1.44). The authors concluded that although host factors 
and signs of increased disease severity were associated with an 
increased risk of developing HIV-DSP during the initial expo-
sure to ART, immunity improved and the risk of HIV-DSP 
decreased with continued ART. Currently, the presence of sen-
sory neuropathic symptoms in a patient with untreated HIV is 
highly suggestive of HIV-DSP [38].
Systematic reviews of pharmacotherapies for neuropathic 
pain provide a broad overview of potential treatments that 
might be used in PLWH. Limitations in the literature, however, 
include the modest efficacy of active medications, large placebo 
responses, heterogeneous diagnostic criteria for neuropathic 
pain, inadequate classification of patients in clinical trials, and 
controversial dichotomous outcome measures for clinically 
meaningful pain reduction or improvement that have not been 
validated for chronic neuropathic pain [116, 117]. With these 
limitations in mind, a 2010 systematic review of 44 studies in 
PLWH with associated sensory neuropathy found no superior-
ity over placebo in the 14 included randomized, controlled trials 
(RCTs) that examined amitriptyline (100 mg/day), gabapentin 
(2.4 g/day), pregabalin (1200 mg/day), Prosaptide (16 mg/day), 
peptide-T (6 mg/day), acetyl-L-carnitine (1 g/day), mexiletine 
(600 mg/day), lamotrigine (600 mg/day), and topical capsaicin 
(0.075% 4 times per day). Evidence of efficacy was found only 
for topical capsaicin 8%, recombinant human nerve growth fac-
tor (which is clinically unavailable), and smoked cannabis [38].
Gabapentin. Gabapentin is recommended as a first-line oral 
pharmacological treatment of chronic HIV-associated neu-
ropathic pain. Possibly through central allodynic effects and 
inhibition of ectopic discharge activity from injured nerves, the 
anticonvulsant may reduce HIV-associated sensory neuropa-
thies. In a small, double-blind RCT by Hahn and colleagues, gab-
apentin was titrated to a maximum of 2400 mg/day over 4 weeks 
and found to improve visual analog scale measures of pain and 
median sleep scores [118]. Somnolence was reported by 80% of 
patients who received gabapentin. This study, however, had sev-
eral limitations. Only 26 patients enrolled (15 gabapentin and 11 
placebos) and the placebo group had a 29.8% reduction in pain 
on the visual analog scale, suggesting a high placebo response 
rate. Larger studies are needed in PLWH to improve the quality 
of evidence supporting this recommendation.
Antidepressants.  If patients have an inadequate response 
to gabapentin, clinicians might consider a trial of serotonin- 
norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) or tricyclic antide-
pressants, both of which have been studied for the treatment of 
neuropathic pain.
Duloxetine is a SNRI approved by the US Food and Drug 
Administration for major depressive disorders, urinary stress 
incontinence, and pain associated with diabetic peripheral 
neuropathy [119]. Harrison and colleagues compared the effec-
tiveness of duloxetine, methadone, and the combination of 
duloxetine–methadone with placebo for the treatment of pain-
ful HIV-associated polyneuropathies in a phase 2, randomized, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled, 4-period crossover multi-
center study (ACTG A5252) [120]. Only 15 patients enrolled 
with 8 completing the trial, making the study unsuccessful in 
answering this clinical question.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/10/e1/4157299 by guest on 02 June 2019
 e16 • CID 2017:65 (15 November) • Bruce et al
In 2007, Saarto and colleagues reviewed 60 RCTs in a 
Cochrane systematic review to examine the use of antidepres-
sants in the treatment of neuropathic pain. While evidence sup-
ported the use of amitriptyline, a tricyclic antidepressant, and 
venlafaxine, another SNRI, for the treatment of neuropathic 
pain due to other etiologies (eg, diabetes), evidence was lacking 
for HIV-associated neuropathy [121].
Phillips et al conducted another systematic review and 
metaanalysis in 2010 that focused on the clinical effective-
ness of pharmacological treatment of painful HIV-associated 
sensory neuropathy. Of 44 studies identified, 19 were RCTs 
and 2 examined amitriptyline [38]. These 2 RCTs enrolled 
270 PLWH and demonstrated that amitriptyline is no better 
than placebo in reducing painful HIV-related neuropathy 
[122, 123]. As discussed earlier (see Acupuncture section), the 
study of amitriptyline and acupuncture by Shlay had serious 
methodologic flaws [122], as they did not account for signif-
icant interactions between the interventions. When the raw 
data were reanalyzed, amitriptyline was helpful through week 
6, but by week 14, pain increased to the highest level of pain 
among the groups studied [123]. In the second study (ACTG 
242) [112], 145 PLWH were randomized to a double-blind, 
10-week trial of amitriptyline, mexiletine, or matching pla-
cebo. This study was terminated early after an interim review 
of results determined the study was unlikely to detect signifi-
cant differences between arms even with further enrollment. 
Analysis at the termination of the study showed no difference 
among the treatment groups in pain intensity between base-
line and final visits.
Pregabalin. There is a lack of evidence for the use of pre-
gabalin in the treatment of neuropathic pain in PLWH, 
except for those with post-herpetic neuralgia (see below). 
A double-blind RCT of pregabalin in 302 patients over 12 
weeks with a 3-month open-label extension demonstrated 
pregabalin was similar to placebo in reducing the pain inten-
sity of HIV-associated DSP as measured using the numeric 
pain rating scale [124]. In the study, doses of pregabalin 
could be titrated up to 600 mg/day in twice daily dosing. In 
a subsequent investigation, 377 patients were randomized 
to flexible-dose pregabalin (150–600 mg/day) or placebo in 
a single-blind, placebo lead-in, randomized, double-blind, 
parallel-group, placebo-controlled multinational trial for 
17 weeks with a 6-month open label extension study. The 
sponsor terminated both after a preplanned interim analysis 
indicated trial futility [125].
Capsaicin. Capsaicin is recommended as a topical treatment 
for the management of chronic HIV-associated peripheral neu-
ropathic pain. Three RCTs have examined capsaicin in persons 
with HIV-associated peripheral neuropathy. The first study 
by Paice and colleagues demonstrated no benefit of low-dose 
capsaicin (0.075% cream) compared to placebo [126]. However, 
interest in capsaicin persisted, and 2 studies examined a high-
er-dose (8%) dermal patch (NGX-4010). The first study by 
Simpson and colleagues reported on 307 patients randomized 
to the high-dose patch or to a control, low-dose patch (0.04%) 
[127]. Capsaicin was applied for 30, 60, or 90 minutes. Since 
capsaicin application is painful, lidocaine 4% was applied for 
60 minutes before capsaicin and was washed off prior to capsai-
cin application. Additionally, opioids were available at the onset 
of treatment, as needed, and patients could take hydrocodone 
with acetaminophen for up to 7 days post-capsaicin application. 
Patients were allowed to continue any chronic pain medications 
they were already taking; however, the specific medications 
allowed were not reported. Patients were followed for 12 weeks 
after the application of capsaicin to ascertain benefit. The pri-
mary outcome was a reduction in the mean numeric pain rating 
scale (NPRS) for the average pain level in the past 24 hours. 
Reduction in pain intensity was greater in the intervention arm 
throughout the 12-week study, with 31% of the active arm expe-
riencing >30% mean reduction on the NPRS compared to 14% 
of the controls (P = .007). After this 12-week study, patients 
were allowed to roll over into a 40-week open-label portion of 
the study where they could receive up to three 60-minute treat-
ments of NGX-4010. Of the 307 enrolled, 272 (89%) elected to 
continue in the open-label portion. Repeated treatments were 
tolerated with equivalent reductions in pain scores occurring 
regardless of the number of treatments received [39].
A second RCT was undertaken to confirm the previous study 
[128]. This study randomized 494 patients (332 to NGX-4010, 
162 to placebo). Capsaicin was applied for 30 or 60 minutes. 
This study failed to demonstrate a significant reduction in pain 
at either time point. This may be the result of a large reduction in 
pain among the 60-minute control group (30% reduction) com-
pared to the 30-minute control group (19% reduction). This dif-
ference prevented pooling of the control group data and reduced 
the study’s power to detect a significant difference in effect.
A subsequent integrated analysis that combined the data from 
both phase 3 studies described above demonstrated that a single 
30-minute application of NGX-4010 provides significant pain 
relief for a least 12 weeks in patients with HIV-associated distal 
sensory polyneuropathy [129]. More research is needed to ascer-
tain the frequency of reapplication, different doses, and duration 
of effect. In addition, patients and providers must be advised of 
the practical issues regarding the application of capsaicin, which 
is a local irritant. Gloves should be worn when placing the patch, 
and patients should use care to avoid contact with their eyes and 
genitalia until they have thoroughly washed their hands.
Cannabinoids.  Medical cannabis may be an effective treat-
ment for chronic neuropathic pain in appropriate patients. 
A growing body of literature suggests that cannabinoids 
have a role in the modulation of pain [130]. Two RCTs have 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/10/e1/4157299 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Pain Management in People with HIV • CID 2017:65 (15 November) • e17
examined cannabis for the treatment of HIV-associated neu-
ropathic pain. Abrams and colleagues randomized patients to 
either 3.56% tetrahydrocannabinol or placebo cigarettes, both 
items were smoked 3 times daily for 5 days [131]. Patients in 
this study were allowed to continue other concomitant medi-
cations (15 patients on gabapentin and 14 on opioids). A total 
of 50 (91%) patients completed the study. The primary out-
come measure was a reduction in pain intensity over the last 
24 hours along a visual analog scale administered daily. Pain 
was reduced by 34% in the smoked cannabis group compared 
to 17% in the placebo group (P = .03). Of the 25 randomized 
to cannabis, 13 (52%) patients had greater than 30% reduction 
in pain from baseline to the end of treatment compared with 
6 of 25 (24%) patients on placebo (P = .04). Despite this pos-
itive benefit, the study had 2 important limitations. First, all 
patients enrolled had prior cannabis exposure, and this may 
have created a selection bias toward individuals who benefited 
from cannabis treatment. Second, the requirement of prior use 
of cannabis likely limited the ability to blind the study partic-
ipants [131].
Ellis et al conducted a double-blind, single-group, place-
bo-controlled crossover study to examine smoked cannabis 
(concentration 1%–8% tetrahydrocannabinol) in patients with 
HIV-associated neuropathic pain refractory to at least 2 previ-
ous analgesics [132]. Patients were allowed to continue other 
concomitant medications (18 opioids, 10 nonsteroidal antiin-
flammatory drugs, 8 tricyclic antidepressants, and 18 anticon-
vulsants) [132]. After a baseline series of assessments, patients 
were randomized to placebo or cannabis, 4 times a day for 
5 days of dose titration. Patients had a 2-week washout phase 
and then repeated the 5-day dose titration with the alternative 
treatment. The primary outcome measure was the difference 
in the descriptor differential scale (DDS), a scale validated to 
measure pain intensity [133, 134]. Thirty-four patients were 
randomized, and 96% had prior exposure to cannabis. One 
patient without prior cannabis exposure developed an acute 
psychosis during the study and dropped out. Of the 28 patients 
who completed the study, the proportion with a pain reduction 
of >30% by the DDS was 0.46 among cannabis users vs 0.18 
among placebo (P = .043). As in the Abrams study, patients’ 
prior use of cannabis may have biased the study to those who 
had already perceived benefits from its use and limited the abil-
ity to blind patients to the intervention groups [132]. The evolv-
ing legal status of cannabis in the United States, the potential 
risk of neuropsychiatric adverse events in naive patients, and 
the risk of developing a cannabis use disorder are all considera-
tions that patients and providers should discuss before pursuing 
a trial of this treatment.
Alpha-lipoic acid. ALA is a medium-chain fatty acid derived 
from linoleic acid. Twenty-seven RCTs have demonstrated 
some benefit in the symptoms of diabetic neuropathy. A recent 
metaanalysis found that oral ALA dosing of 600 mg once daily 
was equivalent to intravenous infusions.
Lamotrigine. We recommend not using lamotrigine to relieve 
HIV-associated neuropathic pain. Lamotrigine, another anti-
convulsant, blocks voltage-sensitive sodium channels and 
inhibits the release of glutamate and aspartate. A small mul-
ticenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study 
in patients with painful HIV-associated neuropathy titrated 
lamotrigine to 300 mg/day to evaluate possible improvements 
in average neuropathic pain at 14 weeks compared to base-
line [135]. Of the 42 enrolled patients, 13 did not complete 
the study. Of the remaining 29 evaluable patients, 20 received 
placebo and 9 received lamotrigine. The reduction in average 
pain from baseline to week 14, however, was greater (P = .03) 
in the lamotrigine group (−0.55) than in the placebo group 
(−0.18), adjusting for baseline levels of pain. This finding 
prompted Simpson and colleagues to conduct a larger trial 
in which they randomized 227 HIV-infected patients in a 2:1 
fashion to lamotrigine or placebo, stratifying for patients cur-
rently on neurotoxic HIV therapy [136]. In the stratum that 
received neurotoxic HIV ART, 62 were randomized to lam-
otrigine and 30 to placebo, while in the stratum not on neu-
rotoxic HIV ART, 88 were assigned to lamotrigine and 47 to 
placebo. The primary outcome was a mean reduction in the 
Gracely pain intensity scale for the patient’s average pain after 
a 7-week titration and a 4-week maintenance phase. The target 
dose was 400 mg/day (200 mg twice daily) for individuals who 
were not receiving enzyme-inducing medications (eg, medica-
tions that impact CYP450 isoenzymes such as efavirenz) and 
600 mg/day for individuals who were receiving enzyme-in-
ducing medications. Lamotrigine was not superior to placebo 
by the primary outcome. However, a secondary outcome, the 
visual analog scale for pain intensity, did show a significant 
reduction in the arm that received neurotoxic HIV ART and 
assigned to lamotrigine compared to placebo. Although lam-
otrigine may reduce neuropathic pain intensity in patients 
on neurotoxic HIV ART, we recommend that all neurotoxic 
ART be discontinued first. The findings from these 2 studies 
were included as the only data on PLWH in 2 larger Cochrane 
reviews, which found no convincing evidence that lamotrigine 
was effective in treating neuropathic pain and fibromyalgia at 
doses of 200 to 400 mg daily [137, 138].
Post-herpetic neuralgia
Post-herpetic neuralgia (PHN), a complication of acute herpes 
zoster infection that can occur in people with HIV
, is distinct 
from painful distal symmetrical peripheral neuropathies associ-
ated with HIV
. A 2005 systematic review of analgesic therapies 
for adults with more than 3 months of PHN and unspecified HIV 
status identified 31 placebo-controlled RCTs from 62 studies that 
were included in a metaanalysis [139]. Analgesic efficacy, defined 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/10/e1/4157299 by guest on 02 June 2019
 e18 • CID 2017:65 (15 November) • Bruce et al
as a number needed to treat (NNT) of less than 5.00, was observed 
for tricyclic antidepressants (NNT = 2.64); certain opioids, includ-
ing oxycodone, extended-release morphine, and methadone 
(NNT = 2.67); gabapentin (NNT = 4.39); tramadol (NNT = 4.76); 
and pregabalin (NNT = 4.93). Topically administered lidocaine 
patches (NNT = 2) and capsaicin 0.075% (NNT = 3.26) were asso-
ciated with analgesic efficacy, but these studies were limited by low 
numbers of patient episodes. In addition, intrathecal therapy with 
lidocaine and methylprednisolone was associated with long-last-
ing analgesia (NNT = 1.13) [139]. The evidence summaries for 
specific pharmacological treatments are described below.
If patients have an inadequate response to gabapentin for 
post-herpetic neuralgia, clinicians might consider a trial 
of pregabalin. Pregabalin is a precursor to gabapentin. In 
2 parallel-group placebo-controlled trials of pregabalin for 
HIV-negative persons with PHN, pregabalin was found to 
be superior over placebo [140]. However, 1 of these studies 
excluded patients who had failed to respond to previous treat-
ment for PHN with gabapentin at doses ≥1200 mg/day [141]. 
Because of pregabalin’s efficacy in treating PHN, 2 trials of pre-
gabalin were conducted by Simpson and colleagues in PLWH, 
which was previously discussed.
Use of Opioids
21. For PLWH, opioid analgesics should not be prescribed as a 
first-line agent for the long-term management of chronic 
neuropathic pain (strong, moderate). Values and prefer-
ences: This recommendation places a relatively high value on 
the potential risk of pronociception through the upregulation 
of specific chemokine receptors, cognitive impairment, res-
piratory depression, endocrine and immunological changes, 
and misuse and addiction.
22. Clinicians may consider a time-limited trial of opioid 
analgesics for patients who do not respond to first-line 
therapies and who report moderate to severe pain. As a 
second- or third-line treatment for chronic neuropathic 
pain, a typical adult regimen should start with the smallest 
effective dose and combine short- and long-acting opioids 
(weak, low). Remark: When opioids are appropriate, a com-
bination regimen of morphine and gabapentin should be 
considered in patients with neuropathic pain for their possi-
ble additive effects and lower individual doses required of the 
2 medications when combined.
Evidence Summary
Opioid analgesics are an important class of medication used in 
the treatment of chronic pain. The effects of opioids beyond 
their interaction with the opioid receptor is a growing area of 
research. Although the data are limited, there are concerns that 
opioids could be pronociceptive when used to treat painful 
HIV-related neuropathy; this is in part due to the upregulation 
of specific chemokine receptors (eg, CXCR4) that are associated 
with promoting HIV-related pain [42]. Opioid use is further 
complicated by recent data that show that the HIV-1 envelope 
protein, gp120, impedes the ability of methadone and mor-
phine (but not buprenorphine) to provide analgesia in a mouse 
model [142]. This is likely due to the higher binding affinity of 
buprenorphine compared to methadone and morphine [143]. 
The clinical implications are unclear, and further research is 
needed to determine if opioids with higher binding affinities, 
such as buprenorphine, may be preferable for pain control in 
patients with unsuppressed HIV viral loads. Finally, some data 
also suggest that exogenous opioids suppress the immune sys-
tem (eg, reduce antibody production). However, the long-term 
impact of opioids and the clinical significance of any immuno-
suppression have not been evaluated [42, 144].
Studies that have examined opioid analgesics for the treat-
ment of chronic neuropathic pain can be divided into short-term 
(less than 24 hours) and intermediate-term drug administra-
tion (1–8 weeks). In 2005, Eisenberg and colleagues conducted 
a systematic review of 8 blinded randomized, controlled trials 
in which full opioid agonists were administered orally over 
intermediate periods (between 8 and 56 days; median, 28 days) 
for the treatment of nonmalignant neuropathic pain. None of 
these studies included HIV-associated neuropathy [145]. The 
following 4 medications were tested: morphine (3 studies), 
oxycodone (3 studies), methadone (1 study), and levorphanol 
(1 study). All 8 studies reported improvements in neuropathic 
pain intensity or pain relief. Six of the trials (levorphanol 
and 1 morphine study were excluded) had data sufficient for 
pooling across studies, showing a 14-point reduction in the 
visual analog pain scale compared to the placebo group [145]. 
Medication-related nausea was the most common side effect, 
followed by constipation, drowsiness, vomiting, and dizziness. 
None of the observed side effects were life threatening. An 
updated Cochrane review in 2013 that included 14 intermedi-
ate-duration (lasting 12 weeks or less) trials provided data on 
845 patients with neuropathic pain. Significant efficacy for opi-
oid analgesics was shown when compared to placebo (at least 
one-third reduction in pain in 57% of patients who received 
opioids vs 34% who received placebo). Opioids, however, did 
not demonstrate significant improvements in physical or emo-
tional functioning. Additionally, the authors concluded that 
there remains considerable uncertainty regarding the analgesic 
efficacy of opioids for chronic neuropathic pain since signif-
icant bias exists in the reported data “due to small size, short 
duration, and potentially inadequate handling of dropouts” 
[146]. A subsequent 2014 Cochrane review examined oxyco-
done for the treatment of neuropathic pain and fibromyalgia 
in adults. There were 3 studies with a total of 254 patients (204 
with diabetic neuropathy and 50 with post-herpetic neuralgia), 
and oxycodone could not be recommended given the lack of 
unbiased evidence [147].
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/10/e1/4157299 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Pain Management in People with HIV • CID 2017:65 (15 November) • e19
A more recent systematic review and metaanalysis was con-
ducted in 2015 by the International Association for the Study of 
Pain’s Special Interest Group on Neuropathic Pain (NeuPSIG) 
[116]. In this review, data from randomized, double-blind stud-
ies of neuropathic pain pharmacotherapy (oral and topical) were 
examined. Thirteen studies were identified in which full opioid 
agonists (oxycodone or morphine) were used, primarily for periph-
eral neuropathic pain. There was a moderate quality of evidence 
for the efficacy of opioid analgesics, with maximum effectiveness 
associated with 180 mg of morphine or equivalent. However, 
because of the increased risk for misuse, diversion, addiction, and 
adverse events (eg, overdose, cognitive impairment, immunologic 
and endocrine changes), the NeuPSIG authors designated opioid 
analgesics as a third-line treatment for neuropathic pain.
Additional clinical trials are needed to assess the effective-
ness of the long-term use of opioids in neuropathic pain in 
PLWH. Although short-term use may provide some relief, 
these medications may be of limited success in chronic neuro-
pathic pain. Due to these concerns, the European Federation of 
Neurological Societies (EFNS) Panel on Neuropathic Pain also 
recommends opioids as a third-line intervention for the treat-
ment of painful peripheral neuropathies (eg, diabetes). Opioids 
are not currently recommended by the EFNS Panel for HIV-
associated peripheral painful neuropathies due to the limited 
data on the use of opioids for the treatment of HIV peripheral 
neuropathy [148].
The additive or synergistic effects of combination therapy for 
chronic disease (as in the treatment of hypertension and diabe-
tes) may be an important approach to improving neuropathic 
pain in PLWH. While the ACTG A5252 trial of duloxetine 
combined with methadone for the treatment of painful HIV-
associated polyneuropathies could not enroll patients, Gilron 
and colleagues examined combination therapy in the treat-
ment of neuropathic pain in patients without HIV [149]. In this 
study, an active placebo (lorazepam) preparation, gabapentin, 
sustained-release morphine, and a combination of morphine 
and gabapentin were compared. Pain intensity improved with 
all interventions, but the greatest improvement was with a com-
bination of gabapentin and morphine. Moreover, combined 
gabapentin and morphine achieved better analgesia at lower 
doses than when used as single agents. Additional research is 
needed to validate the results from this small study and to deter-
mine which combination therapies, and in what doses, may be 
required to reduce neuropathic pain in PLWH.
V. What are the recommended nonopioid pharmacologic treat-
ments for chronic nonneuropathic pain in persons living with 
human immunodeficiency virus?
Recommendations
23. Acetaminophen and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs) are recommended as first-line agents for the 
treatment of musculoskeletal pain (strong, high). Remark: 
Acetaminophen has fewer side effects than NSAIDs. Studies 
typically used 4 g/day dosing of acetaminophen; lower dosing 
is recommended for patients with liver disease. Compared 
to traditional NSAIDs, COX-2 NSAIDs are associated with 
decreased risk of gastrointestinal side effects but increased 
cardiovascular risk.
Evidence Summary
There are limitations in the literature on the efficacy of 
nonopioid pharmacological treatments for chronic nonneu-
ropathic pain, including a paucity of trials performed with 
PLWH. In 2008, Roelofs and colleagues conducted an updated 
systematic review of more than 11 000 patients enrolled in 65 
trials of NSAIDs for the treatment of nonspecific acute and 
chronic low back pain [150]. Data from this review (42% of 
trials considered high quality) suggested that, compared to 
placebo, NSAIDs are effective for short-term symptomatic 
relief in patients with chronic low back pain without sciatica 
but at the risk of significantly more gastrointestinal and ren-
ovascular side effects [151]. It is important to note that effect 
sizes were small. An additional review for the American Pain 
Society and American College of Physicians also supports the 
use of NSAIDs for short-term symptomatic relief of low back 
pain [27].
For knee and hip osteoarthritis, the American College of 
Rheumatology continues to recommend the use of NSAIDS 
and acetaminophen [152]. Chou and colleagues conducted 
an extensive comparative effectiveness review of analgesics 
for osteoarthritis for the Agency for Healthcare Research and 
Quality in 2011 [153]. They found that one medication was not 
superior to others, largely due to the complex need to balance 
the varied risks and benefits of the medications. For example, 
the chronic administration of NSAIDs is linked to gastrointes-
tinal (eg, bleeding), renal, and other systemic side effects that 
among PLWH could be exacerbated by other medication inter-
actions (eg, tenofovir) and so require continual monitoring. 
Coprescribing of proton pump inhibitors or H2-antagonists 
reduced the risk of endoscopically detected gastroduodenal 
ulcers compared to placebo; and certain HIV antiretroviral 
therapy medications (eg, atazanavir) require an acid environ-
ment for absorption.
Studies with acetaminophen typically used 4 g/day, but aceta-
minophen prescription requires closer hepatotoxicity monitor-
ing in populations with a higher prevalence of advanced liver 
disease, including persons with chronic viral hepatitis and alco-
hol use disorders. In the Veterans Aging Cohort, 31% of 14 885 
patients with HIV disease received at least 1 prescription for 
acetaminophen of more than 2 g/day. Use of acetaminophen 
was common in both HIV (31%) and HIV/hepatitis C virus 
coinfected (32%) patients [154]. Current recommendations 
limit the dose of acetaminophen to no more than 2 g/day in 
patients with liver disease [155].
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/10/e1/4157299 by guest on 02 June 2019
 e20 • CID 2017:65 (15 November) • Bruce et al
VI. What are the recommended opioid pharmacological treat-
ments for chronic nonneuropathic pain in persons living with 
human immunodeficiency virus?
Recommendations
24. Patients who do not respond to first-line therapies and who 
report moderate to severe pain and functional impairment 
can be considered for a time-limited trial of opioid analge-
sics (weak, low). Values and preferences: This recommenda-
tion places a relatively high value on safer opioid prescribing. 
The potential benefits of opioid analgesics need to be bal-
anced with the potential risks of adverse events, misuse, 
diversion, and addiction. Remark: As a second- or third-line 
treatment for chronic nonneuropathic pain, a typical adult 
regimen should start with the smallest effective dose, com-
bining short- and long-acting opioids.
25. Tramadol taken for up to 3 months may decrease pain 
and improve stiffness, function, and overall well-being 
in patients with osteoarthritis (weak, moderate). Remark: 
The range of tramadol dosing studied is 37.5 mg (combined 
with 325 mg of acetaminophen) once daily to 400 mg in 
divided doses.
Evidence Summary
Short-acting opioids such as morphine, hydromorphone, oxy-
codone, and codeine are commonly used for effective pain 
management. Typically, they are initiated for acute pain that 
becomes chronic or used in the initial management of chronic 
pain to determine the patient’s actual analgesic requirements 
(dosage titration). Frequent administration at short time inter-
vals that reflect the specific medication’s half-life may be nec-
essary to achieve optimal control. Prescription of an opioid 
for chronic nonneuropathic pain raises concern among some 
healthcare providers about the risks of misuse, addiction, diver-
sion, and overdose. There is a paucity of prospective data com-
paring specific opioids or formulations (eg, patch vs tablet) 
in PLWH; however, opioids do play a role in the treatment of 
chronic noncancer pain.
In a 2006 systematic review, Cepeda and colleagues exam-
ined 1019 persons on tramadol or tramadol/paracetamol 
(acetaminophen) and 920 patients assigned to placebo or an 
active control for the management of osteoarthritis. The range 
of tramadol dosing was 37.5 mg (combined with 325 mg of 
acetaminophen) once daily to 400 mg in divided doses, with 
the mean dose of 201.4 mg ± 50.15 mg. The average length of 
follow-up was 35 days (range, 7–91 days). Patients on trama-
dol demonstrated a decrease in pain, improvement in stiffness, 
and improvement in function and overall well-being [156]. 
However, these benefits remain small; there was a 12% relative 
decrease in pain intensity and a 37% increase in those reporting 
moderate improvement [156].
With the introduction of longer-acting formulations of opi-
oid analgesics, patients may require less frequent administration 
of immediate-release opioids [83]. Scheduled administration of 
long-acting agents maintains plasma concentrations in a thera-
peutic range, minimizing the frequency of end-of-dose failures 
or withdrawal symptoms. Surveys of patients of unknown HIV 
status with chronic, noncancer pain have shown that around-
the-clock pain relief with transdermal fentanyl and extend-
ed-release morphine resulted in a better quality of life [157]. 
In a systematic review published in 2015, Santos and colleagues 
examined the use of tapentadol compared to oxycodone for the 
treatment of chronic musculoskeletal pain in 4 randomized, 
controlled trials with a total of 4094 patients [158]. While the 
authors found that extended-release tapentadol reduced pain 
more than placebo and controlled-released oxycodone, the 
clinical significance was uncertain because of high dropout 
rates, lack of data for the primary outcome in some studies, and 
use of baseline-observation-carried-forward for imputed data 
analysis.
Portenoy and colleagues conducted a prospective cohort 
study of 233 patients of unspecified HIV status with noncancer 
pain who were treated with controlled-release oxycodone and 
followed for up to 3 years [159]. Only 39 patients (17%) were 
retained for 3 years, but this subgroup had prolonged relief. It is 
unknown if those who discontinued treatment did so due to a 
lack of benefit, intolerable side effects, or improvement in their 
condition.
The potentially serious side effects of chronic opioid therapy 
make opioid analgesics second- or third-line agents for the man-
agement of chronic nonneuropathic pain. With all currently 
available opioids, constipation is an expected side effect that 
requires use of a stool softener or laxative and fluids, particularly 
in bed-ridden patients or during warm weather when patients 
are at higher risk for volume depletion. Unaddressed, opioid-re-
lated constipation can lead to ileus and gastrointestinal obstruc-
tion. Nausea or vomiting is another common medication side 
effect that may occur in the first week of opioid treatment but 
generally resolves as the patient develops tolerance. Recurrent 
or persistent nausea and vomiting should trigger a second eval-
uation of the patient for other causes. Opioid-induced hypog-
onadism (potentially worsened in untreated HIV) is another 
adverse effect, and there are no standardized time schedules for 
screening or monitoring. Individuals who are symptomatic (eg, 
sexual dysfunction, depression, osteoporosis) should be eval-
uated [160]. Women of child-bearing age who are considering 
opioid analgesic therapy must be informed of the risk of fetal 
physical dependence and neonatal abstinence syndrome.
Central respiratory depression, which can lead to stupor, 
apnea, and death, is typically associated with rapid opioid dose 
escalations, lowered opioid tolerance, drug–drug interactions, 
and/or underlying pulmonary disease. In a large cohort study in 
Denmark, those on chronic opioid therapy (COT) were found 
to have higher all-cause mortality than the background popula-
tion. While there was no association between COT and a specific 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/10/e1/4157299 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Pain Management in People with HIV • CID 2017:65 (15 November) • e21
etiology of death, individuals on COT had higher rates of injury 
and toxicity/poisoning that resulted in hospital admission [161]. 
Higher doses of opioids have been associated with overdose and 
death in several studies [162–164]. It is advisable for patients to 
avoid medications or other substances that could alter the phar-
macology of the opioid analgesic and/or increase the risk of res-
piratory depression. This is especially true for alcohol and sedative 
hypnotics (benzodiazepines), which have been associated with 
increased risk of emergency department visits and overdose [165].
VII. What is the recommended approach for assessing the 
likelihood of developing the negative, unintended conse-
quences of opioid treatment (eg, misuse, substance use dis-
order, or possible diversion) in persons living with human 
immunodeficiency virus?
Recommendations
26. Providers should assess all patients for the possible risk of 
developing the negative, unintended consequences of opi-
oid treatment (eg, misuse, diversion, addiction) prior to 
prescribing opioid analgesics for the treatment of chronic 
pain (strong, low). Remark: A trial of opioid analgesics for 
the treatment of moderate-to-severe chronic pain may be 
reasonable only when the potential benefits of chronic opioid 
therapy for pain severity, physical function, and quality of 
life outweigh its potential harms.
Evidence Summary
Patients who receive opioid therapy for chronic pain are suscep-
tible to both beneficial and adverse effects. Potential negative, 
unintended consequences include pharmacodynamic effects 
(eg, sedation, respiratory depression, nausea, constipation, 
tolerance, and physiologic dependence), as well as the devel-
opment of concerning (sometimes called “aberrant”) behaviors 
that may indicate misuse, addiction, or possible diversion.
A significant limitation in the literature on this topic is incon-
sistent terminology, including definitions for “aberrant drug-re-
lated behaviors” that are not standardized across studies and not 
uniformly stratified by severity. With these limitations in mind, 
“aberrant opioid-related behaviors” may be defined here as 
patient behavior patterns that should alert the provider to reas-
sess the risk–benefit ratio of the treatment and possibly modify 
the treatment plan. Such patient behaviors include requests for 
early refills or escalating dosages, taking more medication than 
prescribed, an unremitting focus during clinic encounters on 
obtaining controlled substance prescriptions or certain brand-
name formulations, repeated lost or stolen medications, hav-
ing multiple prescribers, prescription forgery, and the sale or 
diversion of secure prescriptions [166–168]. Some “drug-seek-
ing” behaviors, such as using or requesting more medication 
than prescribed, may simply be manifestations of the expected 
physical dependence and tolerance that patients will develop on 
chronic opioid therapy or, in some cases, are due to undertreated 
pain. These behaviors, when due to undertreated pain, have been 
coined “pseudo-addiction” and should be included in the differ-
ential diagnosis for patients who demonstrate concerning behav-
iors. Whereas the 4 principle features of addiction are impaired 
control over drug use, compulsive use, continued use despite 
harm, and craving, pseudo-addiction is characterized by the res-
olution of the behavior with effective pain treatment [169, 170].
The prevalence of “aberrant analgesic use behaviors” among 
PLWH in the published literature ranges from 9% in persons 
without a substance use history to 73% lifetime prevalence in 
urban indigent adults [166, 171]. In a cross-sectional study 
of 296 marginally housed or homeless adult PLWH in San 
Francisco, where 91% of respondents reported pain in the 
prior week, 54% met criteria for a lifetime history of cocaine, 
amphetamine, or heroin/opioid use disorder as defined in the 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (fourth 
edition), Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association, 
1994, and 73% reported a lifetime history of at least 1 of 20 con-
cerning behaviors provided on an inventory. Additionally, 37% 
reported any “aberrant opioid behavior” within the prior 90 
days, and 19% reported major aberrant behaviors, which were 
defined as “behaviors that posed imminent risk to the patient 
or others for overdose or legal consequences (eg, using opioid 
analgesics to ‘get high’ or snorting, crushing, injecting, or smok-
ing opioid analgesics)” [166].
Passik et al compared a small sample of 73 PLWH with a 
history of substance use disorders to 100 cancer patients 
without a history of substance use disorders. In addition to 
experiencing higher global distress, greater pain-related inter-
ference in daily functioning, and less relief from their pain 
medications, the PLWH reported more than twice as many 
aberrant analgesic use behaviors than the cancer group [172]. 
Subsequently, Tsao and colleagues conducted a more rigorous 
examination of a nationally representative longitudinal sam-
ple of 2267 PLWH [171]. The investigators used structured 
equation modeling to test the predictive and concurrent asso-
ciations between pain, aberrant use of opioids, and problem 
drug use history. Patients were considered to have a history 
of problematic drug use if they responded “yes” to both of 
the following conditions: they ever had to use much larger 
amounts of illicit drugs than usual to get the same effect or 
that the same amount had less effect on them than before or 
that they ever had any emotional or psychological problems 
from using drugs, such as feeling uninterested in things, feel-
ing depressed, being suspicious of people, feeling paranoid, or 
having strange ideas. Compared to patients without a history 
of problematic drug use, patients with problematic drug use 
reported more pain, were more likely to report aberrant use 
of prescription analgesics, and were more likely to use such 
analgesics specifically for pain over time [171].
Routine screening for unhealthy substance use is recom-
mended for all patients being considered for a trial of chronic 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/10/e1/4157299 by guest on 02 June 2019
 e22 • CID 2017:65 (15 November) • Bruce et al
opioid treatment regardless of HIV status [32]. In addition to a 
prior history of a substance use disorder (including alcohol and 
tobacco), other factors associated with increased risk of opioid 
misuse that should be assessed include younger age, family his-
tory of substance use disorders, childhood trauma (including 
sexual abuse), personal/family psychiatric history, and history 
of motor vehicle collisions (possibly a marker for driving under 
the influence of substances) [97, 166, 173–179]. Validated 
screening tools for unhealthy alcohol, tobacco, or other drug 
use and for mental health problems are widely available, and 
several risk prediction instruments have been developed to aid 
in safer opioid prescribing. The results of these assessments 
should be discussed openly and nonjudgmentally with patients 
as a safety issue when developing a pain care plan.
Screening for unhealthy alcohol and drug use is feasible, par-
ticularly if conducted routinely as a clinic-wide practice with 
all new patients and annually in established patients. Validated 
tools have been developed to facilitate screening and assessment 
in primary care settings, and these are reviewed elsewhere [180, 
181]. Suggested tools include the World Health Organization’s 
alcohol, smoking, and substance involvement screening test 
(ASSIST), the alcohol use disorders identification test for alco-
hol (AUDIT), and the drug abuse screening test (DAST) or 
CAGE-AID for drug use [182–185]. At healthcare sites where a 
clinic-wide procedure cannot be operationalized, a single-ques-
tion screener has been developed and validated for detecting 
unhealthy alcohol and drug use. The questions are: How many 
times in the past year have you had more than 5 (4 for women) 
standard drinks in 1 day? and How many times in the past year 
have you used an illegal drug or used a prescription medication 
for nonmedical reasons? [186, 187]. Responses of 1 or more are 
positive screens for unhealthy alcohol and/or drug use. The sin-
gle-question alcohol screen was tested on 286 patients and found 
to have 81.8% sensitivity and 79.3% specificity for the detection 
of unhealthy alcohol use. The single-question drug screen was 
tested on 286 patients and was found to have 100% sensitivity 
and 73.5% specificity for the detection of unhealthy drug use.
Opioid risk prediction tools offer another approach to assess-
ing a patient’s likelihood of developing the negative, unintended 
consequences of opioid analgesic treatment. The American Pain 
Society and the American Academy of Pain Medicine recom-
mend these tools for all patients with chronic pain who are being 
considered for initiation of chronic opioid therapy. Chou et al 
published a 2009 systematic review of methods to predict the risk 
of aberrant drug-related behaviors before initiation of opioids 
for chronic noncancer pain [188]. Several instruments exist for 
this purpose, including the screener and opioid assessment for 
patients with pain (SOAPP and the revised SOAPP-R), the opi-
oid risk tool (ORT), the pain medication questionnaire (which is 
self-administered), and the diagnosis, intractability, risk, efficacy 
(DIRE) instrument. Risk prediction tools with good content and 
construct validity are the SOAPP, SOAPP-R, and ORT [189–193]. 
Since the 2009 review, 1 small study compared the SOAPP, ORT, 
and DIRE and found that the SOAPP best predicted concerning 
behaviors in patients for whom opioids were ultimately discon-
tinued [194]. Another review by Solanki et al in 2011 could not 
identify any other studies that compared these instruments [195]. 
None have been evaluated in PLWH. To date, studies have not 
demonstrated whether pretreatment risk prediction tools assist 
HIV clinicians in making decisions that improve the clinical out-
comes of their patients with chronic pain.
Based on risk stratification and other available clinical and 
laboratory information, providers should weigh and discuss the 
potential harms and potential benefits of chronic opioid therapy 
with each patient. In all cases, providers should use a risk–ben-
efit framework to discuss safety with their patients and to set a 
level of patient monitoring and support that is appropriate to 
their risk of opioid analgesic misuse and harm. The decision 
to treat chronic pain with opioid analgesics is never a risk-free 
situation. One risk is a failure to provide needed treatment for 
suffering. The treatment of pain is a human right, and under-
treating pain has resulted in legal judgments against physicians 
by state medical boards [73]. In patients for whom the poten-
tial benefits of opioid therapy in terms of analgesia, function, 
and quality of life outweigh its potential harms, a trial of opi-
oid analgesics as a second- or third-line treatment for moder-
ate-to-severe chronic pain may be appropriate. Patients with 
risk factors for opioid-related harms may require more frequent 
and intensive monitoring during a trial of opioid analgesic ther-
apy (see recommendations on monitoring below). For some 
patients, the potential harms of opioid treatment may outweigh 
the benefits, and opioid analgesics should not be prescribed.
VIII. What is the recommended approach to safeguard per-
sons living with human immunodeficiency virus against harm 
while undergoing the treatment of chronic pain with opioid 
analgesics?
Recommendations
27. Routine monitoring of patients prescribed opioid analge-
sics for the management of chronic pain is recommended 
(strong, very low). Remark: Opioid treatment agreements, 
urine drug testing (UDT), pill counts, and prescription drug 
monitoring programs are commonly used tools to safeguard 
against harms.
28. An “opioid patient–provider agreement (PPA)” is rec-
ommended as a tool for shared decision making with all 
patients before receiving opioid analgesics for chronic 
pain (strong, low). Remark: PPAs consist of 2 components: 
informed consent and a plan of care. When a patient’s behav-
ior is inconsistent with the PPA, the provider must carefully 
consider a broad differential diagnosis.
29. The provider should understand the clinical uses and lim-
itations of UDT, including test characteristics, indications 
for confirmatory testing, and the differential diagnosis of 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/10/e1/4157299 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Pain Management in People with HIV • CID 2017:65 (15 November) • e23
abnormal results (strong, low). Remark: UDT results should 
never be used in isolation to discharge patients from care. 
Rather, results should be used in combination with other 
clinical data for periodic evaluation of the current treatment 
plan and to support a clinical decision to safely continue opi-
oid therapy.
Evidence Summary
In a 2008 systematic review, the prevalence of opioid misuse 
in the general populations of patients with chronic pain was 
between 27% and 42% [188]. Compared to the general public, 
PLWH are overrepresented among those with opioid use dis-
orders and chronic pain; this increases their risk of prescrip-
tion opioid-related harm [188]. In an anonymous waiting room 
survey of 262 PLWH in a San Francisco HIV clinic, 232 (89%) 
of respondents had ever received prescription opioids for pain; 
one-third reported taking them for reasons other than pain, 
including to sleep better, calm down when worried or anxious, 
prevent opioid withdrawal, come down off speed or crack, and 
keep from feeling sad [196].
Healthcare providers are often neither trained nor confi-
dent in identifying patients with or at risk of problematic drug 
use [197–199]. Lum and colleagues conducted an anonymous 
on-line survey of a national sample of 100 HIV clinicians who 
prescribed opioids to their patients with chronic pain [198]. 
The providers reported only limited confidence (6/10 on a 
visual analog scale) in their “ability to recognize abuse of pre-
scription pain medications”; however, confidence was higher 
among clinicians who reported they discussed substance use 
issues and conducted UDT with their chronic pain patients 
[198]. In another study of 105 HIV-infected indigent adults and 
their primary care providers in San Francisco [199], providers’ 
perceptions were discordant with their patients’ self-reports of 
opioid analgesic misuse, defined as “getting high, altering the 
route, selling, stealing, forging prescriptions, trading street 
drugs for opioids, and exchanging opioids for sex in the past 
90 days.” Although previous data have suggested younger age 
is associated with prescription opioid misuse, the primary care 
providers in this study incorrectly assigned younger age and 
African American race but correctly used past year estimates of 
illicit substance use (cocaine, methamphetamine, and heroin) 
as predictors of opioid analgesic misuse in this high-risk cohort.
Given the high prevalence of both opioid use disorders and 
chronic noncancer pain among persons living with HIV in 
the United States and the difficulty that HIV providers report 
identifying individuals who struggle with one or both, pre-
scribers should implement an appropriate level of treatment 
monitoring when prescribing opioid analgesics for chronic 
pain. Currently, there is no evidence to support the specific 
frequency with which patient monitoring should occur in any 
patient population. Intuitively, however, more frequent and 
intensive monitoring (eg, pill counts, random UDT) should be 
considered for higher-risk patients, which would permit earlier 
identification, intervention, referral, and support for patients in 
need. Some authors have suggested every 3–6 months for stable 
patients and monthly or even weekly monitoring for high-risk 
patients such as those with recent histories of substance use (last 
use <6 months) and active mental health disorders [83, 188]. 
Progress note templates such as the pain assessment and doc-
umentation tool are available to assist clinicians as they doc-
ument these periodic assessments over time; however, studies 
are needed to ascertain the affect this tool has on clinical out-
comes [188, 200]. The current opioid misuse measure (COMM) 
is a 17-item, patient-administered instrument to assess aberrant 
behavior during chronic opioid therapy and to also assist clini-
cians in documenting decisions about the level of monitoring 
planned or justification for a specialty referral [201]. Although 
not validated in HIV clinical settings, the reliability and pre-
dictive validity of the COMM was high in 226 patients with 
chronic noncancer pain recruited from 5 pain management 
centers in the United States [202].
Other tools that may help safeguard against the harms of 
chronic opioid therapy include opioid treatment agreements, 
UDT, pill counts, and PDMPs that provide statewide data on all 
controlled substance prescriptions filled by a patient in a speci-
fied period of time.
Patient–provider agreements.  PPAs, sometimes referred to 
as “opioid treatment agreements” or “pain contracts,” are rec-
ommended by professional pain societies and the Federation 
of State Medical Boards when patients with chronic pain are 
prescribed opioid analgesics. We prefer the term “agreement,” 
as it reinforces the shared decision making valued in a thera-
peutic patient–provider relationship rather than the criminal 
justice or legal connotations implied in a “contract” [203, 204]. 
A model PPA consists of 2 components: informed consent and 
a plan of care. The purpose of informed consent is to openly 
acknowledge the intended benefits or targeted goals of the 
planned treatment (eg, decreased pain severity, increased phys-
ical function, and improved mood) and to educate the patient 
about the potential risks or adverse effects of the treatment 
plan. Opioid-related adverse effects that should be discussed 
during informed consent include constipation, nausea, urinary 
retention, hypogonadism, physical dependence, sedation, res-
piratory depression, and death. Other possible risks such as 
medication misuse, diversion, and addiction also should be 
discussed. A consensus statement from the Center for Practical 
Bioethics stresses the critical importance of informed consent 
as a component of the treatment agreement [204].
The second component of the PPA, the plan of care, 
describes the specific therapies or medications to be tried, 
how their effectiveness will be evaluated, what safety moni-
toring procedures will be followed, and the circumstances 
under which the treatment will be modified or discontinued. 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/10/e1/4157299 by guest on 02 June 2019
 e24 • CID 2017:65 (15 November) • Bruce et al
Successfully met functional goals support the continuation of 
the treatment plan. Failure to meet these goals necessitates 
reevaluation and a possible change. Monitoring procedures 
may include UDT, pill counts, and use of a PDMP. If opioids 
will be prescribed, then the plan of care should explicitly state 
the clinic’s prescription refill or renewal policies, how con-
cerning behaviors or unexpected safety monitoring results 
will be addressed, and under what conditions the risk of ongo-
ing opioid prescription might exceed the benefit (eg, an injury 
due to oversedation) (Table 1). Restructuring of the treatment 
plan may include more intensive monitoring, more education, 
resetting functional goals, increasing or reducing medication 
dosages or frequency, or discontinuing medications that are 
not providing any benefit [73].
The advantage of a written PPA is that it can be printed and 
provided for patient education and as a reference document. 
Vague or undocumented verbal agreements risk future misun-
derstandings between the provider and patient regarding their 
roles and responsibilities to each other, treatment expectations, 
and the management of unintended consequences. PPAs should 
meet the literacy level of the patient and avoid coercive lan-
guage or attempts to apply legalistic terms or conditions to what 
should be a therapeutic clinical relationship [205–207]. While a 
standardized PPA form has not yet been validated, a model PPA 
form is undergoing pilot testing in New York by the US Food 
and Drug Administration.
The efficacy of PPAs in reducing prescription opioid-related 
harm is not well established in the pain literature. A 2010 
systematic review identified only 4 studies that evaluated 
the effects of opioid treatment agreements on opioid misuse/
aberrant behavior that included a control group. These studies 
showed a decline in concerning behaviors after the implemen-
tation of opioid treatment agreements, but the studies used 
only historical controls [206, 208]. Despite the low quality of 
evidence supporting PPAs, professional pain societies recom-
mend them [209]. The American Pain Society and American 
Academy of Pain Medicine’s guidelines for the use of chronic 
opioids for noncancer pain recommend and contain a sample 
written treatment agreement [210]. There is no evidence of a 
negative effect of treatment agreements on patient outcomes, 
and there is some low-quality evidence that providers who 
use them may experience positive effects. Opioid treatment 
agreements may improve primary care providers’ comfort 
with opioid prescribing, facilitate an open dialogue between 
the patient and provider about the risks and benefits of pur-
suing a trial of opioid analgesic therapy, put everyone on the 
“same page,” and provide a mechanism for providers to estab-
lish expectations around monitoring for benefit and risk. Pain 
medication agreements were found to be useful by 90% of 
internal medicine residents surveyed at a Rhode Island hos-
pital. Residents who reported greater use of agreements were 
significantly more likely to report a greater sense of prepara-
tion and greater sense of reward for managing chronic non-
cancer pain [211].
Urine drug testing.  Universal UDT is recommended as a clin-
ical tool for monitoring the course of chronic pain treatment 
in all persons who receive opioid analgesics. In a 2012 study 
of 173 PLWH who were prescribed opioids for chronic pain in 
New York, 62% were found to have problematic prescription 
opioid use, with the majority detected by UDT [212]. In a pro-
spective cohort study of 500 consecutive pain clinic patients, 
Manchikanti and colleagues reported significant reductions in 
overall illicit drug use (marijuana, cocaine, methamphetamine) 
when adherence monitoring was combined with random UDT 
and compared to a historical control [213].
We recommend baseline UDT to establish the reliability of 
a new patient’s reported substance use history, because both 
clinician predictions and patients’ self-reported history have 
been found in a number of studies to be unreliable [214–218]. 
Appropriate baseline UDT does not rule out the potential for 
future concerning behavior, and there is insufficient evidence 
to recommend the frequency with which UDT should be per-
formed [212, 215]. However, Christo and colleagues deline-
ated a practical approach to UDT monitoring among stable 
chronic pain patients that may be reasonable. This approach 
Table 1. Basic Content of Any Pain Treatment Agreement
Pain 
T
reatment Policy
Pain Treatment Agreement
The provider should inform the patient of the specific medications prescribed 
and the possible side effects of those medications
Should include the specific medications
The specific policy on how the medical team will handle requests for early  
refills (eg, not allowable or allowable under certain conditions)
Agreement should inform the patient of the policy on early refill requests
Specific policy on discontinuation of opioids when deemed ineffective
Opioids are being prescribed as a time-limited trial and may be discontinued if 
their prescription is no longer appropriate
Frequency of reevaluation should be standardized to avoid seeming bias where 
one patient is reevaluated frequently while others are not
Inform the patient that treatment will be continually reevaluated
A listing of other treatment options should be standardized across the agency
A listing of other treatment options (eg, physical therapy)
The content of the treatment goals (plan of care) should be standardized
Treatment goals (eg, improvement in walking upstairs)
The manner in which discontinuation of opioids occurs in the setting of illicit 
drug use should be specifically delineated
Conditions under which the risks of opioids might exceed the benefits (eg, use 
of illicit substances concurrently with opioids)
The role of patient and provider should be defined clearly 
The responsibilities of both the patient and provider
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/10/e1/4157299 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Pain Management in People with HIV • CID 2017:65 (15 November) • e25
includes baseline UDT of all patients prior to the initiation 
of opioids for chronic pain; adherence monitoring within 
1–3 months after baseline monitoring; and routine, random 
monitoring approximately every 6–12 months, with provisions 
for additional monitoring for unexpected results or concern-
ing behavior patterns [216]. Whichever strategy is adopted, 
we recommend that the UDT monitoring policy be applied 
uniformly to all patients who receive opioid analgesics (“we 
do this for everyone”), so as to prevent bias and reduce further 
stigmatization of patients. Randomly scheduled UDT may 
be most appropriate when additional monitoring is required, 
since predictably scheduled UDT increases opportunities for 
tampering [213].
When monitoring the course of opioid treatment for chronic 
pain, the provider should understand the clinical uses and lim-
itations of UDT, including urine drug test characteristics, indi-
cations for confirmatory testing, and the differential diagnosis of 
abnormal results. Forensic use of UDT is strongly discouraged 
and has no place in the patient–provider relationship. In addi-
tion, the use of UDT in isolation is insufficient to diagnose a sub-
stance use disorder and should not be attempted. Urine testing 
can create an environment of mistrust and further stigmatize the 
use of opioids for pain in a population of patients who, by virtue 
of their HIV and chronic pain diagnoses, are already stigmatized 
[206]. Requiring baseline UDT in all patients prior to opioid 
analgesic prescribing establishes a standard that all patients in 
the clinic are treated in the same fashion. This measure serves 
to reduce the stigma of both UDT and unhealthy substance use 
in an already heavily stigmatized patient population. A failure to 
institute universal UDT highlights the biased assumption that 
the provider can correctly guess and identify patients using illicit 
or nonprescribed substances [198, 214, 215, 219].
Many providers have inadequate training in the interpreta-
tion of UDT results, and the ramifications of incorrect inter-
pretation can be severe [216, 220, 221]. UDT is imperfect, as 
the immunoassays used in most screening tests can be falsely 
positive due to cross-reactivity with other agents and can be 
falsely negative due to dilution or adulteration. In a 2008 sys-
tematic review, Turk and colleagues found that a positive test 
result was only a moderately positive predictor of prescription 
opioid misuse [97]. Gas chromatography/mass spectroscopy, 
which is performed for confirmatory testing, is used to differ-
entiate these false positives. Because new toxicology assays and 
medications are always being created, healthcare providers are 
encouraged to establish a working relationship with their local 
toxicologist who conducts the assays and can consult on results 
interpretation.
In patients who exhibit aberrant opioid-related behav-
iors or who have a urinary drug test that contains illicit or 
nonprescribed substances, providers should carefully but 
promptly consider a broad differential diagnosis before taking 
action [216]. Aberrant opioid-related behaviors may be due to 
inadequate analgesia, substance use disorders, development of 
tolerance to opioids, opioid-induced hyperalgesia, or self-medi-
cation of psychiatric symptoms [83, 222]. For patients in whom 
the prescribed substance is absent from the urine, the differential 
diagnosis includes diversion, levels of drug below the screening 
threshold due to a delay between the last dose and the test itself 
(eg, increased pain and need to consume more opioids thereby 
running out early), or dilution of the urine (eg, in the context 
of uncontrolled diabetes mellitus). Presence of an illegally pre-
scribed substance should be discussed promptly with the patient 
in order to address a potential substance use disorder, keeping in 
mind that it may represent a false-positive result.
Unexpected UDT results and concerning behaviors should 
not be used to discharge patients from the practice; this vio-
lates the principle of nonabandonment and undermines the 
therapeutic relationship [204]. Instead, these results should be 
used in combination with other clinical data to reevaluate the 
current treatment strategy, including the risk–benefit ratio of 
opioid therapy and the potential for other clinical services (eg, 
substance use treatment).
IX. What are the recommended methods to minimize adverse 
effects from chronic opioid therapy in persons living with 
human immunodeficiency virus?
Recommendations
30. Controlled substances should be stored safely away from 
individuals at risk of misuse and/or overdose; family mem-
bers should be educated on the medications and signs of 
overdose, and the poison control number should be read-
ily visible (strong, low).
31. Clinicians should teach patients and their caregivers about 
opioid overdose and the use of naloxone to reverse over-
dose; a naloxone rescue kit should be readily available 
(strong, moderate).
32. Patient education is recommended to help patients avoid 
adverse events related to pharmacological interactions 
(strong, low).
33. Providers should be knowledgeable about common phar-
macological interactions and be prepared to identify 
and manage those drug–drug interactions (strong, low). 
Providers should follow patients closely when interactions 
are likely (strong, low).
Evidence Summary
Controlled substances should be stored safely away from indi-
viduals at risk of misuse and/or overdose. Family members 
should be educated on the medications, their risks, and the 
signs of overdose. The poison control number should be read-
ily visible. Family members should be educated on safe storage 
devices (eg, lock boxes) and, if needed, on safe disposal options. 
There is, however, a paucity of data on effective methods to 
accomplish these tasks [223].
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/10/e1/4157299 by guest on 02 June 2019
 e26 • CID 2017:65 (15 November) • Bruce et al
Furthermore, clinicians should teach their patients about 
opioid overdose and the use of naloxone to reverse overdose; a 
naloxone rescue kit should be prescribed [224]. The availability 
and use of naloxone reduces the risk of overdose death, which is 
the leading cause of morbidity and mortality among illicit opi-
oid users [225–234]. Prescribing naloxone to someone at risk of 
overdose is legal in every state [235].
It is important to clarify that much of the research discussed 
here was conducted with patients at specialty pain clinics 
[213–215, 218, 219]. These findings may not be generalizable 
to patients seen in HIV primary care clinics, because they may 
have a higher prevalence of substance use and mental health 
disorders. Furthermore, definitions for aberrant drug-related 
behaviors are not standardized across studies and not stratified 
by severity. Table 2 provides basic guidance when considering 
the discontinuation of controlled substances in patients.
Patients and providers should be educated on important 
pharmacological interactions. Pharmacological interactions 
between opioids and HIV therapeutics are well documented 
(Table 3) [236]. Methadone has a wide interindividual variabil-
ity in its clinical pharmacology, and individual titration of doses 
is critical to avoid adverse outcomes [237]. Methadone has sev-
eral interactions of import; specifically, efavirenz and rifampin 
can result in opioid withdrawal, and fluconazole can increase 
the effects of methadone [238].
When prescribing methadone for chronic pain, health-
care providers should be aware of the clinical discourse 
over heart rate corrected QT (QTc) prolongation, torsade de 
pointes, and the extent to which methadone, other medica-
tions prescribed to PLWH (psychotropics, macrolides, certain 
fluoroquinolones and antimalarials, pentamidine, azole anti-
fungals) [239], and specific clinical states (eg, hypokalemia, 
Table 2. Discontinuation of Controlled Substances for Pain Management 
Therapy: Techniques to Use When Continuation of Controlled Substances 
Are no Longer Useful or Indicated
1.  
When there is lack of benefit: patient is not improving and may have opi-
oid-resistant pain (Some patients experience improvement in function and 
pain control when chronic opioids are stopped.)
 •  
Stress how much you believe/empathize with patient’s pain severity and 
impact
 • Express empathy re: lack of good pill to fix it
 • Focus on patient’s strengths
 • Encourage therapies for “coping with” pain
 •  
Show commitment to continue caring about patient and pain, even with-
out opioid therapy
 • Taper dose slowly to prevent opioid withdrawal symptoms
 • Schedule close follow-ups during and after medication taper
2. When discussing the possibility of a substance use disorder
 •  
Explain why observed (and documented) behavior raises your concern 
for possible addiction
 •  
Benefits no longer outweigh risks: “I cannot responsibly continue pre-
scribing opioids at this time, as I believe it would cause you more harm 
than good.
”
 • Always offer referral to substance use treatment
 • Stay 100% in “benefit–risk of medication” mindset
 •  
Be clear that you will continue to work on pain management using non-
controlled medications
 • Taper dose slowly to prevent opioid withdrawal symptoms
Adapted from Dan Alford [82, 295].
Table 
3. Drug 
Interactions 
Between 
Opioids 
and 
Human 
Immunodeficiency Virus Medicationsa
Medication
Recommendation
Nucleoside Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitor 
Abacavir (ABC)
No dose change required for METH; no study for BUP
Emtricitabine (FTC) No studies with METH or BUP
Lamivudine (3TC)
AZT/3TC coformulation studied only with METH; no 
dose adjustments necessary in METH or BUP
Tenofovir (TDF)
No dose adjustments necessary in METH or BUP; 
tenofovir AF (TAF) not studied, but likely no dose 
adjustment necessary
Zidovudine (AZT)
Watch for AZT-related toxicity (symptoms and labora-
tory); dose reductions of AZT may be required in 
METH patients; no dose adjustments for BUP
Nonnucleoside Reverse 
Transcriptase Inhibitor 
Efavirenz (EFV)
Opioid withdrawal from METH common; METH dose 
increase likely necessary; no dosage adjustments 
necessary with BUP
Etravirine (ETV)
No dose adjustments necessary for METH; no study 
for BUP
Nevirapine (NVP)
Opioid withdrawal from METH common; METH dose 
increase likely necessary; no dose adjustments nec-
essary for BUP
Rilpivirine (RPV)
Monitoring for symptoms of METH withdrawal is rec-
ommended; no study for BUP
Protease Inhibitor 
Atazanavir (ATV)
No dose adjustments necessary in METH; some indi-
viduals may experience oversedation with BUP; ATV 
should be boosted with ritonavir when coadminis-
tered with BUP
Darunavir (DRV)
No antitretroviral dose change when combined with 
METH or BUP; 4 of 16 patients in METH study 
reported mild opioid withdrawal, but no dose adjust-
ments were needed
Fosamprenavir 
(FAMP)
No dose adjustments necessary for METH or BUP
Lopinavir/ritonavir 
(LPV/r)
METH dose increase may be necessary in some 
patients; no dose adjustments are necessary for BUP
Nelfinavir (NFV)
No dose adjustments necessary for METH; no study 
for BUP
Ritonavir (RTV)
No dosage adjustments necessary for METH or BUP; 
boosts oxycodone and dose reductions in oxycodone 
may be necessary
Tipranavir (TPV)
METH dose may need to be increased; no dose adjust-
ments necessary for BUP; clinical significance in the 
changes in TPV pharmacokinetic parameters in the 
presence of BUP is unknown
Integrase Inhibitor 
Elvitegravir (with 
cobicistat)
No dosage adjustments necessary for METH or BUP; 
cobicistat has similar mechanism of action as ritona-
vir and may (though not studied) increase oxycodone 
levels as well
Raltegravir
No dosage adjustments necessary for METH or BUP
Dolutegravir
No dosage adjustment necessary for METH [294]; no 
published data on BUP
Only includes commonly prescribed medications.
Abbreviations: ATV, atazanavir; BUP
, buprenorphine; METH, methadone; TPV, tipranavir; 
AZT
, zidovudine.
aUsed with permission [236].
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/10/e1/4157299 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Pain Management in People with HIV • CID 2017:65 (15 November) • e27
hypomagnesemia) may impact the QTc interval [240]. QTc 
prolongation has been observed primarily in persons receiv-
ing moderate to high doses of methadone once daily for the 
maintenance treatment of opioid use disorders. QTc prolonga-
tion has been rarely studied in a controlled manner in persons 
administered methadone for chronic pain [241, 242], usually 
cancer patients [241, 242], and not at all in PLWH. In 2015, a 
small prospective pilot study examined the effect of low-dose 
(<60 mg/day) methadone at a chronic pain clinic and com-
pared automated QTc calculations from 12-lead electrocar-
diograms (ECGs) conducted at baseline (pretreatment) and 
at 6 months. The comparison was made between 82 patients 
who received <60 mg/day of methadone and 102 patients who 
received nonmethadone opioid therapy for chronic pain [243]. 
The incidence of clinically significant QTc prolongation (>470 
milliseconds or >60 milliseconds increase from baseline) in 
patients who received methadone was no different than in 
patients who received nonmethadone opioid therapy. Patients 
did demonstrate an increase in QTc in the first month after 
starting methadone compared to control patients (P = .073), 
but this difference was not statistically significant and disap-
peared in the third and sixth months.
A 2013 Cochrane systematic review found no evidence to 
support the effectiveness of ECG-based screening strategies 
for preventing cardiac morbidity and mortality in persons 
who receive methadone for the treatment of opioid use dis-
order [244]. However, 2014 clinical practice guidelines on 
methadone safety from the American Pain Society, College 
on Problems of Drug Dependence, and Heart Rhythm Society 
continue to recommend an initial ECG in all patients with 
increased risk of an arrhythmia (eg, patients with elevated 
QTc, history of palpitations, or syncope) and that an ini-
tial ECG be considered in all patients starting methadone. 
Follow-up ECGs should be conducted based on the initial 
recording, with higher QTc intervals requiring closer fol-
low-up (as early as 2 to 4 weeks) and as late as when the patient 
reaches 100 mg/day of methadone. The reader is referred to 
the detailed recommendations for more specific information 
[245] and is cautioned that due to the limitations in current 
research, most of the recommendations in this guideline are 
based on a low quality of evidence.
Oxycodone drug levels have been shown to increase 2–3 fold 
in healthy volunteers in the presence of CYP3A-mediated inhi-
bition by short-term administration of ritonavir, suggesting that 
downward dose adjustments may be needed when oxycodone is 
prescribed in patients initially taking ritonavir [246]. Although 
not studied to date, cobicistat, another pharamcoenhancer, is 
likely to cause a similar effect given it has a similar mechanism 
of action [247]. Buprenorphine, despite pharmacokinetic inter-
actions, can be safely administered with all currently available 
HIV therapies with minimal risk of clinical opioid withdrawal 
[68, 248, 249].
X. What is the recommended approach to prescribing con-
trolled substances for the management of chronic pain to per-
sons living with human immunodeficiency virus with a history 
of substance use disorder?
Recommendations
34. Persons with a history of a substance use disorder or addic-
tion should be carefully evaluated and risk stratified in 
the same manner as all other PLWH with chronic pain 
(strong, low). Values and preferences: This recommenda-
tion places a high value on clinical strategies that neutral-
ize bias and reduce stigma in the care of all PLWH and the 
possibility of behavior change over time. Remark: A patient’s 
history of addiction or substance use disorder is not an abso-
lute contraindication to receiving controlled substances for 
the management of chronic pain. A risk–benefit framework 
that views controlled substances as medications with unique 
risks to every patient (“a universal precautions approach”) 
should be applied uniformly to help providers make fair 
and informed clinical decisions about controlled substance 
prescribing.
35. Persons with a history of addiction for whom the risks 
currently outweigh the benefits of a controlled substance 
prescription should have their chronic pain reasonably 
managed by other therapies and should receive emo-
tional support, close monitoring and reassessment, and 
linkages to addiction treatment and mental health ser-
vices as indicated (strong, low). Values and preferences: 
This recommendation places a high value on access to 
pain management as a fundamental human right with an 
underlying principle that every person deserves to have 
his or her pain reasonably managed by adequately trained 
healthcare professionals and that every medical provider 
has a duty to listen to and reasonably respond to a patient’s 
report of pain.
Evidence Summary
The prescription of opioid analgesics to persons with a history of 
addiction and/or mental illness can make providers feel uncom-
fortable [250, 251]. Persons with active or recent substance use 
are at higher risk for the development of harmful opioid-related 
behaviors, and medical providers report a lack confidence when 
prescribing opioids to patients with histories of addiction [198]. 
In accordance with recommendations from the American Pain 
Society and the American Academy of Pain Medicine, high-
er-risk patients who are prescribed opioids should undergo 
routine monitoring, with providers using opioid risk mitigation 
strategies [32]. In addition, linkage to addiction treatment and 
recovery resources and mental health services, when applicable, 
is essential [83]. A mechanism for providing these safeguards 
should be detailed in the treatment agreement and explicitly 
discussed between patient and provider prior to initiating opi-
oid analgesics.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/10/e1/4157299 by guest on 02 June 2019
 e28 • CID 2017:65 (15 November) • Bruce et al
Although specific data for the prescription of benzodiaze-
pines in patients with chronic pain is lacking, we recommend 
a judicious approach. Providers are reminded that in addition 
to the rapid development of tolerance and physical dependence, 
benzodiazepines and other sedative–hypnotics may contribute 
to the risk of opioid analgesic overdose and cause anterograde 
amnesia. Moreover, long-term benzodiazepine use has been 
associated with cognitive impairment and dementia in the 
general population, and this may negatively impact other evi-
denced-based treatments for pain, such as cognitive behavioral 
therapy [165, 252–254].
XI. What are the recommended approaches to the pharmaco-
logical management of chronic pain in persons living with 
human immunodeficiency virus who are on methadone for the 
treatment of opioid use disorder?
Recommendations
36. A signed release for the exchange of health information 
between the provider and the opioid treatment program 
(OTP) is recommended prior to any controlled substance 
prescribing (strong, low). Remark: Ongoing communica-
tion with the OPT is essential when there are 2 controlled 
substance prescribers. Sharing information about a patient’s 
progress in recovery is an important component of the assess-
ment and periodic monitoring of a pain treatment’s risks and 
benefits, for example, whether to pursue a trial of or to con-
tinue or discontinue opioid analgesic therapy.
37. Initial screening with electrocardiogram to identify 
heart rate corrected QT (QTc) prolongation for all 
patients on methadone is recommended, with interval 
follow-up with dose changes. This is especially helpful 
if the patient is also prescribed other medications that 
may additively prolong the QTc (eg, certain psycho-
tropics, fluconazole, macrolides, potassium-lowering 
agents) (strong, low).
38. The splitting of methadone into 6- to 8-hour doses is rec-
ommended in order to lengthen the active analgesic effects 
of methadone with the goal of continuous pain control 
(strong, low). Remark: Some OTPs may be able to offer a 
split-dose methadone regimen for patients. Alternatively, the 
medical provider may need to prescribe the remaining daily 
doses: 5%–10% of the current methadone dose should be 
added, usually as an afternoon and evening dose for a total 
10%–20% increase over the regular dose for the treatment of 
opioid use disorder (strong, very low).
39. If prescribing additional methadone is not possible (eg, 
OTP policy, high baseline methadone dose, prolonged 
QTc intervals, high risk of diversion, the patient is new to 
or poorly adherent to the OTP), then the addition of an 
additional medication may be recommended for chronic 
pain management depending on the etiology of the 
pain (eg, gabapentin for neuropathic pain, nonsteroidal 
antiinflammatory drugs for musculoskeletal pain, or an 
additional opioid) (weak, low).
40. Acute exacerbations in pain or “breakthrough pain” should 
be treated with small amounts of short-acting opioid anal-
gesics in patients at low risk for opioid misuse (strong, 
low). Remark: Providers and patients should agree on the 
number of pills that will be dispensed for breakthrough pain, 
their frequency of use, and the expected duration of this 
treatment.
Evidence Summary
Methadone, a strong full μ-opioid receptor agonist and 
N-methyl-D-aspartate antagonist, can provide effective anal-
gesia when dosed carefully, especially for patients with severe 
pain that is not controlled by other opioids or for patients 
who poorly tolerate other opioids [255, 256]. Although meth-
adone has a long half-life (30 hours) and is dosed once daily 
for the treatment of opioid use disorders, it has an analge-
sic effect of only 6 to 8 hours [257]. Patients with chronic 
pain who are on methadone maintenance for the treatment of 
opioid use disorder will have increased opioid tolerance but 
will not experience adequate analgesia with once daily dosing 
[82]. One option for some methadone-maintained patients is 
to split their once-daily dose of methadone into several daily 
doses. Methadone clinics have the capability of “split-dosing” 
methadone; that is, dispensing a morning dose of metha-
done and then providing take-home bottles of methadone for 
self-administration later in the day. This split-dosing is more 
traditionally reserved for “fast metabolizers” of methadone 
and for pregnant patients for whom once daily methadone 
may be inadequate [258]. Split-dosing is typically reserved 
for patients whose substance use disorder is in remission and 
who demonstrate good adherence to methadone treatment 
(ie, they have graduated to at least once weekly “pickups” 
or “take homes”). To begin split-dosing for the treatment of 
chronic pain, 5%–10% of the current methadone dose should 
be added, usually as an afternoon and evening dose for a 
10%–20% increase over the regular dose. For example, 10% 
of a patient’s 100-mg daily sdose is 10 mg that, when dosed 
at 10 mg in the afternoon and 10 mg in the evening, comes 
to a total of 120 mg daily. Methadone clinics have demon-
strated an ability to successfully administer or dispense other 
treatments, including daily observed antiretroviral therapy or 
tuberculosis regimens, thereby supporting adherence [259–
261]. The promotion of adherence to opioid tresatments for 
pain and/or addiction should be under the logical purview 
of the methadone clinic system. However, to date, no studies 
have examined the use of a methadone maintenance clinic’s 
structure of dispensing methadone and splitting that dose for 
the treatment of chronic pain.
Methadone is known to prolong the heart rate QTc, and 
patients should be advised of the risk of arrhythmia when 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/10/e1/4157299 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Pain Management in People with HIV • CID 2017:65 (15 November) • e29
prescribed methadone. Clinicians should ask patients about a 
prior history of structural heart disease, arrhythmia, or syncope. 
A pretreatment electrocardiogram (ECG) is recommended for 
all patients starting methadone for addiction to measure the 
baseline QTc, and a follow-up ECG should be performed within 
30 days to determine changes impacted by methadone and/or 
additional medications [262]. Data are lacking on the pretreat-
ment use of ECGs for patients prescribed methadone for the 
treatment of chronic pain. The reader is referred to additional 
literature on potential drug interactions that may impact QTc as 
well as recommendations on QTc management in methadone 
patients [240, 244, 262, 263].
XII. What are the recommended approaches to the pharma-
cological management of chronic pain in persons living with 
human immunodeficiency virus who are on buprenorphine for 
the treatment of opioid use disorders?
Recommendations
41. Clinicians should use adjuvant therapy appropriate to the 
pain syndrome for mild-to-moderate breakthrough pain 
(strong, moderate). Remark: These adjuvants include, but 
are not limited to, nonpharmacologic treatments, steroids, 
nonopioid analgesics, and topical agents. (See section on 
“nonopioids” for treatment of chronic neuropathic and non-
neuropathic pain.)
42. Based on expert opinion, the clinician should increase the 
dosage of buprenorphine in divided does as an initial step 
in the management of chronic pain (strong, very low). 
Remark: Dosing ranges of 4–16 mg divided into 8-hour doses 
have shown benefit in patients with chronic noncancer pain.
43. Based on expert opinion, clinician’s might switch from 
buprenorphine/naloxone to buprenorphine transdermal 
formulation alone (weak, very low).
44. We recommend that if a maximal dose of buprenorphine 
is reached, an additional long-acting potent opioid such 
as fentanyl, morphine, or hydromorphone should be tried 
(strong, low).
45. If usual doses of an additional opioid are ineffective for 
improving chronic pain, we recommend a closely moni-
tored trial of higher doses of an additional opioid (strong, 
moderate). Remark: Buprenorphine’s high binding affinity 
for the μ-opioid receptor may prevent the lower doses of 
other opioids from accessing the μ-opioid receptor.
46. For patients on buprenorphine maintenance with inade-
quate analgesia despite the above-mentioned strategies, we 
recommend transitioning the patient from buprenorphine 
to methadone maintenance (strong, very low).
Evidence Summary
Buprenorphine is a partial opioid agonist with a high bind-
ing affinity for the μ-opioid receptor [143]. This high affinity 
diminishes the ability of other more potent full agonist opioids 
to dislodge it from the receptor [264]. This blocking of other 
full opioid agonists is a beneficial property in the treatment of 
opioid use disorder [265]. This high affinity and slow dissocia-
tion are also beneficial in the treatment of chronic pain, provid-
ing analgesia over a long period of time [266, 267].
Buprenorphine is available as a sublingual tablet, sublingual 
film, and 6-month implant that are approved for the treatment 
of opioid use disorders; a transdermal patch is approved for the 
treatment of chronic pain. The tablet or film can be prescribed 
off label in split doses (ie, every 6–8 hours) for the treatment of 
pain; however, the buprenorphine patch cannot be prescribed 
off label for the treatment of opioid use disorder.
During acute episodes of pain, buprenorphine may pose a 
greater challenge than methadone in achieving analgesia [268]. 
The dose of buprenorphine can be increased to provide additional 
analgesia. Walsh and colleagues examined doses of buprenor-
phine up to 70 times the normal analgesic doses and verified the 
ceiling effect of buprenorphine on respiratory depression [269]. 
Rubenstein [270] argued that buprenorphine has not been stud-
ied for a ceiling effect on analgesia, and, given its potency and 
safety, buprenorphine may be beneficial at higher doses for treat-
ing pain. Malinoff and colleagues enrolled 95 individuals with 
chronic noncancer pain who were medically withdrawn from 
long-term opioid analgesic therapy and transferred to daily sub-
lingual buprenorphine ranging from 4 to 16 mg (mean 8 mg) in 
divided doses. The mean duration of treatment was 8.8 months, 
and 86% of patients experienced moderate to substantial relief 
in pain with improved functioning and mood [271]. Additional 
buprenorphine side effects (eg, headache, constipation), how-
ever, may be more pronounced at higher doses.
For management of chronic pain in persons on buprenor-
phine for the treatment of opioid use disorder, clinicians might 
consider switching from buprenorphine/naloxone to buprenor-
phine transdermal alone. The sublingual formulation has a 90% 
first-pass hepatic metabolism. A transdermal patch bypasses 
hepatic metabolism and may provide better analgesia relative to 
the tablet or film formulation. Transdermal buprenorphine has 
proven efficacy and may be safer than full opioid agonists in the 
treatment of chronic pain. In a systematic review of buprenor-
phine vs transdermal fentanyl and morphine for chronic pain, it 
was found that buprenorphine provided comparable pain relief 
with fewer adverse events [272].
Because buprenorphine does not occupy all opioid receptors, 
other opioids can be given when pain is acute. High-potency opi-
oids such as fentanyl or hydromorphone should be considered 
when the addition of nonpharmacologic treatments and nonopi-
oid pharmacotherapies are ineffective [273]. If the maximum dose 
of transdermal buprenorphine is reached, consideration should 
be given to adding or replacing it with an additional long-acting 
potent opioid such as fentanyl, morphine, or hydromorphone.
As noted previously, patients on buprenorphine mainte-
nance treatment for opioid use disorder who have inadequate 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/10/e1/4157299 by guest on 02 June 2019
 e30 • CID 2017:65 (15 November) • Bruce et al
analgesia should be considered for methadone maintenance 
instead. Methadone is a full agonist and, when dosed appro-
priately, may provide greater analgesia. In addition, it can be 
prescribed with other opioid analgesics. Other agents such as 
long-acting morphine preparations can complicate substance 
use disorder treatment since heroin metabolizes to morphine, 
making it difficult to interpret urine drug testing results.
XIII. What are the recommended instruments for screening 
common mental health disorders in persons living with human 
immunodeficiency virus with chronic pain?
Recommendations
47. Clinicians should fully review a patient’s baseline mental 
health status for modifiable factors that can impact suc-
cessful pain management (strong, low). Remark: Potentially 
modifiable factors include self-esteem and coping skills; 
recent major loss or grief; unhealthy substance use; history of 
violence or lack of safety in the home; mood disorders; and 
history of serious mental illness or suicidal ideation.
48. All patients should be screened for depression with the 
following 2 questions: During the past 2 weeks have you 
often been bothered by feeling down, depressed, or hope-
less? During the past 2 weeks have you been bothered by 
little interest or pleasure in doing things? (strong, high). 
Remark: If the patient answers in the affirmative to either 
question, a follow-up question regarding help should be 
asked: Is this something with which you would like help?
49. The patient health questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9), which is in 
the public domain, is recommended as a screening tool in 
clinical settings without access to trained mental health 
professionals as it can be used to diagnose depression 
(strong, high). Remark: Psychiatric follow-up for a result 
that is ≥10 (88% sensitivity and 88% specificity for major 
depression) is recommended, and the clinical site should 
have a policy for referrals for more in-depth evaluation of 
these issues.
50. All patients should be screened for comorbid neurocogni-
tive disorders prior to and during use of long-term opioid 
therapy (strong, low). Remark: Questions administered to 
elicit cognitive complaints in the Swiss HIV Cohort study 
(eg, frequent memory loss; feeling slower when reasoning, 
planning activities, or solving problems; and difficulties pay-
ing attention) detected, but have not been tested as screening 
questions in the clinical setting.
51. It is recommended that all patients with chronic pain have 
a full neuropsychiatric evaluation with history, physical, 
and use of the HIV dementia scale or an equivalent to 
document baseline capacity (strong, high).
Evidence Summary
A patient’s baseline self-esteem and coping skills play a signifi-
cant role in controlling chronic pain. Depression, anxiety, and 
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) are common in people 
living with HIV, as seen in a cohort of adults with severe men-
tal illness where HIV was the third leading cause of death in 
one-third of the Medicaid recipients in 1 US state [274]. Mental 
illness in PLWH can in turn be impacted by dependency, dis-
ability, fear of pain, and fear of death. Patients with these diag-
noses may have less-effective coping skills than those without a 
history of a mood disorder [275]. These diagnoses are known 
to result in recording of greater pain intensity and pain-related 
disability [10, 197, 276].
Full mental health management is beyond the scope of this 
guideline, but mental health disorders must be recognized as a 
potentially confounding problem for the successful management 
of chronic pain in PLWH since depression and pain frequently 
co-occur [17]. Effective screening tools for use in the clinical set-
ting are available for many mental health syndromes. Some of the 
most common mental health syndromes experienced by indi-
viduals with chronic pain include self-esteem and coping skills 
used during previous difficult times in life; recent significant loss 
or grief; documentation of serious life events or traumas; mood 
disorders, especially those known to negatively impact adherence 
(eg, depression, PTSD); substance use disorders; or lack of safety 
in the home. Where possible, clinics should use standardized and 
validated instruments to screen for mental illness.
Screening for depression.  The 2-question questionnaire refer-
enced in recommendation 48 is simple to implement in even 
the busiest clinical practice. The screen has performed as well 
as other, longer screens in non-HIV clinical settings with a sen-
sitivity of 96% and a specificity of 57% [277]. When a question 
was added inquiring if help is needed, the specificity increased 
to 94% [278]. In addition to this questionnaire, there is the 
PHQ-2 and the PHQ-9. The PHQ-2 lists responses on a Likert 
scale. The PHQ-2 and PHQ-9 have been validated in PLWH in 
Kenya [279, 280]. The PHQ-9 is a simple screen for depression 
that patients can self-administer prior to the provider seeing 
the patient [281, 282]. The site must have a policy to respond 
to positive screens for more in-depth evaluation. Current evi-
dence demonstrates that screening programs with staff-assisted 
depression care (eg, case management, mental health special-
ist) are more likely to improve depression outcomes and that 
clinics should ascertain if they can either provide these services 
directly or through partnerships with other agencies [283].
Screening for neurocognitive disorders.  HIV-associated 
dementia has declined dramatically with effective antiretroviral 
therapy (ART). However, HIV-associated neurocognitive disor-
der (HAND) remains underrecognized in the current HIV pop-
ulation and can complicate evaluation and management of the 
person with chronic pain. In a recent review of 364 patients in 
the Multicenter AIDS Cohort, the majority of PLWH on com-
bination ART with virologic suppression were diagnosed with 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/10/e1/4157299 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Pain Management in People with HIV • CID 2017:65 (15 November) • e31
HAND at the same rate, and it was not progressive over 4 years 
of follow-up [284]. Symptoms have been reported in 20%–50% 
of HIV-infected persons at all stages of illness regardless of viral 
suppression and ART use [285, 286]. Clinical signs include 
mental slowing, memory loss (seen in 20%–70%), and diffi-
culty with complex function (executive function), plus motor 
disorders. Patients may demonstrate apathy, decreased spon-
taneity, or dampened emotional response. These signs must be 
distinguished from depression. Cognitive impairment may be 
subtle, making it useful to use a clinically tested screening tool 
such as the International HIV dementia scale (IHDS). This scale 
was designed to identify subcortical dementias, including HIV 
dementia, by assessing memory (registration and recall), atten-
tion, psychomotor speed, and timed construction [287]; how-
ever, the full instrument may require practice on the part of the 
administrator for efficient completion [286]. A modified HDS 
has been developed for nonneurologists but has been assessed 
only for HAND [288, 289].
In 2013, Hu et al conducted a metaanalysis and found that 
“IHDS and HDS may offer high diagnostic performance accu-
racy for the detection of HAND in primary health care and 
resource-limited settings” [290]. However, low accuracy of 
HDS and IHDS for the diagnosis of HAND and minor neuro-
cognitive disorder (MND) was reported by Haddow et al [291]. 
The pooled diagnostic odds ratio for the HDS was 7.52 (95% 
confidence interval, 3.75–15.11); sensitivity and specificity for 
HAND were estimated at 68.1% and 77.9%; and sensitivity 
and specificity for MND were estimated at 42.0% and 91.2%. 
Zipursky et al published a systematic review of brief screening 
tools for neurocognitive impairment in PLWH and found that 
the HDS had poor pooled sensitivity (0.48) and that the IHDS 
had moderate pooled sensitivity (0.62) in detecting a range of 
cognitive impairments. Five newer screening tools had rela-
tively good sensitivities (>0.70) [292]; however, none of the 
tools differentiated HAND conditions well enough to suggest 
broader use [292]. There were significant methodological short-
comings noted in most studies. These authors concluded that 
“HDS and IHDS perform well to screen for HAND but poorly 
for milder HAND conditions.” Recently, a microRNA plasma 
biomarker has been developed to predict neurocognitive disor-
ders in PLWH, but clinical screening will highlight the need for 
use of such a test [289].
The hallmark of HIV dementia is memory deficits with 
psychomotor retardation. Current outpatients with advanced 
HIV disease may develop minor cognitive motor disorders 
over months, with subtle neurological impairment in 20% 
of symptomatic adults regardless of degree of viral suppres-
sion. Clinical manifestations to watch for include cognitive, 
behavioral, and motor dysfunction such as gait disturbance 
or tremor [293]. Patients with these symptoms would benefit 
from a neurological consultation or formal neuropsychiatric 
testing.
In the Swiss Cohort, 80% of patients with long-standing HIV 
viral suppression demonstrated measurable cognitive deficits 
when screened with the following questions: Do you experi-
ence frequent memory loss? For example, forget the occurrence 
of special events or appointments; Do you feel you are slower 
when reasoning, planning activities, or solving problems?; and 
Do you have difficulties paying attention? For example, paying 
attention to a conversation, book, or movie. Answers included 
“yes,” “no,” or “definitely yes” [286]. Persons responding with 
“definitely yes” to any question should be formally evaluated for 
neurocognitive disorder [286].
Because of the impact controlled substances have on cogni-
tive function, pain treatments should be managed as effectively 
as possible during the evaluation. Additionally, dosing should 
be stabilized at the time of testing to minimize confounding.
There is a significant continuum of mental health issues that 
represent serious comorbidities for PLWH who have chronic 
pain. These issues can complicate both evaluation and man-
agement of chronic pain and must be well documented in the 
patient record to allow for effective team-wide care planning. 
Each care delivery site must develop policies for screening, 
evaluation, and referrals related to mental health issues that will 
assist in streamlining pain management strategies. Patients and 
their support persons will appreciate overall coordination by 
the primary care provider to avoid potential difficulties encoun-
tered by many chronic pain patients.
Future Directions
Although chronic pain is common in PLWH, many questions 
remain unanswered. Findings from studies conducted in the 
general population are not always generalizable to PLWH, and 
interventions to reduce the negative unintended consequences 
of opioid treatment have not been rigorously tested. Additional 
studies are needed to ascertain the optimal nonpharmacological 
and pharmacologic treatment for HIV-associated neuropathic 
pain and nonneuropathic pain in PLWH. Additional research is 
needed to adapt behavioral interventions designed for relatively 
healthy general population to chronic pain in PLWH. Finally, 
work to understand the impact of chronic pain on outcomes in 
PLWH is needed.
Notes
Acknowledgments. The Expert Panel expresses its gratitude to external 
reviewers Drs Robert Arnold, E. Jennifer Edelman, and Romy Parker. The 
panel also thanks Vita Washington for continued guidance throughout the 
guideline development process.
Financial support. Support was provided by the IDSA.
Potential conflicts of interest. The following is a reflection of what has 
been reported to the IDSA. In order to provide thorough transparency, 
the IDSA requires full disclosure of all relationships, regardless of rele-
vancy to the guideline topic. Evaluation of such relationships as poten-
tial conflicts of interest is determined by a review process that includes 
assessment by the SPGC chair, the SPGC liaison to the development panel, 
the BOD liaison to the SPGC, and, if necessary, the Conflict of Interest 
Task Force of the board. This assessment of disclosed relationships for 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/10/e1/4157299 by guest on 02 June 2019
 e32 • CID 2017:65 (15 November) • Bruce et al
possible conflicts of interest is based on the relative weight of the financial 
relationship (ie, monetary amount) and the relevance of the relationship 
(ie, the degree to which an association might reasonably be interpreted 
by an independent observer as related to the topic or recommendation of 
consideration). The reader should be mindful of this when the list of dis-
closures is reviewed. A. C. has received research grants from the Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention and National Institutes of Health. All 
remaining authors: No reported conflicts of interest. All authors have sub-
mitted the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest. 
Conflicts that the editors consider relevant to the content of the manu-
script have been disclosed.
References
1. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R, et al; GRADE Working Group. Going from evi-
dence to recommendations. BMJ 2008; 336:1049–51.
2. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Vist GE, et al; GRADE Working Group. GRADE: an 
emerging consensus on rating quality of evidence and strength of recommenda-
tions. BMJ 2008; 336:924–6.
3. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R, Vist GE, Falck-Ytter Y, Schünemann HJ; 
GRADE Working Group. What is “quality of evidence” and why is it important to 
clinicians? BMJ 2008; 336:995–8.
4. Jaeschke R, Guyatt GH, Dellinger P, et al; GRADE Working Group. Use of 
GRADE grid to reach decisions on clinical practice guidelines when consensus is 
elusive. BMJ 2008; 337:a744.
5. Chow AW, Benninger MS, Brook I, et al; Infectious Diseases Society of America. 
IDSA clinical practice guideline for acute bacterial rhinosinusitis in children and 
adults. Clin Infect Dis 2012; 54:e72–e112.
6. Merlin JS, Westfall AO, Raper JL, et al. Pain, mood, and substance abuse in HIV: 
implications for clinic visit utilization, antiretroviral therapy adherence, and viro-
logic failure. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 2012; 61:164–70.
7. Cervia LD, McGowan JP, Weseley AJ. Clinical and demographic variables related 
to pain in HIV-infected individuals treated with effective, combination antiretro-
viral therapy (cART). Pain Med 2010; 11:498–503.
8. Harding R, Lampe FC, Norwood S, et al. Symptoms are highly prevalent among 
HIV outpatients and associated with poor adherence and unprotected sexual 
intercourse. Sex Transm Infect 2010; 86:520–4.
9. Lee KA, Gay C, Portillo CJ, et al. Symptom experience in HIV-infected adults: a 
function of demographic and clinical characteristics. J Pain Symptom Manage 
2009; 38:882–93.
10. Miaskowski C, Penko JM, Guzman D, Mattson JE, Bangsberg DR, Kushel MB. 
Occurrence and characteristics of chronic pain in a community-based cohort of 
indigent adults living with HIV infection. J Pain 2011; 12:1004–16.
11. Silverberg MJ, Gore ME, French AL, et al. Prevalence of clinical symptoms asso-
ciated with highly active antiretroviral therapy in the Women’s Interagency HIV 
Study. Clin Infect Dis 2004; 39:717–24.
12. Silverberg MJ, Jacobson LP, French AL, Witt MD, Gange SJ. Age and racial/ethnic 
differences in the prevalence of reported symptoms in human immunodeficiency 
virus-infected persons on antiretroviral therapy. J Pain Symptom Manage 2009; 
38:197–207.
13. Newshan G, Bennett J, Holman S. Pain and other symptoms in ambulatory HIV 
patients in the age of highly active antiretroviral therapy. J Assoc Nurses AIDS 
Care 2002; 13:78–83.
14. Aouizerat BE, Miaskowski CA, Gay C, et al. Risk factors and symptoms associated 
with pain in HIV-infected adults. J Assoc Nurses AIDS Care 2010; 21:125–33.
15. Breitbart W, Passik S, McDonald MV, et al. Patient-related barriers to pain man-
agement in ambulatory AIDS patients. Pain 1998; 76:9–16.
16. Breitbart W, Rosenfeld BD, Passik SD, McDonald MV, Thaler H, Portenoy RK. 
The undertreatment of pain in ambulatory AIDS patients. Pain 1996; 65:243–9.
17. Breitbart W, Chapman CR, FK, eds. Suicide Risk and Pain in Cancer and AIDS 
Patients: Current and Emerging Issues in Cancer Pain: Research and Practice. 
New York Raven Press, 1993.
18. Carr DB. Pain in HIV/AIDS a major global healthcare problem. 2012.
19. Dowell D, Haegerich TM, Chou R. CDC guideline for prescribing opioids for 
chronic pain—United States, 2016. MMWR Recomm Rep 2016; 65:1–49.
20. Cheung CW, Qiu Q, Choi SW, Moore B, Goucke R, Irwin M. Chronic opioid ther-
apy for chronic non-cancer pain: a review and comparison of treatment guide-
lines. Pain Physician 2014; 17:401–14.
21. Turk DC, Wilson HD, Cahana A. Treatment of chronic non-cancer pain. Lancet 
2011; 377:2226–35.
22. Henry DE, Chiodo AE, Yang W. Central nervous system reorganization in a vari-
ety of chronic pain states: a review. PM R 2011; 3:1116–25.
23. Thomas Cheng H. Spinal cord mechanisms of chronic pain and clinical implica-
tions. Curr Pain Headache Rep 2010; 14:213–20.
24. Önen NF, Barrette EP, Shacham E, Taniguchi T, Donovan M, Overton ET. 
A review of opioid prescribing practices and associations with repeat opi-
oid prescriptions in a contemporary outpatient HIV clinic. Pain Pract 2012; 
12:440–8.
25. Perry BA, Westfall AO, Molony E, et al. Characteristics of an ambulatory palliative 
care clinic for HIV-infected patients. J Palliat Med 2013; 16:934–7.
26. Johnson A, Condon KD, Mapas-Dimaya AC, et al. Report of an HIV clinic-based 
pain management program and utilization of health status and health service by 
HIV patients. J Opioid Manag 2012; 8:17–27.
27. Chou R. Pharmacological management of low back pain. Drugs 2010; 70:387–402.
28. Chou R. Steering patients to relief from chronic low back pain: opioids’ role. J Fam 
Pract 2013; 62:S8–13.
29. Chou R, Deyo RA, Jarvik JG. Appropriate use of lumbar imaging for evaluation of 
low back pain. Radiol Clin North Am 2012; 50:569–85.
30. Deyo RA, Jarvik JG, Chou R. Low back pain in primary care. BMJ 2014; 
349:g4266.
31. Chou R, Fanciullo GJ, Fine PG, Miaskowski C, Passik SD, Portenoy RK. Opioids 
for chronic noncancer pain: prediction and identification of aberrant drug-related 
behaviors: a review of the evidence for an American Pain Society and American 
Academy of Pain Medicine clinical practice guideline. J Pain 2009; 10:131–46.
32. Chou R, Fanciullo GJ, Fine PG, et al; American Pain Society-American Academy 
of Pain Medicine Opioids Guidelines Panel. Clinical guidelines for the use of 
chronic opioid therapy in chronic noncancer pain. J Pain 2009; 10:113–30.
33. Zheng W, Ouyang H, Zheng X, et al. Glial TNFα in the spinal cord regulates neu-
ropathic pain induced by HIV gp120 application in rats. Mol Pain 2011; 7:40.
34. Ellis RJ, Rosario D, Clifford DB, et al; CHARTER Study Group. Continued high 
prevalence and adverse clinical impact of human immunodeficiency virus-asso-
ciated sensory neuropathy in the era of combination antiretroviral therapy: the 
CHARTER Study. Arch Neurol 2010; 67:552–8.
35. Lichtenstein KA, Armon C, Baron A, Moorman AC, Wood KC, Holmberg SD; 
HIV Outpatient Study Investigators. Modification of the incidence of drug-asso-
ciated symmetrical peripheral neuropathy by host and disease factors in the HIV 
outpatient study cohort. Clin Infect Dis 2005; 40:148–57.
36. Morgello S, Estanislao L, Simpson D, et al; Manhattan HIV Brain Bank. HIV-
associated distal sensory polyneuropathy in the era of highly active antiretroviral 
therapy: the Manhattan HIV Brain Bank. Arch Neurol 2004; 61:546–51.
37. Simpson DM, Kitch D, Evans SR, et al; ACTG A5117 Study Group. HIV neuropa-
thy natural history cohort study: assessment measures and risk factors. Neurology 
2006; 66:1679–87.
38. Phillips TJ, Cherry CL, Cox S, Marshall SJ, Rice AS. Pharmacological treatment of 
painful HIV-associated sensory neuropathy: a systematic review and meta-analy-
sis of randomised controlled trials. PLoS One 2010; 5:e14433.
39. Simpson DM, Brown S, Tobias JK, Vanhove GF. NGX-4010, a capsaicin 8% der-
mal patch, for the treatment of painful HIV-associated distal sensory polyneurop-
athy: results of a 52-week open-label study. Clin J Pain 2013; 30:134–42.
40. Childs EA, Lyles RH, Selnes OA, et al. Plasma viral load and CD4 lymphocytes 
predict HIV-associated dementia and sensory neuropathy. Neurology 1999; 
52:607–13.
41. Bacellar H, Munoz A, Miller EN, et al. Temporal trends in the incidence of 
HIV-1-related neurologic diseases: multicenter AIDS Cohort Study, 1985–1992. 
Neurology 1994; 44:1892–900.
42. Smith HS. Treatment considerations in painful HIV-related neuropathy. Pain 
Physician 2011; 14:E505–24.
43. Bhangoo SK, Ren D, Miller RJ, et al. CXCR4 chemokine receptor signaling medi-
ates pain hypersensitivity in association with antiretroviral toxic neuropathy. 
Brain Behav Immun 2007; 21:581–91.
44. Vaso A, Adahan HM, Gjika A, et al. Peripheral nervous system origin of phantom 
limb pain. Pain 2014; 155:1384–91.
45. Goebel A. Complex regional pain syndrome in adults. Rheumatology (Oxford) 
2011; 50:1739–50.
46. du Plessis CD, Aden AA, Firnhaber C, Sanne I. Complex regional pain syndrome 
in a HIV seropositive patient starting antiretroviral therapy. J Clin Rheumatol 
2009; 15:371–2.
47. Mbizvo GK, Nolan SJ, Nurmikko TJ, Goebel A. Placebo responses in long-stand-
ing complex regional pain syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J 
Pain 2015; 16:99–115.
48. Freedman M, Greis AC, Marino L, Sinha AN, Henstenburg J. Complex regional 
pain syndrome: diagnosis and treatment. Phys Med Rehabil Clin N Am 2014; 
25:291–303.
49. Wasner G. Central pain syndromes. Curr Pain Headache Rep 2010; 14:489–96.
50. Nicholson BD. Evaluation and treatment of central pain syndromes. Neurology 
2004; 62:S30–6.
51. Simms RW, Zerbini CA, Ferrante N, Anthony J, Felson DT, Craven DE. 
Fibromyalgia syndrome in patients infected with human immunodeficiency 
virus. The Boston City Hospital Clinical AIDS Team. Am J Med 1992; 92:368–74.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/10/e1/4157299 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Pain Management in People with HIV • CID 2017:65 (15 November) • e33
52. Cassisi G, Sarzi-Puttini P, Cazzola M. Chronic widespread pain and fibromyal-
gia: could there be some relationships with infections and vaccinations? Clin Exp 
Rheumatol 2011; 29:S118–26.
53. Populations CotDCfMECFSBotHoS. Committee on the Diagnostic Criteria for 
Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome; Board on the Health of 
Select Populations; Institute of Medicine. Beyond Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome: Redefining an Illness. Washington, DC: National 
Academies Press US. 2015.
54. International Pain Summit of the International Association for the Study of Pain. 
Declaration of Montréal: declaration that access to pain management is a funda-
mental human right. J Pain Palliat Care Pharmacother 2011; 25:29–31.
55. Brennan F, Carr DB, Cousins M. Pain management: a fundamental human right. 
Anesth Analg 2007; 105:205–21.
56. Marcus DA. Treatment of nonmalignant chronic pain. Am Fam Physician 2000; 
61:1331–8, 1345–6.
57. Roditi D, Robinson ME. The role of psychological interventions in the manage-
ment of patients with chronic pain. Psychol Res Behav Manag 2011; 4:41–9.
58. Marcus KS, Kerns RD, Rosenfeld B, Breitbart W. HIV/AIDS-related pain as a 
chronic pain condition: implications of a biopsychosocial model for comprehen-
sive assessment and effective management. Pain Med 2000; 1:260–73.
59. Flor H, Fydrich T, Turk DC. Efficacy of multidisciplinary pain treatment centers: 
a meta-analytic review. Pain 1992; 49:221–30.
60. Leserman J, Whetten K, Lowe K, Stangl D, Swartz MS, Thielman NM. How trauma, 
recent stressful events, and PTSD affect functional health status and health utiliza-
tion in HIV-infected patients in the south. Psychosom Med 2005; 67:500–7.
61. Lucey BP, Clifford DB, Creighton J, Edwards RR, McArthur JC, Haythornthwaite 
J. Relationship of depression and catastrophizing to pain, disability, and medica-
tion adherence in patients with HIV-associated sensory neuropathy. AIDS Care 
2011; 23:921–8.
62. Clark MR, Treisman GJ. Perspectives on pain and depression. Adv Psychosom 
Med 2004; 25:1–27.
63. Faltz BG. Counseling substance abuse clients infected with human immunodefi-
ciency virus. J Psychoactive Drugs 1988; 20:217–21.
64. Matthias MS, Parpart AL, Nyland KA, et al. The patient-provider relationship in 
chronic pain care: providers’ perspectives. Pain Med 2010; 11:1688–97.
65. Di Blasi Z, Harkness E, Ernst E, Georgiou A, Kleijnen J. Influence of context 
effects on health outcomes: a systematic review. Lancet 2001; 357:757–62.
66. Beck RS, Daughtridge R, Sloane PD. Physician-patient communication in the pri-
mary care office: a systematic review. J Am Board Fam Pract 2002; 15:25–38.
67. Simpson DM, Haidich AB, Schifitto G, et al; ACTG 291 study team. Severity of 
HIV-associated neuropathy is associated with plasma HIV-1 RNA levels. AIDS 
2002; 16:407–12.
68. Bruce RD, Moody DE, Altice FL, Gourevitch MN, Friedland GH. A review of 
pharmacological interactions between HIV or hepatitis C virus medications and 
opioid agonist therapy: implications and management for clinical practice. Expert 
Rev Clin Pharmacol 2013; 6:249–69.
69. Field MJ, Lohr KN; Institute of Medicine Committee to Advise the Public Health 
Service on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Clinical practice guidelines: directions 
for a new program. Washington, DC: National Academy Press 1990: 52–77.
70. Schünemann HJ, Schünemann AH, Oxman AD, et al; GRADE Working Group. 
Grading quality of evidence and strength of recommendations for diagnostic tests 
and strategies. BMJ 2008; 336:1106–10.
71. Kish MA; Infectious Diseases Society of America. Guide to development of prac-
tice guidelines. Clin Infect Dis 2001; 32:851–4.
72. Landmark T, Romundstad P, Dale O, Borchgrevink PC, Kaasa S. Estimating the 
prevalence of chronic pain: validation of recall against longitudinal reporting (the 
HUNT pain study). Pain 2012; 153:1368–73.
73. Fishman SM. Responsible Opioid Prescribing: A Clinician’s Guide. Michigan: 
FSMB, 2007.
74. Dworkin RH, Turk DC, Wyrwich KW, et al. Interpreting the clinical importance 
of treatment outcomes in chronic pain clinical trials: IMMPACT recommenda-
tions. J Pain 2008; 9:105–21.
75. Namisango E, Harding R, Atuhaire L, et al. Pain among ambulatory HIV/AIDS 
patients: multicenter study of prevalence, intensity, associated factors, and effect. 
J Pain 2012; 13:704–13.
76. Merlin JS, Cen L, Praestgaard A, et al. Pain and physical and psychological symp-
toms in ambulatory HIV patients in the current treatment era. J Pain Symptom 
Manage 2012; 43:638–45.
77. Dworkin RH, Turk DC, Revicki DA, et al. Development and initial validation of 
an expanded and revised version of the short-form McGill pain questionnaire 
(SF-MPQ-2). Pain 2009; 144:35–42.
78. Melzack R. The short-form McGill pain questionnaire. Pain 1987; 30:191–7.
79. Krebs EE, Lorenz KA, Bair MJ, et al. Development and initial validation of the 
PEG, a three-item scale assessing pain intensity and interference. J Gen Intern 
Med 2009; 24:733–8.
80. Kress HG, Aldington D, Alon E, et al. A holistic approach to chronic pain man-
agement that involves all stakeholders: change is needed. Curr Med Res Opin 
2015; 31:1743–54.
81. Moseley GL, Nicholas MK, Hodges PW. A randomized controlled trial of intensive 
neurophysiology education in chronic low back pain. Clin J Pain 2004; 20:324–30.
82. Alford DP, Compton P, Samet JH. Acute pain management for patients receiv-
ing maintenance methadone or buprenorphine therapy. Ann Intern Med 2006; 
144:127–34.
83. Basu S, Bruce RD, Barry DT, Altice FL. Pharmacological pain control for human 
immunodeficiency virus-infected adults with a history of drug dependence. J 
Subst Abuse Treat 2007; 32:399–409.
84. Lewden C, May T, Rosenthal E, et al. Changes in causes of death among adults 
infected by HIV between 2000 and 2005: the “Mortalite 2000 and 2005” surveys 
(ANRS EN19 and Mortavic). J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 2008; 48:590–8.
85. Bailey FA, Williams BR, Goode PS, et al. Opioid pain medication orders and 
administration in the last days of life. J Pain Symptom Manage 2012; 44:681–91.
86. Curtis JR, Patrick DL, Shannon SE, Treece PD, Engelberg RA, Rubenfeld GD. The 
family conference as a focus to improve communication about end-of-life care in 
the intensive care unit: opportunities for improvement. Crit Care Med 2001; 29(2 
Suppl): N26–33.
87. Broom A, Kirby E, Good P, Wootton J, Adams J. Specialists’ experiences and per-
spectives on the timing of referral to palliative care: a qualitative study. J Palliat 
Med 2012; 15:1248–53.
88. Mansky PJ, Wallerstedt DB. Complementary medicine in palliative care and can-
cer symptom management. Cancer J 2006; 12:425–31.
89. Pan CX, Morrison RS, Ness J, Fugh-Berman A, Leipzig RM. Complementary and 
alternative medicine in the management of pain, dyspnea, and nausea and vomiting 
near the end of life. A systematic review. J Pain Symptom Manage 2000; 20:374–87.
90. Passik SD, Kirsh KL. Managing pain in patients with aberrant drug-taking behav-
iors. J Support Oncol 2005; 3:83–6.
91. Fine PG, Mahajan G, McPherson ML. Long-acting opioids and short-acting opioids: 
appropriate use in chronic pain management. Pain Med 2009; 10 Suppl 2:S79–88.
92. Meier DE, Back AL, Morrison RS. The inner life of physicians and care of the 
seriously ill. JAMA 2001; 286:3007–14.
93. Shanafelt TD, Bradley KA, Wipf JE, Back AL. Burnout and self-reported 
patient care in an internal medicine residency program. Ann Intern Med 2002; 
136:358–67.
94. Dyrbye LN, Thomas MR, Massie FS, et al. Burnout and suicidal ideation among 
U.S. medical students. Ann Intern Med 2008; 149:334–41.
95. Beck AT, Dozois DJ. Cognitive therapy: current status and future directions. 
Annu Rev Med 2011; 62:397–409.
96. Kerns RD, Sellinger J, Goodin BR. Psychological treatment of chronic pain. Annu 
Rev Clin Psychol 2011; 7:411–34.
97. Turk DC, Swanson KS, Gatchel RJ. Predicting opioid misuse by chronic pain 
patients: a systematic review and literature synthesis. Clin J Pain 2008; 24:497–508.
98. Lucey BP, Noetzel MJ, Duntley SP. Paroxysmal arousals and myoclonic move-
ments associated with interictal epileptiform discharges in NREM and REM 
sleep. Clin Neurol Neurosurg 2011; 113:419–22.
99. Kim JE, Dodd M, West C, et al. The PRO-SELF pain control program improves 
patients’ knowledge of cancer pain management. Oncol Nurs Forum 2004; 
31:1137–43.
100. Von Korff M, Moore JE, Lorig K, et al. A randomized trial of a lay person-led 
self-management group intervention for back pain patients in primary care. 
Spine (Phila Pa 1976) 1998; 23:608–15.
101. Warsi A, LaValley MP, Wang PS, Avorn J, Solomon DH. Arthritis self-manage-
ment education programs: a meta-analysis of the effect on pain and disability. 
Arthritis Rheum 2003; 48:2207–13.
102. Hooten WM, Timming R, Belgrade M, et al. Assessment and Management of 
Chronic Pain. Bloomington, MN: Institute for Clinical Systems Improvement. 2016.
103. Trafton JA, Sorrell JT, Holodniy M, et al. Outcomes associated with a cogni-
tive-behavioral chronic pain management program implemented in three public 
HIV primary care clinics. J Behav Health Serv Res 2012; 39:158–73.
104. Evans S, Fishman B, Spielman L, Haley A. Randomized trial of cognitive behav-
ior therapy versus supportive psychotherapy for HIV-related peripheral neuro-
pathic pain. Psychosomatics 2003; 44:44–50.
105. Mawar N, Katendra T, Bagul R, et al. Sudarshan Kriya yoga improves quality 
of life in healthy people living with HIV (PLHIV): results from an open label 
randomized clinical trial. Indian J Med Res 2015; 141:90–9.
106. Büssing A, Ostermann T, Lüdtke R, Michalsen A. Effects of yoga interventions 
on pain and pain-associated disability: a meta-analysis. J Pain 2012; 13:1–9.
107. Cramer H, Lauche R, Hohmann C, et al. Randomized-controlled trial com-
paring yoga and home-based exercise for chronic neck pain. Clin J Pain 2013; 
29:216–23.
108. Michalsen A, Traitteur H, Lüdtke R, et al. Yoga for chronic neck pain: a pilot 
randomized controlled clinical trial. J Pain 2012; 13:1122–30.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/10/e1/4157299 by guest on 02 June 2019
 e34 • CID 2017:65 (15 November) • Bruce et al
109. Dorfman D, George MC, Schnur J, Simpson DM, Davidson G, Montgomery G. 
Hypnosis for treatment of HIV neuropathic pain: a preliminary report. Pain Med 
2013; 14:1048–56.
110. Tan G, Rintala DH, Jensen MP, Fukui T, Smith D, Williams W. A randomized 
controlled trial of hypnosis compared with biofeedback for adults with chronic 
low back pain. Eur J Pain 2015; 19:271–80.
111. Grøndahl JR, Rosvold EO. Hypnosis as a treatment of chronic widespread pain 
in general practice: a randomized controlled pilot trial. BMC Musculoskelet 
Disord 2008; 9:124.
112. Shiflett SC, Schwartz GE. Statistical reanalysis of a randomized trial of acupunc-
ture for pain reveals positive effects as well as adverse treatment interactions on 
pain, attrition, and mortality. Explore (NY) 2010; 6:246–55.
113. Shiflett SC, Schwartz GE. Effects of acupuncture in reducing attrition and mor-
tality in HIV-infected men with peripheral neuropathy. Explore (NY) 2011; 
7:148–54.
114. Anastasi JK, Capili B, McMahon DJ, Scully C. Acu/Moxa for distal sensory 
peripheral neuropathy in HIV: a randomized control pilot study. J Assoc Nurses 
AIDS Care 2013; 24:268–75.
115. Galantino ML, Eke-Okoro ST, Findley TW, Condoluci D. Use of noninvasive 
electroacupuncture for the treatment of HIV-related peripheral neuropathy: a 
pilot study. J Altern Complement Med 1999; 5:135–42.
116. Finnerup NB, Attal N, Haroutounian S, et al. Pharmacotherapy for neuropathic pain 
in adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Neurol 2015; 14:162–73.
117. Hempenstall K, Nurmikko TJ, Johnson RW, A’Hern RP, Rice AS. Analgesic ther-
apy in postherpetic neuralgia: a quantitative systematic review. PLoS Medicine 
2005; 2(7):e164. Available at: http://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/arti-
cle?id=10.1371/journal.pmed.0020164.
118. Hahn K, Arendt G, Braun JS, et al; German Neuro-AIDS Working Group. A 
placebo-controlled trial of gabapentin for painful HIV-associated sensory neu-
ropathies. J Neurol 2004; 251:1260–6.
119. Lunn MP, Hughes RA, Wiffen PJ. Duloxetine for treating painful neuropathy, 
chronic pain or fibromyalgia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014; 1:CD007115.
120. Harrison T, Miyahara S, Lee A, et al; ACTG A5252 Team. Experience and chal-
lenges presented by a multicenter crossover study of combination analgesic 
therapy for the treatment of painful HIV-associated polyneuropathies. Pain Med 
2013; 14:1039–47.
121. Saarto T, Wiffen PJ. Antidepressants for neuropathic pain. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev 2007; 4:CD005454.
122. Shlay JC, Chaloner K, Max MB, et al. Acupuncture and amitriptyline for pain 
due to HIV-related peripheral neuropathy: a randomized controlled trial. Terry 
Beirn Community Programs for Clinical Research on AIDS. JAMA 1998; 
280:1590–5.
123. Kieburtz K, Simpson D, Yiannoutsos C, et al. A randomized trial of amitripty-
line and mexiletine for painful neuropathy in HIV infection. AIDS Clinical Trial 
Group 242 Protocol Team. Neurology 1998; 51:1682–8.
124. Simpson DM, Schifitto G, Clifford DB, et al; 1066 HIV Neuropathy Study Group. 
Pregabalin for painful HIV neuropathy: a randomized, double-blind, place-
bo-controlled trial. Neurology 2010; 74:413–20.
125. Simpson DM, Rice AS, Emir B, et al. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-con-
trolled trial and open-label extension study to evaluate the efficacy and safety of 
pregabalin in the treatment of neuropathic pain associated with human immu-
nodeficiency virus neuropathy. Pain 2014; 155:1943–54.
126. Paice JA, Ferrans CE, Lashley FR, Shott S, Vizgirda V, Pitrak D. Topical capsaicin 
in the management of HIV-associated peripheral neuropathy. J Pain Symptom 
Manage 2000; 19:45–52.
127. Simpson DM, Brown S, Tobias J; NGX-4010 C107 Study Group. Controlled trial 
of high-concentration capsaicin patch for treatment of painful HIV neuropathy. 
Neurology 2008; 70:2305–13.
128. Clifford DB, Simpson DM, Brown S, et al; NGX-4010 C119 Study Group. A ran-
domized, double-blind, controlled study of NGX-4010, a capsaicin 8% dermal 
patch, for the treatment of painful HIV-associated distal sensory polyneuropa-
thy. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 2012; 59:126–33.
129. Brown S, Simpson DM, Moyle G, et al. NGX-4010, a capsaicin 8% patch, for the 
treatment of painful HIV-associated distal sensory polyneuropathy: integrated 
analysis of two phase III, randomized, controlled trials. AIDS Res Ther 2013; 
10:5.
130. Woolridge E, Barton S, Samuel J, Osorio J, Dougherty A, Holdcroft A. Cannabis 
use in HIV for pain and other medical symptoms. J Pain Symptom Manage 2005; 
29:358–67.
131. Abrams DI, Jay CA, Shade SB, et al. Cannabis in painful HIV-associated sen-
sory neuropathy: a randomized placebo-controlled trial. Neurology 2007; 
68:515–21.
132. Ellis RJ, Toperoff W, Vaida F, et al. Smoked medicinal cannabis for neuropathic 
pain in HIV: a randomized, crossover clinical trial. Neuropsychopharmacology 
2009; 34:672–80.
133. Doctor JN, Slater MA, Atkinson JH. The descriptor differential scale of pain 
intensity: an evaluation of item and scale properties. Pain 1995; 61:251–60.
134. Gracely RH, Kwilosz DM. The descriptor differential scale: applying psycho-
physical principles to clinical pain assessment. Pain 1988; 35:279–88.
135. Simpson DM, Olney R, McArthur JC, Khan A, Godbold J, Ebel-Frommer K. A 
placebo-controlled trial of lamotrigine for painful HIV-associated neuropathy. 
Neurology 2000; 54:2115–9.
136. Simpson DM, McArthur JC, Olney R, et al; Lamotrigine HIV Neuropathy Study 
Team. Lamotrigine for HIV-associated painful sensory neuropathies: a place-
bo-controlled trial. Neurology 2003; 60:1508–14.
137. Wiffen PJ, Derry S, Moore RA. Lamotrigine for acute and chronic pain. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2011; 2:CD006044.
138. Wiffen PJ, Derry S, Moore RA. Lamotrigine for chronic neuropathic pain and 
fibromyalgia in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013; 12:CD006044.
139. Hempenstall K, Nurmikko TJ, Johnson RW, A’Hern RP, Rice AS. Analgesic ther-
apy in postherpetic neuralgia: a quantitative systematic review. PLoS Med 2005; 
2:e164.
140. Dworkin RH, Corbin AE, Young JP Jr, et al. Pregabalin for the treatment of pos-
therpetic neuralgia: a randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Neurology 2003; 
60:1274–83.
141. Sabatowski R, Gálvez R, Cherry DA, et al; 1008-045 Study Group. Pregabalin 
reduces pain and improves sleep and mood disturbances in patients with 
post-herpetic neuralgia: results of a randomised, placebo-controlled clinical 
trial. Pain 2004; 109:26–35.
142. Palma J, Cowan A, Geller EB, Adler MW, Benamar K. Differential antinocice-
ptive effects of buprenorphine and methadone in the presence of HIV-gp120. 
Drug Alcohol Depend 2011; 118:497–9.
143. Volpe DA, McMahon Tobin GA, Mellon RD, et al. Uniform assessment and 
ranking of opioid μ receptor binding constants for selected opioid drugs. Regul 
Toxicol Pharmacol 2011; 59:385–90.
144. Vallejo R, de Leon-Casasola O, Benyamin R. Opioid therapy and immunosup-
pression: a review. Am J Ther 2004; 11:354–65.
145. Eisenberg E, McNicol ED, Carr DB. Efficacy and safety of opioid agonists 
 
in the treatment of neuropathic pain of nonmalignant origin: systematic 
review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. JAMA 2005; 
293:3043–52.
146. McNicol ED, Midbari A, Eisenberg E. Opioids for neuropathic pain. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev 2013; 8:CD006146.
147. Gaskell H, Moore RA, Derry S, Stannard C. Oxycodone for neuropathic pain and 
fibromyalgia in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014; 6:CD010692.
148. Attal N, Cruccu G, Baron R, et al; European Federation of Neurological Societies. 
EFNS guidelines on the pharmacological treatment of neuropathic pain: 2010 
revision. Eur J Neurol 2010; 17:1113–e88.
149. Gilron I, Bailey JM, Tu D, Holden RR, Weaver DF, Houlden RL. Morphine, 
gabapentin, or their combination for neuropathic pain. N Engl J Med 2005; 
352:1324–34.
150. Roelofs PD, Deyo RA, Koes BW, Scholten RJ, van Tulder MW. Nonsteroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs for low back pain: an updated Cochrane review. Spine 
(Phila Pa 1976) 2008; 33:1766–74.
151. Chou R, Huffman LH; American Pain Society; American College of Physicians. 
Medications for acute and chronic low back pain: a review of the evidence for an 
American Pain Society/American College of Physicians clinical practice guide-
line. Ann Intern Med 2007; 147:505–14.
152. Hochberg MC, Altman RD, April KT, et al; American College of Rheumatology. 
American College of Rheumatology 2012 recommendations for the use of non-
pharmacologic and pharmacologic therapies in osteoarthritis of the hand, hip, 
and knee. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken) 2012; 64:465–74.
153. Chou R, McDonagh MS, Nakamoto E, Griffin J. Analgesics for Osteoarthritis: 
An Update of the 2006 Comparative Effectiveness Review. Rockville, MD: 
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, 2011.
154. Edelman EJ, Gordon KS, Lo Re V III, Skanderson M, Fiellin DA, Justice AC; 
VACS Project Team. Acetaminophen receipt among HIV-infected patients with 
advanced hepatic fibrosis. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 2013; 22:1352–6.
155. Chandok N, Watt KD. Pain management in the cirrhotic patient: the clinical 
challenge. Mayo Clin Proc 2010; 85:451–8.
156. Cepeda MS, Camargo F, Zea C, Valencia L. Tramadol for osteoarthritis. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2006; 3:CD005522.
157. Milligan K, Lanteri-Minet M, Borchert K, et al. Evaluation of long-term efficacy 
and safety of transdermal fentanyl in the treatment of chronic noncancer pain. J 
Pain 2001; 2:197–204.
158. Santos J, Alarcao J, Fareleira F, Vaz-Carneiro A, Costa J. Tapentadol for chronic 
musculoskeletal pain in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015; 5: CD009923.
159. Portenoy RK, Farrar JT, Backonja MM, et al. Long-term use of controlled-re-
lease oxycodone for noncancer pain: results of a 3-year registry study. Clin J Pain 
2007; 23:287–99.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/10/e1/4157299 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Pain Management in People with HIV • CID 2017:65 (15 November) • e35
160. Amini Lari M, Parsa N, Marzban M, Shams M, Faramarzi H. Depression, testos-
terone concentration, sexual dysfunction and methadone use among men with 
hypogonadism and HIV Infection. AIDS Behav 2012; 16:2236–43.
161. Ekholm O, Kurita GP, Højsted J, Juel K, Sjøgren P. Chronic pain, opioid prescrip-
tions, and mortality in Denmark: a population-based cohort study. Pain 2014; 
155:2486–90.
162. Bohnert AS, Valenstein M, Bair MJ, et al. Association between opioid prescribing 
patterns and opioid overdose-related deaths. JAMA 2011; 305:1315–21.
163. Dunn KM, Saunders KW, Rutter CM, et al. Opioid prescriptions for chronic pain 
and overdose: a cohort study. Ann Intern Med 2010; 152:85–92.
164. Gomes T, Mamdani MM, Dhalla IA, Paterson JM, Juurlink DN. Opioid dose 
and drug-related mortality in patients with nonmalignant pain. Arch Intern Med 
2011; 171:686–91.
165. Jones CM, Paulozzi LJ, Mack KA, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
Alcohol involvement in opioid pain reliever and benzodiazepine drug abuse-re-
lated emergency department visits and drug-related deaths—United States, 2010. 
MMWR Weekly Report 2014; 63:881–5.
166. Hansen L, Penko J, Guzman D, Bangsberg DR, Miaskowski C, Kushel MB. 
Aberrant behaviors with prescription opioids and problem drug use history in a 
community-based cohort of HIV-infected individuals. J Pain Symptom Manage 
2011; 42:893–902.
167. Højsted J, Sjøgren P. Addiction to opioids in chronic pain patients: a literature 
review. Eur J Pain 2007; 11:490–518.
168. Larance B, Degenhardt L, Lintzeris N, Winstock A, Mattick R. Definitions 
related to the use of pharmaceutical opioids: extramedical use, diversion, 
non-adherence and aberrant medication-related behaviours. Drug Alcohol Rev 
2011; 30:236–45.
169. Kirsh KL, Whitcomb LA, Donaghy K, Passik SD. Abuse and addiction issues in 
medically ill patients with pain: attempts at clarification of terms and empirical 
study. Clin J Pain 2002; 18:S52–60.
170. Ballantyne JC, LaForge KS. Opioid dependence and addiction during opioid 
treatment of chronic pain. Pain 2007; 129:235–55.
171. Tsao JC, Stein JA, Dobalian A. Pain, problem drug use history, and aberrant anal-
gesic use behaviors in persons living with HIV. Pain 2007; 133:128–37.
172. Passik SD, Kirsh KL, Donaghy KB, Portenoy RK. Pain and aberrant drug-related 
behaviors in medically ill patients with and without histories of substance abuse. 
Clin J Pain 2006; 22:173–81.
173. Edlund MJ, Steffick D, Hudson T, Harris KM, Sullivan M. Risk factors for clini-
cally recognized opioid abuse and dependence among veterans using opioids for 
chronic non-cancer pain. Pain 2007; 129:355–62.
174. Fleming MF, Balousek SL, Klessig CL, Mundt MP, Brown DD. Substance use disor-
ders in a primary care sample receiving daily opioid therapy. J Pain 2007; 8:573–82.
175. Ives TJ, Chelminski PR, Hammett-Stabler CA, et al. Predictors of opioid misuse 
in patients with chronic pain: a prospective cohort study. BMC Health Serv Res 
2006; 6:46.
176. Manchikanti L, Giordano J, Boswell MV, Fellows B, Manchukonda R, Pampati V. 
Psychological factors as predictors of opioid abuse and illicit drug use in chronic 
pain patients. J Opioid Manag 2007; 3:89–100.
177. Michna E, Ross EL, Hynes WL, et al. Predicting aberrant drug behavior in 
patients treated for chronic pain: importance of abuse history. J Pain Symptom 
Manage 2004; 28:250–8.
178. Reid MC, Engles-Horton LL, Weber MB, Kerns RD, Rogers EL, O’Connor PG. 
Use of opioid medications for chronic noncancer pain syndromes in primary 
care. J Gen Intern Med 2002; 17:173–9.
179. Taplin C, Saddichha S, Li K, Krausz MR. Family history of alcohol and drug 
abuse, childhood trauma, and age of first drug injection. Subst Use Misuse 2014; 
49:1311–6.
180. Mdege ND, Lang J. Screening instruments for detecting illicit drug use/abuse 
that could be useful in general hospital wards: a systematic review. Addict Behav 
2011; 36:1111–9.
181. Bowman S, Eiserman J, Beletsky L, Stancliff S, Bruce RD. Reducing the 
health consequences of opioid addiction in primary care. Am J Med 2013; 
126:565–71.
182. Humeniuk R, Ali R, Babor TF, et al. Validation of the alcohol, smok-
ing and substance involvement screening test (ASSIST). Addiction 2008; 
103:1039–47.
183. Bohn MJ, Babor TF, Kranzler HR. The alcohol use disorders identification test 
(AUDIT): validation of a screening instrument for use in medical settings. J Stud 
Alcohol 1995; 56:423–32.
184. Skinner HA. The drug abuse screening test. Addict Behav 1982; 7:363–71.
185. Brown RL, Rounds LA. Conjoint screening questionnaires for alcohol and 
other drug abuse: criterion validity in a primary care practice. Wis Med J 1995; 
94:135–40.
186. Smith PC, Schmidt SM, Allensworth-Davies D, Saitz R. Primary care validation 
of a single-question alcohol screening test. J Gen Intern Med 2009; 24:783–8.
187. Smith PC, Schmidt SM, Allensworth-Davies D, Saitz R. A single-question 
screening test for drug use in primary care. Arch Intern Med 2010; 170:1155–60.
188. Chou R, Fanciullo GJ, Fine PG, Miaskowski C, Passik SD, Portenoy RK. Opioids 
for chronic noncancer pain: prediction and identification of aberrant drug-re-
lated behaviors: a review of the evidence for an American Pain Society and 
American Academy of Pain Medicine clinical practice guideline. J Pain 2009; 
10:131–46.
189. Akbik H, Butler SF, Budman SH, Fernandez K, Katz NP, Jamison RN. Validation 
and clinical application of the screener and opioid assessment for patients with 
pain (SOAPP). J Pain Symptom Manage 2006; 32:287–93.
190. Butler SF, Budman SH, Fernandez KC, Fanciullo GJ, Jamison RN. Cross-
validation of a screener to predict opioid misuse in chronic pain patients 
(SOAPP-R). J Addict Med 2009; 3:66–73.
191. Webster LR, Webster RM. Predicting aberrant behaviors in opioid-treated 
patients: preliminary validation of the opioid risk tool. Pain Med 2005; 6:432–42.
192. Adams LL, Gatchel RJ, Robinson RC, et al. Development of a self-report screen-
ing instrument for assessing potential opioid medication misuse in chronic pain 
patients. J Pain Symptom Manage 2004; 27:440–59.
193. Belgrade MJ, Schamber CD, Lindgren BR. The DIRE score: predicting outcomes 
of opioid prescribing for chronic pain. J Pain 2006; 7:671–81.
194. Moore TM, Jones T, Browder JH, Daffron S, Passik SD. A comparison of common 
screening methods for predicting aberrant drug-related behavior among patients 
receiving opioids for chronic pain management. Pain Med 2009; 10:1426–33.
195. Solanki DR, Koyyalagunta D, Shah RV, Silverman SM, Manchikanti L. 
Monitoring opioid adherence in chronic pain patients: assessment of risk of sub-
stance misuse. Pain Physician 2011; 14:E119–31.
196. Little S, Asher A, Lum PJ. Opioid analgesic misuse in a large urban HIV clinic. 
Paper 184928. 136th American Public Health Association Annual Meeting & 
Exposition. San Diego, CA, 2008.
197. Wasan AD, Butler SF, Budman SH, Benoit C, Fernandez K, Jamison RN. 
Psychiatric history and psychologic adjustment as risk factors for aberrant 
drug-related behavior among patients with chronic pain. Clin J Pain 2007; 
23:307–15.
198. Lum PJ, Little S, Botsko M, et al; BHIVES Collaborative. Opioid-prescribing 
practices and provider confidence recognizing opioid analgesic abuse in HIV 
primary care settings. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 2011; 56 Suppl 1:S91–7.
199. Vijayaraghavan M, Penko J, Guzman D, Miaskowski C, Kushel MB. Primary care 
providers’ judgments of opioid analgesic misuse in a community-based cohort of 
HIV-infected indigent adults. J Gen Intern Med 2011; 26:412–8.
200. Passik SD, Kirsh KL, Whitcomb L, et al. A new tool to assess and document 
pain outcomes in chronic pain patients receiving opioid therapy. Clin Ther 2004; 
26:552–61.
201. Butler SF, Budman SH, Fernandez KC, et al. Development and validation of the 
current opioid misuse measure. Pain 2007; 130:144–56.
202. Butler SF, Budman SH, Fanciullo GJ, Jamison RN. Cross validation of the current 
opioid misuse measure to monitor chronic pain patients on opioid therapy. Clin 
J Pain 2010; 26:770–6.
203. Rowe W. Pain treatment agreements. Am J Bioeth 2010; 10:3–4.
204. Payne R, Anderson E, Arnold R, et al. A rose by any other name: pain contracts/
agreements. Am J Bioeth 2010; 10:5–12.
205. Roskos SE, Keenum AJ, Newman LM, Wallace LS. Literacy demands and format-
ting characteristics of opioid contracts in chronic nonmalignant pain manage-
ment. J Pain 2007; 8:753–8.
206. Arnold RM, Han PK, Seltzer D. Opioid contracts in chronic nonmalignant pain 
management: objectives and uncertainties. Am J Med 2006; 119:292–6.
207. Collen M. Opioid contracts and random drug testing for people with chronic 
pain—think twice. J Law Med Ethics 2009; 37:841–5.
208. Starrels JL, Becker WC, Alford DP, Kapoor A, Williams AR, Turner BJ. Systematic 
review: treatment agreements and urine drug testing to reduce opioid misuse in 
patients with chronic pain. Ann Intern Med 2010; 152:712–20.
209. Chouaid C, Atsou K, Hejblum G, Vergnenegre A. Economics of treatments for 
non-small cell lung cancer. Pharmacoeconomics 2009; 27:113–25.
210. Fishman SM, Bandman TB, Edwards A, Borsook D. The opioid contract in the 
management of chronic pain. J Pain Symptom Manage 1999; 18:27–37.
211. Fagan MJ, Chen JT, Diaz JA, Reinert SE, Stein MD. Do internal medicine resi-
dents find pain medication agreements useful? Clin J Pain 2008; 24:35–8.
212. Robinson-Papp J, Elliott K, Simpson DM, Morgello S; Manhattan HIV Brain 
Bank. Problematic prescription opioid use in an HIV-infected cohort: the 
importance of universal toxicology testing. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 2012; 
61:187–93.
213. Manchikanti L, Manchukonda R, Pampati V, et al. Does random urine drug 
testing reduce illicit drug use in chronic pain patients receiving opioids? Pain 
Physician 2006; 9:123–9.
214. Fishbain DA, Cutler RB, Rosomoff HL, Rosomoff RS. Validity of self-reported 
drug use in chronic pain patients. Clin J Pain 1999; 15:184–91.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/10/e1/4157299 by guest on 02 June 2019
 e36 • CID 2017:65 (15 November) • Bruce et al
215. Katz NP, Sherburne S, Beach M, et al. Behavioral monitoring and urine toxicol-
ogy testing in patients receiving long-term opioid therapy. Anesth Analg 2003; 
97:1097–102, table of contents.
216. Christo PJ, Manchikanti L, Ruan X, et al. Urine drug testing in chronic pain. Pain 
Physician 2011; 14:123–43.
217. Ready LB, Sarkis E, Turner JA. Self-reported vs. actual use of medications in 
chronic pain patients. Pain 1982; 12:285–94.
218. Berndt S, Maier C, Schütz HW. Polymedication and medication compliance in 
patients with chronic non-malignant pain. Pain 1993; 52:331–9.
219. Michna E, Jamison RN, Pham LD, et al. Urine toxicology screening among 
chronic pain patients on opioid therapy: frequency and predictability of abnor-
mal findings. Clin J Pain 2007; 23:173–9.
220. Pergolizzi J, Pappagallo M, Stauffer J, et al; Integrated Drug Compliance Study 
Group. The role of urine drug testing for patients on opioid therapy. Pain Pract 
2010; 10:497–507.
221. Reisfield GM, Webb FJ, Bertholf RL, Sloan PA, Wilson GR. Family physicians’ 
proficiency in urine drug test interpretation. J Opioid Manag 2007; 3:333–7.
222. Fishman SM. Responsible Opioid Prescribing: A Clinician’s Guide, 2nd ed. 
Washington, DC: Waterford Life Sciences, 2014.
223. Binswanger IA, Glanz JM. Pharmaceutical opioids in the home and youth: impli-
cations for adult medical practice. Subst Abus 2015; 36:141–3.
224. Bowman S, Eiserman J, Beletsky L, Stancliff S, Bruce RD. Reducing the 
health consequences of opioid addiction in primary care. Am J Med 2013; 
126:565–71.
225. Dettmer K, Saunders B, Strang J. Take home naloxone and the prevention of 
deaths from opiate overdose: two pilot schemes. BMJ 2001; 322:895–6.
226. Maxwell S, Bigg D, Stanczykiewicz K, Carlberg-Racich S. Prescribing naloxone 
to actively injecting heroin users: a program to reduce heroin overdose deaths. J 
Addict Dis 2006; 25:89–96.
227. Seal KH, Thawley R, Gee L, et al. Naloxone distribution and cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation training for injection drug users to prevent heroin overdose death: 
a pilot intervention study. J Urban Health 2005; 82:303–11.
228. Sporer KA, Kral AH. Prescription naloxone: a novel approach to heroin overdose 
prevention. Ann Emerg Med 2007; 49:172–7.
229. Strang J, Powis B, Best D, et al. Preventing opiate overdose fatalities with take-
home naloxone: pre-launch study of possible impact and acceptability. Addiction 
1999; 94:199–204.
230. Galea S, Worthington N, Piper TM, Nandi VV, Curtis M, Rosenthal DM. 
Provision of naloxone to injection drug users as an overdose prevention strat-
egy: early evidence from a pilot study in New York City. Addict Behav 2006; 
31:907–12.
231. Strang J, Best D, Man L, Noble A, Gossop M. Peer-initiated overdose resuscita-
tion: fellow drug users could be mobilised to implement resuscitation. Int J Drug 
Policy 2000; 11:437–45.
232. Sherman SG, Gann DS, Tobin KE, Latkin CA, Welsh C, Bielenson P. “The life 
they save may be mine”: diffusion of overdose prevention information from a 
city sponsored programme. Int J Drug Policy 2009; 20:137–42.
233. Tobin KE, Sherman SG, Beilenson P, Welsh C, Latkin CA. Evaluation of the 
Staying Alive programme: training injection drug users to properly administer 
naloxone and save lives. Int J Drug Policy 2009; 20:131–6.
234. Pollini RA, McCall L, Mehta SH, Vlahov D, Strathdee SA. Non-fatal overdose 
and subsequent drug treatment among injection drug users. Drug Alcohol 
Depend 2006; 83:104–10.
235. Beletsky L, Ruthazer R, Macalino GE, Rich JD, Tan L, Burris S. Physicians’ 
knowledge of and willingness to prescribe naloxone to reverse accidental 
 
opiate overdose: challenges and opportunities. J Urban Health 2007; 
84:126–36.
236. Bruce RD, Moody DE, Altice FL, Gourevitch MN, Friedland GH. A review of 
pharmacological interactions between HIV or HCV medications and opioid 
agonist therapy: implications and management for clinical practice. Expert Rev 
Clin Pharmacol 2013; 6:249–69.
237. Eap CB, Buclin T, Baumann P. Interindividual variability of the clinical pharma-
cokinetics of methadone: implications for the treatment of opioid dependence. 
Clin Pharmacokinet 2002; 41:1153–93.
238. McCance-Katz EF, Rainey PM, Friedland G, Kosten TR, Jatlow P. Effect of opioid 
dependence pharmacotherapies on zidovudine disposition. Am J Addict 2001; 
10:296–307.
239. Owens RC Jr, Nolin TD. Antimicrobial-associated QT interval prolongation: 
pointes of interest. Clin Infect Dis 2006; 43:1603–11.
240. Saber-Tehrani AS, Bruce RD, Altice FL. Pharmacokinetic drug interactions and 
adverse consequences between psychotropic medications and pharmacotherapy 
for the treatment of opioid dependence. Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse 2011; 37:1–11.
241. Reddy S, Hui D, El Osta B, et al. The effect of oral methadone on the QTc interval 
in advanced cancer patients: a prospective pilot study. J Palliat Med 2010; 13:33–8.
242. Schmidt JE, Joyner MJ, Carlson CR, Hooten WM. Cardiac autonomic function 
associated with treatment adherence after a brief intervention in patients with 
chronic pain. Appl Psychophysiol Biofeedback 2013; 38:193–201.
243. Grodofsky S, Edson E, Huang S, et al. The QTc effect of low-dose methadone for 
chronic pain: a prospective pilot study. Pain Med 2015; 16:1112–21.
244. Pani PP, Trogu E, Maremmani I, Pacini M. QTc interval screening for cardiac 
risk in methadone treatment of opioid dependence. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
2013; 6:CD008939.
245. Chou R, Cruciani RA, Fiellin DA, et al; American Pain Society; Heart Rhythm 
Society. Methadone safety: a clinical practice guideline from the American Pain 
Society and College on Problems of Drug Dependence, in collaboration with the 
Heart Rhythm Society. J Pain 2014; 15:321–37.
246. Nieminen TH, Hagelberg NM, Saari TI, et al. Oxycodone concentrations are 
greatly increased by the concomitant use of ritonavir or lopinavir/ritonavir. Eur J 
Clin Pharmacol 2010; 66:977–85.
247. Mathias AA, German P, Murray BP, et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacody-
namics of GS-9350: a novel pharmacokinetic enhancer without anti-HIV activ-
ity. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2010; 87:322–9.
248. Bruce RD, McCance-Katz E, Kharasch ED, Moody DE, Morse GD. 
Pharmacokinetic interactions between buprenorphine and antiretroviral med-
ications. Clin Infect Dis 2006; 43 Suppl 4:S216–23.
249. Bruce RD, Altice FL, Gourevitch MN, Friedland GH. Pharmacokinetic drug 
interactions between opioid agonist therapy and antiretroviral medications: 
implications and management for clinical practice. J Acquir Immune Defic 
Syndr 2006; 41:563–72.
250. Edlund MJ, Martin BC, Devries A, Fan MY, Braden JB, Sullivan MD. Trends in 
use of opioids for chronic noncancer pain among individuals with mental health 
and substance use disorders: the TROUP study. Clin J Pain 2010; 26:1–8.
251. Gourlay DL, Heit HA. Treatment of polysubstance abuse in the active user. Pain 
Med 2004; 5:109–10.
252. Mihic S, Harris RA. Hypnotics and Sedatives. In: Brunton LL, Blumenthal 
DK, Murri N, Hilal-Dandan R, Knollmann BC. Goodman & Gilman’s the 
Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2011:458–68.
253. Zhong G, Wang Y, Zhang Y, Zhao Y. Association between benzodiazepine use 
and dementia: a meta-analysis. PLoS One 2015; 10:e0127836.
254. Billioti de Gage S, Begaud B, Bazin F, et al. Benzodiazepine use and risk of 
dementia: prospective population based study. BMJ 2012; 345:e6231.
255. Soares LG. Methadone for cancer pain: what have we learned from clinical stud-
ies? Am J Hosp Palliat Care 2005; 22:223–7.
256. Goesmann A, Linke B, Rupp O, et al. Building a BRIDGE for the integration of 
heterogeneous data from functional genomics into a platform for systems biol-
ogy. J Biotechnol 2003; 106:157–67.
257. Fishman SM, Wilsey B, Mahajan G, Molina P. Methadone reincarnated: novel 
clinical applications with related concerns. Pain Med 2002; 3:339–48.
258. Jansson LM, Dipietro JA, Velez M, Elko A, Knauer H, Kivlighan KT. Maternal 
methadone dosing schedule and fetal neurobehaviour. J Matern Fetal Neonatal 
Med 2009; 22:29–35.
259. Gourevitch MN, Wasserman W, Panero MS, Selwyn PA. Successful adherence 
to observed prophylaxis and treatment of tuberculosis among drug users in a 
methadone program. J Addict Dis 1996; 15:93–104.
260. Lucas GM, Mullen BA, Weidle PJ, Hader S, McCaul ME, Moore RD. Directly 
administered antiretroviral therapy in methadone clinics is associated with 
improved HIV treatment outcomes, compared with outcomes among concur-
rent comparison groups. Clin Infect Dis 2006; 42:1628–35.
261. Bruce RD, Eiserman J, Acosta A, Gote C, Lim JK, Altice FL. Developing a mod-
ified directly observed therapy intervention for hepatitis C treatment in a meth-
adone maintenance program: implications for program replication. Am J Drug 
Alcohol Abuse 2012; 38:206–12.
262. Krantz MJ, Martin J, Stimmel B, Mehta D, Haigney MC. QTc interval screening 
in methadone treatment. Ann Intern Med 2009; 150:387–95.
263. Martin JA, Campbell A, Killip T, et al; Substance Abuse and Mental Health 
Services Administration. QT interval screening in methadone maintenance 
treatment: report of a SAMHSA expert panel. J Addict Dis 2011; 30:283–306.
264. Boas RA, Villiger JW. Clinical actions of fentanyl and buprenorphine. The signif-
icance of receptor binding. Br J Anaesth 1985; 57:192–6.
265. Johnson RE, Chutuape MA, Strain EC, Walsh SL, Stitzer ML, Bigelow GE. A 
comparison of levomethadyl acetate, buprenorphine, and methadone for opioid 
dependence. N Engl J Med 2000; 343:1290–7.
266. Johnson RE, Fudala PJ, Payne R. Buprenorphine: considerations for pain man-
agement. J Pain Symptom Manage 2005; 29:297–326.
267. Jones JD, Sullivan MA, Manubay J, Vosburg SK, Comer SD. The subjective, rein-
forcing, and analgesic effects of oxycodone in patients with chronic, non-ma-
lignant pain who are maintained on sublingual buprenorphine/naloxone. 
Neuropsychopharmacology 2011; 36:411–22.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/10/e1/4157299 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Pain Management in People with HIV • CID 2017:65 (15 November) • e37
268. Roberts DM, Meyer-Witting M. High-dose buprenorphine: periopera-
tive precautions and management strategies. Anaesth Intensive Care 2005; 
33:17–25.
269. Walsh SL, Preston KL, Stitzer ML, Cone EJ, Bigelow GE. Clinical pharmacol-
ogy of buprenorphine: ceiling effects at high doses. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1994; 
55:569–80.
270. Rubenstein A. Is sublingual buprenorphine a better opioid. Sonoma 
Medicine. Spring 2015. Available at: http://www.nbcms.org/en-us/about-us/
sonoma-county-medical-association/magazine/spring-2015-birth-de-
partments-local-frontiers-is-sublingual-buprenorphine-a-better-opioid.
aspx?pageid=748&tabid=747.
271. Malinoff HL, Barkin RL, Wilson G. Sublingual buprenorphine is effective in the 
treatment of chronic pain syndrome. Am J Ther 2005; 12:379–84.
272. Wolff RF, Aune D, Truyers C, et al. Systematic review of efficacy and safety of 
buprenorphine versus fentanyl or morphine in patients with chronic moderate 
to severe pain. Curr Med Res Opin 2012; 28:833–45.
273. Heit HA, Gourlay DL. Buprenorphine: new tricks with an old molecule for pain 
management. Clin J Pain 2008; 24:93–7.
274. Daumit GL, Dalcin AT, Jerome GJ, et al. A behavioral weight-loss intervention 
for persons with serious mental illness in psychiatric rehabilitation centers. Int J 
Obes (Lond) 2011; 35:1114–23.
275. Adewuya AO, Afolabi MO, Ola BA, et al. Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) 
after stigma related events in HIV infected individuals in Nigeria. Soc Psychiatry 
Psychiatr Epidemiol 2009; 44:761–6.
276. Smith MY, Egert J, Winkel G, Jacobson J. The impact of PTSD on pain experience 
in persons with HIV/AIDS. Pain 2002; 98:9–17.
277. Whooley MA, Avins AL, Miranda J, Browner WS. Case-finding instruments 
for depression. Two questions are as good as many. J Gen Intern Med 1997; 
12:439–45.
278. Arroll B, Goodyear-Smith F, Kerse N, Fishman T, Gunn J. Effect of the addi-
tion of a “help” question to two screening questions on specificity for diag-
nosis of depression in general practice: diagnostic validity study. BMJ 2005; 
331:884.
279. Monahan PO, Shacham E, Reece M, et al. Validity/reliability of PHQ-9 and 
PHQ-2 depression scales among adults living with HIV/AIDS in western Kenya. 
J Gen Intern Med 2009; 24:189–97.
280. Cholera R, Gaynes BN, Pence BW, et al. Validity of the patient health question-
naire-9 to screen for depression in a high-HIV burden primary healthcare clinic 
in Johannesburg, South Africa. J Affect Disord 2014; 167:160–6.
281. Shacham E, Nurutdinova D, Satyanarayana V, Stamm K, Overton ET. Routine 
screening for depression: identifying a challenge for successful HIV care. AIDS 
Patient Care STDS 2009; 23:949–55.
282. Spitzer RL, Kroenke K, Williams JB. Validation and utility of a self-report version 
of PRIME-MD: the PHQ primary care study. Primary care evaluation of mental 
disorders. Patient health questionnaire. JAMA 1999; 282:1737–44.
283. O’Connor EA, Whitlock EP, Beil TL, Gaynes BN. Screening for depression in 
adult patients in primary care settings: a systematic evidence review. Ann Intern 
Med 2009; 151:793–803.
284. Sacktor N, Skolasky RL, Seaberg E, et al. Prevalence of HIV-associated neurocogni-
tive disorders in the Multicenter AIDS Cohort Study. Neurology 2016; 86:334–40.
285. Antinori A, Arendt G, Becker JT, et al. Updated research nosology for HIV-
associated neurocognitive disorders. Neurology 2007; 69:1789–99.
286. Simioni S, Cavassini M, Annoni JM, et al. Cognitive dysfunction in HIV patients 
despite long-standing suppression of viremia. AIDS 2010; 24:1243–50.
287. Power C, Selnes OA, Grim JA, McArthur JC. HIV dementia scale: a rapid screen-
ing test. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr Hum Retrovirol 1995; 8:273–8.
288. Davis HF, Skolasky RL, Jr., Selnes OA, Burgess DM, McArthur JC. Assessing 
HIV-associated dementia: modified HIV dementia scale versus the grooved peg-
board. AIDS Read 2002; 12:29–31, 8.
289. Asahchop EL, Akinwumi SM, Branton WG, Fujiwara E, Gill MJ, Power C. 
Plasma microRNA profiling predicts HIV-associated neurocognitive disorder. 
AIDS 2016; 30:2021–31.
290. Hu X, Zhou Y, Long J, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of the international HIV demen-
tia scale and HIV dementia scale: a meta-analysis. Exp Ther Med 2012; 4:665–8.
291. Haddow LJ, Floyd S, Copas A, Gilson RJ. A systematic review of the screening 
accuracy of the HIV dementia scale and international HIV dementia scale. PLoS 
One 2013; 8:e61826.
292. Zipursky AR, Gogolishvili D, Rueda S, et al. Evaluation of brief screening tools 
for neurocognitive impairment in HIV/AIDS: a systematic review of the litera-
ture. AIDS 2013; 27:2385–401.
293. McArthur JC, Brew BJ, Nath A. Neurological complications of HIV infection. 
Lancet Neurol 2005; 4:543–55.
294. Song I, Mark S, Chen S, et al. Dolutegravir does not affect methadone phar-
macokinetics in opioid-dependent, HIV-seronegative subjects. Drug Alcohol 
Depend 2013; 133:781–4.
295. Alford DP, Zisblatt L, Ng P, et al. SCOPE of pain: an evaluation of an opioid 
risk evaluation and mitigation strategy continuing education program. Pain Med 
2016; 17:52–63.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/65/10/e1/4157299 by guest on 02 June 2019
