 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 8 9 4
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 10   October 2016
Introduction
Ventricular tachycardia (VT) and ventricular fibrillation (VF) 
are malignant arrhythmias, which are characterized by fast and 
uncoordinated electrical excitations of the myocardium, result-
ing in pump failure and leading to sudden cardiac death. The 
current state-of-the-art therapy for these life-threatening dis-
orders is defibrillation by the delivery of high-energy electrical 
shocks. Patients at risk for developing ventricular arrhythmia 
receive implantable automatic defibrillators. Clinical studies 
have demonstrated the life-saving potential of this therapeutic 
approach; however, it is also associated with significant adverse 
effects, such as structural damage of cardiac tissue worsening 
the underlying cardiac disease, severe pain due to nonselective 
excitation of nerves and muscles with subsequent psychological 
trauma, and increased mortality (1–4). Thus, there is a need for 
alternative approaches that enable pain-free and less deleterious 
termination of lethal arrhythmia.
Optogenetics is an emerging technology that enables mod-
ulation of electrical function with light in cells overexpressing 
light-sensitive proteins. The light-activated cation channel chan-
nelrhodopsin-2 (ChR2) has been used to directly pace the heart 
with brief (1–10 ms) blue light pulses in vivo (5–8). However, 
these results do not imply the feasibility of optogenetic defibril-
lation, because cardiac pacing entails only a brief depolarization 
in a few cardiomyocytes with subsequent intrinsic excitation of 
the whole heart through gap-junctional electrical coupling. In 
contrast, defibrillation requires the simultaneous depolarization 
of a large mass of ventricular tissue (9), and therefore the energy 
required for a defibrillating shock is dramatically larger than that 
of a typical pacing stimulus. Optogenetics enables the selective 
depolarization of ChR2-expressing cardiomyocytes only, making 
it an attractive pain-free alternative to electrical shocks. An addi-
tional strength over electrical shocks is that optogenetics allows 
uniform and sustained depolarization by continuous illumination. 
Although this advantage has been exploited in vitro to achieve 
fine-grain control of excitation waves in cardiomyocyte monolay-
ers, including reentry destabilization (10), slowing of conduction 
(11), and suppression of electrical activity (5), the feasibility of 
optogenetic defibrillation in intact hearts has never been demon-
strated experimentally.
Herein, we report a new protocol to induce sustained ventricu-
lar arrhythmia in mouse hearts and provide experimental evidence 
that optogenetic defibrillation by illumination of the epicardial sur-
face is a highly reliable approach. In addition, we investigate the 
translational potential of optogenetic defibrillation by epicardial 
illumination with a novel in silico approach using a model of the 
heart of a patient with a propensity for infarct-related VT.
Results
Optogenetic defibrillation via epicardial illumination in intact hearts 
of transgenic mice. First, we explored optogenetic defibrillation via 
epicardial illumination in hearts of transgenic mice expressing 
ChR2 in all cardiomyocytes (5). Because of the small size of the 
Ventricular arrhythmias are among the most severe complications of heart disease and can result in sudden cardiac 
death. Patients at risk currently receive implantable defibrillators that deliver electrical shocks to terminate arrhythmias 
on demand. However, strong electrical shocks can damage the heart and cause severe pain. Therefore, we have tested 
optogenetic defibrillation using expression of the light-sensitive channel channelrhodopsin-2 (ChR2) in cardiac tissue. 
Epicardial illumination effectively terminated ventricular arrhythmias in hearts from transgenic mice and from WT mice 
after adeno-associated virus–based gene transfer of ChR2. We also explored optogenetic defibrillation for human hearts, 
taking advantage of a recently developed, clinically validated in silico approach for simulating infarct-related ventricular 
tachycardia (VT). Our analysis revealed that illumination with red light effectively terminates VT in diseased, ChR2-expressing 
human hearts. Mechanistically, we determined that the observed VT termination is due to ChR2-mediated transmural 
depolarization of the myocardium, which causes a block of voltage-dependent Na+ channels throughout the myocardial wall 
and interrupts wavefront propagation into illuminated tissue. Thus, our results demonstrate that optogenetic defibrillation 
is highly effective in the mouse heart and could potentially be translated into humans to achieve nondamaging and pain-free 
termination of ventricular arrhythmia.
Optogenetic defibrillation terminates ventricular 
arrhythmia in mouse hearts and human simulations
Tobias Bruegmann,1,2 Patrick M. Boyle,3 Christoph C. Vogt,1 Thomas V. Karathanos,3 Hermenegild J. Arevalo,3  
Bernd K. Fleischmann,1 Natalia A. Trayanova,3 and Philipp Sasse1
1Institute of Physiology I, Life and Brain Center, and 2Research Training Group 1873, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. 3Institute for Computational Medicine and Department of Biomedical Engineering, 
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
Authorship note: T. Bruegmann and P
.M. Boyle contributed equally to this work.
Conflict of interest: The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists.
Submitted: June 3, 2016; Accepted: August 4, 2016.
Reference information: J Clin Invest. 2016;126(10):3894–3904. doi:10.1172/JCI88950.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 8 9 5
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 10   October 2016
second, 0.4 mW/mm2, 143 mm2; Supplemental Figure 1B) resulted 
in arrhythmia termination with an average success rate of about 
85%, independent of the preceding arrhythmia duration (3, 5, or 
10 seconds; Figure 1B, blue). Control experiments without illumi-
nation showed that the rate of spontaneous arrhythmia termina-
tion in the same time window was very low (<15%, P < 0.04; Figure 
1B, black). To further enhance optogenetic defibrillation efficacy, 
we developed an illumination protocol involving 4 consecutive 
light pulses (1 second, 0.4 mW/mm2, 143 mm2; Supplemental Fig-
ure 1C), which yielded a very high success rate of 97% ± 0.01% 
(n = 29; Figure 1C, blue). Importantly, when the identical illumina-
tion protocol was applied to hearts without ChR2 expression from 
EGFP-expressing or CD1 WT mice, the arrhythmia termination 
rate in the same time window was approximately 20% (Figure 1C, 
green and red). This value is similar to the spontaneous termina-
mouse heart, electrically induced ventricular arrhythmias in vivo 
are often self-terminating after several cycles (12), rendering the 
analysis of defibrillation efficacy impossible. Therefore, we devel-
oped a novel protocol and obtained sustained ventricular arrhyth-
mias evoked by electrical burst stimulation or S1-S2 protocols 
from the base of the right ventricular wall at a point with minimal 
effective refractory period (ERP) in hearts perfused ex vivo with 
low-K+ (2 mM) Tyrode’s solution and the KATP channel activator 
pinacidil (100 μM; Supplemental Figure 1A; supplemental mate-
rial available online with this article; doi:10.1172/JCI88950DS1). 
Termination of ventricular arrhythmia was achieved by illumi-
nation of the anteroseptal epicardium with blue light (470 nm) 
in all hearts tested (n = 36; Figure 1A). These results reveal that 
uniform light- 
induced depolarization is sufficient for cardiac 
defibrillation. Quantitatively, application of 1 single light pulse (1 
Figure 1. Optogenetic defibrillation in transgenic hearts. (A) Representative ECG (black) from an explanted heart expressing ChR2. Sustained VT was 
induced by electrical burst stimulation (50 Hz, red bar) and terminated by epicardial illumination with blue light (blue bar, 470 nm, 1 second, 0.4 mW/mm2, 
143 mm2, n = 36). (B) Arrhythmia termination rate in ChR2 hearts after one 1-second-long light pulse (0.4 mW/mm2, 143 mm2, blue) applied 3, 5, and 10 sec-
onds after induction of arrhythmia compared with control conditions (i.e., no illumination, black) in the same time window (see Supplemental Figure 1B for 
experimental protocol; Wilcoxon matched pairs test, P < 0.04, n = 6). (C) Arrhythmia termination rate in response to a 4-light-pulse protocol (Supplemental 
Figure 1C) in ChR2 mouse hearts with illumination (1 second, 0.4 mW/mm2, 143 mm2, blue) and without illumination (black), as well as in hearts expressing 
only EGFP (green) and in CD1 WT hearts (red) with illumination (Kruskal-Wallis test, P < 0.0001, with Dunn’s multiple-comparison post-test; ChR2 light: n = 
29; ChR2 no light: n = 6; EGFP: n = 4; CD1 WT: n = 6). (D–F) Influence of illumination duration (D, 0.4 mW/mm2, 29 mm2, n = 7, P = 0.0007), area (E, 1 second, 
0.4 mW/mm2, n = 9, P = 0.031), and light intensity (F, 1 second, 15 mm2, n = 5, P = 0.013) on arrhythmia termination rate (Friedman test). Each point shows 
the percentage of successful optogenetic defibrillation attempts in 1 heart. Data are shown as the mean ± SEM. *P ≤ 0.05, **P ≤ 0.01, and ***P ≤ 0.001.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 8 9 6
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 10   October 2016
therapeutic applications in humans. We previously used adeno- 
associated virus (AAV) with tropism toward cardiomyocytes 
systemically injected into WT mice and found ChR2 expression 
in approximately 58.2% of cardiomyocytes 4 to 8 weeks later, 
enabling optogenetic cardiac pacing (6). With the same approach, 
1 year after AAV injection we found uniform ChR2 expression 
throughout the ventricles (Figure 3A) and in all myocardial layers 
(Figure 3B), localized to the sarcolemma and the T-tubule system 
of cardiomyocytes (Figure 3C). In vivo optogenetic pacing exper-
iments (5, 6) in these hearts demonstrated stable ventricular pac-
ing 1 year after the AAV injection with a threshold of 0.64 ± 0.20 
mW/mm2 (Figure 3D; 10 ms pulse duration, 15 mm2 illuminated 
area, n = 3). This value is similar to our previously reported data for 
optogenetic pacing 4–8 weeks after injection of AAV (6). Impor-
tantly, we also tested optogenetic defibrillation ex vivo 1 year after 
the AAV injection. Therefore we induced ventricular arrhythmia 
after low K+ (2 mM) and pinacidil perfusion and found that illumi-
nation (1 second, 0.4 mW/mm2, 143 mm2) of the anteroseptal epi-
cardium reliably terminated ventricular arrhythmia in all 3 tested 
mice (Figure 3E).
Optogenetic defibrillation via epicardial illumination in a mod-
el of a patient heart. In order to explore whether our findings in 
mice could be translated to human hearts for potential clinical 
applications, we conducted computer simulations of optical 
defibrillation by epicardial illumination in the heart of a patient 
suffering recurrent VT. The model (Supplemental Figure 2) 
was reconstructed from a late gadolinium enhancement MRI 
scan of a patient with myocardial infarction and VT episodes 
that required defibrillator implantation. Consistent with clin-
ical observations, rapid electrical pacing from the ventricular 
apex in this model induced infarct-related, sustained VT (cycle 
length: ~350 ms; Supplemental Figure 3 and Supplemental Video 
1), which was evident in the pseudo-ECG (Figure 4A). Based on 
expression levels in our previous reports on AAV gene transfer 
(6), we simulated expression of ChR2 in 58.2% of the cardiomy-
ocytes (Supplemental Figure 4) using an optogenetic modeling 
framework (13) validated by comparison with in vitro recordings 
from ChR2-expressing cardiomyocyte syncytia (14). The ChR2 
tion rate in the absence of illumination in transgenic ChR2 hearts 
(Figure 1C, black). Thus, neither illumination of ChR2-negative 
hearts nor ChR2 expression in the absence of illumination caused 
or facilitated arrhythmia termination.
To determine how different illumination parameters affect 
defibrillation success rates, sequential protocols with light stimu-
li of varying duration, intensity, and size of illuminated area were 
tested (Supplemental Figure 1, A and C). This revealed a signifi-
cant influence of light stimulus duration, and the defibrillation 
rate was low for durations less than 100 ms (Figure 1D), suggest-
ing that illumination lasting for at least the duration of the entire 
VT cycle (~80 ms) was required for successful arrhythmia termi-
nation. Decreasing the illuminated area to 15 mm2 also reduced 
efficacy (Figure 1E), and in this situation the light intensity needed 
to effectively defibrillate increased from 0.4 to 1 mW/mm2 (Fig-
ure 1F). This suggests that optogenetic depolarization of a critical 
portion of myocardium was necessary to successfully defibrillate.
Optogenetic defibrillation after acute myocardial infarction. To 
experimentally assess the feasibility of optogenetic defibrillation 
in a scenario clinically more relevant to the underlying causes of 
life-threatening arrhythmia in humans, we determined whether 
infarct-related arrhythmia could be terminated by light. There-
fore, hearts from ChR2 mice were perfused ex vivo with stan-
dard Tyrode’s solution, and the left anterior descending coronary 
artery was ligated (Figure 2A, arrow). This led to acute myocardial 
ischemia, which was proven by ST-segment elevation in the ECG 
(Figure 2B) and by the lack of local perfusion documented by dye 
injection after the experiment (Figure 2A). Prolonged ventricular 
arrhythmia could be induced by electrical pacing in 6 of the 12 
hearts investigated. In these 6 hearts we found that a single light 
pulse (1 second, 0.4 mW/mm2, 143 mm2) could terminate arrhyth-
mia (Figure 2B) with a success rate of 88% ± 0.04% in contrast 
to the significantly lower rate of spontaneous termination in the 
absence of illumination (27% ± 0.07%, P = 0.03; Figure 2C).
Optogenetic defibrillation in WT hearts after gene transfer. After 
establishing the feasibility of optogenetic defibrillation in trans-
genic mice, we sought to test the same approach in nontransgenic 
hearts after gene transfer in vivo, since this would be required for 
Figure 2. Optogenetic defibrillation of infarct-related ventricular arrhythmia in ChR2-expressing hearts. (A) Image of the whole heart after ligation of 
the left anterior descending coronary artery (red arrow) and dye perfusion (blue), highlighting the nonperfused infarct area. (B) Representative ECG (black) 
after ligation. Note the prominent elevation of the ST segment during normal sinus rhythm. Ventricular arrhythmia was induced by electrical burst stimu-
lation (50 Hz, red bar) and terminated by epicardial illumination with blue light (blue bar, 470 nm, 1 second, 0.4 mW/mm2, 143 mm2, n = 10). (C) Arrhythmia 
termination rate in infarcted hearts induced by one 1-second-long light pulse (0.4 mW/mm2, 143 mm2, blue) applied 5 seconds after induction of arrhyth-
mia compared with control (i.e., no illumination, black) within the same time window (see Supplemental Figure 1B for experimental protocol; Wilcoxon 
matched pairs test, P = 0.031, n = 6). Scale bar: 1 mm. Data are shown as the mean ± SEM. *P ≤ 0.05.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 8 9 7
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 10   October 2016
the excitability of the illuminated myocardial wall. Importantly, 
the deepest layer in which red light depolarized at least 75% of all 
cardiomyocytes beyond the threshold to inactivate 90% of Na+ 
channels (Vm = –65.8 mV) was 6 mm from the epicardium (Figure 
5D, red arrow). Consequently, the wavefront emerging from the 
isthmus of the re-entrant circuit, located in the nonilluminated 
ventricular septum, could not propagate through the optogeneti-
cally depolarized right ventricular free wall, thereby leading to VT 
termination (Figure 5E and Supplemental Video 3).
To verify that transmural depolarization is critical for optoge-
netic defibrillation, we simulated epicardial illumination with blue 
light, which is much more attenuated by heart tissue (Supplemen-
tal Figure 5) (20). In fact, blue light (488 nm) triggered an initial 
epicardial excitation, which propagated transmurally and induced 
the above-defined degree of depolarization to block Na+ channels 
only within 1 mm of the epicardial surface (Figure 5D, blue arrow, 
and Supplemental Figure 6A). Therefore, the excitation wave-
front emerging from the septum was able to propagate through 
the endocardial layer of the right ventricular free wall, sustaining 
re-entrant propagation (Supplemental Figure 6, B and C, and Sup-
plemental Video 2 and 3).
Modeling of pericardial illumination. Since illumination of the 
pericardium, rather than direct application of light to the epicar-
dium, will be practically more feasible, we performed addition-
al calculations to assess how the tissue layers surrounding the 
human heart would attenuate light. First, we considered layers of 
epicardial fat and pericardium assuming uniform thickness based 
on values previously reported for these layers in humans (4.1 and 
1.7 mm, respectively) (21, 22). We found that the intensity of a 
pericardial light stimulus would need to be 4.7-fold higher than 
the target intensity on the epicardium in order to overcome atten-
uation in the fibrous and adipose layers covering the heart (Sup-
plemental Figure 7A). Since individual and regional variability in 
epicardial fat thickness has been reported (21), we analyzed the 
consequences and found a required increase in pericardial light 
stimulus strength from approximately 2-fold in the absence of fat 
to approximately 10-fold when the adipose tissue layer was 8 mm 
thick (Supplemental Figure 7B).
Discussion
Herein we demonstrate effective optogenetic defibrillation in the 
intact mouse heart by epicardial illumination. To enable these 
experiments, we had to establish a new approach to reliably induce 
sustained ventricular arrhythmia in the small mouse heart, which 
normally lasts only a few seconds in vivo (12). Our approach is to 
perfuse explanted mouse hearts with low-K+ solution, which is 
known to promote arrhythmias (23), and pinacidil, which activates 
photocurrent model (15) was calibrated to match measurements 
from AAV-transfected mouse cardiomyocytes (6).
We have recently shown in computer stimulations that for 
optogenetic defibrillation of a structurally normal heart by simul-
taneous epicardial and endocardial illumination, red light and 
increased opsin light sensitivity (increased 2.2-fold vs. normal 
ChR2) are needed (16). These changes are consistent with the bio-
physical properties of red-shifted ChR2 variants (17, 18) and the 
CatCh variant of ChR2 (19), respectively. Accordingly, to assess 
the feasibility of light-based defibrillation in the more complex 
setting of a patient heart with structural and electrophysiological 
heterogeneities, we performed simulations with the same opto-
genetic parameters. However, epicardial-only illumination was 
simulated, because the feasibility of endocardial illumination is 
questionable. Our simulations revealed that exclusive illumina-
tion from the epicardium with red light (1 second, 10 mW/mm2, 
669 nm) effectively terminated the sustained VT (Figure 4, B and 
C, and Supplemental Video 2).
Critical biophysical determinants for optogenetic defibrillation. 
Next, we investigated the critical factors underlying successful 
optogenetic defibrillation by analyzing membrane potential (Vm) 
traces from epicardial, midmyocardial, and endocardial sites 
during simulated illumination (Figure 5A). Our analysis revealed 
simultaneous transmural excitation upon illumination, followed 
by strong diastolic depolarization (~−40 mV) that affected all lay-
ers (Figure 5B) and completely abrogated Na+ channel excitabil-
ity, even in the endocardial layer (Figure 5C). Therefore, action 
potential initiation during illumination became purely Ca2+ cur-
rent–dependent (Figure 5C), resulting in a critical decrease in 
Figure 3. Optogenetic pacing and defibrillation in hearts 1 year after in 
vivo gene transfer. (A) Epicardial mCherry fluorescence signal of a mouse 
heart 16 months after systemic injection of ChR2-mCherry AAV. (B) Section 
through the left ventricle showing transmural mCherry fluorescence. (C) 
Membrane-bound ChR2-mCherry signals in a ventricular cardiomyocyte. 
(D) Pulsed illumination (blue dots, 470 nm, 10 ms, 0.36 mW/mm2, 15 
mm2, n = 3) of the left ventricle in vivo induced ectopic ventricular pacing, 
as shown in the ECG (black). (E) VT episode was terminated by epicardial 
illumination (470 nm, 1 second, 0.4 mW/mm2, 143 mm2, n = 3) of the ven-
tricles. Scale bars: 1 mm (A and B) and 20 μm (C); nuclear staining in blue.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 8 9 8
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 10   October 2016
Figure 4. Optogenetic defibrillation 
in a model of a patient heart with 
infarct-related VT. (A and B) Pseu-
do-ECG signals for model configurations 
with no illumination (A) and epicardial 
illumination with red light (669 nm, 
10 mW/mm2, 1 second, red box, B). VT 
was induced by electrical stimulation 
(yellow triangles). (C) Snapshots of Vm 
distribution during the response to red 
light. Timings (from start of simulation) 
correspond to dashed lines in B. The 
right ventricular free wall is cut away 
to facilitate visualization. Black arrows 
indicate propagation of reentry during 
VT (see also Supplemental Figure 3 and 
Supplemental Videos 1 and 2); red trian-
gles indicate initial excitations induced 
directly by optogenetic stimulation.
strated the in silico approach to simulate this type of arrhythmia 
and its predictive power and clinical relevance, by predicting, 
with high accuracy and reliability, postinfarction risk of sudden 
cardiac death in a cohort of 41 patients (27). Here, in contrast to 
our recent modeling of optogenetic defibrillation in structurally 
normal ventricles (16), we exclusively illuminated the epicardi-
al surface. This is because intracavitary optogenetic stimulation 
of the endocardium would be extremely challenging because of 
the presence of light-absorbing blood, the need for anticoagula-
tion, and the difficulty of implanting light-emitting diodes (LEDs) 
within the densely trabeculated endocardium of the beating heart 
without compromising ventricular function or hemodynamic sta-
bility. Conversely, illumination of the epicardium in the human 
heart could be achieved by leveraging new developments in opto-
electronics, such as light sources integrated in cell-scale injectable 
devices (28) or stretchable integumentary membranes, which 
have been proven useful for illumination of the heart (29). More-
over, because direct epicardial implantation of light sources will 
be associated with risks of infection, pericarditis, friction, or coro-
nary artery damage, we anticipate that illumination in the human 
heart would be more feasible from the pericardial surface. Thus, 
we performed mathematical analysis to approximate the extent of 
light attenuation in the pericardium and epicardial fat and found 
that the intensity of light applied to the pericardium would need 
to be increased approximately 5-fold compared with direct epicar-
dial illumination. However, excessive epicardial fat would greatly 
attenuate light and thus diminish the effectiveness of optogenetic 
defibrillation by pericardial illumination.
The new mechanistic insights presented here suggest that 
ventricular arrhythmia can be terminated not only by electrical 
shock–induced brief excitation, but also by a steady-state opto-
genetic modulation of electrical activity involving transmural 
depolarization and Na+ channel inactivation. Importantly, our 
simulations clearly demonstrate that transmural depolarization 
depends critically on effective light penetration. This parameter 
is influenced greatly by the wavelength dependency of light pen-
etration and, to a lesser degree, by ChR2 light sensitivity, pho-
tocurrent, or expression levels. Thus sufficient transmural depo-
the ventricular Kir6.2/SUR2A KATP channels (24) and thus mim-
ics pro-arrhythmic effects of ischemia, including action potential 
shortening and dispersion of repolarization and refractoriness 
(25). The ex vivo retrograde perfusion of the coronary arteries in 
the Langendorff configuration has the distinct advantage of con-
stant oxygen and nutrition supply even during long episodes of 
sustained ventricular arrhythmia, enabling multiple defibrillation 
attempts for systematic analysis of defibrillation success rate.
Epicardial illumination proved to be highly efficient in all 
ChR2-expressing mouse hearts tested in terminating ventricular 
arrhythmias, the ECG patterns of which resembled those of VT, 
torsades de pointes, and VF. By comparing light-induced and 
spontaneous arrhythmia termination in ChR2-expressing hearts 
and by investigating control hearts without ChR2, we proved 
unequivocally that neither illumination nor ChR2 expression per 
se is sufficient for arrhythmia termination. Instead, optogenet-
ic defibrillation is achieved by light-induced depolarization of 
ChR2-expressing cardiomyocytes. We found that optogenetic 
defibrillation required higher light intensities, longer durations, 
and larger illumination sizes compared with optogenetic pacing 
(5), reflecting the clear mechanistic difference between pacing, for 
which local depolarization is sufficient, and defibrillation, which 
requires depolarization of a much larger tissue volume (9). This 
requirement of defibrillation was proven in earlier work by selec-
tive coronary injection of potassium chloride, demonstrating that 
VF in canines could only be terminated when a critical amount 
of myocardium was depolarized (9). Our findings are consistent 
with these experiments because diminishing the illumination area 
reduced the efficacy of optogenetic defibrillation.
Although our experimental work here demonstrated the effi-
cacy of optogenetic defibrillation after acute myocardial infarction 
and after AAV-based ChR2 gene transfer of WT mice, it is difficult 
to extrapolate these results to the human heart. Thus, the next step 
will be the extension of this technology to preclinical large-ani-
mal models with electrical and structural defects comparable to 
the human heart. As a preliminary proof-of-concept exploration 
in humans, we simulated optogenetic defibrillation in a human 
model of infarct-related VT (26). Our group has recently demon-
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 8 9 9
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 10   October 2016
larization at low light intensities will be facilitated by exploiting 
recent advances in optogenetics, like red-shifted and hypersen-
sitive ChR2 variants (17–19).
The fact that optogenetic defibrillation in human diseased 
hearts is feasible using only epicardial illumination and that car-
diac gene expression via AAV in humans is safe (30) suggests the 
tantalizing possibility that clinical applications might be feasible. 
Importantly, we were able to demonstrate effective pacing and 
defibrillation of mouse hearts by epicardial illumination even more 
than 1 year after the gene transfer. The great advantage of optoge-
netic defibrillation is that this would be, in contrast to electrical 
shocks, pain-free, because ChR2 expression would be restricted 
to cardiomyocytes by cardiomyocyte-specific AAV vector capsids 
(30) or promoters (31). Notably, AAV-mediated transduction will 
result in spatial heterogeneity of ChR2 expression, which is not 
expected to be pro-arrhythmic per se since ChR2 has neither a 
leak current in the absence of illumination nor does it affect the 
electrophysiological properties of cardiomyocytes (5). During illu-
mination, however, non-uniformities in either ChR2 expression or 
light application could result in heterogeneous excitation patterns, 
which might have secondary pro-arrhythmic consequences (e.g., 
reinitiation of VT/VF) in addition to the primary effect of optoge-
netic defibrillation. Fortunately, in contrast to electrical shocks, 
light stimuli used for optogenetic defibrillation have a much high-
er degree of flexibility, because spatially and temporally shaped 
light patterns minimizing secondary pro-arrhythmic effects could 
be used. Moreover, unlike defibrillation shocks, sequential light 
pulses can be applied repetitively, as these do not require the 
charging of a capacitator to generate high-voltage fields. In fact, 
our experimental results in mouse hearts showed that 4 consec-
utive light pulses instead of 1 increased the termination rate from 
85% to 97%. Importantly, the optogenetic modeling approach pre-
sented here makes it possible to predict in silico the effectiveness 
of novel red-shifted ChR2 variants, gene transfer strategies, or 
illumination technologies before conducting large animal exper-
iments in vivo and before proposing individualized clinical trials, 
Figure 5. Mechanism of optogenetic defibrillation in the human heart. (A) Illustration of the locations of sites 1–3 on the right ventricular posteroseptal 
wall. (B) Vm traces from sites 1–3 during epicardial illumination with red light (669 nm, 1 second, 10 mW/mm2, red box) Dashed lines indicate Vm = 0. (C) 
Ionic Na+ (INa) and L-type Ca2+ (ICa,L) currents underlying Vm from endocardial site 3 in B. (D) Minimum diastolic Vm values during illumination with blue (488 
nm) and red light as a function of depth in the ventricular free walls. Upper quartile, median, and lower quartile values are shown. Blue and red arrows 
indicate the deepest tissue layers in which more than 75% of cardiomyocytes had a minimum diastolic Vm exceeding the threshold for 90% inactivation 
of Na+ current (Vm = –65.8 mV, dashed line). (E) Zoomed-in snapshots of Vm distribution during the illumination at the indicated time points from start of 
simulation (see also Supplemental Video 3). Snapshots were taken from the region shown in A (black rectangle, in top panel). 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 9 0 0
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 10   October 2016
e.g., for therapy-resistant patients who experience frequent pain-
ful electrical shocks from implanted defibrillators.
Methods
Animals. Experiments on transgenic ChR2-expressing mice were per-
formed with 23 males (aged 4–15 months, median 6 months) and 27 
females (aged 3.5–14.5 months, median 4.5 months) from a previously 
established mouse line (5) expressing ChR2 with the H134R mutation 
(32) under the control of the chicken β-actin (CAG) promoter and back-
crossed at least 10 generations onto a CD1 genetic background. The 
CAG-EGFP mouse line was reported before (5), backcrossed at least 10 
generations onto a CD1 genetic background, and we used five 2.5- to 
3.5-month-old females. From the CD1 WT strain (Charles River) we 
used 7 female mice 6.5 to 12 months old as controls and three 10-week-
old female mice for ChR2 gene transfer by systemic injection of AAV.
Optogenetic defibrillation. Mice were heparinized and sacrificed 
by cervical dislocation. Hearts were explanted and perfused in Lan-
gendorff configuration with Tyrode’s solution containing (in mM) 140 
NaCl, 5.4 KCl, 1.8 CaCl2, 2 MgCl2, 10 glucose, and 10 HEPES (pH 7.4, 
adjusted with NaOH). A bipolar cardiac electrogram was recorded 
with a silver chloride electrode placed at the right atrium and a met-
al spoon under the apex of the heart using a bio-amplifier recording 
system (PowerLab 8/30, Animal Bio Amp ML 136, LabChart 7.1 soft-
ware, AD Instruments). Electrical stimulation (1–10 mA, 2 ms) was 
applied via a bipolar silver chloride electrode (<3 mm distance) placed 
epicardially. The local effective refractory period (ERP) was deter-
mined using an S1-S2 protocol, with 6 stimuli at a cycle length of 150 
ms (S1) followed by a premature stimulus (S2) with a variable delay 
(<150 ms) that was decreased in 5-ms increments. The shortest delay 
for successful S2 pacing was defined as the local ERP. The electrode 
was relocated until an epicardial site with a low local ERP (<55 ms) 
was identified, because we observed that pacing from such locations 
was the most reliable way to induce ventricular arrhythmia in mouse 
hearts. Application of either electrical burst stimulation (50 Hz, 20–50 
pulses) or an S1-S2 protocol with an S2 delay exceeding the local ERP 
by less than 5 ms evoked free-running ventricular arrhythmia. In stan-
dard Tyrode’s solution, arrhythmia episodes often terminated sponta-
neously after less than 15 seconds. Because sustained arrhythmias are 
required to test optogenetic defibrillation, we lowered the potassium 
concentration to 2 mM and added 100 μM pinacidil, which enabled 
induction of sustained (>30 seconds) ventricular arrhythmia. Notably, 
optogenetic defibrillation was attempted in all cases at least 3 seconds 
after induction, which led to inclusion of sustained arrhythmia only 
and exclusion of self-terminating VTs, most of which were shorter 
than 3 seconds. Illumination of the anterior ventricular epicardium 
(Supplemental Figure 1A) was performed with a macroscope (MVX10, 
Olympus) equipped with a 1× objective (MVPLAPO1x, numerical 
aperture 0.25) using 470-nm LEDs (LEDC5 and LEDD1, Thorlabs, 
or GCS-0470-50-A0510 and BLS-13000-1, Mightex) attached to 
the epifluorescence port. LED pulse duration and intensity were con-
trolled and sampled with the bio-amplifier recording system. The spa-
tial extent of the illuminated area was varied using the zoom function 
of the macroscope (Supplemental Figure 1A). Light intensity was cali-
brated by measuring the light power with a power meter (PM100 and 
S130A, Thorlabs) and dividing by the illuminated area. The maximum 
light intensities tested were 0.4, 1.5, and 1.5 mW/mm2 for 143-, 29-, 
and 15-mm2 large circular areas, respectively.
We assessed defibrillation success rates by conducting multiple 
defibrillation attempts per heart using 2 different protocols as follows. 
(a) Single-light-pulse protocol (Supplemental Figure 1B): VT/VF epi-
sodes were allowed to stabilize for 3, 5, or 10 seconds after induction. 
Subsequently, 1 single light pulse (1 second, 0.4 mW/mm2, 143 mm2) 
was applied, and we determined whether it terminated the arrhythmia 
within 4 seconds after the start of illumination (green box in Supple-
mental Figure 1B); otherwise, rescue defibrillation was performed. 
Spontaneous termination rate was analyzed during the same time 
period but without illumination (Figure 1B, black). (b) Four-light-pulse 
protocol (Supplemental Figure 1C): VT/VF episodes were allowed to 
stabilize for 3–15 seconds after induction. Subsequently, 4 light puls-
es with identical illumination parameters were applied with a 1- to 
5-second delay in between, and we determined whether the arrhyth-
mias were terminated between the onset of the first light pulse and 
3–10 seconds after the last illumination (green box in Supplemental 
Figure 1C); otherwise rescue defibrillation was performed. For control 
experiments, the longest illumination protocols were applied to hearts 
from transgenic mice expressing EGFP under the control of the chick-
en β-actin promoter (5) and from CD1 WT mice (Figure 1C, green, 
red). The rate of spontaneous termination in ChR2 mice was assessed 
during the maximum duration of the 4-light-pulse protocol (Figure 
1C, black) but without illumination. The efficacy of the different illu-
mination parameters (pulse duration, illuminated area, and intensity; 
Figure 1, D and E) was analyzed using the 4-light-pulse protocol with 
identical illumination parameters for each of the 4 pulses.
The rescue defibrillation procedure included sequential or 
simultaneous application of high-intensity illumination (145 mm2, 
0.4 to 0.9 mW/mm2, >3 seconds), mechanical force applied to the 
ventricles by tweezers, and/or electrical antitachycardia pacing (50 
Hz, >20 pulses). If this procedure did not terminate the arrhythmia, 
the heart was temporarily perfused with normal Tyrode’s solution 
and, if this restored normal rhythm, optogenetic defibrillation exper-
iments were reattempted.
Acute myocardial infarction. The left anterior descending cor-
onary artery of explanted hearts was ligated with a Prolene 8-0 
thread (Ethicon). Ventricular arrhythmias were induced as reported 
above, but during perfusion with standard Tyrode’s solution. This 
induced prolonged VT/VF episodes (>10 seconds) in 6 of 12 hearts. 
In these hearts, optogenetic defibrillation was tested 5 seconds 
after induction using the single-light-pulse protocol (Supplemental 
Figure 1B), as described above. To verify complete artery ligation, 
hearts were coronary-perfused after the experiment with the food 
dye Patent Blue V E131 (Brauns-Heitmann), and macroscopic imag-
es were taken (see below).
AAV-based gene transfer and optical cardiac pacing. Systemic 
injection of AAV was performed as reported earlier (6). Briefly, the 
AAV9-CAG-hChR2(H134R)-mCherry virus consisting of AAV9 virus 
capsid and AAV2 virus DNA was obtained from the Penn Vector Core 
(University of Pennsylvania) and injected into the jugular vein of 
WT mice anesthetized by inhalation of 1.5% isoflurane and O2/N2O 
(50%/50%). For this purpose, a 5-mm-long cervical incision was per-
formed, 2 × 1011 AAV particles diluted in 100 μl of PBS were slowly 
(~10 seconds) injected, bleeding was stopped with forceps and surgical 
swabs, and the skin was sutured (Prolene C-1 13 mm 3/8c, Ethicon).
For optical cardiac pacing in vivo, mice were intubated and venti-
lated with 1.5% to 2.5% isoflurane and O2/N2O (50%/50%) 16 months 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 9 0 1
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 10   October 2016
Simulation of cardiac electrophysiology and numerical methods. Elec-
trophysiology of normal and diseased human cardiac tissue was repre-
sented using an extensively validated approach (35). Briefly, cell- and 
tissue-scale properties were assigned to all 3 regions in the ventricu-
lar mesh: normal myocardium, PIZ, and infarct. At the cell scale, the 
infarcted region was modeled as electrically passive. In the PIZ and 
normal myocardium, action potential dynamics were represented via 
a validated human-specific model (43). In the PIZ, specific modifica-
tions to this model were incorporated to represent electrophysiological 
remodeling observed in patch-clamped myocytes harvested from the 
infarct border zone: fast sodium current (INa) was decreased by 62% 
(44), L-type calcium current (ICa,L) was decreased by 68% (45), and 
delayed rectifier potassium currents (IKr and IKs) were decreased by 
80% and 70%, respectively (46). Consequently, the PIZ action poten-
tial differed from that in the normal myocardium: +16.1% duration, 
–42.2% upstroke velocity, and –42.8% amplitude. These changes were 
consistent with previously reported values (47, 48). At the tissue scale, 
the infarcted region was modeled as nonconductive. In normal myo-
cardium, longitudinal and transverse intracellular conductivity values 
were scaled to 0.255 and 0.0775 S/m, respectively. This resulted in 
longitudinal and transverse conduction velocities (CVL = 59.9 and CVT 
= 33.5 cm/s, respectively) consistent with values measured in experi-
ments with human ventricular tissue (49, 50). In the PIZ, transverse 
intracellular conductivity was reduced by 90% to represent connex-
in-43 remodeling observed in the infarct border zone (51). Because of 
this change and differences in cell-level electrophysiology (as described 
above), PIZ conduction velocities were lower than in normal myocar-
dium (CVL = 49.2 cm/s, CVT = 4.16 cm/s) and had a larger anisotropy 
ratio (11.8:1 vs. 1.79:1). Excitation propagation in the ventricular model 
was modeled via the monodomain formulation as implemented in the 
CARP software (Johns Hopkins University, Université de Bordeaux, 
Medizinische Universität Graz) (52, 53). As described previously (52), 
a leapfrogging approach was used to couple the monodomain partial 
differential equation with the system of ordinary differential equa-
tions that modeled cell-level phenomena. Our previous studies have 
described rigorous validation of this computational framework against 
experimental measurements (14, 34, 54–56). All simulations were exe-
cuted on 24 Intel Haswell CPUs (2.5 GHz) on the parallel computing 
resource at the Maryland Advanced Research Computing Center. The 
total wall time required to simulate 1 second of electrophysiological 
activity in the ventricular model was about 1 hour 40 minutes.
Simulation of channelrhodopsin expression and illumination. To sim-
ulate optogenetic transduction of the human ventricles via viral gene 
delivery, we used our previously validated computational modeling 
framework (13, 14, 57). Channelrhodopsin expression was modeled 
by incorporation of a photocycle model (15) in 58.2% of myocardial 
nodes (normal + PIZ) with a diffuse spatial pattern (Supplemental Fig-
ure 4). This value corresponded to the reported average percentage 
of ChR2-expressing cardiomyocytes in mouse hearts after systemic 
AAV injection (6). The ChR2 channel conductance parameter was cal-
ibrated to 0.17 mS/cm2, resulting in a peak photocurrent of 5.04 pA/
pF when a simulated myocyte clamped to Vm = –52 mV was subject-
ed to blue illumination (5 mW/mm2). This value matched (<1% error) 
recorded peak photocurrent in patch-clamped ChR2-positive myo-
cytes from our earlier study (6). ChR2 light sensitivity was adjusted 
to the CatCh variant (17, 19) by increasing the model rate parameters 
controlling the dark- and light-adapted transitions between closed and 
after the virus injection. To expose the beating heart, the rib cage 
was carefully removed as reported earlier (5, 6). Cardiac ECGs were 
recorded from a needle electrode placed at the right front leg and a 
spoon placed below the heart for stabilization using the bio-amplifier 
recording system (see above). Heart rates were adjusted to 350 to 450 
bpm by varying isoflurane concentration. Optical pacing of the epicar-
dial surface of the left ventricle was performed at a constant frequency 
30 to 50 bpm above basal heart rate using the macroscope and LED 
system (see above). At each light intensity, a train of 40 light pulses 
was applied, and the threshold for optical pacing was defined as the 
minimal light intensity required to achieve 1:1 stimulation for the last 
20 pulses. After in vivo optical pacing, hearts were explanted during 
anesthesia and perfused in Langendorff configuration. Optogenetic 
defibrillation was then tested as described above.
Histology and immunofluorescence. High-resolution macroscopic 
images were recorded from explanted and perfused hearts with an 
AxioZoom.V16 macroscope equipped with a PlanApoZ ×1.0 objective 
lens, a 43 HE filter set, and an AxioCam MRm camera with ZEN 2012 
software (all Zeiss). Images of the curved epicardium were generated 
using Z-stacks and the extended focus module (Zeiss). Hearts were 
fixated by perfusion with 4% paraformaldehyde, dehydrated in 20% 
sucrose, cryopreserved, and sectioned in 10-μm-thick slices with a 
cryotome (Cryostat CM3050 S, Leica). Heart slices were permeabi-
lized with 0.2% Triton X (Sigma-Aldrich) for 20 minutes. Nuclear 
staining was performed with 0.1% Hoechst 33342 (Sigma-Aldrich) 
for 1 hour at room temperature. Microscopic pictures were taken 
with inverted fluorescence microscopes (Axiovert 200M) equipped 
with the Apotome section module, a ×20 or ×40 Plan-Apochromat 
objective, AxioCam MRc or MRm camera, ZEN 2012 or AxioVision 
software, a 64 HE filter set (all Zeiss), and an mCherry filter set (F46-
008, AHF Analysentechnik).
Geometrical model of the diseased human ventricles. We used a com-
putational model of the diseased human ventricles reconstructed from 
clinical late gadolinium-enhanced MRI (LGE-MRI) scans of a patient 
with post–myocardial infarction VT (33). The modeling approach has 
been previously validated in infarct-related VT inducibility studies 
(12, 34, 35). Our laboratory pipeline for cardiac model reconstruc-
tion has been described in detail in previous work (12, 34–37). Briefly, 
anatomical landmark points on the epicardial and endocardial walls 
were identified manually in each LGE-MRI slice. These points were 
used as input data for previously described interpolation software, 
which was used to recreate a 3D rendering of the cardiac surfaces. To 
represent the patient’s infarct geometry, tissue within the ventricu-
lar contours on each 2-dimensional LGE-MRI slice was classified as 
diseased or healthy via signal thresholding. Diseased tissue was then 
classified as either peri-infarct zone (PIZ) or infarct using a validated 
full-width half-maximum approach (38). 3D boundaries between the 
3 tissue regions were reconstructed using a shape-based interpolation 
approach (39) that has been validated for use in characterizing myo-
cardial scar (40). We then combined infarct and PIZ contours with the 
rendering of ventricular geometry and used a fully automatic octree-
based technique (41) to generate a boundary-fitted, locally refined, 
smoothed, and conformal 3D mesh (Supplemental Figure 2) suitable 
for finite element modeling of cardiac electrophysiology. The ventric-
ular mesh had 2,110,030 points and 2,687,615 volumetric elements. 
Finally, myocardial fiber orientations were assigned throughout this 
mesh using a previously validated rules-based approach (42).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 9 0 2
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 10   October 2016
Ee(x) = Ee,0e–x/δ
 
 
 
 
(Equation 3)
Optical decay rates (δ) for nonmyocardial layers were obtained from 
the available literature, with optical diffusivity values derived from 
absorption and scattering coefficients (μa and μ′
s, respectively) using 
the following formulas:
 
 
 
 
(Equation 4)
 
 
 
 
(Equation 5)
For the epicardial fat layer, we used parameter values for red light (669 
nm) illumination of subcutaneous adipose tissue (μa = 0.0134 mm–1 
and μ′
s = 1.13 mm–1, D = 0.292 mm, δ = 4.66 mm) (60). Relevant mea-
surements of the mammalian pericardium were not found in the liter-
ature; thus, for the pericardium in our model, we used optical param-
eters reported for the human peritoneum (μa = 0.0270 mm–1, μ′
s = 1.83 
mm–1, D = 0.180 mm, δ = 2.56 mm) (61, 62).
Protocol for initiation and optogenetic defibrillation of VT. Sus-
tained arrhythmia (≥5 seconds of self-sustained re-entrant activity) 
was initiated by a rapid pacing sequence resembling the clinical pro-
tocol for electrophysiological study in VT patients (59). A train of six 
10-ms-long electrical stimuli (S1) was delivered to the ventricular 
apex at a cycle length of 350 ms. This was followed by a premature 
stimulus (S2, coupling interval = 270 ms), which induced sustained 
VT (Figure 4A, Supplemental Figure 3, and Supplemental Video 1). 
Three unique simulations were conducted with different optogenetic 
configurations: control (no illumination), blue illumination (488 nm), 
and red illumination (669 nm). For the latter 2 cases, light stimulation 
(10 mW/mm2) was applied to the entire epicardial surface for 1 second. 
Light pulse onset time was at t = 4 seconds, approximately 2 seconds 
after the delivery of the S2 stimulus.
Pseudo-ECGs. Extracellular potential from 2 points approximate-
ly 1 cm away from the left and right ventricular surfaces (φLV and φRV, 
respectively; black dots in Supplemental Figure 3) was calculated using 
an approach we have used in previous studies (63, 64). Pseudo-ECG 
signals (Figure 4, A and B, Supplemental Figure 6B, and Supplemental 
Video 2), analogous to clinical lead I (i.e., left arm minus right arm), 
were obtained by subtraction of φRV from φLV.
Analysis of diastolic depolarization and Na+ current inactivation. To 
characterize minimal diastolic transmembrane voltage (Vm) values 
within the free ventricular walls (without the septum) during illumi-
nation (Figure 5D), 3D maps of Vm were output at high temporal res-
olution (1-ms time step) for the interval during which stimulation was 
applied (t = 4–5 seconds). Data within the first 100 ms (i.e., t = 4–4.1 
seconds) were excluded from analysis to ensure that these values 
were not biased toward either fast upstrokes associated with the initial 
response to optogenetic stimulation (i.e., directly light-induced action 
potentials) or low preillumination resting potentials. The threshold for 
open states (i.e., k1 and k2 in the Williams et al. model; ref. 15) by 2.2-
fold. This resulted in a half-maximal optogenetic activation level (i.e., 
threshold irradiance to elicit 50% of maximal IChR2) of 0.4 mW/mm2, 
which was consistent with the reported value for CatCh (58). The 
expression for ChR2 photocurrent was:
IChR2 = gChR2(O1 + γO2)(Vm − EChR2)
 
 
 
 
(Equation 1)
where gChR2 was the maximal channel conductance (0.17 mS/cm2), 
γ = 0.1 was the conductance ratio between dark- and light-adapted 
open channel states (O1 and O2, respectively), and EChR2 = 0 mV was 
the ChR2 reversal potential. The ordinary differential equations 
controlling light- and voltage-dependent rates of change in O1, 
O2, and other model state variables can be found in previous pub-
lications (13, 15, 57). At the organ scale, we used a finite element 
approximation of the steady-state photon diffusion equation to 
model light attenuation due to scattering and energy absorption in 
the ventricular myocardium (13, 57). The corresponding partial dif-
ferential equation, which assumes isotropic absorption and homog-
enous scattering, is given by:
D∇ 2Ee(r) – μaEe(r) = –w(r)
 
 
 
 
(Equation 2)
where Ee and w are, respectively, the distributions of irradiance and 
photon sources at each point r; ∇2 is the Laplace operator; D is the dif-
fusivity of light in cardiac tissue; and μa is the light absorption rate. As 
described previously (57), w is set to zero and the equation is solved 
with Dirichlet boundary conditions derived from the placement of 
simulated light sources. We validated this approach in earlier work 
concerned with simulation of optical mapping experiments (20). 
Optical parameters of myocardium were derived from experimental-
ly measured values for cardiac tissue (59) and depended on whether 
the applied illumination was blue (λ = 488 nm, D = 0.18 mm, μa = 0.52 
mm–1) or red (λ = 669 nm, D = 0.34 mm, μa = 0.10 mm–1). As shown in 
Supplemental Figure 5, this resulted in significantly deeper light pen-
etration for red stimuli (approximate exponential decay rate δ = 1.84 
mm) compared with blue stimuli (δ = 0.588 mm).
Additional calculations were performed to analyze how optical 
energy requirements for optogenetic defibrillation would be affected 
if red light were applied to the outer surface of the pericardium instead 
of directly to the epicardium. This illumination configuration was 
modeled by assuming the heart was surrounded by a layer of adipose 
tissue (i.e., epicardial fat) and a fibrous sac filled with fluid (i.e., vis-
ceral and parietal pericardial membranes plus pericardial fluid). Both 
layers were assumed to have uniform thickness based on nominal 
measurements from human patients: 1.7 mm for the pericardium (21) 
and 4.1 mm for the epicardial fat layer (22). To quantify how variability 
in the extent of epicardial fat would affect the light energy required 
for optogenetic defibrillation, we considered a range of possible adi-
pose layer thicknesses (0 to 8 mm) and calculated, for each case, the 
applied pericardial Ee necessary to ensure that light with a particular 
Ee,0 value was able to reach the epicardial surface based on the expo-
nential decay approximation:
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 9 0 3
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 10   October 2016
lished by the National Institutes of Health (8th edition, revised 2011) 
and were authorized by the local ethics review board (Landesamt für 
Natur, Umwelt und Verbraucherschutz Nordrhein-Westfalen, Germa-
ny, 84-02.04.2011.A292).
Author contributions
TB, PMB, BKF, NAT, and PS designed the study. TB, CCV, and PS 
performed the experiments in mice and analyzed the experimen-
tal data. HJA developed the human VT model. TVK and PMB per-
formed and analyzed the simulations of the human VT model. TB, 
PMB, TVK, BKF, NAT, and PS wrote the manuscript.
Acknowledgments
We thank F. Holst for technical assistance and Penn Vector Core, 
Gene Therapy Program (University of Pennsylvania), for pro-
viding the AAV9-CAG-hChR2(H134R)-mCherry.WPRE.SV40 
virus vector. This work was supported by the German Research 
Foundation (SA 1785/5-1, SA 1785/7-1 and Research Training 
Group 1873 to P. Sasse); the BONFOR Program, Medical Faculty, 
University of Bonn (O-162.0011 to P. Sasse); and the NIH (DP1 
HL123271, R01 HL105216, R01 HL103428, and R01 HL126802 
to N.A. Trayanova).
Address correspondence to: Philipp Sasse, Institute of Physiolo-
gy I, University of Bonn, Life and Brain Center, Sigmund-Freud-
Strasse 25, 53127 Bonn, Germany. Phone: 49.228.6885.200; 
E-mail: philipp.sasse@uni-bonn.de.
90% inactivation of Na+ current (dashed line in Figure 5D) was derived 
by identification of the specific value (Vm = –65.8 mV) for which h∞ was 
equal to 0.1 in the human ventricular action potential model (43).
Statistics. Because of the exploratory nature of this study, effect siz-
es could not be predicted, and thus prior power analysis to determine 
the sample sizes could not be performed. Randomization and blinding 
for mouse strains were not applicable because the light pulse–induced 
stimulation is disclosing the ChR2 genotype. For statistical compari-
son (Figure 1, B–F, and Figure 2C), we considered only experiments 
in which at least 5 defibrillation attempts could be evaluated for each 
displayed parameter. For each mouse heart, the average termination 
rate for a given illumination parameter was calculated, displayed as 1 
data point in the graphs, and used for subsequent statistical analysis as 
1 biological replicate. Because of the non-normal distribution and the 
unequal variances of average arrhythmia termination rates, the fol-
lowing nonparametric tests were used: the Friedman test to estimate 
the influences of illumination parameters (Figure 1, D–F), the 1-way 
ANOVA Kruskal-Wallis with Dunn’s multiple-comparison post-test for 
comparison between different mouse lines (Figure 1C), and the Wil-
coxon matched pairs t test for comparison between protocols with and 
without illumination in ChR2-expressing hearts (Figure 1B and Figure 
2C). Statistics were calculated with GraphPad Prism (GraphPad Soft-
ware). P values less than 0.05 were considered statistically significant 
and are indicated by *P ≤ 0.05, **P ≤ 0.01, and ***P ≤ 0.001 in the fig-
ures. Data are shown as mean ± SEM unless otherwise indicated.
Study approval. All animal procedures were performed in accor-
dance with the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals pub-
 1. Marcus GM, Chan DW, Redberg RF. Recol-
lection of pain due to inappropriate versus 
appropriate implantable cardioverter- 
defibrillator shocks. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 
2011;34(3):348–353.
 2. Reynolds MR, et al. The frequency and incremental 
cost of major complications among medicare bene-
ficiaries receiving implantable cardioverter-defibril-
lators. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2006;47(12):2493–2497.
 3. Sohail MR, Henrikson CA, Braid-Forbes MJ, 
Forbes KF, Lerner DJ. Mortality and cost 
associated with cardiovascular implantable 
electronic device infections. Arch Intern Med. 
2011;171(20):1821–1828.
 4. Larsen GK, Evans J, Lambert WE, Chen Y, Raitt 
MH. Shocks burden and increased mortality in 
implantable cardioverter-defibrillator patients. 
Heart Rhythm. 2011;8(12):1881–1886.
 5. Bruegmann T, et al. Optogenetic control of 
heart muscle in vitro and in vivo. Nat Methods. 
2010;7(11):897–900.
 6. Vogt CC, et al. Systemic gene transfer enables 
optogenetic pacing of mouse hearts. Cardiovasc 
Res. 2015;106(2):338–343.
 
7. Nussinovitch U, Gepstein L. Optogenetics for in 
vivo cardiac pacing and resynchronization thera-
pies. Nat Biotechnol. 2015;33(7):750–754.
 8. Arrenberg AB, Stainier DY, Baier H, Huisken J. 
Optogenetic control of cardiac function. Science. 
2010;330(6006):971–974.
 9. Zipes DP, Fischer J, King RM, Nicoll A deB, Jolly 
WW. Termination of ventricular fibrillation in 
dogs by depolarizing a critical amount of myocar-
dium. Am J Cardiol. 1975;36(1):37–44.
 10. Burton RA, et al. Optical control of exci-
tation waves in cardiac tissue. Nat Photonics. 
2015;9(12):813–816.
 11. Bingen BO, et al. Light-induced termination of 
spiral wave arrhythmias by optogenetic engi-
neering of atrial cardiomyocytes. Cardiovasc Res. 
2014;104(1):194–205.
 12. Maguire CT, Wakimoto H, Patel VV, Hammer 
PE, Gauvreau K, Berul CI. Implications of ven-
tricular arrhythmia vulnerability during murine 
electrophysiology studies. Physiol Genomics. 
2003;15(1):84–91.
 13. Boyle PM, Williams JC, Ambrosi CM, Entcheva 
E, Trayanova NA. A comprehensive multiscale 
framework for simulating optogenetics in the 
heart. Nat Commun. 2013;4:2370.
 14. Ambrosi CM, Boyle PM, Chen K, Trayanova NA, 
Entcheva E. Optogenetics-enabled assessment 
of viral gene and cell therapy for restoration of 
cardiac excitability. Sci Rep. 2015;5:17350.
 15. Williams JC, et al. Computational optogenetics: 
empirically-derived voltage- and light-sensitive 
channelrhodopsin-2 model. PLoS Comput Biol. 
2013;9(9):e1003220.
 16. Karathanos TV, Bayer JD, Wang D, Boyle PM, 
Trayanova NA. Opsin spectral sensitivity deter-
mines the effectiveness of optogenetic termination 
of ventricular fibrillation in the human heart: a 
simulation study [published online ahead of print 
March 4, 2016]. J Physiol. doi:10.1113/JP271739.
 17. Klapoetke NC, et al. Independent optical exci-
tation of distinct neural populations. Nat Meth-
ods. 2014;11(3):338–346.
 18. Lin JY, Knutsen PM, Muller A, Kleinfeld D, 
Tsien RY. ReaChR: a red-shifted variant of 
channelrhodopsin enables deep transcra-
nial optogenetic excitation. Nat Neurosci. 
2013;16(10):1499–1508.
 19. Kleinlogel S, et al. Ultra light-sensitive and fast neu-
ronal activation with the Ca2+-permeable channel-
rhodopsin CatCh. Nat Neurosci. 2011;14(4):513–518.
 20. Bishop MJ, Rodriguez B, Eason J, Whiteley 
JP, Trayanova N, Gavaghan DJ. Synthesis of 
voltage-sensitive optical signals: application 
to panoramic optical mapping. Biophys J. 
2006;90(8):2938–2945.
 21. Sechtem U, Tscholakoff D, Higgins CB. MRI of 
the normal pericardium. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 
1986;147(2):239–244.
 22. Flüchter S, et al. Volumetric assessment of epi-
cardial adipose tissue with cardiovascular mag-
netic resonance imaging. Obesity (Silver Spring). 
2007;15(4):870–878.
 23. Pezhouman A, et al. Molecular basis of hypokale-
mia-induced ventricular fibrillation. Circulation. 
2015;132(16):1528–1537.
 24. Glukhov AV, Flagg TP, Fedorov VV, Efimov IR, 
Nichols CG. Differential K(ATP) channel phar-
macology in intact mouse heart. J Mol Cell Cardi-
ol. 2010;48(1):152–160.
 25. Billman GE. The cardiac sarcolemmal ATP-sen-
sitive potassium channel as a novel target for 
anti-arrhythmic therapy. Pharmacol Ther. 
2008;120(1):54–70.
 26. Zipes DP, Wellens HJ. Sudden cardiac death. Cir-
culation. 1998;98(21):2334–2351.
 27. Arevalo HJ, et al. Arrhythmia risk stratification of 
patients after myocardial infarction using person-
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 9 0 4
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 10   October 2016
alized heart models. Nat Commun. 2016;7:11437.
 28. Kim TI, et al. Injectable, cellular-scale optoelec-
tronics with applications for wireless optogenet-
ics. Science. 2013;340(6129):211–216.
 29. Xu L, et al. 3D multifunctional integumentary 
membranes for spatiotemporal cardiac measure-
ments and stimulation across the entire epicardi-
um. Nat Commun. 2014;5:3329.
 30. Zacchigna S, Zentilin L, Giacca M. Adeno-asso-
ciated virus vectors as therapeutic and investi-
gational tools in the cardiovascular system. Circ 
Res. 2014;114(11):1827–1846.
 31. Werfel S, et al. Rapid and highly efficient induc-
ible cardiac gene knockout in adult mice using 
AAV-mediated expression of Cre recombinase. 
Cardiovasc Res. 2014;104(1):15–23.
 32. Nagel G, Brauner M, Liewald JF, Adeishvili 
N, Bamberg E, Gottschalk A. Light activation 
of channelrhodopsin-2 in excitable cells of 
Caenorhabditis elegans triggers rapid behavioral 
responses. Curr Biol. 2005;15(24):2279–2284.
 33. Prakosa A, et al. Methodology for image-based 
reconstruction of ventricular geometry for 
patient-specific modeling of cardiac electrophysiol-
ogy. Prog Biophys Mol Biol. 2014;115(2–3):226–234.
 34. Deng D, et al. Accuracy of prediction of 
infarct-related arrhythmic circuits from image-
based models reconstructed from low and high 
resolution MRI. Front Physiol. 2015;6:282.
 35. Ashikaga H, et al. Feasibility of image-based simula-
tion to estimate ablation target in human ventricular 
arrhythmia. Heart Rhythm. 2013;10(8):1109–1116.
 36. Arevalo H, Plank G, Helm P, Halperin H, 
Trayanova N. Tachycardia in post-infarction 
hearts: insights from 3D image-based ventricular 
models. PLoS One. 2013;8(7):e68872.
 37. Vadakkumpadan F, et al. Image-based models of 
cardiac structure with applications in arrhyth-
mia and defibrillation studies. J Electrocardiol. 
2009;42(2):157.e1–157.10.
 38. Schmidt A, et al. Infarct tissue heterogeneity by 
magnetic resonance imaging identifies enhanced 
cardiac arrhythmia susceptibility in patients 
with left ventricular dysfunction. Circulation. 
2007;115(15):2006–2014.
 39. Raya SP, Udupa JK. Shape-based interpolation of 
multidimensional objects. IEEE Trans Med Imag-
ing. 1990;9(1):32–42.
 40. McDowell KS, et al. Methodology for 
patient-specific modeling of atrial fibrosis as a 
substrate for atrial fibrillation. J Electrocardiol. 
2012;45(6):640–645.
 41. Prassl AJ, et al. Automatically generated, ana-
tomically accurate meshes for cardiac electro-
physiology problems. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. 
2009;56(5):1318–1330.
 42. Bayer JD, Blake RC, Plank G, Trayanova NA. A 
novel rule-based algorithm for assigning myo-
cardial fiber orientation to computational heart 
models. Ann Biomed Eng. 2012;40(10):2243–2254.
 43. ten Tusscher KH, Panfilov AV. Alternans 
and spiral breakup in a human ventricular 
tissue model. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 
2006;291(3):H1088–H1100.
 44. Pu J, Boyden PA. Alterations of Na+ currents in 
myocytes from epicardial border zone of the 
infarcted heart. A possible ionic mechanism 
for reduced excitability and postrepolarization 
refractoriness. Circ Res. 1997;81(1):110–119.
 45. Dun W, Baba S, Yagi T, Boyden PA. Dynamic 
remodeling of K+ and Ca2+ currents in cells that 
survived in the epicardial border zone of canine 
healed infarcted heart. Am J Physiol Heart Circ 
Physiol. 2004;287(3):H1046–H1054.
 46. Jiang M, Cabo C, Yao J, Boyden PA, Tseng G. 
Delayed rectifier K currents have reduced 
amplitudes and altered kinetics in myocytes 
from infarcted canine ventricle. Cardiovasc Res. 
2000;48(1):34–43.
 47. Decker KF, Rudy Y. Ionic mechanisms of elec-
trophysiological heterogeneity and conduction 
block in the infarct border zone. Am J Physiol 
Heart Circ Physiol. 2010;299(5):H1588–H1597.
 48. Cabo C, Boyden PA. Electrical remodeling of the 
epicardial border zone in the canine infarcted 
heart: a computational analysis. Am J Physiol 
Heart Circ Physiol. 2003;284(1):H372–H384.
 49. Taggart P, et al. Inhomogeneous transmural 
conduction during early ischaemia in patients 
with coronary artery disease. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 
2000;32(4):621–630.
 50. Glukhov AV, et al. Transmural dispersion of 
repolarization in failing and nonfailing human 
ventricle. Circ Res. 2010;106(5):981–991.
 51. Yao JA, Hussain W, Patel P, Peters NS, Boyden PA, 
Wit AL. Remodeling of gap junctional channel 
function in epicardial border zone of healing 
canine infarcts. Circ Res. 2003;92(4):437–443.
 52. Vigmond EJ, Weber dos Santos R, Prassl AJ, Deo 
M, Plank G. Solvers for the cardiac bidomain equa-
tions. Prog Biophys Mol Biol. 2008;96(1–3):3–18.
 53. Vigmond EJ, Hughes M, Plank G, Leon LJ. 
Computational tools for modeling electri-
cal activity in cardiac tissue. J Electrocardiol. 
2003;36(suppl):69–74.
 54. Rodríguez B, Li L, Eason JC, Efimov IR, Trayanova 
NA. Differences between left and right ventricular 
chamber geometry affect cardiac vulnerability to 
electric shocks. Circ Res. 2005;97(2):168–175.
 55. Bishop MJ, Rodriguez B, Qu F, Efimov IR, 
Gavaghan DJ, Trayanova NA. The role of 
photon scattering in optical signal distortion 
during arrhythmia and defibrillation. Biophys J. 
2007;93(10):3714–3726.
 56. Rantner LJ, Arevalo HJ, Constantino JL, Efimov 
IR, Plank G, Trayanova NA. Three-dimension-
al mechanisms of increased vulnerability to 
electric shocks in myocardial infarction: altered 
virtual electrode polarizations and conduction 
delay in the peri-infarct zone. J Physiol (Lond). 
2012;590(18):4537–4551.
 57. Boyle PM, Karathanos TV, Entcheva E, Trayano-
va NA. Computational modeling of cardiac 
optogenetics: Methodology overview & review 
of findings from simulations. Comput Biol Med. 
2015;65:200–208.
 58. Mattis J, et al. Principles for applying optogenetic 
tools derived from direct comparative analysis of 
microbial opsins. Nat Methods. 2012;9(2):159–172.
 59. Wellens HJ, Brugada P, Stevenson WG. Pro-
grammed electrical stimulation of the heart 
in patients with life-threatening ventricular 
arrhythmias: what is the significance of induced 
arrhythmias and what is the correct stimulation 
protocol? Circulation. 1985;72(1):1–7.
 60. Bashkatov AN, Genina ÉA, Kochubey VI, Tuchin 
VV. Optical properties of the subcutaneous adi-
pose tissue in the spectral range 400–2500 nm. 
Opt Spectrosc. 2005;99(5):836–842.
 61. Sandell JL, Zhu TC. A review of in-vivo optical 
properties of human tissues and its impact on 
PDT. J Biophotonics. 2011;4(11–12):773–787.
 62. Wang HW, et al. Broadband reflectance measure-
ments of light penetration, blood oxygenation, 
hemoglobin concentration, and drug concen-
tration in human intraperitoneal tissues before 
and after photodynamic therapy. J Biomed Opt. 
2005;10(1):14004.
 63. Boyle PM, Veenhuyzen GD, Vigmond EJ. Fusion 
during entrainment of orthodromic reciprocating 
tachycardia is enhanced for basal pacing sites but 
diminished when pacing near Purkinje system 
end points. Heart Rhythm. 2013;10(3):444–451.
 64. Boyle PM, Massé S, Nanthakumar K, Vigmond 
EJ. Transmural IK(ATP) heterogeneity as a 
determinant of activation rate gradient during 
early ventricular fibrillation: mechanistic insights 
from rabbit ventricular models. Heart Rhythm. 
2013;10(11):1710–1717.
