 Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg., 97(4), 2017, pp. 1170–1179
doi:10.4269/ajtmh.16-0955
Copyright © 2017 by The American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene
The Impact of Introducing Malaria Rapid Diagnostic Tests on Fever Case Management:
A Synthesis of Ten Studies from the ACT Consortium
Katia J. Bruxvoort,1* Baptiste Leurent,1 Clare I. R. Chandler,1 Evelyn K. Ansah,2 Frank Baiden,3 Anders Bj ¨
orkman,4
Helen E. D. Burchett,1 Si ˆ
an E. Clarke,1 Bonnie Cundill,5 Debora D. DiLiberto,1 Kristina Elfving,6 Catherine Goodman,1
Kristian S. Hansen,1,7 S. Patrick Kachur,8 Sham Lal,1 David G. Lalloo,9 Toby Leslie,1 Pascal Magnussen,10,11
Lindsay Mangham-Jefferies,1 Andreas M ˚
artensson,12 Ismail Mayan,13 Anthony K. Mbonye,14,15 Mwinyi I. Msellem,16
Obinna E. Onwujekwe,17 Seth Owusu-Agyei,18 Mark W. Rowland,1 Del ´
er Shakely,4,19,20 Sarah G. Staedke,1
Lasse S. Vestergaard,10,21 Jayne Webster,1 Christopher J. M. Whitty,1 Virginia L. Wiseman,1,22 Shunmay Yeung,1
David Schellenberg,1 and Heidi Hopkins1
1London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom; 2Ghana Health Service, Accra, Ghana; 3Ensign College of Public
Health, Kpong, Ghana; 4Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden; 5Leeds Institute of Clinical Trials Research, University of Leeds, Leeds, United
Kingdom; 6University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden; 7University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; 8US Centers for Disease Control
andPrevention, Atlanta,Georgia; 9LiverpoolSchoolof Tropical Medicine, Liverpool,UnitedKingdom; 10Centrefor Medical Parasitology, University
of Copenhagen and Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark; 11Department for Veterinary and Animal Sciences, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; 12Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden; 13Health Protection Research Organisation, Kabul, Afghanistan;
14Ministry of Health, Kampala, Uganda; 15Makerere University School of Public Health, Kampala, Uganda; 16Zanzibar Malaria Elimination
Programme, Tanzania; 17Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, University of Nigeria, Enugu, Nigeria; 18Kintampo Health Research
Centre, Kintampo, Ghana; 19Centre for Malaria Research, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden; 20Health Metrics at Sahlgrenska Academy,
University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden; 21Department of Infectious Disease Epidemiology and Prevention, Statens Serum Institut,
Copenhagen, Denmark; 22School of Public Health and Community Medicine, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia
Abstract.
Since 2010, the World Health Organization has been recommending that all suspected cases of malaria
be confirmed with parasite-based diagnosis before treatment. These guidelines represent a paradigm shift away from
presumptive antimalarial treatment of fever. Malaria rapid diagnostic tests (mRDTs) are central to implementing this
policy, intended to target artemisinin-based combination therapies (ACT) to patients with confirmed malaria and to
improve management of patients with nonmalarial fevers. The ACT Consortium conducted ten linked studies, eight in
sub-Saharan Africa and two in Afghanistan, to evaluate the impact of mRDT introduction on case management
across settings that vary in malaria endemicity and healthcare provider type. This synthesis includes 562,368 out-
patient encounters (study size range 2,400–432,513). mRDTs were associated with significantly lower ACT pre-
scription (range 8–69% versus 20–100%). Prescribing did not always adhere to malaria test results; in several
settings, ACTs were prescribed to more than 30% of test-negative patients or to fewer than 80% of test-positive
patients. Either an antimalarial or an antibiotic was prescribed for more than 75% of patients across most settings;
lower antimalarial prescription for malaria test-negative patients was partly offset by higher antibiotic prescription.
Symptomatic management with antipyretics alone was prescribed for fewer than 25% of patients across all sce-
narios. In community health worker and private retailer settings, mRDTs increased referral of patients to other
providers. This synthesis provides an overview of shifts in case management that may be expected with mRDT introduction
and highlights areas of focus to improve design and implementation of future case management programs.
INTRODUCTION
Providing appropriate antimalarial treatment to patients
who have malaria has been a long-standing challenge in fever
case management and has traditionally relied on presumptive
symptom-based diagnosis. Many people with malaria do not
receive effective antimalarial medications, increasing their risk
of severe disease or death. At the same time, many of those
who receive antimalarials do not have malaria and are suffer-
ing from a nonmalaria illness which may need alternative
treatment.1 To improve the rational use of artemisinin-based
combination therapies (ACTs), the World Health Organization
(WHO) recommended in 2010 that all suspected cases of
malaria should have parasitological confirmation before
treatment.2,3 These changes represent a paradigm shift from
presumptive antimalarial treatment of fever to targeted use of
ACTs only for those with a positive malaria test.
Central to implementing this policy change are malaria rapid
diagnostic tests (mRDTs), relatively simple, inexpensive, and
reliable point-of-care tests that can be used where high-
quality microscopy services are not available.4 mRDTs are
intended to improve the management of suspected malaria
cases, increasing the use of first-line antimalarials in pa-
tients with confirmed malaria and encouraging the di-
agnosis and appropriate treatment of patients without
malaria.1 After the WHO policy change, mRDT pro-
curement surged from 45 million tests globally in 2008 to
314 million in 2014.5 Parasite-based diagnosis before
treatment is now a policy in public health facilities in most
malaria-endemic countries, and mRDTs are also being in-
troduced among private retail and community health
providers.6–14
Clinical trials and early pilot projects before the widespread
adoption of mRDTs supported their use, though with some
heterogeneity of results.15 Compared with presumptive
treatment with antimalarials, case management based on
mRDTs generally reduced antimalarial prescription, particu-
larly in settings with relatively high provider adherence to test
results and low malaria prevalence.16–22 On the other hand,
although provider adherence to negative mRDT results was
high in some studies,16,17,23,24 it was low in others.25–27
Comparable data from good-quality studies in a variety of
* Address correspondence to Katia J. Bruxvoort, London School of
Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, 15-17 Tavistock Place, London WC1H
9SH, United Kingdom. E-mail: katia.bruxvoort@lshtm.ac.uk
1170
 contexts are needed to anticipate the effects of mRDT
implementation as these tests are rolled out at scale.
The ACT Consortium is a research partnership created to
address key questions and inform policy on ACT delivery.28
The Consortium conducted studies in 10 countries in Africa
and Asia, including 10 studies specifically designed to ad-
dress questions on improving the targeting of ACTs through
the use of mRDTs. These studies looked at the impact of
mRDT introduction on fever case management across a range
of clinical and epidemiological contexts and among various
types of healthcare providers. Studies evaluated different
mRDT intervention packages, leading to heterogeneity that
precludes formal meta-analysis. The current synthesis com-
pares individual study results to identify patterns across
contexts and provide an overview of what may be expected
from mRDT implementation programs.
METHODS
Studies included in the analysis. ACT Consortium studies
were included in this analysis if they collected data on patient
consultations for suspected malaria, evaluatedan intervention
to implement mRDTs by healthcare providers, and included a
comparison group without the mRDT intervention. The 10
studies meeting these criteria are described in Table 1, in-
cluding the abbreviation for each study used throughout the
text. All studies received ethical approval from their host ac-
ademic institutions and national authorities; see open-access
publications for further details.29–38 Data are available at the
ACT Consortium data repository (https://actc.lshtm.ac.uk/) or
from the authors on request.
Eight studies took place in sub-Saharan Africa and two in
Afghanistan, in a mix of rural and urban settings. mRDTs
were introduced in health facilities only (Afgh1, Cam1,
Ghan1, Tanz1, Tanz2, and Uga1), among community health
workers (Afgh2 and Uga2), in private drug shops only (Uga3),
or in a combination of public facilities, private pharmacies,
and drug shops (Nige1). Seven studies were cluster-
randomized trials of interventions to introduce mRDTs, two
studies were individually randomized trials (Afgh1 and
Ghan1), and one study was a descriptive “before and after”
evaluation (Tanz1). All patients that were eligible in each
study were included in the present analysis; typically, these
were patients with suspected malaria, although one study
included only children under age 5 years (Uga2), and two
studies collected data on all patient consultations (Tanz2
and Uga1). Data were collected using provider-completed
records of treatments administered (Afgh1, Afgh2, Ghan1,
Uga1, and Uga2), patient exit interviews (Tanz1), both of
these methods (Cam1, Nige1, and Tanz2), or provider-
completed records with follow-up interviews of a subsample
of patients (Uga3).
From each study, “settings” and “scenarios” were identified
for this analysis. Six studies were conducted in multiple set-
tings (indicated by suffix a, b, and c), such as distinct geo-
graphical areas and malaria transmission zones (Afgh1,
Afgh2, Cam1, Tanz1, and Uga2), or where providers used
different methods of routine malaria diagnosis (presumptive
care or microscopy; Afgh1 and Ghan1). Trial arms or com-
parison groups within a setting were termed scenarios. All
settings included at least one scenario without mRDT inter-
ventions, and settings in three studies (Cam1, Nige1, and
Tanz2) included multiple mRDT intervention scenarios. In to-
tal, the 10 studies were conducted in 18 settings, with 18
scenarios without mRDT interventions and 24 scenarios with
mRDT interventions.
Data were collected concurrently from scenarios with and
without mRDT interventions in seven studies. In three studies
(Nige1, Tanz1, and Tanz2), data from scenarios without mRDT
interventions were collected before mRDT introduction. The
scale of the interventions and their evaluations varied: for
example,inUga1theinterventionwasimplementedin10health
facilities, and data were collected on 432,513 patient encoun-
ters in the study area whereas Tanz1 evaluated a nationwide
intervention, and data were collected from 3,456 patients.
Microscopy was widely available in all settings in Cam1 and
available at some higher-level facilities in Tanz1, particularly in
the Tanz1/c scenario without mRDT interventions. The two
individually randomized studies (Afgh1 and Ghan1) took place
both in settings where microscopy was the standard practice
and in settings where malaria diagnosis was symptom based.
Microscopy services were nonexistent or very limited in the
other six studies (Afgh2, Nige1, Tanz2, Uga1, Uga2, and
Uga3).
Indicators of interest. To examine the impact of mRDTs
on patient care, malaria testing and prescribing indicators
were reviewed. Because the objective was to compare case
management in areas with and without mRDT interventions,
the first indicator of interest was the proportion of patients
tested by the provider with any parasite-based diagnostic test
(microscopy or mRDT). Prescribing indicators were the pro-
portions of patients prescribed one or more of the following
medicines: ACTs, non-ACT antimalarials, antibiotics (anti-
bacterials), antifungals, antihelminthics, and antipyretics. The
proportion of patients referred to another healthcare provider
was also reviewed.
The ACT indicator was adjusted to account for malaria ep-
idemiology and differences in first-line antimalarial in two
cases: In Afghanistan, Plasmodium vivax was treated with
chloroquine and Plasmodium falciparum with ACT; in these
settings, the proportion of patients prescribed any antimala-
rial is reported instead of ACT. In Nige1, prescription of
sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine (SP) andACTs are reported for the
scenario without mRDT interventions, whereas only ACTs are
reported for the scenarios with mRDT interventions. This re-
flects a change in treatment between the 2009 scenario
without mRDT interventions (when ACTs were recommended
but not yet widely used) and the 2011 scenarios with mRDT
interventions (when ACTs had largely replaced SP).
Analytical approach. Descriptive statistics on the indica-
tors of interest were calculated from each scenario. Estimates
for each indicator were made for scenarios without mRDT
interventions and those with mRDT interventions. Prescribing
indicators were further stratified by result of the diagnostic test
performed by the healthcare provider. Odds ratios and 95%
confidence intervals for indicators of interest within each
setting were calculated using logistic regression with robust
standard errors to account for clustering by the primary unit of
sampling or randomization (see Supplemental Tables). Formal
meta-analysis was deemed inappropriate because of the
heterogeneity of interventions evaluated and study contexts.
However, to aid comparisons between scenarios with and
without mRDT interventions, the indicators of interest are
presented as graphic point estimates by study arm. The
IMPACT OF INTRODUCING MALARIA RDTS ON FEVER CASE MANAGEMENT
1171
 analysis was conducted in STATA 14 (STATA Corp LP, Col-
lege Station, TX). Factors which may explain variations in
mRDT use are examined with additional qualitative data
sources elsewhere.39
RESULTS
Proportion of patients tested. More patients were tested
in scenarios where mRDTs had been introduced (Figure 1
and Supplemental Tables 1 3). However, even with mRDTs
available, the percentage of patients tested varied widely, with
50% or fewer patients tested in five settings (Nige1, Tanz1/a,
Tanz1/b, Tanz2, and Uga1), and nearly 100% in others
(Afgh2/a, Afgh2/b, Uga/2, Uga2/b, and Uga3). The largest
increases in proportion of patients tested were seen where
mRDTs were introduced outside of health facilities (Afgh2,
Uga2, and Uga3). Similar proportions of children and adults
were tested in most scenarios, but in Nige1, Tanz1/a, and
Uga1 test uptake was slightly higher for young children than
for older patients. The proportion of patients tested is not
TABLE 1
Description of studies included in the analysis
Study country (reference)
Context
Healthcare provider type
Dates
Design
Setting*
Scenario
description†
Number of
patients
Number of
clusters‡
Afgh1Afghanistan(29)
Urban
and rural
Public health
facilities
September
2009–September
2010
Individually
randomized trial
Afgh1/a
C
2,005
12
R1
2,048
12,
same
as C
Afgh1/b
C
517
5
R1
527 5, same
as C
Afgh1/c
C
323
5
R1
329 5, same
as C
Afgh2Afghanistan(30)
Urban
and rural
Community health
workers
October 2011–May
2012
Cluster-randomized
trial
Afgh2/a
C
607
6
R1
733
6
Afgh2/b
C
594
5
R1
466
5
Cam1 Cameroon (31)
Urban
and rural
Public and mission
health facilities
October–December
2011
Cluster-randomized
trial
Cam1/a
C
400
5
R1
699
8
R2
778
9
Cam1/b
C
281
4
R1
932
10
R2
891
10
Ghan1 Ghana (32)
Rural
Public health facilities
August
2007–December
2008
Individually
randomized trial
Ghan1/a
C
1,907
1
R1
1,904 1, same
as C
Ghan1/b
C
1,727
3
R1
1,725 3, same
as C
Nige1 Nigeria (33)
Urban
and rural
Public health facilities
and private medicine
retailers
July–December 2009
(formative),
June–December
2011 (trial)
Formative study
followed by cluster-
randomized trial
Nige1
C
1,642
100
R1
1,588
41
R2
1,850
47
R3§
1,508
41
Tanz1 Tanzania (34)
Rural/
periurban
Public health
facilities
May–October 2010
(baseline), April–July
2012 (follow-up)
Descriptive before
and after evaluation
Tanz1/a
C
689
39
R1
750
60
Tanz1/b
C
559
56
R1
388
60
Tanz1/c
C
498
44
R1
572
57
Tanz2 Tanzania (35)
Rural
Public health
facilities
September 2010–
January 2011
(baseline), February
2011–Mar. 2012 (trial)
Baseline, followed by
cluster-randomized
trial
Tanz2
C
16,068
36
R1
14,217
12
R2
15,931
12
R3jj
13,973
12
Uga1 Uganda (36)
Rural
Public health facilities
April 2011–March
2013
Cluster-randomized
trial
Uga1
C
210,758
10
R1
221,755
10
Uga2 Uganda (37)
Rural
Community health
workers
January–December
2011
Cluster-randomized
trial
Uga2/a
C
2,444
32
R1
1,207
32
Uga2/b
C
10,625
31
R1
7,872
30
Uga3 Uganda (38)
Rural
Private medicine
retailers
January–December
2011
Cluster-randomized
trial
Uga3
C
8,109
10
R2
10,365
10
Further details of the studies are available from individual study publications.
* Some studies had multiple “settings,” defined as distinct geographical areas, malaria transmission zones, or different standard practices of malaria diagnosis. Where the study had only one
setting, the study and setting abbreviations are the same.
† C = Without malaria rapid diagnostic test (mRDT) interventions; R1 = mRDT intervention with basic provider training; R2 = mRDT intervention with enhanced provider training; R3 = mRDT
intervention with enhanced provider training and other activities.
‡ Clusters were health facilities in all studies, except Nige1 (health facilities and private medicine retailers), Uga2 (villages) and Uga3 (drug shops within a single administrative area, and drug shops
in a neighboring administrative area if the distance between drug shops was < 1 km).
§ The R3 intervention in Nige1 also included school-based activities.
jj The R3 intervention in Tanz2 also included patient sensitization.
1172
BRUXVOORT AND OTHERS
 reported in Afgh1 or Ghan1, where patients were indi-
vidually randomized to mRDTs or microscopy (Afgh1/a,
Afg1/b, and Ghan1/a), and to mRDTs or symptom-based
diagnosis (Afgh1/c and Ghan1/b).
Patients were also tested with microscopy in Cam1 and, to a
lesser extent, in Tanz1. In Cam1/a and Cam1/b, microscopy
was common in all scenarios, and test use was not higher in
scenarios with mRDT interventions. In scenarios without
mRDT interventions, 80% of patients were tested with mi-
croscopy. In the four scenarios with mRDT interventions,
27–61% of patients were tested with microscopy and 17–52%
with mRDT (71–81% tested overall). Of the three Tanz1 set-
tings, microscopy was most frequently used in the Tanz1/c
scenario without mRDT interventions, where 29% of patients
were tested with microscopy and 2% with mRDT; in the cor-
responding scenario with mRDT interventions, 8% were
tested with microscopy and 63% with mRDT.
Prescription of ACTs and other antimalarial medications.
Overall, mRDTs were associated with lower ACT prescribing
(Figure 2AandSupplemental Table 4). In10/13 African settings,
mRDT scenarios had statistically significantly lower ACT pre-
scriptions than scenarios without mRDT interventions. In two
African settings, there was little difference between mRDT and
non-mRDT scenarios: Uga1, a high-transmission area where a
highproportionofpatients required ACTsevenafter testingand
Ghan1/a, where all non-mRDT patients were randomized to
testing with microscopy. In Nige1, where levels of testing were
very low, presumptive diagnosis of malaria was common even
where mRDTs were available. Prescription of ACT or SP in
the scenario without mRDT interventions was similar to
prescription of ACT in the three mRDT intervention scenarios
(around 50%). In 4/5 Afghanistan settings, prescription of
any antimalarial was much lower in scenarios with mRDT
interventions than without; the exception was Afgh1/b,
where (similar to Ghan1/a) all non-mRDT patients were ran-
domized to testing with microscopy and where malaria
transmission was low.
Recorded prescription of non-ACT antimalarials (e.g., SP,
quinine, oral, and artemisinin monotherapies) was generally
uncommon, except in Afghanistan. In 11/13 African settings,
non-ACTs were prescribed for fewer than 10% of patients
both with and without mRDT interventions (data not shown).
Prescription of non-ACT antimalarials was higher in Cam1/b
(20.9% in the scenario without an mRDT intervention and
approximately 15% in the two scenarios with mRDT inter-
ventions) and in Nige1 (52.8% in the scenario without an
mRDT intervention and approximately 30% in the three sce-
narios with mRDT interventions).
Overall, the finding of lower ACT prescription in scenarios
with mRDT interventions was mostly due to malaria test-
negative patients not receiving ACTs (Figure 2B–D and Sup-
plemental Table 5). Fewer than 30% of test-negative patients
were treated with ACTs in most mRDT intervention scenarios;
exceptions were Cam1/a and Cam1/b, and Ghan1/a and
Ghan1/b, where ACTs were prescribed for 39.2–49.1% of
patients with negative malaria test results. There was no evi-
dent difference in this indicator by test type; in the Cam1/a and
Cam1/b scenarios with mRDT interventions, ACTs were pre-
scribed to 17.3–42.9% of microscopy test-negative patients
and 15.6–45.9% of mRDT test-negative patients (data not
shown). The percentages of malaria test-positive patients in
scenarios with mRDT interventions who were prescribed
ACTs ranged from 60.2% to 98.0% in 12/15 settings with data
for this indicator. Prescription of ACTs to test-positive patients
was over 90% in six of these settings, but was just 60.2–81.2%
in another six settings, with 69.4–96.2% prescribed any
antimalarial. In Tanz1/a, where stock-outs of ACTs in public
health facilities were a major problem, ACT prescribing for
test-positive patients was 18.2%. In Afgh1/a and Afgh2/a,
99.5% and 82.7% of test-positive patients were prescribed
any antimalarial.
Prescription of antibiotics. In contrast to reduced ACT
prescribing, the mRDT interventions were associated with
significantly more prescribing of systemic antibiotic (anti-
bacterial) medications in seven settings (Afgh1/c, Afgh2/a,
Tanz1/a, Tanz1/b, Tanz1/c, Tanz2, and Uga3) (Figure 3 and
Supplemental Tables 6 7). In scenarios with mRDT interven-
tions, antibiotic prescribing patterns varied by mRDT result. In
all settings except Nige1, 40.0–79.9% of patients who tested
negative for malaria were prescribed antibiotics. Antibiotic
prescription was similar in patients who were not tested.
Among those with a positive malaria test result, fewer than
45% were prescribed antibiotics, with higher proportions in
Cam1/a and Cam1/b. Prescription of both an antimalarial
and a systemic antibiotic (Figure 4A and Supplemental
Table 8) was relatively uncommon in all settings (< 25% of
patients, except in Cam1 and Afgh2/b) and was similar or
lower in scenarios with mRDT interventions. By contrast, the
prescription of either an antimalarial or an antibiotic medicine
was high in all settings (more than 68%, except in Tanz1/a)
and similar or lower in scenarios with mRDT interventions
(Figure 4B and Supplemental Table 9). Further details of an-
tibiotic prescribing in ACT Consortium studies are presented
elsewhere.40
Prescription of other medicines. Data were recorded on
prescription of other anti-infectives in some study settings.
Prescription of systemic antifungals (fluconazole and griseo-
fulvin) was reported in five settings (Cam1/a, Cam1/b, Ghan1/a,
Ghan1/b, and Uga1); the proportion of patients prescribed
these medicines across these settings was 2.6% or less
(Supplemental Table 10). Prescription of antihelminthics
(albendazole and mebendazole) was recorded in 13 settings
(all study settings except those in Afgh2, Tanz2, and Uga2);
the proportion of patients prescribed these medicines ranged
from 0.3% to 33.3%, which did not appear attributable to
whether the scenarios had an mRDT intervention or not
(Supplemental Table 10).
Prescription of antipyretic medicines alone, for symptom-
atic relief, without an antimalarial or an antibiotic, ranged
from 0.3% to 23.7% across all scenarios and was similar or
higher with mRDT interventions except in Nige1 (Figure 4C
and Supplemental Table 11). Polypharmacy, defined as the
prescription of three or more medicines, varied widely across
settings (Figure 4D). However, in most settings, polypharmacy
was comparable with and without mRDT interventions, but
was significantly lower with mRDT interventions in four set-
tings (Afgh1/b, Afgh2/a, Afgh2/b, and Cam2/b (Figure 4D and
Supplemental Table 12).
Referral. Figure 5 and Supplemental Table 13 show the
percentage of patients referred to another care provider or
facility. Referral was generally low across study settings.
However, referral was significantly higher with mRDT inter-
ventions among community health workers, particularly in
Uga2/a, Uga2/b, and Afgh2/b, and to a lesser extent in Uga3.
IMPACT OF INTRODUCING MALARIA RDTS ON FEVER CASE MANAGEMENT
1173
 FIGURE 1.
Patients in scenarios without and with malaria rapid diagnostic test (mRDT) interventions that were tested with any malaria diagnostic
test at the provider of (A) all patients, (B) patients under age five years, and (C) patients ages five years and older. Afgh1 and Ghan1 studies
individually randomized patients to malaria diagnostic method and are not included in this analysis. Some settings had more than one mRDT
intervention scenario, which are graphed separately using the color and symbol for the setting. These include Cam1/a and Cam1/b (two intervention
scenarios each),Nige1(threeinterventionscenarios),andTanz2(threeintervention scenarios). SeeTable1. Scenarios withdenominators fewerthan
50 patients in Figure 2B are Afgh2/a without mRDT interventions and Afgh2/b both with and without mRDT interventions.
FIGURE 2.
Patients prescribed an artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT) of all patients in scenarios without and with malaria rapid
diagnostic test (mRDT) interventions and by test result for all patients in scenarios with mRDT interventions. Graphs depict the percentage of
patients prescribed ACT except for: Afgh1 and Afgh2, where all antimalarials are included to account for Plasmodium vivax treatment; and Nige1
without mRDT interventions only, where ACT or sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine (SP) are included to reflect treatment practices at the time of data
collection. Scenarios with denominators fewer than 10 patients are not graphed, resulting in some points without adjoining lines: Afgh2/a and Afgh2/b
in the “Not tested” column and Afgh1/b, Afgh1/c, and Afgh2/b in the “Positive test result” column. Afgh1 and Ghan1 studies individually randomized
patients to malaria diagnostic method; data are not included in the “Not tested” column because all patients in mRDT intervention scenarios were
tested. Some settings had more than one mRDT intervention scenario, which are graphed separately using the color and symbol for the setting.
These include Cam1/a and Cam1/b(two intervention scenarios each), Nige1 (three intervention scenarios), and Tanz2 (three intervention scenarios).
See Table 1. The following scenarios with denominators fewer than 50 patients are included: Uga2 in the “Not tested” column, and Cam1/a (R1),
Tanz1/b, and Uga2/a in the “Positive test result” column. All other scenarios had larger denominators.
1174
BRUXVOORT AND OTHERS
 Referral was uncommon (< 5%) across all scenarios in studies
in public health facilities.
DISCUSSION
Providing appropriate treatment to patients who present
with malaria-like symptoms remains a challenge in many en-
demic regions. This synthesis of data from 10 ACT Consor-
tium studies illustrates the impact of mRDTs on case
management. The data represent 24 scenarios where
mRDTs were introduced, compared with 18 scenarios
without mRDT interventions. This synthesis found that
mRDT interventions reduced prescription of first-line anti-
malarials across almost all settings, except where the tests
were not often used. However, prescribing did not always
reflect test results: across a range of scenarios, ACTs were
prescribed for some mRDT-negative cases, and at least as
concerning, ACTs were not prescribed for all mRDT-
positive cases. The use of mRDTs also influenced other
treatment decisions, notably resulting in an increase of
antibiotic prescription especially for test-negative cases.
Referral of patients to other healthcare providers was low
FIGURE 3.
Patients prescribed an antibacterial of all patients in scenarios without and with malaria rapid diagnostic test (mRDT) interventions and
bytest resultfor allpatientsin scenarioswithmRDTinterventions. Somesettingshad more thanone mRDTinterventionscenario, whichare graphed
separatelyusingthecolorandsymbolfor thesetting.TheseincludeCam1/aandCam1/b(twointerventionscenarioseach),Nige1(threeintervention
scenarios), and Tanz2 (three intervention scenarios). See Table 1. Community health workers in Uga2 were not permitted to prescribe antibacterials
medications, so this study is not included in figure 3. Afgh1 and Ghan1 studies individually randomized patients to malaria diagnostic method; data
are not included in the “Not tested” column because all patients in scenarios with mRDT interventions were tested. Scenarios with denominators
fewer than 10 patients are not graphed, resulting in some points without adjoining lines: Afgh2/a and Afgh2/b in the “Not tested” column, and Afgh1/b,
Afgh1/c, and Afgh2/b in the “Positive test result” column. The following scenarios with denominators fewer than 50 patients are included: Cam1/a (R1)
and Tanz1/b in the “Positive test result” column. All other scenarios had larger denominators.
FIGURE 4.
Patients in scenarios without and with malaria rapid diagnostic test (mRDT) interventions prescribed (A) an antimalarial and an
antibacterial, (B) an antimalarial or an antibacterial, (C) an antipyretic without an antimalarial or an antibacterial, and (D) three or more medicines.
Some settings had more than one mRDT intervention scenario, which are graphed separately using the color and symbol for the setting. These
include Cam1/a and Cam1/b (two intervention scenarios each); Nige1 (three intervention scenarios) and Tanz2 (three intervention scenarios). See
Table 1. Community health workers in Uga2 were not permitted to prescribe antibacterials medications, so this study is not included in figure 4.
Tanz2 did not record data on all medications prescribed, so this study is not included in (D).
IMPACT OF INTRODUCING MALARIA RDTS ON FEVER CASE MANAGEMENT
1175
 across nearly all settings, with a few specific exceptions
discussed below.
What lessons can be learned from this synthesis, to inform
expectations of programs that implement mRDTs at scale?
Although mRDTs generally improve malaria case manage-
ment, alone, they are not a panacea to solve the major chal-
lenge of effective fever management. Simply providing
mRDTs is insufficient if health workers continue prescribing
antimalarials to test-negative patients27,41 or if alternative
treatments are not appropriate. The ACT Consortium studies
evaluated a range of tailored and pretested elements as part of
mRDT intervention strategies, such as enhanced provider
training or community awareness activities.42,43 Anecdotally,
interventions designed with more intensive formative research
led to greater reductions in ACT prescription for test-negative
patients; but such prescribing remained inappropriately high
(10–49%).
Furthermore, in five of the eight African studies included in
this analysis, more than 20% of patients who tested positive
for malaria at the point of care were not prescribed ACTs.
Undertreatment of malaria in settings where mRDTs have
been implemented has been recognized in a small proportion
of cases (less than 5%), with few exceptions.44–46 However,
results of this synthesis suggest that undertreatment may be a
more common problem than previously recognized. The six
settings with high ACT prescription for test-positive patients
varied in terms of malaria epidemiology, geography, and
provider type; the same is true for the six settings with lower
ACT prescription for test-positive patients. To date, research
into the reasons for this phenomenon has been limited, al-
though ACT Consortium study results presented elsewhere
suggest that provider motivations, stability of ACT supplies
and preexisting antimalarial preferences account for some of
this underprescription.39 Missed or ineffective treatment of
malaria presents a risk to patients; a balance between re-
ducing unnecessary antimalarial use while ensuring ACTs
are provided to all malaria-positive cases needs to be in-
tegrated in future research, training, and implementation
programs.
This synthesis highlights the fact that effecting change in
one healthcare practice can have knock-on consequences for
other practices. In many ACT Consortium studies, mRDT
implementation was associated with a higher level of antibiotic
prescription, particularly for malaria test-negative patients.40
The proportion of patients prescribed either an antimalarial or
an antibiotic was high, for more than 75% of cases across
most settings, and this was approximately similar in settings
with and without mRDT interventions. This suggests that in the
absence of other diagnostic options, presumptive antimalarial
treatment may be exchanged for presumptive antibiotic
treatment when mRDTs are introduced. Many patients with
uncomplicated febrile illness are likely to improve with
symptomatic management only (e.g., antipyretic), as noted
in WHO case management guidelines47,48; this approach
was prescribed for just 0–24% of patients in ACT Consor-
tium studies. Inappropriate use of antimicrobials is of in-
creasing global concern because of rising resistance, which
can result in longer illnesses, higher mortality, and in-
creased treatment costs.49,50 A more comprehensive ap-
proach to case management is needed, rather than focusing
on only a single diagnosis and medication (e.g., malaria
mRDTs and ACTs), if unintended consequences are to be
avoided.51
Our data support the observation that introducing mRDTs
may increase patient referral to other healthcare providers,
particularly among community health workers and private
retailers.10,52 In particular, when a malaria test is negative,
alternative diagnoses must be considered; the clinical skills
and diagnostic capacity to achieve this are limited among
providers with less formal training, so that, referral may be
necessary for adequate case management. Overall, referral
remained infrequent in ACT Consortium studies. Even
when referral is recommended, patients are not always
inclined or able to follow the recommendation.53–55 If cur-
rent recommendations to scale up mRDTs in community
and private healthcare settings are implemented, to im-
prove referral practices in a way that is safe for individual
patients, and without unduly burdening other parts of the
healthcare system, the role of mRDTs will need to be better
integrated into local pathways of treatment seeking and
care provision.56–58
The observed shifts in case management practices have
cost implications for health systems and for patients. When
mRDTs lead to reductions in ACT use, there can be substantial
savings in ACT costs. However, additional costs are incurred
for mRDT implementation: the tests themselves, alternative
treatments provided to mRDT-negative patients, additional
referrals, and the activities required for mRDT introduction,
such as training, supervision, communication campaigns, and
quality control. The overall cost impact in a given context will
depend on several parameters, including the relative cost of
ACTs and mRDTs, the amount of subsidy for each, the pro-
portion of patients tested, the proportion who test positive,
and provider adherence to test results. Analyses of the in-
cremental economic cost per fever case managed have been
published for four studies included in this synthesis. Where
FIGURE 5.
Patients in scenarios without and with malaria rapid di-
agnostic test (mRDT) interventions that were referred to another care
provider or health facility. Ghan1, Tanz1, Tanz2, and Uga1 did not
record data on referral. Case management was performed by com-
munityhealthworkersin Afgh2andUga2, privatedrugstore retailersin
Uga3, and both public and private health facilities in Nige1. All other
studies were conducted in public health facilities.
1176
BRUXVOORT AND OTHERS
 mRDTs were compared with microscopy (Afgh1, Ghan1, and
Cam1), mRDTs were cost saving or costs were similar in
Afghanistan,59 with an incremental provider cost per fever
case managed ranging from 0.20 to 1.11 USD in in Ghana60
and Cameroon61 (2011 USD). Where mRDTs were compared
with clinical diagnosis, the incremental provider cost per fever
case managed ranged from 0.24 to 10.9 USD across different
transmission levels and provider types in Afghanistan, Ghana,
and Uganda (2011 USD).59,60,62 These incremental costs
may be considered good value for money if they lead to
sufficient improvements in health outcomes. A full con-
sideration of cost effectiveness would require costs from
both health sector and household perspectives, extrapo-
lation to final health outcomes such as cost per death or
disability adjusted life year averted, and sensitivity analy-
ses to explore the impact of variation in prescribing and
referral practices. Ideally, a full analysis should also include
the impact of malaria testing on enhancing malaria sur-
veillance systems and resulting improvements in targeting
of malaria interventions.
The presentanalysis was subject to several limitations. Data
were collected concurrently from scenarios with and without
mRDT interventions in seven studies, whereas in the other
three (Nige1, Tanz1, and Tanz2) data were collected before
and after mRDT introduction (Table 1). In Nige1, the interval
between the two data collection points corresponded with a
shift in antimalarial use from SP to ACT; whereas ACT pre-
scription decreased, any antimalarial prescription remained
high (³ 75%). In addition, some indicators varied in availability
and precise definition across studies (see footnotes to Figures
and Supplemental Tables). For example, in Uga2, prescription
of antibiotics and polypharmacy was not reported because
community health workers were only permitted to dispense
antimalarials and antipyretics. In Tanz1, data on medicines
prescribed were not available from scenarios without
mRDTs, so data on medicines dispensed were used for all
Tanz1 scenarios. In designing the ACT Consortium studies
and mRDT implementation packages, investigators sought
to accommodate varied and transitioning contexts while
still obtaining data that could be compared across studies.
This synthesis therefore did not aim to provide combined
estimates of the size of effect of the impact of mRDTs
(meta-analysis). Instead, comparison of findings from the
individual studies identified clear patterns across diverse
geographical, epidemiological, and health sector contexts,
indicating both robustness and generalizability of the
results.
In summary, evidence from ten ACT Consortium studies
demonstrates that mRDT introduction can reduce pre-
scription of ACTs. However, mRDTs are not an easy tech-
nological fix. Critically, challenges exist in ensuring that all
patients who test positive for falciparum malaria are pre-
scribed ACT; anything less endangers individual patients
and the credibility of programs. It is also necessary to ensure
that patients who test negative receive appropriate man-
agement, which may or may not include other antimicro-
bials. ACT Consortium studies were conducted between
2007 and 2013, and since that time, mRDT implementation
programs continue to evolve. These combined results pro-
vide an overview of the generally positive shifts in case
management that may be expected with mRDT introduction,
and highlight issues that warrant particular attention in future
work on point-of-care diagnosis and fever and malaria case
management.
Received December 6, 2016. Accepted for publication May 22, 2017.
Published online August 7, 2017.
Note: Supplemental tables appear at www.ajtmh.org.
Acknowledgments: We are grateful to patients and field teams who
participated in and coordinated the original research studies; Denise
Roth Allen, Daniel Chandramohan, Catherine Maiteki, Renata Man-
dike, Wilfred Mbacham, Richard Ndyomugyenyi, Hugh Reyburn, and
Rebecca Thomson for earlier participation in the ACT Consortium
mRDTs in the Context working group; Paul Snell for development and
management of the central data repository; and Bianca D’Souza,
D ´
ebora Miranda, Rebecca Tremain, Eleanor Challenger, and Philippe
Verstraete for their logistical and administrative support for this
analysis.
Financial support: All individual studies and this analysis were sup-
ported by the ACT Consortium, which is funded through a grant from
the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation to the London School of Hygiene
& Tropical Medicine.
Disclosures: All authors declare no support from any organization for
the submitted work other than the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, no
financial relationships with any organizations that might have an in-
terest in the submitted work in the previous 3 years, and no other
relationships or activities that could appear to have influenced the
submitted work. The study funders had no role in the study design,
implementation, analysis, manuscript preparation, or decision to
submit this article for publication.
Authors’ addresses: Katia J. Bruxvoort, Baptiste Leurent, Clare I. R.
Chandler, Helen E. D. Burchett, Sˆ
ıan E. Clarke, Debora D. DiLiberto,
Catherine Goodman, Kristian S. Hansen, Sham Lal, Toby Leslie,
Lindsay Mangham-Jefferies, Mark W. Rowland, Sarah G. Staedke,
Jayne Webster, Christopher J. M. Whitty, Shunmay Yeung, David
Schellenberg, and Heidi Hopkins, London School of Hygiene &
Tropical Medicine, Global Health and Development, London, United
Kindom, E-mails: katia.bruxvoort@lshtm.ac.uk, baptiste.leurent@
lshtm.ac.uk, clare.chandler@lshtm.ac.uk, helen.burchett@lshtm.ac.
uk, sian.clarke@lshtm.ac.uk, deborah.diliberto@lshtm.ac.uk, catherine.
goodman@lshtm.ac.uk, kristian.hansen@lshtm.ac.uk, sham.lal@lshtm.
ac.uk, toby.leslie@lshtm.ac.uk, lindsay.mangham-jefferies@lshtm.
ac.uk, mark.rowland@lshtm.ac.uk, sarah.staedke@lshtm.ac.uk, jayne.
webster@lshtm.ac.uk, christopher.whitty@lshtm.ac.uk, shunmay.
yeung@lshtm.ac.uk, david.schellenberg@lshtm.ac.uk, and heidi.
hopkins@lshtm.ac.uk. Evelyn K. Ansah, Ghana Health Service, Re-
search and Development, Accra, Greater Accra, Ghana, E-mail:
ansahekdr@yahoo.co.uk. Frank Baiden, Ensign College of Public
Health, Epidemiology, Kpong, Ghana, E-mail: baidenf@gmail.com.
Anders Bj ¨
orkman, Karolinska Institutet, Microbiology, Tumor and Cell
Biology, Stockholm, Sweden, E-mail: anders.bjorkman@ki.se. Bonnie
Cundill,Leeds Instituteof ClinicalTrials Research,University of Leeds,
Leeds, United Kingdom. Kristina Elfving, University of Gothenburg,
Infectious Diseases, Gothenburg, Sweden, E-mail: kristinaelfving@
hotmail.com. Kristian S. Hansen, University of Copenhagen, Health
Services Research, Copenhagen, Denmark, E-mail: kristian.hansen@
lshtm.ac.uk. S. Patrick Kachur, CDC, Malaria Branch, Atlanta, GA,
E-mail: skachur@cdc.gov. David G. Lalloo, Liverpool School of
Tropical Medicine, Clinical Sciences and International Public Health,
Liverpool, UnitedKingdom,E-mail:david.lalloo@lstmed.ac.uk. Pascal
Magnussen, University of Copenhagen and Copenhagen University
Hospital, Centre for Medical Parasitology, Copenhagen, Denmark,
and University of Copenhagen, Veterinary and Animal Sciences,
Copenhagen,Denmark,E-mail:pma@sund.ku.dk.AndreasM˚
artensson,
Uppsala Universitet, Women’s and Children’s Health, International Ma-
ternal and Child Health (IMCH), Uppsala, Sweden, E-mail: andreas.
martensson@kbh.uu.se. Ismail Mayan, Health Protection Research Or-
ganisation, Clinical Trials, Kabul, Afghanistan, E-mail: drmayan2006@
gmail.com. Anthony K. Mbonye, Makerere University School of Public
Health, Community Health and Behavioral Sciences, Kampala, Uganda,
E-mail: akmbonye@yahoo.com. Mwinyi I. Msellem, Zanzibar Ministry of
Health, Zanzibar Malaria Elimination Programme, Zanzibar, Tanzania,
E-mail: mmwinyi@hotmail.com. Obinna E. Onwujekwe, University of
IMPACT OF INTRODUCING MALARIA RDTS ON FEVER CASE MANAGEMENT
1177
 Nigeria Enugu Campus, Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Enugu,
Nigeria,E-mail:onwujekwe@yahoo.co.uk.SethOwusu-Agyei,Kintampo
Health Research Centre, Director, Kintampo, Ghana, E-mail: seth.
owusu-agyei@kintampo-hrc.org. Del´
er Shakely, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden, Centre for Malaria Research, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden, and Health Metrics at Sahlgrenska Academy,
University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden. Lasse S. Vestergaard,
Centre for Medical Parasitology, University of Copenhagen and
Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark and De-
partment of Infectious Disease Epidemiology and Prevention, Statens
Serum Institut, Copenhagen, Denmark, E-mail: lav@ssi.dk. Virginia
Wiseman, London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, London,
United Kingdom and School of Public Health and Community Medicine,
University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia, E-mail: virginia.
wiseman@lshtm.ac.uk.
This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted
use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the
original author and source are credited.
REFERENCES
1. Whitty CJ, Chandler C, Ansah E, Leslie T, Staedke SG, 2008.
Deployment of ACT antimalarials for treatment of malaria:
challenges and opportunities. Malar J 7 (Suppl 1): S7.
2. World Health Organization, 2011. Universal Access to Malaria
Diagnostic Testing: An Operational Manual. Geneva, Switzer-
land: World Health Organization.
3. World Health Organization, 2010. Guidelines for the Treatment of
Malaria. 2nd edition. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health
Organization.
4. Mabey D, Peeling RW, Ustianowski A, Perkins MD, 2004. Diag-
nostics for the developing world. Nat Rev Microbiol 2: 231–240.
5. UNITAID, 2016. Malaria Diagnostics Landscape Update. Geneva,
Switzerland: World Health Organization for the UNITAID
Secretariat.
6. Ruizendaal E, Dierickx S, Peeters Grietens K, Schallig HD,
Pagnoni F, Mens PF, 2014. Success or failure of critical steps in
community case management of malaria with rapid diagnostic
tests: a systematic review. Malar J 13: 229.
7. MukangaD,et al., 2012. Integrated communitycasemanagement
of fever in children under five using rapid diagnostic tests and
respiratory rate counting: a multi-country cluster randomized
trial. Am J Trop Med Hyg 87: 21–29.
8. Hamer DH, Brooks ET, Semrau K, Pilingana P, MacLeod WB,
Siazeele K, Sabin LL, Thea DM, Yeboah-Antwi K, 2012. Quality
and safety of integrated community case management of
malaria using rapid diagnostic tests and pneumonia by com-
munity health workers. Pathog Glob Health 106: 32–39.
9. Awor P, Wamani H, Tylleskar T, Jagoe G, Peterson S, 2014. In-
creased access to care and appropriateness of treatment at
private sector drug shops with integrated management of
malaria, pneumonia and diarrhoea: a quasi-experimental study
in Uganda. PLoS One 9: e115440.
10. Ansah EK, Narh-Bana S, Affran-Bonful H, Bart-Plange C, Cundill
B, Gyapong M, Whitty CJ, 2015. The impact of providing rapid
diagnostic malaria tests on fever management in the private
retail sector in Ghana: a cluster randomized trial. BMJ 350:
h1019.
11. Aung T, White C, Montagu D, McFarland W, Hlaing T, Khin HS,
San AK, Briegleb C, Chen I, Sudhinaraset M, 2015. Improving
uptake and use of malaria rapid diagnostic tests in the context
of artemisinin drug resistance containment in eastern Myan-
mar: an evaluation of incentive schemes among informal pri-
vate healthcare providers. Malar J 14: 105.
12. Cohen J, Fink G, Maloney K, Berg K, Jordan M, Svoronos T, Aber
F, Dickens W, 2015. Introducing rapid diagnostic tests for
malaria to drug shops in Uganda: a cluster-randomized con-
trolled trial. Bull World Health Organ 93: 142–151.
13. Yeung S, Patouillard E, Allen H, Socheat D, 2011. Socially-
marketed rapid diagnostic tests and ACT in the private sector:
ten years of experience in Cambodia. Malar J 10: 243.
14. UNITAID, 2016. Creating a Private Sector Market for Quality-
Assured RDTs in Malaria Endemic Countries. Available at:
http://www.unitaid.org/en/creating-a-private-sector-market-
for-quality-assured-rdts-in-malaria-endemic-countries. Accessed
October 21, 2016.
15. Odaga J, Sinclair D, Lokong JA, Donegan S, Hopkins H, Garner P,
2014. Rapid diagnostic tests versus clinical diagnosis for
managing people with fever in malaria endemic settings.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 4: CD008998.
16. Msellem MI, et al., 2009. Influence of rapid malaria diagnostic
tests on treatment and health outcome in fever patients, Zan-
zibar: a crossover validation study. PLoS Med 6: e1000070.
17. Mubi M, et al., 2011. Malaria rapid testing by community health
workers is effective and safe for targeting malaria treatment:
randomised cross-over trial in Tanzania. PLoS One 6: e19753.
18. D’Acremont V, Kahama-Maro J, Swai N, Mtasiwa D, Genton B,
Lengeler C, 2011. Reduction of anti-malarial consumption after
rapid diagnostic tests implementation in Dar es Salaam: a
before-after and cluster randomized controlled study. Malar J
10: 107.
19. KyabayinzeDJ,AsiimweC,NakanjakoD,NabakoozaJ,CounihanH,
Tibenderana JK, 2010. Use of RDTs to improve malaria di-
agnosis and fever case management at primary health care
facilities in Uganda. Malar J 9: 200.
20. Bastiaens GJ, Schaftenaar E, Ndaro A, Keuter M, Bousema T,
Shekalaghe SA, 2011. Malaria diagnostic testing and treatment
practices in three different Plasmodium falciparum trans-
mission settings in Tanzania: before and after a government
policy change. Malar J 10: 76.
21. Thiam S, et al., 2011. Major reduction in anti-malarial drug con-
sumption in Senegal after nation-wide introduction of malaria
rapid diagnostic tests. PLoS One 6: e18419.
22. Yukich JO, et al., 2012. Reductions in artemisinin-based combi-
nation therapy consumption after the nationwide scale up of
routine malaria rapid diagnostic testing in Zambia. Am J Trop
Med Hyg 87: 437–446.
23. Yeboah-Antwi K, et al., 2010. Community case management of
fever due to malaria and pneumonia in children under five in
Zambia: a cluster randomized controlled trial. PLoS Med 7:
e1000340.
24. Skarbinski J, et al., 2009. Effect of malaria rapid diagnostic tests
on the management of uncomplicated malaria with artemether-
lumefantrine in Kenya: a cluster randomized trial. Am J Trop
Med Hyg 80: 919–926.
25. Bisoffi Z, Sirima BS, Angheben A, Lodesani C, Gobbi F, Tinto H,
Van den Ende J, 2009. Rapid malaria diagnostic tests vs. clin-
ical management of malaria in rural Burkina Faso: safety and
effect on clinical decisions. A randomized trial. Trop Med Int
Health 14: 491–498.
26. Chinkhumba J, Skarbinski J, Chilima B, Campbell C, Ewing V,
San Joaquin M, Sande J, Ali D, Mathanga D, 2010. Compar-
ative field performance and adherence to test results of four
malaria rapid diagnostic tests among febrile patients more
than five years of age in Blantyre, Malawi. Malar J 9: 209.
27. Reyburn H, Mbakilwa H, Mwangi R, Mwerinde O, Olomi R,
Drakeley C, Whitty CJ, 2007. Rapid diagnostic tests compared
with malaria microscopy for guiding outpatient treatment of
febrile illness in Tanzania: randomised trial. BMJ 334: 403.
28. ACT Consortium, 2016. ACT Consortium: Answering Key Ques-
tions on Malaria Drug Delivery. Available at: http://www.
actconsortium.org.
29. Leslie T, et al., 2014. Rapid diagnostic tests to improve treatment
of malaria and other febrile illnesses: patient randomised ef-
fectiveness trial in primary care clinics in Afghanistan. BMJ 348:
g3730.
30. Leslie T, et al., 2017. Use of malaria rapid diagnostic tests by
community health workers in Afghanistan: cluster randomised
trial. BMC Med. 15: 124.
31. Mbacham WF, et al., 2014. Basic or enhanced clinician training to
improve adherence to malaria treatment guidelines: a cluster-
randomised trial in two areas of Cameroon. Lancet Glob Health
2: e346–e358.
32. Ansah EK, Narh-Bana S, Epokor M, Akanpigbiam S, Quartey AA,
Gyapong J, Whitty CJ, 2010. Rapid testing for malaria in set-
tings where microscopy is available and peripheral clinics
where only presumptive treatment is available: a randomised
controlled trial in Ghana. BMJ 340: c930.
1178
BRUXVOORT AND OTHERS
 33. Onwujekwe O, Mangham-Jefferies L, Cundill B, Alexander N,
Langham J, Ibe O, Uzochukwu B, Wiseman V, 2015. Effec-
tiveness of provider and community interventions to improve
treatment of uncomplicated malaria in Nigeria: a cluster ran-
domized controlled trial. PLoS One 10: e0133832.
34. Bruxvoort K, et al., 2013. Getting antimalarials on target: impact of
national roll-out of malaria rapid diagnostic tests on health fa-
cility treatmentin threeregions of Tanzania.Trop MedInt Health
18: 1269–1282.
35. CundillB,et al., 2015. Prescriber andpatient-orientedbehavioural
interventions to improve use of malaria rapid diagnostic tests in
Tanzania: facility-based cluster randomised trial. BMC Med 13:
118.
36. Staedke SG, et al., 2016. The impact of an intervention to improve
malaria care in public health centers on health indicators of
children in Tororo, Uganda (PRIME): a cluster-randomized trial.
Am J Trop Med Hyg 95: 358–367.
37. Ndyomugyenyi R, Magnussen P, Lal S, Hansen K, Clarke SE,
2016. Appropriate targeting of artemisinin-based combination
therapy by community health workers using malaria rapid
diagnostic tests: findings from randomized trials in two
contrasting areas of high and low malaria transmission in
south-western Uganda. Trop Med Int Health 21: 1157–1170.
38. Mbonye AK, Magnussen P, Lal S, Hansen KS, Cundill B, Chandler
C, Clarke SE, 2015. A cluster randomised trial introducing rapid
diagnostic tests into registered drug shops in Uganda: impact
on appropriate treatment of malaria. PLoS One 10: e0129545.
39. Burchett HE, et al., 2017. Improving prescribing practices with
rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs): synthesis of 10 studies to explore
reasons for variation in malaria RDT uptake and adherence.
BMJ Open 7: e012973.
40. Hopkins H, et al., 2017. Impact of introduction of rapid diagnostic
tests for malaria on antibiotic prescribing: analysis of obser-
vational and randomised studies in public and private health-
care settings. BMJ 356: j1054.
41. Hamer DH, Ndhlovu M, Zurovac D, Fox M, Yeboah-Antwi K,
Chanda P, Sipilinyambe N, Simon JL, Snow RW, 2007. Im-
proved diagnostic testing and malaria treatment practices in
Zambia. JAMA 297: 2227–2231.
42. Achonduh OA, et al., 2014. Designing and implementing inter-
ventions to change clinicians’ practice in the management of
uncomplicated malaria: lessons from Cameroon. Malar J 13:
204.
43. Chandler CI, Meta J, Ponzo C, Nasuwa F, Kessy J, Mbakilwa H,
Haaland A, Reyburn H, 2014. The development of effective
behaviour change interventions to support the use of malaria
rapid diagnostic tests by Tanzanian clinicians. Implement Sci 9:
83.
44. Rao VB, Schellenberg D, Ghani AC, 2013. Overcoming health
systems barriers to successful malaria treatment. Trends Par-
asitol 29: 164–180.
45. Masanja IM, Selemani M, Amuri B, Kajungu D, Khatib R, Kachur
SP, Skarbinski J, 2012. Increased use of malaria rapid di-
agnostic tests improves targeting of anti-malarial treatment in
rural Tanzania: implications for nationwide rollout of malaria
rapid diagnostic tests. Malar J 11: 221.
46. Nicastri E, et al., 2009. Accuracy of malaria diagnosis by mi-
croscopy, rapid diagnostic test, and PCR methods and evi-
dence of antimalarial overprescription in non-severe febrile
patients in two Tanzanian hospitals. Am J Trop Med Hyg 80:
712–717.
47. World Health Organization, 2011. IMAI District Clinician Manual:
Hospital Care for Adolescents and Adults, Guidelines for the
Management of Common Illnesses with Limited Resources.
Integrated Management of Adolescent and Adult Illness (IMAI).
Geneva, Switzerland: WHO.
48. World Health Organization, 2014. Integrated Management of
Childhood Illness: Chart Booklet. Geneva, Switzerland: WHO.
49. Bebell LM, Muiru AN, 2014. Antibiotic use and emerging re-
sistance: how can resource-limited countries turn the tide?
Glob Heart 9: 347–358.
50. Laxminarayan R, et al., 2013. Antibiotic resistance-the need for
global solutions. Lancet Infect Dis 13: 1057–1098.
51. Rambaud-Althaus C, Shao AF, Kahama-Maro J, Genton B,
d’Acremont V, 2015. Managing the sick child in the era of de-
clining malaria transmission: development of ALMANACH, an
electronic algorithm for appropriate use of antimicrobials. PLoS
One 10: e0127674.
52. Lal S, Ndyomugenyi R, Magnussen P, Hansen KS, Alexander ND,
Paintain L, Chandramohan D, Clarke SE, 2016. Referral pat-
terns of community health workers diagnosing and treating
malaria: cluster-randomized trials in two areas of high- and low-
malaria transmission in southwestern Uganda. Am J Trop Med
Hyg 95: 1398–1408.
53. Newbrander W, Ickx P, Werner R, Mujadidi F, 2012. Compliance
with referral of sick children: a survey in five districts of Afgha-
nistan. BMC Pediatr 12: 46.
54. Thomson A, Khogali M, de Smet M, Reid T, Mukhtar A, Peterson
S, von Schreeb J, 2011. Low referral completion of rapid di-
agnostic test-negative patients in community-based treatment
of malaria in Sierra Leone. Malar J 10: 94.
55. Kallander K, Tomson G, Nsungwa-Sabiiti J, Senyonjo Y, Pariyo G,
Peterson S, 2006. Community referral in home management of
malaria in western Uganda: a case series study. BMC Int Health
Hum Rights 6: 2.
56. Obrist B, et al., 2007. Access to health care in contexts of liveli-
hood insecurity: a framework for analysisandaction. PLoS Med
4: 1584–1588.
57. Altaras R, Nuwa A, Agaba B, Streat E, Tibenderana JK, Martin S,
Strachan CE, 2016. How do patients and health workers in-
teract around malaria rapid diagnostic testing, and how are the
tests experienced by patients in practice? A qualitative study in
western Uganda. PLoS One 11: e0159525.
58. Peterson S, Nsungwa-Sabiiti J, Were W, Nsabagasani X,
Magumba G, Nambooze J, Mukasa G, 2004. Coping with
paediatric referral–Ugandan parents’ experience. Lancet 363:
1955–1956.
59. Hansen KS, et al., 2015. Cost-effectiveness of malaria diagnosis
using rapid diagnostic tests compared to microscopy or clinical
symptoms alone in Afghanistan. Malar J 14: 217.
60. Ansah EK, Epokor M, Whitty CJ, Yeung S, Hansen KS, 2013.
Cost-effectiveness analysis of introducing RDTs for malaria
diagnosis as compared to microscopy and presumptive di-
agnosis in central and peripheral public health facilities in
Ghana. Am J Trop Med Hyg 89: 724–736.
61. Mangham-Jefferies L, Wiseman V, Achonduh OA, Drake TL,
Cundill B, Onwujekwe O, Mbacham W, 2014. Economic
evaluation of a cluster randomized trial of interventions to
improve health workers’ practice in diagnosing and treating
uncomplicated malaria in Cameroon. Value Health 17:
783–791.
62. Hansen KS, Ndyomugyenyi R, Magnussen P, Lal S, Clarke SE,
2017. Cost-effectiveness analysis of malaria rapid di-
agnostic tests for appropriate treatment of malaria at
the community level in Uganda. Health Policy Plan 32:
676–689.
IMPACT OF INTRODUCING MALARIA RDTS ON FEVER CASE MANAGEMENT
1179
