 Harnessing adolescent values to motivate
healthier eating
Christopher J. Bryana,1, David S. Yeagerb,1, Cintia P. Hinojosaa, Aimee Chabotc, Holly Bergend, Mari Kawamurad,
and Fred Steubinge
aUniversity of Chicago Booth School of Business, Chicago, IL 60637; bDepartment of Psychology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712; cDuke
University Fuqua School of Business, Durham, NC 27708; dDepartment of Psychology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093; and eCanyon
Middle School, New Braunfels, TX 78130
Edited by Julie Lumeng, University of Michigan, and accepted by Editorial Board Member Susan T. Fiske July 23, 2016 (received for review March 19, 2016)
What can be done to reduce unhealthy eating among adolescents?
It was hypothesized that aligning healthy eating with important
and widely shared adolescent values would produce the needed
motivation. A double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled exper-
iment with eighth graders (total n = 536) evaluated the impact of a
treatment that framed healthy eating as consistent with the ado-
lescent values of autonomy from adult control and the pursuit of
social justice. Healthy eating was suggested as a way to take a stand
against manipulative and unfair practices of the food industry, such
as engineering junk food to make it addictive and marketing it to
young children. Compared with traditional health education mate-
rials or to a non–food-related control, this treatment led eighth graders
to see healthy eating as more autonomy-assertive and social justice-
oriented behavior and to forgo sugary snacks and drinks in favor of
healthier options a day later in an unrelated context. Public health
interventions for adolescents may be more effective when they harness
the motivational power of that group’s existing strongly held values.
adolescent health behavior | construal | field experiment |
intertemporal choice | temporal discounting
S
temming the rising obesity rate is both important and urgent.
In the coming decades, obesity is expected to cause enor-
mous increases in disease, death, and the economic cost of health
care (1).
In response to this, a large number of school-based preventative
interventions have sought to improve children’s and adolescents’
eating habits (2, 3).* These have primarily involved a combination
of health and nutrition education and behavioral skills training
(e.g., goal-setting, analysis of barriers to behavior change). Such
approaches have yielded some success among young children, but
a meta-analysis showed null effects for adolescents (3). Such re-
sults have led to pessimism among some experts, reflected in
sentiments like the following one from a leading expert on ado-
lescent development: “Classroom-based health education is an
uphill battle against evolution and endocrinology, and it is not a
fight we are likely to win” (ref. 4, p. 714).
One might be tempted to conclude from this that health inter-
ventions should only be targeted at young children. But even if in-
terventions are successful at changing behavior in early childhood,
healthy habits cannot be counted on to survive adolescence. Ad-
olescents undergo physiological and psychological changes that
alter their childhood appetites and food preferences (5). Adoles-
cence also brings new freedoms and increased disposable income
and, consequently, more control over personal choices such as which
snacks to buy. A major limitation of current theories in behavioral
science, then, is their inability to offer strategies that produce in-
ternalized changes in adolescent food preferences.
We suggest that a critical reason for the failure of past interven-
tions is their overwhelming tendency to rely on the (usually implicit)
assumption that adolescents are already motivated by a desire to be
healthier in the distant future.† Consistent with this assumption,
programs have tended to focus on giving participants an appreciation
for the health implications of their food choices and/or on teaching
them the cognitive skills necessary to pursue the presumed goal of
future health (3). However, this motivational assumption is ques-
tionable even for adults (7), and findings from developmental sci-
ence suggest it is even less appropriate for adolescents (4, 8–10).
Although adolescents might not be motivated by health in the
distant future, they are certainly not apathetic, as popular stereotypes
suggest. Adolescents are known to be highly motivated to live up to
important values that are shared with their peers, most likely as a
means to demonstrate their value to the peer group (9). This drive
for peer status and respect has been documented at neural, hor-
monal, and behavioral levels of analysis (8, 9, 11).
The desire for status and respect has often been associated
with unhealthy or high-risk behavior, but we propose that it is
possible instead to harness this desire as a driver of positive
behavior. We seek to do this by aligning the behavior (healthy
eating) with important, widely shared adolescent values. Two
such values are autonomy and a concern for social justice.
Autonomy
Adolescents are extremely sensitive to perceived encroachments
on their autonomy. They frequently express reactance in response
Significance
Behavioral science has rarely offered effective strategies for
changing adolescent health behavior. One limitation of previous
approaches may be an overemphasis on long-term health out-
comes as the focal source of motivation. The present research
uses a rigorous randomized trial to evaluate an approach that
aligns healthy behavior with values about which adolescents
already care: feeling like a socially conscious, autonomous per-
son worthy of approval from one’s peers. It improved the health
profile of snacks and drinks participants chose in an ostensibly
unrelated context and did so because it caused adolescents to
construe the healthy behavior as being aligned with prominent
adolescent values. This suggests a route to an elusive result:
effective motivation for adolescent behavior change.
Author contributions: C.J.B., D.S.Y., C.P.H., A.C., H.B., M.K., and F.S. designed research; C.J.B.,
D.S.Y., C.P.H., A.C., H.B., M.K., and F.S. performed research; C.J.B., D.S.Y., C.P.H., H.B., and M.K.
analyzed data; and C.J.B., D.S.Y., and C.P.H. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission. J.L. is a Guest Editor invited by the Editorial Board.
Data deposition: All data are available on Open Science, https://osf.io/rxa93.
1To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: christopher.bryan@chicagobooth.edu
or dyeager@utexas.edu.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1604586113/-/DCSupplemental.
*Our review and analysis focuses on “universal prevention” programs—those with the
goal of promoting healthy behavior in the general population before people are obese
rather than treating a selected group of obese individuals.
†Some researchers have begun to explore approaches designed to foster intrinsic motivation
for health behavior in adolescents by tailoring programs to their personal preferences.
Randomized, controlled tests of this idea are still lacking. Yet initial small-sample, quasi-
experimental studies suggest some reason for optimism (6).
10830–10835
|
PNAS
|
September 27, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 39
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1604586113
 to such encroachments (12, 13), rejecting or ignoring adults’ attempts
to influence their behavior—or even endorsing the opposite—to
reassert their autonomy (14).
For instance, in one study, simply framing a request in terms of
what one “should” do as opposed to what one “might consider”
doing prevented adolescents from internalizing a message or
changing their behavior (13). In another recent study, adolescents
who watched video clips of their mothers telling them how they
should change their behavior (e.g., cleaning your room, being nice
to your sister) showed a pattern of neural activity that suggested
they were not processing the criticism or planning to alter their
behavior, but they were feeling angry (14).
The autonomy motive can often be a barrier to behavioral
health interventions since such interventions typically involve
telling adolescents how they should make personal choices (e.g.,
about what to eat). In this research, we seek to turn adolescents’
strong autonomy motive from a barrier into an asset.
Social Justice and Beyond-the-Self Aims
Adolescents are sometimes characterized as concerned only with
short-term selfish aims, but recent developmental science high-
lights that this is a period of increased concern for social justice
and beyond-the-self aims (15, 16). This phenomenon is in-
stantiated by attraction to social movements such as vegetarianism
or antiglobalization activism (17) and is tied to neural and endo-
crine system developments that heighten attention to unfairness
(18) and create a greater concern for finding meaning in life (19).
This attention to social justice often manifests as reactance against
authorities (e.g., parents and teachers); adolescents are often highly
motivated to avoid being seen as aligned with the interests of unjust
adult authorities. But it can also manifest as a more general con-
demnation of societal unfairness and motivate prosocial action to
address that unfairness (16). The opportunity to have a meaningful
impact on the world beyond the self can create a powerful feeling of
eudaimonic reward in the immediate term (15–17, 19).
Harnessing Adolescent Values to Motivate Healthy Eating
To capture the motivating power of these values, we designed a
treatment to reshape adolescents’ construal of healthy eating as
autonomous behavior that serves the purpose of social justice.
We hypothesized that this would increase the perception of
healthy eating as a status-enhancing behavior and in doing so
motivate healthier choices. To achieve this shift in construal, we
took a two-pronged approach.
First, our healthy eating message was framed as an exposé of
manipulative food industry marketing practices designed to in-
fluence and deceive adolescents and others into eating larger
quantities of unhealthy foods than they otherwise would choose to
eat. We described journalistic accounts of such industry practices
as engineering processed foods to maximize addictiveness and
encourage overconsumption and using deceptive labeling to make
unhealthy products seem healthy (20, 21). Our goal here was to
portray healthy eating as a way to “stick it to the man”—we cast
the executives behind food marketing as controlling adult au-
thority figures and framed the avoidance of junk food as a way to
rebel against their control.
Second, we emphasized the social justice consequences of these
manipulative industry practices: for example, disproportionately
targeting poor people and very young children with advertisements
for the unhealthiest products. Our goal here was to portray healthy
eating as a way to take a stand against injustice—to stand up for
vulnerable people who lack the ability to protect themselves.
The Present Research
To evaluate the exposé treatment, we conducted a double-blind,
randomized, controlled experiment with the full eighth grade class
in a Texas middle school in two consecutive school years (i.e., two
cohorts). The primary outcome was the effect of treatment on snack
and drink choices 1 d posttreatment, when participants were un-
aware they were being observed. Survey items, administered im-
mediately posttreatment, allowed us to test the psychological
mechanism. We expected that if the treatment messages led ado-
lescents to reconstrue healthy eating as more autonomous (in-
dicated by agreement with statements like “When I eat healthy, I
feel like I’m taking control of my food choices”) and more consis-
tent with social justice (indicated by agreement with statements like
“When I eat healthy, I’m doing my part to protect kids who are
being controlled by food companies”), this would cause adolescents
to see healthy behavior as having greater social status appeal (in-
dicated by agreement with statements like “I respect healthy eaters
more than unhealthy eaters”). Because adolescents strongly value
social status, we expected that increasing the perceived social status
appeal of healthy eating would motivate healthy choices. We tested
this theoretical model using mediation analysis.
We also examined whether the food industry exposé treatment
might have had another potentially important effect: By directly
targeting adolescents’ construal of food marketing, we expected to
change their reactions to ads for junk food products—essentially
to inoculate them against the persuasive power of food ads. That
is, we sought to transform adolescents’ construal of food ads from
tempting enticements into anger-inducing reminders of the unjust
practices of food marketers.
Analyses throughout the paper are “intent-to-treat”: Data were
analyzed based on participants’ random assignment to a condition,
regardless of whether they successfully completed the treatment.
Two separate controls were used: a “standard practice” health
appeal control and a “no health treatment” control, see Method
for details. As expected, the control groups did not differ on any
outcome (Ps > 0.4), so they were combined in all analyses.
Results
Equivalence Among Experimental Groups. Confirming that random
assignment was successful, the experimental groups did not differ
in terms of demographic characteristics, including age in years,
χ2(6) = 6.06, P = 0.42; body mass index (BMI; only measured in
year 2), F(2, 242) = 0.62, P = 0.54; gender, χ2(2) = 3.73, P = 0.15;
percent Hispanic/Latino, χ2(2) = 4.03, P = 0.13; percent white,
non-Hispanic, χ2(2) = 3.90, P = 0.14; or percent economically
disadvantaged, χ2(2) = 1.65, P = 0.44.
Alignment of Healthy Eating with Adolescent Values. As expected,
the exposé treatment significantly increased the extent to which
adolescents saw healthy eating as aligned with the values of au-
tonomy and social justice (MControl = 2.18, SD = 0.71; MExposé =
3.33, SD = 0.99), t(487) = 14.56, P < 0.001, Cohen’s d = 1.41.‡
Social Status Appeal of Healthy Eating. Consistent with our theo-
retical model, the exposé treatment increased the social status
appeal of healthy eating on the immediate posttreatment survey
(MControl = 3.25, SD = 1.00; MExposé = 3.61, SD = 0.98), t(488) =
4.47, P < 0.001, d = 0.40. A mediation analysis showed that
treatment effects on the social status appeal of healthy eating
were mediated by changes in participants’ construal of healthy
eating as consistent with the core adolescent values of autonomy
and social justice [indirect effect from exposé treatment to social
status appeal through autonomy/social justice composite, b =
0.47 (0.35, 0.62), P < 0.001].
Effect on Free-Choice Unhealthy Snacking 1 d Posttreatment. The
primary dependent measure was the total number of free-choice
unhealthy food and drink choices (range, 0–3) 1 d posttreat-
ment. Adolescents chose fewer junk food options in the exposé
‡The effect of the treatment was also highly significant (Ps < .001) when considering the
autonomy and social justice items separately.
Bryan et al.
PNAS
|
September 27, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 39
|
10831
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES
 condition than in the control: MControl = 2.30, SD = 0.79; MExposé =
2.13, SD = 0.85; ordered logistic regression, χ2(1) = 5.34, P = 0.020,
d = 0.22 (Fig. 1).
Other ways of analyzing the behavioral outcome yield similar
results and shed additional light on the practical significance of the
effect. For example, the treatment condition resulted in a 7 per-
centage point increase (compared with the controls) in the rate at
which participants opted to forgo sugary drinks in favor of water
(see Fig. 1) and an 11 percentage point increase in the rate at
which they opted to forgo at least one unhealthy snack (chips or
cookies) in favor of something healthy (fruit, carrots, or nuts):
Control = 46%, Exposé = 57%, χ2(1) = 4.58, P = 0.03. From a
nutritional perspective, it resulted in a 4.26-g (or 7%) reduction in
mean total carbohydrate content, t(466) = 2.59, P = 0.009, and a
3.60-g (or 9%) reduction in the total sugar content of selections,
t(467) = 2.33, P = 0.020 (see Table 1). And both of these numbers
undersell the nutritional significance of the effect. None of the
sugar in the healthy choices is added, but almost all of the sugar in
the unhealthy options is added,§ and none of the carbohydrates in
the healthy options are simple (or “bad”) carbohydrates, but all or
almost all of the carbohydrates in the unhealthy choices are.
Treatment effects were not moderated by study year (in-
teraction effect Ps > 0.5) or by BMI (Supporting Information).
Thus, in sum, when teens were faced with a seemingly unrelated
private choice among snacks and drinks, in a different class a day
later, those who had received the exposé treatment made signifi-
cant and substantially healthier choices than those who had not.
Mediation of Behavioral Effect. In support of our broader theoretical
model, mediation analyses showed that the exposé treatment in-
creased perceptions of the social status appeal of healthy eating,
which in turn led to healthier food and drink choices the next day.
Increased perceptions of the social status appeal of healthy
eating significantly predicted reductions in unhealthy food and
drink choices, r(420) = –0.16, P < 0.001, demonstrating that
framing healthy eating as consistent with important and widely
shared adolescent values was effective in increasing the perceived
social status appeal of that behavior. Further, there was a signif-
icant indirect effect of the exposé treatment on next-day food and
drink choices mediated through ratings of the social status appeal
of healthy eating [ordinary least squares, b = –0.05 (–0.10, –0.02),
P < 0.001] (Fig. 2). In the mediation model, the direct effect of
treatment on behavior became nonsignificant (P > 0.4), consistent
with full mediation.
Perceptions of Marketing of High-Calorie Beverages. In the year 2
sample only, we administered an additional survey measuring
perceptions of high-calorie beverage marketing (e.g., Coca
Cola) 2 d after participants completed the treatment. The ex-
posé treatment caused participants to respond to soda ads with
more anger (MControl = 1.21, SD = 0.51; MExposé = 1.64, SD =
0.87), t(267) = 4.40, P < 0.001, d = 0.54, and less desire to
consume soda (MControl = 3.10, SD = 0.98; MExposé = 2.69, SD =
1.10), t(267) = 2.96, P = 0.003, d = 0.36, compared with the
control treatments.
These results extend the research in two ways. First, they show
that adolescents internalized content from the treatment in a way
that had detectable effects at least 2 d later. Second, they suggest the
tantalizing possibility that the exposé treatment could produce last-
ing changes in healthy eating behavior by altering emotional reac-
tions to the food ads to which adolescents are continually exposed.
Discussion
The present research showed that framing healthy eating as a way
to assert their autonomy from adult control and take a stand in
favor of social justice could increase the social status appeal of
healthy eating. This change in construal substantially improved the
health profile of food and drink choices adolescents made a day
later when they did not believe they were being observed. Evi-
dence for this came from a large-sample, double-blind design that
was replicated in two cohorts.
This research suggests potential revisions to basic theories of self-
regulation. A classic challenge in motivating people to forgo im-
mediate temptation in favor of more important long-term benefits is
that people discount the value of temporally distant rewards to an
extreme and irrational degree. So the reward value of succumbing
to temptation in the immediate term reliably outweighs the reward
of abstaining. Traditional self-regulation approaches focus on cog-
nitive strategies to either counter the emotional power of the im-
mediate reward (7) or to bridge the cognitive divide between the
present and the distant benefit (e.g., intermediate goal-setting) (22).
Neuroscientific research with adolescents has provided a reason for
pessimism about such approaches in this age group (4, 10).
The present research transforms this problem by eliminating the
need to think about long-term material benefit. Instead, it offers
an immediate symbolic benefit (and, consequently, eudaimonic
reward) for resisting temptation: feeling like a high-status and
respect-worthy person right now because one is acting in accor-
dance with important values shared with one’s peers. Previous
neuroscientific research shows that adolescents are especially
likely to experience an immediate feeling of reward, comparable
to what one feels in response to positive hedonic experiences,
when they are made to feel socially valuable (19). We suggest that
the immediacy of this eudaimonic reward gives it the emotional
and motivational power to compete effectively with the anticipated
hedonic reward of succumbing to temptation (19). This general
approach might be effective at any age if the relevant behavior can
be construed in terms appropriate to the target audience. In adults
Fig. 1.
Effect of exposé treatment on free-choice unhealthy food and drink choices, 1 d postintervention. n = 469. Bars represent SEM.
§It is impossible to say exactly what the difference in added sugar is because regulations
at the time of the study did not require companies to disclose the added sugar content of
their products.
10832
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1604586113
Bryan et al.
 with young children, for example, it might be optimal to frame
healthy eating as a way to be a good parent by setting a posi-
tive example.
In addition to their theoretical importance, these findings have
practical value. Policy analysts have argued that preventing people
from ever becoming obese is both more effective and less expensive
than treating people who are already obese (23). Recent research
suggests that dietary habits are a more important cause of obesity
than exercise habits (24). This research demonstrates the potential
power of a novel strategy to motivate healthier food choices in
adolescence—late enough that habits established at this stage of life
could carry through to adulthood but early enough that prevention
(rather than treatment) of obesity is still a relevant goal for most
people (25).
This work was not designed to provide a blueprint for a com-
prehensive intervention that would be expected to produce lasting
changes in eating habits or body weight or to change behavior in
contexts outside of the school setting. Rather, its contribution is to
demonstrate the potential power of a novel theory of behavior
change—to show that aligning a target behavior with existing
strongly held values can be a more effective way to motivate be-
havior change than traditional efforts. The present results suggest
there is cause for optimism, though, about the potential for the
“values harnessing” approach to lead to lasting change. Our
finding that the exposé treatment changed participants’ emotional
reactions to soda ads suggests we might be able to change ado-
lescents’ construal of food marketing, undercutting its tempting
effects and even co-opting it as an ongoing motivator of healthy
choices. Moreover, an intervention based on this work could
use tactics—such as school-wide campaigns with student-designed
posters and online videos—that could create a lasting and self-
reinforcing social movement that could also reduce countervailing
peer pressures (17). Although we refrained from using such tac-
tics in our experiment to prevent spillover from the treatment
to the control group, they might be fruitful avenues for future
implementations.
This approach of framing healthy behavior in terms that align
it with a group’s existing strongly held values suggests the po-
tential for success where past approaches have failed: It pro-
duced internalized motivation for healthy eating in eighth grade
adolescents. This research represents a theoretical breakthrough
toward designing developmentally appropriate health behavior
programs for adolescents, and this general approach could pro-
duce similar breakthroughs in motivating important behaviors in
other age groups.
Method
Study data and all measures used in this research are available at https://osf.
io/a627d/. The institutional review board at the University of Texas, Austin,
approved the study. Parents were informed of the research in advance and
given the opportunity to withdraw their children from the study. Written
consent was not required.
Participants. In 2 consecutive years, all students attending eighth grade at a large,
public, rural/suburban middle school in Texas were invited to participate in the
study, and 536 (92% of those who had not participated in a pilot) did. It was a
diverse sample, ethnically and socioeconomically. Fifty-one percent were fe-
male, 51% were Latino, 46% were white, and the rest were Black/African
American or of mixed racial/ethnic origin. Forty percent were officially desig-
nated as economically disadvantaged based on parental income. See Support-
ing Information for details of how sample size was determined.
Procedure. The study was fully blinded; neither students nor teachers were
aware that this was an experiment designed to determine the effects of
different treatments, nor were they aware of any of the research hypotheses.
The researchers who conducted the research were kept blind to condition.
In year 1, students were randomly assigned at the individual level (within
classrooms) to an exposé condition or a traditional public health appeal. In
addition, 34 students in two eighth grade science classes were assigned to a
quasi-experimental no-treatment control condition and only provided be-
havioral outcome data the day after the treatment. This allowed us to
compare the randomly assigned control group to a group of students who
were never visited by researchers. In year 2, we fully randomized participants
to the exposé condition or to one of the two controls (the traditional health
appeal or a neutral control described below) at the individual level. In nei-
ther year did control conditions differ from each other on any outcome (all
Ps > 0.4).
The day after the treatment and control exercises were administered, the
primary dependent variable was measured: students’ food and drink choices
for a “snack pack,” announced by the principal as a reward to the entire
eighth grade class for their hard work during the state testing period that
had just ended. To ensure that students would not see the snack pack as
related to the study, we arranged for the principal to announce it weeks
before students heard anything about the study.
Manipulation and survey. We report all manipulations. The experimental ses-
sion occurred during science classes and involved a brief (20- to 40-min)
Fig. 2.
Path model for effect of exposé treatment on unhealthy snack choices (range, 0–3) through psychological measures. Numbers above lines correspond
to direct effects (c paths); numbers below lines correspond to direct paths controlling for mediators (c’ paths). b, unstandardized OLS regression coefficient.
*P < 0.05; ***P < 0.001; n.s., nonsignificant.
Table 1.
Effect of exposé treatment on major behavioral and nutritional outcomes (measured 1 d posttreatment)
Outcome
Control
Treatment
Absolute difference
Relative difference, %
Significance level, P
Total number of unhealthy choices, mean (SD)
2.30 (0.79)
2.13 (0.85)
0.17
7
0.020
Percent choosing a sugary drink
82
75
7
9
0.112
Percent choosing only unhealthy snacks
54
43
11
20
0.030
Carbohydrate content, g, mean (SD)
60.18 (18.53)
55.92 (19.67)
4.26
7
0.009
Sugar content, g, mean (SD)
40.40 (16.03)
36.66 (16.79)
3.6
9
0.020
Extrapolation to daily consumption based on statistics for current average consumption by adolescents in the United States.
Bryan et al.
PNAS
|
September 27, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 39
|
10833
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES
 reading and writing activity that students completed privately and quietly at
their desks. Research assistants introduced the activity as an opportunity to
provide feedback on novel curricula for schools. Assistants, working with
teachers, maintained a quiet and focused atmosphere until all students were
finished, but all manipulated content was delivered in the written materials,
not orally, so that participants in different conditions could participate in the
same classroom. Cardboard dividers were placed on each student’s desk to
provide privacy and prevent contamination across conditions. Facilitators
reported that very few if any students discussed the content with each other
during the sessions.
All experimental materials were distributed in unmarked manila envelopes
containing a series of stapled packets, each numbered and completed se-
quentially: (i) a treatment or control article, (ii) treatment or control writing
exercises, (iii) survey items assessing psychological process variables, and
(iv) packets of neutral word-search puzzles to keep any student who finished
early busy and quiet until the end of the period.
Exposé treatment. The treatment article summarized recent journalistic works
exposing the deceptive and manipulative marketing practices of food com-
panies and describing their harmful effects on society—with a particular em-
phasis on harm to young children and the poor. In particular, it described
practices such as formulating foods based on scientific research specifically
to maximize its addictiveness (or “craveability”), using deceptive labels and
product names to create the perception that unhealthy products are healthy,
and disproportionately targeting very young children and the poor with ad-
vertisements for many of their unhealthiest products. To tap into the stereo-
type of the controlling, hypocritical adult and thus activate teens’ drive to
assert their autonomy, the article included pictures of four specific food in-
dustry executives or consultants (all white, middle-aged men in business attire)
and described their hypocritical behavior (e.g., “[Name] is a former tobacco
executive who oversaw Kraft. He calls himself ‘a bit of a fitness freak.’ So he
avoids the sweet drinks and fatty snacks that his company sells.”).
So that adolescents would internalize this information, the treatments
used techniques that are now standard in “wise” psychological interventions
(26). First, to create a descriptive norm in support of the treatment message
after reading the article, participants read a brief report from an ostensible
survey of older students in their school district suggesting that most such
students felt outraged about food company practices and planned to “fight
back” (e.g., “. . .almost all 9th graders said they planned to fight back against
the companies by buying and eating less processed food”; bold in original).
Students then read a series of purported quotes from students who had
completed that survey designed both to contribute to the perception of
widespread outrage and to suggest how that outrage could be channeled to
fight back against the injustice perpetrated by food companies by eating less
unhealthy, and more healthy, food. Second, students wrote essays explain-
ing why they were outraged and how they might fight back against the
companies—a so-called “saying is believing” exercise (26, 27).
Traditional public health message: The active placebo control. The randomized
control activities were designed to encourage healthy eating without com-
municating the theoretically relevant treatment messages—that is, an au-
tonomous, social justice construal of healthy eating.
The placebo control article was based heavily on existing middle school health
textbooks and conveyed scientific information about how the body processes
foods and how this relates to weight and health in general. It included colorful,
appealing pictures of healthy foods, informative tips about reading nutrition
labels, and recommendations for eating a healthy and balanced diet. Like the
exposé article, it was developed through a process of prototyping and piloting
with adolescents and science teachers to ensure it was evocative and age-
appropriate. The control materials involved reading normative quotations
purportedly from adults (parents, health educators, etc.) who stated that most
teens should read and follow the recommendations. Finally, participants were
asked to write essays explaining why it is important to make healthy eating
choices. They were also asked to describe some active steps they might take if
they wanted to follow the advice of the article and of the adults who endorsed
it. Hence, like the treatment, it involved active interaction with the messages.
Altogether, the active placebo control was more informative about the
science of health and nutrition (i.e., self-interest–based reasons why it is
important to eat healthily) than the treatment. It also involved explicit en-
treaties to drink water; avoid food high in salt, fat, and sugar; eat fruit; and
make other healthy dietary choices. In this way, it was a strong control,
allowing for a conservative test.
No-treatment control group. In year 1, the no-treatment control group simply
received no content. In year 2, one-third of students received an unrelated
reading and writing activity about the brain, how it functions, how it adapts
to middle school, and what implications that has for learning. Hence, it was
informative, scientific, involved quotes from peers, and required adolescents
to write, but it never mentioned food or weight.
Measures.
Self-reports. Six survey items, presented in a single randomly determined order,
assessed three focal constructs outlined below. Each item was rated on a 5-point
scale (1 = “not at all true/not at all like me”; 5 = “extremely true/extremely like
me”). For the sake of brevity, we wrote items for each subscale that were a
priori expected to be conceptually related but not redundant.
Alignment of healthy eating with adolescent values. Two items assessed adolescents’
construal of healthy eating as addressing social justice concerns: “When I eat
healthy, I’m doing my part to protect kids who are being controlled by food
companies” and “When I choose to eat healthy, I’m helping to make the world
a better place.” In year 1 only, three additional questions were also asked.
Including these showed the same statistical significance levels for all tests.
However, because they were not administered in year 2 (for the sake of ef-
ficiency), they are not included in the final composite.
Next, two items assessed individuals’ construal of healthy eating as in-
dependent and autonomy-assertive behavior: “Eating healthy is a way to
stand up to people who are trying to control us” and “If people eat junk
food, it’s because they want to, not because someone made them” (reverse-
coded). As above, in year 1 only, additional questions were asked; these
showed the same statistical significance levels for all tests but were not used
in the composite because they were not asked in year 2.
Items measuring autonomous construal of healthy eating were strongly
correlated with the prosocial construal of healthy eating (average r = 0.71, P <
0.001), and so the four social justice and autonomy items were combined into
a composite (α = 0.75).
Social status appeal of healthy eating. Finally, two items assessed the social status
appeal of healthy eating: “I like the idea of being a healthy eater” and “I respect
healthy eaters more than unhealthy eaters.” These were averaged (α = 0.59).
In year 2, we sought to rule out the potential concern that the use of the
noun phrasing alone could be producing our behavioral effects, because prior
research has shown that the noun phrasing can drive people to enact behavior
consistent with desired identities or refrain from behavior consistent with
undesired identities (28). Therefore, in year 2 only, we randomly assigned half
of all participants to have the words “healthy eater” replaced with “healthy
eating.” This showed no statistically significant interactions with treatment
effects on snack choice behavior. Regardless, we reanalyzed the items in-
cluding a dummy variable indicating noun/verb condition from year 2; this did
not change any of the results reported in the manuscript.
Emotional responses to food advertisements. Two days posttreatment, participants
viewed three advertisements for sugary drinks (Coca Cola Classic, Sprite, and
Gatorade) and rated “How angry does this ad make you?” (1 = “not angry at
all”; 5 = “extremely angry”) and “How much does this ad make you want to
drink this product?” (1 = “not at all”; 5 = “a great deal”). Supporting the
validity of the measure, adolescents who rated the advertisements as making
them want to consume the sugary drinks tended to be the ones who had
made more junk food choices the previous day, r(237) = 0.19, P = 0.003.
Free-choice unhealthy snacking behavior. Students completed the snack forms in
their homerooms (a different setting from the one in which they had received
the treatment). Teachers instructed students to complete the snack pack
order forms with no discussion and without looking at any other students’
forms. Students completed the forms immediately upon arriving at their
first-period (i.e., homeroom) class. Teachers then collected the forms and
sent them to the office, where the research team prepared the snack packs
out of sight of students to prevent participants from noticing a connection
with the previous day’s activities.
The snack menu allowed students to select one of five possible drinks (two
healthy and three unhealthy) as well as two of six possible food items (three
healthy and three unhealthy). Unhealthy drinks were Coca Cola Classic,
Sprite, and Hi-C, whereas healthy drink options were sparkling and still
bottled water (Topo Chico and Arrowhead, respectively). Unhealthy snack
options were Oreos, Doritos, and Hot Cheetos, and healthy snack options
were a fruit cup, trail mix, and baby carrots. We calculated variables in-
dicating whether students chose an unhealthy drink (0 = “water”; 1 =
“sugary drink”) and how many unhealthy foods were chosen (0–2). The focal
analysis was an ordered logistic regression predicting the total number of
unhealthy choices (0–3).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. The authors thank Carol Dweck and Kristy Pathakis for
feedback on earlier drafts and gratefully acknowledge funding from the New
Paths to Purpose Project at the Chicago Booth Center for Decision Research and
from The Character Lab. The preparation of this manuscript was supported by a
fellowship from the FMC faculty research fund at the University of Chicago’s
10834
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1604586113
Bryan et al.
 Booth School of Business (to C.J.B.), by grants from the Raikes Foundation and
the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (Grant
10.13039/100000071 R01HD084772-01), and by a fellowship from the Center
for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences (CASBS) (to D.S.Y.).
1. Wang YC, McPherson K, Marsh T, Gortmaker SL, Brown M (2011) Health and eco-
nomic burden of the projected obesity trends in the USA and the UK. Lancet
378(9793):815–825.
2. Katz DL, et al. (2005) Public Health Strategies for Preventing and Controlling Overweight
and Obesity in School and Worksite Settings: A Report on Recommendations of the Task
Force on Community Preventive Services (Center for Disease Control, Atlanta, GAl).
3. Stice E, Shaw H, Marti CN (2006) A meta-analytic review of obesity prevention pro-
grams for children and adolescents: The skinny on interventions that work. Psychol
Bull 132(5):667–691.
4. Steinberg L (2015) How to improve the health of American adolescents. Perspect
Psychol Sci 10(6):711–715.
5. Nicklaus S, Boggio V, Chabanet C, Issanchou S (2004) A prospective study of food
preferences in childhood. Food Qual Prefer 15(7–8):805–818.
6. Wilson DK, et al. (2005) A preliminary test of a student-centered intervention on
increasing physical activity in underserved adolescents. Ann Behav Med 30(2):
119–124.
7. Metcalfe J, Mischel W (1999) A hot/cool-system analysis of delay of gratification:
Dynamics of willpower. Psychol Rev 106(1):3–19.
8. Braams BR, van Duijvenvoorde ACK, Peper JS, Crone EA (2015) Longitudinal changes
in adolescent risk-taking: A comprehensive study of neural responses to rewards,
pubertal development, and risk-taking behavior. J Neurosci 35(18):7226–7238.
9. Crone EA, Dahl RE (2012) Understanding adolescence as a period of social-affective
engagement and goal flexibility. Nat Rev Neurosci 13(9):636–650.
10. Casey B, Caudle K (2013) The teenage brain: Self control. Curr Dir Psychol Sci 22(2):
82–87.
11. Chein J, Albert D, O’Brien L, Uckert K, Steinberg L (2011) Peers increase adolescent risk
taking by enhancing activity in the brain’s reward circuitry. Dev Sci 14(2):F1–F10.
12. Brehm JW (1966) A Theory of Psychological Reactance (Academic Press, Oxford, UK).
13. Vansteenkiste M, Simons J, Lens W, Sheldon KM, Deci EL (2004) Motivating learning,
performance, and persistence: The synergistic effects of intrinsic goal contents and
autonomy-supportive contexts. J Pers Soc Psychol 87(2):246–260.
14. Lee KH, Siegle GJ, Dahl RE, Hooley JM, Silk JS (2015) Neural responses to maternal
criticism in healthy youth. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 10(7):902–912.
15. Yeager DS, et al. (2014) Boring but important: A self-transcendent purpose for
learning fosters academic self-regulation. J Pers Soc Psychol 107(4):559–580.
16. Damon W, Menon J, Bronk KC (2003) The development of purpose during adoles-
cence. Appl Dev Sci 7(3):119–128.
17. Robinson TN (2010) Save the world, prevent obesity: Piggybacking on existing social
and ideological movements. Obesity (Silver Spring) 18(Suppl 1):S17–S22.
18. Eisenegger C, Naef M, Snozzi R, Heinrichs M, Fehr E (2010) Prejudice and truth about
the effect of testosterone on human bargaining behaviour. Nature 463(7279):
356–359.
19. Telzer EH, Fuligni AJ, Lieberman MD, Galván A (2014) Neural sensitivity to eudaimonic
and hedonic rewards differentially predict adolescent depressive symptoms over
time. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111(18):6600–6605.
20. Moss M (2013) Salt, Sugar, Fat: How the Food Giants Hooked Us (Random House, New
York).
21. Kessler DA (2010) The End of Overeating: Taking Control of the Insatiable American
Appetite (Rodale Books, Emmaus, PA), reprint Ed.
22. Mann T, de Ridder D, Fujita K (2013) Self-regulation of health behavior: Social psy-
chological approaches to goal setting and goal striving. Health Psychol 32(5):487–498.
23. Carneiro PM, Heckman JJ (2003) Human Capital Policy (Institute for the Study of
Labor, Bonn, Germany).
24. Luke A, Cooper RS (2013) Physical activity does not influence obesity risk: Time to
clarify the public health message. Int J Epidemiol 42(6):1831–1836.
25. Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Kit BK, Flegal KM (2014) Prevalence of childhood and adult
obesity in the United States, 2011-2012. JAMA 311(8):806–814.
26. Walton GM (2014) The new science of wise psychological interventions. Curr Dir
Psychol Sci 23(1):73–82.
27. Aronson JM, Fried CB, Good C (2002) Reducing the effects of stereotype threat on
African American college students by shaping theories of intelligence. J Exp Soc
Psychol 38(2):113–125.
28. Bryan CJ, Walton GM, Rogers T, Dweck CS (2011) Motivating voter turnout by in-
voking the self. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108(31):12653–12656.
29. Barlow SE; Expert Committee (2007) Expert committee recommendations regarding
the prevention, assessment, and treatment of child and adolescent overweight and
obesity: Summary report. Pediatrics 120(Suppl 4):S164–S192.
Bryan et al.
PNAS
|
September 27, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 39
|
10835
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES
