 Viewpoint 
Low back pain: A call for action 
Rachelle Buchbinder PhD (Corresponding Author) 
NHMRC Senior Principal Research Fellow 
Director, Monash Department of Clinical Epidemiology, Cabrini Institute 
Professor, Department of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, Monash University 
Suite 41 Cabrini Medical Centre, 183 Wattletree Rd, Malvern, Vic 3144, Australia 
Email rachelle.buchbinder@monash.edu 
Maurits van Tulder PhD 
Professor of Health Technology Assessment, Department of Health Sciences, Faculty of 
Science, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, De Boelelaan 1085, 1081 HV Amsterdam, the 
Netherlands 
Email maurits.van.tulder@vu.nl 
Birgitta Öberg PhD 
Professor of Physiotherapy, Department of Medical and Health Sciences, Faculty of 
Medicine and Health Sciences, Linköping university, SE-581 83 Linköping, Sweden 
Email: birgitta.oberg@liu.se 
Lucíola Menezes Costa PhD 
Associate Professor, Masters and Doctoral Programs in Physical Therapy, Universidade 
Cidade de São Paulo 
*Manuscript 
2 
Rua Cesário Galeno, 448 Tatuapé, São Paulo, Brazil 
Email: luciolamenezes@gmail.com 
Anthony Woolf, FRCP 
Professor, Bone and Joint Research Group, Royal Cornwall Hospital and University of Exeter 
Medical School, Knowledge Spa, Royal Cornwall Hospital, Truro TR1 3HD, UK 
Email: anthony.woolf@btopenworld.com 
Mark Schoene, BS 
Editor, The BackLetter 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins 
25 Storey Ave, Suite 154, Newburyport MA 01950, USA 
Email: BackLetterEditor@gmail.com 
Peter Croft MD 
Professor of Primary Care Epidemiology, Arthritis Research UK Primary Care Centre, 
Research Institute for Primary Care and Health Sciences, Keele University, Staffordshire, UK 
ST5 5BG 
Email: p.r.croft@keele.ac.uk 
for The Lancet Low Back Pain Series Working Group* 
3 
Key messages 
1. Use the concept of ‘positive health’ for non-specific low back pain - the ability to 
adapt and to self-manage, in the face of social, physical and emotional challenges. 
2. Avoid harmful and useless treatments by adopting a similar framework to drug 
regulation - only include them in public reimbursement packages if proven safe, 
effective and cost-effective. 
3. Address widespread population and health professional misconceptions about the 
causes and prognosis of low back pain and the effectiveness of different treatments, 
and fragmented and outdated models of care. 
4. Policy, public health, health care practice, social services and workplaces must jointly 
tackle the ‘low back pain paradox’ in low- and middle-income countries where 
improving social and economic conditions could prevent or reduce low back pain 
incidence, but at the same time create expectations and demands for medical 
investigations and low-value health care that increase the risk of long-term backrelated 
disability. 
Word count: 2,220 words 
4 
 Low back pain is the leading worldwide cause of years lost to disability and its burden is 
growing in tandem with the increasing and ageing population.1 As these population shifts 
are more rapid in low- and middle- income countries, where adequate resources to address 
the problem may not exist, the impacts will likely be more extreme in these regions. Most 
low back pain is unrelated to specific identifiable spinal pathology, and our Viewpoint, the 
third paper in this Lancet series,2,3 is a call for action on this global problem of non-specific 
low back pain. 
The challenges 
Panel 1 summarises the most pressing political, public health and health care challenges and 
identifies actions to meet them. Preventing the onset and persistence of disability 
associated with low back pain requires recognition that the disability is inseparable from the 
social and economic context of people’s lives and is entwined with personal and cultural 
beliefs about back pain.4 Health and workplace policies and disability payment systems are 
often ineffective and wasteful and represent key targets for improvements. 
Socioeconomically disadvantaged people are overrepresented among those with disabling 
low back pain.5 In many settings they will be further disadvantaged by restricted access to 
accurate information sources, health care approaches that provide appropriate support for 
self-management of uncomplicated low back pain, and to more specialised effective 
interventions, such as multidisciplinary rehabilitation, for more complex persistent low back 
pain. 
While independent associations are uncertain, public health programmes that tackle 
lifestyle issues of obesity and low levels of physical activity may provide a model and 
5 
structure for reducing the impact of low back pain on daily life.6 Implementation of these 
programmes are especially pressing in some low- and middle-income countries where 
increasing obesity rates and rapid industrial growth and consequent reductions in physical 
activity are occurring in urban areas. Health system and societal initiatives addressing low 
back pain should synergise with the WHO European Region Action plan for the prevention 
and control of non-communicable diseases which recognises the need for comprehensive 
promotion of musculoskeletal health. As low back pain disability affects employability in 
many informal sectors, multi-sectorial integration between health, labour and social 
services should also be a key goal. 
Disabling low back pain is partly iatrogenic. Studies in low-income countries and indigenous 
and acculturated populations in high-income countries report harmful consequences from 
exposure to health care per se.7-9 Such negative effects reflect changes from traditional 
views (low back pain is a relatively benign part of daily life), to low back pain being a 
problem requiring medical attention. Increased use of ineffective and potentially harmful 
treatments has wasted limited health care resources and caused harm. The current 
epidemic of addiction and rising mortality resulting from increased opioid prescribing in the 
U.S. over the past 20 years provides a dramatic example of the disastrous effects of harmful 
medical intervention.10 In low- and middle-income countries, epidemiological evidence 
suggests that improving social and economic conditions could prevent or reduce low back 
pain incidence, but at the same time create expectations and demands for medical 
investigations and low-value health care that paradoxically increase the risk of long-term 
back-related disability (the ‘low back pain paradox’). 
6 
The global challenge is to prevent the introduction and use of practices that are harmful or 
wasteful while at the same time ensuring equitable access to effective and affordable health 
care for those who need it. High rates of advice to rest and use of ineffective treatment 
modalities are already a reality in low- and middle-income countries. While overmedicalisation 
disproportionately affects the wealthy minority, it also threatens to reduce 
or obscure availability of high-value health care services for the poorer majority and further 
widen health and social disparities. Contextual factors, such as lack of suitable available 
work duties, may also mean that what would be considered appropriate in high-income 
countries, such as encouragement to remain or return early to work for people with low 
back pain, may not always be appropriate (or even an option) in less affluent countries. 
Protection of the public from unproven or harmful approaches to managing low back pain 
 requires that governments and health care leaders tackle entrenched and 
counterproductive reimbursement strategies, vested interests and financial and 
professional incentives that maintain the status quo. Funders should only pay for high-value 
care, stop paying for ineffective or harmful tests and treatments, and commission research 
on those that are unproven. Similar to strict drug regulations in many countries, new tests 
and non-drug treatments should only be available in trials until their status is established. 
Some countries are testing these approaches. In Australia, a clinician-led taskforce is 
reviewing all government-subsidised tests and procedures with the aim of removing funding 
for those that are unnecessary, outdated or potentially unsafe. In the Netherlands, 
unproven interventions are conditionally included in the public health insurance package 
only if there is an evaluation to inform a final decision. Stakeholders, including patients, 
7 
agree in advance to design and eligibility criteria for the evaluation. This framework has 
already assessed radiofrequency denervation for patients with chronic low back pain.11 
As this treatment was not found to provide significant added benefit over a standardised 
exercise program alone, it is no longer being reimbursed. 
A new approach to low back pain 
The biopsychosocial model of low back pain has brought significant advances in 
understanding the prognostic significance of psychosocial factors in individual patients. It 
has had less success shifting practitioners away from managing patients within a biomedical 
framework. The importance of behavioural approaches to back pain management does not 
obscure the continuing need to investigate mechanisms and potential biological 
determinants of non-specific low back pain in phenotypically distinct subgroups. 
However, to move the field forward we propose adoption of the ‘positive health’ concept as 
the overarching strategic approach to the prevention of long-term disability from low back 
pain.12 Positive health, as proposed by Huber et al, is ‘the ability to adapt and to selfmanage, 
in the face of social, physical and emotional challenges’. This term encompasses a 
much broader concept of health than simply ‘absence of disease’ and its emphasis on 
medicalisation and cure. 
There is evidence that population levels of long-term disabling low back pain could be 
reduced by adopting this positive health approach. 13,14 For health professionals, positive 
health focuses on alternatives to ‘treatment’ and ‘cure’ that promote high-quality, 
meaningful lives for people with persistent low back pain. Public and patient expectations 
8 
will need to change, with people not expecting a diagnosis or complete cure for their low 
back pain. This requires initiatives to change widespread and inaccurate beliefs about back 
pain,13 helping the next generation to avoid counterproductive patterns of illness behaviour. 
For people with persistent low back pain, positive health entails learning how to cope with a 
long-term health problem through self-management activities, seeking health care only 
when needed. While passive approaches such as rest and medication are linked with 
worsening disability, active strategies such as exercise are associated with lower levels of 
disability and less reliance on formal health care. There are numerous behavioural and 
cognitive strategies that people with chronic pain in the community use, regardless of 
whether or not they seek care.15 In the occupational setting, interventions focusing on 
positive health, including peer support for the notion that low back pain is not an ‘injury’ in 
need of medical treatment,16 and redirecting problem-solving efforts away from seeking 
cures towards improved adaptation to the pain, yield beneficial outcomes.17 
Improved training and support of primary care doctors and other professionals engaged in 
activity and lifestyle facilitation (e.g. physiotherapists, chiropractors, nurses, community 
workers) could minimise use of unnecessary medical care. System changes that integrate 
and support health professionals from diverse disciplines and care settings to provide 
patients with consistent messages about mechanisms, causes, prognosis and natural history 
of low back pain as well as the benefits of physical activity and exercise, are crucial to 
changing behavior and improving delivery of effective care. Traditional healers where 
integrated into the health care system, community health workers and family remain 
important providers of lower cost basic education and/or care in many low-income 
9 
 countries for the majority of people with low back pain who do not require medical 
attention.18 In rural and remote regions ‘tele-rehabilitation’ blended with self-management 
may be an option where internet access is available. 
What should be known about low back pain? 
The success of a positive health approach will depend on whether relevant stakeholders 
share the same mission, vision and objectives and the success of strategies for knowledge 
transfer and exchange. Panels 2 and 3 list information that well-informed consumers, 
patients, clinicians and policy makers should know about low back pain and its global 
burden. 
Policy-makers in all countries should look to local stakeholders to help decide what is best 
and appropriate for their individual setting. As in other fields of development, low- and 
middle-income countries should ensure that investment in musculoskeletal services is 
effective for patients and does not harm local health systems.19 Local participation and 
ownership, integration with existing priorities and policies, and coordination with national 
and regional systems and processes are crucial. 
The research and evidence challenge 
Funding for low back pain research is limited and uncoordinated. This particularly affects 
low- and middle-income countries where the effects of disabling low back pain remain 
under-recognised and research priorities and funding remain focused on infectious diseases. 
One way forward would be a global network of low back pain researchers from developed 
and developing countries, pooling experience and knowledge and building research capacity 
10 
where it is needed. Reducing research waste is a priority, achievable by ensuring that 
research studies focus on the most important stakeholder questions, are large and rigorous 
enough to provide definitive answers, have the potential to significantly improve outcomes, 
and test interventions that can be quickly and widely implemented into practice. 
Panel 4 lists major research priorities. These align with priorities previously identified by the 
international low back pain primary care research community.20 Implementation research to 
determine how best to put existing knowledge and evidence to use through changes in 
patient and clinician behaviour and health system design is necessary in all countries. For 
low- and middle-income countries, priorities include identifying interventions that are 
optimal given the social, political, cultural and health resource context. While current 
evidence-based guidelines may be well suited for high-income countries and highly 
developed health care systems, they may need adaptation to assure feasibility and cultural 
appropriateness for low resource settings. 
Monitoring and surveillance 
An active ongoing monitoring and surveillance system is vital to evaluate the effects of new 
strategies on outcomes such as disability, ability to work and social participation. There is a 
pressing need for surveys and health care databases in different countries that use common 
metrics for measuring low back pain burden, use of active self-management strategies such 
as exercise, tests and treatments, and outcomes and costs of care. Panel 5 shows an 
indicator set for surveillance and monitoring. Uniform data collection would encourage 
benchmarking of health services within and across countries. Standardised low back pain 
definitions for prevalence studies have already been developed and incorporated into the 
Comment [RB1]: check 
11 
Global Alliance for Musculoskeletal Health Surveillance Taskforce survey module for 
musculoskeletal conditions. 
Conclusion 
Action is needed to address the growing burden of low back pain on many millions of 
people worldwide. Future social change, including ageing, urbanisation, sedentary lifestyles, 
and the development and promotion of new technologies, will likely exacerbate this 
problem. Examples of new technologies that may exacerbate the problem include the use 
and promotion of increasingly sensitive imaging techniques such as MRI that reveal 
‘abnormalities’ that may be incorrectly inferred to be the cause of a patient’s symptoms. 
Better recognition of the growing burden of low back pain is crucial to stimulate new, more 
effective strategies of prevention and care. The impact of disabling low back pain can be 
 reduced through social change that supports full participation in daily life. In low- to middleincome 
countries, the ‘paradox of low back pain’ needs to be addressed. Other barriers to 
optimal evidence-based management range from widespread population and health 
professional misconceptions about the causes and prognosis of low back pain and the 
effectiveness of different treatments, fragmented and outdated models of care, and the 
widespread use of ineffective and harmful care, particularly in countries considered to be 
models of high quality care. 
We have described actions all countries can take to reduce the impact of disabling low back 
pain on their populations. Strong and coordinated political action from international and 
national policy makers, including the World Health Organisation and research funding 
12 
agencies is needed. Such action could significantly reduce disability and suffering and 
improve the effectiveness and efficiency of care for people with low back pain throughout 
the world. 
13 
Contributors 
RB and MvT were part of the team that developed the original proposal for the series and 
RB co-ordinated the development and amendment of the paper. RB, MvT, BO, LC, AW, MS 
and PC all contributed to drafting and writing of this paper, and have edited it for key 
content. RB, LC and PC drafted and analysed the survey of the Lancet Low Back Pain Series 
Working Group that populated the draft version of the panels in this paper. RB, MvT, BO, LC, 
AW, PC participated in the authors’ meeting and discussion during the drafting process. All 
other authors have read and provided substantive intellectual comments to the draft and 
approved the final version of the paper. 
*The Lancet Low Back Pain Series Working Group 
Steering Group: Rachelle Buchbinder (Chair), Jan Hartvigsen (Deputy Chair), Dan Cherkin, 
Nadine E Foster, Chris Maher, Martin Underwood, Maurits van Tulder. Members: Johannes 
R Anema, Roger Chou, Stephen P Cohen, Lucíola Menezes Costa, Peter Croft, Manuela 
Ferreira, Paulo Ferreira, Julie Fritz, Stéphane Genevay, Douglas P Gross, Mark Hancock, 
Damian Hoy, Jaro Karppinen, Bart Koes, Alice Kongsted, Quinette Louw, Birgitta Öberg, 
Wilco Peul, Glenn Pransky, Mark Schoene, Joachim Sieper, Rob Smeets, Judith A Turner, 
Anthony Woolf 
Declarations of Interest 
Johannes R. Anema is chief investigator, or co-investigator on multiple previous and current 
(personal) research grants from government research agencies in the Netherlands (eg, 
Netherlands Organisation for Health Research & Development) and Canada (eg, IRSST). His 
research has also received funding from philanthropy and quasi-governmental agencies 
14 
(Dutch Social Security Agency, Institute GAK) and charities linked to professional body 
membership (Dutch Foundation of Occupational Medicine). Prof Anema and his research 
team received a grant from Pfizer to write a report on depression and anxiety disorders 
based on a secondary analysis of data collected with funding from government research 
agencies. His travel expenses have been covered when he has been an invited speaker at 
conferences and he has received honoraria for talks and reviewing grants. Prof Anema was 
an invited co-opted member of the guideline development group for the Dutch 
Occupational Medicine guideline for low back pain and the Dutch national Insurance 
Medicine protocol for lumbosacral syndrome. He is President of the Work Disability 
Prevention and Integration Committee of the International Commission on Occupational 
Health (ICOH). He has published multiple papers on low back pain, some of which may be 
referenced in the series. He is editor of the International Handbook of Work Disability which 
is referenced in the series. Prof Anema is stockholder and senior consultant of Evalua 
Netherlands Ltd. His chair in Insurance Medicine is paid by the Dutch Social Security Agency. 
Rachelle Buchbinder is chief investigator or associate investigator on multiple previous and 
current research grants from government research agencies from Australia (eg, NHMRC, 
ARC), and overseas (eg, ZonMW in the Netherlands and PCORI in the USA). Her research has 
also received funding from philanthropy (eg, Arthritis Australia) and government agencies 
(eg, NSW WorkCover). She has been funded by research fellowships from NHMRC since 
 2005. She has received travel expenses for speaking at conferences from the professional 
organisations hosting the conferences. She chaired the back pain expert group for the 2010 
Global Burden of Diseases, Injuries, and Risk Factors (GBD) Study. She was appointed to the 
15 
Australian Medical Services Advisory Committee in May 2016. She has published multiple 
papers on low back pain some of which may be referenced in the series. 
Dan Cherkin is chief investigator, or co-investigator on multiple previous and current 
research grants from government-related research agencies in the USA (eg, NIH and PCORI). 
His travel expenses have been covered when he has been an invited speaker at conferences 
and he has received honoraria for talks, reviewing grants and theses (no honoraria or travel 
expenses from pharmaceutical or device companies). Dr. Cherkin has published multiple 
papers on low back pain some of which may be referenced in the series. 
Roger Chou has received funding from the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality and 
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to conduct systematic reviews on low back 
pain treatments, was an author on the 2016 CDC guideline, receives royalties from 
UpToDate as an author on low back pain topics, has had travel expenses covered when he 
has been an invited speaker at conferences and has received honoraria for talks (no 
honoraria or travel expenses from pharmaceutical or device companies). 
Stephen P. Cohen is Principal Investigator for multiple clinical trials evaluating interventions 
for low back pain funded by the U.S. Department of Defense (Congressionally Mandated 
Research Programs). He serves on the Advisory Boards of a company that make 
radiofrequency equipment (Halyard) and another one working with the U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) to design a steroid approved for epidural injection (Semnur). He was 
the lead speaker on the effectiveness of epidural steroid injections at the FDA-convened 
panel on the procedure following the fungal meningitis outbreak. He serves on several 
16 
National Institutes of Health task forces, including one for pain education and another for 
research priorities for chronic pain. He is a member of the American Society of Regional 
Anesthesia and Pain Medicine (ASRA) Board of Directors. He was a “stakeholder” for ASRA 
and the Dept. of Defense for the recent U.S. Drug Enforcement guidelines on opioids for 
chronic pain. He has published numerous studies on low back pain, some of which are 
referenced in this series. 
Luciola Menez Costa is chief investigator or associate investigator on multiple previous and 
current research grants from government research agencies FAPESP and CNPq from Brazil. 
She has published multiple papers on low back pain some of which may be referenced in the 
series. 
Peter Croft has been chief investigator or co-investigator on multiple previous research 
grants for musculoskeletal pain research from UK government agencies (including National 
Institute for Health Research and the Medical Research Council) and UK charitable 
organisations (Arthritis Research UK and the Wellcome Trust), but none from industry. His 
travel expenses have been covered by the organising professional organisations (including 
rheumatology, pain specialists, physical therapy, primary care) when he has been an invited 
speaker at conferences. He has received honoraria for reviewing grant proposals from 
government organisations in Canada, Norway and Sweden. PC’s department has received 
payment for two reports to the UK Committee on Advertising Practice. He has published 
multiple papers on low back pain some of which may be referenced in the series. 
17 
Manuela Ferreira holds a Sydney Medical Foundation Fellowship/Sydney Medical School 
and is chief investigator, or co-investigator on multiple previous and current research grants 
from government research agencies in Australia (NHMRC) and Brazil (eg, CAPES/CNPQ), 
philanthropy (eg, Arthritis Australia), industry (eg, Medibank Research Fund) and 
institutional research funds (eg, International Research and Research Training Fund/The 
University of Melbourne). Her travel expenses have been covered when she has been 
invited speaker at conferences and she has received honoraria for talks, reviewing grants 
and theses. She has published multiple papers on low back pain some of which may be cited 
in this series. 
Paulo Ferreira is chief investigator, or associate investigator on multiple previous & current 
 research grants from government research agencies from Australia (eg, NHMRC, Arthritis 
Australia), USA (eg, MDT Research Foundation), Spain (e.g. MAPFRE foundation), and Brazil 
(eg, CNPQ, FAPESP). The University of Sydney funds his salary. His travel expenses have 
been covered when he has been an invited speaker at conferences or through his research 
funding (no honoraria or travel expenses from pharmaceutical or device companies). He has 
received industry related funding from competitive peer-reviewed schemes (eg, Medibank 
Private Research Foundation – Australia) for a trial investigating the effects of physical 
activity for recurrent low back pain (IMPACT). IMPACT is currently in its pilot stages. He has 
published multiple papers on low back pain some of which may be referenced in the series. 
Nadine E. Foster is chief investigator, or co-investigator on multiple previous and current 
research grants from government research agencies in the UK (eg, NIHR), USA (e.g. PCORI) 
and Australia (eg, NMHRC). For 10 years her salary has been covered by research 
18 
fellowships from the UK’s National Institute for Health Research (NIHR). Her research has 
also received funding from philanthropy (e.g Arthritis Research UK, Medical Research 
Council) and charities linked to professional body membership (eg, Chartered Society of 
Physiotherapy’s Charitable Trust). Her travel expenses have been covered when she has 
been an invited speaker at conferences and she has received honoraria for talks, reviewing 
grants and theses (no honoraria or travel expenses from pharmaceutical or device 
companies). Prof Foster was an invited co-opted member of the guideline development 
group for the UK’s National Clinical Guideline on low back pain and sciatica. She is the 
President of the Society of Back Pain Research in the UK and has published multiple papers 
on low back pain some of which may be referenced in the series. 
Julie Fritz is chief investigator, or co-investigator on multiple previous and current research 
grants from government research agencies in the United States including NIH, AHRQ, DOD 
and PCORI. Her research has also received funding from Foundations in the USA including 
the Foundation for Physical Therapy and National Athletic Trainers Association Research 
Foundation. Her travel expenses have been covered when she has been an invited speaker 
at conferences and she has received honoraria for talks and reviewing grants (no honoraria 
or travel expenses from pharmaceutical or device companies). Dr. Fritz has received 
payment as a journal editor (Journal of Orthopaedic and Sports Physical Therapy). She is an 
author or co-author on multiple papers on low back pain some of which may be referenced 
in the series. 
Stéphane Genevay is principal investigator or associate investigator on multiple previous 
and current research grants from Swiss research foundation (e.g. HUG). His research has 
19 
also received funding from philanthropy (eg, Rheumasearch, Centre de Recherches 
Médicales Carlos & Elsie de Reuter, Eugenio Litta). He has received funding from 
pharmaceutical companies (Abbvie, MSD, Pfizer) for investigator-initiated trials. He has 
received travel expenses and honorariums for speaking at conferences from the 
professional organisations hosting the conferences. He has papers on low back pain some of 
which may be referenced in the series. 
Douglas P. Gross is chief investigator, or co-investigator on multiple previous and current 
research grants from government research agencies in Canada (eg, Canadian Institutes for 
Health Research, Alberta Innovates Health Solutions) and the Netherlands (eg, 
TechForFuture Centre of Expertise HTSM Oost). His research has also received funding from 
philanthropy and quasi-governmental agencies (eg, Workers’ Compensation Board of 
Alberta, Workers’ Compensation Board of Manitoba, WorkSafeBC, Institute for Health 
Economics, Canadian Hemophilia Society) and charities linked to professional body 
membership (eg, Physiotherapy Foundation of Canada, Canadian Occupational Therapy 
Foundation). He has received funding from pharmaceutical companies (Bayer Hemophilia 
Awards Program) to undertake investigator-initiated research. His travel expenses have 
been covered when he has been an invited speaker at conferences and he has received 
honoraria for talks, reviewing grants and theses (no honoraria or travel expenses from 
pharmaceutical or device companies). Prof Gross was an invited co-opted member of the 
guideline development group for the Ontario Ministry of Government Services Community 
Research Award, “Development of a Minor Injury Treatment Protocol”. He has published 
 multiple papers on low back pain, some of which may be referenced in the series. 
20 
Mark Hancock is chief investigator, or associate investigator on previous and current 
research grants from government agencies (e.g. NHMRC and WorkCover) and from 
philanthropy (e.g., Arthritis NSW and International Mechanical Diagnosis and Therapy 
Research Foundation). His travel expenses have been covered when he has been an invited 
speaker at conferences. He is chief investigator on two investigator-initiated NHMRC-funded 
trials that have received supplementary industry funding. The first trial, PACE, was published 
in Lancet in 2014 and had co-funding from GSK. PACE demonstrated that paracetamol was 
ineffective for acute low back pain. The second NHMRC-funded trial, PRECISE, is evaluating 
pregabalin for sciatica. Pfizer provided the study medicine at no cost but provided no other 
funding. PRECISE is currently under review. He has published multiple papers on low back 
pain some of which may be referenced in the series. 
Jan Hartvigsen is chief investigator, or co-investigator on multiple previous and current 
research grants from government research agencies in Denmark (e.g. the Danish Ministry of 
Science and Innovation), and the USA (e.g. Health Resources and Service Administration). He 
holds tenured positions at the University of Southern Denmark and the Nordic Institute of 
Chiropractic and Clinical Biomechanics, which cover his full salary. His research has also 
received funding from philanthropy (e.g. Danish League against Rheumatism) and charities 
linked to professional bodies (e.g. the Danish Chiropractors Research Fund). His travel 
expenses have been covered when he has been invited speaker at conferences and he has 
received honoraria for talks, reviewing grants and theses. He has received honoraria for 
speaking from one pharmaceutical company (Nycomed 2002) but no device companies. Prof 
Hartvigsen was invited member of the expert groups that in 2014-16 developed Danish 
National Guidelines commissioned by the Danish Health and Medicines Authority for the 
21 
management of low back pain, lumbar radiculopathy, and cervical radiculopathy. He has 
published multiple papers on low back pain some of which may be cited in this series. 
Damian Hoy is the principal epidemiologist for the Pacific Community. This work involves 
dealing with all conditions in the Pacific that cause burden. It is funded by multiple donors, 
including the Governments of Australia, New Zealand, and France. It has included funding to 
travel to one research conference on surveillance. He is a member of the Global Burden of 
Diseases, Injuries, and Risk Factors (GBD) Study Musculoskeletal Expert Group, and is codeputy 
chair of the Global Alliance for Musculoskeletal Diseases Surveillance Taskforce. He 
has published multiple papers on low back pain some of which may be referenced in the 
series. 
Jaro Karppinen is chief investigator or associate investigator on multiple previous and 
current research grants from Finnish government research agency (Finnish Academy). He 
has received travel expenses for speaking at conferences from the professional 
organisations hosting the conferences. He was nominated as a member of the European 
Academy of Rehabilitation Medicine in 2012. He has published multiple papers on low back 
pain some of which may be referenced in the series. 
Bart Koes is chief investigator or associate investigator on multiple previous and current 
research grants from government research agencies from the Netherlands (eg ZonMW, 
NWO) and overseas (eg, NHMRC, Australia). His research has also received funding from 
philanthropy (eg, Dutch Arthritis Foundation). He has received travel expenses for speaking 
22 
at conferences from the professional organisations hosting the conferences. He has 
published multiple papers on low back pain some of which may be referenced in the series. 
Alice Kongsted’s position at University of Southern Denmark is financially supported by The 
Foundation for Advancement of Chiropractic Research and Postgraduate Education, 
Denmark. She was the content area expert in the development of Danish national clinical 
guidelines for treatment of neck pain for which she received a fee. She has received funding 
from The Foundation for Advancement of Chiropractic Research and Postgraduate 
Education and “IMK Almene Fond” to conduct observational cohort studies in Danish 
general practice and chiropractic practice. Her travel expenses have been covered when 
she has been invited as a speaker at conferences. She has published multiple papers on low 
 back pain some of which may be referenced in the series. 
Quinette Louw is the principal or associate investigator on grants from South African 
government research agencies, including the Medical Research Council and National 
Research Foundation. She has published multiple papers on low back pain some of which 
may be referenced in the series. She received travel expenses when she was an invited 
speaker at conferences or workshops and has received honoraria for talks and theses (no 
honoraria or travel expenses from pharmaceutical or device companies). Prof Louw was 
invited to assist with the South African Physiotherapy Society’s low back pain clinical 
practice guidelines. 
Chris Maher is chief investigator, or associate investigator on multiple previous & current 
research grants from government research agencies from Australia (eg, NHMRC), Brazil (eg, 
23 
FAPESP) and the Netherlands (eg, ZonMW). For the past 10 years his salary has been 
covered by research fellowships from Australia’s National Health and Medical Research 
Council and The Australian Research Council. His research has also received funding from 
philanthropy (eg, Arthritis Australia) and government agencies (eg, NSW WorkCover). He 
has received travel expenses for speaking at conferences from the professional associations 
hosting the conferences, and has received honoraria for talks from professional associations 
and industry hosting the talks, honoraria for reviewing grants from government grant 
agencies and honoraria for marking theses from the relevant university. Prof Maher has 
received supplementary industry funding for two investigator-initiated NHMRC-funded 
trials. The first trial had co-funding from GlaxoSmithKline. Pfizer provided the study 
medicine for the second trial, PRECISE, at no cost, but provided no other funding. He has 
published multiple papers on low back pain some of which may be referenced in the series. 
Birgitta Öberg is head of research at the division and responsible for research previous and 
ongoing research funded by government research agencies in Sweden. She has received 
travel expenses for speaking at conferences from the professional organisations hosting the 
conferences. She chaired the Scientific Council of Medicine and Health 2013-2016 and been 
a member 2010-2012. 
Wilco Peul has no conflicts of interest to disclose. 
Glenn Pransky is chief investigator or co-investigator on multiple previous and current 
research studies, primarily funded by his employer, the Liberty Mutual Research Institute. 
He has also collaborated on studies funded by the US National Institute of Health, the 
24 
National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health, the Canadian Institute of Health 
Research, and others. He has received travel expenses for speaking at conferences from 
the professional organizations hosting the conferences, and support for conference travel 
from his employer. He chaired the Work Disability Prevention and Integration section of the 
International Commission on Occupational Health from 2010- 2015. He has published 
multiple papers on low back pain and work disability, some of which are referenced in this 
series. 
Mark Schoene receives the majority of his funding from the publishing company Wolters 
Kluwer for writing/editing an international newsletter on spine/back pain research (The 
BackLetter). He authors all the articles and shares editorial control with the executive editor 
(a researcher, academic spine surgeon, and Chairman, Dept of Orthopaedics at Georgetown 
University Medical Center). Neither has any conflicts of interest with drug or device 
companies. MS has co-authored several editorials for journals owned by publishers (The 
Spine Journal, Spine—owned respectively by Elsevier and Wolters Kluwer). The editorials 
concerned the inadequacy of the evidence base for regulated surgical devices or 
drugs/biologics. He received nothing of value for those editorials. The remainder of his 
funding comes from the non-profit Sports Health and Safety Institute at the University of 
Washington for research, writing, and editing in the concussion area. He was previously a 
paid consultant for the non-profit Informed Medical Decisions Foundation in Boston, 
involved in the preparation of Decision Aids and Shared Decision Making materials. He 
occasionally receives travel funding from professional societies to take part in symposia 
sponsored by those societies. MS has been an unpaid editorial board member and 
Consumer Representative at the Cochrane Collaboration Back and Neck Group since 1999. 
 25 
Joachim Sieper has no conflict of interested as related to these manuscripts. Outside the 
submitted manuscripts he reports grants and personal fees from Abbvie, personal fees from 
Boehringer Ingelheim, grants from Eli-Lilly, personal fees from Galapagos, grants and 
personal fees from Janssen, grants and personal fees from Merck, personal fees from 
Novartis, grants and personal fees from Pfizer, personal fees from Roche, personal fees from 
UCB. 
Rob Smeets is chief investigator or associate investigator on multiple previous and current 
research grants from government research agencies from the Netherlands (ZonMW), and 
overseas (eg, NHMRC in Australia and Swedish Research Council). His research has also 
received funding from philanthropy (eg, Eurospine, Revalidatiefonds, Stichting Annadal) and 
health care insurance companies (eg, CZ and VGZ) and government agencies (eg, Province of 
Limburg). He has received travel expenses for speaking at conferences from the professional 
organisations hosting the conferences. He chaired the IASP Special Interest Group Pain, 
Mind and Movement and was member of the governmental working group protocol 
lumbosacral radicular syndrome for insurance medicine (Gezondheidsraad) and is member 
of the project group Dutch Quality Care Standard Chronic pain. He has published multiple 
papers on low back pain some of which may be referenced in the series. 
Judith A. Turner is co-investigator on multiple previous and current research grants from US 
government agencies, including NIH, AHRQ, and PCORI. She is President of the International 
Association for the Study of Pain. Her travel expenses have been covered when she has 
been an invited speaker at conferences and she has received honoraria for talks (no 
26 
honoraria or travel expenses from pharmaceutical or device companies). She is an author on 
multiple articles on low back pain, some of which may be referenced in this series. She 
receives royalties from PAR, Inc. for questionnaires not referenced in this series. 
Martin Underwood was Chair of the NICE accreditation advisory committee until March 
2017 for which he received a fee. He was chair of the guideline development group that 
produced the 2009 NICE back pain guidelines. He is chief investigator or co-investigator on 
multiple previous and current research grants from the UK National Institute for Health 
Research, Arthritis Research UK and is a co-investigator on grants funded by Arthritis 
Australia and Australian NHMRC. He has completed trials of manual therapy, group exercise, 
and a cognitive behavioural approach as treatments for low back pain. He has received 
travel and subsistence to attend meeting by the EU Joint Research Centre. He is a director 
and shareholder of Clinvivo Ltd that provides electronic data collection for health services 
research. He is an editor of the NIHR journal series for which he receives a fee. He has 
published multiple papers on low back pain some of which may be referenced in the series. 
Maurits van Tulder is chief investigator, or co-investigator on multiple previous and current 
research grants from government research agencies in the Netherlands (ZONMW; the Dutch 
Health Insurance Council) and Australia (NMHRC). His research has also received funding 
from professional organisations (eg, the Royal Dutch Association for Physiotherapy; the 
Netherlands National Chiropractic Association and the European Chiropractic Union). His 
travel expenses have been covered by the organizing professional organizations when he 
has been an invited speaker at conferences. He has received honoraria for reviewing grant 
proposals from the Swedish Medical Research Council and VINNOVA (Sweden’s innovation 
27 
agency). He has not received any honoraria or travel expenses from the industry. Prof van 
Tulder was chairman of the Netherlands National Multidisciplinary Guideline on Low Back 
Pain. He has published multiple papers on low back pain some of which may be referenced 
in the series. 
Anthony Woolf has been chief investigator or co-investigator on projects to identify burden 
of musculoskeletal conditions and to develop strategies for their control. He has been an 
expert advisor to the World Health Organisation (WHO). He is chair of the Global Alliance 
for Musculoskeletal Health. The European Community, professional bodies and research 
agencies have supported his work. Professional bodies or organisers of scientific meetings 
have supported his travel expenses. He has not received any funding from the private 
sector. 
 Acknowledgements 
There were no sources of funding for this paper. RB is supported by an Australian National 
Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) Senior Principal Research Fellowship. 
28 
References 
1 Vos T, et al. Global, regional, and national incidence, prevalence, and years lived with 
disability for 310 diseases and injuries, 1990-2015: a systematic analysis for the 
Global Burden of Disease Study 2015. Lancet 2016; 388: 1545-602. 
2 Hartvingsen J, Hoy D, Smeets R, Ferreira M, Louw Q, Pransky G, Kongsted A, Hancock 
M, Karppinen J, Genevay S, Sieper J, Underwood M for the Lancet Low Back Pain 
Series Working Group. Low back pain: Time to start paying attention? Lancet 201x; 
xxx: xxxx-xxx. 
3 Foster NE, Koes B, Chou R, Peul W, Turner JA, Cohen SP, Cherkin D, Anema JR, Gross 
DP, Fritz J, Ferreira P, Maher C, for the Lancet Low Back Pain Series Working Group. 
Best evidence management of low back pain and the evidence-practice gap. Lancet 
201x; xxx: xxxx-xxx. 
4 MacNeela P, Doyle C, O'Gorman D, Ruane N, McGuire BE. Experiences of chronic low 
back pain: a meta-ethnography of qualitative research. Health Psychol Rev 2015; 9: 
63–82. 
5 Schofield DJ, Callander EJ, Shrestha RN, Percival R, Kelly SJ, Passey ME. Labor force 
participation and the influence of having back problems on income poverty in 
Australia. Spine 2012; 37: 1156–63. 
6 Steffens D, Maher CG, Pereira LS, et al. Prevention of low back pain: A systematic 
Review and meta-analysis. JAMA Intern Med 2016; 176: 199–208. 
7 Igwesi-Chidobe CN, Kitchen S, Sorinola IO, Godfrey EL. "A life of living death": the 
experiences of people living with chronic low back pain in rural Nigeria. Disabil 
Rehabil 2016; 39 :779–790. 
29 
8 Lin IB, O'Sullivan PB, Coffin JA, Mak DB, Toussaint S, Straker LM. Disabling chronic 
low back pain as an iatrogenic disorder: a qualitative study in Aboriginal Australians. 
BMJ Open 2013; 3; e002654. 
9 Bui Q, Doescher M, Takeuchi D, Taylor V. Immigration, acculturation and chronic 
back and neck problems among Latino-Americans. J Immigr Minor Health 2011; 13: 
194–201. 
10 Case A, Deaton A. Rising morbidity and mortality in midlife among white non- 
Hispanic Americans in the 21st century. Proc Nat Acad Sci 2015; 112: 15078–83. 
11 Juch JNS, Maas ET, Ostelo RWJG, Groeneweg JG, Kallewaard JW, Koes BW, Verhagen 
AP, van Dongen JM, Huygen FJPM, van Tulder MW. Effect of radiofrequency 
denervation on pain intensity among patients with chronic low back pain: the MINT 
randomized clinical trials. JAMA 2017; 318: 68-81. 
12 Huber M, van Vliet M, Giezenberg M, et al. Towards a ‘patient-centred’ 
operationalisation of the new dynamic concept of health: a mixed methods study. 
BMJ Open 2016; 5: e010091. 
13 Buchbinder R, Jolley D, Wyatt M. Population based intervention to change back pain 
beliefs and disability: three part evaluation. BMJ 2001; 322: 1516–20. 
14 Loisel P, Lemaire J, Poitras S, et al. Cost-benefit and cost-effectiveness analysis of a 
disability prevention model for back pain management: a six year follow up study. 
Occup Environ Med 2002; 59: 807–15. 
15 Blyth FM, March LM, Nicholas MK, Cousins MJ. Self-management of chronic pain: a 
population-based study. Pain 2005; 113: 285–93. 
16 Werner EL, Lærum E, Wormgoor MEA, Lindh E, Indahl A. Peer support in an 
occupational setting preventing LBP-related sick leave. Occup Med 2007; 57: 590–95. 
30 
17 Linton SJ, Boersman K, Traczyk M, Shaw W, Nicholas M. Early workplace 
communication and problem solving to prevent back disability: Results of a 
randomized controlled trial among high-risk workers and their supervisors. J Occup 
Rehabil 2016; 26: 150–9. 
 18 Birhan W, Giday M, Teklehaymanot T. The contribution of traditional healers’ clinics 
to public health care system in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia: a cross-sectional study. J 
Ethnobiol Ethnomed 2011; 7: 39. 
19 Hoy D, Geere JA, Davatchi F, Meggitt B, Barrero LH. A time for action: Opportunities 
for preventing the growing burden and disability from musculoskeletal conditions in 
low- and middle-income countries. Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol 2014; 28: 377-93. 
20 da Cunha Menezes Costa L, Koes BW, Pransky G, Borkan J, Maher CM, Smeets RJ. 
Primary care research priorities in low back pain: an update. Spine 2013; 38: 148-56. 
31 
Panel 1: Call for actions for meeting the political, public health, health care and research 
challenges to preventing disabling low back pain 
Actions to meet the political challenge of a lack of recognition of the impact and burden of 
back pain by international and 
national policy makers 
Call on the World Health Organisation to put disabling low back pain on the target list for all nations and 
increase attention on 
(i) the burden it causes (ii) the need to avoid excessively medical solutions and (iii) the need to integrate low 
back pain into all 
chronic disease initiatives 
Call on international and national political, medical and social policy leaders to adequately fund public health 
strategies 
focused on preventing low back pain from interfering with life, ensuring inclusion of disadvantaged and 
culturally diverse 
populations 
Call on national and international funding agencies to make low back pain research a global health priority in 
recognition of its 
impact on people’s lives in low-, middle-, and high-income countries 
Actions to meet the public health challenge of preventing the onset and persistence of the 
disability associated with low back 
32 
pain 
Change the priorities: 
o Prioritise low back pain, together with other musculoskeletal conditions, as a public health problem 
o Develop and implement positive strategies for primary prevention of disabling low back pain that are 
integrated with 
strategies for preventing other chronic conditions (physical activity, maintenance of healthy weight, mental 
health) 
o Develop and implement strategies to address modifiable risk factors for disabling low back pain at all levels 
(society, 
workplace, health professionals, individuals) 
Change systems and change practice 
o Integrate back pain care with public health initiatives providing credible advice that people who develop 
low back pain 
should stay active and remain working and people with low back pain should be supported in early return to 
work 
o Develop and implement strategies to ensure early identification and adequate education of low back pain 
patients at 
risk for persistence and disability 
o Promote a healthy lifestyle and address common comorbidities, in patients with persistent low back pain. 
Tackle social 
determinants of disability. Incentivise work through change and adaptation of the workplace and the job, and 
change 
33 
worker disability policies which do not improve/promote/support return to work 
o Consider provision of financial incentives to resume appropriate work without risk of loss of benefits for 
people who 
are off work due to low back pain 
 o Promote active multidisciplinary rehabilitation to support return-to-work 
Actions to meet the health care challenge of continued emphasis on a biomedical and 
fragmented model of care 
Change culture 
o Develop interventions to address misconceptions about low back pain among health professionals, patients, 
the media 
and the general public 
o Promote ‘living well’ with low back pain: person-centred care focusing on self-management and healthy 
lifestyles as a 
means of restoring and maintaining function and optimising participation 
o Investigate the effectiveness and place of traditional practices for reducing low back pain disability in low- 
and middleincome 
countries 
Change clinician behaviour 
34 
o Invest in implementation research to address evidence-practice gaps across all relevant health care 
providers 
o Identify and implement effective behaviour change and training interventions to improve and integrate 
care 
o Deliver a workforce fit-for-purpose which includes targeted training of health care professionals and others 
with the 
right competencies and resolve to deliver evidence-based care 
o Build consensus across clinical disciplines, patient groups and journal editors for shared guidelines of care 
that are 
straightforward and non-denominational 
Change systems 
o Develop clear care pathways, referral, funding and information technology systems to enable people to see 
the right 
person for delivery of the right treatment at the right time, while precluding use of alternative inappropriate 
pathways 
o Develop consistent evidence-based clinical care standards and key indicators integrated across healthcare 
systems and 
settings 
o Develop and implement cost-effective strategies that provide access to effective care in low- and middle-
income 
countries for all 
Tackle vested interests 
35 
o Government, insurers and commissioners should consider tackling conflicts of interest through regulation 
and 
contracts, including not paying for inappropriate tests and for unnecessary, ineffective and harmful treatments 
o Existing and new tests and procedures for low back pain should be regulated in the same way as drugs; 
there should 
be evidence that they are safe, effective and cost-effective before they get reimbursed within public health 
care 
systems 
o Introduce incentives for effective and efficient care and disincentives for continued use of ineffective and 
potentially 
harmful approaches 
36 
Panel 2: What should well-informed consumers, patients and clinicians know about low 
back pain? 
Bed rest can delay recovery from back pain 
Early return to normal activity and work speeds recovery 
Pain does not always equal injury, especially long-term pain 
It isn’t necessary to be pain-free to have a healthy, productive life; usually it is best to 
 continue or resume activity before the pain is gone 
For those who find it difficult to resume activity, there are people and programmes of 
care in health centres and workplaces to help 
Only a small number of people will have an identifiable cause for their back pain that 
calls for use of a specific treatment 
Many people should be encouraged to self-manage—and avoid unnecessary 
engagement with health care, including diagnosis and treatment 
Because the experience of pain has effects on both body and mind, treatments targeted 
at both have greater potential for reducing pain and disability than medical care alone 
37 
Panel 3: What should well-informed policy-makers know about low back pain? 
Back pain and related disability are exorbitantly expensive problems that are difficult to 
solve; they haven’t received adequate attention from policy makers 
Governments can play a key role in resolving some aspects of low back pain related 
problems by altering policies that incentivise work absence, inactivity and work 
disability, and that support ineffective care 
Ineffective, low-value care should be eliminated 
Increased investment in implementation research could uncover why evidence is not 
being taken up in practice and identify and test strategies to ensure rapid uptake of 
evidence into clinical care 
Investment in promoting a healthy lifestyle will reduce low back pain disability and costs 
Research that leads to improved management and prevention of low back pain across 
low-, middle- and high-income countries is an urgent priority 
To identify optimal approaches for the majority of the world’s population, there is a 
need to test suitably considered strategies for the local context in low- and middleincome 
societies 
38 
Panel 4: Major evidence gaps about low back pain and how to address them 
Evidence gap Addressing the gap 
Population burden 
Low back pain in older age 
groups 
Low back pain in low- and 
middle-income countries 
Population surveys and registries 
Combine datasets for new knowledge without additional cost 
Develop informed perspective on low back pain impact in low and middle income 
countries 
Population monitoring 
Lack of standard low back pain 
definition 
Lack of universal patientrelevant 
outcome measures in 
Agree on and apply a standard definition and new ‘back health’ measure for 
inclusion in national surveys and health care databases that can be compared 
across countries. 
Develop indicators and population surveillance to monitor impact of population 
strategies 
39 
routine health care 
Health care use (e.g. opioids, 
imaging) 
Occupational data 
Identification of effective and cost-effective treatments for low back pain 
Mechanisms and phenotypes 
of persistent disabling low back 
 pain to drive new interventions 
Paucity of highly effective and 
cost-effective interventions for 
low back pain 
Lack of trials of complex 
interventions and including 
complex and older patients 
Commission research on these topics 
o Pathophysiology and prognosis of different low back pain phenotypes 
including trajectories of low back pain from childhood through the life 
course 
o Mechanisms of persistent low back pain 
o Development of theories to guide research integrating pain mechanisms, 
patient perceptions and behaviours, and social determinants of persistent 
low back pain 
Realignment of the research agenda to restrict and focus research funding to 
40 
Need for new technologies to 
deliver interventions and to 
collect patient data 
important questions that will change practice and/or improve patient-relevant 
outcomes 
Align and combine research questions, priorities and funding, with other health 
conditions to avoid duplication, increase efficiency, and improve the low back pain 
share of research funding; fund more innovations that exist entirely outside of 
health care 
Investigate innovative approaches that combine primary care with occupational 
rehabilitation and multidisciplinary interventions, such as placing musculoskeletal 
therapists as the gatekeepers for all care of low back pain patients and providing 
systems-level support to ensure safe and successful implementation 
Improve the evidence base for individualised and stratified care for people with low 
back pain 
Develop or improve the evidence base for effective prevention of low back pain 
Develop the evidence base for effective management of low back pain in older 
41 
adults and children 
Implementation of evidence into practice 
Paucity of knowledge about 
how best to improve the 
uptake of low back pain 
evidence into practice 
Realignment of the research agenda to restrict and focus research funding to 
investigate better strategies for implementing what is already known into practice 
Fund evidence syntheses and policy research 
Develop or improve the evidence base for effective prevention of low back pain, 
dysfunction of prolonged disability due to low back pain, and seeking of ineffective 
care 
Develop the evidence base for effective management of low back pain outside of 
health care 
Identification of effective and cost-effective population-based strategies to reduce low back 
pain burden 
Gap in research on how to shift Develop and test strategies designed to address popular misconceptions 
about low 
42 
cultural beliefs about common 
low back pain 
 Lack of integrated research 
programme into prevention of 
long-term disabling conditions 
Lack of trials investigating 
population-level social and 
psychological interventions to 
prevent disability 
How to avoid mistakes of highincome 
countries in low- and 
middle-income countries 
back pain 
Realign the research agenda to focus research funding on important questions that 
will tackle the rising prevalence and burden of disabling low back pain 
Develop or improve the evidence base for low back pain population-based social 
strategies to reduce disability 
Develop or improve the evidence base for promotion of wellbeing despite chronic 
low back pain 
Determine an agenda for research as a priority in low and middle income countries 
Foster links between low-, middle- and high-income countries among policy-makers 
and researchers to allow all countries to benefit from the successes and failures of 
attempts to tackle the burden of low back pain in different settings 
43 
Panel 5: Indicators that could be used globally for surveillance and monitoring to 
determine whether or not this call to action is yielding positive results 
Number of people with disabling low back pain and their characteristics 
Number of people unable to do activities of daily living because of low back pain 
Number of people not working (whether paid or unpaid) because of chronic low back 
pain 
Number of people unable to participate in usual sport and leisure activities because of 
chronic low back pain 
Number and characteristics of people with low back pain who don’t have any of the 
above problems 
Health care utilization among people with chronic low back pain 
o Number of people undergoing imaging for acute and persisting low back pain 
and the imaging that they receive 
o Number of people with chronic low back pain prescribed/taking opioid 
medication and the duration of use 
o Number of people undergoing spinal injections, the indications for these 
injections, and the injections that they receive 
o Number of people undergoing spinal surgery and other invasive interventions, 
the indications for these interventions, and the specific interventions that they 
receive 
Regular national surveys to determine whether there is a change in population 
knowledge and behaviour over time 
