 Early cancer diagnoses through BRCA1/2 screening of
unselected adult biobank participants
Adam H. Buchanan, MS, MPH1,2, Kandamurugu Manickam, MD, MPH1,2,
Michelle N. Meyer, PhD, JD1,3, Jennifer K. Wagner, JD, PhD1,3, Miranda L.G. Hallquist, MSc1,2,
Janet L. Williams, MS1,2, Alanna Kulchak Rahm, PhD, MS1,2, Marc S. Williams, MD1,2,
Zong-Ming E. Chen, MD, PhD1,4, Chaitali K. Shah, MD1,5, Tullika K. Garg, MD, MPH1,6,
Amanda L. Lazzeri, BS1,2, Marci L.B. Schwartz, ScM1,2, D’Andra M. Lindbuchler, MSN1,2,
Audrey L. Fan, MS1,2, Rosemary Leeming, MD, MHCM1,7, Pedro O. Servano III, MD1,8,
Ashlee L. Smith, DO1,9, Victor G. Vogel, MD, MHS1,10, Noura S. Abul-Husn, MD, PhD11,
Frederick E. Dewey, MD11, Matthew S. Lebo, PhD12, Heather M. Mason-Suares, PhD12,
Marylyn D. Ritchie, PhD1,13, F. Daniel Davis, PhD1,3, David J. Carey, PhD1,14,
David T. Feinberg, MD, MBA1,15, W. Andrew Faucett, MS1,2, David H. Ledbetter, PhD1,2 and
Michael F. Murray, MD1,2
Purpose: The clinical utility of screening unselected individuals for
pathogenic BRCA1/2 variants has not been established. Data on
cancer risk management behaviors and diagnoses of BRCA1/2-
associated cancers can help inform assessments of clinical utility.
Methods: Whole-exome sequences of participants in the MyCode
Community Health Initiative were reviewed for pathogenic/likely
pathogenic BRCA1/2 variants. Clinically confirmed variants were
disclosed to patient–participants and their clinicians. We queried
patient–participants’
electronic
health
records
for
BRCA1/2-
associated cancer diagnoses and risk management that occurred
within 12 months after results disclosure, and calculated the
percentage of patient–participants of eligible age who had begun
risk management.
Results: Thirty-seven MyCode patient–participants were unaware of
their pathogenic/likely pathogenic BRCA1/2 variant, had not had a
BRCA1/2-associated cancer, and had 12 months of follow-up. Of the
33 who were of an age to begin BRCA1/2-associated risk manage-
ment, 26 (79%) had performed at least one such procedure. Three
were diagnosed with an early-stage, BRCA1/2-associated cancer—
including a stage 1C fallopian tube cancer—via these procedures.
Conclusion: Screening for pathogenic BRCA1/2 variants among
unselected individuals can lead to occult cancer detection shortly
after disclosure. Comprehensive outcomes data generated within our
learning
healthcare
system
will
aid
in
determining
whether
population-wide BRCA1/2 genomic screening programs offer clinical
utility.
Genet Med advance online publication 26 October 2017
Key Words: BRCA1; BRCA2; biobank; Hereditary Breast and
Ovarian Cancer Syndrome; Whole Exome sequencing
INTRODUCTION
The clinical utility of screening unselected individuals for
pathogenic BRCA1/2 variants has not been established.
Proponents point to (i) the well-established potential for
reducing morbidity and mortality in individuals found to have
a pathogenic BRCA1/2 variant1 and (ii) the significant
proportion of the population with a cancer family history
that would not prompt clinical attention.2 Others caution that
implementing population BRCA1/2 screening is premature
without
evidence
of
clinical
utility
among
unselected
individuals.3 BRCA1/2-associated morbidity and mortality
data4 are derived from individuals identified because of a
personal or family history that raised suspicion of a BRCA1/2
mutation (i.e., indication-based testing). If these benefits do
not emerge from genomic screening of unselected individuals,
the associated medical, psychosocial, and financial costs of
surveillance and prophylactic surgery might not be justified.3
Determining the clinical utility of a BRCA1/2 screening
program in unselected individuals requires longitudinal data
on (i) prevalence and penetrance of pathogenic BRCA1/2
1Geisinger Health System, Danville, Pennsylvania, USA; 2Genomic Medicine Institute, Geisinger Health System, Danville, Pennsylvania, USA; 3Center for Translational Bioethics
and Health Care Policy, Geisinger Health System, Danville, Pennsylvania, USA; 4Laboratory Medicine, Geisinger Health System, Danville, Pennsylvania, USA; 5Radiology, Geisinger
Health System, Danville, Pennsylvania, USA; 6Department of Urology, Geisinger Health System, Danville, Pennsylvania, USA; 7General Surgery, Geisinger Health System, Danville,
Pennsylvania, USA; 8Family Medicine, Geisinger Health System, Danville, Pennsylvania, USA; 9Women's Health, Geisinger Health System, Danville, Pennsylvania, USA;
10Hematology & Oncology, Geisinger Health System, Danville, Pennsylvania, USA; 11Regeneron Genetics Center, Tarrytown, New York, USA; 12Laboratory for Molecular Medicine,
Partners HealthCare Personalized Medicine, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA; 13Biomedical and Translational Informatics, Geisinger Health System, Danville, Pennsylvania, USA;
14Department of Molecular and Functional Genomics, Geisinger Health System, Danville, Pennsylvania, USA; 15Office of the Chief Executive Officer, Geisinger Health System,
Danville, Pennsylvania, USA. Correspondence: Adam H. Buchanan (ahbuchanan@geisinger.edu)
Submitted 10 February 2017; accepted 12 July 2017; advance online publication 26 October 2017. doi:10.1038/gim.2017.145
554
Volume 20 | Number 5 | May 2018 | GENETICS in MEDICINE
BRIEF REPORT
Official journal of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics
 variants in diverse, unselected populations; (ii) impact of risk
management
on
cancer
morbidity
and
mortality;
(iii)
adherence to recommended risk management in the absence
of compelling family cancer history; (iv) costs associated with
risk management procedures; and (v) psychological outcomes
of receiving a pathogenic BRCA variant via the screening
program.3 Here we report two early measures of the impact of
a BRCA1/2 screening program among individuals previously
unaware that they were carrying a pathogenic variant–risk-
management initiation and cancer diagnoses prompted by
results disclosure.
This assessment was performed through the Geisinger
Health System (GHS) MyCode Community Health Initiative
(hereafter “MyCode”), a research project in which partici-
pants’ whole exome sequences are reviewed for pathogenic
and likely pathogenic variants in 76 genes (including
BRCA1/2 and 54 genes originally proposed by the American
College of Medical Genetics and Genomics5) associated with
27 medically actionable conditions. Clinically confirmed
variants are disclosed to patient–participants and their
clinicians, who are supported in integrating results into care.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
MyCode enrollment process and targeted screening for
genomic findings
GHS established MyCode in 2007 as a discovery research
initiative enabled by a biobank. Recruitment occurs in
primary-care and specialty clinics throughout GHS without
regard to underlying disease or cancer risk, and without
specific interest in genomic testing. In 2014 GHS established a
research
collaboration
with
Regeneron
Genetics
Center
(RGC) that includes conducting whole-exome sequencing in
MyCode participants and linking sequence data to partici-
pants’ electronic health record (EHR) data. After significant
engagement with patient–partners, ethicists, and clinicians,
GHS developed an institutional review board–approved
protocol (GenomeFIRST) to assess MyCode participants’
exomes
for medically actionable findings in 76 genes
(including BRCA1/2), confirm results in a Clinical Laboratory
Improvement
Amendments–certified
clinical
diagnostic
laboratory (Laboratory for Molecular Medicine, LMM),
return clinically confirmed results to patient–participants
and clinicians, initiate guidelines-based risk assessment and
management, and facilitate cascade testing for at-risk family
members.6
Whole-exome sequencing and variant classification
Whole-exome sequencing is performed at RGC as described
elsewhere.7 Independent teams at GHS, RGC, and the LMM
perform bioinformatics reviews of BRCA1/2 variant call files
and agree to consensus classification as pathogenic or likely
pathogenic according
to
American College
of
Medical
Genetics and Genomics criteria.8 An independent DNA
sample is sent to the LMM for Sanger confirmation of the
variants. After this confirmation the LMM sends a clinical
laboratory report to the Geisinger Clinical Genomics team.
Clinical program for returning genomic results
In the cases described in this brief report, the Geisinger
Clinical Genomics team (genetic counselors, medical geneti-
cists, a nurse practitioner, and administrative staff) received
the clinical laboratory report of the pathogenic variant and
initiated a disclosure and follow-up protocol. After Clinical
Genomics notified the primary-care physician (PCP) and
patient–participant, Geisinger’s multidisciplinary Inherited
Risk Breast Clinic (genetic counselor, breast surgeon, physi-
cian assistant, breast oncologist, and clinical psychologist),
Clinical Genomics, and PCPs coordinated medical evaluation9
and cancer risk management. Risk management recommen-
dations were based on National Comprehensive Cancer
Network guidelines (which include serial sectioning of fallo-
pian tubes following risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomy,
and prostate cancer surveillance for men with a pathogenic
BRCA2 variant).10
Tracking clinical outcomes
The Clinical Genomics team defined outcomes relevant to
recommended risk management and cancer diagnoses and
tracked them via EHR review. These standardized outcomes
(including dates and results of BRCA1/2-associated surveil-
lance and prophylactic surgery and diagnoses of BRCA1/2-
associated cancers) were aggregated in a database maintained
for all participants with a disclosed result. We chose to assess
outcomes at 12 months after disclosure to allow sufficient
time for patient–participants to have undergone evaluation
and to initiate risk management. For females, mammogram,
breast magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), risk-reducing
mastectomy, risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomy, CA125
testing, and transvaginal ultrasound were considered to be
BRCA1/2-associated, per National Comprehensive Cancer
Network guidelines.10 For males, clinical breast exam and
prostate-specific antigen (PSA) testing were considered to be
BRCA1/2-associated. We considered melanoma and breast,
ovarian, prostate, and pancreatic cancers to be BRCA1/2-
associated.
RESULTS
As of 1 April 2017, 55 MyCode participants and their
PCPs had been notified of a clinically confirmed pathogenic/
likely pathogenic BRCA1/2 variant and followed for at least
12 months. Seven of these were already aware of their
BRCA1/2 variant via clinical testing. An additional 11 had a
personal history of BRCA1/2-associated cancer. The remain-
ing 37 patient–participants included 17 females (46%)
and had a median age of 60 years (mean 56.1 years, range
26–87 years).
Of the 33 patient–participants old enough to perform
BRCA1/2-associated risk management, 26 (79%, 15 females,
11 males) had performed at least one such behavior. Three of
these patient-participants were diagnosed via these proce-
dures with an early-stage, BRCA1/2-associated cancer, a
subclinical phenotype revealed through evaluation.9
Early BRCA1/2-associated cancers in unselected individuals | BUCHANAN et al
BRIEF REPORT
GENETICS in MEDICINE | Volume 20 | Number 5 | May 2018
555
 The first patient–participant was a 56-year-old woman with
a pathogenic BRCA1 variant (ClinVar variation ID 125513).
Her medical history was positive for Crohn’s disease and she
had had a basal cell carcinoma removed in her 40s, but
the history was otherwise negative for cancer. EHR-docu-
mented family history (Figure 1a) did not meet guidelines
for referral to genetic counseling.10 Her most recent screen-
ing mammogram, made at age 52, was normal. Following
disclosure she had a normal mammogram, breast MRI, CA125
testing, pelvic ultrasound, and a risk-reducing salpingo-
oophorectomy (Figure 2). Final pathology on a 1.4 cm mass
first found intraoperatively during the risk-reducing salpingo-
oophorectomy
revealed
a
high-grade,
serous
carcinoma
with stromal invasion and a focal serous tubal intraepithelial
CASE 1
CASE 2
BRCA1 c. 1812delA (p.Ala605Hisfs)
BRCA1 c.5722_5723delCT (p.Leu1908Argfs)
CASE 3
BRCA2 c.7069_7070delCT (p.Leu2357Valfs)
d. 48, CAD
d. 37
CAD
55 yrs old
57 yrs old
56 yrs old
LEGEND
LEGEND
LEGEND
Coronary artery
disease
Unknown CA
a
b
c
Breast CA
CAD
BRCA2 variant +
Colon CA
Prostate CA
Pancreatic CA
BRCA2 variant +
Leukemia
CAD
BRCA1 variant +
Coronary artery
disease
Skin CA
(non melanoma)
Figure 1 Patient-participants’ family cancer histories. (a–c) Patient-participants’ family cancer histories, as documented in electronic health records prior
to BRCA1/2 results disclosure.
Case 1:
ovarian
cancer
Disclosure
Disclosure
Disclosure
2 months
4 months
6 months
Disclosure
Clinical
genomics
Clinical
genomics
Mammogram
Mammogram
Breast MRI
Breast MRI
PSA
PSA
RRSO scheduled,
cancelled
Inherited risk
breast clinic
Breast
biopsy
Urology
scheduled,
canceled
Urology
consult
Prostate biopsy
Bilateral
mastectomies
Inherited risk
breast clinic
Inherited risk
breast clinic
Gyn-oncology
consult
RRSO
Case 2:
breast
cancer
Case 3:
prostate
cancer
Legend:
Appointments
Normal screenings and procedures
Cancer diagnosis
Abnormal screen
Figure 2 Timeline of BRCA1/2 variant disclosure, medical evaluation, risk management, and diagnostic workup (cases 1–3). RRSO, risk-reducing
salpingo-oophorectomy; PSA, prostate-specific antigen.
BRIEF REPORT
BUCHANAN et al | Early BRCA1/2-associated cancers in unselected individuals
556
Volume 20 | Number 5 | May 2018 | GENETICS in MEDICINE
 carcinoma in the right fallopian tube (Supplementary Figure
1a and b online). Peritoneal washes demonstrated malignant
cells, indicating stage 1C, which has a 5-year survival of 85%.11
The second patient–participant was a 57-year-old woman
with a pathogenic BRCA2 variant (ClinVar Variation ID
9320). Past medical history was significant for a bilateral
salpingo-oophorectomy and a hysterectomy at age 42 for
fibroids but was negative for cancer. EHR-documented family
history (Figure 1b) was notable for a brother who died of
pancreatic cancer at 37 and two relatives with colon cancer,
but she did not meet referral guidelines for hereditary breast
cancer risk.10 Her most recent screening mammogram, at age
53, was normal. Following results disclosure, breast MRI
showed a nonmass enhancement in the left breast; subse-
quent left diagnostic mammogram and targeted second-
look ultrasound in the upper outer quadrant were normal
(Figure 2; Supplementary Figure 1c–f). MRI-guided biopsy
revealed ductal carcinoma in situ (Supplementary Figure 1g).
The
patient–participant
underwent bilateral mastectomy
and breast reconstruction. Final pathology showed ductal
carcinoma in situ measuring 1.2 cm in its greatest dimension,
grade 2 to 3, with negative sentinel lymph nodes—a stage 0
cancer associated with 20-year survival of 97%.12
The third patient–participant was a 55-year-old man with
a pathogenic BRCA2 variant (ClinVar Variation ID 38082)
and no personal history of cancer. EHR-documented family
history (Figure 1c) did not meet genetic counseling referral
guidelines.10 Past medical history was significant for morbid
obesity,
status
post
Roux-en-Y
gastric
bypass
surgery.
Additionally, he had two mildly elevated PSA tests in 2007
(3.27 ng/ml—normal
is
less
than
3.1 ng/ml)
and
2008
(3.24 ng/ml) and a markedly elevated PSA test in 2015
(16.60 ng/ml). He was referred to urology after the latter
elevated PSA test but did not attend an appointment.
Disclosure of his BRCA2 variant prompted his PCP to order
another PSA test (eight months after the previous test), which
was again markedly elevated, at 19.12 ng/ml (Figure 2). Clinical
stage, based on PSA and normal digital rectal exam, was cT1c.
A prostate biopsy revealed adenocarcinoma in 5/12 cores
(Gleason score 4 + 4 = 8 in one core, 4 + 3 = 7 in four other
cores; Supplementary Figure 1h). Computed tomography of
abdomen/pelvis and bone scans were negative for metastases.
DISCUSSION
Three of 37 unselected individuals with a pathogenic
BRCA1/2 variant detected through a genomic screening pro-
gram were found to have an early-stage cancer via their initial
post-disclosure evaluations and risk management procedures.
This is consistent with rates of occult cancer detection upon
surveillance and prophylactic surgery in individuals whose
BRCA1/2 mutation was identified via family history.13,14
These cancers were found in individuals without compelling
family history documented in the EHR, adding support to the
view that genomic screening programs for BRCA1/2 variants
can identify at-risk individuals who otherwise would not have
come to medical attention.2 By relying on genotypic detection
of risk rather than on family history, the BRCA1/2 screening
approach focuses on individuals who may derive the greatest
benefit from identification of risk.
Finding cancer early is not universally beneficial, as
evidenced by concerns about over-diagnosis of cancer and
the inability of screening modalities such as PSA testing to
distinguish indolent from aggressive cancers.15,16 Among
these three cases, the benefit of early detection is clearest in
the patient–participant with an early-stage diagnosis of
ovarian cancer and a precursor lesion, which are difficult to
screen for effectively.17 Owing in part to these screening
limitations, ovarian cancer is detected at a metastatic stage in
60% of cases, with associated 5-year survival of 29%.11
The other two patient–participants might have benefited
from genomic screening and subsequent detection of an
early cancer, as well. In the patient–participant with ductal
carcinoma in situ, the BRCA2 result led to performing breast
MRI per the evidence-based guideline10—a test that was
otherwise not indicated. This facilitated detection of a
mammographically occult, early-stage cancer. That the ductal
carcinoma
in
situ
was
intermediate-
to
high-grade
is
significant, as there is evidence of survival benefit from
surgical treatment in such cases.18 In the prostate cancer case,
the patient–participant’s PCP used the BRCA1/2 variant
to make a risk-based recommendation of a screening test
(PSA) of controversial value to the general population.15 As
the patient–participant informed the Clinical Genomics team,
knowledge of the BRCA2 variant motivated him to follow up
an elevated PSA result, which he had not done when prior
PSA tests had been elevated. This follow-up led to diagnosis of
an aggressive, Gleason 8 prostate cancer.
Our early data on performance of recommended cancer risk
management—with 79% of eligible patient–participants hav-
ing performed some risk management—indicate that genoty-
pically detected variant carriers might place a similar value on
risk management as their unaffected counterparts detected via
family history.19 The degree to which occult cancer detection
and performance of recommended risk management will be
replicated in other populations will be influenced by a wide
variety of factors, including age, racial and ethnic diversity,
and length of follow-up.
Those considering the implementation of BRCA1/2 screen-
ing programs should note two system factors that facilitated
risk management performance and cancer diagnoses and
undergird the genomic screening initiative: (i) an integrated
health-care system capable of managing cases from genome-
scale testing through evaluation and risk management and (ii)
a learning health-care system committed to studying the
outcomes of clinical interventions.20 A system that provides
only surveillance and prophylactic surgery for individuals
with genomic results cannot meaningfully contribute to
evidence-based policy about the appropriateness of screening
unselected individuals for genomic findings. In a learning
health-care system, research and other learning activities are
seamlessly integrated with standard and innovative care, all of
which continuously inform one another. MyCode is a
Early BRCA1/2-associated cancers in unselected individuals | BUCHANAN et al
BRIEF REPORT
GENETICS in MEDICINE | Volume 20 | Number 5 | May 2018
557
 traditional genomic discovery research project, but actionable
genomic results are returned to patient–participants who,
supported by their clinicians, undergo traditional surveillance
and prophylactic surgery. Effects on patient–participants and
the health system of disclosing variants discovered via a
genomic screening program (a form of innovative care) are
studied (a learning activity) so that outcomes data can more
readily inform clinical policies at our institution and beyond.
Through this learning health-care system approach, we can
learn whether returning BRCA1/2 findings to unselected
individuals offers clinical utility.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the
paper at http://www.nature.com/gim
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The genomic screening program described here was funded by
institutional support from GHS and grants from the Horace W.
Goldsmith Foundation, the Mericle Foundation, the Robert Wood
Johnson Foundation, and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania—
Department of Community and Economic Development. These
funders had no role in study design, collection or analysis of data,
or the decision to publish. We are grateful to the more than
150,000 MyCode participants for their participation in this
research and, in particular, to the three patient–participants
described here for their willingness to share their information. We
thank the MyCode leadership, including Carroll Flansburg and
Ann Mooney, and the many MyCode consenters, for their
thorough patient engagement. We are grateful for the rigor and
responsiveness exhibited by bioinformatics colleagues at the
Laboratory for Molecular Medicine, particularly Christina Austin-
Tse and Heidi Rehm, and at GHS, particularly Raghu Metpally and
Thomas Person. Finally, we thank the staff of Geisinger Clinical
Genomics and the Inherited Risk Breast Clinic for helping to
coordinate care for individuals with a genomic result.
DISCLOSURE
The authors declare no conflict of interest as relates to the
content in this article.
REFERENCES
1.
CDC. Public Health Genomics—Genomic Tests and Family History by
Levels of Evidence. 2014. https://www.cdc.gov/genomics/implementation/
toolkit/tier1.htm. Accessed 28 April 2015.
2.
King MC, Levy-Lahad E, Lahad A. Population-based screening for BRCA1
and BRCA2: 2014 Lasker Award. JAMA 2014;312:1091–1092.
3.
Foulkes WD, Knoppers BM, Turnbull C. Population genetic testing for
cancer susceptibility: founder mutations to genomes. Nat Rev Clin Oncol
2016;13:41–54.
4.
Nelson HD, Pappas M, Zakher B, Mitchell JP, Okinaka-Hu L, Fu R. Risk
assessment, genetic counseling, and genetic testing for BRCA-related
cancer in women: a systematic review to update the U.S. Preventive
Services Task Force recommendation. Ann Intern Med. 2014;160:
255–266.
5.
Green RC, Berg JS, Grody WW, et al. ACMG recommendations for
reporting
of
incidental
findings
in
clinical
exome
and
genome
sequencing. Genet Med 2013;15:565–574.
6.
Carey DJ, Fetterolf SN, Davis FD, et al. The Geisinger MyCode community
health initiative: an electronic health record-linked biobank for precision
medicine research. Genet Med 2016;18:906–913.
7.
Dewey FE, Murray MF, Overton JD, et al. Distribution and clinical impact
of functional variants in 50,726 whole-exome sequences from the
DiscovEHR study. Science. 2016;354.
8.
Richards S, Aziz N, Bale S, et al. Standards and guidelines for the
interpretation of sequence variants: a joint consensus recommendation
of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics and the
Association for Molecular Pathology. Genet Med 2015;17:405–424.
9.
Murray MF. Your DNA is not your diagnosis: getting diagnoses right
following secondary genomic findings. Genet Med 2016;18:765–767.
10. NCCN. Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology—Genetic/Familial High-
Risk Assessment: Breast and Ovarian Version 2.2016. 2016. Accessed 21
October 2016.
11. Howlader N, Noone AM, Krapcho M, et al. SEER Cancer Statistics Review,
1975-2013. 2016; http://seer.cancer.gov/csr/1975_2013/. Accessed 21
October 2016.
12. Narod SA, Iqbal J, Giannakeas V, Sopik V, Sun P. Breast cancer mortality
after a diagnosis of ductal carcinoma in situ. JAMA Oncol. 2015;1:
888–896.
13. Finch AP, Lubinski J, Moller P, et al. Impact of oophorectomy on cancer
incidence and mortality in women with a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation.
J Clin Oncol. 2014;32:1547–1553.
14. Scheuer L, Kauff N, Robson M, et al. Outcome of preventive surgery and
screening for breast and ovarian cancer in BRCA mutation carriers. J Clin
Oncol. 2002;20:1260–1268.
15. Pinsky PF, Prorok PC, Kramer BS. Prostate cancer screening – a
perspective on the current state of the evidence. N Engl J Med. 2017;376:
1285–1289.
16. Hosseini A, Khoury AL, Esserman LJ. Precision surgery and avoiding over-
treatment. Eur J Surg Oncol. 2017;43:938–943.
17. Buys SS, Partridge E, Black A, et al. Effect of screening on ovarian cancer
mortality: the Prostate, Lung, Colorectal and Ovarian (PLCO) Cancer
Screening Randomized Controlled Trial. JAMA. 2011;305:2295–2303.
18. Sagara Y, Mallory MA, Wong S, et al. Survival benefit of breast surgery
for low-grade ductal carcinoma in situ: a population-based cohort study.
JAMA Surg 2015;150:739–745.
19. Buchanan AH, Voils CI, Schildkraut JM, et al. Adherence to recom-
mended risk management among unaffected women with a BRCA
mutation. J Genet Couns. 2017;26:79–92.
20. IOM. Genomics-Enabled Learning Health Care Systems: Gathering and
Using Genomic Information to Improve Patient Care and Research:
Workshop Summary. National Academies Press: Washington, DC, 2015.
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs
4.0
International License. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative
Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in the credit
line; if the material is not included under the Creative
Commonslicense,userswillneedtoobtainpermissionfrom
the license holder to reproduce the material. To view a copy
of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-nc-nd/4.0/
© The Author(s) 2018
BRIEF REPORT
BUCHANAN et al | Early BRCA1/2-associated cancers in unselected individuals
558
Volume 20 | Number 5 | May 2018 | GENETICS in MEDICINE
