 ARTICLE
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171385
1891
J. Exp. Med. 2018 Vol. 215 No. 7 1891–1912
Rockefeller University Press
Cellular dormancy and heterogeneity in cell cycle length provide important explanations for treatment failure after adjuvant 
therapy with S-phase cytotoxics in colorectal cancer (CRC), yet the molecular control of the dormant versus cycling state 
remains unknown. We sought to understand the molecular features of dormant CRC cells to facilitate rationale identification 
of compounds to target both dormant and cycling tumor cells. Unexpectedly, we demonstrate that dormant CRC cells are 
differentiated, yet retain clonogenic capacity. Mouse organoid drug screening identifies that itraconazole generates spheroid 
collapse and loss of dormancy. Human CRC cell dormancy and tumor growth can also be perturbed by itraconazole, which 
is found to inhibit Wnt signaling through noncanonical hedgehog signaling. Preclinical validation shows itraconazole to be 
effective in multiple assays through Wnt inhibition, causing both cycling and dormant cells to switch to global senescence. 
These data provide preclinical evidence to support an early phase trial of itraconazole in CRC.
Itraconazole targets cell cycle heterogeneity in 
colorectal cancer
Simon J.A. Buczacki1, Semiramis Popova1, Emma Biggs1, Chrysa Koukorava1, Jon Buzzelli3, Louis Vermeulen2, Lee Hazelwood1, Hayley Francies4, 
Mathew J. Garnett4, and Douglas J. Winton1
Rockefeller University Press
Introduction
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common cancer in the 
Western World. CRC is a heterogeneous disease and recent large 
scale molecular studies have identified clinically relevant over-
lapping subgroups that can be identified in primary tumors, pri-
mary cultures, xenografts, and traditional cell lines (De Sousa E 
Melo et al., 2013; Guinney et al., 2015; Linnekamp et al., 2018). 
This intertumoral heterogeneity is a major explanation for dif-
ferential chemotherapy responses and clinical progression. 
Although recent advances in oncological treatment have gen-
erated marked improvements for patients with CRC, many who 
receive adjuvant therapy ultimately die as a result of relapse with 
systemic disease. There are several explanations for tumor recur-
rence, including cellular dormancy or quiescence that allow can-
cer cells to persist and reenter the cell cycle after a latent period 
or therapy-induced stimulation. Across cancer types, cellular 
dormancy has been shown to represent an important hallmark 
of cancer cells that facilitates immune evasion and avoidance of 
targeted death by S-phase cytotoxics (Kreso et al., 2013; Malladi 
et al., 2016). From a functional perspective, dormant CRC cells 
have been found to be rare, chemoresistant, and yet highly clo-
nogenic, features compatible with a stem cell–like phenotype 
(Moore et al., 2012; Kreso et al., 2013). However, their true molec-
ular identity and the mechanisms underlying dormancy remain 
elusive, and there is an urgent need to identify compounds that 
can perturb this dormant state to enable more complete cancer 
cell killing to prevent late recurrence.
In the normal intestine there are two stem cell populations: 
one rapidly dividing and another quiescent reserve population 
that becomes activated during tissue injury (Clevers, 2013). It is 
increasingly recognized that premalignant adenomas and malig-
nant tumors contain many similar cell types as that found in the 
tissue of origin (Verga Falzacappa et al., 2012). Two very recent 
studies have identified and characterized cancer stem cell (CSC) 
populations in CRC (De Sousa E Melo et al., 2017; Shimokawa et 
al., 2017). In one study, De Sousa E Melo et al. demonstrate that 
liver metastases arising from primary colon cancers are highly 
dependent on Lgr5-expressing CSCs, and elimination of these 
cells dramatically decreases both the formation and mainte-
nance of liver metastases, whereas in primary tumors they are 
redundant (De Sousa E Melo et al., 2017). In an alternative study, 
Shimokawa et al. (2017) show two distinct cell populations exist 
in human CRCs: a differentiated cell population with limited 
self-renewal capacity expressing Keratin 20 (Krt20) and a pro-
liferative CSC population expressing Lgr5. Intriguingly, targeting 
of Lgr5+ CSCs leads to dedifferentiation of the Krt20 population 
to an Lgr5+ status, sustaining continued tumor growth. Whether 
both populations are present throughout all molecular subtypes 
of CRC and what signaling pathways control these divergent 
Correspondence to Simon J.A. Buczacki: simon.buczacki@ 
cruk 
.cam 
.ac 
.uk; Douglas J. Winton: doug.winton@ 
cruk 
.cam 
.ac 
.uk. 
© 2018 Buczacki et al. This article is available under a Creative Commons License (Attribution 4.0 International, as described at https:/
/ 
creativecommons 
.org/ 
licenses/ 
by/ 
4 
.0/ 
).
1Cancer Research UK (CRUK) Cambridge Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre, Robinson Way, Cambridge, England, UK; 2Laboratory for Experimental Oncology 
and Radiobiology (LEX 
OR), Center for Experimental Molecular Medicine (CEMM), Academic Medical Center (AMC), University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, 
Netherlands; 3Cancer Research UK/Medical Research Council Oxford Institute for Radiation Oncology (OIRO), Department of Oncology, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
UK; 4Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, England, UK.
on June 4, 2019
jem.rupress.org 
Downloaded from 
http://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171385
Published Online: 31 May, 2018 | Supp Info: 
 Buczacki et al. 
Colorectal cancer label–retaining cells
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171385
1892
behaviors is unknown. However, it is clear, to achieve therapeu-
tic benefit, Lgr5+ CSCs and less proliferative Krt20+ cells must 
both be targeted.
The Wnt pathway is commonly hyperactivated in CRC and 
plays a pivotal role in intestinal stem cell maintenance. High 
Wnt activity has been shown to also define CSCs (Vermeulen 
et al., 2010). Although much is now understood about how Wnt 
signaling functions and several experimental compounds have 
been tested, it has been impossible to develop a clinically useful 
drug that can target the pathway. In addition to Wnt, there are 
several other autocrine- and paracrine-signaling pathways that 
are involved in controlling intestinal stem cell behavior/kinet-
ics during epithelial homeostasis and regeneration (Beumer and 
Clevers, 2016). Further, there is significant cross talk between 
many of these signaling pathways. Perturbation of individual 
pathways has been shown to alter the behavior of stem cells, pro-
genitor populations, and the proportions of differentiated cells 
generated. Here, we seek to characterize dormant cells in differ-
ent CRC subtypes to identify controlling pathways. We hypothe-
size that disrupting these pathways could cause departure from 
dormancy with subsequent proliferation, thus rendering the 
tumor as a whole more susceptible to conventional therapies that 
target dividing cells.
Results
Human spheroid label–retaining cells are a 
differentiated population
Dormant cells have previously been identified in CRC cell lines 
and xenografts using dye staining and subsequent dilution 
assays and are classified as label-retaining cells (LRCs) if the dye 
is retained with time (Moore et al., 2012). To isolate and char-
acterize CRC LRCs, we applied this approach using CFSE in 3D 
nonadherent serum-free spheroid culture (Fig. 1, A–C), together 
with FACS and transcriptomic profiling. Six human CRC cell lines 
representing the three main CRC subtypes (CCS1–3) were ana-
lyzed to identify potential subgroup specific patterns (Fig. 1 D; 
De Sousa E Melo et al., 2013; Linnekamp et al., 2018). The colon 
cancer subtype (CCS) classification overlaps with the recent CRC 
consensus classification where CCS1 = CMS2/3, CCS2 = CMS1, and 
CCS3 = CMS4. All lines displayed high initial CFSE staining and 
then dilution with time (Fig. 1 B). LRCs were visible in cultured 
spheroids up to 2 wk after initial seeding, compatible with a pre-
vious study for an appropriate time point to isolate tumor LRCs 
(Fig. 1 C; Pece et al., 2010). Cell cycle analysis of CFSE-labeled 
SW948 spheroids 1 wk after labeling showed a higher number 
of LRCs in G2/M and less in S phase, compared with cycling cells 
compatible with previous in vivo studies in CRC (Fig. 1 E; Moore 
et al., 2012). Mathematical modeling (see Materials and meth-
ods) of SW48 CFSE dilution kinetics predicted the presence of 
two populations, one rapidly cycling and a smaller (<2%) slowly 
cycling population (CFSEHigh; Fig. S1, A and B).
To identify targetable pathways and generate a molecular 
signature from LRCs in spheroid culture, we performed RNA 
sequencing (RNAseq) on day 6 FACS-sorted LRC (CFSEHigh) and 
non-LRC (CFSEBulk) populations (Fig. 1 D). Hierarchical clus-
tering showed that cell lines clustered primarily according to 
subtype and secondarily to CFSE retention (Fig. S1 C). CCS1+3-
LRCs were most similar in expression profile while CCS2-LRCs 
clustered separately (Fig. 1 F). As predicted by their LRC status, 
gene ontology (GO) pathways associated with down-regulated 
genes were dominated by cell cycle components (Fig. 2 A). GO 
pathway analysis of overexpressed genes in LRCs across subtypes 
demonstrated strong representation from pathways involved in 
the immune response (complement pathway), cell adhesion, and 
cytoskeletal remodeling (Fig. 2 B). Gene set enrichment analysis 
(GSEA) showed the most significant hallmark gene set enriched 
in LRCs was implicated in hedgehog (Hh) signaling, whereas the 
most underrepresented gene set was associated with targets of 
Myc (Fig. 2 C). Matrix Metalloproteinases and Keratins were 
abundantly expressed in LRCs, suggesting that LRCs may rep-
resent a differentiated cell population. To test for similarities 
with differentiated CRC cell signatures, GSEA was performed 
on the microarray expression dataset generated from the recent 
Shimokawa study (Shimokawa et al., 2017). The top 200 genes 
expressed in Lgr5+ CSCs and Krt20+-differentiated cells were 
compared with the LRC transcriptome (Data S1 and Fig. 2 D). 
There was a highly significant enrichment of the differentiated 
cell signature with the LRC transcriptome. Conversely, there 
was an enrichment of the Lgr5 CSC signature with non-LRCs 
(Fig. 2 D). We also noted, using our RNAseq data, that mRNA lev-
els of Wnt target genes were elevated in CCS1-LRCs when com-
pared with CCS2- and 3-LRCs, compatible with the overall higher 
Wnt activity reported in this subtype (Fig. S1 D). However, LRCs 
from all subtypes (including CCS1) had lower levels of Wnt target 
gene expression than non-LRCs.
To validate the Krt20/Lgr5 GSEA findings (Fig. 2 D), FACS 
was used using a CSC-specific marker. From the Sato microar-
ray data for Lgr5+ CSCs, we identified a potential antibody based 
marker founded on the newly described human colon stem cell 
marker PTK7 (Data S1; Jung et al., 2015; Shimokawa et al., 2017). 
In the normal colon, PTK7High marks the WntHigh Lgr5+ stem cell 
compartment and PTK7Neg/Low, a nonclonogenic differentiated 
population. To ascertain whether PTK7 marks similar popu-
lations in human CRCs, FACS was performed for PTK7High and 
PTK7Low populations from SW948 spheroids, and then RT-PCR 
was performed for Wnt target genes (Lgr5 and EphB2) and dif-
ferentiation markers (CDX2 and Muc2). RT-PCR confirmed 
PTK7High and PTK7Low mark a stem-like WntHigh population and 
a differentiated population, respectively (Fig. 2 E). It was noted 
that when PTK7High cells were grown in spheroid culture, they 
had far higher spheroid-forming efficiency than PTK7Low cells 
(Fig. 2 F). To quantify these differences, extreme limiting dilu-
tion analysis (LDA) was performed using PTK7Low and PTK7High 
cells from SW948 and HT55 spheroids to identify spheroid 
forming efficiencies (Fig. 2 G). LDA demonstrated that PTK7High 
cells from both cell lines had a higher tumor-/spheroid-initiat-
ing cell (TIC) frequency than PTK7Low cells. Next, we sought to 
establish whether PTK7High cells were more proliferative in vivo 
than PTK7Low cells compatible with their WntHigh CSC phenotype. 
PTK7High and PTK7Low cells were sorted from SW948 spheroids, 
and 50,000 cells (to ensure adequate tumor formation from both 
populations) were engrafted bilaterally into NSG mice. Mice 
were left for 5 wk to establish subsequent tumor size. Tumors 
 Buczacki et al. 
Colorectal cancer label–retaining cells
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171385
1893
grew in all mice engrafted with PTK7High cells and all but one of 
the PTK7Low-engrafted animals, compatible with the previously 
calculated TIC frequencies. Tumors derived from PTK7High cells 
were found on average to be larger than those from PTK7Low cells 
(n = 6; Fig. 2 H and Fig. S1 E)
Having validated PTK7 expression as a novel CSC marker 
and a read-out of Wnt activity, FACS quantification of PTK7 lev-
els was performed from single cells derived from CFSE-labeled 
CCS1-SW948 and HT55 6-d spheroids, which confirmed LRCs to 
generally be marked by PTK7Low and non-LRCs PTK7High (Fig. 2 I). 
Validating the GSEA analyses in SW948 cells, it was found that 
64% ± 2% of LRCs were found to be PTK7Neg/Low, whereas 82% 
± 2% of non-LRCs were PTK7High; that is, the majority of LRCs 
have lower levels of PTK7 than non-LRCs (Fig. 2 I). Further, of 
the PTK7Neg/Low population, 24.5% ± 3% were LRCs, implying that 
LRCs are a subpopulation of differentiated tumor cells, yet the 
majority (98.8% ± 0.1%) of PTK7High cells are cycling cells (Fig. 2 J).
To ascertain whether LRCs derived from primary CRCs 
were similar to those from CRC cell lines, we made use of 
patient-derived organoid (PDO) culture. Three CRC PDO lines 
Figure 1. Dormant tumor cells may be isolated from spheroid culture using dye staining with subsequent chase. (A) Bright field image of HCT15 
spheroids 5 d after seeding. (B) FACS histogram from SW48 spheroid cells after CFSE labeling (blue) and 6 d later (red). (C) Image of HCT15 spheroid 6 d after 
labeling with CFSE. Single CFSEHigh (LRC) cells indicated. Bars, 100 µm (A and C). (D) FACS histograms of CFSE levels in 6 CRC cell lines 6 d after CFSE labeling. 
(E) Stacked bar chart showing the cell cycle status of SW948 spheroid cycling and LRCs. (F) Hierarchical clustering of RNAseq data for LRCs from each cell line.
 Buczacki et al. 
Colorectal cancer label–retaining cells
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171385
1894
were generated from primary tissue and cultured as previously 
reported (van de Wetering et al., 2015). Targeted sequencing 
showed that all three lines were derived from the common CCS1 
subtype (Data S1 and Materials and methods). PDOs were pas-
saged, and cells were labeled with CFSE as described earlier. After 
8 d in culture, organoids were disaggregated and cells underwent 
Figure 2. Dormant CRC cells are a differentiated cell population. (A) GO pathway analysis of genes down-regulated in LRCs. (B) GO pathway analysis of 
genes up-regulated in LRCs. (C) GSEA charts of significantly enriched gene sets in LRCs and non-LRCs. (D) GSEA showing enrichment of the Krt20 differentiated 
gene set in LRCs and the Lgr5 CSC gene set in non-LRCs. (E) RT-PCR histogram showing enrichment of Wnt targets in PTK7High and differentiation markers 
in PTK7Low. n = 6; mean ± SEM. ***, P < 0.001; *, P < 0.05 by two-way ANO 
VA. (F) Bright field images of PTK7High and PTK7Low SW948 spheroid cells 5 d after 
seeding in nonadherent culture. Bars, 100 µm. (G) Histogram of the tumor-initiating cell frequency (TIC) from FACS sorted SW948 and HT55 spheroids. Mean ± 
SEM. (H) Column scatter plot of xenograft sizes derived from PTK7High and PTK7Low SW948 cells. Mean ± SEM; **, P < 0.01 by unpaired t test. (I) FACS histogram 
of PTK7 levels in LRCs and non-LRCs derived from CFSE-labeled SW948 and HT55 spheroids. (J) Pie charts of the relative proportions of LRCs and non-LRCs 
within PTK7High and PTK7Low populations from SW948 spheroids. Size of each chart is proportional to relative numbers of cells present.
 Buczacki et al. 
Colorectal cancer label–retaining cells
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171385
1895
flow cytometric analysis of CFSE and PTK7 levels (Fig. 3, A–C). In 
line with the results from the cell lines, the vast majority (97% ± 
0.6%) of PDO-LRCs from all lines retained a PTK7Neg/Low differen-
tiated cell phenotype (Fig. 3, B and C).
It has previously been established that CRC LRCs form xeno-
grafts in vivo, although the mechanism behind this apparently 
paradoxical behavior is not known (Moore et al., 2012). We sought 
to understand whether LRCs in vitro retain the same ability to 
proliferate and, if so, to use these assays to describe the type of 
phenotypical change seen. CFSE-labeled SW948 cells were grown 
as spheroids, and then FACS was performed for LRCs (CFSEHigh) 
and non-LRCs (CFSEBulk). Equal cell numbers of each sorted popu-
lation were then seeded in permissive 2D culture to quantify latent 
proliferative capacity (Fig. 3 D). Both LRCs and non-LRCs retained 
Figure 3. CCS1-LRCs are differentiated yet can revert to a CSC-like state. (A) Fluorescence micrograph of CFSE-labeled PDO (COLO05) 8 d after labeling 
with CFSE. LRC marked with arrow. (B) Representative FACS density plot of PTK7 levels in CFSE labeled PDOs. (C) Histogram of B showing the majority of 
LRCs (CFSE+) are differentiated (PTK7Low). (D) FACS histogram showing the sorting strategy for reseeding of SW948 CFSE-labeled spheroid-derived LRCs and 
non-LRCs. Accompanying fluorescent microscopy images from seeded wells. Bars, 100 µm (A and D). (E) Replating efficiencies of LRCs and non-LRCs across 
CCSs. (F) FACS quantification of changes in differentiation status (PTK7 levels) in SW948 spheroid LRCs and cycling cells upon replating in adherent culture.
 Buczacki et al. 
Colorectal cancer label–retaining cells
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171385
1896
the ability to proliferate after sorting, despite differences in initial 
cell cycle status (Fig. 1 E). Both populations proliferated within 24 h 
of seeding, and full confluency was achieved in 6 d for CFSEBulk 
and 7 d for CFSEHigh populations, implying an acquisition of 
near-similar cycling speed in LRCs (Fig. 3 D). There were only very 
rare, scattered remaining LRCs in the CFSEHigh-sorted populations 
by the time confluency was achieved. Next, both populations were 
relabeled with CFSE and reseeded in 3D spheroid culture (Fig. S1 
F). Both populations retained the capacity to generate spheroids 
with new LRCs and non-LRCs derived from both populations (Fig. 
S1 F). To test whether LRCs from other CCSs also retained the 
capacity for proliferation, similar experiments were performed 
with spheroid-derived LRCs and non-LRCs. Although most LRCs 
retained an ability to proliferate, only LRCs from CCS1 SW948 and 
HT55s proliferated as efficiently as non-LRCs (Fig. 3 E). To identify 
whether LRCs from the CCS1 subtype underwent dedifferentiation 
to a stem cell state on replating, we measured PTK7 levels in LRCs 
and non-LRCs at the time of and 48 h after replating (Fig. 3 F). Both 
LRCs and non-LRCs acquired higher levels of PTK7 after replat-
ing, confirming dedifferentiation to a WntHigh stem–like state. In 
summary, the LRC cell cycle status in CCS1 tumors is highly plastic, 
and the population retains the ability to dedifferentiate and prolif-
erate, analogous to the behavior previously described for LRCs in 
the normal epithelium and also Krt20-differentiated tumor cells’ 
behavior in vitro (Buczacki et al., 2013; Shimokawa et al., 2017).
Cumulatively, these data show that tumor LRCs are a differ-
entiated cell population that express Hh components, but addi-
tionally, in CCS1 tumors, they are also found to express higher 
levels of Wnt target genes than LRCs from CCS2&3. To further 
identify and test pathways potentially involved in regulating this 
dormancy, a screen of compounds including Hh and Wnt manip-
ulators was undertaken.
Itraconazole releases dormancy by inducing tumor-wide 
proliferation then arrest
To focus our analysis to a biologically reproducible tumor type 
with a single genetic etiology and identify candidate compounds 
and pathways that could facilitate cell cycle reentry in LRCs, a 
mouse 3D organoid drug screen was used (Fig. 4 and Fig. 5 A). 
Mouse tumor organoids derived from Apc1322t mice (that, like 
the most common CCS1 subtype, show high Wnt signaling) were 
used in combination with small molecules and recombinant 
proteins to analyze the effects of manipulation of the Wnt, Hh, 
BMP, Notch, epidermal growth factor (EGF)/ErbB, and mTOR 
pathways on tumor development.
Apc1322t mice were crossed with Ah-H2B-YFP transgenic mice 
(Buczacki et al., 2013). Spontaneous intestinal tumors from dou-
ble transgenic animals (YFP-1322) were excised, and cells were 
isolated to generate primary organoid cultures that allowed a 
YFP-pulse, with in vitro βNF induction and subsequent chase to 
identify LRCs (Fig. 4, A–E). Adenoma organoids were cultured as 
previously described by Sato et al. (2011a). Uninduced organoids 
demonstrated no YFP expression (Fig. 4 C). Scattered LRCs were 
identified in induced organoid cultures up to 8 d after removal of 
βNF (Fig. 4, D and E).
Next, organoids received candidate treatments likely to affect 
cell cycle progression (see Materials and methods and Data S1). 
Organoids were then analyzed for differentiation effects using 
RT-PCR, the proportion of remaining LRCs using flow cytometry, 
and organoid growth using an automated imaging system (Fig. 4, 
F and G). Predictably, as a result of the presence of a downstream 
Apc mutation, Wnt ligand antagonism with four separate com-
pounds (Wif1, sFRP1, sFRP5, and Draxin) failed to generate any 
culture phenotype (Fig. 5 B). RT-PCR quantification showed that 
several compounds (BMP7, BMP3, HGF, and DAPT) induced pro-
found changes in secretory differentiation (Fig. 5 C). However, 
despite large molecular differentiation effects being acquired 
with pathway manipulation (Fig. 5 C), overall organoid growth 
was generally unaffected across conditions, implying significant 
functional cellular redundancy and plasticity (Fig. 5 B). The most 
dramatic changes seen were with attempted Hh manipulation 
using itraconazole (a previously described smoothened antago-
nist) that generated almost complete loss of LRCs and marked 
organoid growth collapse (Fig. 5, B and D), but with no change to 
overall cellular viability (Fig. 5 E). To test whether cells were ini-
tially entering apoptosis and then surviving cells were arresting, 
we performed apoptosis (Annexin V) and viability (PI) staining 
at early (2 d) and late time points (6 d) in organoids treated with 
itraconazole (Fig. 5, F and G). As described earlier, early time 
points demonstrated no change in overall viability; however, 
at 6 d after treatment, after the spheroid collapse had occurred, 
there were significantly fewer dead and apoptotic cells in 
itraconazole-treated samples, suggesting global cell cycle arrest 
had developed. From the drug screen, as a result of the limited 
numbers of cells present in wells treated with high dose (2.5 µM) 
itraconazole, no reliable RT-PCR measurements were available 
to suggest the molecular mode of action of the drug (Fig. 5 C). 
However, importantly, Gant-61, another well-validated canoni-
cal Hh antagonist acting downstream of smoothened, failed to 
reproduce the same phenotype, suggesting an alternative, non–
Hh-driven explanation for the effect seen (Fig. 5 B).
To validate the itraconazole-induced phenotype, the six 
human CRC cell lines used previously were treated with itracon-
azole, and responsiveness was quantified using continuous 2D 
live cell confluence measurements. Two of the six lines (HT55 
and SW948 [CCS1]) demonstrated responsiveness (Fig. 6 A). 
These results were validated on six further cell lines where full 
sensitivity (confluence <20%) was seen again in both CCS1 cell 
lines (T84 and SW1463) and only partial or nonresponse in CCS2 
(HCT116 and LoVo) and CCS3 (SW480; Fig. 6 B). HT29 cells (CCS3) 
also demonstrated a strong response to itraconazole treatment. 
Characteristically, an initial proliferative phase was seen, fol-
lowed by apparent cell cycle arrest, potentially explaining the 
initial loss/mobilization of LRCs seen in mouse spheroids.
To test whether LRCs were also lost in human CRCs, SW948 
cells were labeled with CFSE and grown as spheroid cultures; 4 d 
later, they were treated with itraconazole or control. 4 d further 
after treatment, spheroids were disaggregated, and FACS analy-
sis was performed for the proportion of CFSEHigh cells remaining 
(LRCs; Fig. 6, C and D). As predicted by the live cell confluence 
experiments, high dose itraconazole initially reduced the propor-
tion of LRCs. To ascertain whether itraconazole forces cell cycle 
progression differentially between LRCs and non-LRCs, EdU 
incorporation was quantified in CFSE-labeled and itraconazole 
 Buczacki et al. 
Colorectal cancer label–retaining cells
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171385
1897
or DMSO-treated SW948 spheroids (Fig. 6 E). After labeling with 
CFSE, cells were grown to generate spheroids with both LRCs and 
non-LRCs as described earlier. 10 d after seeding, spheroids were 
treated with itraconazole or DMSO. 36 h later (to capture the pro-
liferative burst) spheroids were provided with 1 h of EdU expo-
sure. Spheroids then underwent flow cytometric quantification 
of EdU incorporation. Analogous to the proliferative burst seen 
in 2D culture, larger numbers of cells in spheroid culture incor-
porated EdU shortly after treatment with itraconazole. However, 
this effect of itraconazole is equally distributed between LRCs 
and non-LRCs (Fig. 6 E). To ascertain whether LRCs were dying 
as a result of itraconazole treatment, Annexin V levels were 
quantified in HT55 tumor spheroids 10 d after CFSE labeling and 
48 h after treatment with itraconazole. Levels of apoptosis (PI−/
Annexin V+) were higher in non-LRCs than LRCs compatible with 
their proliferative nature (Fig. 6 F). However, itraconazole treat-
ment did not alter the number or distribution of apoptotic cells 
between LRCs and non-LRCs, further confirming proliferation 
Figure 4. A 3D tumor organoid drug screen using label-retaining Ah-H2B-YFP_Apc1322t mice identifies modulators of spheroid growth and cellular 
dormancy. (A–E) Fluorescence and bright field microscopy images of βNF induced YFP-1322 organoids 24 h after βNF treatment (A and B), uninduced control 
(C), and 5 d after βNF treatment (D and E). White arrowheads show retained CFSE in LRCs, and the dashed line demonstrates the outer border of the organoid 
(E). (F) Example images of control treated organoids (left) and positive control (right) BMP4 treated and collapsed organoids. The green line indicates the 
uniformly applied well mask and the red circles indicate the organoids identified by a customized CHA 
RM setting. Bars: (A–E) 100 µm; (F) 1 mm. (G) Example 
flow cytometry histogram plots of cellular YFP intensity (Single/PI-) from disaggregated organoids 5 d after βNF treatment and 4 d after treatment with carrier 
control or itraconazole at 500 nM, 1 µM, or 2.5 µM.
 Buczacki et al. 
Colorectal cancer label–retaining cells
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171385
1898
 Buczacki et al. 
Colorectal cancer label–retaining cells
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171385
1899
then arrest rather than cell death as the phenotype associated 
with itraconazole treatment. Finally, pulse-labeling cells grown 
in 2D, with EdU in combination with propidium iodide (PI)–
staining at both 2 and 7 d (see Materials and methods) after 
itraconazole treatment confirmed that cells initially stimulated 
to enter the cell cycle (EdU+) by itraconazole treatment subse-
quently growth arrest in G1 (Fig. S2, A and B).
Overall, these data show that itraconazole treatment alters 
cell cycle progression in both dormant and nondormant cells 
by initially causing proliferation and subsequently G1 cell cycle 
arrest. Not all tumors responded, however, and treatment effi-
cacy appeared most pronounced in the CCS1 subtype that is char-
acterized by high Wnt levels. We therefore sought to ascertain 
whether Wnt signaling, Lgr5 status, or alternative pathways 
were effected by itraconazole treatment.
Itraconazole treatment inhibits Wnt signaling and induces 
global senescence in responsive CCS1 cell lines
Itraconazole, a commonly prescribed antifungal, has been 
shown to antagonize canonical Hh signaling in medulloblastoma 
and basal cell carcinoma. Itraconazole inhibits smoothened, a 
key mediator of the Hh pathway, by binding at an unknown 
location, but distinct from that of other classical smoothened 
inhibitors (Kim et al., 2010). Our cell line responsiveness neither 
correlated with Hh component mutational status, copy number, 
nor genes previously associated with itraconazole resistance 
(unpublished data; Barretina et al., 2012). Therefore, to better 
understand the molecular effects of itraconazole, RNAseq analy-
sis was performed on itraconazole-treated HT55 and SW948 cell 
lines 6 d after treatment. GO pathway analysis of gene expres-
sion changes showed significant down-regulation in both the 
Wnt and Hh signaling pathways, as well as cell cycle–associ-
ated pathways, but no evidence of autophagy, mTOR, or MAPK 
changes also previously associated with itraconazole treatment 
(Fig. 7 A; Liu et al., 2014; Hara et al., 2016). Selected highly altered 
genes were validated using immunohistochemistry including 
AGR2 (a known correlate of Wnt activity; Fig. 7 B; Valladares-
Ayerbes et al., 2012). Strikingly, using GSEA, there was a highly 
significant loss of the WntHigh Lgr5+ CSC signature upon treat-
ment with itraconazole in both cell lines (Fig. 7 C; Shimokawa 
et al., 2017). To validate these GSEA findings, SW948 cells were 
grown as spheroids for 4 d and then treated with itraconazole 
for 3 d. Spheroids were then disaggregated, and FACS was per-
formed to quantify the proportion of WntHigh CSCs using anti-
PTK7 staining (Fig. 7 D). Itraconazole treatment was found to 
diminish PTK7 levels in all cells, confirming loss of the WntHigh 
CSC phenotype.
CDKN1C (p57) and CDKN2D (p19), previously shown to be 
associated with senescent cells, were found elevated in both cell 
lines in response to itraconazole (Fig. 8 A; Matsuoka et al., 1995; 
Kang et al., 2003; Giovannini et al., 2012). To investigate if senes-
cence is induced after itraconazole treatment, the RNAseq data 
were compared with the senescence-defining dataset of Fridman 
(Fridman and Tainsky, 2008). There was a large overlap of the 
entire Fridman dataset to genes similarly expressed in response 
to itraconazole treatment; >50% (43/77) of the identified Frid-
man genes were found differentially expressed in SW948 cells 
and >30% (24/77) in HT55 cells. There was a statistically signifi-
cant correlation of up-regulated Fridman genes and up-regulated 
expression in both cell lines (P < 0.0001), and this finding was 
further confirmed using GSEA (Fig. 8 B). 10 genes were identi-
fied in both cell lines to be differentially expressed in response 
to itraconazole and associated with senescence (Fig. 8 C and Data 
S1). GO Process analysis of this core itraconazole senescence-as-
sociated gene set showed strong representation of processes 
involved in the negative regulation of cell death and apoptosis 
compatible with the senescence phenotype seen (Fig. 8 D).
To experimentally test whether itraconazole-arrested cells 
had entered senescence, senescence-associated β-galactosidase 
(SA-β-GAL) staining was performed on HT55 and SW948 cells in 
2D culture 6 d after itraconazole treatment. High levels of SA-β-
GAL staining were seen in treated cells, confirming the induc-
tion of senescence (Fig. 8 E). Importantly, proliferative arrest 
remained after removal of itraconazole, further confirming the 
senescent phenotype (Fig. 8 F).
Next, PDOs were assessed for similar responses to itracon-
azole treatment. PDOs were established and treated with itracon-
azole or control. All three PDO lines responded phenotypically 
in a similar manner to mouse organoids, with organoid growth 
collapse occurring approximately 4 d after treatment (Fig. 9, A 
and B). To ascertain whether treatment was reversible in PDOs, 
organoids were treated with itraconazole for 5 d, and then media 
were replaced without the addition of itraconazole for a further 
6 d (Fig. 9 C). Strikingly, not only did organoids fail to recover, 
but organoid collapse continued to progress even in the absence 
of further treatment. Itraconazole treatment of PDOs also repro-
duced the G1 cell cycle arrest phenotype seen in other assays. Cells 
from PDOs treated with itraconazole for 5 d incorporated less 
EdU, and a higher proportion were found in G1 (Fig. 9, D and E).
Analysis of individual gene expression changes from CRC 
cell lines in response to itraconazole treatment revealed that 
although the Wnt pathway was uniformly affected in both cell 
lines, alterations in components of the Hh pathway were not 
equally represented in both lines (Data S1). Importantly, the Hh 
Figure 5. A mouse tumor organoid drug screen identifies itraconazole as a modulator of quiescence and adenoma organoid development. (A) Sche-
matic of the drug screen protocol using YFP-1322 mice. (B) Column graphs of the effect of candidate drugs on organoid size and proportion of LRCs. Mean ± 
SD. Significant (P < 0.05 by independent t tests on each drug treatment compared with control) changes shown in red. (C) Hierarchical clustering of RT-PCR 
changes in (cancer) stem, differentiation, and pathway associated genes. Red, upregulated. Blue, down-regulated. Black, not detected. (D) Bright field images 
of YFP-1322 tumor organoids 10 d after single cell plating and 4 d after treatment with DMSO or itraconazole. Bars, 100 µm. (E) Percentage viability of organ-
oid cells as determined by PI incorporation after itraconazole treatment. n = 3; mean ± SD; ns, not significant by one-way ANO 
VA). (F) Bright field images of 
Apc-deficient mouse spheroids treated with itraconazole (2.5 µM) or DMSO at early and late time points after treatment. Bars, 100 µm. (G) Histograms of 
changes in viability (PI) and apoptosis (Annexin V) in mouse spheroids after treatment with itraconazole at early and late time points. n = 3; mean ± SEM; *, P 
< 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001 by one-way ANO 
VA.
 Buczacki et al. 
Colorectal cancer label–retaining cells
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171385
1900
Figure 6. Itraconazole treatment of CRC cell lines demonstrates treatment is effective in CCS1 cell lines and eliminates dormant cells. (A) Live cell 
confluence graphs of six CRC cell lines grown in 2D showing a dose-dependent effect in response to itraconazole in SW948 and HT55 lines. (B) Validation live 
cell confluence graphs for six CRC further cell lines. Full sensitivity (confluence <20%) was seen in T84 and SW1463 cells (CCS1) and HT29 cells (CCS3). (C) FACS 
measurements of the proportions of LRCs in CFSE labeled SW948 spheroids 4 d after treatment with itraconazole or DMSO. n = 3; mean ± SEM; *, P < 0.05 by 
one-way ANO 
VA. (D) Fluorescent images of SW948 spheroids grown in nonadherent culture after CFSE labeling for 4 d and then treated with itraconazole or 
DMSO for 48 h. Bars, 100 µm. (E) Histograms quantifying EdU incorporation in SW948 spheroids treated with itraconazole or DMSO during the proliferative 
burst. n = 3; mean ± SEM; ***, P < 0.001 by unpaired t test. (F) Histogram displaying levels of apoptosis (PI−/AnnexinV+) in HT55 CFSE labeled spheroids 10 d 
after labeling and 48 h after treatment with itraconazole or DMSO. n = 3; mean ± SEM; ***, P < 0.001 by two-way ANO 
VA; ns, not significant.
 Buczacki et al. 
Colorectal cancer label–retaining cells
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171385
1901
 Buczacki et al. 
Colorectal cancer label–retaining cells
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171385
1902
pathway defining effector genes (Gli1-3) were not expressed in 
HT55s, and only Gli1 was detectable in SW948s, despite the same 
phenotype being observed in both lines. These data indicate 
that if the shared sensitivity of the two lines is similarly reg-
ulated, it cannot be mediated via canonical Gli effectors of the 
Hh pathway. To identify whether our other responsive CRC cell 
lines demonstrated a similar dichotomy in molecular response to 
itraconazole treatment, we performed RT-PCR for the Wnt tar-
get Lgr5 and the Hh target Gli1 (Fig. 7 E). Responsive cell lines 
demonstrated marked Wnt inhibition, clearly correlated with 
responsiveness to itraconazole. Changes in levels of Gli1 were 
also detected in some lines, but bore no correlation with drug 
responsiveness (Fig. 7 F). Additionally, using a large, publicly 
available RNA expression study dataset, it was confirmed that 
the responsive CRC subtype (CCS1) is also characterized by high 
expression of Wnt components such as Lgr5 (Fig. 7 G; Marisa et 
al., 2013). Hence, we hypothesized that the effects of itraconazole 
were mediated through inhibition of elevated Wnt signaling 
rather than through canonical Hh signaling inhibition. To exper-
imentally test this, we performed small molecule inhibition of Gli 
function. Gli1-expressing SW948 cells were treated with Gant-
61 (a well-validated inhibitor of both Gli1 and Gli2), and growth 
characteristics/expression changes were analyzed (Mazumdar 
et al., 2011). SW948 cells were found nonresponsive to Gant-61 
treatment (Fig. 7 H). Further, despite Gant-61 treatment effec-
tively silencing canonical Hh signaling, it had no effect on the 
Wnt pathway (Fig. S2 C). Next, we tested whether recombinant 
Shh or Ihh could rescue the itraconazole phenotype using live cell 
confluence measurement. Neither treatment provided rescue to 
the cell cycle arrest seen with itraconazole (Fig. S2 D). Suppres-
sor of fused (SuFu) has been shown to act downstream of Smo 
in the Hh pathway, inhibiting Gli activation, but also enhancing 
nuclear β-catenin export, thereby inhibiting Wnt activity (Ding 
et al., 1999; Meng et al., 2001). To test whether SuFu mediates the 
effect of itraconazole on Wnt activity, siRNA knockdown of SuFu 
was performed and found to partially rescue the itraconazole-in-
duced arrest phenotype without affecting canonical Hh pathway 
activation at the mRNA level (Fig. 7 I and Fig. S2, E–G). Using 
a T cell factor/lymphoid enhancer factor–GFP (TCF/LEF-GFP) 
reporter construct (to quantify Wnt pathway activity) together 
with SuFu knockdown, it was seen that rescue of the itracon-
azole phenotype is predicated on SuFu-mediated Wnt pathway 
activation (Fig. S2, H–J). Finally, using live cell confluence mea-
surements, it was tested whether cyclopamine, which binds 
smoothened at a distinct site from itraconazole, can induce the 
same phenotype as itraconazole. SW948 cells were found nonre-
sponsive to cyclopamine treatment, suggesting that itraconazole 
induces a different effect on smoothened than cyclopamine, 
which preferentially effects SuFu activity (Fig. S2 K).
Finally, RT-PCR was used to quantify the degree of Wnt inhi-
bition generated by itraconazole treatment compared with other 
known preclinical Wnt inhibitors. SW948 cells were grown in 
2D and treated with DMSO, itraconazole (2.5 µM), carnosic acid 
(60 µM), and IGC-001 (6 µM) for 3 d. Cells treated with IGC-001 
immediately died and provided no material suitable for RT-PCR 
measurements; however, cells treated with DMSO or carnosic 
acid proliferated. Cells treated with itraconazole proliferated 
and then arrested as described earlier. RT-PCR showed signifi-
cant down-regulation of Wnt target genes in itraconazole treated 
samples compared with carnosic acid and DMSO control (Fig. S3 
A). Overall, these data confirm that the phenotype and molecular 
changes seen with itraconazole treatment appear driven by non-
canonical Hh-driven inhibition of the Wnt pathway rather than 
canonical Hh pathway inhibition.
Itraconazole treatment suppresses tumor growth using in vivo 
and in vitro preclinical assays
To investigate the in vivo effectiveness of itraconazole to inhibit 
Wnt signaling, tumor-predisposed Lgr5-CreER_Apcfl/fl mice were 
dosed with itraconazole or control for 10 d, followed by tamox-
ifen-induced Cre recombination to knockout Apc in intestinal 
stem cells. Mice were culled 18 d later, and small intestinal tis-
sue was analyzed. As previously described, multiple small Wnt 
hyperactive microadenomas were detected throughout the 
small intestine in control and treated animals (van der Heijden 
et al., 2016). However, both the number and size of adenomas 
were lower in itraconazole-treated animals (Fig. 10, A and B). 
Anti–β-catenin staining also revealed less intense nuclear stain-
ing in adenomas from itraconazole-treated animals (Fig. 10 C). 
To confirm this apparent in vivo Wnt inhibitory effect, anti-
GFP staining was performed to identify WntHigh Lgr5–express-
ing stem cells. Anti-GFP staining was uniformly less intense 
or, more commonly, completely absent in the crypts of itracon-
azole-treated animals throughout the small intestine, confirming 
the in vivo Wnt inhibitory capacity of itraconazole (Fig. S4, A and 
B). To exclude confounding as a result of the known mosaicism 
in Lgr5-GFP expression in these mice, numbers of GFP+ cells 
were counted in crypts where there was at least one identifiable 
GFP+ cell (Fig. S4 C). Even in GFP+ crypts, there were dramatically 
fewer GFP+ cells in itraconazole treated mice.
To assess the preclinical utility of itraconazole for the treat-
ment of patients with CRC, nonobese diabetic severe combined 
immunodeficient gamma (NSG) mice were engrafted with the 
Gli-negative/Hh pathway–inactive but itraconazole-responsive 
Figure 7. Itraconazole treatment inhibits Wnt signaling. (A) GO pathway analysis of differentially expressed genes in HT55 and SW948 cells after itracon-
azole treatment. (B) Immunohistochemical validations of RNAseq data of itraconazole treatment in SW948 cells. Bars, 100 µm. (C) GSEA showing loss of 
the Lgr5 CSC signature in response to itraconazole treatment in HT55 and SW948 cells. (D) Histogram of changes in anti-PTK7 staining levels from SW948 
spheroids treated with itraconazole (2.5 µM) or DMSO control. n = 3; mean ± SEM. ***, P < 0.001 by two-way ANO 
VA. (E) RT-PCR quantification of Lgr5 levels 
observed with itraconazole treatment in eight CRC lines. n = 4; mean ± SEM. **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001; ns, not significant by one-way ANO 
VA. (F) RT-PCR 
quantification of Gli1 levels observed with itraconazole treatment in eight CRC lines. n = 4; mean ± SEM. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.001; ns, not significant by one-
way ANO 
VA; nd, transcript not detected. (G) Lgr5 expression levels across CRC subtypes from Marisa et al. (2013) dataset. ***, P < 0.001 by one-way ANO 
VA; 
ns, not significant. (H) Live cell confluence graph of the response of SW948 cells to Gant-61 treatment. (I) Live cell confluence measurements of the response 
of SW948 cells to itraconazole in the presence of siSuFu.
 Buczacki et al. 
Colorectal cancer label–retaining cells
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171385
1903
Figure 8. Itraconazole treatment induces cellular senescence in responsive CCS1 cell lines. (A) Dot graphs showing normalized levels (reads per kilobase 
million [RPKM]) of p19 (CDKN2D) and p57 (CDKN1C) derived from RNAseq data in HT55 and SW948 cells treated with DMSO or itraconazole (mean ± SEM; ***, 
P < 0.001; *, P < 0.05 by independent t tests on each cell line. (B) GSEA plots for the association between genes regulated by itraconazole and those defining 
senescence in HT55 and SW948 cells. (C) Venn diagram showing the overlap of known senescence-associated genes (Fridman) differentially expressed in 
response to itraconazole treatment in HT55 and SW948 cells. (D) GO Processes associated with the core itraconazole senescence gene set. (E) Bright field 
images of HT55 and SW948 cells treated with itraconazole (2.5 µM) or DMSO and stained with SA-β-GAL. Bars, 100 µm. (F) Live cell confluence measurements 
of HT55 cells treated with itraconazole for 180 h and then “released” from treatment by media exchange to standard growth conditions.
 Buczacki et al. 
Colorectal cancer label–retaining cells
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171385
1904
HT55 CRC cell line and were dosed with oral itraconazole or con-
trol (Fig. S4 D). After 3 wk of continuous dosing, tumor volumes 
in mice receiving itraconazole were 70% smaller than controls. 
(Fig. 10, D and E). Levels of the Wnt surrogate AGR2 were also 
found lower in itraconazole-treated animals (Fig. 10 F). To assess 
whether intraconazole could perturb the growth of established 
tumors, SW948 cells were engrafted in NSG mice as described 
earlier, and mice observed for 5 wk. Tumors formed in all ani-
mals. Next, mice were dosed with itraconazole or control for 10 
d and then observed for further tumor growth patterns. During 
the treatment period, tumors in itraconazole-dosed mice failed to 
grow or regressed, whereas rapid growth was observed in control 
mice (Fig. S3 B). After cessation of treatment, tumors in control 
animals continued to grow in volume by 381 ± 185 mm3; however, 
there was only very limited regrowth in itraconazole treated ani-
mals of 53 ± 50 mm3 (Fig. S3 B).
Live cell confluence measurements were next taken to inves-
tigate for synergy between itraconazole and the most commonly 
prescribed chemotherapeutic drugs in CRC, 5-fluorouracil and 
oxaliplatin. The effects of both drugs were found augmented by 
Figure 9. Itraconazole treatment induces phenotypically similar changes in primary PDOs to that seen in cell lines. (A) Representative bright field 
images of changes in PDO morphology in response to itraconazole treatment. Bars, 100 µm. (B) Dot plot quantification of the change in PDO volume in response 
to itraconazole treatment or DMSO. n = 3; mean ± SEM; **, P < 0.01 by two-tailed Mann-Whitney test. (C) Bright field–matched images demonstrating ongoing 
response to itraconazole treatment after removal of treatment. Bars, 100 µm. (D) Histogram of EdU incorporation in PDOs 5 d after itraconazole treatment 
or control. n = 3; mean ± SEM; *, P < 0.05 by unpaired t test. (E) Histogram showing cell cycle distribution of PDO cells after 5 d of itraconazole treatment or 
control. n = 3; mean ± SEM; *, P < 0.05; ns = not significant by independent t tests on each cell cycle stage).
 Buczacki et al. 
Colorectal cancer label–retaining cells
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171385
1905
Figure 10. Itraconazole retards Wnt activity and Lgr5 expression in preclinical assays. (A) Column scatter plot showing areas of microadenomas in the 
presence of itraconazole or control. (B) Column scatter plot of the numbers of microadenomas observed per 100 crypt–villus axes in itraconazole or control 
treated animals. n = 3; mean ± SEM; ***, P < 0.001 by unpaired t test. (C) Bright field images demonstrating less-intense nuclear β-catenin staining in microad-
enomas of itraconazole-dosed animals compared with controls. Bars, 100 µm. (D) Scatter plot showing the relative tumor volumes of HT55 xenografts after 
oral gavage of itraconazole or water to NSG mice. n = 3; mean ± SD; **, P < 0.01 by unpaired t test. Cont, control; Itra, itraconazole. (E) Representative images 
of treated and control xenografts. Bar, 1 cm. (F) Bright field images of anti-AGR2 immunohistochemical staining from HT55 xenografts treated with itracon-
azole of control. Bars, 100 µm. (G and H) Matrix plots of the synergistic effects of itraconazole on oxaliplatin- and 5-FU–treated SW948 cells. Values indicate 
relative cellular confluence 5 d (5-FU) and 3 d (Oxali) after treatments. n = 3. (I) Representative bright field images of organoids derived from human CRC liver 
metastases at initial treatment date and 60 h after treatment with itraconazole. Bars, 100 µm. (J) Growth curves of circumference changes in patient-derived 
liver metastasis organoids after treatment with itraconazole. (K) Histogram of RT-PCR Lgr5 expression levels in patient derived liver metastasis organoids after 
itraconazole treatment. n = 12; ***, P < 0.001; ns = not significant by one-way ANO 
VA. 
 Buczacki et al. 
Colorectal cancer label–retaining cells
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171385
1906
itraconazole (Fig. 10, G and H). Finally, organoids grown from 
patient-derived CRC liver metastases and treated with itracon-
azole were growth retarded by 34% ± 3% (Buzzelli et al., 2018). 
Altered morphology was seen, as well as similar Wnt inhibitory 
effects, as seen in all our other assays (Fig. 10, I–K; and Fig. S3, 
C and D). Organoids underwent targeted hot spot sequencing, 
and all were found to belong to CCS1, validating the sensitivity 
seen (Data S1).
Discussion
Functional cellular heterogeneity is a clinically important but 
neglected focus of cancer therapeutics. Although significant 
progress has been made in characterizing the molecular hetero-
geneity present between tumors, functional heterogeneity is evi-
dently also present and will confound both targeted treatments 
and traditional cytotoxic therapies currently used as adjuvant 
treatments. For the first time, we functionally and molecularly 
characterize dormant tumor cells across CRC molecular sub-
types, finding they are a subset of differentiated cells, capable 
of contextual clonogenicity. LRCs were unexpectedly found 
predominantly in G2 rather than G1/0, suggesting either slow 
cell cycle progression or G2-poised quiescence, as has recently 
been described (Otsuki and Brand, 2018). We find tumor LRCs 
to generally be inversely associated with the WntHgh CSC signa-
ture. These findings are distinct to our previous study in normal 
mouse small intestine where we found LRCs to uniformly have a 
similar transcriptome to Lgr5+ WntHigh stem cells. We hypothe-
size that this interesting difference may be dictated by the overall 
increased levels of Wnt activity within all CRCs or possibly that 
tumor LRCs are further committed in the differentiation process 
than in normal epithelium. The in vitro behavior of LRCs is pre-
cisely that which was recently described for Krt20-differentiated 
cells, which are also highly clonogenic in culture (Shimokawa 
et al., 2017). We uncovered, through mouse drug screening, that 
itraconazole targets WntHigh cycling tumor cells, but also elimi-
nates dormant tumor cells most effectively in CCS1 tumors (Fig. 
S3 D). Phenotypically, itraconazole treatment induces a prolif-
erative burst, causing all cells in responsive tumors (including 
LRCs and non-LRCs) to cycle briefly and then enter stable G1 
arrest and senescence. Our study does not uncover the mech-
anism by which the initial proliferate burst in responsive lines 
(which also causes the temporary reentry of dormant cells into 
the cell cycle) is generated by itraconazole treatment, although 
it is striking that this behavior is reminiscent of that caused by 
oncogene-induced senescence (Di Micco et al., 2006). The induc-
tion of senescence, by down-regulation of Wnt signaling, seen 
with itraconazole treatment, has been reported in other systems, 
but never in the context of CRC (Ye et al., 2007; Elzi et al., 2012). 
The organoid collapse seen in both mouse and human organoids 
upon itraconazole treatment is unusual, not least in the absence 
of cell death or apoptosis. The maintenance of organoid structure 
requires the coordinated action of highly proliferative cells, and 
we hypothesize that the induction of arrest perturbs this process 
causing the organoid structure to collapse without death or apop-
tosis, akin to a deflating balloon.
Itraconazole has been shown in many studies to act as a bona 
fide smoothened inhibitor; yet, in our study we find that its Wnt 
inhibitory ability occurs as a consequence of noncanonical Hh 
signaling inhibition. As this manuscript was being revised, a 
recent study reported autocrine noncanonical Hh signaling as a 
positive regulator of Wnt signaling in CRC CSCs (Regan et al., 
2017). We propose SuFu to be the master regulator linking the 
Hh pathway with Wnt inhibition that both we and Regan et al. 
describe. Several Hh inhibitors have been used in the preclinical 
setting in CRC, although none are in routine clinical use. Vismo-
degib, a small molecule smoothened inhibitor, has been used in 
a randomized Phase II clinical trial in treatment-naive patients 
with metastatic CRC (Berlin et al., 2013). Disappointingly, these 
results failed to show an additional benefit of the new agent to 
standard therapy for metastatic CRC; although, toxicity was 
higher in the Vismodegib arm. Other smoothened inhibitors have 
never been trialed in a clinical context with CRC.
The recent study from De Sousa E Melo et al. (2017) demon-
strating the reliance of CRC liver metastases on Lgr5+ cells 
for their maintenance places these cells, whether inherent or 
induced by dedifferentiation, in addition to the Wnt pathway as 
a whole, as highly relevant for therapeutic targeting. Targeting 
of the Wnt pathway has been an important focus for drug devel-
opment and is of urgent clinical importance in CRC given the 
pathway is commonly (∼80%) activated. Unfortunately, the Wnt 
pathway has been particularly difficult to pharmacologically tar-
get, and there are no drugs in routine clinical use that are effec-
tive in CRC. The Wnt inhibitor IGC-001 was markedly cytotoxic 
in our study, precluding comparison with itraconazole; however, 
itraconazole was far more efficient than carnosic acid in inhib-
iting the pathway. Our robust, panspecies, multiassay demon-
stration of Wnt signaling inhibition in response to itraconazole 
treatment provides a tantalizing glimpse into the potential util-
ity of this FDA-approved drug as adjuvant treatment in CRC for 
targeting the Wnt pathway, Lgr5-expressing cells, and cell cycle 
heterogeneity in a molecularly defined subset of CRCs. Given the 
proven safety profile of itraconazole, our study provides compel-
ling evidence for advancing itraconazole to early phase clinical 
trials, as well as ascertaining whether the same effect is seen with 
different azole antifungals and whether the drug enhances the 
efficacy of conventional adjuvant treatments in vivo.
Materials and methods
Cell culture and associated assays
All CRC cell lines were STR-genotyped and confirmed myco-
plasma free. Cells were grown in standard conditions in 37°C 
incubators (5% CO2 and 5% O2). Media used for 2D-adherent 
culture were DMEM/F12 (supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% 
Pen/Strep) for HT55; SW1463, SW948, SW48, T84, LoVo, RKO, 
and DLD1, RPMI for HCT116; HCT-15 and HT29 (supplemented 
with 10% FBS and 1% Pen/Strep) and DMEM for SW480 (supple-
mented with 10% FBS and 1% Pen/Strep).
Nonadherent “stem cell culture” was performed in Corning 
Ultra-Low attachment flasks in serum-free media as above, supple-
mented by EGF (20 ng/ml), bFGF (10ng/ml), and Pen/Strep (1:100).
 Buczacki et al. 
Colorectal cancer label–retaining cells
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171385
1907
Live cell confluence measurements were performed using the 
Incucyte Live Cell Imaging System (Essen Bioscience). The conflu-
ence readings obtained were normalized to the initial confluence 
for each well to account for any minor differential seeding density.
CFSE labeling was performed as per manufacturer’s instruc-
tions. Cells were trypsinized, CFSE-quenched, and counted using 
the Vi-CELL system (Beckman Coulter). Experimental samples 
and unstained controls were labeled with CFSE or DMSO treat-
ment by adding 15 µl of CFSE or DMSO to a 2 × 106 cell suspension 
while vortexing. Samples were then incubated for 20 min at 37°C 
and then quenched with media containing 10% FBS and left at 
room temperature for 5 min. The samples were then pelleted at 
1,200 rpm and resuspended in media for culture.
FACS EdU estimates were performed using the Click-iT kit as 
per manufacturer’s instructions in combination with PI staining to 
identify cell cycle position. To ascertain whether cells incorporated 
EdU at a late time point, cells were seeded and left to grow for 1 wk 
in the presence of itraconazole or control. Cells were then labeled 
with EdU (10 µM) for 2 h, then trypsinized, fixed, and labeled 
with PI. FACS analysis was then performed for the proportion of 
EdU-positive cells. To ascertain the cell cycle destiny of cells during 
the proliferative burst and subsequent arrest, cells were seeded 
and left to grow for 2 d in itraconazole or control. Cells were then 
labeled with EdU for a further 24 h and then trypsinized, fixed, and 
stained with PI. FACS analysis was then performed to quantify the 
proportion of EdU-positive cells in the G1 phase of the cell cycle.
For SW948 cells, 6 × 104 cells were transfected using Lipofect-
amine 2000 or 3000 (Life Technologies) in 48-well culture plate. 
Cells were analyzed for mRNA levels 2 and 6 d after transfection. 
The siRNAs used were obtained from Dharmacon: siGEN 
OME 
Control Pool Nontargeting no. 1 (D-001206-13-05) and siGEN 
OME SMA 
RT pool Human SuFu (M-015382-00).
A Qiagen Cignal TCF/LEF-GFP reporter assay was used as per 
manufacturer’s protocol to quantify Wnt pathway activation. 
Lipofectamine 3000 was used as the transfection agent. Posi-
tive and negative controls were used to quantify transfection 
efficiencies, unexpected effects, and to normalize data. FACS 
analysis of transfected cells included single cell and PI (live/
dead) gating to control for the altered cell growth seen with dif-
ferent treatments.
Annexin V staining was performed using as per manufac-
turers protocol using AF350-conjugated Annexin V (Thermo 
Fisher Scientific).
Mathematical modeling of CFSE dilution
To identify whether our population was composed of a bulk pop-
ulation together with one possessing different cycling properties, 
we developed a mathematical model of cell division, similar to 
that described in León et al. (2004). Each cell within the popula-
tion will double, entering the next generation at time t according 
to the probability of cellular divisions of bulk population Kbulk (t) 
and the slowly dividing population K 
slow (t).
Cell doubling
The probability that a cell from either population has divided n 
times at time t can be written as
 
 
 
L 
 
n 
 
 
(t) =  
∫ 
0 
 
t  
 
 K 
(t - τ) 
  
L 
 
n-1 
 
 
(τ) 
dτ, 
 
(1)
where K is a probability of cellular division with time and Ln is 
the probability the cell population divides n times at time t, given 
an initial uniform division probability L0. Therefore, the proba-
bility of dividing at least n times is
 
 
 
H 
 
n 
 
 
 
( 
 
t 
) 
 
 
 =  
 ∫ 
0
 
 
t
 
 
  
L 
 
n 
 
 
 
( 
 
τ 
) 
 
 dτ. 
 
(2)
The number of cells in generation n, accounting for those lost to 
the next generation and starting with N0, is
 
 
 
N 
 
n 
 
 
 
( 
 
t 
) 
 
 
 =  
2 
 
 
n 
  
N 
 
0 
 
   
 
[ 
 
  
H 
 
n 
 
 
 
( 
 
t 
) 
 
 
 −  
H 
 
n+1 
 
 
 
( 
 
t 
) 
 
 
 
] 
 
 
. 
 
(3)
Cell division times
The intrinsic distribution of cell division times (K) is taken to be 
an inverse gamma distribution proposed in León et al. (2004):
 
K 
 
( 
 
t,  
t 
 
 
bulk or slow 
 
) 
 
 
 =  
 
{
 
 
 
 
0,  t <  
t 
 
 
b,s 
,
  
 
 
 1 
_ 
σΓ 
 
( 
 
λ 
) 
 
 
 
 
  
 
( 
 
  
 
t −  
t 
 
 
b,s  
_ 
σ  
 
) 
 
 
 
 
λ−1
 
  
E 
 
 − 
 
( 
 
 
 
t− 
t 
 
 
b,s  
_ 
σ  
 
) 
 
  
,  t ≥  
t 
 
 
b,s 
.
 
 
 
 
 
 
(4)
This distribution has a minimum cycle time tbulk or slow and shape 
parameters σ and λ, which control the broadness of the tail. 
These later parameters provide the potential for increasing the 
likelihood of cells with long cycle times.
CFSE intensities
The normalized intensity for each population can then be calcu-
lated using the initial intensity I0(i) as
 
 
 
I 
 
t 
 
 
 
( 
 
i 
) 
 
 
 =  
∑ 
n=1 
 
∞  
 
  
 
 
I 
 
0 
 
 
 
( 
 
i 
) 
 
  
____ 
 
2 
 
 
n−1 
  
  
N 
 
n 
 
 
 
( 
 
t 
) 
 
 
 
/ 
 
 ∫ 
0
 
 
∞
 
 
  
∑ 
n=1 
 
∞  
 
  
 
 
I 
 
0 
 
 
 
( 
 
i 
) 
 
  
____ 
 
2 
 
 
n−1 
  
  
N 
 
n 
 
 
 
( 
 
t 
) 
 
 
 di. 
(5)
Finally, the overall model intensity is calculated as the weighted 
mixture of bulk and slow populations as
 
 
 
I 
 
t 
 
total 
 
 
( 
 
i 
) 
 
 
 =  
 
( 
 
1 − α 
) 
 
 
 
I 
 
t 
 
bulk 
 
 
( 
 
i 
) 
 
 
 + α  
I 
 
t 
 
slow 
 
 
( 
 
i 
) 
. 
(6)
Parameter estimation
The best fit for the predicted model intensity  
 
I 
 
t 
 
total 
 
 to that observed 
in the CFSE data at day 6 is found through least squares minimi-
zation in terms of our model parameter (tbulk, σbulk, λbulk, tslow, 
σslow, λslow, α) using Matlab’s fminsearch algorithm.
Mouse models
Ah-H2B-YFP, Apc1322T, Lgr5-CreER_Apcfl/fl and NSG mice have 
previously been described (Moser et al., 1990; Pollard et al., 2009; 
Buczacki et al., 2013; van der Heijden et al., 2016). Mice were bred 
and housed according to UK Home Office guidelines. All animal 
experimentation was performed in accordance with the Animal 
(Scientific Procedures) Act 1986, the European Union Directive 
86/609, and with local (CRUK CI, University of Cambridge) ethics 
committee approval.
Tumor xenograft volume (H × W × D/2) was calculated using 
callipers in three-dimensions after culling of the animals and 
 Buczacki et al. 
Colorectal cancer label–retaining cells
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171385
1908
dissection of the tumor from the subcutaneous tissue. Mice were 
sex, litter, and age matched.
Mouse tumor disaggregation and flow cytometry
Mice with intestinal tumors were sacrificed and dissected when 
displaying signs of tumor burden. Sections of PBS-flushed small 
intestine were opened and pinned out on silicone plates under 
cold 2% FBS/PBS. Visible tumors were dissected free from the 
tissue and minced with scissors. Minced tumor material was 
resuspended in 10 ml of prewarmed HBSS (-Ca2+/-Mg2+) sup-
plemented with 10 µM EDTA and 10 mM NaOH and incubated 
in a water bath at 37°C for 10 min with regular agitation. The 
sample was then allowed to settle, and the supernatant aspirated 
and combined with 20 ml of ice-cold 2% PBS/FBS. The remaining 
sample was resuspended in a further 10 ml of HBSS for a further 
10 min, and the process was repeated one final time. All samples 
were then pooled and spun down at 1,200 rpm for 5 min. After 
washing in 2% FBS/PBS, the samples were resuspended in 2 ml 
of Dispase (5 mg/ml) and 200–500 µl of DNase and incubated 
with agitation for 7 min. The sample was then filtered through a 
100-µm mesh to gain a reliable single cell preparation. The single 
cell preparation was then washed in 2% FBS/PBS.
Mouse adenoma organoid culture
Mouse adenomas were cultured as per previously described (Sato 
et al., 2011b). In brief, single-cell preparations of tumor cells were 
plated into a 96-well plate. Each well of the plate was precoated 
with 40 µl of 50:50 Advanced DMEM/F12 (ADF)/Matrigel mix. 
Cells were resuspended in ADF-supplemented 2% Matrigel (2%), 
N2 (1:100), B27 (1:50), Pen/Strep (1:100), Rocki (10 µM), and EGF 
(50 ng/ml) at a concentration of ∼8 × 105/ml. 125 µl of the ADF/
Cell mix was then pipetted on top of the Matrigel.
3D mouse adenoma organoid drug screen
YFP-1322 mice were housed until a tumor phenotype developed, 
typically anemia at around 90 d. The mice were then sacrificed 
and small intestinal tumors processed as above (see Mouse tumor 
disaggregation and flow cytometry), with 24 wells being used for 
each drug tested. Cells were seeded and left to form organoids 
over the following 4 d. On day 5, organoid YFP expression was 
induced with 2.9 nM βNF dissolved in DMSO for 24 h. The follow-
ing day, the βNF/media was removed, and media were replaced 
including drugs at three concentrations or carrier control (equal 
volume), in replicates of six (see Data S1). Drugs were selected 
based on literature review of commercially available small mol-
ecules or recombinant proteins that would agonize or antagonize 
pathways known to be involved in the control of intestinal stem 
cell homeostasis or implicated in colorectal cancer development. 
The lowest concentration used was the stated IC50, the middle 
concentration was 2.5× IC50, and the highest was 5× IC50. At the 
end of the experiment (day 9), the entire plate was imaged using 
the GelCount (Oxford Optronix), and organoid number and size 
were calculated using the manufacturer’s software after optimi-
zation. After imaging, half the wells underwent RNA extraction 
using the RNeasy Micro Plus kit as per manufacturer’s instruc-
tions. The remaining 12 wells were processed for FACS analysis. 
In brief, after aspiration of media, 100 µl of matrigel recovery 
solution was applied for 45 min on ice. Next, 100 µl Accutase was 
added at room temperature with regular trituration to enable 
organoids to disaggregate to a single cell preparation. Flow cyto-
metric analysis for YFP expression and viability (DAPI or PI) was 
then performed. Expression data are presented from “High”-
treated samples only.
Human tumor organoid isolation and culture
Primary CRC PDO
Colonic tissues were obtained from hospitals around the UK 
as part of the Human Cancer Models Initiative with informed 
consent, and the study was approved by the London–Camden 
& Kings Cross Research Ethics Committee. Colon tumor sam-
ples were taken from resected colons, and the isolation of tumor 
epithelium was performed as previously described (Sato et al., 
2011a). Tumor samples underwent multiple washes with PBS 
before being minced into small pieces using a scalpel and incu-
bated with collagenase II (10 mg/ml) for 1–2 h at 37°C. After incu-
bation, the mixture was filtered through a 70-µm cell strainer 
to remove large undigested fragments. The cell suspension was 
centrifuged at 800 g for 2 min. The cell pellet was resuspended 
in PBS and centrifugation repeated. This procedure was repeated 
twice to remove debris and collagenase.
The isolated cells were resuspended in 12 mg/ml basement 
membrane matrix (Cultrex BME RGF type 2, Amsbio, BME-2) 
supplemented with complete media and plated as 10- to 15-µl 
droplets in a 6-well plate. After allowing the BME-2 to polymer-
ize, complete media was added and the cells left at 37°C.
Complete media
AdDMEM/F12 medium supplemented with Hepes (1×; Invitro-
gen), Glutamax (1×; Invitrogen), penicillin/streptomycin (1×; 
Invitrogen), B27 (1×; Invitrogen), Primocin (1 mg/ml; InvivoGen), 
N-acetyl-l-cysteine (1 Mm; Sigma), RSPO1-conditioned medium 
(20% vol/vol; cells provided by C. Kuo [Stanford University School 
of Medicine, Stanford, CA]). A cell line is also available from Tre-
vigen), recombinant Noggin protein (0.1 µg/ml; Peprotech), EGF 
(50 ng/ml; Peprotech), Nicotinamide (10 Mm; Sigma), SB202190 
(10 µM; Stem Cell Technologies), and A83-01 (0.5 µM; Tocris).
Organoid culture medium was refreshed twice a week. To pas-
sage the organoids, BME-2 was disassociated by pipetting. The 
organoids were collected into a falcon tube, and TrypLE (Invit-
rogen) was added before being incubated at 37°C for ∼5 min. A 
vigorous manual shake would ensue before the suspension was 
centrifuged at 800 g for 2 min. The remaining cell pellet was 
resuspended in 12 mg/ml BME-2 supplemented with complete 
media and plated as 10- to 15-µl droplets in a 6-well plate. After 
allowing the BME-2 to polymerize, complete media was added 
and the cells left at 37°C.
Liver metastases PDOs
Tissue was acquired from the Oxford Radcliffe Biobank with 
informed consent. The study was approved by the South Cen-
tral-Oxford C Research Ethics Committee. Organoids were 
derived from human liver metastases of colorectal cancer using 
rapid isolation as previously described (Ashley et al., 2014; 
Buzzelli et al., 2018). Organoids were grown in DMEM/F12 + 
 Buczacki et al. 
Colorectal cancer label–retaining cells
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171385
1909
GlutaMAX containing StemPro, ROCK inhibitor, R-Spondin-1 
(RSPO-1), Noggin, WNT3A, EGF, Insulin-like Growth Factor 1 
(IGF-1), Fibroblast Growth Factor 10 (FGF-10), Fibroblast Growth 
Factor basic (FGF-β), and Endothelin 3 (ET3). Expression of 
colonic markers were assessed in organoid cultures and origi-
nal tumor specimens. All organoids showed similar expression 
of colonic markers as their respective tumor specimen confirm-
ing their origin (Buzzelli et al., 2018). Organoids were passaged 
2 d before itraconazole treatment. For itraconazole treatment, 
organoids were given fresh media containing 1.25, 2.5, or 5 µM 
itraconazole or untreated media. Time-lapse images were cap-
tured every 3 h for 60 h on a Nikon Eclipse Ti-E inverted micro-
scope system. Images were converted to TIF files and the area 
of organoids were measured using in-house software written in 
MAT 
LAB R2015b software.
SA-β-GAL staining
Cells were washed with PBS and fixed with 0.5% glutaraldehyde 
in PBS for 15 min at room temperature. Cells were then washed 
with 1 mM MgCl2 in PBS, pH 6.0. X-Gal staining solution was 
incubated overnight at 37°C. Cells were then washed in PBS and 
visualized on a bright field tissue culture microscope.
X-Gal staining solution: 1× X-Gal and 1× KC solution in MgCl2/
PBS. KC solution: 0.32g K3Fe(CN)6, 1.05g K4Fe(CN)6 × 3H20, and 
25 ml PBS, pH 6.0.
RT-PCR
SYBR green RT-PCR was performed under standard conditions 
using a Rotorgene (RG3000; Corbett Research) or a QuantStudio 
12K Real-Time Flex System (Life Technologies). Custom primers 
were validated before use using standard SYBR green qRT-PCR 
and agarose gel electrophoresis of PCR products. Samples were 
normalized to housekeeping genes β-actin or β2 microglobulin.
TaqMan RT-PCR was performed under standard conditions 
as above. Samples were normalized to housekeeping genes 
ribosomal protein L19 and/or β2 microglobulin. All TaqMan 
probes underwent initial efficiency validation using standard 
curve analysis.
Human metastatic organoid RT-PCR
RNA was harvested using RNeasy purification kit (Qiagen). RNA 
was reverse transcribed using Moloney mouse leukemia virus 
reverse transcription (Promega) primed with oligo (dT). Quan-
titative RT-PCR primers were designed using PRI 
MER EXP 
RESS 
(Applied Biosystems). SYBR green chemistry was used with rL32 
as the internal reference gene. The conditions were 95°C for 10 
min, 40 cycles of 95°C for 15 s, and 60°C for 15 s (Mx3005P; Strat-
agene). Results were analyzed using sequence detector software, 
relative fold differences were determined using the ΔΔCt method.
Drug synergism assay and analysis
HT55 and SW948 cells were seeded at concentration of 105 
cells per ml in a 96-well plate. Cells were treated with a range 
of itraconazole (0–5 µM) and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU; Sigma; 
0–0.8 µM) or Oxaliplatin (Sigma; 0–4 µM) concentrations in 
quadruplicate for each drug combination. All reagents were 
dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (Sigma). Cell growth over time 
was measured using an Incucyte ZOOM instrument. Data were 
analyzed after 3 (Oxaliplatin) and 5 d (5-FU) of treatment. Data 
were normalized to lowest seeding value. Final growth values 
for each treatment were calculated as percentage of the vehi-
cle control value.
RNA sequencing and bioinformatic analysis
RNA was extracted using the RNAeasy Micro Plus kit (Qiagen) 
and quantified using the Qubit RNA Assay kit (Thermo Fisher 
Scientific). RNA quality was assessed using the Agilent Bioana-
lyzer system as per manufacturer’s instructions. After normal-
ization and sample randomization, Truseq library (Illumina) 
preparation was performed at the CRUK CI genomics facility 
and subsequent single-end, 50-bp sequencing using the HiSeq 
system (Illumina). After human genome alignment (hg19), read 
counts were normalized, and differential expression was tested 
using the DEseq protocol (Mortazavi et al., 2008; Anders and 
Huber, 2010). Data were deposited to the GEO database under 
accession no. GSE114014.
GO pathway analysis was performed using the online tool 
from GeneGO Metacore. Further bioinformatics analysis was 
performed using the GENE-E and Morpheus platforms (Broad 
Institute) on the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia database and 
the expression database of Marisa et al. (2013). GSEA was per-
formed using the Broad GSEA tool. Genes were preranked based 
on fold change.
All experiments were performed in biological quadruplicate.
For human T-LRC (CFSE+) characterizations, as a control 
experiment to identify off-target effects of the CFSE dye and 
culture artifacts, bulk populations from DLD1 cells at days 1 
and 6 after seeding, both with and without CFSE labeling, were 
included in the RNAseq analysis. Principal component analysis 
(PCA) of these control experiments showed that of the transcrip-
tomic differences seen in this experiment, ∼97% were generated 
by time in culture, and <1% were attributable to the dye.
PDO targeted gene sequencing
For targeted sequencing, we used a custom cRNA bait set (Agi-
lent SureSelect and WTSI v4 Panel) to enrich for all coding exons 
of 279 cancer genes. Short insert libraries (150 bp) were pre-
pared and sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq 4000 using 75-bp–
end sequencing as per Illumina’s protocol. The mean sequence 
coverage was ∼800× for the tumor samples. Sequencing reads 
were aligned to the reference human genome (GRCh37d5) using 
BWA-MEM (v0.7.15; Li, 2013), CaVEMan (v1.11.2) was used for 
calling substitutions (Jones et al., 2016), and Pindel (v2.2.2) for 
small insertions and deletions (Raine et al., 2015). Matched blood 
sample to remove germline mutations and somatic mutations 
were screened against a list of known cancer mutations to flag 
potential drivers.
Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was performed in Excel (Microsoft) and Prism 
v6 (GraphPad). All data were assessed for normality using the 
D’Agostino and Pearson test. Significance of parametric data 
were tested using a two-tailed Student’s t test. For nonparamet-
ric data, the Mann Whitney U test was used. For multiple group 
 Buczacki et al. 
Colorectal cancer label–retaining cells
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171385
1910
comparisons, ANO 
VA testing was performed. Raw experimental 
data are presented in Data S1.
Primers and probes
Mouse TaqMan probes
LP19, 
Mm02601633_g1; 
β2-MG, 
Mm00437762_m1; 
EphB2, Mm01181021_m1; Axin2, Mm00443610_m1; Msx1, 
Mm00440330_m1; Id1, Mm00775963_g1, p21, Mm04205640_
g1, Hes1, Mm01342805_m1; Cox-2, Mm03294838_g1; CyclinD1, 
Mm00432359_m1; Gli1, Mm00494654_m1; Ptch1, Mm00436026_
m1; Lysozyme, Mm00657323_m1; MMP7, Mm00487724_m1; 
Muc2, Mm01276696_m1; Dll1, Mm01279269_m1; Atoh1, 
Mm00476035_s1; ChgA, Mm00514341_m1; Sox9, Mm00448840_
m1; CDX1, Mm00438172_m1; Villin, Mm00494146_m1; Lgr5, 
Mm00438890_m1; Bmi1, Mm03053308_g1; PW1, Mm01337379_
m1; DCA 
MKL-1, Mm00444950_m1; Notch1, Mm00435249_m1, 
CD133, Mm00477115_m1; and CD44, Mm01277163_m1.
Human TaqMan probes
Lgr5, Hs00173664_m1; Smo, Hs01090242_m1; Ptch1, 
Hs00181117_m1; Shh, Hs00179843_m1; β-actin, Hs01060665_
g1; Axin2, Hs00610344_m1; RPL19, Hs02338565_gH; EphB2, 
Hs00362096_m1; Cldn1, Hs00221623_m1; Sox9, Hs00165814_
m1; CDX2, Hs01078080_m1; Muc2, Hs03005103_g1; and 
PTK7, Hs00897151_m1.
Human primers
rL32 forward, 5′-CAT 
CTC 
CTT 
CTC 
GGC 
ATCA-3′; rL32 reverse, 
5′-ACC 
CTG 
TTG 
TCA 
ATG 
CCTC-3′; Lgr5 forward, 5′-AAC 
AGT 
CCT 
GTG 
ACT 
CAA 
CTC 
AAG-3′; Lgr5 reverse, 5′-TTA 
GAG 
ACA 
TGG 
GAC 
AAA 
TGC 
CAC-3′; Shh forward, 5′-TTA 
TCC 
CCA 
ATG 
TGG 
CCG 
AG-3′; 
Shh reverse, 5′-TAC 
ACC 
TCT 
GAG 
TCA 
TCA 
GCC-3′; Ihh forward, 
5′-TCC 
GTC 
AAG 
TCC 
GAG 
CAC-3′; Ihh reverse, 5′-CTC 
GAT 
GAC 
CTG 
GAA 
GGC 
TC-3′.
Drug screen compounds and other reagents
HGF (R&D), Dkk1 (R&D), Wif1 (R&D), Draxin (R&D), sFRP1 
(R&D), sFRP5 (R&D), BMP4 (R&D), Gremlin (R&D), Jagged 1 
(Anaspec), BMP3 (R&D), BMP7 (R&D), Dll1 (R&D), Dll4 (R&D), 
DAPT (Sigma), DAPT-GSI (Sigma), TGF-α (R&D), Lrig1 (R&D), 
Shh (R&D), Ihh (R&D), Itraconazole (Sigma), Gant-61 (Tocris Bio-
science), Calcitriol/Vit D (Sigma), Rapamycin (LC Laboratories), 
ICG-001 (Tocris), and Carnosic Acid (Sigma; also see Data S1)
Xenograft and in vivo itraconazole dosing experiments: Bea-
con Pharmaceuticals (10 mg/ml).
Antibodies for IHC and FACS: AGR2 (Atlas, HPA007912), 
GDF15 (Atlas, HPA011191), β-catenin (BD Biosciences, 610154), 
and PTK7 (clone 188B; Miltenyi).
Online supplemental information
Fig. S1 shows the mathematical modeling used to identify the 
 
CFSEHigh dormant population, summary data from RNAseq char-
acterizations of LRCs, and the plasticity seen in LRC populations. 
Fig. S2 demonstrates itraconazole mediates its effect through 
noncanonical Hh signaling mediated by SuFu. Fig. S3 summaries 
shows additional preclinical validation of the effect of itracon-
azole and a summary diagram explaining its effectiveness. Fig. 
S4 shows the effect of itraconazole in Lgr5-CreER_Apcfl/fl mice. 
Data S1 contains summary RNAseq DE tables, phenotype sig-
natures, additional drug data, PDO sequencing data, and raw 
experimental data.
Acknowledgments
S.J.A. Buczacki is funded by a Cancer Research UK (CRUK) Cli-
nician Scientist Fellowship (C14094/A16485). The M.J. Gar-
nett laboratory is supported by funding from CRUK (C44943/
A22536) and Stand Up to Cancer (SU2C-AACR-DT1213), and the 
Wellcome Trust (102696). L. Vermeulen laboratory is supported 
by The New York Stem Cell Foundation and grants from KWF 
(Dutch Cancer Society; grant UVA2014-7245), the Maurits en 
Anna de Kock Stichting (2015-2), Worldwide Cancer Research 
(14-1164), the Maag Lever Darm Stichting (MLDS-CDG 14-03), 
the European Research Council (ERG-StG 638193), and ZonMW 
(Vidi 016.156.308) to L. Vermeulen, who is a New York Stem Cell 
Foundation–Robertson Investigator. The Cancer Research UK 
Cambridge Institute receives core funding support from CRUK.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Author contributions: S.J.A. Buczacki and D.J. Winton devised 
experiments, carried out experiments, and wrote the manuscript. 
S. Popova, C. Koukorava, and E. Biggs carried out experiments. J. 
Buzzelli carried devised and carried out human organoid experi-
ments. L. Vermeulen and L. Hazelwood carried out computational 
analyses. H. Francies and M.J. Garnett derived and molecularly 
characterized primary human organoids.
Submitted: 3 August 2017
Revised: 16 March 2018
Accepted: 10 May 2018
References
Anders, S., and W. Huber. 2010. Differential expression analysis for sequence 
count data. Genome Biol. 11:R106. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1186/ 
gb 
-2010 
-11 
-10 
-r106
Ashley, N., M. Jones, D. Ouaret, J. Wilding, and W.F. Bodmer. 2014. Rapidly 
derived colorectal cancer cultures recapitulate parental cancer charac-
teristics and enable personalized therapeutic assays. J. Pathol. 234:34–45. 
https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1002/ 
path 
.4371
Barretina, J., G. Caponigro, N. Stransky, K. Venkatesan, A.A. Margolin, S. Kim, 
C.J. Wilson, J. Lehár, G.V. Kryukov, D. Sonkin, et al. 2012. The Cancer Cell 
Line Encyclopedia enables predictive modelling of anticancer drug sen-
sitivity. Nature. 483:603–607. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nature11003
Berlin, J., J.C. Bendell, L.L. Hart, I. Firdaus, I. Gore, R.C. Hermann, M.F. 
Mulcahy, M.M. Zalupski, H.M. Mackey, R.L. Yauch, et al. 2013. A ran-
domized phase II trial of vismodegib versus placebo with FOL 
FOX or 
FOL 
FIRI and bevacizumab in patients with previously untreated meta-
static colorectal cancer. Clin. Cancer Res. 19:258–267. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1158/ 
1078 
-0432 
.CCR 
-12 
-1800
Beumer, J., and H. Clevers. 2016. Regulation and plasticity of intestinal stem 
cells during homeostasis and regeneration. Development. 143:3639–3649. 
https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1242/ 
dev 
.133132
Buczacki, S.J., H.I. Zecchini, A.M. Nicholson, R. Russell, L. Vermeulen, R. 
Kemp, and D.J. Winton. 2013. Intestinal label-retaining cells are secre-
tory precursors expressing Lgr5. Nature. 495:65–69. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nature11965
Buzzelli, J.N., D. Ouaret, G. Brown, P.D. Allen, and R.J. Muschel. 2018. Colorec-
tal cancer liver metastases organoids retain characteristics of original 
tumor and acquire chemotherapy resistance. Stem Cell Res. (Amst.). 
27:109–120. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.scr 
.2018 
.01 
.016
 Buczacki et al. 
Colorectal cancer label–retaining cells
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171385
1911
Clevers, H. 2013. Stem Cells: A unifying theory for the crypt. Nature. 495:53–
54. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nature11958
De Sousa E Melo, F., X. Wang, M. Jansen, E. Fessler, A. Trinh, L.P. de Rooij, J.H. 
de Jong, O.J. de Boer, R. van Leersum, M.F. Bijlsma, et al. 2013. Poor-prog-
nosis colon cancer is defined by a molecularly distinct subtype and 
develops from serrated precursor lesions. Nat. Med. 19:614–618. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nm 
.3174
De Sousa E Melo, F., A.V. Kurtova, J.M. Harnoss, N. Kljavin, J.D. Hoeck, J. Hung, 
J.E. Anderson, E.E. Storm, Z. Modrusan, H. Koeppen, et al. 2017. A dis-
tinct role for Lgr5+ stem cells in primary and metastatic colon cancer. 
Nature. 543:676–680. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nature21713
Di Micco, R., M. Fumagalli, A. Cicalese, S. Piccinin, P. Gasparini, C. Luise, 
C. Schurra, M. Garre’, P.G. Nuciforo, A. Bensimon, et al. 2006. Onco-
gene-induced senescence is a DNA damage response triggered by 
DNA hyper-replication. Nature. 444:638–642. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nature05327
Ding, Q., S. Fukami, X. Meng, Y. Nishizaki, X. Zhang, H. Sasaki, A. Dlugosz, 
M. Nakafuku, and C. Hui. 1999. Mouse suppressor of fused is a negative 
regulator of sonic hedgehog signaling and alters the subcellular distri-
bution of Gli1. Curr. Biol. 9:1119–1122: S1. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
S0960 
-9822(99)80482 
-5
Elzi, D.J., M. Song, K. Hakala, S.T. Weintraub, and Y. Shiio. 2012. Wnt antago-
nist SFRP1 functions as a secreted mediator of senescence. Mol. Cell. Biol. 
32:4388–4399. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1128/ 
MCB 
.06023 
-11
Fridman, A.L., and M.A. Tainsky. 2008. Critical pathways in cellular senes-
cence and immortalization revealed by gene expression profiling. Onco-
gene. 27:5975–5987. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
onc 
.2008 
.213
Giovannini, C., L. Gramantieri, M. Minguzzi, F. Fornari, P. Chieco, G.L. Grazi, 
and L. Bolondi. 2012. CDKN1C/P57 is regulated by the Notch target gene 
Hes1 and induces senescence in human hepatocellular carcinoma. Am. J. 
Pathol. 181:413–422. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.ajpath 
.2012 
.04 
.019
Guinney, J., R. Dienstmann, X. Wang, A. de Reyniès, A. Schlicker, C. Soneson, 
L. Marisa, P. Roepman, G. Nyamundanda, P. Angelino, et al. 2015. The 
consensus molecular subtypes of colorectal cancer. Nat. Med. 21:1350–
1356. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nm 
.3967
Hara, M., T. Nagasaki, K. Shiga, and H. Takeyama. 2016. Suppression of Can-
cer-associated Fibroblasts and Endothelial Cells by Itraconazole in Bev-
acizumab-resistant Gastrointestinal Cancer. Anticancer Res. 36:169–177.
Jones, D., K.M. Raine, H. Davies, P.S. Tarpey, A.P. Butler, J.W. Teague, S. Nik-
Zainal, and P.J. Campbell. 2016. cgpCaVEManWrapper: Simple Execu-
tion of CaVEMan in Order to Detect Somatic Single Nucleotide Variants 
in NGS Data. Curr. Protoc. Bioinformatics. 56:15.10.1–15.10: 18. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1002/ 
cpbi 
.20
Jung, P., C. Sommer, F.M. Barriga, S.J. Buczacki, X. Hernando-Momblona, M. 
Sevillano, M. Duran-Frigola, P. Aloy, M. Selbach, D.J. Winton, and E. Bat-
lle. 2015. Isolation of Human Colon Stem Cells Using Surface Expression 
of PTK7. Stem Cell Reports. 5:979–987. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.stemcr 
.2015 
.10 
.003
Kang, M.K., A. Kameta, K.H. Shin, M.A. Baluda, H.R. Kim, and N.H. Park. 2003. 
Senescence-associated genes in normal human oral keratinocytes. Exp. 
Cell Res. 287:272–281. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
S0014 
-4827(03)00061 
-2
Kim, J., J.Y. Tang, R. Gong, J. Kim, J.J. Lee, K.V. Clemons, C.R. Chong, K.S. Chang, 
M. Fereshteh, D. Gardner, et al. 2010. Itraconazole, a commonly used 
antifungal that inhibits Hedgehog pathway activity and cancer growth. 
Cancer Cell. 17:388–399. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.ccr 
.2010 
.02 
.027
Kreso, A., C.A. O’Brien, P. van Galen, O.I. Gan, F. Notta, A.M. Brown, K. Ng, J. 
Ma, E. Wienholds, C. Dunant, et al. 2013. Variable clonal repopulation 
dynamics influence chemotherapy response in colorectal cancer. Sci-
ence. 339:543–548. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1126/ 
science 
.1227670
León, K., J. Faro, and J. Carneiro. 2004. A general mathematical framework to 
model generation structure in a population of asynchronously dividing 
cells. J. Theor. Biol. 229:455–476. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.jtbi 
.2004 
.04 
.011
Li, H.2013. Aligning sequence reads, clone sequences and assembly contigs 
with BWA-MEM. arXiv: 1303.3997v1[q-bio.GN]
Linnekamp, J.F., S.R.V. Hooff, P.R. Prasetyanti, R. Kandimalla, J.Y. Buikhuisen, 
E. Fessler, P. Ramesh, K.A.S.T. Lee, G.G.W. Bochove, J.H. de Jong, et al. 
2018. Consensus molecular subtypes of colorectal cancer are recapitu-
lated in in vitro and in vivo models. Cell Death Differ. 25:616–633. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
s41418 
-017 
-0011 
-5
Liu, R., J. Li, T. Zhang, L. Zou, Y. Chen, K. Wang, Y. Lei, K. Yuan, Y. Li, J. Lan, 
et al. 2014. Itraconazole suppresses the growth of glioblastoma through 
induction of autophagy: involvement of abnormal cholesterol traffick-
ing. Autophagy. 10:1241–1255. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.4161/ 
auto 
.28912
Malladi, S., D.G. Macalinao, X. Jin, L. He, H. Basnet, Y. Zou, E. de Stanchina, 
and J. Massagué. 2016. Metastatic Latency and Immune Evasion through 
Autocrine Inhibition of WNT. Cell. 165:45–60. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.cell 
.2016 
.02 
.025
Marisa, L., A. de Reyniès, A. Duval, J. Selves, M.P. Gaub, L. Vescovo, M.C. 
Etienne-Grimaldi, R. Schiappa, D. Guenot, M. Ayadi, et al. 2013. Gene 
expression classification of colon cancer into molecular subtypes: char-
acterization, validation, and prognostic value. PLoS Med. 10:e1001453. 
https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1371/ 
journal 
.pmed 
.1001453
Matsuoka, S., M.C. Edwards, C. Bai, S. Parker, P. Zhang, A. Baldini, J.W. Harper, 
and S.J. Elledge. 1995. p57KIP2, a structurally distinct member of the 
p21CIP1 Cdk inhibitor family, is a candidate tumor suppressor gene. 
Genes Dev. 9:650–662. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1101/ 
gad 
.9 
.6 
.650
Mazumdar, T., J. Devecchio, A. Agyeman, T. Shi, and J.A. Houghton. 2011. 
Blocking Hedgehog survival signaling at the level of the GLI genes 
induces DNA damage and extensive cell death in human colon carci-
noma cells. Cancer Res. 71:5904–5914. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1158/ 
0008 
-5472 
.CAN 
-10 
-4173
Meng, X., R. Poon, X. Zhang, A. Cheah, Q. Ding, C.C. Hui, and B. Alman. 2001. 
Suppressor of fused negatively regulates beta-catenin signaling. J. Biol. 
Chem. 276:40113–40119. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1074/ 
jbc 
.M105317200
Moore, N., J. Houghton, and S. Lyle. 2012. Slow-cycling therapy-resistant can-
cer cells. Stem Cells Dev. 21:1822–1830. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1089/ 
scd 
.2011 
.0477
Mortazavi, A., B.A. Williams, K. McCue, L. Schaeffer, and B. Wold. 2008. 
Mapping and quantifying mammalian transcriptomes by RNA-Seq. Nat. 
Methods. 5:621–628. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nmeth 
.1226
Moser, A.R., H.C. Pitot, and W.F. Dove. 1990. A dominant mutation that predis-
poses to multiple intestinal neoplasia in the mouse. Science. 247:322–324. 
https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1126/ 
science 
.2296722
Otsuki, L., and A.H. Brand. 2018. Cell cycle heterogeneity directs the timing 
of neural stem cell activation from quiescence. Science. 360:99–102. 
https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1126/ 
science 
.aan8795
Pece, S., D. Tosoni, S. Confalonieri, G. Mazzarol, M. Vecchi, S. Ronzoni, L. Ber-
nard, G. Viale, P.G. Pelicci, and P.P. Di Fiore. 2010. Biological and molec-
ular heterogeneity of breast cancers correlates with their cancer stem 
cell content. Cell. 140:62–73. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.cell 
.2009 
.12 
.007
Pollard, P., M. Deheragoda, S. Segditsas, A. Lewis, A. Rowan, K. Howarth, L. 
Willis, E. Nye, A. McCart, N. Mandir, et al. 2009. The Apc 1322T mouse 
develops severe polyposis associated with submaximal nuclear beta-cat-
enin expression. Gastroenterology. 136:2204–2213.e13. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1053/ 
j 
.gastro 
.2009 
.02 
.058
Raine, K.M., J. Hinton, A.P. Butler, J.W. Teague, H. Davies, P. Tarpey, S. Nik-
Zainal, and P.J. Campbell. 2015. cgpPindel: Identifying Somatically 
Acquired Insertion and Deletion Events from Paired End Sequencing. 
Curr. Protoc. Bioinformatics. 52:1–12: 12.
Regan, J.L., D. Schumacher, S. Staudte, A. Steffen, J. Haybaeck, U. Keilholz, C. 
Schweiger, N. Golob-Schwarzl, D. Mumberg, D. Henderson, et al. 2017. 
Non-Canonical Hedgehog Signaling Is a Positive Regulator of the WNT 
Pathway and Is Required for the Survival of Colon Cancer Stem Cells. 
Cell Reports. 21:2813–2828. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.celrep 
.2017 
.11 
.025
Sato, T., D.E. Stange, M. Ferrante, R.G. Vries, J.H. Van Es, S. Van den Brink, 
W.J. Van Houdt, A. Pronk, J. Van Gorp, P.D. Siersema, and H. Clevers. 
2011a. Long-term expansion of epithelial organoids from human colon, 
adenoma, adenocarcinoma, and Barrett’s epithelium. Gastroenterology. 
141:1762–1772. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1053/ 
j 
.gastro 
.2011 
.07 
.050
Sato, T., J.H. van Es, H.J. Snippert, D.E. Stange, R.G. Vries, M. van den Born, N. 
Barker, N.F. Shroyer, M. van de Wetering, and H. Clevers. 2011b. Paneth 
cells constitute the niche for Lgr5 stem cells in intestinal crypts. Nature. 
469:415–418. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nature09637
Shimokawa, M., Y. Ohta, S. Nishikori, M. Matano, A. Takano, M. Fujii, S. Date, 
S. Sugimoto, T. Kanai, and T. Sato. 2017. Visualization and targeting of 
LGR5+ human colon cancer stem cells. Nature. 545:187–192. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
nature22081
Valladares-Ayerbes, M., M. Blanco-Calvo, M. Reboredo, M.J. Lorenzo-Patiño, 
P. Iglesias-Díaz, M. Haz, S. Díaz-Prado, V. Medina, I. Santamarina, S. 
Pértega, et al. 2012. Evaluation of the adenocarcinoma-associated gene 
AGR2 and the intestinal stem cell marker LGR5 as biomarkers in col-
orectal cancer. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 13:4367–4387. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.3390/ 
ijms13044367
van der Heijden, M., C.D. Zimberlin, A.M. Nicholson, S. Colak, R. Kemp, S.L. 
Meijer, J.P. Medema, F.R. Greten, M. Jansen, D.J. Winton, and L. Vermeu-
len. 2016. Bcl-2 is a critical mediator of intestinal transformation. Nat. 
Commun. 7:10916. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
ncomms10916
 Buczacki et al. 
Colorectal cancer label–retaining cells
Journal of Experimental Medicine
https:/
/doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171385
1912
van de Wetering, M., H.E. Francies, J.M. Francis, G. Bounova, F. Iorio, A. 
Pronk, W. van Houdt, J. van Gorp, A. Taylor-Weiner, L. Kester, et al. 
2015. Prospective derivation of a living organoid biobank of colorectal 
cancer patients. Cell. 161:933–945. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.cell 
.2015 
.03 
.053
Verga Falzacappa, M.V., C. Ronchini, L.B. Reavie, and P.G. Pelicci. 2012. Regu-
lation of self-renewal in normal and cancer stem cells. FEBS J. 279:3559–
3572. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1111/ 
j 
.1742 
-4658 
.2012 
.08727 
.x
Vermeulen, L., F. de Sousa e Melo, M. van der Heijden, K. Cameron, J.H. de Jong, 
T. Borovski, J.B. Tuynman, M. Todaro, C. Merz, H. Rodermond, et al. 2010. 
Wnt activity defines colon cancer stem cells and is regulated by the micro-
environment. Nat. Cell Biol. 12:468–476. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1038/ 
ncb2048
Ye, X., B. Zerlanko, A. Kennedy, G. Banumathy, R. Zhang, and P.D. Adams. 2007. 
Downregulation of Wnt signaling is a trigger for formation of facultative 
heterochromatin and onset of cell senescence in primary human cells. 
Mol. Cell. 27:183–196. https:// 
doi 
.org/ 
10 
.1016/ 
j 
.molcel 
.2007 
.05 
.034
