 Multiple Sclerosis Journal
2017, Vol. 23(5) 628 
–636
DOI: 10.1177/ 
1352458516682105
© The Author(s), 2016.  
Reprints and permissions:  
http://www.sagepub.co.uk/
journalsPermissions.nav
MULTIPLE
SCLEROSIS MSJ
JOURNAL
628 
journals.sagepub.com/home/msj
Introduction
The gut microbiota has emerged as an area of intense 
interest in multiple sclerosis (MS). Composed of 
approximately 1014 highly diverse micro-organisms, 
the gut microbiota is vital to digestion and metabo-
lism.1 Its immunologic functions, however, includ-
ing physical blockade of ingested potential 
pathogens, oral tolerization to antigenic stimuli, and 
modulation of the gut-associated lymphoid tissue 
(GALT) may play a significant role in autoimmune 
diseases such as MS.1–3
Research examining the gut microbiota in MS is 
framed by our understanding of MS immunopatho-
genesis. Infiltration of Th1 and Th17 CD4+ T-cells 
into the central nervous system seems to be prominent 
in MS.4 CD4+ T-regulatory cells protect against auto-
immunity by suppressing auto-reactive effector 
T-cells, and decreased numbers or defective function 
of T-regulatory cells may also contribute to the devel-
opment of MS.4 Environmental factors such as the gut 
microbiota may contribute to MS immunopathogene-
sis by directing differentiation of CD4+ T-cell 
phenotypes or impacting T-regulatory cell function. 
Previously reviewed animal studies have demon-
strated that alteration of the gut microbiota can pow-
erfully modulate immune-mediated demyelination in 
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) 
and paved the way for examination of the gut micro-
biota in MS.2,5
The gut microbiome in MS
Imbalance, or “dysbiosis” of the gut microbiota, is 
implicated in numerous diseases, including obesity, 
diabetes mellitus type 2 (T2DM), diabetes mellitus 
type 1 (T1DM), inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), 
and rheumatoid arthritis (RA).3 Examination of the 
gut microbiota in MS requires a working under-
standing of normal human gut microbiota composi-
tion. Over 99% of the gut microbiota genome, also 
known as the “microbiome,” is bacterial, with most 
bacteria in the adult human gut belonging to the 
Firmicutes or Bacteroidetes phyla.1 The remaining 
genes are largely from Archaea, a separate prokary-
ote kingdom.1 The advent of massive parallel 
Breaking down the gut microbiome 
composition in multiple sclerosis
Adrian Budhram, Seema Parvathy, Marcelo Kremenchutzky and Michael Silverman
Abstract
Background: The gut microbiome, which consists of a highly diverse ecologic community of micro-
organisms, has increasingly been studied regarding its role in multiple sclerosis (MS) immunopathogen-
esis. This review critically examines the literature investigating the gut microbiome in MS.
Methods: A comprehensive search was performed of PubMed databases and ECTRIMS meeting abstracts 
for literature relating to the gut microbiome in MS. Controlled studies examining the gut microbiome in 
patients with MS were included for review.
Results: Identified studies were predominantly case-control in their design and consistently found dif-
ferences in the gut microbiome of MS patients compared to controls. We examine plausible mechanistic 
links between these differences and MS immunopathogenesis, and discuss the therapeutic implications 
of these findings.
Conclusions: Review of the available literature reveals potential immunopathogenic links between the 
gut microbiome and MS, identifies avenues for therapeutic advancement, and emphasizes the need for 
further systematic study in this emerging field.
Keywords: Multiple sclerosis, gut, microbiome, microbiota
Date received: 13 October 2016; revised: 5 November 2016; accepted: 9 November 2016
Correspondence to:  
A Budhram  
Department of Clinical 
Neurological Sciences, 
Division of Neurology, 
University Hospital, 339 
Windermere Road, London, 
ON N6A 5A5, Canada. 
adrian.budhram@
medportal.ca
Adrian Budhram  
Marcelo Kremenchutzky 
Department of Clinical 
Neurological Sciences, 
Division of Neurology, 
University Hospital, London, 
ON, Canada
Seema Parvathy  
Michael Silverman  
Division of Infectious 
Diseases, St. Joseph’s Health 
Care, London, ON, Canada
682105 MSJ0010.1177/1352458516682105Multiple Sclerosis JournalA Budhram, S Parvathy et al.
research-article2016
Topical Review
 A Budhram, S Parvathy et al.
journals.sagepub.com/home/msj 
629
sequencing technology, such as 16S rRNA sequenc-
ing, has led to the genetic profiling of gut microbiota 
that previously were unidentifiable through tradi-
tional culture techniques; this has hugely advanced 
our ability to study the gut microbiome composition 
in diseases such as MS.1,3 Unlike Clostridium diffi-
cile infection, large shifts in gut microbial commu-
nity composition have generally not been observed 
in MS. Instead, enrichment or depletion of a limited 
number of taxa seems to be a reproducible finding.6,7 
We systematically review alterations in the gut 
microbiota that have been identified in patients with 
MS (see Table 1) and discuss their potential contri-
butions to MS pathogenesis (see Table 2).
Firmicutes and butyrate production
The majority of bacteria in the adult human gut 
belong to the phylum Firmicutes.1,3 An early study 
of the gut microbiome in MS by Rumah et al.16 
implicated 
epsilon 
toxin 
(ETX)-producing 
Clostridium perfringens, which belongs to the 
Firmicutes phylum, in MS pathogenesis. The authors 
isolated ETX-producing Clostridium perfringens 
Type B from the stool of an MS patient and found 
that 10% of their MS patients had ETX-specific anti-
bodies compared to only 1% of controls, indicating 
increased immune system exposure to ETX.16 This 
toxin can disrupt the blood–brain barrier and bind 
myelin, leading to its consideration as a potential 
MS trigger.16 Although provocative, further study is 
needed to explore any possible pathogenic role of 
ETX-producing Clostridium perfringens in MS.
Human bacterial colonic producers of the short-chain 
fatty acid (SCFA) butyrate have garnered interest for 
their immunomodulatory effects and are also largely 
Firmicutes, 
most 
abundantly 
Faecalibacterium 
prausnitzii 
and 
Eubacterium 
rectale/Roseburia 
spp.17,18 Butyrate inhibits the pro-inflammatory sign-
aling pathway nuclear factor-kappa B (NFkB) in 
colonic epithelial cells and prevents systemic expo-
sure to dietary or microbial antigenic stimuli via 
intestinal epithelial cell barrier reinforcement.17,18 As 
such, depletion of butyrate-producing Firmicutes may 
plausibly be linked to the pathogenesis of immune-
mediated diseases such as MS. In support of this 
hypothesis, a pilot study of the gut microbiome in MS 
by Cantarel et al.14 found decreased Faecalibacterium 
among seven relapsing–remitting multiple sclerosis 
(RRMS) patients. Miyake et al.13 similarly identified 
depleted Faecalibacterium when comparing 20 
RRMS patients to controls, and Tremlett et al.6 noted 
reduced butyrate-producing Lachnospiraceae and 
Ruminococcaceae among 18 pediatric patients with 
early MS. Interestingly, however, Chen et al.11 found 
increased abundance of the butyrate producer Blautia 
among 31 RRMS patients compared to controls. This 
finding suggests that butyrate-producing Firmicutes 
are not uniformly depleted among MS patients and 
emphasizes the need for larger-scale, longitudinal 
studies to better characterize such nuanced alterations 
of the gut microbiota.
Jangi et al.7 identified a reduction in Butyricimonas 
among 60 RRMS patients, which belongs to the 
Bacteroidetes phylum but is capable of producing 
butyrate as well. Butyricimonas was similarly 
depleted in pediatric patients with early MS.6 In 
another pediatric study, Tremlett et al.12 followed 17 
early MS patients over a mean of 19.8 months and 
found that absence of the Fusobacteria phylum, 
which also contains butyrate-producing species, was 
associated with shorter time to relapse.35 Presence of 
Fusobacteria, however, has been associated with 
autoimmune diseases such as juvenile idiopathic 
arthritis, and further research is therefore required to 
better delineate its potential role in MS.36 Nonetheless, 
the reproducibly identified depletion of butyrate-pro-
ducing bacteria in MS may be a pro-inflammatory gut 
microbial alteration with significant contribution to 
disease immunopathogenesis.
Bacteroidetes
Bacteroidetes are the second most populous phylum 
in the adult human gut, with the predominant genera 
being Bacteroides and Prevotella.37 Miyake et al.13 
found reductions in Bacteroidetes, including several 
Bacteroides species and Prevotella copri, among 
their RRMS patients. Chen et al.11 similarly found 
depletion of Prevotella among their patients with 
RRMS, and Castillo Alvarez et al.8 also reported a 
reduced abundance of Prevotella copri among MS 
patients that seemed to partially normalize with 
IFN-beta treatment. Baum et al.15 identified reduced 
Bacteroidaceae among 54 MS patients, a finding 
also noted by Tremlett et al.6 among patients with 
pediatric early MS.
Across studies, depletion of Bacteroidetes seems to be a 
repeatedly identified alteration in the gut microbiome of 
patients with MS. This may relate to Lipid 654, a bacte-
rially derived lipodipeptide that is produced by a num-
ber of Bacteroidetes and was found to have lower serum 
levels among MS patients compared to controls.13,19 
Lipid 654 binds toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2); although 
TLRs are critical to innate immune system activation, 
low-level tonic TLR2 stimulation by Lipid 654 has 
been shown to regulate innate immune responses.19,20 
 Multiple Sclerosis Journal 23(5)
630 
journals.sagepub.com/home/msj
Table 1. Analyses of the gut microbiome composition in multiple sclerosis.
Study
Study design
Study participants
Major differences in gut microbiome composition
Castillo Alvarez 
et al.8
Case-control
30 MS patients (15 interferon (IFN)-
beta-1b-treated, 15 untreated) versus 14 
controls.
Differences in Firmicutes, Actinobacteria, Proteobacteria and Lentisphaerae noted between 
MS patients and controls. Tendency toward restoration of normal gut microbiota seen in treated 
compared untreated MS patients, particularly for Prevotella copri. Reduced Archaea found in MS 
patients compared to controls.
Cekanaviciute 
et al.9
Case-control
64 untreated MS patients versus 68 
controls.
Acinetobacter calcoaceticus and Akkermansia muciniphila were increased among MS patients, 
while Parabacteroides diastonis was increased among controls. In vitro Acinetobacter 
calcoaceticus reduced T-regulatory cell differentiation and increased Th1 and Th2 cell 
differentiation, while Akkermansia muciniphila stimulated Th1 cell expansion. In contrast, 
Parabacteroides diastasonis stimulated an interleukin (IL)-10+ T-regulatory cell phenotype.
Tremlett et al. 10
Case-control
15 pediatric early RRMS patients (2 IFN-
beta-treated, 5 glatiramer acetate (GA)-
treated, 8 untreated) versus 9 controls.
In this exploratory study looking at associations between the gut microbiota and immune markers, 
no difference in immune markers between cases and controls was found. However, several 
associations between immune markers and certain gut microbiota, including Bacteroidetes and 
Actinobacteria, were noted.
Jangi et al.7
Case-control
60 RRMS patients (18 IFN-beta-treated, 
14 GA-treated, 28 untreated) versus 43 
controls.
Increased Methanobrevibacter, increased Akkermansia, and decreased Butyricimonas was 
found in MS patients compared to controls. Prevotella, Collinsella, and Slackia were decreased 
in untreated patients compared to controls. MS patients on disease-modifying treatment had 
increased Prevotella, increased Sutterella and decreased Sarcina compared to untreated patients.
Chen et al.11
Case-control
31 RRMS (14 IFN-beta-treated, 1 
GA-treated, 5 natalizumab treated, 11 
untreated) patients versus 36 controls.
Increased abundance of Pseudomonas, Mycoplana, Blautia, and Dorea was identified among MS 
patients, while Parabacteroides, Adlercreutzia, Collinsella, Lactobacillus, and Prevotella were 
increased among controls.
Tremlett et al.6
Case-control
18 pediatric early RRMS patients (3 IFN-
beta-treated, 5 GA-treated, 1 natalizumab-
treated, 9 untreated) versus 17 controls.
Increased Bilophila, Bifidobacterium, and Methanobrevibacter, as well as decreased 
Faecalibacterium, Lachnospiraceae, Ruminococcaceae, Butyricimonas, and Bacteroidaceae 
including Bacteroides fragilis was found among pediatric early MS cases compared to controls.
Tremlett et al.12
Prospective 
Cohort
17 pediatric early RRMS patients (3 IFN-
beta-treated, 5 GA-treated, 1 natalizumab-
treated, 8 untreated).
After covariate adjustments, only absence of Fusobacteria was associated with shorter time to 
relapse over a mean follow-up of 19.8 months.
Miyake et al.13
Case-control
20 RRMS patients versus 40 controls
Depletion of 14 species belonging to Clostridia clusters XIVa and IV, including Faecalibacterium 
prausnitzii, was found among MS patients compared to controls. Decrease in several Bacteroides 
spp., Prevotella copri, and Suterella wadsworthensis in MS patients compared to controls. 
Increased Eggerthella lenta and Streptococcus thermophilus in MS patients compared to controls.
Cantarel et al.14
Case-control
7 RRMS patients (5 GA-treated, 2 
untreated) versus 8 controls enrolled in 
vitamin D trial.
Decreased Faecalibacterium was found in MS patients compared to controls, among other 
differences. Multiple differences also noted in gut microbiota composition in GA-treated 
compared to untreated MS patients, and in untreated MS patients after vitamin D supplementation 
compared to other groups.
Baum et al.15
Case-control
54 MS patients versus controls (number 
of controls not stated in abstract).
Increased Atopobium, increased Bifidobacterium, and decreased Bacteroidaceae was found in MS 
patients compared to controls.
Rumah et al.16
Case-control
30 MS patients (26 RRMS, 4 secondary 
progressive multiple sclerosis (SPMS)) 
versus 31 controls
Epsilon toxin (ETX)-producing Clostridium perfringens Type B was isolated from an MS patient. 
Non-ETX-producing Clostridium perfringens Type A was found in 52% of controls compared to 
only 23% of MS patients. ETX-specific antibodies were found in 10% of MS patients compared 
to only 1% of controls.
 A Budhram, S Parvathy et al.
journals.sagepub.com/home/msj 
631
Table 2. Possible immunopathogenic roles of gut microorganisms in multiple sclerosis.
Gut microorganisms
Phyla
Possible relevance to MS immunopathogenesis
Decreased abundance in multiple sclerosis
Butyrate-producers (e.g. 
Faecalibacterium, Butyricimonas, 
and Fusobacterium)
Mostly Firmicutes, 
some Bacteroidetes, 
some Fusobacteria
Decreased butyrate-mediated inhibition of pro-inflammatory NFkB signaling pathway and prevention of systemic 
exposure to gut antigenic stimuli may be implicated in MS pathogenesis.17,18
Bacteroides, Prevotella, and 
Parabacteroides
Bacteroidetes
Lipid 654 produced by some Bacteroidetes may tonically stimulate toll-like receptor (TLR)-2, leading to innate immune 
regulation that is lost when Bacteroidetes is depleted.19,20 Propionate is a short-chain fatty acid (SCFA) with anti-
inflammatory effects that is produced by some Bacteroidetes, and reduced propionate-producing Bacteroidetes may promote 
inflammation.21–23 Bacteroides fragilis-derived polysaccharide A (PSA) may induce IL-10-dependent enhanced conversion 
of CD4+ T-regulatory cells and protect against autoimmunity in MS.24,25 Oral administration of Parabacteroides distasonis 
may augment the CD4+ T-regulatory phenotype, plausibly linking its depletion in MS pathogenesis.9
Increased abundance in multiple sclerosis
Epsilon-toxin (ETX)-producing 
Clostridium perfringens
Firmicutes
ETX has been shown to disrupt the blood brain barrier and bind myelin.16 Increased exposure to ETX produced by 
Clostridium perfringens Types B and/or D may therefore play a role in triggering demyelination in MS.
Methanobrevibacter
Euryarchaeota
Methanogenic archaea may cause human dendritic cell activation and triggering of adaptive immune responses, 
suggesting a pro-inflammatory effect.7,26,27 Further study of Methanobrevibacter in MS is needed, with adjustment for 
potential confounding effect of the positive association between constipation and methanogenic archaea.
Bilophila, Pseudomonas, 
Mycoplana, and Acinetobacter
Proteobacteria
Proteobacteria have been associated with IBD by driving inflammation and promoting gut dysbiosis, suggesting 
a pro-inflammatory effect that may also contribute to MS pathogenesis.28 A shared molecular sequence between 
Acinetobacter calcoaceticus and an encephalitogenic peptide of bovine myelin, as well as elevated anti-Acinetobacter 
antibodies in MS patients compared to controls, suggests a potential role in MS pathogenesis via molecular mimicry.29 
Acinetobacter calcoaceticus may also reduce T-regulatory cell function in MS.9
Akkermansia
Verrucomicrobia
Reduced Akkermansia muciniphila was noted in IBD, but this bacterium has also been found to facilitate Salmonella 
infection in a mouse model;30,31 potential link to MS unclear but may relate to promotion of a pro-inflammatory T-cell 
phenotype.9
Bifidobacterium
Actinobacteria
Increased Bifidobacterium associated with IBD,32 but administration of some Bifidobacterium spp. and other probiotic 
bacteria associated with EAE amelioration;33,34 how increased Bifidobacterium identified in some studies of the gut 
microbiome in MS relates to disease activity is unclear.
 Multiple Sclerosis Journal 23(5)
632 
journals.sagepub.com/home/msj
Decreased Lipid 654-producing Bacteroidetes may 
therefore lead to a loss of innate immune regulation and 
in turn enable the immune auto-reactivity seen in MS.19 
Bacteroidetes also produce propionate, a SCFA similar 
to butyrate that has anti-inflammatory effects.21–23 Oral 
propionate administration has been shown to increase 
T-regulatory cells and decrease Th1/Th17 cells in 
patients with MS, supporting the possibility that deple-
tion of propionate-producing Bacteroidetes may play a 
role in MS pathogenesis.23
Cekanaviciute et al.9 found that one particular 
Bacteroidetes species, Parabacteroides distasonis, 
was decreased among 64 MS patients compared to 
controls. Parabacteroides distasonis may augment 
the CD4+ T-regulatory cell phenotype, plausibly link-
ing its depletion to MS immunopathogenesis.9 
Tremlett et al.6 identified a reduction in another 
Bacteroidetes species, Bacteroides fragilis, among 
their pediatric early MS cases. Bacteroides fragilis–
derived polysaccharide A (PSA) has been shown to 
induce T-regulatory cells in vitro and protect against 
EAE in vivo.24,25 Bacteroides fragilis PSA uniquely 
exemplifies a single gut microbial-derived product 
that demonstrates anti-inflammatory properties and 
seems protective against immune-mediated demyeli-
nation, suggesting therapeutic potential in MS.
Euryarchaeota
The Euryarchaeota phylum belongs to the prokaryotic 
kingdom Archaea, with the predominant colonic spe-
cies being methane-producing Methanobrevibacter 
smithii.26 Euryarchaeota have been implicated in 
inflammatory processes; Methanosphaera stadtmanae 
is increased in IBD, while both Methanosphaera stadt-
manae and Methanobrevibacter smithii can cause 
human dendritic cell activation.27,38 Interestingly, Jangi 
et al.7 found increased Methanobrevibacter among 60 
RRMS patients compared to controls. Tremlett et al.6 
similarly found enrichment of Methanobrevibacter 
among their patients with pediatric early MS. Castillo 
Alvarez et al.,8 however, found a lower abundance of 
Archaea among 30 MS patients compared to controls, 
suggesting that further investigation of the relationship 
between Methanobrevibacter and MS is warranted. 
Importantly, the association between constipation and 
increased methanogenic archaea is a potential con-
founder that should be controlled for in future studies, 
given the high prevalence of constipation in MS.7,26
Other microorganisms
Several other differences in the gut microbiome of MS 
patients have been identified. Chen et al.11 found an 
increased abundance of Pseudomonas and Mycoplana, 
which belong to the phylum Proteobacteria, among 
their patients with RRMS. Additionally, Tremlett 
et al.6 identified increased Bilophila among patients 
with pediatric early MS, which also belongs to 
Proteobacteria. Proteobacteria have been associated 
with IBD by driving inflammation and promoting 
 
gut dysbiosis, which may contribute to the develop-
ment of other autoimmune diseases such as MS.28 
Cekanaviciute et al.9 found that MS patients had 
increased Acinetobacter calcoaceticus, a bacteria also 
belonging to Proteobacteria. Molecular database 
analysis has identified a shared sequence between 
Acinetobacter calcoaceticus and an encephalitogenic 
peptide of bovine myelin, while elevated anti- 
Acinetobacter antibodies have been found in MS 
patients compared to controls; these findings support 
molecular mimicry as a potential immunopathogenic 
link between Acinetobacter and MS.29 Cekanaviciute 
et al.9 demonstrated a reduction in CD4+ T-regulatory 
cell differentiation after in vitro T-cell stimulation 
with Acinetobacter calcoaceticus, suggesting this 
bacteria may also promote autoimmunity by impair-
ing T-regulatory cell function.
Jangi et al.7 found increased Akkermansia among 
RRMS patients, which belongs to the phylum 
Verrucomicrobia. Cekanaviciute et al.9 also noted 
increased Akkermansia muciniphila among their MS 
patients. Akkermansia muciniphila, a mucin-degrad-
ing bacteria, has been found to facilitate infection and 
inflammation by Salmonella typhimurium in mice;30 
reduced Akkermansia muciniphila, however, has been 
observed in IBD.31 The implications of increased 
Akkermansia 
in 
MS 
are 
therefore 
unclear. 
Cekanaviciute et al. found that Akkermansia mucin-
iphila promotes Th1 cell expansion in vitro, and Jangi 
et al.7 demonstrated that increased Akkermansia and 
Methanobrevibacter both positively correlate with the 
expression of pro-inflammatory T-cell and monocyte 
genes implicated in MS pathogenesis.9 In contrast, 
Butyricimonas inversely correlates with these genes, 
suggesting that gut microbiota may contribute to MS 
pathogenesis by polarizing toward an inflammatory 
rather than immunomodulatory T-cell phenotype.7
Baum et al.15 noted increased Bifidobacterium  
among MS patients, which belong to the phylum 
Actinobacteria. Tremlett et al.6 similarly found an 
increase in Bifidobacterium among pediatric patients 
with early MS. Increased Bifidobacterium, which is 
commonly administered as probiotic therapy, has also 
been linked to IBD.32 However, Bifidobacterium ani-
malis 
and 
a 
probiotic 
mixture 
including 
Bifidobacterium 
bifidum significantly ameliorated EAE activity, with 
 A Budhram, S Parvathy et al.
journals.sagepub.com/home/msj 
633
evidence of inhibited Th1/Th17 cell polarization and 
T-regulatory cell induction.33,34 The reason for this 
conflicting data regarding Bifidobacterium in immune-
mediated demyelinating disease is unclear; further 
study into the potential role of Bifidobacterium and 
other probiotic therapy in MS is needed.
Therapeutic considerations
Diet
Emerging evidence has found that numerous disease-
modifying therapies (DMTs) affect gut microbiota 
composition;7,10,14,39 no therapy, however, has been 
developed with the intent of beneficially altering the 
gut microbiota in MS. Understanding pathogenic links 
between the gut microbiota and MS therefore creates 
opportunities for therapeutic innovation. Dietary 
change rapidly alters the gut microbiota and is one 
treatment consideration.40 Some Firmicutes that pro-
duce the SCFA butyrate are increased among patients 
assigned to a plant-based rather than animal-based diet, 
and SCFAs may have a beneficial anti-inflammatory 
effect in MS.22,23,40 Probiotic bacteria have been shown 
to improve EAE;33,34 whether there is any benefit to 
dietary probiotic supplementation in MS, however, is 
unknown, and caution may even be warranted given 
increased Bifidobacterium identified in some MS gut 
microbiome studies.6,15 Dietary modifications that 
might favorably alter the gut microbiota in MS, such as 
a plant-based diet, SCFA supplementation or probiotic 
administration, require further evaluation. At a mini-
mum, diet is a potential confounder that needs to be 
considered when studying the gut microbiome in MS.
Helminth therapy
Parasitic infestation has theoretical benefit in MS by 
skewing from a Th1 to Th2 cell phenotype and increas-
ing T-regulatory cells to facilitate helminth tolerance.41 
This is supported epidemiologically by a strong 
inverse relationship between MS and Trichuris trichi-
ura prevalence.42 Correale and Farez41 also found a 
dramatic 95% relative reduction in relapses and 
Gadolinium (Gd)-enhancing lesions among 12 com-
munity-acquired helminth-infested MS patients com-
pared to uninfested controls, with evidence of 
associated T-regulatory cell induction. Unfortunately, 
the HINT 2 (Helminth-induced Immunomodulatory 
Therapy) trial found only a modest 34% relative reduc-
tion in Gd-enhancing lesions among 15 RRMS patients 
treated orally with Trichuris suis ova (TSO), and an 
open-label therapeutic trial of TSO oral therapy in 10 
RRMS patients found no benefit.43,44 The reason for 
the more robust positive effect of naturally-acquired 
helminth infestation compared to clinical trials of hel-
minth therapy in MS is unclear and could relate to the 
gut microbiota. Previously reviewed literature has 
found abundant evidence of helminth-gut microbiota 
interactions.45 It is intriguing that in the prospective 
observational study by Correale and Farez,46 helminth-
uninfested MS patients remained uninfested over 90 
months of follow-up despite living in areas with high 
prevalence of helminth infection. Community-
acquired helminth infestation may naturally select for 
individuals with gut microbiota that favorably influ-
ence both establishment of infestation and helminth-
mediated immunomodulation, explaining the more 
impressive therapeutic effect of naturally occurring 
helminth infestation in MS. Examination of the gut 
microbiome in larger-scale helminth trials may shed 
light on the therapeutic mechanisms of helminth ther-
apy in MS.
Fecal microbiota transplantation
Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) is used to 
treat patients with recurrent Clostridium difficile 
infection, an antibiotic-associated bacterial colitis that 
may be life-threatening.47 Antimicrobial therapy dis-
rupts normal intestinal microflora and facilitates 
Clostridium difficile infection; transplantation of 
healthy donor stool is believed to restore fecal micro-
bial diversity in the recipient and prevent Clostridium 
difficile recurrence.47 As evidence of gut dysbiosis in 
MS mounts, FMT from donors free of autoimmune 
disease may be a consideration to restore gut micro-
bial balance. The depletion of butyrate-producing 
bacteria observed in MS is also seen in Clostridium 
difficile infection and is replenished after FMT; this 
anti-inflammatory alteration to the gut microbiota 
after FMT lends biologic plausibility to a potential 
therapeutic role for FMT in MS.48 Interestingly, 
Borody et al.49 reported neurologic benefit in three 
MS patients who underwent FMT for constipation. 
The neurologic improvement was dramatic, including 
recovery of bowel and bladder function and regained 
ability to walk. Although enthusiasm for these find-
ings is tempered by the absence of controls, the diag-
nosis of “atypical” MS in two patients, and the unclear 
mechanisms behind how FMT could reverse estab-
lished MS disease burden, further investigation of 
FMT in MS seems warranted.49
Conclusion and future directions
The gut microbiome is a new and exciting frontier in 
MS research. There is growing evidence demonstrat-
ing alterations in the gut microbiota of patients with 
MS, and plausible immunologic links between these 
 Multiple Sclerosis Journal 23(5)
634 
journals.sagepub.com/home/msj
differences and MS pathogenesis. A better under-
standing of this field also facilitates the development 
of gut-directed treatments in MS, such as dietary 
modification, helminth therapy, Bacteroides fragilis-
derived PSA and even FMT. Current observational 
studies reproducibly demonstrate gut dysbiosis in MS 
but are limited by their small size and cross-sectional 
nature, which is likely the reason for differing and 
occasionally conflicting results. Larger-scale, longi-
tudinal, multicentre endeavors such as the International 
MS Microbiome Study will likely provide valuable 
insights, and allow for stratification of potential con-
founders such as age, sex, weight, ethnicity, geo-
graphic location, diet, disease phenotype and use of 
DMTs.50 Effective interpretation of future gut micro-
biome research will be critical to uncovering immu-
nopathogenic mechanisms and advancing therapeutic 
possibilities in MS.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of inter-
est with respect to the research, authorship, and/or 
publication of this article.
Funding
The author(s) received no financial support for the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this 
article.
References
 1. Qin J, Li R, Raes J, et al. A human gut microbial gene 
catalogue established by metagenomic sequencing. 
Nature 2010; 464(7285): 59–65.
 2. Joscelyn J and Kasper LH. Digesting the emerging 
role for the gut microbiome in central nervous system 
demyelination. Mult Scler 2014; 20(12): 1553–1559.
 3. Guinane CM and Cotter PD. Role of the gut 
microbiota in health and chronic gastrointestinal 
disease: understanding a hidden metabolic organ. 
Therap Adv Gastroenterol 2013; 6(4): 295–308.
 4. Dendrou CA, Fugger L and Friese MA. 
Immunopathology of multiple sclerosis. Nat Rev 
Immunol 2015; 15: 545–558.
 5. Mielcarz DW and Kasper LH. The gut microbiome in 
multiple sclerosis. Curr Treat Options Neurol 2015; 
17(4): 344.
 6. Tremlett H, Fadrosh DW, Faruqi AA, et al. Gut 
microbiota in early pediatric multiple sclerosis: A 
case−control study. Eur J Neurol 2016; 23: 1308–1321.
 7. Jangi S, Gandhi R, Cox LM, et al. Alterations of the 
human gut microbiome in multiple sclerosis. Nat 
Commun 2016; 7: 12015.
 8. Castillo Alvarez F, Perez Matute P, Colina Lizuain S, et al. 
Intestinal microbiota in multiple sclerosis: Influence of 
treatment with interferon β-1b. In: Proceedings of the 
ECTRIMS 2016, London, http://onlinelibrary.ectrims-
congress.eu/ectrims/2016/32nd/146290/federico.
castillo.lvarez.intestinal.microbiota.in.multiple.sclerosis.
influence.html?f=m3
 9. Cekanaviciute E, Debelius JW, Singh S, et al. Gut 
dysbiosis is a feature of MS and it is characterized by 
bacteria able to regulate lymphocyte differentiation 
in vitro. In: Proceedings of the ECTRIMS 2016, 
London, http://onlinelibrary.ectrims-congress.eu/
ectrims/2016/32nd/147026/sergio.e.baranzini.gut.
dysbiosis.is.a.feature.of.ms.and.it.is.characterized.
by.html?f=m3
 
10. Tremlett H, Fadrosh DW, Faruqi AA, et al. 
Associations between the gut microbiota and host 
immune markers in pediatric multiple sclerosis and 
controls. BMC Neurol 1186; 16(1): 182.
 
11. Chen J, Chia N, Kalari KR, et al. Multiple sclerosis 
patients have a distinct gut microbiota compared to 
healthy controls. Sci Rep 2016; 6: 28484.
 
12. Tremlett H, Fadrosh DW, Faruqi AA, et al. Gut 
microbiota composition and relapse risk in pediatric 
MS: A pilot study. J Neurol Sci 2016; 363: 153–157.
 
13. Miyake S, Kim S, Suda W, et al. Dysbiosis in the gut 
microbiota of patients with multiple sclerosis, with a 
striking depletion of species belonging to Clostridia 
XIVa and IV clusters. PLoS ONE 2015; 10(9): 
e0137429.
 
14. Cantarel BL, Waubant E, Chehoud C, et al. Gut 
microbiota in multiple sclerosis: Possible influence 
of immunomodulators. J Investig Med 2015; 63(5): 
729–734.
 
15. Baum K, Rejmus R and Dorffel Y. Commensal gut 
flora in MS: Spatial organization and composition. 
Mult Scler 2015; 21(Suppl. 11): 458–459.
 
16. Rumah KR, Linden J, Fischetti VA, et al. Isolation 
of Clostridium perfringens type B in an individual 
at first clinical presentation of multiple sclerosis 
provides clues for environmental triggers of the 
disease. PLoS ONE 2013; 8(10): e76359.
 
17. Kelly CJ, Zheng L, Campbell EL, et al. Crosstalk 
between microbiota-derived short-chain fatty acids 
and intestinal epithelial HIF augments tissue barrier 
function. Cell Host Microbe 2015; 17(5): 662–671.
 
18. Canani RB, Di Costanzo M, Leone L, et al. Potential 
beneficial effects of butyrate in intestinal and 
extraintestinal diseases. World J Gastroenterol 2011; 
17(12): 1519–1528.
 
19. Farrokhi V, Nemati R, Nichols FC, et al. Bacterial 
lipodipeptide, Lipid 654, is a microbiome-associated 
biomarker for multiple sclerosis. Clin Transl Immunol 
2013; 2(11): e8.
 A Budhram, S Parvathy et al.
journals.sagepub.com/home/msj 
635
 
20. Perkins DJ, Polumuri SK, Pennini ME, et al. 
Reprogramming of murine macrophages through 
TLR2 confers viral resistance via TRAF3-mediated, 
enhanced interferon production. PLoS Pathog 2013; 
9(7): e1003479.
 
21. Den Besten G, Van Eunen K, Groen AK, et al. The 
role of short-chain fatty acids in the interplay between 
diet, gut microbiota, and host energy metabolism. J 
Lipid Res 2013; 54(9): 2325–2340.
 
22. Haghikia A, Jörg S, Duscha A, et al. Dietary 
fatty acids directly impact central nervous system 
autoimmunity via the small intestine. Immunity 2015; 
43(4): 817–829.
 
23. Dusha A, Jorg S, Berg J, et al. The effect of the short 
chain fatty acid propionate on immune regulation 
in MS: A proof-of-concept study. In: Proceedings 
of the ECTRIMS 2016, London, http://onlinelibrary.
ectrims-congress.eu/ectrims/2016/32nd/145844/
alexander.duscha.the.effect.of.the.short.chain.fatty.
acid.propionate.on.immune.html?f=m3
 
24. Ochoa-Repáraz J, Mielcarz DW, Ditrio LE, et al. 
Central nervous system demyelinating disease 
protection by the human commensal Bacteroides 
fragilis depends on polysaccharide A expression. J 
Immunol 2010; 185(7): 4101–4108.
 
25. Telesford KM, Yan W, Ochoa-Reparaz J, et al. A 
commensal symbiotic factor derived from Bacteroides 
fragilis promotes human CD39(+) Foxp3(+) T 
cells and Treg function. Gut Microbes 2015; 6(4): 
234–242.
 
26. Aminov RI. Role of archaea in human disease. Front 
Cell Infect Microbiol 2013; 3: 42.
 
27. Bang C, Weidenbach K, Gutsmann T, et al. The 
intestinal archaea Methanosphaera stadtmanae and 
Methanobrevibacter smithii activate human dendritic 
cells. PLoS ONE 2014; 9(6): e99411.
 
28. Mukhopadhya I, Hansen R, El-Omar EM, et al. 
IBD—what role do Proteobacteria play? Nat Rev 
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2012; 9(4): 219–230.
 
29. Ebringer A, Hughes L, Rashid T, et al. Acinetobacter 
immune responses in multiple sclerosis: 
Etiopathogenetic role and its possible use as a 
diagnostic marker. Arch Neurol 2005; 62(1): 33–36.
 
30. Ganesh BP, Klopfleisch R, Loh G, et al. Commensal 
Akkermansia muciniphila exacerbates gut 
inflammation in Salmonella Typhimurium-infected 
gnotobiotic mice. PLoS ONE 2013; 8(9): e74963.
 
31. Png CW, Lindén SK, Gilshenan KS, et al. Mucolytic 
bacteria with increased prevalence in IBD mucosa 
augment in vitro utilization of mucin by other bacteria. 
Am J Gastroenterol 2010; 105(11): 2420–2428.
 
32. Wang W, Chen L, Zhou R, et al. Increased 
proportions of Bifidobacterium and the Lactobacillus 
group and loss of butyrate-producing bacteria in 
inflammatory bowel disease. J Clin Microbiol 2014; 
52(2): 398–406.
 
33. Kwon HK, Kim GC, Kim Y, et al. Amelioration 
of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis by 
probiotic mixture is mediated by a shift in T helper cell 
immune response. Clin Immunol 2013; 146(3): 217–227.
 
34. Ezendam J, De Klerk A, Gremmer ER, et al. Effects 
of Bifidobacterium animalis administered during 
lactation on allergic and autoimmune responses in 
rodents. Clin Exp Immunol 2008; 154(3): 424–431.
 
35. Nepelska M, Cultrone A, Béguet-Crespel F, et al. 
Butyrate produced by commensal bacteria potentiates 
phorbol esters induced AP-1 response in human 
intestinal epithelial cells. PLoS ONE 2012; 7(12): 
e52869.
 
36. Tejesvi MV, Arvonen M, Kangas SM, et al. Faecal 
microbiome in new-onset juvenile idiopathic arthritis. 
Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 2016; 35(3): 363–370.
 
37. Wexler HM. Bacteroides: The good, the bad, and 
the nitty-gritty. Clin Microbiol Rev 2007; 20(4): 
593–621.
 
38. Blais Lecours P, Marsolais D, Cormier Y, et al. 
Increased prevalence of Methanosphaera stadtmanae 
in inflammatory bowel diseases. PLoS ONE 2014; 
9(2): e87734.
 
39. Casaccia P, Zhu Y, Cekanaviciute E, et al. Effect of 
oral versus injectable disease-modifying therapies 
on the epigenome-wide DNA methylation and 
gut microbiota in multiple sclerosis patients. In: 
Proceedings of the ECTRIMS 2016, London, 
http://onlinelibrary.ectrims-congress.eu/
ectrims/2016/32nd/145837/patrizia.casaccia.effect.
of.oral.versus.injectable.disease-modifying.therapies.
html?f=m3
 
40. David LA, Maurice CF, Carmody RN, et al. Diet 
rapidly and reproducibly alters the human gut 
microbiome. Nature 2014; 505(7484): 559–563.
 
41. Correale J and Farez M. Association between parasite 
infection and immune responses in multiple sclerosis. 
Ann Neurol 2007; 61(2): 97–108.
 
42. Fleming JO and Cook TD. Multiple sclerosis and 
the hygiene hypothesis. Neurology 2006; 67(11): 
2085–2086.
 
43. Fleming J, Hartman L, Maksimovic J, et al. Clinical 
trial of Helminth-induced Immunomodulatory 
Therapy (HINT 2) in relapsing-remitting multiple 
sclerosis (P3.149). Neurology 2014; 82(Suppl. 10): 
P3.149.
 
44. Voldsgaard A, Bager P, Garde E, et al. Trichuris suis 
ova therapy in relapsing multiple sclerosis is safe but 
without signals of beneficial effect. Mult Scler 2015; 
21(13): 1723–1729.
 Multiple Sclerosis Journal 23(5)
636 
journals.sagepub.com/home/msj
 
45. Zaiss MM and Harris NL. Interactions between 
the intestinal microbiome and helminth parasites. 
Parasite Immunol 2016; 38(1): 5–11.
 
46. Correale J and Farez MF. The impact of parasite 
infections on the course of multiple sclerosis. J 
Neuroimmunol 2011; 233(1–2): 6–11.
 
47. Van Nood E, Vrieze A, Nieuwdorp M, et al. 
Duodenal infusion of donor feces for recurrent 
Clostridium difficile. N Engl J Med 2013; 368(5): 
407–415.
 
48. Shahinas D, Silverman M, Sittler T, et al. Toward an 
understanding of changes in diversity associated with 
fecal microbiome transplantation based on 16S rRNA 
gene deep sequencing. MBio 2012; 3(5): e00338.
 
49. Borody T, Leis S, Campbell J, et al. Fecal microbiota 
transplantation (FMT) in multiple sclerosis (MS). Am 
J Gastroenterol 2011; 106(10S.Suppl. 2): S352.
 
50. Baranzini SE. The international MS microbiome 
study (iMSMS): Investigating the role of gut 
microbiota in multiple sclerosis through open 
collaboration. In: Proceedings of the ECTRIMS 
2016, London, http://onlinelibrary.ectrims-congress.
eu/ectrims/2016/32nd/146272/sergio.e.baranzini.
the.international.ms.microbiome.study.28imsms29.
investigating.html?f=m3
Visit SAGE journals online 
journals.sagepub.com/
home/msj
 
SAGE journals
