 Supplementary materials for 
Surprising lack of liposome-induced complement activation by artificial 1,3-
diamidophospholipids in vitro 
Simon Bugna, MSca, Marzia Buscemaa, MSc, Sofiya Matviykiva, MSc,  
Rudolf Urbanics, M.D., PhDb, Andreas Weinberger, PhDc,  Tamas Meszarosb , MSc, 
Janos Szebeni, M.D., PhD, DScb, Andreas Zumbuehl, PhD*c, Till Saxer, M.D.*d,  
Bert Müller, PhD*a
aBiomaterials Science Center, University of Basel, Allschwil, Switzerland 
bNanomedicine Research and Education Center, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary 
cDepartment of Chemistry, University of Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland 
dCardiology Division, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland 
*corresponding author: phone +41 61 265 9660, bert.mueller@unibas.ch, Biomaterials
Science Center, University of Basel, Gewerbestrasse 14, 4123 Allschwil, Switzerland 
Appendix A. Size distribution of Pad-PC-Pad liposomes 
The DLS measurements were carried out using the Zetasizer Nano S instrument (Malvern 
Instruments Ltd, Malvern, UK).  
Figure S1 shows the results of the liposomes used to perform ELISA test on human sera (left 
diagram) and pig plasma (right diagram). Before the ELISA incubation, an aliquot of the 
liposomal suspension was filtered through a 100 nm tracked-edged polycarbonate membrane 
in order to dissipate any liposome aggregation (labelled F-Lipo). The remaining liposomal 
suspension was kept unfiltered (labelled Lipo). The experimentally derived size distributions 
are equivalent. They are characterized by a mean diameter of 122 nm with a full-width-at-half 
maximum (FWHM) of 152 nm. From these experiments, one can conclude that the liposomes 
do not excessively aggregate over a period of six days. 
Figure S1. The size distributions of Pad-PC-Pad liposomes, which were applied for the 
in vitro tests in human sera (left diagram) and pig plasma (right diagram), were determined 
using DLS measurements. 
Published in "Nanomedicine: Nanotechnology, Biology and Medicine 12(3): 845–849, 2016" 
which should be cited to refer to this work.
http://doc.rero.ch
 For the in vivo test, liposomes with a significantly narrower size distribution were used. The 
extrusion through 100 nm filters was repeated until the size distribution of liposomes became 
mono-disperse at (95.8 ± 1.4) nm. As these liposomes aggregated over night, a filtration-step 
before bolus injection was necessary. 
 
Appendix B. Supplementary data of the in vitro experiments 
 
 
Figure S2. The ELISA results of complement activation in human sera demonstrate the 
variability between five donors. 
Phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and zymosan served as negative and positive control, 
respectively. Their values determined after an incubation time of 60 minutes are compared 
with the results of the unfiltered liposomes (left diagram) and filtered liposomes (right 
diagram) using the incubation times indicated, i.e. starting condition and after 20, 40 and 60 
minutes. One finds variability among sera donors H1 to H5. In all cases, zymosan caused a 
more than 20 times higher complement activation compared to liposomes. There is no 
complement activation by liposomes, as the values are not significantly higher than the ones 
measured for PBS. To determine the SC5b-9 concentration a standard curve was obtained 
using the blank subtracted absorbance-at-450-nm values and the assigned concentration for 
each standard. The slope, intercept, and correlation coefficient of the derived best-fit line for 
the SC5b-9 standards were within the standard ranges with a correlation coefficient of 0.99 
(> 0.95), a slope of 0.00752 ± 0.00007 (0.0039 to 0.0123), and an intercept of -0.0182 ± 
0.0066 (-0.189 to 0.201). 
 
http://doc.rero.ch
  
 
Figure S3. The ELISA results of complement activation in pig plasma show that the 
variability between the five donors is rather small. 
The MicroVue Pan-Specific C3 Reagent Kit (Quidel, San Diego, USA) was used to measure 
complement activation in hirudinized pig plasma in vitro. The reagent kit converts the activity 
of C3 in the pig plasma to human SC5b-9 that is detectable with the MicroVue SC5b-
9 Plus EIA kit (Quidel, San Diego, USA). The relative C3 consumption is inversely 
proportional to SC5b-9. The graphs in Figure S3 show direct proportionality with the SC5b-9 
values. Limited variability between the plasma donors P1 to P5 occurs. Zymosan caused the 
two-fold complement activation in comparison to liposomes and negative control. 
 
Appendix C. Supplementary information to the animal experiment 
The three pigs were rested two days before experiment start. The in vivo experiments were 
approved by local Animal Subject Review Committees and performed at the big animal OP 
facility of Experimental Surgical Department of Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary. 
The pigs were sedated by an intramuscular Calypsol/Xilazine injection (ketamine, 200 to 
300 mg). Anaesthesia was maintained during the experiment using isofluorane inhalation 
method at concentrations from 1.5 to 2.5 % in O2. Fluid supply with PBS was provided by 
venous catheter to maintain stable circulation. 
A tracheotomy was provided. The pigs were intubated with a 6.5 to 7.0 Fr tracheal tube to 
maintain free airways and to enable controlled breathing if necessary. A CAP10 Medlab 
(Medlab Medizinische Diagnosegeräte GmbH, Karlsruhe, Germany) capnograph was 
connected to the tracheal tube to monitor end tidal CO2 and respiratory rates, cf. Figure 1. 
Oxygenation and heart rate were monitored by pulsoximeter. A thermometer was rectally 
inserted to monitor the temperature. A Swan-Ganz catheter was introduced through the right 
external jugular vein about 2 cm from the heart in order to supply NaCl, act as liposome 
injection site to the pulmonary artery, and to measure the pulmonary arterial pressure (PAP). 
A cannula with a pressure transducer was introduced into the left femoral artery to record the 
systemic arterial pressure (SAP). Blood samples were accessible through a catheter inserted 
http://doc.rero.ch
 into the femoral vein. ECG was monitored at the standard Einthoven's 3-lead detection points. 
The hemodynamic parameters, i.e. PAP and SAP, heart rate, and ECG were continuously 
acquired with an AD Instruments PowerLab System with LabChart Pro v6 software at 1 kHz 
sampling rate.  
The baseline blood samples and physiological parameters were recorded ten minutes before 
the first injection. The filtered liposomes were diluted in 5 mL PBS. The suspension was 
administered as a bolus injection into the left external jugular vein at time-point zero. Boluses 
were flushed into the circulation using 5 mL PBS. The complete CARPA test involved 
quantification of the cardiopulmonary, hemodynamic, haematological, skin colour and blood 
cell count changes. Skin changes were visually assessed. Blood samples for white blood cell 
(WBC), red blood cells, and platelets were collected before and after the injection of the 
liposomes at the selected time-points, i.e. 1, 3, 5, 10, 20, and 30 minutes. Blood cell counting 
was carried out using a DIATRON haematology analyser. Blood samples for clinicochemistry 
were taken before the test material injection and at the end of the experiment. 
The pig with a weight of 18.4 kg was injected with a bolus of Pad-PC-Pad 0.5 mg/kg, 
calculated according the phospholipid content, followed by two injections each with a bolus 
of 5 mg/kg. The second pig with a weight of 22.8 kg was injected with a bolus of 0.5 and 
5 mg/kg. The third pig with a weight of 20.2 kg was injected with non-filtrated, aggregates-
containing liposome of 5 mg/kg. Immediately after these procedures, 0.1 mg/kg of zymosan 
was injected as positive control, before the animals were sacrificed under anesthesia with 
Eutasol/KCl overdose. 
 
http://doc.rero.ch
