 Amygdala inputs to prefrontal cortex guide behavior amid 
conflicting cues of reward and punishment
Anthony Burgos-Robles1,*, Eyal Y. Kimchi1,2,*, Ehsan M. Izadmehr1, Mary Jane 
Porzenheim1, William A. Ramos-Guasp1, Edward H. Nieh1, Ada C. Felix-Ortiz1, Praneeth 
Namburi1, Christopher A. Leppla1, Kara N. Presbrey1, Kavitha K. Anandalingam1, Pablo A. 
Pagan-Rivera1, Melodi Anahtar1, Anna Beyeler1, and Kay M. Tye1
1Picower Institute for Learning and Memory, Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA
2Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, 02114, 
USA
Abstract
Orchestrating appropriate behavioral responses in the face of competing signals that predict either 
rewards or threats in the environment is crucial for survival. The basolateral amygdala (BLA) and 
prelimbic (PL) medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) have been implicated in reward-seeking and fear-
related responses, but how information flows between these reciprocally-connected structures to 
coordinate behavior is unknown. We recorded neuronal activity from the BLA and PL while rats 
performed a task where in shock- and sucrose-predictive cues were simultaneously presented to 
induce competition. The correlated firing primarily displayed a BLA→PL directionality during 
the shock-associated cue. Furthermore, the majority of optogenetically-identified PL-projecting 
BLA neurons recorded encoded the shock-associated cue, and more accurately predicted 
behavioral responses during competition than unidentified BLA neurons. Finally, BLA→PL 
photostimulation increased freezing, whereas both chemogenetic and optogenetic inhibition 
reduced freezing. The BLA→PL circuit plays a critical role in governing the selection of 
behavioral responses in the face of competing signals.
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Correspondence should be addressed to K.M.T. (kaytye@mit.edu): Kay M. Tye, PhD, Picower Institute for Learning and Memory, 
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Ave, Bldg 46-6263, 
Cambridge, MA 02139.
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
Author Contributions: A.B.R. and K.M.T. conceived and designed experiments. A.B.R. and K.N.P. designed and constructed 
electrodes and optrodes for neural recordings. A.B.R. performed surgeries to chronically implant electrodes and performed single-unit 
recordings. A.B.R., C.A.L., and K.N.P. sorted extracellular waveforms. A.B.R. and E.Y.K. analyzed electrophysiology data. E.Y.K. 
wrote the MATLAB scripts for the support vector machine learning algorithms. E.M.I., M.J.P., K.N.P., P.A.P.R., and M.A. built optical 
fibers. A.B.R., E.M.I., M.J.P., W.A.R.G., K.N.P, and M.A. performed animal training and analyzed behaviors from videos. A.B.R., 
E.M.I., M.J.P., W.A.R.G., A.C.F.O., K.N.P., and M.A. performed histological assessment. E.H.N. assisted with programing of the 
neural recording workstation and wrote the MATLAB script for quantification of animal movement. P.N. assisted with Med-PC 
programming for behavioral paradigms and wrote the MATLAB scripts to analyze port entry data and waveform properties. A.B. 
performed ex vivo whole-cell patch-clamp electrophysiological recordings. A.B. and A.C.F.O. assisted with figures. A.B.R., E.Y.K., 
and K.M.T. made figures and wrote the manuscript. All authors contributed to the editing and revision of the final version of the 
manuscript.
Competing Financial Interests: The authors declare no competing financial interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 24.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Neurosci. 2017 June ; 20(6): 824–835. doi:10.1038/nn.4553.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Keywords
basolateral amygdala; prelimbic cortex; prefrontal; optogenetics; phototagging; behavioral 
flexibility; electrophysiology; correlated activity; machine learning; support vector machine; 
decoding; conflict; competition
Introduction
When animals engage in reward-seeking behaviors such as foraging or hunting, they often 
expose themselves to potential threats, and must assess competing signals that may trigger 
conflicting motivational drives. The ability to appropriately weigh competing environmental 
cues and execute appropriate behavioral responses is paramount for survival and a key 
feature of mental health, yet little is known about the neural circuits that underpin this 
ability.
For decades, the amygdala has been identified as a focal point in emotional processing and is 
thought to be a hub for translating sensory information into motivated behaviors1,2. The 
basolateral nucleus of the amygdala (BLA) is important for the acquisition, encoding and 
retrieval of both positive and negative associations, and plasticity occurs in BLA neurons 
upon the encoding of cues that predict either positive or negative outcomes3–8. The BLA 
also shows prominent neuronal correlates of reward-seeking and fear-related responses in 
semi-naturalistic tasks in which animals need to for age and retrieve food in the presence of 
imminent predator-like threats9,10.
An important target of the BLA thought to be crucial for the coordination of reward-seeking 
and fear-related behaviors is the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC)11–13, which receives 
robust monosynaptic glutamatergic inputs from the BLA14,15 and sends a reciprocal 
connection in return16. Similar to the BLA, the mPFC has been widely implicated in the 
regulation of both reward-seeking17,18 and fear-related behavior19–21, and pharmacological 
inactivation of the mPFC produces deficits in the coordination of these behaviors22,23. 
Furthermore, the mPFC shows prominent neuronal responses that are highly correlated with 
the time course of behavioral manifestations of reward-seeking and fear-related 
behavior11,18. While some studies have examined the necessity of BLA activity for fear-
related signaling in the mPFC24,25, little is known about how dynamic interactions between 
these structures may govern the coordination of reward-seeking and fear-related behavior 
upon presentation of competing signals.
In this study, we used electrophysiological recordings, optogenetic-mediated photo 
identification of BLA→PL neurons, supervised machine learning algorithms to decode 
behavior during competition, and circuit-specific manipulations during a modified Pavlovian 
cue discrimination task, in which conditioned stimuli predicting either sucrose or shock were 
presented separately on some trials and simultaneously in others. We address the following 
questions: (1) Is correlated firing between the BLA and PL dynamic upon presentations of 
cues associated with positive (rewards) or negative (punishments) outcomes?; (2) What is 
the directionality of information flow?; (3) Can we use neural activity and behavior during 
Pavlovian discrimination to accurately decode the behavior of an animal during the 
Burgos-Robles et al.
Page 2
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 presentation of conflicting signals?; and (4) Is the BLA-mPFC projection necessary for and 
sufficient to promote fear-related behavior?
We also examined whether either brain region was particularly sensitive to the sucrose-
predictive or the shock-predictive cue. Based on our finding that predominantly excitatory 
cross-correlations between the BLA and PL developed a BLA→PL directionality during the 
shock-predictive but not the sucrose-predictive cue, we hypothesized that this projection 
supplies information critical for driving fear responses. To further test this, we used 
channelrhodopsin-2 (ChR2) to activate BLA inputs to PL and observed a selective 
enhancement of conditioned fear but not reward-seeking responses. Conversely, we used 
both optogenetic and chemogenetic approaches to inhibit BLA inputs to PL and observed 
suppressed freezing.
Results
To investigate the neural dynamics that occur when an animal is challenged with competing 
environmental signals, we developed a novel variation of a Pavlovian discrimination task 
wherein one conditioned stimulus (CS) was paired with a reward, whereas a second CS was 
paired with shock. We used CSs of different sensory modalities (auditory and visual) to 
subsequently allow us to simultaneously present these stimuli during “competition” trials 
without perceptual interference (Fig. 1a and Supplementary Fig. S1a).
Rats first learned a reward association in which a novel cue (e.g., light) was associated with 
the delivery of a palatable sucrose solution. Rats rapidly learned to explore the sucrose port 
during the cue presentation as compared to the inter-trial intervals (ITI; Supplementary Fig. 
S1c). Rats then learned to discriminate a second cue (e.g., tone) with an electrical shock, 
while still being exposed to the sucrose-predictive cue. Rats responded to the cue that 
predicted shock by freezing, which is a robust and consistent behavioral manifestation 
thought to be related to fear. By the third discrimination session, rats exhibited differential 
behavioral responses during the sucrose-predictive and shock-predictive cues. For simplicity, 
we used the terms reward and fear epochs to describe the time during which the cues 
associated with either sucrose or shock, respectively, were presented. As observed in Fig. 
1b,c (also see Supplementary Fig. S1d), rats spent more time exploring the sucrose port than 
freezing during the reward epochs, whereas they spent more time freezing than exploring the 
sucrose port during the fear epochs.
During subsequent “competition” sessions, the cue-sucrose and cue-shock associations were 
simultaneously presented to induce motivational conflict and competition of reward-seeking 
and fear-related behavior. Pairing of these associations produced a mean performance that 
was between the behaviors produced when the cue-sucrose and cue-shock were presented 
independently (Fig. 1d,e and Supplementary Fig. S1d). Throughout training, while the 
reward- and fear-associated cues were of different sensory modalities, these cues were 
counterbalanced across animals and did not introduce significant differences in behavioral 
performance (Supplementary Fig. S1e-g).
Burgos-Robles et al.
Page 3
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 BLA led more excitatory correlations with PL during the shock-predictive cue
To explore the potential contribution of interactions between the BLA and PL in governing 
behavioral selection in the face of conflicting cues signaling competing motivational drives, 
we first investigated the correlated activity across these two brain regions during distinct 
behavioral epochs during a discrimination session wherein the CS-Suc and CS-Shock were 
presented independently (Fig. 2). Recording sites are shown in Supplementary Fig. S2a-d. 
Details on the detection of correlated activity are provided in the Online Methods (section on 
cross-correlations) and in Supplementary Fig. S3a. Of 3,037 total possible pairs of BLA and 
PL neurons, we observed 639 pairs with positively correlated activity, which we termed 
“Excitatory BLA/PL cross-correlations” (example shown in Fig. 2a), and 107 pairs with 
negatively correlated activity, which we termed “Inhibitory BLA/PL cross-correlations” 
(example shown in Fig. 2b). Although excitatory cross-correlations (CCs) were more 
common during all task epochs (ITI, CS-Suc and CS-Shock; Fig. 2c,e), inhibitory CCs were 
also observed less frequently and with more variability in number of significant correlated 
pairs across each epoch within our data set (Fig. 2d,f).
We wondered whether the directionality of information flow was dynamic depending on 
environmental cues predicting unconditioned stimuli of positive or negative valence. To 
begin exploring this question, we examined the proportion of pairs during each epoch 
wherein spiking of neurons in the BLA or PL preceded spiking in the other structure. We 
observed that a significantly greater proportion of BLA/PL pairs showing excitatory CCs 
were putatively led by neurons in the BLA during the CS-Shock, but not during either the 
CS-Suc or ITI epochs (Fig. 2g). Conversely, among inhibitory CCs, the BLA putatively led a 
greater proportion of cell pairs during the CS-Suc (Fig. 2h), though admittedly there was a 
smaller sample size among inhibitory cross-correlations. Smaller bin widths showed more 
variable cross-correlations, due primarily to sparse, low firing rates (Supplementary Fig. S4).
To control for stimulus generalization, we found that rats displayed neither reward-seeking 
nor fear-related behaviors during a habituation phase prior to any training, or during the 
discrimination of a neutral cue (CS-) that was never paired with sucrose or shock 
(Supplementary Fig. S5a-c). Importantly, significantly smaller proportions of BLA/PL cell 
pairs exhibited correlated activity during the CS- and during habituation (Supplementary 
Fig. S5d), suggesting that BLA/PL correlations developed over the course of training. We 
also confirmed that cue modality did not influence the BLA/PL lead and lag dynamics 
(Supplementary Fig. S6a,b). Furthermore, the lead and lag dynamics were consistent across 
distinct BLA/PL populations that exhibited correlated activity during different task events 
(Supplementary Fig. S6c,d). Interestingly, these dynamics were also strong in a BLA/PL 
population that exhibited excitatory correlations during all task events, but that showed 
significant shifts in BLA and PL leading across task events (see bottom panels in 
Supplementary Fig. S6c). Finally, these lead and lag dynamics were also maintained across 
multiple combinations of putative projection cells and interneurons (Supplementary Fig. 
S6e-i).
Burgos-Robles et al.
Page 4
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Populations of BLA cells that encoded sucrose and shock cues exhibited similar levels of 
correlated activity with PL
Preferential encoding of the “reward” and “fear” memories by the BLA cells could 
potentially contribute to differential patterns of BLA/PL correlations. We examined this 
possibility by assessing CS-elicited changes in BLA activity and then quantifying 
correlations with PL for the reward and fear encoding BLA cells (Fig. 3a-d). Details on CS-
evoked responses are provided in the Online Methods. While many BLA cells responded to 
either of the CSs or to both (Fig. 3a,b and Supplementary Fig. S7a,c,e), no significant 
differences were observed between the proportions of BLA cells that exhibited biased 
responses to either the CS-Suc or CS-Shock (Fig. 3c). Furthermore, the reward- and fear-
biased populations showed similar levels of cross-correlated activity with PL (Fig. 3d). In 
addition, the patterns of lead and lag in the cross-correlations were preserved across multiple 
combinations of BLA and PL cells that responded to either the reward- or fear-associated 
cues (Supplementary Fig. S7g-j). Therefore, the differential dynamics we observed in the 
BLA/PL cross-correlations across reward and fear epochs could not solely be attributed to 
preferential encoding of the BLA cells of the reward and fear memories.
A larger population of PL cells encoded the fear memory, and this population exhibited 
stronger correlations with the BLA than the PL population that encoded reward
We next examined whether the PL cells that encoded the reward and fear associations 
exhibited distinct degrees of cross-correlated activity with the BLA. Representative PL cells 
exhibiting significant responses to the reward- and fear-associated cues are shown in 
Supplementary Fig. S7b. In contrast to the BLA, PL exhibited a larger proportion of cells 
that encoded the fear-associated cue (Fig. 3e,f and Supplementary Fig. S7d). Furthermore, a 
significantly greater overall population of PL cells exhibited biased responses to the fear-
associated cue (Fig. 3g), and this population showed more cross-correlations with the BLA 
than the population of PL cells that exhibited biased responses to the reward-associated cue 
(Fig. 3h). This suggested that fear-biased cells in PL have greater functional connections 
with the BLA.
Taken together, these observations raised the possibility that information was flowing from 
the BLA to the PL during fear-related cues. However, these experiments did not allow us to 
differentiate between direct information flow, indirect connectivity, or activity driven by a 
common upstream site. These findings ultimately prompted us to perform optogenetic-
mediated photo identification of BLA→PL neurons.
The majority of photoidentified BLA→PL neurons recorded were excited to the shock-
predictive cue
Given that the BLA, rather than PL, led more excitatory correlations during the CS-Shock, 
we wondered whether this might be related to monosynaptic input from the BLA to PL. To 
test this hypothesis, we used a dual virus approach as performed by Nieh and colleagues26, 
wherein a retrograde viral vector injected into PL (canine adenovirus, CAV2) carried Cre-
recombinase into the BLA, while an anterograde viral vector injected into the BLA allowed 
for Cre-dependent expression of Channelrhodopsin-2 (ChR2) fused to enhanced yellow 
fluorescent protein (eYFP; see Fig. 4a). We first confirmed in an ex vivo preparation that this 
Burgos-Robles et al.
Page 5
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 viral approach produced reliable ChR2 expression and selective photoresponses in 
BLA→PL neurons (Fig. 4b,c). We also determined in the ex vivo preparation the 
photoresponse latency threshold in these cells (Fig. 4d,e). For in vivo recordings, we 
implanted into the BLA an optrode (probe that combined an optical fiber with recording 
wires) to allow for photo identification of the BLA→PL cells shortly after the recording 
session during the behavioral task (Fig. 4f). Photo Identification parameters are provided in 
the Online Methods (section on photo identification of the BLA-PL population).
Among the BLA neurons recorded in vivo, 11/60 (18%) were identified as BLA→PL 
neurons, based on short-latency photoresponses that were below the 12-ms threshold 
determined in our visually-guided ex vivo recordings (Fig. 4g,h). In addition, we observed a 
subpopulation of BLA cells (8/60, 13%) exhibiting inhibition in response to the 
photostimulation of BLA→PL neurons. We termed this subpopulation the “network-
inhibited” cells, though the precise number of synapses or distribution of the neurons in this 
network is not known.
We found that a greater proportion of the photoidentified BLA→PL neurons showed 
excitatory responses to the fear-associated cue (“F+”; Fig. 4i). This was in contrast to the 
network-inhibited cells in which only one cell showed selective excitatory responses to the 
fear-associated cue (Fig. 4j), while the majority of the cells recorded showed inhibitory 
responses to the fear cue (“F-”) or excitatory responses to the reward-associated cue (“R+”).
Activity of BLA→PL neurons decoded behavior in moments of conflict more accurately 
than unidentified BLA neurons
Based on the above findings taken together, we hypothesized that the neural activity of 
photoidentified BLA→PL neurons during independent presentations of the fear and reward-
related cues would allow us to decode the behavior of animals challenged with competing 
signals, specifically the simultaneous co-presentation of CS-Suc and CS-Shock (Fig. 5). The 
selection of a behavioral output during competition trials varied between animals, and even 
between trials within a single animal (Fig. 5b), as competition trials could produce behaviors 
related to either reward-seeking (port entry) or fear (freezing).
To test this, we used a support vector machine (SVM) algorithm to compare the decoding 
accuracy of individual neurons in the BLA. CS-Suc trials, which reliably induced port entry, 
and CS-Shock trials, which reliably induced freezing, were used as training data for the 
SVM (Fig. 5c; see section on machine learning in the Online Methods). The SVM algorithm 
was then tested on competition trials to determine the percentage of trials for which the 
activity of each individual BLA neuron accurately predicted behavioral selection (port entry 
or freezing; Fig. 5d). Here, a representative BLA→PL neuron is shown to have 85% 
decoding accuracy (Fig. 5d).
Indeed, photoidentified BLA→PL neurons showed a significantly higher mean decoding 
accuracy than unidentified BLA neurons (Fig. 5e). Additionally, cross-regional neuronal 
pairs containing a photoidentified BLA→PL neuron had greater decoding accuracy if the PL 
neurons showed correlated firing with the PL-projecting BLA neuron (Fig. 5f). The 
Burgos-Robles et al.
Page 6
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 significantly greater accuracy in predicting action selection during competition trials 
suggests that the BLA→PL projection encodes information that can guide behavior.
Photostimulation of BLA inputs to PL was sufficient to promote freezing
To test whether the BLA→mPFC projection was sufficient to promote fear-related behavior 
such as freezing, we photostimulated ChR2-expressing BLA terminals in the mPFC (Fig. 
6a-d and Supplementary Fig. S8a). During the Pavlovian discrimination session, rats 
expressing ChR2 displayed significantly more freezing during laser-ON than laser-OFF 
epochs relative to eYFP-expressing controls (Fig. 6c).
To control for the potential contribution of vesicle release from BLA terminals at targets 
other than PL, which may be induced by backpropagating action potentials or stimulating 
axons of passage, in a separate experiment (Fig. 6e-j and Supplementary Fig. S8b,c) we used 
a standard pharmacological control for projection-specific optogenetic manipulation27. In 
ChR2-expressing animals, we either infused a glutamate receptor antagonist cocktail 
(NBQX+AP5; see Methods) or artificial cerebrospinal fluid (ACSF) unilaterally into the PL, 
counterbalanced for order across two different sessions wherein a subset of trials were 
paired with photostimulation. If off-site vesicle release contributed to the behavioral change 
in ChR2-expressing animals relative to eYFP animals, then we would expect those 
contributions to exist after the NBQX+AP5 treatment. We found that infusion of NBQX
+AP5 abolished the light-induced increase in freezing observed in CS-Shock trials (Fig. 6g), 
as well as during competition trials (Fig. 6i), confirming that transmission from BLA 
terminals within the PL was sufficient to promote cue-induced freezing.
Inhibition of the BLA→PL pathway suppressed cue-induced fear-related behavior
Although our photostimulation experiments demonstrated the sufficiency of the BLA→PL 
projection to augment fear behavior, fear-related behavior is likely governed by parallel, 
redundant circuits. We next tested the necessity of the BLA→PL pathway with optogenetic 
and chemogenetic inhibition during discrimination and competition (Fig. 7 and 
Supplementary Figs. S9 and S10).
For optogenetic inhibition, we bilaterally expressed the inhibitory opsin ArchT28,29 in BLA 
neurons and photoinhibited BLA terminals in the mPFC during the presentation of a subset 
of CS-Suc, CS-Shock, and competition trials (Fig. 7a,b). We found that ArchT-expressing 
animals showed a significant reduction in freezing during the laser-ON versus laser-OFF 
trials relative to GFP-expressing controls, during CS-Shock trials (Fig. 7c) and competition 
trials (Fig. 7e).
Given the caveats associated with optogenetic inhibition, including the possibility of 
photoinhibition of adjacent mPFC subregions, effects of heating, or sensory detection of the 
light stimulation, we also performed chemogenetic inhibition. We selectively expressed an 
inhibitory chemogenetic tool, hM4D(Gi) DREADDs (Designer Receptors Exclusively 
Activated by Designer Drugs)30 activated by clozapine-N-oxide (CNO), in BLA→PL 
neurons using the CAV2-Cre virus strategy (Fig. 7g). We then systemically injected either 
vehicle or CNO into animals prior to sessions wherein CS-Suc, CS-Shock, and competition 
trials were presented in a pseudo-random order (Fig. 7h). Consistent with results from our 
Burgos-Robles et al.
Page 7
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 optogenetic inhibition experiment, we observed that selective inhibition of the BLA→PL 
neurons reduced freezing relative to mCherry-expressing controls during CS-Shock trials 
(Fig. 7i) and competition trials (Fig. 7k).
Discussion
In this study, we developed a novel paradigm wherein we could study the naturalistic 
phenomenon of orchestrating competing mechanisms elicited by simultaneous presentation 
of cues associated with conflicting motivational drives in a systematic trial structure to allow 
for extraction of neural correlates (Fig. 1). Electrophysiological recordings revealed 
correlated neural activity in the BLA and PL that were predominantly excitatory during the 
entire task. However, the direction of information flow changed depending on the specific 
behavioral epoch, as the BLA was more likely to lead excitatory correlations with PL during 
fear-related behavior (Fig. 2), and that PL neurons encoding the fear-associated cue were 
more likely to be correlated with BLA activity (Fig. 3). This result was bolstered by our 
finding that photoidentified BLA→PL neurons predominantly showed excitation in 
response the fear cue and more accurately decoded behavior in the face of competing signals 
(Fig. 4 and 5), showing that this effect was at least in part due to direct input from BLA to 
PL. Conversely, inhibitory cross-correlations were more often led by the BLA upon 
presentation of the sucrose-predictive cue (Fig. 2h), and neurons inhibited by photoidentified 
BLA→PL neurons (“Network Inhibited Cells”) showed a trend towards increased excitatory 
responding to the reward-associated cue or inhibition to the shock-predictive cue. Although 
the sample sizes for the inhibitory cross-correlations and network inhibited neurons were 
admittedly small, these data lead us to speculate that a competing reward-related network 
exists and is suppressed locally within the BLA2,31.
Anatomical implications
Several subtle effects from our experiments prompted us to speculate about the possible 
interactions between BLA and PL neurons. From our phototagging experiment (Fig. 4), we 
observed “Network Inhibited” neurons in the BLA that were inhibited upon 
photostimulation of BLA-PL neurons. We speculate that BLA-PL neurons have collaterals 
that may synapse locally onto BLA interneurons that inhibit these “Network Inhibited” cells, 
though it is possible that they collateralize to distal GABAergic neurons that have long-range 
projections back to the BLA. Though we are not aware of any direct evidence that the BLA 
contains GABAergic neurons that project to the PL, our experiments do not allow us to 
exclude this possibility. Further, from our BLA-PL inhibition experiments (Supplementary 
Fig. 9), our data suggest that inhibition of BLA-PL neurons may also disinhibit unidentified 
BLA neurons.
Importantly, we took care to photoinhibit BLA terminals in PL only during the cue 
presentation, as we wanted to avoid paradoxical vesicle release associated with prolonged 
illumination of ArchT-expressing axon terminals32. Even so, we observed a minority of 
neurons in the PL (4%; Supplementary Fig. 9h) that showed an increase in activity upon 
photoinhibition of BLA terminals.
Burgos-Robles et al.
Page 8
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 It may also be noteworthy that our optogenetic manipulations produced rather subtle 
behavioral changes (Figs. 6 and 7). The relatively small effect sizes may reflect either 
redundancy in the circuitry involved in this task, or technical challenges related to using rats 
as opposed to mice (including greater volume of illumination required or lower relative 
expression levels achieved).
We found similar proportions of correlated BLA/PL cells during all task events, and a 
substantial proportion of cell pairs exhibited correlated activity during more than one event. 
This suggests that there are consistent anatomical relationships between the BLA and PL 
that are selectively modulated depending upon the memory that is being retrieved. While we 
found evidence supporting bidirectional flow of information during reward-seeking epochs, 
the flow of information became biased towards the BLA→PL direction during fear epochs. 
Importantly, this biased flow of information was not due to increased responsiveness to the 
shock-predictive cue compared to the sucrose-predictive cue in the BLA. More specific 
hypotheses of the underlying change in effective connectivity might include that BLA 
neurons that signal fear memory are more likely to connect functionally in a leading manner 
with PL. In addition, while BLA neurons that encode the same cue-value may be more likely 
to facilitate each other than neurons that encode the opposite cue-value, there is debate as to 
whether such populations are anatomically intermingled or segregated, and how they 
interact7,8,31,33. This suggests that statistical interrelationships are unlikely to remain 
completely independent across reward and fear retrieval. Despite this, we observed dynamic 
changes in the functional relationship between the BLA and PL that differentiated reward 
versus fear memory retrieval, with the BLA driving PL activity more strongly during the 
retrieval of fear than reward. A possible explanation for this could be that another structure 
mediates the changing relationship between the BLA and PL. One potential candidate is the 
ventral hippocampus, which is required for the expression of conditioned fear responses22, 
and preferentially modulates activity in both the BLA and PL during states of elevated fear 
and anxiety34,35.
Could another BLA-mPFC pathway preferentially guide reward-seeking behavior?
Other mPFC subregions such as the infralimbic cortex (IL) play different functional roles 
than PL in the regulation of reward-seeking and fear responses. In the reward domain, while 
PL activity is required for the initial acquisition of goal-directed reward-seeking behavior, IL 
activity is required for habitual reward-seeking behavior in over-trained animals36–38. 
Furthermore, IL shows stronger increases in activity than PL during reward-seeking tasks18. 
In addition, IL activity has also been correlated with food enticement39, contextually-driven 
reward-seeking responses13, and Pavlovian-to-instrumental transfer of reward-seeking 
behavior40. In the fear domain, while PL activity is crucial for fear expression11,21,41, IL 
activity is crucial for fear extinction and the inhibition of fear responses later on19. The 
ability of IL to inhibit fear could reliably allow reward-related signals to emerge without 
conflicting with fear signals, thus allowing reward-seeking behavior to occur. Future studies 
could be focused on determining the functional role of the BLA→IL pathway during 
reward-fear discrimination and test the hypothesis that IL may be a reward-biased pathway 
between the BLA and the mPFC.
Burgos-Robles et al.
Page 9
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Potential implications regarding the impact of emotion on cognition
While we found evidence for both “bottom-up” (BLA→PL) and “top-down” (PL→BLA) 
interactions overall, BLA→PL regulation dominated over the reciprocal PL→BLA 
regulation during fear retrieval. This finding is consistent with other models that predict 
transfer of information from the BLA to PL during fear learning11,12,24,25,42. Furthermore, 
recent studies that examined neural oscillations in the theta and gamma frequencies of local 
field potentials reported synchronized activity between the BLA and PL43–45. However, 
these oscillations did not clearly reflect preferential “bottom-up” BLA→PL regulation 
during fear retrieval. In contrast, “top-down” PL→BLA regulation has been reported to 
dominate during the presentation of “safety” cues (e.g., cues that do not predict electrical 
shocks)43,44, or during anesthesia in untrained anaimals46. Thus, it appears that “bottom-up” 
BLA→PL regulation dominates during high-fear states, whereas “top-down” PL→BLA 
regulation dominates during low-fear states. Nonetheless, we did not observe stronger “top-
down” PL→BLA regulation during reward-seeking behavior, which is a low-fear state. 
Perhaps, some “bottom-up” BLA→PL regulation might have occurred during reward-
seeking that countered the opposite “top-down” PL→BLA regulation during this low-fear 
reward-seeking state.
After being trained using only neural activity during the individual fear- and reward-
associated cues, machine learning algorithms were used to decode subject behavior using 
neural activity from competition trials (Fig. 5). The ability to predict behavior in the face of 
conflicting cues suggests that limbic representations of singular motivational states are 
nested within the representation of these states in conflict. Indeed, the representation of 
emotional conflict in the BLA is not only associated with the cues that trigger positive or 
negative emotional states, but also the behavioral expression of those states2 Despite 
variability across or even within animals, behavior on competition trials was strikingly 
decisive within individual trials, suggesting that emotional conflict is inherently unstable and 
quickly pivots towards simpler, singular motivational states. Our findings support the notion 
that the process of conflict resolution or state stabilization has, to some extent, already 
occurred in the information communicated by the BLA to the PL47–50.
In summary, the present study establishes a novel paradigm and identifies new vistas for 
exploration regarding the distal networks and microcircuitry involved in the neural 
mechanisms guiding action selection in situations of conflict.
Online Methods
Animals
All procedures were approved by the Committee on Animal Care of the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology and the Animal Care and Use Review Office of the USAMRMC, in 
compliance with the PHS Policy on Humane Care and Use of Laboratory Animals (Public 
Law 99–158). Adult male Long-Evans rats weighing ~275-300 g (3-months-old) were 
acquired from a commercial supplier (Taconic Biosciences), and were housed individually in 
Plexiglas home cages in a vivarium with controlled temperature, humidity, and pressure. 
Rats were maintained on a regular 12-hr light/dark cycle and all experiments were 
Burgos-Robles et al.
Page 10
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 performed during the light phase. Water was available ad libitum. Standard rat chow was 
restricted to 20 g/d.
Surgeries
Rats were anesthetized using isoflurane gas (~2.0%), and surgeries were performed using 
stereotaxic apparatuses (Kopf Instruments). Midline incisions were made down the scalp 
using surgical blades and craniotomies were opened using a dental drill. Coordinates to 
target the BLA were -2.60 to -2.80 mm anterior-posterior (AP), ±4.80 to ±5.00 mm medial-
lateral (ML), and -8.50 to -8.80 mm dorsal-ventral (DV). Coordinates to target PL were 
+3.00 to +2.90 mm AP, ±0.50 to ±0.75 mm ML, and -3.75 to -4.00 mm DV. All coordinates 
were relative to bregma. Implants were secured to the skull using stainless steel screws 
(Amazon), adhesive cement (C&B Metabond, Parkell), and dental acrylic (Ortho-Jet, Lang 
Dental). Incisions were sutured and post-operative care and analgesia (5 mg/kg Ketoprofen 
or 1.5 mg/kg meloxicam) were provided for 4 days. Rats were allowed to fully recover from 
surgery for two weeks.
Optogenetic Manipulations
Viral vectors were infused during a surgical procedure that occurred at least 12-16 weeks 
prior to implanting optical fibers during a second surgical procedure. All viral aliquots were 
obtained from the University of North Carolina Vector Core, unless otherwise specified. 
DNA sequences for viral constructs can be found online (www.optogenetics.org). A 10-µL 
microsyringe with a 33-Ga needle (Nanofil, WPI) was used to deliver viral vectors into the 
targets at a rate of 0.1 µL/min, using a microsyringe pump (UMP3/Micro4; WPI). Viral 
volumes of ~700-1000 nL were infused per target. Needles were kept at the infusion site for 
an extra 10 min to allow viral diffusion. Needles were slowly withdrawn at an approximate 
rate of 1 mm/min.
For optogenetic stimulation, the BLA was unilaterally transduced with a serotype-5 adeno-
associated viral vector (AAV5) coding for the blue light-sensitive cation-pump 
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii channelrhodopsin-2 (ChR2), which was fused to enhanced 
yellow fluorescent protein (eYFP) and expressed under the calcium/calmodulin-dependent 
protein kinase II alpha promoter (CaMKllα) (AAV5-CaMKllα-ChR2(H134R)-eYFP). 
Animals in the control group received a viral vector that only coded for eYFP (AAV5-
CaMKIIα-eYFP). For optogenetic inhibition, the BLA was bilaterally transduced with a 
viral vector coding for the yellow light-sensitive outward proton-pump Halorubrum 
sodomense TP009 archaerhodopsin (ArchT), which was fused to green fluorescent protein 
(GFP) and expressed under the CaMKllα promoter (AAV9-CaMKllα-ArchT-GFP). Animals 
in the control group received a viral vector that only coded for GFP (AAV8-CaMKIIα-GFP).
Optical fibers were chronically implanted in the dorsal portion of PL to either stimulate or 
inhibit BLA inputs. These implants consisted of a Ø400-µm core multimode fiber (NA = 
0.48; Thorlabs) that was held within a stainless steel ferrule (Precision Fiber Products). 
Optical fibers were cut at ~5-8 mm from the bottom of the ferrules to reach PL. Fibers were 
polished until reaching an efficiency to transmit light of ~85-95%. During behavioral testing, 
optical fibers were connected to patch cords (Doric), which were in turn connected to blue or 
Burgos-Robles et al.
Page 11
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 yellow light lasers (OEM Laser Systems) using FC/PC adapters located above the operant 
chambers. Laser output was controlled with a Master-8 pulse stimulator (A.M.P.I.). For 
photostimulation, 473-nm DPSS lasers (100-mW) were used to deliver 5-ms pulses of blue 
light at a frequency of 20 Hz, with a power of ~10 mW at the tip of the optical fibers (~80 
mW/mm2). For photoinhibition, 589-nm DPSS lasers (100-mW) were used to deliver 
constant yellow light at a power of ~8 mW at the tip of the optical fibers (~64 mW/mm2). 
The blue laser was activated 500 ms prior to CS onset and deactivated 500 ms after CS 
offset, whereas the yellow laser was activated 1000 ms prior to CS onset and deactivated 
1000 ms after CS offset.
Pharmacology Experiment
Optogenetic and pharmacology approaches were combined to rule out the possibility of 
stimulation of fibers of passage. After unilaterally transducing the BLA with ChR2, a 20-Ga 
stainless steel cannula was chronically implanted above PL (stereotaxic coordinates: 2.95 
mm anterior, 0.60 mm lateral, and 3.00 mm ventral from bregma). A 24-Ga dummy was 
inserted to prevent clogging of the cannula, and 24-Ga injectors extending 1 mm from the tip 
of the cannula were used to infuse drugs into PL. A 10-µL microsyringe (Nanofil, WPI) was 
used to infuse drugs at a rate of 0.1 µL/min, using a microsyringe pump (UMP3/Micro4; 
WPI).
Drugs were delivered into PL prior to the insertion of optical fibers and behavioral testing. 
Animals were tested on two days in a counterbalanced fashion shortly after infusion of either 
artificial cerebrospinal fluid (ACSF) or the AMPA (α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-
isoxazolepropionic acid) and NMDA (N-Methyl-D-aspartic acid) antagonists NBQX (22 
mM51; 2,3-dihydroxy-6-nitro-7-sulfamoyl-benzo[f]quinoxaline-2,3-dione; Tocris) and AP5 
(38 mM51; (2R)-amino-5-phosphonovaleric acid; Tocris). A total volume of 500 nL of ACSF 
or NBQX+AP5 (250 nL each) was infused into PL. Injectors were kept at the infusion site 
for an extra 5 min to allow drug diffusion. After drug infusion (~10 min), Ø400-µm core 
optical fibers, which were mounted on stainless steel ferrules and glued to nylon dust caps, 
were inserted and attached to the cannulas. Optical fibers extended ~250-500 µm beyond the 
cannula tips. Animals were then transferred to operant chambers and connected to patch 
cords for testing.
Chemogenetic Silencing
Viral vectors were used to express either the control fluorophore mCherry or the Gi-coupled 
designer receptor hM4D(Gi), which silences neural activity upon activation with a designer 
drug. mCherry or hM4D(Gi) were selectively expressed in the BLA cells terminating in PL 
using a Cre-dependent dual-virus strategy in which the BLA was infused with a virus 
containing mCherry or hM4D(Gi) within a double-floxed inverted open reading cassette 
(AAV5-hSyn-DIO-mCherry or AAV5-hSyn-DIO-hM4D(Gi)-mCherry), whereas PL was 
infused with a retrograde canine virus type-2 coding for Cre-recombinase (CAV2-Cre52; 
Institute of Molecular Genetics of Montpellier). Viral volumes of ~700-1000 nL were 
infused per site at a rate of 0.1 µL/min. Viral expression was allowed for ~12-16 weeks prior 
to behavioral testing. hM4D(Gi) was activated with the designer drug clozapine-N-oxide 
(CNO; Sigma-Aldrich), which was diluted in a solution of 5%DMSO and 0.9% saline. 
Burgos-Robles et al.
Page 12
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Systemic injections (i.p.) were performed ~15-20 min prior to behavioral testing, at a dose 
of 10 mg/kg to inhibit neuronal activity. Behavioral testing was also performed after 
multiple vehicle injections (5%DMSO in 0.9% saline).
Behavioral Tasks
Rats were trained in standard operant chambers (23 × 30 × 40 cm; Med Associates) located 
inside sound-attenuating cubicles. Each chamber was equipped with a red house light, light 
cues, speakers for the delivery of tone or white noise cues, a syringe pump to deliver 
sucrose, a sucrose port that was equipped with an infrared beam for the detection of entries 
and exits, and a grid floor for the delivery of electrical shocks. A customized digital-relay 
circuit was added between the shock generator and grid floor to minimize electrical artifacts. 
Chambers were scrubbed with 70% isopropyl alcohol after testing each animal.
All training phases occurred in the context. The first phase of training consisted of the 
acquisition of a Pavlovian reward association in which rats learned to associate a 
conditioned stimulus with sucrose (i.e., CS-Suc). To facilitate reward acquisition, rats were 
pre-exposed multiple times to sucrose in the homecage as well as in the training chambers. 
Reward conditioning consisted of the presentation of either a light cue or a sine wave tone 
cue (5 kHz, 80 dB) that lasted for 20 s, and predicted the delivery of a 30% sucrose solution 
(120 µL/trial). Sucrose was delivered over 10 s during the cue presentation (5-15 s, relative 
to CS onset). Rats underwent three reward sessions (one per day), and each consisted of a 
total of 25 trials delivered over ~35 min. The ITI was variable with an average of 1 min. 
Sucrose was removed by a vacuum immediately after cue offset if rats did not retrieve it 
during the CS.
The second phase of training consisted of the discrimination of conditioned stimuli that 
predicted sucrose reward (CS-Suc), aversive shocks (CS-Shock), or no outcome (CS-). The 
light and tone cues were counterbalanced across rats for the CS-Suc and CS-Shock 
associations. The white noise cue was always used for the CS-. The aversive shocks (0.40 
mA) lasted for 0.5 s and co-terminated with the CS (19.5-20 s, relative to CS onset). CS-
Suc, CS-Shock, and CS- trials occurred in a pseudorandom manner. Rats underwent at least 
three discrimination sessions (one per day), and each consisted of a total of 60 trials 
delivered over ~83 min. The ITI was variable with an average of 1 min.
The third phase of training tested the direct competition of reward and fear related behaviors. 
In addition to individual CS-Suc and CS-Shock trials, this phase of training included 
“competition” trials in which the CS-Suc and CS-Shock associations were co-presented to 
induce conflicting motivational drives and the potential for competition between reward and 
fear associated behaviors. CS-Suc, CS-Shock, and competition trials occurred in a 
pseudorandom manner, and a total of 60 trials were delivered over ~83 min during these 
competition sessions (variable ITI with an average of 1 min).
Reward and Fear Behaviors
Entries into the sucrose port provided a readout of reward-related behavior. Timestamps for 
port entries and exits were sampled from beam breaks (Med-PC IV, Med Associates). These 
timestamps were used to quantify the amount of time that animals spent in the port. Freezing 
Burgos-Robles et al.
Page 13
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 responses, which are defined as the lack of all movement except for respiration53, provided a 
readout of fear-related behavior. Videos were sampled using infrared cameras at 30 fps, and 
freezing was quantified using an automated custom MATLAB script that quantified frame-
by-frame changes in total pixel intensity, as approximations for animal motion. Frame-by-
frame motion values were then converted into freezing scores using a binary method relative 
to a motion threshold (i.e., motion levels above a certain threshold were classified as no 
freezing, whereas motion levels below a certain threshold were classified as freezing). The 
time that animals spent in the port was subtracted from the freezing quantification as animals 
showed low motion while collecting sucrose.
In Vivo Single-Unit Electrophysiology
Extracellular single-unit recordings were performed using in-house built multichannel 
electrodes. An electrode consisted of a 10 × 2 pin connector (Mill-Max Manufacturing 
Corp) that accommodated 16 microwires for single-unit recordings, an extra microwire for 
analog reference, and a low resistance 200-µm silver wire to provide ground (A-M Systems). 
A 22.9-µm HML-insulated nichrome microwire was used (Stablohm 675, California Fine 
Wire). A 26-Ga stainless steel cannula was attached to one of the electrode pins to insert the 
microwire bundle. Microwires were secured to the connector pins using a silver print coating 
(GC Electronics). After testing for short circuits, all connections were secured using dental 
acrylic. Final cutting of the microwire tips was performed using serrated fine scissors (Fine 
Science Tools). Gold-platting of the microwire tips was performed to reduce impedance and 
improve the signal-to-noise ratio54. Gold-platting was achieved by submerging the electrode 
tips in a solution containing equal parts of a non-cyanide gold solution (SIFCO Selective 
Plating) and a 1 mg/mL polyethylene glycol solution (Sigma-Aldrich). A cathodal electric 
current of 1 µA was then applied until the impedance of each channel was reduced to a range 
of ~200-300 kΩ.
Extracellular waveforms exceeding a voltage threshold were band-pass filtered (500-5000 
Hz) and digitized at 25 kHz using a multichannel extracellular recording workstation 
(Tucker-Davis Technologies). Rats were habituated to the recording tethers prior to 
experiments by connecting them multiple times (~30 min/d) while the experimenters 
adjusted the voltage thresholds to isolate stable single-units. During this procedure, rats also 
were habituated to the operant chambers. Neural activity was monitored during behavioral 
assessment, and the recorded waveforms were sorted offline using commercial software 
(Offline Sorter, Plexon Inc.). Principal components and peak-valley voltage values were 
assessed for each waveform, and then plotted in three-dimensional feature space to define 
clusters formed by single-units.
In Vivo Photo Identification of the BLA-PL Population
The activity of BLA cells terminating in PL (i.e., BLA-PL population) was monitored using 
a combination of single-unit recordings and optogenetic tools. First, ChR2 was selectively 
expressed in the BLA-PL population using the Cre-dependent dual-virus strategy in which 
the BLA was infused with a virus containing ChR2 within a DIO cassette (AAV5-EF1α-
DIO-ChR2(H134R)-eYFP), whereas PL was infused with the retrograde CAV2-Cre virus. 
Viral volumes of 1 µL were infused in each target using 33-Ga needles. Viral expression was 
Burgos-Robles et al.
Page 14
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 allowed for ~6 months prior to chronically implanting into the BLA a recording optrode 
(i.e., electrode containing an optical fiber for light delivery). In contrast to wire-bundle 
electrodes, optrodes were constructed by attaching microwires around an optical fiber 
(Ø300-µm, NA = 0.37; Thorlabs) that was in turn attached to the electrode connector. Wires 
extended ~500 µm from the tip of the optical fiber. Photo Identification of presumed 
ChR2+∷BLA-PL cells was achieved by delivering pulses of 473-nm blue light with a power 
of ~25-30 mW at the tip of the optical fibers (~17-20 mW/mm2 at the tip of the recording 
microwires). Two stimulation patterns were used: (a) 5-ms pulses at 1 Hz; and (b) 1-s pulses 
of constant light. These stimulation patterns were delivered in a pseudorandomly dispersed 
fashion with at least 20 iterations of each and with an average inter-stimulus interval of 10 s. 
This photo identification procedure was conducted shortly after the recording session in 
which animals underwent the behavioral paradigms.
Ex Vivo Slice Electrophysiology
Brain Tissue Preparation—BLA slices from 7 animals were examined. Approximately 
six months after transduction of the BLA with the AAV5-EF1α-DIO-ChR2-eYFP viral 
vector, and transduction of PL with the retrograde CAV2-Cre virus, rats were anesthetized 
with 90 mg/kg pentobarbital and perfused transcardially with 50 mL of cold, modified 
artificial cerebrospinal fluid (ACSF, at ~4°C) containing (in mM): 75 sucrose, 87 NaCl, 2.5 
KCl, 1.3 NaH2PO4, 7 MgCl2, 0.5 CaCl2, 25 NaHCO3 and 5 ascorbic acid. The brain was 
then extracted and glued (Roti coll 1; Carh Roth GmbH) to the platform of a semiautomatic 
vibrating blade microtome (VT1200; Leica). The platform was placed in the slicing chamber 
containing modified ACSF at 4°C. 300-μm coronal sections containing the BLA were 
collected in a holding chamber filled with ACSF saturated with 95% O2 and 5% CO2, 
containing (in mM): 126 NaCl, 2.5 KCl, 1.25 NaH2PO4, 1.0 MgCl2, 2.4 CaCl2, 26.0 
NaHCO3, and 10 glucose. Recordings were started 1 h after slicing, and the temperature was 
maintained at approximately 31°C both in the holding chamber and during the recordings.
Whole-Cell Patch-Clamp Recordings—Recordings were made on visually identified 
neurons expressing eYFP. Oxygenated ACSF was perfused onto the slice with a peristaltic 
pump (Minipuls3; Gilson) at ~3 mL/min. Recorded cells were filled with Alexa Fluor (AF) 
350 and biocytin. Voltage- and current-clamp recordings were conducted using glass 
microelectrodes (4-7 MΩ) molded with a horizontal puller (P-1000) and filled with a 
solution containing (in mM): 125 potassium gluconate, 20 HEPES, 10 NaCl, 3 MgATP, 8 
biocytin and 2 Alexa Fluor 350 (pH = 7.33; 287 milliOsmol). Recorded signals were 
amplified using a Multiclamp 700B amplifier (Molecular Devices). Analog signals were 
digitized at 10 kHz using Digidata 1440 and recorded using the pClamp10 software 
(Molecular Devices).
After opening the cell membrane, neurons where confirmed to express ChR2 if they showed 
a constant inward current in voltage-clamp in response to a 1-s constant blue light pulse, 
with a light power density of 84 mW/mm2 (20 mW with a 40× objective) delivered via a 
470-nm LED light source. From the 30 recorded neurons, 6 were confirmed to express ChR2 
as they showed constant inward currents in response to the light pulse. The remaining 24 
neurons were confirmed to not express ChR2 nor receiving inputs from nearby ChR2 
Burgos-Robles et al.
Page 15
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 neurons, as they did not respond to the light stimulus. Cell bodies for the 24 neighboring 
cells were located at least 150 µm from the cell bodies of ChR2-expressing neurons.
After categorizing the cells as ChR2-expressing or non-expressing, we recorded the 
photoresponse of the expressing neurons in current-clamp. The six ChR2+ neurons received 
5-ms single pulses delivered every 10 s, and 20-s trains of 5-ms pulses at 1 Hz at increasing 
light power light power density until a maximum of 84 mW/mm2 (20 mW with a 40× 
objective). The location within the BLA of all recorded neurons was confirmed after the 
recording. Co-localization of AF 350 and eYFP was confirmed for the six ChR2+ neurons.
Latency of Photoresponses—Offline analysis was performed using Clampfit software 
(Molecular Devices). Light-evoked latencies of action potentials (AP) were measured during 
40 light stimulations delivered at 1 Hz (5-ms pulses; two individual 20-pulse trains). 
Latencies were measured from the onset of the light pulse to the peak of the AP.
Histology
Rats were euthanized with sodium pentobarbital (150 mg/kg) and microlesions were 
produced at the recording sites by passing an anodal electrical current (20 s at ~25-35 µA on 
at least 4 channels). Rats were transcardially perfused with ice-cold phosphate buffer saline 
(1×-PBS) and paraformaldehyde (4% PFA, pH = 7.3). Brains were collected and fixed in 4% 
PFA for 24 hr and equilibrated in 30% sucrose for 48 hr. Coronal sections were cut at 60 µm 
using a microtome (HM430, Thermo Fisher Scientific).
Brain sections containing the BLA and PL were incubated for 30 min in a DNA-specific 
fluorescent probe (DAPI: 4′,6-Diamidino-2-Phenylindole; 1:50,000 dilution). After 4 
washes in 1×-PBS (10 min each), sections were mounted on microscope slides using 
fluorescence-compatible PVD-DABCO media. Confocal images were acquired with an 
Olympus FV1000 confocal laser-scanning microscope, using a 10×/0.40NA or 40×/1.30NA 
oil immersion objective. Image stitches and serial z-stacks were achieved with commercial 
imaging software (Fluoview, Olympus). Expression of eYFP and DAPI was examined in 
sections containing various anterior-posterior coronal levels of the BLA and PL. 
Microlesions were examined on confocal images and reconstructed onto coronal drawings 
adapted from a rat brain atlas55.
Statistical Analyses
All statistical analyses were based on two-tailed comparisons and were performed using 
either GraphPad Prism (GraphPad Software, Inc.), unless otherwise specified. Although no 
statistical tests were used to pre-determine sample sizes, our sample sizes are consistent with 
previous publications56–58. All data met the assumptions of every statistical tests used. The 
Kolmogorov-Smirnov normality test was used to determine if data sets required parametric 
or non-parametric statistical tests.
Randomization and Blinding—For behavioral training, the counterbalanced auditory 
and visual CSs were randomly assigned to animals. Pseudorandom trial sequences were 
generated to deliver CS-Suc, CS-Shock, CS-, Competition, laser-OFF, and laser-ON trials. 
Burgos-Robles et al.
Page 16
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 All animals received the same trial and laser sequences in any given experiment. Viral 
treatments for optogenetic and chemogenetic experiments were randomly assigned to 
animals. For the pharmacology experiment, the vehicle and drug treatments were randomly 
assign during the initial test session, whereas they were counterbalanced during the second 
test session. Although blinding was not performed, behavioral testing was controlled by 
software and data analyses were performed using customized automated methods whenever 
possible. In addition, all experiments were designed with appropriate internal controls (e.g., 
within-subject comparisons of laser-OFF versus laser-ON trials, within-subject comparisons 
of CS-Suc versus CS-Shock trials, etc.).
Exclusion of Animals, Cells, or Data Points—Several animals were excluded from 
this study due to either electrode misplacement (n = 2 animals), lack of viral expression (n = 
5 animals), viral leakage (n = 2 animals), or breakage or misplacement of optical fibers (n = 
3 animals). Several cells were also excluded from this study (BLA: n = 22 cells, PL: n = 23 
cells) due to repetitions across channels. In addition, for cross-correlation analyses, we 
excluded cells that fired at low frequencies (< 0.1 Hz), which typically produce unpopulated 
correlograms with spurious peaks and troughs. One data point was excluded from the 
decoding analysis as it was detected by the Grubbs' test as a statistically significant outlier.
Behavioral Data—Pearson's correlation test was used on a subset of freezing data to 
determine whether our automated quantification method provided reliable values compared 
to hand-scoring (df = 58; R = 0.989; P < 0.0001; n = 60 trials including CS-Suc, CS-Shock, 
and Compet; n = 3 animals). For the initial behavioral experiments, within-subject 
comparisons of port and freezing data across distinct CSs were performed using either 
paired T-test (in the case of two conditions) or one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with 
repeated-measures and Bonferroni post-hoc tests (in the case of three or more conditions). 
For optogenetic and chemogenetic experiments, normalizations were performed to port and 
freezing data by calculating the difference between experimental conditions (%time values 
were used for the subtractions). For instance, the percentage of time that animals spent 
performing either of the behaviors during laser-OFF trials was subtracted from laser-ON 
trials (i.e., laser-ON minus laser-OFF). Similarly, values obtained during the first test session 
in the chemogenetic experiment were subtracted from values obtained during subsequent 
sessions (e.g., CNO minus Veh1). Statistical comparisons between groups were performed 
using two-way ANOVA with repeated measures and Bonferroni post-hoc tests.
Quality of Cluster Sorting—Single-units were considered for analysis if clusters met 
two sorting quality statistical parameters: (a) multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA; 
probability threshold for significance was set to P < 0.01), which indicated that each cluster 
was positioned at a statistically different feature space location at any given feature space; 
and (b) the non-parametric J3 statistic, which measured the ratio of between-cluster to 
within-cluster scatter. These cluster statistics were examined using Offline Sorter (Plexon 
Inc.). To avoid duplicates across channels, auto-correlograms and cross-correlograms of 
simultaneously recorded units were inspected using Neuroexplorer (NEX Technologies).
Burgos-Robles et al.
Page 17
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Putative Principal Cells and Interneurons—Using a hierarchical clustering method, 
BLA and PL cells were separated into putative principal neurons versus interneurons based 
on spike width and firing frequency59,60. Three parameters were used: (a) latency of the 
depolarization phase at half amplitude, (b) latency of the hyperpolarization phase at half 
amplitude, and (c) the average firing frequency during the entire recording session.
Cross-Correlations (CCs)—CCs were assessed to examine whether BLA and PL cells 
exhibited different patterns of functional interactions during distinct task epochs. Analyses 
for CCs were performed using a combination of tools in Neuroexplorer (NEX 
Technologies), Matlab (MathWorks), and R (R Core Team; https://www.R-project.org/). CCs 
were examined during various task epochs: (a) ITI, (b) CS-Suc, (c) CS-Shock, (d) CS-, and 
(e) Competition. The ITI epochs were pseudorandomly generated such that they matched the 
number of CS epochs in any given recording session, and such that the ITI epochs were at 
least 5 s away from any CS epoch. To generate CCs, the BLA spikes were used as the 
reference events, and the PL spikes were used as the target events. CCs were generated for a 
window of ±1000 ms relative to the reference spikes, using bin widths of 25 ms61.
Two correction methods were applied to control for apparent correlations that might be due 
to CS-elicited covariation or nonstationary firing rates: (a) trial-shift predictor in which spike 
trains from the reference and target neurons were compared during shifted trials (19 trial 
shifts were applied per neural pair); and (b) spike- shuffle predictor in which the spike trains 
of the reference neurons were repeatedly shuffled over time (100 random spike shuffles per 
trial were applied). The trial-shift predictor and spike-shuffle predictor correlograms were 
individually subtracted from the raw correlograms, and neural pairs were deemed 
significantly correlated if peaks or troughs reached statistical significance after application 
of both correction methods. The statistical significance of peaks and troughs was determined 
by Z-score transformations of the corrected correlograms, relative to the average standard 
deviations of correlogram generated for each predictor. Significant peaks and troughs were 
evaluated within an experimental window of ±100 ms relative to the reference spikes, using 
a Z-score criterion that was based on a two-tailed significance level of P < 0.01, and that was 
Bonferroni-corrected for multiple comparisons (i.e., eight 25-ms bins within the ±100 ms 
window; actual P = 0.01/8 = 0.00125). The significance P-value of 0.00125 corresponded to 
Z-score thresholds of Z > 3.23 for excitatory CCs or Z < -3.23 for inhibitory CCs. CCs had 
to meet these significance thresholds for both predictor-corrections (trial-shifting and spike-
shuffling) in order to be considered for further analyses.
Since 25-ms bins were too broad to detect coincident firing, zero-lag “common-input” 
correlations62 were examined from 5-ms binned correlograms with the central bin centered 
at zero (i.e., ±2.5 ms). If the 5-ms binned correlograms exhibited peaks or troughs centered 
at zero, correlations were considered as “common input”, and they were excluded from 
analyses.
The timing of peaks and troughs in the 25-ms binned correlograms was examined to 
determine putative lead and lag. Excluding zero-lag cell pairs, correlations were considered 
to be led by BLA if peaks or troughs occurred after the BLA reference spikes (i.e., within 
+2.5 to +100 ms in the correlograms), whereas correlations were considered to be led by PL 
Burgos-Robles et al.
Page 18
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 if peaks or troughs occurred before the BLA reference spikes (i.e., within -100 to -2.5 ms in 
the correlograms). Proportions of significantly correlated cell pairs were compared across 
task epochs using Bonferroni-corrected chi-square tests. Results obtained with the 25-ms 
binned correlograms were confirmed using 10-ms binned correlograms63. However, the 
narrower bins in the setting of low firing rate cells led to highly sparse correlograms with 
increased variability and the potential for false positive and false negative correlations. In 
addition, the narrower bins failed to detect many inhibitory correlations that were detected 
with the wider bins, due to increased variability and floor effects, especially in the low firing 
rate cell pairs.
CS-Evoked Responses—The response of individual cells to CSs was examined using a 
combination of the non-parametric Wilcoxon signed-rank test (as primary) and a Z-score test 
(as secondary). Given the existence of cells in both the BLA and PL that typically show 
either “transient” or “prolonged” responses to CSs64–68, two signed-rank tests with 1000 
bootstraps and Bonferroni corrections were performed per CS. For transient responses, 
neural activity was binned in 25 ms intervals, and comparisons were made between a 
baseline window ranging from -1 to 0 s and an experimental window ranging from 0 to 300 
ms, relative to CS onset. For prolonged responses, activity was binned in 50 ms intervals, 
and comparisons were made between a baseline window ranging from -2 to 0 s and an 
experimental window ranging from 0 to 1.5 s, relative to CS onset. The Z-score test 
confirmed that the peak responses reached a certain significance threshold of either Z > 2.58 
for excitatory responses (corresponding to P < 0.01) or Z < -1.96 for inhibitory responses 
(corresponding to P < 0.05). Cells that met both the Wilcoxon and Z-score criteria were then 
considered as CS-responsive cells. Proportions of CS-responsive populations were compared 
using chi-square tests with Bonferroni corrections for multiple comparisons.
Machine Learning to Decode Neuronal Activity and Predict Behavior—A 
machine-learning algorithm69,70 was used to determine whether behavioral responses during 
competition trials could be predicted based on how individual cells responded during CS-
Suc and CS-Shock trials. Neural data for individual cells was extracted for the entire 20 s of 
each trial (20 trials for the CS-Suc, 20 trials for the CS-Shock, and 20 trials for 
Competition). These data were then preprocessed by binning neural activity within each 
individual trial into 50-ms bins. Spike density estimates for each trial were then generated by 
convolving the binned rasters with a Gaussian kernel (standard deviation of 200 ms). The 
dimensionality of each cell's data was further reduced using principal component analysis 
across all trial types71, and retained the first four principal component scores for each trial. 
This procedure reduced the data from 400 data points per cell per trial (50-ms bins over 20 
s) to only four data points per cell per trial. The same preprocessing steps were used for 
pairs of BLA and PL cells, except that the spike trains of each cell were concatenated prior 
to principal component analysis, and eight principle components were selected in total for 
each pair of cells. Each pair of cells was separately preprocessed using all possible 
combinations of simultaneously recorded cells.
The reduced preprocessed data was then used to train a support vector machine (SVM) 
classifier72,73. The SVM classifier was trained using linear kernels (fitcsvm.m, Matlab 
Burgos-Robles et al.
Page 19
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 R2015b) to determine the optimal hyperplane that separated neural activity during the CS-
Suc and CS-Shock trials. The identified separating hyperplane was then used to predict 
behavioral responses during competition trials by classifying neuronal activity as more “CS-
Suc like” or more “CS-Shock like” on a trial-by-trial basis. Cross-validation was not 
necessary as data from the competition trials was never used to train the classifier but only 
used to test it. The predicted classification was compared to the actual behavioral output of 
the animal to determine whether the prediction was correct or incorrect. The decoding 
accuracy for a given cell or cell pair was calculated as the percentage of competition trials in 
which the predicted behavioral response matched the actual response of the animal. The 
statistical significance of the calculated decoding accuracies were empirically determined 
using permutation tests, which compared the decoding accuracy for real training data to 
decoding accuracies obtained after scrambling the identity of the CS-Suc and CS-Shock 
trials 1000 times, each time generating a permuted separating hyperplane that was used to 
classify the actual neural data from competition trials74. The decoding accuracy obtained 
using the hyperplane derived from the actual CS-Suc and CS-Shock neural data was 
compared to the permuted distribution only once, therefore there was no need to correct for 
multiple comparisons. For between-population comparisons of the decoding accuracies, we 
used one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni post-hoc tests. For within-population comparisons 
against scrambled data, we used Bonferroni-corrected paired T-tests.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank Siamak Sorooshyari for helpful discussion and assistance on MATLAB programming, as well as 
Craig Wildes and the entire Tye Laboratory for helpful discussion and support on this project. A.B.R. was 
supported by the Brain and Behavior Research Foundation (NARSAD Young Investigator Award) and NIMH 
(Research Supplement to Promote Diversity in Health-Related Sciences). E.Y.K. was supported by the 
Collaborative Clinical Neuroscience Fellowship and the American Brain Foundation Clinical Research Training 
Fellowship. W.A.R.G. and P.A.P.R. were supported by the MIT Summer Research Program, which received support 
from the Center for Brains, Minds and Machines (CBMM), NSF (STC Award CCF-1231216), and NIH (Endure 
Award 1R25-MH092912-01). E.H.N. was supported by the National Science Foundation Graduate Research 
Fellowship (NSF GRFP), the Integrative Neuronal Systems Training Fellowship (T32 GM007484), and the 
Training Program in the Neurobiology of Learning and Memory. A.C.F.O. was supported by an institutional NRSA 
training grant (5T32GM007484-38). P.N. was supported by the Singleton, Leventhal and Whitaker fellowships. 
C.A.L. was supported by the NSF Graduate Research Fellowship, Integrative Neuronal Systems Fellowship, and the 
James R. Killian Fellowship. M.J.P, K.N.P., and M.A. were supported by the MIT Undergraduate Research 
Opportunities Program. K.K.A. was supported by the MIT Research Assistantship Program. K.M.T. is a New York 
Stem Cell Foundation - Robertson Investigator and McKnight Scholar and this work was supported by funding 
from the JPB Foundation, PIIF, PNDRF, JFDP, Whitehall Foundation, Klingenstein Foundation, NARSAD Young 
Investigator Award, Alfred P Sloan Foundation, New York Stem Cell Foundation, McKnight Foundation, NIH R01-
MH102441-01 (NIMH), R01-AA023305-01 (NIAAA), and NIH Director's New Innovator Award DP2-
DK-102256-01 (NIDDK).
Data and Code Availability: All relevant data and code supporting the findings of this study are available from the 
corresponding author upon reasonable request.
References
1. Maren S, Quirk GJ. Neuronal signalling of fear memory. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2004; 5:844–852. 
[PubMed: 15496862] 
Burgos-Robles et al.
Page 20
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 2. Janak PH, Tye KM. From circuits to behaviour in the amygdala. Nature. 2015; 517:284–292. 
[PubMed: 25592533] 
3. Rogan MT, Stäubli UV, LeDoux JE. Fear conditioning induces associative long-term potentiation in 
the amygdala. Nature. 1997; 390:604–607. [PubMed: 9403688] 
4. Paton JJ, Belova MA, Morrison SE, Salzman CD. The primate amygdala represents the positive and 
negative value of visual stimuli during learning. Nature. 2006; 439:865–870. [PubMed: 16482160] 
5. Tye KM, Stuber GD, de Ridder B, Bonci A, Janak PH. Rapid strengthening of thalamo-amygdala 
synapses mediates cue-reward learning. Nature. 2008; 453:1253–1257. [PubMed: 18469802] 
6. Shabel SJ, Janak PH. Substantial similarity in amygdala neuronal activity during conditioned 
appetitive and aversive emotional arousal. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009; 106:15031–15036. 
[PubMed: 19706473] 
7. Namburi P, et al. A circuit mechanism for differentiating positive and negative associations. Nature. 
2015; 520:675–678. [PubMed: 25925480] 
8. Beyeler A, et al. Divergent Routing of Positive and Negative Information from the Amygdala during 
Memory Retrieval. Neuron. 2016; 90:348–361. [PubMed: 27041499] 
9. Choi JS, Kim JJ. Amygdala regulates risk of predation in rats foraging in a dynamic fear 
environment. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010; 107:21773–21777. [PubMed: 21115817] 
10. Amir A, Lee SC, Headley DB, Herzallah MM, Pare D. Amygdala Signaling during Foraging in a 
Hazardous Environment. J Neurosci Off J Soc Neurosci. 2015; 35:12994–13005.
11. Burgos-Robles A, Vidal-Gonzalez I, Quirk GJ. Sustained conditioned responses in prelimbic 
prefrontal neurons are correlated with fear expression and extinction failure. J Neurosci Off J Soc 
Neurosci. 2009; 29:8474–8482.
12. Senn V, et al. Long-range connectivity defines behavioral specificity of amygdala neurons. Neuron. 
2014; 81:428–437. [PubMed: 24462103] 
13. Moorman DE, Aston-Jones G. Prefrontal neurons encode context-based response execution and 
inhibition in reward seeking and extinction. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015; 112:9472–9477. 
[PubMed: 26170333] 
14. McGarry LM, Carter AG. Inhibitory Gating of Basolateral Amygdala Inputs to the Prefrontal 
Cortex. J Neurosci Off J Soc Neurosci. 2016; 36:9391–9406.
15. Dilgen J, Tejeda HA, O'Donnell P. Amygdala inputs drive feedforward inhibition in the medial 
prefrontal cortex. J Neurophysiol. 2013; 110:221–229. [PubMed: 23657281] 
16. Gabbott PLA, Warner TA, Jays PRL, Salway P, Busby SJ. Prefrontal cortex in the rat: projections 
to subcortical autonomic, motor, and limbic centers. J Comp Neurol. 2005; 492:145–177. 
[PubMed: 16196030] 
17. Ishikawa A, Ambroggi F, Nicola SM, Fields HL. Contributions of the amygdala and medial 
prefrontal cortex to incentive cue responding. Neuroscience. 2008; 155:573–584. [PubMed: 
18640246] 
18. Burgos-Robles A, Bravo-Rivera H, Quirk GJ. Prelimbic and infralimbic neurons signal distinct 
aspects of appetitive instrumental behavior. PloS One. 2013; 8:e57575. [PubMed: 23460877] 
19. Burgos-Robles A, Vidal-Gonzalez I, Santini E, Quirk GJ. Consolidation of fear extinction requires 
NMDA receptor-dependent bursting in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex. Neuron. 2007; 53:871–
880. [PubMed: 17359921] 
20. Sotres-Bayon F, Quirk GJ. Prefrontal control of fear: more than just extinction. Curr Opin 
Neurobiol. 2010; 20:231–235. [PubMed: 20303254] 
21. Courtin J, et al. Prefrontal parvalbumin interneurons shape neuronal activity to drive fear 
expression. Nature. 2014; 505:92–96. [PubMed: 24256726] 
22. Sierra-Mercado D, Padilla-Coreano N, Quirk GJ. Dissociable roles of prelimbic and infralimbic 
cortices, ventral hippocampus, and basolateral amygdala in the expression and extinction of 
conditioned fear. Neuropsychopharmacol Off Publ Am Coll Neuropsychopharmacol. 2011; 
36:529–538.
23. Sangha S, Robinson PD, Greba Q, Davies DA, Howland JG. Alterations in reward, fear and safety 
cue discrimination after inactivation of the rat prelimbic and infralimbic cortices. 
Neuropsychopharmacol Off Publ Am Coll Neuropsychopharmacol. 2014; 39:2405–2413.
Burgos-Robles et al.
Page 21
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 24. Laviolette SR, Lipski WJ, Grace AA. A subpopulation of neurons in the medial prefrontal cortex 
encodes emotional learning with burst and frequency codes through a dopamine D4 receptor-
dependent basolateral amygdala input. J Neurosci Off J Soc Neurosci. 2005; 25:6066–6075.
25. Sotres-Bayon F, Sierra-Mercado D, Pardilla-Delgado E, Quirk GJ. Gating of fear in prelimbic 
cortex by hippocampal and amygdala inputs. Neuron. 2012; 76:804–812. [PubMed: 23177964] 
26. Nieh EH, et al. Decoding Neural Circuits that Control Compulsive Sucrose Seeking. Cell. 2015; 
160:528–541. [PubMed: 25635460] 
27. Tye KM, et al. Amygdala circuitry mediating reversible and bidirectional control of anxiety. 
Nature. 2011; 471:358–362. [PubMed: 21389985] 
28. Chow BY, et al. High-performance genetically targetable optical neural silencing by light-driven 
proton pumps. Nature. 2010; 463:98–102. [PubMed: 20054397] 
29. Mattis J, et al. Principles for applying optogenetic tools derived from direct comparative analysis of 
microbial opsins. Nat Methods. 2012; 9:159–172.
30. Armbruster BN, Li X, Pausch MH, Herlitze S, Roth BL. Evolving the lock to fit the key to create a 
family of G protein-coupled receptors potently activated by an inert ligand. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 
2007; 104:5163–5168. [PubMed: 17360345] 
31. Kim J, Pignatelli M, Xu S, Itohara S, Tonegawa S. Antagonistic negative and positive neurons of 
the basolateral amygdala. Nat Neurosci. 2016; 19:1636–1646. [PubMed: 27749826] 
32. Mahn M, Prigge M, Ron S, Levy R, Yizhar O. Biophysical constraints of optogenetic inhibition at 
presynaptic terminals. Nat Neurosci. 2016; 19:554–556. [PubMed: 26950004] 
33. Zhang W, et al. Functional circuits and anatomical distribution of response properties in the 
primate amygdala. J Neurosci Off J Soc Neurosci. 2013; 33:722–733.
34. Adhikari A, Topiwala MA, Gordon JA. Single units in the medial prefrontal cortex with anxiety-
related firing patterns are preferentially influenced by ventral hippocampal activity. Neuron. 2011; 
71:898–910. [PubMed: 21903082] 
35. Jin J, Maren S. Fear renewal preferentially activates ventral hippocampal neurons projecting to 
both amygdala and prefrontal cortex in rats. Sci Rep. 2015; 5:8388. [PubMed: 25669753] 
36. Killcross S, Coutureau E. Coordination of actions and habits in the medial prefrontal cortex of rats. 
Cereb Cortex N Y N. 2003; 199113:400–408.
37. Balleine BW, O'Doherty JP. Human and rodent homologies in action control: corticostriatal 
determinants of goal-directed and habitual action. Neuropsychopharmacol Off Publ Am Coll 
Neuropsychopharmacol. 2010; 35:48–69.
38. Smith KS, Virkud A, Deisseroth K, Graybiel AM. Reversible online control of habitual behavior 
by optogenetic perturbation of medial prefrontal cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012; 
109:18932–18937. [PubMed: 23112197] 
39. Valdés JL, Maldonado P, Recabarren M, Fuentes R, Torrealba F. The infralimbic cortical area 
commands the behavioral and vegetative arousal during appetitive behavior in the rat. Eur J 
Neurosci. 2006; 23:1352–1364. [PubMed: 16553796] 
40. Keistler C, Barker JM, Taylor JR. Infralimbic prefrontal cortex interacts with nucleus accumbens 
shell to unmask expression of outcome-selective Pavlovian-to-instrumental transfer. Learn Mem 
Cold Spring Harb N. 2015; 22:509–513.
41. Corcoran KA, Quirk GJ. Activity in prelimbic cortex is necessary for the expression of learned, but 
not innate, fears. J Neurosci Off J Soc Neurosci. 2007; 27:840–844.
42. Klavir O, Genud-Gabai R, Paz R. Functional connectivity between amygdala and cingulate cortex 
for adaptive aversive learning. Neuron. 2013; 80:1290–1300. [PubMed: 24314732] 
43. Likhtik E, Stujenske JM, Topiwala MA, Harris AZ, Gordon JA. Prefrontal entrainment of 
amygdala activity signals safety in learned fear and innate anxiety. Nat Neurosci. 2014; 17:106–
113. [PubMed: 24241397] 
44. Stujenske JM, Likhtik E, Topiwala MA, Gordon JA. Fear and safety engage competing patterns of 
theta-gamma coupling in the basolateral amygdala. Neuron. 2014; 83:919–933. [PubMed: 
25144877] 
45. Karalis N, et al. 4-Hz oscillations synchronize prefrontal-amygdala circuits during fear behavior. 
Nat Neurosci. 2016; 19:605–612. [PubMed: 26878674] 
Burgos-Robles et al.
Page 22
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 46. Likhtik E, Pelletier JG, Paz R, Paré D. Prefrontal control of the amygdala. J Neurosci Off J Soc 
Neurosci. 2005; 25:7429–7437.
47. Etkin A, Egner T, Peraza DM, Kandel ER, Hirsch J. Resolving Emotional Conflict: A Role for the 
Rostral Anterior Cingulate Cortex in Modulating Activity in the Amygdala. Neuron. 2006; 
51:871–882. [PubMed: 16982430] 
48. Comte M, et al. Dissociating Bottom-Up and Top-Down Mechanisms in the Cortico-Limbic 
System during Emotion Processing. Cereb Cortex N Y N. 2016; 199126:144–155.
49. Rohr CS, et al. The neural networks of subjectively evaluated emotional conflicts. Hum Brain 
Mapp. 2016; 37:2234–2246. [PubMed: 26991156] 
50. Kanske P, Kotz SA. Emotion Speeds up Conflict Resolution: A New Role for the Ventral Anterior 
Cingulate Cortex? Cereb Cortex. 2011; 21:911–919. [PubMed: 20732901] 
51. Felix-Ortiz AC, et al. BLA to vHPC inputs modulate anxiety-related behaviors. Neuron. 2013; 
79:658–664. [PubMed: 23972595] 
52. Kremer EJ, Boutin S, Chillon M, Danos O. Canine adenovirus vectors: an alternative for 
adenovirus-mediated gene transfer. J Virol. 2000; 74:505–512. [PubMed: 10590140] 
53. Blanchard RJ, Flannelly KJ, Blanchard DC. Defensive behavior of laboratory and wild Rattus 
norvegicus. J Comp Psychol Wash DC 1983. 1986; 100:101–107.
54. Ferguson JE, Boldt C, Redish AD. Creating low-impedance tetrodes by electroplating with 
additives. Sens Actuators Phys. 2009; 156:388–393.
55. Paxinos, G., Watson, C. The Rat Brain in Stereotaxic Coordinates. Academic Press; 1998. 
56. Meyer RM, Burgos-Robles A, Liu E, Correia SS, Goosens KA. A ghrelin-growth hormone axis 
drives stress-induced vulnerability to enhanced fear. Mol Psychiatry. 2014; 19:1284–1294. 
[PubMed: 24126924] 
57. Do-Monte FH, Quiñones-Laracuente K, Quirk GJ. A temporal shift in the circuits mediating 
retrieval of fear memory. Nature. 2015; 519:460–463. [PubMed: 25600268] 
58. Felix-Ortiz AC, Burgos-Robles A, Bhagat ND, Leppla CA, Tye KM. Bidirectional modulation of 
anxiety-related and social behaviors by amygdala projections to the medial prefrontal cortex. 
Neuroscience. 2015; doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2015.07.041
59. Barthó P, et al. Characterization of neocortical principal cells and interneurons by network 
interactions and extracellular features. J Neurophysiol. 2004; 92:600–608. [PubMed: 15056678] 
60. Likhtik E, Pelletier JG, Popescu AT, Paré D. Identification of basolateral amygdala projection cells 
and interneurons using extracellular recordings. J Neurophysiol. 2006; 96:3257–3265. [PubMed: 
17110739] 
61. Livneh U, Paz R. Amygdala-Prefrontal Synchronization Underlies Resistance to Extinction of 
Aversive Memories. Neuron. 2012; 75:133–142. [PubMed: 22794267] 
62. Abeles M, Gerstein GL. Detecting spatiotemporal firing patterns among simultaneously recorded 
single neurons. J Neurophysiol. 1988; 60:909–924. [PubMed: 3171666] 
63. Paz R, Bauer EP, Paré D. Measuring Correlations and Interactions Among Four Simultaneously 
Recorded Brain Regions During Learning. J Neurophysiol. 2009; 101:2507–2515. [PubMed: 
19244352] 
64. Tye KM, Janak PH. Amygdala neurons differentially encode motivation and reinforcement. J 
Neurosci Off J Soc Neurosci. 2007; 27:3937–3945.
65. Herry C, et al. Switching on and off fear by distinct neuronal circuits. Nature. 2008; 454:600–606. 
[PubMed: 18615015] 
66. Johansen JP, Tarpley JW, LeDoux JE, Blair HT. Neural substrates for expectation-modulated fear 
learning in the amygdala and periaqueductal gray. Nat Neurosci. 2010; 13:979–986. [PubMed: 
20601946] 
67. Amano T, Duvarci S, Popa D, Paré D. The fear circuit revisited: contributions of the basal 
amygdala nuclei to conditioned fear. J Neurosci Off J Soc Neurosci. 2011; 31:15481–15489.
68. Pendyam S, et al. Fear signaling in the prelimbic-amygdala circuit: a computational modeling and 
recording study. J Neurophysiol. 2013; 110:844–861. [PubMed: 23699055] 
69. Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R., Friedman, J. The Elements of Statistical Learning: Data Mining, 
Inference, and Prediction, Second Edition. Springer; 2011. 
Burgos-Robles et al.
Page 23
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 70. Narayanan NS, Laubach M. Methods for studying functional interactions among neuronal 
populations. Methods Mol Biol Clifton NJ. 2009; 489:135–165.
71. Richmond BJ, Optican LM. Temporal encoding of two-dimensional patterns by single units in 
primate inferior temporal cortex II. Quantification of response waveform J Neurophysiol. 1987; 
57:147–161. [PubMed: 3559669] 
72. [Accessed: 16th January 2017] Introduction An to Support Vector Machines and Other Kernel-
based Learning Methods. Cambridge University Press. Available at: http://www.cambridge.org/gb/
academic/subjects/computer-science/pattern-recognition-and-machine-learning/introduction-
support-vector-machines-and-other-kernel-based-learning-methods?
format=HB&isbn=9780521780193
73. Schlkopf, B., Smola, AJ. Learning with Kernels: Support Vector Machines, Regularization, 
Optimization, and Beyond. The MIT Press; 2001. 
74. Phillip I Good. Springer; Permutation, Parametric, and Bootstrap Tests of Hypotheses. 
Burgos-Robles et al.
Page 24
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
Behavioral tasks to examine the discrimination and competition of reward and fear 
memories. (a) During discrimination, discrete conditioned stimuli (CS) predicted either 
sucrose or shocks. These CSs were termed the “CS-Suc” and “CS-Shock”, and their sensory 
modalities (light vs tone) were counterbalanced across animals. Sucrose was removed from 
the port if animals did not collect it by the end of the CS (vacuum; “Vac”). During 
competition, in addition to the individual CS-Suc and CS-Shock, animals were challenged 
by the co-presentation of these associations to induce conflicting motivational drives and 
“competition”. (b and c) For simplicity, we operationalize the term “Rew” to refer to port-
entry behavior and “Fear” to refer to freezing. (b) Port entry responses per CS during the last 
discrimination session. Inset show the average time that animals spent in the port per CS 
(paired T-test: t15 = 20.3, ***P < 0.001, n = 16 animals). (c) Freezing responses per CS 
during the last discrimination session. Inset shows the average time that animals spent 
freezing per CS (paired T-test: t15 = 20.6, ***P < 0.001, n = 16 animals). (d) Port entry 
responses during the last competition session. Inset shows the average time in the port per 
CS (repeated measures one-way ANOVA: F2,30 = 107.6, P < 0.001, n = 16 animals; 
Bonferroni post-hoc tests: t15 > 6.85 and ***P < 0.001 for all comparisons). (e) Freezing 
responses during the last competition session. Inset shows the average time that animals 
spent freezing per CS (repeated measures one-way ANOVA: F2,30 = 89.0, P < 0.001, n = 16 
Burgos-Robles et al.
Page 25
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 animals; Bonferroni post-hoc tests: t15 > 6.01 and ***P < 0.001 for all comparisons). Error 
bands in line plots and error bars in insets represent s.e.m.
Burgos-Robles et al.
Page 26
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. 
Correlated activity between the BLA and PL varied between the retrieval of reward- and 
fear-related memories. (a-b) Neural activity was simultaneously recorded in the BLA and 
PL (n = 12 animals). Representative CCs between BLA/PL neural pairs (25-ms bins) exhibit 
either excitatory correlations (i.e., the target cell showed increased firing when the reference 
cell fired) or inhibitory correlations (i.e., the target cell showed reduced firing when the 
reference cell fired). Significant peaks or troughs were detected within ±100 ms from the 
reference spikes. Correlations due to common input (i.e., zero lag) were excluded by 
examining CCs generated with smaller bin widths (5-ms bins; see Supplementary Fig. S3). 
Only a small fraction of cell pairs showed zero lag (see Supplementary Fig. S6c-d). (c-d) 
Excitatory correlations predominated over inhibitory correlations in all task epochs 
(Bonferroni-corrected chi-square tests: χ2 > 136.5, P < 0.001 in all task epochs). In the 
heatmaps, cell pairs were ordered based on the latency of peaks and troughs. Mean latency
±s.e.m. of peaks for excitatory CCs: ITI, 3.9±2.4 ms; CS-Suc, 5.9±2.5 ms; and CS-Shock, 
13.0±2.4 ms. Mean latency of troughs for inhibitory CCs: ITI, 12.5±5.3 ms; CS-Suc, 
17.1±7.6 ms; CS-Shock, -1.4±5.2 ms. Numbers at the bottom of the heatmaps indicate the 
overall proportion of correlated cell pairs per epoch. Vertical dash lines represent the time of 
the reference spikes, and the horizontal dash lines represent the separation between putative 
Burgos-Robles et al.
Page 27
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 BLA-led versus PL-led correlations. (e-f) Distinct populations of BLA/PL neural pairs 
exhibited correlated activity during different epochs. (g) Putative leading structure in the 
excitatory CCs, based on the latency of peaks. Cell pairs were deemed as BLA-led if the 
peak occurred within +2.5 to +100 ms from the reference, whereas they were deemed as PL-
led if the peak occurred within -100 to -2.5 ms from the reference (n's reported within each 
bar). BLA leading was significantly greater than PL leading only during the CS-Shock (ITI, 
χ2 = 3.83, P = 0.14; CS-Suc, χ2 = 0.91, P = 0.71; CS-Shock, χ2 = 29.2, ***P < 0.001). The 
leading ratio during the CS-Shock was also significantly different than during other epochs 
(ITI vs CS-Suc, χ2 = 0.71, P = 0.78; ITI vs CS-Shock, χ2 = 10.4, **P = 0.004; CS-Suc vs 
CS-Shock, χ2 = 16.0, ***P < 0.001). (h) Putative leading structure in the inhibitory CCs. 
There was a trend towards higher BLA than PL leading during the CS-Suc (ITI, χ2 = 0.89, P 
= 0.72; CS-Suc, χ2 = 4.28, ~P = 0.11; CS-Shock, χ2 = 0.15, P = 0.97). The leading ratio 
during the CS-Suc was significantly different than during the CS-Shock (ITI vs CS-Suc, χ2 
= 2.33, P = 0.35; ITI vs CS-Shock, χ2 = 1.37, P = 0.56; CS-Suc vs CS-Shock, χ2 = 5.70, *P 
= 0.05).
Burgos-Robles et al.
Page 28
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. 
BLA neurons biased towards encoding the CS-Sucrose (Rew) or CS-Shock (Fear) exhibited 
similar proportions of correlated activity with PL, whereas a greater proportion of “fear”-
biased PL cells exhibited correlated activity with BLA. (a-b) BLA populations based on the 
response to the reward-associated cue (i.e., CS-Suc; “R”), fear-associated cue (i.e., CS-
Shock; “F”), or to both cues (“R” and “F” combinations). There were no significant 
differences in proportions across these populations (Bonferroni-corrected chi-square tests: 
χ2 < 9.50 and P > 0.056 for all comparisons). (c) Separation of reward and fear biased BLA 
cells, based on the peak response to each cue. Cells in the light-gray zones exhibited larger 
responses to the reward-related cue, and were deemed as “reward biased”. Cells in the dark-
gray zones exhibited larger responses to the fear-related cue, and were deemed as “fear 
biased”. Inset shows the average proportion of reward and fear biased cells in the BLA per 
subject (paired T-test: t11 = 0.61, P = 0.56, n = 12 animals). (d) Reward and fear biased BLA 
cells showed similar proportions of cross-correlated activity with simultaneously recorded 
PL cells. These values were normalized to the total number of correlated neural pairs per 
subject per cue (repeated measures two-way ANOVA: cells, F1,22 = 0.01, P = 0.91; cue, 
F1,22 = 1.48, P = 0.24; interaction, F1,22 = 0.04, P = 0.85, n = 12 animals). (e-f) PL 
populations based on the response to the cues. Asterisk in the F+ bar indicates that this 
Burgos-Robles et al.
Page 29
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 population was significantly larger than most other populations (χ2 = 8.86 and P = 0.079 
compared to R+F+; χ2 > 11.06 and P < 0.024 compared to all other populations). (g) 
Separation of reward and fear biased PL cells, based on the peak response to each cue. A 
greater proportion of PL cells exhibited fear bias than reward bias (t11 = 3.03, *P = 0.011, n 
= 12 animals). (h) A greater proportion of fear-biased PL cells showed cross-correlated 
activity with simultaneously recorded BLA cells (cells, F1,22 = 13.5, P = 0.0013; cue, F1,22 = 
3.66, P = 0.069; interaction, F1,22 = 1.23, P = 0.28; CS-Suc, t11 = 3.32, **P = 0.0026; CS-
Shock, t11 = 3.73, ***P < 0.001, n = 12 animals). Error bars represent s.e.m.
Burgos-Robles et al.
Page 30
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. 
The majority of BLA-PL cells recorded showed selective excitations to the shock-predictive 
cue. An optogenetic approach was used to photoidentify these cells (“BLA-PL population”). 
(a-e) Assessment of photoresponse latencies in slices. (a) Ex vivo whole-cell patch-clamp 
recordings were performed after selectively expressing ChR2 in BLA-PL cells using a Cre-
dependent viral system (n = 7 animals). Expressing cells (n = 6 cells) and non-expressing 
neighbors (n = 24 cells) were recorded while stimulating with blue light (5-ms pulses at 1 
Hz). (b) Representative traces from a ChR2+∷BLA-PL cell and 4 non-expressing neighbors. 
(c) Distribution of all cells sampled with whole-cell patch-clamp recording. (d) 
Representative traces show the latency of photoresponses at various light power densities 
(power range, 0.5-84 mW/mm2). Latencies were calculated from light onset to action 
potential peaks. (e) Distribution of photoresponse latencies for the BLA-PL cells. Dots 
represent individual cells, and error bar represents s.e.m. (f-h) Photo Identification of BLA-
PL cells in behaving animals. (f) Optrodes were chronically implanted in the BLA for neural 
recordings after selectively expressing ChR2 in BLA-PL cells. Optimal ChR2 expression 
and detection of photoresponses was achieved in a subset of animals (n = 2/6 animals, 33%). 
(g) BLA-PL cell displaying photoresponses in vivo (bin-width, 20 ms). (h) Assessment of 
photoresponse latencies in vivo. Latencies were calculated from laser onset to the time at 
which cells exhibited a significant increase in firing frequency. Eleven out of sixty cells 
(18%) were deemed as BLA-PL cells as they displayed photoresponse latencies shorter than 
12 ms, which was the longest latency observed in slices. One cell displayed latencies greater 
than 12 ms (white-filled bin) and it was excluded from further analyses. (i-j) Response 
Burgos-Robles et al.
Page 31
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 profile of photoidentified BLA populations. Error bands in line plots represent s.e.m. (i) 
BLA-PL population. A greater proportion of these cells displayed selective excitatory 
responses to the fear-associated cue (“F+”, n = 6/11 cells, 55%). (j) An additional BLA 
population that exhibited significant inhibition during ChR2 stimulation. These cells thus did 
not terminate in PL, and perhaps received inhibitory influence from the BLA-PL network. 
These cells were deemed as network-inhibited cells (“Netw(-)”, n = 8/60 cells, 13%). During 
the discrimination task, the majority of these cells exhibited either inhibitory responses to 
the fear cue (“F-”, 3/8, 38%) or excitatory responses to the reward cue (“R+”, 3/8, 38%).
Burgos-Robles et al.
Page 32
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. 
BLA cells terminating in PL more accurately predicted the animal's behavioral response 
during competition. (a) Photo Identification of the distinct BLA populations: “BLA-PL” 
(8/57, 14%), population terminating in PL; “Netw(-)” (8/57, 14%), population that showed 
inhibition during photostimulation; and “Unidentified” (41/57, 72%), population that did not 
respond to light stimulation. (b) Schematic of the competition task in which in addition to 
CS-Suc and CS-Shock trials, animals were challenged by the co-presentation of these 
associations to induce behavioral competition. Below, trial-by-trial behavioral output for a 
representative animal during each trial type. (c-d) Support vector machine (SVM) model to 
predict behavioral responses during 20 competition trials. The SVM model was trained 
using neural activity during the CS-Suc and CS-Shock trials. Data for the entire 20 s of CS 
presentation was used to classify neural activity. The model was then tested during 
competition trials to predict behavioral responses based on neural activity. For this given 
example, this BLA-PL cell accurately predicted behavioral responses on 85% of the 
competition trials. (e) Mean decoding accuracy for the distinct BLA populations. 
Superimposed dots represent individual cells (n's per population are reported in the bars). 
All BLA populations showed averaged decoding accuracies that were significantly higher 
than chance (Bonferroni-corrected paired T-test comparisons against scrambled data are 
Burgos-Robles et al.
Page 33
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 represented by the asterisks above the number of cells per population: BLA-PL, t7 = 3.31, 
*P = 0.013; Netw(-), t7 = 3.74, **P = 0.007; Unidentified, t40 = 2.29, *P = 0.028). 
Furthermore, the BLA-PL population but not the Netw(-) population showed significantly 
higher decoding accuracy than unidentified cells (one-way ANOVA: F2,54 = 3.36, P = 0.042; 
Bonferroni post-hoc tests: BLA-PL vs Unidentified, t47 = 2.74, *P = 0.017; Netw(-) vs 
Unidentified, t47 = 1.22, P = 0.23). (f) Mean decoding accuracy for the BLA populations, 
when their activity was paired with the activity of simultaneously recorded PL cells with 
which they showed either uncorrelated activity (“Unc”) or significantly correlated activity 
(“Corr”). Superimposed dots represent BLA/PL neural pairs (number of cell pairs per 
population are reported within the bars). All populations showed decoding accuracies that 
were significantly higher than chance (BLA-PL Unc, t38 = 2.91, **P = 0.006; BLA-PL Corr, 
t38 = 6.76, ***P < 0.001; Netw(-) Unc, t32 = 5.87, ***P < 0.001; Netw(-) Corr, t68 = 10.5, 
***P < 0.001; Unidentified Unc, t284 = 8.36, ***P < 0.001; Unidentified Corr, t124 = 4.24, 
***P < 0.001). Furthermore, the BLA-PL cells showed significantly higher decoding 
accuracy when its activity was paired with correlated PL activity (one-way ANOVA: F5,584 
= 11.1, P < 0.001; Bonferroni post-hoc tests: “BLA-PL”, Unc vs Corr, t76 = 2.64, *P = 
0.011; “Netw(-)”, Unc vs Corr, t100 = 0.68, P = 0.50; “Unidentified”, Unc vs Corr, t408 = 
1.18, P = 0.24). Error bars represent s.e.m.
Burgos-Robles et al.
Page 34
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. 
Stimulation of BLA inputs to PL facilitated fear-related behavior, and biased behavioral 
responses towards fear during competition. (a) Optogenetic strategy to stimulate BLA inputs 
to PL. The BLA was unilaterally transduced with either eYFP (n = 10 animals) or ChR2 (n = 
8 animals), and an optical fiber was chronically implanted in the dorsal regions of PL to 
locally stimulate BLA inputs. (b) Schematic of the discrimination task in which half of the 
trials were paired with 20-Hz blue light stimulation. The trial and laser sequences were 
pseudorandom. (c) Freezing behavior during CS-Shock trial, illustrated as the difference 
score in the percentage of time spent freezing, relative to laser-OFF. Stimulation of BLA 
inputs to PL significantly enhanced freezing responses (repeated measures two-way 
ANOVA: group, F1,16 = 11.4, P = 0.004; laser, F1,16 = 2.88, P = 0.11; interaction, F1,16 = 
11.4, P = 0.004; eYFP vs ChR2 during laser-ON: t16 = 4.78, ***P = 0.0002). (d) Port entry 
behavior during CS-Suc trials, illustrated as the difference score in the percentage of time 
spent in the sucrose port, relative to laser-OFF. No significant differences were detected for 
port entry responses (group, F1,16 = 0.95, P = 0.34; laser, F1,16 = 0.13, P = 0.72; interaction, 
F1,16 = 0.95, P = 0.34). (e) Pharmacology experiment to rule out the possible contribution of 
stimulation of fibers of passage. After unilateral transduction of the BLA with ChR2 (n = 8 
animals), a cannula was chronically implanted above PL to allow for the infusion of either 
Burgos-Robles et al.
Page 35
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 ACSF or the AMPA and NMDA receptor antagonists NBQX and AP5 ~10-15 min prior to 
inserting an optical fiber for optical stimulation and behavioral testing. (f) Experimental 
design for drug treatment and schematic of the competition task in which half of the trials 
were paired with light stimulation. The trial and laser sequences were pseudorandom. (g) 
Freezing behavior during CS-Shock trials. Ruling out the possibility of stimulation of fibers 
of passage, the NBQX+AP5 treatment abolished the stimulation effect on freezing observed 
after the ACSF treatment (drug, F1,14 = 4.88, P = 0.044; laser, F1,14 = 7.64, P = 0.015; 
interaction, F1,14 = 4.88, P = 0.044; ACSF vs NBQX+AP5 during laser-ON: t7 = 3.12, **P = 
0.0075). (h) Port entry behavior during CS-Suc trials. No significant differences were 
detected (drug, F1,14 = 1.27, P = 0.28; laser, F1,14 = 4.58, P = 0.0504; interaction, F1,14 = 
1.27, P = 0.28). (i) Freezing during competition trials. Stimulation of BLA inputs to PL also 
enhanced freezing during competition trials under the ACSF treatment, and this effect was 
abolished by the NBQX+AP5 treatment (drug, F1,14 = 6.79, P = 0.02; laser, F1,14 = 1.89, P = 
0.19; interaction, F1,14 = 6.79, P = 0.02; ACSF vs NBQX+AP5 during laser-ON: t7 = 3.69, 
**P = 0.0024). (j) Port entry behavior during competition. There was a trend towards 
reduced port entry responses during competition (drug, F1,14 = 2.18, P = 0.16; laser, F1,14 = 
1.83, P = 0.20; interaction, F1,14 = 2.18, P = 0.16; ACSF vs NBQX+AP5 during laser-ON: t7 
= 2.09, ~P = 0.056). Error bars represent s.e.m.
Burgos-Robles et al.
Page 36
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 7. 
The BLA-PL pathway is necessary for expression of the fear-associated memory, but not for 
reward-seeking behavior. (a) Optogenetic strategy to inhibit BLA inputs to PL. The BLA 
was bilaterally transfected with either GFP (n = 6 animals) or the opsin ArchT (n = 6 
animals), and optical fibers were chronically implanted just above PL to silence BLA inputs 
locally. (b) Competition paradigm in which half of the trials were paired with constant 
yellow light to silence BLA inputs to PL. The trial and laser sequences were 
pseudorandomized. (c) Freezing during CS-Shock trials. Silencing of BLA inputs to PL 
significantly impaired freezing responses (repeated measures two-way ANOVA: group, F1,10 
= 5.64, P = 0.039; laser, F1,10 = 2.75, P = 0.14; interaction, F1,10 = 5.64, P = 0.039; GFP vs 
ArchT during laser-ON: t10 = 3.36, **P = 0.0072). (d) Port entries during CS-Suc trials. No 
significant differences were detected on port entry responses (group, F1,10 = 2.53, P = 0.14; 
laser, F1,10 = 1.70, P = 0.22; interaction, F1,10 = 2.53, P = 0.14). (e) Freezing during 
competition trials. Significant group differences were detected for freezing during 
competition (group, F1,10 = 5.20, P = 0.046; laser, F1,10 = 4.37, P = 0.063; interaction, F1,10 
= 5.20, P = 0.046; GFP vs ArchT during laser-ON: t10 = 3.23, **P = 0.0091). (f) Port entries 
during competition trials. Significant group differences were also detected for port entries 
during competition (group, F1,10 = 10.5, P = 0.009; laser, F1,10 = 9.73, P = 0.011; 
interaction, F1,10 = 10.5, P = 0.009; GFP vs ArchT during laser-ON: t10 = 4.58, ***P = 
0.001). (g) Chemogenetic strategy to selectively silence BLA cell that terminate in PL (i.e., 
Burgos-Robles et al.
Page 37
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 selective inhibition of the BLA-PL population). Using a Cre-dependent dual-virus method, 
BLA-PL cells were bilaterally transduced with either mCherry (n = 7 animals) or M4D-Gi 
(n = 7 animals), which is a Gi-coupled designer receptor that induces neuronal silencing 
upon activation with the designer drug clozapine-N-oxide (CNO). (h) Experimental design 
to treat animals with either vehicle (5% DMSO in 0.9% saline, i.p.) or CNO (10 mg/kg, i.p.) 
~15-20 min prior to behavioral testing. (i) Freezing behavior during CS-Shock trials. 
Silencing the BLA-PL population significantly impaired freezing responses (group, F1,12 = 
3.41, P = 0.09; drug, F2,24 = 7.96, P = 0.0022; interaction, F2,24 = 6.31, P = 0.006; mCherry 
vs M4D(Gi) during CNO: t12 = 3.66, **P = 0.0033). (j) Port entry behavior during CS-Suc 
trials. No significant differences were detected (group, F1,12 = 0.13, P = 0.72; drug, F2,24 = 
0.69, P = 0.51; interaction, F2,24 = 0.57, P = 0.58). (k) Freezing behavior during competition 
trials. Silencing of the BLA-PL population impaired freezing responses (group, F1,12 = 1.45, 
P = 0.25; drug, F2,24 = 0.09, P = 0.91; interaction, F2,24 = 2.67, P = 0.09; mCherry vs 
M4D(Gi) during CNO: t12 = 2.56, *P = 0.025). (l) Port entry behavior during competition 
trials. No significant differences were detected (group, F1,12 = 0.13, P = 0.72; drug, F2,24 = 
0.60, P = 0.55; interaction, F2,24 = 0.17, P = 0.84). Error bars represent s.e.m.
Burgos-Robles et al.
Page 38
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
