  
 
 
 
 
Burmester, G. R., Bijlsma, J. W.J., Cutolo, M. and McInnes, I. B.  (2017) 
Managing rheumatic and musculoskeletal diseases - past, present and 
future. Nature Reviews Rheumatology, 13(7), pp. 443-448.  
(doi:10.1038/nrrheum.2017.95 
 
This is the author’s final accepted version. 
 
There may be differences between this version and the published version. 
You are advised to consult the publisher’s version if you wish to cite from 
it. 
 
http://eprints.gla.ac.uk/143112/            
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deposited on: 31 August 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Enlighten – Research publications by members of the University of Glasgow 
http://eprints.gla.ac.uk33640 
 Managing rheumatic and musculoskeletal diseases:  
Past, present and future  
 
Gerd R. Burmester (also for correspondence) 
Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology 
Charité - University Medicine Berlin 
Charitéplatz 1, D - 10117 Berlin 
Germany 
 
Johannes W. J. Bijlsma 
Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology 
University Medical Center Utrecht 
Box 85 500 3508CX Utrecht 
The Netherlands 
 
Maurizio Cutolo 
Research Laboratory and Academic Division of Clinical Rheumatology,  
Department of Internal Medicine,  
University of Genova 
Italy 
 
Iain B. McInnes 
Institute of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, 
College of Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences, 
University of Glasgow,  
120 University Place,  
Glasgow, G12 8TA 
 
 
 
 Abstract  
Progress in rheumatology has been remarkable in the last 70 years impacting favourably on 
quality of life for people with rheumatic and musculoskeletal diseases. Therapeutics have 
advanced from early developments including the introduction of glucocorticoids, the general 
use of methotrexate and other disease modifying agents, through to the advent of biologic and 
recently small molecule JAK-inhibitors. Strategic approaches using such agents also 
transformed outcomes. Similarly, non-pharmacologic management of RMDs including 
surgery, physical and occupational therapy have contributed greatly to progress delivered 
within the multi-disciplinary team. Breakthroughs in pathogenesis understanding, diagnostics, 
and the use of ‘big data’ continue to drive the field. Critically, and especially going forward, 
the patient is at the centre of management strategies and the future research agenda. 
 
Introduction 
Rheumatology is one of the most fascinating and comprehensive disciplines in medicine. Few 
medical specialties have matched the rate of progress in understanding disease pathogenesis 
leading to novel therapeutic development. When combined with innovations in the strategic 
approach to care embodied in the “Treat to Target” concept that aims for remission employing 
constant monitoring and adaptation of treatments, this has led to a transformation of outcomes 
for patients. Progress has been especially remarkable across diseases such as rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA), psoriatic arthritis (PsA) and ankylosing spondylitis (AS) providing a blueprint 
for similar developments in the wider spectrum of rheumatologic conditions. However, even 
previously often fatal diseases such as severe systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) or 
granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA) can now be managed by modern immunosuppressive 
therapies to better outcome. Nevertheless, there are significant unmet medical needs, 
especially in the connective tissues disease spectrum, e.g. systemic sclerosis, in osteoarthritis 
 (OA) and in fibromyalgia where we frequently lack effective drug treatments. On the 
occasion of the 70th anniversary of the European League Against Rheumatology (EULAR) 
(see box), the major rheumatologic association of physicians/scientists, health professionals 
and people with rheumatic and musculoskeletal diseases (RMDs) in Europe, it is timely to 
reflect on our past, our present and our remaining future challenges.  
___________________________________________________________________________ 
Box 
In 1913 the Dutch general practitioner Jan van Breemen, moved by the needs of disabled 
people in his practice, initiated an international cooperative to fight rheumatic and 
musculoskeletal diseases (RMDs). His initiative to form an International Organisation for the 
Investigation of Rheumatic Diseases was delayed by World War 1 until 1919. In 1925 this 
organisation transformed into the International League Against Rheumatism (ILAR). ILAR 
aims were: to stimulate and promote the development of awareness, knowledge and means of 
prevention, treatment, rehabilitation, and the relief of rheumatic diseases; to foster co-
operation between different countries and regions concerned with the objectives of ILAR; to 
encourage and assist in the creation of rheumatism societies in areas of the world where they 
do not exist1. Aligned with these aims, regional Leagues were formed, namely PANLAR in 
the Pan-American Region in 1943, and EULAR in the European region in 1947, that included 
some non-European countries, e.g. in North-Africa that in 1989 joined the African League 
(AFLAR). Later the Asia Pacific League of Associations for Rheumatology (APLAR) was 
established in Sydney in 1963.  
The first EULAR Congress was held 70 years ago in September 1947 in Copenhagen and was 
attended by 200 delegates from 16 countries. At the EULAR 2017 Madrid Congress about 
14,000 attendees are expected, coming from more than 120 countries. EULAR has in these 70 
years developed into a unique organisation of rheumatologists, scientists, health professionals 
 and patients, arising from 45 countries, who together aim to reduce the burden of rheumatic 
diseases on the individual and society and to improve the treatment, prevention and 
rehabilitation of musculoskeletal diseases. To this end, EULAR fosters excellence in 
education and research in the field of rheumatology. It promotes translation of research 
advances into daily care and fights for the recognition of the needs of people with RMDs by 
the 
governing 
bodies 
in 
Europe 
(EULAR 
mission 
statement 
2005, 
http://www.eular.org/eular_mission.cfm)  
___________________________________________________________________________ 
70 Years of treatment of RMDs 
Pharmacological treatment:  
Pharmacologic therapeutics for RMDs have evolved remarkably over these 70 years. The 
earliest clinical use of glucocorticoids (GCs) more than half a century ago in a bedridden RA 
patient (1948) prompted a ‘miraculous’ recovery that was the first break-through in the 
treatment of RA. Two years later (1950) the Nobel Prize was given for this discovery. GCs 
have been part of the treatment of nearly all inflammatory RMDs since. GCs have many 
beneficial effects (e.g. life-saving in nephritis), but also detrimental effects (e.g. death through 
masked infections). Their safety has been debated; presently there is consensus that long-term 
use of doses of 5 mg prednisone or below/day is rather safe, while long-term use of doses of 
10 mg prednisone or above/day is in general not advised2. 
Conventional disease modifying anti-rheumatic drugs: 
Sulfasalazine was formulated in 1942 by the Swedish Nana Svartz3 as a combination of 
sulfapyridine and 5-amino salicylic acid, with the assumption that the antibiotic (sulfonamide) 
would benefit the presumed infective component and the salicylate the pain and stiffness 
component of polyarthritis. It is now used in RA, especially as a component of triple therapy, 
but perhaps most in peripheral spondyloarthritis.  
 Methotrexate (MTX) was developed in 1946, but the first publications of its use in RA date to 
nearly 40 years later4. It was initially used especially in patients with psoriatic arthritis, since 
the skin lesions responded very well to MTX. Only after starting to use higher dosages of 
MTX (up to 25 mg/week) did the real potential of MTX in the treatment of RA emerge5. 
Nowadays both GCs and MTX are considered the “anchor drugs” in the treatment of RA6. In 
many other inflammatory RMDs MTX has found its place as a potent immune-suppressive 
drug, often enabling a decrease of the dosage GCs that patients´ need7.  
Other csDMARDS 
A variety of other DMARDs also found their place in the treatment especially of 
inflammatory arthropathies e.g. gold, D-penicillamine, auranofin, cyclosporine A or 
leflunomide, the last an alternative to the treatment of RA in case of MTX failure or 
contraindications. This phase of RMD treatment was remarkable for the narrow toxicity 
benefit windows that were pervasive and dominated clinical practice – and in turn lead to a 
conservative approach to care, often leading to delays in the commencement of effective 
therapeutics to long term detriment. The observation that combinations of these agents 
conferred advantage without necessarily increasing toxicity was a seminal advance. Moreover 
these agents were also used to establish the principle that early intervention was preferable 
and that targeted treatment goals could also dramatically improve outcomes8.  
Biologicals delivered a further step-change for patients with RMDs. Targeted as a result of 
elegant pathogenesis discovery, Tumor Necrosis Factor alpha (TNF) inhibition in patients 
with RA9 and then also in patients with spondyloarthritides, psoriasis and Juvenile Idiopathic 
Arthritis provided critical proof of concept that immune targeting capitalising on exquisite 
specificity of monoclonal antibodies and other biotechnical developments could deliver in the 
clinic. Biologicals with other mechanisms of action (against Interleukin-1, IL-6, IL-17, 
depleting B-cells, interfering with co-stimulation molecules or intracellular signalling like 
 kinase inhibitors) have followed and are generally effective in an increasing range of RMDs, 
including system autoimmune diseases, gout and osteoporosis10. Biologicals were a non-
existing market in the 90s, but have now grown to a market well over 100 billion Euros a 
year11. In addition, starting (aggressive) treatment in inflammatory RMDs early has been 
widely adopted and lead to a significant gain in efficacy, and drug free remission is now 
becoming an attainable goal in the treatment of RA12. A timeline of drug development in 
rheumatology is presented in Figure 1. 
 
Surgical treatment 
Total joint replacement has become the treatment of ultimate choice in patients with 
osteoarthritis of the hip and knee. Many joints are amenable to replacement in RMDs, 
sometimes aided by 3D evaluation and printing. Total joint replacement is one of the most 
frequent and cost-effective surgical interventions worldwide13. Interestingly, although 
previously commonly used for many patients with RA, with improved medical treatment, the 
necessity for such interventions has become rarer. There are interesting new developments in 
the surgical approach to resolving articular problems, especially in different phases of 
osteoarthritis including e.g. resurfacing operations; joint distraction in relatively young 
patients (45-60 years)14, thus postponing a total joint replacement; mesenchymal stem cell 
transplantation in localised (often traumatic) osteoarthritic cartilage lesions and others15. 
Minimal invasive surgical methods are presently under development to treat future RMD-
patients. 
 
Non-Pharmacological treatment 
 
At the celebration of 50 years of non-physician health professionals in Rheumatology16 three 
Science-driven Practice Paradigm Shifts were recognized that now play an important role in 
 managing patients with RMDs. Widely used “Self-management programs”, were developed 
from information giving and ’patient education’. The positive and intensive use of “Exercise 
and physical activity” was developed from previous acclaimed bed rest and assisted range of 
motion exercises. Finally, OMERACT initiated definitions and applications of Patient-
Reported Outcome measures, instead of only biomedical assessment of disease activity. In 
addition, two ‘Evolutions in Practice’ were recognized. Understanding Psychological Factors, 
from accepting “the arthritic personality” to actively addressing depression, anxiety, coping 
skills, sense of control and confidence. In addition the implementation of important rules for 
nurses and other health professionals as supported by EULAR strategic plans have improved 
the management of patients with RMD6.  
Patients’ perspectives and involvement  
When asked, patients clearly recognize that the evolution of research and scientific knowledge 
has enabled a new era of treatment for people with RMDs and has made remission possible 
for many patients17. Here the experience of the EULAR patients associations (PAREs) has 
become a “driving force” in the last decades. 
 Important breakthroughs include wider adoption of information dissemination and self-
management to support a better outcome for patient. Patient participation in research adds the 
patients’ views and contributes to successful study design and outcome dissemination and 
implementation. Finally there is a growing awareness that shared decision making means a 
therapeutic gain 
 
 
 
 
 70 Years development of diagnostics in rheumatic diseases: laboratory analyses and 
imaging techniques 
 
From rheumatoid factors to anti-citrullinated protein/peptide antibodies  
Two years after EULAR was founded, Rose redescribed in 1949 the test for rheumatoid 
factors which had been discovered by the Norwegian Erik Waaler in 193718. He was among 
the founders of EULAR in 1947. The subsequently developed Waaler-Rose test used 
sensitized sheep erythrocytes to detect rheumatoid factors but is now replaced by 
nephelometry or ideally an ELISA system which can detect RFs of various immunoglobulin 
isotypes. Twenty four years later, Nienhuis et al. detected a novel antibody specificity which 
they called the anti-perinuclear factor (APF) identifying keratohyalin granules in buccal 
mucosa cells (reviewed in19). 15 years later anti-keratin antibodies (AKA) were reported, 
which were RA specific and reacted with keratinized tissues of the oesophagus and 
interestingly also with cells from human hair follicles. In 1993, filaggrin was described to be 
recognized by RA sera, and subsequently it was shown that both APF and AKA reacted with 
(pro)fillagrin proteins (present in the keratohyalin granules in terminally differentiated 
epidermal cells) and were then named anti-filaggrin antibodies (AFA). A major breakthrough 
was the detection of the enzyme peptidyl-arginine deiminase (PAD) responsible for the 
citrullination of molecules which subsequently may become immunogenic to the RA immune 
system, e.g. citrullinated filaggrin, but also with many other molecules such as vimentin, 
collagen and enolase. They were then termed ACPA (anti-citrullinated protein/peptide 
antibodies). All these findings led to new test systems to detect anti-citrullinated 
protein/peptide antibodies including the anti-ccp (cyclic citrullinated peptides) test, and others 
such as the MCV (modified citrullinated vimentin) test followed. Finally in 2010, both the RF 
and ACPA became important corner stones in the ACR/EULAR RA classification criteria20. 
 Other posttranslational modifications such as carbamylation have also been shown to render 
proteins immunogenic in RA21, and there may be a possible link between the induction of RF 
and carbamylated proteins22. 
Other milestones in laboratory diagnosis concerned the detection of “LE cells” by Hargraves 
and colleagues in 194823, and subsequently an inducing factor was found in the serum of SLE 
patients. In 1953, Miescher observed that rabbit sera induced the SLE cell formation after 
immunization with human leukocytes and could finally demonstrate that nuclei from calf 
thymus cells led to the elimination of the LE cell phenomenon24. Thus, the LE factor was 
identified as antinuclear antibodies (ANA). Subsequently, DNA was detected as the 
responsible antigen and then numerous other autoantibody specificities against nuclear 
antigens that were present in salt-soluble extracts from calf thymus cells (called extractable 
nuclear antigens, ENA) have been detected25. Another major breakthrough was the detection 
of the anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) in 1985 by van der Woude et al. 
which greatly helped in the diagnosis and management of vasculitides26. 
 
Imaging and RMDs 
Besides a laboratory work up, imaging procedures are important tools to diagnose and 
monitor rheumatic diseases. Conventional x-rays were detected in 1895 by the Nobel laureate 
Wilhelm C. Röntgen, a German mechanical engineer, and the first x-ray of a hand was shown 
in 189627. This technique revolutionized the diagnostic procedures in RMDs. In 
rheumatology, a major breakthrough was the scoring of x-ray changes such as the Larsen 
score in 197728 and the Sharp score in 198529, which was then modified by van der Heijde et 
al. in 198930. These scores enabled the assessment of structural damage for instance in RA 
and guided the design of many modern trials providing evidence of halting progression by 
modern treatment.  
 In 1959, the neurologist William Oldendorf developed the idea of "scanning a head through a 
transmitted beam of X-rays, and being able to reconstruct the radiodensity patterns of a plane 
through the head" triggered by seeing an automated apparatus built to reject frostbitten fruits 
by detecting dehydrated portions. In 1961, he described the basic tomography concept31, 
which was later used by McLeod Cormack to develop the mathematics behind the CT 
technology32. Transverse axial scanning was then due in large part to the work of Hounsfield 
and McLeod Cormack who received in 1979 the Nobel Prize in Physiology and Medicine "for 
the development of computer assisted tomography". In rheumatology, this technique is used 
in many areas ranging from the assessment of lung involvement in systemic autoimmune 
diseases to the evaluation crystal dispositions in gout using dual emission CT (DECT), and 
finally to detect finger joint erosions in micro CT.  
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)33 represents a further pivotal development that allows 
evaluation of soft tissues based on measurement of relaxation, diffusion, and chemical 
exchange of water in cells and tissues. Paul Lauterbur at Stony Brook University developed a 
way to generate the first MRI images and published the first nuclear MRI in 1973 and the first 
cross-sectional image of a living mouse in January 1974. In the late 1970s, Peter Mansfield 
developed a new technique that led to scans taking seconds rather than hours with clearer 
images. Damadian, along with Larry Minkoff and Michael Goldsmith performed the first 
MRI body scan of a human being on July 3, 1977. During the 1970s John Mallard built the 
first full-body MRI scanner at the University of Aberdeen and in 1980 used this machine to 
obtain the first clinically relevant image of a patient's internal tissues. In recognition of the 
fundamental importance and applicability of MRI in medicine, Paul Lauterbur and Sir Peter 
Mansfield were awarded the 2003 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine. Today, MRI 
scanning is a standard procedure in nearly all fields of RMDs ranging from cartilage and 
 meniscus assessment in the knee to the sacroiliac joints and to the sensitive assessment of 
structural damage using a scoring system (RAMRIS)34. 
Of note, a further important and safe imaging procedure employed by rheumatologists is 
ultrasonography (US)35. In 1941, the Austrian neurologist Karl Theo Dussik was the first to 
use ultrasound to image the human body demonstrating the ventricles of a human brain. 
Subsequently in Glasgow, Ian Donald performed the first diagnostic applications of this 
technique in an obstetric context. Arthrosonograpy was first used in the early and mid-1970s 
to detect Baker´s cysts36. A major breakthrough was the utilization of ultrasound to detect 
alteration in the new-born’s hips by Graf in 198137. In the 1980s, numerous standardized 
techniques were described to establish this imaging modality in all fields of orthopaedics, 
trauma surgery and rheumatology. Newer US techniques included color and power Doppler 
imaging, which provide color maps of tissues reflecting soft tissue vascularisation and hence 
inflammation (i.e. synovial tissue). EULAR played and is playing a major role in the 
development of this field around the world, notably with publishing the first guidelines for 
musculoskeletal ultrasound in rheumatology in 200138. 
Finally, after early descriptions by Maricq about the utility of nailfold capillaroscopy in 
grading the severity of systemic sclerosis, this microscopic analysis of the microcirculation 
became a validated qualitative and quantitative method since the 90s for the early diagnosis of 
systemic sclerosis and prediction of clinical complications and optimized management39. In 
2013, the capillaroscopic analysis was introduced in the new ACR/EULAR guidelines for the 
classification of SSc brining significant improvement in sensitivity and specificity of the 
criteria40.  
A timeline of diagnostic development in rheumatology is presented in Figure 2. 
 
 
 Future developments in rheumatology 
So – what does the future hold? Medical science is advancing at an unprecedented pace 
capitalising on remarkable developments in techniques with which to interrogate 
pathogenesis, phenotype, disease progression and co-morbid impact. Thus molecular 
methodologies can dissect the genome, epigenome, transcriptome, metabolome and proteome 
with ever greater clarity. The computational sciences are evident in all elements of practice 
and will increasingly be so. We will move increasingly to a system based discovery approach 
whereby ‘big data’ will dominate as well in silico modelling of the pathways and diagnostics 
with most merit for clinical application. This will in turn inform new insights to the 
pathogenesis and ultimately the causes of the RMDs. Thus, the future will progressively move 
RMD treatment earlier in disease progression. Focus will realign on refractory disease states 
as these become the new “chronic illnesses” in our discipline as acute interventions that are 
effective prophylactics, or preventions emerge. RMDs may be rationalised at the molecular 
level and classified according to molecular pathotype rather than only on clinical phenotype. 
The role of microbiota in RMDs should be an example41. Thus RMDs will embrace the 
developing revolution in precision medicine – now well advanced in cancer therapeutics but 
only nascent in our field42. Taken to logical conclusion this will facilitate the search for 
prevention and cures of diseases that are currently considered to be chronic and managed only 
with medications in perpetuity.  
 
Computational science is likely also to influence our daily practice via a revolution in e-
Health e.g. with continuous electronic evaluation and downloading of measures of disease 
activity, prompting semi-automated clinical decision making in real time43. Health care 
systems too will need to evolve to ensure equitable access to therapeutics and advances at 
manageable cost to patient and payer alike. Partnership between health care professionals, 
 oversight organisations such as EULAR and governments will need to be agile and responsive 
to the changing needs of an ageing population that is ever more demanding of robust and 
positive health related outcomes. Patients already are, but will increase their role as a crucial 
part to the decision making process both at the individual level and also in terms of policy 
design and implementation. EULAR is supporting educational projects in this direction. 
Concluding section 
Midst progress and change mentioned above, it remains vital that organisations such as 
EULAR provide intellectual and philosophical cohesion and insist that the rights and well-
being of people with RMDs remain at the centre of our ambitions. The possibilities for 
remarkable progress also carry the risk of misdirection and political minimisation of the true 
impact of RMDs on the lives of our patients. An algorithmic approach to treatment should not 
be allowed to replace the fundamental depth and care that is implicit in the relationship 
between health professionals and people with RMDs and that pervades our discipline. Such a 
caring art of rheumatology should remain our legacy to future generations.  
 
 
 
 References 
1. Barnes C. G. The history of EULAR. EULAR Kilchberg, Switzerland (2007). 
2. Strehl C. et al. Defining conditions where long-term glucocorticoid treatment has an 
acceptably 
low 
level 
of 
harm 
to 
facilitate 
implementation 
of 
existing 
recommendations: viewpoints from a EULAR task force. Ann. Rheum. Dis. 75, 952-
957 (2016). 
3. Svartz N. Salazopyrin, a new sulphanilamide preparation. Acta Med. Scand. 110: 577-
598 (1942). 
4. Weinblatt M. E. et al. Efficacy of low-dose methotrexate in rheumatoid arthritis. N. 
Engl. J Med. 312, 818-822 (1985) 
5. Bakker M. F. et al. Low-dose prednisone inclusion in a methotrexate-based, tight 
control strategy for early rheumatoid arthritis: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med. 
156, 329-339 (2012) 
6. Smolen J. et al. EULAR recommendations for the management of rheumatoid arthritis 
with synthetic and biological disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs: 2016 update. 
Ann. 
Rheum. 
Dis. 
2017 
Mar 
6. 
pii: 
annrheumdis-2016-210715. 
doi: 
10.1136/annrheumdis-2016-210715. [Epub ahead of print] (2016) 
7. Johnsen A. K. & Weinblatt M. E. Methotrexate.  In: Hochberg M. C. et al. (ed.), 
Rheumatology. Elsevier 2011, pp. 509-517.  
8. Grigor C. et al. Effect of a treatment strategy of tight control for rheumatoid 
arthritis (the TICORA study): a single-blind randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 364, 
263-269 (2004) 
9. Maini R. et al. Infliximab (chimeric anti-tumour necrosis factor alpha monoclonal 
antibody) versus placebo in rheumatoid arthritis patients receiving concomitant 
 methotrexate: a randomised phase III trial. ATTRACT Study Group. Lancet. 354, 
1932-1939 (1999). 
10. Siebert S. et al. Cytokines as therapeutic targets in rheumatoid arthritis and other 
inflammatory diseases. Pharmacol. Rev. 67, 280-309 (2015). 
11. EvaluatePharma® World Preview 2015, Outlook to 2020 8th Edition – June 2015, 
http://info.evaluategroup.com/rs/607-YGS-364/images/wp15.pdf, 
accessed 
March 
2017. 
12. Bijlsma J. W. J. et al. Early rheumatoid arthritis treated with tocilicumab, 
methotrexate, or their combination (U-Act-Early): a multicentre, randomised, double-
blind, double-dummy, strategy trial. Lancet. 388, 343-355 
13. Daigle M. E. et al. The cost-effectiveness of total joint arthroplasty: a systematic 
review of published literature. Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol. 26, 649-58 (2012). 
14. Van der Woude J. A. et al. Knee Joint Distraction Compared to Total Knee 
Arthroplasty for Treatment of End Stage Osteoarthritis: Simulating Long-Term 
Outcomes and Cost-Effectiveness. PLoS One. May 12;11(5):e0155524 (2016) 
15. Ruiz M., Cosenza S., Maumus M., Jorgensen C. & Noël D. Therapeutic application of 
mesenchymal stem cells in osteoarthritis. Expert Opinion on Biological Therapy. 16, 
33-42 (2016) 
16. Brady J. Jubilee lecture at ARHP congress, San Francisco (2015). 
17. Kouloumas M., Vice President PARE, EULAR. Personal communication, January 
2017 
18. Dörner T., Egerer K., Feist E. & Burmester G. R. Rheumatoid factor revisited. Curr. 
Opin. Rheumatol. 16, 246-253 (2004). 
 19. Puszczewicz M. & Iwaszkiewicz C. Role of anti-citrullinated protein antibodies in 
diagnosis and prognosis of rheumatoid arthritis. Arch. Med. Sci 7, 189-194 (2011). 
20.  Aletaha D. et al. Rheumatoid Arthritis Classification Criteria. An American College 
of Rheumatology/European League Against Rheumatism Collaborative Initiative. 
Ann. Rheum. Dis. 69, 1580-1588 (2010). 
21. Shi J. et al. Carbamylation and antibodies against carbamylated proteins in 
autoimmunity and other pathologies. Autoimmun. Rev. 13, 225-230 (2014). 
22. Ospelt C. et al. Carbamylation of vimentin is inducible by smoking and represents an 
independent autoantigen in rheumatoid arthritis. Ann Rheum Dis. 2017 Feb 9. pii: 
annrheumdis-2016-210059. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2016-210059. Epub ahead of 
print. (2017). 
23. Hargraves M. M., Richmond H. & Morton R. J. Presentation of two bone marrow 
elements: The ‘tart’ cell and the ‘L.E.’ cell. Proc. Mayo Clin. 23, 25–28 (1948). 
24. Miescher P. & Fouconnet M. L’absorption du facteur ‘LE’ par des noyaux cellulaires 
isolés. Experimentia 10, 252–254 (1945). 
25. Hiepe F., Dörner T. & Burmester G. R. Editorial Overview: Antinuclear Antibody- 
and Extractable Nuclear Antigen-Related Diseases. Int. Arch. Allergy Immunol. 123, 
5–9 (2000). 
26. van der Woude FJ et al. Autoantibodies against neutrophils and monocytes: tool for 
diagnosis and marker of disease activity in Wegener's granulomatosis. Lancet. 8426, 
425-429 (1985). 
27. Haase A., Landwehr G. & Umbach E. (eds.). Röntgen Centennial: X-rays in Natural 
and Life Sciences, Singapur: World Scientific, S. 7–8 ISBN: 981-02-3085-0 (1997). 
28. Larsen A., Dale K. & Eek M. Radiographic Evaluation of Rheumatoid Arthritis. Acta 
Radiologica Diagnosis. 18, 481-91 (1977)  
 29. Sharp J. T. et al. Reproducibility of Multiple-observer Scoring of Radiologic 
Abnormalities in the Hands and Wrists of Patients with Rheumatoid Arthritis. Arthritis 
Rheum. 27, 61-4 (1985) 
30. van der Heijde D. M., van Riel P. L., Nuver-Zuwart H. H., Gribnau F. W. & van de 
Putte L. B. Effects of hydroxochloroquin and sulphasalazine on progression of joint 
damage in rheumatoid arthritis. Lancet, 1846, 1036-1038 (1989). 
31. Mishra S. K. and Singh P. History of Neuroimaging: The Legacy of William 
Oldendorf. Journal of Child Neurology, 25, 508-517 (2010). 
32. Rubin G. D. Computed Tomography: Revolutionizing the Practice of Medicine for 40 
Years. Radiology. 273, S45-S74 (2014). 
33. A quick history of the MRI in two views - words and pictures - 
http://www.twoviews.com/mri-imaging/history.html#sthash.LPFKbwrI.dpbs, accessed 
11 March 2017. 
34. Lassere M. et al. OMERACT Rheumatoid Arthritis Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
Studies. Exercise 3: an international multicenter reliability study using the RA-MRI 
Score. J. Rheumatol. 30, 1366-1375 (2003). 
35. Woo J. A short History of the development of Ultrasound in Obstetrics and 
Gynecology. http://www.ob-ultrasound.net/history1.html, accessed 11 March 2017 
36. Gompelt B. M. & Darlington L. G. Grey scale ultrasonography and evaluation of 
popliteal cyst. Clin. Radiol. 30, 539-545 (1979). 
37. Graf R. The diagnosis of congenital hip-joint dislocation by the ultrasonic Combound 
treatment. Arch. Orthop. Trauma Surg. 97, 117-133 (1980). 
38. Backhaus M. et al. Guidelines for musculoskeletal ultrasound in rheumatology. Ann. 
Rheum. Dis. 60, 641–649 (2001). 
 39. Maricq H. R. & LeRoy E. C. Patterns of finger capillary abnormalities in connective 
tissue disease by ‘widefield’ microscopy Arthritis Rheum. 16, 619–628 (1973). 
40. Cutolo M., Sulli A. & Smith V. Assessing microvascular changes in systemic sclerosis 
diagnosis and management. Nat Rev Rheumatol. 6, 578-587 (2010). 
41. Abdollahi-Roodsaz S., Abramson S. B. & Scher J. U. The metabolic role of the gut 
microbiota in health and rheumatic disease: mechanisms and interventions. Nat. Rev. 
Rheumatol. 12, 446-455 (2016).  
42. van der Vlist M., Kuball J., Radstake T. R. & Meyaard L. Immune checkpoints and 
rheumatic diseases: what can cancer immunotherapy teach us? Nat. Rev. Rheumatol. 
12, 593-604 (2016). 
43. Topol E. Digital medicine: empowering both patients and clinicians. Lancet 388, 740-
741. (2016). 
 
 
 
