 Hunger-driven motivational state competition
C. Joseph Burnett1,2,3,*, Chia Li1,2,*, Emily Webber1,2, Eva Tsaousidou4,5,6, Stephen Y. 
Xue1,2, Jens C. Brüning4,5,6, and Michael J. Krashes1,2,#
1Diabetes, Endocrinology and Obesity Branch, National Institutes of Diabetes and Digestive and 
Kidney Diseases (NIDDK), National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, 20892 USA
2National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA), National Institutes of Health, Baltimore, Maryland, 
21224 USA
3Brown University Graduate Partnerships Program, Providence, RI 02912, USA
4Max Plank Institute for Metabolism Research, Department of Neuronal Control of Metabolism, 
Gleueler Str. 50, 50931 Cologne, Germany
5Center for Endocrinology, Diabetes and Preventive Medicine (CEDP), University Hospital 
Cologne, Kerpener Str. 26, 50924 Cologne, Germany
6Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging Associated Diseases (CECAD) and 
Center of Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 
26, 50931 Cologne, Germany
7National Center for Diabetes Research (DZD), Ingolstädter Land Str. 1, 85764 Neuherberg, 
Germany
Summary
Behavioral choice is ubiquitous in the animal kingdom and is central to goal-oriented behavior. 
Hypothalamic Agouti-related peptide (AgRP) neurons are critical regulators of appetite. Hungry 
animals, bombarded by multiple sensory stimuli, are known to modify their behavior during times 
of caloric need, rapidly adapting to a consistently changing environment. Utilizing ARCAgRP 
neurons as an entry point, we analyzed the hierarchical position of hunger related to rival drive 
states. Employing a battery of behavioral assays we found that hunger significantly increases its 
capacity to suppress competing motivational systems such as thirst, anxiety-related behavior, 
innate fear and social interactions often only when food is accessible. Furthermore, real-time 
monitoring of ARCAgRP activity revealed time-locked responses to conspecific investigation in 
addition to food presentation, further establishing that even at the level of ARCAgRP neurons 
#Lead Contact: michael.krashes@nih.gov.
*equally contributing authors
Author Contributions
C.J.B., C.L., E.W. and M.J.K. conceived the project and designed the experiments. C.J.B., C.L. E.W., M.J.K. and S.X. performed 
experiments and analyzed the data. J.C.B. and E.T. assisted with pilot photometry experiments. M.J.K. wrote the paper.
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Published in final edited form as:
Neuron. 2016 October 5; 92(1): 187–201. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2016.08.032.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 choices are remarkably flexible computations integrating internal state, external factors and 
anticipated yield.
Introduction
Sherrington’s “singleness of action” principle in which an organism must decide to pursue 
one behavior to the exclusion of others is central to the science of ethology (Sherington, 
1906). This means that at some level in the nervous system, incentive stimuli must compete 
for expression. Hunger provides one of the strongest homeostatic motivations for behavior in 
the animal kingdom. Despite the wide diversity of stimuli and competing demands that 
naturally impinge upon animals, they must select and pursue food in times of caloric 
insufficiency. To address this homeostatic imbalance, animals must often navigate their 
environment in ways that require switching between exploratory, defensive, and competing 
behaviors, indicating tremendous plasticity in feeding behavior.
Agouti-related peptide (AgRP) neurons localized in the arcuate nucleus (ARC) display 
appetite-state-dependent, dynamic activity changes (Betley et al., 2015; Chen et al., 2015; 
Mandelblat-Cerf et al., 2015; Takahashi and Cone, 2005; Wu et al., 2014). Post-natal 
ablation of ARCAgRP neurons results in cessation of feeding and ultimately starvation, 
establishing their necessity for survival (Gropp et al., 2005; Luquet et al., 2005). This 
function was further clarified using recent advances in neural manipulation and monitoring 
technologies. Selective activation of ARCAgRP neurons rapidly and robustly promotes 
motivated feeding in calorically replete mice, while silencing these cells significantly 
attenuates food intake in mice with energy deficits (Aponte et al., 2011; Krashes et al., 
2011). Importantly, in concert with human starvation studies demonstrating the physical, 
psychological and physiological damage due to caloric restriction (Keys, 1946), ARCAgRP 
neural activity has been shown to induce a negative affective state, which is immediately 
suppressed in response to sensory cues anticipating food consumption (Betley et al., 2015). 
Taken together, these findings reinforce the role of ARCAgRP neurons in both the need 
detection and response enactment of physiological hunger. In contrast, a subpopulation of 
GABAergic neurons marked by Vgat (vesicular GABA transporter) in the lateral 
hypothalamus (LH) have been shown to engage an undirected motor program encoding 
distinct sub-modalities of feeding and other motivated behaviors (Jennings et al., 2015; 
Navarro et al., 2015; Nieh et al., 2015; Nieh et al., 2016).
While feeding behavior remains complicated, it, like other motivations, has mostly been 
studied in experimental vacuums targeting a specified outcome (Calhoon and Tye, 2015; 
Falkner and Lin, 2014; Liu et al., 2014; Oka et al., 2015; Sternson, 2013; Yang and Shah, 
2014). In nature, however, ethologically relevant motivations likely intersect in a highly 
complex manner and animals must select explicit actions at the expense of others. Thus, we 
sought to test the hypothesis that both physiological and ARCAgRP-mediated hunger can 
subdue orthogonal motivated behaviors in favor of foraging. We employed optogenetic 
photoactivation to manipulate ARCAgRP neuron activity in sated mice and compared 
responses to physiologically sated and hungry animals in a variety of behavioral assays. We 
found that even when motivated to pursue other behavioral programs, including water-
Burnett et al.
Page 2
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 consumption, self-preservation in anxiogenic-like or fear-inducing contexts, or social 
interaction with conspecifics, hunger overrode competing incentives to promote feeding 
behavior. Furthermore, in vivo photometry analyses indicate that while these competing 
stimuli do not appreciably influence ARCAgRP neural activity levels to the same extent as 
food, real-time network dynamics do respond to conspecifics, highlighting a novel way in 
which these neurons can integrate rival motivational systems.
Results
ARCAgRP neural activation directs biased caloric consumption
To selectively mark and modulate ARCAgRP neurons we injected Cre-dependent viruses 
encoding green fluorescent protein (GFP) or channelrhodopsin-2 (ChR2) into the ARC of 
Agrp-IRES-Cre mice (Figure S1A). For all experiments, Agrp-IRES-Cre animals were 
divided into three behavioral groups; physiologically sated mice with ad libitum access to 
food transduced with GFP (fedGFP), physiologically hungry mice fasted for 24 hours 
transduced with GFP (fastedGFP) and physiologically sated mice with ad libitum access to 
food transduced with ChR2 (fedChR2). All groups were tethered to patchcords and received 
the same light delivery protocol. Concordant with previous reports, home cage screening of 
light cycle food intake, a time when mice typically refrain from eating as seen in the fedGFP 
group, revealed that photoactivation of ARCAgRP neurons (fedChR2) promoted feeding 
comparable to fasted animals (fastedGFP) (Figure S1B–C) (Aponte et al., 2011).
To evaluate whether this consumption was geared toward caloric sustenance, we acclimated 
mice to recognize and ingest 20 mg grain, sucrose and 1% saccharin pellets over the course 
of 3 consecutive dark cycle periods (Figure S1D). On study days, mice were exposed to each 
individual food source for one hour near the start of the light cycle. Both fedChR2 and 
fastedGFP mice displayed significantly increased consumption of grain and sucrose, but not 
of 1% saccharin pellets, versus fedGFP animals (Figure 1A), demonstrating that ARCAgRP 
neurons are tuned to attaining caloric sufficiency. To further investigate this specificity, we 
used ChR2 to photostimulate LHVGAT neurons in our pellet assay (Figure S1E). Unlike 
ARCAgRP neurons, acute activation of LHVGAT neurons significantly elevated consumption 
of all three types of pellets irrespective of caloric value (Figure S1F). Thus, unlike the broad 
consummatory spectrum evoked by LHVGAT stimulation, ARCAgRP neural activation is 
directed toward caloric intake.
Physiological hunger naturally promotes food-seeking responses across species, a calculated 
action whereby the organism must compute environmental costs and benefits, to 
appropriately ensure survival (Yapici et al., 2014). Head-dipping activity on a hole-board 
apparatus is frequently utilized as an indicator of exploratory tendencies in rodent studies 
(Boissier and Simon, 1962; Montgomery, 1955). To assess the explicit contribution of 
ARCAgRP neurons toward exploration and foraging behavior, respectively, we tested our 
mice employing this assay when the 16 holes were either empty or baited with 20 mg grain 
pellets (Figure S1G–H). FedChR2 and fastedGFP mice drastically escalated the amount of 
exploratory head-dips into the empty wells compared to fedGFP animals (Figure 1B). 
Furthermore, in a separate cohort of mice to avoid repeated exposure to the apparatus, 
fedChR2 and fastedGFP animals displayed a fivefold increase in the retrieval and consumption 
Burnett et al.
Page 3
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 of the grain pellets, with several mice reaching the maximum limit of 16 pellets, compared 
to fedGFP controls (Figure 1C). Therefore, both physiological and ARCAgRP-mediated 
hunger enhanced exploratory tendencies and foraging behavior.
An animal’s commerce with its environment depends on its ability to predict where and 
when incentive stimuli are likely to appear. To ensure viability organisms must form 
representations of their surroundings and learn relationships between a response and the 
consequences of the response (Kheifets and Gallistel, 2012). As acute ARCAgRP stimulation 
motivates the seeking and consumption of food, we sought to determine if ARCAgRP activity 
was sufficient to facilitate choice behavior and recall a learned preference for food location 
using a Y-maze apparatus (Figure 1D). Importantly, prior to any conditioning, each group of 
animals displayed an unbiased choice between the two arms of the maze, with a distribution 
comparable to chance (Figure 1E) (Binomial distribution, two-tailed P-test; fedGFP > 0.9999, 
fastedGFP = 0.4545, fedChR2 = 0.8036). Throughout training, animals were restricted to 85% 
of their initial body weights to boost motivation in procuring food reward. Following 
conditioning trials, in which mice were trained to associate one arm of the maze with a 20 
mg grain pellet utilizing visual and spatial cues, all groups of mice exhibited high 
proficiency in learning the task, with a weighted distribution toward the baited arm 
statistically significant from chance (Figure 1F) (Binomial distribution, two-tailed P-test; 
fedGFP = 0.0213, fastedGFP = 0.0042, fedChR2 = 0.0042). After the last conditioning trial, 
animals were sorted into the respective groups and tested the following day under 
photostimulation conditions. Strikingly, while fedGFP mice displayed random distribution 
between the two unbaited arms of the maze comparable to chance, both fastedGFP and 
fedChR2 mice continued to demonstrate a learned preference toward the arm associated with 
food reward (Figure 1G) (Binomial distribution, two-tailed P-test; fedGFP = 0.8036, 
fastedGFP = 0.0042, fedChR2 < 0.0001). Accordingly, the foraging behavior elicited via 
physiological and ARCAgRP-mediated hunger extends to learning and decision-making 
surrounding the exploration of an environment previously associated with food.
Next, we probed the integrative role of ARCAgRP neurons on thirst regulation using a 
lickometer to analyze drinking behavior. These experiments were executed both in the 
presence or absence of food, adding a within-subject scheme in addition to the between-
subject design (Figure S2A). All groups of mice that had ad libitum access to water before 
the 1 hour test exhibited modest interactions (licking) with a water spout when a non-food 
object was present, demonstrating that acute ARCAgRP neural activation was not sufficient to 
orchestrate water drinking behavior (Figure 2A). However, when food was available, 
fedChR2 and fastedGFP mice significantly increased the number of spout interactions 
(prandial thirst) contrasted to fedGFP controls, an effect correlated to food intake (Figures 
2A–B, E). Thus, ARCAgRP activation, akin to physiological hunger, does not stimulate water 
intake independently of food consumption.
In a separate set of experiments, mice were deprived of water for 24 hours before testing 
(water restricted) in the presence or absence of food. As expected, water-restricted fedGFP 
mice revealed a higher number of spout interactions in the object condition compared to the 
same group of animals with ad lib access to water before the assay (Figures 2C, S2D). 
Interestingly, in the non-food object condition, water-deprived fastedGFP animals displayed a 
Burnett et al.
Page 4
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 sharp reduction in spout interactions compared to fedGFP mice (Figure 2C), a phenomenon 
previously reported in rodents attributed to differences in cellular dehydration and plasma 
osmolality or alternatively, neurological inhibition of the drinking system due to hunger 
(Siegel and Talantis, 1950; Verplanck and Hayes, 1953). In support of a competing drive-
state hypothesis, whereby two motivational states contend to promote a defined goal-
oriented behavior, we found that water-restricted fedChR2 animals, presumably with similar 
physiology (blood volume and tonicity) as fedGFP mice, mimicked the decline in spout 
interactions observed in the fastedGFP mice (Figure 2C). All water-restricted groups of mice 
demonstrated comparable spout interactions when food was made available, a result 
correlated with the amount of food consumed (Figures 2C–E). Moreover, in agreement with 
prior findings (Kutscher, 1972), water-restricted animals likely voluntarily curbed their food 
intake leading up to the experiment, as water-restricted fedGFP mice ate significantly more 
than the same group of animals with ad lib access to water before the assay (Figure 2F).
Within subject comparisons showed that while the fedGFP group did not alter drinking 
behavior in the presence or absence of food in either the ad lib water or water restricted 
conditions, both fastedGFP and fedChR2 groups consumed more water when food was present 
in either condition (Figure S3B–C, F–G, J–K). All groups exhibited increased water intake 
in the absence of food when water restricted (Figure S2D, H, L). Finally, while the fedGFP 
group enhanced drinking behavior when food was accessible in the water restricted 
condition, both fastedGFP and fedChR2 groups displayed comparable water intake in the 
presence of food regardless of thirst state (Figure S2E, I, M). These studies reveal the 
complex contestation between water- and caloric-deprivation, indicating ARCAgRP neural 
activation mimics physiological hunger in responding to thirst imbalances.
ARCAgRP neural stimulation suppresses anxiety-like behavior depending on food location
It has been shown that ARCAgRP activation decreased anxiety-related behavior (Dietrich et 
al., 2015; Padilla et al., 2016), yet whether this increased risk behavior is linked with food 
acquisition remains to be elucidated. Here we employed a range of apparati known to induce 
anxiety-related behavior in mice to explore whether physiological and/or artificial hunger 
could subdue anxiety-like behavior in the absence or presence of food positioned in 
anxiogenic open zones versus anxiolytic “safe” zones. We found that fedChR2 and fastedGFP 
mice spent more time in the center of a standard mouse open field apparatus, when a non-
food object was located in the middle, than fedGFP controls (Figures 3A–B, S3A). However, 
time spent in the center by fastedGFP and fedChR2 mice was heightened when food was 
located in the middle, an effect reflected by food consumption levels (Figures 3A–C, S3B–
D).
To better illuminate total time spent in an open zone and further strengthen anxiety-like 
behavior, we tested our groups in a larger open field apparatus (2.5 x bigger) where we 
found comparable levels of time spent in the center zone in the presence of a non-food 
object between all groups (Figures 3D–E, S3E). Conversely, the addition of food in the 
middle of the apparatus significantly elevated the time spent in the center zone in fastedGFP 
and fedChR2 mice compared to fedGFP controls, again indicated by total food consumption 
(Figures 3D–F, S3F–H). Interestingly, although fedGFP mice significantly escalated the time 
Burnett et al.
Page 5
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 spent in the center zone in the presence of food versus object in the small open field 
apparatus, this enhancement was abolished using the big open field (Figure S3B, F). To 
gauge the context specificity of ARCAgRP activation to reduce anxiety-related behavior, we 
examined another subset of cells (LHVGAT) demonstrated to impact acute feeding (Jennings 
et al., 2015; Navarro et al., 2015; Nieh et al., 2015). Importantly we failed to detect a 
significant difference between the total time spent in the center zone interacting with the 
object or food irrespective of context during LHVGAT photostimulation (Figure S3I).
Next, to deconstruct general anxiety-related behavior from food accessibility, we repeated 
the above experiment in the big open field placing the object or food in a random corner 
(“safe” zone) of the apparatus (Figure S4A). We then measured the total time each animal 
spent in either the open center zone or the corner object/food zone. Interestingly, we found 
no differences between the three groups in the total time spent in the center zone either in 
the presence of an object or food in the corner of the apparatus (Figure S4B). Although all 
groups displayed similar time spent in the corner object zone, fastedGFP and fedChR2 mice 
spent significantly more time in the corner food zone than fedGFP controls (Figure S4F), 
presumably due to elevated food intake (Figure S4J). Notably, within-subject comparisons 
revealed a statistical decrease in the time spent in the center zone in fastedGFP and fedChR2 
mice when food was made available (Figure S4D–E), a probable reflection of the statistical 
increase spent in the food zone (Figure S4H–I). No such alterations were detected in fedGFP 
mice (Figure S4C, G).
Lastly, we used a zero-maze apparatus to interrogate anxiety-related behavior, which is 
inversely correlated with the time that animals spend in the open arms (Figure S3J). Again, 
when objects were placed in the middle zones of the open arms, all groups displayed a 
similar amount of time in these designated areas (Figure 3G–H). In contrast, fedChR2 and 
fastedGFP animals spent considerably more time in these middle zones, when they were 
baited with food, than fedGFP mice, reflected by increased food intake (Figures 3G–I, S3K–
M). Thus, the capability of hunger to curtail anxiety-like behavior in the absence of food 
seems to be dependent on the assay adopted, but regardless, the presence of food in open/
exposed zones is sufficient to override anxiogenic responses.
ARCAgRP neural activation competes with innate motivational drives
Innate fear is a basic and natural mechanism by which organisms evade danger. A volatile 
chemical produced by foxes, trimethylthiazoline (TMT), has been shown to incite fear-like 
and aversive behavior in mice, enabling remote or contact-based detection of predator cues 
(Fendt et al., 2005; Yang et al., 2016). We assessed whether physiological or artificial 
hunger could supersede the inherent avoidance of this odorant in the absence or presence of 
food. Importantly, we validated that mice exposed to TMT exhibit diminished locomotor 
activity and time spent in both the TMT paired chamber and designated TMT zone while 
increasing immobility (freezing), compared to the same mice exposed to a neutral odorant 
(water) (Figure 4A–E).
When a non-food object was placed in the TMT zone, fedGFP, fastedGFP and fedChR2 
animals showed a strong preference for the neutral side of the chamber compared to the 
TMT-paired side (Figures 4F–G, S5A). Moreover, all groups intensely avoided the TMT 
Burnett et al.
Page 6
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 zone (Figure 4F, H). However, presentation of food in the TMT zone significantly increased 
fastedGFP and fedChR2 animals’ preference for the TMT-paired chamber, time spent in the 
TMT zone and total food intake compared to fedGFP mice (Figures 4F–H, S5B). Notably, 
within-subject analysis unveiled fedGFP subjects avoided both the TMT-paired chamber and 
TMT zone irrespective of object or food, while fastedGFP and fedChR2 animals shifted 
preference toward the TMT-paired chamber and TMT zone in the presence of food versus 
object (Figure S5C–E, G–I). In contrast food-dependent shifts in chamber preference and 
time spent in the TMT zone observed with ARCAgRP-mediated hunger, no statistical 
differences were observed with LHVGAT activation in the presence of a non-food object 
versus food (Figure S5F, J). These experiments establish the capacity of both physiological 
and ARCAgRP-, but not LHVGAT-, mediated hunger to suppress innate fear when the 
acquisition of food is a likely outcome.
Mice are naturally social animals demonstrating high interaction rates with conspecifics. Not 
only do mice prefer social to isolated housing, but also the aversive state of isolation 
generates the motivation to seek and engage in social contact (Niesink and van Ree, 1982; 
Van Loo et al., 2004). To analyze the effects of hunger on social interactions (a proxy of 
mating or aggression), we exposed experimental animals (socially isolated naïve males) to 
either a receptive female or juvenile male, respectively, confined to a social cage in the 
absence or presence of food (Figures S6A). Importantly, social approach was controlled by 
the experimental animal, as containment of the receptive female or juvenile male eliminated 
the potential of copulation or territorial attack, respectively, enabling an unbiased readout of 
social interest. FedGFP, fastedGFP and fedChR2 mice all demonstrated a high preference for 
the side of the chamber paired with the receptive female versus the chamber paired with an 
object, including a minimal duration of time spent in the designated object zone (Figure 5A–
C). On the other hand, while fedGFP controls continued to display a strong preference for the 
female-paired chamber in the presence of food, fastedGFP and fedChR2 animals reversed this 
initial preference, spending a significant amount of time in the allocated food zone, 
associated with enhanced food consumption (Figures 5A–C, S6B). Within-subject 
comparison established that chamber preference and zone duration in fedGFP subjects was 
not altered in object versus food conditions compared to the statistical changes of these 
parameters observed in fastedGFP and fedChR2 mice (Figure S6D–F, H–J). To assess whether 
these shifts were specific to physiological and ARCAgRP-mediated hunger, we tested the 
faculty of LHVGAT neurons in mediating this condition-dependent transition. Importantly, 
we found that LHVGAT-mediated hunger failed to modify either chamber preference or zone 
duration in a condition-dependent manner (Figure S6G, K).
Similar to the efficiency of natural or ARCAgRP-evoked hunger to rival female social 
interactions, all groups revealed a selective preference for the juvenile male-paired side over 
the non-food-paired side in the object condition, spending a modest amount of time in the 
marked object zone (Figure 5D–F). While this bias toward the chamber paired with the 
juvenile male remained intact in the fedGFP group in the food condition, fastedGFP and 
fedChR2 mice switched preference toward the food-paired side, spending significantly more 
time in the designated food zone, which is reflected in their elevated food intake levels 
(Figures 5D–F, S6C). Again, evaluation of within-subject data revealed fedGFP subjects 
showed comparable levels of time spent in the male-paired side and zone regardless of 
Burnett et al.
Page 7
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 object or food, while fastedGFP and fedChR2 animals presented shifts toward the food-paired 
chamber and food zone in the presence of food versus object (Figure S6L–Q). In conclusion, 
when confronted with competing demands (hunger versus social interaction), calorically 
depleted mice modify their behavior from an innate preference to interact with a conspecific 
to the acquisition and consumption of food when it becomes accessible, an effect 
recapitulated at the ARCAgRP, but not the LHVGAT, neuron level.
ARCAgRP neural activity responds to food and conspecifics
The experiments above would suggest that ARCAgRP excitation is sufficient to overrule 
instinctive, motivational states, especially in the presence of food. However, the 
physiological activity of this cell-type in direct response to distinct, external stimuli is 
unknown. To probe these questions, fiber photometry was used to enable optical recording 
of real-time ARCAgRP activity via selective targeting of the genetically-encoded calcium 
indicator GCaMP6s (Figure S7A–B) (Cui et al., 2013). This technique has convincingly 
shown that food exposure strongly and swiftly inhibited ARCAgRP neurons in fasted mice 
compared to a non-food object and importantly this response was state-dependent as sated 
mice failed to show suppression of ARCAgRP activity (Chen et al., 2015). We sought to 
examine the effects of a water, TMT, receptive female or juvenile male stimulus on 
ARCAgRP activity compared to food or neutral object presentation in both hungry and sated 
animals. We employed 2 protocols to investigate these responses; In Protocol 1 (Figure 
S7A), after a 5 min baseline, a water, TMT, receptive female or juvenile male stimulus was 
introduced into the cage for 5 min (stimulus in), removed for 5 min (stimulus out), followed 
immediately by food introduction for 5 min (food in). This sequential presentation 
culminating in food introduction was chosen due to the sharp and persistent suppression of 
ARCAgRP activity by food (Chen et al., 2015). Protocol 2 (Figure S7A) constituted a 5 min 
baseline signal followed by the introduction of a water, TMT, receptive female or juvenile 
male, food or non-salient object stimulus for 5 min allowing direct comparisons of these 
external cues on ARCAgRP neural activity.
Supporting our behavioral data, the presentation of water to both fasted and sated animals 
had no significant effect on ARCAgRP activity (respectively, ΔF/F = 0.87% +/− 5.48%; ΔF/F 
= 0.63% +/− 0.33% comparing 5 min baseline average and 5 min water presentation 
average), while food presentation rapidly and robustly suppressed activity in the fasted 
condition (ΔF/F = −27.74% +/− 5.66%) compared to both water and a non-salient object 
(Figure 6A–C). Congruent with previous findings this reduction in ARCAgRP neural activity 
in response to food was state-dependent as it was absent in the sated condition (ΔF/F = 
−5.27% +/− 2.54%; Figure S7C–E). Furthermore, the introduction of TMT failed to alter 
real-time ARCAgRP neural dynamics in either hungry or sated animals (respectively, ΔF/F = 
3.82% +/− 5.62%; ΔF/F = −0.55% +/− 0.74% 5 min average during TMT vs 5 min baseline 
average), indicating that although predatory odors induce substantial behavioral adaptations, 
this is not encoded directly at the level of ARCAgRP neurons (Figure 6D–F, S7F–H).
Given the strong social structure of mice, we next examined the effects of conspecific 
introduction on ARCAgRP activity. Notably, conspecifics were food-deprived and kept in 
cages devoid of food before testing to assure no food-related sensory cues could affect the 
Burnett et al.
Page 8
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 recordings as just the smell of food has been shown to suppress ARCAgRP activity (Chen et 
al., 2015). Conspecifics were isolated in grid enclosure sociability cages and introduced to a 
new cage housing the experimental animal. Surprisingly, we found that presentation of a 
receptive female or a juvenile male to fasted mice elevated ARCAgRP neural activity 
(respectively, ΔF/F = 7.69% +/− 5.15%; ΔF/F = 7.12% +/− 7.9% 5 min average during 
stimulus,) although these changes in network dynamics over a 5 minute window were not 
significantly different compared to the introduction of a non-salient object (Figure 6G–L). 
Importantly, unlike the response to food, these ARCAgRP response properties occurred 
regardless of the experimental animals appetite state, as conspecific presentation increased 
ARCAgRP activity in the fed state (female ΔF/F = −2.70% +/− 2.50%; male ΔF/F = −1.60% 
+/− 3.51%; Figure S7I–N). Importantly, these dynamics were unrelated to mouse movement 
or changes in ambient light as they were absent from recordings of control mice expressing 
GFP in ARCAgRP neurons, indicating that they represent calcium-dependent GCaMP6s 
signals (Figure S6M–X).
To further investigate this effect, we video-recorded the photometry sessions and compared 
the fluorescence signals in response to initial investigative contact with the receptive female 
or juvenile male mouse versus a non-salient object. Strikingly, we observed a significant 
increase in ARCAgRP activity in response to first contact with either the receptive female or 
juvenile male, compared with a non-salient object in hungry mice (Figure 7A–C). This 
significantly heightened effect was found independent of the satiety state of the experimental 
animal (Figure 7D–F), although the response appeared to be dampened compared to the 
fasted condition. Next, to determine if ARCAgRP neural response properties toward a 
conspecific was associated with novelty/familiarity, we ran another protocol (Protocol 3) 
whereby each experimental animal was exposed to either the empty, clean grid enclosure 
sociability cage or the same receptive female in four repeated sessions (Figure S7A). 
Reinforcing the authenticity of the GCaMP6 signals, we observed very little response to the 
empty cage over the four trials (Figure 7G–H). However, ARCAgRP population dynamics 
transiently increased during the initial investigative contact with the receptive female, an 
effect that repeated itself over 3 trials before becoming extinguished on the final session, 
suggesting the involvement of a potential learning component to these responses (Figure 
7G–H).
Discussion
Recent work has begun to unravel the neural circuits fundamental for discrete behaviors 
including feeding, but these motivational systems are most often studied in behavioral 
isolation, with strict control over internal and external variables for simplification (Calhoon 
and Tye, 2015; Falkner and Lin, 2014; Liu et al., 2014; Oka et al., 2015; Sternson, 2013; 
Yang and Shah, 2014). In this way the animal is encouraged to express goal-seeking 
behavior directed toward one objective. From an ethological perspective, individual 
motivational systems probably rarely, if ever, operate in isolation untouched by competing 
factors. Hunger drive represents one of these motivation systems, and remarkably, despite an 
amalgamation of peripheral and central fluctuations coupled with varying satiety levels, 
ARCAgRP neurons govern an increasingly well-defined behavioral program for the seeking 
and subsequent consumption of food (Aponte et al., 2011; Betley et al., 2015; Dietrich et al., 
Burnett et al.
Page 9
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 2015; Krashes et al., 2011). However, the interaction between ARCAgRP-mediated hunger 
with competing motivational systems has not been explicitly and rigorously tested to date. 
Here, through combinatorial behavioral and real-time physiological recording methods, we 
demonstrate that similar to starvation-induced hunger, ARCAgRP, but not LHVGAT, 
stimulation can drive motivated food-seeking and consumption behavior directed toward 
caloric sustenance over rival motivations. Furthermore, in addition to the state-dependent, 
prolonged suppression of ARCAgRP activity by food, ARCAgRP network dynamics are 
unaltered by water or TMT but display elevated activity in response to the investigation of 
conspecifics independent of satiety levels.
ARCAgRP versus LHVGAT neurons
Similar to ARCAgRP neurons, activation of LHVGAT neurons is sufficient to acutely promote 
voracious feeding behavior (Aponte et al., 2011; Jennings et al., 2015; Krashes et al., 2011; 
Navarro et al., 2015; Nieh et al., 2015). However, unlike photostimulation of ARCAgRP 
neurons, photostimulation of LHVGAT neurons failed to reproducibly suppress contesting 
drive systems in an appetite state-dependent manner. A number or reasons may explain for 
these observed behavioral disparities. Firstly, while ARCAgRP activation selectively elicits 
caloric intake, chemogenetic stimulation of LHVGAT neurons escalated wide-ranging 
consummatory behavior directed toward chow, sucrose, ethanol, saccharin, water, and even a 
block of wood (Navarro et al., 2015). Furthermore, photoactivation of a specific LHVGAT 
projection to the ventral tegmental area (VTA) often resulted in repetitive gnawing and 
aberrant motor sequences (Nieh et al., 2015). Follow-up studies have demonstrated that 
optogenetic activation of the LHVGAT→VTA pathway promiscuously promoted the 
investigation of the most proximal salient object to the experimental animal (Nieh et al., 
2016). In agreement with these prior findings, we found a significant increase in non-caloric 
pellet intake and excessive chewing on the inedible non-food object, bedding, social 
isolation cages and the plastic of the apparati used in our behavioral assays during LHVGAT 
photoactivation, an effect we rarely if ever observed during ARCAgRP photoactivation. 
However, it should be noted that high frequency, synchronous activation of these neural 
subsets might promote behavior beyond that of normal caloric deficiency.
Notably, activation of the LHVGAT→VTA circuit strongly supported positive reinforcement 
and place preference via the modulation of dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens 
(Nieh et al., 2016), subscribing to a more general change in the motivational state of the 
animal (Berridge and Robinson, 1998; Saunders and Robinson, 2012). Although the 
immediate effects on the mesolimbic system during ARCAgRP activation are currently 
unknown, ARCAgRP neurons have been shown to transmit a negative-valence teaching signal 
as mice learned to avoid locations or conditioned stimuli associated with ARCAgRP 
photostimulation (Betley et al., 2015). However it should be noted that mice failed to 
perform instrumental responses leading to a reduction in ARCAgRP neural activity, a 
hallmark of a negative reinforcement model, spawning alternative valence models such as 
increasing the positively rewarding properties of food (Chen and Knight, 2016). Moreover, 
elegant microendoscopic imaging studies uncovered that food rapidly inhibited the large 
majority (96%) of ARCAgRP neural activity and that this suppression occurred prior to 
consumption (Betley et al., 2015) fortifying similar findings at the network level (Chen et 
Burnett et al.
Page 10
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 al., 2015). These findings would suggest ARCAgRP activity encodes the appetitive, pre-
consummatory phase of feeding behavior as both individual ARCAgRP neurons and 
population level dynamics undergo quiescence time-locked to food-related cues before 
consumption ensues. Interestingly, this repressed activity steadily ramps back up if animals 
are prohibited from engaging in restoring caloric balance (Betley et al., 2015; Chen et al., 
2015). Similar refined calcium imaging strategies were utilized to demonstrate that separate 
subsets of appetitive-coding and consumption-coding ensembles exist within the LHVGAT 
neural network (Jennings et al., 2015), further highlighting the differences between these 
two sets of neurons.
ARCAgRP neurons express the neuromodulators Agouti-related peptide and Neuropeptide Y 
along with the fast transmitter GABA, all of which influence feeding behavior (Clark et al., 
1984; Krashes et al., 2013; Rossi et al., 1998; Stanley and Leibowitz, 1985; Stratford and 
Kelley, 1997). Furthermore, high-quality gene expression profiles of ARCAgRP neurons have 
been carried out revealing tremendous fluctuations in transcript levels dependent on energy 
state (Henry et al., 2015). Far less is known about the molecular composition of LHVGAT 
neurons. A complete transcriptional profiling of this subpopulation is currently lacking 
although it has been shown that LHVGAT neurons are distinct from cells containing the 
feeding-related neuropeptides melanin-concentrating hormone and orexin (Jennings et al., 
2015). Moreover, while several ARCAgRP efferents, which are wired in a one-to-one fashion 
(Betley et al., 2013), have been assessed for their sufficiency to evoke acute food intake 
including projections to the bed nucleus of the stia terminalis (BNST), LH, parabrachial 
nucleus (PBN), amygdala, periaqueductal gray and both the paraventricular thalamus (PVT) 
and hypothalamus (PVH) (Atasoy et al., 2012; Betley et al., 2013; Padilla et al., 2016; 
Steculorum et al., 2016), only the LHVGAT→VTA circuit has been analyzed to date and the 
anatomical architecture including terminal targets and potential collateralization of axons 
has yet to be described.
Facilitating food acquisition via inhibition of competing drives
Hunger is known to shift foraging behavior toward a higher risk-reward strategy to locate a 
food cache (Sih, 1980). Mice, like humans, have the ability to rapidly assess probabilities 
and risks and abruptly modify their behavior in sync with variable environmental fluxes 
(Kheifets and Gallistel, 2012). Given the inhibitory nature and widespread distribution of 
non-collateralizing ARCAgRP projections throughout the mammalian brain, including axonal 
targeting to intrahypothalmic nuclei, limbic regions of the forebrain, midbrain and brainstem 
nuclei (Betley et al., 2013; Broberger et al., 1998), it is possible that these appetite-
regulating neurons are capable of producing broad suppression signals which halt other 
motivated behaviors to prioritize the seeking and consumption of caloric food. Supporting 
this notion, both physiological and ARCAgRP-mediated hunger dampened rival drive states 
such as thirst, anxiety-related behavior, innate fear and social interactions, which were often 
dependent on food accessibility. From a circuit perspective, GABAergic ARCAgRP neurons 
densely innervate regions shown to play key roles in these competing behaviors (Calhoon 
and Tye, 2015; Kawano and Masuko, 2010; Oka et al., 2015; Silva et al., 2013; Stamatakis et 
al., 2014). In accordance with this model, a recent study found that photoactivation of the 
Burnett et al.
Page 11
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 ARCAgRP→medial amygdala (MeA) terminal field curbed territorial aggression in the 
absence of food (Padilla et al., 2016).
Conspecific investigation transiently increases ARCAgRP activity
Social interactions are a fundamental and adaptive biological component of numerous 
species, especially mice, in which recognition of conspecifics is imperative in maintaining 
social hierarchy and mate choice (Wang et al., 2014). Socially-isolated mice exhibit goal-
directed behavior aimed toward the re-connection with conspecifics, investing time and 
energy when the opportunity presents (Niesink and van Ree, 1982). We explored the 
competitive relationship between hunger and the drive of socially isolated, naïve male mice 
to interact with either a receptive female or juvenile male. While our behavioral experiments 
concluded that both physiological and ARCAgRP-mediated hunger, shifted preference from 
the conspecific-paired chamber to the food-paired side, photometry analyses revealed 
changes in ARCAgRP activity time-locked to the investigation of a conspecific. Interestingly, 
these responses do not appear to be related to general arousal as no alterations in ARCAgRP 
activity were detected in response to TMT, although it should be noted that conspecific 
interaction is largely associated with positive valence and approach (Niesink and van Ree, 
1982), while TMT elicits freezing and avoidance (Fendt et al., 2005).
As previously reported, food presentation rapidly and persistently silenced ARCAgRP 
network dynamics dependent on energy status (Chen et al., 2015), whereas the increased 
ARCAgRP activity during conspecific investigation was transient and independent of satiety 
levels. These findings suggest the prospect of heterogeneity in ARCAgRP response 
properties, however whether the same or distinct subpopulations respond to both food and/or 
conspecifics cannot be resolved using photometry targeted at soma. Notably, although deep-
brain imaging revealed essentially all ARCAgRP neurons were inhibited by food cues (Betley 
et al., 2015), optrode recordings found an ~65% reduction (Mandelblat-Cerf et al., 2015). 
Therefore it is plausible that a subset of ARCAgRP neurons either respond independently to a 
conspecific or in concert with food cues. Further testing employing these individual cellular 
resolution approaches or alternatively, fiber photometry directed toward explicit terminal 
fields (Chen et al., 2015), given the one-to-one ARCAgRP neural architecture (Betley et al., 
2013), would begin to elucidate these questions. Importantly, projection-defined ARCAgRP 
neurons target a number of downstream areas that fail to elicit acute feeding behavior giving 
rise to the possibility that these efferents modulate surrogate behaviors such as mating and 
territorial aggression (Falkner and Lin, 2014; Matthews et al., 2016; Padilla et al., 2016; 
Yang and Shah, 2014).
Why would ARCAgRP activity be influenced by conspecifics? One interpretation may be 
another animal signals competition for resources enhancing the priority of procuring food. If 
food cues cause a pre-ingestive decrease in AgRPARC activity due to the expectation of 
satiation, the addition of a competing mouse may increase activity as that satiety expectation 
dwindles. This decrease in expected food intake may stem from food contention but may 
also be related to the engagement of principal social behaviors such as mating and 
aggression. Further studies will be needed to address these possibilities.
Burnett et al.
Page 12
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Foraging, fighting, fleeing and mating decisions deeply impact evolutionary fitness and thus 
are likely to have played a vital role in molding the neural circuits that mediate decision-
making. Here, we report how physiological and ARCAgRP-mediated hunger coordinates 
food-seeking and vies for behavioral expression with other competing motivational drives 
such as thirst, anxiety, innate fear and social interaction. Future studies aimed at dissecting 
the explicit circuitry whereby ARCAgRP neurons integrate with cell-types and structures 
encoding alternative motivational systems will be key to unlocking the complexity of 
hierarchical decision-making.
Experimental Procedures (See Supplemental Items for detailed methods)
Animals
All animal care and experimental procedures were approved by the National Institute of 
Health Animal Care and Use Committee. Mice were housed at 22–24 °C with a 12 h light:
12 h dark cycle with standard mouse chow (Teklad F6 Rodent Diet 8664; 4.05 kcal g−1, 3.3 
kcal g−1 metabolizable energy, 12.5% kcal from fat; Harlan Teklad) and water provided ad 
libitum, unless otherwise stated.
Viral injections
Stereotaxic injections were performed as previously described(Krashes et al., 2011). Mice 
were anaesthetised with isoflurane and placed into a stereotaxic apparatus (Stoelting Just for 
Mice). For postoperative care, mice were injected intraperitoneally with meloxicam (0.5 mg 
per kg). After exposing the skull via small incision, a small hole was drilled for injection. A 
pulled-glass pipette with 20–40 mm tip diameter was inserted into the brain and virus was 
injected by an air pressure system. A micromanipulator (Grass Technologies, Model S48 
Stimulator) was used to control injection speed at 25 nl min−1 and the pipette was withdrawn 
5 min after injection.
Behavioural testing testing (food intake screening, pellet and water intake studies) All 
animals were singly housed for at least 2.5 weeks following surgery and handled for 10 
consecutive days before the assays to reduce stress response. Studies were conducted in a 
home-cage environment near the beginning of the light cycle (9 am) for food intake 
screening, pellet and water intake studies and in specialized environments for hole-board, Y-
maze, open-field, elevated zero maze, TMT and social interaction assays. All Agrp-ires-Cre 
animals (fedGFP, fastedGFP and fedChR2 groups) were photostimulated for 10 minutes in the 
homecage in the absence of food before being placed in the behavioral apparati.
In vivo fiber photometry
Unilateral optic-fiber cannulas (fiber: core=400μm; NA=0.48;M3 thread titanium receptacle; 
Doric Lenses Inc) were implanted in the ARC of each experimental mouse. Behavioral 
testing started 4 weeks later to allow for viral expression and recovery from surgery. Mice 
were then allowed to adapt to the experimental cages and the fiber patch cord for at least 3 
days prior to experiments (core 400 uM; NA 0.53; M3 connector; Doric Lenses Inc). 
Continuous ~20 uW blue LED at 465 nm served as a light source delivered through optic 
fibers connected to a rotary joint (FRJ 1X1, Doric Lenses Inc.) to allow for movement. 
Burnett et al.
Page 13
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 GCaMP calcium GFP signals were collected through the same fibers via a dichroic port 
(FMC4 port, Doric Lenses Inc) into a femtowatt silicon photoreceiver (2151, Newport). 
Digital signals were then amplified and collected through Plexon softwares OmniPlex. 
Synchronized multi-angled videos were recorded via Cineplex for time-locked data analysis 
in NeuroExplorer.
Statistical analysis
Statistical analyses were performed using Prism 6.0 (GraphPad) software. In all statistical 
tests normal distribution and equal variance was established. The data presented met the 
assumptions of the statistical test employed. Exclusion criteria for experimental fedChR2 
animals were <0.40 grams of food intake during the screening period. This criterion was 
established prior to data collection. N-numbers represent final number of animals used per 
assay.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank Brad B. Lowell for providing Agrp-ires-Cre mice used in this study. We thank Alex Chesler, Lex Kravitz 
and Nima Ghitani for photometry assistance and Alastair Garfield for comments on the manuscript. We thank the 
GENIE project for the development of GCaMP6. This work was supported by the Intramural Research Program of 
the NIH, The National Institutes of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases – NISSK; DK075087 (M.J.K.), 
DK075089 (M.J.K.).
References
Aponte Y, Atasoy D, Sternson SM. AGRP neurons are sufficient to orchestrate feeding behavior 
rapidly and without training. Nature neuroscience. 2011; 14:351–355. [PubMed: 21209617] 
Atasoy D, Betley JN, Su HH, Sternson SM. Deconstruction of a neural circuit for hunger. Nature. 
2012; 488:172–177. [PubMed: 22801496] 
Berridge KC, Robinson TE. What is the role of dopamine in reward: hedonic impact, reward learning, 
or incentive salience? Brain Res Brain Res Rev. 1998; 28:309–369. [PubMed: 9858756] 
Betley JN, Cao ZF, Ritola KD, Sternson SM. Parallel, redundant circuit organization for homeostatic 
control of feeding behavior. Cell. 2013; 155:1337–1350. [PubMed: 24315102] 
Betley JN, Xu S, Cao ZF, Gong R, Magnus CJ, Yu Y, Sternson SM. Neurons for hunger and thirst 
transmit a negative-valence teaching signal. Nature. 2015; 521:180–185. [PubMed: 25915020] 
Boissier JR, Simon P. The exploration reaction in the mouse. Preliminary note. Therapie. 1962; 
17:1225–1232. [PubMed: 13968530] 
Broberger C, Johansen J, Johansson C, Schalling M, Hokfelt T. The neuropeptide Y/agouti gene-
related protein (AGRP) brain circuitry in normal, anorectic, and monosodium glutamate-treated 
mice. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 1998; 
95:15043–15048. [PubMed: 9844012] 
Calhoon GG, Tye KM. Resolving the neural circuits of anxiety. Nature neuroscience. 2015; 18:1394–
1404. [PubMed: 26404714] 
Chen Y, Knight ZA. Making sense of the sensory regulation of hunger neurons. Bioessays. 2016; 
38:316–324. [PubMed: 26898524] 
Chen Y, Lin YC, Kuo TW, Knight ZA. Sensory detection of food rapidly modulates arcuate feeding 
circuits. Cell. 2015; 160:829–841. [PubMed: 25703096] 
Burnett et al.
Page 14
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Clark JT, Kalra PS, Crowley WR, Kalra SP. Neuropeptide Y and human pancreatic polypeptide 
stimulate feeding behavior in rats. Endocrinology. 1984; 115:427–429. [PubMed: 6547387] 
Cui G, Jun SB, Jin X, Pham MD, Vogel SS, Lovinger DM, Costa RM. Concurrent activation of striatal 
direct and indirect pathways during action initiation. Nature. 2013; 494:238–242. [PubMed: 
23354054] 
Dietrich MO, Zimmer MR, Bober J, Horvath TL. Hypothalamic Agrp neurons drive stereotypic 
behaviors beyond feeding. Cell. 2015; 160:1222–1232. [PubMed: 25748653] 
Falkner AL, Lin D. Recent advances in understanding the role of the hypothalamic circuit during 
aggression. Frontiers in systems neuroscience. 2014; 8:168. [PubMed: 25309351] 
Fendt M, Endres T, Lowry CA, Apfelbach R, McGregor IS. TMT-induced autonomic and behavioral 
changes and the neural basis of its processing. Neuroscience and biobehavioral reviews. 2005; 
29:1145–1156. [PubMed: 16099043] 
Gropp E, Shanabrough M, Borok E, Xu AW, Janoschek R, Buch T, Plum L, Balthasar N, Hampel B, 
Waisman A, et al. Agouti-related peptide-expressing neurons are mandatory for feeding. Nature 
neuroscience. 2005; 8:1289–1291. [PubMed: 16158063] 
Henry FE, Sugino K, Tozer A, Branco T, Sternson SM. Cell type-specific transcriptomics of 
hypothalamic energy-sensing neuron responses to weight-loss. Elife. 2015; 4
Jennings JH, Ung RL, Resendez SL, Stamatakis AM, Taylor JG, Huang J, Veleta K, Kantak PA, Aita 
M, Shilling-Scrivo K, et al. Visualizing hypothalamic network dynamics for appetitive and 
consummatory behaviors. Cell. 2015; 160:516–527. [PubMed: 25635459] 
Kawano H, Masuko S. Region-specific projections from the subfornical organ to the paraventricular 
hypothalamic nucleus in the rat. Neuroscience. 2010; 169:1227–1234. [PubMed: 20678996] 
Keys A. Human starvation and its consequences. Journal of the American Dietetic Association. 1946; 
22:582–587. [PubMed: 20991087] 
Kheifets A, Gallistel CR. Mice take calculated risks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
of the United States of America. 2012; 109:8776–8779. [PubMed: 22592792] 
Krashes MJ, Koda S, Ye C, Rogan SC, Adams AC, Cusher DS, Maratos-Flier E, Roth BL, Lowell BB. 
Rapid, reversible activation of AgRP neurons drives feeding behavior in mice. The Journal of 
clinical investigation. 2011; 121:1424–1428. [PubMed: 21364278] 
Krashes MJ, Shah BP, Koda S, Lowell BB. Rapid versus delayed stimulation of feeding by the 
endogenously released AgRP neuron mediators GABA, NPY, and AgRP. Cell metabolism. 2013; 
18:588–595. [PubMed: 24093681] 
Kutscher CL. Interaction of food and water deprivation on drinking: effect of body water losses and 
characteristics of solution offered. Physiology & behavior. 1972; 9:753–758. [PubMed: 4655168] 
Liu X, Ramirez S, Redondo RL, Tonegawa S. Identification and Manipulation of Memory Engram 
Cells. Cold Spring Harbor symposia on quantitative biology. 2014; 79:59–65. [PubMed: 
25637263] 
Luquet S, Perez FA, Hnasko TS, Palmiter RD. NPY/AgRP neurons are essential for feeding in adult 
mice but can be ablated in neonates. Science. 2005; 310:683–685. [PubMed: 16254186] 
Mandelblat-Cerf Y, Ramesh RN, Burgess CR, Patella P, Yang Z, Lowell BB, Andermann ML. Arcuate 
hypothalamic AgRP and putative POMC neurons show opposite changes in spiking across 
multiple timescales. Elife. 2015; 4
Matthews GA, Nieh EH, Vander Weele CM, Halbert SA, Pradhan RV, Yosafat AS, Glober GF, 
Izadmehr EM, Thomas RE, Lacy GD, et al. Dorsal Raphe Dopamine Neurons Represent the 
Experience of Social Isolation. Cell. 2016; 164:617–631. [PubMed: 26871628] 
Montgomery KC. The relation between fear induced by novel stimulation and exploratory behavior. 
Journal of comparative and physiological psychology. 1955; 48:254–260. [PubMed: 13252152] 
Navarro M, Olney JJ, Burnham NW, Mazzone CM, Lowery-Gionta EG, Pleil KE, Kash TL, Thiele TE. 
Lateral Hypothalamus GABAergic Neurons Modulate Consummatory Behaviors Regardless of the 
Caloric Content or Biological Relevance of the Consumed Stimuli. Neuropsychopharmacology. 
2015
Nieh EH, Matthews GA, Allsop SA, Presbrey KN, Leppla CA, Wichmann R, Neve R, Wildes CP, Tye 
KM. Decoding Neural Circuits that Control Compulsive Sucrose Seeking. Cell. 2015; 160:528–
541. [PubMed: 25635460] 
Burnett et al.
Page 15
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Nieh EH, Vander Weele CM, Matthews GA, Presbrey KN, Wichmann R, Leppla CA, Izadmehr EM, 
Tye KM. Inhibitory Input from the Lateral Hypothalamus to the Ventral Tegmental Area 
Disinhibits Dopamine Neurons and Promotes Behavioral Activation. Neuron. 2016; 90:1286–
1298. [PubMed: 27238864] 
Niesink RJ, van Ree JM. Short-term isolation increases social interactions of male rats: a parametric 
analysis. Physiology & behavior. 1982; 29:819–825. [PubMed: 7156221] 
Oka Y, Ye M, Zuker CS. Thirst driving and suppressing signals encoded by distinct neural populations 
in the brain. Nature. 2015; 520:349–352. [PubMed: 25624099] 
Padilla SL, Qiu J, Soden ME, Sanz E, Nestor CC, Barker FD, Quintana A, Zweifel LS, Ronnekleiv 
OK, Kelly MJ, et al. Agouti-related peptide neural circuits mediate adaptive behaviors in the 
starved state. Nature neuroscience. 2016; 19:734–741. [PubMed: 27019015] 
Rossi M, Kim MS, Morgan DG, Small CJ, Edwards CM, Sunter D, Abusnana S, Goldstone AP, 
Russell SH, Stanley SA, et al. A C-terminal fragment of Agouti-related protein increases feeding 
and antagonizes the effect of alpha-melanocyte stimulating hormone in vivo. Endocrinology. 1998; 
139:4428–4431. [PubMed: 9751529] 
Saunders BT, Robinson TE. The role of dopamine in the accumbens core in the expression of 
Pavlovian-conditioned responses. Eur J Neurosci. 2012; 36:2521–2532. [PubMed: 22780554] 
Sherington, C. The Integrative Action of the Nervous System. New Haven, Conn: Yale Univ. Press; 
1906. 
Siegel PS, Talantis BS. Water intake as a function of privation interval when food is withheld. Journal 
of comparative and physiological psychology. 1950; 43:62–65. [PubMed: 15404696] 
Sih A. Optimal behavior: can foragers balance two conflicting demands? Science. 1980; 210:1041–
1043. [PubMed: 17797495] 
Silva BA, Mattucci C, Krzywkowski P, Murana E, Illarionova A, Grinevich V, Canteras NS, Ragozzino 
D, Gross CT. Independent hypothalamic circuits for social and predator fear. Nature neuroscience. 
2013; 16:1731–1733. [PubMed: 24212674] 
Stamatakis AM, Sparta DR, Jennings JH, McElligott ZA, Decot H, Stuber GD. Amygdala and bed 
nucleus of the stria terminalis circuitry: Implications for addiction-related behaviors. 
Neuropharmacology. 2014; 76(Pt B):320–328. [PubMed: 23752096] 
Stanley BG, Leibowitz SF. Neuropeptide Y injected in the paraventricular hypothalamus: a powerful 
stimulant of feeding behavior. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America. 1985; 82:3940–3943. [PubMed: 3858854] 
Steculorum SM, Ruud J, Karakasilioti I, Backes H, Engstrom Ruud L, Timper K, Hess ME, 
Tsaousidou E, Mauer J, Vogt MC, et al. AgRP Neurons Control Systemic Insulin Sensitivity via 
Myostatin Expression in Brown Adipose Tissue. Cell. 2016; 165:125–138. [PubMed: 27015310] 
Sternson SM. Hypothalamic survival circuits: blueprints for purposive behaviors. Neuron. 2013; 
77:810–824. [PubMed: 23473313] 
Stratford TR, Kelley AE. GABA in the nucleus accumbens shell participates in the central regulation 
of feeding behavior. The Journal of neuroscience: the official journal of the Society for 
Neuroscience. 1997; 17:4434–4440. [PubMed: 9151760] 
Takahashi KA, Cone RD. Fasting induces a large, leptin-dependent increase in the intrinsic action 
potential frequency of orexigenic arcuate nucleus neuropeptide Y/Agouti-related protein neurons. 
Endocrinology. 2005; 146:1043–1047. [PubMed: 15591135] 
Van Loo PL, Van de Weerd HA, Van Zutphen LF, Baumans V. Preference for social contact versus 
environmental enrichment in male laboratory mice. Lab Anim. 2004; 38:178–188. [PubMed: 
15070458] 
Verplanck WS, Hayes JR. Eating and drinking as a function of maintenance schedule. Journal of 
comparative and physiological psychology. 1953; 46:327–333. [PubMed: 13109046] 
Wang F, Kessels HW, Hu H. The mouse that roared: neural mechanisms of social hierarchy. Trends 
Neurosci. 2014; 37:674–682. [PubMed: 25160682] 
Wu Q, Lemus MB, Stark R, Bayliss JA, Reichenbach A, Lockie SH, Andrews ZB. The temporal 
pattern of cfos activation in hypothalamic, cortical, and brainstem nuclei in response to fasting and 
refeeding in male mice. Endocrinology. 2014; 155:840–853. [PubMed: 24424063] 
Burnett et al.
Page 16
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Yang CF, Shah NM. Representing sex in the brain, one module at a time. Neuron. 2014; 82:261–278. 
[PubMed: 24742456] 
Yang H, Yang J, Xi W, Hao S, Luo B, He X, Zhu L, Lou H, Yu YQ, Xu F, et al. Laterodorsal 
tegmentum interneuron subtypes oppositely regulate olfactory cue-induced innate fear. Nature 
neuroscience. 2016; 19:283–289. [PubMed: 26727549] 
Yapici N, Zimmer M, Domingos AI. Cellular and molecular basis of decision-making. EMBO Rep. 
2014; 15:1023–1035. [PubMed: 25239948] 
Burnett et al.
Page 17
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. ARCAgRP neural activation directs biased caloric consumption (See also Figure S1)
Physiological or ARCAgRP-mediated hunger significantly enhanced (A) homecage 
consumption of grain and sucrose, but not saccharin pellets, (B) total number of exploratory 
head dips and (C) foraging-based consumption of grain pellets in a hole-board apparatus, 
compared to sated controls. (D) Schematic of Y-maze used to condition mice to associate 
paired arm with a food reward. (E) All groups of mice revealed unbiased distribution 
comparable to chance pre-conditioning. (F) All groups of mice revealed biased distribution 
toward the paired arm statistically different to chance post-conditioning. (G) Physiological 
or ARCAgRP-mediated hunger revealed biased distribution toward the conditioned (paired) 
arm statistically different to chance while sated mice revealed unbiased distribution 
comparable to chance during testing. Error bars represent mean +/− SEM. •p < 0.05. ••p < 
0.01,•••p < 0.001,••••p < 0.0001.
Burnett et al.
Page 18
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. ARCAgRP neural activation influences water intake (See also Figure S2)
(A) Physiological or ARCAgRP-mediated hunger failed to elicit water intake in the object 
condition but significantly elicited water intake in the food condition compared to sated 
controls when animals had ad lib access to water pre-experiment, (B) an effect correlated to 
total food intake. (C) Physiological or ARCAgRP-mediated hunger significantly decreased 
water intake in the object condition compared to sated controls when animals were water 
restricted pre-experiment. All groups of water-restricted animals exhibited comparable water 
intake in the food condition, (D) an effect correlated to total food intake. (E–F) 
Physiological or ARCAgRP-mediated hunger enhanced food intake in both ad lib and water 
Burnett et al.
Page 19
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 restricted conditions compared to sated controls. Error bars represent mean +/− SEM. •p < 
0.05. ••p < 0.01,•••p < 0.001,••••p < 0.0001.
Burnett et al.
Page 20
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. ARCAgRP neural stimulation suppresses anxiety-like behavior toward food (See also 
Figures S3–4)
(A–B) Physiological or ARCAgRP-mediated hunger significantly enhanced open field center 
zone duration time in both object and food conditions compared to sated controls. (C) 
Increased center zone duration time during the food condition was related to levels of food 
intake. (D–E) Physiological or ARCAgRP-mediated hunger significantly enhanced big open 
field center zone duration time in the food condition, but failed to do so in the object 
condition, compared to sated controls. (F) Increased center zone duration time during the 
food condition was related to levels of food intake. (G–H) Physiological or ARCAgRP-
mediated hunger significantly enhanced zero maze open arm center zone duration time in 
the food condition, but failed to do so in the object condition, compared to sated controls. (I) 
Increased open arm center zone duration time during the food condition was related to levels 
Burnett et al.
Page 21
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 of food intake. Error bars represent mean +/− SEM. •p < 0.05. ••p < 0.01,•••p < 0.001,••••p < 
0.0001.
Burnett et al.
Page 22
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. ARCAgRP neural activation suppresses TMT-induced fear responses toward food (See 
also Figure S5)
(A, D) Schematic of two-chamber apparatus (water or TMT). Within-subject analyses 
revealed that TMT odor significantly (B) decreased total distance traveled, (C) increased 
total amount of time spent immobile and (E) reduced time spent in both the paired chamber 
and designated water/TMT zone, compared to a neutral water stimulus. (F–H) Physiological 
or ARCAgRP-mediated hunger significantly shifted chamber preference from the neutral side 
toward the TMT side and enhanced TMT zone duration in the food condition, but failed to 
do so in the object condition, compared to sated controls. Error bars represent mean +/− 
SEM. •p < 0.05. ••p < 0.01,•••p < 0.001,••••p < 0.0001.
Burnett et al.
Page 23
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. ARCAgRP neural activation competes with innate social drive in the presence of food 
(See also Figure S6)
(A–C). Physiological or ARCAgRP-mediated hunger significantly shifted chamber 
preference from the receptive female side toward the food side and enhanced food zone 
duration time in the food condition, but failed to do so in the object condition, compared to 
sated controls. (D–F). Physiological or ARCAgRP-mediated hunger significantly shifted 
chamber preference from the juvenile male side toward the food side and enhanced food 
zone duration time in the food condition, but failed to do so in the object condition, 
compared to sated controls. Error bars represent mean +/− SEM. •p < 0.05. ••p < 0.01,•••p < 
0.001,••••p < 0.0001.
Burnett et al.
Page 24
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. ARCAgRP neural activity responds to food and conspecifics in hungry mice (See also 
Figure S7)
Normalized representative in vivo calcium imaging traces showing GCaMP (A, D, G, J) or 
GFP (M, P, S, V) fluorescent signal fluctuations through the presentation of 
baseline→stimuli→removal of stimuli→food. Plots showing calcium signal (B, E, H, K) of 
GFP (N, Q, T, W) changes between object, stimuli (water, TMT, female, or juvenile male), 
and food. (C, F, I, L) Calcium levels were significantly decreased upon the presentation of 
food, and increased upon the presentation of conspecifics, but not water or TMT. No 
changes were detected in GFP controls (O, R, U, X). Unpaired t-test with equal SD revealed 
Burnett et al.
Page 25
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 significant differences between GCaMP and GFP signals in response to food (p=0.0034), 
female (p=0.0423) and male (p=0.0486). Error bars represent mean +/− SEM. *p < 0.05.
Burnett et al.
Page 26
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 7. ARCAgRP neural activity increases in response to initial social contact
(A, D) Normalized sample traces of calcium signals during bouts of interaction with 
different stimuli in hungry and sated mice, respectively. (B, E) Population z-score plots 
showing the averaged response to the first interaction bout in hungry and sated mice, 
respectively. (C, F) ARCAgRP neurons showed a significantly greater increase in activity 
upon first contact with conspecifics, compared with response to a non-salient object in 
hungry and sated mice, respectively (G) Representative traces of 4 repeated exposure to an 
empty grid isolation cage or receptive female, respectively. (H) Comparison of area under 
the curve of z-score between each exposure. Error bars represent mean +/− SEM. *p < 0.05.
Burnett et al.
Page 27
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
