 Financing U.S. Graduate Medical Education: A Policy Position Paper of
the Alliance for Academic Internal Medicine and the American College
of Physicians
Renee Butkus, BA; Susan Lane, MD; Alwin F. Steinmann, MD; Kelly J. Caverzagie, MD; Thomas G. Tape, MD; Susan T. Hingle, MD;
Darilyn V. Moyer, MD; and the Alliance for Academic Internal Medicine and American College of Physicians Graduate Medical
Education Task Forces, for the Health and Public Policy Committee of the American College of Physicians*
In this position paper, the Alliance for Academic Internal Medi-
cine and the American College of Physicians examine the state
of graduate medical education (GME) financing in the United
States and recent proposals to reform GME funding. They make
a series of recommendations to reform the current funding sys-
tem to better align GME with the needs of the nation's health
care workforce. These recommendations include using Medi-
care GME funds to meet policy goals and to ensure an adequate
supply of physicians, a proper specialty mix, and appropriate
training sites; spreading the costs of financing GME across the
health care system; evaluating the true cost of training a resident
and establishing a single per-resident amount; increasing trans-
parency and innovation; and ensuring that primary care resi-
dents receive training in well-functioning ambulatory settings
that are financially supported for their training roles.
Ann Intern Med. 2016;165:134-137. doi:10.7326/M15-2917
www.annals.org
For author affiliations, see end of text.
This article was published at www.annals.org on 3 May 2016.
G
raduate medical education (GME) is the process by
which graduate medical students become compe-
tent practitioners in a particular field of medicine. The
GME programs, known as residencies and fellowships,
allow trainees to develop the knowledge, skills, and at-
titudes required for independent practice. Therefore,
GME plays a major role in addressing the nation's work-
force needs because it is the ultimate determinant of
physician output. Recognizing the important public
good GME provides to the nation and, by extension, its
help in ensuring needed care to patients, the federal
government is the largest explicit provider of GME
funding, contributing nearly $15 billion annually. Most
of the government's funding comes from Medicare.
Currently, the types and numbers of residents trained
in teaching hospitals are largely determined by the
staffing needs of the particular hospital and the number
of funded positions established by a “cap” in the Bal-
anced Budget Act of 1997, which froze the number of
funded GME positions at 1996 levels for existing train-
ing programs. Although hospitals that have never been
assigned a resident cap can start new programs and
have 5 years to establish one, the existing caps on the
current number of Medicare-funded GME positions
available make it impossible to fund the number of
GME training positions necessary to slow or reverse the
growing shortage of primary care physicians and other
specialists. With sharply increasing numbers of gradu-
ating allopathic and osteopathic medical students and
looming physician workforce shortfalls, especially in
primary care, the current bottleneck in the physician
supply chain is the fixed number of funded GME posi-
tions for residency training (1).
Much attention has been focused on Medicare's
support of GME. Its costs are recognized by Medicare
under 2 mechanisms: direct GME (DGME) payments to
hospitals for residents' stipends, faculty salaries, admin-
istrative costs, and institutional overhead; and an indi-
rect medical education (IME) adjustment developed to
compensate teaching hospitals for the higher costs as-
sociated with teaching, the involvement of residents in
See also:
Web-Only
Appendix: Full Position Paper
* This paper, written by Renee Butkus, BA; Susan Lane, MD; Alwin F. Steinmann, MD; Kelly J. Caverzagie, MD; Thomas G. Tape, MD; Susan T. Hingle, MD;
Darilyn V. Moyer, MD; and the Alliance for Academic Internal Medicine and American College of Physicians Graduate Medical Education Task Forces, was
developed for the Health and Public Policy Committee of the American College of Physicians. Individuals who served on the Health and Public Policy
Committee from initiation of the project until its approval were Darilyn V. Moyer, MD (Chair)†; Douglas M. DeLong, MD (Vice Chair)†; Sue S. Bornstein, MD‡;
James F. Bush, MD‡; Gregory A. Hood, MD‡; Carrie A. Horwitch, MD‡; Gregory C. Kane, MD†; Robert H. Lohr, MD‡; Kenneth E. Olive, MD‡; Shakaib U.
Rehman, MD‡; Micah Beachy, DO‡; Mitch Biermann‡; and Fatima Syed, MD‡. Members of the Alliance for Academic Internal Medicine Graduate Medical
Education Task Force include Kelly J. Caverzagie, MD (Co-Chair)†; Susan Lane, MD (Co-Chair)†; D. Craig Brater, MD‡; Bergitta E. Cotroneo, BA‡; John
Donnelly, MD†; Jeffrey Jaeger, MD†; Heather S. Laird-Fick, MD†; John P. Moriarty, MD†; Darilyn V. Moyer, MD†; Niraj Sharma, MD‡; Alwin F. Steinmann, MD†;
Sara L. Wallach, MD‡; and Richard M. Wardrop III, MD, PhD†. Members of the American College of Physicians Graduate Medical Education Task Force include
Thomas G. Tape, MD (Co-Chair)†; Darilyn V. Moyer, MD (Co-Chair)†; Michael S. Bronze, MD†; Thomas G. Cooney, MD†; Douglas M. DeLong, MD†; Gustavo
R. Heudebert, MD†; Susan T. Hingle, MD†; Gregory C. Kane, MD†; Susan Lane, MD†; Mark A. Levine, MD†; Wickliffe J. Many Jr., MD†; Lawrence G. Smith,
MD†; and Sara L. Wallach, MD‡. Approved by the ACP Health and Public Policy Committee in October 2015 and the ACP Board of Regents and the AAIM
Board of Directors in January 2016.
† Author.
‡ Nonauthor contributor.
POSITION PAPER
Annals of Internal Medicine
134 © 2016 American College of Physicians
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 patient care, and the severity of illness of patients who
require the specialized services that teaching hospitals
provide. In a 2010 report to Congress, the Medicare
Payment Advisory Commission stated that 50% of the
IME adjustment represents overpayment to hospitals
and recommended using those funds to establish a
performance-based GME program. Since then, IME has
been frequently identified as an opportunity for deficit
reduction. Calls for increased transparency and ac-
countability for training an adequate supply of physi-
cians with the skills necessary to meet the nation's
health care needs have been made. In 2014, the Insti-
tute of Medicine (IOM) released a report recommend-
ing that Congress overhaul the federal financing and
governance of GME, including the creation of new in-
frastructure for fund distribution and research into im-
proved payment models. Many applauded the IOM for
its call for transformation and innovation in GME, but
the report also sparked criticism. Although it called for
maintaining Medicare's current level of support for
GME, the net effect would be a reduction in payments
for existing GME programs because the funds would
not only support 2 new federal entities and probably
absorb the Children's Hospitals GME Payment Program
costs, they would also be distributed to facilitate
innovation.
Furthermore, the report did not recognize the
looming physician shortage, especially in primary care,
declaring that there are “no credible data” to support
this claim (2). Although workforce projections are un-
likely to precisely predict shortages, trends can guide
determination and preparation for future challenges. In
fact, several projections indicate a shortfall of physi-
cians in both primary and specialty care (3–18). The
IOM rejected the evidence of existing and looming
shortages, stating that these projections often assume
historic provider–patient ratios, and called for a more
coordinated, affordable, and patient-centered health
care system through expanded roles for advanced
practice clinicians, redesign of care delivery, and other
innovations in health care delivery (including telehealth
and electronic communication). Although such a sys-
tem would be ideal, transformation will take time and
making future workforce decisions based on a model
that has not been achieved or tested would be unwise.
An adequate workforce to assist in the transition to, and
training of, physicians in the model health delivery sys-
tem to which the nation aspires will also be necessary.
In 2010 and 2011, the Alliance for Academic Inter-
nal Medicine (AAIM) and the American College of Phy-
sicians (ACP) individually called for GME reform and
alignment of GME with the nation's health care work-
force needs (19, 20). Since then, nearly 50 billion Medi-
care dollars have been spent to train physicians without
consideration of those needs. Our organizations, with a
combined membership of 151 627 internists, internal
medicine subspecialists, medical students, residents,
and fellows, feel strongly that sufficient GME funding
and a strategic approach to physician workforce pro-
jections (as they relate to GME financing) is critical. The
imperative of deficit reduction also suggests that fund-
ing for GME could be more effectively targeted and
prioritized to fields with the greatest and most critical
needs, with the goal of training more physicians to
meet national workforce needs.
The GME system should ensure that the nation has
an adequate supply of the types of physicians needed
to treat patients; that they enter the workforce with the
knowledge, skills, and attitudes required to provide the
highest quality care; and that all Americans have access
to such care. The nation will not be able to expand
access, improve outcomes, and decrease expenditures
without a national health care workforce policy and the
appropriate direction of funding to achieve these
goals.
METHODS
This policy paper was drafted by the AAIM and
ACP Graduate Medical Education Task Forces for the
ACP Health and Public Policy Committee, which is
charged with addressing issues that affect the health
care of the U.S. public and the practice of internal med-
icine and its subspecialties. The authors reviewed avail-
able studies, reports, policy documents, and surveys on
GME from PubMed, Google Scholar, Web sites, and
other sources. Recommendations were based on re-
viewed literature and input from the ACP Board of Gov-
ernors, Board of Regents, Council of Early Career Phy-
sicians, Council of Resident/Fellow Members, Council
of Student Members, and Council of Subspecialty Soci-
eties; and the AAIM Advocacy Committee, Education
Committee, and Board of Directors. The policy paper
and related recommendations were reviewed and ap-
proved by the ACP Health and Public Policy Committee
in October 2015 and the ACP Board of Regents and the
AAIM Board of Directors in January 2016. Financial
support for the development of this position paper
comes exclusively from the ACP operating budget.
AAIM AND ACP POSITION STATEMENTS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS
The following statements represent the official pol-
icy positions and recommendations of the AAIM and
ACP. The rationale for each is provided in the full
position paper (see the Appendix, available at www
.annals.org).
1. The federal government should maintain its com-
mitment to GME. Payment of Medicare GME funds
should be linked to the ability of the GME system to
meet the nation's health care workforce needs. Pay-
ments should be used to meet policy goals to ensure
adequate supply, specialty mix, and training sites.
2. All payers should be required to contribute to a
financing pool to support residencies that meet the na-
tion's policy goals related to supply, specialty mix, and
training sites.
3. A thorough evaluation of the true cost of training
physicians is required before any decisions are made
about how GME funds are distributed.
Financing U.S. Graduate Medical Education
POSITION PAPER
www.annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 165 No. 2 • 19 July 2016 135
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 4. Direct GME and IME should be combined into a
single, more functional payment program that is de-
signed to meet the needs of patients and populations.
5. Graduate medical education funding should be
transparently allocated to ensure that funds are appro-
priately designated toward activities related to the edu-
cational mission of teaching and training residents and
fellows. Graduate medical education funds should fol-
low trainees into all training settings, rather than being
linked to the location of service relative to the sponsor-
ing institutions.
6. Graduate medical education caps should be
lifted as needed to permit training an adequate number
of primary care physicians, including internal medicine
specialists, and physicians in other specialties facing
shortages, including internal medicine–pediatrics and
many internal medicine subspecialties.
7. The concept of a performance-based GME pay-
ment system is worth exploring. Such a system should
be thoughtfully developed and considered in a deliber-
ate way to ensure that goals are achieved without de-
stabilizing the system of physician training. We recom-
mend the following:
a. Measures should be developed by appropriate
stakeholders, including physicians involved in GME
training.
b. All measures must be carefully developed and
thoroughly evaluated before they are implemented.
c. Institutions must be allowed adequate time to
make necessary changes to their training programs be-
fore financial incentives are introduced.
d. Revised GME funding should account for the
costs of transitioning into a performance-based GME
system, and once done, clear-cut financial transparency
and incentives must be delineated.
e. The performance measures should be evidence-
based and align with the Accreditation Council for
Graduate Medical Education (ACGME) requirements.
The core mission of individual programs should be con-
sidered. Producing a certain number of physicians
trained in a certain specialty or subspecialty should not
be a specific performance metric.
f. A careful study of unintended consequences
should be done to ensure that programs are not unfairly
disadvantaged.
g. Regular evaluations of the measures should be
implemented
to
avoid
adverse
unintended
conse-
quences, ensure that the goals of implementing such a
system are achieved, and confirm that the measures re-
main relevant over time.
8. Pilot projects should be introduced to evaluate
potential
changes
to
GME
funding,
including
a
performance-based GME payment system, and to pro-
mote innovation in GME by providing training programs
with the resources necessary to experiment with innova-
tive training models. Pilot projects should not be funded
using existing GME funding.
9.
Internal
medicine
and
internal
medicine–
pediatrics residents should receive primary care training
in well-functioning ambulatory settings that are finan-
cially supported for their training roles. Barriers should
be removed to encourage programs to train residents in
nonhospital settings, promote innovation in training,
and facilitate clinical learning experiences that promote
primary care.
CONCLUSION
A concerted effort must be made to ensure that the
nation has an adequate supply of the types of physi-
cians needed to treat patients, that they enter the work-
force with the knowledge and skills required to provide
the highest quality care in an ever-evolving delivery sys-
tem, and that all Americans have access to such care.
Graduate medical education funding must be reformed
to include all health care payers and to ensure that pay-
ments better correlate with the funds they are intended
to cover, address physician workforce needs, and pro-
vide an optimal training environment so that residents
gain the skills necessary to care for the needs of
society.
From the American College of Physicians, Washington, DC;
Saint
Joseph
Hospital,
Denver,
Colorado;
University
of
Nebraska
Medical
Center,
Omaha,
Nebraska;
Southern
Illinois University School of Medicine, Springfield, Illinois;
Temple University, University of Pennsylvania, and Thomas
Jefferson
University,
Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania;
Cristiana
Care Health System, Newark, Delaware; Michigan State Uni-
versity, Lansing, Missouri; Yale–New Haven Hospital, New Ha-
ven, Connecticut; Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts; St. Francis Medical Center, Trenton, New Jer-
sey; University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina;
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma
City, Oklahoma; Oregon Health & Science University, Port-
land, Oregon; Bassett Healthcare Network, Cooperstown,
New York; University of Alabama at Birmingham School of
Medicine, Birmingham, Alabama; University of Vermont Med-
ical Center, Burlington, Vermont; and Northwell Health, Great
Neck, New York.
Financial Support: Financial support for the development of
this guideline comes exclusively from the ACP operating
budget.
Disclosures: Dr. Lohr reports being a member of the ACP
Board of Regents. Dr. Tape reports personal fees from ACP,
UnitedHealthcare, and the University of Nebraska Medical
Center outside the submitted work. Dr. Wallach reports stocks
(Pfizer) outside of the submitted work. Authors not named
here have disclosed no conflicts of interest. Disclosures can
be viewed at www.acponline.org/authors/icmje/ConflictOf
InterestForms.do?msNum=M15-2917.
Requests for Single Reprints: Renee Butkus, BA, American
College
of
Physicians,
25
Massachusetts
Avenue
NW,
Suite 700, Washington, DC 2001; e-mail, RButkus@acponline
.org.
Current author addresses and author contributions are avail-
able at www.annals.org.
POSITION PAPER
Financing U.S. Graduate Medical Education
136 Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 165 No. 2 • 19 July 2016
www.annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 References
1. Kane GC, Grever MR, Kennedy JI, Kuzma MA, Saltzman AR, Wi-
ernik PH, et al. The anticipated physician shortage: meeting the na-
tion's need for physician services. Am J Med. 2009;122:1156-62.
[PMID: 19958898] doi:10.1016/j.amjmed.2009.07.010
2. Eden J, Berwick D, Wilensky G, eds; Committee on the Gover-
nance and Financing of Graduate Medical Education; Board on
Health Care Services; Institute of Medicine. Graduate Medical Edu-
cation That Meets the Nation's Health Needs. Institute of Medicine.
Washington, DC: National Academies Pr; 2014.
3. Colwill JM, Cultice JM, Kruse RL. Will generalist physician supply
meet demands of an increasing and aging population? Health Aff
(Millwood). 2008;27:w232-41. [PMID: 18445642] doi:10.1377/hlthaff
.27.3.w232
4. Petterson SM, Liaw WR, Phillips RL Jr, Rabin DL, Meyers DS, Ba-
zemore AW. Projecting US primary care physician workforce needs:
2010-2025. Ann Fam Med. 2012;10:503-9. [PMID: 23149526] doi:10
.1370/afm.1431
5. IHS; Association of American Medical Colleges. The complexities
of physician supply and demand: projections from 2013 to 2025:
final report. Washington, DC: Association of American Medical
Colleges; 2015. Accessed at www.aamc.org/download/426242/data
/ihsreportdownload.pdf on 21 April 2016.
6. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; Health Resources
and Services Administration; National Center for Health Workforce
Analysis. Projecting the supply and demand for primary care practi-
tioners through 2020. Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services; 2013. Accessed at http://bhpr.hrsa.gov/health
workforce/supplydemand/usworkforce/primarycare
on
21
April
2016.
7. Center for Health Workforce Studies. Forecasting allergy and im-
munology physician supply and demand through 2024. Rensselaer,
NY: Center for Health Workforce Studies; 2006.
8. Fye WB. Cardiology workforce: a shortage, not a surplus. Health
Aff
(Millwood).
2004;Suppl
Web
Exclusives:W4-64-6.
[PMID:
15451974]
9. Duke E; Health Resources and Services Administration. Report to
Congress: the critical care workforce: a study of the supply and de-
mand for critical care physicians. Rockville, MD: Health Resources
and Services Administration; 2006.
10. American College of Emergency Physicians. America's emer-
gency care environment: a state-by-state report card: 2014 edition.
Irving, TX: American College of Emergency Physicians; 2015.
Accessed
at
www.emreportcard.org/uploadedFiles/EMReport
Card2014.pdf 10 September 2015.
11. Rizza RA, Vigersky RA, Rodbard HW, Ladenson PW, Young WF
Jr, Surks MI, et al. A model to determine workforce needs for endo-
crinologists in the United States until 2020. Endocr Pract. 2003;9:
210-9. [PMID: 12917063]
12. Lynge DC, Larson EH, Thompson MJ, Rosenblatt RA, Hart LG. A
longitudinal analysis of the general surgery workforce in the United
States, 1981-2005. Arch Surg. 2008;143:345-50. [PMID: 18427021]
doi:10.1001/archsurg.143.4.345
13. The Donald W. Reynolds Foundation and the John A. Hartford
Foundation. Grantee's final progress report summary: the status of
geriatrics workforce study. New York: American Geriatrics Society;
2009.
Accessed
at
www.americangeriatrics.org/files/documents
/gwps/ADGAP%20Final%20Report,%20Phase%20III,%202006
-2009%20for%20web.pdf on 10 August 2015.
14. Erikson C, Salsberg E, Forte G, Bruinooge S, Goldstein M. Future
supply and demand for oncologists: challenges to assuring access to
oncology services. J Oncol Pract. 2007;3:79-86. [PMID: 20859376]
doi:10.1200/JOP.0723601
15. Deal CL, Hooker R, Harrington T, Birnbaum N, Hogan P, Bouch-
ery E, et al. The United States rheumatology workforce: supply and
demand,
2005-2025.
Arthritis
Rheum.
2007;56:722-9.
[PMID:
17328042]
16. Scully JH, Wilk JE. Selected characteristics and data of psychia-
trists in the United States, 2001-2002. Acad Psychiatry. 2003;27:247-
51. [PMID: 14754847]
17. Schubert A, Eckhout G Jr, Tremper K. An updated view of the
national anesthesia personnel shortfall. Anesth Analg. 2003;96:207-
14, table of contents. [PMID: 12505954]
18. Kim, WJ. Child and adolescent psychiatry workforce: a critical
shortage and national challenge. Academic Psychiatry. 2003;27:277-
82.
19. Alliance for Academic Internal Medicine. Principles for Medicare
GME reform. Alexandria, VA: Alliance for Academic Internal Medi-
cine; 2010.
20. Butkus R; American College of Physicians. Aligning GME policy
with the nation's health care workforce needs. Philadelphia: Ameri-
can College of Physicians; 2011.
Financing U.S. Graduate Medical Education
POSITION PAPER
www.annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 165 No. 2 • 19 July 2016 137
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 Current Author Addresses: Ms. Butkus: American College of
Physicians, 25 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Suite 700, Wash-
ington, DC 2001.
Dr. Lane: Stony Brook Medicine, 101 Nicolls Road, Stony
Brook, NY 11794.
Dr. Steinmann: Saint Joseph Hospital, 1960 North Ogden
Street, Suite 300, Denver, CO 80218.
Drs. Caverzagie and Tape: Department of Internal Medicine,
University of Nebraska Medical Center, 42nd Street and Emile
Street, Omaha, NE 68198.
Dr. Hingle: Southern Illinois University School of Medicine,
801 North Rutledge Street, Mail Code 9628, Springfield, IL
62794.
Dr. Moyer: Department of Medicine, Temple University, 3401
North Broad Street, 8 Parkinson Pavilion, Philadelphia, PA
19140.
Dr. Donnelly: Christiana Care Health System, John H. Ammon
Medical Education Center, 4475 Ogletown-Stanton Road,
Suite 2E70, Newark, DE 19718.
Dr. Jaeger: University of Pennsylvania, 3701 Market Street, 7th
Floor, Suite 760, Philadelphia, PA 19104.
Dr. Laird-Flick: Michigan State University, 788 Service Road,
B301 Clinical Center, East Lansing, MI 48824.
Dr. Moriarty: Yale–New Haven Hospital, 1450 Chapel Street,
New Haven, CT 06511.
Dr. Sharma: Brigham and Women's Hospital, 75 Francis
Street, Mail Code PBB-B416, Boston, MA 02115.
Dr. Wallach: St. Francis Medical Center, 601 Hamilton Ave-
nue, Trenton, NJ 08629.
Dr. Wardrop: Department of Pediatrics, University of North
Carolina, 260 MacNider Building, CB 7220, Chapel Hill, NC
27599.
Dr. Bronze: Department of Internal Medicine, University of
Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, 920 Stanton Young Boule-
vard, PO Box 26901, WP1140, Oklahoma City, OK 73126.
Dr. Cooney: Department of Medicine, Oregon Health & Sci-
ence University, Mail Code OP30, 3181 Southwest Sam Jack-
son Park Road, Portland, OR 97239.
Dr. DeLong: Bassett Healthcare Network, 1 Atwell Road, Coo-
perstown, NY 13326.
Dr. Heudebert: University of Alabama at Birmingham School
of Medicine, Faculty Office Tower Room 730, 510 20th Street
South, Birmingham, AL 35294.
Dr. Kane: Thomas Jefferson University, Sidney Kimmel Medi-
cal College, 1025 Walnut Street, Philadelphia, PA 19107.
Dr. Levine: University of Vermont Medical Center, 111
Colchester Avenue, Burlington, VT 05401.
Dr. Many: University of Alabama at Birmingham School of
Medicine, 2119 East South Boulevard, Suite 304, Montgom-
ery, AL 36116.
Dr. Smith: Northwell Health, 145 Community Drive, Great
Neck, NY 11021.
Author Contributions: Conception and design: R. Butkus, K.J.
Caverzagie, D.M. DeLong, G.R. Heudebert, S.T. Hingle, G.C.
Kane, H.S. Laird-Fick, S.W. Lane, M.A. Levine, J.P. Moriarty,
D.V. Moyer, N. Sharma, L.G. Smith, T.G. Tape.
Analysis and interpretation of the data: M.S. Bronze, R. Butkus,
K.J. Caverzagie, T.G. Cooney, G.R. Heudebert, S.W. Lane,
M.A. Levine, J.P. Moriarty, D.V. Moyer, S.L. Wallach.
Drafting of the article: R. Butkus, G.R. Heudebert, S.T. Hingle,
G.C. Kane, H.S. Laird-Fick, S.W. Lane, M.A. Levine, J.P. Mori-
arty, D.V. Moyer, N. Sharma, L.G. Smith, A. Steinmann, T.G.
Tape.
Critical revision for important intellectual content: R. Butkus,
K.J. Caverzagie, T.G. Cooney, D.M. DeLong, G.R. Heudebert,
S.T. Hingle, J.R. Jaeger, G.C. Kane, H.S. Laird-Fick, S.W. Lane,
M.A. Levine, W.J. Many, J.P. Moriarty, D.V. Moyer, N. Sharma,
T.G. Tape, S.L. Wallach, R.M. Wardrop.
Final approval of the article: M.S. Bronze, R. Butkus, K.J. Cav-
erzagie, T.G. Cooney, D.M. DeLong, J. Donnelly, G.R. Heude-
bert, S.T. Hingle, J.R. Jaeger, G.C. Kane, H.S. Laird-Fick, S.W.
Lane, M.A. Levine, W.J. Many, J.P. Moriarty, D.V. Moyer, N.
Sharma, L.G. Smith, A. Steinmann, T.G. Tape, S.L. Wallach,
R.M. Wardrop.
Administrative, technical, or logistic support: R. Butkus.
Collection and assembly of data: M.S. Bronze, R. Butkus, S.T.
Hingle, S.W. Lane, J.P. Moriarty, D.V. Moyer.
APPENDIX: FINANCING U.S. GRADUATE
MEDICAL EDUCATION: POLICY POSITION OF
THE ALLIANCE FOR ACADEMIC INTERNAL
MEDICINE AND THE AMERICAN COLLEGE OF
PHYSICIANS
Background
GME in the United States
Graduate medical education is formal clinical train-
ing provided by approved residency and fellowship
programs to physicians who have received an MD or a
DO degree (or an international equivalent). It involves a
3- to 7-year training period after completion of medical
school in which physicians are directly supervised as
they progressively assume more responsibility for pa-
tient care. This training is mandatory for certification. In
the United States, training programs must be accred-
ited by the ACGME or approved by the Commission on
Osteopathic College Accreditation. Osteopathic pro-
grams are in the process of transitioning to accredita-
tion by the ACGME. Teaching hospitals generally serve
as the sponsors and main training sites for most
residency programs, although training can occur in
other inpatient and ambulatory settings in various
community-based settings.
In the 2013–2014 academic year, 120 108 residents
were enrolled in ACGME-accredited residency pro-
grams. During this time, 693 institutions sponsored res-
idency programs, of which 377 were considered multi-
site sponsors that sponsored programs in more than 1
specialty or affiliated subspecialties. Internal medicine
had 24% of the total number of residents enrolled in
these residency programs, with 11% in family medicine,
8.9% in pediatrics, and 1.9% in internal medicine–pedi-
atrics. Of note, 42% of these internal medicine resi-
dents were international medical graduates (21).
Overview of GME Financing System
Graduate medical education financing is provided
primarily to teaching hospitals from federal and state
Annals of Internal Medicine
www.annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 165 No. 2 • 19 July 2016
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 government payers and indirectly from private payers
through the higher payments negotiated with teaching
hospitals. Although teaching hospitals account for only
6% of the nation's hospitals, they provide 20% of all
U.S. hospital care, 25% of all Medicaid hospitalizations,
and 41% of all hospital charity care (22). The primary
federal sources of GME funding are Medicare, Medic-
aid, the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, the Health
Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) Title VII
health professions programs, the Children's Hospitals
GME Payment Program, and the U.S. Department of
Defense. Other sources include private payers (al-
though this is rarely explicit), philanthropy, and institu-
tional resources.
Medicare.
The largest single explicit financing
source for GME is Medicare. Medicare subsidizes edu-
cation and training for more than 90 000 residents in
more than 1100 hospitals. In 2012, Medicare expenses
associated with GME were approximately $9.6 billion
(2). Such funding is provided to teaching hospitals with
no restrictions on which types of physicians are trained;
however, the number of funded positions has been
capped at 1996 levels by the Balanced Budget Act of
1997. Hospitals that have never been assigned a resi-
dent cap can start new programs and have 5 years to
establish a Medicare cap, which has allowed for a mod-
est expansion of Medicare GME positions.
The costs of GME are recognized by Medicare un-
der 2 mechanisms: DGME payments to hospitals for
residents'
stipends,
faculty
salaries,
administrative
costs, and institutional overhead; and an IME adjust-
ment developed to compensate teaching hospitals for
the higher costs associated with teaching, the involve-
ment of residents in patient care, and the severity of
illness of patients who require the specialized services
that are available in teaching hospitals (Appendix
Figure).
Direct GME payments are based on a hospital-
specific per-resident amount (PRA). The PRA is calcu-
lated by taking the DGME costs incurred by a teaching
hospital during a base period (1984 or 1985) and divid-
ing it by the number of full-time equivalent residents
during that year. The PRA is updated annually for infla-
tion. Payments for primary care residents are slightly
higher because in 1994 and 1995, only their payments
were updated for inflation. In addition, the DGME
amount for training beyond residents' initial board cer-
tification in their first specialty is reduced by 50% (ex-
cept for geriatrics). Medicare capped the number of
residents it supports to the number in a hospital's most
recent cost report period ending on or before 31 De-
cember 1996 as a result of changes made in the Bal-
anced Budget Act of 1997 (23).
Indirect medical education payments are tied to a
hospital's Medicare inpatient volume and case mix
along with its training program size (subject to its resi-
dent cap number). The payments, based on a formula,
are an adjustment to Medicare's inpatient payment
rates and vary based on each hospital's ratio of resi-
dents to beds. The current IME rate is 5.5%. Based on
this rate, the IME adjustment would result in a 5.5%
increase in a teaching hospital's Medicare reimburse-
ment per 0.1 increase in the resident-to-bed ratio (1
resident to 10 beds). Medicare IME payments were
more than double the Medicare DGME payments in
2010 (24).
Appendix Figure. Total Medicare GME funding in 2012.
Total Medicare GME funding (2012)
~$9.6 billion
DGME funding:
~$2.8 billion (29.2%)
IME funding:
~$6.8 billion (70.8%)
DGME funding goes toward
• stipends for residents;
faculty salary;
administrative costs; and
institutional overhead.
•
•
•
IME funding goes toward
• compensation to teaching hospitals;
involvement of residents in patient care;
costs of specialized service for severely ill
patients served in teaching hospitals;
added staff; and
state-of-the-art technology.
•
•
•
•
DGME = direct graduate medical education; GME = graduate medical education; IME = indirect medical education.
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 165 No. 2 • 19 July 2016
www.annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 Medicaid and Other State Support. States can sup-
port GME through their Medicaid programs, although
the amounts and mechanisms of support vary substan-
tially. Medicaid's contribution to GME expenses is
considerable—it comprised an estimated $3.9 billion in
support from federal and state funds in 2012 (2). Med-
icaid GME funding has become extremely vulnerable
due to recent financial constraints in state budgets. A
2012 survey found that 42 states and the District of
Columbia provided GME payments under their Medic-
aid program. Five states reported having recently con-
sidered ending GME Medicaid payments (25). Some
states have dedicated programs to support GME,
whereas others facing shortages have recently in-
creased their support. Maryland has collected money
from private insurance plans to help finance GME since
1974. In 2014, the New Mexico legislature redirected
state Medicaid funds to help open new primary resi-
dency slots in underserved areas of the state (26). Texas
lawmakers granted an additional $30 million ($97 mil-
lion total) for GME in its 2014–2015 state budget (27).
Other Federal Support.
The U.S. Department of
Veterans Affairs funds more than 10 000 resident full-
time equivalent positions ($1.4 billion annually). The
U.S. Department of Defense supports the education
and training of about 3000 residents. The Children's
Hospitals GME Payment Program, administered by
HRSA, provides funds (which have decreased in recent
years to $265 million for the 2015 fiscal year) that sup-
port direct and indirect GME costs at children's teach-
ing hospitals. The Teaching Health Center (THC) GME
program also supports direct and indirect costs of GME
for about 550 residents through HRSA, but unlike other
funding, support from these sources is appropriations-
based (28). Start-up costs for new residency programs,
including those for program directors and residency
coordinators, and facility-related costs, including con-
struction of conference and call rooms, are high; with-
out a guaranteed funding stream, cost and uncertainty
about future appropriations represent a major deter-
rent for THCs. Some Title VII grants administered by
HRSA are used to support residency programs in pri-
mary care and geriatrics; however, funds for these pro-
grams are modest and appropriations-based, which of-
ten makes them vulnerable and unpredictable.
Private Funding.
Graduate medical education is
also supported by private sources, including hospitals,
universities, philanthropy, and industry gifts and grants.
Although the amount is not well-documented, it may
be significant. Private insurers also support GME indi-
rectly through the higher rates they pay to teaching
hospitals than other hospitals. The actual amount is dif-
ficult to estimate because the proportion attributed to
education is not specifically identified in these pay-
ments (29). Despite the 1997 cap by Congress on the
number of Medicare-supported residency positions,
between academic years 2003–2004 and 2012–2013,
the number of trainees increased by 17.5% (from
100 176 to 117 717), indicating that there is substantial
private funding for GME (2). Some of the increase in-
volves Medicare-funded positions, yet the portion
funded privately has changed over time. After a few
years of relative stability following the passage of the
Balanced Budget Act, the number of U.S. trainees grew
by nearly 17 000 positions by 2010, with about 27% of
these being funded by Medicare and 73% being
funded through other sources. By 2013, that number
had grown to more than 23 000 and the percentage
with Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services funding
increased to 46%. This may have to do more with GME-
naive hospitals starting new programs, especially in as-
sociation with newly formed medical schools (30, 31).
Problems With the Current GME Funding
System
Lack of Consideration of Workforce Needs
Graduate medical education funding is not linked
to current or future health care workforce needs. Al-
though Medicare GME funds are intended to help de-
velop the future physician workforce, teaching hospi-
tals are not required to consider local, regional, or
national workforce needs. The types of residents
trained in teaching hospitals are largely determined by
the particular hospital's staffing needs and the number
of funded positions set by the cap in 1997. Despite the
increasing need for primary care physicians, hospitals
have
largely
favored
less
costly,
higher
revenue-
generating
specialty
training
when
adding
GME
positions (32).
The existing caps on the number of Medicare-
funded GME positions available also make it impossi-
ble to fund the number of GME training positions nec-
essary to slow or reverse the growing shortages of
primary care physicians and other specialists. With
sharply increasing numbers of allopathic and osteo-
pathic medical students and looming physician work-
force shortfalls, especially in primary care, the current
bottleneck in the physician supply chain is the number
of residency positions.
Our organizations have long been concerned
about the shortage of primary care physicians in the
United States, particularly the supply of internal medi-
cine physicians who apply scientific knowledge and
clinical expertise to the diagnosis, treatment, and com-
passionate care of adults across the spectrum of health
and complex illness. The projected growth in demand
for services necessary for the elderly population is ex-
pected to be substantially higher than the growth for
pediatric services because the population younger
than age 18 is projected to grow by only 5% by 2025,
whereas the population aged 65 years or older is pro-
jected to grow by 46% (5). The Medicare population is
www.annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 165 No. 2 • 19 July 2016
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 expected to grow from 53.8 million in 2014 to 82 mil-
lion in 2030 (33). The skills of internal medicine physi-
cians will be increasingly needed to care for an aging
population with a growing incidence of chronic disease
and multiple comorbidities. Health care systems domi-
nated by primary care providers have better outcomes
at lower costs (34), yet the nation faces a severe short-
age of primary care physicians—estimated to be 12 500
to 31 100 by 2025 (5).
The reasons behind this decline in the supply of
primary care physicians are multifaceted and complex.
Key factors include the rapid increase in medical edu-
cation debt, decreased income potential for primary
care physicians compared with specialists, and in-
creased administrative requirements that have caused
great dissatisfaction with the current practice environ-
ment. Although studies show that debt is near the bot-
tom of factors affecting specialty choice, when com-
bined with other factors, especially differential in
earnings over a lifetime, debt may have a major effect
on specialty choice (35, 36). In 2014, the average med-
ical student graduate was $176 348 in debt (37). Dur-
ing residency training, the average resident works 40 to
80 hours each week and earns a median first-year sal-
ary of $50 214. The average education debt and salary
during training are the same for all residents, but the
salary when entering practice varies greatly by spe-
cialty. The gap between the median income of a pri-
mary care physician and that of a subspecialist is
$135 000. This amounts to a $3.5 million difference
over a 35- to 40-year career and decreases the odds of
choosing primary care by nearly 50% (38). Of note,
there is significant variation in salary based on spe-
cialty, with procedural subspecialists at the higher end
and cognitive-based subspecialists at the lower end.
These barriers must be addressed simultaneously and
swiftly for the nation to meet the demand for the num-
ber of primary care physicians necessary to care for the
U.S. population.
Although it is imperative that the number and pro-
portion of primary care physicians be increased, the
aging of the population will demand a sufficient num-
ber of physicians, including geriatricians and many
other internal medicine subspecialties, trained in the
complex medical problems typical of that age group. In
addition, other specialties are facing shortages, includ-
ing general surgery (5, 10, 12, 13).
Of note, as the general population rapidly ages, so
does the physician population. According to the Asso-
ciation of American Medical Colleges 2015 State Physi-
cian Workforce Data Book (39), 29.4% of the physician
population (248 572 physicians) is aged 60 years or
older. The work product of retiring versus newly minted
physicians should not be considered a 1:1 equivalency
because new medical school graduates are more likely
to take employed positions and are increasingly seek-
ing quality work–life balance, therein working fewer
hours than older physicians. Productivity will also be
affected by the increasing number of female physicians
in the workforce. Women represent a growing portion
of U.S. medical school graduates, increasing from
nearly 20% in 1980 to 47% in 2014. They are more
likely to work part-time and take extended leave than
their male counterparts. In addition, female physicians
work an average of 7.4 hours fewer per week than male
physicians (40).
Geographic Disparities and Maldistribution
Beyond overall shortages, the geographic dispari-
ties in the number of Medicare-funded GME positions
among states and the amount that is paid per resident
are large. Teaching hospitals, and therefore residents,
are unevenly distributed across the United States. This
is important because there is a positive correlation be-
tween the site of residency training and where a physi-
cian ultimately chooses to practice medicine (41). Phy-
sician maldistribution results in gaps in access to care
and health disparities experienced by specific regions,
races, and income groups (38).
Resident-to-population ratios range from 1.63 resi-
dents per 100 000 persons in Montana to 77.13 resi-
dents per 100 000 persons in New York (42). Since the
resident caps went into effect in 1997, population
growth and shifts in where people reside have been
noteworthy.
Between
2010
and
2014,
seven
of
the ten fastest growing areas were southern and west-
ern states. Texas has led the nation in population
growth for a decade, with an increase of 450 000 peo-
ple between 2013 and 2014 alone (43). Between 2000
and 2010, the populations of the resident-poor states
of California, Florida, and Texas grew by 10%, 17.6%,
and 20.6%, respectively, whereas the resident-rich
states of New York, Massachusetts, and Pennsylvania
grew only by 2.1%, 3.1%, and 3.4%, respectively (42).
The current GME formula also results in substantial vari-
ation in the amount that is paid by Medicare per resi-
dent depending on the institution. Substantial inequal-
ities also exist when this is viewed at the state level. For
example, the average GME payment to institutions per
resident ranges from $43 908 in Wyoming to $155 135
in Connecticut (42). Although some degree of variation
in GME payments is appropriate due to cost-of-living
differences across geographic areas and other factors,
this amount of variation warrants examination.
Lack of Transparency
Medicare GME funds go directly to teaching hospi-
tals that sponsor training programs even if the hospitals
do not directly incur all of the training costs. Some in-
stitutions have specific formulas for the distribution of
GME funds, but others are subject to annual negotia-
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 165 No. 2 • 19 July 2016
www.annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 tions with departments, which could result in the use of
funds for purposes not intended. Faculty who direct
training programs often do not know how they are sup-
ported or whether they are receiving adequate support
from Medicare (19). In addition, although hospitals are
required to provide cost reports annually to the Cen-
ters for Medicare & Medicaid Services, obtaining infor-
mation on specific direct and indirect payments is
sometimes problematic because of large variation in
transparency and accountability. Information on the
amount of funding provided through private sources
and the true cost of training residents are also unclear.
Variable Accountability to Government Funding
of GME
Currently, accountability for the substantial invest-
ment the federal government makes in GME varies. The
Medicare Payment Advisory Commission, IOM, and
others have recommended moving toward a GME pay-
ment system that fosters greater accountability for
Medicare GME dollars and rewards programs that
meet desired educational outcomes and standards.
Data suggest that teaching hospitals have favored less
costly, higher revenue-generating specialty training
over primary care positions (35). The expansion of
these programs over the past 10 years parallels losses
in positions in primary care specialties.
Need for More Flexibility to Allow for Innovative
Models of Training
As the health care delivery system evolves, a paral-
lel evolution in the setting, content, and duration of
training must also occur. Experimentation and adop-
tion of innovative models of training are necessary to
prepare future physicians with the skills necessary to
practice in patient-centered medical homes, account-
able care organizations, and other contemporary and
interprofessional models of health care. Enabling resi-
dents to train in well-functioning ambulatory settings,
specifically physician offices, will allow them to gain the
skills necessary to care for the kinds of patients encoun-
tered in a typical office-based practice. Such training
will require changes to GME funding, accreditation,
and the culture of academic medicine. Systems-based
practice, 1 of the 6 core competencies in the ACGME
Next Accreditation System, defines an expectation that
residency
programs
and
trainees
understand
the
changing face of health care delivery and work to im-
prove systems to optimize patient care. Accomplishing
this goal will require innovative models of training.
IOM Report on the Governing and Financing
of GME
In July 2014, the IOM released the highly antici-
pated report, “Graduate Medical Education That Meets
the Nation's Health Needs” (2), which calls for major
restructuring of GME financing “to allow a transition to
an accountable, performance-based system” to fund
GME over the next 10 years.
IOM Recommendations
Recommendation 1: Maintain Medicare gradu-
ate medical education (GME) support at the
current aggregate amount (i.e., the total of in-
direct medical education and direct graduate
medical
education
expenditures
in
an
agreed-on base year, adjusted annually for in-
flation) while taking essential steps to modern-
ize GME payment methods based on perfor-
mance,
to
ensure
program
oversight
and
accountability, and to incentivize innovation in
the content and financing of GME. The current
Medicare GME payment system should be
phased out.
Recommendation 2: Build a graduate medical
education (GME) policy and financing infra-
structure.
2a. Create a GME Policy Council in the Office of
the Secretary of the U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services. Council members should
be appointed by the Secretary and provided
with sufficient funding, staff, and technical re-
sources
to
fulfill
the
responsibilities
listed
below.
• Development and oversight of a strategic
plan for Medicare GME financing;
• Research and policy development regarding
the sufficiency, geographic distribution, and
specialty configuration of the physician work-
force;
• Development of future federal policies con-
cerning the distribution and use of Medicare
GME funds;
• Convening, coordinating, and promoting col-
laboration between and among federal agen-
cies and private accreditation and certification
organizations; and
• Provision of annual progress reports to Con-
gress and the Executive Branch on the state of
GME.
2b. Establish a GME Center within the Centers
for Medicare & Medicaid Services with the fol-
lowing responsibilities in accordance with and
fully responsive to the ongoing guidance of the
GME Council:
• Management of the operational aspects of
GME Medicare funding;
• Management of the GME Transformation
Fund (see Recommendation 3), including solic-
itation and oversight of demonstrations; and
• Data collection and detailed reporting to en-
sure transparency in the distribution and use of
Medicare GME funds.
www.annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 165 No. 2 • 19 July 2016
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 Recommendation
3:
Create
one
Medicare
graduate medical education (GME) fund with
two subsidiary funds.
3a. A GME Operational Fund to distribute on-
going support for residency training positions
that are currently approved and funded.
3b. A GME Transformation Fund to finance ini-
tiatives to develop and evaluate innovative
GME programs, to determine and validate ap-
propriate GME performance measures, to pilot
alternative GME payment methods, and to
award new Medicare-funded GME training po-
sitions in priority disciplines and geographic
areas.
Recommendation 4: Modernize Medicare grad-
uate
medical
education
(GME)
payment
methodology.
4a. Replace the separate indirect medical edu-
cation and direct GME funding streams with
one payment to organizations sponsoring GME
programs, based on a national per-resident
amount (PRA) (with a geographic adjustment).
4b. Set the PRA to equal the total value of the
GME Operational Fund divided by the current
number
of
full-time
equivalent
Medicare-
funded training slots.
4c. Redirect the funding stream so that GME
operational funds are distributed directly to
GME sponsoring organizations.
4d. Implement performance-based payments
using information from Transformation Fund
pilots.
Recommendation 5: Medicaid graduate medi-
cal education (GME) funding should remain at
the
state's
discretion.
However,
Congress
should mandate the same level of transparency
and accountability in Medicaid GME as it will
require under the changes in Medicare GME
herein proposed. (2)
Our organizations have reviewed the report in de-
tail, and although we support many elements of it,
there are several areas of concern. We join the IOM in
the call for innovation and transformation in GME, in-
cluding a greater emphasis on training in community-
based settings. However, we are concerned that reduc-
ing GME payments to existing programs (by taking the
expense of 2 new government offices and the Chil-
dren's Hospitals GME payments out of a static GME
fund) will devastate many teaching hospitals and the
patients they serve who are in the greatest need of
health care—those who disproportionately consist of
the poor, minorities, and underserved persons. We
agree with the IOM that it is critical that GME policy be
aligned with the nation's workforce policies. Although
we also agree that GME is a public good, we are dis-
appointed that the IOM did not call for an all-payer
GME financing system to support this public good.
Although not part of the recommendations, that
the IOM stated that it “did not find credible evidence”
(2) that the nation is facing a looming physician short-
age, particularly in primary care specialties, is extremely
concerning. Paradoxically, the IOM suggested that
“GME funds might be used to finance new incentives
for choosing a primary care career” (2), even as it ques-
tioned whether a primary care shortage exists. We con-
cur with the IOM that more research is needed to guide
physician workforce policies and that incentives, includ-
ing payment reform, are needed to encourage careers
in primary care, but we believe there is credible evi-
dence of a real and growing shortage of primary care
physicians for adults and other specialties that warrants
immediate action.
Although workforce projections are unlikely to pre-
cisely predict shortages, the trends can serve as a
guide in determining and preparing for future chal-
lenges. Several projections indicate a shortfall of physi-
cians in both primary and specialty care (3–18). The
IOM rejected the evidence of existing and looming
shortages, stating that these predictions often assume
historic provider–patient ratios. The IOM noted the
need for a more coordinated, affordable, and patient-
centered health care system and cited studies that con-
sidered models with expanded roles for advanced
practice clinicians; redesign of care delivery; and other
innovations in health care delivery, such as telehealth
and electronic communication (44–47). Such a system
would be ideal, but transformation will take time and it
would be dangerous to make workforce decisions
based on a model that has not been achieved or
tested. For example, nurse practitioners and physician
assistants have similar subspecialization trends seen in
physicians and cannot be relied on to increase access
to primary care (48).
Further, adoption of technology and increased use
of telemedicine have had many obstacles, so wide-
spread use is not guaranteed and will take time. Elec-
tronic health record (EHR) systems have the promise of
improving patient care and practice efficiency, but the
evidence suggests that these effects have not been re-
alized. A 2015 report by AmericanEHR Partners and the
American Medical Association based on a survey of
physicians revealed that compared with 5 years ago,
more physicians report being dissatisfied or very dissat-
isfied with their EHR system. Of note, 72% believed that
decreasing the workload was difficult or very difficult to
do with EHR use and 42% believed that improving effi-
ciencies was difficult or very difficult with EHR use (49).
In addition, the federal EHR incentive payment pro-
gram designed to encourage physicians and health fa-
cilities to install EHRs has had many challenges, includ-
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 165 No. 2 • 19 July 2016
www.annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 ing delays and a decline in physician participation in
the program's fourth year (50).
In its November 2014 report (51), the Council on
Graduate Medical Education, an advisory body to the
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and
Congress, reaffirmed its past findings that federal GME
investments should increase above current levels and
expressed reservations about proposals, including the
IOM's, to redirect or cut existing investments (51). The
Council on Graduate Medical Education urged “caution
to suggestions that the supply of physicians in the train-
ing pipeline should be limited until there is evidence to
judge the effectiveness of emerging practice models
that rely on mid-level providers” (51). It also disagreed
with the IOM's recommendation that funding should be
limited to current levels and cited evidence of short-
ages in many specialties, including family medicine, ge-
riatrics, general internal medicine, general surgery, and
pediatric subspecialties. The Council on Graduate
Medical Education also cautioned, “With the current in-
creasing demand for health care services, missteps in
GME policies could have long-lasting, detrimental ef-
fects on the physician workforce, cost, healthcare qual-
ity, access to medical services, and the patient experi-
ence” (51). Our organizations echo this warning and
offer the following recommendations to ensure that the
nation has an adequate supply of the types of physi-
cians needed to treat patients; that they enter the work-
force with the knowledge, skills, and attitudes required
to provide the highest quality care; and that all Ameri-
cans have access to such care.
Positions
1. The federal government should maintain its com-
mitment to GME. Payment of Medicare GME funds
should be linked to the ability of the GME system to
meet the nation's health care workforce needs. Pay-
ments should be used to meet policy goals to ensure
adequate supply, specialty mix, and training sites.
Our organizations believe that sufficient GME fund-
ing and a more strategic approach to its use are critical.
Medicare's contribution to GME must be preserved. Al-
though we agree that some of the costs covered by the
IME adjustment have decreased, we also contend that
other costs related to DGME expenditures have in-
creased, primarily because of increased regulatory de-
mands. The DGME reimbursement amounts were set in
1986 and have been adjusted only for inflation. Studies
evaluating the costs of residency programs support
higher DGME costs over time (52). In fact, the increase
in DGME costs seems to roughly offset the decrease in
IME costs, such that across the entire system, current
reimbursement approximates actual costs of training
residents (recognizing that significant variation exists
across states and institutions). Substantial reductions in
IME payments would result in a failure to cover neces-
sary direct costs and could have a devastating effect on
GME programs. Of note, these calculations were based
on studies conducted in the early 2000s; a more recent
study published in 2014 found substantially greater
training costs that exceed the IME offset (53).
We also feel strongly that Medicare GME funds
should be tied to the nation's health care workforce
needs. We were encouraged by the establishment of
the
National
Health
Care
Workforce
Commission,
which is charged with evaluating the nation's health
care workforce needs and providing recommendations
to Congress and the administration on national health
workforce priorities, goals, and policies through The
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. However,
we are dismayed that this Commission has yet to re-
ceive funding to conduct its important work. The nation
needs workforce policies that include sufficient support
to educate and train a supply of health professionals
that meets the nation's health care needs—policies that
ensure an adequate supply and spectrum of primary
care physicians trained to manage care for the whole
patient.
The Association of American Medical Colleges
projects a shortfall of between 46 100 and 90 400 phy-
sicians by 2025. The shortage in the number of primary
care physicians is estimated to range between 12 500
and 31 100 by 2025 (5). A report released by HRSA in
November 2013 (6) also predicted a shortage of pri-
mary care physicians within this range, estimating a
shortage of 20 400 primary care physicians by 2020 (6).
These projections are not as large as those that have
been found in prior studies, yet they are still significant.
In certain parts of the country, a shortage of primary
care physicians already exists. The HRSA estimates that
there are 6100 designated primary care health profes-
sional shortage areas, and it would take approximately
8200 additional primary care physicians to eliminate
them (54).
We found significant evidence of geographic mal-
distribution of physicians (55, 56). Metropolitan areas
have 84 primary care physicians per 100 000 persons,
whereas nonmetropolitan areas have 68 primary care
physicians per 100 000 persons (57). Specialists are
even more concentrated, with more than 3 times the
density of specialists in metropolitan than nonmetro-
politan areas (58). Physicians tend to stay and work
where they were trained, so Medicare GME dollars
should be weighted to favor training programs in rural
and underserved areas. Students from rural areas are
more likely to practice there than those from urban ar-
eas (59). Weighting or shifting GME dollars to pro-
grams in areas where physicians are needed most
might lead to an increase in training positions in under-
served areas and a change in the distribution of physi-
cians once their training is completed.
www.annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 165 No. 2 • 19 July 2016
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 A thorough assessment of the supply, specialty
mix, and distribution of physicians is necessary, and
Medicare GME dollars should be used to address any
shortcomings. This assessment should be a top priority
for the National Healthcare Workforce Commission and
the National Center for Health Workforce Analysis. We
believe that workforce data should be used in a real-
time, dynamic system to inform GME funding formulas.
If the GME finance system is to act as a lever to affect
the physician workforce, then the process by which it
acts should be nimble and dynamic enough to respond
to the changing priorities of our health care system.
Further, this system should recognize the need that in-
stitutions and programs have for intermediate-range
stability. It is important that state and regional needs
are considered and that these entities have a role in the
decision-making process.
The American Academy of Family Physicians has
proposed limiting GME funding to first-certificate pro-
grams, which we cannot support because it would ef-
fectively eliminate all federal GME funding of nearly all
internal medicine subspecialty fellowship training pro-
grams, including cardiology, critical care medicine, en-
docrinology, gastroenterology, geriatrics, hematology,
infectious disease, nephrology, oncology, pulmonol-
ogy, and rheumatology (60). Internal medicine and in-
ternal medicine–pediatrics training programs provide a
strong foundation in clinical decision-making skills that
can be applied in several settings, including complex
and chronic illnesses. This patient-centered, high-value
focus is important in primary care and subspecialty
practices. Many internal medicine subspecialists serve
as primary care physicians for their patients. All subspe-
cialists are first trained in 3 years of core internal med-
icine, which prepares them with the diagnosis, man-
agement,
and
prevention
of
diseases
that
affect
patients. The amount of primary care that subspecialists
provide depends on various factors, including geogra-
phy and practice type. Fellowship programs already re-
ceive only 50% of the DGME payment that first-
certificate programs receive, leaving teaching hospitals
to cover the remainder. Many institutions are already
strained by these costs, and elimination of such funding
in internal medicine subspecialty training programs
would undermine the goals of having well-trained phy-
sicians in these critically important subspecialty areas
and contribute to a growing shortage of physicians in
many of these fields. Cognitive subspecialties in partic-
ular are underfunded, and their pipeline is drying up
quickly, which is illustrated by the 2015 appointment
year fellowship data—56.1% of geriatrics, 32.1% of ne-
phrology, and 30.3% of infectious diseases programs
went unfilled due to lack of applications (61) (Appendix
Table). In addition, up to one third of physician–
scientists who drive research and innovation come
through the internal medicine subspecialty pipeline
(62). Flexibility is internal medicine's strength, and as
we produce physicians for an ever-changing health
care system, internal medicine should be structured to
draw persons into needed specialties.
2. All payers should be required to contribute to a
financing pool to support residencies that meet the na-
tion's policy goals related to supply, specialty mix, and
training sites.
Our organizations feel strongly that the costs of fi-
nancing GME should be spread across the health care
system. Although Medicare and other federal pro-
grams should continue to make a substantial contribu-
tion to the financing of GME, an all-payer system would
ease the obligation on Medicare and taxpayers and
provide a more stable and predictable funding stream.
The supply and distribution of physicians affect the
availability, cost, and quality of care for all Americans.
As such, the cost should be borne by all payers of
health care services—public and private.
Appendix Table. 2015 Match Summary, Internal Medicine Subspecialties*
Specialty
Positions
Offered, n
Programs, n
Positions Filled by
U.S. Graduates, %
Positions Filled by
All Applicants, %
Programs
Filled, %
Allergy and immunology
126
82
71.4
92.9
90.2
Cardiovascular disease
835
187
51.6
98.7
95.7
Endocrinology, diabetes, and
metabolism
271
134
36.5
93.0
88.8
Gastroenterology
464
181
64.2
98.5
96.7
Geriatric medicine
353
126
18.4
43.9
21.4
Hematology
14
3
71.4
100.0
100.0
Hematology and oncology
521
134
54.7
97.9
94.8
Infectious disease
327
138
34.3
69.7
49.3
Interventional pulmonology
24
20
29.2
95.8
95.0
Nephrology
374
134
21.1
67.9
49.3
Oncology
20
7
25.0
100.0
100.0
Pulmonary disease
23
11
4.3
100.0
100.0
Pulmonary disease and critical
care medicine
519
139
49.5
98.5
96.4
Rheumatology
209
107
33.0
90.9
84.1
* Data obtained from reference 61.
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 165 No. 2 • 19 July 2016
www.annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 Graduate medical education serves a public good.
It benefits all of society, not just persons who directly
purchase or receive it. All payers depend on well-
trained medical graduates, medical research, and tech-
nical advances from teaching hospitals to meet the na-
tion's demand for high-quality care. All payers should
be concerned that the nation's system of GME is pre-
served, high standards of quality for patient care ser-
vices are maintained, and opportunities for entry into
the medical profession are available to the most quali-
fied candidates. A mechanism should be established to
require all payers to explicitly contribute to GME.
3. A thorough evaluation of the true cost of training
physicians is required before any decisions are made
about how GME funds are distributed.
Except for inflation, the hospital-specific PRA has
not been adjusted since 1983. Since then, much has
changed in GME that has added to the cost of training,
including program requirements mandated by the
ACGME. For example, costs related to implementing
duty hour changes have had a substantial effect on pro-
grams' funds (63, 64). In many programs, the GME
costs are often subsidized by clinical practice, and as
these dollars shrink, it will be challenging to function
with a reduction in GME funds or cover the costs of
additional unfunded mandates.
We believe that the current distribution of DGME
and IME funds does not accurately reflect the expenses
that they are intended to cover. Payment must be cali-
brated to the true costs of educating physicians in to-
day's accreditation and clinical environment and be
structured to account for any future changes so that
funds are not held static while the costs of training
increase.
4. Direct GME and IME should be combined into a
single, more functional payment program that is de-
signed to meet the needs of patients and populations.
Our organizations support the IOM's recommenda-
tion that Congress combine DGME and IME funds and
establish a single PRA with a geographic adjustment.
We believe that once the true cost of training a resident
is determined and a single PRA is set, transparency will
greatly improve.
5. Graduate medical education funding should be
transparently allocated to ensure that funds are appro-
priately designated toward activities related to the edu-
cational mission of teaching and training residents and
fellows. Graduate medical education funds should fol-
low trainees into all training settings, rather than being
linked to the location of service relative to the sponsor-
ing institutions.
Our organizations strongly favor funding that “fol-
lows” trainees to settings outside the walls of the spon-
soring institution, thus minimizing barriers to training
sites that would broaden their experience and expose
them to a greater variety of practice settings. Any rota-
tion or experience that is approved by the training pro-
gram and is consistent with accreditation standards
should be eligible for Medicare reimbursement, re-
gardless of the location.
We considered the option that IOM and others
have proposed to pay training programs directly but
determined that such action would not improve their
quality. Individual residency programs generally lack
the infrastructure to deal with such financial processes,
and acquiring this resource would add overhead costs
to residency training. In addition, programs have a
budget and would probably be allocated costs by their
institutions, which they would have to pay from GME
funds. We believe the core issue is transparency. The
entity to which the funds are distributed would be a
nonissue if institutions had to fully account for how the
dollars are dispersed to the programs and other perti-
nent entities. More flexibility is needed in how funds
are used so that programs have the ability to use alter-
native “highly functioning” settings, recruit from excel-
lent outpatient practices and other innovative ambula-
tory settings, and pay more equitably for faculty
teaching time and resources required for training in
various settings.
Further, although the term “accountability” has
been tied to the notion that training programs and in-
stitutions should be responsible for producing the spe-
cialty spectrum and geographic distribution of physi-
cians that are necessary to meet the nation's health
care needs, we believe this expectation is unreason-
able. National and regional workforce decisions should
be guided by periodic rigorous analyses made on a
national and regional level and promoted through spe-
cific funding mechanisms rather than metrics (as noted
in our first position).
Medicare GME payment information should be
made publicly available in a concise, timely, and easily
accessible report to ensure that the funds are used for
educating and training residents. We support an annu-
ally published report that clearly identifies each institu-
tion and training program, the GME payments re-
ceived, the number of residents and other health
professionals that Medicare supports, and Medicare's
share of teaching costs incurred. Hospitals should show
that funds flow to programs.
6. Graduate medical education caps should be
lifted as needed to permit training an adequate number
of primary care physicians, including internal medicine
specialists, and physicians in other specialties facing
shortages, including internal medicine–pediatrics and
many internal medicine subspecialties.
Changing the way existing GME dollars are distrib-
uted is important, but Medicare limits on GME funding
on residency training positions will continue to impede
the establishment of new residency programs and ad-
ditional training positions in existing programs. Medical
www.annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 165 No. 2 • 19 July 2016
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 schools have expanded class sizes by nearly 30% and
are on track to meet enrollment increases that the As-
sociation of American Medical Colleges called for in
2006 to address the projected physician shortage (65).
However, this will not increase the total number of U.S.
physicians unless GME capacity is also increased. Our
organizations believe that GME funding should be
more effectively targeted and prioritized to fields with
the greatest and most critical needs to train more phy-
sicians to meet national workforce goals, rather than
asking the federal government to incur the much larger
costs associated with a general or an undifferentiated
expansion of residency positions.
The Affordable Care Act included provisions for a
modest redistribution of unused residency slots with a
priority for primary care, but this redistribution will not
be enough to help meet the future demand for such
physicians. To reform the nation's health care delivery
system to better manage chronic conditions and keep a
patient from requiring hospitalization, we need an ad-
equate supply of primary care physicians who collabo-
rate with subspecialists and other health professionals
as part of a team to manage a patient's whole health. In
addition, without an increase in residency positions, in-
ternational medical graduates may be forced out of the
U.S. health care system. More U.S. medical graduates
will probably fill residency positions once filled by in-
ternational medical graduates, leading to a potential
reversal of gains made in reducing health professional
shortage areas and a less culturally diverse physician
population.
7. The concept of a performance-based GME pay-
ment system is worth exploring. Such a system should
be thoughtfully developed and considered in a deliber-
ate way to ensure that goals are achieved without de-
stabilizing the system of physician training. We recom-
mend the following:
a. Measures should be developed by appropriate
stakeholders, including physicians involved in GME
training.
b. All measures must be carefully developed and
thoroughly evaluated before they are implemented.
c. Institutions must be allowed adequate time to
make necessary changes to their training programs be-
fore financial incentives are introduced.
d. Revised GME funding should account for the
costs of transitioning into a performance-based GME
system, and once done, clear-cut financial transparency
and incentives must be delineated.
e. The performance measures should be evidence-
based and align with the ACGME requirements. The
core mission of individual programs should be consid-
ered. Producing a certain number of physicians trained
in a certain specialty or subspecialty should not be a
specific performance metric.
f. A careful study of unintended consequences
should be done to ensure that programs are not unfairly
disadvantaged.
g. Regular evaluations of the measures should be
implemented
to
avoid
adverse
unintended
conse-
quences, ensure that the goals of implementing such a
system are achieved, and confirm that the measures re-
main relevant over time.
In recent years, there have been several proposals
to use a portion of GME dollars to establish a
performance-based GME payment system in an effort
to encourage greater accountability for Medicare's
GME dollars and reward education and training that
will improve the health care delivery system or meet
the nation's workforce goals. Our organizations believe
that the concept of a performance-based GME pay-
ment system is worth exploring, but caution that such a
system must be thoughtfully developed using a sound
research basis and evaluated with input from various
stakeholders, including physicians involved in training.
It should not be assumed that simply instituting perfor-
mance metrics will result in improved medical educa-
tion or progress toward workforce goals.
We feel strongly that immediate implementation of
a performance-based GME payment system is prema-
ture without other substantial changes. Other than for
inflation, GME funding has not been adjusted for some
time while salary and other indirect costs of GME have
increased. It would be difficult to think that such a pro-
gram could be successfully implemented in a budget-
neutral manner. In addition, it is critical that programs
be given time to implement the measures. Of note, in-
stitutions have unique restrictions that affect their ability
to change their programs, including accreditation re-
quirements that preclude significant adjustment in ad-
ministrative support (ratio of faculty to number of
residents for all programs, and more detailed require-
ments for some disciplines for other types of clinical
and nonclinical staff), contractual commitments to resi-
dents that are reinforced by accreditation that super-
sede “at-will” employment regulations in states and
even require institutions to place currently contracted
residents if they go out of business, rules stating that
the size of programs cannot expand to meet workforce
needs without documenting educational need and in-
stitutional resources and obtaining approval from ac-
crediting bodies, and policies stating that institutions
cannot increase the price of services in response to
changes in demand and are legally obliged to provide
emergency care to all who present to the emergency
department.
Metrics should also be evidence-based to the ex-
tent possible. The evidence base available to inform
changes to the financing of GME is extremely limited,
and pilot projects are essential to mitigating unin-
tended consequences. In addition, we believe that
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 165 No. 2 • 19 July 2016
www.annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 most GME funding should be based on accurate cost
estimates and that payments based on performance
metrics should make up a substantial portion (but less
than the majority).
We do not recommend specific performance met-
rics in this policy position paper but have identified po-
tential areas to be explored. These include high-value
care, innovating ambulatory training, interprofessional
models of care, and other new models of care. Hospi-
tals and residency programs are already required to
meet certain measures as part of the ACGME program
and institutional requirements, the ACGME Clinical
Learning Environment Review, and the competency-
based ACGME milestones for their trainees. Although
direct use of these formative measures would not be
appropriate
and
would
have
unintended
conse-
quences that would undermine competency-based
training, the variables that guide the Clinical Learning
Environment Review and milestones data could inform
a performance-based GME payment system. The AAIM
has developed a GME Funding task force with the ex-
press purpose of proposing performance metrics in the
following areas: care of the underserved; value in
health care; patient safety; access to care; patient-
centered care; educational environments; and commu-
nication, teamwork, and transitions of care. This task
force will consider each of these performance catego-
ries across 4 perspectives: collective GME, institutions,
programs, and trainees.
Several proposals to move toward a performance-
based GME payment system have included a measure
to increase the number of physicians in needed special-
ties and geographic locations, and some specify pri-
mary care as a metric. We caution that this is not a
realistic metric because training programs cannot be
held accountable for the career decisions of their train-
ees. Important factors for the career choice of medical
students include perceived professional satisfaction of
practitioners; lifestyle; and ability to pay off debt in-
curred
for
medical
school,
which
now
averages
$176 348. In addition, the effect of our dysfunctional
health care system, undergraduate medical education
environment, family pressures, and professional goals
are major determinants of the career decisions of
young physicians. Unless there are other reforms (such
as payment and practice reform) that draw persons into
shortage fields or underserved geographic areas,
changes to our GME finance system will probably have
little effect. We believe that measures should go be-
yond workforce needs and instead hold programs ac-
countable for ensuring that residents obtain durable
skills that they will need when they start practice and
confer flexibility in skills to lead and evolve as delivery
systems change.
Flexibility and adaptability in measurement are
necessary because not every program or institution has
the same core mission and patient population, and they
should not be required to meet the same set of perfor-
mance measures. Although some programs may focus
on training residents in ambulatory primary care or
highly specialized specialties, others may have a history
of training the nation's best researchers. All of these
clinicians will be needed to meet the nation's health
care needs. We support a core set of measures with
additional measures that are unique to the core mission
of each program.
8. Pilot projects should be introduced to evaluate
potential
changes
to
GME
funding,
including
a
performance-based GME payment system, and to pro-
mote innovation in GME by providing training programs
with the resources necessary to experiment with innova-
tive training models. Pilot projects should not be funded
using existing GME funding.
Our organizations believe that GME must continu-
ally improve and evolve to better meet the needs of
society. We agree with the IOM that a transformation
fund is needed with the goal of promoting innovation
and achieving the triple aim of improving the experi-
ence of care, improving the health of populations, and
reducing per capita costs of health care. However, we
strongly oppose using existing GME dollars to fund
these pilot projects because any reduction would be
destabilizing to the nation's training programs. Instead,
there should be a separate, dedicated source of fund-
ing for pilot projects and multisite educational out-
comes research. Successful studies can then lead to
wide application.
The nation cannot reform the health care delivery
system without ensuring that future physicians have the
skills necessary to coordinate care across settings, im-
prove care quality, and use resources efficiently. Train-
ing should evolve to incorporate the coordinated care
that patients want and need to improve the value of the
health care delivery system. Our organizations believe
that there is no single appropriate model for a training
program, and programs should be encouraged to de-
velop models that best fit the needs of the communities
they serve.
In addition, any changes to the structure of GME
funding, including a performance-based GME payment
system, should be studied through pilot programs be-
fore implementation to help balance unintended con-
sequences. To our knowledge, there is no evidence on
the effects of implementing such a payment system.
An alternative to the IOM's proposed transforma-
tion fund is the establishment of a Center for Medical
Education Innovation and Research, parallel to the Cen-
ter for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation, with dedi-
cated funding for pilot programs. If successful, such
programs would then have wider dissemination in the
GME community. We feel strongly that this would
greatly enhance efforts to ensure that residents are
www.annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 165 No. 2 • 19 July 2016
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 trained with the necessary skills for the practice envi-
ronment of the future.
9.
Internal
medicine
and
internal
medicine–
pediatrics residents should receive primary care training
in well-functioning ambulatory settings that are finan-
cially supported for their training roles. Barriers should
be removed to encourage programs to train residents in
nonhospital settings, promote innovation in training,
and facilitate clinical learning experiences that promote
primary care.
Internal medicine and internal medicine–pediatrics
residents receive in-depth training in the prevention,
diagnosis, and treatment of conditions that affect all
organ systems. They are also trained to solve puzzling
diagnostic problems and handle severe chronic ill-
nesses and situations in which several illnesses may oc-
cur at the same time. Internal medicine residents are
also trained in the essentials of primary care internal
medicine, which incorporates an understanding of dis-
ease prevention, health promotion, substance abuse,
and mental health. Internists are particularly focused on
the care of adult and elderly patients with multiple
complex chronic diseases. Internal medicine specialists
provide long-term, comprehensive care in both the of-
fice and hospital. They manage both common and
complex illnesses of adolescents, adults, and the el-
derly. It is essential that residents receive training in
hospitals and various well-functioning ambulatory set-
tings, including physician offices, geriatrics clinics, sub-
acute rehabilitation and skilled nursing facilities, area
health education centers, and community health cen-
ters. Exposure to the mix of patients typically seen in
practice is also important during training.
The mix of patients typically seen by residents in
internal medicine programs is heavily skewed toward
those whose overall health is negatively affected by so-
cial determinants, including poverty, low literacy, and
limited access to resources and safe housing. This ef-
fect can seem overwhelming to physicians-in-training
who may not have the experience or resources to ad-
dress
their
patients'
medical
and
biopsychosocial
needs. Residents might view careers in office-based
general internal medicine more positively if they were
exposed to a wider, more representative mix of pa-
tients and practiced in models with appropriate re-
sources to address the effects of these social determi-
nants. Ambulatory experiences should also mitigate
against inpatient responsibility conflicts. One possible
approach to this is to use ambulatory immersion
systems.
Further, changes in health care delivery and the
population's health have deemphasized hospital-based
training, making it less relevant to some specialties. By
exposing residents to well-functioning ambulatory set-
tings, specifically physician offices, residents will be
able to gain the skills necessary to care for the kinds of
patients encountered in a typical office-based primary
care practice.
The current requirement for ambulatory education
for internal medicine residents is set at a minimum of
33% of overall residency training. The importance of
considering a change in the amount of ambulatory
training is highlighted in a recent study that showed a
dramatic reduction in hospitalizations among Medicare
beneficiaries from 1999 to 2013. Hospitalizations de-
creased from 35 274 per 100 000 beneficiaries to
26 903 per 100 000 beneficiaries, underscoring the
need to continue to improve our trainees' outpatient
experience and better prepare them for the health care
system of tomorrow (66). We believe that internal med-
icine training programs should improve not only the
quantity but also the quality of ambulatory training
time. This may need to be encouraged through the
regulatory or funding process. By establishing specific
goals for training time spent in well-functioning ambu-
latory settings and ensuring “protected time” while in
the ambulatory setting, internal medicine and other pri-
mary care residency programs can offer a more bal-
anced and realistic experience. Although it is important
for all programs to provide high-quality outpatient set-
tings, there could be more flexibility around increasing
the quantity of ambulatory training depending on indi-
vidual program goals. For more outpatient-intense pro-
grams, GME payments should reflect their higher cost
of training (53). In addition, mentorship programs
should be encouraged and strengthened to ensure
that residents are matched with practicing primary care
physicians who can show them the many rewarding as-
pects of careers in general internal medicine and other
primary care specialties.
Community-based training programs are 1 option
to ensure more training in nonhospital ambulatory set-
tings for primary care residents. The THC GME pro-
gram, established through the Affordable Care Act,
provides primary care medical and dental training op-
portunities in community-based settings. According to
HRSA, physicians trained in health centers are more
than 3 times as likely to work in a health center and
more than 2 times as likely to work in an underserved
area than those not trained at health centers. The pro-
gram is administered and funded by HRSA rather than
Medicare and is subject to appropriations. We believe
it is important that this program continue and receive
adequate and stable funding to support its mission.
Community-based stakeholders have been reluctant to
spend the time developing this program, only to see it
lose funding. We also believe that the THC program
should be modified so that it is more conducive to the
participation of other primary care specialties (67).
Funding for the THC program should not come out of
existing Medicare GME funds but should be supported
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 165 No. 2 • 19 July 2016
www.annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 through mandatory appropriations or making THC
funding permanent with additional GME funding.
Web-Only References
21. Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education. ACGME
data resource book: 2013-2014. Chicago: Accreditation Council for
Graduate Medical Education; 2014. Accessed at www.acgme.org
/acgmeweb/tabid/259/Publications/GraduateMedicalEducation
DataResourceBook.aspx on 10 September 2015.
22. Association of American Medical Colleges. How do teaching
hospitals serve America's communities? Accessed at www.aamc.org
/linkableblob/70256-3/data/teachhospfacts2-data.pdf on 22 Sep-
tember 2015.
23. Association of American Medical Colleges. Medicare direct
graduate medical education (DGME) payments. Washington, DC:
Association of American Medical Colleges; 2010.
24. Health policy briefs: graduate medical education. Bethesda, MD:
Health Affairs; 2012. Accessed at www.healthaffairs.org/healthpolicy
briefs/brief.php?brief_id=73 on 21 April 2016.
25. Association of American Medical Colleges. Medicaid graduate
medical education payments: a 50-state survey. Washington, DC:
Association of American Medical Colleges; 2013. Accessed at https:
//members.aamc.org/eweb/upload/Medicaid%20Graduate%20
Medical%20Education%20Payments%20A%2050-State%20Survey
.pdf on 23 November 2015.
26. Kaufman A, Alfero C. A state-based strategy for expanding pri-
mary care residency. Bethesda, MD: Health Affairs Blog; 2015. Ac-
cessed
at
http://healthaffairs.org/blog/2015/07/31/a-state-based
-strategy-for-expanding-primary-care-residency on 6 August 2015.
27. Pittman D. Residency slots: a crisis in the making? New York:
MedPage Today; 2013. Accessed at www.medpagetoday.com
/PublicHealthPolicy/MedicalEducation/42786 on 5 September 2015.
28. Health Resources and Services Administration; U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services. Teaching Health Center Graduate
Medical Education (THCGME). Accessed at http://bhpr.hrsa.gov
/grants/teachinghealthcenters on 23 September 2015.
29. Wynn B, Guarino C, Morse L, Cho M. Alternative ways of financ-
ing graduate medical education. Washington, DC: RAND Health;
2006.
30. Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education. ACGME
data resource book: 2014-2015. Chicago: Accreditation Council for
Graduate Medical Education; 2015. Accessed at www.acgme.org
/acgmeweb/tabid/259/GraduateMedicalEducation/GraduateMedical
EducationDataResourceBook.aspx on 26 September 2015.
31. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. CMS cost reports:
hospital Form 2552-10. Baltimore: Centers for Medicare & Medicaid
Services; 2014. Accessed at www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data
-and-Systems/Downloadable-Public-Use-Files/Cost-Reports/Hospital
-2010-form.html on 5 September 2015.
32. Weida NA, Phillips RL Jr, Bazemore AW. Does graduate medical
education also follow green? [Letter]. Arch Intern Med. 2010;170:
389-90. [PMID: 20177044] doi:10.1001/archinternmed.2009.529
33. 2015 annual report of the Boards of Trustees of the Federal Hos-
pital Insurance and Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance trust
funds. Baltimore: Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services; 2015.
Accessed
at
www.cms.gov/research-statistics-data-and-systems
/statistics-trends-and-reports/reportstrustfunds/downloads/tr2015.pdf
on 25 September 2015.
34. American College of Physicians. How is a shortage of primary
care physicians affecting the quality and cost of medical care? A
comprehensive evidence review. Washington, DC: American Col-
lege of Physicians; 2008.
35. Association of American Medical Colleges. Medical school grad-
uation questionnaire: 2013 all schools summary report. Washington,
DC: Association of American Medical Colleges; 2013. Accessed at
www.aamc.org/download/350998/data/2013gqallschoolssummary
report.pdf on 25 September 2015.
36. Schwartz MD, Durning S, Linzer M, Hauer KE. Changes in med-
ical students' views of internal medicine careers from 1990 to 2007.
Arch Intern Med. 2011;171:744-9. [PMID: 21518941] doi:10.1001
/archinternmed.2011.139
37. Association of American Medical Colleges. Medical student ed-
ucation: debt, costs, and loan repayment fact card. Washington, DC:
Association of American Medical Colleges; 2014. Accessed at https:
//members.aamc.org/eweb/upload/2014%20DFC_%20vertical.pdf
on 22 September 2015.
38. Phillips RL, Dodoo MS, Petterson SM, Xierali I, Bazemore A, Te-
evan B, et al. Specialty and geographic distribution of the physician
workforce: what influences medical student and resident choices?
Washington, DC: Robert Graham Center; 2009. Accessed at www
.graham-center.org/dam/rgc/documents/publications-reports
/monographs-books/Specialty-geography-compressed.pdf on
21 April 2016.
39. Association of American Medical Colleges. 2015 state physician
workforce data book. Washington, DC: Association of American
Medical Colleges; 2015. Accessed at http://members.aamc.org
/eweb/upload/2015StateDataBook%20(revised).pdf on 23 February
2016.
40. Dorsey ER, Jarjoura D, Rutecki GW. Influence of controllable life-
style on recent trends in specialty choice by US medical students.
JAMA. 2003;290:1173-8. [PMID: 12952999]
41. Seifer SD, Vranizan K, Grumbach K. Graduate medical education
and physician practice location. Implications for physician workforce
policy. JAMA. 1995;274:685-91. [PMID: 7650819]
42. Mullan F, Chen C, Steinmetz E. The geography of graduate med-
ical education: imbalances signal need for new distribution policies.
Health Aff (Millwood). 2013;32:1914-21. [PMID: 24191080] doi:10
.1377/hlthaff.2013.0545
43. Henderson T. Population grows in South and West, slows in D.C.
and North Dakota. The Washington Post. 11 January 2015. Accessed
at on www.washingtonpost.com/politics/population-grows-in-south
-and-west-slows-in-dc-and-north-dakota/2015/01/11/9789100e
-99dc-11e4-bcfb-059ec7a93ddc_story.html 21 April 2016.
44. Altschuler J, Margolius D, Bodenheimer T, Grumbach K. Estimat-
ing a reasonable patient panel size for primary care physicians with
team-based task delegation. Ann Fam Med. 2012;10:396-400.
[PMID: 22966102] doi:10.1370/afm.1400
45. Green LV, Savin S, Lu Y. Primary care physician shortages could
be eliminated through use of teams, nonphysicians, and electronic
communication.
Health
Aff
(Millwood).
2013;32:11-9.
[PMID:
23297266] doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2012.1086
46. Auerbach DI, Chen PG, Friedberg MW, Reid R, Lau C, Buerhaus
PI, et al. Nurse-managed health centers and patient-centered medi-
cal homes could mitigate expected primary care physician shortage.
Health Aff (Millwood). 2013;32:1933-41. [PMID: 24191083] doi:10
.1377/hlthaff.2013.0596
47. Bodenheimer TS, Smith MD. Primary care: proposed solutions to
the physician shortage without training more physicians. Health Aff
(Millwood). 2013;32:1881-6. [PMID: 24191075] doi:10.1377/hlthaff
.2013.0234
48. Petterson SM, Phillips RL Jr, Bazemore AW, Teevan Burke B,
Koinis GT. Relying on NPs and PAs does not avoid the need for
policy solutions for primary care. Am Fam Physician. 2013;88:230.
[PMID: 23944725]
49. AmericanEHR; American Medical Association. Physicians use of
EHR systems 2014. Naples, Florida: AmericanEHR; 2015. Accessed
at
www.americanehr.com/research/reports/Physicians-Use-of-EHR
-Systems-2014.aspx on 4 September 2015.
50. Conn J. Meaningful use of EHRs by doctors fell in 2014. Modern
Healthcare. 12 August 2015. Accessed at www.modernhealthcare
.com/article/20150812/NEWS/150819976 on 10 September 2015.
51. Council on Graduate Medical Education. Twenty-second report:
the role of graduate medical education in the new health care para-
digm. Rockville, MD: Health Resources & Services Administration;
2014. Accessed at www.hrsa.gov/advisorycommittees/bhpradvisory
/cogme/Reports/22report.pdf on 23 September 2015.
52. Steinmann AF. Threats to graduate medical education funding
and the need for a rational approach: a statement from the alliance
www.annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 165 No. 2 • 19 July 2016
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 for academic internal medicine. Ann Intern Med. 2011;155:461-4.
[PMID: 21969344] doi:10.7326/0003-4819-155-7-201110040-00008
53. Ben-Ari R, Robbins RJ, Pindiprolu S, Goldman A, Parsons PE. The
costs of training internal medicine residents in the United States. Am
J Med. 2014;127:1017-23. [PMID: 25063649] doi:10.1016/j.amjmed
.2014.06.040
54. Health Resources and Service Administration. Shortage designa-
tion: health professional shortage areas & medically underserved ar-
eas/populations. Accessed at www.hrsa.gov/shortage on 17 Sep-
tember 2015.
55. Council on Graduate Medical Education. Physician distribution
and health care challenges in rural and inner-city areas. Washington,
DC: Health Resources and Services Administration; 1998.
56. Zhang X, Phillips RL Jr, Bazemore AW, Dodoo MS, Petterson SM,
Xierali I, et al. Physician distribution and access: workforce priorities.
Am Fam Physician. 2008;77:1378. [PMID: 18853533]
57. Petterson SM, Phillips RL, Bazemore AW, Koinis GT. Unequal
distribution of the U.S. primary care workforce. Washington, DC:
Robert Graham Center; 2013. Accessed at www.graham-center
.org/rgc/publications-reports/publications/one-pagers/unequal
-distribution-2013.html on 21 April 2016.
58. Government Accountability Office. Testimony before the U.S.
Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions, U.S.
Senate: Primary care professionals: recent supply trends, projec-
tions, and valuation of services. GAO-08-472T. Washington, DC:
Government Accountability Office; 2008. Accessed at www.gao.gov
/new.items/d08472t.pdf on 15 September 2015.
59. Martin JC, Avant RF, Bowman MA, Bucholtz JR, Dickinson JR,
Evans KL, et al; Future of Family Medicine Project Leadership Com-
mittee. The Future of Family Medicine: a collaborative project of the
family medicine community. Ann Fam Med. 2004;2 Suppl 1:S3-32.
[PMID: 15080220]
60. American Academy of Family Physicians. Aligning resources, in-
creasing accountability, and delivering a primary care physician
workforce for America. Shawnee, KS: American Academy of Family
Physicians; 2014. Accessed at www.aafp.org/dam/AAFP/documents
/advocacy/workforce/gme/FullGME-090914.pdf on 21 April 2016.
61. National Resident Matching Program. Results and data: special-
ties matching service: 2015 appointment year. Washington, DC: Na-
tional Resident Matching Program; 2015. Accessed at www.nrmp
.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/Results-and-Data-SMS-2015.pdf
on 25 September 2015.
62. Brass LF, Akabas MH, Burnley LD, Engman DM, Wiley CA, An-
dersen OS. Are MD-PhD programs meeting their goals? An analysis
of career choices made by graduates of 24 MD-PhD programs.
Acad Med. 2010;85:692-701. [PMID: 20186033] doi:10.1097/ACM
.0b013e3181d3ca17
63. Nuckols TK, Bhattacharya J, Wolman DM, Ulmer C, Escarce JJ.
Cost implications of reduced work hours and workloads for resident
physicians. N Engl J Med. 2009;360:2202-15. [PMID: 19458365] doi:
10.1056/NEJMsa0810251
64. Nuckols TK, Escarce JJ. Cost implications of ACGME's 2011
changes to resident duty hours and the training environment. J Gen
Intern Med. 2012;27:241-9. [PMID: 21779949] doi:10.1007/s11606
-011-1775-9
65. Association of American Medical Colleges. Medical school en-
rollment to approach 30 percent increase by 2019. Washington, DC:
Association of American Medical Colleges; 2015. Accessed at www
.aamc.org/newsroom/newsreleases/431036/20150430.html on 22
September 2015.
66. Krumholz HM, Nuti SV, Downing NS, Normand SL, Wang Y. Mor-
tality, hospitalizations, and expenditures for the Medicare population
aged 65 years or older, 1999-2013. JAMA. 2015;314:355-65. [PMID:
26219053] doi:10.1001/jama.2015.8035
67. Rieselbach RE, Feldstein DA, Lee PT, Nasca TJ, Rockey PH, Stein-
mann AF, et al. Ambulatory training for primary care general inter-
nists: innovation with the affordable care act in mind. J Grad Med
Educ. 2014;6:395-8. [PMID: 24949177] doi:10.4300/JGME-D-14
-00119.1
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 165 No. 2 • 19 July 2016
www.annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
