 Does Cognitive Training Prevent Cognitive Decline?
A Systematic Review
Mary Butler, PhD, MBA; Ellen McCreedy, PhD; Victoria A. Nelson, MSc; Priyanka Desai, MSPH; Edward Ratner, MD;
Howard A. Fink, MD; Laura S. Hemmy, PhD; J. Riley McCarten, MD; Terry R. Barclay, PhD; Michelle Brasure, PhD, MSPH, MLIS;
Heather Davila, MPA; and Robert L. Kane, MD†
Background: Structured activities to stimulate brain function—
that is, cognitive training exercises—are promoted to slow or pre-
vent cognitive decline, including dementia, but their effective-
ness is highly debated.
Purpose: To summarize evidence on the effects of cognitive
training on cognitive performance and incident dementia out-
comes for adults with normal cognition or mild cognitive impair-
ment (MCI).
Data Sources: Ovid MEDLINE, EMBASE, the Cochrane Central
Register of Controlled Trials, and PsycINFO through July 2017,
supplemented by hand-searches.
Study Selection: Trials (published in English) lasting at least 6
months that compared cognitive training with usual care, waitlist,
information, or attention controls in adults without dementia.
Data Extraction: Single-reviewer extraction of study character-
istics confirmed by a second reviewer; dual-reviewer risk-of-bias
assessment; consensus determination of strength of evidence.
Only studies with low or medium risk of bias were analyzed.
Data Synthesis: Of 11 trials with low or medium risk of bias, 6
enrolled healthy adults with normal cognition and 5 enrolled
adults with MCI. Trainings for healthy older adults were mostly
computer based; those for adults with MCI were mostly held in
group sessions. The MCI trials used attention controls more of-
ten than trials with healthy populations. For healthy older adults,
training improved cognitive performance in the domain trained
but not in other domains (moderate-strength evidence). Results
for populations with MCI suggested no effect of training on per-
formance (low-strength and insufficient evidence). Evidence for
prevention of cognitive decline or dementia was insufficient. Ad-
verse events were not reported.
Limitation: Heterogeneous interventions and outcome mea-
sures; outcomes that mostly assessed test performance rather
than global function or dementia diagnosis; potential publica-
tion bias.
Conclusion: In older adults with normal cognition, training im-
proves cognitive performance in the domain trained. Evidence
regarding prevention or delay of cognitive decline or dementia
is insufficient.
Primary Funding Source: Agency for Healthcare Research and
Quality.
Ann Intern Med. 2018;168:63-68. doi:10.7326/M17-1531
Annals.org
For author affiliations, see end of text.
This article was published at Annals.org on 19 December 2017.
† Deceased.
F
ear of losing one's cognitive ability to Alzheimer dis-
ease and related dementias (ADRD) and ultimately
declining to a state considered by many to be worse
than death (1) is driving a growing “brain-training” in-
dustry. Cognitive training programs, marketed to oth-
erwise healthy adults and persons with a recent diag-
nosis of mild cognitive impairment (MCI), make bold
claims for reversing brain aging. Such claims include
the ability to boost “cognitive reserve” in midlife (with
cognitive reserve referring to both the mismatch be-
tween clinical symptoms of dementia and pathologic
brain lesion load at death and the repeatedly demon-
strated association between educational achievement
and dementia risk). However, few studies have evalu-
ated the effect of cognitive training programs on cog-
nitive decline or the onset of dementia, which is the
outcome of interest for most people who buy these
programs.
This review systematically evaluates the existing lit-
erature on the effectiveness of cognitive training in pre-
venting cognitive decline and ADRD. It is part of a
larger systematic review commissioned by the National
Institute on Aging to address a range of potential inter-
ventions to slow cognitive decline and prevent or delay
dementia.
METHODS
We developed and followed a standard protocol
that was posted on the Agency for Healthcare Research
and Quality (AHRQ) Web site (www.effectivehealthcare
.ahrq.gov). Full details of the methods, including litera-
ture searches, findings, and evidence tables, are avail-
able in the final report (2).
Data Sources and Searches
We searched Ovid MEDLINE, PsycINFO, EMBASE,
and the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials
for relevant literature published between January 2009
and July 2017 (see Part A of the Supplement, available
at Annals.org, for searches) and hand-searched refer-
ence lists of selected articles. We identified studies
published before 2009 by reviewing studies included
See also:
Related articles. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30, 39, 52
Editorial comment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
Web-Only
Supplement
CME/MOC activity
Annals of Internal Medicine
REVIEW
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 1 • 2 January 2018 63
Downloaded From: https://annals.org/ by a Tufts University User  on 07/27/2018
 and excluded from the 2010 AHRQ review on prevent-
ing Alzheimer disease and cognitive decline (3).
Study Selection
Two investigators independently reviewed titles
and abstracts of search results and screened the full
text of potentially eligible references. We included ran-
domized trials of cognitive training interventions enroll-
ing adults with either normal cognition or MCI if the
studies followed participants for at least 6 months, pro-
vided cognitive performance or incident dementia out-
comes, and were published in English. We excluded
studies that enrolled only persons diagnosed with de-
mentia. The final health outcome of interest was inci-
dent ADRD. Intermediate health outcomes of interest
included performance on cognitive testing, biomarker
protein levels, brain matter volume, and brain cell ac-
tivity level. No restrictions were placed on sample size
or comparator type.
Data Extraction and Quality Assessment
One reviewer extracted study, population, inter-
vention, comparator, and setting characteristics as well
as the funding source from all eligible studies. Risk of
bias was assessed independently from full texts by 2
investigators using an instrument based on AHRQ guid-
ance (4). Risk of bias was individually reviewed overall
and for each outcome and time point, and was summa-
rized as low, medium, or high on the basis of a sum-
mary of bias risk across risk-of-bias domains and confi-
dence that results were credible given the study's
limitations. Outcomes and adverse events were ex-
tracted from studies with low to medium risk of bias. A
second reviewer checked the quality of all data.
Data Synthesis and Analysis
Only studies with low or medium risk of bias
were summarized, because we judged findings from
studies with high risk of bias to lack validity, have little
meaning, or be easily misinterpreted. Because studies
used a highly varied set of outcome measures, neuro-
psychological tests were categorized by the following
specific cognitive domains to facilitate analysis: execu-
tive function, attention, and processing speed; mem-
ory; language; and visuospatial abilities (Supplement
Table A1). The domains of executive function, atten-
tion, and processing speed were grouped together be-
cause cognitive tests frequently measure all 3 of these
related domains. Because studies analyzed and re-
ported cognitive test results in many different ways,
making it difficult or impossible to determine effect size
or to assess whether between-group differences in
scores or subscores were clinically meaningful (Supple-
ment Table A2), we analyzed and reported cognitive
test results by direction of effect and statistical signifi-
cance. When we identified at least 2 studies or 1 large
study (>500 participants) for a treatment comparison, 2
reviewers graded strength of evidence for each out-
come on the basis of study limitations, directness, con-
sistency, and precision; otherwise, strength of evidence
was graded as insufficient. Assessments were con-
firmed by consensus.
Role of the Funding Source
The National Institute on Aging of the National In-
stitutes of Health requested this report from the AHRQ
Evidence-based Practice Center Program. The funding
agencies provided comments on draft reports but had
no role in data collection, analysis, interpretation, or
manuscript development.
RESULTS
We identified 35 publications of 34 unique ran-
domized controlled trials of cognitive training interven-
tions, 11 of which had medium or low risk of bias (5–
16). Only 1 trial was industry funded (8), whereas in 3
cases, trial funding was not reported (9, 15, 16). (See
the Supplement Figure and Supplement Tables C1 to
C4 for the literature flow diagram, evidence tables, and
risk-of-bias assessments.)
The Table summarizes the overall strength-of-
evidence
findings.
For
cognitively
normal
adults,
moderate-strength evidence suggests that cognitive
training in a particular domain improves performance
in that domain compared with inactive or attention con-
trol populations. These results are driven largely by the
results from the ACTIVE (Advanced Cognitive Training
for Independent and Vital Elderly) trial. Low-strength
evidence suggests that for persons with MCI, cognitive
training in a particular domain does not improve per-
formance in that domain compared with controls. The
MCI trials have more limitations and are less precise
than the studies conducted with cognitively normal par-
ticipants. Evidence is insufficient for incident MCI or
ADRD outcomes.
Studies in Cognitively Normal Populations
Six trials with low to medium risk of bias tested
training interventions in cognitively normal older adults
(5–10). Sample sizes for the selected studies ranged
from 40 to 2832 participants. Interventions lasted from
2 weeks to 6 months; follow-up ranged from 6 months
to 2 years. Three of the 6 trials used only computer-
based interventions (6–8), 2 used a combination of
computer and noncomputer (paper-and-pencil) inter-
ventions (5, 9), and 1 used group-based competition
to increase divergent thinking (10). Three of the
computer-based interventions were designed to in-
crease performance on a specific cognitive domain
(such as processing speed) (5, 6, 9), 1 used computers
for cognitive stimulation more generally (7), and 1 used
a computer program designed to train several cogni-
tive domains (8). Comparators included both inactive
(5, 7, 8, 10) and attention controls (6, 9). No studies
reported adverse effects.
The largest trial of cognitive training, ACTIVE,
randomly assigned 2832 older adults (mean age, 74
years) without clinically significant cognitive impairment
to 1 of 3 training groups or a no-contact control group
(5). In each training group, a different cognitive domain
was
targeted:
memory,
reasoning,
or
processing
speed. Participants in the intervention groups received
10 trainings of 60 to 70 minutes over 6 weeks. Cogni-
REVIEW
Does Cognitive Training Prevent Cognitive Decline?
64 Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 1 • 2 January 2018
Annals.org
Downloaded From: https://annals.org/ by a Tufts University User  on 07/27/2018
 tive testing outcomes included measuring changes
in domain-specific test performance. Patient-centered
cognitive outcomes included measuring changes in ev-
eryday problem solving (such as the ability to identify
information on medication bottles), everyday speed
(such as the time required to find food items on a gro-
cery shelf), driving, and degree of dependency in com-
pleting activities of daily living and instrumental activi-
ties of daily living. Incident MCI or ADRD was not a
prespecified outcome.
Although
5-
and
10-year
outcomes
from
the
ACTIVE trial have been published (17, 18), only the re-
sults from the 2-year study had a medium risk of bias
(5). At 2 years, ACTIVE participants showed improve-
ment in the cognitive domains in which they were
trained (for example, those who received memory train-
ing improved on memory-related tasks compared with
control participants), but no statistically significant dif-
ferences were found among groups with regard to
other cognitive outcomes (for example, persons who
received training in memory did not do better than
control participants on reasoning tasks). Intervention
and control groups did not differ in other patient-
centered cognitive outcomes at 2-year follow-up.
Modeled on the visual process and speed training
group of the ACTIVE trial, IHAMS (the Iowa Healthy and
Active Minds Study) (n = 681) (6) randomly assigned
adults by age group (50 to 64 years vs. ≥65 years) to
visual processing speed training at the study center,
visual processing speed training on the participant's
home computer, or computerized crossword puzzles
(attention control group). Two-hour training sessions
were held once a week for 5 weeks. Participants as-
signed to the intervention at the training center also
received a booster training at 11 months. One year af-
ter training, both intervention groups showed statisti-
cally significant improvement in the primary outcome
of the Useful Field of View test compared with the at-
tention control group.
The IHAMS participants also were administered 8
secondary cognitive tests on which they had not been
trained. These tests were primarily within the executive
functioning, attention, or processing speed domains.
The intervention groups showed improvement in the
Symbol Digit Modalities and Stroop Word tests com-
pared with the attention control participants. The
home training group showed improvement in parts A
and B of the Trail Making Test compared with the con-
trol group. However, the training center–only group
showed improvement only in Trails A, whereas the
training center–booster group showed improvement
only in Trails B, compared with the control group. No
differences were found among groups with regard to
the other 4 secondary tests.
Miller and colleagues (8) (n = 84) randomly as-
signed participants to a computerized brain-training
Table. Summary of Conclusions and Strength of Evidence for Cognitive Training in Adults With Normal Cognition or MCI*
Outcome
Conclusion for Normal Cognition
Strength of Evidence
(Justification)
Conclusion for MCI
Strength of Evidence
(Justification)
Dementia
No data
Insufficient
Unable to draw conclusion
(k = 1; n = 24; 28 mo)
Insufficient (high study
limitations, imprecise)
MCI
No data
Insufficient
Not applicable
Not applicable
Reasoning
ACTIVE trial: Improvement with
reasoning training; no differences
with memory or processing speed
training
Other trials: Improvement with
reasoning training (k = 2; n = 3293;
24 mo)
Moderate (medium
study limitations,
indirect)
No data
Insufficient
Executive function/attention/
processing speed
ACTIVE trial: Improvement with
processing speed training; no
differences with reasoning or memory
training
Other trials: Improvement with
executive function, attention, or
processing speed training (2 of 3 tests
significant); less improvement with
training in other domains or general
cognitive training (4 of 12 tests
significant) (k = 4; n = 4233; 24 mo)
Moderate (medium
study limitations,
indirect)
No improvement in
executive function,
attention, or processing
speed with training (1 of
14 tests significant)
(k = 4; n = 429; 28 mo)
Low (medium study
limitations, indirect,
imprecise)
Memory
ACTIVE trial: Improvement with memory
training intervention; no differences
with reasoning or processing speed
training
Other trials: Some improvement with
memory-specific training (6 of 11 tests
significant) (k = 5; n = 3676; 24 mo)
Moderate (medium
study limitations,
indirect)
No improvement in
memory with training
(3 of 19 tests significant)
(k = 5; n = 448; 28 mo)
Low (medium study
limitations, indirect,
imprecise)
Verbal
ACTIVE trial: No data
Other trials: No improvement with
nonverbal-specific training (0 of 3
tests significant) (k = 3; n = 1024;
12 mo)
Low (medium study
limitations, indirect,
imprecise)
No improvement in verbal
skills with training (0 of
1 test significant) (k = 1;
n = 160; 12 mo)
Insufficient (high study
limitations, imprecise)
ACTIVE = Advanced Cognitive Training for Independent and Vital Elderly; MCI = mild cognitive impairment.
* “No differences” refers to no statistically significant differences.
Does Cognitive Training Prevent Cognitive Decline?
REVIEW
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 1 • 2 January 2018 65
Downloaded From: https://annals.org/ by a Tufts University User  on 07/27/2018
 program addressing 6 domains (short- and long-term
memory, language, visuospatial processing, reasoning,
and calculation) or to a waitlist control group. Cogni-
tively normal participants were asked to use the pro-
gram 20 to 25 minutes a day, 5 days a week, for 8
weeks. Outcomes were evaluated by domain-specific
tests of delayed memory, immediate memory, and lan-
guage (visuospatial processing, reasoning, and calcula-
tion were not evaluated). Outcomes were evaluated
at baseline and at 2 and 6 months. Only overall domain
scores were reported, of which only delayed memory
showed
statistically
significant
improvement
from
training.
Carretti and colleagues (9) (n = 40) randomly as-
signed volunteers to individual-level working-memory
training using audio recordings for word recall and
computers for text recall versus a no-intervention
control. Participants in the intervention group were
asked to complete three 50- to 70-minute training ses-
sions over 2 weeks. At 6 months, those receiving
working-memory training showed statistically signifi-
cant improvement in working memory and listening
comprehension compared with the control partici-
pants. No statistically significant differences were found
in reading comprehension or fluid intelligence be-
tween groups.
Klusmann and colleagues (7) (n = 259) randomly
assigned women older than 70 years to a computer-
based cognitive intervention or a nonintervention con-
trol group. (A physical exercise group is not included in
this review.) The cognitive intervention group attended
90-minute computer courses taught approximately 3
times per week for 6 months. Course activities included
learning to use e-mail and the Internet, taking and ed-
iting pictures or videos, playing games, word process-
ing, and drawing. Six months after the intervention, the
cognitive training group had a statistically significant
improvement in immediate and delayed story recall,
long-delay free recall, and Trail Making Test parts A
and B compared with control participants. Groups did
not differ in short-delay free recall, semantic verbal flu-
ency, or Stroop test results.
Stine-Morrow and colleagues (10) (n = 461) ran-
domly assigned older adults (mean age, 73 years) to a
group intervention aimed at engagement and problem
solving, an individual intervention with cognitive train-
ing in reasoning, or a waitlist control group. Participants
in the group intervention were divided into teams, at-
tended weekly practice sessions, and competed in a
tournament in which teams were judged on their ability
to develop novel solutions to problems. The individual
training consisted of paper-and-pencil weekly lessons
and activities focused on inductive reasoning. Both ac-
tive interventions lasted for 16 weeks. Posttests were
conducted between 30 and 32 weeks. At 8 months,
participants in the individual training showed greater
improvement in reasoning (the skill in which they were
trained) than the engagement or control group. Partic-
ipants in the group intervention showed greater im-
provement in divergent thinking (also the skill they
practiced) than those in the training and waitlist groups.
No generalized treatment effects were observed on
composites of processing speed, visuospatial abilities,
or verbal episodic memory in either intervention group.
Studies in Adults With MCI
We identified 5 trials with low to medium risk of
bias that enrolled adults with MCI (11–16). Sample sizes
ranged from 19 to 223 participants. Nearly all the inter-
ventions included a component that provided memory
training; however, additional components varied. Inter-
ventions lasted 6 weeks to 6 months; follow-up was
6 to 28 months. Most interventions were delivered in
small groups (11–14, 16); 1 was delivered individually
through a computer (15). Only 1 trial measured conver-
sion to ADRD or biomarkers related to ADRD pathol-
ogy (13, 14). Two of the 5 trials used an educational
control (11, 12), 2 used an attention control (13–15),
and 1 had an inactive control group (16). No studies
reported adverse effects.
Kwok and colleagues (1) (n = 223) randomly as-
signed persons with subjective memory problems
(mean Mini-Mental State Examination [MMSE] score,
26 points) to receive cognitive training based on the
ACTIVE protocol or to attend health-related educa-
tional lectures (12). Small-group cognitive training
classes were led by occupational therapists 1.5 hours
per week for 12 weeks. Groups did not differ on 5 sub-
scales of the Chinese version of the Mattis Dementia
Rating Scale after the intervention or at 1 year. How-
ever, some subgroup analyses by education level
showed that training was more effective for participants
with less education.
Vidovich and colleagues (11) (n = 160) randomly
assigned older adults with MCI to a multidomain cog-
nitive activity program or an educational control group.
The small-group cognitive strategy training sessions,
led by a clinical psychologist, focused on attention,
memory, and executive processes. Participants at-
tended 90-minute sessions twice a week for 5 weeks.
Of the 11 cognitive tests reported, none showed a sta-
tistically significant effect of the intervention compared
with the educational control.
Buschert and Fo
¨ rster and their colleagues (13, 14)
(n = 24) randomly assigned participants with MCI
(mean MMSE score, 26 points) to either memory train-
ing and social engagement or a control condition that
involved monthly paper-and-pencil activities. A cross-
over design was used. For 6 months, participants in the
intervention group received 120 minutes per week of
training and engagement in a small-group setting. Of
the 2 reported global measures of cognition, only the
Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale–Cognitive Sub-
scale showed improvement in the intervention group
compared with the control group. This improvement
was sustained for 22 months after the intervention. One
of the 4 domain-specific tests, the Repeatable Battery
for
Neuropsychological
Status
(RBANS)
Immediate
Memory Index, showed statistically significant improve-
ment with the intervention compared with the control;
RBANS Delayed Memory and Trail Making Test A and B
results were not statistically significantly improved by
REVIEW
Does Cognitive Training Prevent Cognitive Decline?
66 Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 1 • 2 January 2018
Annals.org
Downloaded From: https://annals.org/ by a Tufts University User  on 07/27/2018
 the intervention. Conversion to Alzheimer disease oc-
curred in half the participants in the control or delayed-
intervention group and none of those in the early-
intervention group during the 28-month follow-up.
Herrera and colleagues (15) (n = 22) randomly as-
signed adults with MCI (mean MMSE score, 27 points)
to computer-based memory and attention training or
computer-based cognitive activities (such as organizing
a list of purchases in categories) as a control condition.
Participants received 2 hours of training per week for
12 weeks. The authors categorized the measured cog-
nitive tests as recognition (Doors Recognition Sets A
and B, DMS48), working memory (Digit Span Forward
and Backward), and recall (BEM-144 12-word list, 16
items free and cued, MMSE-3 words, Rey Complex
Figure). Results were mixed. Compared with partici-
pants in the control group, those receiving the inter-
vention had improvement in 1 of 3 recognition tests
(Doors, Set A), 1 of 2 working memory tests (Digit Span
Forward), and 2 of 4 recall tests (BEM-144 and MMSE).
Rapp and colleagues (16) (n = 19) randomly as-
signed participants with MCI (mean MMSE score, 28
points) to either memory training and education or a
no-intervention control group. The memory training
was delivered in small groups by clinical geropsycholo-
gists 2 hours per week for 6 weeks. The study reported
8 objective memory measures, both immediate and de-
layed: word lists, shopping lists, names and faces, and
paragraphs. No statistically significant effects of training
were seen at 6 months on any of the measures.
DISCUSSION
Many consumers of cognitive training programs
wish to stave off dementia or slow the progression of an
already-diagnosed cognitive deficit. However, only 1
small trial (12 participants per group) measured pro-
gression to ADRD, and no included trials reported inci-
dent MCI among cognitively normal participants. In-
stead of reporting incident MCI or ADRD, most of
the trials measured intermediate outcomes of test
performance. The evidence suggests that cognitive
training improves cognitive test performance in other-
wise healthy older adults, for the domain trained
(5, 6, 9, 10). The ACTIVE trial provides the most com-
pelling evidence for domain-specific improvements in
performance after cognitive training, particularly for
processing speed training (effect sizes were larger for
speed of processing than for memory or reasoning
training) (5). However, these gains do not seem to gen-
eralize to domains not trained.
Evidence for an effect of cognitive training on
adults who already have MCI or other subjective mem-
ory loss seems less encouraging. Three of the 5 trials
found no statistically significant effects of the training
on cognitive testing (24 comparisons between inter-
vention and control groups) (11, 12, 16). The other 2
small trials found mixed results of training on cognitive
testing outcomes for people with MCI (13, 15).
Attrition is a major barrier to conducting cognitive
training trials to assess long-term, patient-centered out-
comes. In the ACTIVE trial, attrition at 5 years was 33%
and was similar for all groups, including control partic-
ipants (17); attrition at 10 years was 57% and, again,
was similar across groups (18). Only about 18% of the
sample loss at 5 years was attributable to death (17).
Efforts were made to assess the effect of attrition, but
none adequately addressed potential bias. Regular
contact with the cohorts was not maintained, and rea-
sons for sample loss were not well-established.
The evidence base for this review has limitations
beyond attrition. Selected studies used many different
validated and investigator-designed cognitive mea-
sures that often were combined into aggregate scores,
making comparisons difficult and statistical summariza-
tion impossible. Trials sometimes included many per-
formance test outcomes; whether positive performance
test results were preferentially reported (publication
bias) could not be assessed. Most studies were small
and were not designed to evaluate clinically meaning-
ful changes in global function or prevention of cogni-
tive decline and dementia. Participants' adherence to
the interventions was not directly reported in most
cases.
Our findings are more positive than those of the
other systematic reviews of randomized controlled tri-
als of cognitive interventions that we identified in our
literature searches (19–21). Clare and colleagues (20)
and Bahar-Fuchs and coworkers (19) found no benefit
from cognitive training and insufficient evidence for
cognitive rehabilitation. Both reviews focused on per-
sons with Alzheimer disease and vascular dementia,
whereas our review focused on those with healthy cog-
nition or MCI. Although Martin and colleagues (21)
found some improvements in memory outcomes for
persons with healthy cognition or MCI who received
memory training, these gains did not exceed those in
the active control groups. However, the authors did not
require at least 6 months of follow-up in their inclusion
criteria. In addition, their review did not evaluate non-
memory outcomes because of insufficient data for
pooling. Because of data limitations, we did not pool,
but we did qualitatively analyze all available evidence,
providing a more comprehensive assessment of inter-
mediate outcomes. All 3 reviews note substantial limi-
tations in the consistency and methodological quality
of the literature on cognitive training interventions.
We found that in older adults with presumed nor-
mal cognition, cognitive training seems to provide
some protection against diminishing performance in
the domain of training but no broader cognitive or
functional benefit. Evidence was insufficient regarding
whether cognitive training reduces the risk for future
MCI or dementia. At this time, not enough evidence is
available for health care providers to endorse or en-
courage any specific cognitive training to reduce the
risk for cognitive decline or incident dementia. Patients
may require education about how to interpret advertis-
ing for cognitive training programs and products.
From University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota; Brown
University, Providence, Rhode Island; Minneapolis VA Health
Does Cognitive Training Prevent Cognitive Decline?
REVIEW
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 1 • 2 January 2018 67
Downloaded From: https://annals.org/ by a Tufts University User  on 07/27/2018
 Care System, Minneapolis, Minnesota; University of Minnesota
and Minneapolis VA Health Care System, Minneapolis, Minne-
sota; and HealthPartners, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
Disclaimer: Findings and conclusions are those of the authors,
who are responsible for the article's contents; findings and
conclusions do not necessarily represent views of AHRQ. No
statement in this report should be construed as an official
position of AHRQ or the U.S. Department of Health and Hu-
man Services.
Financial Support: This manuscript is based on research con-
ducted by the Minnesota Evidence-based Practice Center un-
der AHRQ contract 290-2015-00008-I.
Disclosures: Drs. Hemmy and Barclay report grant support
from AHRQ during the conduct of the study. Authors not
named here have disclosed no conflicts of interest. Disclo-
sures can also be viewed at www.acponline.org/authors/icmje
/ConflictOfInterestForms.do?msNum=M17-1531.
Reproducible Research Statement: Study protocol: Available
at https://effectivehealthcare.ahrq.gov. Statistical code: Not
applicable. Data set: See Systematic Review Data Repository
at https://srdr.ahrq.gov/.
Requests for Single Reprints: Mary Butler, PhD, MBA, Division
of Health Policy and Management, University of Minnesota,
420 Delaware Street Southeast, Mayo Memorial Building
D351, Minneapolis, MN 55455; e-mail, butl0092@umn.edu.
Current author addresses and author contributions are avail-
able at Annals.org.
References
1. Patrick DL, Starks HE, Cain KC, Uhlmann RF, Pearlman RA. Mea-
suring preferences for health states worse than death. Med Decis
Making. 1994;14:9-18. [PMID: 8152361]
2. Kane R, Butler M, Fink H, Brasure M, Davila H, Desai P, et al.
Interventions to Prevent Age-Related Cognitive Decline, Mild Cogni-
tive Impairment, and Clinical Alzheimer's-Type Dementia. Compara-
tive Effectiveness Review no. 188. (Prepared by the Minnesota
Evidence-based Practice Center under contract no. 290-2015-
00008-I.) AHRQ publication no. 17-EHC008-EF. Rockville: Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality; February 2017. Accessed at www
.effectivehealthcare.ahrq.gov/reports/final.cfm on 3 October 2017.
3. Williams JW, Plassman BL, Burke J, Benjamin S. Preventing Alz-
heimer's disease and cognitive decline. Evid Rep Technol Assess
(Full Rep). 2010:1-727. [PMID: 21500874]
4. Viswanathan M, Ansari MT, Berkman ND, Chang S, Hartling L,
McPheeters M, et al. Assessing the risk of bias of individual studies in
systematic reviews of health care interventions. In: Methods Guide
for Effectiveness and Comparative Effectiveness Reviews. AHRQ
publication no. 12-EHC047-EF. Rockville: Agency for Healthcare Re-
search and Quality; 2012.
5. Ball K, Berch DB, Helmers KF, Jobe JB, Leveck MD, Marsiske M,
et al; Advanced Cognitive Training for Independent and Vital El-
derly Study Group. Effects of cognitive training interventions with
older adults: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2002;288:2271-
81. [PMID: 12425704]
6. Wolinsky FD, Vander Weg MW, Howren MB, Jones MP, Dotson
MM. A randomized controlled trial of cognitive training using a visual
speed of processing intervention in middle aged and older adults.
PLoS One. 2013;8:e61624. [PMID: 23650501] doi:10.1371/journal
.pone.0061624
7. Klusmann V, Evers A, Schwarzer R, Schlattmann P, Reischies FM,
Heuser I, et al. Complex mental and physical activity in older women
and cognitive performance: a 6-month randomized controlled trial. J
Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2010;65:680-8. [PMID: 20418350] doi:
10.1093/gerona/glq053
8. Miller KJ, Dye RV, Kim J, Jennings JL, O’Toole E, Wong J, et al.
Effect of a computerized brain exercise program on cognitive per-
formance in older adults. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2013;21:655-63.
[PMID: 23602310] doi:10.1016/j.jagp.2013.01.077
9. Carretti B, Borella E, Zavagnin M, de Beni R. Gains in language
comprehension relating to working memory training in healthy older
adults. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2013;28:539-46. [PMID: 22821686]
doi:10.1002/gps.3859
10. Stine-Morrow EA, Payne BR, Roberts BW, Kramer AF, Morrow
DG, Payne L, et al. Training versus engagement as paths to cognitive
enrichment with aging. Psychol Aging. 2014;29:891-906. [PMID:
25402337] doi:10.1037/a0038244
11. Vidovich MR, Lautenschlager NT, Flicker L, Clare L, McCaul K,
Almeida OP. The PACE study: a randomized clinical trial of cognitive
activity strategy training for older people with mild cognitive impair-
ment. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2015;23:360-72. [PMID: 24801607]
doi:10.1016/j.jagp.2014.04.002
12. Kwok TC, Bai X, Li JC, Ho FK, Lee TM. Effectiveness of cognitive
training in Chinese older people with subjective cognitive com-
plaints: a randomized placebo-controlled trial. Int J Geriatr Psychia-
try. 2013;28:208-15. [PMID: 22528470] doi:10.1002/gps.3812
13. Buschert VC, Giegling I, Teipel SJ, Jolk S, Hampel H, Rujescu D,
et al. Long-term observation of a multicomponent cognitive inter-
vention in mild cognitive impairment. J Clin Psychiatry. 2012;73:
e1492-8. [PMID: 23290333] doi:10.4088/JCP.11m07270
14. Fo
¨ rster S, Buschert VC, Teipel SJ, Friese U, Buchholz HG, Dr-
zezga A, et al. Effects of a 6-month cognitive intervention on brain
metabolism in patients with amnestic MCI and mild Alzheimer's dis-
ease. J Alzheimers Dis. 2011;26 Suppl 3:337-48. [PMID: 21971473]
doi:10.3233/JAD-2011-0025
15. Herrera C, Chambon C, Michel BF, Paban V, Alescio-Lautier B.
Positive effects of computer-based cognitive training in adults with
mild cognitive impairment. Neuropsychologia. 2012;50:1871-81.
[PMID: 22525705] doi:10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2012.04.012
16. Rapp S, Brenes G, Marsh AP. Memory enhancement training for
older adults with mild cognitive impairment: a preliminary study. Ag-
ing Ment Health. 2002;6:5-11. [PMID: 11827617]
17. Willis SL, Tennstedt SL, Marsiske M, Ball K, Elias J, Koepke KM,
et al; ACTIVE Study Group. Long-term effects of cognitive training
on everyday functional outcomes in older adults. JAMA. 2006;296:
2805-14. [PMID: 17179457]
18. Rebok GW, Ball K, Guey LT, Jones RN, Kim HY, King JW, et al;
ACTIVE Study Group. Ten-year effects of the advanced cognitive
training for independent and vital elderly cognitive training trial on
cognition and everyday functioning in older adults. J Am Geriatr Soc.
2014;62:16-24. [PMID: 24417410] doi:10.1111/jgs.12607
19. Bahar-Fuchs A, Clare L, Woods B. Cognitive training and cogni-
tive rehabilitation for mild to moderate Alzheimer's disease and vas-
cular dementia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013:CD003260.
[PMID: 23740535] doi:10.1002/14651858.CD003260.pub2
20. Clare L, Woods RT, Moniz Cook ED, Orrell M, Spector A. Cogni-
tive rehabilitation and cognitive training for early-stage Alzheimer's
disease and vascular dementia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2003:
CD003260. [PMID: 14583963]
21. Martin M, Clare L, Altgassen AM, Cameron MH, Zehnder F.
Cognition-based interventions for healthy older people and people
with mild cognitive impairment. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011:
CD006220. [PMID: 21249675] doi:10.1002/14651858.CD006220
.pub2
REVIEW
Does Cognitive Training Prevent Cognitive Decline?
68 Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 1 • 2 January 2018
Annals.org
Downloaded From: https://annals.org/ by a Tufts University User  on 07/27/2018
 Current Author Addresses: Drs. Butler and Brasure, Ms. Nel-
son, Ms. Desai, and Ms. Davila: Division of Health Policy and
Management, University of Minnesota, 420 Delaware Street
Southeast, Mayo Memorial Building D351, Minneapolis, MN
55455.
Dr. McCreedy: Center for Gerontology and Healthcare Re-
search, Brown University, School of Public Health, 121 South
Main Street, Suite 6, Providence, RI 02903.
Drs. Ratner, Fink, Hemmy, and McCarten: Geriatric Research
Education and Clinical Center, VA Health Care System, One
Veterans Drive, 11-G, Minneapolis, MN 55417.
Dr. Barclay: Department of Neurology, University of Minne-
sota, 295 Phalen Boulevard, Mailstop 41203C, St. Paul, MN
55130.
Author Contributions: Conception and design: M. Butler, H.A.
Fink, L.S. Hemmy, J.R. McCarten, M. Brasure, R.L. Kane.
Analysis
and
interpretation
of
the
data:
M.
Butler,
E.
McCreedy, V.A. Nelson, P. Desai, E. Ratner, H.A. Fink, L.S.
Hemmy, J.R. McCarten, T.R. Barclay, M. Brasure, R.L. Kane.
Drafting of the article: M. Butler, E. McCreedy, V.A. Nelson, P.
Desai, T.R. Barclay, M. Brasure, R.L. Kane.
Critical revision for important intellectual content: M. Butler, E.
Ratner, H.A. Fink, L.S. Hemmy, J.R. McCarten, T.R. Barclay, B.
Brasure.
Final approval of the article: M. Butler, E. McCreedy, V.A. Nel-
son, P. Desai, E. Ratner, H.A. Fink, L.S. Hemmy, J.R. McCarten,
T.R. Barclay, M. Brasure, H. Davila.
Provision of study materials or patients: M. Brasure.
Obtaining of funding: M. Butler, H.A. Fink, M. Brasure, R.L.
Kane.
Administrative, technical, or logistic support: V.A. Nelson, P.
Desai, M. Brasure, H. Davila.
Collection and assembly of data: M. Butler, E. McCreedy, V.A.
Nelson, P. Desai, M. Brasure, H. Davila.
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 168 No. 1 • 2 January 2018
Downloaded From: https://annals.org/ by a Tufts University User  on 07/27/2018
