 INTRODUCTION
Women are vulnerable to a variety of 
psychological 
difficulties 
during 
the 
perinatal period. Such women may be 
reluctant to access health care and to 
disclose their mental health symptoms, 
potentially 
adversely 
affecting 
the 
development of their child and the wellbeing 
of their partner
.1 To address this situation, a 
greater understanding of what influences 
women’s behaviour is needed. The existing 
literature focuses predominantly on North 
American populations rather than perinatal 
populations in the UK, where perinatal 
health care is more easily accessible. 
Therefore, this study reports a meta-
synthesis of the qualitative literature on 
what influences women’s help-seeking 
behaviour for perinatal distress in the UK. 
The concept of perinatal psychological 
distress is not well defined in the literature, 
but is closely linked to stress and coping. 
Although some stressors may be adaptive, 
psychological distress, generally, involves 
a maladaptive psychological response 
to a demand. This creates an adverse 
emotional state, which may be reflected 
in a person’s behaviour, possibly causing 
them ‘harm’, for example, by adversely 
affecting interpersonal relationships.2 It 
encompasses a range of psychological 
symptoms, such as anxiety, stress, and 
depression, arising from a variety of 
stressors.3
The concept of ‘help seeking’ is discussed 
in the general health literature. It is viewed 
as a decision-making process, where action 
is preceded by recognising a problem and a 
conscious decision to do something about 
it.4 It includes seeking both professional and 
non-professional sources of help.5
Help seeking is affected by an individual’s 
health beliefs and expectations — particularly 
beliefs about control over their symptoms, 
how long symptoms might last, and negative 
consequences.6 It is also affected by stigma 
— both personal beliefs (self-stigma) and 
others’ perceptions. Stigma is one of the 
primary barriers to seeking help for mental 
health concerns, particularly among men, 
young people, those from ethnic minority 
or military backgrounds, and health 
professions.7 Although many distressed 
people seek informal help for their 
symptoms, only around 40% of these seek 
professional help.8 Perception of positive 
consequences may increase the likelihood 
of seeking help.9 This may be influenced by 
a person who has previously sought help 
themselves or who recommends such an 
action.8 Cultural factors influence choice 
of help-seeking strategy, for example, the 
use of a traditional healer
. Primary care 
services are often used following informal 
consultation with another person.10
Barriers to help seeking for perinatal 
psychological distress include the woman’s 
inability to disclose her feelings, cultural 
Research
Abstract
Background
Women may not seek help for perinatal 
psychological distress, despite regular contact 
with primary care services. Barriers include 
ignorance of symptoms, inability to disclose 
distress, others’ attitudes, and cultural 
expectations. Much of the evidence has been 
obtained from North American populations and 
may not, therefore, extrapolate to the UK. 
Aim
To understand the factors affecting women’s 
decision to seek help for perinatal distress.
Design and setting
Meta-synthesis of the available published 
qualitative evidence on UK women’s experiences 
of seeking help for perinatal distress. 
Method
Systematic searches were conducted in 
accordance with PRISMA guidelines. Databases 
searched were PubMed, Scopus, PsycINFO, 
PsycARTICLES, CINAHL, and Academic 
Search Complete. Searches of grey literature 
and references were also conducted. Studies 
were eligible for inclusion if they reported 
qualitative data on UK women’s experiences of 
perinatal distress and contact with healthcare 
professionals. The synthesis was conducted 
using meta-ethnography. 
Results
In all, 24 studies were eligible for inclusion. 
Metasynthesis identified three main themes: 
identifying a problem, the influence of 
healthcare professionals, and stigma. These 
themes build on current understanding of help 
seeking by identifying the need for women to be 
able to frame their experience, for healthcare 
professionals to educate women about their 
roles, the need for continuity of care, and the 
way that being seen as a ‘bad mother’ causes 
women to self-silence. 
Conclusion
Perinatal care provision needs to allow for 
continuity of care and for staff training that 
facilitates awareness of factors that influence 
women’s help seeking. Further research is 
required, particularly in relation to effective means 
of identifying perinatal psychological distress.
Keywords
help-seeking behaviour; perinatal care; 
postnatal depression; psychological distress; 
seeking help, stigma.
S Button, PhD, nurse teacher, Department of 
Adult Nursing and Paramedic Science, Faculty of 
Education and Health, University of Greenwich, 
London. A Thornton, MSc, research assistant; 
S Lee, RM, lecturer in midwifery; S Ayers, PhD, 
professor of child and maternal health, Centre for 
Maternal and Child Health Research, School of 
Health Sciences, City, University of London, London. 
J Shakespeare, GP (retired), MRCP, FRCP, Royal 
College of General Practitioners, London.
Address for correspondence
Suzanne Lee, Centre for Maternal and Child 
Health Research, School of Health Sciences, 
City, University of London, Northampton Square, 
London, EC1V 0HB, UK.
E-mail: Suzanne.Lee.1@city.ac.uk 
Submitted: 12 December 2016; Editor’s response: 
8 March 2017; final acceptance: 10 May 2017.
©British Journal of General Practice
This is the full-length article (published online 
29 Aug 2017) of an abridged version published in 
print. Cite this version as: Br J Gen Pract 2017; 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.3399/bjgp17X692549
Susan Button, Alexandra Thornton, Suzanne Lee, Judy Shakespeare and Susan Ayers
Seeking help for perinatal psychological distress:
a meta-synthesis of women’s experiences
e692  British Journal of General Practice, October 2017
 obstacles, ignorance about symptoms of 
postnatal depression (PND), and/or how 
to obtain help, and the attitudes of family, 
friends, and healthcare professionals 
(HCPs).11 However, research has focused 
almost exclusively on PND in non-UK 
samples and is concerned with treatment 
preference rather than help-seeking per 
se. In the UK, services are structured 
differently. Access to help for perinatal 
distress is usually through primary care 
services, such as the GP, midwife, or health 
visitor, and is provided free at the point 
of delivery. Furthermore, UK guidance 
regarding perinatal mental health suggests 
that women should be screened on first 
contact with health services to identify those 
who may need further assessment. It also 
recognises that women may choose not to 
disclose their distress.12 This review focuses 
on help seeking in women experiencing 
perinatal psychological distress in the UK, 
where systematic, structural barriers to 
accessing help are reduced due to care 
being provided free at the point of delivery.
METHOD
Search strategy
Searches were conducted in accordance 
with the PRISMA statement,13 in Academic 
Search Complete, CINAHL, PsycARTICLES, 
PsycINFO, PubMed, and Scopus. Boolean 
search terms combined help-seeking terms 
with perinatal and mental health terms, 
and returned 10 954 articles (Figure 1). A 
search of the grey literature and back-
searching identified 26 additional articles. 
Duplicates were removed (n = 1886). Titles 
and abstracts were screened, and 37 full-
text articles were examined for eligibility. 
Eligibility
Articles were eligible if they presented 
primary research evidence from the UK 
concerning women seeking help for 
psychological distress experienced during 
pregnancy or the first year postpartum. 
Articles were excluded if they concerned 
only non-UK populations, did not report 
evidence 
regarding 
help-seeking, 
if 
participants had not experienced distress, 
or if they did not present primary data. A 
total of 24 studies met these criteria.
Quality assessment
The quality of the studies was assessed using 
the Critical Appraisal Skills Programme 
guidelines.14 Quality varied from good to very 
good (range 0.5–0.85, further information 
available from the author on request). No 
studies were excluded on grounds of quality.
Analytic strategy
The meta-synthesis was performed by two 
researchers independently using a meta-
ethnographic approach.15 This allows data 
from different studies to be synthesised, 
preserving the terminology of the original 
studies and, therefore, the meaning.16 
Articles were read and key themes 
extracted. Each theme was tabulated and 
illustrated with first- and second-order 
constructs:17 specifically, direct quotes 
from participants (first order) and authors’ 
analysis of interview content (second order). 
Common themes emerged through 
the process of reciprocal and refutational 
translation.15 The meta-synthesis was 
constructed using second-order constructs. 
How this fits in
Psychological distress and problems are 
common in pregnant women and new 
mothers, but very few women access 
treatment. Awareness of women’s 
experiences is important to inform primary 
healthcare practitioners of how best to 
help women with perinatal distress. The 
authors reviewed qualitative studies of 
women’s experiences of seeking help for 
psychological distress in the UK. Findings 
showed that women’s help seeking is 
influenced by identifying something is 
wrong, their experience with healthcare 
professionals, and stigma. 
Studies included in
qualitative synthesis
(n = 24)
Full-text articles assessed 
for eligibility
(n = 37)
Records screened
(n = 9094)
Records excluded
(n = 9057)
Records after duplicates removed
(n = 9094)
Records identified through 
database search
(n = 10 954)
Additional records identified 
through other sources
(n = 26)
Full-text articles excluded (n = 13):
 
Non-UK populations (n = 3)
 
No evidence regarding help 
 
seeking (n = 7)
 
Participants did not report 
 
distress (n = 2)
 
No primary data reported (n = 1)
Figure 1. Flow diagram of study selection.
British Journal of General Practice, October 2017  e693
 First-order constructs were used to 
illustrate and directly support themes, while 
enabling them to be traced back to the 
original studies. Researchers subsequently 
created third-order constructs (‘the views 
and interpretations of the synthesis team’)17 
in order to generate new understandings of 
the data. These third-order constructs were 
discussed and agreed by the wider research 
team. First-order constructs were used to 
support and validate the findings. 
RESULTS
All 24 studies identified were concerned 
with seeking help for PND. Nine explored 
this concept in minority groups living 
in the UK.18–26 Three studies had mixed 
samples,27–29 five had predominantly white 
samples,30–34 and seven did not report 
ethnicity,35–41 21 used interviews to gather 
data, four with focus groups.
Three key themes emerged from the 
meta-synthesis: identifying a problem, the 
healthcare experience, and stigma (Table 1). 
Identifying a problem
Identification of a problem was the first step 
in the help-seeking process. Some women 
identified for themselves that something 
was ‘wrong’ and were able to seek help:
‘That’s when I thought, you know: 
“Something is really wrong here, I need to 
go to the doctors if I’m thinking about killing 
myself.”’ 
31 
This process was facilitated if women had 
previously experienced difficulties: 
‘It did help a bit last time, not, you know, it 
wasn’t fantastic, but it did help a bit. So I 
thought, well, OK, I’ll try them again.’35 
Other women, however, felt overwhelmed, 
even by everyday tasks — ‘Sometimes it 
kills me to just go to school to drop [my son] 
off’27 — and unable to reach out for support:
‘It’s the one thing you can’t do, and that’s the 
trouble … you want people to come to you, to 
show they care, but there’s no way that you 
can go to them.’34
Women differed in their ability to 
recognise or to articulate their distress. 
Some did not understand depression:
‘I don’t know what postnatal depression 
is — how you’re supposed to feel, look, or 
whatever
. I don’t know. I have no idea … 
what exactly is postnatal depression? What 
are you supposed to be doing, saying, or 
whatever? I don’t know.’20 
Women in this situation sometimes 
described their feelings somatically, for 
example, as ‘pressure in the heart’ or 
‘restlessness in the mind’.23 Cultural beliefs 
also affected help seeking, especially where 
symptoms were perceived in religious 
terms: 
‘All illness is coming from God — it is 
a punishment, and if Allah wants to do 
something, he can.’25
Sometimes, concerns were raised by 
family, friends, or HCPs: 
‘It was sort of my partner saying to me: 
“Right, if you don’t go, I’m basically making 
you an appointment … You can’t just keep 
feeling like this.”’36
‘It usually takes a professional to say: “Look, 
I think you’re suffering from depression.” 
And it’s quite a relief when they say it.’35 
Table 1. Themes identified
 
 
Themes
 
Identifying a 
The influence of 
studies 
problem 
healthcare professionals 
Stigma
Almond et al, 201129 
Yes 
– 
–
Boath et al, 201339 
Yes 
Yes  
Yes
Chew-Graham et al, 200935 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes
Cooke et al, 201227 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes
Edge et al, 200421 
– 
Yes  
Yes 
Edge, 200620 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes
Edge, 200819 
– 
Yes 
Yes
Edge et al, 201022 
– 
Yes 
Yes
Edge, 201118 
– 
Yes 
–
Gardner et al, 201426 
– 
– 
Yes
Hall, 200630 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes
Hanley et al, 200638 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes
Hanley, 200725 
Yes 
Yes 
–
Hannan, 201632 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes
Iles et al, 201531 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes
McIntosh, 199340 
– 
Yes 
Yes
Mauthner, 199733 
– 
Yes 
Yes
Mauthner, 199934 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes
Parvin et al, 200423 
Yes 
Yes 
-
Patel et al, 201341 
– 
– 
Yes
Raymond et al, 200928 
– 
Yes 
Yes
Shakespeare et al, 200337 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes
Slade et al, 201036 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes
Templeton et al, 200324 
– 
– 
Yes 
e694  British Journal of General Practice, October 2017
 Being screened for psychological distress 
evoked a range of reactions. It was seen as 
a less ‘personal’ means of disclosure: 
‘It’s much easier to do this than to actually 
look somebody in the face.’37 
It provided women with reassurance: 
(‘Relieved in a way … seeing the questions I 
thought: “Well, I’m not going mad.”’29) and 
an opportunity to admit that they needed 
help: 
‘When I started to fill in that form I knew I 
couldn’t lie about how I felt anymore.’38 
However, other women found it of limited 
value: 
‘There’s so much more that you want to 
say, rather than just answering quite closed 
questions.’37
They described the questions as ‘daft’ 
and ‘patronising’,37 and a poor substitute for 
face-to-face contact: 
‘You can tell when somebody’s lying, can’t 
you, if you talk to them properly. Whereas 
… you could just lie on the form, and there’s 
nothing to say that you were lying.’37
The healthcare experience
Women’s help seeking was influenced 
by their expectations and experience of 
healthcare professionals and by structural 
factors inherent in the healthcare system. 
Structural factors predominantly inhibited 
help seeking, including waiting times: 
‘[There is a] 7-month waiting list for 
counselling’,19 lack of childcare facilities: 
‘You have to have someone to look after 
your baby so who am I going to get to 
look after [baby]?’,19 and English-language 
proficiency: ‘Bengali girls don’t come with 
[sic] the midwife, we don’t understand what 
they say. We just sit there staring at their 
faces.’23 Similarly, women reported that 
services did not recognise their cultural 
needs: 
‘You need someone who’s on the same 
wavelength as you, who shares the 
same cultural experiences as you, which 
sometimes isn’t available.’19 
Women’s knowledge and experiences of 
health care influenced their expectations 
around help-seeking behaviour after birth. 
Women who had negative experiences of 
care during childbirth could be deterred 
from seeking help postnatally: 
‘You’re thinking, “What’s the point in going 
back?” It [negative experience during 
pregnancy and labour] just doesn’t give 
you any confidence to think they’ll be 
sympathetic.’18
Women were unsure of the role of 
professionals in providing support: 
‘I don’t really know what their job is. Nobody 
gave me, like, the parameters of this role 
of the health visitor and, so, I think if that 
happened then you’d … be able to use them 
better
.’36
They believed that available help was 
ineffective and inappropriate: 
‘There is nothing else available. No GP, no 
health visitor
. They’re there, but not in a 
helpful sense, sort of like.’35
Medication was seen as the likely, but 
unwanted, treatment on offer (‘I knew she 
would just write a prescription and send me 
away … that wasn’t what I wanted’32), and 
women expressed concerns about addiction: 
‘I just didn’t want to go onto antidepressants, 
because obviously I’ve heard people get 
addicted to them and then you’re stuck on 
them and you have a vicious circle,’35 and 
its viability as a long-term solution: ‘What 
is the point? If I take these tablets, when I 
stop, what am I going to do, go back into this 
depression?’20 
Familiarity with HCPs was important. 
Women were hesitant to approach 
professionals they did not know: 
‘You have to go to the health visitor first and 
do a scale and see how you come out, but 
I didn’t, because I haven’t really seen the 
health visitor
. I don’t know who she is.’39
Furthermore, women highlighted the 
importance of continuity of care: 
‘It was the not having to start explaining 
again to someone new which was so great.’28
The response from HCPs had an 
important influence on help-seeking 
behaviour
. Women were concerned about 
the negative consequences of disclosure. 
They emphasised the value of a non-
judgemental approach: 
‘She takes you as you are, she listens. She 
doesn’t condemn you for it happening.’33
‘It’s good having someone that you can talk 
British Journal of General Practice, October 2017  e695
 to about how you really feel … she is not 
critical in any way.’36 
Women were more likely to discuss their 
concerns with professionals who appeared 
caring and genuinely interested in their 
wellbeing: 
‘She asked how I was. As soon as she 
said it, you know, “How you feeling?”, I just 
cried.’35 
‘My health visitor, she’s brill, she is always 
there for me at the end of the phone.’39 
Healthcare professionals did not always 
recognise an attempt to seek help: 
‘I purposely circled the things ’cos I’m 
struggling … the health visitor didn’t get 
back to me, which I’m really disappointed 
about.’37 
In some cases, this invalidated women’s 
view that there was something wrong: 
‘I did ask for support, but I didn’t really 
get any. And the health visitor’s response 
— “Well you seem like you’re doing all 
right” – which kind of closes it off, doesn’t 
it, then?’36
Women were also deterred from seeking 
help when professionals seemed too busy 
to provide support: 
‘The health visitor said something like: “You 
know, in this community we have to look 
after a thousand and something babies.” 
And that instilled in me the feeling, like: “Oh, 
they are very busy these people, and I don’t 
have to be bothering them all the time.”’18 
Women also believed professionals 
focused on the baby’s health to the 
detriment of women’s wellbeing: 
‘I thought that the care would be more 
round care, as opposed to just being about 
my baby’s weight, which is basically all it’s 
ever been about.’27
Stigma 
Psychological distress was viewed in 
negative terms: 
‘There’s a huge stigma about feeling 
depressed, particularly postnatal.’37 
Stigma manifested itself in several ways: 
self-judgement, concern about others’ 
judgements, 
symptom 
normalisation, 
external attribution, and anxiety around 
consequences of stigmatisation. This 
stigma deterred women from seeking help. 
Women judged themselves harshly. They 
felt under pressure to conform to ideal 
standards of motherhood, many of which 
were internalised (‘Mothers are supposed 
to be rock solid aren’t they?’28), and seen as 
informing others’ opinions (‘With my health 
visitor, I try not to let too much out, because 
then she won’t think I am a bad mum.’35) 
Distress was perceived as a sign of 
weakness, and a challenge to a woman’s 
self-identity:
‘I felt angry, that I, a woman who had held a 
responsible post in work, was not capable of 
looking after my own child.’38
‘Coping’ was entwined with perceptions 
of ‘good’ mothering.
‘I’m quite independent, and I just like to 
think and show people that I can cope.’34 
‘I felt like I was a bad mother, and I couldn’t 
cope with it all.’30
Sociocultural values contributed to the 
perceived pressure to cope: 
‘It’s quite a matriarchal society, and 
therefore you’ve got to cope. You’ve got to 
sort your family out, and so therefore you 
are not allowed to be depressed.’20
Women were deterred from seeking help 
by these pressures to conform to ideals of 
motherhood: 
‘I couldn’t tell anybody, because I felt like 
I’d let everyone down. I wanted to do really 
well.’33
Rather than face the potential stigma of 
admitting distress, they remained silent: 
‘When the health visitors come round: “Any 
problems?” “No, everything’s fine.” It’s the 
attitude of women and how we’ve been 
brought up not to make a fuss.’33
Some 
women 
rationalised 
their 
symptoms as justifiable reactions to difficult 
circumstances: 
‘I thought it was just lack of sleep and 
this heavy cold. I thought that after a good 
night’s sleep it would get better, and I would 
be able to manage again.’38
This process of normalising symptoms 
e696  British Journal of General Practice, October 2017
 also justified the failure to seek help on the 
grounds that HCPs could not resolve the 
circumstances that had brought about the 
problem: 
‘What could the doctor do? He can’t sort 
out my man or any of my other problems.’40 
Women were also deterred from seeking 
help by the perceived consequences of being 
diagnosed with a stigmatised condition. 
Black women expressed specific concerns 
about the relationship between ethnicity 
and diagnosis: 
‘I’m very much aware that black people 
are more likely to be labelled as having 
psychiatric problems and, therefore, I don’t 
want people labelling me [with postnatal 
depression], and then saying later on: “Well, 
you’ve also got this [more serious mental 
illness] cos you’re prone to it.”’ 
20 
More generally, women were concerned 
about their children being taken into care: 
‘Because of the fear of postnatal depression 
and the taboo of social services and having 
your children taking [sic] away from you, I 
wasn’t going to admit anything to anyone.’31
DISCUSSION
Summary
There were three clear factors affecting 
whether women seek help for perinatal 
distress: identifying a problem, the 
healthcare experience, and stigma. These 
are important for effective identification 
and treatment of women in primary and 
community health settings.
From ‘identifying a problem’ it is clear 
that women may not understand the 
significance of their symptoms. This may 
explain why women do not seek help for 
perinatal psychological distress.1 In the UK, 
women are screened for PND at around 
6 weeks postpartum. This review confirms 
not all women find screening helpful,12 and 
some misrepresent their symptoms on 
the screening tool. Women may conceal 
symptoms and only seek help once they 
reach ‘crisis point’. Furthermore, some 
women are unable to communicate how 
they feel; either because they do not 
understand their symptoms, or because 
they do not have the vocabulary to articulate 
them. This is consistent with the notion 
that help seeking requires the recognition 
of a problem and a conscious decision to 
address it,4 but goes further in identifying 
that women need to frame their experience 
in a way that others can also understand 
and support. That support may differ 
according to women’s cultural, religious, 
and social contexts. The evidence suggests 
that women who receive help for perinatal 
mental illness achieve better outcomes for 
both themselves and their babies,42 although 
the impact for women experiencing less 
severe symptoms of psychological distress 
is unclear. One difficulty, potentially, is 
deciding when to intervene. Some level of 
distress may be inevitable, such as that 
associated with sleep deprivation. In these 
instances, women may not require formal 
intervention, but practical and emotional 
support. However, women still need to feel 
able to ask for that help.
Results are consistent with previous 
studies highlighting how relationships 
with HCPs influence help seeking,27,35 
especially in terms of the need for staff to 
be open, non-judgemental, and accepting 
of women’s accounts of their feelings and 
experiences. Such findings are consistent 
with evidence of the negative impact that 
inflexible attitudes seen in HCPs have on 
the HCP–patient relationship.43 This review 
extends the evidence by identifying that 
help seeking is negatively influenced by 
women’s lack of understanding of HCPs’ 
roles, suggesting that HCPs need to 
discuss this with the women in their care. 
Furthermore, poor continuity of care may 
negatively influence help seeking. This is 
consistent with evidence identifying that 
provision of care by the same HCP over time 
is the desired clinical model in maternity 
services.44
Consistent with the wider literature, the 
perceived stigma of mental illness deterred 
women from seeking help.6 This meta-
synthesis also identified that women felt 
under pressure to be ‘good mothers’ and that 
‘failure’ impacted negatively on their mental 
health and their likelihood to seek help. 
This is consistent with other reports of the 
relationship between mental wellbeing and 
‘being a good mother’,45 and that the fear of 
failure may cause women to ‘self-silence’. 
This includes deliberately misrepresenting 
how they truly feel to HCPs involved in their 
care. The combined fear of stigma and 
the high expectations that women have 
of themselves further undermine their 
self-worth, increasing distress.46 More 
understanding of this process by HCPs 
may help improve how they approach and 
interact with new mothers. 
Perinatal care services need to be 
developed in a way that meets women’s 
needs for continuity of care, and for staff 
training to increase awareness of factors 
that might impact on the likelihood of 
British Journal of General Practice, October 2017  e697
 seeking help. More research is needed in 
this area, particularly in relation to improving 
detection of perinatal psychological distress. 
Strengths and limitations
This review has highlighted that women do 
not always understand their symptoms and, 
even if they identify that there is something 
wrong, may not be able to articulate how they 
feel. Furthermore, the fear of being seen as 
a ‘bad mother’ and of being stigmatised for 
not being able to cope can lead to women 
‘self-silencing’. This includes deliberately 
misrepresenting how they truly feel to HCPs 
involved in their care. 
The meta-synthesis was confined to 
evidence from the UK, published in English. 
It captures the diversity of UK society, 
but much of the UK literature focuses 
on traditional minority groups, such as 
Afro-Caribbean and Bengali populations, 
while neglecting others. Furthermore, 
the literature is primarily concerned with 
PND, despite evidence that women and 
men experience mental illness during 
pregnancy, not just after birth, and may 
commonly suffer from anxiety disorders 
as well as depression. There is clearly 
a need for increased primary evidence 
around help seeking in relation to antenatal 
psychological distress, including for minority 
groups and fathers. Researchers aimed to 
reduce subjectivity of data interpretation 
by conducting independent analysis, but 
recognise that subjectivity cannot be 
completely avoided in qualitative work.
Implications for research and practice
Although a large number of studies were 
included in this review, the focus was on 
seeking help for PND only. The authors’ 
understanding of seeking help for other 
types of perinatal distress, such as anxiety or 
traumatic birth, is therefore limited. Future 
research needs to explore help seeking 
in these other conditions, and culturally 
changing attitudes to mental illness and 
reducing stigma.47 
HCPs need to understand that help 
seeking involves recognition of a problem 
and a conscious decision to address it. 
Therefore, educating women and their 
partners about perinatal mental health and 
the roles of the different HCPs should form 
part of routine antenatal care. Furthermore, 
the importance of continuity of care and 
trusting relationships for help seeking 
suggests that consideration should be 
given to both service structure and staff 
training. One strategy may be for women 
to receive crossover care from a dedicated 
midwife and health visitor, working closely 
with the woman’s GP, during the third 
trimester/early postnatal period. This would 
increase continuity and facilitate timely 
access to care. This would require careful 
consideration of the caseload implications 
for HCPs, who are often overworked. 
Furthermore, greater consideration needs 
to be given to the NICE recommendations 
about screening women, including how 
stigma and interactions with HCPs affect 
this, and whether the current model is 
fit for purpose. It is important to identify 
methods that elicit women’s confidence 
in disclosing how they feel, combined 
with increasing HCPs’ ability to detect and 
manage situations where women avoid 
disclosure. There also needs to be further 
investigation of the impact of seeking help 
on outcomes for women experiencing less 
severe forms of psychological distress, and 
the most appropriate means of educating 
HCPs to meet women’s needs.
Funding
This work was funded by the Research 
Sustainability Fund at the School of Health 
Sciences at City, University of London (RSF-
2014-ST).
Ethical approval
Not applicable.
Provenance
Freely submitted; externally peer reviewed.
Competing interests 
The authors have declared no competing 
interests.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the 
input of Louise Phillips in the initial stages 
of developing this review.
Discuss this article
Contribute and read comments about this 
article: bjgp.org/letters
e698  British Journal of General Practice, October 2017
 REFERENCES
1. 
Wachs TD, Black MM, Engle PL. Maternal depression: a global threat to 
children’s health, development, and behavior and to human rights. Child Dev 
Perspect 2009; 3(1): 51–59. 
2. 
Ridner SH. Psychological distress: concept analysis. J Adv Nurs 2004; 45(5): 
536–545.
3. 
Premji S. Perinatal distress in women in low and middle income countries: 
allostatic load as a framework to examine the effect of perinatal distress on 
preterm birth and infant health. Mat Child Health J 2014; 18(10): 2393–2407.
4. 
Cornally N, McCarthy G. Help-seeking behaviour: a concept analysis. Int J Nurs 
Pract 2011; 17(3): 280–288.
5. 
Rickwood D, Thomas K. Conceptual measurement framework for help seeking 
for mental health problems. Psychol Res Behav Manag 2012; 5: 173–183.
6. 
Baines T, Wittkowski A. A systematic review of the literature exploring illness 
perceptions in mental health utilising the self-regulation model. J Clin Psychol 
Med Settings 2013; 20(3): 263–274.
7. 
Clement S, Schauman O, Graham T, et al. What is the impact of mental 
health-related stigma on help-seeking? A systematic review of quantitative and 
qualitative studies. Psychol Med 2015; 45(1): 11–27.
8. 
Vogel DL, Wade NG, Hackler AH. Perceived public stigma and the willingness 
to seek counseling: the mediating roles of self-stigma and attitudes toward 
counseling. J Couns Psychol 2007; 54(1): 40–50.
9. 
O’Connor P
J, Martin B, Weeks CS, Ong L. Factors that influence young 
people’s mental health help-seeking behaviour: a study based on the Health 
Belief Model. J Adv Nurs 2014; 70(11): 2577–2587.
10. 
Rüdell K, Bhui K, Priebe S. Do ‘alternative’ help-seeking strategies affect 
primary care service use? A survey of help-seeking for mental distress. BMC 
Public Health 2008; 8: 207.
11. 
Dennis C-L, Chung-Lee L. Postpartum depression help-seeking barriers and 
maternal treatment preferences: a qualitative systematic review. Birth 2006; 
33(4): 323–331.
12. 
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Antenatal and 
postnatal mental health: clinical management and service guidance. 
CG192. London: NICE, 2015. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/
cg192?unlid=4298883492016928123635 (accessed 17 Aug 2017).
13. 
Preferred Reporting Items of Systematic reviews and Meta-Analyses. PRISMA, 
2015. http://prisma-statement.org/ (accessed 17 Aug 2017).
14. 
Critical Appraisal Skills Programme. Making sense of evidence. CASP, 2014. 
http://www.casp-uk.net/casp-tools-checklists (accessed 17 Aug 2017).
15. 
Noblit GW, Hare RD. Meta-ethnography: synthesizing qualitative studies. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1988.
16. 
Britten N, Campbell R, Pope C, et al. Using meta ethnography to synthesise 
qualitative research: a worked example. J Health Serv Res Policy 2002; 7(4): 
209–215.
17. 
Malpass A, Shaw A, Sharp D, et al. ‘Medication career’ or ‘Moral career’? 
The two sides of managing antidepressants: a meta-ethnography of patients’ 
experience of antidepressants. Soc Sci Med 2009; 68(1): 154–168.
18. 
Edge D. ‘It’s leaflet, leaflet, leaflet then, “see you later”’: black Caribbean 
women’s perceptions of perinatal mental health care. Br J Gen Pract 2011; DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.3399/bjgp11X567063&#39.
19. 
Edge D. ‘We don’t see black women here’: an exploration of the absence of 
black Caribbean women from clinical and epidemiological data on perinatal 
depression in the UK. Midwifery 2008; 24(4): 379–389.
20. 
Edge D. Perinatal depression: its absence among black Caribbean women. Br J 
Midwifery 2006; 14(11): 646–652.
21. 
Edge D, Baker D, Rogers A. Perinatal depression among black Caribbean 
women. Health Soc Care Comm 2004; 12(5): 430–438.
22. 
Edge D, MacKian SC. Ethnicity and mental health encounters in primary care: 
help-seeking and help-giving for perinatal depression among black Caribbean 
women in the UK. Ethn Health 2010; 15(1): 93–111.
23. 
Parvin A, Jones CE, Hull SA. Experiences and understandings of social and 
emotional distress in the postnatal period among Bangladeshi women living in 
Tower Hamlets. Fam Pract 2004; 21(3): 254–260.
24. 
Templeton L, Velleman R, Persaud A, Milner P
. The experiences of postnatal 
depression in women from black and minority ethnic communities in Wiltshire, 
UK. Ethn Health 2003; 8(3): 207–221.
25. 
Hanley J. The emotional wellbeing of Bangladeshi mothers during the 
postnatal period. Community Pract 2007; 80(5): 34–37.
26. 
Gardner PL, Bunton P, Edge D, Wittkowski A. The experience of postnatal 
depression in West African mothers living in the United Kingdom: a qualitative 
study. Midwifery 2014; 30(6): 756–763.
27. 
Cooke S, Smith I, Turl E, et al. Parent perspectives of clinical psychology access 
when experiencing distress. Community Pract 2012; 85(4): 34–37.
28. 
Raymond JE. ‘Creating a safety net’: women’s experiences of antenatal 
depression and their identification of helpful community support and services 
during pregnancy. Midwifery 2009; 25(1): 39–49.
29. 
Almond P, Lathlean J. Inequity in provision of and access to health visiting 
postnatal depression services. J Adv Nurs 2011; 67(11): 2350–2362.
30. 
Hall P
. Mothers’ experiences of postnatal depression: an interpretative 
phenomenological analysis. Community Pract 2006; 79(8): 256–260.
31. 
Iles J, Pote H. Postnatal posttraumatic stress: a grounded theory model of first-
time mothers’ experiences. J Reprod Infant Psychol 2015; 33(3): 238–255.
32. 
Hannan J. Older mothers’ experiences of postnatal depression. Br J Midwifery 
2016; 24(1): 28–36.
33. 
Mauthner NS. Postnatal depression: how can midwives help? Midwifery 1997; 
13(4): 163–171.
34. 
Mauthner NS. ‘Feeling low and feeling really bad about feeling low’: women’s 
experiences of motherhood and postpartum depression. Can Psychol/
Psychologie Canadienne 1999; 40(2): 143–161.
35. 
Chew-Graham CA, Sharp D, Chamberlain E, et al. Disclosure of symptoms of 
postnatal depression, the perspectives of health professionals and women: a 
qualitative study. BMC Fam Pract 2009; 10: 7.
36. 
Slade P, Morrell CJ, Rigby A, et al. Postnatal women’s experiences of 
management of depressive symptoms: a qualitative study. Br J Gen Pract 2010; 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.3399/bjgp10X532611&#39.
37. 
Shakespeare J, Blake F, Garcia J. A qualitative study of the acceptability 
of routine screening of postnatal women using the Edinburgh Postnatal 
Depression Scale. Br J Gen Pract 2003; 53(493): 614–619.
38. 
Hanley J, Long B. A study of Welsh mothers’ experiences of postnatal 
depression. Midwifery 2006; 22(2): 147–157.
39. 
Boath EH, Henshaw C, Bradley E. Meeting the challenges of teenage mothers 
with postpartum depression: overcoming stigma through support. J Reprod 
Infant Psychol 2013; 31(4): 352–369.
40. 
McIntosh J. Postpartum depression: women’s help-seeking behaviour and 
perceptions of cause. J Adv Nurs 1993; 18(2): 178–184.
41. 
Patel S, Wittkowski A, Fox JRE, Wieck A. An exploration of illness beliefs in 
mothers with postnatal depression. Midwifery 2013; 29(6): 682–689.
42. 
Poobalan AS, Aucott LS, Ross L, et al. Effects of treating postnatal depression 
on mother–infant interaction and child development: systematic review. Br J 
Psych 2007; 191: 378–386.
43. 
Entwistle VA, Carter SM, Cribb A, McCaffery K. Suporting patient autonomy: 
the importance of clinican–patient relationships. J Gen Int Med 2010; 25(7): 
741–745.
44. 
Sandall J, Soltani H, Gates S, et al. Midwife-led continuity models versus other 
models of care for childbearing women. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2016; 4: 
CD004667. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD004667.pub5.
45. 
Ayers S, Fitzgerald G, Thompson S. Brief online self-help exercises for 
postnatal women to improve mood: a pilot study. Matern Child Health J 2015; 
19(11): 2375–2383.
46. 
Briscoe L, Lavender T, McGowan L. A concept analysis of women’s vulnerability 
during pregnancy, birth and the postnatal period. J Adv Nurs 2016; 72(10): 
2330–2345.
47. 
Time to Change. A milestone year: a year of tackling stigma and discrimination 
in the words of the people who made it happen. Annual report 2012–13. 2013. 
http://www.time-to-change.org.uk/resources/research-and-reports/annual-
reports (accessed 17 Aug 2017).
British Journal of General Practice, October 2017  e699
