  
 
1 
Opinion 
 
Interrogating open issues in cancer precision medicine with patient-
derived xenografts 
 
Annette T. Byrne, Denis G. Alférez, Frédéric Amant, Daniela Annibali, Joaquín 
Arribas, Andrew V. Biankin, Alejandra Bruna, Eva Budinská, Carlos Caldas, 
David K. Chang, Robert B. Clarke, Hans Clevers, George Coukos, Virginie 
Dangles-Marie, S. Gail Eckhardt, Eva Gonzalez-Suarez, Els Hermans, Manuel 
Hidalgo, Monika A. Jarzabek, Steven de Jong, Jos Jonkers, Kristel Kemper, 
Luisa Lanfrancone, Gunhild Mari Mælandsmo, Elisabetta Marangoni, Jean-
Christophe Marine, Enzo Medico, Jens Henrik Norum, Héctor G. Palmer, Daniel 
S. Peeper, Pier Giuseppe Pelicci, Alejandro Piris-Gimenez, Sergio Roman-
Roman, Oscar M. Rueda, Joan Seoane, Violeta Serra, Laura Soucek, 
Dominique Vanhecke, Alberto Villanueva, Emilie Vinolo, Andrea Bertotti and 
Livio Trusolino 
 
Annette T. Byrne and Monika A. Jarzabek are members of the EurOPDX 
Consortium and are at the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin 2, 
Ireland. 
Denis G. Alférez and Robert B. Clarke are members of the EurOPDX 
Consortium and are at the Breast Cancer Now Research Unit, Division of 
Molecular and Clinical Cancer Sciences, Manchester Cancer Research 
Centre, University of Manchester, Manchester M20 4QL, UK. 
  
 
2 
Frédéric Amant, Daniela Annibali and Els Hermans are members of the 
EurOPDX Consortium and are at the Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, 3000 
Leuven, Belgium. Frédéric Amant is also at The Netherlands Cancer 
Institute, Plesmanlaan 121, 1066CX Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 
Joaquín Arribas, Joan Seoane and Laura Soucek are members of the 
EurOPDX Consortium and are at the Vall d’Hebron Institute of Oncology, 
08035 Barcelona, the Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 08193 Bellaterra, 
and the Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), 08010 
Barcelona, Spain. Joaquín Arribas and Joan Seoane are also at CIBERONC, 
08035 Barcelona, Spain. 
Andrew V. Biankin and David K. Chang are members of the EurOPDX 
Consortium and are at the Wolfson Wohl Cancer Research Centre, Institute of 
Cancer Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G61 1QH, UK. 
Alejandra Bruna, Carlos Caldas and Oscar M. Rueda are members of the 
EurOPDX Consortium and are at Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, 
Cambridge Cancer Centre, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0RE, 
UK. 
Eva Budinská is a member of the EurOPDX Consortium and is at the Institute 
of Biostatistics and Analyses, Faculty of Medicine, and Research Centre for 
Toxic Compounds in the Environment, Faculty of Science, Masarykova 
Univerzita, 625 00 Brno, Czech Republic. 
Hans Clevers is at the Hubrecht Institute, University Medical Centre Utrecht, 
and Princess Maxima Center for Pediatric Oncology, 3584CT Utrecht, The 
Netherlands. 
  
 
3 
George Coukos and Dominique Vanhecke are members of the EurOPDX 
Consortium and are at Lausanne Branch, Ludwig Institute for Cancer 
Research at the University of Lausanne, 1066 Lausanne, Switzerland. 
Virginie Dangles-Marie is a member of the EurOPDX Consortium and is at 
the Institut Curie, PSL Research University, Translational Research 
Department, 75005 Paris, and Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris 
Cité, Faculté de Pharmacie de Paris, 75006 Paris, France. 
S. Gail Eckhardt is at the University of Colorado Cancer Center, Aurora, 
Colorado 80045, USA. 
Eva Gonzalez-Suarez is a member of the EurOPDX Consortium and is at the 
Cancer Epigenetics and Biology Program, Bellvitge Biomedical Research 
Institute IDIBELL, 08908 L’Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain. 
Manuel Hidalgo is a member of the EurOPDX Consortium and is at Beth 
Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02215, USA. 
Steven de Jong is a member of the EurOPDX Consortium and is at the 
University Medical Centre Groningen, University of Groningen, 9713GZ 
Groningen, The Netherlands. 
Jos Jonkers, Kristel Kemper and Daniel S. Peeper are members of the 
EurOPDX Consortium and are at The Netherlands Cancer Institute, 
Plesmanlaan 121, 1066CX Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 
Luisa Lanfrancone and Pier Giuseppe Pelicci are members of the EurOPDX 
Consortium and are at the Department of Experimental Oncology, European 
Institute of Oncology, 20139 Milan, Italy. 
  
 
4 
Gunhild Mari Mælandsmo and Jens Henrik Norum are members of the 
EurOPDX Consortium and are at Oslo University Hospital, Institute for 
Cancer Research, 0424 Oslo, Norway. 
Elisabetta Marangoni and Sergio Roman-Roman are members of the 
EurOPDX Consortium and are at Institut Curie, PSL Research University, 
Translational Research Department, 75005 Paris, France. 
Jean-Christophe Marine is a member of the EurOPDX Consortium and is at the 
Laboratory for Molecular Cancer Biology, Department of Oncology, Katholieke 
Universiteit Leuven, and the Center for Cancer Biology, VIB, 3000 Leuven, 
Belgium. 
Enzo Medico, Andrea Bertotti and Livio Trusolino are members of the 
EurOPDX Consortium and are at the Candiolo Cancer Institute IRCCS and 
Department of Oncology, University of Torino, 10060 Candiolo, Torino, Italy. 
Héctor G. Palmer, Alejandro Piris-Gimenez and Violeta Serra are members of 
the EurOPDX Consortium and are at the Vall d’Hebron Institute of Oncology 
and CIBERONC, 08035 Barcelona, Spain. 
Alberto Villanueva is a member of the EurOPDX Consortium and is at the 
Program Against Cancer Therapeutic Resistance (ProCURE), Catalan Institute 
of Oncology ICO, Bellvitge Biomedical Research Institute IDIBELL, 08098 
L’Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, and Xenopat S.L., Business 
Bioincubator, Bellvitge Health Science Campus, 08907 L’Hospitalet 
de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain. 
Emilie Vinolo is at Seeding Science SAS, 75020 Paris, France. 
 
  
 
5 
Correspondence to A.T.B. and L.T. 
annettebyrne@rcsi.ie; 
livio.trusolino@ircc.it 
 
doi:10.1038/nrc.2016.140 
Published online 20 Jan 2017 
 
Abstract 
Patient-derived xenografts (PDXs) have emerged as an important platform to 
elucidate new treatments and biomarkers in oncology. PDX models are used 
to address clinically relevant questions, including the contribution of tumour 
heterogeneity to therapeutic responsiveness, the patterns of cancer 
evolutionary dynamics during tumour progression and under drug pressure, 
and the mechanisms of resistance to treatment. The ability of PDX models to 
predict clinical outcomes is being improved through mouse humanization 
strategies and implementation of co-clinical trials, within which patients and 
PDXs reciprocally inform therapeutic decisions. This Opinion article discusses 
aspects of PDX modelling that are relevant to these questions and highlights 
the merits of shared PDX resources to advance cancer medicine from the 
perspective of EurOPDX, an international initiative devoted to PDX-based 
research. 
 
 
 
  
 
6 
Response to anticancer therapies varies owing to the substantial molecular 
heterogeneity of human tumours and to poorly defined mechanisms of drug 
efficacy and resistance1. Immortalized cancer cell lines, either cultured in vitro 
or grown as xenografts, cannot interrogate the complexity of human tumours, 
and only provide determinate insights into human disease, as they are limited 
in number and diversity, and have been cultured on plastic over decades2. This 
disconnection in scale and biological accuracy contributes considerably to 
attrition in drug development3-5. 
 
Surgically derived clinical tumour samples that are implanted in mice (known 
as patient-derived xenografts (PDXs)) are expected to better inform therapeutic 
development strategies. As intact tissue - in which the tumour architecture and 
the relative proportion of cancer cells and stromal cells are both maintained -  
is directly implanted into recipient animals, the alignment with human disease 
is enhanced. More importantly, PDXs retain the idiosyncratic characteristics of 
different tumours from different patients; hence, they can effectively 
recapitulate the intra-tumour and inter-tumour heterogeneity that typifies human 
cancer6-9. 
 
 
Exhaustive information on the key characteristics and the practical applications 
of PDXs can be found in recent reviews10-13. In this Opinion article, we discuss 
basic methodological concepts, as well as challenges and opportunities in 
developing “next-generation” models to improve the reach of PDXs as 
preclinical tools for in vivo studies (TABLE 1). We also elaborate on the merits 
of PDXs for exploring the intrinsic heterogeneity and subclonal genetic 
  
 
7 
evolution of individual tumours, and discuss how this may influence therapeutic 
resistance. Finally, we examine the utility of PDXs in navigating complex 
variables in clinical decision-making, such as the discovery of predictive and 
prognostic biomarkers, and the categorization of genotype-drug response 
correlations in high-throughput formats. Being primarily co-authored by leading 
members of the EurOPDX Consortium (see Further information), we provide a 
perspective on the value of PDX models as an important resource for the 
international cancer research community towards the realization of a precision 
medicine paradigm (BOX 1; TABLE 2). 
 
 
Modelling cancer phenotypes 
Interrogating intra-tumour heterogeneity and evolutionary dynamics. 
Cancer is increasingly being recognized as an ecosystem of cells that 
constantly evolves following Darwinian laws. Owing to cancer cell intrinsic 
mutability, an incipient tumour clone gives rise to a progeny of genetically 
heterogeneous subclones, some of which will thrive while others shrink, 
depending on their ability to cope with environmental selection pressures14. 
This is of particular relevance for cancer treatment, as most patients will 
eventually succumb to the disease owing to the appearance of resistant tumour 
subclones. Despite the considerable clinical impact of tumour heterogeneity15, 
little is known about how it affects response to cancer therapy and how it may 
change during treatment at both the genomic and the phenotypic levels16-20. 
These issues highlight the need for preclinical models that capture the 
heterogeneous nature of human cancers and their on-going evolution.  
  
 
8 
 
For example, breast cancer is a constellation of at least 10 different genomic 
subtypes, 
each 
with 
distinct 
drivers 
and 
variable 
intra-tumour 
heterogeneity15,21,22. Recent evidence has suggested that each breast cancer 
comprises multiple tumour cell populations with distinct evolutionary trajectories 
that are likely to be affected by treatment pressure23-25. Genomic evolution 
between primary and recurrent tumours also occurs24-28. Such intra-tumour and 
inter-tumour variability affects therapeutic responses, and hence needs to be 
considered in the preclinical and clinical settings. Although some engraftment-
associated selection has been documented24,29, PDX models of breast cancer 
seemingly preserve most of the genomic clonal architecture of the original 
patient sample and also seem to resemble patient counterparts at the 
transcriptomic, epigenomic and histological levels, as well as in terms of shared 
signalling pathways8,30-32. Notably, the majority of tumour subclones that 
change upon engraftment do not include known breast cancer oncogenic 
drivers29. This suggests that, although engraftment pressure is observed, it is 
evolutionarily neutral, as it does not affect intra-tumour heterogeneity when 
considering the clonal representation of relevant genes. These features 
probably underpin the successful use of breast cancer PDXs to predict clinical 
drug responses9 and mechanisms of acquired resistance33,34.  
 
As discussed below, an advantage of PDX models is that they can be 
generated with a limited amount of material; for example, using fine-needle 
biopsies (TABLE 1). However, these methods may be confounding when the 
studied tumour type is particularly heterogeneous (such as melanoma). For 
  
 
9 
example, within one tumour or metastasis, multiple melanoma subclones can 
exist, each harbouring different genetic and/or epigenetic alterations35-37. 
Simply taking a single biopsy sample can result in a PDX that does not 
represent the heterogeneity of the patient’s tumour35,38. Notably, regional 
genetic variability can be exacerbated by PDX serial propagation, producing 
divergent responses in tumour measurements within a single cohort of treated 
mice32,39. Methods to overcome this limitation include good, standardized pre-
clinical designs (those with adequate statistical power and proper 
randomization), as well as the mixing of heterogeneous tumour masses before 
implantation, such as through the use of single-cell suspension injections or 
rough tumour homogenates24. 
 
The direct derivation of PDXs from circulating tumour cells (CTCs) may 
represent another tool to further interrogate tumour heterogeneity. The 
numbers of cancer cells shed by tumours into the bloodstream may be 
exceedingly low, and the biological and clinical relevance of CTCs in sustaining 
malignant disease has been questioned40. However, as CTCs are shed by 
tumours on a stochastic rather than a deterministic basis41, they are expected 
to better recapitulate the distribution of different subclonal tumour populations 
(TABLE 1).  
 
Intra-tumoural heterogeneity may also be non-genetic and intrinsic to the 
hierarchical organization of some tumours, in which a small subpopulation of 
cancer stem cells (CSCs) may be responsible for long-term tumourigenicity42-
45. CSCs are thought to be chemoresistant and the main cause of recurrence 
  
 
10 
and distant metastasis46-48. Much of the supporting evidence originates from 
PDX models that were directly derived from various clinical samples, including 
CTCs, ascites fluid and pleural effusion cells, and surgical biopsy samples49-53. 
PDX models have provided evidence of CSC colonization in metastatic sites 
and have also highlighted the role and importance of the surrounding tumour 
stroma, a niche that is known to influence CSC behaviour by cell-to-cell 
contacts and through the secretion of pro-tumorigenic ligands and 
cytokines8,51,54. An ongoing debate exists as to whether CSCs recapitulate the 
full characteristics of stem cells (that is, they are undifferentiated cells with 
limitless replicative potential, which partly self-perpetuate to maintain a 
tumorigenic reservoir and which partly differentiate to give rise to a diverse 
progeny of non-tumorigenic cells) or simply identify a more robust or 
proliferative population of “tumour-initiating” cells selected by engraftment. To 
address this quandary, it will be important to compare the results of side-by-
side fate-mapping experiments and transplantation assays to analyse whether 
the cells endowed with tumorigenic potential after transplantation also exhibit 
the other typical stem-like properties, such as the ability to self-renew, 
asymmetric cell division and differentiation potential55. 
 
PDX models of treatment-resistant disease. 
There are primarily two ways in which PDX models can be used to interrogate 
primary or acquired resistance. One strategy is to derive models from patients’ 
samples before initiation of therapy and again at the time of treatment 
resistance. Alternatively, models can be developed from pretreatment tumour 
samples, and resistance can be recapitulated in the PDX upon iterative cycles 
  
 
11 
of exposure to the drug, as previously observed in genetically engineered 
mouse (GEM) models56. Using cycles of drug exposure in pretreatment PDX 
models, paired analysis of PDX models of cisplatin-sensitive and cisplatin-
resistant testicular germ cell cancer (TGCC) proposed potential alternatives for 
the treatment of cisplatin-refractory TGCC, including anti-angiogenic therapy57 
and blockade of the platelet-derived growth factor receptor β (PDGFRβ)–AKT 
pathway58.  
 
PDX models have also proven useful in identifying mechanisms of resistance 
to targeted therapies in oestrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast cancer. The 
analysis of four hormone-resistant PDX tumours, which were obtained from two 
ER-positive breast cancer PDX models by continuous treatment with tamoxifen 
or by oophorectomy-mediated hormone depletion, revealed that hormone 
resistance was associated with various forms of deregulated ER-mediated 
gene transcription33. Taking a similar approach, PDX models of ER-positive 
breast cancer have been used to investigate jagged 1 (JAG1)–NOTCH4 
signalling as a means for attenuating sensitivity to hormonal therapy59 and to 
identify mechanisms of acquired resistance to cyclin-dependent kinase 4 
(CDK4) and CDK6 blockade60. 
 
Patients with advanced cancer who acquire resistance to several lines of 
treatment mostly present with multiple metastatic lesions that are not amenable 
to resection, and may harbour different resistance pathways. Generating PDX 
models that recapitulate such complex scenarios of therapy-resistant 
metastatic tumours has become feasible for several tumours (TABLE 1). For 
  
 
12 
example, analysis of biopsy specimens and corresponding PDXs from different 
drug-resistant metastases in patients with melanoma who had been treated 
with a BRAF inhibitor resulted in the identification of multiple resistance 
mechanisms both within individual lesions and among separate samples from 
the same patient35,38. The resistance mechanisms identified in PDXs were also 
found in the original patient samples35, and clinically resistant tumours were 
also treatment-refractory when grown as PDXs38. These studies provide proof 
of principle for the heterogeneous nature of acquired resistance in individual 
patients with melanoma and further attest to the ability of PDX models to predict 
clinical 
outcomes. 
Similar 
results 
have 
been 
observed 
in 
lung 
adenocarcinomas61. 
 
Although PDXs generally retain drug-sensitivity profiles that are similar to those 
of the corresponding patient tumour30,38,62,63, PDX models derived from 
treatment-resistant tumours can become sensitive again upon xenografting, 
owing to the effect of the so-called “drug holiday” in which treatment is 
discontinued after tumour implantation to facilitate engraftment. Some 
resistance mechanisms are thus reversible in the absence of drug, as shown 
for melanoma64,65 and lung adenocarcinoma66. This suggests that treatment-
resistant PDXs should be exposed to continuous treatment immediately after 
implantation, although this is a cost- and labour-intensive approach. However, 
uninterrupted therapy might also result in the further selection of a 
subpopulation of tumour cells, resulting in a loss of intra-tumour heterogeneity 
and genetic variation in the PDX tumours compared with the original tumours.  
 
  
 
13 
In response to the need for more sophisticated models, several groups (for 
example, see REF.67) have developed protocols and networks to generate 
clinical trial-associated xenografts (CTAXs) (TABLE 1). These advanced PDX 
models are currently being derived from image-guided biopsy samples taken at 
different time points during disease progression and following new lines of 
treatment in the context of clinical trials. Such models will be extremely valuable 
in evaluating how the molecular evolution of advanced tumours is associated 
with innate or acquired drug resistance, and will be important for studying the 
tumour heterogeneity and clonal selection that results from drug treatment. In 
principle, CTAXs may also serve as personalized cancer models to test drug 
combinations that aim to overcome acquired resistance, generating information 
that could be transferred back to the donor patient for therapeutic decisions 
(see below). However, this opportunity might be hindered by limitations such as 
the low engraftment success rates for some tumour types and the 
disconnection between the time needed for PDX expansion and treatment 
(which can be long, especially for tumours with indolent growth in mice) and the 
rapidity of disease progression in patients. 
 
Finally, PDXs that are established from tumours resistant to conventional 
therapies delivered in the neoadjuvant setting are of special interest (TABLE 
1). In triple-negative breast cancer, the establishment and molecular profiling 
of PDXs from residual cancer cells that persist after neoadjuvant treatment 
(minimal residual disease (MRD)) may lead to the identification of targetable 
molecular alterations in the chemotherapy-resistant component of the tumour, 
which may mirror micro-metastases that are destined to clinically recur68. 
  
 
14 
Despite often being limited in size due to prior exposure to cytotoxic therapy, 
triple-negative breast tumours from patients treated in the neoadjuvant setting 
engraft much more efficiently than do treatment-naive tumours (72% and 34%, 
respectively) (TABLE 2). Given the high engraftment efficiency and rapid 
growth of PDXs from drug-tolerant MRD tissues, at least in the case of breast 
cancer, these models represent an unprecedented opportunity to identify 
genomic alterations and associated targeted therapies before tumour 
recurrence in patients.  
 
 
Next-generation PDX models 
Humanized PDX models to evaluate cancer immunotherapies. The 
importance of the immune system in tumour progression and treatment 
highlights the need for PDX models to facilitate the preclinical assessment of 
cancer immune therapies69. However, to avoid immune rejection of 
xenotransplants by the host, PDX models are primarily generated by 
transplanting tumour fragments into immunodeficient mice. The absence of 
many components of the immune system in these mice, and the loss of 
endogenous human immune cells upon propagation of the human tumour 
tissue over multiple passages70,71, limit the utility of such models to explore the 
role of the immune system in tumour progression and to test novel immune-
based therapies72.  
 
Humanized mice (also known as human haemato-lymphoid chimeric mice or 
human immune system (HIS) models) are immunocompromised mice in which 
  
 
15 
selected immune components have been introduced to generate a competent 
human immune system with different degrees of immune reconstitution. One 
methodology for the generation of humanized mice involves the transplantation 
of total peripheral blood from healthy human donors or patients (peripheral 
blood lymphocyte(PBL) models) or, in particular applications, the infusion of 
tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) (FIG. 1). Although these procedures are 
known to cause severe graft-versus-host disease (GvHD) beginning 2-5 weeks 
after injection73,74, seriously limiting the useful investigative time window of 
these models and the translational value of these studies75, PBL and TIL mice 
can be used for cost-effective short-term testing of novel immune therapeutics 
and for assessing short-term adverse effects.  
 
Alternatively, HIS mice can be generated through the transplantation of CD34-
positive human haematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) or precursor cells isolated 
from umbilical cord blood, bone marrow and peripheral blood, either alone or in 
combination with additional human immune tissues (bone ossicles or human 
thymic tissue)76 into immunodeficient mice (FIG. 1). Compared with PBL- and 
TIL-derived models, transplantation with HSCs results in a more complete 
haematopoietic reconstitution, as HSCs give rise to various lineages of human 
blood cells throughout the life of the animal. Methods for transplantation depend 
on the source of HSCs, the co-transplantation of immune tissues, the mouse 
strain and the age of the recipient mice75-78. In order to avoid the immune 
reactions caused by human leukocyte antigen (HLA) mismatch, the ideal 
source of HSCs is the same patient from whom the PDX has been established. 
However, isolating HSCs from cancer patients may prove daunting: on the one 
  
 
16 
hand, bone marrow biopsies are difficult in debilitated individuals; on the other 
hand, growth factor-stimulated bone marrow mobilization for HSC collection 
from peripheral blood might foster tumour progression79 Moreover, even when 
applicable, the low yield of HSCs obtainable from cancer patients severely limits 
the number of mice than can be humanized. An attractive alternative is the in 
vitro expansion of HSCs80, although this procedure could introduce biological 
perturbations affecting stemness and differentiation potential. 
 
Whereas various strains of immunodeficient mice are used to transplant solid 
tumour tissue, not all of these strains are suitable for generating HIS models. 
The survival of human immune cells is highly dependent on the compatibility of 
the “do-not-eat-me” signals (CD47–signal-regulatory protein α (SIRPα)) on 
phagocytes in the host81. The most commonly used mice to generate 
compatible HIS models are those derived from the non-obese-diabetic (NOD)-
severe combined immune deficiency (SCID)-interleukin-2 receptor common -
chain (IL2-R)-deficient (NSG; also known as NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjll/SzJ) 
strain and the NOD/Sci-SCID/IL-2R strain (NOG; also known as NOD-Cg-
Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Sug/JicTac). Substantial efforts are thus being made to develop 
novel GEM strains that not only express human-specific do-not-eat-me signals 
but also express human-specific cytokines or HLAs. These mouse strains differ 
upon transplantation in durability and quality of engraftment of the human 
immune system78. Some key examples of how humanized models are currently 
evolving to support PDX transplantation towards application in the immune-
oncology space are presented as online supplementary information (see 
Supplementary information S1 (table)). 
  
 
17 
 
Modelling metastatic disease. Subcutaneous transplantation usually fails to 
reproduce the organ-specific tropism of distant metastases that is observed in 
patients. Therefore, models of metastatic disease are typically generated 
through orthotopic procedures. These include the transplantation of fragments 
of the primary tumour into the same location in the mouse, which is usually 
followed by the development of spontaneous metastases, or the direct transfer 
of metastatic lesions into the same organ in the host (TABLE 1). Patient-derived 
orthotopic xenografts (PDOXs; also known as orthoxenografts) of primary 
tumours can reproducibly lead to local invasive growth and metastases, often 
identical to those observed in the patient82-84. PDOX models for most cancer 
indications have typically been developed from surgical specimens. More 
recently, however, they have been successfully derived from biopsy samples, 
despite the limited quantity and quality of tissue available85. 
 
Advantages of orthotopic models include the ability to investigate tumour-host 
interactions at the relevant site of primary and secondary tumour growth, the 
development of patient-like metastases, the ability to interrogate site-specific 
dependence of therapy, and the potential to conduct clinically relevant studies, 
such as monitoring the effects of adjuvant therapy on occult metastases 
(TABLE 1). Nevertheless, orthotopic models remain relatively rare, probably 
owing to the non-trivial microsurgical procedures that are required for organ-
specific transplantation. Furthermore, the incorporation of clinically relevant 
imaging modalities and appropriate in vivo imaging probes is necessary to 
visualize tumour orthotopic implants and metastatic progression in deep 
  
 
18 
tissues and to ensure timely therapeutic intervention when animals develop 
disease symptoms86. 
 
PDOX models of breast cancer are particularly amenable for modelling 
metastasis. They primarily rely on mammary fat pad injection of primary tumour 
samples, which successfully recapitulate the entire metastatic process from the 
appropriate primary anatomic site8,87. PDOX models of brain metastases and 
primary brain tumours are challenging. To prevent the default seeding of 
intravenously injected tumour cells in the lung and to ensure colonization of the 
central nervous system, intra-cardiac left ventricular inoculation of tumour cells 
is required88. Cells may also be implanted intracranially to overcome the blood-
brain barrier89. Orthotopic homing and the metastatic potential of cancer cells 
can be boosted by genetic modification; for example, colorectal cancer PDX 
cells engineered to express C-C motif chemokine receptor 9 (CCR9) efficiently 
localize to the mouse colon after tail-vein injection, attracted by the abundance 
of the CCR9 ligand C-C motif chemokine ligand 25 (CCL25) in the intestine, 
and then spontaneously metastasize to the liver90. Genetic manipulation is 
useful to develop models of spontaneous metastasis for mechanistic studies in 
vivo; however, the introduction of exogenous molecules to patient-derived 
material may affect some properties of the original tumour, thus reducing 
translational relevance. 
 
Whether PDOX models more accurately recapitulate clinical response to 
anticancer drugs compared with conventional subcutaneous PDX models 
remains to be established. One report showed that the antitumoural effects of 
  
 
19 
a microtubule-stabilizing drug on PDX models of brain metastases from non-
small-cell lung cancer were different in orthotopic versus subcutaneous 
implants85, but results remain anecdotal. It is conceivable that therapies that 
target components of the tumour microenvironment, such as endothelial cells 
and immune cells, would be better evaluated in an orthotopic context. 
Conversely, the therapeutic response of “oncogene-addicted tumours”, which 
intrinsically rely on activating mutations for their growth and survival, is likely to 
be less dependent on anatomical location and more influenced by the 
underlying cancer genetic makeup. Indeed, despite their heterotopic location, 
subcutaneous PDXs from BRAF-mutant melanoma9,91 and HER2 (also known 
as ERBB2)-amplified colorectal cancer6,92,93 mimic the therapeutic response 
observed in patients. Sharing results from different experimental models within 
the EurOPDX consortium will allow us to shed some light on this critical 
question. 
 
CTC-derived PDX models. As mentioned above, a step forwards for minimally 
invasive tumour sampling is the isolation and characterization of CTCs, 
detected at low concentrations in the peripheral blood of patients with different 
solid tumours40. Although the role of CTCs in metastasis development is still 
uncertain40, their levels ostensibly correlate with patient survival and response 
to therapy94-96. These features mean that CTCs are promising tools to monitor 
cancer burden and drug susceptibility in metastatic and late-stage disease, 
when repetitive biopsies are not indicated. Technological advances now allow 
the isolation of viable CTCs, which maintain tumorigenicity when xenografted 
in immunocompromised mice97-99 (TABLE 1). 
  
 
20 
 
Several reports have demonstrated the feasibility of establishing CTC-derived 
PDX models by directly injecting freshly isolated and enriched CTCs from 
patients with different cancers into immunocompromised mice. Using various 
CTC-capture techniques (such as epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EPCAM) 
or cytokeratin-based selection of cancer cells derived from epithelial tissues or 
microfluidic-based leukocyte depletion100,101), CTC-derived xenografts are now 
practicable for breast cancer97, prostate cancer102, gastric cancer103, small-cell 
lung cancer (SCLC)98 and melanoma91. Moreover, it has also been shown that 
ex vivo cultivated and fully molecularly characterized breast104 and colorectal105 
CTCs maintain their tumorigenic potential. Notably, both freshly isolated CTCs 
and CTC-derived PDXs genetically and histologically mirror the original tumour 
and retain analogous drug sensitivities91,97,98,100,102-105. As an example, PDXs 
that are established from chemotherapy-naive circulating SCLC cells 
recapitulate donor patients’ response to both platinum and etoposide98. In 
patients with ER-positive breast cancer, CTCs have also proven to be a useful 
model to study the genetic evolution of the tumour and to identify novel drug 
susceptibilities104.  
 
Although technically challenging, the use of CTC-derived PDX models opens 
new possibilities for translational research. In addition to being a source of 
information regarding disease prognosis106, tumour heterogeneity107,108, 
evolution109 and dissemination110,111, CTC-derived PDXs hold promise for 
precision medicine applications (TABLE 1). For instance, CTCs from women 
with treatment-refractory ER-positive breast tumours have been recently 
  
 
21 
analysed to investigate the functional and phenotypic consequences of 
prolonged anti-hormonal therapies, and xenografts from such CTCs have been 
used to design new therapies to overcome resistance112. Similarly, the next-
generation sequencing of tumours, complemented with genomic analysis of 
CTCs and CTC-derived PDX mouse models, has proven to be a powerful 
platform for developing precision medicine strategies in patients with 
melanoma91. This approach has, in specific cases, facilitated the clinical 
implementation of alternative therapeutic strategies informed by the preclinical 
models91. 
 
 
PDXs for clinical decision-making 
PDX population xenopatient trials. Across tumours of the same origin, 
genetic lesions that sustain tumorigenesis (and that therefore associate with 
response to targeted drugs) often involve many different oncogenes, each of 
which is mutated at low frequency113. Furthermore, genotype-based prediction 
of drug response is not unequivocal. Despite harbouring the genetic lesion 
known to correlate with drug response, many tumours do not regress due to the 
presence of signals that compensate for target inhibition114. Collectively, this 
information indicates that the genetic selection of tumours for the application of 
targeted therapies requires representative study populations and suitable 
pharmacogenomic platforms. 
 
Provided that they are generated in high numbers and extensively 
characterized at the molecular level, PDXs can act as a powerful resource for 
  
 
22 
large-scale genotype-response correlations and therapeutic studies in 
genetically defined tumour subsets. Several recent studies testify to this 
potential; in late-stage colorectal cancer, for example, a systematic assessment 
of response to antibodies targeting epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) 
using PDX models (“xenopatients”) derived from hundreds of individual 
tumours was coupled to candidate-gene or whole-exome sequencing analyses. 
Through this effort, several genetic determinants of resistance to EGFR 
blockade were discovered, including amplifications or mutations in genes 
encoding druggable kinases6,7,115,116. Similarly, more dynamic features such as 
expression changes in pro-survival genes and the activation of compensatory 
feedback loops during treatment were identified as mechanisms of tumour 
adaptation to EGFR family117,118 or MEK119 inhibition in colorectal cancer. The 
flexibility of PDXs also enabled preclinical testing of drug combinations in 
models displaying some of these resistance traits, with a permutation capability 
that was clearly beyond the number of testable hypotheses in humans (FIG. 2).  
 
An analogous population-based drug screen has been recently performed in 
more than 1,000 PDX models representing a wide range of solid cancers (the 
‘PDX Encyclopaedia’)9. Some genetic hypotheses and biomarkers of drug 
sensitivity, which emerged from cultured cancer cell lines, were successfully 
validated in this large panel of PDX models (FIG. 2). Notably, experiments in 
PDXs also enabled the identification of therapeutic candidates that in vitro 
model systems failed to capture9. In all these studies, responses obtained in 
mice were highly consistent with responses in patients. For example, the 
distribution of tumour regression, disease stabilization and progression in 
  
 
23 
colorectal cancer xenopatients receiving EGFR antibodies was similar to that 
found in the clinic, and treatment-refractory tumour grafts were enriched for 
known genetic predictors of therapeutic resistance in patients6 (TABLE 3); 
moreover, in analogy with clinical studies120, the addition of an EGFR small-
molecule inhibitor to the EGFR antibody increased tumour regression118. 
Similarly, PDXs from BRAF-mutant melanomas underwent substantial 
shrinkage when treated with BRAF inhibitors, a response that was further 
magnified – as in patients – by the addition of a MEK inhibitor9,121. PDX 
platforms have recently been used for the systematic identification of cancer 
vulnerabilities through RNA interference-based genetic screens in tumour 
grafts, which have revealed new oncogenic drivers in melanoma122 and 
pancreatic tumours123. 
 
PDX population trials may be highly informative, but they are also expensive 
and technically cumbersome, and the trade-off between sufficient sample size 
to ensure adequate coverage of inter-patient heterogeneity and experimental 
feasibility requires careful study design. To reduce the number of animal 
replicates while preserving statistical power, reproducibility studies have been 
conducted to compare response calls made on a single mouse with majority 
responses in reference cohorts composed of many animals. Thus, a strong 
concordance between single-mouse responses and majority responses has 
been found, with a prediction accuracy varying from 75%124 to 95%9. 
Accordingly, ‘one animal per model per treatment’ (1 x 1 x 1) approaches have 
been recently advocated9,125.  
 
  
 
24 
Alternative strategies to reduce experimental burden could rely on step-wise 
approaches, whereby large-scale pharmacogenomic screens are performed 
using less laborious formats (such as cancer cell lines) followed by in vivo 
validation in selected, molecularly relevant PDX models. In this regard, it is 
noteworthy that patient-derived material from human tumours, such as 
colorectal, pancreas and prostate cancers126-132, can be grown and nearly 
indefinitely expanded as three-dimensional (3D) organoids. These can be 
easily transplanted to establish PDXs, and vice versa, and are amenable to 
drug screens in a semi-high-throughput manner130. Albeit more difficult to 
establish and propagate, two-dimensional (2D) primary cultures of dissociated 
cancer cells from both patient samples and PDXs are also being attempted with 
similar rationale and objectives133. In this vein, a platform for drug testing in 
short-term cultured breast cancer cells from PDXs has been recently developed 
and shown to predict in vivo drug response29. 
 
PDX co-clinical ‘Avatar’ trials. The term co-clinical trial refers to simultaneous 
clinical and preclinical trials with anticancer agents in patients with a tumour 
type of a defined genetic makeup and a mouse model with similar genetic 
abnormalities134. The underpinning idea is that comparison of responses 
between the patients and the preclinical model will help to define the 
mechanism of action of a given drug, as well as biomarkers of response. 
Originally implemented with GEM models, the co-clinical trial concept has been 
expanded to include PDX models (“avatars”), which are generated from cancer 
patients enrolled in clinical trials and, in parallel, treated with the same drug or 
drugs that the patient is receiving10 (FIG. 2). In general, these studies aim to 
  
 
25 
develop a PDX model from newly diagnosed patients and use it to explore 
therapies that can be administered to the patient at the time of disease 
progression. Ongoing trials cover different tumour settings, including sarcomas 
(NCT02720796)135, head and neck carcinomas (NCT02752932)136, ovarian 
cancer (NCT02312245)137 and pancreatic cancer (NCT02795650)138. Although 
a cogent argument exists for implementing avatar trials, and several case 
reports have provided data to support the concept139-141, the logistical difficulties 
and technical hurdles are likely to limit the broad applicability of this approach 
(see above). 
 
PDX models in biomarker development. The validation of mechanisms that 
link specific biomarkers to treatment efficacy will have direct clinical effects, 
allowing patient stratification for tailored treatment protocols. Large-scale PDX 
trial formats, such as the PDX Encyclopaedia9 mentioned above, represent a 
more accurate approach to identify predictive biomarkers compared with the 
use of cell lines (TABLE 1). A transcriptional profiling study on 85 PDX models 
of nine different cancer types treated with nine separate cancer drugs identified 
1,578 genes, the expression of which correlated with sensitivity to at least one 
drug; 333 of these genes showed significant association with sensitivity to two 
or more drugs, and 32 genes predicted response to six or seven drugs142. This 
type of study provides an initial set of biomarkers that require further evaluation 
in clinical material to determine translatability into a clinically useful assay.  
 
Epigenetic biomarkers, such as DNA methylation, can also be assessed in 
PDXs as possible response predictors. A study including 28 glioblastoma 
  
 
26 
PDOXs showed that the poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitor 
veliparib significantly enhances the efficacy of temozolomide (TMZ) 
chemotherapy only in models with O-6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase 
(MGMT) promoter hyper-methylation143. On the basis of these data, MGMT 
promoter hyper-methylation was included as an eligibility criterion for TMZ and 
veliparib combination treatment in an ongoing] phase II/III glioblastoma clinical 
trial (NCT02152982)144. 
 
Determinants of therapeutic sensitivity can be identified at the protein level 
using pathway analysis in PDXs: a proteomic survey of 20 PDX models of 
glioblastoma and their parental tumours identified a subset of cases with 
comparable proteomic profiles displaying high levels of expression and 
phosphorylation of EGFR and its downstream signalling proteins145. The 
expression and phosphorylation status of EGFR and downstream targets might 
be used as a predictive biomarker of response to EGFR inhibition in preclinical 
trials and, if successful, included in future clinical trials aiming at inhibiting 
EGFR signalling in patients with glioblastoma. 
 
PDX models are also useful for the preclinical identification of metabolic 
biomarkers using magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS). This technique 
has recently been used to demonstrate differences in metabolic characteristics 
between molecular subtypes of breast cancer146,147. Elevated phosphocholine 
levels and low glycerophosphocholine levels have been proposed to be 
metabolic markers of aggressive disease in breast cancer based on in vitro 
studies148. However, MRS on intact tissue from PDX models of poor-prognosis 
  
 
27 
basal-like breast cancer displays an inverted metabolic profile, with high 
glycerophosphocholine rather than high phosphocholine concentration146,147. 
These observations suggest that proper tumour architecture, as maintained in 
PDXs, influences choline metabolism. Accordingly, a strong correlation 
between PDX models and clinical material was observed in the expression of 
genes that are involved in key metabolic pathways146. MRS technology also 
holds potential for in vivo non-invasive detection of metabolic biomarkers 
through tailored techniques such as 31P MRS or hyperpolarized 13C 
MRS149,150. Recently, a proof-of-principle study demonstrated the ability of in 
vivo MRS to distinguish basal-like from luminal-like breast cancer PDXs non-
invasively using 31P MRS imaging151.  
 
For some cancer types, the ability of tumours to successfully engraft in mice 
can be considered per se a surrogate biomarker of risk for disease progression. 
For example, in mammary tumours, the ability to generate stable tumour grafts 
significantly predicted reduced survival8,152, and gene expression signatures 
associated with successful PDX engraftment correlated with worse survival 
outcome when tested in prognostically annotated data sets of triple-negative 
breast cancer153. Similarly, tumour grafts of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma 
displayed higher expression of metastasis-associated genes compared with 
samples that failed engraftment, and patient donors of successfully engrafted 
tumours had shorter survival154.  
It is now well established that human tumour stromal cells are replaced by 
mouse counterparts following engraftment155. As a consequence of this 
substitution, species-specific RNA sequencing-based expression profiling of 
  
 
28 
PDXs offers a unique opportunity to distinguish mouse stroma-derived 
transcripts from human cancer cell-derived transcripts without the need to 
physically separate the two components before RNA extraction. Such analyses 
led to the identification of stromal-associated transcriptional signatures in 
colorectal cancer associated with poor prognosis and treatment resistance156. 
The negative prognostic significance of tumour stromal transcriptional 
signatures and their value for therapeutic decision-making and patient follow-
up have also been described in other reports157,158.  
 
 
Challenges and opportunities 
Ideal animal models for preclinical experimentation in oncology should fulfil 
several criteria: reflecting the diversity of cancer patients at the epidemiological 
and molecular levels; retaining, to the highest possible extent, the functional, 
phenotypic and genotypic characteristics of human tumours; faithfully 
predicting response to therapies, and recapitulating mechanisms of innate and 
acquired resistance, and allowing for experimental flexibility.  
 
Although PDXs fulfil several of these criteria and can be further improved to 
meet additional requirements, certain inherent limitations remain difficult to 
address. A major obstacle is the necessity of using immunocompromised mice 
to circumvent xenograft rejection. This requirement hampers the use of current 
PDX models to assess immunotherapeutics. Although emerging humanization 
procedures are now expected to overcome some of the most important 
concerns (see Supplementary information S1 (table)), issues still remain with 
  
 
29 
the incorporation of particular immune cell types, immune responses and 
lymphoid structures in these humanized models and with the eradication of 
xenogeneic GvHD. It is expected that the development of novel immune-
deficient mice will take advantage of emerging technologies based on 
engineered nuclease enzymes for genome editing (such as transcription 
activator-like effector nuclease (TALEN) and CRISPR–Cas9). These 
modifications will include the replacement or introduction of combinations of 
human-specific cytokine receptors and adhesion molecules, as well as more 
comprehensive sets of HLA class I and class II molecules.  
 
As mentioned above, serial passaging of tumours leads to substitution of 
human stroma by murine components, and mouse-derived cytokines and 
growth factors in some cases do not crossreact with receptors that are 
expressed by human (cancer) cells159-162. This makes the contribution of the 
tumour microenvironment to drug response difficult to assess in PDXs. 
Moreover, the lack of a species-compatible tumour stroma complicates the 
identification of pharmacodynamic markers of target inactivation for drugs that 
intercept cancer-related microenvironmental processes, such as angiogenesis 
and inflammation. While mouse humanization procedures seek to reconstitute 
the human immune system, the replacement of stromal elements such as 
endothelial cells and fibroblasts with their human counterparts is currently 
daunting, if not unfeasible.  
 
PDX-based efforts for cancer precision medicine also require adequate 
logistics, from proper archival biobanking to continuous propagation of live 
  
 
30 
biospecimens, intensive animal experimentation and systematic integration of 
therapeutic results with high-content molecular annotation. The perception of 
this complexity and the awareness that resource sustainability cannot be 
maintained by individual academic laboratories have fuelled initiatives for 
creating and implementing shared large-scale PDX platforms, including the 
European EurOPDX resource, the US National Cancer Institute (NCI) 
repository of patient-derived models, the Public Repository of Xenografts 
(PRoXe), the Children's Oncology Group (COG) cell culture and xenograft 
repository, and the Pediatric Preclinical Testing Consortium (PPTC) (BOX 1).  
 
When dealing with such large multi-institutional platforms, standardized 
methodological procedures should be carried out to ensure reproducibility and 
to streamline readouts so that they are interpretable across different 
laboratories (BOX 1). Further, therapeutic outcomes should be univocally 
deciphered and stringently interpreted. Retardation of tumour growth during 
therapy typically results in tumours that are smaller than controls at end point, 
but larger than they were before starting treatment; while this may well suggest 
that the therapy is biologically active (because it affects cancer cell 
proliferation), it is not an indication that the therapy is clinically effective; indeed, 
this kind of response would be clinically defined as ‘disease progression’ or, at 
best, ‘disease stabilization’. In the EurOPDX experience, even manifest effects 
of tumour growth inhibition – as observed, for example, after blockade of MEK 
in PDXs of KRAS-mutant colorectal cancer125 – did not translate into clinical 
benefit when analogous therapies were applied to patients163. By contrast, overt 
regression in PDXs predicted positive results in the clinic: the finding that an 
  
 
31 
antibody and small molecule combination against HER2 induced massive 
regressions in HER2-amplified colorectal tumour grafts6,117 has been recently 
translated into a successful clinical trial, with the vast majority of patients 
achieving tumour shrinkage when treated with the same regimen93. It has also 
become increasingly clear that the use of quantitative metrics to classify 
response (equivalent to clinical Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumours 
(RECIST)) should be implemented to more precisely assess therapeutic effects 
in PDX trials. Modified RECIST criteria for mouse xenograft applications have 
recently been described9. ‘Best response’ is defined as the minimum value of 
percentage tumour volume change, compared with tumour volume at baseline, 
for treatment durations equal to or longer than 10 days, and ‘best average 
response’ is the minimum value of the mean percentage of tumour volume 
change, as measured at each evaluation time point along treatment, compared 
with baseline9. Such definitions, coupled with specific tumour volume cut-offs, 
have been applied to categorize complete response, partial response, stable 
disease and progressive disease in tumour-bearing mice. These modified 
RECIST criteria capture response kinetics, robustness and durability, and thus 
improve the ability of preclinical studies to accurately predict patient outcome. 
 
Extended and detailed molecular annotation is a prerequisite for precision 
oncology paradigms. However, the accumulation of multiple layers of genomic 
information requires the development of computational systems with common 
or interoperable standards for normalization, correction and retrieval of complex 
data sets. The issue of big data collection, harmonization and storage is 
particularly critical when working with large PDX collections, in which one 
  
 
32 
original tumour from a single patient gives rise, upon serial passages, to many 
descendants that expand at an exponential rate (BOX 2). In EurOPDX, efforts 
are ongoing to aggregate cancer genomic profiles obtained through different 
technologies in different laboratories and to implement a user-friendly, open-
source portal that showcases the molecular characteristics of the participating 
collections (BOX 1). Importantly, besides the detection of individual variants 
with clinically actionable potential, multi-dimensional molecular information 
from existing PDX models can be subjected to systems-based bioinformatics 
analysis to extract algorithms that identify key biological parameters164. 
Preliminary evidence suggests that such algorithms can be subsequently used 
to identify one or more ‘biofacsimile’ or ‘proxy’ PDX models for individual 
patients, and PDX-associated information may be leveraged to instruct 
treatment options and/or to derive predictive indicators in the clinic164 (FIG. 2).  
 
All these considerations underscore the opportunities offered by PDX models 
to illuminate new angles of translational cancer research, but they also put 
forward the challenges that are intrinsic to this approach, and the need for 
finding new ways to maximize PDX potential. Industry-led PDX ventures rely 
on common and extensively tested operating procedures, backed by 
considerable funding, which ensures scalable, homogeneous and reproducible 
experimental schemes; however, pharmaceutical initiatives are typically bound 
to preclinical testing of proprietary compounds and may face obstacles in 
publishing results, especially when data relate to sensitive commercial or 
patenting issues. Conversely, due to their multi-institutional nature, scholarly 
consortia usually suffer from heterogeneous characterization of their PDX 
  
 
33 
collections, a flaw that is hardly corrected by the relatively limited resources 
provided by government or charity grants; however, PDX academic efforts 
enjoy flexibility in drug testing and unfettered scientific reporting (including 
reporting of negative results, which avoids the duplication of effort and reduces 
costs). As EurOPDX members working in academia, we share with our 
colleagues of PRoXe the concern that “academic centers are ill suited to bear 
the burden of housing, expanding, archiving, characterizing, and disseminating 
PDXs to investigators (academic and industrial) across the world”(REF. 165). 
Meanwhile, we believe that joining forces, incorporating models, coordinating 
methodologies, and improving the public shareability and visibility of molecular 
data in an academic-oriented rather than industry-scale format are viable 
objectives that will foster not only a stronger collaborative spirit in cancer 
medicine, but also a change of mind-set within institutional authorities and 
industrial stakeholders. EurOPDX has started as a crowd-funded initiative of 
scientists with common goals, complementary skills and similar needs, and is 
now growing in a more structured fashion thanks to enterprise-wide 
development plans. Ultimately, we envision a virtuous circle in which new 
knowledge from bottom-up efforts like ours and others will inform clinical 
decision making, which in turn will orient public and private financial interests 
to secure further sustainability of PDX-based activities. Successful examples in 
other contexts of biomedical research, such as TRANSAUTOPHAGY (see 
Further information; a European consortium for multidisciplinary research and 
translation of knowledge on autophagy) and GENiE (see Further information; a 
network of scientists using Caenorhabditis elegans as a model organism), bode 
well to achieve this ambition. 
  
 
34 
 
Acknowledgements 
The authors would like to thank all members of the EurOPDX Consortium who also 
contributed to this article, and in particular S. Corso, S. Giordano, P. P. López-Casas, 
K. Moran-Jones and F. Nemati. The Caldas laboratory would like to thank the PGE 
team for their support, especially Lisa, Steve and Yi. A.T.B. is supported by Science 
Foundation Ireland under grants 13/CDA/2183 and 15/TIDA/2963 and further 
receives funding from the Irish Cancer Society Collaborative Cancer Research 
Centre BREAST-PREDICT Grant CCRC13GAL. D.G.A. and R.B.C. are 
supported by Breast Cancer Now. F.A., E.H. and J.C.M. received KULeuven GOA 
funding (GOA/14/012) and a research grant from Stichting tegen Kanker. J.A. is 
funded by the Breast Cancer Research Foundation, the Spanish Association Against 
Cancer (AECC) and the Instituto de Salud Carlos III (PI16/00253 and CIBER- ONC). 
A.V.B. and D.K.C. are supported by Cancer Research UK (C29717/A17263), the 
Wellcome Trust (10372/Z/14/Z), the Scottish Genomes Partnership — SEHHD-
CSO 1175759/2158447, the Howat Foundation and Pancreatic Cancer UK. A.B., 
C.C. and O.M.R. have been supported by funding from Cancer Research UK and by 
the European Union to the EUROCAN Network of Excellence (FP7; grant number 
260791). 
E.B. 
is 
supported 
by 
the 
CETOCOEN 
PLUS 
project 
(CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/15_003/0000469) and the RECETOX Research Infrastructure 
(LM2015051). G.C. and D.V. were funded by NIH transformative R01CA156695 and 
European Research Council ERC Advanced grant 1400206AdG-322875. S.G.E. 
receives support from NCI grant 1UM1CA186688 for early-phase trials through 
the ET-CTN. E.G.S. is supported by the Spanish Ministry of Economy and 
Competitivity MINECO and from the ISCIII (SAF2014-55997; PIE13/00022, co-funded 
  
 
35 
by FEDER funds/European Regional Development Fund (ERDF) — a way to build 
Europe), by a Career Catalyst Grant from the Susan Komen Foundation 
(CCR13262449) and by a European Research Council Consolidator grant 
(CoG682935). M.A.J. 
is supported by an Irish Health Research Board Health Research 
Award (#HRA-POR-2014-547). S.D.J. is supported by the Dutch Cancer Society 
(grants RUG 2010-4833, RUG 2011- 5231, RUG 2012-5477 and RUG 2014-6691). 
J.J. is funded by the Dutch Cancer Society (NKI 2011-5197 and EMCR 2014-
7048), the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (Zenith 
93512009, Vici 91814643, CancerGenomiCs.nl) and the European Research 
Council (ERC- SyG CombatCancer). K.K. and D.S.P. are supported by the Dutch 
Cancer Society (NKI-2013-5799). L.L. and P.G.P. are funded by ERC Advanced 
Grant 341131 and Italian Association for Cancer Research (AIRC) Investigator 
Grant 14216. G.M.M. receives funds from the Norwegian Cancer Society (421851) 
and the Research Council of Norway (222262/F20). J.H.N. is funded by the Research 
Council of Norway under grant 250459/F20. H.G.P. is sup- ported by the Instituto de 
Salud Carlos III and the Miguel Servet Program (MSII14/00037). V.S. is supported 
by the Instituto de Salud Carlos III (PI13/01714 and the Miguel Servet Program 
CP14/00028), by a Career Catalyst Grant from the Susan Komen Foundation 
CCR15330331 and the FERO Foundation. L.S. was funded by Worldwide Cancer 
Research (WCR/AICR Grant #13-1182), the European Research Council (CoG 
Grant #617473), the Instituto de Salud Carlos III (FIS Grant #PI13/01705) and the 
FERO Foundation. A.V. is supported by the Instituto de Salud Carlos III (PI13/0133 
and PIE13/00022 (Oncoprofile)), Fundación Mutua Madrileña AP150932014 and 
a grant from the Spanish Association Against Cancer from Barcelona, AECC. A.B. 
is supported by AIRC (Investigator Grant project 15571). L.T. and E.M. are supported 
  
 
36 
by the AIRC (Special Programme Molecular Clinical Oncology 5 × 1000, project 
9970, and Investigator Grant projects, 14205 to L.T. and 12944 to E.M.) and also 
receive funding from the Fondazione Piemontese per la Ricerca sul Cancro-ONLUS 
(5 × 1000 Italian Ministry of Health 2011). 
 
Competing Interests Statement 
The authors declare competing interests: see Web version for details. 
 
 
 
 
 
Children’s Oncology Group (COG) cell culture and 
Public Repository of Xenografts (PRoXe): 
http://www.proxe.org 
US 
National 
Cancer 
Institute 
(NCI) 
repository 
of 
patient- 
 
FURTHER INFORMATION 
EurOPDX: http://www.europdx.eu 
GENiE: http://worm-genie.eu/ 
TRANSAUTOPHAGY: http://cost-transautophagy.eu/ 
http://www.ncipptc.org/ 
SUPPLEMENTARY  INFORMATION 
 
 
  
 
37 
BOX 1 - The EurOPDX Consortium and other related initiatives 
EurOPDX (see Further information; established in 2013) is a collaborative 
network of 16 European academic institutions with expertise in basic, 
preclinical, translational and clinical oncology. Participating laboratories are 
affiliated with comprehensive cancer centres within which preclinical 
experimentation is closely associated with clinical activities. This allows for the 
efficient sharing of patient specimens – together with fully annotated clinical 
information – and facilitates the collection of tumours with unique characteristics 
(for example, rare types, exceptional responders and therapy-refractory cases). 
Currently sustained by membership fees organized by a consortium 
agreement, EurOPDX aims to obtain competitive infrastructural funding to 
further implement collaborative research projects and formalize external access 
procedures to models. The consortium agreement also sets forth general rules 
for confidentiality and intellectual property issues to regulate activities among 
EurOPDX members (co-ownership of results) and between EurOPDX and 
potential partners, including other patient-derived xenograft (PDX) consortia 
and industry. 
 
 
MAIN OBJECTIVES: 
• To create a uniquely extensive collection of characterized PDX models. 
The collection consists of more than 1,500 subcutaneous and orthotopic 
models from over 30 different pathologies (see TABLE 2). The models 
and their molecular annotation are currently being made publicly 
available through the cBioPortal, and are accessible for collaboration 
  
 
38 
upon signature of a material transfer agreement. Systematic derivation 
of primary cultures and organoids for in vitro studies is planned. 
• To provide a platform for population-scale studies to discover low-
prevalence genetic alterations with clinically actionable potential; to 
explore mechanisms of therapeutic resistance in molecularly defined 
tumour subtypes; and to develop predictive biomarkers for personalized 
cancer treatment. 
• To harmonize working practices. This entails several aspects: first, 
standardization of biobanking procedures, including systematic 
assessment of genetic identity by single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) 
DNA fingerprinting. Second, the implementation of common rules for 
PDX expansion and archiving; discussions are ongoing to limit PDX 
propagation to a maximum of 5 passages, but exceptions will be 
considered for tumour types known to deteriorate after freezing-thawing 
steps and for models characterized by very indolent growth, for which 
expansions up to 5 passages would take exceedingly long. Third, 
optimization of inter-laboratory reproducibility through proof-of-concept 
studies by which models from the same source are tested independently. 
And finally, the definition of a set of minimal information to be linked to 
each PDX. 
 
 
OTHER MAJOR PDX INITIATIVES: 
• US National Cancer Institute (NCI) repository of patient-derived models 
(see Further information). 
  
 
39 
• US Pediatric Preclinical Testing Consortium (PPTC; see Further 
information), a US National Cancer Institute (NCI)-centralized and NCI-
funded collection for in vivo testing of paediatric anticancer drug 
candidates. 
• Children's Oncology Group (COG) cell culture and xenograft repository 
(see Further information), a COG-based resource that provides 
validated cell lines and PDXs from paediatric cancers. 
• Public Repository of Xenografts (PRoXe; see Further information), an 
open-source repository of leukemia and lymphoma PDXs165. Many of the 
models are being licensed to the Jackson Laboratories for industry-scale 
purposes, including distribution on a fee-for-service basis 
• Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research PDX Encyclopedia (NIBR 
PDXE), an industry-led initiative that includes approximately 1,000 
models9. Clinical, pathological and PDX-level data from this collection 
are currently being incorporated into PRoXe165. 
 
 
BOX 2 - Data management and integration 
By combining the flexibility of preclinical analysis with the instructive value of 
population-based 
studies, 
patient-derived 
xenografts 
(PDXs) 
offer 
unprecedented opportunities for drawing statistically robust correlations 
between genetic or functional traits and sensitivity to anticancer drugs. 
However, the advantages of high-throughput studies with PDX-based 
approaches may become major hurdles when dealing with large-scale data 
management, analysis and utilization. The deployment of PDX models for 
  
 
40 
translational studies often requires their stratification into existing predictive or 
prognostic molecular classes and subgroups as derived on tumours from 
patients. The portability of the stratification criteria from human to mice, and 
vice versa, is not trivial, owing to multiple sources of biological and genomic 
variation, which may be introduced in the process of engrafting and propagating 
patient tumour material into murine hosts. 
 
DATA MANAGEMENT ISSUES: 
• Data complexity and dynamics. The representation of cancer data in 
classical oncogenomic portals is normally static: the results obtained by 
analysing such public resources are not fed back to refine, update or 
complement the original information. The possibility to incrementally 
stratify and integrate multiple layers of information generated from the 
same original sample by diverse laboratories at different times 
represents one of the key added values of PDX-based approaches. This 
implies the need for further dimensions of complexity to interrogate an 
almost infinite number of variables and to implement decision-making 
algorithms in case of data inconsistency across experiments166. 
• Data normalization and annotations. The joint utilization of human and 
PDX data requires the standardization of sample metadata such as 
clinical and molecular ontologies. Through this effort, data derived from 
different experiments, technologies and platforms can be normalized 
against common categories and used to interrogate samples with 
integrative queries exploring heterogeneous data domains.  
DATA ANALYSIS ISSUES: 
  
 
41 
• Population selection bias. Owing to the different engraftment efficacies 
inherent to each tumour sample, the population of xenografts might not 
recapitulate the full distribution of tumour phenotypic or molecular 
variables observed in patients. Any prior-dependent statistical models 
should be adapted to the new distribution of subclasses within the PDX 
population. This implies the necessity to identify the missing or 
underrepresented subgroups through analytical investigation of 
multidimensional 
parameters 
(genomics, 
transcriptomics, 
histopathology, and so on). 
• Loss of human immune and stromal cells. Athough both stromal and 
immune components are replaced over time by murine analogues, the 
haematopoietic elements show important differences in their spatial 
distribution167 or may be missing overall156,168. This affects the signal 
received from molecular profiling, and could require application of 
specific algorithms for signal correction to avoid or reduce artefacts and 
biases156,169. 
 
 
 
 
  
 
42 
Table 1: Modelling cancer phenotypes with PDX models 
 
PDX model 
 Open clinical question 
Advantages 
Challenges 
Primary tumour specimens 
implanted s.c. 
• 
Interrogation of primary or 
acquired resistance 
mechanisms  
• 
Discovery of prognostic and 
predictive biomarkers 
• 
Drug response 
• 
Identification of targetable 
molecular alterations 
• 
Characterization of intra-
tumour clonal evolution 
• 
Intact primary tumour tissue 
that maintains tumour 
architecture  
• 
Captures clonal diversity 
• 
Easy to measure tumour 
responses 
• 
Intravital tumour imaging 
• 
Lack of proper anatomical 
niche 
• 
Not all grades of tumour 
engraft s.c. Generally, higher 
grade, more aggressive 
tumours engraft more easily. 
Primary tumour specimens 
implanted orthotopically (PDOX) 
• 
Mechanisms of metastasis 
• 
Study site-specific 
dependence of therapy 
• 
Monitoring the effects of 
adjuvant therapy on occult 
metastasis 
• 
Stromal contribution to 
response 
• 
Intact primary tumour tissue 
that maintains primary 
tumour architecture 
• 
Local growth of primary 
tumour in proper anatomical 
context 
• 
Spontaneous distant 
metastases from primary 
tumour 
• 
Presence of primary and 
metastatic tumour niche 
• 
Recapitulates the entire 
metastatic process from the 
appropriate anatomical site 
• 
Ability to mimic clinical 
scenarios, for example, 
surgical removal of primary 
tumour or adjuvant therapy  
• 
Access to imaging 
technologies to visualize 
tumour in longitudinal studies 
• 
Microsurgical skills 
• 
Large collections and high-
throughput screens difficult 
to implement 
Metastatic tumour specimens 
implanted s.c. 
• 
Interrogation of primary or 
acquired resistance 
mechanisms  
• 
Intact metastatic tumour 
tissue that maintains tumour 
architecture  
• 
Lack of tumour metastatic 
niche 
  
 
43 
• 
Discovery of prognostic and 
predictive biomarkers 
• 
Drug response 
• 
Identification of targetable 
molecular alterations 
• 
Characterization of intra-
tumour clonal evolution 
Metastatic tumour specimens 
implanted orthotopically at the 
metastatic site 
• 
Mechanisms of metastasis 
• 
Drug resistance 
• 
Genetic and cellular 
mechanisms of tumour 
growth 
• 
Drug response in the setting 
of metastatic disease 
• 
Stromal contribution to 
response 
• 
Intact metastatic tumour 
tissue that maintains tumour 
architecture 
 
• 
Access to imaging 
technologies to visualize 
tumour in longitudinal studies 
• 
Microsurgical skills 
• 
Large collections and high-
throughput screens difficult 
to implement 
PDX models of MRD  
• 
Drug resistance 
• 
Discovery of prognostic and 
predictive biomarkers 
• 
Biological and 
pharmacological studies 
• 
Identification of targetable 
molecular alterations 
• 
Studies can help us to 
understand the molecular 
bases of and optimize 
therapies for MRD 
• 
Higher tumour take rate 
when compared with 
untreated cancers 
• 
Enables study of clonal 
evolution and cancer stem 
cell behaviour 
• 
PDXs are never therapy 
naive. 
Clinical trial-associated xenografts 
(CTAXs)  
• 
Discovery of prognostic and 
predictive biomarkers  
• 
Drug resistance 
• 
Drug response 
• 
Identification of targetable 
molecular alterations 
• 
Mechanisms of metastasis 
• 
Possibility to establish 
xenografts at different clinical 
stages during patient tumour 
progression  
• 
Permits the parallel testing of 
novel drug combinations 
• 
Limited quantity and quality 
of tissue 
• 
Limited number of 
successfully generated PDXs 
• 
A PDX derived from a single 
biopsy sample may not 
represent the patient’s 
tumour. 
  
 
44 
CTC-derived PDX models 
• 
Molecular tumour 
heterogeneity 
• 
Discovery of prognostic and 
predictive biomarkers 
• 
Study of the genetic 
evolution of the tumour 
• 
Identification of targetable 
molecular alterations  
• 
Minimally invasive sampling 
• 
Ability to monitor cancer 
burden and drug 
susceptibility in metastatic 
and late-stage settings 
• 
Recapitulates donor patient's 
response to treatment 
• 
Facilitates investigation of 
the biology of otherwise 
inaccessible tumour 
specimens 
• 
Low concentration in 
peripheral blood of patients 
with different solid tumours 
• 
Access to technologies to 
isolate all CTCs (both 
epithelial and mesenchymal) 
• 
Technically challenging 
Humanized PDX models 
• 
Investigation of immune 
therapeutics 
• 
Recapitulates human 
immune system in mice 
• 
Requires lengthy mouse 
humanization procedures 
• 
Hurdles to achieve complete 
human immune system 
reconstitution 
• 
See Supplementary 
information S1 (table) for 
further details 
 
CTC, circulating tumour cell; MRD, minimal residual disease; PDX, patient-derived xenograft; PDOX, patient-derived orthotopic xenograft; s.c., 
subcutaneously 
 
 
  
 
45 
Table 2: Facts and figures about the EurOPDX collection* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Average engraftment 
rate: treatment naive 
and adjuvant samples 
(%) 
Engraftment rates: 
neoadjuvant 
samples (if 
relevant) (%) 
Tumour type 
or Organ 
Subtype 
Primary 
tumour or 
metastasis 
Total 
number of 
established 
models 
Subcutane
ous 
Orthotopic 
Subcu
taneo
us 
Orthotopic 
CRC 
All subtypes 
included 
  
Primary 
291 
52-75 
80 
NA 
NA 
  
 
  
Liver 
metastasis 
444 
73-91 
90 
84 
NA 
Pancreas 
(PDAC) 
All subtypes 
included 
 
Primary 
211 
54-71 
70 
NA 
NA 
 
  
 
Liver 
metastasis 
24 
60-100 
90 
NA 
NA 
Breast 
ER+ (incl. 
ER+HER2+) 
 
Primary 
24 
4-7 
7 
20 
NA 
  
 
Metastasis 
20 
25-49 
33-47 
NA 
NA 
  
TNBC 
 
Primary 
78 
30-34 
60-86 
72 
86 
  
 
Metastasis 
26 
60 
50-66 
NA 
NA 
  
HER2+ only 
 
Primary 
16 
26 
NA 
13 
NA 
  
 
Metastasis 
5 
NA 
33 
NA 
NA 
Skin 
melanoma 
All subtypes 
included 
 
Primary 
8 
67-90 
29 
NA 
NA 
 
 
Metastasis 
(cutaneous, 
liver, lung) 
161 
72-90 
83-85 
NA 
NA 
Ovary 
All subtypes 
included 
  
Primary 
123 
40-85‡ 
68 
62‡ 
NA 
  
 
  
Metastasis 
19 
47-85‡ 
80 
NA 
NA 
Gastric 
All subtypes 
included 
 
Primary 
87 
41-50 
70 
34 
NA 
  
 
46 
Endometrial 
All subtypes 
included 
  
Primary 
67 
43-55 
74 
NA 
NA 
  
 
  
Metastasis 
10 
10-60§ 
95 
NA 
NA 
Lung 
NSCLC 
 
Primary and 
metastasis  
59 
50-70 
(primary) 
52 
NA 
NA 
 
SCLC 
 
Primary and 
metastasis 
12 
50 
75 
Not 
applica
ble 
Not 
applicable 
HNSCC 
All subtypes 
included 
  
Primary 
50 
45 
65 
NA 
NA 
  
 
  
Metastasis 
13 
83 
  
NA 
NA 
Glioblastoma 
All subtypes 
included 
 
Primary 
52 
Not 
applicable 
95-100 
Not 
applica
ble 
NA 
Uveal 
melanoma 
All subtypes 
included  
  
Primary 
12 
32 
NA 
Not 
applica
ble 
Not 
applicable 
  
 
  
Liver 
metastasis 
14 
65 
NA 
Not 
applica
ble 
Not 
applicable 
Testicular 
All subtypes 
included 
 
Primary and 
metastasis 
(lymph 
node, lung 
and brain) 
18 
NA 
35 
NA 
NA 
Uterine 
Sarcoma 
High grade 
  
Primary 
3 
75 
NA 
Not 
applica
ble 
Not 
applicable 
  
 
  
Metastasis 
9 
100 
NA 
Not 
applica
ble 
Not 
applicable 
Renal 
All subtypes 
included 
 
Primary 
8 
30 
NA 
NA 
NA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
47 
CRC, colorectal cancer; ER, oestrogen receptor; HNSCC; head and neck squamous cell carcinoma; NA, not available; NSCLC, non-small-cell lung cancer; 
PDAC, pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma; SCLC, small-cell lung cancer; TNBC, triple-negative breast cancer. *The data presented represent the range of 
implantation rates obtained across EurOPDX partner laboratories as of October 2016. ‡Highest take rates obtained with the high-grade serous ovarian 
cancer subtype. §Take rates of 10–15% for abdominal, pelvic lymph node and peritoneal metastases, 60% for vaginal metastases. 
 
 
Table 3: Comparative quantitative data of response rates in PDXs versus human patients 
 
Tumour type 
Clinical question 
Comparative response rates 
CRC* 
Response to EGFR antibody 
monotherapy in genetically unselected 
CRC PDXs6, or unselected 
chemorefractory patients with CRC178 
PDXs: 
• 
PR: 5 of 47 (10.6%) 
• 
SD: 14 of 47 (29.8%) 
• 
PD: 28 of 47 (59.6%) 
Patients: 
• 
PR: 12 of 111 (10.8%) 
• 
SD: 24 of 111 (21.6%) 
• 
PD: 59 of 111 (53.2%) 
• 
Not evaluated: 16 of 111 
(14.4%) 
CRC* 
• PDXs118: Response to EGFR antibody 
monotherapy in KRAS, NRAS and BRAF 
wild-type models 
• Patients179: Response to EGFR 
antibody plus chemotherapy in 
chemorefractory patients with KRAS, 
NRAS and BRAF wild-type CRC 
PDXs: 
• 
PR: 31 of 125 (24.8%) 
• 
SD: 60 of 125 (48%) 
• 
PD: 34 of 125 (27.2%) 
Patients: 
• 
PR: 15 of 56 (26.8%) 
• 
SD: 29 of 56 (51.8%) 
• 
PD: 12 of 56 (21.4%) 
NSCLC 
Co-clinical trial, PDX versus donor 
patient66: response to EGFR small-
molecule inhibitors in four representative 
cases out of six established PDXs 
1 PR (both patient and PDX) 
1 SD (both patient and PDX) 
2 PD (both patient and PDX) 
Breast 
cancer 
Co-clinical trial, PDX versus donor 
patient63: response to several therapies 
• 
Doxorubicin: 
4 PD (both patient and PDX) 
 
• 
Docetaxel: 
1 PR (both patient and PDX) 
6 PD (both patient and PDX) 
 
• 
Anti-HER2 combination therapy (trastuzumab 
  
 
48 
and lapatinib): 1 PR (both patient and PDX) 
 
CRC, colorectal cancer; EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; NSCLC, non-small cell lung cancer; PD: progressive disease; PDX, patient-derived 
xenograft; PR, partial response; SD, stable disease. *Data represent separate PDX and patient population studies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
49 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Strategies to generate humanized PDXs. Sources of immune cells include tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs), 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and CD34-positive haematopoietic stem cells (HSCs); HSCs may be purified from 
MHC restricted 
HLA restricted 
IL3, GM-CSF and SCF 
IL3, GM-CSF, M-CSF, 
SIRP and THPO 
NOG-GM3 
NSG 
NOG 
BRG 
NSG 
NOG 
BRG 
IL3 and GM-CSF 
MISTRG 
NSG-SGM3 
TIL 
PBMC 
CD34
+ HSC 
Umbilical cord 
  
 
50 
mobilized adult peripheral blood, bone marrow or umbilical cord blood. Engrafted TILs or PBMCs generate mainly circulating human 
leukocyte antigen (HLA)-restricted T cells and natural killer (NK) cells (top row). This system is characterized by a vigorous graft-
versus-host reaction that narrows the experimental window to approximately 2-5 weeks. Despite this limitation, the system is useful 
for certain analyses, such as monitoring the recruitment of T lymphocytes to tumours by therapeutic antibodies170. Fully humanized 
systems (bottom four rows) use severely immunodeficient mouse strains such as NOG (NOD-Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Sug/JicTac)171, NSG 
(NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjll/SzJ)172 and BRG (C.Cg-Rag1tm1Mom IL2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ)173,174. Mice with a NOD (non-obese diabetic) 
background have functionally deficient NK cells. SCID (severe combined immunodeficiency) is a loss-of-function mutation that affects 
DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK), a DNA repair enzyme involved in V(D)J recombination during T cell and B cell 
development. As a consequence, SCID mice have reduced levels of T cells and B cells. Inactivation of the interleukin-2 (IL-2) receptor 
γ-chain leads to impaired T cell and B cell development and prevents the generation of NK cells. Recombination-activating gene 1 
(RAG1) is necessary for V(D)J recombination; thus, RAG1 inactivating mutations affect T cell and B cell development. All these 
different strains show subtle differences to support engraftment of functional human immune cells173. Injection of human CD34-
positive HSCs into these mice leads to the generation of major histocompatibility complex (MHC)-restricted T cells and B cells, as 
well as to limited amounts of monocytes, macrophages, neutrophils and dendritic cells. In addition, these mouse strains have been 
improved by genetic modifications for the production of a variety of human cytokines that stimulate the differentiation of additional 
  
 
51 
haematopoietic lineages. For example, strains such as NOG-GM3 (which expresses human IL-3 and granulocyte-macrophage 
colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF; also known as CSF2)175, NSG-SGM3 (which expresses human IL-3, GM-CSF and SCF (also 
known as KIT ligand))176 and MISTRG (which expresses human IL-3, GM-CSF, macrophage CSF (M-CSF, also known as CSF1), 
signal regulatory protein-α (SIRPα) and thrombopoietin (THPO))177 produce increased numbers of human myeloid and mast cells, 
regulatory T cells and NK cells (see Supplementary information S1 (table)). PDXs, patient-derived xenografts. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
52 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
53 
Figure 2: PDX preclinical study designs. a. Large collections of patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models (‘xenopatients’) now allow 
population-based studies to be carried out, which better mimic the inter-tumour heterogeneity that is seen in patients and are more 
predictive of clinical efficacy than conventional xenografts of immortalized cancer cell lines. PDX molecular characterization and 
correlation with therapeutic response also facilitates biomarker discovery, as well as identification of primary (and acquired) resistance 
mechanisms. These studies can lead to new hypotheses and support the initiation of new clinical trials. b. For some cancer types for 
which avatar models can be developed, co-clinical avatar studies allow for simultaneous drug testing in mice and patients for real-
time adaptive therapeutic decisions. c. In the “biofacsimile” or “proxy” study format, integrative systems-based bioinformatics analysis 
can be used to pinpoint the best-matched PDX for a given patient from a collection of molecularly profiled models. PDX-associated 
information is then leveraged to instruct clinical treatment options and/or derive prognostic indicators. NGS, next generation 
sequencing. 
  
 
54 
References: 
1. 
de Bono, J.S. & Ashworth, A. Translating cancer research into targeted 
therapeutics. Nature 467, 543-9 (2010). 
2. 
Daniel, V.C. et al. A primary xenograft model of small-cell lung cancer 
reveals irreversible changes in gene expression imposed by culture in 
vitro. Cancer Res. 69, 3364-73 (2009). 
3. 
Arrowsmith, J. Trial watch: Phase II failures: 2008-2010. Nat. Rev. Drug 
Discov. 10, 328-9 (2011). 
4. 
Arrowsmith, J. & Miller, P. Trial Watch: Phase II and Phase III attrition 
rates 2011-2012. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 12, 569 (2013). 
5. 
Paul, S.M. et al. How to improve R&D productivity: the pharmaceutical 
industry's grand challenge. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 9, 203-14 (2010). 
6. 
Bertotti, A. et al. A molecularly annotated platform of patient-derived 
xenografts ("xenopatients") identifies HER2 as an effective therapeutic 
target in cetuximab-resistant colorectal cancer. Cancer Discov. 1, 508-
23 (2011). 
7. 
Bertotti, A. et al. The genomic landscape of response to EGFR blockade 
in colorectal cancer. Nature 526, 263-7 (2015). 
8. 
DeRose, Y.S. et al. Tumor grafts derived from women with breast cancer 
authentically reflect tumor pathology, growth, metastasis and disease 
outcomes. Nat Med. 17, 1514-20 (2011). 
9. 
Gao, H. et al. High-throughput screening using patient-derived tumor 
xenografts to predict clinical trial drug response. Nat Med. 21, 1318-25 
(2015). 
  
 
55 
10. 
Hidalgo, M. et al. Patient-derived xenograft models: an emerging 
platform for translational cancer research. Cancer Discov. 4, 998-1013 
(2014). 
11. 
Siolas, D. & Hannon, G.J. Patient-derived tumor xenografts: 
transforming clinical samples into mouse models. Cancer Res. 73, 5315-
9 (2013). 
12. 
Tentler, J.J. et al. Patient-derived tumour xenografts as models for 
oncology drug development. Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol. 9, 338-50 (2012). 
13. 
Day, C.P., Merlino, G. & Van Dyke, T. Preclinical mouse cancer models: 
a maze of opportunities and challenges. Cell 163, 39-53 (2015). 
14. 
Tabassum, D.P. & Polyak, K. Tumorigenesis: it takes a village. Nat. Rev. 
Cancer 15, 473-83 (2015). 
15. 
Aparicio, S. & Caldas, C. The implications of clonal genome evolution 
for cancer medicine. N. Engl. J. Med. 368, 842-51 (2013). 
16. 
Almendro, V. et al. Inference of tumor evolution during chemotherapy by 
computational modeling and in situ analysis of genetic and phenotypic 
cellular diversity. Cell Rep. 6, 514-27 (2014). 
17. 
Kreso, A. & Dick, J.E. Evolution of the cancer stem cell model. Cell Stem 
Cell 14, 275-91 (2014). 
18. 
Kreso, A. et al. Variable clonal repopulation dynamics influence 
chemotherapy response in colorectal cancer. Science 339, 543-8 
(2013). 
19. 
Marusyk, A., Almendro, V. & Polyak, K. Intra-tumour heterogeneity: a 
looking glass for cancer? Nat. Rev. Cancer 12, 323-34 (2012). 
  
 
56 
20. 
Maley, C.C. et al. Genetic clonal diversity predicts progression to 
esophageal adenocarcinoma. Nat. Genet. 38, 468-73 (2006). 
21. 
Curtis, C. et al. The genomic and transcriptomic architecture of 2,000 
breast tumours reveals novel subgroups. Nature 486, 346-52 (2012). 
22. 
Dawson, S.J., Rueda, O.M., Aparicio, S. & Caldas, C. A new genome-
driven integrated classification of breast cancer and its implications. 
EMBO J. 32, 617-28 (2013). 
23. 
Shah, S.P. et al. The clonal and mutational evolution spectrum of primary 
triple-negative breast cancers. Nature 486, 395-9 (2012). 
24. 
Eirew, P. et al. Dynamics of genomic clones in breast cancer patient 
xenografts at single-cell resolution. Nature 518, 422-6 (2015). 
25. 
Nik-Zainal, S. et al. The life history of 21 breast cancers. Cell 149, 994-
1007 (2012). 
26. 
Bhang, H.E. et al. Studying clonal dynamics in response to cancer 
therapy using high-complexity barcoding. Nat. Med. 21, 440-8 (2015). 
27. 
Jeselsohn, R. et al. Emergence of constitutively active estrogen 
receptor-alpha mutations in pretreated advanced estrogen receptor-
positive breast cancer. Clin. Cancer Res. 20, 1757-67 (2014). 
28. 
Murtaza, M. et al. Multifocal clonal evolution characterized using 
circulating tumour DNA in a case of metastatic breast cancer. Nat. 
Commun. 6, 8760 (2015). 
29. 
Bruna, A. et al. A Biobank of Breast Cancer Explants with Preserved 
Intra-tumor Heterogeneity to Screen Anticancer Compounds. Cell 167, 
1-15 (2016). 
  
 
57 
30. 
Marangoni, E. et al. A new model of patient tumor-derived breast cancer 
xenografts for preclinical assays. Clin. Cancer Res. 13, 3989-98 (2007). 
31. 
Li, S. et al. Endocrine-therapy-resistant ESR1 variants revealed by 
genomic characterization of breast-cancer-derived xenografts. Cell Rep. 
4, 1116-30 (2013). 
32. 
Cassidy, J.W., Caldas, C. & Bruna, A. Maintaining Tumor Heterogeneity 
in Patient-Derived Tumor Xenografts. Cancer Res. 75, 2963-8 (2015). 
33. 
Cottu, P. et al. Acquired resistance to endocrine treatments is associated 
with tumor-specific molecular changes in patient-derived luminal breast 
cancer xenografts. Clin. Cancer Res. 20, 4314-25 (2014). 
34. 
Ter Brugge, P. et al. Mechanisms of Therapy Resistance in Patient-
Derived Xenograft Models of BRCA1-Deficient Breast Cancer. J. Natl 
Cancer Inst. 108(2016). 
35. 
Kemper, K. et al. Intra- and inter-tumor heterogeneity in a vemurafenib-
resistant melanoma patient and derived xenografts. EMBO Mol. Med. 7, 
1104-18 (2015). 
36. 
Shi, H. et al. Acquired resistance and clonal evolution in melanoma 
during BRAF inhibitor therapy. Cancer Discov. 4, 80-93 (2014). 
37. 
Tirosh, I. et al. Dissecting the multicellular ecosystem of metastatic 
melanoma by single-cell RNA-seq. Science 352, 189-96 (2016). 
38. 
Kemper, K. et al. BRAF(V600E) Kinase Domain Duplication Identified in 
Therapy-Refractory Melanoma Patient-Derived Xenografts. Cell Rep. 
16, 263-77 (2016). 
  
 
58 
39. 
Nguyen, L.V. et al. DNA barcoding reveals diverse growth kinetics of 
human breast tumour subclones in serially passaged xenografts. Nat. 
Commun. 5, 5871 (2014). 
40. 
Joosse, S.A., Gorges, T.M. & Pantel, K. Biology, detection, and clinical 
implications of circulating tumor cells. EMBO Mol. Med. 7, 1-11 (2015). 
41. 
Massague, J. & Obenauf, A.C. Metastatic colonization by circulating 
tumour cells. Nature 529, 298-306 (2016). 
42. 
Lapidot, T. et al. A cell initiating human acute myeloid leukaemia after 
transplantation into SCID mice. Nature 367, 645-8 (1994). 
43. 
Pece, S. et al. Biological and molecular heterogeneity of breast cancers 
correlates with their cancer stem cell content. Cell 140, 62-73 (2010). 
44. 
Reya, T., Morrison, S.J., Clarke, M.F. & Weissman, I.L. Stem cells, 
cancer, and cancer stem cells. Nature 414, 105-11 (2001). 
45. 
Li, C., Lee, C.J. & Simeone, D.M. Identification of human pancreatic 
cancer stem cells. Methods Mol. Biol. 568, 161-73 (2009). 
46. 
Lawson, D.A. et al. Single-cell analysis reveals a stem-cell program in 
human metastatic breast cancer cells. Nature 526, 131-5 (2015). 
47. 
Li, X. et al. Intrinsic resistance of tumorigenic breast cancer cells to 
chemotherapy. J. Natl Cancer Inst. 100, 672-9 (2008). 
48. 
Todaro, M. et al. Colon cancer stem cells dictate tumor growth and resist 
cell death by production of interleukin-4. Cell Stem Cell 1, 389-402 
(2007). 
49. 
Al-Hajj, M., Wicha, M.S., Benito-Hernandez, A., Morrison, S.J. & Clarke, 
M.F. Prospective identification of tumorigenic breast cancer cells. Proc. 
Natl Acad. Sci. USA 100, 3983-8 (2003). 
  
 
59 
50. 
Fan, F. et al. The requirement for freshly isolated human colorectal 
cancer (CRC) cells in isolating CRC stem cells. Br. J. Cancer 112, 539-
46 (2015). 
51. 
Borovski, T., De Sousa, E.M.F., Vermeulen, L. & Medema, J.P. Cancer 
stem cell niche: the place to be. Cancer Res. 71, 634-9 (2011). 
52. 
Charafe-Jauffret, E. et al. ALDH1-positive cancer stem cells predict 
engraftment of primary breast tumors and are governed by a common 
stem cell program. Cancer Res. 73, 7290-300 (2013). 
53. 
Miranda-Lorenzo, I. et al. Intracellular autofluorescence: a biomarker for 
epithelial cancer stem cells. Nat. Methods 11, 1161-9 (2014). 
54. 
Sainz, B., Jr. et al. Microenvironmental hCAP-18/LL-37 promotes 
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma by activating its cancer stem cell 
compartment. Gut 64, 1921-35 (2015). 
55. 
Magee, J.A., Piskounova, E. & Morrison, S.J. Cancer stem cells: impact, 
heterogeneity, and uncertainty. Cancer Cell 21, 283-96 (2012). 
56. 
Rottenberg, S. et al. Selective induction of chemotherapy resistance of 
mammary tumors in a conditional mouse model for hereditary breast 
cancer. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 104, 12117-22 (2007). 
57. 
Castillo-Avila, W. et al. Sunitinib inhibits tumor growth and synergizes 
with cisplatin in orthotopic models of cisplatin-sensitive and cisplatin-
resistant human testicular germ cell tumors. Clin. Cancer Res. 15, 3384-
95 (2009). 
58. 
Juliachs, M. et al. The PDGFRbeta-AKT pathway contributes to CDDP-
acquired resistance in testicular germ cell tumors. Clin. Cancer Res. 20, 
658-67 (2014). 
  
 
60 
59. 
Simoes, B.M. et al. Anti-estrogen Resistance in Human Breast Tumors 
Is Driven by JAG1-NOTCH4-Dependent Cancer Stem Cell Activity. Cell 
Rep. 12, 1968-77 (2015). 
60. 
Herrera-Abreu, M.T. et al. Early Adaptation and Acquired Resistance to 
CDK4/6 Inhibition in Estrogen Receptor-Positive Breast Cancer. Cancer 
Res. 76, 2301-13 (2016). 
61. 
Kim, K.T. et al. Single-cell mRNA sequencing identifies subclonal 
heterogeneity in anti-cancer drug responses of lung adenocarcinoma 
cells. Genome Biol. 16, 127 (2015). 
62. 
Cottu, P. et al. Modeling of response to endocrine therapy in a panel of 
human luminal breast cancer xenografts. Breast Cancer Res. Treat. 133, 
595-606 (2012). 
63. 
Zhang, X. et al. A renewable tissue resource of phenotypically stable, 
biologically and ethnically diverse, patient-derived human breast cancer 
xenograft models. Cancer Res. 73, 4885-97 (2013). 
64. 
Das Thakur, M. et al. Modelling vemurafenib resistance in melanoma 
reveals a strategy to forestall drug resistance. Nature 494, 251-5 (2013). 
65. 
Sun, C. et al. Reversible and adaptive resistance to BRAF(V600E) 
inhibition in melanoma. Nature 508, 118-22 (2014). 
66. 
Stewart, E.L. et al. Clinical Utility of Patient-Derived Xenografts to 
Determine Biomarkers of Prognosis and Map Resistance Pathways in 
EGFR-Mutant Lung Adenocarcinoma. J. Clin. Oncol. 33, 2472-80 
(2015). 
67. 
Stebbing, J. et al. Patient-derived xenografts for individualized care in 
advanced sarcoma. Cancer 120, 2006-15 (2014). 
  
 
61 
68. 
Balko, J.M. et al. Molecular profiling of the residual disease of triple-
negative breast cancers after neoadjuvant chemotherapy identifies 
actionable therapeutic targets. Cancer Discov. 4, 232-45 (2014). 
69. 
Zacarias-Fluck, M.F. et al. Effect of cellular senescence on the growth 
of HER2-positive breast cancers. J. Natl Cancer Inst. 107(2015). 
70. 
Bankert, R.B., Egilmez, N.K. & Hess, S.D. Human-SCID mouse chimeric 
models for the evaluation of anti-cancer therapies. Trends Immunol. 22, 
386-93 (2001). 
71. 
Hylander, B.L. et al. Origin of the vasculature supporting growth of 
primary patient tumor xenografts. J. Transl. Med. 11, 110 (2013). 
72. 
Schreiber, R.D., Old, L.J. & Smyth, M.J. Cancer immunoediting: 
integrating immunity's roles in cancer suppression and promotion. 
Science 331, 1565-70 (2011). 
73. 
Guichelaar, T. et al. Human regulatory T cells do not suppress the 
antitumor immunity in the bone marrow: a role for bone marrow stromal 
cells in neutralizing regulatory T cells. Clin. Cancer Res. 19, 1467-75 
(2013). 
74. 
King, M.A. et al. Human peripheral blood leucocyte non-obese diabetic-
severe combined immunodeficiency interleukin-2 receptor gamma chain 
gene mouse model of xenogeneic graft-versus-host-like disease and the 
role of host major histocompatibility complex. Clin. Exp. Immunol. 157, 
104-18 (2009). 
75. 
Holzapfel, B.M., Wagner, F., Thibaudeau, L., Levesque, J.P. & 
Hutmacher, D.W. Concise review: humanized models of tumor 
  
 
62 
immunology in the 21st century: convergence of cancer research and 
tissue engineering. Stem Cells 33, 1696-704 (2015). 
76. 
Drake, A.C., Chen, Q. & Chen, J. Engineering humanized mice for 
improved hematopoietic reconstitution. Cell. Mol. Immunol. 9, 215-24 
(2012). 
77. 
Reinisch, A., Gratzinger, D., Hong, W.-J. & Majeti, R. A Novel 
Humanized Bone Marrow Niche Xenotransplantation Model Allows 
Superior Engraftment of Human Normal and Malignant Hematopoietic 
Cells 
and 
Reveals 
Myelofibrosis-Initiating 
Cells 
in 
the 
HSC 
Compartment. Blood 124, 349 (2014). 
78. 
Rongvaux, A. et al. Human hemato-lymphoid system mice: current use 
and future potential for medicine. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 31, 635-74 
(2013). 
79. 
Voloshin, T. et al. G-CSF supplementation with chemotherapy can 
promote revascularization and subsequent tumor regrowth: prevention 
by a CXCR4 antagonist. Blood 118, 3426-35 (2011). 
80. 
Morton, J.J. et al. XactMice: humanizing mouse bone marrow enables 
microenvironment reconstitution in a patient-derived xenograft model of 
head and neck cancer. Oncogene 35, 290-300 (2016). 
81. 
Takenaka, K. et al. Polymorphism in Sirpa modulates engraftment of 
human hematopoietic stem cells. Nat. Immunol. 8, 1313-23 (2007). 
82. 
Du, Q. et al. Establishment of and comparison between orthotopic 
xenograft and subcutaneous xenograft models of gallbladder carcinoma. 
Asian Pac. J. Cancer Prev. 15, 3747-52 (2014). 
  
 
63 
83. 
Hoffman, R.M. Patient-derived orthotopic xenografts: better mimic of 
metastasis than subcutaneous xenografts. Nat. Rev. Cancer 15, 451-2 
(2015). 
84. 
Dai, L., Lu, C., Yu, X.I., Dai, L.J. & Zhou, J.X. Construction of orthotopic 
xenograft mouse models for human pancreatic cancer. Exp. Ther. Med. 
10, 1033-1038 (2015). 
85. 
Ambrogio, C. et al. Combined inhibition of DDR1 and Notch signaling is 
a therapeutic strategy for KRAS-driven lung adenocarcinoma. Nat. Med. 
22, 270-7 (2016). 
86. 
de Jong, M., Essers, J. & van Weerden, W.M. Imaging preclinical tumour 
models: improving translational power. Nat. Rev. Cancer 14, 481-93 
(2014). 
87. 
Iorns, E. et al. A new mouse model for the study of human breast cancer 
metastasis. PLoS One 7, e47995 (2012). 
88. 
Gupta, P., Adkins, C., Lockman, P. & Srivastava, S.K. Metastasis of 
Breast Tumor Cells to Brain Is Suppressed by Phenethyl Isothiocyanate 
in a Novel Metastasis Model. PLoS One 8, e67278 (2013). 
89. 
Lee, H.W. et al. Patient-derived xenografts from non-small cell lung 
cancer brain metastases are valuable translational platforms for the 
development of personalized targeted therapy. Clin. Cancer Res. 21, 
1172-82 (2015). 
90. 
Chen, H.J. et al. Comprehensive models of human primary and 
metastatic colorectal tumors in immunodeficient and immunocompetent 
mice by chemokine targeting. Nat. Biotechnol 33, 656-60 (2015). 
  
 
64 
91. 
Girotti, M.R. et al. Application of Sequencing, Liquid Biopsies, and 
Patient-Derived Xenografts for Personalized Medicine in Melanoma. 
Cancer Discov. 6, 286-99 (2016). 
92. 
Nunes, M. et al. Evaluating patient-derived colorectal cancer xenografts 
as preclinical models by comparison with patient clinical data. Cancer 
Res. 75, 1560-6 (2015). 
93. 
Sartore-Bianchi, A. et al. Dual-targeted therapy with trastuzumab and 
lapatinib in treatment-refractory, KRAS codon 12/13 wild-type, HER2-
positive metastatic colorectal cancer (HERACLES): a proof-of-concept, 
multicentre, open-label, phase 2 trial. Lancet Oncol. 17, 738-46 (2016). 
94. 
Krebs, M.G. et al. Evaluation and prognostic significance of circulating 
tumor cells in patients with non-small-cell lung cancer. J. Clin. Oncol. 29, 
1556-63 (2011). 
95. 
Scher, H.I. et al. Circulating tumour cells as prognostic markers in 
progressive, castration-resistant prostate cancer: a reanalysis of 
IMMC38 trial data. Lancet Oncol. 10, 233-9 (2009). 
96. 
Zhang, L. et al. Meta-analysis of the prognostic value of circulating tumor 
cells in breast cancer. Clin. Cancer Res. 18, 5701-10 (2012). 
97. 
Baccelli, I. et al. Identification of a population of blood circulating tumor 
cells from breast cancer patients that initiates metastasis in a xenograft 
assay. Nat. Biotechnol. 31, 539-44 (2013). 
98. 
Hodgkinson, C.L. et al. Tumorigenicity and genetic profiling of circulating 
tumor cells in small-cell lung cancer. Nat. Med. 20, 897-903 (2014). 
  
 
65 
99. 
Yap, T.A., Lorente, D., Omlin, A., Olmos, D. & de Bono, J.S. Circulating 
tumor cells: a multifunctional biomarker. Clin. Cancer Res. 20, 2553-68 
(2014). 
100. Alix-Panabieres, C. & Pantel, K. Challenges in circulating tumour cell 
research. Nat. Rev. Cancer 14, 623-31 (2014). 
101. Ignatiadis, M., Lee, M. & Jeffrey, S.S. Circulating Tumor Cells and 
Circulating Tumor DNA: Challenges and Opportunities on the Path to 
Clinical Utility. Clin. Cancer Res. 21, 4786-800 (2015). 
102. Williams, E.S. et al. Generation of Prostate Cancer Patient Derived 
Xenograft Models from Circulating Tumor Cells. J. Vis. Exp., 53182 
(2015). 
103. Toyoshima, K. et al. Analysis of circulating tumor cells derived from 
advanced gastric cancer. Int. J. Cancer 137, 991-8 (2015). 
104. Yu, M. et al. Cancer therapy. Ex vivo culture of circulating breast tumor 
cells for individualized testing of drug susceptibility. Science 345, 216-
20 (2014). 
105. Cayrefourcq, L. et al. Establishment and characterization of a cell line 
from human circulating colon cancer cells. Cancer Res. 75, 892-901 
(2015). 
106. Aggarwal, C. et al. Relationship among circulating tumor cells, CEA and 
overall survival in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer. Ann. Oncol. 
24, 420-8 (2013). 
107. Vishnoi, M. et al. The isolation and characterization of CTC subsets 
related to breast cancer dormancy. Sci. Rep. 5, 17533 (2015). 
  
 
66 
108. Krebs, M.G. et al. Molecular analysis of circulating tumour cells-biology 
and biomarkers. Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol. 11, 129-44 (2014). 
109. Markou, A. et al. PIK3CA mutational status in circulating tumor cells can 
change during disease recurrence or progression in patients with breast 
cancer. Clin. Cancer Res. 20, 5823-34 (2014). 
110. Giuliano, M. et al. Circulating and disseminated tumor cells from breast 
cancer patient-derived xenograft-bearing mice as a novel model to study 
metastasis. Breast Cancer Res. 17, 3 (2015). 
111. Torphy, R.J. et al. Circulating tumor cells as a biomarker of response to 
treatment in patient-derived xenograft mouse models of pancreatic 
adenocarcinoma. PLoS One 9, e89474 (2014). 
112. Jordan, N.V. et al. HER2 expression identifies dynamic functional states 
within circulating breast cancer cells. Nature 537, 102-106 (2016). 
113. Garraway, L.A. & Lander, E.S. Lessons from the cancer genome. Cell 
153, 17-37 (2013). 
114. Trusolino, L. & Bertotti, A. Compensatory pathways in oncogenic kinase 
signaling and resistance to targeted therapies: six degrees of separation. 
Cancer Discov. 2, 876-80 (2012). 
115. Bardelli, A. et al. Amplification of the MET receptor drives resistance to 
anti-EGFR therapies in colorectal cancer. Cancer Discov. 3, 658-73 
(2013). 
116. Kavuri, S.M. et al. HER2 activating mutations are targets for colorectal 
cancer treatment. Cancer Discov. 5, 832-41 (2015). 
  
 
67 
117. Leto, S.M. et al. Sustained Inhibition of HER3 and EGFR Is Necessary 
to Induce Regression of HER2-Amplified Gastrointestinal Carcinomas. 
Clin. Cancer Res. 21, 5519-31 (2015). 
118. Zanella, E.R. et al. IGF2 is an actionable target that identifies a distinct 
subpopulation of colorectal cancer patients with marginal response to 
anti-EGFR therapies. Sci. Transl. Med. 7, 272ra12 (2015). 
119. Sun, C. et al. Intrinsic resistance to MEK inhibition in KRAS mutant lung 
and colon cancer through transcriptional induction of ERBB3. Cell Rep. 
7, 86-93 (2014). 
120. Weickhardt, A.J. et al. Dual targeting of the epidermal growth factor 
receptor using the combination of cetuximab and erlotinib: preclinical 
evaluation and results of the phase II DUX study in chemotherapy-
refractory, advanced colorectal cancer. J. Clin. Oncol. 30, 1505-12 
(2012). 
121. Long, G.V. et al. Combined BRAF and MEK inhibition versus BRAF 
inhibition alone in melanoma. N. Engl. J. Med. 371, 1877-88 (2014). 
122. Bossi, D. et al. In Vivo Genetic Screens of Patient-Derived Tumors 
Revealed Unexpected Frailty of the Transformed Phenotype. Cancer 
Discov. 6, 650-63 (2016). 
123. Carugo, A. et al. In Vivo Functional Platform Targeting Patient-Derived 
Xenografts Identifies WDR5-Myc Association as a Critical Determinant 
of Pancreatic Cancer. Cell Rep. 16, 133-47 (2016). 
124. Murphy, B. et al. Evaluation of Alternative In Vivo Drug Screening 
Methodology: A Single Mouse Analysis. Cancer Res. 76, 5798-5809 
(2016). 
  
 
68 
125. Migliardi, G. et al. Inhibition of MEK and PI3K/mTOR suppresses tumor 
growth but does not cause tumor regression in patient-derived 
xenografts of RAS-mutant colorectal carcinomas. Clin. Cancer Res. 18, 
2515-25 (2012). 
126. Boj, S.F. et al. Organoid models of human and mouse ductal pancreatic 
cancer. Cell 160, 324-38 (2015). 
127. Gao, D. et al. Organoid cultures derived from patients with advanced 
prostate cancer. Cell 159, 176-87 (2014). 
128. Huang, L. et al. Ductal pancreatic cancer modeling and drug screening 
using human pluripotent stem cell- and patient-derived tumor organoids. 
Nat. Med. 21, 1364-71 (2015). 
129. Sato, T. et al. Long-term expansion of epithelial organoids from human 
colon, 
adenoma, 
adenocarcinoma, 
and 
Barrett's 
epithelium. 
Gastroenterology 141, 1762-72 (2011). 
130. van de Wetering, M. et al. Prospective derivation of a living organoid 
biobank of colorectal cancer patients. Cell 161, 933-45 (2015). 
131. Weeber, F. et al. Preserved genetic diversity in organoids cultured from 
biopsies of human colorectal cancer metastases. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 
USA 112, 13308-11 (2015). 
132. Hubert, C.G. et al. A Three-Dimensional Organoid Culture System 
Derived from Human Glioblastomas Recapitulates the Hypoxic 
Gradients and Cancer Stem Cell Heterogeneity of Tumors Found In 
Vivo. Cancer Res. 76, 2465-77 (2016). 
  
 
69 
133. Crystal, A.S. et al. Patient-derived models of acquired resistance can 
identify effective drug combinations for cancer. Science 346, 1480-6 
(2014). 
134. Nardella, C., Lunardi, A., Patnaik, A., Cantley, L.C. & Pandolfi, P.P. The 
APL paradigm and the "co-clinical trial" project. Cancer Discov. 1, 108-
16 (2011). 
135. US 
National 
Library 
of 
Medicine, 
ClinicalTrials.gov, 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02720796?term=NCT02720796&
rank=1 (2016). 
136. US 
National 
Library 
of 
Medicine, 
ClinicalTrials.gov, 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02752932?term=NCT02752932&
rank=1 (2016). 
137. US 
National 
Library 
of 
Medicine, 
ClinicalTrials.gov, 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02312245?term=NCT02312245&
rank=1 (2016). 
138. US 
National 
Library 
of 
Medicine, 
ClinicalTrials.gov, 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02795650?term=NCT02795650&
rank=1 (2016). 
139. Azaro, A. et al. A first-in-human phase I trial of LY2780301, a dual p70 
S6 kinase and Akt Inhibitor, in patients with advanced or metastatic 
cancer. Invest. New Drugs 33, 710-9 (2015). 
140. Juric, D. et al. Convergent loss of PTEN leads to clinical resistance to a 
PI(3)Kalpha inhibitor. Nature 518, 240-4 (2015). 
  
 
70 
141. Morelli, M.P. et al. Prioritizing phase I treatment options through 
preclinical testing on personalized tumorgraft. J. Clin. Oncol. 30, e45-8 
(2012). 
142. Zembutsu, H. et al. Genome-wide cDNA microarray screening to 
correlate gene expression profiles with sensitivity of 85 human cancer 
xenografts to anticancer drugs. Cancer Res. 62, 518-27 (2002). 
143. Gupta, S.K. et al. Delineation of MGMT Hypermethylation as a 
Biomarker for Veliparib-Mediated Temozolomide-Sensitizing Therapy of 
Glioblastoma. J. Natl Cancer Inst. 108(2016). 
144. US 
National 
Library 
of 
Medicine, 
ClinicalTrials.gov, 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02152982?term=NCT02152982&
rank=1 (2016). 
145. Brown, K.E. et al. Proteomic profiling of patient-derived glioblastoma 
xenografts identifies a subset with activated EGFR: implications for drug 
development. J. Neurochem. 133, 730-8 (2015). 
146. Grinde, M.T. et al. Interplay of choline metabolites and genes in patient-
derived breast cancer xenografts. Breast Cancer Res. 16, R5 (2014). 
147. Moestue, S.A. et al. Distinct choline metabolic profiles are associated 
with differences in gene expression for basal-like and luminal-like breast 
cancer xenograft models. BMC Cancer 10, 433 (2010). 
148. Glunde, K., Jie, C. & Bhujwalla, Z.M. Molecular causes of the aberrant 
choline phospholipid metabolism in breast cancer. Cancer Res. 64, 
4270-6 (2004). 
  
 
71 
149. Nelson, S.J. et al. Metabolic imaging of patients with prostate cancer 
using hyperpolarized [1-(1)(3)C]pyruvate. Sci. Transl. Med. 5, 198ra108 
(2013). 
150. Klomp, D.W. et al. 31P MRSI and 1H MRS at 7 T: initial results in human 
breast cancer. NMR Biomed. 24, 1337-42 (2011). 
151. Esmaeili, M. et al. In vivo (31)P magnetic resonance spectroscopic 
imaging (MRSI) for metabolic profiling of human breast cancer 
xenografts. J. Magn. Reson. Imaging 41, 601-9 (2015). 
152. Eyre, R. et al. Patient-derived Mammosphere and Xenograft Tumour 
Initiation Correlates with Progression to Metastasis. J. Mammary Gland 
Biol. Neoplasia (2016). 
153. Moon, H.G. et al. Prognostic and functional importance of the 
engraftment-associated genes in the patient-derived xenograft models 
of triple-negative breast cancers. Breast Cancer Res. Treat. 154, 13-22 
(2015). 
154. Garrido-Laguna, I. et al. Tumor engraftment in nude mice and 
enrichment in stroma- related gene pathways predict poor survival and 
resistance to gemcitabine in patients with pancreatic cancer. Clin. 
Cancer Res. 17, 5793-800 (2011). 
155. Delitto, D. et al. Patient-derived xenograft models for pancreatic 
adenocarcinoma demonstrate retention of tumor morphology through 
incorporation of murine stromal elements. Am. J. Pathol. 185, 1297-303 
(2015). 
156. Isella, C. et al. Stromal contribution to the colorectal cancer 
transcriptome. Nat. Genet. 47, 312-9 (2015). 
  
 
72 
157. Calon, A. et al. Stromal gene expression defines poor-prognosis 
subtypes in colorectal cancer. Nat. Genet. 47, 320-9 (2015). 
158. Dunne, P.D. et al. Challenging the Cancer Molecular Stratification 
Dogma: Intratumoral Heterogeneity Undermines Consensus Molecular 
Subtypes and Potential Diagnostic Value in Colorectal Cancer. Clin. 
Cancer Res. 22, 4095-104 (2016). 
159. Bhargava, M. et al. Scatter factor and hepatocyte growth factor: 
activities, properties, and mechanism. Cell Growth Differ. 3, 11-20 
(1992). 
160. Pennacchietti, S. et al. Microenvironment-derived HGF overcomes 
genetically determined sensitivity to anti-MET drugs. Cancer Res. 74, 
6598-609 (2014). 
161. Mestas, J. & Hughes, C.C. Of mice and not men: differences between 
mouse and human immunology. J. Immunol. 172, 2731-8 (2004). 
162. Brodeur, J. et al. Abstract #305: Knock-in of human HGF into the mouse 
genome maintains endogenous HGF regulation and supports the growth 
of HGF-dependent human cancer cell lines. Cancer Res. 69, 305 (2009). 
163. Zimmer, L. et al. Phase I expansion and pharmacodynamic study of the 
oral MEK inhibitor RO4987655 (CH4987655) in selected patients with 
advanced cancer with RAS-RAF mutations. Clin. Cancer Res. 20, 4251-
61 (2014). 
164. Eckhardt, S.G. Challenges, Opportunities, and Lessons Learned in the 
Bench-to-Bedside Translation of Xenopatient Studies. AACR Meeting - 
Patient-Derived Cancer Models: Present and Future Applications from 
Basic Science to the Clinic (2016). 
  
 
73 
165. Townsend, E.C. et al. The Public Repository of Xenografts Enables 
Discovery and Randomized Phase II-like Trials in Mice. Cancer Cell 29, 
574-86 (2016). 
166. Baralis, E., Bertotti, A., Fiori, A. & Grand, A. LAS: a software platform to 
support oncological data management. J. Med. Syst. 36 Suppl 1, S81-
90 (2012). 
167. Chou, J. et al. Phenotypic and transcriptional fidelity of patient-derived 
colon cancer xenografts in immune-deficient mice. PLoS One 8, e79874 
(2013). 
168. Ito, R., Takahashi, T., Katano, I. & Ito, M. Current advances in 
humanized mouse models. Cell. Mol. Immunol. 9, 208-14 (2012). 
169. Conway, T. et al. Xenome--a tool for classifying reads from xenograft 
samples. Bioinformatics 28, i172-8 (2012). 
170. Bacac, M. et al. A Novel Carcinoembryonic Antigen T-Cell Bispecific 
Antibody (CEA TCB) for the Treatment of Solid Tumors. Clin. Cancer 
Res. 22, 3286-97 (2016). 
171. Ito, M. et al. NOD/SCID/gamma(c)(null) mouse: an excellent recipient 
mouse model for engraftment of human cells. Blood 100, 3175-82 
(2002). 
172. Shultz, L.D. et al. Human lymphoid and myeloid cell development in 
NOD/LtSz-scid IL2R gamma null mice engrafted with mobilized human 
hemopoietic stem cells. J. Immunol. 174, 6477-89 (2005). 
173. Shultz, L.D., Brehm, M.A., Garcia-Martinez, J.V. & Greiner, D.L. 
Humanized mice for immune system investigation: progress, promise 
and challenges. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 12, 786-98 (2012). 
  
 
74 
174. Traggiai, E. et al. Development of a human adaptive immune system in 
cord blood cell-transplanted mice. Science 304, 104-7 (2004). 
175. Ito, R. et al. Establishment of a human allergy model using human IL-
3/GM-CSF-transgenic NOG mice. J. Immunol. 191, 2890-9 (2013). 
176. Billerbeck, E. et al. Development of human CD4+FoxP3+ regulatory T 
cells in human stem cell factor-, granulocyte-macrophage colony-
stimulating 
factor-, 
and 
interleukin-3-expressing 
NOD-SCID 
IL2Rgamma(null) humanized mice. Blood 117, 3076-86 (2011). 
177. Rongvaux, A. et al. Development and function of human innate immune 
cells in a humanized mouse model. Nat. Biotechnol. 32, 364-72 (2014). 
178. Cunningham, D. et al. Cetuximab monotherapy and cetuximab plus 
irinotecan in irinotecan-refractory metastatic colorectal cancer. N. Engl. 
J. Med. 351, 337-45 (2004). 
179. Kawazoe, 
A. 
et 
al. 
A 
retrospective 
observational 
study 
of 
clinicopathological features of KRAS, NRAS, BRAF and PIK3CA 
mutations in Japanese patients with metastatic colorectal cancer. BMC 
Cancer 15, 258 (2015). 
  
 
  
 
75 
Online Only information 
Annette Byrne is Senior Lecturer at the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland 
(RCSI), Department of Physiology and Medical Physics, Principal Investigator 
at the RCSI Centre for Systems Medicine and Director of the RCSI Laboratory 
for Tumour Biology and Molecular Imaging. She received her BSc in Physiology 
in 1996 and was awarded a PhD in Cell Biology from the University of York, UK 
in 1999. Her work supports the preclinical development of novel targeted 
anticancer therapeutics and biomarkers applying multi-modality molecular 
imaging. Her laboratory focuses on colorectal, brain and breast malignancies 
implementing patient-derived xenograft (PDX) population and bio-facsimile 
trials. 
 
Livio Trusolino is an associate professor of histology at the University of Turin 
Medical School, Candiolo, Turin, Italy, and co-directs, together with Andrea 
Bertotti, the Laboratory of Translational Cancer Medicine at the Candiolo 
Cancer Institute, Candiolo, Turin, Italy. He received his M.D. in 1993, a Ph.D. 
in human oncology in 1997 and a specialization in pathology in 2003. The work 
in his laboratory concentrates on the characterization of the genetic makeup 
and intracellular signalling networks underlying sensitivity and resistance to 
anticancer targeted therapies, with a focus on colorectal cancer, using patient-
derived xenograft (PDXs) as the main preclinical models. 
 
Competing interests statement 
Grants from Celgene and Boehringer-Ingelheim, honoraria from Roche and 
Genentech, consultancy for Roche, Genentech, Novartis and Sanofi-Aventis 
(G.C.), consultancy for Oncodesign and funding by Novartis (S.R.R.), founder 
  
 
76 
of the spin-off Xenopat S.L. (A.V.). The other authors declare no competing 
interests.  
 
ToC summary 
This Opinion article discusses progress and challenges in using patient-derived 
tumour xenograft (PDX) models in cancer precision medicine. It is primarily co-
authored by members of the EurOPDX Consortium and as such highlights the 
merits of shared PDX resources. 
 
 
 
  
1 
Supplementary Information S1 | Examples of improvements in humanised mouse models for PDX studies 
 
Pending issues 
Details 
Circumvention or solutions 
Models (Supplier or Developer) 
Graft versus Host 
Disease (GvHD) 
Engraftment with mature human T cells 
leads to xenogeneic GvHD due to 
mismatch between murine MHC and 
human HLA in engrafted cells or tissues. 
• Use of genetically modified 
mouse strains that develop reduced 
or no GvHD  
•  GvHD reported to depend on 
HLA haplotype of HSC donor1 
• Immune-deficient strains lacking B2m (NSG-B2m), 
MHC-I (NSG-(KbDb)null or MHC-II (NSG-(H2-Ab)null 
(Jackson Laboratory2,3) 
• 
B6RG-Cd47: C57BL/6 mice lacking Rag2 and Il2rg, 
and deficient for CD474. Absence of GvHD due to 
improper “education” and functionality of mouse 
myeloid cells. However, functionality of human myeloid 
cells still to be validated. 
HLA restriction of T 
cells and 
compatibility with 
tumours 
Absence of human HLA molecules on 
thymic epithelial cells generates human 
T cells unable to recognize de novo 
antigens (eg. Tumor specific antigens) in 
a HLA-restricted manner in HSC 
transplanted mice5. 
• Transplantation of human 
thymus tissue (BLT/ Bone Liver 
Thymus mice)6 
• Use of human HLA class I 
and/or class II transgenic immune 
deficient mice7-11 
• 
E.g. NOG-Dr4 mice (Taconic); NSG-Dr1, NSG-Dr4 
or NSG-HLA-A2 mice (Jackson Laboratory). 
Species-specific 
cytokines and 
factors 
Some human cytokines or factors are 
species specific, preventing generation 
or maintenance of specific human 
immune cell types. 
• New mouse strains expressing 
human cytokines or receptors to 
obtain a more complete human 
immune system12 
• Onset of anaemia described as 
a limitation for many of the current 
models with improved myeloid 
reconstitution. Efforts being made to 
avoid anaemia for example by 
introducing human CD47. 
Immune deficient mouse strains transgenic for human 
cytokines to promote myeloid and NK lineage 
commitment include: 
• NOG-GM3: NOG mice expressing human GM-CSF 
and IL-3 (CIEA, Japan)13; 
• NSG- SGM3: NSG mice expressing human IL-3, 
GM-CSF and SCF (Jackson Laboratory14); 
• MISTRG: BALB/c x 129S4 Rag2;Il2rg double ko 
mice expressing human M-CSF, GM-CSF, IL-3, 
THPO and a human SIRPA allele15; 
• NOG-hIL6: NOG mice expressing human IL6 
(Taconic), featuring increased human monocytes and 
macrophages (in particular M2 type)  
• NSG-W41: NSG mice with mutated mouse Kit. 
Reduced mouse haematopoiesis results in higher 
human reconstitution levels without the need to 
  
2 
precondition mice. Display improved human myeloid 
reconstitution as compared to NSG mice16. 
• 
NOGh-IL2: NOG mice expressing human IL2, 
featuring higher numbers of human NK cells 
(Taconic17) 
Remaining mouse 
innate immunity 
Despite multiple gene modifications to 
eliminate mouse immune cells, 
commonly used NSG and NOD mice 
still have mouse myeloid cells 
(macrophages, dendritic cells and 
granulocytes) which can play a role in 
tumour biology18. 
• Models with reduced mouse 
innate immune cells. These include 
strains transgenic for human 
myeloid specific cytokines 
mentioned earlier. 
• Immune-deficient mice further 
modified to functionally incapacitate 
remaining innate cells. 
• NSG-Tlr4-/-: facilitates monitoring of human TLR4 
responses only (mentioned in19) 
• BRGF: Rag2-deficient, Il2rg-deficient BALB/c 
(BRG) mice lacking mouse Flt3, resulting in loss of 
mouse dendritic cells, increased numbers of human 
dendritic cells, NK and T cells20 
• B6RG-Cd47 mice (as above) 
Impaired humoral 
immune 
responses, low Ig 
levels and impaired 
Ig 
class switching 
B cells in humanised NSG or NOG mice 
do not undergo sufficient maturation to 
become memory and antibody-
producing cells21. 
Development of new mouse strains: 
• e.g. human HLA class II 
transgenic mice, with improved 
humoral responses due to 
increased CD4-mediated help22; 
• Mice strains transgenic for human 
cytokines23; 
•  Improved lymphoid organ 
development resulting in increased 
B cell development and Ig class 
switching (see below). 
• 
SRG-IL6: Rag2;Il2rg double ko mice with a 
human SIRPA allele and expressing human IL6 show 
increase in development of CD45+ cells, in particular 
B cells and class switched B cells (discussed in24)  
• 
Human HLA class II transgenic NSG or NOG 
mice7,9 
Impaired lymph 
node development, 
poorly developed 
germinal centres 
• 
Defects in cytokine signalling in 
immune-deficient strains results in poorly 
developed secondary lymphoid tissues 
(NSG, NOG and BRG are all Il2rg-
deficient25). This includes poor germinal 
centre formation, ineffective class 
switching of B cells and antigen 
presentation to naïve T cells, impeding 
robust adaptive immune responses upon 
humanisation26. 
• 
Mouse models with restored 
secondary lymphoid tissue 
development. 
• 
Discussed in24 
• NOG-pRorgt-IL2Rg: transgenic NOG mice in 
which IL2R expression is driven by the promoter of 
Rort, an isoform of Rorc whose expression is 
restricted to the thymus. This leads to specific IL2R 
expression in lymphoid tissue inducer cells resulting 
in normal lymph node development and improved B 
cell maturation and Ig class switching. 
Impaired 
Immunodeficient strains based on NOD 
• 
Use immune-deficient mice 
• NSG-C5a: NSG-C5a mice have the intact Hc gene, 
  
3 
complement 
system  
background lack hemolytic complement 
due to a mutation in the C5 complement 
gene, preventing the formation of the 
C5b-9 membrane attack complex18. 
These mice lack complement dependent 
cytotoxicity in e.g. antibody dependent 
therapies. 
strains that do not have the NOD 
background such as SRG mice. 
• 
Genetically modified NOD 
based mice that have a functional 
C5 gene. 
restoring the complement system27. 
 
 
 
B2m, beta2-microglobulin; DR, Antigen D-related; Flt3, Fms-like tyrosine kinase 3; GM-CSF, granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor; GvHD, Graft 
versus Host Disease; Hc, hemolytic complement; HSC, haematopoietic stem cell; Ig, immunoglobulin; Il2rg, interleukin 2 receptor common gamma chain; IL2, 
interleukin 2; IL3, interleukin 3; IL6, interleukin 6; ko, knockout; M-CSF, macrophage colony-stimulating factor; NK, natural killer; Rag2, recombination 
activating gene 2; SCF, stem cell factor; SIRPA, signal-regulatory protein ; TLR4, toll-like receptor 4; THPO, thrombopoietin. 
 
 
References:  
1. 
Sonntag, K. et al. Chronic graft-versus-host-disease in CD34(+)-humanized NSG mice is associated with human 
susceptibility HLA haplotypes for autoimmune disease. J. Autoimmun. 62, 55-66 (2015). 
2. 
King, M.A. et al. Human peripheral blood leucocyte non-obese diabetic-severe combined immunodeficiency interleukin-2 
receptor gamma chain gene mouse model of xenogeneic graft-versus-host-like disease and the role of host major 
histocompatibility complex. Clin. Exp. Immunol. 157, 104-18 (2009). 
3. 
Pino, S. et al. Development of novel major histocompatibility complex class I and class II-deficient NOD-SCID IL2R gamma 
chain knockout mice for modeling human xenogeneic graft-versus-host disease. Methods Mol. Biol. 602, 105-17 (2010). 
  
4 
4. 
Lavender, K.J. et al. BLT-humanized C57BL/6 Rag2-/-gammac-/-CD47-/- mice are resistant to GVHD and develop B- and T-
cell immunity to HIV infection. Blood 122, 4013-20 (2013). 
5. 
Watanabe, Y. et al. The analysis of the functions of human B and T cells in humanized NOD/shi-scid/gammac(null) (NOG) 
mice (hu-HSC NOG mice). Int. Immunol. 21, 843-58 (2009). 
6. 
Lan, P., Tonomura, N., Shimizu, A., Wang, S. & Yang, Y.G. Reconstitution of a functional human immune system in 
immunodeficient mice through combined human fetal thymus/liver and CD34+ cell transplantation. Blood 108, 487-92 
(2006). 
7. 
Danner, R. et al. Expression of HLA class II molecules in humanized NOD.Rag1KO.IL2RgcKO mice is critical for 
development and function of human T and B cells. PLoS One 6, e19826 (2011). 
8. 
Shultz, L.D. et al. Generation of functional human T-cell subsets with HLA-restricted immune responses in HLA class I 
expressing NOD/SCID/IL2r gamma(null) humanized mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107, 13022-7 (2010). 
9. 
Suzuki, M. et al. Induction of human humoral immune responses in a novel HLA-DR-expressing transgenic NOD/Shi-
scid/gammacnull mouse. Int. Immunol. 24, 243-52 (2012). 
  
5 
10. 
Takahashi, T., Katano, I., Ito, R. & Ito, M. Visualization of the human CD4(+) T-cell response in humanized HLA-DR4-
expressing NOD/Shi-scid/gammac(null) (NOG) mice by retrogenic expression of the human TCR gene. Biochem. Biophys. 
Res. Commun. 456, 219-24 (2015). 
11. 
Patton, J., Vuyyuru, R., Siglin, A., Root, M. & Manser, T. Evaluation of the efficiency of human immune system reconstitution 
in NSG mice and NSG mice containing a human HLA.A2 transgene using hematopoietic stem cells purified from different 
sources. J. Immunol. Methods 422, 13-21 (2015). 
12. 
Chen, Q., Khoury, M. & Chen, J. Expression of human cytokines dramatically improves reconstitution of specific human-
blood lineage cells in humanized mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106, 21783-8 (2009). 
13. 
Ito, R. et al. Establishment of a human allergy model using human IL-3/GM-CSF-transgenic NOG mice. J. Immunol. 191, 
2890-9 (2013). 
14. 
Billerbeck, E. et al. Development of human CD4+FoxP3+ regulatory T cells in human stem cell factor-, granulocyte-
macrophage colony-stimulating factor-, and interleukin-3-expressing NOD-SCID IL2Rgamma(null) humanized mice. Blood 
117, 3076-86 (2011). 
15. 
Rongvaux, A. et al. Development and function of human innate immune cells in a humanized mouse model. Nat. Biotechnol. 
32, 364-72 (2014). 
  
6 
16. 
Waskow, C., Rahmig, S. & Cosgun, N. Kit Deficiency Regulates Stable Human Hematopoietic Stem Cell Engraftment in 
Mice. Blood 124, 653 (2014). 
17. 
Katano, I. et al. Predominant development of mature and functional human NK cells in a novel human IL-2-producing 
transgenic NOG mouse. J. Immunol. 194, 3513-25 (2015). 
18. 
Brehm, M.A., Wiles, M.V., Greiner, D.L. & Shultz, L.D. Generation of improved humanized mouse models for human 
infectious diseases. J. Immunol. Methods 410, 3-17 (2014). 
19. 
Brehm, M.A., Shultz, L.D., Luban, J. & Greiner, D.L. Overcoming current limitations in humanized mouse research. J. Infect. 
Dis. 208 Suppl 2, S125-30 (2013). 
20. 
Li, Y. et al. A novel Flt3-deficient HIS mouse model with selective enhancement of human DC development. Eur. J. 
Immunol. 46, 1291-9 (2016). 
21. 
Villaudy, J., Schotte, R., Legrand, N. & Spits, H. Critical assessment of human antibody generation in humanized mouse 
models. J. Immunol. Methods 410, 18-27 (2014). 
22. 
Lang, J. et al. Studies of lymphocyte reconstitution in a humanized mouse model reveal a requirement of T cells for human 
B cell maturation. J. Immunol. 190, 2090-101 (2013). 
  
7 
23. 
Chen, Q., He, F., Kwang, J., Chan, J.K. & Chen, J. GM-CSF and IL-4 stimulate antibody responses in humanized mice by 
promoting T, B, and dendritic cell maturation. J. Immunol. 189, 5223-9 (2012). 
24. 
MacBride, 
M.M. 
Meeting 
Report: 
International 
Workshop 
on 
Humanized 
Mice 
5. 
Taconic 
Website. 
http://www.taconic.com/taconic-insights/precision-research-models/meeting-report-international-workshop-on-humanized-
mice-5.html (2016). 
25. 
Cao, X. et al. Defective lymphoid development in mice lacking expression of the common cytokine receptor gamma chain. 
Immunity 2, 223-38 (1995). 
26. 
Nochi, T., Denton, P.W., Wahl, A. & Garcia, J.V. Cryptopatches are essential for the development of human GALT. Cell Rep. 
3, 1874-84 (2013). 
27. 
Shultz, L.D. et al. Multiple defects in innate and adaptive immunologic function in NOD/LtSz-scid mice. J. Immunol. 154, 
180-91 (1995). 
 
