 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
6 0 8
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 2   February 2017
Introduction
The innervation territory of intraepidermal nerve fibers (IENF) 
within the skin is plastic and maintained through a combination 
of collateral sprouting and regeneration that is regulated partly 
by neurotrophic factors (1). Distal dying-back or degeneration of 
nerve fibers is observed in many axonopathic diseases, includ-
ing diabetic neuropathy, chemotherapy-induced peripheral neu-
ropathy (CIPN), Friedreich ataxia, Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease 
type 2, and HIV-associated distal-symmetric neuropathy. There 
are no therapies for any of these diseases, all of which display 
some degree of mitochondrial dysfunction (2–4). This is perti-
nent, as the growth-cone motility required to maintain fields of 
innervation consumes 50% of ATP supplies in neurons due to 
high rates of actin treadmilling (5). Maintenance of plastic inner-
vation therefore requires high consumption of ATP for growth-
cone motility and maintenance of terminals and synapses (6, 
7). Unmyelinated axons are also more energetically demanding 
than myelinated axons, consuming 2.5- to 10-fold more energy 
per action potential (8). Mitochondria are known to concentrate 
in regions of high metabolic demand (9), and sensory terminal 
boutons are packed with mitochondria (10).
Our work in rodent models of type 1 and 2 diabetes exhibit-
ing neuropathy demonstrates that hyperglycemia triggers nutrient 
excess in neurons that, in turn, mediates a phenotypic change in 
mitochondria through alteration of the AMPK/peroxisome prolif-
erator–activated receptor γ coactivator-1α (PGC-1α) signaling axis 
(4, 11). This vital energy-sensing metabolic pathway modulates 
mitochondrial function, biogenesis, and regeneration (12). There 
is accumulating evidence that stimulation of the AMPK/PGC-1α 
axis in neurons promotes improved mitochondrial function and 
regeneration (4, 13). For example, the AMPK activator resveratrol 
enhances neurite outgrowth (14), while augmented AMPK signal-
ing maintains outer retina synapses (15) and directs mitochondria 
to axons to drive branching in cerebellar granule neurons (16). 
Upregulation of PGC-1α is protective against oxidative stress in 
hippocampal neurons (17) and prevents mutant Parkin-related 
degeneration in dopaminergic neurons (18). In the context of dia-
betes, the bioenergetic phenotype of mitochondria in dorsal root 
ganglia–derived (DRG-derived) sensory neurons is characterized 
by inner membrane depolarization, reduced expression of respira-
tory chain components, and suboptimal spare respiratory capacity 
(4, 11) without remarkable ultrastructural alterations (19). Activa-
tion of AMPK by resveratrol protected mitochondrial function and 
peripheral nerve structure and function in rodent models of both 
type 1 and type 2 diabetes (11).
Sensory neurons have the capacity to produce, release, and respond to acetylcholine (ACh), but the functional role of cholinergic 
systems in adult mammalian peripheral sensory nerves has not been established. Here, we have reported that neurite 
outgrowth from adult sensory neurons that were maintained under subsaturating neurotrophic factor conditions operates 
under cholinergic constraint that is mediated by muscarinic receptor–dependent regulation of mitochondrial function via 
AMPK. Sensory neurons from mice lacking the muscarinic ACh type 1 receptor (M1R) exhibited enhanced neurite outgrowth, 
confirming the role of M1R in tonic suppression of axonal plasticity. M1R-deficient mice made diabetic with streptozotocin were 
protected from physiological and structural indices of sensory neuropathy. Pharmacological blockade of M1R using specific 
or selective antagonists, pirenzepine, VU0255035, or muscarinic toxin 7 (MT7) activated AMPK and overcame diabetes-
induced mitochondrial dysfunction in vitro and in vivo. These antimuscarinic drugs prevented or reversed indices of peripheral 
neuropathy, such as depletion of sensory nerve terminals, thermal hypoalgesia, and nerve conduction slowing in diverse rodent 
models of diabetes. Pirenzepine and MT7 also prevented peripheral neuropathy induced by the chemotherapeutic agents 
dichloroacetate and paclitaxel or HIV envelope protein gp120. As a variety of antimuscarinic drugs are approved for clinical use 
against other conditions, prompt translation of this therapeutic approach to clinical trials is feasible.
Selective antagonism of muscarinic receptors is 
neuroprotective in peripheral neuropathy
Nigel A. Calcutt,1 Darrell R. Smith,2 Katie Frizzi,1 Mohammad Golam Sabbir,2 Subir K. Roy Chowdhury,2 Teresa Mixcoatl-Zecuatl,1 
Ali Saleh,2 Nabeel Muttalib,1 Randy Van der Ploeg,2 Joseline Ochoa,1 Allison Gopaul,1 Lori Tessler,2 Jürgen Wess,3  
Corinne G. Jolivalt,1 and Paul Fernyhough2,4
1Department of Pathology, UCSD, La Jolla, California, USA. 2Division of Neurodegenerative Disorders, St. Boniface Hospital Research Centre, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada. 3Molecular Signaling Section, 
Laboratory of Bioorganic Chemistry, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, USA. 4Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, University of 
Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.
Conflict of interest: P
. Fernyhough and N.A. Calcutt declare they are directors and sharehold-
ers in WinSanTor Inc., which has licensed intellectual property from the University of Manito-
ba and UCSD. This intellectual property includes data presented in the current manuscript.
Submitted: May 11, 2016; Accepted: November 22, 2016.
Reference information: J Clin Invest. 2017;127(2):608–622. 
https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI88321.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
6 0 9
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 2   February 2017
opment (22, 23). In mammals, cell bodies of sensory neurons 
synthesize and secrete ACh (24), express a peripheral form of 
choline acetyltransferase (pChAT), exhibit ChAT activity, have 
low acetylcholinesterase (AChE) activity, and express multiple 
muscarinic receptors including muscarinic Ach type 1 receptor 
(M1R) (25–27). Together, these findings support the credibility 
of an endogenous cholinergic system that tonically suppresses 
neurite outgrowth in adult mammalian neuronal cells.
The aim of the current study was to determine the mechanism 
by which antimuscarinic compounds enhance neurite outgrowth 
and to translate findings into a therapeutic approach that could 
prevent or reverse peripheral neuropathy in a range of in vitro and 
in vivo models. Our data introduce selective or specific antimus-
carinic drugs as a therapeutic approach for preventing and revers-
ing sensory neuropathy in a variety of disease states of the PNS.
Results
Muscarinic antagonists selective or specific for M1R enhance neurite 
outgrowth. A preliminary screen (summarized in Supplemental 
Figures 1 and 2; supplemental material available online with this 
In an effort to identify molecules capable of enhancing 
peripheral nerve repair, we screened compounds for their 
ability to enhance neurite outgrowth in adult sensory neurons 
using the NIH/Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation (JDRF) 
Custom Collection (maintained by Micro Source Discovery 
Systems Inc.). The primary screen utilized sensory neurons 
derived from DRG of adult rats, with subsequent hits advanced 
to neurons derived from rat models of type 1 (streptozoto-
cin [STZ]) and type 2 (Zucker diabetic fatty [ZDF]) diabetes. 
A number of molecules with antimuscarinic properties were 
identified as promoting neurite outgrowth in this system. Prior 
work in neurons from Aplysia and Xenopus showed both spon-
taneous and evoked release of quantal packets of acetylcholine 
(ACh) from growth cones. ACh modulated Ca2+-dependent 
motility via nicotinic and muscarinic receptors, with nicotinic 
signaling being positive for growth and muscarinic signaling 
negative (20, 21). Studies in embryonic sensory neurons have 
also demonstrated that ACh signaling through muscarinic 
receptors, and associated mobilization of Ca2+ from internal 
stores, acts as a regulator of growth-cone motility during devel-
Figure 1. The M1R regulates neurite outgrowth from adult sensory neurons. (A) Neurons derived from normal rats were cultured for 24 hours and total 
neurite outgrowth presented as mean ± SEM of n = 7 replicate cultures. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ****P < 0.0001 vs. 0 by 1-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s post-
hoc test. PZ, pirenzepine. (B) β-tubulin III–immunostained sensory neurons that were untreated (control) or treated with 1 μM pirenzepine for 24 hours. 
Scale bar: 100 μm. (C) Total neurite outgrowth when exposed to 1 μM pirenzepine, 30 nM VU0255035 (VU), 1 μM darafenacin (DA), 1 μM gallamine (GA), 
and 1 μM tropicamide (TR) or (D) 1 μM pirenzepine, 10 μM muscarine (MU), 20 μM hexamethonium (HX), and 50 μM mecamylamine (ME). Open circles 
indicate individual data points. C, control. (E) Dose-response curve for effect of MT7 on total neurite outgrowth. Data points represent mean ± SEM of  
n = 6–12 replicate cultures. Within an experiment, *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001; ****P < 0.0001 by 1-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s (in E vs. untreat-
ed) or Tukey’s (in C and D) post-hoc test. Sensory neurons were loaded with fluo-4 and transient changes in intracellular calcium concentration were 
measured in response to (F) 50 μM muscarine (n = 54 neurons), (G) pretreated with 1 μM pirenzepine, then treated with muscarine (n = 69 neurons), and 
(H) pretreated with 0.1 μM atropine, then treated with muscarine (n = 78 neurons). Group mean ± SEM are shown.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
6 1 0
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 2   February 2017
(darafenacin, 1 μM) (31), or M4R (tropicamide, 1 μM) (32) had no 
effect on neurite outgrowth (Figure 1C). The muscarinic receptor 
agonist muscarine (10 μM) significantly inhibited neurite out-
growth, by approximately 50% (Figure 1D). As ACh also activates 
a variety of nicotinic receptor subtypes in neurons, we determined 
whether blockade of this signaling pathway also modulated neu-
rite outgrowth. The broad-spectrum nicotinic antagonists hexa-
article; doi:10.1172/JCI88321DS1; and previously described in 
ref. 28) identified pirenzepine, a selective M1R antagonist (29), as 
able to induce a dose-dependent (3 to 100 nM) increase of total 
neurite outgrowth from neurons derived from normal rats (Figure 
1, A and B). This effect was mimicked by 30 nM VU0255035, a 
structurally dissimilar but also selective M1R antagonist (30) (Fig-
ure 1C). Selective antagonists of the M2R (gallamine, 1 μM), M3R 
Figure 2. Overexpression of GFP-M1R fusion protein inhibits neurite outgrowth. (A) Immunoblot showing expression of GFP-tagged M1R protein in 
DRG neurons. M1R cDNA was cloned in PEGFP-C1 vector and used for transient transfection of DRG neurons using Amaxa Nucleofection reagent. Cells 
were harvested 24 hours after transfection, and proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE, followed by immunoblotting using anti-GFP and anti-M1R 
antibodies. (B) Bright-field (BF) and fluorescence images showing expression of GFP and GFP-M1R in neurons. Note extensive growth in GFP- vs. 
GFP-M1R–overexpressing neuron. (C) Fluorescent and immunostained images showing expression of GFP-tagged M1R in DRG neurons. Neurons were 
immunostained for β-tubulin III. Neurons with coexpression of GFP-M1R and β-tubulin III exhibited reduced neurite outgrowth compared with neurons 
expressing GFP alone. Scale bars: 100 μm. Colocalization of GFP (green) and β-tubulin III (red) indicated by yellow. (D) Neurons were transfected with 
GFP or GFP-M1R plasmids and maintained in vitro for 48 hours and immunostained for β-tubulin III. Total neurite outgrowth is shown as mean + SEM 
of n = 51 neurons; open circles indicate individual data points. ****P < 0.0001, Student’s unpaired t test. (E) Cultures overexpressing GFP-M1R were 
treated with 100 nM MT7 or 1 μM pirenzepine for 48 hours. Total neurite outgrowth is shown as group median with n = 100 neurons. ***P < 0.001; 
****P < 0.0001 vs. control by 1-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s post-hoc test. Box and whisker plot where upper and lower limits of box indicate 75th and 
25th percentiles, respectively. The middle lines show median, and error bars show maximum and minimum values. (F) WT (+/+) or M1R knockout  
(M1R-KO) mouse cultures were maintained for 48 hours in the presence of a low- (LD), medium- (MD), or high-dose (HD) neurotrophic factor cocktail. 
Total neurite outgrowth is shown as mean + SEM of n = 8 replicate cultures. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01, Student’s t test.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
6 1 1
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 2   February 2017
Figure 3. M1R blockade augmented mitochondrial function and elevated neurite outgrowth via AMPK/PGC-1α. (A) DRG cultures from adult M1R-KO mice 
and WT mice. OCR per 1,000 neurons. Oligo, oligomycin; rot/AA, rotenone plus antimycin A. Arrows indicate time added. (B) Neurons from STZ-induced 
diabetic mice were maintained overnight and exposed to 100 nM MT7 or vehicle for 1 hour. (A and B) Data are shown as mean ± SEM of n = 4–5 replicate 
cultures. *P < 0.05 vs. WT or untreated diabetic mice by unpaired Student’s t test. Neurons from diabetic rats were exposed to 100 nM MT7 for various 
times. Blots for p-AMPK and p-ACC in C and D data normalized to total ERK (T-ERK). Data are shown as mean + SEM of n = 3 replicate cultures. *P < 0.05; 
**P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001 vs. time 0 by 1-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s post-hoc test. (E) Reporter assay for PGC-1α in neurons from STZ-diabetic rats exposed 
to 10 μM VU0255035 or 100 nM MT7 for 1 hour. Data are shown as mean + SEM of n = 3 replicate cultures. *P < 0.05 vs. untreated cells (red bar) by 1-way 
ANOVA with Dunnett’s post-hoc test. Normalized to control plasmid, pGL3 (black bar). (F) Reporter activity for PGC-1α in neurons from STZ-diabetic rats 
exposed to 100 nM MT7 or 0.3 μM CC or in combination for 30 minutes. Untreated is shown as red bar. Data are shown as mean + SEM of n = 3 replicate 
cultures. **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001, 1-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post-hoc test. (G–H) Total neurite outgrowth of neurons from diabetic rats transduced with 
adenovirus carrying dominant negative mutants of α1 (DN1) or α2 (DN2) subunits of AMPK. (H) Constitutively active α1 subunit of AMPK (Ad-CA-AMPK) 
expressed. Data are shown as mean + SEM of n = 3 replicate cultures. (G) **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001; ****P < 0.0001 by 1 -way ANOVA with Tukey’s post-hoc 
test. (H) ***P < 0.05 by Student’s unpaired t test.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
6 1 2
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 2   February 2017
Overexpression of M1R inhibits neurite outgrowth. We construct-
ed a plasmid that overexpressed a full-length rat GFP-M1R fusion 
protein (Figure 2A). Adult sensory neurons transfected with this 
plasmid exhibited low levels of neurite outgrowth compared with 
neurons transfected with GFP alone (Figure 2, B–D). The bright-
field images in Figure 2B show that GFP-expressing neurons 
exhibited extensive neurite outgrowth and that this was stunted 
by overexpression of GFP-M1R. Immunocytochemistry confirmed 
that neurite outgrowth was significantly suppressed in neurons 
overexpressing GFP-M1R (Figure 2, C and D). Diminished neur-
ite outgrowth by neurons that overexpressed GFP-M1R was par-
methonium (20 μM) and mecamylamine (50 μM) had no effect on 
neurite outgrowth (Figure 1D). Pirenzepine and VU0255035 are 
selective M1R antagonists, whereas the only specific antagonist of 
the M1R is muscarinic toxin 7 (MT7)(33). Concentrations of MT7 as 
low as 10 nM significantly augmented neurite outgrowth (Figure 
1E). The capacity of adult sensory neurons to support cholinergic 
signaling was confirmed using fluo-4 loading and fluorescence 
video microscopy. Application of 50 μM muscarine caused an 
acute and transient increase of intracellular Ca2+ levels that was 
inhibited by prior exposure (2 minutes) to 1.0 μM pirenzepine or 
0.1 μM atropine, a nonspecific antimuscarinic (Figure 1, F–H).
Figure 4. M1R antagonism prevents and reverses diabetic sensory neuropathy. (A) Thermal response latency and paw skin IENF density in female 
C57BL/6 (Ctrl, control) and STZ-diabetic mice ± pirenzepine (0.1–10 mg/kg/d s.c.) after 4 weeks of diabetes. Data are shown as mean ± SEM of n = 11–12.  
*P < 0.05; ****P < 0.0001 vs. control by 1-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s post-hoc test. (B) Thermal response latency and paw skin IENF density in WT and 
M1R-KO mice after 6 weeks (thermal response) or 12 weeks (IENF) of STZ-induced diabetes. Data are shown as mean ± SEM of n = 3–7. **P < 0.01;  
***P < 0.001 vs. WT by 1-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s post-hoc test. (C) Thermal response latency in Swiss Webster, STZ-diabetic, and STZ-diabetic mice 
with pirenzepine (10 mg/kg/day s.c.) from 14 weeks. Data are shown as mean ± SEM of n = 8–10. ***P < 0.001 vs. control by repeated-measures 2-way 
ANOVA and Dunnett’s post-hoc test. (D) Thermal response latency in female C57BL/6 mice, STZ-diabetic mice, and STZ-diabetic mice with pirenzepine  
(10 mg/kg/d s.c.) up to 8 weeks, when treatment was withdrawn. Data are shown as mean ± SEM of n = 8–10. ***P < 0.001 vs. control by repeated- 
measures 2-way ANOVA and Dunnett’s post-hoc test. Groups as indicated by key in C. (E) Paw IENF density in mice where thermal response latency shown 
in C (14 weeks and 21 weeks of diabetes) and D (8 weeks and 17 weeks of diabetes), normalized to IENF of control mice at same time. The mean − SEM of 
control mice at each time point defined lower limit of control group range, and mean + SEM of STZ-diabetic mice at each time point defined upper limit of 
diabetic group range. Data are shown as mean ± SEM of n = 8–10. **P < 0.01 vs. start or cessation of treatment in same cohort by unpaired t test. (F) Paw 
thermal response latency in male C57BL/6 mice, db/db mice, and C57BL/6 or db/db mice with pirenzepine (10 mg/kg/d s.c.) from 12 weeks onwards. Data 
are shown as mean ± SEM of n = 9–10. ***P < 0.001 vs. db/db by repeated-measures 2-way ANOVA and Dunnett’s post-hoc test.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
6 1 3
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 2   February 2017
tially rescued by treatment with MT7 (100 nM) or pirenzepine 
 
(1 μM; Figure 2E). To further establish the specific role of the M1R, 
we next cultured sensory neurons from adult M1R-deficient mice 
(M1R-KO mice), having confirmed neuronal M1R expression in 
WT mice and lack thereof in M1R-KO mice (Supplemental Figure 
3A). Neurons from adult M1R-KO mice showed enhanced neurite 
outgrowth when maintained under a low- or medium-dose con-
centration of a cocktail of neurotrophic growth factors in the cul-
ture medium, compared with those from WT mice (Figure 2F). In 
the presence of high-dose concentrations of growth factors, the 
inhibitory effect of the M1R pathway was not observed.
As ACh was not a component of the culture media, we hypoth-
esized that, under cell culture conditions, the M1R-mediated mod-
ulation of neurite outgrowth involved neuron-derived ACh. We 
confirmed that sensory neurons expressed the peripheral form 
of ChAT (25) (Supplemental Figure 3B) and ACh was detected 
in the culture medium from neurons grown at the same density 
as in all other experiments (16.52 ± 1.42 nmol/ml). Cultured neu-
rons exhibited immunostaining for ChAT in perikarya, axons, and 
growth cones when using an antibody with selectivi-
ty for peripheral ChAT (Supplemental Figure 3, C–E). 
We therefore propose that the cholinergic phenotype 
of isolated adult sensory neurons places a tonic con-
straint on neurite outgrowth via a mechanism involv-
ing sensory neuron-derived ACh and the M1R.
Muscarinic receptor blockade enhances mito-
chondrial function. Neuronal growth cones require 
optimal mitochondrial function to produce ATP for 
axon growth/plasticity, and sensory axons exhibit a 
high density of condensed organelles reflective of 
high ATP demand (5, 8, 34). Given the constraint on 
neurite outgrowth imposed by ACh, we investigated 
whether manipulation of cholinergic systems oper-
ating in peripheral sensory neurons altered mito-
chondrial regulatory pathways. We first measured 
the oxygen consumption rate (OCR) of isolated adult 
sensory neurons to determine whether M1R inhibi-
tion directly affects neuronal respiration. Neurons 
derived from M1R-KO mice exhibited enhanced 
spare respiratory capacity compared with those from 
WT mice without any concurrent change in basal res-
piration, coupling efficiency, or respiratory control 
ratio (Figure 3A and Supplemental Figure 4A). This 
suggests that ongoing cholinergic signaling via the 
M1R constrains mitochondrial maximal respiratory 
capacity, which will restrict mitochondrial ATP gen-
eration under conditions of high demand.
Neurons derived from STZ-induced diabetic 
rodents exhibited oxidative stress, reduced spare 
respiratory capacity, and when dissociated and 
placed in culture, impaired neurite outgrowth (4, 11, 
35). Spare respiratory capacity was increased in these 
neurons by the M1R antagonists MT7 (100 nM, in 
STZ-mouse DRG culture) (Figure 3B and Supplemen-
tal Figure 4B), VU0255035 (10 μM, in STZ-rat DRG 
culture), or pirenzepine (1 μM, in STZ-mouse DRG 
culture) (Supplemental Figure 4D). Note that in all 
studies of neurons derived from STZ-induced diabetic rodents, the 
basal rate of respiration was not significantly different from that of 
age-matched controls. This confirms previous work from our labo-
ratory and others (11, 36–38). Neurons derived from STZ-diabetic 
mice also exhibited enhanced neurite outgrowth when exposed to 
pirenzepine (1 μM) or MT7 (100 nM) (Supplemental Figure 4C), 
further illustrating the potential of antagonizing endogenous mus-
carinic receptor activity to overcome a disease phenotype.
M1R-selective antagonists activate the AMPK pathway to drive 
neurite outgrowth. A key pathway that senses cellular energy 
demands and modulates mitochondrial function is the AMPK 
and PGC-1α signaling axis (39). Exposure of sensory neurons 
derived from STZ-induced diabetic rats to 100 nM MT7 or 
10 μM VU0255035 enhanced activation (phosphorylation) of 
AMPK and its endogenous substrate, acetyl-CoA carboxylase 
(ACC) (Figure 3, C and D, and Supplemental Figure 4E). MT7, 
VU0255035, and pirenzepine also augmented luciferase report-
er activity for PGC-1α, a downstream target of AMPK, when 
added to neurons derived from STZ-diabetic rats (Figure 3E and 
Figure 5. Pirenzepine augments AMPK/PGC-1α pathway gene expression and mitochon-
drial activity in STZ-diabetic mice. (A and B) DRG homogenates from animals reported in 
Figure 4, C and E (21-week time point), underwent Western blotting and were probed for 
p-AMPK (on Thr-172), T-AMPK, PGC-1α, NDUFS3 (complex I), and COX IV (complex IV). ERK 
was probed as a loading control. Data are calculated relative to T-ERK and expressed as 
mean ± SEM of n = 5–6/group. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001; ****P < 0.0001, 1-way 
ANOVA with Tukey’s post-hoc test. (C) DRG homogenates from the same study were ana-
lyzed for respiratory chain complex activities. Data are shown as mean ± SEM of  
n = 8/group. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001, 1-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post-hoc test.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
6 1 4
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 2   February 2017
Supplemental Figure 4F). MT7 enhancement of PGC-1α was 
blocked by compound C (0.3 μM), a well-characterized pharma-
cological inhibitor of AMPK (Figure 3F). The mechanistic asso-
ciation between M1R regulation of AMPK activation and neurite 
outgrowth was confirmed using sensory neurons derived from 
STZ-induced diabetic rats transduced with adenovirus carrying 
dominant negative mutants of AMPKα1 and AMPKα2 subunits. 
Neurons overexpressing mutant AMPK did not show enhanced 
neurite outgrowth in response to 1 μM pirenzepine (Figure 3G 
and Supplemental Figure 4G), whereas overexpression of a 
constitutively active mutant of AMPK augmented neurite out-
growth (Figure 3H). Thus, ongoing activity of M1R and subse-
quent dampening of the AMPK/PGC-1α signaling axis restricted 
the capacity of sensory neurons to respond to increased energy 
demands such as those required to sustain neurite outgrowth.
M1R antagonism prevents and reverses indices of diabetic neurop-
athy in mice. Mitochondrial dysfunction is linked to the onset of 
diabetic peripheral neuropathy (2–4). We therefore tested the ther-
apeutic potential of antagonizing muscarinic receptor–mediated 
suppression of mitochondrial function in diabetic mice, a model 
that reflects human diabetic neuropathy by developing loss of 
terminal regions of small sensory fibers and loss of sensorimotor 
function (40). We focused on pirenzepine as the test agent due to 
its well-characterized pharmacokinetics/dynamics, limited pene-
tration of the blood-brain barrier, and history of safe clinical use 
for other indications (41). Pirenzepine did not alter disease sever-
ity, as body weight, plasma glucose, and HbA1c were unchanged 
(Supplemental Table 1). Analysis of expression of the M1R in the 
DRG of C57BL/6 mice with STZ-induced diabetes revealed no 
significant change in mRNA expression (Supplemental Figure 5). 
Adult C57BL/6 mice with STZ-induced type 1 diabetes developed 
loss of paw IENF (illustrated in Supplemental Figure 6A) with con-
current thermal hypoalgesia, and both disorders were prevented 
by pirenzepine in a dose-dependent fashion (Figure 4A). Mice 
lacking the M1R had normal response times to paw heat stimula-
tion and normal paw-skin IENF density when compared with WT 
mice (Figure 4B). Induction of diabetes in WT mice caused paw 
thermal hypoalgesia and depletion of IENF, whereas induction 
of diabetes in mice lacking the M1R was without effect on these 
parameters (Figure 4B). Importantly for potential clinical transla-
tion, the therapeutic capacity of pirenzepine extended to reversal 
of established neuropathy in mouse models of type 1 (STZ) and 
type 2 (db/db) diabetes (Figure 4, C, E, and F). Moreover, efficacy 
persisted for 5 to 9 weeks after cessation of treatment (Figure 4, D 
and E). The efficacy of pirenzepine was replicated by VU0255035, 
which also corrected loss of thermal sensation and IENF depletion 
without affecting disease severity in a mouse model of type 1 dia-
betes (Supplemental Figure 6B).
Pirenzepine-dependent recovery from diabetic neuropathy was 
associated with correction of mitochondrial dysfunction. Concurrent 
protection of mitochondria was confirmed by assays performed 
on sensory ganglia derived from diabetic rodents. Diabetes- 
induced defects in AMPK/PGC-1α, mitochondrial complex protein 
expression, and OCR were absent in pirenzepine-treated models of 
type 1 and type 2 diabetes (Figure 5, A and B, and Supplemental Fig-
ure 6, C–E). Furthermore, pirenzepine corrected the depression of 
respiratory chain complex I and IV activities in DRG obtained from 
Figure 6. M1R antagonism prevents nerve-conduction deficits and 
tactile allodynia in diabetic neuropathy. (A) SNCV (left panel) and 50% 
paw withdrawal threshold (PWT, right panel) to von Frey filaments (right 
panel) in control female Sprague-Dawley rats (C), STZ-diabetic rats (STZ), 
and diabetic rats treated with pirenzepine at 10 mg/kg/d s.c. for the last 
given 24 hours before assay (STZ+PZ) after 8 weeks of diabetes. Data are 
shown as mean ± SEM of n = 8–12/group. ***P < 0.001; ****P < 0.0001 vs. 
control by 1-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s post-hoc test. (B) Time course of 
sciatic MNCV in male Wistar rats (open circles), STZ-diabetic rats (black 
circles), and STZ-diabetic rats treated with pirenzepine (5 mg/kg/d s.c.) 
for 8 weeks of diabetes (red squares). Data are shown as mean ± SEM of 
n = 5–8/group. ****P < 0.0001 vs. control by repeated-measures 2-way 
ANOVA with Dunnett’s post-hoc test. (C) Paw flinching in response to sub-
dermal injection of 50 μl 0.5% formalin to the dorsal hind paw of female 
Sprague-Dawley rats (C), diabetic rats (STZ), and diabetic rats treated with 
pirenzepine (10 mg/kg/day s.c.) daily from onset of diabetes for 8 weeks 
and last given 24 hours before assay (STZ+PZ). Phase 1 represents the sum 
of flinches during minutes 1–2, 6–7, and 11–12, and phase 2 represents the 
sum of flinches during minutes 16–17, 21–22, 26–27, 31–32, 36–37, 41–42, 
46–47, 51–52, 56–57, and 61–62 after paw formalin injection. Data are 
shown as mean + SEM of n = 8–11/group. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01 vs. STZ by 
1-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s post-hoc test.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
6 1 5
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 2   February 2017
altering the increased paw flinching 
during phase 2 (Figure 6C). As piren-
zepine has poor CNS penetration (42), 
a peripheral mode of action against 
phase 1 activity in the formalin test may 
be suspected.
M1R antagonists are neuroprotective 
in models of chemotherapy- and HIV- 
induced peripheral neuropathy. The 
neuroprotective effects of pirenzepine 
were not restricted to diabetic neuropa-
thy. Dichloracetic acid (DCA) is a com-
pound under investigation as a cancer 
treatment that causes dose-dependent 
peripheral neuropathy (43). The paw 
thermal hypoalgesia and loss of IENF 
that are indicative of degenerative neu-
ropathy in mice following chronic expo-
sure to DCA were prevented by pirenze-
pine (Figure 7A). Paw tactile allodynia 
and thermal hyperalgesia, indicative of 
painful neuropathy in mice exposed to 
the chemotherapeutic agent paclitaxel, 
were also prevented by treatment with 
pirenzepine (Figure 7B). To confirm 
that pirenzepine can have direct pro-
tective effects on peripheral neurons 
undergoing stress from exposure to 
chemotherapeutic agents, we isolated 
neurons from the DRG of normal rats 
and measured subsequent neurite out-
growth during exposure to the chemo-
therapeutic agent paclitaxel (0.3 μM) or 
oxaliplatin (3.0 μM). Reduced total neu-
rite outgrowth induced by these agents 
was prevented by exposure to 1 to 10 μM pirenzepine (Figure 7, C 
and D). To extend our investigations to a model of HIV-associated 
neuropathy, we exposed adult DRG neurons in culture to the HIV 
envelope protein gp120, which causes direct axonal damage (44). 
The reduced neurite outgrowth from gp120-exposed DRG neurons 
was prevented by 1 μM pirenzepine (Figure 8A). Delivery of gp120 
to the eye of normal mice daily for 5 weeks induced reduced nerve 
density in the corneal subbasal nerve plexus, as detected using 
noninvasive corneal confocal microscopy (Figure 8, B–E). Loss of 
corneal nerves was both prevented and reversed by concurrent 
topical application of the specific M1R antagonist MT7 (Figure 8F).
Discussion
We have discovered that adult peripheral sensory neurons main-
tained in vitro exhibit ongoing cholinergic constraint of mito-
chondrial function and neurite outgrowth. The signal transduc-
tion pathway linking M1R receptor activity to modulation of the 
AMPK/PGC-1α axis and mitochondrial function in neurons can 
be antagonized, and blocking this pathway may contribute to our 
observations of neuroprotection and recovery from injury pro-
moted by M1R antagonists in models of metabolic-, chemical-, 
and HIV-related peripheral neuropathy.
the same diabetic animals (Figure 5C). These data establish the ther-
apeutic potential of M1R antagonism against functional and structur-
al indices of small fiber sensory neuropathy in diverse models of type 
1 and type 2 diabetes in conjunction with protection of AMPK and 
mitochondrial activity in the sensory ganglia of such animals.
M1R antagonism prevents diabetic neuropathy in other mod-
els. The ability of M1R antagonism to prevent loss of thermal 
sensation and IENF in mice extended to other indices of neu-
ropathy measured in other species. Reduced large-fiber senso-
ry nerve-conduction velocity (NCV) and increased sensitivity 
to light touch (Figure 6A) in female STZ-diabetic rats and pro-
gressive large-fiber motor nerve-conduction velocity (MNCV) 
slowing in male STZ-diabetic rats (Figure 6B) were prevented by 
pirenzepine without affecting disease severity (Supplemental 
Table 2). These findings demonstrate that efficacy of treatment 
with this M1R antagonist was not species, fiber type, or sex spe-
cific. Pirenzepine did not act as an acute antinociceptive agent 
or general sedative, as a single dose to otherwise untreated STZ- 
diabetic rats did not affect paw tactile responses (Supplemental 
Figure 7A) or motor function (Supplemental Figure 7B). However, 
pirenzepine treatment suppressed primary afferent-driven phase 1 
activity during the paw formalin test in STZ-diabetic rats without 
Figure 7. M1R antagonists are neuroprotective in models of CIPN. (A) Paw thermal response latency (left 
panel) and IENF profiles (right panel) in female Swiss Webster mice (C), DCA-exposed mice (DCA), and 
DCA-exposed mice treated with pirenzepine (10 mg/kg/d s.c. last given 24 hours before assay) for 8 weeks 
during DCA exposure (DCA+PZ). (B) Paw withdrawal threshold (left panel) and thermal response latency 
(right panel) in female Swiss Webster mice (C), paclitaxel-exposed mice (PX), and paclitaxel-exposed mice 
treated with pirenzepine (10 mg/kg/d s.c. for 4 weeks following the last paclitaxel exposure and last given 
24 hours before assay; PX+PZ). Data in A–B are shown as group mean + SEM of n = 9–12/group. *P < 0.05; 
**P < 0.01; ****P < 0.0001 vs. control by 1-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s post-hoc test. Neurite outgrowth 
in adult sensory neuron cultures exposed to (C) paclitaxel (0.3 μM) or (D) oxaliplatin (3 μM) for 1 day in the 
absence/presence of 1 μM (C) or 0.1–10 μM (D) pirenzepine. Data are shown as mean ± SEM of n = 5–8 repli-
cates/group. (C) **P < 0.01, 1-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post-hoc test. (D) *P < 0.05 vs. oxaliplatin alone by 
1-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s post-hoc test.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
6 1 6
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 2   February 2017
Gi/Go G proteins (45). While we cannot entirely exclude a con-
tribution by other subtypes of this class when interpreting data 
using selective M1R antagonists, our data using M1R-deficient 
mice, overexpression of GFP-M1R, and the M1R-specific antago-
nist MT7 indicate that this receptor subtype mediates cholinergic 
constraint of the AMPK/PGC-1α axis, mitochondrial function, 
and neurite outgrowth. A role for endogenous ACh in regulating 
this pathway is supported by our measurement of secreted ACh 
detected in the culture medium, approximately 16 nmoles/ml 
(16 μM), which far exceeds estimations of the ACh KD of 0.2-0.4 
nM for the M1R taken from studies with rat brain neurons (46, 
47). These data also correspond well with extracellular levels of 
ACh in the range of 0.1 to 0.6 nM detected using microdialysis in 
human and rat skin (48, 49). Thus, it is feasible that endogenously 
released ACh could act on M1R at nerve endings in the skin. In 
vitro work in the current study (Supplemental Figure 3, C–E) and 
in vivo studies in adult rat utilizing immunohistochemistry for 
the peripheral form of ChAT reveal that the protein is present in 
the cell body, axon, and nerve endings in the skin (25, 48). Fur-
thermore, compartmented cultures using Campenot chambers of 
embryonic chick sensory neurons demonstrated secretion of ACh 
within the cell body compartment and also within the distal axo-
nal compartment (49), emphasizing that ACh could be derived 
from sites along the whole sensory neuron axis.
The best-characterized role of M1R in the PNS is in sympathet-
ic neurons, where it mediates the M current (50). Acute ACh acti-
vation of M1R stimulates phospholipase C β (PLCβ) and triggers 
generation of inositol triphosphate, which induces endoplasmic 
reticulum Ca2+ release. Downstream Ca2+-dependent pathways 
drive closing of Kv7 channels, and the outcome is an enhanced 
propensity for depolarization of the plasma membrane. Sensory 
neurons also express Kv7 channels and exhibit the M current, but 
an initiating role of M1R in this pathway has not been confirmed 
(51). Upon axotomy, sensory neurons exhibit spontaneous electri-
cal activity that consumes extensive ATP. Given our findings that 
M1R antagonism of axotomized adult sensory neurons in culture 
enhances neurite outgrowth, we speculate that blockade of the M 
current would reduce likelihood of depolarization, thus preserving 
ATP to support actin-treadmilling in the growth cone and enhanc-
ing axon outgrowth (5).
Sensory neuron culture data presented in Supplemental Figure 
8 indicate that the antimuscarinic drug-driven activation of AMPK 
is mediated by Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase kinase 
β (CaMKKβ), a well-characterized upstream kinase that phosphor-
ylates AMPK in an AMP-independent manner (52). In cultured 
sensory neurons, lipid nanoparticle-mediated siRNA knockdown 
of CaMKKβ caused reduced phosphorylation of AMPK (Supple-
mental Figure 8C) and a shift in isoelectric focusing to more pos-
itively charged, presumably less phosphorylated, AMPK isoforms 
(Supplemental Figure 8D). In nonneuronal transformed cells coex-
pressing Halo-CaMKKβ and M1R or Halo-AMPKα2 and M1R, sub-
sequent treatment with pirenzepine altered the charged state of 
CaMKKβ isoforms (Supplemental Figure 8E) and phosphorylation 
state of AMPK α2 isoforms (Supplemental Figure 8F), indicative 
of direct modulation via M1R (no effect was seen in the absence 
of M1R coexpression). Finally, in cultured sensory neurons, the 
MT7-induced phosphorylation of AMPK was blocked by the 
 
There are 5 distinct subtypes of muscarinic receptor (M1–5R) 
that are divided into 2 classes according to their G protein– 
coupling preference (45). The M1, M3, and M5 subtypes couple to 
the Gq/G11 G proteins, whereas the M2 and M4 subtypes link to 
Figure 8. M1R antagonists are neuroprotective in models of peripher-
al neuropathy induced by the HIV envelope protein gp120. (A) Neurite 
outgrowth in adult sensory neuron cultures exposed to gp120 (1–3 ng/ml) 
± 1 μM pirenzepine for 24 hours. Data are shown as mean + SEM of n = 5–8 
replicate cultures. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01, 1-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post-hoc 
test. (B–C) Unprocessed and (D–E) processed images corneal nerves of the 
subbasal plexus. Dimensions = 400 × 400 μm, resolution = 384 × 384 pixels. 
(B) Corneal nerves from a control Swiss Webster mouse. (C) Corneal nerves 
from a Swiss Webster mouse that received daily eye drops of gp120 for 10 
weeks. (D and E) Same images overlaid with tracings of the corneal nerve and 
an 8 × 8 counting grid. Grid squares bounded by red lines represent those that 
contain 1 or more corneal nerves. Panel D shows 56/64 sectors that contain 
nerve (occupancy = 87.5%), and panel E shows 36/64 sectors containing nerve 
(occupancy = 56.3%). (F) Time course of subbasal plexus nerve density (as 
percentage of occupancy) in adult female Swiss Webster mice that received 
daily eye drops of vehicle (solid black line), gp120 (dashed black line), or both 
gp120 and MT7, where MT7 treatment was initiated either on the same day 
as gp120 (MT7 prevention, dot/dash green line) or 5 weeks after onset of gp120 
treatment (MT7 reversal, dotted red line). Values are shown as mean ± SEM 
of n = 10. *P < 0.05 for gp120 untreated vs. other groups; **P < 0.01 for gp120 
untreated vs. MT7 prevention and vehicle by repeated-measures 2-way ANOVA 
and Dunnett’s post-hoc test.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
6 1 7
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 2   February 2017
diabetes (Supplemental Figure 5). Further studies are required to 
determine whether endogenous GPCR activity was altered by dia-
betes. Nonneuronal cells such as keratinocytes also express M1R, 
so that systemic delivery of M1R antagonists or loss of M1R in the 
M1R-KO mice may impart neuroprotective and regenerative effects 
via alternative and/or additional pathways. Keratinocytes exhibit a 
rich cholinergic phenotype with expression of a range of musca-
rinic and nicotinic components, including M1R, ChAT, and AChE 
(60). It has been reported that, during development, keratinocytes 
produce a cholinergic barrier to penetration of the superficial lay-
ers of the epidermis by the plastic peripheral terminals of epider-
mal sensory neurons (60). Thus, in our studies using systemically 
delivered M1R antagonists in animals, these agents could also oper-
ate via blockade of M1R activity in keratinocytes or by disruption 
of the keratinocyte cholinergic barrier. Blockade of M1R signaling 
in satellite cells within the DRG, which then affects neighboring 
neurons, also cannot be excluded. However, M1R expression has 
not yet been demonstrated in satellite cells, and a study utilizing 
electron microscopy combined with autoradiography in rat supe-
rior cervical ganglia found specific binding of a muscarinic agonist 
to the M1R in neuronal somata and dendrites and not satellite cells 
(61). Given the possible range of off-target effects of the antimus-
carinic drugs, it was promising that, from a therapeutic standpoint, 
no side effects were observed. Moreover, none of the drugs in the 
long term (3- to 4-month treatment protocols) affected the diabetic 
state, thereby excluding acute or long-term modulation of pancre-
atic function (Supplemental Tables 1 and 2). Noninvasive and iter-
ative echocardiogram studies in STZ-induced diabetic mice have 
also been unable to demonstrate alterations in cardiac structure or 
function (data not shown).
Although the manifestations of peripheral neuropathy can 
vary between patients with any of the diseases modeled in our 
studies, there is a growing appreciation that mitochondrial dys-
function contributes to many types of neuropathy by promoting 
retraction or loss of peripheral sensory terminals and sensory 
loss (2–4). Sensory neurons exhibit a condensed mitochondrial 
network, and this is particularly apparent in unmyelinated neu-
rons that require very high rates of ATP production to maintain 
electrical activity along the whole length of the axon due to the 
absence of nodes of Ranvier to mediate saltatory conduction 
(8, 34). In human skin biopsies, loss of mitochondrial content in 
IENF of patients with early signs of neuropathy has been docu-
mented (62). Our in vivo studies with pirenzepine-treated type 
1 and type 2 diabetic rodents indicate that nerve protection and/
or repair occurred in association with correction of deactivation 
of AMPK and of multiple indices of mitochondrial dysfunction in 
the DRG (Figure 5, A–C, and Supplemental Figure 6, C–E). Other 
factors that augment mitochondrial function, such as ciliary neu-
rotrophic factor and C-terminal inhibitors of heat shock protein 
90, also correct neuropathy in diabetic rodents (37, 38). The block-
ade of muscarinic receptor–mediated inhibition of mitochondrial 
activity using antimuscarinic drugs may not represent a specific 
intervention against any one primary pathogenic mechanism and 
potentially allows broad therapeutic application to all conditions 
that show diminished energy capacity under stress. Moreover, 
diminished AMPK activity and mitochondrial complex expression 
and activity are not unique to the nervous system in diabetes, and 
CaMKK inhibitor STO-609 (Supplemental Figure 8, G and H). 
 
The in vitro activation of AMPK in response to MT7 or VU0255035 
developed slowly over 60 minutes (Figure 3, C and D, and Supple-
mental Figure 4E). Fluo-4 live imaging indicated that this activation 
of AMPK was associated with a rise of intracellular Ca2+ concen-
tration in neurites over a 37.5-minute time period (Supplemental 
Figure 9). This observation seems counterintuitive, since, as shown 
in Figure 1, F–H, pirenzepine blocks the acute Ca2+ transient follow-
ing muscarine treatment. However, this longer-term effect of M1R 
blockade, of as-yet-unknown genesis, that is driving elevation of 
intracellular Ca2+ concentration in axons could mediate activation 
of CaMKKβ and subsequently AMPK. AMPK activity maintains 
optimal mitochondrial function under high ATP demand, and this 
pathway is critical for axonal plasticity and growth-cone motility (5, 
14–16). For example, the specific complex I inhibitor rotenone low-
ered intraneuritic ATP concentration and diminished neurite out-
growth in mouse adult sensory neurons (53) and embryonic rat neu-
rons (54). Rotenone similarly blocked neurite outgrowth in adult 
sensory neurons, without concomitant cell death (P. Fernyhough, 
unpublished observations). In vivo, axotomy of adult sensory neu-
rons causes mitochondrial depolarization and ATP depletion, and 
subsequent genetically mediated enhancement of mitochondrial 
trafficking elevates rates of nerve regeneration in response to a 
sciatic nerve crush (55). The pathogenic mechanisms that depress 
AMPK activity in peripheral neuropathies caused by diabetes (4) 
and paclitaxel (P. Fernyhough, unpublished observations) remain 
unclear. In nonneuronal cells from animal and human tissues, high 
extracellular glucose concentration drives down AMPK activity 
via nutrient stress (13). This inhibition of AMPK activity, and sub-
sequently mitochondrial respiration, is mediated by a fall in the 
AMP/ATP ratio, so that high intracellular glucose concentration 
funnels through glycolysis to generate ATP and obviates a require-
ment for extensive mitochondrial-dependent ATP production (56). 
An attractive feature of the M1R-mediated activation of AMPK is 
that it likely occurs through an AMP-independent pathway, such 
as CaMKKβ. Alternatively, it is possible that AMPK activation in 
response to M1R blockade is a consequence of neurite outgrowth–
driven diminishment of local ATP supplies and a subsequent rise in 
the AMP/ATP ratio. Nevertheless, we have identified a therapeutic 
approach that may release mitochondrial respiration and neuronal 
plasticity from tonic cholinergic constraint and offers an alterna-
tive approach to neuroprotection and regeneration following acute 
stress or ongoing metabolic injury.
Antimuscarinic drugs were effective in several aspects of 
peripheral neuropathy. The ability of pirenzepine to reverse loss of 
IENF profiles in type 1 diabetes is the first experimental evidence, 
to our knowledge, showing reversal of this clinically significant 
end point. Previous studies have focused on prevention of IENF 
loss, for example, when studying protective effects of neurotroph-
in treatment in STZ-induced diabetic mice (57, 58). M1R-KO mice 
were also protected from diabetic neuropathy, revealing a primary 
role for M1R in driving neuroprotection (Figure 4B). However, these 
findings require cautious interpretation. We found no evidence for 
diabetes altering the endogenous muscarinic receptor signaling 
pathway. Previous work revealed no change in ChAT activity in the 
sciatic nerve of db/db mice (59), and in the current study, mRNA 
levels for the M1R in the DRG were not affected by STZ-induced 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
6 1 8
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 2   February 2017
neurons were cultured in the presence of 10 mM d-glucose and 0.1 nM 
insulin and diabetic neurons with 25 mM d-glucose and zero insulin. 
MT7 was purchased from Alomone Labs.
Assessment of total neurite outgrowth. Rat or mouse neurons grown 
on glass coverslips were fixed with 2% paraformaldehyde in PBS 
(pH 7.4) for 15 minutes at room temperature and permeabilized with 
0.3% Triton X-100 in PBS for 5 minutes. Cells were then incubated 
in blocking buffer (Roche) diluted with FBS and 1.0 mM PBS (1:1:3) 
for 1 hour, then rinsed 3 times with PBS. The primary antibody used 
was against β-tubulin isotype III (cat. T8578; 1:1000), which is neu-
ron specific (Sigma Aldrich). Plates were incubated at 4°C overnight. 
The following day, the coverslips were incubated with CY3-conjugated 
secondary antibodies (Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories) for 1 
hour at room temperature and then mounted and imaged using a Carl 
Zeiss Axioscope-2 fluorescence microscope equipped with an Axio-
Cam camera. Random images were captured using Axio-Vision4.8 
software. Alternatively, in neurons transfected with GFP-expressing 
vectors, random images of the GFP signal were captured. Quantifica-
tion of total neurite outgrowth was performed by measuring the mean 
pixel area of captured images using ImageJ software (NIH) adjusted 
for the cell body signal. All values were adjusted for neuronal number 
(38, 72). In this culture system, the level of total neurite outgrowth has 
been validated to be directly related to an arborizing form of axonal 
plasticity and homologous to collateral sprouting in vivo (73).
Real-time intracellular calcium imaging. For acute measure-
ments, as shown in Figure 1, F–H, neurons were cultured in 96-well 
glass-bottom dishes overnight and then loaded with calcium- 
sensitive dye using the Fluo-4 NW (no wash) Kit from Thermo Fish-
er Scientific. The dish was placed in a Cellomics Arrayscan–VTI 
HCS Reader (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with liquid delivery attach-
ment. Baseline signals were collected over 1 to 2 minutes; then drugs 
were added, after which images were collected over 80 seconds. 
At least 54–78 neurons were imaged in each well over this period. 
The data are presented as averaged intensity of fluo-4 fluorescence. 
Cloning and expression of M1R. The full-length cDNA of M1R was ampli-
fied using the forward and reverse primers (ATGAACACCTCAGTG-
CCCCCTGC and TTAGCATTGGCGGGAGGGGGTG, respective-
ly) from total RNA extracted from C57BL/J mouse brain tissue. The 
M1R-cDNA was subsequently cloned in pEGFP-C1 vector (Promega) 
at the Xho1 and SacII restriction sites. The pEGFP-M1R plasmid was 
transfected into adult primary rat DRG neurons using Amaxa Rat Neu-
ron Nucleofection Reagent (VPG-01003) and cultured as described 
above. The neurons were harvested 48 hours after transfection, and 
cell lysates were prepared for Western blot, or neurons were fixed in 
2% paraformaldehyde. Western blot was immunoblotted using anti-
bodies to GFP (ab-290, Abcam) and M1R (AMR-001, Alomone Labs) 
to detect M1R-GFP fusion protein.
Measurement of mitochondrial respiration in DRG neurons from mice 
and rats. An XF24 Analyzer (Seahorse Biosciences) was used to mea-
sure neuronal bioenergetic function. The XF24 creates a transient 7-μl 
chamber in specialized 24-well microplates that allows for OCR to be 
monitored in real time. Culture medium was changed 1 hour before the 
assay to unbuffered DMEM (pH 7.4) supplemented with 1 mM pyruvate 
and 10 mM d-glucose. Neuron density in the range of 2,500-5,000 
cells per well gave linear OCR. Oligomycin (1 μM), carbonyl cyanidep- 
trifluorocarbonyl-cyanide methoxyphenyl hydrazone (FCCP) (range of 
0.1 to 1.0 μM), and rotenone (1 μM) plus antimycin A (1 μM) was inject-
similar deficits have been reported in mesangial cells of the kidney 
in diabetic nephropathy (63). Interestingly, a recent drug screen 
for factors enhancing myelination in models of multiple sclerosis 
also identified broad spectrum antimuscarinics as potential ther-
apeutics (64). While the animal models of peripheral neuropathy 
that we studied do not exhibit overt demyelination, it is a feature 
of the equivalent human diseases that may also be amenable to 
antimuscarinic therapy.
Peripheral neuropathy is a major, and largely untreated, cause 
of human morbidity, with huge associated health care costs (65). 
One particularly encouraging implication of our identification of 
the endogenous M1R-mediated suppression of sensory neuron 
metabolism is that drugs that modulate this process are already in 
widespread clinical use for other indications. Moreover, the safety 
profile of antimuscarinic drugs is well characterized, with over 20 
years of clinical application for a variety of indications in Europe 
and the safe use of topical pirenzepine applied to the eye to treat 
myopia in children (41). The therapeutic application of M1R antag-
onists suggested by our studies could potentially translate relative-
ly rapidly to clinical use. Nerve conduction slowing is commonly 
used as an efficacy end point in clinical trials, and this disorder 
was prevented in diabetic rodents by pirenzepine therapy. Most 
notably, structural (IENF loss) and functional (thermal hypoalge-
sia) indices of small fiber neuropathy present in diabetic rodents 
were both prevented and reversed by antimuscarinic drugs. Since 
small fiber degeneration develops early in the human disease and 
can be reliably quantified using a variety of minimal or noninva-
sive techniques that can be applied iteratively (66–68), future clin-
ical trials of antimuscarinic drugs might feasibly focus on reversal 
of these early indices of neuropathy. Further, as antimuscarinic 
drugs were effective in augmenting collateral sprouting in our in 
vitro assay, this new therapeutic approach may be most effective 
during the early stages of a dying-back neuropathy prior to overt 
and/or complete fiber loss.
Methods
Culture of adult sensory neurons from rats and mice. DRGs from adult 
male rats or mice (from Central Animal Care, University of Manito-
ba) were dissociated using previously described methods (37, 69, 70). 
Centrifugation through a 15% BSA column was used to enrich for neu-
rons, as described (71). This procedure removed the vast majority of 
fibroblasts and Schwann cells; however, a small number of satellite 
cells approximating 5% to 10% of the final culture remained (mostly 
directly associated with large sensory neurons). Neurons were cultured 
in defined Hams F12 media in the presence of modified Bottenstein’s 
N2 supplement without insulin (0.1 mg/ml transferrin, 20 nM proges-
terone, 100 μM putrescine, 30 nM sodium selenite, 0.1 mg/ml BSA; 
all additives were from Sigma-Aldrich; culture medium was from Life 
Technologies). In all experiments, the media was also supplemented 
with a low-dose cocktail of neurotrophic factors (0.1 ng/ml NGF, 1.0 
ng/ml GDNF, and 0.1 ng/ml NT-3; all from Promega). The growth fac-
tor treatment attempted to mimic the levels of neurotrophic support 
experienced in vivo by sensory neurons (see Supplemental Figure 1 for 
rationale). As shown in Figure 2F and Supplemental Figure 1, we also 
used a medium-dose cocktail (0.3 ng/ml NGF, 5 ng/ml GDNF, 1 ng/
ml NT-3, and 0.1 nM insulin) or a high-dose cocktail (1 ng/ml NGF, 10 
ng/ml GDNF, 10 ng/ml NT-3, and 1 nM insulin). Age-matched control 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
6 1 9
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 2   February 2017
using the Amaxa Nucleofector Electroporation Kit for low numbers 
of cells according to the manufacturer’s instructions (ESBE Scientif-
ic). Cells were lysed using passive lysis buffer provided with the Dual- 
Luciferase Reporter Assay System (Promega). Luciferase activity was 
measured using a luminometer (model LMAXII; Molecular Devices). 20 
μl of each sample was loaded in a 96-well plate and was mixed with 100 
μl of Luciferase Assay Reagent II, and firefly luciferase activity was first 
recorded. Then, 100 μl of Stop-and-Glo Reagent (Promega)  was added, 
and Renilla luciferase activity was measured. All values were adjusted 
to Renilla luciferase activity and normalized to control plasmid pGL3 
levels. CC, a specific inhibitor of AMPK (77), was obtained from Abcam.
Viral transduction of AMPK mutants in cultured sensory neurons. 
Adult sensory neurons from control or diabetic rats maintained in the 
presence of a low-dose cocktail of neurotrophic factors were infect-
ed with adenovirus carrying dominant negative mutants of AMPKα1 
or AMPKα2 subunits (DN1 or DN2) or constitutively active AMPK 
(ad-AMPK-CA), respectively. The ad-AMPK-CA and dominant neg-
ative adenoviral constructs were delivered at 20 PFU/cell, and the 
control adenoviral construct was delivered at 10 PFU/cell. Cultures 
were allowed to attach/grow for 1 day and were incubated with ade-
novirus for 3 hours, and the media was changed. Neurite outgrowth 
was determined in GFP-positive neurons 48 hours after infection. The 
constructs were gifts from Jason Dyck (University of Alberta, Edmon-
ton, Alberta, Canada) (78).
Respiratory complex activities in mouse DRG. Measurements of 
enzymatic activities of respiratory complexes from mouse DRG 
homogenates were performed using a temperature-controlled Ultro-
spec 2100 UV-visible spectrophotometer equipped with Biochrom 
Swift II software (Biopharmacia Biotech) as previously described (11).
Animals. Studies were performed in Sprague-Dawley rats (Har-
lan) and Swiss Webster, C57BL/6 (stock 000664), C57BLKS (stock 
000662), and BKS.Cg-Dock7m+/+Leprdb/J (stock 000642: commonly 
called db/db) mice (all Jackson Laboratories) or M1R knockout mice on 
a C57BL/6 background (line 1784; Taconic Biosciences Inc.) (79). In all 
but the spontaneously diabetic db/db mice, type 1 diabetes was induced 
by injection of STZ (from Sigma-Aldrich) in 0.9% saline after overnight 
fast at a single dose of 50–60 mg/kg for female rats, 75 mg/kg for male 
rats, or 90–100 mg/kg on 2 consecutive days for mice. Blood glucose 
levels were confirmed 4 to 7 days later in samples obtained by tail prick 
and measured using a strip-operated reflectance meter (One Touch 
Ultra, LifeScan Inc.). Persistence of diabetic status was confirmed at 
the end of each study (see Supplemental Tables 1 and 2) by record-
ing body weight, blood glucose, and in select studies, plasma insulin 
concentration (Ultra Mouse Insulin ELISA kit, Crystal Chem Inc.) and 
HbA1c (A1CNow Test Kit, Bayer Healthcare). Paclitaxel neuropathy 
was induced by injection (5.0 mg/kg i.p.) on days 1, 3, 5, and 7 of the 
study (80). DCA neuropathy was induced by daily injection (1.0 g/kg 
i.p.) throughout the study (43, 81). Local exposure to gp120 (product 
1021, ImmunoDX) was used to model HIV neuropathy (44). Adult 
female Swiss Webster mice received 1 daily eye drop containing vehicle 
alone (20 μl of 0.1M sodium phosphate buffer) or gp120 (2.5 ng/ml in 
vehicle) for 10 weeks. In all studies, animals were randomly assigned to 
groups, and all animals and their derived tissues were coded to ensure 
blinding of investigators during behavioral, physiological, and histo-
logical assays. Pirenzepine (Sigma-Aldrich) was given at 0.1–10 mg/kg 
s.c. 5 times weekly, and VU0255035 (a gift from Vanderbilt Center for 
Neuroscience Drug Discovery, Franklin, Tennessee) was given at 10 
ed sequentially through ports in the Seahorse Flux Pak cartridges. Each 
loop was started with mixing for 3 minutes, then delayed for 2 minutes 
and OCR measured for 3 minutes. This allowed determination of the 
basal level of oxygen consumption, the amount of oxygen consumption 
linked to ATP production, the level of non–ATP-linked oxygen con-
sumption (proton leak), the maximal respiration capacity, and the non-
mitochondrial oxygen consumption (74, 75). Oligomycin inhibits the 
ATP synthase, leading to a build-up of the proton gradient that inhibits 
electron flux and reveals the state of coupling efficiency. Uncoupling of 
the respiratory chain by FCCP injection reveals the maximal capacity to 
reduce oxygen. Finally, rotenone plus antimycin A was injected to inhib-
it the flux of electrons through complexes I and III, and thus no oxygen 
was further consumed at cytochrome c oxidase. The remaining OCR 
determined after this intervention is primarily nonmitochondrial. Fol-
lowing OCR measurement, the cells were immediately fixed and dou-
ble-stained for β-tubulin III and activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), 
which specifically labels nuclei of axotomized sensory neurons. The 
plates were then inserted into a Cellomics Arrayscan–VTI HCS Reader 
(Thermo Scientific) equipped with Cellomics Arrayscan–VTI software 
to determine total neuronal number in each well. Data are expressed as 
OCR in pmoles/min for 1,000 cells. For mitochondria isolated from rat 
DRG, oxygen consumption was determined at 37°C using the OROB-
OROS Oxygraph-2K (OROBOROS Instruments GmbH) (76). Isolated 
mitochondria from lumbar DRG were resuspended in KCl medium (80 
mM KCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EDTA, 5 mM potassium 
phosphate, pH 7.4). Various substrates and inhibitors for mitochondrial 
respiratory chain complexes were used as described in Supplemental 
Figure 6, D and E. OROBOROS DatLab software was used to calculate 
the OCRs and for the graphic presentation of experimental data.
Protein expression in DRG. DRG homogenate or lysate from DRG 
cell culture (7.5–10.0 μg) was resolved on a 10% SDS-PAGE gel (8% 
for phosphorylated acetyl coenzyme A carboxylase [P-ACC]) and elec-
troblotted onto nitrocellulose membrane. Blots were then blocked in 
5% nonfat milk containing 0.05% Tween-20, rinsed in TBS then PBS 
(pH 7.4), and incubated with antibodies to the following proteins: 
phosphorylated AMPK (Thr172, p-AMPK; cat. SC3352; 1:500, San-
ta Cruz Biotechnology Inc.; Cell Signaling Technology), total AMPK 
(T-AMPK; cat. SC25792; 1:500, Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc.), PGC-
1α (cat SC13067; 1:500, Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc.), p-ACC (cat. 
ab31931; 1:2000, Abcam), CaMKKβ (cat. SC100364; 1:1000, Santa 
Cruz Biotechnology Inc.), CaMKKα (cat. SC17827 [F-2]; 1:1000, San-
ta Cruz Biotechnology Inc.), cytochrome c oxidase subunit 4 (COX IV; 
cat. MS407; 1:1000, Mitoscience), and NADH dehydrogenase (ubi-
quinone) iron-sulfur protein 3 (NDUFS3; cat. MS110; 1:1000, Mitosci-
ence). Total extracellular regulated protein kinase (T-ERK; cat. SC93 
[C-16]; 1:2000, Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc.) was probed as a loading 
control (previous studies have shown that the expression of this protein 
does not change in intact DRG or cultures from diabetic rats). The blots 
were rinsed, incubated in Western blotting Luminol Reagent (Santa 
Cruz Biotechnology Inc.), Bio-Rad Clarity Western ECL substrate, or 
ECL Advanced (GE Healthcare) and imaged using a Bio-Rad or Fluor-S 
analyzer or ChemiDoc MP (Bio-Rad).
Luciferase reporter constructs for PGC-1α and cell transfection. 
Reporter plasmids with the PGC-1α promoter upstream from lucifer-
ase were donated by Michael Czubryt (University of Manitoba). Rat 
DRG cells (30 × 103) were transfected in triplicate with 1.8 μg of PGC-1α 
 
Luc-promoter plasmid DNA and 0.2 μg of pCMV-Renilla (Promega) 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
6 2 0
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 2   February 2017
mittee on Animal Care) using Canadian Council of Animal Care rules 
or the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at UCSD.
Author contributions
KF, AG, TMZ, and DRS established, maintained, treated, and per-
formed behavioral assays on groups of rats and mice. LT, RVDP, 
MGS, and DRS performed primary neuron cell culture, Western 
blotting, and immunocytochemistry. RVDP carried out the initial 
drug screen and analyzed calcium signals in cultured neurons. 
SKR performed mitochondrial enzymatic activities and Seahorse 
and Oroboros analysis of mitochondrial function. AS carried out 
gene reporter and adenoviral infection studies. MGS generated 
the GFP-M1R and Halo constructs, reverse-transcriptase PCR 
(RT-PCR), siRNA knockdown, 2D gel and isoelectric focusing, and 
time-lapse calcium imaging. KF, JO, AG, NM, and CGJ performed 
morphometric, electrophysiological, and biochemical assays. LT, 
RVP, DRS, MGS, AS, SKRC, KF, and CGJ analyzed data. JW pro-
vided M1R knockout mice and edited the paper. DRS, MGS, and 
CGJ designed experiments. PF and NAC designed experiments, 
analyzed data, and wrote and edited the paper.
Acknowledgments
This work was funded by grants 14-2006-341, 17-2008-1047, and 
17-2011-252 from the JDRF and grants RPA-124953 and MOP-
130282 from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (to PF), 
grants DK057629, NS081082, DP3DK094346-01 (sub-award), 
and DK076169 (sub-award 23789-5) from the NIH (to NAC) and 
NIH grant AG039736 (to CGJ). We are grateful to St. Boniface 
Hospital Research Foundation for support. We thank Michael 
Czubryt (University of Manitoba) for reporter plasmids, Jason 
Dyck (University of Alberta) for adenoviral constructs, Jeffrey 
Conn (Vanderbilt Center for Neuroscience Drug Discovery) for 
gifts of VU0255035, and Nick Anderson, Alex Marquez, Dwane 
Morrow, Allison Quach, Mahalakshmi Razdan, Graziella Te, and 
Vanessa Thompson for expert technical assistance.
Address correspondence to: Paul Fernyhough, R4046 – 351 
Taché Avenue, St. Boniface Hospital Research Centre, Winni-
peg, Manitoba, R2H 2A6, Canada. Phone: 204.235.3692; E-mail: 
pfernyhough@sbrc.ca.
mg/kg i.p. 5 times weekly. MT7 (product M-200, Alomone Labs) was 
given as eye drops (20 μl of 25 ng/ml solution in 0.1 M sodium phos-
phate buffer) either once daily from the onset of gp120 exposure or 3 
times daily starting after 5 weeks of gp120 exposure.
Behavioral tests. Hind-paw withdrawal responses to von Frey fila-
ments (50% paw withdrawal threshold in gram of force applied) and 
radiant heat (latency to withdrawal in seconds) and also paw flinch-
ing following injection of 50 μl 0.5% formalin were measured in con-
scious unrestrained animals (82, 83).
Electrophysiology. Electrophysiological parameters were determined 
as previously described in multiple papers (84, 85). Animals were anes-
thetized with isoflurane and stimulating electrodes placed at the sciatic 
notch and Achilles tendon of the left hind limb, with recording electrodes 
placed in the interosseus muscles of the ipsilateral foot. Nerve tempera-
ture was maintained at 37°C and the nerve stimulated by single-square 
wave pulses applied first to the notch and then the tendon. Peak-peak 
latency of the resulting M or H waves was used to derive MNCV and sci-
atic sensory nerve-conduction velocity (SNCV), respectively, using the 
distance between stimulating electrodes. NCV was measured in tripli-
cate and the median used to represent NCV of the animal.
IENF quantification. The plantar dermis and epidermis of the hind 
paw was removed and added to 4% paraformaldehyde. Tissue was pro-
cessed to paraffin blocks, cut as 6-μm sections, and immunostained 
using an antibody to PGP 9.5 (cat. 7863-0504; 1:1000, AbD Serotec); the 
number of immunoreactive IENF profiles was quantified under blinded 
conditions by light microscopy and normalized to length of the dermal/
epidermal junction (86).
Corneal confocal microscopy. Corneal nerves of the subbasal nerve 
plexus were imaged in anesthetized mice using a Heidelberg Retina 
Tomograph 3 with Rostock Cornea Module (Heidelberg Engineering), 
and occupancy of 5 consecutive images (2 μm intervals) per animal was 
calculated using an 8 × 8 grid (Figure 8) as described elsewhere (87).
Statistics. Data are expressed as mean ± SEM and individual data 
points shown in scatter dot plots when n is greater than 3. Where appropri-
ate, data were subjected to unpaired 2-tailed Student’s t test, 1-way ANO-
VA with post-hoc comparisons using Tukey’s or Dunnett’s post-hoc tests, 
or 2-way ANOVA with repeat measures followed by Dunnett’s post-hoc 
test. GraphPad Prism software was used to perform statistical analysis.
Study approval. All animal procedures were approved by the Uni-
versity of Manitoba Animal Care Committee (overseen by the Com-
 1. Albers KM, Davis BM. The skin as a neurotrophic 
organ. Neuroscientist. 2007;13(4):371–382.
 2. Bennett GJ, Doyle T, Salvemini D. Mitotoxicity in 
distal symmetrical sensory peripheral neuropa-
thies. Nat Rev Neurol. 2014;10(6):326–336.
 3. Cashman CR, Höke A. Mechanisms of distal 
axonal degeneration in peripheral neuropathies. 
Neurosci Lett. 2015;596:33–50.
 4. Chowdhury SK, Smith DR, Fernyhough P. The role 
of aberrant mitochondrial bioenergetics in diabet-
ic neuropathy. Neurobiol Dis. 2013;51:56–65.
 5. Bernstein BW, Bamburg JR. Actin-ATP hydrolysis 
is a major energy drain for neurons. J Neurosci. 
2003;23(1):1–6.
 6. Harris JJ, Jolivet R, Attwell D. Synaptic energy use 
and supply. Neuron. 2012;75(5):762–777.
 
7. Li Z, Okamoto K, Hayashi Y, Sheng M. The 
importance of dendritic mitochondria in the 
morphogenesis and plasticity of spines and syn-
apses. Cell. 2004;119(6):873–887.
 8. Wang SS, et al. Functional trade-offs in 
white matter axonal scaling. J Neurosci. 
2008;28(15):4047–4056.
 9. Chen H, Chan DC. Critical dependence of neu-
rons on mitochondrial dynamics. Curr Opin Cell 
Biol. 2006;18(4):453–459.
 10. Breathnach AS. Electron microscopy of cuta-
neous nerves and receptors. J Invest Dermatol. 
1977;69(1):8–26.
 11. Roy Chowdhury SK, et al. Impaired adenosine 
monophosphate-activated protein kinase sig-
nalling in dorsal root ganglia neurons is linked 
to mitochondrial dysfunction and peripheral 
neuropathy in diabetes. Brain. 2012;135(Pt 
6):1751–1766.
 12. Feige JN, Auwerx J. Transcriptional coregulators 
in the control of energy homeostasis. Trends Cell 
Biol. 2007;17(6):292–301.
 13. Chowdhury SK, Dobrowsky RT, Fernyhough 
P. Nutrient excess and altered mitochondrial 
proteome and function contribute to neu-
rodegeneration in diabetes. Mitochondrion. 
2011;11(6):845–854.
 14. Dasgupta B, Milbrandt J. Resveratrol stimulates 
AMP kinase activity in neurons. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci USA. 2007;104(17):7217–7222.
 15. Samuel MA, et al. LKB1 and AMPK regulate 
synaptic remodeling in old age. Nat Neurosci. 
2014;17(9):1190–1197.
 16. Tao K, Matsuki N, Koyama R. AMP-activated 
protein kinase mediates activity-dependent axon 
branching by recruiting mitochondria to axon. 
Dev Neurobiol. 2014;74(6):557–573.
 17. St-Pierre J, et al. Suppression of reactive 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
6 2 1
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 2   February 2017
oxygen species and neurodegeneration by 
the PGC-1 transcriptional coactivators. Cell. 
2006;127(2):397–408.
 18. Shin JH, et al. PARIS (ZNF746) repression of 
PGC-1α contributes to neurodegeneration in Par-
kinson’s disease. Cell. 2011;144(5):689–702.
 19. Kamiya H, Zhang W, Sima AA. Degeneration of 
the Golgi and neuronal loss in dorsal root ganglia 
in diabetic BioBreeding/Worcester rats. Diabeto-
logia. 2006;49(11):2763–2774.
 20. Erskine L, McCaig CD. Growth cone neu-
rotransmitter receptor activation modulates 
electric field-guided nerve growth. Dev Biol. 
1995;171(2):330–339.
 21. Young SH, Poo MM. Spontaneous release of 
transmitter from growth cones of embryonic 
neurones. Nature. 1983;305(5935):634–637.
 22. Tata AM, Cursi S, Biagioni S, Augusti-Tocco G. 
Cholinergic modulation of neurofilament expres-
sion and neurite outgrowth in chick sensory neu-
rons. J Neurosci Res. 2003;73(2):227–234.
 23. Yang H, Kunes S. Nonvesicular release of ace-
tylcholine is required for axon targeting in the 
Drosophila visual system. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 
2004;101(42):15213–15218.
 24. Bernardini N, Tomassy GS, Tata AM, Augus-
ti-Tocco G, Biagioni S. Detection of basal 
and potassium-evoked acetylcholine release 
from embryonic DRG explants. J Neurochem. 
2004;88(6):1533–1539.
 25. Bellier JP, Kimura H. Acetylcholine synthesis by 
choline acetyltransferase of a peripheral type as 
demonstrated in adult rat dorsal root ganglion.  
J Neurochem. 2007;101(6):1607–1618.
 26. Bernardini N, Levey AI, Augusti-Tocco G. Rat 
dorsal root ganglia express m1-m4 muscarinic 
receptor proteins. J Peripher Nerv Syst. 1999;4(3-
4):222–232.
 27. Tata AM, Vilaró MT, Mengod G. Muscarinic 
receptor subtypes expression in rat and chick 
dorsal root ganglia. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 
2000;82(1-2):1–10.
 28. Hadimani MB, et al. Guaifenesin derivatives 
promote neurite outgrowth and protect dia-
betic mice from neuropathy. J Med Chem. 
2013;56(12):5071–5078.
 29. Birdsall NJ, et al. Muscarinic receptor subclasses: 
evidence from binding studies. Adv Biochem Psy-
chopharmacol. 1983;37:323–329.
 30. Sheffler DJ, et al. A novel selective muscarinic 
acetylcholine receptor subtype 1 antagonist 
reduces seizures without impairing hippo-
campus-dependent learning. Mol Pharmacol. 
2009;76(2):356–368.
 31. Alabaster VA. Discovery & development of 
selective M3 antagonists for clinical use. Life Sci. 
1997;60(13-14):1053–1060.
 32. Lazareno S, Birdsall NJ. Pharmacological charac-
terization of acetylcholine-stimulated [35S]-GTP 
gamma S binding mediated by human musca-
rinic m1-m4 receptors: antagonist studies. Br J 
Pharmacol. 1993;109(4):1120–1127.
 33. Max SI, Liang JS, Potter LT. Purification and 
properties of m1-toxin, a specific antago-
nist of m1 muscarinic receptors. J Neurosci. 
1993;13(10):4293–4300.
 34. Perkins GA, Ellisman MH. Mitochondrial config-
urations in peripheral nerve suggest differential 
ATP production. J Struct Biol. 2011;173(1):117–127.
 35. Zherebitskaya E, Akude E, Smith DR, Ferny-
hough P. Development of selective axonopathy in 
adult sensory neurons isolated from diabetic rats: 
role of glucose-induced oxidative stress. Diabe-
tes. 2009;58(6):1356–1364.
 36. Ma J, et al. Heat shock protein 70 is necessary 
to improve mitochondrial bioenergetics and 
reverse diabetic sensory neuropathy follow-
ing KU-32 therapy. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 
2014;348(2):281–292.
 37. Urban MJ, Pan P, Farmer KL, Zhao H, Blagg BS, 
Dobrowsky RT. Modulating molecular chap-
erones improves sensory fiber recovery and 
mitochondrial function in diabetic peripheral 
neuropathy. Exp Neurol. 2012;235(1):388–396.
 38. Saleh A, et al. Ciliary neurotrophic factor acti-
vates NF-κB to enhance mitochondrial bioener-
getics and prevent neuropathy in sensory neu-
rons of streptozotocin-induced diabetic rodents. 
Neuropharmacology. 2013;65:65–73.
 39. Cantó C, Auwerx J. PGC-1alpha, SIRT1 and 
AMPK, an energy sensing network that con-
trols energy expenditure. Curr Opin Lipidol. 
2009;20(2):98–105.
 40. Biessels GJ, et al. Phenotyping animal models 
of diabetic neuropathy: a consensus statement 
of the diabetic neuropathy study group of 
the EASD (Neurodiab). J Peripher Nerv Syst. 
2014;19(2):77–87.
 41. Siatkowski RM, et al. Two-year multicenter, ran-
domized, double-masked, placebo-controlled, 
parallel safety and efficacy study of 2% pirenze-
pine ophthalmic gel in children with myopia.  
J AAPOS. 2008;12(4):332–339.
 42. Hammer R, Koss FW. The pharmacokinetic pro-
file of pirenzepine. Scand J Gastroenterol Suppl. 
1979;57:1–6.
 43. Kankotia S, Stacpoole PW. Dichloroacetate and 
cancer: new home for an orphan drug? Biochim 
Biophys Acta. 2014;1846(2):617–629.
 44. Melli G, Keswani SC, Fischer A, Chen W, Höke A. 
Spatially distinct and functionally independent 
mechanisms of axonal degeneration in a model 
of HIV-associated sensory neuropathy. Brain. 
2006;129(Pt 5):1330–1338.
 45. Wess J. Molecular biology of muscarinic 
acetylcholine receptors. Crit Rev Neurobiol. 
1996;10(1):69–99.
 46. Bakker G, et al. 123I-iododexetimide preferen-
tially binds to the muscarinic receptor subtype 
M1 in vivo. J Nucl Med. 2015;56(2):317–322.
 47. Pavia J, Marquez E, Laukkonen S, Martos F, 
Gómez A, Sánchez de la Cuesta F. M1 and 
M3 muscarinic receptor subtypes in rat fore-
brain. Methods Find Exp Clin Pharmacol. 
1991;13(10):653–660.
 48. Hanada K, Kishimoto S, Bellier JP, Kimura H. 
Peripheral choline acetyltransferase in rat skin 
demonstrated by immunohistochemistry. Cell 
Tissue Res. 2013;351(3):497–510.
 49. Corsetti V, Mozzetta C, Biagioni S, Augusti 
Tocco G, Tata AM. The mechanisms and pos-
sible sites of acetylcholine release during chick 
primary sensory neuron differentiation. Life Sci. 
2012;91(15-16):783–788.
 50. Brown DA, Passmore GM. Neural KCNQ (Kv7) 
channels. Br J Pharmacol. 2009;156(8):1185–1195.
 51. Passmore GM, et al. KCNQ/M currents in senso-
ry neurons: significance for pain therapy.  
J Neurosci. 2003;23(18):7227–7236.
 52. Hawley SA, et al. Calmodulin-dependent protein 
kinase kinase-beta is an alternative upstream 
kinase for AMP-activated protein kinase. Cell 
Metab. 2005;2(1):9–19.
 53. Persson AK, Kim I, Zhao P, Estacion M, Black 
JA, Waxman SG. Sodium channels contribute 
to degeneration of dorsal root ganglion neur-
ites induced by mitochondrial dysfunction in 
an in vitro model of axonal injury. J Neurosci. 
2013;33(49):19250–19261.
 54. Press C, Milbrandt J. Nmnat delays axonal degen-
eration caused by mitochondrial and oxidative 
stress. J Neurosci. 2008;28(19):4861–4871.
 55. Zhou B, Yu P, Lin MY, Sun T, Chen Y, Sheng ZH. 
Facilitation of axon regeneration by enhancing 
mitochondrial transport and rescuing energy 
deficits. J Cell Biol. 2016;214(1):103–119.
 56. Diaz-Ruiz R, Rigoulet M, Devin A. The War-
burg and Crabtree effects: On the origin of 
cancer cell energy metabolism and of yeast 
glucose repression. Biochim Biophys Acta. 
2011;1807(6):568–576.
 57. Akkina SK, Patterson CL, Wright DE. GDNF 
rescues nonpeptidergic unmyelinated primary 
afferents in streptozotocin-treated diabetic mice. 
Exp Neurol. 2001;167(1):173–182.
 58. Christianson JA, Riekhof JT, Wright DE. Restor-
ative effects of neurotrophin treatment on dia-
betes-induced cutaneous axon loss in mice. Exp 
Neurol. 2003;179(2):188–199.
 59. Calcutt NA, Willars GB, Tomlinson DR. Axonal 
transport of choline acetyltransferase and 6- 
phosphofructokinase activities in genetically dia-
betic mice. Muscle Nerve. 1988;11(12):1206–1210.
 60. Grando SA, Pittelkow MR, Schallreuter 
KU. Adrenergic and cholinergic control 
in the biology of epidermis: physiological 
and clinical significance. J Invest Dermatol. 
2006;126(9):1948–1965.
 61. Ramcharan EJ, Matthews MR. Autoradiographic 
localization of functional muscarinic receptors 
in the rat superior cervical sympathetic ganglion 
reveals an extensive distribution over non- 
synaptic surfaces of neuronal somata, dendrites and 
nerve endings. Neuroscience. 1996;71(3):797–832.
 62. Casanova-Molla J, et al. Mitochondrial loss indi-
cates early axonal damage in small fiber neurop-
athies. J Peripher Nerv Syst. 2012;17(2):147–157.
 63. Sharma K. Mitochondrial hormesis and diabetic 
complications. Diabetes. 2015;64(3):663–672.
 64. Mei F, et al. Micropillar arrays as a high-throughput 
 
screening platform for therapeutics in multiple 
sclerosis. Nat Med. 2014;20(8):954–960.
 65. McInnes AD. Diabetic foot disease in the United 
Kingdom: about time to put feet first. J Foot Ankle 
Res. 2012;5(1):26.
 66. Breiner A, Lovblom LE, Perkins BA, Bril V. 
Does the prevailing hypothesis that small-fiber 
dysfunction precedes large-fiber dysfunction 
apply to type 1 diabetic patients? Diabetes Care. 
2014;37(5):1418–1424.
 67. Malik RA, et al. Small fibre neuropathy: role in the 
diagnosis of diabetic sensorimotor polyneuropa-
thy. Diabetes Metab Res Rev. 2011;27(7):678–684.
 68. Smith AG, Ramachandran P, Tripp S, Singleton 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
6 2 2
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 2   February 2017
JR. Epidermal nerve innervation in impaired 
glucose tolerance and diabetes-associated neu-
ropathy. Neurology. 2001;57(9):1701–1704.
 69. Huang TJ, Sayers NM, Verkhratsky A, Ferny-
hough P. Neurotrophin-3 prevents mito-
chondrial dysfunction in sensory neurons 
of streptozotocin-diabetic rats. Exp Neurol. 
2005;194(1):279–283.
 70. Gardiner NJ, Fernyhough P, Tomlinson DR, 
Mayer U, von der Mark H, Streuli CH. Alpha7 
integrin mediates neurite outgrowth of distinct 
populations of adult sensory neurons. Mol Cell 
Neurosci. 2005;28(2):229–240.
 71. Gavazzi I, Kumar RD, McMahon SB, Cohen J. 
Growth responses of different subpopulations of 
adult sensory neurons to neurotrophic factors in 
vitro. Eur J Neurosci. 1999;11(10):3405–3414.
 72. Fernyhough P, Willars GB, Lindsay RM, Tomlin-
son DR. Insulin and insulin-like growth factor I 
enhance regeneration in cultured adult rat senso-
ry neurones. Brain Res. 1993;607(1-2):117–124.
 73. Smith DS, Skene JH. A transcription-dependent 
switch controls competence of adult neurons 
for distinct modes of axon growth. J Neurosci. 
1997;17(2):646–658.
 74. Brand MD, Nicholls DG. Assessing mito-
chondrial dysfunction in cells. Biochem J. 
2011;435(2):297–312.
 75. Hill BG, Dranka BP, Zou L, Chatham JC, Dar-
ley-Usmar VM. Importance of the bioenergetic 
reserve capacity in response to cardiomyocyte 
stress induced by 4-hydroxynonenal. Biochem J. 
2009;424(1):99–107.
 76. Chowdhury SK, Gemin A, Singh G. High activity 
of mitochondrial glycerophosphate dehydro-
genase and glycerophosphate-dependent ROS 
production in prostate cancer cell lines. Biochem 
Biophys Res Commun. 2005;333(4):1139–1145.
 77. Zhou G, et al. Role of AMP-activated protein 
kinase in mechanism of metformin action. J Clin 
Invest. 2001;108(8):1167–1174.
 78. Jacobs RL, Lingrell S, Dyck JR, Vance DE. Inhibi-
tion of hepatic phosphatidylcholine synthesis by 
5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide-1-beta-4- 
ribofuranoside is independent of AMP-acti-
vated protein kinase activation. J Biol Chem. 
2007;282(7):4516–4523.
 79. Miyakawa T, Yamada M, Duttaroy A, Wess J. 
Hyperactivity and intact hippocampus- 
dependent learning in mice lacking the M1 
muscarinic acetylcholine receptor. J Neurosci. 
2001;21(14):5239–5250.
 80. Matsumoto M, Inoue M, Hald A, Xie W, Ueda H. 
Inhibition of paclitaxel-induced A-fiber hyper-
sensitization by gabapentin. J Pharmacol Exp 
Ther. 2006;318(2):735–740.
 81. Calcutt NA, et al. Peripheral neuropathy in rats 
exposed to dichloroacetate. J Neuropathol Exp 
Neurol. 2009;68(9):985–993.
 82. Calcutt NA. Experimental models of painful diabet-
ic neuropathy. J Neurol Sci. 2004;220(1-2):137–139.
 83. Ramos KM, Jiang Y, Svensson CI, Calcutt NA. 
Pathogenesis of spinally mediated hyperalgesia 
in diabetes. Diabetes. 2007;56(6):1569–1576.
 84. Calcutt NA, et al. Therapeutic efficacy of sonic 
hedgehog protein in experimental diabetic neu-
ropathy. J Clin Invest. 2003;111(4):507–514.
 85. Mizisin AP, Vu Y, Shuff M, Calcutt NA. Ciliary 
neurotrophic factor improves nerve conduction 
and ameliorates regeneration deficits in diabetic 
rats. Diabetes. 2004;53(7):1807–1812.
 86. Beiswenger KK, Calcutt NA, Mizisin AP. Epi-
dermal nerve fiber quantification in the assess-
ment of diabetic neuropathy. Acta Histochem. 
2008;110(5):351–362.
 87. Chen DK, Frizzi KE, Guernsey LS, Ladt K, 
Mizisin AP, Calcutt NA. Repeated monitoring 
of corneal nerves by confocal microscopy as an 
index of peripheral neuropathy in type-1 diabetic 
rodents and the effects of topical insulin. J Periph-
er Nerv Syst. 2013;18(4):306–315.
