 236 American Journal of Hypertension 30(3) March 2017
Brief CommuniCation
Hypertension has a staggering impact on the qual-
ity of life and risk of morbidity and mortality worldwide. 
Hypertension is attributed to approximately 54% of strokes 
and 47% of ischemic heart disease cases every year.1 As a 
result in 2013, hypertension was deemed the number one 
risk factor associated with mortality in the world.2
The Canadian average for the prevalence of hyperten-
sion (i.e., on antihypertensive medications or blood pres-
sure ≥140/90 mm Hg) is 22.6% in adults.3 In the province 
of Manitoba, the prevalence of diagnosed hypertension 
is similar to the national average—20.3%.4 First Nations 
(Aboriginal Canadians) and Métis (of French–Canadian 
and Aboriginal ancestry) populations in Manitoba have an 
incidence of hypertension of 35 and 28%, respectively.5,6 
The rate of untreated hypertension in those with previously 
diagnosed hypertension is 13% in Canada with significant 
regional variations.7 However, these results have been lim-
ited to primarily self-reporting or medical records. As well, 
the process of assessing the burden of hypertension in any 
population is not a static process but a dynamic one that 
requires continual monitoring.8
As a result, a hypertension awareness campaign was 
designed to generate recent data relevant to the preva-
lence of high blood pressure in an urban center, Winnipeg, 
Manitoba, Canada (population: ~718,000). The objectives of 
the hypertension awareness campaign were to: (i) determine 
the prevalence of high blood pressure in the general public 
through mobile clinics, (ii) increase hypertension awareness 
and management for the public, and (iii) gain knowledge on 
reasons for lack of therapy adherence.
METHODS
The mobile clinic was created through a collaboration of 
graduate students, nurses, dietitians, physicians, and techni-
cians. The clinics were based at various locations including 
Alarming Prevalence of Emergency Hypertension Levels in 
the General Public Identified by a Hypertension Awareness 
Campaign
Stephanie P. B. Caligiuri,1,2 Jose Alejandro Austria,1 and Grant N. Pierce1,2 
BACKGROUND
Hypertension is a major cause of mortality and morbidity today. The 
“silent” nature of hypertension makes it critical to determine its preva-
lence and its severity in the general public and to identify strategies 
to identify people unaware of its presence. A mobile hypertension 
awareness campaign was created to: (i) determine the prevalence and 
types of hypertension in an urban North American center, (ii) increase 
hypertension awareness, and (iii) identify reasons for lack of therapy 
adherence.
METHODS
Mobile clinics were provided at shopping malls, workplaces, hospitals, 
and community centres to measure blood pressure in the public. Blood 
pressure recordings were done on a voluntary basis.
RESULTS
Of 1097 participants, 50% presented with high blood pressure which 
was higher than expected. Of particular clinical significance, an unex-
pectedly large number of participants (2%) exhibited a hypertensive 
urgency/emergency. Most of these people were not adherent to 
medications (if their hypertension was detected previously), were 
unaware of their hypertensive state, and/or unwilling to acknowl-
edge or ignored the clinical significance of the extremely high blood 
pressure readings. Reasons for lack of adherence included: denial, 
being unaware of health consequences, and proper management of 
hypertension.
CONCLUSIONS
A relatively large segment of an urban population lives unaware of 
severe emergency levels of hypertension. A public mobile hyperten-
sion clinic provides a valuable strategy for identifying hypertension 
in the general public and for knowledge translation of hypertension 
management.
Keywords: blood pressure; drug adherence; emergency blood pressure; 
hypertension; incidence of hypertension.
doi:10.1093/ajh/hpw136
Correspondence: Grant N. Pierce (gpierce@sbrc.ca).
Initially submitted July 14, 2016; date of first revision August 19, 2016; 
accepted for publication October 13, 2016; online publication January 
5, 2017.
© American Journal of Hypertension, Ltd 2017. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
1Institute of Cardiovascular Sciences, St. Boniface Hospital Albrechtsen 
Research Centre, Winnipeg, Canada;  2Departments of Physiology and 
Pathophysiology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada. 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajh/article-abstract/30/3/236/2804685 by guest on 01 June 2019
 American Journal of Hypertension 30(3) March 2017 237
Emergency Hypertension in an Urban Community
shopping malls, workplaces, community events, Aboriginal 
campuses, and hospitals. The greatest number of individu-
als screened occurred at workplaces. Interested participants 
would either sign up for an appointment or drop in to the 
mobile clinic. Men and women of different ethnic back-
grounds, occupations, socioeconomic status, and age were 
included. Ethnicities included: First Nations, Caucasian, 
African–Canadian, East Indian, Philipino, Korean, Chinese, 
Japanese, and South American. The age range of people who 
participated in the clinics was wide—from 16 to 92 years old. 
The sex distribution of the participants was fairly even with 
49% males and 51% females tested. Occupations were also 
numerous including but not limited to: homemakers, cooks, 
students, lawyers, healthcare professionals, engineers, car-
penters, managers, and unemployed. A significant proportion 
of the population (~15%) did not have a family physician. All 
participants participated voluntarily and provided informed 
consent. University of Manitoba Research Ethics Board, 
Health Sciences Centre Research, and St. Boniface Hospital 
Research Review Committee approvals were obtained.
Blood pressure was measured according to the Canada 
Hypertension Guidelines on proper blood pressure meas-
urement.9 Blood pressure was measured either through 
auscultatory and oscillometric (using a BPTru instrument) 
methods or just oscillometric (BPTru) after sitting at rest 
for at least 3 minutes. Approximately 30 percent of the read-
ings were obtained using both blood pressure measurement 
methods. Oscillometric measurements were used as the sole 
measurement method when Hypertension Canada in 2016 
deemed that automated devices were the preferred method.10 
Blood pressure measurements were performed in quiet and 
private locations, i.e., empty offices, cubicles, and curtained 
private spaces. Two blood pressure readings were taken in 
each arm at 1 minute intervals. The first reading would be 
excluded for determination to which blood pressure cat-
egory the participant belonged, i.e., (i) normotensive/pre-
hypertensive/controlled hypertension, (ii) uncontrolled 
hypertension, (iii) high blood pressure and undiagnosed/yet 
to be treated, (iv) hypertensive emergency/urgency. Blood 
pressure was defined according to Hypertension Canada 
guidelines.9 Prehypertension was defined as 121/81 mm 
Hg—139/89 mm Hg. High blood pressure (uncontrolled 
blood pressure) was defined as ≥140/90 mm Hg. An urgency/
emergency blood pressure measurement was defined as 
≥180/110 mm Hg.9 A hypertensive urgency was defined as 
blood pressure ≥180/110 mm Hg with no signs of organ 
damage whereas a hypertensive emergency was defined as 
blood pressure ≥180/110 mm Hg with signs of organ dam-
age according to Canada Hypertension Education Program 
guidelines.9 Examples of organ damage included acute coro-
nary syndrome, acute ischemic stroke, and hypertensive 
encephalopathy to name a few.9 Signs and symptoms of these 
included chest pain, back pain, retinal hemorrhages, severe 
headache, dizziness, blurred vision, and/or slurred speech. 
Data collected included the category to which their blood 
pressure belonged, diagnosis of hypertension, and qualita-
tive information on obstacles to therapy adherence. A mean 
of the blood pressure readings for all participants was not 
collected. Following the blood pressure measurement, the 
participant would meet briefly with a healthcare professional 
to discuss ways to help manage or prevent hypertension.
RESULTS
From July 2014 to May 2016, 1097 individuals par-
ticipated in the hypertension awareness mobile clinic. Of 
the 1097 participants seen, 50% presented with normo-
tension or prehypertension and 50% were hypertensive 
(Figure 1). Surprisingly, 2% of participants presented with 
a hypertensive urgency/emergency. Those exhibiting a 
hypertensive urgency/emergency were asked if they had a 
prescription for antihypertensive medication. Participants 
responded with (i) no, they have never been prescribed an 
antihypertensive (n = 4), (ii) they have an antihyperten-
sive medication and take it regularly (n = 4), or (iii) they 
have an antihypertensive medication but reported not tak-
ing it regularly (n = 14). The majority of these people with 
emergency/urgency levels of high blood pressure had 
Figure 1. Percentage of individuals by blood pressure category (n = 1097). Prehypertension was defined as 121/81–139/89 mm Hg. High blood pres-
sure was defined as ≥140/90 mm Hg. A hypertensive urgency was defined as blood pressure ≥180/110 mm Hg with no signs of organ damage. A hyper-
tensive emergency was defined as blood pressure ≥180/110 mm Hg with signs of organ damage.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajh/article-abstract/30/3/236/2804685 by guest on 01 June 2019
 238 American Journal of Hypertension 30(3) March 2017
Caligiuri et al.
no realization that their blood pressure was abnormal. 
 
They reported their health as “normal.” Participants that 
presented with a hypertensive emergency were advised to 
go immediately to the Emergency Department of the nearest 
Hospital. Approximately 25% of those with a hypertensive 
urgency/emergency dismissed the results and the advice 
they were given during the appointment.
To the group of those with a hypertensive urgency that 
were previously diagnosed with hypertension and stopped 
taking their antihypertensive medications, they were asked to 
provide reasons for the discontinuance of hypertensive med-
ication. The respondents identified experiencing side-effects 
from the medications, forgetting to fill the prescription once 
it was completed, feeling good without the medication, dis-
missing the clinical significance of high blood pressure read-
ings, and trying to control their blood pressure by alternative 
approaches (life style, nutrition, behavioral changes) instead 
of using the antihypertensive drugs.
DISCUSSION
The quantitative and qualitative data collected from the 
hypertension awareness clinic provide an important insight 
into the prevalence of high blood pressure in a relatively 
large urban North American city. The findings demonstrate 
that 50% of the population surveyed required medical 
attention due to uncontrolled hypertension. The remaining 
50% of the population presented with controlled or normal 
blood pressure. The results collected during this study on 
the prevalence of high blood pressure are about twice as 
high as previously reported national and provincial reports 
for Canada.3,4 The difference in findings could be explained 
by means of data collection. The national statistics were 
based on 3 different databases:3 (i) Canadian Health 
Measures Survey, (ii) the National Population Health 
Survey and the Canadian Community Health Survey, and 
(iii) the Canadian Chronic Disease Surveillance System. 
The means by which these 3 databases collected the results 
were different: (i) self-reported diagnosis or prescription of 
antihypertensive drugs, (ii) blood pressure measurement 
using a BPTru machine, (iii) a database that determined a 
diagnosis of hypertension with 2 physician claims within 
2 years or an in-patient hospitalization.3 Information col-
lected in the current report were not collected based on 
medical records, but rather on blood pressure readings that 
day. Findings from a Stroke Prevention Clinic in another 
urban Canadian center reported that ~50% of patients 
referred to the clinic had uncontrolled systolic blood pres-
sure.11 Our findings are similar in proportion but very 
different in terms of population distribution. The Stroke 
Prevention Clinic is for individuals with risk factors for a 
stroke. Our population included a heterogeneous group of 
individuals at all risk levels.
It is arguable whether the data collected from mobile clin-
ics is more accurate than self-reporting or physician claims 
in a database. Clearly, one important limiting factor in the 
collection of the present data is that the mobile clinics are 
limited to individuals interested in having their blood pres-
sure measured. Despite this limitation, 29% of the population 
included individuals with previously diagnosed hyperten-
sion and uncontrolled blood pressure (>140/90 mm Hg). 
This is more than twice the national average of 13%.7
A key finding includes the 2% of the population that exhib-
ited an asymptomatic hypertensive urgency/emergency. The 
population prevalence is likely to be even higher than 2%. Of 
the 22 individuals with a hypertensive urgency/emergency, 7 
individuals were under the age of 40 years old. The only loca-
tion where these particular individuals (<40 years of age) were 
observed was at their workplace. This illustrates the crucial 
need for hypertension awareness, particularly among young 
individuals. Workplace mobile health clinics appear to be a 
very effective way to reach people who may otherwise be unin-
terested in having their blood pressure measured, too busy or 
without access to a physician. The detection of hypertension in 
the workplace has large implications not only for companies 
interested in workplace safety but will be of special significance 
for life insurance companies involved with insuring workplace 
health. In future studies of hypertension prevalence in the gen-
eral public, it may be important to focus exclusively on work-
place measurements to obtain representative estimates.
Lack of therapy adherence was a common observation dur-
ing the campaign. It has been previously reported that only 
8.1% of patients adhere to their antihypertensive medications 
≥80% of the time.12 This suggests that a large proportion of the 
population are at risk for target organ damage and cardiovas-
cular events. The overarching theme of responses for not taking 
antihypertensive medications included a lack of awareness for 
the consequences of hypertension and effective means to man-
age hypertension. It is for these reasons that mobile clinics offer 
an important means to increase knowledge and awareness.
This information has health implications for the general 
public. The mobile clinics offer a strategy for knowledge 
translation to the public. In addition, these results have 
identified areas of need that require further attention. The 
mobile clinics and the hypertension campaign provided 
increased awareness to populations unaware of significant 
impending medical need. It is recommended that this type 
of approach could and should be implemented on a regular 
basis throughout North America.
It is also important to discuss these data in relation to the 
Canadian context of diagnosis, treatment, and control of 
hypertension. Although Canada has been recently applauded 
for its hypertension control rates (68%),13 the low prevalence 
of hypertension (13–22%7,13) and its treatment strategies for 
hypertension, our data would argue that considerable work 
still needs to be done. There may be many reasons for the 
apparent discrepancy. Campbell and Feldman13 recently 
pointed out that the “careful detailed analysis of hypertension 
surveys indicate many of those who are undiagnosed and 
uncontrolled are not within the health care system.” Our data 
would not have this limitation. They also suggested that very 
successful community programs to improve hypertension 
have not been disseminated widely throughout Canada. In 
addition, public health efforts to prevent and control hyper-
tension have met with limited success in Canada.13 They con-
cluded, as have others,3 that further coordinated efforts are 
still required to improve the treatment and control of hyper-
tension in Canada. Our data are consistent with this need and 
further emphasizes the potential urgency of the demand.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajh/article-abstract/30/3/236/2804685 by guest on 01 June 2019
 American Journal of Hypertension 30(3) March 2017 239
Emergency Hypertension in an Urban Community
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The work was supported through grants from the 
Canadian Institutes for Health Research (Ottawa, Canada), 
Agri-food Research and Development Initiative (Winnipeg, 
Canada), SaskFlax (Saskatoon, Canada), and the Western 
Grains Research Foundation (Saskatoon, Canada). S.P.B.C. is 
supported by a Scholarship from the Canadian Institutes of 
Health Research (Ottawa, Canada) and Research Manitoba 
(Winnipeg, Canada).
DISCLOSURE
The authors declared no conflict of interest.
REFERENCES
 1. Lawes CM, Vander Hoorn S, Rodgers A; International Society of 
Hypertension. Global burden of blood-pressure-related disease, 2001. 
Lancet 2008; 371:1513–1518.
 2. World Health Organization. A Global Brief on Hypertension: Silent 
Killer, Global Public Health Crisis. WHO/DCO/WHD/2013.2 ed. World 
Health Organization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2013.
 3. Padwal RS, Bienek A, McAlister FA, Campbell NR; Outcomes Research 
Task Force of the Canadian Hypertension Education Program. 
Epidemiology of hypertension in Canada: an update. Can J Cardiol 
2016; 32:687–694.
 4. Robitaille C, Dai S, Waters C, Loukine L, Bancej C, Quach S, Ellison 
J, Campbell N, Tu K, Reimer K, Walker R, Smith M, Blais C, Quan H. 
Diagnosed hypertension in Canada: incidence, prevalence and associ-
ated mortality. CMAJ 2012; 184:E49–E56.
 5. Riediger ND, Lukianchuk V, Bruce SG. Incident diabetes, hypertension 
and dyslipidemia in a Manitoba First Nation. Int J Circumpolar Health 
2015; 74:27712.
 6. Martens PJ, Bartlett JG, Prior HJ, Sanguins J, Burchill CA, Burland EM, 
Carter S. What is the comparative health status and associated risk fac-
tors for the Métis? A population-based study in Manitoba, Canada. 
BMC Public Health 2011; 11:814.
 7. Mohan S, Chen G, Campbell NR, Hemmelgarn BR. Regional variations 
in not treating diagnosed hypertension in Canada. Can J Cardiol 2010; 
26:409–413.
 8. Robinson R, Carriere KC, Young TK, Roos LL, Gelskey DE. Health care 
seeking behavior following a health survey: impact on prevalence esti-
mates of chronic diseases. J Clin Epidemiol 2000; 53:681–687.
 9. Daskalopoulou SS, Rabi DM, Zarnke KB, Dasgupta K, Nerenberg 
K, Cloutier L, Gelfer M, Lamarre-Cliche M, Milot A, Bolli P, McKay 
DW, Tremblay G, McLean D, Tobe SW, Ruzicka M, Burns KD, 
Vallée M, Ramesh Prasad GV, Lebel M, Feldman RD, Selby P, Pipe 
A, Schiffrin EL, McFarlane PA, Oh P, Hegele RA, Khara M, Wilson 
TW, Brian Penner S, Burgess E, Herman RJ, Bacon SL, Rabkin SW, 
Gilbert RE, Campbell TS, Grover S, Honos G, Lindsay P, Hill MD, 
Coutts SB, Gubitz G, Campbell NR, Moe GW, Howlett JG, Boulanger 
JM, Prebtani A, Larochelle P, Leiter LA, Jones C, Ogilvie RI, Woo V, 
Kaczorowski J, Trudeau L, Petrella RJ, Hiremath S, Stone JA, Drouin 
D, Lavoie KL, Hamet P, Fodor G, Grégoire JC, Fournier A, Lewanczuk 
R, Dresser GK, Sharma M, Reid D, Benoit G, Feber J, Harris KC, 
Poirier L, Padwal RS. The 2015 Canadian Hypertension Education 
Program recommendations for blood pressure measurement, diag-
nosis, assessment of risk, prevention, and treatment of hypertension. 
Can J Cardiol 2015; 31:549–568.
 
10. Leung AA, Nerenberg K, Daskalopoulou SS, McBrien K, Zarnke 
KB, Dasgupta K, Cloutier L, Gelfer M, Lamarre-Cliche M, Milot 
A, Bolli P, Tremblay G, McLean D, Tobe SW, Ruzicka M, Burns 
KD, Vallée M, Prasad GV, Lebel M, Feldman RD, Selby P, Pipe A, 
Schiffrin EL, McFarlane PA, Oh P, Hegele RA, Khara M, Wilson 
TW, Penner SB, Burgess E, Herman RJ, Bacon SL, Rabkin SW, 
Gilbert RE, Campbell TS, Grover S, Honos G, Lindsay P, Hill 
MD, Coutts SB, Gubitz G, Campbell NR, Moe GW, Howlett JG, 
Boulanger JM, Prebtani A, Larochelle P, Leiter LA, Jones C, Ogilvie 
RI, Woo V, Kaczorowski J, Trudeau L, Petrella RJ, Hiremath S, 
Drouin D, Lavoie KL, Hamet P, Fodor G, Grégoire JC, Lewanczuk 
R, Dresser GK, Sharma M, Reid D, Lear SA, Moullec G, Gupta M, 
Magee LA, Logan AG, Harris KC, Dionne J, Fournier A, Benoit 
G, Feber J, Poirier L, Padwal RS, Rabi DM; CHEP Guidelines 
Task Force. Hypertension Canada’s 2016 Canadian Hypertension 
Education Program Guidelines for Blood Pressure Measurement, 
Diagnosis, Assessment of Risk, Prevention, and Treatment of 
Hypertension. Can J Cardiol 2016; 32:569–588.
 
11. Spence JD. Blood pressure control in Canada: the view from a stroke 
prevention clinic. Can J Cardiol 2015; 31:593–595.
 
12. Mazzaglia G, Ambrosioni E, Alacqua M, Filippi A, Sessa E, Immordino 
V, Borghi C, Brignoli O, Caputi AP, Cricelli C, Mantovani LG. 
Adherence to antihypertensive medications and cardiovascular mor-
bidity among newly diagnosed hypertensive patients. Circulation 2009; 
120:1598–1605.
 
13. Campbell NR, Feldman RD. Hypertension in Canada and the global 
context. The wine is vintage and the glass is two-thirds full, but is the 
bottle empty? Can J Cardiol 2016; 32:609–611.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajh/article-abstract/30/3/236/2804685 by guest on 01 June 2019
