 Advocating for Life Support Training 
of Children, Parents, Caregivers, 
School Personnel, and the Public
James M. Callahan, MD, FAAP, 
a Susan M. Fuchs, MD, FAAP, 
b COMMITTEE ON PEDIATRIC EMERGENCY MEDICINE
Out-of-hospital cardiac arrest occurs frequently among people of all ages, 
including more than 6000 children annually. Pediatric cardiac arrest in the 
out-of-hospital setting is a stressful event for family, friends, caregivers, 
classmates, school personnel, and witnesses. Immediate bystander 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation and the use of automated external 
defibrillators are associated with improved survival in adults. There is some 
evidence in which improved survival in children who receive immediate 
bystander cardiopulmonary resuscitation is shown. Pediatricians, in 
their role as advocates to improve the health of all children, are uniquely 
positioned to strongly encourage the training of children, parents, 
caregivers, school personnel, and the lay public in the provision of basic life 
support, including pediatric basic life support, as well as the appropriate use 
of automated external defibrillators.
abstract
INTRODUCTION
Each year, more than 300 000 adults and 6000 children experience 
out-of-hospital cardiac arrest (OHCA).‍1 Although survival rates in 
OHCA in both adults and children are low, the provision of bystander 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) has been shown to increase the 
rate of survival, with favorable neurologic outcome in OHCA victims of all 
ages.‍2 Schools are a potential setting for OHCA in children, adolescents, 
and adults.‍ OHCA is frequently associated with an initial cardiac rhythm 
that is potentially treatable by using an automated external defibrillator 
(AED) in adults (ie, a “shockable rhythm”).‍ Shockable rhythms, although 
less common in children, do occur with an increasing prevalence in older 
children and adolescents.‍ The American Heart Association recommends 
the use of AEDs in children of all ages who have experienced OHCA until 
a manual defibrillator is available.‍ Researchers have shown that the 
presence of AEDs in the community, training of lay people in their use, 
and their use during OHCA is associated with increased survival among 
To cite: Callahan JM, Fuchs SM, AAP COMMITTEE ON 
PEDIATRIC EMERGENCY MEDICINE. Advocating for Life Support 
Training of Children, Parents, Caregivers, School Personnel, 
and the Public. Pediatrics. 2018;141(6):e20180704
aDivision of Emergency Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Children’s 
Hospital of Philadelphia and Raymond and Ruth Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; and 
bDepartment of Pediatrics, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern 
University, Evanston, Illinois, and Division of Emergency Medicine, Ann 
& Robert H Lurie Children’s Hospital of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois
Drs Callahan and Fuchs were responsible for all aspects of writing and 
editing this statement and reviewing and responding to questions and 
comments from reviewers and the Board of Directors.
This document is copyrighted and is property of the American 
Academy of Pediatrics and its Board of Directors. All authors have 
filed conflict of interest statements with the American Academy 
of Pediatrics. Any conflicts have been resolved through a process 
approved by the Board of Directors. The American Academy of 
Pediatrics has neither solicited nor accepted any commercial 
involvement in the development of the content of this publication.
Policy statements from the American Academy of Pediatrics benefit 
from expertise and resources of liaisons and internal (AAP) and 
external reviewers. However, policy statements from the American 
Academy of Pediatrics may not reflect the views of the liaisons or the 
organizations or government agencies that they represent.
The guidance in this statement does not indicate an exclusive course 
of treatment or serve as a standard of medical care. Variations, taking 
into account individual circumstances, may be appropriate.
All policy statements from the American Academy of Pediatrics 
automatically expire 5 years after publication unless reaffirmed, 
revised, or retired at or before that time.
DOI: https:// 
doi. 
org/ 
10. 
1542/ 
peds. 
2018- 
0704
Address correspondence to James M. Callahan, MD, FAAP. E-mail: 
callahanj@email.chop.edu
Organizational Principles to Guide and Define the Child Health Care System 
and/or Improve the Health of all Children
POLICY STATEMENT
PEDIATRICS Volume 141, number 6, June 2018:e20180704
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
 by guest on June 2, 2019
www.aappublications.org/news
Downloaded from 
 adults with OHCA.‍3 
–5 Training of the 
public is associated with increased 
rates of bystander CPR when OHCA 
occurs.‍ Children can be taught from a 
young age how to seek assistance for 
victims of OHCA, and older children 
and adolescents can be taught CPR 
and how to use AEDs effectively.‍6 
– 
8 
More than 30 states currently require 
CPR training as a prerequisite for 
high school graduation.‍ Although 
funding is a potential obstacle to 
more widespread implementation 
of CPR training in schools and 
AED installation, many innovative 
solutions to this have been used to 
overcome this barrier.‍ Relatively 
small investments may yield 
significant improvement in survival 
after OHCA.‍ Pediatricians are 
recognized as advocates for the 
health of all children and are in a 
unique position to advocate for 
increased life support training of 
children, parents, caregivers, school 
personnel, and the public, including 
the use of AEDs, and to be sources of 
such training and role models for its 
implementation.‍
RECOMMENDATIONS
1.‍ Pediatricians should stay up-to-
date on recommendations for 
CPR performance and pediatric 
basic and advanced life support, 
including recommendations for 
bystander CPR and AED use in 
out-of-hospital settings; 
2.‍ Pediatricians should support and 
advocate for:
 
⚬ Including age-appropriate life 
support training for children (eg, 
teaching young children how 
to seek assistance for victims 
of OHCA, teaching CPR to older 
children, and teaching CPR and 
AED use to adolescents) as part 
of the curriculum in schools 
beginning in the primary grades;
 
⚬ Providing life support training to 
all school personnel;
 
⚬ Programs that provide life 
support training for parents, 
caregivers, and the public that 
could be taught in schools, 
hospitals, and other health care 
organizations and by community 
groups;
 
⚬ Placement of an AED appropriate 
for the treatment of adults and 
children in every school in the 
community as well as training 
for proper AED use for school 
personnel and older children.‍ 
AED should be placed in high 
schools first, and if funding is 
available, this could be expanded 
to other schools;
 
⚬ Placement of an AED appropriate 
for the treatment of adults and 
children near every school 
athletic facility and training 
for proper AED use for school 
personnel and older children; 
and
 
⚬ Funding to promote the above; 
and
3.‍ Pediatricians should work with 
parents and legislators to mandate 
CPR training and AED placement 
in all public and private schools if 
those laws do not already exist in 
their state.‍
LEAD AUTHORS
James M. Callahan, MD, FAAP
Susan M. Fuchs, MD, FAAP
AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS 
COMMITTEE ON PEDIATRIC EMERGENCY 
MEDICINE, 2017–2018
Joseph Wright, MD, MPH, FAAP, Chairperson
Terry Adirim, MD, MPH, FAAP
Michael S.D. Agus, MD, FAAP
James M. Callahan, MD, FAAP
Toni Gross, MD, MPH, FAAP
Natalie Lane, MD, FAAP
Lois Lee, MD, MPH, FAAP
Suzan Mazor, MD, FAAP
Prashant Mahajan, MD, MPH, MBA, FAAP
Nathan Timm, MD, FAAP
LIAISONS
Andrew Eisenberg, MD – American Academy of 
Family Physicians
Cynthia Wright Johnson, MSN, RN – National 
Association of State EMS Officials
Cynthiana Lightfoot, BFA, NRP – American 
Academy of Pediatrics Family Partnerships 
Network
Charles Macias, MD, MPH, FAAP – National EMS 
for Children Innovation and Improvement Center 
Brian Moore, MD, MPH, FAAP – National 
Association of Emergency Medical Services 
Physicians
Diane Pilkey, RN, MPH – Health Resources and 
Services Administration
Katherine Remick, MD, FAAP – National 
Association of Emergency Medical Technicians
Mohsen Saidinejad, MD, MBA, FAAP, FACEP – 
American College of Emergency Physicians
Sally Snow, RN, BSN, CPEN, FAEN – Emergency 
Nurses Association
Mary Fallat, MD, FAAP – American College of 
Surgeons
OTHER FORMER COMMITTEE MEMBERS 
WITH INPUT DURING STATEMENT 
DEVELOPMENT
Joan E. Shook, MD, MBA, FAAP, Immediate Past 
Chairperson
Lee Benjamin, MD, FAAP, FACEP
Thomas H. Chun, MD, MPH, FAAP
Gregory P. Conners, MD, MPH, MBA, FAAP
Edward E. Conway Jr, MD, MS, FAAP
Nanette C. Dudley, MD, FAAP
Susan M. Fuchs, MD, FAAP
Brian R. Moore, MD, FAAP
Paul Sirbaugh, DO, MBA, FAAP
STAFF
Sue Tellez
ABBREVIATIONS
AED:  
automated external 
defibrillator
CPR:  
cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation
OHCA:  
out-of-hospital cardiac 
arrest
PEDIATRICS (ISSN Numbers: Print, 0031-4005; Online, 1098-4275).
Copyright © 2018 by the American Academy of Pediatrics
FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE: The authors have indicated they have no financial relationships relevant to this article to disclose.
FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
2
 by guest on June 2, 2019
www.aappublications.org/news
Downloaded from 
 REFERENCES
1.  
Mozaffarian D, Benjamin EJ, Go AS, et al; 
American Heart Association Statistics 
Committee and Stroke Statistics 
Subcommittee. Heart disease and 
stroke statistics–2015 update: a report 
from the American Heart Association. 
Circulation. 2015;131(4):e29–e322
2.  
Goto Y, Maeda T, Goto Y. Impact 
of dispatcher-assisted bystander 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation on 
neurological outcomes in children 
with out-of-hospital cardiac arrests: a 
prospective, nationwide, population-
based cohort study. J Am Heart Assoc. 
2014;3(3):e000499
3.  
Cave DM, Aufderheide TP, Beeson J, 
et al; American Heart Association 
Emergency Cardiovascular Care 
Committee; Council on Cardiopulmonary, 
Critical Care, Perioperative and 
Resuscitation; Council on Cardiovascular 
Diseases in the Young; Council on 
Cardiovascular Nursing; Council on 
Clinical Cardiology, and Advocacy 
Coordinating Committee. Importance 
and implementation of training in 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation and 
automated external defibrillation in 
schools: a science advisory from the 
American Heart Association. Circulation. 
2011;123(6):691–706
4.  
Hallstrom AP, Ornato JP, Weisfeldt 
M, et al; Public Access Defibrillation 
Trial Investigators. Public-access 
defibrillation and survival after out-of-
hospital cardiac arrest. N Engl J Med. 
2004;351(7):637–646
5.  
Weisfeldt ML, Sitlani CM, Ornato JP,  
et al; ROC Investigators. Survival after 
application of automatic external 
defibrillators before arrival of the 
emergency medical system: evaluation 
in the resuscitation outcomes 
consortium population of 21 million.  
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010;55(16): 
1713–1720
6.  
Plant N, Taylor K. How best to teach  
CPR to schoolchildren: a 
systematic review. Resuscitation. 
2013;84(4):415–421
7.  
Uray T, Lunzer A, Ochsenhofer A, et al. 
Feasibility of life-supporting first-aid 
(LSFA) training as a mandatory subject 
in primary schools. Resuscitation. 
2003;59(2):211–220
8.  
Bollig G, Wahl HA, Svendsen MV. Primary 
school children are able to perform 
basic life-saving first aid measures. 
Resuscitation. 2009;80(6):689–692
FUNDING: No external funding.
POTENTIAL CONFLICT OF INTEREST: The authors have indicated they have no potential conflicts of interest to disclose.
COMPANION PAPER: A companion to this article can be found online at www. 
pediatrics. 
org/ 
cgi/ 
doi/ 
10. 
1542/ 
peds. 
2018- 
0705.
PEDIATRICS Volume 141, number 6, June 2018
3
 by guest on June 2, 2019
www.aappublications.org/news
Downloaded from 
 DOI: 10.1542/peds.2018-0704 originally published online May 23, 2018; 
2018;141;
Pediatrics 
EMERGENCY MEDICINE
James M. Callahan, Susan M. Fuchs and COMMITTEE ON PEDIATRIC
Personnel, and the Public
Advocating for Life Support Training of Children, Parents, Caregivers, School
Services
Updated Information &
http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/141/6/e20180704
including high resolution figures, can be found at: 
References
http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/141/6/e20180704#BIBL
This article cites 8 articles, 4 of which you can access for free at: 
Subspecialty Collections
sub
http://www.aappublications.org/cgi/collection/emergency_medicine_
Emergency Medicine
ic_emergency_medicine
http://www.aappublications.org/cgi/collection/committee_on_pediatr
Committee on Pediatric Emergency Medicine
http://www.aappublications.org/cgi/collection/current_policy
Current Policy
following collection(s): 
This article, along with others on similar topics, appears in the
Permissions & Licensing
http://www.aappublications.org/site/misc/Permissions.xhtml
in its entirety can be found online at: 
Information about reproducing this article in parts (figures, tables) or
Reprints
http://www.aappublications.org/site/misc/reprints.xhtml
Information about ordering reprints can be found online: 
 by guest on June 2, 2019
www.aappublications.org/news
Downloaded from 
 DOI: 10.1542/peds.2018-0704 originally published online May 23, 2018; 
2018;141;
Pediatrics 
EMERGENCY MEDICINE
James M. Callahan, Susan M. Fuchs and COMMITTEE ON PEDIATRIC
Personnel, and the Public
Advocating for Life Support Training of Children, Parents, Caregivers, School
 
http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/141/6/e20180704
located on the World Wide Web at: 
The online version of this article, along with updated information and services, is
1073-0397. 
ISSN:
60007. Copyright © 2018 by the American Academy of Pediatrics. All rights reserved. Print 
the American Academy of Pediatrics, 141 Northwest Point Boulevard, Elk Grove Village, Illinois,
has been published continuously since 1948. Pediatrics is owned, published, and trademarked by 
Pediatrics is the official journal of the American Academy of Pediatrics. A monthly publication, it
 by guest on June 2, 2019
www.aappublications.org/news
Downloaded from 
