   ENDOCRINE PRACTICE Vol 22 (Suppl 4) September 2016  1
  
 
 AACE/ACE Guidelines
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF CLINICAL ENDOCRINOLOGISTS AND 
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF ENDOCRINOLOGY 
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES FOR THE DIAGNOSIS AND
TREATMENT OF POSTMENOPAUSAL OSTEOPOROSIS — 2016
Pauline M. Camacho, MD, FACE; Steven M. Petak, MD, MACE, FACP, FCLM, JD;
Neil Binkley, MD; Bart L. Clarke, MD, FACP, FACE;
Steven T. Harris, MD, FACP Daniel L. Hurley, MD, FACE;
Michael Kleerekoper, MBBS, MACE; E. Michael Lewiecki, MD, FACP, FACE;
Paul D. Miller, MD; Harmeet S. Narula, MD, FACP, FACE;
Rachel Pessah-Pollack, MD, FACE; Vin Tangpricha, MD, PhD, FACE;
Sunil J. Wimalawansa, MD, PhD, MBA, FCCP, FACP, FRCP, DSc, FACE;
Nelson B. Watts, MD, FACP, MACE
From 1Professor of Medicine, Loyola University Medical Center, Director, Loyola University Osteoporosis and Metabolic Bone Disease Center, Chicago, IL; 
2Associate Clinical Professor Weill-Cornell Medical College, Division Head Endocrinology and Chief of Endocrinology, Houston Methodist Hospital, Houston, 
TX;  3School of Medicine and Public Health, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI; 4Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, Metabolism, and Nutrition, Mayo 
Clinic, Rochester, MN; 5Clinical Professor of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco; 6Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, Metabolism and Nutrition, 
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN; 7University of Toledo Medical School, Toledo, OH; 8New Mexico Clinical Research & Osteoporosis Center, Albuquerque, NM; 
9Distinguished Clinical Professor of Medicine, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Medical Director, Colorado Center for Bone Research at Centura 
Health, Lakewood, CO; 10Banner Health, Phoenix, AZ; 11Assistant Clinical Professor, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, NY, NY, ProHealth Care Associates, 
Division of Endocrinology, Lake Success, NY; 12Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Lipids, Department of Medicine, Emory University School of 
Medicine and the Atlanta VA Medical Center, Atlanta, GA; 13Professor of Medicine, Endocrinology & Nutrition; 14Director, Mercy Health Osteoporosis and Bone 
Health Services, Cincinnati OH. 
Address correspondence to American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists, 245 Riverside Ave, Suite 200, Jacksonville, FL 32202.
E-mail: publications@aace.com. DOI:10.4158/EP161435.GL
To purchase reprints of this article, please visit: www.aace.com/reprints.
Copyright © 2016 AACE.
A complete list of the Reviewers of the AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis Clinical Practice Guidelines can be found in the Acknowledgment.
     The American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists/American College of Endocrinology Medical Guidelines 
for Practice are systematically developed statements to assist healthcare professionals in medical decision-making for 
specific clinical conditions. Most of the content herein is based on literature reviews. In areas of uncertainty, professional 
judgment was applied.
      These guidelines are a working document that reflects the state of the field at the time of publication. Because rapid 
changes in this area are expected, periodic revisions are inevitable. We encourage medical professionals to use this 
information in conjunction with their best clinical judgment. The presented recommendations may not be appropriate 
in all situations. Any decision by practitioners to apply these guidelines must be made in light of local resources and 
individual patient circumstances.
 2  AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(Suppl 4)
 
Abbreviations:
AACE 
= 
American 
Association 
of 
Clinical 
Endocrinologists; AFF = atypical femur fracture; 
ASBMR = American Society for Bone and Mineral 
Research; BEL = best evidence level; BMD = bone 
mineral density; BTM = bone turnover marker; CBC = 
complete blood count; CI = confidence interval; DXA 
= dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry; EL = evidence 
level; FDA = U.S. Food and Drug Administration; 
FLEX = Fracture Intervention Trial (FIT) Long-term 
Extension; FRAX® = Fracture Risk Assessment Tool; 
GFR = glomerular filtration rate; GI = gastrointestinal; 
HORIZON = Health Outcomes and Reduced Incidence 
with Zoledronic Acid Once Yearly; IOF = International 
Osteoporosis Foundation; ISCD = International Society 
for Clinical Densitometry; IU = international units; IV 
= intravenous; LSC = least significant change; NBHA 
= National Bone Health Alliance; NOF = National 
Osteoporosis Foundation; 25(OH)D = 25-hydroxy vita-
min D; ONJ = osteonecrosis of the jaw; PINP = serum 
carboxy-terminal propeptide of type I collagen; PTH = 
parathyroid hormone; R = recommendation; RANK = 
receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-B; RANKL 
= receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-B ligand; 
RCT = randomized controlled trial; RR = relative risk; 
S-CTX = serum C-terminal telopeptide; SQ = subcuta-
neous; VFA = vertebral fracture assessment; WHO = 
World Health Organization.
1.  INTRODUCTION
 
Osteoporosis is a growing major public health prob-
lem with impacts on quality and quantity of life that cross 
medical, social, and economic lines. These guidelines 
were developed by the American Association of Clinical 
Endocrinologists (AACE) with hopes of reducing the risk 
of osteoporosis-related fractures and thereby maintaining 
the quality of life for people with osteoporosis. The guide-
lines use the best evidence, taking into consideration the 
economic impact of the disease and the need for efficient 
and effective evaluation and treatment of postmenopausal 
women with osteoporosis. The intent is to provide evi-
dence-based information about the diagnosis, evaluation, 
and treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis for endocri-
nologists, physicians in general, regulatory bodies, health-
related organizations, and interested laypersons.
2.  METHODS FOR DEVELOPMENT OF AACE 
     CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES FOR 
     POSTMENOPAUSAL OSTEOPOROSIS
 
Evidence was obtained through MEDLINE searches 
and other designated reference sources. Expert opinion 
was used to evaluate the available literature and to grade 
references relative to evidence level (EL) (Table 1), evi-
dence analysis, and subjective factors (Table 2), based on 
the ratings of 1 through 4 from the 2010 and 2014 AACE 
protocols for standardized production of clinical practice 
guidelines (available online at https://www.aace.com/files/
checklists_july_2014_ep.pdf) (1 [EL 4; CPG NE], 2 [EL 
4; CPG NE]). Best evidence level (BEL) for evidence 
presented in the discussion of the evidence base is given 
for each recommendation in the Executive Summary. In 
addition, recommendations were graded A through D, in 
accordance with methods established by the AACE in 2004 
and clarified in 2010 (Table 3) (1 [EL 4; CPG NE], 3 [EL 
4; CPG NE]). Information pertaining to cost-effectiveness 
was included when available. Examples of qualifiers that 
are appropriate to append to recommendations include 
risk-benefit analyses, evidence gaps, alternative physician 
preferences (dissenting opinions), alternative recommen-
dations (e.g., based on resource availability and cultural 
factors), expert consensus and relevance (i.e., patient-ori-
ented evidence that matters) (1 [EL 4; CPG NE]). (Endocr 
Pract. 2016;22:Suppl4;1-42)
3.  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
To guide readers, recommendations are organized into the 
following questions:
•  Q1. How is fracture risk assessed and osteoporosis 
diagnosed?
•  Q2. When osteoporosis is diagnosed, what is an 
appropriate evaluation?
•  Q3. What are the fundamental measures for bone 
health?
•  Q4. Who needs pharmacologic therapy?
•  Q5. What medication should be used to treat 
osteoporosis?
•  Q6. How is treatment monitored?
•  Q7. What is successful treatment of osteoporosis?
•  Q8. How long should patients be treated?
•  Q9. Is combination therapy better than treatment 
with a single agent?
•  Q10. Should sequential use of therapeutic agents be 
considered?
•  Q11. Should vertebral augmentation be considered 
for compression fractures?
•  Q12. When should referral to a clinical endocrinolo-
gist or osteoporosis specialist be considered?
3.Q1.  How Is Fracture Risk Assessed and 
           Osteoporosis Diagnosed?
•  R1. Evaluate all postmenopausal women aged ≥50 
years for osteoporosis risk (Grade B; BEL 1, down-
graded due to gaps in evidence).
•  R2. A detailed history, physical exam, and clinical
 AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(Suppl 4)  3 
 
fracture risk assessment with the World Health 
Organization (WHO) Fracture Risk Assessment Tool 
(FRAX®) should be included in the initial evaluation 
for osteoporosis (Grade B; BEL 2).
•  R3. Consider bone mineral density (BMD) testing based 
on clinical fracture risk profile (Grade B; BEL 2).
•  R4. When BMD is measured, axial dual-energy X-ray 
absorptiometry (DXA) measurement (spine and hip) 
should be used (Grade B; BEL 2).
•  R5a. Osteoporosis should be diagnosed based on pres-
ence of fragility fractures in the absence of other meta-
bolic bone disorders (Grade B; BEL 2) or a T-score 
of –2.5 or lower in the lumbar spine (anteroposterior), 
femoral neck, total hip, and/or 33% (one-third) radius 
even in the absence of a prevalent fracture (Grade B; 
BEL 2). 
•  R5b. Osteoporosis may also be diagnosed in patients 
with osteopenia and increased fracture risk using 
FRAX® country-specific thresholds (Grade B; BEL 2).
3.Q2.  When Osteoporosis Is Diagnosed, 
           What Is an Appropriate Evaluation?
•  R6. Evaluate for causes of secondary osteoporosis 
(Grade B; BEL 2).
•  R7. Evaluate for prevalent vertebral fractures (Grade 
A; BEL 1).
•  R8. Consider using bone turnover markers (BTMs) 
in the initial evaluation and follow-up of osteoporosis 
patients. Elevated levels can predict more rapid rates 
of bone loss and higher fracture risk (Grade B; BEL 1, 
downgraded based on expert consensus).
3.Q3.  What Are the Fundamental Measures for 
           Bone Health?
•  R9. Measure serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25[OH]D) 
in patients who are at risk for vitamin D insufficiency, 
particularly those with osteoporosis (Grade B; BEL 2).
•  R10. Maintain serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25[OH]
D) ≥30 ng/mL in patients with osteoporosis (prefera-
ble range, 30-50 ng/mL) (Grade B; BEL 3, upgraded 
based on expert consensus).
•  R11. Supplement with vitamin D3 if needed; 1,000 
to 2,000 international units (IU) of daily maintenance 
therapy is typically needed to maintain an optimal 
serum 25(OH)D level (Grade C, BEL 4; upgraded 
based on expert consensus). 
•  R12. Higher doses may be necessary in the presence of 
certain factors (e.g., obesity, malabsorption, transplant 
patients, certain ethnicities, older individuals) (Grade 
A; BEL 1).
•  R13. Counsel patients to maintain adequate dietary 
intake of calcium, to a total intake (including diet plus 
supplement, if needed) of 1,200 mg/day for women ≥50 
years (Grade B; BEL 2).
•  R14. Counsel patients to limit alcohol intake to no 
more than 2 units per day. (Grade B; BEL 2).
•  R15. Counsel patients to avoid or stop smoking (Grade 
B; BEL 2).
•  R16. Counsel patients to maintain an active lifestyle, 
including weight-bearing, balance, and resistance exer-
cises (Grade B; BEL 2). 
•  R17. Provide counseling on reducing risk of falls, par-
ticularly among the elderly (Grade A; BEL 1).
Table 1
2010 AACE Protocol for Production of Clinical Practice Guidelines
Step 1: Evidence Rating
1
Meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials (MRCT)
1
Randomized controlled trial (RCT)
2
Meta-analysis of nonrandomized prospective or case-controlled trials (MNRCT)
2
Nonrandomized controlled trial (NRCT)
2
Prospective cohort study (PCS)
2
Retrospective case-control study (RCCS)
3
Cross-sectional study (CSS)
3
Surveillance study (registries, surveys, epidemiologic study) (SS)
3
Consecutive case series (CCS)
3
Single case reports (SCR)
4
No evidence (theory, opinion, consensus, or review) (NE)
1 = strong evidence; 2 = intermediate evidence; 3 = weak evidence; 4 = no evidence.
Adapted from Mechanick et al. Endocr Pract. 2010;16:270-283.(1 [EL 4; CPG NE])
 4  AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(Suppl 4)
•  R18. Consider recommending use of hip protectors 
in individuals with a high risk of falling (Grade B; 
BEL 1, downgraded due to discrepancy in efficacy 
between studies). 
•  R19. Consider referral for physical therapy, which may 
reduce discomfort, prevent falls, and improve quality 
of life (Grade A; BEL 1).
3.Q4.  Who Needs Pharmacologic Therapy?
•  R20. Strongly recommend pharmacologic therapy for 
patients with osteopenia or low bone mass and a history 
of fragility fracture of the hip or spine (Grade A; BEL 
1).
•  R21. Strongly recommend pharmacologic therapy for 
patients with a T-score of –2.5 or lower in the spine, 
femoral neck, total hip or 33% radius (Grade A; BEL 
1).
•  R22. Strongly recommend pharmacologic therapy for 
patients with a T-score between –1.0 and –2.5 if the 
FRAX® 10-year probability for major osteoporotic 
fracture is ≥20% or the 10-year probability of hip frac-
ture is ≥3% in the U.S. or above the country-specific 
threshold in other countries or regions (Grade B; BEL 
2). 
3.Q5.  What Medication Should Be Used to 
           Treat Osteoporosis?
•  R23. Approved agents with efficacy to reduce hip, non-
vertebral, and spine fractures including alendronate, 
risedronate, zoledronic acid, and denosumab are appro-
priate as initial therapy for most patients at high risk of 
fracture (Grade A; BEL 1).
•  R24. Teriparatide, denosumab, or zoledronic acid 
should be considered for patients unable to use oral 
therapy and as initial therapy for patients at especially 
high fracture risk (Grade A; BEL 1).
•  R25. Raloxifene or ibandronate may be appropriate 
initial therapy in some cases where patients requiring 
drugs with spine-specific efficacy (Grade A; BEL 1).
3.Q6.  How Is Treatment Monitored?
•  R26. Obtain a baseline axial (spine and hip) DXA, and 
repeat DXA every 1 to 2 years until findings are stable. 
Continue with follow-up DXA every 1 to 2 years or at 
a less-frequent interval, depending on clinical circum-
stances (Grade B; BEL 2).
•  R27. Monitor serial changes in lumbar spine, total hip, 
or femoral neck BMD; if spine, hip, or both are not 
evaluable, consider monitoring using the 33% radius 
site (Grade A; BEL 1).
•  R28. Follow-up of patients should ideally be conducted 
in the same facility with the same machine (Grade B; 
BEL 4, upgraded based on expert consensus).
•  R29. Consider using BTMs for assessing patient com-
pliance and therapy efficacy. Significant reductions in 
BTMs are seen with antiresorptive therapy and have 
been associated with fracture reduction; significant 
increases indicate good response to anabolic therapy 
(Grade B; BEL 1; downgraded based on expert 
consensus). 
3.Q7.  What Is Successful Treatment of Osteoporosis?
•  R30. Successful treatment of osteoporosis is defined as 
stable or increasing BMD with no evidence of new frac-
tures or fracture progression (Grade A; BEL 1).
•  R31. For patients taking antiresorptive agents, target 
for treatment success is BTMs at or below the median 
value for premenopausal women (Grade A; BEL 1). 
•  R32. Consider alternative therapy or reassessment for 
causes of secondary osteoporosis in patients who have 
recurrent fractures or significant bone loss while on 
therapy (Grade A; BEL 1). A single fracture while on 
Table 2
2010 AACE Protocol for Production of Clinical Practice Guidelines
Step 2: Evidence Analysis and Subjective Factors
Study design
Data analysis
Interpretation
Premise correctness
Intent-to-treat
Generalizability
Allocation concealment (randomization)
Appropriate statistics
Logical
Selection bias
Incompleteness
Appropriate blinding
Validity
Using surrogate end points (especially in 
  “first-in-its-class” intervention)
Sample size (beta error)
Null hypothesis versus Bayesian statistics
Adapted from Mechanick et al. Endocr Pract. 2010;16:270-283.(1 [EL 4; CPG NE])
 AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(Suppl 4)  5 
therapy is not necessarily evidence of treatment failure, 
but it does suggest that fracture risk is high. 
3.Q8.  How Long Should Patients Be Treated?
•  R33. Treatment with teriparatide should be limited to 2 
years (Grade A; BEL 1).
•  R34a. For oral bisphosphonates, consider a “bisphos-
phonate holiday” after 5 years of stability in moderate-
risk patients (Grade B; BEL 1, downgraded due to 
limitations of data).
•  R34b. For oral bisphosphonates, consider a “bisphos-
phonate holiday” after 6 to 10 years of stability in 
higher-risk patients (Grade B; BEL 1, downgraded 
due to limitations of data). 
•  R34c. For intravenous (IV) zoledronic acid, consider 
a drug holiday after 3 annual doses in moderate-risk 
patients and after 6 annual doses in higher-risk patients. 
(Grade B, BEL 1, downgraded due to limitations of 
data).
•  R34d. Teriparatide or raloxifene may be used during 
Table 3
2010 AACE Protocol for Production of Clinical Practice Guidelines
Step 3: Grading Recommendations
2004 AACE Criteria for Grading Recommendations
Recommendation grade
Description
A
Homogeneous evidence from multiple, well-designed, randomized, controlled trials with sufficient 
statistical power
Homogeneous evidence from multiple, well-designed, cohort-controlled trials with sufficient 
statistical power
≥1 conclusive level 1 publications demonstrating benefit >> risk
B
Evidence from ≥1 well-designed clinical trial, cohort- or case-controlled analytic study, or meta-
analysis
No conclusive level 1 publications; ≥1 conclusive level 2 publications demonstrating benefit >> risk
C
Evidence based on clinical experience, descriptive studies, or expert consensus opinion
No conclusive level 1 or 2 publications; ≥1 conclusive level 3 publications demonstrating benefit >> 
risk
No conclusive risk at all and no conclusive benefit demonstrated by evidence
D
Not rated
No conclusive level 1, 2, or 3 publications demonstrating benefit >> risk 
Conclusive level 1, 2, or 3 publications demonstrating risk >> benefit
2010 AACE Update: Mapping Evidence Levels to Recommended Grading
BEL
Subject 
factor impact
Two-thirds 
consensus
Mapping
Recommended 
grading
1
None
Yes
Direct
A
2
Positive
Yes
Adjust up
A
2
None
Yes
Direct
B
1
Negative
Yes
Adjust down
B
3
Positive
Yes
Adjust up
B
3
None
Yes
Direct
C
2
Negative
Yes
Adjust down
C
4
Positive
Yes
Adjust up
C
4
None
Yes
Direct
D
3
Negative
Yes
Adjust Down
D
1, 2, 3, 4
NA
No
Adjust down
D
1 = strong evidence; 2 = intermediate evidence; 3 = weak evidence; 4 = no evidence.
Starting with the left column, best evidence level (BEL), subjective factors, and consensus map to recommendation grades in the right 
column. When subjective factors have little or no impact (“none”), then the BEL is directly mapped to recommendation grades. When 
subjective factors have a strong impact, then recommendation grades may be adjusted up (“positive” impact) or down (“negative” 
impact). If a two-thirds consensus cannot be reached, then the recommendation grade is D. NA = not applicable (regardless of the 
presence or absence of strong subjective factors, the absence of a two-thirds consensus mandates a recommendation grade D).
Adapted from Mechanick et al. Endocr Pract. 2010;16:270-283 (1 [EL 4; CPG NE])
 6  AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(Suppl 4)
the “bisphosphonate holiday” period for higher-risk 
patients (Grade D; BEL 4). 
•  R34e. A drug “holiday” is not recommended with deno-
sumab (Grade A; BEL 1). 
•  R34f. The ending of the “holiday” for bisphospho-
nate treatment should be based on individual patient 
circumstances (fracture risk or change in BMD or 
BTMs) (Grade B; BEL 4, upgraded based on expert 
consensus).
•  R34g. Other therapeutic agents should be continued for 
as long as clinically appropriate (Grade D; BEL 4).
3.Q9.  Is Combination Therapy Better Than 
           Treatment With a Single Agent? 
•  R35a. Until the effect of combination therapy on frac-
ture risk is demonstrated AACE does not recommend 
concomitant use of these agents for prevention or treat-
ment of postmenopausal osteoporosis (Grade C; BEL 
4; expert consensus, upgraded due to cost and poten-
tial increased side effects).
•  R35b. If estrogen is being given for treatment of meno-
pausal symptoms or raloxifene is administered to reduce 
the risk of breast cancer, an additional agent such as a 
bisphosphonate, denosumab, or teriparatide may be 
considered in higher-rise patients (Grade D; BEL 4). 
•  R35c. Combined denosumab and teriparatide achieves 
a better BMD response versus either agent alone, but no 
fracture data are available. (Grade B; BEL 1; down-
graded due to potential increased side effects and 
increased cost). 
3.Q10.  Should Sequential Use of Therapeutic 
             Agents Be Considered?
•  R36. Treatment with teriparatide should always be fol-
lowed by antiresorptive agents to prevent bone density 
decline and loss of fracture efficacy (Grade A; BEL 1).
3.Q11.  Should Vertebral Augmentation Be 
             Considered for Compression Fractures?
•  R37. Vertebroplasty and kyphoplasty are not recom-
mended as first-line treatment of vertebral fractures 
given the unclear benefit on overall pain and the poten-
tial increased risk of vertebral fractures in adjacent ver-
tebrae (Grade B, BEL 1; downgraded due to limita-
tions of published studies).
3.Q12.  When Should Referral to a Clinical 
             Endocrinologist or Osteoporosis Specialist 
             Be Considered?
•  R38. When a patient with normal BMD sustains a frac-
ture without major trauma (Grade C; BEL 4; upgraded 
due to expert consensus).
•  R39. When recurrent fractures or continued bone loss 
occurs in a patient receiving therapy without obvi-
ous treatable causes of bone loss (Grade C; BEL 4; 
upgraded due to expert consensus). 
• R40. When osteoporosis is unexpectedly severe, has 
unusual features, or less common secondary conditions 
(e.g., hyperthyroidism, hyperparathyroidism, hypercal-
ciuria, or elevated prolactin) are identified (Grade C; 
BEL 4; upgraded due to expert consensus).
• R41. When a patient has a condition that complicates 
management (e.g., chronic kidney disease [CKD]: glo-
merular filtration rate [GFR] <35, hyperparathyroid-
ism, or malabsorption) (Grade C; BEL 4; upgraded 
due to expert consensus).
• R42. Patients who experience fragility fractures should 
be evaluated and treated. Referral to an osteoporosis 
specialist or a fracture liaison team, if available, should 
be considered (Grade B; BEL 2). 
4. EVIDENCE BASE 
 
In this update, there are 321 reference citations, of 
which 115 (36%) are EL 1 (strong), 77 (24%) are EL 2 
(intermediate), 39 (12%) are EL 3 (weak), and 90 (28%) are 
EL 4 (no clinical evidence). The majority of reference cita-
tions are EL 1 or 2: 192/321 (60%), which is slightly more 
than the 121/209 (58%) EL 1 and 2 references included in 
the 2010 AACE Clinical Practice Guidelines. The evidence 
base presented here provides relevant information for the 
recommendations in the Executive Summary.
 
Public Health Impact of Osteoporosis 
 
Osteoporosis is a major public health problem. The 
National Osteoporosis Foundation (NOF) estimates that 
10.2 million Americans have osteoporosis and that an 
additional 43.4 million have low bone mass. More than 2 
million osteoporosis-related fractures occur annually in the 
U.S., more than 70% of these occur in women (Fig. 1) (4 
[EL 3; SS], 5 [EL 3; SS]). In the U.S., Medicare currently 
pays for most of these costs, and as the population ages, the 
costs of these fractures are estimated to exceed $25 billion 
Fig. 1. Fractures attributable to osteoporosis in the United States 
in 2005. Distribution by skeletal site is shown. Adapted from 
Burge et al (5 [EL 3; SS]).
 AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(Suppl 4)  7 
by 2025. Despite these significant costs, fewer than 1 in 4 
women aged 67 years or older with an osteoporosis-related 
fracture undergoes bone density measurement or begins 
osteoporosis treatment (6 [EL 4; review NE]). A recent 
retrospective analysis demonstrated that the annual cost of 
caring for osteoporotic fracture exceeds the annual costs of 
caring for breast cancer, myocardial infarction, or stroke in 
women aged 55 years and older (7 [EL 2; RCCS]).
 
Osteoporosis is preventable and treatable, but only a 
small proportion of those at increased risk for fracture are 
evaluated and treated. Age is an important risk factor for 
bone loss; by age 60, half of white women have osteopenia 
or osteoporosis (8 [EL 3; SS]). The average femoral neck 
T-score by DXA for a 75-year-old women is –2.5, meaning 
that more than half of women age 75 and older meet the 
criterion for osteoporosis (9 [EL 3; SS]). More than 20% 
of postmenopausal women have prevalent vertebral frac-
tures (10 [EL 3; CSS]). Although these guidelines focus on 
the evaluation and treatment of osteoporosis in postmeno-
pausal women, osteoporosis may affect men and premeno-
pausal women.
4.Q1.  How Is Fracture Risk Assessed and 
           Osteoporosis Diagnosed?
4.Q1.1. What Is the Definition of Postmenopausal 
Osteoporosis?
 
Osteoporosis is defined as “a [silent] skeletal disorder 
characterized by compromised bone strength predisposing 
to an increased risk of fracture. Bone strength reflects the 
integration of two main features: bone density and bone 
quality” (11 [EL 4; NE]). 
 
In 1994, a Working Group of the WHO established 
an operational definition of postmenopausal osteoporosis 
(Table 4) (6 [EL 4; review NE]). The T-score is defined 
as the SD of an individual’s BMD from the mean value 
for healthy young white women. Although the WHO diag-
nostic criteria were not intended to serve as thresholds for 
treatment decisions, they are often used for this purpose. 
In addition, the WHO criteria are useful for making pub-
lic health and health policy decisions and are commonly 
accepted as standards for inclusion in clinical trials for 
research purposes.
4.Q1.2.  What Are the Diagnostic Criteria?
 
Clinically, osteoporosis can be diagnosed if there is a 
low-trauma (i.e., fragility) fracture in the absence of other 
metabolic bone disease, independent of the BMD (T-score) 
value. Thus, patients with osteopenia or low bone mass 
(defined as T-score between –1.0 and –2.5, based on BMD 
testing) but with a low-trauma (fragility) fracture of the 
spine, hip, proximal humerus, pelvis, or possibly distal 
forearm are also at an increased risk for future fractures 
and should be diagnosed with osteoporosis and consid-
ered for pharmacologic therapy (see R20-R22) (Table 5) 
(12 [EL 4; NE], 13 [EL 2; RCCS], 14 [EL 4; review NE], 
15 [EL 4; NE], 16 [EL 4; NE]). While osteoporosis has 
traditionally been diagnosed based on T-scores less than 
–2.5 in the lumbar spine, total hip, femoral neck and/or 
33% radius (6 [EL 4; review NE]), the AACE agrees with 
the proposed new clinical diagnosis by the National Bone 
Health Alliance that osteoporosis may also be diagnosed in 
patients with osteopenia and increased fracture risk using 
FRAX® country-specific thresholds (12 [EL 4; NE], 13 
[EL 2; RCCS], 14 [EL 4; review NE], 17 [EL 2; PCS]). 
 
All postmenopausal women ≥50 years should undergo 
clinical assessment for osteoporosis and fracture risk, 
including a detailed history and physical examination 
(Table 6) (18 [EL 3; SS], 19 [EL 4; CPG NE], 20 [EL 3; 
SS], 21 [EL 4; review NE], 22 [EL 1; RCT; incomplete 
follow-up; 60% response rate]). Tools such as the WHO 
clinical fracture risk assessment (FRAX®) should be uti-
lized when available (23 [EL 4; NE], 24 [EL 4; opinion 
Table 4
World Health Organization Criteria for 
Classification of Osteopenia and Osteoporosis
Category
T-score
Normal
–1.0 or above
Low bone mass (osteopenia)a
Between –1.0 and –2.5
Osteoporosis
–2.5 or below
a Fracture rates within this category vary widely. The category 
of “osteopenia” is useful for epidemiology studies and clinical 
research but is problematic when applied to individual patients 
and must be combined with clinical information to make 
treatment decisions.
Table 5
2016 AACE Diagnosis of Osteoporosis in Postmenopausal Women
1. 
T-score –2.5 or below in the lumbar spine, femoral neck, total, and/or 33% (one-third) radius 
2. 
Low-trauma spine or hip fracture (regardless of BMD)
3. 
Osteopenia or low bone mass (T-score between –1 and –2.5) with a fragility fracture of proximal humerus, pelvis, or 
possibly distal forearm
4. 
Low bone mass or osteopenia and high FRAX® fracture probability based on country-specific thresholds
 8  AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(Suppl 4)
NE]). The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recom-
mends BMD testing for all women aged ≥65 and younger 
women whose fracture risk is equal to or greater than that 
of a 65-year-old white woman who has no additional risk 
factors (18 [EL 3; SS], 19 [EL 4; CPG NE]). 
4.Q1.3.  What Are the Clinical Features and 
             Complications of Postmenopausal Osteoporosis?
4.Q1.3.1.  Low BMD
 
As noted above, low BMD can be used to define post-
menopausal osteoporosis. There is a strong inverse rela-
tionship between BMD and fracture risk. Therefore, low 
BMD is a major indicator of fracture risk, although it is 
important to realize that individual patients may sustain 
fractures at different BMD levels and factors other than 
bone density influence fracture risk (see 4.Q2. What Are 
the Risk Factors for Osteoporosis-Related Fractures?). 
Low BMD and/or bone loss are not associated with symp-
toms prior to fracture.
4.Q1.3.2.  Fracture
 
Fracture is the single most important manifestation of 
postmenopausal osteoporosis. Osteoporotic fractures are 
usually precipitated by low-energy injuries such as a fall 
from standing height. Osteoporosis can also be diagnosed 
in patients with or without fragility fractures. Vertebral 
fractures, however, may occur during routine daily activi-
ties, without a specific fall or injury. In clinical practice, it 
may be difficult or impossible to reconstruct the mechani-
cal force applied to bone in a particular fall. 
 
Osteoporosis-related fractures often lead to pain, dis-
ability, and deformity and reduce quality and quantity of 
life. Hip fractures are the most serious consequence of 
osteoporosis. Women with hip fracture have an increased 
mortality of 12 to 20% during the following 2 years. More 
than 50% of hip fracture survivors are unable to return to 
independent living; many require long-term nursing home 
care (25 [EL 4; review NE]). Other low-trauma fractures 
that are considered osteoporosis-related include those of 
the proximal humerus and pelvis and in some cases of the 
distal forearm.
Table 6
Assessment for Fracture Risk and Osteoporosis in Postmenopausal Women
• 
Medical history and physical examination to identify:
Prior fracture without major trauma (other than fingers, toes, skull) after age 50 
Clinical risk factors for osteoporosis
Age ≥65
Low body weight (<57.6 kg [127 lb])
Family history of osteoporosis or fractures 
Smoking
Early menopause
Excessive alcohol intake (≥3 drinks daily)
Secondary osteoporosis 
Height loss or kyphosis
Risk factors for falling
Patient’s reliability, understanding, and willingness to accept interventions
• 
Lateral spine imaging with standard radiography or vertebral fracture assessment in patients with unexplained height loss, self-
reported but undocumented prior spine fractures, or glucocorticoid therapy equivalent to ≥5 mg prednisone daily for 3 months or 
more 
• 
Bone mineral density measurements in those at increased risk for osteoporosis and fractures and willing to consider 
pharmacologic treatment if low bone mass is documented:
All women ≥65 y of age 
Younger postmenopausal women
With a history of fracture(s) without major trauma 
Starting or taking long-term systemic glucocorticoid therapy 
With radiographic osteopenia 
With clinical risk factors for osteoporosis (low body weight, cigarette smoking, family history of spine or hip fractures, 
early menopause, or secondary osteoporosis) 
• 
In women who are candidates for pharmacologic therapy, laboratory evaluation to identify coexisting conditions that may 
contribute to bone loss and/or interfere with therapy 
 AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(Suppl 4)  9 
4.Q1.4.  What Are the Risk Factors for  
              Osteoporosis-Related Fractures? 
 
BMD testing is a powerful tool, but clinical risk fac-
tors also significantly influence fracture risk in individual 
patients. The WHO FRAX® tool is widely available (www.
shef.ac.uk/FRAX) and incorporates multiple clinical risk 
factors that predict fracture risk, largely independent of 
BMD (26 [EL 4; NE], 27 [EL 4; NE], 28 [EL 3; SS], 29 
[EL 4; review NE], 30 [EL 2; PCS]). Clinical risk factors in 
FRAX® include age, sex, body mass index, smoking, alco-
hol use, prior fracture, parental history of hip fracture, use 
of glucocorticoids, rheumatoid arthritis, secondary osteo-
porosis, and femoral neck BMD (when available). FRAX® 
predicts the 10-year probability of hip fracture and major 
osteoporotic fracture (hip, clinical spine, humerus, or fore-
arm). Postmenopausal women aged 50 years or older with 
osteopenia (T-score between –1.0 and –2.5) with a 10-year 
probability ≥3% for hip fracture or ≥20% for major osteo-
porotic fracture in the U.S. or above country-specific 
threshold) are recommended to consider osteoporosis 
treatment (Table 7). 
 
It is important to note that FRAX® underestimates 
future fracture risk as it reports risk for only hip and major 
fractures, which comprise approximately half of all fragil-
ity fractures. FRAX® also underestimates risk in patients 
with multiple osteoporosis-related fractures, recent frac-
tures, lumbar spine BMD much lower than femoral neck 
BMD, those with secondary osteoporosis, and those at 
increased risk of falling (31 [EL 4; review NE], 32 [EL 
4; review NE], 33 [EL 4; NE], 34 [EL 4; review NE], 35 
[EL 3; CSS], 36 [EL 2; PCS], 37 [EL 2; RCCS], 38 [EL 3; 
CSS]). Fall events are not directly captured in the FRAX® 
tool. Falls magnify the risk due to other factors and are the 
proximate cause of most fractures in older adults (39 [EL 
2; PCS]). Table 8 shows factors that increase the risk of 
falls and fractures. 
4.Q1.5. Bone Densitometry
4.Q1.5.1.  Bone density scores
 
Bone density results are reported as grams of mineral 
per square cm of projected bone area and are converted 
to T- and Z-scores. The T-score represents the number of 
SDs from the normal young-adult mean values, whereas 
the Z-score represents the number of SDs from the normal 
mean value for age-, race- or ethnicity-, and sex-matched 
control subjects. T-scores are used for diagnostic classifica-
tion in postmenopausal women. Z-scores are recommended 
for premenopausal women, with a Z-score –2.0 or lower 
defined as “below the expected range for age” and >–2.0 
as “within the expected range for age.” Postmenopausal 
women with very low Z scores often have secondary osteo-
porosis and should undergo comprehensive evaluation to 
identify the causes.
4.Q1.5.2.  Indications for BMD measurement
 
BMD testing is useful for screening and monitoring 
therapy in people at high risk for osteoporosis (e.g., post-
menopausal women, patients with hyperparathyroidism or 
Table 7
Risk Factors Included in FRAX®
Country of residence
Ethnicity (US models only—white, black, Hispanic, and Asian)
Age (accepts ages between 40 and 90 y)
Sex
Weight (kg) and height (cm) used to calculate body mass index; a converter from English to metric units is provided within the 
FRAX® tool
Family history (either parent with a hip fracture)
Personal history of fragility fracture, including radiographic vertebral fracture
Glucocorticoid use (prednisolone ≥5 mg daily for 3 mo or longer, current or past)
Rheumatoid arthritis (confirmed diagnosis)
Smoking (current)
Alcohol use (>3 units daily)
Secondary osteoporosisa (specifically mentioned are type 1 diabetes, osteogenesis imperfect in adults, untreated long-standing 
hyperthyroidism, hypogonadism or premature menopause, chronic malnutrition or malabsorption and chronic liver disease)
BMDb. Either T-score or femoral neck BMD can be entered. The model also works without BMD.
Abbreviations: BMD = bone mineral density; FRAX® = Fracture Risk Assessment Tool.
a Because the effects of causes of secondary osteoporosis on fracture risk are assumed to be mediated through changes in BMD, 
  a “yes” answer to this question does not change fracture risk if BMD is entered into the risk tool.
b If the T-score is used, prior correction with the “FRAX® patch” is required. If BMD is used, data are entered as g/cm2 after 
  identification of the densitometer manufacturer.
Reproduced with permission from Watts et al. J Bone Miner Res. 2009;24:975-979 (1 [EL 4; CPG NE]).
 10  AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(Suppl 4)
other bone disorders, or those being treated with medica-
tions associated with bone loss [e.g., glucocorticoids]), 
if evidence of bone loss would result in modification of 
therapy. A list of indications for BMD testing is shown in 
Table 9.
 
BMD testing is the gold standard in diagnosing osteo-
porosis; however, not everyone has access to this evalua-
tion. Therefore, the decision to measure BMD should be 
based on an individual’s clinical fracture risk profile and 
skeletal health assessment (40 [EL 2; MNRCT]). The 
AACE recommends BMD testing for women aged 65 and 
older and younger postmenopausal women at increased 
risk for bone loss and fracture based on fracture risk analy-
sis. BMD measurement is not recommended in children, 
adolescents, or healthy young men or premenopausal 
women, unless there is a significant fracture history or 
there are specific risk factors for bone loss (e.g., long-term 
glucocorticoid therapy). 
 
In addition to its role in diagnosis, BMD measurement 
is useful in monitoring response to therapy, as shown in 
Table 10.
4.Q1.5.3.  BMD measurement sites and techniques
 
DXA of the lumbar spine and proximal femur (hip) 
provides accurate and reproducible BMD measurements at 
important osteoporosis-associated fracture sites. Optimally, 
both hips should be initially measured to prevent misclas-
sification and to have a baseline for both hips in case a frac-
ture or replacement occurs in 1 hip. These axial sites are 
preferred over peripheral sites for both baseline and serial 
measurements. The most reliable comparative results are 
obtained when the same instrument and, ideally, the same 
technologist are used for serial measurements (41 [EL 4; 
position statement]).
 
Diagnostic criteria, therapeutic studies, and cost-effec-
tiveness data have been primarily based on DXA measure-
ments of the total hip, femoral neck, and/or lumbar spine 
(L1-L4), and are the preferred measurement sites (42 [EL 
2; PCS], 43 [EL 2; PCS], 44 [EL 2; PCS]). The distal one-
third radius (33%) can also be used as a diagnostic site, 
particularly when other preferred sites are not available. 
Use of other subregions within the proximal femur (i.e., 
Ward’s triangle or trochanter) or of an individual vertebra 
has not been validated and is not recommended.
 
Several other techniques are available for BMD mea-
surement, including quantitative computed tomography for 
measurement of both central and peripheral sites, quantita-
tive ultrasonometry, radiographic absorptiometry, and sin-
gle-energy x-ray absorptiometry. Peripheral bone density 
measurements can identify patients at increased risk for 
fracture; however, the diagnostic DXA criteria established 
by the WHO and recommended by the AACE apply only to 
the axial measurements (i.e., lumbar spine, femoral neck, 
Table 8
Factors That Increase Risk of Falling and Fracture
Neurologic disorders
 
Parkinson disease
 
Seizure disorder
 
Peripheral neuropathy
 
Prior stroke
 
Dementia
 
Impaired gait and/or balance
 
Autonomic dysfunction with orthostatic hypotension
Impaired vision
Impaired hearing
Frailty and deconditioning
Proximal myopathy
Sarcopenia
Medications
 
Sedatives and hypnotics
 
Antihypertensive agents
 
Narcotic analgesics
Environmental factors
 
Poor lighting
 
Stairs
 
Slippery floors
 
Wet, icy, or uneven pavement
 
Uneven roadways
 
Electric or telephone cords
 
Walking large dogs, being tripped up by small dogs
 
Throw rugs
 
Positioning in a wet or dry bathtub
Table 9
Indications for Bone Mineral Density Testing
 
All women ≥65 years old
 
All postmenopausal women 
 
With a history of fracture(s) without major trauma 
 
With osteopenia identified radiographically 
 
Starting or taking long-term systemic glucocorticoid
              therapy (≥3 mo)
 
Other peri- or postmenopausal women with risk factors for
 
 osteoporosis if willing to consider pharmacologic 
         interventions
 
Low body weight (<127 lb or body mass index 
              <20 kg/m2)
 
Long-term systemic glucocorticoid therapy (≥3 mo)
 
Family history of osteoporotic fracture
 
Early menopause (<40 years old)
 
Current smoking
 
Excessive alcohol consumption
 
Secondary osteoporosis 
 AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(Suppl 4)  11 
and total hip) and the distal one-third of the radius. Thus, 
other technologies should not be used to diagnose osteopo-
rosis but may be used to assess fracture risk.
4.Q1.5.4.  Role of BMD in diagnosis and clinical 
                decision-making 
 
For women without prior fragility fractures, BMD 
is the single best predictor of osteoporotic fracture risk 
(for every 1-SD decrease in age-adjusted BMD, the rela-
tive risk [RR] of fracture increases 1.6- to 2.6-fold) (45 
[EL 2; MNRCT]). The relationship between bone density 
and fracture risk, however, is a continuum, without a clear 
“fracture threshold.” The WHO has defined T-score criteria 
for the classification of osteoporosis (T-score at or below 
–2.5) and low BMD (i.e., “osteopenia” with a T-score 
between –1.0 and –2.5) (Table 4) based on DXA measure-
ments. Evidence supporting the association of BMD by 
DXA and fracture risk is well established, and a relation-
ship between BMD change with therapy and fracture risk 
reduction has also been shown (46 [EL 1; RCT]). These 
criteria are useful for classification and risk stratification in 
individual patients, epidemiologic studies, and therapeutic 
trial design, but they are not intended as treatment thresh-
olds. Although there is good evidence that fracture risk 
is sufficiently high in most postmenopausal women with 
osteoporosis to merit pharmacologic intervention, cost-
effective management of women with osteopenia is less 
clear. While their overall rate of fractures is lower than that 
of patients with osteoporosis, more than 50% of fragility 
fractures occur in women with BMD in the “osteopenia” 
range. It is now recommended that treatment decisions 
include consideration of fracture probability. Thus, BMD 
results should be combined with other clinical fracture risk 
factors for accurate fracture risk assessment and to guide 
treatment decisions. FRAX® integrates the contribution of 
BMD and other clinical risk factors and calculates an indi-
vidual’s probability of fracture over 10 years. Other frac-
ture tools of varying complexity have been proposed, but 
FRAX® is the most widely used. 
4.Q1.5.5.  Inaccuracies in bone density reports
 
Inaccuracies in BMD readings can result from a vari-
ety of factors. These include the following: inadequate 
training in DXA testing and interpretation; positioning 
errors (of the patient as well as of the region of interest), 
inadequate knowledge of how to eliminate fractured ver-
tebrae or vertebrae with more severe osteoarthritis and 
extra-articular calcification from the field, nonadherence to 
the International Society for Clinical Densitometry (ISCD) 
guideline recommending measurement of at least 2 consec-
utive vertebrae, inclusion of artifacts in the analysis, errors 
in use of ethnic- or sex-specific databases, faulty data input 
to the FRAX® calculator, failure to exclude extraskeletal 
calcifications, inaccurate reporting of results (e.g., “patient 
has lost 30% of BMD” or “bones are equivalent to an 
80-year-old”), and failure to compare results or comparing 
results from different machines or following major soft-
ware changes without appropriate adjustment or recalibra-
tion. Clinicians need to be aware of these potential pitfalls 
in DXA report interpretation.
4.Q2.  When Osteoporosis Is Diagnosed, What Is an 
           Appropriate Evaluation?
4.Q2.1.  What Laboratory Testing Is Recommended to 
              Assess for Causes of Secondary Osteoporosis? 
 
An appropriate medical evaluation is indicated in all 
women with postmenopausal osteoporosis and at high 
fracture risk to identify coexisting medical conditions that 
cause or contribute to bone loss. Some of these disorders 
may be asymptomatic and require laboratory testing for 
detection. Some causes of osteoporosis in adults are sum-
marized in Table 11. 
 
Because of the high prevalence of causes of secondary 
osteoporosis even in apparently healthy, postmenopausal 
women, laboratory testing should be considered for all 
women with osteoporosis (24 [EL 4; opinion NE]). In a 
retrospective study, a few simple laboratory tests provided 
Table 10
Bone Mineral Density Measurements: Potential Uses in Postmenopausal Women
Screening for osteoporosis
Establishing the severity of osteoporosis or bone loss in patients with suspected osteoporosis (e.g., patients with fractures or 
radiographic evidence of osteopenia)
Determining fracture risk—especially when combined with other risk factors for fractures 
Identifying candidates for pharmacologic intervention
Assessing changes in bone density over time in treated and untreated patients
Enhancing acceptance of, and perhaps adherence with, treatment
Assessing skeletal consequences of diseases, conditions, or medications known to cause bone loss
 12  AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(Suppl 4)
useful information in at least 40% of women who did not 
have clinical evidence of secondary osteoporosis. (47 [EL 
4; opinion NE], 48 [EL 3; CSS], 49 [EL 1; MRCT], 50 
[EL 3; SS], 51 [EL 2; RCCS], 52 [EL 2; RCCS], 53 [EL 
4; opinion NE]). If medical history, physical findings, or 
laboratory test results suggest causes of secondary osteo-
porosis, additional laboratory evaluation is warranted and 
may include, but is not limited to, the tests listed in Table 
12. 
 
Laboratory evaluation should include a complete 
blood count (CBC); comprehensive metabolic panel; 
25(OH)D, intact parathyroid hormone (PTH); phosphate; 
and a 24-hour urine collection for calcium, sodium, and 
creatinine. The 24-hour urine calcium collection must 
occur after the patient is vitamin D replete and has been on 
a reasonable calcium intake (1,000-1,200 mg/day) for at 
least 2 weeks. If the patient is receiving thyroid hormone or 
there is a suspicion for hyperthyroidism, thyroid-stimulat-
ing hormone should also be measured. If there is clinical or 
biochemical evidence of malabsorption, celiac antibodies 
should be obtained. Serum and urine protein electropho-
resis could be obtained if there is a suspicion for multiple 
myeloma (e.g., non-PTH mediated hypercalcemia).
4.Q2.2.  Vertebral Fracture Detection 
 
Vertebral fracture is the most common osteoporotic 
fracture and indicates a high risk for future fractures, 
even when the T-score does not meet the threshold for 
osteoporosis. Prevalent fractures, therefore, may change 
an individual’s diagnostic classification, estimated risk of 
future fractures, and clinical management. The majority of 
vertebral fractures, however, remain undetected unless spe-
cifically sought by imaging techniques (spine x-ray or ver-
tebral fracture assessment, VFA) (54 [EL 4; review NE]). 
VFA, a technique to assess vertebral fractures with DXA 
technology, can often be done at the same time with DXA 
(55 [EL 3; CSS], 56 [EL 3; CSS], 57 [EL 3; CSS]). Both 
historical and prospective height loss have been associated 
with a new vertebral fracture (58 [EL 2; PCS], 59 [EL 3; 
CSS]). Lateral spine imaging with standard radiography or 
VFA with DXA is indicated when T-score is <–1.0 and 1 or 
more of the following is present:
• Women aged ≥70 years or men aged ≥80 years
• Historical height loss >4 cm (>1.5 inches)
• Self-reported but undocumented prior vertebral fracture
• Glucocorticoid therapy equivalent to ≥5 mg prednisone 
or equivalent per day for ≥3 months (https://iscd.app.
box.com/OP-ISCD-2015-Adult)
 
In patients with unexplained height loss or back 
pain, thoracic and lumbar spine radiography or VFA by 
DXA is indicated if prevalent vertebral fractures would 
alter clinical management. Although these height loss 
thresholds have >90% specificity, the sensitivity for detect-
ing prevalent vertebral fractures is low. Other indications 
for vertebral radiographs include kyphosis and systemic 
glucocorticoid therapy, both of which are associated with 
Table 11
Causes of Secondary Osteoporosis in Adults
Endocrine or 
metabolic causes
Nutritional/GI 
conditions
Drugs
Disorders 
of collagen 
metabolism
Other
Acromegaly
Diabetes mellitus 
Type 1 
Type 2
Growth hormone 
deficiency
Hypercortisolism
Hyperparathyroidism
Hyperthyroidism
Hypogonadism
Hypophosphatasia
Porphyria
Pregnancy
Alcoholism
Anorexia nervosa
Calcium deficiency
Chronic liver disease
Malabsorption 
syndromes/ 
malnutrition 
(including celiac 
disease, cystic 
fibrosis, Crohn’s 
disease, and gastric 
resection or bypass)
Total parenteral 
nutrition
Vitamin D deficiency
Antiepileptic drugsa
Aromatase inhibitors
Chemotherapy/ 
immunosuppressants
Depo-Provera
Glucocorticoids
Gonadotropin-releasing 
hormone agents
Heparin
Lithium
Proton pump inhibitors
Selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors
Thiazolidinediones
Thyroid hormone (in 
supraphysiologic doses)
Ehlers-Danlos 
syndrome
Homocystinuria due 
to cystathionine 
deficiency
Marfan syndrome
Osteogenesis 
imperfect
AIDS/HIV
a
Ankylosing spondylitis
Chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease
Gaucher disease
Hemophilia
Hypercalciuria
Immobilization
Major depression
Myeloma and some 
cancers
Organ transplantation
Renal insufficiency/ 
failure
Renal tubular acidosis
Rheumatoid arthritis
Systemic mastocytosis
Thalassemia
Abbreviations: AIDS = acquired immunodeficiency syndrome; GI = gastrointestinal; HIV = human immunodeficiency virus; 
GI = gastrointestinal.
a Phenobarbital, phenytoin, primidone, valproate, and carbamazepine have been associated with low bone mass.
 AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(Suppl 4)  13 
increased vertebral fracture risk. The sensitivity and reli-
ability of standard radiography to assess BMD are poor, 
and this technique should not be used to diagnose osteopo-
rosis in the absence of vertebral fractures. 
4.Q2.3.  How Are BTMs Used in the Initial Evaluation 
             and Follow-up of Postmenopausal 
             Osteoporosis?
 
BTMs provide a dynamic assessment of skeletal 
activity and are useful modalities for skeletal assessment. 
Although they cannot be used to diagnose osteoporosis, 
elevated levels can predict more rapid rates of bone loss 
(60 [EL 1; RCT, no blinding], 61 [EL 2; PCS], 62 [EL 
2; PCS]) and are associated with increased fracture risk 
independent of BMD (63 [EL 2; PCS], 64 [EL 2; PCS]). 
In addition, these markers respond quickly to therapeutic 
intervention, and changes in markers have been associated 
with bone response to therapy and fracture risk reduction 
(65 [EL 1; RCT]). Their use in clinical practice, however, is 
limited by high in vivo and assay variability (e.g., urinary 
resorption markers), poor predictive ability in individual 
patients, and lack of evidence-based thresholds for clinical 
decision-making. In 2010, the International Osteoporosis 
Foundation (IOF) proposed that serum C-terminal telo-
peptide (S-CTX) and serum carboxy-terminal propeptide 
of type I collagen (PINP) be used as reference analytes 
for BTMs in clinical and observational studies (66 [EL 2; 
MNRCT]). Recently, the National Bone Health Alliance 
(NBHA) working in association with the American 
Association for Clinical Chemistry (AACC) have estab-
lished that the preferred resorption marker is S-CTX and 
the preferred formation marker is PINP and have defined 
the steps necessary to enhance the science and clinical util-
ity of BTMs (67 [EL 4; consensus NE]). 
 
The most useful BTMs include the bone formation 
osteoblast-derived products and the bone resorption prod-
ucts of collagen degradation. Clinical trials have shown 
that early changes in BTMs are associated with long-term 
BMD changes in women taking antiresorptive (68 [EL 1; 
RCT]) or anabolic (69 [EL 1; RCT]) drugs. Significant 
reductions in BTMs have also been associated with fracture 
reduction (70 [EL 1; MRCT], 71 [EL 1; RCT], 72 [EL 2; 
PCS]). Antiresorptive therapy can likely be deemed effec-
tive if BTMs during therapy are at or below the median 
value for premenopausal women. The decrease in BTMs 
compared to pretreatment levels with oral and IV bisphos-
phonates can range from 30 to 50% (73 [EL 1; RCT]) and 
from 40 to 80% with denosumab (74 [EL 1; RCT]). Use of 
a bone resorption marker such as a fasting morning S-CTX 
may be helpful in evaluating nonresponders with bone loss 
or fractures on therapy or to identify patients with high 
bone turnover. An elevated S-CTX level is associated with 
high bone turnover and could represent malabsorption or 
poor compliance and the need for evaluation for causes of 
secondary osteoporosis. It must be noted, however, that a 
recent fracture will transiently raise BTMs. In summary, 
BTMs may be useful in certain situations for fracture risk 
assessment or determining medication compliance, drug 
absorption, or therapeutic efficacy.
Table 12
Laboratory Tests to Consider in Detecting Secondary Osteoporosis
Complete blood cell count
Serum chemistry, including calcium, phosphate, total protein, albumin, liver enzymes, alkaline phosphatase, creatinine, 
    and electrolytes
24-h collection for calcium, sodium, and creatinine excretion (to identify calcium malabsorption or hypercalciuria)
Serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D
Additional tests if clinically indicated might include (but not limited to):
Serum intact parathyroid hormone concentration for possible primary or secondary hyperparathyroidism
Serum thyrotropin
Tissue transglutaminase antibodies for suspected celiac disease 
Serum protein electrophoresis and free kappa and lambda light chains for suspected myeloma
Urinary free cortisol or other tests for suspected adrenal hypersecretion
Serum tryptase, urine N-methylhistidine, or other tests for mastocytosis
Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy to look for marrow-based diseases
Undecalcified iliac crest bone biopsy with double tetracycline labeling
Recommended for patients with bone disease and renal failure to establish the correct diagnosis and direct management
May be helpful in the assessment of patients with the following:
Suspected osteomalacia or mastocytosis when laboratory test results are inconclusive
Fracture without major trauma despite normal or high bone density
Vitamin D-resistant osteomalacia and similar disorders to assess response to treatment
Genetic testing for unusual features that suggest rare metabolic bone diseases
 14  AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(Suppl 4)
4.Q3.  What Are Fundamental Factors for 
           Bone Health?
4.Q3.1.  How Can Bone Loss and Fractures 
              Be Prevented?
 
Several lifestyle modifications may improve musculo-
skeletal integrity and balance, preserve bone strength, and 
prevent future fractures. These include an adequate intake 
of calcium and vitamin D; lifelong participation in regular, 
weight-bearing, resistance exercise and balance-improving 
exercises to minimize falls; avoiding use of tobacco and 
excessive use of alcohol; and elimination of potential risk 
factors for falling. This “bone healthy” lifestyle is impor-
tant for everyone, not just patients with osteopenia and 
osteoporosis. 
 
Patients with osteoporosis may benefit from physical 
therapy or other activities and other nonpharmacologic 
measures to improve strength and reduce the risk of falls 
and fractures. Goals include the following:
• Optimize skeletal development and maximize peak 
bone mass at skeletal maturity
• Maintain skeletal mass and prevent age-related bone 
loss
• Preserve the structural integrity of the skeleton
• Prevent falls and fractures
4.Q3.2. Vitamin D 
 
Vitamin D plays a major role in calcium absorption and 
bone health and may be important in muscle performance, 
balance, and falling risk. Moreover, optimal vitamin D sta-
tus may enhance the response to bisphosphonate therapy 
(75 [EL 2; PCS]), increase BMD, and prevent fractures (76 
[EL 3; CSS]). Many scientific organizations recommend 
intake of at least 1,000 IU of vitamin D per day for adults 
aged 50 years and older. The Institute of Medicine (IOM) 
suggests 4,000 IU of vitamin D per day as the safe upper 
limit in the general population (77 [EL 4; consensus NE], 
78 [EL 4; consensus NE]). 
 
Vitamin D deficiency is common in patients with 
osteoporosis (79 [EL 3; CSS]) and hip fracture (80 [EL 2; 
PCS]). It is advisable to measure serum 25(OH)D levels 
in patients at risk of deficiency, especially in those with 
osteoporosis (Grade B, BEL 2). The effectiveness of anti-
osteoporosis treatment may be hindered by vitamin D defi-
ciency. The dose of vitamin D needed to correct deficiency 
varies among individuals (81 [EL 4; review NE]). Recent 
results suggest doses greater than 1,000 IU or even 4,000 
IU of vitamin D per day may be needed (82 [EL 1; RCT], 
83 [EL 1; RCT]). In addition, patient factors including obe-
sity, race or ethnicity, and history of transplant may influ-
ence vitamin D status and increase the necessary vitamin 
D dose to achieve adequate levels (84 [EL 1; RCT], 85 
[EL 1; RCT], 86 [EL 1; RCT], 87 [EL 1; RCT], 88 [EL 2; 
retrospective analysis], 89 [EL 2; retrospective analysis], 
90 [EL 2; PCS]). 
 
An individual’s vitamin D status is assessed by mea-
suring serum 25(OH)D. The optimal 25(OH)D level is con-
troversial; the AACE and Endocrine Society recommend 
serum 25(OH)D ≥30 ng/mL to define vitamin D sufficiency 
based on evidence that secondary hyperparathyroidism is 
increasingly common as 25(OH)D levels fall below 30 ng/
mL (91 [EL 3; CSS], 92 [EL 1; MRCT]). Controversy about 
the optimal upper limit for serum 25(OH)D remains, and 
evidence of the safety of higher levels in different popula-
tions is not conclusive. Until further evidence is available, 
a reasonable upper limit is 50 ng/mL, based on levels in 
sun-exposed healthy young adults. Evidence from another 
randomized controlled trial (RCT) suggests no benefit in 
exceeding serum levels of 30 ng/mL (93 [EL 1; RCT]) 
 
A meta-analysis of studies in postmenopausal women 
found a significant reduction in hip and nonvertebral frac-
tures with vitamin D supplementation at doses ≥700 to 800 
IU/day (94 [EL 1; MRCT]). The Women’s Health Initiative 
(WHI) study showed a small but significant increase in hip 
BMD (1%) in the group that received 1,000 mg of calcium 
and 400 IU of vitamin D per day (95 [EL 1; RCT]). In addi-
tion to the skeletal effects of vitamin D, some studies have 
also shown improvement in muscle strength, balance, and 
fall risk (96 [EL 2; MNRCT], 97 [EL 1; RCT], 98 [EL 1; 
RCT]), as well as survival (99 [EL 1; MRCT]). 
 
Adults who are vitamin D insufficient or deficient 
(serum 25(OH)D 20-29 or <20 ng/mL, respectively) may 
be treated with 50,000 IU of vitamin D2 or vitamin D3 once 
a week or 5,000 IU vitamin D2 or vitamin D3 daily for 8 
to 12 weeks to achieve a 25(OH)D blood level >30 ng/mL 
(78 [EL 4; consensus NE], 81 [EL 4; review NE]). This 
regimen should be followed by maintenance therapy of 
vitamin D3 1,000 IU to 2,000 IU daily (or an appropriate 
dose to maintain an adequate target 25(OH)D blood level). 
A higher dose may be required in patients with obesity or 
malabsorption and those on medications affecting vitamin 
D metabolism, and may also be needed in other individuals. 
Alternatively, single, large doses of vitamin D (bolus dos-
ing of vitamin D3 ≥300,000 IU) may rapidly correct defi-
ciencies and improve vitamin D status for up to 3 months 
(100 [EL 2; MNRCT]). Due to the limited amount of food 
products containing sufficient vitamin D (fresh salmon 
with up to 1,000 IU and shitake mushrooms with 1,600 
IU), the authors recommend vitamin D supplementation.
4.Q3.3.  Calcium 
 
Adequate calcium intake is a fundamental aspect of 
any osteoporosis prevention or treatment program and 
part of a lifestyle for healthy bones at any age. The rec-
ommended daily calcium intake for various populations is 
outlined in Table 13 (77 [EL 4; consensus NE]). For adults 
aged 50 years and older, the recommended calcium intake 
 AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(Suppl 4)  15 
(including diet, plus calcium supplements, if necessary if 
dietary intake is insufficient) is 1,200 mg/day. Calcium 
supplementation has been shown to slightly increase 
BMD, and a recent meta-analysis from the NOF showed 
a 15% reduced risk of total fractures (summary relative 
risk estimate [SRRE], 0.85; 95% confidence interval [CI], 
0.73-0.98) and a 30% reduced risk of hip fractures (SRRE, 
0.70; 95% CI, 0.56-0.87) (101 [EL 1; MRCT]). Other stud-
ies have shown mixed results as far as calcium and fracture 
efficacy. This is likely due in part to problems with study 
design and patient compliance (95 [EL 1; RCT], 102 [EL 
1; RCT], 103 [EL 1; MRCT], 104 [EL 1; RCT]).
 
The optimal intake and utility of calcium supplements 
is controversial. In a Swedish prospective longitudinal 
cohort, calcium intake (both dietary and supplemental) 
of more than 1,500 mg/day was associated with a hazard 
ratio of 1.40 (95% CI, 1.17-1.67) for all-cause mortality 
(105 [EL 2; PCS]). Three prospective cohort studies and 
a meta-analysis suggested increased risk of cardiovascu-
lar disease among calcium supplement users (106 [EL 1; 
RCT], 107 [EL 1; RCT], 108 [EL 1; RCT]). In contrast, 
low dietary calcium intake (<700 mg/day compared with 
1,400 mg/day) has been associated with increased cardio-
vascular risks (109 [EL 2; PCS]). Other studies found no 
effect of calcium supplements on cardiovascular risk (110 
[EL 1; RCT], 111 [EL 1; RCT]). A recent study of more 
than 9,000 participants followed for 10 years found that 
postmenopausal women taking 500 to 1,000 mg of sup-
plemental calcium had a significant survival advantage 
over women not taking supplements (112 [EL 2; PCS]). 
Moreover, there was no increase or decrease in mortal-
ity in women taking more than 1,000 mg of supplemen-
tal calcium. A large study raised concerns about the risk 
of nephrolithiasis from calcium supplementation (95 [EL 
1; RCT]); however, hypercalciuria may worsen with cal-
cium supplementation, and participants in the study were 
not evaluated for renal calcium wasting. Also, the abso-
lute risk of kidney stones was small (2.5% in the calcium-
supplemented group versus 2.1% in the control group). 
In addition, the mean total calcium intake from diet and 
supplements in these subjects was higher than currently 
recommended. Patients with a history of nephrolithiasis 
should be evaluated for the etiology for renal stone for-
mation or hypercalciuria prior to deciding about calcium 
supplementation. In summary, existing studies suggest 
that dietary calcium may be preferred over supplemental 
calcium and that total calcium intake should not exceed 
1,500 mg/day (113 [EL 4; consensus NE]). Increasing cal-
cium intake beyond the recommended levels has not been 
shown to be useful and may be harmful (114 [EL 4; review 
NE], 115 [EL 1; RCT], 116 [EL 4; NE], 117 [EL 1; RCT], 
118 [EL 4; consensus NE]). The AACE, NOF, IOM, and 
Endocrine Society recommend that women aged 51 years 
or older consume 1,200 mg of calcium per day (77 [EL 4; 
consensus NE], 119 [EL 4; NE]). 
 
It is important to obtain a dietary history to assess cal-
cium intake prior to recommending calcium supplements. 
The average daily calcium intake among American adults 
is about half of what is recommended, with a median of 
approximately 600 mg/day (120 [EL 3; SS]). Patients with 
low dietary intake may increase their daily intake by con-
suming extra calcium-rich foods including dairy products. 
For individuals who are unable to increase dietary calcium 
due to lactose intolerance or lack of access to calcium-rich 
foods, calcium supplementation is an option. 
 
Numerous calcium supplements are available. 
Calcium carbonate is generally the least expensive and 
requires the smallest number of tablets, due to a generous 
calcium content (40%). Calcium carbonate, however, may 
cause more gastrointestinal (GI) complaints (e.g., constipa-
tion and bloating) than calcium citrate, in the expert opin-
ion of task force members. In addition, it requires gastric 
acid for absorption and is best absorbed when taken with 
meals. Calcium citrate is often more expensive than cal-
cium carbonate, and requires more tablets to achieve the 
desired dose due to a lower calcium content (21%), but its 
absorption is not dependent on gastric acid, and it may be 
less likely to cause GI complaints. In addition to tablets, 
which can be large and difficult for some patients to swal-
low, calcium supplements are available as soft chews and 
gummy preparations. For optimal absorption, calcium sup-
plementation should not exceed 500 to 600 mg per dose, 
irrespective of the preparation. The dose should be divided 
for patients requiring more than 600 mg calcium supple-
ment daily. 
 
It is advisable to assess calcium and vitamin D ade-
quacy through laboratory evaluation prior to initiation of 
pharmacologic therapy for osteoporosis.
Table 13
Recommended Dietary Allowance for Calcium
Age
Sex
Recommended
dietary allowance  
(mg/d)
0-6 mo
M + F
200
6-12 mo
M + F
260
1-3 y
M + F
700
4-8 y
M + F
1,000
9-18 y
M + F
1,300
19-50 y
M + F
1,000
51-70 y
M
1,000
51-70 y
F
1,200
71+ y
M + F
1,200
From Ross et al (77 [EL 4; consensus NE]). Reproduced with 
permission.
 16  AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(Suppl 4)
4.Q3.3.1.  Other supplements and nutrition considerations
 
Magnesium: Patients frequently question whether 
magnesium supplementation is needed, but no RCT has 
evaluated the effect of magnesium intake on fracture risk 
or BMD. Most people have adequate dietary intake of mag-
nesium; however, individuals who are at risk for hypomag-
nesemia (e.g., those with GI malabsorption, chronic liver 
disease [including alcoholics], or renal tubular loss or those 
using proton pump inhibitors or diuretics long term) may 
benefit from magnesium supplementation. Magnesium 
may also help counteract constipation associated with cal-
cium supplementation.
 
Although magnesium is required for adequate calcium 
absorption, if body stores are adequate, magnesium supple-
mentation does not increase BMD (121 [EL 4; NE]). In 
fact, there is no evidence that adding magnesium to cal-
cium tablets increases the absorption of calcium. One study 
showed that adding 789 to 826 mg of magnesium per day 
did not increase the rates of calcium absorption (122 [EL 3; 
CCS]). 
 
Vitamins A and K and phytoestrogens: Excessive 
chronic intake of vitamin A (i.e., more than 10,000 IU 
daily) should be avoided, as this has been shown to have 
detrimental effects on bone (123 [EL 4; review NE]). Some 
data suggest that vitamin K (1 mg/day) may reduce bone 
turnover and loss in postmenopausal women (124 [EL 
1; RCT]). However, not all studies replicate this finding, 
and further investigation is needed before vitamin K can 
be considered a part of the standard recommendation for 
osteoporosis prevention. “Natural” estrogens (isoflavones) 
are promoted to prevent bone loss, but there are no conclu-
sive data to support the use of these agents for increasing 
bone density or decreasing fracture risk (125 [EL 1; RCT], 
126 [EL 1; RCT], 127 [EL 1; RCT, small sample size, no 
placebo]).
 
Caffeine: Patients should be advised to limit caffeine 
intake to less than 1 to 2 servings (8-12 ounces/serving) 
of caffeinated drinks per day. Several observational studies 
have shown an association between caffeinated beverage 
consumption and fractures (128 [EL 2; PCS], 129 [EL 2; 
PCS], 130 [EL 2; NRCT]). Caffeine intake leads to a slight 
decrease in intestinal calcium absorption and increase in 
urinary calcium excretion, but the most important effect of 
caffeinated beverages is that, by replacing milk in the diet, 
they contribute to overall inadequate calcium intake in the 
U.S. population. 
 
Protein: Adequate protein intake (U.S. recommended 
daily allowance, 0.8 g/kg) helps minimize bone loss among 
patients who have suffered hip fractures (131 [EL 4; review 
NE], 132 [EL 1; RCT, small sample size]). In one study, 
patients who received supplemental protein after hip frac-
ture had shorter hospital stays and better functional recov-
ery (132 [EL 1; RCT, small sample size]).
4.Q3.4. Alcohol 
 
Excessive intake of alcohol is associated with 
increased fracture risk (133 [EL 2; PCS]). The mechanisms 
of increased fractures from alcohol are multifactorial and 
include a negative effect on bone formation, a predisposi-
tion to falls, calcium deficiency, and chronic liver disease. 
Chronic liver disease, in turn, predisposes to vitamin D 
deficiency. Postmenopausal women at risk for osteoporosis 
should be advised against consuming more than 3 drinks 
daily, with 1 drink equivalent to 120 mL of wine, 30 mL 
of liquor, or 260 mL of beer (133 [EL 2; PCS], http://www.
shef.ac.uk/FRAX/).
4.Q3.5. Smoking 
 
Multiple studies have shown that cigarette smoking 
increases osteoporotic fracture risk and should therefore be 
avoided (134 [EL 2; CCS], 135 [EL 3; CSS]). The exact 
mechanism is unclear but may relate to increased metab-
olism of endogenous estrogen or direct effects of cad-
mium on bone metabolism. No prospective studies have 
been performed to determine whether smoking cessation 
reduces fracture risk, but a meta-analysis showed a higher 
risk of fractures in current smokers compared with previ-
ous smokers (136 [EL 2; MNRCT]). All smokers should 
be counseled on smoking cessation. The use of tobacco 
products is detrimental to the skeleton, as well as to overall 
health. 
4.Q3.6. Exercise 
 
Regular weight-bearing exercise (e.g., walking 30-40 
minutes per session, plus back and posture exercises for 
a few minutes, 3-4 days per week) should be advocated 
throughout life. Studies on early postmenopausal women 
have shown that strength training leads to small yet sig-
nificant changes in BMD; a meta-analysis of 16 trials 
including 699 subjects showed a 2% improvement in 
lumbar spine BMD in the group that exercised compared 
with the group that did not (137 [EL 2; MNRCT]). Among 
the elderly, these exercises help slow bone loss attribut-
able to disuse, improve balance and muscle strength, and 
ultimately help reduce the risk of falls (138 [EL 2; PCS], 
139 [EL 2; MNRCT], 140 [EL 2; MNRCT], 141 [EL 1; 
MRCT], 142 [EL 1; MRCT]). 
 
Effects of exercise on BMD are modest, but a 
recent meta-analysis concluded that the exercise induced 
improvements in lumbar spine and femoral neck BMD 
would reduce osteoporosis fracture risk by approximately 
10% (143 [EL 1; MRCT]). The reduction in fall risk is 
likely more important than the effects of exercise on BMD, 
as approximately 95% of hip fractures are due to a fall 
(144 [EL 4; NE]). Both home and group exercise programs 
 AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(Suppl 4)  17 
reduce falls (145 [EL 1; MRCT]); exercises that challenge 
balance and improve trunk muscle strength produce a 
greater reduction in fall risk (142 [EL 1; MRCT], 146 [EL 
2; MNRCT]).
 
Individuals with severe osteoporosis should use cau-
tion when engaging in activities that involve forward spine 
flexion and rotation, lifting heavy weights, or even side 
bending of the trunk, because these maneuvers exert com-
pressive forces on the spine that may lead to fracture. 
 
Weight-bearing and resistance exercise can improve 
agility, strength, posture, and balance, which may reduce 
the risk of falls. In addition, exercise may modestly increase 
bone density. The AACE strongly endorses lifelong physi-
cal activity for cardiovascular health, osteoporosis preven-
tion, and overall health. Weight-bearing exercise includes 
walking, jogging, tai chi, stair climbing, dancing, and other 
activities. Muscle-strengthening exercise includes weight 
training and other resistive movements. A clinician’s eval-
uation is recommended before initiating an exercise pro-
gram in an individual with osteoporosis. Physical therapy 
plays an important role in the effort to mitigate sarcopenia 
and reduce fall risk.
4.Q3.7.  Fall Prevention 
 
Falls are the precipitating cause of most fractures, and 
an effective osteoporosis treatment regimen must include 
a program for fall prevention. All patients should be coun-
seled on fall prevention. Particularly predisposed are indi-
viduals who are older or frail, have a stroke history, or are 
on medications that decrease mental alertness. Although 
several interventions have been shown to reduce the risk 
of falling, none have been shown to reduce the risk of frac-
tures, though it seems logical that they would.
 
Approximately one-third of people aged 65 years or 
older and roughly half of those aged 80 years or older fall 
each year (147 [EL 2; PCS], 148 [EL 2; PCS]). An esti-
mated 20 to 30% of persons who fall suffer moderate-to-
severe injuries (149 [EL 4; NE], 150 [EL 3; SS]). A higher 
percentage of women with osteoporosis have a history of 
falling within the prior year than women without osteopo-
rosis (151 [EL 3; CSS]). This association has been ascribed 
to shared risk factors such as age, muscle weakness, and 
sedentary lifestyle (152 [EL 4; NE]). Indeed, a recent 
French guideline supports BMD measurement in individu-
als at high risk of falling (152 [EL 4; NE], 153 [EL 4; con-
sensus, NE]). 
 
Table 14 lists measures that can be taken to avoid 
falls at home. Individuals who are older or frail, have 
recently been hospitalized, have suffered a prior stroke, 
are receiving medications that decrease mental alertness, 
or have cognitive impairment are particularly vulnerable 
(154 [EL 2; PCS]). In addition to minimizing the use of 
medications that impair balance, appropriate correction of 
visual impairment may improve mobility and reduce risk 
of falls. Several interventions reduce risk of falls (141 [EL 
1; MRCT], 145 [EL 1; MRCT], 155 [EL 1; MRCT]), and a 
meta-analysis found decreased fracture risk with exercise, 
but fracture numbers were small and the possibility of pub-
lication bias was raised (156 [EL 2; MNRCT]). The rela-
tionship of vitamin D with falls is unclear; some, but not 
all, meta-analyses found that vitamin D supplementation 
reduced fall risk (96 [EL 2; MNRCT], 157 [EL 1; MRCT]), 
and an RCT failed to find a decrease in falls with vitamin 
D (158 [EL 1; RCT]). Annual high-dose vitamin D, how-
ever, was associated with an increased risk of falls (159 
[EL 1; RCT]). Rigorous prospective studies are needed to 
clarify the effect of vitamin D deficiency on fall risk. In the 
interim, assurance of a normal 25(OH)D status in patients 
with osteoporosis is appropriate.
4.Q3.8.  Hip Protectors 
 
Hip protectors do not reduce the risk of falling, but 
they should reduce the risk of fracture. Positive results have 
been seen in some but not all trials, and compliance is poor 
(160 [EL 2; MNRCT, quasi-randomized included], 161 [EL 
1; MRCT], 162 [EL 3; SS], 163 [EL 2; PCS], 164 [EL 2; 
RCCS], 165 [EL 2; MNRCT, quasi-randomized included]). 
A recent Cochrane review found poor long-term adherence 
with no effect on hip fracture risk in community-dwelling 
adults. This review suggested that hip protectors probably 
reduce hip fracture risk among people in nursing care or 
residential care settings (166 [EL 2; MNRCT, quasi-ran-
domized included]). Hip protectors may be considered for 
patients with prior hip fracture and those who are slender 
or frail, have fallen in the past, and have significant risk 
factors for falling due to postural hypotension or imbal-
ance, regardless of whether they have osteoporosis.
 
Hip protectors may protect an individual from injuring 
the hip in the event of a fall (162 [EL 3; SS]), but whether 
they effectively reduce hip fractures is inconclusive (167 
[EL 2; MRCT, quasi-RCTs included]). There is additional 
Table 14
Measures for Prevention of Falls
Anchor rugs
Minimize clutter
Remove loose wires
Use nonskid mats
Install handrails in bathrooms, halls, and long stairways
Light hallways, stairwells, and entrances
Encourage patient to wear sturdy, low-heeled shoes
Recommend hip protectors for patients who are predisposed 
   to falling
Keep all items within reach and avoid using stepstools
 18  AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(Suppl 4)
uncertainty regarding which hip protector to use, as most 
marketed products have not been tested in RCTs. Several 
studies have illustrated the usefulness of improving bal-
ance and BMD using vibration stands, although the results 
are conflicting (168 [EL 4; NE], 169 [EL 4; review NE], 
170 [EL 2; NRCT]). 
4.Q3.9. Physical Therapy 
 
Elderly patients with significant kyphosis, back dis-
comfort, and gait instability may benefit from referral for 
physical therapy. A treatment plan that focuses on weight-
bearing exercises, back strengthening, and balance train-
ing with selective orthotic use may help reduce discomfort, 
prevent falls and fractures, and improve quality of life (171 
[EL 1; MRCT]). Table 15 summarizes the recommenda-
tions for lifestyle modifications.
4.Q4.  Who Needs Pharmacologic Therapy?
 
The AACE strongly recommends pharmacologic ther-
apy for the following patients:
a. 
Those with osteopenia or low bone mass and a history 
of fragility fracture of the hip or spine.
b. 
Those with a T-score of –2.5 or lower in the spine, 
femoral neck, total hip, or 33% radius. 
c. 
Those with a T-score between –1.0 and –2.5 in the 
spine, femoral neck, total hip, or 33% radius, if the 
FRAX® 10-year probability for major osteoporotic 
fracture is ≥20% or the 10-year probability of hip frac-
ture is ≥3% (in the U.S.) or above the country-specific 
threshold in other countries or regions.
References:
a. 
(172 [EL 1; RCT], 173 [EL 1; RCT], 174 [EL 1; RCT], 
175 [EL 1; RCT], 176 [EL 1; RCT], 177 [EL 1; RCT], 
178 [EL 1; RCT], 179 [EL 1; RCT], 180 [EL 1; RCT, 
partial blinding], 181 [EL 1; RCT])
b. 
(175 [EL 1; RCT], 179 [EL 1; RCT], 180 [EL 1; RCT, 
partial blinding], 182 [EL 2; PCS], 183 [EL 1; RCT], 
184 [EL 4; NE], 185 [EL 1; RCT], 186 [EL 1; RCT], 
187 [EL 1; RCT], 188 [EL 1; RCT], 189 [EL 1; RCT], 
190 [EL 1; RCT], 191 [EL 1; RCT])
c. 
(192 [EL 4; opinion NE], 193 [EL 4; guideline], 194 
[EL 3; SS], 195 [EL 3; SS])
4.Q4.1. Decision-making on Pharmacologic Therapy 
 
Therapeutic intervention thresholds vary among coun-
tries based on the cost-effectiveness of treatments, the 
approach taken to setting the intervention threshold, and 
available therapeutic modalities and resources (192 [EL 4; 
opinion NE], 196 [EL 3; CSS]). To be most effective, the 
clinical experience of the treating physician is incorporated 
with best practices in a given country and locally available 
resources. Potential risks and benefits of available osteo-
porosis interventions should be reviewed and incorporated 
into local guidelines, while allowing physicians to indi-
vidualize treatment decisions for patient preferences and 
circumstances. 
4.Q5.  What Medication Should Be Used to 
           Treat Osteoporosis?
 
A number of agents are approved by the U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) for prevention and/or treat-
ment of postmenopausal osteoporosis as shown in Table 
16. Full prescribing information should be reviewed before 
recommending any specific agent.
 
There are no-head-to-head trials with a preplanned 
endpoint of fractures comparing one drug with another. 
Four agents (alendronate, risedronate, zoledronic acid, 
and denosumab) have evidence for “broad spectrum” anti-
fracture efficacy (spine, hip, and nonvertebral fracture risk 
reduction) and should generally be considered as initial 
options for most patients who are candidates for treatment 
(Table 17) (174 [EL 1; RCT], 175 [EL 1; RCT], 189 [EL 
1; RCT], 197 [EL 1; RCT], 198 [EL 1; RCT]). Those who 
have lower or moderate fracture risk (e.g., younger post-
menopausal women with no prior fractures and moder-
ately low T-scores) can be started on oral agents. Injectable 
agents such as teriparatide, denosumab, or zoledronic acid 
can be considered as initial therapy for those who have 
the highest fracture risk (e.g., older women who have had 
multiple vertebral fractures or hip fractures, or who have 
very low T-scores), those who have upper GI problems and 
might not tolerate oral medication, those who have lower 
GI problems and might not absorb oral medications, and 
for patients who have trouble remembering to take oral 
medications or coordinating an oral bisphosphonate with 
other oral medications or their daily routine. For patients 
at high risk of spine fracture but not at risk for hip or non-
vertebral fractures, ibandronate and raloxifene may be 
appropriate, and raloxifene has a “side benefit” of reduc-
ing breast cancer risk. (179 [EL 1; RCT], 180 [EL 1; RCT, 
partial blinding], 189 [EL 1; RCT], 199 [EL 1; RCT], 200 
Table 15
Recommendations Regarding Lifestyle Issues
Ensure adequate calcium intake
Ensure adequate vitamin D intake
Consume a balanced diet
Regularly perform weight-bearing and balance exercises
Avoid tobacco use
Limit alcohol consumption
Take measures to avoid falls
Consider use of hip protectors
 AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(Suppl 4)  19 
[EL 1; RCT], 201 [EL 1; RCT], 202 [EL 1; RCT], 203 [EL 
2; RCCS]).
 
Denosumab is the agent of choice for patients with 
renal insufficiency, but this agent is not recommended for 
dialysis patients or those with stage 5 kidney disease due to 
the high risk of hypocalcemia.
4.Q5.1. How Are Bisphosphonates Used?
 
First introduced in the 1990s, bisphosphonates have 
been the most widely used drugs for treating osteoporo-
sis. Bisphosphonates bind to hydroxyapatite in bone, par-
ticularly at sites of active bone remodeling, and reduce 
the activity of bone-resorbing osteoclasts. In the U.S., 4 
bisphosphonates are available (alendronate, ibandronate, 
risedronate, and zoledronic acid) (173 [EL 1; RCT], 174 
[EL 1; RCT], 175 [EL 1; RCT], 189 [EL 1; RCT], 197 
[EL 1; RCT], 204 [EL 1; RCT]); 3 of the 4 (alendronate, 
risedronate, and zoledronic acid) have evidence for broad-
spectrum antifracture efficacy (174 [EL 1; RCT], 175 [EL 
1; RCT], 189 [EL 1; RCT], 197 [EL 1; RCT]). All of these 
agents are available as generic preparations. 
 
Orally administered bisphosphonates (most commonly 
used are alendronate 70 mg weekly and risedronate 35 mg 
weekly or 150 mg monthly) must be taken after a prolonged 
fast (usually fasting overnight and taken in the morning 
soon after arising) and swallowed with a full glass of water 
(with at least a 30-minute wait after ingestion before other 
medications, food, or beverages other than water). Orally 
administered bisphosphonates should be used with caution 
in patients with active esophageal disease. Other contra-
indications to oral bisphosphonate administration include 
the inability to follow the dosing regimen for oral use (i.e., 
inability to remain upright for 30-60 minutes), the presence 
of anatomic or functional esophageal abnormalities that 
might delay tablet transit (e.g., achalasia, stricture, or dys-
motility), and the presence of documented or potential GI 
malabsorption (e.g., gastric bypass procedures, celiac dis-
ease, Crohn’s disease, infiltrative disorders, etc.). A special 
formulation of risedronate (Atelvia®) can be taken with or 
after food and, because the delayed-release coating does 
not dissolve until after exiting the stomach, may be con-
sidered for patients with upper GI problems. The incidence 
of upper GI adverse events, however, is not lower with the 
coated preparation compared with the conventional prepa-
ration (205 [EL 4; NE]).
 
Contraindications to oral or IV bisphosphonate 
therapy include drug hypersensitivity or hypocalcemia. 
Bisphosphonates should be used with caution, if at all, in 
patients with reduced kidney function (GFR <30 mL/min 
for risedronate and ibandronate or <35 mL/min for alen-
dronate and zoledronic acid) (206 [EL 4; CPG NE]). Rapid 
IV administration of nitrogen-containing bisphosphonates 
may cause transient or permanent decreases in kidney 
Table 16
Drugs Approved by the US Food and Drug Administration
for Prevention and Treatment of Postmenopausal Osteoporosisa
Postmenopausal osteoporosis
Drug
Prevention
Treatment
Alendronate (Fosamax)
5 mg PO daily
35 mg PO weekly
10 mg PO daily
70 mg PO weeklyb
70 mg + Dc
Calcitonin (Miacalcin, Fortical)
—
200 IU intranasally once daily, or 100 IU SQ qod
Denosumab (Prolia)
—
60 mg SQ every 6 mo
Estrogen (multiple formulations)
Multiple regimens
—
Ibandronate (Boniva, generic form)
2.5 mg PO daily
150 mg PO monthly
2.5 mg PO daily
150 mg PO monthly
3 mg IV every 3 mo
Raloxifene (Evista)
60 mg PO daily
60 mg PO daily
Risedronate (Actonel, Atelvia, generic form)a
5 mg PO daily
35 mg PO weekly
150 mg PO monthly
5 mg PO daily
35 mg PO weekly
150 mg PO monthly
Teriparatide (Forteo)
—
20 μg SQ daily
Zoledronic acid (Reclast, generic infusion form)
5 mg IV every 2nd y
5 mg IV once yearly
Abbreviations: IV = intravenous; PO = per os; qod = every other day; SQ = subcutaneous.
a Please review the package inserts for specific prescribing information. 
b Fosamax 70 mg is available as both a tablet and a unit dose liquid. Alendronate (generic Fosamax) is available.
c Fosamax Plus D is a tablet containing 70 mg of alendronate and 2,800 IU or 5,600 IU of vitamin D for weekly administration.
d Risedronate 150 mg once monthly tablet is available.
 20  AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(Suppl 4)
function, especially in older patients, with dehydration, or 
in those using diuretics or potentially nephrotoxic drugs 
(207 [EL 4; NE], 208 [EL 3; SS], 209 [EL 4; NE]). 
 
IV or high-dose oral administration of nitrogen-con-
taining bisphosphonates may cause acute-phase reactions 
in up to 30% of patients receiving their first dose (210 [EL 
2; PCS]). These reactions are characterized by fever and 
muscle aches—a flu-like illness—lasting several days. 
Acetaminophen given 1 to 2 hours before treatment may 
reduce the likelihood of these reactions and can also be 
given to treat the symptoms.
 
Although not seen in clinical trials, there are post-
marketing reports of patients treated with an oral or IV 
bisphosphonate who experienced bone, joint, or muscle 
complaints that may be severe (211 [EL 3; SS]) but usu-
ally resolve on discontinuation. The possible association 
between orally administered bisphosphonates and esoph-
ageal cancer has been explored. One study suggested no 
increased risk (212 [EL 2; PCS]), and another suggested 
that risk was increased with long-term use but small in 
absolute terms—from 1 case per 1,000 in untreated subjects 
to 2 cases per 1,000 with bisphosphonate use of 5 years or 
more (213 [EL 2; RCCS]). The FDA concluded that there 
is no definite association between bisphosphonate use and 
esophageal cancer (214 [EL 4; review NE]). Atrial fibril-
lation as a serious adverse event was noted in the Health 
Outcomes and Reduced Incidence with Zoledronic Acid 
Once Yearly (HORIZON) Pivotal Fracture Trial (189 [EL 
1; RCT]) but was not seen in other trials of zoledronic acid 
or other bisphosphonates and is thought by the FDA to be 
a chance finding (215 [EL 4; NE]).
 
Osteonecrosis of the jaw (ONJ) and atypical femur 
fractures (AFFs) are safety concerns with bisphospho-
nates but with other agents as well and will be discussed 
elsewhere.
4.Q5.2. How Is Denosumab Used?
 
Denosumab is a fully human monoclonal antibody 
that prevents receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-
B ligand (RANKL) from binding to its receptor, RANK, 
thereby reducing the differentiation of precursor cells 
into mature osteoclasts and decreasing the function and 
survival of activated osteoclasts. For treatment of osteo-
porosis, the dose is 60 mg by subcutaneous (SQ) injec-
tion every 6 months. In the pivotal clinical trial of 7,808 
women, denosumab showed “broad spectrum” antifracture 
efficacy. Studies of up to 8 years’ duration indicate a good 
safety profile. Calcium deficiency, vitamin D deficiency, 
and secondary hyperparathyroidism should be corrected 
prior to initiating denosumab treatment to avoid precipi-
tating hypocalcemia (179 [EL 1; RCT], 199 [EL 1; RCT], 
200 [EL 1; RCT], 201 [EL 1; RCT], 202 [EL 1; RCT]). In a 
3-year, pivotal, placebo-controlled trial there was an imbal-
ance in some low-frequency events (cellulitis, pancreati-
tis, and endocarditis) that did not seem causally related 
to denosumab treatment (198 [EL 1; RCT]) and have not 
been reported with higher-dose denosumab (Xgeva®) used 
to treat patients with advanced cancer.
 
When treatment with denosumab was stopped after 
2 years, BMD decreased to baseline values and BTMs 
increased to values above baseline by 12 months after dis-
continuation (200 [EL 1; RCT]), so a “drug holiday” is not 
recommended with denosumab.
4.Q5.3. How Is Raloxifene Used?
 
Raloxifene is approved by the FDA for prevention and 
treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis, as well as for 
the reduction of risk of breast cancer in women with post-
menopausal osteoporosis or at high risk of breast cancer 
Table 17
Summary of Evidence for Fracture Risk Reduction
Fracture risk reduction
Drug
Vertebral
Nonvertebral
Hip
Alendronate (Fosamax) (197 [EL 1; RCT])
Yes
Yes
Yes
Calcitonin (Miacalcin, Fortical) (177 [EL 1; RCT])
Yes
No effect demonstrateda
No effect demonstrateda
Denosumab (Prolia) (198 [EL 1; RCT])
Yes
Yes
Yes
Ibandronate (Boniva) (173 [EL 1; RCT], 204 [EL 1; RCT])
Yes
No effect demonstrateda
No effect demonstrateda
Raloxifene (Evista) (178 [EL 1; RCT])
Yes
No effect demonstrateda
No effect demonstrateda
Risedronate (Actonel, Atelvia) (174 [EL 1; RCT], 175 
[EL 1; RCT])
Yes
Yes
Yes
Teriparatide (Forteo) (180 [EL 1; RCT, partial blinding], 203 
[EL 2; RCCS])
Yes
Yes
No effect demonstrateda
Zoledronic acid (Reclast) (189 [EL 1; RCT])
Yes
Yes
Yes
a The lack of demonstrable effect at these sites should be considered in the context that the studies may not have been adequately 
  powered.
 AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(Suppl 4)  21 
(216 [EL 4, NE]) and is available in a generic formulation. 
The approved dose is 60 mg daily. Raloxifene is contra-
indicated in women of childbearing potential, those who 
have had venous thromboembolic disease, and those who 
are known to be hypersensitive to any component of ralox-
ifene tablets (216 [EL 4, NE]). Raloxifene has been shown 
to reduce the risk of spine fracture (178 [EL 1; RCT]), but 
neither nonvertebral nor hip fracture efficacy has been 
demonstrated (178 [EL 1; RCT], 217 [EL 1; RCT]). 
 
A significant reduction in breast cancer was seen in 
an osteoporosis trial with raloxifene (178 [EL 1; RCT], 
218 [EL 1; RCT]). This finding was confirmed in a larger 
trial of women at high risk of breast cancer (219 [EL 1; 
RCT]). Of note, raloxifene is not indicated for the treat-
ment of invasive breast cancer, for reduction of the risk of 
recurrence of breast cancer, or for reduction of the risk of 
noninvasive breast cancer.
 
Because raloxifene has not been shown to reduce hip 
or nonvertebral fracture, it may not be the best treatment 
option in many patients with osteoporosis. However, for 
patients with low BMD in the spine but not in the hip (dis-
cordance), it may be an acceptable initial choice, and it may 
be particularly attractive in these patients who are also at 
high risk of breast cancer. Although we recommend against 
the combined use of 2 antiresorptive drugs for treatment 
of osteoporosis, patients at high risk of hip fracture who 
are taking raloxifene with the main goal of reducing their 
risk of breast cancer can reasonably have a bisphosphonate 
or denosumab added for hip fracture risk reduction. The 
risk-benefit ratio of combined treatment with raloxifene 
and bisphosphonate or denosumab is unclear, as data on 
fracture risk reduction and adverse events such as ONJ and 
AFF are lacking. 
 
Raloxifene is associated with an approximately 3-fold 
increase in occurrence of venous thromboembolic dis-
eases (similar to estrogen), although the absolute risk is 
low (220 [EL 1; RCT]). Other side effects include meno-
pausal symptoms (e.g., hot flashes and night sweats) and 
leg cramps (220 [EL 1; RCT]).
 
When use of raloxifene is stopped, the skeletal ben-
efits appear to be lost fairly quickly, during the following 1 
or 2 years.
4.Q5.4. How Is Calcitonin Used?
 
Injectable and nasal spray recombinant salmon calci-
tonin are approved by the FDA for treatment of postmeno-
pausal osteoporosis (221 [EL 4; NE], 222 [EL 4; NE]). The 
approved dosage of injectable calcitonin for treatment of 
postmenopausal osteoporosis is 100 IU daily given SQ or 
intramuscularly. The approved dose of nasal spray calcito-
nin is 200 IU (1 spray) daily. Injectable calcitonin is avail-
able in a sterile solution. The main contraindication to use 
of calcitonin is drug hypersensitivity (221 [EL 4; NE], 222 
[EL 4; NE]). Skin testing is recommended before use in 
patients with suspected sensitivity to the drug.
 
There are no published studies with injectable calci-
tonin that show antifracture efficacy. Nasal spray calcito-
nin (200 IU daily) has been shown to reduce the risk of 
new vertebral fractures in women with postmenopausal 
osteoporosis, but neither a lower dose (100 IU daily) nor a 
higher dose (400 IU daily) was effective in reducing ver-
tebral fractures and the approved dose was not shown to 
reduce hip or nonvertebral fracture risk (177 [EL 1; RCT]). 
Calcitonin produces a minimal increase in BMD in the 
spine in women >5 years after menopause onset but does 
not increase BMD at sites other than the spine (177 [EL 1; 
RCT]).
 
A 5-year clinical study indicated a good safety profile 
(177 [EL 1; RCT]). Common side effects of parenterally 
administered calcitonin include nausea, local inflammatory 
reactions at the injection site, and vasomotor symptoms 
including sweating and flushing. The most common side 
effect of nasally administered calcitonin is nasal discom-
fort including rhinitis, irritation of the nasal mucosa, and 
occasional epistaxis. Use of calcitonin with either route of 
administration is well tolerated (221 [EL 4; NE], 222 [EL 
4; NE]).
 
Safety and efficacy data are available through 5 years 
(177 [EL 1; RCT]). When calcitonin is stopped, the skel-
etal benefits are lost fairly quickly, during the subsequent 1 
or 2 years.
 
Primarily because more effective agents are avail-
able to increase bone density and reduce fracture risk, few 
patients are using calcitonin as long-term treatment for 
osteoporosis. Because of a suggested analgesic effect (223 
[EL 2; NRCT], 224 [EL 1; RCT, small sample], 225 [EL 
1; RCT, no placebo, small sample], 226 [EL 1; RCT, small 
sample], 227 [EL 1; RCT]), short-term prescriptions are 
often given to patients with acute painful vertebral frac-
tures with hopes of an analgesic effect.
 
A meta-analysis of 21 RCTs of nasal spray calcitonin 
and an investigational oral calcitonin formulation showed 
a higher incidence of malignancy in the calcitonin-treated 
patients (215 [EL 4; NE]). The FDA did not find sufficient 
evidence to establish a causal relationship between calci-
tonin administration and cancer risk, but they urged that 
the risks and benefits of the various osteoporosis treatment 
options be weighed for individual patients.
4.Q5.5. What Is the Role of Estrogen and Menopausal 
              Hormone Therapy in Treatment of 
              Postmenopausal Osteoporosis?
 
Although once considered the “treatment of choice” 
for postmenopausal osteoporosis, estrogen was never spe-
cifically approved for this use. It is approved by the FDA 
for prevention of postmenopausal osteoporosis with the 
 22  AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(Suppl 4)
added caveat, “when prescribing solely for the prevention 
of postmenopausal osteoporosis, therapy should only be 
considered for women at significant risk of osteoporosis 
and for whom nonestrogen medications are not considered 
to be appropriate” (228 [EL 4; NE]). This agent improved 
bone density and vasomotor symptoms without stimulating 
breast or uterine tissue.
 
When estrogen is prescribed for a patient with an 
intact uterus, a progestin should also be used, either daily 
or cyclically, to protect against endometrial stimulation. A 
combination of conjugated equine estrogens (0.45 mg) and 
the selective estrogen receptor modulator bazedoxifene (20 
mg) has now been approved by the FDA for the prevention 
of postmenopausal osteoporosis (229 [EL 1; RCT]). In the 
WHI, conjugated equine estrogen (0.625 mg daily) with or 
without medroxyprogesterone acetate was shown to reduce 
the risk of fractures of the spine, hip, and nonvertebral sites 
in postmenopausal women (230 [EL 1; RCT], 231 [EL 1; 
RCT]). There has been considerable controversy regard-
ing the extraskeletal effects of estrogen, particularly with 
regard to cardiovascular disease and breast cancer. Current 
recommendations are to use estrogen for the relief of meno-
pausal symptoms in the lowest dose necessary and for the 
shortest time possible. For women who are appropriately 
treated with long-term estrogen (or combination estrogen/
progestin) therapy, these agents may be sufficient, but they 
can also be used in conjunction with other medications for 
osteoporosis (e.g., bisphosphonates, denosumab, or teripa-
ratide) based on clinical needs and judgment. 
4.Q5.6.  How Is Teriparatide Used?
 
Teriparatide—recombinant human PTH(1-34)—is 
considered an “anabolic” agent; by contrast, the medica-
tions discussed above appear to work by reducing bone 
resorption. It is approved by the FDA for initial treatment 
of women with postmenopausal osteoporosis who are at 
high risk of fracture or have failed or been intolerant of pre-
vious osteoporosis therapy (232 [EL 4; NE]). Teriparatide 
is also approved for treatment of glucocorticoid-induced 
osteoporosis. The dose is 20 mcg once daily SQ. It is pru-
dent to measure serum calcium, PTH, and 25(OH)D levels 
before treatment with the drug.
 
Teriparatide has been shown to reduce the risk of 
vertebral and nonvertebral fractures in women with post-
menopausal osteoporosis (180 [EL 1; RCT, partial blind-
ing]). The incidence of hip fracture was low in this trial, 
so whether teriparatide protects against hip fracture is 
unknown. Teriparatide dramatically increases BMD in the 
spine but has little effect on BMD in the hip or forearm 
(180 [EL 1; RCT, partial blinding]). Patients who lose 
BMD in the hip with teriparatide treatment are still pro-
tected against vertebral fracture compared with placebo 
(203 [EL 2; RCCS]).
 
Side effects of teriparatide are mild and transient and 
include nausea, orthostatic hypotension (which usually 
does not necessitate discontinuation of the drug, occurs 
in association with the first few doses, and responds to 
assumption of a recumbent posture), and leg cramps. 
Hypercalcemia, usually mild, asymptomatic, and transient, 
has been observed but is not common (232 [EL 4; NE]). 
Hypercalciuria may also rarely occur and may respond to 
calcium supplement dose modification. Serum calcium 
level should be drawn at least 16 hours after teriparatide 
administration.
 
Teriparatide has a boxed warning because of the 
occurrence of osteosarcomas in 1 strain of rats treated with 
very high doses (3-50 times higher than the human equiva-
lent dose), starting at 2 weeks of age, and continued for 
their lifetimes (approximately 75 human-year equivalents) 
(233 [EL 4; NE]). Subsequent studies in the same strain 
of rats showed no development of malignant bone tumors 
with use of doses of teriparatide up to 3 times higher than 
the human equivalent dose (234 [EL 4; NE]). Because 
teriparatide caused an increased incidence of osteosarco-
mas in rats, it should not be used in patients at increased 
risk of osteosarcoma (those with Paget disease of bone, 
open epiphyses, a history of irradiation involving the skel-
eton, or an unexplained elevation of alkaline phosphatase 
level of skeletal origin) (232 [EL 4; NE]). The annual inci-
dence of osteosarcoma in women aged 50 years or older 
in the general population is approximately 1 in 250,000. 
The actual incidence of osteosarcoma in users of teripara-
tide is unknown; there are rare reports, consistent with the 
background incidence (235 [EL 4; NE], 236 [EL 3; SCR]). 
Teriparatide should also not be administered to patients 
with primary or any form of secondary untreated or unre-
solved hyperparathyroidism (232 [EL 4; NE]). Teriparatide 
is not approved for use longer than 2 years’ total duration 
(232 [EL 4; NE]).
 
When treatment with teriparatide is stopped, bone den-
sity declines quickly during the following year, although 
fracture reduction may persist for 1 or 2 years (237 [EL 
2; PCS]). Use of alendronate after teriparatide therapy has 
been shown to prevent this loss and in some cases will be 
associated with a further increase in BMD (238 [EL 1; 
RCT]). Likely, other agents (e.g., zoledronic acid or deno-
sumab) would work as well as alendronate and perhaps 
better.
4.Q5.7.  What Is the Role of Strontium?
 
Strontium ranelate is approved for the treatment of 
osteoporosis in some countries but not the U.S. Due to evi-
dence of increased cardiovascular risk and occurrence of 
severe Stevens-Johnson reactions, the European Medicines 
Agency (EMA) has recommended that strontium ranelate 
use be restricted to patients who cannot be treated with 
 AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(Suppl 4)  23 
other medicines approved for osteoporosis, and that these 
patients be evaluated regularly by their doctor and that 
treatment be stopped if patients develop heart or circula-
tory problems such as uncontrolled high blood pressure 
or angina. An increased risk of myocardial infarction was 
observed in pooled analyses of safety data from RCTs with 
strontium ranelate (239 [EL 4; NE], 240 [EL 3; SS]). This 
was not however, seen in postmarketing studies, prescrip-
tion event monitoring, an observational cohort study (241 
[EL 2; PCS]) or studies in prescription databases in the 
U.K. and Denmark (242 [EL 2; RCCS], 243 [EL 3; SS], 
244 [EL 3; SS]). 
 
Some patients in the U.S. are taking over-the-coun-
ter preparations that contain other salts of strontium (e.g., 
strontium citrate) in the hope that this might be useful to 
prevent or treat osteoporosis. Some of these products con-
tain trivial doses of strontium or combine strontium with 
other compounds that compete for absorption. If a suffi-
cient amount of strontium is absorbed and incorporated 
into the skeleton, a measurable increase in BMD may 
occur. However, the efficacy and safety of these prod-
ucts have not been evaluated in rigorous clinical trials. 
Although strontium ranelate has reasonable evidence for 
antifracture efficacy, much of the BMD increase observed 
in strontium-treated patients is attributable to incorpora-
tion of strontium (a heavy element) in bone matrix, rather 
than to any putative bone building effect of strontium (245 
[EL 4; NE]). Therefore, the AACE recommends against the 
use of over-the-counter strontium products in osteoporosis 
management.
4.Q6.  How Is Treatment Monitored?
 
Serial BMD testing may be done to determine if or 
when to initiate treatment and to monitor the response to 
treatment. In untreated patients, the frequency of testing 
depends on the results of the initial test (e.g., how close 
the patient is to an intervention threshold) and the likeli-
hood of significant future bone loss. Age-related bone loss, 
which begins in the fifth decade of life, occurs at an aver-
age rate of 0.5 to 1.0% per year (246 [EL 2; PCS, small 
sample size]). Menopause-related bone loss, which begins 
3 to 5 years before the last menstrual period and continues 
for 3 to 5 years after the cessation of menses, occurs at 
an average rate of 1 to 2% per year (247 [EL 2; PCS]). 
A more rapid bone loss (3 to 5% in a year) may occur in 
some women after natural menopause, after stopping post-
menopausal estrogen therapy, or after initiation of gluco-
corticoid or aromatase inhibitor therapy (53 [EL 4; opin-
ion NE]). A bone-loss calculator can be found at the ISCD 
website (www.iscd.org). One SD is a ~10% deviation from 
the young-adult mean. Thus, a 10% bone loss (which typi-
cally occurs over 10 to 20 years of age-related bone loss or 
5 to 10 years of menopause-related bone loss) will result in 
a decrease of ~1.0 T-score unit. 
 
For patients on treatment or with a baseline evaluation 
near a fracture intervention threshold, BMD testing every 
1 to 2 years is often appropriate. This frequency of BMD 
testing may be appropriate in recently postmenopausal 
women, for whom rates of bone loss are increased, and in 
women of any age with other disorders or medications that 
adversely affect bone. The frequency of testing is individu-
alized depending on the patient’s clinical state (248 [EL 2; 
PCS]). 
 
The goal of monitoring osteoporosis therapy is to 
identify those who have significant bone loss. In patients 
on treatment, stable or increasing BMD at the spine and 
hip indicates a satisfactory response (249 [EL 4; review 
NE]). If BMD decreases significantly in treated patients, 
they should be evaluated for noncompliance, secondary 
causes of osteoporosis, or use of medications that might 
cause bone loss (250 [EL 4; NE]). 
 
Differences between BMD results may simply reflect 
the inherent variability of the test measurement; thus, test-
ing facilities must calculate the least significant change 
(LSC) for relevant measurement sites to determine the 
magnitude of difference that represents a real change. This 
is determined using a facility’s regular technologist(s), 
patients, and device (251 [EL 4; NE], 252 [EL 4; NE]). 
The ISCD has established guidelines for determining the 
number of patients and repetitive scans needed to deter-
mine the LSC (30 patients in duplicate or 15 patients in 
triplicate) (251 [EL 4; NE], 252 [EL 4; NE]). The LSC 
is usually set at the 95% confidence limit for change. 
The manufacturer’s LSC should not be used, because 
it does not account for differences in patients who will 
be tested and the performance and skill of the technolo-
gist. If serial studies show a difference that exceeds the 
LSC, the probability that the difference is real is greater
than 95%. 
 
In addition to knowing the LSC, it is important to 
note that differences in regions of interest, local struc-
tural change, or skeletal artifacts may result in an apparent 
“change” in BMD that does not reflect true progression of 
bone loss or gain. Before accepting a report of significant 
loss, images and numeric results of the studies should be 
viewed to assess comparability. 
 
The definition of a “nonresponder” to therapy is 
complex, and the proportion of nonresponders for differ-
ent therapies varies. Treatment failure may be defined by 
a significant decrease in BMD or recurrent fractures in a 
patient who is compliant to therapy. In clinical trials, some 
patients experienced bone loss and/or fractures; however, 
these patients may still have benefited from treatment by 
preventing even greater bone loss or postponing the occur-
rence of fractures (249 [EL 4; review NE]). Nevertheless, 
it is reasonable that a patient with significant bone loss or 
1 or more new fragility fractures be evaluated for com-
pliance with medication, secondary causes of bone loss, 
and new medications or diseases that can cause bone loss. 
 24  AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(Suppl 4)
Furthermore, studies have shown that the change in BMD 
accounts for <20% of the fracture risk reduction following 
antiresorptive therapy (70 [EL 1; MRCT], 253 [EL 4; NE]). 
Finally, although it has been suggested that BMD moni-
toring might improve patient compliance, nonadherence to 
therapy usually occurs early (after 6-7 months), before the 
second BMD would be performed (254 [EL 3; survey SS]). 
 
Ideally, BMD monitoring should occur at the same 
facility, using the same machine and, if possible, the same 
technologist as the previous DXA and should involve the 
same regions of interest (ROIs) for both the spine and hip. 
The distal one-third radius site is also acceptable, when 
spine and hip sites are not evaluable (6 [EL 4; review NE], 
255 [EL 1; MRCT], 256 [EL 1; RCT]). Other peripheral 
sites (e.g., heel, finger, and tibia) should not be used for 
monitoring. Most third-party payers and some Medicare 
carriers financially support yearly BMD testing in appro-
priate circumstances (e.g., with a diagnosis of osteoporo-
sis or high risk for rapid bone loss); all Medicare carri-
ers financially support testing every 2 years. The AACE 
recommends a repeat DXA 1 to 2 years after initiation of 
therapy until bone density is stable, and longer intervals 
between testing with evidence of continued BMD stability, 
based on expert opinion. Because sites rich in trabecular 
bone such as the posterior-anterior spine are more metabol-
ically active, a significant change is likely to occur earlier 
at the spine than at the hip. 
 
Skeletal status can also be examined by assessing the 
development or progression of asymptomatic vertebral 
fractures, using lateral x-rays of the thoracic and lumbar 
spine or VFA. (55 [EL 3; CSS], 56 [EL 3; CSS], 57 [EL 3; 
CSS], 58 [EL 2; PCS], 59 [EL 3; CSS], 257 [EL 4; consen-
sus NE], 258 [EL 4; consensus NE])
 
BTMs are useful for assessing patient compliance and 
efficacy of therapy. Significant reductions in BTMs are 
seen with antiresorptive therapy and have been associated 
with fracture reduction, and significant increases indicate 
good response to anabolic therapy (249 [EL 4; review 
NE]).
4.Q7.  What Is Successful Treatment of Osteoporosis?
 
Pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic treatments for 
osteoporosis aim to prevent fractures by improving bone 
strength, preventing falls, and reducing the impact force of 
falls. RCTs have demonstrated a reduction in fracture risk 
in patients with stable or increasing BMD receiving phar-
macological therapy, in particular, use of bisphosphonates 
for osteoporosis treatment compared with those receiving 
placebo (174 [EL 1; RCT], 175 [EL 1; RCT], 189 [EL 1; 
RCT], 197 [EL 1; RCT]). In addition, larger increases in 
BMD may result in increased reduction of fracture risk; 
however, this association has not been consistently shown 
(259 [EL 1; RCT], 260 [EL 1; MRCT], 261 [EL 1; RCT]).
 
The goal of treatment is fracture prevention, but no 
treatment can completely eliminate the risk. A fracture 
during therapy is not necessarily a treatment failure, but 
it should trigger reconsideration of risk factors for fracture 
and possibly a change in treatment strategies. The risk of 
fracture is highest after a recent fracture and diminishes 
over time (34 [EL 4; review NE], 262 [EL 2; PCS]). The 
number, severity, and recency of vertebral fractures are 
directly correlated with the future fracture risk (263 [EL 2; 
PCS], 264 [EL 1; RCT]). 
 
The concept that response to therapy is not necessar-
ily the same as achieving an acceptable level of fracture 
risk has led to proposals for the development of osteoporo-
sis treatment targets (265 [EL 4; opinion NE], 266 [EL 4; 
opinion NE]), as are used in the management of some other 
chronic silent diseases such as hypertension and diabetes. 
As a consequence, an American Society for Bone and 
Mineral Research (ASBMR)/NOF task force was formed 
to review the medical evidence, determine the feasibility of 
developing osteoporosis treatment targets, propose targets 
(if possible), and recommend an agenda for further study. 
At this time, treatment targets have not been identified. 
 
When treatment is initiated due to a low DXA T-score 
(such as ≤–2.5) it is intuitive that the treatment target be a 
higher T-score. When treatment is started due to high frac-
ture probability with an algorithm such as FRAX®, it is 
also intuitive that fracture probability should be reduced 
to a level that is less than the threshold for starting treat-
ment, perhaps to a level that is similar to an age-matched 
person with normal BMD by WHO criteria and no clinical 
risk factors for fracture. A change in BTM is also a pos-
sible treatment target. There are strengths and weaknesses 
to each of these strategies, which have been described 
in detail elsewhere (265 [EL 4; opinion NE]). There are 
many challenges to identifying 1 or more treatment tar-
gets, including limited data on comparative effectiveness 
of therapeutic agents in reducing fracture risk, lack of con-
sensus on what an acceptable level of fracture risk should 
be, and limited effectiveness of current therapeutic agents 
to reduce risk of fracture, particularly nonvertebral frac-
tures. Osteoporosis treatment targets may achieve greater 
clinical utility as more data comparing fracture risk with 
different agents become available and drugs with a more 
robust antifracture effect are developed. 
4.Q8.  How Long Should Patients Be Treated?
4.Q8.1.  What Are the Safety Concerns of 
             Antiresorptive Therapy?
 
ONJ was first reported in patients with advanced can-
cer receiving high-dose bisphosphonate therapy. More 
recently, head-to-head trials in advanced cancer patients 
showed an incidence of 1 to 2% per year with zoledronic 
acid (at an annual dose 10 times higher than that used to 
 AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(Suppl 4)  25 
treat osteoporosis) and denosumab (at an annual dose 12 
times higher than that used to treat osteoporosis). The inci-
dence of ONJ is much lower with oral or IV bisphospho-
nate therapy for osteoporosis, on the order of 1/10,000 to 
1/100,000 patients per year (267 [EL 4; review NE], 268 
[EL 4; review NE], 269 [EL 4; consensus NE], 270 [EL 
4; review NE]) and appears to be low with denosumab 
therapy for osteoporosis (179 [EL 1; RCT]). Risk factors 
include dental pathologic conditions, invasive dental pro-
cedures, and poor dental hygiene. An oral examination 
should be done in patients being considered for treatment 
with these agents; if significant dental issues are present, 
delaying the initiation of bisphosphonate or denosumab 
therapy until the dental issues have been corrected should 
be considered. For patients already receiving bisphospho-
nates or denosumab who require invasive dental proce-
dures, there is no evidence that discontinuing or interrupt-
ing treatment will change the outcome or reduce the risk 
of ONJ. Nonetheless, stopping treatment should at least be 
considered for patients undergoing extensive invasive den-
tal procedures (e.g., extraction of several teeth).
 
AFF of the subtrochanteric region is another rare 
event that seems to be increased with long-term bisphos-
phonate therapy (>5 years duration) but is rarely (if at all) 
seen with the higher doses used in advanced cancer (271 
[EL 1; RCT], 272 [EL 2; RCCS], 273 [EL 4; review NE]). 
Such fractures are sometimes described as “chalk stick” 
because of their radiologic appearance. They occur after 
little or no trauma. A literature review of AFF cases by the 
ASBMR reported a history of prodromal groin or thigh 
pain in approximately 70% of patients with AFF, bilateral 
fractures and bilateral radiographic abnormalities in 28%, 
and delayed healing in 26% (273 [EL 4; review NE]). 
Any patient with a history of bisphosphonate therapy who 
presents with persistent thigh or groin pain should inter-
rupt bisphosphonate treatment while appropriate imaging 
studies are performed. In the early stages, a lateral perios-
teal stress reaction may be seen radiologically. It has been 
hypothesized that these patients may have very low bone 
turnover, although this point has not been rigorously sub-
stantiated. Whether a direct etiologic relationship exists 
between ONJ or AFFs and bisphosphonate use is not clear 
(274 [EL 4; review NE], 275 [EL 3; CCS]). Evidence for 
atypical femoral shaft fractures was recently reviewed by 
an ASBMR task force (273 [EL 4; review NE], 276 [EL 
4; review NE]). Subtrochanteric femur fractures are also 
seen in patients with low BMD not on bisphosphonates and 
with other therapies for osteoporosis, such as denosumab. 
A causal relationship has not been established (277 [EL 2; 
PCS]). Because these fractures can occur in patients not 
on any treatment, “atypical” fractures will be seen even-
tually with any agent, unless a new drug for osteoporosis 
prevents this type of fracture. Definitions and diagnostic 
criteria for ONJ and AFF are given in Table 18.
Table 18
ONJ and AFF: Definitions and Diagnostic Criteria (269 [EL 4; consensus NE], 273 [EL 4; review NE], 318 [EL 2; RCCS])
(ONJ)
The presence of exposed bone in the maxillofacial region that did not heal within 8 weeks after 
identification by a healthcare professional
(AFF)
The fracture must be located along the femoral diaphysis from just distal to the lesser trochanter to just 
proximal to the supracondylar flare
Major features (at least 4 of 5)
• 
The fracture is associated with minimal or no trauma, as in a fall from a standing height or less
• 
The fracture line originates at the lateral cortex and is substantially transverse in its orientation, 
although it may become oblique as it progresses medially across the femur
• 
Complete fractures extend through both cortices and may be associated with a medial spike; 
incomplete fractures involve only the lateral cortex
• 
The fracture is noncomminuted or minimally comminuted
• 
Localized periosteal or endosteal thickening of the lateral cortex is present at the fracture site 
(“beaking” or “flaring”)
Minor features (none required)
• 
Generalized increase in cortical thickness of the femoral diaphyses
• 
Unilateral or bilateral prodromal symptoms such as dull or aching pain in the groin or thigh
• 
Bilateral incomplete or complete femoral diaphysis fractures
• 
Delayed fracture healing
Abbreviations: AFF = atypical femur fracture; ONJ = osteonecrosis of the jaw.
 26  AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(Suppl 4)
 
A recent meta-analysis found an increased risk of new-
onset atrial fibrillation among users of oral and IV bisphos-
phonates. Caution and close monitoring is advised among 
elderly patients with pre-existing cardiovascular disease, 
especially when IV bisphosphonates are used (278 [EL 2; 
MNRCT], 279 [EL 2; MNRCT]).
4.Q8.2.  Bisphosphonate Holidays 
 
Because bisphosphonates accumulate and may have 
a prolonged residence time in bone (and residual thera-
peutic effect after stopping), “bisphosphonate holidays” 
may be considered. A post hoc analysis of results from 
Fracture Intervention Trial (FIT) Long Term Extension 
(FLEX) Trial of 10 versus 5 years of alendronate assessed 
the influence of fracture status and T-score on treatment 
effect. Higher-risk women (those with T-score ≤–2.5) who 
stopped treatment had nearly twice as many nonvertebral 
fractures: 21 (28%) versus 16 (15%) with continued treat-
ment (280 [EL 1; RCT]), suggesting that longer treatment 
is better for higher-risk patients. However, in the first 2 
years, the Kaplan-Meier curves for clinical vertebral frac-
tures showed no difference between those who stopped and 
those who continued, indicating a residual benefit. In the 
second extension of the HORIZON trial, postmenopausal 
women previously treated with zoledronic acid for 6 years 
were randomized to continue treatment or switched to pla-
cebo for an additional 3 years. Three morphometric verte-
bral fractures were reported with 9 years of treatments com-
pared with 5 reported with 6 years of treatment. Clinical 
fractures were similar between the 2 groups, reported in 
10 of the patients who continued treatment for 9 years and 
in 9 patients who received 6 years of therapy (71 [EL 1; 
RCT], 183 [EL 1; RCT], 281 [EL 1; RCT]). A 3-year exten-
sion study of the zoledronic acid arms of the HORIZON 
study showed significantly fewer morphometric spine frac-
tures in patients who continued yearly zoledronic acid for 
6 years versus those who switched to placebo after 3 years 
of treatment. No differences in clinical vertebral fractures 
or nonvertebral fractures, however, were noted (282 [EL 1; 
RCT]).
 
The AACE agrees with the recently published 
ASBMR algorithm for managements of patients on long-
term bisphosphonate treatment that recommends that 
patients who are initially at high risk and remain at high 
risk receive a treatment duration of 10 years for an oral 
bisphosphonate (280 [EL 1; RCT], 283 [EL 4; consensus]) 
or 6 years for IV zoledronic acid (281 [EL 1; RCT], 282 
[EL 1; RCT], 284 [EL 1; RCT]). The risk-benefit ratio for 
treatment beyond 10 years has not been investigated and 
remains unknown. For lower risk patients, a drug holiday 
can be considered after 5 years of stability on oral bisphos-
phonates or 3 years on IV zoledronic acid. No other treat-
ment is needed during the bisphosphonate “holiday” for 
lower-risk patients but for higher-risk patients, teriparatide 
or a weaker antiresorptive drug such as raloxifene might be 
appropriate. 
 
The optimal duration of a “bisphosphonate holiday” 
has not been established. Patient selection and monitor-
ing during “bisphosphonate holidays” is important. The 
rank order for binding affinity for bone is zoledronic 
acid>alendronate>risedronate; logic suggests that the 
“holiday” might be longest after treatment with zoledronic 
acid, shortest after treatment with risedronate, and interme-
diate after treatment with alendronate (285 [EL 4; review]). 
In addition, consider resuming therapy in patients who 
experience fracture or show significant BMD loss. The rise 
in bone resorption markers (e.g., C- and N-terminal telo-
peptides) to pretreatment levels might be a signal that the 
“holiday” should be over, but this may not apply to patients 
with osteoporosis who had low bone resorption markers 
before treatment initiation.
4.Q9.  What Is the Role of Concomitant Use of 
           Therapeutic Agents?
 
There are no studies showing that combination treat-
ment with two or more osteoporosis drugs has a greater 
effect on fracture reduction than treatment with a single 
agent (286 [EL 4; review NE]). Modest additive effects on 
BMD and bone turnover have been observed with combi-
nations of two antiresorptive agents. The combined use of 
an antiresorptive drug and teriparatide or PTH may alter 
BMD and the bone turnover response, depending on which 
antiresorptive agent is used (287 [EL 1; RCT]). 
 
There is evidence some combinations may enhance 
the rapidity of BMD changes. For example, while teripa-
ratide increases lumbar spine BMD more than zoledronic 
acid and zoledronic acid increases hip BMD more than 
teriparatide, a single dose of IV zoledronic acid given at the 
same time as starting teriparatide leads to the most rapid 
BMD increase at both the lumbar spine and hip (288 [EL 
1; RCT, partial blinding]). Perhaps the most robust additive 
BMD effect is seen with the combination of teriparatide 
and denosumab, which results in a larger increase in BMD 
than either agent alone (289 [EL 1; RCT]); however, no 
fracture data are available.
 
Combination therapy substantially raises the cost and 
probably increases the potential for side effects. Until the 
effect of combination therapy on fracture risk is better 
understood, the AACE does not recommend concomitant 
use of these agents for prevention or treatment of postmeno-
pausal osteoporosis. However, in certain situations when the 
patient needs a stronger agent because fracture risk is espe-
cially high or there is demonstrated suboptimal effect from 
raloxifene or hormone replacement therapy (i.e., recurrent 
fractures, high bone resorption markers, or progression of 
BMD loss), yet the patient has specific nonbone reasons to 
continue with these agents, another antiresorptive agent or 
anabolic therapy could be added to the therapy.
 AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(Suppl 4)  27 
4.Q10.  What Is the Role of Sequential Use of 
             Therapeutic Agents?
 
Treatment with teriparatide should always be followed 
by antiresorptive agents to prevent bone density decline 
and loss of fracture efficacy (287 [EL 1; RCT], 288 [EL 1; 
RCT, partial blinding], 290 [EL 1; RCT], 291 [EL 1; RCT], 
292 [EL 1; RCT], 293 [EL 4; review NE]). The rationale 
for using an antiresorptive agent after anabolic therapy is 
based both on the limited period that anabolic therapy with 
teriparatide is used and on data showing that, lumbar spine 
BMD declines if antiresorptive therapy is not initiated after 
teriparatide therapy (294 [EL 2; PCS]). 
4.Q11.  What Is the Role of Vertebral Augmentation 
             for Compression Fractures?
 
Vertebral fractures can be associated with pain and 
limit mobility. Surgical procedures including vertebro-
plasty and kyphoplasty have been considered for relief of 
vertebral fracture pain. Initial data on 2 RCTs comparing 
vertebroplasty versus a control procedure on a primary out-
come of overall pain showed no significant benefit from 
vertebroplasty up to 1 month (295 [EL 1; RCT]) and up 
to 6 months; however, the control group had a high rate of 
crossover to the vertebroplasty group (296 [EL 1; RCT]). 
A meta-analysis of individual patient data from 2 blinded 
trials of vertebroplasty failed to show an advantage of ver-
tebroplasty over placebo for participants with acute frac-
tures (<6 weeks) or severe pain (297 [EL 1; MRCT, small 
sample size]). Recently published 2-year follow-up data of 
patients with acute osteoporotic vertebral fractures found 
no beneficial effects of vertebroplasty over a sham proce-
dure at 12 or 24 months (298 [EL 1; RCT]).
 
Both vertebroplasty and kyphoplasty have been sug-
gested to increase the risk of vertebral fractures in the adja-
cent vertebrae. Despite a potential benefit with faster pain 
relief, a significantly increased incidence of additional ver-
tebral fractures in patients undergoing vertebroplasty com-
pared with placebo was noted in an RCT of 125 patients 
with vertebral fractures at 12 months’ follow-up (299 [EL 
1; RCT]). In contrast, another study found no difference in 
new fractures in patients receiving vertebroplasty versus 
usual care at a mean of 11.4 months, with decreased sever-
ity of further height loss in treated vertebrae (300 [EL 1; 
RCT]). In a meta-analysis assessing the safety of balloon 
kyphoplasty in patients with symptomatic osteoporotic 
vertebral fractures, new vertebral fractures were detected 
in 20.7% of treated patients, and more than half of the 
cases had fractures adjacent to the treated level (301 [EL 
1; RCT]). Given the limitations to these published studies, 
the role for surgical procedures in treatment of vertebral 
fractures remains uncertain.
4.Q12.  When Should Referral to a Clinical 
             Endocrinologist or Osteoporosis Specialist 
             Be Considered?
 
Referral to a clinical endocrinologist or osteoporosis 
specialist may be important in patients with normal BMD 
and fracture without major trauma, those with recurrent 
fractures or continued bone loss while receiving therapy 
without obvious treatable causes of bone loss, those with 
less common secondary conditions (e.g., hyperthyroidism, 
hyperparathyroidism, hypercalciuria, or elevated prolac-
tin), those with osteoporosis with unexpectedly severe or 
unusual features, and those with a condition that compli-
cates management (e.g., chronic kidney disease [CKD]: 
GFR <35, hyperparathyroidism, or malabsorption). 
Patients who experience fragility fractures should be eval-
uated and treated. Referral to an osteoporosis specialist or 
a fracture liaison team, if available, should be considered 
(302 [EL 3; SS], 303 [EL 2; MNRCT]). 
5. COMMUNICATING RISK TO PATIENTS
 
Risk communication has been defined in general terms 
as “the study and practice of collectively and effectively 
understanding risks” (304 [EL 4; NE]). When applied to 
healthcare interactions, including those concerned with 
the management of osteoporosis, it can be characterized 
as “one-to-one communication in which the intervention 
includes a stimulus to patients to weigh the risks and ben-
efits of a treatment choice or behavioral (risk reducing) 
change” (305 [EL 4; review NE]). In addition to under-
standing the potential risk and expected benefits of osteo-
porosis treatments, patients must fully appreciate the risk 
of fractures and their consequences (e.g., pain, disability, 
loss of independence, and death) when no treatment is 
given (306 [EL 4; review NE]). It is incumbent on the clini-
cian to provide this information to each patient in a manner 
that is fully understood, and it is equally important to learn 
from the patient about cultural beliefs, previous treatment 
experiences, fears, and concerns. With effective risk com-
munication, the clinician and the patient are both privy to 
the same information. This is the first step toward shared 
decision-making (307 [EL 3; SS], 308 [EL 4; review NE], 
309 [EL 4; review NE]), a process by which a management 
plan is developed with active patient participation. Shared 
decision-making often begins with a recommendation from 
the clinician followed by a response, perhaps with an alter-
native plan, from the patient. In the end, the desired result 
is a treatment plan that is medically reasonable and accept-
able to the patient, often involving compromises from both 
participants. 
 
There are many obstacles to risk communication (310 
[EL 4; review NE]). The medical evidence on efficacy and 
safety of treatment options may be complex, incomplete, 
 28  AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(Suppl 4)
and uncertain. Patients often distrust medical experts and 
pharmaceutical companies. Statistical illiteracy is common 
in both clinicians and patients. The risk of fracture and its 
consequences may not be fully appreciated. Clinicians may 
lack the necessary skills or time needed to explain the bal-
ance of benefits and risks. Competing healthcare priorities 
may detract from attention paid to osteoporosis. Patients 
may be reluctant to reveal their fears and concerns. Risks 
that may seem trivial or nonexistent to the clinician may 
nevertheless be frightening for the patient. News media 
reports of rare possible adverse effects of osteoporosis 
treatment and questionable overuse of diagnostic proce-
dures sometimes generate concern that osteoporosis treat-
ment is dangerous or overused. Postmarketing case reports 
of undesirable medical occurrences in patients treated for 
osteoporosis do not necessarily represent a causal rela-
tionship with the medication being used. For a variety of 
reasons, patients may fail to fill a prescription when it is 
written. When treatment is started, it may not be taken 
correctly or for a sufficient length of time to achieve the 
desired reduction in fracture risk. 
 
Strategies to overcome obstacles to effective risk 
communication include recognition and acceptance of the 
limitations of medical evidence (310 [EL 4; review NE]). 
Treatment decisions for osteoporosis must be individual-
ized with the understanding that many or most patients 
would not qualify for participation in the clinical trial 
that demonstrated efficacy and safety of the medications 
under consideration (311 [EL 2; RCCS]). Patients can be 
educated on the current state of medical knowledge using 
credible information sources. Media reports can be put 
in perspective by describing the benefits of treatment in 
proportion to the possible risks. Data can be presented 
in simple language that is understandable to the patient, 
sometimes with the use of decision aids such as brochures, 
graphs, videos, and models to enhance what is spoken and 
facilitate treatment decisions. The concerns of the patient 
must be considered and validated. Finally, shared decision-
making allows the patient to be an active participant in 
osteoporosis management.
 
Studies to evaluate the effectiveness of communica-
tion interventions have been difficult to compare due to 
the diversity of measured outcomes. Study endpoints have 
included those that are behavioral (e.g., compliance and 
persistence), cognitive (e.g., knowledge and risk percep-
tion), and affective (e.g., anxiety and satisfaction) (305 
[EL 4; review NE]). A systematic review of RCTs of com-
munication tools found that most formats (verbal, written, 
video, provider-delivered, and computer-based) increased 
patients’ understanding of the medical evidence (312 [EL 
1; MRCT]). Understanding was enhanced when the meth-
ods were individualized and/or interactive, with decision 
aids such as cartoons or graphs also helping. It was con-
cluded that increasing evidence supports the design of 
evidence-based communication tools, although there is 
limited access to these tools in clinical practice. Attentive 
listening to patients is an important component of risk com-
munication and shared decision-making, with evidence 
that this a skill can be learned (313 [EL 4; review NE]). 
An RCT of risk communication for treatment to prevent 
hip fractures for patients in primary care practices found 
that presentation of treatment benefit and harm using abso-
lute risk estimates (expressed by icon array graphs with 
human figures with hip fracture risk calculated by FRAX®) 
led to greater treatment acceptance than presentation of the 
same information as RRs (314 [EL 1; RCT]). Another RCT 
evaluated postmenopausal women with low BMD receiv-
ing a decision aid (a tailored pictograph of 10-year fracture 
probability, absolute risk reduction with bisphosphonates, 
side effects, and cost) compared with controls receiving 
a standard brochure (315 [EL 1; RCT]). The decision aid 
improved the quality of clinical decisions (i.e., patient 
understanding of benefit and risk) and may have improved 
adherence but did not affect rates of initiating treatment. 
Regular contact with a healthcare professional after start-
ing osteoporosis treatment appears to be one of a few inter-
ventions that improves adherence (316 [EL 1; RCT], 317 
[EL 2; PCS]). Examples of decision aids that illustrate risk 
in a visual, patient-friendly manner are given in Figure 2. 
Figure 3 provides risk comparisons for osteoporosis, frac-
ture, ONJ, and other events.
Fig. 2. Examples of visual depictions of fracture risk for use with 
patients.
 AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(Suppl 4)  29 
Fig. 3. (A) Comparative risk of fracture, ONJ, 
and other events in women aged 65-69 (319 [EL 
3; SS], 320 [EL 2; RCCS], 321 [EL 4; consensus 
recommendations]); (B) 10-year probability of 
fracture in treated and untreated patients, ONJ in 
treated patients, and other events in an 80-year-
old woman (269 [EL 4; consensus NE], 318 [EL 
2; RCCS]); (C) benefits and risks of treatment in 
osteoporosis compared with seat belt interven-
tion in MVAs. AFF = atypical femur fracture; 
Fx = fracture; MVA = motor vehicle acci-
dent; ONJ = osteonecrosis of the jaw; PCN = 
penicillin.
A
B
C
 30  AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(Suppl 4)
 
Further study is needed to determine the most effec-
tive means of communicating benefit and risk in osteopo-
rosis management. The best available evidence at this time 
suggests that communication skills can be learned, deci-
sion aids may be helpful, and that shared decision-making 
may improve clinical outcomes.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
 
Reviewers of the AACE/ACE Postmenopausal 
Osteoporosis Clinical Practice Guidelines: Robert Adler, 
MD; Donald A. Bergman, MD, MACE; John Paul 
Bilezikian, MD, MACE; Dima L. Diab, MD, FACE, CCD; 
Angelo Licata, MD, PhD, FACP, FACE; Alan Malabanan 
MD, FACE, CCD; Michael R. McClung, MD.
DISCLOSURE
Co-Chairs
Dr. Pauline Camacho reports that she has received research 
grant support from Amgen Inc, and NPS Pharmaceuticals.
Dr. Steven M. Petak reports that he has received consult-
ing fees from NASA-JSC. 
Task Force Members
Dr. Neil Binkley reports that he has received advisory/
consultant honoraria from Merck, Amgen, Eli Lilly and 
Company, Bristol-Myers Squibb, and Nestle. He has also 
received research support from Amgen, Merck, Eli Lilly 
and Company, Opko Health, Novartis, and GE Healthcare 
Lunar. 
Dr. Bart Clarke reports that he has received consulting 
fees for his service on Data Monitoring Committees for 
Amgen Inc.; and research grant support for his role as Site 
Principal Investigator from NPS Pharmaceuticals, Inc.
Dr. Steven T. Harris reports that he has received consultant 
fees from Eli Lilly and Company, Gilead Sciences, Merck, 
and Radius Health. He has also received speaker honoraria 
from Eli Lilly and Company and Gilead Sciences. 
Dr. Daniel L. Hurley reports that he does not have any rel-
evant financial relationships with any commercial interests.
Dr. Michael Kleerekoper reports that he does not have 
any relevant financial relationships with any commercial 
interests.
Dr. E. Michael Lewiecki reports that he has received con-
sultant honoraria and research grant support from Amgen, 
Eli Lilly and Company, and Merck.
Dr. Paul D. Miller reports that he has received consultant 
fees for his role on Scientific Advisory Boards for Amgen, 
AgNovos, Eli Lilly and Company, Merck, Radius Pharma, 
Roche, and Ultragenyx, as well as for his role on Data 
Safety Committees for Allergan Pharmaceuticals, and 
GrĀ1/4nenthal Group. He has also received speaker 
honoraria from Amgen Australia and research grant 
support from Alexion, Amgen, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Immunodiagnostics, Eli Lilly and Company, Merck, Merck 
Serrano, National Bone Health Alliance, Novartis, Radius 
Pharma, Roche Diagnostics, Regeneron, Daiichi Sankyo, 
and Ultragenyx. 
Dr. Harmeet Singh Narula reports that he does not have 
any relevant financial relationships with any commercial 
interests.
Dr. Rachel Pessah-Pollack reports that she has received 
consulting fees and speaker honoraria from Boehringer 
Ingelheim and Eli Lilly and Company. 
Dr. Vin Tangpricha reports that he has received con-
sulting fees from Elsevier, as the Editor in Chief for the 
Journal of Clinical and Translational Endocrinology. 
Dr. Tangpricha has also received speaker honoraria from 
Quest Diagnostics Inc and research grants from the Cystic 
Fibrosis Foundation and NIH.
Dr. Nelson B. Watts reports that he has received stock 
options as a stockholder and royalties as a cofounder/direc-
tor from OsteoDynamics; consultant fees from Amgen, 
Abbvie, Sanofi, Merck, Radius Health, and Sprout; and 
speaker honoraria from Amgen and Merck. 
Dr. Sunil J. Wimalawansa reports that he does not have 
any relevant financial relationships with any commercial 
interests.
Reviewers
Dr. Robert A. Adler reports that he does not have any rele-
vant financial relationships with any commercial interests.
Dr. Donald Bergman reports that he does not have any rel-
evant financial relationships with any commercial interests.
Dr. John Paul Bilezikian reports that he is a consultant for 
Amgen, Merck, and Radius.
Dr. Dima L. Diab reports that she does not have any rele-
vant financial relationships with any commercial interests.
Dr. Angelo Licata reports that he does not have any rele-
vant financial relationships with any commercial interests.
Dr. Alan Malabanan reports that he has received consult-
ing fees as a member of the Editorial Board for the Harvard 
 AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(Suppl 4)  31 
Health Letter, as a Journal Watch CME question author 
from Boston University, and from Advance Medical, Inc. 
He has also received speaker fees from Metrowest Medical 
Center; Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Needham; 
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston; Boston 
University Dental School and Medical School, and MCE 
Conferences. 
Dr. Michael R. McClung reports that he has received con-
sultant fees and speaker honoraria from Amgen and Merck.
Medical Writer
Ms. Renée Kashuba reports that she has received con-
sulting fees for writing and editorial support from Celgene 
Corporation.
REFERENCES
Note: Reference sources are followed by an evidence level 
[EL] rating of 1, 2, 3, or 4. The strongest evidence levels 
(EL 1 and EL 2) appear in red for easier recognition.
 
1. Mechanick JI, Camacho PM, Cobin RH, Garber AJ, 
Garber JR, Gharib H, et al. American Association 
of Clinical Endocrinologists Protocol for Standardized 
Production of Clinical Practice Guidelines--2010 update. 
Endocr Pract. 2010;16:270-283. [EL 4; CPG NE]
 
2. Mechanick JI, Camacho PM, Garber AJ, Garber JR, 
Pessah-Pollack R, Petak SM, et al. American Association 
of Clinical Endocrinologists and American College of 
Endocrinology Protocol for Standardized Production 
of 
Clinical 
Practice 
Guidelines, Algorithms, 
and 
Checklists--2014 Update and the AACE G4G Program. 
Endocr Pract. 2014;20:692-702. [EL 4; CPG NE]
 
3. Mechanick JI, Bergman DA, Braithwaite SS, Palumbo 
PJ. American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists 
protocol for standardized production of clinical practice 
guidelines. Endocr Pract. 2004;10:353-361. [EL 4; CPG 
NE]
 
4. Wright NC, Looker AC, Saag KG, Curtis JR, Delzell 
ES, Randall S, et al. The recent prevalence of osteoporo-
sis and low bone mass in the United States based on bone 
mineral density at the femoral neck or lumbar spine. J 
Bone Miner Res. 2014;29:2520-2526. [EL 3; SS]
 
5. Burge R, Dawson-Hughes B, Solomon DH, Wong JB, 
King A, Tosteson A. Incidence and economic burden of 
osteoporosis-related fractures in the United States, 2005-
2025. J Bone Miner Res. 2007;22:465-475. [EL 3; SS]
 
6. Kanis JA, Melton LJ 3rd, Christiansen C, Johnston 
CC, Khaltaev N. The diagnosis of osteoporosis. J Bone 
Miner Res. 1994;9:1137-1141. [EL 4; review NE]
 
7. Singer A, Exuzides A, Spangler L, O’Malley C, Colby 
C, Johnston K, et al. Burden of illness for osteoporotic 
fractures compared with other serious diseases among 
postmenopausal women in the United States. Mayo Clin 
Proc. 2015;90:53-62. [EL 2; RCCS]
 
8. Looker AC, Orwoll ES, Johnston CC Jr, Lindsay RL, 
Wahner HW, Dunn WL, Calvo MS, et al. Prevalence 
of low femoral bone density in older U.S. adults from 
NHANES III. J Bone Miner Res. 1997;12:1761-1768. [EL 
3; SS]
 
9. Faulkner KG, von Stetten E, Miller P. Discordance in 
patient classification using T-scores. J Clin Densitom. 
1999;2:343-350. [EL 3; SS]
 10. Melton LJ 3rd, Lane AW, Cooper C, Eastell R, O’Fallon 
WM, Riggs BL. Prevalence and incidence of vertebral 
deformities. Osteoporos Int. 1993;3:113-119. [EL 3; CSS]
 11. NIH Consensus Development Panel on Osteoporosis 
Prevention, Diagnosis, and Therapy. Osteoporosis pre-
vention, diagnosis, and therapy. JAMA. 2001;285:785-795. 
[EL 4; NE]
 12. Siris ES, Adler R, Bilezikian J, Bolognese M, Dawson-
Hughes B, Favus MJ, et al. The clinical diagnosis of 
osteoporosis: a position statement from the National Bone 
Health Alliance Working Group. Osteoporos Int. 2014;25: 
1439-1443. [EL 4; NE]
 13. Leslie WD, Majumdar SR, Lix LM, Johansson H, Oden 
A, McCloskey E, et al. High fracture probability with 
FRAX usually indicates densitometric osteoporosis: impli-
cations for clinical practice. Osteoporos Int. 2012;23:391-
397. [EL 2; RCCS]
 14. Siris ES, Boonen S, Mitchell PJ, Bilezikian J, Silverman 
S. What’s in a name? What constitutes the clinical diagno-
sis of osteoporosis? Osteoporos Int. 2012;23:2093-2097 
[EL 4; review NE]
 15. NIH Consensus Development Panel on Osteoporosis 
Prevention, Diagnosis, and Therapy. Osteoporosis pre-
vention, diagnosis, and therapy. JAMA. 2001;285:785-795 
[EL 4; NE]
 16. Guglielmi G, Muscarella S, Bazzocchi A. Integrated 
imaging approach to osteoporosis: state-of-the-art review 
and update. Radiographics. 2011;31:1343-1364. [EL 4; 
NE]
 17. Wainwright SA, Marshall LM, Ensrud KE, Cauley JA, 
Black DM, Hillier TA, et al. Hip fracture in women with-
out osteoporosis. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2005;90:2787-
2793. [EL 2; PCS]
 18. Nayak S, Roberts MS, Chang CC, Greenspan SL. Health 
Beliefs about Osteoporosis and Osteoporosis Screening in 
Older Women and Men. Health Educ J. 2010;69:267-276. 
[EL 3; SS]
 19. Nelson HD, Haney EM, Dana T, Bougatsos C, Chou 
R. Screening for osteoporosis: an update for the U.S. 
Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med. 2010;153: 
99-111. [EL 4; CPG NE]
 20. Hiligsmann M, Gathon HJ, Bruyère O, Ethgen O, 
Rabenda V, Reginster JY. Cost-effectiveness of osteopo-
rosis screening followed by treatment: the impact of medi-
cation adherence. Value Health. 2010;13:394-401. [EL 3; 
SS]
 21. Thompson M, Evitt CP, Whaley MM. Screening for 
falls and osteoporosis: prevention practice for the hand 
therapist. J Hand Ther. 2010;23:212-228; quiz 229. [EL 4; 
review NE]
 22. Barr RJ, Stewart A, Torgerson DJ, Reid DM. Population 
screening for osteoporosis risk: a randomised control 
trial of medication use and fracture risk. Osteoporos Int. 
2010;21:561-568. [EL 1; RCT; incomplete follow-up; 60% 
response rate]
 23. Kanis JA. Assessment of osteoporosis at the pri-
mary health-care level. WHO Collaborating Center for 
Metabolic Bone Diseases. Technical Report. University of 
Sheffield, UK; 2007. Available at: https://www.shef.ac.uk/
FRAX/pdfs/WHO_Technical_Report.pdf. [EL 4; NE]
 24. Gallagher JC, Sai AJ. Bone: Is screening for secondary 
 32  AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(Suppl 4)
causes of osteoporosis worthwhile? Nat Rev Endocrinol. 
2010;6:360-362. [EL 4; opinion NE]
 25. Orwig DL, Chan J, Magaziner J. Hip fracture and its 
consequences: differences between men and women. 
Orthop Clin North Am. 2006;37:611-622. [EL 4; review 
NE]
 26. Kanis JA, Hans D, Cooper C, Baim S, Bilezikian JP, 
Binkley N, et al. Interpretation and use of FRAX in clini-
cal practice. Osteoporos Int. 2011;22:2395-2411. [EL 4; 
NE]
 27. Lewiecki EM, Compston JE, Miller PD, Adachi JD, 
Adams JE, Leslie WD, et al. FRAX(®) Bone Mineral 
Density Task Force of the 2010 Joint International Society 
for Clinical Densitometry & International Osteoporosis 
Foundation Position Development Conference. J Clin 
Densitom. 2011;14:223-225. [EL 4; NE]
 28. Kanis JA, Johansson H, Oden A, Cooper C, McCloskey 
EV; Epidemiology and Quality of Life Working Group 
of IOF. Worldwide uptake of FRAX. Arch Osteoporos. 
2014;9:166. [EL 3; SS]
 29. Kanis JA, McCloskey E, Johansson H, Oden A, Leslie 
WD. FRAX(®) with and without bone mineral density. 
Calcif Tissue Int. 2012;90:1-13. [EL 4; review NE]
 30. Hillier TA, Cauley JA, Rizzo JH, Pedula KL, Ensrud 
KE, Bauer DC, et al. WHO absolute fracture risk models 
(FRAX): do clinical risk factors improve fracture predic-
tion in older women without osteoporosis? J Bone Miner 
Res. 2011;26:1774-1782. [EL 2; PCS]
 31. McCloskey E, Kanis JA. FRAX updates 2012. Curr Opin 
Rheumatol. 2012;24:554-560. [EL 4; review NE]
 32. Silverman SL, Calderon AD. The utility and limitations 
of FRAX: A US perspective. Curr Osteoporos Rep. 2010; 
8:192-197. [EL 4; review NE]
 33. Watts NB, Ettinger B, LeBoff MS. FRAX facts. J Bone 
Miner Res. 2009;24:975-979. [EL 4; NE]
 34. van den Bergh JP, van Geel TA, Lems WF, Geusens PP. 
Assessment of individual fracture risk: FRAX and beyond. 
Curr Osteoporos Rep. 2010;8:131-137. [EL 4; review NE]
 35. Kreidieh OI, El-Hajj Fuleihan G. Impact of changes in 
mortality on FRAX-derived fracture probabilities. Bone. 
2014;62:43-50 [EL 3; CSS]
 36. Kanis JA, Johansson H, Oden A, McCloskey EV. 
Guidance for the adjustment of FRAX according to the 
dose of glucocorticoids. Osteoporos Int. 2011;22:809-816. 
[EL 2; PCS]
 37. Leslie WD, Lix LM, Johansson H, Oden A, McCloskey 
E, Kanis JA. Spine-hip discordance and fracture risk 
assessment: a physician-friendly FRAX enhancement. 
Osteoporos Int. 2011;22:839-847. [EL 2; RCCS]
 38. Leslie WD, Lix LM, Johansson H, Oden A, McCloskey 
E, Kanis JA, et al. Does osteoporosis therapy invali-
date FRAX for fracture prediction? J Bone Miner Res. 
2012;27:1243-1251. [EL 3; CSS]
 39. Sambrook PN, Cameron ID, Chen JS, Cumming RG, 
Lord SR, March LM, et al. Influence of fall related fac-
tors and bone strength on fracture risk in the frail elderly. 
Osteoporos Int. 2007;18:603-610. [EL 2; PCS]
 40. Kanis JA, Oden A, Johnell O, Johansson H, De Laet C, 
Brown J, et al. The use of clinical risk factors enhances 
the performance of BMD in the prediction of hip and 
osteoporotic fractures in men and women. Osteoporos Int. 
2007;18:1033-1046. [EL 2; MNRCT]
 41. International Society for Clinical Densitometry. 2015 ISCD 
Official Positions − Adult. Middletown, CT: International 
Society for Clinical Densitometry; 2015. [EL 4; position 
statement]
 42. Johnell O, Kanis JA, Oden A, Johansson H, De Laet C, 
Delmas P, et al. Predictive value of BMD for hip and other 
fractures. J Bone Miner Res. 2005;20:1185-1194. [EL 2; 
PCS]
 43. Stone KL, Seeley DG, Lui LY, Cauley JA, Ensrud K, 
Browner WS, et al. BMD at multiple sites and risk of frac-
ture of multiple types: long-term results from the Study of 
Osteoporotic Fractures. J Bone Miner Res. 2003;18: 1947-
1954. [EL 2; PCS]
 44. Cummings SR, Black DM, Nevitt MC, Browner W, 
Cauley J, Ensrud K, et al. Bone density at various sites 
for prediction of hip fractures. The Study of Osteoporotic 
Fractures Research Group. Lancet. 1993;341:72-75. [EL 2; 
PCS]
 45. Marshall D, Johnell O, Wedel H. Meta-analysis of how 
well measures of bone mineral density predict occurrence 
of osteoporotic fractures. BMJ. 1996;312:1254-1259 [EL 
2; MNRCT]
 46. Austin M, Yang YC, Vittinghoff E, Adami S, Boonen S, 
Bauer DC, et al. Relationship between bone mineral den-
sity changes with denosumab treatment and risk reduction 
for vertebral and nonvertebral fractures. J Bone Miner Res. 
2012;27:687-693. [EL 1; RCT]
 47. Barzel US. Recommended testing in patients with low 
bone density. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2003;88:1404-
1405; author reply 1405. [EL 4; opinion NE]
 48. Tannenbaum C, Clark J, Schwartzman K, Wallenstein 
S, Lapinski R, Meier D, et al. Yield of laboratory testing 
to identify secondary contributors to osteoporosis in other-
wise healthy women. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2002;87: 
4431-4437. [EL 3; CSS]
 49. Lindsay R, Silverman SL, Cooper C, Hanley DA, 
Barton I, Broy SB, et al. Risk of new vertebral fracture 
in the year following a fracture. JAMA. 2001;285:320-323. 
[EL 1; MRCT]
 50. Gehlbach S, Saag KG, Adachi JD, Hooven FH, Flahive 
J, Boonen S, et al. Previous fractures at multiple sites 
increase the risk for subsequent fractures: the Global 
Longitudinal Study of Osteoporosis in Women. J Bone 
Miner Res. 2012;27:645-653. [EL 3; SS]
 51. Edwards BJ, Bunta AD, Simonelli C, Bolander M, 
Fitzpatrick LA. Prior fractures are common in patients 
with subsequent hip fractures. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 
2007;461:226-230. [EL 2; RCCS]
 52. Camacho PM, Dayal AS, Diaz JL, Nabhan FA, Agarwal 
M, Norton JG, et al. Prevalence of secondary causes of 
bone loss among breast cancer patients with osteopenia 
and osteoporosis. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26:5380-5385. [EL 
2; RCCS]
 53. Lane NE. An update on glucocorticoid-induced osteopo-
rosis. Rheum Dis Clin North Am. 2001;27:235-253. [EL 4; 
opinion NE]
 54. Lewiecki EM, Laster AJ. Clinical review: Clinical appli-
cations of vertebral fracture assessment by dual-energy 
x-ray absorptiometry. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2006;91: 
4215-4222. [EL 4; review NE]
 55. Greenspan SL, von Stetten E, Emond SK, Jones L, 
Parker RA. Instant vertebral assessment: a noninvasive 
dual X-ray absorptiometry technique to avoid misclassifi-
cation and clinical mismanagement of osteoporosis. J Clin 
Densitom. 2001;4:373-380. [EL 3; CSS]
 56. Schousboe JT, Debold CR. Reliability and accuracy of 
vertebral fracture assessment with densitometry compared 
to radiography in clinical practice. Osteoporos Int. 2006; 
17:281-289. [EL 3; CSS]
 AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(Suppl 4)  33 
 57. Binkley N, Krueger D, Gangnon R, Genant HK, 
Drezner MK. Lateral vertebral assessment: a valuable 
technique to detect clinically significant vertebral frac-
tures. Osteoporos Int. 2005;16:1513-1518. [EL 3; CSS]
 58. Siminoski K, Jiang G, Adachi JD, Hanley DA, Cline G, 
Ioannidis G, et al. Accuracy of height loss during pro-
spective monitoring for detection of incident vertebral 
fractures. Osteoporos Int. 2005;16:403-410. [EL 2; PCS]
 59. Siminoski K, Warshawski RS, Jen H, Lee K. The accu-
racy of historical height loss for the detection of vertebral 
fractures in postmenopausal women. Osteoporos Int. 2006; 
17:290-296. [EL 3; CSS]
 60. Chesnut CH 3rd, Bell NH, Clark GS, Drinkwater BL, 
English SC, Johnson CC Jr, et al. Hormone replacement 
therapy in postmenopausal women: urinary N-telopeptide 
of type I collagen monitors therapeutic effect and predicts 
response of bone mineral density. Am J Med. 1997;102:29-
37. [EL 1; RCT, no blinding]
 61. Ross PD, Knowlton W. Rapid bone loss is associated with 
increased levels of biochemical markers. J Bone Miner 
Res. 1998;13:297-302. [EL 2; PCS]
 62. Garnero P, Sornay-Rendu E, Duboeuf F, Delmas PD. 
Markers of bone turnover predict postmenopausal forearm 
bone loss over 4 years: the OFELY study. J Bone Miner 
Res. 1999;14:1614-1621. [EL 2; PCS]
 63. Garnero P, Hausherr E, Chapuy MC, Marcelli C, 
Grandjean H, Muller C, et al. Markers of bone resorp-
tion predict hip fracture in elderly women: the EPIDOS 
Prospective Study. J Bone Miner Res. 1996;11:1531-1538. 
[EL 2; PCS]
 64. Garnero P, Sornay-Rendu E, Claustrat B, Delmas PD. 
Biochemical markers of bone turnover, endogenous hor-
mones and the risk of fractures in postmenopausal women: 
the OFELY study. J Bone Miner Res. 2000;15:1526-1536. 
[EL 2; PCS]
 65. Eastell R, Barton I, Hannon RA, Chines A, Garnero P, 
Delmas PD. Relationship of early changes in bone resorp-
tion to the reduction in fracture risk with risedronate. J 
Bone Miner Res. 2003;18:1051-1056. [EL 1; RCT]
 66. Vasikaran S, Eastell R, Bruyère O, Foldes AJ, Garnero 
P, Griesmacher A, et al. Markers of bone turnover for the 
prediction of fracture risk and monitoring of osteoporosis 
treatment: a need for international reference standards. 
Osteoporos Int. 2011;22:391-420. [EL 2; MNRCT]
 67. Bauer D, Krege J, Lane N, Leary E, Libanati C, Miller 
P, et al. National Bone Health Alliance Bone Turnover 
Marker Project: current practices and the need for US 
harmonization, standardization, and common reference 
ranges. Osteoporos Int. 2012;23:2425-2433. [EL 4; con-
sensus NE]
 68. Greenspan SL, Resnick NM, Parker RA. Early changes 
in biochemical markers of bone turnover are associated 
with long-term changes in bone mineral density in elderly 
women on alendronate, hormone replacement therapy, or 
combination therapy: a three-year, double-blind, placebo-
controlled, randomized clinical trial. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab. 2005;90:2762-2767. [EL 1; RCT]
 69. Bauer DC, Garnero P, Bilezikian JP, Greenspan SL, 
Ensrud KE, Rosen CJ, et al. Short-term changes in bone 
turnover markers and bone mineral density response to 
parathyroid hormone in postmenopausal women with 
osteoporosis. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2006;91:1370-
1375. [EL 1; RCT]
 70. Hochberg MC, Greenspan S, Wasnich RD, Miller P, 
Thompson DE, Ross PD. Changes in bone density and 
turnover explain the reductions in incidence of nonverte-
bral fractures that occur during treatment with antiresorp-
tive agents. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2002;87:1586-1592. 
[EL 1; MRCT]
 71. Bauer DC, Schwartz A, Palermo L, Cauley J, Hochberg 
M, Santora A, et al. Fracture prediction after discontinua-
tion of 4 to 5 years of alendronate therapy: the FLEX study. 
JAMA Int Med. 2014;174:1126-1134. [EL 1; RCT]
 72. Eastell R, Vrijens B, Cahall DL, Ringe JD, Garnero P, 
Watts NB. Bone turnover markers and bone mineral den-
sity response with risedronate therapy: relationship with 
fracture risk and patient adherence. J Bone Miner Res. 
2011;26:1662-1669. [EL 2; PCS]
 73. Delmas PD, Munoz F, Black DM, Cosman F, Boonen S, 
Watts NB, et al. Effects of yearly zoledronic acid 5 mg on 
bone turnover markers and relation of PINP with fracture 
reduction in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis. J 
Bone Min Res. 2009;24:1544-1551. [EL 1; RCT]
 74. Eastell R, Christiansen C, Grauer A, Kutilek S, 
Libanati C, McClung MR, et al. Effects of denosumab 
on bone turnover markers in postmenopausal osteoporosis. 
J Bone Miner Res. 2011;26:530-537 [EL 1; RCT]
 75. Carmel AS, Shieh A, Bang H, Bockman RS. The 25(OH)
D level needed to maintain a favorable bisphosphonate 
response is ≥33 ng/ml. Osteoporos Int. 2012;23:2479-
2487. [EL 2; PCS]
 76. Bischoff-Ferrari HA, Dietrich T, Orav EJ, Dawson-
Hughes B. Positive association between 25-hydroxy vita-
min D levels and bone mineral density: a population-based 
study of younger and older adults. Am J Med. 2004;116: 
634-639. [EL 3; CSS]
 77. Ross AC, Manson JE, Abrams SA, Aloia JF, Brannon 
PM, Clinton SK, et al. The 2011 report on dietary refer-
ence intakes for calcium and vitamin D from the Institute 
of Medicine: what clinicians need to know. T J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab. 2011;96:53-58. [EL 4; consensus NE]
 78. Holick MF, Binkley NC, Bischoff-Ferrari HA, Gordon 
CM, Hanley DA, Heaney RP, et al. Evaluation, treatment, 
and prevention of vitamin D deficiency: an Endocrine 
Society clinical practice guideline. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab. 2011; 96:1911-1930. [EL 4; consensus NE]
 79. Holick MF, Siris ES, Binkley N, Beard MK, Khan A, 
Katzer JT, et al. Prevalence of Vitamin D inadequacy 
among postmenopausal North American women receiving 
osteoporosis therapy. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2005;90: 
3215-3224. [EL 3; CSS]
 80. LeBoff MS, Hawkes WG, Glowacki J, Yu-Yahiro J, 
Hurwitz S, Magaziner J. Vitamin D-deficiency and post-
fracture changes in lower extremity function and falls in 
women with hip fractures. Osteoporos Int. 2008;19:1283-
1290. [EL 2; PCS]
 81. Wimalawansa SJ. Vitamin D in the new millennium. 
Curr Osteoporos Rep. 2012;10:4-15. [EL 4; review NE]
 82. Baron JA, Barry EL, Mott LA, Rees JR, Sandler RS, 
Snover DC, et al. A Trial of Calcium and Vitamin D for 
the Prevention of Colorectal Adenomas. N Engl J Med. 
2015;373:1519-1530. [EL 1; RCT]
 83. Arora P, Song Y, Dusek J, Plotnikoff G, Sabatine MS, 
Cheng S, et al. Vitamin D therapy in individuals with 
prehypertension or hypertension: the DAYLIGHT trial. 
Circulation. 2015;131:254-262. [EL 1; RCT]
 84. Mason C, Xiao L, Imayama I, Duggan C, Wang CY, 
Korde L, et al. Vitamin D3 supplementation during 
weight loss: a double-blind randomized controlled trial. 
Am J Clin Nutr. 2014;99:1015-1025. [EL 1; RCT]
 34  AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(Suppl 4)
 85. Dhaliwal R, Mikhail M, Feuerman M, Aloia JF 2014 
The vitamin d dose response in obesity. Endocr Pract. 20: 
1258-1264. [EL 1; RCT]
 86. Ng K, Scott JB, Drake BF, Chan AT, Hollis BW, 
Chandler PD, et al. Dose response to vitamin D sup-
plementation in African Americans: results of a 4-arm, 
randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Am J Clin Nutr. 
2014;99:587-598. [EL 1; RCT]
 87. Knutsen KV, Madar AA, Lagerlov P, Brekke M, 
Raastad T, Stene LC, et al. Does vitamin D improve mus-
cle strength in adults? A randomized, double-blind, pla-
cebo-controlled trial among ethnic minorities in Norway. 
J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014;99:194-202. [EL 1; RCT]
 88. Chaney A, Heckman MG, Diehl NN, Meek S, Keaveny 
AP 2015 Effectiveness and Outcomes of Current Practice 
in Treating Vitamin D Deficiency in Patients Listed for 
Liver Transplantation. Endocr Pract. 21:761-769. [EL 2; 
retrospective analysis]
 89. Farahati J, Nagarajah J, Gilman E, Mahjoob S, Zohreh 
M, Rosenbaum-Krumme S, et al. Ethnicity, Clothing 
Style, and Body Mass Index are Significant Predictors of 
Vitamin D Insufficiency in Germany. Endocr Pract. 2015; 
21:122-127. [EL 2; retrospective analysis]
 90. Li Y, Chen C, Liu HL, Qian G. Vitamin D, parathyroid 
hormone, and heart failure in a chinese elderly population. 
Endocr Pract. 2015;21:30-40. [EL 2; PCS]
 91. Chapuy MC, Preziosi P, Maamer M, Arnaud S, Galan 
P, Hercberg S, et al. Prevalence of vitamin D insufficiency 
in an adult normal population. Osteoporos Int. 1997;7:439-
443. [EL 3; CSS]
 92. Boonen S, Lips P, Bouillon R, Bischoff-Ferrari HA, 
Vanderschueren D, Haentjens P. Need for additional cal-
cium to reduce the risk of hip fracture with vitamin d sup-
plementation: evidence from a comparative metaanalysis 
of randomized controlled trials. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 
2007;92:1415-1423. [EL 1; MRCT]
 93. Hansen KE, Johnson RE, Chambers KR, Johnson 
MG, Lemon CC, Vo TN, et al. Treatment of Vitamin D 
Insufficiency in Postmenopausal Women: A Randomized 
Clinical Trial. JAMA Int Med. 2015;175:1612-1621. [EL 
1; RCT]
 94. Bischoff-Ferrari 
HA, 
Willett 
WC, 
Wong 
JB, 
Giovannucci E, Dietrich T, Dawson-Hughes B. Fracture 
prevention with vitamin D supplementation: a meta-analy-
sis of randomized controlled trials. JAMA. 2005;293:2257-
2264. [EL 1; MRCT]
 95. Jackson RD, LaCroix AZ, Gass M, Wallace RB, 
Robbins J, Lewis CE, et al. Calcium plus vitamin D sup-
plementation and the risk of fractures. N Engl J Med. 2006; 
354:669-683. [EL 1; RCT]
 96. Bischoff-Ferrari HA, Dawson-Hughes B, Willett WC, 
Staehelin HB, Bazemore MG, Zee RY, et al. Effect of 
Vitamin D on falls: a meta-analysis. JAMA. 2004;291:1999-
2006. [EL 2; MNRCT]
 97. Bischoff-Ferrari HA, Conzelmann M, Stähelin HB, 
Dick W, Carpenter MG, Adkin AL, et al. Is fall preven-
tion by vitamin D mediated by a change in postural or 
dynamic balance? Osteoporos Int. 2006;17:656-663. [EL 
1; RCT]
 98. Pfeifer M, Begerow B, Minne HW, Abrams C, 
Nachtigall D, Hansen C. Effects of a short-term vitamin 
D and calcium supplementation on body sway and second-
ary hyperparathyroidism in elderly women. J Bone Miner 
Res. 2000;15:1113-1118. [EL 1; RCT]
 99. Autier P, Gandini S. Vitamin D supplementation and total 
mortality: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. 
Arch Intern Med. 2007;167:1730-1737. [EL 1; MRCT]
100. Kearns MD, Alvarez JA, Tangpricha V 2014 Large, sin-
gle-dose, oral vitamin d supplementation in adult popula-
tions: a systematic review. Endocr Pract. 20:341-351. [EL 
2; MNRCT]
101. Weaver CM, Alexander DD, Boushey CJ, Dawson-
Hughes B, Lappe JM, LeBoff MS, et al. Calcium plus 
vitamin D supplementation and risk of fractures: an 
updated meta-analysis from the National Osteoporosis 
Foundation. Osteoporos Int. 2016;27:367-376. [EL 1; 
MRCT]
102. Porthouse J, Cockayne S, King C, Saxon L, Steele E, 
Aspray T, et al. Randomised controlled trial of calcium 
and supplementation with cholecalciferol (vitamin D3) for 
prevention of fractures in primary care. BMJ. 2005;330: 
1003. [EL 1; RCT]
103. Shea B, Wells G, Cranney A, Zytaruk N, Robinson V, 
Griffith L, et al. Meta-analyses of therapies for postmeno-
pausal osteoporosis. VII. Meta-analysis of calcium supple-
mentation for the prevention of postmenopausal osteopo-
rosis. Endocr Rev. 2002;23:552-559. [EL 1; MRCT]
104. Grant AM, Avenell A, Campbell MK, McDonald AM, 
MacLennan GS, McPherson GC, et al. Oral vitamin 
D3 and calcium for secondary prevention of low-trauma 
fractures in elderly people (Randomised Evaluation of 
Calcium Or vitamin D, RECORD): a randomised placebo-
controlled trial. Lancet. 2005;365:1621-1628. [EL 1; RCT]
105. Michaelsson K, Melhus H, Warensjo Lemming E, Wolk 
A, Byberg L. Long term calcium intake and rates of all 
cause and cardiovascular mortality: community based pro-
spective longitudinal cohort study. BMJ. 2013;346:f228. 
[EL 2; PCS]
106. Bolland MJ, Grey A, Avenell A, Gamble GD, Reid 
IR. Calcium supplements with or without vitamin D and 
risk of cardiovascular events: reanalysis of the Women’s 
Health Initiative limited access dataset and meta-analysis. 
BMJ. 2011;342:d2040. [EL 1; RCT]
107. Bolland MJ, Avenell A, Baron JA, Grey A, MacLennan 
GS, Gamble GD, et al. Effect of calcium supplements on 
risk of myocardial infarction and cardiovascular events: 
meta-analysis. BMJ. 2010; 341:c3691. [EL 1; RCT]
108. Bolland MJ, Barber PA, Doughty RN, Mason B, Horne 
A, Ames R, et al. Vascular events in healthy older women 
receiving calcium supplementation: randomised controlled 
trial. BMJ. 2008;336:262-266. [EL 1; RCT]
109. Bostick RM, Kushi LH, Wu Y, Meyer KA, Sellers TA, 
Folsom AR. Relation of calcium, vitamin D, and dairy 
food intake to ischemic heart disease mortality among 
postmenopausal women. Am J Epidemiol. 1999;149:151-
161. [EL 2; PCS]
110. Zhu K, Bruce D, Austin N, Devine A, Ebeling PR, 
Prince RL. Randomized controlled trial of the effects of 
calcium with or without vitamin D on bone structure and 
bone-related chemistry in elderly women with vitamin D 
insufficiency. J Bone Miner Res. 2008;23:1343-1348. [EL 
1; RCT]
111. Zhu K, Devine A, Dick IM, Wilson SG, Prince RL. 
Effects of calcium and vitamin D supplementation on 
hip bone mineral density and calcium-related analytes in 
elderly ambulatory Australian women: a five-year random-
ized controlled trial. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2008;93: 
743-749. [EL 1; RCT]
112. Langsetmo L, Berger C, Kreiger N, Kovacs CS, Hanley 
DA, Jamal SA, et al. Calcium and vitamin D intake 
and mortality: results from the Canadian Multicentre 
Osteoporosis Study (CaMos). J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 
 AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(Suppl 4)  35 
2013;98:3010-3018. [EL 2; PCS]
113. Silverman 
SL, 
Cummings 
SR, 
Watts 
NB, 
Consensus Panel of the ASBMR, ISCD, and NOF. 
Recommendations for the clinical evaluation of agents for 
treatment of osteoporosis: consensus of an expert panel 
representing the American Society for Bone and Mineral 
Research (ASBMR), the International Society for Clinical 
Densitometry (ISCD), and the National Osteoporosis 
Foundation (NOF). J Bone Min Res. 2008;23:159-165. [EL 
4; consensus NE]
114. Bauer DC. Clinical practice. Calcium supplements and 
fracture prevention. N Engl J Med. 2013;369:1537-1543. 
[EL 4; review NE]
115. Prentice RL, Pettinger MB, Jackson RD, Wactawski-
Wende J, Lacroix AZ, Anderson GL, et al. Health risks 
and benefits from calcium and vitamin D supplementation: 
Women’s Health Initiative clinical trial and cohort study. 
Osteoporos Int. 2013;24:567-580. [EL 1; RCT]
116. Reid IR, Bolland MJ. Calcium supplements: bad for the 
heart? Heart. 2012;98:895-896. [EL 4; NE]
117. Bolland MJ, Grey A, Gamble GD, Reid IR. Calcium and 
vitamin D supplements and health outcomes: a reanalysis 
of the Women’s Health Initiative (WHI) limited-access 
data set. Am J Clin Nutr. 2011;94:1144-1149. [EL 1; RCT]
118. Moyer VA; U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. 
Vitamin D and calcium supplementation to prevent frac-
tures in adults: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force rec-
ommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2013;158:691-
696. [EL 4; consensus NE]
119. Ross AC. The 2011 report on dietary reference intakes for 
calcium and vitamin D. Public Health Nutr. 2011;14:938-
939. [EL 4; NE]
120. Alaimo K, McDowell MA, Briefel RR, Bischof AM, 
Caughman CR, Loria CM, et al. Dietary intake of vita-
mins, minerals, and fiber of persons ages 2 months and over 
in the United States: Third National Health and Nutrition 
Examination Survey, Phase 1, 1988-91. Adv Data. 1994;1-
28. [EL 3; SS]
121. Kim MH, Kim EJ, Jung JY, Choi MK. Effect of water-
soluble silicon supplementation on bone status and balance 
of calcium and magnesium in male mice. Biol Trace Elem 
Res. 2014;158:238-242. [EL 4; NE]
122. Spencer H, Fuller H, Norris C, Williams D. Effect of 
magnesium on the intestinal absorption of calcium in man. 
J Am Coll Nutr. 1994;13:485-492. [EL 3; CCS]
123. Jackson HA, Sheehan AH. Effect of vitamin A on frac-
ture risk. Ann Pharmacother. 2005;39:2086-2090 [EL 4; 
review NE]
124. Braam LA, Knapen MH, Geusens P, Brouns F, 
Hamulyak K, Gerichhausen MJ, et al. Vitamin K1 sup-
plementation retards bone loss in postmenopausal women 
between 50 and 60 years of age. Calcif Tissue Int. 2003; 
73:21-26. [EL 1; RCT]
125. Alexandersen 
P, Toussaint A, 
Christiansen 
C, 
Devogelaer JP, Roux C, Fechtenbaum J, et al. 
Ipriflavone in the treatment of postmenopausal osteoporo-
sis: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2001;285:1482-
1488. [EL 1; RCT]
126. Atkinson C, Compston JE, Day NE, Dowsett M, 
Bingham SA. The effects of phytoestrogen isoflavones 
on bone density in women: a double-blind, randomized, 
placebo-controlled trial. Am J Clin Nutr. 2004;79:326-333. 
[EL 1; RCT]
127. Gallagher JC, Satpathy R, Rafferty K, Haynatzka 
V. The effect of soy protein isolate on bone metabolism. 
Menopause. 2004;11:290-298. [EL 1; RCT, small sample 
size, no placebo]
128. Hallström H, Wolk A, Glynn A, Michaëlsson K. Coffee, 
tea and caffeine consumption in relation to osteoporotic 
fracture risk in a cohort of Swedish women. Osteoporos 
Int. 2006;17:1055-1064. [EL 2; PCS]
129. Kiel DP, Felson DT, Hannan MT, Anderson JJ, Wilson 
PW. Caffeine and the risk of hip fracture: the Framingham 
Study. Am J Epidemiol. 1990;132:675-684. [EL 2; PCS]
130. Barrett-Connor E, Chang JC, Edelstein SL. Coffee-
associated osteoporosis offset by daily milk consumption. 
The Rancho Bernardo Study. JAMA. 1994;271:280-283. 
[EL 2; NRCT]
131. Rizzoli R, Ammann P, Chevalley T, Bonjour JP. Protein 
intake and bone disorders in the elderly. Joint Bone Spine. 
2001;68:383-392. [EL 4; review NE]
132. Schurch MA, Rizzoli R, Slosman D, Vadas L, Vergnaud 
P, Bonjour JP. Protein supplements increase serum 
insulin-like growth factor-I levels and attenuate proxi-
mal femur bone loss in patients with recent hip fracture. 
A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Ann 
Intern Med. 1998;128:801-809. [EL 1; RCT, small sample 
size]
133. Kanis JA, Johansson H, Johnell O, Oden A, De Laet 
C, Eisman JA, et al. Alcohol intake as a risk factor for 
fracture. Osteoporos Int. 2005;16:737-742. [EL 2; PCS]
134. Giampietro PF, McCarty C, Mukesh B, McKiernan F, 
Wilson D, Shuldiner A, et al. The role of cigarette smok-
ing and statins in the development of postmenopausal 
osteoporosis: a pilot study utilizing the Marshfield Clinic 
Personalized Medicine Cohort. Osteoporos Int. 2010;21: 
467-477. [EL 2; CCS]
135. Daniell HW. Osteoporosis of the slender smoker. Vertebral 
compression fractures and loss of metacarpal cortex in 
relation to postmenopausal cigarette smoking and lack of 
obesity. Arch Intern Med. 1976;136:298-304. [EL 3; CSS]
136. Kanis JA, Johnell O, Oden A, Johansson H, De Laet C, 
Eisman JA, et al. Smoking and fracture risk: a meta-anal-
ysis. Osteoporos Int. 2005;16:155-162. [EL 2; MNRCT]
137. Kelley GA, Kelley KS, Tran ZV. Exercise and lumbar 
spine bone mineral density in postmenopausal women: a 
meta-analysis of individual patient data. J Gerontol A Biol 
Sci Med Sci. 2002;57:M599-M604. [EL 2; MNRCT]
138. Gardner MM, Phty M, Robertson MC, McGee R, 
Campbell AJ. Application of a falls prevention program 
for older people to primary health care practice. Prev Med. 
2002;34:546-553. [EL 2; PCS]
139. Robertson MC, Campbell AJ, Gardner MM, Devlin N. 
Preventing injuries in older people by preventing falls: a 
meta-analysis of individual-level data. J Am Geriatr Soc. 
2002;50:905-911. [EL 2; MNRCT]
140. Wolff I, van Croonenborg JJ, Kemper HC, Kostense 
PJ, Twisk JW. The effect of exercise training programs on 
bone mass: a meta-analysis of published controlled trials in 
pre- and postmenopausal women. Osteoporos Int. 1999;9: 
1-12. [EL 2; MNRCT]
141. Choi M, Hector M. Effectiveness of intervention pro-
grams in preventing falls: a systematic review of recent 10 
years and meta-analysis. J Am Med Dir Assoc. 2012;13:188 
e113-e121. [EL 1; MRCT]
142. Sherrington C, Whitney JC, Lord SR, Herbert RD, 
Cumming RG, Close JC. Effective exercise for the pre-
vention of falls: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J 
Am Geriatr Soc. 2008;56:2234-2243. [EL 1; MRCT]
143. Kelley GA, Kelley KS, Kohrt WM. Effects of ground and 
joint reaction force exercise on lumbar spine and femo-
ral neck bone mineral density in postmenopausal women: 
 36  AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(Suppl 4)
a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. BMC 
Musculoskelet Disord. 2012;13:177. [EL 1; MRCT]
144. Scott V, Wagar L, Elliott S. Falls & related injuries among 
older Canadians: Fall-related hospitalizations & interven-
tion initiatives. Dvision of Aging and Seniors, Public 
Health Agency of Canada; 2010. Available at: http://
www.hiphealth.ca/media/research_cemfia_phac_epi_and_
inventor_20100610.pdf. [EL 4; NE]
145. Gillespie LD, Robertson MC, Gillespie WJ, Sherrington 
C, Gates S, Clemson LM, et al. Interventions for prevent-
ing falls in older people living in the community. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2012;9:CD007146. [EL 1; MRCT]
146. Granacher U, Gollhofer A, Hortobagyi T, Kressig RW, 
Muehlbauer T. The importance of trunk muscle strength 
for balance, functional performance, and fall prevention 
in seniors: a systematic review. Sports Med. 2013;43:627-
641. [EL 2; MNRCT]
147. Tinetti ME, Speechley M, Giner SF. Risk factors for falls 
among elderly persons living in the community. N Engl J 
Med. 1988;319:1701-1707. [EL 2; PCS]
148. Hausdorff JM, Rios DA, Edelberg HK. Gait variability 
and fall risk in community-living older adults: a 1-year 
prospective study. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2001;82:1050-
1056. [EL 2; PCS]
149. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National 
Center for Injury Prevention and Control. Web-based 
Injury Statistics Query and Reporting System (WISQARS). 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National 
Center for Injury Prevention and Control; 2006. Available 
at: https://www.cdc.gov/injury/wisqars/. [EL 4; NE]
150. Stevens JA RG, Kresnow MS. Fatalities and injuries 
from falls among older adults-United States, 1993-2003 
and 2001-2005. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2006;55: 
1221-1224. [EL 3; SS]
151. da Silva RB, Costa-Paiva L, Morais SS, Mezzalira R, 
Ferreira Nde O, Pinto-Neto AM. Predictors of falls in 
women with and without osteoporosis. J Orthop Sports 
Phys Ther. 2010;40:582-588. [EL 3; CSS]
152. Blain H, Rolland Y, Beauchet O, Annweiler C, 
Benhamou CL, Benetos A, et al. Usefulness of bone den-
sity measurement in fallers. Joint Bone Spine. 2014;5:403-
408. [EL 4; NE]
153. Briot K, Cortet B, Thomas T, Audran M, Blain H, 
Breuil V, et al. 2012 update of French guidelines for the 
pharmacological treatment of postmenopausal osteoporo-
sis. Joint Bone Spine. 2012; 79:304-313. [EL 4; consensus, 
NE]
154. van Doorn C, Gruber-Baldini AL, Zimmerman S, 
Hebel JR, Port CL, Baumgarten M, et al. Dementia as 
a risk factor for falls and fall injuries among nursing home 
residents. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2003;51:1213-1218. [EL 2; 
PCS]
155. Goodwin VA, Abbott RA, Whear R, Bethel A, 
Ukoumunne OC, Thompson-Coon J, et al. Multiple 
component interventions for preventing falls and fall-
related injuries among older people: systematic review and 
meta-analysis. BMC Geriatr. 2014;14:15. [EL 1; MRCT]
156. Kemmler W, Haberle L, von Stengel S. Effects of exer-
cise on fracture reduction in older adults: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Osteoporos Int. 2013;24:1937-
1950. [EL 2; MNRCT]
157. Bischoff-Ferrari HA, Dawson-Hughes B, Staehelin HB, 
Orav JE, Stuck AE, Theiler R, et al. Fall prevention with 
supplemental and active forms of vitamin D: a meta-analy-
sis of randomised controlled trials. BMJ. 2009;339:b3692. 
[EL 1; MRCT]
158. Uusi-Rasi K, Patil R, Karinkanta S, Kannus P, Tokola 
K, Lamberg-Allardt C, et al. Exercise and vitamin D in 
fall prevention among older women: a randomized clinical 
trial. JAMA Int Med. 2015;175:703-711. [EL 1; RCT]
159. Sanders KM, Stuart AL, Williamson EJ, Simpson JA, 
Kotowicz MA, Young D, et al. Annual high-dose oral 
vitamin D and falls and fractures in older women. JAMA. 
2010;303:1815-1822. [EL 1; RCT]
160. Parker MJ, Gillespie WJ, Gillespie LD. Effectiveness 
of hip protectors for preventing hip fractures in elderly 
people: systematic review. BMJ. 2006;332:571-574. [EL 
2; MNRCT, quasi-randomized included]
161. Sawka AM, Boulos P, Beattie K, Thabane L, 
Papaioannou A, Gafni A, et al. Do hip protectors decrease 
the risk of hip fracture in institutional and community-
dwelling elderly? A systematic review and meta-analysis 
of randomized controlled trials. Osteoporos Int. 2005;16: 
1461-1474. [EL 1; MRCT]
162. Singh S, Sun H, Anis AH. Cost-effectiveness of hip pro-
tectors in the prevention of osteoporosis related hip frac-
tures in elderly nursing home residents. J Rheumatol. 
2004;31:1607-1613. [EL 3; SS]
163. van Schoor NM, Asma G, Smit JH, Bouter LM, Lips 
P. The Amsterdam Hip Protector Study: compliance and 
determinants of compliance. Osteoporos Int. 2003;14:353-
359. [EL 2; PCS]
164. Warnke A, Meyer G, Bender R, Muhlhauser I. 
Predictors of adherence to the use of hip protectors in nurs-
ing home residents. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2004;52:340-345. 
[EL 2; RCCS]
165. Kiel DP, Magaziner J, Zimmerman S, Ball L, Barton 
BA, Brown KM, et al. Efficacy of a hip protector to pre-
vent hip fracture in nursing home residents: the HIP PRO 
randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2007;298:413-422. 
[EL 2; MNRCT, quasi-randomized included]
166. Santesso N, Carrasco-Labra A, Brignardello-Petersen 
R. Hip protectors for preventing hip fractures in older peo-
ple. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014;3:CD001255. [EL 
2; MNRCT, quasi-randomized included]
167. Gillespie WJ, Gillespie LD, Parker MJ. Hip protectors 
for preventing hip fractures in older people. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2010;CD001255. [EL 2; MRCT, quasi-
RCTs included]
168. Wei QS, Huang L, Chen XH, Wang HB, Sun WS, Huo 
SC, et al. Effect of whole body vibration therapy on cir-
culating serotonin levels in an ovariectomized rat model of 
osteoporosis. Iran J Basic Med Sci. 2014;17:62-68. [EL 4; 
NE]
169. Totosy de Zepetnek JO, Giangregorio LM, Craven BC. 
Whole-body vibration as potential intervention for people 
with low bone mineral density and osteoporosis: a review. 
J Rehabil Res Dev. 2009;46:529-542. [EL 4; review NE]
170. Ruan XY, Jin FY, Liu YL, Peng ZL, Sun YG. Effects 
of vibration therapy on bone mineral density in postmeno-
pausal women with osteoporosis. Chinese Med J (Engl). 
2008;121:1155-1158. [EL 2; NRCT]
171. Li WC, Chen YC, Yang RS, Tsauo JY. Effects of exer-
cise programmes on quality of life in osteoporotic and 
osteopenic postmenopausal women: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis. Clin Rehabil. 2009;23:888-896. [EL 1; 
MRCT]
172. Black DM, Cummings SR, Karpf DB, Cauley JA, 
Thompson DE, Nevitt MC, et al. Randomised trial of 
effect of alendronate on risk of fracture in women with exist-
ing vertebral fractures. Fracture Intervention Trial Research 
Group. Lancet. 1996;348:1535-1541. [EL 1; RCT]
 AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(Suppl 4)  37 
173. Chesnut IC, Skag A, Christiansen C, Recker R, 
Stakkestad JA, Hoiseth A, et al. Effects of oral ibandro-
nate administered daily or intermittently on fracture risk in 
postmenopausal osteoporosis. J Bone Miner Res. 2004;19: 
1241-1249. [EL 1; RCT]
174. Harris ST, Watts NB, Genant HK, McKeever CD, 
Hangartner T, Keller M, et al. Effects of risedronate 
treatment on vertebral and nonvertebral fractures in women 
with postmenopausal osteoporosis: a randomized con-
trolled trial. Vertebral Efficacy With Risedronate Therapy 
(VERT) Study Group. JAMA. 1999;282:1344-1352. [EL 1; 
RCT]
175. Reginster J, Minne HW, Sorensen OH, Hooper M, 
Roux C, Brandi ML, et al. Randomized trial of the 
effects of risedronate on vertebral fractures in women 
with established postmenopausal osteoporosis. Vertebral 
Efficacy with Risedronate Therapy (VERT) Study Group. 
Osteoporos Int. 2000;11:83-91. [EL 1; RCT]
176. Kanis JA, Barton IP, Johnell O. Risedronate decreases 
fracture risk in patients selected solely on the basis of prior 
vertebral fracture. Osteoporos Int. 2005;16:475-482. [EL 
1; RCT]
177. Chesnut CH 3rd, Silverman S, Andriano K, Genant H, 
Gimona A, Harris S, et al. A randomized trial of nasal 
spray salmon calcitonin in postmenopausal women with 
established osteoporosis: the prevent recurrence of osteo-
porotic fractures study. PROOF Study Group. Am J Med. 
2000;109:267-276. [EL 1; RCT]
178. Ettinger B, Black DM, Mitlak BH, Knickerbocker RK, 
Nickelsen T, Genant HK, et al. Reduction of vertebral 
fracture risk in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis 
treated with raloxifene: results from a 3-year randomized 
clinical trial. Multiple Outcomes of Raloxifene Evaluation 
(MORE) Investigators. JAMA. 1999;282:637-645. [EL 1; 
RCT]
179. Cummings SR, San Martin J, McClung MR, Siris ES, 
Eastell R, Reid IR, et al. Denosumab for prevention of 
fractures in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis. N 
Engl J Med. 2009;361:756-765. [EL 1; RCT]
180. Neer RM, Arnaud CD, Zanchetta JR, Prince R, Gaich 
GA, Reginster JY, et al. Effect of parathyroid hormone 
(1-34) on fractures and bone mineral density in postmeno-
pausal women with osteoporosis. N Engl J Med. 2001; 
344:1434-1441. [EL 1; RCT, partial blinding]
181. Lyles KW, Colón-Emeric CS, Magaziner JS, Adachi 
JD, Pieper CF, Mautalen C, et al. Zoledronic Acid 
in Reducing Clinical Fracture and Mortality after Hip 
Fracture. N Engl J Med. 2007;357:nihpa40967. [EL 1; 
RCT]
182. Black DM, Thompson DE, Bauer DC, Ensrud K, 
Musliner T, Hochberg MC, et al. Fracture risk reduction 
with alendronate in women with osteoporosis: the Fracture 
Intervention Trial. FIT Research Group. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab. 2000;85:4118-4124. [EL 2; PCS]
183. Black DM, Schwartz AV, Ensrud KE, Cauley JA, 
Levis S, Quandt SA, et al. Effects of continuing or stop-
ping alendronate after 5 years of treatment: the Fracture 
Intervention Trial Long-term Extension (FLEX): a ran-
domized trial. JAMA. 2006;296:2927-2938. [EL 1; RCT]
184. Bone HG, Hosking D, Devogelaer JP, Tucci JR, Emkey 
RD, Tonino RP, et al. Ten years’ experience with alendro-
nate for osteoporosis in postmenopausal women. N Engl J 
Med. 2004;350:1189-1199. [EL 4; NE]
185. Miller PD, McClung MR, Macovei L, Stakkestad JA, 
Luckey M, Bonvoisin B, et al. Monthly oral ibandronate 
therapy in postmenopausal osteoporosis: 1-year results 
from the MOBILE study. J Bone Miner Res. 2005;20:1315-
1322. [EL 1; RCT]
186. Reginster JY, Adami S, Lakatos P, Greenwald M, 
Stepan JJ, Silverman SL, et al. Efficacy and tolerabil-
ity of once-monthly oral ibandronate in postmenopausal 
osteoporosis: 2 year results from the MOBILE study. Ann 
Rheum Dis. 2006;65:654-661. [EL 1; RCT]
187. Eisman JA, Civitelli R, Adami S, Czerwinski E, Recknor 
C, Prince R, et al. Efficacy and tolerability of intravenous 
ibandronate injections in postmenopausal osteoporosis: 
2-year results from the DIVA study. J Rheumatol. 2008; 
35:488-497. [EL 1; RCT]
188. McClung MR, Geusens P, Miller PD, Zippel H, Bensen 
WG, Roux C, et al. Effect of risedronate on the risk of 
hip fracture in elderly women. Hip Intervention Program 
Study Group. N Engl J Med. 2001;344:333-340. [EL 1; 
RCT]
189. Black DM, Delmas PD, Eastell R, Reid IR, Boonen S, 
Cauley JA, et al. Once-yearly zoledronic acid for treat-
ment of postmenopausal osteoporosis. N Engl J Med. 
2007;356:1809-1822. [EL 1; RCT]
190. Sorensen OH, Crawford GM, Mulder H, Hosking DJ, 
Gennari C, Mellstrom D, et al. Long-term efficacy of 
risedronate: a 5-year placebo-controlled clinical experi-
ence. Bone. 2003;32:120-126. [EL 1; RCT]
191. Rossouw JE, Anderson GL, Prentice RL, LaCroix AZ, 
Kooperberg C, Stefanick ML, et al. Risks and benefits of 
estrogen plus progestin in healthy postmenopausal women: 
principal results From the Women’s Health Initiative ran-
domized controlled trial. JAMA. 2002;288:321-333. [EL 1; 
RCT]
192. Dawson-Hughes B, Tosteson AN, Melton LJ 3rd, Baim 
S, Favus MJ, Khosla S, et al. Implications of absolute 
fracture risk assessment for osteoporosis practice guide-
lines in the USA. Osteoporos Int. 2008;19:449-458. [EL 4; 
opinion NE]
193. Guideline for the prevention of falls in older persons. 
American Geriatrics Society, British Geriatrics Society, 
and American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons Panel on 
Falls Prevention. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2001;49:664-672. [EL 
4; guideline]
194. Kanis JA, Johansson H, Oden A, Dawson-Hughes B, 
Melton LJ 3rd, McCloskey EV. The effects of a FRAX 
revision for the USA. Osteoporos Int. 2010;21:35-40. [EL 
3; SS]
195. Ettinger B, Black DM, Dawson-Hughes B, Pressman 
AR, Melton LJ 3rd. Updated fracture incidence rates for 
the US version of FRAX. Osteoporos Int. 2010;21:25-33. 
[EL 3; SS]
196. Tosteson AN, Melton LJ 3rd, Dawson-Hughes B, Baim 
S, Favus MJ, Khosla S, et al. Cost-effective osteoporo-
sis treatment thresholds: the United States perspective. 
Osteoporos Int. 2008;19:437-447. [EL 3; CSS]
197. Cummings SR, Black DM, Thompson DE, Applegate 
WB, Barrett-Connor E, Musliner TA, et al. Effect of 
alendronate on risk of fracture in women with low bone 
density but without vertebral fractures: results from the 
Fracture Intervention Trial. JAMA. 1998;280:2077-2082. 
[EL 1; RCT]
198. Watts NB, Roux C, Modlin JF, Brown JP, Daniels A, 
Jackson S, et al. Infections in postmenopausal women 
with osteoporosis treated with denosumab or placebo: 
coincidence or causal association? Osteoporos Int. 2012; 
23:327-337. [EL 1; RCT]
199. Bone HG, Bolognese MA, Yuen CK, Kendler DL, Wang 
H, Liu Y, et al. Effects of denosumab on bone mineral 
 38  AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(Suppl 4)
density and bone turnover in postmenopausal women. J 
Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2008;93:2149-2157. [EL 1; RCT]
200. Miller PD, Bolognese MA, Lewiecki EM, McClung 
MR, Ding B, Austin M, et al. Effect of denosumab on 
bone density and turnover in postmenopausal women with 
low bone mass after long-term continued, discontinued, 
and restarting of therapy: a randomized blinded phase 2 
clinical trial. Bone. 2008;43:222-229. [EL 1; RCT]
201. McClung MR, Lewiecki EM, Geller ML, Bolognese 
MA, Peacock M, Weinstein RL, et al. Effect of deno-
sumab on bone mineral density and biochemical markers 
of bone turnover: 8-year results of a phase 2 clinical trial. 
Osteoporos Int. 2013;24:227-235. [EL 1; RCT]
202. Bone HG, Chapurlat R, Brandi ML, Brown JP, 
Czerwinski E, Krieg MA, et al. The effect of three or six 
years of denosumab exposure in women with postmeno-
pausal osteoporosis: results from the FREEDOM exten-
sion. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013;98:4483-4492. [EL 1; 
RCT]
203. Watts NB, Miller PD, Kohlmeier LA, Sebba A, Chen P, 
Wong M, et al. Vertebral fracture risk is reduced in women 
who lose femoral neck BMD with teriparatide treatment. J 
Bone Miner Res. 2009;24:1125-1131. [EL 2; RCCS]
204. McClung MR, Wasnich RD, Recker R, Cauley JA, 
Chesnut CH 3rd, Ensrud KE, et al. Oral daily ibandro-
nate prevents bone loss in early postmenopausal women 
without osteoporosis. J Bone Miner Res. 2004;19:11-18. 
[EL 1; RCT]
205. 2015 Atelvia (risedronate sodium) delayed-release tablets. 
In. North Norwich, NY: Norwich Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 
[EL 4; NE]
206. Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) 
CKD-MBD Work Group. 2009 KDIGO clinical practice 
guideline for the diagnosis, evaluation, prevention, and 
treatment of Chronic Kidney Disease-Mineral and Bone 
Disorder (CKD-MBD). Kidney Intl Suppl. 2009;S1-S130. 
[EL 4; CPG NE]
207. Jones SG, Dolan G, Lengyel K, Myers B. Severe increase 
in creatinine with hypocalcaemia in thalidomide-treated 
myeloma patients receiving zoledronic acid infusions. Br J 
Haematol. 2002;119:576-577. [EL 4; NE]
208. Chang JT, Green L, Beitz J. Renal failure with the use 
of zoledronic acid. N Engl J Med. 2003;349:1676-1679; 
discussion 1676-1679. [EL 3; SS]
209. Tarassoff P HY, Maladorno D. Renal failure with the use 
of zoledronic acid. N Engl J Med. 2003;349:1678-1679. 
[EL 4; NE]
210. Adami S, Bhalla AK, Dorizzi R, Montesanti F, Rosini S, 
Salvagno G, et al. The acute-phase response after bisphos-
phonate administration. Calcif Tissue Int. 1987;41:326-
331. [EL 2; PCS]
211. Wysowski DK, Chang JT. Alendronate and risedronate: 
reports of severe bone, joint, and muscle pain. Arch Intern 
Med. 2005;165:346-347. [EL 3; SS]
212. Cardwell CR, Abnet CC, Cantwell MM, Murray LJ. 
Exposure to oral bisphosphonates and risk of esophageal 
cancer. JAMA. 2010;304:657-663. [EL 2; PCS]
213. Green J, Czanner G, Reeves G, Watson J, Wise L, Beral 
V. Oral bisphosphonates and risk of cancer of oesophagus, 
stomach, and colorectum: case-control analysis within a 
UK primary care cohort. BMJ. 2010;341:c4444. [EL 2; 
RCCS]
214. McClung M, Harris ST, Miller PD, Bauer DC, Davison 
KS, Dian L, et al. Bisphosphonate therapy for osteoporo-
sis: benefits, risks, and drug holiday. Am J Med. 2013;126: 
13-20. [EL 4; review NE]
215. U.S. Food & Drug Administration. Questions and answers: 
changes to the indicated population for miaclcin (calcito-
nin-salmon). U.S. Food & Drug Administration; 2014. 
Available at: http://www.fda.gov/drugs/drugsafety/post
 
 marketdrugsafetyinformationforpatientsandproviders/
ucm388641.htm [EL 4; NE]
216. 2011 Evista (raloxifene hydrochloride) Tablet for Oral Use 
[package insert]. Indianapolis, IN: Eli Lilly and Company. 
[EL 4, NE]
217. Delmas PD, Bjarnason NH, Mitlak BH, Ravoux AC, 
Shah AS, Huster WJ, et al. Effects of raloxifene on bone 
mineral density, serum cholesterol concentrations, and 
uterine endometrium in postmenopausal women. N Engl J 
Med. 1997;337:1641-1647. [EL 1; RCT]
218. Siris ES, Harris ST, Eastell R, Zanchetta JR, Goemaere 
S, Diez-Perez A, et al. Skeletal effects of raloxifene after 
8 years: results from the continuing outcomes relevant to 
Evista (CORE) study. J Bone Miner Res. 2005;20:1514-
1524. [EL 1; RCT]
219. Vogel VG, Costantino JP, Wickerham DL, Cronin 
WM, Cecchini RS, Atkins JN, et al. Effects of tamoxi-
fen vs raloxifene on the risk of developing invasive breast 
cancer and other disease outcomes: the NSABP Study of 
Tamoxifen and Raloxifene (STAR) P-2 trial. JAMA. 2006; 
295:2727-2741. [EL 1; RCT]
220. Barrett-Connor E, Mosca L, Collins P, Geiger MJ, 
Grady D, Kornitzer M, et al. Effects of raloxifene on 
cardiovascular events and breast cancer in postmenopausal 
women. N Engl J Med. 2006;355:125-137. [EL 1; RCT]
221. 2014 Fortical (calcitonin-salmon [rDNA origin]) Nasal 
Spray for intranasal use [package insert]. Maple Grove, 
MN: Upsher-Smith Laboratories, Inc. [EL 4; NE]
222. 2014 Miacalcin (calcitonin-salmon) for injection and 
nasal spray [package insert]. East Hanover, NJ: Novartis 
Pharmaceuticals Corporation. [EL 4; NE]
223. Pun KK, Chan LW. Analgesic effect of intranasal salmon 
calcitonin in the treatment of osteoporotic vertebral frac-
tures. Clin Ther. 1989;11:205-209. [EL 2; NRCT]
224. Ofluoglu D, Akyuz G, Unay O, Kayhan O. The effect 
of calcitonin on beta-endorphin levels in postmenopausal 
osteoporotic patients with back pain. Clin Rheumatol. 
2007;26:44-49. [EL 1; RCT, small sample]
225. Laroche M, Cantogrel S, Jamard B, Constantin A, 
Zabraniecki L, Cantagrel A, et al. Comparison of the 
analgesic efficacy of pamidronate and synthetic human 
calcitonin in osteoporotic vertebral fractures: a double-
blind controlled study. Clin Rheumatol. 2006;25:683-686. 
[EL 1; RCT, no placebo, small sample]
226. Lyritis GP, Ioannidis GV, Karachalios T, Roidis N, 
Kataxaki E, Papaioannou N, et al. Analgesic effect of 
salmon calcitonin suppositories in patients with acute pain 
due to recent osteoporotic vertebral crush fractures: a pro-
spective double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled 
clinical study. Clin J Pain. 1999;15:284-289. [EL 1; RCT, 
small sample]
227. Lyritis GP, Paspati I, Karachalios T, Ioakimidis D, 
Skarantavos G, Lyritis PG. Pain relief from nasal salmon 
calcitonin in osteoporotic vertebral crush fractures. A dou-
ble blind, placebo-controlled clinical study. Acta Orthop 
Scand Suppl. 1997;275:112-114. [EL 1; RCT]
228. 2014 Premarin (conjugated estrogens) Tablets, USP 
for oral use [package insert]. Philadelphia, PA: Wyeth 
Pharmaceuticals Inc. [EL 4; NE]
229. Pinkerton JV, Harvey JA, Lindsay R, Pan K, Chines 
AA, Mirkin S, et al. Effects of bazedoxifene/conjugated 
estrogens on the endometrium and bone: a randomized 
 AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(Suppl 4)  39 
trial. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014;99:E189-E198. [EL 
1; RCT]
230. Cauley JA, Robbins J, Chen Z, Cummings SR, Jackson 
RD, LaCroix AZ, et al. Effects of estrogen plus progestin 
on risk of fracture and bone mineral density: the Women’s 
Health Initiative randomized trial. JAMA. 2003;290:1729-
1738. [EL 1; RCT]
231. Jackson RD, Wactawski-Wende J, LaCroix AZ, 
Pettinger M, Yood RA, Watts NB, et al. Effects of con-
jugated equine estrogen on risk of fractures and BMD in 
postmenopausal women with hysterectomy: results from 
the women’s health initiative randomized trial. J Bone 
Miner Res. 2006;21:817-828. [EL 1; RCT]
232. 2012 Forteo (teriparatide [rDNA origin] injection) for sub-
cutaneous use [package insert]. Indianapolis, IN: Eli Lilly 
and Company. [EL 4; NE]
233. Vahle JL, Sato M, Long GG, Young JK, Francis PC, 
Engelhardt JA, et al. Skeletal changes in rats given daily 
subcutaneous injections of recombinant human parathy-
roid hormone (1-34) for 2 years and relevance to human 
safety. Toxicol Pathol. 2002;30:312-321. [EL 4; NE]
234. Vahle JL, Long GG, Sandusky G, Westmore M, Ma 
YL, Sato M. Bone neoplasms in F344 rats given teripara-
tide [rhPTH(1-34)] are dependent on duration of treatment 
and dose. Toxicol Pathol. 2004;32:426-438. [EL 4; NE]
235. Harper KD, Krege JH, Marcus R, Mitlak BH. 
Osteosarcoma and teriparatide? J Bone Miner Res. 2007; 
22:334. [EL 4; NE]
236. Subbiah V, Madsen VS, Raymond AK, Benjamin RS, 
Ludwig JA. Of mice and men: divergent risks of teripara-
tide-induced osteosarcoma. Osteoporos Int. 2010;21:1041-
1045. [EL 3; SCR]
237. Lindsay R, Scheele WH, Neer R, Pohl G, Adami S, 
Mautalen C, et al. Sustained vertebral fracture risk 
reduction after withdrawal of teriparatide in postmeno-
pausal women with osteoporosis. Arch Intern Med. 2004; 
164:2024-2030. [EL 2; PCS]
238. Black DM, Bilezikian JP, Ensrud KE, Greenspan SL, 
Palermo L, Hue T, et al. One year of alendronate after 
one year of parathyroid hormone (1-84) for osteoporosis. 
N Engl J Med. 2005;353:555-565. [EL 1; RCT]
239. Reginster JY. Cardiac concerns associated with strontium 
ranelate. Expert Opin Drug Saf. 2014;13:1209-1213. [EL 
4; NE]
240. European Medicines Agency. 2013 Assessment report—
periodic safety update report. London, UK: European 
Medicines Agency; 2013. EPAR - Protelos-H-C-560-
PSU31. [EL 3; SS]
241. Audran M, Jakob FJ, Palacios S, Brandi ML, Broll H, 
Hamdy NA, et al. A large prospective European cohort 
study of patients treated with strontium ranelate and fol-
lowed up over 3 years. Rheumatol Int. 2013;33:2231-2239. 
[EL 2; PCS]
242. Cooper C, Fox KM, Borer JS. 2014 Ischaemic cardiac 
events and use of strontium ranelate in postmenopausal 
osteoporosis: a nested case-control study in the CPRD. 
Osteoporos Int. 2014;25:737-745. [EL 2; RCCS]
243. Abrahamsen B, Grove EL, Vestergaard P. Nationwide 
registry-based analysis of cardiovascular risk factors 
and adverse outcomes in patients treated with strontium 
ranelate. Osteoporos Int. 2014;25:757-762. [EL 3; SS]
244. Svanström H, Pasternak B, Hviid A. Use of strontium 
ranelate and risk of acute coronary syndrome: cohort study. 
Ann Rheum Dis. 2014;73:1037-1043. [EL 3; SS]
245. Blake GM, Fogelman I. The correction of BMD measure-
ments for bone strontium content. J Clin Densitom. 2007; 
10:259-265. [EL 4; NE]
246. Greenspan SL, Maitland LA, Myers ER, Krasnow MB, 
Kido TH. Femoral bone loss progresses with age: a lon-
gitudinal study in women over age 65. J Bone Miner Res. 
1994;9:1959-1965. [EL 2; PCS, small sample size]
247. Finkelstein JS, Brockwell SE, Mehta V, Greendale 
GA, Sowers MR, Ettinger B, et al. Bone mineral density 
changes during the menopause transition in a multiethnic 
cohort of women. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2008;93:861-
868. [EL 2; PCS]
248. Gourlay ML, Fine JP, Preisser JS, May RC, Li C, Lui 
LY, et al. Bone-density testing interval and transition to 
osteoporosis in older women. N Engl J Med. 2012;366:225-
233. [EL 2; PCS]
249. Lewiecki EM, Watts NB. Assessing response to osteopo-
rosis therapy. Osteoporos Int. 2008;19:1363-1368. [EL 4; 
review NE]
250. Lewiecki EM, Randolph LA. How common is loss of 
bone mineral density in elderly clinical practice patients 
receiving oral bisphosphonate therapy for osteoporosis? J 
Bone Miner Res. 2002;17:S367. [EL 4; NE]
251. Lenchik L, Kiebzak GM, Blunt BA. What is the role of 
serial bone mineral density measurements in patient man-
agement? J Clin Densitom. 2002;5 Suppl:S29-S38. [EL 4; 
NE]
252. Baim S, Wilson CR, Lewiecki EM, Luckey MM, 
Downs RW Jr, Lentle BC. Precision assessment and 
radiation safety for dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry: 
position paper of the International Society for Clinical 
Densitometry. J Clin Densitom. 2005;8:371-378. [EL 4; 
NE]
253. Bouxsein ML. Mechanisms of osteoporosis therapy: a 
bone strength perspective. Clin Cornerstone. 2003;Suppl 
2:S13-S21. [EL 4; NE]
254. Tosteson AN, Grove MR, Hammond CS, Moncur MM, 
Ray GT, Hebert GM, et al. Early discontinuation of treat-
ment for osteoporosis. Am J Med. 2003;115:209-216. [EL 
3; survey SS]
255. Shen L, Xie X, Su Y, Luo C, Zhang C, Zeng B. Parathyroid 
hormone versus bisphosphonate treatment on bone mineral 
density in osteoporosis therapy: a meta-analysis of ran-
domized controlled trials. PLoS One. 2011;6:e26267. [EL 
1; MRCT]
256. Simon JA, Recknor C, Moffett AH Jr, Adachi JD, 
Franek E, Lewiecki EM, et al. Impact of denosumab 
on the peripheral skeleton of postmenopausal women 
with osteoporosis: bone density, mass, and strength of the 
radius, and wrist fracture. Menopause. 2013;20:130-137. 
[EL 1; RCT]
257. Schousboe JT, Vokes T, Broy SB, Ferrar L, McKiernan 
F, Roux C, et al. Vertebral Fracture Assessment: the 2007 
ISCD Official Positions. J Clin Densitom. 2008;11:92-108. 
[EL 4; consensus NE]
258. Schousboe JT, Shepherd JA, Bilezikian JP, Baim S. 
Executive summary of the 2013 International Society for 
Clinical Densitometry Position Development Conference 
on bone densitometry. J Clin Densitom. 2013;16:455-466. 
[EL 4; consensus NE]
259. Hochberg MC, Ross PD, Black D, Cummings SR, 
Genant HK, Nevitt MC, et al. Larger increases in bone 
mineral density during alendronate therapy are associated 
with a lower risk of new vertebral fractures in women with 
 40  AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(Suppl 4)
postmenopausal osteoporosis. Fracture Intervention Trial 
Research Group. Arthritis Rheum. 1999;42:1246-1254. 
[EL 1; RCT]
260. Watts NB, Cooper C, Lindsay R, Eastell R, Manhart 
MD, Barton IP, et al. Relationship between changes in 
bone mineral density and vertebral fracture risk associated 
with risedronate: greater increases in bone mineral density 
do not relate to greater decreases in fracture risk. J Clin 
Densitom. 2004;7:255-261. [EL 1; MRCT]
261. Chapurlat RD, Palermo L, Ramsay P, Cummings SR. 
Risk of fracture among women who lose bone density dur-
ing treatment with alendronate. The Fracture Intervention 
Trial. Osteoporos Int. 2005;16:842-848. [EL 1; RCT]
262. Ryg J, Rejnmark L, Overgaard S, Brixen K, 
Vestergaard P. Hip fracture patients at risk of second hip 
fracture: a nationwide population-based cohort study of 
169,145 cases during 1977-2001. J Bone Miner Res. 2009; 
24:1299-1307. [EL 2; PCS]
263. Black DM, 
Arden NK, Palermo L, Pearson J, Cummings 
SR. Prevalent vertebral deformities predict hip fractures 
and new vertebral fractures but not wrist fractures. J Bone 
Miner Res. 1999;14:821-828. [EL 2; PCS]
264. Gallagher JC, Genant HK, Crans GG, Vargas SJ, 
Krege JH. Teriparatide reduces the fracture risk associ-
ated with increasing number and severity of osteoporotic 
fractures. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2005;90:1583-1587. 
[EL 1; RCT]
265. Lewiecki EM, Cummings SR, Cosman F. Treat-to-
target for osteoporosis: Is now the time? J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab. 2013;98:946-953. [EL 4; opinion NE]
266. Cummings SR, Cosman F, Eastell R, Reid IR, Mehta 
M, Lewiecki EM. Goal-directed treatment of osteoporo-
sis. J Bone Miner Res. 2013;28:433-438. [EL 4; opinion 
NE]
267. Woo SB, Hellstein JW, Kalmar JR. Narrative [corrected] 
review: bisphosphonates and osteonecrosis of the jaws. 
Ann Intern Med. 2006;144:753-761. [EL 4; review NE]
268. Bilezikian J. Osteonecrosis of the jaw: do bisphospho-
nates pose a risk? N Engl J Med. 2006;355:2278-2282. [EL 
4; review NE]
269. Khosla S, Burr D, Cauley J, Dempster DW, Ebeling PR, 
Felsenberg D, et al. Bisphosphonate-associated osteone-
crosis of the jaw: report of a task force of the American 
Society for Bone and Mineral Research. J Bone Miner Res. 
2007;22:1479-1491. [EL 4; consensus NE]
270. Khan AA, Morrison A, Hanley DA, Felsenberg D, 
McCauley LK, O’Ryan F, et al. Diagnosis and manage-
ment of osteonecrosis of the jaw: a systematic review and 
international consensus. J Bone Miner Res. 2015;30:3-23. 
[EL 4; review NE]
271. Bauer DC, Black D, Ensrud K, Thompson D, Hochberg 
M, Nevitt M, et al. Upper gastrointestinal tract safety pro-
file of alendronate: the fracture intervention trial. Arch 
Intern Med. 2000;160:517-525. [EL 1; RCT]
272. Lenart BA, Neviaser AS, Lyman S, Chang CC, Edobor-
Osula F, Steele B, et al. Association of low-energy femo-
ral fractures with prolonged bisphosphonate use: a case 
control study. Osteoporos Int. 2009;20:1353-1362. [EL 2; 
RCCS]
273. Shane E, Burr D, Abrahamsen B, Adler RA, Brown TD, 
Cheung AM, et al. Atypical subtrochanteric and diaphy-
seal femoral fractures: second report of a task force of the 
American Society for Bone and Mineral Research. J Bone 
Miner Res. 2014;29:1-23. [EL 4; review NE]
274. Watts N, Freedholm D, Daifotis A. The clinical tolerabil-
ity profile of alendronate. Int J Clin Pract Suppl. 1999;101: 
51-61. [EL 4; review NE]
275. de Groen PC, Lubbe DF, Hirsch LJ, Daifotis A, 
Stephenson W, Freedholm D, et al. Esophagitis associated 
with the use of alendronate. N Engl J Med. 1996;335:1016-
1021. [EL 3; CCS]
276. Shane E, Burr D, Ebeling PR, Abrahamsen B, Adler 
RA, Brown TD, et al. Atypical subtrochanteric and 
diaphyseal femoral fractures: report of a task force of the 
American Society for Bone and Mineral Research. J Bone 
Miner Res. 2010;25:2267-2294. [EL 4; review NE]
277. Kim SY, Schneeweiss S, Katz JN, Levin R, Solomon 
DH. Oral bisphosphonates and risk of subtrochanteric or 
diaphyseal femur fractures in a population-based cohort. J 
Bone Miner Res. 2011;26:993-1001. [EL 2; PCS]
278. Sharma A, Chatterjee S, Arbab-Zadeh A, Goyal S, 
Lichstein E, Ghosh J, et al. Risk of serious atrial fibril-
lation and stroke with use of bisphosphonates: evidence 
from a meta-analysis. Chest. 2013;144:1311-1322. [EL 2; 
MNRCT]
279. Sharma A, Einstein AJ, Vallakati A, Arbab-Zadeh A, 
Walker MD, Mukherjee D, et al. Risk of atrial fibrilla-
tion with use of oral and intravenous bisphosphonates. Am 
J Cardiol. 2014;113:1815-1821. [EL 2; MNRCT]
280. Schwartz AV, Bauer DC, Cummings SR, Cauley JA, 
Ensrud KE, Palermo L, et al. Efficacy of continued alen-
dronate for fractures in women with and without prevalent 
vertebral fracture: the FLEX trial. J Bone Miner Res. 2010; 
25:976-982. [EL 1; RCT]
281. Black DM, Reid IR, Cauley JA, Cosman F, Leung 
PC, Lakatos P, et al. The Effect of 6 versus 9 Years of 
Zoledronic Acid Treatment in Osteoporosis: A Randomized 
Second Extension to the HORIZON-Pivotal Fracture Trial 
(PFT). J Bone Miner Res. 2015;30:934-944. [EL 1; RCT]
282. Cosman F, Cauley JA, Eastell R, Boonen S, Palermo 
L, Reid IR, et al. Reassessment of fracture risk in women 
after 3 years of treatment with zoledronic acid: when is 
it reasonable to discontinue treatment? J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab. 2014;99:4546-4554. [EL 1; RCT]
283. Adler RA, El-Hajj Fuleihan G, Bauer DC, Camacho 
PM, Clarke BL, Clines GA, et al. Managing Osteoporosis 
in Patients on Long-Term Bisphosphonate Treatment: 
Report of a Task Force of the American Society for Bone 
and Mineral Research. J Bone Miner Res. 2016;31:16-35. 
[EL 4; consensus]
284. Black DM, Reid IR, Boonen S, Bucci-Rechtweg C, 
Cauley JA, Cosman F, et al. The effect of 3 versus 6 years 
of zoledronic acid treatment of osteoporosis: a randomized 
extension to the HORIZON-Pivotal Fracture Trial (PFT). J 
Bone Miner Res. 2012;27:243-254. [EL 1; RCT]
285. Russell RG. Bisphosphonates: the first 40 years. Bone. 
2011;49:2-19. [EL 4; review]
286. Compston JE, Watts NB. Combination therapy for post-
menopausal osteoporosis. Clin Endocrinol. 2002;56:565-
569. [EL 4; review NE]
287. Black DM, Greenspan SL, Ensrud KE, Palermo L, 
McGowan JA, Lang TF, et al. The effects of parathyroid 
hormone and alendronate alone or in combination in post-
menopausal osteoporosis. N Engl J Med. 2003;349:1207-
1215. [EL 1; RCT]
288. Cosman F, Eriksen EF, Recknor C, Miller PD, 
Guanabens N, Kasperk C, et al. Effects of intravenous 
zoledronic acid plus subcutaneous teriparatide [rhPTH(1-
34)] in postmenopausal osteoporosis. J Bone Miner Res. 
2011;26:503-511. [EL 1; RCT, partial blinding]
289. Leder BZ, Tsai JN, Uihlein AV, Burnett-Bowie SA, Zhu 
Y, Foley K, et al. Two years of Denosumab and teripara-
tide administration in postmenopausal women with osteo-
porosis (The DATA Extension Study): a randomized con-
trolled trial. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014;99:1694-1700. 
[EL 1; RCT]
290. Leder BZ, Tsai JN, Uihlein AV, Wallace PM, Lee H, 
Neer RM, et al. Denosumab and teriparatide transitions 
in postmenopausal osteoporosis (the DATA-Switch study): 
extension of a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2015; 
386:1147-1155. [EL 1; RCT]
 AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(Suppl 4)  41 
291. Finkelstein JS, Hayes A, Hunzelman JL, Wyland JJ, 
Lee H, Neer RM. The effects of parathyroid hormone, 
alendronate, or both in men with osteoporosis. N Engl J 
Med. 2003;349:1216-1226. [EL 1; RCT]
292. Rittmaster RS, Bolognese M, Ettinger MP, Hanley DA, 
Hodsman AB, Kendler DL, et al. Enhancement of bone 
mass in osteoporotic women with parathyroid hormone 
followed by alendronate. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2000; 
85:2129-2134. [EL 1; RCT]
293. Diab DL, Watts NB. Postmenopausal osteoporosis. Curr 
Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes. 2013;20:501-509. [EL 4; 
review NE]
294. Leder BZ, Neer RM, Wyland JJ, Lee HW, Burnett-
Bowie SM, Finkelstein JS. Effects of teriparatide treat-
ment and discontinuation in postmenopausal women and 
eugonadal men with osteoporosis. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab. 2009;94:2915-2921. [EL 2; PCS]
295. Kallmes DF, Comstock BA, Heagerty PJ, Turner JA, 
Wilson DJ, Diamond TH, et al. A randomized trial of ver-
tebroplasty for osteoporotic spinal fractures. N Engl J Med. 
2009;361:569-579. [EL 1; RCT]
296. Buchbinder R, Osborne RH, Ebeling PR, Wark JD, 
Mitchell P, Wriedt C, et al. A randomized trial of ver-
tebroplasty for painful osteoporotic vertebral fractures. N 
Engl J Med. 2009;361:557-568. [EL 1; RCT]
297. Staples MP, Kallmes DF, Comstock BA, Jarvik JG, 
Osborne RH, Heagerty PJ, et al. Effectiveness of ver-
tebroplasty using individual patient data from two ran-
domised placebo controlled trials: meta-analysis. BMJ. 
2011;343:d3952. [EL 1; MRCT, small sample size]
298. Kroon F, Staples M, Ebeling PR, Wark JD, Osborne 
RH, Mitchell PJ, et al. Two-year results of a randomized 
placebo-controlled trial of vertebroplasty for acute osteo-
porotic vertebral fractures. J Bone Miner Res. 2014;29: 
1346-1355. [EL 1; RCT]
299. Blasco J, Martinez-Ferrer A, Macho J, San Roman L, 
Pomés J, Carrasco J, et al. Effect of vertebroplasty on 
pain relief, quality of life, and the incidence of new ver-
tebral fractures: a 12-month randomized follow-up, con-
trolled trial. J Bone Miner Res. 2012;27:1159-1166. [EL 1; 
RCT]
300. Klazen CA, Venmans A, de Vries J, van Rooij WJ, 
Jansen FH, Blonk MC, et al. Percutaneous vertebroplasty 
is not a risk factor for new osteoporotic compression frac-
tures: results from VERTOS II. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 
2010;31:1447-1450. [EL 1; RCT]
301. Bouza C, Lopez-Cuadrado T, Almendro N, Amate JM. 
Safety of balloon kyphoplasty in the treatment of osteopo-
rotic vertebral compression fractures in Europe: a meta-
analysis of randomized controlled trials. Eur Spine J. 
2015;24:715-723. [EL 1; RCT]
302. Aghamirsalim M, Sorbi R. Do the hospitalized patients 
with osteoporotic fractures require endocrinologists’ help? 
J Endocrinol Invest. 2012;35:992-995. [EL 3; SS]
303. Bell K, Strand H, Inder WJ. Effect of a dedicated osteo-
porosis health professional on screening and treatment in 
outpatients presenting with acute low trauma non-hip frac-
ture: a systematic review. Arch Osteoporos. 2014;9:167. 
[EL 2; MNRCT]
304. Radonich M. Communicating radiation risk to the pub-
lic. Presented at: Community Environmental Monitoring 
Program 25th Anniversary Annual Workshop; July 23-27, 
2006; Mt. Charleston, NV. Available at: http://www.cemp.
dri.edu/cemp/workshop2006/presentations/Radonich-
Communicating_Radiation_Risk_to_the_Public-Part_1.
pdf [EL 4; NE]
305. Edwards A, Elwyn G. How should effectiveness of risk 
communication to aid patients’ decisions be judged? A 
review of the literature. Med Decis Making. 1999;19:428-
434. [EL 4; review NE]
306. Lewiecki EM. 2011 The role of risk communication in the 
care of osteoporosis. Curr Osteoporos Rep. 2011;9:141-
148 [EL 4; review NE]
307. Charles CA, Whelan T, Gafni A, Willan A, Farrell S. 
Shared treatment decision making: what does it mean to 
physicians? J Clin Oncol. 2003;21:932-936. [EL 3; SS]
308. Charles C, Gafni A, Whelan T. Decision-making in the 
physician-patient encounter: revisiting the shared treat-
ment decision-making model. Soc Sci Med. 1999;49:651-
661. [EL 4; review NE]
309. Charles C, Gafni A, Whelan T. Shared decision-making 
in the medical encounter: what does it mean? (or it takes at 
least two to tango). Soc Sci Med. 1997; 44:681-692. [EL 4; 
review NE]
310. Lewiecki EM. Risk communication and shared decision 
making in the care of patients with osteoporosis. J Clin 
Densitom. 2010;13:335-345. [EL 4; review NE]
311. Dowd R, Recker RR, Heaney RP. Study subjects and 
ordinary patients. Osteoporos Int. 2000;11:533-536. [EL 
2; RCCS]
312. Trevena LJ, Davey HM, Barratt A, Butow P, Caldwell 
P. A systematic review on communicating with patients 
about evidence. J Eval Clin Pract. 2006;12:13-23. [EL 1; 
MRCT]
313. Boudreau JD, Cassell E, Fuks A. Preparing medical stu-
dents to become attentive listeners. Med Teach. 2009;31: 
22-29. [EL 4; review NE]
314. Hudson B, Toop L, Mangin D, Pearson J. Risk commu-
nication methods in hip fracture prevention: a randomised 
trial in primary care. Br J Gen Pract. 2011;61:e469-e476. 
[EL 1; RCT]
315. Montori VM, Shah ND, Pencille LJ, Branda ME, Van 
Houten HK, Swiglo BA, et al. Use of a decision aid to 
improve treatment decisions in osteoporosis: the osteopo-
rosis choice randomized trial. Am J Med. 2011;124:549-
556. [EL 1; RCT]
316. Clowes JA, Peel NF, Eastell R. The impact of monitoring 
on adherence and persistence with antiresorptive treatment 
for postmenopausal osteoporosis: a randomized controlled 
trial. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2004;89:1117-1123. [EL 1; 
RCT]
317. Briot K, Ravaud P, Dargent-Molina P, Zylberman M, 
Liu-Leage S, Roux C. Persistence with teriparatide in 
postmenopausal osteoporosis; impact of a patient edu-
cation and follow-up program: the French experience. 
Osteoporos Int. 2009;20:625-630. [EL 2; PCS]
318. Schilcher J, Michaelsson K, Aspenberg P. Bispho-
sphonate use and atypical fractures of the femoral shaft. N 
Engl J Med. 2011;364:1728-1737. [EL 2; RCCS]
319. Kanis JA, Oden A, Johnell O, Jonsson B, de Laet C, 
Dawson A. The burden of osteoporotic fractures: a method 
for setting intervention thresholds. Osteoporos Int. 2001; 
12:417-427. [EL 3; SS]
320. International 
Collaborative 
Study 
of 
Severe 
Anaphylaxis. Risk of anaphylaxis in a hospital popula-
tion in relation to the use of various drugs: an international 
study. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2003;12:195-202. 
[EL 2; RCCS]
321. American Dental Association Council on Scientific 
Affairs. Dental management of patients receiving oral 
bisphosphonate therapy: expert panel recommendations. 
J Am Dent Assoc. 2006;137:1144-1150. [EL 4; consensus 
recommendations]
 42  AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(Suppl 4)
Evaluate for causes of secondary osteoporosis
Correct calcium/vitamin D deficiency and address causes of secondary osteoporosis
• Recommend pharmacologic therapy
• Education on lifestyle measures, fall prevention, benefits and risks of medications
No prior fragility fractures or moderate fracture risk**
• Alendronate, denosumab, risedronate, zoledronic acid***
• Alternate therapy: Ibandronate, raloxifene
Prior fragility fractures or indicators of higher fracture risk**
• Denosumab, teriparatide, zoledronic acid***
• Alternate therapy: Alendronate, risedronate
Reassess at least yearly for response to therapy and fracture risk 
Increasing or stable BMD and 
no fractures
Resume therapy when a fracture 
occurs, BMD declines beyond 
LSC, BTM’s rise to pretreatment 
values or patient meets initial
treatment criteria
• Assess compliance
• Re-evaluate for causes of 
secondary osteoporosis and 
factors leading to suboptimal 
response to therapy
• Switch to injectable
 
antiresorptive if on oral agent
• Switch to teriparatide if on
 
injectable antiresorptive or at 
very high risk of fracture
Reassess at least yearly for response to therapy and fracture risk
Continue therapy or 
consider adding 
teriparatide if 
progression of bone 
loss or recurrent 
fractures
Sequential therapy 
with oral or injectable 
antiresorptive agent
Progression of bone loss or 
recurrent fractures
Denosumab
Teriparatide for up
to 2 years
Zoledronic acid
Consider a drug holiday after 5 
years of oral and 3 years of IV 
bisphosphonate therapy
AACE/ACE 2016 Postmenopausal Osteoporosis Treatment Algorithm
Lumbar spine or femoral neck or total hip T-score of ≤ -2.5, a history of fragility fracture, or high FRAX® fracture probability*
• If stable, continue
 
therapy for 6 years****
• If progression 
of bone loss or 
recurrent fractures, 
consider switching 
to teriparatide
* 
10 year major osteoporotic fracture risk ≥ 20% or hip fracture risk ≥ 3%. Non-US 
countries/regions may have different thresholds.
** 
Indicators of higher fracture risk in patients with low bone density would include advanced 
age, frailty, glucocorticoids, very low T scores, or increased fall risk.
***  Medications are listed alphabetically.
****  Consider a drug holiday after 6 years of IV zoledronic acid.
 
During the holiday, another agent such as teriparatide or
 
raloxifene could be used.
