   ENDOCRINE PRACTICE Vol 22 No. 9 September 2016  1111
  
Copyright © 2016 ACCE
 
 AACE/ACE Guidelines
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF CLINICAL ENDOCRINOLOGISTS AND 
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF ENDOCRINOLOGY 
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES FOR THE DIAGNOSIS AND
TREATMENT OF POSTMENOPAUSAL OSTEOPOROSIS — 2016
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Complete Guidelines available at http://journals.aace.com
Pauline M. Camacho, MD, FACE1; Steven M. Petak, MD, MACE, FACP, FCLM, JD2;
Neil Binkley, MD3; Bart L. Clarke, MD, FACP, FACE4;
Steven T. Harris, MD, FACP5; Daniel L. Hurley, MD, FACE6;
Michael Kleerekoper, MBBS, MACE7; E. Michael Lewiecki, MD, FACP, FACE8;
Paul D. Miller, MD9; Harmeet S. Narula, MD, FACP, FACE10;
Rachel Pessah-Pollack, MD, FACE11; Vin Tangpricha, MD, PhD, FACE12;
Sunil J. Wimalawansa, MD, PhD, MBA, FCCP, FACP, FRCP, DSc, FACE13;
Nelson B. Watts, MD, FACP, MACE14
 
From 1Professor of Medicine, Loyola University Medical Center, Director, Loyola University Osteoporosis and Metabolic Bone Disease Center, Chicago, IL; 
2Associate Clinical Professor Weill-Cornell Medical College, Division Head Endocrinology and Chief of Endocrinology, Houston Methodist Hospital, Houston, 
TX;  3School of Medicine and Public Health, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI; 4Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, Metabolism, and Nutrition, Mayo 
Clinic, Rochester, MN; 5Clinical Professor of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco; 6Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, Metabolism and Nutrition, 
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN; 7University of Toledo Medical School, Toledo, OH; 8New Mexico Clinical Research & Osteoporosis Center, Albuquerque, NM; 
9Distinguished Clinical Professor of Medicine, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Medical Director, Colorado Center for Bone Research at Centura 
Health, Lakewood, CO; 10Banner Health, Phoenix, AZ; 11Assistant Clinical Professor, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, NY, NY, ProHealth Care Associates, 
Division of Endocrinology, Lake Success, NY; 12Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Lipids, Department of Medicine, Emory University School of 
Medicine and the Atlanta VA Medical Center, Atlanta, GA; 13Professor of Medicine, Endocrinology & Nutrition; 14Director, Mercy Health Osteoporosis and Bone 
Health Services, Cincinnati OH. 
Address correspondence to American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists, 245 Riverside Ave, Suite 200, Jacksonville, FL 32202.
E-mail: publications@aace.com. DOI:10.4158/EP161435.ESGL
To purchase reprints of this article, please visit: www.aace.com/reprints.
Copyright © 2016 AACE.
A complete list of the Reviewers of the AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis Clinical Practice Guidelines can be found in the Acknowledgments.
     The American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists/American College of Endocrinology Medical Guidelines 
for Practice are systematically developed statements to assist healthcare professionals in medical decision-making for 
specific clinical conditions. Most of the content herein is based on literature reviews. In areas of uncertainty, professional 
judgment was applied.
      These guidelines are a working document that reflects the state of the field at the time of publication. Because rapid 
changes in this area are expected, periodic revisions are inevitable. We encourage medical professionals to use this 
information in conjunction with their best clinical judgment. The presented recommendations may not be appropriate 
in all situations. Any decision by practitioners to apply these guidelines must be made in light of local resources and 
individual patient circumstances.
 1112  AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(No. 9)
Copyright © 2016 ACCE
 
Abbreviations:
AACE 
= 
American 
Association 
of 
Clinical 
Endocrinologists; AFF = atypical femur fracture; 
ASBMR = American Society for Bone and Mineral 
Research; BEL = best evidence level; BMD = bone 
mineral density; BTM = bone turnover marker; CBC = 
complete blood count; CI = confidence interval; DXA 
= dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry; EL = evidence 
level; FDA = U.S. Food and Drug Administration; 
FLEX = Fracture Intervention Trial (FIT) Long-term 
Extension; FRAX® = Fracture Risk Assessment Tool; 
GFR = glomerular filtration rate; GI = gastrointestinal; 
HORIZON = Health Outcomes and Reduced Incidence 
with Zoledronic Acid Once Yearly; IOF = International 
Osteoporosis Foundation; ISCD = International Society 
for Clinical Densitometry; IU = international units; IV 
= intravenous; LSC = least significant change; NBHA 
= National Bone Health Alliance; NOF = National 
Osteoporosis Foundation; 25(OH)D = 25-hydroxy vita-
min D; ONJ = osteonecrosis of the jaw; PINP = serum 
carboxy-terminal propeptide of type I collagen; PTH = 
parathyroid hormone; R = recommendation; RANK = 
receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-B; RANKL 
= receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-B ligand; 
RCT = randomized controlled trial; RR = relative risk; 
S-CTX = serum C-terminal telopeptide; SQ = subcuta-
neous; VFA = vertebral fracture assessment; WHO = 
World Health Organization.
1.  INTRODUCTION
 
Osteoporosis is a growing major public health prob-
lem with impacts on quality and quantity of life that cross 
medical, social, and economic lines. These guidelines 
were developed by the American Association of Clinical 
Endocrinologists (AACE) with hopes of reducing the risk 
of osteoporosis-related fractures and thereby maintaining 
the quality of life for people with osteoporosis. The guide-
lines use the best evidence, taking into consideration the 
economic impact of the disease and the need for efficient 
and effective evaluation and treatment of postmenopausal 
women with osteoporosis. The intent is to provide evi-
dence-based information about the diagnosis, evaluation, 
and treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis for endocri-
nologists, physicians in general, regulatory bodies, health-
related organizations, and interested laypersons.
2.  METHODS FOR DEVELOPMENT OF AACE 
     CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES FOR 
     POSTMENOPAUSAL OSTEOPOROSIS
 
Evidence was obtained through MEDLINE searches 
and other designated reference sources. Expert opinion 
was used to evaluate the available literature and to grade 
references relative to evidence level (EL) (Table 1), evi-
dence analysis, and subjective factors (Table 2), based on 
the ratings of 1 through 4 from the 2010 and 2014 AACE 
protocols for standardized production of clinical practice 
guidelines (available online at https://www.aace.com/files/
checklists_july_2014_ep.pdf) (1 [EL 4; CPG NE], 2 [EL 
4; CPG NE]). Best evidence level (BEL) for evidence 
presented in the discussion of the evidence base is given 
for each recommendation in the Executive Summary. In 
addition, recommendations were graded A through D, in 
accordance with methods established by the AACE in 2004 
and clarified in 2010 (Table 3) (1 [EL 4; CPG NE], 3 [EL 
4; CPG NE]). Information pertaining to cost-effectiveness 
was included when available. Examples of qualifiers that 
are appropriate to append to recommendations include 
risk-benefit analyses, evidence gaps, alternative physician 
preferences (dissenting opinions), alternative recommen-
dations (e.g., based on resource availability and cultural 
factors), expert consensus and relevance (i.e., patient-ori-
ented evidence that matters) (1 [EL 4; CPG NE]). (Endocr 
Pract. 2016;22:1111-1118)
3.  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
To guide readers, recommendations are organized into the 
following questions:
•  Q1. How is fracture risk assessed and osteoporosis 
diagnosed?
•  Q2. When osteoporosis is diagnosed, what is an 
appropriate evaluation?
•  Q3. What are the fundamental measures for bone 
health?
•  Q4. Who needs pharmacologic therapy?
•  Q5. What medication should be used to treat 
osteoporosis?
•  Q6. How is treatment monitored?
•  Q7. What is successful treatment of osteoporosis?
•  Q8. How long should patients be treated?
•  Q9. Is combination therapy better than treatment 
with a single agent?
•  Q10. Should sequential use of therapeutic agents be 
considered?
•  Q11. Should vertebral augmentation be considered 
for compression fractures?
•  Q12. When should referral to a clinical endocrinolo-
gist or osteoporosis specialist be considered?
3.Q1.  How Is Fracture Risk Assessed and 
           Osteoporosis Diagnosed?
•  R1. Evaluate all postmenopausal women aged ≥50 
years for osteoporosis risk (Grade B; BEL 1, down-
graded due to gaps in evidence).
•  R2. A detailed history, physical exam, and clinical
 AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(No. 9)  1113 
Copyright © 2016 ACCE
 
fracture risk assessment with the Fracture Risk 
Assessment Tool (FRAX®) should be included in the 
initial evaluation for osteoporosis (Grade B; BEL 2).
•  R3. Consider bone mineral density (BMD) testing based 
on clinical fracture risk profile (Grade B; BEL 2).
•  R4. When BMD is measured, axial dual-energy X-ray 
absorptiometry (DXA) measurement (spine and hip) 
should be used (Grade B; BEL 2).
•  R5a. Osteoporosis should be diagnosed based on pres-
ence of fragility fractures in the absence of other meta-
bolic bone disorders (Grade B; BEL 2) or a T-score 
of –2.5 or lower in the lumbar spine (anteroposterior), 
femoral neck, total hip, and/or 33% (one-third) radius 
even in the absence of a prevalent fracture (Grade B; 
BEL 2). 
•  R5b. Osteoporosis may also be diagnosed in patients 
with osteopenia and increased fracture risk using 
FRAX® country-specific thresholds (Grade B; BEL 2).
3.Q2.  When Osteoporosis Is Diagnosed, 
           What Is an Appropriate Evaluation?
•  R6. Evaluate for causes of secondary osteoporosis 
(Grade B; BEL 2).
•  R7. Evaluate for prevalent vertebral fractures (Grade 
A; BEL 1).
•  R8. Consider using bone turnover markers (BTMs) 
in the initial evaluation and follow-up of osteoporosis 
patients. Elevated levels can predict more rapid rates 
of bone loss and higher fracture risk (Grade B; BEL 1, 
downgraded based on expert consensus).
3.Q3.  What Are the Fundamental Measures for 
           Bone Health?
•  R9. Measure serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25[OH]D) 
in patients who are at risk for vitamin D insufficiency, 
particularly those with osteoporosis (Grade B; BEL 2).
•  R10. Maintain serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25[OH]
D) ≥30 ng/mL in patients with osteoporosis (prefera-
ble range, 30-50 ng/mL) (Grade B; BEL 3, upgraded 
based on expert consensus).
•  R11. Supplement with vitamin D3 if needed; 1,000 
to 2,000 international units (IU) of daily maintenance 
therapy is typically needed to maintain an optimal 
serum 25(OH)D level (Grade C, BEL 4; upgraded 
based on expert consensus). 
•  R12. Higher doses may be necessary in the presence of 
certain factors (e.g., obesity, malabsorption, transplant 
patients, certain ethnicities, older individuals) (Grade 
A; BEL 1).
•  R13. Counsel patients to maintain adequate dietary 
intake of calcium, to a total intake (including diet plus 
supplement, if needed) of 1,200 mg/day for women ≥50 
years (Grade B; BEL 2).
•  R14. Counsel patients to limit alcohol intake to no 
more than 2 units per day. (Grade B; BEL 2).
•  R15. Counsel patients to avoid or stop smoking (Grade 
B; BEL 2).
•  R16. Counsel patients to maintain an active lifestyle, 
including weight-bearing, balance, and resistance exer-
cises (Grade B; BEL 2). 
•  R17. Provide counseling on reducing risk of falls, par-
ticularly among the elderly (Grade A; BEL 1).
Table 1
2010 AACE Protocol for Production of Clinical Practice Guidelines
Step 1: Evidence Rating
1
Meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials (MRCT)
1
Randomized controlled trial (RCT)
2
Meta-analysis of nonrandomized prospective or case-controlled trials (MNRCT)
2
Nonrandomized controlled trial (NRCT)
2
Prospective cohort study (PCS)
2
Retrospective case-control study (RCCS)
3
Cross-sectional study (CSS)
3
Surveillance study (registries, surveys, epidemiologic study) (SS)
3
Consecutive case series (CCS)
3
Single case reports (SCR)
4
No evidence (theory, opinion, consensus, or review) (NE)
1 = strong evidence; 2 = intermediate evidence; 3 = weak evidence; 4 = no evidence.
Adapted from Mechanick et al. Endocr Pract. 2010;16:270-283.(1 [EL 4; CPG NE])
 1114  AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(No. 9)
Copyright © 2016 ACCE
•  R18. Consider recommending use of hip protectors 
in individuals with a high risk of falling (Grade B; 
BEL 1, downgraded due to discrepancy in efficacy 
between studies). 
•  R19. Consider referral for physical therapy, which may 
reduce discomfort, prevent falls, and improve quality 
of life (Grade A; BEL 1).
3.Q4.  Who Needs Pharmacologic Therapy?
•  R20. Strongly recommend pharmacologic therapy for 
patients with osteopenia or low bone mass and a history 
of fragility fracture of the hip or spine (Grade A; BEL 
1).
•  R21. Strongly recommend pharmacologic therapy for 
patients with a T-score of –2.5 or lower in the spine, 
femoral neck, total hip or 33% radius (Grade A; BEL 
1).
•  R22. Strongly recommend pharmacologic therapy for 
patients with a T-score between –1.0 and –2.5 if the 
FRAX® 10-year probability for major osteoporotic 
fracture is ≥20% or the 10-year probability of hip frac-
ture is ≥3% in the U.S. or above the country-specific 
threshold in other countries or regions (Grade B; BEL 
2). 
3.Q5.  What Medication Should Be Used to 
           Treat Osteoporosis?
•  R23. Approved agents with efficacy to reduce hip, non-
vertebral, and spine fractures including alendronate, 
risedronate, zoledronic acid, and denosumab are appro-
priate as initial therapy for most patients at high risk of 
fracture (Grade A; BEL 1).
•  R24. Teriparatide, denosumab, or zoledronic acid 
should be considered for patients unable to use oral 
therapy and as initial therapy for patients at especially 
high fracture risk (Grade A; BEL 1).
•  R25. Raloxifene or ibandronate may be appropriate 
initial therapy in some cases where patients requiring 
drugs with spine-specific efficacy (Grade A; BEL 1).
3.Q6.  How Is Treatment Monitored?
•  R26. Obtain a baseline axial (spine and hip) DXA, and 
repeat DXA every 1 to 2 years until findings are stable. 
Continue with follow-up DXA every 1 to 2 years or at 
a less-frequent interval, depending on clinical circum-
stances (Grade B; BEL 2).
•  R27. Monitor serial changes in lumbar spine, total hip, 
or femoral neck BMD; if spine, hip, or both are not 
evaluable, consider monitoring using the 33% radius 
site (Grade A; BEL 1).
•  R28. Follow-up of patients should ideally be conducted 
in the same facility with the same machine (Grade B; 
BEL 4, upgraded based on expert consensus).
•  R29. Consider using BTMs for assessing patient com-
pliance and therapy efficacy. Significant reductions in 
BTMs are seen with antiresorptive therapy and have 
been associated with fracture reduction; significant 
increases indicate good response to anabolic therapy 
(Grade B; BEL 1; downgraded based on expert 
consensus). 
3.Q7.  What Is Successful Treatment of Osteoporosis?
•  R30. Successful treatment of osteoporosis is defined as 
stable or increasing BMD with no evidence of new frac-
tures or fracture progression (Grade A; BEL 1).
•  R31. For patients taking antiresorptive agents, target 
for treatment success is BTMs at or below the median 
value for premenopausal women (Grade A; BEL 1). 
•  R32. Consider alternative therapy or reassessment for 
causes of secondary osteoporosis in patients who have 
recurrent fractures or significant bone loss while on 
therapy (Grade A; BEL 1). A single fracture while on 
Table 2
2010 AACE Protocol for Production of Clinical Practice Guidelines
Step 2: Evidence Analysis and Subjective Factors
Study design
Data analysis
Interpretation
Premise correctness
Intent-to-treat
Generalizability
Allocation concealment (randomization)
Appropriate statistics
Logical
Selection bias
Incompleteness
Appropriate blinding
Validity
Using surrogate end points (especially in 
  “first-in-its-class” intervention)
Sample size (beta error)
Null hypothesis versus Bayesian statistics
Adapted from Mechanick et al. Endocr Pract. 2010;16:270-283.(1 [EL 4; CPG NE])
 AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(No. 9)  1115 
Copyright © 2016 ACCE
therapy is not necessarily evidence of treatment failure, 
but it does suggest that fracture risk is high. 
3.Q8.  How Long Should Patients Be Treated?
•  R33. Treatment with teriparatide should be limited to 2 
years (Grade A; BEL 1).
•  R34a. For oral bisphosphonates, consider a “bisphos-
phonate holiday” after 5 years of stability in moderate-
risk patients (Grade B; BEL 1, downgraded due to 
limitations of data).
•  R34b. For oral bisphosphonates, consider a “bisphos-
phonate holiday” after 6 to 10 years of stability in 
higher-risk patients (Grade B; BEL 1, downgraded 
due to limitations of data). 
•  R34c. For intravenous (IV) zoledronic acid, consider 
a drug holiday after 3 annual doses in moderate-risk 
patients and after 6 annual doses in higher-risk patients. 
(Grade B, BEL 1, downgraded due to limitations of 
data).
•  R34d. Teriparatide or raloxifene may be used during 
Table 3
2010 AACE Protocol for Production of Clinical Practice Guidelines
Step 3: Grading Recommendations
2004 AACE Criteria for Grading Recommendations
Recommendation grade
Description
A
Homogeneous evidence from multiple, well-designed, randomized, controlled trials with sufficient 
statistical power
Homogeneous evidence from multiple, well-designed, cohort-controlled trials with sufficient 
statistical power
≥1 conclusive level 1 publications demonstrating benefit >> risk
B
Evidence from ≥1 well-designed clinical trial, cohort- or case-controlled analytic study, or meta-
analysis
No conclusive level 1 publications; ≥1 conclusive level 2 publications demonstrating benefit >> risk
C
Evidence based on clinical experience, descriptive studies, or expert consensus opinion
No conclusive level 1 or 2 publications; ≥1 conclusive level 3 publications demonstrating benefit >> 
risk
No conclusive risk at all and no conclusive benefit demonstrated by evidence
D
Not rated
No conclusive level 1, 2, or 3 publications demonstrating benefit >> risk 
Conclusive level 1, 2, or 3 publications demonstrating risk >> benefit
2010 AACE Update: Mapping Evidence Levels to Recommended Grading
BEL
Subject 
factor impact
Two-thirds 
consensus
Mapping
Recommended 
grading
1
None
Yes
Direct
A
2
Positive
Yes
Adjust up
A
2
None
Yes
Direct
B
1
Negative
Yes
Adjust down
B
3
Positive
Yes
Adjust up
B
3
None
Yes
Direct
C
2
Negative
Yes
Adjust down
C
4
Positive
Yes
Adjust up
C
4
None
Yes
Direct
D
3
Negative
Yes
Adjust Down
D
1, 2, 3, 4
NA
No
Adjust down
D
1 = strong evidence; 2 = intermediate evidence; 3 = weak evidence; 4 = no evidence.
Starting with the left column, best evidence level (BEL), subjective factors, and consensus map to recommendation grades in the right 
column. When subjective factors have little or no impact (“none”), then the BEL is directly mapped to recommendation grades. When 
subjective factors have a strong impact, then recommendation grades may be adjusted up (“positive” impact) or down (“negative” 
impact). If a two-thirds consensus cannot be reached, then the recommendation grade is D. NA = not applicable (regardless of the 
presence or absence of strong subjective factors, the absence of a two-thirds consensus mandates a recommendation grade D).
Adapted from Mechanick et al. Endocr Pract. 2010;16:270-283 (1 [EL 4; CPG NE])
 1116  AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(No. 9)
Copyright © 2016 ACCE
the “bisphosphonate holiday” period for higher-risk 
patients (Grade D; BEL 4). 
•  R34e. A drug “holiday” is not recommended with deno-
sumab (Grade A; BEL 1). 
•  R34f. The ending of the “holiday” for bisphospho-
nate treatment should be based on individual patient 
circumstances (fracture risk or change in BMD or 
BTMs) (Grade B; BEL 4, upgraded based on expert 
consensus).
•  R34g. Other therapeutic agents should be continued for 
as long as clinically appropriate (Grade D; BEL 4).
3.Q9.  Is Combination Therapy Better Than 
           Treatment With a Single Agent? 
•  R35a. Until the effect of combination therapy on frac-
ture risk is demonstrated AACE does not recommend 
concomitant use of these agents for prevention or treat-
ment of postmenopausal osteoporosis (Grade C; BEL 
4; expert consensus, upgraded due to cost and poten-
tial increased side effects).
•  R35b. If estrogen is being given for treatment of meno-
pausal symptoms or raloxifene is administered to reduce 
the risk of breast cancer, an additional agent such as a 
bisphosphonate, denosumab, or teriparatide may be 
considered in higher-rise potients (Grade D; BEL 4). 
•  R35c. Combined denosumab and teriparatide achieves 
a better BMD response versus either agent alone, but no 
fracture data are available. (Grade B; BEL 1; down-
graded due to potential increased side effects and 
increased cost). 
3.Q10.  Should Sequential Use of Therapeutic 
             Agents Be Considered?
•  R36. Treatment with teriparatide should always be fol-
lowed by antiresorptive agents to prevent bone density 
decline and loss of fracture efficacy (Grade A; BEL 1).
3.Q11.  Should Vertebral Augmentation Be 
             Considered for Compression Fractures?
•  R37. Vertebroplasty and kyphoplasty are not recom-
mended as first-line treatment of vertebral fractures 
given the unclear benefit on overall pain and the poten-
tial increased risk of vertebral fractures in adjacent ver-
tebrae (Grade B, BEL 1; downgraded due to limita-
tions of published studies).
3.Q12.  When Should Referral to a Clinical 
             Endocrinologist or Osteoporosis Specialist 
             Be Considered?
•  R38. When a patient with normal BMD sustains a frac-
ture without major trauma (Grade C; BEL 4; upgraded 
due to expert consensus).
•  R39. When recurrent fractures or continued bone loss 
occurs in a patient receiving therapy without obvi-
ous treatable causes of bone loss (Grade C; BEL 4; 
upgraded due to expert consensus). 
• R40. When osteoporosis is unexpectedly severe, has 
unusual features, or less common secondary conditions 
(e.g., hyperthyroidism, hyperparathyroidism, hypercal-
ciuria, or elevated prolactin) are identified (Grade C; 
BEL 4; upgraded due to expert consensus).
• R41. When a patient has a condition that complicates 
management (e.g., chronic kidney disease [CKD]: glo-
merular filtration rate [GFR] <35, hyperparathyroid-
ism, or malabsorption) (Grade C; BEL 4; upgraded 
due to expert consensus).
• R42. Patients who experience fragility fractures should 
be evaluated and treated. Referral to an osteoporosis 
specialist or a fracture liaison team, if available, should 
be considered (Grade B; BEL 2). 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
 
Reviewers of the AACE/ACE Postmenopausal 
Osteoporosis Clinical Practice Guidelines: Robert Adler, 
MD; Donald A. Bergman, MD, MACE; John Paul 
Bilezikian, MD, MACE; Dima L. Diab, MD, FACE, CCD; 
Angelo Licata, MD, PhD, FACP, FACE; Alan Malabanan 
MD, FACE, CCD; Michael R. McClung, MD.
DISCLOSURE
Co-Chairs
Dr. Pauline Camacho reports that she has received research 
grant support from Amgen Inc, and NPS Pharmaceuticals.
Dr. Steven M. Petak reports that he has received consult-
ing fees from NASA-JSC. 
Task Force Members
Dr. Neil Binkley reports that he has received advisory/
consultant honoraria from Merck, Amgen, Eli Lilly and 
Company, Bristol-Myers Squibb, and Nestle. He has also 
received research support from Amgen, Merck, Eli Lilly 
and Company, Opko Health, Novartis, and GE Healthcare 
Lunar. 
Dr. Bart Clarke reports that he has received consulting 
fees for his service on Data Monitoring Committees for 
Amgen Inc.; and research grant support for his role as Site 
Principal Investigator from NPS Pharmaceuticals, Inc.
Dr. Steven T. Harris reports that he has received consultant 
fees from Eli Lilly and Company, Gilead Sciences, Merck, 
and Radius Health. He has also received speaker honoraria 
from Eli Lilly and Company and Gilead Sciences. 
 AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(No. 9)  1117 
Copyright © 2016 ACCE
Dr. Daniel L. Hurley reports that he does not have any rel-
evant financial relationships with any commercial interests.
Dr. Michael Kleerekoper reports that he does not have 
any relevant financial relationships with any commercial 
interests.
Dr. E. Michael Lewiecki reports that he has received con-
sultant honoraria and research grant support from Amgen, 
Eli Lilly and Company, and Merck.
Dr. Paul D. Miller reports that he has received consul-
tant fees for his role on Scientific Advisory Boards for 
Amgen, AgNovos, Eli Lilly and Company, Merck, Radius 
Pharma, Roche, and Ultragenyx, as well as for his role on 
Data Safety Committees for Allergan Pharmaceuticals, 
and GrĀ1/4nenthal Group. He has also received speaker 
honoraria from Amgen Australia and research grant 
support from Alexion, Amgen, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Immunodiagnostics, Eli Lilly and Company, Merck, Merck 
Serrano, National Bone Health Alliance, Novartis, Radius 
Pharma, Roche Diagnostics, Regeneron, Daiichi Sankyo, 
and Ultragenyx. 
Dr. Harmeet Singh Narula reports that he does not have 
any relevant financial relationships with any commercial 
interests.
Dr. Rachel Pessah-Pollack reports that she has received 
consulting fees and speaker honoraria from Boehringer 
Ingelheim and Eli Lilly and Company. 
Dr. Vin Tangpricha reports that he has received con-
sulting fees from Elsevier, as the Editor in Chief for the 
Journal of Clinical and Translational Endocrinology. 
Dr. Tangpricha has also received speaker honoraria from 
Quest Diagnostics Inc and research grants from the Cystic 
Fibrosis Foundation and NIH.
Dr. Nelson B. Watts reports that he has received stock 
options as a stockholder and royalties as a cofounder/direc-
tor from OsteoDynamics; consultant fees from Amgen, 
Abbvie, Sanofi, Merck, Radius Health, and Sprout; and 
speaker honoraria from Amgen and Merck. 
Dr. Sunil J. Wimalawansa reports that he does not have 
any relevant financial relationships with any commercial 
interests.
Reviewers
Dr. Robert A. Adler reports that he does not have any rele-
vant financial relationships with any commercial interests.
Dr. Donald Bergman reports that he does not have any 
relevant financial relationships with any commercial 
interests.
Dr. John Paul Bilezikian reports that he is a consultant for 
Amgen, Merck, and Radius.
Dr. Dima L. Diab reports that she does not have any rele-
vant financial relationships with any commercial interests.
Dr. Angelo Licata reports that he does not have any rele-
vant financial relationships with any commercial interests.
Dr. Alan Malabanan reports that he has received consult-
ing fees as a member of the Editorial Board for the Harvard 
Health Letter, as a Journal Watch CME question author 
from Boston University, and from Advance Medical, Inc. 
He has also received speaker fees from Metrowest Medical 
Center; Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Needham; 
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston; Boston 
University Dental School and Medical School, and MCE 
Conferences. 
Dr. Michael R. McClung reports that he has received con-
sultant fees and speaker honoraria from Amgen and Merck.
Medical Writer
Ms. Renée Kashuba reports that she has received con-
sulting fees for writing and editorial support from Celgene 
Corporation.
REFERENCES
 
1. Mechanick JI, Camacho PM, Cobin RH, Garber AJ, 
Garber JR, Gharib H, et al. American Association 
of Clinical Endocrinologists Protocol for Standardized 
Production of Clinical Practice Guidelines--2010 update. 
Endocr Pract. 2010;16:270-283. [EL 4; CPG NE]
 
2. Mechanick JI, Camacho PM, Garber AJ, Garber JR, 
Pessah-Pollack R, Petak SM, et al. American Association 
of Clinical Endocrinologists and American College of 
Endocrinology Protocol for Standardized Production 
of 
Clinical 
Practice 
Guidelines, Algorithms, 
and 
Checklists--2014 Update and the AACE G4G Program. 
Endocr Pract. 2014;20:692-702. [EL 4; CPG NE]
 
3. Mechanick JI, Bergman DA, Braithwaite SS, Palumbo 
PJ. American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists 
protocol for standardized production of clinical practice 
guidelines. Endocr Pract. 2004;10:353-361. [EL 4; CPG 
NE]
 
 1118  AACE/ACE Postmenopausal Osteoporosis CPG, Endocr Pract. 2016;22(No. 9)
Copyright © 2016 ACCE
Evaluate for causes of secondary osteoporosis
Correct calcium/vitamin D deficiency and address causes of secondary osteoporosis
• Recommend pharmacologic therapy
• Education on lifestyle measures, fall prevention, benefits and risks of medications
No prior fragility fractures or moderate fracture risk**
• Alendronate, denosumab, risedronate, zoledronic acid***
• Alternate therapy: Ibandronate, raloxifene
Prior fragility fractures or indicators of higher fracture risk**
• Denosumab, teriparatide, zoledronic acid***
• Alternate therapy: Alendronate, risedronate
Reassess at least yearly for response to therapy and fracture risk 
Increasing or stable BMD and 
no fractures
Resume therapy when a fracture 
occurs, BMD declines beyond 
LSC, BTM’s rise to pretreatment 
values or patient meets initial
treatment criteria
• Assess compliance
• Re-evaluate for causes of 
secondary osteoporosis and 
factors leading to suboptimal 
response to therapy
• Switch to injectable
 
antiresorptive if on oral agent
• Switch to teriparatide if on
 
injectable antiresorptive or at 
very high risk of fracture
Reassess at least yearly for response to therapy and fracture risk
Continue therapy or 
consider adding 
teriparatide if 
progression of bone 
loss or recurrent 
fractures
Sequential therapy 
with oral or injectable 
antiresorptive agent
Progression of bone loss or 
recurrent fractures
Denosumab
Teriparatide for up
to 2 years
Zoledronic acid
Consider a drug holiday after 5 
years of oral and 3 years of IV 
bisphosphonate therapy
AACE/ACE 2016 Postmenopausal Osteoporosis Treatment Algorithm
Lumbar spine or femoral neck or total hip T-score of ≤ -2.5, a history of fragility fracture, or high FRAX® fracture probability*
• If stable, continue
 
therapy for 6 years****
• If progression 
of bone loss or 
recurrent fractures, 
consider switching 
to teriparatide
* 
10 year major osteoporotic fracture risk ≥ 20% or hip fracture risk ≥ 3%. Non-US 
countries/regions may have different thresholds.
** 
Indicators of higher fracture risk in patients with low bone density would include advanced 
age, frailty, glucocorticoids, very low T scores, or increased fall risk.
***  Medications are listed alphabetically.
****  Consider a drug holiday after 6 years of IV zoledronic acid.
 
During the holiday, another agent such as teriparatide or
 
raloxifene could be used.
