 April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 648
1
Review
published: 16 April 2018
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.00648
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
Edited by: 
Annemieke Boots, 
 
University Medical Center 
 
Groningen, Netherlands
Reviewed by: 
Ana Maria Teixeira, 
 
University of Coimbra, Portugal 
 
Emily C. LaVoy, 
 
University of Houston, 
United States
*Correspondence:
John P
. Campbell  
j.campbell@bath.ac.uk; 
James E. Turner  
j.e.turner@bath.ac.uk
Specialty section: 
This article was submitted 
 
to Inflammation, 
 
a section of the journal 
Frontiers in Immunology
Received: 19 November 2017
Accepted: 15 March 2018
Published: 16 April 2018
Citation: 
Campbell JP and Turner JE (2018) 
Debunking the Myth of Exercise-
Induced Immune Suppression: 
Redefining the Impact of Exercise 
on Immunological Health 
 
Across the Lifespan. 
Front. Immunol. 9:648. 
 
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.00648
Debunking the Myth of exercise-
induced immune Suppression: 
Redefining the impact of exercise  
on immunological Health Across  
the Lifespan
John P. Campbell* and James E. Turner*
Department for Health, University of Bath, Bath, United Kingdom
Epidemiological evidence indicates that regular physical activity and/or frequent 
structured exercise reduces the incidence of many chronic diseases in older age, 
including communicable diseases such as viral and bacterial infections, as well as non- 
communicable diseases such as cancer and chronic inflammatory disorders. Despite 
the apparent health benefits achieved by leading an active lifestyle, which imply that 
regular physical activity and frequent exercise enhance immune competency and regu-
lation, the effect of a single bout of exercise on immune function remains a controversial 
topic. Indeed, to this day, it is perceived by many that a vigorous bout of exercise can 
temporarily suppress immune function. In the first part of this review, we deconstruct 
the key pillars which lay the foundation to this theory—referred to as the “open window” 
hypothesis—and highlight that: (i) limited reliable evidence exists to support the claim 
that vigorous exercise heightens risk of opportunistic infections; (ii) purported changes 
to mucosal immunity, namely salivary IgA levels, after exercise do not signpost a period 
of immune suppression; and (iii) the dramatic reductions to lymphocyte numbers and 
function 1–2 h after exercise reflects a transient and time-dependent redistribution 
of immune cells to peripheral tissues, resulting in a heightened state of immune sur-
veillance and immune regulation, as opposed to immune suppression. In the second 
part of this review, we provide evidence that frequent exercise enhances—rather than 
suppresses—immune competency, and highlight key findings from human vaccination 
studies which show heightened responses to bacterial and viral antigens following bouts 
of exercise. Finally, in the third part of this review, we highlight that regular physical 
activity and frequent exercise might limit or delay aging of the immune system, providing 
further evidence that exercise is beneficial for immunological health. In summary, the 
over-arching aim of this review is to rebalance opinion over the perceived relationships 
between exercise and immune function. We emphasize that it is a misconception to label 
any form of acute exercise as immunosuppressive, and, instead, exercise most likely 
improves immune competency across the lifespan.
Keywords: exercise, physical activity, upper respiratory tract infections, open window hypothesis, infection 
susceptibility, ageing, immunosenescence, immune competency
 2
Campbell and Turner
Exercise, Health, and Immunity Across the Lifespan
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 648
iNTRODUCTiON
Lifelong physical activity1 is a potent means of reducing the 
risk of non-communicable diseases including cancer, car-
diovascular disease, and other chronic inflammatory disorders 
 
(1). Evidence also shows that a physically active lifestyle 
diminishes the risk of contracting a range of communicable 
diseases including viral and bacterial infections (2–6). In 
contrast to the widely accepted long-term health benefits that 
are achieved by regular physical activity, which imply that 
immune competency and regulation are improved by frequent 
exercise bouts, the effect of a single bout of exercise on immune 
function remains hotly disputed. Undeniably, acute vigorous 
exercise has a profound effect on the phenotypic makeup and 
functional capacity of the immune system. Indeed, the behav-
ior of almost all immune cell populations in the bloodstream is 
altered in some way during and after exercise (7, 8). However, 
for decades, it has been widely accepted that these changes 
result in a temporary decline in immune competency in the 
hours following exercise. In the first part of this review, we 
re-interpret these data and strive to dispel the misconception 
that an acute bout of exercise is detrimental to immunological 
health. In the second part of this article, we demonstrate that 
rather than suppressing immunity, contemporary evidence 
shows that an acute bout of exercise improves immune sur-
veillance, for example leading to enhanced antibacterial and 
antiviral immunity. Finally, in the third part of this article, we 
summarize recent data suggesting that regular physical activity 
and frequent exercise, which reduces systemic inflammatory 
activity and improves aspects of immune function, also leads to 
alterations in classical biomarkers of an aging immune system. 
These changes could be interpreted as limiting or delaying 
immunological aging (9–13).
PART A: iS iT TiMe TO CLOSe THe 
SHUTTeRS ON THe “OPeN-wiNDOw” 
HYPOTHeSiS? A BOUT OF eXeRCiSe 
DOeS NOT SUPPReSS iMMUNe 
COMPeTeNCY
A prevailing myth has formed in the literature that participating in 
an acute bout of aerobic exercise, particularly if it is vigorous and 
prolonged, can be detrimental to immune competency. The foun-
dations of this belief lay in research publications emanating from 
1 “Physical activity” refers to activities undertaken during leisure time, at home, 
as part of employment, or for transport purposes. “Exercise” is a component of 
physical activity within the leisure time domain and refers to physical activities that 
are planned, structured, repetitive, and undertaken for the purpose of improving or 
maintaining components of physical fitness and/or sporting performance. When 
individuals are referred to as being “active” or “inactive,” the description infers that 
these people undertake (or fail to undertake) a defined level of exercise or physical 
activity (e.g., age-specific physical activity recommendations, such as those pub-
lished by the World Health Organisation). In this review, the term “exercise” will 
generally be used to describe the effects that active behaviours have on immune 
competency. Individuals described as being “sedentary” accumulate prolonged 
periods of behaviour eliciting low energy expenditure (e.g. sitting and lying).
the 1980s and 1990s, reviewed extensively elsewhere (7, 8, 14). 
Findings from these early studies led to three principles of exer-
cise immunology being formed, which have, until now, generally 
been unchallenged in the literature: (i) infection risk is increased 
after an acute bout of prolonged and vigorous aerobic exercise; 
(ii) acute bouts of vigorous exercise can lead to a temporary 
reduction to salivary IgA levels culminating in a higher risk 
of opportunistic infections; and (iii) transient decreases in the 
number of peripheral blood immune cells, which occurs in the 
hours following vigorous exercise, represents a period of immune 
suppression. Over the years, these collective observations have 
coalesced and led to the creation of the so-called “open-window” 
hypothesis, which purports that the immune system is compro-
mised in the hours after vigorous exercise, leading to an increased 
risk of opportunistic infections in the days thereafter. To this 
day, the “open window” hypothesis continues to be discussed 
 
(15), despite the existence of contradictory evidence. Here, in 
the first part of this review, we aim to dispel the “open-window” 
hypothesis by revisiting key research studies and highlighting 
that limited evidence exists to support each of the three pillars 
that lay its foundation.
exercise and Opportunistic infections
It has been speculated for over a century that participation 
in physical activity heightens the risk of opportunistic infec-
tions (16). However, deeper investigation into the relationship 
between exercise and infection susceptibility did not take place 
until the end of the twentieth century. At this juncture, the 
principle focus of many of these studies in the late 1980s and 
early 1990s was to determine whether infection incidence was 
increased in elite and recreational athletes in the weeks fol-
lowing mass participation distance running events. One of the 
first studies from this era found that one third of 150 runners 
participating in the 1982 Two Oceans 56 km ultramarathon in 
Cape Town South Africa self-reported symptoms of upper res-
piratory tract infections (URTIs; symptoms = runny nose, sore 
throat, sneezing) within 2 weeks of the race (17). The control 
group, who were age matched and shared a home with another 
of the race competitors, reported only half the amount of URTIs 
in the same period (17). Similar observations were made in an 
often-cited larger study of the 1987 Los Angeles Marathon (18). 
Of 2,311 respondents who had completed the marathon and 
whom did not report an infection in the week prior to the race, 
12.9% reported an infection in the week after the race compared 
to only 2.2% of individuals who withdrew from the race for 
reasons other than illness (odds ratio of infection in runners 
versus non-runners = 5.9). A separate study conducted around 
the same time found that shorter duration running events, such 
as 5, 10 km, and half-marathons (21 km) did not appear to elicit 
an increased incidence of self-reported URTIs (19), thereby 
suggesting that URTI symptoms are increased only when the 
duration of the exercise is long.
A fundamental limitation of each of the aforementioned 
studies is that none of the self-reported infections were clinically 
confirmed by laboratory analyses (e.g., molecular or microbio-
logical techniques, such as polymerase chain reaction or bacte-
rial cultures). As a consequence, it was questioned whether the 
 3
Campbell and Turner
Exercise, Health, and Immunity Across the Lifespan
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 648
self-reported URTIs in these studies represented genuine infec-
tions. Clarifying this issue, a study employing nasopharyngeal 
and throat swabs in athletes who reported URTI symptoms over 
a 5-month period—including periods of competition—found 
that few of the self-reported infections were of bacterial, viral, 
chlamydial, or mycoplasmal nature (20). Indeed, of 37 episodes 
of URTI reported by athletes in this study, only 11 of these 
(30%) had a positive laboratory diagnosis. These findings place 
the previously discussed marathon studies in a different light 
 
(17, 18) and open the possibility that many of the URTIs reported 
were a symptom of other non-infectious causes. Indeed, of the 
of the non-infectious “URTIs” reported by Spence et al. (20), 
and likely captured elsewhere (17, 18), it is proposed that these 
symptoms are a result of other causes, including allergy and 
asthma, non-specific mucosal inflammation, or airway epithe-
lial cell trauma due to increased ventilation or exposure to cold 
air (21). In the few cases of clinically confirmed URTIs, these 
appear to be from viruses—in particular rhinoviruses (i.e., the 
 
“common cold”)—rather than bacterial infection (20, 22), which 
is in line with the typical incidence and etiology of infections at 
the population level (23).
In the previously discussed clinical laboratory study of infec-
tion incidence in athletes (20), it is notable that the proportion of 
athletes with a confirmed infection during the 5-month period 
was as follows: 2/20 controls (10%), 3/31 (10%) recreational 
athletes, and 6/32 (19%) elite athletes. Although this study was 
small, these data appear to align with observations from earlier 
self-report studies which found that the incidence of URTI symp-
toms was higher in those with the fastest race time and those who 
had completed a greater training volume pre-race (17, 18). These 
early observations contributed to the formulation of the “J-shaped 
curve” (24). This hypothesis infers that those who undertake an 
excessive volume of exercise, over a period of weeks and months, 
sometimes referred to as “over-training” or “intensified training” 
(25, 26), are at a greater risk of infections (24). In this scenario, 
other factors present prior to an acute bout of exercise, such as 
psychological stress and anxiety (27–29), or nutritional deficien-
cies (30) which are known to impact immune regulation, are 
likely to impact immune competency and contribute to the risk 
of genuine URTIs, rather than the acute and transient immune 
changes that arise after the acute bout of exercise itself; these acute 
immunological changes arising after acute exercise are discussed 
later in this article (see Part A: “Is it Time to Close the Shutters on 
the “Open-Window” Hypothesis? A Bout of Exercise Does Not 
Suppress Immune Competency”; and see “Exercise and Salivary 
IgA and Changes to Lymphocyte Frequency and Functional 
Capacity in the Hours After Acute Exercise”).
Moreover, we contend that attendance at any mass participa-
tion event—whether it is a marathon or otherwise—is likely to 
increase the risk of acquiring novel infectious pathogens, which 
are in abundance due to the mass gathering of people. For exam-
ple, it has been shown that around 40% of individuals attending 
the Hajj—a crowded religious event in Saudi Arabia—self-report 
an URTI (31). In this study, there was a greater risk of infection 
among those with the longest exposure to crowds (31). Thus, it 
is important to consider that other underlying factors, often not 
measured in the context of exercise and illness studies, likely 
play a greater role in infection risk than exercise participation 
per se. For example, recently, it has been demonstrated that air 
travel is a significant predictor of illness symptoms in athletes 
(32). Infections linked to air travel are exacerbated by long-haul 
flights crossing multiple time zones, implicating many other fac-
tors known to influence immune function, including exposure 
to hypobaric hypoxia, radiation, temperature changes, sleep 
disruption, fatigue, altered or inadequate diet, dehydration, and 
psychological stress (32–34).
Contrary to the aforementioned reports that exercise height-
ens infection incidence, it is often overlooked that other studies 
indicate that exercise participation may in fact reduce the inci-
dence of infections. For example, a recent prospective cohort 
study of 1,509 Swedish men and women aged 20–60 years found 
that higher physical activity levels were associated with a lower 
incidence of self-reported URTIs (35). A much smaller but 
very detailed analysis of illness records kept by 11 elite endur-
ance athletes over a period of 3–16 years showed that the total 
number of training hours per year was inversely correlated with 
sickness days reported (36). Similarly, another study of swim-
mers monitored for 4 years found that national level athletes 
had higher incidence of infections than more elite international 
level athletes (37). Finally, studies of ultramarathon runners, 
who undertake the largest volume of exercise among athletes, 
have shown that these individuals report fewer days missed 
from school or work due to illness compared to the general 
population. For example, the mean number of sickness days 
reported over 12 months was 1.5 days in a study of 1,212 ultra-
marathon runners and 2.8 days in a study of 489 ultramarathon 
runners (38, 39). These studies compared their findings to data 
from the United States Department of Health and Human 
Services report in 2009, showing that the general population 
report on average 4.4 illness days each year. Thus, a number of 
studies challenge the “J-shaped curve,” indicating that athletes 
undertaking the largest training loads, become ill less frequently 
than athletes competing at, and training at, a lower level. These 
findings have previously been conceptualized by extending the 
“J-shaped curve” into an “S-shaped curve,” thereby suggesting 
that very elite athletes are better adapted to the demands of 
their training (40). Given the nature of their design, very few 
of these reports—akin to many of the aforementioned studies 
showing increased infection risk among athletes following mass 
participation endurance events—used appropriate laboratory 
diagnostics to confirm an infection. However, despite their 
limitations, it is important to highlight that there are as many 
epidemiological studies showing that regular exercise reduces 
infections as there are studies showing exercise increases infec-
tions, and that these studies are often overlooked in the exercise 
immunology literature.
It should also be considered whether the commonly reported 
“increased frequency” of illness symptoms among athletic 
populations or those taking part in sporting events is indeed 
more frequent than among the general population. For example, 
large studies have reported that approximately 7–10% of athletes 
competing in the Olympic Games report symptoms of illness 
during the competition weeks (41, 42). However, accumulating 
evidence suggests the incidence of infection among athletes is 
 4
Campbell and Turner
Exercise, Health, and Immunity Across the Lifespan
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 648
not substantially different to other populations. For example, in 
a telephone survey of 2011 adults considered to represent the 
general population in the USA, 24% experienced a cold during 
a 4-week period, which is a similar timeframe to many interna-
tional sporting competitions (43). In another telephone survey of 
4,051 adults in the USA, 72% experienced at least 1 non-influenza 
related URTI over 12 months, and on average, experienced 2 
infections annually (44). In a year-long Internet-based monitor-
ing study of 627 individuals over 14 years of age in Germany, 
weekly acute respiratory illness rates were 2.7–8.2%, manifesting 
in 1.3–3.2 episodes annually (45). Thus, evidence suggests that the 
frequency of illness episodes in athletic communities is similar to 
the general population annually.
In the context of exercise participation in older age, it would 
appear to be counterintuitive that the incidence of URTI symp-
toms appears to be inversely correlated with age: it has been 
shown that URTI symptoms are more common in younger rather 
than older runners (18). While, once more, this aforementioned 
study did not confirm infections by laboratory analyses, it is 
notable that if acute exercise does suppress immune compe-
tency, it might be expected that older adults—whom typically 
have inferior immune function—would be at greatest risk of 
exercise-induced immune suppression. Rather than exercise 
per se, again, a more likely explanation for differences in illness 
symptoms between groups of athletes are other factors present 
before competing, such as fatigue, nutritional deficiency, 
psychological stress, or environmental exposures. On the other 
hand, proponents of the “open-window” hypothesis could 
portend that experienced athletes have higher tolerance of the 
symptoms associated with URTI, and/or have developed coping 
methods or strategies to reduce symptoms. Alternatively, expe-
rienced athletes may have evolved strategies to reduce infec-
tion risk by adopting good practice (e.g., sleep, diet, hygiene) 
 
before, during and following attendance at a mass participa-
tion event.
Separately, it has also been questioned whether illness 
symptoms—even if confirmed to be infectious—are a result of 
encountering a novel pathogen. For example, over a decade ago, 
some studies suggested that reactivation of latent viruses—such as 
Epstein Barr Virus which had most likely infected the host during 
childhood—was responsible for illness symptoms after exercise 
(46, 47). Although these studies suggest new pathogens were 
not to blame, it was interpreted that exercise-induced immune 
suppression had resulted in loss of viral control. However, herpes 
viruses can reactivate even with a fully functioning immune 
system, for example, in response to adrenergic activity, reactive 
oxygen species and inflammatory cytokines (48–50), all of which 
increase during exercise. Moreover, recent evidence appears 
to discount herpes virus involvement in causing symptoms of 
illness, by showing that individuals previously infected with 
Cytomegalovirus, or those infected with both Epstein Barr Virus 
and Cytomegalovirus, exhibited a lower incidence of illness symp-
toms than individuals not latently infected (51).
Taken together, evidence that participation in an acute bout of 
vigorous exercise leads to heightened infection incidence remains 
spurious. If symptoms of URTI are observed after a bout of vigor-
ous exercise, the cause is unlikely to be infectious. However, if 
infection or immune impairment is confirmed, their trigger is 
more likely to be the physical, nutritional, and psychological 
wellbeing of the individual prior to undertaking the single bout 
of acute vigorous exercise. In the context of mass participation 
sporting events, it is likely that increased exposure to pathogens, 
or the influence of environmental factors that can affect immune 
function (e.g., travel, sleep disruption) most likely explain genu-
ine infections. Thus, we conclude that it is unlikely that vigorous 
and prolonged exercise heighten the risk of infections and should 
not be considered a deterrent to those seeking to become more 
physically active.
exercise and Salivary igA
A second mainstay of exercise immunology that has received 
considerable attention over the last three decades is the assess-
ment of exercise-induced changes to mucosal immunity, 
principally via measurement of IgA levels in saliva (52). Given 
that IgA is the most abundant immunoglobulin in mucosal 
secretions and that its principle role is the inhibition of invading 
pathogens, isolated changes to salivary IgA following exercise 
has been considered of some importance in light of the purport-
edly higher risk of infections among athletes (7, 8).
One of the earliest and most cited papers in this research area 
found that IgA was reduced by 20% after 2–3 h of cross-country 
skiing (53). Another study found that this effect is transient, 
whereby salivary IgA concentrations decreased immediately 
after 2 h of intensive cycling exercise, and remained low in sam-
ples collected 1 h post-exercise, but returned to normal levels 
within 24 h (54). A criticism of these studies at that time was 
that the absolute IgA levels reported did not adequately control 
for the amount of saliva produced, and thus these results may 
misrepresent IgA secretion. Although some studies measuring 
IgA secretory rate (IgA protein concentration multiplied by 
saliva flow rate) support the early findings with IgA concentra-
tion, others have shown profoundly contradictory results. For 
example, in alignment with prior observations, it was found in 
trained runners that IgA secretion rate decreased by 25% from 
pre-marathon to 90 min post-marathon (55). Likewise, in a sepa-
rate study, a 20% reduction in IgA secretion rate was observed 
in elite athletes after a 2-h rowing exercise session (56). Several 
other studies of similar design reported analogous findings 
(57–59); however, contradictory findings are also in abundance 
but are much less cited in the literature. Indeed, an elegant study 
exploring the effects of different exercise intensities, including 
moderate- and high-intensity exercise to exhaustion, found that 
although saliva flow rate decreased, IgA secretion rate actu-
ally increased in response to both of the exercise bouts. In the 
words of the authors, exercise to exhaustion has an “effect on the 
quantity of saliva, but not the quality of saliva” (60). Many other 
studies have also reported that exercise does not elicit a decrease 
in IgA secretion rates following exercise (61–66).
Any subtle isolated changes to IgA that occur after exercise 
appear to be clinically insignificant as it would appear that the 
increased incidence of URTI symptoms that has been purported 
following vigorous and prolonged exercise is unrelated to salivary 
immunoglobulin status. A longitudinal field study of participants 
in the Comrades Marathon (86.5 km ultramarathon) in South 
 5
Campbell and Turner
Exercise, Health, and Immunity Across the Lifespan
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 648
Africa found that salivary IgA levels in the 4 weeks prior to the race, 
and 2 weeks following the race, were unrelated to the incidence of 
self-reported URTI (67). In the aforementioned study, it was found 
that symptoms of URTI were highest 4 weeks prior to the marathon, 
and URTI symptoms seemed to re-appear within many of the same 
athletes 1 or 2 weeks post-marathon. This study did not confirm 
the re-emergence of infections by laboratory testing, but if this was 
indeed demonstrated in future studies, it again shows that acute 
exercise participation per se does not heighten risk of opportunistic 
infections. In this case, an underlying infection, not resolved prior 
to exercise participation, or some other idiosyncrasy, is perhaps to 
blame. Such conclusions appear to be supported by evidence from 
athletes who report the most frequent illness symptoms. For exam-
ple, these individuals exhibit mostly anti-inflammatory cytokine 
responses when whole blood, collected at rest, is cultured ex vivo 
with antigens from diphtheria, tetanus, acellular pertussis, poliomy-
elitis, and hemophilus influenza type b (68, 69). These findings sug-
gest the immune system may be functionally altered by underlying 
illness, or is already different in these “illness-prone” athletes prior 
to infection, rather than exercise affecting immune function per se.
A flaw in studies investigating the link between mucosal 
immunity and purported exercise-induced infection risk is that 
oral health status is rarely adequately evaluated. Salivary IgA is 
heavily involved in host-bacterial ecology and mucosal homeo-
stasis (70, 71). As optimal oral health is rare in adults—with 
nearly all exhibiting caries, gingivitis or periodontitis—pro-
found between-person IgA variation has been reported, which 
is dependent on oral health status (71). Moreover, periodontal 
diseases are complex and multifactorial, and as a result, studies 
report large fluctuations in IgA levels relative to disease status 
between persons, probably due to the bespoke ecological makeup 
of different host mucosa (71). In addition, oral disease is a com-
mon problem in athlete populations (72), which is likely to be 
caused by high volume and frequent carbohydrate consumption, 
and in some, a neglect of oral hygiene, perhaps due to practical 
constraints. Thus, changes to oral inflammatory status has not 
been adequately considered, and emerging salivary biomarkers 
of oral inflammation, such as immunoglobulin-free light chains 
(73), may offer a means of controlling for this confounder. As 
highlighted elsewhere (70), salivary IgA is also highly vulnerable 
to short-term variation, in particular, due to circadian rhythms, 
typically peaking in the morning, and falling thereafter (74). 
As salivary IgA secretion is controlled by the parasympathetic 
and sympathetic nervous system, psychological stress also plays 
a powerful role in regulating IgA levels (75). Animal models 
suggest that salivary IgA levels could vary up to 27-fold within 
the same host over a short period of time (76). Salivary IgA 
levels are also affected by factors such as sex differences (77), 
diet, ethnicity, disease, medications, tobacco, and phase of 
the menstrual cycle, as reviewed elsewhere (71). To overcome 
some of these variations in salivary IgA, it is often the case that 
studies evaluate only secretory IgA (sIgA; i.e., IgA containing 
the secretory component) as this represents IgA produced by 
local mucosal plasma cells, and not IgA from the bloodstream 
transported via crevicular fluid. While this approach may 
reduce some confounding error, most IgA in saliva contains the 
secretory component and is, itself, subject to large variation; 
extensively reviewed elsewhere (78). Given these many consid-
erations, we propose that longitudinal measurement of salivary 
IgA, as an isolated measure of immune competency within a 
single host, and even more so between persons, depicts too 
confusing a picture, and it is ambitious to say that any subtle 
changes to salivary IgA following exercise reflects immune 
suppression and a heightened risk of opportunistic infections. 
Given the limitations of salivary IgA measurement, research is 
being undertaken to explore mucosal IgA in other biofluids, and 
a recent study has shown links between reduced tear IgA levels 
and infection incidence (79). Others have moved toward more 
comprehensive oral immunity panels (80), and such strategies 
could benefit further from an integrative approach that, in addi-
tion to immune parameters, incorporates full dental examina-
tion, oral inflammation biomarkers, and host mucosal ecology.
Changes to Lymphocyte Frequency  
and Functional Capacity in the Hours  
After Acute exercise
One of the most reproduced findings in human exercise physiol-
ogy is the profound and transient time-dependent change that 
arises to the phenotypic composition and functional capacity 
of lymphocytes in the peripheral bloodstream in response to 
a single bout of exercise (8). During vigorous aerobic exercise, 
it is commonly observed that peripheral blood lymphocyte 
frequency—and, concomitantly, the functional capacity of the 
lymphocyte pool—is dramatically increased, leading to the 
concept that, during exercise, exercise appears to “stimulate” 
the immune system. On the other hand, in the hours follow-
ing exercise, it is typically observed that total peripheral blood 
lymphocyte frequency—and the functional capacity of the lym-
phocyte pool—is decreased below pre-exercise levels, leading 
some to propose that exercise induces a short-term window of 
immune suppression (termed the “open-window” hypothesis). 
The purpose of this part of our review is to outline that it is 
a misconception to state that the “reductions” to lymphocyte 
frequency and function, that arise in the hours following acute 
exercise, reflects immune suppression, and instead we emphasize 
that during this post-exercise period, the immune system is in a 
heightened state of immune surveillance and regulation.
Transient Changes to Blood Lymphocyte  
Frequency in the Hours Following Exercise
The classic biphasic response of lymphocytes to acute steady 
state vigorous exercise lasting for around at least 45–60 min-
utes, is first characterized by a dramatic lymphocytosis. This 
response is typified by a dramatic influx of natural killer cells, 
which rise by up to 10-fold, and CD8+ T cells which increase to 
a lesser—but still profound—extent by approximately 2.5-fold 
(81). This exercise intensity-dependent mobilization is driven 
in part by increased shear forces and blood pressure during 
exercise causing a non-specific flushing of the marginal pools 
(82) but, moreover, is principally governed by adrenergic 
stimulation of beta-2-adrenergic receptors on the surface of 
lymphocytes, arising from adrenaline released during exercise, 
causing endothelial detachment and subsequent recirculation 
 6
Campbell and Turner
Exercise, Health, and Immunity Across the Lifespan
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 648
of lymphocytes into the bloodstream (83–85). Indeed, the 
lymphocyte mobilization response observed during exercise 
appears to broadly mirror the differential expression of beta-2 
adrenergic receptors on lymphocytes: natural killer cells > 
CD8+ T cells > B cells > CD4+ T cells, including regulatory 
T cells (81, 86–88). Upon exercise cessation, the classic biphasic 
exercise response is next characterized by a dramatic decrease in 
the frequency of lymphocytes in the bloodstream. This nadir is 
typically observed approximately 1–2 h post-exercise when the 
lymphocyte numerical count is lower than pre-exercise levels; 
lymphocyte frequency normally returns to pre-exercise levels 
within 24 h (87, 89, 90). The lymphopenia that occurs 1–2 h 
later is exercise intensity dependent and the most profound 
reductions during this period are typically observed among 
natural killer cells and CD8+ T cells (90). Akin to purported 
reductions to salivary IgA, discussed earlier, it was perceived 
that the numerical decline of blood lymphocytes that arises dur-
ing this time represented “double jeopardy” (89), temporarily 
exposing an individual to impaired immune competency and 
concomitantly providing an “open-window” for opportunistic 
infections (91, 92).
Rather than suppressing immune competency however, a more 
 
contemporary viewpoint is that this acute and transient lym-
phopenia 1–2 h after exercise is beneficial to immune surveillance 
and regulation. Indeed, in what appears to be a highly specialized 
and systematic response, it is widely proposed that exercise rede-
ploys immune cells to peripheral tissues (e.g., mucosal surfaces) 
to conduct immune surveillance. Here, these immune cells are 
thought to identify and eradicate other cells infected with patho-
gens, or those that have become damaged or malignant, termed 
the acute stress/exercise immune-enhancement hypothesis (93). 
A seminal study by Kruger and colleagues, using fluorescent cell 
tracking in rodents, found that T cells are redeployed in large 
numbers to peripheral tissues including the gut and lungs, and 
to the bone marrow following exercise (84, 94). In line with 
Dhabhar’s theory, it is hypothesized that this redistribution 
reflects heightened immune surveillance in sites where patho-
gens are likely to be encountered during and after exercise (i.e., 
lungs, gut). This response has also been proposed to maintain 
immune homeostasis via augmented regulatory activities (12). 
In this context, evidence implies that bone marrow homing and 
subsequent apoptosis of senescent T cells stimulates the produc-
tion or mobilization of new progenitor cells into the periphery 
(95), which has been hypothesized as an exercise-induced means 
of maintaining a younger immune system (12), discussed later 
in Part C “Does Exercise and Regular Physical Activity Influence 
Immunological Ageing.” Links between exercise-induced 
apoptosis and lymphopenia have in the past been interpreted as 
detrimental, with speculation that apoptosis could be responsible 
for the fall in lymphocyte number in the hours after exercise (96, 
97). Other studies have reported increased lymphocyte apoptosis 
immediately after exercise (i.e., as a result of the large mobili-
zation of cells) but not in the hours following exercise during 
lymphopenia (98–100). Although the magnitude of lymphocyte 
apoptosis reported in studies is dependent on the measurement 
technique, typically <10% of lymphocytes undergo post-exercise 
apoptosis (96, 97). Given the 30–60% decrease in lymphocyte 
numbers post-exercise (89, 101, 102), apoptosis could be a small 
contributor to exercise-induced lymphopenia, but this process 
of cell death is likely to be beneficial given the stimulation of 
progenitor cells from the bone marrow (95).
While it has not been shown in humans that exercise—in 
line with rodent models—causes the redistribution of immune 
cells to peripheral tissues, further support for a coordinated, 
exercise-induced immune surveillance response elicited 
by lymphopenia, is revealed by studying the phenotypic 
charac 
teristics of the cells that preferentially mobilize and 
subsequently extravasate out of the circulation after exercise. 
With regard to natural killer cells—the most exercise-
responsive lymphocyte subset—CD56dim cells are preferen-
tially redeployed rather than their CD56bright counterparts 
(81). CD56dim cells are a mature subset of natural killer cells 
which have exclusive migratory potential for non-lymphoid 
tissue and potent effector capabilities, including the capacity 
to produce high amounts of perforin and granzyme, whereas 
CD56bright cells are a more immature regulatory cell subset 
(103) and reside in secondary lymphoid organs, typified 
by their cell-surface expression of CD62L and CCR7 (104). 
CD56dim natural killer cells can be further dissected, into cells 
with highly potent effector function based on loss of NKG2A 
and expression of killer immunoglobulin-like receptors and 
CD57 (105, 106). In a recent study, it was shown that these 
natural killer cells, which are capable of rapid effector func-
tions, are preferentially redistributed after exercise (107, 108). 
Synergistically, T cells also appear to exert heterogeneous but 
highly coordinated responses to acute exercise. Indeed, it is 
consistently observed that discrete populations of CD8+ but 
not CD4+ T cell subsets are redeployed by exercise. For some 
time, there was confusion pertaining to the exact behavior 
of CD8+ T cells in response to exercise. Rather than losing 
or gaining markers of adhesion or activation—as evaluated 
elsewhere (8)—these changes represent a uniform redeploy-
ment of a preferentially mobilized group of memory cells. In a 
flurry of studies about a decade ago, it was shown that exercise 
selectively mobilizes memory CD8+ T cells with a phenotypic 
propensity for homing to peripheral tissues—typified for 
example by CD11, and not CCR7 or CD62L expression—and 
the distinctive capacity to mount rapid effector functions (81, 
109–111). This response presumably facilitates the detection 
and elimination of neoplastic, stressed or infected cells in 
synergy with natural killer cells, as proposed elsewhere (112). 
Aligned with the immune surveillance theory of Burnet 
and Thomas, reviewed elsewhere (113), these results imply 
that sentinel cells of the immune system are redeployed by 
exercise-induced perturbations to stress hormones, to exert 
effector functions against neoplastic, stressed, or infected cells 
in the hours following exercise. This process, which occurs 
daily in a natural diurnal process (114), orchestrated subtly by 
stress hormones (115, 116), appears to be primed in response 
to exercise, leading to enhanced immune surveillance (117). 
Principles of the acute stress/exercise immune-enhancement 
hypothesis continue to be investigated. For example, it has 
recently been shown that acute exercise does not preferentially 
mobilize CD8+ T cells and natural killer cells with the capacity 
 7
Campbell and Turner
Exercise, Health, and Immunity Across the Lifespan
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 648
for skin-homing (118). However, skin-homing in this context 
is a role that may be fulfilled by exercise-responsive mucosal-
associated invariant T cells (119); but further work is needed 
in this area.
A key example illustrating how exercise-induced immune 
cell redistribution is beneficial to host health can be found in 
the rapidly emerging field of exercise oncology. Indeed, a recent 
seminal study demonstrated inhibition of tumor onset and dis-
ease progression across a range of tumor models in voluntarily 
active rodents (112). In this work, natural killer cell infiltration 
was significantly increased in tumors from active versus inactive 
rodents, leading to the conclusion that the presence of natural 
killer cells (but perhaps also T cells) in tumor sites, redeployed 
by adrenaline during exercise stress, “provides a spark” for 
tumor elimination, in what could be considered a form of 
“exercise immunotherapy” (112, 120). Importantly, administra-
tion of propranolol—a beta 2 adrenergic blocker—abolished 
the adrenaline-induced redistribution of immune cells, and 
nullified the anti-tumor effect of exercise on neoplastic growth 
(112). While these studies are limited to rodents, there is grow-
ing evidence that exercise may promote anti-cancer effects in 
humans. For example, in a key study recently conducted in 
humans, it was shown that natural killer cells with a highly 
mature effector phenotype are preferentially redistributed after 
exercise, and have the capacity to exert augmented cytotoxicity 
against myeloma and lymphoma cells in vitro (107, 108). In light 
of these results, research is now being conducted to harness the 
beneficial impact of acute exercise on lymphocyte kinetics for 
the purposes of cancer immunotherapy (121). It is beyond the 
scope of this review to discuss other findings in this exciting field 
and we briefly conclude that the aforementioned studies imply 
that exercise-induced lymphocytosis, and the lymphopenia that 
follows, is beneficial to the immune system’s capacity to iden-
tify and neutralize damaged and neoplastic cells in peripheral 
tissues. Furthermore, in the context of neoplastic growth, this 
process may be directly responsible for reduced incidence of 
cancer among physically active people across the lifespan (122). 
Further comprehensive discussion of the role of exercise and 
lymphocyte kinetics in anti-tumor responses can be found else-
where (117). Clearly more research is needed in this area, and 
a shift in focus toward investigating the benefits—rather than 
purported detrimental effects—of exercise on health, is no doubt 
underway and will be a key focus for exercise immunologists in 
the coming years.
Transient Changes to Blood Lymphocyte  
Function in the Hours Following Exercise
A common misinterpretation, brought about by the exercise-
induced reductions to blood lymphocyte frequency in the hours 
following exercise, is the observation that the functional capacity 
of immune cells in the peripheral blood is reduced in the hours 
following vigorous exercise. As measurements of cell function 
in peripheral blood are entirely dependent on the cells present 
at the time of sampling, a change to the composition of the cells 
in blood in the hours after exercise—as outlined in the section; 
“Transient Changes to Blood Lymphocyte Frequency in the 
Hours Following Exercise”—will consequently lead to parallel 
changes in overall cell function, indicated by the performance 
of the sampled cells being assayed. For example, among CD8+ 
T cells, subsets that exhibit strong effector function (e.g., CD45
RA+CD27−CD28−CCR7−CD62L−CD57+), substantially increase 
during exercise (81, 123). Thus, during exercise, blood is pre-
dominantly occupied by cells capable of responding strongly 
(i.e., IFN-gamma production) to in vitro stimuli, and therefore, 
many studies have shown an increase in IFN-gamma production 
by cells isolated close to the exercise stimulus. In the hours fol-
lowing exercise, the same effector CD8+ T cells are subsequently 
redeployed to peripheral tissues, and, as such, this results in 
the blood having fewer cells capable of responding strongly 
to in vitro stimuli, thus explaining the commonly reported 
decrease in cellular function post-exercise. These effects have 
been neatly demonstrated approximately two decades ago when 
it was shown that IFN-gamma production by stimulated CD8+ 
T cells is reduced 2 h after completing a prolonged 2.5 h bout 
of cycling (124). Importantly, it was shown that this reduced 
capacity to produce IFN-gamma was due to a reduced number 
of IFN-gamma-positive CD8+ T cells in peripheral blood at the 
same time-point (124, 125).
The same principles apply to other cell functions, such as 
in vitro proliferation in response to mitogenic stimuli. However, 
with this measurement in particular, the commonly reported 
increase in T cell proliferation immediately after acute bouts of 
exercise is also strongly influenced by laboratory processes and 
in vitro assay conditions (e.g., blood processing, temperature, 
mitogen selection) (126). A recent meta-analysis of 24 studies 
concluded that lymphocyte proliferation is suppressed following 
acute bouts of exercise, and that a greater magnitude of sup-
pression is caused by exercise lasting longer than 1 h, regardless 
of exercise intensity (127). However, this meta-analysis did 
not examine the most important determinant of cell function 
following exercise: the time-dependent changes in the cellular 
composition of the samples assayed. Thus, findings such as these 
should be interpreted with caution if analyses did not differentiate 
between studies collecting samples immediately after exercise or 
in the hours following.
As with research focusing on T cells, a similar group of stud-
ies citing reductions to natural killer cell cytotoxicity following 
acute exercise, reviewed elsewhere (128), did not always take into 
account dramatic shifts in the constitutional makeup of the natu-
ral killer cell compartment, which is known to change in response 
to exercise (81). Once more, changes to the functional capacity of 
the total natural killer cell pool are likely to have been misrepre-
sented, given that many of these cells, with potent effector func-
tions, are redistributed to peripheral tissues following exercise 
cessation. The principles discussed herein regarding lymphocyte 
function are also broadly applicable to the assessment of function 
in other cells, such as neutrophils and monocytes; the response 
of these cells to exercise is beyond the scope of this article and is 
reviewed elsewhere (8).
Taken together, it is important to emphasize that statements 
such as “acute intensive exercise elicits a depression of several 
aspects of acquired immune function” and “prolonged bouts of 
heavy exertion reduce the normal functioning of all major immune 
cell subtypes” mentioned elsewhere (8, 15) should be interpreted 
 8
Campbell and Turner
Exercise, Health, and Immunity Across the Lifespan
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 648
with caution. We conclude that the results of studies exploring 
the effects of acute exercise on cell function must be considered 
very carefully in light of the time-dependent changes in the 
cellular composition of blood that typically arise following a 
vigorous bout.
Summary: Exercise Induces Lymphocyte  
Immune Surveillance Not Immune Suppression
In summary, strong evidence implies that a reduction in the 
frequency and function of lymphocytes (and other immune 
cells) in peripheral blood in the hours following vigorous 
and prolonged exercise does not reflect immune suppression. 
Instead, the observed lymphopenia represents a heightened 
state of immune surveillance and immune regulation driven by 
a preferential mobilization of cells to peripheral tissues. As such, 
nutritional interventions, which have been employed to dampen 
the magnitude of exercise lymphopenia (124, 129) are unlikely 
to reduce the incidence of infections, but inter 
ventions that 
augment exercise-induced lymphocyte trafficking may provide 
benefits (130).
PART B: ReGULAR PHYSiCAL ACTiviTY 
AND FReQUeNT eXeRCiSe AUGMeNT 
ASPeCTS OF iMMUNe COMPeTeNCY 
ACROSS THe LiFeSPAN
Contrary to a commonly held belief—outlined in Part A “Is it 
Time to Close the Shutters on the “Open Window” Hypothesis? 
A Bout of Exercise Does Not Suppress Immune Competency?”—
that acute vigorous exercise can suppress aspects of immune 
function, an increasingly large body of research indicates 
that both single bouts of exercise, or frequent participation 
in regular exercise, can act as an adjuvant to stimulate the 
immune system. Numerous methods exist to assess the effects 
of behavioral interventions on immunity (131) but arguably 
the optimal means of evaluating global immune competency 
at a systems level is via assessment of the immune response to 
in vivo challenge, ideally with a novel and clinically recognized 
pathogen, for example via vaccination (132). Thus, here, in the 
first section of Part B “Regular Physical Activity and Frequent 
Exercise Augment Aspects of Immune Competency Across the 
Lifespan,” we focus on the influence that exercise has on immune 
responses to antigenic challenge, which requires a coordinated 
response from most, if not all, innate and adaptive immune 
system components. In light of the age-associated decline in 
immune competence with aging—caused in part by underlying 
changes to the numerical, phenotypic, and functional capacity 
of almost all innate and adaptive immune cells—the second sec-
tion of Part B “Regular Physical Activity and Frequent Exercise 
Augment Aspects of Immune Competency Across the Lifespan,” 
will evaluate the impact aging has on the immune benefits that 
can be attained from exercise throughout the lifespan. A detailed 
discussion of immunological aging processes and the influence 
that an active lifestyle has on established biomarkers of an 
aging immune system is covered in Part C “Does exercise and 
Regular Physical Activity Influence Immunological Ageing?” of 
 
this article.
exercise and immune Responses  
to experimental In Vivo Challenge  
Across the Lifespan
In a research context, the most clinically relevant model to 
assess in vivo challenge in a controlled manner is via vaccina-
tion. Vaccine administration assesses the integrated capacity of 
the immune system to recognize and process antigen, leading to 
antigen neutralization. In a clinical research context, vaccination 
responses are principally quantified clinically in two ways, either 
via antibody production from antigen-specific plasma cells or via 
cytokine responses—typically IFN-gamma production—from 
T cells stimulated with cognate antigen.
Vaccination: Effects of a Single Exercise Bout
Evidence from an array of studies, evaluated recently in a com-
prehensive review elsewhere (9), indicates that a single acute bout 
of exercise appears to enhance immune responses to vaccination 
in both younger and older individuals. The majority of studies 
to date have examined muscle-damaging upper arm resistance 
exercise performed close to the time of vaccination which is 
administered shortly after the regimen into exercised muscle. 
However, other modes of exercise, including acute bouts of whole 
body aerobic activity, have also been investigated. Six of the eight 
trials identified in the aforementioned review indicated a sta-
tistically significant exercise-induced enhancement of immune 
responses against constituent antigens contained within the 
vaccine administered (133–138). It is notable that in five of these 
studies, statistically significant benefits were found where the 
vaccine strains appeared to have lower immunogenicity (9). For 
example, it was shown in a trial of 133 young adults, approximately 
20 years of age, receiving either a full- or half-dose Pneumovax-23 
(a pneumococcal vaccine), that those who exercised at the time 
of receiving the half-dose vaccine had heightened responses to 
five of the eleven pneumococcal strains contained in the vaccine, 
whereas no differences were observed for the other six strains; 
and no benefits of exercise were observed for the full-dose vac-
cine (137). As such, given the potential effectiveness of exercise 
as an adjuvant in situations where vaccine immunogenicity is 
low, studying the effects of exercise on antibody responses in 
older adults—whom typically exhibit impaired responses—has 
received considerable attention. In one recent study, it was found 
that antibody responses in women 55–75 years of age, were 
significantly improved when moderate-intensity aerobic exercise 
was performed immediately prior to vaccination; however, no 
beneficial effects were found in men (138). Another trial reported 
no benefits of a single 45-min bout of moderate-intensity walking 
exercise on the immune response to influenza and pneumococ-
cal vaccination in women around 47 years of age (139). Finally, 
 
a very recent study found no effect of a bout of resistance exer-
cise on antibody responses to influenza vaccination in adults 
approximately 73 years of age (140). It is possible that a number 
of factors including immunological aging, biological sex and 
variations in sex hormone levels, and perhaps latent infections 
 
(e.g., herpes viruses) (141–143) limit the immunostimulatory 
effects of exercise, and many studies have not adequately con-
trolled for these factors. Alternatively, in light of the mechanisms 
 9
Campbell and Turner
Exercise, Health, and Immunity Across the Lifespan
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 648
proposed in the acute stress/exercise immune-enhancement 
hypothesis (93), it is plausible that more intensive exercise may 
be needed to elicit enhanced vaccine responses. Despite null 
 
findings, it is important to point out that few, if any, studies inves-
tigating the effects of acute exercise on vaccination responses 
 
have reported exercise-induced impairment to immune respon-
ses, and rather, these studies report that exercise has no effect, 
 
or in some cases a beneficial effect, on the immune response to 
vaccination in older adults.
Vaccination: Effects of Frequent Exercise Bouts
Data from vaccine studies exploring the effects of regular physical 
activity or frequent exercise training on the immune response to 
vaccination provides robust support for the argument that exercise 
enhances, rather than suppresses immunity. Indeed, at least eight 
studies have demonstrated heightened vaccination responses 
in older adults, typically over 60 years of age, who are physically 
active (144–151). For example, an early study categorized adults 
aged 62 years or older, into one of three groups: active (undertak-
ing at least 20 min of vigorous exercise three or more times per 
week), moderately active (undertaking regular exercise but with 
lower intensity, frequency, and/or duration), or sedentary (non-
exercisers). Two weeks after influenza vaccination, it was shown 
that serum anti-influenza IgG and IgM titers were higher in 
active versus sedentary adults, and so too were peripheral blood 
mononuclear cell responses to antigen-specific stimulation (144). 
In addition, a recent study has shown that men aged 65–85 years, 
who regularly undertook moderate or vigorous exercise training, 
exhibited higher antibody responses compared to inactive controls 
in response to an influenza vaccine (151). Data linking habitual 
levels of physical activity to enhanced immune competency in 
humans are supported by evidence from animal studies, and 
show that the immunological benefits of exercise may be particu-
larly beneficial in enhancing otherwise poor responses in older 
 
age (152).
Interpreting Data From Vaccine Trials
A major criticism of vaccine and exercise trials conducted in 
humans is that many solely focus on the maximal antibody titer 
following vaccination, and it is not practical to follow-up with 
investigations into infection incidence as a gauge of protection 
status following vaccination (153). As such, it is unknown 
whether differences observed with absolute antibody titers, or 
the amount of IFN-gamma produced from stimulated T cells, 
between exercise and control groups, is representative of clini-
cally meaningful benefits in terms of protection from infections. 
Three elegant studies in rodents imply that benefits, beyond 
antibody titer, may be brought about by acute exercise. In one of 
these studies, it was found that antibody responses to influenza 
exposure were lower in rodents that exercised around the time of 
exposure, compared to those that did not exercise, yet, exercised 
mice were still protected and did not exhibit any signs of infec-
tion upon re-exposure to the virus (154). Moreover, in an earlier 
study by the same authors, it was found that mice undertaking an 
acute bout of exercise before being expose to influenza exhibited 
a lower severity of infection and had enhanced viral clearance 
and lower inflammation in the lungs in the days following 
(155). Thus, it may be the case that exercise enhances immune 
responses, beyond those captured using maximal antibody titer 
as an endpoint. In accordance with this view, an elegant rodent 
study conducted by an independent group (156) found that mice 
exercised for 20–30 min at moderate intensity 4 h after intrana-
sal influenza exposure had a substantially higher survival rate 
 
(18 of 22 survived; 82%) when compared to mice that did not 
exercise after influenza exposure (10 of 23 survived; 43%).
Contact Sensitivity Reactions and Acute  
Exercise Bouts
More recent studies have examined the effects of acute exercise 
on immune competency using other in vivo models of immune 
challenge that, in principle, also assess the coordinated efforts of 
immune system components. These studies have employed con-
tact-sensitivity reactions by topically applying to skin, the dendritic 
cell and T cell stimulant (or attractant) diphenylcyclopropenone 
(DPCP), and the non-specific inflammatory stimulant, croton oil 
(157, 158). For example, in studies of young adults (approximately 
20–30 years of age), by applying a primary sensitizing dose of DPCP 
20 min after 2 h of moderate-intensity treadmill running, and 
assessing recall challenge 4 weeks later, it has been concluded that 
this form of exercise impairs both the induction of T cell immunity 
and the memory response (159, 160). Thirty minutes of moder-
ate- or vigorous-intensity running had no effect, and no forms 
of exercise modulated the non-specific inflammatory challenge 
in response to croton oil (159, 160). Although these findings are 
biologically interesting, the clinical relevance of exercise-induced 
change is unclear, in part, because the process of DPCP-induced 
immune modulation is not well defined (158) unlike the immune 
response to antigen administration by vaccination.
Summary: Exercise Enhances Immune Responses  
to In Vivo Antigenic Challenge
We conclude that there is growing evidence from a powerful 
array of studies in humans and rodents, indicating that exercise 
enhances, or at least does not suppress immune responses 
to in vivo challenge in younger and older individuals. These 
observations—which contradict those predicated by the “open-
window” hypothesis—support the contention that an acute bout 
of exercise has no detrimental immune consequences for health. 
Thus, exercise should be encouraged, particularly for older adults 
who are at greatest risk of infections and who may obtain the 
greatest exercise-induced benefits to immune competency; an 
overview of the impact of aging on the immunological benefits 
that can be attained from exercise is described next.
Does Aging influence the immunological 
Benefits of exercise and Regular Physical 
Activity?
Effect of a Single Exercise Bout
Research investigating the effects of exercise on immune 
function has sought to establish whether the observed ben-
efits, as outlined earlier in young adults, such as exercise-induced 
immune cell mobilisation, that has been implicated in protection 
against cancer, is also applicable to older adults. For example, it 
has been reported that the magnitude of T cell mobilization 
 10
Campbell and Turner
Exercise, Health, and Immunity Across the Lifespan
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 648
in response to acute vigorous exercise is smaller in older 
(65 ± 1 years) compared to younger (22 ± 1 years) adults (161, 
162). However, in this study, it was also shown that following 
exercise, the magnitude of T cell proliferation in response to 
mitogens was smaller in young adults, whereas a similar exercise- 
induced stimulation of natural killer cell cytotoxicity was obser-
ved for both groups (161, 162). It is beyond the scope of this 
review to fully critique investigations examining the influence of 
single exercise bouts on the function of different immune cells, 
with comparisons made between younger and older individuals 
across the lifespan; we refer the reader to comprehensive reviews 
on this topic (163–165). Nevertheless, it is important to point 
out that many studies in this area are difficult to interpret: at the 
time of their publication, the influence of Cytomegalovirus infec-
tion on the magnitude of exercise-induced immune responses 
was not known and was therefore not considered (123, 166). 
Moreover, while the magnitude of change to lymphocyte kinet-
ics is likely to be important for detecting and eliminating viral 
and bacterial infections and neoplastic cells, this process is 
complex to study, and comparisons between younger and older 
people is difficult, partly due to other age-associated changes 
that influence the physiological response to exercise, such as 
the decline in fitness (e.g., sarcopenia, cardiorespiratory fitness) 
with age. It is likely that some, or all of these factors impact 
upon on the efficacy of exercise as an adjuvant to vaccination 
responses in older adults, outlined earlier in the section “Exercise 
and Immune Responses to Experimental In Vivo Challenge 
Across the Lifespan.” In light of the challenge interpreting the 
clinical relevance of the aforementioned lymphocyte kinetics 
studies, from here onward, we briefly evaluate the impact of 
regular physical activity or frequent exercise bouts on immune 
competency across the lifespan, using measurements in samples 
collected from participants at rest.
Frequent Bouts of Exercise
Immune competency at rest has been assessed in cross-sectional 
studies, comparing elderly individuals differentiated by physi-
cal activity level or cardiorespiratory fitness, or by examining 
immune function before and after structured exercise training 
interventions. For example, it has commonly been reported 
among the elderly, that the most active participants, compared to 
those who are least active, show the highest T cell proliferation and 
cytokine production in response to mitogens (163–165). Fewer 
studies have assessed innate immune competency, but higher 
natural killer cell cytotoxicity has been consistently shown among 
the elderly who are active compared to less active age-matched 
controls (163–165). Recent studies have expanded measurements 
into other innate immune cells such as neutrophils. For example, 
a recent cross-sectional study of 211 elderly adults, showed that 
neutrophils from the 20 most active participants, compared to the 
20 least active participants, migrated toward interleukin (IL)-8 
with greater chemotactic accuracy, but there were no differences 
in chemotactic speed (167). In addition, a recent exercise train-
ing study has shown in both young and middle-aged adults, that 
10 weeks of moderate-intensity continuous cycling training, 
or high-intensity interval cycling training, improve neutrophil 
and monocyte phagocytosis and oxidative burst irrespective 
of age (168). Improvements in these common measurements 
of immune competency, however, are not always consistent in 
longitudinal studies employing exercise training interventions, 
with around half of studies reporting improvements, and half 
reporting no change (163–165). One reason for this could be 
because the dramatic effects of Cytomegalovirus on driving 
immunological aging was not considered by most of these studies, 
and it is feasible that results would be different when examining 
individuals who are latently infected compared to those who are 
seronegative. Importantly however, no studies report impaired 
immune competency from increased participation in structured 
exercise. Altogether, we conclude that despite declines in fitness 
and immune competency, aging does not appear to negate the 
immunological benefits that can be attained from exercise, and 
indeed, frequent participation in exercise across the lifespan may 
lead to immune benefits, even in older age.
PART C: DOeS eXeRCiSe AND ReGULAR 
PHYSiCAL ACTiviTY iNFLUeNCe 
iMMUNOLOGiCAL AGeiNG?
Since the first exercise immunology research in the early 1900s, 
and the substantial increase in scientific interest from the late 
1980s and early 1990s (169), studies examining interaction 
between immune function and lifestyle factors such as exercise and 
physical activity have become common. Although a few exercise 
studies published in the last 10–15 years have investigated some 
immunological processes relevant to aging, health, and disease, 
the theme of exercise-induced “immune suppression” continues 
to influence the design of new studies or at least features in the 
interpretation of findings and is often justified or contextualized 
with relevance to self-reported illness symptoms among athletes. 
As outlined in Part A “Is it Time to Close the Shutters on the 
“Open-Window” Hypothesis? A Bout of Exercise Does Not 
Suppress Immune Competency,” there is limited reliable evidence 
to show that exercise heightens risk of opportunistic infections, 
but there is, however, a growing body of evidence to show that 
exercise enhances, rather than suppresses, immune competency, 
as summarized in Part B: “Regular Physical Activity and Frequent 
Exercise Augment Aspects of Immune Competency Across the 
Lifespan.” The beneficial effects of exercise on immune function 
are likely to be greatest for elderly people exhibiting the age-
associated deterioration of immune competency, also referred 
to as immunosenescence. Moreover, preliminary evidence sug-
gests that physical activity and regular structured exercise may 
even limit or delay immunological aging. Here, in Part C: “Does 
Exercise and Regular Physical Activity Influence Immunological 
Ageing?” we evaluate whether an active lifestyle influences 
immunosenescence.
The Aging immune System
Aging is associated with profound changes to the numerical, phe-
notypic, and functional capacity of almost all innate and adaptive 
immune cells, resulting in altered immune responses. Some innate 
immune cells exhibit numerical, phenotypic, and functional altera-
tions with aging, whereas others appear to be less affected (170). 
 11
Campbell and Turner
Exercise, Health, and Immunity Across the Lifespan
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 648
For example, the numbers and functions of eosinophils, basophils, 
and mast cells appear to be largely unchanged with aging, or at 
least, there is not a clear effect of age based on the limited current 
literature (170). Neutrophil numbers often increase with aging, but 
these cells exhibit diminished phagocytosis and impaired chemo-
taxis, although chemokinesis is maintained (170). Natural killer 
cells increase with aging, driven by an accumulation of cytotoxic 
CD56dim cells but a decline in regulatory CD56bright cells, and over-
all, cytokine production and cytotoxicity are less on a per cell basis 
(170). Other innate lymphocytes, such as invariant CD1d-restricted 
natural killer T cells (iNKT cells), which represent <1% of the T cell 
pool, decline in number but age-associated changes to their func-
tion have not been established (171). Monocyte numbers are stable 
with aging, but classical cells (CD14++CD16−) decline, and inter-
mediate (CD14+CD16+) and non-classical (CD14+CD16++) cells 
increase, but overall, monocyte cytokine production is impaired 
(170, 172). These changes with blood monocytes are thought to 
be mirrored by tissue-resident macrophages, whereby classically 
activated M1 cells decline, and alternatively activated M2 cells 
accumulate (173). However, alterations in tissue-resident cells with 
advancing age are very likely to be a result of adipose tissue accu-
mulation and dysfunction that also occurs in parallel with aging 
(174, 175). Indeed, inflamed adipose tissue attracts macrophages 
with cell-surface characteristics similar to M2 alternatively activated 
cells—often assumed to be anti-inflammatory. However, despite 
their cell-surface phenotype, these cells are potent producers of 
inflammatory cytokines in adipose tissue, and likely drive age- and 
obesity-associated inflammation (176–179). Thus, the M1/M2 
paradigm for macrophages is likely to be an over-simplification 
(180, 181). It is unknown if other, primarily tissue-resident cells, 
are affected by adipose tissue dysfunction, but with aging, the 
number and function of dendritic cells have been reported to 
decrease in the skin and mucosal membranes (170). There is also 
an age-associated increase in myeloid-derived suppressor cells—a 
heterogeneous population of granulocytes, macrophages, and 
dendritic cells—that may impair aspects of immune function by 
producing reactive oxygen species and inhibitory cytokines (182).
Within the adaptive immune system, there are substantial 
changes to the numbers, function, and phenotype of T cells with 
aging. Among the broad population of CD4+ T-helper cells, aging 
is associated with a predominance of Th2 (i.e., IL-4 and IL-10), 
and Th17-producing cells (i.e., IL-17-producing cells that are 
associated with autoimmune disease), whereas there is a decline 
in cells with a Th1 profile [i.e., IFN-gamma- and tumor necrosis 
factor-alpha (TNF-alpha)-producing cells] (183, 184). With 
aging, the numbers and proportions of antigen-inexperienced 
CD4+ and CD8+ T cells decreases (e.g., CD27+CD28+CD45RA+
CD57−CD62L+CCR7+KLRG1− naïve cells) (185, 186). In parallel, 
the numbers and proportions of antigen-experienced CD4+ and 
CD8+ T cells increases (e.g., CD27−CD28−CD45RA+CD57+CD
62L−CCR7−KLRG1+ memory cells), and these cells are potent 
producers of inflammatory cytokines (185, 186). These changes 
are driven by lower hematopoietic stem cell numbers, thymic 
involution resulting in reduced output of antigen-naïve T cells, 
and infection with latent viruses, in particular Cytomegalovirus 
(185, 187). With aging, T cells that express natural killer cell-
associated cell-surface proteins (NKT-like cells) also accumulate, 
exhibiting similar changes to their phenotype, functional proper-
ties, and specificities as with the broader population of CD4+ and 
CD8+ T cells (171). There is an age-associated decline in the total 
number of γδ T cells; however age per se, in the absence of chronic 
infections, is associated with a decline in Vδ2 cells (60–80% of γδ 
T cells), whereas Vδ1 (15–20% γδ T cells) remain stable (188). 
Some evidence suggests that γδ T cell proliferative responses 
are impaired with aging, perhaps due to increased susceptibility 
of Vδ2 cells to apoptosis (189, 190). Natural regulatory T cells 
increase with aging whereas inducible regulatory T cells decrease, 
but it is unclear if their function is affected (191). As with T cells, 
aging is associated with a decline in the numbers and proportions 
of naïve B cells, an accumulation of memory B cells with limited 
specificities, and impaired plasma cell antibody production (192).
Several robust and accepted hallmarks of immunosenescence 
have been established, especially within the adaptive immune 
system. For example, low numbers and proportions of naïve 
T cells (in particular CD8+ T cells) and high numbers and 
proportions of memory T cells (especially late-stage differenti-
ated CD8+ T cells) are well established biomarkers (185, 186, 
193, 194). In addition, a cluster of parameters, revealed in 
longitudinal studies of octogenarians and nonagenarians from 
an isolated population in Sweden, have been referred to as the 
immune risk profile (195–197). Biomarkers included low num-
bers and proportions of B cells, high numbers and proportions 
of late-stage differentiated CD8+ T cells (i.e., CD27−CD28−), 
poor T cell proliferation in response to mitogens, a CD4:CD8 
ratio of <1.0, infection with Cytomegalovirus and high plasma 
IL-6, which together, predicted greater all-cause mortality at 
2-, 4-, and 6-year follow-up (195, 197–200). Indeed, the age-
associated increase in systemic inflammation, referred to as 
“inflammageing” is another principle observation among aging 
and longevity studies (201, 202). Subsequently, high levels of 
IL-6, TNF-alpha, and C-reactive protein, have been associated 
with shorter survival (203–205). Overall, it is well established 
that elderly individuals exhibit impaired immune responses to 
in vivo challenge with novel antigens (143, 206, 207) and these 
individuals are subsequently thought to be at increased risk of 
infection. Encouragingly however, as outlined in Part B: “Regular 
Physical Activity and Frequent Exercise Augment Aspects of 
Immune Competency Across the Lifespan” exercise can be a 
potent stimulus of immune function, including the response 
to vaccination, and some evidence suggests that exercise might 
delay or limit the age-associated decline in immune competency.
Relationships Between exercise and 
Regular Physical Activity with Hallmarks 
of an Aging Adaptive immune System
As summarized in Part B: “Regular Physical Activity and Frequent 
Exercise Augment Aspects of Immune Competency Across the 
Lifespan” many studies have examined the influence of regular 
physical activity or frequent structured exercise on the function 
of the adaptive immune system with aging (163–165). Here, we 
focus on recent studies that have examined relationships between 
exercise, physical activity or cardiorespiratory fitness, and the 
numbers and proportions of CD4+ and CD8+ naïve and memory 
 12
Campbell and Turner
Exercise, Health, and Immunity Across the Lifespan
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 648
T cells, as hallmarks of immunosenescence. Indeed, a small 
number of studies have investigated whether the characteristics 
of the T cell pool are influenced by an active lifestyle. There is a 
larger body of evidence in young adults, typically between 18 and 
30 years, compared to older adults, hereafter considered as being 
over 40 years of age due to the characteristics of studies published to 
date. If an active lifestyle can be linked with a smaller accumulation 
of memory T cells, and a smaller decline in naïve T cells, then in 
young adults, one interpretation might be that exercise prevents, or 
at least delays immunosenescence, whereas in older adults, these 
associations could be interpreted as countering or limiting the 
development of an age-associated immune profile.
Experimental Evidence in Young People: Can 
Exercise Prevent or Delay Aging of the Adaptive 
Immune System?
The characteristics of the T cell pool have been examined in 
16 young adults (50% male; 18 ± 2 years) classified as being 
very active (well-trained soccer players self-reporting 9–12 h 
of exercise per week) and compared to 16 young adults (50% 
male; 19 ± 2 years) classified as being untrained (individuals 
self-reporting 2–3 h of exercise per week). Untrained individu-
als showed the highest proportions of CD4+ and CD8+ memory 
T cells, and the lowest proportions of CD8+ naïve T cells, defined 
on the basis of CD57 and CD28 expression (208). Although these 
results suggest that regular exercise might limit the age-associated 
accumulation of memory T cells and decline in naïve T cells, the 
effects were strongly influenced by sex: only untrained males 
exhibited high proportions of memory T cells and low propor-
tions of naïve cells compared to trained males, and these effects 
were driven by changes in the CD4+ T cell pool (208). Extending 
these findings by examining a female-only population of young 
adults, the same authors compared 13 well-trained soccer players 
(self-reporting around 12 h of exercise per week; 20 ± 2 years) to 
13 untrained controls (self-reporting around 3 h of exercise per 
week; 21 ± 2 years) (209). Trained females exhibited a greater 
proportion of CD8+ naïve T cells compared to untrained females, 
but these associations did not remain statistically significant after 
controlling for body fat percentage (trained 21.7 ± 4.0 versus 
untrained 25.1 ± 4.1%, p < 0.05) (209). Indeed, very few studies 
have considered whether relationships between an active lifestyle 
and markers of an aging immune system could be influenced by 
other factors, such as body composition. Recently, a very small 
study of 15 males aged 30 ± 4 years, categorized participants 
using a combination of gold standard methods for measuring 
physiological and lifestyle variables (210). Three groups were 
formed (sedentary, active, and very active) on the basis of 
objectively assessed habitual physical activity, directly measured 
cardiorespiratory fitness, and body composition assessed with 
dual energy X-ray absorptiometry (210). This work showed that 
sedentary individuals had higher proportions of memory CD4+ 
T cells expressing CD45RO and PD-1, supporting the results of 
other published studies that have not taken body composition 
into consideration.
It should be emphasized, that among younger adults in 
particular, mixed results have been reported when investigat-
ing links between an active lifestyle and hallmarks of an aging 
immune system. Most investigations have been cross-sectional 
in design, or have made observations between groups over 
short periods. For example, one study has shown that national 
standard triathletes (age range 18–36 years, n = 19), appear to 
exhibit impaired thymic output, assessed by T cell receptor exci-
sion circle levels (211). Among CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, these 
athletes had lower absolute numbers of naïve cells and higher 
absolute numbers of memory cells compared to age-matched 
less active controls (n = 16), as shown by CD45RA, CD45RO, 
and CD27 expression (211). Similar observations have been 
made by examining individuals in the third decade of life, show-
ing that endurance athletes, compared to less active controls, 
appear to exhibit slightly larger accumulations of memory 
T cells and slightly fewer naïve T cells, defined by CD45RA 
and CCR7 expression (212). Thus, it appears that among 
younger individuals (i.e., less than 40 years of age), if exercise is 
undertaken at very extreme volumes, such as more than 5–10 
times the amount of physical activity recommended each week 
(i.e., 12–25 h per week), this might contribute toward a small 
decline in naïve T cells and a small increase in memory T cells. 
It is possible that these changes are due to reactivation of latent 
viruses, which could be independent of immune function, and 
driven by exercise-induced adrenergic activity, oxidative stress 
and inflammatory cytokines (48–50). However, these results 
might also be explained by fluctuations in cell numbers and cell 
sub-populations in peripheral blood over time. Such changes 
have been interpreted as being linked to exercise training load 
(213, 214), but it is also conceivable that these changes occur 
due to seasonal variation, as has been shown in non-exercise 
contexts (215, 216).
Experimental Evidence in Older People: Can  
Exercise Limit or Counter Aging of the Adaptive 
Immune System?
Although most studies have examined associations between 
biomarkers of an aging adaptive immune system in young 
adults, other studies have made measurements across a broader 
range of ages. For example, one study examined 102 men rang-
ing in age from 18 to 61 years (mean 39 ± 6 years) (217). It 
was shown that the proportion of the CD4+ and CD8+ T cell 
pool comprising of memory cells (defined as KLRG1+CD57+ 
or KLRG1+CD28−) was inversely correlated with cardiores-
piratory fitness, which is largely indicative of an active lifestyle 
(217). The age-associated decrease of naïve T cells (defined as 
KLRG1−CD57− or KLRG1−CD28+) and increase in memory 
T cells did not withstand statistical adjustment for cardiorespira-
tory fitness, but remained significant after adjusting statistically 
for body composition and Cytomegalovirus infection (217). 
Thus, it was concluded that fitter individuals exhibit a smaller 
age-associated decline of naïve T cells and a smaller accumula-
tion of memory T cells.
As with work examining relationships between an active 
lifestyle and hallmarks of an aging adaptive immune system in 
young and middle-aged adults, similar associations have been 
shown in an older population of 61 men aged 65–85 years 
(218). In this study, participants self-reported to be “untrained” 
(n = 15), or to lead a “moderate” training lifestyle (n = 16; 
 13
Campbell and Turner
Exercise, Health, and Immunity Across the Lifespan
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 648
taking part in team sports or running less than 6 km two to 
three times per week), or an “intense” training lifestyle (n = 15; 
running approximately 10 km at least 5 days per week). These 
categories were confirmed with a validated physical activity 
questionnaire and by measurement of cardiorespiratory fitness. 
Both training groups exhibited a lower proportion of CD4+ 
and CD8+ memory cells (defined as CD45RA+CCR7−), but 
these associations were largest and only statistically significant 
among men leading an “intense” training lifestyle, suggesting 
a dose–response effect of exercise. Although findings were 
less clear when examining other cell subpopulations based on 
CD45RA and CCR7 expression, and there were no effects of 
exercise when examining CD28− cells, men in the “trained” 
groups had T cells with the longest telomeres (218). Another 
recent study compared 125 adults (55–79 years of age) who 
maintained a high level of cycling throughout life to 75 age-
matched inactive controls (219). Within the CD4+ and CD8+ 
T cell pool, the frequency of naive cells (defined as CD45RA+) 
was greater, and the frequency of memory cells (defined as 
CD45RA-) was lower among cyclists. Extended phenotyping 
revealed that CD4+ and CD8+ CCR7-CD45RA+ accumulation 
was less among cyclists, but no differences were found for 
CD28-CD57+ cells. Cyclists also exhibited higher frequencies 
of recent thymic emigrants and regulatory B cells, lower Th17 
polarization, and in plasma, higher IL-7 and lower IL-6 (219). 
Despite these findings, suggesting a beneficial effect of leading 
an active lifestyle on immunosenescence among older adults, 
there is some inconsistency in the literature. For example, 
comparing elderly athletes (n = 12, approximately 74 years of 
age) to less active age-matched controls (n = 26), there were 
no differences in thymic output, the proportions of naïve 
or memory CD4+ and CD8+ T cells (defined with CD45RA 
and CCR7 expression), or T cell activation in response to 
anti-CD3 stimulation (212). Most investigations of T cell 
immunosenescence and lifestyle among healthy elderly adults 
have had cross-sectional study designs. Longitudinal studies, 
or randomized and controlled trials of exercise training are 
lacking and might yield promising results. For example, one 
study has compared 6 months of exercise training in men and 
women (n = 28, aged 61–76 years) to a similar group who 
maintained their current lifestyle (n = 20, aged 62–79 years) 
(220). Using a simple immunophenotyping strategy, the results 
showed that the proportion of CD4+ T cells expressing CD28 
increased in the exercise group after 6 months, but not in those 
who maintained their lifestyle (220).
Summary of Experimental Evidence
In summary, evidence shows that the characteristics of the 
T cell pool appear to be influenced by leading an active life-
style, determined by exercise training, physical activity level, 
or cardiorespiratory fitness. It seems that among both the 
 
young and elderly, an active lifestyle is generally linked to 
lower numbers and proportions of memory T cells and higher 
numbers and proportions of naïve T cells (10). This summary 
is partly supported by a recent systematic review, concluding 
that regular structured exercise increases the number of naïve 
T cells in peripheral blood at rest (221). Altogether, findings 
from recent studies examining relationships between an active 
lifestyle and the characteristics of the T cell pool—as robust and 
accepted biomarkers of immunosenescence—support obser-
vations from some cross-sectional and longitudinal studies, 
showing that other measures of immune competency, which 
typically decline with aging, can be improved with physical 
activity or regular structured exercise (163–165). However, 
further research is needed in this area that employs precise 
lifestyle measurements (e.g., using wearable technology to 
assess physical activity, and dual energy X-ray absorptiometry 
to measure body composition) and more robust measurements 
of immune competency (e.g., absolute cell counts rather than 
proportions, measurements of cell function, and in vivo 
antigen challenges) while controlling for factors that drive 
immunosenescence (e.g., inflammation and Cytomegalovirus 
infection).
Mechanisms
Links between a physically active lifestyle with lower numbers 
or proportions of memory T cells, and higher numbers or 
proportions of naïve T cells, have been hypothesized as being 
driven by the acute effects of exercise bouts. For example, it has 
been suggested that repeated bouts of exercise might prevent 
or delay immunological aging by limiting the accumulation of 
CD4+ and CD8+ antigen-experienced memory T cell clones, 
repopulating blood with antigen-inexperienced naïve T cells 
(11, 12). In this hypothesis, it is proposed that memory T cells 
are frequently mobilized into blood during regular bouts of 
exercise, followed by an extravasation to peripheral tissues, 
where these cells are exposed to pro-apoptotic stimuli, such 
as reactive oxygen species, glucocorticoids, and cytokines (11, 
12). Subsequently, it is proposed that the number of naïve 
T cells increases as part of a negative feedback loop governing 
the number of naïve and memory cells in the immune system, 
which is bolstered by exercise-induced thymopoiesis and extra-
thymic T cell development (11, 12). Supporting the mechanisms 
proposed in this hypothesis, many investigations have shown 
that memory T cells are mobilized into the circulation during 
exercise, followed by extravasation out of the bloodstream 
in the hours following (81, 123). In addition, studies in mice 
show that lymphocyte apoptosis occurs post-exercise in tissues 
thought to be the homing destination of mobilized cells (222). 
Although some T cells mobilized by exercise might be resistant 
to apoptosis, given that Cytomegalovirus-specific CD8+ T cells 
express high levels of Bcl-2 (223), other work has shown 
that Cytomegalovirus-specific CD8+ T cells, are equally as 
susceptible to Fas-induced apoptosis as the total pool of CD8+ 
T cells (224). Further, irrespective of virus specificity, studies 
have shown that T cells expressing cell-surface proteins such 
as CD57 and KLRG1 are more susceptible to H2O2-induced 
apoptosis than total lymphocytes and naïve T cells (225, 226). 
Thus, the concept of exercise directly countering memory 
T cell accumulation is supported by evidence from human and 
animal studies.
It is unknown whether triggering apoptosis among expan-
ded clones of memory T cells specific for viruses such as 
Cytomegalovirus is advantageous. For example, in a transplant 
 14
Campbell and Turner
Exercise, Health, and Immunity Across the Lifespan
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 648
setting, Cytomegalovirus disease occurs when T cells fail to 
provide antiviral control (227) and a robust pro-inflammatory 
response to Cytomegalovirus has been associated with longer 
survival in the elderly (228). However, it remains to be deter-
mined what proportion of the T cell pool needs to be specific 
for Cytomegalovirus to limit viral reactivation. Infection with 
Cytomegalovirus results in approximately 10% of the CD4+ and 
CD8+ T cell pool becoming specific for this virus (229), although 
large inter-individual differences exist. For example, it has been 
reported that 23% of the CD8+ T cell pool can become specific 
for a single Cytomegalovirus epitope (223). Traditionally, it has 
been considered disadvantageous for such a large proportion of 
the T cell pool to be specific for one virus. This view is linked 
to another age- or infection-associated change that occurs in 
parallel—a fall in the numbers and proportions of naïve cells—
which has been interpreted as limiting capacity to engage novel 
antigens. These interpretations are based upon two assumptions. 
First, there is an upper limit to the size of the immune system, 
and second, thymic output is negligible after adolescence (230). 
Thus, it has been proposed that antigen-inexperienced naïve 
T cells could be “used up” due to ongoing differentiation into 
antigen-experienced memory T cells that “fill up” immunological 
“space” (230). It has also been proposed that this accumulation 
of antigen-experienced memory T cells leads to “squeezing out” 
of T cells targeting less dominant viruses leading to loss of viral 
control (231). This concept of a fixed amount of immunological 
space has since been debated (232, 233) and thymic output is 
now known to persist, albeit reduced, up until around 70 years 
of age (234). However, even if removal of some memory T cells 
is not essential for maintaining an effective T cell pool, assuming 
these cells contribute to systemic inflammation, their removal 
might limit “inflammageing” (230). Despite uncertainties over 
the susceptibility of memory T cells to undergo apoptosis, or 
whether it is advantageous to stimulate their removal, it seems 
that exercise-induced immune cell death in the tissues has 
relevance to other processes. For example, apoptotic cells and 
cell debris stimulates hematopoietic stem cell mobilization 
into blood (95) perhaps promoting trafficking to the thymus 
or extrathymic sites facilitating output of naïve T cells (235). 
Additional support for exercise stimulating production of naïve 
T cells is provided by work showing that contracting skeletal 
muscle produces IL-7 (236) which might increase thymic mass 
and function (237).
A physically active lifestyle might also counter T cell immu-
nosenescence indirectly, perhaps by limiting adipose tissue 
accumulation and dysfunction that occurs with aging and obesity 
(174, 238, 239). Indeed, obesity has been linked with impaired 
lymphocyte proliferation (240), shorter leukocyte telomere length 
(241), and a skewing of the T cell pool toward a regulatory and 
Th2-phenotype (242). In addition, large expansions of differenti-
ated αβ T cells and γδ T cells have been shown among people with 
obesity, with γδ T cells exhibiting impaired antiviral function 
(243–245). It is generally accepted that repeated stimulation with 
antigens from Cytomegalovirus drives immunosenescence (185, 
186, 193, 194). With obesity, adipose tissue is the primary source 
of pro-inflammatory cytokines and reactive oxygen species (174, 
246) which can reactivate Cytomegalovirus directly (48, 49). 
Thus, exercise might limit T cell immunosenescence by decreas-
ing visceral and subcutaneous adipose tissue (238), providing a 
potent anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidative stimulus (247, 248). 
In turn, lower systemic inflammation and better redox balance 
might limit viral reactivation, reducing stimulation with antigens 
from viruses such as Cytomegalovirus. In addition, T cell dysfunc-
tion might also be prevented, in part, by limiting reactive oxygen 
species production (249).
In summary, leading a physically active lifestyle appears to 
limit the age-associated changes to the cellular composition 
of the adaptive immune system, but the mechanisms are yet 
to be determined. Exercise might counter the expansion of 
memory T cells directly, which is desirable assuming these 
cells contribute to systemic inflammation and not all are 
required to control latent viruses. Limiting the expansion of 
memory T cells also assumes the “size” of the immune sys-
tem is fixed, the capacity to produce antigen-naïve T cells is 
limited, and these constraints contribute to immune decline 
in the elderly. However, exercise might affect memory T cell 
accumulation indirectly, by reducing viral reactivation, or 
preventing T cell senescence, by controlling adipose tissue 
deposition and dysfunction that drives inflammation and 
oxidative stress with aging and obesity.
CONCLUDiNG ReMARKS
Contemporary evidence from epidemiological studies shows 
that leading a physically active lifestyle reduces the incidence 
of communicable (e.g., bacterial and viral infections) and non-
communicable diseases (e.g., cancer), implying that immune 
competency is enhanced by regular exercise bouts. However, to 
this day, research practice, academic teaching, and even physi-
cal activity promotion and prescription continues to consider a 
prevailing myth that exercise can temporarily suppress immune 
function. We have critically reviewed related evidence, and conclude 
that regular physical activity and frequent exercise are beneficial, 
or at the very least, are not detrimental to immunological health. 
We summarize that (i) limited reliable evidence exists to support 
the claim that exercise suppresses cellular or soluble immune 
competency, (ii) exercise per se does not heighten the risk of 
opportunistic infections, and (iii) exercise can enhance in vivo 
immune responses to bacterial, viral, and other antigens. In addi-
tion, we present evidence showing that regular physical activity 
and frequent exercise might limit or delay immunological aging. 
We conclude that leading an active lifestyle is likely to be benefi-
cial, rather than detrimental, to immune function, which may 
have implications for health and disease in older age.
AUTHOR CONTRiBUTiONS
JC and JT contributed equally toward literature searching and 
retrieval, the ideas and interpretation of the studies described, 
drafting and revision of the manuscript, and approval of the final 
version to be published. JT and JC both agreed to be accountable 
for the work in ensuring that questions related to the accuracy or 
integrity of any part of the work are appropriately investigated 
and resolved.
 15
Campbell and Turner
Exercise, Health, and Immunity Across the Lifespan
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 648
ReFeReNCeS
1. Warburton DER, Bredin SSD. Health benefits of physical activity: a system-
atic review of current systematic reviews. Curr Opin Cardiol (2017) 32(5): 
541–56. doi:10.1097/HCO.0000000000000437 
2. Pape K, Ryttergaard L, Rotevatn TA, Nielsen BJ, Torp-Pedersen C, 
Overgaard C, et al. Leisure-time physical activity and the risk of suspected 
bacterial infections. Med Sci Sports Exerc (2016) 48(9):1737–44. doi:10.1249/
MSS.0000000000000953 
3. Kostka T, Berthouze SE, Lacour J, Bonnefoy M. The symptomatology of 
upper respiratory tract infections and exercise in elderly people. Med Sci 
Sports Exerc (2000) 32(1):46–51. doi:10.1097/00005768-200001000-00008 
4. Leveille SG, Gray S, LaCroix AZ, Ferrucci L, Black DJ, Guralnik JM. Physical 
inactivity and smoking increase risk for serious infections in older women. 
J Am Geriatr Soc (2000) 48(12):1582–8. doi:10.1111/j.1532-5415.2000.
tb03867.x 
5. Romaniszyn D, Pobiega M, Wojkowska-Mach J, Chmielarczyk A, Gryglewska B, 
 
Adamski P, et al. The general status of patients and limited physical activity 
as risk factors of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus occurrence 
in long-term care facilities residents in Krakow, Poland. BMC Infect Dis 
(2014) 14:271. doi:10.1186/1471-2334-14-271 
6. Baik I, Curhan GC, Rimm EB, Bendich A, Willett WC, Fawzi WW. 
 
A prospective study of age and lifestyle factors in relation to community- 
acquired pneumonia in US men and women. Arch Intern Med (2000) 
160(20):3082–8. doi:10.1001/archinte.160.20.3082 
7. Walsh NP, Gleeson M, Pyne DB, Nieman DC, Dhabhar FS, Shephard RJ, et al. 
Position statement. Part two: maintaining immune health. Exerc Immunol 
Rev (2011) 17:64–103. 
8. Walsh NP, Gleeson M, Shephard RJ, Gleeson M, Woods JA, Bishop NC, 
 
et al. Position statement. Part one: immune function and exercise. Exerc 
Immunol Rev (2011) 17:6–63. 
9. Pascoe AR, Fiatarone Singh MA, Edwards KM. The effects of exercise 
on vaccination responses: a review of chronic and acute exercise inter-
ventions in humans. Brain Behav Immun (2014) 39:33–41. doi:10.1016/j.
bbi.2013.10.003 
10. Turner JE. Is immunosenescence influenced by our lifetime “dose” of 
exercise? Biogerontology (2016) 17(3):581–602. doi:10.1007/s10522-016- 
9642-z 
11. Simpson RJ, Guy K. Coupling aging immunity with a sedentary lifestyle: 
has the damage already been done? – a mini-review. Gerontology (2010) 
56(5):449–58. doi:10.1159/000270905 
12. Simpson RJ. Aging, persistent viral infections, and immunosenescence: can 
exercise “make space”? Exerc Sport Sci Rev (2011) 39(1):23–33. doi:10.1097/
JES.0b013e318201f39d 
13. Turner JE, Brum PC. Does regular exercise counter T cell immunosenes-
cence reducing the risk of developing cancer and promoting successful 
treatment of malignancies? Oxid Med Cell Longev (2017) 2017:4234765. 
doi:10.1155/2017/4234765 
14. Mackinnon LT. Advances in Exercise Immunology. Champaign, IL: Human 
Kinetics (1999). xii, 363 p.
15. Peake JM, Neubauer O, Walsh NP, Simpson RJ. Recovery of the immune sys-
tem after exercise. J Appl Physiol (1985) (2017) 122(5):1077–87. doi:10.1152/
japplphysiol.00622.2016 
16. Cowles WN. Fatigue as a contributory cause of pneumonias. Boston Med 
 
Surg J (1918) 179:555. doi:10.1056/NEJM191810311791801 
17. Peters EM, Bateman ED. Ultramarathon running and upper respiratory tract 
infections. An epidemiological survey. S Afr Med J (1983) 64(15):582–4. 
18. Nieman DC, Johanssen LM, Lee JW, Arabatzis K. Infectious episodes in 
runners before and after the Los Angeles Marathon. J Sports Med Phys Fitness 
(1990) 30(3):316–28. 
19. Nieman DC, Johanssen LM, Lee JW. Infectious episodes in runners before 
and after a roadrace. J Sports Med Phys Fitness (1989) 29(3):289–96. 
20. Spence L, Brown WJ, Pyne DB, Nissen MD, Sloots TP, McCormack JG, 
et al. Incidence, etiology, and symptomatology of upper respiratory illness 
in elite athletes. Med Sci Sports Exerc (2007) 39(4):577–86. doi:10.1249/
mss.0b013e31802e851a 
21. Gleeson M. Immune function in sport and exercise. J Appl Physiol (1985) 
(2007) 103(2):693–9. doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.00008.2007 
22. Cox AJ, Gleeson M, Pyne DB, Callister R, Hopkins WG, Fricker PA. Clinical 
and laboratory evaluation of upper respiratory symptoms in elite athletes. 
Clin J Sport Med (2008) 18(5):438–45. doi:10.1097/JSM.0b013e318181e501 
23. Makela MJ, Puhakka T, Ruuskanen O, Leinonen M, Saikku P, Kimpimaki M, 
 
et al. Viruses and bacteria in the etiology of the common cold. J Clin Microbiol 
(1998) 36(2):539–42. 
24. Nieman DC. Exercise, infection, and immunity. Int J Sports Med (1994) 
15(Suppl 3):S131–41. doi:10.1055/s-2007-1021128 
25. Meeusen R, Duclos M, Foster C, Fry A, Gleeson M, Nieman D, et al. 
Prevention, diagnosis and treatment of the overtraining syndrome: joint 
consensus statement of the European College of Sport Science (ECSS) and 
the American College of Sports Medicine (ACSM). Eur J Sport Sci (2013) 
13(1):1–24. doi:10.1080/17461391.2012.730061 
26. Meeusen R, Duclos M, Foster C, Fry A, Gleeson M, Nieman D, et al.  
Prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of the overtraining syndrome: 
joint consensus statement of the European College of Sport Science and 
the American College of Sports Medicine. Med Sci Sports Exerc (2013) 
45(1):186–205. doi:10.1249/MSS.0b013e318279a10a 
27. Edwards JP, Walsh NP, Diment PC, Roberts R. Anxiety and perceived 
psychological stress play an important role in the immune response after 
exercise. Exerc Immunol Rev (2018) 24:26–34. 
28. Glaser R, Kiecolt-Glaser JK. Stress-induced immune dysfunction: implica-
tions for health. Nat Rev Immunol (2005) 5(3):243–51. doi:10.1038/nri1571 
29. Kohut ML, Lee W, Martin A, Arnston B, Russell DW, Ekkekakis P, et al. The 
exercise-induced enhancement of influenza immunity is mediated in part by 
improvements in psychosocial factors in older adults. Brain Behav Immun 
(2005) 19(4):357–66. doi:10.1016/j.bbi.2004.12.002 
30. Bermon S, Castell LM, Calder PC, Bishop NC, Blomstrand E, Mooren FC, 
et al. Consensus statement immunonutrition and exercise. Exerc Immunol 
Rev (2017) 23:8–50. 
31. Choudhry AJ, Al-Mudaimegh KS, Turkistani AM, Al-Hamdan NA. Hajj-
associated acute respiratory infection among hajjis from Riyadh. East 
Mediterr Health J (2006) 12(3–4):300–9. 
32. Svendsen IS, Taylor IM, Tonnessen E, Bahr R, Gleeson M. Training-related 
and competition-related risk factors for respiratory tract and gastroin-
testinal infections in elite cross-country skiers. Br J Sports Med (2016) 
50(13):809–15. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2015-095398 
33. Gleeson M. Immunological aspects of sport nutrition. Immunol Cell Biol 
(2016) 94(2):117–23. doi:10.1038/icb.2015.109 
34. Schwellnus MP, Derman WE, Jordaan E, Page T, Lambert MI, Readhead C, 
 
et al. Elite athletes travelling to international destinations >5 time zone 
differences from their home country have a 2-3-fold increased risk of illness. 
Br J Sports Med (2012) 46(11):816–21. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2012-091395 
35. Fondell E, Lagerros YT, Sundberg CJ, Lekander M, Balter O, Rothman KJ, 
 
et al. Physical activity, stress, and self-reported upper respiratory tract 
infection. Med Sci Sports Exerc (2011) 43(2):272–9. doi:10.1249/MSS. 
0b013e3181edf108 
36. Martensson S, Nordebo K, Malm C. High training volumes are associated 
with a low number of self-reported sick days in elite endurance athletes. 
J Sports Sci Med (2014) 13(4):929–33. 
37. Hellard P, Avalos M, Guimaraes F, Toussaint JF, Pyne DB. Training-related 
risk of common illnesses in elite swimmers over a 4-yr period. Med Sci Sports 
Exerc (2015) 47(4):698–707. doi:10.1249/MSS.0000000000000461 
38. Hoffman MD, Krishnan E. Health and exercise-related medical issues among 
1,212 ultramarathon runners: baseline findings from the Ultrarunners 
Longitudinal TRAcking (ULTRA) study. PLoS One (2014) 9(1):e83867. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0083867 
39. Hoffman MD, Fogard K. Demographic characteristics of 161-km ultramar-
athon runners. Res Sports Med (2012) 20(1):59–69. doi:10.1080/15438627.2
012.634707 
40. Malm C. Susceptibility to infections in elite athletes: the S-curve. Scand 
 
J Med Sci Sports (2006) 16(1):4–6. doi:10.1111/j.1600-0838.2005.00499.x 
41. Derman W, Schwellnus M, Jordaan E. Clinical characteristics of 385 illnesses 
of athletes with impairment reported on the WEB-IISS system during 
the London 2012 Paralympic Games. PM R (2014) 6(8 Suppl):S23–30. 
doi:10.1016/j.pmrj.2014.05.016 
42. Bonini M, Gramiccioni C, Fioretti D, Ruckert B, Rinaldi M, Akdis C, 
et al. Asthma, allergy and the Olympics: a 12-year survey in elite athletes. 
 16
Campbell and Turner
Exercise, Health, and Immunity Across the Lifespan
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 648
Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol (2015) 15(2):184–92. doi:10.1097/ACI. 
0000000000000149 
43. Bramley TJ, Lerner D, Sames M. Productivity losses related to the common 
cold. J Occup Environ Med (2002) 44(9):822–9. doi:10.1097/00043764- 
200209000-00004 
44. Fendrick AM, Monto AS, Nightengale B, Sarnes M. The economic burden of 
non-influenza-related viral respiratory tract infection in the United States. 
Arch Intern Med (2003) 163(4):487–94. doi:10.1001/archinte.163.4.487 
45. Bayer C, Remschmidt C, an der Heiden M, Tolksdorf K, Herzhoff M, 
 
Kaersten S, et al. Internet-based syndromic monitoring of acute respiratory 
illness in the general population of Germany, weeks 35/2011 to 34/2012. Euro 
Surveill (2014) 19(4):1–11. doi:10.2807/1560-7917.ES2014.19.4.20684 
46. Gleeson M, Pyne DB, Austin JP, Lynn Francis J, Clancy RL, McDonald WA, 
 
et al. Epstein-Barr virus reactivation and upper-respiratory illness in 
elite swimmers. Med Sci Sports Exerc (2002) 34(3):411–7. doi:10.1097/ 
00005768-200203000-00005 
47. Cox AJ, Gleeson M, Pyne DB, Saunders PU, Clancy RL, Fricker PA. Valtrex 
therapy for Epstein-Barr virus reactivation and upper respiratory symptoms 
in elite runners. Med Sci Sports Exerc (2004) 36(7):1104–10. doi:10.1249/01.
MSS.0000131957.40985.2B 
48. Speir E. Cytomegalovirus gene regulation by reactive oxygen species. Agents 
in atherosclerosis. Ann N Y Acad Sci (2000) 899:363–74. doi:10.1111/j. 
1749-6632.2000.tb06200.x 
49. Docke WD, Prosch S, Fietze E, Kimel V, Zuckermann H, Klug C, et al. 
Cytomegalovirus reactivation and tumour necrosis factor. Lancet (1994) 
343(8892):268–9. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(94)91116-9 
50. Prösch S, Wendt CEC, Reinke P, Priemer C, Oppert M, Krüger DH, et al.  
A novel link between stress and human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) infection: 
sympathetic hyperactivity stimulates HCMV activation. Virology (2000) 
272:357–65. doi:10.1006/viro.2000.0367 
51. He CS, Handzlik M, Muhamad A, Gleeson M. Influence of CMV/EBV 
serostatus on respiratory infection incidence during 4 months of winter 
training in a student cohort of endurance athletes. Eur J Appl Physiol (2013) 
113(10):2613–9. doi:10.1007/s00421-013-2704-x 
52. Bishop NC, Gleeson M. Acute and chronic effects of exercise on markers 
of mucosal immunity. Front Biosci (Landmark Ed) (2009) 14:4444–56. 
doi:10.2741/3540 
53. Tomasi TB, Trudeau FB, Czerwinski D, Erredge S. Immune parameters 
in athletes before and after strenuous exercise. J Clin Immunol (1982) 
2(3):173–8. doi:10.1007/BF00915219 
54. Mackinnon LT, Chick TW, van As A, Tomasi TB. Decreased secretory 
immunoglobulins following intense endurance exercise. Sports Train Med 
Rehabil (1989) 1:209–18. doi:10.1080/15438628909511878 
55. Nieman DC, Henson DA, Fagoaga OR, Utter AC, Vinci DM, Davis JM, et al. 
Change in salivary IgA following a competitive marathon race. Int J Sports 
Med (2002) 23(1):69–75. doi:10.1055/s-2002-19375 
56. Nehlsen-Cannarella SL, Nieman DC, Fagoaga OR, Kelln WJ, Henson DA, 
Shannon M, et al. Saliva immunoglobulins in elite women rowers. Eur J Appl 
Physiol (2000) 81(3):222–8. doi:10.1007/s004210050034 
57. Palmer FM, Nieman DC, Henson DA, McAnulty SR, McAnulty L, Swick NS, 
et al. Influence of vitamin C supplementation on oxidative and salivary IgA 
changes following an ultramarathon. Eur J Appl Physiol (2003) 89(1):100–7. 
doi:10.1007/s00421-002-0756-4 
58. Steerenberg PA, van Asperen IA, van Nieuw Amerongen A, Biewenga A, 
 
Mol D, Medema GJ. Salivary levels of immunoglobulin A in triathletes. 
Eur J Oral Sci (1997) 105(4):305–9. doi:10.1111/j.1600-0722.1997.
tb00245.x 
59. Nieman DC, Dumke CI, Henson DA, McAnulty SR, McAnulty LS, 
Lind RH, et al. Immune and oxidative changes during and following 
the western states endurance run. Int J Sports Med (2003) 24(7):541–7. 
doi:10.1055/s-2003-42018 
60. Blannin AK, Robson PJ, Walsh NP, Clark AM, Glennon L, Gleeson M. The 
effect of exercising to exhaustion at different intensities on saliva immu-
noglobulin A, protein and electrolyte secretion. Int J Sports Med (1998) 
19(8):547–52. doi:10.1055/s-2007-971958 
61. Killer SC, Svendsen IS, Gleeson M. The influence of hydration status 
during prolonged endurance exercise on salivary antimicrobial proteins. 
Eur J Appl Physiol (2015) 115(9):1887–95. doi:10.1007/s00421-015-3173-1 
62. Allgrove JE, Gomes E, Hough J, Gleeson M. Effects of exercise intensity on 
salivary antimicrobial proteins and markers of stress in active men. J Sports 
Sci (2008) 26(6):653–61. doi:10.1080/02640410701716790 
63. Sari-Sarraf V, Reilly T, Doran DA. Salivary IgA response to intermittent and 
continuous exercise. Int J Sports Med (2006) 27(11):849–55. doi:10.1055/ 
s-2006-923777 
64. Reid MR, Drummond PD, Mackinnon LT. The effect of moderate aerobic 
exercise and relaxation on secretory immunoglobulin A. Int J Sports Med 
(2001) 22(2):132–7. doi:10.1055/s-2001-11347 
65. Davison G. Innate immune responses to a single session of sprint interval 
training. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab (2011) 36(3):395–404. doi:10.1139/h11-033 
66. Walsh NP, Blannin AK, Clark AM, Cook L, Robson PJ, Gleeson M. The effects 
of high-intensity intermittent exercise on saliva IgA, total protein and alpha- 
amylase. J Sports Sci (1999) 17(2):129–34. doi:10.1080/026404199366226 
67. Peters EM, Shaik J, Kleinveldt N. Upper respiratory tract infection symp-
toms in ultramarathon runners not related to immunoglobulin status. Clin 
J Sport Med (2010) 20(1):39–46. doi:10.1097/JSM.0b013e3181cb4086 
68. Gleeson M, Bishop N, Oliveira M, McCauley T, Tauler P, Muhamad AS. 
Respiratory infection risk in athletes: association with antigen-stimulated 
IL-10 production and salivary IgA secretion. Scand J Med Sci Sports (2012) 
22(3):410–7. doi:10.1111/j.1600-0838.2010.01272.x 
69. Gleeson M, Bishop N, Oliveira M, Tauler P. Influence of training load on 
upper respiratory tract infection incidence and antigen-stimulated cytokine 
production. Scand J Med Sci Sports (2013) 23(4):451–7. doi:10.1111/j. 
1600-0838.2011.01422.x 
70. Brandtzaeg P. Secretory immunity with special reference to the oral cavity. 
J Oral Microbiol (2013) 5:1–24. doi:10.3402/jom.v5i0.20401 
71. Marcotte H, Lavoie MC. Oral microbial ecology and the role of salivary 
immunoglobulin A. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev (1998) 62(1):71–109. 
72. Needleman I, Ashley P, Petrie A, Fortune F, Turner W, Jones J, et al. Oral 
health and impact on performance of athletes participating in the London 
2012 Olympic Games: a cross-sectional study. Br J Sports Med (2013) 
47(16):1054–8. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2013-092891 
73. Heaney JL, Gleeson M, Phillips AC, Taylor IM, Drayson MT, Goodall M, 
et al. Salivary immunoglobulin free light chains: reference ranges and 
responses to exercise in young and older adults. Exerc Immunol Rev 
(2016) 22:28–41. 
74. Li TL, Gleeson M. The effect of single and repeated bouts of prolonged 
cycling and circadian variation on saliva flow rate, immunoglobulin A and 
alpha-amylase responses. J Sports Sci (2004) 22(11–12):1015–24. doi:10.108
0/02640410410001716733 
75. Engeland CG, Hugo FN, Hilgert JB, Nascimento GG, Junges R, Lim HJ, 
 
et al. Psychological distress and salivary secretory immunity. Brain Behav 
Immun (2016) 52:11–7. doi:10.1016/j.bbi.2015.08.017 
76. Deslauriers N, Oudghiri M, Seguin J, Trudel L. The oral immune system: 
dynamics of salivary immunoglobulin production in the inbred mouse. 
Immunol Invest (1986) 15(4):339–49. doi:10.3109/08820138609052953 
77. Booth CK, Dwyer DB, Pacque PF, Ball MJ. Measurement of immunoglob-
ulin A in saliva by particle-enhanced nephelometric immunoassay: sample 
collection, limits of quantitation, precision, stability and reference range. 
Ann Clin Biochem (2009) 46(Pt 5):401–6. doi:10.1258/acb.2009.008248 
78. Brandtzaeg P. Do salivary antibodies reliably reflect both mucosal and 
systemic immunity? Ann N Y Acad Sci (2007) 1098:288–311. doi:10.1196/
annals.1384.012 
79. Hanstock HG, Walsh NP, Edwards JP, Fortes MB, Cosby SL, Nugent A, 
et al. Tear fluid SIgA as a noninvasive biomarker of mucosal immunity and 
common cold risk. Med Sci Sports Exerc (2016) 48(3):569–77. doi:10.1249/
MSS.0000000000000801 
80. Gleeson M, Pyne DB, Elkington LJ, Hall ST, Attia JR, Oldmeadow C, et al. 
Developing a multi-component immune model for evaluating the risk of 
respiratory illness in athletes. Exerc Immunol Rev (2017) 23:52–64. 
81. Campbell JP, Riddell NE, Burns VE, Turner M, van Zanten JJ, Drayson MT, 
 
et al. Acute exercise mobilises CD8+ T lymphocytes exhibiting an effector- 
memory phenotype. Brain Behav Immun (2009) 23(6):767–75. doi:10.1016/j. 
bbi.2009.02.011 
82. Shephard RJ. Adhesion molecules, catecholamines and leucocyte redis-
tribution during and following exercise. Sports Med (2003) 33(4):261–84. 
doi:10.2165/00007256-200333040-00002 
 17
Campbell and Turner
Exercise, Health, and Immunity Across the Lifespan
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 648
83. Benschop RJ, Nijkamp FP, Ballieux RE, Heijnen CJ. The effects of beta- 
adrenoceptor stimulation on adhesion of human natural killer cells to 
cultured endothelium. Br J Pharmacol (1994) 113(4):1311–6. doi:10.1111/j. 
1476-5381.1994.tb17141.x 
84. Kruger K, Lechtermann A, Fobker M, Volker K, Mooren FC. Exercise-induced 
redistribution of T lymphocytes is regulated by adrenergic mechanisms. 
Brain Behav Immun (2008) 22(3):324–38. doi:10.1016/j.bbi.2007.08.008 
85. Dimitrov S, Lange T, Born J. Selective mobilization of cytotoxic leukocytes 
by epinephrine. J Immunol (2010) 184(1):503–11. doi:10.4049/jimmunol. 
0902189 
86. Turner JE, Spielmann G, Wadley AJ, Aldred S, Simpson RJ, Campbell JP. 
Exercise-induced B cell mobilisation: preliminary evidence for an influx of 
immature cells into the bloodstream. Physiol Behav (2016) 164(Pt A):376–82. 
doi:10.1016/j.physbeh.2016.06.023 
87. Kruger K, Alack K, Ringseis R, Mink L, Pfeifer E, Schinle M, et al. Apoptosis 
of T-cell subsets after acute high-intensity interval exercise. Med Sci Sports 
Exerc (2016) 48(10):2021–9. doi:10.1249/MSS.0000000000000979 
88. Clifford T, Wood MJ, Stocks P, Howatson G, Stevenson EJ, Hilkens CMU. 
T-regulatory cells exhibit a biphasic response to prolonged endurance 
exercise in humans. Eur J Appl Physiol (2017) 117(8):1727–37. doi:10.1007/
s00421-017-3667-0 
89. Shek PN, Sabiston BH, Buguet A, Radomski MW. Strenuous exercise and 
immunological changes: a multiple-time-point analysis of leukocyte subsets, 
CD4/CD8 ratio, immunoglobulin production and NK cell response. Int 
J Sports Med (1995) 16(7):466–74. doi:10.1055/s-2007-973039 
90. Shinkai S, Shore S, Shek PN, Shephard RJ. Acute exercise and immune 
function. Relationship between lymphocyte activity and changes 
in subset counts. Int J Sports Med (1992) 13(6):452–61. doi:10.105
5/s-2007-1021297 
91. Kakanis MW, Peake J, Brenu EW, Simmonds M, Gray B, Hooper SL, et al. 
The open window of susceptibility to infection after acute exercise in healthy 
young male elite athletes. Exerc Immunol Rev (2010) 16:119–37. 
92. Pedersen BK, Ullum H. NK cell response to physical activity: possible 
mechanisms of action. Med Sci Sports Exerc (1994) 26(2):140–6. doi:10.1249/ 
00005768-199402000-00003 
93. Dhabhar FS. Effects of stress on immune function: the good, the bad, and 
the beautiful. Immunol Res (2014) 58(2–3):193–210. doi:10.1007/s12026- 
014-8517-0 
94. Kruger K, Mooren FC. T cell homing and exercise. Exerc Immunol Rev (2007) 
13:37–54. 
95. Mooren FC, Kruger K. Apoptotic lymphocytes induce progenitor cell 
mobilization after exercise. J Appl Physiol (1985) (2015) 119(2):135–9. 
doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.00287.2015 
96. Mars M, Govender S, Weston A, Naicker V, Chuturgoon A. High intensity 
exercise: a cause of lymphocyte apoptosis? Biochem Biophys Res Commun 
(1998) 249(2):366–70. doi:10.1006/bbrc.1998.9156 
97. Mooren FC, Lechtermann A, Volker K. Exercise-induced apoptosis of 
lymphocytes depends on training status. Med Sci Sports Exerc (2004) 
36(9):1476–83. doi:10.1249/01.MSS.0000139897.34521.E9 
98. Mooren FC, Bloming D, Lechtermann A, Lerch MM, Volker K. Lymphocyte 
apoptosis after exhaustive and moderate exercise. J Appl Physiol (2002) 
93(1):147–53. doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.01262.2001 
99. Tanimura Y, Shimizu K, Tanabe K, Otsuki T, Yamauchi R, Matsubara Y, et al. 
Exercise-induced oxidative DNA damage and lymphocytopenia in seden-
tary young males. Med Sci Sports Exerc (2008) 40(8):1455–62. doi:10.1249/
MSS.0b013e31817242cf 
100. Simpson RJ, Florida-James GD, Whyte GP, Black JR, Ross JA, Guy K. 
Apoptosis does not contribute to the blood lymphocytopenia observed 
after intensive and downhill treadmill running in humans. Res Sports Med 
(2007) 15(3):157–74. doi:10.1080/15438620701405339 
101. Shephard RJ, Shek PN. Effects of exercise and training on natural killer 
cell counts and cytolytic activity: a meta-analysis. Sports Med (1999) 28(3): 
177–95. doi:10.2165/00007256-199928030-00003 
102. Hansen JB, Wilsgard L, Osterud B. Biphasic changes in leukocytes induced 
by strenuous exercise. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol (1991) 62(3):157–61. 
doi:10.1007/BF00643735 
103. Freud AG, Caligiuri MA. Human natural killer cell development. Immunol 
Rev (2006) 214:56–72. doi:10.1111/j.1600-065X.2006.00451.x 
104. Poli A, Michel T, Theresine M, Andres E, Hentges F, Zimmer J. CD56bright 
natural killer (NK) cells: an important NK cell subset. Immunology (2009) 
126(4):458–65. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2567.2008.03027.x 
105. Bjorkstrom NK, Riese P, Heuts F, Andersson S, Fauriat C, Ivarsson MA, et al. 
Expression patterns of NKG2A, KIR, and CD57 define a process of CD56dim 
NK-cell differentiation uncoupled from NK-cell education. Blood (2010) 
116(19):3853–64. doi:10.1182/blood-2010-04-281675 
106. Lopez-Verges S, Milush JM, Pandey S, York VA, Arakawa-Hoyt J, Pircher H, 
et al. CD57 defines a functionally distinct population of mature NK cells in 
the human CD56dimCD16+ NK-cell subset. Blood (2010) 116(19):3865–74. 
doi:10.1182/blood-2010-04-282301 
107. Bigley AB, Rezvani K, Chew C, Sekine T, Pistillo M, Crucian B, et al. Acute 
exercise preferentially redeploys NK-cells with a highly-differentiated 
phenotype and augments cytotoxicity against lymphoma and multiple 
myeloma target cells. Brain Behav Immun (2014) 39:160–71. doi:10.1016/j.
bbi.2013.10.030 
108. Bigley AB, Rezvani K, Pistillo M, Reed J, Agha N, Kunz H, et al. Acute exercise 
preferentially redeploys NK-cells with a highly-differentiated phenotype and 
augments cytotoxicity against lymphoma and multiple myeloma target cells. 
Part II: impact of latent cytomegalovirus infection and catecholamine sen-
sitivity. Brain Behav Immun (2015) 49:59–65. doi:10.1016/j.bbi.2014.12.027 
109. Simpson RJ, Florida-James GD, Cosgrove C, Whyte GP, Macrae S, 
 
Pircher H, et al. High-intensity exercise elicits the mobilization of senescent 
T lymphocytes into the peripheral blood compartment in human subjects. 
J Appl Physiol (1985) (2007) 103(1):396–401. doi:10.1152/japplphysiol. 
00007.2007 
110. Simpson RJ, Cosgrove C, Ingram LA, Florida-James GD, Whyte GP
, Pircher H, 
 
et al. Senescent T-lymphocytes are mobilised into the peripheral blood 
compartment in young and older humans after exhaustive exercise. Brain 
Behav Immun (2008) 22(4):544–51. doi:10.1016/j.bbi.2007.11.002 
111. Simpson RJ, Cosgrove C, Chee MM, McFarlin BK, Bartlett DB, Spielmann G, 
 
et al. Senescent phenotypes and telomere lengths of peripheral blood 
T-cells mobilized by acute exercise in humans. Exerc Immunol Rev (2010) 
16:40–55. 
112. Pedersen L, Idorn M, Olofsson GH, Lauenborg B, Nookaew I, Hansen RH, 
et al. Voluntary running suppresses tumor growth through epinephrine- and 
IL-6-dependent NK cell mobilization and redistribution. Cell Metab (2016) 
23(3):554–62. doi:10.1016/j.cmet.2016.01.011 
113. Kim R, Emi M, Tanabe K. Cancer immunoediting from immune surveillance 
to immune escape. Immunology (2007) 121(1):1–14. doi:10.1111/j.1365- 
2567.2007.02587.x 
114. Scheiermann C, Kunisaki Y, Frenette PS. Circadian control of the immune 
system. Nat Rev Immunol (2013) 13(3):190–8. doi:10.1038/nri3386 
115. Suzuki K, Hayano Y, Nakai A, Furuta F, Noda M. Adrenergic control of the 
adaptive immune response by diurnal lymphocyte recirculation through 
lymph nodes. J Exp Med (2016) 213(12):2567–74. doi:10.1084/jem.20160723 
116. Dimitrov S, Benedict C, Heutling D, Westermann J, Born J, Lange T. Cortisol 
and epinephrine control opposing circadian rhythms in T cell subsets. Blood 
(2009) 113(21):5134–43. doi:10.1182/blood-2008-11-190769 
117. Hojman P. Exercise protects from cancer through regulation of immune 
function and inflammation. Biochem Soc Trans (2017) 45(4):905–11. 
doi:10.1042/BST20160466 
118. Turner JE, Wadley AJ, Aldred S, Fisher JP, Bosch JA, Campbell JP. Inten-
sive exercise does not preferentially mobilize skin-homing T cells and 
NK cells. Med Sci Sports Exerc (2016) 48(7):1285–93. doi:10.1249/MSS. 
0000000000000914 
119. Hanson ED, Danson E, Nguyen-Robertson CV, Fyfe JJ, Stepto NK, 
 
Bartlett DB, et al. Maximal exercise increases mucosal associated invariant 
T cell frequency and number in healthy young men. Eur J Appl Physiol 
(2017) 117(11):2159–69. doi:10.1007/s00421-017-3704-z 
120. Gross E, Sunwoo JB, Bui JD. Cancer immunosurveillance and immu-
noediting by natural killer cells. Cancer J (2013) 19(6):483–9. doi:10.1097/
PPO.0000000000000005 
121. Simpson RJ, Bigley AB, Agha N, Hanley PJ, Bollard CM. Mobilizing immune 
cells with exercise for cancer immunotherapy. Exerc Sport Sci Rev (2017) 
45(3):163–72. doi:10.1249/JES.0000000000000114 
122. Moore SC, Lee IM, Weiderpass E, Campbell PT, Sampson JN, Kitahara CM, 
 
et al. Association of leisure-time physical activity with risk of 26 types of 
 18
Campbell and Turner
Exercise, Health, and Immunity Across the Lifespan
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 648
cancer in 1.44 million adults. JAMA Intern Med (2016) 176(6):816–25. 
doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2016.1548 
123. Turner JE, Aldred S, Witard OC, Drayson MT, Moss PM, Bosch JA. Latent 
cytomegalovirus infection amplifies CD8 T-lymphocyte mobilisation and 
egress in response to exercise. Brain Behav Immun (2010) 24(8):1362–70. 
doi:10.1016/j.bbi.2010.07.239 
124. Lancaster GI, Khan Q, Drysdale PT, Wallace F, Jeukendrup AE, Drayson MT, 
 
et al. Effect of prolonged exercise and carbohydrate ingestion on type 1 
and type 2 T lymphocyte distribution and intracellular cytokine produc-
tion in humans. J Appl Physiol (1985) (2005) 98(2):565–71. doi:10.1152/
japplphysiol.00754.2004 
125. Starkie RL, Rolland J, Febbraio MA. Effect of adrenergic blockade on lym-
phocyte cytokine production at rest and during exercise. Am J Physiol Cell 
Physiol (2001) 281(4):C1233–40. doi:10.1152/ajpcell.2001.281.4.C1233 
126. Siedlik JA, Deckert JA, Benedict SH, Bhatta A, Dunbar AJ, Vardiman JP, 
 
et al. T cell activation and proliferation following acute exercise in human 
subjects is altered by storage conditions and mitogen selection. J Immunol 
Methods (2017) 446:7–14. doi:10.1016/j.jim.2017.03.017 
127. Siedlik JA, Benedict SH, Landes EJ, Weir JP, Vardiman JP, Gallagher PM. 
Acute bouts of exercise induce a suppressive effect on lymphocyte prolif-
eration in human subjects: a meta-analysis. Brain Behav Immun (2016) 
56:343–51. doi:10.1016/j.bbi.2016.04.008 
128. Zimmer P, Schenk A, Kieven M, Holthaus M, Lehmann J, Lovenich L, et al. 
Exercise induced alterations in NK-cell cytotoxicity – methodological issues 
and future perspectives. Exerc Immunol Rev (2017) 23:66–81. 
129. McFarlin BK, Venable AS, Carpenter CK, Henning AL, Stephan O. Oral 
supplementation with baker’s yeast beta glucan is associated with altered 
monocytes, T cells and cytokines following a bout of strenuous exercise. 
Front Physiol (2017) 8:786. doi:10.3389/fphys.2017.00786 
130. Witard OC, Turner JE, Jackman SR, Kies AK, Jeukendrup AE, Bosch JA, 
et al. High dietary protein restores overreaching induced impairments in 
leukocyte trafficking and reduces the incidence of upper respiratory tract 
infection in elite cyclists. Brain Behav Immun (2014) 39:211–9. doi:10.1016/j.
bbi.2013.10.002 
131. Albers R, Bourdet-Sicard R, Braun D, Calder PC, Herz U, Lambert C, et al. 
Monitoring immune modulation by nutrition in the general population: 
identifying and substantiating effects on human health. Br J Nutr (2013) 
110(Suppl 2):S1–30. doi:10.1017/S0007114513001505 
132. Burns VE, Gallagher S. Antibody response to vaccination as a marker of 
in vivo immune function in psychophysiological research. Neurosci Biobehav 
Rev (2010) 35(1):122–6. doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev.2010.01.005 
133. Edwards KM, Burns VE, Reynolds T, Carroll D, Drayson M, Ring C. 
Acute stress exposure prior to influenza vaccination enhances antibody 
response in women. Brain Behav Immun (2006) 20(2):159–68. doi:10.1016/j.
bbi.2005.07.001 
134. Edwards KM, Burns VE, Allen LM, McPhee JS, Bosch JA, Carroll D, et al. 
Eccentric exercise as an adjuvant to influenza vaccination in humans. Brain 
Behav Immun (2007) 21(2):209–17. doi:10.1016/j.bbi.2006.04.158 
135. Edwards KM, Burns VE, Adkins AE, Carroll D, Drayson M, Ring C. 
Meningococcal A vaccination response is enhanced by acute stress in men. 
Psychosom Med (2008) 70(2):147–51. doi:10.1097/PSY.0b013e318164232e 
136. Edwards KM, Campbell JP, Ring C, Drayson MT, Bosch JA, Downes C, 
et al. Exercise intensity does not influence the efficacy of eccentric exercise 
as a behavioural adjuvant to vaccination. Brain Behav Immun (2010) 
24(4):623–30. doi:10.1016/j.bbi.2010.01.009 
137. Edwards KM, Pung MA, Tomfohr LM, Ziegler MG, Campbell JP, Drayson MT, 
 
et al. Acute exercise enhancement of pneumococcal vaccination response: 
a randomised controlled trial of weaker and stronger immune response. 
Vaccine (2012) 30(45):6389–95. doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2012.08.022 
138. Ranadive SM, Cook M, Kappus RM, Yan H, Lane AD, Woods JA, et al.  
Effect of acute aerobic exercise on vaccine efficacy in older adults. Med Sci 
Sports Exerc (2014) 46(3):455–61. doi:10.1249/MSS.0b013e3182a75ff2 
139. Long JE, Ring C, Drayson M, Bosch J, Campbell JP, Bhabra J, et al. Vaccination 
response following aerobic exercise: can a brisk walk enhance antibody 
response to pneumococcal and influenza vaccinations? Brain Behav Immun 
(2012) 26(4):680–7. doi:10.1016/j.bbi.2012.02.004 
140. Edwards KM, Pascoe AR, Fiatarone-Singh MA, Singh NA, Kok J, Booy R. 
 
A randomised controlled trial of resistance exercise prior to administration 
of influenza vaccination in older adults. Brain Behav Immun (2015) 
49:e24–5. doi:10.1016/j.bbi.2015.06.102 
141. Furman D, Hejblum BP, Simon N, Jojic V, Dekker CL, Thiebaut R, et al. 
Systems analysis of sex differences reveals an immunosuppressive role for 
testosterone in the response to influenza vaccination. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
 
U S A (2014) 111(2):869–74. doi:10.1073/pnas.1321060111 
142. Trigunaite A, Dimo J, Jorgensen TN. Suppressive effects of androgens on 
the immune system. Cell Immunol (2015) 294(2):87–94. doi:10.1016/j.
cellimm.2015.02.004 
143. Haq K, McElhaney JE. Immunosenescence: influenza vaccination and 
the elderly. Curr Opin Immunol (2014) 29:38–42. doi:10.1016/j.coi.2014. 
03.008 
144. Kohut ML, Cooper MM, Nickolaus MS, Russell DR, Cunnick JE. Exercise 
and psychosocial factors modulate immunity to influenza vaccine in elderly 
individuals. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci (2002) 57(9):M557–62. doi:10.1093/
gerona/57.9.M557 
145. Kohut ML, Arntson BA, Lee W, Rozeboom K, Yoon KJ, Cunnick JE, et al. 
Moderate exercise improves antibody response to influenza immuniza-
tion in older adults. Vaccine (2004) 22(17–18):2298–306. doi:10.1016/j.
vaccine.2003.11.023 
146. Smith TP, Kennedy SL, Fleshner M. Influence of age and physical activity on 
the primary in vivo antibody and T cell-mediated responses in men. J Appl 
Physiol (1985) (2004) 97(2):491–8. doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.01404.2003 
147. Schuler PB, Leblanc PA, Marzilli TS. Effect of physical activity on the 
production of specific antibody in response to the 1998–99 influenza virus 
vaccine in older adults. J Sports Med Phys Fitness (2003) 43(3):404. 
148. Grant RW, Mariani RA, Vieira VJ, Fleshner M, Smith TP, Keylock KT, 
 
et al. Cardiovascular exercise intervention improves the primary antibody 
response to keyhole limpet hemocyanin (KLH) in previously sedentary 
older adults. Brain Behav Immun (2008) 22(6):923–32. doi:10.1016/j.bbi. 
2008.01.006 
149. Woods JA, Keylock KT, Lowder T, Vieira VJ, Zelkovich W, Dumich S, et al. 
Cardiovascular exercise training extends influenza vaccine seroprotection in 
sedentary older adults: the immune function intervention trial. J Am Geriatr 
Soc (2009) 57(12):2183–91. doi:10.1111/j.1532-5415.2009.02563.x 
150. Yang Y, Verkuilen J, Rosengren KS, Mariani RA, Reed M, Grubisich SA, 
et al. Effects of a traditional Taiji/Qigong curriculum on older adults’ 
immune response to influenza vaccine. Med Sport Sci (2008) 52:64–76. 
doi:10.1159/000134285 
151. de Araujo AL, Silva LC, Fernandes JR, Matias Mde S, Boas LS, Machado CM, 
 
et al. Elderly men with moderate and intense training lifestyle present sus-
tained higher antibody responses to influenza vaccine. Age (Dordr) (2015) 
37(6):105. doi:10.1007/s11357-015-9843-4 
152. Kapasi ZF, Catlin PA, Joyner DR, Lewis ML, Schwartz AL, Townsend EL. 
 
The effects of intense physical exercise on secondary antibody response in 
young and old mice. Phys Ther (2000) 80(11):1076–86. 
153. Grande AJ, Reid H, Thomas EE, Nunan D, Foster C. Exercise prior to 
influenza vaccination for limiting influenza incidence and its related 
complications in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev (2016) (8):CD011857. 
doi:10.1002/14651858.CD011857.pub2 
154. Warren K, Thompson N, Wannemuehler M, Kohut M. Antibody and CD8+ 
T cell memory response to influenza A/PR/8/34 infection is reduced in 
treadmill-exercised mice, yet still protective. J Appl Physiol (1985) (2013) 
114(10):1413–20. doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.01355.2012 
155. Sim YJ, Yu S, Yoon KJ, Loiacono CM, Kohut ML. Chronic exercise reduces 
illness severity, decreases viral load, and results in greater anti-inflammatory 
effects than acute exercise during influenza infection. J Infect Dis (2009) 
200(9):1434–42. doi:10.1086/606014 
156. Lowder T, Padgett DA, Woods JA. Moderate exercise protects mice from 
death due to influenza virus. Brain Behav Immun (2005) 19(5):377–80. 
doi:10.1016/j.bbi.2005.04.002 
157. Nosbaum A, Vocanson M, Rozieres A, Hennino A, Nicolas JF. Allergic and 
irritant contact dermatitis. Eur J Dermatol (2009) 19(4):325–32. doi:10.1684/
ejd.2009.0686 
158. Gulati N, Suarez-Farinas M, Fuentes-Duculan J, Gilleaudeau P, Sullivan-
Whalen M, Correa da Rosa J, et al. Molecular characterization of human 
skin response to diphencyprone at peak and resolution phases: therapeutic 
insights. J Invest Dermatol (2014) 134(10):2531–40. doi:10.1038/jid.2014.196 
 19
Campbell and Turner
Exercise, Health, and Immunity Across the Lifespan
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 648
159. Diment BC, Fortes MB, Edwards JP
, Hanstock HG, Ward MD, Dunstall HM, 
 
et al. Exercise intensity and duration effects on in vivo immunity. Med Sci 
Sports Exerc (2015) 47(7):1390–8. doi:10.1249/MSS.0000000000000562 
160. Harper Smith AD, Coakley SL, Ward MD, Macfarlane AW, Friedmann PS, 
 
Walsh NP. Exercise-induced stress inhibits both the induction and eli-
citation phases of in vivo T-cell-mediated immune responses in humans. 
Brain Behav Immun (2011) 25(6):1136–42. doi:10.1016/j.bbi.2011. 
02.014 
161. Ceddia MA, Price EA, Kohlmeier CK, Evans JK, Lu Q, McAuley E, et al. 
Differential leukocytosis and lymphocyte mitogenic response to acute maxi-
mal exercise in the young and old. Med Sci Sports Exerc (1999) 31(6):829–36. 
doi:10.1097/00005768-199906000-00011 
162. Woods JA, Evans JK, Wolters BW, Ceddia MA, McAuley E. Effects of max-
imal exercise on natural killer (NK) cell cytotoxicity and responsiveness to 
interferon-alpha in the young and old. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci (1998) 
53(6):B430–7. doi:10.1093/gerona/53A.6.B430 
163. Simpson RJ, Lowder TW, Spielmann G, Bigley AB, LaVoy EC, Kunz H. 
Exercise and the aging immune system. Ageing Res Rev (2012) 11(3):404–20. 
doi:10.1016/j.arr.2012.03.003 
164. Kohut ML, Senchina DS. Reversing age-associated immunosenescence via 
exercise. Exerc Immunol Rev (2004) 10:6–41. 
165. Woods JA, Lowder TW
, Keylock KT. Can exercise training improve immune 
function in the aged? Ann N Y Acad Sci (2002) 959:117–27. doi:10.1111/j. 
1749-6632.2002.tb02088.x 
166. Simpson RJ, Bigley AB, Spielmann G, LaVoy EC, Kunz H, Bollard CM. 
Human cytomegalovirus infection and the immune response to exercise. 
Exerc Immunol Rev (2016) 22:8–27. 
167. Bartlett DB, Fox O, McNulty CL, Greenwood HL, Murphy L, Sapey E, et al. 
Habitual physical activity is associated with the maintenance of neutrophil 
migratory dynamics in healthy older adults. Brain Behav Immun (2016) 
56:12–20. doi:10.1016/j.bbi.2016.02.024 
168. Bartlett DB, Shepherd SO, Wilson OJ, Adlan AM, Wagenmakers AJM, Shaw CS, 
 
et al. Neutrophil and monocyte bactericidal responses to 10 weeks of low- 
volume high-intensity interval or moderate-intensity continuous training in 
sedentary adults. Oxid Med Cell Longev (2017) 2017:8148742. doi:10.1155/ 
2017/8148742 
169. Shephard RJ. Development of the discipline of exercise immunology. Exerc 
Immunol Rev (2010) 16:194–222. 
170. Hazeldine J, Lord JM. Innate immunesenescence: underlying mechanisms 
and clinical relevance. Biogerontology (2015) 16(2):187–201. doi:10.1007/
s10522-014-9514-3 
171. Peralbo E, Alonso C, Solana R. Invariant NKT and NKT-like lymphocytes: 
two different T cell subsets that are differentially affected by ageing. Exp 
Gerontol (2007) 42(8):703–8. doi:10.1016/j.exger.2007.05.002 
172. Ziegler-Heitbrock L, Ancuta P, Crowe S, Dalod M, Grau V, Hart DN, et al. 
Nomenclature of monocytes and dendritic cells in blood. Blood (2010) 
116(16):e74–80. doi:10.1182/blood-2010-02-258558 
173. Goh J, Ladiges WC. Exercise enhances wound healing and prevents cancer 
progression during aging by targeting macrophage polarity. Mech Ageing Dev 
(2014) 139:41–8. doi:10.1016/j.mad.2014.06.004 
174. Kanneganti TD, Dixit VD. Immunological complications of obesity. Nat 
Immunol (2012) 13(8):707–12. doi:10.1038/ni.2343 
175. Garg SK, Delaney C, Shi H, Yung R. Changes in adipose tissue macrophages 
and T cells during aging. Crit Rev Immunol (2014) 34(1):1–14. doi:10.1615/
CritRevImmunol.2013006833 
176. Kratz M, Coats BR, Hisert KB, Hagman D, Mutskov V, Peris E, et al. 
Meta 
bolic dysfunction drives a mechanistically distinct proinflammatory 
phenotype in adipose tissue macrophages. Cell Metab (2014) 20(4):614–25. 
doi:10.1016/j.cmet.2014.08.010 
177. Bourlier V, Zakaroff-Girard A, Miranville A, De Barros S, Maumus M, 
Sengenes C, et al. Remodeling phenotype of human subcutaneous adipose 
tissue macrophages. Circulation (2008) 117(6):806–15. doi:10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.107.724096 
178. Zeyda M, Farmer D, Todoric J, Aszmann O, Speiser M, Gyori G, et al. 
Human adipose tissue macrophages are of an anti-inflammatory phenotype 
but capable of excessive pro-inflammatory mediator production. Int J Obes 
(Lond) (2007) 31(9):1420–8. doi:10.1038/sj.ijo.0803632 
179. Xu X, Grijalva A, Skowronski A, van Eijk M, Serlie MJ, Ferrante AW Jr. 
Obesity activates a program of lysosomal-dependent lipid metabolism in 
adipose tissue macrophages independently of classic activation. Cell Metab 
(2013) 18(6):816–30. doi:10.1016/j.cmet.2013.11.001 
180. Chavez-Galan L, Olleros ML, Vesin D, Garcia I. Much more than M1 and 
M2 macrophages, there are also CD169(+) and TCR(+) macrophages. Front 
Immunol (2015) 6:263. doi:10.3389/fimmu.2015.00263 
181. Mills CD. Anatomy of a discovery: m1 and m2 macrophages. Front Immunol 
(2015) 6:212. doi:10.3389/fimmu.2015.00212 
182. Bueno V, Sant’Anna OA, Lord JM. Ageing and myeloid-derived suppressor 
cells: possible involvement in immunosenescence and age-related disease. 
Age (Dordr) (2014) 36(6):9729. doi:10.1007/s11357-014-9729-x 
183. Shearer GM. Th1/Th2 changes in aging. Mech Ageing Dev (1997) 94(1–3):1–5. 
184. Schmitt V, Rink L, Uciechowski P. The Th17/Treg balance is disturbed during 
aging. Exp Gerontol (2013) 48(12):1379–86. doi:10.1016/j.exger.2013. 
09.003 
185. Fulop T, Larbi A, Pawelec G. Human T cell aging and the impact of 
persistent viral infections. Front Immunol (2013) 4:271. doi:10.3389/
fimmu.2013.00271 
186. Pawelec G. Hallmarks of human “immunosenescence”: adaptation or dysreg-
ulation? Immun Ageing (2012) 9(1):15. doi:10.1186/1742-4933-9-15 
187. Geiger H, de Haan G, Florian MC. The ageing haematopoietic stem 
cell compartment. Nat Rev Immunol (2013) 13(5):376–89. doi:10.1038/
nri3433 
188. Roux A, Mourin G, Larsen M, Fastenackels S, Urrutia A, Gorochov G, et al. 
Differential impact of age and cytomegalovirus infection on the gamma-
delta T cell compartment. J Immunol (2013) 191(3):1300–6. doi:10.4049/
jimmunol.1202940 
189. Colonna-Romano G, Aquino A, Bulati M, Lio D, Candore G, Oddo G, et al. 
Impairment of gamma/delta T lymphocytes in elderly: implications for 
immunosenescence. Exp Gerontol (2004) 39(10):1439–46. doi:10.1016/j.
exger.2004.07.005 
190. Michishita Y, Hirokawa M, Guo YM, Abe Y, Liu J, Ubukawa K, et al.  
Age-associated alteration of gammadelta T-cell repertoire and different pro-
files of activation-induced death of Vdelta1 and Vdelta2 T cells. Int J Hematol 
(2011) 94(3):230–40. doi:10.1007/s12185-011-0907-7 
191. Jagger A, Shimojima Y, Goronzy JJ, Weyand CM. Regulatory T cells and 
the immune aging process: a mini-review. Gerontology (2014) 60(2):130–7. 
doi:10.1159/000355303 
192. Siegrist CA, Aspinall R. B-cell responses to vaccination at the extremes 
 
of age. Nat Rev Immunol (2009) 9(3):185–94. doi:10.1038/nri2508 
193. Appay V, Sauce D. Naive T cells: the crux of cellular immune aging? Exp 
Gerontol (2014) 54:90–3. doi:10.1016/j.exger.2014.01.003 
194. Pawelec G. Immunosenenescence: role of cytomegalovirus. Exp Gerontol 
(2013) 54:1–5. doi:10.1016/j.exger.2013.11.010 
195. Wikby A, Maxson P, Olsson J, Johansson B, Ferguson FG. Changes in CD8 
and CD4 lymphocyte subsets, T cell proliferation responses and non- 
survival in the very old: the Swedish longitudinal OCTO-immune study. Mech 
Ageing Dev (1998) 102(2–3):187–98. doi:10.1016/S0047-6374(97)00151-6 
196. Pawelec G, Ferguson FG, Wikby A. The SENIEUR protocol after 16 years. 
Mech Ageing Dev (2001) 122(2):132–4. doi:10.1016/S0047-6374(00)00240-2 
197. Wikby A, Johansson B, Ferguson F, Olsson J. Age-related changes in immune 
parameters in a very old population of Swedish people: a longitudinal study. 
Exp Gerontol (1994) 29(5):531–41. doi:10.1016/0531-5565(94)90036-1 
198. Wikby A, Nilsson BO, Forsey R, Thompson J, Strindhall J, Lofgren S, et al. 
The immune risk phenotype is associated with IL-6 in the terminal decline 
stage: findings from the Swedish NONA immune longitudinal study of very 
late life functioning. Mech Ageing Dev (2006) 127(8):695–704. doi:10.1016/j.
mad.2006.04.003 
199. Wikby A, Ferguson F, Forsey R, Thompson J, Strindhall J, Lofgren S, et al. 
An immune risk phenotype, cognitive impairment, and survival in very late 
life: impact of allostatic load in Swedish octogenarian and nonagenarian 
humans. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci (2005) 60(5):556–65. doi:10.1093/
gerona/60.5.556 
200. Olsson J, Wikby A, Johansson B, Lofgren S, Nilsson BO, Ferguson FG. Age-related 
change in peripheral blood T-lymphocyte subpopulations and cytomegalovirus 
infection in the very old: the Swedish longitudinal OCTO immune study. Mech 
Ageing Dev (2000) 121(1–3):187–201. doi:10.1016/S0047-6374(00)00210-4 
201. Franceschi C, Bonafe M, Valensin S, Olivieri F, De Luca M, Ottaviani E, et al. 
Inflamm-aging. An evolutionary perspective on immunosenescence. Ann 
 
N Y Acad Sci (2000) 908:244–54. doi:10.1111/j.1749-6632.2000.tb06651.x 
 20
Campbell and Turner
Exercise, Health, and Immunity Across the Lifespan
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 648
202. Franceschi C, Capri M, Monti D, Giunta S, Olivieri F, Sevini F, et al. 
Inflammaging and anti-inflammaging: a systemic perspective on aging 
and longevity emerged from studies in humans. Mech Ageing Dev (2007) 
128(1):92–105. doi:10.1016/j.mad.2006.11.016 
203. Giovannini S, Onder G, Liperoti R, Russo A, Carter C, Capoluongo E, 
et al. Interleukin-6, C-reactive protein, and tumor necrosis factor-alpha as 
pre 
dictors of mortality in frail, community-living elderly individuals. J Am 
Geriatr Soc (2011) 59(9):1679–85. doi:10.1111/j.1532-5415.2011.03570.x 
204. Baune BT, Rothermundt M, Ladwig KH, Meisinger C, Berger K. Systemic 
inflammation (interleukin 6) predicts all-cause mortality in men: results 
from a 9-year follow-up of the MEMO Study. Age (Dordr) (2011) 33(2): 
209–17. doi:10.1007/s11357-010-9165-5 
205. Bruunsgaard H, Ladelund S, Pedersen AN, Schroll M, Jorgensen T, 
Pedersen BK. Predicting death from tumour necrosis factor-alpha and 
interleukin-6 in 80-year-old people. Clin Exp Immunol (2003) 132(1):24–31. 
doi:10.1046/j.1365-2249.2003.02137.x 
206. McElhaney JE, Kuchel GA, Zhou X, Swain SL, Haynes L. T-cell immunity 
to influenza in older adults: a pathophysiological framework for develop-
ment of more effective vaccines. Front Immunol (2016) 7:41. doi:10.3389/
fimmu.2016.00041 
207. Frasca D, Blomberg BB. Aging, cytomegalovirus (CMV) and influenza vac-
cine responses. Hum Vaccin Immunother (2016) 12(3):682–90. doi:10.1080/ 
21645515.2015.1105413 
208. Brown FF, Bigley AB, Sherry C, Neal CM, Witard OC, Simpson RJ, et al. 
Training status and sex influence on senescent T-lymphocyte redistribution 
in response to acute maximal exercise. Brain Behav Immun (2014) 39:152–9. 
doi:10.1016/j.bbi.2013.10.031 
209. Brown FF, Bigley AB, Ross JC, LaVoy EC, Simpson RJ, Galloway SD. 
T-lymphocyte populations following a period of high volume training in 
female soccer players. Physiol Behav (2015) 152(Pt A):175–81. doi:10.1016/j.
physbeh.2015.09.027 
210. Gustafson MP, DiCostanzo AC, Wheatley CM, Kim CH, Bornschlegl S, 
Gastineau DA, et al. A systems biology approach to investigating the influ-
ence of exercise and fitness on the composition of leukocytes in peripheral 
blood. J Immunother Cancer (2017) 5:30. doi:10.1186/s40425-017-0231-8 
211. Prieto-Hinojosa A, Knight A, Compton C, Gleeson M, Travers PJ. Redu-
ced thymic output in elite athletes. Brain Behav Immun (2014) 39:75–9. 
doi:10.1016/j.bbi.2014.01.004 
212. Moro-Garcia MA, Fernandez-Garcia B, Echeverria A, Rodriguez-Alonso M, 
Suarez-Garcia FM, Solano-Jaurrieta JJ, et al. Frequent participation in high 
volume exercise throughout life is associated with a more differentiated adap-
tive immune response. Brain Behav Immun (2014) 39:61–74. doi:10.1016/j.
bbi.2013.12.014 
213. Teixeira AM, Rama L, Carvalho HM, Borges G, Carvalheiro T, Gleeson M, 
 
et al. Changes in naive and memory T-cells in elite swimmers during a 
winter training season. Brain Behav Immun (2014) 39:186–93. doi:10.1016/j.
bbi.2014.01.002 
214. Cosgrove C, Galloway SD, Neal C, Hunter AM, McFarlin BK, Spielmann G, 
et al. The impact of 6-month training preparation for an Ironman triathlon 
on the proportions of naive, memory and senescent T cells in resting blood. 
Eur J Appl Physiol (2012) 112(8):2989–98. doi:10.1007/s00421-011-2273-9 
215. Dopico XC, Evangelou M, Ferreira RC, Guo H, Pekalski ML, Smyth DJ, 
et al. Widespread seasonal gene expression reveals annual differences in 
human immunity and physiology. Nat Commun (2015) 6:7000. doi:10.1038/
ncomms8000 
216. Goldinger A, Shakhbazov K, Henders AK, McRae AF, Montgomery GW, 
 
Powell JE. Seasonal effects on gene expression. PLoS One (2015) 10(5): 
e0126995. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0126995 
217. Spielmann G, McFarlin BK, O’Connor DP, Smith PJ, Pircher H, Simpson RJ. 
Aerobic fitness is associated with lower proportions of senescent blood T-cells in 
man. Brain Behav Immun (2011) 25(8):1521–9. doi:10.1016/j.bbi.2011.07.226 
218. Silva LC, de Araujo AL, Fernandes JR, Matias Mde S, Silva PR, Duarte AJ, 
et al. Moderate and intense exercise lifestyles attenuate the effects of aging on 
telomere length and the survival and composition of T cell subpopulations. 
Age (Dordr) (2016) 38(1):24. doi:10.1007/s11357-016-9879-0 
219. Duggal NA, Pollock RD, Lazarus NR, Harridge S, Lord JM. Major features of 
immunesenescence, including reduced thymic output, are ameliorated by high 
levels of physiacl activity in adulthood. Aging Cell (2018). doi:10.1111/acel.12750
220. Shimizu K, Kimura F, Akimoto T, Akama T, Tanabe K, Nishijima T, et al. 
Effect of moderate exercise training on T-helper cell subpopulations in 
elderly people. Exerc Immunol Rev (2008) 14:24–37. 
221. Cao Dinh H, Beyer I, Mets T, Onyema OO, Njemini R, Renmans W
, et al. Effects 
of physical exercise on markers of cellular immunosenescence: a systematic 
review. Calcif Tissue Int (2017) 100(2):193–215. doi:10.1007/s00223-016-0212-9 
222. Kruger K, Frost S, Most E, Volker K, Pallauf J, Mooren FC. Exercise affects 
tissue lymphocyte apoptosis via redox-sensitive and Fas-dependent signaling 
pathways. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol (2009) 296(5):R1518–27. 
doi:10.1152/ajpregu.90994.2008 
223. Khan N, Shariff N, Cobbold M, Bruton R, Ainsworth JA, Sinclair AJ, 
et al. Cytomegalovirus seropositivity drives the CD8 T cell repertoire 
toward greater clonality in healthy elderly individuals. J Immunol (2002) 
169(4):1984–92. doi:10.4049/jimmunol.169.4.1984 
224. Mueller YM, De Rosa SC, Hutton JA, Witek J, Roederer M, Altman JD, et al. 
Increased CD95/Fas-induced apoptosis of HIV-specific CD8(+) T cells. 
Immunity (2001) 15(6):871–82. doi:10.1016/S1074-7613(01)00246-1 
225. Wang JS, Lin CT. Systemic hypoxia promotes lymphocyte apoptosis induced 
by oxidative stress during moderate exercise. Eur J Appl Physiol (2010) 
108(2):371–82. doi:10.1007/s00421-009-1231-2 
226. Takahashi A, Hanson MG, Norell HR, Havelka AM, Kono K, Malmberg KJ, 
et al. Preferential cell death of CD8+ effector memory (CCR7-CD45RA-) 
T cells by hydrogen peroxide-induced oxidative stress. J Immunol (2005) 
174(10):6080–7. doi:10.4049/jimmunol.174.10.6080 
227. Stocchi R, Ward KN, Fanin R, Baccarani M, Apperley JF. Management of 
human cytomegalovirus infection and disease after allogeneic bone marrow 
transplantation. Haematologica (1999) 84(1):71–9. 
228. Derhovanessian E, Maier AB, Hahnel K, Zelba H, de Craen AJ, Roelofs H, 
et al. Lower proportion of naive peripheral CD8+ T cells and an unopposed 
pro-inflammatory response to human cytomegalovirus proteins in vitro 
are associated with longer survival in very elderly people. Age (Dordr) 
(2013) 35(4):1387–99. doi:10.1007/s11357-012-9425-7 
229. Sylwester AW, Mitchell BL, Edgar JB, Taormina C, Pelte C, Ruchti F, et al. 
Broadly targeted human cytomegalovirus-specific CD4+ and CD8+ T cells 
dominate the memory compartments of exposed subjects. J Exp Med (2005) 
202(5):673–85. doi:10.1084/jem.20050882 
230. Franceschi C, Bonafe M, Valensin S. Human immunosenescence: the 
prevailing of innate immunity, the failing of clonotypic immunity, and the 
filling of immunological space. Vaccine (2000) 18(16):1717–20. doi:10.1016/
S0264-410X(99)00513-7 
231. Akbar AN, Fletcher JM. Memory T cell homeostasis and senescence during 
aging. Curr Opin Immunol (2005) 17(5):480–5. doi:10.1016/j.coi.2005.07.019 
232. van Leeuwen EM, Koning JJ, Remmerswaal EB, van Baarle D, van Lier RA, 
 
ten Berge IJ. Differential usage of cellular niches by cytomegalovirus versus 
EBV- and influenza virus-specific CD8+ T cells. J Immunol (2006) 177(8): 
4998–5005. doi:10.4049/jimmunol.177.8.4998 
233. Huster KM, Stemberger C, Gasteiger G, Kastenmuller W
, Drexler I, Busch DH. 
 
Cutting edge: memory CD8 T cell compartment grows in size with immu-
nological experience but nevertheless can lose function. J Immunol (2009) 
183(11):6898–902. doi:10.4049/jimmunol.0902454 
234. Ferrando-Martinez S, Franco JM, Ruiz-Mateos E, Hernandez A, Ordonez A, 
Gutierrez E, et al. A reliable and simplified sj/beta-TREC ratio quantification 
method for human thymic output measurement. J Immunol Methods (2010) 
352(1–2):111–7. doi:10.1016/j.jim.2009.11.007 
235. Radtke F, MacDonald HR, Tacchini-Cottier F. Regulation of innate and adap-
tive immunity by Notch. Nat Rev Immunol (2013) 13(6):427–37. doi:10.1038/
nri3445 
236. Haugen F, Norheim F, Lian H, Wensaas AJ, Dueland S, Berg O, et al.  
IL-7 is expressed and secreted by human skeletal muscle cells. Am J Physiol 
Cell Physiol (2010) 298(4):C807–16. doi:10.1152/ajpcell.00094.2009 
237. Fry TJ, Mackall CL. The many faces of IL-7: from lymphopoiesis to periph-
eral T cell maintenance. J Immunol (2005) 174(11):6571–6. doi:10.4049/
jimmunol.174.11.6571 
238. Tchernof A, Despres JP. Pathophysiology of human visceral obesity: an 
update. Physiol Rev (2013) 93(1):359–404. doi:10.1152/physrev.00033.2011 
239. Trim W, Turner JE, Thompson D. Parallels in immunometabolic adipose 
tissue dysfunction with ageing and obesity. Front Immunol (2018) 9:169. 
doi:10.3389/fimmu.2018.00169 
 21
Campbell and Turner
Exercise, Health, and Immunity Across the Lifespan
Frontiers in Immunology | www.frontiersin.org
April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 648
240. Nieman DC, Henson DA, Nehlsen-Cannarella SL, Ekkens M, Utter AC, 
Butterworth DE, et al. Influence of obesity on immune function. J Am Diet 
Assoc (1999) 99(3):294–9. doi:10.1016/S0002-8223(99)00077-2 
241. Muezzinler A, Zaineddin AK, Brenner H. Body mass index and leukocyte 
telomere length in adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obes Rev 
(2014) 15(3):192–201. doi:10.1111/obr.12126 
242. van der Weerd K, Dik WA, Schrijver B, Schweitzer DH, Langerak AW, 
Drexhage HA, et al. Morbidly obese human subjects have increased periph-
eral blood CD4+ T cells with skewing toward a Treg- and Th2-dominated 
phenotype. Diabetes (2012) 61(2):401–8. doi:10.2337/db11-1065 
243. Alam I, Larbi A, Pawelec G. Nutritional status influences peripheral immune 
cell phenotypes in healthy men in rural Pakistan. Immun Ageing (2012) 
9(1):16. doi:10.1186/1742-4933-9-16 
244. Spielmann G, Johnston CA, O’Connor DP, Foreyt JP, Simpson RJ. Excess 
body mass is associated with T cell differentiation indicative of immune 
ageing in children. Clin Exp Immunol (2014) 176(2):246–54. doi:10.1111/cei. 
12267 
245. Costanzo AE, Taylor KR, Dutt S, Han PP, Fujioka K, Jameson JM. Obesity 
impairs gammadelta T cell homeostasis and antiviral function in humans. 
PLoS One (2015) 10(3):e0120918. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0120918 
246. Aroor AR, DeMarco VG. Oxidative stress and obesity: the chicken or the egg? 
Diabetes (2014) 63(7):2216–8. doi:10.2337/db14-0424 
247. Gleeson M, Bishop NC, Stensel DJ, Lindley MR, Mastana SS, Nimmo MA. 
The anti-inflammatory effects of exercise: mechanisms and implications 
for the prevention and treatment of disease. Nat Rev Immunol (2011) 11(9): 
607–15. doi:10.1038/nri3041 
248. Radak Z, Chung HY, Goto S. Systemic adaptation to oxidative challenge 
induced by regular exercise. Free Radic Biol Med (2008) 44(2):153–9. 
doi:10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2007.01.029 
249. Henson SM, Lanna A, Riddell NE, Franzese O, Macaulay R, Griffiths SJ, 
et al. p38 signaling inhibits mTORC1-independent autophagy in senescent 
human CD8(+) T cells. J Clin Invest (2014) 124(9):4004–16. doi:10.1172/
JCI75051 
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was con-
ducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be 
construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2018 Campbell and Turner. This is an open-access article distri 
buted 
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, 
distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original 
author(s) and the copyright owner are credited and that the original publication in 
this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribu-
tion or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
