 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
Weekly / Vol. 66 / No. 18 
May 12, 2017
INSIDE
470 Hepatitis C Virus Infection Among Women Giving 
Birth — Tennessee and United States, 2009–2014
474 Current and Binge Drinking Among High School 
Students — United States, 1991–2015
479 CDC Grand Rounds: Public Health Strategies to 
Prevent and Treat Strokes
482 Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on 
Immunization Practices for Use of Cholera Vaccine
486 Notes from the Field: Severe Human 
Metapneumovirus Infections — North Dakota, 2016
489 Announcements
491 QuickStats
Continuing Education examination available at  
https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/cme/conted_info.html#weekly. 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Hepatitis Awareness Month and 
Testing Day — May 2017
May 19th is National Hepatitis Testing Day in the United 
States to emphasize the importance of testing persons at risk 
for hepatitis B virus (HBV) and hepatitis C virus (HCV) 
infections, most of whom are unaware of their infection status. 
 
 
Recognizing the effectiveness of testing and other preventive 
and treatment measures, the National Academies of Science, 
Engineering, and Medicine recently set goals for the elimination 
of HBV and HCV as public health threats in the United States.*
HCV is the most common form of viral hepatitis in the 
United States and in 2013, accounted for approximately 19,000 
deaths per year, a number that was greater than that of 60 other 
nationally notifiable infectious diseases combined (1). During 
2010–2015, HCV incidence increased by 294% with the 
highest rates among young persons who inject drugs (PWID).†
This issue of MMWR includes two reports describing 
trends in HCV incidence and the availability of HCV 
prevention and treatment services that stop transmission. 
In the first report, only three states had comprehensive laws 
providing full access to HCV preventive and treatment 
services for PWID. The second report estimates rates of 
HCV infection among pregnant women in the United 
States and Tennessee; in the United States, HCV rates 
nearly doubled during 2009–2014, and in Tennessee, the 
rate in 2014 was approximately three times the national 
rate. Data from both reports emphasize the importance of 
viral hepatitis surveillance to identify communities at risk 
for HCV and public health policies that make available 
interventions that prevent HCV transmission and disease.
* http://www.nationalacademies.org/hmd/reports/2017/national-strategy-
for-the-elimination-of-hepatitis-b-and-c.aspx.
† https://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/statistics/index.htm.
Reference
1. Ly KN, Hughes EM, Jiles RB, Holmberg SD. Rising mortality 
associated with hepatitis C virus in the United States, 2003–2013. 
Clin Infect Dis 2016;62:1287–8. https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciw111
State HCV Incidence and Policies 
Related to HCV Preventive and 
Treatment Services for Persons 
Who Inject Drugs — 
United States, 2015–2016
Cecily A. Campbell, JD1, Lauren Canary, MPH1; Nicole Smith, PhD1; 
Eyasu Teshale, MD1; A. Blythe Ryerson, PhD1; John W. Ward, MD1
Hepatitis C is associated with more deaths in the United 
States than 60 other infectious diseases reported to CDC 
combined. Despite curative hepatitis C virus (HCV) therapies 
and known preventive measures to interrupt transmission, new 
HCV infections have increased in recent years (1,2). Injection 
drug use is the primary risk factor for new HCV infections (2). 
One potential strategy to decrease the prevalence of HCV is 
to create and strengthen public health laws and policies aimed 
specifically at reducing transmission risks among persons who 
inject drugs. To evaluate factors affecting access to HCV preven-
tive and treatment services, CDC assessed state laws governing 
access to safe injection equipment and Medicaid policies related 
Please note: An erratum has been published for this issue. To view the erratum, please click here.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
466 
MMWR / May 12, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 18
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
The MMWR series of publications is published by the Center for Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Laboratory Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Atlanta, GA 30329-4027.
Suggested citation: [Author names; first three, then et al., if more than six.] [Report title]. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2017;66:[inclusive page numbers].
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Anne Schuchat, MD, Acting Director 
Patricia M. Griffin, MD, Acting Associate Director for Science  
Joanne Cono, MD, ScM, Director, Office of Science Quality 
Chesley L. Richards, MD, MPH, Deputy Director for Public Health Scientific Services
Michael F. Iademarco, MD, MPH, Director, Center for Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Laboratory Services 
MMWR Editorial and Production Staff (Weekly)
Sonja A. Rasmussen, MD, MS, Editor-in-Chief
Charlotte K. Kent, PhD, MPH, Executive Editor 
Jacqueline Gindler, MD, Editor
Teresa F. Rutledge, Managing Editor 
Douglas W. Weatherwax, Lead Technical Writer-Editor
Soumya Dunworth, PhD, Teresa M. Hood, MS,  
Technical Writer-Editors
Martha F. Boyd, Lead Visual Information Specialist
Maureen A. Leahy, Julia C. Martinroe, 
Stephen R. Spriggs, Tong Yang,
Visual Information Specialists
Quang M. Doan, MBA, Phyllis H. King, 
Terraye M. Starr, Moua Yang, 
Information Technology Specialists
MMWR Editorial Board
Timothy F. Jones, MD, Chairman
Matthew L. Boulton, MD, MPH
Virginia A. Caine, MD 
Katherine Lyon Daniel, PhD
Jonathan E. Fielding, MD, MPH, MBA
David W. Fleming, MD 
William E. Halperin, MD, DrPH, MPH
King K. Holmes, MD, PhD 
Robin Ikeda, MD, MPH 
Rima F. Khabbaz, MD
Phyllis Meadows, PhD, MSN, RN
Jewel Mullen, MD, MPH, MPA
Jeff Niederdeppe, PhD
Patricia Quinlisk, MD, MPH 
Patrick L. Remington, MD, MPH 
Carlos Roig, MS, MA
William L. Roper, MD, MPH 
William Schaffner, MD
to sobriety requirements for approval of HCV treatment for 
persons who inject drugs. Acute HCV incidence rates were 
obtained from CDC’s National Notifiable Disease Surveillance 
System (NNDSS). States were categorized based on analysis 
of laws related to access to clean needles and syringes and 
Medicaid HCV treatment policies associated with sobriety 
requirements. In 2015, HCV incidence remained high in the 
United States, with rates in 17 states exceeding the national 
average. Three states were determined to have state laws and 
Medicaid policies capable of comprehensively preventing and 
treating HCV among persons who inject drugs. Opportunities 
exist for states to adopt laws and policies that could help 
increase access to HCV preventive and treatment services 
reducing the number of persons at risk for HCV transmission 
and disease.
HCV transmission primarily occurs through percutaneous 
exposure to blood; thus, injection drug use is an important 
risk factor (3). HCV incidence has increased 294% nationally 
from 2010 to 2015 (4). This increase in acute cases of HCV 
is largely attributed to injection drug use (2). Access to safe 
injection equipment for persons who inject drugs can prevent 
HCV infection (3), and HCV therapy can cure >90% of 
infected persons, thereby reducing the risk for HCV-associated 
mortality and transmission of HCV to others. State laws and 
policies can enhance or limit access to HCV prevention and 
treatment services, particularly for persons who inject drugs 
(5). For example, recent studies have shown that states policies 
can reduce deaths associated with drug overdose (6).
Incidence of HCV per 100,000 population was calculated 
based on acute cases of HCV reported electronically by each 
state and the District of Columbia (hereafter referred to as 
states) to NNDSS in 2015 and U.S. Census data. Existing 
state laws in all states related to access to clean needles and 
syringes by persons who inject drugs were reviewed using 
the legal database WestlawNext. Once the relevant laws were 
identified, the legal findings were corroborated with findings 
from the Syringe Distribution Laws data set on LawAtlas.* 
The state laws were then provided to health departments in 
all states for review of accuracy of interpretation.
Three types of laws related to access to clean needles and 
syringes were researched: 1) authorization of syringe exchange 
programs; 2) the scope of drug paraphernalia laws; and 3) retail 
sale of needles and syringes. Two independent analysts qualita-
tively assessed the laws based on the presence of five elements 
in each type of law, and the potential impact of these elements 
on access to clean needles and syringes, in a method similar to 
other legal analyses (7). The elements assessed included whether 
state laws explicitly 1) authorize syringe exchange statewide or 
in selected jurisdictions; 2) exempt needles or syringes from 
the definition of drug paraphernalia; 3) decriminalize the pos-
session and distribution of syringes or needles for participants 
of a legally authorized syringe exchange program; 4) allow for 
a person to avoid criminal prosecution for possession of drug 
* http://lawatlas.org/datasets/syringe-policies-laws-regulating-non-retail-
distribution-of-drug-parapherna.
Please note: An erratum has been published for this issue. To view the erratum, please click here.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / May 12, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 18 
467
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
paraphernalia by disclosing to an arresting officer that they 
possess a needle or sharp object; and 5) allow for the retail 
sale of syringes without a prescription to persons who inject 
drugs. The analysts grouped the laws into five categories (most 
comprehensive, more comprehensive, moderately comprehen-
sive, less comprehensive, and least comprehensive) based on 
the presence or absence of the five elements.
Data on Medicaid fee-for-service HCV treatment policies 
were collected from a report developed by the Center for 
Health Law and Policy Innovation of Harvard Law School 
and the National Viral Hepatitis Roundtable on Medicaid 
access to hepatitis C treatment (8). The Medicaid treatment 
policies were provided to the states for review of accuracy and 
updated, as needed. Based on the length of required sobriety 
from alcohol and/or drugs provided by the states, CDC char-
acterized the state’s Medicaid treatment policy as either restric-
tive or permissive depending on the presence or absence of a 
sobriety requirement. For this analysis, any required period of 
sobriety, including requirements that a person could not have 
any evidence of active injection drug use, was considered a 
barrier and, therefore, restrictive. Screening and counseling 
requirements were not considered barriers, and were therefore 
categorized as permissive, given that those services did not 
necessarily require a referral or postponement of treatment. 
A state policy that did not require any period of sobriety was 
also categorized as permissive.
In 2015, the national reported acute HCV incidence rate was 
0.8 per 100,000 persons, representing 2,436 new infections 
reported from 40 state health departments; with adjustment 
to account for underascertainment and underreporting, the 
reported number of cases is estimated to represent 33,900 
new HCV infections (4). Incidence in 17 states exceeded the 
national average, including seven states with rates at least twice 
the national average (Figure 1).
Eighteen states had laws that were categorized as least com-
prehensive related to the prevention of HCV transmission 
among persons who inject drugs. In particular, these 18 states 
had no laws authorizing a syringe exchange program, decrimi-
nalizing possession and distribution of syringes and needles, or 
allowing the retail sale of syringes without a prescription. Three 
states (Maine, Nevada, and Utah) had the most comprehensive 
laws related to prevention; each state had laws that authorized 
syringe exchange without jurisdictional limitations, removed 
barriers to possessing and distributing syringes and needles 
through drug paraphernalia laws, and explicitly allowed for the 
retail sale of syringes to persons who inject drugs (Figure 2).
Twenty-four states had restrictive Medicaid treatment 
policies that required some period of sobriety to receive HCV 
FIGURE 1. Acute hepatitis C virus infection incidence rate ratios* — 
 
United States,† 2015
>1.9
0.6–1.9
<0.6
Not available
* The national rate (0.8 per 100,000 population) is the denominator.
† Seven states have rates at least twice the national average: Indiana, Kentucky, 
Maine, Massachusetts, New Mexico, Tennessee, and West Virginia. Ten states 
have rates above the national average (but not twice the national average): 
Alabama, Montana, New Jersey, North Carolina, Ohio, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, 
Utah, Washington, and Wisconsin.
FIGURE 2. Comprehensiveness* of state laws pertinent to prevention 
of hepatitis C virus infection among persons who inject drugs — 
United States, 2016
Most comprehensive
More comprehensive
Less comprehensive
Least comprehensive
Moderate
* Assessment of whether a state had established certain laws and the presence 
or absence of five elements in those laws, i.e., 1) authorization of syringe 
exchange statewide or in selected jurisdictions; 2) exemption of needles or 
syringes from the definition of drug paraphernalia; 3) decriminalization of 
possession and distribution of syringes or needles for participants of a legally 
authorized syringe service program; 4) avoidance of criminal prosecution for 
possession of drug paraphernalia by disclosing possession of a needle or sharp 
object to an arresting officer; and 5) allowance for the retail sale of syringes 
without a prescription to persons who inject drugs.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
468 
MMWR / May 12, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 18
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
treatment through Medicaid, including 11 of the states with 
the least comprehensive set of laws related to prevention. 
Sixteen states had permissive Medicaid HCV treatment poli-
cies that did not require a period of sobriety or only required 
screening and counseling to receive HCV treatment through 
Medicaid (Figure 3). Among the seventeen states with high 
HCV incidence, five (Massachusetts, New Mexico, North 
Carolina, Pennsylvania, and Washington) had permissive 
Medicaid treatment policies.
Only three states (Massachusetts, New Mexico, and 
Washington) had both a most comprehensive or more com-
prehensive set of laws and a permissive Medicaid treatment 
policy that might affect access to both HCV preventive and 
treatment services for persons who inject drugs.
Discussion
The creation and implementation of law can be used to 
achieve public health objectives, including infectious disease 
prevention and control, and legislation can be an effective tool 
to address public health threats faced by a state’s residents (9). 
To promote HCV prevention, state laws can facilitate access 
to clean injection equipment, and other services for persons 
who inject drugs and, thereby be an effective tool to reduce the 
risk for transmission and stop the increasing incidence of HCV 
infection in communities, particularly those most affected by 
the nation’s current opioid epidemic.
The laws governing access to comprehensive HCV preven-
tion services varied in the 17 states with high HCV incidence 
in 2015. For example among the three states with the highest 
HCV incidence rates (Kentucky, Massachusetts, and West 
Virginia), West Virginia had less comprehensive laws, and 
Kentucky and Massachusetts had more comprehensive laws. 
However, some of these laws did not take effect until 2015, 
suggesting that some laws might have been enacted in response 
to the increased HCV prevalence in these states.
In addition to legal strategies aimed at primary prevention, 
state Medicaid policies can either facilitate or hinder access 
to HCV treatment services for persons who inject drugs (4). 
Medicaid treatment policies with strict sobriety requirements 
can delay or even prevent access to effective and curative treat-
ment (5), although access to HCV treatment cures infection, 
reducing viral transmission and ultimately, incidence, among 
persons who inject drugs (10). Although the costs of HCV 
therapies have raised budgetary issues for state Medicaid pro-
grams in the past, the costs of HCV treatment have declined 
in recent years, increasing the cost-effectiveness of treatment, 
particularly among persons who inject drugs and who might 
serve as an ongoing source of transmission to others (10).
FIGURE 3. State Medicaid fee-for-service hepatitis C virus treatment 
policy restrictions* — United States, 2016
Permissive
Not available
Restrictive
* Permissive: Medicaid fee-for-service (FFS) did not require a period of sobriety or 
only required screening and counseling. Other restrictions, including restrictions 
based on liver disease or specialty provider requirements are not included; 
Restrictive: Medicaid FFS required a period of sobriety from drugs and/or alcohol; 
Not available: No information on Medicaid treatment policy available.
The findings in this analysis are subject to at least five limi-
tations. First, the HCV incidence data provided are based on 
reports of acute HCV cases, representing persons who were 
recently tested for and received a diagnosis of HCV and were 
reported to public health authorities. Because most HCV 
infections are asymptomatic, NNDSS data largely underes-
timate the prevalence of disease. Furthermore, because HCV 
reporting requirements and practices differ by state, the degree 
of underreporting also likely differs by state and should be 
interpreted with caution. Second, the analysis was conducted 
at a state level. Local jurisdictions might have implemented 
different legal or policy interventions that were not captured 
in this assessment. In addition, this analysis did not consider 
the enforcement of laws. Third, this cross-sectional, descrip-
tive analysis was based on the most recent surveillance data 
and the most recent legal data; it is not possible to associate 
the legal findings with particular incidence rates within states. 
Additional analysis is needed to understand the impetus 
behind the laws and to determine their direct impact on HCV 
incidence, including the impact of case reporting by syringe 
exchange programs. Fourth, only Medicaid policy data for fee-
for-service programs were considered; restrictions in Medicaid 
managed care programs might differ, other Medicaid barriers 
to treatment were not assessed, and the direct association 
between Medicaid sobriety requirements and the number of 
persons being treated in each state was not assessed. Finally, 
legal analyses of this nature are largely qualitative, and catego-
rizing states’ policy environments might be subject to reviewer 
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / May 12, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 18 
469
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Summary
What is already known about this topic?
The United States has experienced a sharp increase in 
hepatitis C virus (HCV) incidence that can be attributed to 
injection drug use. Some states have used public health laws 
and treatment policies to reduce the risk for transmission of 
HCV infections among persons who inject drugs.
What is added by this report?
In 2015, seventeen states were characterized as having acute HCV 
incidence rates above the national average. In an analysis of state 
laws governing access to safe injection equipment and Medicaid 
policies related to sobriety requirements for approval of HCV 
treatment for persons who inject drugs, only three states had 
state laws and Medicaid policies capable of comprehensively 
preventing and treating HCV among persons who inject drugs.
What are the implications for public health practice?
This report can be used as a tool for states in establishing laws 
and policies to address increases in HCV incidence in their own 
jurisdictions, and as a source of data for evaluating the long-term 
impact of these laws and policies. State laws that increase access 
to syringe exchange programs and clean needles and syringes, 
and policies that facilitate access to HCV treatment through state 
Medicaid programs can reduce HCV transmission risk.
interpretation. However, two separate analysts independently 
assessed the state laws and Medicaid policies, and their analyses 
were further validated by state personnel familiar with HCV 
prevention and treatment activities.
Legal and policy interventions can be tailored to a state’s 
unique needs to serve as part of a comprehensive strategy 
for reducing HCV transmission through increased access to 
preventive services, including safe injection equipment and 
HCV treatment. The findings from this assessment of state 
laws and one component of Medicaid treatment policies can 
inform jurisdictions when building their capacity to prevent 
the spread of HCV in their communities. Whereas any one 
policy can have a positive impact on public health, many fac-
tors contribute to the prevalence of disease, and it is important 
for policy makers and public health officials to work together 
to understand the various needs of particular populations to 
prevent HCV transmission and disease.
Acknowledgments
Alice Asher, Alycia Downs, Scott Holmberg, Ruth Jiles, Ben Kupronis, 
Alyson Rose-Wood, Claudia Vellozzi, State Health Departments.
 1Division of Viral Hepatitis, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, 
STD, and TB Prevention, CDC.
Corresponding author: Cecily A. Campbell, CCampbell1@cdc.gov, 
404-639-0485.
References
 1. Ly KN, Hughes EM, Jiles RB, Holmberg SD. Rising mortality associated 
with hepatitis C virus in the United States, 2003–2013. Clin Infect Dis 
2016;62:1287–8. https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciw111
 2. Zibbell JE, Iqbal K, Patel RC, et al. Increases in hepatitis C virus infection 
related to injection drug use among persons aged ≤30 years—Kentucky, 
Tennessee, Virginia, and West Virginia, 2006–2012. MMWR Morb 
Mortal Wkly Rep 2015;64:453–8.
 3. CDC. Recommendations for prevention and control of hepatitis C virus 
(HCV) infection and HCV-related chronic disease. MMWR Recomm 
Rep 1998;47(No. RR-19).
 4. CDC. Viral hepatitis surveillance—United States, 2015. Atlanta, GA: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2017. https://
www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/statistics/2015surveillance/index.htm
 5. Canary LA, Klevens RM, Holmberg SD. Limited access to new 
hepatitis C virus treatment under state Medicaid programs. Ann Intern 
Med 2015;163:226–8. https://doi.org/10.7326/M15-0320
 6. Johnson H, Paulozzi L, Porucznik C, Mack K, Herter B; Hal Johnson 
Consulting and Division of Disease Control and Health Promotion, 
Florida Department of Health. Decline in drug overdose deaths after 
state policy changes—Florida, 2010–2012. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly 
Rep 2014;63:569–74.
 7. Mello MM, Pomeranz J, Moran P
. The interplay of public health law 
and industry self-regulation: the case of sugar-sweetened beverage sales in 
schools. Am J Public Health 2008;98:595–604. https://doi.org/10.2105/
AJPH.2006.107680
 8. National Viral Hepatitis Roundtable; Center for Health Law & Policy 
Innovation, Harvard Law School. Hepatitis C: the state of Medicaid access. 
Preliminary findings: national summary report. Washington, DC: National 
Viral Hepatitis Roundtable; 2016. http://www.chlpi.org/wp-content/
uploads/2013/12/HCV-Report-Card-National-Summary_FINAL.pdf
 9. Burris S, Wagenaar AC, Swanson J, Ibrahim JK, Wood J, Mello 
MM. Making the case for laws that improve health: a framework for 
public health law research. Milbank Q 2010;88:169–210. https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1468-0009.2010.00595.x
 
10. Hickman M, De Angelis D, Vickerman P
, Hutchinson S, Martin NK. 
Hepatitis C virus treatment as prevention in people who inject drugs: 
testing the evidence. Curr Opin Infect Dis 2015;28:576–82. https://
doi.org/10.1097/QCO.0000000000000216
