 Comprehensive Analysis of Hypermutation in Human Cancer
A full list of authors and affiliations appears at the end of the article.
Summary
We present an extensive assessment of mutation burden through sequencing analysis of >81,000 
tumors from pediatric and adult patients, including tumors with hypermutation caused by 
chemotherapy, carcinogens, or germline alterations. Hypermutation was detected in tumor types 
not previously associated with high mutation burden. Replication repair deficiency was a major 
contributing factor. We uncovered new driver mutations in the replication-repair-associated DNA 
polymerases and a distinct impact of microsatellite instability and replication repair deficiency on 
the scale of mutation load. Unbiased clustering, based on mutational context, revealed clinically 
relevant subgroups regardless of the tumors' tissue of origin, highlighting similarities in 
evolutionary dynamics leading to hypermutation. Mutagens, such as UV light, were implicated in 
unexpected cancers, including sarcomas and lung tumors. The order of mutational signatures 
identified previous treatment and germline replication repair deficiency, which improved 
management of patients and families. These data will inform tumor classification, genetic testing, 
and clinical trial design.
Graphical abstract
A large-scale analysis of hypermutation in human cancers provides insights into tumor evolution 
dynamics and identifies clinically actionable mutation signatures.
*Correspondence: uri.tabori@sickkids.ca (U.T.), adam.shlien@sickkids.ca (A.S.).
49These authors contributed equally
50Senior author
51Lead Contact
Supplemental Information: Supplemental Information includes five figures and five tables and can be found with this article online at 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2017.09.048.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization: B.B.C., N.L., U.T., and A.S.; Methodology: B.B.C., N.L., D.F., J.A.E., F.F., M.Z., R.d.B., 
S.D., K.P.H., Z.F.P., W.J.Z., Z.S., U.T., and A.S.; Resources and Data Curation: B.B.C., D.F., J.A.E., M.E., T.L., K.W., C.P.K., D.C.B., 
T.W.L., G.P.D., T.M.J., M.R.G., I.V.S., V.L., D. Samuel, A.B., M.Y., D. Stearns, P.R., K.A.C., P.B.S., M.O., E.O., G.M., G.A.T., M.S., 
B.G., D.S.Z., S.L., V.M.I., S.C., H.T., R.E., R.F., R.D., P.D., A.H., M.A.G., J.C., V.R., M.S.I., M.A., C.D., M.D.T., G.R., J.M.M., E.B., 
C.H., J.F.C., M.S.M., and Z.F.P.; Writing – Original Draft: B.B.C., N.L., D.M., U.T., and A.S.; Writing – Review and Editing: B.B.C., 
N.L., J.M.M., M.S.M., D.M., U.T., and A.S.; Visualization: B.B.C. and N.L. Supervision: J.M.M., M.S.M., D.M., U.T., and A.S.; 
Funding Acquisition: U.T. and A.S.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Published in final edited form as:
Cell. 2017 November 16; 171(5): 1042–1056.e10. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2017.09.048.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Introduction
Mutations in cancer genes can be inherited, spontaneously arise in premalignant cells, or be 
acquired over time during tumor evolution (Stratton et al., 2009). It is often difficult to 
determine, from the sequencing of the diagnostic specimen alone, which mutations arose 
first or whether their order is important in driving tumorigenesis and/or enabling therapeutic 
resistance. The ultimate aggregate mutation count, termed mutation burden, is influenced by 
the tumor type, but is also affected by mutagenic processes shared across cancer types. All 
together, these factors contribute to only modest variations in burden; most tumors have a 
relatively low number of somatic mutations. Yet there is emerging evidence that outliers 
with much higher mutation burdens (hypermutation) do exist for many cancer types. 
Systematic retrospective sequencing efforts, such as those by The Cancer Genome Atlas 
(TCGA) and International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC), have confirmed frequent 
hypermutation in melanoma (Akbani et al., 2015), lung (Govindan et al., 2012), and bladder 
cancer (Weinstein et al., 2014) and uncovered rare cases of hypermutation in other cancers. 
These studies have used different thresholds as there is no agreed on definition of 
“hypermutation.” Larger unbiased cohorts are needed to define cut-offs for hypermutation, 
not only to understand its frequency across cancer but also to uncover common mutagenic 
processes associated with hypermutation, whose temporal order is important but usually 
unknown.
A deeper understanding of the forces and dynamics of hyper-mutagenesis would be 
clinically useful. First, there is an urgent need to define driver mutations in cancer genomes. 
This is especially difficult in hypermutant cancers due to the sheer abundance of passenger 
variants that can obscure true drivers. Second, understanding early drivers of hypermutation 
may be useful for predicting the cancer's evolutionary trajectory and accumulation of 
additional mutations. Finally, hypermutation is correlated with response to immune 
checkpoint inhibitors, which can lead to durable remissions in some patients (Bouffet et al., 
Campbell et al.
Page 2
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 2016; Johanns et al., 2016; Le et al., 2015; Rizvi et al., 2015; Santin et al., 2016; Van Allen 
et al., 2015).
Hypermutation can be caused by environmental factors (extrinsic exposures). UV light is the 
primary cause of the high numbers of mutations in malignant melanoma (Pfeifer et al., 2005; 
Sage, 1993). Similarly, the >60 carcinogens in tobacco smoke are the primary cause of 
hypermutation in tumors in the lung and larynx, as well as other tumors, due to direct 
mutagen exposure (Pleasance et al., 2010). Recently, several intrinsic sources of 
hypermutation have been described. Dysregulation of apolipoprotein B mRNA editing 
enzyme, catalytic polypeptide-like (APOBEC) family members, has been shown to result in 
increased levels of C to T transitions in a wide range of cancers (Roberts et al., 2013). 
Defective DNA replication repair by mutations that compromise proofreading, performed by 
the major replicative enzymes Polε and Polδ1, or DNA mismatch repair, are associated with 
hypermutation in colorectal, endometrial, and other cancers (Kandoth et al., 2013; Muzny et 
al., 2012). DNA replication repair mutations are also found in cancer predisposition 
syndromes, such as constitutional or biallelic mismatch repair deficiency (CMMRD), Lynch 
syndrome, and polymerase proofreading-associated polyposis (PPAP). Although data 
gathered by the International Biallelic Mismatch Repair Deficiency consortium revealed that 
all malignant CMMRD cancers are hypermutant (Bouffet et al., 2016), it is not known if the 
same is true in Lynch syndrome or PPAP. Importantly, replication repair defects can lead to 
acquired resistance to common genotoxic therapies, such as alkylating agents (van Thuijl et 
al., 2015). It would be of utmost importance to utilize tumor sequencing to define the order 
of mutagen exposure or intrinsic processes leading to hypermutation and predict therapy 
resistance.
Mutagenic processes leave imprints on the genome in the form of mutations in a specific 
nucleotide context, forming a unique signature. This is especially true for hypermutant 
cancers whose vast numbers of non-random mutations form a signature that is deeply 
engraved on the genome. The first taxonomic classification of signatures unveiled >20 
signatures in 30 cancer types (Alexandrov et al., 2013). These have since been refined and 
expanded (Morganella et al., 2016; Nik-Zainal et al., 2016). However, the driving forces of 
rarer hypermutation-associated signatures, seen in fewer tumors, are mostly unknown.
To address these issues, we examined 78,452 adult and 2,885 childhood cancers for 
hypermutation. Targeted regions of the genome were deeply sequenced using a validated 
cancer gene panel (Frampton et al., 2013). We analyzed the range and frequency of 
hypermutation between and within cancer types, measured the contribution of intrinsic and 
extrinsic mutators and used mutation signatures to accurately predict past mutagen exposure. 
We then performed exome and/or genome sequencing of patients with CMMRD (Shlien et 
al., 2015) or treatment-induced cancers—whose mutations were acquired in an established 
order—to model mutation dynamics in the tumors. These data have important implications 
for our understanding of how germline and acquired mutagenic forces govern tumorigenesis, 
which have already improved the clinical management of patients with hypermutant cancers 
and their families.
Campbell et al.
Page 3
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Results
Hypermutation Is Enriched for Replication Repair Defects in Childhood Cancers
We first wanted to define a minimal threshold for hypermutation, to create a definition that 
could ultimately be used in a clinical setting. We sequenced a cohort of 35 tumor samples 
with low, medium, and high number of substitutions by exome, genome, and two separate 
targeted panel sequencing consisting of 315 and 884 genes covering 1.1 and 3.25 Mb, 
respectively (Table S1). We achieved excellent concordance in burden between modalities 
(R2 = 0.94; Figures S1A and S1B). After carefully considering sequencing depth, the 
mutations' allele fractions, and the total footprint of each method, we found that every 
hypermutated cancer (>10 Mut/Mb) was called by all sequencing methods.
Having validated panel-based hypermutation testing, we examined the mutation burden in 
2,885 pediatric tumors. Mutation frequency ranged from 0–864 Mut/Mb (Figure 1A), with a 
mean and median of 6.78 Mut/Mb and 2.50 Mut/Mb, respectively. Using segmented linear 
regression analysis, we calculated 9.91 and 9.0 Mut/Mb as appropriate thresholds for 
hypermutation in childhood and adult cancers (Figures S1C and S1D; STAR Methods). For 
consistency, we use 10 Mut/Mb to define hypermutation in both cohorts. We also note that 
this coincides with the median mutation burden of patients previously reported to respond to 
checkpoint inhibition (Bouffet et al., 2016; Diaz and Le, 2015; Johanns et al., 2016; Le et 
al., 2015; Rizvi et al., 2015; Santin et al., 2016; Snyder et al., 2014; Van Allen et al., 2015).
While childhood cancer genomes are typically thought of as “quiet,” we found 160 cases 
with >10 Mut/Mb (5.5%). Hypermutation was observed in childhood cancer types not 
typically associated with elevated numbers of mutations, including sarcomas, germ cell 
tumors, nephroblastomas, and neuroblastomas. Importantly, across the whole cohort, 
hypermutant cancers were enriched for defects in mismatch repair pathway genes POLE and 
POLD1, responsible for synthesis of the leading and lagging strand (p ≤ 2.2 × 10−16) (Figure 
1B). Ultra-hypermutated (>100 Mut/Mb) pediatric tumors were universally replication repair 
deficient and included only the three tumor types observed in CMMRD: malignant gliomas, 
colorectal cancers, and leukemias/lymphomas.
Replication Repair Deficiency Drives a Mutator Phenotype in Many Childhood and Adult 
Cancers
Functioning DNA replication repair is required by actively dividing cells. And replication 
errors are responsible for two-thirds of mutations in cancer (Tomasetti et al., 2017). Yet, thus 
far, replication-repair-deficient hypermutation has been mainly observed in gliomas, 
gastrointestinal tract cancers, and endometrial cancers.
We expanded our analysis of hypermutation to 78,452 adult cancers sequenced on the same 
panel. Hypermutation and ultra-hypermutation were observed in 17% and 0.6%, 
respectively, across a wide variety of tissues (Figures 1C and 1D). A close examination of 
these cancers revealed enrichment of replication repair mutations and microsatellite 
instability in 81 tumor types (Figure S2A). These include previously underreported 
hypermutant prostate, cervical, and neuroendocrine tumors (87, 84, and 278 cancers).
Campbell et al.
Page 4
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 A striking inverse association was observed between micro-satellite instability (MSI), a 
marker of mismatch repair deficiency, and mutation burden. High levels of microsatellite 
instability (MSI-H) was mostly restricted to tumors in the 10–100 Mut/Mb range, whereas 
tumors with >100 Mut/Mb were microsatellite stable and enriched for replicative 
polymerase mutations (Figures 1E and S2B). Thus, while the loss of mismatch repair ability 
alone is mutagenic, its combination with the loss of polymerase proofreading (Shlien et al., 
2015), and the resultant total replication repair deficiency, leads to an ultra-hypermutated 
state with microsatellite stability. These data suggest that tumors with complete replication 
repair deficiency have elevated mutation burdens, acquired with different temporal dynamics 
than MSI tumors.
Detection and Validation of Cancer Drivers Using an “In Vivo Human Mutagenesis Screen”
While clinical sequencing is becoming routine in multiple institutions, accurate 
classification of variants has remained a challenge (both for germline and for somatic). In 
most cases, there is no functional assay available to determine if variants are true pathogenic 
drivers, and thus most are typically classified as “variants of unknown significance.” Here, 
we used hypermutation to catalog driver mutations in the replication repair genes. 
Determining the pathogenicity of mutations in POLE and POLD1, as it is with many large 
genes, is a challenge, especially since they can be mutated without functional impact. 
Indeed, we observed 2,150 and 1,123 distinct variants in POLE and POLD1, including many 
encoding changes at novel positions (Table S2; STAR Methods). As expected, among 
childhood cancers, most POLE and POLD1 mutations were not associated with 
hypermutation (Figure S2C).
We reasoned that we could determine which variants are in fact true drivers by leveraging 
the large size of this cohort. A mutation was classified as a clear driver if it was found in a 
hypermutated tumor and not in those with a low burden (STAR Methods). Using this 
approach, which can be thought of as an “in vivo human mutagenesis screen,” we 
rediscovered every known POLE and POLD1 driver (known to cause hypermutation in 
human tumors with functional validation) (Albertson et al., 2009; Daee et al., 2010; Kane 
and Shcherbakova, 2014). We found 11 new driver mutations that were all consistently 
associated with hypermutation (7 new drivers in POLE and 4 in POLD1; Table S3). This is 
especially important in POLD1, the lagging strand polymerase, for which driver mutations 
are less well characterized. R689W was the most frequent driver in POLD1, which has been 
shown to be a mutator in yeast (Daee et al., 2010). To our knowledge this is the first series of 
primary tumors that validates this in humans. Just as importantly, we determined that many 
mutations are mere passengers, even in tumors with multiple polymerase mutations (Figure 
2A). POLE R446Q, which was observed in a large group of non-hypermutated cancers, is 
one such false positive. Confirming our classification as non-pathogenic, we observed that 
the allelic fraction of the mutation was ∼0.5, suggesting a germline heterozygous SNP 
(Figure S3A). Furthermore, we also found this variant in the germline of non-affected 
individuals (>1/2,000 ExAC) (Lek et al., 2016).
This proved to be a powerful approach for exploring the effects of different missense 
substitutions in the polymerases on genome-wide mutation burden, both for mutations at the 
Campbell et al.
Page 5
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 exact same residue and for those located in different protein domains. Remarkably, tumors 
with exonuclease mutations at highly conserved motifs of POLD1 (ExoI,II,III) were not 
consistently hypermutant. These variants may be so detrimental to the cell that it requires 
additional suppressor mutations to reduce the burden (Herr et al., 2011). In both POLD1 and 
POLE, driver mutations were uncovered outside the exonuclease domain (Figure 2B), 
suggesting that other domains may be responsible for proofreading. We then used an 
unbiased approach and looked at all driver POLE mutations to compare the impact of 
differing missense substitutions at the same residue. For example, we found that POLE 
V411 is associated with an extremely high mutation burden but only when mutated to 
leucine (we labeled these residues as “invariable” as only a single possible amino acid 
change was found; Figure 2C). Residues S461, Y458, and E978 in POLE seem to be 
insensitive to change, with all amino acid substitutions associated with hypermutation. In 
contrast, at other residues, the mutation load varied depending on the specific amino acid 
change. Leucine 424 is one such “sensitive” residue; it is associated with a strong mutator 
phenotype when replaced with a proline or isoleucine, but is associated with lower mutation 
burden when mutated to a valine or phenylalanine (p = 0.03). To validate this finding, we 
measured the excision rate constants for wild-type POLE, and the L424V and L424I 
mutations using a rapid chemical quench-flow apparatus (Zahurancik et al., 2014; STAR 
Methods). L424I had a 5.7-fold stronger excision effect than L424V, confirming the 
dramatic difference in mutation burden in the primary tumors (Figure S3B). In contrast, 
every D275 mutation mutates an essential active site residue, which coordinates a metal ion 
required for catalysis, and yet we see a 10-fold difference in mutation burden (between 
D275G, D275A, and D275V). The difference between sensitive and insensitive amino acids 
can be related to the structure of the exonuclease and physical/biochemical interactions with 
the mismatches in the DNA.
Using this screen to triage functional variants, we mapped the landscape of driver somatic 
mutation in POLE and POLD1. These observations are key in the precise definition of real 
drivers in POLE and POLD1 cancers and can solve issues raised by recent sequencing 
efforts, which uncovered POLE and POLD1 germline variants of unknown significance in 
children with cancer (Zhang et al., 2016).
Finally, although most POLE and POLD1 driver mutations were restricted to specific tumor 
types with no previously apparent signature (Figure 2D), driver mutations were also 
observed in melanoma and lung cancer, both of which are malignancies with well-described 
extrinsic causes of hypermutation and distinct signatures. These data suggest that 
hypermutation can arise from a variety of sources in a single tumor histotype.
Novel Sub-clustering of Hypermutant Cancer Based on Substitution Signatures
To study the context and footprints of hypermutation across all cancers, we studied 217,086 
mutations in 1,521 hypermutant tumors representing to our knowledge the largest collection 
of hypermutated cancers to be considered together (Table S4; STAR Methods). We classified 
every mutation, whether coding or not, by its nucleotide context (i.e., bases immediately 
preceding and following it, forming a trinucleotide). Then, using the proportion of the 96 
possible trinucleotides, we performed unsupervised clustering of all 1,521 tumors. Taking 
Campbell et al.
Page 6
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the whole map into view, several known clusters emerged, including replication repair 
dominated tumors (left in Figure 3A), skin cancers with a distinctive UV-associated 
signature and two tobacco smoking clusters (right in Figure 3A).
The non-replication-repair-deficient cancers comprised four distinct clusters (labeled C4 to 
C8 on the right of Figure 3A). Viewing the overall landscape of these four clusters, they 
were roughly divided by already known mutagenic signatures (Alexandrov et al., 2013): 
tobacco smoke (C4 and C8), alkylating agents (C5), UV light (C6), and the APOBEC 
cytidine deamination signature (C7). These four mutagens “anchor” their clusters, which 
contain the expected cancer types (e.g., C6 has a strong core of UV-associated skin cancers). 
However, our results revealed that the major mutagens act more broadly than previously 
thought and that the canonical mutagen-tumor-type relationships do not always hold or are 
not exclusive. Thus, using an unsupervised approach on a broad range of cancers, we saw 
surprising similarity in signatures between different cancer types, pointing to broadly shared 
driving forces. These unexpected results can impact the management of patients with 
hypermutant cancer.
Lung cancer is one such example (Figure 3C). Of the most abundantly mutated lung cancers 
examined here (STAR Methods), only 40% harbor the signature for tobacco smoke. We find 
that 35% of hypermutated lung tumors have a high proportion of the UV signature (>40% 
contribution) and 5% have evidence for alkylating agent-associated mutations (n = 100). 
Furthermore, the UV-light-associated signature was almost exclusively observed in the 
squamous cell carcinoma subtype (Figures S4A–S4C). This observation was previously 
reported for three hypermutant lung squamous cell carcinomas (Campbell et al., 2016). 
Either these are all misdiagnosed skin cancers with metastasis to the lung, as has previously 
been suggested, or perhaps, when hypermutated they form a distinct group based on a 
nucleotide context that reflects their cell of origin.
Sarcomas – tumors not previously associated with hypermutation—also clustered in an 
unexpected way. Hypermutated sarcomas were primarily in cluster C6—a large proportion 
of cases (70%) had high levels of UV-associated mutations (Figure 3C). We validated this 
finding using available TCGA sarcoma data (exomes; Figure S4D), confirming that most 
hypermutated sarcomas bear the imprint of sun exposure. Cluster C6 is enriched for soft 
tissue angiosarcomas, which usually present on the face and scalp (Dossett et al., 2015), and 
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor, which can also arise subcutaneously. Consistent 
with this, the pathology records of TCGA sarcomas cancers with high UV-associated 
mutations were mostly superficial tumors. Thus, through this analysis, we have shown that 
UV light is associated with mutagenesis of mesenchymal cells, not just skin epithelia and 
that these sarcomas may result from sun exposure.
Alkylating agents, such as temozolomide, are known mutagens that leave a specific imprint 
on the genome. One of our clusters, C5, is dominated by brain cancers with overwhelming 
contribution of alkylating-associated mutations (average 72%). Unexpectedly, we observed 
similar signatures in skin cancers (14% of the top-most mutated skin cancers in this cohort), 
lung cancers, pancreatic cancers and leiomyosarcomas (Figure 3C). Hypermutation should 
therefore be considered in any relapsed cancers treated with alkylators, regardless of its cell 
Campbell et al.
Page 7
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 of origin and cancers with such signatures are inherently resistant to alkylators and should 
be treated with different chemotherapeutic regimens.
Strikingly, within the replication repair associated tumors, one sees at least three sharply 
delineated sub-clusters (C1, C2 and C3 in Figure 3B). The largest group, C2 (n = 523), is 
characterized by high microsatellite instability in a wide range of cancers (43 tumor types 
with >2 examples each). The middle-sized cluster, C3, which includes colorectal, uterine, 
and seven other tumor types, is made up of cancers that are almost completely microsatellite 
stable and POLE mutated (see Figure 1). The last DNA replication repair cluster, C1, 
includes many microsatellite stable brain cancers with mutated POLE. C1 is unique since it 
harbors a higher mutation burden (380.8 versus 277.5 Mut/Mb for C3 (p = 0.017) and 80.4 
Mut/Mb for C2 (p = 8.9E-5) and includes many children. Taken together, these results 
expand the spectrum of cancers associated with DNA replication repair and define three new 
subgroups—based on trinucleotide mutation context alone—with dramatic differences in 
microsatellite stability, polymerase deficiency, and age.
Novel Sub-clustering Identifies Tumors with Significant Differences in Evolutionary 
Dynamics and Survival
We then explored differences in evolutionary dynamics of each cluster to understand how 
mutational burden changed over time and if this was associated with survival. We observed 
three prominent models of mutation accumulation in hypermutant cancer (Figure 4A).
In the first model, one sees a slow and steady accumulation of mutations. In these cancers, 
which include clusters associated with smoking, UV light, or MMR, hypermutation is 
reached over an extended period. The second model of mutation accumulation was found 
only in POLE-driven cancers (C3). Cluster 3 tumors featured a mid-burst of mutations, 
presumably after the polymerase mutation was acquired, followed by a stable rise in 
mutation burden genome-wide (Figures 4A and 4B). Of note, in the third model of 
evolution, one sees a late and explosive burst of mutations. This unique pattern is a result of 
either secondary polymerase mutations on the background of an early mutation burst due to 
germline MMR-deficiency (C1) or treatment-induced replication repair deficiency (C5).
The replication repair-associated clusters (C1, C2, and C3), whose modes of evolution were 
different from one another (Figure 4B), were also associated with dramatic differences in 
patient survival (Figure 4C). Of note, these included multiple tumor types, suggesting that 
the survival differences are independent of the cancer's histotype and are instead determined 
by its mutagen exposure.
Mutational Signatures Mark the History of Cancer Development
These data suggested that the signatures of hypermutation vary depending on the order of 
mutagen exposure. For example, the trinucleotide pattern of C1 resembles those of gliomas 
in CMMRD (Shlien et al., 2015) and would suggest that these patients do in fact also harbor 
germline MMR mutations. If true, the overall trinucleotide composition of C1 represents an 
early constitutional MMR defect, followed by acquired secondary POLE, whereas tumors in 
C3 have acquired POLE followed by MMR. To test this directly, we sequenced a cohort for 
which the temporal order of mutation was known (Figure 5) from the international bMMRD 
Campbell et al.
Page 8
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 consortium (Table S5). This included (1) cancers with germline MMR mutations plus either 
POLE, POLD1 mutations, or neither, as secondary event; (2) cancers arising in carriers of 
germline POLE mutations; and (3) gliomas whose hypermutation was due to temozolomide 
treatment. We matched the nucleotide context of variants found in these childhood cancers, 
whose mutation order are known, to the clusters (Figure 3), which were derived from an 
unannotated cohort of mostly adult cancers. We did this using the average 96-trinucle-otide 
mutational profile of each group.
Indeed, germline MMRD with secondary polymerase mutations matched cluster C1 whereas 
the cancers from patients with germline MMRD, such as Lynch syndrome or CMMRD 
without secondary polymerase deficiency matched cluster C2 (Figures 5A and B). C3 
matched tumors from patients with germline POLE mutations.
The difference between C2 and C3 suggests that MMR deficiency emerges early in the 
former and late in the latter. This provides an explanation for the unexpected microsatellite 
stable phenotype observed in the POLE ultra-hypermutant, mismatch-repair-deficient tumors 
seen here (Figures 1D and 3B), and in other reports (Muzny et al., 2012; Kandoth et al., 
2013). In microsatellite stable tumors (C3), ultra-hypermutation is driven by an early 
polymerase proofreading defect, whereas mismatch repair, leading to microsatellite 
instability, appears later.
Next, we wanted to determine how the context of mutations changes over the course of each 
tumor's evolution. Using the established signature labels (Alexandrov et al., 2013), we 
ascribed potential causes to several signatures whose etiology is not well established. In 
cases with MMR and secondary POLD1, we observed an enrichment of signature 20. This 
was especially true for POLD1 L606M, a hotspot mutation in motif A of the polymerase 
domain. The mutation signature of POLD1 has not been previously described. Furthermore, 
signatures 14 and 15 were observed in all CMMRD (early) ultra-hypermutant cancers, with 
much higher contribution than all other signatures.
We confirmed that “signature 10” is associated with POLE exonuclease mutation. As 
expected, signature 10 was high in those tumors in which POLE mutated early, from cluster 
C3 (e.g., germline POLE), and low in the late POLE tumors, seen in C1.
It was clear that many hypermutant tumors present with a mix of signatures due to differing 
mutational histories. To separate out early and late signatures, we performed subclonal 
analysis (STAR Methods). First, signature 10, which is associated with POLE mutations, 
was high in those tumors in which POLE mutated early, cluster C3 (e.g., germline POLE, 
Figure 5B, second line, and Figure 5C) and low in the late POLE tumors, cluster C1 (Figure 
5B, first line, and Figure 5D). Similarly, high-depth sequencing enabled us to detect 
subclones in multiple other cancers. For example, we observed late-arising polymerase 
deficiency in a lung cancer, on the background of smoking-associated mutations (Figure 5E), 
and the late emergence of the treatment-associated alkylating agent signature in a skin 
cancer that is otherwise dominated by the UV light signature (Figure 5F).
Campbell et al.
Page 9
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Tumor Mutational Signatures Impact the Management of Inherited Replication Repair 
Deficiency Patients
Finally, we tested whether somatic mutation burden combined with signatures—determined 
by tumor-only panel sequencing—could reveal a germline cancer predisposition syndrome. 
We performed signature analysis on all ultra-hypermutant pediatric cancers, incorporating 
clinical genetic information where available. As expected, all pediatric ultra-hypermutant 
cancers harbored mutations in MMR and/or DNA polymerases. Strikingly, a strong 
replication repair signature was observed in all tumors from patients with confirmed genetic 
diagnosis of germline MMR or POLE mutations (Figure S5A). The only pediatric glioma 
without this signature had the alkylator signature (suggesting that the hypermutation was 
treatment induced, as seen in adults). Three tumors exhibited a small but significant 
alkylator signature. These were later found to be recurrent gliomas from CMMRD children 
whose treatment included temozolomide. In all cases, the initial biopsy did not reveal the 
alkylator signature, which confirms the ability of mutational signatures to determine the 
natural history of cancer. These observations were also observed in hypermutant tumors with 
a lower burden (Figure S5B).
Having verified the clinical utility of tumor-only sequencing—combined with mutation 
burden and this novel classification sys-tem—we contacted physicians whose patients' 
tumors were ultra-hypermutant (by the panel, Figure 6A). Our clinical workflow used the 
tumor's mutational burden (Figure 1), the correct classification of drivers (Figure 2), together 
with the identification of early signatures that could be traced to the germline (Figure 4). 
Using this combined signal, we determined which patients were at risk for a germline 
replication repair deficiency. Of 15 individuals for whom our analysis suggested an early 
replication repair defect, all were found to harbor germline mutation in one of the 
corresponding genes (100%) (Figure 6B). Importantly, these patients and family members 
were put on a surveillance protocol for early tumor detection (Tabori et al., 2017), and for 9 
in 15 patients, treatment was changed to immune checkpoint inhibitors, which we have 
previously shown can result in a clinically significant response (Bouffet et al., 2016).
Discussion
Through these analyses a comprehensive landscape of hypermutation across cancer 
emerged, revealing novel drivers and subgroups whose etiology and timing will be of 
immediate clinical relevance to patients and their families. By following the mutational 
imprints left in the cancer genome, one can uncover early (germline) and late (treatment-
related) drivers and processes.
We found hypermutation in ∼1 in 20 childhood and 1 in 6 adult cancers. Of these, we found 
enrichment for replication repair deficiency and continuous long-term exposure to genotoxic 
agents, which can pinpoint tumors for immune checkpoint inhibition. However, for recurrent 
tumors, the treatment itself may be the primary cause of hypermutation. Exposure to 
chemotherapies such as alkylators or thiopurines can lead to replication repair (Nguyen et 
al., 2014; Swann et al., 1996). These recurrent hypermutant cancers will be resistant to 
chemotherapy and other agents, due to an accelerated evolution rate and subsequently an 
increased ability to inactivate genes that are required for cytotoxicity (Swann et al., 1996). 
Campbell et al.
Page 10
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Therefore, defining mutational load, thresholds, and signatures could be used to avoid 
unnecessary treatment, and the use of targeted or immune-based treatments (Topalian et al., 
2016).
Given the new-found prevalence of replication repair deficiency related hypermutation 
across tumor types, correctly identifying drivers has become extremely important. Our 
method for separating the drivers from the many passengers—the in vivo human 
mutagenesis screen—is a robust way of measuring functional consequence of putative 
mutators (more so than conservation analysis or impact predictors). This more than doubled 
the number of POLE and POLD1 driver mutations. Just as importantly, it identified residues 
for which only certain amino acid changes were pathogenic. In addition, other sites were 
always spared from mutation, likely due to their importance to the cell. Mutations in POLE 
and POLD1 have only recently been described (Esteban-Jurado et al., 2017; Shinbrot et al., 
2014), thus our method will be useful for the proper clinical classification. Further research 
and clinical follow-up are required to fully understand why some mutations in the 
exonuclease domain have weak mutagenic effects, yet occasionally mutations in the 
polymerase domain can be associated with hypermutation and putative loss of proofreading 
ability. Importantly, a similar approach may lead to novel insights and clinical applications 
in other DNA repair genes, especially for those with a unique signature (Scarpa et al., 2017).
Considering the size of the genome, many of the somatic mutations in hypermutant cancers 
will likely have no functional consequence. Despite the high amount of noise, the 
“information content” and ability to infer tumor evolution from the passengers in a 
hypermutant tumor may be superior to that of a non-hypermutated cancer. As seen here, 
these passengers (i.e., the “noise”), considered together, bear the imprint of specific 
signatures that can differentiate clinically relevant subgroups (Figure 3).
These signatures also helped to untangle remaining questions about the biological processes 
at work in hypermutant cancers. For example, why are POLE replication repair ultra-
hypermutant cancers microsatellite stable? These data suggest that such tumors (i.e., C1 and 
C3) maintain microsatellite stability because their mismatch repair proficiency is lost late 
(C3), or it is lost when there is insufficient time to accumulate high numbers of insertions or 
deletions, which are a feature of mismatch-repair-driven cancers of adulthood (C2). 
Moreover, the signatures uncovered new tumor types whose primary mutagen was UV light. 
These cancers, such as squamous cell carcinomas of the lung may have originated from 
metastastic skin cancers, or from other epithelioid stem cells that harbor the signature. 
Importantly, different mechanisms of carcinogenesis may produce similar patterns.
We can now study the differing routes tumors took to reach hypermutation. These have clear 
survival implications and can help to tailor therapy, both with respect to which drugs to take 
but also which to avoid. Patients whose cancers display an early burst of hypermutation, 
such as those that are POLE-driven, have improved survival. Perhaps this is because their 
tumors reached a threshold of mutational burden early and are then less efficient and more 
responsive to therapy (Figure 4). In contrast, late-arising signatures of hypermutation often 
mark aggressive cancers or late-acquired resistance to chemotherapies (Figure 4). We 
Campbell et al.
Page 11
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 appreciate that in rare cases where the relative abundance of signatures are equal, there may 
be ambiguity in determination of chronological order.
Finally, in replication repair deficiency, one can use these signatures to trace the drivers to 
the germline. The cancer genome becomes a powerful new diagnostic aid for underlying 
germline susceptibility. For instance, if a young patient is found to have a hypermutant 
tumor with a signature similar to C1 (Figure 3), their family should be offered genetic 
counseling and testing for CMMRD, an underdiagnosed syndrome without clear warning 
signs (Amayiri et al., 2016; Durno et al., 2015). This is important to ensure surveillance and 
treatment options are appropriately customized.
In summary, the analysis of tumor samples from 81,337 children and adults revealed novel 
subgroups. These form a new taxonomic tree of hypermutant cancers defined by the type 
and order of their exposure to mutagens. Within the branches of this tree, tumors are 
organized by their shared evolutionary history, which are marked by select true driver 
mutations and new signatures. In some patients, these can be traced back to the germline. 
Knowledge of a hypermutant tumor's past yields information that can be acted on in the 
present day, as an aid in diagnosis, a predictor of prognosis, or as an instrument for 
determining rational therapeutic approaches.
Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper and include the following:
Contact for Reagent and Resource Sharing
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be 
fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Adam Shlien (adam.shlien@sickkids.ca).
Experimental Model and Subject Details
Patient and sample collection for FoundationOne Panel Sequencing
Tumor samples for FoundationOne Panel Sequencing were collected as previously described 
(Frampton et al., 2013). The sex ratios for each tumor-type was similar to previous reports, 
with an overall female:male ratio of 55:45 among all FoundationOne patients whose tumor 
samples are described in this study.
Patient and sample collection for whole genome sequencing, exome sequencing and KiCS 
panel sequencing
A cohort of germline replication-repair deficient patients with known clinical history was 
collected as described previously (Shlien et al., 2015). In brief, patients were registered as a 
part of the International Biallelic Mismatch Repair Consortium, which includes multiple 
centers worldwide. For further information on The International Replication Repair 
Deficiency Consortium, see http://www.sickkids.ca/MMRD/index.html. Following 
Institutional Research Ethics Board approval, all data were centralized in the Division of 
Haematology/Oncology at The Hospital for Sick Children (SickKids). Consent forms were 
obtained from the parents or guardians, or from the patients, where applicable. Family 
history, demographic and clinical data were obtained from the responsible physician and/or 
Campbell et al.
Page 12
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 genetic counselor at the corresponding centers. Tumor and blood samples were collected 
from the SickKids tumor bank. Detailed information on the SickKids Cancer Sequencing 
Program, KiCS, is available at https://www.kicsprogram.com. The diagnosis of a replication 
repair deficiency-related cancer predisposition syndrome was made when a germline 
biallelic mutation in any of the four MMR genes (MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PMS2) or a driver 
mutation in POLE, was confirmed by sequencing in a clinically approved laboratory. The 
sequencing of temozolomide-treated tumors was previously described (van Thuijl et al., 
2015).
Method Details
FoundationOne panel sequencing
FoundationOne Panel sequencing was performed for 81,337 tumors as previously described 
(Frampton et al., 2013). In brief, exonic hybridization capture of 315 cancer-related genes 
was applied to a minimum of 50 ng of DNA extracted from formalin-fixed paraffin-
embedded clinical cancer specimens. Pathologic diagnosis of each case was confirmed by 
review of hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stained slides and samples were excluded if found 
to contain < 20% tumor cells. Libraries were sequenced to high uniform median coverage (> 
500×) and assessed for base substitutions, copy number alterations, and gene fusions/
rearrangements. For the purposes of the findings described in this study pediatric was 
defined as < 25 years of age.
Exome sequencing
High-throughput sequencing, read mapping and identification of mutations was performed at 
the Center for Applied Genomics at the Hospital for Sick Children, as previously described 
(Shlien et al., 2015). Briefly, tumor and matched blood derived DNA were run using 
Agilent's exome enrichment kit (Sure Select V4/V5; with > 50% of baits above 25× 
coverage), on an Illumina HiSeq2500. Base calls and intensities from the Illumina HiSeq 
2500 were processed into FASTQ files using CASAVA and/or HAS. The paired-end FASTQ 
files were aligned to UCSC's hg19 GRCh37 with BWA. Aligned reads were realigned for 
known insertion/deletion events using SRMA and/or GATK. Base quality scores were 
recalibrated using the Genome Analysis Toolkit26 (v1.1-28). Somatic substitutions were 
identified using MuTect (v1.1.4). Mutations were then filtered against common single-
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) found in dbSNP (v132), the 1000 Genomes Project (Feb 
2012), a 69-sample Complete Genomics dataset, and the Exome Sequencing Project (v6500) 
and the ExAc database.
Whole genome sequencing
Whole genome sequencing was performed at The Centre for Applied Genomics on an 
Illumina HiSeq 2500 or Illumina HiseqX at mean coverage > = 30. Read alignment and 
variant calling/filtering were performed as described above for exome sequencing.
KiCS panel sequencing
The SickKids Cancer Sequencing (KiCS) gene panel utilizes the Agilent Sure Select capture 
kit technology, targeting 15,000 exons across 880 genes. Enriched libraries were prepared 
Campbell et al.
Page 13
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 from both tumor DNA and matched normal (blood or skin) and sequenced on Illumina 
HiSeq2500 sequencers running in rapid mode producing paired end 100 base reads. Reads 
were aligned with BWA-MEM according to GATK best practices with coverage metrics 
meeting greater than 700× mean coverage, with > = 98.5% of bases above 50×, > = 95% of 
bases above 200× coverage, and > = 75% of bases above 500× coverage. Substitution 
mutations were called using MuTect, with variants called above 50× coverage in tumor and 
normal. We achieved > 95% sensitivity and specificity for variants above 5% allele 
frequency.
Clinical genetic information collection for ultra-hypermutant pediatric cancers
Patients with FoundationOne panel results and who were concurrently enrolled in the 
International Biallelic Mismatch Repair Deficiency Consortium underwent germline 
sequencing services in accordance with the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments 
(CLIA) program standards, following a rigorous consent process and genetic counselling 
consultation. Clinical diagnoses of a replication repair deficiency associated syndrome were 
made based on the presence of inherited predicted pathogenic mutations in MMR and 
polymerase genes. Physicians involved in patient care were notified of the diagnosis.
POLE exonuclease excision rate assay
Excision rate constants were measured as described (Zahurancik et al., 2014). Briefly, a pre-
incubated solution of Pol e (100 nM) and 5′-32P-labeled DNA substrate (20 nM) was rapidly 
mixed with Mg2+ (8 mM) in reaction buffer at 37°C. After various incubation times, the 
reaction was quenched with the addition of EDTA. The excision rate constants for Polε 
wild-type and L424V were measured using a rapid chemical quench-flow apparatus. Product 
concentration was plotted versus time and fit to a single-exponential equation, [product] = 
Aexp(-kexot), to yield the excision rate constant, kexo.
Quantification and Statistical Analysis
Determination of hypermutation threshold
To determine a threshold of hypermutation in human cancer, a segmented linear regression 
analysis or “broken-stick analysis” was performed on the mutation burdens from the 
pediatric (n = 2,885) and adult (n = 78,452) FoundationOne panel cohorts. Briefly, using the 
R package Segmented, an iterative process was used to determine segment breakpoints at 
which a statistically significant change in the slope of adjacent regression lines occurred 
(Muggeo, 2003). For the pediatric cohort, the first such breakpoint at which a statistically 
significant change occurred, accompanied by a visually observed uptick in the slope of the 
regression line, was at 9.91 mut/Mb. For the adult cohort, a corresponding change occurred 
at 9 mut/Mb. This threshold was rounded up to 10 mut/Mb to account for statistical 
uncertainty and for the purposes of simplicity.
Microsatellite instability analysis
To determine MSI status, 114 intronic homopolymer repeat loci with adequate coverage on 
the FoundationOne panel are analyzed for length variability and compiled into an overall 
MSI score via principal components analysis (PCA). Among the 1,897 microsatellites, the 
Campbell et al.
Page 14
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 114 that maximized variability between samples were chosen. Each chosen locus was 
intronic and had hg19 reference repeat length of 10-20bp. This range of repeat lengths was 
selected such that the microsatellites are long enough to produce a high rate of DNA 
polymerase slippage, while short enough such that they are well within the 49bp read length 
of NGS to facilitate alignment to the human reference genome. A detailed description can be 
found at Chalmers et al., (2017).
Detection of POLE and POLD1 driver mutations
To identify polymerase mutations associated with hypermutation we built a model based on 
the following criteria: 1) Tumors harboring the variant must be hypermutant at a 
conservative cut-off of 50 mutations/mb. This number was selected since most POLE mutant 
tumors typically exceed 100 mut/mb (Shinbrot et al., 2014); 2) Variants found in 
hypermutant tumors must not co-occur with an existing known driver mutations in the same 
tumor; 3) Variants that were found both in hypermutant and lowly mutated tumors (< 10 
mut/mb) were excluded. The burden of these samples is shown in Figure S1E; and 4) 
Variants must occur in a minimum of 2 hypermutant tumors. Variant allele fraction and 
tumor purity were also considered, as previously described (Frampton et al., 2013).
Unsupervised clustering and signature analysis
A cohort of hypermutant samples was selected for hierarchal clustering and signature 
analysis by the following criteria.
Exclusion for all:
1.
< 50 exonic mutations detected in the FoundationOne panel.
Inclusion for adults (> 25 years):
1.
Any colon or uterine with MSI-H
2.
Top 100 most-mutated lung cancers
3.
Top 100 most-mutated skin cancers
4.
For all other tumors, > 50 Mut/Mb and/or > 2 standard deviations above mean 
for that tumor type (provided there were > 50 tumors of that type)
Inclusion for children:
1.
Any tumor with > 50 exonic mutations.
This yielded a total of 1,521 tumors (1,491 adult and 30 pediatric) for clustering analysis.
The proportion of mutations corresponding to each of 96 trinucleotide contexts was 
determined for each of the 1,521 samples selected above using the pyrimidine-converted 
single base substitution and the corresponding tri-nucleotide sequence context (i.e., 
reference base at mutation position and its 5′ and 3′ neighbors). Unsupervised hierarchical 
clustering of the hypermutant cohort by trinucleotide context was performed using the diana 
clustering method.
Campbell et al.
Page 15
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The R package DeConstructSigs was used to determine the proportion of COSMIC 
signatures as defined by Alexandrov et al. (2013) (http://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/cancergenome/
assets/signatures_probabilities.txt) (Rosenthal et al., 2016).
Validation of Signature 7 in sarcomas using the TCGA database
Somatic substitution calls (MuTect2) were obtained from 103 TCGA adult sarcoma exome 
samples, with a minimum of 50 substitutions. These samples were analyzed using 
deconstructSigs as described above. Five tumors were found to be hypermutant (> 10 
Mut/Mb) and have significant contributions from Signature 7 (> 0.5). Examination of the 
pathology reports of these tumors revealed all 5 to be located superficially (subcutaneous 
and/or extending into the dermis).
Subclonal analysis
Tumor subclones (early and late) were determined using the R package SciClone (Miller et 
al., 2014) Variant allele fraction and percentage of alternate reads were used to determine the 
order of mutational events. Mutations with variant allele fraction greater than 0.45 were 
excluded from analysis to filter out germline mutations and somatic mutations in regions of 
copy number gain. For the determination of early and late mutations, clusters were limited to 
6. Subclonal mutational signatures were then determined using deconstructSigs as described 
above (Rosenthal et al., 2016).
Data and Software Availability
Whole genome and/or whole exome sequencing data for tumors from patients with germline 
replication repair deficiency have been deposited in the European Genome Phenome Archive 
under study accession number EGAS00001001112.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Authors 
Brittany B. Campbell1,2,3,49, Nicholas Light1,3,49, David Fabrizio4, Matthew 
Zatzman1,48, Fabio Fuligni1, Richard de Borja1, Scott Davidson1,47, Melissa 
Edwards1, Julia A. Elvin4, Karl P
. Hodel5, Walter J. Zahurancik6,7, Zucai Suo6,7, 
Tatiana Lipman1, Katharina Wimmer8, Christian P
. Kratz9, Daniel C. Bowers10,11, 
Theodore W. Laetsch10,11, Gavin P
. Dunn12, Tanner M. Johanns12,13, Matthew R. 
Grimmer13, Ivan V. Smirnov14,15, Valérie Larouche16, David Samuel17, Annika 
Bronsema18, Michael Osborn19, Duncan Stearns20, Pichai Raman21,22, Kristina A. 
Cole21,22, Phillip B. Storm23, Michal Yalon24, Enrico Opocher25, Gary Mason26, 
Gregory A. Thomas27, Magnus Sabel28, Ben George29, David S. Ziegler30,31, Scott 
Lindhorst32, Vanan Magimairajan Issai33, Shlomi Constantini34, Helen Toledano34, 
Ronit Elhasid37, Roula Farah38, Rina Dvir35,36, Peter Dirks39, Annie Huang2,40,48, 
Melissa A. Galati1, Jiil Chung1, Vijay Ramaswamy40, Meredith S. Irwin40, Melyssa 
Aronson41, Carol Durno41,42, Michael D. Taylor39, Gideon Rechavi45, John M. 
Campbell et al.
Page 16
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Maris21,22, Eric Bouffet40, Cynthia Hawkins2, Joseph F
. Costello14, M. Stephen 
Meyn43,44, Zachary F
. Pursell5, David Malkin40,46, Uri Tabori1,2,40,50,*, and Adam 
Shlien1,47,48,50,51,*
Affiliations
1Program in Genetics and Genome Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, 
ON, Canada
2The Arthur and Sonia Labatt Brain Tumour Research Centre, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, Toronto, ON, Canada
3Institute of Medical Science, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
ON, Canada
4Foundation Medicine, Inc., Cambridge, MA, USA
5Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Tulane Cancer Center, Tulane 
University School of Medicine, New Orleans, LA, USA
6The Ohio State Biochemistry Program, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, 
USA
7Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, The Ohio State University, Columbus, 
OH, USA
8Division of Human Genetics, Medical University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria
9Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, 
Germany
10Departmentof Pediatrics and Harold C. Simmons Comprehensive Cancer Center, 
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA
11Pauline Allen Gill Center for Cancer and Blood Disorders, Children's Health, 
Dallas, TX, USA
12Department of Neurological Surgery, Center for Human Immunology and 
Immunotherapy Programs, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
MO, USA
13Division of Oncology, Department of Medicine, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA
14Department of Neurological Surgery, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA, USA
15Division of Neuroepidemiology, Department of Neurological Surgery, University of 
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA
16Department of Pediatrics, Centre Mère-enfant Soleil du CHU de Québec, CRCHU 
de Qué bec, Université Laval, Quebec City, QC, Canada
17Department of Hematology-Oncology, Valley Children's Hospital, Madera, CA, 
USA
Campbell et al.
Page 17
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 18Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, University Medical Center 
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany
19Department of Haematology and Oncology, Women's and Children's Hospital, 
North Adelaide, SA, Australia
20Department of Pediatrics-Hematology and Oncology, UH Rainbow Babies and 
Children's Hospital, Cleveland, OH, USA
21Division of Oncology and Center for Childhood Cancer Research, Children's 
Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA
22Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 
USA
23Division of Neurosurgery, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, 
USA
24Department of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Sheba Medical Center, Tel 
Hashomer, Israel
25Pediatric Oncology & Hematology, Azienda Ospedaliera-Universitá degli Studi di 
Padova, Via Giustiniani n.1, Padova, Italy
26Department of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh 
of UPMC, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
27Division of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Oregon Health & Science University, 
Portland, OR, USA
28Department of Pediatrics, Institute of Clinical Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy, 
University of Gothenburg & Queen Silvia Children's Hospital, Sahlgrenska 
University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden
29Division of Hematology and Oncology, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, 
WI, USA
30Kids Cancer Centre, Sydney Children's Hospital, Randwick, NSW, Australia
31Children's Cancer Institute, Lowy Cancer Research Centre, University of New 
South Wales, Randwick, NSW, Australia
32Neuro-Oncology, Department of Neurosurgery, and Department of Medicine, 
Division of Hematology/Medical Oncology, Medical University of South Carolina, 
Charleston, SC, USA
33Department of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Cancer Care Manitoba; Research 
Institute in Oncology and Hematology (RIOH), University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, 
MB, Canada
34Department of Pediatric Neurosurgery, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv 
University, Tel Aviv, Israel
35Department of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Schneider Children's Medical 
Center of Israel, Petach Tikva, Israel
Campbell et al.
Page 18
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 36Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel
37Department of Hematology-Oncology, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, 
Israel
38Department of Pediatrics, Saint George Hospital University Medical Center, Beirut, 
Lebanon
39Department of Neurosurgery, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada
40Division of Hematology/Oncology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, 
Canada
41Zane Cohen Centre for Digestive Diseases, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON, 
Canada
42Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, Toronto, ON, Canada
43Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
44Center for Human Genomics and Precision Medicine, University of Wisconsin, 
Madison, WI, USA
45Cancer Research Center and Wohl Institute for Translational Medicine, Sheba 
Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Ramat Gan, Israel
46Department of Pediatrics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
47Department of Paediatric Laboratory Medicine, The Hospital for Sick Children, 
Toronto, ON, Canada
48Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, ON, Canada
Acknowledgments
The SickKids Cancer Sequencing (KiCS) program is supported by the Garron Family Cancer Centre with funds 
from the SickKids Foundation. This research is supported by LivWise, Meagan's Walk (MW-2014-10), the CIHR 
Joint Canada-Israel Health Research Program (MOP – 137899), a Stand Up to Cancer (SU2C) – Bristol-Myers 
Squibb Catalyst Research (SU2C-AACR-CT-07-17), and a SU2C – St. Baldrick's Pediatric Dream Team 
Translational Research Grant (SU2C-AACR-DT1113). SU2C is a program of the Entertainment Industry 
Foundation administered by the AACR. B.B.C. is supported by the Government of Ontario, the Frank Fletcher 
Memorial Fund, and SickKids Research Training Competition. N.L. is supported by the University of Toronto 
MD/PhD program, the McLaughlin Centre, and a CIHR MD/PhD Studentship. D.F. and J.A.E. are employees and 
stockholders of Foundation Medicine. G.M. is an employee of Janssen Pharmaceutical Companies of Johnson & 
Johnson.
References
Akbani R, Akdemir KC, Aksoy BA, Albert M, Ally A, Amin SB, Arachchi H, Arora A, Auman JT, 
Ayala B, et al. Cancer Genome Atlas Network. Genomic classification classification of cutaneous 
melanoma. Cell. 2015; 161:1681–1696. [PubMed: 26091043] 
Albertson TM, Ogawa M, Bugni JM, Hays LE, Chen Y, Wang Y, Treuting PM, Heddle JA, Goldsby 
RE, Preston BD. DNA polymerase epsilon and delta proofreading suppress discrete mutator and 
cancer phenotypes in mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2009; 106:17101–17104. [PubMed: 
19805137] 
Campbell et al.
Page 19
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Alexandrov LB, Nik-Zainal S, Wedge DC, Aparicio SA, Behjati S, Biankin AV, Bignell GR, Bolli N, 
Borg A, Børresen-Dale AL, et al. Australian Pancreatic Cancer Genome Initiative; ICGC Breast 
Cancer Consortium; ICGC MMML-Seq Consortium; ICGC PedBrain. Signatures of mutational 
processes in human cancer. Nature. 2013; 500:415–421. [PubMed: 23945592] 
Amayiri N, Tabori U, Campbell B, Bakry D, Aronson M, Durno C, Rakopoulos P, Malkin D, 
Qaddoumi I, Musharbash A, et al. BMMRD Consortium. High frequency of mismatch repair 
deficiency among pediatric high grade gliomas in Jordan. Int J Cancer. 2016; 138:380–385. 
[PubMed: 26293621] 
Bouffet E, Larouche V, Campbell BB, Merico D, de Borja R, Aronson M, Durno C, Krueger J, Cabric 
V, Ramaswamy V, et al. Immune checkpoint inhibition for hypermutant glioblastoma multiforme 
resulting from germline biallelic mismatch repair deficiency. J Clin Oncol. 2016; 34:2206–2211. 
[PubMed: 27001570] 
Campbell JD, Alexandrov A, Kim J, Wala J, Berger AH, Pedamallu CS, Shukla SA, Guo G, Brooks 
AN, Murray BA, et al. Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network. Distinct patterns of somatic 
genome alterations in lung adenocarcinomas and squamous cell carcinomas. Nat Genet. 2016; 
48:607–616. [PubMed: 27158780] 
Chalmers ZR, Connelly CF, Fabrizio D, Gay L, Ali SM, Ennis R, Schrock A, Campbell B, Shlien A, 
Chmielecki J, et al. Analysis of 100,000 human cancer genomes reveals the landscape of tumor 
mutational burden. Genome Med. 2017; 9:34. [PubMed: 28420421] 
Daee DL, Mertz TM, Shcherbakova PV. A cancer-associated DNA polymerase delta variant modeled 
in yeast causes a catastrophic increase in genomic instability. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2010; 
107:157–162. [PubMed: 19966286] 
Diaz LA Jr, Le DT. PD-1 blockade in tumors with mismatch-repair deficiency. N Engl J Med. 2015; 
373:1979.
Dossett LA, Harrington M, Cruse CW, Gonzalez RJ. Cutaneous angiosarcoma. Curr Probl Cancer. 
2015; 39:258–263. [PubMed: 26276214] 
Durno CA, Sherman PM, Aronson M, Malkin D, Hawkins C, Bakry D, Bouffet E, Gallinger S, Pollett 
A, Campbell B, Tabori U. International BMMRD Consortium. Phenotypic and genotypic 
characterisation of biallelic mismatch repair deficiency (BMMR-D) syndrome. Eur J Cancer. 2015; 
51:977–983. [PubMed: 25883011] 
Esteban-Jurado C, Giménez-Zaragoza D, Muñoz J, Franch-Expósito S, Álvarez-Barona M, Ocaña T, 
Cuatrecasas M, Carballal S, López-Cerón M, Marti-Solano M, et al. POLE and POLD1 screening 
in 155 patients with multiple polyps and early-onset colorectal cancer. Oncotarget. 2017; 8:26732–
26743. [PubMed: 28423643] 
Frampton GM, Fichtenholtz A, Otto GA, Wang K, Downing SR, He J, Schnall-Levin M, White J, 
Sanford EM, An P, et al. Development and validation of a clinical cancer genomic profiling test 
based on massively parallel DNA sequencing. Nat Biotechnol. 2013; 31:1023–1031. [PubMed: 
24142049] 
Govindan R, Ding L, Griffith M, Subramanian J, Dees ND, Kanchi KL, Maher CA, Fulton R, Fulton 
L, Wallis J, et al. Genomic landscape of non-small cell lung cancer in smokers and never-smokers. 
Cell. 2012; 150:1121–1134. [PubMed: 22980976] 
Herr AJ, Ogawa M, Lawrence NA, Williams LN, Eggington JM, Singh M, Smith RA, Preston BD. 
Mutator suppression and escape from replication error-induced extinction in yeast. PLoS Genet. 
2011; 7:e1002282. [PubMed: 22022273] 
Johanns TM, Miller CA, Dorward IG, Tsien C, Chang E, Perry A, Uppaluri R, Ferguson C, Schmidt 
RE, Dahiya S, et al. Immunogenomics of hypermutated glioblastoma: a patient with germline 
POLE deficiency treated with checkpoint blockade immunotherapy. Cancer Discov. 2016; 6:1230–
1236. [PubMed: 27683556] 
Kandoth C, Schultz N, Cherniack AD, Akbani R, Liu Y, Shen H, Robertson AG, Pashtan I, Shen R, 
Benz CC, et al. Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network. Integrated genomic characterization of 
endometrial carcinoma. Nature. 2013; 497:67–73. [PubMed: 23636398] 
Kane DP, Shcherbakova PV. A common cancer-associated DNA polymerase ε mutation causes an 
exceptionally strong mutator phenotype, indicating fidelity defects distinct from loss of 
proofreading. Cancer Res. 2014; 74:1895–1901. [PubMed: 24525744] 
Campbell et al.
Page 20
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Le DT, Uram JN, Wang H, Bartlett BR, Kemberling H, Eyring AD, Skora AD, Luber BS, Azad NS, 
Laheru D, et al. PD-1 blockade in tumors with mismatch-repair deficiency. N Engl J Med. 2015; 
372:2509–2520. [PubMed: 26028255] 
Lek M, Karczewski KJ, Minikel EV, Samocha KE, Banks E, Fennell T, O'Donnell-Luria AH, Ware JS, 
Hill AJ, Cummings BB, et al. Exome Aggregation Consortium. Analysis of protein-coding genetic 
variation in 60,706 humans. Nature. 2016; 536:285–291. [PubMed: 27535533] 
Li, H. Aligning sequence reads, clone sequences and assembly contigs with BWA-MEM. arXiv, arXiv:
1303.3997. 2013. https://arxiv.org/abs/1303.3997
Miller CA, White BS, Dees ND, Griffith M, Welch JS, Griffith OL, Vij R, Tomasson MH, Graubert 
TA, Walter MJ, et al. SciClone: inferring clonal architecture and tracking the spatial and temporal 
patterns of tumor evolution. PLoS Comput Biol. 2014; 10:e1003665. [PubMed: 25102416] 
Morganella S, Alexandrov LB, Glodzik D, Zou X, Davies H, Staaf J, Sieuwerts AM, Brinkman AB, 
Martin S, Ramakrishna M, et al. The topography of mutational processes in breast cancer 
genomes. Nat Commun. 2016; 7:11383. [PubMed: 27136393] 
Muggeo VMR. Estimating regression models with unknown breakpoints. Stat Med. 2003; 22:3055–
3071. [PubMed: 12973787] 
Muzny DM, Bainbridge MN, Chang K, Dinh HH, Drummond JA, Fowler G, Kovar CL, Lewis LR, 
Morgan MB, Newsham IF, et al. Cancer Genome Atlas Network. Comprehensive molecular 
characterization of human colon and rectal cancer. Nature. 2012; 487:330–337. [PubMed: 
22810696] 
Nguyen SA, Stechishin OD, Luchman HA, Lun XQ, Senger DL, Robbins SM, Cairncross JG, Weiss S. 
Novel MSH6 mutations in treatment-naïve glioblastoma and anaplastic oligodendroglioma 
contribute to temozolomide resistance independently of MGMT promoter methylation. Clin 
Cancer Res. 2014; 20:4894–4903. [PubMed: 25078279] 
Nik-Zainal S, Davies H, Staaf J, Ramakrishna M, Glodzik D, Zou X, Martincorena I, Alexandrov LB, 
Martin S, Wedge DC, et al. Landscape of somatic mutations in 560 breast cancer whole-genome 
sequences. Nature. 2016; 534:47–54. [PubMed: 27135926] 
Pfeifer GP, You YH, Besaratinia A. Mutations induced by ultraviolet light. Mutat Res. 2005; 571:19–
31. [PubMed: 15748635] 
Pleasance ED, Stephens PJ, O'Meara S, McBride DJ, Meynert A, Jones D, Lin ML, Beare D, Lau KW, 
Greenman C, et al. A small-cell lung cancer genome with complex signatures of tobacco exposure. 
Nature. 2010; 463:184–190. [PubMed: 20016488] 
Rizvi NA, Hellmann MD, Snyder A, Kvistborg P, Makarov V, Havel JJ, Lee W, Yuan J, Wong P, Ho 
TS, et al. Cancer immunology Mutational landscape determines sensitivity to PD-1 blockade in 
non-small cell lung cancer. Science. 2015; 348:124–128. [PubMed: 25765070] 
Roberts SA, Lawrence MS, Klimczak LJ, Grimm SA, Fargo D, Stojanov P, Kiezun A, Kryukov GV, 
Carter SL, Saksena G, et al. An APOBEC cytidine deaminase mutagenesis pattern is widespread 
in human cancers. Nat Genet. 2013; 45:970–976. [PubMed: 23852170] 
Rosenthal R, McGranahan N, Herrero J, Taylor BS, Swanton C. DeconstructSigs: delineating 
mutational processes in single tumors distinguishes DNA repair deficiencies and patterns of 
carcinoma evolution. Genome Biol. 2016; 17:31. [PubMed: 26899170] 
Sage E. Distribution and repair of photolesions in DNA: genetic consequences and the role of sequence 
context. Photochem Photobiol. 1993; 57:163–174. [PubMed: 8389052] 
Santin AD, Bellone S, Buza N, Choi J, Schwartz PE, Schlessinger J, Lifton RP. Regression of 
chemotherapy-resistant polymerase ε (POLE) ultra-mutated and MSH6 hyper-mutated 
endometrial tumors with nivolumab. Clin Cancer Res. 2016; 22:5682–5687. [PubMed: 27486176] 
Scarpa A, Chang DK, Nones K, Corbo V, Patch AM, Bailey P, Lawlor RT, Johns AL, Miller DK, 
Mafficini A, et al. Australian Pancreatic Cancer Genome Initiative. Whole-genome landscape of 
pancreatic neuroendocrine tumours. Nature. 2017; 543:65–71. [PubMed: 28199314] 
Shinbrot E, Henninger EE, Weinhold N, Covington KR, Göksenin AY, Schultz N, Chao H, 
Doddapaneni H, Muzny DM, Gibbs RA, et al. Exonuclease mutations in DNA polymerase epsilon 
reveal replication strand specific mutation patterns and human origins of replication. Genome Res. 
2014; 24:1740–1750. [PubMed: 25228659] 
Campbell et al.
Page 21
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Shlien A, Campbell BB, de Borja R, Alexandrov LB, Merico D, Wedge D, Van Loo P, Tarpey PS, 
Coupland P, Behjati S, et al. Biallelic Mismatch Repair Deficiency Consortium. Combined 
hereditary and somatic mutations of replication error repair genes result in rapid onset of ultra-
hypermutated cancers. Nat Genet. 2015; 47:257–262. [PubMed: 25642631] 
Snyder A, Makarov V, Merghoub T, Yuan J, Zaretsky JM, Desrichard A, Walsh LA, Postow MA, 
Wong P, Ho TS, et al. Genetic basis for clinical response to CTLA-4 blockade in melanoma. N 
Engl J Med. 2014; 371:2189–2199. [PubMed: 25409260] 
Stratton MR, Campbell PJ, Futreal PA. The cancer genome. Nature. 2009; 458:719–724. [PubMed: 
19360079] 
Swann PF, Waters TR, Moulton DC, Xu YZ, Zheng Q, Edwards M, Mace R. Role of postreplicative 
DNA mismatch repair in the cytotoxic action of thioguanine. Science. 1996; 273:1109–1111. 
[PubMed: 8688098] 
Tabori U, Hansford JR, Achatz MI, Kratz CP, Plon SE, Frebourg T, Brugières L. Clinical management 
and tumor surveillance recommendations of inherited mismatch repair deficiency in childhood. 
Clin Cancer Res. 2017; 23:e32–e37. [PubMed: 28572265] 
Tomasetti C, Li L, Vogelstein B. Stem cell divisions, somatic mutations, cancer etiology, and cancer 
prevention. Science. 2017; 355:1330–1334. [PubMed: 28336671] 
Topalian SL, Taube JM, Anders RA, Pardoll DM. Mechanism-driven biomarkers to guide immune 
checkpoint blockade in cancer therapy. Nat Rev Cancer. 2016; 16:275–287. [PubMed: 27079802] 
Van Allen EM, Miao D, Schilling B, Shukla SA, Blank C, Zimmer L, Sucker A, Hillen U, Foppen 
MHG, Goldinger SM, et al. Genomic correlates of response to CTLA-4 blockade in metastatic 
melanoma. Science. 2015; 350:207–211. [PubMed: 26359337] 
van Thuijl HF, Mazor T, Johnson BE, Fouse SD, Aihara K, Hong C, Malmström A, Hallbeck M, 
Heimans JJ, Kloezeman JJ, et al. Evolution of DNA repair defects during malignant progression of 
low-grade gliomas after temozolomide treatment. Acta Neuropathol. 2015; 129:597–607. 
[PubMed: 25724300] 
Weinstein JN, Akbani R, Broom BM, Wang W, Verhaak RG, McConkey D, Lerner S, Morgan M, 
Creighton CJ, Smith C, et al. Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network. Comprehensive molecular 
characterization of urothelial bladder carcinoma. Nature. 2014; 507:315–322. [PubMed: 
24476821] 
Zahurancik WJ, Klein SJ, Suo Z. Significant contribution of the 3′→5′ exonuclease activity to the 
high fidelity of nucleotide incorporation catalyzed by human DNA polymerase E. Nucleic Acids 
Res. 2014; 42:13853–13860. [PubMed: 25414327] 
Zhang J, Nichols KE, Downing JR. Germline mutations in predisposition genes in pediatric cancer. N 
Engl J Med. 2016; 374:1391.
Campbell et al.
Page 22
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Highlights
•
Mutation burden analysis reveals new drivers of hypermutation in POLE and 
POLD1
•
Timing of replication repair deficiency determines mutation signature 
composition
•
Germline replication repair deficiency identified from tumor-only sequencing
•
Mutation burden and signatures have value for screening, surveillance, and 
therapy
Campbell et al.
Page 23
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. The Landscape of Hypermutation across 81,337 Pediatric and Adult Cancers
(A) Mutation burden for 2,885 pediatric cancers. ≥ 10 mut/Mb = hypermutant; ≥ 100 
mut/Mb = ultra-hypermutant.
(B) Hypermutation pediatric cohort by tumor type. The pie chart depicts the proportion of 
tumors with mutations in replication repair genes (MSH2, MLH1, MSH6, PMS2 POLE, and 
POLD1).
(C) Mutation burden range for 78,452 adult tumors with breakdown by tumor type.
(D) Tumor types that show enrichment for MSI-MSI-H tumors cluster in the 10–100 
Mut/Mb range, while tumors with mismatch repair and polymerase proofreading in the same 
types are ultrahypermutant.
(E) Proportion of ultra-hypermutant, hypermutant, and lowly mutated tumors, and their 
correlation with MSI-H and MMR/POL mutations. GI, gastrointestinal; AML, acute 
myeloid leukemia; NBL, neuroblastoma; RMS, rhabdomyosarcoma; STS, soft tissue 
sarcoma; OS, osteosarcoma; EWS, Ewing sarcoma; WLMS, Wilm's tumor; RCC, renal cell 
carcinoma; NP&PNS, nasopharynx and paranasal sinuses undifferentiated carcinoma; and 
MM&MDS, mutiple myeloma and myelodysplastic syndrome.
See also Figures S1 and S2 and Table S1.
Campbell et al.
Page 24
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Characterization of Known and Novel POLE and POLD1 Drivers
(A) Examples of tumors with three or more POLE/POLD1 mutations. Other tumors found in 
the entire dataset harboring the same mutations shown below (gray bars represent individual 
tumors and their burden is shown on the y axis). No bars indicate no other tumors identified 
with this mutation. One clear driver emerges in each tumor.
(B) Landscape of drivers (top) and passengers (bottom) in POLE and POLD1. Green circles, 
previously known drivers; yellow circles, novel drivers, first described here.
(C) Codons in POLE with driver mutations, indicating whether they are sensitive to amino 
acid changes. Invariable codons are those at which only one amino acid change was 
detected. Insensitive codons are those in which the mutation burden was high, regardless of 
amino acid change. Sensitive codons are those in which certain amino acid changes would 
abrogate the mutator effect. Green, yellow, and red bars represent strong, moderate, and 
weak mutation burden phenotypes, respectively.
(D) All tumors harboring POLE and POLD1 mutations by tumor type. Green, POLE driver; 
yellow, POLD1 driver; and gray, passenger mutation.
See also Figure S3 and Tables S2 and S3.
Campbell et al.
Page 25
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Unsupervised Clustering by Trinucleotide Context Reveals Mutational Etiology of 
Hypermutant Tumors
(A) Top: Hierarchical clustering of 1,521 tumors by trinucleotide context reveals 8 major 
clusters. Middle: Disease type, MSI status. Bottom: Heatmap colored by proportion of 
mutations from each class of mutational signatures.
(B) Top: Range of tumors types found in clusters C1, C2, and C3, size of circle indicates 
number of tumors. Middle: Boxplots displaying mutation burden. Bottom: Proportion of 
tumors in each cluster that are MSI-high, POLE mutant, and arising in children, respectively.
(C) Average proportion of mutations attributed by 4 mutational signature classes, tobacco 
smoke (signature 4), alkylating agents (signature 11), UV Light (signature 7), and APOBEC 
(signatures 2 and 13). Color of circles indicates the cluster that tumors belong to; size 
indicates the number of tumors in this cluster and tumor type; and the y axis indicates the 
average proportion of mutations attributed to each signature.
See also Figure S4 and Table S4.
Campbell et al.
Page 26
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Clustering Identifies Tumors with Differences in Evolutionary Dynamics and Survival
(A) Histograms with number of single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) by variant allele fraction 
(VAF) in each of the 8 major clusters (Figure 3). Colors indicate the functional impact of a 
SNV.
(B) VAF versus median cumulative mutation burden plotted for each of the 3 replication 
repair clusters. C1 tumors exhibit an early burst of mutations (∼0.4 VAF) with a second burst 
of mutations later in tumor evolution (∼0.2 VAF). C3 tumors display a single burst of 
mutations ∼0.2 VAF, and C2 tumors exhibit a more gradual accumulation of mutations 
throughout their evolution.
(C) Kaplan-Meier plot of overall survival for tumors with mutational signatures consistent 
with clusters 1, 2, or 3. Cluster 3, n = 27. Cluster 2, n = 168. Cluster 1, n = 22. p < 0.0001.
Campbell et al.
Page 27
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Mutational Context in Hypermutant Tumors Determined by Timing and Etiology of 
Mutation
(A) Left: Average proportion of mutations by trinucleotide context in exomes with known 
germline status/treatment history. Right: Same, but from panel sequencing. Germline status 
and treatment history unknown. N indicates the number of tumor samples.
(B) Example mutational signatures in exomes from tumors with known germline status/
treatment history.
(C–F) Examples of subclonal mutational signatures determined from allelic read depth on 
panel sequencing data. (C) Subclonal mutational signatures in an adult colorectal carcinoma 
with somatic POLE mutation. (D) Subclonal mutational signatures in a pediatric 
glioblastoma. (E) Mutational signatures present in subclonal clusters of mutations in a lung 
adenocarcinoma. (F) Mutational signatures present in 3 subclonal clusters of mutations in 
skin melanoma.
See also Table S5.
Campbell et al.
Page 28
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. Confirmation of Cancer Predisposition Syndrome and Clinical Interventions following 
Tumor-Only Panel Sequencing
(A) Procedure for diagnosing cancer predisposition syndrome via tumor-only panel 
sequencing. Sequencing results with high-tumor-mutation burden, a driver mutation in a 
replication repair gene, and signatures of replication repair deficiency are specific for 
CMMRD. Clinical interventions include surveillance and immune checkpoint inhibition 
therapy for active tumors.
(B) Left: 15 patients for which only panel sequencing was performed prior to confirmation 
of predisposition syndrome diagnosis. Blue squares, signatures of MMR and the subsequent 
identification of a germline mutation in an MMR gene. Orange, same for POLE. Right: 
Example of a brain tumor found via surveillance. Bottom right: Colorectal cancer 
responding to anti-PD1 therapy after confirmation of germline MMR mutation.
See also Figure S5.
Campbell et al.
Page 29
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Campbell et al.
Page 30
Key Resources Table
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Chemicals, Peptides, and Recombinant Proteins
Catalytic PolE-N140 mutant (L424V)
This Paper
N/A
Catalytic PolE-N140 mutant (L424I)
This Paper
N/A
Deposited Data
TCGA database
NCI Genomics Data 
Commons
https://portal.gdc.cancer.gov/
ExAC database
Broad Institute
http://exac.broadinstitute.org/
dbSNP database (v132)
NCBI
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/SNP/
1000 Genomes database
The International Genome 
Sample Resource
http://www.internationalgenome.org/data
Whole genome/exome sequencing data
https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ega/
EGAS00001000579; EGAS00001001112
Oligonucleotides
Pre-steady state kinetic excision assay primer: 5′-
CGCAGCCGTCCAACCAACTCA-3′
This Paper
N/A
Pre-steady state kinetic excision assays template: 
3′-
GCGTCGGCAGGTTGGTTGAGTAGCAGCTAG 
GTTACGGCAGG-5′
This Paper
N/A
Software and Algorithms
R 3.3.3
The R Foundation
https://www.r-project.org/
deconstructSigs
Rosenthal et al., 2016
https://github.com/raerose01/deconstructSigs
ggplot2
The R Foundation
https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/ggplot2/index.html
BWA
Li, 2013
https://github.com/lh3/bwa
Genome Analysis Toolkit26 (v1.1-28).
Broad Institute
https://github.com/broadinstitute/gatk
MuTect
Broad Institute
https://github.com/broadinstitute/mutect
SciClone
The McDonnell Genome 
Institute
https://github.com/genome/sciclone
Reshape2
The R Foundation
https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/reshape2/index.html
Plyr
The R Foundation
https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/plyr/index.html
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 16.
