 Article
Suicide: Why Are Older
Men So Vulnerable?
Silvia Sara Canetto1
Abstract
Globally, older adults have higher suicide rates than other age-groups. However, it
is predominantly men who die of suicide in late adulthood, with variability by culture.
In the United States, European-descent men are overrepresented among suicide
decedents. In this article, theories and evidence about aging adversities, individual
dispositions, and cultural influences were evaluated for their potential to explain the
suicide vulnerability of European-descent older men. Aging adversities were not
found to account for these men’s suicide proneness. European-descent older men
are exposed to less severe aging adversities than older women or ethnic-minority
men—though they may be more impacted by them. Rigidity in coping and in
sense of self, consistent with hegemonic-masculinity scripts, emerged as individual-
level clues. The indignities-of-aging and the masculinity-of-suicide scripts may be
cultural influences. This analysis shows how consideration of masculinities and sui-
cide scripts expands our understanding of older men’s suicide as well as, likely, our
tools for its prevention.
Keywords
older adult men, suicide, rigidity, masculinity-of-suicide script, indignities-of-aging
suicide script
Older adults have higher suicide rates than younger age individuals in almost all
regions of the world. A common explanation is that older adult suicide is a response
to the adversities of late adulthood. An early version of this theory was put forth by
1 Department of Psychology, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO, USA
Corresponding Author:
Silvia Sara Canetto, Department of Psychology, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO 80523, USA.
Email: Silvia.Canetto@colostate.edu
Men and Masculinities
2017, Vol. 20(1) 49-70
ª The Author(s) 2015
Reprints and permission:
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/1097184X15613832
journals.sagepub.com/home/jmm
 Dublin: ‘‘With advancing years . . . forced changes become more difficult and dis-
turbing. Impairments are accumulated, particularly of chronic and painful diseases.
Many older people suffer from . . . feelings of loneliness and futility as relations
with family and friends and productive work drop off. Economic insecurity is often
a serious problem, as is also inability or unwillingness to tolerate hardship’’ (1963,
22). Given the many difficult changes that come with advancing years, therefore, ‘‘it
is not strange [according to Dublin] that some old people wish to shake off the infir-
mities and the boredom of an unsatisfactory existence’’ via suicide (p. 7). In recent
versions of this theory (e.g., Chiu and Tsoh 2013; Conwell and O’Riley 2013), the
typical adversities of aging presumed to challenge the coping capacities of older
individuals also include health, social, and occupational/economic problems.
A challenge to the adversities-of-aging theory is the gap in older adult suicide rates
by sex. It is predominantly men who die of suicide in late adulthood. World suicide
rates (per 100,000) individuals have been estimated at 28.2 for men age sixty to
sixty-nine (as compared to 12.4 in their female age peers), 42.2 for men age seventy
to seventy-nine (as compared to 18.7 in their female age peers), and 60.1 for men age
eighty and older (as compared to 27.8 in their female age peers; Va
¨rnik 2012). The
male to female ratio for persons aged sixty and older is however variable by region
and country—the ratio being higher in high-income countries than in low- and
middle-income countries (Shah et al. 2015; World Health Organization 2014).
Another challenge to the theory that suicide is a relatively normal response to
the adversities of aging is the within-country variability in older adult rates by sex
and ethnicity, and the sometime paradoxical manner of such variability. For exam-
ple, in the United States, suicide rates are highest among European-descent older
men, and lowest among older women of Indigenous- and African descent (Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention n.d.). The suicide rates of European American
older men are nearly three times higher than the suicide rates of ethnic-minority
older men (see Figure 1).
The variability in older adult suicide rates, by sex and culture, means that ques-
tions and explanations about older adult suicide need to be sex- and culture grounded
(Canetto 1992, 1997; Fung and Chan 2011). This article examines theories and evi-
dence about older adult suicide by sex and ethnicity in a case country, the United
States. The suicide vulnerability of older men of European descent is this article’s
guiding question. Articulating cultural and gender factors in these older men’s sui-
cidal behavior is this article’s primary goal. Culture and gender analyses of
European-descent older men’s suicide are nearly absent in the literature.
In this article theory and evidence on contextual factors (i.e., the adversities of
aging) in the suicide vulnerability of European-descent older men are considered first.
Next, theory and evidence on individual factors are examined. Finally, theory and evi-
dence on cultural factors are discussed. To provide examples of cultural and gender
themes in the suicide of older men of European descent, the section before the discus-
sion features the cases of two older European American men who took their lives, and
examines how their suicide was narrated and explained in the media of their time.
50
Men and Masculinities 20(1)
 0
10
20
30
40
Suicide rate per 100,000
50
60
05-09 10-14 15-19 20-24 25-29 30-34 35-39 40-44 45-49 50-54 55-59 60-64 65-69 70-74 75-79 80-84 85+
Age (Years)
Latino descent
Asian/Pacific descent
Indigenous descent
African descent
European descent
Men
Figure 1. Men’s five-year average suicide rates by ethnicity and age, United States, 2009–2013. From the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
Web-based Injury Statistics Query and Reporting System (WISQARS) Fatal Injury Data, http://www.cdc.gov/injury/wisqars/fatal.html. Graphs generated
by John L. McIntosh, Indiana University South Bend, March 2015.
51
 Why Are Suicide Rates Highest among Older Men
of European Descent? Do the Adversities of Aging Explain
Their Vulnerability?
The first issues to consider in trying to explain European-descent older men’s high
suicide rates are the adversities of aging. The aging adversities most often associated
with suicide in the literature are physical health, social, and occupational/economic
problems.
Are Suicide Rates Highest among Older Men of European Descent because
They Suffer from Worse Physical Health Adversities than Older Women or
Ethnic-minority Older Men?
Physical illness has long been theorized to play a role in older adult suicide. ‘‘Under-
standing the association between late-life suicide and physical illness is critical
because ill-health may serve as an important stressor contributing to the accumula-
tive risk for a vulnerable individual,’’ argued Conwell and O’Riley (2013, 211).
According to a recent review of studies, physical health problems were present in
the majority of older people who took their own lives. The conclusion of the review
was that certain ‘‘physical conditions including malignancies and diseases of the car-
diovascular, pulmonary, gastrointestinal, and central nervous system . . . [are]
implicated’’ in older adult suicide (Conwell 2014, 245–46). In the review, it was
recognized that the base rate of physical illness in older adulthood is high, and there-
fore its predictive value for suicide is low.
Could physical health problems be an explanation for European-descent older
men’s high suicide rates? Are these men in worse physical health than older women
or ethnic-minority older men? Studies do not find that older men in general, and
older men of European descent in particular, have higher rates of physical illness and
functional disability than older women (Meyer and Parker 2011). If anything, the
opposite is true. Typically, women have morbidity rates that are higher than (or at
best, similar to) those of men. The types of illnesses women and men typically expe-
rience are different: men are more likely than women to be diagnosed with more
immediately life-threatening illnesses, such as cancer, but are less likely than women
to suffer from chronic, debilitating (but not immediately life threatening) illnesses,
such as arthritis (Bird and Rieker 2008; Hayutin, Dietz, and Mitchell 2010). Also,
older men experience lower levels of functional impairment than older women
(Cameron et al. 2010). In addition, men are less likely than women to suffer from
painful conditions (Bird and Rieker 2008). With regard to ethnic differences, older
men of European descent generally enjoy better physical and functional health than
ethnic-minority older men—particularly relative to ethnic-minority older men with
lower suicide rates (i.e., older men of African descent; Hayutin, Dietz, and Mitchell
2010; Link, Phelan, and Fremont 2000).
52
Men and Masculinities 20(1)
 Could European-descent older men’s high suicide rates be related to their worse
access to care, relative to older women or ethnic-minority older men? Once again,
the opposite is true. European-descent older men have greater access to medical care
than older women or ethnic-minority older men. Older men of European descent also
have more resources (e.g., wealth) and are more likely to be able to afford costly
medical services than older women (Cameron et al. 2010) or ethnic-minority older
men, particularly older men with lower suicide rates (i.e., African- and Native-
descent older men; US Department of Health and Human Services 2001). In fact,
a national study of community-dwelling older adults found that older men made
more physician visits (including preventive care visits) and were more likely to have
hospital stays than older women with similar demographic and health profiles, even
after adjusting for economic access factors—a finding that was interpreted as related
to men’s fewer caregiving responsibilities (Cameron et al. 2010). Furthermore, older
men have smaller family networks than older women, but they can count on their
spouses for care, while older women cannot. When suffering from illness or disabil-
ities, older men are usually cared for by their wives, in contrast to older women who
are usually cared for by their daughters or another female relative (Hess 1990; Mon-
tgomery and Datwyler 1990; National Alliance for Caregiving and American Asso-
ciation of Retired Persons 2009).
In conclusion, older men have less exposure to, and experience less negative
impact from physical illnesses and disabilities than older women or ethnic-
minority men. And yet, in studies with European or mostly European American sam-
ples, physical illness, impairment, and pain appear to be more important suicide risk
factors for older men than for older women (Fa
¨ssberg et al. 2015). For example, high
overall physical-illness burden was associated with suicide for men, but not for
women, in Sweden (Waern et al. 2002). With regard to pain, in a Canadian study,
the association of severe pain and suicide was stronger in men than in women (Juur-
link et al. 2004). Similarly, a US study found that, among older adults receiving
home-care services, the presence of severe pain elevated the risk of self-injury idea-
tion in men but not in women (Li and Conwell 2010). The fact that physical illness,
impairment, and pain are more important suicide risk factors for older men than for
older women, though older women experience more illness, disability, and pain than
older men, suggests that older men may be less psychologically equipped than older
women to cope with illnesses, disability, and pain.
Are Suicide Rates Highest among Older Men of European Descent because
They Experience More Social Adversities than Older Women or Ethnic-
minority Older Men?
Older adult suicide has been linked to the social adversities of aging. Death of a
spouse and living alone are among the late-life situations theorized to contribute
to older adults’ high suicide rates (Chiu and Tsoh 2013; Conwell 2001).
Canetto
53
 Could older men be more likely to take their lives than older women because they
are more likely to experience widowhood and to live alone? In the United States, the
opposite is actually true. Men are nearly three times less likely than older women to
be widowed, mostly because they tend to marry younger women, and because they
have a shorter life expectancy. Men are also more likely than women to remarry after
widowhood (and after divorce). Seventy-two percent of men aged sixty-five and
older were married in 2012, compared to 45 percent of their female age peers. As
a result, older men are less likely to live alone than older women (Torres 2014).
In conclusion, older men are less likely than older women to be exposed to the
social adversities of aging, widowhood, and living alone, most commonly associated
with suicide. At the same time, in European and European-descent populations,
widowhood appears to be more of a suicide risk factor for men than for women
(Ajdacic-Gross et al. 2008; Erlangsen et al. 2004; Li 1995; Yip 1998; however, see
Turvey et al. 2002, for an exception). For example, a Swiss study found that suicide
risk was elevated in the first week after bereavement for both older women and older
men, but thereafter it remained elevated only in older men (Ajdacic-Gross et al.
2008). The evidence on living alone and suicide is difficult to interpret, and for many
reasons, including the fact that living alone is a weak proxy of feeling lonely—the
factor that may be truly suicidogenic (Holwerda et al. 2012). In any case, living
alone is not consistently associated with a higher probability of suicidality among
older adults (Conwell 2001; Fa
¨ssberg et al. 2012). Inconsistent is also the evidence
on the association of frequency of social contact and suicidality (Fa
¨ssberg et al.
2012). The fact that widowhood appears to be a more important suicide risk factor
for older men than for older women, though older women are more likely to expe-
rience the loss of a spouse, suggests that older men may be less psychologically
equipped than older women to cope with widowhood, and with being on their own.
Are Suicide Rates Highest among Older Men of European Descent because
They Experience More Work or Financial Adversities than Older Women or
Ethnic-minority Older Men?
Retirement and financial difficulties are late-life experiences believed to contribute
to older adults’ high suicide rates (Chiu and Tsoh 2013; De Leo and Diekstra 1990).
Are older men of European descent more likely to kill themselves than older women
or ethnic-minority men because of their greater exposure to the stress of retirement
and/or the economic challenges of aging?
Questions of gender and retirement require consideration of the different work his-
tories and experience of women and men (Calasanti 1993; Moen 1996). First, men as a
group experience more favorable (e.g., higher pay, higher status, and greater continu-
ity) employment conditions throughout their work history than women or ethnic-
minority men. Second, men’s employment is less likely than women’s to have been
interrupted by caregiving responsibilities (Torres 2014). Third, formal and full
54
Men and Masculinities 20(1)
 occupational retirement has been and still is more normative for men than for women.
Women in the workforce carry the vast majority of house and caregiving responsibil-
ities, prior to and post retirement (Meyer and Parker 2011). This means that, relative to
men, women have a greater work burden, prior to retirement from paid labor, but also
that they experience a less dramatic change in work pace and type, after retirement.
Hence, men’s and women’s retirement experiences are different—in ways that advan-
tage men in some ways, and women in other ways. Retirement often involves greater
identity and social losses for men than for women because for men, employment is a
primary site of social engagements, due to men’s low involvement in kin- and friend
keeping and caregiving (Granville and Evandrou 2010; Lyons 1984; Lumsdaine and
Vermeer 2015). At the same time, retirement does not bring as serious economic chal-
lenges for men as it does for women (Gregoire, Kilty, and Richardson 2002). In any
case, retirement from paid labor is not per se a negative experience. Studies find that
many retirees look forward to and are satisfied with retirement (Calasanti 1996; Kim
and Moen 2001). In addition, retirement can be especially difficult for women because
it often comes after too few years of uninterrupted paid work, before they have had the
time to attain their occupational goals and/or to accumulate postretirement income,
and/or involuntarily, in response to the care needs of their spouses or grandchildren
(Hatch 1992; Price and Balaswamy 2009). For all these reasons, it is not evident that
retirement would be so much more stressful for European-descent older men that it
would account for their high suicide rates, relative to older women or ethnic-
minority men.
With regard to financial resources, older men of European descent are advan-
taged, relative to older women or ethnic-minority men. European American older
men are less likely to be poor than older women, especially relative to ethnic-
minority older women with low rates of suicide. In 2011, the poverty rate for US
men over sixty-five was 6.2 percent, as compared to 10.7 percent for US women
(Torres 2014).
In conclusion, European-descent older men are not more exposed than older
women or ethnic-minority men to two late-life occupational and economic situa-
tions, retirement and financial difficulties, commonly associated with suicide risk.
In any case, evidence on the role of retirement and financial problems in older
persons’ suicide is weak. A psychological autopsy, case-control study of suicide
in mostly (73 percent) male, nearly all (98 percent) European-descent individuals
aged fifty and older found that changes in employment (which included but was
not restricted to retirement) distinguished the suicides from the controls. How-
ever, the suicides were not more likely than the controls to have retired the year
prior the suicide (Duberstein et al. 2004). In a Swedish psychological autopsy
study, financial problems distinguished older adult suicides (56 percent male)
from case controls but not after controlling for mental disorders (Rubenowitz
et al. 2001). In Duberstein and colleagues’ 2004 US study, lower annual income
differentiated suicide decedents from controls, but this finding did not hold in the
multivariate analyses.
Canetto
55
 Why Are Suicide Rates Highest among Older Men
of European Descent? Do Individual Factors Explain Their
Vulnerability?
The second set of issues to evaluate in order to make sense of European-descent
older men’s high suicide rates is individual factors. The individual factors most often
mentioned in the literature are mental disorders, personality, and coping style.
Are Suicide Rates Highest among Older Men of European Descent because
They Suffer from More, or More Serious Mental Disorders, Relative to Older
Women or Ethnic-minority Older Men?
In the United States, mental disorders are viewed as a major factor in older adult sui-
cide. A dominant perspective is that the evidence linking ‘‘psychiatric illnesses’’ and
suicide is unequivocal: ‘‘major affective illness is the factor associated with the high-
est population-attributable risk for suicide in later life,’’ wrote Conwell (2014,
S245). The evidence on the role of mental disorders in general, and major depression
specifically, in older adult suicide is however difficult to evaluate. One reason is that
information on the mental-disorder status of suicide decedents often comes from
psychological autopsy studies, where diagnoses are assigned retrospectively, on the
basis of interviews with the bereaved by suicide.
Could a higher burden of mental disorders be an explanation for European-
descent older men’s suicide rates, relative to older women or ethnic-minority older
men? Are European-descent older men uniquely affected by affective disorders? To
start, it is important to note that older adults report more emotional well-being and
stability than young adults (Carstensen et al. 2011). Also, major depression is less
prevalent among older adults than among younger adults (Fiske, Wetherell, and Gatz
2009), especially in ‘‘developed’’ countries, with the association between depression
and physical illness decreasing with age (Kessler et al. 2010).
In any case, studies do not find that older men have higher rates of depression
than older women. In fact, the opposite seems true. According to a review of studies
of European American and European older adults, depressive disorders and depres-
sive symptoms were more, or similarly common in women, relative to men (Djernes
2006). Very little is known about older adults’ mental disorders by sex and ethnicity.
The available evidence suggests few differences in depressive symptoms between
African American and European American older adults (US Department of Health
and Human Services 2001).
Taken together, these findings suggest that, by conventional measures, older men
have lower rates of mental disorders, including depression, than older women (or, at
most, rates of mental disorders that are similar to those of older women). In addition,
European American older adults do not appear to be more affected by depression
than ethnic-minority older adults with low rates of older adult suicide, such as
56
Men and Masculinities 20(1)
 African Americans. Based on the available evidence, therefore, it does not appear
that mental disorders in general, and depression specifically, account for the high
suicide rates of older men of European descent. It may be that suicide in older men
of European descent is not connected with depression. Or it may be that depression
in older men of European descent is under-recognized and underdiagnosed. A factor
contributing to older men’s discordant rates of depression and suicide may also be
these men’s reluctance to acknowledge being depressed and to seek help for their
depression (Addis 2008). In any case, the psychological autopsy evidence on the
mental health status of (mostly male) suicide decedents is that most of these dece-
dents were diagnosable as depressed. As noted above, this evidence is however pro-
blematic because it is often based on retrospective, post-suicide diagnosing.
Are Suicide Rates Highest among Older Men of European Descent because
of Their Dysfunctional Coping or Personality?
Coping style and personality have been theorized as playing a role in suicide prone-
ness in general, and in older men’s suicide vulnerability, specifically. A version of
this theory is that older men are more likely to kill themselves because they do not
acquiesce to the losses of aging, as women presumably do. Older women’s resilience
to suicide comes from their ‘‘passivity, suggestibility, and malleability,’’ argued
Breed and Huffine (1979, 301). According to Breed and Huffine, older men’s diffi-
culties in accommodating to age-related changes results from their lack of practice
with changes: a man ‘‘is not likely to experience major qualitative change after the
first few years of adulthood and marriage. In his developmental process . . . the
demands and expectations on him are consistent throughout—he is expected to be
assertive, to seek mastery over his environment, and to strive for achievement’’
(p. 302). By contrast, according to them, women have practice with losses, their
roles and status likely having shifted through adulthood: for example, ‘‘during
. . . mothering, the woman may well be in and out of the labor market,’’ they say
(p. 302). Another version of this theory is that older men are more likely to take their
own lives because they are less flexible in their coping with the normal changes of
aging than older women (Canetto 1992, 1995a). An important feature of the latter
version of the coping theory is that accepting and adapting to aging changes are posi-
tively framed, as resilience and grit, not as passivity and weakness.
Could inflexibility in coping be a factor in European-descent older men’s high
suicide rates? Research points to rigid coping and being low in openness to experi-
ence as common in older adult who died of suicide. Specifically, US psychological
autopsy studies found that the (mostly European-descent male) older adult decedents
were often remembered as having been rigid, conscientious, disciplined, conserva-
tive, habit driven, emotionally unaware and emotionally constricted (Duberstein,
Conwell, and Caine 1994; Clark 1993; Horton-Deutsch, Clark, and Farran 1992;
Useda et al. 2007). For example, in Horton and colleagues’ study, the suicide dece-
dents (93 percent European-descent males) were described as having had a narrow
Canetto
57
 sense of self and chronic difficulties adapting to ordinary life events. Also, according
to Clark, these suicide decedents had not faced particularly severe social or health
adversities in their last year of life. In the other psychological autopsy study (Duber-
stein, Conwell, and Caine 1994), the older adult suicide decedents (88 percent male)
were found to have been low in openness to experience, relative to matched controls.
Specifically, they had a constricted range of interests, shunned challenges, and were
closed to feelings.
In conclusions, there are suggestions in the literature that rigidity in sense of self
and coping may be individual dispositions contributing to the suicide proneness of
older persons in general, and possibly, older men specifically (Canetto 1992, 1995a,
1997; Duberstein 1995, 2001; Schmutte et al. 2009). Some dimensions of this inflex-
ibility construct map onto aspects of hegemonic-masculinity scripts—for example,
the strong-and-silent masculinity script and the independent masculinity script
(Mahalik, Good, and Englar-Carlson 2003). It may be that tenacious commitment
to dominant masculinity scripts, particularly scripts of autonomy and control, threa-
tens not only men’s well-being (Mahalik, Good, and Englar-Carlson 2003; Mahalik,
Burns, and Syzdek 2007; Perrig-Chiello and Hutchison 2010) but their survival as
well, especially late in life (Canetto 1992, 1997; Mo
¨ller-Leimku
¨hler 2003; Schmutte
et al. 2009). For European-descent men, rigidity in coping and sense of self may be
reinforced by gender and ethnic privilege—European-descent men’s lives prior to
late adulthood having been relatively protected from challenges to status, autonomy,
and control (Canetto 1992, 1997).
Why Are Suicide Rates Highest among Older Men
of European Descent? Do Cultural Factors Explain These
Older Men’s Suicide Propensity?
The last set of issues considered relevant to the high suicide rates of older European-
descent men are cultural factors. Aspects of cultural scripts of gender and suicide,
including suicide beliefs and attitudes as well as suicide method choice, are the most
discussed and researched of these cultural factors.
Are Suicide Rates Highest among Older Men of European Descent because
in Their Culture Suicide Is Viewed as a Masculine Response to the Status and
Power Losses (‘‘the Indignities’’) of Aging?
It has long been observed that suicide rates vary, often stably, across social, cultural,
and national groups (Canetto 1997; Canetto and Lester 1998; Cutright and Fernquist
2000; Nock et al. 2008). This stability suggests cultural influences on suicide. An
increasingly well-documented theory is that variations in suicide rates reflect varia-
tions in suicide scripts, including differences in suicide acceptability. Studies show
that suicidal planning and behavior are most likely among individuals (Joe, Romer,
58
Men and Masculinities 20(1)
 and Jamieson 2007; Kleiman 2015) for whom, and in communities (Cutright and
Fernquist 2004) where suicide is most acceptable.
In different cultures, there are unique conditions when suicide is relatively per-
missible, and even considered good (e.g., rational, moral, and powerful; Andriolo
1998; Canetto 1997; Canetto and Lester 1998). These conditions represent an aspect
of the suicide script of that culture. A suicide script also includes the person expected
to engage in suicidal behavior, the suicide method, the emotions and motives
expressed by or attributed to the suicidal person and to other individuals associated
with the suicidal act, the outcome of the suicidal act (i.e., nonfatal vs. fatal), and the
social interpretation and consequences of the suicidal behavior. Suicide scripts, like
scripts of any other behavior, are both descriptive and prescriptive. They are impli-
citly influential rather than consciously adopted (Canetto 1997; Canetto and Lester
1998; Canetto and Sakinofsky 1998).
Studies show that European Americans think that suicide is more acceptable
when it involves older adults (Deluty 1988–1989b). In addition, suicide in response
to a physical illness is considered most understandable even when the person is not
an older adult (Deluty 1988–1989a; Droogas, Siiter, and O’Connell 1982–1983;
Hammond and Deluty 1992; Ingram and Ellis 1995; LoPresto, Sherman, and
DiCarlo 1994–1995; McAndrew and Garrison 2007; Range and Martin 1990).
Furthermore, European Americans have been found to endorse the belief that older
adult suicide is a relatively rational response to physical illness (Stice and Canetto
2008; Winterrowd, Canetto, and Benoit 2015). Finally, among mostly European
American respondents, men view older adult suicide as more admissible than
women do (Winterrowd, Canetto, and Benoit 2015).
There is also evidence of a belief, in European and European-descent commu-
nities, that suicide is a masculine act (Canetto 1997; Kushner 1993). An early ver-
sion of this belief is found in the writings of Durkheim (1951) who argued that
killing oneself requires the intelligence and courage only ‘‘white’’ men possess.
US empirical studies have confirmed the perception, among predominantly
European-descent respondents, of the masculinity of suicide. For example, in one
study, male suicide was viewed as less foolish, less wrong, more powerful, and more
permissible than female suicide (Deluty 1988–1989b). In another study, suicide was
judged more masculine than ‘‘attempted’’ suicide (Linehan 1973). In yet another
study, males were more concerned than females about social disapproval of their sui-
cidal ideation (Rich et al. 1992), and with good reason, given that males have been
found to be particularly critical of other males who ‘‘attempt’’ and ‘‘fail’’ to take
their lives (White and Stillion 1988). Finally, there is evidence that suicide by
European-descent, ill older men is interpreted as a reasoned choice exemplifying
masculine control, power, and determination (Canetto 1995b, 1997; Canetto and
Lester 1998). Consistent with this evidence, a Canadian interview study of mostly
European-descent older adults with chronic health problems found that older men
described their illnesses as a threat to their identity as autonomous and powerful, and
viewed suicide as a masculine way to regain control and dignity. ‘‘The hell with it!
Canetto
59
 Go home and get the gun out and blow your brains out,’’ said seventy-nine years old
man in response to the question of how he might handle further declines in his health
(Clarke, Korotchenko, and Bundon 2012, 11).
In conclusion, there are suggestions, in the empirical literature, that in European-
descent communities, suicide is considered a permissible, if not rational response to
physical illness. Older adults with health problems may see themselves, or may be
seen by others, as experiencing a situation for which suicide is a reasonable, or even
a moral choice. Since in European-descent communities, suicide is also considered a
masculine act, and masculinity is associated with physical vigor, it is not surprising
that European-descent older men are more likely than European-descent older
women to act on this illness and indignities-of-aging suicide script.
Are Suicide Rates Highest among Older Men of European Descent Because
They Use More Immediately Lethal Suicide Methods than Older Women or
Ethnic-minority Older Men?
It has been argued that men’s high suicide mortality, including in late life, is primar-
ily a function of men using more immediately lethal suicide methods (e.g., firearms)
than women. Men’s use of firearms in suicide is also often taken as an indication of
men’s higher suicidal intent than women’s. Studies show that, in the United States,
men are indeed more likely than women to use firearms in suicide, and also that fire-
arms use is major factor in the lethality of suicidal behavior (Spicer and Miller
2000). However, men’s suicide mortality is higher than women’s, independent of
method (in the United States, see Spicer and Miller 2000; in Germany, see Cibis
et al. 2012)—which suggests other influences on men’s higher mortality across sui-
cide methods. Ultimately, it is important to note that US males’ preference for fire-
arms in suicide takes place in a culture that considers guns a masculine method
(McAndrew and Garrison 2007). Men’s higher suicide mortality from all methods
also makes sense in light of the perceived femininity of ‘‘attempted suicide’’ in
European-heritage cultures. Once they engage in a suicidal act, European-descent
men might not be willing to allow themselves to survive it because of the dominant
stigma against men who do not ‘‘complete’’ a suicide (Canetto 1995b, 1997).
Two Case Studies
As an illustration of the ideas presented so far, and to clarify what is meant by mas-
culinity and suicide scripts, the narratives of the suicide of two European-descent
older men are presented and analyzed below.
‘‘My Work Is Done: Why Wait?’’
These words were in the suicide note penned by George Eastman (1854–1932), the
founder of Eastman Kodak. Eastman ended his life, at age seventy-seven, in his bed,
60
Men and Masculinities 20(1)
 with a gunshot to his heart. His death was declared a suicide ‘‘while temporarily
deranged’’ (Democrat Chronicle 1932). According to a biographer (Brayer 1996),
Eastman was an ever-single man who never had close intimate relationships. His
social and affective ties were to his mother and his friends. At the time of his death,
Eastman was likely in mourning, having lost, a few weeks earlier, his lifelong friend
and business associate, Walter Hubbell. In typical male-suicide narrative mode,
however, his suicide was explained as the unemotional act of an older, ill man who
did not wish to suffer the indignities of aging and was determined to be in charge of
his death, as he had been in charge of his life. In an article published soon after his
suicide in the Democrat Chronicle (1932), his physician was cited as declaring that
‘‘ill health . . . undoubtedly inspired the act.’’ In the same article, a business asso-
ciate was quoted as stating: ‘‘By his own hand he lived his life; and by his own hand
he ended it.’’ While there is mention, in the article, that Eastman’s lifelong friend
had just died, the potential emotional impact of the friend’s death on Eastman’s deci-
sion to suicide is not considered. Rather, attention is drawn to the fact that, prior to
his death, the friend had been confined to bed. It is speculated that Eastman wanted
to avoid becoming dependent as his friend had: ‘‘he planned carefully to end his
orderly life in an orderly way’’ (Democrat Chronicle 1932). In a 1963 analysis of
Eastman’s suicide, Dublin argued that Eastman’s suicide was a rational act triggered
by the ‘‘serious and painful sickness’’ he had been suffering. ‘‘Rather than become a
burden to himself or his friends, he shot himself. . . . His intimates were confident
that at the time of this demise, Eastman . . . was as rational as ever,’’ wrote Dublin
(p. 5). The common theme in Eastman’s suicide narratives, across commentators, is
exemplified in his biographer’s statement that Eastman was unprepared and unwill-
ing ‘‘to face the indignities of old age’’ (Brayer 1996, 516).
‘‘Sixty-seven. You Are Getting Greedy. Act Your Old Age. Relax. This Won’t
Hurt’’
These were the final words of the suicide note left by journalist and author Hunter
Thompson (1937–2005). Thompson ended his life in his house, with a gunshot into
his mouth, at the age of sixty-seven (Brinkley 2005). Thompson was famous for his
Gonzo, personally involved style of reporting and his contempt for authority. Close
family and friends interviewed soon after his death insisted that his suicide was the
planned, rational choice of an irrepressibly transgressive man. ‘‘He died . . . as he
planned . . . with a single, courageous . . . gunshot,’’ ‘‘with a bang,’’ ‘‘on his own
terms on his own time,’’ they said. ‘‘This [suicide] is a triumph of his, not a desper-
ate, tragic failure,’’ and ‘‘He was not going to suffer the indignities of old age,’’ they
affirmed (Jacoby 2005; Nanji 2005). This rebel suicide narrative, however,
crumbled when his suicide note was published in Rolling Stone September 8,
2015 (Brinkley, 2005), several months after his death. ‘‘They found Hunter S.
Thompson’s suicide note, and it twists our moral telescope back into the focus we
had when we first heard that he’d shot himself in the head,’’ wrote Allen in a
Canetto
61
 September 9, 2005 Washington Post article. ‘‘When he took himself out, we wanted
to think that it was a .45 caliber hara-kiri, an act of honor by a 67-year old cultural
hero who . . . faced old age . . . . But no, we quickly learned that it wasn’t that
pretty’’ continued Allen. ‘‘He killed himself while talking on the phone with his
wife, Anita. In the house with him were his son Juan, and his grandson. Not so hon-
orable. You are supposed to go out behind the woodshed, face the existential solitude
and let your survivors find you later.’’
Thompson’s suicide note (No More Walking. No More Fun . . . 67. That is 17
years past 50. 17 more than I needed or wanted. Boring . . . 67. You are getting
greedy. Act your old age. Relax. This won’t hurt) and the way Thompson went about
killing himself (at home, and while on the phone with his wife) give hints of an emo-
tionally troubled man who was ambivalent about taking his life. A man who perhaps
wished to live and to be invited to live, and be loved, as he was, with his infirmities,
but who was perhaps afraid to accept himself, and to ask to be accepted as vulnerable
and unexciting. His long-divorced first wife, Sondi Wright, was the only person in
his entourage to suggest that Thompson killed himself a lonely and desperate man
(Stephenson 2012)—a man perhaps tired of the macho persona. By contrast, his
closer kin and friends insisted his suicide was a Gonzo triumph over the indignities
of aging, and blasted his ashes through a cannon, in celebration.
Analysis
Eastman’s and Thompson’s suicides were narrated through the codes of European
American conventional masculinity. The dominant story is that their suicide was a
rational, courageous, decisive choice. They were men who were not going to put
up with the indignities of aging, we are told. In both stories, information about feel-
ings, personal shortcomings, and relationship needs was missing. While both sui-
cides were constructed as a form of masculine mastery, in Eastman’s case, stoic
mastery is the main script, while Thompson’s is an example of an exhibitionist
macho script. Both men were assumed to have been firm about their suicide. Their
suicide notes (by omission, consistent with the stoic script, in the case of Eastman,
and loudly, by his own words of fear and ambivalence, in the case of Thompson),
however, raise questions about the interpretation of their suicide as an unemo-
tional, unambivalent act.
Discussion and Conclusions
This article started with the observations that older men are more likely to die by
suicide than older women and that, in the United States, European-descent older men
have the highest suicide rates. This article’s main questions questions were: Are
older European-descent men more prone to suicide because they are uniquely
exposed to presumably suicidogenic aging adversities? What may be the individual
62
Men and Masculinities 20(1)
 factors associated with their suicide vulnerability? And, what cultural factors may be
at play?
This analysis challenged widespread suicide myths in the professional and
popular literature, including the idea that interpersonal losses (e.g., widowhood) are
relatively unimportant in older male suicide. It also highlighted often overlooked
facts in European-descent older men’s suicide proneness, including the fact that
European-descent older men have less exposure than older women to many of the
conditions (e.g., depression, chronic illnesses and functional disabilities, financial
difficulties, widowhood, and living alone) assumed to increase suicide risk in older
adults. Therefore, aging adversities burden per se does not explain the extraordinary
suicide proneness of European-descent older men, relative to older women or ethnic-
minority older men. Suicide for many European-descent older men seems to be a
response to the ordinary challenges and losses of aging.
Cues to European-descent older men’s suicide propensity, despite and perhaps
because of their relatively privileged status among older adults, and often in the
absence of extraordinary age-related adversities, came from studies of the personal-
ity of suicide decedents. In these studies, the (mostly) European-descent older adult
(mostly) male decedents were described as having displayed traits (e.g., closeness to
new experiences) and ways of coping (e.g., inflexible) consistent with dimensions
of dominant scripts of masculinity. More cues to European-descent older men’s
suicide vulnerability came from the cultural-scripts-of-suicide literature, via the
evidence on beliefs, in predominantly European-descent communities, about the
masculinity of suicide as well as the evidence on the acceptability of suicide under
conditions of ill-health and when the person is older adult. Taken together, this
individual and cultural evidence suggests that older male suicide may be enabled
by its cultural acceptability, and also by its masculine connotation. European
American men who rigidly and tenaciously abide to hegemonic-masculinity
scripts, particularly the independent (as in the case of Eastman) or the macho
(as in the case of Thompson) scripts, may be both least equipped for the challenges
of aging, and most vulnerable to the indignities of aging suicide script. European
American men may be particularly likely to act on the indignities-of-aging suicide
script due to the connection, in European American culture, between masculinity
and physical vigor, control, and autonomy.
Among the implications, for suicide prevention, of the findings of this analysis is
the importance to examine and address the dominant and idiosyncratic, community
and individual suicide scripts. With regard to the prevention of suicide among
European-descent older men, the findings of this analysis point to the value of chal-
lenging the indignities-of-aging suicide script as well as the belief that suicide is a
masculine response to aging. Education about the costs and dangers, with regard
to suicide, of certain aspects (e.g., the being-in-control dimension) of dominant
ideologies of masculinity would also likely be useful in initiatives aimed at reducing
European-descent older male suicidality (Canetto 1997; Canetto and Cleary 2012;
Canetto and Lester 1998; Canetto and Sakinofsky 1998; Mo
¨ller-Leimku
¨hler 2003;
Canetto
63
 Oliffe et al. 2011; Springer and Mouzon 2011; Stanistreet, Bambra, and Scott-
Samuel 2005).
There are limitations to this analysis. A chief limitation is that few older adult
suicide studies included sex-specific information, and even fewer had sex-by-
ethnicity data. Another limitation is that it focused on the United States, a country
that is overrepresented in the suicide literature. As noted in the introduction, patterns
of older adult suicide in the United States specifically, and in high-income countries
generally, are at variance with patterns of older adult suicide in low- and middle-
income countries. Considering that 75 percent of global suicides occur in low- and
middle-income countries (World Health Organization 2014), it is important to exam-
ine the gender and cultural scripts of older adult suicide in those countries, and see
the lessons they teach us about suicide risk and protection there, and elsewhere.
A contribution of this analysis is that it makes visible gender and cultural patterns
and paradoxes of older adult suicide in the United States, the chief paradox being
that the most privileged of older adults, men of European descent, are the most sui-
cide prone. This analysis points to the importance of attending to meanings and prac-
tices of masculinity in relation to meanings of aging and meanings of suicide, to
make sense of the suicidality of European-descent older men. Finally, this analysis
shows how gender and culture lenses generally expand our understanding of older
men’s suicide proneness as well as, likely, our tools for its prevention.
Acknowledgments
The author would like to thank Dr. Erin Winterrowd for her helpful critical com-
ments on an earlier version of this article.
Author’s Note
Portions of the content of this article were presented at the 2006, 2008, and 2010
Annual Conferences of the American Association of Suicidology.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Funding
The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or pub-
lication of this article.
References
Addis, M. E. 2008. ‘‘Gender and Depression in Men.’’ Clinical Psychology: Science and
Practice 15:153–68.
Ajdacic-Gross, V., M. Ring, E. Gadola, C. Lauber, M. Bop, F. Gutzwiller, and W. Ro
¨ssler.
2008. ‘‘Suicide After Bereavement: An Overlooked Problem.’’ Psychological Medicine
38:673–76.
64
Men and Masculinities 20(1)
 Allen, H.2005. ‘‘Last Words: A Testament to Hunter Thompson.’’ The Washington Post.
Accessed May 1, 2015. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2005/
09/08/AR2005090801993.html.
Andriolo, K. R. 1998. ‘‘Gender and the Cultural Construction of Good and Bad Suicides.’’
Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior 28:37–49.
Bird, C. E., and P. P. Rieker. 2008. Gender and Health: The Effect of Constrained Choices
and Social Policies. New York: Cambridge Press.
Brayer, E. 1996. George Eastman: A Biography. Baltimore, MD: The John Hopkins Press.
Breed, W., and C. L. Huffine. 1979. ‘‘Sex Differences in Suicide among Older White Amer-
icans: A Role and Developmental Approach.’’ In Psychopathology of Aging, edited by C.
J. Kaplan, 280–309. New York: Academic Press.
Brinkley, D. 2005. ‘‘Football Season Is over Dr. Hunter S. Thompson’s Final Note . . . Enter-
ing the No More Fun Zone.’’ Rolling Stone. Accessed May 1, 2015. http://web.archive.org/
web/20080619074031/http://www.rollingstone.com/news/story/7605448/football_season_
is_over.
Calasanti, T. M. 1993. ‘‘Bringing in Diversity: Toward an Inclusive Theory of Retirement.’’
Journal of Aging Studies 7:133–50.
Calasanti, T. M. 1996. ‘‘Gender and Life Satisfaction in Retirement: An Assessment of the
Male Model.’’ Journal of Gerontology Series B-Psychological Sciences and Social
Sciences 51:S18–29.
Cameron, K. A., J. Song, L. M. Manheim, and D. D. Dunlop. 2010. ‘‘Gender Disparities in
Health and Healthcare Use among Older Adults.’’ Journal of Women’s Health 19:
1643–50.
Canetto, S. S. 1992. ‘‘Gender and Suicide in the Elderly.’’ Suicide and Life-Threatening Beha-
vior 22:80–97.
Canetto, S. S. 1995a. ‘‘Elderly Women and Suicidal Behavior.’’ In Women and Suicidal Beha-
vior, edited by S. S. Canetto and D. Lester, 215–33. New York: Springer.
Canetto, S. S. 1995b. ‘‘Men Who Survive a Suicidal Act: Successful Coping or Failed Mas-
culinity?’’ In Men’s Health and Illness: Gender, Power, and the Body, edited by D. Sabo
and D. Gordon, 292–304. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Canetto, S. S. 1997. ‘‘Gender and Suicidal Behavior: Theories and Evidence.’’ In Review of
Suicidology, edited by R. W. Maris, M. M. Silverman, and S. S. Canetto, 138–67. New
York: Guilford.
Canetto, S. S., and A. Cleary. 2012. ‘‘Men, Masculinities and Suicidal Behavior.’’ Social Sci-
ence & Medicine 74:461–65.
Canetto, S. S., and D. Lester. 1998. ‘‘Gender, Culture and Suicidal Behavior.’’ Transcultural
Psychiatry 35:163–91.
Canetto, S. S., and I. Sakinofsky. 1998. ‘‘The Gender Paradox in Suicide.’’ Suicide and Life-
Threatening Behavior 28:1–23.
Carstensen, L. L., B. Turan, S. Scheibe, N. Ram, H. Ersner-Hershfield, G. R. Samanez-
Larkin, K. P. Brooks, and J. R. Nesslroade. 2011. ‘‘Emotional Experience Improves
with Age: Evidence Based on over 10 Years of Experience Sampling.’’ Psychology and
Aging 26:21–33.
Canetto
65
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. n.d. ‘‘National Suicide Statistics at a Glance.’’
Accessed June 8, 2015. http://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/suicide/statistics/rates05.
html.
Chiu, H., and J. Tsoh. 2013. ‘‘Suicide and Attempted Suicide in Older People.’’ In Oxford
Textbook of Old Age Psychiatry, edited by T. Dening and A. Thomas, 571–79. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Cibis, A., R. Mergl, A. Bramesfeld, D. Althaus, G. Niklewski, A. Schmidtke, and U. Hegerl.
2012. ‘‘Preference for Lethal Methods Is Not the Only Cause for Higher Suicide Rates in
Males.’’ Journal of Affective Disorders 136:9–16.
Clark, D. C. 1993. ‘‘Narcissistic Crises of Aging and Suicidal Despair.’’ Suicide and Life-
Threatening Behavior 23:21–26.
Clarke, L. H., A. Korotchenko, and A. Bundon. 2012. ‘‘‘The Calendar Is Just About Up’:
Older Adults with Multiple Chronic Conditions Reflect on Death and Dying.’’ Ageing and
Society 32:399–417.
Conwell, Y. 2001. ‘‘Suicide in Later Life: A Review and Recommendations for Prevention.’’
Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior 31:32–47.
Conwell, Y. 2014. ‘‘Suicide in Later Life: Challenges and Priorities for Prevention.’’ Amer-
ican Journal of Preventive Medicine 47:S244–50.
Conwell, Y., and A. O’Riley. 2013 ‘‘The Challenge of Suicide Prevention in Later Life.’’ In
Late-life Mood Disorders, edited by H. Lavretsky, M. Sajatovic, and C. F. Reynolds III,
206–19. New York: Oxford University Press.
Cutright, P., and R. M. Fernquist. 2000. ‘‘Effects of Societal Integration, Period, Region, and
Culture of Suicide on Male Age-specific Suicide Rates: 20 Developed Countries, 1955–
1989.’’ Social Science Research 29:148–72.
Cutright, P., and R. M. Fernquist. 2004. ‘‘The Culture of Suicide through Social Integration
and Regulation: 1996–1998: Gender-specific Suicide Rates in 50 American States.’’
Archives of Suicide Research 8:271–85.
De Leo, D., and R. F. W. Diekstra. 1990. Depression and Suicide in Late Life. Toronto,
Canada: Hogrefe & Huber.
Deluty, R. H. 1988–1989a. ‘‘Physical Illness, Psychiatric Illness, and the Acceptability of Sui-
cide.’’ Omega: The Journal of Death and Dying 19:79–91.
Deluty, R. H. 1988–1989b. ‘‘Factors Affecting the Acceptability of Suicide.’’ Omega: The
Journal of Death and Dying 19:315–26.
Democrat Chronicle. 1932. ‘‘George Eastman Is Mourned: Takes Own Life; ‘Work Done,
Why Wait?’ He Writes.’’ March 13, Section I, p. 1.
Djernes, J. K. 2006. ‘‘Prevalence and Predictors of Depression in Populations of Elderly:
A Review.’’ Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica 113:372–87.
Droogas, A., R. Siiter, and A. N. O’Connell. 1982-1983. ‘‘Effects of Personal and Situational
Factors on Attitudes toward Suicide.’’ Omega: The Journal of Death and Dying 13:127–44.
Duberstein, P. R. 1995. ‘‘Openness to Experience and Completed Suicide across the Second
Half of Life.’’ International Psychogeriatrics 7:183–98.
Duberstein, P. R. 2001. ‘‘Are Close-minded People More Open to the Idea of Killing
Themselves?’’ Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior 31:9–14.
66
Men and Masculinities 20(1)
 Duberstein, P. R., Y. Conwell, and E. D. Caine. 1994. ‘‘Age Differences in the Personality
Characteristics of Suicide Completers: Preliminary Findings from a Psychological
Autopsy Study.’’ Psychiatry 57:213–24.
Duberstein, P. R., Y. Conwell, K. R. Conner, E. Eberly, and E. D. Caine. 2004. ‘‘Suicide at 50
Years of Age and Older: Perceived Physical Illness, Family Discord and Financial Strain.’’
Psychological Medicine 34:137–46.
Dublin, L. I. 1963. Suicide: A Sociological and Statistical Study. New York: Ronald.
Durkheim, E. 1951. Suicide: A Study in Sociology. New York: Free Press.
Erlangsen, A., B. Jeune, U. Bille-Brahe, and J. W. Vaupel. 2004. ‘‘Loss of Partner and Suicide
Risks among Oldest Old: A Population-based Register Study.’’ Age Ageing 33:378–83.
Fa
¨ssberg, M. M., G. Cheung, S. S. Canetto, A. Erlangsen, S. Lapierre, L. Reinhart, B. Draper,
J. J. Gallo, C. Wong, J. Wu, P. Duberstein, and M. Waern. 2015. ‘‘A Systematic Review of
Physical Illness, Functional Disability and Suicidal Behavior in Later Life.’’ Aging &
Mental Health. doi:10.1080/13607863.2015.1083945.
Fa
¨ssberg, M. M., K. Van Orden, P. Duberstein, A. Erlangsen, S. Lapierre, E. Bodner, S. S.
Canetto, D. De Leo, K. Szanto, and M. Waern. 2012. ‘‘A Systematic Review of Social Fac-
tors and Suicidal Behavior in Older Adulthood.’’ International Journal of Environmental
Research and Public Health 9:722–45.
Fiske, A., J. L. Wetherell, and M. Gatz. 2009. ‘‘Depression in Older Adults.’’ Annual Review
of Clinical Psychology 5:363–89.
Fung, Y. L., and Z. C. Y. Chan. 2011. ‘‘A Systematic Review of Suicidal Behavior in Old
Age: A Gender Perspective.’’ Journal of Clinical Nursing 20:2109–24.
Granville, G., and M. Evandrou. 2010. ‘‘Older Men, Work and Health.’’ Occupational Med-
icine 60:178–83.
Gregoire, T. K., K. Kilty, and V. Richardson. 2002. ‘‘Gender and Racial Inequities in Retire-
ment Resources.’’ Journal of Women and Aging 14:25–39.
Hammond, L. K., and R. H. Deluty. 1992. ‘‘Attitudes of Clinical Psychologists, Psychiatrists,
and Oncologists toward Suicide.’’ Social Behavior and Personality 20:289–94.
Hatch, L. R. 1992. ‘‘Gender Differences in Orientation toward Retirement from Paid Labor.’’
Gender and Society 6:66–85.
Hayutin, A. M., M. Dietz, and L. Mitchell. 2010. New Realities of an Older America: Chal-
lenges, Changes and Questions. Stanford Center on Longevity. Accessed May 6, 2015.
http://longevity3.stanford.edu/wp-content/uploads/2013/01/New-Realities-of-an-Older-
America.pdf.
Hess, B. H. 1990. ‘‘The Demographic Parameters of Gender and Aging.’’ Generations 14:12–16.
Holwerda, T. J., A. T. F. Beekmam, D. J. H. Deeg, M. L. Stek, T. G. van Tilburg, P. J. Visser,
B. Schmand, C. Jonker, and R. A. Choevers. 2012. ‘‘Increased Risk of Mortality Associ-
ated with Social Isolation in Older Men: Only When Feeling Lonely? Results from the
Amsterdam Study of the Elderly (AMSTEL).’’ Psychological Medicine 42:843–53.
Horton-Deutsch, S. L., D. C. Clark, and C. J. Farran. 1992. ‘‘Chronic Dyspnea and Suicide in
Elderly Men.’’ Hospital and Community Psychiatry 43:1198–203.
Ingram, E., and J. B. Ellis. 1995. ‘‘Situational Analysis of Attitudes toward Suicide Behavior.’’
Death Studies 19:269–75.
Canetto
67
 Jacoby, J. 2005. No Glory in Suicide. Accessed May 7, 2015. http://www.boston.com/news/
globe/editorial_opinion/oped/articles/2005/03/03/no_glory_in_suicide/.
Joe, S., D. Romer, and P. E. Jamieson. 2007. ‘‘Suicide Acceptability is Related to Suicide Planning
in U.S. Adolescents and Young Adults.’’ Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior 37:165–78.
Juurlink, D. N., N. N. Herrmann, J. P. Szalai, A. Kopp, and D. Redelmeier. 2004. ‘‘Medical Ill-
ness and the Risk of Suicide in the Elderly.’’ Archives of Internal Medicine 164:1179–84.
Kessler, R. C., H. G. Birnbaum, V. Shahly, E. Bromet, I. Hwang, K. A. McLaughlin, N.
Sampson, L. H. Andrade, G. de Girolamo, K. Demyttenaere, J. M. Haro, A. N. Karam,
S. Kostyuchenko, V. Kovess, C. Lara, D. Levinson, H. Matschinger, Y. Nakane, M. O.
Browne, J. Ormel, J. Posada-Villa, R. Sagar, and D. J. Stein. 2010. ‘‘Age Differences in
the Prevalence and Co-morbidity of DBM-VI Major Depressive Episodes: Results from
the WHO World Mental Health Survey Institute.’’ Depression and Anxiety 27:351–64.
Kim, J. E., and P. Moen. 2001. ‘‘Is Retirement Good or Bad for Subjective Well-being?’’
Current Directions in Psychological Science 10:83–86.
Kleiman, E. M. 2015. ‘‘Suicide Acceptability as a Mechanism of Suicide Clustering in a
Nationally Representative Sample of Adolescents.’’ Comprehensive Psychiatry 59:17–20.
Kushner, H. I. 1993. ‘‘Gender and the Irrelevance of Medical Innovation: The Social Con-
struction of Suicide as a Male Behavior in Nineteenth Century Psychiatry.’’ In L’Innova-
tion en Medicine: E
´tudes Historiques et Sociologiques, edited by I. Lowy, 421–45. Paris,
France: Les Editions INSERM/Libby Eurotext.
Li, G. 1995. ‘‘The Interaction Effect of Bereavement and Sex on the Risk of Suicide in the
Elderly: An Historical Cohort Study.’’ Social Science & Medicine 40:825–28.
Li, G., and Y. Conwell. 2010. ‘‘Pain and Self-injury Ideation in Elderly Men and Women
Receiving Home Care.’’ Journal of the American Geriatrics Society 58:2160–65.
Linehan, M. M. 1973. ‘‘Suicide and Attempted Suicide: Study of Perceived Sex Differences.’’
Perceptual and Motor Skills 37:31–34.
Link, B., J. C. Phelan, and A. M. Fremont. 2000. ‘‘Evaluating the Fundamental Cause Expla-
nation for Social Disparities in Health.’’ In Handbook of Medical Sociology, 5th ed., edited
by C. E. Bird and P. Conrad, 33–46. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
LoPresto, C. T., M. F. Sherman, and M. A. DiCarlo. 1994–1995. ‘‘Factors Affecting the Unac-
ceptability of Suicide and the Effects of Evaluator Depression and Religiosity.’’ Omega:
The Journal of Death and Dying 30:205–21.
Lumsdaine, R. L., and S. G. C. Vermeer. 2015. ‘‘Retirement Timing of Women and the Role
of Care Responsibilities for Grandchildren.’’ Demography 52:433–54.
Lyons, M. J. 1984. ‘‘Suicide in Later life: Some Putative Causes with Implications for Preven-
tion.’’ Journal of Community Psychology 12:379–88.
Mahalik, J.R., S. M. Burns,and M. Syzdek. 2007.‘‘Masculinity and Perceived Normative Health
BehaviorsasPredictorsofMen’sHealthBehaviors.’’ SocialScience&Medicine64:2201–09.
Mahalik, J. R., G. G. Good, and M. Englar-Carlson. 2003. ‘‘Masculinity Scripts, Presenting
Concerns, and Help-seeking: Implications for Practice and Training.’’ Professional
Psychology: Research and Practice 34:123–31.
McAndrew, F. T., and A. J. Garrison. 2007. ‘‘Beliefs about Gender Differences in Methods
and Causes of Suicide.’’ Archives of Suicide Research 11:271–79.
68
Men and Masculinities 20(1)
 Meyer, M. H., and W. M. Parker. 2011. ‘‘Gender, Aging, and Social Policy.’’ In Handbook of
Aging and the Social Science, 7th ed., edited by R. B. Binstock and L. George, 323–35.
Burlington, MA: Elsevier.
Moen, P. 1996. ‘‘A Life Course Perspective on Retirement, Gender, and Well-being.’’ Journal
of Occupational Health Psychology 1:131–44.
Mo
¨ller-Leimku
¨hler, A. M. 2003. ‘‘The Gender Gap in Suicide and Premature Death: Or Why Are
Men So Vulnerable?’’ European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience 253:1–8.
Montgomery, R. J. V., and M. M. Datwyler. 1990. ‘‘Women and Men in the Caregiving Role.’’
Generations 14:34–8.
Nanji, A. 2005. Thompson Death Spurs Book Sale. Accessed June 8, 2015. http://www.
cbsnews.com/news/thompson-death-spurs-book-sales/.
National Alliance for Caregiving and American Association of Retired Persons (AARP). 2009.
Caregiving in the U.S., 2009. Washington, DC: National Alliance for Caregiving and AARP.
Nock, M. K., G. Borges, E. J. Bromet, C. B. Cha, R. C. Kessler, and S. Lee. 2008. ‘‘Suicide
and Suicidal Behavior.’’ Epidemiologic Reviews 30:133–54.
Oliffe, J. L., C. S. E. Han, J. S. Ogrodniczuck, J. G. Phillips, and P. Roy. 2011. ‘‘Suicide from
the Perspectives of Older Men Who Experience Depression: A Gender Analysis.’’ Amer-
ican Journal of Men’s Health 5:444–54.
Perrig-Chiello, P., and S. Hutchison. 2010. ‘‘Health and Well-being in Old Age: The Perti-
nence of a Gender Mainstreaming Approach to Research.’’ Gerontology 56:208–13.
Price,C.A.,andS.Balaswamy.2009.‘‘BeyondHealthandWealth:PredictorsofWomen’sRetire-
ment Satisfaction.’’ International Journal of Aging and Human Development 68:195–214.
Range, L. M., and S. K. Martin. 1990. ‘‘How Knowledge of Extenuating Circumstances Influ-
ences Community Reactions toward Suicide Victims and their Bereaved Families.’’
Omega: The Journal of Death and Dying 21:191–98.
Rich, A. R., J. Kirkpatrick-Smith, R. L. Bonner, and F. Jans. 1992. ‘‘Gender Differences in the
Psychosocial Correlates of Suicidal Ideation among Adolescents.’’ Suicide and Life-
Threatening Behavior 22:364–73.
Rubenowitz, E., M. Waern, K. Wilhelson, and P. Allebeck. 2001. ‘‘Life Events and Psychosocial
Factors in Elderly Suicide—A Case-control Study.’’ Psychological Medicine 31:1193–202.
Schmutte, T., M. O’Connell, M. Weiland, S. Lawless, and L. Davidson. 2009. ‘‘Stemming the
Tide of Suicide in Older White Men: A Call to Action.’’ American Journal of Men’s
Health 3:189–200.
Shah, A., R. Bhat, S. Zarate-Escudero, D. DeLeo, and A. Erlangsen. 2015. ‘‘Suicide Rates in
Five-year Age-bands After the Age of 60 Years: The International Landscape.’’ Aging &
Mental Health. doi:10.1080/13607863.2015.1055552.
Spicer, R. S., and T. R. Miller. 2000. ‘‘Suicide Acts in 8 States: Incidence and Case Fatality
Rates by Demographics and Method.’’ American Journal of Public Health 90:1885–91.
Springer, K. W., and D. M. Mouzon. 2011. ‘‘‘Macho Men’ and Preventive Health Care: Impli-
cations for Older Men in Different Social Classes.’’ Journal of Health and Social Behavior
52:212–27.
Stanistreet, D., C. Bambra, and A. Scott-Samuel. 2005. ‘‘Is Patriarchy the Source of Men’s
Higher Mortality?’’ Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health 59:873–76.
Canetto
69
 Stephenson, W. 2012. Gonzo Republic: Hunter S. Thompson’s America. New York: Conti-
nuum International.
Stice, B. D., and S. S. Canetto. 2008. ‘‘Older Adult Suicide: Perceived Precipitants and Protec-
tive Factors.’’ Clinical Gerontologist: The Journal of Aging and Mental Health 31:1–25.
Torres, S. 2014. ‘‘Aging Women, Living Poorer.’’ Contexts 13:72–4. Accessed May 11, 2015.
http://contexts.org/articles/aging-women-living-poorer/.
Turvey, C. L., Y. Conwell, M. P. Jones, C. Phillips, E. Simonsick, J. L. Pearson, and R. Wal-
lace. 2002. ‘‘Risk Factors for Late-life Suicide: A Prospective, Community-based Study.’’
American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry 10:398–406.
US Department of Health and Human Services. 2001. Mental Health: Culture, Race and Eth-
nicity. A Supplement to Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon General. Rockville, MD.
Accessed April 30, 2015. http://www.consumerstar.org/resources/pdf/surgeongeneralsre-
port2001.pdf.
Useda, J. D., P. R. Duberstein, K. R. Conner, A. Beckman, N. Franus, X. Tu, and Y. Conwell.
2007. ‘‘Personality Differences in Attempted Suicide versus Suicide in Adults 50 Years of
Age or Older.’’ Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 75:126–33.
Va
¨rnik, P. 2012. ‘‘Suicide in the World.’’ International Journal of Environmental Research
and Public Health 9:760–71.
Waern, M., E. Rubenowitz, B. Runeson, I. Skoog, K. Wilhelmson, and P. Allebeck. 2002.
‘‘Burden of Illness and Suicide in Elderly People: Case-control Study.’’ British Medical
Journal 324:1355–57.
White, H., and J. M. Stillion. 1988. ‘‘Sex Differences in Attitudes toward Suicide: Do Males
Stigmatize Males?’’ Psychology of Women Quarterly 12:357–66.
Winterrowd, E., S. S. Canetto, and K. Benoit. 2015. ‘‘Permissive Beliefs and Attitudes About
Older Adult Suicide: A Suicide Enabling Script?’’ Aging & Mental Health.
World Health Organization. 2014. Preventing Suicide: A Global Imperative. Accessed August
10,
2015.
http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/131056/8/9789241564878_eng.pdf?
ua¼1&ua¼1.
Yip, P. S. 1998. ‘‘Age, Sex, Marital Status and Suicide: An Empirical Study of East and West.’’
Psychological Reports 82:311–22.
Author Biography
Silvia Sara Canetto is a full professor at Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO, USA,
with appointments in the Psychology, Women’s/Ethnic Studies, and Human-Development-
and-Family-Studies Departments. She holds graduate degrees from Italy, Israel, and the
United States. Her research focuses on cultural scripts of gender, with studies conducted in
Ghana, Israel, Italy, Nepal, Peru, South Africa, and the United States. She is author of over
200 publications, including the highly cited ‘‘The Gender Paradox in Suicide’’ (with Saki-
nofsky), and is ‘‘Fellow’’ of several professional societies, including the American Psycholo-
gical Association and the Association for Psychological Science.
70
Men and Masculinities 20(1)
