 February 21, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e50-e87. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000458
e50
ABSTRACT: Today, most female children born with congenital heart 
disease will reach childbearing age. For many women with complex 
congenital heart disease, carrying a pregnancy carries a moderate to 
high risk for both the mother and her fetus. Many such women, however, 
do not have access to adult congenital heart disease tertiary centers 
with experienced reproductive programs. Therefore, it is important 
that all practitioners who will be managing these women have current 
information not only on preconception counseling and diagnostic evaluation 
to determine maternal and fetal risk but also on how to manage them 
once they are pregnant and when to refer them to a regional center with 
expertise in pregnancy management.
E
xpanded diagnostic, medical, and surgical management options have improved 
the long-term survival of patients with congenital heart disease (CHD). Thus, 
most women born with CHD will reach reproductive age. The ability to bear 
children is a major point of care for this growing population. As a result, pregnancy 
counseling and management are among the major noncardiac issues facing pediat-
ric and congenital cardiac providers.
For the majority of patients, the ability to conceive and carry a pregnancy to term 
will present little problem. However, for those with complex CHD, pregnancy may be 
associated with an increased risk compared with women with milder forms of CHD, 
regardless of whether they are clinically stable at the time of conception. This docu-
ment provides an overview of the management of the patient with complex CHD who 
becomes pregnant.
DEFINING THE POPULATION
Simple CHD lesions include mild pulmonary valve stenosis, a small, uncomplicated 
atrial septal defect or ventricular septal defect, patent ductus arteriosus, and suc-
cessfully repaired atrial septal defect, ventricular septal defect, patent ductus ar-
teriosus, and anomalous pulmonary venous connection without important residua. 
Complex CHD, on the other hand, includes any complex anatomical or physiological 
lesion as defined by the Bethesda conference.1 Some patients with simple CHD 
lesions would, however, be considered high pregnancy risk because of the pres-
ence of comorbid conditions. An example is the patient with an atrial septal defect 
and pulmonary hypertension or atrial fibrillation; this patient would require a higher 
level of care during pregnancy and in the peripartum period. Thus, a designation of 
simple versus complex CHD is not adequate when referring to patients with CHD 
considering pregnancy.
Mary M. Canobbio, RN, 
MN, FAHA, Chair
Carole A. Warnes, MD, 
FRCP
, Co-Chair
Jamil Aboulhosn, MD
Heidi M. Connolly, MD
Amber Khanna, MD
Brian J. Koos, MD, DPhil
Seema Mital, MD, FAHA, 
FRCPC
Carl Rose, MD
Candice Silversides, MD, 
FRCPC
Karen Stout, MD, FAHA
On behalf of the Ameri-
can Heart Association 
Council on Cardiovas-
cular and Stroke Nurs-
ing; Council on Clinical 
Cardiology; Council on 
Cardiovascular Disease 
in the Young; Council on 
Functional Genomics  
and Translational Biology; 
and Council on Quality 
of Care and Outcomes 
Research
Management of Pregnancy in Patients With 
Complex Congenital Heart Disease
A Scientific Statement for Healthcare Professionals From the American 
Heart Association
© 2017 American Heart 
Association, Inc.
Key Words: AHA Scientific 
Statements ◼ heart defects, 
congenital ◼ heart diseases  
◼ pregnancy
AHA SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Pregnancy in Patients With Complex CHD
Circulation. 2017;135:e50-e87. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000458 
February 21, 2017
e51
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
The modified World Health Organization (WHO) classifi-
cation categorized patients into 4 pregnancy risk classes 
(classes I–IV) as determined by their medical condition 
(Table 1).2 Patients in class I have no detectable increased 
risk of maternal mortality and either no or a mild increase 
in morbidity; thus, they are not included in this document. 
Women in class II might have a small increase in mater-
nal mortality or a moderate increase in morbidity with 
pregnancy, and those in class III might have a significant 
increase in maternal mortality or severe morbidity. Those 
in class IV, however, may carry an extremely high risk of 
maternal mortality or severe morbidity such that preg-
nancy is ill advised. These patients should be counseled 
to avoid pregnancy. If pregnancy is confirmed in a woman 
in WHO class IV, then termination is advised.
High-risk patients are further identified in observation-
al data to include patients with prosthetic valves or those 
with more than moderate atrioventricular valve regurgi-
tation or New York Heart Association (NYHA) class II or 
higher heart failure before pregnancy.4–7
PHYSIOLOGICAL ADAPTATION OF PREGNANCY
Maternal organ systems undergo significant physiologi-
cal alterations during pregnancy. The following sections 
highlight the physiological changes that have particular 
relevance to the management of gravidas with CHD.
Antepartum
Blood Volume
Maternal blood volume begins to increase with the early 
hormonal changes of conception.8 Overall, pregnancy in-
creases maternal blood volume by ≈40% for a singleton 
and 67% for twins, with peak values at ≈32 weeks of 
gestation8,9 (Figure 1). Both plasma volume and red cell 
mass contribute to the hypervolemia, with respective in-
creases of ≈45% to 55% and 20% to 30%.10–12 Estrogen 
has a key role in plasma volume expansion and promotes 
sodium and water retention by upregulating the produc-
tion of angiotensinogen, renin, and aldosterone.13–15 The 
disproportionate expansion of plasma volume relative to 
red cell mass contributes to the physiological anemia of 
pregnancy, with mean±SD hemoglobin concentrations 
of 10.9±0.6 and 12.4±1.0 g/dL for the second and 
third trimesters, respectively.
B-Type Natriuretic Peptide
The median level of B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) in 
normal pregnant woman is about twice that of nonpreg-
nant control subjects, rising early in pregnancy and re-
maining high throughout gestation16–18 until ≈72 hours 
after delivery.19,20 Adverse maternal cardiac events have 
been associated with high BNP concentrations (>100 
pg/mL), but its use as a negative predictive indicator ap-
pears to be of most value. In 1 series, the negative pre-
dictive value of NT-pro-BNP <128 pg/mL at 20 weeks’ 
gestation exceeded 95%.21
Colloid Oncotic Pressure
Circulating albumin concentrations fall 12% to 18% in 
pregnancy, with the lowest levels at ≈24 weeks’ gesta-
tion.22 The decline in colloid oncotic pressure, along with 
increased femoral venous pressure caused by uterine 
compression of the inferior vena cava, elicits the ede-
ma of pregnancy.22,23 The fall in oncotic pressure can 
be hemodynamically significant, particularly when com-
bined with generous intravenous infusion of crystalloid, 
and thus the gravida is more susceptible to pulmonary 
edema under these conditions.
Cardiac Output
Maternal cardiac output begins to rise after conception 
and plateaus at ≈24 weeks of gestation, as shown in 
Figure 2.24–33 Maternal cardiac output increases 30% to 
50% in a singleton pregnancy, with an additional 10% to 
20% increment in a twin pregnancy.34–37 Maternal pos-
ture can significantly affect cardiac output, especially 
after 20 weeks’ gestation when the gravid uterus com-
presses the vena cava and pelvic veins.38 Compared 
with measurements in late pregnancy in the left lateral 
recumbent position, cardiac output is lowered by ≈14% 
in the supine position and by ≈30% in lithotomy.39 In fact, 
≈8% of gravidas become hypotensive in later pregnancy 
when in the supine position, with pallor, nausea, and diz-
ziness. The hemodynamic effects vary widely, with the 
fall in arterial pressure ranging from mild to severe.31 
These women can also manifest a blunted rise in heart 
rate or even a bradycardia. Severe hypotension can 
even occur without maternal symptoms.40
Cardiac Rhythm
Maternal heart rate progressively rises 10 to 20 bpm 
over pregestational rates, peaking in the late second or 
early third trimester. Pregnancy also lowers the thresh-
old for isolated rhythm disturbances, including atrial and 
ventricular premature beats and reentrant supraventricu-
lar tachycardia (SVT). Similarly, ventricular arrhythmias, 
although rare in labor, have been reported in 5% of nor-
mal gravidas.41 Common changes observed on the ECG 
are listed in Table 2.
Arterial Vasculature
The vascular tree undergoes remodeling to accommodate 
increased blood volume. Along with the hyperkinetic circu-
lation, structural alterations increase the risk of aortic root 
enlargement and dissection, particularly in gravidas with 
aortopathies such as Marfan or Turner syndrome.
Pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) declines by 
≈24% by the eighth week of gestation and remains 
stable over the remainder of pregnancy. The decrease 
in PVR accommodates the ≈47% increase in pulmonary 
flow; thus, the mean pulmonary artery pressure remains 
unaltered in a normal pregnancy.42–45
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Canobbio et al
February 21, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e50-e87. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000458
e52
A primary fall in systemic vascular resistance (SVR), 
which reduces preload and afterload, may trigger many of 
the changes in the hemodynamics and volume homeosta-
sis that accompany early pregnancy. Within 8 weeks after 
the last menstrual period, SVR has fallen by ≈30%, reach-
ing a nadir at ≈24 weeks’ gestation (Figure 2).23,25,27,43,46–50 
After 24 weeks’ gestation, SVR begins to increase again, 
approaching preconception levels by term.
The fall in SVR is associated with 10 to 15 mm 
Hg 
reduction in diastolic pressure at 20 to 24 weeks’ gesta-
tion (measured in the lateral recumbent position), which 
is followed by a rise toward nonpregnant measurements 
(Figure 2).27,51
Respiratory Changes
Tidal volume increases 40% with a proportional rise in 
minute ventilation.52–54 This physiological hyperventila-
tion is greater than the increase in oxygen consumption 
and accounts for the breathlessness that begins in early 
pregnancy.55–58
Table 1. Modified WHO Classification of Maternal Cardiovascular Risk
WHO Pregnancy 
Risk Category
Risk Description
Maternal Risk Factors
I
No detectable increase in maternal 
mortality and no/mild increase  
in morbidity risk
Uncomplicated small/mild pulmonary stenosis, PDA, mitral valve prolapse
Successfully repaired simple lesions (ASD, VSD, PDA, anomalous pulmonary 
venous drainage)
Atrial or ventricular ectopic beats, isolated
II
Small increase in maternal mortality and 
moderate increase in morbidity risk
If otherwise well and uncomplicated:
Unoperated ASD, VSD
Repaired TOF
Most arrhythmias
II–III
Moderate increase in maternal mortality 
morbidity risk
Mild LV impairment
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Native or tissue valvular disease (not considered risk category I or IV)
Marfan syndrome without aortic dilation
Aortic dilation <45 mm in bicuspid aortic valve aortopathy
Repaired coarctation
III
Significantly increased maternal mortality 
or severe morbidity risk. Expert counseling 
required. In the event of pregnancy, 
intensive specialist cardiac and obstetric 
monitoring needed throughout pregnancy, 
childbirth, and the puerperium.
Mechanical valve
Systemic RV
Fontan circulation
Cyanotic heart disease (unrepaired)
Other complex CHD
Aortic dilation 40–45 mm in Marfan syndrome
Aortic dilation 45–50 mm in bicuspid aortic valve aortopathy
IV
Extremely high maternal mortality or 
severe morbidity risk. Pregnancy is 
contraindicated. In the event of pregnancy, 
termination should be discussed. If 
pregnancy continues, care should follow 
class III recommendations.
Pulmonary arterial hypertension (of any cause)
Severe systemic ventricular dysfunction (LV ejection fraction <30%, NYHA class 
III-IV)
Previous peripartum cardiomyopathy with any residual impairment of LV function
Severe mitral stenosis, severe symptomatic aortic stenosis 
Aortic dilation >45 mm in Marfan syndrome
Aortic dilation >50 mm in bicuspid aortic valve aortopathy
Native severe coarctation
AS indicates aortic stenosis; ASD, atrial septal defect; CHD, congenital heart disease; LV, left ventricular; NYHA, New York Heart Association; PDA, patent 
ductus arteriosus; RV, right ventricle; TOF, tetralogy of Fallot; VSD, ventricular septal defect; and WHO, World Health Organization. 
Modified from Thorne et al2 with permission from the BMJ Publishing Group Ltd. Copyright © 2006, BMJ Publishing Group Ltd and the British 
Cardiovascular Society. Modified from Balci et al3 with permission from the BMJ Publishing Group Ltd. Copyright © 2014, BMJ Publishing Group Ltd and 
the British Cardiovascular Society. 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Pregnancy in Patients With Complex CHD
Circulation. 2017;135:e50-e87. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000458 
February 21, 2017
e53
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Intrapartum
Labor results in important hemodynamic changes, in-
cluding elevations in heart rate, central venous pressure, 
and cardiac output.59–61 A change from the supine to a 
lateral recumbent position between contractions (basal 
conditions) increases maternal cardiac output by ≈22% 
and decreases heart rate by 6%.60 Basal systemic arte-
rial pressure rises with the progression of the first stage 
of labor, with further increases during uterine contrac-
tions.33,59,61 Uterine contractions augment maternal car-
diac output as a result of enhanced sympathetic activity 
(via anxiety, pain) and expulsion of uterine blood into the 
central venous circulation.58–60 During a contraction, the 
uterus expels up to 400 mL blood into the central venous 
circulation, leading to a rise in central venous pressure, 
right atrial pressure,62 cardiac output, and arterial pres-
sure. The labor-induced augmentation of cardiac output 
is attenuated by effective epidural anesthesia.
Maternal position modulates these hemodynamic re-
sponses. In the supine position, contractions are associ-
ated with an ≈15% rise in cardiac output; in the lateral 
position, cardiac output rises only ≈8% to 11%.32,35,63 
In the supine position, compression of the inferior vena 
cava by the gravid uterus reduces venous return and 
cardiac output, whereas virtual occlusion of the distal 
aorta and its branches by the uterus results in a greater 
increase in arterial pressure.63.64 Lateral recumbency is 
not associated with impeded venous return or elevations 
in systemic arterial pressure. Overall, maternal cardiac 
output increases 10% to 30% during the first stage of 
labor and up to 50% in the second stage.32,46,58–60,65,66
The labor-associated rise in arterial pressure can be 
attenuated by effective pain control (eg, epidural) and lat-
eral tilting of the patient.67,68 Because epidural anesthe-
sia via venodilatation can reduce return of blood to the 
heart, cautious incremental dosing is advised, especially 
in gravidas whose maternal cardiac output is sensitive 
to falls in preload.
The pelvic descent of the fetus in the second stage of 
labor elicits pressure and an urge to bear down against 
a closed glottis in a gravida without effective epidural 
anesthesia. When performed in the absence of contrac-
tions or between contractions, the Valsalva maneuver 
typically elicits a moderate transient fall in cardiac out-
put resulting from decreased venous return.58 Minimiz-
ing maternal expulsive effort by passive delivery and 
facilitating the second stage by assisted delivery (for-
ceps or vacuum extraction) to avoid the Valsalva maneu-
ver and thereby minimize hemodynamic perturbations 
should be considered in those with critical obstructive 
lesions (eg, aortic stenosis [AS]), fragile aortas (bicus-
pid aortic valve with aortopathy, coarctation), and pul-
monary hypertension.68
Postpartum
Further challenges to maternal cardiac reserve occur at 
delivery, that result from increased preload via vena ca-
val decompression and extrusion of blood from the con-
tracted uterus into the inferior vena cava. Augmented 
50
Plasma
40
30
20
10
0
Whole
Blood
Blood Volumes 
% control
Erythrocytes
10
20
30
40
Figure 1. Pregnancy changes in blood volume.  
Reprinted with permission from Longo et al.13 Copyright © 
1983, American Physiological Society.
20
10
0
0
10
20
30
40
0
-20
-40
0
0
20
40
60
10
20
30
40
0
20
10
0
-20
-40
10
20
30
40
0
10
20
30
40
Systolic
Diastolic
Figure 2. Pregnancy changes in maternal systemic 
hemodynamics.
Reproduced with permission from Robson et al.24 Copyright 
© 1989, American Physiological Society.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Canobbio et al
February 21, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e50-e87. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000458
e54
venous return increases maternal cardiac output by 60% 
to 80% after vaginal delivery.58–62,65 This abrupt rise in 
cardiac output dissipates to prelabor values within ≈1 
hour postpartum and falls further over the following 24 
weeks. Mean arterial pressure can be elevated for 1 to 
2 days postpartum60 before declining over the ensuing 
2 weeks. PVR rises to preconception values within 6 
months postpartum.42
Maternal blood loss in the first postpartum hour aver-
ages 600 mL for vaginal and 1000 mL for cesarean 
delivery.69 Excessive blood loss is associated with ma-
ternal tachycardia and decreased stroke volume.70,71
ASSESSMENT AND EVALUATION
Preconception Counseling and Diagnostic 
Evaluation
Optimal preconception diagnostic cardiovascular evalu-
ation should accurately assess an individual patient’s 
pregnancy risk and direct appropriate therapies to re-
duce risk. At present, risk algorithms are imperfect for 
assessing individual risk but provide a framework from 
which to evaluate patients. The most reliable appears 
to be the modified WHO classification of maternal car-
diovascular risk (see Estimating Maternal and Fetal Risk 
and Table 1).3
Preconception Counseling
All women of reproductive age with CHD should be coun-
seled about pregnancy early in their medical care by a 
provider who is knowledgeable in the care of the CHD 
patient. Ideally, age-appropriate counseling should be 
initially offered at or soon after sexual maturity in the 
patient’s teen years. Counseling should include a discus-
sion of the anticipated impact of pregnancy on maternal 
heart disease and the importance of pregnancy plan-
ning, including effective contraception options.
For the woman with complex CHD, preconception 
planning is imperative. The woman and her partner 
should have a clear understanding of the potential risk 
of pregnancy for her and her offspring. For the woman 
contemplating an immediate pregnancy, a more focused 
conversation is required about pregnancy risk and possi-
ble need to undergo additional diagnostic cardiovascular 
evaluation to determine maternal risk, to optimize ma-
ternal status, and to treat or repair any residual defects 
or other problems before conception as needed. The 
discussion should also include the possibility that preg-
nancy may contribute to a decline in maternal cardiac 
status that may not recover to baseline after pregnancy. 
It is also important to identify any potential impediments 
such as insurance, transportation, and geographic dis-
tance from the tertiary center. Finally, it is important to 
stress that women with complex CHD must be cared for 
by an obstetrician and cardiologist experienced in the 
management of adult CHD.68,72
A brief overview of the anticipated delivery plan (vagi-
nal versus cesarean delivery, anesthesia) should also be 
discussed (Figure 3). A preconception visit with a mater-
nal-fetal medicine obstetrician can be helpful, particularly 
for women at higher risk for complications.
Genetic counseling may be particularly valuable to 
women for whom there is a significant risk of recurrence 
in offspring. The risk for recurrence of CHD varies widely 
from 3% to 50%, depending on the type of maternal heart 
disease73,74 (see Estimating Maternal and Fetal Risk).
Diagnostic Evaluation 
The preconception evaluation of a patient with complex 
CHD begins with a thorough review of medical records 
that include information on the primary defect, surgical 
history, including both palliative and reparative proce-
dures, and the presence of comorbidities and any residua 
or sequelae associated with the specific cardiac lesions 
or surgery. Similarly, reports from prior testing such as 
echocardiograms, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 
and exercise tests should be available for comparison. 
The initial diagnostic evaluation includes measurement of 
arterial oxygen saturation, ECG, and echocardiogram.
Because maternal functional capacity is an important 
predictor of a woman’s ability to tolerate pregnancy, as-
sessment of exercise capacity may be helpful. For most 
patients with complex disease, objective exercise test-
ing by a cardiopulmonary exercise test or an exercise 
stress test may be in order to obtain an objective as-
sessment of functional capacity and to facilitate the iden-
tification of exercise-induced arrhythmias, particularly 
because many patients underreport or underrecognize 
the degree of their limitation.75,76
Suggestions for Clinical Practice
The initial diagnostic evaluation should include the 
 
following:
• Detailed history, including any current cardiovascu-
lar symptoms and family history
• Review of medications for benefits and risks, 
with appropriate adjustment or changes of drugs 
known to be teratogenic
• Arterial oxygen saturation
• Baseline laboratory studies, including complete 
blood count, electrolytes, and thyroid and liver 
function tests
Table 2. Normal Electrocardiographic Changes 
Associated With Pregnancy
Left axis shift is seen, with the greatest shift in the third trimester 
caused by elevation of the diaphragm.
Shortening of the PR, QRS, and QT intervals may accompany the 
increase in resting heart rate.
Nonspecific ST abnormalities, including segment depression or 
flattened and inverted T waves in lead III, occur frequently.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Pregnancy in Patients With Complex CHD
Circulation. 2017;135:e50-e87. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000458 
February 21, 2017
e55
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
• ECG
• Cardiopulmonary or exercise stress test
• Comprehensive echocardiogram
• Consideration of genetic counseling
Additional testing, including imaging or invasive stud-
ies, should be carried out only to further investigate 
anatomy, ventricular function or integrity of valve func-
tion, or calculation of shunts or to determine the pres-
ence of pulmonary hypertension. If there is doubt about 
the presence or absence of pulmonary hypertension, 
cardiac catheterization should be performed.
Estimating Maternal and Fetal Risk
Maternal risk in pregnancy is dependent not only on the 
complexity of the primary cardiac lesion but also on the 
presence of residual lesions and clinical sequelae such 
as heart failure, arrhythmias, or cerebrovascular events 
that contribute to overall risk.77–79
Maternal Risk
Several risk stratification scores, including the Canadian 
Cardiac Disease in Pregnancy (CARPREG) score74 and 
the Zwangerschap bij Aangeboren HARtAfwijkingen (ZA-
HARA; translated in English as “Pregnancy and Congeni-
tal Heart Disease”) score,4 have been developed to pre-
dict maternal risk during pregnancy. Both models identify 
predictors of maternal cardiovascular and fetal events 
and attribute points to each predictor in an attempt to 
delineate more precisely maternal cardiovascular and 
offspring risk to the pregnancy. These risk scores have 
significant limitations, however, because they are highly 
population dependent. For example, Canadian Cardiac 
Disease in Pregnancy included 22% of patients with ac-
Figure 3. Assessment and man-
agement of women with complex 
congenital heart disease.  
ACE indicates angiotensin-converting 
enzyme; ACHD, adult congenital heart 
disease; ARB, angiotensin receptor blocker; 
L&D, labor and delivery; MFM, maternal-fetal 
medicine; NYHA, New York Heart Associa-
tion; OB, obstetrics; and POC, plan of care.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Canobbio et al
February 21, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e50-e87. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000458
e56
quired heart disease, and 4% of the population were 
included because of arrhythmias. Therefore, in an effort 
to prevent high-risk patients from becoming pregnant, 
including those with severe pulmonary hypertension and 
severely dilated aortas and those who are not repre-
sented in these studies, a prepregnancy counseling ses-
sion should be organized in an adult CHD center.
More recently, a prospective validation study re-
ported that the modified WHO classification of maternal 
cardiovascular risk was the most reliable predictor of 
maternal cardiovascular complications, the most com-
mon of which are arrhythmias and heart failure.3 The 
recommendation to each patient, however, should be 
individualized. If a reparable lesion or clinical problem 
is identified at the time of prepregnancy counseling, a 
recommendation for directed therapies to address the 
problem is made.
For some patients, the evaluation may suggest a 
pregnancy risk that is unacceptable to the patient. Ap-
propriate contraception is vital for those women who are 
counseled against pregnancy and for those women who 
choose not to pursue pregnancy.
Fetal Risk
Maternal CHD is major determinant of risk to the fetus 
and the neonate, resulting in the following:
• Higher frequency of spontaneous abortions, rang-
ing between 15% and 25%, and intrauterine fetal 
demise in selected defects.79,80
• Higher frequency of recurrence of CHD, underscor-
ing the need to offer fetal echocardiography to all 
pregnant women with CHD at 18 to 22 weeks.
• Higher preterm birth rate (10%–12%), especially in 
those with complex CHD (22%–65%).
• Higher frequency of neonatal events, for example, 
small for gestational age, respiratory distress syn-
drome, interventricular hemorrhage, and neona-
tal death (27.8%). Specific maternal risk factors 
such as subaortic ventricular outflow obstruction, 
maternal cyanosis, and reduced cardiac output 
have been reported as predictors of adverse peri-
natal events.79,80
• Higher perinatal mortality that may be >4-fold 
higher than in the general population (<1%) and is 
common with premature delivery or recurrence of 
CHD. Perinatal mortality is highest in patients with 
Eisenmenger syndrome (27.7%).4,78,79
Genetic Counseling
It is important to provide genetic counseling to women 
with CHD on the potential for recurrence risk in the off-
spring, ideally before conception.
Genetic counseling should include the assessment of 
genetic risk, a discussion of the genetic screening tests 
available and the implications of genetic test results, and 
pretest and posttest counseling. Positive consequences 
include a more accurate estimation of transmission risk 
to offspring and greater awareness and better manage-
ment of comorbid conditions that can influence fetal 
and maternal outcomes. A detailed 3-generation family 
history, including history of consanguinity and history of 
miscarriages, should be obtained in all pregnancies.81,82
Maternal and paternal evaluation should be performed 
for clinical features suggestive of a syndromic pheno-
type. The absence of typical phenotypic features does 
not preclude the presence of a genetic or chromosomal 
anomaly; therefore, genetic testing may still be offered if 
the index of suspicion for a genetic pathogenesis is high. 
Most genetic conditions associated with CHD are autoso-
mal dominant conditions, which have a transmission risk 
of 50%, including the Marfan, Holt-Oram, Noonan, Ala-
gille, CHARGE (coloboma, heart defect, atresia choanae, 
retarded growth and development, genital abnormality, 
and ear abnormality), 22q11.2 microdeletion, and Wil-
liams syndromes. For CHD that arises de novo, the risk 
of CHD recurrence in offspring is between 3% and 5%.83 
The risk of recurrence is higher with heterotaxy, atrio-
ventricular septal defect, and obstructive lesions of the 
left ventricular outflow tract.84 Besides genetic factors, 
it is important to assess for environmental risk factors 
such as obesity, diabetes mellitus, hypertension, infec-
tions, alcohol, smoking, and teratogenic medications 
that can negatively affect fetal growth and well-being and 
increase the risk of fetal birth defects.85
Because a number of conotruncal abnormalities may 
be associated with chromosomal abnormalities such 
as 22q11.2 deletion syndrome, genetic testing should 
be offered not only to women with strong family history 
of CHD but also to women with cardiac lesions known 
to be associated with genetic disorders. These include 
interrupted aortic arch, truncus arteriosus, tetralogy of 
Fallot, pulmonary atresia, ventricular septal defect with 
aortic arch anomaly, isolated aortic arch anomaly, and 
discontinuous branch pulmonary arteries.
Two consensus statements from the American Heart 
Association (AHA) and the Canadian Cardiovascular So-
ciety provide excellent guidance for genetic testing in 
CHD.85,86
Suggestions for Clinical Practice
• A 3-generation family history, including any con-
sanguinity, should be completed.
• Genetic evaluation should be made available to all 
women with CHD to determine recurrence, par-
ticularly in those patients with a family history of 
CHD and those with possible autosomal dominant 
lesions (eg, 22q 11 deletion).
PREGNANCY MANAGEMENT
Ideally, the cardiovascular evaluation should occur be-
fore conception. For the patient who presents for the 
first time with an unplanned pregnancy, however, the 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Pregnancy in Patients With Complex CHD
Circulation. 2017;135:e50-e87. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000458 
February 21, 2017
e57
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
diagnostic workup must be individualized with consider-
ation of the potential risk to both mother and fetus.
Diagnostic Testing in Pregnancy
Electrocardiogram
A standard 12-lead ECG is a simple method for evaluat-
ing abnormal heart rhythm, chamber enlargement, evi-
dence of ischemia, and medication effects. Normal elec-
trocardiographic changes associated with pregnancy 
are listed in Table 2. Holter monitors and extended event 
recorders may be helpful in the evaluation of a patient 
with palpitations, presyncope, or syncope.
Echocardiography
Transthoracic echocardiography remains a mainstay of 
cardiac evaluation in the CHD population and can provide 
information on cardiac structure, anatomic abnormali-
ties, chamber and great vessel dimensions, ventricular 
function, valvular function, and hemodynamics.
The use of agitated saline during pregnancy has not 
been systematically studied but is generally considered 
safe.87 Intravenous contrast agents such as perflutren 
lipid microspheres (Definity) or perflutren protein type A 
(Optison) have not been studied in pregnant women. Ei-
ther may be used if a clear maternal benefit is defined.
An echocardiogram taken before the pregnancy is 
useful in establishing the baseline status and may be 
repeated safely throughout pregnancy.88 In those with 
limited echocardiographic windows, transesophageal 
echocardiography is relatively safe during pregnancy 
but with attention to airway protection to avoid the risk 
of vomiting and aspiration.68,89
Exercise Stress Testing
Exercise stress testing and measurement of maximal 
oxygen consumption (V
⋅ o2max) during exercise can be 
useful in evaluating cardiopulmonary reserve, functional 
status, or potential exercise-induced arrhythmias during 
pregnancy, although they are rarely necessary.90–93 A 
submaximal stress protocol (80% of the maximal pre-
dicted heart rate) is recommended.68,91 A stress echo-
cardiogram is indicated to determine the risk of myo-
cardial ischemia in patients with suspected or confirmed 
underlying coronary artery disease or in patients with 
mildly reduced ventricular function.
Imaging
Chest Radiography
Chest radiography is generally not advocated during preg-
nancy unless specifically indicated. Even the normal heart 
may appear to be increased in size during pregnancy.94
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
MRI is particularly useful for evaluating extracardiac vas-
cular structures, including the aorta and left ventricular 
myocardium. The majority of studies evaluating MRI 
safety during pregnancy report that maternal risk asso-
ciated with the use of MRI is the same as for nonpreg-
nant patients.95–97 Safety concerns arise, however, with 
respect to the fetus. Although no ill effects to the fetus 
have been reported, concerns include the potential for 
fetal acoustic damage because MRI coils produce a loud 
tapping noise.98,99 Limited data on organogenesis are 
available, but MRI is probably safe after the first trimes-
ter.68 The American College of Radiology recommends 
that gadolinium be avoided and used only when other 
imaging (transthoracic and transesophageal echocar-
diography) is insufficient for diagnosis and that the risks 
and benefits be discussed with the pregnant patient and 
referring physician.96,97 If required, it is preferable to wait 
until the second or third trimester when organogenesis 
is completed.97,100
Computed Tomography
The risk of radiation exposure from computed tomog-
raphy (CT) procedures varies, depending on gestational 
age and dose of radiation. CT is recommended only if 
other imaging is insufficient for the diagnosis.87.101 If pul-
monary embolism is suspected and CT is thought nec-
essary for definitive diagnosis, CT of the chest may be 
performed at low dose of fetal exposure with a thorough 
discussion of risks and benefits.68,101 V/Q scans carry 
similar risk. The threshold for fetal risk appears to be 
increased at doses >100 mGy.101,102
Cardiac Catheterization
Concerns exist over the short- and long-term conse-
quences of fetal radiation exposure during diagnostic 
and interventional cardiac catheterization. However, in 
clinical instances when hemodynamic compromise or an 
emergent intervention requires either right-sided heart 
or full cardiac catheterization, radiation exposure can 
be minimized by ensuring shortened fluoroscopy time 
and ensuring that the radiation dose remains at lower 
levels.102
The radiation exposure to the fetus arises predomi-
nantly from scattered radiation within the patient. Ex-
ternal lead shielding of the maternal pelvis is of limited 
value although generally still used. The radiation dose 
absorbed by the fetus without shielding is only 3% 
higher than that with external shielding for all periods 
of gestation.87,97
Medications in Pregnancy
The relative safety of any medication during pregnancy 
involves the comparative determination of maternal 
benefit versus potential fetal risk. Teratogenicity occurs 
primarily during postmenstrual weeks 4 to 12, with ex-
posures during the first 2 weeks after conception consid-
ered to result in either loss of pregnancy or no significant 
effect. Table 3 presents an overview of common medica-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Canobbio et al
February 21, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e50-e87. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000458
e58
tions encountered in the adult CHD population, highlight-
ing specific concerns during pregnancy. The individual 
Micromedex REPROTOX drug summaries (Micromedex 
2.0) provide a more comprehensive discussion.103
Currently, the US Food and Drug Administration clas-
sifies drugs into risk categories based on safety during 
pregnancy and breastfeeding.1 Table 4 shows the risk 
category for some commonly used drugs in patients 
with heart disease.
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and 
angiotensin receptor blockers are pregnancy category D 
drugs because of the risk of reduced fetal renal function 
and increased fetal and neonatal morbidity and death, es-
pecially with use during the second and third trimesters. 
Cooper et al104 reported an additional risk of malforma-
tion among infants exposed to ACE inhibitors during the 
first trimester. Ideally, women taking an ACE inhibitor or 
angiotensin receptor blocker who desire to become preg-
nant should be advised to stop taking these drugs before 
conception to minimize the risk of fetal abnormality. Dur-
ing this time, repeated clinical evaluation with echocar-
diography should be carried out to reassess ventricular 
function and exercise capacity. Stability in ejection frac-
tion suggests that patients are less likely to be intolerant 
of the volume load that pregnancy imposes.
β-Blockers have a favorable safety profile, and no 
teratogenic risks have been reported with their use.105 
They have been associated with an increase in small-
for-gestational-age infants and neonatal bradycardia 
and hypoglycemia but in practical terms are considered 
safe to use. Atenolol has been associated with low birth 
weight and therefore is not the β-blocker of choice dur-
ing pregnancy.106
The routine use of diuretics is discouraged because of 
the potential reduction in maternal plasma volume early 
in gestation that is potentially harmful to the fetus.107 If in-
dicated, they should be used judiciously. Thiazides have 
been associated with maternal and fetal thrombocytope-
nia. Although listed as a category C agent, spironolac-
tone is not recommended for use during pregnancy or 
lactation because of the reported antiandrogenic effects 
and feminization of male fetuses. Amiodarone has been 
associated with a 9% incidence of fetal hypothyroidism 
and a 21% incidence of intrauterine growth retardation 
and should be reserved for cases of refractory ventricu-
lar arrhythmias.108
Drugs listed as category X include the following:
• Anticoagulants. Vitamin K antagonists cross the 
placenta and are potentially fetotoxic. They are 
commonly used in women with mechanical valves, 
and the risks and benefits associated with their use 
should be discussed with the patient before preg-
nancy is contemplated (see Mechanical Valves and 
Anticoagulation).
• Endothelin receptor antagonists (bosentan, ambrisen-
tan, and macitentan) (Micromedex and REPROTOX).
• Statins. Although inadvertent exposure to statins 
during early pregnancy appears unlikely to 
increase the risk of adverse pregnancy outcome, 
theoretical considerations concerning the role of 
cholesterol in embryo development and the lack 
of demonstrated benefit of treating hyperlipidemia 
during gestation are reasons for not recommend-
ing statins during pregnancy.109,110 They remain 
pregnancy category X drugs in the United States.
Fetal Screening During Pregnancy
Formal fetal echocardiography at 18 to 22 weeks’ ges-
tation is recommended for all patients with CHD and 
partners of male patients with CHD68; earlier echocardio-
graphic screening may be recommended in patients with 
high rates of familial CHD recurrence and more severe 
cardiac defects. Referral to a maternal-fetal medicine 
specialist, pediatric cardiologist, neonatologist, and ge-
neticist is indicated if fetal CHD is discovered to discuss 
prognosis and perinatal management.
Antepartum Care
Existing adult CHD and pregnancy guidelines recom-
mend that patients with complex CHD should be man-
aged and delivered at a regional or tertiary center where 
a multidisciplinary team with knowledge and experience 
in adult CHD is available.68,73,86 This team includes a 
cardiologist, a high-risk obstetrician, an anesthesiolo-
gist, and a neonatologist. Additional providers, includ-
ing a geneticist, an advanced practice nurse, a social 
worker, and an ethicist, should be identified to assist in 
the coordination of care as required. Early coordination 
and ongoing communication between members of the 
multidisciplinary team are crucial to optimizing maternal 
outcomes. Prenatal care is individualized on the basis 
of the patient’s maternal risk, accounting for the com-
plexity of the CHD, the patient’s functional capacity, and 
the presence of any existing or potential clinical issues 
(ie, rhythm disturbances). Practical factors such as cur-
rent social situation, insurance coverage, and proximity 
to the adult CHD center and delivery hospital should be 
considerations in clinical scheduling.
First Trimester (0–14 Weeks)
Cardiology Care
The initial visit should include a review of the patient’s car-
diac history and preconception diagnostic evaluations to 
elucidate any new symptoms such as palpitation, short-
ness of breath, or edema. The physician should perform 
a comprehensive cardiovascular examination, keeping in 
mind the normal physiological changes apparent at 12 
weeks of pregnancy (Table 5). Particular attention should 
be given to the development of arrhythmias, new mur-
murs, or clinical evidence of heart failure.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Pregnancy in Patients With Complex CHD
Circulation. 2017;135:e50-e87. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000458 
February 21, 2017
e59
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Table 3. Medications During Pregnancy
 
Common 
Examples
FDA 
Pregnancy 
Category
Teratogenic 
Risks (First 
Trimester)
Other Pregnancy 
Concerns 
(Second and 
Third Trimesters)
Suggested 
Evaluation
Lactation
Notes
Antihypertensives
 β-Blockers
Metoprolol
Propranolol
Carvedilol
Atenolol
C
C
C
D
None reported
Possible association 
with fetal growth 
restriction in 
second and third 
trimesters (atenolol, 
propranolol), 
neonatal 
bradycardia 
(esmolol, nadolol)
Consider serial 
fetal sonography to 
assess interval fetal 
growth in second 
and third trimesters
Except for 
atenolol, 
probably safe
 
  
Combined 
α-/β-
blockers
Labetalol
C
None reported
No
 
Yes
 
  
Calcium 
channel 
blockers
Nifedipine
Verapamil
Diltiazem
C
None reported
Caution if used in 
combination with 
magnesium sulfate
 
Yes
 
  
ACE 
inhibitors
Captopril
Enalapril
Lisinopril
C (first 
trimester)
D (second 
and third 
trimesters)
 
Fetal renal 
dysplasia, 
oligohydramnios, 
growth restriction, 
and intrauterine 
demise reported in 
second and third 
trimesters
Consider fetal 
echocardiography 
with first trimester 
exposure, serial 
sonography to 
assess interval 
fetal growth and 
amniotic fluid 
volume in second 
and third trimesters
Yes (captopril 
and enalapril)
Unknown 
(lisinopril)
Avoid if 
possible 
during 
pregnancy
  
α2-
Adrenergic 
agonists
Methyldopa
Clonidine
B
C
None reported
Induction of 
positive indirect 
Coombs testing 
(methyldopa), 
rare neonatal 
hypertension 
(clonidine)
 
Yes (methyldopa) 
Probably safe 
(clonidine)
 
 Vasodilators
Hydralazine 
Epoprostenol 
Nitroprusside 
Nitroglycerin 
Isosorbide dinitrate 
Sildenafil
C
B
B
None reported
Possible transient 
fetal bradycardia 
(nitroprusside)
 
Yes (hydralazine) 
Probably safe 
(nitroglycerin) 
Unknown 
(epoprostenol, 
nitroprusside, 
isosorbide 
dinitrate, 
sildenafil)
 
Diuretics
  
Thiazide 
diuretics
Hydrochlorothiazide
B
None reported
Possible increased 
risk of neonatal 
hypoglycemia and 
thrombocytopenia
Consider neonatal 
blood count 
and electrolyte 
evaluation
Yes (AAP)
No (WHO)
Maintenance 
therapy 
permissible, 
but therapy 
not usually 
started during 
pregnancy
(Continued )
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Canobbio et al
February 21, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e50-e87. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000458
e60
Diuretics Continued
  
Loop of 
Henle 
diuretics
Furosemide
C
None reported
Possible 
association with 
neonatal PDA 
and sensorineural 
hearing loss
Maternal electrolyte 
monitoring
No
 
  
Potassium-
sparing 
diuretics
Spironolactone
(not recommended)
C
None reported
 
 
Yes (probably 
safe;
(not 
recommended)
 
Anticoagulants
  
Heparin 
(including 
LMWHs)
Heparin
Enoxaparin
Dalteparin
C
None reported
Possible maternal 
osteoporosis, 
heparin-induced 
thrombocytopenia, 
and bleeding
Maternal platelet 
and coagulation 
status monitoring 
(as appropriate)
Yes
 
  
Vitamin K 
antagonists
Warfarin
X
Fetal warfarin 
syndrome 
(craniofacial 
and skeletal 
anomalies) 
with exposure 
in weeks 6–9; 
fetal intracranial 
hemorrhage in 
second and third 
trimesters
 
Comprehensive 
fetal sonography 
at 18–20 wk of 
gestation
Yes
Teratogenicity 
appears to 
be related to 
doses >5 mg 
daily
  
Antiplatelet 
agents
Aspirin (full dose)
Clopidogrel
D (third 
trimester)
B
None reported
Premature closure 
of fetal ductus 
arteriosus at ≥32 
wk of gestation
Empirical 
recommendation 
to discontinue 
clopidogrel 7 d 
in advance of 
anticipated delivery
Unknown (AAP)
No (WHO)
Low-dose 
aspirin (≤100 
mg/d) does 
not appear 
to have 
deleterious 
effects
  
Direct 
thrombin 
inhibitors
Argatroban
B
None reported
 
 
Unknown
 
  
Indirect 
factor Xa 
inhibitors
Fondaparinux
B
None reported
Possible neonatal 
factor Xa inhibition
 
Unknown
 
  
Direct factor 
Xa inhibitors
Rivaroxaban
C
None reported
Theoretical risk 
of maternal 
hemorrhage
 
Unknown
 
  
Fibrinolytics
Streptokinase
C
None reported
 
 
Unknown
 
Inotropic/vasopressors
  
Cardiac 
glycosides
Digoxin
Digitalis
C
None reported
 
 
Yes
 
Table 3. Continued
 
Common 
Examples
FDA 
Pregnancy 
Category
Teratogenic 
Risks (First 
Trimester)
Other Pregnancy 
Concerns 
(Second and 
Third Trimesters)
Suggested 
Evaluation
Lactation
Notes
(Continued )
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Pregnancy in Patients With Complex CHD
Circulation. 2017;135:e50-e87. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000458 
February 21, 2017
e61
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
The current medication regimen should also be re-
viewed for appropriate indications, potential risks, and 
any need for dose adjustments or discontinuation. For 
the patient who presents for the first time early in preg-
nancy for cardiac care, the initial visit should include a 
thorough assessment as described previously for a pa-
tient contemplating pregnancy.
The frequency of cardiology visits is largely individual-
ized by estimated risk and the development of symp-
toms or complications. Once antepartum care has been 
Table 4. FDA Drug Classifications
Rating A
Controlled studies in women fail to demonstrate a risk to the fetus in the first trimester; no evidence of a risk.
Rating B
Either animal-reproduction studies have not demonstrated a fetal risk but there are no controlled studies in pregnant women or 
animal-reproduction studies have shown adverse effect (other than a decrease in fertility) that was not confirmed in controlled studies 
in women in the first trimester (and there is no evidence of a risk in later trimesters).
Rating C
Either studies in animals have revealed adverse effects on the fetus (teratogenic, embryocidal, or other) and there are no controlled studies in 
women or studies in women and animals are not available. Drugs should be given only if the potential benefit justifies the potential risk to the fetus.
Rating D
There is positive evidence of human fetal risk, but the benefits from use in pregnant women may be acceptable despite the risk (eg, if 
the drug is needed in a life-threatening situation or for a serious disease for which safer drugs cannot be used or are ineffective).
Rating X
Studies in animals or human beings have demonstrated fetal abnormalities, there is evidence of fetal risk based on human experience, 
or both, and the risk of the use of the drug in pregnant women clearly outweighs any possible benefit. The drug is contraindicated in 
women who are or may become pregnant.
FDA indicates US Food and Drug Administration.
Data are from REPROTOX.103
Inotropic/vasopressors Continued
  
Adrenergic 
agents
Epinephrine
Norepinephrine 
 Phenylephrine
Dopamine
Isoproterenol
C
Possible 
association with 
gastroschisis 
or hemifacial 
microsomia 
(phenylephrine)
 
 
Probably safe 
(dopamine) 
Unknown 
(epinephrine, 
norepinephrine, 
phenylephrine, 
isoproterenol)
 
Antiarrhythmics
 β-Blockers
Metoprolol
Propranolol
Carvedilol
Atenolol
C
C
C
D
None reported
Association with fetal 
growth restriction 
in second and third 
trimesters (atenolol, 
propranolol), 
neonatal bradycardia 
(esmolol, nadolol)
Consider serial 
fetal sonography to 
assess interval fetal 
growth in second 
and third trimesters
Except for 
atenolol, 
probably safe
 
 Class 1A
Quinidine 
Procainamide
C
C
None reported
Yes
 
 Class 1C
Flecainide
C
None reported
Yes
 
 Class III
Sotalol
Amiodarone
B
D
None reported
Thyroid dysfunction
 
No
No WHO)/ 
(AAP Yes)
 
  
Purine 
nucleosides
Adenosine
C
None reported
 
 
Unknown
 
AAP indicates American Academy of Pediatrics; ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme; FDA, US Food and Drug Administration; LMWH, low-molecular-
weight heparin; PDA, patent ductus arteriosus; and WHO, World Health Organization.
Table 3. Continued
 
Common 
Examples
FDA 
Pregnancy 
Category
Teratogenic 
Risks (First 
Trimester)
Other Pregnancy 
Concerns 
(Second and 
Third Trimesters)
Suggested 
Evaluation
Lactation
Notes
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Canobbio et al
February 21, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e50-e87. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000458
e62
established, patients who remain clinically asymptomatic 
may be seen at the beginning of the second trimester 
and again at the beginning of the third trimester.68 Those 
deemed at moderate to high risk or who are symptom-
atic would require more frequent visits ranging from bi-
monthly to weekly.
Obstetric Care
CHD guidelines recommend that these patients be man-
aged by an obstetrician trained in maternal-fetal medi-
cine or experienced in caring for patients with CHD.72 
However, attending scheduled prenatal visits can be a 
logistical challenge for patients who reside remote from 
a specialized care center. Therefore, maintaining clear 
and consistent communication between local and tertiary 
center providers about maternal and fetal clinical status 
is of paramount importance. A plan including both ex-
pedient transport in the event of an acute complication 
and consideration of the patient relocating proximate (<1 
hour distant) to the tertiary facility in the early or mid third 
trimester (34–36 weeks) will also optimize the probability 
of delivery occurring in a properly supervised manner.
Prenatal care appointments are generally scheduled 
on a chronological basis. In uncomplicated pregnancies, 
visits are typically scheduled every 4 weeks through 28 
weeks’ gestation, every 2 weeks through 36 weeks, and 
then weekly thereafter until delivery. Because a subset 
of the CHD population may require more frequent evalu-
ation to assess the response to the progressive intra-
vascular volume load of advancing gestational age, the 
frequency of prenatal visits may be modified as individu-
ally appropriate.
Lifestyle Issues
• Physical activity. The level of physical activity is 
dependent on the patient and prepregnancy func-
tional ability. Many patients can (and should) con-
tinue a regular exercise program such as walking or 
swimming but should restrict maneuvers that might 
impair cardiac output. Significant fatigue is common 
in the first trimester; thus, patients may need to 
adjust their schedule to allow sufficient intervals of 
rest. Excessive heat exposure can cause peripheral 
vasodilation with consequent decreased cardiac 
output. Elevated core temperature may be terato-
genic. Thus, patients should avoid exhaustive activ-
ity on hot days and prolonged hot bathing; the use 
of saunas or hot tubs should be discouraged.94,111
• Hydration. Maintenance of adequate maternal 
hydration (which may be influenced by environ-
mental factors) is generally recommended for all 
pregnancies but may have more significance in the 
CHD population. Limitation of salt intake is prudent 
in those with impaired ventricular function who are 
vulnerable to heart failure.
• Prevention of thromboembolism. Pregnancy rep-
resents a hypercoagulable state. Lower-extremity 
graduated compression stockings may reduce 
orthostatic effects and symptomatic lower-
extremity edema but may not reduce the risk of 
thrombosis.112
• Employment. Many patients are able to safely 
continue working throughout their pregnancy. 
Providers should assess the individual patient’s 
work situation and discuss anticipated potential 
accommodations that may be necessary, particu-
larly with advancing gestation.
• Sexual activity. Cardiovascular effects (heart 
rate, blood pressure, oxygen uptake) vary greatly 
among different patients, but in general, sexual 
activity is equivalent to moderate physical activ-
ity. Similar to physical activity and work, sexual 
activity should be symptom limited and may be 
restricted for obstetric reasons (placenta previa, 
cervical incompetence, history of preterm labor). 
Although not specifically studied in the CHD pop-
ulation, there is no evidence that sexual activity 
during pregnancy increases the risk of adverse 
pregnancy outcomes.113
Suggestions for Clinical Practice
• Patients considered low risk without specific 
clinical issues may receive prenatal care locally. 
However, evaluation should be performed early in 
pregnancy at a regional adult CHD center to estab-
lish a regimen for prenatal management and then 
repeated in the third trimester to evaluate current 
maternal status and candidacy for local delivery.
• Patients considered to be at moderate risk who 
live geographically remote from a regional adult 
CHD center may also receive routine prenatal care 
locally but should be evaluated at a regional center 
by both a cardiologist and a maternal-fetal medi-
cine obstetrician each trimester with an explicit 
plan that delivery will be carried out at the regional 
adult CHD center.
• High-risk patients should be managed exclusively 
at a regional adult CHD center for prenatal care 
Table 5. Clinical Signs and Symptoms Observed in 
Normal Pregnancy
Hyperventilation causing shortness of breath and dyspnea
Brisk, full carotid upstroke with distended jugular veins with prominent 
A and V waves
Diffuse, displaced left ventricular impulse; palpable RV impulse
Increased first heart sound; persistent splitting of second heart sound
Systolic ejection-type murmurs at the left lower sternal border over 
the pulmonary area
Anemia
Weight gain
RV indicates right ventricular.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Pregnancy in Patients With Complex CHD
Circulation. 2017;135:e50-e87. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000458 
February 21, 2017
e63
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
and delivery. If geographical and financial con-
cerns preclude this option, coordinated shared 
care between a regional center and a local obste-
trician and cardiologist who are willing to communi-
cate directly with the regional adult CHD should be 
explored once fetal viability has been established.
• For patients considered exceedingly high risk for 
maternal morbidity or mortality such as those with 
elevated pulmonary pressures or important aortic 
root enlargement, therapeutic termination of the 
pregnancy should be offered (see Termination of 
Pregnancy).
Second Trimester (14–28 Weeks)
The second trimester is associated with the greatest 
magnitude of hemodynamic changes (Figures 1 and 2). 
The frequency of evaluation must be individualized. A 
repeat echocardiogram may be indicated to evaluate 
the hemodynamic effects of the pregnancy on cardiac 
and valvular function. Comprehensive fetal echocar-
diography is usually performed at 18 to 22 weeks’ ges-
tation and may be repeated if any fetal anomaly has 
been detected.
A clear and coordinated plan for labor, delivery, and 
postpartum care should be developed by the end of 
the second trimester and distributed to all members of 
the multidisciplinary team, including labor and delivery 
staff, in the event of spontaneous or indicated preterm 
delivery. For patients deemed at particularly high risk 
(eg, those who have pulmonary hypertension or severe 
AS), an initial multidisciplinary planning meeting includ-
ing all providers potentially involved in their care should 
be organized once fetal viability has been established, 
usually after week 23 to 24. A specific delivery plan 
is outlined with contingencies for early hospital admis-
sion and requirement for urgent delivery. If cardiac sup-
port systems such as ventricular assist devices are re-
quired or if cardiac surgery is being considered during 
pregnancy or concomitant with delivery, members of 
the cardiothoracic team should also be included. The 
involvement of social services and possibly an institu-
tional ethics team should be also considered in high-
risk cases.
Third Trimester (28–42 Weeks)
The frequency of cardiac evaluation in late pregnancy 
must be individualized. Once the peak hemodynamic 
load of pregnancy is reached, normal symptoms of preg-
nancy (edema, dyspnea on exertion) may worsen, so 
patients must be monitored closely to distinguish such 
symptoms and signs of normal pregnancy from those 
that may reflect hemodynamic compromise. Continued 
participation in physical activity, work, and sexual activ-
ity may prove difficult as the pregnancy progresses; all 
activities should be limited by symptomatology or ob-
stetric concerns. Planning and contingencies for delivery 
should be finalized in the third trimester.
Obstetric Complications
Because these patients remain at risk for the spectrum 
of obstetric complications independently of their cardiac 
condition, specific obstetric concerns in this population 
include the following:
• Spontaneous abortion. The rate of spontaneous 
abortion varies between 12% and 15%, depending 
on the primary cardiac anomaly.79,114
• Fetal growth restriction. Small-for-gestational-age 
neonates (birth weight <10%) have been reported 
in 4% to 8% of pregnancies, with intrauterine 
demise reported in 3%.79
• Preterm delivery. Approximately 17% to 21% of 
all patients with CHD ultimately deliver preterm as 
a result of either spontaneous preterm labor/pre-
term premature rupture of membranes (59%) or 
indicated delivery (41%).74,79 The use of tocolytic 
agents is generally considered safe, but caution is 
warranted with the use of terbutaline, particularly 
in patients with a history of arrhythmias.
• Hypertension. Increases in SVR such as with 
gestational hypertension/preeclampsia may be 
poorly tolerated in patients with marginal cardiac 
output.
Termination of Pregnancy
For the patient with complex CHD in whom continua-
tion of pregnancy presents a substantial risk of mater-
nal morbidity or mortality, a forthright discussion of the 
advisability of therapeutic termination is imperative. 
However, because termination incurs an increased ma-
ternal risk with advancing gestational age regardless of 
method, expediency in patient decisiveness is impor-
tant. The therapeutic benefit of termination for patients 
presenting at ≥20 weeks of gestation is controversial 
because many of the physiological cardiopulmonary ad-
aptations are established by this time and consequently 
would not necessarily be mitigated by interruption of the 
pregnancy.
• First trimester. Surgical dilation and suction curet-
tage represents the most common method of 
pregnancy termination through 12 weeks’ gesta-
tion. Complication rates are low for skilled practi-
tioners, and selection of anesthetic technique may 
be dictated by maternal status. The procedure 
should be carried out in a hospital setting where 
careful monitoring is accessible. Medical abor-
tion regimens using combined antiprogesterone 
(mifepristone) and prostaglandin E1 (misoprostol) 
agents are similar in efficacy to suction curettage 
if administered within the first 7 weeks of preg-
nancy; however, because the process and subse-
quent hemorrhage typically occur in a relatively 
unpredictable manner in an unmonitored outpa-
tient setting, this may not be an appropriate option 
for hemodynamically fragile patients.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Canobbio et al
February 21, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e50-e87. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000458
e64
• Second trimester. Midtrimester medical termi-
nation can be accomplished with transvaginal 
misoprostol to induce labor on an inpatient basis. 
Disadvantages of this approach include prolonged 
duration (>24 hours), intrapartum discomfort, 
and potential requirement for uterine curettage if 
placental retention occurs. Surgical dilation and 
evacuation is more frequently performed, offering 
the principal advantage of effecting termination 
under controlled circumstances in a surgical suite. 
Although no studies have specifically evaluated 
adult patients with CHD, in the general population, 
dilation and evacuation by experienced providers 
appears to have a lower complication rate than 
labor induction at gestational ages between 13 
and 24 weeks.115
Intrapartum Care
Clinically stable patients with complex CHD should antici-
pate a normal labor and delivery. The risks for gravidas 
with functionally significant CHD can be minimized by 
proper planning and management of labor, delivery, and 
the puerperium. In these high-risk cases, elective induc-
tion of labor under controlled conditions is recommend-
ed.116 Careful consideration should be given to maternal 
benefit versus neonatal risk when elective delivery before 
39 weeks is contemplated because induction of labor 
may be less successful at earlier gestational ages.116
From a practical point of view, inductions should be 
initiated so that delivery will likely occur during regular 
hours when the adult CHD teams are readily available. 
Labor should be conducted in a right or left lateral tilt 
position to maximize maternal hemodynamic stability; 
this posture reduces compression of the inferior vena 
by the gravid uterus, which maintains cardiac preload. 
Vaginal delivery with adequate relief of pain with paren-
tal narcotic analgesia or epidural anesthesia is generally 
preferred. Cesarean delivery is typically reserved for ob-
stetric indications.
The uterine contractions of the second stage of la-
bor (which extends from the time of complete cervical 
dilatation until delivery) are normally augmented by ma-
ternal Valsalva maneuvers. Historically, Valsalva maneu-
vers have been discouraged for patients with significant 
cardiac disease because of the associated increase in 
maternal O2 consumption and reduction in cardiac return 
and cardiac output. Management should be individual-
ized; with some cardiac disorders, a passive second 
stage of labor may be more appropriate (the fetus de-
scends through the birth canal exclusively via uterine 
contractions), particularly in women whose venous return 
or myocardial contractility is significantly compromised. 
Regional epidural anesthesia can suppress the Valsalva 
reflex arising from fetal pelvic descent, which can be re-
instated by reducing the intensity of anesthesia. Forceps- 
or vacuum-assisted operative delivery may be performed 
to facilitate delivery from a low or outlet station.
Neuraxial anesthetic techniques should be used cau-
tiously if cardiac output is sensitive to a reduction in pre-
load; a narcotic combined spinal-epidural may be opti-
mal. General anesthesia may be used, but the inhalation 
agents must be carefully selected and administered by 
an anesthesiologist.
Intrapartum Management
• Intravenous crystalloid should be administered 
when necessary for hydration with close monitor-
ing of fluid balance. All patients with right-to-left 
shunts should have filtered vascular lines to pre-
vent paradoxical air embolization.117 Patients with 
complex CHD should have continuous pulse oxim-
etry for monitoring changes in systemic arterial 
oxygen saturation (Sao2). In those with right-to-left 
shunts, Sao2 provides a continuous estimate of the 
extent of the right-to-left shunt.118 Maintenance of 
systemic pressures in these gravidas is critical to 
maintain the balance of systemic and pulmonary 
blood flow. A decrease in SVR or an increase in 
PVR leads to increased right-to-left shunting, result-
ing in an increase in hypoxemia and an increase in 
the risk of maternal and fetal death.117
• Continuous ECG monitoring (eg, via telemetry) is 
indicated for patients with history of arrhythmias 
before or during pregnancy or for gravidas with 
reduced ventricular function who have become 
symptomatic during gestation.
• Invasive hemodynamic monitoring is rarely required 
for the vast majority of patients with complex CHD; 
exceptions include patients with clinical evidence 
of congestive heart failure and volume overload, in 
whom a central venous catheter may be useful to 
guide intravenous fluid administration. An arterial 
line can be helpful in monitoring fluid shifts and 
blood loss. If implemented, hemodynamic monitor-
ing should continue for 24 hours after delivery.
• Neither transvaginal nor cesarean delivery is consid-
ered to inherently impart a high risk of bacteremia. 
Consequently, the AHA119 does not recommend 
antibiotic prophylaxis for delivery. Because patients 
with CHD can suffer life-threatening consequences 
(eg, patients with Eisenmenger syndrome, cyanotic 
patients7) should they develop endocarditis, it is not 
unreasonable to administer antibiotics to high-risk 
patients. When indicated, antibiotics for endocardi-
tis prophylaxis should be given at least 30 minutes 
before anticipated delivery.
Postpartum Care
Immediately after delivery, the intravascular volume is 
augmented by an “autotransfusion” of 500 mL blood 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Pregnancy in Patients With Complex CHD
Circulation. 2017;135:e50-e87. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000458 
February 21, 2017
e65
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
from the involuting uterus. In uncomplicated pregnan-
cies, stroke volume and cardiac output increase imme-
diately by 71% and 60% to 80%, respectively. These 
changes begin to reverse shortly after delivery and con-
tinue to decrease over the next 24 hours, resolving over 
the next 6 to 8 weeks.59–61,120,121 The extravascular fluid 
accumulation that occurs during gestation will typically 
resolve over a similar time interval.
Because many of these hemodynamic changes occur 
concurrently, cardiopulmonary complications may ensue 
immediately after delivery, depending on the maternal 
hemodynamic compensatory ability. Consequently, rec-
ommendations for postpartum monitoring are largely 
dependent on the patient’s underlying congenital cardiac 
abnormality, predisposition to arrhythmias, presence or 
absence of heart failure signs or symptoms, and clini-
cal course during pregnancy and delivery.122 Telemetry 
cardiac monitoring should continue for at least 24 hours 
for those patients with symptoms or signs of significant 
antepartum or intrapartum arrhythmias. For the patient 
considered at highest risk or who has demonstrated 
signs of decompensation during the pregnancy or deliv-
ery period, management in an intensive care unit/critical 
care unit setting for the first 24 to 48 hours after deliv-
ery for hemodynamic monitoring should be considered.
If a patient is delivered in a local or community-based 
institution with limited resources or staff unfamiliar with 
managing complex CHD, it may be prudent to care for 
these patients in an intensive care unit/critical care unit 
setting, along with appropriate obstetric nursing surveil-
lance, for the first 24 to 48 hours postpartum. Standard 
postpartum units are less likely to have cardiac moni-
toring capability or clinical experience in recognizing 
and managing early cardiopulmonary decompensation. 
However, patients who have remained clinically stable 
throughout pregnancy and delivery may be transferred 
directly to postpartum units with instructions to monitor 
for cardiopulmonary symptoms. Early ambulation and 
continued use of support stockings may reduce the risk 
of thromboembolism.117
The hemodynamic effects of pregnancy typically re-
solve primarily during the initial 6 to 12 weeks postpar-
tum but may persist for up to 6 months.123 Thus, dis-
charge planning should include appropriate return visits 
for routine postpartum and cardiac evaluation and de-
tailed patient instructions for signs and symptoms merit-
ing medical evaluation.
Contraception
Contraception is an important topic to readdress pe-
riodically throughout the reproductive life of a woman 
with complex CHD. The optimal method is governed by 
medical candidacy, potential side effects, compliance, 
and risk of unplanned conception. The ideal time to 
discuss contraceptive methods is before conception, 
but it is equally important to have a discussion on con-
traceptive choices with the pregnant patient as part of 
her postpartum management. Typical methods include 
the following:
• Combination estrogen-progesterone oral con-
traceptive pills. Advantages include predictable 
menstrual cyclicity, high efficacy, and reduction 
in incidences of gynecologic malignancy. In gen-
eral, estrogen-containing oral contraceptives have 
historically been avoided during lactation because 
of concern about a pharmacological reduction in 
milk supply, although existing data are conflict-
ing.124 Other contraindications in the CHD popula-
tion include a history of previous thrombosis (not 
requiring maintenance anticoagulation), cyanosis, 
or elevated hepatic functions. Because of the rela-
tively thrombophilic state immediately postpartum, 
combination oral contraceptive pills are usually ini-
tiated 21 to 30 days after delivery.
• Progesterone-only contraception. This category 
includes progesterone-only contraceptive pills, 
depot medroxyprogesterone acetate injections, 
and subdermal etonogestrel implants. Because 
progesterone is not considered to increase the 
risk of thrombosis, any of these methods may 
be initiated during the postpartum inpatient hos-
pitalization. Long-acting (36-month) subdermal 
etonogestrel implants (Implanon, Nexplanon) are 
also widely available. For patients with a history of 
venous thromboembolism or those with cyanotic 
conditions, progesterone-only contraception may 
represent an optimal selection.
• Intrauterine device. Although historically the intra-
uterine device was avoided in patients with CHD 
because of concern about maternal bacteremia 
and anemia from menorrhagia, the newer levo-
norgestrel-releasing intrauterine devices (Mirena, 
Skyla) may strike an optimal compromise between 
risk of unplanned pregnancy and effective con-
traception. Insertion is usually delayed until ≥4 
weeks postpartum to minimize the incidence of 
spontaneous expulsion, although insertion imme-
diately postpartum after placental delivery or at 
the time of cesarean section has been described. 
Neither type of intrauterine device appears to 
affect lactation.125
• Sterilization. If subsequent fertility is not desired, 
sterilization via tubal ligation or occlusion proce-
dures may offer the lowest risk of future unin-
tended conception. If cesarean delivery is planned 
or required, concurrent bilateral tubal ligation may 
be performed expediently, with a low cumulative 
10-year risk of failure (1:133).126 Office-based hys-
teroscopic fallopian tubal occlusion with a metallic 
insert (Essure) offers an efficacious alternative to 
an abdominal surgical approach, although interval 
contraception is required until subsequent imaging 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Canobbio et al
February 21, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e50-e87. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000458
e66
is performed to confirm complete occlusion 3 
months after the procedure. Recent reports have 
raised concern that patients with metal allergies or 
a history of pelvic inflammatory disease or other 
autoimmune conditions maybe suboptimal candi-
dates for this procedure.127
Although partner vasectomy may be an option for 
couples in a monogamous relationship, this procedure 
does not directly address the risk of pregnancy in an 
individual CHD patient. Furthermore, because in some 
cases the male partner may outlive the female partner 
with CHD, the decision for vasectomy should factor in 
the possibility that later he may wish to have a family.
CARDIAC COMPLICATIONS
Arrhythmias
Arrhythmia Risk During Pregnancy
Pregnancy is associated with physiological changes 
that can cause shortening of the PR, QRS, and QT inter-
vals as a result of an increase in heart rate or a leftward 
shift of the axis (small q wave, inverted T wave in lead 
III) resulting from an elevation of the diaphragm causing 
rotation of the heart. Ectopic beats are common and 
usually benign.41 However, pregnancy can also lower 
the threshold for ventricular arrhythmias and reentrant 
SVT; therefore, clinically significant arrhythmias are not 
uncommon in pregnant women with CHD, particularly 
in those with history of arrhythmias. These are often 
related to the extra volume load, enhanced adrenergic 
receptor excitability, and presence of surgical scar. In a 
single-center study of 73 women with 83 pregnancies, 
44% of women showed recurrence of tachyarrhyth-
mias during pregnancy or early postpartum.128 Recur-
rence rates were 50% to 52% in those with a history 
of SVT or paroxysmal atrial fibrillation/atrial flutter and 
27% in those with a history of ventricular tachycardia. 
Adverse fetal events occurred in 20% of pregnancies 
with a 3- to 4-fold higher risk in those who developed 
antepartum arrhythmias. Thus, the presence of a pre-
existing arrhythmia in women with complex CHD must 
be considered at the time of prepregnancy counseling 
because the recurrence risk may be high. Appropriate 
antiarrhythmic medications should be continued during 
pregnancy, with consideration given to increasing the 
dose as the volume load of pregnancy increases and 
drug levels decline.
Arrhythmia Management During Pregnancy
In general, the principles of arrhythmia management in 
pregnant women are similar to those in nonpregnant 
women, but the underlying hemodynamic conditions spe-
cific to each congenital anomaly must be considered. In 
patients with repaired complex CHD who have residual 
ventricular dysfunction or other abnormalities, tachyar-
rhythmias may be associated with hemodynamic com-
promise and significant maternal and fetal morbidity (eg, 
single-ventricle physiology after the Fontan operation). 
The same is true for those with tenuous hemodynam-
ics (eg, those with Eisenmenger syndrome). It should be 
kept in mind that untreated maternal arrhythmias lead to 
poor placental and fetal perfusion, which can result in 
fetal compromise and even preterm delivery. Addition-
ally, during labor and the postpartum period, cardiac ar-
rhythmias are more prevalent; therefore, women with a 
history of arrhythmias before conception or who have 
had documented arrhythmias during pregnancy should 
be placed on continuous cardiac monitoring (direct or 
telemonitoring) throughout labor, delivery, and the post-
partum period.
Many antiarrhythmic drugs cross the placenta and 
may adversely affect fetal development; the risk-bene-
fit ratio must be considered in every case. In general, 
drugs are avoided in the first trimester unless neces-
sary, but if they are required for arrhythmia control, sev-
eral options are available. Table 4 gives the US Food and 
Drug Administration classification of the safety of anti-
arrhythmic drugs during pregnancy. Additionally, direct 
current cardioversion is safe and may be used to treat 
hemodynamically unstable arrhythmias. Radiofrequency 
catheter ablation therapy, however, is discouraged and 
should be considered only in drug-refractory, poorly tol-
erated arrhythmias (see Cardioversion).
Paroxysmal SVT
Digoxin or β-blockers are often used to treat SVT or 
paroxysmal atrial fibrillation during pregnancy. Adenos-
ine or β-blockers are used for acute exacerbation. Ad-
enosine does not cross the placenta, does not have 
adverse fetal effects, and will terminate most SVTs in-
volving the atrioventricular node as part of a reentry 
circuit. Although β-blockers can cross the placenta and 
may result in fetal bradycardia, hypoglycemia, prema-
ture birth, and low birth weight, they are generally well 
tolerated. The exception is atenolol, which should be 
avoided during pregnancy because of an increased as-
sociation with fetal growth retardation.129 Calcium chan-
nel blockers are negatively inotropic, leading to slowing 
of atrioventricular conduction and reduced heart rate. 
Used for arrhythmias and maternal hypertension and 
as tocolytic agents to prevent premature labor and 
preeclampsia, they pose no teratogenic risk to the fe-
tus.105,130,131
Antiarrhythmic drugs such as quinidine, procain-
amide, and digoxin may be used in patients with con-
cealed accessory pathway. Digoxin is the safest; most 
other drugs are in category C. Hemodynamically un-
stable SVT should be treated with direct current car-
dioversion.
Atrial Flutter or Fibrillation
Rhythm control is the first step for treatment of atrial 
tachycardia or flutter. Selective β-blocking agents (eg, 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Pregnancy in Patients With Complex CHD
Circulation. 2017;135:e50-e87. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000458 
February 21, 2017
e67
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
metoprolol) are recommended drugs of first choice and 
are considered safe in pregnancy.68 Sotalol is the only 
oral antiarrhythmic drug that is considered category B 
during pregnancy and can be used for atrial flutter, atrial 
fibrillation, or ventricular tachycardia. Calcium channel 
blockers can be used for long-term management if other 
atrioventricular node–blocking agents fail. Drugs such 
as diltiazem, verapamil, and ibutilide are considered 
relatively safe (category C) during pregnancy. Because 
of their potential proarrhythmic effect, class 1C agents 
such as propafenone and flecainide (category C) should 
be used when necessary with monitoring for proarrhyth-
mia at initiation. Amiodarone should not be used unless 
absolutely necessary because of the risk of fetal toxicity. 
Protection against thromboembolism is recommended 
in women considered high risk such as those with atrial 
flutter. The choice of antithrombotic therapy (heparin, 
antiplatelet therapy) depends on the relative risk and the 
stage of pregnancy.68
Ventricular Tachyarrhythmias
Ventricular arrhythmias may arise or be exacerbated 
during pregnancy. Patients receiving β-blocker therapy 
for arrhythmias should continue treatment throughout 
pregnancy, delivery, and postpartum unless specifically 
contraindicated because β-blockers are considered safe 
for mother and fetus.132 Short-term treatment of ventric-
ular tachycardia includes intravenous lidocaine, which 
is considered safe during pregnancy (category B) but 
should not be used during delivery. Intravenous mexili-
tene and amiodarone can be used in emergency situa-
tions. Cardioversion may be necessary for those with 
hemodynamic compromise.
Heart Block
Atrioventricular block during pregnancy is often pro-
gressive and should be closely monitored for need for 
pacing. If permanent pacing becomes necessary during 
pregnancy, the procedure should be performed after the 
eighth week of gestation, and echocardiography-guided 
insertion is preferred to avoid fetal radiation exposure 
(see Imaging).68
In patients paced before pregnancy, pacing is well 
tolerated.133 In patients with sick sinus syndrome, the 
lower rate limit of the pacemaker should be increased 
to parallel the physiological increase that occurs in first 
trimester.
Suggestions for Clinical Practice
• Cardiac monitoring (direct vs telemonitoring) is 
recommended during active labor and delivery for 
women with history of preconception arrhythmias 
or those who have developed arrhythmias during 
pregnancy.
• Pacemaker function, including battery life, should 
be checked before pregnancy.
Mechanical Valves and Anticoagulation
Pregnancy in women with mechanical heart valves is as-
sociated with significant maternal, fetal, and neonatal 
risks. Maternal risks include valve thrombosis, throm-
boembolic complications, heart failure, arrhythmias, 
endocarditis, and hemorrhage. Fetal and neonatal risks 
include fetal loss, still births, preterm births, growth re-
striction, and prematurity.134–148 The rates of complica-
tions vary in relation to the woman’s underlying cardiac 
condition, the function and location of the mechanical 
valve, and the type of anticoagulation used during preg-
nancy. Because of the high-risk nature of these pregnan-
cies, all women should be seen for preconception coun-
seling by a cardiologist with expertise in pregnancy and 
valve disease.
The most common life-threatening complication in 
pregnant women with mechanical valves is valve throm-
bosis. The prothrombotic state of pregnancy and the 
challenge of maintaining therapeutic anticoagulation 
contribute to thromboembolic complications in this 
group of women. The risk of thromboembolic complica-
tions is higher in women with older mechanical valves 
(ie, ball and cage valves), in women with valves in the 
mitral position (compared with the aortic position), when 
there is >1 implanted mechanical valve, when the valve 
does not function normally, and when heparin is used for 
anticoagulation compared with warfarin. Patient compli-
ance is a major factor affecting outcome regardless of 
the types of anticoagulants used.
To prevent serious thromboembolic complications, 
therapeutic anticoagulation is required in all pregnant 
women with mechanical valves. Anticoagulation options 
include vitamin K antagonists (eg, warfarin), low-molec-
ular-weight heparin (LMWH), and unfractionated heparin 
(UFH). New direct oral anticoagulants are not used in 
patients with mechanical valves. The risks and benefits 
of various anticoagulation options should be discussed 
with women before pregnancy or, if not previously ad-
dressed, at the time of the first antenatal visit. All forms 
of anticoagulation increase the risk of spontaneous abor-
tion, retroplacental bleeding, stillbirth, and fetal death. 
Warfarin is the safest anticoagulant for the mother, asso-
ciated with the lowest rates of maternal thromboembolic 
complications (2.9%–3.9% of pregnancies) and maternal 
mortality (1.1%–1.3%).149,150 However, warfarin crosses 
the placenta and can cause an embryopathy if exposure 
occurs during embryogenesis (6–12 weeks’ gestation). 
Warfarin embryopathy is less common when lower 
doses of warfarin (≤5 mg/d) are adequate to achieve 
therapeutic anticoagulation.151 LMWH does not cross the 
placenta and is therefore not associated with an embry-
opathy. However, LMWH is associated with higher rates 
of thromboembolic complications in pregnant women 
with mechanical valves. Most thromboembolic complica-
tions often occur when LMWH levels are subtherapeutic, 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Canobbio et al
February 21, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e50-e87. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000458
e68
and therefore, close monitoring of peak anti-Xa levels is 
necessary. In studies of pregnant women with mechani-
cal heart valves on LMWH who also had anti-Xa moni-
toring during pregnancy, thromboembolic complications 
occurred in 4% to 16% of pregnancies.143–148 Rates of 
thromboembolic complications with UFH range from 
13% to 33%.149,150 Long-standing use of UFH is associ-
ated with osteoporosis and thrombocytopenia.
Management
The management of the pregnant patient on anticoagula-
tion is challenging, with no method being totally devoid 
of maternal or fetal risk. Detailed preconception counsel-
ing should be provided to the patient and partner by a 
team with expertise in CHD and pregnancy with valvular 
disease. The importance of compliance with scheduled 
clinical visits and laboratory appointments to maintain 
dose adjustments should be emphasized. For women 
who live far from the adult CHD center, arrangements 
need to be explored to ensure compliance with the pre-
scribed protocol.
Guidelines on the management of anticoagulation in 
pregnant women with mechanical valves are available 
from the European Society of Cardiology68 and the AHA/
American College of Cardiology (ACC).152 The AHA/ACC 
guidelines for the management of patients with valvular 
heart disease suggest that women who are therapeutic 
on ≤5 mg/d warfarin should be maintained on warfarin 
throughout pregnancy until before delivery. Women re-
quiring >5 mg/d warfarin can use LMWH with meticu-
lous monitoring (administered at least twice per day) or 
continuous intravenous UFH during the first trimester 
with an activated partial thromboplastin time more than 
twice normal. Because of the difficulty in attaining sta-
ble therapeutic anticoagulation with subcutaneous UFH, 
it is not recommended in the “2014 AHA/ACC Guide-
line for the Management of Patients with Valvular Heart 
Disease.”152 Current guidelines recommend that during 
the second trimester, all women should be transitioned 
to warfarin. Women with mechanical valves require 
close follow-up throughout pregnancy and postpartum. 
Follow-up, as frequently as weekly, may be required, de-
pending on the clinical status and anticoagulation moni-
toring requirements. Joint care with an anticoagulation 
clinic can optimize outcomes.147 Women taking warfarin 
should be maintained on the dose necessary to achieve 
an international normalized ratio between 2.5 and 3. 5. 
For those who elect to use LMWH, weight-based dosing 
is inadequate, and meticulous anticoagulation monitor-
ing must be used, aiming for a target anti-Xa level be-
tween 0.8 and 1.2 U/mL measured 4 to 6 hours after 
administration. The measurement of trough levels may 
also be helpful, although data are scant.153–155 In addi-
tion to anticoagulants, all pregnant women with mechan-
ical valves should receive low-dose aspirin (75–100 mg 
once a day).
A coordinated plan for delivery must be developed, 
documented, and circulated to the obstetric and adult 
CHD team as the patient approaches her scheduled ad-
mission date to allow the transition from warfarin to UFH. 
It is necessary to discontinue warfarin well before deliv-
ery (>1 week) because maternal warfarin use close to 
delivery results in persisting warfarin effect in the fetus 
and increases the risk for fetal intracranial hemorrhage 
during vaginal delivery. Intravenous UFH should be sub-
stituted when warfarin is withdrawn and discontinued just 
before labor. Because of the risk of preterm labor that 
is known to occur in some women with complex CHD, 
transfer to UFH or LMWH should be considered at ≈32 
to 34 weeks. The timing of induction is individualized but 
should factor in the individual’s risk of a premature de-
livery. If the patient is on LMWH, it should be withdrawn 
at least 36 hours before delivery and changed to intra-
venous UFH.68 Once active labor begins, heparin is with-
held so that epidural anesthesia may be administered. 
Regional anesthesia should be performed only after clot-
ting studies (activated partial thromboplastin time) have 
been restored to normal to avoid spinal hemorrhage. 
A cesarean delivery is required if the mother has not 
stopped her oral anticoagulant at least 1 week before 
delivery. Postpartum bleeding is increased in women 
receiving anticoagulation. UFH should be restarted as 
soon after delivery as deemed safe by the obstetric 
team, typically 6 to 8 hours after delivery. The timing of 
the reintroduction of warfarin varies among centers, but 
warfarin commonly is restarted within 48 hours of deliv-
ery unless there is a hemorrhagic complication.
If valve thrombosis is suspected or if a woman presents 
with a thromboembolic event, transesophageal echocar-
diography is the most direct and usually quickest way to 
assess valve function and thrombus burden. If the trans-
esophageal echocardiography does not provide a defini-
tive answer, fluoroscopy can be used after a discussion 
with the patient and in accordance with protocols to mini-
mize radiation exposure to the fetus. Pregnant women with 
thromboembolic complications such as valve thrombosis 
should be managed at a tertiary care center by a multidis-
ciplinary team that includes cardiac surgeons. Treatment 
options for a woman with documented valve thrombosis 
should be individualized and should take into account her 
clinical status, the severity of valve dysfunction, the throm-
bus burden, the maternal cardiac status, and the gesta-
tional age of the fetus. Treatment options include con-
tinuous intravenous UFH, thrombolytic therapy, and valve 
replacement. Surgery during pregnancy continues to carry 
a significant fetal risk, with fetal mortality of up to 33% in 
earlier reports (see Cardiovascular Surgery).156–158
Suggestions for Clinical Practice
• All women with mechanical valves should undergo 
prepregnancy counseling by a cardiologist with 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Pregnancy in Patients With Complex CHD
Circulation. 2017;135:e50-e87. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000458 
February 21, 2017
e69
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
expertise in valvular heart disease and pregnancy 
in accordance with the AHA/ACC guidelines. The 
risks to both mother and baby of embarking on 
a pregnancy should be reviewed in detail, as well 
as the risks and benefits of each anticoagulation 
strategy.
• Before pregnancy, a comprehensive clinical evalu-
ation should be undertaken, including transtho-
racic echocardiography to assess valve function.
• A detailed plan of care stressing the importance 
of compliance with scheduled clinical visits and 
laboratory appointments to maintain therapeutic 
anticoagulation must be provided to the woman 
who desires pregnancy and her partner.
• To prevent serious thromboembolic complications, 
therapeutic anticoagulation with frequent monitor-
ing is required in all pregnant women with mechani-
cal valves.
• Patients should be managed throughout pregnancy 
and delivery at a tertiary care center by a multidis-
ciplinary team with expertise in the management 
of such patients.
• Continuation of low-dose aspirin (75–100 mg/d) is 
recommended in the second and third trimesters 
in accordance with AHA/ACC guidelines.
• Discontinuation of warfarin with substitution of 
LMWH or UFH to achieve therapeutic anticoagu-
lation is recommended at least 1 week before 
planned delivery. LMWH must be discontinued 
at least 36 hours before epidural anesthesia, at 
which time UFH may be substituted.
Heart Failure
For women with complex CHD, a number of potential 
factors may increase the risk of developing heart fail-
ure during pregnancy. Tachyarrhythmias such as atrial 
fibrillation or intra-atrial reentrant tachycardia can occur 
during pregnancy and can precipitate heart failure. The 
discontinuation of cardiac medications such as ACE in-
hibitors before or during pregnancy may also increase 
the risk. Obstetric complications such as gestational 
hypertension, preeclampsia, and anemia can precipitate 
heart failure in the high-risk patient.
A history of heart failure before pregnancy4,74 and re-
duced subaortic ventricular systolic function (ejection 
fraction <40%) identify women at risk for cardiac com-
plications and mortality. In the ROPAC study (Registry 
on Pregnancy and Cardiac Disease), cardiomyopathy, 
NYHA functional class III or higher, WHO risk classifica-
tion of 3 or greater, prepregnancy heart failure, and 
pulmonary hypertension were predictors of develop-
ing heart failure during pregnancy.159 Women with left-
sided obstructive lesions, D-transposition of the great 
arteries (D-TGA) with Mustard or Senning operation, 
congenitally corrected transposition of the great ar-
teries (CC-TGA), Eisenmenger syndrome, or significant 
subaortic ventricular dysfunction are at risk of devel-
oping pulmonary edema.5–7,78,114,157,160–165 Women with 
repaired right ventricular (RV) outflow tract obstruction 
(eg, tetralogy of Fallot or pulmonary atresia) are at risk 
of developing right-sided heart failure.78,166,167 Pregnan-
cy is contraindicated in women with severe systemic 
ventricular dysfunction (left ventricular ejection frac-
tion <30%, NYHA class III or IV).1 Women should also 
be informed of the potential for deterioration (both 
reversible and irreversible) with systemic ventricular 
dysfunction during pregnancy.163,168
For pregnant women with chronic heart failure, medi-
cations should be optimized before delivery. In general, 
women who develop heart failure should be treated simi-
larly to nonpregnant patients, avoiding fetotoxic medica-
tions (ie, ACE inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers, 
aldosterone antagonists), and β-blockers should be con-
tinued. Hydralazine and oral isosorbide dinitrate can be 
used as afterload-reducing agents as alternatives to ACE 
inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers.
Acute heart failure typically occurs in the late second 
or third trimester or early postpartum and may be pre-
cipitated by eclampsia or preeclampsia.159 It is impor-
tant to differentiate the normal signs and symptoms of 
pregnancy from those of heart failure. Although avoid-
ance of radiation is optimal, if the diagnosis of pulmo-
nary edema is in question, a chest radiograph should be 
performed to facilitate a diagnosis of pulmonary edema. 
Serum BNP can be helpful for diagnosis.18 Potential 
precipitants such as hypertension or anemia should be 
treated. Women with pulmonary edema or right-sided 
heart failure should be treated with loop diuretics such 
as furosemide, but these should be used judiciously, 
beginning with a low dose, because they can decrease 
placental flow. Digoxin is safe in pregnancy. Vasodilators 
such as nitroprusside and nesiritide have potential fetal 
toxicity. Although safety data are not available, inotropic 
drugs such as dopamine or dobutamine have been used 
in women with heart failure who are not responding to 
conventional medical therapy.
Management
Women with ventricular dysfunction require close follow-
up throughout pregnancy and delivery at a regional 
center by an adult CHD multidisciplinary team with a 
preliminary delivery plan in place in the event of early de-
compensation necessitating early delivery. Women with 
refractory heart failure should be managed at a center 
with ventricular assist device and heart transplantation 
capabilities.
During the antenatal period, heart failure therapy is 
tailored to the individual patient and is based on informa-
tion from the patient on changes in symptoms such as 
sudden weight gain and peripheral edema in excess of 
expected changes during pregnancy. The patient should 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Canobbio et al
February 21, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e50-e87. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000458
e70
be instructed on exercise allowances and limitations and 
the need to rest/sleep in the lateral decubitus position.
Women who are clinically symptomatic may require 
weekly visits; women who remain clinically stable may 
be seen less frequently. Repeated transthoracic echo-
cardiograms facilitate the assessment of ventricular 
function, valvular regurgitation, and RV systolic pressure 
when necessary.
Induction of labor is determined by the clinical course 
but should be delayed beyond week 37 unless there is a 
threat to maternal or fetal morbidity and mortality. Early 
delivery may be required in pregnant women with refrac-
tory heart failure, and this may necessitate a cesarean 
section delivery. Careful pain management with early epi-
dural analgesia and a facilitated second stage of labor 
may help to prevent complications.168a Fetal lung matu-
rity must be addressed, and corticosteroids should be 
given when necessary. Prostaglandin E analogs, used 
during induction, can decrease SVR and contribute to 
reflex tachycardia; these changes can be detrimental 
to women with heart failure, and careful monitoring is 
required. Oxygen saturation monitoring should be used 
at the time of labor and delivery in women with heart fail-
ure. Arterial blood pressure monitoring and Swan-Ganz 
catheterization may be used in women with acute heart 
failure or significant subaortic ventricular dysfunction to 
optimize hemodynamic monitoring and fluid status. To 
avoid fetal compression of the inferior vena cava, wom-
en should labor in the left lateral decubitus position. The 
amount of intravenous fluid administered at the time of 
labor and delivery should be minimized to prevent vol-
ume overload. Reassessment of volume status after de-
livery is important.
The risk of heart failure continues after delivery, and 
frequent clinical evaluations should continue in the post-
partum period. ACE inhibitors may be restarted post-
partum; both captopril and enalapril have been used in 
breastfeeding women.169 Most β-blockers can be used 
during breastfeeding, although atenolol is not recom-
mended.
Suggestions for Clinical Practice
• Preconception counseling is important for women 
at risk of developing heart failure during pregnancy.
• Pregnancy is contraindicated in women with severe 
systemic ventricular dysfunction (left ventricular 
ejection fraction <30%, NYHA class III or IV).
• For pregnant women at high risk for heart fail-
ure, frequent surveillance during pregnancy is 
necessary.
• Women who develop heart failure during preg-
nancy should be treated similarly to nonpregnant 
patients, avoiding fetotoxic medications.
• Women should be followed up at a center with 
experience in pregnancy and heart disease.
• Before delivery, a detailed delivery plan should be 
circulated to all members of the healthcare team.
Cyanosis (Excluding Patients With Eisenmenger 
Syndrome)
Cyanosis in a patient with unrepaired or palliated com-
plex CHD indicates the presence of a right-to-left shunt 
at the atrial, ventricular, or ductal level. As pregnancy 
advances, hypoxemia may worsen because of the fall 
in SVR, which increases the right-to-left shunt.7,68,117 Be-
cause of the inherent clotting abnormalities associated 
with cyanosis, patients are at increased risk of both 
thrombosis and hemorrhage. The prothrombotic state of 
pregnancy enhances the risk of thrombosis, in addition 
to the other risks of heart failure, arrhythmias, hemopty-
sis, and endocarditis.7,68,117
Maternal cyanosis also carries substantial risk to the 
fetus with a higher chance of fetal loss in the first trimes-
ter, prematurity, and small-for-gestational-age infants. 
The risk is higher with greater maternal hypoxia, and if 
maternal oxygen saturation is ≤85%, only 12% of infants 
are born alive.7,79,169a
Management
Little is known about the optimal management of women 
with cyanosis during pregnancy, but because cyanosis 
poses serious risks for the mother and the fetus, preg-
nancy should be discouraged until the defect is repaired. 
If pregnancy is unplanned, termination should be consid-
ered. If a decision to proceed with pregnancy is made, 
patients with cyanosis require very close monitoring at a 
regional center with an experienced adult CHD team (see 
Pregnancy Management). Hemoglobin and hematocrit 
should also be monitored, with careful iron supplementa-
tion to avoid relative anemia.68 Phlebotomy is not recom-
mended because of the risk of iron deficiency and lack of 
benefit in nonpregnant patients.169b Oxygen saturations 
should be measured at each clinic visit. Supplemental 
oxygen is unlikely to improve saturations dramatically in 
women with CHD, but it may slightly increase oxygen 
delivery to the placenta, and its initiation should be in-
dividualized for the patient. Given the increased risk of 
prematurity and small-for-gestational-age neonates, fetal 
growth should be closely monitored.
Anticoagulation remains a complex issue. Heparin, 
either UFH or LMWH, may be useful, particularly for 
women who are on bed rest. Compression stockings or 
sequential compression devices should be considered in 
women who are hospitalized or on bed rest.
The timing and mode of delivery should be individu-
alized. Delivery should be in a center with expertise in 
high-risk obstetrics and preferably with adult CHD. Oxy-
gen would generally be used during labor and delivery. 
Because of the right-to-left shunting, air filters should be 
used on all intravenous lines. Diuretics should be used 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Pregnancy in Patients With Complex CHD
Circulation. 2017;135:e50-e87. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000458 
February 21, 2017
e71
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
cautiously to avoid hemoconcentration. Vaginal delivery 
is preferred, with cesarean section typically reserved for 
obstetric indications. If a cesarean section is indicated, 
anesthesia should be managed by a cardiac anesthesi-
ologist.170
Repair of the hysterotomy should be done inside the 
abdomen without exteriorization of the uterus to prevent 
venous air embolus. For vaginal delivery, an assisted 
second stage may be required. Patients should be moni-
tored by telemetry with continuous pulse oximetry. There 
should be close monitoring for postpartum hemorrhage 
with aggressive management. Volume status should be 
carefully monitored during labor and postpartum. Pa-
tients will be at risk of both volume depletion and volume 
overload.
Because the critical period for major cardiovascular 
events is the first 24 to 48 hours after delivery, close 
observation in the intensive care unit is usually indicated. 
Early ambulation with support stockings can reduce risk 
of thromboembolism. Because of the continued risk of 
future pregnancies, contraception should be discussed 
with appropriate arrangements before discharge stress-
ing the importance of avoiding an unplanned pregnan-
cy. Cardiac follow-up commonly should be within 1 to 
2 weeks of discharge. The patient should be instructed 
on any worrisome signs and symptoms to report before 
scheduled follow-up appointments.
Suggestions for Clinical Practice
• Prepregnancy counseling should be provided by 
a cardiologist with expertise in the management 
of such patients. Because of the increased risk 
associated with cyanosis to the mother and high 
risk of fetal loss, pregnancy termination should be 
considered.
• Thromboembolic prophylaxis should be used for 
patients on prolonged bed rest for cardiac or 
obstetrical reasons, including compression stock-
ings, sequential compression devices, air filters on 
intravenous lines, and use of low-dose heparin, but 
each case should be individualized.
• Patients with right-to-left shunts should have fil-
tered vascular lines to prevent paradoxical air 
embolization.
• Delivery of patients with cyanotic CHD should be 
managed by a multidisciplinary team in a tertiary 
care center.
Interventional Therapies
Transcatheter Diagnostic Procedures and Interventions
Transcatheter diagnostic and interventional procedures 
may be performed during pregnancy when necessary 
and when no alternative is available (see Imaging).87 
Minimizing fetal radiation exposure can be accomplished 
by shortening fluoroscopic time, reducing the x-ray tube 
voltage, reducing the tube current, reducing the imag-
ing frames per second to the lowest setting (usually 7.5 
frames per second), using single-plane fluoroscopy, and 
avoiding cineangiography. Internal jugular or subclavian/
radial approaches are preferable, avoiding femoral ac-
cess if possible. In addition, the use of complementary 
imaging modalities such as transthoracic echocardiog-
raphy, intracardiac echocardiography, transesophageal 
echocardiography, and 3-dimensional MRI and CT over-
lay techniques may significantly reduce radiation expo-
sure.
Invasive diagnostic catheterization is seldom neces-
sary during pregnancy in women with CHD. The rare 
patients who may require it include those in whom pul-
monary artery pressure and arterial resistance cannot 
be estimated with noninvasive methods. Transcatheter 
interventional procedures are rarely performed during 
pregnancy, and if a procedure is considered, the patient 
should be referred to an adult CHD center with interven-
tional expertise in the treatment of such conditions.171 
RV obstructive lesions are generally well tolerated, and 
an intervention to relieve pulmonary stenosis is rarely 
necessary during pregnancy in the absence of RV failure 
or symptoms of RV pressure overload.167 Pulmonary bal-
loon valvuloplasty may be performed successfully during 
pregnancy with expected improvement in the degree of 
stenosis.172 Transcatheter occlusion of various shunts 
can be performed with transcatheter techniques but is 
rarely indicated during pregnancy. Transcatheter closure 
of atrium-level shunts could be considered in pregnant 
women with cyanosis because of right-to-left shunting 
at the atrial level and poor fetal growth. However, this 
should not be done in the presence of elevated pulmo-
nary arterial resistance or right heart failure. In the con-
text of paradoxical embolism and stroke, closure of an 
atrial septal defect or patent foramen ovale is not usu-
ally performed in pregnancy. Severe aortic valve steno-
sis may be associated with maternal and fetal cardiac 
complications, including premature labor and heart fail-
ure (see AS and Left Ventricular Outflow Tract Obstruc-
tion).161,173 Transcatheter balloon aortic valvuloplasty 
may be performed successfully during pregnancy, but 
only in those with a mobile, pliable valve and no more 
than mild aortic regurgitation.174
Cardiovascular Surgery During Pregnancy
Cardiothoracic surgery should be avoided during preg-
nancy unless absolutely necessary. When other treat-
ment options fail, an experienced multidisciplinary team 
usually can safely perform and facilitate cardiovascular 
surgery on the pregnant patient. Emergent surgery con-
fers a higher risk of maternal and fetal complications 
than elective surgery. Fetal prematurity and death are 
associated with urgent, high-risk surgery, maternal co-
morbidity, and early gestational age.158,176
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Canobbio et al
February 21, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e50-e87. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000458
e72
Patients with CHD often have had 1 or more prior 
operations when they become pregnant. These patients 
are more likely to require urgent or emergent operations 
during pregnancy than patients without CHD. Maternal 
mortality associated with cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) 
during pregnancy was once reported to be 3% to 15%.171 
In the current era, the maternal mortality rate is similar 
to that of CPB in nonpregnant women.156,177
Fetal mortality rates of 16% to 33% have been re-
ported in early series when CPB is required during 
pregnancy.156 Maternal mean arterial blood pressure 
decreases during CPB, and there is a reduction in 
pulsatile uterine blood flow. These factors can cause 
uteroplacental hypoperfusion, which can precipitate 
uterine contractions.
Fetal loss is associated with urgent, high-risk cardiac 
surgery, maternal comorbidities, and operations per-
formed at an early gestational age. Data suggest that 
fetal mortality can be decreased when cardiac surgery is 
delayed and the fetus is allowed to mature.176,178
Additional measures used to reduce fetal risks include 
avoiding hypothermia,179 minimizing intraoperative blood 
loss, using normothermic CPB, minimizing CPB times, 
maintaining a high CPB flow rate (>2.5 L·min−1·m−2), and 
maintaining a mean arterial pressure >70 mm 
Hg while 
the patient is on CPB.180 In addition, maintaining uterine 
displacement to avoid aortocaval compression appears 
to provide fetal protection by avoiding impairment of 
uteroplacental blood flow. Uterine displacement is per-
formed for any parturient at a gestation of >20 weeks 
and can be accomplished by placing the patient in the 
left lateral recumbent position during CPB.
Cardioplegia may increase serum potassium levels, 
particularly in cases with prolonged periods of cardiople-
gic arrest. Maternal serum potassium concentration is 
closely monitored and modified as needed. In addition, 
optimizing maternal oxygen saturation and avoiding ma-
ternal hypoglycemia are important for preventing fetal 
bradycardia.181,182
Delaying maternal cardiac surgery when possible min-
imizes the risks associated with prematurity and fetal 
demise. Fetal heart rate monitoring during CPB is gen-
erally recommended at a gestational age >24 weeks. 
CPB flow rates, mean arterial pressure, and maternal 
temperature are optimized to maintain fetal heart rates 
between 110 and 160 bpm. Prolonged fetal bradycardia 
(<80 bpm) that is unresponsive to therapeutic strategies 
is an indication for cesarean delivery if the fetus is at a 
viable gestational age.
Limited data document the safety of anesthetic agents 
used for cardiac operations during pregnancy. Adverse 
maternal and fetal outcomes from cardiac surgery during 
pregnancy are generally related to the underlying cardiac 
status of the mother and the urgency and duration of 
CPB. Sympathomimetic agents such as ephedrine and 
phenylephrine can be used to maintain perfusion pres-
sure, although increasing CPB flow rates is preferable 
and will result in increased placental perfusion.183
One of the most critical and challenging decisions in 
the management of the parturient with cardiac disease 
is determining the optimal timing of cardiac surgical in-
tervention. Maternal risk may decrease with early inter-
vention, but early intervention increases the risk of fetal 
compromise.
Delaying cardiac surgery until after delivery may re-
sult in excess maternal morbidity and mortality. If the 
fetus is of advanced gestational age and the planned 
maternal surgery is anticipated to be complicated or pro-
longed in length or anticoagulation will be needed, deliv-
ery before CPB should be considered. Cesarean delivery 
has been successfully performed immediately before or 
even while the mother was on CPB.184
Other Cardiac Therapies
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
Cardiac arrest occurs in 1 in 30 
000 pregnancies,185 with 
CHD being the third most common cause of arrest in 
cardiac patients. Management is in accord with current 
resuscitation guidelines with the same protocols as for 
nonpregnant patients185,186 with modifications that ac-
count for the impact of the gravid uterus on maternal car-
diopulmonary function. At a gestation age of 20 weeks 
and beyond, the pregnant uterus can press against the 
inferior vena cava and the aorta, impeding venous return 
and cardiac output. Uterine obstruction of venous return 
can produce prearrest hypotension or shock and in the 
critically ill patient may precipitate arrest.186 Positioning 
the patient in the left lateral tilt results in improved ma-
ternal hemodynamics.186
In accordance with the 2015 guidelines, a “bundled 
emergency code call” (eg, maternal code blue) to all 
necessary responders may save time and avoid confu-
sion.185 This team should include obstetrics, obstetrical 
anesthesiology, cardiology, and neonatology.
Defibrillation can be performed according to the rec-
ommended advanced cardiac life support guidelines be-
cause pregnancy does not change thoracic impedance 
or defibrillation thresholds. Although there is a small risk 
of fetal arrhythmias, defibrillation is considered safe at 
all stages of pregnancy.185 Additionally, if fetal monitor-
ing is being used, it should be removed during defibrilla-
tion. Intravenous access should be above the umbilicus 
(diaphragm) because medications and volume given via 
femoral access may be limited by aortocaval compres-
sion by the uterus.
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation may require a more 
cephalad hand positioning than usual if the uterus is 
above the umbilicus. Manually pushing the uterus left-
ward ≈1.5 cm from midline will alleviate the aortocaval 
compression more effectively than left lateral position-
ing while retaining the advantages of supine positioning 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Pregnancy in Patients With Complex CHD
Circulation. 2017;135:e50-e87. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000458 
February 21, 2017
e73
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
for cardiopulmonary resuscitation.187 If resuscitation is 
ongoing for 4 minutes and the uterus is sufficiently large 
to cause aortocaval compression, a cesarean section 
should be performed. The cesarean delivery early in re-
suscitation may be lifesaving for the mother because it 
alleviates aortocaval compression.187
Cardioversion
Cardioversion can be performed safely with standard 
protocols.188,189 Because the energy transmission to the 
fetus is minimal, the risk of inducing fetal arrhythmia is 
very small and should not preclude effective treatment 
of maternal arrhythmias requiring cardioversion.
Ablation
Although ablation is seldom required in pregnancy, it 
may be indicated in patients who develop tachyarrhyth-
mias that are poorly tolerated and refractory to medical 
therapy. There are case reports of ablations performed 
in pregnancy, with a general strategy to minimize fluo-
roscopy during the procedure.189,189a,190 Fetal exposure 
can be minimized, particularly with current mapping 
technology and the use of short bursts of fluoroscopy, 
as previously described (see Pregnancy Management). 
Only providers with expertise in minimizing fluoroscopy 
should perform ablations in pregnant women.68
Implantable Defibrillators and Pacemakers
Implantable cardiac defibrillators (ICDs) are well tolerat-
ed in pregnant women.190,191 Similarly, pacemakers pres-
ent no problem in pregnancy. However, the pacemaker 
should be interrogated, ideally before pregnancy, to 
evaluate lead function, battery life, presence of arrhyth-
mias, and determination of pacemaker dependency. For 
patients with pacemakers for sick sinus syndrome, the 
lower rate limit of the pacemaker should be increased 
to parallel the physiological heart rate increase that nor-
mally occurs during pregnancy.105,133
Pacemaker or ICD implantation can be performed 
with little to no radiation. For ICD implantation, one 
should consider the hemodynamic impact of testing the 
device on maternal and fetal stability. As with ablation, 
providers experienced in techniques that minimize ra-
diation should perform these procedures. There is no 
evidence suggesting that an ICD should be turned off 
during delivery. Recent studies show that no arrhythmias 
or ICD discharges were precipitated during delivery.191 
However, if electrocautery is used for cesarean section, 
the ICD should be deactivated with a portable defibrilla-
tor on standby.
SPECIFIC LESIONS
Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension
Pulmonary hypertension, considered one of the least 
well-tolerated conditions in the pregnant patient, is de-
fined as an increase in mean pulmonary arterial pressure 
≥25 mm 
Hg at rest.192,193 In patients with CHD, pulmo-
nary arterial hypertension (PAH) most commonly occurs 
as a result of long-term left-to-right shunting, leading to 
increased pulmonary flow that eventually causes high 
PVR, resulting in reversed or bidirectional shunts, which 
is referred to as Eisenmenger syndrome. It should be 
noted, however, that PAH may also develop in patients 
who have undergone surgical or transcatheter repair of 
their defects.
Eisenmenger syndrome is associated with decreased 
oxygen saturation in the systemic circulation, cyanosis, 
and erythrocytosis.194–197 Although maternal mortality 
has declined in recent years, it remains unacceptably 
high, reportedly between 30% and 50%, and thus, preg-
nancy is contraindicated.4 The greatest risk of death 
is in the postpartum period but may extend beyond 6 
weeks after delivery.4,164,193 The hemodynamic factors 
occurring in pregnancy that contribute to poor clinical 
outcomes in PAH include the following:
• Pulmonary vascular disease prevents the fall in 
PVR normally associated with pregnancy, leading 
to a further rise in pulmonary artery pressure. 
The obligatory increase in cardiac output cannot 
be achieved, thereby resulting in right-sided heart 
failure.
• Plasma volume increases by 50% by the third tri-
mester with resultant volume overload of a poorly 
compliant RV that is unable to adequately augment 
its output.
• In Eisenmenger syndrome, the decrease in SVR of 
pregnancy augments right-to-left shunting, wors-
ens hypoxia and cyanosis, and thus may increase 
the pulmonary arterial resistance.
• During labor and delivery, the risk of cardiovascu-
lar collapse increases as a result of hemodynamic 
perturbations, including volume shifts caused by 
blood loss and uterine contractions, withdrawal of 
sympathetic tone, or RV failure.
• The prothrombotic changes of pregnancy may 
contribute to in situ pulmonary thrombosis in the 
context of abnormal pulmonary vasculature and 
preexisting pulmonary thrombus.
Death may be attributed to arrhythmias, RV failure, 
or hemorrhage, which decreases blood volume and in-
creases left-to-right shunting as a result of a decrease in 
SVR, which increases cyanosis and tissue hypoxia. Fetal 
loss is equally high, with rates of spontaneous abortion 
of 40% to 50%.164,193–197 The fetus is typically exposed 
to a hypoxic environment and is at risk for intrauterine 
growth restriction and preterm delivery.
The prognosis in patients with PAH, whether they are 
cyanotic or not, is driven largely by RV function. Those 
with preserved RV systolic function and normal central 
venous pressure are well compensated; those with fail-
ing RVs, as manifested by increased central venous 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Canobbio et al
February 21, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e50-e87. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000458
e74
pressure and decreased cardiac output, are decompen-
sated and have a far worse prognosis. The degree of 
pulmonary arterial resistance elevation plays a major 
role, but so does the chronicity of pulmonary hyperten-
sion. Those with large central congenital defects (eg, 
ventricular septal defect or patent ductus arteriosus) 
have a high pressure and high flow pulmonary arterial 
circuit until the pulmonary arterial resistance inevitably 
rises, eventually resulting in the Eisenmenger syndrome. 
Patients with congenital heart disease with pulmonary 
hypertension and cyanosis are invariably limited by cya-
nosis and a variety of other multisystem derangements, 
but their RV function may be preserved. On the other 
hand, RV function in women who develop PAH later in 
life (eg, those with atrium-level shunts or idiopathic pul-
monary hypertension) is often reduced, as is the cardiac 
output.
Women with PAH should be strongly counseled 
against pregnancy at the time the diagnosis of PAH is 
made with appropriate contraceptive provided. If they 
do become pregnant, the safer option is termination of 
pregnancy, but termination in these patients, particularly 
beyond 12 weeks, is also considered high risk and man-
aged accordingly (see Termination of Pregnancy).
In the current era of pulmonary vasodilators and pul-
monary vascular remodeling agents, the outcomes of 
pregnancy in Eisenmenger syndrome have improved 
somewhat, and the use of such agents should be consid-
ered early in pregnancy.4,5,68 Although endothelin recep-
tor antagonists are teratogenic and prohibited in preg-
nancy, phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors are used and may 
be effective. Both nebulized iloprost and intravenous 
iloprost have been used safely.198 More intensive paren-
teral or subcutaneous infusion with prostacyclin can also 
be used during pregnancy to decrease the likelihood of 
RV failure. These targeted pulmonary vascular therapies 
are aimed at reducing pulmonary arterial resistance to 
stabilize the RV function and can be used in conjunction 
with the cautious use of diuretics. However, the outcome 
for many of these women is still often fatal, and publica-
tion bias means that the poor outcomes are often not 
reported. The choice of therapy and the stage of preg-
nancy at which it should be introduced remain uncertain.
Management
For the woman who chooses to proceed with pregnancy, 
a detailed plan of care must be organized once fetal vi-
ability is established at about 24 to 28 weeks of gesta-
tion. The pregnancy and delivery should be carried out 
in a tertiary center with a multidisciplinary team that 
includes a pulmonary hypertension specialist. Manage-
ment is focused on the optimization of RV preload and 
systolic function and reduction in PVR. Therefore, the pa-
tient should be followed up monthly or more frequently as 
needed because deterioration may occur as early as the 
second trimester. The arterial saturation should be moni-
tored, and if it drops below 85%, admission is warranted 
for fetal monitoring. Baseline laboratory studies should 
include a complete blood count, platelets, electrolytes, 
and coagulation panel. In the patient with Eisenmenger 
syndrome, iron deficiency may occur. Iron supplementa-
tion should be given in small doses, and the erythrocyte 
response should be checked periodically to ensure that 
excessive erythrocytosis does not occur.94,195 Echocar-
diography should be obtained regularly to monitor de-
creases in RV function and tricuspid regurgitation. If the 
patient exhibits sign of failure with significantly elevated 
jugular venous pressure, the addition of diuretics such 
as furosemide is indicated. Although important in con-
trolling RV volume overload, diuretics should be used 
judiciously to avoid hemoconcentration and intravascu-
lar volume depletion. Spironolactone is contraindicated 
because of antiandrogenic effects.
If followed up on an outpatient basis, the patient 
should be cautioned to minimize cardiac demands 
through reduced activity levels, enhanced bed rest with 
legs elevated, limited salt intake, and resting in a lateral 
position to avoid caval vein compression and to maintain 
venous return. The addition of anticoagulation is contro-
versial but should be considered if the patient has a pre-
pregnancy indication such as atrial fibrillation or history 
of thrombotic event or when admitted for bed rest.5,199
Hospital admission for bed rest and monitoring is 
usually recommended by the third trimester.5,68,193,195 
Cardiac monitoring, pulse oximetry, peripheral vein ac-
cess for fluids with bubble filters to avoid the risk of 
air emboli, and compression stockings to avoid venous 
stasis should be standard care for all in-patients. Oxygen 
therapy is indicated in the event of arterial desaturation 
or maternal decompensation. Low-dose subcutaneous 
heparin may be used, but there is greater concern for 
hemorrhagic complications in the cyanotic patients who 
have an inherent bleeding diathesis with concomitant 
thrombocytopenia.164
More invasive monitoring such as with an arterial line 
and central venous catheter for monitoring right atrial 
pressure should be considered for the patient who be-
gins to show signs of decompensation, in preparation 
for delivery, and for managing fluid volume, as well as for 
careful monitoring during the postdelivery period. Place-
ment of a pulmonary artery catheter should be avoided 
because the benefits of the information obtained are out-
weighed by the risks.195,196
The timing and mode of delivery, although conten-
tious, will depend on the clinical status of the mother 
and fetal maturity. If vaginal delivery is selected, then 
induction of labor is recommended. Careful regional an-
esthesia may be used with an assisted second stage of 
labor because bearing down must be avoided. For many 
patients, delivery by cesarean is elected in an attempt 
to abbreviate the duration of hemodynamic perturba-
tions or because of maternal decompensation.4,5,162,195 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Pregnancy in Patients With Complex CHD
Circulation. 2017;135:e50-e87. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000458 
February 21, 2017
e75
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Regional anesthesia has been used, but if epidural anes-
thesia is selected, then small incremental doses must be 
used, and single-dose spinal anesthesia must be avoided 
because of the risks of hypotension.
Large-volume boluses and excessive blood loss can 
destabilize the hemodynamics of the patient during the 
peripartum period and should be avoided. Volume over-
load should be treated with diuretics. Inhaled nitric ox-
ide can decrease pulmonary arterial resistance further 
and improve pulmonary blood flow and oxygenation and 
is indicated for women with cardiac decompensation. 
Inhaled supplemental oxygen is often used in conjunc-
tion with nitric oxide to improve oxygenation. Continu-
ous ECG, pulse oximetry, and invasive arterial pressure 
monitoring are important during delivery. Oxytocic drugs 
may have harmful effects and should be avoided.
Given the reported high risk of mortality in postpar-
tum period, these patients should recover in an intensive 
care unit with the capability of monitoring cardiac pres-
sure, arterial pressure, oxygen saturation, and central 
venous pressure. Intravenous anticoagulation such as 
UFH is used in the postpartum period to reduce the risk 
of thromboembolic complications. However, the benefit 
of these agents must be weighed against the risk of 
postpartum bleeding, which is higher in a cyanotic pa-
tient because of the inherent bleeding diathesis.
Hospital discharge should be delayed 7 to 10 days 
after delivery or longer to continue monitoring for com-
plications such as RV failure and to adjust the dose of 
pulmonary vasodilators.
AS and Left Ventricular Outflow Tract Obstruction
Congenital bicuspid aortic valve is the most common 
cause of AS in women of childbearing age. Patients 
with severe AS may first become symptomatic during 
pregnancy. Echocardiography is the diagnostic test of 
choice for patients with suspected AS; it confirms the 
diagnosis, determines the severity, and identifies associ-
ated conditions. Prepregnancy exercise testing is rec-
ommended in asymptomatic patients with AS to confirm 
symptom status and to identify high-risk features such 
as reduced exercise capacity, abnormal blood pressure 
response, ischemic electrocardiographic changes, and 
arrhythmias during exercise.152
Bicuspid aortic valve is often associated with aortic 
dilatation. All women with a bicuspid aortic valve should 
undergo imaging of the aorta before pregnancy to as-
sess aortic dimensions and to rule out coarctation. As-
cending aortic replacement should be considered before 
pregnancy when the aortic diameter is >50 mm.
Maternal cardiac morbidity during pregnancy is relat-
ed to AS severity and symptoms. The increased cardiac 
output that occurs during pregnancy adds a volume load 
to a pressure-loaded left ventricle, which, in addition to 
the fall in afterload, can lead to an increase in gradi-
ent.200 Pregnancy is well tolerated in asymptomatic pa-
tients with mild (mean gradient <25 mm 
Hg) or moderate 
(mean gradient, 25–40 mm 
Hg) AS. Patients with severe 
AS (mean gradient >40 mm 
Hg, atrioventricular area 
<1.0 cm2) may tolerate pregnancy and remain asymp-
tomatic, but careful individualized assessment is need-
ed173,201,202 because complications occur with increased 
frequency. The most common complications include 
heart failure and arrhythmias; angina is less common.161
Pregnancy is not advised for symptomatic patients 
with severe AS or asymptomatic patients with severe AS 
and impaired left ventricular function, abnormal exercise 
test with the development of arrhythmia, evidence of 
myocardial ischemia, failure to augment blood pressure, 
or ventricular dysfunction, as well as severe left ventricu-
lar hypertrophy. These patients should be referred for 
valvuloplasty or valve replacement before pregnancy. 
Recent progression of AS severity warrants additional 
surveillance before declaring whether it is safe to pro-
ceed with pregnancy.68,152
Management
During pregnancy, the patient with moderate or severe 
AS should receive regular follow-up by an experienced 
multidisciplinary team. These patients may become more 
symptomatic as pregnancy progresses as the volume load 
increases and the fall in afterload exaggerates the aortic 
gradient. They should be evaluated frequently to assess for 
early signs and symptoms of heart failure, angina, or syn-
cope/presyncope. The frequency of evaluations is individu-
alized. High-risk patients may need to be hospitalized and 
seen daily; others, weekly or monthly. Echocardiography 
is recommended frequently to reassess AS severity and 
ventricular function. An ECG should be reviewed initially for 
signs of left ventricular strain or ischemia and thereafter if 
the patient develops chest pain or tachycardia. Congestive 
symptoms should be promptly assessed, and surgical or 
percutaneous intervention should be considered.
Percutaneous valvuloplasty can be undertaken dur-
ing pregnancy in severely symptomatic patients not re-
sponding to medical therapy when AS is associated with 
a noncalcified valve and there is minimal regurgitation.203 
For patients with life-threatening symptoms and AS not 
amenable to percutaneous therapy, valve replacement 
may be required. This can be performed during preg-
nancy or timed with caesarean delivery.158
Before delivery, a detailed delivery plan should be 
developed and circulated to all members of the multidis-
ciplinary team. A planned induction of labor is suggest-
ed; the timing depends on the patient’s cardiovascular 
status. In the stable patient, labor is generally induced 
at or after 39 weeks’ gestation in an effort to prevent 
spontaneous onset of labor during off-hours when an 
experienced multidisciplinary team is not available. The 
timing of induction may vary, depending on maternal he-
modynamics and symptom status.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Canobbio et al
February 21, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e50-e87. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000458
e76
In nonsevere AS, vaginal delivery is generally favored. 
If the aorta is dilated or if the patient is clinically stable, 
the delivery is facilitated by the use of forceps or vacuum 
delivery. Regional anesthesia and analgesia are used, 
and the aim is to avoid a decrease in peripheral vascular 
resistance during delivery. In a symptomatic patient with 
severe AS, caesarean delivery with endotracheal intuba-
tion and general anesthesia may be considered.
Limited data are available on the preferred mode of 
delivery in patients with bicuspid aortic valve and dilated 
aorta. If the aorta has increased substantially in size dur-
ing pregnancy or is >4.5 cm, it is reasonable to consider 
a caesarean delivery.68
Monitoring during labor and delivery is dictated by 
the severity of the AS and functional status of the pa-
tient. In the absence of symptoms, electrocardiographic 
monitoring may be used during active labor and delivery. 
Placement of an arterial line and a pulmonary artery cath-
eter can be considered in the patient with left ventricular 
dysfunction in an effort to maintain ventricular pressures 
by maintaining cardiac filling without excessive preload, 
which could result in pulmonary edema.204
Antibiotic prophylaxis for endocarditis at the time of 
vaginal delivery is not routinely recommended. However, 
some experts continue to administer antibiotics because 
the risk of developing endocarditis has such serious con-
sequences.
Patients with severe AS also have increased potential 
for obstetric complications. Intrauterine growth retarda-
tion, preterm birth, and low birth weight have been re-
ported to occur in up to 25% of the offspring of mothers 
with moderate and severe AS.161
Although less common, AS in pregnant women may be 
attributable to subvalvular and supravalvular AS. These 
lesions are managed during pregnancy with principles 
similar to those for patients with valvular AS, although 
percutaneous intervention is not an option in either of 
these disorders.
After delivery, the patient who is clinically stable may 
recover similarly to the general obstetric patient but 
with telemonitoring for the first 24 hours. The hemody-
namic changes of pregnancy may take up to 6 months 
to normalize; the patient is generally seen by the car-
diologist within the first few months after delivery to 
reassess clinical status. Long-term follow-up is critical 
for women with moderate to severe AS to reassess the 
hemodynamics and to provide counseling about future 
pregnancy.173
D-Transposition of the Great Arteries (D-TGA): 
Congenitally Corrected Transposition of the Great 
Arteries (CC-TGA or L-TGA)
Transposition of the great arteries most commonly oc-
curs as 1 of 2 abnormalities, either D-TGA or L-transpo-
sition of the great arteries.
L-transposition of the great arteries is often referred 
to as CC-TGA because, in addition to transposed great 
vessels, ventricular inversion is present, which results in 
a physiologically normal circulation, although with the RV 
as the systemic pump. Patients with CC-TGA may have 
had prior surgery or may be unoperated. Surgery is most 
common in those with concomitant abnormalities such as 
ventricular septal defect or pulmonary stenosis. Adults 
with CC-TGA are at risk for complete heart block and sys-
temic atrioventricular valve regurgitation (the anatomic 
tricuspid valve) and heart failure.
D-TGA must be repaired, however, because the paral-
lel circulation that results from the aorta arising from the 
RV and pulmonary artery from the left ventricle is not 
compatible with long-term survival. However, the type of 
repair depends on the era in which the child was born 
and concomitant cardiac abnormalities.
Atrial Repair
The atrial repair of D-TGA, also known as an atrial switch 
(Mustard or Senning repair), involves the redirection of 
the systemic and pulmonary venous return at the atrial 
level so that deoxygenated blood returns to the left ven-
tricle and then to the pulmonary artery, and oxygenated 
blood returns to the RV and then the aorta. With an atrial 
switch repair, the circulation is physiologically normal, 
but again, the RV serves as the systemic ventricle. 
Adults with an atrial switch repair are at significant risk 
for sinus node dysfunction and atrial arrhythmias result-
ing from atrial surgical scarring related to the Mustard or 
Senning repair and sudden death resulting from ventricu-
lar arrhythmias.205 Baffle obstruction or leak can occur; 
heart failure caused by systemic ventricular dysfunction 
is a significant concern; and pulmonary hypertension is 
seen in a minority of patients.206,207
Pregnancy in a patient with a systemic RV, whether D-
TGA with an atrial switch or CC-TGA, may be poorly toler-
ated. The increased blood volume, heart rate, stroke vol-
ume, and cardiac output that occur with pregnancy may 
unmask heart failure, worsen tricuspid regurgitation, or 
exacerbate arrhythmias.32,162,205 In a multicenter study of 
70 pregnancies, cardiac complications occurred in 36% 
of pregnancies, including arrhythmias, heart failure, and 
hemoptysis, with these complications developing in the 
third trimester.162
Some data suggest that pregnancy accelerates the 
decline in systemic RV function and progression of sys-
temic atrioventricular valve regurgitation. This may re-
sult in an irreversible decrement in either systolic func-
tion, functional capacity, or both.163,208,209 Other studies 
suggest, however, that RV function is not changed by 
pregnancy.210 Because data are derived from small case 
series, the data are controversial, and as with many 
concerns about pregnancy and CHD, it is difficult to de-
termine whether the decline in systemic RV function is 
simply a function of time or truly is made worse by preg-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Pregnancy in Patients With Complex CHD
Circulation. 2017;135:e50-e87. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000458 
February 21, 2017
e77
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
nancy.168 Regardless of cause, heart failure can compli-
cate both the pregnancy and the years after pregnancy. 
Thus, patients who want to become pregnant should be 
counseled accordingly.
Preconception evaluation of the patient with D-TGA or 
CC-TGA should be directed toward ventricular and valvu-
lar function and the presence of arrhythmias and should 
include echocardiogram or MRI, cardiopulmonary exer-
cise testing, and Holter monitoring.
More invasive hemodynamic assessment is indi-
cated only if history, examination, imaging, or exercise 
testing suggests a significant hemodynamic lesion that 
warrants invasive investigation or treatment such as 
heart failure, residual shunt, pulmonary hypertension, 
coronary ischemia, or obstruction of Mustard/Senning 
pathways.
Patients with moderate to severe ventricular dysfunc-
tion (NYHA class III or IV) should be advised against be-
coming pregnant.
Management
Because of the potential for deterioration during preg-
nancy, once pregnancy is confirmed, a careful history 
and clinical examination are needed with a baseline ECG 
and echocardiogram. In patients with moderate or se-
vere ventricular dysfunction, baseline BNP may be useful 
as an indicator of ventricular overload in patients who 
begin to develop symptoms during pregnancy. For those 
with a history of arrhythmias, an ECG or interval ambula-
tory ECG monitoring should be done if the patient com-
plains of palpitations.
If clinically stable, the patient may be seen by a car-
diologist every 4 to 6 weeks in the second trimester 
and every 2 to 4 weeks in the third. Women who be-
come symptomatic may require visits as often as every 
1 to 2 weeks. Patients who remain asymptomatic may 
continue routine activities but should be cautioned to 
restrict active exercise as they progress with pregnancy 
and to rest at regular intervals; they should also monitor 
the amount of dietary sodium and report persistent pe-
ripheral edema, especially if associated with increased 
dyspnea.
Before delivery, a detailed delivery plan should be de-
veloped and disseminated to team members. If a patient 
has become symptomatic, induction of labor should be 
considered after week 39 or earlier as indicated by clini-
cal presentation. Depending on the clinical status at the 
time of admission, pulse oximetry and cardiac monitor-
ing during active labor and delivery may be all that is 
required.
Women with good functional status and no significant 
ventricular or valvular dysfunction or arrhythmias may do 
well. If, however, a patient is admitted with heart failure 
or arrhythmias, labor may be poorly tolerated, and she 
will require more acute management (see Arrhythmias; 
Heart Failure).
Vaginal delivery with a facilitated second stage of 
labor and regional anesthesia is recommended unless 
cesarean delivery is warranted for obstetric reasons. 
Regional anesthesia is recommended to minimize hemo-
dynamic perturbations of labor.
The increase in maternal blood volume that occurs in 
the first 24 to 48 hours after delivery may result in clini-
cal heart failure, in some cases even if heart failure had 
not previously been present. However, if the patient is 
clinically stable at the time of delivery, she may be trans-
ferred to postpartum care with cardiac monitoring for 
24 hours, with the nursing staff instructed to observe for 
symptoms of volume overload or arrhythmias. Patients 
must continue to be monitored because symptoms of 
decreased ventricular function may not occur until 3 to 
5 days after delivery and have been reported to occur as 
late as 4 to 6 months after delivery.168
Arterial Switch
The more modern repair of D-TGA is the arterial switch 
repair, which moves the great arteries and coronary ar-
teries so that the aorta arises from the left ventricle and 
the pulmonary artery from the RV. This repair affords 
both physiologically and anatomically normal circulation. 
The arterial switch repair was not commonly performed 
until the late 1980s and 1990s, so neither the long-term 
sequelae of the repair nor the experience with preg-
nancy and the arterial switch repair is robust. However, 
patients with an arterial switch thus far have done well, 
with neoaortic dilation, aortic valve regurgitation, supra-
valvular and branch pulmonary stenosis, and coronary 
abnormalities developing in a minority of patients.211–213 
Women with an arterial switch repair are anticipated to 
do well in pregnancy, provided that there are no hemo-
dynamically important residua such as valve dysfunction, 
supravalvular or branch pulmonary stenosis, supravalvu-
lar AS, coronary ischemia, or ventricular dysfunction. 
Thus far, there are scant data on pregnancy in women 
with an arterial switch repair, and complications in 1 se-
ries were related to associated abnormalities that would 
have been identified as high risk in any circumstance 
(mechanical valve replacement and left ventricular dys-
function).214
Evaluation and management during pregnancy will 
be dictated by symptoms or residual hemodynamic ab-
normalities. In the asymptomatic woman with an arterial 
switch and no hemodynamic abnormalities, evaluation 
and management may be similar to that in lower-risk car-
diac patients. In women with pulmonary stenosis in the 
main or branch pulmonary arteries, supravalvular AS at 
the anastomotic site, neoaortic dilation, or aortic regur-
gitation or coronary ischemia, more frequent and more 
intensive evaluation may be necessary. Neoaortic dilation 
may require an early epidural and good pain management 
and may necessitate a facilitated second stage of delivery 
or even a cesarean section, depending on the severity.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Canobbio et al
February 21, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e50-e87. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000458
e78
Single-Ventricle Physiology/Fontan Palliation
Single-ventricle physiology refers to the presence of a 
dominant systemic ventricle and typically a second hypo-
plastic “ventricle”; less commonly, patients present with 
a true single ventricle. There are a host of morphological 
and anatomical variants of single-ventricle physiology (ie, 
tricuspid atresia, double-inlet left ventricle, hypoplastic 
left ventricle), but all have the presence of only 1 func-
tional pump that must be used to perfuse the systemic 
arterial bed. Surgical palliations consist of a variety of 
systemic arterial to pulmonary arterial and systemic ve-
nous to pulmonary arterial connections.215,216
The Fontan operation is considered definitive repair in 
that the deoxygenated systemic venous flow is directed 
to the pulmonary arterial circulation without the pres-
ence of an intervening pump, resulting in alleviation of 
cyanosis but also in a host of long-term sequelae related 
to chronically elevated systemic venous pressure, dimin-
ished cardiac output, and cardiac reserve.217
Clinically, patients tend to do well for many years after 
the procedure, but a number of clinical problems and 
complications occur over time, including arrhythmias, 
reduced functional capacity resulting from impaired ven-
tricular function, protein-losing enteropathy, thromboem-
bolism, and portal hypertension.218–220
These data present a challenge in the setting of preg-
nancy given the obligatory increase in heart rate, cardiac 
output, and plasma volume, especially during the sec-
ond and third trimesters.
Additionally, during delivery, there are invariably in-
creases in central venous pressure and decreases in 
cardiac output with straining, the vasoplegic effects of 
anesthetic agents may be magnified,6 and the fluid shifts 
noted in the postpartum period may result in volume 
overload and necessitate diuresis. Arrhythmias are an-
other area of concern in patients with Fontan circulation, 
especially in those with the older right atrial to pulmonary 
artery connections. Data emerging on the risk of preg-
nancy in the setting of Fontan physiology indicate that in 
selected, clinically stable women, those with good ven-
tricular function with no history of atrial arrhythmias or 
thromboembolic events, pregnancy and delivery may be 
well tolerated but are not without risk,114,221–224 and early 
delivery is frequently necessary because of maternal de-
compensation. Atrial arrhythmias, particularly in those 
with history of prepregnancy arrhythmias, thromboem-
bolic events, and heart failure, are the primary cardiac 
events to be reported.114,224 Obstetric complications 
have also been reported, including a high rate of fetal 
loss (miscarriage or fetal demise), premature rupture of 
membranes, and preterm labor leading to small-for-ges-
tational-age neonates and low birth weight.224 Therefore, 
it is important that these patients undergo a full precon-
ception diagnostic evaluation to determine ventricular 
function, the presence of intracardiac thrombosis, the 
risk of developing arrhythmias, oxygen saturation, and 
pulmonary pressures.
Management
These patients must be under the direct management 
of an experienced adult CHD multidisciplinary team. Be-
cause of the potential for deterioration during pregnancy, 
once pregnancy is confirmed, a full cardiac medication 
and obstetric history and a clinical examination are re-
quired. A repeat echocardiogram should be considered 
at the start of each trimester to determine ventricular 
function. For those with a history of arrhythmias or if the 
patient complains of persistent palpitations, ambulatory 
electrocardiographic monitoring may be indicated. Base-
line arterial oxygen saturation and liver function studies 
should be obtained. Oxygen saturations should be ob-
tained at each clinic visit.
For women who were on anticoagulation before preg-
nancy, the need to continue anticoagulation throughout 
pregnancy is controversial, but for those who have a his-
tory of a thromboembolic event or atrial arrhythmias, the 
use of LMWH would seem to be justified (see Mechani-
cal Valves and Anticoagulation). For those on low-dose 
aspirin, there are no data showing increased obstetric 
bleeding or adverse fetal effects, but the degree of ben-
efit is unclear.
Regular cardiology follow-up visits should be sched-
uled and increased if the patient becomes symptomatic. 
Patients who remain asymptomatic may continue routine 
activities but should be cautioned to restrict active exer-
cise as they progress with pregnancy, to rest at regular 
intervals, and to monitor the amount of dietary sodium. 
They should be instructed to report persistent palpita-
tions and the presence of early or persistent peripheral 
edema, especially if associated with increased dyspnea.
Before delivery, a detailed delivery plan should be 
developed and circulated to all members of the mul-
tidisciplinary team, including labor and delivery. Be-
cause of the risk of preterm labor, the delivery plan 
should be drafted and distributed at the beginning of 
the third trimester if not earlier. If the patient has be-
come symptomatic, induction of labor should be con-
sidered after week 38 or earlier as indicated by clinical 
presentation.
Depending on the clinical status at time of admission, 
cardiac monitoring, pulse oximetry, peripheral vein ac-
cess for fluids, and compression stockings to avoid ve-
nous stasis should be standard care for all in-patients. 
Intravenous air filters should be used if shunts have been 
detected to avoid the risk of air emboli. The patient 
should labor in the left lateral position.
Oxygen therapy is indicated only in the event of arterial 
desaturation or in the event of maternal decompensation. 
More invasive monitoring such as arterial line and central 
venous catheter should be considered only for the patient 
who begins to show signs of decompensation.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Pregnancy in Patients With Complex CHD
Circulation. 2017;135:e50-e87. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000458 
February 21, 2017
e79
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Labor may be poorly tolerated in the patient with poor 
ejection fraction who is admitted with symptomatic heart 
failure or arrhythmias, and she will require more acute 
management (see Arrhythmias; Heart Failure) and early 
delivery. This may necessitate cesarean section deliv-
ery. Vaginal delivery, usually with a shortened second 
stage of labor and regional anesthesia, is otherwise 
recommended unless cesarean delivery is warranted for 
obstetric reasons. Fluid management in the patient with 
Fontan circulation is a delicate balance. Excessive use 
of crystalloids may tip the balance, resulting in heart fail-
ure, but dehydration should be avoided because volume 
depletion can lower the central venous pressure and in-
terfere with blood flowing through the cavopulmonary or 
atriopulmonary connection to the lungs.
After delivery, the significant fluid shifts that occur in 
the first 24 to 48 hours after delivery are of concern. 
However, if the patient remains clinically stable at the 
time of delivery and has had an uncomplicated delivery, 
she may be transferred to the postpartum unit with re-
mote cardiac monitoring for 24 hours, with the obstetric 
nursing staff instructed to observe for symptoms of vol-
ume overload or palpitation. For patients with compro-
mised cardiac function, admission to the intensive care 
unit for 24 to 48 hours is prudent.
FOOTNOTES
The American Heart Association makes every effort to avoid 
any actual or potential conflicts of interest that may arise as a 
result of an outside relationship or a personal, professional, or 
business interest of a member of the writing panel. Specifical-
ly, all members of the writing group are required to complete 
and submit a Disclosure Questionnaire showing all such rela-
tionships that might be perceived as real or potential conflicts 
of interest.
This statement was approved by the American Heart Asso-
ciation Science Advisory and Coordinating Committee on June 
7, 2016, and the American Heart Association Executive Com-
mittee on July 20, 2016. A copy of the document is available 
at http://professional.heart.org/statements by using either 
“Search for Guidelines & Statements” or the “Browse by Topic” 
area. To purchase additional reprints, call 843-216-2533 or 
e-mail kelle.ramsay@wolterskluwer.com.
The American Heart Association requests that this docu-
ment be cited as follows: Canobbio MM, Warnes CA, Aboulhosn 
J, Connolly HM, Khanna A, Koos BJ, Mital S, Rose C, Silversides 
C, Stout K; on behalf of the American Heart Association Council 
on Cardiovascular and Stroke Nursing; Council on Clinical Cardi-
ology; Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young; Council 
on Functional Genomics and Translational Biology; and Council 
on Quality of Care and Outcomes Research. Management of 
pregnancy in patients with complex congenital heart disease: 
a scientific statement for healthcare professionals from the 
American Heart Association. Circulation. 2017;135:e50–e87. 
doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000458.
Expert peer review of AHA Scientific Statements is conducted 
by the AHA Office of Science Operations. For more on AHA state-
ments and guidelines development, visit http://professional.
heart.org/statements. Select the “Guidelines & Statements” 
drop-down menu, then click “Publication Development.”
Permissions: Multiple copies, modification, alteration, enhance-
ment, and/or distribution of this document are not permitted with-
out the express permission of the American Heart Association. 
Instructions for obtaining permission are located at http://www.
heart.org/HEARTORG/General/Copyright-Permission-Guidelines_
UCM_300404_Article.jsp. A link to the “Copyright Permissions 
Request Form” appears on the right side of the page.
Circulation is available at http://circ.ahajournals.org.
DISCLOSURES
Writing Group Disclosures
Writing Group 
Member
Employment
Research 
Grant
Other 
Research 
Support
Speakers’ 
Bureau/
Honoraria
Expert 
Witness
Ownership 
Interest
Consultant/
Advisory 
Board
Other
Mary M. 
Canobbio
UCLA School of 
Nursing
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Carole A. Warnes
Mayo Clinic
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Jamil Aboulhosn
David Geffen 
School of Medicine 
at UCLA
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Heidi M. Connolly
Mayo Clinic
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Amber Khanna
University of 
Colorado, Denver
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Brian J. Koos
David Geffen 
School of Medicine 
at UCLA
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
(Continued )
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Canobbio et al
February 21, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e50-e87. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000458
e80
Reviewer Disclosures
Reviewer
Employment
Research 
Grant
Other 
Research 
Support
Speakers’ 
Bureau/
Honoraria
Expert 
Witness
Ownership 
Interest
Consultant/
Advisory 
Board
Other
Jack M. 
Colman
University of 
Toronto (Canada)
CIHR (pregnancy 
and heart disease 
funded research 
studies)*; HSFC 
(pregnancy and 
heart disease 
funded research 
studies)*
None
None
Expert witness 
for a defendant 
hospital in 
a maternal 
mortality case*; 
expert witness 
for a defendant 
doctor in a 
maternal 
mortality case*
None
None
ACC/AHA 
2015 ACHD 
guidelines 
(in process), 
member of 
the writing 
group*
Ian S. Harris
University of 
California, San 
Francisco
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Marla A. 
Mendelson
Northwestern 
University
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
This table represents the relationships of reviewers that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as reported on the 
Disclosure Questionnaire, which all reviewers are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be “significant” if (a) the person receives 
$10 000 or more during any 12-month period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 5% or more of the voting stock or 
share of the entity, or owns $10 000 or more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to be “modest” if it is less than “significant” 
under the preceding definition.
*Modest.
Seema Mital
Hospital for Sick 
Children
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Carl Rose
Mayo Clinic
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Candice 
Silversides
Toronto General 
Hospital
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Karen Stout
University of 
Washington
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
This table represents the relationships of writing group members that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as 
reported on the Disclosure Questionnaire, which all members of the writing group are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be 
“significant” if (a) the person receives $10 000 or more during any 12-month period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 
5% or more of the voting stock or share of the entity, or owns $10 000 or more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to be 
“modest” if it is less than “significant” under the preceding definition.
Writing Group Disclosures Continued
Writing Group 
Member
Employment
Research 
Grant
Other 
Research 
Support
Speakers’ 
Bureau/
Honoraria
Expert 
Witness
Ownership 
Interest
Consultant/
Advisory 
Board
Other
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Pregnancy in Patients With Complex CHD
Circulation. 2017;135:e50-e87. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000458 
February 21, 2017
e81
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
REFERENCES
 1. Warnes CA, Liberthson R, Danielson GK, Dore A, Harris L, Hoff-
man JI, Somerville J, Williams RG, Webb GD. Task force 1: the 
changing profile of congenital heart disease in adult life. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2001;37:1170–1175.
 2. Thorne S, MacGregor A, Nelson-Piercy C. Risks of contraception 
and pregnancy in heart disease. Heart. 2006;92:1520–1525. 
doi: 10.1136/hrt.2006.095240.
 3. Balci A, Sollie-Szarynska KM, van der Bijl AG, Ruys TP, Mulder 
BJ, Roos-Hesselink JW, van Dijk AP, Wajon EM, Vliegen HW, Dren-
then W, Hillege HL, Aarnoudse JG, van Veldhuisen DJ, Pieper PG; 
ZAHARA-II Investigators. Prospective validation and assessment 
of cardiovascular and offspring risk models for pregnant women 
with congenital heart disease. Heart. 2014;100:1373–1381. doi: 
10.1136/heartjnl-2014-305597.
 4. Drenthen W, Boersma E, Balci A, Moons P, Roos-Hesselink JW, 
Mulder BJ, Vliegen HW, van Dijk AP, Voors AA, Yap SC, van Veld-
huisen DJ, Pieper PG; ZAHARA Investigators. Predictors of preg-
nancy complications in women with congenital heart disease. Eur 
Heart J. 2010;31:2124–2132. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehq200.
 5. Bédard E, Dimopoulos K, Gatzoulis MA. Has there been any prog-
ress made on pregnancy outcomes among women with pulmo-
nary arterial hypertension? Eur Heart J. 2009;30:256–265. doi: 
10.1093/eurheartj/ehn597.
 6. Weiss BM, Zemp L, Seifert B, Hess OM. Outcome of pulmonary 
vascular disease in pregnancy: a systematic overview from 1978 
through 1996. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1998:31:1650–1657.
 7. Presbitero P, Somerville J, Stone S, Aruta E, Spiegelhalter D, Ra-
bajoli F. Pregnancy in cyanotic congenital heart disease: outcome 
of mother and fetus. Circulation. 1994;89:2673–2676.
 8. Hytten FE, Paintin DB. Increase in plasma volume during normal 
pregnancy. J Obstet Gynaecol Br Emp. 1963;70:402–407.
 9. Rovinsky JJ, Jaffin H. Cardiovascular hemodynamics in pregnancy, 
I: blood and plasma volumes in multiple pregnancy. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol. 1965;93:1–15.
 
10. Caton WL, Roby CC, Reid DE, Caswell R, Maletskos CJ, Fluharty 
RG, Gibson JG 2nd. The circulating red cell volume and body 
hematocrit in normal pregnancy and the puerperium by direct 
measurement using radioactive red cells. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 
1951;61:1207–1217.
 
11. Dahlstrom H, Ihrman K. A clinical and physiological study of preg-
nancy in a material from northern Sweden, IV: observations on 
the blood volume during and after pregnancy. Acta Soc Med Ups. 
1960;65:295–304.
 
12. Pritchard JA. Changes in the blood volume during pregnancy and 
delivery. Anesthesiology. 1965;26:393–399.
 
13. Longo LD. Maternal blood volume and cardiac output during 
pregnancy: a hypothesis of endocrinologic control. Am J Physiol. 
1983:245(pt 1):R720–R729.
 
14. Yusef YR, Thomas W, Harvey BJ. Estrogen increases ENaC activ-
ity via PKCδ signaling in renal cortical collecting duct cells. Physiol 
Rep. 2014:2:e12020. doi: 10.14814/phy2.12020.
 
15. Lumbers ER, Pringle KG. Roles of the circulating renin-angiotensin-
aldosterone system in human pregnancy. Am J Physiol Regul In-
tegr Comp Physiol. 2014:306:R91–R101.
 
16. Chisholm M. A controlled clinical trial of prophylactic folic 
acid and iron in pregnancy. J Obstet Gynaecol Br Commonw. 
1966:73:191–196.
 
17. Hameed AB, Chan K, Ghamsary M, Elkayam U. Longitudinal 
changes in the B-type natriuretic peptide levels in normal preg-
nancy and postpartum. Clin Cardiol. 2009:32:E60–E62. doi: 
10.1002/clc.20391.
 
18. Tanous D, Siu SC, Mason J, Greutmann M, Wald RM, Parker JD, 
Sermer M, Colman JM, Silversides CK. B-type natriuretic pep-
tide in pregnant women with heart disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2010;56:1247–1253. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2010.02.076.
 
19. Resnik JL, Hong C, Resnik R, Kazanegra R, Beede J, Bhalla V, 
Maisel A. Evaluation of B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) lev-
els in normal and preeclamptic women. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 
2005;193:450–454. doi: 10.1016/j.ajog.2004.12.006.
 
20. Yoshimura T, Yoshimura M, Yasue H, Ito M, Okamura H, Mu-
koyama M, Nakao K. Plasma concentration of atrial natri-
uretic peptide and brain natriuretic peptide during normal 
human pregnancy and the postpartum period. J Endocrinol. 
1994;140:393–397.
 
21. Kampman MA, Balci A, van Veldhuisen DJ, van Dijk AP, Roos-Hes-
selink JW, Sollie-Szarynska KM, Ludwig-Ruitenberg M, van Melle 
JP, Mulder BJ, Pieper PG; ZAHARA II Investigators. N-terminal pro-
B-type natriuretic peptide predicts cardiovascular complications 
in pregnant women with congenital heart disease. Eur Heart J. 
2014;35:708–715. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/eht526.
 
22. Robertson EG, Cheyne GA. Plasma biochemistry in relation 
to oedema of pregnancy. J Obstet Gynaecol Br Commonw. 
1972;79:769–776.
 
23. Brown MA, Zammit VC, Mitar DM. Extracellular fluid volumes in 
pregnancy-induced hypertension. J Hypertens. 1992;10:61–68.
 
24. Robson SC, Hunter S, Boys RJ, Dunlop W. Serial study of factors 
influencing changes in cardiac output during human pregnancy. 
Am J Physiol. 1989:256(pt 2):H1060–H1065.
 
25. Duvekot JJ, Cheriex EC, Pieters FA, Menheere PP, Peeters 
LH. Early pregnancy changes in hemodynamics and volume 
homeostasis are consecutive adjustments triggered by a pri-
mary fall in systemic vascular tone. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 
1993;169:1382–1392.
 
26. Chapman AB, Abraham WT, Zamudio S, Coffin C, Merouani A, Young 
D, Johnson A, Osorio F, Goldberg C, Moore LG, Dahms T, Schrier 
RW. Temporal relationships between hormonal and hemodynamic 
changes in early human pregnancy [published correction appears 
in Kidney Int. 1999;55:1185]. Kidney Int. 1998;54:2056–2063. 
doi: 10.1046/j.1523-1755.1998.00217.x.
 
27. Ueland K, Metcalfe J. Circulatory changes in pregnancy. Clin Ob-
stet Gynecol. 1975;18:41–50.
 
28. Clark SL, Cotton DB, Pivarnik JM, Lee W, Hankins GD, Benedetti TJ, 
Phelan JP. Position change and central hemodynamic profile dur-
ing normal third-trimester pregnancy and post partum [published 
correction appears in Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1991;165:241]. Am 
J Obstet Gynecol. 1991;164:883–887.
 
29. McLennan FM, Haites NE, Rawles JM. Stroke and minute distance 
in pregnancy: a longitudinal study using Doppler ultrasound. Br J 
Obstet Gynaecol. 1987;94:499–506.
 
30. Armstrong S, Fernando R, Columb M, Jones T. Cardiac index in 
term pregnant women in the sitting, lateral, and supine positions: 
an observational, crossover study. Anesth Analg. 2011;113:318–
322. doi: 10.1213/ANE.0b013e31821f125c.
 
31. McRoberts WA Jr. Postural shock in pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gy-
necol. 1951;62:627–632.
 
32. Quilligan EJ, Tyler C. Postural effects on the cardiovascular status 
in pregnancy: a comparison of the lateral and supine postures. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1959;78:465–471.
 
33. Ueland K, Hansen JM. Maternal cardiovascular dynamics, II: posture 
and uterine contractions. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1969:103:1–7.
 
34. Kametas NA, McAuliffe F, Krampl E, Chambers J, Nicolaides KH. 
Maternal cardiac function in twin pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol. 
2003;102:806–815.
 
35. Kuleva M, Youssef A, Maroni E, Contro E, Pilu G, Rizzo N, Pelusi G, 
Ghi T. Maternal cardiac function in normal twin pregnancy: a lon-
gitudinal study. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol. 2011;38:575–580. 
doi: 10.1002/uog.8936.
 
36. Robson SC, Hunter S, Boys RJ, Dunlop W. Hemodynamic changes 
during twin pregnancy: a Doppler and M-mode echocardiographic 
study. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1989;161:1273–1278.
 
37. Veille JC, Morton MJ, Burry KJ. Maternal cardiovascular adaptations 
to twin pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1985;153:261–263.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Canobbio et al
February 21, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e50-e87. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000458
e82
 
38. McLennan CE. Antecubital and femoral venous pressure 
in normal and toxemic pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 
1943:45:568–591.
 
39. Vorys N, Ullery JC, Hanusek GE. The cardiac output chang-
es in various positions in pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 
1961;82:1312–1321.
 
40. Kinsella SM, Lohmann G. Supine hypotensive syndrome. Obstet 
Gynecol. 1994;83(pt 1):774–788.
 
41. Knotts RJ, Garan H. Cardiac arrhythmias in pregnancy. Semin Peri-
natol. 2014;38:285–288. doi: 10.1053/j.semperi.2014.04.017.
 
42. Robson SC, Hunter S, Boys RJ, Dunlop W. Serial changes in 
pulmonary haemodynamics during human pregnancy: a non-
invasive study using Doppler echocardiography. Clin Sci (Lond). 
1991;80:113–117.
 
43. Bader RA, Bader ME, Rose DF, Braunwald E. Hemodynamics 
at rest and during exercise in normal pregnancy as studies by 
cardiac catheterization. J Clin Invest. 1955;34:1524–1536. doi: 
10.1172/JCI103205.
 
44. Clark SL, Cotton DB, Lee W, Bishop C, Hill T, Southwick J, Pivarnik 
J, Spillman T, DeVore GR, Phelan J, Hankins GDV, Bemedetto TJ, 
Tolley D. Central hemodynamic assessment of normal term preg-
nancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1989;161(pt 1):1439–1442.
 
45. Werko L. Pregnancy and heart disease. Acta Obstet Gynecol 
Scand. 1954;33:162–210.
 
46. Walters WA, MacGregor WG, Hills M. Cardiac output at rest during 
pregnancy and the puerperium. Clin Sci. 1966;30:1–11.
 
47. Clapp JF 3rd, Capeless E. Cardiovascular function before, dur-
ing, and after the first and subsequent pregnancies. Am J Cardiol. 
1997;80:1469–1473.
 
48. Capeless EL, Clapp JF. Cardiovascular changes in early phase of 
pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1989;161(pt 1):1449–1453.
 
49. Easterling TR, Benedetti TJ, Schmucker BC, Millard SP. Maternal 
hemodynamics in normal and preeclamptic pregnancies: a longi-
tudinal study. Obstet Gynecol. 1990;76:1061–1069.
 
50. Veille JC, Morton MJ, Burry K, Nemeth M, Speroff L. Estradiol 
and hemodynamics during ovulation induction. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab. 1986;63:721–724. doi: 10.1210/jcem-63-3-721.
 
51. Moutquin JM, Rainville C, Giroux L, Raynauld P, Amyot G, Bi-
lodeau R, Pelland N. A prospective study of blood pressure in 
pregnancy: prediction of preeclampsia. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 
1985;151:191–196.
 
52. Awe RJ, Nicotra MB, Newsom TD, Viles R. Arterial oxygenation 
and alveolar-arterial gradients in term pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol. 
1979;53:182–186.
 
53. Rees GB, Broughton Pipkin F, Symonds EM, Patrick JM. A longi-
tudinal study of respiratory changes in normal human pregnancy 
with cross-sectional data on subjects with pregnancy-induced hy-
pertension. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1990;162:826–830.
 
54. DeSwiet M. Pulmonary disorders. In: Creasy RK, Resnik R, ed. 
Maternal-Fetal Medicine. 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 
1999:921–934.
 
55. Lehmann V. Dyspnea in pregnancy. J Perinat Med. 1975;3:154–160.
 
56. Milne JA, Howie AD, Pack AI. Dyspnoea during normal pregnancy. 
Br J Obstet Gynaecol. 1978;85:260–263.
 
57. Hirnle L, Lysenko L, Gerber H, Lesnik P, Baranowska A, Rach-
walik M, Leszczyszyn J, Strozecki L. Respiratory function in 
pregnant women. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2013;788:153–160. doi: 
10.1007/978-94-007-6627-3_23.
 
58. Hendricks CH, Quilligan EJ. Cardiac output during labor. Am J Ob-
stet Gynecol. 1956;71:953–972.
 
59. Robson SC, Dunlop W, Boys RJ, Hunter S. Cardiac output during 
labour. Br Med J (Clin Res Ed). 1987;295:1169–1172.
 
60. Ueland K, Hansen JM. Maternal cardiovascular dynamics, 3: labor 
and delivery under local and caudal analgesia. Am J Obstet Gyne-
col. 1969;103:8–18.
 
61. Adams JQ, Alexander AM Jr. Alterations in cardiovascular physiol-
ogy during labor. Obstet Gynecol. 1958;12:542–549.
 
62. Palmer AJ, Walker AH. The maternal circulation in normal preg-
nancy. J Obstet Gynaecol Br Emp. 1949;56:537–547.
 
63. Lee W, Rokey R, Miller J, Cotton DB. Maternal hemodynamic ef-
fects of uterine contractions by M-mode and pulsed-Doppler echo-
cardiography. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1989;161:974–977.
 
64. Bieniarz J, Yoshida T, Romero-Salinas G, Curuchet E, Caldeyro-Bar-
cia R, Crottogini JJ. Aortocaval compression by the uterus in late 
human pregnancy. IV. Circulatory homeostasis by preferential per-
fusion of the placenta. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1969;103:19–31.
 
65. Hendricks CH. The hemodynamics of a uterine contraction. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol. 1958;76:969–982.
 
66. Atkins AF, Watt JM, Milan P, Davies P, Crawford JS. A longitudinal 
study of cardiovascular dynamic changes throughout pregnancy. 
Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 1981;12:215–224.
 
67. Metcalfe J, Ueland K. Maternal cardiovascular adjustments to 
pregnancy. Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 1974;16:363–374.
 
68. Regitz-Zagrosek V, Blomstrom Lundqvist C, Borghi C, Cifkova R, 
Ferreira R, Foidart J- M, Gibbs JSR, Gohlke-Baerwolf C, Gorenek 
B, Iung B, Kirby M, Maas AH, Morais J, Nihoyannopoulos P, Pieper 
PG, Presbitero P, Roos-Hesselink JW, Schaufelberger M, Seeland 
U, Torracca L; ESC Committee for Practice Guidelines. ESC 
guidelines on the management of cardiovascular diseases during 
pregnancy: the Task Force on the Management of Cardiovascular 
Diseases During Pregnancy of the European Society of Cardiology 
(ESC). Eur Heart J. 2011:32:3147–3197.
 
69. Ueland K. Maternal cardiovascular dynamics. VII. Intrapartum blood 
volume changes. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1976;126:671–677.
 
70. James CF, Banner T, Caton D. Cardiac output in women undergo-
ing cesarean section with epidural or general anesthesia. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol. 1989;160(pt 1):1178–1184.
 
71. Robson SC, Boys RJ, Hunter S, Dunlop W. Maternal hemodynam-
ics after normal delivery and delivery complicated by postpartum 
hemorrhage. Obstet Gynecol. 1989;74:234–239.
 
72. Warnes CA, Williams RG, Bashore TM, Child JS, Connolly HM, Dea-
rani JA, del Nido P, Fasules JW, Graham TP Jr, Hijazi ZM, Hunt 
SA, King ME, Landzberg MJ, Miner PD, Radford MJ, Walsh EP, 
Webb GD. ACC/AHA 2008 guidelines for the management of 
adults with congenital heart disease: a report of the American 
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association, Task Force on 
Practice Guidelines (Writing Committee to Develop Guidelines on 
the Management of Adults With Congenital Heart Disease). Circu-
lation. 2008;118:e714–e833. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA. 
108.190690.
 
73. Whittemore R, Hobbins JC, Engle MA. Pregnancy and its outcome 
in women with and without surgical treatment of congenital heart 
disease. Am J Cardiol. 1982;50:641–651.
 
74. Siu SC, Sermer M, Colman JM, Alvarez AN, Mercier LA, Morton 
BC, Kells CM, Bergin ML, Kiess MC, Marcotte F, Taylor DA, Gor-
don EP, Spears JC, Tam JW, Amankwah KS, Smallhorn JF, Farine 
D, Sorensen S; Cardiac Disease in Pregnancy (CARPREG) Investi-
gators. Prospective multicenter study of pregnancy outcomes in 
women with heart disease. Circulation. 2001;104:515–521.
 
75. Diller GP, Dimopoulos K, Okonko D, Li W, Babu-Narayan SV, Bro-
berg CS, Johansson B, Bouzas B, Mullen MJ, Poole-Wilson PA, 
Francis DP, Gatzoulis MA. Exercise intolerance in adult congenital 
heart disease: comparative severity, correlates, and prognos-
tic implication. Circulation. 2005;112:828–835. doi: 10.1161/ 
CIRCULATIONAHA.104.529800.
 
76. Lui GK, Silversides CK, Khairy P, Fernandes SM, Valente AM, 
Nickolaus MJ, Earing MG, Aboulhosn JA, Rosenbaum MS, Cook 
S, Kay JD, Jin Z, Gersony DR; Alliance for Adult Research in Con-
genital Cardiology (AARCC). Heart rate response during exercise 
and pregnancy outcome in women with congenital heart disease. 
 
Circulation. 2011;123:242–248. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA. 
110.953380.
 
77. Opotowsky AR, Siddiqi OK, D’Souza B, Webb GD, Fernandes 
SM, Landzberg MJ. Maternal cardiovascular events during 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Pregnancy in Patients With Complex CHD
Circulation. 2017;135:e50-e87. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000458 
February 21, 2017
e83
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
childbirth among women with congenital heart disease. Heart. 
2012;98:145–151. doi: 10.1136/heartjnl-2011-300828.
 
78. Drenthen W, Pieper PG, Roos-Hesselink JW, van Lottum WA, 
Voors AA, Mulder BJ, van Dijk AP, Vliegen HW, Yap SC, Moons P, 
Ebels T, van Veldhuisen DJ; ZAHARA Investigators. Outcome of 
pregnancy in women with congenital heart disease: a literature 
review. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007;49:2303–2311. doi: 10.1016/j.
jacc.2007.03.027.
 
79. Khairy P, Ouyang DW, Fernandes SM, Lee-Parritz A, Economy KE, 
Landzberg MJ. Pregnancy outcomes in women with congenital 
heart disease. Circulation; 2006:113:517–524. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.105.589655. 
 
80. Gelson E, Curry R, Gatzoulis MA, Swan L, Lupton M, Steer P, John-
son M. Effect of maternal heart disease on fetal growth [published 
correction appears in Obstet Gynecol. 2011;113(pt1):364]. 
Obstet 
Gynecol. 
2011;117:886–891. 
doi: 
10.1097/
AOG.0b013e31820cab69.
 
81. Burchill L, Greenway S, Silversides CK, Mital S. Genetic counsel-
ing in the adult with congenital heart disease: what is the role? 
Curr Cardiol Rep. 2011;13:347–355. doi: 10.1007/s11886-
011-0188-z.
 
82. Pierpont ME, Basson CT, Benson DW Jr, Gelb BD, Giglia TM, Gold-
muntz E, McGee G, Sable CA, Srivastava D, Webb CL. Genetic 
basis for congenital heart defects: current knowledge: a scien-
tific statement from the American Heart Association Congenital 
Cardiac Defects Committee, Council on Cardiovascular Disease 
in the Young. Circulation. 2007;115:3015–3038. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.106.183056.
 
83. Øyen N, Poulsen G, Boyd HA, Wohlfahrt J, Jensen PK, Melbye 
M. Recurrence of congenital heart defects in families. Circula-
tion. 2009;120:295–301. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA. 
109.857987.
 
84. Gill HK, Splitt M, Sharland GK, Simpson JM. Patterns of recur-
rence of congenital heart disease: an analysis of 6,640 consecu-
tive pregnancies evaluated by detailed fetal echocardiography. 
 
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2003;42:923–929.
 
85. Jenkins KJ, Correa A, Feinstein JA, Botto L, Britt AE, Daniels SR, 
Elixson M, Warnes CA, Webb CL. Noninherited risk factors and 
congenital cardiovascular defects: current knowledge: a scientific 
statement from the American Heart Association Council on Car-
diovascular Disease in the Young. Circulation. 2007;115:2995–
3014. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.183216.
 
86. Silversides CK, Marelli A, Beauchesne L, Dore A, Kiess M, Sale-
hian O, Bradley T, Colman J, Connelly M, Harris L, Khairy P, 
Mital S, Niwa K, Oechslin E, Poirier N, Schwerzmann M, Taylor 
D, Vonder Muhll I, Baumgartner H, Benson L, Celermajer D, 
Greutmann M, Horlick E, Landzberg M, Meijboom F, Mulder B, 
Warnes C, Webb G, Therrien J. Canadian cardiovascular soci-
ety 2009 consensus conference on the management of adults 
with congenital heart disease: executive summary. Can J Car-
diol; 2010:26:143–150.
 
87. Colletti PM, Lee KH, Elkayam U. Cardiovascular imaging of the 
pregnant patient. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2013;200:515–521. doi: 
10.2214/AJR.12.9864.
 
88. Naqvi TZ, Elkayam U. Serial echocardiographic assessment of 
the human heart in normal pregnancy. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging. 
2012;5:283–285. doi: 10.1161/CIRCIMAGING.112.974808.
 
89. Campos O. Doppler echocardiography during pregnancy: 
physiological 
and 
abnormal 
findings. 
Echocardiography. 
1996;13:135–146.
 
90. MacPhail A, Davies GA, Victory R, Wolfe LA. Maximal exer-
cise testing in late gestation: fetal responses. Obstet Gynecol. 
2000;96:565–570.
 
91. Moore DH, Jarrett JC 2nd, Bendick PJ. Exercise-induced chang-
es in uterine artery blood flow, as measured by Doppler ultra-
sound, in pregnant subjects. Am J Perinatol. 1988;5:94–97. doi: 
10.1055/s-2007-999663.
 92. van Doorn MB, Lotgering FK, Struijk PC, Pool J, Wallenburg HC. 
Maternal and fetal cardiovascular responses to strenuous bicycle 
exercise. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1992;166:854–859.
 93. Piran S, Veldtman G, Siu S, Webb GD, Liu PP. Heart failure and 
ventricular dysfunction in patients with single or systemic right 
ventricles. Circulation. 2002;105:1189–1194.
 94. Perloff JK, Koos B. Pregnancy and congenital heart disease: 
the mother and the fetus: medical considerations. In: Perloff JK, 
Child JS, eds. Congenital Heart Disease in Adults. Philadelphia, 
PA: WB Saunders; 1998:144–164.
 95. Patenaude Y, Pugash D, Lim K, Morin L; Diagnostic Imaging 
Committee; Lim K, Bly S, Butt K, Cargill Y, Davies G, Denis 
N, Hazlitt G, Morin L, Naud K, Ouellet A, Salem S; Society of 
Obstetricians and Gynaecologists of Canada. The use of magnet-
ic resonance imaging in the obstetric patient. J Obstet Gynaecol 
Can. 2014;36:349–363.
 96. Kanal E, Barkovich AJ, Bell C, Borgstede JP, Bradley WG Jr, 
Froelich JW, Gilk T, Gimbel JR, Gosbee J, Kuhni-Kaminski E, 
Lester JW Jr, Nyenhuis J, Parag Y, Schaefer DJ, Sebek-Scoumis 
EA, Weinreb J, Zaremba LA, Wilcox P, Lucey L, Sass N; ACR Blue 
Ribbon Panel on MR Safety. ACR guidance document for safe MR 
practices: 2007. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2007;188:1447–1474. 
doi: 10.2214/AJR.06.1616.
 97. American College of Radiology (ACR); Society for Pediatric 
Radiology (SPR). Practice guideline for the safe and optimal 
 
performance of fetal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). 2010  
(Resolution 13). http://www.acr.org/~/media/ CB384A65345F40 
2083639E6756CE513F.pdf. Accessed December 9, 2013.
 98. Glover P, Hykin J, Gowland P, Wright J, Johnson I, Mansfield 
P. An assessment of the intrauterine sound intensity level dur-
ing obstetric echo-planar magnetic resonance imaging. Br J 
Radiol. 1995;68:1090–1094. doi: 10.1259/0007-1285-68- 
814-1090.
 99. Baker PN, Johnson IR, Harvey PR, Gowland PA, Mansfield P. 
A three-year follow-up of children imaged in utero with echo- 
planar magnetic resonance. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1994;170(pt 1): 
32–33.
 
100. Shellock FG, Spinazzi A. MRI safety update 2008, part 2: screen-
ing patients for MRI. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2008;191:1140–
1149. doi: 10.2214/AJR.08.1038.2.
 
101. Chen MM, Coakley FV, Kaimal A, Laros RK Jr. Guidelines for com-
puted tomography and magnetic resonance imaging use during 
pregnancy and lactation. Obstet Gynecol. 2008;112(pt 1):333–
340. doi: 10.1097/AOG.0b013e318180a505.
 
102. Damilakis J, Perisinakis K, Voloudaki A, Gourtsoyiannis N. 
Estimation of fetal radiation dose from computed tomogra-
phy scanning in late pregnancy: depth-dose data from routine 
examinations [published correction appears in Invest Radiol. 
2000;35:706]. Invest Radiol. 2000;35:527–533.
 
103. REPROTOX database. www.reprotox.org. Accessed September 
1, 2014.
 
104. Cooper WO, Hernandez-Diaz S, Arbogast PG, Dudley JA, Dyer 
S, Gideon PS, Hall K, Ray WA. Major congenital malformations 
after first-trimester exposure to ACE inhibitors. N Engl J Med. 
2006;354:2443–2451. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa055202.
 
105. Lee JCR, Wetzel G, Shannon K. Maternal arrhythmia manage-
ment during pregnancy in patients with structural heart disease. 
Prog Pediatr Cardiol. 2004;19:71–82.
 
106. Lip GY, Beevers M, Churchill D, Shaffer LM, Beevers DG. Effect 
of atenolol on birth weight. Am J Cardiol. 1997;79:1436–1438.
 
107. Lindheimer MD, Katz AI. Pregnancy and the kidney. J Reprod 
Med. 1973;11:14–18.
 
108. McKenna WJ, Rowland E, Krikler DM. Amiodarone: the ex-
perience of the past decade. Br Med J (Clin Res Ed). 
1983;287:1654–1656.
 
109. Lecarpentier E, Morel O, Fournier T, Elefant E, Chavatte-Palmer 
P, Tsatsaris V. Statins and pregnancy: between supposed 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Canobbio et al
February 21, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e50-e87. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000458
e84
risks and theoretical benefits. Drugs. 2012;72:773–788. doi: 
10.2165/11632010-000000000-00000.
 
110. Costantine MM, Cleary K; Eunice Kennedy Shriver National 
Institute of Child Health and Human Development Obstetric–Fetal 
Pharmacology Research Units Network. Pravastatin for the pre-
vention of preeclampsia in high-risk pregnant women. Obstet 
Gynecol. 2013;121(pt 1):349–353. doi: http://10.1097/AOG. 
0b013e31827d8ad5.
 
111. Canobbio MM, Chugh R. Congenital heart disease and preg-
nancy. In: Wzszynski DF, Correa-Villasenor, Graham TP, eds. 
Congenital Heart Defects: From Origin to Treatment. Oxford, UK: 
Oxford Press; 2011:301–328.
 
112. Kahn SR, Lim W, Dunn AS, Cushman M, Dentali F, Akl EA, Cook DJ, 
Balekian AA, Klein RC, Le H, Schulman S, Murad MH; American 
College of Chest Physicians. Prevention of VTE in nonsurgical 
patients: Antithrombotic Therapy and Prevention of Thrombosis, 
9th ed: American College of Chest Physicians Evidence-Based 
Clinical Practice Guidelines. Chest. 2012;141(suppl):e195S–
e226S. doi: 10.1378/chest.11-2296.
 
113. Sayle AE, Savitz DA, Thorp JM, Hertz-Picciotta I, Wilcox AJ. 
Sexual activity during late pregnancy and risk of preterm delivery. 
Obstet Gynecol. 2011:283–289.
 
114. Canobbio MM, Mair DD, van der Velde M, Koos BJ. Pregnancy 
outcomes after the Fontan repair. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
1996;28:763–767.
 
115. Bryant AG, Grimes DA, Garrett JM, Stuart GS. Second-trimester 
abortion for fetal anomalies or fetal death: labor induction 
compared with dilation and evacuation. Obstet Gynecol. 
2011;117:788–792. doi: 10.1097/AOG.0b013e31820c3d26.
 
116. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. ACOG 
committee opinion no. 560: medically indicated late-preterm and 
early-term deliveries. Obstet Gynecol. 2013;121:908–1010. 
doi: 10.1097/01.AOG.0000428648.75548.00.
 
117. Koos B. Management of uncorrected, palliated, and repaired 
cyanotic congenital heart disease in pregnancy. Prog Pediatr 
Cardiol. 2004:19: 25–45. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
ppedcard.2003.09.004.
 
118. Cole PJ, Cross MH, Dresner M. Incremental spinal anaesthesia 
for elective caesarean section in a patient with Eisenmenger’s 
syndrome. Br J Anaesth. 2001;86:723–726.
 
119. Wilson W, Taubert KA, Gewitz M, Lockhart PB, Baddour LM, Levison 
M, Bolger A, Cabell CH, Takahashi M, Baltimore RS, Newburger 
JW, Strom BL, Tani LY, Gerber M, Bonow RO, Pallasch T, Shulman 
ST, Rowley AH, Burns JC, Ferrieri P, Gardner T, Goff D, Durack DT. 
Prevention of infective endocarditis: guidelines from the American 
Heart Association: a guideline from the American Heart Association 
Rheumatic Fever, Endocarditis, and Kawasaki Disease Committee, 
Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young, and the Council 
on Clinical Cardiology, Council on Cardiovascular Surgery and 
Anesthesia, and the Quality of Care and Outcomes Research 
Interdisciplinary Working Group [published correction appears in 
Circulation. 2007;116:e376–e377]. Circulation. 2007;116:1736–
1754. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.183095.
 
120. Kjeldsen J. Hemodynamic investigations during labour and deliv-
ery. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand Suppl. 1979;89:1–252.
 
121. Robson SC, Dunlop W, Moore M, Hunter S. Combined Doppler 
and echocardiographic measurement of cardiac output: 
theory and application in pregnancy. Br J Obstet Gynaecol. 
1987;94:1014–1027.
 
122. Zeeman GG, Wendel GD Jr, Cunningham FG. A blueprint for ob-
stetric critical care. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2003;188:532–536.
 
123. Capeless EL, Clapp JF. When do cardiovascular parameters 
return to their preconception values? Am J Obstet Gynecol. 
1991;165(pt 1):883–886.
 
124. Truitt ST, Fraser AV, Grimes DA, Gallo MF, Schulz KF. Combined 
hormonal versus nonhormonal versus progestin-only contracep-
tion in lactation. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2003:CD003988.
 
125. American College Obstetrics Gynecology. ACOG Practice Bulletin 
No. 121: long-acting reversible contraceptives: implants and 
intrauterine devices. Obstet Gynecol. 2011:118:184–196. doi: 
10.1097/AOG.0b013e318227f05e.
 
126. Peterson HB, Xia Z, Hughes JM, Wilcox LS, Tylor LR, Trussell J. 
The risk of pregnancy after tubal sterilization: findings from the 
U.S. Collaborative Review of Sterilization. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 
1996;174:1161–1168.
 
127. US Food and Drug Administration. 2015 Meeting materials of the 
Obstetrics and Gynecology Devices Panel. 2015. http://www.
fda.gov/AdvisoryCommittees/CommitteesMeetingMaterials/
MedicalDevices/MedicalDevicesAdvisoryCommittee/
ObstetricsandGynecologyDevices/ucm463457.htm. Accessed 
February 22, 2016.
 
128. Silversides CK, Harris L, Haberer K, Sermer M, Colman JM, Siu 
SC. Recurrence rates of arrhythmias during pregnancy in women 
with previous tachyarrhythmia and impact on fetal and neonatal 
outcomes. Am J Cardiol. 2006;97:1206–1212. doi: 10.1016/j.
amjcard.2005.11.041.
 
129. Lydakis C, Lip GY, Beevers M, Beevers DG. Atenolol and fe-
tal growth in pregnancies complicated by hypertension. Am J 
Hypertens. 1999;12:541–547.
 
130. Bryerly WG, Hartman A. Foster DE, Tannenbaum AK. Verapamil 
in the treatment of paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia. Ann 
Emerg Med. 1991;20:552–554.
 
131. Holbrook RH Jr, Gibson RN, Voss EM. Tocolytic and cardio-
vascular effects of the calcium antagonist diltiazem in the 
near-term pregnant rabbit. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1988;159: 
591–595.
 
132. Zipes DP, Camm AJ, Borggrefe M, Buxton AE, Chaitman B, 
Fromer M, Gregoratos G, Klein G, Moss AJ, Myerburg RJ, 
Priori SG, Quinones MA, Roden DM, Silka MJ, Tracy C. ACC/
AHA/ESC 2006 guidelines for management of patients with 
ventricular arrhythmias and the prevention of sudden car-
diac death: a report of the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association Task Force and the European 
Society of Cardiology Committee for Practice Guidelines 
(Writing Committee to Develop Guidelines for Management of 
Patients With Ventricular Arrhythmias and the Prevention of 
Sudden Cardiac Death). Circulation. 2006:114:e385–e484. 
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.178233.
 
133. Thaman R, Curtis S, Faganello G, Szantho GV, Turner MS, Trinder 
J, Sellers S, Stuart GA. Cardiac outcome of pregnancy in women 
with a pacemaker and women with untreated atrioventricular 
conduction block. Europace. 2011;13:859–863. doi: 10.1093/
europace/eur018.
 
134. Sbarouni E, Oakley CM. Outcome of pregnancy in women with 
valve prostheses. Br Heart J. 1994;71:196–201.
 
135. Meschengieser SS, Fondevila CG, Santarelli MT, Lazzari MA. 
Anticoagulation in pregnant women with mechanical heart valve 
prostheses. Heart. 1999;82:23–26.
 
136. Sadler L, McCowan L, White H, Stewart A, Bracken M, North 
R. Pregnancy outcomes and cardiac complications in women 
with mechanical, bioprosthetic and homograft valves. BJOG. 
2000;107:245–253.
 
137. Cotrufo M, De Feo M, De Santo LS, Romano G, Della Corte A, 
Renzulli A, Gallo C. Risk of warfarin during pregnancy with me-
chanical valve prostheses. Obstet Gynecol. 2002;99:35–40.
 
138. Nassar AH, Hobeika EM, Abd Essamad HM, Taher A, Khalil AM, 
Usta IM. Pregnancy outcome in women with prosthetic heart 
valves. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2004;191:1009–1013. doi: 
10.1016/j.ajog.2004.05.064.
 
139. Suri V, Keepanasseril A, Aggarwal N, Chopra S, Bagga R, 
Sikka P, Vijayvergiya R. Mechanical valve prosthesis and antico-
agulation regimens in pregnancy: a tertiary centre experience. 
Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2011;159:320–323. doi: 
10.1016/j.ejogrb.2011.09.011.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Pregnancy in Patients With Complex CHD
Circulation. 2017;135:e50-e87. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000458 
February 21, 2017
e85
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
 
140. Basude S, Hein C, Curtis SL, Clark A, Trinder J. Low-molecular-
weight heparin or warfarin for anticoagulation in pregnant women 
with mechanical heart valves: what are the risks? A retrospec-
tive observational study. BJOG. 2012;119:1008–1013. doi: 
10.1111/j.1471-0528.2012.03359.x.
 
141. De Santo LS, Romano G, Della Corte A, D’Oria V, Nappi G, 
Giordano S, Cotrufo M, De Feo M. Mechanical aortic valve re-
placement in young women planning on pregnancy: maternal and 
fetal outcomes under low oral anticoagulation, a pilot observa-
tional study on a comprehensive pre-operative counseling pro-
tocol. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;59:1110–1115. doi: 10.1016/j.
jacc.2011.10.899.
 
142. Bian C, Wei Q, Liu X. Influence of heart-valve replacement 
of warfarin anticoagulant therapy on perinatal outcomes. 
Arch Gynecol Obstet. 2012;285:347–351. doi: 10.1007/
s00404-011-1962-2.
 
143. Oran B, Lee-Parritz A, Ansell J. Low molecular weight heparin for 
the prophylaxis of thromboembolism in women with prosthetic 
mechanical heart valves during pregnancy. Thromb Haemost. 
2004;92:747–751. doi: 10.1160/TH04-06-0337.
 
144. Abildgaard U, Sandset PM, Hammerstrøm J, Gjestvang FT, 
Tveit A. Management of pregnant women with mechanical heart 
valve prosthesis: thromboprophylaxis with low molecular weight 
heparin. Thromb Res. 2009;124:262–267. doi: 10.1016/j.
thromres.2008.12.005.
 
145. Quinn J, Von Klemperer K, Brooks R, Peebles D, Walker F, Cohen 
H. Use of high intensity adjusted dose low molecular weight hepa-
rin in women with mechanical heart valves during pregnancy: a 
single-center experience. Haematologica. 2009;94:1608–1612. 
doi: 10.3324/haematol.2008.002840.
 
146. McLintock C, McCowan LM, North RA. Maternal complications 
and pregnancy outcome in women with mechanical prosthetic 
heart valves treated with enoxaparin. BJOG. 2009;116:1585–
1592. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-0528.2009.02299.x.
 
147. Yinon Y, Siu SC, Warshafsky C, Maxwell C, McLeod A, Colman JM, 
Sermer M, Silversides CK. Use of low molecular weight heparin 
in pregnant women with mechanical heart valves. Am J Cardiol. 
2009;104:1259–1263. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2009.06.040.
 
148. Nelson-Piercy C, Greer IA. Anticoagulation with tinzaparin for 
women with mechanical valves in pregnancy: a retrospective 
case series. Thromb Res. 2013;131:185–186. doi: 10.1016/j.
thromres.2012.11.022.
 
149. Chan WS, Anand S, Ginsberg JS. Anticoagulation of pregnant 
women with mechanical heart valves: a systematic review of the 
literature. Arch Intern Med. 2000;160:191–196.
 
150. Hassouna A, Allam H. Anticoagulation of pregnant women with 
mechanical heart valve prosthesis: a systematic review of the 
literature (2000–2009). J Coagul Disord. 2010:2:81–88.
 
151. Vitale N, De Feo M, De Santo LS, Pollice A, Tedesco N, Cotrufo 
M. Dose-dependent fetal complications of warfarin in preg-
nant women with mechanical heart valves. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
1999;33:1637–1641.
 
152. Nishimura RA, Otto CM, Bonow RO, Carabello BA, Erwin JP 3rd, 
Guyton RA, O’Gara PT, Ruiz CE, Skubas NJ, Sorajja P, Sundt TM 
3rd, Thomas JD; ACC/AHA Task Force Members. 2014 AHA/
ACC guideline for the management of patients with valvular 
heart disease: executive summary: a report of the American 
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on 
Practice Guidelines [published correction appears in Circulation. 
2014;129:e650]. Circulation. 2014;129:2440–2492. doi: 
10.1161/CIR.0000000000000029.
 
153. Berresheim M, Wilkie J, Nerenberg KA, Ibrahim Q, Bungard TJ. 
A case series of LMWH use in pregnancy: should trough anti-Xa 
levels guide dosing? Thromb Res. 2014;134:1234–1240. doi: 
10.1016/j.thromres.2014.09.033.
 
154. Bates SM, Greer IA, Middeldorp S, Veenstra DL, Prabulos 
AM, Vandvik PO; American College of Chest Physicians. 
VTE, thrombophilia, antithrombotic therapy, and pregnancy: 
Antithrombotic Therapy and Prevention of Thrombosis, 9th ed: 
American College of Chest Physicians Evidence-Based Clinical 
Practice Guidelines. Chest. 2012;141(suppl):e691S–e736S. 
doi: 10.1378/chest.11-2300.
 
155. Goland S, Schwartzenberg S, Fan J, Kozak N, Khatri N, Elkayam 
U. Monitoring of anti-Xa in pregnant patients with mechanical 
prosthetic valves receiving low-molecular-weight heparin: peak or 
trough levels? J Cardiovasc Pharmacol Ther. 2014;19:451–456. 
doi: 10.1177/1074248414524302.
 
156. Weiss BM, von Segesser LK, Alon E, Seifert B, Turina MI. Outcome 
of cardiovascular surgery and pregnancy: a systematic review 
of the period 1984–1996. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1998:179(pt 
1):1643–1653.
 
157. Arnoni RT, Arnoni AS, Bonini RC, de Almeida AF, Neto CA, 
Dinkhuysen JJ, Issa M, Chaccur P, Paulista PP. Risk factors asso-
ciated with cardiac surgery during pregnancy. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2003;76:1605–1608.
 
158. John AS, Gurley F, Schaff HV, Warnes CA, Phillips SD, Arendt 
KW, Abel MD, Rose CH, Connolly HM. Cardiopulmonary bypass 
during pregnancy. Ann Thorac Surg. 2011;91:1191–1196. doi: 
10.1016/j.athoracsur.2010.11.037.
 
159. Ruys TP, Roos-Hesselink JW, Hall R, Subirana-Domènech MT, 
Grando-Ting J, Estensen M, Crepaz R, Fesslova V, Gurvitz M, 
De Backer J, Johnson MR, Pieper PG. Heart failure in preg-
nant women with cardiac disease: data from the ROPAC. 
Heart. 2014;100:231–238. doi: 10.1136/heartjnl-2013- 
304888.
 
160. Hameed A, Karaalp IS, Tummala PP, Wani OR, Canetti M, Akhter 
MW, Goodwin I, Zapadinsky N, Elkayam U. The effect of valvular 
heart disease on maternal and fetal outcome of pregnancy. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2001;37:893–899.
 
161. Yap SC, Drenthen W, Pieper PG, Moons P, Mulder BJ, 
Mostert B, Vliegen HW, van Dijk AP, Meijboom FJ, Steegers 
EA, Roos-Hesselink JW; ZAHARA Investigators. Risk of com-
plications during pregnancy in women with congenital aortic 
stenosis. Int J Cardiol. 2008;126:240–246. doi: 10.1016/j.
ijcard.2007.03.134.
 
162. Canobbio MM, Morris CD, Graham TP, Landzberg MJ. Pregnancy 
outcomes after atrial repair for transposition of the great ar-
teries. Am J Cardiol. 2006;98:668–672. doi: 10.1016/j.
amjcard.2006.03.050.
 
163. Guédès A, Mercier LA, Leduc L, Bérubé L, Marcotte F, Dore 
A. Impact of pregnancy on the systemic right ventricle af-
ter a Mustard operation for transposition of the great arter-
ies. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2004;44:433–437. doi: 10.1016/j.
jacc.2004.04.037.
 
164. Avila WS, Grinberg M, Snitcowsky R, Faccioli R, Da Luz PL, Bellotti 
G, Pileggi F. Maternal and fetal outcome in pregnant women with 
Eisenmenger’s syndrome. Eur Heart J. 1995;16:460–464.
 
165. Connolly HM, Grogan M, Warnes CA. Pregnancy among women 
with congenitally corrected transposition of great arteries. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 1999;33:1692–1695.
 
166. Veldtman GR, Connolly HM, Grogan M, Ammash NM, Warnes 
CA. Outcomes of pregnancy in women with tetralogy of 
Fallot. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2004;44:174–180. doi: 10.1016/j.
jacc.2003.11.067.
 
167. Greutmann M, Von Klemperer K, Brooks R, Peebles D, O’Brien P, 
Walker F. Pregnancy outcome in women with congenital heart dis-
ease and residual haemodynamic lesions of the right ventricular 
outflow tract. Eur Heart J. 2010;31:1764–1770. doi: 10.1093/
eurheartj/ehq157.
 
168. Bowater SE, Selman TJ, Hudsmith LE, Clift PF, Thompson PJ, 
Thorne SA. Long-term outcome following pregnancy in wom-
en with a systemic right ventricle: is the deterioration due to 
pregnancy or a consequence of time? Congenit Heart Dis. 
2013;8:302–307. doi: 10.1111/chd.12001.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Canobbio et al
February 21, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e50-e87. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000458
e86
 
168a.  
Robertson JE, Silversides CK, Mah ML, Kulikowski J, Maxwell 
C, Wald RM, Colman JM, Siu SC, Sermer M. A contemporary 
approach to the obstetric management of women with heart 
disease. J Obstet Gynaecol Can. 2012;34:812–819.
 
169.  
Beardmore KS, Morris JM, Gallery ED. Excretion of antihyper-
tensive medication into human breast milk: a systematic re-
view. Hypertens Pregnancy. 2002;21:85–95. doi: 10.1081/
PRG-120002912.
 
169a.  
Siu SC, Colman JM, Sorensen S, Smallhorn JF, Farine D, 
 
Amankwah KS, Spears JC, Sermer M. Adverse neonatal and 
cardiac outcomes are more common in pregnant women with 
cardiac disease. Circulation. 2002:105:2179–2184.
 
169b.  
Ammash N, Warnes CA. Cerebrovascular events in adult pa-
tients with cyanotic congenital heart disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
1996;28:768–772.
 
170.  
Chambers CE, Clark SL. Cardiac surgery during pregnancy. Clin 
Obstet Gynecol. 1994;37:316–323.
 
171.  
Aboulhosn J, Levi DS, Child JS. Common congenital heart disorders 
in adults: percutaneous therapeutic procedures. Curr Probl Cardiol. 
2011:36:263–284. doi: 10.1016/j.cpcardiol.2011.04.003.
 
172.  
Oylumlu M, Aykent K, Soydinc HE, Oylumlu M, Ertas F, 
Ozer HO, Sari I. Pulmonary balloon valvuloplasty during 
pregnancy. Case Rep Cardiol. 2012;2012:353168. doi: 
10.1155/2012/353168.
 
173.  
Silversides CK, Colman JM, Sermer M, Farine D, Siu SC. Early 
and intermediate-term outcomes of pregnancy with congenital 
aortic stenosis. Am J Cardiol. 2003;91:1386–1389.
 
174.  
Avila WS, Hajjar LA, Souza Tda R, Gomex Junior MP, Grinberg M, 
Zugaib M. Aortic valvuloplasty with balloon catheter in maternal-
fetal emergency in adolescence. Arq Bras Cardiol. 2009:93: 
e76–e79, e89-e92.
 
175. Deleted in proof.
 
176.  
Pomini F, Mercogliano D, Cavalletti C, Caruso A, Pomini P. 
Cardiopulmonary bypass in pregnancy. Ann Thorac Surg. 
1996:61:259–268.
 
177.  
Martin SR, Foley MR. Intensive care in obstetrics: an evidence 
based review. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2006:195:673–689.
 
178.  
Hawkins JA, Paape KL, Adkins TP, Shaddy RE, Gay WA Jr. 
Extracorporeal circulation in the fetal lamb: effects of hy-
pothermia and perfusion rate. J Cardiovasc Surg (Torino). 
1991;32:295–300.
 
179.  
Chandrasekhar S, Cook CR, Collard CD. Cardiac surgery in the 
parturient. Anesth Analg. 2009;108:777–785. doi: 10.1213/
ane.0b013e31819367aa.
 
180.  
Parry AJ, Westaby S. Cardiopulmonary bypass during 
pregnancy. Ann Thorac Surg. 1996;61:1865–1869. doi: 
10.1016/0003-4975(96)00150-6.
 
181.  
Kole SD, Jain SM, Walia A, Sharma M. Cardiopulmonary bypass 
in pregnancy. Ann Thorac Surg. 1997;63:915–916.
 
182.  
Arendt K, Abel M. The pregnant patient and cardiopulmonary 
bypass. In: Cohen N.H. ed. Medically Challenging Patients 
Undergoing Cardiothoracic Surgery: A Society of Cardiovascular 
Anesthersiologists Monograph. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott 
Williams & Wilkins; 2009:215–244.
 
183.  
Martin MC, Pernoll ML, Boruszak AN, Jones JW, LoCicero J 3rd. 
Cesarean section while on cardiac bypass: report of a case. 
Obstet Gynecol. 1981;57(suppl):41S–45S.
 
184.  
The confidential enquiry into maternal and child health 
(CEMACH): saving mothers’ lives: reviewing maternal deaths 
to make motherhood safer 2003–2005. In: Lewis G, ed. The 
Seventh Confidential Enquiry Into Maternal Deaths in the United 
Kingdom. London, UK; RCOG Press; 2007.
 
185.  
Jeejeebhoy FM, Zelop CM, Lipman S, Carvalho B, Joglar J, Mhyre 
JM, Katz VL, Lapinsky SE, Einav S, Warnes CA, Page RL, Griffin 
RE, Jain A, Dainty KN, Arafeh J, Windrim R, Koren G, Callaway 
CW; American Heart Association Emergency Cardiovascular 
Care Committee, Council on Cardiopulmonary, Critical Care, 
Perioperative and Resuscitation, Council on Cardiovascular 
Diseases in the Young, and Council on Clinical Cardiology. 
Cardiac arrest in pregnancy: a scientific statement from the 
American Heart Association. Circulation. 2015;132:1747–
1773. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000300.
 
186.  
Kundra P, Khanna S, Habeebullah S, Ravishankar M. Manual dis-
placement of the uterus during caesarean section. Anaesthesia. 
2007;62:460–465. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2044.2007.05025.x.
 
187.  
Dijkman A, Huisman CM, Smit M, Schutte JM, Zwart JJ, van 
Roosmalen JJ, Oepkes D. Cardiac arrest in pregnancy: in-
creasing use of perimortem caesarean section due to 
emergency skills training? BJOG. 2010;117:282–287. doi: 
10.1111/j.1471-0528.2009.02461.x.
 
188.  
European Heart Rhythm Association; European Association 
for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery, Camm AJ, Kirchhof P, Lip GY, 
Schotten U, Savelieva I, Ernst S, Van Gelder IC, Al-Attar N, 
Hindricks G, Prendergast B, Heidbuchel H, Alfieri O, Angelini 
A, Atar D, Colonna P, De Caterina R, De Sutter J, Goette A, 
Gorenek B, Heldal M, Hohloser SH, Kolh P, Le Heuzey JY, 
Ponikowski P, Rutten FH. Guidelines for the management of 
atrial fibrillation: the Task Force for the Management of Atrial 
Fibrillation of the European Society of Cardiology [published 
correction appears in Eur Heart J. 2011;32:1172]. Eur Heart 
J. 2010;31:2369–2429.
 
189.  
Tromp CH, Nanne AC, Pernet PJ, Tukkie R, Bolte AC. Electrical 
cardioversion during pregnancy: safe or not? Neth Heart J. 
2011;19:134–136.
 
189a.  
Driver K, Chisholm CA, Darby AE, Malhotra R, Dimarco JP, 
Ferguson JD. Catheter ablation of arrhythmia during pregnancy. 
J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2015;26:698–702.
 
190.  
Miyoshi T, Kamiya CA, Katsuragi S, Ueda H, Kobayashi Y, 
Horiuchi C, Yamanaka K, Neki R, Yoshimatsu J, Ikeda T, Yamada 
Y, Okamura H, Noda T, Shimizu W. Safety and efficacy of im-
plantable cardioverter-defibrillator during pregnancy and after 
delivery. Circ J. 2013;77:1166–1170.
 
191.  
Natale A, Davidson T, Geiger MJ, Newby K. Implantable car-
dioverter-defibrillators and pregnancy: a safe combination? 
Circulation. 1997;96:2808–2812.
 
192.  
Bao Z, Zhang J, Yang D, Xu X. Analysis of high risk factors 
for patient death and its clinical characteristics on pregnancy 
associated with pulmonary arterial hypertension [in Chinese]. 
Zhonghua Fu Chan Ke Za Zhi. 2014;49:495–500.
 
193.  
Pieper PG, Lameijer H, Hoendermis ES. Pregnancy and pul-
monary hypertension. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol. 
2014;28:579–591. doi: 10.1016/j.bpobgyn.2014.03.003.
 
194.  
Daliento L, Somerville J, Presbitero P, Menti L, Brach-Prever S, 
Rizzoli G, Stone S. Eisenmenger syndrome: factors relating to 
deterioration and death. Eur Heart J. 1998;19:1845–1855.
 
195.  
Warnes 
CA. 
Pregnancy 
and 
pulmonary 
hypertension. 
Int J Cardiol. 2004;97(suppl 1):11–13. doi: 10.1016/j.
ijcard.2004.08.004.
 
196.  
Zhang XJ, Wang H, Zhang LH, Lin D. Severe idiopathic pulmo-
nary arterial hypertension in pregnancy: a review of 10 cases. 
Zhonghua Fu Chan Ke Za Zhi, 2014;49:419–423.
 
197.  
Gleicher N, Midwall J, Hochberger D, Jaffin H. Eisenmenger’s 
syndrome 
and 
pregnancy. 
Obstet 
Gynecol 
Surv. 
1979;34:721–741.
 
198.  
Elliot CA, Stewart P, Webster VJ, Mills GH, Hutchinson SP, 
Howarth ES, Bu’lock FA, Lawson RA, Armstrong IJ, Kiely DG. 
The use of iloprost in early pregnancy in patients with pulmo-
nary arterial hypertension. Eur Respir J. 2005;26:168–173. 
doi: 10.1183/09031936.05.00128504.
 
199.  
Curry RA, Fletcher C, Gelson E, Gatzoulis MA, Woolnough 
M, Richards N, Swan L, Steer PJ, Johnson MR. Pulmonary 
hypertension and pregnancy: a review of 12 pregnancies 
 
in nine women. BJOG. 2012;119:752–761. doi: 10.1111/j. 
1471-0528.2012.03295.x.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Pregnancy in Patients With Complex CHD
Circulation. 2017;135:e50-e87. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000458 
February 21, 2017
e87
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
 
200. Easterling TR, Chadwick HS, Otto CM, Benedetti TJ. Aortic steno-
sis in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol. 1988;72:113–118.
 
201. Lao TT, Sermer M, MaGee L, Farine D, Colman JM. Congenital 
aortic stenosis and pregnancy: a reappraisal. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol. 1993;169:540–545.
 
202. Leśniak-Sobelga A, Tracz W, KostKiewicz M, Podolec P, 
Pasowicz M. Clinical and echocardiographic assessment of 
pregnant women with valvular heart diseases–maternal and 
fetal outcome. Int J Cardiol. 2004;94:15–23. doi: 10.1016/j.
ijcard.2003.03.017.
 
203. Bhargava B, Agarwal R, Yadav R, Bahl VK, Manchanda SC. 
Percutaneous balloon aortic valvuloplasty during pregnancy: use 
of the Inoue balloon and the physiologic antegrade approach. 
Cathet Cardiovasc Diagn. 1998;45:422–425.
 
204. Mendelson MA. Pregnancy in patients with obstructive lesions: 
aortic stenosis, coarctation of the aorta and mitral stenosis. 
Prog Pediatr Cardiol. 2004;19:61–70.
 
205. Gelatt M, Hamilton RM, McCrindle BW, Connelly M, Davis A, Harris 
L, Gow RM, Williams WG, Trusler GA, Freedom RM. Arrhythmia and 
mortality after the Mustard procedure: a 30-year single-center 
 
experience. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1997;29:194–201.
 
206. Moons P, Gewillig M, Sluysmans T, Verhaaren H, Viart P, Massin M, 
Suys B, Budts W, Pasquet A, De Wolf D, Vliers A. Long term out-
come up to 30 years after the Mustard or Senning operation: a na-
tionwide multicentre study in Belgium. Heart. 2004;90:307–313.
 
207. Dobson R, Danton M, Nicola W, Hamish W. The natural and un-
natural history of the systemic right ventricle in adult survivors 
[published correction appears in J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2015;149:950]. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2015;145:1493–
1501. doi: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2013.02.030.
 
208. Trigas V, Nagdyman N, Pildner von Steinburg S, Oechslin E, 
Vogt M, Berger F, Schneider KT, Ewert P, Hess J, Kaemmerer H. 
Pregnancy-related obstetric and cardiologic problems in women 
after atrial switch operation for transposition of the great arter-
ies. Circ J. 2014;78:443–449.
 
209. Metz TD, Jackson GM, Yetman AT. Pregnancy outcomes in 
women who have undergone an atrial switch repair for con-
genital d-transposition of the great arteries. Am J Obstet 
 
Gynecol. 2011;205:273.e1–273.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.ajog.2011. 
06.042.
 
210. Kowalik E, Klisiewicz A, Biernacka EK, Hoffman P. Pregnancy 
and long-term cardiovascular outcomes in women with congeni-
tally corrected transposition of the great arteries. Int J Gynaecol 
Obstet. 2014;125:154–157. doi: 10.1016/j.ijgo.2013.10.022.
 
211. Lo Rito M, Fittipaldi M, Haththotuwa R, Jones TJ, Khan N, Clift 
P, Brawn WJ, Barron DJ. Long-term fate of the aortic valve af-
ter an arterial switch operation. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2015;149:1089–1094. doi: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2014.11.075.
 
212. Fricke TA, d’Udekem Y, Richardson M, Thuys C, Dronavalli M, 
Ramsay JM, Wheaton G, Grigg LE, Brizard CP, Konstantinov IE. 
Outcomes of the arterial switch operation for transposition of 
the great arteries: 25 years of experience. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2012;94:139–145. doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2012.03.019.
 
213. Warnes CA. Transposition of the great arteries. Circulation. 
2006;114:2699–2709. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.105. 
592352.
 
214. Tobler D, Williams WG, Jegatheeswaran A, Van Arsdell GS, 
McCrindle BW, Greutmann M, Oechslin EN, Silversides CK. 
Cardiac outcomes in young adult survivors of the arterial switch 
operation for transposition of the great arteries. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2010;56:58–64. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2010.03.031.
 
215. Aboulhosn JA, Child JS. A blue baby grows up. Congenit Heart Dis. 
2009;4:378–383. doi: 10.1111/j.1747-0803.2009.00276.x.
 
216. Aboulhosn J, Child JS. The adult with a Fontan operation. Curr 
Cardiol Rep. 2007;9:331–335.
 
217. Gewillig M. The Fontan circulation. Heart. 2005;91:839–846.
 
218. Khairy P, Fernandes SM. Mayer JE Jr, Triedman JK, Walsh EP, 
Lock JE, Landzberg MJ. Long-term survival, modes of death, 
and predictors of mortality in patients with Fontan surgery. 
Circulation. 2008;117:85–92. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA. 
107.738559. 
 
219. Elder RW, McCabe NM, Veledar E, Kogon BE, Jokhadar M, 
Rodriguez FH 3rd, McConnell ME, Book WM. Risk factors for ma-
jor adverse events late after Fontan palliation. Congenit Heart 
Dis. 2015;10:159–168. doi: 10.1111/chd.12212.
 
220. Pundi KN, Johnson JN, Dearani JA, Pundi KN, Li Z, Hinck CA, Dahl 
SH, Cannon BC, O’Leary PW, Driscoll DJ, Cetta F. 40-Year follow-
up after the Fontan operation: long-term outcomes of 1,052 pa-
tients. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015;66:1700–1710. doi: 10.1016/j.
jacc.2015.07.065.
 
221. Drenthen W, Pieper PJ, Roos-Hesselink JW, van Lottum WA, 
Voors AA, Mulder BJ, van Dijk AP, Vliegen HW, Sollie KM, 
Moons P, Ebels T, van Veldhuisen DJ; ZAHARA Investigators. 
Pregnancy and delivery in women after Fontan palliation. Heart. 
2006;92:1290–1294.
 
222. Nitsche JF, Phillips SD, Rose CH, Brost BC, Watson WJ. 
Pregnancy and delivery in patients with Fontan circula-
tion: a case report and review of obstetric management.  
Obstet Gynecol Surv. 2009;64:607–614. doi: 10.1097/OGX. 
0b013e3181b279d6.
 
223. Gouton M, Nizard J, Patel M, Sassolas F, Jimenez M, Radojevic 
J, Mathiron A, Amedro P, Barre E, Labombarda F, Vaksmann G, 
Chantepie A, Le Gloan L, Ladouceur M. Maternal and fetal out-
comes of pregnancy with Fontan circulation: a multicentric obser-
vational study. Int J Cardiol. 2015;187:84–89. doi: 10.1016/j.
ijcard.2015.03.344.
 
224. Canobbio MM, Cetta F, Silversides C, Warnes C, Aboulhosn 
J, Colman J. Pregnancy after Fontan operation: early and 
late outcomes. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;61. doi: 10.1016/
S0735-1097(13)60427-1.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
