 REVIEW ARTICLE
Advancing environmental exposure assessment
science to benefit society
Andrew Caplin1, Masoud Ghandehari2, Chris Lim3, Paul Glimcher1 &
George Thurston3
Awareness of the human health impacts of exposure to air pollution is growing rapidly. For
example, it has become evident that the adverse health effects of air pollution are more
pronounced in disadvantaged populations. Policymakers in many jurisdictions have respon-
ded to this evidence by enacting initiatives that lead to lower concentrations of air pollutants,
such as urban traffic restrictions. In this review, we focus on the interplay between advances
in environmental exposure assessment and developments in policy. We highlight recent
progress in the granular measurement of air pollutants and individual-level exposures, and
how this has enabled focused local policy actions. Finally, we detail an illustrative study
designed to link individual-level health-relevant exposures with economic, behavioral, bio-
logical, familial, and environmental variables.
A
wareness of the human health impacts of exposure to air pollution is growing rapidly1–5,
and is increasingly being translated into public policy6,7. A particular spur to action is
that the effects of air pollution are often most clearly evidenced among the most dis-
advantaged populations8–11. For example, children in households with low-socioeconomic status
(SES) have worse health at birth than those with high SES12. This gradient between SES and
health steepens during life, and various health conditions such as respiratory disease can attri-
bute to this relationship13. As a respiratory disease, childhood asthma can be aggravated and
induced by air pollution exposure14,15. Those who are less well-off often live in areas where the
air contains higher levels of hazardous particulate matter (PM)16,17, thus having a compound
effect on health conditions later in life. While all are of us are affected by air pollution exposure,
the combination of compromised baseline health and lower air quality can inflict even more
profound long-term health effects18.
Given this sobering reality, policymakers in many countries and communities have begun
responding appropriately by controlling or banning dangerous air pollutants, requiring cleaner
heating fuels, restricting urban traffic, etc. The political will for cleaner air presents us with a
tremendous opportunity. The more that factors determining pollutant exposures are detailed, the
better individuals and policymakers can mitigate elevated exposure and adverse health effects. In
this paper, we focus precisely on the interplay between advances in environmental exposure
assessment on the one hand, and policy advances on the other.
In the past, pollution measurement has been relatively crude in terms of compositional,
spatial, and temporal resolution. There have been significant improvements in the ability to
conduct granular measurement of air pollutants, and this has enabled more awareness and
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-09155-4
OPEN
1 School of Arts and Sciences, Department of Economics, New York University, New York, NY, USA. 2 Tandon School of Engineering, Department of Urban
Engineering, New York University, New York, NY, USA. 3 NYU School of Medicine, Department of Environmental Medicine, New York University, New York,
NY, USA. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to M.G. (email: masoud@nyu.edu)
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |   (2019) 10:1236 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-09155-4 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
1
1234567890():,;
 more focused local policy actions, as addressed below. We out-
line more recent progress and the most current practices in the
ability to measure pollution exposure at the individual level,
rather than in geographical terms. The level of practical use of
these personal monitoring methods has not yet been developed
to the point of directly impacting policy (e.g., by their application
for ambient air regulatory purposes), but the potential is high.
We detail an illustrative study designed to turn that potential
into practice by measuring individuals’ exposures over a pro-
longed period of time, along with measures of factors that
influence health outcomes, including economic, behavioral,
biological, familial, and environmental contexts. Though other
parallel projects may well be in planning elsewhere, we describe
this initiative, which is currently being applied in New York City,
as a pilot study for the method applied in a very large metro-
politan area. We expect that such individual-level studies will
deepen the understanding of the health outcomes of pollution
exposure, enable personal preventive actions, motivate collective
adjustment, thereby enabling more effective policies. There are
challenges in enabling policies that limit personal exposures, but
the likely improvements in health and welfare are potentially
massive.
Pollution and poverty
Common outdoor “community”-based air pollutants that have
been identified as associated with increasing risks of cardiovas-
cular and respiratory diseases, lung cancer, and early death,
include ozone (O3); fine PM2.5 and elemental carbon (EC) soot;
nitrogen dioxide (NO2); and sulfur dioxide (SO2)19. Recently,
increased attention has also been directed toward ultrafine par-
ticles, defined as particles with ≤0.1 µm in aerodynamic diameter,
as they also have been associated with adverse health effects,
largely independent of PM2.5 mass20,21. Elevated exposures to
PM2.5 are especially widespread22, with among the most dan-
gerous of these apparently being from fossil fuel combustion,
especially coal burning23–25, likely because of these particles’
small size and especially toxic composition. These exposures have
been estimated to shorten adult life expectancy by 1–2 years26,
while
also
damaging
long-term
cardiac
and
pulmonary
health27,28. Recent evidence also implicates exposure to a range of
adverse health outcomes, including neurological diseases, cardio-
metabolic diseases, and renal disease29–31.
Understanding of the widespread impact of air pollution on
human health, and the associated economic impact, has improved
in recent years32–34. For example, estimates by Public Health
England have indicated that the exposure to PM and nitrogen
dioxide air pollution in London resulted in 41,404 life years lost in
2010, with an estimated associated annual financial impact of
£3,653 million35. Worldwide, WHO has estimated that each year,
more than 7 million premature deaths can be attributed to the
combined effects of indoor and outdoor air pollution36. Overall,
80% of the premature deaths attributed to outdoor air pollution
are caused by ischemic heart disease and strokes, 14% are due to
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or acute lower respiratory
infections, and 6% are due to lung cancer, primarily from expo-
sure to fine PM2.5. A recent Global Burden of Disease (GBD)
study reported that 4.2 million annual deaths were attributable to
ambient PM2·5, making it the fifth-ranking mortality risk factor in
2015 globally, and that, if trends of increasing levels of air pol-
lution continue in low- and middle-income countries, the
increasing health burdens will be significant, if a substantial
reduction of pollution is not achieved.37. Compounding this
concern, a recent reanalysis of available air pollution cohort
studies has revealed that past GBD estimates of the mortality
effects, which relied on the integrated exposure-response, have
been underestimating the effects of outdoor air pollution on
human mortality38.
Of the health problems known to be worsened by air pollution,
asthma is among the most widespread, especially among the
children. A study looking at asthma prevalence and health care in
the U.S. found that, in 2008, persons with asthma missed 10.5
million school days and 14.2 million work days due to their
asthma and that, in 2007, there were 1.75 million asthma-related
emergency department visits and 456,000 asthma hospitaliza-
tions39. A majority of childhood asthma is estimated to be
induced by environmental exposures40,41. In 1 year alone, the cost
of childhood exposure to environmental contaminants resulting
in asthma was estimated to be close to 2 billion USD34. Several
recent reviews have found evidence for a link between air pol-
lution
and
incidence
of
new
cases
of
child
and
adult
asthma15,42,43, however, the evidence has still been considered by
some as yet insufficient proof of a causal link.
Poverty is known to be a critical factor in susceptibility to
pollution-related asthma; a 1999 study in Los Angeles found that
the air pollution-related asthma admissions were higher for
families of lower income44, independent of health insurance
coverage. Similarly, an analysis of records of daily hospital
admissions and air pollution in New York City (NYC), estab-
lished that an apparent difference between the races in the risk of
hospital admissions was explained by consideration of lower SES,
where the poor and the working poor were found to have higher
risks per amount of pollution exposure than wealthier individuals,
irrespective of race45. Also, a recent US study of some 60 million
older adults found that the mortality effects from long-term air
pollution exposure in the elderly Medicare population was greater
amongst those eligible for Medicaid (i.e., those with lower
income) than others in that population46, again indicating that
SES is a primary risk factor that increases susceptibility to adverse
health outcomes of air pollution.
Other studies expand on the link between SES status and health
effects of pollution. As reported for Sweden47, fluctuations in
pollution caused by atmospheric inversions were used as indi-
cators of pollution effects on health, while considering the role of
SES. Inversions are transient episodes when the usual gradient of
near surface air temperature (cooling with increasing elevation)
reverses, resulting in an atmospheric trapping of pollutants. The
authors used information on pollution, weather, and precipitation
generated by NASA and the Swedish Environmental Research
Institute, as well as pollution measured at fixed sites (typically
located in town centers in Sweden). They acquired health data
from Statistics Sweden, as well as inpatient and outpatient data
covering all those of age 18 or under. The authors found that the
worsening of pollution associated with atmospheric inversions
increased health care visits for respiratory illnesses, and that the
impact on children from high-income households was sig-
nificantly lower than that on children in low-income households,
indicating that baseline health played a key role. While the impact
was virtually identical across income groups for children in poor
health, among children in good health the impact of pollution
was much larger for low and medium income than for high-
income families.
Pollution policy at the global and national level
Air pollution exposure is a global health concern: some 90% of
the world’s population is breathing outdoor air that falls below
the World Health Organization (WHO) air quality guidelines36.
In the US alone, more than 125 million people are estimated to
live in communities with unhealthy air48. In the developing
world, while accelerated economic development and indus-
trialization has led to a reduction of poverty, it has also resulted in
REVIEW ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-09155-4
2
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2019) 10:1236 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-09155-4 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
 greater economic disparities and extreme poor air qualities,
especially in megacities49. There are many health risks and eco-
nomic
impacts
associated
with
such
pollution
exposures,
including a diminished lifelong economic productivity that results
from permanent reduction in physical health and cognitive cap-
ability, compounded by increased costs of health care and early
morbidity34.
Knowledge of the damage that pollutants impose on health has
been instrumental in policies and global accords; the Paris
Agreement being one example. Recent progress in the scientific
understanding of pollution, and the air quality implications of
anthropogenic climate change mitigation policies, highlight the
progress for cleaner air can immediately benefit society at large50.
Improving air pollution policy at the local level
While there have been striking air quality policy successes in the
past, such as the US Clean Air Act, there are limitations as to
what can be achieved when relying only on traditional central-site
air quality measurements that often deliver only infrequent
measures of just a few select pollutants. It is now known that air
pollution, and its composition, often varies dramatically over
short distances and periods of time51,52. Likewise, awareness has
grown regarding the links between pollution and poverty. The
geographic link between asthma and poverty in NYC is one
example, as indicated in Fig. 1, showing: (a) the spatial dis-
tribution of asthma admissions rates by children aged 5–14 (per
10,000 population) across the 59 Community Districts in NYC
during 2010–2014; and (b) the percent of poverty in the
population in each of the same Districts in the same time period.
The spatial correlation between poor health and poverty is
apparent; a statistical analysis of these data also indicates a sig-
nificant association between health and wealth in this case (r =
0.35, p = 0.01).
In Fig. 1, note that the asthma admissions rates vary drama-
tically across New York City. This suggests that it is important to
understand local patterns of pollution exposures. Unfortunately,
it has been common to measure pollutant exposure levels to
represent large and highly heterogeneous areas (e.g., city or
county-wide). The fixed monitoring stations that are used in the
U.S. mainly for regulatory purposes are often sparsely located,
and elevated on buildings. New York City, for example, has 13
high-performance regulatory air monitoring stations. While this
level of instrumentation has been of great value, and has resulted
in positive action, differences in air quality across individual
neighborhoods, and at ground-level, are not captured by such
coarsely distributed and elevated air monitors.
The chemical constituents and sources of pollution are also
often studied with low specificity. The label “fine particulate
matter mass” is highly nonspecific, even though the mass is
comprised of many different particles with differing compositions
and sources that can have differing health implications. For
example, studies have been carried out on differentiation of
outdoor PM2.5 (fine mass) exposures across the US by composi-
tion and source category53. In the US, these were then incorpo-
rated into a nationwide cohort study to differentiate the
respective ischemic cardiovascular mortality impacts of PM2.5
from different sources, finding that coal combustion particles
were approximately five times the health risk for this outcome
than other particles23. Hence, improving the study design
requires not only finer measures of time and spatial exposure
resolution, but also to further distinguish pollution constituents/
sources. These differentiations are then linked to health out-
comes, helping guide the optimal public health strategies and
respective regulatory efforts6. In the next section, we provide
examples where finer resolution monitoring strategies have been
adopted, and where air quality policies have been changed as a
result.
While not yet numerous, there are examples of approaches that
result in highly granular measurement of pollution over large
areas. In London, for example, King’s College London “London
Air” website provides hourly exposure estimates at a 20 m reso-
lution across London for NO2, O3, PM10 (thoracic PM mass less
than 10 µm in diameter), and PM2.554, using models relying on
data from monitoring networks. With recent advancement and
proliferation of low-cost sensor technology, networks of such
sensors are also being deployed across urban locations to measure
air pollution concentration levels. Examples include deployments
of a distributed network of sensors in eight locations in Xi’an,
China to measure and locate pollution hotspots55 and 32 elec-
trochemical sensor nodes deployed over a 2-month period in
Cambridge, UK, collecting high spatial and temporal resolution
data on carbon monoxide (CO) concentrations56. Researchers
also recently carried out sampling at 25 locations in Rochester,
NY using low-cost sensors to estimate hourly concentrations of
PM2.557. As demonstrated by these studies, the low-cost, ease of
operation, and the high volume of data generated by sensor
networks can allow for streamlined deployment and maintenance
of multiple units, providing improved and detailed spatio-
temporal coverage in a given area. Cities and government agen-
cies around the world are increasingly engaged in partnerships for
the application of sensor technologies58, for example, the city of
Chicago, in partnership with University of Chicago and Argonne
National Laboratory, recently launched Array of Things (AoT),
which consists of a network of sensor boxes mounted on light
posts to collect a host of real-time data on Chicago’s environ-
mental surroundings (e.g., air quality, temperature, and wind
speed) and urban activity. The AoT aims to provide real-time,
location-based data to the public, allowing researchers, policy-
makers, developers, and residents to collaborate and take action.
Other approaches have employed land use regression (LUR)
methods to empirically model air pollution levels using both
geographic variables and regulatory stationary monitoring data.
LUR models that incorporate mobile sampling have also recently
gained traction as a cost-effective approach to model urban air
quality.
Mobile sampling
consists
of continuous
monitors
mounted on mobile platforms (e.g., foot, bicycle, and cars)
repeatedly sampling travel routes, and then applying statistical
approaches to predict air pollution concentration levels. For
example, efforts in Hong Kong59, Montreal60, Minneapolis61, and
San Francisco62 have successfully modeled intra-urban air quality
with high-predictive power and increased spatial resolution. For
example, a Google Street View mapping vehicle, outfitted with air
quality sensors, sampled every street in a 30-km2 area of Oakland,
CA in order to reveal urban air pollution patterns at 4–5 orders of
magnitude greater spatial precision than possible with regulatory
central-site ambient monitoring. Vehicle-based mobile measure-
ments were employed to create LUR models to estimate the
spatial variation of PM2.5 and PM10 in the downtown area of
Hong Kong. The “OpenSense” project in Zurich, Switzerland63
used mobile sensor nodes installed on top of public transport
tram vehicles in the city to create pollution maps with a high
spatial resolution for ultrafine particles and particle counts. This
project aimed to use ultrafine particle maps created with mea-
surements from mobile air pollution monitoring network to build
apps to minimize resident’s exposure by providing optimal
pollution-avoidance travel routes.
Deployment of improved measurement technologies is now
allowing policymakers to target their mitigation and evaluation
measures with far greater precision. This happened, for example,
in three Israeli cities, which resulted in switching from heavier
oil-fueled power plants to cleaner burning natural gas, and
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-09155-4
REVIEW ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |   (2019) 10:1236 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-09155-4 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
3
 a corresponding reduction in mortality64. Spatially granular
analysis of pollution has been carried out in London, resulting in
seminal policy progress in traffic congestion pricing65, while bans
on diesel fuel have been put in place in many European cities.
To illustrate how improved measurement and policy interact,
we cite one particular case in New York City, where a detailed
study of patterns of pollution resulted in certain diesel fuels being
banned. The 2005–2007 campaign involved the chemical com-
position analyses of pollution, carried out by the NYC Depart-
ment of Health and Mental Hygiene (NYC DOHMH)66, as part
of a program called the New York City Community Air Survey
(NYCCAS). In this ongoing study, spatial variations in pollutant
concentrations have been measured using 2-week averaged con-
centrations (Fig. 2). These data were measured using street level
monitors that have been methodically rotated among approxi-
mately 150 sampling locations around the city7, incorporating
unusually rich chemical analysis, including PM2.5, nitrogen oxi-
des, black carbon, ozone, and sulfur dioxide. Critically, the PM2.5
itself was analyzed for constituents, such as aluminum, bromine,
calcium, copper, iron, potassium, manganese, sodium, nickel,
lead, sulfur, silicon, titanium, vanadium, and zinc. The measured
concentrations have been used, along with population density and
attributes of the physical infrastructure, as inputs to a LUR model
in order to estimate pollutant level and composition at a spatial
resolution of 300 m, resulting in the identification of sources
(Fig. 2 left). Once the rich details of pollutant concentrations were
established at the local level in New York City, it was then pos-
sible for researchers to gain insight into the average exposures of
those living near particular sources of pollution67,68. As a result,
in April of 2011, specifically citing the NYCCAS study, New York
City Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) set a new
rule to phase out the use of two highly polluting forms of heating
oil: those known as Number 6 and Number 4.
However,
while
the
broad
correlation
between
adverse
respiratory health outcomes and residential proximity to traffic
pollution is known in New York City and elsewhere, we are still
learning about the individual contributions of different pollu-
tants. In a panel study among inner-city children with asthma69, a
study was used to evaluate the associations of adverse asthma
outcome incidences with increased personal exposure to PM2.5 as
a whole, and the diesel-related carbonaceous fraction of PM2.5
known as EC soot, in particular. The study found increased risk
of cough, wheeze, and total symptoms to be associated with
personal exposure to increased diesel EC. The findings pinpointed
the diesel “soot” fraction of PM2.5 as most responsible for
pollution-related asthma exacerbations among children living
near roadways. This helped identify the particular diesel fuels that
were most responsible, for which substitutes were readily avail-
able at only marginally higher prices. This led to calls for
reductions in these exposures67,70, with resulting government
actions for less diesel traffic, and limitations on idling vehicles
near public schools in NYC. These examples have documented
how improved science can lead to more effectively targeted public
health action71.
Analysis of data from the NYC studies above have shown the
within-city variations in air pollution-related premature mortality
and morbidity at 42 city neighborhoods, as well as the benefits of
the elimination of the low-quality fuel oil6. Study results indicated
that the complete phase out of the low-quality building fuel oil
reduced the annual average level of PM2.5 by an estimated 0.71
μg/m3 citywide (~0.5% of city-wide mean concentration). This
was further estimated to have resulted in an annual decrease of
290 premature deaths, 180 fewer hospital admissions for
respiratory and cardiovascular complications, and 550 fewer
emergency department visits for asthma. The largest reductions
of air pollutant emissions were in more affluent neighborhoods,
but the greatest health benefits were estimated to occur in the
high-poverty neighborhoods. This disparity in effects is attributed
to the higher baseline morbidity and mortality rates at lower
income levels. These estimates of the 2005–2007 human toll and
cost of PM air pollution exposures are summarized in Table 1.
The valuation shown was calculate with BenMAP methodology
developed by USEPA, using the events as function of age group
from studies carried by NYCDOH6. The citywide 3200 premature
death can be compared to the 290 decrease in deaths as result of
the switch to cleaner fuel.
Pollution and policy at the individual level
For all that knowledge and public policy have advanced in recent
years, much more needs to be known to further optimize policy
priorities and decision-making as related to clean air and public
health. In terms of the impact of air pollutant exposure on human
30
10
Poverty
20 30 40
Asthma
60
90
Fig. 1 NYC 2014 Community District Data for: (left) Children’s Asthma Admissions per 10,000 persons; and, (right) percent poverty in the same period.
Green shaded areas represent parks, airports, etc. Figure rendered using data from NY State DOH6
REVIEW ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-09155-4
4
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2019) 10:1236 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-09155-4 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
 health, it is critical to better understand: (1) pollutant exposures
at the level of individual and (2) cofactors that have a bearing on
health at the level of individual.
It is now recognized that personal exposure to pollution can
vary dramatically from block to block in a city, and over time
during a day. This cannot be accurately assessed with only the
detailed geospatial mappings of fluctuating pollution levels.
People move through physical space, and their mobility must be
considered. The public spends only a part of their daily lives at
home, and there are now technologies available for personal-level
exposure assessment to assess the effects of that mobility on their
individual exposure profiles72. In addition to mobility, even those
who live next door to one another may have very different resi-
dential pollution exposures, depending on the quality and effec-
tiveness of any in home ventilation or filters. This may depend on
the quality of air conditioning, or other unmeasured home-
specific factors. Accordingly, the exposures and health implica-
tions of pollution may be radically different for population groups
living in close proximity to high levels of outdoor pollution. NYC,
in particular, is a good illustration of this effect, with many
wealthy individuals living near pollution from traffic in Midtown
Manhattan, albeit many at high elevation in tall buildings. Yet less
is known about exactly why the wealthier population has been
found to be less acutely affected by pollution-induced health
problems, such as asthma.
It is now technically possible to get most pollution exposures in
real time, and to track individual exposures over many years.
Acceptance of the benefits of individual-level exposure assess-
ment is growing, and trials including those cited above are
underway worldwide, showcasing the value of these advances in
technology. In this section, we document ongoing advances in the
understanding of personal exposures.
One new insight in relation to pollutant exposure concerns
travel to work. It is now known that daily commutes may con-
tribute disproportionately to amount of daily inhalation to air
pollutants particularly in urban settings. Designing cities to
promote physically active travel is a potential strategy to improve
public health, but the built environment can provide both benefits
(physical activity) and hazards (air pollution). Exposures to air
pollution during active travel were estimated in Minneapolis,
Minnesota73; active travel occurs on high-traffic streets or near
activity centers where concentration levels are highest, and that
only 2-3% of blocks have high active travel with low concentra-
tions. The study authors identified 20% of local roads where
shifting active travel from high-traffic roads to adjacent low-
traffic roads would reduce exposure by around 15%. In another
study, exposures and inhaled doses of air pollutants were eval-
uated in different travel microenvironments in Barcelona,
Spain74. Travel modes explained much more of commuters’
exposure variability than meteorology, and moving by car
experienced highest concentrations for all contaminants, includ-
ing black carbon, ultrafine particles, carbon monoxide, PM2.5, and
CO2. Whether certain populations may experience different levels
of exposure needs to be ascertained through larger scale studies.
Whether there are inequalities among different socioeconomic
groups for exposure to air pollutants during commuting in
London was compared75; no systematic relationship between
income deprivation and pollutant concentrations was found,
suggesting that differences between transport modes are a
stronger influence on exposure. People from low-income areas
Table 1 Annual health events attributable and cost of PM2.5 exposure compared to background levels (2005–2007)
Health effect
Age group
Events
Valuation
Premature mortality
30 and older
3200
$30,772,770,000
Hospital admissions for respiratory
20 and older
1200
$38,000,000
Hospital admissions for cardiovascular
40 and older
920
$34,770,000
Emergency department visits for asthma
Under 18
2400
$1,020,000
Emergency department visits for asthma
18 and older
3600
$1,530,000
>13.6
<7.8
PM 2.5 µg/m3
Value
Census 2010
0.0 – 22.2
22.3 – 36.0
36.1 – 50.2
50.3 – 64.8
64.9 – 81.6
81.7 – 102.9
103.0 – 144.1
144.2 – 325.2
Population density per acre
Fig. 2 (Left) Yearly average distribution of particulate matter PM2.5. Source: New York City Community Air Survey (NYCCAS). (Right) NYC-population
density (source American Community Survey, open source online)
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-09155-4
REVIEW ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |   (2019) 10:1236 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-09155-4 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
5
 have rely more heavily on the bus for transport, receiving high
exposures during commute75. A study of 42 healthy adults in
Ottawa, Canada found that short-term exposures to traffic pol-
lution may contribute to altered autonomic modulation of the
heart in the hours immediately after cycling76. Another clear
indicator of the importance of mode of transport is illustrated by
an example in central London, where the health benefits of
walking in highly polluted Oxford Street were negated by expo-
sure to traffic pollution among individuals who are healthy as well
as for those with chronic health conditions77.
Exercise is also an important factor to consider when evalu-
ating the effects of air pollution exposures, particularly if exercise
is done outdoors, as it can increase the dose received at a given
ambient concentration exposure. During exercise, increased pul-
monary ventilation (i.e., inhaled volume of air per minute) brings
more air pollution through the conductive airways than at rest78.
This can lead to greater dosages of air pollution among exercising
individuals, and greater health effects than at lower ventilation
rates79. Thus, exercise has the potential to increase dose and
adverse health effects over nonexercising individuals, and should
be considered by the public in choosing where to exercise, as well
as in the design and interpretation of air pollution exposure and
health assessment studies.
Nevertheless, studies indicate that the benefits of exercise can
outweigh the adverse effects of pollution exposure at the popu-
lation level. Assessment of health impacts of promoting active
transportation (increased cycling and increased walking) across
six European cities (Barcelona, Basel, Copenhagen, Paris, Prague,
and Warsaw) in the TAPAS study found that the potential health
benefits outweighed the risks posed by increased inhalation of air
pollution80. The trade-off between exercise benefits and air pol-
lution harms, however, is dependent on city characteristics (e.g.,
built environment and pollution levels), as well as the individual
and their activities (e.g., health status, mode of transport, and
locale of exercise).
Improved characterizations as to how people move through
time and space will improve the understanding of heterogeneities
in population exposure. A recent study81 used cell-phone data to
estimate the mobility of several million people in New York City
and then used this, along with data on spatiotemporal PM2.5
concentration levels, to calculate the population-weighted pollu-
tion exposure, and compared to “Home Population Exposure”,
which assumed a static population distribution. The value of this
dynamic approach was demonstrated in that the temporal
variability of the cell phone -based exposures was significantly
different to “static” estimates based on Census data, during both
the daytime and the nighttime.
In another study82, survey-based data were used to derive a
model
of
travel
behavior
and
time-activity
patterns
for
89,385 subjects in Hong Kong. This information on population
mobility was then incorporated in LUR models to estimate
dynamic time-weighted air pollution exposure for different age,
sex, and employment groups. Working adults and students
showed increased exposure, due to their higher mobility, sug-
gesting that population mobility patterns add value to epide-
miological studies of air quality and human health.
Advances have also been made in the development of citizen-
based monitoring technologies to assess location-specific or
personal-specific exposures. “Participatory sensing” refers to a
methodology in which sensors are carried by citizen volunteers,
who often benefit in terms of access to data on their own expo-
sures. For example, one study explored the potential of “oppor-
tunistic” monitoring to map the exposure to air pollution in the
urban environment at a high-spatial resolution83. The sampling
design made use of an existing mobile infrastructure or people’s
daily routines to move measurement devices around. The study
equipped the city wardens in Antwerp, Belgium, who are out-
doors for a large part of the day on surveillance tours by bicycle or
on foot, with black carbon monitors. The data collection gathered
a total of 393 h of measurements to capture and characterize the
pollution within those patrolled areas of the city. CITI-SENSE is
another initiative launched in Europe to develop “citizens’
observatories” to “empower citizens to contribute to and parti-
cipate in environmental governance, to enable them to support
and influence community and societal priorities and associated
decision-making.” CITI-SENSE enables people to use low-cost air
quality monitors in eight European cities to collect and share their
data84. One of the largest community-based air monitoring net-
works in the US is the Imperial County Community Air Mon-
itoring Network, with 40 sensors generating real-time PM
sensors85. Similar community-driven, citizen-science efforts by a
collaborative group of community, academic, nonprofit, and
government partners could supplement regulatory data, as well as
drive public policy and discourse. Notably, the State of California
recently passed new legislation (SCAQMD AB 617) requiring air
districts to establish “community air monitoring systems” that
include community input and low-cost sensors, the first regula-
tion of its kind in the world86. Globally, many nonprofit orga-
nizations and agencies are beginning to share their air pollution
concentration data as part of “open data” and “citizen science”
movements. Other examples include determination of burden of
disease at a given location using estimation of pollution at high
spatial and temporal resolution (see animation showing one day
in NYC), along with passive sensing of human mobility using
cellular phone signals87. Cities and agencies worldwide are
beginning to share their environmental and exposure data: the
nonprofit AirCasting is example of a crowd-sourced air pollution
mapping platform using its mobile monitor “AirBeam,” with
more than 2 million data points shared so far. Similarly, Pur-
pleAir shares online both personal and central-site air quality
data from around the world.
Studies on real-time personal exposure and health
The individual-level health outcomes due to short- and long-term
exposure in relation to baseline health, SES, and other key
cofactors is emerging as the focus for future research. As indi-
cated above, it is now possible to greatly increase the granularity
of data on geospatial patterns of pollution, and combine this with
detailed information on individual exposures. In principle, it
should soon be possible to more accurately gauge the beneficial
effects of well-filtered air in the home and office, living on a tree
lined street, limiting outdoor exposure for children on polluted
days, or avoiding exposure to rush hour traffic conditions. It is
this more individuated knowledge that would advance the
understanding of the biological mechanisms of response, and give
rise to changes in individual and social behavior to reduce air
pollution exposures, and motivate protective public policies.
The potentially massive public health benefits that granular
data would provide is motivating research efforts worldwide. For
example, an increasing number of studies have used temporally
resolved exposure data to estimate longer term exposures (e.g.,
weekly exposures throughout pregnancy). The EU funded
EXPOsOMICS project88 aims at generating this type of space and
time resolved exposure data.
The goal of much of this recent research on pollution exposure
and health outcomes is to move beyond group associations, and
investigate causal pathways and effects at the individual level. The
questions asked include: “Who is most affected by air pollution,
and why?”. This is challenging to answer in standard data sets, in
which exposures and/or characteristics are grouped. This is why
the recent studies outlined above (for example, the work47 on
REVIEW ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-09155-4
6
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2019) 10:1236 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-09155-4 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
 inversions in Sweden) are of such importance. Yet, valuable as
these exposure-effects pathway studies are, they cover relatively
short periods of time, using aggregate population groups, and
only highly specific effects. There are no comprehensive studies
that track exposures over time and link measured exposures to
the wide range of related health outcomes on the individual level,
both short-term and long-term89. For example, participant
exposures for entire residence and work location histories after
enrollment to prospective cohorts are lacking in most available
studies today, which could be addressed in future studies. It
should be acknowledged that short-term peaks in exposure are
most pertinent when targeting illness (e.g., asthma) exacerbations,
requiring temporally and spatially resolved exposure data; while
long-term annual or decadal averages are pertinent to the
development of diseases (e.g., cardiovascular disease (CVD)).
Thus, study platforms that enable the integration of these two
scales, at level of the individual, promise to advance the under-
standing of the respective roles of short-term exposures on acute
illness, while delivering realistic measures of cumulative expo-
sures’ role in chronic disease development.
In addition to measuring pollution-related health impacts, such
as respiratory and CVDs, it is also important to measure baseline
health conditions known to impact susceptibility to pollution-
related health outcomes. These conditions themselves have been
found to be SES dependent, suggesting the need to study inter-
actions among exposure, health, and socioeconomic status over
longer periods. In addition to socioeconomic factors, there is
some evidence of psychological effects of pollution, for example
on mood states, which are rarely monitored90,91. For this reason,
research groups worldwide are pushing for enriched measure-
ment of pollution exposures and their many interactions with the
human condition.
There are exposure assessment approaches that could help
address such pollution-health interaction issues. As noted above,
the portability and mobility of sensor technologies allow for
measurements of real-time exposures to airborne pollutants.
Similarly, deployment of wearable technologies and equipment
assessing real-time health outcomes is a growing area of research.
Researchers have evaluated the effects of acute PM2.5 exposure
during different modes of transport (cycling, walking, bus, and
train) on changes in heart rate variability (HRV) in 32 young
participants. HRV was measured using Actiheart units placed on
participants’ chests. Personal PM exposure was monitored using
mobile real-time monitors carried by participants (Met One
Aerocet 531 particle profilers were used to measure PM at 2-min
intervals). Elevated PM2.5 and PM10 inhaled and lung deposited
doses were significant associated with decreased HRV indices.
Percent declines in standard deviation of normal RR heart beat
intervals were stronger in cyclists and pedestrians, in comparison
to bus and train passengers92. Another study assessed association
between PM2.5 exposure and HRV in 18 healthy male Swiss
highway workers93. The workers were equipped with small
devices to record ECG (H12 + Digital) and personal-level PM2.5
(DataRAM PDR100, a light scattering nephelometer). Acute
exposure to PM2.5 was followed by reduced HRV, and reduced
modulation of HRV, were also observed at elevated PM2.5 levels
for all three activity phases assessed (work, home, and night).
Other parallel efforts to monitor personal pollution exposures
include a multicity study in Europe94 that measured movement,
black carbon air pollution, and physiological health markers of
122 adults for 3 weeks in 3 European cities (Antwerp, Barcelona,
London) as part of the Physical Activity through Sustainable
Transport Approaches project. A SenseWear for physical activity
registration and a Zephyr BioHarness 3 was used to measure
participants’ real-time breathing rate, breathing wave amplitude,
and heart rate. MicroAeth black carbon monitors (AE51) were
used to measure personal exposures to traffic related air pollu-
tants. The study compared minute ventilation and inhaled dose
across methods in a panel study design. There are also multiple
efforts ongoing in the U.S.: the NIH launched the Pediatric
Research using Integrated Sensor Monitoring Systems (PRISMS)
program, a multi-institution center, in 2015 to develop sensor-
based, integrated health monitoring systems for measuring
environmental, physiological, and behavioral factors in pediatric
epidemiological studies of asthma. Another ongoing effort by city
of Louisville, Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, and Propeller
Health, a company that collects data from sensors attached on
asthma inhalers, looks to identify environmental triggers asso-
ciated with inhaler use. In that study, several environmental
factors were significantly associated with inhaler use, including
the Air Quality Index, PM10, weed pollen, and mold95.
The New York City Human Project
There is also now a prototype project beginning in New York City
that will measure individual exposures over extended period of
time (years), with plans to link these exposures to health and
individual behavior. “The Human Project” (THP), presently in its
pilot stage, is designed to provide a longitudinal study of the
relation between pollution and health, and socioeconomic factors,
behavior patterns, and other cofactors96. The goal of THP is serve
as a resource for the discrimination of individual-level variability
in the effects of air pollution on health, and associated socio-
economic modifiers. To ensure sufficiently rich measurement of
human exposure, THP is being designed as a long run panel
study. In its full-scale implementation, it is expected to gather
data on a representative sample of 10,000 New Yorkers in their
family units with plans to track this panel over 20+ years.
Already in place are key elements of the framework for partici-
pation, privacy, security, collaboration, resource sharing, and
dissemination. Central to the research design is the collaboration
of researchers from multiple disciplines, including environmental
medicine, economics, psychology, neuro-economics, urban and
environmental engineering, data analysis and modeling, working
to put together a common analytic framework. The aim in this
work is the rapid development and deployment of new methods
of pollution exposure assessment, while increasing the duration of
analysis (therefore the number of sampling points per individual).
Individual-level health data will be central to THP and its study
of pollution. This will include the participants’ medical data such
as electronic medical records (EMRs) data, health insurance
claims, in-patient and outpatient hospital visit data. Data sharing
agreements are currently underway with EMRs data providers
and the New York State Department of Health (NYSDOH), and
strict protocols for data privacy and security are built into the
study. Other EMRs will be acquired from the New York State
(NYS) Health Information Exchanges (HIEs). Overall, this pro-
ject seeks to make corresponding advances in the understanding
of the links between exposure, health, wealth, and human beha-
vior, focusing on the New York City area as the laboratory.
Information on THP participants’ hospital inpatient stays and
outpatient visits will be captured from NYS’s Statewide Planning
and Research Cooperative System (SPARCS). SPARCS is a
comprehensive all payer data reporting system established in
1979 as a result of cooperation between the health care industry
and government. SPARCS data includes individual-level detail on
patient characteristics, diagnoses and treatments, services, and
charges for each hospital inpatient stay and outpatient visit. This
includes ICD 9/10 codes and data on ambulatory surgery,
emergency department, and outpatient services.
Data on participant medical encounters covered by Medicaid
will be also obtained from the Medicaid Data Warehouse
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-09155-4
REVIEW ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |   (2019) 10:1236 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-09155-4 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
7
 (MDW). This contains over 25 years of structured claims data
and allows authorized users to extract longitudinal information
on an individual’s encounters with the Medicaid system. This
data is also made available for authorized purposes, through
agreements with NYSDOH.
In addition to having detailed information from medical
records, advances made by the research community quantifying
individual exposure (described in previous section) will be used to
link exposure to short- and long-term health outcomes. Mobile
sensors and applications will be used to record a host of phy-
siological metrics of participants’, such as activity levels, pulse,
and heart rate variability, in real time. A mobile smartphone
“app” will be used to push surveys to participants’ mobile devices
to measure fluctuations in mood, perception of air quality and
symptoms such as shortness of breath.
THP will measure behaviors in a granular manner. This will
allow the study to gauge the prevalence and effects of so-called
avoidance behaviors in lowering the adverse effects of air pollu-
tion on health97. Such activities include purchasing preventive
pharmaceuticals and reducing time spent in polluted environ-
ments98. To date, little is known about how prevalent and
important these behaviors are. For that reason, THP is expected
to record a rich battery of behavioral responses to pollution.
This projects and similar efforts carried out in Europe are
beginning to successfully interject personal environmental and
health monitoring into the study and evaluation of the human
health effects of air pollution. However, challenges remain. While
sensors enable us to monitor pollution at a highly granular scale,
this benefit is somewhat offset by the less accurate/reproducible
measurement these devices offer, as smaller and/or cheaper
devices tend to be less sensitive, less precise, and less chemically
specific to the compound or variable of interest. Thus, while
ambulatory devices give a very detailed picture of individual
exposure, we still struggle to implement these approaches at a
scale required to have sufficient power to assess the more subtle,
but widespread, impacts of air pollution exposure.
Conclusions
This paper outlines the current state of research on spatial
mapping of air pollution exposures, and the quantitative analysis
of their human health effects. It highlights the interaction of
science with policy and the many places advances in scientific
understanding have produced appropriate policy responses. We
outline newly feasible approaches to measuring exposures and
health outcomes over the course of the human life cycle in their
economic, geographic, familial, and social context. As such
extensive new data becomes available, policymakers will be tooled
to pinpoint and eliminate key environmental hazards. Such
policies are particularly necessary to protect those who are most
vulnerable, including the young, the old, and the less well-off.
We have documented examples of ways in which scientific
progress has resulted in public policy improvements, and the
opportunities and technical feasibility of increased assessment of
individual exposures and health effects. We end with a descrip-
tion of a prototype study designed for the assessment of air
pollution exposures and effects over an individual’s life cycle. It is
possible that such air pollution research will have policy out-
comes as strong as those that followed research on the health
impacts of smoking. In that case, scientific awareness of its
damaging effects gave rise to public health initiatives that resulted
in dramatic declines in smoking-related deaths in the developed
world99,100. Along these lines, the recent First WHO Global
Conference on Air Pollution and Health in Geneva, Switzerland
(30 October–1 November 2018) highlighted the need to make
commitments to air quality around the globe. By personalizing
the exposures and impacts, such studies can contribute to this
advancement of environmental health science and policy, and
thereby have the potential to engender more optimal societal
changes to the benefit of everyone, perhaps particularly for
society’s most adversely affected individuals and groups.
Data availability
Figure 1, created using open source data:
OpenNYC: https://data.cityofnewyork.us/City-Government/Community-Districts/yfnk-
k7r4 Data2go.nyc: https://data2go.nyc/faq.pdf
Figure 2, created using open sourced data:
Figure 2 (left): https://data.cityofnewyork.us/Environment/NYCCAS-Air-Pollution-
Rasters/q68s-8qxv
Figure 2 (right): https://www1.nyc.gov/site/planning/data-maps/nyc-population/census-
2010.page, and using Census Tract shapefile, also available open source: https://www1.
nyc.gov/site/planning/data-maps/open-data/districts-download-metadata.page
Data and code for the animation of hourly 300 m spatially resolved concentration of
PM2.5 is available at: https://github.com/masoudhub/Nowcasting.git
Received: 18 October 2017 Accepted: 23 February 2019
References
1.
Kheirbek, I., Haney, J., Douglas, S., Ito, K. & Matte, T. The contribution of
motor vehicle emissions to ambient fine particulate matter public health
impacts in New York City: a health burden assessment. Environ. Health 15, 89
(2016).
2.
Thurston, G. D. et al. Ambient particulate matter air pollution exposure and
mortality in the NIH-AARP diet and health cohort. Environ. Health Perspect.
124, 484–490 (2015).
3.
Deschênes, O., Greenstone, M. & Shapiro, J. S. Defensive Investments and the
demand for air quality: evidence from the NOx budget program. Am. Econ.
Rev. 107, 2958–2989 (2017).
4.
Sunyer, J. et al. Association between traffic-related air pollution in schools and
cognitive development in primary school children: a prospective cohort study.
PLOS Med. 12, e1001792 (2015).
5.
Chen, J.-C. et al. Ambient air pollution and neurotoxicity on brain structure:
evidence from women’s health initiative memory study. Ann. Neurol. 78,
466–476 (2015).
6.
Kheirbek, I. et al. The public health benefits of reducing fine particulate matter
through conversion to cleaner heating fuels in New York City. Environ. Sci.
Technol. 48, 13573–13582 (2014). New York City recently issued regulations
to reduce emissions resulting from burning heating oil. This paper highlights
the impact of such science-driven policies by exploring the potential health
benefits of these regulations, finding that although the reductions are greatest
in low-poverty neighborhoods, the benefits are estimated to be greatest in
high-poverty neighborhoods due to higher baseline mortality rates.
7.
Matte, T. D. et al. Monitoring intraurban spatial patterns of multiple
combustion air pollutants in New York City: design and implementation. J.
Expo. Sci. Environ. Epidemiol. 23, 223–231 (2013).
8.
World Health Organization. Poverty and Health. http://www.who.int/tobacco/
research/economics/publications/oecd_dac_pov_health.pdf (2003).
9.
Shmool, J. L. C. et al. Area-level socioeconomic deprivation, nitrogen dioxide
exposure, and term birth weight in New York City. Environ. Res. 142, 624–632
(2015).
10. Bell, M. L. & Ebisu, K. Environmental inequality in exposures to airborne
particulate matter components in the United States. Environ. Health Perspect.
120, 1699–704 (2012).
11. Cushing, L. et al. Racial/ethnic disparities in cumulative environmental health
impacts in California: evidence from a statewide environmental justice
screening tool (CalEnviroScreen 1.1). Am. J. Public Health 105, 2341–2348
(2015).
12. Case, A., Lubotsky, D. & Paxson, C. Economic status and health in childhood:
the origins of the gradient. Am. Econ. Rev. 92, 1308–1334 (2002).
13. Currie, J. & Stabile, M. Socioeconomic status and child health: why is the
relationship stronger for older children? Am. Econ. Rev. 93, 1813–1823
(2003).
14. Thurston, G. D. et al. A joint ERS/ATS policy statement: what constitutes an
adverse health effect of air pollution? An analytical framework. Eur. Respir. J.
49, 1600419 (2017).
15. Khreis, H. et al. Exposure to traffic-related air pollution and risk of
development of childhood asthma: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Environ. Int. 100, 1–31 (2017).
REVIEW ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-09155-4
8
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2019) 10:1236 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-09155-4 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
 16. Hajat, A., Hsia, C. & O’Neill, M. S. Socioeconomic disparities and air pollution
exposure: a global review. Curr. Environ. Health Rep. 2, 440–450 (2015). This
work provides a comprehensive review of the relationship between
socioeconomic status and air pollution exposure, finding that low
socioeconomic status areas are generally exposed to higher levels of criteria
air pollutants throughout the world, although more studies are still needed
especially in developing countries.
17. Clark, L. P., Millet, D. B. & Marshall, J. D. Changes in transportation-related
air pollution exposures by race-ethnicity and socioeconomic status: outdoor
nitrogen dioxide in the United States in 2000 and 2010. Environ. Health
Perspect. 125, 1–10 (2017).
18. Neidell, M. J. Air pollution, health, and socio-economic status: the effect of
outdoor air quality on childhood asthma. J. Health Econ. 23, 1209–1236
(2014).
19. World Health Organization & UNAIDS. Air Quality Guidelines: Global
Update 2005. http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/69477/
WHO_SDE_PHE_OEH_06.02_eng.pdf (2006).
20. Ostro, B. et al. Associations of mortality with long-term exposures to fine and
ultrafine particles, species and sources: results from the California Teachers
Study Cohort. Environ. Health Perspect. 123, 549–556 (2015).
21. Bai, L. et al. Exposure to ambient ultrafine particles and nitrogen dioxide and
incident hypertension and diabetes. Epidemiology 29, 323–332 (2018).
22. Brauer, M. et al. Exposure assessment for estimation of the global burden of
disease attributable to outdoor air pollution. Environ. Sci. Technol. 46,
652–660 (2012).
23. Thurston, G. D. et al. Ischemic heart disease mortality and long-term exposure
to source-related components of U.S. fine particle air pollution. Environ.
Health Perspect. 124, 1–10 (2015). Health effects of fine particulate matter
can vary considerably depending on its type and source. This work highlights
the differential effect of particulate matter components, finding that the
combustion-related (from coal burning and diesel traffic) constituents of fine
PM have the largest impact.
24. Pope, C. A. III et al. Lung cancer, cardiopulmonary mortality, and long-term
exposure to fine particulate air pollution. J. Am. Med. 287, 1132–1141 (2002).
25. Lippmann, M., Chen, L. C., Gordon, T., Ito, K. & Thurston, G. D. National
Particle Component Toxicity (NPACT) Initiative: integrated epidemiologic
and toxicologic studies of the health effects of particulate matter components.
Res. Report 177, 5–13 (2013).
26. Fann, N., Kim, S., Olives, C. & Sheppard, L. Estimated changes in life
expectancy and adult mortality resulting from declining PM2.5 exposures in
the contiguous United States: 1980–2010. Environ. Health Perspect. 125, 1–8
(2017). Regulations have been successful in reducing PM2.5 emissions in the
U.S. In this study, PM2.5 concentrations were estimated for 1980, 1990, 2000,
and 2010. The population-weighted PM2.5 exposures decreased by about a
half between 1980 and 2010, corresponding to a significant change in
attributable excess deaths, declining by about a third.
27. Ito, K. et al. Fine particulate matter constituents associated with cardiovascular
hospitalizations and mortality in New York City. Environ. Health Perspect.
119, 467–473 (2011).
28. Thurston, G. & Lippmann, M. Ambient particulate matter air pollution and
cardiopulmonary diseases. Semin. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 36, 422–432 (2015).
29. Chen, H. et al. Living near major roads and the incidence of dementia,
Parkinson’s disease, and multiple sclerosis: a population-based cohort study.
Lancet 6736, 1–9 (2017).
30. Eze, I. C. et al. Long-term exposure to transportation noise and air pollution in
relation to incident diabetes in the SAPALDIA study. Int. J. Epidemiol. 46,
1115–1125 (2017).
31. Bowe, B. et al. Associations of ambient coarse particulate matter, nitrogen
dioxide, and carbon monoxide with the risk of kidney disease: a cohort study.
Lancet Planet. Health 1, e267–e276 (2017).
32. Dominici, F., Sheppard, L. & Clyde, M. Health effects of air pollution: a
statistical review. Int. Stat. Rev. 71, 243–276 (2007).
33. Fann, N., Wesson, K. & Hubbell, B. Characterizing the confluence of air
pollution risks in the United States. Air Qual. Atmos. Health 9, 293–301
(2016).
34. Landrigan, P. J. The hidden costs of environmental contamination. Eur.
Respir. J. 40, 286–288 (2012).
35. Gowers, A. M., Miller, B. G., & Stedman, J. R. Estimating Local Mortality
Burdens Associated With Particulate Air Pollution. Centre for Radiation,
Chemical and Environmental Hazards, Public Health England
(2014).
36. World Health Organization. WHO Global Urban Ambient Air Pollution
Database (update 2016). http://www.who.int/phe/health_topics/outdoorair/
databases/cities/en/ (2016).
37. Cohen, A. J. et al. Estimates and 25-year trends of the global burden of disease
attributable to ambient air pollution: an analysis of data from the Global
Burden of Diseases Study 2015. Lancet 389, 1907–1918 (2017). This global
burden analysis finds that ambient PM2.5 was the fifth-ranking mortality
risk factor in 2015, responsible for 4.2 million deaths. The attributable
deaths have been increasing over the past 25 years, due to aging populations,
increases in non-communicable diseases, and increasing air pollution levels
in low-income and middle-income countries.
38. Burnett, R. et al. Global estimates of mortality associated with long-term
exposure to outdoor fine particulate matter. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 115,
9592–9597 (2018).
39. Akinbami, L. J., Moorman, J. E. & Liu, X. Asthma prevalence, health care use,
and mortality: United States, 2005–2009. Natl Health Stat. Report 32, 1–14
(2011).
40. Landrigan, P. J., Schechter, C. B., Lipton, J. M., Fahs, M. C. & Schwartz, J.
Environmental pollutants and disease in American children: estimates of
morbidity, mortality, and costs for lead poisoning, asthma, cancer, and
developmental disabilities. Environ. Health Perspect. 110, 721–728 (2002).
41. McConnell, R. et al. Childhood incident asthma and traffic-related air
pollution at home and school. Environ. Health Perspect. 118, 1021–1026
(2010).
42. Anderson, H. R., Favarato, G. & Atkinson, R. W. Long-term exposure to air
pollution and the incidence of asthma: meta-analysis of cohort studies. Air
Qual. Atmos. Health 6, 47–56 (2013).
43. Bowatte, G. et al. The influence of childhood traffic-related air pollution
exposure on asthma, allergy and sensitization: a systematic review and a meta-
analysis of birth cohort studies. Allergy 70, 245–256 (2015).
44. Nauenberg, E. & Basu, K. Effect of insurance coverage on the relationship
between asthma hospitalizations and exposure to air pollution. Public Health
Rep. 114, 135–48 (1999).
45. Gwynn, R. C. & Thurston, G. D. The burden of air pollution: Impacts among
racial minorities. Environ. Health Perspect. 109, 501–506 (2001).
46. Di, Q. et al. Air pollution and mortality in the medicare population. N. Engl. J.
Med. 376, 2513–2522 (2017).
47. Jans, J., Johansson, P. & Nilsson, J. P. Economic status, air quality, and child
health: evidence from inversion episodes. J. Health Econ. 61, 220–232 (2018).
48. American Lung Association. State of the Air. https://www.lung.org/assets/
documents/healthy-air/state-of-the-air/state-of-the-air-2017.pdf
(2017).
49. Guo, Y. et al. The burden of air pollution on years of life lost in Beijing, China,
2004–2008: retrospective regression analysis of daily deaths. Br Med J 347,
1–10 (2013).
50. Markandya, A. et al. Health co-benefits from air pollution and mitigation costs
of the Paris Agreement: a modelling study. Lancet Planet. Health 2, e126–e133
(2018).
51. Ito, K. et al. Intraurban variation of fine particle elemental concentrations in
New York City. Environ. Sci. Technol. 50, 7517–7526 (2016).
52. Ross, Z. et al. Spatial and temporal estimation of air pollutants in New York
City: exposure assignment for use in a birth outcomes study. Environ. Health
12, 51 (2013).
53. Thurston, G. D., Ito, K. & Lall, R. A source apportionment of U.S. fine
particulate matter air pollution. Atmos. Environ. 45, 3924–3936 (2011).
54. Walton, H., Dajnak, D., Beevers, S., Williams, M., Watkiss, P., & Hunt, A.
Understanding the Health Impacts of Air Pollution in London (2015).
55. Gao, M., Cao, J. & Seto, E. A distributed network of low-cost continuous
reading sensors to measure spatiotemporal variations of PM2.5 in Xi’an,
China. Environ. Pollut. 199, 56–65 (2015).
56. Heimann, I. et al. Source attribution of air pollution by spatial scale separation
using high spatial density networks of low cost air quality sensors. Atmos.
Environ. 113, 10–19 (2015).
57. Zikova, N. et al. Estimating hourly concentrations of PM2.5 across a
metropolitan area using low-cost particle monitors. Sensors17, 1–19
(2017).
58. Morawska, L. et al. Applications of low-cost sensing technologies for air
quality monitoring and exposure assessment: How far have they gone?
Environ. Int. 116, 286–299 (2018). Numerous sensor technologies with
varying prices and performance capabilities have entered the market in the
past few years. This review provides a comprehensive overview of recent
technological advancements and research applications to date.
59. Shi, Y., Lau, K. K.-L. & Ng, E. Developing Street-Level PM 2.5 and PM 10 land
use regression models in high-density Hong Kong with urban morphological
factors. Environ. Sci. Technol. 50, 8178–8187 (2016).
60. Hatzopoulou, M. et al. Robustness of land-use regression models developed
from mobile air pollutant measurements. Environ. Sci. Technol. 51, 3938–3947
(2017).
61. Hankey, S. & Marshall, J. D. Land Use Regression Models of On-Road
Particulate Air Pollution (Particle Number, Black Carbon, PM2.5, Particle
Size) Using Mobile Monitoring. Environ. Sci. Technol. 150702142726005.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.5b01209 (2015)
62. Apte, J. S. et al. High-resolution air pollution mapping with google street view
cars: exploiting big data. Environ. Sci. Technol. 51, 6999–7008 (2017). This
work represents a significant advancement in air pollution mapping and
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-09155-4
REVIEW ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |   (2019) 10:1236 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-09155-4 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
9
 modeling methodology. The researchers employed a mobile sampling method
to measure air pollutants on Google Street View cars in San Francisco, and
used the collected data to model fine scale air pollution concentration levels.
63. Hasenfratz, D. et al. Deriving high-resolution urban air pollution maps using
mobile sensor nodes. Pervasive Mob. Comput. 16, 268–285 (2015).
64. Yinon, L. & Thurston, G. An evaluation of the health benefits achieved at the
time of an air quality intervention in three Israeli cities. Environ. Int. 102,
66–73 (2017).
65. Tonne, C., Beevers, S., Armstrong, B., Kelly, F. & Wilkinson, P. Air pollution
and mortality benefits of the London Congestion Charge: spatial and
socioeconomic inequalities. Occup. Environ. Med. 65, 620–627
(2008).
66. Clougherty, J. E. et al. Intra-urban spatial variability in wintertime street-level
concentrations of multiple combustion-related air pollutants: the New York
City Community Air Survey (NYCCAS). J. Expo. Sci. Environ. Epidemiol. 23,
232–240 (2013).
67. NYT Editorial. Black Soot and Asthma. The New York Times. https://www.
nytimes.com/2006/11/19/opinion/nyregionopinions/black-soot-and-asthma.
html (2006).
68. Cornell, A. G. et al. Domestic airborne black carbon and exhaled nitric oxide
in children in NYC. J. Expo. Sci. Environ. Epidemiol. 22, 258–266
(2012).
69. Spira-Cohen, A., Chen, L. C., Kendall, M., Lall, R. & Thurston, G. D. Personal
exposures to traffic-related air pollution and acute respiratory health among
bronx schoolchildren with asthma. Environ. Health Perspect. 119, 559–565
(2011).
70. Chan, S. New Effort to Crack Down on Engine Idling. The New York Times City
Room Blog Post. https://cityroom.blogs.nytimes.com/2009/01/28/new-efforts-
to-crack-down-on-engine-idling (2009).
71. Hernández, D. Clean heat: a technical response to a policy innovation.
Cityscape 18, 277–282 (2016).
72. Greenemeier, L. NYC Cyclist Air Quality Study. Scientific American. https://
www.scientificamerican.com/citizen-science/nyc-cyclist-air-quality-study
(2015).
73. Hankey, S., Lindsey, G. & Marshall, J. D. Population-level exposure to
particulate air pollution during active travel: planning for low-exposure,
health-promoting cities. Environ. Health Perspect. 125, 527–534 (2016). This
work explored population-level patterns in exposure during active travel and
association of such patterns with the built environment, finding that active
travel often occurs on high-traffic streets or high-pollution locations. The
findings highlight the interplay between urban design and public health, as
benefits of physical activity and hazards posed by air pollution need to be
considered and balanced.
74. de Nazelle, A. et al. A travel mode comparison of commuters’ exposures to air
pollutants in Barcelona. Atmos. Environ. 59, 151–159 (2012).
75. Rivas, I., Kumar, P. & Hagen-Zanker, A. Exposure to air pollutants during
commuting in London: Are there inequalities among different socio-economic
groups? Environ. Int. 101, 143–157 (2017).
76. Weichenthal, S. et al. Traffic-related air pollution and acute changes in heart
rate variability and respiratory function in urban cyclists. Environ. Health
Perspect. 119, 1373–1378 (2011).
77. Sinharay, R. et al. Respiratory and cardiovascular responses to walking down a
traffic-polluted road compared with walking in a traffic-free area in
participants aged 60 years and older with chronic lung or heart disease and
age-matched healthy controls: a randomised, crosso. Lancet 391, 339–349
(2017).
78. Giorgini, P., Rubenfire, M., Bard, R., Jackson, E., Ferri, C. & Brook, R. D. Air
pollution and exercise: a review of the cardiovascular implications for health
care professionals. J. Cardiopulm. Rehabil. Prev. 36, 84–95 (2016).
79. Cakmak, S., Dales, R., Leech, J. & Liu, L. The influence of air pollution on
cardiovascular and pulmonary function and exercise capacity: Canadian
Health Measures Survey (CHMS). Environ. Res. 111, 1309–1312 (2011).
80. Rojas-Rueda, D. et al. Health impacts of active transportation in Europe. PLoS
One 11, 1–14 (2016). This study estimated the potential health benefits and
risks of promoting active transportation in six European cities using two
scenarios: increased cycling and increased walking amongst communing
populations. These scenarios produced health benefits in all six cities due to
benefits of increased physical activity levels.
81. Nyhan, M. et al. “Exposure Track”—the impact of mobile-device-based
mobility patterns on quantifying population exposure to air pollution.
Environ. Sci. Technol. 50, 9671–9681 (2016).
82. Tang, R. et al. Integrating travel behavior with land use regression to estimate
dynamic air pollution exposure in Hong Kong. Environ. Int. 113, 100–108
(2018).
83. Van den Bossche, J. et al. Opportunistic mobile air pollution monitoring: a
case study with city wardens in Antwerp. Atmos. Environ. 141, 408–421
(2016).
84. Castell, N. et al. Mobile technologies and services for environmental
monitoring: the Citi-Sense-MOB approach. Urban Clim. 14, 370–382
(2015).
85. English, P. B. et al. The Imperial County Community Air Monitoring
Network: a model for community-based environmental monitoring for public
health action. Environ. Health Perspect. 125, 074501 (2017). Proliferation of
low-cost sensors allows for both communities and regulatory agencies to
generate real-time air quality data. This paper provides description of a
collaborative project in Imperial County, California, between community
members, researchers, non-profits, and government partners to establish an
air pollution monitoring network of 40 low-cost sensors.
86. AB-617 Nonvehicular Air Pollution: Criteria Air Pollutants and Toxic Air
Contaminants. https://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/faces/billNavClient.xhtml?
bill_id=201720180AB617 (2017).
87. Yang, L., Li, W., Ghandehari, M. & Fortino, G. People-centric cognitive
internet of things for the quantitative analysis of environmental exposure.
IEEE Internet Things J. 5(4), 2353–2366 (2018).
88. Vineis, P. et al. The exposome in practice: design of the EXPOsOMICS
project. Int. J. Hyg. Environ. Health 220, 142–151 (2017).
89. Ausiello, D. & Lipnick, S. Real-time assessment of wellness and disease in daily
life. Big Data 3, 203–208 (2015).
90. Fonken, L. K. et al. Air pollution impairs cognition, provokes depressive-like
behaviors and alters hippocampal cytokine expression and morphology. Mol.
Psychiatry 16, 987–995 (2011).
91. Kioumourtzoglou, M.-A. et al. The association between air pollution and onset
of depression among middle-aged and older women. Am. J. Epidemiol. 185,
801–809 (2017).
92. Nyhan, M., McNabola, A. & Misstear, B. Comparison of particulate matter
dose and acute heart rate variability response in cyclists, pedestrians, bus and
train passengers. Sci. Total Environ. 468–469, 821–831 (2013).
93. Riediker, M., Franc, Y., Bochud, M., Meier, R. & Rousson, V. Exposure to fine
particulate matter leads to rapid heart rate variability changes. Front. Environ.
Sci. 6, 1–9 (2018).
94. Dons, E. et al. Wearable sensors for personal monitoring and estimation of
inhaled traffic-related air pollution: evaluation of methods. Environ. Sci.
Technol. 51, 1859–1867 (2017).
95. Su, J. G. et al. Feasibility of deploying inhaler sensors to identify the impacts of
environmental triggers and built environment factors on asthma short-acting
bronchodilator use. Environ. Health Perspect. 125, 254–261 (2017). Asthma
epidemiology studies usually relied on self-reported symptoms in the past,
but advancement of wearable technologies and mobile health platforms
provide novel opportunities. This study equipped sensors on asthma inhalers
and explored the association between environmental exposures and inhaler
use among 140 participants, successfully identifying several environmental
triggers.
96. The Human Project. https://www.thehumanproject.org. Accessed Auguest 1,
2018.
97. Neidell, M. Information, avoidance behavior, and health: the effect of ozone
on asthma hospitalizations. J. Hum. Resour. 44, 450–478 (2009).
98. Moretti, E. & Neidell, M. Pollution, health, and avoidance behavior: evidence
from the ports of Los Angeles. J. Hum. Resour. 46, 154–75 (2011).
99. US Department of Health and Human Services. The Health Consequences of
Smoking—50 Years of Progress: A Report of The Surgeon General. https://www.
surgeongeneral.gov/library/reports/50-years-of-progress/full-report.pdf
(2014).
100. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. How tobacco smoke causes
disease: The Biology and Behavioral Basis for Smoking-attributable Disease: A
Report of the Surgeon General. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
NBK53017/pdf/Bookshelf_NBK53017.pdf (2010).
Acknowledgements
We thank Ari Patrinos, David Cesarini, Juan Pablo Mora Lopez, Rebecca Rosen, Gian-
mattia Verzella, and the staff at the NYC Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
(DOHMH) for their facilitation, advice, contributions, and guidance. We also thank Amy
Stinchcombe, manuscript editor.
Author contributions
M.G. is the primary author and contributing domain on the quantitative assessment of
pollution. A.C. is the contributing author with focus on the policy assessments. G.T. is
the contributing author with focus on the health impacts. C.L. is the contributing author
with focus on the citizen-based methods and literature compilations. P.G. gave con-
tributions on drafting the approach for the Human Project.
Additional information
Supplementary Information accompanies this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-
019-09155-4.
REVIEW ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-09155-4
10
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2019) 10:1236 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-09155-4 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
 Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.
Reprints and permission information is available online at http://npg.nature.com/
reprintsandpermissions/
Journal peer review information: Nature Communications thanks the anonymous
reviewers for their contribution to the peer review of this work.
Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2019
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-09155-4
REVIEW ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |   (2019) 10:1236 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-09155-4 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
11
