 A Brain–Spinal Interface Alleviating Gait Deficits after Spinal 
Cord Injury in Primates
Marco Capogrosso1,2,*, Tomislav Milekovic1,*, David Borton1,3,*, Fabien Wagner1,£, Eduardo 
Martin Moraud2,£, Jean-Baptiste Mignardot1, Nicolas Buse4, Jerome Gandar1, Quentin 
Barraud1, David Xing3, Elodie Rey1, Simone Duis1, Yang Jianzhong5, Wai Kin D. Ko5, Qin 
Li5,6, Peter Detemple6, Tim Denison4, Silvestro Micera2,8,&, Erwan Bezard5,6,9,10,&, Jocelyne 
Bloch11,&, and Grégoire Courtine1,11
1International foundation for Research in Paraplegia chair in Spinal Cord Repair, Center for 
Neuroprosthetics and Brain Mind Institute, School of Life Sciences, Swiss Federal Institute of 
Technology (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland 2Bertarelli Foundation Chair in Translational 
Neuroengineering, Center for Neuroprosthetics and Institute of Bioengineering, School of 
Bioengineering, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland 3School of Engineering, Brown University 
Providence, USA 4Medtronic, Minneapolis, USA 5Motac neuroscience Ltd, Manchester, UK 
6Institute of Lab Animal Sciences, China Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, China 
7Fraunhofer ICT-IMM, Mainz, Germany 8The BioRobotics Institute, Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna, 
Pisa, Italy 9University of Bordeaux, Institut des Maladies Neurodégénératives, UMR 5293, 
Bordeaux, France 10CNRS, Institut des Maladies Neurodégénératives, UMR 5293, Bordeaux, 
France 11Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois (CHUV), Lausanne, Switzerland
Abstract
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Corresponding author: Grégoire Courtine, PhD, Professor, International Paraplegic Foundation Chair in Spinal Cord Repair, Center for 
Neuroprosthetics and Brain Mind Institute, SWISS FEDERAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY (EPFL), CH-1015 Lausanne, 
gregoire.courtine@epfl.ch.
*, £, &contributed equally to this work
Author Contributions. M.C., T.M. and D.B. contributed equally to this work. S.M., E.B. and J.B. contributed equally to this work. 
M.C. developed the spinal cord stimulation protocols and the routines for the identification of flexion and extension hotspots. T.M. 
developed the brain decoder and the decoder calibration routines. D.B. developed the experimental platform. M.C., T.M., F.W. and 
E.M.M. performed all the behavioural experiments with help from D.B., J.G., Y.J. and G.C.; M.C., T.M. and F.W. analysed the data, 
with input from E.M.M., J.B.M. and D.X.; M.C., T.M., F.W., E.M.M. and J.G. developed the real-time software application. N.B. and 
T.D. developed the Neural Research Programmer, with input from M.C., D.B., T.M., F.W. and J.G. Q.B. and E.R. processed the 
anatomical data. Y.J. trained all the monkeys. W.K.D.K., Q.L. and E.B. managed experimental protocols and procedures. P.D. 
developed and produced the spinal implants from design by M.C., D.B., J.B. and G.C.; J.B., D.B., Q.L. and G.C. performed the 
surgeries. G.C., S.M., E.B., J.B., and P.D. secured funding for the study. G.C. conceived and supervised the study. G.C. wrote the 
paper with M.C., T.M. and F.W., and all the authors contributed to its editing.
Author Information. Data that supports the findings and software routines developed for the data analysis will be made available 
upon reasonable request to the corresponding author at gregoire.courtine@epfl.ch. Reprints and permissions information is available at 
www.nature.com/reprints.
The authors declare competing financial interests: G.C., D.B., M.C., S.M., E.M.M. and J.B. hold various patents in relation with the 
present work. T.D. and N.B are Medtronic employees. In review of the manuscript they contributed to technical accuracy but did not 
influence the results or the content of the manuscript. E.B. reports personal fees from Motac Neuroscience Ltd UK and is a 
shareholder of Motac Holding UK and Plenitudes SARL France. G.C., S.M. and J.B. are founders and shareholders of G–Therapeutics 
BV.
Europe PMC Funders Group
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 09.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2016 November 10; 539(7628): 284–288. doi:10.1038/nature20118.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Spinal cord injury disrupts the communication between the brain and the spinal circuits that 
orchestrate movement. To bypass the lesion, brain–computer interfaces1–3 have directly linked 
cortical activity to electrical stimulation of muscles, which have restored grasping abilities after 
hand paralysis1,4. Theoretically, this strategy could also restore control over leg muscle activity 
for walking5. However, replicating the complex sequence of individual muscle activation patterns 
underlying natural and adaptive locomotor movements poses formidable conceptual and 
technological challenges6,7. Recently, we showed in rats that epidural electrical stimulation of the 
lumbar spinal cord can reproduce the natural activation of synergistic muscle groups producing 
locomotion8–10. Here, we interfaced leg motor cortex activity with epidural electrical stimulation 
protocols to establish a brain–spinal interface that alleviated gait deficits after a spinal cord injury 
in nonhuman primates. Rhesus monkeys were implanted with an intracortical microelectrode array 
into the leg area of motor cortex; and a spinal cord stimulation system composed of a spatially 
selective epidural implant and a pulse generator with real-time triggering capabilities. We designed 
and implemented wireless control systems that linked online neural decoding of extension and 
flexion motor states with stimulation protocols promoting these movements. These systems 
allowed the monkeys to behave freely without any restrictions or constraining tethered electronics. 
After validation of the brain–spinal interface in intact monkeys, we performed a unilateral 
corticospinal tract lesion at the thoracic level. As early as six days post-injury and without prior 
training of the monkeys, the brain–spinal interface restored weight-bearing locomotion of the 
paralyzed leg on a treadmill and overground. The implantable components integrated in the brain–
spinal interface have all been approved for investigational applications in similar human research, 
suggesting a practical translational pathway for proof-of-concept studies in people with spinal cord 
injury.
A century of research in spinal cord physiology has demonstrated that the circuits embedded 
in lumbar segments of mammals can produce coordinated patterns of leg motor activity 
without brain input11,12. Various neuromodulation approaches have been developed to 
activate these circuits after injury to reestablish locomotion8,13–17. For example, epidural 
electrical stimulation (EES) of lumbar segments restored adaptive locomotion in paralyzed 
rats8. Recent studies showed that EES is also capable of activating lumbar spinal circuits in 
people with paraplegia14,16.
These empirical observations prompted us to develop an evidenced-based framework to 
understand the interactions between EES and spinal circuits8–10. We aimed to exploit this 
knowledge to optimize stimulation protocols for clinical applications. Computational 
modelling and functional experiments revealed that EES engages spinal circuits through the 
modulation of proprioceptive feedback circuits10. This framework guided the design of 
spatiotemporal neuromodulation therapies that not only activate but also control the activity 
of spinal circuits engaging synergistic muscle groups8–10, enabling robust modulation of 
locomotor movements in rats whose spinal cords were void of brain input.
However, volitional locomotion requires the brain to control the activity of spinal circuits. 
Brain–computer interface technologies1–4,18 provide the tools to link the intended motor 
states to EES protocols19–21 to reestablish voluntary control of locomotion after injury. For 
these developments, nonhuman primates are more appropriate models than rodents since 
Capogrosso et al.
Page 2
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 they exhibit cortical engagement during locomotion similar to humans22, analogous 
recovery mechanisms from injury23, and comparable technological requirements24. Here, 
we decoded motor states from leg motor cortex activity to trigger EES protocols facilitating 
extension and flexion of the corresponding leg. We show that this brain–spinal interface 
alleviated gait deficits after spinal cord injury in nonhuman primates.
To support the development of the brain–spinal interface, we established a wireless 
recording and stimulation platform in freely behaving, unconstrained and untethered 
nonhuman primates (Fig. 1 and Supplementary Video 1). Rhesus monkeys (Supplementary 
Table 1) were implanted with a microelectrode array into the leg area of the left motor cortex 
to record spiking activity from neuronal ensembles. Electromyographic signals were 
monitored using bipolar electrodes implanted into antagonist muscles spanning each joint of 
the right leg. Wireless modules enabled transmission of neural (20kHz) and 
electromyographic (2kHz) signals to external receivers25. We simultaneously acquired video 
recordings (100Hz) to reconstruct whole-body kinematics23. To deliver EES, we used 
technologies previously developed in rats9, which we adapted to the characteristics of spinal 
segments and vertebras measured in three monkeys (Extended Data Fig.1). These spinal 
implants were inserted into the epidural space over lumbar segments, and connected to an 
implantable pulse generator commonly used for deep brain stimulation therapy. We 
engineered wireless communication modules that enabled control over the spatial and 
temporal parameters of EES with a latency of about 100ms (Extended Data Fig.2).
We first used well-established methods9,26 to identify the natural spatiotemporal pattern of 
motoneuron activation underlying locomotion. Our aim was to reproduce this pattern after 
injury. We conducted an anatomical tracing to identify the spatial distribution of motoneuron 
pools innervating antagonist muscles spanning each joint of the leg (Fig. 2a). We then 
projected the muscle activity recorded during locomotion onto motoneuron locations to 
visualize the spatiotemporal maps of motoneuron activation (Fig. 2c). These maps showed 
that locomotion involves the successive activation of well-defined hotspots located in 
specific regions of the spinal cord that were reproducible across monkeys (Extended Data 
Fig. 3). The most intense hotspots emerged in the caudal (L6/L7) and rostral (L1/L2) 
compartments of lumbar segments around the transitions between stance and swing phases. 
We labelled these hotspots extension and flexion hotspots, respectively.
EES activates motoneurons through the recruitment of large-diameter proprioceptive fibres 
within the dorsal roots10,27. To access the extension and flexion hotspots, we targeted the 
dorsal roots projecting to spinal segments containing these hotspots. We reconstructed the 
spatial trajectory of the dorsal roots innervating each lumbar segment, and integrated this 
information together with motoneuron distribution into a unified library (Fig. 2a). We 
utilized the entry points of the dorsal roots as the targeted anatomical landmarks that guided 
the design and positioning of spinal implants (Fig. 2b and Extended Data Fig. 1). 
Experiments in three sedated monkeys confirmed that single EES pulses delivered through 
the electrodes targeting the extension and flexion hotspots led to spinal segment activation 
that correlated with the activation of these hotspots during locomotion (Fig 2c-d and 
Extended Data Fig. 3).
Capogrosso et al.
Page 3
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 We next exploited cortical signals to decode the temporal structure of extensor and flexor 
hotspot activation. The spiking activity recorded from the left motor cortex displayed cyclic 
modulations that were phase-locked with right leg movements (Extended Data Fig. 4a). We 
developed a decoder that calculated the probability of foot strike and foot off events from 
this modulation to anticipate the activation of extensor and flexor hotspots associated with 
right leg movements (Extended Data Fig. 4b). Evaluations in two intact monkeys showed 
that the decoder accurately predicted these gait events in real-time over extended periods of 
locomotion, including when initiating and terminating gait, and during rest (Extended Data 
Fig. 5).
We then exploited our wireless platform to implement a brain–spinal interface — a system 
wherein the decoded motor states triggered EES protocols targeting the extension and 
flexion hotspots. We tested the capacity of the brain–spinal interface to modulate the 
extension and flexion hotspots independently and simultaneously in two intact monkeys 
during locomotion on a treadmill. We calibrated the decoder with temporal offsets that were 
tuned to trigger and terminate stimulation protocols concomitantly to the activation of each 
hotspot (Fig. 3a and Supplementary Methods). We used data without and with stimulation to 
calibrate the decoders4, which substantially improved decoding accuracy (Extended Data 
Fig. 5).
Without prior training of the monkeys, brain-controlled stimulation of the extension and 
flexion hotspots immediately modulated kinematic and muscle activity parameters related to 
the extension and flexion of the leg ipsilateral to stimulation (Fig. 3). A gradual increase in 
the frequency or amplitude of EES pulses led to a monotonic modulation of these 
parameters (Extended Data Fig. 6). We previously documented similar responses in 
rodents8–10, suggesting that the mechanisms underlying the modulation of spinal activity 
with EES are similar across mammals including humans14,16.
Finally, we tested the ability of the brain–spinal interface to alleviate locomotor deficits after 
a lesion of the corticospinal tract extending in the right dorsolateral column of mid-thoracic 
segments in two monkeys (Fig. 4a). Additional pathways were damaged, including the 
rubrospinal tract, dorsal column and reticulospinal fibres. This lesion initially led to a 
paralysis of the leg ipsilateral to the lesion, followed by an extensive yet incomplete 
recovery (Fig. 4b and Extended Data Fig. 7). During the first week after lesion and without 
training of the monkeys, the brain–spinal interface restored weight-bearing locomotion on a 
treadmill (Fig. 4b-c) and overground (Extended Data Fig. 8), improving both the quantity 
and quality of steps performed by the impaired leg (Fig. 4d-e, Extended Data Fig. 9 and 
Supplementary Video 1). The quantity and quality of steps was directly linked to the 
temporal structure of the stimulation (Extended Data Fig. 10).
Decoding accuracy declined shortly after lesion. Improvement of decoding performance 
during the following week suggested that this decrease was primarily due to the 
reorganization of cortical dynamics (Extended Data Fig. 9). This recovery coincided with 
improvement in the quantity and quality of steps, indicating that the monkeys had 
spontaneously regained some degree of neural control over the impaired leg (Extended Data 
Fig. 7). At this stage, the brain–spinal interface alleviated many of the remaining gait deficits 
Capogrosso et al.
Page 4
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 (Fig. 4d-e). Tuning EES frequency maximized the quantity and quality of steps, whereas the 
same stimulation protocols applied continuously failed to facilitate locomotion or were 
markedly less efficient than brain-controlled stimulation (Extended Data Fig. 10).
The recovery of coordinated, weight-bearing locomotion in a primate model of spinal cord 
injury emphasizes the therapeutic potential of the brain–spinal interface for clinical 
applications. We have integrated intracortical arrays2,3, wireless modules25 and pulse 
generators that have been approved for research applications in humans, opening realistic 
perspectives for proof-of-concept clinical studies.
Our brain–spinal interface exploits neuronal ensemble modulation that naturally occurs 
during locomotion, immediately linking cortical dynamics with spatiotemporal 
neuromodulation therapies without prior training of the monkeys. This ecological 
approach29 enabled a smooth cooperation between residual supraspinal signals and the 
brain–spinal interface in generating leg movements. Imaging30 and electrophysiological4 
studies showed that leg motor cortex dynamics is preserved in people with paralysis. 
Moreover, cortical activity modulates with intended movements in people with long-lasting 
tetraplegia, which allowed them to control robotic arms2,3 and neuromuscular stimulators4. 
These results suggest that the decoding strategy employed in this study may have useful 
application in people with paraplegia.
Our model of paralysis avoided many of the complications associated with severe injuries 
that are difficult to manage and ethically debatable in primates24. The use of a brain–spinal 
interface to restore bipedal locomotion in humans after severe injuries may require 
additional interventions, including monoaminergic replacement therapies13,19 
compensating for the interrupted source of serotonin from brainstem centres and robotic 
systems to sustain balance. Nevertheless, individuals with motor complete injuries regained 
weight-bearing standing and stepping-like movements during continuous EES14,16. 
Therefore, the conditions now exist to test the efficacy of the brain–spinal interface to 
enhance neuroplasticity21,28 during rehabilitation in people with spinal cord injury.
Methods
Animal Husbandry, Surgical Intervention and Behavioral Training
Animal husbandry—Experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and 
Use Committee of Bordeaux (CE50 – France) under the license number 50120102-A and 
performed in accordance with the European Union directive of September 22, 2010 
(2010/63/EU) on the protection of animals used for scientific purposes in an AAALAC-
accredited facility (Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing, China). Nine healthy male rhesus 
monkeys (Macaca mulatta, China; Supplementary Table 1) aged between 4 and 9 years old, 
and weighing between 4.3 and 8.4kg (6. 5 ± 0.5kg) were housed individually in cages 
designed according to European guidelines (2x1.6x1.26m). Environmental enrichment 
included toys and soothing music. All the monkeys are included in the manuscript. Only two 
monkeys received a spinal cord injury.
Capogrosso et al.
Page 5
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Surgical procedures—All the surgical procedures were performed under full anaesthesia 
induced with atropine (0.04 mg/kg) and ketamine (10 mg/kg, intramuscular injection) and 
maintained under 1-3% isoflurane after intubation. A certified functional neurosurgeon 
(J.B.) supervised all the surgical procedures. Surgical implantations were performed during a 
single operation lasting approximately 8 hours. We implanted a 96-channel microelectrode 
array (Blackrock Microsystems, pitch, 1.5mm) into the leg area of the left primary motor 
cortex1 (F4, Extended Table 1). The monkeys also received a wireless system2 (T33F-4, 
Konigsberg Instruments, USA) to record electromyographic signals from the following leg 
muscles: gluteus medius (GLU), iliopsoas (IPS), rectus femoris (RF), semitendinosus (ST), 
gastrocnemius medialis (GM), tibialis anterior (TA), extensor digitorum longus (EDL), and 
flexor hallucis longus (FHL). A custom-made spinal implant was inserted into the epidural 
space of the lumbar spinal cord according to previously described methods9. The implant 
was inserted at L4-L5 vertebrae and pulled until T13-L1 vertebrae. Electrophysiological 
testing was performed intra-operatively to adjust the position of the electrodes. Specifically, 
we verified that a single pulse of stimulation delivered through the most rostral and most 
caudal electrodes induced motor responses in the IPS and GM muscles, respectively. The 
connector of the implant, enclosed into a titanium orthosis, was secured to the vertebral bone 
using titanium screws (Vis MatrixMIDFACE, diameter 1.5 mm, length 8 mm, Synthes). The 
wires were routed subcutaneously to an implantable pulse generator inserted between 
intercostal muscles (See Supplementary Information).
Monkeys Q2 and Q3 received a spinal cord injury. A partial laminectomy was made at the 
T7/T8 level. A micro-blade was used to cut approximatively two thirds of the dorsoventral 
extent of the spinal cord. The lesion was completed using micro-scissors under microscopic 
observation. Animals retained bowel, bladder, and autonomic function after the injury.
The veterinary team continuously monitored the monkeys during the first hours after 
surgery, and numerous times daily during the seven subsequent days. A few hours after 
completion of surgical interventions, the animals were able to move around and feed 
themselves unaided. Clinical rating and monitoring scales were used to assess post/operative 
pain. Ketophen (2mg/kg; s.c.) and Metacam (0.2 mg/kg; s.c.) were administered once daily. 
Lidocaine cream was also applied to surgical wounds twice per day. The antibiotics 
ceftriaxone sodium (100 mg/kg; i.m.) was given immediately following surgery, and then 
once daily for 7 days.
Experimental Recordings
Monkeys were trained to walk on a treadmill and overground along a corridor 
(300x35x70cm). Plexiglas enclosures were used to maintain the monkeys within the field of 
view of the cameras. Food pellets and fruits rewarded appropriate behaviours. Additional 
food to complete daily dietary requirement was provided after training.
Single pulse stimulation in sedated monkeys—Monkeys were lightly sedated with 
ketamine (3.5 mg/kg), and suspended in the air using a jacket that did not impede leg 
movements. Single pulses of cathodic monopolar, charge-balanced stimulation (0.3ms, 1Hz) 
were delivered through the electrodes to elicit compound potentials in leg muscles. We 
Capogrosso et al.
Page 6
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 selected the active sites whose corresponding spatial maps of motoneuron activation showed 
the highest correlation with the hotspots.
Brain-controlled stimulation during locomotion on a treadmill in intact 
monkeys—Brain-controlled stimulation protocols were tested during locomotion on a 
treadmill at a comfortable speed (Q1, 2.0km/h; Q2, 1.6km/h). Recording sessions were 
organized as follows: first, we recorded two to five blocks of 1-2 minutes-long during 
stepping without stimulation. These baseline recordings were used to calibrate the decoders 
for real-time detection of foot off and foot strike gait events. Second, monkeys were 
recorded during brain-controlled stimulation protocols involving (i) solely the electrode 
targeting the extensor hotspot, (ii) solely the electrode targeting the flexor hotspot, and (iii) 
both electrodes. We tested the effects of stimulation frequency and amplitude over functional 
ranges (30 to 80Hz; 1.5 to 3.9 V). See Supplementary Table 2.
EES during locomotion in lesioned monkeys—Monkey Q2 and Q3 were recorded 
after injury as soon as they were able to sustain independent locomotion on the treadmill, 
which corresponded to 6 days and 16 days post-injury, respectively. Q3 recovered more 
slowly than Q2, probably due to more extensive ventral and lateral spinal cord damage 
(Extended Data Fig. 9). Therefore, monkey Q3 could only be recorded when appropriate 
behavioural and physical conditions were reached, which occurred two weeks post-injury. 
Due to restrictions on the total duration of the experiments (2 weeks), only one entire 
session could be conducted with this monkey. Following this experiment, the monkey 
rapidly recovered, which prevented evaluating the efficacy of the brain-spinal interface. The 
monkeys were recorded on the treadmill at their most comfortable speed (1.2-1.4km/h for 
monkey Q2 and 1.0 km/h for monkey Q3). Recording sessions were organized as follows. 
First, we recorded two to six blocks of 1-2 min without stimulation. These recordings were 
used to calibrate the decoders. Second, the decoders were used to test brain-controlled 
stimulation of both the extension and flexion hotspots over a range of stimulation 
frequencies. The effects of continuous stimulation using the same stimulation features as 
during brain-controlled stimulation were also tested. Within functional range of stimulation 
parameters, brain-controlled stimulation did not trigger undesired movements or spasms that 
impaired locomotor movements. See Supplementary Table 2.
Data Acquisition
Procedures to record kinematics and muscle activity have been detailed previously25,31. 
Whole-body kinematics was measured using the high-speed motion capture system SIMI 
(Simi Reality Motion Systems, Germany), combining 4 or 6 video-cameras (100Hz). 
Reflective white paint was directly applied on the shaved skin of the monkey overlying the 
following body landmarks of the right side: iliac crest, greater trochanter (hip), lateral 
condyle (knee), lateral malleolus (ankle), 5th metatarsophalangeal (mtp), and the outside tip 
of the fifth digit (toe). The Simi motion tracking software was used to obtain the 3D spatial 
coordinates of the markers. Joint angles were computed accordingly. Electromyographic 
signals were recorded simultaneously (2 kHz, Kronisberg, USA) and synchronized through 
the Blackrock Cerebrus system (Blackrock Microsystems, USA), which also recorded neural 
signals. For this, the Cereplex wireless system25 was mounted on the head of the monkeys. 
Capogrosso et al.
Page 7
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Six antennae and a receiver were used to transmit25 broadband neural signals (0.1 Hz – 7.8 
kHz, sampled at 22 kHz). The signals were band-pass filtered (500 Hz - 7.5 kHz) and 
spiking events were extracted through threshold crossings2,32–35. Specifically, a spiking 
event was defined on each channel (96 in total) if the signal exceeded 3.0 to 3.5 times its 
root mean square value calculated over a period of 5s. This procedure resulted in a binary 
signal from 96 multiunits, each originating from one of the 96 electrode of the array. Signals 
from all 96 multiunits have been integrated in the decoder.
Decoding of Motor States from Neural Signals
Our aim was to deliver stimulation over the extensor and flexor hotspots around the times at 
which these hotspots are active during natural locomotion. To this end, we decoded gait-
related motor states from neural activity and used those detections to trigger the stimulation 
protocols at the appropriate times. The control computer was connected to the local network 
and continuously received UDP packets containing neural recordings. We designed a custom 
in-house software application running on the control computer (Visual Studio C++ 2010), 
which analysed the neural signals in real time. Every 20ms, the application made a decision 
whether to trigger one of the spinal cord stimulation protocols. The decision was made based 
on probabilities of observing a “foot off” or a “foot strike” motor state given the history of 
neural data (300ms pre-lesion and 400ms post-lesion), as calculated by our decoders.
Natural activations of the extension and flexion hotspots were time-locked to foot off and 
foot strike gait events (fo and fs, respectively). In turn, we defined the foot off and foot strike 
motor states as the neural activity preceding foot off and foot strike gait events by ΔtFO and 
ΔtFS temporal offsets, respectively. The offsets were derived in order to maximize the 
overlap between the stimulation over the hotspots and the natural activation of those 
hotspots. In effect, the offsets integrated the latencies between the gait events and the hotspot 
activations, as well as latencies related to wireless communication between our devices, into 
the design of our decoders.
Extraction of motor states used for decoder calibration—We calibrated the 
decoders on data from two to seven no stimulation blocks recorded at the beginning of each 
session. Gait events were identified from electromyographic recordings (Q1) or from video 
recordings (Q2 and Q3). Identification of fo and fs gait events from electromyographic 
recordings was performed using signals from the iliopsoas muscle, which was active around 
the time of swing onset and remained active throughout most of the swing phase of gait. The 
fo and fs events were estimated by thresholding the envelope of the rectified 
electromyographic signal. Identification of fo and fs gait events from video recordings was 
performed visually. After injury and while the monkeys only exhibited minimal movements 
of the limb ipsilateral to lesion, fo and fs gait events were defined according to residual hip/
knee oscillations, which correlated with the attempt to execute steps.
Calibration procedure to account for stimulation-induced changes in neural 
signals—Analysis of the decoding temporal precision in Q1 revealed that decoded foot off 
and foot strike motor states during brain-controlled stimulation differed from the times of 
the motor states estimated from the foot off and foot strike gait events (median difference: 
Capogrosso et al.
Page 8
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 foot off: 68ms; foot strike: -90ms). We did not observe such difference when detecting motor 
states in the absence of stimulation (median difference: foot off: 11ms; foot strike: 3ms). A 
range of factors could have decreased decoding performance including: changes in 
somatosensory feedback influenced by the stimulation, monkeys’ attempts to adapt its gait, 
changes in stability, etc. To improve temporal accuracy of our decoder, we introduced a 
decoder recalibration process. The initial decoder, trained on data without stimulation, was 
used to trigger stimulation through the extension hotspot or flexion hotspot independently 
for 2 to 3 blocks each. The data collected during these blocks was then combined to the 
blocks without stimulation to calibrate a new, second decoder. This decoder successfully 
compensated for stimulation-induced changes in motor cortex activity (Fig 3. and Extended 
Data Fig. 5).
Duration of hotspot stimulation protocols—We sought to stimulate flexion and 
extension hotspots throughout the duration of their natural activation during locomotion. We 
determined the duration of the flexion and extension hotspot stimulation protocols by setting 
this duration to 300ms. We then recorded a few steps during brain-controlled stimulation, 
and adjusted the duration of the stimulation protocols for each monkey when necessary in 
order to obtain a clear modulation of leg kinematics. This procedure was performed only 
once for all pre-injury sessions and was repeated for each post-injury session.
Data Processing and Analysis
Code availability—The software routines utilized for data analysis will be made available 
upon reasonable request to the corresponding author.
Blinding—Data analyses, except identification of the steps and the marking of foot off and 
foot strike gait events from video recordings, were performed by automatic computer 
routines. When analyses required involvement of investigators, they were blind to the 
experimental conditions.
Spatiotemporal map of motoneuron activation—To visualize spatiotemporal maps 
of motoneuron activation, electromyographic signals were mapped onto the rostrocaudal 
distribution of the motoneurons reconstructed from histological analyses. This approach 
provides an interpretation of the motoneuron activation at a segmental level rather than at the 
individual muscle level.
Identification of extensor and flexor hotspots activation—Flexion and extension 
hotspots were identified from the mean spatiotemporal map of motoneuron activation for 
each monkey independently (n = 3 for Q1, P2 and P3). Single maps computed between two 
consecutive foot strike events were time-interpolated to a 1000 point map and averaged to 
obtain the mean spatiotemporal map of motoneuron activation. Flexion and extension 
hotspots were then identified by time-averaging the mean map around the foot off event 
(-10% + 20% of the gait cycle) for the flexion hotspot and around the foot strike event (-10% 
+ 30% of the gait cycle) for the extension hotspot.
Capogrosso et al.
Page 9
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Analysis of muscle recruitment curves—The compound potentials recorded in leg 
muscles were rectified and integrated for each muscle and stimulation amplitude, and 
represented in color-coded spatial maps of motoneuron activation. Instead of measuring 
specific flexor and extensor muscle selectivity we selected the electrodes that elicited spatial 
maps similar to those extracted during activation of the flexion and extension hotspots, 
regardless of muscle specificity. The correlation between the resulting map and the maps 
recorded during locomotion was calculated for each monkey to identify the voltage range 
over which the correlation was maximal. The derived voltage range was then used during 
behavioural experiments (Extended Data Fig. 3c).
Decoding performance quantification—We quantified the performance of our 
asynchronous decoders using confusion matrices and normalized mutual information, as 
described before36
Steps classification for kinematic analysis—In order to evaluate the efficacy of the 
brain-spinal interface and assess the importance of the timing of stimulation in correcting 
gait deficits, we conducted a post-hoc classification of the steps based on the temporal 
accuracy of the decoder to reproduce the desired hotspot activation timings. We defined 
optimal and sub-optimal steps according to the initiation of flexion and extension hotspot 
stimulation. All the gait cycles that contained only one correct extension activation 
(stimulation occurring at Foot Strike ± 125 ms) and only one correct flexion activation 
(stimulation occurring between Foot Off -200 ms and Foot Off +50 ms) were defined as 
optimal steps (Extended Data Fig. 10).
Stepping quantity—After the spinal cord lesion, the monkeys typically walked with the 
three intact limbs while the leg ipsilateral to the lesion was either dragging along the 
walking surface or maintained in a flexed posture. Occasionally, monkeys hopped to move 
both legs forward and avoid bumping against the back of the treadmill enclosure due to their 
inability to move at the selected treadmill belt speed. We counted the numbers of these 
“hop” and “bump” steps, as well as the numbers of normal steps. Experimenters were 
blinded to stimulation conditions during this analysis. To quantify the functional 
improvement mediated by the brain-spinal interface, we calculated the proportion of normal 
steps over all recorded blocks on a given day. To quantify the ability of the monkeys to 
sustain locomotion, we extracted all the events marked as steps, and measured the relative 
number of steps that were not performed while bumping into the back of the treadmill 
enclosure.
Stepping quality—A total of 26 parameters quantifying kinematics (Supplementary Table 
3) were computed for each step according to methods described in details previously8,9,31. 
We used principal component analysis (PCA) to visualize the changes in gait over time and 
for different conditions (Fig. 4, Extended Data Fig. 7, 8). To quantify locomotor 
performance, we calculated the mean Euclidian distance between steps corresponding to a 
given experimental condition and the mean of steps recorded before the lesion in the same 
monkey in the entire 26-dimensional space of kinematic parameters.
Capogrosso et al.
Page 10
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Anatomical Procedures
Tissue processing—Monkeys were deeply anesthetized and perfused transcardially with 
a 4% solution of paraformaldehyde. The spinal cord dura was removed and the spinal cord 
was cut using a cryostat, and stored at 4°C in 0.1M PBS azide (0.03%).
Anterograde tracing of motor cortex projections—Monkeys Q2 and Q3 underwent 
anterograde tracing of corticospinal projections from the leg and trunk area of the left motor 
cortex using anatomical tracers. All animals were anesthetized as described above. 
Biotinylated dextran amine (BDA; 10% solution in water; 10,000 Da; Molecular Probes, 
TSA PLUS Biotin KIT PerkinElmer, cat. NEL749A001KT) was injected at 300 nl/site into 
40 sites spanning the leg and trunk regions of the left motor cortex.
Quantification of the spinal cord lesion—Camera lucida reconstructions of the lesion 
(Neurolucida 11.0, MBF biosciences, USA) were performed using evenly spaced horizontal 
sections (1:4) throughout the whole dorsoventral axis on sections labelled for astrocytic 
(glial fibrillary acidic protein, GFAP; 1:1000, Dako, USA, cat. Z0334), NeuN (anti-NeuN; 
1:300, Millipore, cat. MAB377) and BDA reactivity. Immunoreactions were visualized with 
secondary antibodies labelled with Alexa fluor® 488 (1:400, Invitrogen, cat. A-11034) and 
647 (1:300, Invitrogen, cat. A-21235).
Statistical Procedures
All the computed parameters were quantified and compared within each monkey. All data 
are reported as mean values +/- standard error of the mean (s.e.m.). Significance was 
analysed using the non-parametric Wilcoxon rank sum test, bootstrapping or a Monte-Carlo 
approach.
Capogrosso et al.
Page 11
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data
Extended Data Figure 1. Design and fabrication of the spatially selective spinal implant
Step 1: Quantification of the length of vertebra T12 to L4, and of spinal segments L1 to S1. 
The photographs show coronal sections of the the left halves of the L3 and S1 spinal 
segments, including the dura mater, dorsal roots and spinal tissue. The complementary views 
show camera Lucida reconstructions of the dorsal roots, white and grey matter. The dorsal 
roots projecting to L1/L2 and L6/L7 spinal segments are color-coded to visualize their 
respective location. Step 2: 3D reconstruction of the entire lumbosacral spinal cord and 
Capogrosso et al.
Page 12
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 dorsal roots. The dorsal roots innervating spinal segments containing the targeted extension 
(L6, L7) and flexion (L1, L2) hotspots are color-coded to help visualize their respective 
spatial trajectory. The 3D reconstructions are displayed from a dorsal view, and from a view 
that is rotated by 45 deg leftward around the rostrocaudal axis in order to visualize the 
trajectory of the dorsal roots along spinal segments. Step 3: Design of the spatially selective 
spinal implants, including the location of the electrodes with respect to the dorsal roots, and 
positioning of the implants with respect to the vertebra. The cyan and magenta shapes 
highlight the electrodes targeting the flexor and extensor hotspots, respectively. Step 4: 
Mask layout of the spatially selective epidural spinal implant. Step 5: Fabrication of the 
spinal implants. Processing starts with deposition of a 40 µm thick Polyimide film by spin 
coating on the silicon substrate. The Polyimide-based bottom layer constituting the footprint 
of the implant is realized through ultra-violet lithography. A 200 nm thick gold layer is 
deposited using vacuum evaporation and lithographically structured to create a conductive 
seed pattern. An additional gold layer is electroplated to a height of approximately 6 µm to 
create the electrodes and interconnects. A 20 µm cover layer of photosensitive Polyimide is 
then applied by spin coating to uniformly cover the bottom and electrode structure. A final 
ultra-violet lithography is applied to structure the top layer of the implant, and to create 
openings over the electrodes and contact pads. The implants are gently released from the 
carrier wafer. To create a connector, the contact pads located at the extremity of the implant 
are glued to a small support plate made of medical grade poly-methyl methacrylate (PMMA) 
sheet material. Precision milled alignment structures allow fine adjustment of the support 
plate to the spinal implant, and to the extremity of the leads. The support plate contained a 
seat in which a tiny printed circuit board with conductive stripes is fixed. Stainless steel 
leads with silicone rubber insulation are directly soldered to the contact pads of the implant 
via the contact stripes located on the printed circuit board. The resulting implants and 
connective leads were highly reliable mechanically and electrically. A fixation structure was 
realized by using 3D laser sintering of medical grade titanium. Step 6: Photographs, 
including zoomed insets, showing a fabricated spinal implant and a micro-computed 
tomography scan performed after implantation.
Capogrosso et al.
Page 13
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 2. Protocols and technology of the spinal cord stimulation system.
Step 1: A Neural Research Programmer interface (screen snapshot) encodes stimulation 
protocols that are pre-programmed into a table uploaded to the implantable pulse generator. 
Each row of this table corresponds to a specific electrode configuration (cathodes and 
anodes) and stimulation features (amplitude, frequency, pulse width and duration of 
stimulation). During experiments, the control computer selects the rows to be executed. The 
plot reports the distribution of temporal delays introduced by the communication between 
the decoder and the Neural Research Programmer (n = 5000). Step 2: stimulation 
Capogrosso et al.
Page 14
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 commands are transmitted to the implantable pulse generator. Commands are first 
broadcasted via Bluetooth to a module that converts them into infrared signals transferred to 
the stimulation programmer device. The Bluetooth to infrared module and the stimulation 
programmer were embedded into a jacket worn by the monkeys during the experiments. The 
stimulation programmer transmitted the stimulation commands into the implantable pulse 
generator via induction telemetry. The antenna was placed under the jacket, in contact with 
the skin and aligned to the implantable pulse generator. The plot reports the distribution of 
delays needed to transmit the stimulation commands from the Neural Research Programmer 
to the implantable pulse generator. Step 3: The implantable pulse generator executed the 
selected stimulation protocols. After execution of the stimulation command, the implantable 
pulse generator switched to idle mode. The shape of a single charge balanced cathodic pulse 
is shown in the inset (1). The plot reports the distribution of time delays required to execute 
a single stimulation command by the implantable pulse generator.
Capogrosso et al.
Page 15
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 3. Anatomical, computational, and functional experiments allowed the 
identification of stimulation protocols to access flexion and extension hotspots
(a) Computational procedure to estimate spatiotemporal maps of motoneuron activation 
during locomotion. Step 1: Four pairs of antagonist muscles spanning each joint of the leg 
are implanted with bipolar electrodes to record electromyographic signals during 
locomotion. Step 2: Muscle activity recorded during locomotion on a treadmill is band pass 
filtered using a Butterworth 3rd order filter (30-800 Hz, monkey P3), Step 3: The signals are 
rectified, filtered with a low pass at 10 Hz, normalized to the maximum activity recorded 
Capogrosso et al.
Page 16
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 across all the gait cycles, and then projected onto the location of the corresponding 
motoneuron columns in the spinal cord for each of the recorded muscles. The estimated 
motoneuron activation is represented as a color-coded spatiotemporal map of motoneuron 
activation. (b) Spatiotemporal maps of motoneuron activation recorded in three intact 
monkeys (Q1, P2 and P3). The maps were obtained by averaging electromyographic signals 
recorded during continuous locomotion on a treadmill (n = 73, 25 and 24 steps for monkey 
Q1, P2 and P3, respectively). The maps underlying the activation of extension and flexion 
hotspots were extracted by averaging the estimated motoneuron activation around the foot 
strike and foot off events, respectively. For this, a window was defined from -10% to +30% 
of the gait cycle duration for the foot strike event, and from -10% to +20% of the gait cycle 
duration for the foot off event. The maps were reproducible across monkeys: correlation 
between monkey Q1, P2 and P3 for the flexion hotspot was 0.94, 0.90 and 0.90 for Q1-P2, 
Q1-P3 and P2-P3, respectively. Correlation between monkey Q1, P2 and P3 for the 
extension hotspot was 0.88, 0.90 and 0.60 for Q1-P2, Q1-P3 and P2-P3, respectively. The 
resulting maps were projected onto the reconstructed spinal segments (Extended Data Fig. 
1). (c) Recruitment curves showing the relationships between motor evoked potentials 
elicited by single pulses of epidural electrical stimulation in each of the recorded hindlimb 
muscles and the stimulation amplitude for three intact monkeys (Q1, Q2 and P1). 
Stimulation was delivered through the electrodes targeting the extension and flexion 
hotspots. The compound responses elicited in leg muscles were rectified and integrated to 
calculate the amplitude of the responses, and then projected on the reconstructed spinal 
segments. The spatial maps of motoneuron activation corresponding to the optimal range of 
stimulation amplitudes to access the hotspots stimulation are displayed for each monkey, 
including the location of the electrodes with respect to spinal segments. To compute the 
optimal range of stimulation amplitudes to access each hotspot, we extracted the stimulation 
amplitudes for which the spatial map of motoneuron activation displayed the highest values 
of correlation with the spatial maps of the targeted hotspots. The cyan and magenta shadings 
highlight the functional range of stimulation amplitude for each hotspot and monkey.
Capogrosso et al.
Page 17
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 4. Procedure to calibrate the decoders for real-time detection of motor 
states.
Step 1: The locomotor movements of the right leg were recorded using the video camera 
system. In parallel, neural signals were recorded from the microelectrode array implanted 
into the leg area of the primary motor cortex. The signals were band-pass filtered 
(0.5-7.5kHz). A threshold was at 3 to 3.5 times the standard deviation in order to obtain 
spike events. The two data streams were saved onto computers. Step 2: Visual inspection of 
the video frames allowed the identification of foot off and foot strike gait events. We 
estimated the spike rates from overlapping 150ms bins that were updated every 20ms. Gait 
events were then synchronized with the spike rate estimates using a trigger saved with the 
neural data that marked the onset of video recordings. Step 3: We extracted feature vectors 
that originated at foot off and foot strike events and assigned them to foot off and foot strike 
motor state classes, respectively. All other feature vectors were assigned to the neither class. 
Step 4: Motor state classes of feature vectors were used to calibrate a regularized linear 
discriminant analysis decoder. Step 5: The decoder was uploaded into our real-time analysis 
application running on the control computer. Neural data was collected in real-time, 
processed into spike rate estimates, and passed through the decoder that calculated the 
Capogrosso et al.
Page 18
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 probabilities of foot off and foot strike motor states. When one of the motor state 
probabilities crossed a threshold of 0.8, a command to trigger the flexion or extension 
hotspot stimulation protocols was sent to the neural research programmer, which relayed this 
instruction to the implanted pulse generator. Due to the wireless communication, the 
command was executed 178ms (Q1) or 105ms (Q2-3) after the detection of the motor states.
Extended Data Figure 5. The real-time decoder accurately detected the motor states and 
triggered stimulation protocols during locomotion and when initiating and terminating it in 
intact monkeys.
Capogrosso et al.
Page 19
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 (a) Example of a continuous sequence of locomotion (20 s) during brain-controlled flexion 
and extension stimulation in an intact monkey (Q2, pre-lesion session 2, Extended Table 2). 
Conventions are the same as in Figure 3. The real-time decoder correctly detected the 
succession of 22 foot off and foot strike motor states occurring in this sequence (vertical 
dotted lines), and appropriately triggered the relevant stimulation protocols throughout the 
locomotor sequence. (b) Histograms showing the distribution of the temporal differences 
between the actual occurrence of foot off and foot strike events and the decoded occurrence 
of these motor states for all the recording sessions of the tested intact monkeys (Q1, Q2). 
The dotted lines indicate the median for each distribution. For the monkey Q1, the decoders 
were calibrated using recordings without stimulation only. For the monkey Q2, we improved 
the accuracy of the decoders by performing the calibration twice. First, the decoders were 
recalibrated using recordings without stimulation. These decoders were used to collect 
recordings during brain-controlled flexion or brain-controlled extension independently. New 
decoders were then calibrated using all the combined recording blocks together. (c) 
Confusion matrices reporting the accuracy of the real-time decoders without stimulation and 
during brain-controlled stimulation, given a tolerance window or ±125ms. The bar plots 
report the normalized mutual information calculated for the real-time decoders compared to 
random decoders and chance level decoders. Random decoders were the same decoders 
calibrated using shuffled gait events. The chance level decoders randomly assigned motor 
states with chance level probabilities, which were estimated from the data used to calibrate 
the online decoders, and at the same rate as the online decoders. (d) Two examples of 
recordings collected while monkey Q1 and Q2 initiated or terminated sequences of 
continuous locomotion on a treadmill. The green shaded area indicates the period during 
which the treadmill was turned off. The brain-spinal interface was kept on throughout the 
recordings. Conventions are the same as in Figure 3. Probability of foot strike and foot off 
motor states remained low during the periods of rest, and recommenced to modulate with the 
occurrence of motor states when the monkey resumed continuous locomotion. The decoder 
confusion matrices were calculated during brain-controlled stimulation across all the 
sessions with intact monkeys during which the treadmill was turned off (n = 345 and n = 127 
temporal windows for Q1 and Q2). False positive detections were rare.
Capogrosso et al.
Page 20
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 6. Modulation of leg locomotor movements during brain-controlled 
stimulation in intact monkeys.
(a) PC analysis was applied on individual gait cycles extracted from locomotion on a 
treadmill without stimulation (n = 125 and n = 119 for Q1 and Q2) and during brain-
controlled stimulation of the extension (n = 33 and n = 54 gait cycles with stimulation for 
Q1 and Q2, respectively) or flexion (n = 98 and n = 120 total stimulation steps for Q1 and 
Q2, respectively) hotspots for the intact monkeys Q1 and Q2. Conventions are the same as in 
Figure 3 and Extended Data Figure 7. This analysis emphasizes the graded modulation of 
Capogrosso et al.
Page 21
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 gait parameters when increasing the frequency or amplitude of stimulation for extension and 
flexion hotspots independently. (b) Plots showing relationships between the amplitude or 
frequency of extensor (magenta) or flexor (cyan) hotspot stimulation and relevant kinematic 
or muscle activity parameter related to the extension or flexion of the right leg. The upper 
right plot shows the average foot trajectories during each experimental condition, illustrating 
the graded modulation of flexion during brain-controlled stimulation of the flexion hotspot. 
The lower right plot highlights the high degree of leg-specific modulation over the entire 
extent of tested stimulation parameters. Results were comparable in monkey Q1 and Q2. 
***,* p<0.001 and p<0.05, respectively. Wilcoxon rank sum test. Error bars, s.e.m.
Capogrosso et al.
Page 22
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 7. Quantification and reconstruction of the spinal cord lesions and 
quantification of gait deficits and spontaneous recovery after the spinal cord lesion.
(a) Scheme illustrating the anatomical experiments to quantify the lesion of the corticospinal 
tract. The anterograde anatomical tracer BDA was injected into the leg and trunk regions of 
the left primary motor cortex to label corticospinal tract fibres in the spinal cord, shown in 
pink in the photographs. Top-right scheme shows the approximate pathways of the dorsal 
ascending tract and all descending tracts identified from37,38. For monkey Q2 and Q3, the 
area of maximal damage was reconstructed in 2D by identifying the border of the glia scar 
Capogrosso et al.
Page 23
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 on evenly spaced sagittal sections spanning the entire dorsoventral extent of the lesioned 
spinal cord. (b,c,d,e) For each monkey, confocal photographs show longitudinal sections of 
the lesioned spinal cord at specific dorsoventral levels, as indicated with dotted lines. In each 
photograph, the following anatomical elements are labelled: astrocytes (GFAP, grey), neural 
cell bodies (NeuN, cyan) and corticospinal tract axons (BDA, pink). The insets show high-
resolution photographs of selected (white square) regions of the same photograph that 
illustrates intact corticospinal tract axons above the injury, axon retraction bulbs right above 
the lesion, and the absence of axons below the injury. Monkey Q2 displayed a small subset 
of spared corticospinal tract axons in the more dorsal aspect of the dorsolateral column. The 
asterisks indicate the location of the lesion. Scale bars, overviews: 500µm. Insets: 50µm. (f) 
Gait cycles were extracted from locomotion recorded in monkey Q2 and Q3 pre-lesion, 
during the first two weeks after the lesion, and at 99 days after the lesion. Analysis was only 
applied to gait cycles classified as steps, i.e. gait cycles classified as limb paralysis or 
stumbling were not included. The number of analysed gait cycles is directly reported into the 
figure. The bar plots report the mean Euclidean distance between all the steps under a given 
recording day without stimulation and steps recorded before the lesion, computed in the 
entire space of the 26 kinematic parameters. The other bar plots report mean values of 
relevant kinematic parameters. This analysis illustrates the progressive yet incomplete 
recovery of locomotion. ***, p < 0.001, Wilcoxon rank sum test. Error bars, s.e.m.
Capogrosso et al.
Page 24
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 8. Restoration of leg locomotor movements during overground locomotion 
after the spinal cord lesion.
(a) Representative sequences of locomotion along a straight corridor without stimulation and 
during brain-controlled stimulation recorded at 7 days and 13 days after the lesion for 
monkey Q2. Conventions are the same as in Figure 4. The bar plots report the mean step 
height of the right (lesioned) leg during swing. *, p<0.05, Wilcoxon rank sum test. Error bar, 
s.e.m. (b). Snapshots extracted from video recordings showing a representative sequence of 
leg movements during one gait cycle without stimulation and during brain-controlled 
Capogrosso et al.
Page 25
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 stimulation at 7 days post-injury for monkey Q2. The stick diagrams overlying the right 
(lesioned side) leg and the trajectory of the foot are color-coded using the same color 
scheme as the stick diagram decomposition in panel a. Without stimulation, the monkey 
dragged the leg along the ground, whereas brain-controlled stimulation restored weight-
bearing locomotion with plantar placement.
Extended Data Figure 9. Quantification of gait improvements and decoding accuracy during 
brain-controlled stimulation after the spinal cord lesion
Capogrosso et al.
Page 26
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 (a) Two successive gait cycles performed during locomotion on a treadmill without 
stimulation and during brain-controlled stimulation in monkey Q2 at 6 and 14 days post-
lesion, and in monkey Q3 at 16 days post-injury. Conventions are the same as in Figure 4. In 
addition, the average foot trajectories calculated over all the recorded gait cycles are 
displayed for each experimental condition including during pre-lesion locomotion, 
illustrating the marked improvement of foot movements during brain-controlled stimulation. 
(b) Bar plot reporting the mean values of the total excursion of the angle, step height and 
foot trajectory area for monkey Q2 and Q3 during locomotion pre-lesion and post-lesion 
without stimulation and with brain-controlled stimulation. Analysis was only applied to gait 
cycles classified as steps, i.e. gait cycles classified as limb paralysis or stumbling were not 
included (Q2: pre-lesion n = 294; day 6 post-lesion no stimulation: n = 6; brain control: n = 
12; day 14: no stimulation: n = 39; brain control: n = 93. Q3: pre-lesion n = 185; day 16 
post-injury no stimulation: n = 98; brain control: n = 31). ***,** p<0.001 and p<0.01, 
respectively. Wilcoxon rank sum test. Error bars, s.e.m. (c) Bar plots reporting the capacity 
of the monkeys to sustain walking at the imposed treadmill belt speed. The functional score 
is computed as the percentage of regular steps in which the animal is able to walk at the 
treadmill belt speed i.e. animal does not bump into the back of the treadmill. Gait cycles 
classified as hops or stumbling were not included. ***,* p<0.001 and p<0.05, respectively, 
Bootstrap. Error bars, s.e.m. (d) Decoding accuracy increases during recovery after the 
spinal cord lesion. Decoder confusion matrices calculated reporting the accuracy of the real-
time decoders and chance level decoder during brain-controlled stimulation for monkey Q2 
at day 6 (n = 76 foot strikes, n = 74 foot offs) and day 14 post-injury (n = 264 foot strikes, n 
= 264 foot offs) and for monkey Q3 at 16 days post-injury (n = 319 foot strikes, n = 321 foot 
offs). The tolerance window was set at ± 125ms. The bar plots report the normalized mutual 
information calculated for the real-time decoders compared to random decoders and chance 
level decoders. (e) Top, from left to right: mean event rate, modulation depth and preferred 
direction for the neuronal spiking signal recorded obtained by regressing spike rates against 
the phase of the gait cycle for monkeys Q1-3. Preferred direction was defined as the angle 
for which the fitted tuning function was at a maximum. Bottom, from left to right: mean 
absolute single-electrode difference for mean event rates, modulation depths and preferred 
directions between two consecutive sessions shown in (e) top. Analysis shows substantial 
changes both before and after the spinal-cord lesion. Nevertheless, the rate of change 
between the last pre-lesion and the first post-lesion sessions was substantially higher than 
between any two other session pairs, thus indicating increased level of plasticity following 
spinal cord lesion. ***,** significant difference at p < 0.001 and p < 0.01, respectively. 
Monte Carlo, Wilcoxon ranksum test, signed Wilcoxon ranksum test and Bootstrap. Error 
bars, s.e.m.
Capogrosso et al.
Page 27
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 10. The temporal structure and features of stimulation determine the 
quantity and quality of steps
(a) Two successive gait cycles performed during locomotion on a treadmill during brain-
controlled stimulation with optimal and suboptimal temporal structures at 6 days post-injury, 
and during continuous stimulation at 14 days post-lesion for monkey Q2. The gait cycles 
were classified as suboptimal temporal structures when stimulation occurred outside an 
± 125ms tolerance window. Conventions are the same as in Figure 4. (b) Bar plots reporting 
the quantity of steps calculated during locomotion with optimal and suboptimal temporal 
Capogrosso et al.
Page 28
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 structures over a range of stimulation frequencies and during continuous stimulation for 
monkey Q2 and Q3 at 6, 14 and 16days post-injury. (c) Bar plots reporting the quality of 
stepping for the same conditions as in panel b. The quality of stepping was measured as the 
mean Euclidean distance between pre-lesion and post-lesion gait cycles calculated in the 
kinematic space defined by the 26 gait parameters, as reported in Figure 4. These results 
show that the optimal temporal structure leads to an increased number of steps and improved 
quality of stepping compared to sub-optimal temporal structures. Moreover, brain-controlled 
stimulation with both optimal and suboptimal temporal structure promoted markedly 
improved locomotor performance compared to continuous stimulation delivered with the 
same stimulation features. These results also highlight the ability to optimize locomotor 
performance when tuning the stimulation frequency. ***,**,* significant difference at p < 
0.001, p < 0.01 and p < 0.05, respectively. Bootstrap (panel b). Wilcoxon ranksum test 
(panel c). Error bars, s.e.m.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgements
We thank Xing Rulin and Cheng Yunlong for providing support, taking care of the monkeys, performing behavioral 
training, and collecting data; Elvira Pirondini, Natalia Pavlova and Pavel Musienko for help with experiments; 
Jacquelin Courtine, Isabelle Pitteloud, Jasmina Rubattel, Laura Dalang and Romy Hasler for help with kinematic 
reconstruction; Jacquelin Courtine for the voice over in video; Julie Kreider for help with anatomy; and Jean 
Laurens for discussions and photographs. Illustration created by Jemere Ruby. This work was supported by 
Medtronic, the European Community's Seventh Framework Program [CP-IP 258654, NeuWALK], the International 
Paraplegic foundation (IRP), Starting Grant from the European Research Council [ERC 261247, Walk Again], the 
Wyss centre in Geneva, a Wings for Life Fellowship to G.C., a Marie Curie Fellowship to D.A.B. [331602, e-
WALK], Marie Curie COFUND EPFL fellowships to T.M. and F.W, a Morton Cure Paralysis Fund fellowship to 
T.M., and the Swiss National Science Foundation including the National Centre of Competence in Research 
(NCCR) in Robotics, Sino-Swiss Science and Technology Cooperation [IZLCZ3_156331], and NanoTera.ch 
program [SpineRepair].
References
1. Ethier C, Oby ER, Bauman MJ, Miller LE. Restoration of grasp following paralysis through brain-
controlled stimulation of muscles. Nature. 2012; 485:368–371. DOI: 10.1038/nature10987 
[PubMed: 22522928] 
2. Collinger JL, et al. High-performance neuroprosthetic control by an individual with tetraplegia. 
Lancet. 2013; 381:557–564. DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61816-9 [PubMed: 23253623] 
3. Hochberg LR, et al. Reach and grasp by people with tetraplegia using a neurally controlled robotic 
arm. Nature. 2012; 485:372–375. DOI: 10.1038/nature11076 [PubMed: 22596161] 
4. Bouton CE, et al. Restoring cortical control of functional movement in a human with quadriplegia. 
Nature. 2016; doi: 10.1038/nature17435
5. Mushahwar VK, Guevremont L, Saigal R. Could cortical signals control intraspinal stimulators? A 
theoretical evaluation. IEEE Trans Neural Syst Rehabil Eng. 2006; 14:198–201. DOI: 10.1109/
TNSRE.2006.875532 [PubMed: 16792293] 
6. Ho CH, et al. Functional electrical stimulation and spinal cord injury. Physical medicine and 
rehabilitation clinics of North America. 2014; 25:631–654. ix. DOI: 10.1016/j.pmr.2014.05.001 
[PubMed: 25064792] 
7. Kapadia N, et al. A randomized trial of functional electrical stimulation for walking in incomplete 
spinal cord injury: Effects on walking competency. J Spinal Cord Med. 2014; 37:511–524. DOI: 
10.1179/2045772314Y.0000000263 [PubMed: 25229735] 
Capogrosso et al.
Page 29
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 8. Wenger N, et al. Closed-loop neuromodulation of spinal sensorimotor circuits controls refined 
locomotion after complete spinal cord injury. Science translational medicine. 2014; 6:255ra133.doi: 
10.1126/scitranslmed.3008325
9. Wenger N, et al. Spatiotemporal neuromodulation therapies engaging muscle synergies improve 
motor control after spinal cord injury. Nature medicine. 2016; 22:138–145. DOI: 10.1038/nm.4025
10. Moraud EM, et al. Mechanisms Underlying the Neuromodulation of Spinal Circuits for Correcting 
Gait and Balance Deficits after Spinal Cord Injury. Neuron. 2016; 89:814–828. DOI: 10.1016/
j.neuron.2016.01.009 [PubMed: 26853304] 
11. Sherrington C. Flexion-reflex of the limb, crossed extension reflex, and reflex stepping and 
standing. J Physiol (Lond). 1910; 40:28–121. [PubMed: 16993027] 
12. Kiehn O. Decoding the organization of spinal circuits that control locomotion. Nat Rev Neurosci. 
2016; 17:224–238. DOI: 10.1038/nrn.2016.9 [PubMed: 26935168] 
13. Holinski BJ, Everaert DG, Mushahwar VK, Stein RB. Real-time control of walking using 
recordings from dorsal root ganglia. J Neural Eng. 2013; 10:056008.doi: 
10.1088/1741-2560/10/5/056008 [PubMed: 23928579] 
14. Angeli CA, Edgerton VR, Gerasimenko YP, Harkema SJ. Altering spinal cord excitability enables 
voluntary movements after chronic complete paralysis in humans. Brain : a journal of neurology. 
2014; 137:1394–1409. DOI: 10.1093/brain/awu038 [PubMed: 24713270] 
15. Gerasimenko Y, et al. Noninvasive Reactivation of Motor Descending Control after Paralysis. J 
Neurotrauma. 2015; doi: 10.1089/neu.2015.4008
16. Danner SM, et al. Human spinal locomotor control is based on flexibly organized burst generators. 
Brain : a journal of neurology. 2015; doi: 10.1093/brain/awu372
17. Barthelemy D, Leblond H, Rossignol S. Characteristics and mechanisms of locomotion induced by 
intraspinal microstimulation and dorsal root stimulation in spinal cats. J Neurophysiol. 2007; 
97:1986–2000. 00818.2006 [pii]. DOI: 10.1152/jn.00818.2006 [PubMed: 17215509] 
18. Shenoy KV, Carmena JM. Combining Decoder Design and Neural Adaptation in Brain-Machine 
Interfaces. Neuron. 2014; 84:665–680. DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.08.038 [PubMed: 25459407] 
19. Shanechi MM, Hu RC, Williams ZM. A cortical-spinal prosthesis for targeted limb movement in 
paralysed primate avatars. Nature communications. 2014; 5:3237.doi: 10.1038/ncomms4237
20. Zimmermann JB, Jackson A. Closed-loop control of spinal cord stimulation to restore hand 
function after paralysis. Frontiers in neuroscience. 2014; 8:87.doi: 10.3389/fnins.2014.00087 
[PubMed: 24904251] 
21. Nishimura Y, Perlmutter SI, Eaton RW, Fetz EE. Spike-timing-dependent plasticity in primate 
corticospinal connections induced during free behavior. Neuron. 2013; 80:1301–1309. DOI: 
10.1016/j.neuron.2013.08.028 [PubMed: 24210907] 
22. Lemon RN. Descending pathways in motor control. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2008; 31:195–218. DOI: 
10.1146/annurev.neuro.31.060407.125547 [PubMed: 18558853] 
23. Friedli L, et al. Pronounced species divergence in corticospinal tract reorganization and functional 
recovery after lateralized spinal cord injury favors primates. Science translational medicine. 2015; 
7:302ra134.doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aac5811
24. Courtine G, et al. Can experiments in nonhuman primates expedite the translation of treatments for 
spinal cord injury in humans? Nature medicine. 2007; 13:561–566.
25. Yin M, et al. Wireless Neurosensor for Full-Spectrum Electrophysiology Recordings during Free 
Behavior. Neuron. 2014; 84:1170–1182. DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.11.010 [PubMed: 25482026] 
26. Yakovenko S, Mushahwar V, VanderHorst V, Holstege G, Prochazka A. Spatiotemporal activation 
of lumbosacral motoneurons in the locomotor step cycle. J Neurophysiol. 2002; 87:1542–1553. 
[PubMed: 11877525] 
27. Rattay F, Minassian K, Dimitrijevic MR. Epidural electrical stimulation of posterior structures of 
the human lumbosacral cord: 2. quantitative analysis by computer modeling. Spinal Cord. 2000; 
38:473–489. [PubMed: 10962608] 
28. van den Brand R, et al. Restoring voluntary control of locomotion after paralyzing spinal cord 
injury. Science. 2012; 336:1182–1185. DOI: 10.1126/science.1217416 [PubMed: 22654062] 
29. Courtine G, Bloch J. Defining ecological strategies in neuroprosthetics. Neuron. 2015; 86:29–33. 
DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2015.02.039 [PubMed: 25856483] 
Capogrosso et al.
Page 30
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 30. Shoham S, Halgren E, Maynard EM, Normann RA. Motor-cortical activity in tetraplegics. Nature. 
2001; 413:793.doi: 10.1038/35101651 [PubMed: 11677592] 
31. Courtine G, et al. Kinematic and EMG determinants in quadrupedal locomotion of a non-human 
primate (Rhesus). J Neurophysiol. 2005; 93:3127–3145. [PubMed: 15647397] 
32. Fraser GW, Chase SM, Whitford A, Schwartz AB. Control of a brain-computer interface without 
spike sorting. J Neural Eng. 2009; 6:055004. S1741-2560(09)06199-0 [pii]. doi: 
10.1088/1741-2560/6/5/055004 [PubMed: 19721186] 
33. Hochberg LR, et al. Reach and grasp by people with tetraplegia using a neurally controlled robotic 
arm. Nature. 2012; 485:372–375. http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v485/n7398/abs/
nature11076.html -supplementary-information. [PubMed: 22596161] 
34. Gilja V, et al. Clinical translation of a high-performance neural prosthesis. Nature medicine. 2015; 
doi: 10.1038/nm.3953
35. Aflalo T, et al. Neurophysiology. Decoding motor imagery from the posterior parietal cortex of a 
tetraplegic human. Science. 2015; 348:906–910. DOI: 10.1126/science.aaa5417 [PubMed: 
25999506] 
36. Milekovic T, Ball T, Schulze-Bonhage A, Aertsen A, Mehring C. Detection of Error Related 
Neuronal Responses Recorded by Electrocorticography in Humans during Continuous 
Movements. PLoS One. 2013; 8:e55235.doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055235 [PubMed: 23383315] 
37. Marieb, EN. Human Anatomy & Physiology Hardcover. 6th edition edn. Pearson Education; 2003. 
38. Kuypers, HGJM. Comprehensive Physiology. John Wiley & Sons, Inc; 2011. 
Capogrosso et al.
Page 31
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 1. Conceptual and technological design of the brain–spinal interface
The monkeys were implanted with a microelectrode array into the leg area of the left motor 
cortex. During recordings, a wireless module transmitted broadband neural signals to a 
control computer. (1) Raster plot recorded over three successive gait cycles. Each line 
represents spiking events identified from one electrode, while the horizontal axis indicates 
time. (2) A decoder running on the control computer identified motor states from these 
neural signals. (3) These motor states triggered electrical spinal cord stimulation protocols. 
For this, the monkeys were implanted with a pulse generator featuring real-time triggering 
Capogrosso et al.
Page 32
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 capabilities. (4) The stimulator was connected to a spinal implant targeting specific dorsal 
roots of the lumbar spinal cord. Electromyographic signals of an extensor (grey) and flexor 
(black) muscles acting at the ankle recorded over three successive gait cycles are shown 
together with a stick diagram decomposition of leg movements during the stance (grey) and 
swing (black) phases of gait.
Capogrosso et al.
Page 33
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 2. Development and validation of selective spinal cord stimulation protocols
(a) Diagram illustrating injections of retrograde anatomical tracers into leg muscles to label 
motoneurons. The inset shows a confocal photograph of labelled motoneurons. The 3D 
reconstruction shows each labelled motoneuron innervating iliopsoas (IPS) and 
gastrocnemius medialis (GM) muscles. The same procedure was applied to the gluteus 
medius (GLU), rectus femoris (RF), semitendinosus (ST), extensor digitorum longus (EDL), 
and flexor hallucis longus (FHL) muscles. The diagram reports the averaged (n = 1 to 3 
monkeys per muscle) distribution of leg motoneurons within the spinal cord. (b) 
Capogrosso et al.
Page 34
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Representative micro–computed tomography (µCT) scans of the spinal implant (monkey 
Q1). (c) Electromyography of the recorded leg muscles (monkey Q1) was projected onto the 
motoneuron locations in the spinal cord to compute the mean (n = 73 gait cycles) 
spatiotemporal map of motoneuron activation during locomotion. Maps recorded around 
foot off (-10% to +20% of gait cycle) and foot strike (-10% to +30%) were extracted to 
highlight extension and flexion hotspots (data from other monkeys in Extended Data Fig. 3). 
(d) Median (n = 6 pulses) spatial map of motoneuron activation resulting from single pulses 
of stimulation delivered through the electrodes targeting the extension and flexion hotspots. 
For each monkey, the bar plots report the correlation between these spatial maps and the 
maps corresponding to the extension and flexion hotspots.
Capogrosso et al.
Page 35
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 3. Brain-controlled stimulation modulates the extension and flexion of the leg during 
locomotion in intact monkeys
(a) Two successive gait cycles recorded during locomotion without stimulation and during 
brain-controlled stimulation of the flexion hotspot, extension hotspot, or both (monkey Q2). 
From top to bottom: stick diagram decompositions of right leg movements; example of 
single channel neural recording; probability of foot off and foot strike motor states; detected 
motor states (cyan and magenta broken lines), periods of stimulation through the electrodes 
targeting the flexion and extension hotspots; electromyographic signals; limb length 
calculated as distance from the hip to the fifth metatarsal joint. The grey and white 
backgrounds correspond to stance and swing, respectively. (b) Relationship between 
Capogrosso et al.
Page 36
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 frequency of brain-controlled flexion stimulation and step height, and between the 
stimulation amplitude and the activity of the GM muscle during brain-controlled extension 
stimulation. Values for individual gait cycles (smaller dots) and mean values (larger dots) are 
shown. (c) Bar plots reporting the mean step height and mean GM activity without 
stimulation and during brain-controlled stimulation for monkeys Q1 (n = 125 steps) and Q2 
(n = 119 steps). (d) Decoder confusion matrices calculated during brain-controlled 
stimulation for monkeys Q1 (n = 125 steps) and Q2 (n = 119 steps).
Capogrosso et al.
Page 37
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 4. The brain-spinal interface alleviates gait deficits after spinal cord injury.
(a) Diagram illustrating the location of the lesion and corticospinal tract labelling using 
biotinylated dextran amine (BDA). Right, anatomical reconstructions of spinal segments 
containing the lesion (grey), for monkeys Q2 and Q3. Photographs including insets, showing 
a longitudinal view of the lesioned spinal cord wherein astrocytes (GFAP, grey), neurons 
(NeuN, cyan) and corticospinal tract axons (BDA, pink) are labelled. Asterisk, lesion. Scale 
bars, overview: 500µm. Insets: 50µm. (b) Gait cycles performed during locomotion without 
stimulation and during brain-controlled stimulation of both flexion and extension hotspots in 
Capogrosso et al.
Page 38
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 monkey Q2 at 6 days post-lesion. Conventions, same as Figure 3. Limb paralysis in red. (c) 
Snapshots extracted from video recordings showing a sequence of leg movements without 
stimulation and during brain-controlled stimulation (monkey Q2, 6 days post-injury). 
Timeline indicates video snapshot timing. Legend refers to panels d and e. (d) Bar plots 
reporting the ratio between of steps performed by the affected versus unaffected leg by each 
monkey without stimulation (n = 6 for day 6 and n = 39 for day 14 for Q2, n = 68 for Q3) 
and during brain-controlled stimulation (n = 12 for day 6 and n = 93 for day 14 for Q2, n = 
31 for Q3). (e) Principal component (PC) analysis applied on 26 gait parameters for Q2. All 
the gait cycles corresponding to limb paralysis or stumbling have been excluded from this 
analysis. Each gait cycle is shown in the space defined by PC1 and PC2. Bar plots reporting 
the mean Euclidean distance between pre-lesion and post-lesion gait cycles corresponding to 
steps, calculated in the entire kinematic space. **,*** significant difference at p < 0.01 and 
p < 0.001, respectively using bootstrapping (panel d) or Wilcoxon ranksum test (panel e).
Capogrosso et al.
Page 39
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 09.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
