 Impact of Pre-adapted HIV Transmission
Jonathan M. Carlson1, Victor Y. Du2,*, Nico Pfeifer1,*,†, Anju Bansal2, Vincent Y.F. Tan1,‡, 
Karen Power3, Chanson J. Brumme4, Anat Kreimer1,‖, Charles E. DeZiel1, Nicolo Fusi1, 
Malinda Schaefer5, Mark A. Brockman4,6, Jill Gilmour7,8, Matt A. Price7,9, William 
Kilembe10, Richard Haubrich11, Mina John12,13, Simon Mallal12,14, Roger Shapiro15, John 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Correspondence to: JMC: carlson@microsoft.com, EH: ehunte4@emory.edu, PG: paulg@uab.edu.
*These authors contributed equally to this work
†Current address: Department of Computational Biology and Applied Algorithmics, Max Planck Institute for Informatics, 
Saarbrücken, Germany
‡Current address: Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and Department of Mathematics, National University of 
Singapore, Singapore
‖Current address: Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA
Author Contributions
JMC designed and implemented the statistical analyses and adaptation model and wrote the paper. NP designed and implemented the 
adaptation model, with help from VYFT, AK, CED and DH. NF and CJB helped with the design and/or implementation of the 
statistical analyses. PAG designed the functional studies on primary immune responses, which were performed by VYD, AB, and JS. 
KP, AGY and TMA provided controller sequences. MS, SA, and EH provided transmission pair and longitudinal sequence and clinical 
data. MAB, JG, MAP, DG, CV, WK, RH, MJ, SM, RS, JF, PRH, TN, SA, PJRG, ZLB and EH provided chronic infection data. JMC, 
EH, PAG, ZLB and PJRG advised the project and helped write the paper, with input from all authors.
Author Information: The statistical model is implemented (and source code provided) as a web service at https://
phylod.research.microsoft.com. Data are available in the supplement. HIV sequence data are available from the referenced original 
sources. Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints. The authors declare no competing financial 
interests. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to JMC (carlson@microsoft.com), EH 
(ehunte4@emory.edu), or PAG (paulg@uab.edu).
Accession codes
Durban, South Africa (Southern Africa): FJ198407–FJ199088, EU698132–EU698633, AY838569–AY838639, HM593106–
HM593510 (gag); FJ199532–FJ199992, EU698737–EU698888 (pol); FJ199089–FJ199531, EU698634–EU698736, AY838640–
AY838756 (nef), AY463217–AY772701, AY838639, AY838567, AY878054–AY878072, AY901965–AY901981, DQ011165–
DQ011180, DQ056404–DQ093607, DQ164104–DQ164129, DQ275642–DQ275665, DQ351216–DQ351238, DQ369976–
DQ396400, DQ445631–DQ445637 (full length).
Bloemfontein, South Africa (Southern Africa): KT736510–KT736715 (gag), KT736966–KT737213 (pol), KT736716–KT736965 
(nef).
Kimberley, South Africa (Southern Africa): KT860066–KT860091 (gag).
Gabarone, Botswana (Southern Africa): FJ497801–FJ497951, KT860175–KT860351 (gag); FJ498244–FJ498543, KT860352–
KT860415 (pol); FJ498544–FJ498778, KT860120–KT860174 (nef).
Thames Valley Cohort (Southern Africa): FJ645274–FJ645344, FJ645350–FJ645360, FJ645409–FJ645410 (gag), FJ645411–
FJ645478, FJ645483–FJ645488, FJ645534–FJ645538 (pol); KT860092–KT860119 (nef).
British Columbia, Canada (IHAC): EU241938–EU242504 (gag); GQ303719–GQ304249, EF368373–EF368603, EF368604–
EF369427 (Pr-RT); FJ812899–FJ813480 (integrase); JX147785–JX148365 (tat/rev exon 1); JX147023–JX147784 (gp41; tat/rev exon 
2); JX148366–JX148914 (vpu); JX148915–JX149509 (vif); DQ203856–DQ204405, EF567317–EF567389 (vpr); DQ484067–
DQ485128 (nef).
Western Australian HIV Cohort Study (IHAC): AY856956–AY857186 (full length).
US AIDS Clinical Trials Group protocols 5142 and 5128 (IHAC): GQ371216–GQ371763 (gag); GQ371764–GQ372317 (pol); 
GQ372318–GQ372824, GQ398382–GQ398387 (nef); GU727870–GU731062 (env and accessory).
Ragon Elite Controller: EU517772–517812 (gag); EU517898–EU517938 (protease); EU517972–EU518012 (reverse transcriptase); 
EU517859–EU517897 (integrase); EU518046–EU518086 (vif); EU518088–EU518127 (vpr); EU517721–EU517760 (vpu); 
EU518013–EU518044 (tat); EU517815–EU517970 (rev); GU046566–GU046603 (nef).
Ragon Non–Controllers: DQ886031, DQ886038, FJ469682–FJ469772, JQ403024–JQ403086, JQ403091 (full length).
Zambian Transmission Pairs: KM048382–KM049006 (gag); KM049900–KM050767 (pol); M049007–KM049899 (nef).
Step Study: JF320002–JF320643 (full length).
COMPETING INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 16.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Med. 2016 June ; 22(6): 606–613. doi:10.1038/nm.4100.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Frater16,17,18, P. Richard Harrigan4,19, Thumbi Ndung’u3,20,21,22, Susan Allen10,23,24, David 
Heckerman1, John Sidney25, Todd M. Allen3, Philip J.R. Goulder20,26, Zabrina L. 
Brumme4,6, Eric Hunter5,10,23, and Paul A. Goepfert2
1Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA, USA
2Department of Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA
3Ragon Institute of Massachusetts General Hospital, Massachusetts Institute of Technology and 
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA
4British Columbia Centre for Excellence in HIV/AIDS, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
5Emory Vaccine Center at Yerkes National Primate Research Center, Emory University, Atlanta, 
GA, USA
6Faculty of Health Sciences, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, British Columbia, Canada
7International AIDS Vaccine Initiative, New York, NY, USA
8Imperial College of Science Technology and Medicine, London, UK
9Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA, USA
10Rwanda-Zambia HIV Research Group: Zambia-Emory HIV Research Project, Lusaka, Zambia
11Gilead Sciences, Foster City, CA, USA
12Institute for Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Murdoch University, Murdoch, Western 
Australia, Australia
13Department of Clinical Immunology, Royal Perth Hospital, Perth, Western Australia, Australia
14Center for Translational Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Vanderbilt University School of 
Medicine, Nashville, TN, USA
15Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA
16Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
17National Institute of Health Research, Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, Oxford, UK
18Oxford Martin School, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
19Department of Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
20HIV Pathogenesis Programme, The Doris Duke Medical Research Institute, University of 
KwaZulu-Natal, Durban, South Africa
21KwaZulu-Natal Research Institute for Tuberculosis and HIV (K-RITH), Nelson R. Mandela 
School of Medicine, University of KwaZulu-Natal, Durban, South Africa
22Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, Berlin, Germany
23Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA
24Department of Global Health, Rollins School of Public Health, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, 
USA
Carlson et al.
Page 2
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 25Division of Vaccine Discovery, La Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology, La Jolla, CA, USA
26Department of Paediatrics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
Abstract
Human Leukocyte Antigen class I (HLA) restricted CD8+ T lymphocyte (CTL) responses are 
critical to HIV-1 control. Although HIV can evade these responses, the longer-term impact of viral 
escape mutants remains unclear, since these variants can also reduce intrinsic viral fitness. To 
address this question, we here develop a metric to determine the degree of HIV adaptation to an 
HLA profile. We demonstrate that transmission of viruses pre-adapted to the HLA molecules 
expressed in the recipient is associated with impaired immunogenicity, elevated viral load and 
accelerated CD4 decline. Furthermore, the extent of pre-adaptation among circulating viruses 
explains much of the variation in outcomes attributed to expression of certain HLA alleles. Thus, 
viral pre-adaptation exploits “holes” in the immune response. Accounting for these holes may be 
critical for vaccine strategies seeking to elicit functional responses from viral variants, and to HIV 
cure strategies requiring broad CTL responses to achieve successful eradication of HIV reservoirs.
 Introduction
Immune control of HIV is epidemiologically linked to expression of certain HLA alleles, 
which mediate control through the presentation of viral peptides to CTL1,2. The resulting 
suppression of viral replication induces strong evolutionary pressure that drives selection of 
CTL escape mutations. These mutations may fully or partially abrogate viral peptide-HLA 
binding, disrupt peptide processing, or alter peptide-HLA interactions with the T-cell 
receptor (TCR)3. Within-host selection of escape mutations is thought to increase viral 
fitness by facilitating immune evasion, which should result in increased plasma viral load 
(VL) and accelerated CD4 decline. However, at least two factors work against the virus in 
this context. First, some escape mutations impair the ability of the virus to replicate4–10. 
Second, the CTL response itself adapts to the changing virus through the emergence of new 
TCR variants that either recognize the escaped epitope or shift focus to new epitopes11–15. 
Indeed, while case studies report increased VL following escape from highly 
immunodominant epitopes11,16–19, the overall impact of within-host escape is unknown.
Once selected, escape mutations are frequently transmitted7–9 and may be accumulating in 
some populations20–22. Transmission of these escape variants to HLA-mismatched hosts has 
been linked to improved clinical outcomes due to reduced intrinsic viral fitness7,8,10, but the 
clinical consequences of transmission of viruses pre-adapted to the recipient’s HLA profile 
is unknown. Although mutations that abrogate antigen processing and/or HLA binding may 
confer universal escape consequences in hosts expressing the relevant HLA allele19,23, TCR 
escape mutations can retain immunogenicity in subsequent hosts1,17,24,25 and the loss of 
some epitopes in the founder virus may simply result in targeting other epitopes12.
Resolving the role of transmitted escape in HIV progression is central to both vaccine design 
and epidemiology. A leading hypothesis as to why T-cell vaccines based on whole-protein 
immunogens have failed to reduce post-infection VL is that they have not adequately 
accounted for the role of immune escape and viral diversity26. Alternative vaccine strategies 
Carlson et al.
Page 3
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 have thus emerged. One aims to focus the immune response on relatively conserved HIV 
regions (“conserved element vaccines”)27–30, while another aims to stimulate variant-
specific responses by incorporating multiple immunogens that reflect circulating viral 
diversity (“polyvalent vaccines”)31. A key assumption of these strategies—the polyvalent 
approach in particular—is that effective immune responses can be elicited against epitope 
variants, including those representing HLA-specific escape mutations. This assumption, 
however, conflicts with concerns that the stable transmission and accumulation of CTL 
escape mutations at the population level will gradually compromise host immunity and 
result in increased HIV virulence as the pandemic progresses20. Such concerns assume 
escape variants are universally non-immunogenic and carry low fitness costs. Furthermore, 
efforts to quantify the extent to which VL is “heritable” (i.e. determined by the viral 
sequence) make critical simplifying assumptions, such as assuming viral and host genetics 
act independently on VL and that escaped epitopes are non-immunogenic32,33. Thus, 
fundamental working theories on HIV pathogenesis and vaccine design currently operate on 
strong—and often opposing—assumptions regarding the impact of transmitted immune 
escape.
 Estimating viral adaptation to HLA
The complexity of escape has prevented in-depth study of the clinical consequences of 
transmitted and within-host escape. Although escape mutations are remarkably predictable 
based on HLA subtype, there is a strong stochastic component to both CTL targeting34 and 
escape selection3. We therefore sought to reduce the complexity of escape to a single metric, 
which we call “adaptation”. Adaptation to a particular HLA allele h is rooted in a 
probabilistic model which compares two scenarios: what would an HIV sequence “look 
like” were it to evolve indefinitely in a host whose immune system either (1) solely targeted 
epitopes restricted by h, or (2) did not target any HLA-restricted epitopes? We then write the 
adaptation of a particular sequence s to h as 
., where 
captures scenario (1), 
 captures scenario (2), and 
 scales the ratio to be 
symmetric on the interval −1 to 1.
We define four types of scores: (1) “autologous adaptation” compares the autologous viral 
sequence to an individual’s own alleles; (2) “heterologous adaptation” compares a non-
autologous virus to an individual’s alleles; (3) “circulating adaptation” is the average 
heterologous adaptation over all viruses within a cohort with respect to an individual’s 
alleles; and (4) “transmitted adaptation” is the autologous adaptation of an individual’s 
founder virus. These scores can be defined with respect to a single HLA allele (“allele-
specific adaptation”), or to an individual’s HLA repertoire (the average over the individual’s 
allele-specific scores). Further, the adaptation-similarity of two alleles (or individuals) is the 
Pearson correlation coefficient of their respective scores over a panel of heterologous viral 
sequences. Adaptation can be defined with respect to each viral protein, but it is unclear 
whether adaptation scores are comparable among proteins (Supplementary Note).
Estimation of adaptation requires estimation of the conditional probability distribution 
. To this end, we extend the phylogenetic logistic regression framework35 to allow 
Carlson et al.
Page 4
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 estimation of the probability of observing any amino acid, at any site, conditional on any set 
of HLA alleles (see methods; an implementation is available at https://
phylod.research.microsoft.com). We trained two separate models for HIV adaptation, based 
on the availability of linked HLA and sequence data for chronically infected, untreated 
individuals. The HIV-1 subtype B (“HIVB”) model was trained on the International HIV 
adaptation collaborative (IHAC) cohort36, which consists of 1,888 individuals from North 
America and Australia with sequences from all HIV proteins except gp120. The HIV-1 
subtype C (“HIVC”) model was trained on a set of cohorts from southern Africa9, which 
consists of 2,037 individuals with Gag, Pol and Nef sequences. See Supplementary Figure 
S1 for a synopsis of the datasets used in this manuscript.
As expected, autologous adaptation was substantially higher than heterologous adaptation 
(Fig. 1a & Supplementary Fig. 2a), and mean autologous adaptation increased during the 
first two years of infection and beyond (Fig. 1b and Supplementary Fig. 2b,c). These results 
indicate that adaptation is measuring subject-specific viral variation. Nevertheless, there is 
substantial overlap between autologous and heterologous adaptation, indicating some 
individuals will by chance be infected by a virus that is pre-adapted to their HLA alleles.
 Within-host adaptation accelerates disease progression
If within-host adaptation in the context of a robust CTL response drives pathogenesis, then 
our measure of autologous adaptation should correlate with clinical markers of disease 
progression. Consistent with prior reports37, we observed significantly lower levels of 
autologous adaptation in HIVB-infected controllers than in non-controllers (Fig. 2a). This 
pattern held across all HLA loci and proteins as well as among individuals expressing 
protective alleles (Supplementary Fig. 3a, b). Similarly, among 2,917 chronically infected 
non-controllers, autologous adaptation was the most important predictor of both VL and 
CD4 counts (Supplementary Table 1). This result was consistent across HIV subtypes and 
statistical models, and persisted when host and viral covariates were added to the models.
Critically, allele-specific autologous adaptation completely abrogated the protection 
attributable to each HLA allele (Fig. 2b, Supplementary Figs. 3c and 4), including alleles for 
which multiple escape mutations are known to carry substantial in vitro fitness costs5,6. This 
result indicates the benefit the virus receives from evading the CTL responses dominates any 
reduction in intrinsic fitness, and suggests that the majority of escape mutations either have 
negligible impact on intrinsic fitness or that any such reduction is typically restored by 
compensatory mutations. Indeed, there was no clear association between autologous Gag 
adaptation and in vitro viral gag-protease replicative capacity (vRC) over all alleles 
(Supplementary Fig. 5a,b), nor among protective alleles (Supplementary Fig. 5c). This is 
consistent with disappearance of any association between protective alleles and vRC over 
the course of chronic infection38,39.
The conserved element vaccine strategy targets epitopes believed to be relatively resistant to 
escape, under the assumption that robust CTL responses in the absence of escape are critical 
for control27–30. To test this hypothesis using our metric for adaptation, we measured Gag-
specific CTL responses among 691 HIVC-infected individuals from Durban using 18-mer 
Carlson et al.
Page 5
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 overlapping peptides (OLPs) based on the subtype C consensus. We then stratified these 
individuals by both Gag-specific autologous adaptation and response breadth. This 
stratification demonstrates that the reduction in VL associated with a broad Gag-specific 
CTL response is observed primarily among individuals whose virus has not adapted to that 
response (Fig. 2c). Indeed, high levels of adaptation nearly eliminate the benefit of targeting 
Gag. In the absence of a CTL response, adaptation is not associated with changes in VL 
(Fig. 2c). This suggests that escape primarily influences VL by reducing effective immune 
responses, not by reducing intrinsic viral fitness. Critically, the lowest VL was observed 
among individuals who broadly targeted Gag, yet harbored low levels of autologous 
adaptation. These individuals appear to be mounting a robust CTL response, associated with 
a substantial reduction of VL, but with limited selection of escape variants. These 
observations support protective responses as those that broadly target “difficult-to-escape” 
epitopes2,28, which in turn directly supports vaccine strategies that aim to elicit such 
responses27–29. We did not observe an interaction between adaptation and the number of 
OLP-eliciting responses in Pol or Nef; however, Pol adaptation was positively correlated 
with VL (Supplementary Fig. 6). In contrast with Gag, CTL responses against these proteins 
have not consistently been linked with viral control40.
The ability to define a single metric for adaptation allows us to address the question, “are 
high levels of autologous adaptation predictive of future disease progression, or simply the 
result of high virus replication?” To this end, we applied an autoregression model to 
longitudinal VL and sequence samples from the Zambian transmission pair cohort9 to test 
the ability of autologous adaptation to predict future changes in VL. VL at each time point 
was modeled as a function of the prior two VL measurements and adaptation at the previous 
VL measurement, with additional clinical covariates. On average, one standard deviation 
difference in autologous adaptation predicted an additional 0.13 log increase in VL 
( 
), whereas VL did not significantly predict subsequent changes in adaptation 
(Supplementary Fig. 7). Thus, these longitudinal data are consistent with adaptation (on 
average) driving subsequent changes in VL, not vice versa.
 Transmitted adaptation predicts accelerated disease progression
The majority of amino acid variants present in the donor consensus sequence are transmitted 
to the recipient9. Although some of these variants have been linked to lower VL in HLA-
mismatched recipients due to presumed reduced intrinsic viral fitness7,8, if the variants are 
adapted with respect to the recipient’s HLA alleles, they have the potential to undermine the 
host immune response41. We therefore measured the extent to which the donor HIV Gag, 
Pol, and Nef sequences were by chance pre-adapted to the recipients’ HLA alleles in 129 
HIVC-infected, epidemiologically linked Zambian transmission pairs9. The extent of 
transmitted adaptation was associated with an increased rate of CD4 decline (Fig. 3a) and 
was correlated with recipient VL (Fig. 3b). Overall, transmitted adaptation explained more 
variation in recipient VL (both early [<12 months post infection] and late) than HLA alleles, 
vRC, donor VL, age or (for late VL) recipient sex (Supplementary Table 2).
To confirm the role of transmitted adaptation as a predictor of disease progression in newly 
infected individuals, we evaluated a separate cohort of individuals who were infected during 
Carlson et al.
Page 6
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the Step Study HIV vaccine trial42. Consistent with our findings in the Zambian cohort, VL 
was correlated with adaptation of inferred founder viruses to host HLA alleles among 
seroconverting participants (Fig. 3c and Supplementary Table 2). The larger correlation 
coefficient in the Step data compared to the Zambian data may be explained by differences 
among males and females, as the correlation for Zambian males was comparable to that 
observed in the (all male) Step data (Supplementary Table 2), though this sex difference was 
not statistically significant within the Zambian cohort.
To determine whether transmitted adaptation affects VL and CD4 counts many years into 
infection, we used circulating adaptation (over all virus sequences within a cohort) as an 
estimate for expected transmitted adaptation for each individual in our chronic infection 
cohorts. Overall, the level of circulating adaptation to an individual’s HLA alleles was an 
independent predictor of both VL and CD4 counts (Supplementary Table 3), suggesting that 
transmitted adaptation has long term effects on natural control.
 Estimates of host and virus genetic impact on VL are confounded by 
adaptation
The impact of autologous and transmitted adaptation on markers of disease progression 
imply a strong interaction between viral and host genetics with respect to these markers. 
Such interactions suggest that population-level estimates of epidemiologic parameters will 
depend on the circulating virus and the predominant host alleles in a particular population.
Indeed, allele-specific circulating adaptation explained much of the variation in HLA-
specific VL and CD4 effects (Fig. 4a and Supplementary Fig. 8a–c), suggesting that 
protective alleles are those for which the circulating virus is not well adapted. Moreover, 
among four alleles with evidence of differential impact on VL among three Southern African 
cities, the relative differences of city-specific VL effects was largely explained by relative 
differences in city-specific circulating adaptation (Fig. 4b and Supplementary Fig. 8d). Thus, 
circulating adaptation may explain many of the differences in allele-specific associations 
with markers of disease progression among diverse cohorts, and supports the hypothesis that 
accumulation of escape mutations in a population will undermine natural control20,22.
The role of viral genetics in determining VL can be quantified with population-level 
estimates of VL heritability32. Published estimates vary from 6% to 59%, with a recent 
meta-analysis of transmission-pair cohorts estimating broad-sense heritability at 33% (95% 
CI: 20–46%)32. However, the results presented here predict that the relationship between 
donor and recipient VL will be substantially higher among pairs with “similar” HLA alleles, 
as autologous adaptation in these donors (resulting in higher donor VL) will result in 
increased transmitted adaptation to their recipients (resulting in higher recipient VL).
Indeed, over the set of all 275 HLA-typed Zambian transmission pairs43,44, heritability was 
estimated at 18% (95% CI:4–31%). However, when we grouped couples based on HLA-B 
adaptation similarity (see methods), heritability ranged from 2% (lower tertile) to 41% 
(upper tertile; 
, Fig. 4c and Supplementary Table 4). Thus, heritability estimates 
vary widely as a function of how similar the recipient’s alleles are to the donor’s, suggesting 
Carlson et al.
Page 7
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 that discordant heritability estimates in the literature may in part be due to differing levels of 
HLA heterogeneity in the cohorts.
 Dysfunctional responses to pre-adapted transmitted epitopes
The prior results suggest that infection by pre-adapted viruse compromises the initial and 
long-term efficacy of CTL responses. To confirm this hypothesis, we tested epitope-specific 
responses to autologous peptides from 11 individuals recently infected with a single HIVB 
founder virus (median 31d post infection). For each individual, we defined the founder virus 
sequence and identified all HLA-matched, optimally defined epitopes it encoded45. Each 
founder virus epitope was then classified as non-adapted if it matched the most prevalent 
circulating HIVB sequence that did not harbor an escape polymorphism; all other epitopes 
were classified as adapted. Autologous adapted founder virus epitopes were less likely than 
non-adapted epitopes to elicit an interferon-γ response (Fig. 5a), and the response rate 
correlated inversely with the proportion of adapted epitopes in the founder virus (Fig. 5b), 
suggesting that transmitted adapted epitopes are less immunogenic.
In many cases, reduced responses to adapted founder virus epitopes are likely attributable to 
escape-induced reductions in HLA binding affinity36. However, the HLA-peptide binding 
affinity of numerous non-immunogenic adapted epitopes was similar to that of immunogenic 
non-adapted epitopes (Fig. 5c,d), suggesting that some adapted mutations confer escape by 
exploiting holes in the TCR repertoire. Moreover, for all three epitopes that elicited 
responses in both adapted and non-adapted variants, the adapted epitopes elicited 
substantially weaker cytotoxic responses than the non-adapted variant (Fig. 5e–g). These 
differences could not be explained by HLA-I binding nor T-cell polyfunctionality (Fig. 5c,d 
and Supplementary Fig. 9a–c), but were consistent with reduced antigen sensitivity and 
magnitude of interferon-γ response (Fig. 5h and Supplementary Fig. 9d). Together, these in 
vivo and in vitro data indicate that, when present in the founder virus, adapted epitopes are 
generally poorly immunogenic and, when recognized, elicit suboptimal primary CTL 
responses.
 Vaccination with adapted epitopes
If acquisition of a pre-adapted founder virus at transmission undermines initial host CTL 
responses, then the quality of vaccine-induced immune responses will likely depend on the 
extent to which the vaccine insert is pre-adapted to a recipient’s HLA alleles. The Step 
Study vaccine trial provides an opportunity to investigate this hypothesis46. Among trial 
participants, there was evidence of a weak inverse correlation between the extent to which 
the vaccine insert was adapted to an individual’s HLA alleles and pre-infection pooled 
interferon-γ ELISpot response magnitudes, as measured by two independent laboratories 
(Supplementary Fig. 10). These observations suggest that different vaccine insert sequences 
will result in qualitatively different—yet predictable—immune responses in the same 
individual. Whether simultaneous immunization by polyvalent vaccines will focus the 
immune response on functional, non-adapted epitopes, or whether such a strategy risks 
eliciting suboptimal, non-protective responses to adapted epitopes, remains an important 
open question.
Carlson et al.
Page 8
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
  Discussion
Although the importance of the CTL response, and the presence of immune-mediated 
escape, in the context of HIV infection has been generally recognized for 20 years, the link 
between transmitted and within-host adaptation and disease progression has been obscured 
by the complexity of in vivo targeting and escape. By directly measuring adaptation through 
a probabilistic model, we provide a general framework for estimating host-specific viral 
adaptation. The results demonstrate the dominant role HLA escape variants play in 
mediating disease progression, thereby validating some common assumptions while refuting 
others.
The role of autologous adaptation as a primary correlate of (and predecessor to) key markers 
of disease progression argues that an effective immune response is one that controls viral 
replication in the absence of escape (Fig. 2c). This stands in contrast to suggestions that an 
effective immune response drives selection of escape mutations that substantially reduce 
intrinsic fitness. Although the cost to intrinsic fitness of potential escape variants is likely 
critical to delaying time to escape47, and thus will serve as a useful correlate of protection in 
identifying potential vaccine candidates2,27–29, escape mutations are selected in vivo 
precisely because they increase overall fitness. In theory, in vivo fitness may not be fully 
restored by escape, but high levels of adaptation were strongly linked to high VL and loss of 
allele-specific control, indicating that compensatory mutations typically offset any reduced 
intrinsic fitness within a clinically relevant time frame. Reducing escape may also be 
achievable by increasing the breadth of the immune response47, though such strategies must 
take care to account for transmitted adaptation.
Indeed, the impact of transmitted adaptation on host immunity and disease progression is 
critical. From an epidemiologic perspective, the interaction of host and viral genetic effects 
undermines efforts to predict individual and population outcomes on the basis of host or 
viral genetics alone. For example, estimates of VL heritability depends on the degree of 
similarity between donor and recipient HLA alleles, while allele-specific circulating 
adaptation explains much of the variation in natural control attributed to individual HLA 
alleles. Moreover, circulating adaptation defines why some alleles are only protective in 
certain regions20,22,48 and predicts clinical outcomes for individuals, suggesting an 
individual’s prognosis will depend in part on the region in which infection is acquired. 
These results further provide explanations for epidemiologic observations that may influence 
transmitted adaptation, including reduced VL associated with rare alleles49, and elevated VL 
associated with multiple-virus infection50 or infection by a partner with a shared B allele43. 
By undermining HLA-mediated control, accumulation of escape variants in different 
populations will thus lead (all else being equal) to increasing average viral loads as the 
pandemic progresses, though other factors may mitigate this process22. Measuring 
transmitted and within-host adaptation will thus be critical for clinical and observational 
trials in which reduction in VL or rate of CD4 decline is a primary or secondary endpoint.
From an immunologic perspective, the inability of primary immune responses to effectively 
target adapted epitopes casts doubt on prophylactic and therapeutic vaccine strategies that 
seek to elicit responses to such variants and argues instead for conserved element approaches 
Carlson et al.
Page 9
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 that target a restricted set of epitopes with limited circulating variation. Furthermore, the 
observation that some adapted epitopes may competently bind their cognate HLA and elicit 
detectable, yet dysfunctional, responses, suggests the virus is exploiting biases in the 
circulating naïve TCR pool51,52. Such dysfunctional responses argue for in depth screening 
for virus-inhibiting responses throughout the vaccine development cycle and raise the 
disturbing possibility that dysfunctional responses are causally worse than the complete 
absence of a response53.
By combining the largest, most feature-rich datasets available with a novel statistical method 
for summarizing the extent of cellular immune adaptation, we have demonstrated the ability 
of HIV to exploit universal “holes” in the adaptive immune response. These holes explain 
much of the HLA- and region-specific heterogeneity in clinical outcomes and suggest that 
vaccine-induced “sieving”54 may not simply result from insufficient vaccine coverage, but is 
in part inherent in the limitations of the naïve immune system. Accounting for these holes 
will be imperative to ongoing efforts to design strategies that leverage the CTL response to 
prevent infection27–31 or clear the latent reservoir55.
 Online Methods
 Datasets
The data used in this study were pooled from multiple, previously published cohorts. 
Enrollment criteria and available data varied among cohorts. As such, the presented analyses 
were conducted on different subsets of cohorts. See Supplementary Figure S1 for a synopsis 
of cohorts and how they are used in this work. For each analysis, we use the most general 
name possible to describe the datasets used. In this section, we describe each of the cohorts.
For each cohort, we used the same alignments used in previous publications, as obtained 
from the authors. These alignments were all previously aligned to the HXB2 reference 
sequence, and were further hand edited to match the alignments used to train the Subtype B 
and C models. Such hand editing was performed with blinded IDs to ensure the editing did 
not systematically effect the quality of alignments relative to outcome variables of interest. 
All individuals (except some in the Ragon non-controller cohort) were therapy naïve. 
Finally, while the model is described below, we note from the outset that the HIVB model 
was trained on the IHAC dataset, while the HIVC model was trained on the Southern Africa 
dataset. Model training was based solely on HLA and sequence information.
 Southern Africa Cohort—The Southern Africa cohort consisted of a collection of six 
chronic-infection cohorts, as previously described9, and included gag, pol, and nef 
sequences paired with high resolution HLA typing data from 2,037 individuals, chronically 
infected with HIVC. In addition to training the HIVC model on this dataset, we used clinical 
and functional data from subsets of this cohort, as available. Overall, sequence availability 
for this cohort was as follows: for Gag-p17/p24 (n = 1,897), Gag-p15 (n = 1,135), Pol-Pr (n 
= 1,315), Pol-RT (n = 1,364), Pol-Int (n = 698) and Nef (n = 1,336). High-resolution HLA 
types were missing or ambiguous for at least one allele in 239 of 2,066 (11.5%) of non-
Zambian individuals. For estimating HLA allele effect sizes with respect to VL and CD4, we 
used additional individuals from each of these cohorts (n = 2,298, VL; n = 1,983, CD4). For 
Carlson et al.
Page 10
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 computing circulating adaptation, only individuals with gag, pol, and nef sequences were 
used. For VL and CD4 analyses, all individuals with any sequence data were included. 
Although missing data biases adaptation scores toward zero, the pattern of missing data 
largely followed cohort divisions, so this bias was largely captured with our cohort 
covariates. Repeating the analyses only on individuals without missing data resulted in 
qualitatively similar results. Ethics approval was obtained from the University of Zambia 
Research Ethics Committee and the Emory University Institutional Review Board (Zambia 
cohort); the University of KwaZulu-Natal Biomedical Research Ethics Committee and the 
Massachusetts General Hospital Review Board (Durban cohort); the University of the Free 
State Ethics Committee (Kimberley and Bloemfontein cohorts); the Office of Human 
Research Administration, Harvard School of Public Health and the Health Research 
Development Committee, Botswana Ministry of Health (Gaborone cohort); and the Oxford 
Research Ethics Committee (Durban, Kimberly, and Thames Valley cohorts). Study subjects 
from all cohorts gave written informed consent for their participation.
A total of 1,246 individuals from Durban, South Africa, were included in the South African 
cohort. These individuals were drawn from four maternal cohorts and two mixed-sex HIV 
clinics. Participant sex was not available for one of the outpatient clinics, so was imputed at 
50% based on summary clinic data. The absolute VL and CD4 counts varied significantly 
among the Durban cohorts (P < 0.001, Kruskal-Wallis test). Thus, in all analyses cohort-
specific random effects treated Durban as six distinct cohorts. In all of these cohorts, 
individuals were enrolled upon first presentation to the clinic and are believed to have been 
unexposed to therapy. Each of these 6 cohorts enrolled over a 1–3 year time frame. Subject 
age was unavailable for all of the maternal cohorts, but was assumed to be <40. In vitro viral 
replicative capacity (vRC) was measured using NL4-3 recombinant viruses encoding gag-
protease sequences from 403 of these individuals, as previously described56. In vitro HIV-
specific CTL responses were determined for 691 subjects from Durban (372 with vRC), as 
previously described57, by means of an IFN-γ ELISpot assay using a set of 410 overlapping 
18mer peptides (OLPs) spanning the whole HIV-1 subtype C proteome (2001 consensus 
sequence). For each individual, the identity of responding OLP, as well as the total number 
of responding OLP for each protein (“Protein responses”), were used as random effects 
features in a mixed model (see below).
The Bloemfontein, South Africa, cohort58 consisted of a subset of 261 individuals from a 
cohort enrolling individuals upon first visit to government ARV clinics who self-reported as 
therapy naive. Gag, Pol and Nef sequences and VL and CD4 counts were available for these 
individuals.
The Kimberley, South Africa, cohort59 consisted of 31 individuals from a maternal cohort. 
Gag sequences, VL and CD4 counts were available for these women. As in Durban, samples 
were taken upon first enrollment and the individuals are believed to have been therapy naïve.
The Gaborone, Botswana cohort60 consisted of 514 individuals from a maternal cohort, 379 
of whom had available sequence data (gag, pol, nef). All individuals are believed to have 
been therapy naïve at the time of enrollment.
Carlson et al.
Page 11
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The Thames Valley cohort59 derived from individuals presenting at clinics in the Thames 
Valley area of the United Kingdom (n = 102), other Southern African descent (Botswana, 
Malawi, South Africa and Zimbabwe) and believed to have been infected in these areas. 
Gag, Pol and Nef sequences were available for (n = 65) of these individuals.
The Southern Africa combined cohort also included 360 chronically infected partners from 
the Zambian Transmission Pairs cohort, described below.
 International HIV adaptation collaborative (IHAC)—The IHAC cohort consisted of 
three chronic-infection cohorts, as previously described36, and included sequence data from 
the entire proteome, excluding gp120, paired with medium-resolution HLA types, for 1,888 
individuals, chronically infected with HIVB, from the HOMER cohort of British Columbia, 
Canada (n = 1,103)61,62; the Western Australian HIV Cohort Study, (n = 247)63–65; and the 
US AIDS Clinical Trials Group (ACTG) protocols 5,14213,66 and 5,128 (n = 538)67. Final 
HLA/HIV sequence dataset sizes were as follows: Gag (n = 1,548), Pol (n = 1,799) [Pr-RT, n 
= 1,786, INT, n = 1,566], Nef (n = 1,685), Vif (n = 1,325), Vpr (n = 1,310), Vpu (n = 1,243), 
gp41 (n = 1,425), Tat (n = 1,734), Rev (n = 1,731). Ethical approval was obtained from the 
University of British Columbia-Providence Health Care Research Ethics Board (British 
Columbia cohort), Royal Perth Hospital Ethics Committee (WAHCS), and the NIH’s 
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) Clinical Science Review 
Committee (SRC) (ACTG 5142/5128). Study subjects from all cohorts gave written 
informed consent for their participation and/or specimens were anonymized by IRB-
approved procedures.
Only the British Columbia cohort was used for analysis against VL and CD4 counts. As for 
the Southern Africa cohort, only individuals with full-proteome data were used for 
computing circulating adaptation; all individuals with any sequence data were used for VL 
and CD4 analyses. Notably, the British Columbia cohort consisted largely of individuals 
with advanced disease, as it primarily enrolled individuals who were initiating therapy in the 
late-1990s. This enrollment criterion largely limits the association of HLA alleles to CD4 
counts, and may explain the relative increase in autologous adaptation relative to the 
Southern Africa cohort (Fig. 1a). The observation also suggests that HIVB model will 
estimate larger effect sizes, as more individuals in the training data will have adapted 
autologous virus. Because both VL assays and therapy guidelines changed during the course 
of sample collection for this cohort, we treated each sampling year as a separate cohort, 
specified by indicator variables (reported as the “cohort” random effect in Supplementary 
Tables S1 and S3). In vitro viral replicative capacity was measured using NL4-3 
recombinant viruses encoding gag-protease sequences from 749 of the British Columbia 
subjects, as previously described38. Time since infection was estimated for a subset (n = 
325) of the British Columbia subjects, using either physician-reported estimates of the 
midpoint between last HIV seronegative and first HIV seropositive samples, as previously 
described68.
 Ragon Elite Controller and Non-Controller cohorts (update)—The controller 
cohort consisted of 21 individuals previously identified as elite controllers (VL < 50 
copies/ml for at least one year), for whom full-length genomic HIV sequences and high 
Carlson et al.
Page 12
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 resolution HLA typing were available37,69. Autologous adaptation for this group of 
individuals was compared to the British Columbia cohort, as well as an independent cohort 
of 80 individuals chronically infected with HIVB who were not used to train the 
models70–72. Some of these Ragon non-controllers were on therapy at the time of 
sequencing. Individuals were included in the analyses only if complete protein sequences 
were available for all HIV proteins (excluding Env), the sequences were Subtype B, and 
high resolution HLA types were available.
 Zambian Transmission Pairs—The Zambian Transmission Pairs cohort enrolled 
heterosexual discordant couples in long term stable relationships73–75. Couples counseling 
and condoms were provided for all couples. During the timeframe of the samples used in 
this study, the seropositive partner was offered therapy according to national guidelines 
(CD4 < 200 cells/mm3). All seropositive partners were chronically infected and believed to 
be therapy naïve upon enrollment. The individuals used here were all from clinics in Lusaka 
and were enrolled in one of two protocols, in which the seronegative partner was tested 
either monthly or quarterly, and samples were collected from both partners upon a positive 
result.
For 129 individuals, complete gag, pol and nef sequences were available from the donor, 
longitudinal VL samples (≥ 2) were available for the epidemiologically linked recipients, 
and VL was available from the donor from the time of sequencing. Samples from both donor 
and recipient were available a median of 46 days post estimated date of infection (IQR, 43–
61; max, 349). The recipient samples were collected on or near the same day as the matched 
donor samples, allowing us to consider the matched donor HIV sequences as representative 
of the viral population that was likely present upon exposure9. Epidemiological linkage was 
defined by phylogenetic analyses of gp41 sequences from both partners76. Setpoint VL was 
defined to be the geometric mean VL from 30 d to 365 d post infection. For all studies, only 
VL measurements taken prior to initiation of therapy were included. Among these subjects, 
five initiated therapy within two years of infection. At least three VL measurements and 
complete sequence samples were available for 77 recipients; these individuals were included 
in the autoregression model. For 46 of the 129 couples, longitudinal CD4 counts were 
available for the recipients. In vitro gag viral replicative capacity was measured using MJ4 
chimera viruses for 113 linked recipients, using the first available blood sample for each 
individual, as previously described10. Sequence samples from 360 seropositive individuals, 
203 of whom had not yet transmitted to their partners at the time of sample collection, were 
included in the Southern Africa cohort.
As a separate study, HLA types were previously determined for 275 couples for whom 
linked transmission was confirmed, longitudinal VL samples were available for the 
recipients, and donor viral load was available within 12 months of transmission43,44,77. We 
used these individuals for the heritability analysis (Fig. 4c).
All subject protocols were approved by both the University of Zambia Research Ethics 
Committee and the Emory University Institutional Review Board. Before enrollment, 
individuals received counseling and signed a written informed consent form agreeing to 
participate.
Carlson et al.
Page 13
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
  Step Study dataset—The Step Study (HVTN 502) was a double-blind, phase 2b test-
of-concept trial of Merck adenovirus 5 HIV-1 subtype B vaccine42. The insert contained gag, 
pol, and nef sequences, each isolated from a different individual, and thus, expected to carry 
escape footprints to different HLA alleles. For a subset of individuals, immune responses to 
the vaccine insert were assessed using Interferon-γ ELISpot assays against overlapping 
peptides pooled by protein, as previously described46. Two pools were assessed for 
Polymerase. The total magnitude of responses was estimated for each pool and normalized 
as the number of spot forming cells (SFC) per million cells. ELISpot assays were carried out 
independently by the HVTN and Merck laboratories. For our analyses, we compared the 
protein-specific adaptation of the vaccine insert against the log-total magnitude of the pooled 
response. For polymerase, we used the geometric mean magnitude of the two pools. We 
limited our analyses to samples collected after the second vaccination and before evidence of 
HIV infection.
Autologous Gag, Pol, and Nef sequences and HLA types were available for 60 
seroconverting males in the modified intent to treat group, of whom 37 were in the vaccine 
arm54. For these individuals, we defined transmitted adaptation as the autologous adaptation 
of the inferred founder virus. Because sequences were previously derived from samples 
obtained during acute or early infection using serial dilution, followed by whole- or half- 
genome amplification and sequencing, we computed for each participant the autologous 
adaptation of each amplicon separately for each protein. We then computed the mean 
autologous adaptation over the amplicons for each protein, then combined these protein-
specific adaptation scores as described below, yielding the estimated autologous adaptation 
of each individual’s founder virus (or viruses). As for the Zambian transmission pairs, we 
compared transmitted adaptation against the participants’ geometric mean VL, taken over all 
samples that occurred between the first Western blot positive sample and the start of 
antiretroviral therapy or 365 days post Western blot positive date, whichever was sooner. 
Four individuals were excluded from this analysis due to missing VL data: three had a single 
VL measurement; one initiated therapy immediately upon seroconversion.
 Functional data for acute infection cohort
 Subjects—Thirteen acutely HIVB-infected subjects were recruited from the University 
of Alabama at Birmingham HIV infection clinic after obtaining written informed consent 
and approval from the UAB Institutional Review Board for Human Use (IRB) committee. 
Acute infection was identified by detectable HIV-1 viral RNA in plasma and a lack of HIV-
specific antibodies in a Western Blot78 at the first screening visit. The founder virus 
sequences were inferred from the plasma of each subject via a single genome amplification 
(SGA) method at Fiebig stage III or earlier, performed as previously described79. PBMCs 
for functional analysis were obtained a median of 31 days post estimated date of infection 
(range 16–51). All subjects were typed for HLA class I alleles. For 2 of 13 subjects, multiple 
founder viruses were identified. These subjects were excluded from further analysis. No 
experimental blinding was performed.
 Peptide selection and synthesis—For each of the 11 subjects with single founder 
viruses, we identified all optimally defined epitopes (8–11mer) restricted by the subject’s 
Carlson et al.
Page 14
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 HLA alleles45. For each of those HLA-epitope pairs, we selected the subset for which an 
HLA-escape association related to the allele in question had been previously identified36. 
From this subset, the corresponding autologous peptide sequence from the founder virus was 
identified, resulting in a total of 87 unique peptide variants. These peptides were synthesized 
from NEP (New England Peptide) in a 96 well array format. Each peptide was reconstituted 
at 40 mM in 100% DMSO and stored at −70 °C until use. Each epitope was classified as 
non-adapted (NAE) if it represented the most frequent epitope form found in the circulating 
HIVB viral population (QuickAlign from Los Alamos Database) that did not contain any 
HLA-I associated adapted amino acid variants36. All other epitopes were classified as 
adapted (AE).
 In vitro and predicted HLA class I binding affinity—HLA-I binding affinity for 
peptides tested in the immune assays was determined in vitro according to a previously 
established protocol involving competition assays that utilize purified HLA molecules and 
high affinity radiolabeled probe peptides. The competition assays were based on monoclonal 
antibody capturing of MHC-peptide complexes80. In addition, predicted HLA class I binding 
affinity for these peptides was assessed by using the NetMHC software program81,82 
(version 3.4, http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/NetMHC/).
 IFN-γ ELISpot assay—ELISpot was performed as previously described83,84. 
Experiments were performed in duplicate. Briefly, nitrocellulose plates were coated 
overnight with anti-IFN-γ antibody. In duplicate experiments, subject-derived PBMCs were 
added at 105 cells/well and were stimulated with the appropriate autologous peptide at a 
final concentration of 10 μM for 24 hrs. The cells were then washed, and biotinylated anti-
IFN-γ antibody was added for 2 hrs. After this incubation step, streptavidin-alkaline 
phosphatase was added for 1 hr before using NBT/BCIP substrate for spot detection. The 
number of spots was counted using an ELISpot plate reader (CTL ImmunoSpot) and was 
normalized to 106 PBMCs (SFC/106 cells). The mean SFC/106 cells over the two duplicates 
is reported. A positive response was defined as 55 SFC/106 PBMCs or greater and also at 
least 4 times the unstimulated media-only controls. PHA (10 μg/mL) was used as a positive 
control in this assay.
 Antigen sensitivity—Four to five 10-fold serial dilutions of peptides were used in an 
IFN-γ ELISpot assay as described above to assess functional avidity, or antigen sensitivity, 
of the CD8+ T-cell responses. Antigen sensitivity was determined by the peptide 
concentration that elicited 50% of maximal IFN-γ response (EC50) for any given epitope. 
Stimulation of PBMCs at each peptide concentration was performed in experimental 
duplicate, and mean and observed values are reported in the figures.
 Intracellular cytokine staining (ICS)—ICS flow cytometry was done as previously 
described85. In brief, 106 PBMCs were pulsed with autologous peptide at 10 μM in the 
presence of co-stimulatory antibodies (anti-CD28 and anti-CD49D), anti-CD107a-FITC, 
monensin, and brefeldin A (all from BD Biosciences) for 6 hrs. The cells were then surface 
stained with LIVE/DEAD cell dye (Invitrogen), anti-CD3-Alexa 780 (eBioscience), and 
anti-CD8-PE (BD Biosciences). The cells were permeabilized and labeled with anti-IFN-γ-
Carlson et al.
Page 15
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Alexa 700, anti-IL-2-APC, anti-TNFα-PECy7, and anti-Granzyme B-V450 (all from BD 
Biosciences). CD3 events greater than 100,000 were acquired on an LSR II (BD 
Immunocytometry Systems), and data were analyzed using FlowJo (version 9.6.4; TreeStar). 
Polyfunctionality analysis was performed using Boolean gating and SPICE & PESTLE 
(version 5.1; NIAID)86.
 In vitro expansion of CD8+ T-cell lines—In vitro expansion of epitope-specific 
CD8+ T-cell lines was performed as described previously by our group87. Briefly, freshly 
thawed cryopreserved autologous PBMCs were plated in a 48 well plate at 1.2 × 106 
cells/ml in serum free RPMI media. Supernatants containing non-adherent cells were 
removed after a two-hour incubation at 37°C. Adherent cells, mainly monocytes, were 
irradiated (3,300 rad, 45 min) and pulsed with the appropriate autologous peptide (10 μM) 
for 2 hrs. CD8+ T cells were isolated from the non-adherent cells using the CD8+ untouched 
isolation kit (MACS Miltenyi Biotec) and were plated onto peptide-pulsed monocytes in the 
presence of complete media (RPMI+10% Hyclone serum) containing IL-7 (25 ng/ml). The 
CD8+ T-cell culture was maintained by adding IL-2 (50 U/ml) every 2 to 3 days and re-
stimulating the CD8+ T cells with peptide-pulsed monocytes as described above on day 7. 
On day 13, T-cell lines were tested for cytokine responses to the cognate HIV peptide in a 6 
hr ICS assay as outlined above.
 Target killing assay using 7-aminoactinomycin D (7-AAD) staining—7-AAD 
killing assay was performed according to a modified protocol based on a prior study53. To 
avoid repeated exposure to autologous peptide stimulation, PBMCs from HLA-I matched 
HIV-1 seronegative donors were used as target cells. CD4+ T cells were isolated from the 
PBMCs of seronegative donors by depleting their CD8+ T cells (Dynabeads® CD8, 
Invitrogen) and activating them with PHA (5 μg/mL) in the presence of IL-2 (100 U/mL) for 
2 days. Activated CD4 targets (5×105 cells) were either pulsed with the relevant HIV peptide 
at 10μM or the irrelevant CEF peptide pool (containing CMV, EBV, and Flu, synthesized 
from NIH AIDS Reagents Program) at 2 μg/mL for 1 hr before co-culturing with appropriate 
epitope-specific CD8+ T-cell line for 24 hrs at four effector:target (E/T) ratios (0:1, 0.5:1, 
1:1, and 1.5:1). Each E:T co-culture was performed in duplicate. After incubation, the cells 
were surface stained with anti-CD3-Pac Blue (BD Biosciences) and anti-CD4-Alexa780 
(eBioscience) before washing and staining with 0.25 μg of 7-AAD (BD Biosciences) for 20 
min at 4 °C. Using flow cytometry, target killing by epitope-specific T-cell lines was 
determined by comparing the percentage of 7-AAD+ CD4+ T cells in the presence of 
effectors (at 0.5:1, 1:1, and 1.5:1 E:T’s) relative to that from the target cells without any 
effectors (at 0:1 E:T). Mean and observed values over the experimental duplicates are 
reported.
 In vitro killing assay—Two HIV-1 MJ4 viruses (one containing the HLA B*07:02-
restricted non-adapted epitope form Nef-FPVRPQVPL, the other one containing the adapted 
form Nef-FPVKPQVPL) were used to infect targets. While MJ4 is a HIVC virus88, the two 
epitope forms share the same NAE and AE classifications in clades B and C. In vitro killing 
assay was carried out as previously described by our group83. In brief, to avoid viral 
outgrowth and competition from a subject’s autologous virus, CD8-depleted PBMCs from 
Carlson et al.
Page 16
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 HLA B*07:02-matched and mismatched HIV seronegative donors were used as infection 
targets. Prior to infection, the target cells were activated for 2 days with PHA (5 μg/mL) and 
IL-2 (100 U/mL). Activated targets were then infected with HIV-1 MJ4 (containing either 
the NAE or the AE Nef epitope mentioned above) at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.5 
for 2 days, after which cognate peptide-specific CD8+ T-cell line (i.e. from Nef-
FPVRPQVPL or Nef-FPVKPQVPL) was added to the infected targets (5 × 105 cells) at 
three E:T ratios (0:1, 1:5, and 1:1) for 24 hrs. Each E:T co-culture was performed in 
duplicate. Then, the co-cultured cells were surface stained with anti-CD3-Pac Blue and anti-
CD4-Percyp Cy5.5 antibodies (both from BD Biosciences), permeabilized, and labeled with 
the intracellular anti-gag p24-PE antibody (BD Biosciences). Gag p24 reduction from CD4+ 
T cells on flow cytometry was used to assess the % killing of infected targets. The formula 
used for determining the percentage of CD8+ T-cell mediated killing is as follows:
This formula was calculated for each experimental duplicate and the mean and observed 
values are reported.
 Statistical methods
For each cohort, viral load (VL) was transformed using log10 and CD4 counts were 
transformed using the Box-Cox procedure89, applied separately to all British Columbia (λ = 
0.45) and all Southern Africa (λ = 0.58) data, to make the counts as close to normally 
distributed as possible. The resulting distributions in the chronic infection cohorts remained 
modestly right-skewed (CD4) and left-skewed (VL). This effect was most extreme for the 
British Columbia data, where VL was right censored at 106 copies/ml. This censoring may 
affect model estimates. As such, we focused cross-sectional analyses on the Southern Africa 
data and used non-parametric tests where possible (see below). The associations between 
adaptation and VL and CD4 were highly significant whether estimated with the mixed 
model (to account for confounders) or Spearman rank correlation (to account for non-
normality).
Where HLA alleles were typed to low or medium resolution, we estimated a probability 
distribution over HLA haplotypes as previously described90. The distributions were used in 
training and applying the adaptation model as described below. When used as independent 
variables in standard generalized linear fixed and mixed effects models, we imputed the 
HLA alleles by calculating the marginal probability that the individual expressed each HLA 
supertype, type, and subtype. The marginal probabilities for each HLA were then treated as 
a fractional observation of that HLA. HLA alleles were treated as (possibly fractionally 
observed) binary variables, such that homozygosity was not encoded in the models.
The adaptation model training was based on HLA and viral genetic data alone; clinical 
parameters were not considered in the model training. Autologous adaptation for the 
Southern Africa, the British Columbia, and the Zambian transmission pairs cohorts were 
estimated out of sample using 10-fold cross validation. Individuals lacking both VL and 
Carlson et al.
Page 17
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 CD4 data were used in the training sets for all 10 folds. For the IHAC cohort, clinical 
parameters were only available for the British Columbia cohort. Thus, all ACTG and 
Western Australia individuals were included in all cross validation partitions. All other 
adaptation scores were computed from models trained on the entire Southern Africa (HIVC) 
or IHAC (HIVB) datasets.
All reported P-values are from two-sided tests and unadjusted for multiple comparisons. 
When a large number of comparisons is employed, false discovery rates in the form of q-
values are reported91,92. Wherever possible, analyses were adjusted for subject Age, Sex, 
cohort of origin and HLA alleles. Age was dichotomized at ≥4093. HLA alleles were treated 
as random effects (see below). For the British Columbia data, sampling year was treated as a 
random effect. For the Zambian Transmission Pairs, no significant effect was observed for 
sampling Year; we therefore used a dichotomous fixed effect (around median sampling year) 
as a covariate. For the Southern Africa data, sampling dates were not available for a 
substantial number of samples; however, each cohort (with the exception of Zambia) 
collected samples within a small time frame. Therefore, any variation due to sampling time 
will be approximately captured by the cohort indicator variables. For all analyses, missing 
demographic data (age, sex, sampling year) were imputed using linear imputation; 
individuals with missing clinical, functional or sequence data were excluded. As noted 
above, individuals with partially missing sequence data were included in the Southern Africa 
and British Columbia autologous adaptation results, but excluded in all other analyses.
 Stepwise regression—Stepwise regression for generalized linear models was 
performed using P < 0.05 and P > 0.05 as entry and exit criteria, respectively. For the 
controller data (Supplementary Fig. 3b) logistic regression was used and all HLA alleles, at 
both type and subtype resolution, observed in at least 5 individuals were included as 
potential features. For these analyses, we excluded all HLA supertypes. q-values were 
estimated from the P-values of all possible features, conditioned on the final model.
Stepwise regression was also applied to the Southern Africa and British Columbia cohorts to 
identify the dominant alleles that contribute to clinical parameters. For these applications, 
only HLA-subtypes (4-digit) observed in at least 20 individuals were considered, and age, 
sex, and cohort indicator variables were included in the model as covariates.
 Cox proportional hazards model—The association between transmitted adaptation 
and CD4 decline was assessed using the 46 Zambian transmission pairs for whom we had 
longitudinal CD4 counts immediately following transmission. We evaluated the relationship 
using the Cox proportional hazards model, treating the adaptation of the donor virus to the 
recipient alleles as a continuous variable, and Sex, Age (≥40), and sample date (>median) as 
covariates (none were significant). For Figure 3a, we stratified individuals based on the 
mean transmitted adaptation over those 46 subjects. For this figure only, the adaptation score 
was scaled so that a one-unit change corresponded to the difference in mean adaptation 
within the two strata. Thus, the reported hazard ratio (3.0) indicates that an individual with 
above-average transmitted adaptation progresses to CD4 < 250 cells/mm3 at a three-fold 
higher rate than an individual with below-average transmitted adaptation.
Carlson et al.
Page 18
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Our pre-specified endpoint was CD4 < 250 cells/mm3. This end point was based on two 
factors: 1) national therapy guidelines at the time of sampling were CD4 < 200 cells mm3, 
and no individuals initiated at CD4 > 250 cells/mm3; and 2) 27 of 46 (59%) of individuals 
reached CD4 < 250 cells/mm3 within the timeframe of the study. As a post hoc analysis, we 
repeated the analysis for CD4 count thresholds, incrementing by 50 cells/mm3, and 
including therapy initiation as an additional endpoint; results were significant (P < 0.05) for 
all endpoints from 150 to 350 cells/mm3, with hazard ratios ranging from 2.2 to 3.2.
 Linear Mixed Models (LMMs)—With the chronic data, our primary goal was to 
estimate the effect of adaptation on clinical parameters. However, HLA class I alleles are 
known to represent the primary host genetic factor that influences VL and CD4 counts94,95. 
Within the HLA-I loci, a number of different HLA alleles have been reported as significantly 
associated with VL, with differences observed between HIV subtype, cohort, and disease 
stage. Furthermore, some HLA alleles appear to have HLA subtype-specific effects on VL 
and CD4 (most prominently, B*58:01 compared to B*58:02, but others as well), while other 
alleles act at the type or even supertype level. It is therefore clear that all HLA alleles, at all 
resolutions, need to be accounted for when assessing the effects of a new independent 
variable.
To this end, we used linear mixed models (LMMs). In this setup, we conceptually build a 
linear model with a separate weight for every HLA allele (we provide one at the supertype, 
type, and subtype levels for each HLA allele). Because such a model is over parameterized, 
we place a Gaussian prior distribution on the parameter for each HLA and integrate out the 
HLA effects based on those priors. The parameter-specific Gaussian priors are specified by 
 for the HLA A, B, and C alleles, respectively. In 
this way, we are able to condition on all HLA alleles, while allowing the variance of effect 
sizes to differ among loci. In addition, we treat the sub-cohorts (Southern Africa) and 
sampling year (British Columbia) as random effects, drawn from a separate Gaussian 
distribution with its own variance, and similarly for other random effects noted in the text. 
When displayed in tables, all features in italics are treated as random effects with their own 
effect-size variance. We used the LMM implementation from the Matlab statistics toolbox. 
The model can be expressed as
where Y is the 
 response vector, X is the 
 fixed effects design matrix, 
( 
) are the 
 random effects design matrices, β is a 
 fixed effects vector; 
, and 
; I is the 
 identity matrix, 
 is the variance of the 
elements of E, and 
 is the variance of the estimates of 
. This model thus groups random 
effects by categories (e.g., each HLA-B allele is grouped with all HLA-B alleles), then 
estimates different variance components for each effect category.
Carlson et al.
Page 19
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Models were fit using both restricted maximum likelihood (REML) and maximum 
likelihood (ML). Fraction of variation explained (pseudo- 
) was computed according to 
the likelihood ratio test method96, trained using ML. P-values for the fixed effects were 
derived from the standard error of the estimated effects (trained via REML); P-values for 
random effects came from the likelihood ratio test (trained via ML), corrected for boundary 
effects97.
 Allele specific adaptation—To estimate the effects of allele-specific adaptation, we 
constructed a series of independent linear models, one for each HLA subtype, h. Each linear 
model was defined as follows:
where  is the value of the dependent variable (transformed VL or CD4) for individual i, 
is a binary variable indicating whether the individual i expresses h, 
 is the 
autologous adaptation to h for each individual i, defined to be 0 if 
,  is a vector of 
covariates and β the corresponding vector of weights, and  is independently sampled from 
a Gaussian distribution. In this context, the covariates are indicator variables for cohort of 
origin, sex, age (≥40) and HLA subtypes identified via an independent stepwise regression 
analysis. Since 
 ranges from 
 to 1, 
 defines the expected relative 
change in VL attributable to h in the complete absence of allele-specific adaptation, and 
 defines the expected relative change in VL attributable to h in the presence of 
complete allele-specific adaptation. 95% confidence intervals and P-values are readily 
obtained from the variance-covariance matrix associated with the parameter estimates. 
Figure 2b and Supplementary Figure S3c show all alleles for which a likelihood ratio test 
against a null model with 
 was significant at 
. This threshold corresponded 
to a 10% false discovery rate for both VL and CD4. In Figure 2b, we also indicate the results 
of testing the null hypothesis 
, indicating the significance of allele-specific adaptation 
on VL (and similarly for CD4, Supplementary Fig. 3c).
 Longitudinal data analysis—To test whether changes in adaptation predict future 
changes in viral load, we used longitudinal VL and sequence samples from the Zambian 
transmission pairs dataset, and analyzed them in a autoregression (AR) mixed model with 
second-order lag and random intercept varying by subject and HLA alleles. Adapting the 
above notation for mixed models, for each subject i, we modeled VL at time point t 
(described below) using
As above, 
 captures fixed-effect covariates (see Supplementary Fig. 7) and 
 is a vector 
of random effects, with 
 the random effect weights. Here, we used HLA alleles 
(as above) and subject identifiers as random effects to account for subject- and HLA-specific 
effects on the change of VL over time. The model thus assumes that VL at any time point 
Carlson et al.
Page 20
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 can be predicted based on the prior to VL measurements, the absolute level of adaptation at 
the prior time point, and a set of covariates. We chose a lag of two based on exploratory 
analysis in the absence of Adaptation that showed a 3rd order lag did not significantly 
improve model fit.
Our primary endpoint was to determine if autologous adaptation at the prior time point 
predicted changes in VL at the next time point. Secondary analyses show estimated effect 
sizes of alternative definitions of adaptation (allele specific and protein specific; 
Supplementary Figure S7b). We also explored a model in which Adaptation is the dependent 
variable and VL is the independent variable, and varied the definition of adaptation.
To specify the time points, we started with available sequence samples, limiting to samples 
with complete gag, pol, and nef sequencing. These were sampled approximately 0–3, 3–9, 
9–15, 15–21, and 21–30 months post infection, though precise sampling times varied among 
individuals. Each sequence sample was discretized to one of the above time points; if 
multiple samples discretized to the same time point, the latest sample in the time point was 
used. VL measurements were discretized to the same time points. If multiple VL 
measurements mapped to the same time point, we used that which was closest to the 
sequencing time point. Only VL measurements made within 90 days of the sequencing 
samples were used. VL and sampling dates were identical for 384 of 422 matched time 
points.
 Circulating adaptation and HLA alleles—Figure 4a,b and Supplementary Figure 
S8a–c display the correlation between allele-specific circulating adaptation and the relative 
protection attributable to each allele. For each allele, we computed adaptation between that 
allele and the HIV sequences isolated from all individuals in the cohort (limiting to 
sequences without missing data). Allele-specific circulating adaptation was then defined to 
be the mean adaptation for each allele over these sequences. We computed this mean 
separately over all British Columbia and all Southern Africa sequences. City-specific 
circulating adaptation for the Southern Africa cohort was computed for the three cities with 
the largest samples sizes (see below). Circulating adaptation thus estimates the expected 
transmitted allele-specific adaptation were an individual with that allele infected randomly 
by an HIV sequence selected from that cohort (or city).
To estimate the allele-specific effect on VL or CD4 counts, we used LMMs as described 
above, but using a single variance parameter for HLA-A, -B, and -C to make cross-locus 
comparison possible. Age, Sex, and cohort were used as covariates. The allele-specific effect 
on VL or CD4 was taken to be the best linear unbiased (BLU) estimate for each allele, 
which was then regressed against allele-specific circulating adaptation. R2 and P-values 
were computed as described above for a LMM that uses the BLU estimate as the dependent 
variable, HLA locus as a random effect, and allele-specific circulating adaptation as the 
fixed effect of interest. In all analyses, we limited to HLA subtypes that were observed in at 
least 20 individuals.
We performed three analyses. In the first (Fig. 4a and Supplementary Fig. 8a), we limited the 
analysis to alleles selected in a stepwise regression procedure, as described above. The 
Carlson et al.
Page 21
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 second analysis (Supplementary Fig. 8b,c) included all alleles. By including all alleles, the 
effect size estimated for each allele shrinks, due to information sharing across allele pairs 
that are in linkage disequilibrium, as well as the increased regularization effect of the LMM.
In the third analysis (Fig. 4c and Supplementary Fig. 8d), we compared city-specific VL 
effects against city-specific circulating adaptation. To this end, we limited our samples to 
individuals from the three cities with the most subjects (Durban, South Africa; Gaborone, 
Botswana; and Lusaka, Zambia), then performed stepwise regression on those individuals to 
identify alleles that should be used as covariates. We then tested all alleles for significant 
interaction effects with the set of city indicator variables using a likelihood ratio test, and 
identified four alleles with some evidence of differential effects by city (P < 0.1). The city-
specific effects on VL were then estimated in a mixed model, including as covariates the 
other alleles and demographic variables; all effects were estimated jointly. The city-specific 
effects on VL compared to city-specific circulating adaptation are shown in Supplementary 
Figure S8d, which shows a clear trend in which cities with higher circulating adaptation for 
a given allele are also associated with higher relative VL for that allele. To form an omnibus 
statistical test, we mean-centered the city-specific VL effects and the circulating adaptation 
for each of the four alleles (Fig. 4b). We then estimated pseudo-R2 and P-value by modeling 
mean-centered VL effects in a mixed model with mean-centered circulating adaptation as a 
fixed effect and city as a random effect.
 Adaptation similarity
For the purpose of adaptation, we consider that two HLA alleles 
 and 
 are similar if they 
drive similar escape mutations. In the context of the adaptation score, this suggests that 
similarity of 
 and 
 can be defined as the Pearson correlation coefficient, 
, between 
the two alleles, over the entire population of HIV sequences. In practice, we must estimate 
this correlation over a set of observed sequences. Here, we use all Southern Africa 
sequences that are not missing entire protein sequences. We thus estimate the sample 
Pearson correlation coefficient, 
, over these sequences. To account for sequence 
features such as gaps, missing regions, and AA mixtures, we perform an additional 
normalizing step. Specifically, we first compute the matrix 
, where 
 is the adaptation of the ith sequence to the jth allele, then mean-center 
each row. The sample “Adaptation similarity” of 
 and 
 is then defined to be the Pearson 
correlation coefficient between columns i and j of the resulting matrix. The resulting HLA-
specific similarity largely recreates supertype definitions (see Supplementary Data File). At 
the subject level, we extend the above definition such that 
 refer to the sets of alleles 
(all alleles, or all alleles at one of the loci). Here, we focus on HLA-B adaptation similarity 
between donor and recipient pairs, as adaptation to HLA-B consistently had the largest 
effect size on all the previous analyses (Supplementary Tables 1–3).
 Adaptation score
When a CTL response is directed against a particular epitope, there is a fitness advantage for 
viruses containing genetic mutations that reduce or eliminate that response, provided those 
mutations do not reduce viral protein function such that the loss of fitness from disrupted 
protein function is greater than the gain in fitness from reducing the efficacy of the immune 
Carlson et al.
Page 22
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 response. Although such escape mutations may act by disrupting TCR recognition, HLA 
binding, or epitope processing, the escape mutations are remarkably consistent across 
individuals with a particular HLA allele. Typically, escape mutations are specific to HLA 
subtypes35,98,99, though the same mutation may be selected across HLA types and even 
supertypes35. These observations allow us to conceive of HLA-specific adaptation roughly 
in terms of the proportion of known HLA-associated sites that have escaped, as we have 
previously done21,22,100. The problem with this definition is that it ignores the apparent 
hierarchy of escape: although escape is largely consistent, there are large variations across 
individuals in the timing of escape101. Some of this variation is due to variation in the 
frequency with which an epitope is targeted (immunodominance), though even when an 
epitope is targeted, alternative escape routes may be taken, with some typically preferred 
over others. In addition, variation in population-wide prevalence of escape mutations make 
observation of some variants more surprising than others in any given individual20. As such, 
simple counting-based metrics of escape will under emphasize the presence of rare escapes 
and overemphasize the presence of common escapes (some of which are consensus in the 
circulating viral populations).
We consider that a probabilistic approach to estimating HLA-specific adaptation will yield a 
more intuitive metric that implicitly accounts for the frequency of within-host escape, as 
well as the baseline frequency of escape polymorphisms in the population. Conceptually, our 
approach is to estimate the probability distribution over all possible HIV sequences, 
conditional on all possible HLA repertoires. In practice, these distributions are estimated 
based on observed data, as described below. We then define adaptation of a particular 
sequence to a particular HLA allele to be a function of the likelihood ratio that compares a 
model in which the immune system is restricted by that single HLA allele against a 
hypothetical null model in which there is no immune response. This ratio is transformed to 
be on the range −1 to 1. The computation of the adaptation score is thus the result of several 
steps:
1.
Training the model
a.
A feature selection step, in which the HLA alleles that drive 
selection at each site are identified
b.
The estimation of the multinomial probability distribution over all 
amino acids (AAs) at each site, conditional on all HLAs and the 
transmitted sequence
2.
Defining adaptation of a sequence s with respect to an HLA allele h
a.
Estimating the probabilities of observing a particular HIV sequence 
in (1) the presence of a specific HLA and in (2) the absence of all 
immune pressure
b.
A transformation of the likelihood ratio from step 2a
What follows is a detailed description of each of the steps, beginning with a preliminary 
introduction that defines the notation and outlines the approach, then following with one 
section for each of these steps.
Carlson et al.
Page 23
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Parenthetically, we note that the model described in step 1 does not describe the rate of 
change in the viral population. Rather, it estimates the distribution of AAs among 
chronically infected individuals. Since adaptation increases during chronic infection 
(Supplementary Fig. 2c), parameter learning is dependent on the average duration of 
infection in the training set. As such, models trained on individuals with advanced disease 
(our HIVB model) will encode different AA distributions than those trained on individuals 
who are earlier in infection (our HIVC model). Qualitatively, not observing expected escape 
mutations will thus be less “surprising” in the HIVC model.
 Preliminaries—Let 
 be a random variable whose state space covers all possible 
HIV sequences over 
 sites (which may span multiple proteins). Our aim is to 
estimate the probability distribution over S conditional on an individual’s HLA alleles. An 
individual’s HLA class I repertoire consists of three to six HLA alleles (two each from the 
HLA-A, -B, and -C loci, with a possibility of homozygosity at each locus). HLA alleles are 
specified hierarchically102. For our purposes, we consider three levels: supertype, type, and 
subtype. Because supertypes are defined based on binding profiles, some alleles do not fit 
within a supertype, while others are classified in two supertypes103. We represent the space 
of possible HLA combinations using a binary vector H, with one entry for each HLA 
supertype, subtype, and type observed in our training datasets. We refer to a binary vector 
realization of H as , but for ease of notation will sometimes write 
 to 
represent the binary vector  that consists of all zeros except those supertypes, types, and 
subtypes corresponding with the k specified HLA alleles. For example H = {B*57:01, 
 B*58:01} corresponds to the binary vector with five entries set to 1: those for B*57:01, 
B*57, B*58, B*58:01, and the B58 supertype. Our aim is to estimate
for any sequence s and any set of HLA alleles h. Under the assumption of independence 
among sites, we factor the distribution as
It should be noted that the state of a sequence in chronic infection is strongly dependent on 
the transmitted sequence, which in turn will be related to other transmitted sequences based 
on phylogenetic relatedness. Thus, we write the per-site probability distribution using the 
law of total probability as
where 
 represents the space of possible transmitted HIV sequences over 
sites. See104 for a full motivation and explanation of this factorization that is used to create 
the phylogenetically corrected distribution. As described below, in the present application, 
Carlson et al.
Page 24
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
  is defined according to the modified logistic regression model. The 
prior distribution over the transmitted sequence, 
, is specified differently for 
model training and estimation of adaptation.
For simplicity of notation, we will often use the shorthand 
 to mean 
, 
and similarly for other random variables (capital letters) and their realizations (lower case 
letters).
 Step 1: Training the model—The model is trained from large cross sectional 
observational cohorts of chronically infected, therapy-naïve individuals, for whom HIV 
sequence and linked HLA types are available.
 Step 1a: Feature selection: By assuming independence among sites, we are able to 
estimate independent per-site models. Importantly, any given site is unlikely to be under 
selection pressure from more than a couple HLA alleles. Indeed, on a recent large scale 
HLA association study using our subtype B training data, there were an average of 1.3 HLA 
alleles associated per site that was associated with at least one HLA allele36. Thus, our first 
step is to identify site-specific HLA alleles, so that estimation of the probability distribution 
is parameterized only by those alleles for which there is statistical evidence of selection. To 
this end, we use previously published approaches to identify HLA associations35,36,104,105. 
Of note, these methods treat each individual amino acid at each site independently, as it 
simplifies the model and increases statistical power. The result is a list of HLA-amino acid 
(AA) pairs with a corresponding q-value, which is an estimate of the proportion of 
associations that are false positives among those associations that are deemed significant at 
the corresponding threshold92. We chose 
 as our threshold. The full list of HLA-AA 
associations is available in the Supplementary Data File.
These methods are based on the phylogenetically corrected logistic regression model, which 
models 
 using logistic regression, with 0/1 binary features for each HLA allele, 
and a −1/1 binary feature for the transmitted state . Thus, we can specify the model for 
amino acid a at site i as
for the 
 binary feature vector h encoding the HLA alleles expressed by the individual, 
the 
 parameter vector  and the scalar offset parameter 
. Under this model, in the 
absence of HLA-mediated selection pressure, the log-odds that 
 is 
 if the individual 
was transmitted amino acid a, and 
 if the individual was transmitted any other amino 
acid. To perform feature selection, we start with the null model of no selection pressure 
( 
), then systematically test each HLA j using maximum likelihood to optimize 
 and 
. The HLA that results in the maximum likelihood is allowed to stay in the model, and the 
process is repeated until no HLA yields a significant addition at 
 by the likelihood 
ratio test. These P-values are used to estimate false discovery rates, which are estimated over 
Carlson et al.
Page 25
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 all amino acids at all sites within a single protein. All tests at 
 were treated as 
significant, while the remaining tests had their weights set to 
.
Because the transmitted AA is not observed, we average over all possible states ( 
 and 
). The probability distribution 
 is estimated from the phylogeny, which is 
parameterized as a continuous-time Markov process (CTMP) with a reversible substitution 
rate matrix. To this end, we begin with a phylogeny, whose structure is estimated using 
PhyML 3.0106. For each site, we estimate a general time reversible (GTR) substitution rate 
matrix R (under two states) and a stationary binary AA probability distribution π using the 
expectation maximization (EM) algorithm107,108. For each expectation step, we fix the β 
parameters from the logistic regression portion of the model, as well as phylogenetic 
parameters, then estimate the marginal and pairwise-marginal distributions of all hidden 
nodes in the tree, including the hidden nodes that represent the transmitted virus. Using 
these marginal distributions, the likelihood is then maximized with respect to both the 
phylogenetic parameters and the logistic regression parameters (β). The process is repeated 
until convergence. The details of the EM algorithm for phylogenies are given by Holmes and 
Rubin108. Maximization of the logistic regression parameters, conditional on 
, is 
achieved by creating fractional observations for each individual, where 
, 
estimated for each individual in the tree, defines the weight for each fractional observation. 
For binary models, the matrix exponentials required for the CTMP can be computed 
analytically, leading to a substantial simplification and speedup. Additional steps can be 
taken to deal with ambiguous HLA data, which involve treating the high resolution HLA 
variables as missing data, conditional on the low resolution types and estimated haplotype 
frequencies, as previously described36.
 Step 1b: Multinomial logistic regression: The methods described in step 1a have been 
previously used to great effect in identifying HIV residues that likely serve as adapted or 
non-adapted residues in the context of HLA-mediated immune escape3. However, because 
they treat amino acids at the same position as independent, they do not yield consistent 
estimates of the probability distribution over all amino acids at a site. To this end, we 
describe here a modification of the phylogenetically-corrected logistic regression algorithm 
that uses a multinomial GTR substitution model in the phylogeny and multinomial logistic 
regression model to estimate 
.
For a multinomial logistic regression model with A states and M predictors, we can define 
the probabilities for each of the A states as
where 
 denotes the ath amino acid, 
 is the 
 parameter vector for 
, and 
evaluates to 1 if the contents are true and 0 otherwise. Thus the transmitted amino acid 
places 
 weight in favor of the same amino acid and 
 weight against all other amino 
acids.
Carlson et al.
Page 26
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 To set up this model, we begin with all amino acids observed in at least 3 of our training 
sequences, then add ‘X’ to represent all other amino acids. The space of HLA variables that 
are allowed to have non-zero weights is taken as the union of all HLA variables that were 
associated with any amino acid at site i in step 1a. The weights are then chosen to maximize 
the likelihood, subject to an L1-norm regularization penalty term that subtracts 
, 
, with  chosen independently for each site 
using 7-fold cross-validation.
As in step 1a, the distribution over the transmitted amino acid, 
, is taken from the 
marginal distribution for the hidden node that represents the transmitted sequence in the 
phylogeny, which in turn is affected by the parameters of the multinomial logistic regression 
model, as well as the observed amino acids at the tips of the tree and the phylogenetic 
parameters, which consist of the substitution rate matrix R and stationary distribution π. 
Optimization of these latter parameters is carried out using an EM algorithm, with the M-
step including maximization of both phylogenetic and logistic regression parameters, 
conditional on the inferred marginal and pair-wise marginal distributions on the internal 
nodes. We parameterize the phylogenetic model as a site-specific GTR model with A states. 
The model is trained with a modification of the algorithm described by Holmes and 
Rubin108, as described in the next section. Of note, the trained parameters 
 represent 
HLA-corrected, site-specific estimates of the standard phylogenetic parameters, with π 
representing the steady state amino acid frequency distribution, and R representing the 
transition rate matrix, each corrected for the effect of HLA-mediated selection and the 
phylogenetic structure.
 EM algorithm for multistate phylogenies: Holmes and Rubin108 describe an EM 
algorithm for maximizing the likelihood of a continuous time Markov process over A states 
with respect to the substitution rate matrix R and the stationary state probabilities π. Their 
model is defined for general (non-reversible) R and π, with reversibility heuristically 
imposed and the constraints that all substitution rates be positive and that π defines a 
probability distribution imposed by Lagrange multipliers. In practice, we found that these 
approaches were numerically unstable and frequently resulted in invalid R (being 
irreversible or containing negative entries) and π (containing negative entries or failing to 
sum to one). We therefore modified the procedure as follows.
We start by following Holmes and Rubin in calculating the expected complete log likelihood 
with respect to given parameters 
 and update parameters 
 as
where a, b index into the A possible amino acid states observable at site i, and , 
, and 
are sufficient statistics computed from 
 and described in Holmes and Rubin108. These 
correspond, respectively, to the expected number of substitution paths that start in state a, the 
expected time spent in state a, and the expected number of 
 transitions. Whereas 
Carlson et al.
Page 27
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Holmes and Rubin introduce Lagrange multipliers to 
 to enforce boundary constraints, 
then maximize the resulting expression with respect to 
 and make a heuristic 
correction to ensure 
 is reversible, we begin by parameterizing R with respect to its 
stationary probability distribution π to enforce reversibility. Specifically, we define the 
substitution rate matrix to be
We then numerically maximize 
 with respect to 
 by computing the gradient of 
, 
which yields
To further enforce that 
, 
, and 
, we reparameterize 
 as
and 
 as
For 
, these functions have gradients
Thus, we maximize 
 with respect to α and β using
and
Carlson et al.
Page 28
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 This parameterization allows us to use gradient-based optimizers that expect unbounded 
parameters, while assuring reversibility of R and appropriate bounds on the rates and 
probabilities. For our implementation, we use an efficient implementation of L-BFGS quasi-
Newton optimization109.
 Step 2: Defining the adaptation of a sequence s with respect to an HLA 
allele h
 Step 2a: Estimating the probability of a sequence in an HLA context: Step 1 yields a 
model that allows the estimation of the probability of observing any given amino acid at site 
i in the context of any set of HLA alleles and given any transmitted amino acid. Since our 
ultimate goal is to measure adaptation, we consider that a useful distribution over the 
transmitted AA, 
, is our estimate of the ancestral (equivalently, steady state) 
distribution, provided by π, which represents an HLA-corrected estimate of the “ideal” 
distribution in the absence of HLA pressure and corrected for the phylogenetic structure of 
the observed sequences. We therefore estimate
where 
 is the stationary probability of amino acid a. Assuming independence of sites 
yields
which is an estimate of the probability of observing any particular sequence in a chronically 
infected individual who expresses HLA alleles h.
 Step 2b: Defining the adaptation score: Step 2a yields a probability distribution over 
HIV sequences conditional on a set of HLA alleles. In practice, we find it most helpful to 
consider a single HLA allele at a time. Thus, if 
, then 
 is the probability 
of observing s in an individual whose CTL are only targeting epitopes presented by h. We 
then define the adaptation of s to h to be
where 
 is a vector with all HLA variables set to zero, representing an HIV sequence 
evolving in the absence of immune pressure. The transformation 
 maps the ratio to a 
heavy-tailed sigmoidal function on the range 
, with 0, 0.75, 0.85, and 0.90 
Carlson et al.
Page 29
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 respectively corresponding to the cases where the HIV sequence is equally, ≈ 10-, ≈ 100-, 
or ≈ 1,000-fold more likely in the context of the HLA allele than in the absence of any 
selection pressure. Because we define 
, the adaptation score thus has the intuitive 
interpretation as a measure of the extent to which the deviation of s from the idealized 
ancestral sequence is due to selection pressure mediated by h. Further, by defining the 
adaptation score in terms of a null immune response, we naturally normalize for variations 
in sequence coverage due to incomplete or ambiguous sequencing.
Notably, our independence-of-sites assumption allows the straightforward combination of 
adaptation scores computed from two different genomic regions. For example, if we’ve 
computed adaptation of Gag and Nef with respect to an HLA allele h, then we have
The shape of the inverse tangent function is such that the approximation is close to equality 
when the adaptation scores of the regions are both between 
 and 
.
Because the models are trained on high resolution HLA types, 
 must be extended 
to cover low and medium resolution datasets. If 
 represents a low- or medium-resolution 
HLA type, with corresponding subtypes 
, 
, then the adaptation of s with 
respect to 
 is defined to be the weighted average of the adaptation of s to the possible 
subtypes,
with θ parameterizing the ethnicity-specific distribution of HLA subtypes. In our 
experiments, 
 was taken from a modification of a published statistical HLA 
haplotype completion tool90. Our modification allowed the averaging over uncertain 
ethnicities when the ethnicity of individuals was unknown but the distribution over a 
population could be provided from external sources.
Finally, when h represents a set of alleles (such as 
, 
representing an individual’s full class I repertoire), then adaptation is defined to be the 
average adaptation score over the set of alleles:
Thus, we compute the adaptation score for each of an individual’s HLA alleles separately, 
then use those numbers to compute adaptation scores for each locus and for the entire 
repertoire. Although our model could instead estimate the distribution of s conditional on a 
set of alleles, we found it more intuitive to think of adaptation of s to a particular allele as 
being independent of the other alleles expressed by an individual. Moreover, because most 
Carlson et al.
Page 30
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 sites are not under selection by multiple alleles, and when multiple selection does occur, 
most individuals don’t express both alleles, the fully conditional adaptation scores were 
highly correlated ( 
) to the definition we used.
In our HIVB cohort, the distribution of autologous sequences to an individual’s HLA alleles 
is shown in Figure 1. The mean was 0.26 ( 
, which is approximately 1.5 fold 
more likely than 
, with a minimum of −0.44 (2.3 fold less likely) and a 
maximum of 0.8 (22 fold more likely). For HIVC these numbers were respectively 0.18 (1.3 
fold), −0.49 (−2.6 fold) and 0.99 (1027 fold). By transforming the numbers this way, large 
differences in fold (say 1,000–1027) yield a small difference in adaptation score (0.9–0.99), 
and thus a small difference when used as a linear predictor of clinical outcomes. This 
property increases robustness against (for example) model overfitting or errors in HLA 
typing and yields an approximately normal distribution of adaptation scores in any given 
population (Fig. 1 and Supplementary Fig. 2a).
 Code availability—Implementation of the adaptation score and adaptation similarity are 
available as a web service and downloadable software at https://
phylod.research.microsoft.com.
 Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
 Acknowledgments
We thank M. Carrington for comments on the manuscript, S. Riddler (University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, 
USA) for access to HLA and sequence data from the ACTG trials, D. Claiborne (Emory University, Atlanta, GA, 
USA) for providing the MJ4 proviruses with non-adapted and adapted epitopes, R.A. Kaslow and J. Tang 
(University of Alabama, Birmingham, AL, USA) for access to Zambian HLA data, and D. Goedhals and C. van 
Vuuren (University of Free State, Bloemfontein, South Africa) for curating additional clinical data from the 
Bloemfontein cohort. We thank Merck, the NIH National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) and 
the NIAID-funded HIV Vaccine Trials Network for providing the clinical dataset, viral sequences, HLA types and 
CTL response data from the Step Study (HVTN 502). We also thank the Step and ACTG 5142 and 5128 staff and 
trial participants, as well as the staff and volunteers of the HOMER, WAHCS, ZEHRP, Durban, Gaborone, 
Kimberley and Bloemfontain cohorts, for their contributions.
This study was funded by the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) grants R01 AI112566 
(P.A.G.), R56 AI098551 (P.A.G.), R01 AI64060 (E.H.), R37 AI51231 (E.H.), P01 AI074415 (T.M.A.), U01 AI 
66454 (R.S.), RO1 AI46995 (P.J.R.G.), and R01 AI071906 (R.A. Kaslow and J. Tang); Canadian Institutes of 
Health Research grants MOP-93536 (M.A.B, Z.L.B) and HOP-115700 (M.A.B., Z.L.B.); and Wellcome Trust grant 
WT104748MA (P.J.R.G.). HLA typing and viral sequencing of the ACTG cohorts were supported by U01 
AI068636 and by National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial 
Research (NIDCR). Support for the ZEHRP cohort was also provided by the International AIDS Vaccine Initiative 
(S.A.), and made possible in part by the support of the American people through the U.S. Agency for International 
Development (USAID). A full list of IAVI donors is available at www.iavi.org. This work was also supported, in 
part, by the Virology Core at the Emory Center for AIDS Research (grant P30 AI050409 [E.H.]), the Flow 
Cytometry Core at the University of Alabama at Birmingham Center for AIDS Research (grant P30 AI027767 
[P.A.G.]), the Tennessee Center for AIDS Research (P30 AI110527 [S.M.]), and the Yerkes National Primate 
Research Center base grant (P51OD11132 [E.H.]) through the NIH Office of the Director. M.S. was supported in 
part by an Action Cycling Fellowship. T.N. was supported by the International AIDS Vaccine Initiative, the South 
African Department of Science and Technology and the National Research Foundation through the South Africa 
Research Chairs Initiative, by an International Early Career Scientist award from the Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute, and by the Victor Daitz Foundation. P.R.H. is supported by a CIHR/GSK Professorship in Clinical 
Virology. M.A.B. holds a Canada Research Chair in Viral Pathogenesis and Immunity. Z.L.B. is supported by a 
Scholar Award from the Michael Smith Foundation for Health Research. E.H. is a Georgia Eminent Scholar.
Carlson et al.
Page 31
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The contents are the responsibility of the study authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of USAID, NIAID, 
NIH or the U.S. government.
References
1. Goonetilleke N, et al. The first T cell response to transmitted/founder virus contributes to the control 
of acute viremia in HIV-1 infection. J Exp Med. 2009; 206:1253–72. [PubMed: 19487423] 
2. Pereyra F, et al. HIV Control Is Mediated in Part by CD8+ T-Cell Targeting of Specific Epitopes. J 
Virol. 2014; 88:12937–12948. [PubMed: 25165115] 
3. Carlson JM, Le AQ, Shahid A, Brumme ZL. HIV-1 adaptation to HLA: a window into virus–host 
immune interactions. Trends Microbiol. 2015; 23:212–224. [PubMed: 25613992] 
4. Martinez-Picado J, et al. Fitness cost of escape mutations in p24 Gag in association with control of 
human immunodeficiency virus type 1. J Virol. 2006; 80:3617–23. [PubMed: 16537629] 
5. Boutwell CL, Rowley CF, Essex M. Reduced viral replication capacity of human immunodeficiency 
virus type 1 subtype C caused by cytotoxic-T-lymphocyte escape mutations in HLA-B57 epitopes of 
capsid protein. J Virol. 2009; 83:2460–8. [PubMed: 19109381] 
6. Wright JK, et al. Impact of HLA-B*81-associated mutations in HIV-1 Gag on viral replication 
capacity. J Virol. 2012; 86:3193–9. [PubMed: 22238317] 
7. Goepfert, Pa, et al. Transmission of HIV-1 Gag immune escape mutations is associated with reduced 
viral load in linked recipients. J Exp Med. 2008; 205:1009–17. [PubMed: 18426987] 
8. Chopera DR, et al. Transmission of HIV-1 CTL escape variants provides HLA-mismatched 
recipients with a survival advantage. PLoS Pathog. 2008; 4:e1000033. [PubMed: 18369479] 
9. Carlson JM, et al. Selection bias at the heterosexual HIV-1 transmission bottleneck. Science. 2014; 
345:1254031. [PubMed: 25013080] 
10. Prince JL, et al. Role of transmitted Gag CTL polymorphisms in defining replicative capacity and 
early HIV-1 pathogenesis. PLoS Pathog. 2012; 8:e1003041. [PubMed: 23209412] 
11. Feeney ME, et al. Immune escape precedes breakthrough human immunodeficiency virus type 1 
viremia and broadening of the cytotoxic T-lymphocyte response in an HLA-B27-positive long-
term-nonprogressing child. J Virol. 2004; 78:8927–8930. [PubMed: 15280502] 
12. Keane NM, et al. High-avidity, high-IFNγ-producing CD8 T-cell responses following immune 
selection during HIV-1 infection. Immunol Cell Biol. 2012; 90:224–34. [PubMed: 21577229] 
13. Almeida C-AM, et al. Translation of HLA-HIV associations to the cellular level: HIV adapts to 
inflate CD8 T cell responses against Nef and HLA-adapted variant epitopes. J Immunol. 2011; 
187:2502–13. [PubMed: 21821798] 
14. Allen TM, et al. De novo generation of escape variant-specific CD8+ T-cell responses following 
cytotoxic T-lymphocyte escape in chronic human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection. J Virol. 
2005; 79:12952–12960. [PubMed: 16188997] 
15. Iglesias MC, et al. Escape from highly effective public CD8+ T-cell clonotypes by HIV. Blood. 
2011; 118:2138–49. [PubMed: 21734237] 
16. Ntale RS, et al. Temporal association of HLA-B*81:01 and B*39:10 mediated HIV-1 p24 sequence 
evolution with disease progression. J Virol. 2012; doi: 10.1128/JVI.00539-12
17. Oxenius A, et al. Loss of viral control in early HIV-1 infection is temporally associated with 
sequential escape from CD8+ T cell responses and decrease in HIV-1-specific CD4+ and CD8+ T 
cell frequencies. J Infect Dis. 2004; 190:713–721. [PubMed: 15272399] 
18. Goulder PJR, et al. Late escape from an immunodominant cytotoxic T-lymphocyte response 
associated with progression to AIDS. Nat Med. 1997; 3:212–217. [PubMed: 9018241] 
19. Crawford H, et al. Evolution of HLA-B*5703 HIV-1 escape mutations in HLA-B*5703-positive 
individuals and their transmission recipients. J Exp Med. 2009; 206:909–21. [PubMed: 19307327] 
20. Kawashima Y, et al. Adaptation of HIV-1 to human leukocyte antigen class I. Nature. 2009; 
458:641–5. [PubMed: 19242411] 
21. Cotton LA, et al. Genotypic and Functional Impact of HIV-1 Adaptation to Its Host Population 
during the North American Epidemic. PLoS Genet. 2014; 10:e1004295. [PubMed: 24762668] 
Carlson et al.
Page 32
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 22. Payne RP, et al. Impact of HLA-driven HIV adaptation on virulence in populations of high HIV 
seroprevalence. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014; 111:E5393–400. [PubMed: 25453107] 
23. Goulder PJ, et al. Evolution and transmission of stable CTL escape mutations in HIV infection. 
Nature. 2001; 412:334–338. [PubMed: 11460164] 
24. Asquith B, Edwards CTT, Lipsitch M, McLean AR. Inefficient cytotoxic T lymphocyte-mediated 
killing of HIV-1-infected cells in vivo. PLoS Biol. 2006; 4:e90. [PubMed: 16515366] 
25. Iversen AKN, et al. Conflicting selective forces affect T cell receptor contacts in an 
immunodominant human immunodeficiency virus epitope. Nat Immunol. 2006; 7:179–89. 
[PubMed: 16388312] 
26. Korber BT, Letvin NL, Haynes BF. T-cell vaccine strategies for human immunodeficiency virus, 
the virus with a thousand faces. J Virol. 2009; 83:8300–8314. [PubMed: 19439471] 
27. Rolland M, Nickle DC, Mullins JI. HIV-1 group M conserved elements vaccine. PLoS Pathog. 
2007; 3:e157. [PubMed: 18052528] 
28. Mothe B, et al. Definition of the viral targets of protective HIV-1-specific T cell responses. J Transl 
Med. 2011; 9:208. [PubMed: 22152067] 
29. Létourneau S, et al. Design and pre-clinical evaluation of a universal HIV-1 vaccine. PLoS One. 
2007; 2:e984. [PubMed: 17912361] 
30. Borthwick N, et al. Vaccine-elicited Human T Cells Recognizing Conserved Protein Regions 
Inhibit HIV-1. Mol Ther. 2014; 22:464–75. [PubMed: 24166483] 
31. Fischer W, et al. Polyvalent vaccines for optimal coverage of potential T-cell epitopes in global 
HIV-1 variants. Nat Med. 2007; 13:100–6. [PubMed: 17187074] 
32. Fraser C, et al. Virulence and pathogenesis of HIV-1 infection: an evolutionary perspective. 
Science. 2014; 343:1243727. [PubMed: 24653038] 
33. van Dorp CH, van Boven M, de Boer RJ. Immuno-epidemiological Modeling of HIV-1 Predicts 
High Heritability of the Set-Point Virus Load, while Selection for CTL Escape Dominates 
Virulence Evolution. PLoS Comput Biol. 2014; 10:e1003899. [PubMed: 25522184] 
34. Yewdell JW. Confronting Complexity: Real-World Immunodominance in Antiviral CD8+ T Cell 
Responses. Immunity. 2006; 25:533–543. [PubMed: 17046682] 
35. Carlson JM, et al. Widespread impact of HLA restriction on immune control and escape pathways 
of HIV-1. J Virol. 2012; 86:5230–43. [PubMed: 22379086] 
36. Carlson JM, et al. Correlates of protective cellular immunity revealed by analysis of population-
level immune escape pathways in HIV-1. J Virol. 2012; 86:13202–13216. [PubMed: 23055555] 
37. Miura T, et al. HLA-associated viral mutations are common in human immunodeficiency virus 
type 1 elite controllers. J Virol. 2009; 83:3407–12. [PubMed: 19153230] 
38. Brockman, Ma, et al. Early selection in Gag by protective HLA alleles contributes to reduced 
HIV-1 replication capacity that may be largely compensated for in chronic infection. J Virol. 2010; 
84:11937–49. [PubMed: 20810731] 
39. Huang K-HG, et al. Progression to AIDS in South Africa is associated with both reverting and 
compensatory viral mutations. PLoS One. 2011; 6:e19018. [PubMed: 21544209] 
40. Kiepiela P, et al. CD8+ T-cell responses to different HIV proteins have discordant associations with 
viral load. Nat Med. 2007; 13:46–53. [PubMed: 17173051] 
41. Wright JK, et al. Influence of Gag-protease-mediated replication capacity on disease progression in 
individuals recently infected with HIV-1 subtype C. J Virol. 2011; 85:3996–4006. [PubMed: 
21289112] 
42. Buchbinder SP, et al. Efficacy assessment of a cell-mediated immunity HIV-1 vaccine (the Step 
Study): a double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled, test-of-concept trial. Lancet. 2008; 
372:1881–93. [PubMed: 19012954] 
43. Tang J, et al. HLA allele sharing and HIV type 1 viremia in seroconverting Zambians with known 
transmitting partners. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 2004; 20:19–25. [PubMed: 15000695] 
44. Song W, et al. Disparate associations of HLA class I markers with HIV-1 acquisition and control of 
viremia in an African population. PLoS One. 2011; 6:e23469. [PubMed: 21858133] 
45. Llano, A.; Frahm, N.; Brander, C. HIV Mol Immunol. Yusim, K., et al., editors. Los Alamos 
National Laboratory, Theoretical Biology and Biophysics; 2009. p. 3-24.
Carlson et al.
Page 33
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 46. McElrath MJ, et al. HIV-1 vaccine-induced immunity in the test-of-concept Step Study: a case-
cohort analysis. Lancet. 2008; 372:1894–1905. [PubMed: 19012957] 
47. Liu MKP, et al. Vertical T cell immunodominance and epitope entropy determine HIV-1 escape. J 
Clin Invest. 2013; 123:380–393. [PubMed: 23221345] 
48. Matthews PC, et al. Differential clade-specific HLA-B*3501 association with HIV-1 disease 
outcome is linked to immunogenicity of a single gag epitope. 2012; 86:12643–12654.
49. Trachtenberg E, et al. Advantage of rare HLA supertype in HIV disease progression. Nat Med. 
2003; 9:928–35. [PubMed: 12819779] 
50. Janes H, et al. HIV-1 infections with multiple founders are associated with higher viral loads than 
infections with single founders. Nat Med. 2015; 21:1139–41. [PubMed: 26322580] 
51. Miles JJ, Douek DC, Price Da. Bias in the αβ T-cell repertoire: implications for disease 
pathogenesis and vaccination. Immunol Cell Biol. 2011; 89:375–87. [PubMed: 21301479] 
52. Kløverpris HN, et al. CD8+ TCR Bias and Immunodominance in HIV-1 Infection. J Immunol. 
2015; 194:5329–45. [PubMed: 25911754] 
53. Mailliard RB, et al. Selective induction of CTL helper rather than killer activity by natural epitope 
variants promotes dendritic cell-mediated HIV-1 dissemination. J Immunol. 2013; 191:2570–80. 
[PubMed: 23913962] 
54. Rolland M, et al. Genetic impact of vaccination on breakthrough HIV-1 sequences from the STEP 
trial. Nat Med. 2011; 17:366–71. [PubMed: 21358627] 
55. Deng K, et al. Broad CTL response is required to clear latent HIV-1 due to dominance of escape 
mutations. Nature. 2015; 517:381–385. [PubMed: 25561180] 
56. Wright JK, et al. Gag-protease-mediated replication capacity in HIV-1 subtype C chronic infection: 
associations with HLA type and clinical parameters. J Virol. 2010; 84:10820–31. [PubMed: 
20702636] 
57. Kiepiela P, et al. Dominant influence of HLA-B in mediating the potential co-evolution of HIV and 
HLA. Nature. 2004; 432:769–75. [PubMed: 15592417] 
58. Huang K-HG, et al. Prevalence of HIV type-1 drug-associated mutations in pre-therapy patients in 
the Free State, South Africa. Antivir Ther. 2009; 14:975–84. [PubMed: 19918101] 
59. Matthews PC, et al. HLA-A*7401-mediated control of HIV viremia is independent of its linkage 
disequilibrium with HLA-B*5703. J Immunol. 2011; 186:5675–86. [PubMed: 21498667] 
60. Shapiro RL, et al. Antiretroviral Regimens in Pregnancy and Breast-Feeding in Botswana. N Engl J 
Med. 2010; 362:2282–2294. [PubMed: 20554983] 
61. Brumme ZL, et al. Evidence of differential HLA class I-mediated viral evolution in functional and 
accessory/regulatory genes of HIV-1. PLoS Pathog. 2007; 3:e94. [PubMed: 17616974] 
62. Brumme ZL, et al. HLA-associated immune escape pathways in HIV-1 subtype B Gag, Pol and 
Nef proteins. PLoS One. 2009; 4:e6687. [PubMed: 19690614] 
63. Bhattacharya T, et al. Founder effects in the assessment of HIV polymorphisms and HLA allele 
associations. Science (80-). 2007; 315:1583–1586.
64. Moore CB, et al. Evidence of HIV-1 adaptation to HLA-restricted immune responses at a 
population level. Science. 2002; 296:1439–1443. [PubMed: 12029127] 
65. Mallal SA. The Western Australian HIV Cohort Study, Perth, Australia. J Acquir Immune Defic 
Syndr Hum Retrovirol. 1998; 17(Suppl 1):S23–7. [PubMed: 9586648] 
66. John M, et al. Adaptive interactions between HLA and HIV-1: highly divergent selection imposed 
by HLA class I molecules with common supertype motifs. J Immunol. 2010; 184:4368–4377. 
[PubMed: 20231689] 
67. Haas DW, et al. A multi-investigator/institutional DNA bank for AIDS-related human genetic 
studies: AACTG Protocol A5128. HIV Clin Trials. 2003; 4:287–300. [PubMed: 14583845] 
68. Poon AFY, et al. The impact of clinical, demographic and risk factors on rates of HIV 
transmission: a population-based phylogenetic analysis in British Columbia, Canada. J Infect Dis. 
2015; 211:926–935. [PubMed: 25312037] 
69. Miura T, et al. Genetic characterization of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 in elite 
controllers: lack of gross genetic defects or common amino acid changes. J Virol. 2008; 82:8422–
8430. [PubMed: 18562530] 
Carlson et al.
Page 34
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 70. Wang YE, et al. Protective HLA class I alleles that restrict acute-phase CD8+ T-cell responses are 
associated with viral escape mutations located in highly conserved regions of human 
immunodeficiency virus type 1. J Virol. 2009; 83:1845–55. [PubMed: 19036810] 
71. Henn MR, et al. Whole genome deep sequencing of HIV-1 reveals the impact of early minor 
variants upon immune recognition during acute infection. PLoS Pathog. 2012; 8:e1002529. 
[PubMed: 22412369] 
72. Frahm N, et al. Increased sequence diversity coverage improves detection of HIV-specific T cell 
responses. J Immunol. 2007; 179:6638–6650. [PubMed: 17982054] 
73. McKenna SL, et al. Rapid HIV testing and counseling for voluntary testing centers in Africa. 
AIDS. 1997; 11(Suppl 1):S103–10. [PubMed: 9376093] 
74. Kempf M-C, et al. Enrollment and retention of HIV discordant couples in Lusaka, Zambia. J 
Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2008; 47:116–25. [PubMed: 18030162] 
75. Allen S, et al. Promotion of couples’ voluntary counselling and testing for HIV through influential 
networks in two African capital cities. BMC Public Health. 2007; 7:349. [PubMed: 18072974] 
76. Trask SA, et al. Molecular epidemiology of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 transmission in 
a heterosexual cohort of discordant couples in Zambia. J Virol. 2002; 76:397–405. [PubMed: 
11739704] 
77. Yue L, et al. Cumulative impact of host and viral factors on HIV-1 viral-load control during early 
infection. J Virol. 2013; 87:708–15. [PubMed: 23115285] 
78. McMichael AJ, Borrow P, Tomaras GD, Goonetilleke N, Haynes BF. The immune response during 
acute HIV-1 infection: clues for vaccine development. Nat Rev Immunol. 2010; 10:11–23. 
[PubMed: 20010788] 
79. Salazar-Gonzalez JF, et al. Genetic identity, biological phenotype, and evolutionary pathways of 
transmitted/founder viruses in acute and early HIV-1 infection. J Exp Med. 2009; 206:1273–89. 
[PubMed: 19487424] 
80. Sidney J, et al. Measurement of MHC/peptide interactions by gel filtration or monoclonal antibody 
capture. Curr Protoc Immunol. 2013; :1–47. DOI: 10.1002/0471142735.im1803s100 [PubMed: 
24510597] 
81. Lundegaard C, et al. NetMHC-3.0: accurate web accessible predictions of human, mouse and 
monkey MHC class I affinities for peptides of length 8–11. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008; 36
82. Lundegaard C, Lund O, Nielsen M. Accurate approximation method for prediction of class I MHC 
affinities for peptides of length 8, 10 and 11 using prediction tools trained on 9mers. 
Bioinformatics. 2008; 24:1397–1398. [PubMed: 18413329] 
83. Bansal A, et al. CD8 T cell response and evolutionary pressure to HIV-1 cryptic epitopes derived 
from antisense transcription. J Exp Med. 2010; 207:51–9. [PubMed: 20065064] 
84. Bansal A, et al. Immunological control of chronic HIV-1 infection: HLA-mediated immune 
function and viral evolution in adolescents. AIDS. 2007; 21:2387–2397. [PubMed: 18025875] 
85. Bansal A, et al. Multifunctional T-cell characteristics induced by a polyvalent DNA prime/protein 
boost human immunodeficiency virus type 1 vaccine regimen given to healthy adults are 
dependent on the route and dose of administration. J Virol. 2008; 82
86. Roederer M, Nozzi JL, Nason MC. SPICE: Exploration and analysis of post-cytometric complex 
multivariate datasets. Cytom Part A. 2011; 79 A:167–174.
87. Akinsiku OT, Bansal A, Sabbaj S, Heath SL, Goepfert Pa. Interleukin-2 Production by 
Polyfunctional HIV-1-Specific CD8 T Cells Is Associated With Enhanced Viral Suppression. J 
Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2011; 58:132–140. [PubMed: 21637109] 
88. Ndung’u T, Renjifo B, Essex M. Construction and analysis of an infectious human 
Immunodeficiency virus type 1 subtype C molecular clone. J Virol. 2001; 75:4964–4972. 
[PubMed: 11333875] 
89. Box GEP, Cox DR. An analysis of transformations. J R Stat Soc Ser B Statistical Methodol. 1964; 
26:211–252.
90. Listgarten J, et al. Statistical resolution of ambiguous HLA typing data. PLoS Comput Biol. 2008; 
4:e1000016. [PubMed: 18392148] 
91. Storey JD, Tibshirani R. Statistical significance for genomewide studies. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S 
A. 2003; 100:9440–5. [PubMed: 12883005] 
Carlson et al.
Page 35
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 92. Storey JD. The positive false discovery rate: a Bayesian interpretation and the q -value. Ann Stat. 
2003; 31:2013–2035.
93. Vance DE, Mugavero M, Willig J, Raper JL, Saag MS. Aging with HIV: a cross-sectional study of 
comorbidity prevalence and clinical characteristics across decades of life. J Assoc Nurses AIDS 
Care. 2011; 22:17–25. [PubMed: 20471864] 
94. Carrington M, O’Brien SJ. The influence of HLA genotype on AIDS. Annu Rev Med. 2003; 
54:535–551. [PubMed: 12525683] 
95. Pereyra F, et al. The major genetic determinants of HIV-1 control affect HLA class I peptide 
presentation. Science. 2010; 330:1551–7. [PubMed: 21051598] 
96. Nagelkerke NJD. A note on a general definition of the coefficient of determination. Biometrika. 
1991; 78:691–692.
97. Self SG, Liang K-Y. Asymptotic Properties of Maximum Likelihood Estimators and Likelihood 
Ratio Tests Under Nonstandard Conditions. J Am Stat Assoc. 1987; 82:605.
98. Leslie A, et al. Differential selection pressure exerted on HIV by CTL targeting identical epitopes 
but restricted by distinct HLA alleles from the same HLA supertype. J Immunol. 2006; 177:4699–
4708. [PubMed: 16982909] 
99. Payne RP, et al. Differential escape patterns within the dominant HLA-B*57:03-restricted HIV 
Gag epitope reflect distinct clade-specific functional constraints. J Virol. 2014; 88:4668–78. 
[PubMed: 24501417] 
100. Brumme ZL, et al. Human leukocyte antigen-specific polymorphisms in HIV-1 Gag and their 
association with viral load in chronic untreated infection. AIDS. 2008; 22:1277–86. [PubMed: 
18580606] 
101. Brumme ZL, et al. Marked epitope- and allele-specific differences in rates of mutation in human 
immunodeficiency type 1 (HIV-1) Gag, Pol, and Nef cytotoxic T-lymphocyte epitopes in acute/
early HIV-1 infection. J Virol. 2008; 82:9216–27. [PubMed: 18614631] 
102. Marsh SGE, et al. Nomenclature for factors of the HLA system, 2010. Tissue Antigens. 2010; 
75:291–455. [PubMed: 20356336] 
103. Sidney J, Peters B, Frahm N, Brander C, Sette A. HLA class I supertypes: a revised and updated 
classification. BMC Immunol. 2008; 9:1. [PubMed: 18211710] 
104. Carlson JM, et al. Phylogenetic dependency networks: inferring patterns of CTL escape and 
codon covariation in HIV-1 Gag. PLoS Comput Biol. 2008; 4:e1000225. [PubMed: 19023406] 
105. Carlson JM, Kadie C, Mallal SA, Heckerman D. Leveraging hierarchical population structure in 
discrete association studies. PLoS One. 2007; 2:e591. [PubMed: 17611623] 
106. Guindon S, et al. New algorithms and methods to estimate maximum-likelihood phylogenies: 
assessing the performance of PhyML 3.0. Syst Biol. 2010; 59:307–21. [PubMed: 20525638] 
107. Dempster AP, Laird NM, Rubin DB. Maximum likelihood from incomplete data via the EM 
algorithm. J R Stat Soc Ser B. 1977; 39:1–38.
108. Holmes I, Rubin GM. An expectation maximization algorithm for training hidden substitution 
models. J Mol Biol. 2002; 317:753–764. [PubMed: 11955022] 
109. Andrew, G.; Gao, J. Proc 24th Int Conf Mach Learn - ICML ’07. ACM Press; 2007. Scalable 
training of L1-regularized log-linear models; p. 33-40.
Carlson et al.
Page 36
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Adaptation of viral sequence to HLA-I alleles
(a) The distribution of adaptation scores computed for all viruses against all HLA profiles in 
Southern Africa (left) and British Columbia (right). Adaptation of autologous virus to host 
HLA (autologous adaptation) is shown in red; adaptation of a virus sequence to a different 
host’s HLA (heterologous adaptation) is shown in blue. Median scores for each distribution 
are indicated. (b) Autologous adaptation is shown for linked transmission pairs from 
Zambia. Colors indicate adaptation with respect to recipients’ (solid) or donors’ (dashed) 
HLA-A (red), -B (blue) and -C (purple) alleles or entire repertoire (black). Error bars, 95% 
confidence intervals. Number of samples in each time point indicated at top. Adaptation of 
linked donor sequence (time point ‘D’) is set to −50 d for display.
Carlson et al.
Page 37
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Autologous adaptation predicts faster disease progression
(a) Adaptation in controllers (VL < 50 copies/ml; left blue, n = 21) and non-controllers 
(middle red, n = 80, Ragon cohort; right purple, n = 383, British Columbia cohort with no 
missing sequence data). Right, individuals who express B*57 or B*27 (n = 11, 8, and 41, for 
the three cohorts, respectively). P-values, two-tailed Mann-Whitney U test. (b) Estimated 
HLA-specific effects on VL in the Southern Africa cohort. Estimated VL (error bars, 95% 
CI) relative to cohort average for individuals expressing the allele with no (blue) or with 
complete (red) allele-specific adaptation. Significant adaptation effects are denoted for P < 
0.001 (***), P < 0.01 (**), and P < 0.05 (*), estimated from likelihood ratio test. (c) VL for 
each of n = 691 HIVC-infected subjects from Durban are shown, stratified by Gag-specific 
adaptation and OLP response breadth (above vs. below population averages). Red, below 
(blue, above) average OLP responses; solid bars, stratum median; dashed line, cohort 
median. P-values, two-tailed Mann-Whitney U-test (primary and interaction effects remain 
significant at P = 0.02 when treated as continuous variables in a mixed model).
Carlson et al.
Page 38
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Transmitted adaptation establishes clinical prognosis and largely explains which HLA 
alleles are protective
(a, b) Pre-adaptation of donor virus to the recipient HLA alleles among Zambian 
Transmission Pairs predicts CD4 decline (a) and early setpoint VL (b). (a) For visualization, 
individuals are stratified into above (red) and below (blue) mean transmitted adaptation; 
here, adaptation is scaled to define a unit change as the difference of transmitted adaptation 
means between the two strata. Hazard ratio (HR) and two-tailed P-value from Cox 
proportional hazard, computed from continuous value. Data for all individuals with 
longitudinal CD4 counts are shown. (c) Adaptation of founder virus from infected 
participants of the Step vaccine trial. Data from all individuals in both vaccine and placebo 
arms with at least two VL measurements prior to initiation of therapy). Rs, P-value, 
Spearman rank correlation. Best fit and 95% CI lines from unadjusted model. See 
Supplementary Table 2 for mixed model with additional covariates.
Carlson et al.
Page 39
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Adaptation impacts HLA-VL associations and heritability estimates
(a) Circulating allele-specific adaptation is compared against allele-specific effects on VL, 
as estimated from a mixed model fitted to the Southern Africa (left; n = 2,298) or British 
Columbia (right; n = 1,048) cohorts. Alleles selected in an independent stepwise regression 
analysis are shown. P-values, pseudo-R2, from mixed model with random offsets for each 
locus. Blue, HLA-A; red, HLA-B, purple, HLA-C. (b) Four alleles showed city-specific VL 
effects (Durban, Lusaka, Gaborone). Their relative VL and circulating adaptation (mean 
centered for each allele) is shown. P-value, pseudo-R2, from mixed model with random 
offset for each city. See Supplementary Fig. 8. (c) Heritability (h2) estimates (95% CI) over 
all 275 Zambian linked transmission pairs with available VL and HLA types, stratified into 
tertiles by HLA-B adaptation-similarity (from left to right: low, medium, high). Donor and 
recipient VL adjusted for sex, age, and sample year independently for each stratum.
Carlson et al.
Page 40
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. CTL responses against pre-adapted transmitted epitopes are dysfunctional
(a, b) Interferon-γ response rates for autologous founder epitopes. (a) Response frequencies 
for non-adapted (blue) and adapted (red) epitopes. Number of epitopes tested and number of 
responses for each protein are indicated. P-value, Fisher’s exact test over total. (b) Response 
rate versus proportion of autologous epitopes that are adapted, on a per-subject level. (c, d) 
Experimental (c) and predicted (d) HLA-peptide binding affinity for adapted (AE) and non-
adapted (NAE) epitopes that elicited response (R) or not (NR). Colored points represent 
matched immunogenic NAE/AE pairs. Solid bars, median; P-values, Mann-Whitney test. (e–
h) Epitope-specific CD8+ T-cells (effectors) assessed for cytotoxicity of activated CD4+ T-
cells (targets). All results from duplicate experiments shown. Lines, mean values; dotted 
lines, negative controls. (e) Representative flow cytometry plot for 7-AAD+ targets in the 
absence (0:1 E:T) or presence (1.5:1 E:T) of effectors. (f) Relative killing of targets from 
HLA-matched (solid) and mismatched (dotted) donors, infected with MJ4 virus mutated to 
contain the NAE or AE FL9 variant and incubated with NAE- or AE-specific effectors. (g, 
h) Cytoxicity (g) and antigen sensitivity (h) curves are indicated for the three matched 
NAE/AE epitopes pairs.
Carlson et al.
Page 41
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 November 16.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
