 BRIEF COMMUNICATION
OPEN
Biomedical findings from NASA’s Project Mercury: a case
series
William R. Carpentier1, John B. Charles2, Mark Shelhamer3, Amanda S. Hackler4, Tracy L. Johnson5, Catherine M. M. Domingo5,
Jeffrey P. Sutton5,6, Graham B. I. Scott5,6,7 and Virginia E. Wotring5,6,8
The United States first sent humans into space during six flights of Project Mercury from May 1961 to May 1963. These flights were
brief, with durations ranging from about 15 min to just over 34 h. A primary purpose of the project was to determine if humans
could perform meaningful tasks while in space. This was supported by a series of biomedical measurements on each astronaut
before, during (when feasible), and after flight to document the effects of exposure to the spaceflight environment. While almost all
of the data presented here have been published in technical reports, this is the first integrated summary of the main results. One
unexpected finding emerges: the major physiological changes associated with these short-term spaceflights are correlated more
strongly with time spent by the astronaut in a spacesuit than with time spent in space per se. Thus, exposure to the direct stressors
of short-duration (up to 34 h) spaceflight was not the dominant factor influencing human health and performance. This is relevant
to current spaceflight programs and especially to upcoming commercial flights in which time spent in space (as on a suborbital
flight) will be minor compared to the time spent in associated preparation, ascent, and return.
npj Microgravity  (2018) 4:6 ; doi:10.1038/s41526-018-0040-5
INTRODUCTION
The launch of Sputnik I by the Soviet Union in October
1957 spurred the creation of Project Mercury in 1958. The project
involved a series of one-man space missions of American
astronauts into suborbital space and ultimately into low Earth
orbit. The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)
was charged with conducting these missions, which were among
the first opportunities to observe the physiological impact on the
human body to prolonged exposure to spaceflight environment
factors.1–3
NASA
selected
seven
active-duty
military
test
pilots
for
temporary duty as astronauts.4 This ensured that individuals had
the requisite technical skills and security clearances, excellent
physical fitness, psychological capabilities for effective perfor-
mance under extreme duress, and the ability to work productively
both independently and within a team.5 At the time of flight, the
Mercury astronauts were a homogeneous group: they were
between 35 and 40 years of age, and due to the size constraints
of the space capsule, stood no taller than 180 cm (5 feet, 11
inches).1,3,5
Each Mercury astronaut was fitted with a specialized spacesuit
intended as a back-up to the spacecraft’s life-support system. The
suit had a dual-layer pressure bladder covered with nylon and
weighed approximately 9.1 kg (20 pounds). Joint reinforcements
and an aluminum-coated outer layer were added to improve
mobility and thermal control, respectively. A hose connected to a
fitting at the waist allowed oxygen to flow through the suit for
cooling and then into the helmet for respiration. The astronauts fit
snuggly into the conical Mercury vehicle that measured 2 m in
height by 1.9 m in diameter at the base.6 Constrained in a small
cabin
(measuring
approximately
1.73 m3),
astronauts
were
restrained by a harness in a semi-supine posture (hips and knees
flexed 90°) for the duration of their flights3,6,7 (see Fig. 1).
One of the greatest challenges in Project Mercury was
characterizing both the physiological and psychological reactions
that could occur in space. Space medicine was considered an
extension of aviation medicine whose experts were consulted on
the health risks of the space environment.5 Scientists knew little
about human tolerance to a sustained weightless environment
and some believed that weightlessness could lead to circulatory
failure, disorientation, gastrointestinal and urinary disturbances,
and muscular incoordination.2,5 Exposure to radiation was also a
concern.
RESULTS
Most physiological measurements made during Project Mercury
were easily implemented, common clinical measures for the
purposes of medical monitoring during the missions. As a result of
operational considerations, most data that were used for this
analysis were collected inconsistently across flights. However,
except for blood pressure, the in-flight vital sign measurements
were reasonably consistent. The post-flight evaluations were not
consistent in timing or in body posture. Specific in-flight tests
varied between the flights.
Nevertheless, several findings were common to all missions. The
key biomedical conclusion of Project Mercury was that human
beings could function in the space environment for incrementally
Received: 5 June 2017 Revised: 31 January 2018 Accepted: 9 February 2018
1NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX, USA; 2NASA Human Research Program, Houston, TX, USA; 3The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA;
4Universities Space Research Association, Houston, TX, USA; 5National Space Biomedical Research Institute, Houston, TX, USA; 6Center for Space Medicine, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX, USA; 7Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA and 8Department of Pharmacology and Chemical
Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA
Correspondence: Virginia E. Wotring (Virginia.Wotring@bcm.edu)
www.nature.com/npjmgrav
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
 increasing flight durations of more than a day. Other major
findings include the following:
In-flight
●
Heart rates of the astronauts were generally increased
compared to those measured during centrifuge runs. Changes
in heart rates from weightlessness to reentry and during
planned exercise tests (a series of pulls on an elastic bungee
cord) were within the same range as observed during
simulations.
●
Respiration rates were higher at lift-off for most crewmembers
but during flight and reentry were similar to simulations.
●
In-flight blood pressure was similar to that seen during pre-
flight simulations.
●
All astronauts reported that sensory functions seemed normal
during their missions. They reported no changes in vision,
hearing, vestibular function, taste, or smell.
●
All astronauts reported that chewing and swallowing of liquids
and solid foods was normal.
●
Urination was also normal.
Post-flight
●
Body temperature was slightly increased above the pre-flight
measurement in all flights (Table 1).
●
Increased heart rate was noted following all Mercury flights
(Table 1).
●
Weight loss was noted following all Mercury flights (Table 2).
●
Systolic blood pressure was lower in five of the six astronauts
when measured in the same body position. .
●
Estimated fluid intake from the time of the pre-flight to the
post-flight physical examination varied widely from 240 mL to
2303 mL, at an average rate of 27.4 to 151.5 mL/h.
●
Urine output varied widely from 295 to 2360 mL and was
strongly associated with fluid intake, and flow rate varied from
an average of 47.6 to 153.3 mL/h.
Loss of body mass
All Mercury astronauts had a recorded weight loss ranging from
1.1 to 3.5 kg, or 1.4 to 5.2% of body weight. The linear
relationships of weight loss to time spent in weightlessness
(r = 0.792; p = 0.60) and to total flight time (r = 0.794; p = 0.059)
are nearly identical. The two suborbital missions had flight
durations of only 15 min with a 5-min period of weightlessness,
but their pilots lost 1.1 to 1.5 kg (1.4–2.2% of body weight). There
is a strong linear correlation between the weight loss time spent in
the Mercury full pressure suit (Fig. 2, filled circles, r = 0.84; p =
0.036). Time in the full pressure suit is defined as starting with the
donning of the spacesuit on launch morning and extending to the
time of the first medical exam after the suit was removed. There is
an even higher correlation when time in the spacesuit is
compared to percent of total
body weight loss (r = 0.87;
p = 0.025).
Crewmembers experienced
similar weight losses
following centrifuge runs, and following simulations in the
spacecraft and in the procedures trainer while wearing Mercury
full pressure suits (Fig. 2, open squares), supporting the notion
that weight losses were related to suited time, rather than
weightless time.
In simulations, the average rate of weight loss in a full pressure
suit was 180 ± 55 g/h. The average rate of weight loss for flights
with similar time in the pressure suit (MR-3 to MA-6) was 212 ±
55 g/h and for all flights (MR-3 to MA-9) was 179 ± 69 g/h.
Fluid balance
Urine volume was measured for four flights: MR-4, MA-6, MA-7,
and MA-9. The rate of excretion during the collection period
varied widely from an average of approximately 30 mL/h for the
MA-9 pilot to an average of 155 mL/h for the MA-7 pilot. Fluid
intake during these flights varied from an average of 27.4 mL/h for
the MA-6 pilot to 151.5 mL/h for the MA-7 pilot. Urine output
during the collection period appeared to be directly associated
with fluid intake.
The MA-7 pilot had a post-flight follow-up examination at
approximately 11 h after landing during which a weight gain of
1.7 kg or approximately 155 g/h was observed, which is likely due
primarily to fluid replacement. Fluid losses can have measurable
effects on the cardiovascular system, as discussed below.
Heart rate
All post-flight heart rates were increased compared to pre-flight
measurements made in the same posture. Only sitting heart rates
Fig. 1
Mercury capsule diagram. This cutaway diagram shows that
the capsule provided close quarters for its single occupant. Image
modified from NASA original
Table 1.
Pre/post body temperature and heart rates
Flight
Temperature (°F)
Heart rate (bpm)
Pre
Post
Change
Pre
Post
Change
MR-3
99.0
100.2
1.2
68
76
8
MR-4
97.8
100.4
2.6
68
90
22
MA-6
98.2
99.2
1.0
68
76
8
MA-7
97.2
97.6
0.4
60
78
18
MA-8
97.6
99.4
1.8
72
92
20
MA-9
97.4
99.4
2.0
76
86
10
Table 2.
Pre/post weight loss, actual and percentage
Flight
Weight (kg)
% Weight loss
Pre
Post
Change
MR-3
76.79
75.70
−1.09
1.42
MR-4
68.27
66.80
−1.47
2.15
MA-6
77.79
75.30
−2.49
3.20
MA-7
69.85
67.10
−2.75
3.94
MA-8
80.19
78.20
−1.99
2.48
MA-9
66.68
63.20
−3.48
5.22
Biomedical findings from NASA’s Project Mercury...
WR Carpentier et al.
2
npj Microgravity (2018)  6 
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
1234567890():,;
 were available for all six Mercury astronauts; supine and standing
rates
were
infrequent.
Cardiovascular
changes,
including
increased heart rate with change in position and the associated
decreases in blood pressure, appear to be related to the weight
loss. The rate of change in sitting heart rate (% increase in beats/h)
was significantly correlated with the rate of change in weight (%
decrease in kg/h) for time spent in the spacesuit (r = 0.85; p =
0.03).
Heart rate increases were also recorded following one MA-8 and
two MR-4 simulations. These heart rate increases were also
associated with weight losses and were in a similar range as post-
flight (Fig. 3).
Blood pressure
Post-flight blood pressure measurements were less standardized
than heart rate measurements in terms of timing and body
position. Of the five astronauts who had pre-flight sitting blood
pressures recorded, only three had post-flight sitting measure-
ments. One astronaut had pre-flight and post-flight supine
measurements and one had standing measurements. In all but
one case, post-flight systolic pressure measurements in similar
body positions were lower than pre-flight values by 3–18 mmHg.
Systolic pressure was also lower following four out of five
simulations. In general, a greater decrease in systolic blood
pressure was associated with a higher increase in heart rate.
Compared to the changes in systolic pressure, the post-flight
diastolic pressures were much more variable. However, calculated
pulse pressure was lower in four of the five astronaut measure-
ments,
but
body
position
during
measurements
was
not
consistent. Mean arterial pressure was lower in all cases, due
mainly to the decrease in systolic pressure. The MA-8 pilot had a
drop in standing systolic pressure compared to his supine systolic
pressure. This was associated with a significant increase in
standing heart rate. The MA-9 pilot had a low systolic pressure
while supine in the spacecraft and he became presyncopal
while standing after egressing. His supine rest and tilt systolic and
diastolic
pressures
were
significantly
decreased
post-flight.
Pulse pressure was narrowed and mean arterial pressure was
decreased. These findings are consistent with orthostatic hypo-
tension. His weight gain that may be explained by fluid
replacement was also associated with a return to normal pre-
flight blood pressure.
DISCUSSION
The six Mercury astronauts were placed into the essentially
unknown and potentially dangerous environment of space. No
established normal physiological values for spaceflight stress
parameters existed at the time, nor were there proven methods
for determining whether an astronaut was approaching a thresh-
old of tolerance. Personalized physiological norms needed to be
empirically derived for each astronaut and used to evaluate the in-
flight status of each individual. These norms, which included both
physiological factors and clinical assessments, would be based on
measurements made before, during, and following training trials
on centrifuges and flight simulators. Project Mercury demon-
strated that humans could function during spaceflight of up to
34 h without notable deterioration of normal body functions or
significant degradation of pilot function.
Decreased appetite was reported for all four orbital flights and
water intake was also reduced during three of the four flights.
Weight loss of the magnitude occurring over the short duration of
these spaceflights, especially the suborbital flights, is likely due to
a combination of limited intake, loss from the skin and respiratory
tract, and increased sweating while wearing the Mercury full
pressure suit. Individual data suggest that the observed weight
loss may have been be reduced or prevented by a replacement
intake that includes fluid, electrolytes, and nutrients. The loss of
water through the skin is obligatory in most environments and the
need to dissipate body heat through sweating takes precedence
over conserving water, which can result in dehydration. The
evaporation of moisture from the skin serves as a primary method
of cooling in a ventilated pressure suit. The estimate for average
insensible and sweat loss for these four flights was 150 mL/h
(range 96–194). When test subjects were evaluated seated and
mildly active in full pressure suits during simulated flight
conditions, sweat production of 300 to 600 mL/h was reported.
The Mercury
spaceflights were
brief relative to modern
missions,
but
their
durations
are
comparable
to
expected
commercial tourist spaceflights. This new analysis spanning all
the manned Mercury missions shows that certain physiological
responses associated with spaceflight correlate better with suited
time than with time in weightlessness or time in flight. Since
operational aspects like spacesuits can be modified to reduce their
physiological impact, this finding can be used to improve crew
health, comfort, and performance on future spaceflights.
METHODS
Flights were designated and numbered sequentially according to the
launch vehicle: the suborbital missions used the Redstone rocket and were
designated “MR” for “Mercury-Redstone”; the orbital missions employed
Fig. 2
Changes in body mass correlate with time in the spacesuit.
Body mass data from all Project Mercury flights and simulations
show a correlation with time spent in the suit. Since the weight
losses observed in simulations (open squares) show the same trend
as those observed during actual spaceflights (filled circles), weight
loss was likely associated with time spent in the suit, that was
common to both scenarios
Fig. 3
Heart rate elevations during missions correlated with the rate
of body mass loss. Both variables are shown as a percentage: (pre-
flight–post-flight) divided by pre-flight. Linear regression of flight
data (dashed line) had a correlation coefficient of 0.72; note that
simulation data, although few in number, also appear to fit this
correlation
Biomedical findings from NASA’s Project Mercury...
WR Carpentier et al.
3
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
npj Microgravity (2018)  6 
 the Atlas rocket and were designated “MA” for “Mercury-Atlas.” Technical
characteristics of the six crewed Mercury flights (MR-3, MR-4, MA-6, MA-7,
MA-8, and MA-9) are shown in Table 3. Mission designs and time spent in
the pressure suit, in the spacecraft, in-flight, and in weightlessness are
shown in Fig. 4. Other flights in Project Mercury are not discussed further in
this paper, including seven unmanned test flights and two chimpanzee
flights to demonstrate the compatibility of complex life with the spacecraft
and flight environment. These subjects were the first Americans to
experience weightlessness; their data were collected for medical monitor-
ing purposes. The analysis presented here is new, but the data have been
published previously (Table 4).
These missions predate the Privacy Act of 1974 and Institutional Review
Board (IRB), so data collection and analysis protocols were not approved by
any such boards; however, the authors received a determination from the
NASA IRB Chairman that this current analysis did not require IRB review.
MEASUREMENTS
Biomedical measurements were initially limited to the most basic
vital signs, but additional measures were added as missions grew
longer. Flight surgeons relied on sensors that measured body core
temperature, respiration rate, and electrical activity in the heart,8–
10 to aid in the real-time assessment of astronaut status.
Measuring physiological responses in pilots was not new, but
such prolonged monitoring had not been previously attempted.
Along
with
remote
monitoring,
verbal
feedback
from
the
astronauts was vital to determining their well-being, but, like the
monitoring, could only be employed when in range of one of the
limited number of ground stations.5
Body temperature
Body temperature was measured rectally during all but the final
Mercury mission, to give the most effective temperature indication
with the simplest device.11 On the last flight, MA-9, which was
much longer than previous missions, the thermistor was modified
for oral use for reasons of comfort.2
Blood pressure
A blood pressure system was not technically feasible at the
beginning of Project Mercury but was developed in time for use
on the four orbital missions.12 With continued refinement, the last
two missions, MA-8 and MA-9, returned excellent blood pressure
data.2,13 Body postures were not consistent across measurements;
for approximately half the subjects, posture was the same at both
pre-flight and post-flight measurements.
Table 3.
Project Mercury missions
Mission
Date
Flight duration (h:min:s)
Weightless time (h:min:s)
# Earth orbits
Pilot
MR-3
5/5/1961
15:28
5:04
0
A.B. Shepard
MR-4
7/21/1961
15:37
5:00
0
V.I. Grissom
MA-6
2/20/1962
4:55:23
4:38:00
3
J.H. Glenn
MA-7
5/24/1962
4:56:05
4:39:00
3
M.S. Carpenter
MA-8
10/3/1962
9:13:11
8:56:22
6
W.M. Schirra
MA-9
5/15/1963
34:19:49
34:03:30
22
L.G. Cooper
Fig. 4
Mission architecture for Project Mercury. Histogram shows time in hours spent in weightlessness (blue), in-flight (red), in the spacecraft
(green), and in the pressure suit (purple). Note that suit time did not differ greatly for the first 5 missions, although weightless time did. Icons
(top) indicate suborbital flights and number of orbits for each orbital flight
Biomedical findings from NASA’s Project Mercury...
WR Carpentier et al.
4
npj Microgravity (2018)  6 
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
 Respiration
A thermistor sensing system which measured air movement
directly and eliminated the need for chest straps was used for the
first four flights.11 Because the thermistor responded to ambient
temperature,
it
was
heated
to
a
temperature
above
the
surroundings so respiratory airflow could be measured by the
cooling of the probe.8 An impedance pneumograph system was
implemented for the final two flights which provided accurate
respiration information during most of the flight.5
Cardiac electrical activity
An
electrocardiogram
electrode
was
developed
for
Project
Mercury that provided good electrical contact with the subject’s
skin, easy application, no physical interference with the subject,
resistance compatible with the amplifier system, and the capacity
to function for 30+ h of flight.5,8 This solution gave distinguishable
QRS complexes and T-waves and was used throughout the
project.8
Body weight
Weight was measured before and after flight.11 All weight
measurements were made nude with an empty bladder on a
beam-balance scale. Pre-flight measurements were made on the
same scale by the same operators, while post-flight measurements
were made on different scales by different operators on different
recovery ships. These scales measured in pounds interpolated to
the nearest quarter pound by the operator; values given in this
report have been converted to metric units. While the elapsed
time between the pre-flight physical examination and launch was
relatively consistent at 2.5 to 4.2 h, the elapsed time between
landing and the first post-flight medical examination varied from
30 min to 4.6 h.2,11–15
Urine collection
Urine was collected using an in-suit device for all flights but the
first one. The start time for the collection could not be
documented but was estimated to be after the launch day
physical examination and prior to donning the suit. The urine
volume was measured following suit removal post-flight and
included urinations on the launch pad, during flight, and post-
flight.2,12,14,15 Thus, urine collection time was somewhat longer
than suited time. For the longest flight, the collection bag could
be emptied into storage bags aboard the spacecraft using a
syringe-type pump. The urine collection device attachment failed
during landing on the MA-8 flight and most of the collection was
lost,13 but accurate measurements were made for the other four
flights.
Insensible Fluid Loss and Sweat Loss
Insensible fluid loss and sweat loss together were estimated as
that portion of total weight loss that equals the pre-flight weight
plus subsequent pre-flight and in-flight fluid intake minus urine
volume.
Data availability statement
The data analyzed are available online in the NASA History Office
(https://history.nasa.gov/) or on the NASA Technical Reports Server
(https://ntrs.nasa.gov/). Our collected data have been submitted
for archiving in NASA Lifetime Surveillance of Astronaut Health
(https://lsda.jsc.nasa.gov/lsah_home1.aspx).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to acknowledge the Mercury 7 astronauts for their contributions to the
beginning of the space life sciences as well as the scientists, engineers, and
physicians that enabled their successful journeys.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
W.R.C. provided the data, initial observations, and concept. W.R.C., J.P.S., M.S., and V.E.
W. developed the presentation of the study as a historical case series. V.E.W. prepared
graphs and tables. A.S.H. and C.M.M.D. wrote the Introduction; J.B.C. and T.L.J. wrote
the Methods and Measurements; G.B.I.S. and M.S. wrote the Results and Discussion.
All authors discussed the entire manuscript and its implications, and participated in
editing the complete manuscript. V.E.W, G.B.I.S., T.L.J., C.M.M.D., A.S.H., and J.P.S. were
supported by NSBRI (A.S.H. is now at USRA). J.B.C. is employed by NASA civil service;
W.R.C. is retired from NASA. M.S. was supported by NASA (detailed from Johns
Hopkins, his current employer.)
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.
Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional affiliations.
REFERENCES
1. Grinter,
K.
Project
Mercury
Overview
http://www-pao.ksc.nasa.gov/history/
mercury/mercury-overview.htm (2000).
2. Office of
Scientific and
Technical Information National
Aeronautics
and
Space Administration. Mercury Project Summary Including Results of the Fourth
Manned Orbital Flight, May 15 and 16, 1963 (Office of Scientific and Technical
Information National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Washington DC,
1963).
3. Swenson, L. S., Grimwood, J. M. & Alexander, C. C. This New Ocean, A History of
Project Mercury (Scientific and Technical Information Division, Office of Technol-
ogy Utilization, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Houston, 1966).
in Time Vol. LXXIII (1959).
4. Voas, R. B. Project Mercury astronaut training program. Symposium on Psycho-
physiological Aspects of Space Flight http://docplayer.net/986308-Project-mercury-
astronaut-training-program-robert-b-voas-nasa-space-task-group-langley-field-
virginia-introduction.htmL (1960).
5. Link, M. M. & United States. National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
Scientific and Technical Information Division. Space Medicine in Project Mercury.
(Scientific and Technical Information Division, National Aeronautics and Space
Administration, Houston, 2006).
6. McDonnell Aircraft Corporation. Project Mercury Familiarization Manual (McDon-
nell Aircraft Corporation, St. Louis, MO, 1959).
7. Young, A. Spacesuits Within the Collections of the Smithsonian National Air and
Space Museum 1st edn (PowerHouse Books, Brooklyn, NY, 2009).
8. Wheelwright, C. D. Physiological Sensors for use in Project Mercury (Manned
Spacecraft Center, Houston, TX, National Aeronautics and Space Administration,
Houston, 1962).
9. Grimwood, J. M. Project Mercury; A Chronology (National Aeronautics and Space
Administration, Washington, DC, 1963).
10. Akens, D. S. Historical Origins of the George C. Marshall Space Flight Center (His-
torical Office, Office of Management Services, George C. Marshall Space Flight
Center, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Houston, 1960).
Table 4.
Pre/post Hct and Hb
Flight
Hct (%)
Hb (g/100 ml)
Pre (mean)
Post
Change
Pre (mean)
Post
Change
MR-3
45.0
40.0
−5.0
13.0
13.5
0.5
MR-4
42.5
42.2
−0.3
14.1
14.4
0.3
MA-6
42.3
46.0
3.7
14.3
16.1
1.8
MA-7
44.5
50.0
5.5
14.4
16.0
1.6
MA-8
44.0
47.0
3.0
15.0
14.5
−0.5
MA-9
44.3
49.0
4.7
14.8
16.5
1.7
Mean
43.77
45.70
1.93
14.27
15.17
0.90
SD
1.11
3.90
3.94
0.70
1.20
0.94
Hct hematocrit, Hb hemoglobin
Biomedical findings from NASA’s Project Mercury...
WR Carpentier et al.
5
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
npj Microgravity (2018)  6 
 11. Manned Spacecraft Center (U.S.). Results of the First U.S. Manned Suborbital Space
Flight, June 6, 1961 (National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Washington,
DC, 1961).
12. Manned Spacecraft Center (U.S.). Results of the First U.S. Manned Orbital Space
Flight, February 20, 1962 (U.S. Govt. Print. Off., Washington, 1962).
13. Manned Spacecraft Center (U.S.). Results of the Third U.S. Manned Orbital Space
Flight, October 3, 1962 (National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Manned
Spacecraft Center, Project Mercury; for sale by the Superintendent of Documents,
U.S. Govt. Print. Off., Washington, 1962).
14. Manned Spacecraft Center (U.S.). Results of the Second U.S. Manned Suborbital
Space Flight, July 21, 1961 (U.S. Govt. Print. Off., Washington, 1961).
15. Manned Spacecraft Center (U.S.). Results of the Second U.S. Manned Orbital Space
Flight, May 24, 1962 (National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Manned
Spacecraft Center, Houston, 1962)
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2018
Biomedical findings from NASA’s Project Mercury...
WR Carpentier et al.
6
npj Microgravity (2018)  6 
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
