 The cellular composition of the human immune system is 
shaped by age and cohabitation
Edward J. Carr#1, James Dooley#2,3, Josselyn E. Garcia-Perez2,3, Vasiliki Lagou2,3,4, James 
C. Lee5, Carine Wouters3, Isabelle Meyts3, An Goris4, Guy Boeckxstaens6, Michelle A. 
Linterman#1, and Adrian Liston#2,3,*
1Lymphocyte Signaling and Development ISP
, Babraham Institute, Cambridge CB22 3AT, UK
2Translational Immunology Laboratory, VIB, Leuven 3000, Belgium
3Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Leuven, Leuven 3000, Belgium
4Department of Neurosciences, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
5Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge Biomedical 
Campus, Cambridge CB2 0XY, UK; Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge School of 
Clinical Medicine, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, UK
6Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
# These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract
Detailed population-level description of the human immune system has recently become 
achievable. We used a “systems-level” approach to establish a resource of cellular immune profiles 
of 670 healthy individuals. We report a high level of inter-individual variation, with low 
longitudinal variation, at the level of cellular subset composition of the immune system. Despite 
the profound effects of antigen exposure on individual antigen-specific clones, the cellular subset 
structure proved highly elastic, with transient vaccination-induced changes being followed by a 
return to the unique baseline of the individual. Strikingly, the largest influence on immunological 
variation identified was cohabitation, with a 50% reduction in immunological variation between 
individuals who share an environment (parents) compared to the wider population. These results 
identify local environmental conditions are a key shaper of the human immune system.
Introduction
Enormous progress has been made in understanding the cellular and molecular components 
of the immune system. The key tool in this progression has been the use of mouse models, 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
*To whom correspondence should be addressed: adrian.liston@vib.be. 
Author’s contribution
EJC analysed the data and drafted the manuscript. JD and JG performed the experiments. VL analysed the vaccination cohort. JCL, 
CW, IM, AN and GB designed and recruited sub-cohorts. MAL designed and supervised the vaccination study, contributed to the data 
analysis and the manuscript. AL designed and supervised the study and drafted the manuscript.
Europe PMC Funders Group
Author Manuscript
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Immunol. 2016 April ; 17(4): 461–468. doi:10.1038/ni.3371.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 especially genetically modified models that have allowed the functional dissection of the 
myriad of interconnecting components. Despite this progress in mouse models, or, perhaps 
because of it, it has been convincingly argued that the focus of immunology should return to 
the human context1, including a comprehensive analysis of the full spectrum of 
immunological diversity, and the causes thereof.
Several recent studies have embraced this call for investigating human immunological 
diversity, identifying genetic factors as accounting for ~25-50% of measured immunological 
variation 2, 3, 4. A recent twin-study indicated that at least half of the immune trait variance 
is explained by non-genetic factors 3. Similarly the mean heritability of immune traits 
reported by a quantitative trail locus (QTL) study in healthy Sardinians was 41% 2. The 
ImmVar project, which tested for gene expression QTLs in circulating human immune cells, 
estimated that approximately 22% of the variance in gene expression is explained by genetic 
factors 4. Together these studies suggest that the immunoprofile of the healthy population is 
governed in a large part by non-genetic factors. As these non-genetic factors predominate, 
and arguably are more amenable to clinical manipulation, it is critical for us to identify and 
quantify the key factors that shape the human immune landscape.
Using hypothesis-based approaches, several non-genetic factors have already been identified 
which influence the landscape of the human immune system. Chronic infections, in 
particular latent herpesvirus infection, are associated with a panoply of immunological 
changes and discordance for CMV seropositivity in monozygotic twin pairs resulted in 
weaker pairwise correlations for many immune parameters 3. Another important non-genetic 
impact on the immune system is ageing, with potent effects on both the innate and adaptive 
arms of the immune response 5. Within the adaptive system, ageing is associated with a 
decline in naïve T cells 6. In mice, this is due to thymic involution, however, in humans, loss 
of naïve CD4+ T cells is primarily driven by a failure of peripheral replication of naïve cells 
7, 8, again demonstrating the importance of direct assessment of human immunology rather 
than relying entirely on the mouse (and, indeed, far too often on a single inbred strain).
In the present study, we profiled the immune system of 670 healthy human volunteers, aged 
2 to 86 years old, to provide a description of the population-level heterogeneity present in 
the cellular composition of the circulating immune system. Through the targeted recruitment 
of sub-cohorts with longitudinal sampling before and after severe immunological challenge, 
we were able to determine that the immunological diversity between individuals is highly 
robust, with an elastic return to the unique steady state of the individual following 
immunological challenge. We report that co-parenting profoundly reduces the 
immunological variation between two individuals, suggesting that environmental influences 
can drive convergence as well as diversity within our immunological profile.
Results
Elasticity of the human cellular immune system
To investigate diversity in the composition of the human immune system, we developed an 
immune phenotyping platform quantifying 54 distinct immunological parameters by flow 
cytometry and serum analysis, with a focus on cellular subsets within the adaptive immune 
Carr et al.
Page 2
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 system. Following optimization, we recruited 638 healthy Belgian individuals for immune 
profiling, ranging from 2 to 86 years of age and free from self-reported gastrointestinal, 
autoimmune or inflammatory disease (Supplementary Table 1). Of these, 140 individuals 
were recruited as 70 pairs (co-parents of children). 177 individuals were sampled at multiple 
time-points (average of 6 months between sampling) to allow the measurement of 
longitudinal variation. Within this longitudinal cohort we targeted individuals who were 
planning to travel with a high risk of developing gastroenteritis and obtained before and after 
travel samples for 50 individuals. In total, 921 samples from 638 individuals were assessed 
over a period of 3 years.
As an exploratory analysis of the dataset, we examined the degree and structure of the 
variation. Substantial variation was observed in all of the immunological parameters 
measured (Supplementary Table 2). To determine whether there were underlying patterns 
within the variation, we performed unsupervised hierarchical clustering (Fig. 1a). The 
strongest clustering was observed between parameters manually annotated as “precursor” 
cell types, with recent thymic emigrant (RTE) CD4 T cells, RTE CD8 T cells, naïve CD4 T 
cells and naïve CD8 T cells forming a single cluster (Fig. 1). This cluster was robust, being 
identified through iterative re-clustering (Supplementary Fig. 1). Parameters within the other 
manually annotated groups (humoral, inflammatory, regulatory, core cell types, cytokines) 
were distributed throughout the hierarchy. Using multi-dimensional scaling (MDS), we 
identified, in a data-driven manner, co-correlations between precursor populations (Fig. 1b). 
As precursor parameters separated from the rest of the parameters along the first dimension, 
this represents the largest source of variability between immune parameters, suggesting 
more co-ordinated biological control of these particular subsets. These data demonstrate that 
there is a high degree of variation in the immunological profiles of healthy individuals, with 
the largest component of the variation being a co-regulated change in the frequency of naïve 
or precursor cell types. Activated cell types and products, by contrast, demonstrated only 
minor co-regulation (with several biologically-relevant exceptions, such as between TH1 and 
TC1 cells).
To determine whether immunological variation represented a dynamic process of change 
within individuals or a spectrum of different stable equilibria between individuals, we used 
the longitudinal sub-cohort of 177 individuals to ANOVA model with 2 independent 
variables – the volunteer’s unique identifier and the sample time-point (Fig. 2). Each 
immune parameter (Supplementary Table 2) was used as the response variable in these 
models (Fig. 2). The majority of the variation in each parameter was explained by a model 
of stable intra-individual immune profiles over longitudinal sampling (Fig. 2a), with a 
median R2 of 0.84 across the parameters (range, 0.5-1.0) and 60% of models maintaining 
statistical significance after correction for multiple testing (Fig. 2b). Variation between 
repeat samples of individuals, by contrast, contributed very little to the observed total 
variation, with a median proportion of R2 of 0.017 (range, 0.004-0.066), whereas intra-
individual variation explained a much larger effect with a median proportion of R2 of 0.983 
(range, 0.934-0.996) (Fig. 2c). Thus, of the total variation observed within our dataset, the 
majority (84%) can be explained by a model that includes both inter-individual and intra-
individual variation, with just 1.4% attributable to the intra-individual variation between 
sample time-points. This stability in the cellular immune profile of individuals over an 
Carr et al.
Page 3
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 extended sampling period is consistent with that observed by other flow cytometry-based 
studies 2, 3, 9, and is consistent with a diverse set of stable equilibria observed between 
individuals.
Having established that the relationship between immune subsets within an individual is 
highly stable over time, we sought to determine whether this stability was elastic or fragile. 
Within our dataset, we included a sub-cohort of fifty individuals who were sampled before 
and after travel to a developing nation, where there is an elevated risk of acquiring 
gastrointestinal infection. Of this sub-cohort, 24 individuals developed acute gastroenteritis 
whilst abroad and 26 did not (Supplementary Fig. 2a). Of these cases, 22 were classified as 
moderate or classic gastroenteritis with a median of 2 days of diarrhoea. Individuals were 
requested not to use antibiotics during this gastrointestinal challenge unless clinically 
indicated (87.5% did not use antibiotics), to allow a natural immune response to take course. 
Given the activation of the immune system during infection, as well as the importance of the 
gut microbiome 10, this experimental design allowed the determination of whether a 
combined immunological and microbiological disturbance would act as a “reset” on the 
immunological landscape, with individuals stabilising at an alternative equilibria point after 
the resolution of infection. To test this hypothesis, we repeated our earlier analysis of intra-
individual variation by segregating the population into individuals that were continuously 
healthy during the sampling period and individuals that experienced acute gastrointestinal 
challenge between samples. No substantive effect was seen for gastrointestinal interlude on 
any single immunological parameter, with the modest changes in R2 (Fig. 2a) being driven 
by reduced numbers in subsets, as indicated by the accompanying reductions in P values 
(Fig. 2b). Notably TH17 cells, the cell type with the most compelling microbiome-
interaction evidence 11, were unaffected in this analysis (Fig. 2a,b and Supplementary Fig. 
3). Having failed to identify single immune parameters altered by immunological 
perturbation, we performed multi-dimensional scaling on paired samples to test whether 
severe gastrointestinal infection had an effect via the cumulative effect of minor changes on 
multiple parameters (Fig. 2d). In this analysis, multi-dimensions (representing each of 54 
immune parameters) are reduced to 2 dimensions. Samples (either different visits or 
different individuals) that are closer together are more similar; those further apart are more 
dissimilar. The individuals affected by the diarrhoeal immunological insult did not separate 
from the rest of the data and the “immunological distance” between longitudinal samples 
was no greater than that of individuals who were continuously healthy (Fig. 2e). Even 
among the subset of patients with the longest duration of gastroenteritis (≥4 days) no 
increase in immunological distance was observed (Supplementary Fig. 2). Together our 
analyses demonstrate that not only can the human immune system exist in a diverse set of 
stable equilibria, but that these equilibria are maintained following immunological and 
microbiological disturbances, with each individual returning back to the original steady state 
following the resolution of infection. This result does not exclude functional or numerical 
changes within the response clones (expansion, conversion to a memory phenotype), but 
instead refers to the overall cell subset structure of the immune system. One possible 
explanation for this is that the number of antigen-specific memory cells remaining following 
immunological challenge are few in number 12, 13, 14, and the intrinsic biases in the 
individual that make up the prior immune status also apply to newly expanded clones. Thus, 
Carr et al.
Page 4
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 while individual responding T cell and B cell clones may change markedly as a response to 
activation, the functional landscape in which they assimilate remains intact.
The real world context of gastrointestinal infection results in several study limitations, with 
the inability to take a peak-infection sample and variation in the sampling schedule and 
infection. To overcome these intrinsic caveats, we initiated an independent cohort to assess 
how a defined immunological stimulus, influenza vaccination, impacts on the immune 
landscape. 32 healthy English individuals, between 53 and 64 years of age, were recruited 
during the 2014-2015 winter influenza vaccination season. Volunteers were sampled prior to 
intramuscular vaccination with the standard seasonal inactivated influenza vaccine, and at 7 
and 42 days post-vaccination. Samples were then phenotyped on a parallel immune 
phenotyping platform, which replicated the variation structure and substructure present in 
the Belgian cohort (Supplementary Fig. 4). Analysis of individual immune parameters 
indicated that most parameters remained unchanged throughout the study (Fig. 3a and 
Supplementary Fig. 5). The exceptions were circulating follicular T helper-like cells (cTFH), 
proliferating CD4+ T cells (Ki67+) and plasmablasts, all of which demonstrated marked 
increases at day 7, before returning to baseline at day 42 (Fig. 3b). To determine whether the 
immunological challenge of vaccination disrupted the immune landscape of the volunteers, 
we built a longitudinal ANOVA model. Between day 0 and day 7, almost the entire variation 
could be accounted for by inter-individual variation, with the exception of the three 
vaccination response parameters, where sample time-point (intra-individual variation)(Fig. 
3c). With the resolution of the vaccine response (assessing day 0 and 42 time-points), even 
the vaccination response parameters showed no substantial time-point (intra-individual) 
variation (Fig. 3d), demonstrating that even perturbed parameters rebounded to pre-
challenge settings. This is consistent with previous systems vaccinology papers that describe 
an alteration in the gene expression profile of peripheral blood samples in the first two-
weeks following vaccination, followed by a return to baseline state 12, 15, 16. To 
demonstrate the global robustness of the immunological landscape, we used 
multidimensional scaling. This analysis indicated clustering of samples by individual rather 
than time-point (Fig. 3e), with low immunological distances between samples (Fig. 3f). To 
test whether the return to baseline was a population level process or whether each individual 
returned to their own unique baseline, we calculated a Z-score for each immunological 
parameter for each individual at day 0 and day 7. A strong correlation (R2 0.74, P<2x10-16) 
was observed (Fig. 3g), indicating that individuals regained their relative inter-individual 
differences after vaccination. In all, using an independent immunological challenge, these 
results show significant stability of human immune cell subsets, and indicate an elastic 
ability to respond to antigen before returning to a baseline state.
Age and cohabitation affect the immunological landscape
Having established the diversity of elastic stable equilibria in the human immune system, we 
sought to determine the underlying biological drivers. As the variability was greatest in the 
precursor populations, we first investigated the effect of age on immune profile. Our dataset 
includes individuals ranging from 2 to 86 years of age, with substantial numbers of both 
children (<18 years, n=40) and older persons (>65 years, n=54). Strong relationships, both 
positive and negative, were observed between immune parameters and age (Fig. 4a-c). Using 
Carr et al.
Page 5
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 a threshold of adjusted p<0.01 and r<-0.35 or r>0.35 (see Supplementary Fig. 6 and 
Supplementary Table 2), three immune parameters had a negative relationship with age and 
seven had a positive relationship with age. CD4+ RTE (Fig. 4b), transitional B cells (Fig. 4c) 
and CD8+ RTE (Fig. 4d) were all reduced in a linear fashion as individuals aged, consistent 
with an age-dependent reduction in thymus and bone-marrow activity. We observed a 
positive relationship of several inflammatory populations with age, namely TH1 cells (Figure 
4E), CD4+IL-2+ cells (Fig. 4f), TC1 cells (Fig. 4g), CD8+IL-2+ cells (Fig. 4h) and iNKT 
cells (Fig. 4j), and an age-associated increase in CD8+ T cells (Fig. 4i). Despite finding 
significantly more Th1-associated cells with age, serum IFN-γ did not reach our threshold 
for correlation coefficient (r=0.18 [95% CI 0.06-0.29]; adjusted P=5.2x10-3). We did, 
however, identify IL-6, another pro-inflammatory cytokine as significantly increased with 
age (Fig. 4k). Together these data demonstrate that age is a major contributor to the immune 
profile of healthy individuals, with a successive downregulation of precursor populations and 
an upregulation of TH1-associated inflammatory populations with age. Interestingly, the 
data-points from two extremes of age (<18 and >65 years old), do not have larger variances 
than the central ages. This observation suggests, at least for these immune parameters, that 
paediatric and geriatric immunology are not “special cases” with different rules, but rather 
follow a set of continuous influences.
There are well-defined differences in ageing-related diseases between the genders. We 
therefore assessed whether any of the immune parameters were associated with gender, 
while controlling for age. We found that gender added no explanatory power to a model 
already including age, with essentially no effect on the variance of each immune parameter 
with a median difference in R2 of 0.006 (Fig. 4b,c). The only significant effects of gender on 
the immune profile was an increase in CD4+ T cell numbers in women compared to men, 
with a median CD4+ T cell frequency of 17.8% in women and 14.6% in men (adjusted 
P=1.3x10-3), consistent with previous reports 17.
To extend the analysis on physiological influences on immune profiles, we assessed body 
mass index (BMI), anxiety and depression in a subset of adult volunteers (>18 years). BMI 
provided two significant associations with immune parameters: CD4+IL-2+ (adjusted 
P=0.03) and IL-6 (P=0.007), however their effect sizes were modest, with an R2 of 0.06 and 
0.09, respectively (Fig. 5a,b). As an extra complexity, there is a relationship between BMI 
and age (Fig. 5c), with a tendency for BMI to increase with age. To control for this, we built 
both age and BMI into our model. For all the age-BMI immune associations, with the 
exception of IL-6, BMI was the minor contributor to the observed variation, with age 
playing a much greater role (Fig. 5d). By contrast, serum concentrations of IL-6, an adipose-
associated cytokine, was equally influenced by both age and BMI (Fig. 5d). Many of the 
other changes associated with BMI in the literature 18, 19, 20, 21 were not observed in our 
dataset. This discrepancy may be due to inadequate controlling for age in prior studies 
(based on the relative strength of associations observed here, using age as a category rather 
than as a linear variable would substantially over-estimate the effect of BMI), or a relative 
lack of individuals at the extreme ends of the BMI scale in the current study. To investigate a 
potential neuro-immunological connection, we sought to determine whether anxiety and 
depression scores 19 altered immune parameters, however no substantial or significant 
effects were observed (Fig. 5e). Together, these data indicate that BMI, depression or anxiety 
Carr et al.
Page 6
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 do not substantively alter immune equilibria point of healthy individuals, beyond the 
association of BMI with serum IL-6 concentrations.
Finally, we sought to determine whether cohabitation had an impact on immune equilibria. 
Within our study, we sampled 70 parental pairs (adults, 18 to 65, with one or more children 
living at home). From these 140 individuals we could ask whether a shared environment 
altered immunoprofiles. Our hypothesis was that the immunoprofiles of a parental pair 
would be more closely related than a random in silico male:female pairing. To test this 
assertion, we used multi-dimensional scaling to reduce the diversity of the immune system 
down to two dimensions (Fig. 6a) and linked each pair with a line. We measured the distance 
between mother and father for all parental pairs (Fig. 6b) and compared this to the distance 
between randomly generated pairings (Fig. 6b). We found that there was a significant and 
substantial (~50%) reduction in the immune variability between genuine parental pairs 
compared to the randomised, null pairs, suggesting that a shared environment drives a 
convergence between immunoprofile. This effect was independent of age, as exclusion of the 
identified age-related parameters gave no difference in the result (Supplementary Fig. 7). 
Likewise, measurement of cytokine production following in vitro stimulations of PBMCs 
demonstrated significant convergence between the profiles of parents (Supplementary Fig. 
8), demonstrating that the effect extends to alternative methodologies. These results 
demonstrate that while the immunological equilibria point is robust and stable within an 
individual, two individuals in a close relationship converge towards a single immunological 
equilibria point.
Discussion
Non-genetic factors are estimated to account for ~50-75% of immunological variation 
between healthy individuals 2, 3, 4, yet a thorough understanding of the causative factors at 
play remains lacking. Through the use of a systems immunology approach and targeted sub-
cohorts of healthy individuals, we were able to assess the main non-genetic factors. Of the 
intrinsic factors of age, BMI, sex and psychological state, an individual’s age was the most 
important influence on their immunological landscape. This result complements 
longstanding observations that immune function (response to vaccination, infection, cancer 
immunosurveillance) deteriorates with age. The reduction in T cell precursors may be 
explained by thymic involution 22, however the highly concordant decrease in transitional B 
cells, suggests a common root cause, such as impaired bone-marrow function 23. The age-
dependent increase in TH1-associated populations is striking because TH2 and TH17 cell 
populations did not show an association with age, demonstrating that this effect is specific to 
the TH1 arm of the immune system, rather than a generic increase in T cell activation. 
Overall, for the 10 age-associated traits, the combined effect of age and genetics appears to 
account for almost the entire variability in the human population. In the current study, the 
median age-dependent R2 for these traits was 0.13. The median published heritability for 
these traits (R2 for genetic effects) 3, is 0.67. We estimate that for age-related immune 
parameters, ~80% of their variation would be explicable by age and genetic factors, with 
more variability potentially explained by age-genetic interaction. It is intriguing that the 
immune parameters that are age-related have higher heritability estimates than the rest of the 
immunoprofile 3.
Carr et al.
Page 7
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 The immunological effect of BMI could perhaps be best regarded as a minor acceleration in 
the normal immunoageing process. The striking exception to the negligible effect of BMI 
was the positive association with serum IL-6 concentrations. One possibility is that this IL-6 
is “non-immune” in origin, as monocytes from older individuals secrete less IL-6 in 
response to TLR ligation 5. While the precise cellular origin of increased IL-6 in aged and 
high BMI humans is unknown, a plausible candidate is vascular smooth muscle cells 
(VSMCs). Aged VSMC from mice and non-human primates produce more IL-6 than 
younger controls 24, 25, while obesity increases the inflammatory phenotype of VSMCs 26. 
With the complex biological functions of IL-6 27, this effect could partially account for the 
alteration of clinical outcomes that obesity has on diseases such heart failure.
We found very little effect of gender on the immune landscape. This is at odds to the 
longstanding observation that autoimmune diseases are, in general, more frequent in women 
than men (at pre-menopausal ages) and that vaccine responses are reportedly more robust in 
women than men 28, although the sex difference in vaccine response varies greatly 28 29 30. 
Notably, the gender-based differences are more limited at the cellular level compared to the 
molecular level 31. The incomplete correlation between gene signature and cell type 
suggests that the discrepancy can be resolved by a model where high diversity in molecular 
expression is largely compensated for at the cellular level.
One of the most surprising results from our study was the degree to which the immune 
profiles of parents were more similar to one another than to unrelated pairs. This suggests 
that a shared environment acts in some way to bring immunoprofiles towards a convergent 
equilibria. Within the environment shared by parents, there is a panoply of plausible 
biological mechanisms. For example, an individual’s microbiome converges with those that 
they live with 32, even including their dogs 33. Individuals in a relationship, rather than just 
co-habiting, have a more similar microbiome 34, possibly via direct transmission 35, which 
would make the microbial convergence even stronger for parents. Within our study design, 
this shared environment also includes a shared vector (the child), the significance of which 
requires further investigation. Beyond the bacterial components of the microbiome, close 
proximity allows the transmission of viral pathogens, including CMV, which was found to 
influence twin concordance in more than half of their immune traits 3. A shared 
environment, including, presumably, socio-economic status, will also bring shared 
behaviours, a process called spousal concordance: diet (which can also influence gut 
microbiome 36), smoking 37, alcohol intake 38, exercise levels and even control of chronic 
diseases like hypertension 39 are all likely to be influenced by a partner’s attitudes towards 
them. It is fascinating to speculate that partner choice may also influence response to 
immunity and immune pathologies. Finally, we also note, but decline to comment further, 
that this “parenthood effect” is a far stronger influence on the immune system than acute and 
untreated gastroenteritis.
On-line Methods
Participant selection and ethical approval
All participants were Caucasian in origin and all sampling was conducted in Belgium, 
except for the vaccination cohort, who were Caucasian and sampled in England. All 
Carr et al.
Page 8
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 individuals, or their legal guardians, gave written informed consent and the study was 
approved by the Ethics Committee of the University Hospitals Leuven. The influenza 
vaccination study protocol was approved by the Health Research Authority, National 
Research Ethics Service committee South Central, Hampshire A, UK (REC reference:
14/SC/1077). Demographic and clinical data were collected through a questionnaire. 
Exclusion criteria were cancer, autoimmunity or gastrointestinal complaints. Individuals that 
were parents of the same child were considered to be cohabiting. Individuals from the travel 
clinic planning a trip to developing countries in South America, Africa or Asia were 
considered to be at elevated risk of gastrointestinal infection. Acute gastroenteritis was 
defined as self-reported diarrhoea (passage of unformed stools), with or without additional 
symptoms of nausea, vomiting, abdominal cramps, pain, fever or blood in stools (using 
ROME-III criteria). Gasteroenteritis was classified as mild if no additional symptoms were 
reported, moderate with at least one additional symptom and classic with at least three 
diarrhoeal episodes per day and at least one additional symptom. Anxiety and depression 
was assessing using the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS) and the Patient 
Health Questionnaire (PHQ-15). For recruitment to the vaccination study potential 
participants were excluded if they have already received the 2014-2015 seasonal influenza 
vaccination, if they have had a previous adverse reaction to any vaccination, a known allergy 
to any components of the vaccine, were taking immune modulating medication, and women 
who are pregnant or breastfeeding. In total 32 healthy donors between 53 and 64 years of 
age were recruited from the Cambridge BioResource as part of the vaccination study during 
the 2014-2015 winter. Participants were administered the inactivated influenza vaccine (split 
virion) BP vaccine (Sanofi Pasteur) by intramuscular injection in the right deltoid.
Blood sampling and peripheral blood mononuclear cell isolation
Blood samples from Belgian participants were collected in Heparin tubes and rested at 22°C 
for four hours prior to separation of serum and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) 
using lymphocyte separation medium (LSM, MP Biomedicals). PBMCs were frozen in 10% 
DMSO (Dimethyl sulfoxide, Sigma) and stored at -80°C for a maximum of 10 weeks. For 
the vaccination cohort, research nurses at the Cambridge BioResource collected blood 
samples into EDTA coated tubes on the day of vaccination (prior to administration of the 
vaccine), seven days and 42 days following vaccination. PBMC were isolated using 15mL of 
Histopaque-1077 (Sigma) then frozen in Foetal Bovine Serum supplemented with 10% 
Dimethyl sulfoxide (Sigma) overnight at -80°C, then stored in the liquid nitrogen freezer 
prior to analysis by flow cytometry.
Flow cytometry phenotyping
Thawed cells were stained with antibodies as listed in Supplementary Table 3. Ki67 and 
Foxp3 staining was performed following treatment with fixation/permeabilization buffer 
(eBioscience). Cytokine staining was performed following ex vivo stimulation for five hours 
in 50 ng/ml PMA (Phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate, Sigma) and 500 ng/ml ionomycin 
(Sigma) in the presence of GolgiStop (BD Biosciences). Stimulated cells were surface 
stained, fixed and permeabilized with Cytofix/cytoperm (BD), prior to staining for 
cytokines. Additional cells were stimulated for 72 h for supernatant assessment by MSD 
(see below). Data was acquired on a BD FACSCantoII and analyzed with FlowJo (Tree star). 
Carr et al.
Page 9
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 The vaccination cohort data was acquired on a BD LSRFORTESSA and analysed using 
FlowJo (Tree star).
Serological assessment
Plasma samples collected were stored at -80°C. Circulating levels of MBL were quantified 
in plasma using the MBL Oligomer ELISA Kit form Bioporto® (Copenhagen, Denmark). 
Circulating levels of BAFF were measured using a human BAFF Quantikine ELISA (R&D 
Systems). Cytokine plasma concentrations were quantified by an electrochemiluminescence 
immunoassay format using the V-Plex™ human Pro-inflammatory panel MSD (Meso Scale 
Discovery. Rockville, Maryland, USA) plates. All reagents and standards were provided by 
each manufacturer. Samples and standards were prepared according to each manufacturer’s 
instructions.
Data handling
Data (phenotypic, flow cytometric and serological) were collated and stored in Microsoft 
Excel. All data analysis was performed using R (http://www.r-project.org version 3.1.0 40) 
via the RStudio IDE (http://www.rstudio.com version 0.98.1102). Figures were drawn using 
knitr 41, which produces pdf output via LaTeX.
ELISA and MSD data were pre-processed as follows: Any experimental value lower than the 
lower limit of detection for the assay was replaced with the lower limit of detection of that 
cytokine. After this step, all ELISA and MSD data were log10 transformed. The flow 
cytometry data was used as percentage as exported from FlowJo. No data was excluded from 
analysis. Inter-quartile range, median, number of missing values for each immune parameter 
(flow cytometry derived and serologically derived parameters together) are shown in 
Supplementary Table 2. For non-longitudinal analyses only the most recent sampling of each 
individual was used. The original data (phenotypic, flow cytometric and serological) is 
available to download as an xls or an RData file.
Statistical analysis
All sample collection, data acquisition and data processing was performed blind prior to 
statistical analysis. Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient was used throughout for pairwise 
correlation comparisons. Euclidean distances were calculated from correlation matrices 
(using Spearman) as pre-processing for multi-dimensional scaling (using either cmdscale in 
base R, or monoMDS from the vegan package 42) or hierarchical clustering (using heatmap 
in stats package 40). Consensus clustering was performed using the R package 
ConsensusClusterPlus, an R implementation of the original algorithm 43. Correlation plots 
were drawn using the plotcorr function in the ellipse package 44. Linear regression 
modelling was performed using base R function (lm), with the proportions of R2 calculated 
with the relaimpo package 45. Lm will provide differing statistical models depending upon 
the input data. For most of the modelling shown, a continuous variable (immune parameter) 
is modelled using a categorical variable (such as subject identifier, visit number). In this 
scenario, lm provides an ANOVA model. If both variables are continuous, linear regression 
modelling is used. Two group comparisons were made using two-tailed Mann-Whitney tests, 
except for the paired vaccination data, where a paired t-test was used to compare samples 
Carr et al.
Page 10
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 from the same individual at different time points. Bonferroni correction was used for all 
corrections for multiple testing, as implemented in base R.
Code availability
Original datasets are provided as both .xls and .RData files, split into the Belgian profiling 
cohort and the English vaccination cohort. The code used to produce our figures is provided 
as both a pdf (for easier reading) or as an R markdown file (for easier re-running or 
evaluation).
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgements
This study was supported via funding from the European Research Council Start Grant IMMUNO to AL and the 
European Research Council Start Grant TWILIGHT to MAL. EJC is an academic clinical fellow funded by the 
NIHR. MAL is supported by the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council. AG is supported by the 
Research Fund KU Leuven (OT/11/087) and Research Foundation Flanders (G073415N). JCL is supported by the 
Wellcome Trust (105920/Z/14/Z). We gratefully acknowledge the participation of all volunteers. We thank the 
Cambridge BioResource staff for their help with volunteer recruitment. We thank members of the Cambridge 
BioResource SAB and Management Committee for their support of our study and the National Institute for Health 
Research Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre for funding. The authors thank Anh Nuygen, Dean Franckaert, 
Dina Danso-Abeam and Lien Van Eyck (KUL-VIB) for technical assistance.
References
1. Davis MM. Immunology taught by humans. Sci Transl Med. 2012; 4(117):117fs112.
2. Orru V, Steri M, Sole G, Sidore C, Virdis F, Dei M, et al. Genetic variants regulating immune cell 
levels in health and disease. Cell. 2013; 155(1):242–256. [PubMed: 24074872] 
3. Brodin P, Jojic V, Gao T, Bhattacharya S, Angel CJ, Furman D, et al. Variation in the human 
immune system is largely driven by non-heritable influences. Cell. 2015; 160(1-2):37–47. [PubMed: 
25594173] 
4. De Jager PL, Hacohen N, Mathis D, Regev A, Stranger BE, Benoist C. ImmVar project: Insights and 
design considerations for future studies of “healthy” immune variation. Semin Immunol. 2015
5. Shaw AC, Goldstein DR, Montgomery RR. Age-dependent dysregulation of innate immunity. Nat 
Rev Immunol. 2013; 13(12):875–887. [PubMed: 24157572] 
6. Jamieson BD, Douek DC, Killian S, Hultin LE, Scripture-Adams DD, Giorgi JV, et al. Generation 
of functional thymocytes in the human adult. Immunity. 1999; 10(5):569–575. [PubMed: 10367902] 
7. den Braber I, Mugwagwa T, Vrisekoop N, Westera L, Mogling R, de Boer AB, et al. Maintenance of 
peripheral naive T cells is sustained by thymus output in mice but not humans. Immunity. 2012; 
36(2):288–297. [PubMed: 22365666] 
8. Johnson PL, Yates AJ, Goronzy JJ, Antia R. Peripheral selection rather than thymic involution 
explains sudden contraction in naive CD4 T-cell diversity with age. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2012; 109(52):21432–21437. [PubMed: 23236163] 
9. Tsang JS, Schwartzberg PL, Kotliarov Y, Biancotto A, Xie Z, Germain RN, et al. Global analyses of 
human immune variation reveal baseline predictors of postvaccination responses. Cell. 2014; 
157(2):499–513. [PubMed: 24725414] 
10. Caballero S, Pamer EG. Microbiota-mediated inflammation and antimicrobial defense in the 
intestine. Annu Rev Immunol. 2015; 33:227–256. [PubMed: 25581310] 
11. Ivanov II, Atarashi K, Manel N, Brodie EL, Shima T, Karaoz U, et al. Induction of intestinal Th17 
cells by segmented filamentous bacteria. Cell. 2009; 139(3):485–498. [PubMed: 19836068] 
Carr et al.
Page 11
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 12. Tsang JS, Schwartzberg PL, Kotliarov Y, Biancotto A, Xie Z, Germain RN, et al. Global analyses 
of human immune variation reveal baseline predictors of postvaccination responses. Cell. 2014; 
157(2):499–513. [PubMed: 24725414] 
13. Lucas M, Day CL, Wyer JR, Cunliffe SL, Loughry A, McMichael AJ, et al. Ex vivo phenotype and 
frequency of influenza virus-specific CD4 memory T cells. Journal of virology. 2004; 78(13):
7284–7287. [PubMed: 15194806] 
14. Miller JD, van der Most RG, Akondy RS, Glidewell JT, Albott S, Masopust D, et al. Human 
effector and memory CD8+ T cell responses to smallpox and yellow fever vaccines. Immunity. 
2008; 28(5):710–722. [PubMed: 18468462] 
15. Bucasas KL, Franco LM, Shaw CA, Bray MS, Wells JM, Nino D, et al. Early patterns of gene 
expression correlate with the humoral immune response to influenza vaccination in humans. The 
Journal of infectious diseases. 2011; 203(7):921–929. [PubMed: 21357945] 
16. Nakaya HI, Wrammert J, Lee EK, Racioppi L, Marie-Kunze S, Haining WN, et al. Systems 
biology of vaccination for seasonal influenza in humans. Nature immunology. 2011; 12(8):786–
795. [PubMed: 21743478] 
17. Amadori A, Zamarchi R, De Silvestro G, Forza G, Cavatton G, Danieli GA, et al. Genetic control 
of the CD4/CD8 T-cell ratio in humans. Nat Med. 1995; 1(12):1279–1283. [PubMed: 7489409] 
18. Spiegelman BM, Hotamisligil GS. Through thick and thin: wasting, obesity, and TNF alpha. Cell. 
1993; 73(4):625–627. [PubMed: 8500160] 
19. Spielmann G, Johnston CA, O'Connor DP, Foreyt JP, Simpson RJ. Excess body mass is associated 
with T cell differentiation indicative of immune ageing in children. Clin Exp Immunol. 2014; 
176(2):246–254. [PubMed: 24401077] 
20. Martin-Romero C, Santos-Alvarez J, Goberna R, Sanchez-Margalet V. Human leptin enhances 
activation and proliferation of human circulating T lymphocytes. Cell Immunol. 2000; 199(1):15–
24. [PubMed: 10675271] 
21. Damluji AA, Ramireddy A, Al-Damluji MS, Marzouka GR, Otalvaro L, Viles-Gonzalez JF, et al. 
Association between anti-human heat shock protein-60 and interleukin-2 with coronary artery 
calcium score. Heart. 2015; 101(6):436–441. [PubMed: 25561686] 
22. Dooley J, Liston A. Molecular control over thymic involution: from cytokines and microRNA to 
aging and adipose tissue. Eur J Immunol. 2012; 42(5):1073–1079. [PubMed: 22539280] 
23. Franckaert D, Schlenner SM, Heirman N, Gill J, Skogberg G, Ekwall O, et al. Premature thymic 
involution is independent of structural plasticity of the thymic stroma. Eur J Immunol. 2015; 45(5):
1535–1547. [PubMed: 25627671] 
24. Song Y, Shen H, Schenten D, Shan P, Lee PJ, Goldstein DR. Aging enhances the basal production 
of IL-6 and CCL2 in vascular smooth muscle cells. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2012; 32(1):
103–109. [PubMed: 22034510] 
25. Csiszar A, Sosnowska D, Wang M, Lakatta EG, Sonntag WE, Ungvari Z. Age-associated 
proinflammatory secretory phenotype in vascular smooth muscle cells from the non-human 
primate Macaca mulatta: reversal by resveratrol treatment. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2012; 
67(8):811–820. [PubMed: 22219513] 
26. Van de Voorde J, Boydens C, Pauwels B, Decaluwe K. Perivascular adipose tissue, inflammation 
and vascular dysfunction in obesity. Curr Vasc Pharmacol. 2014; 12(3):403–411. [PubMed: 
24846230] 
27. Fontes JA, Rose NR, Cihakova D. The varying faces of IL-6: From cardiac protection to cardiac 
failure. Cytokine. 2015; 74(1):62–68. [PubMed: 25649043] 
28. Giefing-Kröll C, Berger P, Lepperdinger G, Grubeck-Loebenstein B. How sex and age affect 
immune responses, susceptibility to infections, and response to vaccination. Aging Cell. 2015; 
14(3):309–321. [PubMed: 25720438] 
29. Furman D, Hejblum BP, Simon N, Jojic V, Dekker CL, Thiebaut R, et al. Systems analysis of sex 
differences reveals an immunosuppressive role for testosterone in the response to influenza 
vaccination. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2014; 111(2):869–874.
30. Tsang JS, Schwartzberg PL, Kotliarov Y, Biancotto A, Xie Z, Germain RN, et al. Global Analyses 
of Human Immune Variation Reveal Baseline Predictors of Postvaccination Responses. Cell. 
157(2):499–513. [PubMed: 24725414] 
Carr et al.
Page 12
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 31. Whitney AR, Diehn M, Popper SJ, Alizadeh AA, Boldrick JC, Relman DA, et al. Individuality and 
variation in gene expression patterns in human blood. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America. 2003; 100(4):1896–1901. [PubMed: 12578971] 
32. Yatsunenko T, Rey FE, Manary MJ, Trehan I, Dominguez-Bello MG, Contreras M, et al. Human 
gut microbiome viewed across age and geography. Nature. 2012; 486(7402):222–227. [PubMed: 
22699611] 
33. Song SJ, Lauber C, Costello EK, Lozupone CA, Humphrey G, Berg-Lyons D, et al. Cohabiting 
family members share microbiota with one another and with their dogs. Elife. 2013; 2:e00458. 
[PubMed: 23599893] 
34. Lax S, Smith DP, Hampton-Marcell J, Owens SM, Handley KM, Scott NM, et al. Longitudinal 
analysis of microbial interaction between humans and the indoor environment. Science. 2014; 
345(6200):1048–1052. [PubMed: 25170151] 
35. Kort R, Caspers M, van de Graaf A, van Egmond W, Keijser B, Roeselers G. Shaping the oral 
microbiota through intimate kissing. Microbiome. 2014; 2:41. [PubMed: 25408893] 
36. Carmody RN, Gerber GK, Luevano JM Jr, Gatti DM, Somes L, Svenson KL, et al. Diet dominates 
host genotype in shaping the murine gut microbiota. Cell Host Microbe. 2015; 17(1):72–84. 
[PubMed: 25532804] 
37. Falba TA, Sindelar JL. Spousal concordance in health behavior change. Health Serv Res. 2008; 
43(1 Pt 1):96–116. [PubMed: 18211520] 
38. Graham K, Braun K. Concordance of use of alcohol and other substances among older adult 
couples. Addict Behav. 1999; 24(6):839–856. [PubMed: 10628517] 
39. McAdams DeMarco M, Coresh J, Woodward M, Butler KR, Kao WH, Mosley TH Jr, et al. 
Hypertension status, treatment, and control among spousal pairs in a middle-aged adult cohort. Am 
J Epidemiol. 2011; 174(7):790–796. [PubMed: 21841158] 
40. R Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. Vienna, Austria: 2014. 
41. Xie Y. knitr: A General-Purpose Package for Dynamic Report Generation in R. 2015
42. Oksanen J, Blanchet FG, Kindt R, Legendre P, Minchin PR, O'Hara RB, et al. vegan: Community 
Ecology Package. 2015
43. Monti S, Tamayo P, Mesirov J, Golub T. Consensus clustering: A resampling-based method for 
class discovery and visualization of gene expression microarray data. Mach Learn. 2003; 52(1-2):
91–118.
44. Murdoch D, Chow ED. ellipse: Functions for drawing ellipses and ellipse-like confidence regions. 
2013
45. Grömping U. Relative Importance for Linear Regression in R: The Package relaimpo. Journal of 
Statistical Software. 2006; 17(1):1–27.
Carr et al.
Page 13
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 AOP Summary
Large-scale flow cytometric and serological assessment of the human immune landscape 
by Liston and colleagues demonstrates a wide inter-individual variation that is modified 
by age and cohabitation.
Carr et al.
Page 14
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 1. 
Data-driven analysis of immunological variation reveals biologically meaningful co-
correlations between individual immune parameters. (a) On the complete dataset of 638 
individuals (most recent sample only), a dendrogram of immune parameters was generated 
by hierarchical clustering on Euclidean distances of Spearman correlations between each 
parameter (left). Correlation plots using pairwise Spearman correlation coefficients between 
each two immunological parameters are shown (right). Coefficients are shown by the angle 
of eclipse (left-leaning, negative; right-leaning, positive) and colour (blue, negative; red, 
Carr et al.
Page 15
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 positive). Manually annotated thematic groups of immune parameters are shown by the 
colour bar next to the dendrogram. (b) Non-metric multidimensional scaling of pairwise 
Spearman correlations. The dataset is reduced from 54 immune parameters (54 dimensions) 
to a 2 dimensional representation, an exploratory approach to investigate the presence or 
absence of inter-relatedness between immune parameters. Each immune parameter is a point 
and the thematic groups are highlighted.
Carr et al.
Page 16
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 2. 
The human immune system is robustly maintained in multiple stable equilibriums. 177 
individuals were sampled at least twice, allowing a dissection of inter- versus intra-
individual variation. (a) Linear models were made for each immune parameter based on the 
multiple samples from each individual (ANOVA model: immune parameter ~ subject 
identifier + visit number). Open circles represent models built using all individuals (n=638) 
with multiple visits (177 individuals with up to 3 repeat visits; 921 visits in total). The filled 
circles represent models using only individuals who were continuously healthy between 
Carr et al.
Page 17
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 visits (152 individuals), filled squares represent models using only individuals who 
experienced acute gastroenteritis between their samples (24 individuals). For each cohort, R2 
values and (b) -log10 of Bonferroni adjusted P values are shown for the linear models. (c) 
Proportion of the R2 values from all volunteers attributable to either inter-individual 
differences or intra-individual differences. (d) Multidimensional scaling of the pre- and post-
travel study visits. Each individual is represented twice; their first and second visits depicted 
with a dot or diamond respectively and linked by a grey line indicating immunological 
distance (50 individuals; 100 visits). Continuously healthy individuals (n=26) are shown in 
aqua, individuals with intervening acute gastroenteritis (n=24) are shown in orange. (e) 
Quantification of the immunological distance between the first and second visits for 
continuously healthy individuals (n=26) versus individuals with intervening acute 
gastroenteritis (n=24). A two-tailed Mann-Whitney test was used to compare the 
immunological distances.
Carr et al.
Page 18
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 3. 
Immunologial equilibria demonstrate elasticity following influenza vaccination. In a parallel 
cohort of 32 English individuals, volunteers were sampled prior to vaccination, with follow-
up samples at day 7 and day 42 post-vaccination. (a) Samples were phenotyped, normalised 
to the day 0 value and assessed for change using paired t-tests. Unchanged variables are 
shown in grey, significantly modified variables are shown in red, with (b) boxplots for each 
significant immune parameter. Each parameter is labeled on the graph with an (uncorrected, 
two tailed) paired t-test P value. Boxes show median and interquartile ranges (IQRs), 
whiskers extend to 1.5 x IQR. (c) A linear model was made for each immune parameter 
based on the multiple samples from each individual (ANOVA model: immune parameter ~ 
subject identifier + visit number). For each parameter the proportion of the R2 values from 
all volunteers attributable to either inter-individual differences or intra-individual differences 
was assessed for day 0 and 7 or (d) day 0 and 42. (e) Multidimensional scaling of the 
vaccination time-points. Each individual is represented at day 0 (green), 7 (red) and 42 
(blue) and linked by a grey line indicating immunological distance (32 individuals; 96 
visits). (f) Quantification of the immunological distance between day 0 and 7, 7 and 42, and 
0 and 42 for each volunteer (n=32), with paired t-test. (g) For each volunteer, a Z-score was 
Carr et al.
Page 19
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 calculated for each parameter at day 0 and 42, indicating standard deviations from the mean 
value. Correlation analysis indicates the line of best fit. *, p<0.001; **,p<0.0001.
Carr et al.
Page 20
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 4. 
Age is a major determinant of immunological equilibria. (a) Each immune parameter was 
correlated with age and each other immune parameter using pairwise Spearman r values. 
The arrangement of the immune parameters is determined by their correlation with age. 
Inset panels show Spearman’s r (upper) and -log10 Bonferroni corrected P values (lower) 
plotted against age. (b) R2 for each immune parameter for models incorporating gender 
(filled circles), age (grey squares) or both gender and age (open circles) as the independent 
variable(s), with (c) accompanying -log10 of Bonferroni corrected P values. (d) to (m) 
Carr et al.
Page 21
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Individual scatterplots for each of the immune parameters with significant association with 
age. The percentage values of the flow parameters, or log10 cytokine concentrations, are 
plotted against age, with women in red, men in blue and linear regression lines for the whole 
cohort in black. Data shown for (d) CD4+ RTE (p=3x10-18), (e) transitional B cells 
(p=8x10-7), (f) CD8+ RTE (p=1x10-8), (g) TH1 (p=3x10-20), (h) CD4+ IL-2+ T cells 
(p=5x10-23), (i) Tc1 (p=5x10-31), (j) CD8+ IL-2+ T cells (p=8x10-33), (k) CD8+ T cells 
(p=8x10-11) (l) iNKT cells (p=6x10-10) and (m) serum IL-6 (p=7x10-11).
Carr et al.
Page 22
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 5. 
Immunoprofile is not influenced by BMI, depression, or anxiety. (a) R2 for each immune 
parameter for models incorporating BMI (filled circles; 213 individuals), age (filled squares; 
367 individuals) or both BMI and age (open circles; 213 individuals) as the independent 
variable(s), with (b) accompanying -log10 of Bonferroni corrected P values. Analysis 
excluded children (<18 years). (c) Relationship between BMI and age in the analysed 
cohort. (d) The relative R2 contributions of age and BMI to immune parameters that were 
significant in a model including both BMI and age (adjusted P<0.05). (e) R2 and -log10 
Carr et al.
Page 23
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 adjusted P values for each immune parameter for a model incorporating HADS anxiety 
score and HADS depression score (235 individuals).
Carr et al.
Page 24
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 6. 
Parenthood shapes the immune system towards a shared equilibria. (a) 140 individuals were 
identified as adult (18-65 years) biological parents with a child still living at home. The 
immune profile (54 parameters) was compressed using multidimensional scaling (k=2) of 
the correlation matrix between individuals, visualising pairwise Spearman’s correlation 
coefficients between each individual. The immunological distance between each 
male:female pair is indicated by the connecting gray line. (b) The immunological distance, 
as measured by multidimensional scaling, between parental pairs versus random 
male:female pairs. To generate the random distribution, each male was computationally 
paired in a random fashion with 5 females from the parental dataset. Distributions were 
compared using a two-tailed Mann-Whitney test. *, p=8x10-11.
Carr et al.
Page 25
Nat Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 22.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
