 www.thelancet.com/lancetgh   Vol 6   May 2018 
e514
Articles
The impact of social protection and poverty elimination on 
global tuberculosis incidence: a statistical modelling analysis 
of Sustainable Development Goal 1
Daniel J Carter, Philippe Glaziou, Knut Lönnroth, Andrew Siroka, Katherine Floyd, Diana Weil, Mario Raviglione, Rein M G J Houben*, Delia Boccia*
Summary
Background The End TB Strategy and the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) are intimately linked by their 
common targets and approaches. SDG 1 aims to end extreme poverty and expand social protection coverage by 2030. 
Achievement of SDG 1 is likely to affect the tuberculosis epidemic through a range of pathways. We estimate the 
reduction in global tuberculosis incidence that could be obtained by reaching SDG 1.
Methods We developed a conceptual framework linking key indicators of SDG 1 progress to tuberculosis incidence via 
well described risk factor pathways and populated it with data from the SDG data repository and the WHO tuberculosis 
database for 192 countries. Correlations and mediation analyses informed the strength of the association between the 
SDG 1 subtargets and tuberculosis incidence, resulting in a simplified framework for modelling. The simplified 
framework linked key indicators for SDG 1 directly to tuberculosis incidence. We applied an exponential decay model 
based on linear associations between SDG 1 indicators and tuberculosis incidence to estimate tuberculosis incidence 
in 2035.
Findings Ending extreme poverty resulted in a reduction in global incidence of tuberculosis of 33·4% (95% credible 
interval 15∙5–44∙5) by 2035 and expanding social protection coverage resulted in a reduction in incidence of 
76∙1% (45∙2–89∙9) by 2035; both pathways together resulted in a reduction in incidence of 84·3% (54∙7–94∙9).
Interpretation Full achievement of SDG 1 could have a substantial effect on the global burden of tuberculosis. 
Cross-sectoral approaches that promote poverty reduction and social protection expansion will be crucial complements 
to health interventions, accelerating progress towards the End TB targets.
Funding World Health Organization.
Copyright © The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an Open Access article under the CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 license.
Introduction
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) came into 
being in 2016 as a more detailed and globally focused 
successor to the Millennium Development Goals. 
Covering a broad range of environmental, economic, 
and social development initiatives, the SDG targets are 
regarded as being profoundly interlinked, integrated, 
and inseparable from one another.1 For example, 
progress in health (SDG 3) will depend on progress in 
poverty reduction efforts (SDG 1), highlighting the 
need for cross-sectoral thinking in their implementation. 
Tuberculosis, as a disease that features complex 
interactions with poverty and its associ 
ated social and 
structural factors, offers the opportunity to investigate 
closely how the SDGs align with disease control efforts.
The SDG targets share a conceptual and pragmatic 
vision with WHO’s End TB Strategy.2 From the con-
ceptual perspective, both the End TB Strategy and the 
SDG targets are concerned with the root determinants of 
human health.3 In line with this thinking, the social 
determinants of tuberculosis are increasingly recognised 
as a research and programmatic priority, and the 
overarching aims of the End TB and SDG agendas 
should be regarded as linked. The End TB Strategy aims 
to reduce tuberculosis incidence by 90%, related deaths 
by 95%, and catas 
trophic costs by 100% by 2035, and 
includes a milestone for 2030, reflected in SDG 3, of an 
80% reduction in tuberculosis incidence.4
Specifically, the eventual elimination of tuberculosis 
will require progress on the SDG 1 subtargets, 
which include efforts towards the reduction of poverty 
and expansion of social protection coverage. The 
links between increased social protection and reduced 
tuberculosis burden are well known to be applicable 
at the ecological level.5,6 Biosocial theories of disease 
provide a potential mechanism by which social 
protection and poverty reduction could reduce tubercu-
losis burden at the individual level.7,8 Because 
biomedical innovation in the response to tuberculosis 
alone will not be able to accelerate the reduction 
in tuberculosis incidence required to meet the 
programmatic targets of the End TB Strategy,4 what 
impact a reduction in the socioeconomic drivers of 
tuberculosis might have is also important to investigate. 
The SDG 1 subtargets include several indicators 
designed to operationalise and measure progress 
Lancet Glob Health 2018; 
6: e514–22
Published Online 
March 23, 2018 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S2214-109X(18)30195-5
See Comment page e475
*Joint senior authors
Department of Infectious 
Disease Epidemiology 
(D J Carter MSc, D Boccia PhD) 
and TB Modelling Group, TB 
Center (R M G J Houben PhD), 
London School of Hygiene & 
Tropical Medicine, London, UK; 
Global TB Programme, World 
Health Organization, Geneva, 
Switzerland (P Glaziou MD, 
A Siroka PhD, K Floyd PhD, 
D Weil MSc, 
Prof M Raviglione MD); 
Department of Global Health, 
University of Milan, Milan, Italy 
(Prof M Raviglione); and 
Department of Public Health 
Sciences, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden 
(Prof K Lönnroth MD)
Correspondence to: 
Mr Daniel J Carter, Department of 
Infectious Disease Epidemiology, 
London School of Hygiene & 
Tropical Medicine, London 
WC1E 7HT, UK 
daniel.carter1@lshtm.ac.uk
 Articles
e515 
www.thelancet.com/lancetgh   Vol 6   May 2018
towards poverty reduction and expansion of social 
protection programmes. In view of the ubiquity of 
SDGs in the development agenda, the SDG 1 indicators 
and timeline provide an appropriate framework.
In this Article, reflecting a key target of the End TB 
Strategy, we estimate the reduction in global tuber-
culosis incidence that could be obtained by reaching 
SDG 1’s targets of reducing poverty and expanding 
social protection.
Methods
Overview
To produce an estimate of the impact of attaining SDG 1 
on tuberculosis incidence, we undertook three key 
steps: generation of a conceptual framework, reduction 
of that conceptual framework, and statistical modelling.
Conceptual framework generation
We sought to build a conceptual framework composed 
of theoretical pathways that link the relevant 
SDG 1 indicators, via several relevant risk factors, to an 
impact 
on 
tuber 
culosis 
incidence 
(figure 
1). 
Furthermore, we sought to populate the framework 
with available data from a range of sources.
As established by the UN, SDG 1 is composed of 
five subtargets. For this analysis, key subtargets of 
interest are SDG 1.1 (elimination of extreme poverty), 
SDG 1.2 (halving of multidimensional poverty), and 
SDG 1.3 (social protection for all). Extreme poverty is 
defined as living on less than US$1∙90 per day, whereas 
multidimensional poverty is a composite measure of 
poor health, education, and living standards. Social 
protection refers to measures that are designed to 
reduce vulnerability to falling into poverty, including 
labour market interventions, contributory welfare 
programmes, and cash or resource transfers. We 
excluded subtargets SDG 1.4 (access to land rights and 
basic services for all) and SDG 1.5 (reduce mortality 
from climate-related disasters) from the overall analysis 
on the grounds of no evidence in the scientific literature 
for a relevant link to tuberculosis burden.9
The tuberculosis risk factors were selected on the basis 
of a review by Lönnroth and colleagues10 as proximal risk 
factors with the highest population attributable fraction. 
The risk factors include malnutrition, HIV infection, 
housing quality, and health behaviour. The health 
behaviour (smoking prevalence and diabetes prevalence) 
and housing quality (proportion exposed to indoor air 
pollution and proportion living in an urban slum) risk 
factors are composite factors informed by a principal 
components analysis done on the data. Care was taken to 
select only those risk factors that were thought to be 
more proximal to tuberculosis than the SDG 1 subtargets 
themselves.
Data were extracted to populate the framework for 
192 countries from 2010 to 2015 corresponding to the 
indicators (measures) for the SDG subtargets and 
measures for the tuberculosis risk factors. The most 
recent value was carried forward. No data were more 
recent than 2015, so we consider 2015 the baseline year.
We populated the SDG subtargets with data taken 
from the SDG repository for their corresponding 
indicator.11 Indicators for SDG 1.1 and 1.2 are measures 
of poverty reduction. The primary indicator for 
Research in context
Evidence before this study
Sustainable Development Goal 1 (SDG 1) commits to ending 
poverty and expanding social protection coverage. The link 
between poverty and tuberculosis has been well described and 
evidence from ecological studies supports an association 
between increased social protection and decreased tuberculosis 
burden. Both poverty reduction and social protection are 
codified as part of WHO’s End TB Strategy to implement and 
strengthen bold policies and supportive systems. Two articles 
published in 2016 describe a shared conceptual and pragmatic 
alignment between the End TB Strategy and the broader SDGs, 
but no quantitative evidence or projections of effect exist to 
support this strategic link.
Added value of this study
Conceptually, our study is the first to adopt an SDG 
framework to quantify the interdependence between 
tuberculosis elimination and development. Methodologically, 
the use of a well defined conceptual framework and clear 
operationalisation of indicators and outcomes provides a 
robust approach to statistical modelling. The resulting 
estimate of a decrease in incidence of 84·3% (95% credible 
interval 54·7–94·9) from baseline by the target year for the 
SDGs reaffirms the role of poverty elimination and social 
protection in global tuberculosis control. Furthermore, 
because this methodological approach can be extended to 
SDGs other than SDG 1 and to diseases other than 
tuberculosis, our study provides a replicable analytical model 
suitable across a range of development and public health 
thematic areas.
Implications of all the available evidence
WHO’s End TB Strategy arose in parallel with the SDGs with the 
precise intent of aligning indicators, targets, and strategic 
thinking. In the case of SDG 1, our study confirms this 
alignment is supported by quantitative evidence. Multisectoral 
approaches including the development sector are necessary if 
global health challenges, including tuberculosis, are to be 
addressed in an effective and sustainable way. The framing of 
our study within the broader development agenda should 
guide policy and practice across the development and health 
policy landscapes.
 Articles
www.thelancet.com/lancetgh   Vol 6   May 2018 
e516
SDG 1.1 is the proportion of individuals living under 
the extreme poverty line of $1·90 per day. The primary 
indicator 
for 
SDG 
1.2 
is 
the 
value 
of 
the 
multidimensional poverty index for that country. 
SDG 1.3 is composed of three primary indicators that 
are measures of social protection expansion: the 
proportion of people covered by labour market 
protections, the proportion of people covered by social 
assistance, and the proportion of people covered by 
social insurance.
We populated the risk factor measures with data 
obtained from the WHO databank for smoking, HIV, 
and diabetes prevalence, and data from the SDG 
repository for all other risk factors.11,12 The measure for 
malnutrition was the proportion malnourished, for 
HIV infection was the proportion HIV positive, for 
housing quality was composed of the proportion 
burning unclean fuels in the home and the proportion 
living in urban slums, and for health behaviour was 
composed of the proportion of smokers and the 
proportion with diabetes. Although not proximal risk 
factors for tuberculosis, we also extracted information 
on gross domestic product and Gini coefficients from 
the SDG repository for sensitivity analyses.
After the most recent observed value was carried 
forward, all SDG indicators and risk factor measures had 
fairly large (>20%) amounts of missing data (appendix), 
with the exception of HIV prevalence, tuberculosis 
incidence, and malnutrition. A similar proportion of 
missing data were found across all different income 
levels and all different regions, suggesting that 
missingness was not associated with observed data and, 
as such, the data were unlikely to be missing not at 
random.13 In view of the large amounts of missing data, 
single 
imputation 
approaches 
were 
adopted 
for 
exploratory analyses and a multiple imputation approach 
using chained equations was used for analyses directly 
informing the statistical modelling (appendix).
Conceptual framework reduction
The conceptual framework (figure 1) is complex to model 
statistically because the multiple layers in the framework 
require hierarchical models and result in difficulties in 
propagating uncertainty. As such, we created a reduced 
version of the conceptual framework that was more 
amenable to quantitative analysis (figure 2). This reduced 
framework makes two key simplifying assumptions: that 
SDG 1.1 (extreme poverty) and SDG 1.2 (multidimensional 
poverty) measure a similar underlying construct, and 
that the intermediate layer composed of tuberculosis risk 
factors can be omitted.
We assessed the first assumption’s validity by 
generating a correlogram between all measures in the 
complete framework and examining the resulting 
correlation coefficients, with particular focus on the 
SDG 1 subtargets. The correlogram would also inform 
which choice of metric (social insurance, social 
assistance, or labour market interventions) to use for 
SDG 1.3 (social pro 
tection) because the measure used 
must be associated directly with tuberculosis incidence. 
We created the correlogram after conducting a single 
imputation by region using the regression substitution 
method. We generated five imputations of the dataset 
and the data used to generate the correlogram come 
from a randomly selected imputed dataset.
We did an assessment for mediation to confirm 
whether each tuberculosis risk factor is individually a 
mediator. We investigated whether adjusting for a 
single intermediary risk factor changed the association 
between 
tuberculosis 
incidence 
and 
a 
given 
SDG 1 subtarget. To omit the intermediate layer of 
tuberculosis risk factors from the framework for 
analysis, we assume that these proximal risk factors 
completely mediate the relation between the SDG 
indicators and tuberculosis incidence. For this 
assumption to hold, all risk factors should collectively 
be sufficient to account for the total effect of SDG 1 on 
tuberculosis incidence. For a risk factor to be a 
mediator, it must be associated with the outcome and 
exposure, and be on the causal pathway (figure 3).
See Online for appendix
Figure 1: Conceptual framework linking SDG 1 indicators to tuberculosis 
incidence
We assumed a hierarchical relation among subtargets, by which increasing 
social protection coverage affects extreme and multidimensional poverty. 
Each of the SDG subtargets is assumed to be linked to each of four 
tuberculosis-relevant risk factors (malnutrition, HIV, health behaviours, and 
housing quality), which in turn are linked to tuberculosis incidence. On the 
basis of this framework, simple epidemiological analyses were done to 
estimate the effect of meeting the three subtargets on tuberculosis incidence, 
both directly or as mediated by each of the four intermediate risk factors. 
SDG=Sustainable Development Goal.
Tuberculosis risk factors
Tuberculosis incidence
SDG 1.3.2
Social
assistance
SDG 1.3.3
Labour
market
interventions
SDG 1.3.1
Social 
insurance
SDG 1.2
Multidimensional
poverty
SDG 1.1
Extreme 
poverty
Poverty
Social protection
Malnutrition
HIV/AIDS
Smoking
Unclean fuels
Diabetes
Urban slums
SDG subtargets
Tuberculosis risk factors
Tuberculosis outcomes
Health
behaviour
Housing
quality
 Articles
e517 
www.thelancet.com/lancetgh   Vol 6   May 2018
To assess whether the total effect of the SDG 1 
subtargets was accounted for by the risk factors, we 
used linear models to estimate the total crude 
association of each SDG subtarget with tuberculosis 
incidence. We compared these associations with the 
adjusted associations between the SDG subtargets and 
tuberculosis incidence to determine the degree to which 
adjustment for the risk factor pathways changed the 
crude estimate from the linear models. We hypothesise 
that much of the total crude association is accounted for 
via adjustment for the risk factor pathways and expect a 
reduction of the estimated association towards 0 after 
adjustment. The total association would then be 
equivalent to the indirect association via the risk factor 
pathways and the risk factors can be omitted from the 
model, assuming that the set of variables adjusted for 
capture all major tuberculosis risk factors and that, 
consequently, there is minimal residual confounding 
(figure 3).
Statistical modelling
We used the reduced framework to statistically model 
five effects on tuberculosis incidence: the direct effect 
of increased social protection, the direct effect of 
reduced extreme poverty, the joint effect of increased 
social protection and reduced extreme poverty, the 
indirect effect of social protection via reduced poverty, 
and the total effect composed of the joint effect and 
indirect effect (figure 2).
We performed the statistical modelling in five steps. 
First, we estimated the association between the subtarget 
(or subtargets) of interest and tuberculosis incidence at 
baseline to provide the expected reduction in tuberculosis 
incidence per 1% change in subtarget measure (β). 
Second, we extracted the change per year (for t years) in 
absolute poverty (or increase in social protection) 
associated with an x% reaching of the SDG subtarget:
Third, we scaled the expected decrease in tuberculosis 
incidence by this change to get the expected incidence 
reduction from reaching the SDG subtarget:
Fourth, we obtained the annual proportional decrease 
in incidence by converting to a proportion of baseline 
incidence:
Fifth, we placed the annual proportional decrease into 
an exponential decay model:
or with multiple subtarget measures into the model:
This results in an expected tuberculosis incidence 
for 2035, the year by which both the SDG 1 and End TB 
targets are supposed to have been completed. We 
produced credible intervals (CrI) by applying the same 
modelling procedure to the 5% and 95% bounds of the 
initial estimate for β, capturing the uncertainty in the 
association and reflecting the bounds between which 
we expect 95% of incidence projections to fall.
Sensitivity analyses
We examined linear models that adjusted for income and 
income equality as a sensitivity analysis to determine if 
income effects accounted for any residual confounding 
and should thus have been included in the full framework 
in figure 1.
Figure 2: Reduced conceptual framework
A reduced framework amenable to statistical modelling, depicting five pathways 
to represent the direct effect of social protection for all on tuberculosis 
(Pathway A), the direct effect of poverty elimination on tuberculosis (Pathway C), 
the joint effect of the two simultaneous direct effects (Pathway A and Pathway C), 
the indirect effect of social protection on tuberculosis via poverty elimination 
(Pathways B + C), and the total effect of social protection on tuberculosis 
(Pathway A and Pathways B + C). SDG=Sustainable Development Goal.
Tuberculosis incidence
SDG 1.3.1
Social insurance
SDG 1.1
Extreme poverty
Poverty
Social protection
SDG subtargets
Tuberculosis outcomes
Pathway B
Pathway A
Pathway C
Figure 3: Examples of causal pathways
(A) Pathway 1 is the total effect of an exposure on an outcome. (B) The total 
effect of an exposure on an outcome can be decomposed into a direct effect of 
the exposure on the outcome (Pathway 4) and an indirect effect of the exposure 
on the outcome via a mediator (Pathways 2 + 3). Statistical adjustment for the 
mediator will show the amount of the total effect that is attributable to the 
indirect effect via the mediator. If a large amount of the total effect is accounted 
for by the indirect effect (Pathway 4 close to 0) and there is no residual 
confounding, modelling either the total effect (Pathway 1) or the indirect effect 
(Pathways 2 + 3) should result in similar effect estimates. This would justify the 
reduced modelling framework (structurally equivalent to Pathway 1) over the 
full framework (structurally equivalent to Pathways 2 + 3).
Exposure
Outcome
Pathway 1
A
Exposure
Outcome
Mediator
Pathway 4
Pathway 2
Pathway 3
B
Δx = x/t
Ix = Δx ∙ β
φx = – Ix/I0
I(t) = I0 (1 – φx)t
I(t) = I0 (1 – (φ1x + φ2x))t
 Articles
www.thelancet.com/lancetgh   Vol 6   May 2018 
e518
We also did sensitivity analyses to investigate some 
of the assumptions of the statistical modelling. We 
investigated the results in an analysis that included only 
countries with non-missing data for social protection 
outcomes and measures of extreme poverty. We further 
investigated how much the results would change 
under scenarios in which social protection coverage was 
expanded to 50% (instead of 100%) and in which extreme 
poverty was 90% eliminated (instead of 100%).
To determine whether the assumption of a linear 
trend for β was valid, we examined a model with a 
quadratic term for improved model fit. Restricted cubic 
spline methods and piecewise linear functions were 
also considered but would have resulted in substantial 
additional complexity in statistical modelling and 
eventual interpretation of projections, and thus, were 
not a valid alternative for the methodology presented in 
this study.
Role of the funding source
The funder of the study gave input on the general 
approach and provided some data on SDG and 
tuberculosis indicators. The funder had no role in 
collation of additional data, development of the analysis 
framework, data analysis, data interpretation, or writing 
of the report. The corresponding author had full access 
to all the data in the study and had final responsibility 
for the decision to submit for publication.
Results
We created a correlogram that describes the structure 
of the data to validate the assumptions required for 
reducing the conceptual framework (figure 4). Extreme 
poverty and multidimensional poverty are strongly 
correlated (r=0∙83), validating the assumption that they 
might be measuring the same underlying construct. 
Social insurance is the only form of social protection 
correlated with tuberculosis incidence (r=–0∙45), and 
social insurance was therefore used as the measure of 
choice for statistical modelling of SDG 1.3.
We found evidence that all tuberculosis risk factors 
were potential mediators, but that social insurance was 
a particularly strong mediator, further suggesting its 
use in the statistical model (appendix).
There was no evidence that any of the SDG subtarget 
indicators were associated with tuberculosis after 
adjusting for more proximal factors or more and 
equally proximal factors (table 1). However, all four 
tuberculosis 
risk 
factors 
were 
associated 
with 
tuberculosis incidence after adjusting for other risk 
factors (table 1). These findings suggest that none of the 
set of four risk factors were solely responsible for the 
direct effect on tuberculosis incidence.
Taken together, these models suggest that the total 
effect of the SDG subtargets on tuberculosis incidence 
is representative of the indirect effect through the 
four tuberculosis risk factor pathways, validating the 
omission of the risk factor pathways in the reduced 
modelling framework. We do not suspect any residual 
confounding by gross domestic product or by Gini 
coefficient because these variables were not associated 
with tuberculosis incidence after adjustment for all 
other targets and risk factors (appendix).
Ending extreme poverty resulted in a reduction in 
global tuberculosis incidence of 33∙4% (95% CrI 
15∙5–44∙5) by 2035. Expanding social protection 
coverage resulted in a reduction in global tuberculosis 
incidence of 76∙1% (95% CrI 45∙2–89∙9) by 2035. Both 
direct effects together resulted in a reduction in 
incidence of 84∙3% (95% CrI 54∙7–94∙9).
The effect of eliminating poverty and increasing 
social protection coverage to 100% gives an estimated 
annual proportional decrease in tuberculosis incidence 
of approximately 9·1% (table 2). Increasing social 
protection coverage alone could result in an estimated 
annual proportional decrease of about 8·7%.
Figure 4: Correlogram of all indicators, measures, and tuberculosis incidence
Blue indicates positive correlation whereas red indicates negative correlation. The value inside each square of the 
grid is the correlation coefficient (r value). All correlation coefficients shown have an associated p value of less than 
0·05 under a null hypothesis of pairwise independence. Malnutrition (r=0·52), extreme poverty (r=0·49), 
multidimensional poverty (r=0·43), HIV (r=0·57), and housing quality (r=0·47) are all moderately correlated with 
tuberculosis incidence. They are all strongly positively correlated with each other (dark blue values) and moderately 
negatively correlated with adverse health behaviours and social insurance (light red values).
Tuberculosis
incidence
Extreme poverty
Mulitidimensional poverty
prevalence
Social protection: labour
Social protection: assistance
Social protection: insurance
Malnutrition
Health behaviour
Housing quality
HIV prevalence
0·57
0·31
0·2
–0·22
–0·28
0·37
–0·21
0·14
1
–1·0
–0·8
–0·6
–0·4
–0·2
0
0·2
0·4
0·6
0·8
1·0
Correlation
Tuberculosis incidence
Extreme poverty
Multidimensional poverty prevalence
Social protection: labour
Social protection: assistance
Social protection: insurance
Malnutrition
Health behaviour
Housing quality
HIV prevalence
0·47
0·79
0·91
–0·38
–0·67
0·55
–0·42
1
–0·44
–0·53
–0·16
0·53
–0·35
1
0·52
0·52
0·54
–0·49
1
–0·45
–0·64
–0·74
0·32
1
–0·39
–0·41
0·18
1
1
0·43
0·83
1
0·49
1
1
 Articles
e519 
www.thelancet.com/lancetgh   Vol 6   May 2018
Adjustment for gross domestic product and the Gini 
coefficient resulted in a decrease in effect size for the 
health behaviour pathway and an increase in effect size 
for the social insurance pathway (appendix).
An analysis using complete cases for social insurance 
and extreme poverty was found to be broadly similar in 
terms of the size of the effect estimate produced by the 
statistical model, although with wider CrIs, which are 
likely to result from the insufficient power produced by 
restriction of the sample size. Under the scenario in 
which social protection was expanded to 50% (instead 
of 100%) and in which extreme poverty was 
90% eliminated (instead of 100%), the point estimates 
for reduction from baseline were still substantial: 
18∙1% for absolute poverty elimination, 41∙6% for 
social protection expansion, and 52∙5% for the 
combination of these strategies (appendix).
The addition of a quadratic term in an additional 
sensitivity analysis did not substantially improve the fit 
of the model, suggesting no evidence of a non-linear 
trend in the association between extreme poverty and 
tuberculosis, and social protection and tuberculosis.
Discussion
The reduced framework linked SDG 1 subtargets 
directly 
to 
tuberculosis 
incidence, 
validated 
by 
correlational analyses and an assessment for mediation. 
Ending extreme poverty and expanding social protection 
coverage each resulted in a reduction in the global 
incidence of tuberculosis by 2035. Both direct effects 
together also resulted in a reduction in incidence, 
suggesting social protection expansion is key.
The scale of the reduction in tuberculosis incidence 
projected is particularly important in view of 
a 2017 study14 suggesting that fewer than 5% of countries 
will reach the goal for tuberculosis elimination outlined 
in SDG 3. The 11% annual proportional decrease in 
tuberculosis projected by this model is commensurate 
with the scale of the proportional annual decrease that 
the End TB Strategy suggests would be necessary to 
reach the 2035 targets and is likely to have an effect on 
transmission dynamics.4 Regardless of whether the 
SDG 1, SDG 3, or End TB targets are reached completely, 
our study shows that eliminating extreme poverty and 
especially increasing social protection coverage are key 
to reducing tuberculosis incidence.
A major strength of this study is the data-driven 
approach to generating and analysing the modelling 
framework. Validation of the modelling framework 
with an analytical approach means we are measuring 
the association of interest—namely, SDG 1 and 
tuberculosis incidence—while still accounting for 
major risk factor pathways. Our approach provides a 
reasonable balance between complexity and clarity. The 
statistical model extends beyond point associations and 
provides projections of future tuberculosis burden that 
are key for policy discussions. However, we avoid the 
escalating assumptions and uncertainties of using a 
mechanistic transmission model to capture these 
associations.
This study has some data-centric limitations. Not all 
countries yet collect routine prevalence estimates for 
social protection coverage or for extreme poverty. 
However, a robust protocol for the handling of missing 
data was implemented, and missing data on key 
exposure variables were not associated with tuberculosis 
risk factors or WHO region. Improved data availability 
and quality would have allowed for more refinements to 
the overall statistical model. Particularly, the production 
of regional estimates would have been preferable to the 
global model in view of the different effects of different 
types of social protection in different regions. The 
annual proportional decrease in tuberculosis incidence 
is probably lower than our estimate in high-income 
regions and higher than our estimate in regions with a 
greater proportion of low-income and middle-income 
countries, although in this global model, all regions are 
given equal weight.
Because the burden of tuberculosis and of poverty 
is concentrated in low-income and middle-income 
countries, the proportional annual decrease provided is 
probably a conservative estimate for the reduction in 
incidence expected were SDG 1 to be globally attained. 
With improved data quality, we could also assess 
whether the relation between poverty, social protection, 
and tuberculosis is non-linear in some regions, which 
could result in a more precise estimate than obtained by 
assuming linearity. Studies using similar analytical 
projection methodologies for tuberculosis have used 
regional models and non-linear associations to inform 
global estimates.15,16 However, in this analysis, regional 
models resulted in wide confidence intervals for β due 
Crude estimate  
(95% CI)
Adjusted estimate 
(95% CI)*
Adjusted estimate 
(95% CI)†
Subtarget indicator
SDG 1.1: extreme poverty
3·59 (2·54 to 4·65)
0·22 (–1·22 to 1·66)
0·62 (–1·08 to 2·33)
SDG 1.2: MPI prevalence
2·52 (1·48 to 3·57)
–0·50 (–2·35 to 1·36)
–0·87 (–3·02 to 1·28)
SDG 1.3: labour protection
–0·19 (–5·38 to 5·01)
–1·04 (–3·97 to 1·89)
–0·92 (–4·09 to 2·26)
SDG 1.3: social assistance
–1·27 (–2·28 to –0·26)
–0·06 (–0·77 to 0·64)
0·01 (–0·75 to 0·78)
SDG 1.3: social insurance
–3·52 (–4·44 to –2·60)
–0·94 (–2·36 to 0·48)
–1·04 (–2·55 to 0·48)
Risk factor measure
Malnourishment
7·25 (5·54 to 8·95)
··
3·09 (1·19 to 4·98)
Health behaviour
–2·16 (–5·10 to 0·78)
··
4·13 (1·52 to 6·73)
Housing quality
2·70 (1·89 to 3·51)
··
1·93 (1·19 to 2·68)
HIV prevalence
26·85 (19·90 to 33·80)
··
23·62 (18·90 to 28·34)
Equal hierarchy of risk factors was assumed, in line with figure 1. SDG=Sustainable Development Goal. 
MPI=Multidimensional Poverty Index. *The association between a single indicator or risk factor and tuberculosis, 
adjusted for all variables more proximal to tuberculosis incidence (tuberculosis risk factors). †The association between 
a single indicator or risk factor and tuberculosis, adjusted for all variables more and equally proximal to tuberculosis 
incidence (SDG subtargets and tuberculosis risk factors).
Table 1: The association between each indicator or measure and tuberculosis incidence per 100 000 people 
per year
 Articles
www.thelancet.com/lancetgh   Vol 6   May 2018 
e520
to sparsity of data. Although we acknowledge that, in a 
global model, countries will have heterogeneous profiles 
for risk factors, this heterogeneity must be considered 
in a trade off with statistical power. Sufficient statistical 
power to make robust conclusions is unlikely to be 
attained in subgroup analyses, particularly in view of 
the missing data in this study; this is evident in the 
sensitivity analysis done on complete cases.
The estimated annual proportional decrease in tuber-
culosis incidence projected assumes that the association 
between the SDG 1 subtargets remains constant as 
progress is made towards eliminating poverty. Because 
tuberculosis remains concentrated in the most 
vulnerable populations, elimination of the last 
1% of extreme poverty might have a larger effect on 
incidence than elimination of the first 1%,17 and thus 
the value for β might increase over time, which is not 
captured by this model. This would imply the 
projections are conservative. However, the elimination 
of the last pockets of extreme poverty is likely to be 
more challenging than elimination at baseline, which is 
captured by the exponential decay component of the 
statistical model; the absolute decrease slows as 
progress is made towards reducing poverty. As such, 
the projections might over 
estimate the amount of 
poverty elimination (or social protection) that is feasible 
within the given timeframe. Both the changing value 
of β and the changing difficulty of eliminating poverty 
over time are likely to be heterogeneous between 
nations and regions, and it is not possible to tell from 
the collected data whether taken together these factors 
bias the global estimate upwards or downwards.
The sensitivity analysis investigating non-linearities 
in β suggest that the assumption of a constant β is not 
unreasonable. Although other shapes might be 
possible, little evidence is available to guide either 
selection of an appropriate non-linear term to replace 
our analysis or to estimate appropriate standard errors 
for the CrIs. Although we recognise that β can change 
over time, in practice incorporation of this change into 
the model while maintaining the present balance 
between complexity and interpretability is impossible. 
Similar concerns arise for changes in the scaling of 
poverty reduction or social protection expansion; what a 
reasonable value is for non-linearity with respect to Δx is 
unclear, as is how to propagate the uncertainty involved 
with a variable value of Δx.
The statistical model estimates use social insurance as 
the main measure of social protection, which tends to be 
more associated with higher-income countries relative 
to social assistance and labour protection measures 
(appendix). However, we found an association between 
social insurance and reduced tuberculosis incidence 
even after accounting for gross domestic product and the 
Gini coefficient, which suggests that social insurance is 
not simply acting as a proxy measure for being in a 
high-income country or for having low-income inequality 
(appendix). Social insurance might also be the only 
SDG 1 measure correlated with tuberculosis incidence 
because social insurance systems (eg, welfare and 
unemployment) have wide-ranging effects on society 
compared with social assistance schemes, which might 
be more directly targeted at groups that probably, but 
might not necessarily, overlap with patients with 
tuberculosis (eg, conditional cash transfers, disability 
grants, and child benefits). Social insurance is also likely 
to act more tangibly and more rapidly on tuberculosis 
trends than labour market reforms or social assistance 
programmes by enhancing access to tuberculosis care 
(eg, through health insurance) and by mitigating 
the effect of tuberculosis-related catastrophic costs and, 
more broadly, the financial consequences of tuberculosis 
(ie, unemployment programmes). Although an aggregate 
measure of social protection prevalence would be a 
useful metric for SDG 1.3, it is not provided by the 
SDG databank.
β (95% CI)
Estimated 2035 incidence 
per 100 000 people (95% CrI)
Decrease from baseline* 
(95% CrI)
Expected annual 
proportional decrease
Pathway A: social protection for all 
(100% coverage)
–2·13 (–3·36 to –0·90)
28·5 (11·9 to 65·3)
76·1% (45·2 to 89·9)
8·7%
Pathway C: poverty elimination 
(100% eliminated)
–2·37 (–3·64 to –1·10)
80·6 (66·2 to 100·7)
33·4% (15·5 to 44·5)
2·0%
Pathway A and Pathway C: social 
protection and poverty elimination
··
18·7 (6·0 to 54·0)
84·3% (54·7 to 94·9)
11·1%
Pathways B + C: social protection 
via poverty elimination
··
83·2 (65·7 to 103·2)†‡
30·2% (13·4 to 44·9)
1·8%
Pathway A and Pathways B + C: 
total effect of social protection
··
21·6 (6·3 to 43·1)†
81·9% (64·8 to 94·8)
9·1%
The value of β comes from linear associations generated from the pathways in figure 2 and represents the association of tuberculosis and social protection, independent of 
extreme poverty and vice versa. 95% CrIs represent the values between which 95% of model projections would be expected to fall on the basis of the distribution of β. 
95% CrIs are not perfectly symmetrical because the exponential decay portion of the model creates an asymptote at y=0; as the expected incidence approaches 0, the 95% CrI 
will be closer to the estimate. Joint effects are calculated with the provided values of β. SDG=Sustainable Development Goal. CrI=credible interval. *Baseline: year 2015 with 
last year reported since 2010 carried forward. †Includes variance from Pathway C but not from B. ‡β for Pathway B alone is –0·57 (95% CI –0·72 to –0·42).
Table 2: Projected tuberculosis incidence per 100 000 people per year associated with the achievement of selected SDG 1 subtargets
 Articles
e521 
www.thelancet.com/lancetgh   Vol 6   May 2018
There are some limitations to the use of social 
insurance as a proxy measure of social protection 
coverage. We consider prevalence of social insurance to 
be a measure of a wider construct that includes the 
structural and social factors required to implement a 
social insurance system, which might bias our estimate 
higher. This is probably why social protection was 
found to be more efficacious than extreme poverty 
elimination alone; promotion of social insurance 
systems is likely to entail efforts to eradicate poverty. 
For a country to expand social insurance, its citizens 
need to be able to contribute in some way to a system of 
wealth redistribution, which in turn requires a degree 
of household financial stability that is unlikely to occur 
without the elimination of other factors associated with 
tuberculosis incidence, such as malnutrition, poor 
housing, and catastrophic costs. In this way, the floor of 
poverty is first raised by implementation of policy 
towards expanding social insurance, which might 
include forms of social protection that are comparatively 
easier to implement, such as social assistance and 
labour market interventions. As such, we might 
conceive of social insurance as a measure that indicates 
concomitant progress on the other SDG 1 targets.
Evidence is coalescing around a positive effect of social 
protection in tuberculosis control.5,6,18,19 This is the 
first study to directly link policies that form part of the 
End TB Strategy to SDG 1 or to provide projections of 
potential future tuberculosis incidence reduction from 
SDG achievement. Through this alignment there are 
high level opportunities to enable common progress 
towards both sets of targets. In view of the strong 
potential of social protection in tuberculosis, even 
compared with extreme poverty elimination, further 
policy assessment and consideration should be given to 
the role that various social protection programmes might 
have in tuberculosis control efforts, including the added 
value of social protection to mitigate catastrophic costs.
In November, 2017, Russia hosted an unprecedented 
WHO Global Interministerial Conference on ending 
tuberculosis to stimulate action and commitments. The 
resulting Moscow resolution aimed for the development 
of a framework working towards improved integration 
between tuberculosis care and social protection 
services. This framework entails the development of 
cross-sectoral delivery models able to rapidly detect 
eligible patients on the basis of clinical and vulnerability 
criteria, rather than just income; identify the most 
suitable social protection scheme on the basis of the 
patient’s profile; and facilitate access and enrolment by 
supporting the patients administratively and legally.
Because national social protection programmes are 
often under the jurisdiction of governmental development 
and welfare agencies or non-governmental organisations, 
the aforementioned cross-sectoral approaches are urgently 
needed if we are to capitalise on the opportunities 
to address the distal and proximal risk factors for 
tuberculosis. Political commitment is one of the key tenets 
of the End TB Strategy, and responsibility for work 
towards a sustainable solution to ending the tuber-
culosis epidemic rests in part with stakeholders outside 
the biomedical community capable of modifying its 
upstream drivers.
The scale of reduction in tuberculosis incidence seen 
by the attainment of SDG 1 would have a substantial 
effect on the progress towards tuberculosis elimination, 
accelerating the global down 
wards trend in tuberculosis 
incidence. Irrespective of whether the SDG 1, SDG 3, or 
End TB targets are reached completely, our research 
suggests that eliminating extreme poverty and 
especially increasing social protection coverage are key 
to reducing tuberculosis incidence. Cross-sectoral 
approaches that promote poverty reduction and social 
protection expansion will be crucial to the achievement 
of SDG 1 and provide the reduction in tuberculosis 
incidence that SDG 3 and the End TB Strategy are 
aiming to achieve. The approach of this study should be 
used to assess how other SDGs might affect the 
reduction of tuberculosis incidence to inform future 
advocacy and policy efforts.
Contributors
DJC, DB, and RMGJH conceptualised the Article. DJC, PG, KL, KF, 
MR, RMGJH, and DB agreed on the study protocol and analysis plan. 
DJC and PG were responsible for data procurement and storage. DJC 
did the data analysis and drafted the manuscript with input from 
RMGJH and DB. All authors discussed and agreed on the implications 
of the study findings and approved the final version to be published.
Declaration of interests
WHO provided financial assistance in the form of salary support 
during the study. We declare no competing interests.
References
1 
Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development: Sustainable Development Knowledge Platform. 
https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/post2015/
transformingourworld (accessed Aug 24, 2017).
2 
Lönnroth K, Raviglione M. The WHO’s new End TB Strategy in 
the post-2015 era of the Sustainable Development Goals. 
Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 2016; 110: 148–50.
3 
Fitchett JR, MacPherson P, Corbett EL. Implementing the End TB 
Strategy and the intersection with the Sustainable Development 
Goals, 2016–2030. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 2016; 110: 145–47
.
4 
Uplekar M, Weil D, Lönnroth K, et al. WHO’s new End TB 
Strategy. Lancet 2015; 385: 1799–801.
5 
Reeves A, Basu S, McKee M, Stuckler D, Sandgren A, Semenza J. 
Social protection and tuberculosis control in 21 European 
countries, 1995–2012: a cross-national statistical modelling 
analysis. Lancet Infect Dis 2014; 14: 1105–12.
6 
Siroka A, Ponce NA, Lönnroth K. Association between spending 
on social protection and tuberculosis burden: a global analysis. 
Lancet Infect Dis 2016; 16: 473–79.
7 
Krieger N. Methods for the scientific study of discrimination and 
health: an ecosocial approach. Am J Public Health 2012; 
102: 936–44.
8 
Ortblad KF, Salomon JA, Bärnighausen T, Atun R. 
Stopping tuberculosis: a biosocial model for sustainable 
development. Lancet 2015; 386: 2354–62.
9 
Lönnroth K, Jaramillo E, Williams BG, Dye C, Raviglione M. 
Drivers of tuberculosis epidemics: the role of risk factors and 
social determinants. Soc Sci Med 2009; 68: 2240–46.
10 
Lönnroth K, Castro KG, Chakaya JM, et al. Tuberculosis control 
and elimination 2010–50: cure, care, and social development. 
Lancet Lond Engl 2010; 375: 1814–29.
 Articles
www.thelancet.com/lancetgh   Vol 6   May 2018 
e522
11 
UN. SDG indicators. https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/metadata/ 
(accessed Aug 31, 2017).
12 
WHO. Tuberculosis data. http://www.who.int/tb/data/en/ 
(accessed Aug 31, 2017).
13 
Rubin DB. Inference and missing data. Biometrika 1976; 
63: 581–92.
14 
Abajobir AA, Abate KH, Abbafati C, et al. Measuring progress and 
projecting attainment on the basis of past trends of the 
health-related Sustainable Development Goals in 188 countries: 
an analysis from the Global Burden of Disease Study 2016. 
Lancet 2017; 390: 1423–59.
15 
Odone A, Houben RMGJ, White RG, Lönnroth K. The effect of 
diabetes and undernutrition trends on reaching 2035 global 
tuberculosis targets. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2014; 2: 754–64.
16 
Dye C, Trunz BB, Lönnroth K, Roglic G, Williams BG. 
Nutrition, diabetes and tuberculosis in the epidemiological 
transition. PLoS One 2011; 6: e21161.
17 
Ravallion M. How long will it take to lift one billion people out of 
poverty? World Bank Res Obs 2013; 28: 139–58.
18 
Boccia D, Hargreaves J, Lönnroth K, et al. Cash transfer and 
microfinance interventions for tuberculosis control: review of the 
impact evidence and policy implications. 
Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2011; 15 (suppl 2): S37–49.
19 
Nery JS, Rodrigues LC, Rasella D, et al. Effect of Brazil’s 
conditional cash transfer programme on tuberculosis incidence. 
Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2017; 21: 790–96.
