  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This is the author accepted version of the following article: 
'Seeking authorization': a grounded theory exploration of mentors' experiences of 
assessing nursing students on the borderline of achievement of competence in clinical 
practice 
Cassidy, S,Coffey, M,Murphy, F 
Journal of Advanced Nursing 
2017, 73 (9), pp. 2167-2178 
which has been published in final form at 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jan.13292  
 This article may be used for non-commercial purposes in accordance with Wiley Terms 
and Conditions for Self-Archiving. 
http://olabout.wiley.com/WileyCDA/Section/id-828039.html#terms 
 
  
Cassidy, S., Coffey, M. and Murphy, F. (2017), ‘Seeking authorization’: A grounded theory exploration of mentors’ experiences of 
assessing nursing students on the borderline of achievement of competence in clinical practice. J Adv Nurs. Accepted Author 
Manuscript. doi:10.1111/jan.13292 
1 
 
Title: ‘Seeking authorization’: A grounded theory exploration of mentors’ experiences of 
assessing nursing students on the borderline of achievement of competence in clinical 
practice. 
 
*Simon CASSIDY, PhD, RN. 
Practice Education Facilitator Abertawe Bro Morgannwg University Health Board, 
Wales. 
 
Michael COFFEY, PhD, RN. 
Associate Professor, Public Health, Policy and Social Sciences, Swansea University, 
Wales. 
 
Fiona MURPHY. PhD, RN. 
Professor of Clinical Nursing, Department of Nursing & Midwifery, Faculty of Education 
& Health Sciences, University of Limerick, Ireland. 
 
Acknowledgements 
We thank the participants who generously shared their experiences and therefore made 
this study possible. 
 
Conflict of interest 
This study was undertaken as a part-time PhD candidature.* No conflict of interest has 
been declared by the authors. 
 
Funding 
This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, 
commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. 
 
 
This is pre-peer review pre-print version of the paper published as  
Cassidy, S., Coffey, M. and Murphy, F. (2017), ‘Seeking authorization’: A grounded 
theory exploration of mentors’ experiences of assessing nursing students on the 
borderline of achievement of competence in clinical practice. J Adv Nurs. Accepted 
Author Manuscript. doi:10.1111/jan.13292 
 
The definitive and final version of this paper can be accessed via the link below 
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jan.13292/full  
 
 
 
 Cassidy, S., Coffey, M. and Murphy, F. (2017), ‘Seeking authorization’: A grounded theory exploration of mentors’ experiences of 
assessing nursing students on the borderline of achievement of competence in clinical practice. J Adv Nurs. Accepted Author 
Manuscript. doi:10.1111/jan.13292 
2 
 
Impact Statement 
 We provide new insights via our analysis of assessments by nurse mentors of 
nursing students who are on the borderline of achievement of competence in 
clinical practice. Findings show how the weighty consequences of personal and 
statutory obligations have the potential to dissuade mentors from addressing 
concerns about nursing students. Yet the study also reveals mentors’ views that 
not to act is a failure by omission should those students go on to register as a 
nurse. 
 
 Our study’s substantive theoretical explanation reveals that where mentors 
perceive they are part of a wider assessing community for students in borderline 
situations, this mitigates the repercussions of a fail decision. Collegial and 
organizational acknowledgement of the significance of borderline assessment 
situations emphasizes mentors’ accountability as binding in the same way as when 
safeguarding patient care. 
 
 
Abstract 
Aim: To develop a substantive theoretical explanation of how mentors make sense of 
their experiences where nursing students are on the borderline of achievement of 
competence in clinical practice.  
 
Background: The reluctance of registered nurse mentors to fail nursing students in 
clinical practice despite concerns about competence remains a contemporary issue in 
international healthcare education. Mentors’ assessment decisions have considerable 
impact for a variety of key stakeholders, not least for the student themselves as to 
whether they continue on pre-registration nursing programmes.  
 
Design: Grounded theory qualitative study. 
 
Methods: Phase one involved twenty individual semi-structured interviews with nurse 
mentors in one United Kingdom National Health Service Health Board. Phase two 
included eight individual semi-structured interviews and seven focus groups (n=38) with 
mentors and practice educators in four further Health Boards. Data were analysed using 
open, axial and selective coding consistent with grounded theory method. 
 
Findings: Three categories ‘the conundrum of practice competence,’ ‘the intensity of 
nurturing hopefulness,’ and ‘managing assessment impasse,’ led to the study’s 
substantive theoretical explanation - ‘Seeking authorization: Establishing collective 
 Cassidy, S., Coffey, M. and Murphy, F. (2017), ‘Seeking authorization’: A grounded theory exploration of mentors’ experiences of 
assessing nursing students on the borderline of achievement of competence in clinical practice. J Adv Nurs. Accepted Author 
Manuscript. doi:10.1111/jan.13292 
3 
 
accountability for mentorship.’ This demonstrates how mentors are dependent on key 
sources of support and feedback to validate their assessment decision-making, 
notwithstanding substantial personal, professional and organisational pressures.  
 
Conclusion: We conclude that management of borderline assessment situations is 
considerably developed by recognition of the authorizing effects of a wider community of 
assessors. Consequently, we identify the personal, professional and organisational 
implications involved in the preparation, support and regulation of mentors specifically 
during borderline assessment circumstances. 
 Journal of Advanced Nursing submission 
 
4 
 
Summary Statement:  
 
Why is this research or review needed? 
 
 The phenomenon of mentors who fail to fail nursing students during clinical 
placements despite concerns about their competence remains a concern for nurse 
education. 
 
 There is limited empirical research around the decision-making processes mentors 
adopt where students are on the borderline of achievement of competence in 
clinical practice. 
 
What are the key findings? 
 
 A substantive theoretical explanation of the way mentors seek authorization of 
their assessment decision-making about nursing students who are on the 
borderline of achievement of competence in clinical practice. 
 
 New insights concerning students in borderline assessment situations and the 
difficulties of interpreting competence in clinical practice, the emotional intensity 
of supporting students and managing situations where assessment processes have 
come to an impasse. 
 
 Evidence that whilst individual and environmental pressures exist in borderline 
assessment circumstances, they are not an inevitable impediment to mentors’ 
sense of personal or collective agency in making assessment decisions. 
 
 
How should the findings be used to influence policy/practice/research/education? 
 
 This substantive theoretical explanation provides a framework to ensure due 
scrutiny of mentors’ evaluations of nursing students in borderline assessment 
situations both at the time and as a resource for similar future events. 
 
 
Keywords: mentor, nursing, nurse education, student, competence, clinical practice, 
assessment, borderline decision-making, qualitative, grounded theory. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journal of Advanced Nursing submission 
 
5 
 
Introduction 
In the United Kingdom, the term ‘mentor’ is associated with nurses’ support of pre-
registration nursing students during clinical practice placements (NMC, 2008). This paper 
reports the findings of a study concerning mentors’ assessment of nursing students who 
are failing to meet expected levels of competence during clinical practice placements. 
Whereas some students can be clearly distinguished as failing, others are providing some 
evidence of meeting programme criteria but not enough for mentors to be confident in 
signing off students’ competence. This study concerns those students who are deemed to 
be on the borderline of achievement. In this paper, we present an analysis of the 
relationships, emotions and mentorship resources deployed in addressing concerns about 
students in borderline assessment circumstances.  
 
The concept of mentors failing to fail students in clinical practice remains a concern in 
the United Kingdom (Black, 2011; Duffy, 2006; Hunt, McGee, Gutteridge, & Hughes, 
2012), internationally (Hrobsky & Kersbergen, 2002; Luhanga, Yonge, & Myrick, 2008) 
and across professions (Finch, 2009; Cleland, Knight, Rees, Tracey, & Bond, 2008; 
Dudek, Marks, & Regehr, 2005). Yet despite being widely discussed (Gopee, 2008; 
Rutkowski, 2007; Vinales, 2015; Wells & McLoughlin, 2014), there is still little research 
in this area. Reports call for sustained concentration on the quality of mentorship in 
relation to the governance of nursing practice (RCN, 2013; Willis, 2012, 2015). Yet there 
are worries not all nurses meet registrant standards and questions have been raised as to 
whether pre-registration nursing programmes are fit for purpose (Francis, 2013), although 
an automatic link between poor practice and pre-registration nurse education is debated 
(Ion & Lauder, 2015). The study this paper reports is therefore ideally placed as it 
explores the very territory about which contemporary literature indicates there are a 
number of concerns, that of gate-keeping professional nursing standards and competence. 
The paper presents key study findings including the study’s substantive theoretical 
explanation of the phenomenon of nursing students who are on the borderline of 
achievement of competence in clinical practice.   
 
Background 
There is longstanding confusion concerning the interpretation of competence in clinical 
practice (Bedford et al., 1994; Garside & Nhemachena, 2013; Watson et al., 2002; 
Yanhua & Watson, 2011). A tension exists between job-related competence required by 
 Journal of Advanced Nursing submission 
 
6 
 
employers and a contemporary emphasis on transferable skills, critical thinking and 
lifelong learning (Cowan, Norman, & Coopamah, 2005; Gallagher, Smith, & Ousey, 
2012). Complications also arise because of reported difficulties concerning the validity 
and reliability of competence assessment tools (Cassidy et al., 2012; Dolan, 2003; 
McCarthy & Murphy, 2008). In particular, there is disquiet that a behavioural checklist 
approach to assessment of competence neglects a holistic view of nursing practice (Eraut, 
1994; Levett-Jones, Gersbach, Arthur, & Roche, 2011).  
 
Mentorship literature reveals the emotional turmoil of assessment decision-making where 
students’ competence is in doubt (Dudek et al., 2005; Duffy, 2013; Finch, Schaub, & 
Dalrymple, 2014; Larocque & Luhanga, 2013) especially a conflict between mentors’ 
pastoral and assessment roles (Black, 2011; Black, Curzio, & Terry, 2014). Assessment 
of competence is also complicated by disputes between key stakeholders regarding the 
credibility and sufficiency of mentors’ assessments of students in practice (Duffy, 2006; 
Smith & Allan, 2010), and by mentors’ own uncertainties about their decision-making 
authority (Brown, Douglas, Garrity, & Shepherd, 2012; Jervis & Tilki, 2011). Mentors 
also find it difficult to define or record their intuitive concerns (Black, 2011; Hunt, 2014). 
Furthermore, whilst there are reported benefits of mentor preparation (Clemow, 2007; 
Veeramah, 2012), it seems no training can fully anticipate the emotional realities of a 
failing or borderline student scenario (Black, 2011; Donaldson & Gray, 2012). 
 
Continuing concern about the credibility of assessment decision-making in clinical 
practice is therefore remarkable given the phenomenon of mentors failing to fail nursing 
students has been known about for over twenty years. Yet the management of borderline 
or fail decisions has remained a major consideration in terms of the credibility of nursing 
programmes (Brown et al., 2012; Black et al., 2014; Gainsbury, 2010; Hunt et al., 2012). 
However, the psychological, emotional and intensely human complexities of a borderline 
or fail decision, suggests that although these issues are recognized, they are no less easy 
to resolve (Heaslip & Scammell, 2012; Hunt, 2014; Vinales, 2015).  
 
 
 
 
 Journal of Advanced Nursing submission 
 
7 
 
The study 
Aim 
To explore mentors’ experiences of assessing nursing students on the borderline of 
achievement of competence in clinical practice and to develop a substantive theoretical 
explanation of this phenomenon.  
 
Design 
A particular strand of grounded theory drawing on symbolic interactionism and social 
constructionism (Corbin & Strauss, 2008; Strauss & Corbin, 1998) was adopted. 
Interviews were conducted over two phases with mentors and practice educators from 
five United Kingdom NHS Health Boards.  
 
Participants 
Study sampling parameters included UK registered nurse mentors and practice educators 
from adult (n=34), mental health (n=10), learning disability (n=9), and child (n=5) fields 
of nursing. All participants met UK Nursing and Midwifery Council standards to be a 
mentor and had experience of assessing at least one student on the borderline of 
achievement of competence. Following research ethics committee approval, presentations 
to mentors and practice educators at key meetings took place and potential participants 
came forward. Initial purposive sampling included participants with experience of the 
study phenomena. However, in grounded theory, sampling is driven by constant 
comparative analysis of data which carries particular resonance (Strauss & Corbin, 1998). 
Subsequently, through an iterative process of data collection and analysis, we identified a 
further theoretical sample of different participants and locations (Table 1). This was 
considered adequate in terms of theoretical saturation (Strauss & Corbin, 1998), and 
included individuals of varying role seniority (ward-based staff nurses; community 
nurses; clinical leads; practice educators), age range (26-59 years), and experience as a 
mentor (4-20 years). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journal of Advanced Nursing submission 
 
8 
 
Table 1: Details of interviews and focus groups 
Health 
Board 
No. of interviews 
and focus groups 
 
No. of 
participants 
Fields of nursing represented 
Phase one 
  One 
20 individual interviews 
Adult/ mental health/ learning disability/Child 
Phase two 
One 
1 focus group 
5 
 
Adult/ mental health/ learning disability/Child 
1 interview 
Adult 
Two 
 
2 focus groups 
12 
Adult/ Learning disability 
2 interviews 
Adult 
Three 
 
1 focus group 
7 
Adult/Mental Health/ Child 
2 interviews 
Mental Health 
Four 
 
1 focus group 
6 
Adult 
2 interviews 
Adult 
Five 
 
2 focus groups 
8 
Adult/ Learning disability 
1 interviews 
Adult 
 
 
Data collection 
Phase one data were collected between July - October 2009, using twenty semi-structured 
individual interviews with nurse mentors. Phase two data were collected between June 
2011 and February 2012. This involved eight further semi-structured individual 
interviews and seven focus groups with thirty eight nurse mentors and practice educators. 
Phase one interviews began with an open-ended question: Can you tell me about your 
experiences of being a mentor? Follow up questions then encouraged discussion about 
students on the borderline of achievement of competence. Focus groups started similarly, 
but where conversation resonated with themes derived from the on-going process of 
constant comparative analysis those topics were developed further. All interviews and 
focus groups were arranged at participants’ convenience and held away from clinical 
practice settings. Data were digitally recorded and transcribed verbatim.  
 
Ethical considerations 
Ethical approval was obtained from local Research Ethics Committees and Health Board 
Research and Development departments for both study phases. All participants were 
given a study information sheet and consent form including assurances of confidentiality, 
anonymity and right to withdraw at any point.  
 
 
 Journal of Advanced Nursing submission 
 
9 
 
Data analysis 
Interview and focus group data were analysed using a process of open, axial and selective 
coding consistent with grounded theory method (Corbin & Strauss, 2008; Strauss & 
Corbin, 1998). Constant comparison of data encouraged a focus on early associations and 
patterns. Initial codes were developed through analysis of the contexts, effects and 
outcomes of the ways participants made particular assessment decisions. These were 
organized within a thematic framework using Nvivo software version 8. Selective coding 
ultimately led to a substantive theoretical explanation of mentors’ experiences of 
assessing nursing students who were on the borderline of achievement of competence in 
clinical practice. 
 
Rigour 
Rigour included reflexive sensitivity towards the study phenomenon aided by on-going 
critical reflection between the researchers, field notes at the time of interviews and focus 
groups, memos detailing thematic development, and negative case analysis.  
 
Findings 
Three core categories, ‘the conundrum of practice competence,’ ‘the intensity of 
nurturing hopefulness,’ and ‘managing assessment impasse,’ were generated from 
analysis of data. These findings revealed substantial conflicts operating to derail mentors’ 
assessment decision-making where students were on the borderline of achievement of 
competence in clinical practice. Such issues were central to the study’s substantive 
theoretical explanation concerning authorization of mentors’ assessment decision-
making. 
 
The conundrum of practice competence 
Participants’ evaluation of competence in borderline assessment situations was varied and 
open to their interpretation. For example, perceptions of competence were highly 
influenced by the way students did or did not attach humanistic value to fundamental care 
activities: 
 
 Journal of Advanced Nursing submission 
 
10 
 
“If you’re changing a smelly dressing or assisting patients with a 
commode it’s very difficult for them. But that’s when you’ll have a 
better holistic understanding of your patient. I’m a person first and 
then a patient. That’s my criteria.” (Interview: Fay - Nurse Mentor). 
 
There was concern that competence could be more straightforwardly considered using 
reductionist criteria which had organizational value, such as students’ assistance with 
completion of tasks in pressurised nursing environments. Participants could also be 
swayed by positive aspects of students’ performance without consideration being given to 
a wider set of skills, behaviours, and attitudes necessary for competent nursing practice. 
Participants were continually mindful therefore to consider a more comprehensive view 
of competence: 
 
“When we go to administer medication I expect some humanity and 
positive interactions with the patient. So administering an injection is 
not just one task it encompasses a whole plethora of other nursing 
activities. I think competence is a much undefined term.” (Interview: 
Dave - Nurse Mentor) 
  
This conundrum in determining what competence looks like and the level at which it is 
assessed was also complicated by assessment of students’ capacity for reflection and 
critical thinking. Participants saw competence as requiring an ability to interpret and 
respond to changing contexts of practice rather than simply follow instructions. This 
produced a dilemma in borderline situations when participants were looking out for 
indications that students were developing a holistic sense of nursing practice yet students 
were overestimating their abilities: 
 
“The student didn’t relate well to patients and they couldn’t really 
relate back to her, but what concerned me most was that she didn’t 
perceive she couldn’t relate.” (Interview: Kate - Nurse Mentor) 
 
The subjective nature of participants’ assessments without reference to pre-defined 
competency statements made determining practice competence more complicated. Yet 
whilst reliant on their intuition and subjective interpretations of students’ competence, 
participants were also uncomfortable about the apparent certainty of their assessment 
decisions being shaped by such personal views: 
 
 Journal of Advanced Nursing submission 
 
11 
 
Jess: “An example recently was a mentor who said well the student’s 
not aggressive enough, she’s not assertive enough, but there’s a 
difference between assertiveness and aggression. You don’t want the 
student to be aggressive, but you certainly want them to be assertive 
enough to advocate for the patient. So how was she making her 
judgement on that student?  
Amy: It comes back to the fact that everybody is subjective. 
Jess: It is. The levels of assessment are not clear.” (Focus Group: 
Amy and Jess - Practice Educators) 
 
The intensity of nurturing hopefulness 
This second core category related to how mentors strove to ensure that students on the 
borderline of achievement might be successful. Participants’ emotional resilience was 
repeatedly challenged when building a consensus of hope in this extra-ordinary 
predicament of borderline assessment situations. Whilst pastoral concern and nurturing 
was seen as integral to effective mentorship, the level and type of nurturing that 
constituted legitimate mentorship support was difficult. However, there was a strong 
sense that mentors could be involved in pastoral, supportive, and nurturing roles without 
automatically compromising their accountability: 
 
Tanya: “With a failing student, you do have to be firm and say what 
is acceptable and what isn’t acceptable and you can’t do that if 
you’re on a friendship footing.  
Interviewer: And did you find it difficult to negotiate that 
relationship? 
Tanya: I didn’t find that difficult at all. But I certainly know that gets 
you viewed as a bit stuffy. You know I’ll be your work colleague I’ll 
be a friend in a certain way but I’m not your best buddy. I’m your 
mentor.” (Focus group: Tanya - Nurse Mentor)  
 
Learning was also seen as contingent on students’ belongingness and participation in the 
cultural life of placement communities. Yet in borderline situations, participants often 
found themselves arbitrators of assessment fairness especially when confronted by 
colleagues’ contrary opinions about students: 
 
“Other mentors on the ward were saying the student should be 
standing on her own two feet, but I felt I had kind of worked out this 
person’s style and how the team should adapt. So then I became very 
defensive of the student and I had to say hang on a minute if this, this 
and this is put in place she’s fine.” (Interview: Jim - Nurse Mentor) 
 
 Journal of Advanced Nursing submission 
 
12 
 
Borderline assessment situations also took on heightened emotional intimacy where 
participants were involved in extending the appearance of hope that students would meet 
required levels of competence whilst privately believing achievement was unlikely. Such 
tension produced a contradictory state of reverse mentorship where mentors were in 
effect ‘nurturing failure.’ They were knowingly being encouraging even though the 
outcome for the student seemed bleak. At the same time, mentors blamed themselves for 
students’ failure to progress, although crucially this self-deprecation did not result in 
admitting defeat or necessarily failing to fail: 
 
“I can understand to a degree why some nurses don’t say anything 
because they don’t want to feel a failure mentoring a student. I can 
understand that but you have to put that to one side. It’s about 
thinking of the greater good. I mean if you don’t bring concerns to the 
fore the student won’t ever change.” (Interview: Mary - Nurse 
Mentor) 
 
Participants did admonish themselves based on perceptions of their effectiveness in the 
mentoring role, but these reproaches were integral to coping in the emotional intensity 
of borderline assessment situations. Ultimately, participants’ perceptions of culpability 
appeared in contrast to vicarious liability for service users and carers and this sense of 
moral practice transcended loyalty to students.  
 
Managing assessment impasse 
As borderline situations evolved, participants became especially conscious of a need to 
restate learning agreements with students in order to move on. In ‘usual’ mentorship 
situations, participants aimed to encourage student enterprise and decrease levels of 
supervision relative to programme progression. However the extra-ordinary relationships 
and resources involved in borderline assessment situations could conspire to bring those 
aspirations to an impasse: 
 
“Yes you need the student to be there with you especially when they 
are not up to the mark, but you don’t always have the time or the 
staffing levels to be able to do that. I know most of the time people 
will say that’s a cop out and you’ve got to make time. But it’s not so 
easy when you’re working in that environment. It’s so frustrating. 
Obviously we made that know to the powers that be.” (Interview: Fay 
- Nurse Mentor)  
 
 Journal of Advanced Nursing submission 
 
13 
 
However, despite potential derailment of assessment relations, participants’ overall 
approach towards students remained restorative. There was a clear sense that 
student/mentor relations could survive assessment impasse by carefully constructed 
positive and negative feedback assisting students’ self-regulation of their practice: 
 
“I fed back on some issues and actually sent her away to go and think 
about the concerns. You know go back through some of your nursing 
work. Talk to your peer group. Have a robust response to come back 
to me for the concerns we’ve discussed. In fairness I would say for 
most of the issues she was able to, but I think that’s because I’d given 
her the time and space to go away to reflect on things.” (Focus 
group: Hilda - Practice Educator) 
 
Management of assessment impasse was also influenced by the immediacy of 
participants’ personal support infrastructure during borderline events. The benefits of 
formal mentor preparation were acknowledged although there was a perception that such 
training could never replicate the extra-ordinary predicament of borderline 
circumstances. However, swift support from trusted colleagues and a wider collegial 
approach to assessment decision-making provided important reassurance against the 
repercussions of failing a student: 
 
 “It’s about a community of mentors. That’s something that’s been 
missing. I think mentors work very much in isolation until there are 
specific issues.” (Focus group: Delia - Nurse Mentor) 
 
The effectiveness of the interface between mentors, practice educators and Higher 
Education Institution (HEI) personnel also had an impact on participants’ feelings of trust 
in how borderline assessment situations were managed. Where external support (such as 
from HEIs) was perceived as being effective, participants highlighted the benefits of this 
assistance in being able to move on from periods of impasse. Yet there was also a 
perception that mentors assessment decision-making could be over-ruled: 
 
 Journal of Advanced Nursing submission 
 
14 
 
 “I don’t think the mentors had much faith in the fact that the student 
would be rigorously followed through by the university. They felt the 
student would just be left to go on which hasn’t happened at all. But 
that was mentors perspective of it.” (Focus group: Hilda - Practice 
Educator) 
 
Notwithstanding the accuracy of key stakeholder perceptions, participants nevertheless 
saw the response of external personnel, especially links with HEI’s, as having a decisive 
impact on mentors’ actions (and inactions).  
 
Seeking authorization: Establishing collective accountability for mentorship. 
These three core study categories ‘the conundrum of practice competence,’ ‘the intensity 
of nurturing hopefulness,’ and ‘managing assessment impasse,’ emerged as critical to the 
study’s substantial theoretical explanation - ‘Seeking authorization: Establishing 
collective accountability for mentorship.’ Moreover, participants’ experience of assessing 
students in borderline assessment situations was characterized by a series of stages. These 
were identified as ‘assessment inheritance’ (the effects of previous placement 
information on current assessment decision-making); ‘the mentor experience’ (the way in 
which participants rationalized and sought permissions concerning their assessment 
decisions despite a number of socio-cultural forces impacting on their sense of agency 
and authorization as a mentor), and ‘assessment bequest’ (the construction of a legacy of 
information for future mentors). These stages are outlined in Figure 1 and described in 
the following sections.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journal of Advanced Nursing submission 
 
15 
 
Figure 1 The substantive theoretical explanation: ‘Seeking authorization: 
Establishing collective accountability for mentorship.’ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Constructing a 
legacy 
Post-placement 
gate-keeping  
Pre-entry  
student histories 
 
Socio-cultural forces 
 
Mentor agency 
Concerns  
Rationalizing   
Permission  
Seeking  
 
Borderline 
situation 
Conundrum of practice 
competence 
Intensity of nurturing 
hopefulness 
Managing assessment impasse 
Initial 
concerns 
Sense of 
authorization 
 Journal of Advanced Nursing submission 
 
16 
 
     Stage 1 - Assessment inheritance 
As Figure 1 illustrates, the extent of previous ‘assessment inheritance’ detail students 
brought to a placement often led to first recognition of a borderline situation. Participants 
needed to make sense of ‘pre-entry student histories’ despite previous assessment 
concerns not always being fully documented. They were unclear why previous mentors 
had only hinted at problems and how students had progressed through placements only for 
subsequent concerns to arise. Participants were also often advocating for students’ 
legitimate inclusion within placement teams when team colleagues had already formed 
opinions about the likelihood of students’ achievement. Moreover, whilst participants 
often experienced intuitive ‘initial concerns’ about students in borderline assessment 
situations, they were not always clear about what these feelings might indicate.  
 
Stage 2 - The mentor experience  
Rationalizing concerns and seeking permission 
Linking the three core categories were mentors’ attempts to rationalize their concerns and 
seek permission for their assessment decision-making (Figure 1). As borderline 
assessment situations evolved, participants were frequently encouraged by positive 
indications of a student’s competence and were on the brink of signing off practice 
learning outcomes. Yet such episodes often turned out to be false dawns and concerns 
remained. Data revealed how participants continued to extend the appearance of hope that 
a student would achieve whilst secretly doubting this outcome. Participants entered into a 
process of ‘rationalizing concerns.’ Initially they internalized students’ failure as poor 
mentorship and blamed themselves for lack of progress. These self-deprecating views 
were nevertheless a way of coping with the emotional complexity involved. However, the 
process of rationalization was ultimately balanced by participants’ duty of care to service 
users and carers.  
 
Effective management of borderline assessment situations was also closely connected to 
collaboration between participants, colleagues and external placement personnel, 
particularly HEI staff. Consequently, data revealed the symbolic importance of ‘seeking 
permission’ and authorization of participants’ assessment decision-making as a result of a 
wider sense of communal identity. The authorizing or disempowering effects of these 
interactions were a prominent feature of the value participants attached to their discrete 
 Journal of Advanced Nursing submission 
 
17 
 
placement assessments as part of the overall nursing programme. As identified in the three 
core data categories, perceptions of an assessing community were enhanced where there 
was agreement within placement teams about the nature of competence being assessed 
(conundrum of practice competence), appreciation of the emotional effort involved 
(intensity of nurturing hopefulness), and acknowledgement of the difficulties of re-
establishing students’ learning progression where this had stalled (managing assessment 
impasse).  
 
Socio-cultural forces and mentor agency  
Participants’ experience of borderline assessment situations also incorporated socio-
cultural forces and how these impacted on mentor agency. Study data shows how 
participants were often caught between their ability to resist a number of organisational 
and regulatory pressures (socio-cultural forces) whilst attempting to make fair and 
equitable assessment decisions (mentor agency). For example, pressure from colleagues to 
pass or fail a student, time and staffing constraints on mentorship, perceived devaluation 
of mentorship within Health Boards and HEI’s, and a sense of lone accountability all 
influenced participants individual and collective decision-making. Moreover, in borderline 
assessment situations, participants were also dealing with the emotional complexity of 
suppressing feelings of doubt about students’ prospects of achievement whilst remaining 
outwardly encouraging. Despite such personal and organisational tensions however, our 
participants were still able to take action in relation to their concerns about students. 
Furthermore, they continued to nurture hopeful outcomes even though there was doubt a 
student would achieve practice learning outcomes.  
 
Sense of authorization  
Central to how borderline assessment situations were managed by participants was their 
ability to negotiate the competing forces illustrated in Figure 1 (rationalizing concerns and 
seeking permission, sociocultural forces and mentor agency, and the complexities 
involved in the three core study categories). Whilst participants could decide to fail 
students they had doubts about, they could also exercise agency in deciding not to act on 
these concerns. Inaction was intentional in this sense. In view of these dynamics, we drew 
on theories of social structure and personal agency to assist analysis of the complexity of 
mentors situated experience. Such theories include a view that personal actions are 
 Journal of Advanced Nursing submission 
 
18 
 
ultimately constrained by institutional forces (Durkheim, 1982 [1895]; Foucault, 2002 
[1972]). Alternatively that individuals are able to resist social constraints particularly 
through collaborative enterprise (Blumer, 1969; Mead, 1934; Weber, 1992 [1904-5]). 
There is also a middle ground where institutional forces are seen as impinging on personal 
agency alongside acknowledgement that individuals have capacity to act on their 
intentions (Archer, 1995, 2000, 2003; Giddens, 1984).  
 
These theoretical insights added to understanding of the substantive theory - ‘seeking 
authorization’ - whereby participants attempted to reach a point of comfort about their 
assessment decision-making whilst managing the physical, resource, and emotional 
demands borderline circumstances provoked. Critically, effective management of 
borderline assessment situations depended on the authorizing effects of a wider community 
of assessors. Yet although study data showed how participants recognized their 
responsibilities as part of an assessing community, there was little sense of connection 
between placement mentors. Participants were therefore referencing a community invested 
with vital gate-keeping responsibilities, but were significantly troubled by their separation 
from usual team relations. This ambiguity had a particularly persuasive and moderating 
effect on participants’ sense of personal and collective agency. Furthermore, 
rationalization of these issues was instrumental to participants’ understanding of the value 
of their assessment decision-making and decisively, their perceptions of the credibility of 
the nursing programme. 
 
Stage 3 - Assessment bequest 
As students neared the end of their placement, study data showed participants’ concern for 
a comprehensive and on-going record of students’ trajectory which constituted a vital 
‘assessment bequest.’ This further stage of participants’ experience involved making sense 
of assessment concerns and ‘constructing a legacy’ of information for the following 
mentor (Figure 1). Participants’ were especially conscious of how their discrete placement 
evaluations contributed to the assessment of particular students over the course of the 
nursing programme. Yet whilst participants could feel empowered by the significance of 
assessment decision-making during discrete placements, they often experienced a sense of 
disempowerment when the student left. So even though a placement had ended, there was 
still conflict for participants in ‘post-placement gatekeeping’ and their attempts to resolve 
 Journal of Advanced Nursing submission 
 
19 
 
lingering concerns.   
 
Discussion 
Our study resonates with other research about the difficulties of assessing competence 
where nursing students are failing in practice (Brown et al., 2012; Gainsbury, 2010; Jervis 
& Tilki, 2011). Mentors’ espoused intentions to assess competence in more holistic ways 
appear compromised by practice contingencies, not least divergent and subjective assessor 
perspectives (Black et al., 2014; Duffy, 2013; Hunt et al., 2012). Assessment decision-
making being disproportionately influenced by perceptions of students’ positive or 
negative personal characteristics and behaviours, and assumptions that vicarious learning 
has taken place simply by students being present with their mentor also remain a challenge 
for practice education (Ironside, McNelis, & Ebright, 2014; Thompson & Stapley, 2011). 
These findings indicate an increased likelihood of mentors failing to fail (Black, 2011; 
Duffy, 2003; Hunt, 2014). However, our findings showed mentors were not intentionally 
failing to fail so much as struggling to interpret practice learning outcomes appropriately 
and convey the meaning of those issues to others.  
 
Our study also revealed that the process of instilling hope a student might achieve 
intensified anxieties where students failed to progress. Participants faced a contradiction of 
‘nurturing failure.’ They internalized culpability for this lack of progress as being a result 
of poor mentorship which is consistent with other research as a reason why mentors might 
fail to fail students (Duffy 2006; Black 2011; Hunt 2014). Our findings also showed that 
participants’ culpability and self-deprecating views were a necessary part of coping in 
difficult assessment circumstances and this triggered a vital process of rationalization. We 
have also identified new understanding about mentors’ attempts to make progress in 
borderline assessment situations despite relationships with students having stalled. 
Findings reaffirmed the value of assessment feedback to students pitched in restorative 
terms, especially when they were enabled to use feedback as a means of self-regulation of 
their on-going learning (Fotheringham, 2011; Duffy, 2013). Our study illustrated the 
critical liaisons necessary between students, mentors, external placement personnel, and 
HEI staff in such circumstances.  
 
 Journal of Advanced Nursing submission 
 
20 
 
Ultimately, the study’s substantive theoretical explanation identified the extent to which 
individually and collectively, mentors felt authorized to make assessment decisions whilst 
exposed to social, organizational and regulatory pressures. We identified that whilst 
organisational constraints exist, they were not an inevitable impediment to mentors’ sense 
of personal or collective agency. Significantly, despite regulatory standards predominantly 
portraying mentorship in terms of individual accountability (NMC, 2008), borderline 
assessment situations were particularly framed by the authorizing effects of participants’ 
sense of collective mentorship identity. Moreover, the implicit power of this sense of 
communal identity had considerable moderating effects on individual mentors’ sense of 
agency when making assessment decisions. The study’s substantive theoretical 
explanation therefore indicates it is the concept of agency and its link to mentors sense of 
authorization of their decision-making that is a constant and determining feature of 
borderline assessment situations. This has critical implications for gate-keeping the 
nursing profession. 
 
Strengths and limitations 
Significant service reconfiguration was occurring both locally and nationally as this study 
was being undertaken. Validation of all United Kingdom HEI nursing programmes in line 
with Nursing and Midwifery Council Standards for pre-registration nursing education 
(NMC, 2010) also took place during the study timeframe. The currency of study data 
should be considered in light of these issues. Measures of parsimony and scope enhanced 
the trustworthiness, clarity and practicality of the emergent theory using criterion devised 
by Corbin and Strauss (2008, pp. 307-309).  
 
Implications for practice, education and research 
Implications arose for mentors, placement teams, health care organizations, Higher 
Education Institutions, and professional regulators. Good practice ‘Mentor Footprint’ 
guidance including strategic questions for use in borderline assessment situations has been 
developed for mentors, practice teams and other key stakeholders involved in borderline 
assessment situations. As such, health care organizations must recognize individual 
mentorship as a whole practice team responsibility whereby assessment accountability 
does not rest solely with one mentor. Roles such as Practice Education Facilitators and 
those with lead responsibilities for practice education should be extended. Health Boards 
 Journal of Advanced Nursing submission 
 
21 
 
and HEI’s must jointly consider the need for routine case reviews following borderline 
assessment events which can act to galvanize mentors sense of personal and collective 
agency. HEI’s must review the way they receive and respond to feedback from practice 
colleagues about students who are perceived to be on the borderline of achievement of 
competence. Mentor preparation and update sessions must also include simulation of 
strategies associated with conflict resolution. For professional regulators, there must be 
greater emphasis on practice team accountability for mentorship and a requirement that 
HEI’s record data on students who are withdrawn from nursing programmes as a result of 
failure of practice. In terms of further research, it is timely to explore the views of UK 
mentors and practice personnel concerning new registrants competence at the point of 
registration since the introduction of the most recent NMC validated programmes (NMC, 
2010).  
 
Conclusion 
Management of borderline assessment situations is more understood by recognition of the 
authorizing effects of a wider community of assessors. This study has revealed the 
personal, professional and organisational pressures involved in mentorship of students on 
the borderline of achievement of competence in practice, and their impact on the 
preparation, support and regulation of mentors specifically in these circumstances.  
 
References 
Archer, M. S. (1995). Realist social theory: the morphogenetic approach. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Archer, M. S. (2000). Being Human: The problem of agency. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Archer, M. S. (2003). Structure, Agency and the Internal Conversation. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Bedford, H., Phillips, T., Schostak, J. F., & Robinson, J. (1994). The Assessment of 
Competencies in Nursing and Midwifery Education and Training (The ACE Project): 
Final Report.   Retrieved from http://www.imaginativespaces.net/ACE%20final.htm 
Black, S. (2011). Being a mentor who fails a pre-registration nursing student in their final 
placement: Understanding failure (PhD), London South Bank University, London. 
Retrieved from 
http://www.rcn.org.uk/__data/assets/pdf_file/0008/458234/Black_S_PhD_Thesis_August_
2011.pdf  
Black, S., Curzio, J., & Terry, L. (2014). Failing a student nurse: A new horizon of moral 
courage. Nursing Ethics, 21(2), 224-238.  
Blumer, H. (1969). Symbolic Interactionism: Perspective and Method. London: University 
of California press. 
 Journal of Advanced Nursing submission 
 
22 
 
Brown, L., Douglas, V., Garrity, J., & Shepherd, C. K. (2012). What influences mentors to 
pass or fail students? Nursing Management - UK, 19(5), 16-21.  
Cassidy, I., Butler, M. P., Quillinan, B., Egan, G., Mc Namara, M. C., Tuohy, D., . . . 
Tierney, C. (2012). Preceptors’ views of assessing nursing students using a competency 
based approach. Nurse Education in Practice, 12(6), 346-351.  
Cleland, J. A., Knight, L. V., Rees, C. E., Tracey, S., & Bond, C. M. (2008). Is it me or is 
it them? Factors that influence the passing of underperforming students. Medical 
Education, 42(8), 800-809.  
Clemow, R. (2007). An illuminative evaluation of skills rehearsal in a mentorship course. 
Nurse Education Today, 27(1), 80-87.  
Corbin, J., & Strauss, A. (2008). Basics of Qualitative Research (3rd ed.). London: Sage. 
Cowan, D. T., Norman, I., & Coopamah, V. P. (2005). Competence in nursing practice: A 
controversial concept – A focused review of literature. Nurse Education Today, 25(5), 
355-362.  
Dolan, G. (2003). Assessing student nurse clinical competency: will we ever get it right? 
Journal of Clinical Nursing, 2003(12), 132-141.  
Donaldson, J. H., & Gray, M. (2012). Systematic review of grading practice: Is there 
evidence of grade inflation? Nurse Education in Practice, 12(2), 101-114.  
Dudek, N. L., Marks, M. B., & Regehr, G. (2005). Failure to Fail: The Perspectives of 
Clinical Supervisors. Academic Medicine RIME: Proceedings of the Forty-fourth Annual 
Conference November 6-9, 2005, 80(10), S84-S87.  
Duffy, K. (2003). Failing students: a qualitative study of factors that influence the 
decisions regarding assessment of students’ competence in practice. Glasgow Caledonian 
University, Caledonian Nursing and Midwifery Research Centre School of Nursing, 
Midwifery and Community Health. Retrieved from 
http://www.science.ulster.ac.uk/nursing/mentorship/docs/nursing/oct11/failingstudents.pdf 
Duffy, K. (2006). Weighing the Balance: A grounded theory study of the factors that 
influence the decisions regarding the assessment of students' competence in practice. 
(PhD), Glasgow Caledonian University.    
Duffy, K. (2013). Deciding to fail: Nurse mentors' expereinces of managing a failed 
practice assessment. Journal of Practice Teaching and Learning, 11(3), 36-58.  
Durkheim, E. (1982 [1895]). The Rules of Sociological Method. London: Macmillan. 
Eraut, M. (1994). Developing Professional Knowledge and Competence. London: The 
Falmer Press. 
Finch, J. (2009). Can’t Fail, Won’t Fail - Why Practice Assessors Find it Difficult to Fail 
Social Work Students. A Qualitative Study of Practice Assessors’ Experiences of Assessing 
Marginal or Failing Social Work Students. (PhD), Sussex. Retrieved from 
http://sro.sussex.ac.uk/2370/1/Finch%2C_Johanna_Louise.pdf   
Finch, J., Schaub, J., & Dalrymple, R. (2014). Projective Identification and the Fear of 
Failing: Making Sense of Practice Educators' Experiences of Failing Social Work Students 
in Practice Learning Settings. Journal of Social Work Practice, 28(2), 139-154.  
Foucault, M. (2002 [1972]). The Archeology of Knowledge (A. M. Sheridan Smith, 
Trans.). London: Routledge. 
Francis, R. (2013). Report of the Mid Staffordshire NHS Foundation Trust Public Inquiry. 
London: The Stationary Office. 
Gainsbury, S. (2010). Mentors passing students despite doubts over their ability. Nursing 
Times, 106(16), 1-3.  
 Journal of Advanced Nursing submission 
 
23 
 
Gallagher, P., Smith, T., & Ousey, K. (2012). Problems with competence assessment as it 
applies to student nurses. Nurse Education in Practice, 12(6), 301-303.  
Garside, J. R., & Nhemachena, J. Z. Z. (2013). A concept analysis of competence and its 
transition in nursing. Nurse Education Today, 33(5), 541-545.  
Giddens, A. (1984). The constitution of society. Cambridge: Polity Press. 
Gopee, N. (2008). Assessing student nurses' clinical skills: The ethical competence of 
mentors. International Journal of Therapy and Rehabilitation, 15(9), 401-407.  
Heaslip, V., & Scammell, J. M. E. (2012). Failing underperforming students: The role of 
grading in practice assessment. Nurse Education in Practice, 12(2), 95-100.  
Hrobsky, P. E., & Kersbergen, A. L. (2002). Preceptors' perceptions of clinical 
performance failure. Journal of Nursing Education, 41(12), 550-553.  
Hunt, L. A. (2014). Failing Securely: Enabling Mentors to Fail Underperforming Student 
Nurses in Practical Assessments. (PhD), Birmingham, Birmingham City University.    
Hunt, L. A., McGee, P., Gutteridge, R., & Hughes, M. (2012). Assessment of student 
nurses in practice: A comparison of theoretical and practical assessment results in 
England. Nurse Education Today, 32(4), 351-355.  
Ion, R., & Lauder, W. (2015). Willis and the generic turn in nursing. Nurse Education 
Today, 35(7), 841-842.  
Ironside, P. M., McNelis, A. M., & Ebright, P. (2014). Clinical education in nursing: 
Rethinking learning in practice settings. Nursing Outlook, 62(3), 185-191.  
Jervis, A., & Tilki, M. (2011). Why are nurse mentors failing to fail student nurses who do 
not meet clinical performance standards? British Journal of Nursing, 20(9), 582-587.  
Larocque, S., & Luhanga, F. L. (2013). Exploring the Issue of Failure to Fail in a Nursing 
Program. International Journal of Nursing Education Scholarship, 10(1), 1-8.  
Levett-Jones, T., Gersbach, J., Arthur, C., & Roche, J. (2011). Implementing a clinical 
competency assessment model that promotes critical reflection and ensures nursing 
graduates’ readiness for professional practice. Nurse Education in Practice, 11(1), 64-69.  
Luhanga, F., Yonge, O. J., & Myrick, F. (2008). "Failure to assign failing grades": issues 
with grading the unsafe student. International Journal of Nursing Education Scholarship, 
5(1), 1-13.  
McCarthy, B., & Murphy, S. (2008). Assessing undergraduate nursing students in clinical 
practice: Do preceptors use assessment strategies? Nurse Education Today, 28(3), 301-
313.  
Mead, G. H. (1934). Mind, Self, and Society. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
NMC. (2008). Standards to support learning and assessment in practice: NMC standards 
for mentors, practice teachers and teachers. London: United Kingdom Nursing and 
Midwifery Council. 
NMC. (2010). Standards for pre-registration nursing education. London: United Kingdom 
Nursing and Midwifery Council. 
RCN. (2013). Mid Staffordshire NHS Foundation Trust Public Inquiry Report. Response 
of the Royal College of Nursing. Retrieved from 
http://royalnursing.3cdn.net/c11a136fd716684867_dnm6i60l3.pdf 
Rutkowski, K. (2007). Failure to fail: assessing nursing students' competence during 
practice placements. Nursing Standard, 22(13), 35-40.  
Smith, P., & Allan, T. H. (2010). “We should be able to bear our patients in our teaching 
in some way”: Theoretical perspectives on how nurse teachers manage their emotions to 
negotiate the split between education and caring practice. Nurse Education Today, 30(3), 
218-223.  
 Journal of Advanced Nursing submission 
 
24 
 
Strauss, A. L., & Corbin, J. (1998). Basics of Qualitative Research (2nd ed.). Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Thompson, C., & Stapley, S. (2011). Do educational interventions improve nurses’ clinical 
decision making and judgement? A systematic review. International Journal of Nursing 
Studies, 48(7), 881-893.  
Veeramah, V. (2012). Effectiveness of the new NMC mentor preparation course. British 
Journal of Nursing, 21(7), 413-418.  
Vinales, J. J. (2015). Exploring failure to fail in pre-registration nursing. British Journal of 
Nursing, 24(5), 284-288.  
Watson, R., Stimpson, A., Topping, A., & Porock, D. (2002). Clinical competence 
assessment in nursing: a systematic review of the literature. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 
39(5), 421-431.  
Weber, M. (1992 [1904-5]). The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. London: 
Allen & Unwin. 
Wells, L., & McLoughlin, M. (2014). Fitness to practice and feedback to students: A 
literature review. Nurse Education in Practice, 14(2), 137-141.  
Willis, P. (2012). Quality with compassion: the future of nursing education. Report of the 
Willis Commission on Nursing Education, 2012. Retrieved from 
www.williscommission.org.uk 
Willis, P. (2015). Shape of Caring: A Review of the Future Education and Training of 
Registered Nurses and Care Assistants. Retrieved from http://hee.nhs.uk/wp-
content/blogs.dir/321/files/2015/03/2348-Shape-of-caring-review-FINAL.pdf 
Yanhua, C., & Watson, R. (2011). A review of clinical competence assessment in nursing. 
Nurse Education Today, 31, 832-836.  
 
