 1 
 
‘I’ve no fear of dying alone’: Exploring perspectives on living and dying 
alone 
Glenys Caswell and Mórna O’Connor 
 
Corresponding author: 
Dr Glenys Caswell: glenys.caswell@nottingham.ac.uk   0115 8230872; 
Nottingham Centre for the Advancement of Research into Supportive, Palliative 
and End of Life Care (NCARE), School of Health Sciences, University of 
Nottingham, Queen’s Medical Centre, Nottingham NG7 2HA 
 
 
 
The research was carried out at the University of Nottingham 
 
This work was supported by the British Academy under grant number 510074 
 
Disclosure statement: neither author will receive, nor has received, any financial 
interest or benefit arising from the direct applications of their research. 
 
 
 2 
 
‘I’ve no fear of dying alone’: Exploring perspectives on living and dying 
alone  
 
Abstract  
Dying alone is portrayed as undesirable in terms of policy, health and social care 
provision, the wishes of family and friends, and in popular culture. Despite this, 
people do often die alone, both in institutional and domestic settings. This paper 
reports findings from a study which explored ways of investigating individuals’ 
perspectives on dying alone at home. It tested methods of recruitment and data 
collection, gathered preliminary data and explored the ethical issues involved.  
Interviews with 11 older people living alone and seven hospice at home nurses 
are reported here. For the older people, the idea of dying alone was less 
problematic than the idea of needing care and support from others, and the 
perceived loss of independence that this would entail. Participants reacted in 
differing ways to threats to their independence, but all utilised a form of 
relational reflexivity when considering the effect their actions might have on 
others. The nurses would prefer no one to die alone, but believed they had seen 
patients managing their own dying so that they could be alone at the moment of 
death. The paper suggests that dying alone may be a problem for survivors, 
rather than for the person who is dying. 
Key words:  choice; dying alone; hospice at home; independence; living alone; 
relational reflexivity. 
 
 
 3 
 
Introduction 
Worldwide the number of single person households is increasing and, in northern 
Europe, almost half of households have only one person living in them (Jamieson 
and Simpson, 2013). In the United Kingdom (UK) figures published by the Office 
for National Statistics (ONS) indicate that 28% of households are occupied by a 
person living alone (ONS, 2015a), representing 7.6 million people (ONS, 2015b).  
Living alone brings with it an assumption that the individual desires and values 
their independence and that they act as autonomous agents (Hague, 2011; 
Portacolone, 2013). However, this assumption may be overly simplistic, as 
agency and autonomy are not straightforward concepts. Agency encompasses a 
notion of acting on the world in order to generate some desired effect, but this 
cannot be done in isolation from other people and without acting in association 
with others, at least on some occasions (Burkitt, 2016). In addition, while 
autonomy is often understood as suggesting freedom of choice and self-
determination, it is not generally the case that individuals make decisions in 
isolation; autonomy can be constrained and promoted by the actions of others 
(Collopy, 1988; Hague, 2011). Thus, while it may be assumed that an individual 
who lives alone is independent and acts autonomously, it is also the case that 
they do not act in isolation from others and their decisions and actions reference 
others, as well as being enabled and constrained by them; people live 
interdependently (Burkitt, 2016; Elias, 1978). 
Although living alone has become more common, dying alone continues to be 
portrayed as undesirable, creating the perception that when someone does die 
alone, their death may be termed a failure of ‘emotional accompaniment’ (Seale, 
1995, p. 378).  English healthcare policy promotes the idea of choice for dying 
 4 
 
adults, in the belief that the exercise of choice with regard to aspects of care will 
enable individuals to have a good death (Department of Health, 2008; Choice in 
End of Life Care Programme Board, 2015).  Such choice is assumed to include 
dying while surrounded by family and friends (Department of Health, 2008), yet 
what counts as a good death is subject to an ongoing debate which is 
predominantly framed within a healthcare context (Hart et al., 1998).  In 
healthcare research the impact of different aspects of care on views about the 
good death are reported as varying within and between groups such as people 
who are dying, their families and friends, and the professionals who are 
providing care for them. For example, quality of life in terms of maintaining hope 
or the feeling that life is worth living is of greater importance to family members 
than it is to the dying person or healthcare professionals (Meier et al., 2016).   
Healthcare practitioners working in different social contexts, and particularly 
nurses who provide much of the professional care for dying people, are reported 
to believe that no one should die alone (Field, 1984; Fridh et al., 2009; Gunther 
and Thomas, 2006; Hadders et al., 2014; Izumi, 2006; James et al., 2010). 
Families are described as making strenuous efforts to maintain a vigil when one 
of their members is dying (Bradbury, 1999; Donnelly and Battley, 2010; Gould, 
2012; Kastenbaum, 2000; McNamara, 2001; Porock et al., 2009). Popular 
culture also portrays dying alone as something which should not happen, with 
examples easily found, from fiction on television and in books, through to 
documentaries broadcast on radio and television, and idealised newspaper 
accounts of deaths.1 
                                      
 
1 See for example ‘The Time of the Doctor’, broadcast 25 December 2013, BBC1 
http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2986512/ Stephen Booth, (2003) ‘Blind to the bones’, 
Harper Collins, page 159; Sue Grafton, (2014) ‘Wasted’, Pan Books, pages 270-271; ‘My 
Last Summer’, episode 4, broadcast 25 June 2014, Channel 4 
 5 
 
In spite of the negative connotations attached to dying alone it has been 
suggested that some individuals exercise agency in relation to their own deaths, 
which results in them being alone as they are dying (Caswell & O’Connor, 2015; 
Howse, 1997; Kellehear, 2009; Seale, 2004), or in taking control over the timing 
of their death (Hardwig, 2009; Heinrich et al., 2011). For some people, the risk 
of living too long and dying too late is real; they feel that their life is complete 
and they wish for it to end. Such an individual is most likely to be an older 
person who has neither a terminal illness nor a serious psychiatric illness (van 
Wijngaarden et al., 2015). While many in this situation believe that suicide is 
wrong and do not take steps towards hastening the end of their life, the feeling 
of life’s completion may also lead to pre-emptive suicide or assisted suicide 
(Hardwig, 2009; Heinrich et al., 2011; van Wijngaarden et al., 2015). 
Despite its perceived undesirability, it is possible for a person to die alone in any 
setting, including hospitals and care homes (Gelo, 2004; Page and Komaromy, 
2005). However, dying alone at home has a particular resonance, and 
represents ‘…a powerful symbol of social abandonment and failure’ (Klinenberg, 
2001, p. 503), for home is supposed to be a place of safety and family life 
(Collier et al., 2015). When the body of an individual who has died alone at 
home is undiscovered for an extended period of time there are likely to be 
negative inferences made, particularly in the media, focusing on supposed 
character flaws of the person who died and on perceived failings of the local 
community and wider society (Bradshaw et al., 1978; Howse, 1997; Seale, 
2004).  
                                                                                                                      
 
http://www.channel4.com/programmes/my-last-summer/on-demand/54645-004 ‘Lives 
in a Landscape’, series 17, episode 2, broadcast 29 August 2014, BBC Radio 4 
http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b04fchlm Lea, R. and Davies, C. (2015) ‘Terry took 
Death’s arm and followed through the doors’, The Guardian, 13 March 2015, page 2 
 6 
 
Research that prioritises the perspectives of people who live alone with regard to 
their choices about dying and their preferences for end of life care is limited 
(Aoun et al., 2013; Rolls et al., 2010). There is evidence to suggest that the idea 
of dying alone at home is a frightening possibility for some individuals (Gott et 
al., 2004), which leads to some people taking steps to guard against their body 
being undiscovered for a long time, should they die alone. For example, some 
research participants have described arranging for a neighbour to call regularly, 
or having milk delivered to the house in the belief that help would be summoned 
if they did not answer the door or take in the milk bottles (Lloyd-Williams et al., 
2007).  
This paper draws on findings from a small-scale study exploring perspectives on 
dying alone to suggest that people’s views on dying alone are much more 
nuanced than might be thought from its portrayal in the literature. While people 
may die alone in any setting (Gelo, 2004; Page and Komaromy, 2005) the 
choice was made to interview people living alone as they are more likely to die 
alone at home than those who share accommodation and they are also more 
likely to have considered the possibility that they may die alone. Eleven older 
people living alone were interviewed about their perspectives on their future 
care needs as they came towards the end of their lives. Independence was 
important to them and death was not the biggest threat that they perceived. The 
idea of dying alone was not problematic for them and could even, in some 
circumstances, be preferable. Seven hospice at home nurses were also 
interviewed. They expressed the view that no one should die alone, but 
acknowledged that patients sometimes died in a way that suggested they would 
prefer to be alone. The paper begins by describing the study and then moves on 
 7 
 
to discuss the findings in more detail, before drawing some tentative 
conclusions. 
 
Study aims and objectives 
The aim of the study was to assess the feasibility of conducting a full scale 
research project exploring individuals’ perspectives on dying alone and how this 
might best be approached. The study objectives were designed to fulfil this aim 
in four ways. First, the intention was to explore the most appropriate ways of 
gathering data about individuals’ perspectives on the issue of dying alone at 
home. The second objective was to test possible recruitment strategies and the 
third was to gather some preliminary data. The final study objective was to 
explore the ethical issues involved in carrying out research in this sensitive field.  
The aim of this paper is to present the preliminary data, drawing on findings 
from interviews conducted with people living alone and with hospice at home 
nurses.  
 
Methods 
Researching individuals’ views on the possibility of dying alone at home involves 
engaging with issues that are both sensitive and ethically challenging (Wiles, 
2013), and it also appeared possible that recruiting participants for such a study 
could be difficult both in terms of identifying potential participants and reaching 
out to them (Marpsata and Razafindratsimab, 2010). Conducting a pilot study 
prior to a full-scale study would allow the testing of different recruitment 
methods and also permit participants to express their views about the 
 8 
 
acceptability of carrying out such interviews. Generating some preliminary data 
on the topic was also part of the rationale for conducting a pilot study, to 
discover whether this was an issue in the real world where people live their lives, 
or just a topic of academic debate (van Teijlingen and Hundley, 2001). 
There were two separate strands to the study. In the first the sociological 
autopsy was used as a way of examining deaths of people who lived alone and 
whose bodies were found later. This methodology involves an ethnographic 
approach to the study of coroner records, thus utilising the records as both 
sources of information and objects of research (Fincham et al., 2011). This 
strand of the study has been reported elsewhere (Caswell & O’Connor, 2015). 
The second strand involved conducting semi-structured interviews with older 
people who lived alone. A focus group and a joint interview were also carried out 
with nurses working in a hospice at home service whose caseloads included 
people who lived alone.  
During the process of developing the proposal the research was discussed with 
the Patient and Public Involvement (PPI) group which works with the research 
centre in which the researchers are based (INVOLVE, 2015). PPI members were 
active in helping the researchers shape the project, particularly in terms of what 
to ask, how to ask it and how to find participants. Two PPI members became 
part of the project’s advisory group. Ethical approval was obtained from the 
University’s Faculty Research Ethics Committee. 
The study was presented to potential participants as being about ‘Exploring 
views about independence and care towards the end of life for people who live 
alone’. Older people were recruited by advertising in a number of different 
places, including the local branches of Age UK and the University of the Third 
 9 
 
Age (U3A) and also in a community newsletter that is delivered free of charge to 
homes in one postcode area. Recruiting in this way was intended to allow 
individuals to decide whether or not they were interested in being involved in 
such a study and, if they were, to make the first approach to the research team.  
Nurses were recruited through a clinical service manager at the hospice for 
which they worked. Information about the study was distributed to those whose 
work was community based and they were invited to come along and meet the 
researcher. The participation of hospice at home nurses was sought because 
they provide care for people who are dying at home and are therefore likely to 
have experience of caring for people who live alone and opinions about the 
desirability of people dying alone at home.  
Interviews were carried out by the authors of the paper and, with participants’ 
permission, were audio recorded. Recordings were transcribed and the analysis 
was carried out using the constant comparative method, beginning with a 
process of initial coding before moving on to more focused coding  (Charmaz, 
2006). The analysis was carried out using Nvivo as a means of managing the 
data, and with the aim of grounding the findings in the data.  
 
Findings  
Acceptability of interviews 
At the end of the interviews with older people the researcher asked each 
participant for permission to contact them a few days’ later to discuss their 
views on the interview process. The aim of this discussion was to find out how 
 10 
 
the participant had experienced the interview and whether, on reflection, they 
felt that it was acceptable to carry out the research in this particular manner.  
Six participants offered feedback on the interview process, either during a phone 
conversation or by email. They told us that they came forward for the study 
partly because they found this an interesting topic which was relevant to them 
and partly because they wanted to help. Participants felt that the research was 
worth doing and they were pleased to have taken part in it, despite the 
challenging nature of the topic. One participant wrote in her email: 
I was surprised how I felt afterwards and was grateful I felt I 
could phone you and talk it through… I am pleased I took part in 
the interview not only because it was interesting but because it 
made me face up to reality. There is nothing wrong with being 
disturbed but also perhaps a little prepared. 
Feedback was thus largely positive, although highlighted the need for awareness 
on the part of researchers of the potential effects of such a discussion for 
participants. Being available for follow-up discussions and finding ways to ensure 
appropriate support is available, if needed, are key reminders for future work.  
 
Participants  
Eleven older adults who lived alone, eight women and three men, took part in 
interviews and their characteristics are shown in Table 1 below. Seven nurses 
took part in the research, five in a focus group discussion, and two nurses were 
interviewed together on a separate occasion. Table 2 shows the professional 
roles of the nurses. 
 11 
 
Table 1:  Participant characteristics 
Name  
Status 
Age  
Time living 
alone (years) 
Thought about 
dying alone? 
Fiona Gough  
Widowed  
79 
5  
Yes  
Andrea Taylor 
Widowed  
71 
5 
No  
Rosalind 
Norton 
Divorced  
66 
10 
Yes  
Emily Watkins 
Divorced  
70 
15 
Yes  
Grace Hughes 
Widowed  
67 
30 
Yes  
Jackie 
Spencer 
Widowed  
67 
15 
Yes  
Freda 
Braithwaite 
Divorced  
72 
12 
No  
Alison Slocock 
Divorced  
69 
10 
Yes  
Archie Sutton 
Widowed  
79 
7 
Yes  
Michael Carr 
Divorced  
64 
31 
Yes  
David Keating 
Widowed  
83 
1.5 
Yes  
 
 
Table 2: Nursing roles 
Name  
Role  
Interview or focus 
group 
Brenda  
Deputy team leader 
Focus group 
Shona  
Staff nurse 
Focus group 
James 
Staff nurse 
Focus group  
Vera 
Healthcare worker 
Focus group  
Karen  
Healthcare worker 
Focus group 
Jenny  
Staff nurse 
Interview  
Paula  
Staff nurse 
Interview  
 
Older people living alone 
Participants had a number of characteristics in common. They all had family and 
all but one had adult children, although the level of contact with family members 
varied. Another common factor was that while all had retired from paid work, 
they were active outside their homes. They undertook voluntary work, took part 
in social activities either with friends, family or with organisations such as Age 
 12 
 
UK, they provided support for family members or took part in sporting activities. 
Despite their activities outside the home, however, it was still the case that 
research participants spent most of their time alone at home. They all valued 
their independence, which they tended to equate with living alone. Rosalind, for 
example, said: ‘my aunt once said it’s very liberating, living on your own, and…I 
found it was.’ 
 
Threats to independence 
Participants were aware that their independence could be threatened, and all 
had given some thought to this possibility. Death was not seen as the greatest 
threat, rather the loss of independence through illness or infirmity was perceived 
as something which could, in the future, cause the individual to be unable to 
maintain their independent living. Participant responses to this threat could be 
broadly categorised in two ways. The first group, comprised of seven 
participants, viewed this possibility as something that would be outside their 
control and they would handle this with differing degrees of pragmatism. The 
second group of four participants reacted to the idea of such threats by 
suggesting steps they might take to try and take control of the situation. 
 
Pragmatism  
David felt that, if he should need care: ‘I would like to be looked after at home.’ 
However, David went on to say: ‘And some people have to go into a home… 
They need 24/7 care, don’t they?...If it was very serious I’d have to go into a 
home. No question.’ 
 13 
 
David’s perspective was influenced by his experience of caring for his wife when 
she was dying. He had looked after her at home, but in his view the health and 
social care services were inadequate, and left his wife and himself poorly 
supported. This left him with the opinion that it is impossible for someone to be 
cared for properly at home when they are dying, or needing full-time care. 
When Andrea was taken ill with a suspected stroke she said that her family, ‘just 
pulled together’ to support her. She went on to say: ‘I have got family support if 
I need it. However, should I have something like a stroke or cancer or, heaven 
forbid, dementia, they'd have to find a home for me. If I couldn’t manage on my 
own.’ In reflecting on this Andrea drew on her personal experience of caring for 
her widowed mother in the later years of her life. Andrea found this an 
exhausting and dispiriting experience and did not wish to make such demands of 
her own children. 
Rosalind’s opinion was that while moving into a care home may seem a dreadful 
thing she would, if it should happen, probably adapt quickly to the new 
environment and find there the social contact she needs. Rosalind said: 
Human nature is incredible, isn’t it? You get used to things very 
quickly. Even the most awful things you can get used to quite 
quickly, and, and you can make the best of it. I think it’s 
completely up to you if, you know, you can make the best of a 
situation.  
 
 
 
 14 
 
Wresting control  
Four participants responded differently to the idea of threats to their 
independence, talking instead about ways in which they could take control of the 
situation. One night Archie had been unable to sleep and had felt so ill he 
thought he might die. He did not summon help, but lay down on the sofa: ‘that 
night, I was thinking then, I’m going to die sometime.’ Since that experience the 
thought of his own death has ceased to worry Archie, but he is worried at the 
thought of needing full-time care. Archie said: 
I don’t want to go into a care home. Take a couple of tablets or 
something. That’s the way, I think. You hear too many things, 
don’t you, about care homes…I don’t want my family to look 
after me, either.  
Grace, Emily and Michael had also considered how they might respond to threats 
to their independence. Grace thought she might join Dignitas, the Swiss 
organisation which supports people with a terminal illness or an unendurable 
disability to end their lives.2  Grace had a friend who had suffered with severe 
arthritis and he had become a member of Dignitas with the intention of going to 
Switzerland to die. In the end he had died at home but, Grace said, ‘the last two 
years of his life were awful’. Through witnessing her friend’s life as he was dying 
Grace had come to realise that: 
There’s a quality of life, not a quantity, you know…I don’t want 
to hang on…so if it was something like that (that my friend 
                                      
 
2 Information about Dignitas may be found on their website here: 
http://www.dignitas.ch/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=20&lang=en 
 15 
 
had), if I ended with something like that, I’d be looking to doing 
something, you know, ending my life that way. 
Michael also expressed the view that assisted suicide may be a good thing for 
some people in some situations, although he was cautious in his approach. 
Assisted suicide is illegal in the United Kingdom and Michael did not directly 
suggest that he would seek such support for himself. He did, however, suggest 
that such support might be a good thing, saying: 
I’m a big believer in, you know, if you’ve decided, you know, 
you’ve had enough of life, then you know, some kind of help 
wouldn’t be a bad thing. I’m a big believer in that…I think 
(assisted suicide) should be far more in the open and recognised 
and accepted. 
Michael was unsure how he might handle the situation should he find himself in 
need of constant care, but believed that ‘people should be given power over 
their own destiny kind of thing, shouldn’t they?’3 
Emily had the most closely thought-out plan. She had a neurological condition 
and had almost died a few years previously, about which she said, ‘I sometimes 
wonder if that might not have been the best thing (if I had died)’. She 
particularly enjoyed the peace and quiet of living alone and dreaded the idea of 
being trapped in a care home where ‘you're not seen as individuals’. Emily said: 
                                      
 
3 Information about the legal position with regard to assisted suicide in the UK can be 
found on the NHS website here: 
http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/Euthanasiaandassistedsuicide/Pages/Introduction.aspx 
One set of arguments put forward by a pro-assisted suicide organisation can be found 
here: http://www.dignityindying.org.uk/assisted-dying/lord-falconers-assisted-dying-bill/        
One set of arguments against assisted suicide can be found here: 
http://www.carenotkilling.org.uk/about/   
 
 16 
 
I would rather die than go into a care home. And I have a plan. 
And it’s always as well to have a plan. You don’t have to stick to 
it but I know what I would do…I’ve got some sleeping pills and 
I’ve got some (pills), this name I’ve forgotten…Plan B would be 
just not to eat but it would be a long death…it’s one of those 
things that when it comes to it, you don’t know if you will. But 
it’s quite nice to have your insurance policy. 
Emily’s plan was well thought out and the idea of moving into a care home was 
anathema to her. However, she also had two adult children and she was worried 
about the effect on them if she should kill herself but, as Emily said, ‘you can’t 
control how people are going to feel’. 
 
Dying alone at home 
All except two participants had thought prior to the interview about the 
possibility that they might die alone at home. Andrea said she had ‘never 
thought about it’ and moved the conversation on to talk about the phone and 
panic button beside her bed. She was comfortable talking about the possibility 
that she might become incapacitated in some way and thus need care and 
support, but not about the possibility of dying alone at home. Freda thought that 
most people would want to ‘just go to bed and just don’t wake up’, but did not 
relate this idea specifically to herself.  
The other nine participants, however, had thought about this issue and had 
views on its desirability for themselves. Broadly speaking, a sudden death at 
home was considered to be a good thing, as there would be minimal suffering 
 17 
 
and the participant would know nothing about it afterwards, because they would 
be dead. Fiona did not mind the idea of dying alone at home, saying, ‘Well, if I 
died in bed, I wouldn’t mind…I’ve no fear of dying alone.’ While some people 
might think such a death a bad one because there was no time to say goodbye 
Fiona did not agree with that view. Her husband had died after a long illness and 
they had both known that he was dying but they had never spoken about it: ‘we 
never said cheerio to each other, because I was too emotional’ (Fiona). 
The belief that it would be a good thing to die suddenly at home was shared 
amongst this group of participants, even although that meant being alone. 
Archie said, ‘I just go to sleep in the chair, and that’s it, I wake up and I’m dead, 
that’s it.’ He went on to say that there is no point worrying about it because 
‘once you're dead, you're dead’, and you will know nothing about it. 
Despite the desirability of dying suddenly alone at home, there were a number 
of apparent contradictions to be found within participants’ responses. Fiona, for 
example, liked the idea of a quick pain free death, but after saying she had no 
fear of dying alone she went on to say, ‘my worst fear is just being found by (my 
daughter)’. Fiona saw her daughter on a regular basis and the likelihood was 
that her daughter would find her body if she died at home. The effect that such a 
discovery would have on her daughter worried Fiona. 
For some participants the possibility of their body not being found for a while 
was troublesome. Jackie expressed a preference for a quick death but had 
reservations about the length of time it might take for her body to be 
discovered. Jackie said: 
The way my husband went is the way I’d like to go, suddenly, 
yeah…when you hear tales of people not being found for months 
 18 
 
on end…It’s like nobody cared to look…that would be a bit 
distressing…if it was just like three days, that would be, yeah, I 
wouldn’t mind that. 
Jackie’s response to this worry was to have milk delivered to the door, saying 
‘the milkman would see that there was milk there and know that there was 
something wrong…that’s my insurance policy’. 
David, Grace and Archie all thought that their neighbours would notice if they 
were not going about their usual business and that their neighbours would 
investigate. Grace was a familiar figure in her neighbourhood as she was often 
out jogging, and she believed that her next door neighbour would notice and 
take action if her curtains were not drawn back. David and Archie both lived in 
neighbourhoods where people kept an eye on each other. David said: 
It’s happened on a couple of occasions, when I’ve decided not to 
get up in the morning. You know, I thought I’d have a lie in. You 
can’t have a lie in round here, they come knocking on your 
door. Are you all right David?...I’m under surveillance, which is 
fine…you need nosey neighbours. 
Not all neighbourhoods were like this, however. Rosalind usually said hello to her 
neighbours when she saw them on the street, but did not think anyone would 
notice if they did not see her for a long time. She said, ‘It would probably be 
quite a while before anyone knew anything had happened’.  Both Michael and 
Emily thought that they could lie dead for a week or two before their bodies 
were found, but they did not see this as a problem.   
 
 19 
 
 Hospice at home nurses 
The nurses who took part in the study were of the opinion that people should be 
accompanied when they are dying, although that is not always what happens in 
their experience. The possibility that someone may prefer to be alone when 
dying was not something that they had ever discussed before. James, who had 
completed his nurse training only a few months prior to taking part in the study, 
said ‘I don’t think it’s ever come up in any of my training, that actual question, 
should someone be alone or with someone when they die?’ The hospice at home 
nurses worked with patients considered to be in the last 12 to 16 weeks of their 
lives, and their role included the provision of support and care for people to die 
at home if that was what they wanted. Generally speaking, for someone to be 
enabled to die at home it was necessary for them to have family and friends who 
could look after them when the professionals were not present. It was 
particularly problematic when the dying person lived alone, because ‘there’s 
more safety issues if there's not someone living there with them’ (James). Such 
issues included matters of security and access to the home for professionals 
when the patient may be unable to come to the door, and also issues such as 
the risk of falls or loneliness for the person living alone.  
A big risk the nurses perceived was that the person would die alone for, as 
Brenda said, ‘I don’t like the thought, I don’t think anyone should be alone to 
die.’ The resources were not available to provide workers to spend 24 hours a 
day with a person who lived alone, although: ‘Normally you’ve got a good 
indication that someone’s deteriorating so, by the point of nearly dying, they 
probably have someone with them, because we get, like, night-sits in’ (James). 
Often patients ‘come to realise that they cannot manage at home’ (Karen) and 
 20 
 
will be admitted to a care home for their last days of life. On other occasions 
family members who have moved away will return to provide the necessary 
care. Despite this, however, the nurses had all worked with patients who had 
died alone at home.  
The nurses believed that, provided they had the capacity to make a decision, it 
was for the patients who lived alone to decide whether they wished to stay at 
home when they were dying; as Jenny said ‘at the end of the day it’s their 
choice. We do our best to support them’.  It was important to the nurses that 
they should do their best to ensure that a dying person who lived alone 
understood the risks involved, including the risk of dying alone.  They worried 
about their patients’ vulnerability when they were on their own and about what 
could happen to them, but despite this Jenny thought ‘being on your own is 
achievable.’ 
Paula echoed Brenda’s thought that no one should be alone when they are 
dying, but went on to reflect: ‘whether that would be for me or the patient.’ 
Jenny described an experience that all the nurses were able to recognise: 
Working years ago in the in-patient unit where there can be 
families around the bed, we’ve probably called them in actually, 
saying we think that it’s imminent, and, family have been there 
quite a long time, and they’ve just gone off to have a cup of tea 
and the patient will die. And some patients do just want to be 
on their own. So, to be on their own is probably what that 
person wanted. 
Shona suggested that people who are dying may have a measure of control over 
the moment at which death occurs: ‘I think people just choose when they want 
 21 
 
to go, if they want to go by themselves, I think, I don’t really think we have a 
say in it. I think it’s the person that’s dying has that decision.’  
 
Discussion 
The people living alone who took part in this pilot study were a heterogeneous 
group of people, with diverse interests and backgrounds, but they had three 
things in common in addition to the fact that they lived alone: they all had 
family with whom they had differing levels of contact, they were all active in the 
world outside their homes and they had all at one time lived with others as 
adults. None of them, in other words, lived as individuals isolated from wider 
society (Kellehear, 2009).  
Participants spoke about their mediated experience (Giddens, 1991), and how 
the later years and deaths of family members and friends had helped to form 
their own views; they did not only experience bereavement on the loss of the 
person about whom they cared, but they also experienced the process of that 
individual’s dying. How they interpreted that experience had an impact on the 
ways in which they thought about their own future deaths and the processes 
involved in dying.  
All participants stated that they liked their independence and liked being alone 
for the freedoms it gave them. This does not necessarily mean that they would 
have chosen to live alone; Michael and Emily were the only participants who said 
that living alone was a better experience for them than living with their spouses 
or partners. However, all participants had created new identities, whether post-
 22 
 
bereavement or post-divorce, as people who valued their independence and 
liked living alone (Garthwaite, 2015; Giddens, 1991).  
Most of the participants’ social contacts took place outside their homes, so they 
needed to be able to go out in order to maintain this contact and their 
independence. A situation where participants would be unable to take an active 
part in the outside world thus represented a serious threat to the individuals’ 
sense of independence, however the inability came about. How participants 
responded to this potential threat differed.  
Seven participants thought that, should their independence be threatened, they 
would take steps to secure the care and support that they needed in order to 
maintain their life and live as comfortably as possible in the circumstances. This 
might not be their ideal choice, but if necessary they would accept their 
changing situation and adapt to the need for care (Lloyd et al., 2006). During 
the interview, for example, Rosalind began to reframe her identity as someone 
who liked her independence, but who needed social contact even more. As 
Rosalind pointed out, human beings are surprisingly adaptable and just as, after 
the loss of their partner or spouse, participants created new identities for 
themselves as independent people who enjoyed living alone, so they would be 
able to adapt these identities to their new circumstances (Garthwaite, 2015).  
Four participants, however, talked about the possibility of ending their lives 
rather than putting themselves in the situation where they are looked after by 
other people. For these individuals death was perceived as less of a threat than 
the idea of moving into a care home, or of needing 24 hour care and support 
(Davis-Berman, 2011). This fear of losing control of their own lives gave a sense 
of legitimacy to the idea of participants’ dying, whether that death was to come 
 23 
 
about by natural means or through suicide or assisted suicide (Howarth, 1998).  
Although none of them talked about feeling that their life was already complete 
(van Wijngaarden et al., 2015), for these participants pre-emptive suicide would 
be a way of avoiding a long drawn out death and of attaining the kind of dying 
that they might prefer at some unknown point in the future (Hardwig, 2009; 
Heinrich et al., 2011). For this small group of participants taking charge of when 
they will die could be one way of trying to ensure a good death for themselves at 
a time when their life is complete and to avoid what they perceive as 
unnecessary suffering (Meier et al., 2016). 
Living alone increases the chances of dying alone at home, and all but two of the 
participants addressed the idea of their own possible deaths alone at home. In 
general, if this meant a sudden death with little suffering then people were in 
favour. However, contradictions were evident between individuals’ personal 
wishes and their concerns about how other people might be affected by such a 
death, and what other people might think or do (Lloyd et al., 2006),   for 
example, Fiona’s belief that her daughter would be distressed by finding her 
mother’s dead body or other participants’ anxieties that their bodies might not 
be found for an extended period of time. Participants did make some efforts to 
alleviate these anxieties; Jackie had milk delivered in the hope that the milkman 
would notice if she did not take the milk bottles into the house, in a similar 
manner to participants in an earlier study (Lloyd-Williams et al., 2007).  Grace, 
Archie and David all had neighbours whom they believed would take action if 
they did not draw back their curtains (Lloyd-Williams et al., 2007), but did not 
consider that their neighbours might not notice the undrawn curtains or might 
be away from home.  For these participants the feeling of anxiety was caused, 
 24 
 
not by the idea of death itself, but by other factors related to the circumstances 
of the death which would be out of the participant’s control.  
In voicing their concerns participants revealed themselves as engaging in a 
process of reflexivity, by which they developed desired futures (Giddens, 1991).  
These desired futures made reference not only to participants’ own wishes, but 
also considered the feelings and wishes of others in their social circle. In doing 
this individuals exhibited themselves as embedded in networks of 
interdependence which, even for those who lived alone, informed and facilitated 
their actions (Burkitt, 2016; Elias, 1978). However, unless the individual decides 
to end their own life, as four participants thought they might at some point in 
the future, it is unlikely that they will have control over the timing of their dying. 
Their engagement in relational reflexivity is therefore unlikely to lead to 
autonomous action (Burkitt, 2016; Hague, 2011). 
The nine participants in this study who engaged with the idea of dying alone did 
not consider this to be something to worry about. There were aspects of the 
process that caused them some concerns, but the notion of being alone at the 
point of death was not one of them; this was even considered desirable as it 
suggested dying swiftly and without suffering. This suggests the possibility that 
when individuals think about their own deaths, as opposed to the deaths of 
others, the factors which count as important are different. This is consistent with 
findings of a review on the good death conducted by Meier et al. (2016), which 
reports that perceptions of what counts as a good death may vary between 
those who are dying, their families and the professionals involved in their care. 
For the person who is dying and for their family members, a death while asleep 
is a good one, suggesting perhaps a lack of suffering. However, the presence of 
 25 
 
family is of greater importance to the family than it is to the dying individual 
(Meier et al., 2016); dying alone is not necessarily a problem for the person who 
is dying. 
The nurses who took part in the study all believed that no one should die alone, 
which is consistent with previous research on nurses’ views (Field, 1984; Fridh et 
al., 2009; Gunther and Thomas, 2006; Hadders et al., 2014; Izumi, 2006; 
James et al., 2010). They were, however, prepared to discuss the issue and 
suggested themselves that the desire to see no one die alone might be more for 
the nurses’ own benefit or that of the patients’ relatives, than for meeting the 
needs of the patient. They were able to provide examples of the deaths of 
patients for whom they had cared, which suggested to them that dying people 
may have a measure of control over the timing of their own death and that some 
may choose to die when they are alone. Lack of previous discussion of the issue 
may relate to the idea that not being with a patient is counterintuitive for those 
working in a profession devoted to the provision of care (Royal College of 
Nursing, 2014).   
 
Conclusion  
This group of participants were not only willing to talk about death; they were 
also willing to talk about it in relation to themselves (Chapple et al., 2015). For 
some participants who provided feedback on the interview process the 
opportunity to speak openly about possible future infirmity and how they might 
die was welcome; some even felt that researchers were not direct enough in 
their questions about dying. 
 26 
 
Threats to their independence were viewed as serious by all participants. Death 
itself, however, was not viewed as such a serious threat and for some individuals 
was considered preferable to accepting care from others. Participants in this pilot 
described themselves in terms that prioritised notions of independence and 
agency, appearing to have few qualms at the thought of dying alone. Anxieties 
were, rather, focused on the processes and experiences which would precede 
that death or on how their family members might experience their death. 
Several participants had plans to end their own lives, should they deem it 
necessary, expressing a strong idea of being autonomous agents. However, it is 
important to remember that the participants were not imminently facing their 
own deaths and that they might change their minds. 
The hospice at home nurses expressed their belief that no one should die alone, 
but acknowledged that this may be more for their own benefit, as their 
professional experiences suggested that some people prefer to be alone as they 
approach death. The findings therefore suggest that the concept of dying alone 
needs to be reconsidered. While this is a small-scale study its findings do 
suggest that dying alone may be more of a problem for those who survive a 
death, rather than for the person undergoing the death. 
 
References  
Aoun, SM & Skett, K (2013) ‘A longitudinal study of end-of-life preferences of 
terminally-ill people who live alone’, Health and Social Care in the Community, 
21(5), 530-535. 
Booth, S. (2003) Blind to the bones, London: Harper Collins.   
 27 
 
Bradbury, M. (1999) Representations of death. London: Routledge. 
Bradshaw J, Clifton M, Kennedy J (1978) Found dead a study of old people found 
dead. London: Age Concern. 
Burkitt, I. (2016) ‘Relational agency: relational sociology, agency and 
interaction’, European Journal of Social Theory, 19(3), 322-339. 
Caswell, G. & O’Connor, M. (2015) ‘Agency in the context of social death: Dying 
alone at home’, Contemporary Social Science, 10(3), 249-261. 
DOI:10.1080/21582041.2015.1006806 
Chapple, A., Ziebland, S. and Hawton, K. (2015) ‘Taboo and the different death? 
Perceptions of those bereaved by suicide or other traumatic death’, Sociology of 
Health & Illness, 37 (4), 610–625  doi: 10.1111/1467-9566.12224. 
Charmaz, K. (2006) Constructing grounded theory. London: Sage. 
Choice in End of Life Care Programme Board (2015) What’s important to me. 
A Review of Choice in End of Life Care. 
https://www.gov.uk/government/policies/end-of-life-care  
Collier, A., Phillips, J.L. and Iedema, R. (2015) ‘The meaning of home at the end  
of life: A video-reflexive ethnography study’, Palliative Medicine, DOI: 
10.1177/0269216315575677. 
Collopy, B.J. (1988) ‘Autonomy in long term care: some crucial distinctions’, The 
Gerontologist, 28, suppl., 10 – 17. 
Davis-Berman, J. (2011) ‘Assisted, and Long-Term Care Settings Conversations 
About Death : Talking to Residents in Independent, Assisted and Long-term Care 
 28 
 
Settings’, Journal of Applied Gerontology, 30(3), 353-369. DOI: 
10.1177/0733464810367637. 
Department of Health (2008) End of Life Care Strategy.  London: Department of 
Health. 
Donnelly, S & Battley, J (2010) ‘Relatives’ experiences of the moment of death 
in a tertiary referral hospital’, Mortality, 15(1), 81-100. 
Elias, N. (1978) What is sociology? ( S. Mennell & G. Morrissey, Trans.). New 
York: Columbia University Press. 
Field, D (1984) ‘’We didn’t want him to die on his own’ – nurses’ accounts of 
nursing dying patients’, Journal of Advanced Nursing, 9, 59-70. 
Fincham, B., Langer, S., Scourfield, J. & Shiner, M. (2011) Understanding suicide 
a sociological autopsy. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Fridh, I., Forsberg, A & Bergbom, I. (2009) ‘Doing one’s utmost: Nurses’ 
descriptions of caring for dying patients in an intensive care environment’, 
Intensive and Critical Care Nursing, 25, 233-241. 
Garthwaite, K. (2015) ‘Becoming incapacitated? Long-term sickness benefit 
recipients and the construction of stigma and identity narratives’, Sociology of 
Health & Illness, 37(1), 1-13. doi: 10.1111/1467-9566.12168. 
Gelo, F. (2004) ‘Dying alone with the TV’, American Journal of Hospice & 
Palliative Medicine, 21(3) 167-168. 
Giddens, A. (1991) Modernity and self-identity. Cambridge: Polity Press. 
 29 
 
Gott, M., Seymour, J., Bellamy, G., Clark, D. and Ahmedzai, S. (2004) ‘Older 
people’s views about home as a place of care at the end of life’, Palliative 
Medicine, 18, 460 – 467. 
Gould, P. (2012) When I die, Lessons from the death zone. London: Abacus. 
Grafton, S. (2014) Wasted, London: Pan Books. 
Gunther, M. and Thomas, S.P. (2006) ‘Nurses’ narratives of unforgettable 
patient care events’, Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 38(4), 370-376. 
Hadders, H., Paulsen, B. and Fougner, V. (2014) ‘Relatives’ participation at the 
time of death: Standardisation in pre and post-mortem care in a palliative 
medical unit’, European Journal of Oncology Nursing, 18, 159-166. 
Hardwig, J. (2009) ‘Going to meet death: The Art of Dying in the Early Part of 
the Twenty-First Century’, Hastings Center Report, 39(4), 37-45. DOI: 
10.1353/hcr.0.0151. 
Hague, R. (2011) Autonomy and identity. Abingdon: Routledge. 
Hart, B., Sainsbury, P. & Short, S. (1998) ‘Whose dying? A sociological critique 
of the ‘good death’, Mortality, 3(1), 65-77. 
Heinrich, R. L., Morgan, M.T. and Rottman, S.J. (2011) ‘Advance Directives, 
Preemptive Suicide and Emergency Medicine Decision Making’, Narrative Inquiry 
in Bioethics Volume 1(3), 189–197. 
Howarth, G. (1998) ‘’Just live for today’. Living, caring, ageing and dying’, 
Ageing and Society, 18, 673-689. 
Howse, K (1997) Deaths of people alone. Centre for Policy of Ageing: London 
 30 
 
INVOLVE (2015) ‘What is public involvement in research?’  
http://www.invo.org.uk/find-out-more/what-is-public-involvement-in-research-
2/   
Izumi, S. (2006) ‘Bridging western ethics and Japanese local ethics by listening 
to nurses’ concerns’, Nursing Ethics, 13 (3), 275-283. 
James, I., Andershed, B. Gustavsson, B. and Ternstedt, B-M. (2010) ‘Emotional 
knowing in nursing practice: In the encounter between life and death’, 
International Journal of Qualitative Study of Health and Well-being, 5 doi: 
10.3402/qhw.v5i2.5367. 
Jamieson, L. & Simpson, R. (2013) Living alone. Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
Kastenbaum, R. (2000) The Psychology of Death. (3rd edition). London: Free 
Association Books. 
Kellehear, A. (2009) ‘Dying old – and preferably alone? Agency, resistance and 
dissent at the end of life’, International Journal of Ageing and Later Life, 4(1) 5-
21. 
Klinenberg, E. (2001) ‘Dying alone. The social production of urban isolation’, 
Ethnography, 2(4), 501-531. 
Lea, R. & Davies, C. (2015, March 13) ‘Terry took death’s arm and followed 
through the doors’, The Guardian, p. 2. 
Lloyd, L., Calnan, M., Cameron, A., Seymour, J. & Smith, R. (2006) ‘ Identity in 
the fourth age: perseverance, adaptation and maintaining dignity’,  Ageing and 
Society, doi:10.1017/S0144686X12000761. 
 31 
 
Lloyd-Williams, L., Kennedy, V., Sixsmith, A. & Sixsmith, J. (2007) ‘Perceptions 
of people over the age of 80 on issues surrounding death and dying’, Journal of 
Pain and Symptom Management, 34(1), 60-66. 
McNamara, B. (2001) Fragile lives. Buckingham: Open University Press. 
Marpsata, M. and Razafindratsimab, N. (2010) ‘Survey methods for hard-to-
reach populations: introduction to the special issue’, Methodological Innovations 
Online 5(2) 3-16, DOI: 10.4256/mio.2010.0014. 
Meier, E.A., Gallegos, J.V, Montross-Thomas, L.P., Depp, C.A, Irwin, S.A. and 
Jeste, D.V. (2016) ‘Defining a Good Death (Successful Dying): Literature Review 
and a Call for Research and Public Dialogue’,  American Journal of Geriatric 
Psychiatry 24(4): 261–271.  doi:10.1016/j.jagp.2016.01.135. 
Office for National Statistics (2015a) ‘Families and Households, 2014’, 
http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/family-demography/families-and-
households/2014/families-and-households-in-the-uk--2014.html   
Office for National Statistics (2015b) ‘Families and Household, 2014: Living 
Alone’, http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/family-demography/families-and-
households/2014/families-and-households-in-the-uk--2014.html#tab-Living-
alone  
Page, S. & Komaromy, C. (2005) ‘Professional performance: The case of 
unexpected and expected deaths’, Mortality, 10(4), 294-307. 
Porock, D., Pollock, K. & Jurgens, F. (2009) ‘Dying in public: The nature of dying 
in an acute hospital setting’, Journal of Housing for the Elderly, 23, 10-28. 
 32 
 
Portacolone, E. (2013) ‘The notion of precariousness among older adults living 
alone in the U.S.’, Journal of Aging Studies 27, 166–174 
Rolls, L., Seymour, J.E., Froggatt, K.A. and Hanratty, B. (2010) ‘Older people 
living alone at the end of life in the UK: research and policy challenges’, 
Palliative Medicine, doi: 10.1177/0269216310373165.  
Royal College of Nursing (2014) Defining Nursing. 
https://www.rcn.org.uk/professional-development/publications/pub-004768  
Seale, C. (1995) ‘Dying alone’, Sociology of Health & Illness, 17(3), 376-392. 
Seale, C. (2004) ‘Media constructions of dying alone: a form of ‘bad death’’, 
Social Science & Medicine, 58, 967-974. 
van Teijlingen, E.R. and Hundley, V. (2001) ‘The importance of pilot studies’, 
Social Research Update, 35  http://sru.soc.surrey.ac.uk/SRU35.html  
van Wijngaarden, E., Leget, C. and Goossensen, A. (2015) ‘Ready to give up on 
life: The lived experience of elderly people who feel life is completed and no 
longer worth living’, Social Science & Medicine, 138, 257-264  
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2015.05.015   
Wiles, R. (2013)   What are qualitative research ethics?  London: Bloomsbury 
Academic. 
