 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
The Illness Experience of Undocumented Immigrants
With End-stage Renal Disease
Lilia Cervantes, MD; Stacy Fischer, MD; Nancy Berlinger, PhD; Maria Zabalaga, BA; Claudia Camacho, BA;
Stuart Linas, MD; Debora Ortega, PhD
A
pproximately 11.3 million undocumented immigrants
live and work in the United States.1 Because this low-
income population is excluded from a range of public
benefitsthatincludeMedicare,federallyfundedMedicaid,and
the insurance provisions of the Affordable Care Act, undocu-
mented immigrants are a significant portion of the post–
Affordable Care Act population who remain uninsured.2 Their
access to health care is limited largely to safety-net provi-
sions for the uninsured, chiefly, nonprofit community health
centers, public clinics, and emergency treatment in hospital
emergency departments (EDs) mandated by the 1986 Emer-
gency Medical Treatment and Active Labor Act (EMTALA).2,3
Arranging care is especially complex when an undocu-
mented immigrant is diagnosed with end-stage renal disease
(ESRD),forwhichhemodialysisisalife-sustainingtreatment.4,5
Undocumented immigrants’ineligibility for public benefits
means they cannot access the diagnostically based Medicare
entitlement for hemodialysis.6 An estimated 6480 undocu-
mented immigrants in the United States have ESRD.7 Their
accesstohemodialysisdependsonstatepolicyandlocalsafety-
net investments. Some states, including California and New
York,usestateemergencyMedicaidprogramstofinancesched-
uled hemodialysis for these patients.8,9 Most states, includ-
ing some with large undocumented immigrant populations,
IMPORTANCE The exclusion of undocumented immigrants from Medicare coverage for
hemodialysis based on a diagnosis of end-stage renal disease (ESRD) requires physicians in
some states to manage chronic illness in this population using emergent-only hemodialysis.
Emergent-only dialysis is expensive and burdensome for patients.
OBJECTIVE To understand the illness experience of undocumented immigrants with ESRD
who lack access to scheduled hemodialysis.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS A qualitative, semistructured, interview study was
conducted in a Colorado safety-net hospital from July 1 to December 31, 2015, with 20
undocumented immigrants (hereinafter referred to as undocumented patients) with ESRD
and no access to scheduled hemodialysis. Demographic information was collected from the
participants’medical records. The interviews were audiorecorded, translated, and then
transcribed verbatim. The interviews were analyzed using inductive qualitative theme
analysis by 4 research team members from March 1 to June 30, 2016.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES Themes and subthemes from semistructured interviews.
RESULTS All 20 undocumented patients included in the study (10 men and 10 women; mean
[SD] age, 51.4 [13.8] years) had been in the United States for at least 5 years preceding their
diagnosis with ESRD. They described the following 4 main themes: (1) a distressing symptom
burden and unpredictable access to emergent-only hemodialysis, (2) death anxiety
associated with weekly episodes of life-threatening illness, (3) family and social
consequences of accommodating emergent-only hemodialysis, and (4) perceptions of the
health care system.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE Undocumented patients with ESRD experience debilitating,
potentially life-threatening physical symptoms and psychosocial distress resulting from
emergent-only hemodialysis. States excluding undocumented immigrants with ESRD from
scheduled dialysis should reconsider their policies.
JAMA Intern Med. 2017;177(4):529-535. doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2016.8865
Published online February 6, 2017.
Invited Commentary page 536
Related article page 579
Author Affiliations: Division of
Hospital Medicine, Department of
Medicine, Denver Health, Denver,
Colorado (Cervantes); Department of
Medicine, Denver Health, Denver,
Colorado (Cervantes, Zabalaga,
Camacho, Linas); Division of General
Internal Medicine, University of
Colorado, Denver (Fischer); Research
Department, The Hastings Center,
Garrison, New York (Berlinger);
Division of Nephrology, Denver
Health, Denver, Colorado (Linas);
Graduate School of Social Work,
University of Denver, Denver,
Colorado (Ortega).
Corresponding Author: Lilia
Cervantes, MD, Division of Hospital
Medicine, Department of Medicine,
Denver Health, 660 Bannock, Mail
Code 4000, Denver, CO 80204
(lilia.cervantes@dhha.org).
Research
JAMA Internal Medicine | Original Investigation
jamainternalmedicine.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Internal Medicine
April 2017
Volume 177, Number 4
529
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  by a University of Florida User  on 02/13/2018
 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
offer nonstandard emergent-only hemodialysis, accessed
through the ED under EMTALA and reimbursed by states’
emergency Medicaid programs.4,7,10 In a Denver hospital, for
example, patients who present with critical illness are admit-
ted and receive 2 days of consecutive emergent-only hemo-
dialysis through an arteriovenous fistula.11 A cost-utilization
study comparing 2 approaches in Houston, Texas, found that
emergent-only hemodialysis is 3.7 times more expensive than
scheduled thrice-weekly hemodialysis owing to a higher vol-
ume of ED visits, more frequent admissions to medical inten-
sive care units, and longer inpatient stays.12 Consistent with
these findings, a Colorado analysis of “superutilizers” (de-
fined as patients with high numbers of hospitalizations) found
that patients with ESRD who lacked access to scheduled he-
modialysis had the highest per capita costs owing to a high
number of inpatient admissions (33.9 mean annual inpa-
tients admissions per person).5 We designed a qualitative re-
search study to gather information about the experience of
chronically ill patients who lack access to scheduled hemodi-
alysis because of their immigration status (hereinafter
referred to as undocumented patients).
Methods
Study Design
The study included 20 semistructured interviews with un-
documented Latino patients diagnosed with ESRD who lacked
access to scheduled hemodialysis. This study was approved
for human subjects through the multi-institutional review
board of the University of Colorado, Denver. All study partici-
pants provided written informed consent and received finan-
cial compensation. The consent form was read verbatim in
Spanish by the interviewer to account for variation in patient
literacy. All participants received a copy of the signed
consent form.
Setting and Participants
Eligible participants were adult undocumented, Spanish-
speaking Latino immigrants with ESRD who accessed hemo-
dialysis through the ED or urgent care center at a safety-net
hospital in Denver, Colorado. Patients without decision-
making capacity were excluded. This hospital provides emer-
gent hemodialysis for a mean of 55 to 60 people per month.
All patients with ESRD undergo an arteriovenous fistula
surgery for hemodialysis access.
Participants were recruited using convenience sampling
methods. Patients meeting eligibility criteria and receiving
emergent-only hemodialysis on the day of interviews were
invited to participate in the study. To receive emergent-only
hemodialysis, a hemodialysis chair must be available and a
patient must be critically ill, defined as the presence of a
potassium level greater than 5.2 mEq/L (to convert to milli-
moles per liter, multiply by 1.0); a bicarbonate level less than
15 mEq/L (to convert to millimoles per liter, multiply by 1.0);
an oxygen saturation level less than 90%; uremic symptoms,
including confusion, dyspnea, and substantial nausea and
vomiting; diminished mental status or other neurologic
signs and symptoms; and/or severe shortness of breath.
Patients admitted for emergent-only hemodialysis stayed in
the hospital overnight to receive a second hemodialysis ses-
sion the following day. Patients were discharged after their
second hemodialysis session and typically returned 6 to 7
days later, critically ill, to repeat the cycle. Patients were
sometimes kept a third night or discharged before their sec-
ond hemodialysis treatment if the hemodialysis unit had no
available hemodialysis chairs.
Interview Guide
The semistructured interviews were conducted in Spanish and
used open-ended questions to explore the illness experience
and perspectives of undocumented patients with ESRD.
Questions iteratively changed during the course of interview-
ing (the question guide is found in the Box). Initially, patients
were asked to describe the circumstances of their diagnosis,
the effect of their diagnosis on their daily life, and the conse-
quences of emergent-only hemodialysis on themselves and
their families.
Data Collection
One of us (L.C., the study’
s principal investigator) identified,
obtained consent from, and interviewed eligible participants
for the study as they were admitted to the hospital from July
1 to December 31, 2015. The principal investigator is a bilin-
gual and bicultural physician with an established clinical
relationship with the patients. Interviews were conducted
one-to-one during hemodialysis or after hemodialysis while
the patient was in his or her hospital room. Interviews were
audiorecorded and then professionally translated, tran-
scribed verbatim, and deidentified. Once transcribed, all
interviews were reviewed by the principal investigator and
2 of us who are native Spanish speakers (M.Z. and C.C.) for
accuracy. The principal investigator took field notes after
each interview. Recruitment of study participants and
interviews ceased when no new perspectives or themes
emerged. Participants provided demographic information
that included their number of years in the United States and
timing of ESRD diagnosis. A Charlson Comorbidity Index
score (range, 2-15, with higher scores indicating more
comorbidities)13 was calculated through review of patient
medical records.
Key Points
Question What is the illness experience of undocumented
immigrants with end-stage renal disease and no access to
scheduled thrice-weekly hemodialysis?
Findings In this qualitative study of 20 undocumented
immigrants with kidney failure, patients described substantial
physical and psychosocial distress related to emergent-only
hemodialysis care.
Meaning States should reconsider policies on access to routine
maintenance hemodialysis for undocumented immigrants given
the symptom burden and cost.
Research Original Investigation
The Experience of Undocumented Immigrants With End-stage Renal Disease
530
JAMA Internal Medicine
April 2017
Volume 177, Number 4
(Reprinted)
jamainternalmedicine.com
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  by a University of Florida User  on 02/13/2018
 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Statistical Analysis
Transcribed interviews were analyzed using Atlas.ti software
(version 7.5.12; Scientific Software Development GmbH). Data
were analyzed using an inductive approach from March 1 to
June 30, 2016. Reliability among the 4 research team mem-
bers (L.C., S.F., C.C., and D.O.) was achieved through the in-
dependent review of interviews using open coding proce-
dures and weekly meetings to reach consensus on themes and
subthemes.
Results
We approached 20 patients for participation and all 20 agreed
to be interviewed. Table 1 summarizes the characteristics of
the 20 undocumented Latino patients with ESRD who partici-
pated in this study (10 men and 10 women). Participants had
a mean (SD) age of 51.4 (13.8) and a mean (SD) Charlson
Comorbidity Index score of 6.5 (2.7). All participants had re-
sided in the United States for at least 5 years preceding their
ESRD diagnosis. The length of the interviews ranged from 43
to 72 minutes (mean [SD], 60 [10] minutes). Participants de-
scribed the following 4 main themes concerning their illness
experience: (1) distressing symptom burden and unpredict-
able access to emergent-only hemodialysis, (2) death anxiety
associated with weekly episodes of life-threatening illness,
(3) family and social consequences of accommodating
emergent-only hemodialysis, and (4) perceptions of the health
care system. Table 2 provides illustrative quotations for the
themes and subthemes.
Distressing Symptom Burden and Unpredictable Access
to Emergent-Only Hemodialysis
Symptom Accumulation
Participants described the experience of feeling well for 2 days
after hemodialysis and then gradually becoming impaired by
symptom accumulation. The symptom described as the most
burdensome was shortness of breath. Despite restrictions on
beverage consumption, fluid built up in the chest and caused
dyspnea, a physically debilitating and psychologically dis-
tressing symptom. Patients presented in the ED with a weekly
feeling of drowning.
Variable Access to Hemodialysis Owing to High Patient Volume
and Inconsistent Admission Criteria
Although patients were admitted with the intention of receiv-
ing a second hemodialysis session, many were discharged
having received only their initial emergent hemodialysis
session owing to a lack of hemodialysis chairs. Also, when a
hemodialysis unit was at capacity and participants’labora-
tory values (in particular, potassium levels) did not meet the
threshold for critical illness, they were turned away from ad-
mission for hemodialysis treatment even if they met other cri-
teria. Participants also reported that they were likely to wait
until symptoms were severe enough to put them at risk for
death, rather than present earlier and risk being turned away.
Risking Death to Meet Admission Criteria
Many respondents had experienced the medical conse-
quences of waiting for a high enough potassium blood level:
these included cardiopulmonary resuscitation or severe
arrhythmia requiring intensive care unit admission. Despite
these experiences, participants described consuming food or
beverages high in potassium outside the door of the hospital
when they experienced the drowning sensation so their labo-
ratory results would meet the criteria of critical illness. They
Box. Interview Guide
1. Following completion of the consent, spend 5 to 10 minutes
with the participant to establish a trusting and personalized
relationship.
2. Begin with questions that seek to understand how the patient’
s
life was affected by the diagnosis of end-stage renal disease
(ESRD).
a. Thinking back to when you were first diagnosed with kidney
failure and you were told you needed to start dialysis, what
were some of the conversations you had with your health
care professionals?
b. How did your family and friends react?
c. Describe some of the conversations you had with your family.
d. How has kidney failure affected you?
e. How has this affected your family?
3. Now explore how variable access to hemodialysis impacts the
patient and their families.
a. You have access to emergent-only hemodialysis; what does
this look like day by day during the week?
b. What has been most distressing about emergent-only
hemodialysis for you?
c. What has been most distressing about emergent-only
hemodialysis for your family?
d. How has your illness affected your relationship with your
family and friends?
e. What sources of support do you have that help you cope
with emergent-only hemodialysis?
4. Next, explore questions that explore their fears and values.
a. What are your greatest fears since starting emergent-only
hemodialysis?
b. What do you value most since starting emergent-only
hemodialysis?
Table 1. Patient Characteristics
Characteristic
Value
(n = 20)
Age, mean (SD), y
51.4 (13.7)
Females, No. (%)
10 (50)
Latino race/ethnicity, No. (%)
20 (100)
Preferred interview in Spanish, No. (%)
20 (100)
Employed, No. (%)
10 (50)
Educational level, No. (%)
Less than high school
14 (70)
Completed high school
6 (30)
Time in the United States before ESRD, mean (SD), y
15.4 (6.9)
Time receiving hemodialysis, mean (SD), mo
51.0 (34.9)
Charlson Comorbidity Index score, mean (SD)a
6.5 (2.7)
Abbreviation: ESRD, end-stage renal disease.
a Scores range from 2 to 15, with higher scores indicating more comorbidities.
The Experience of Undocumented Immigrants With End-stage Renal Disease
Original Investigation Research
jamainternalmedicine.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Internal Medicine
April 2017
Volume 177, Number 4
531
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  by a University of Florida User  on 02/13/2018
 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
were also aware that identical laboratory values would be suf-
ficient for treatment on a day when the hemodialysis unit was
not at capacity.
Effect of Weekly Hospital Admission
Manyparticipantsworkedsubsistence-leveljobs,andtheirabil-
ity to work was impeded by the 2 to 3 nights per week they
needed to stay in the hospital to accommodate emergent
hemodialysis. Many participants also described the frequent
hospital stays as one of the most difficult aspects of emergent
hemodialysis because they missed their families and friends
and needed to arrange care for their minor children. One par-
ticipant, in describing what she did during her weekly hospi-
tal stay, said, “I spend my time talking to my daughter and my
Table 2. Themes and Subthemes With Illustrative Quotations
Themes and Subthemes
Illustrative Quotations
1. Distressing symptom burden and unpredictable access to emergent-only hemodialysis
Symptom accumulation
“When I leave [the hospital] on Thursday, I leave feeling good. I am okay on Friday and Saturday and then on Sunday
in the afternoon, I start feeling bad. Then Monday and Tuesday I am worse and by Wednesday, I have to come fast
because I feel like I am dying…the lack of air.”
“Sometimes I come in almost drowning…Last week, I was discharged on Friday and by Tuesday, I came back and
was doing badly…I couldn’
t breathe well. I had to go to the intensive care unit because I couldn’
t breathe.”
“I don’
t want anyone to resuscitate me if my heart or lungs stop. It’
s not that I don’
t want to live, but sometimes the
symptoms make one feel that one would be better off dead than alive.”
Variable access to hemodialysis
because of high patient volume
and inconsistent admission criteria
“I am sometimes told, ‘
Your dialysis is postponed, there are other patients who are sicker than you and we need you
to stay an extra day while we treat them,’and of course, I am fine with that. I have told other patients before to take
my place.”
“I came here yesterday and I was feeling really bad…high temperature…I wasn’
t able to talk…and the doctor who took
care of me said, ‘
Your potassium levels are not high enough and so you have to go home,’and I said, ‘
I feel really bad,’
and the doctor said, ‘
You can’
t stay here.’She asked the nurse to sit me in a wheelchair and drop me off at the
entrance…they have to treat us better to have a better quality of life…to be treated like human beings.”
Risking death to meet
admission criteria
“You cannot explain your illness, what I go through…when you enter through the emergency department, you arrive in
bad shape…you need to have a high potassium or they send you home even though you feel you are dying. Sometimes,
you crawl out when they decide to not do dialysis. You eat a banana because it is high in potassium even though you may
die and you go back and wait and hope that they will do dialysis so that you don’
t feel like you are drowning and so that
the anxiety goes away.”
“Well, I ate half an orange. Then when I walked in, I was feeling really bad. They admitted me because I was unable
to breathe.”
Effect of weekly hospital admission
“Well, my family gets sad when I come to dialysis …the little one [grandchild] calls and asks, ‘
Are you going to get out
mom?’
…I tell them, ‘
One more day,’but there we go again.”
“I worked for some days at a McDonald’
s, but they didn’
t want to give me the job anymore because I was getting sick
very often because I do not sleep.”
2. Death anxiety associated with weekly episodes of life-threatening illness
Near-death experiences
are commonplace
“It’
s happened to me twice, not being able to breathe… They saw me vomiting blood and that is when I was taken to the
intensive care unit and after that I was unaware of anything around me for 2 days…A different time, I ignored my
symptoms too long and then when I came here I couldn’
t breathe…I was going to be taken to dialysis but after a while
I had no pulse…they kept talking to me to keep me awake because they couldn’
t find my pulse.”
“I’
ve had people pushing on me, right here, my chest…I think it’
s happened 3 or 4 times, but I don’
t remember much
except that my chest hurt a lot afterwards and my family thought I was dead.”
Anxiety about the possibility
of death
“When I talk to other [undocumented] people in hemodialysis, I say, ‘
Live your life to the fullest because we don’
t know
if we’
ll be here next week.’Sometimes when I say this to my companions, it scares me.”
“Sometimes I get emotions like sadness, I need to cry, I fear death.”
Witnessing fellow patients die
“I have known people who gave up on life because they didn’
t want to continue emergent dialysis. One of them was
Carla and she didn’
t want dialysis…she went to Mexico very sad and that’
s where her life ended…there was Maria, her
life ended here at the hospital because she didn’
t want to eat anymore.”
“I see that some of the other people that used to come here [for hemodialysis] just don’
t come anymore. They died.”
3. Family and social consequences of accommodating emergent-only hemodialysis
Effect of emergent-only
hemodialysis on family
“Well, after the first dialysis I feel good and after the second dialysis I feel like I was just born. One can then do things
with family. If you don’
t get dialysis, other than dying, you can’
t do much with family or at home.”
“With this disease, you suffer a lot. You suffer with your children, but we have to continue.”
“My daughter is sad. Sometimes she is shocked. She is more worried than me because she used to wear make-up and
now she doesn’
t; she is always sad.”
“Sometimes, when I feel really bad, I tell my family to not pay attention to me…I go to my room and fall asleep.”
Family caregiving
“I was very severe on 2 occasions and [my grandchildren] were about 6 years old…they came to the hospital and said,
‘
Eat, grandpa, because we need you and we love you a lot,’and they were around me a lot.”
“My children, my daughter-in-law, and my husband are really supportive. My husband spends the whole time here
with me.”
4. Perceptions of health care system
Gratitude for emergent-only
hemodialysis
“I thank God that despite my situation and the substandard dialysis, I at least have dialysis.”
“We become very close with the providers and we are appreciative of all the people that work here. We love them…this
[hemodialysis] treatment is offered in very few countries.”
Health care professionals are
highly valued
“I gave thanks to God when I came to Denver Health, not because I am sick but because I met everyone here and you are
all lovely people that truly take care for us…you guys are angels here on earth. I think you understand how much we
suffer. Imagine coming to a hospital and suffering like we do and not having people as kind and excellent as you?”
“A lot of compassion! These people are truly kind. I have never come across anyone that has made me feel negatively.”
Awareness of double standard
concerning organ transplant
“Did you know that in Colorado and in the rest of the US, people that are undocumented are not allowed to donate a
kidney if they are living? If an undocumented person dies, though, and if they have the little heart on their license, they
don’
t have a problem taking every organ. So you cannot donate to your loved one when you are alive, but they will take
all your organs when you die.”
“But if the time comes and if I cannot be resuscitated and if I die, as I said, I’
ll donate all my organs which could be
useful. Maybe they won’
t be useful because I’
m too old. But hopefully they are useful.”
Research Original Investigation
The Experience of Undocumented Immigrants With End-stage Renal Disease
532
JAMA Internal Medicine
April 2017
Volume 177, Number 4
(Reprinted)
jamainternalmedicine.com
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  by a University of Florida User  on 02/13/2018
 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
husband [over the telephone], or I let the time fly praying.
I sleep. Sometimes it seems very long for me.”
Death Anxiety Associated With Weekly Episodes
of Life-Threatening Illness
Commonplace Near-Death Experiences
Many respondents described near-death and resuscitation ex-
periences in a matter-of-fact way. One young patient re-
ported chronic chest pain, which she believed was related to
broken ribs caused by the numerous times she had received
cardiopulmonaryresuscitation.Anotherpatientdescribedcol-
lapsing at home on several occasions and how, because of this,
her son did not leave her side for fear he might need to call an
ambulance. These experiences often happened after the pa-
tients had been admitted with symptom accumulation and
were waiting for hemodialysis.
Anxiety About the Possibility of Death
Participants described a recurrent fear of dying that took hold
each week as their symptoms began to accumulate and they
awaitedadmissionforemergent-onlyhemodialysis.Duringthe
last 2 nights before their presenting for emergent-only hemo-
dialysis, patients reported growing anxiety that led to insom-
nia because they did not know if they would survive. They de-
scribed anxiety over the uncertainty of death they experience
with their families: “When I talk to my wife, she says, ‘
What if
they just bring your pants and you never come back?’
”
Witnessing Fellow Patients Die
Participants described the comforting relationships they
built with each other based on a shared language, culture,
illness experiences, and risks associated with emergent-
only dialysis. Participants became close friends as they kept
each other company during hemodialysis and the 2- to
3-day hospital stays. They gave each other advice on how to
deal with symptoms and reached out to newly diagnosed
patients to pass on their acquired knowledge. Witnessing
the death of one of their peers when cardiopulmonary
resuscitation occurred in the hemodialysis center and failed
or when they learned that a peer had died and would no
longer be with them during hemodialysis caused deep
distress.
Family and Social Consequences of Accommodating
Emergent-Only Hemodialysis
Effect of Emergent-Only Hemodialysis on Family
Participants described the overwhelming distress their fami-
lies experienced as they watched a loved one cope with symp-
tom accumulation and fear of dying each week. Parents de-
scribed their children as depressed because they were afraid
of losing their parent. Two participants described suicide at-
tempts by their children. Participants preemptively said their
goodbyes to their families each week because they were
uncertain whether they would survive the process of waiting
to be admitted or of undergoing hemodialysis under emer-
gency conditions. Many participants also felt the need to pro-
tect their families from further distress by concealing their
accumulating symptoms and not sharing new medical infor-
mation. Participants described hiding in their bedroom as their
condition began to deteriorate.
Family Caregiving
Participants described their families as the reason they were
able to persevere with emergent-only hemodialysis. Their
families brought them to the hospital, called them while they
were inpatients, and picked them up when they were dis-
charged. Describing what he values most, a participant said,
“Family, mostly because I think I have a reason to live . . . I
live with my daughter and she gives me moral support. She
says, ‘
Come Dad, let’
s go to the hospital.
’They take me to and
from the hospital. . . I am very grateful to my daughter.
”
Perceptions of the Health Care System
Gratitude for Emergent-Only Hemodialysis
Participants understood that they were receiving nonstan-
dard, suboptimal hemodialysis treatment owing to their
undocumented status and resulting lack of health care cover-
age. Nonetheless, they continually expressed appreciation
for their care and were grateful to be living on borrowed time.
Although hemodialysis was offered to them only when they
were critically ill, they would not have access to this life-
sustaining treatment in their countries of origin.
High Value of Health Care Professionals
Participants described hemodialysis health care profession-
als at the safety-net hospital as kind and empathetic. Partici-
pants came in with low expectations and then began to build
great respect for and friendships with their clinicians, whom
theycametoknowbytheirfirstnamesandinvitedtotheirfam-
ily events. Participants described how many of these health
care professionals also attended the funerals of undocu-
mented patients who died.
Awareness of the Double Standard Concerning Organ Transplant
Many participants wanted to receive a kidney transplant and
hadafamilymemberwillingtodonateakidney,yettheylacked
access to organ transplant owing to their lack of insurance cov-
erage for lifelong antirejection medication. They were aware
of the irony that undocumented immigrants are permitted to
enroll as organ donors, and many participants had a heart
emblem on their driver’
s license because they themselves
wanted to donate their organs should they die.
Discussion
Publications on the experiences of undocumented patients
with ESRD and without access to scheduled hemodialysis are
scarce. The few reports on this issue provide only the health
care perspective.14-18 Our study exploring the illness experi-
ence and perspectives of these vulnerable patients found that
they and their families experience substantial physical and
emotional distress from symptom accumulation, being turned
away from treatment despite being extremely symptomatic
when limited resources result in triage by laboratory values,
the perceived imminence of death, and lack of access to trans-
The Experience of Undocumented Immigrants With End-stage Renal Disease
Original Investigation Research
jamainternalmedicine.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Internal Medicine
April 2017
Volume 177, Number 4
533
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  by a University of Florida User  on 02/13/2018
 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
plant. Nevertheless they are grateful for the care they receive
and describe their health care professionals as angels.
The disruption of personal and family life experienced by
many people living with chronic illnesses that requires ongo-
ing treatment is exacerbated among undocumented patients
with ESRD because of the weekly occurrence of acute epi-
sodes of illness that trigger the emergency condition thresh-
old for admission and emergent-only hemodialysis. Manag-
ing even routine hemodialysis often requires family support.19
Undocumented patients reliant on emergent-only hemodialy-
sis, including weekly hospitalization, report substantial fam-
ilydistressduetothepainofseparation,theneedtomakechild
care arrangements, and worries about the real risk of dying.
The symptom burden and psychological distress result-
ing from emergent-only hemodialysis is of concern across
health care professions and specialties involved in ESRD care.
To our knowledge, only a single study12 has reported on out-
comes among undocumented patients with ESRD. In that
study, quality of life was compared between undocumented
patients with ESRD who received emergent-only hemodialy-
sis and undocumented participants who received thrice-
weekly scheduled hemodialysis. Not surprisingly, and consis-
tent with what our participants describe, undocumented
patientsreceivingemergent-onlyhemodialysisreportedgreater
physical pain and a lower level of overall function.
The physical symptoms that alert undocumented pa-
tients with ESRD that they must go to the hospital for emer-
gent hemodialysis—in particular, the sensation of drowning as
fluid builds up in the chest or nausea and vomiting as blood
urea levels rise—are normally prevented by routine hemodi-
alysis and pharmacologic symptom alleviation. Nausea and
vomiting, for example, are common symptoms described by
patients with ESRD and are typically treated with antiemet-
ics that can be taken as often as every 4 hours.20,21 Pharma-
cologic symptom alleviation, however, may not be feasible for
undocumented patients because these symptoms are the pa-
tient’
s trigger to present at the hospital. If the symptoms are
palliated by medication such that they are not bothersome, the
patient’
s rising potassium level may trigger a deadly heart
rhythm before the patient receives medical attention.
To finance a shift from emergent-only to scheduled he-
modialysis for undocumented patients would require policy
change at the federal, state, or local level given this popula-
tion’
s exclusion from the Medicare entitlement. At present,
EMTALA requires hospitals to perform a medical screening of
allpatientswhopresentinEDsandtoprovideemergencytreat-
ment if needed until a patient’
s condition is stable. EMTALA
is not a funding mechanism, and health care professionals rely
on state-funded emergency Medicaid provisions to recoup
treatment costs for uninsured patients meeting income crite-
ria, including undocumented patients.22,23 Emergency Med-
icaid programs typically define emergency medical treatment
in terms of conditions that seriously jeopardize a patient’
s
health, put the patient at risk for bodily dysfunction or organ
failure, or cause severe pain. States have discretion to define
the emergency threshold and which medical treatments and
services are included or excluded from emergency Medicaid
reimbursement to health care professionals. California’
s
emergency Medicaid policy states that “acute, ongoing, and
maintenance renal hemodialysis services are covered as
emergency services.”8,24,25(p4.1) In Colorado, only emergent
hemodialysis is covered.26 Other states whose emergency
Medicaid policies may cover some outpatient hemodialysis
services include Arizona, Delaware, Florida, Illinois, Massa-
chusetts, Minnesota, New York, North Carolina, Virginia, and
Washington and the District of Columbia.10 Further policy
analysis is needed to clarify whether health care profession-
als in these states are using this mechanism in ways similar to
California’
s approach.
Limitations
This study was conducted with a convenience sample from a
single safety-net hospital in Colorado; however, to our knowl-
edge, this study is the first to describe the first-hand experi-
enceofemergent-onlyhemodialysisamongundocumentedpa-
tients. In addition, study participants were all Latino. Latino
individuals constitute a heterogeneous group, and these
patients’description of their illness experiences cannot be
generalized to the whole group.
Conclusions
Undocumented patients with ESRD and no access to sched-
uled hemodialysis describe significant physical and psycho-
logical distress that affects their families and their own abil-
ity to work. This distress, coupled with higher costs for
emergent dialysis, indicate that we should reconsider our pro-
fessional and societal approach to ESRD care for undocu-
mented patients.12 Comparing the experiences of different
states and localities may aid in identifying more humane and
higher-value solutions.
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Accepted for Publication: October 10, 2016.
Published Online: February 6, 2017.
doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2016.8865.
Author Contributions: Dr Cervantes had full access
to all the data in the study and takes responsibility
for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the
data analysis.
Study concept and design: Cervantes, Fischer,
Berlinger.
Acquisition,analysis,orinterpretationofdata:Cervantes,
Fischer, Zabalaga, Camacho, Linas, Ortega.
Drafting of the manuscript: Cervantes, Fischer,
Zabalaga, Camacho.
Critical revision of the manuscript for important
intellectual content: Cervantes, Fischer, Berlinger,
Linas, Ortega.
Statistical analysis: Cervantes, Fischer, Zabalaga,
Camacho.
Obtained funding: Cervantes, Fischer.
Administrative, technical, or material support:
Cervantes, Berlinger, Zabalaga, Camacho.
Study supervision: Fischer.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: None reported.
Funding/Support: The study was supported by the
Harold Amos Medical Faculty Development Award
from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation and by
grant 2015212 from the Doris Duke Charitable
Foundation and University of Colorado School of
Medicine.
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: The funding
organizations had no role in the design and conduct
of the study; collection, management, analysis, and
interpretation of the data; preparation, review, or
approval of the manuscript; and decision to submit
the manuscript for publication.
Research Original Investigation
The Experience of Undocumented Immigrants With End-stage Renal Disease
534
JAMA Internal Medicine
April 2017
Volume 177, Number 4
(Reprinted)
jamainternalmedicine.com
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  by a University of Florida User  on 02/13/2018
 Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
REFERENCES
1. Ana B. Statistical portrait of the foreign-born
population in the United States. http://www
.pewhispanic.org/2016/04/19/statistical-portrait
-of-the-foreign-born-population-in-the-united
-states-key-charts/#2013-fb-unauthorized-line.
Posted April 19, 2016. Accessed July 12, 2016.
2. Zuckerman S, Waidmann TA, Lawton E.
Undocumented immigrants, left out of health
reform, likely to continue to grow as share of the
uninsured. Health Aff (Millwood). 2011;30(10):1997-
2004.
3. Gusmano MK. Undocumented Immigrants in the
United States: US Health Policy and Access to Care.
Garrison, NY: Hastings Center; October 3, 2012.
4. Hurley L, Kempe A, Crane LA, et al. Care of
undocumented individuals with ESRD: a national
survey of US nephrologists. Am J Kidney Dis. 2009;
53(6):940-949.
5. Johnson TL, Rinehart DJ, Durfee J, et al. For
many patients who use large amounts of health
care services, the need is intense yet temporary.
Health Aff. 2015;34(8):1312-1319.
6. Rettig RA. Special treatment—the story of
Medicare’
s ESRD entitlement. N Engl J Med. 2011;
364(7):596-598.
7. Rodriguez RA. Dialysis for undocumented
immigrants in the United States. Adv Chronic Kidney
Dis. 2015;22(1):60-65.
8. Harper J. Medicaid rules can thwart immigrants
who need dialysis. Health news from NPR. http:
//www.npr.org/sections/health-shots/2016/03/08
/469221408/medicaid-rules-can-thwart
-immigrants-who-need-dialysis. Posted March 8,
2016. Accessed December 16, 2016.
9. Lee EYH. Health clinic refuses to give
undocumented immigrant a kidney transplant from
her husband. https://thinkprogress.org/health
-clinic-refuses-to-give-undocumented-immigrant-a
-kidney-transplant-from-her-husband
-e873ec27012#.erml2tisz. Posted June 18, 2015.
Accessed December 16, 2016.
10. Schrag WF. Insurance coverage for
unauthorized aliens confusing and complex. Policy
and Politics. http://www.nephrologynews.com
/insurance-coverage-for-unauthorized-aliens
-confusing-and-complex/. Posted July 9, 2015.
Accessed September 29, 2016.
11. Cervantes L, Fung P, Fischer S. Undocumented
immigrants with end-stage renal disease: the case
for dialysis. SGIM Forum. 2015;38(10):1-3.
12. Sheikh-Hamad D, Paiuk E, Wright AJ, Kleinmann
C, Khosla U, Shandera WX. Care for immigrants with
end-stage renal disease in Houston: a comparison
of two practices. Tex Med. 2007;103(4):54-58.
13. Beddhu S, Bruns FJ, Saul M, Seddon P, Zeidel
ML. A simple comorbidity scale predicts clinical
outcomes and costs in dialysis patients. Am J Med.
2000;108(8):609-613.
14. Nuila R. Taking care of our own. A National
Journal of Literature and Discussion. http://www
.vqronline.org/reporting-articles/2015/01/taking
-care-our-own. Published Winter 2015. Accessed
December 16, 2016.
15. Raghavan R, Nuila R. Survivors—dialysis,
immigration, and US law. N Engl J Med. 2011;364
(23):2183-2185.
16. Campbell GA, Sanoff S, Rosner MH. Care of the
undocumented immigrant in the United States with
ESRD. Am J Kidney Dis. 2010;55(1):181-191.
17. Mendola A. Undocumented and at the end of
life. Narrat Inq Bioeth. 2014;4(2):179-184.
18. Williams ME. The ESRD uninsured matter. Adv
Chronic Kidney Dis. 2007;14(1):67-74.
19. Davison SN. End-of-life care preferences and
needs: perceptions of patients with chronic kidney
disease. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2010;5(2):195-204.
20. Cano AE, Neil AK, Kang JY, et al.
Gastrointestinal symptoms in patients with
end-stage renal disease undergoing treatment by
hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis. Am J
Gastroenterol. 2007;102(9):1990-1997.
21. Murtagh FE, Addington-Hall J, Higginson IJ. The
prevalence of symptoms in end-stage renal disease:
a systematic review. Adv Chronic Kidney Dis. 2007;
14(1):82-99.
22. Galewitz P. How undocumented immigrants
sometimes receive medicaid treatment. http:
//www.pbs.org/newshour/rundown/how
-undocumented-immigrants-sometimes-receive
-medicaid-treatment/. Posted February 13, 2013.
Accessed July 16, 2016.
23. DuBard CA, Massing MW. Trends in emergency
Medicaid expenditures for recent and
undocumented immigrants. JAMA. 2007;297(10):
1085-1092.
24. Grubbs V. Undocumented immigrants and
kidney transplant: costs and controversy. Health Aff
(Millwood). 2014;33(2):332-335.
25. California Department of Health Care Services.
Criteria for emergency and pregnancy-related
services for persons entitled to restricted benefits
only. Page 4.1, Section R-15-98E. http://www.dhcs
.ca.gov/services/medi-cal/Documents/ManCriteria
_06_EmergPreg.htm. Accessed December 16, 2016.
26. Department of Health Care Policy and
Financing. Medical Assistance—Section 8.100. 10
CCR 2505-10 8.100. http://www.sos.state.co.us
/CCR/10%20CCR%202505-10%208.100.pdf
?ruleVersionId=6798&fileName=10. Effective
March 30, 2009. Accessed August 8, 2016.
The Experience of Undocumented Immigrants With End-stage Renal Disease
Original Investigation Research
jamainternalmedicine.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Internal Medicine
April 2017
Volume 177, Number 4
535
Copyright 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  by a University of Florida User  on 02/13/2018
