 Correction
APPLIED BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES, ENGINEERING
Correction for “Dendrimer-RNA nanoparticles generate pro-
tective immunity against lethal Ebola, H1N1 influenza, and Toxo-
plasma gondii challenges with a single dose,” by Jasdave S. Chahal,
Omar F. Khan, Christopher L. Cooper, Justine S. McPartlan,
Jonathan K. Tsosie, Lucas D. Tilley, Saima M. Sidik, Sebastian
Lourido, Robert Langer, Sina Bavari, Hidde L. Ploegh, and
Daniel G. Anderson, which appeared in issue 29, July 19, 2016, of
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA (113:E4133–E4142; first published July 5,
2016; 10.1073/pnas.1600299113).
The authors note that a statement in the Acknowledgments
appeared incorrectly. “Partial support was provided by Medi-
Vector, Inc. Grant OSP 30-1765-9901” should instead appear as
“Partial support was provided by Fujifilm/MediVector, Inc. Grant
OSP 30-1765-9901.”
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1612792113
E5250
|
PNAS
|
August 30, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 35
www.pnas.org
 Dendrimer-RNA nanoparticles generate protective
immunity against lethal Ebola, H1N1 influenza, and
Toxoplasma gondii challenges with a single dose
Jasdave S. Chahala,1, Omar F. Khanb,1, Christopher L. Cooperc, Justine S. McPartlana, Jonathan K. Tsosieb,
Lucas D. Tilleya, Saima M. Sidika, Sebastian Louridoa, Robert Langerb,d,e,f,g, Sina Bavaric, Hidde L. Ploegha,
and Daniel G. Andersonb,c,d,f,g,2
aWhitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142; bDavid H. Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139; cMolecular and Translational Sciences, United States Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases, Fort
Detrick, MD 21702; dDepartment of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139; eDepartment of Chemical Engineering,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139; fInstitute for Medical Engineering and Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA 02139; and gHarvard-MIT Division of Health Science and Technology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139
Edited by Joseph M. DeSimone, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and Carbon, Chapel Hill, NC, and approved May 25, 2016 (received for review
January 7, 2016)
Vaccines have had broad medical impact, but existing vaccine
technologies and production methods are limited in their ability to
respond rapidly to evolving and emerging pathogens, or sudden
outbreaks. Here, we develop a rapid-response, fully synthetic, single-
dose, adjuvant-free dendrimer nanoparticle vaccine platform
wherein antigens are encoded by encapsulated mRNA replicons.
To our knowledge, this system is the first capable of generating
protective immunity against a broad spectrum of lethal pathogen
challenges, including H1N1 influenza, Toxoplasma gondii, and
Ebola virus. The vaccine can be formed with multiple antigen-
expressing replicons, and is capable of eliciting both CD8+ T-cell
and antibody responses. The ability to generate viable, contami-
nant-free vaccines within days, to single or multiple antigens, may
have broad utility for a range of diseases.
nanoparticle | vaccine platform | replicon | viruses | parasites
T
oday, there are a range of vaccine technologies used clini-
cally, with varied use of inactivated pathogens, molecular
antigens, adjuvants, delivery technologies, administration routes,
and dosing regimes (1–13). Although existing vaccine systems
have had a huge impact on prevention of infectious disease,
challenges remain. There is a need for safe and effective vaccines
that are flexible—capable of rapid, on-demand production and
optimization near the point of care (14, 15).
As one of the standard vaccine forms, live-attenuated vaccines can
confer long-lasting immunity, in part, due to their ability to undergo
limited replication in the host. Such vaccines mimic natural infection
and drive endogenous antigen production and presentation by host
class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules (16).
However, safety issues (e.g., reversion to virulence, contamination due
to production in living systems) and manufacturing limitations [e.g.,
long times necessary for growth in eggs or cell culture, poor shelf-life
(17)] complicate the development and production of live vaccines.
Recombinant subunit vaccines, which consist of single or multiple
protein antigens produced in bacteria, yeast, or plants, can be syn-
thesized more rapidly and do not pose the risk of reversion or geno-
toxicity, but they are often less immunogenic. In addition, cell-based
production necessitates extensive purification steps, hampering efforts
to respond to outbreaks rapidly. DNA-based vectors used for gene-
based vaccination (18–20) have shown efficacy in humans (21), but
raise safety concerns due to the risk of mutagenic integration into the
patient’s genome (22, 23). Nonretroviral RNA vaccines are attractive
due to their inherent transience and absence of recombination or
integration into the patient’s genome. However, RNA-based vac-
cines require intracellular delivery methods to function (24–29).
Replicon mRNA, a type of self-replicating nucleic acid, can
substantially amplify the production of encoded protein, leading to
sustained translation (30). This ability to produce large amounts of
antigen and self-adjuvant through replication via dsRNA intermedi-
ates has motivated investigation into their potential as a vaccine (31).
However, delivery is required for replicon mRNA function, and, to
date, there has been no report of protective immunity capable of
allowing for survival against a lethal challenge of any pathogen using
nonviral, fully synthetic approaches (32). Naked replicon mRNA can
activate the innate immune system upon administration, which can
limit translational efficiency, diminish potency, and induce toxicity
(33–36). RNA, particularly single-stranded RNA, is rapidly degraded
by nucleases when injected in vivo (37). Although therapeutic RNA
can be chemically modified to facilitate delivery and reduce immu-
nogenicity (38–41), no such modifications have been reported for
replicons; this may reflect the sensitivity of the viral replicase to base
modification (42–44) or to the secondary structure effects modifica-
tions may have on vital conserved RNA replication elements (45). We
reasoned that nanoformulation could allow for the protection and
functional delivery of replicon mRNA vaccines.
Significance
To respond better to evolving pathogens, sudden outbreaks, and
individual patient needs, a flexible, safe, and efficient vaccine
platform amenable to rapid production near the point of care is
required. To this end, we created a fully synthetic, single-dose,
adjuvant-free nanoparticle vaccine platform wherein modified
dendrimer molecules nanoencapsulate antigen-expressing replicon
mRNAs. Vaccines can be multiplexed and formed with multiple
antigen-expressing replicons. After a single immunization, the
rapid-production, contaminant-free vaccines elicit vital CD8+ T-cell
and antibody responses that fully protect against lethal exposures
to several deadly pathogens, including Ebola virus, H1N1 influenza,
and Toxoplasma gondii. We believe this technology may allow for
rapid-response vaccines with broad efficacy that reduce the number
and frequency of vaccinations, and healthcare worker burden.
Author contributions: O.F.K. conceived and produced the vaccine delivery system; J.S.C.,
O.F.K., and C.L.C. designed research; J.S.C., O.F.K., C.L.C., J.S.M., and J.K.T. performed research;
J.S.C., O.F.K., C.L.C., L.D.T., S.M.S., and S.L. contributed new reagents/analytic tools; J.S.C.,
O.F.K., and C.L.C. analyzed data; and J.S.C., O.F.K., R.L., S.B., H.L.P., and D.G.A. wrote
the paper.
Conflict of interest statement: A patent has been filed for the nanoparticle vaccine by J.S.C.,
O.F.K., R.L., H.L.P., and D.G.A.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
1J.S.C. and O.F.K. contributed equally to this work.
2To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: dgander@mit.edu.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1600299113/-/DCSupplemental.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1600299113
PNAS
|
Published online July 5, 2016
|
E4133–E4142
APPLIED BIOLOGICAL
SCIENCES
ENGINEERING
PNAS PLUS
 Cationic and ionizable materials have shown promise as nano-
particulate nucleic acid delivery systems (46). Given the very large
size of replicon mRNA, and lack of chemical modification necessary
for mRNA replicon function, we reasoned that charge-dense poly-
amines might provide optimal protection from nucleases in the body
while allowing for functional release in the cytoplasm. Charge-dense
polyamines, such as those polyamines based on polyethylene imine,
can condense nucleic acids through interaction with the phosphate
backbone, resulting in compact nanoparticles that provide a measure
of protection against nucleases (46). Furthermore, these materials
often contain amines with pKa values between 5 and 7, which have
been observed to facilitate release of endocytosed nucleic acid into
the cytoplasm (47–50). We further reasoned that the use of mono-
disperse, molecularly defined dendrimers instead of more poly-
disperse amine polymers would allow for better definition of
nanoparticulate composition following self-assembly, and reduce
efforts needed to confirm the identity and batch-to-batch re-
producibility of these often heterogeneous materials (51). Here, we
develop dendrimer formulations with self-replicating RNA to deliver
antigenic RNA payloads in vivo, resulting in antibody production
and antigen-specific CD8+ T-cell responses against the encoded
protein antigen, as well as protective immunity and survival to lethal
pathogen challenges.
Conventional unmodified in vitro-transcribed mRNA, and
replicon RNAs based on the genomes of two alphaviruses, Ven-
ezuelan equine encephalitis virus (VEEV) and Semliki Forest virus
Fig. 1.
MDNP vaccine platform. (A) Ionizable dendrimer-based nanomaterial, a lipid-anchored PEG, and RNA are combined to form the final vaccine nanoparticle.
Additional characterization is provided in Fig. S9. (B) Size distribution of the MDNPs by dynamic light scattering. Error bars ± SD and n = 3. (C) Transmission electron
micrograph of MDNPs. (Scale bar: 50 nm.) (D) Firefly luciferase activity in BHK cells mediated by conventional mRNA and replicon RNAs based on VEEV and SFV
genomes, assayed 14 h posttransfection. Error bars ± SD and n = 3. (E) Stability of formulated nanoparticles using different nanomaterials over 2 h in 50% AB
human serum at 37 °C. MDNPs were formulated to contain an equimolar mixture of RNAs labeled with Alexa Fluor 594 and Alexa Fluor 647. When in close contact
(i.e., within the intact MNDP), the RNAs would act as a FRET pair. When the MDNPs disassembled, the released RNAs would no longer close enough to generate a
FRET signal. To measure FRET, the samples were excited at 540 nm and the fluorescence intensity was read at 690 and 620 nm. FRET was determined as the ratio of
the fluorescence intensities at 690/620 nm. FRET signals were normalized to the signals of free RNA controls. The more stable MDNP nanomaterial was synthesized
using 2-tridecyloxirane, whereas the less stable control MDNP used 1,2-Epoxydodecane. Negative controls were free RNA. PBS was used to determine background
levels. The FRET signal was normalized to the value of the completely ruptured nanoparticles. Nanoencapsulation in the MDNP provides superior protection because
nanoparticles remain intact and do not release their RNA payloads while in whole human serum. Because of this stability, the RNA payloads are protected from
endonuclease degradation. Error bars ± SD and n = 4–8. (F) Vaccine stability over long periods of storage. Nanoparticles containing luciferase replicon RNA were
created and stored at 4 °C for extended periods of time. HeLa cells were treated with a fixed amount of the nanoparticles, and luciferase expression was assayed
after 14 h. After a minimum of 30 d of storage, no statistically significant changes in luciferase transfection efficiency were detected by ANOVA analysis (with Tukey
multiple comparison correction), indicating the particles remained stable and the RNA payload remained intact. Error bars ± SD and n = 4.
E4134
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1600299113
Chahal et al.
 (SFV), were developed that support self-amplification via an im-
munogenic double-stranded RNA intermediate in the cytoplasm to
drive efficient antigen expression. We show that a modified den-
drimer nanoparticle (MDNP)-delivered VEEV replicon RNA
encoding the hemagglutinin protein (HA) of an H1N1 influenza
virus (A/WSN/33) or the Ebola virus (EBOV) glycoprotein (GP)
protects mice against lethal viral infection. A multiplexed MDNP
vaccine that simultaneously carries multiple replicons encoding dense
granule protein 6 (GRA6), rhoptry protein 2A (ROP2A), rhoptry
protein 18 (ROP18), surface antigen 1 (SAG1), surface antigen 2A
(SAG2A), and apical membrane antigen 1 (AMA1) also protects
mice against lethal Toxoplasma gondii challenges. Thus, this platform
is capable of generating protection against representative diseases
from all three categories of the National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases’ Priority Pathogen List for emerging and rapidly
increasing threats (52). Importantly, generation of a new MDNP
vaccine system composed of these dendrimers and replicon RNA
takes only about 1 wk, in contrast to the cell culture and fertilized egg
systems that can take 6 mo or more to develop (53–58). In addition,
postproduction purification required for this MDNP system is min-
imal, as is the risk of contaminating allergens relative to existing
vaccine systems (59–61). Finally, this synthetic system is able to
produce multiple antigens and to induce appropriate antibody and
T-cell responses without additional adjuvants in a range of disease
models. We believe the delivery technology developed here may
serve as a flexible, scalable, and potent approach to immunization.
Results
MDNPs Protect RNA Payloads and Are Stable. Nanoparticle-based
vaccines should elicit robust antigen expression, protect the RNA
payload from environmental RNase activity, and preserve these
properties during storage. To test whether our MDNP (Fig. 1 A–C)
exhibited these characteristics, a VEEV replicon RNA encoding
firefly luciferase was selected as a model nanoencapsulation cargo.
Low polydispersity particles (Fig. 1 B and C) were routinely pro-
duced using this method. We chose this payload because VEEV-
driven luciferase expression in tissue culture was the strongest of the
three RNA types tested (conventional mRNA, VEEV replicon, and
SFV replicon) (Fig. 1D). The VEEV replicon RNA was formulated
into MDNPs using a microfluidic-based production method (49, 50).
The nanomaterial’s ability to generate RNA-containing nano-
particles that remain stable while in human serum was verified by
fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) assay (62) (Fig.
1E). To confirm long-term stability, HeLa cells were treated with
MDNPs containing luciferase-expressing replicons, which had been
stored following formulation for varying times. No statistically
significant changes in luminescence were observed when using
particles stored at 4 °C for 1, 3, 22, or 30 d (Fig. 1F).
The modified dendrimer is fully synthetic and purified, and the
RNA payload is produced in the complete absence of cells. The
MDNP nanomaterial has been established not to cause systemic
increases in inflammatory cytokines in vivo at doses an order of
magnitude greater than used for the immunizations described in
this report (49, 50). The particle preparations used in these studies
are free of infectious contaminants and virtually endotoxin-free
[<0.228 endotoxin units per milliliter, which is 40-fold lower than
an acceptable endotoxin burden for viral/nonviral vectors (63)].
RNAs Nanoencapsulated in MDNPs Drive Expression at the Site of
Intramuscular Injection and Stimulate Antigen-Specific T Cells in Vivo.
The MDNP-encapsulated RNAs were successfully expressed in a
broad variety of cell types in culture, including the human epi-
thelial cell line HeLa, murine and human primary fibroblasts, the
mouse dendritic cell line DC2.4, the murine and rat skeletal
myoblast cell lines C2C12 and L6, and differentiated mouse
myotubes derived from the C2C12 cell line (Fig. S1A and Table
S1). Intramuscular injection of MDNP was observed to drive
readily detectible gene expression at the site of injection in vivo
(Fig. S1B). To test whether or not an immune response was
induced using the MDNP system, a cytoplasmically expressed
ovalbumin fragment (cOVA) (64) was used as a model in-
tracellular antigen. We produced conventional mRNA, VEEV
replicon RNAs, and SFV replicon RNAs to express this protein.
The cOVA protein contains the dominant epitope recognized by
CD8+ T cells (64). The expression of cOVA 14 h posttransfection
in BHK21 cells was confirmed by immunoblot analysis, with the
VEEV replicon proving to be the most robust (Fig. S2A). To
determine if antigen expression was sufficient to activate CD8+ T
cells in vivo using MDNPs, transgenic mice exclusively expressing a
T-cell receptor (TCR) specific for the immunodominant H-2Kb–
restricted ovalbumin epitope SIINFEKL (OT-1 transgenic/Rag1-
knockout mice) were used as lymphocyte donors in an adoptive
transfer experiment. Mice that received OT-1 T cells were given
either unpackaged (“naked”) RNA or the same RNA encapsulated
as MDNPs by bilateral intramuscular leg injection. Three days
postimmunization, OT-1 T-cell proliferation was determined by
5-(and 6)-Carboxyfluorescein diacetate succinimidyl ester (CFSE)
dilution (Fig. 2A and Fig. S2B). Mice immunized with naked RNA
showed no OT-1 cell proliferation. In contrast, at least six rounds of
proliferation were detected in mice that received RNAs as MDNPs.
A
B
C
Unimm.
Naked mRNA
MDNP mRNA
Naked VEEV
MDNP VEEV
Naked SFV
MDNP SFV
0
20
40
60
80
100
Unimm.
Naked mRNA
MDNP mRNA
Naked VEEV
MDNP VEEV
Naked SFV
MDNP SFV
0
20
40
60
80
100
IL-2
IFNγ
Unimmunized
VEEV MDNP
% proliferated
% proliferated
Fig. 2.
MDNP RNA vaccines stimulate CD8+ T-cell responses against a model intracellular antigen. (A) Quantification of four independent biological replicates of
OT-1 proliferation assay performed 4 d posttransfer/3 d postimmunization. Error bars ± SD. (B) Quantification of six independent biological replicates of OT-1
proliferation assay performed 10 d posttransfer/14 d postimmunization. Error bars ± SD. (C) Intracellular cytokine staining for IFN-γ and IL-2 on splenocytes of
VEEV-cOVA MDNP-immunized mice 9 d postinjection, gated on CD8+ cells. Independent results are shown for two unimmunized (Left) and two immunized (Right)
mice. Unimm., unimmunized.
Chahal et al.
PNAS
|
Published online July 5, 2016
|
E4135
APPLIED BIOLOGICAL
SCIENCES
ENGINEERING
PNAS PLUS
 The strongest proliferation was observed in mice immunized with
nonreplicon conventional mRNA MDNPs. Because the doses given
were based on equivalent masses of injected RNA, an ∼10-fold
molar excess of the conventional mRNA was injected relative to the
replicon RNAs. A 10-fold higher dose of packaged VEEV replicon
RNA indeed yielded a profile of OT-1 proliferation similar to
dendrimer-packaged mRNA (Fig. S2C).
To address whether a single dose of MDNP-delivered RNAs
resulted in antigen presentation over a longer period (29), C57BL/6
mice were immunized with naked or MDNP RNAs, followed by
adoptive transfer of CFSE-labeled OT-1 cells 10 d later. Four days
posttransfer, proliferation was analyzed (Fig. 2B). Naked mRNA
immunization failed to induce OT-1 T-cell proliferation. Immuni-
zation with MDNP mRNAs resulted in low, but detectable, OT-1
proliferation in some mice. Immunization with naked replicon
RNAs caused highly variable proliferation of OT-1 T cells. However,
with the MDNP system, the VEEV replicon RNA led to consistent
proliferation of OT-1 T cells in the majority of immunized mice
(ranging from 20–50% proliferation in five of the six animals).
MDNP-delivered SFV replicon RNA failed to induce OT-1 pro-
liferation at this time point. VEEV superiority was further confirmed
with the viral structural polyproteins HIV1 Gag (Fig. S3) and Ebola
GP (Fig. S4A).
We therefore pursued MDNP-delivered VEEV replicons as the
vaccine candidate. To confirm that VEEV MDNP could stimulate
endogenous T-cell responses, C57BL/6 mice were immunized with a
high 40-μg dose of cOVA VEEV MDNP. After 9 d, we measured
intracellular IFN-γ and IL-2 production in splenocytes stimulated in
vitro with the immunodominant H2-Kb class I MHC-restricted OVA
peptide SIINFEKL (65). In two independent experiments, >1% of
endogenous CD8+ splenocytes from immunized mice contained
discrete populations of strongly IFN-γ+ cells upon peptide stimula-
tion (Fig. 2C). Eighteen days postimmunization, abundant circulat-
ing CD8+ T cells with TCR specificity for MHC class I-bound
SIINFEKL, as detected by tetramer staining, were observed in
similarly immunized mice (Fig. S5A). For comparison, in similar
independent experiments using mRNA as the payload, fewer cir-
culating tetramer-positive cells were detected over the course of the
study, and levels were nearly undetectable by day 16 (Fig. S5B).
These observations, coupled with the fact that alphavirus replicons
induce potent type I IFN responses (66, 67) (Fig. S6), as well as
apoptosis and antigen uptake by dendritic cells (68, 69), further
justified the selection of VEEV as the candidate payload for further
experiments with a variety of target antigens. It should be noted that
in MDNP VEEV-immunized animals, antigen-coding RNA was
detectible by day 11 in the draining inguinal lymph nodes (Fig.
S5C), raising the possibility that the immunogenic action of
replicons delivered by MDNPs may not be limited to the site of
injection, although the injection site is likely to be the major
source of actual antigen production in vivo.
Single-Dose HA-Expressing MDNP Vaccine Protects Against Lethal
Influenza Challenge. To determine whether the nanoparticle-based
vaccine could elicit immunity that protects against a lethal viral
challenge, RNAs encoding the influenza A/WSN/33 HA protein
(Fig. S7A) were synthesized. HA was detected by immunoblot only
when expressed from the VEEV replicon. Correct processing and
shuttling of the VEEV RNA-expressed HA protein to the cell sur-
face were confirmed by surface immunostaining with an HA-specific
single-chain antibody (70) (Fig. S7B).
BALB/c mice were immunized with VEEV MDNPs encoding
either the HA protein or an irrelevant antigen (cOVA) as a control,
and challenged 14 d later with a lethal dose of influenza A/WSN/33.
Control mice succumbed to infection by day 7, whereas all HA-
expressing nanoparticle-immunized mice survived the challenge, and
showed complete recovery of body weight by day 11 (Fig. 3A), with
no clinical signs of infection after 3 wk. No anti-HA IgG was de-
tected in the sera of mice 7 d postimmunization or in control mice at
the time of sacrifice (6 or 7 d postinfection; Fig. 3B). At 7 d post-
challenge, HA-reactive IgG was readily detectable in the surviving
mice immunized with HA-encoding VEEV replicon MDNPs
(Fig. 3B).
VEEV MDNP Vaccine Protects Mice from Lethal EBOV Challenge. To
demonstrate the MDNP platform’s versatility, an EBOV vaccine
was created. Although no licensed US Food and Drug Adminis-
tration vaccine for EBOV is currently available, most existing
EBOV vaccine platforms center on the viral GP as the primary
target antigen. Therefore, RNAs expressing full-length Kikwit
EBOV GP were synthesized. As was observed for influenza HA,
GP expression was difficult to detect in lysates from all but the
VEEV replicon-transfected cells. We could not detect GP in cells
transfected with conventional unstabilized mRNA, but we ob-
served a weak signal in cells transfected with 3′ UTR-stabilized
mRNA or SFV replicon RNA (Fig. S4A). Based on the EBOV
GP expression profile, the VEEV replicon was used as the MDNP
payload (Fig. S4B).
Mice immunized with 40 μg of VEEV-GP MDNP exhibited
robust GP-specific T-cell responses 9 d after immunization, as
determined by IFN-γ and IL-2 expression by CD8+ and CD4+
splenocytes in response to ex vivo treatment with the EBOV
GP-derived WE15 peptide (71) (Fig. 4A). Using a prime-boost
schedule of day 0 and day 21, mice were vaccinated with VEEV-GP
MDNPs, naked VEEV-GP, or VEEV-cOVA MDNP, and then
tested for GP-specific antibody responses. An additional group re-
ceiving a single (prime-only) injection of VEEV-GP MDNP was
also tested. VEEV-GP MDNP vaccination resulted in a robust and
dose-dependent humoral response, with the highest tested dose
(40 μg) resulting in ∼4- to 5-log titers of GP-specific IgG responses
from both single-dose (prime-only) and two-dose (prime-boost)
vaccinations (Fig. 4B). However, both antibody titers and the
number of animals with detectable GP antibodies began to de-
cline at vaccine doses below 4.0 μg.
MDNPs also protected mice against EBOV. Twenty-eight days
postvaccination, animals were challenged with a lethal dose of
mouse-adapted EBOV (ma-EBOV) (72). Although all control an-
imals succumbed to EBOV infection by day 7, 100% protection was
conferred by 4.0-μg and 40-μg Ebola MDNP prime-boost vaccina-
tions, with no EBOV clinical pathological findings observed over
the course of the study (Fig. 4C). A single high-dose MDNP prime
Fig. 3.
Single-dose VEEV-based MDNP immunization protects against lethal
H1N1 influenza challenge. (A) Protection against influenza challenge. Mice were
infected with a lethal dose of influenza A/NWS/33 on day 0, and body weight
was plotted as a percentage of preinfection weight. Mice were euthanized when
body weight dropped below 80%. One hundred percent of control-immunized
mice died, and 100% of HA-immunized mice fully recovered and survived for
3 wk with no signs of infection, at which point the experiment was terminated.
Error bars ± SD and n = 3. (B) Serum anti-HA IgG in response to infection. HA-
immunized surviving mice exhibited higher HA-specific antibody titers 7 d post-
infection than control-immunized mice at the time of death. Results for each
individual animal are shown. Error bars ± SD of technical duplicates.
E4136
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1600299113
Chahal et al.
 vaccination likewise resulted in 100% protection against lethal
EBOV infection. In agreement with humoral immune responses,
protection began to decrease at MDNP vaccine doses below
4.0 μg, with 60% of the animals surviving following vaccination
with 0.4 μg of MDNP. Noteworthy and demonstrative of enhanced
efficacy granted by MDNP nanoencapsulation, 40 μg of naked
VEEV-GP and 0.4 μg of VEEV-GP MDNP elicited compara-
ble humoral and protective responses, despite an approximate
100-fold reduction in the total amount of VEEV replicon present
during vaccination. As observed with other EBOV vaccine plat-
forms, the antibody response did not completely correlate with
protection (71).
VEEV MDNP Vaccine Protects Mice Against Lethal T. gondii Challenge.
As a demonstration of the MDNP’s large-payload capacity, a hexa-
plex vaccine was produced for T. gondii. T. gondii is an apicomplexan
protozoan that infects one-third of world’s population through con-
taminated food, can cause cerebral toxoplasmosis in immunocom-
promised individuals, and has no approved human vaccine despite
efforts to generate immunity through injection of live-attenuated
parasites, DNA, and peptides (73). The annual cost of this illness in
the United States is estimated to be $3 billion (74). After confirming
the ability to express multiple replicons simultaneously coformulated
into a single MDNP (Fig. S8A), a multiplexed T. gondii MDNP
vaccine was produced. Six T. gondii-specific antigens (GRA6,
ROP2A, ROP18, SAG1, SAG2A, and AMA1) were encoded into
VEEV replicons (Fig. S8B), and equimolar amounts were coformu-
lated into MDNPs. These antigens were selected because they rep-
resent proteins expressed in multiple life-cycle stages of the parasite
and are conserved across multiple strains and types. Animals were
vaccinated with a single 40-μg dose of vaccine (6.67 μg per replicon,
which is within the effective dose range established for Ebola in Fig. 4
B and C). As a control, animals were treated with a matching dose of
MDNPs carrying VEEV HA as an irrelevant antigen. Thirty-two days
postimmunization, animals were challenged with lethal doses of the
T. gondii type II strain Prugniaud (PRU) (Fig. 5). By day 12, all
control animals succumbed to infection. The remaining animals
vaccinated with the hexaplex MDNP vaccine survived for over 6 mo
with no clinical indications. To our knowledge, this is the first dem-
onstration of a fully protective, single-dose mRNA replicon
nanoparticle vaccine for T. gondii.
Discussion
Gene-based approaches to vaccines have a number of potential ad-
vantages over conventional methods, because they are fully synthetic
and rapidly customizable, and can be produced in adjuvant-free
preparations (75). Current virus-based vaccine production methods
are time-consuming; they require over 5 mo of lead time, and output
can be complicated by scale-up and yield issues, as experienced in
the 2009 H1N1 pandemic (53). Vaccines based on gene delivery by
viral vectors such as adenovirus, recombinant vesicular stomatitis
virus (rVSV), adeno-associated virus (AAV), or CMV face the ad-
ditional challenge of preexisting or induced antivector immunity,
which precludes repeated administration. The MDNP platform can
better respond to sudden outbreaks, evolving pathogens, and indi-
vidual patient needs due to its flexibility, safety, and efficiency. With
this platform, the time line of production from initial access to the
relevant DNA sequences to milligram-scale, injection-ready MDNP
vaccine is only 7 d. By facilitating replicon delivery to the cytosol, the
MDNPs drive endogenous antigen production that stimulates both
T-cell and antibody responses. Furthermore, because nano-
encapsulation is RNA sequence-independent, a variety of different
replicons, each encoding a unique antigen, can be created and
coencapsulated (Fig. 5 and Fig. S8A). The attainable doses (up to at
least 40 μg) are an order of magnitude greater than those doses
needed to achieve significant protective immunity (Figs. 4 and 5).
Assuming this range of therapeutic index translates to humans, we
believe there is the potential to incorporate multiple distinct antigens
into a single formulation.
As a vector for immunization, mRNA has been investigated with
varying degrees of success, particularly in the field of cancer im-
munotherapy (76). Several factors complicate and limit the efficacy
of mRNA-based therapeutics: (i) RNA molecules are susceptible to
intracellular and extracellular degradation, (ii) mRNA expression is
transient, and (iii) translational repression can occur in response to
RNA (77–81). Nevertheless, administration of naked antigen-
encoding mRNA can confer antitumor immunity when injected
directly into lymph nodes (82, 83). Immunogenicity and/or toxicity
of delivery compounds that could be used to deploy the vaccine by
more amenable routes poses an additional complication. Cationic
lipids, efficacious in some applications (29, 84), can be toxic when
used at higher doses and if incompletely complexed (85–87). Fur-
thermore, cationic lipids can be immunogenic, which can limit
transgene expression and raise safety concerns (88). IFN production
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
5
10
15
20
Percent survival
Days post-challenge
40 μg cOVA MDNP (0/10)
4.0 μg GP MDNP (10/10)
40 μg Naked GP (6/10)
40 μg GP MDNP (10/10)
0.4 μg GP MDNP (6/10)
40 μg GP MDNP, 1 dose (10/10)
A
B
C
IL-2
IFNγ
CD4+
CD8+
Unimmunized
VEEV MDNP
106
105
104
103
102
101
100
Titer
40 μg cOVA MDNP
40 μg Naked GP
0.4 μg GP MDNP
4.0 μg GP MDNP
40 μg GP MDNP
40 μg GP MDNP, 1 dose
Fig. 4.
VEEV-based MDNP immunization protects against lethal EBOV challenge. (A) EBOV-GP–specific T-cell responses assayed 9 d postimmunization with 40 μg
of VEEV-GP MDNP vaccine. Splenocytes were cultured ex vivo for 6 h in the absence or presence of the EBOV-GP–derived WE15 peptide, and IFN-γ and IL-2
expression in CD8+ and CD4+ cells was assayed by intracellular cytokine staining and FACS. One representative result of three similar independent experiments is
shown. (B) EBOV-GP specific IgG antibody titers were determined by ELISA from mice vaccinated with the indicated amounts of Ebola-GP MDNP, 40 μg of cOVA
MDNP, or 40 μg of naked VEE-GP on days 0 and 21. A single-dose, prime-only vaccination with 40 μg of EBOV-GP MDNP was also tested. Titers were determined by
reciprocal end-point dilution on serum from day 23 postvaccination. Red symbols denote animals that succumbed to EBOV disease. The dashed line represents the
assay’s level of detection. (C) Survival of animals following challenge with 1,000 pfu of mouse-adapted EBOV 28 d postvaccination. Control animals are denoted by
a solid gray line. Study was concluded 21 d postinfection (n = 10 animals per group).
Chahal et al.
PNAS
|
Published online July 5, 2016
|
E4137
APPLIED BIOLOGICAL
SCIENCES
ENGINEERING
PNAS PLUS
 in response to lipid-complexed mRNA can limit efficacy of mRNA-
based vaccines (34).
Various nanoparticle formats have demonstrated varying levels of
efficacy through intradermal (89), intrasplenic (90), subcutaneous
(34), intravenous (89, 91), and even intranasal (92) routes of ad-
ministration. Successful applications of RNA nanoparticle-based
vaccines that are independent of ex vivo transfection of antigen-
presenting cells are limited in animal models (reviewed in 32, 93),
and few such approaches have made it to clinical trials. Although
correlates of immune protection in humans have been reported,
clinical efficacy has been disappointing (94–97). Replicons based on
RNA viruses of the alphavirus family, such as SFV, VEEV, and
Sindbis virus (SIN), have served as vaccine vectors, usually de-
livered as replication-deficient pseudoviral particles generated
through complementation of structural genes in cell culture (98).
Previously, PRINT protein particles were explored for the
nonviral in vitro delivery of mRNA replicons (99). However, to our
knowledge, only two nonviral in vivo delivery methods have been
reported. These methods include a cationic nanoemulsion, com-
prising cationic lipid 1,2-Dioleoyl-3-trimethylammonium propane
emulsified with the constituents of the MF59 adjuvant (26, 28), and
a 1,2-dilinoleyloxy-3-dimethylaminopropane (DLinDMA)-centric
lipid nanoparticle (27, 29), both of which are five-component sys-
tems. Although these methods have been used as a synthetic de-
livery method for a chimeric SIN/VEEV replicon vaccine in vivo,
they have yet to show protection against lethal pathogen challenges
(27–29). In contrast, our MDNP approach, a fully synthetic three-
component system that uses ionizable delivery materials, lipid-
anchored PEG, and replicons, confers protection in mouse models
of lethal virus and protozoan infection. To our knowledge, this
system is the first fully synthetic RNA-based replicon system ca-
pable of generating protective immunity against a broad variety of
pathogens in lethal challenge models. This work also demonstrates
that the choice of RNA payload, be it conventional mRNA or
replicon, can significantly affect the intensity and persistence of
antigen expression (Figs. 1B, 2 A–D, 3A, and 4A, and Fig. S2).
The MDNP delivery technology does not generate a systemic
increase in inflammatory cytokine production, including IFN,
when using doses 500-fold higher than the doses required for
Ebola and T. gondii protection (49, 50), which is helpful because a
strong, early IFN response may impede alphavirus replication, and
thus limit the dose of antigen over time (35, 36). Furthermore,
complete protection in both disease models and prolonged antigen-
specific T-cell responses (at least 10 d postvaccination) were
achieved in the absence of adjuvants, which are commonly used to
increase the inflammatory response (13).
The lack of a systemic cytokine response to the nanoparticle
delivery vehicles may also prevent antivector immunity (32). Anti-
vector immunity occurs when the immune system responds to and
inactivates the delivery vehicle, which has been observed in, for
example, virus-mediated delivery platforms (100, 101). This prop-
erty may also obviate the need for homologous boosting, which has
been suggested to be necessary for rVSV-based systems during
recent human trials (102), which may enable repeated dosing of
patients for a variety of diseases using the same delivery technology.
To respond better to evolving pathogens, sudden outbreaks, and
individual patient needs, a flexible, safe, and efficient vaccine plat-
form amenable to rapid production near the point of care is required.
We believe the platform developed here has the potential to address
this need by providing a synthetic system that can (i) allow for very
rapid production following target identification; (ii) allow for minimal
postproduction purification; (iii) have low potential for contaminating
allergens; (iv) allow for relatively large payloads to permit for en-
capsulation of multiple antigen-producing RNAs, including replicons;
(v) not require the use of additional adjuvants that can induce un-
favorable immune responses (33), diminish endogenous mRNA
production, and reduce replicon self-amplification (34–36); (vi) in-
duce appropriate antibody production and CD8+ T-cell responses;
and (vii) generate protective immunity with a single dose to improve
patient compliance and reduce healthcare worker burden.
Materials and Methods
Cell Lines. All cells were maintained at 37 °C and 5% (vol/vol) CO2. BHK21 cells
were kindly provided by Tasuku Kitada, Weiss Laboratory, Massachusetts In-
stitute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge, MA, and maintained in Eagle’s min-
imal essential medium supplemented with 5% (vol/vol) FBS and 2 mM sodium
pyruvate. Unless otherwise specified, BHK21 cells growing in log phase were
transfected at 50–75% confluency using TransIT-mRNA transfection kits (Mirus
Bio) according to the manufacturer’s protocols. HeLa cells were maintained in
DMEM with 10% FBS.
Mice. Wild-type female C57BL/6 and BALB/c mice were obtained from The
Jackson Laboratory and used between 5 and 8 wk of age. C57BL/6 Ptprca mice
serving as recipients of adoptive cell transfer were maintained in-house and
used between 5 and 8 wk of age. OT-1/Rag1−/− mice were maintained in-house
by inbreeding of original founders purchased from Taconic. Mice were housed
at the Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research and were maintained
according to protocols approved by the MIT Committee on Animal Care.
A/WSN/33-infected animals were housed in an approved quarantine room at
the Whitehead Institute. For Ebola studies, female C57BL/6 mice, 8–12 wk of
age, were obtained from National Cancer Institute/Charles River Laboratories
and housed at the US Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases
(USAMRIID). Mice were vaccinated intramuscularly with the indicated MDNP
at day 0 and day 21.
Plasmids and Cloning. Conventional mRNAs, without chemical modification or
stabilizing UTRs, were produced by cloning the antigen of interest into the HindIII
and XbaI sites in the multiple cloning site of the mammalian expression plasmid
pcDNA3-EGFP (a gift from Doug Golenbock, University of Massachusetts Medical
School, Worcester, MA; Addgene plasmid no. 13031) after excision of the EGFP
coding sequence flanked by those restriction sequences. PCR products containing
a Kozak consensus sequence (103) followed by the desired antigen coding se-
quence were inserted using an In-Fusion (Clontech Laboratories) cloning kit.
VEEV replicon RNA vectors were produced by cloning antigens into the VEEV
replicon plasmid pTK126, based on the wild-type TRD strain, kindly provided by
Tasuku Kitada, Weiss Laboratory, MIT, Cambridge, MA, to replace the mVenus
coding sequence that is located downstream of the VEEV subgenomic promoter
sequence. Luciferase-expressing VEEV replicon pTK158 was also provided by
Fig. 5.
VEEV-based MDNP immunization protects against lethal T. gondii infection. (A) Survival curve of animals vaccinated with hexaplex MDNPs containing
GRA6, ROP2A, ROP18, SAG1, SAG2A, and AMA1 replicons. Control animals received MDNPs containing an irrelevant antigen (HA). All control animals (n = 5)
succumbed to infection, whereas all hexaplex-immunized animals survived (n = 5). (B) Relative body weights of mice (normalized to preinfection weights)
were tracked over time.
E4138
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1600299113
Chahal et al.
 Tasuku Kitada. SFV replicon RNA vectors were produced by cloning antigens into
a modified version of the plasmid pSFV1 (104), which was constructed by re-
striction digestion of pSFV1-GFP (kindly provided by Giuseppe Balistreri, Ari
Helenius Laboratory, Institute of Biochemistry, Eidgenössiche Technische Hoch-
schule Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland) at the HindIII and XbaI sites, followed by li-
gation of the PCR fragment spanning positions 8,145–9,226 with the addition
of a custom cloning site linker immediately upstream of the fragment to re-
construct the original plasmid, but carrying a unique BamHI restriction site in
place of the EGFP coding sequence that was downstream of the subgenomic
promoter, which served as the site of insertion for antigen coding sequences.
The cOVA coding sequence was amplified by PCR from the vector pCI-neo-
cOVA (64), (a gift from Maria Castro, University of California, Los Angeles;
Addgene plasmid no. 25097), and was cloned into pcDNA3, pTK126, or pSFV1-
JC1 using the In-Fusion cloning kit according to the manufacturer’s instruc-
tions. The influenza HA coding sequence was amplified from the commercially
available expression-ready influenza A H1N1 (A/WSN/33) cDNA clone, codon-
optimized, full-length ORF (product no. VG11692-C; Sino Biological). EBOV GP
coding sequences were amplified from pWRG7077-GP.
RNA Synthesis. RNAs for studies of luciferase and cOVA expression in tissue culture
and in vivo OT-1 stimulation were generated from linearized plasmid vectors by in
vitro transcription with MEGAscript kits (Life Technologies), 5′ capped to produce
cap-0 structured 7-methylguanylate 5′ ends using ScriptCap m7G Capping System
kits (CellScript), and 3′ poly(A)-tailed using A-Plus Poly(A) Polymerase Tailing kits
(CellScript, Inc.), all according to the manufacturers’ protocols. For all other ex-
periments, replicon RNAs were synthesized essentially the same way, except for
inclusion of 2′-O-methyltransferase (from ScriptCap 2′-O-methyltransferase kits;
CellScript, according to the manufacturer’s protocol) in the capping step to
methylate the cap-adjacent 5′ nucleotide of the RNA, thus producing a cap-1
structure and ensuring more efficient first-round endogenous translation. Con-
ventional mRNA was synthesized from the pcDNA3-derived plasmids carrying the
antigen cloned into the HindIII/XbaI sites using T7 RNA polymerase after lineari-
zation with SacI. These mRNAs contained virtually no 5′ or 3′ UTR sequences, save
for the short vector-derived space intervening between the T7 promoter and
Kozak consensus sequence (103) at the start codon, and between the stop codon
and a restriction site downstream of the SacI restriction site used for linearization.
VEEV-based RNA replicon RNAs were synthesized from the vectors described
above after linearization with the restriction enzyme I-SceI. I-SceI cuts downstream
of the VEEV 3’ UTR and short poly(A) tract of 40 bp, and upstream of a T7 RNA
polymerase promoter element preceding the VEEV 5’ UTR. SFV-based RNA
replicons were constructed from the pSFV1-derived plasmids using Sp6 RNA po-
lymerase transcription after linearization with SpeI.
Tissue Culture Protein Expression Assays. Luciferase gene expression in nano-
particle-treated cells was measured using the Steady-Glo Luciferase Assay
System (Promega Corporation), according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
Expression of cOVA, influenza HA, and EBOV GP in RNA-transfected BHK21
cells was assayed by immunoblotting. Cells were lysed, and proteins were
extracted in RIPA-benzonase buffer [20 mM Tris (pH 8), 137 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM
EDTA, 10% glycerol, 1% Nonidet P-40, 0.1% SDS, 1% deoxycholate, 2 mM
MgCl2, 25 U/μL benzonase (EMD Millipore), and protease inhibitors (cOmplete,
Mini, EDTA-free; Roche Life Science, used according to the manufacturer’s
recommendations)] and separated by SDS/PAGE before transfer to PVDF
membranes for immunoblotting. Membranes were blocked with 10% milk in
TBS-T and incubated with the following antibodies for detection in blocking
buffer for 2–4 h at room temperature: for cOVA detection, rabbit polyclonal to
OVA and HRP-conjugated, ab20415 (Abcam) diluted 1:3,000; for HA detection,
single-chain alpaca nanobody VHH68 (70) diluted 1:1,000 followed by anti–
penta-His HRP conjugate (Qiagen) diluted 1:5,000; and for EBOV GP detection,
mouse monoclonal 6D8 (105) diluted 1:1,000 followed by anti-mouse HRP di-
luted 1:10,000. Enhanced luminol-based detection was performed using
Western Lightning-ECL kits (PerkinElmer). Cell surface expression of influenza
HA was assayed by dissociation of a transfected cell monolayer by trypsiniza-
tion, washing once in growth medium, and staining for 15 min on ice with
Alexa Fluor 647-conjugated VHH68 in PBS. Cells were washed twice with PBS,
and surface staining was measured by FACS on a BD LSR II Flow Cytometer
(BD Biosciences).
Modified Dendrimer Synthesis. 2-Tridecyloxirane was synthesized by the drop-
wise addition of 1-pentadecene (TCI) to a twofold molar excess of 3-chloro-
perbenzoic acid (Sigma) in dichloromethane (BDH) under constant stirring at
room temperature. After reacting for 8 h, the reaction mixture was washed
with equal volumes of supersaturated aqueous sodium thiosulfate solution
(Sigma) three times. After each wash, the organic layer was collected using a
separation funnel. Similarly, the organic layer was then washed three times
with 1 M NaOH (Sigma). Anhydrous sodium sulfate was added to the organic
phase and stirred overnight to remove any remaining water. The organic layer
was concentrated under vacuum to produce a slightly yellow, transparent oily
liquid. This liquid was vacuum-distilled (∼6.5 Pa, ∼80 °C) to produce clear,
colorless 2-tridecyloxirane. Generation 1 poly(amido amine) dendrimer with an
ethylenediamine core (Dendritech) was then reacted with 2-tridecyloxirane.
The stoichiometric amount of 2-tridecyloxirane was equal to 1.5-fold the total
number of amine reactive sites within the dendrimer (two sites for primary
amines and one site for secondary amines). Reactants were combined in
cleaned 20-mL amber glass vials. Vials were filled with 200-proof ethanol as
the solvent and reacted at 90 °C for 7 d in the dark under constant stirring to
ensure the completion of the reaction. The crude product was mounted on a
Celite 545 (VWR) precolumn and purified via flash chromatography using a
CombiFlash Rf machine with a RediSep Gold Resolution silica column (Tele-
dyne Isco) with gradient elution from 100% CH2Cl2 to 75:22:3 CH2Cl2/MeOH/
NH4OHaq (by volume) over 40 min. TLC was used to test the eluted fractions for
the presence of modified dendrimers using an 87.5:11:1.5 CH2Cl2/MeOH/
NH4OHaq (by volume) solvent system. Modified dendrimers with different
levels of substitution appeared as a distinct band on the TLC plate. Fractions
containing unreacted 2-tridecyloxirane and poly(amido amine) dendrimer
were discarded. Remaining fractions were combined, dried under ramping
high vacuum for 12 h, and stored under a dry and inert atmosphere until used.
All products contained a mixture of conformational isomers.
Nanoparticle Formulation. Nanoparticles were formulated using a microfluidic
mixing device as described previously (49, 50). Briefly, modified dendrimer and
1,2-dimyristoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine-N-[methoxy(polyethylene
glycol)-2000] (Avanti Polar Lipids) were combined in ethanol. RNA was diluted
with ultraPure, DNase/RNase-free, endotoxin-free distilled water (Invitrogen)
and sterile 100 mM (pH 3.0) QB Citrate Buffer (Teknova) to a final citrate
concentration of 10 mM. The ethanol and citrate streams were loaded into
gas-tight glass syringes (Hamilton), and using a microfluidic mixing device, the
ethanol and citrate streams were combined and mixed in a 1:3 volumetric flow
rate ratio (combined total flow rate equal to 5.3 mL/min) to produce nano-
particles. Using glassware washed for 24 h in 1.0 M NaOH (Sigma) for endo-
toxin removal and sterilized in a steam autoclave, nanoparticles were dialyzed
against sterile, endotoxin-free PBS using 20,000 molecular weight cut-off Slide-
A-Lyzer G2 dialysis cassettes. Dialyzed nanoparticles were sterile-filtered using
0.2 μm poly(ether sulfone) filters (Genesee Scientific) and characterized with
a Zetasizer NanoZS machine (Malvern). The concentration of RNA was de-
termined by theoretical mass balance calculations and confirmed by Nano-
Drop measurement (Thermo Scientific). The final nanoparticles contained an
11.5:1:2.3 mass ratio of modified dendrimer to 1,2-dimyristoyl-sn-glycero-3-
phosphoethanolamine-N-[methoxy(polyethylene glycol)-2000] to RNA.
Real-Time Analysis of Nanoparticle Disassembly. FRET was used to estimate the
stability of nanoparticles under simulated intramuscular conditions. Desalted,
HPLC-purified RNA duplexes labeled at the 5′ end of the sense strand with either
Alexa Fluor 594 or Alexa Fluor 647 dye were purchased from Integrated DNA
Technologies. Nanoparticles with equimolar amounts of both types of RNA were
formulated and diluted to a final RNA concentration of 2 μg/mL. In quadruplets,
100 μL of the diluted nanoparticles was added to each well of an opaque black
96-well plate. One hundred microliters of 50% AB human serum (Invitrogen),
which had been diluted in PBS, was added to each well. Negative control wells
contained free siRNA. Positive control wells contained polyethylenimine (PEI)
nanoparticles. PEI nanoparticles were formed by the repeat pipetting of 800 MW
PEI (Sigma) with RNA in a 5:1 PEI-to-RNA mass ratio in a 10 wt% sucrose solution.
The plate was sealed with a clear adhesive plate seal and placed into a Tecan
Infinite M200 microplate reader set to 37 °C. To measure FRET, samples were
excited at 540 nm and the fluorescent intensity was read at 690 nm and 620 nm
every 5 min for 2 h. FRET was calculated as the 690-nm/620-nm fluorescent in-
tensity signal ratio. FRET values were normalized to the values of the completely
ruptured nanoparticle, which were determined after adding octyl β-D-glucopyr-
anoside (Sigma) to a final in-well concentration of 2 wt% and mixing for
1 h at 37 °C.
In Vivo Experiments. All animal studies were approved by the MIT, Whitehead
Institute, and USAMRIID Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees and
were also consistent with all applicable local, state, and federal regulations.
Adoptive Transfer and OT-1 Proliferation Assays. OT-1 cells were isolated from
the mesenteric and inguinal lymph nodes and spleens of transgenic 6- to 12-wk-
old OT-1/Rag1−/− C57BL/6 mice and resuspended in PBS. The cells were labeled
for 5 min at room temperature with CFSE (Sigma) at a final concentration of
5 μM, and then washed once in RPMI supplemented with 10% FBS before
Chahal et al.
PNAS
|
Published online July 5, 2016
|
E4139
APPLIED BIOLOGICAL
SCIENCES
ENGINEERING
PNAS PLUS
 resuspension in PBS for injection. Wild-type CD45.1 mice at 4–8 wk of age re-
ceived 1.5 million labeled OT-1 cells by i.v. injection. Four days after adoptive
transfer, inguinal lymph nodes were dissected and lymphocytes were isolated for
FACS analysis. Cells were stained with 7-AAD (BD Biosciences), Alexa Fluor 700- or
APC-conjugated anti-CD45.1, phycoerythrin (PE)-Cy7– or APC-Cy7–conjugated
anti-CD45.2, and Pacific Blue- or PE-conjugated anti-CD8. Stained samples were
analyzed by FACS on a BD LSR II Flow Cytometer (BD Biosciences).
T-Cell Activation Assay. Splenocytes were isolated from mice and plated at a density
of 10 million cells per milliliter in 96-well culture plates in the presence of growth
medium [all components were from Life Technologies unless otherwise indicated:
RPMI 1620 with GlutaMAX supplemented with 8% FBS, 1 mM nonessential amino
acids, 1 mM sodium pyruvate, 10 mM Hepes, 50 μM 2-mercaptoethanol (Sigma), and
penicillin/streptomycin] only or 2 μg/mL OVA-derived peptide in growth medium.
Peptides used were the immunodominant H-2Kb–restricted MHC class I OVA-derived
peptide SIINFEKL (InvivoGen) or the H-2 I-Ab MHC class II-restricted pep-
tide ISQAVHAAHAEINEAGR (InvivoGen). After 5 d in culture, the concentration of
1:20 diluted supernatant IFN-γ was quantified using IFN-γ ELISA kits (BD Biosciences).
Anti-HA IgG ELISA. High-binding, surface-treated, polystyrene 96-well micro-
plates (Corning) were coated overnight at 4 °C with 0.5 μg/mL recombinant
influenza A H1N1 WSN/33 protein (Sino Biological, Inc.) in PBS. Plates were
blocked for 2 h with blocking buffer (PBS with 10% FBS) at room temperature,
serum was applied to wells in duplicate at a 1:100 dilution in blocking buffer,
and wells were incubated for 2 h at room temperature. Plates were washed
with wash buffer (PBS with 0.05% Tween-20) and incubated at room tem-
perature with anti-mouse IgG-HRP (GE Healthcare) diluted 1:3,000 in blocking
buffer for 1 h. After five rounds of washing with wash buffer, plates were de-
veloped with TMB substrate (Sigma) for 20–30 min, and the reaction was stop-
ped by the addition of 1 vol of 1 M HCl before reading absorbance at 450 nm.
T-Cell Intracellular Cytokine Staining Assay. Splenocytes were isolated from
mice 9 d after immunization with 40 μg MDNP and cultured in growth medium
[all components were from Life Technologies unless otherwise indicated: RPMI
1620 with GlutaMAX supplemented with 8% FBS, 1 mM nonessential amino
acids, 1 mM sodium pyruvate, 10 mM Hepes, 50 μM 2-mercaptoethanol
(Sigma), and penicillin/streptomycin]. Cytokine expression in response to
stimulation with the immunodominant H-2Kb–restricted MHC class I OVA-
derived peptide SIINFEKL (InvivoGen) or EBOV GP-derived WE15 peptide
(WIPYFGPAAEGIYTE) was assayed by intracellular cytokine staining and FACS
analysis essentially as described previously (71). Briefly, 1 × 107 splenocytes per
milliliter were cultured in the presence of IL-2 (10 U/mL), anti-CD28 + anti-
CD49d (0.5 μg/mL each; BioLegend), and Brefeldin A (2 μg/mL final; Sigma)
with or without 2 μg/mL peptide. The IL-2, anti-CD28, and anti-CD49d were
omitted for stimulation with SIINFEKL, because the splenic response to this
peptide in OVA-vaccinated mice is apparent even without exogenous cos-
timulation. Cultures stimulated nonspecifically with 0.1 μg/mL PMA and 1 μg/mL
ionomycin were used as single-color antibody staining controls for FACS
analysis. After 6 h in culture, cells were stained using a BD Cytofix/Cytoperm kit
(BD Biosciences) according to the manufacturer’s protocol with FITC-conju-
gated anti-CD8 (BioLegend), APC-conjugated anti-CD4 (BioLegend), PE-conju-
gated anti–IFN-γ (BD Biosciences), and Pacific Blue-conjugated IL-2 (BioLegend).
Stained samples were analyzed by FACS on a BD LSR II Flow Cytometer
(BD Biosciences).
Influenza Challenge. Immunized mice were inoculated by intranasal adminis-
tration of a lethal dose [5 × 104 chicken embryo infectious dose 50% (CEID50)]
of influenza A/NWS/33 (H1N1; American Type Culture Collection), which, in
our hands, kills 100% of infected BALB/c mice in under 9 d. Body weight was
monitored daily, and mice were euthanized when over 20% loss was observed.
Mice were considered recovered when preinfection body weight was sur-
passed, and their health was monitored for an additional 3 wk to ensure no
clinical signs of infection were observed.
EBOV GP Serum ELISA. Blood was collected at the indicated time points in
serum separation tubes. ELISA plates were coated at 4 °C overnight with
recombinant mammalian Ebola GP at 2 μg/mL in PBS. Plates were washed
three times with PBS plus 0.1% Tween-20 (PBS-T) and then blocked for 2 h
at room temperature with PBS-T 5% nonfat milk. Serum was diluted by
half-log dilutions starting at 1:100 and incubated for 1 h on GP-coated
plates. Plates were then washed three times with PBS-T, incubated with
the indicated secondary HRP-antibody for 45 min, and then washed three
times with PBS-T. ELISA was developed using TMB substrate/stop solution
and measured on a Tecan plate reader. Absorbance cutoff was determined
as background + 0.2 OD.
EBOV Challenge. Mice were inoculated with a target titer of 1,000 pfu of ma-
EBOV (72). All studies were conducted in the USAMRIID Biosafety Level 4
containment facility. Beginning on day 0 and continuing for the duration of
the in-life phase, clinical observations were recorded and animals were closely
monitored for disease progression. Moribund animals were euthanized based
on institutionally approved clinical scoring.
T. gondii Challenge. The wild-type PRU-delta HXGPRT strain of T. gondii parasites,
a gift from the Jeroen J. P. Saeij laboratory, University of California, Davis, CA,
were prepared as previously described (106). Mice were inoculated with 105
tachyzoites. Animals were monitored for clinical signs of sickness, including
weight loss, poor grooming, lethargy, squinting, dehydration, and drops in body
temperature. Mice were euthanized if they experienced over 10% weight loss,
severe dehydration, severe lethargy, or significant drops in body temperature.
Electrospray Ionization. Electrospray ionization analysis of the modified
dendrimer nanomaterial was performed as a service provided by the Swanson
Biotechnology Center at MIT.
Statistical Analysis. Means were compared by ANOVA with Tukey multiple
comparison corrections. For survival curves, the Mantel–Cox test was used. P
values below 0.05 were considered statistically significant.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank David Langan and Jesse Steffens (US Army
Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases) for assistance in Ebola virus
vaccination/challenge studies, and Nicki Watson (W. M. Keck Microscopy
Facility) for electron microcopy imagery. Electrospray ionization analysis was
provided by the Koch Institute’s Swanson Biotechnology Center at MIT. Fund-
ing support was provided by the Department of Defense Office of Congres-
sionally Directed Medical Research’s Joint Warfighter Medical Research
Program. Partial support was provided by MediVector, Inc. Grant OSP 30-
1765-9901, Ragon Institute Innovation Grant OSP 39-1788-0101, and the De-
fense Threat Reduction Agency/Joint Science and Technology Office programs
in vaccines and pretreatments.
1. Arnon R, Ben-Yedidia T (2003) Old and new vaccine approaches. Int Immunopharmacol
3(8):1195–1204.
2. Azad N, Rojanasakul Y (2006) Vaccine delivery—Current trends and future. Curr
Drug Deliv 3(2):137–146.
3. Koblin BA, et al.; NIAID HIV Vaccine Trials Network (2011) Safety and immunogenicity of an
HIV adenoviral vector boost after DNA plasmid vaccine prime by route of administration: A
randomized clinical trial. PLoS One 6(9):e24517.
4. Pittman PR (2002) Aluminum-containing vaccine associated adverse events: Role of
route of administration and gender. Vaccine 20(Suppl 3):S48–S50.
5. Scheiermann J, Klinman DM (2014) Clinical evaluation of CpG oligonucleotides as
adjuvants for vaccines targeting infectious diseases and cancer. Vaccine 32(48):
6377–6389.
6. Aucouturier J, Ascarateil S, Dupuis L (2006) The use of oil adjuvants in therapeutic
vaccines. Vaccine 24(Suppl 2):44–45.
7. Mulligan MJ, et al.; DMID 13-0032 H7N9 Vaccine Study Group (2014) Serological
responses to an avian influenza A/H7N9 vaccine mixed at the point-of-use with MF59
adjuvant: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA 312(14):1409–1419.
8. Cox RJ, et al. (2011) Evaluation of a virosomal H5N1 vaccine formulated with Matrix
M™ adjuvant in a phase I clinical trial. Vaccine 29(45):8049–8059.
9. Mata E, Salvador A, Igartua M, Hernández RM, Pedraz JL (2013) Malaria vaccine adjuvants:
Latest update and challenges in preclinical and clinical research. BioMed Res Int 2013:282913.
10. Rizza P, Capone I, Moretti F, Proietti E, Belardelli F (2011) IFN-α as a vaccine adjuvant:
Recent insights into the mechanisms and perspectives for its clinical use. Expert Rev
Vaccines 10(4):487–498.
11. Stephenson R, You H, McManus DP, Toth I (2014) Schistosome vaccine adjuvants in
preclinical and clinical research. Vaccines (Basel) 2(3):654–685.
12. Innes EA, Bartley PM, Maley S, Katzer F, Buxton D (2009) Veterinary vaccines against
Toxoplasma gondii. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz 104(2):246–251.
13. Schijns VE, Lavelle EC (2011) Trends in vaccine adjuvants. Expert Rev Vaccines 10(4):
539–550.
14. Plotkin SA, Orenstein WA, Offit PA (2012) Vaccines (Elsevier, Amsterdam), 6th Ed.
15. Rappuoli R, Pizza M, Del Giudice G, De Gregorio E (2014) Vaccines, new opportu-
nities for a new society. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111(34):12288–12293.
16. Rock KL, Goldberg AL (1999) Degradation of cell proteins and the generation of
MHC class I-presented peptides. Annu Rev Immunol 17:739–779.
17. Lauring AS, Jones JO, Andino R (2010) Rationalizing the development of live attenu-
ated virus vaccines. Nat Biotechnol 28(6):573–579.
18. MacGregor RR, et al. (1998) First human trial of a DNA-based vaccine for treatment
of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection: Safety and host response. J Infect
Dis 178(1):92–100.
19. Tang DC, DeVit M, Johnston SA (1992) Genetic immunization is a simple method for
eliciting an immune response. Nature 356(6365):152–154.
E4140
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1600299113
Chahal et al.
 20. Fynan EF, et al. (1993) DNA vaccines: Protective immunizations by parenteral, mucosal,
and gene-gun inoculations. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 90(24):11478–11482.
21. Bagarazzi ML, et al. (2012) Immunotherapy against HPV16/18 generates potent TH1
and cytotoxic cellular immune responses. Sci Transl Med 4(155):155ra138.
22. Ferraro B, et al. (2011) Clinical applications of DNA vaccines: Current progress. Clin
Infect Dis 53(3):296–302.
23. Wang Z, et al. (2004) Detection of integration of plasmid DNA into host genomic
DNA following intramuscular injection and electroporation. Gene Ther 11(8):
711–721.
24. Petsch B, et al. (2012) Protective efficacy of in vitro synthesized, specific mRNA
vaccines against influenza A virus infection. Nat Biotechnol 30(12):1210–1216.
25. Kallen K-J, et al. (2013) A novel, disruptive vaccination technology: Self-adjuvanted
RNActive(�) vaccines. Hum Vaccin Immunother 9(10):2263–2276.
26. Brito LA, et al. (2014) A cationic nanoemulsion for the delivery of next-generation
RNA vaccines. Mol Ther 22(12):2118–2129.
27. Hekele A, et al. (2013) Rapidly produced SAM(�) vaccine against H7N9 influenza is
immunogenic in mice. Emerg Microbes Infect 2(8):e52.
28. Bogers WM, et al. (2015) Potent immune responses in rhesus macaques induced by
nonviral delivery of a self-amplifying RNA vaccine expressing HIV type 1 envelope
with a cationic nanoemulsion. J Infect Dis 211(6):947–955.
29. Geall AJ, et al. (2012) Nonviral delivery of self-amplifying RNA vaccines. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 109(36):14604–14609.
30. Perri S, et al. (2003) An alphavirus replicon particle chimera derived from venezuelan
equine encephalitis and sindbis viruses is a potent gene-based vaccine delivery
vector. J Virol 77(19):10394–10403.
31. Ljungberg K, Liljeström P (2015) Self-replicating alphavirus RNA vaccines. Expert Rev
Vaccines 14(2):177–194.
32. Ulmer JB, Mason PW, Geall A, Mandl CW (2012) RNA-based vaccines. Vaccine 30(30):
4414–4418.
33. Gupta RK, et al. (1993) Adjuvants–a balance between toxicity and adjuvanticity.
Vaccine 11(3):293–306.
34. Pollard C, et al. (2013) Type I IFN counteracts the induction of antigen-specific immune
responses by lipid-based delivery of mRNA vaccines. Mol Ther 21(1):251–259.
35. White LJ, Wang JG, Davis NL, Johnston RE (2001) Role of alpha/beta interferon in
Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus pathogenesis: Effect of an attenuating mutation
in the 5′ untranslated region. J Virol 75(8):3706–3718.
36. Zhang Y, Burke CW, Ryman KD, Klimstra WB (2007) Identification and characterization
of interferon-induced proteins that inhibit alphavirus replication. J Virol 81(20):
11246–11255.
37. D’Alessio G (2011) The superfamily of vertebrate-secreted ribonucleases. Ribonucleases,
Nucleic Acids and Molecular Biology, ed Nicholson AW (Springer, Heidelberg), pp 1–34.
38. Thess A, et al. (2015) Sequence-engineered mRNA without chemical nucleoside
modifications enables an effective protein therapy in large animals. Mol Ther 23(9):
1456–1464.
39. Kariko K, Muramatsu H, Keller JM, Weissman D (2012) Increased erythropoiesis in
mice injected with submicrogram quantities of pseudouridine-containing mRNA
encoding erythropoietin. Mol Ther 20(5):948–953.
40. Wang Z, Tiruppathi C, Minshall RD, Malik AB (2009) Size and dynamics of caveolae
studied using nanoparticles in living endothelial cells. ACS Nano 3(12):4110–4116.
41. Maeda H, Fang J, Inutsuka T, Kitamoto Y (2003) Vascular permeability enhancement
in solid tumor: Various factors, mechanisms involved and its implications. Int
Immunopharmacol 3(3):319–328.
42. Schwartz S, et al. (2014) Transcriptome-wide mapping reveals widespread dynamic-regulated
pseudouridylation of ncRNA and mRNA. Cell 159(1):148–162.
43. Ganot P, Bortolin ML, Kiss T (1997) Site-specific pseudouridine formation in preribosomal
RNA is guided by small nucleolar RNAs. Cell 89(5):799–809.
44. Cantara WA, et al. (2011) The RNA Modification Database, RNAMDB: 2011 update.
Nucleic Acids Res 39(Database issue):D195–D201.
45. Helm M (2006) Post-transcriptional nucleotide modification and alternative folding
of RNA. Nucleic Acids Res 34(2):721–733.
46. Yin H, et al. (2014) Non-viral vectors for gene-based therapy. Nat Rev Genet 15(8):
541–555.
47. Whitehead KA, et al. (2014) Degradable lipid nanoparticles with predictable in vivo
siRNA delivery activity. Nat Commun 5:4277.
48. Wan C, Allen TM, Cullis PR (2014) Lipid nanoparticle delivery systems for siRNA-based
therapeutics. Drug Deliv Transl Res 4(1):74–83.
49. Khan OF, et al. (2014) Ionizable amphiphilic dendrimer-based nanomaterials with
alkyl-chain-substituted amines for tunable siRNA delivery to the liver endothelium in
vivo. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 53(52):14397–14401.
50. Khan OF, et al. (2015) Dendrimer-inspired nanomaterials for the in vivo delivery of
siRNA to lung vasculature. Nano Lett 15(5):3008–3016.
51. Duncan R, Ringsdorf H, Satchi-Fainaro R (2006) Polymer therapeutics: Polymers as
drugs, drug and protein conjugates and gene delivery systems: Past, present and
future opportunities. Polymer Therapeutics I, Advances in Polymer Science, eds
Satchi-Fainaro R, Duncan R (Springer, Berlin), Vol 192, pp 1–8.
52. National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (2015) NIAID Emerging Infectious
Diseases/Pathogens. Available at https://www.niaid.nih.gov/topics/biodefenserelated/
biodefense/pages/cata.aspx. Accessed June 14, 2016.
53. Partridge J, Kieny MP; World Health Organization H1N1 influenza vaccine Task Force
(2010) Global production of seasonal and pandemic (H1N1) influenza vaccines in
2009-2010 and comparison with previous estimates and global action plan targets.
Vaccine 28(30):4709–4712.
54. Gerdil C (2003) The annual production cycle for influenza vaccine. Vaccine 21(16):
1776–1779.
55. Kilbourne ED, et al. (1971) Related studies of a recombinant influenza-virus vaccine.
I. Derivation and characterization of virus and vaccine. J Infect Dis 124(5):449–462.
56. Chen Z, et al. (2010) Generation of live attenuated novel influenza virus A/California/
7/09 (H1N1) vaccines with high yield in embryonated chicken eggs. J Virol 84(1):
44–51.
57. Biesova Z, et al. (2009) Preparation, characterization, and immunogenicity in mice of a
recombinant influenza H5 hemagglutinin vaccine against the avian H5N1 A/Vietnam/
1203/2004 influenza virus. Vaccine 27(44):6234–6238.
58. Wurm FM (2004) Production of recombinant protein therapeutics in cultivated
mammalian cells. Nat Biotechnol 22(11):1393–1398.
59. Chu L, Robinson DK (2001) Industrial choices for protein production by large-scale
cell culture. Curr Opin Biotechnol 12(2):180–187.
60. Li M, Qiu YX (2013) A review on current downstream bio-processing technology of
vaccine products. Vaccine 31(9):1264–1267.
61. Lua LH, et al. (2014) Bioengineering virus-like particles as vaccines. Biotechnol
Bioeng 111(3):425–440.
62. Boussif O, et al. (1995) A versatile vector for gene and oligonucleotide transfer into
cells in culture and in vivo: Polyethylenimine. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 92(16):
7297–7301.
63. Brito LA, Singh M (2011) Acceptable levels of endotoxin in vaccine formulations
during preclinical research. J Pharm Sci 100(1):34–37.
64. Yang J, et al. (2010) Kupfer-type immunological synapse characteristics do not
predict anti-brain tumor cytolytic T-cell function in vivo. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
107(10):4716–4721.
65. Rötzschke O, et al. (1991) Exact prediction of a natural T cell epitope. Eur J Immunol
21(11):2891–2894.
66. Leitner WW, et al. (2003) Alphavirus-based DNA vaccine breaks immunological tolerance by
activating innate antiviral pathways. Nat Med 9(1):33–39.
67. Leitner WW, Bergmann-Leitner ES, Hwang LN, Restifo NP (2006) Type I Interferons
are essential for the efficacy of replicase-based DNA vaccines. Vaccine 24(24):
5110–5118.
68. Levine B, et al. (1993) Conversion of lytic to persistent alphavirus infection by the bcl-2
cellular oncogene. Nature 361(6414):739–742.
69. Ying H, et al. (1999) Cancer therapy using a self-replicating RNA vaccine. Nat Med
5(7):823–827.
70. Dougan SK, et al. (2013) Antigen-specific B-cell receptor sensitizes B cells to infection
by influenza virus. Nature 503(7476):406–409.
71. Martins KA, et al. (2014) Toll-like receptor agonist augments virus-like particle-mediated
protection from Ebola virus with transient immune activation. PLoS One 9(2):e89735.
72. Kuhn JH, et al. (2013) Virus nomenclature below the species level: A standardized
nomenclature for laboratory animal-adapted strains and variants of viruses assigned
to the family Filoviridae. Arch Virol 158(6):1425–1432.
73. Zhang NZ, Chen J, Wang M, Petersen E, Zhu XQ (2013) Vaccines against Toxoplasma
gondii: New developments and perspectives. Expert Rev Vaccines 12(11):1287–1299.
74. Hoffmann S, Batz MB, Morris JG, Jr (2012) Annual cost of illness and quality-adjusted
life year losses in the United States due to 14 foodborne pathogens. J Food Prot
75(7):1292–1302.
75. Srivastava IK, Liu MA (2003) Gene vaccines. Ann Intern Med 138(7):550–559.
76. Van Lint S, et al. (2015) The ReNAissanCe of mRNA-based cancer therapy. Expert Rev
Vaccines 14(2):235–251.
77. Baum A, García-Sastre A (2010) Induction of type I interferon by RNA viruses: Cellular
receptors and their substrates. Amino Acids 38(5):1283–1299.
78. Heil F, et al. (2004) Species-specific recognition of single-stranded RNA via toll-like
receptor 7 and 8. Science 303(5663):1526–1529.
79. Karikó K, Ni H, Capodici J, Lamphier M, Weissman D (2004) mRNA is an endogenous
ligand for Toll-like receptor 3. J Biol Chem 279(13):12542–12550.
80. Pichlmair A, et al. (2006) RIG-I-mediated antiviral responses to single-stranded RNA
bearing 5′-phosphates. Science 314(5801):997–1001.
81. Levin DH, Petryshyn R, London IM (1981) Characterization of purified double-
stranded RNA-activated eIF-2 alpha kinase from rabbit reticulocytes. J Biol Chem
256(14):7638–7641.
82. Kreiter S, et al. (2010) Intranodal vaccination with naked antigen-encoding RNA
elicits potent prophylactic and therapeutic antitumoral immunity. Cancer Res 70(22):
9031–9040.
83. Van Lint S, et al. (2012) Preclinical evaluation of TriMix and antigen mRNA-based
antitumor therapy. Cancer Res 72(7):1661–1671.
84. Bogers WM, et al. (2014) Potent immune responses in rhesus macaques induced by
nonviral delivery of a self-amplifying RNA vaccine expressing HIV type 1 envelope
with a cationic nanoemulsion. J Infect Dis 211(6):947–955.
85. Hofland HE, Shephard L, Sullivan SM (1996) Formation of stable cationic lipid/DNA
complexes for gene transfer. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93(14):7305–7309.
86. Cullis PR, Chonn A, Semple SC (1998) Interactions of liposomes and lipid-based carrier
systems with blood proteins: Relation to clearance behaviour in vivo. Adv Drug Deliv
Rev 32(1-2):3–17.
87. Lv H, Zhang S, Wang B, Cui S, Yan J (2006) Toxicity of cationic lipids and cationic
polymers in gene delivery. J Control Release 114(1):100–109.
88. Henriksen-Lacey M, et al. (2011) Comparison of the depot effect and immunogenicity of li-
posomes based on dimethyldioctadecylammonium (DDA), 3β-[N-(N′,N′-Dimethylamino-
ethane)carbomyl] cholesterol (DC-Chol), and 1,2-Dioleoyl-3-trimethylammonium propane
(DOTAP): Prolonged liposome retention mediates stronger Th1 responses. Mol Pharm 8(1):
153–161.
89. Hoerr I, Obst R, Rammensee HG, Jung G (2000) In vivo application of RNA leads to
induction of specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes and antibodies. Eur J Immunol 30(1):1–7.
90. Zhou WZ, et al. (1999) RNA melanoma vaccine: Induction of antitumor immunity by
human glycoprotein 100 mRNA immunization. Hum Gene Ther 10(16):2719–2724.
Chahal et al.
PNAS
|
Published online July 5, 2016
|
E4141
APPLIED BIOLOGICAL
SCIENCES
ENGINEERING
PNAS PLUS
 91. Mockey M, et al. (2007) mRNA-based cancer vaccine: Prevention of B16 melanoma
progression and metastasis by systemic injection of MART1 mRNA histidylated lip-
opolyplexes. Cancer Gene Ther 14(9):802–814.
92. Phua KK, Staats HF, Leong KW, Nair SK (2014) Intranasal mRNA nanoparticle vacci-
nation induces prophylactic and therapeutic anti-tumor immunity. Sci Rep 4:5128.
93. Weiner DB (2013) RNA-based vaccination: Sending a strong message. Mol Ther 21(3):
506–508.
94. Weide B, et al. (2008) Results of the first phase I/II clinical vaccination trial with direct
injection of mRNA. J Immunother 31(2):180–188.
95. Weide B, et al. (2009) Direct injection of protamine-protected mRNA: Results of a phase
1/2 vaccination trial in metastatic melanoma patients. J Immunother 32(5):498–507.
96. Rittig SM, et al. (2011) Intradermal vaccinations with RNA coding for TAA generate
CD8+ and CD4+ immune responses and induce clinical benefit in vaccinated patients.
Mol Ther 19(5):990–999.
97. Kreiter S, Diken M, Selmi A, Türeci Ö, Sahin U (2011) Tumor vaccination using
messenger RNA: Prospects of a future therapy. Curr Opin Immunol 23(3):399–406.
98. Lundstrom K (2015) Alphaviruses in gene therapy. Viruses 7(5):2321–2333.
99. Xu J, et al. (2013) RNA replicon delivery via lipid-complexed PRINT protein particles.
Mol Pharm 10(9):3366–3374.
100. Small JC, Ertl HCJ (2011) Viruses—From pathogens to vaccine carriers. Curr Opin Virol
1(4):241–245.
101. Lopez-Gordo E, Podgorski II, Downes N, Alemany R (2014) Circumventing antivector
immunity: Potential use of nonhuman adenoviral vectors. Hum Gene Ther 25(4):
285–300.
102. Fuchs JD, et al.; HVTN 090 Study Group and the National Institutes of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases HIV Vaccine Trials Network (2015) First-in-human evaluation of
the safety and immunogenicity of a recombinant vesicular stomatitis virus human
immunodeficiency virus-1 gag vaccine (HVTN 090). Open Forum Infect Dis 2(3):
ofv082.
103. Kozak M (1987) An analysis of 5′-noncoding sequences from 699 vertebrate messenger
RNAs. Nucleic Acids Res 15(20):8125–8148.
104. Liljeström P, Garoff H (1991) A new generation of animal cell expression vectors
based on the Semliki Forest virus replicon. Biotechnology (N Y) 9(12):1356–1361.
105. Wilson JA, et al. (2000) Epitopes involved in antibody-mediated protection from
Ebola virus. Science 287(5458):1664–1666.
106. Sidik SM, Hackett CG, Tran F, Westwood NJ, Lourido S (2014) Efficient genome engineering
of Toxoplasma gondii using CRISPR/Cas9. PLoS One 9(6):e100450.
E4142
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1600299113
Chahal et al.
