 A human neurodevelopmental model for Williams syndrome
Thanathom Chailangkarn1,2,¶, Cleber A. Trujillo1,¶, Beatriz C. Freitas1, Branka Hrvoj-Mihic3, 
Roberto H. Herai1,4, Diana X. Yu5, Timothy T. Brown6,7,8, Maria C. N. Marchetto5, Cedric 
Bardy5, Lauren McHenry5, Lisa Stefanacci1,§, Anna Järvinen9, Yvonne M. Searcy9, Michelle 
DeWitt9, Wenny Wong9, Philip Lai9, M. Colin Ard7, Kari L. Hanson3, Sarah Romero1, Bob 
Jacobs10, Anders M. Dale6,11,12, Li Dai13, Julie R. Korenberg13, Fred H. Gage5,14, Ursula 
Bellugi9, Eric Halgren6,7,14, Katerina Semendeferi3,14,15,*, and Alysson R. Muotri1,14,*
1University of California San Diego, School of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics/Rady Children’s 
Hospital San Diego, Department of Cellular & Molecular Medicine, Stem Cell Program, Center for 
Academic Research and Training in Anthropogeny (CARTA), La Jolla, CA 92037-0695, USA 
2National Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (BIOTEC), Virology and Cell 
Technology Laboratory, Pathum Thani, 12120, Thailand 3University of California San Diego, 
Department of Anthropology, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA 4Graduate Program in Health Sciences, 
School of Medicine, Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Paraná (PUCPR), Curitiba, Paraná, Brazil 
5The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, Laboratory of Genetics, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA 
6University of California San Diego, Multimodal Imaging Laboratory, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA 
7University of California San Diego, School of Medicine, Department of Neurosciences, La Jolla, 
CA 92093, USA 8University of California San Diego, Center for Human Development, La Jolla, CA 
92093, USA 9The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, Laboratory for Cognitive Neuroscience, La 
Jolla, CA 92037, USA 10Colorado College, Department of Psychology, Colorado Springs, CO 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#termsReprints and 
permission information is available at www.nature.com/reprints
*To whom correspondence should be addressed: Dr. Muotri, 2880 Torrey Pines Scenic Drive, La Jolla, CA 92037. MC0695, 
muotri@ucsd.edu, Phone: (858) 534-9320 or Dr. Semendeferi, 9500 Gilman Dr., La Jolla, CA 92037. MC0532, ksemende@ucsd.edu, 
Phone: (858) 822-0750.
§Deceased.
¶These authors contributed equally to the work.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to muotri@ucsd.edu.
Supplementary Information is linked to the online version of the paper at www.nature.com/nature
Author Contributions
A.R.M., T.C. and C.A.T. designed the experiments and wrote the manuscript with input from K.S. and all authors. T.C. processed 
DPCs, generated and characterized iPSCs, NPCs and neurons, and performed cell number, proliferation, and apoptosis experiments as 
well as FZD9 knockdown and overexpression and statistical analysis. C.A.T. performed C1 single cell analyses, synaptic 
quantification, calcium imaging, cell density experiments, live neuronal morphology analysis and statistical analysis. B.C.F. performed 
MEA recording, PCR for retrovirus silencing and Wnt pathway gene expression analysis. B.C.F. and S.E.R prepared astrocytes for co-
culture experiments, NPC characterization by flow cytometry and CHIR 98014 experiments. K.S. designed all morphometry 
experiments with B.H-M. and B.J., and co-wrote the manuscript to link the various levels of investigation from the whole brain 
imaging findings to the cellular level. L.S. prepared Golgi staining for postmortem neurons with help from K.L.H. and B.J. B.H-M. 
obtained morphometric data on iPSC-derived neurons and postmortem neurons. D.X.Y., M.C.N.M., C.A.T. and L.M. performed 
calcium transient experiments and statistical analysis. T.T.B. performed brain scan and statistical analysis with help from A.M.D. C.B. 
performed electrophysiological test. M.D., W.W., P.L. and Y.M.S performed and neurocognitive and social tests. A.J., Y.M.S, and 
M.C.A., performed analyses and interpretation of social/neurocognitive tests. R.H.H. performed bioinformatics analysis. L.D. and 
J.R.K. confirmed deletion of all WS participants who donated cells for reprogramming. E.H., U.B., F.H.G, K.S. and A.R.M. edited the 
manuscript for publication.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 18.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2016 August 18; 536(7616): 338–343. doi:10.1038/nature19067.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 80903, USA 11University of California San Diego, School of Medicine, Department of Radiology, 
La Jolla, CA 92093, USA 12University of California San Diego, Department of Cognitive Science, 
La Jolla, CA 92093, USA 13University of Utah, Department of Pediatrics and The Brain Institute, 
Salt Lake City, Utah, 84108, USA 14University of California San Diego, Kavli Institute for Brain and 
Mind, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA 15University of California San Diego, School of Medicine, 
Neuroscience Graduate Program, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA
Summary
Williams syndrome (WS) is a genetic neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by an 
uncommon hypersociability and a mosaic of retained and compromised linguistic and cognitive 
abilities. Nearly all clinically diagnosed individuals with WS lack precisely the same set of genes, 
with breakpoints in chromosome band 7q11.231–5. The contribution of specific genes to the 
neuroanatomical and functional alterations, leading to behavioral pathologies in humans, remains 
largely unexplored. Here, we investigate neural progenitor cells (NPCs) and cortical neurons 
derived from WS and typically developing (TD) induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). WS NPCs 
have an increased doubling time and apoptosis compared to TD NPCs. Using an atypical WS 
subject6, 7, we narrowed this cellular phenotype to a single gene candidate, FZD9. At the neuronal 
stage, WS-derived layers V/VI cortical neurons were characterized by longer total dendrites, 
increased numbers of spines and synapses, aberrant calcium oscillation and altered network 
connectivity. Morphometric alterations observed in WS neurons were validated after Golgi 
staining of postmortem layers V/VI cortical neurons. This human iPSC model8 fills in the current 
knowledge gap in WS cellular biology and could lead to further insights into the molecular 
mechanism underlying the disorder and the human social brain.
This study included participants with clinical diagnosis of WS: individuals harboring typical 
gene deletions in the Williams-Beuren Syndrome Critical Region1, 9 (WS17, 25, 77 and 79) 
and atypical WS subject with a partial deletion (pWS88) as well as TD subjects (TD55, 59, 
63 and 70) (Fig. 1a and Extended Data Fig. 1a). After a series of cognitive and social 
profiles2, 5, 10, we confirmed that the typically-deleted WS participants were a representative 
cohort of the disorder (Fig. 1b–c; Extended Data Fig. 1b–g and Supplementary Note 1). To 
generate a human cellular model of WS11, 12, dental pulp cells obtained from subjects’ 
deciduous teeth were reprogrammed into iPSCs (Extended Data Fig. 2a). We selected two to 
three clones from each individual for further investigation (Extended Data Fig. 2b–g and 
Supplementary Table 1, 2). To obtain the relevant cells, iPSC clones underwent neural 
induction (Fig. 1d) and were further characterized (Fig. 1e–g). Cortical neurons were 
obtained using a modified protocol from our previous publication11 (Fig. 1h–j). Finally, 
iPSC-derived neurons exhibited a complete set of electrophysiological properties (Fig. 1k–m 
and Extended Data Fig. 2h, i).
The impact of the genome-wide WBSCR deletion was determined by unbiased RNA-seq 
(Extended Data Fig. 3a–d). Differential expression analyses revealed misregulated genes 
among the three genotypes (Extended Data Fig. 3e–h; Extended Data Table 1 and 
Supplementary Table 3–9). Gene ontology analyses (GO) in NPCs and neurons revealed 
Chailangkarn et al.
Page 2
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 biological processes that are relevant to the condition (Extended Data Fig. 3h, i; Extended 
Data Table 2–3 and Supplementary Table 10). Remarkably, “cell adhesion,” “axon 
guidance” and “cell maturation” were also among the top-ranking categories detected in an 
independent publication using WS NPCs gene expression analysis13.
As suggested by the NPC global gene expression analyses, during the culture maintenance, 
typical WS NPCs became confluent more slowly than TD NPCs (Fig. 2a). After plating the 
same number of NPCs, we verified that the number of typical WS NPCs on day 4 was less 
than the TD NPCs (Fig. 2b and Extended Data Fig. 4a). To rule out the possibility that the 
difference in heterogeneity of iPSC-derived NPCs could result in this observation, the NPC 
population was fully characterized and no difference between WS and TDs were found (Fig. 
1e–g and Extended Data Fig. 4b). We also used single-cell gene expression profiling to 
access the homogeneity of the NPCs (Fig. 2c–e; Extended Data Fig. 4c–g). We further 
investigated the proliferation of WS NPCs by performing BrdU labeling, immunostaining 
and FACS (Extended Data Fig. 4h, i). Since no difference was found, we assessed apoptosis 
in WS NPCs using DNA fragmentation (propidium iodide) and caspase assay (Extended 
Data Fig. 4j). We found a significant increase in subG1 (Fig. 2f, g) and caspase-positive 
populations (Fig. 2h, i) in WS NPCs, indicating increased apoptosis.
Frizzled 9 (FZD9) is expressed in NPCs14 (Fig. 2j) and has been shown to regulate cell 
division and programmed cell death in different cell types15, 16. In our study, FZD9 was 
hemizygously deleted in the typical WS participants, but retained in atypical pWS88 (Fig. 1a 
and Extended Data Fig. 1b). Thus, we hypothesized that FZD9 regulates human NPC 
apoptosis. We transduced TD NPCs with a lentivirus carrying either shRNA against FZD9 
(shFZD9) or non-specific shRNA (shControl) and WS NPCs with lentiviruses carrying a 
FZD9 cDNA construct (Fig. 2k, l). TD NPCs transduced with shFZD9 showed a reduction 
in the number of cells on day 4 (Fig. 2m) and an increase in the subG1 population (Fig. 2n) 
and caspase activity (Fig. 2o) compared to TD NPCs expressing the shControl. Similar 
results were observed in atypical pWS88 (Extended Data Fig. 4k–n). Restoring FZD9 
expression in typical WS NPCs brought the number of NPCs on day 4/day 0 to a similar 
level to TD NPCs. It also significantly reduced the apoptotic population to the TD level.
Since several Wnt genes were downregulated in WS NPCs (Extended Data Tables 2, 3) and 
FZD9 can be activated by Wnt ligands, we tested if we could rescue the NPC viability by 
treating cells with the GSK3 inhibitor CHIR9801417. First, we confirmed that the canonical 
Wnt pathway was affected in WS by measuring the Axin2 and SP5 expression levels, two 
universal Wnt target genes18,19. Both genes were significantly downregulated in WS cells 
compared to TDs (Fig. 2p, q). By treating WS NPCs with CHIR98014, we were able to 
rescue cell viability (Fig. 2r). Together, our results indicate a role for FZD9 in NPC viability.
Our protocol generated a consistent population of forebrain neurons, confirmed by the pan-
neuronal and subtype-specific cortical markers such as CTIP2 (Layers V/VI)20–22 and 
SATB2 (Layers III) (Fig. 1h, i). The neuronal population was also characterized by single-
cell gene expression profiling (Fig. 3a–c and Extended Data Fig. 5a–f), revealing mostly 
glutamatergic neurons, with a small population of GABAergic neurons and glia (Fig. 3a). 
We did not detect significant variability in these subtypes of neurons expressing target genes 
Chailangkarn et al.
Page 3
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 or in the expression levels of several markers for cortical layers and neurotransmitters among 
the genotypes. However, we did detect differences in the expression of specific genes in 
these populations (Fig. 3b, c) that could lead to specific alterations in mature neurons. We 
focused specifically on markers for cortical layers V/VI, since pathologies affecting these 
layers have been reported in disorders with compromised social functioning, such as 
autism23. We found that typical WS iPSC-derived CTIP2-positive neurons had significantly 
higher total dendritic length, dendrite number, and number of dendritic spines than TDs (Fig. 
3d–g and Extended Data Fig. 6a–m). Interestingly, atypical pWS88 neurons were 
morphologically similar to TD neurons except for dendrite number (Fig. 3f). To determine if 
the WS neuronal phenotype was cell autonomous or dependent on other cells or culture 
conditions, we recorded the dendritic growth over time. The result showed a faster dendritic 
growth rate in WS neurons compared to TD or pWS88 (Extended Data Fig. 6n–r). Also, no 
differences were observed in the total dendritic length, segment number or spine density 
using NPCs plated at different cellular densities (Extended Data Fig. 6s–u).
An increase in the number of dendritic spines per neuron could lead to an increase in 
synaptic contacts and, therefore, synaptic activity24, which could result in functional 
alterations. WS neurons had significantly more glutamatergic excitatory synapses compared 
to TD and pWS88 (Fig. 3h, i and Extended Data Fig. 6v and 7a) and an increased frequency 
of calcium transients with a higher percentage of signaling neurons in WS cultures (Fig. 3j–
m and Extended Data Fig. 7b–f). Using multi-electrode array (MEA) electrophysiology, our 
data showed that WS neuronal cultures had a significant increase in spike frequency 
compared to TD-derived neurons (Fig. 3n, o and Extended Data Fig. 7g, h).
In an attempt to place our iPSC findings in a larger context of the cortical morphology of 
human subjects at the gross anatomical and cellular levels, we conducted two sets of 
additional experiments to test predictions based on NPC and neuronal differences found in 
vitro. In addition to the total volume reduction in WS brains previously reported25, 
multivariate analyses of variance (MANOVA) from our structural brain imaging of living 
subjects, revealed a significant decrease in overall cortical surface area in WS compared to 
TD individuals (Fig. 4a, b), but not in cortical thickness. Additionally, we conducted a 
separate set of experiments on postmortem brains from WS and TD tissue donors to 
investigate possible alterations in the morphology of cortical neurons, as predicted by our 
iPSC findings. Similar to WS iPSC-derived CTIP2-positive neurons, postmortem layers 
V/VI pyramidal neurons displayed larger total dendritic length and higher number of 
dendritic spines (Fig. 4c–e), similar spine density and soma area than TDs (Extended Data 
Fig. 7i–s). Postmortem layer V/VI neurons also showed significantly increased numbers of 
dendritic segments and branching points (Fig. 4f, g), and similar number of dendritic trees.
The morphometric data in combination with the increased glutamatergic gene expression 
and number of co-localized synaptic puncta observed in WS neurons suggest that an 
increased number of synapses may result in the altered network activity, which could 
contribute to the characteristic behavior of WS individuals. Our study reveals that the WS 
phenotypes described here are the foundation for the understanding of the complex human 
social behavior. This approach provides an additional strategy to study the cellular and 
Chailangkarn et al.
Page 4
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 molecular underpinnings of complex human attributes, such as language in a social 
environment.
Methods
Subjects for behavioral study and source of cells for reprogramming
The study protocols were approved by USCD and Salk Institute IRB/ESCRO committees. 
Four TD individuals (ages 8 – 19) and five individuals with WS (ages 8 – 14; Extended Data 
Fig. 1a) were included in the analysis: four of the latter had typical WS gene deletions and 
one (pWS88) had a partial deletion in the WS region. Informed consents were obtained from 
all subjects or their parents as appropriate. Genetic diagnosis of WS was established using 
fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) probes for elastin (ELN), a gene consistently 
associated with the deletion in the typical WS region1, 9. All of the WS participants with 
confirmed genetic deletion exhibited the medical and clinical characteristics of the WS 
phenotype, including previously established cognitive, behavioral, and physical features 
associated with the syndrome4. WS diagnosis was confirmed based on the Diagnostic Score 
Sheet for WS (DSS; American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Genetics, 2001), with a 
particular focus on the cardiovascular abnormalities and the characteristic facial features 
associated with the ELN deletion. The scores for the participants were at the mean for WS 
(9) or higher, with the individual with partial deletion in the WS chromosomal region 
(pWS88) scoring lower than the individuals with typical WS deletion. Similarly, pWS88 
reported fewer symptoms with connective tissue and growth, his cognitive scores were 
slightly higher than the typical WS subjects, and he did not demonstrate the disparity 
between verbal and visual-spatial abilities typical of WS. However, pWS88 did display 
behavioral and developmental features consistent with WS, including developmental delay, 
over-friendliness, and anxiousness.
Behavioral and neurocognitive tests
The participants were administered standard tests to quantify their non-verbal and verbal 
abilities, as well as versions of the WS cognitive (WSCP) and social (WSSP) profiles to 
capture the distinct pattern of strengths and weaknesses both within and across domains 
associated with the WS cognitive and social phenotype. Details of the tests and the measures 
tapping into the two profiles are presented in Extended Data Figure 1. The WSCPs for the 
five WS participants were constructed by calculating log predictive likelihood ratios under 
assumed normality for age-appropriate TD vs. WS classifications based on VIQ, PIQ, VMI 
and PPVT standard scores, subject to availability. Predictive distributions were based on 
published normative means and SDs for each of the tests employed, whereas for the WS 
classification the predictive distributions26 were determined using data from n = 81 (VIQ 
and PIQ), n = 56 (VMI), and n = 97 (PPVT) subjects in a broader WS sample (described in 
Extended Data Fig. 1d). A Tobit model was used to estimate parameters for WS subjects on 
the VMI due to the presence of floor effects. The WSSPs for the five WS participants were 
constructed using measures of social approach behavior, emotionality/empathy, and 
language use.
Chailangkarn et al.
Page 5
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 WS deletion confirmation
Quantitative PCR was used to define the breakpoints of deleted regions in DNA isolated 
from iPSCs, or lymphoblast cell lines for WS participants, with probes spanning from 
CALN1 to WBSCR16 and template DNA. Taqman expression assay probes detecting the 
WS region genes were designed and synthesized with sequences shown in Supplementary 
Table 11. RNase P (VIC) was used as control. Quantitative PCR was performed on the ABI 
PRISM 7900HT system and the results were analyzed using SDS 3.2.
Cell collection, reprogramming and characterization
We avoided invasive sample collection methods such as skin biopsy or blood withdrawal by 
taking advantage of the natural loss of deciduous teeth as a source of somatic cells. We 
chose to reprogram dental pulp cells (DPCs) because these cells develop from the same set 
of early progenitors that generate neurons. Furthermore, the neurons derived from iPSCs 
generated from DPCs express higher levels of forebrain genes when compared to the ones 
generated from skin fibroblast-derived iPSCs27, serving the purpose of this study. Deciduous 
teeth were collected when they fell out and were shipped to our laboratory in DMEM 1X 
(Mediatech) with 4% Pen/Strep (Mediatech). Dental pulp was pulled out, washed in PBS 
with 4% Pen/Strep and incubated in 5% TrypLE (Gibco) for 15 min. Pulp was partially 
dissociated using needles and plated in culture medium (DMEM/F12 50:50, 15% FBS, 
1%NEAA, 1% fungizone and 2% Pen/Strep). In one to four weeks, DPCs migrated out of 
the pulp and could be passaged and frozen as stock. DPCs in early passage (two to three) 
were reprogrammed using pMXs retroviruses expressing Yamanaka transcription factors 
(obtained from Addgene, Cambridge, MA, USA)28. After 4 days, transduced DPCs were 
trypsinized, plated on mouse embryonic fibroblasts and cultured using human embryonic 
stem cell (hESC) medium. After manually picked and clonally expanded, feeder-free iPSCs 
were grown on matrigel-coated dishes (BD Bioscience, San Jose, CA, USA) with mTeSR1 
(StemCell Technologies) or iDEAL29.
Karyotyping
All G-banding karyotyping analyses were performed by Molecular Diagnostics Service (San 
Diego, CA) and Children’s Hospital Los Angeles (Los Angeles, CA).
Genotyping
Two hundred nanograms of DNA were processed and hybridized to the Illumina Infinium 
Human Core Exome BeadChip following manufacturer’s instructions. Illumina 
GenomeStudio V2011.1 with the Genotyping Module Ver. 1.9.4 was used to normalize data 
and call genotypes using reference data provided by Illumina. Illumina’s cnv Partition and 
gada R package were used to automatically detect aberrant copy number region. In addition, 
the B Allele Frequency (BAF) and Log R Ratio (LRR) distributions were manually checked 
to determine additional CNVs not detected by the software. Sample identification/
relatedness was assessed by comparing called genotypes for each sample. The absolute 
number of different genotypes was counted and the Euclidean distances were calculated to 
identify relatedness of the samples.
Chailangkarn et al.
Page 6
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Teratoma assay
Dissociated iPSC colonies were centrifuged and resuspended in 1:1 matrigel and phosphate 
buffer saline solution. The cells were injected subcutaneously in nude mice. After 1–2 
months, teratomas were dissected, fixed and sliced. Sections were stained with hematoxylin 
and eosin for further analysis. Protocols were previously approved by the University of 
California San Diego Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.
Neural induction and neuronal differentiation
iPSCs were cultured on matrigel-coated dishes and fed daily with mTeSR for 7 days. On the 
next day, mTeSR was substituted by N2 medium (DMEM/F12 supplemented with 0.5X N2 
supplement (Life Technologies), 1 μM dorsomorphin (Tocris) and 1 μM SB431542 
(Stemgent)) for 1–2 days. iPSC colonies were lifted off, cultured in suspension on the shaker 
(95 rpm at 37°C) for 8 days to form EBs and fed with N2 media. EBs then were 
mechanically dissociated, plated on a matrigel-coated dish and fed with N2B27 medium 
(DMEM/F12 supplemented with 0.5X N2 supplement, 0.5X B27 supplement (Life 
Technologies), 1% penicillin/streptomycin, and 20 ηM FGF). The emerging rosettes were 
picked manually, dissociated completely using accutase and plated on a poly-ornithine/
laminin-coated plate. NPCs were expanded in N2B27 medium and fed every other day. To 
differentiate NPCs into neurons, FGF was withdrawn from the N2B27 medium. NPCs and 
neurons were characterized for stage-specific markers by immunostaining and flow 
cytometry (NPCs only), expression profile by single cell RT-PCR and RNA sequencing and 
electrophysiological property (neurons).
Total RNA extraction
Total RNA of DPCs, iPSCs, NPCs and neurons was extracted using TRIzol reagent (Life 
Technologies) according to the manufacturer’s protocols. Contaminating DNA in RNA 
samples was removed using TURBO DNase (Life Technologies) according to the 
manufacturer’s protocols. Quality and quantity of DNase-treated RNA were assessed using 
NanoDrop 1000 (Thermo Scientific).
PCR for exogenous retrovirus DNA silencing
RNA was extracted from iPSCs as previously described using Trizol reagent (Life 
Technologies). cDNA was generated from the RNA using super script III protocol according 
to manufacturer’s instructions. PCR was performed using primers listed below at the 
following cycles: 94°C for 10 minutes; 35 repeats of 94°C for 30 seconds, 62°C for 30 
seconds and 72°C for one minute; and finally, 72°C for seven minutes. As a positive control, 
the pMX plasmid of the four vectors used on the reprogramming of the cells was placed 
along the samples as well as water as a negative template control for amplification. As an 
additional positive control for the endogenous genes, two hESC lines were used along with 
our iPSCs: H1 and HUES6 cells. Primers used were:
Endo-cMyc
F TTGAGGGGCATCGTCGCGGGA
Chailangkarn et al.
Page 7
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 R GCGTCCTGGGAAGGGAGATCC
Endo-Klf4
F GAA ATT CGC CCG CTC CGA TGA
R CTG TGT GTT TGC GGT AGT GCC
Endo-OCT3/4
F TCT TTC CAC CAG GCC CCC GGC TC
R TGC GGG CGG ACA TGG GGA GAT CC
Endo-SOX2
F GCCGAGTGGAAACTTTTGTCG
R GGCAGCGTGTACTTATCCTTCT
Exo transgenes F pMXs-TgUS
F GTG GTG GTA CGG GAA ATC AC
Exo-Oct4 R pMXs-Oct3/4-TgDS
R TAG CCA GGT TCG AGA ATC CA
Exo-Sox2 R pMXs-Sox2-TgDS
R GGT TCT CCT GGG CCA TCT TA
Exo-Klf4 R pMXs-Klf4-TgDS
R GGG AAG TCG CTT CAT GTG AG
Exo-c-Myc R pMXs-c-Myc-TgDS
R AGC AGC TCG AAT TTC TTC CA
Embryoid body (EB) formation for pluripotency characterization
Partially dissociated iPSCs were re-suspended in EB medium (DMEM/F12 medium, 1X N2 
supplement and 1% FBS) and cultured on shaker (95 rpm) at 37°C. Medium was changed 
every 3–4 days. After 20 days, total RNA of EBs was extracted for further gene expression 
analyses by qPCR.
Mycoplasma testing
All tissue culture samples were routinely tested for mycoplasma by PCR. One mL of media 
supernatants (with no antibiotics or fungizone) was collected for all cell lines, spun down, 
and resuspended in TE buffer. Ten μL of each sample were used in PCR reaction with the 
following primers: Forward: GGCGAATGGGTGAGTAAC; Reverse: 
CGGATAACGCTTGCGACCT. Any positive sample was immediately discarded.
Microarray
Three hundred nanograms of total extracted RNA from each sample were subjected to 
microarray by using the Affymatrix GeneChip one-cycle target labeling kit (Affymatrix, 
Santa Clara, CA) according to the manufacturer’s recommended protocols. The resultant 
biotinylated cRNA was fragmented and then hybridized to the GeneChip Human 1.0 ST 
Array [764885 probes, 28869 genes, 19734 gene-level probe sets with putative full-length 
transcript support (GenBank and RefSeq)] based on human genome, Hg18. Arrays were 
prepared at the University of California DNA Core Facility. Arrays were analyzed by the 
Affy (Affymetrix pre-processing)30 Bioconductor software package for microarray data. 
Data were then normalized by the RMA (robust multichip averaging) method to 
background-corrected and normalized probe levels to obtain a summary expression of 
normalized values for each probe set. Normalized microarray samples were then clustered 
by a hierarchical approach based on a matrix of distances. Normalized expression data were 
used to create a distance matrix that is calculated based on Euclidean distance between the 
transcripts over a pair of samples representing a variation between two samples. Having the 
distances for all pairs of samples, a linkage method is used to cluster samples in a 
Chailangkarn et al.
Page 8
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 dendrogram by using calculated distances (sample expression similarities). This method also 
creates a heatmap to graphically show the expression correlation between the samples.
Gene expression analyses by qPCR
RNA samples were reverse transcribed into cDNA using the Super Script III First Strand 
Synthesis System (Invitrogen, CA) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Reactions were 
run on the Bio-Rad detection system using Sybr-green master mix (Bio-Rad). Primers were 
selected from Primerbank; validated database (http://pga.mgh.harvard.edu/primerbank/) and 
specificity were confirmed by melting curve analysis through Bio-Rad detection system 
(Bio-Rad). Sequences of the primers are described in Supplementary Table 12. Quantitative 
analysis was performed using the comparative threshold cycle method31. GAPDH was used 
as housekeeping gene. Each sample was run in triplicate.
RNA-seq and global gene expression analyses
The RNA-seq analyses were previously described by our group32. Briefly, RNAs were 
isolated using the RNeasy Mini kit (QIAGEN). A total of 1,000 ng of RNA was used for 
library preparation using the Illumina TruSeq RNA Sample Preparation Kit. The RNAs were 
sequenced on Illumina HiSeq2000 with 50bp paired-end reads, generating 50 million high 
quality sequencing fragments per sample on average. For validation purposes of biological 
samples subjected to RNA-seq, hESC and iPSC data available from the literature were 
downloaded and used to compare with our sequenced cell lines. The two hESC lines used 
are available through the accession codes SRR873630 (HUES-6, referred as ES(HUES)) and 
SRR873631 [H1, referred to here as ES(H1)]. The two human iPSC lines used are available 
through the accession codes SRR873619 [referred to here as iPS(TD,1)] and SRR873620 
[referred to here as iPS(TD,2)].
Gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis
RNA-seq enrichment analysis was performed using WebGestalt33 and Cytoscape34 software 
plugins, considering only categories having statistical significance (p-value < 0.05). Genes 
tested for differential expression were used as the background for GO annotation and 
enrichment analysis.
NPC counting
NPCs were seeded onto poly-ornithine/laminin-coated six-well plates at a total number of 
105 cells/well on day 0. Medium change was done on day 2. Cells were collected and 
counted on day 4.
NPC flow characterization
NPCs were resuspended, dissociated with accutase and fixed using fixation buffer 
(BioLegend) for 15 minutes followed by three PBS washes. The cell pellet was incubated 
and kept in Perm III buffer (BD Biosciences) in the −20C until needed for the experiment. A 
total of 106 cells were incubated with antibodies Sox1 (PE), Sox2 (APC) or Nestin (PE) and 
Pax6 (APC) (Bd Biosciences) for 30 minutes and then washed three times before being 
Chailangkarn et al.
Page 9
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 resuspended for cell analyses. Cells were analyzed in a plate reader mode using FACS Canto 
II machine (BD Biosciences).
Immunofluorescence staining
Cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 10–20 min, washed with PBS three times (5 
min each), permeabilized with 0.1% triton X-100 for 15 min, incubated in blocking solution 
(2% BSA) for 1 hour at RT and then in primary antibodies (goat anti-Nanog, Abcam 
ab77095, 1:500; rabbit anti-Lin28, Abcam ab46020, 1:500; rabbit anti-Oct4, Abcam 
ab19857, 1:500; mouse anti-SSEA4, Abcam ab16287, 1:200; mouse anti-Nestin, Abcam 
ab22035, 1:200; rabbit anti-Musashi1, Abcam ab52865, 1:250; rat anti-CTIP2, Abcam 
ab18465, 1:250; rabbit anti-SATB2, Abcam ab34735, 1:200; chicken anti-MAP2, Abcam 
ab5392, 1:1000; rabbit anti-FZD9, Origene TA314730, 1:150; chicken anti-EGFP, Abcam 
ab13970, 1:1000; rabbit anti-Synapsin1, EMD-Millipore AB1543P, 1:500; mouse anti-
Vglut1, Synaptic Systems 135311, 1:500; rabbit anti-Homer1, Synaptic Systems 160003, 
1:500) overnight at 4°C. The next day, cells were washed with PBS three times (5 min each), 
incubated with secondary antibodies (Alexa Fluor 488, 555 and 647, Life Technologies, 
1:1000) for 1 hour at RT, and washed with PBS three times (5 min each). Nuclei were 
stained using DAPI (1:10,000). Slides or coverslips were mounted using ProLong Gold 
antifade mountant (Life Technologies).
DNA fragmentation analysis
One million NPCs were harvested to single cell suspension in 1mL PBS, then fixed by 
addition of 3 mL of 100% ethanol and stored at 4°C for at least two hours. NPC pellets were 
washed once with 5 mL PBS. After removal of PBS, cells were resuspended in 1 mL of 
propidium iodide (PI) staining solution (0.1% (v/v) Triton X-100, 10 μg/mL PI, and 100 
μg/mL RNase A in 1X PBS). WS and TD NPC samples were analyzed by FACS on a 
Becton Dickinson LSRI, and gating of subG1 population (cells with fragmented DNA) was 
examined using FLOWJO-Flow Cytometry Analysis Software.
Caspase assay
Caspase activity was measured using Green FLICA Caspases 3 & 7 Assay kit 
(ImmunoChemistry Technologies, LLC.). Briefly, NPCs were harvested, washed and stained 
with 1X carboxyfluorescein Fluorochrome Inhibitor of Caspase Assay (FAM-FLICA) 
reagent, 10 μg/mL Hoechst and 10 μg/mL propidium iodide (PI). Samples were analyzed on 
the NC-3000 using the pre-optimized Caspase Assay. The population with caspase activity 
was used to analyze for apoptosis.
Proliferation assay
NPC proliferation was assessed using BD Pharmingen BrdU Flow Kits (BD Biosciences) 
according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, NPCs were incubated with 1 μM BrdU for 
45 min at 37°C and harvested to single cell suspension. NPCs were then fixed and 
permeabilized using BD Cytofix/Cytoperm Buffer and stained using FITC-conjugated anti-
BrdU antibody and 7-aminoactinomycin D (7-AAD), a fluorescent dye for labeling DNA. 
Fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) was done on LSRFortessa (BD Biosciences) and, 
Chailangkarn et al.
Page 10
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 to obtain the percentage of the BrdU-positive population, the cell cycle profiles were 
analyzed using Flowjo-Flow Cytometry Analysis Software.
Construction and characterization of lentiviruses
Commercially available lentiviral vectors (pLKO.1) expressing short-hairpin RNAs 
(shRNAs) against FZD9 under the control of the U6 promoter (Thermo Scientific) were 
engineered to express the Discosoma sp. red fluorescent protein mCherry under the control 
of the hPGK (human phosphoglycerate kinase) promoter. The following shRNAs against 
FZD9 and a non-silencing scrambled control shRNA were selected (Thermo Scientific):
shRNA-control, 5′-TTCTCCGAACGTGTCACGT-3′
shRNA-FZD9, 5′-ATCTTGCGGATGTGGAAGAGG-3′
For rescue experiments, FZD9 cDNA was amplified from TD NPC cDNA as template by the 
following primer pair:
5′-CCGAGATCTTCGAGGTGTGTGGGGTTCTCCAAAG-3′;
5′-TCTAGAGCCACCATGGCCGTAGCGCCTCTG-3′
The reaction was performed using Phusion High-Fidelity DNA polymerase (New England 
Biolabs) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The FZD9 cDNA was cloned into a 
lentiviral vector driven by the ubiquitin promoter followed by a self-clevage peptide and 
GFP sequence. The specificity and efficiency of shRNA-control, shRNA-FZD9, and the 
FZD9-WT constructs were verified by co-transfection into HEK-293 cells. Cell lysates were 
collected and analyzed by Western blot analysis with anti-FZD9 antibodies (Aviva 
OAEC02415, 1:1000).
CHIR-98014 treatment
CHIR-98014 (Selleckchem) was resuspended according to manufacturer’s instructions into 
10 mM stock using DMSO and then diluted to 100 μM. Final concentration used in cells was 
100 ηM of CHIR-98014, whereas the vehicle cells received only DMSO. For qPCR 
experiments, NPCs were propagated in 6-well plates until 70% confluency and then treated 
with CHIR-98014 for six hours to have their RNA collected using Trizol as previously 
described. For the NPC counting experiment, cells were seeded in 6-well plates as described 
in the presence of CHIR-98014 or DMSO, in triplicates (TD and WS). After 48 hours, the 
culture medium was changed and treatment was repeated. Cells were collected and counted 
after 96 hours of incubation.
Astrocyte differentiation
The TD NPCs were lifted into suspension and maintained on a shaker (95 rpm) to form 
neurospheres for three weeks. For the first week, the spheres were grown with N2B27 
medium. The neurospheres were overlaid with the astrocyte medium (Lonza) for the 
remaining two weeks. The neurospheres were plated onto poly-ornithine- and laminin-
coated plates and expanded for two to three passages before experimentation. Co-cultures of 
neurons and astrocytes were prepared for morphometric and functional analyses.
Chailangkarn et al.
Page 11
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Western blotting
NPCs were lysed in RIPA buffer with protease inhibitor. Rabbit anti-FZD9 antibody (Aviva 
OAEC02415, 1:1000) and mouse anti-β-actin (Abcam ab8226, 1:3000) were used as 
primary antibodies. IRDye 800CW goat anti-rabbit and IRDye 680RD goat anti-mouse 
(1:10000) were used as secondary antibodies. The Odyssey system was used for signal 
detection. Signal intensities were measured using the Odyssey Image Studio and semi- 
quantitative analysis of FZD9 signal intensity was corrected with respect to β-actin relative 
quantification. A paired t-test analysis with a p-value < 0.05 was used in the comparison of 
TD and WS FZD9 signal intensity normalized data.
Synaptic puncta quantification
Co-localized Vglut (pre-synaptic) and Homer1 (post-synaptic) puncta were quantified after 
three-dimensional reconstruction of z-stack random images for all individuals and from two 
different experiments. Slides were analyzed under a fluorescence microscope (Z1 Axio 
Observer Apotome, Zeiss). Only puncta in proximity of MAP2-positive processes were 
scored.
Single cell qRT-PCR and analysis
Specific target amplification was performed in individual dissociated NPCs or 6-week-old 
neurons using C1 Single-Cell and BioMark HD Systems (Fluidigm), according to the 
manufacturer’s protocol and as described previously35–37. Briefly, single cells were captured 
on a C1 chip (10–17 μm cells) and cell viability was checked using a LIVE/DEAD Cell 
Viability/Cytotoxicity kit (Life Technologies). After lysis, RNA was reverse transcribed into 
cDNA with validated amplicon-specific DELTAgene Assays (Supplementary Table 13) 
using SuperScript III RT Platinum Taq Mix. Specific target amplification was performed by 
18 cycles of 95°C denaturation for 15 seconds and 60°C annealing and amplification for 4 
min. Each preamplified cDNA was mixed with 2X SsoFast EvaGreen Supermix with Low 
ROX (Bio-Rad) and then pipetted into an individual sample inlet in a 96.96 Dynamic Array 
IFC chip (Fluidigm). DELTAgene primer pairs (Supplementary Table 13) were diluted and 
pipetted into individual assay inlets in the same 96.96 Dynamic Array IFC chip. Quantitative 
PCR results were analyzed using Fluidigm’s Real-time PCR Analysis software using Linear 
(Derivative) Baseline Correction Method and the Automatic (Gene) Ct Threshold Method 
with 0.65 curve quality threshold. Hierarchical clustering heatmap, PCA analyses, violin 
plots of Log2-expression Ct values (LoD = 24) and ANOVA statistical analysis were carried 
out using Singular Analysis Toolset 3.0 (Fluidigm).
Calcium imaging
Neuronal networks derived from human iPSCs were transduced with lentivirus carrying the 
Syn::RFP reporter construct. Cell cultures were washed with Krebs HEPES Buffer (KHB) 
(10 mM HEPES, 4.2 mM NaHCO3, 10 mM dextrose, 1.18 mM MGSO4, 1.18 mM KH2PO4, 
4.69 mM KCl, 118 mM NaCl, 1.29 mM NaCl2; pH 7.3) and incubated with 2–5 μM 
Fluo-4AM (Molecular Probes/Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) in KHB for 40 min. 5,000 frames 
were acquired at 28 Hz with a region of 256 × 256 pixels (100x magnification), using a 
Hamamatsu ORCA-ER digital camera (Hamamatsu Photonics K.K., Japan) with a 488 nm 
Chailangkarn et al.
Page 12
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (FITC) filter on an Olympus IX81 inverted fluorescence confocal microscope (Olympus 
Optical, Japan). Images were acquired with MetaMorph 7.7 (MDS Analytical Technologies, 
Sunnyvale, CA), processed and analyzed using individual circular regions of interest (ROI) 
on ImageJ and Matlab 7.2 (Mathworks, Natick, MA). Syn::RFP+ neurons were selected 
after confirmation that calcium transients were blocked with 1 mM of tetrodotoxin (TTX). 
The amplitude of signals was presented as relative fluorescence changes (ΔF/F) after 
background subtraction. The threshold for calcium spikes was set at the 95th percentile of 
the amplitude of all detected events.
Electrophysiology
For whole-cell patch-clamp recordings, individual coverslips containing live 1-month-old 
neurons were transferred into a heated recording chamber and continuously perfused (1 mL/
min) with artificial cerebrospinal fluid (ACSF) bubbled with a mixture of CO2 (5%) and O2 
(95%) and maintained at 25 °C. ACSF contained (in mM) 121 NaCl, 4.2 KCl, 1.1 CaCl2, 1 
MgSO4, 29 NaHCO3, 0.45 NaH2PO4-H2O, 0.5 Na2HPO4 and 20 glucose (all chemicals 
from Sigma). Whole-cell recordings were performed using a digidata 1440A/ Multiclamp 
700B and Clampex 10.3 (Molecular devices). Patch electrodes were filled with internal 
solutions containing 130 mM K-gluconate, 6 mM KCl, 4 mM NaCl, 10mM Na-HEPES, 0.2 
mM K-EGTA; 0.3 mM GTP, 2 mM Mg-ATP, 0.2 mM cAMP, 10mM D-glucose, 0.15% 
biocytin and 0.06% rhodamine. The pH and osmolarity were adjusted for physiological 
conditions. Data were all corrected for liquid junction potentials, electrode capacitances 
were compensated on-line in cell-attached mode and a low-pass filtered at 2 kHz were used. 
The access resistance of the cells in our sample was around 37 MOhm with resistance of the 
patch pipettes 3–5 MOhm. Spontaneous synaptic AMPA events were recorded at the reversal 
potential of Cl− and could be reversibly blocked by AMPA receptor antagonist (10 μM 
NBQX, Sigma). Spontaneous synaptic GABA events were recorded at the reversal potential 
of Na+ and could be reversibly blocked with GABAa receptor antagonist (10 μM SR95531, 
Sigma).
Multi-electrode array (MEA)
Using 12-well MEA plates from Axion Biosystems, we plated the same density of NPCs 
from TD and WS individuals in triplicate. Each well was seeded with 10,000 NPCs that 
were induced into neuronal differentiation as previously described. Each well was coated 
with poly-L-ornithine and laminin prior to cell seeding. Cells were fed once a week and 
measurements were taken before the medium was changed. Recordings were performed 
using a Maestro MEA system and AxIS software (Axion Biosystems), using a band-pass 
filter with 10 Hz and 2.5 kHz cutoff frequencies. Spike detection was performed using an 
adaptive threshold set to 5.5 times the standard deviation of the estimated noise on each 
electrode. Each plate first rested for 5 minutes in the Maestro, and then 5 to 10 minutes of 
data were recorded to calculate the spike rate per well. MEA analysis was performed using 
the Axion Biosystems Neural Metrics Tool, wherein electrodes that detected at least 5 
spikes/minute were classified as active electrodes. Bursts were identified in the data 
recorded from each individual electrode using an adaptive Poisson surprise algorithm. 
Network bursts were identified for each well, using a nonadaptive algorithm requiring a 
minimum of ten spikes with a maximum inter-spike interval of 100 ms. Only channels that 
Chailangkarn et al.
Page 13
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 exhibited bursting activity (more than 10 spikes in 5-min interval) were included in this 
analysis. After measurement, neurons were immunostained to check morphology and 
density.
Postmortem brain specimens and cortical sampling
We used six postmortem brains (2 WS and 4 TD) that were gender, age and hemisphere 
matched. All brain specimens were harvested within a postmortem interval of 18 to 30 hours 
and had been immersed and fixed in 10% formalin for up to 20 years. For the purpose of the 
present experiments, samples were obtained from anatomically well-identified cortical areas 
in a consistent manner across specimens. Tissue blocks approximately 5 mm3 were removed 
from primary somatosensory cortex (Brodmann area 3) and primary motor cortex (BA 4) in 
the arm/hand knob region of the pre- and postcentral gyri, respectively, and from the 
secondary visual area (BA 18) from approximately 1.4 cm dorsally to the occipital pole and 
2 cm from the midline38, 39. We focused specifically on these parts of the cortex because 
pathologies in dendritic morphology in these areas have been reported in other 
neurodevelopmental disorders40–42. In addition, pyramidal neurons in the selected areas 
reach their mature-like morphology early in development and start displaying dendritic 
pathologies sooner than high integration areas, such as the prefrontal cortex, allowing for a 
comparison of post-mortem findings with iPSC-derived neurons in early stages of 
development43, 44.
Postmortem brain tissue processing
Sampled tissue blocks were processed using an adaptation of the Golgi-Kopsch method45, 
which has been shown to give good results with tissue that has been fixed for long periods of 
time46. Briefly, blocks were immersed in a solution of 3% potassium dichromate, 0.5% 
formalin for eight days, followed by immersion into 0.75% silver nitrate for 2 days. Blocks 
were then sectioned on a vibratome, perpendicular to the pial surface, at a thickness of 120 
μm. Golgi sections were cut into 100% ethyl alcohol and transferred briefly into methyl 
salicylate followed by toluene, mounted onto glass slides and cover-slipped. Adjacent blocks 
from each region were sectioned at 60 μm and stained with thionin for visualization of cell 
bodies and laminar organization, which enabled identifying the position of each individual 
neuron within a specific cortical layer. Cytoarchitectonic analysis of histological sections 
from each block confirmed that tissue was sampled from the ROI and that the Golgi-
impregnated pyramidal neurons were located in cortical layers V/VI.
Cell selection and quantification
Golgi-impregnated neurons—Cortical neurons from all six postmortem brains were 
used in the study. Neurons included in the morphological analysis did not display 
degenerative changes47. Only neurons with fully impregnated soma, apical dendrites with 
present oblique branches, and at least two basal dendrites with third order segments were 
chosen for the analysis48. To minimize the effects of cutting on dendritic measurements, we 
included neurons with cell bodies located near the center of 120-μm thick histological 
sections, with natural terminations of higher-order dendritic branches present where 
possible38, 48. Inclusion of the neurons completely contained within 120-μm sections biases 
Chailangkarn et al.
Page 14
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the sample toward smaller neurons, leading to the underestimation of dendritic length49; 
therefore, we applied the same criteria blinded across all WS and TD specimens, and we 
thus included the neurons with incomplete endings if they were judged to otherwise fulfill 
the criteria for successful Golgi impregnation. All neurons were oriented with apical 
dendrite perpendicular to the pial surface; inverted pyramidal cells as well as 
magnopyramidal neurons were excluded from the analysis. Neuronal morphology was 
quantified along x-, y-, and z-coordinates using Neurolucida v.10 software (MBF 
Bioscience, Williston, VT) connected to a Nikon Eclipse 80i microscope, with 40x (0.75) 
Plan Fluor dry objective. Tracings were conducted on both apical and basal dendrites, and 
the results reflect summed values for both types of dendrites per neuron. Following the 
recommendation that the applications of Sholl’s concentric spheres or Eayrs’ concentric 
circles for the analysis of neuronal morphology are not adequate when neuronal morphology 
is analyzed in three dimensions49, we conducted dendritic tree analysis with the following 
measurements 38, 48: (1) soma area – cross sectional surface area of the cell body; (2) 
dendritic length – summed total length of all dendrites per neuron; (3) dendrite number – 
number of dendritic trees emerging directly from the soma per neuron; (4) dendritic segment 
number – total number of segments per neuron; (5) dendritic spine/protrusion number – total 
number of dendritic spines per neuron; (6) dendritic spine/protrusion density – average 
number of spines/20 μm of dendritic length; and (7) branching point number – number of 
nodes (points at the dendrite where a dendrite branches into two or more) per neuron. 
Dendritic segments were defined as parts of the dendrites between two branching points - 
between the soma and the first branching point in the case of first order dendritic segments, 
and between the last branching point and the termination of the dendrite in the case of 
terminal dendritic segments. Since the long formalin-fixation time may result in degradation 
of dendritic spines, spine values may be underestimated and are thus reported here with 
caution. All of the tracings were accomplished blind to brain region and diagnostic status.
iPSC-derived neurons—The iPSC-derived sample consisted of EGFP-positive eight-
week-old neurons with pyramidal- or ovoid-shaped soma and at least two branched neurites 
(dendrites) with visible spines/protrusions. Protrusions from dendritic shaft, which 
morphologically resembled dendritic spines in postmortem specimens, were considered and 
quantified as dendritic spines in iPSC-derived neurons. The neurites were considered 
dendrites based on the criteria applied in postmortem studies: (1) thickness that decreased 
with the distance from the cell body; (2) branches emerging under acute angle; and (3) 
presence of dendritic spines. In addition, only EGFP-positive neurons with nuclei co-stained 
with CTIP2, indicative of layer V/VI neurons, and with the dendrites displaying evenly 
distributed fluorescent stain along their entire length were included in the analysis. The 
morphology of the neurons was quantified along x-, y-, and z-coordinates using Neurolucida 
v.9 software (MBF Bioscience, Williston, VT) connected to a Nikon Eclipse E600 
microscope with 40x oil objective. No distinction was made between apical and basal 
dendrites, and the results reflect summed length values of all neurites/dendrites per neuron, 
consistent with what was done for the postmortem neurons. The same set of measurements 
used in the analysis of Golgi-impregnated neurons was applied to the analysis of iPSC-
derived neurons, and all of the tracings were accomplished blind to the diagnostic status and 
were conducted by the same rater (B.H-M.). Intra-rater reliability was assessed by having 
Chailangkarn et al.
Page 15
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the rater traced the same neuron after a period of time. The average coefficient of variation 
between the results of retraced neurons was 2% for SA, TDL, DSN, and BPN, and 3% for 
DPN; there was no variation in TN in different tracings of the same neuron. The accuracy 
was further checked by having three individuals (B.H-M., B.J. and L.S.) trace the same 
neuron.
Brain imaging data acquisition and quality control
MRI scanning was completed in 19 participants with WS (aged 19 to 43 years; mean = 29.0, 
SD = 8.8; 11 males, 8 females) and 19 TD control subjects (aged 16 to 43 years; mean = 
26.2, SD = 7.3; 8 males, 11 females). There was no significant difference between the 
groups in age (t = 1.0, p < 0.30) or in gender ratio (Pearson χ2 = 0.95, p < 0.33). A 
standardized multiple modality high-resolution structural MRI protocol was implemented, 
involving 3D T1- and T2-weighted volumes and a set of diffusion-weighted scans. Imaging 
data were obtained at the UCSD Radiology Imaging Laboratory on a 1.5 Tesla GE Signa 
HDx 14.0M5 TwinSpeed system (GE Healthcare, Waukesha, WI) using an eight-channel 
phased array head coil. A 3D inversion recovery spoiled gradient echo (IR-SPGR) T1-
weighted volume was acquired with pulse sequence parameters optimized for maximum 
gray/white matter contrast (TE = 3.9 ms, TR = 8.7 ms, TI = 270 ms, flip angle = 8°, TD = 
750 ms, bandwidth = ± 15.63 kHz, FOV=24 cm, matrix=192×192, voxel 
size=1.25×1.25×1.2 mm). All MRI data were collected using prospective motion (PROMO) 
correction for non-diffusion imaging50. This method has been shown to improve image 
quality, reduce motion-related artifacts, increase the reliability of quantitative measures, and 
improve the clinical diagnostic utility of MRI data obtained in children and clinical 
groups 51, 52. Standardized quality control procedures were followed for both raw and 
processed data, including visual inspection ratings by a trained imaging technician and 
computer algorithms testing general image characteristics as well as aspects specific to each 
imaging modality, such as contrast properties, registrations, and artifacts from motion and 
other sources. Subjects included in the current analyses were only those who passed all raw 
and processed quality control measures.
MRI data post-processing
Image post-processing and analysis were performed using FreeSurfer software suite (http://
surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/). Surface-based cortical reconstruction and subcortical 
volumetric segmentation procedures have been shown elsewhere53–59. Briefly, three-
dimensional model of the cortical surface was generated using MRI scans with 4 attributes: 
white matter segmentation; tessellation of the gray/white matter boundary; inflation of the 
folded, tessellated surface; and correction of topological defects54, 55. Cortical thickness was 
measured using the distances from each point on the white matter surface to the pial 
surface58. Cortical surface area was measured at the pial surface for the entire cerebrum and 
for each parcel of the Desikan and Destrieux atlases 54, 55, 59, 60.
Statistical analysis
Means ± s.e.m. for each parameter were obtained from samples described in Supplementary 
Table 1. There were no statistical methods used to predetermine sample size and no 
adjustments for multiple comparisons. All statistical analyses were done using Prism 
Chailangkarn et al.
Page 16
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (Graphpad). Prior to statistical analysis comparing means between three to five unmatched 
groups of data, normal distribution was tested using D’Agostino & Pearson omnibus 
normality test and variance similarity was tested using Bartlett’s test for equal variances. 
Means of 3–5 unmatched groups, where normal distribution and equal variances between 
groups were confirmed, were statistically compared using one-way ANOVA and Tukey’s 
post hoc test. Otherwise, Kruskal-Wallis test and Dunn’s multiple comparison test were 
used. Prior to statistical analysis comparing means between two unmatched groups of data, 
normal distribution was tested using D’Agostino & Pearson omnibus normality test and 
variance similarity was tested using F test to compare variances. To compare the means of 
two groups where normal distribution and similar variance between groups were confirmed, 
Student’s t test was used. Otherwise, Mann Whitney test was used. Significance was defined 
as P<0.05(*), P<0.01(**), P<0.001(***) or P<0.0001(****).
Chailangkarn et al.
Page 17
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data
Extended Data Figure 1. WS participants in iPSC study and their neurocognitive and social 
profiles
a, Summary of scores on the Diagnostic Score Sheet (DSS) for WS subjects. b, Table 
showing allele number of genes in WS-deleted region in each subject obtained from qPCR. 
c, Summary of all neurocognitive and social behavioral tests used on this study. d–e, WS 
neurocognitive profiles. Log predictive likelihood ratio for iPSC subjects (identified by 
subject number) calculated as the log of the ratio of the likelihoods for each individual test 
score based on the predictive distributions for TD and WS subjects (d). Values < 0 indicate 
Chailangkarn et al.
Page 18
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 depressed scores consistent with expectations for WS. Predictive distributions for TD 
subjects used published norms (means and standard deviations with assumed normality). 
Predictive distributions for WS subjects were calculated using available WS data (VIQ/PIQ 
n = 81, VMI n = 56, PPVT n = 97) (e), assuming normality and least squares estimation, and 
according to the procedures described elsewhere26. WS parameter estimates for the VMI 
were calculated using censored regression due to a number of WS subjects scoring at the 
instrument floor. f, Description of population included in Benton Face Recognition and 
Judgment of Line Orientation in Figure 1b (TD n = 22 vs. WS n = 65). g, Boxplots for WS 
(red) and TD (blue) subjects on Complex Syntax (WS n = 45; TD n = 47) and Social 
Evaluation (WS n = 44; TD n = 49). Red and blue circles depict scores that are more than 
1.5 times the inter-quartile range away from the median.
Chailangkarn et al.
Page 19
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 2. Generation and characterization of iPSCs
a, Diagram summarizing reprogramming protocol using retrovirus carrying Yamanaka 
transcription factors (see Supplementary Information for details). Scale bar, 200 μm. b, 
Representative images of iPSCs expressing pluripotent markers including Nanog, Lin28, 
Oct4 and SSEA4 assessed by immunofluorescence staining. Scale bar, 200 μm. c, 
Expression of three germ layer markers in iPSC-derived embryoid bodies (EBs); PAX6 
(ectoderm), MSX1 (mesoderm) and AFP (endoderm) assessed by semi quantitative RT-PCR. 
TBP, housekeeping control. d, Cluster analysis showing correlation coefficients of 
microarray profiles of 3 WS dental pulp cells (DPCs), 3 TD DPCs, 3 WS iPSCs, 3 TD 
Chailangkarn et al.
Page 20
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 iPSCs and one ESCs. e, Representative PCR showing silencing of the four transgenes 
(exogenous) in iPSCs. f, Representative images of teratoma from iPSCs showing tissues of 
three germ layers; neural rosettes (ectoderm), cartilage (mesoderm), muscle cells 
(mesoderm) and goblet cells (endoderm). g, Representative image of iPSC chromosomes 
showing its genetic stability assessed by G-banding karyotype analysis. h–i, Spontaneous 
synaptic GABA events (h) and spontaneous synaptic AMPA events (i) in one-month-old 
iPSC-derived neurons.
Extended Data Figure 3. Global gene expression analysis during neuronal differentiation
Chailangkarn et al.
Page 21
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 a, Principal component (PC) analysis plot of embryonic stem cells (ES), induced pluripotent 
stem cells (iPS), neuronal progenitor cells (NPC) and neurons (NE) for TD, WS and pWS88. 
c, Euclidian matrix distance-based heatmap and hierarchical clustering-based dendrogram of 
ES, NPC and NE cells for WD, WS and pWS88 samples. Expression variability between 
samples is indicated by Z-score, varying from green (negative variation) to red (positive 
variation). c, Euclidian matrix distance-based heatmap and hierarchical clustering-based 
dendrogram of pluripotency gene markers for ES, NPC and NE cells for TD, WS and 
pWS88 samples. d, Euclidian matrix distance-based heatmap and hierarchical clustering-
based dendrogram of neuronal gene markers for iPS, NPC and NE cells for TD, WS and 
pWS88 samples. Expression variability between samples is indicated by Z-score, varying 
from green (negative variation) to red (positive variation). e, Specific cell type-based 
clustering analysis of biological replicates subjected to RNA-seq for the WS-related genes in 
three stages during differentiation (iPS, NPC and NE). f, Fold change variation of WS-
related genes in different cell lines. Ideogram of chromosome 7 (band 7q11.23) 
corresponding to the commonly deleted region with the WS-related genes. Fold change 
variation of normalized WS-related gene expression in NPCs and neurons (NE) compared to 
TDs. Non-represented fold change corresponds to those genes having high expression 
variability between biological replicates, or having very low expression values. g, 
Expression of FZD9 gene in iPSC, NPCs and neurons from TD and WS. Error bars are 
represented by standard error. h, Venn diagram showing correlation of significant 
differentially expressed genes between TD, pWS88 and WS during neuronal differentiation. 
Significantly enriched GO terms found for down-regulated (red histogram) and up-regulated 
(blue histogram) differentially expressed genes between TD and WS in NPC. Significantly 
enriched GO terms found for down-regulated (red histogram) and up-regulated (blue 
histogram) differentially expressed genes between TD and WS in neurons (NE). Vertical line 
(black) corresponds to significant p-value (0.05). i, Enriched GO metabolic process terms 
found in NPC of WS samples correlated with the GO found by a similar comparison 
performed by Adamo et al. (2014)13.
Chailangkarn et al.
Page 22
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 4. Defect in WS NPC apoptosis and role of FZD9
a, Ratio of NPC number on day 4 over day 0 relative to TD. Data are shown as mean ± 
s.e.m. n = number of clones. b, High percentage (>95%) of Sox1/Sox2-positive and Pax6/
Nestin-positive cell population was comparably observed in TD, typical WS and pWS88 
NPCs assessed by FACS. Data are shown as mean ± s.e.m. n = number of clones. c, 
Microfluidics of C1 chip used to capture live single cells (calcein+ cell). d, Outliers 
exclusion based on the recommended/default LoD value 24, analyzed by Fluidigm Singular 
3.0. Outliers were removed manually based on the sample median Log2Ex values. e, 
Representative example of non-normalized Ct Plot, indicated with the rectangle in the heat 
Chailangkarn et al.
Page 23
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 map. Cells are shown in rows and genes in columns. The range of cycle threshold (Ct) 
values is color coded from low (blue) to high (red) and absent (black). f, Violin plots of all 
96 genes showing the comparison between TD and WS NPCs from the single cell analyses 
(Log2ex values). The majority of genes show unimodal expression distribution. g, Volcano 
plot of single-cell expression data. Plot illustrates differences in expression patterns of target 
genes of iPSC-derived NPCs. The dotted lines represent more than or equal to 3.0-fold 
differentially expressed genes between the groups at P<0.05 (unpaired two-sample t-test). h, 
Schematic diagram summarizing NPC preparation for proliferation assay and representative 
scatter plot showing cells in each cycle phase (G1, S and G2/M). i, No significant 
differences in percentage of the BrdU-positive population between TD, typical WS and 
pWS88 NPCs. j, Schematic diagram summarizing NPC preparation for apoptosis analysis 
and representative analyzed data for DNA fragmentation (left) and caspase assay (right). k–
m, Changes in ratio of NPC number on day 4 over day 0 relative to TD (k), percentage of 
subG1 population (l) and percentage of population with high caspase activity (m) of pWS88 
NPCs when treated with shFZD9 and shControl. n, Increase in cell number day 4/day 0 
upon overexpression of FZD9 in WS iPSC-derived NPCs. Data are shown as mean ± s.e.m. 
for each individual. n = technical replicates. For i and k–m, data are shown as mean ± s.e.m. 
n = number of clones, *P<0.05, **P<0.01, ***P<0.001, one-way ANOVA and Tukey’s post 
hoc test (i), Kruskal-Wallis test and Dunn’s multiple comparison test (k–m).
Chailangkarn et al.
Page 24
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 5. Single-cell analysis of WS and TD iPSC-derived neurons
a–b, Outliers exclusion based on LoD = 24, analyzed by Fluidigm Singular 3.0. Outliers 
were removed manually based on the sample median Log2Ex values. c, Heatmap of number 
of genes with ANOVA P-value < 0.05 (82 genes in total). d, Unsupervised hierarchical 
clustering of 672 single-cell of WS and TD iPSC-derived neurons identified cell sub-
populations not linked with the genotype. Cells are shown in rows and genes in columns. 
Log2- gene expression levels were converted to a global Z-score (blue is the lowest value 
and red is highest). Genes were clustered using the Pearson correlation method and cells 
Chailangkarn et al.
Page 25
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 were clustered using Euclidean method. e, PCA projections of the 96 genes, showing the 
contribution of each gene to the first two PCs. f, Violin plots of all 96 genes showing the 
comparison between TD, WS and pWS88 neurons from the single cell analyses (Log2ex 
values).
Extended Data Figure 6. Morphometric analysis of WS-derived CTIP2-positive cortical neurons
a, Schematic diagram summarizing preparation of neurons for evaluation through 
morphometric analysis. b, Representative images of EGFP- and CTIP2-positive neuron 
(arrowhead) and tracing. Scale bar, 200 μm. c–f, No significant differences in dendritic 
Chailangkarn et al.
Page 26
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 segment numbers (c), number of branching points (d), dendritic spine density (e) and soma 
area (f) between TD, typical WS and pWS88 were observed. g–m, Morphometric analysis 
shown as individual subject for total dendritic length (g), dendritic tree number (h), dendritic 
spine number (i), dendritic segment number (j), number of branching points (k), dendritic 
spine density (l) and soma area (m). n, Four-weeks-old neurons were dissociated and plated 
to trace total neurite length every hour, in a total of 6 h. Representative images of traced 
neurons plated after 0 and 6 h from TD, typical WS and atypical pWS88 iPSC-derived 
neurons. o–r, Morphometric analysis showing significant differences among TD, typical WS 
and pWS88 in the initial neurite growth velocity (6h period). r, Morphometric analysis 
shown for individual subjects for neurite growth velocity for 6h interval. n = number of 
traced neurons. s–u, No significant changes were observed in the total dendritic length (s), 
dendritic segment number (t) and dendritic spine number (u) of TD neurons plated in 
different densities (300–1200 cells/mm2). v, Individual channels of puncta quantification of 
post- and pre-synaptic markers (Homer1 / Vglut1). Scale bar, 2 μm. For c–m and o–u, data 
are shown as mean ± s.e.m. n = number of traced neurons, *P<0.05, **P<0.01, Kruskal-
Wallis test (c–f), one-way ANOVA and Tukey’s post hoc test (o–q, r–u).
Chailangkarn et al.
Page 27
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 7. Alteration in calcium transient in WS iPSC-derived neurons and 
morphometric analysis of cortical layer V/VI pyramidal neurons in postmortem tissue
a, Puncta quantification of post- and pre-synaptic markers. The synaptic proteins Vglut (pre-
synaptic) and Homer1 (post-synaptic) were used as markers and only co-localized puncta on 
MAP2+ cells were quantified and graphed. Data are shown as the mean ± s.e.m. n = number 
of neurons. b, Schematic diagram summarizing preparation of neurons for calcium transient 
analysis. Representative images of live neuronal culture expressing RFP driven by synapsin 
promoter and the uptake of Fluo-4AM calcium dye. c, Blockade of calcium transient by 
TTX inhibition of synaptic activity. d, Representative images of calcium transient in single 
neurons (RFP-positive, arrowhead) from TD (top), typical WS (middle) and pWS88 
Chailangkarn et al.
Page 28
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (bottom). Number in the lower right of each figure represents each time point (second) when 
change in Fluo-4AM occurs. e–f, Calcium transient analysis shown as individual for 
frequency (e) and percentage of signaling neurons (f). Data are shown as mean ± s.e.m. n = 
number of fields analyzed. g, MEA analyses revealed an increase in spontaneous neuronal 
spikes. Data shows individual clones. i, Table showing subjects used for the analysis. h, 
Raster plot of TD and WS iPSC-derived neurons analyzed by multi-electrode array. i, Table 
showing subjects used for the analysis. j–l, No significant differences in dendrite number (j), 
dendritic spine density (k) and soma area (l) between TD and typical WS were observed. 
Data are shown as mean ± s.e.m. n = number of traced neurons, two-sided unpaired 
Student’s t test. m–s, Morphometric analysis shown for each individual for total dendritic 
length (m), dendritic spine number (n), segment number (o), branching point number (p), 
dendrite number (q), dendritic spine density (r) and soma area (s). Data are shown as mean 
± s.e.m. n = number of traced neurons.
Extended Data Table 1
List of top ten most significant differentially expressed genes in WS compared to TD for 
NPC and neurons.
NPC: TD x WS
Gene name
Description
Fold-change
p-value
SCN4A
sodium channel, voltage gated, type IV alpha subunit
−11.92
9.72E-10
SLC7A14
solute carrier family 7, member 14
−15.85
1.85E-12
SLC38A5
solute carrier family 38, member 5
−8.51
5.67E-09
ADGRA2
adhesion G protein-coupled receptor A2
−30.50
3.26E-08
SLC1A6
solute carrier family 1 (high affinity aspartate/glutamate transporter), 
member 6
8.03
1.56E-08
CXCL12
chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 12
−7.51
3.33E-08
SLC30A3
solute carrier family 30 (zinc transporter), member 3
10.28
8.32E-09
SLC8A2
solute carrier family 8 (sodium/calcium exchanger), member 2
−16.84
5.36E-13
HTR1B
5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin) receptor 1B, G protein-coupled
−10.96
8.20E-09
SLC24A2
solute carrier family 24 (sodium/potassium/calcium exchanger), member 2
−13.25
4.43E-10
NPC: TD x pWS88
Gene name
Description
Fold-change
p-value
GABRA3
gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) A receptor, alpha 3
14.71
6.30E-10
SYT13
synaptotagmin XIII
6.55
1.87E-08
PPP2R2C
protein phosphatase 2, regulatory subunit B, gamma
15.74
7.69E-09
CELF4
CUGBP, Elav-like family member 4
7.27
1.22E-07
TRIM67
tripartite motif containing 67
15.08
6.52E-10
ADRA2A
adrenoceptor alpha 2A
8.44
1.42E-07
JAKMIP1
janus kinase and microtubule interacting protein 1
19.56
7.21E-09
CA10
carbonic anhydrase X
74.54
8.50E-10
LHFPL4
lipoma HMGIC fusion partner-like 4
8.31
5.71E-08
ACSL6
acyl-CoA synthetase long-chain family member 6
7.07
7.63E-08
Chailangkarn et al.
Page 29
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Neuron: TD x pWS88
Gene name
Description
Fold-change
p-value
CRYM
crystallin, um
7.68
3.21E-05
RASL12
RAS-like, family 12
13.41
6.04E-08
PDLIM1
PDZ and LIM domain 1
5.44
1.00E-05
ZSCAN10
zinc finger and SCAN domain containing 10
58.80
6.22E-06
ANO1
anoctamin 1, calcium activated chloride channel
9.61
1.78E-06
DUSP23
dual specificity phosphatase 23
5.09
0.000114507
SLC16A5
solute carrier family 16 (monocarboxylate transporter), member 5
33.27
8.90E-05
KRT19
keratin 19, type I
9.94
0.000130985
TMEM30B
transmembrane protein 30B
17.09
2.11E-07
KIF18B
kinesin family member 18B
4.50
0.000217123
Neuron: TD x WS
Gene name
Description
Fold-change
p-value
FAM19A5
family with sequence similarity 19 (chemokine (C-C motif)-like), 
member A5
1076.39
2.23E-10
TPM2
tropomyosin 2 (beta)
−5.88
2.99E-08
SCN4A
sodium channel, voltage gated, type IV alpha subunit
−45.81
1.63E-07
IGSF21
immunoglobin superfamily, member 21
8.20
2.33E-07
TNNT2
troponin T type 2 (cardiac)
−29.87
3.58E-07
PXMP4
peroxisomal membrane protein 4, 24kDa
−7.39
3.83E-05
ZSCAN10
zinc finger and SCAN domain containing 10
35.64
9.74E-05
MYOZ1
filamin-, Actinin- And Telethonin-Binding Protein
−6.64
0.000119159
LAD1
ladinin 1
−24.81
0.000213205
PHOSPHO1
phosphatase, Orphan 1
33.95
0.000266061
Extended Data Table 2
Most significant (p-value<0.05) enriched GO terms in NPC of WS compared to TD samples.
Down-regulated genes in WS compared to TD in NPC cells
GO TERM
GO Description
−Log (p-value)
P-value
Genes
GO:0005578
proteinaceous extracellular matrix
18.3452855
4.52E-19
WNT16,MMP25,DCN,LAMC3,COL16A1,WNT11,ADAMTS2,LAMB1,PAPLN,MMP9,WISP1,ECM2,COL1A1,CPZ,EFEMP1,LTBP2,COL10A1,COL21A1,OMD,ADAMTS8,WNT10A,EMILIN1,ADAMTS14,KERA, FBLN5,ADAMTS17,COL6A1,COL6A2,ADAMTS10,HMCN1,ADAMTS16,HAPLN1,ADAMTS4,COL6A3,COL1A2,MFAP4,SOST,NPNT,COL6A5,HPSE2,VWC2,PRELP,SPOCK3,LAMA2,ADAMTSL2,COL28A1
GO:0048856
anatomical structure development
16.80415844
1.57E-17
WNT16,MYLIP,TFAP2B,BAZ1B,CD4,DCN,SEMA3B,ADGRA2,RUNX3,IBSP,TG,ALX4,CAMK2B,TLE2,MAOB,RORA,EPHA8,TP63,PLXNA2,RARB,MEF2C,WNT11,TFAP2C,LAMB1,DSP,NEFH,MMP9,HCK, SGCG,FLT1,CRISPLD2,CPQ,MET,COBL,ENG,PITX3,COL1A1,CPT1A,CYP27B1,VDR,EYA4,TFEB,PCDHB2,PCDHB5,PCDHB6,PDGFRB,FN1,TFAP2E,LPPR4,RCAN3,TNNT2,BCL11A,PCDHB14, 
PCDHB12,INHBA,COL10A1,BMP2,TCF15,SIX1,HSPA2,PTPRB,CDH15,SERPINF1,LYVE1,PDGFRA,TBX3,HEY2,AGT,WNT10A,RAPGEF5,MYO7A,MSTN,ARHGAP24,CDH11,COL6A1,COL6A2,ITGA10, CASQ1,LEFTY2,EPHA5,HAPLN1,ARHGAP26,DCDC2,CACNA1C,EDNRA,UNC5D,ZIC3,MMP14,CACNA1D,NBL1,FGF17,ADAMTS4,STC1,ITGB2,PTH1R,PLXDC1,ALOX15,BRINP3,MSX1,FZD5,COL6A3, 
ELF3,SERPINI1,HEYL,PITX2,NPY1R,NPY5R,ITGA2,DACT2,COL1A2,SYK,DACT1,ANPEP,BATF2,NPNT,EFNA1,GPR183,BNC1,ALCAM,SIX2,SGCD,HAS2,PTGER4,NINJ2,SCG2,RARG,SSH3,ABLIM3, CSPG4,CMKLR1,LY6H,PCDHB9,TH,MAB21L1,GREM2,ADGRB1,FES,CSF1R,NTM,CAMK1D,GAS6,OPCML,SCN5A,TBX1,ALDH1A3,SLITRK6,SGCZ,TNFAIP2,NTF3,RTN4RL1,PDE2A,DNER,VWC2, PRELP,TDRD7,AKR1C3,RYR1,MME,LAMA2,PCDHB11,PAPSS2,MAFB,POU5F1,PCDHA7,PCDHA5,DPF3,ITGA1,GSTA1,PCDHA11,PCDHA10
GO:0007155
cell adhesion
16.70678997
1.96E-17
CD4,CLDN11,IBSP,TNC,LAMC3,RORA,EPHA8,COL16A1,LAMB1,FERMT1,HCK,SRPX,WISP1,ECM2,ENG,CXCL12,PRPH2,PCDHB2,PCDHB5,PCDHB6,FN1,PCDH17,PCDHB14,PCDHB12,ADGRE5, TNFAIP6,OMD,ADGRE2,ISLR,CDH15,MYBPH,LYVE1,PDGFRA,EMILIN1,PCDH10,FBLN5,CDH11,COL6A1,COL6A2,ITGA10,HAPLN1,CNTNAP5,ITGB2,AZGP1,SNED1,COL6A3,IGFBP7,ITGA2,EDIL3, 
SYK,MFAP4,NPNT,EFNA1,PCDH7,ALCAM,LRRN2,PTGER4,NINJ2,COL6A5,PCDHB9,ADGRB1,NTM,GAS6,OPCML,PKP3,THBS2,LAMA2,PCDHB11,ITGBL1,PCDHA7,PCDHA5,ITGA1,COL28A1, PCDHA13,PCDHGC3,ACTN3,PCDHA11,PCDHA10,PCDHGA7
GO:0030198
extracellular matrix organization
13.94978657
1.12E-14
DCN,IBSP,TNC,LAMC3,COL16A1,ADAMTS2,LAMB1,MMP9,ENG,COL1A1,EFEMP1,FN1,COL10A1,COL21A1,BMP2,EMILIN1,ADAMTS14,FBLN5,COL6A1,COL6A2,ITGA10,CTSK,HAPLN1,MMP14, ADAMTS4,ITGB2,CTSS,COL6A3,ITGA2,KLKB1,COL1A2,MFAP4,LTBP3,NPNT,HAS2,COL6A5,GAS6,LAMA2,ITGA1,COL28A1
GO:0005576
extracellular region
9.533946889
2.92E-10
WNT16,SCIN,MMP25,SYT7,DCN,SEMA3B,CLDN11,GPRC5A,ACPP,EHD2,IBSP,TNC,FAM65C,TG,LAMC3,ENTPD2,LY75,TLE2,BCL3,MAOB,FRMPD1,COL16A1,WNT11,ADAMTS2,LAMB1,DSP,SUSD2, APOL4,PAPLN,MMP9,BPI,MCF2,PLP2,ACP5,FLT1,WFDC1,CRISPLD2,CRYM,PDGFRL,CPQ,WISP1,NDRG1,MET,STX1A,PCOLCE,ECM2,ENG,PTGDS,CXCL12,PNPO,COL1A1,CPZ,OAS3,PDGFRB, 
POMC,EFEMP1,FN1,IL1R1,QPCT,ANGPTL1,VAMP8,LTBP2,ENOX1,CAT,CPXM2,XPNPEP2,INHBA,ADGRE5,COL10A1,EDN3,COL21A1,CPNE5,BMP2,PCSK2,CFP,HSPA2,OMD,TUBA4A,FGL2,ISLR, CDH15,DPP6,SERPINF1,GSTT2B,LYVE1,IAH1,ADAMTS8,DYSF,AGT,WNT10A,EMILIN1,ADAMTS14,MSTN,RBP5,KERA,SLC46A3,FBLN5,ADAMTS17,CDH11,COL6A1,COL6A2,NTN5,ADAMTS10,FCN3, 
HMCN1,CTSK,LEFTY2,TMEFF2,ADAMTS16,HAPLN1,GABRB2,PLA2G7,IGSF1,LCN9,SLC5A12,CCDC3,IGSF10,PLA2R1,TMPRSS11D,MMP21,GNA14,WIF1,NBL1,FGF17,ADAMTS4,STC1,C1R,ITGB2, PTH1R,AZGP1,FGFR4,PLXDC1,CXCL16,ITIH3,BRINP3,SNED1,HAAO,CTSS,S100A11,COL6A3,IGFBP7,SERPINI1,ALB,CDCP1,PRSS12,EDIL3,KLKB1,COL1A2,CHMP4C,AKR1E2,VWA2,MFAP4,ACSM1, 
ANPEP,GPT,SOST,LTBP3,NPNT,FSTL5,EFNA1,ALCAM,CYTL1,SOSTDC1,SCG2,COL6A5,HPSE2,CSPG4,ADGRG2,C1QTNF1,VPS37D,CLEC14A,EPS8L2,GREM2,PENK,C1S,GRID1,GAS6,OPCML, OLFML1,ALDH1A3,FAM19A3,MUC6,TNFAIP2,FAM212A,NTF3,RTN4RL1,THBS2,THSD4,VWC2,PRELP,PLAC9,SPOCK3,HLA-DRB1,AKR1C3,RYR1,MME,LAMA2,ADAMTSL2,SULT1C2,HLA- DRB5,ITGBL1,RASSF9,TGM2,ITGA1,COL28A1,APOL6,PCDHGC3,GSTA1,C4A,ACTN3,PCDHA10
GO:0005615
extracellular space
8.287607079
5.16E-09
WNT16,DCN,ACPP,IBSP,TNC,TG,TLE2,WNT11,LAMB1,APOL4,MMP9,FLT1,WFDC1,CPQ,WISP1,PCOLCE,ENG,PTGDS,COL1A1,OAS3,POMC,EFEMP1,FN1,ANGPTL1,LTBP2,ENOX1,CPXM2,INHBA, ADGRE5,EDN3,BMP2,PCSK2,CFP,HSPA2,FGL2,SERPINF1,AGT,WNT10A,MSTN,FBLN5,COL6A2,FCN3,CTSK,LEFTY2,PLA2G7,NBL1,FGF17,ADAMTS4,C1R,AZGP1,PLXDC1,CXCL16,CTSS,S100A11, COL6A3,IGFBP7,SERPINI1,ALB,KLKB1,COL1A2,VWA2,ACSM1,ANPEP,SOST,CYTL1,SOSTDC1,SCG2,C1QTNF1,C1S,GAS6,TNFAIP2,VWC2,SPOCK3,C4A
GO:0005886
plasma membrane
8.166494631
6.82E-09
CALCR,ABCC8,TBXA2R,SCN4A,CACNA2D2,MYLIP,MMP25,CD4,HFE,CLDN11,GPRC5A,ACPP,SLC38A5,ATP1A2,ADGRA2,EHD2,PTGER3,CYBA,ENTPD2,LY75,MCOLN3,CAMK2B,FRMPD1,CNGB1, EPHA8,MGLL,PLXNA2,PAG1,ATP8B1,IL12RB2,KCNK2,GABRP,DSP,KCNK6,SUSD2,SLC10A1,SLC8A3,FERMT1,HCK,BPI,PLP2,NALCN,SGCG,FLT1,NDRG1,MET,VIPR2,COBL,STX1A,ENG,RNF43, 
TCIRG1,TNS2,KCNA1,OAS3,ADGRD1,PCDHB2,PCDHB5,PCDHB6,SLC27A6,PDGFRB,IL1R1,LPPR4,SLC8A2,SGK1,VAMP8,PCDH17,GPR68,GRIA2,PCDHB14,PCDHB12,ENOX1,XPNPEP2,ADGRE5, PMEPA1,HSPA2,PTPRB,ADGRE2,ADCY4,CDH15,ATP1A4,LYVE1,TRPM1,PDGFRA,HTR1B,DYSF,SLC19A3,PCDH10,FBLN5,DISP2,CDH11,BEST4,ITGA10,RGS16,UNC80,SLC22A14,EPHA5,GABRB2, 
SLC22A3,HTR2C,SLC26A7,SLC5A12,PLCH2,LYPD6B,CACNA2D4,CACNA1C,ANO4,EDNRA,GABRA2,PLA2R1,TMPRSS11D,MCOLN2,FGD5,SLC24A2,GNA14,MMP14,CACNA1D,LYPD5,ABCG1,ITGB2, PTH1R,AZGP1,FGFR4,LY6E,PLXDC1,ALOX15,CXCL16,DHRS3,FZD5,CDCP1,MST1R,PRSS12,NPY1R,NPY5R,ITGA2,KLKB1,ACSL6,GRIK2,HCN1,SYK,ANPEP,PARM1,AFAP1L2,GSG1L,EFNA1,PTAFR, 
Chailangkarn et al.
Page 30
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Down-regulated genes in WS compared to TD in NPC cells
GO TERM
GO Description
−Log (p-value)
P-value
Genes
NPR1,GPR183,PCDH7,TM4SF1,SLC16A5,SIX2,SGCD,PRKCDBP,HAS2,KCND3,PTGER4,NINJ2,SYNPO,GPR22,HPSE2,EVC2,BNC2,CSPG4,ADGRG2,C1QTNF1,CMKLR1,SLCO3A1,LY6H,EPS8L2, PCDHB9,TH,GPR139,ADGRB1,FES,CSF1R,NTM,GRID1,RGS7,OPCML,SCN5A,PKP3,SLITRK6,TMEM173,ANKS1B,SGCZ,IFNLR1,PRKG1,EVI2B,RTN4RL1,PDE2A,TPCN1,QRFPR,NPSR1,GJA4,DNER, OR7D2,CLEC2A,NKAIN2,HLA-DRB1,RYR1,MME,CHRNG,PCDHB11,HLA-
DRB5,PPAPDC1A,PCDHA7,PCDHA5,ITGA1,PCDHA13,PCDHGC3,C4A,FMN1,PCDHA11,PCDHA10,PCDHGA7
GO:0055085
transmembrane transport
7.872963268
1.34E-08
ABCC8,SCN4A,CACNA2D2,SLC7A14,SLC38A5,ATP1A2,MCOLN3,ATP2C2,CNGB1,ATP2A3,RARB,SLC25A43,ATP8B1,KCNK2,FXYD5,SLC17A6,GABRP,KCNK6,SLC10A1,SLC8A3,PLP2,NALCN,CPT1A, TCIRG1,KCNA1,SLC27A6,PEX5L,STEAP3,SLC8A2,SGK1,GRIA2,ADCY4,ATP1A4,TRPM1,ADAMTS8,SLC19A3,SLC46A3,BEST4,CASQ1,UNC80,SLC22A14,SLC25A48,GABRB2,SLC22A3,SLC26A7, 
SLC5A12,CACNA2D4,CACNA1C,ANO4,GABRA2,MCOLN2,SLC24A2,CACNA1D,ABCG1,AZGP1,COX7A1,ALB,GRIK2,HCN1,SLC16A5,KCND3,RARG,SLCO3A1,SLC17A8,SLC9A9,GRID1,SLC25A18, GAS6,SCN5A,PDE2A,TPCN1,RYR1,CHRNG
Up-regulated genes in WS compared to TD in NPC cells
GO TERM
GO Description
−Log (p-value)
P-value
Genes
GO:0007155
cell adhesion
2.964750421
0.00108455
ITGB5,TNR,TEK,PARVG,CDHR1,MPZL2,GRID2,ACAN,PIK3CD,EGFL7,CLDN6,GCNT1,CLDN4,PTPRT,DPP4
GO:0005886
plasma membrane
2.391582019
0.00405899
GABRA3,ERBB3,ITGB5,TNFRSF10A,SLC1A6,SLC6A12,GLP1R,SLC30A3,ABCG2,TEK,CSMD2,SDC4,BTN1A1,F12,PDE6B,MAP7,PARVG,RHCG,PPAP2C,ZNF185,PLIN2,CDHR1,KIRREL3,DLG2,GPR158, GRID2,ADCY8,XKR8,F11R,CLIC6,WNT4,OXGR1,OSCAR,PIK3CD,MRGPRF,GRM8,KCNB2,EPHA10,ADRA2C,CLDN6,CLDN4,PTPRT,DPP4,OCLN,CD247,HLA-DOA,SHISA9,HLA-DMB
GO:0006629
lipid metabolic process
2.063032094
0.00864904
ST3GAL6,ST8SIA5,SDC4,APOC1,CYP2J2,CYP11A1,PPAP2C,PLIN2,WNT4,HACD1,PIK3CD,ACOT12,FADS6,UGT8,SPTSSB
GO:0007009
plasma membrane organization
1.872296029
0.0134185
MAP7,XKR8,F11R,WNT4
GO:0006790
sulfur compound metabolic 
process
1.823703224
0.0150071
MGST1,ST3GAL6,SDC4,ACOT12,OPLAH,CHST6
GO:0007267
cell-cell signaling
1.725551179
0.0188126
GABRA3,PTPRN,SLC1A6,SLC6A12,TEK,DLG2,GRID2,ADCY8,KCNB2,MAFA,ADRA2C
GO:0048856
anatomical structure development
1.689882589
0.0204229
ERBB3,MYLK,ITGB5,HTATIP2,TNR,HPCAL4,PADI2,TEK,LIN28A,CHI3L1,TMOD1,RHCG,RP11-35N6.1,KIRREL3,MPZL2,DLG2,GRID2,ACAN,F11R,WNT4,HACD1,KRT19,PIK3CD,EGFL7,UGT8,ALX1,EPHA10, ADRA2C,CLDN4
GO:0005576
extracellular region
1.604486647
0.0248607
ST3GAL6,ERBB3,MYLK,ITGB5,ZDHHC15,CPVL,ENPP5,TNR,PADI2,TEK,NPPB,SDC4,BTN1A1,SPINK2,PRRG3,APOC1,F12,CHI3L1,CYP2J2,RHCG,CBLC,PLIN2,KIRREL3,ACAN,ITLN2,F11R,VWA5B1,CLIC6, WNT4,MUC3A,OSCAR,KRT19,EGFL7,MRGPRF,CREG2,EPHA10,BEX5,ADAMTSL5,PABPC1L2A,DPP4,GPX3,FAM19A5
GO:0007010
cytoskeleton organization
1.404009141
0.0394449
MYLK,ITGB5,CORO2A,MAP7,TMOD1,PARVG,F11R,CDC42BPG,KRT19
GO:0016757
transferase activity, transferring 
glycosyl groups
1.395223326
0.040251
ST3GAL6,ST8SIA5,GALNT14,UGT8,GCNT1
Extended Data Table 3
Most significant (p-value<0.05) enriched GO terms in neurons of WS compared to TD 
samples.
Down-regulated genes in WS compared to TD in neurons
GO TERM
GO Description
−Log(p-value)
P-value
Genes
GO:0043167
ion binding
2.995842055
0.00100962
BAZ1B,FMO1,VRK2,DSG2,RFC2,ME1,ATP2A3,ADAMTS2,MYL9,TNNC2,ENO3,FOLR1,ACSS3,TRIM38,PCDHB5,TNNC1,ABCG2,CAT, ADGRE5,MYH2,ADGRE2,ZNF835,ATP8B3,MTL5,GSTM1,ACTA1,SH3RF2,ACTC1,ALOX15,CAPN13,ZNF283,ZNF558,ACOX2,GSTM4, SLFN12,RHOD,RNF212,ZNF626,SERPINA5,S100A13,S100A4,ZNF502,ZFP28,ZNF560,ZNF667,PEG3,ZNF726,ZNF737,ZNF578
GO:0008092
cytoskeletal protein binding
2.841323964
0.00144104
USH1C,MYBPC2,TNNC2,STX1A,TNNC1,TNNT2,MYH2,ACTA1,ACTC1,MYOZ1,TPM2
GO:0003013
circulatory system process
2.42626763
0.00374742
ELN,TNNC1,AGT,ACTC1,CD34
GO:0006950
response to stress
2.270514469
0.00536396
TBXA2R,BAZ1B,VRK2,RFC2,ATP2A3,IL4R,LAT2,MYL9,TRIM38,CAT,ADGRE5,MYH2,ADGRE2,MTL5,GSTM1,PARP9,ALOX15,ACOT11, BATF2,CD34,BHLHA15,SIGIRR,IFITM2,SERPINA5,HLA-DRB1,HLA-DRB5,POU5F1
GO:0005198
structural molecule activity
2.015682009
0.00964535
MYOM2,ELN,MYBPC2,MYL9,MYH2,TINAGL1,ACTA1,LAD1,TPM2
GO:0005829
cytosol
1.675077895
0.0211311
USH1C,ME1,MYBPC2,MYL9,TNNC2,STX1A,EIF4H,ENO3,TRIM38,TNNC1,TNNT2,MYH2,GSTM1,PARP9,ACTA1,ACTC1,ALOX15, GSTM4,RHOD,ALDH1A3,S100A13,TPM2,POU5F1
GO:0005777
peroxisome
1.574933909
0.0266113
PXMP4,CAT,ACOX2
GO:0003674
Molecular function
1.54856974
0.0282768
USH1C,TBXA2R,SCN4A,BAZ1B,FMO1,ACPP,VRK2,MYOM2,DSG2,PREX2,ELN,RFC2,ME1,ATP2A3,IL4R,LAT2,MYBPC2,ADAMTS2, PROKR2,MYL9,PXMP4,TNNC2,STX1A,TBL2,EIF4H,ENO3,FOLR1,ACSS3,TRIM38,SLC22A2,PCDHB5,SLC27A6,TNNC1,TNNT2, ABCG2,CAT,ADGRE5,MYH2,ADGRE2,ZNF835,ATP8B3,NSUN5,MTL5,DMGDH,GSTM1,AGT,THUMPD2,PARP9,TINAGL1,ACTA1, 
RASSF3,SH3RF2,LAD1,ACTC1,ALOX15,ACOT11,UBXN10,CAPN13,RBM47,TC2N,ZNF283,ZNF558,BATF2,ACOX2,GSTM4,CYTL1, PRKCDBP,SLFN12,RHOD,CD34,CHRNA9,GCNT4,MYOZ1,RNF212,BHLHA15,MAATS1,ALDH1A3,RNLS,RBM43,SIGIRR,CCK, ZNF626,LRRIQ4,SERPINA5,S100A13,HLA-DRB1,S100A4,ZNF502,ZFP28,SLC2A10,ZNF560,ZNF667,PEG3,TPM2,HLA-DRB5,LAYN, 
POU5F1,ZNF726,ANKRD65,ZNF737,ZNF578,SLC22A31,TCF24
GO:0016765
transferase activity, 
transferring alkyl or aryl 
(other than methyl) groups
1.475366347
0.0334683
GSTM1,GSTM4
GO:0016887
ATPase activity
1.459248951
0.0347337
RFC2,ATP2A3,TNNT2,ABCG2,ATP8B3,ACTC1
GO:0016874
ligase activity
1.406285389
0.0392387
RFC2,ACSS3,TRIM38,SLC27A6,SH3RF2,RNF212
GO:0015979
photosynthesis
1.387345392
0.0409878
RFC2
GO:0005615
extracellular space
1.320715681
0.0477842
ACPP,ENO3,ADGRE5,AGT,TINAGL1,ACTA1,ACTC1,CYTL1,SERPINA5,S100A13,S100A4
Chailangkarn et al.
Page 31
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Up-regulated genes in WS compared to TD in neurons
GO TERM
GO Description
−Log(p-value)
P-value
Genes
GO:0001071
nucleic acid binding transcription 
factor activity
2.409059017
0.00389889
PITX1,TFAP2C,HAND1,NR5A2,IRF6,ZSCAN10,KLF4,ALX1,DMBX1,FOXB2
GO:0008233
peptidase activity
1.531733923
0.0293945
HPN,PRSS16,RHBDF2,ADAMTS16,USP41,TMPRSS2
GO:0009790
embryo development
1.354676981
0.0441899
HPN,HAND1,NR5A2,KLF4
GO:0006091
generation of precursor 
metabolites and energy
1.330439536
0.0467262
ALDOC,MT-ND2,MT-ND4,MT-ND1
GO:0048856
anatomical structure development
1.312454095
0.0487019
PITX1,TFAP2C,HPN,ALDOC,HAND1,NR5A2,IRF6,ZSCAN10,KLF4,PRDM14,BMP6,ISL2,PROK2,PHOSPHO1,ALX1,DMBX1
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by grants from the California Institute for Regenerative Medicine (CIRM) TR2-01814 and 
TR4-06747, the National Institutes of Health through the P01 NICHD033113, NIH Director’s New Innovator 
Award Program 1-DP2-OD006495-01, R01MH094753, R01MH103134, U19MH107367 and a NARSAD 
Independent Investigator Grant to A.R.M., grants from the Engmann Foundation, the JPB Foundation and Helmsley 
Foundation to F.H.G., the Royal Thai Government Scholarship to T.C., CIRM postdoctoral fellowship to C.A.T., the 
Rita L. Atkinson Graduate fellowship to B.H-M. Human tissue was obtained from the NICHD Brain and Tissue 
Bank for Developmental Disorders at the University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD. We would like to acknowledge 
Dr. Kristen Jepsen at Institute of Genomic Medicine at UCSD for the DNA bead arrays and members of the Willert 
laboratory (UCSD) for the assistance with the Wnt pathway experiments. We would like to thank all TD 
participants and WS individuals and their families.
References
1. Korenberg JR, et al. VI. Genome structure and cognitive map of Williams syndrome. Journal of 
cognitive neuroscience. 2000; 12(Suppl 1):89–107. [PubMed: 10953236] 
2. Meyer-Lindenberg A, et al. Neural basis of genetically determined visuospatial construction deficit 
in Williams syndrome. Neuron. 2004; 43:623–631. [PubMed: 15339645] 
3. Bellugi U, Lichtenberger L, Mills D, Galaburda A, Korenberg JR. Bridging cognition, the brain and 
molecular genetics: evidence from Williams syndrome. Trends in Neurosciences. 1999; 22:197–
207. [PubMed: 10322491] 
4. Bellugi U, Lichtenberger L, Jones W, Lai Z, St George MI. The neurocognitive profile of Williams 
Syndrome: a complex pattern of strengths and weaknesses. J Cogn Neurosci. 2000; 12(Suppl 1):7–
29. [PubMed: 10953231] 
5. Doyle TF, Bellugi U, Korenberg JR, Graham J. “Everybody in the world is my friend” 
hypersociability in young children with Williams syndrome. American Journal of Medical Genetics 
Part A. 2004; 124A:263–273. [PubMed: 14708099] 
6. Dai L, et al. Is it Williams syndrome? GTF2IRD1 implicated in visual-spatial construction and 
GTF2I in sociability revealed by high resolution arrays. Am J Med Genet A. 2009; 149A:302–314. 
[PubMed: 19205026] 
7. Edelmann L, et al. An atypical deletion of the Williams-Beuren syndrome interval implicates genes 
associated with defective visuospatial processing and autism. Journal of Medical Genetics. 2007; 
44:136–143. [PubMed: 16971481] 
8. Chailangkarn T, Acab A, Muotri AR. Modeling neurodevelopmental disorders using human 
neurons. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2012; 22:785–790. [PubMed: 22717528] 
9. Ewart AK, et al. Hemizygosity at the elastin locus in a developmental disorder, Williams syndrome. 
Nat Genet. 1993; 5:11–16. [PubMed: 7693128] 
Chailangkarn et al.
Page 32
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 10. Jarvinen-Pasley A, et al. Defining the social phenotype in Williams syndrome: a model for linking 
gene, the brain, and behavior. Dev Psychopathol. 2008; 20:1–35. [PubMed: 18211726] 
11. Marchetto MC, et al. A model for neural development and treatment of Rett syndrome using 
human induced pluripotent stem cells. Cell. 2010; 143:527–539. [PubMed: 21074045] 
12. Beltrao-Braga PCB, et al. Feeder-Free Derivation of Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells From Human 
Immature Dental Pulp Stem Cells. Cell Transplantation. 2011; 20:1707–1719. [PubMed: 
21457612] 
13. Adamo A, et al. 7q11.23 dosage-dependent dysregulation in human pluripotent stem cells affects 
transcriptional programs in disease-relevant lineages. Nat Genet. 2015; 47:132–141. [PubMed: 
25501393] 
14. Van Raay TJ, et al. frizzled 9 is expressed in neural precursor cells in the developing neural tube. 
Dev Genes Evol. 2001; 211:453–457. [PubMed: 11685582] 
15. Zhao C, et al. Hippocampal and visuospatial learning defects in mice with a deletion of frizzled 9, 
a gene in the Williams syndrome deletion interval. Development. 2005; 132:2917–2927. [PubMed: 
15930120] 
16. Fujimoto T, Tomizawa M, Yokosuka O. SiRNA of frizzled-9 suppresses proliferation and motility 
of hepatoma cells. Int J Oncol. 2009; 35:861–866. [PubMed: 19724923] 
17. Lian X, et al. Efficient differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells to endothelial progenitors via 
small-molecule activation of WNT signaling. Stem cell reports. 2014; 3:804–816. [PubMed: 
25418725] 
18. Jho EH, et al. Wnt/beta-catenin/Tcf signaling induces the transcription of Axin2, a negative 
regulator of the signaling pathway. Mol Cell Biol. 2002; 22:1172–1183. [PubMed: 11809808] 
19. Fujimura N, et al. Wnt-mediated down-regulation of Sp1 target genes by a transcriptional repressor 
Sp5. J Biol Chem. 2007; 282:1225–1237. [PubMed: 17090534] 
20. Srinivasan K, et al. A network of genetic repression and derepression specifies projection fates in 
the developing neocortex. P Natl Acad Sci USA. 2012; 109:19071–19078.
21. Chen B, et al. The Fezf2-Ctip2 genetic pathway regulates the fate choice of subcortical projection 
neurons in the developing cerebral cortex. P Natl Acad Sci USA. 2008; 105:11382–11387.
22. Leone DP, Srinivasan K, Chen B, Alcamo E, McConnell SK. The determination of projection 
neuron identity in the developing cerebral cortex. Current Opinion in Neurobiology. 2008; 18:28–
35. [PubMed: 18508260] 
23. Hutsler JJ, Zhang H. Increased dendritic spine densities on cortical projection neurons in autism 
spectrum disorders. Brain Res. 2010; 1309:83–94. [PubMed: 19896929] 
24. Spitzer NC, Root CM, Borodinsky LN. Orchestrating neuronal differentiation: patterns of Ca2+ 
spikes specify transmitter choice. Trends in Neurosciences. 2004; 27:415–421. [PubMed: 
15219741] 
25. Chiang MC, et al. 3D pattern of brain abnormalities in Williams syndrome visualized using tensor-
based morphometry. Neuroimage. 2007; 36:1096–1109. [PubMed: 17512756] 
26. Lawless JF, Fredette M. Frequentist prediction intervals and predictive distributions. Biometrika. 
2005; 92:529–542.
27. Chen J, et al. Transcriptome Comparison of Human Neurons Generated Using Induced Pluripotent 
Stem Cells Derived from Dental Pulp and Skin Fibroblasts. PLoS One. 2013; 8
28. Beltrao-Braga PCB, et al. Feeder-Free Derivation of Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells From Human 
Immature Dental Pulp Stem Cells. Cell Transplantation. 2011; 20:1707–1719. [PubMed: 
21457612] 
29. Marinho PA, Chailangkarn T, Muotri AR. Systematic optimization of human pluripotent stem cells 
media using Design of Experiments. Sci Rep. 2015; 5:9834. [PubMed: 25940691] 
30. Gautier L, Cope L, Bolstad BM, Irizarry RA. affy - analysis of Affymetrix GeneChip data at the 
probe level. Bioinformatics. 2004; 20:307–315. [PubMed: 14960456] 
31. Livak KJ, Schmittgen TD. Analysis of relative gene expression data using real-time quantitative 
PCR and the 2(−Delta Delta C(T)) Method. Methods. 2001; 25:402–408. [PubMed: 11846609] 
32. Marchetto MC, et al. Differential L1 regulation in pluripotent stem cells of humans and apes. 
Nature. 2013; 503:525–529. [PubMed: 24153179] 
Chailangkarn et al.
Page 33
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 33. Zhang B, Kirov S, Snoddy J. WebGestalt: an integrated system for exploring gene sets in various 
biological contexts. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005; 33:W741–748. [PubMed: 15980575] 
34. Shannon P, et al. Cytoscape: a software environment for integrated models of biomolecular 
interaction networks. Genome Res. 2003; 13:2498–2504. [PubMed: 14597658] 
35. Llorens-Bobadilla E, et al. Single-Cell Transcriptomics Reveals a Population of Dormant Neural 
Stem Cells that Become Activated upon Brain Injury. Cell Stem Cell. 2015; 17:329–340. 
[PubMed: 26235341] 
36. Livak KJ, et al. Methods for qPCR gene expression profiling applied to 1440 lymphoblastoid 
single cells. Methods. 2013; 59:71–79. [PubMed: 23079396] 
37. Hermann BP, et al. Transcriptional and translational heterogeneity among neonatal mouse 
spermatogonia. Biology of reproduction. 2015; 92:54. [PubMed: 25568304] 
38. Jacobs B, et al. Regional dendritic and spine variation in human cerebral cortex: a quantitative 
golgi study. Cereb Cortex. 2001; 11:558–571. [PubMed: 11375917] 
39. Semendeferi K, et al. Spatial organization of neurons in the frontal pole sets humans apart from 
great apes. Cereb Cortex. 2011; 21:1485–1497. [PubMed: 21098620] 
40. Marin-Padilla M. Structural abnormalities of the cerebral cortex in human chromosomal 
aberrations: a Golgi study. Brain Res. 1972; 44:625–629. [PubMed: 4263073] 
41. Takashima S, Becker LE, Armstrong DL, Chan F. Abnormal neuronal development in the visual 
cortex of the human fetus and infant with down’s syndrome. A quantitative and qualitative Golgi 
study. Brain Res. 1981; 225:1–21. [PubMed: 6457667] 
42. Jay V, Chan FW, Becker LE. Dendritic arborization in the human fetus and infant with the trisomy 
18 syndrome. Brain research Developmental brain research. 1990; 54:291–294. [PubMed: 
2397592] 
43. Marin-Padilla M. Prenatal and early postnatal ontogenesis of the human motor cortex: a golgi 
study. II. The basket-pyramidal system. Brain Res. 1970; 23:185–191. [PubMed: 4097698] 
44. Vuksic M, Petanjek Z, Rasin MR, Kostovic I. Perinatal growth of prefrontal layer III pyramids in 
Down syndrome. Pediatr Neurol. 2002; 27:36–38. [PubMed: 12160971] 
45. Jacobs B, et al. Quantitative analysis of cortical pyramidal neurons after corpus callosotomy. Ann 
Neurol. 2003; 54:126–130. [PubMed: 12838530] 
46. Riley JN. A reliable Golgi-Kopsch modification. Brain Res Bull. 1979; 4:127–129. [PubMed: 
89002] 
47. Williams RS, Ferrante RJ, Caviness VS Jr. The Golgi rapid method in clinical neuropathology: the 
morphologic consequences of suboptimal fixation. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 1978; 37:13–33. 
[PubMed: 73572] 
48. Jacobs B, Scheibel AB. A Quantitative Dendritic Analysis of Wernicke Area in Humans 1. Life-
Span Changes. J Comp Neurol. 1993; 327:83–96. [PubMed: 8432909] 
49. Uylings HB, Ruiz-Marcos A, van Pelt J. The metric analysis of three-dimensional dendritic tree 
patterns: a methodological review. J Neurosci Methods. 1986; 18:127–151. [PubMed: 3540466] 
50. White N, et al. PROMO: Real-time prospective motion correction in MRI using image-based 
tracking. Magn Reson Med. 2010; 63:91–105. [PubMed: 20027635] 
51. Brown TT, et al. Prospective motion correction of high-resolution magnetic resonance imaging 
data in children. Neuroimage. 2010; 53:139–145. [PubMed: 20542120] 
52. Kuperman JM, et al. Prospective motion correction improves diagnostic utility of pediatric MRI 
scans. Pediatr Radiol. 2011; 41:1578–1582. [PubMed: 21779892] 
53. Jovicich J, et al. Reliability in multi-site structural MRI studies: effects of gradient nonlinearity 
correction on phantom and human data. Neuroimage. 2006; 30:436–443. [PubMed: 16300968] 
54. Dale AM, Fischl B, Sereno MI. Cortical surface-based analysis. I. Segmentation and surface 
reconstruction. Neuroimage. 1999; 9:179–194. [PubMed: 9931268] 
55. Fischl B, Sereno MI, Dale AM. Cortical surface-based analysis. II: Inflation, flattening, and a 
surface-based coordinate system. Neuroimage. 1999; 9:195–207. [PubMed: 9931269] 
56. Fischl B, et al. Sequence-independent segmentation of magnetic resonance images. Neuroimage. 
2004; 23(Suppl 1):S69–84. [PubMed: 15501102] 
Chailangkarn et al.
Page 34
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 57. Fischl B, et al. Automatically parcellating the human cerebral cortex. Cereb Cortex. 2004; 14:11–
22. [PubMed: 14654453] 
58. Fischl B, Dale AM. Measuring the thickness of the human cerebral cortex from magnetic 
resonance images. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000; 97:11050–11055. [PubMed: 10984517] 
59. Desikan RS, et al. An automated labeling system for subdividing the human cerebral cortex on 
MRI scans into gyral based regions of interest. Neuroimage. 2006; 31:968–980. [PubMed: 
16530430] 
60. Destrieux C, Fischl B, Dale A, Halgren E. Automatic parcellation of human cortical gyri and sulci 
using standard anatomical nomenclature. Neuroimage. 2010; 53:1–15. [PubMed: 20547229] 
Chailangkarn et al.
Page 35
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Characterization of participating individuals and iPSC differentiation
a, Diagram showing genes and deletion region of WS subjects. b, Scatter plot of Benton 
Face Recognition and Judgment of Line Orientation scores (jitter added) for n = 69 WS 
subjects and n = 22 TD subjects. c, Solid red lines depict mean test scores for WS (n = 101 
for Approach Strangers; n = 100 for Social-emotional/empathic), and dotted blue lines 
depict mean test scores for TD (n = 80 for Approach Strangers; n = 79 for Social-emotional/
empathic). d, Neural induction and neuronal differentiation protocol. Scale bar, 50 μm. e, 
Stage-specific protein expression in iPSC-derived NPCs. Scale bar, 50 μm. f, High 
percentage of Nestin and Musashi1-positive population was comparably observed in TD, 
typical WS and pWS88 NPCs by FACS. Data are shown as mean ± s.e.m. n = number of 
clones. g, Stage-specific markers for iPSC (OCT4), NPC (Nestin) and neuron (MAP2) by 
Chailangkarn et al.
Page 36
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 qPCR. h, Stage-specific protein expression in 6-week-old neurons. Scale bar, 25 μm. i, 
Expression of different neuronal markers in neurons indicating multiple neuronal subtypes 
in 6-week-old culture by qPCR. Data are shown as mean ± s.e.m. j, A representative image 
of neuronal protrusions (spine-like; arrowheads) from iPSC-derived neurons. Scale bar, 2 
μm. k–m, 4-week-old TD and WS iPSC-derived neurons show evoked action potentials (k), 
evoked voltage-dependent sodium and potassium currents (l), and spontaneous bursts of 
action potentials (m).
Chailangkarn et al.
Page 37
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Defect in apoptosis of WS-derived NPCs due to haploinsufficiency of FZD9
a, Representative images showing the difference in confluency between TD, typical WS and 
pWS88 iPSC-derived NPCs on day 4. Scale bar, 100 μm. b, Ratio of NPC number on day 4 
over day 0 relative to TD. c, Violin plots of representative genes expressed in NPCs from 
single cell analyses. d, Principal component analysis (PCA) was used to compare the 
expression levels in individual cells based on the first two principal components. e, 
Percentage of cells expressing NPC, neuronal (RBFOX3) and neural crest (PAX7, 
contaminant population) related genes. WS and TD iPSC-derived NPCs show similar 
percentages of cells expressing target genes over defined Ct control value. f, Representative 
propidium iodide histogram showing an increase in subG1 population in typical WS NPCs. 
g, Percentage of subG1 population. h, Representative histogram showing an increase in 
Chailangkarn et al.
Page 38
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 caspase activity (caspase-FAM intensity) in typical WS NPCs. i, Percentage of population 
with high caspase activity. j, FZD9 protein expression in TD iPSC-derived NPCs. k, 
Schematic of FZD9 gain/loss of function experiments in NPCs. l, Expression level of FZD9 
protein after treatment with shFZD9, shControl and FZD9 overexpression vectors, assessed 
by Western blot analysis. m–o, Ratio of NPC number on day 4 over day 0 relative to TD 
(m), percentage of subG1 population (n) and percentage of population with high caspase 
activity (o) when TD NPCs were treated with shFZD9 and shControl, and WS NPCs were 
overexpressed with FZD9. p–q, Significant decrease in expression of Axin2 (p) and SP5 (q) 
of WS NPCs compared to TDs. r, Rescue of WS NPC viability after CHIR98014 treatment. 
All data are shown as mean ± s.e.m. and n = number of clones. **P<0.01, ***P<0.001, 
Kruskal-Wallis test and Dunn’s multiple comparison test (b, g, i), one-way ANOVA and 
Tukey’s post hoc test (g, m–o), two-sided unpaired Student’s t test (p, q), two-sided 
unpaired Mann Whitney test (r).
Chailangkarn et al.
Page 39
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Altered morphology of WS-derived cortical neurons and network activity
a, Percentage of cells expressing neural markers, neurotransmitter and cortical layer-related 
genes. WS, pWS88 and TD iPSC-derived neurons show non-significant percentage of cells 
expressing target genes over defined control Ct value. b, PCA of 672 cells projected onto the 
first two components. Overlaid populations of TD, pWS88 and WS neurons are shown. c, 
Volcano plot illustrates differences in expression patterns of target genes of iPSC-derived 
neurons from the single cell analyses. The dotted lines represent more than or equal to 3.0-
fold differentially expressed genes between the groups at P<0.05 (unpaired Student’s t test). 
d, Representative images of tracings from TD, typical WS and atypical pWS88 iPSC-
derived neurons (Syn::eGFP- and CTIP2-positive neurons). e–g, Morphometric analyses 
Chailangkarn et al.
Page 40
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 showing significant differences between TD, typical WS and pWS88 in total dendritic length 
(e), between TD and typical WS in dendrite number (f) and between TD, typical WS and 
pWS88 in dendritic spine number (g). h and i, Puncta quantification of post- and pre-
synaptic markers. Scale bar, 2 μm. For e–g and i, data are shown as mean ± s.e.m. n = 
number of traced neurons. *P<0.05, **P<0.01, ***P<0.001, ****P<0.0001, Kruskal-Wallis 
test and Dunn’s multiple comparison test (e–g), one-way ANOVA and Tukey’s post hoc test 
(i). j, Schematic diagram summarizing preparation of neurons for calcium transient analysis. 
k, Representative images of the calcium tracing from iPSC-derived neurons. Fluorescence 
intensity changes reflecting intracellular calcium fluctuations in neurons in different Regions 
of Interest (ROI). l and m, Typical WS-derived neurons exhibited significant increase in 
calcium transient frequency (l) and percentage of signaling neuron in the culture (m) when 
compared to TD or pWS88 neurons. Data are shown as mean ± s.e.m. n = number of fields 
analyzed; 3198 neurons for TD, 4446 neurons for WS and 48 neurons for pWS88. *P<0.05, 
**P<0.01, ***P<0.001, Kruskal-Wallis test and Dunn’s multiple comparison test. n, MEA 
analyses revealed an increase in spontaneous neuronal spikes in WS during differentiation 
compared to TD. o, Although the number of total network bursts do not differ, WS shows a 
higher number of spikes in each burst compared to TD. Data are shown as mean ± s.e.m. n = 
number of MEA wells analyzed *P<0.05, **P<0.01, two-sided unpaired Student’s t test.
Chailangkarn et al.
Page 41
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Neuroanatomical and morphological alterations in WS human brains
a, Statistical parametric map of the vertex-wise group differences between TD and WS in 
cortical surface area (left hemisphere shown) assessed by structural MRI scans. Color scales 
indicate the p-value for statistical test: blue indicates decrease; gray indicates no difference. 
The statistics are displayed on a template group-averaged cortical surface rendering of 
healthy adult subjects. b, Reduction in overall cerebral cortical surface area in WS. Data are 
shown as mean ± s.e.m. n = number of brains analyzed. **P<0.01, one-sided unpaired 
Student’s t test. c, Representative images of postmortem cortical layer V/VI pyramidal 
neurons using Golgi staining (top) and their corresponding tracing (bottom) from TD and 
WS. d–g, Morphometric analysis showing significant increases in total dendritic length (d), 
dendritic spine numbers (e), dendritic segment number (f) and number of branching points 
(g) in WS compared to TD postmortem cortical layer V/VI pyramidal neurons. Data are 
Chailangkarn et al.
Page 42
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 shown as mean ± s.e.m. n = number of traced neurons. *P<0.05, **P<0.01, ***P<0.001, 
two-sided unpaired Student’s t test (d), two-sided unpaired Mann Whitney test (e–g).
Chailangkarn et al.
Page 43
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 18.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
