 OPEN
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Fibroblast growth factor receptor is a mechanistic link between
visceral adiposity and cancer
D Chakraborty1, V Benham1, B Bullard1, T Kearney2, HC Hsia3, D Gibbon4, EY Demireva5, SY Lunt6 and JJ Bernard1
Epidemiological evidence implicates excess adipose tissue in increasing cancer risk. Despite a steeply rising global prevalence of
obesity, how adiposity contributes to transformation (stage a non-tumorigenic cell undergoes to become malignant) is unknown.
To determine the factors in adipose tissue that stimulate transformation, we used a novel ex vivo system of visceral adipose tissue
(VAT)-condition medium-stimulated epithelial cell growth in soft agar. To extend this system in vivo, we used a murine lipectomy
model of ultraviolet light B-induced, VAT-promoted skin tumor formation. We found that VAT from mice and obese human donors
stimulated growth in soft agar of non-tumorigenic epithelial cells. The difference in VAT activity was associated with fibroblast
growth factor-2 (FGF2) levels. Moreover, human and mouse VAT failed to stimulate growth in soft of agar in cells deficient in FGFR-1
(FGF2 receptor). We also demonstrated that circulating levels of FGF2 were associated with non-melanoma tumor formation in vivo.
These data implicate FGF2 as a major factor VAT releases to transform epithelial cells—a novel, potential pathway of VAT-enhanced
tumorigenesis. Strategies designed to deplete VAT stores of FGF2 or inhibit FGFR-1 in abdominally obese individuals may be
important cancer prevention strategies as well as adjuvant therapies for improving outcomes.
Oncogene (2017) 36, 6668–6679; doi:10.1038/onc.2017.278; published online 7 August 2017
INTRODUCTION
The carcinogenic impact of having excess adipose tissue is
profound but exactly how adiposity affects carcinogenesis has not
been fully uncovered.1,2 This is a significant issue, since 38% of
American adults and 17% of children are obese,3 and US obesity
rates are predicted to hit 42% by 2050.4 Moreover, obesity is
overtaking tobacco use as the number one preventable risk factor
for cancer.5 Adipose tissue does not merely store energy as fat. It is
metabolically active, secreting large numbers of adipokines,
cytokines and growth factors.6,7 Obesity and/or high-fat diets
(HFDs) alter adipose tissue metabolic and endocrine functions by
elevating plasma-free fatty acids and pro-inflammatory adipokines
and cytokines, increasing adipocyte size and stimulating immune
cell infiltration.8,9 Although mechanistic insights have informed
the roles of systemic inflammation, endocrine disruption and
adipose tissue dysfunction, such as macrophage infiltration and
increased secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines, in cancer
progression,10–13 they fall short of explaining the epidemiological
link between obesity and increased cancer incidence.14,15 This
manuscript will address this knowledge gap by demonstrating
how adipose tissue can influence cell transformation (post-
initiation steps or stages a cell undergoes to become malignant).
Many of the changes observed in adipose tissue in obesity
preferentially influence visceral adipose tissue (VAT, around
internal organs); as opposed to subcutaneous adipose tissue
found underneath the skin.10–12,16 Although VAT has been
extensively explored as a risk factor for cardiovascular disease,
hypertension and type-2 diabetes,17 emerging epidemiology
demonstrates an association between VAT and cancer risk. Visceral
adiposity is independently and positively associated with cancer
risk in older men.14 Large waist circumferences and waist-to-hip
ratios, indicators of VAT, are strongly associated with colon and
breast cancer risk.15,18–22
Animal models have linked VAT in HFD-fed mice to skin and
colon cancer by showing a reduction in tumors with surgical
removal of VAT.23,24 Our previous studies have demonstrated that
parametrial adipose tissue removal in HFD-fed mice inhibited
ultraviolet B (UVB)-induced formation of squamous cell carcino-
mas by 75–80% when compared to sham-operated control
mice.24 Parametrial adipose tissue is the largest visceral fat pad
in female mice and closest analog to human omental adipose
tissue, the fat pad implicated in cardiovascular disease, hyperten-
sion and diabetes. Links between VAT and cancer at distant sites
(skin and breast) suggest a systemic mechanism. Other groups
have hypothesized that leptin, glucose, insulin and inflammatory
cytokines, systemic markers of obesity-associated adipose tissue
inflammation, may contribute to tumor promotion as well.8
Here we set out to investigate which factors released by VAT are
responsible for increasing cancer risk. To achieve this, we
performed gain- and loss-of-function studies together with
animal- and cell-based tests to demonstrate a potentially novel
function of VAT-secreted factors for stimulating epithelial cell
transformation. We utilized our previously published model of
HFD-promoted, UVB-induced skin tumor formation24 to study the
systemic effects of visceral adiposity in vivo. We also developed a
novel system to determine the ability of factors released and
filtered from VAT to stimulate cell transformation of non-
transformed but transformation-capable JB6 P+ (epidermal) and
NMuMG (mammary epithelial) cells. The mouse Balb/c epidermal,
1Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA; 2Division of Surgical Oncology, Rutgers Robert Wood Johnson Medical School,
New Brunswick, NJ, USA; 3Section of Plastic Surgery, Department of Surgery, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA; 4Summit Medical4 Group, Livingston, NJ, USA; 5Office
for the Vice President for Research and Graduate Studies, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA and 6Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Michigan
State University, East Lansing, MI, USA. Correspondence: Dr JJ Bernard, Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Michigan State University, 1355 Bogue Street, Life Science
B420, East Lansing, MI 48824, USA.
E-mail: jbernard@msu.edu
Received 21 March 2017; revised 19 May 2017; accepted 3 July 2017; published online 7 August 2017
Oncogene (2017) 36, 6668–6679
www.nature.com/onc
 JB6 P+ cell line has been utilized as well-characterized in vitro
model for neoplastic transformation for tumor promoters.25–36
These cells and NMuMG cells are non-tumorigenic (they fail to
form tumors when injected into immunocompromised mice).37
We measure their transformation following promoter stimulation
using an anchorage-independent proliferation assay, in which
only transformed cells can grow to form colonies.37 When cells
from colonies are isolated, they form tumors when injected into
mice.37 Using this assay, we found that FGFR-1 is critical for
adipose tissue-stimulated transformation of skin and mammary
epithelial cells and that FGF2 is one of the critical players in
FGFR-1-driven transformation.
The rationale for investigating both skin and breast cancer is
that, first, they are among the most common cancers. Second,
epidemiological evidence implicates VAT in increasing pre- and
post-menopausal breast cancer.18–21 There is conflicting evidence
with regard to obesity and non-melanoma skin cancer (NMSC).
Only two of several studies have demonstrated positive associa-
tion between obesity and NMSC.38,39 There is speculation that the
positive association occurs mainly in countries with low UVR
exposure, assuming the impact of higher UVR is greater than
obesities,38 and based on obese individuals spending less time in
the sun.40 Adding to the complexity, HFDs, which can increase
VAT, increase NMSCs.41,42 Our mechanistic animal studies will help
clarify the relationship between VAT and NMSC risk. Despite the
weak epidemiological data, experimental skin carcinogenesis has
been
used
for
a
century
to
provide
information
on
the
development of epithelial tumors in response to environmental
insults—it relates very well to other squamous cell carcinoma
models and has contributed to a better understanding of human
epithelial cancers in general. Therefore, our findings may inform
on the systemic effects of VAT on other epithelial cancers more
highly associated with obesity.
Our finding that VAT-derived factors stimulate cell transforma-
tion through FGFR-1 provides a novel mechanistic link between
visceral adiposity and associated tumor formation. Discovery of
such non-invasive biomarkers of VAT-associated tumor formation
could enable the identification of individuals that might be at an
increased risk of cancer.
RESULTS
Fat tissue filtrate from high-fat diet-fed mice stimulates JB6 P+ cell
transformation
To directly test whether VAT from mice fed different diets could
differentially promote cell transformation, animals were kept on
either a LFD (10% Kcal from fat) or HFD (60% Kcal from fat) for
4 weeks, after which VAT was collected to generate a filtered VAT-
conditioned medium (mouse fat tissue filtrate; MFTF). MFTF
(200 μg/ml) significantly stimulated JB6 P+ cell growth, measured
as percent colony formation in soft agar; however, HFD MFTF
stimulated significantly more transformation compared with LFD
MFTF (Figure 1a). HFD MFTF treatment stimulated cell transforma-
tion in JB6 P+ but not JB6 P− mouse epithelial cells in culture
(Figure 1a). JB6 P− cells are 1000 × less sensitive to tumor
promoters compared with JB6 P+ cells and lack the initiation
events (activated pro-1 and pro-2) needed for transformation.43
Thus, molecular events that occur in JB6 P+ cells in response to
MFTF are candidates for mediating tumor promotion, but not
complete carcinogenesis.
To probe what fraction of VAT possessed transforming activity,
HFD MFTFs were treated with either RNase, DNAse, lipase or
proteinase (Figure 1b). Incubation with proteinase K inhibited the
effect of the HFD MFTF on JB6 P+ growth in soft agar to baseline
levels (Figure 1b), while the remaining treatments had no effect.
Furthermore, a 30 min exposure of HFD MFTF to heat at 37, 42, 55
or 95 °C attenuated colony formation progressively (Figure 1c),
consistent with a thermal protein denaturation curve. Together,
these data demonstrate that the primary transformational activity
of MFTF is found in the protein fraction of the isolate.
To
identify
the
proteins
in
HFD
MFTF
associated
with
transforming activity, angiogenesis and adipokine protein profiler
arrays were used to determine differences in the abundance of
proteins in MFTF generated either from LFD- or HFD-fed mice.
Several pro-inflammatory adipokines and growth factors were
induced in the VAT with 4 weeks of HFD feeding (Figure 1d). These
include osteopontin, Serpin E1, Serpin F1, leptin, thrombospondin-
2 (TSP-1), endoglin, hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), monocyte-
chemoattractant protein-1, CXCL-16, fibroblast growth factor-2
(FGF2; fibroblast growth factor basic), matrix metalloproteinase-9
(MMP-9) and nephroblastoma overexpressed (NOV). These pro-
teins constitute a candidate list of potential tumor promoting
signals released from VAT under conditions of HFD feeding.
Lipectomy reduces transformation-stimulating serum growth
factors in HFD-fed mice
To elucidate the role of VAT on skin tumor promotion in vivo,
serum proteins were compared in HFD-fed mice that were either
sham-operated or lipectomized (parametrial adipose tissue was
removed after 2 weeks of HFD feeding). Lipectomized mice had
significantly less UVB-induced tumors compared with sham-
operated mice24 and had reduced serum levels of several
measured
pro-inflammatory
adipokines
and
growth
factors
compared with the sham-operated mice (Figure 2a). These data
suggest that the analyzed proteins are of VAT origin and
contribute to tumor formation. Adipokines and growth factors
were further screened for transforming activity in the JB6 P+
in vitro assay if they were induced with HFD feeding in VAT
(Figure 1d) and they were also reduced in the serum of
lipectomized mice compared to sham-operated mice (Figure 2a).
The proteins that met both these criteria included osteopontin,
serpin F1, leptin, HGF, CXCL-16 or FGF2. Only JB6 P+ cells cultured
with HGF or FGF2 (10 ng/ml) in soft agar showed significant
colony formation, compared to baseline (Figure 2b). In addition to
protein arrays, to quantify HGF and FGF2 in the MFTF and serum
of lipectomized mice, we performed ELISAs. Lipectomy prevented
the increase in serum HGF and FGF2 stimulated by HFD feeding
(Figure 2c), suggesting that the increase in circulating HGF and
FGF2 from HFD was derived from VAT. HFD significantly increased
both HGF and FGF in VAT however, FGF2 protein was 6 × higher
than HGF protein (4800 pg/ml FGF2 versus 802 pg/ml HGF).
Performing a dose response using recombinant HGF and FGF2
protein starting at 10 ng/ml and titrating down, we found that the
concentration of HGF present in VAT was insufficient to transform
cells. FGF2 was able to stimulate transformation at concentrations
that were present in both LFD and HFD VAT. The dose of FGF2
required to stimulate transformation was not mitogenic in liquid
cultures of cells suggesting that FGF2 has a direct effect on
transformation
that
is
independent
of
proliferation
(Supplementary Figure 1). These data suggest that FGF2 in MFTF
is a primary driver of JB6 P+ transformation.
A role for the FGF2–FGFR-1 axis in cell transformation
To determine the respective contribution of FGF2 signaling to the
transforming activity of MFTF, JB6 P+ were incubated with an
antibody antagonist of the tyrosine kinase FGF2 receptor-1
(FGFR-1 Ab). Inhibiting FGFR-1 tyrosine kinase receptor activity
significantly attenuated MFTF-stimulated transformation by 48%
(Figure 3a). These data suggest that signaling through FGFR-1 is
required for optimal MFTF-stimulated transformation. Therefore,
we used CRISPR-Cas9 genome editing to generate JB6 P+ FgfR-1
knockout (KO) cells that lack all splice variants of FGFR-1, and we
hypothesized that this KO would attenuate FGF2-stimulated
transformation (Figure 3b and Supplementary Figure 2). Clonal
Role of FGFR-1 in adiposity-associated cancer
D Chakraborty et al
6669
Oncogene (2017) 6668 – 6679
 JB6 P+ FgfR-1 KO lines were screened for FGFR-1 function and loss
of
both
alleles
was
validated
by
Sanger
sequencing
(Supplementary Figure 2). FgfR-1 KO cells displayed no difference
in proliferation rate compared to wild-type (WT) cells, formed
colonies in response to HGF, but failed to form colonies above
background levels when cultured with either FGF2 or MFTF
(Figure 3c). To determine if FGF2 promotes in vivo tumorigenicity,
WT or FgfR-1 KO JB6 P+ cells were injected subcutaneously. The
following day, mice were dosed with FGF2 or vehicle daily for 7
consecutive days and the formation of subcutaneous (s.c.) tumors
was evaluated. WT JB6 P+ cells that were transformed in vitro with
VAT were injected s.c. as a positive control. Figure 3d demon-
strates that WT JB6 P+ cells fail to form tumors in vehicle-injected
mice, but proliferate and are tumorigenic in mice injected with
FGF2. Histological analysis of the s.c. tumors revealed polygonal
neoplastically
transformed
cells
and
immunofluorescence
revealed positive Ki67 staining (Supplementary Figure 3). The
latency of tumor development is longer for WT JB6 P+ cells
transformed by FGF2 in vivo compared with WT JB6 P+ cells that
were transformed prior to injection (WT-Tr). FGF2 injected in vivo
failed to induce tumorigenicity in FgfR-1 KO JB6 P+ cells. These
data indicate that FGF2 signals specifically through FGFR-1 to
stimulate cell transformation.
cMYC activity is required for optimal MFTF-transforming capacity
and cMyc protein is stably overexpressed in transformed cells
To determine the downstream mechanisms of FGF2 signaling
responsible for MFTF-induced transformation, cellular lysates of
JB6 P+ cells treated with FGF2 (2.5 ng/ml) were analyzed by
western blotting with antibodies against phospho-ERK, ERK,
phospho-mTOR, mTOR and cMyc. Phospho-ERK was induced at
2, 4 and 8 h following FGF2 treatment (Figure 4a). Phosphorylation
of mTOR was optimally induced 2 h post treatment and declined
at 4 h and 8 h post treatment, but never returned to baseline
Figure 1.
MFTF stimulates JB6 P+ cell transformation. SKH-1 mice (n = 5/group) were fed either a HFD or LFD for 4 weeks. Visceral (parametrial
and epididymal) adipose tissue was removed to make a filtered conditioned medium (MFTF). (a) Percentage of clones growing in soft agar (%
colony formation) significantly increases in JB6 P+ cells cultured with MFTF compared no treatment (control; Cont). No significant change in
the percentage of colony formation in soft agar is observed in JB6 P− cells cultured with MFTF. (b) JB6 P+ colonies growing in soft agar with
HFD MFTF is significantly inhibited with proteinase K, but not with lipase, RNase A or DNase A. (c) JB6 P+ colonies growing in soft agar
decrease as MFTF is exposed to increasing temperatures for 30 min prior to treating the cells in agar. (d) Protein Profiler angiogenesis array of
fat tissue filtrates of LFD-fed mice (top panel) and HFD-fed mice (bottom panel). HFD selectively upregulated protein levels of several key
adipokines, hormones and growth factors in MFTF, versus those seen in MFTF of LFD-fed mice (boxed proteins). Dot intensity was analyzed by
‘Image J’ software. Data are labeled as the percent of the control (reference) dots located in the upper left hand corner of the arrays. Data are
presented as mean ± s.d. of values from triplicate. Statistical significance was determined using a one-way ANOVA (**Po0.01, ***Po0.001).
Role of FGFR-1 in adiposity-associated cancer
D Chakraborty et al
6670
Oncogene (2017) 6668 – 6679
 (Figure 4a). Lastly, FGF2 stimulated a time-dependent induction of
cMyc (Figure 4a). These data demonstrate the activation of ERK,
mTOR and cMYC by FGF2. The expression levels of these proteins
were examined at 8 h following MFTF stimulation in WT and
FGFR-1 KO JB6 P+ cells. FGFR-1 KO cells had higher baseline levels
of ERK1 and mTOR, whereas baseline levels of cMYC were similar
to WT cells. When cells were stimulated with MFTF, there were no
changes in protein expression of phospho-ERK, phospho-mTOR,
mTOR in both cell lines at 8 h. Unlike WT cells, FGFR-1 KO JB6 P+
cells failed to induce cMYC protein expression in response to
MFTF, suggesting that cMYC may be a driver of MFTF-stimulated
transformation (Figure 4b). Inhibiting cMYC, activity in JB6 P+ cells
with a pharmacological inhibitor that blocks the cMYC–MAX (myc-
associated factor X) interaction significantly attenuated MFTF-
transforming activity (Figure 4c). Both ERK and mTOR inhibitors
also significantly attenuated MFTF-transforming activity although
to a lesser extent (Figure 4c). To further understand the
importance of cMYC in transformation, we compared cMYC
protein in non-transformed JB6 P+ cells to MFTF-transformed
JB6 P+ cells. MFTF-transformed JB6 P+ cells lines were generated
Figure 2.
Lipectomy reduces transformation-stimulating serum growth factors in HFD-fed mice. (a) SKH-1 mice were fed either a HFD or LFD
for 2 weeks, and half the mice had their parametrial adipose tissue removed or received a sham operation (n = 20/group). After 33 weeks of
UVB exposure, serum was isolated. Protein Profiler angiogenesis array of pooled sera of HFD-fed sham-operated mice (top panel) and HFD-fed
lipectomized mice (bottom panel). HFD-fed mice that had the surgical removal of parametrial adipose tissue showed a decrease in several
pro-inflammatory proteins in the circulation. Boxed proteins were those found to be both reduced with lipectomy and induced in the MFTF
with HFD (Figure 1d). Dot intensity was analyzed by ‘ImageJ’ software. Data are labeled as the percent of the control (reference) dots located in
the upper left hand corner of the arrays. (b) Proteins found in a were tested for their transforming activity in the soft agar assay. HGF
(10 ng/ml) and FGF2 (10 ng/ml) significantly stimulated colony formation in soft agar. 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA, 10 ng/ml)
was used as a positive control. (c) HGF and FGF2 levels in MFTF from Figures 1a and d were quantified by ELISA. HFD feeding increases the
levels of both HGF and FGF2. (d) SKH-1 mice were treated as described in a. Serum was isolated and analyzed for HGF and FGF2 by ELISA. (e)
Dose response of HGF and FGF2 on JB6 P+ cell transformation. Data are presented as mean ± s.d. of values from triplicates and statistical
significance was determined using a one-way ANOVA (b–e) followed by a Tukey’s test for multiple comparisons (d) (*Po0.05, **Po0.01,
***Po0.001).
Role of FGFR-1 in adiposity-associated cancer
D Chakraborty et al
6671
Oncogene (2017) 6668 – 6679
 Figure 3.
Knockout of FGFR-1 in JB6 P+ cells inhibits the effect of mouse fat tissue filtrate on transformation in vitro. (a) HFD MFTF-stimulated
JB6 P+ cell transformation is partially dependent on FGF2 signaling through the fibroblast growth factor receptor-1 (FGFR-1). Cells were
treated with a FGFR-1 neutralizing antibody (Ab) (2 μg/ml) and then treated with MFTF. Growth in soft agar was measured after 14 days. (b)
FGFR-1 immunofluorescence (red) in WT JB6 P+ cells and Fgfr-1(− / − ) JB6 P+ cells. Specific staining of FGFR-1 is localized to the cell membrane
in the WT cells as indicated by white arrows. Membrane FGFR-1 is absent in the KO cells. Images were taken at ×40 magnification. Details of
generation of the FGFR-1 KO are in Supplementary Figure 2. (c) JB6 P+ cells deficient in FGFR-1 fail to grow in soft agar above baseline when
cultured with FGF2 and MFTF in soft agar. Percentage of clones growing in soft agar (% colony formation) significantly increases in JB6 P+ cells
deficient in FGFR-1 cultured with HGF compared no treatment (Untx). (d) Nude mice were subcutaneously inoculated with either WT or FgfR-1
KO JB6 P+ cells. A JB6 P+ transformed clone (WT-Tr) was injected as a positive control. The following day, FGF2 (200 mg/kg) or vehicle was
injected i.p. once per day for 7 consecutive days. Photos show s.c. carcinomas induced by FGF2. (e) Growth rates of s.c. tumors formed by WT
or FgfR-1(− / − ) (KO) JB6 P+ cells injected into nude mice (n = 5) that were either injected with saline (vehicle; Veh) or FGF2. A JB6 P+ transformed
clone (WT-Tr) was injected as a positive control. The tumor was monitored everyday and tumor volume was recorded on days 5, 12 and 20.
Volume of the tumor was calculated using the formula: V = length × width2 ×0.5. Tumors from FGF2-treated mice inoculated with WT cells are
compared to tumors from Veh-treated mice inoculated with WT cells (Po0.01 at 12 days and Po0.001 at 20 days), and tumors from Veh-
treated mice inoculated with WT-Tr cells (Po0.01 at 12 days and Po0.05 at 20 days). Data are presented as mean ± s.d. of values from
triplicates and statistical significance was determined using a one-way ANOVA followed by a Tukey’s test for multiple comparisons (a)
(*Po0.05, **Po0.001, ***Po0.0001).
Role of FGFR-1 in adiposity-associated cancer
D Chakraborty et al
6672
Oncogene (2017) 6668 – 6679
 by isolating colonies from soft agar. Transformed cells demon-
strated higher cMYC nuclear expression compared to non-
transformed cells (Figure 4d). Overall, these data suggest a role
for cMYC in VAT-stimulated transformation.
Transforming activity of human fat tissue filtrate is associated with
FGF2 levels and is dependent on FGFR-1
To translate the studies from our mouse VAT model to a human
system, human fat tissue filtrates (HuFTF) from VAT of cancer-free,
obese human subjects undergoing hysterectomy were generated
to determine if human VAT stimulates cell transformation. In
addition to using JB6 P+ cells, we also tested transforming activity
in NMuMG (mammary epithelial) cells. Like JB6 P+ cells, NMuMG
cells
are
pre-neoplastic
and
do
not
exhibit
anchorage-
independent growth in soft agar. Cells were incubated in agar
with 150 μg/ml of HuFTF and scored for colony formation. HuFTF-
stimulated cell transformation of both JB6 P+ and NMuMG
epithelial cells (Figure 5a). There was variability in the transforming
activity between donors but the overall relative transforming
activity of each sample was similar between JB6 P+ cells and
NMuMG cells (Figure 5a). In JB6 P+ cells, transformation stimulated
by HuFTFs was strongly associated with FGF2 levels in these
filtrates (R2 = 0.9875; Figure 5b) based on the soft agar assay and
growth factor ELISAs. In NMuMG cells, transformation was only
modestly associated with FGF2 in the HuFTFs (R2 = 0.8689;
Figure 5b). We investigated the role of HuFTF-derived FGF2 by
immunodepletion of FGF2 from the filtrate (using an antibody
against FGF2) and measured the transforming activity. FGF2-
immunodepleted HuFTF-transforming activity was significantly
reduced, but not completely attenuated, compared with that of
HuFTF containing FGF2 (Figure 5c). HuFTF had no additional
transforming activity above background levels in JB6 P+ FgfR-1 KO
cells (Figure 5d). These data demonstrate the translational
relevance of our prior mouse experiments and show that HuFTF-
transforming activity is not only specific to skin epithelial cells, but
also applicable to mammary epithelial cells. Furthermore, human
VAT-derived FGF2 activation of FGFR-1 signaling is a driver of
transformation.
DISCUSSION
Despite the number of epidemiological studies that demonstrate
obesity increases cancer risk, the mechanism is unknown. Obesity-
Figure 4.
cMYC activity is required for optimal MFTF-transforming capacity and cMYC protein is stably overexpressed in transformed cells.
(a) JB6 P+ cells were treated with FGF2 (2.5 ng/ml) for indicated time intervals and protein expression was analyzed by western blot.
Phosphorylation of Erk1 and mTOR is upregulated and cMyc increases in a time-dependent manner. Actin was used as a loading control.
(b) WT JB6 P+ cells and Fgfr-1(− / − ) JB6 P+ cells were treated with MFTF (150 μg/ml) for 8 h. Actin was used as a loading control. At this dose and
time of MFTF, there was no change in ERK and mTOR activity. cMYC was induced in WT cells but not KO cells. (c) Inhibition of cMyc, mTOR and
Erk1 activity by pharmacological inhibitors significantly attenuates MFTF-stimulated JB6 P+ colony formation in agar. Data are presented as
mean ± s.d. of values from triplicates and statistical significance was determined using a one-way ANOVA (*Po0.05, **Po0.001,
***Po0.0001). (d) cMYC immunofluorescence (red) in JB6 P+ cells and JB6 P+ cells transformed with MFTF. MFTF-transformed JB6 P+ cells have
a higher expression of cMYC compared with non-transformed cells. Transformed JB6 P+ cells are obtained by isolating colonies from soft agar
and growing the cells in liquid culture. These cells were passaged several times for 28 days and maintained a high expression of cMYC. Images
were taken at ×40 magnification.
Role of FGFR-1 in adiposity-associated cancer
D Chakraborty et al
6673
Oncogene (2017) 6668 – 6679
 driven cancers are expected to rise over the next 20 years;44
however, not all obese individuals get cancer. Understanding how
obesity influences cancer onset and identifying biomarkers of risk
will allow us to identify targets for prevention and determine
which individuals would benefit most from weight loss. Our
previous studies demonstrated that VAT enhances the develop-
ment of UVB-induced skin tumors in mice.24 Herein, we describe a
potential mechanism for visceral adiposity-induced carcinogen-
esis. We demonstrate that circulating FGF2 from VAT is positively
associated with UVB-induced tumor formation in mice, and that
VAT-stimulated transformation of epithelial cells is dependent on
the presence of the primary receptor for FGF2 and FGFR-1.
Historically, cancer research has focused on how genetic
mutations and/or the amplification or deletion of genes cause
cancer. This work on the internal causes of cancer mainly
considers cells in isolation. However, in addition to these intrinsic
risks, extrinsic risk factors such as HFDs and obesity influence
oncogenesis by modifying the hormones, growth factors and
inflammatory mediators in the cellular microenvironment.8 Excess
adiposity is associated with the elevation of estrogen, insulin and
leptin accelerating the proliferation of both cancerous and non-
cancerous cells and stimulating metabolic dysfunction.45–49 In
addition to hormones, elevated cytokines, such as interleukin-6
and tumor necrosis factor-alpha, are key features of adipose tissue
dysfunction and may play a role in chronic inflammation and
immune dysfunction associated with obesity.50 Proper immune
surveillance is critical for preventing skin cancer. Individuals on
immune suppressive agents are at a 65–100-fold higher risk for
skin squamous cell carcinomas.51 Therefore, the increase in
carcinomas we observe in our mouse model of visceral adiposity
Figure 5.
Transforming activity of HuFTF is associated with FGF2 levels and is dependent on FGFR-1. Fat tissue filtrates were made from
human visceral adipose tissue (HuFTF) from four donors undergoing hysterectomy. (a) Percentage of clones growing in soft agar (% colony
formation) significantly increases in JB6 P+ and NMuMG cells cultured with HuFTF from donors 1, 2 and 4 compared no treatment (control;
Cont). (b) HuFTF with higher concentrations of FGF2 are more potent at stimulating cell transformation. (c) Immunodepletion of FGF2 in
HuFTF significantly attenuates JB6 P+ colony formation in soft agar. (d) JB6 P+ cells deficient in FGFR-1 fail to grow in soft agar above baseline
when cultured with FGF2 and HuFTF in soft agar. Percentage of clones growing in soft agar (% colony formation) significantly increases in JB6
P+ cells deficient in FGFR-1 cultured with HGF compared no treatment (Untx). Data are presented as mean ± s.d. of values from triplicates and
statistical significance was determined using a one-way ANOVA (*Po0.05, **Po0.001, ***Po0.0001).
Role of FGFR-1 in adiposity-associated cancer
D Chakraborty et al
6674
Oncogene (2017) 6668 – 6679
 could be a result of immune dysfunction. It is well established that
inflammation is involved in the progression of cancer;52 however,
the precise role of these and other pro-inflammatory factors and
hormones are not well understood. Moreover, in our model, tumor
necrosis factor-alpha was not induced in the VAT with HFD
feeding and interleukin-6 and leptin, which were induced, did not
stimulate epithelial cell transformation.37 Herein, we demonstrate
that VAT may be a driver of cancer by releasing FGF2, a non-
classical adipokine and pro-inflammatory mediator.
FGF2 is a member of the fibroblast growth factor family that
comprises various growth factors involving 22 different genes that
regulate embryonic development and growth, tissue regeneration
and angiogenesis. FGF2, specifically, regulates cell growth, differ-
entiation and angiogenesis in several tissues, and stimulates wound
healing in the skin.53 However, the doses of FGF2 in our model of
adipose tissue-stimulated transformation have no significant effect
on proliferation (Supplementary Figure 1). Previous research shows
that FGF2 is overexpressed in several different types of cancer,
including pancreatic cancer, endometrial cancer, prostate cancer,
melanoma, renal cell carcinoma and lung cancer.54–58 Similar to our
study, FGF2 has also been shown to stimulate the transformation of
pre-neoplastic cells to a malignant phenotype.59,60 The gene that
encodes a receptor for FGF2, Fgfr-1, is amplified in head and neck
cancers,61 squamous cell carcinomas of the lung,62 at least 9% of
breast cancers,63,64 colorectal cancer65 and renal cell carcinoma.66
Additionally, in breast cancer, this amplification is associated with
poor prognosis67 and drives endocrine therapy resistance.68 In skin,
Fgfr-3 mutations are associated with benign skin tumors in both
mice and humans.69 Fgfr-2 and Fgfr-4 single-nucleotide polymorph-
isms have no effect on skin cancer risk in caucasians.70 Mutations
and single-nucleotide polymorphisms in Fgfr-1 have not been
studied in the context of NMSC.
Our work hypothesizes that HFD VAT releases FGF2, making this
growth factor potentially available to distant sites—an event that
is reflected in elevated serum levels of FGF2 that can be potently
inhibited by lipectomy (Figure 2). FGF2 has been shown to be
synthesized and secreted by adipocytes71 and play a role in
adipogenesis, a program which determines the differentiation of
mesenchymal stem cells into adipocytes. Disruption of the Fgf2
gene activates the adipogenic program in mesenchymal marrow
stromal stem cells, suggesting that FGF2 is a negative adipogenic
factor.72 Contrary to this, in vitro cell culture studies demonstrate
that FGF2 stimulates adipocyte differentiation of human adipose
tissue-derived stem cells,73 and marrow-derived stem cells74 and
FGF2 can induce de novo adipogenesis when supplied with
basement membrane.75 Lee et al. found that the discrepancies in
the literature may be explained by the concentration of FGF2
used.76 FGF2 enhanced adipocyte differentiation of human
adipose tissue-derived stem cells at concentrations lower than
2 ng/ml and suppressed at concentrations higher than 10 ng/ml.76
In contrast to our study, the mice fed a HFD had lower levels of
adipose tissue-derived FGF2 compared with mice fed a LFD,
differences that may be due to the experimental design. In the Lee
et al. study, C57BL/6 mice were fed for 9 weeks and the HFD
provided 60% kcal from lard fats, whereas in our study, SKH-1
mice were fed for 4 weeks and the HFD provided 60% kcal from
corn oil. Any of these variables have the potential to influence the
kinetics of adipogenesis and therefore, FGF2 levels.
FGF2 is produced in and secreted from tissues other than VAT.
Although sera FGF2 is mainly derived from VAT in our animal
model, many tissues such as the skin,77 heart,78 liver79 and lungs,80
as well as subcutaneous adipose tissue81 can produce FGF2 and
could contribute to sera FGF2 in humans. In one study that
examined six obese men, FGF2 was found in the subcutaneous
adipose tissue as well as the VAT.81 In a future study, it would be of
interest to compare the impact of gastric bypass surgery (weight
loss in all adipose tissue depots) on sera FGF2 compared to the
impact of liposuction (subcutaneous adipose tissue removal).
FGF2 is heparin bound in the extracellular matrix acting mainly
in a paracrine manner;82 however, studies suggest that FGF2 from
tissue can enter the circulation.83–85 Hao et al.84 demonstrated
that high-plasma FGF2 levels correlate with adipose tissue mass in
62 subjects and Kuhn et al.83 demonstrated that serum FGF2 is
significantly elevated in both obesity and morbidly obese subjects
(BMI 40+). Although these studies do not provide direct evidence
that blood FGF2 is derived from adipose tissue, given the
biological function of FGF2 in adipose tissue, it’s association with
excess adiposity, and the reduction of serum FGF2 following
lipectomy, it is plausible that FGF2 derived from adipose tissue
could enter the circulation and be a key play in tumor promotion
at distant sites. In obese human males, one study demonstrated
that the only cell type in VAT that expresses FGF2 protein is the
adipocyte.81 In contrast, we demonstrate that FGF2 protein is
expressed in both the adipocyte and the stromal vascular fraction
of VAT from HFD-fed mice (Supplementary Figure 4). It is also
attractive to speculate that FGF2 may not be the only factor
released from adipose tissue that stimulates tumor promotion.
Antibody neutralization of FGF2 significantly attenuated, but did
not completely eliminate the transforming activity of HuFTF that
was observed with the FGFR-1 KO cells. This suggests that other
secreted FGFs, such as FGF1, or other factors that signal through
FGFR-1 may be playing a role. We found that FGF1 stimulates JB6
P+ cell transformation, but other FGFs (FGF18 and FGF21) that
mainly bind with other FGF receptors (FGFR-2, FGFR-3 and FGFR-4)
fail to stimulate transformation (Supplementary Figure 4). Deter-
mining the relative contribution of FGF2 and FGF1 from VAT
in vivo and discovering other factors from VAT that could activate
FGFR-1 will be the subject of future investigations.
Targeting receptor tyrosine kinases for cancer therapy faces
challenges due to receptor redundancy and the development of
receptor tyrosine kinases resistance.86 Therefore, understanding
the downstream mechanisms of MFTF-stimulated transformation
is critical for determining additional targets for chemoprevention.
FGF2 and FGFRs have been shown to activate a cascade of
downstream signaling pathways that have an established role in
carcinogenesis. These include mitogen-activated protein kinase/
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (MAPK/ERK), PI3K/AKT/mTOR
and cMYC signaling pathways.76,87,88 ERK is activated in UVB-
induced skin cancer.89 The PI3K/AKT signaling axis stimulates
protein synthesis and cell proliferation by activating mTOR at
downstream leading to the development of breast cancer.90 cMyc
upregulation is associated with several cancer types (including
breast and skin) as it plays a critical role in a wide range of
functions, including cell proliferation, differentiation and progres-
sion, through different phases of cancer.91–93 We focused our
current study on ERK, cMYC and mTOR pathways because these
proteins are involved in obesity-driven cancers94–97 and dietary
restriction has been shown to inhibit mTOR and ERK signaling and
MYC protein expression.98–100 FGF2 stimulated the phosphoryla-
tion of Erk1 and mTOR and increased cMYC protein expression. In
this study, inhibitors of Erk1, cMYC and mTOR all significantly
reduced MFTF-stimulated transformation, indicating that these
downstream signaling pathways are involved in MFTF-stimulated
transformation. Interestingly, cMYC induction was observed in WT
JB6 P+ cells, but not FGFR-1 KO JB6 P+ cells, indicating that cMYC
activity may be critical for malignant transformation. cMYC was
also stably overexpressed in MFTF-transformed cells. Therefore,
FGF2 in VAT may be interacting through FGFR-1 on epithelial cells
to induce downstream signaling of cMYC to stimulate transforma-
tion. While cMYC has traditionally been a difficult drug target to
modulate, bromodomain inhibitors have been shown to epigen-
etically regulate cMYC expression in cancer.101 Exploring how
these drugs may prevent adiposity-associated tumor formation
and determining a cMYC signature in adiposity-associated tumors
provides an attractive area for future study.
Role of FGFR-1 in adiposity-associated cancer
D Chakraborty et al
6675
Oncogene (2017) 6668 – 6679
 In summary, we demonstrated that VAT from HFD-fed mice and
HuFTF transforms non-tumorigenic epithelial cells. The differences
in VAT activity between LFD- and HFD-fed mice and human
donors were associated with FGF2 levels. Moreover, human and
mouse VAT failed to stimulate transformation in cells deficient in
FGFR-1 (FGF2 receptor). We also demonstrated that circulating
levels of FGF2 were associated with non-melanoma tumor
formation in vivo. These data therefore suggest FGF2 stimulation
of FGFR-1 as a previously unappreciated link between VAT and cell
transformation. This key finding begins to inform how HFDs and/
or visceral adiposity elevate cancer risk, previously suggested only
via epidemiological studies.14,15 To determine a causal relation-
ship, future studies will examine if FGF2 administration will
prevent
lipectomy
from
attenuating
HFD-stimulated
tumor
promotion in our UVB-induced skin cancer model. Strategies
designed to deplete VAT stores of FGF2 in abdominally obese
individuals or inhibit FGFR-1 signaling may be important cancer
prevention strategies as well as adjuvant therapies for improving
outcomes following skin or breast cancer diagnosis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture and reagents
JB6 P+ and JB6 P− cells (mouse skin epithelial cells) were obtained from the
American type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA, USA) and were free from
mycoplasma contamination. Cells were grown in MEM (Invitrogen,
Carlsbad, CA, USA) supplemented with 5% FBS and antibiotics. NMuMG
cells were received as a kind gift from Dr Richard Schwartz (MSU) and were
grown in DMEM (Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% FBS and antibiotics.
Pharmacological inhibitors against cMyc, mTOR and Erk1 were purchased
from EMD Millipore (Billerca, MA, USA). Tivantinib was purchased from
APExBIO (Houston, TX, USA). FGFR-1 Ab for immunofluorescence was
purchased from Cell Signaling Technology (Danvers, MA, USA). FGF2 Ab
was
purchased
from
Santa
Cruz
Biotechnology
(Dallas,
TX,
USA).
Antibodies: p-mTOR (Cell Signaling Technology #2974), mTOR (Cell
Signaling Technology #2983), cMyc (Cell Signaling Technology #5605),
p-Erk1 (Cell Signaling Technology #4370), Erk1 (Cell Signaling Technology
#9102), Actin (Sigma #A5060), HGF (Abcam #ab-83760), FGF2 (Santa Cruz
#sc-365106), FGFR-1 (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA #MAB765), Anti-
Rabbit 2nd Ab (Li-Cor #926-32213), Anti-Mouse 2nd Ab (Li-Cor #926-
32212).
Animal models
Healthy inbred female SKH-1 mice (6/8 weeks) were kept at environmen-
tally controlled conditions in polypropylene cages, allowed free drinking
water and basal diet ad libitum. All animal protocols were approved by the
IACUC at MSU. Animals of equal age, size and body weight were chosen
randomly for each experimental group. Animals were kept either on LFD
containing 10 kcal of fat (D11012202) or HFD containing 60 kcal of fat (60%
kcal form corn oil D11012204, Research Diets, Inc., New Brunswick, NJ,
USA). At the end of experimental period, mice were humanely killed using
carbon dioxide and blood and adipose tissue samples were collected. For
the lipectomy study, SKH-1 mice (8 weeks, n = 20) were kept on either a
LFD or HFD for 2 weeks prior to lipectomy. Two weeks after lipectomy,
animals were exposed to UVB (15 mJ/cm2) twice per week for 33 weeks.
Tissues and serum were collected and tumors were analyzed as previously
described.24 For the in vivo tumorigenicity/xenograft study, male nude
mice (8 weeks, n = 5) were subcutaneously inoculated with either WT or
FgfR-1 KO JB6 P+ cells (1.8 × 106/0.2 ml/mouse) in the right and left flanks
(one injection per side). The following day, FGF2 (200 μg/kg) or vehicle was
injected i.p. once per day for the next 7 days. Tumors were measured with
calipers on days 5, 12 and 20 and mice were killed 21 days post injection.
Tumor volume was assessed by investigators blinded to the experimental
groups.
Anchorage-independent colony formation assay in soft agar
Colony formation assays were performed in 12-well plates with either 1000
JB6 P+ cells/well or 1500 NMuMG cells/well in 0.6 ml of 0.3% soft agar with
or without fat tissue filtrate, growth factors and inhibitors on top of a
0.75 ml base layer of 0.5% agar. Cells in plate were allowed to settle for
30 min and cultured for up to 2 weeks (JB6 P+ cells) or 5 weeks (NMuMG
cells). At the end of the incubation period, cells were stained with 0.01%
crystal violet, and colonies were counted in ‘Cytation 3 cell imaging multi-
mode reader’ (BioTek Instruments, Inc., Winooski, VT, USA).
Preparation of fat tissue filtrates
An amount of 100 mg of adipose tissue was gently homogenized in an
equal volume of serum-free MEM on ice for 30 s using Tissue Ruptor
(Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) on medium speed. Homogenates were filtered
through
hanging
15-mm
wide
0.4 μm
filter
insert
(Millicell,
cat#
MCHT06H48) in to a six-well plate previously filled with 400 μl serum-
free MEM and incubated on a rocker at RT for 1 h to allow small molecules
and proteins to diffuse into the medium while removing lipids and
macromolecules. After incubation, filtrates were centrifuged at 4500 rpm
for 5 min and the supernatant was collected and filtered through 0.4 μm
syringe filter (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) and protein concentrations were
quantified using BCA assay. An aliquot of 200 μg/ml concentration of MFTF
and
150 μg/ml
concentration
of
HuFTF
were
used
for
respective
experiments.
Treatment of cells in soft agar
For analysis of heat-induced inactivation of MFTF, samples were pre-
incubated at 4, 37, 55 and 95 °C for 30 min and then added to the top
layers of agar containing JB6 P+ cells. For assessment of protein- and lipid-
specific activity of MFTF, samples were pre-incubated with proteinase K
(1 μg/ml) (Roche, Indianapolis, IN, USA) or lipase (5 μg/ml) (Sigma-Aldrich,
St. Louis, MO, USA) at 37 1C for 30 min before using the samples for soft
agar assay. Activity of DNA and RNA in the MFTF were analyzed by adding
either DNase (1 μg/ml) (Roche) or RNase (1 μg/ml) (Sigma-Aldrich) into the
top layers of soft agar with cells and MFTF. Pharmacological inhibitors
against cMyc, mTOR, Erk1, FGFR-1 and c-MET (tivantinib) were added
directly into the top layers of soft agar containing cells and MFTF or HuFTF.
For neutralization of FGFR-1 activity, cells were pre-incubated with
monoclonal FGFR-1 neutralizing antibody (2–3 μg/ml) in 37 1C for 1 h
before platting them in soft agar for further experiments.
Isolation of adipocytes and the stromal vascular fraction (SVF)
from mouse adipose tissue
Adipocytes and non-adipocyte cells (SVF) from mouse fat were isolated
using the protocol mentioned earlier with some minor modifications.102
Fresh adipose tissue was obtained from mice, minced into small pieces and
immediately placed in fresh physiological saline solution (PSS; 0.9% NaCl).
Fats were digested in 1 ml of 1 mg/ml collagenase Type1 (Worthington
Biochemical Co. Lakewood, NJ, USA) in PSS and incubated at 37 °C for
30 min followed by centrifugation for 5 min at 300 rpm in RT. Using a
syringe with a 23G needle, SVF-rich fraction was removed without
disturbing the upper adipocyte layer. SVF and adipocyte-rich fractions
were placed separately in new tube. SVF and adipocytes were washed
twice with cold PSS and cell pellets were recovered by centrifuging for
10 min at 300 rpm.
Protein profiler arrays
Measurement of mouse adipokines and growth factors from fat tissue
filtrates was performed using the Mouse Angiogenesis Antibody Array kit
(R&D Systems Cat# ARY015). By comparing the signal intensities, relative
expression levels of cytokines were determined and quantified by
densitometry using ‘ImageJ’ software (NIH).
Western blot
A total of 2.8 × 105 cells were plated in 60-mm culture dishes and allowed
to grow for 48 h before treatment. The cells were treated with either MFTF
(at 300 μg/ml dose) or FGF2 − 2.5 ng/ml for indicated period of time. After
treatment, cells were collected, washed and lysed in RIPA buffer pH 7.4,
supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Proteins were
separated by 12% SDS-PAGE and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes.
Membranes were blocked with either 5% nonfat milk solution or 4% BSA
and then incubated with the appropriate primary antibody for overnight at
4 1C, followed by 1 h incubation with fluorochrome-tagged secondary
antibody. Bands were visualized by LI-COR Odyssey classic image scanner
(Lincoln, NE, USA).
Role of FGFR-1 in adiposity-associated cancer
D Chakraborty et al
6676
Oncogene (2017) 6668 – 6679
 Immunodepletion assay
An aliquot of 2 μg affinity purified monoclonal FGF2 antibody was added
to 100–150 μl of fat tissue filtrates and incubated for 16 h in 4 1C under
gentle agitation. An aliquot of 50 μl protein G-coupled agarose beads was
added in to the solution and the slurry was gently mixed followed by
further incubation for 5 h in 4 1C under gentle agitation. Supernatants
were collected after centrifugation at 2000 rpm for 30 s and used for
further experiments.
Quantification of HGF and FGF2
Concentrations of HGF and FGF2 were measured in both mouse and
human adipose tissue and in mouse sera. HGF and FGF2 were quantified
by ELISA according to the manufacturer’s protocol using ‘R&D Systems
Quantikine ELISA kit’ (Cat# DHG00 and Cat# DFB50).
Immunohistochemistry
Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded fat tissue sections from mice were de-
paraffinized and incubated with antigen retrieval buffer for 1 min at 95 1C.
Sections were blocked in 4% BSA for 1 h at RT and then treated either with
control mouse IgG or with primary mouse monoclonal anti-FGF2 or anti-
HGF antibody (1:100) overnight at 4 1C, followed by secondary anti-mouse
antibody labeled with HRP. After brief washing, slides were stained for 30 s
using 3,3-diaminobenzidine as substrate. Nuclei were stained with
hematoxylin (Harris) for 30 s. Images were acquired with a Nikon digital
camera attached on an Olympus microscope at × 400 magnification.
Generation of FGFR-1 KO cells
CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing was used to generate Fgfr-1 homozygous KO
JB6 P+ cells (Supplementary Figure S2). Three gRNAs were selected
to
target
exons
5,
7
and
10
of
the
mouse
Fgfr-1
gene
(ENSMUSG00000031565).
Oligo
duplexes
for
gRNA
templates
were
annealed and cloned into pSpCas9(BB)-2A-GFP (PX458), a gift from Feng
Zhang (Addgene plasmid # 48138), as previously described.103 JB6 P+ were
electroporated (1300 V, 30 ms, single pulse) with three gRNA plasmids
using a Neon Nucleofector (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).
Forty-eight hours later, cells were trypsinized and resuspended in dPBS
+0.1% BSA for cell sorting. Single cells that were GFP (+) and propidium
iodide (− ) were sorted and isolated in a 96-well plate, using a BD Influx
sorter (BD Biosciences-US, San Jose, CA, USA). Clonal lines were expanded
and screened by PCR and functional soft agar assay to identify desired
genotypes and phenotypes. Clonal line #4, used for experiments in this
study, was sequenced at all three exons to determine exact genomic
modifications (Supplementary Figure S2).
Immunofluorescence
Cells were fixed in 4% formaldehyde for 15 min, blocked with 4% BSA for
1 h and permeabilized with 0.2% PBS-T for 10 min. Cells were incubated
overnight with primary c-MYC and a-tubulin (dilutions for both will be
1:200) (1:400 dilution) at 4 °C followed by incubation in secondary anti-
rabbit (1:200 dilution) for 1 h at room temperature. Photographs were
taken at ×40 magnification in Olympus Fluoview 1000.
Animal study approval
All mice used in this study received humane care that adheres to principles
stated in the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals (NIH
publication, 1996 edition), and the protocol was approved by the IACUC
and Animal Care Program of Michigan State University, East Lansing,
MI, USA.
Study approval for human samples
The Rutgers-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School Institutional Review
Board approved the protocol ‘Determining the Impact of Human Fat on
Cancer Development’ on 16 October 2015. Informed consent was obtained
from candidates before undergoing gynecologic surgery. Intra-abdominal
visceral (omental and parametrial) adipose tissue was obtained, and
samples were de-identified to investigators at Michigan State University.
Statistics
For in vitro experiments, three biological and/or three technical replicates
were used to ensure adequate power to detect a significant change in
growth in soft agar. All animal experiments were performed using at least
five mice. The number of mice selected per group for in vivo studies is
anchored in statistical power analysis, whereby historical data from key
experimental end points are utilized to gauge anticipated mean values and
biological variation within a particular experimental group. The experi-
mental end points used included tumor number (for UV experiments) and
tumor volume (for xenograft studies). Data are presented as mean ± s.d.
Two-way ANOVA was used to compare among groups followed by Tukey’s
test for multiple comparisons. For all statistical tests, 0.05, 0.01 and 0.001
level of confidence, were accepted for statistical significance.
DATA AVAILABILITY
The data that support the findings of this study are available from
the corresponding author up reasonable request.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We acknowledge the MSU Investigative HistoPathology Laboratory, Amy S Porter, HT
(ASCP) QIHC and Kathleen A Joseph, HT (ASCP) QIHC. We also thank Dr Karen Liby
(MSU) for her consultation and providing antibodies, Dr Richard Neubig (MSU) and Dr
Matthew Bernard (MSU) for their consultation and assistance with experimental
design and Dr Dalen Agnew (MSU) for his consultation on tumor pathology. JJB is
funded by National Institutes of Health Grant R00 CA177868, Michigan State
University start-up funds. SYL is funded by the Office of the Assistant Secretary of
Defense for Health Affairs, through the Breast Cancer Research Program, under
Award No. W81XWH-15-1-0453 and the 2016 AACR-Incyte Corporation NextGen
Grant for Transformative Cancer Research, Grant Number 16-20-46-LUNT.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
DC designed research studies, conducted experiments, acquired and analyzed
data and wrote the manuscript. VB and BB conducted experiments. TK, HH and
DG provided human adipose tissue, designed experiments and reviewed
manuscript. EYD performed experiments, acquired data and analyzed data for
CRISPR studies. SYL designed experiments and reviewed manuscript. JJB
oversaw research, designed research studies, analyzed data and wrote the
manuscript.
REFERENCES
1 Renehan AG, Zwahlen M, Egger M. Adiposity and cancer risk: new mechanistic
insights from epidemiology. Nat Rev Cancer 2015; 15: 484–498.
2 Nunez NP, Perkins SN, Smith NC, Berrigan D, Berendes DM, Varticovski L et al.
Obesity accelerates mouse mammary tumor growth in the absence of ovarian
hormones. Nutr Cancer 2008; 60: 534–541.
3 Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Curtin LR, Lamb MM, Flegal KM. Prevalence of high body
mass index in US children and adolescents, 2007–2008. JAMA 2010; 303:
242–249.
4 Hill AL, Rand DG, Nowak MA, Christakis NA. Infectious disease modeling of social
contagion in networks. PLoS Comput Biol 2010; 6: e1000968.
5 Ligibel JA, Alfano CM, Courneya KS, Demark-Wahnefried W, Burger RA,
Chlebowski RT et al. American Society of Clinical Oncology position statement
on obesity and cancer. J Clin Oncol 2014; 32: 3568–3574.
6 Ouchi N, Kihara S, Funahashi T, Matsuzawa Y, Walsh K. Obesity, adiponectin and
vascular inflammatory disease. Curr Opin Lipidol 2003; 14: 561–566.
7 Berg KK, Madsen HO, Garred P, Wiseth R, Gunnes S, Videm V. The additive
contribution from inflammatory genetic markers on the severity of cardiovas-
cular disease. Scand J Immunol 2009; 69: 36–42.
8 Font-Burgada J, Sun B, Karin M. Obesity and cancer: the oil that feeds the flame.
Cell Metab 2016; 23: 48–62.
9 Greenberg AS, Obin MS. Obesity and the role of adipose tissue in inflammation
and metabolism. Am J Clin Nutr 2006; 83: 461S–465S.
Role of FGFR-1 in adiposity-associated cancer
D Chakraborty et al
6677
Oncogene (2017) 6668 – 6679
 10 Samaras K, Botelho NK, Chisholm DJ, Lord RV. Subcutaneous and visceral adi-
pose tissue gene expression of serum adipokines that predict type 2 diabetes.
Obesity 2010; 18: 884–889.
11 Fried SK, Bunkin DA, Greenberg AS. Omental and subcutaneous adipose tissues
of obese subjects release interleukin-6: depot difference and regulation by
glucocorticoid. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1998; 83: 847–850.
12 Ouchi N, Parker JL, Lugus JJ, Walsh K. Adipokines in inflammation and metabolic
disease. Nat Rev Immunol 2011; 11: 85–97.
13 Iyengar NM, Zhou XK, Gucalp A, Morris PG, Howe LR, Giri DD et al. Systemic
correlates of white adipose tissue inflammation in early-stage breast cancer. Clin
Cancer Res 2016; 22: 2283–2289.
14 Murphy RA, Bureyko TF, Miljkovic I, Cauley JA, Satterfield S, Hue TF et al.
Association of total adiposity and computed tomographic measures of regional
adiposity with incident cancer risk: a prospective population-based study of
older adults. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab 2014; 39: 687–692.
15 Moore LL, Bradlee ML, Singer MR, Splansky GL, Proctor MH, Ellison RC et al.
BMI and waist circumference as predictors of lifetime colon cancer risk in
Framingham Study adults. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord 2004; 28: 559–567.
16 Ibrahim MM. Subcutaneous and visceral adipose tissue: structural and functional
differences. Obes Rev 2010; 11: 11–18.
17 Vague J. The degree of masculine differentiation of obesities: a factor
determining predisposition to diabetes, atherosclerosis, gout, and uric calculous
disease. Am J Clin Nutr 1956; 4: 20–34.
18 Connolly BS, Barnett C, Vogt KN, Li T, Stone J, Boyd NF. A meta-analysis of
published literature on waist-to-hip ratio and risk of breast cancer. Nutri Cancer
2002; 44: 127–138.
19 Gaudet MM, Carter BD, Patel AV, Teras LR, Jacobs EJ, Gapstur SM. Waist
circumference, body mass index, and postmenopausal breast cancer incidence
in the Cancer Prevention Study-II Nutrition Cohort. Cancer Causes Control 2014;
25: 737–745.
20 Hajian-Tilaki KO, Gholizadehpasha AR, Bozorgzadeh S, Hajian-Tilaki E. Body mass
index and waist circumference are predictor biomarkers of breast cancer risk in
Iranian women. Med Oncol 2011; 28: 1296–1301.
21 Huang Z, Willett WC, Colditz GA, Hunter DJ, Manson JE, Rosner B et al. Waist
circumference, waist:hip ratio, and risk of breast cancer in the Nurses'
Health Study. Am J Epidemiol 1999; 150: 1316–1324.
22 Schapira DV, Clark RA, Wolff PA, Jarrett AR, Kumar NB, Aziz NM. Visceral obesity
and breast cancer risk. Cancer 1994; 74: 632–639.
23 Huffman DM, Augenlicht LH, Zhang X, Lofrese JJ, Atzmon G, Chamberland JP
et al. Abdominal obesity, independent from caloric intake, accounts for the
development of intestinal tumors in Apc(1638 N/+) female mice. Cancer Prev Res
2013; 6: 177–187.
24 Lu YP, Lou YR, Bernard JJ, Peng QY, Li T, Lin Y et al. Surgical removal of the
parametrial fat pads stimulates apoptosis and inhibits UVB-induced carcino-
genesis in mice fed a high-fat diet. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2012; 109: 9065–9070.
25 Zhang D, Li J, Gao J, Huang C. c-Jun/AP-1 pathway-mediated cyclin D1
expression participates in low dose arsenite-induced transformation in mouse
epidermal JB6 Cl41 cells. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 2009; 235: 18–24.
26 Lu FJ, Tseng TH, Lee WJ, Yen CC, Yin YF, Liao CW et al. Promoting neoplastic
transformation of humic acid in mouse epidermal JB6 Cl41 cells. Chem Biol
Interact 2006; 162: 249–258.
27 He Z, Cho YY, Liu G, Ma WY, Bode AM, Dong Z. p38 Mitogen-activated protein
kinase regulation of JB6 Cl41 cell transformation promoted by epidermal
growth factor. J Biol Chem 2003; 278: 26435–26442.
28 Amstad PA, Liu H, Ichimiya M, Chang S, Berezesky IK, Trump BF. bcl-2
enhancement of malignant transformation in mouse epidermal JB6 cells. Mol
Carcinog 1997; 20: 231–239.
29 Dong Z, Lavrovsky V, Colburn NH. Transformation reversion induced in JB6
RT101 cells by AP-1 inhibitors. Carcinogenesis 1995; 16: 749–756.
30 Dong Z, Birrer MJ, Watts RG, Matrisian LM, Colburn NH. Blocking of tumor
promoter-induced AP-1 activity inhibits induced transformation in JB6 mouse
epidermal cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1994; 91: 609–613.
31 Smith Jr JS, Wey HE, Leikauf GD, Baxter CS. JB6 murine epidermal cell lines
sensitive and resistant to 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA)-induced
transformation exhibit differential arachidonic acid metabolism in response to
TPA and the calcium ionophore A23187. Carcinogenesis 1992; 13: 189–192.
32 Ben-Ari ET, Bernstein LR, Colburn NH. Differential c-jun expression in response to
tumor promoters in JB6 cells sensitive or resistant to neoplastic transformation.
Mol Carcinog 1992; 5: 62–74.
33 Jain AK, Shimoi K, Nakamura Y, Sano M, Tomita I. Effect of tea on 12-O
tetradecanoyl-phorbol-13 acetate (TPA) induced promotion of transformation in
JB6 mouse epidermal cells. Indian J Cancer 1989; 26: 92–98.
34 Nakamura Y, Gindhart TD, Winterstein D, Tomita I, Seed JL, Colburn NH. Early
superoxide dismutase-sensitive event promotes neoplastic transformation in
mouse epidermal JB6 cells. Carcinogenesis 1988; 9: 203–207.
35 Smith BM, Gindhart TD, Colburn NH. Extracellular calcium requirement for
promotion of transformation in JB6 cells. Cancer Res 1986; 46: 701–706.
36 Srinivas L, Colburn NH. Preferential oxidation of cell surface sialic acid by
periodate leads to promotion of transformation in JB6 cells. Carcinogenesis 1984;
5: 515–519.
37 Bernard JJ, Lou YR, Peng QY, Li T, Vakil PR, Ding N et al. Parametrial fat tissue
from high fat diet-treated SKH-1 mice stimulates transformation of mouse
epidermal JB6 cells. J Carcinog Mutagen 2014; 5: 2157–2518.
38 Courneya KS, Katzmarzyk PT, Bacon E. Physical activity and obesity in Canadian
cancer
survivors:
population-based
estimates
from
the
2005
Canadian
Community Health Survey. Cancer 2008; 112: 2475–2482.
39 Sahl WJ, Glore S, Garrison P, Oakleaf K, Johnson SD. Basal cell carcinoma and
lifestyle characteristics. Int J Dermatol 1995; 34: 398–402.
40 Pothiawala S, Qureshi AA, Li Y, Han J. Obesity and the incidence of skin cancer in
US Caucasians. Cancer Causes Control 2012; 23: 717–726.
41 Ibiebele TI, van der Pols JC, Hughes MC, Marks GC, Green AC. Dietary fat intake
and risk of skin cancer: a prospective study in Australian adults. Int J Cancer 2009;
125: 1678–1684.
42 Ibiebele TI, van der Pols JC, Hughes MC, Marks GC, Williams GM, Green AC.
Dietary pattern in association with squamous cell carcinoma of the skin: a
prospective study. Am J Clin Nutr 2007; 85: 1401–1408.
43 Colburn NH, Wendel EJ, Abruzzo G. Dissociation of mitogenesis and late-stage
promotion of tumor cell phenotype by phorbol esters: mitogen-resistant
variants are sensitive to promotion. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1981; 78:
6912–6916.
44 Arnold M, Pandeya N, Byrnes G, Renehan AG, Stevens GA, Ezzati M et al. Global
burden of cancer attributable to high body-mass index in 2012: a population-
based study. Lancet Oncol 2015; 16: 36–46.
45 Hursting SD, Lavigne JA, Berrigan D, Perkins SN, Barrett JC. Calorie restriction,
aging,
and
cancer
prevention:
mechanisms
of
action
and
applicability
to humans. Annu Rev Med 2003; 54: 131–152.
46 Yakar S, Nunez NP, Pennisi P, Brodt P, Sun H, Fallavollita L et al. Increased tumor
growth in mice with diet-induced obesity: impact of ovarian hormones.
Endocrinology 2006; 147: 5826–5834.
47 Goodwin PJ, Ennis M, Pritchard KI, Trudeau ME, Koo J, Madarnas Y et al. Fasting
insulin and outcome in early-stage breast cancer: results of a prospective
cohort study. J Clin Oncol 2002; 20: 42–51.
48 Miyoshi Y, Funahashi T, Kihara S, Taguchi T, Tamaki Y, Matsuzawa Y et al.
Association of serum adiponectin levels with breast cancer risk. Clin Cancer Res
2003; 9: 5699–5704.
49 Dutta D, Ghosh S, Pandit K, Mukhopadhyay P, Chowdhury S. Leptin and cancer:
pathogenesis and modulation. Indian J Endocrinol Metab 2012; 16(Suppl 3):
S596–S600.
50 Xu H, Barnes GT, Yang Q, Tan G, Yang D, Chou CJ et al. Chronic inflammation in
fat plays a crucial role in the development of obesity-related insulin resistance.
J Clin Invest 2003; 112: 1821–1830.
51 Chockalingam R, Downing C, Tyring SK. Cutaneous squamous cell carcinomas in
organ transplant recipients. J Clin Med 2015; 4: 1229–1239.
52 Aggarwal BB, Shishodia S, Sandur SK, Pandey MK, Sethi G. Inflammation and
cancer: how hot is the link? Biochem Pharmacol 2006; 72: 1605–1621.
53 Ortega S, Ittmann M, Tsang SH, Ehrlich M, Basilico C. Neuronal defects and
delayed wound healing in mice lacking fibroblast growth factor 2. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 1998; 95: 5672–5677.
54 Hu M, Hu Y, He J, Li B. Prognostic value of basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) in
lung cancer: a systematic review with meta-analysis. PLoS ONE 2016; 11:
e0147374.
55 Cronauer MV, Hittmair A, Eder IE, Hobisch A, Culig Z, Ramoner R et al. Basic
fibroblast growth factor levels in cancer cells and in sera of patients suffering
from proliferative disorders of the prostate. Prostate 1997; 31: 223–233.
56 Nakamoto T, Chang CS, Li AK, Chodak GW. Basic fibroblast growth factor in
human prostate cancer cells. Cancer Res 1992; 52: 571–577.
57 Marshall FF. Impact of serum basic fibroblast growth factor on prognosis in
human renal cell carcinoma. J Urol 2002; 168: 877.
58 Kornmann M, Beger HG, Korc M. Role of fibroblast growth factors and their
receptors in pancreatic cancer and chronic pancreatitis. Pancreas 1998; 17:
169–175.
59 Weber TJ, Shankaran H, Wiley HS, Opresko LK, Chrisler WB, Quesenberry RD.
Basic fibroblast growth factor regulates persistent ERK oscillations in pre-
malignant but not malignant JB6 cells. J Invest Dermatol 2010; 130: 1444–1456.
60 Quarto N, Talarico D, Sommer A, Florkiewicz R, Basilico C, Rifkin DB. Transfor-
mation by basic fibroblast growth factor requires high levels of expression:
comparison with transformation by hst/K-fgf. Oncogene Res 1989; 5: 101–110.
61 Freier K, Schwaenen C, Sticht C, Flechtenmacher C, Muhling J, Hofele C et al.
Recurrent FGFR1 amplification and high FGFR1 protein expression in oral
squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC). Oral Oncol 2007; 43: 60–66.
Role of FGFR-1 in adiposity-associated cancer
D Chakraborty et al
6678
Oncogene (2017) 6668 – 6679
 62 Weiss J, Sos ML, Seidel D, Peifer M, Zander T, Heuckmann JM et al. Frequent and
focal FGFR1 amplification associates with therapeutically tractable FGFR1
dependency in squamous cell lung cancer. Sci Transl Med 2010; 2: 62ra93.
63 Elbauomy Elsheikh S, Green AR, Lambros MB, Turner NC, Grainge MJ, Powe D
et al. FGFR1 amplification in breast carcinomas: a chromogenic in situ hybridi-
sation analysis. Breast Cancer Res 2007; 9: R23.
64 Ahmad I, Iwata T, Leung HY. Mechanisms of FGFR-mediated carcinogenesis.
Biochim Biophys Acta 2012; 1823: 850–860.
65 Sato T, Oshima T, Yoshihara K, Yamamoto N, Yamada R, Nagano Y et al.
Overexpression of the fibroblast growth factor receptor-1 gene correlates with
liver metastasis in colorectal cancer. Oncol Rep 2009; 21: 211–216.
66 Tsimafeyeu I, Demidov L, Stepanova E, Wynn N, Ta H. Overexpression of fibro-
blast growth factor receptors FGFR1 and FGFR2 in renal cell carcinoma. Scand J
Urol Nephrol 2011; 45: 190–195.
67 Jang M, Kim E, Choi Y, Lee H, Kim Y, Kim J et al. FGFR1 is amplified during the
progression of in situ to invasive breast carcinoma. Breast Cancer Res 2012; 14:
R115.
68 Turner N, Pearson A, Sharpe R, Lambros M, Geyer F, Lopez-Garcia MA et al. FGFR1
amplification drives endocrine therapy resistance and is a therapeutic target in
breast cancer. Cancer Res 2010; 70: 2085–2094.
69 Logie A, Dunois-Larde C, Rosty C, Levrel O, Blanche M, Ribeiro A et al. Activating
mutations of the tyrosine kinase receptor FGFR3 are associated with benign skin
tumors in mice and humans. Hum Mol Genet 2005; 14: 1153–1160.
70 Nan H, Qureshi AA, Hunter DJ, Han J. Genetic variants in FGFR2 and FGFR4 genes
and skin cancer risk in the Nurses' Health Study. BMC Cancer 2009; 9: 172.
71 Mydlo JH, Kral JG, Macchia RJ. Preliminary results comparing the recovery of
basic fibroblast growth factor (FGF-2) in adipose tissue and benign and malig-
nant renal tissue. J Urol 1998; 159: 2159–2163.
72 Xiao L, Sobue T, Esliger A, Kronenberg MS, Coffin JD, Doetschman T et al.
Disruption of the Fgf2 gene activates the adipogenic and suppresses the
osteogenic program in mesenchymal marrow stromal stem cells. Bone 2010; 47:
360–370.
73 Kakudo N, Shimotsuma A, Kusumoto K. Fibroblast growth factor-2 stimulates
adipogenic differentiation of human adipose-derived stem cells. Biochem
Biophys Res Commun 2007; 359: 239–244.
74 Neubauer M, Fischbach C, Bauer-Kreisel P, Lieb E, Hacker M, Tessmar J et al. Basic
fibroblast growth factor enhances PPARgamma ligand-induced adipogenesis of
mesenchymal stem cells. FEBS Lett 2004; 577: 277–283.
75 Kawaguchi N, Toriyama K, Nicodemou-Lena E, Inou K, Torii S, Kitagawa Y.
De novo adipogenesis in mice at the site of injection of basement membrane
and basic fibroblast growth factor. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998; 95: 1062–1066.
76 Kim S, Ahn C, Bong N, Choe S, Lee DK. Biphasic effects of FGF2 on adipogenesis.
PLoS One 2015; 10: e0120073.
77 Grazul-Bilska AT, Luthra G, Reynolds LP, Bilski JJ, Johnson ML, Adbullah SA et al.
Effects of basic fibroblast growth factor (FGF-2) on proliferation of human skin
fibroblasts in type II diabetes mellitus. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes 2002; 110:
176–181.
78 Itoh N, Ohta H. Pathophysiological roles of FGF signaling in the heart. Front
Physiol 2013; 4: 247.
79 Pan RL, Xiang LX, Wang P, Liu XY, Nie L, Huang W et al. Low-molecular-weight
fibroblast growth factor 2 attenuates hepatic fibrosis by epigenetic down-
regulation of Delta-like1. Hepatology 2015; 61: 1708–1720.
80 Matsui R, Brody JS, Yu Q. FGF-2 induces surfactant protein gene expression in
foetal rat lung epithelial cells through a MAPK-independent pathway. Cell Signal
1999; 11: 221–228.
81 Gabrielsson BG, Johansson JM, Jennische E, Jernas M, Itoh Y, Peltonen M et al.
Depot-specific expression of fibroblast growth factors in human adipose tissue.
Obes Res 2002; 10: 608–616.
82 Steringer JP, Muller HM, Nickel W. Unconventional secretion of fibroblast growth
factor 2–a novel type of protein translocation across membranes? J Mol Biol
2015; 427: 1202–1210.
83 Kuhn MC, Willenberg HS, Schott M, Papewalis C, Stumpf U, Flohe S et al.
Adipocyte-secreted factors increase osteoblast proliferation and the OPG/RANKL
ratio to influence osteoclast formation. Mol Cell Endocrinol 2012; 349: 180–188.
84 Hao RH, Guo Y, Dong SS, Weng GZ, Yan H, Zhu DL et al. Associations of plasma
FGF2 levels and polymorphisms in the FGF2 gene with obesity phenotypes in
Han Chinese population. Sci Rep 2016; 6: 19868.
85 Larsson A, Skoldenberg E, Ericson H. Serum and plasma levels of FGF-2 and VEGF
in healthy blood donors. Angiogenesis 2002; 5: 107–110.
86 Regad T, Targeting RTK. Signaling pathways in cancer. Cancers 2015; 7:
1758–1784.
87 Lepique AP, Moraes MS, Rocha KM, Eichler CB, Hajj GN, Schwindt TT et al. c-Myc
protein is stabilized by fibroblast growth factor 2 and destabilized by ACTH to
control cell cycle in mouse Y1 adrenocortical cells. J Mol Endocrinol 2004; 33:
623–638.
88 Lau MT, So WK, Leung PC. Fibroblast growth factor 2 induces E-cadherin down-
regulation via PI3K/Akt/mTOR and MAPK/ERK signaling in ovarian cancer cells.
PLoS One 2013; 8: e59083.
89 Bowden GT. Prevention of non-melanoma skin cancer by targeting ultraviolet-B-
light signalling. Nat Rev Cancer 2004; 4: 23–35.
90 Baselga
J.
Targeting
the
phosphoinositide-3
(PI3)
kinase
pathway
in
breast cancer. Oncologist 2011; 16(Suppl 1): 12–19.
91 Sarveswaran S, Chakraborty D, Chitale D, Sears R, Ghosh J. Inhibition of
5-lipoxygenase selectively triggers disruption of c-Myc signaling in prostate
cancer cells. J Biol Chem 2015; 290: 4994–5006.
92 Zhang X, Farrell AS, Daniel CJ, Arnold H, Scanlan C, Laraway BJ et al. Mechanistic
insight into Myc stabilization in breast cancer involving aberrant Axin1 expres-
sion. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2012; 109: 2790–2795.
93 Adhikary S, Eilers M. Transcriptional regulation and transformation by Myc
proteins. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2005; 6: 635–645.
94 Li HJ, Che XM, Zhao W, He SC, Zhang ZL, Chen R et al. Diet-induced obesity
promotes murine gastric cancer growth through a nampt/sirt1/c-myc positive
feedback loop. Oncol Rep 2013; 30: 2153–2160.
95 Malley CO, Pidgeon GP. The mTOR pathway in obesity driven gastrointestinal
cancers: potential targets and clinical trials. BBA Clin 2016; 5: 29–40.
96 Vucenik I, Stains JP. Obesity and cancer risk: evidence, mechanisms, and
recommendations. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2012; 1271: 37–43.
97 Binai NA, Damert A, Carra G, Steckelbroeck S, Lower J, Lower R et al. Expression
of estrogen receptor alpha increases leptin-induced STAT3 activity in breast
cancer cells. Int J Cancer 2010; 127: 55–66.
98 Liu Y, Duysen E, Yaktine AL, Au A, Wang W, Birt DF. Dietary energy restriction
inhibits ERK but not JNK or p38 activity in the epidermis of SENCAR mice.
Carcinogenesis 2001; 22: 607–612.
99 Garratt M, Nakagawa S, Simons MJ. Comparative idiosyncrasies in life extension
by reduced mTOR signalling and its distinctiveness from dietary restriction.
Aging Cell 2016; 15: 737–743.
100 Nakamura KD, Duffy PH, Lu MH, Turturro A, Hart RW. The effect of dietary
restriction on myc protooncogene expression in mice: a preliminary study. Mech
Ageing Dev 1989; 48: 199–205.
101 Delmore JE, Issa GC, Lemieux ME, Rahl PB, Shi J, Jacobs HM et al. BET bromo-
domain inhibition as a therapeutic strategy to target c-Myc. Cell 2011; 146:
904–917.
102 Ayala-Lopez N, Jackson WF, Burnett R, Wilson JN, Thompson JM, Watts SW.
Organic cation transporter 3 contributes to norepinephrine uptake into peri-
vascular adipose tissue. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2015; 309: H1904–H1914.
103 Ran FA, Hsu PD, Wright J, Agarwala V, Scott DA, Zhang F. Genome engineering
using the CRISPR-Cas9 system. Nat Protoc 2013; 8: 2281–2308.
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License. The images or
other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons
license, unless indicated otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under
the Creative Commons license, users will need to obtain permission from the license
holder to reproduce the material. To view a copy of this license, visit http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/
© The Author(s) 2017
Supplementary Information accompanies this paper on the Oncogene website (http://www.nature.com/onc)
Role of FGFR-1 in adiposity-associated cancer
D Chakraborty et al
6679
Oncogene (2017) 6668 – 6679
