 REVIEW ARTICLE
OPEN
Limitations in predicting the space radiation health risk for
exploration astronauts
Jeffery C. Chancellor
1, Rebecca S. Blue2, Keith A. Cengel3, Serena M. Auñón-Chancellor4,5, Kathleen H. Rubins4,
Helmut G. Katzgraber1,6,7 and Ann R. Kennedy3
Despite years of research, understanding of the space radiation environment and the risk it poses to long-duration astronauts
remains limited. There is a disparity between research results and observed empirical effects seen in human astronaut crews, likely
due to the numerous factors that limit terrestrial simulation of the complex space environment and extrapolation of human clinical
consequences from varied animal models. Given the intended future of human spaceflight, with efforts now to rapidly expand
capabilities for human missions to the moon and Mars, there is a pressing need to improve upon the understanding of the space
radiation risk, predict likely clinical outcomes of interplanetary radiation exposure, and develop appropriate and effective mitigation
strategies for future missions. To achieve this goal, the space radiation and aerospace community must recognize the historical
limitations of radiation research and how such limitations could be addressed in future research endeavors. We have sought to
highlight the numerous factors that limit understanding of the risk of space radiation for human crews and to identify ways in
which these limitations could be addressed for improved understanding and appropriate risk posture regarding future human
spaceflight.
npj Microgravity  (2018) 4:8 ; doi:10.1038/s41526-018-0043-2
INTRODUCTION
While space radiation research has expanded rapidly in recent
years, large uncertainties remain in predicting and extrapolating
biological responses to radiation exposure in humans. As future
missions explore outside of low-Earth orbit (LEO) and away from
the protection of the Earth’s magnetic shielding, the nature of the
radiation exposures that astronauts encounter will include higher
radiation exposures than any experienced in historical human
spaceflight. In 1988, the National Council on Radiation Protection
and Measurements (NCRP) released Report No. 98: Guidance On
Radiation Received in Space Activities.1 In this report, authors
recommended that NASA astronauts be limited to career lifetime
radiation exposures that would induce no more than a 3% Risk of
Exposure-Induced Death (REID). This was re-emphasized in the
2015 NCRP Commentary No. 23: Radiation Protection for Space
Activities: Supplement to Previous Recommendations, which
concluded that NASA should continue to observe the 3% REID
career limit for future missions outside of LEO.2 This limit has been
accepted in NASA’s Spaceflight Human-System Standard docu-
ment, NASA STD-3001 Volume 1 (Revision A).3
Despite the adoption of these guidelines and the past 30 years
of research, there has been little progress on fully defining or
mitigating the space radiation risk to human crew. In fact, the
NCRP’s recent conclusions specified that their 3% limit may not be
conservative enough given the incomplete biological data used in
existing projection models, and that such models may over-
estimate the number of allowable “safe days” in space for missions
outside of LEO.2
A recent report by Schwadron et al. has identified further
concerns regarding the interplanetary radiation environment.4
The unusually low activity between solar cycles 23 and 24 (1996-
present) has resulted in the longest period of minimum solar
activity observed in over 80 years of solar measurements. The lack
of solar activity has led to a substantial decrease in solar wind
density and magnetic field strengths that typically attenuate the
fluence (the flux of particles crossing a given plane) of Galactic
Cosmic Ray (GCR) ions during periods of solar minimum. As a
result, Schwadron et al. project that GCR fluences will be
substantially higher during the next solar cycles (24–25) leading
to increased background radiation exposure and, subsequently, as
much as a 20% decrease in the allowable safe days in space
(outside of LEO) to stay below the 3% REID limits.4
The study of human health risks of spaceflight (e.g., bone
health, behavior, nutrition, etc.) typically involves analogs that
closely represent the space environment. In most cases, theory,
models, and study outcomes can be validated with available
spaceflight data or, at a minimum, observation of humans
subjected to analog terrestrial stresses. In contrast, space radiation
research is limited to the use of analogs or models that for many
reasons do not accurately represent the operational space
radiation environment or the complexity of human physiology.
For example, studies on the effects of space radiation generally
use mono-energetic beams and acute, single-ion exposures
(including protons, lithium, carbon, oxygen, silicon, iron, etc.)
instead of the complex energy spectra and diverse ionic
composition of the space radiation environment. In addition, a
Received: 19 August 2017 Revised: 20 February 2018 Accepted: 12 March 2018
1Department of Physics and Astronomy, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843-4242, USA; 2Aerospace Medicine and Vestibular Research Laboratory, The Mayo Clinic
Arizona, Scottsdale, AZ 85054, USA; 3Department of Radiation Oncology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA; 4National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), Johnson Space Center, Houston 77058, USA; 5University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX 77555, USA; 61QB Information
Technologies (1QBit), Vancouver, BC V6B 4W4, Canada and 7Santa Fe Institute, 1399 Hyde Park Road, Santa Fe, NM 87501, USA
Correspondence: Jeffery C. Chancellor (jeff@chancellor.space)
www.nature.com/npjmgrav
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
 projected, cumulative mission dose is often delivered in one-time,
or rapid and sequential, doses delivered to experimental animals.
In most cases, these dose-rates are several orders of magnitude
higher than actual space environment exposures. Even the use of
animal models introduces error, as studies make use of a variety of
animal species with differing responses and sensitivity to radiation
that may not represent human responses to similar exposures.
Further, studies do not challenge multiple organ systems to
respond concurrently to the numerous stressors seen in an
operational spaceflight scenario. Historical epidemiological studies
of humans, which are generally used for correlation of animal and
experimental models, include populations such as atomic bomb or
nuclear accident survivors exposed to whole-body irradiation at
high doses and high dose-rates, limited to scenarios not found in
spaceflight. These disparities and numerous other environmental
considerations contribute to the large uncertainties in the
outcomes of space radiobiology studies and the applicability of
such studies for extrapolation and prediction of clinical health
outcomes in future spaceflight crews.
Here we seek to highlight these factors that contribute to the
challenge of radiation risk prediction and mitigation for future
exploration spaceflight. Our intent is to provide an understanding
of the current state of radiation-specific literature, efforts towards
better
defining
the
space
radiation
environment,
and
the
difficulties in realization of this effort that limit current knowledge.
Further, we hope to identify opportunities for future research that
could best elucidate a path towards successful definition and
mitigation of the space radiation risk to humans outside of LEO.
THE SPACE RADIATION ENVIRONMENT
Biological stressors related to space radiation are due to the
effects of energy transfer from a charged particle to the human
body. The combination of a particle’s charge, mass, and energy
determines how quickly it loses energy when interacting with
matter.5–7 For example, given equal initial kinetic energies, an
electron will penetrate further into aluminum than a heavy
charged particle, and an X-ray will, on average, penetrate even
further. In biological tissue, the absorbed dose that a particular
target organ receives from heavy-charged particle radiation
depends not only on the energy spectrum of the particles but
also on the depth and density of the tissue mass that lie between
the skin surface and the target organ (for example, see Fig. 1,
which demonstrates the tissue depth ionized hydrogen (proton)
penetrates as a function of energy).
The radiation dose to an astronaut, measured in units of Gray
(Gy, defined as Joules per kilogram (J/kg)), is deposited with a
distribution in tissues that results from the specific energy fluence
of the particles. The heavier the charged particle, the greater the
amount of energy deposited per unit path length for that particle.
This is called linear energy transfer (LET).
The space weather environment is most commonly categorized
into three sources of ionizing radiation, each of which is
associated with different energy and prevalence and, thus,
different radiation-related risk. First, the GCR spectrum consists
of primarily ionized hydrogen, as well as less frequent heavier-
charged particles, with relatively high LET, that contribute to the
chronic, background radiation exposure for long-duration astro-
nauts. Solar Particle Events (SPEs) consist mostly of short-duration
exposures of high-energy protons that emanate from the Sun
within regions of solar magnetic instability.8 Finally, solar wind
consists of mostly low energy protons and electrons. The
background dose-rate for solar wind varies with the solar cycle,
but is easily shielded by modern spacecraft designs and is
considered to be of negligible risk. In addition to space
environment radiation, some small amounts of radioisotopes are
used in manned space missions for instrument calibration and
research; however, these sources are highly controlled by flight
rules and mission planners. The vast majority of crew radiation
exposures are delivered by the complex radiation environment in
which they must travel and live.
Galactic Cosmic Rays
GCR ions, originating from outside our solar system, are relativistic
nuclei that possess sufficient energies to penetrate any shielding
technology used on current mission vehicles.9 The GCR spectrum
is a complex combination of fast-moving ions derived from most
atomic species found in the periodic table.10 The GCR spectrum,
from hydrogen (Z, or atomic number, of 1) through iron (Z = 26), is
shown in Fig. 2. This spectrum consists of approximately 87%
hydrogen ions (protons), 12% helium ions (α particles), and 1–2%
heavier nuclei with charges ranging from Z = 3 (lithium) to Z = 28
(nickel).10,11 Ions heavier than nickel are also present, but they are
rare in occurrence. GCR ions with charge Z ≥ 3 are frequently
referred to as HZE particles (High nuclear charge Z and energy E).
During transit outside of LEO, every cell nucleus within an
astronaut’s body would be traversed by a hydrogen ion or delta
Proton Energy (MeV)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Depth in Tissue (cm)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
d 
= 
3 
cm
Mouse
d 
= 
20 
cm
Pig
d 
= 
30 
cm
Human
Fig. 1
Depth dose, energy, and linear energy transfer characteristics
of protons. The range of proton energies relative to the body
diameter (dotted lines) and bone marrow depth (ordinate) for mice,
pigs, and humans for energies up to 60 MeV. Figure reprinted by
permission from Conditions for RightsLink Permissions Springer
Customer Service Center GmbH:Springer-Verlag32
Charge (Z)
0
5
10
15
20
25
Relative Contribution Per Z=1
5
10
4
10
3
10
2
10
1
10
1
Fig. 2
Relative abundance of atomic species, normalized to Z = 1
(hydrogen) and up to Z = 26 (iron), in the Galactic Cosmic Ray (GCR)
spectrum. The GCR spectrum includes every atom in the periodic
table, with ions up to nickel (Z = 28) contributing to any significance.
Note the energy of each ion species varies widely, more prominently
in the range of 400–600 MeV. This broad disparity in ions and
energies makes it extremely difficult to accurately simulate the GCR
environment during ground-based radiobiology experiments. While
larger ions may provide lower relative contribution to the spectrum
makeup they may have a more significant biological impact than
smaller, abundant ions. Data adapted from Saganti et al. 2014108
Limitations in predicting the space radiation health risk
JC Chancellor et al.
2
npj Microgravity (2018)  8 
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
1234567890():,;
 ray (a recoil electron caused by fragmentation after ion interac-
tions) every few days, and by a heavier GCR ion (e.g., O, Si, Fe)
every few months.12,13 Despite their infrequency, the heavy ions
contribute a significant amount to the GCR dose that astronauts
would incur outside of LEO. The energies of the heavier GCR ions
are so penetrating that shielding can only partially reduce the
intravehicular doses.13 Thicker shielding could provide protection,
but is limited by mass and volume restrictions of exploration
vehicles and dependent upon the capabilities of spacecraft launch
systems.
The high-LET radiation found in the GCR spectrum can produce
excessive free radicals that instigate oxidative damage to cell
structures. Chronic exposure to such oxidative stress contributes
to the radiation-induced changes associated with premature
aging, cardiovascular disease, and the formation of cataracts. The
large ionization power of GCR ions makes them a potentially
significant contributor to tissue damage and carcinogenesis,
central nervous system (CNS) degeneration, and deleterious health
outcomes.14,15 In addition, as GCR ions pass through a space
vehicle, interaction with the spacecraft hull attenuates the energy
of heavy-charged particles and frequently causes their fragmenta-
tion into numerous particles of reduced atomic weight, a process
referred to as spallation.16,17 Spallation occurring as GCR particles
collide with shielding materials can result in ‘cascade showers’ that
produce progeny ions with much higher potential for biological
destruction than the original particle.9,13,18,19 This process changes
the makeup of the intravehicular radiation spectrum, adding to
the
complexity
of
the
radiation
environment
unique
to
spaceflight.
Solar Particle Events
During SPEs, magnetic disturbances on the surface of the sun
result in the release of intense bursts of ionizing radiation that are
difficult to forecast in advance.20–22 SPE radiation is primarily
composed of protons with kinetic energies ranging from 10 MeV
up to several GeV (determined by the relativistic speed of
particles) and is predicted to produce a heterogeneous dose
distribution within an exposed astronaut’s body, with a relatively
high superficial (skin) dose and a significantly lower dose to
internal organs.
As extravehicular space suits provide relatively low shielding
protection, SPE exposures occurring during extravehicular activ-
ities would pose
significant risk to astronauts.23
However,
astronauts would still receive potentially significant elevations in
radiation dose even within a shielded spacecraft and remain
vulnerable, especially on long-duration missions, to both acute
effects of sudden SPE radiation boluses and to the overall additive
effects of GCR and repetitive SPEs over the course of a mission.
While many SPEs show modest energy distributions, there are
occasional and unpredictable high fluence events; for example, a
particularly large SPE in October 1989 is predicted to have
delivered dose-rates as high as 1454 mGy/hour to an exposed
astronaut in a vehicle traveling in interplanetary space (for
context, consider that the daily dose for long-duration astronauts
aboard the ISS is approximately 0.282 mGy per day).23–25 Similarly,
some SPE can deliver particularly high-energy doses: for example,
10–15% of the total fluence of an October 1989 SPE was made up
of protons with energies in excess of 100 MeV.1,23 If an astronaut
were exposed to such an event during long-duration spaceflight,
there are potential risks for both acute radiation-induced illnesses
and for significant increase in the overall mission dose accumula-
tion. It should be noted that these predictions made use of classic
shielding values (5 g/cm2) similar to those of the Apollo command
module (average shielding of 6.15 g/cm2).26
Energetic SPE events produce protons with energies ≥100 MeV
that would penetrate classic spacecraft shielding, potentially
reaching blood-forming organ depths with deleterious clinical
sequelae. These highly energetic SPE exposures delivered to crews
undertaking interplanetary flight could result in potentially serious
symptoms ranging from prodromal responses (nausea, vomiting,
fatigue, weakness) to fatality. In addition, large SPE doses can
produce degenerative effects associated with cancer, ocular
cataracts, respiratory and digestive diseases, and damage to the
microvasculature; while these effects are mostly latent and do not
necessarily pose an immediate risk to crew health, their overall
impact upon long-duration crews is an important consideration.27
Interplanetary radiation environment
The fluence of GCR particles in interplanetary space fluctuates
inversely with the solar cycle, with dose-rates of 50–100 mGy/year
at solar maximum to 150–300 mGy/year at solar minimum.28 The
fluence and occurrence of SPEs is unpredictable, but dose-rates as
high as 1400–2837 mGy/hour are possible.1,8,23
As discussed above, even if shielding in spacecraft effectively
reduces radiation dose to the crew from SPEs, spallation occurring
as GCR particles collide with shielding materials may lead to
biological damage.9,13,18,19 Aluminum shielding greater than
20–30 g/cm2 could only reduce the GCR effective dose by no
more than 25%.29 An equivalent mass of polyethylene would only
provide about a 35% reduction in GCR dose.30,31 While this degree
of shielding has been achieved aboard the International Space
Station (ISS), similar shielding is impractical within exploration
mission design parameters due to the limited lift-mass capabilities
of planned space launch systems. The Apollo crew module is the
only vehicle to date that has transported humans outside of LEO;
this vehicle could only effectively shield SPE protons with energies
≤75 MeV.26 To date, no studies have successfully emulated the
complexity of energetic elements of the intravehicular radiation
spectrum that astronauts are actually exposed to during space
travel or successfully incorporated vehicular design and shielding
parameters in analog testing environments, limiting the under-
standing of the true effects of such an environment on the human
body.
CHALLENGES IN ESTIMATING RADIOBIOLOGICAL EFFECT
Modeling the transfer of energy
As a charged particle traverses a material (such as spacecraft
shielding, biological tissue, etc.), it continuously loses energy in
particle interactions until the particle escapes the medium or has
slowed
enough
to
have
strong
interactions
with
orbiting
electrons. This results in a rapid loss of particle energy over a
very small distance with a corresponding rapid and sharp rise in
LET. The ‘Bragg peak’ (Fig. 3a) describes the rapid transfer of
kinetic energy from a charged particle before the particle comes
to rest in a medium. This peak is particularly pronounced for fast-
moving, charged particles, indicating more substantial energy
transfer and, as a result, the potential for greater deleterious
biological effect from such particles. However, if a particle instead
passes directly through tissue without sufficient energy loss to
provide effective stopping power, the sudden energy loss
associated with a Bragg peak does not occur and damage is
minimal. Space radiation studies to date generally presume a
homogeneous distribution of energy loss inclusive of the Bragg
peak for each type of radiation, likely overestimating the relative
damage of some exposures.32 Improved modeling of dose
deposition and resultant biological sequelae specific to the space
environment would advance risk estimation capabilities.
The biological effects of space radiation depend on multiple
particle- and energy-specific factors, such as the LET specific to
each ion, as well as the dose-rate of exposure. The Relative
Biological Effectiveness (RBE) of a particular radiation type is the
numerical expression of the relative amount of damage that a
fixed dose of that type of radiation will have on biological tissues.
Limitations in predicting the space radiation health risk
JC Chancellor et al.
3
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
npj Microgravity (2018)  8 
 Higher RBEs are associated with more damaging radiation for a
given dose. RBE is determined using the effectiveness of cobalt
(60Co) gamma rays as a standard. An RBE = 1 means that the “test”
radiation type (for example, heavy ion exposure) is as effective as
60Co radiation at producing a biological effect, and an RBE > 1
means that the test radiation is more effective than 60Co radiation
at producing a biological effect. However, in some cases this
comparative value does not fully represent the energy transfer
curve of a specific radiobiological insult (Fig. 3b).
The effect of quantifying factors such as LET, particle identity,
dose-rate, and total dose on RBE remains incompletely under-
stood. The RBE can vary for the same particle type, depending on
energy, dose-rate, target organ, and other factors. Different
particle types are assigned a radiation weighting factor (formerly
quality factor), WR, that represents an average of calculated RBEs
for a given particle. To identify the relative biological risk of a
specific type and dose of radiation exposure, the physical dose (in
Gy) is multiplied by WR to obtain the biologically effective dose in
units of Sieverts (Sv). This method of estimating dose and relative
effect introduces limitations in predicting the true biological risk of
exposures, particularly exposures to complex and poorly under-
stood radiation environments.
Limitations of terrestrial analogs
Mechanisms of biological impact.
There are numerous limitations
of current terrestrial analogs used for studying and predicting
space radiation effects on biological tissues. The mechanisms that
cause biological damage from space radiation are uniquely
different from those associated with terrestrial radiation sources
that are frequently used as surrogates in space radiobiology
studies. Charged particle radiation, including GCR and SPE, causes
primarily direct ionization events, where biological effects are the
direct result of interactions between the charged ion and
impacted tissue. As charged particles lose energy successively
through material interactions, each energy loss event can result in
damage to the biological tissue. In contrast, terrestrial analogs
often use radiation that causes indirect ionizing events. In indirect
ionization, non-charged particles, such as photons, interact with
other molecules and cause the release of charged particles, such
as free radicals or electrons, that ultimately cause biological
damage. Thus, it is difficult to extract a meaningful estimation of
the direct ionizing space radiation impact through the use of
terrestrial analogs and indirect ionizing radiation.
Cumulative dose delivery and tissue distribution.
Models of the
space environment outside of LEO have predicted that astronaut
crews may receive a total body dose of approximately 1–2 mSv/
day in interplanetary space and approximately 0.5–1 mSv/day on
the Martian surface.13,33 These doses would increase with any SPE
encountered over the course of the mission.
Many recent studies have led to ominous conclusions regarding
the non-acute effects of GCR radiation on CNS and cardiovascular
health that are difficult to interpret as real effects likely to occur in
humans, but suggest that the protracted, low dose and dose-rate
radiation exposure expected on the longer, exploration missions
might lead to mission-relevant threats to astronaut health.34,35
These experiments were performed using rodent models exposed
to single ion, mono-energetic heavy-ion beams, in some cases at
total doses that are many times higher than the radiation human
crews would experience during interplanetary space travel.36–38
Even in studies where lower total doses are used, study methods
delivered the cumulative mission doses for an entire mission over
a very short period of time, typically over a few minutes.39,40 These
parameters do not allow for critical physiologic components of the
radiobiological response that would be expected under chronic,
low-dose and low-dose-rate radiation conditions, such as cell
regrowth and up-regulation of repair mechanisms.6 Additionally,
there is substantial evidence that GCR exposure at the dose-rates
expected in interplanetary space may not induce acute or
subacute biological responses, while acute exposure to total/
cumulative dosage easily could.27
Recently, NASA has developed an updated GCR simulator
capable of providing three to five consecutive mono-energetic ion
beams, with rapid switching between ion species.39 The NASA
Space Radiation Laboratory (NSRL) is located at Brookhaven
National Laboratory in Brookhaven, NY. Currently, NSRL is the only
U.S. facility with the capapbilites to generate heavy-charged
particles at energies relevent to space radiation studies. While an
improvement upon previous methods, NASA’s new GCR simulator
remains limited in its ability to emulate the GCR environment of
deep space. The simulator lacks the capacity to generate the pions
Fig. 3
a The Bragg peak and depth dose characteristics of space
radiation. The Bragg peak and relative dose deposition for ions at
energies commonly used in space radiation studies compared to the
X-ray and gamma sources used as surrogate radiations for Relative
Biological Effectiveness (RBE) quantification. The Bragg peak refers
to the point where a charged particle promptly loses kinetic energy
before coming to rest in a medium. This effect is very pronounced
for fast moving, charged particles. Shown are 60 MeV Protons
(hydrogen, purple), 600 MeV
56Fe (iron, light blue), 290 MeV12C
(carbon, green), 1 GeV 56Fe (iron, dark blue), X-ray (orange dotted
line), and 60Co (cobalt, yellow dotted line). The shaded gray area,
representing the average diameter of a mouse, demonstrates that
the Bragg peak, and thus the majority of dose deposition, is outside
the mouse body for SPE protons (energies ≥50 MeV) and GCR ions. b
The proton and electron range, energy and dose distributions for
the October 1989 solar particle event compared to a dose-
equivalent
60Co exposure. Charged particles (electrons, protons,
heavy-charged particles) typically deposit more energy towards the
end of their range. In contrast, the current standard, 60Co radiation,
loses the most energy at the tissue surface. These energy
characteristics demonstrate the poor fidelity of 60Co as a surrogate
for studying the complex SPE and GCR spectrums. Figure 3 (b)
reprinted by permission from Conditions for RightsLink Permissions
Springer Customer Service Center GmbH:Springer-Verlag32
Limitations in predicting the space radiation health risk
JC Chancellor et al.
4
npj Microgravity (2018)  8 
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
 (subatomic particles) and neutrons that would follow spallation
reactions, though these would make up 15–20% of a true
intravehicular dose.39,41,42 Sequential beam exposures remain
ineffective in modeling complex and simultaneous exposures of
the actual GCR environment, and there is significant debate
regarding the appropriate order of ion exposures delivered (as
alteration of exposure sequence can affect the outcomes of an
experiment).42,43 Finally, dose-rate delivered by this simulator will
remain significantly higher than the radiation dose-rate antici-
pated for human crews during spaceflight.39,41
As an additional challenge, SPE radiation has a unique dose
distribution with respect to whole body irradiation. Research has
demonstrated that the biological response to space radiation is
unique
due
to
a
non-homogeneous,
multi-energetic
dose
distribution.44,45 The majority of the protons in SPEs have energies
less than 100 MeV, with Bragg peaks that occur inside the body
and LET of 10–80 keV/μm (Fig. 3b). While these energies might be
mitigated with effective shielding, an exposed human would be
expected to receive a much higher absorbed dose to skin and
subcutaneous tissues than to internal organs.23,32,46,47 Until
recently, these SPE-specific toxicity profiles and dose distributions
were poorly understood. As a result, the majority of prior research
has been based largely on simplified models of radiation
transport, relying upon simple spherical geometry to estimate
organ dose approximation at average depths.48,49 However, with
this new evidence of heterogeneous dose distribution, spherical
geometry is insufficient for the modeling of radiation delivered
within the space environment.
Animal model sensitivity and dose simulation.
For ease of dose
specification and modeling, mono-energetic protons and GCR ions
in the 100–1000 MeV range are often used for in vivo animal
model experiments such that the entire target is contained within
the plateau portion of the depth-dose distribution.50–54 In
experimental animals that are much smaller than humans, simple
scaling of particle energies to match dose distribution dramatically
alters the LET spectrum for the protons (Fig. 3 and Fig. 4).
Conversely, delivering a simulated SPE or GCR exposure to smaller
animals without scaling the energies would match their respective
LET spectrum but create an heterogeneous dose distribution that
is higher to internal organs than to superficial tissues, the exact
inverse of the human SPE dose distribution.32 For smaller animals
(such as rodents), it is not possible to match both the LET
spectrum and dose distribution of an SPE using protons.32,55,56
Larger animal models, such as pigs or primates, allow for matching
of the anticipated dose distribution for human SPE exposure using
protons with a similar LET spectrum; thus, larger animal models
are more likely than smaller species to provide robust estimations
of human-specific space radiation effects.32 However, it remains
unclear whether the concurrent exposure to low-dose and dose-
rate GCR radiation can be successfully emulated in small or large
animal models.57 Modeling of GCR radiation effects may be
similarly altered by variations in animal species; however, without
dedicated efforts towards expanding understanding of these
phenomena, prediction of the biological consequences of long-
term GCR exposure will remain theoretical at best.
Animal models pose further challenges in the development of
meaningful and accurate analog research. While animal models
are used in radiobiology studies as surrogates to obtain data that
typically cannot be gained in ethical studies of humans, there are
numerous metabolic, anatomic, and cellular differences between
humans and other animal species.58 Most of the animals used in
all U.S. scientific research are mice and rats, bred specifically for
use in research endeavors. While larger species are likely to
provide more meaningful correlation to human effects,59 due to
animal protection issues and relative societal value, less than one
quarter of 1% of scientific studies are performed on non-human
primates and less than one half of 1% of studies use dogs and
cats. Few studies utilize rabbits, guinea pigs, sheep, pigs, or other
large mammals. While rodent experiments have contributed
significantly to our understanding of mechanisms of disease,
including disease caused by radiation, their value in predicting the
effectiveness of treatment modalities for human application has
remained controversial.60–62
Differences between animals and humans are clearly demon-
strated by the characteristics of radiation-induced death (RID). The
LD50 defines the required dose of an agent (e.g., radiation)
necessary to cause fatality in 50% of those exposed. As illustrated
in Table 1, remarkably different LD50 values have been reported
for radiation exposure among different species. Currently, the
genetic and physiologic basis for inter-species and intra-species
variation in LD50 is not well understood. Mice have been the most
extensively developed model for human diseases including
radiation-induced tissue damage. Rodent models have a high
potential utility in describing the physiologic and genetic basis for
many aspects of the mammalian radiation response. Even so, it
should be noted that, in addition to simple physiological
differences between mice and larger animals (including signifi-
cantly higher metabolic rate, shorter lifespan, and lower body
mass), the LD50 for mice is significantly higher than that of most
other mammalian species, including humans.
Fig. 4
The intravehicular LET of the Space Shuttle. Displayed are the
integrated LET/day values measured by Badhwar et al. 1998 (purple
dotted line),11 as well as the LET of five single-ion exposures
(290 MeV 14C (carbon), 600 MeV 16O (oxygen), 1 GeV 47Ti (titanium),
1 GeV 56Fe (iron), and 600 MeV 56Fe (iron)). As studies generally focus
on a single, mono-energetic radiation exposure, this figure high-
lights the lack in breadth of energies or radiation field complexity
used in current radiobiological studies. Data adapted from Badhwar
et al. 199811
Table 1.
LD50 of various animal models used in space radiobiology
studies compared to the human LD50 dose following radiation
exposures
Species
LD50 (Gy)
Reference
Ferret
<2
Harding
Pigs
2.57
Morris and Jones
Dogs
2.62
Morris and Jones
Primates
4.61
Morris and Jones
Mice
8.16
Morris and Jones
Humans
3–4
Hall and Giaccia
This
broad
spectrum
in
LD50
values
emphasizes
the
difficulty
in
interpreting results of studies using specific radiation exposures in
different animal models and translating them into clinical outcomes in
humans. Note: Table is adapted from the reported results of Harding
1988,109 Morris and Jones 1988,110 and Hall and Glaccia 20126
Limitations in predicting the space radiation health risk
JC Chancellor et al.
5
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
npj Microgravity (2018)  8 
 It has been proposed that the differences between the LD50
values for humans compared to small mammals, like rodents, are
due to different mechanisms involved in RID at these dose levels.
For mammals, death at the LD50 dose is thought to be caused by
the
hematopoietic
syndrome,
which
includes
destruction
of
precursor cell lines within blood-forming organs. Historically, it
was thought that infection and hemorrhage are the major causes
of death from hematopoietic syndrome, with one or the other of
these factors predominating in different species’ responses to
lethal radiation exposure.63 For example, bacterial infection is the
predominate factor leading to RID in mice at doses near their
respective LD50 levels.63–65 However, recent results from Krigsfeld
et al. have indicated that radiation-induced coagulopathy (RIC) and
clinical sequelae that mimic disseminated intravascular coagulation
(DIC) can result in hemorrhage, microvascular thrombosis, organ
damage, and death from multiorgan failure from exposure of large
animals (including ferrets and pigs) to doses of radiation at or near
the species’ LD50.66–70 RIC-associated hemorrhage occurs well
before the expected decline in peripheral platelet counts after
irradiation. Rodents do not exhibit signs of hemorrhage or
disorders of primary hemostasis at time of necropsy after lethal
radiation exposure at doses near the LD50 dose, while large
animals, including humans, do exhibit hemorrhage at death
following radiation exposure. These findings suggest that humans
may be at risk for coagulopathy-induced complications after
radiation exposure in addition to the classically anticipated
(delayed) concerns of infectious sequelae or cell-count decline,
effects that may not be modeled by rodent surrogates.
Further, RBE values for proton irradiation vary between animal
models. In general, RBE values increase with animal size, with
mini-pigs demonstrating higher RBEs than ferrets, and ferrets, in
turn, exhibiting higher RBEs than mice (Table 2).44 Numerous
studies have focused on RBE values for hematopoietic cells in mice
at various time points after the animals have been exposed to
different doses of proton or gamma radiation.45,71 In these rodent
models, RBEs do not differ significantly from one at any of the
time points or doses of radiation evaluated. However, similar
studies in ferrets and mini-pigs have demonstrated alterations of
RBE value that are dependent upon animal model, type of
radiation, time since exposure, and cell-line evaluated (for
example, total white blood cell count vs. neutrophils). In one
study, proton-irradiated ferrets examined 48 h after exposure
demonstrated RBEs for white blood cells ranging from 1.2–1.6 and
RBEs for neutrophils ranging from 1.9 to 2.1.72 In Yucatan mini-
pigs evaluated 4 days after exposure, the RBEs for white blood
cells was found to be 2.4–4.1 and the RBEs for neutrophils was
2.2–5.0 (see Table 2, Fig. 5).56
In other experiments, proton exposure in mini-pigs again
resulted in significantly greater hematopoietic injury and white
blood cell count reduction than comparable gamma exposure
(Fig. 6).55,56 The results of these studies demonstrate that RBE
values of different radiation types, calculated for the same
endpoints, can vary greatly by animal species and cell line. One
contributing factor may be the repair capacity of the blood cell
renewal systems in mice; such capabilities appear to be lacking in
mini-pigs (an animal model with more human-like hematopoietic
characteristics), making them more susceptible to radiation-
induced declines in cell counts. Given the presumed closer
approximation of radiation effects in larger animals to human-
specific consequences, this suggests that space radiation-specific
RBE values for humans may be considerably higher than those in
mice.
These studies demonstrated novel efforts towards an inte-
grated, physiology-based approach for the evaluation of organ
system-specific and species-specific endpoints. Using a more
comprehensive evaluation of radiation toxicity for multiple doses
and dose-rates in multiple animal models, this effort advanced the
understanding of the impact of genetic heterogeneity and
Table 2.
The relative biological effectiveness (RBE) for SPE-like protons
compared with standard reference radiations (gamma or electron) in
animal models
Animal
WBC
Neutrophil
Mouse
1
1
Ferret
1.16–1.6
1.9–2
Mini-Pig
2.4–4.1
2.2–5
Source: Refs.45,56,71,72
The RBE of proton exposure varies greatly for total white blood cells (WBC)
and specifically for neutrophils when comparing animal models. Note that
ferret RBE values were determined 48 h after exposure; mini-pig values
were determined 4 days post-irradiation
Fig. 5
Comparison of lymphocyte and neutrophil counts following
proton and X-ray (comparable to gamma radiation) exposures in
mice, ferrets, and Yucatan mini-pigs. The relative fraction of
lymphocyte (a) and neutrophil (b) counts following a homogeneous
proton or X-ray exposure to the bone marrow compartment are
shown. Note: calculations indicate that animals received approxi-
mately a 2 Gy marrow dose. In both cases, the mouse models
demonstrated the ability to fully recover within 30 days following
proton exposures while the ferret and pig models showed no
recovery. The ferrets were euthanized at day 13.44 The RBE values for
white blood cell counts varied greatly between the mice, ferret and
pig models. RBE values were greater in ferrets than mice, and
considerably greater in pigs compared to either ferrets or mice. This
suggests that model-specific sensitivity to radiation exposure may
lead to drastically different results in experimental outcome, leading
to difficulty in extracting clinical significance from animal models
with dissimilar radiation sensitivity compared to humans. Data from
Kennedy44 (mouse and ferret results) and Krigsfeld et al.66,67
(Yucatan mini-pig results)
Limitations in predicting the space radiation health risk
JC Chancellor et al.
6
npj Microgravity (2018)  8 
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
 demonstrated that animal model, physiology, body mass, and
fidelity of a space radiation analog (in this case, a multi-energy
proton spectrum) all contribute to radiation response. Such efforts
towards the integration of the numerous factors that contribute to
radiation-induced effects will be critical to translation of research
results and prediction of clinical responses in humans.
Finally, studies of the synergistic effects of radiation combined
with spaceflight environment stressors (e.g., microgravity, envir-
onmental factors, isolation and emotional stress, etc.) show that
such factors in combination impart an increased susceptibility to
infection and delayed wound healing.71,73,74 While spaceflight
medical capabilities have been developed for the management of
some acute injuries, such as wound care and infection control, it is
unclear whether standard management techniques will be
effective against the synergistic variables that alter wound healing
and associated risks specific to the space environment. Histori-
cally, there has been limited testing on the efficacy of manage-
ment techniques, including pharmaceutical interventions, when
radiation exposure is a factor. Similarly, few research protocols
examining operational medical care have included the additional
variables
of
the
high-stress
and
isolated
environment,75–77
infections related to the altered bacterial and chemical exposures
specific to space vehicles,78–81 or factors related to gravitational
unloading,73,82–84 and no studies have effectively examined all of
these variables simultaneously. It is unclear whether these
complex interactions can be fully simulated even in large animal
models for appropriate extrapolation of human risk. There is a
need to better understand the mechanism of the synergistic
effects observed, define appropriate animal models for analog
research efforts, and determine efficacy of standard treatments
against damage resulting from radiation-combined injury. Dedi-
cated effort towards these goals will better allow for operationally
relevant and appropriate countermeasures.85
Translation of space radiobiology research to human health
outcomes.
Biological damage from radiation exposure is gen-
erally classified as deterministic, dose threshold-based effects
related to significant cell damage or death (for example, the
spectrum of clinical manifestations that make up Acute Radiation
Sickness), or stochastic, where increased exposure is associated
with increased risk though no threshold dose is necessary for
biological
impact
(for
example,
carcinogenesis).86
Currently,
carcinogenesis is the only long-term, stochastic effect that has a
clearly defined permissible exposure limit in spaceflight. Terrestrial
radiation (e.g., occupational or clinical radiotherapy gamma or X-
ray exposures) is known to be associated with carcinogenic risk;87
at this time, there is no definitive evidence that space radiation
causes human cancer, but it is reasonable to assume that it can.
The dose-equivalent of radiation received by astronauts currently
traveling to the ISS for 6 months is approximately 100 mSv;88
doses of 100 mSv of terrestrial radiation sources have been
associated with an elevated cancer risk in human populations.87
NASA’s
“Lifetime
Surveillance
of
Astronaut
Health”
(LSAH)
program documents cancer cases in astronauts, among other
health parameters. Previous review of LSAH data suggests that
there may be evidence of increased cancer risk in astronauts
compared to a control population, though data are inconclusive
and limited by the very small sample size.89
Most evidence for the effects of space-like radiation exposures
in humans has been derived from epidemiological studies on the
atomic-bomb survivors, radiotherapy patients, and occupationally
exposed workers. These studies have focused on the association
between ionizing radiation exposure and the long-term develop-
ment of degenerative tissue effects such as heart disease,
cataracts, immunological changes, cancer, and premature aging
for moderate to high doses of low-LET radiation.1,8 The findings
are further supported by results of laboratory studies using rodent
animal models.90 However, true risks for these diseases from low
dose-rate exposures to GCR and intermittent SPE are much more
difficult to assess due to long latency periods and the numerous
challenges involved in studying the radiation environment.90
Additionally, the types of radiation exposure produced by atomic
bombs (high dose and high dose-rate gamma and neutron
radiation) are dissimilar to radiation exposures for astronaut crews
during spaceflight.
The theoretical, calculated RBEs for some space radiation-
induced cancers are quite high, which has led to speculation that
the risk of cancer development from space radiation exposure is at
least as high, and perhaps higher, than the risk of cancer
development from exposure to radiation on Earth.91,92 However,
there are currently no biophysical models that can accurately
project all acute, subacute, degenerative, and carcinogenic risks
specific to the range of particles and energies of ionizing radiation
in the space environment. There is little information available
about dose response and dose-rate modifiers for specific effects or
about the degenerative effects associated with ionizing radiation,
and very few biological models describe degenerative processes
(e.g., cardiovascular degeneration) caused by ionizing radiation.93
Exposure to the LEO radiation environment has been associated
with alterations to chromatin structure.94–97 However, it is not well
understood how such damage relates to impacts on cellular
function or long-term carcinogenic risk. There is a paucity of
understanding regarding the interpretation of chromosomal
damage rates identified in astronauts and the long-term effects
induced by the space radiation environment, without relying on
terrestrial studies of different radiation sources, doses, dose-rates,
or complexity for context. For example, NASA’s Human Research
Program Evidence Report on the Risk of Radiation Carcinogen-
esis,98 published in 2016, cites numerous studies to provide an
assessment of risk for chromosomal damage (and, ultimately,
carcinogenesis). A review of the studies cited in this report
highlights the limitations described throughout this manuscript,
including
reliance
upon
mono-energetic
radiation
sources,36,38,40,97,99,100 comparison to or interpretation of results
in the context of gamma or X-ray exposures,38,40,99–101 or use of
Fig. 6
Results from Yucatan mini-pigs exposed to simulated Solar
Particle Event (SPE)-like radiation consisting of several different
energies of protons. In this study, Kennedy et al. utilized an
inhomogeneous distribution of protons that resembled a SPE
spectrum, as demonstrated in Fig. 3. Electrons were used as the
surrogate radiation for determining the RBE following exposure to a
SPE-like distribution of protons. Electrons were chosen because a
SPE-like distribution could not be achieved with 60Co as demon-
strated in Fig. 3. Note the white blood cell counts in the mini-pig
model recovered to near pre-irradiation levels following exposure to
the electron radiation while the white blood cell counts for those
exposed to a SPE-like proton spectrum remained suppressed for
30 days after exposures. These results indicate that the mini-pigs
were not capable of repairing the hematopoietic damage caused by
the proton radiation exposure as efficiently as they could repair the
electron radiation damage. Data from Kennedy 201444
Limitations in predicting the space radiation health risk
JC Chancellor et al.
7
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
npj Microgravity (2018)  8 
 dose or dose-rates far exceeding those expected during space-
flight.36,38,40,97 Indeed, many of these same factors are cited as
limitations to NASA’s primary radiation cancer risk prediction
model.102
In addition, few studies have assessed mutation rates due to
LEO radiation at a whole genome level. Whole genome sampling
techniques are being employed for other carcinogenic stres-
sors.103 Direct observations of mutation rates, as well as an
understanding of the epigenetic changes and cellular damage
using in vitro cell culture models, may now be possible due to
recent advances in long-term cell culture aboard the ISS (Sharma,
A. & Wu, J. Personal Communication (2016)). Quantification of
observable mutation rates from LEO exposures may better inform
future modeling efforts and provide a critical understanding of the
molecular mechanisms behind observed pathologies. However,
even data obtained from the LEO environment is less than ideal,
as the ISS is heavily shielded and the close proximity of the Earth
provides significant protection from radiation exposure. While
improved understanding of the LEO environment may help inform
risk
predictions,
there
is
significant
work
to
be
done
in
characterizing these risks in the radiation environment outside of
LEO.
DISCUSSION
The health risks associated with exposures to space radiation will
become more onerous as future manned spaceflight missions
require extended transit outside of LEO and
beyond the
protection of the Earth’s magnetosphere. The indigenous shield-
ing provided by the Earth’s magnetic field attenuates the major
effects of space radiation exposures for current LEO missions; in
the highly mixed-field environment of interplanetary space,
radiation dose could increase dramatically. Even behind shielding,
secondary particles produced by interactions of primary cosmic
rays and the atomic molecules of the spacecraft structure can
deliver a significant fraction of the total dose equivalent. Astronaut
crews could be exposed to multiple SPEs of unpredictable
magnitude with doses that could induce clinical illness and
exacerbate
biological
outcomes
from
the
chronic
GCR
environment.
The limited accumulation of knowledge to date has yet to
provide sufficient data for even an estimation of total risk,
let alone predictions of human clinical outcomes or appropriate
mitigation strategies before, during, or after exposure. Accurately
simulating the spectrum of energies, ion species, doses, and dose-
rates found in the space radiation environment is a non-trivial
endeavor. For the numerous reasons described above, emulation
of the radiation environment, choice of surrogate animal model,
and delivery of appropriate complexity, rate, and magnitude of
dose have all limited the knowledge available for extrapolation of
radiation risk within the context of spaceflight. These factors have
limited our ability to develop operational and useful medical
countermeasures
to
mitigate
the
radiation
risk
of
future
exploration-class spaceflight.
To improve upon the limitations described, there must be a
focused effort to develop novel or new methods of simulating the
space radiation environment in more realistic analogs. This should
include more realistic dose-rate studies that can determine if
presumed or modeled outcomes are being observed at mission
relevant dose-rates and dose. Additionally, heavier utilization of
the animal laboratory on board the ISS with comparison of tissues,
organ, and blood samples, identifying realistic dose thresholds
and dose-rates, and comparing these data to ground-based
studies, would greatly improve the current approach to analog
construction. The use of animal models should be strategic and
consistent with species, strain, dose, and dose-rates with an effort
towards the highest-fidelity studies possible for human risk
extrapolation.59 While rodent models may be highly useful for
initial characterization studies and for statistically significant
outcomes, true advances are more likely to come from an effort
to utilize larger animals with more human-like physiology for
landmark studies on how specific outcomes may translate to
humans. Finally, while there would be numerous challenges and
ethical considerations involved, studies of non-human primates
for final validation of risk and mitigation strategies would likely
prove highly beneficial for the protection of future human crews.
As described above, NASA’s updated GCR simulator may be
able to provide some improvements to simulation studies by use
of rapid-sequential mono-electric beam exposures.39,41 Recent
developments by Chancellor et al. demonstrate the potential for
more accurate analog recreation of the GCR radiation environ-
ment by allowing for continuous generation of ionizing radiation
that more closely matches the ion distribution, LET spectrum, and
dose-rate of GCR (Fig. 7).42 These recent findings suggest that the
radiation environment inside spaceflight vehicles can be experi-
mentally generated by perturbing the intrinsic properties of
hydrogen-rich crystalline materials in order to produce specific
nuclear spallation processes when placed in an accelerated mono-
energetic heavy ion beam. While still limited by dose-rate (as are
all terrestrial beam exposures), such an approach could allow for
improvements to the simulation of the complex mix of nuclei and
energies found in the space radiation spectrum.42
Potential radiation exposure to astronaut crews occurs on a
timescale that is measured in days to months for SPE and GCR.
Technological, practical, and financial considerations make con-
tinuously irradiating animals for more than a few hours exceed-
ingly
difficult.
In
addition,
because
the
lifespan
of
most
experimental animals is more than an order of magnitude shorter
than the human lifespan, the interpretation of long-term, low
dose-rate exposures using such models would be questionable
even given the open opportunity to perform long-duration
experiments. As radiation dose-rate can have a major impact on
modulating the severity of the radiation response, it is critical to
obtain at least some dose-rate data for radiation experiments
investigating clinical outcomes of space radiation exposures.
While some radiation effects are either unchanged or mitigated by
decreased dose-rates, data on non-targeted radiation effects (such
as genomic instability and adaptive responses) suggest that dose
response could be altered at lower dose-rates, with significant
differences in quantitative (slope of the dose-toxicity curve) or
qualitative (toxicity effects) biological responses. This is especially
true for high-LET radiation exposure under conditions of increased
oxidative stress promoted by spaceflight.104–107 In previous
studies on SPE-like radiation, dose-rates from 17 cGy/hour up to
Fig. 7
Moderator block geometry concept for the emulation of
space radiation spectra. Artist conception of GCR analog detailed in
Chancellor et al.42 A primary beam of 56Fe (iron, left) is selectively
degraded with a carefully designed moderator block to produce a
desired distribution of energies and ions (represented by the
colorful lines on the right) simulating the intravehicular space
radiation environment. To preferentially enhance fragmentation and
energy loss, cuts are performed in the moderator block made up of
different materials (depicted by different shades of gray). Before the
spallation products exit the moderator block, a high-Z material layer
is added for scattering. Image courtesy of R. Blue
Limitations in predicting the space radiation health risk
JC Chancellor et al.
8
npj Microgravity (2018)  8 
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
 50 cGy/minute have been modeled experimentally and statistical
analysis of these data have begun to explore the potential
quantitative or qualitative impact of dose-rate on the toxicity of
multi-energy spectrum.14 Use of such data to better design dose-
rate extrapolation experiments would be highly useful for more
robust, future studies.
There have been other advances in fields related to space
radiation effects, including whole genome sequencing, as well as
transcriptional, proteomic, and epigenomic studies of cellular
response. There is a growing list of genes known to affect
radiation sensitivity for many different biological effects of
radiation (e.g., molecular, chromosomal, signal transduction-
associated growth-regulating changes, cell killing, animal tissue
and tumor acute and late effects, and animal carcinogenesis). Even
so, there is a need to correlate observed sequence changes with
corresponding alterations of radiosensitivity.86 Incorporation of
these investigational directions opens new opportunities to
evaluate space radiation risk on a genomic level, defining risk
and allowing for improved understanding of the pathology of
radiation-induced injury and the potential for intervention in such
processes.
Finally, there are a number of lessons that may be learned from
historical spaceflight and the health of early space pioneers,
though it has been difficult to extract meaningful conclusions
from historical data. For example, some sources suggest that there
is no statistically significant increase in carcinogenesis in Apollo,
Space Shuttle, or ISS astronaut crews in comparison to the average
U.S. population; other reviews of data suggest that risk is indeed
increased for astronauts.1,14,89,92 Given that the broad research
base has utilized non-ideal and highly limited analogs for the
prediction of risk, the fact that reality has deviated from
theoretical, calculated risk is not entirely surprising. Medicine
does not advance without clarifying treatment options using
human subjects. Models and animal data are useful surrogates for
space radiation studies but provide limited benefit for the
interpretation to human outcomes, and studies on humans
exposed to occupational radiation and clinical radiotherapy are
imperfect proxies. The reliance upon these surrogates continues
to limit the ability to translate radiation knowledge to spaceflight
scenarios.
We now have the benefit of a larger, cumulative astronaut
population that has flown in space while exposed to a variety of
doses that exceed the identified thresholds for some degenerative
and carcinogenic outcomes. The health of these astronauts,
including early indicators of disease, is closely monitored by NASA
medical and epidemiological resources with yearly medical
examinations and careful records of clinical outcomes. This
provides critical, real human data that could be used to evaluate
the actual long-term health risk of space radiation. Under-
standably, these data are limited to highly sensitive and protected
internal review in order to ensure the privacy of flown astronauts,
given small sample sizes and the risk of inadvertent identification
through mission-specific or demographic-specific details. This
should not preclude NASA from taking advantage of these data
points while remaining vigilant with prioritizing the privacy and
protection of astronaut medical health records. The application of
this source of data will enhance our understanding of the true risk
of space radiation, the characterization of human clinical out-
comes, and the development of appropriate mitigation strategies.
CONCLUSIONS
The scientific community has struggled to collect meaningful and
robust data for the characterization of the space radiation
environment and the risk that such an environment poses to
future astronaut crews. While many of the challenges outlined
herein have plagued historical research endeavors, there are
significant improvements that could be made to research design
that would improve upon our ability to better predict risk and
provide realistic strategies and risk posturing for future explora-
tion spaceflight. Use of improved modeling techniques to emulate
the
space
environment,
selection
of
appropriate
biological
surrogates for extrapolation of human effects, and careful use of
flown astronaut data could provide much-needed advances in
space radiation research. As humans seek to explore space outside
of the close proximity and protection of LEO, we have the
responsibility to address the space radiation risk to the extent of
terrestrial capabilities in order to provide the best information and
protection possible for our future explorers.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
H.G.K. acknowledges support from the NSF (Grant No. DMR-1151387). Part of the
work of H.G.K. and J.C.C. has been based upon work supported by the Office of the
Director of National Intelligence (ODNI), Intelligence Advanced Research Projects
Activity (IARPA), via Interagency Umbrella Agreement IA1-1198. The views and
conclusions contained herein are those of the authors and should not be interpreted
as necessarily representing the official policies or endorsements, either expressed or
implied, of the ODNI, IARPA, or the U.S. Government. The U.S. Government is
authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Governmental purposes
notwithstanding any copyright annotation thereon.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
J.C.C. developed the concept of the review. J.C.C., K.A.C., and H.G.K. contributed to the
discussion on space physics. J.C.C., R.S.B., S.M.A., and K.A.C. contributed to the
discussion on operational space radiation. J.C.C., K.A.C., and A.R.K. contributed to the
discussion on dosimetry. J.C.C., R.S.B., S.M.A., K.H.R., and A.R.K. contributed to the
discussion on countermeasures. R.S.B., S.M.A., K.A.C., K.H.R., and A.R.K. contributed to
the discussion on clinical effects of space radiation on humans. J.C.C., R.S.B., S.M.A., K.
A.C., K.H.R., and A.R.K. contributed to the discussion on space radiobiology. J.C.C., R.S.
B., S.M.A., K.A.C., K.H.R., and A.R.K. contributed to the discussion on animal models. R.
S.B., K.H.R., and A.R.K. contributed to the discussion on genetics. J.C.C., K.A.C., and H.G.
K. contributed to the discussion on computational modeling. All authors contributed
equally to the review of the literature, discussion on the interpretation of research
outcomes to spaceflight operations, and drafting of the manuscript.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.
Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional affiliations.
REFERENCES
1. National Council on Radiation Protection andMeasurements (NCRP). Guidance
on Radiation Received in Space Activities. Tech. Rep. NCRP 98 (National Council on
Radiation Protection and Measurements, Bethesda, 1989).
2. National Council on Radiation Protection andMeasurements (NCRP). Radiation
Protection for Space Activities: Supplement to Previous Recommendations. Tech.
Rep. NCRP Commentary No. 23 (National Council on Radiation Protection and
Measurements, Bethesda, 2015).
3. Aeronautics, N. & Administration, S. Nasa Spaceflight Human-system Standard.
Tech. Rep. NASA-STD-3001 Vol. 1 (REV A, Washington 2015).
4. Schwadron, N. A. et al. Does the worsening galactic cosmic radiation environ-
ment observed by CRaTER preclude future manned deep space exploration? J.
Space Weather 12, 622–632 (2014).
5. Attix, F. H. Introduction to Radiological Physics and Radiation Dosimetry. (Wiley,
New York, 1986).
6. Hall, E. J. & Giaccia, A. J. Radiobiology for the Radiologist. (Wolters Kluwer Health:
Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, Philadelphia, 2012).
7. Ziegler, J. F. Handbook of Stopping Cross-sections for Energetic Ions in All Elements.
(ElsevierScience: Pergamon Press, Burlington, 2013).
8. National Council on Radiation Protection andMeasurements (NCRP). Information
Needed To Make Radiation Protection Recommendations For Space Missions
Beyond Low-earth Orbit. Tech. Rep. NCRP Report No. 153 (NCRP Bethesda, 2006).
9. Cucinotta, F. A., Kim, M.-H. Y. & Ren, L. Evaluating shielding effectiveness for
reducing space radiation cancer risks. Radiat. Meas. 41, 1173–1185 (2006).
10. Simpson, J. A. Elemental and isotopic composition of the galactic cosmic rays.
Annu. Rev. Nucl. Part. Sci. 33, 323–382 (1983).
Limitations in predicting the space radiation health risk
JC Chancellor et al.
9
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
npj Microgravity (2018)  8 
 11. Badhwar, G. D. et al. Radiation environment on the Mir orbital station during
solar minimum. Adv. Space Res. 22, 501–510 (1998).
12. Cucinotta, F. A. et al. Space radiation cancer risk projections for exploration
missions:
uncertainty
reduction
and
mitigation.
TR
JSC-29295
(National
Aeronautics and Space Administration, Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX,
2001).
13. Cucinotta, F. A. & Durante, M. Cancer risk from exposure to galactic cosmic rays:
implications for space exploration by human beings. J. Lancet Oncol. 7, 431–435
(2006).
14. Chancellor, J., Scott, G. & Sutton, J. Space radiation: the number one risk to
astronaut health beyond low earth orbit. Life 4, 491–510 (2014).
15. Walker, S. A., Townsend, L. W. & Norbury, J. W. Heavy ion contributions to organ
dose equivalent for the 1977 galactic cosmic ray spectrum. Adv. Space Res. 51,
1792–1799 (2013).
16. Rossi, B. B. High-Energy Particles. (Prentice-Hall, New York, 1952).
17. Hodgson, P. E., Gadioli, E. & Gadioli-Erba, E. Introductory Nuclear Physics. (Oxford
Univ. Press, New York, 1997).
18. Guetersloh, S. et al. Polyethylene as a radiation shielding standard in simulated
cosmic-ray environments. Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B 252, 319–332
(2006).
19. Townsend, L. W., Cucinotta, F. A., Wilson, J. W. & Bagga, R. Estimates of HZE
particle contributions to SPE radiation exposures on interplanetary missions.
Adv. Space Res. 14, 671–674 (1994).
20. Hellweg, C. E. & Baumstark-Khan, C. Getting ready for the manned mission to
Mars: the astronauts’ risk from space radiation. Die Nat. 94, 517–526 (2007).
21. Wilson, J. W. et al. Shielding from solar particle event exposures in deep space.
Radiat. Meas. 30, 361–382 (1999).
22. Smart, D. F. & Shea, M. A. Comment on estimating the solar proton environment
that may affect Mars missions. Adv. Space Res. 31, 45–50 (2003).
23. Hu, S., Kim, M.-H. Y., McClellan, G. E. & Cucinotta, F. A. Modeling the acute health
effects of astronauts from exposure to large solar particle events. Health Phys.
96, 465–476 (2009).
24. Wilson, J. Overview of radiation environments and human exposures. Health
Phys. 79, 470–494 (2000).
25. Goddard
space
flight
center.
https://cdaweb.sci.gsfc.nasa.gov/index.html/.
Accessed 30 Oct 2017.
26. Clowdsley, M. S. et al. Radiation protection for lunar mission scenarios. Space
6652 (2005).
27. Wu, H., Huff, J. L., Casey, R., Kim, M.-H. & Cucinotta, F. A. Risk of acute radiation
syndromes due to solar particle events. TR NASA/SP-2009-3405 (National Aero-
nautics and Space Administration, Johnson Space Center, 2008).
28. Mewaldt, R. et al. The Cosmic Ray Radiation Dose in Interplanetary Space-Present
Day and Worst-Case Evaluations. Vol. 2, 433 (International Cosmic Ray Con-
ference, Pune, Maharashtra, 2005).
29. Cucinotta, F. A., Kim, M.-H. Y. & Ren, L. Managing lunar and mars mission
radiation risks Part I: Cancer Risks, Uncertainties, and Shielding Effectiveness. TR
NASA/TP-2005-213164 (National Aeronautics and Space Administration, John-
son Space Center, 2005).
30. Edwards, A. RBE of radiations in space and the implications for space travel.
Phys. Med. 17, 147–152 (2001).
31. Setlow, R. Radiation Hazards to Crews of Interplanetary Missions: Biological Issues
and Research Strategies. (National Academies Press, Washington, 1996).
32. Cengel, K. A., Diffenderfer, E. S., Avery, S., Kennedy, A. R. & McDonough, J.
Using electron beam radiation to simulate the dose distribution for whole body
solar particle event proton exposure. Radiat. Environ. Biophys. 49, 715–721
(2010).
33. Saganti, P. B., Cucinotta, F. A., Wilson, J. W., Simonsen, L. C. & Zeitlin, C. Radiation
climate map for analyzing risks to astronauts on the mars surface from galactic
cosmic rays. Space Sci. Rev. 110, 143–156 (2004).
34. Cherry, J. D. et al. Galactic cosmic radiation leads to cognitive impairment and
increased aβ plaque accumulation in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease.
PLoS One 7, e53275 (2012).
35. Parihar, V. K.et al. What happens to your brain on the way to Mars. Sci. Adv. 1,
e1400256- e1400256 (2015)..
36. Durante, M., George, K., Wu, H. & Cucinotta, F. Karyotypes of human lympho-
cytes exposed to high-energy iron ions. Radiat. Res. 158, 581–590 (2007).
37. Durante, M. et al. Cytogenetic effects of high-energy iron ions: dependence on
shielding thickness and material. Radiat. Res. 164, 571–576 (2007).
38. Wang, H. & Wang, Y. Heavier ions with a different linear energy transfer spec-
trum kill more cells due to similar interference with the ku-dependent dna
repair pathway. Radiat. Res. 182, 458–461 (2015).
39. Norbury, J. W. et al. Galactic cosmic ray simulation at the NASA space radiation
laboratory. Life Sci. Space Res. 8, 38–51 (2016).
40. Loucas, B. & Cornforth, M. The let dependence of unrepaired chromosome
damage in human cells: a break too far? Radiat. Res. 179, 393–405 (2015).
41. Slaba, T. C. et al. GCR simulator reference field and a spectral approach for
laboratory simulation (2015).
42. Chancellor, J. C., Guetersloh, S., Cengel, K., Ford, J. & Katzgraber, H. G. Emulation
of the space radiation environment for materials testing and radiobiological
experiments. Peprint at arXiv:1706.02727 (2017).
43. Elmore, X., Kapadia, R., Swete, M. & Redpath, J. Neoplastic transformation in vitro
by mixed beams of high-energy iron ions and protons. Radiat. Res. 176, 291–302
(2011).
44. Kennedy, A. R. Biological effects of space radiation and development of effective
countermeasures. Life Sci. Space Res. 1, 10–43 (2014).
45. Romero-Weaver, A. L., Wan, X. S., Diffenderfer, E. S., Lin, L. & Kennedy, A. R. Effect
of SPE-like proton or photon radiation on the kinetics of mouse peripheral
blood cells and radiation biological effectiveness determinations. Astrobiology
13, 570–577 (2013).
46. Coutrakon, G. et al. Simulation of a 36 h solar particle event at LLUMC using a
proton beam scanning system. Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B 261,
791–794 (2007).
47. Kim, M.-H. Y., George, K. A. & Cucinotta, F. A. Evaluation of skin cancer risk for
lunar and Mars missions. Adv. Space Res. 37, 1798–1803 (2006).
48. Billings, M., Yucker, W. & Heckman, B. Body self-shielding data analysis. TR MDC-
G4131 (NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX, 1973).
49. Wilson, J. W. et al. Issues in space radiation protection: galactic cosmic rays.
Health Phys. 68, 50–58 (1995).
50. Kennedy, A. R., Davis, J. G., Carlton, W. & Ware, J. H. Effects of dietary antioxidant
supplementation on the development of malignant lymphoma and other
neoplastic lesions in mice exposed to proton or iron-ion radiation. Radiat. Res.
169, 615–625 (2008).
51. Paganetti, H. Nuclear interactions in proton therapy: dose and relative biological
effect distributions originating from primary and secondary particles. Phys. Med.
Biol. 47, 747–764 (2002).
52. Slater, J. D. Clinical applications of proton radiation treatment at Loma Linda
University: review of a fifteen-year experience. Technol. Cancer Res. Treat. 5,
81–89 (2006).
53. Tilly, N. et al. The influence of RBE variations in a clinical proton treatment plan
for a hypopharynx cancer. Phys. Med. Biol. 50, 2765–2777 (2005).
54. Wambi, C. O. et al. Protective effects of dietary antioxidants on proton total-
body irradiation-mediated hematopoietic cell and animal survival. Radiat. Res.
172, 175–186 (2009).
55. Sanzari, J. K. et al. Acute hematological effects of solar particle event proton
radiation in the porcine model. Radiat. Res. 180, 7–16 (2013).
56. Sanzari, J. K., Wan, S. X., Diffenderfer, E. S., Cengel, K. A. & Kennedy, A. R. Relative
biological effectiveness of simulated solar particle event proton radiation to
induce acute hematological change in the porcine model. J. Radiat. Res. 55,
228–244 (2014).
57. Little, M. P. et al. A systematic review of epidemiological associations between
low and moderate doses of ionizing radiation and late cardiovascular effects,
and their possible mechanisms. Radiat. Res. 169, 99–109 (2008).
58. Gawrylewski, A. The trouble with animal models. Scientist 21, 45–51 (2007).
59. Williams, J. P. et al. Animal models for medical countermeasures to radiation
exposure. Radiat. Res. 173, 557–578 (2010).
60. Hackam, D. G. & Redelmeier, D. A. Translation of research evidence from animals
to humans. JAMA 296, 1731–1732 (2006).
61. Perel, P. et al. Comparison of treatment effects between animal experiments
and clinical trials: systematic review. BMJ 334, 197 (2007).
62. Hackam, D. G. Translating animal research into clinical benefit. Br. Med. J. 334,
163–164 (2007).
63. Lorenz, E. & Congdon, C. C. Radioactivity biologic effects of ionizing radiations.
Annu Rev. Med. 5, 323–338 (1954).
64. Miller, C. P. & Hammond, C. W. The role of infection in radiation injury. Trans.
Assoc. Am. Physicians 63, 155–160 (1950).
65. Boone, I. U., Woodward, K. T. & Harris, P. S. Relation between bactermia and
death in mice following x-ray and thermal column exposures. J. Bacteriol. 71,
188–195 (1956).
66. Krigsfeld, G. S., Savage, A. R., Billings, P. C., Lin, L. & Kennedy, A. R. Evidence for
radiation-induced disseminated intravascular coagulation as a major cause of
radiation-induced death in ferrets. IJROBP 88, 940–946 (2014).
67. Krigsfeld, G., Shah, J., Sanzari, J., Lin, L. & Kennedy, A. Evidence of disseminated
intravascular coagulation in a porcine model following radiation exposure. Life
Sci. Space Res. 3, 1–9 (2014).
68. Krigsfeld, G. S. & Kennedy, A. R. Is disseminated intravascular coagulation the
major cause of mortality from radiation at relatively low whole body doses?
Radiat. Res. 180, 231–234 (2013).
69. Krigsfeld, G. S., Sanzari, J. K. & Kennedy, A. R. The effects of proton radiation on
the prothrombin and partial thromboplastin times of irradiated ferrets. Int. J.
Radiat. Biol. 88, 327–334 (2012).
Limitations in predicting the space radiation health risk
JC Chancellor et al.
10
npj Microgravity (2018)  8 
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
 70. Krigsfeld, G. S. et al. Mechanism of hypocoagulability in proton-irradiated ferrets.
Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 89, 823–831 (2013).
71. Maks, C. J. et al. Analysis of white blood cell counts in mice after gamma- or
proton-radiation exposure. Radiat. Res. 176, 170–176 (2011).
72. Sanzari, J. et al. The effects of gamma and proton radiation exposure on
hematopoietic cell counts in the ferret model. Gravit. Space Res. 1, 79–94 (2013).
73. Sanzari, J. K., Wilson, J. M., Wagner, E. B. & Kennedy, A. R. The combined effects
of reduced weightbearing and ionizing radiation on splenic lymphocyte
population and function. Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 87, 1033–1038 (2011).
74. Wilson, J. M. et al. Comparison of hindlimb unloading and partial weight sus-
pension models for spaceflight-type condition induced effects on white blood
cells. Adv. Space Res. 49, 237–248 (2012).
75. Levine, D. S. & Greenleaf, J. E. Immunosuppression during spaceflight decon-
ditioning. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 69, 172–177 (1998).
76. Crucian, B. et al. Terrestrial stress analogs for spaceflight associated immune
system dysregulation. Brain Behav. Immun. 39, 23–32 (2014).
77. Pagel, J. I. & ChoukÃ¨r, A. Effects of isolation and confinement on humans-
implications for manned space explorations. J. Appl. Physiol. 120, 1449–1457
(2016).
78. Alekhova, T. A. et al. Diversity of bacteria of the genus Bacillus on board of
international space station. Dokl. Biochem. Biophys. 465, 347–350 (2015).
79. Pierson, D. L. Microbial contamination of spacecraft. Gravit. Space Biol. Bull. 14,
1–6 (2001).
80. Norbiato, G., Vago, T. & Battocchio, L. Microbial and fungal contamination
contributes to physical stress in space flight: studies in the Euromir-95 mission. J.
Gravit. Physiol. 5, P145–P146 (1998).
81. Mermel, L. A. Infection prevention and control during prolonged human space
travel. Clin. Infect. Dis. 56, 123–130 (2013).
82. Li, M. et al. Broad-spectrum antibiotic or G-CSF as potential countermeasures for
impaired control of bacterial infection associated with an SPE exposure during
spaceflight. PLoS One 10, e0120126 (2015).
83. Li, M. et al. Hindlimb suspension and SPE-like radiation impairs clearance of
bacterial infections. PLoS One 9, e85665 (2014).
84. Zhou, Y. et al. Effect of solar particle event radiation and hindlimb suspension on
gastrointestinal tract bacterial translocation and immune activation. PLoS One 7,
e44329 (2012).
85. DiCarlo, A. L. et al. Medical countermeasures for radiation combined injury:
radiation with burn, blast, trauma and/or sepsis. report of an NIAID Workshop,
March 26-27, 2007. Radiat. Res. 169, 712–721 (2008).
86. National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements (NCRP). Potential
impact of individual genetic susceptibility and previous radiation exposure on
radiation risk for astronauts. Tech. Rep. No. 167. (National Council on Radiation
Protection and Measurements, Bethesda, Maryland, 2011).
87. Beir, V. Health Risks from Exposure to Low Levels of Ionizing Radiation: BEIR VII
Phase 2. (National Academies Press, Washington, 2006).
88. Shavers, M. R. et al. Implementation of ALARA radiation protection on the ISS
through polyethylene shielding augmentation of the Service Module Crew
Quarters. Adv. Space Res. 34, 1333–1337 (2004).
89. Longnecker, D. E., Manning, F. J., Worth, M. H. (ed.) Review of NASA’s Longitudinal
Study of Astronaut Health. (National Academies Press, U.S. Institute of Medicine,
Washington, 2004). OCLC: ocm55201397.
90. Blakely, E. A. & Chang, P. Y. A review of ground-based heavy-ion radiobiology
relevant to space radiation risk assessment. Part II: cardiovascular and immu-
nological effects. Adv. Space Res. 40, 461–469 (2007).
91. Kennedy, A. & Wan, X. Countermeasures for space radiation induced adverse
biological effects. Adv. Space Res. 48, 1460–1479 (2011).
92. Cucinotta, F. A. & Cacao, E. Non-targeted effects models predict significantly
higher mars mission cancer risk than targeted effects models. Sci. Rep. 7,
1832–1843 (2017).
93. Huff, J. & Cucinotta, F. Risk of Cardiovascular Disease and Other Degenerative
Tissue Effects From Radiation Exposure and Secondary Spaceflight Stressors. TR
NASA/SP-2009-3405 (National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Johnson
Space Center, Houston, TX, 2009).
94. Bender, M., Gooch, P. & Kondo, S. The gemini-3 s-4 spaceflight-radiation inter-
action experiment. Radiat. Res 31, 91–111 (1967).
95. Fedorenko, B. et al. Cytogenetic studies of blood lymphocytes from cosmonauts
after long-term space flights on mir station. Adv. Space Res. 27, 355–359 (2001).
96. Testard, L. et al. Radiation-induced chromosome damage in astronautsâ€™
lymphocytes. Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 70, 403–411 (1967).
97. George, K. & Cucinotta, F. Biological Dosimetry in Astronauts. Tech. Rep. JSC-CN-
23294 (NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, 2011).
98. Huff, J. et al. Risk of Radiation Carcinogenesis. Tech. Rep. JSC-CN-35748 (Human
Reaserch Program, NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX, 2016).
99. Belli, M., Cherubini, R. & Dalla Vecchia, M. Dna fragmentation in v79 cells irra-
diated with light ions as measured by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis: I.
experimental results. Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 78, 475–482 (2002).
100. Hada, M., Cucinotta, F., Gonda, S. & Wu, H. mband analysis of chromosomal
aberrations in human epithelial cells exposed to low- and high-let radiation.
Radiat. Res. 168, 98–105 (2007).
101. Johannes, C., Horstmann, M. & M, D. Chromosome intrachanges and inter-
changes detected by multicolor banding in lymphocytes: searching for clasto-
gen signatures in the human genome. Radiat. Res. 161, 540–548 (2007).
102. Cucinotta, F., Kim, M. & Chappell, L. Space Radiation Cancer Risk Projections and
Uncertainties â€“ 2012. Tech. Rep. NASA/TP-2013-217375 (NASA Johnson Space
Center, Houston, 2012).
103. Alexandrov, L. B. et al. Mutational signatures associated with tobacco smoking
in human cancer. Science 354, 618–622 (2016).
104. Azzam, E. I., Jay-Gerin, J.-P. & Pain, D. Ionizing radiation-induced metabolic
oxidative stress and prolonged cell injury. Cancer Lett. 327, 48–60 (2012).
105. Rizzo, A. M. et al. Effects of long-term space flight on erythrocytes and oxidative
stress of rodents. PLoS One 7, e32361 (2012).
106. Buonanno, M., de Toledo, S. M., Pain, D. & Azzam, E. I. Long-term consequences
of radiation-induced bystander effects depend on radiation quality and dose
and correlate with oxidative stress. Radiat. Res. 175, 405–415 (2011).
107. Matsumoto, H., Tomita, M., Otsuka, K. & Hatashita, M. A new paradigm in
radioadaptive response developing from microbeam research. J. Radiat. Res. 50
(Suppl A), A67–A79 (2009).
108. Saganti, P. B., Cucinotta, F. A., Wilson, J. W., Cleghorn, T. F. & Zeitlin, C. J. Model
calculations of the particle spectrum of the galactic cosmic ray (GCR) environ-
ment: assessment with ace/cris and marie measurements. Radiat. Meas. 41,
1152–1157 (2014).
109. Harding, R. Prodromal effects of radiation: pathways, models, and protection by
antiemetics. Pharmacol. Ther. 39, 335–345 (1988).
110. Morris, M. & Jones, T. A comparison of dose-response models for death from
hematological depression in different species. Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 53, 439–456
(1988).
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2018
Limitations in predicting the space radiation health risk
JC Chancellor et al.
11
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
npj Microgravity (2018)  8 
