 By Angela Y. Chang, Carlos Riumallo-Herl, Nicole A. Perales, Samantha Clark, Andrew Clark,
Dagna Constenla, Tini Garske, Michael L. Jackson, Kévin Jean, Mark Jit, Edward O. Jones, Xi Li,
Chutima Suraratdecha, Olivia Bullock, Hope Johnson, Logan Brenzel, and Stéphane Verguet
The Equity Impact Vaccines May
Have On Averting Deaths And
Medical Impoverishment In
Developing Countries
ABSTRACT With social policies increasingly directed toward enhancing
equity through health programs, it is important that methods for
estimating the health and economic benefits of these programs by
subpopulation be developed, to assess both equity concerns and the
programs’ total impact. We estimated the differential health impact
(measured as the number of deaths averted) and household economic
impact (measured as the number of cases of medical impoverishment
averted) of ten antigens and their corresponding vaccines across income
quintiles for forty-one low- and middle-income countries. Our analysis
indicated that benefits across these vaccines would accrue predominantly
in the lowest income quintiles. Policy makers should be informed about
the large health and economic distributional impact that vaccines could
have, and they should view vaccination policies as potentially important
channels for improving health equity. Our results provide insight into the
distribution of vaccine-preventable diseases and the health benefits
associated with their prevention.
P
overty
alleviation
has
become
one of the most important global
development targets. The World
Bank adopted ending extreme pov-
erty by 2030 and promoting shared
prosperity as its twin goals.1 The first of the Unit-
ed Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals, to
“end poverty in all its forms everywhere,”2 ac-
knowledges the importance of eliminating pov-
erty in the next fifteen years. Macroeconomic
development is not the only way to address ex-
treme poverty. International agencies and policy
makers have long recognized that high out-
of-pocket health expenditures were one of the
main reasons for household impoverishment.3,4
In China and India, for example, out-of-pocket
spending for health services was a primary factor
driving families into poverty.5–7 In 2010 the
World Health Organization reported that the
cost of health care prevents many poor people
from seeking treatment while simultaneously
pushing about 150 million care seekers into pov-
erty each year.8 Reducing out-of-pocket spend-
ing for health care and providing financial risk
protection is critical to preventing extreme pov-
erty. One of the targets of Sustainable Develop-
ment Goal 3 for health calls for all countries to
move toward providing health care and financial
protection to everyone through universal health
coverage, emphasizes the importance of reduc-
ing out-of-pocket spending and providing finan-
cial risk protection, and focuses on equity in
accessing health services across socioeconomic
strata.9
It is well recognized that vaccines have con-
tributed significantly to the improvement of pop-
ulation health in the past few decades,10 but their
nonhealth impact has been less explored. Given
doi:
10.1377/hlthaff.2017.0861
HEALTH AFFAIRS 37,
NO. 2 (2018): 316–324
This open access article is
distributed in accordance with the
terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY 4.0) license.
Angela Y. Chang (angela
.chang@mail.harvard.edu) was
a doctor of science candidate
in the Department of Global
Health and Population,
Harvard T. H. Chan School of
Public Health, in Boston,
Massachusetts, at the time
this article was completed.
Currently she is a
postdoctoral fellow at the
Institute for Health Metrics
and Evaluation, University of
Washington, in Seattle.
Carlos Riumallo-Herl was a
doctor of science candidate in
the Department of Global
Health and Population,
Harvard T. H. Chan School of
Public Health, at the time this
article was completed.
Currently he is a postdoctoral
fellow in the Department of
Applied Economics, Erasmus
School of Economics, in
Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
Nicole A. Perales was a
master of science student in
the Department of Global
Health and Population,
Harvard T. H. Chan School of
Public Health, at the time this
article was completed.
Currently she is a doctoral
student at the University of
California, Berkeley.
Samantha Clark is a PhD
candidate in the
Pharmaceutical Outcomes
Research and Policy Program,
University of Washington.
Andrew Clark is an assistant
professor in health decision
modelling, London School of
Hygiene and Tropical
Medicine, in the United
Kingdom.
316
Health Affairs
February 2018
37:2
Global Health Policy
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 01, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 the preventive nature of vaccines, they may play
a role in providing financial risk protection
by preventing illnesses and its high-cost treat-
ments, and therefore averting medical impover-
ishment. Similarly, while poor health is strongly
associated with poverty,11 and the World Health
Organization’s Global Vaccine Action Plan 2011–
2020 listed equity as one of its six guiding
principles,12 limited evidence assessing the dis-
tribution of health benefits of vaccines by socio-
economic strata exists.13–16
The objective of our study was to model
the distributional health and household eco-
nomic benefits of vaccines across socioeconomic
groups. Specifically, we aimed to provide an es-
timate of the distribution of health and financial
risk protection benefits of vaccines for ten anti-
gens in forty-one low- and middle-income coun-
tries for the vaccination period 2016–30.
Study Data And Methods
We studied vaccines that prevent diseases caused
by the following ten antigens: measles, hepatitis
B, human papillomavirus, yellow fever, Hemo-
philus influenzae type b, Streptococcus pneumo-
niae, rotavirus, rubella, Neisseria meningitidis
serogroup A, and Japanese encephalitis.
We looked at the effects of both routine
and campaign immunization programs. A distri-
butional analysis was conducted for each antigen
by quantifying, per income quintile, the future
health gains and household financial conse-
quences correspondingto thevaccinationperiod
of 2016–30 in forty-one low- and middle-income
countries eligible for support from Gavi, the
Vaccine Alliance. Out of the seventy-three Gavi-
eligible countries, we included these forty-one
countries (total population: 1.52 billion) in
our analysisbased on theavailabilityof datafrom
the Demographic and Health Surveys after 2010
(see online appendix A2).17 The number of coun-
tries that have introduced these vaccines as well
as the average projected vaccine coverage rates
in the period 2016–30 are presented in appen-
dix A3.17 We examined health gains in terms of
the number of averted deaths and household
financial consequences in terms of the number
of averted cases of medical impoverishment—
that is, by the reduction in the number of cases
where household income would fall below the
World Bank poverty line of $1.90 per day (pur-
chasing power parity–adjusted constant 2011
international dollars) as a result of medical
expenditures.
Methods A flow diagram outlining each step
of our approach is presented in appendix exhib-
it A6.17 To estimate the number of vaccine-
averted deaths for each antigen, we applied
methods described elsewhere18 for four of them:
measles, Streptococcus pneumoniae, rotavirus,
and human papillomavirus. We quantified the
contribution of sets of risk and prognostic fac-
tors, defined as behaviors and characteristics of a
person that can be used to estimate the likeli-
hood of contracting and dying from each disease.
This model leveraged the differences in the prev-
alence of risk and prognostic factors across
socioeconomic strata (available in the Demo-
graphic and Health Surveys) to estimate the dis-
tribution of cases and deaths.19 For example, risk
factors such as wasting and vitamin A deficiency
were used to determine how measles deaths
could be distributed, based on different preva-
lence rates observed across income groups.
A detailed explanation can be found in ap-
pendix A4.1.17
For the remaining six antigens— hepatitis B,
yellow fever, Hemophilus influenzae type b, rubel-
la, Neisseria meningitidis serogroup A, and Japa-
nese encephalitis —there is a lack of established
evidence regarding the risk and prognostic fac-
tors of their associated diseases and their distri-
bution across socioeconomic strata. Therefore,
we conservatively assumed that the cases were
distributed equally across the income quintiles.
To estimate the distribution of disease-specific
deaths, we applied two coverage gradients across
quintiles:
Quintile-specific
vaccine
coverage
rates from the Demographic and Health Surveys
were applied to determine the number of disease
cases in the presence of vaccine programs; and
quintile-specific treatment coverage rates from
the surveys on the percentages of people seeking
care from a health care provider for events such
as diarrhea, cough, and fever were applied to
determine the number of disease-specific deaths
averted.19 Details on the prevalence and relative
risks of the risk and prognostic factors, as well as
assumptions on vaccine coverage and careaccess
rates, can be found in appendix exhibit A7.17
Several mathematical models have recently
been used to generate disease- and country-
specific estimates of vaccine impact. From each
of these disease-specific models,20–22 we were giv-
en national estimates of the numbers of future
deaths and cases averted over the lifetime of
cohorts vaccinated in the period 2016–30. For
example, all of the future deaths and cases (that
is, those occurring after 2016) averted by vac-
cines administered in 2016 would be considered
to be attributable to vaccination year 2016.
Finally, we calculated the number of deaths
averted per million people vaccinated using
the number of people vaccinated in Gavi’s Stra-
tegic Demand Forecast.23
To calculate the number of cases of medical
impoverishment averted for each antigen, we
Dagna Constenla is an
associate scientist and the
director of Economics and
Finance in the Vaccine Access
Center of the Department of
International Health, Johns
Hopkins Bloomberg School of
Public Health, in Baltimore,
Maryland.
Tini Garske is a lecturer in
the MRC Centre for Outbreak
Analysis and Modelling,
Department of Infectious
Disease Epidemiology,
Imperial College London, in
the United Kingdom.
Michael L. Jackson is an
associate investigator at the
Kaiser Permanente
Washington Health Research
Institute, in Seattle.
Kévin Jean is a lecturer in
epidemiology in the
laboratoire Modélisation,
épidémiologie et surveillance
des risques sanitaires
(MESuRS), Conservatoire
national des Arts et Métiers,
in Paris, France, and a visiting
lecturer in the MRC Centre
for Outbreak Analysis and
Modelling, Department of
Infectious Disease
Epidemiology, Imperial College
London.
Mark Jit is a professor of
vaccine epidemiology in the
Department of Infectious
Disease Epidemiology, London
School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine.
Edward O. Jones was a
researcher in the Department
of Infectious Disease
Epidemiology, London School
of Hygiene and Tropical
Medicine, when this article
was completed.
Xi Li is an independent health
consultant in Manila, the
Philippines.
Chutima Suraratdecha is an
independent consultant in
Vienna, Virginia.
Olivia Bullock is a program
officer at Gavi, the Vaccine
Alliance, in Geneva,
Switzerland.
Hope Johnson is director of
monitoring and evaluation at
Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance.
February 2018
37:2
Health Affairs
317
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 01, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 used
estimates
of
out-of-pocket
spending
amounts for direct costs (treatment of the dis-
ease and transportation) derived from treatment
provider costs in previously published litera-
ture,21,24–27 and the share of out-of-pocket spend-
ing as a percentage of total health spending from
the World Bank;28 and on indirect costs that
reflect the forgone earnings associated with care
seeking.29 We defined the latter as the lost in-
come of the main household member due to
the time lost for either seeking care or taking a
sick child to care (appendix exhibit A8).17 Spe-
cifically, they are defined as the product of
hospitalization or outpatient duration and the
hourly wage for each country. When the illness
affects children, indirect costs correspond to the
time needed to take a child for inpatient or out-
patient care; when the illness affects adults,
indirect costs correspond to the time needed
to seek inpatient or outpatient care.
We simulated monthly household incomes
based on each country’s gross domestic product
per capita (adjusted for purchasing power pari-
ty) and Gini coefficient,30 and we estimated the
number of households that would fall below the
World Bank poverty line with the incurred costs
listed above. A household is considered to be in
poverty when monthly household income per
capita minus the household’s incurred costs falls
below the World Bank poverty line of $1.90 (pur-
chasing power parity–adjusted constant 2011
international dollars) per day. This definition
avoided counting households that would have
been in poverty before the costs were incurred.
We then aggregated the number of cases from
each country to obtain the total number of cases
of medical impoverishment. These measures of
household economic well-being are routinely
used by the World Health Organization and
the World Bank to evaluate the financial impact
of health policies on households.31 More details
can be found in appendix A4.2.17
Outcomes And Scenarios For each country,
we first estimated the number of potential deaths
that would have occurred in each income quin-
tile if no immunization were available (our coun-
terfactual scenario). Second, we assessed the
impact of vaccine programs on this distribution.
Third, we estimated the change in the distribu-
tion of deaths by comparing the results from the
first two steps.
We applied quintile-specific vaccine coverage
rates derived from methods described in appen-
dix A4,17 scaled up as projected by the Strategic
Demand Forecast developed by Gavi.23 In most
countries, the lowest (poorest) quintile has the
lowest vaccine coverage rate, and the highest
(richest) quintile has the highest rate. By defini-
tion, each quintile represents 20 percent of the
households in the population. However, house-
hold size (for example, the number of children)
may vary across quintiles. We therefore applied
country- and quintile-specific total fertility rates
(assumed to be constant over time) to account
for the differences in the number of susceptible
people in each quintile, which would affect how
the disease cases were distributed. To test the
influence of total fertility rates on our results,
we conducted a sensitivity analysis by removing
the adjustment for the total fertility rates.
We
generated
country-specific
outcomes
(listed in appendix exhibit A9),17 and we present
the aggregate findings in the “Study Results”
section below.
Limitations There were several major limita-
tions to this study. First, our model inputs—
including projected vaccine coverage rates, num-
bers of people vaccinated, total numbers of
deaths averted, rates of health care use, and costs
incurred—were obtained from various different
models20,21,23 containing a number of important
assumptions that affected our findings. An im-
portant feature of the disease models is that all
diseases are considered as noncompeting risks,
which means that the sum of deaths across all
diseases might be greaterthan the actual number
of all-cause deaths. We also adopted a simple
static approach to understand the impact of dif-
ferent combinations of factors in a straightfor-
ward way. This approach has limitations, such as
not accounting for herd immunity (additional
protective effect at the population level when a
large percentage of population becomes im-
mune) and dynamic transmissions (the changes
in the nature of disease transmissions with vary-
ing numbers of people becoming susceptible,
infected, and recovered over time).32,33 In addi-
tion, nonspecific effects of vaccines, such as their
effect on overall mortality,34 as well as the time-
liness of receiving the vaccines,35,36 were not tak-
The poorest quintiles
would gain the most
from vaccine programs
because they have the
most to gain, in both
health and economic
terms.
Logan Brenzel is a senior
program officer for economics
and finance, Vaccine Delivery/
Global Development, Bill &
Melinda Gates Foundation, in
Washington, D.C.
Stéphane Verguet is an
assistant professor of global
health in the Department of
Global Health and Population,
Harvard T. H. Chan School of
Public Health.
Global Health Policy
318
Health Affairs
February 2018
37:2
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 01, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 en into account.We believe that including these
factors would lead to a more skewed distribution
of averted deaths and impoverishment cases
toward the poor.
Second, disease-specific cases and deaths are
related, even though the inputs for the relative
risks of prognostic factors used here captured
the impact of these factors among the healthy
population unaffected by disease (that is, not
among disease cases). However, given the lack
of data on the relative risks of prognostic factors
among cases, we had to assume that these rela-
tive risks were for cases as well.
Third, we calculated the absolute number of
averted deaths and their distribution across in-
come quintiles, not how the remaining deaths
were distributed after removing the averted
deaths. It is possible that the distribution of
deaths not averted by vaccines was skewed to-
ward the poor. In other words, achieving greater
reduction in deaths among the poorest groups
does not necessarily equate with improving
health equity. We also applied the income quin-
tiles assigned by the Demographic and Health
Surveys, and we acknowledge that the living con-
ditions of people in the poorest quintile in one
country may differ vastly from those of people in
the poorest quintile in another country.
Fourth, we considered the effects of vaccines
only on mortality, not morbidity. The potentially
large impact of Japanese encephalitis and Neis-
seria meningitidis serogroup A vaccines on reduc-
ing morbidity, such as brain damage and neuro-
psychiatric sequelae, is therefore not reflected in
our results.
Fifth, data on out-of-pocket expenditures and
medical impoverishment by disease cause are
scarce. Therefore, we had to rely on imputed
modeled data and information available for a
small set of countries.
Sixth, estimated deaths and averted cases of
medical impoverishment that we report corre-
spond to the future benefits over the lifetime
of cohorts vaccinated in the period 2016–30.
However, we did not discount these future ben-
efits or account for growth in simulated house-
hold incomes, even though some disease-specif-
ic benefits might occur either earlier (for
example, in the cases of rotavirus and measles)
or later (for example, in the cases of hepatitis B
and human papillomavirus) over that lifetime.
Finally, we recognize that there may be trade-
offs between keeping program costs low and
achieving affordability and equity goals. While
we found that vaccine programs could be more
effective in averting deaths in the poor by a large
magnitude, the programs might not be the most
cost-effective policy—given that reaching the
poorest quintiles could be substantially more
expensive than reaching the richest.
Study Results
In this section we present the projected numbers
of averted deaths and medical impoverishment
cases, compared to the counterfactual scenario if
no immunization were available. Detailed re-
sults from the main analysis and the sensitivity
analysis are presented in appendixes A5 and
A6.17 All costs are expressed in 2011 international
dollars.
Deaths Averted The number of future deaths
averted corresponding to the cohorts vaccinated
in 2016–30 for all ten antigens in forty-one low-
Exhibit 1
Numbers of deaths and cases of medical impoverishment averted by vaccines to be administered in 41 low- and
middle-income countries, 2016–30
Antigen
Deaths averted
(thousands)
Number of deaths
averted (per million
people vaccinated)
Medical impoverishment
cases averted (thousands)
Measles
22,204
11,339
4,787
Hepatitis B
6,639
10,751
14,034
Human papillomavirus
2,522
11,990
112
Yellow fever
1,804
4,551
835
Hemophilus influenzae type b
1,242
1,998
1,054
Streptococcus pneumoniae
782
1,337
248
Rotavirus
454
819
242
Rubella
355
897
141
Neisseria meningitidis serogroup A
137
81
2,684
Japanese encephalitis
13
35
8
SOURCE Authors’ analysis.
February 2018
37:2
Health Affairs
319
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 01, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 and middle-income countries is estimated to
be approximately thirty-six million (exhibit 1).
Vaccines for measles, hepatitis B, and human
papillomavirus accounted for the largest share
of averted deaths—61 percent, 18 percent, and
7 percent, respectively. The magnitude of deaths
averted by vaccines is primarily a function of the
burden of the related disease (measured as total
deaths that would have occurred, estimated in
the counterfactual scenario), the number of
countries that were forecasted to introduce the
vaccine and their national immunization cover-
age, the proportion of people who received care
after contracting the disease, and vaccine and
treatment efficacy. In addition to the large dis-
ease burden in the absence of the related vac-
cines, by 2016 all forty-one countries are fore-
casted to have introduced vaccines for measles
and hepatitis B, with average coverage rates
greater than 80 percent and vaccine efficacy over
85 percent.23 Human papillomavirus vaccine has
high efficacy (close to 100 percent) and is mod-
eled to be introduced in most countries. In con-
trast, while Streptococcus pneumoniae also ac-
counts for a large disease burden, the vaccine
has a lower vaccine efficacy and thus contributed
to fewer averted deaths.37 Vaccines for Japanese
encephalitis
and
Neisseria
meningitidis
se-
rogroup A account for a small proportion of
averted deaths mainly because they are regional
vaccines projected to be introduced in only a
limited number of countries. While rubella has
a sizable case burden, it has a low case-fatality
ratio, so rubella mortality accounts for a relative-
ly small proportion of the averted deaths.
When we examined the counterfactual scenar-
io, we found that more deaths were projected to
occur in the poorest quintile for all vaccine-
related diseases. The poorest quintile had a high
prevalence of risk and prognostic factors, low
use of health care, and a high total fertility rate.
Consequently, members of this population were
more likely than others to develop a case of a
vaccine-preventable disease and less likely to re-
cover from a disease once they contracted it.
Although the poorest quintiles experienced the
lowest vaccine coverage rates, they enjoyed the
most health benefits in terms of absolute num-
ber of averted deaths: The poorest quintile ac-
counted for the largest share of deaths averted by
all vaccines (23–34 percent), and the poorest two
quintiles accounted for over half of the deaths
averted by most vaccines (exhibit 2). Further-
more, our estimates suggest that the distribution
of deaths averted across income quintiles would
vary by vaccine. For example, 61 percent and
60 percent of deaths averted by the vaccines
for human papillomavirus and Hemophilus influ-
enzae type b occurred in the poorest two quin-
tiles, compared to only 16 percent and 19 percent
Exhibit 2
Distribution, by income quintile, of deaths averted and cases of medical impoverishment averted by vaccines to be
administered in 41 low- and middle-income countries, 2016–30
SOURCE Authors’ analysis. NOTES The antigens are ordered by total disease burden, with measles (MV) having the largest
and Japanese encephalitis (JE) the smallest disease burden. HepB is hepatitis B. HPV is human papillomavirus. YF is yellow fever.
Hib is Hemophilus influenzae type b. SP is Streptococcus pneumoniae. RV is rotavirus. R is rubella. NmA is Neisseria meningitidis
serogroup A.
Global Health Policy
320
Health Affairs
February 2018
37:2
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 01, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 in the richest two quintiles, respectively. In com-
parison, the distribution of deaths averted by the
Japanese encephalitis vaccine was flatter: 44 per-
cent of averted deaths occurred in the poorest
two quintiles, compared to 36 percent in the
richest two quintiles. The ratio of averted deaths
between the poorest two and the richest two
quintiles captures these differences in a compa-
rable metric: The ratio ranged from 3.8 for
human papillomavirus to 1.2 for Japanese en-
cephalitis (exhibit 3).
To
consider
the
relative
effectiveness
of
vaccine programs, we estimated the number of
deaths averted per million people vaccinated.
The results varied widely by vaccine, from fewer
than 100 deaths averted per million people vac-
cinated for Japanese encephalitis and Neisseria
meningitidis serogroup A to more than 10,000
deaths averted per million people vaccinated
for human papillomavirus, measles, and hepati-
tis B (exhibit 1). For all antigens, the poorest
quintile accounted for the greatest number of
deaths averted per million vaccinated. In other
words, the benefit of vaccination for a person in
the poorest quintile was greater than that for a
person in a richer quintile. These findings em-
phasize the stark differences in health risk and
prognostic profiles and access to care across in-
come quintiles. When we compared the poorest
two to the richest two quintiles, the ratio of
deaths averted per million people vaccinated
ranged from 3.7, 3.4, and 3.1 for rubella, human
papillomavirus, and Hemophilus influenzae type
b, respectively, to 1.6 and 1.3 for rotavirus and
Japanese encephalitis, respectively (exhibit 3).
Cases Of Medical Impoverishment Averted
All vaccines led to an important reduction in the
number of cases of medical impoverishment:
Overall, an estimated twenty-four million cases
of medical impoverishment were averted by vac-
cines administered in 2016–30 in the forty-one
countries. For context as to the magnitude of the
impoverishment cases averted, this reduction in
the number of cases of medical impoverishment
represents approximately 9 percent of the people
in low-income countries whose incomes are
below the World Bank poverty line of $1.90 a
day in 2013.38 The largest number of impoverish-
ment cases averted was attributed to hepatitis B
(14millioncases),followedbymeasles(5million
cases) and Neisseria meningitidis serogroup A
(3 million cases). The large effect of hepatitis
B is due to the combination of high treatment
costs and a highernumberof futurecases averted
from the cohorts vaccinated in 2016–30 in the
analyzed countries when compared to the other
illnesses. For measles, the estimated effect is due
to the combination of low treatment costs and
hospitalization rates with a high number of
cases. The vaccine for Neisseria meningitidis se-
rogroup A would avert cases that have relatively
high treatment costs but that are substantially
less frequent than cases of measles and hepatitis
B. Finally, the vaccines for Japanese encephalitis
and rubella would each avert fewer than 150,000
medical impoverishment cases.
The number of medical impoverishment cases
decreased greatly with increasing wealth (exhib-
it 2). As expected, the vast majority of averted
impoverishment cases occurred in the poorest
quintiles, and fewer than 20,000 cases were
averted in the richest quintile. For many vaccines
(for example, those for measles, hepatitis B, hu-
man papillomavirus, rotavirus, Neisseria menin-
gitidis serogroup A, and Japanese encephalitis),
more than 40 percent of the averted cases oc-
curred in the poorest quintile. Overall, the re-
sults suggest that vaccination would lead to an
important reduction in medical impoverishment
cases in the poorer quintiles.
Removing the adjustment for total fertility
rates would lead to lower ratios of averted deaths
Exhibit 3
Ratios of deaths averted and of deaths averted per million people vaccinated between
the poorest two and richest two quintiles by vaccines to be administered in 41 low- and
middle-income countries, 2016–30
SOURCE Authors’ analysis. NOTES The antigens are ordered by total disease burden. The antigens are
explained in the notes to exhibit 2.
February 2018
37:2
Health Affairs
321
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 01, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 between the two poorest and two richest quin-
tiles (appendix exhibits A10 and A11).17 In other
words, there would be fewer benefits in the poor-
est two quintiles than in the base-case results.
The poorest quintiles have higher fertility rates
(and thus more people susceptible to disease),
and removing this adjustment would narrow
such differences between the poor and the rich.
Discussion
This study estimated the future distributional
impact of vaccination on mortality and medical
impoverishment for ten antigens in forty-one
low- and middle-income countries for cohorts
vaccinated in the period 2016–30.We found that
these vaccine benefits would primarily accrue in
the poorest income quintiles. In other words, the
projected coverage of vaccine programs would
likely relieve more mortality and household eco-
nomic burden for the poor than for the rich.
It is important to note that the poorest quin-
tiles would gain the most from vaccine programs
because they have the most to gain, in both
health and economic terms. Differences in
health risk and prognostic profiles and care ac-
cess would likely result in a largely unequal dis-
tribution of deaths in the absence of vaccine
programs. These estimated differences are so
stark that vaccine programs would dispropor-
tionately benefit the poor even though that pop-
ulation would have the lowest vaccine coverage.
At face value, this suggests that even pro-rich
vaccine coverage, in which the richest quintiles
enjoy higher coverage rates, would result in the
poorest quintiles’ gaining greater health out-
comes, and that vaccine programs could become
even more pro-poor if coverage were equal
across income quintiles. Alternatively, we also
observe that vaccine programs risk exacerbating
existing health inequities if current pro-rich vac-
cine coverage rates remain.
We acknowledge that in addition to income,
there are many other critical equity dimensions
worth examining, such as gender and geo-
graphy—for example, we may see differences
in the distribution of benefits between males
and females or between rural and urban areas.
The distributional analysis presented here could
be further applied in the future to examine the
distributional
impact
across
these
equity-
relevant dimensions.
Policy Implications
Our projection of the distributional impact of
vaccines has important policy implications.
First, policy makers should be informed about
the potentially large health and economic distri-
butional impact that vaccines may have and
should view vaccination policies as important
channels for improving health equity and reduc-
ing poverty. Strong efforts should be made to
improve vaccine coverage rates among the
poor—for example, by prioritizing the introduc-
tion of vaccines in a country’s poorer geographic
regions, whicharelikely to be the regionsmost at
risk; and introducing demand-creation activi-
ties, such as vaccination campaigns in poorer
communities and communication strategies tar-
geting the poor. Further analyses should be
conducted to describe local inequities so that
context-specific policies could be designed to
address those inequities.
Second, distributional impact should be taken
into account in decision making about introduc-
ing or expanding vaccination programs. Vac-
cines projected to have greater benefits accruing
to the poor (or other marginalized subgroups)
could be prioritized over other vaccines or inter-
ventions with less equity impact.
Third, when faced with issues of affordability
or sustainability of vaccine programs (for exam-
ple, in countries that will soon “graduate” from
receiving aid support), policy makers could
consider phased introductions to prioritize the
populations most at risk and with the highest
projected disease burden.
Fourth, merely ensuring equal access to vac-
cines will not reduce the health and economic
outcome gaps that exist across income quintiles.
The poor face higher baseline risks, which are
tied to social determinants of health, and they
have lower access to treatment. Additional steps
may be needed to address those factors.
Finally, and most importantly, empirical data
on the distribution of the health (both mortality
and morbidity) and financial burden of vaccine-
preventable diseases by key subpopulations
(such as by income quintile and geographical
Policy makers should
view vaccination
policies as important
channels for
improving health
equity and reducing
poverty.
Global Health Policy
322
Health Affairs
February 2018
37:2
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 01, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 setting) are critically needed to enable monitor-
ing of how health policies affect health equity.
Our modeling exercise is a step toward address-
ing this data gap, but we urge governments and
donors to set up data collection systems to gather
this key information.
Conclusion
Vaccines are known to have substantial health
impact and to be cost-effective.20,39 In addition to
highlighting these benefits, this study aimed to
show not only that vaccines could have signifi-
cant health and economic benefits, but also that
these benefits could largely accrue among the
poor. With reducing poverty and improving eq-
uity on the global development agenda, sus-
tained investments in vaccines could make a
large contribution toward achieving the Sustain-
able Development Goals and universal health
coverage. ▪
This work was funded by the Bill &
Melinda Gates Foundation (BMGF). The
authors thank Emilia Vynnycky for her
contribution to the development of the
disease impact models and estimates
used in this analysis. Earlier versions of
this article were presented at a Gavi-
BMGF Vaccination Impact Modeling
meeting in Evian, France, in April 2016,
and at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg
School of Public Health in
October 2016. The authors received
valuable comments from Kate O’Brien,
Peter Hansen, Damian Walker, and Neff
Walker, as well as from two anonymous
reviewers. This is an open access article
distributed in accordance with the terms
of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY 4.0) license, which permits
others to distribute, remix, adapt, and
build upon this work, for commercial
use, provided the original work is
properly cited. See https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
NOTES
1 World Bank. Countries back ambi-
tious goal to help end extreme pov-
erty by 2030 [Internet]. Washington
(DC): World Bank; 2013 Apr 20
[cited 2017 Dec 29]. Available from:
http://www.worldbank.org/en/
news/feature/2013/04/20/
countries-back-goal-to-end-
extreme-poverty-by-2030
2 United Nations. Sustainable Devel-
opment Goals: goal 1: end poverty in
all its forms everywhere [Internet].
New York (NY): UN; [cited 2017 Dec
29]. Available from: http://www
.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/
poverty/
3 Xu K, Evans DB, Kawabata K,
Zeramdini R, Klavus J, Murray CJ.
Household catastrophic health ex-
penditure: a multicountry analysis.
Lancet. 2003;362(9378):111–7.
4 World Health Organization. The
world health report 2000: health
systems: improving performance
[Internet]. Geneva: WHO; 2000
[cited 2017 Dec 29]. Available from:
http://www.who.int/whr/2000/en/
whr00_en.pdf?ua=1
5 Liu Y, Rao K, Hsiao WC. Medical
expenditure and rural impoverish-
ment in China. J Health Popul Nutr.
2003;21(3):216–22.
6 Berman P, Ahuja R, Bhandari L. The
impoverishing effect of healthcare
payments in India: new methodology
and findings. Econ Polit Wkly. 2010;
45(16):65–71.
7 Gupta I. Out-of-pocket expenditures
and poverty: estimates from NSS
61st round: draft [Internet]. Delhi:
Institute of Economic Growth; 2009
May 12 [cited 2017 Dec 29]. Avail-
able from: http://planning
commission.nic.in/reports/
genrep/indrani.pdf
8 World Health Organization. The
world health report: health systems
financing: the path to universal
coverage [Internet]. Geneva: WHO;
2010 [cited 2017 Dec 29]. Available
from: http://apps.who.int/iris/
bitstream/10665/44371/1/
9789241564021_eng.pdf
9 United Nations. Sustainable Devel-
opment Goals: goal 3: ensure healthy
lives and promote well-being for all
at all ages [Internet]. New York
(NY): UN; [cited 2018 Jan 4].
Available from: http://www.un.org/
sustainabledevelopment/health/
10 Feikin DR, Flannery B, Hamel MJ,
Stack M, Hansen P. Vaccines for
children in low- and middle-income
countries. In: Black RE,
Laxminarayan R, Temmerman M,
Walker N, editors. Disease control
priorities, 3rd ed., vol. 2: reproduc-
tive, maternal, newborn, and child
health. Washington (DC): World
Bank; 2016. p. 187–204.
11 Bloom DE, Canning D. Policy forum:
public health. The health and
wealth of nations. Science. 2000;
287(5456):1207, 1209.
12 World Health Organization. Global
Vaccine Action Plan 2011–2020 [In-
ternet]. Geneva: WHO; 2013 [cited
2017 Dec 29]. Available for down-
load from: http://www.who.int/
immunization/global_vaccine_
action_plan/GVAP_doc_2011_
2020/en/
13 Rheingans R, Atherly D, Anderson J.
Distributional impact of rotavirus
vaccination in 25 GAVI countries:
estimating disparities in benefits
and cost-effectiveness. Vaccine.
2012;30(Suppl 1):A15–23.
14 Deogaonkar R, Hutubessy R, van der
Putten I, Evers S, Jit M. Systematic
review of studies evaluating the
broader economic impact of vacci-
nation in low and middle income
countries. BMC Public Health. 2012;
12(1):878.
15 Andre FE, Booy R, Bock HL, Clemens
J, Datta SK, John TJ, et al. Vaccina-
tion greatly reduces disease, dis-
ability, death and inequity world-
wide. Bull World Health Organ.
2008;86(2):140–6.
16 Verguet S, Murphy S, Anderson B,
Johansson KA, Glass R, Rheingans
R. Public finance of rotavirus vacci-
nation in India and Ethiopia: an
extended cost-effectiveness analysis.
Vaccine. 2013;31(42):4902–10.
17 To access the appendix, click on the
Details tab of the article online.
18 Chang AY, Riumallo-Herl C,
Salomon JA, Resch SC, Brenzel L,
Verguet S. Estimating the distribu-
tion of morbidity and mortality of
childhood diarrhea, measles, and
pneumonia by socio-economic group
in low- and middle-income coun-
tries. Unpublished paper.
19 US Agency for International Devel-
opment. The DHS Program [Inter-
net]. Rockville (MD): The Program;
[cited 2017 Dec 29]. Available from:
http://dhsprogram.com
20 Lee LA, Franzel L, Atwell J, Datta SD,
Friberg IK, Goldie SJ, et al. The es-
timated mortality impact of vacci-
nations forecast to be administered
during 2011–2020 in 73 countries
supported by the GAVI Alliance.
Vaccine. 2013;31(Suppl 2):B61–72.
21 Ozawa S, Clark S, Portnoy A, Grewal
S, Stack ML, Sinha A, et al. Esti-
mated economic impact of vaccina-
tions in 73 low- and middle-income
countries, 2001–2020. Bull World
Health Organ. 2017;95(9):629–38.
22 Ozawa S, Clark S, Portnoy A, Stack
ML, Grewal S, Sinha A. Methodolo-
gies to estimate the health and eco-
February 2018
37:2
Health Affairs
323
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 01, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 nomic impact of vaccination against
10 vaccine-preventable diseases.
Baltimore (MD): Johns Hopkins
Bloomberg School of Public Health;
2016.
23 Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance. 2016
Strategic Demand Forecast version
12.0. Geneva: Gavi; 2016.
24 Ozawa S, Mirelman A, Stack ML,
Walker DG, Levine OS. Cost-effec-
tiveness and economic benefits of
vaccines in low- and middle-income
countries: a systematic review.
Vaccine. 2012;31(1):96–108.
25 Ozawa S, Stack ML, Bishai DM,
Mirelman A, Friberg IK, Niessen L,
et al. During the “Decade of Vac-
cines,” the lives of 6.4 million chil-
dren valued at $231 billion could be
saved. Health Aff (Millwood). 2011;
30(6):1010–20.
26 Portnoy A, Ozawa S, Grewal S,
Norman BA, Rajgopal J, Gorham
KM, et al. Costs of vaccine programs
across 94 low- and middle-income
countries. Vaccine. 2015;
33(Suppl 1):A99–108.
27 Stack ML, Ozawa S, Bishai DM,
Mirelman A, Tam Y, Niessen L, et al.
Estimated economic benefits during
the “Decade of Vaccines” include
treatment savings, gains in labor
productivity. Health Aff (Millwood).
2011;30(6):1021–8.
28 World Bank. Out-of-pocket health
expenditure (% of total expenditure
on health). World Development In-
dicators [Internet]. Washington
(DC): World Bank; c 2017 [cited 2018
Jan 11]. Available from: https://
data.worldbank.org/indicator/
SH.XPD.OOPC.TO.ZS?view=chart
29 Riumallo-Herl C, Chang AY, Clark S,
Constenla D, Clark A, Brenzel L,
Verguet S. Poverty reduction and
equity benefits from the introduc-
tion or scaling up of measles, rota-
virus and pneumococcal vaccines in
low- and middle-income countries:
findings from a modeling study. BMJ
Global Health. Forthcoming.
30 World Bank. Gini index (World Bank
estimate). World Development Indi-
cators [Internet]. Washington (DC):
World Bank; c 2017 [cited 2018 Jan
11]. Available from: https://data
.worldbank.org/indicator/SI.POV
.GINI?view=chart
31 World Health Organization, World
Bank. Tracking universal health
coverage: first global monitoring
report [Internet]. Geneva: WHO;
c 2015 [cited 2017 Dec 29]. Available
from: http://www.who.int/
healthinfo/universal_health_
coverage/report/2015/en/
32 Pollard SL, Malpica-Llanos T,
Friberg IK, Fischer-Walker C, Ashraf
S, Walker N. Estimating the herd
immunity effect of rotavirus vaccine.
Vaccine. 2015;33(32):3795–800.
33 Haber M, Barskey A, Baughman W,
Barker L, Whitney CG, Shaw KM,
et al. Herd immunity and pneumo-
coccal conjugate vaccine: a quanti-
tative model. Vaccine. 2007;25(29):
5390–8.
34 Higgins JPT, Soares-Weiser K,
López-López JA, Kakourou A,
Chaplin K, Christensen H, et al. As-
sociation of BCG, DTP, and measles
containing vaccines with childhood
mortality: systematic review. BMJ.
2016;355:i5170.
35 Bielicki JA, Achermann R, Berger C.
Timing of measles immunization
and effective population vaccine
coverage. Pediatrics. 2012;130(3):
e600–6.
36 Clark A, Sanderson C. Timing of
children’s vaccinations in 45 low-
income and middle-income coun-
tries: an analysis of survey data.
Lancet. 2009;373(9674):1543–9.
37 Lucero MG, Dulalia VE, Nillos LT,
Williams G, Parreño RAN, Nohynek
H, et al. Pneumococcal conjugate
vaccines for preventing vaccine-type
invasive pneumococcal disease and
X-ray defined pneumonia in children
less than two years of age. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2009 Oct 7;(4):
CD004977.
38 World Bank. Poverty and shared
prosperity 2016: taking on inequal-
ity [Internet]. Washington (DC):
World Bank; 2016 [cited 2018 Jan 2].
Available from: https://open
knowledge.worldbank.org/
bitstream/handle/10986/25078/
9781464809583.pdf
39 Ozawa S, Clark S, Portnoy A, Grewal
S, Brenzel L, Walker DG. Return on
investment from childhood immu-
nization in low- and middle-income
countries, 2011–20. Health Aff
(Millwood). 2016;35(2):199–207.
Global Health Policy
324
Health Affairs
February 2018
37:2
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 01, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
