 Article
The Rockefeller University Press  
$30.00
J. Exp. Med. 2016 Vol. 213 No. 13 2967–2988
https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20151665
2967
IntroductIon
Solid human tumors such as breast cancer and pancreatic 
ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) are characterized by a pro­
nounced stromal reaction termed the desmoplastic response 
that can promote tumor progression and aggression (Liotta 
and Kohn, 2001; Orimo et al., 2005; Karnoub et al., 2007; 
Shiao and Coussens, 2010). In desmoplastic tumors, carci­
noma­associated fibroblasts (CAFs) are a major component of 
the stroma (Kalluri and Zeisberg, 2006; Erez et al., 2010), and 
these CAFs are not functionally inert but can foster tumor 
cell growth, survival, invasion, and even stemness by secreting 
paracrine factors, such as chemokines (Orimo et al., 2005; 
Erez et al., 2010), prostaglandins (Rudnick et al., 2011), in­
sulin­like growth factor (Chen et al., 2014), and proteases 
(Cheng et al., 2002) and by remodeling the extracellular ma­
trix (Serebriiskii et al., 2008; Levental et al., 2009; Goetz et 
al., 2011). Importantly, both the tumor epithelium and ad­
jacent stroma respond to systemic and local therapies, and a 
chemotherapy­modified stroma can deleteriously influence 
Although traditional chemotherapy kills a fraction of tumor cells, it also activates the stroma and can promote the growth and 
survival of residual cancer cells to foster tumor recurrence and metastasis. Accordingly, overcoming the host response induced 
by chemotherapy could substantially improve therapeutic outcome and patient survival. In this study, resistance to treatment 
and metastasis has been attributed to expansion of stem-like tumor-initiating cells (tIcs). Molecular analysis of the tumor 
stroma in neoadjuvant chemotherapy–treated human desmoplastic cancers and orthotopic tumor xenografts revealed that 
traditional maximum-tolerated dose chemotherapy, regardless of the agents used, induces persistent StAt-1 and nF-κB ac-
tivity in carcinoma-associated fibroblasts. this induction results in the expression and secretion of ELr motif–positive (ELr+) 
chemokines, which signal through cXcr-2 on carcinoma cells to trigger their phenotypic conversion into tIcs and promote 
their invasive behaviors, leading to paradoxical tumor aggression after therapy. In contrast, the same overall dose administered 
as a low-dose metronomic chemotherapy regimen largely prevented therapy-induced stromal ELr+ chemokine paracrine sig-
naling, thus enhancing treatment response and extending survival of mice carrying desmoplastic cancers. these experiments 
illustrate the importance of stroma in cancer therapy and how its impact on treatment resistance could be tempered by alter-
ing the dosing schedule of systemic chemotherapy.
Metronomic chemotherapy prevents therapy-induced 
stromal activation and induction of tumor-initiating cells
Tze­Sian Chan,1,2 Chung­Chi Hsu,1,4 
Vincent C. Pai,1,4 Wen­Ying Liao,4 Shenq­Shyang Huang,6 
Kok­T
ong Tan,7 Chia­Jui Y
en,8 Shu­Ching Hsu,5 Wei­Yu Chen,3 
Yan­Shen Shan,9 Chi­Rong Li,1 
Michael T. Lee,10 Kuan­Ying Jiang,4 Jui­Mei Chu,4 Gi­Shih Lien,1,2 
Valerie M. Weaver,11,12,13 and 
Kelvin K. Tsai1,4,8
1Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, 2Laboratory of Advanced Molecular Therapeutics, Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Wan Fang Hospital, and 3Department of Pathology, Wan Fang Hospital, Taipei Medical University, Taipei 11031, Taiwan
4Laboratory for Tumor Aggressiveness and Stemness, National Institute of Cancer Research and 5National Institute of Infectious Diseases and Vaccinology, National 
Health Research Institutes, Tainan City 70456, Taiwan
6Graduate Program of Biotechnology in Medicine, Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu 30013, Taiwan
7Department of Surgery, Tung’s Metro-harbor Hospital, Taichung 43503, Taiwan
8Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine and 9Department of Surgery, National Cheng Kung University Hospital, Tainan 70403, 
Taiwan
10Department of Computer Science, Kun Shan University, Tainan 71003, Taiwan
11Department of Surgery, 12Department of Anatomy, and 13Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, Center for Bioengineering and Tissue 
Regeneration, Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research, Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of 
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143
© 2016 Chan et al. This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution–Noncommercial–Share 
Alike–No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the publication date (see http 
://www 
.rupress 
.org 
/terms). After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License (Attribution–Noncommercial–
Share Alike 3.0 Unported license, as described at http 
://creativecommons 
.org 
/licenses 
/by 
-nc 
-sa 
/3 
.0 
/).
Correspondence to Kelvin K. Tsai: tsaik@tmu.edu.tw or tsaik@nhri.org.tw
Abbreviations used: 3D, three-dimensional; 4H-CPA, 4-hydroxy-cyclophosphamide; 
ALDH, aldehyde dehydrogenase; α-SMA, α–smooth muscle actin; BLI, biolumines-
cence imaging; CAF, carcinoma-associated fibroblast; ER, estrogen receptor; FFLuc, 
firefly luciferase; HSC, hematopoietic stem cell; LCM, laser-capture microdissection; 
LDM, low-dose metronomic; MDSC, myeloid-derived suppressor cell; MTD, max-
imum-tolerated dose; PDAC, pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma; PDX, patient-de-
rived xenografted; PR, progesterone receptor; PSC, pancreatic stellate cells; qRT-PCR, 
quantitative real-time PCR; SR, super-repressor; TAM, tumor-associated macro-
phage; TIC, tumor-initiating cell.
The Journal of Experimental Medicine
on June 4, 2019
jem.rupress.org 
Downloaded from 
http://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20151665
Published Online: 23 November, 2016 | Supp Info: 
 Metronomic chemotherapy and ELR chemokines | Chan et al.
2968
treatment efficacy (Nakasone et al., 2012; Sun et al., 2012). 
For instance, chemotherapy can stimulate the infiltration of 
tumor­associated macrophages (TAMs), myeloid­derived 
suppressor cells (MDSCs), and endothelial progenitor cells, 
and these chemo­modified stromal cells secrete inflammatory 
mediators and proteases, such as IL­1β, CXCR­4, cathepsin 
B, and matrix metalloproteinase 9, that can compromise ther­
apeutic response (Shaked et al., 2008; Shiao and Coussens, 
2010; Gingis­Velitski et al., 2011; Shree et al., 2011; Nakasone 
et al., 2012; Bruchard et al., 2013; Hughes et al., 2015; 
Volos­
hin et al., 2015). Chemotherapy can also enhance the expres­
sion of vascular endothelial growth factor on endothelial cells 
or induce the proliferation and extravasation of intravascular 
cancer cells and thereby paradoxically promote metastasis (Ya­
mauchi et al., 2008; Daenen et al., 2011). CAFs also respond to 
chemotherapy, and such antitumor treatments can alter their 
functionality and endow them with the capacity to promote 
the malignant behavior of the treated tissue (Sonnenberg et 
al., 2008). Consistently, CAFs are enriched in chemothera­
py­treated human tumor tissues, wherein they promote can­
cer growth and treatment resistance by secreting paracrine 
factors such as IL­17A, as was found in colon cancer, and 
Wnt 
16B, as was observed in prostate cancer (Sun et al., 2012; Lotti 
et al., 2013). Such studies underscore the important role of 
CAFs in cancer therapy and suggest that targeting this com­
ponent of the tumor stroma may provide a new avenue to 
improve the treatment outcome of human malignancies.
Traditional chemotherapy protocols involve the pulsa­
tile administration of drugs to patients at their maximum­tol­
erated dose (MTD). By comparison, the potential benefit of 
using comparatively low doses of drug on a more frequent or 
continuous schedule in chemotherapy, a treatment modality 
termed low­dose metronomic (LDM) therapy, is slowly be­
coming appreciated (Kerbel and Kamen, 2004; Pasquier et 
al., 2010; Loven et al., 2013). Accumulating clinical evidence 
indicates that LDM chemotherapy offers equal if not better 
antitumor efficacy than traditional MTD regimens and at a 
lower accumulative dose of administered drug (Pasquier et al., 
2010; Kerbel and Grothey, 2015). Nevertheless, the molecular 
mechanisms underlying the enhanced treatment response in 
LDM­treated patients remain poorly understood. In this re­
spect, previous studies that have explored the origins of the 
enhanced antitumor efficacy of LDM chemotherapy primar­
ily addressed its antiangiogenic effects (Kerbel and Kamen, 
2004), such as direct cytotoxicity to endothelial cells (Bocci et 
al., 2002), reduced recruitment of endothelial progenitor cells 
and MDSCs into the tumors (Bertolini et al., 2003; Hasnis 
et al., 2014), and increased expression of the antiangiogenic 
factor thrombospondin­1 (Bocci et al., 2003). Recent stud­
ies suggest that LDM therapy may also mediate its antitumor 
effect by inhibiting regulatory T cells (Lutsiak et al., 2005; 
Ghiringhelli et al., 2007) and by triggering the maturation 
of tumor­infiltrating dendritic cells (Tanaka et al., 2009). Al­
though compelling, these findings were obtained using sub­
cutaneously injected human tumors and consequently were 
unable to address the impact of CAF–epithelial tumor inter­
actions on the enhanced therapeutic efficacy observed using 
LDM therapy. Consequently, whether the increased efficacy 
of LDM treatment could be mediated through an altered 
CAF response and how remain unclear.
Tumors are highly heterogeneous and likely contain a 
subset of cancer cells termed tumor­initiating cells (TICs; 
Visvader and Lindeman, 2008). TICs are intrinsically more 
resistant to therapy and, consequently, increase dispropor­
tionately after systemic chemotherapy and are thought to 
contribute to tumor relapse and treatment resistance (Li 
et al., 2008; Visvader and Lindeman, 2008; Creighton et 
al., 2009). Accordingly, adjuvant strategies that temper the 
chemotherapy­induced enrichment of TICs could signifi­
cantly improve the therapeutic outcome of cancer patients. 
In this regard, TICs exist in a dynamic equilibrium with 
their microenvironment such that their abundance is tightly 
regulated by cell–cell interactions and soluble secreted fac­
tors such as cytokines (te Poele et al., 2002; Calabrese et al., 
2007; Beck et al., 2011; Iliopoulos et al., 2011; Korkaya et 
al., 2011, 2012). Given that CAFs are an abundant source 
of cytokines and chemokines and CAFs respond to che­
motherapy, we asked whether the treatment­induced en­
richment in TICs could be caused by enhanced paracrine 
signaling induced in CAFs after standard high­dose chemo­
therapy and whether this phenotype could be tempered by 
an LDM chemotherapy regimen.
rESuLtS
Mtd chemotherapy renders cAFs pro-oncogenic
To study the effect of chemotherapy on the interactions 
between CAFs and their cognate cancer cells in an ex­
perimentally controlled manner, we developed a protocol 
to simultaneously isolate tumor fibroblasts and carcinoma 
cells from the same freshly excised primary tumors from 
patients with breast cancer using sequential enzymatic di­
gestion and cell sorting (Fig. 1 A). From a cohort of 15 
patients who did not receive preoperative chemotherapy 
(Table S1), we successfully isolated three pairs of CAFs and 
carcinoma cells that each could be propagated for at least 
15 passages and thereby permitted extensive in vitro and 
in vivo analysis. After verifying the epithelial origin of the 
breast carcinoma cells using the marker pan­cytokeratin and 
the CAFs using the markers CD90 and α–smooth muscle 
actin (α­SMA; not depicted), we selected two paired cell 
sets, BCAF­011 (isolated from the tumor of a patient with 
estrogen receptor [ER]–, progesterone receptor [PR]–, 
and HER2­negative breast cancer) and BCAF­008 (iso­
lated from a patient with ER­positive, PR­positive, and 
HER2­negative breast cancer) and their cognate breast ep­
ithelial cancer cells BC­011 and BC­008, for further anal­
ysis. Both sets of minimally passaged CAFs (less than three 
passages) were treated with nanomolar concentrations of 
three standard chemotherapeutic agents, doxorubicin, pa­
clitaxel, or 4­hydroxy­cyclophosphamide (4H­CPA; the 
 2969
JEM Vol. 213, No. 13
active metabolite of cyclophosphamide), routinely used 
to treat human breast cancers, and the cells were exposed 
over time interval and at a dosage that best approximated 
the mean serum levels achieved in patients, as estimated by 
pharmacodynamic studies using a standard clinical MTD 
regimen (50 nM × 96 h, 650 nM × 24 h, and 150 nM × 
 
1 h, respectively; Fig. 1 B; Struck et al., 1987; Twelves et al., 
1991; Fogli et al., 2002). Serial monitoring of the treated 
CAFs revealed early onset (between 3 and 14 d after initia­
tion of the treatments) apoptosis in a population (10–20%) 
of fibroblasts, whereas the bulk of the treated cells survived 
that treatment (4 wk) and were found to be growth arrested 
and express features of senescence and mitotic dysregula­
tions (Fig. 1 C and not depicted).
T
o explore whether the MTD chemotherapy–treated 
CAFs (MTD­CAFs) may modulate the behaviors of the 
neighboring carcinoma cells, we co­cultured the surviving 
CAFs collected at 2 wk after initiation of the treatments 
with their cognate carcinoma cells in a three­dimensional 
(3D) culture assay that recapitulates the tissue­like architec­
ture of breast tumor tissue (Tsai et al., 2005). Notably, when 
compared with the vehicle­treated CAFs, all pairs of the 
MTD­doxorubicin–, MTD­paclitaxel–, or MTD–4H­CPA–
treated BCAF­011 CAFs substantially enhanced the growth 
and promoted the invasive behavior of their cognate carci­
noma cells (Fig. 1, D–F). The stimulatory effects of MTD­
CAFs on cancer cells were consistently observed in other 
paired BC­008 carcinoma cells and BCAF­008 CAFs and are 
unlikely to be cancer subtype–specific, as MTD­CAFs also 
promoted the invasive growth of established breast carcinoma 
cells, including the basal subtype HCC­1954 cells and the 
luminal subtype MCF­7 cells (Fig. 1 E).
To examine whether the MTD­treated CAFs could 
also promote tumor progression and aggression in vivo, 
we lentivirally transduced the primary BC­011 carcinoma 
cells with firefly luciferase (FFLuc) and orthotopically 
inoculated them with vehicle­ or MTD­doxorubicin–
treated BCAF­011 CAFs at a cancer cell to CAF ratio of 
1:2 into the mammary fat pads of immunodeficient NOD/
Shi­scid/IL2Rγnull (NOG) mice (Fig. 1 G), with the tu­
mors generated by this model recapitulating the histolog­
ical features, especially the CAF contents (∼40–45%), of 
the primary human breast cancer they were excised from 
(Fig. 1 H). In line with the preceding in vitro findings, 
those tumor cells co­injected with MTD­CAFs grew 
significantly faster and developed lymph node and pul­
monary metastasis at both a higher frequency and with 
a shorter latency than the tumor cells injected with ve­
hicle­treated CAFs (Fig. 1 I). These findings indicate that 
MTD chemotherapy endows CAFs with the ability to fos­
ter tumor growth and aggression.
Mtd-cAFs expand the population of tIcs
Our ensuing functional studies revealed that MTD­CAFs 
not only promoted the invasive growth of the co­culti­
vated breast carcinoma cells, but also rendered them signifi­
cantly more refractory to chemotherapy (Fig. 2 A). These 
observations raised the possibility that the MTD­CAFs 
may have fostered the expansion of TICs, defined as cells 
with tumor­initiating and treatment­resistant properties, 
within the co­injected population of carcinoma cells (Vis­
vader and Lindeman, 2008). To address this possibility, we 
co­cultivated carcinoma cells with vehicle­ or MTD­che­
motherapy–treated CAFs within a dual chamber co­culture 
apparatus. As implied by our in vivo study results, we found 
that BC­011 carcinoma cells when cultured together with 
MTD­CAFs, regardless of their inducing agents, contained 
a higher percentage of CD44+CD24low/− cells, and we de­
termined that this population of cells increased progres­
sively over time (Fig. 2 B and Fig. S1; Al­Hajj et al., 2003; 
Liu et al., 2014). MTD­CAFs also raised the percentage of 
CD44+CD24low/− cells in several established breast cancer 
cell lines (Fig. 2 C). 
These CD44+CD24low/− carcinoma cells 
up­regulated mesenchymal cell markers and were highly in­
vasive and had enhanced tumor­initiating potentials both in 
vitro and in vivo (not depicted). Consistently, breast carci­
noma cells co­cultivated with MTD­CAFs exhibited higher 
tumorsphere­forming abilities in a limiting dilution assay 
(Fig. 2, E and F). Interestingly, MTD­CAFs also significantly 
increased the population of cells with high aldehyde de­
hydrogenase (ALDH) activity (ALDHhigh), which is known 
to contain another enriched population of TICs (Ginestier 
et al., 2007), in luminal subtype BT­474 carcinoma cells 
(Fig. 2 D), albeit to a lesser extent than the increase in the 
percentage of CD44+CD24low/− cells. Intriguingly, further 
meticulous cell subpopulation experiments revealed that the 
CD44+CD24low/− TICs were not derived from the ALDHhigh 
cells but were mainly derived from those carcinoma cells 
that were neither CD44+CD24low/− nor with high ALDH 
activity (i.e., non­CD44+CD24low/−/ALDHlow cells, repre­
senting more differentiated carcinoma cells) when they were 
co­cultivated with MTD­CAFs (Fig. 2, G and H). These 
data suggest that these TICs were likely derived through 
the dedifferentiation or the reprogramming of differentiated 
carcinoma cells (Vermeulen et al., 2010; Iliopoulos et al., 
2011; Liu et al., 2014; Zhang et al., 2015).
To explore the in vivo significance of the expansion 
of TICs induced by MTD­CAFs, we lentivirally transduced 
BC­011 cells with GFP and inoculated them together with 
vehicle­ or MTD­treated CAFs into the mammary fat pads 
of NOG mice and assessed levels and expansion of TICs 
within the resultant tumors (Fig. 2 I). Consistent with the 
notion that MTD­CAFs stimulate the conversion of TICs 
from within a breast tumor population, we observed that 
the percentage of GFP+CD44+CD24low/− carcinoma cells 
substantially increased in those tumors co­injected with 
MTD­ and not vehicle­treated CAFs (Fig. 2 J). These data 
argue that MTD­CAFs can stimulate the conversion of 
and support the expansion of TICs within a population of 
breast carcinoma cells.
 Metronomic chemotherapy and ELR chemokines | Chan et al.
2970
Figure 1. Mtd chemotherapy–treated cAFs are pro-oncogenic. (A) Schematic illustrating strategy used to prepare primary CAFs or carcinoma 
cells from fresh human breast cancer for subsequent treatments and analyses. MACS, magnetic-assisted cell sorting. (B) Schematic showing doxo-
rubicin, paclitaxel, or 4H-CPA treatment protocols that mimic MTD chemotherapy regimens in the clinical settings. Arrows indicate time of drug 
clearance by wash; arrowheads indicate time of analysis (14 d after initiation of the treatments). (C) PKH2-labeled BCAF-011 CAFs were treated 
with doxorubicin as in B, and the cells were fixed and stained with cleaved caspase-3 (representing apoptotic cells) or senescence-associated β-gal 
(SA-β-gal; representing senescent cells) at the indicated time after initiation of treatments. Data from two independent experiments (n = 3 in each 
group; mean ± SEM) are shown. (D) Representative immunofluorescence images of BC-011 carcinoma cells lentivirally transduced with monomeric 
red fluorescence protein (mRFP; red) co-cultivated in 3D multicomponent gels with vehicle-, MTD-doxorubicin–, MTD-paclitaxel–, or MTD–4H-
CPA–treated BCAF-011 CAFs (PKH2 labeled; green). Bars, 200 µm. (E) Bar graphs quantifying the number of breast carcinoma cells per image field 
after 7 d of co-culture with vehicle- or chemo-treated BCAF-011 or BCAF-008 CAFs. Data from three independent experiments (n = 3 in each group) 
are shown. (F) The invasive capacities of BC-011 carcinoma cells in response to vehicle- or MTD-CAFs in a Transwell invasion assay. (Top) Shown 
are representative immunofluorescence images of the invaded cells, with cell nuclei stained with CYT 
OX-green dye. Bars, 100 µm. (Bottom) The 
numbers of invaded cancer cells. Data from three independent experiments (n = 3 in each group) are shown. (G) BCAF-011 CAFs were treated with 
MTD-doxorubicin (MTD-CAF) or vehicle (vehicle-CAF) and then co-injected with FFLuc-transduced BC-011 carcinoma cells into the mammary fat 
pads of immunodeficient NOG mice. Tumor bulk was monitored using bioluminescence imaging (BLI). (H, left) Representative immunohistochem-
ical images of α-SMA staining in a desmoplastic tumor generated by co-inoculating primary BC-011 breast cancer cells and BCAF-011 CAFs into 
the mammary fat pads of NOG mice (bottom) and the parental human breast cancer tissue (TMH-BC-011 tumor; top). Bar, 100 µm. (Right) Percent 
α-SMA–positive cells in the microscopic field. At least 10 different areas were examined in each tissue. Data from three independent experiments 
are shown. (I, left) Representative BLI of tumors at the indicated time after cell inoculation as described in G. (Right) Tumor bulk quantified as BLI 
normalized photon counts as a function of time. Data from one experiment (n = 6 in each group) are shown. Data are mean ± SEM; Student’s t test. 
**, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001.
 2971
JEM Vol. 213, No. 13
Mtd-cAFs produce elevated levels of ELr+ chemokines
To elucidate the mechanism whereby MTD­CAFs might 
promote the conversion and expansion of mesenchy­
mal­like TICs, we conducted serial transcriptomic analysis 
on MTD­doxorubicin– and MTD­paclitaxel–treated CAFs. 
Not surprisingly, we found that the pattern of gene expres­
Figure 2. Mtd chemotherapy–treated cAFs increase the percentage of tIcs. (A) BCAF-011 CAFs were treated with MTD-doxorubicin, MTD-pacl-
itaxel, or vehicle as in Fig. 1 B and then co-cultivated with BC-011 or BT-474 carcinoma cells in a dual chamber culture apparatus for 5 d, after which 
the carcinoma cells were isolated and treated with the same therapy regimen or vehicle for 4 d. The cells surviving the treatment were determined by 
a CYT 
OX-orange/Hoechst 33342 two-color fluorescence cell viability assay. Data from two independent experiments (n = 3 in each group) are shown. 
 
(B) BCAF-011 CAFs were treated with vehicle (vehicle-CAF), MTD-doxorubicin, MTD-paclitaxel, or MTD–4H-CPA (MTD-CAF) and then co-cultivated with BC-
011 carcinoma cells in a dual chamber culture apparatus, and the carcinoma cells were subjected to flow cytometric analysis. (Left) Shown are representative 
plots showing patterns of CD44 and CD24 staining of carcinoma cells with the frequency of the boxed CD44+CD24−/low cell population as a percentage of 
cancer cells shown. (Right) The percentages of CD44+CD24−/low cancer cells at different times in the co-culture. Data from two independent experiments 
 
(n = 3 in each group) are shown. (C and D) The same co-culture experiments as described in B were performed using different basal (HCC-1954, HCC-1806, 
and HCC-38 cells; C)- or luminal (BT-474 cells; D)-subtype breast carcinoma cells and BCAF-008 (C and D) or BCAF-011 CAFs (C). Shown are the percentages 
of CD44+CD24−/low (C) or ALDHhigh cancer cells (D) at different times in the co-culture. Data from two independent experiments (n = 3 in each group) are 
shown. (E) BC-011 carcinoma cells were cultured in the conditioned medium derived from vehicle- or MTD-CAFs in nonadherent culture plates for 10 d. 
Shown are representative phase contrast images of the resultant tumorspheres. Bars, 100 µm. (F) Limiting dilution assay demonstrating the tumorsphere 
formation efficiency of BC011 carcinoma cells cultured in the conditioned medium derived from vehicle- or MTD-CAFs. The arrow indicates change of slope 
of the trend lines, suggestive of differential tumor-sphere formation ability. Data from two independent experiments (n = 6 in each group) are shown. 
 
(G) Breast carcinoma cells can be subdivided into four subpopulations according to the expression patterns of CD44, CD24, and ALDH. (H) MTD-CAFs pro-
moted the conversion of nonstem-like carcinoma cells (i.e., non-CD44+CD24−/low/ALDHlow cells in cell subpopulation D) but not the ALDHhigh TICs (cell sub-
population B) into CD44+CD24−/low cells. Data from two independent experiments (n = 3 in each group) are shown. (I) Vehicle- or MTD-doxorubicin–treated 
BCAF-011 or BCAF-008 CAFs were co-inoculated with GFP-transduced BC-011 and BC-008 carcinoma cells, respectively, into the mammary fat pads of NOG 
mice. 2 wk after cell inoculation, the tumors were removed for cell dissociation, and the cells were subjected to flow cytometric analyses. (J) The percentages 
of CD44+CD24−/low cells relative to GFP-positive cancer cells in tumors described in I. Data from one experiment (n = 3 in each group) are shown. Data are 
mean ± SEM; Student’s t test; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001.
 Metronomic chemotherapy and ELR chemokines | Chan et al.
2972
sion changed dramatically between vehicle­ and MTD­
treated CAFs, and we noted that these effects became more 
pronounced over time (Fig. 3 A). Functional clustering 
analysis of a group of 2,046 differentially expressed genes in 
day 7 and day 14 MTD­treated CAFs identified significantly 
enriched gene ontology terms related to cell­to­cell and 
cell­to­matrix interactions (Fig. 3 B). Importantly, a survey 
of the up­regulated secreted factors identified four ELR 
motif–positive (ELR+) chemokines, including CXCL1, 
CXCL2, CXCL5, and CXCL6, as the most highly induced 
genes in both groups of MTD­CAFs (Fig. 3 B, arrows). In­
deed, the transcript levels of these chemokines was dramat­
ically induced by 65­ to 197­fold in both groups of CAFs 
after MTD chemotherapy treatment (Fig. 3 C). More­
over, ELI 
SA analysis confirmed that MTD­CAFs secreted 
an enormous amount of each of these ELR+ chemokines 
as compared with the vehicle­treated CAFs, which could 
barely produce any of them (Fig. 3 D).
Figure 3. Mtd chemotherapy induces chronic ELr+ chemokine expression in cAFs. (A) Heat map depicting hierarchical clustering of 3,006 differ-
entially expressed genes (DEGs) detected in vehicle (Veh)-, MTD-doxorubicin–, or MTD-paclitaxel–treated BCAF-011 CAFs. The map depicts high (yellow) 
and low (blue) relative levels of medium-centered gene expression in log space (n = 2 at each time point). (B) Network map of enriched functional gene 
categories in the 2,046 late-response genes (i.e., differentially expressed genes at day 7 and/or day 14 after initiation of the treatment) detected in the 
chemotherapy-treated CAFs. GO-BP, gene ontology biological process; GO-CC, gene ontology cellular component; SPK, SwissProt keywords. (C) Relative 
transcript levels of the ELR+ chemokines CXCL1, CXCL2, CXCL5, and CXCL6 in vehicle-, MTD-doxorubicin–, or MTD-paclitaxel–treated CAFs. Data from two 
independent experiments (n = 3 in each group; ***, P < 0.001) are shown. (D) The amounts of the secreted ELR+ chemokines detected in the conditioned 
medium from vehicle- and MTD-doxorubicin– or MTD-paclitaxel–treated CAFs. Data from two independent experiments (n = 3 in each group; *, P < 0.05; ***, 
P < 0.001) are shown. ND, not detected. (E) HistoGene-stained breast cancer tissue sections before (left) and after (right) LCM. The microdissected samples 
(top right) containing mainly (95%) stromal fibroblasts (yellow arrows), and those containing cancer cells were collected from the same tissue sections for 
subsequent RNA isolation. White arrows indicate carcinoma cells. Bars, 50 µm. (F) Relative transcript levels of the ELR+ chemokines measured in laser-cap-
tured tissue excised from the CAF-enriched tumor stroma (left) or the adjacent carcinoma cell–enriched region of neoadjuvant-treated or untreated human 
breast cancer tissues (right). At least six dissections were performed from different tumor areas from each sample. Data from three independent pairs of 
tumor samples (***, P < 0.001 vs. untreated tumors) are shown. Data are mean ± SEM; Student’s t test.
 2973
JEM Vol. 213, No. 13
The clinical relevance of the MTD­induced CAF pheno­
type was then verified in CAFs and epithelial tumor cells iso­
lated by laser­capture microdissection (LCM) from neoadjuvant 
MTD chemotherapy–treated compared with untreated human 
breast cancer tissue (n = 6 for each; Fig. 3 E). In comparison with 
untreated tumors, the expression of each of the identified ELR+ 
chemokines in the CAFs in the neoadjuvant­treated tumor 
tissue was significantly higher (Fig. 3 F
, left). In contrast, there 
was no quantifiable difference in the expression of any of these 
chemokines in the epithelial tissue compartment (Fig. 3 F
, right). 
These findings reveal that systemic MTD chemotherapy induces 
tissue CAFs to produce a unique profile of chemokines.
Mtd-cAFs promote tumor neovascularization and 
macrophage infiltration and expand tIcs through the ELr+ 
chemokine–cXcr-2 signaling axis
Tumors with elevated levels of ELR+ chemokines are more 
aggressive, and this phenotype has been attributed to their 
ability to stimulate angiogenesis or promote macrophage­in­
duced immune suppression within tumors (Ali and Lazennec, 
2007; Seifert et al., 2016). In addition, ELR+ chemokines can 
also foster the growth and survival of stem cells (Liu et al., 
2011; Jung et al., 2015). Consistently, both an in vitro angio­
genesis assay and a tumor neovascularization assay revealed 
that the MTD­CAFs markedly promoted endothelial tube 
formation and tumor neovascularization, which could be 
efficiently blocked by SB225002, a specific inhibitor of the 
conserved ELR+ chemokine receptor CXCR­2 (Fig. 4, A 
and B). Given the abundance of data linking chemotherapy 
with the infiltration of tumor­promoting TAMs (Shree et 
al., 2011; Bruchard et al., 2013; Hughes et al., 2015), we also 
considered the possibility that the recruitment of myeloid 
cells to tumors by chemotherapy is at least partially medi­
ated through CAFs. Consistently, MTD­CAFs enhanced the 
invasiveness of macrophages in a CXCR­2–dependent man­
ner (Fig. 4 C), and the tumors generated by co­inoculating 
MTD­CAFs and carcinoma cells consisted of more tumor­in­
filtrating TAMs, as indicated by their specific markers F4/80 
and Fizz­1, than those in vehicle­CAF–containing tumors 
(Fig. 4 D). Importantly, in line with the prostemness func­
tions of ELR+ chemokines (Liu et al., 2011; Jung et al., 2015), 
treatment with the CXCR­2 inhibitor also reduced the level 
of CD44+CD24low/− TICs within the breast carcinoma cells 
co­cultured with MTD­CAFs (Fig. 4 E). Indeed, each of the 
ELR+ chemokines individually, but most especially CXCL­1 
and CXCL­5, was able to significantly enhance the tumor­
sphere­forming ability and enhance the invasive behavior of 
the CD44+CD24low/– 
TICs (Fig. 4, F and G), and each of these 
phenotypes could be significantly inhibited by treatment with 
SB225002 and/or a neutralizing antibody directed against in­
dividual chemokines (Fig. 4, H and J). These findings imply 
that the ELR+ chemokines secreted by MTD­CAFs exert 
pleotropic tumor­promoting effects by stimulating angiogen­
esis and TAM recruitment and by increasing the population 
of TICs through CXCR­2 activation.
LdM chemotherapy attenuates ELr+ 
chemokine induction in cAFs
We next sought to exploit alternative therapy regimens that 
could be adopted to temper the stroma response without the 
need for additional therapeutic intervention. In this regard, 
tumors treated using LDM therapy show enhanced tumor 
treatment response that has been attributed to reduced angio­
genesis and immune modulation (Kerbel and Kamen, 2004; 
Lutsiak et al., 2005; Ghiringhelli et al., 2007; Tanaka et al., 
2009). Given our striking findings showing that MTD­CAFs 
secrete enormous amounts of ELR+ chemokines that induce 
angiogenesis and TAM infiltration and expand TICs, we ex­
plored the possibility that the enhanced therapy response ob­
served after LDM therapy might be caused by a tempered 
CAF/ELR+ chemokine phenotype. T
o test this possibility, we 
designed a LDM­mimetic treatment regimen in which CAFs 
were treated with low­dose doxorubicin (20 nM) daily for 10 
consecutive days (LDM­doxorubicin) to yield an accumula­
tive dose of the drug that was comparable with that used in 
the MTD regimen (Fig. 5 A). Remarkably, we observed that 
LDM­treated CAFs (LDM­CAFs) expressed significantly 
lower levels of the ELR+ chemokines (Fig. 5 B). Similarly, 
paclitaxel or 4H­CPA administered to CAFs according to the 
LDM­mimetic regimen also failed to induce ELR+ chemok­
ine expression to the level observed in CAFs subjected to the 
same drugs using an MTD regimen (Fig. 5, C–F).
To clarify the origins for the differential ELR+ chemo­
kine response elicited in the CAFs, we exposed CAFs to 
the same total amount of doxorubicin over a protracted pe­
riod of time using the different dosing regimens (Fig. 5 G). 
Surprisingly, we observed that when doxorubicin was ad­
ministered at daily divided doses extending beyond 6 d (reg­
imen LDM­R2), doxorubicin treatment failed to stimulate 
ELR+ chemokine expression in the CAFs (Fig. 5 H), im­
plying the blunted ELR+ chemokine induction reflects the 
dosing schedule. To further explore the possibility that the 
LDM schedule reduced ELR+ chemokine production by 
the CAFs, we lentivirally transduced BCAF­011 CAFs with 
GFP and inoculated them together with BC­011 carcinoma 
cells into the mammary fat pad of NOG mice. Once the tu­
mors were established (2 wk after cell inoculation), we then 
subjected the mice to a clinically relevant MTD (2 mg/kg; 
roughly equivalent to the dose used in clinical regimens) 
or LDM­mimetic regimen of doxorubicin through systemic 
administration. 1 wk after cessation of treatment, the mice 
were sacrificed, the tumors were resected, the GFP­positive 
CAFs were isolated by FACS, and transcript levels of each of 
the four ELR+ chemokines were quantified (Fig. 5 I). Im­
portantly and consistent with our prediction, whereas the 
CAFs isolated from the MTD­doxorubicin–treated mice 
expressed high levels of all four ELR+ chemokine mRNAs, 
the CAFs isolated from LDM­doxorubicin–treated tumors 
expressed comparatively low transcript levels of these same 
chemokines (Fig. 5 J). Thus, although an MTD treatment 
schedule stimulates CAFs to produce ELR+ chemokines, 
 Metronomic chemotherapy and ELR chemokines | Chan et al.
2974
Figure 4. the pleiotropic effects of Mtd chemotherapy–treated cAFs mediated through the ELr+ chemokine−cXcr-2 paracrine signaling 
axis. (A) Bar graphs showing the increased endothelial tube formation induced by MTD-doxorubicin– or MTD-paclitaxel–treated BCAF-011 CAFs that could 
be reduced by treatment with the CXCR-2 inhibitor SB225002 (1 µM) or prevented when LDM-mimetic regimens as described in Fig. 5 (A and C) were used 
to treat CAFs. Data from two independent experiments (n = 3 in each group) are shown. (B, left) Representative photomicrographs showing pronounced 
vascularity in tumors formed by orthotopically implanted BC-011 carcinoma cells along with MTD-doxorubicin (MTD-CAF)– or vehicle (vehicle-CAF)-treated 
CAFs with or without concurrent intraperitoneal injections of SB225002 (0.5 mg/kg/day) in NOG mice. Also shown are immunohistochemical images of 
von Willebrand factor (vWF) staining of the endothelial cells in the tumors. Bar, 50 µm. (Right) quantification of microvessel density (MVD) per high-power 
field (HPF) in tumors. At least 10 different areas were examined in each tissue. Data from one experiment (n = 3 in each group) are shown. (C, left) The 
invasive capacities of U937-derived macrophages in response to vehicle-CAFs, MTD-CAFs, or LDM-CAFs in the absence or presence of 1 µM SB225002 in 
a Transwell invasion assay. Shown are representative immunofluorescence images of the invaded cells, with cell nuclei stained with CYT 
OX-green. Bars, 
100 µm. (Right) The numbers of invaded macrophages. Data from two independent experiments (n = 3 in each group) are shown. (D, left) Representative 
immunohistochemical images of F4/80 staining in tumors formed by subcutaneous inoculation of BC-011 cells along with vehicle-, MTD-, or LDM-CAFs in 
the flank of nude mice. Bar, 50 µm. (Right) Percent F4/80- or Fizz-1–positive cells in the microscopic field. At least 10 different areas were examined in each 
tissue. Data from two independent experiment (n = 3 tumor tissues in each group) are shown. (E) BCAF-011 CAFs were treated with vehicle (vehicle-CAF), 
MTD, (MTD-CAF), or LDM-doxorubicin or paclitaxel (LDM-CAF) as in Fig. 5 and then co-cultivated with BC-011 carcinoma cells in the presence or absence of 
1 µM SB225002 in a dual chamber culture apparatus for 5 d, after which the carcinoma cells were subjected to flow cytometric analyses. Shown are the per-
centages of the CD44+CD24−/low carcinoma cells. Data from two independent experiments (n = 3 in each group) are shown. (F) Freshly sorted CD44+CD24−/low 
BC-011 carcinoma cells were cultured in the presence of human recombinant CXCL-1, -2, -5, and -6 (each at 1 µg/ml) or vehicle in low-attachment culture 
plates for 10 d, and the diameters of the tumorspheres generated were quantified. Data from two independent experiments (n = 3 in each group) are shown. 
(G) The ability of CD44+CD24−/low BC-011 carcinoma cells to invade through reconstituted basement membrane in response to human recombinant CXCL-1, 
-2, -5, and -6 (each at 1 µg/ml) in a Transwell invasion assay. Data from two independent experiments (n = 3 in each group) are shown. (H) The percentages 
of CD44+CD24−/low cells in BC-011 carcinoma cells co-cultivated with vehicle- or MTD-CAFs along with the neutralizing antibody directed against individual 
 2975
JEM Vol. 213, No. 13
this effect can be significantly blunted when an LDM treat­
ment regimen is applied.
LdM chemotherapy prevents therapy-
induced expansion of tIcs
We next assessed the functional consequence of the LDM 
chemotherapy on the tumor phenotype. Importantly, in vitro 
co­culture and animal studies revealed that, as compared with 
the MTD­CAFs, the ability of the LDM­CAFs to promote 
tumor neovascularization (Fig. 4, A and B), the invasiveness 
of macrophages, and the tumor infiltration of TAMs (Fig. 4, 
C and D), to expand the population of CD44+CD24low/− 
TICs (Fig. 4 E), to increase the frequencies of tumorsphere 
formation (Fig. 4 I), and promote the invasive phenotype 
(Fig. 4 J) was greatly blunted. Moreover, FACS analysis of the 
GFP­transduced carcinoma cells co­inoculated with CAFs 
into the mammary fat pads of NOG mice, which were sub­
jected to either an MTD­ or an LDM­doxorubicin regimen 
by intraperitoneal injection (Fig. 5 K), revealed that the per­
centage of CD44+CD24low/− TICs increased substantially in 
the tumors from MTD­doxorubicin–treated mice but did not 
in the LDM­doxorubicin–treated mice (Fig. 5 L). 
These find­
ings argue that the improved patient response observed after 
an LDM­chemotherapy treatment regimen likely reflects a 
tempering of CAF activation characterized by reduced ELR+ 
chemokine induction and a consequent reduction in 
TIC ex­
pansion and tumor aggression.
LdM chemotherapy attenuates therapy-triggered  
StAt-1/nF-κB–ELr+ chemokine signaling in cAFs
T
o clarify why MTD treatment induces such a profound 
stromal fibroblast activation, we conducted bioinformatics 
knowledge­based analysis on the promoters of the up­reg­
ulated ELR+ chemokines. Our experiments revealed that 
each of these chemokine promoters harbored an enrichment 
for STAT
­1 and nuclear factor κ light­chain enhancer of ac­
tivated B cells (NF­κB) binding motifs (Fig. 6 A). In line 
with this prediction, immunoblot analysis revealed that only 
MTD­treated but not LDM­treated CAFs had elevated levels 
of phosphorylated STAT
­1 (p–STAT
­1) as well as an increased 
ratio between the phosphorylated form and the total abun­
dance of the NF­κB inhibitor protein I­κBα (I­κBα; Fig. 6, 
B and C), and luciferase reporter assays revealed heightened 
STAT­1 and NF­κB transcriptional activities in MTD­treated 
CAFs but much less in LDM­treated CAFs (Fig. 6 D). Con­
sistently, immunohistochemical analyses confirmed that the 
p–STAT­1–positive, activated CAFs were abundantly pres­
ent in the stroma of MTD­doxorubicin–treated tumors but 
much less so in LDM­therapy–treated tumors (Fig. 6 E). A 
functional link between elevated STAT­1 and NF­κB activity 
and ELR+ chemokine production in the MTD­CAFs was 
further demonstrated by showing that BCAF­011 CAFs len­
tivirally transduced with a phosphorylation­deficient mutant 
of STAT­1 or IκBα were unable to up­regulate expression of 
any of the ELR+ chemokines after MTD treatment (Fig. 6 F). 
Moreover, loss of STAT­1 and NF­κB activity in the MTD­
CAFs inhibited their ability to expand the population of 
CD44+CD24low/− TICs within the parental breast cancer cell 
population (Fig. 6 G). These data suggest that MTD che­
motherapy treatment activates STAT­1 and NF­κB in CAFs, 
which thereafter induces ELR+ chemokine expression that, 
once secreted, fosters the transdifferentiation and expansion 
of TICs. This phenotype is prevented using a LDM treatment 
regimen and, consequently, so too is the enrichment for 
TICs.
LdM chemotherapy enhances treatment response in 
desmoplastic breast cancer
Given our finding that LDM chemotherapy tempers CAF 
activation and TIC expansion, we next asked whether an 
LDM regimen would reduce tumor aggression and enhance 
treatment response. T
o begin with, we noted that the ortho­
topic tumors developed in mice co­injected with BC­011 
carcinoma cells, and LDM­CAFs not only grew considerably 
slower than the tumor cells co­inoculated with MTD­CAFs, 
but we also detected fewer lymph nodes and distant metastatic 
tumors (Fig. 7 A and not depicted). T
o determine whether 
these phenotypes could be replicated after in vivo chemo­
therapy, we first confirmed that the clinically relevant MTD­ 
and LDM­mimetic doxorubicin therapy (Fig. 5 A) both were 
able to efficiently kill most (>90%) of the carcinoma cells 
in vitro (Fig. 7 B), based on which we devised MTD­ and 
LDM­mimetic chemotherapy regimens that mimicked the 
cyclic systemic treatment of breast cancer patients (Fig. 7 C). 
We first sought to directly investigate the effect of systemic 
chemotherapy–treated CAFs on tumor cells by stably infected 
HCC­1954 carcinoma cells (derived from a patient with a 
basal­subtype primary breast cancer) with the antiapoptotic 
protein Bcl­2, which rendered them apoptotic and treatment 
resistant (not depicted), and co­inoculated them with BC­
011 CAFs into the flanks of nude mice. The mice then re­
ceived cyclic injections of either vehicle or doxorubicin using 
either the MTD­ or the LDM­mimetic regimen. Consistent 
with our earlier findings, we noted that the chemo­resistant 
BCL­2–expressing tumors in the mice treated with the MTD 
ELR+ chemokines. Data from two independent experiments (n = 3 in each group) are shown. (I) Limiting dilution assay demonstrating the tumorsphere for-
mation efficiency of BC-011 carcinoma cells cultured in the conditioned medium from MTD- or LDM-CAFs. The arrow indicates change of slope of the trend 
line, suggestive of differential tumorsphere formation ability. Data from one experiment (n = 6 in each group; mean ± SEM; Student’s t test; ***, P < 0.001 
vs. MTD) are shown. (J) The invasive capacities of BC-011 cells in response to vehicle-, MTD-, or LDM-CAFs, with or without 1 µM SB225002, in a Transwell 
invasion assay. Shown are the numbers of the invaded cancer cells per microscopic field. Data from two independent experiments (n = 3 in each group) are 
shown. (A–H and J) Data are mean ± SEM; Student’s t test; *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001 versus vehicle. †, P < 0.05 versus MTD.
 Metronomic chemotherapy and ELR chemokines | Chan et al.
2976
Figure 5. LdM chemotherapy attenuates the treatment-induced expressions of ELr+ chemokines in cAFs. (A) Schematic showing doxorubicin 
treatment protocols that mimic MTD and LDM chemotherapy regimens. (B) The transcript levels of the ELR+ chemokines CXCL1, CXCL2, CXCL5, and CXCL6 in 
vehicle, MTD-doxorubicin–, or LDM-doxorubicin–treated BCAF-011 or BC-008 CAFs 14 d after initiation of the treatments. Data from two independent ex-
periments (n = 3 in each group) are shown. (C) Schematic showing paclitaxel treatment protocols that mimic MTD (650 nM × 24 h) and LDM (65 nM daily × 
 
10 d) chemotherapy regimens (n = 3 in each group). (D) The transcript levels of the ELR+ chemokines in vehicle-, MTD-paclitaxel–, or LDM-paclitaxel–treated 
BCAF-011 CAFs 14 d after initiation of the treatments. Data from three independent experiments (n = 3 in each group) are shown. (E) Schematic showing 
4H-CPA treatment protocols that mimic MTD (150 nM × 1 h) and LDM (15 nM × 1 h daily for 10 d) chemotherapy regimens. (F) The transcript levels of the 
ELR+ chemokines in vehicle, MTD–4H-CPA–, or LDM–4H-CPA–treated BCAF-011 CAFs 14 d after initiation of the treatments. Data from three independent 
experiments (n = 3 in each group) are shown. (G) Schematic showing doxorubicin treatment protocols that recapitulate MTD (50 nM X 96 h)- or different 
LDM-mimetic regimens with gradually prolonged lengths of drug exposure (from LDM-R1 to LDM-R4). Note that the total accumulated doses of drug 
exposure, as reflected in area under curves, were the same across all the treatment groups (4,800 nM × h). (A, C, E, and G) Arrows indicate time of drug clear-
ance by wash. (H) Fold-increases in the transcript levels of the ELR+-chemokines in BCAF-011 CAFs exposed to vehicle or doxorubicin using the treatment 
protocols described in G. Data from three independent experiments (n = 3 in each group) are shown. (I) BCAF-011 CAFs were lentivirally infected with GFP 
and then co-injected with BC-011 carcinoma cells into the mammary fat pads of NOG mice. 2 wk after cell inoculation, the tumors were given injections of 
vehicle or doxorubicin at an MTD (2 mg/kg as a single-dose intravenous injection)- or an LDM (0.2 mg/kg every day by intraperitoneal injections for 10 con-
secutive days)-mimetic therapy regimen and then removed for cell dissociation followed by transcript analyses. (J) The transcript levels of the ELR+ chemo-
kines in the GFP+ CAFs isolated from the tumors in I. Data from one experiment (n = 5 in each group) are shown. (K) BCAF-011 CAFs were co-inoculated 
with GFP-transduced BC-011 carcinoma cells into the mammary fat pads of NOG mice. The resultant tumors were given injections of vehicle or doxorubicin 
at a MTD- or a LDM-mimetic regimen as described in I. The tumors were then removed for cell dissociation followed by flow cytometric analyses. (L) The 
percentages of GFP+CD44+CD24−/low cells relative to the GFP+ carcinoma cells isolated from the tumors described in K. Data from one experiment (n = 5 in 
each group) are shown. Data are mean ± SEM; Student’s t test. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01 versus vehicle. †, P < 0.05 versus MTD.
 2977
JEM Vol. 213, No. 13
chemotherapy protocol grew significantly faster than either 
the vehicle­treated mice or the mice subjected to a LDM 
therapy regimen (Fig. 7 D). In a second model wherein the 
mammary fat pads of NOG mice were co­inoculated with 
control and apoptotic­sensitive HCC­1954 cells and pri­
mary CAFs, single­agent therapy with LDM­doxorubicin 
could profoundly inhibit the growth of the tumors, and its 
treatment efficacy was comparable with that in those con­
Figure 6. LdM chemotherapy tempers StAt-1– and nF-κB–dependent ELr+ chemokine expressions in cAFs. (A) Schematic showing enrich-
ment for STAT-1, NF-κB, PPAR-γ, C/EBP-α, and p53 binding sites in the promoters of the ELR+ chemokines highly induced in MTD chemotherapy–treated 
BCAF-011 CAFs. (B) Representative immunoblots showing sustained activation of STAT-1 (p–STAT-1) and IκBα (p-IκBα) in vehicle-, MTD-doxorubicin–, or 
MTD-paclitaxel–treated BCAF-011 CAFs. β-tubulin was included as a loading control. (C) Bar graphs quantifying immunoblot data shown in B. Data from 
two independent experiments (*, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001 vs. vehicle) are shown. (D) Bar graphs quantifying fold STAT-1– and NF-κB–mediated 
luciferase expression in MTD- or LDM-treated BCAF-011 CAFs relative to vehicle-treated control. Data from three independent experiments (n = 3 in each 
group. *, P < 0.05 vs. vehicle; †, P < 0.05 vs. MTD) are shown. (E) Representative immunohistochemical images of p–STAT-1 staining in vehicle-, MTD-doxo-
rubicin–, or LDM-doxorubicin–treated desmoplastic tumors generated by co-inoculating BC-011 cells and BCAF-011 CAFs into the mammary fat pads of 
NOG mice. Bar, 100 µm. (F) The transcript levels of the ELR+ chemokines induced after MTD-doxorubicin or MTD-paclitaxel treatment in vector-transduced 
BCAF-011 CAFs or those lentivirally transduced with a STAT-1–SR– or an IκBα-SR–expressing vector to inhibit the STAT-1 and NF-κB activity, respectively. 
Data from three independent experiments (n = 3 in each group. *, P < 0.05 vs. vector) are shown. (G) Vector-, STAT-1– SR–, or IκBα-SR–transduced BCAF-
011 CAFs were treated with MTD-doxorubicin, MTD-paclitaxel, or vehicle and then co-cultivated with BC-011 carcinoma cells in a dual chamber culture 
apparatus for 5 d, after which the carcinoma cells were subjected to flow cytometric analyses. Shown are percentages of CD44+CD24−/low cell subpopulation 
in each group. Data from three independent experiments (n = 3 in each group. *, P < 0.05 vs. vehicle-CAF; †, P < 0.05 vs. vector-transduced CAF) are shown. 
Data are mean ± SEM; Student’s t test.
 Metronomic chemotherapy and ELR chemokines | Chan et al.
2978
Figure 7. LdM chemotherapy enhances treatment response and prevents tIc expansion in desmoplastic breast cancer. (A, left) BCAF-011 CAFs 
were treated with MTD (MTD-CAF) or LDM-doxorubicin (LDM-CAF) as in Fig. 5 A and then co-injected with FFLuc-transduced BC-011 carcinoma cells into 
the mammary fat pads of NOG mice. Tumor bulk was then monitored using BLI. Shown is representative BLI of tumors at the indicated time after cell 
inoculation. (Right) Tumor bulk quantified as BLI normalized photon counts as a function of time. Data from one experiment (n = 6 in each group; mean ± 
 
SEM; Student’s t test; *, P < 0.05; ***, P < 0.001 vs. MTD-CAF) are shown. (B) HCC-1954 carcinoma cells were treated with vehicle or doxorubicin using an 
MTD- or an LDM-mimetic regimen as described in Fig. 5 A, and the cells surviving the therapy were determined by CYT 
OX-orange/Hoechst 33342 two-
color fluorescence cell viability assay 10 d after initiation of the treatments. Data from three independent experiments (n = 3 in each group) are shown. 
(C) Schematic showing in vivo doxorubicin treatment protocols that mimic MTD and LDM chemotherapy regimens. The tumor-bearing mice received cyclic 
(three cycles) injections of vehicle or doxorubicin using an MTD (2 mg/kg by intravenous injections every 10 d for three cycles)- or an LDM (0.2 mg/kg by 
intraperitoneal injections daily for 30 d)-mimetic regimen. (D) BCAF-011 CAFs were co-inoculated with Bcl-2–transduced HCC-1954 carcinoma cells sub-
cutaneously into the flanks of nude mice. 2 wk later, the tumor-bearing mice received cyclic intraperitoneal injections of vehicle or doxorubicin using the 
MTD- or LDM-mimetic regimen as described in C. (Left) Shown are representative bioluminescence images of tumors at the indicated time after initiation 
of the therapy. (Right) Tumor bulk quantified as BLI normalized photon counts as a function of time. Data from one experiment (n = 6 in each group) are 
shown. (E) BCAF-011 CAFs were co-inoculated with FFLuc-transduced HCC-1954 carcinoma cells into the mammary fat pads of NOG mice, and the resultant 
tumors were treated as in C with or without concurrent intraperitoneal injections of SB225002 (0.5 mg/kg/day) in the mice. (Right) Tumor bulk plotted over 
time. Data from one experiment (n = 6 in each group) are shown. (F) FFLuc-transduced HCC-1954 carcinoma cells were inoculated into the mammary fat 
pads of NOG mice without co-inoculation of CAFs. The resultant pauci-CAF tumors were treated as in C, and the tumor bulk was plotted over time. Data 
 2979
JEM Vol. 213, No. 13
currently treated with MTD therapy and the CXCR­2 in­
hibitor (Fig. 7 E). Notably, the desmoplastic tumors treated 
with the MTD­mimetic regimen outgrew the control tu­
mors during the initial period of the treatment (day 0 to day 
31 in Fig. 7 E), whereas the same MTD therapy significantly 
suppressed the growth of the tumors generated when only 
the carcinoma cells without CAFs were inoculated into the 
mice despite that these pauci­CAF tumors grew much more 
slowly than the desmoplastic tumors (Fig. 7 F). This result 
raised the intriguing possibility that the tumor­promoting ef­
fects of the chemo­treated CAFs may override the cytotoxic 
and antitumor effect of traditional MTD chemotherapy in 
certain stroma cell–abundant desmoplastic tumors. We also 
verified that the higher antitumor efficacy of LDM ther­
apy than MTD therapy was not drug specific, as it was also 
evident when the cancer cell/CAF co­culture was treated 
with other types of chemotherapy agents such as paclitaxel 
and 4H­CPA (Fig. 7 G).
To validate that LDM therapy indeed imparts ther­
apeutic benefits in a more clinically relevant paradigm, we 
repeated the in vivo animal studies using highly aggressive 
breast cancer MDA­MB­436 cells in CD34 hematopoietic 
stem cell (HSC)–reconstituted humanized NOG (HSC­hu­
NOG) mice, which contain functionally differentiated human 
immune cells. We found that the tumors in this humanized 
mouse model of orthotopic and desmoplastic breast cancer 
responded to LDM therapy but not to standard MTD che­
motherapy so that the LDM therapy–treated mice survived 
significantly longer than those subjected to standard chemo­
therapy (Fig. 8, A and B), supporting that LDM therapy in­
deed conferred survival benefits to tumor­bearing mice. In 
addition, flow cytometric analyses of the resulting tumors 
revealed that the mice treated with standard MTD chemo­
therapy had a greater number of CD44+CD24low/− TICs as 
compared with those administered the LDM therapy regi­
men or co­administered with the CXCR­2 inhibitor (Fig. 8, 
C and D). Because these phenotypes were not observed in 
tumors generated in mice orthotopically injected with the 
carcinoma cells alone (Fig. 8, E and F), these findings support 
our notion that chemotherapy treatment can drive tumor 
aggression and treatment resistance by activating stromal fi­
broblasts. Next, as mouse xenografts of human cancer cells 
do not necessarily recapitulate the tissue architecture and the 
microenvironment of human tumors and may lack predic­
tive value with regard to chemotherapy treatment response 
and the rate of tumor progression (Hidalgo et al., 2014), we 
repeated the experiments in a highly clinically relevant pa­
tient­derived xenografted (PDX) mouse breast tumor model. 
We first confirmed that these PDX tumors had a consider­
able stromal content with ∼25–30% α­SMA–positive stro­
mal fibroblasts per microscopic field (Fig. 8 G). Consistently, 
single­agent chemotherapy using the LDM­doxorubicin 
regimen substantially reduced the growth rate of the tumors 
in this model, whereas MTD therapy only slightly inhibited 
the tumor growth (Fig. 8, H and I). Furthermore, flow cyto­
metric analyses on the breast cancer cells isolated from these 
PDX tumors using a specific marker of human breast cancer 
cells CD298 (Lawson et al., 2015) confirmed that the PDX 
tumors treated with LDM therapy contained significantly less 
CD44+CD24low/− TICs than those treated with MTD ther­
apy (Fig. 8 J and Fig. S2).
LdM chemotherapy enhances treatment 
response in desmoplastic PdAc
Having demonstrated the beneficial effect of LDM chemo­
therapy in desmoplastic breast cancer, we asked whether this 
phenomenon was not confined only to breast cancer–CAF 
interactions, but also could be extended to other types of 
desmoplastic cancers such as PDAC (Sherman et al., 2014). 
It has been shown that LDM chemotherapy can attenuate 
therapy­induced metastasis caused by rebound MDSC mo­
bilization and increased angiogenesis in PDAC (Hasnis et 
al., 2014). We therefore sought to compare the impact of an 
LDM versus an MTD chemotherapy routine on PDAC cells–
pancreatic stellate cell (PSC; the most abundant fibroblast­like 
stromal cells in PDAC) interactions. 
We treated PSCs with ei­
ther a clinically relevant MTD (20 µM × 30 min; Grunewald 
et al., 1992) or an LDM­mimetic (2 µM × 30 min for 10 
consecutive days; Fig. 9 A) regimen using the standard of care 
PDAC chemotherapy drug gemcitabine and assayed tran­
script levels of ELR+ chemokines in the PSCs. Consistent 
with our findings in breast CAFs, we found that PSCs treated 
with MTD­gemcitabine (MTD­PSCs) expressed high lev­
els of all four ELR+ chemokines, whereas those subjected to 
an LDM regimen (LDM­PSCs) expressed much lower levels 
of those chemokines (Fig. 9 B). Furthermore, FACS anal­
ysis of PANC­1 cells or primary SP­1 PDAC cells co­cul­
tured with MTD­PSCs revealed that these cells contained a 
progressively increasing percentage of CD44+CD133+ cells 
or CD44+CD24+ cells (Fig. 9, C–F; and Figs. S3 and S4), 
which we and others have previously shown to contain TICs 
in PDAC (Li et al., 2007; Wang et al., 2013), whereas the cells 
co­cultured with LDM­PSCs had a lower percentage of 
TICs.
In accordance with the findings in breast cancer, parallel 
studies using FFLuc­transduced PANC­1 PDAC cells co­in­
jected orthotopically into the pancreas with MTD­PSCs in 
HSC­hu­NOG mice grew dramatically faster than those 
co­injected with LDM­PSCs. Moreover, the PANC­1 PDAC 
from one experiment (n = 6 in each group) are shown. (G) HCC-1954 carcinoma cells were co-cultivated with BCAF-011 CAFs in a dual-chamber culture 
apparatus, and the co-cultures were treated with doxorubicin, paclitaxel, or 4H-CPA using the various MTD- or LDM-mimetic regimens for one treatment 
cycle as described in Fig. 5. The cells surviving the treatment were determined as in B. Data from three independent experiments (n = 3 in each group) are 
shown. (B and D–G) Data are mean ± SEM; Student’s t test. *, P < 0.05 vs. vehicle. †, P < 0.05 vs. MTD.
 Metronomic chemotherapy and ELR chemokines | Chan et al.
2980
Figure 8. LdM chemotherapy enhances treatment response in humanized or PdX mouse breast cancer models. (A, left) BCAF-011 CAFs were 
co-inoculated with GFP-FFLuc–transduced MDA-MB-436 carcinoma cells into the mammary fat pads of humanized HSC-hu-NOG mice, and the resultant 
tumors were treated as in Fig. 7 C with or without concurrent intraperitoneal injections of SB225002 (0.5 mg/kg/d) in the mice. (Right) Tumor bulk plotted 
over time. Data from one experiment (n = 10 in each group) are shown. (B) Percent survival as a function of time in mice described in A. The black bar indi-
cates the duration of treatment. Data from one experiment (n = 10 in each group; the survival curves were compared using log-rank test; LDM vs. MTD) are 
shown. (C and D) After the first cycle of chemotherapy in A, the tumors were removed for cell dissociation followed by flow cytometric analyses. (D) Shown 
are the percentages of CD44+CD24−/low cells relative to the GFP+ carcinoma cells. Data from two independent experiments (n = 3 in each group) are shown. 
 
(E) MDA-MB-436 carcinoma cells were inoculated into the mammary fat pads of HSC-hu-NOG mice without co-inoculation of CAFs. The resultant pau-
ci-CAF tumors were treated as in A, and the tumor bulk was plotted over time. Data from one experiment (n = 6 in each group) are shown. (F) The percent-
ages of CD44+CD24−/low cells relative to the GFP+ carcinoma cells isolated from the tumors generated in E. Data from two independent experiments (n = 3 
in each group) are shown. (G) Representative immunohistochemical images of α-SMA staining in a PDX breast tumor xenograft. Bar, 100 µm. (H) NOD-SCID 
γ mice bearing PDX breast tumors were treated with systemic MTD- or LDM-doxorubicin as in Fig. 7 C, and the tumor growth was monitored for 31 d after 
initiation of the treatments. Shown are representative photographs of the tumors in each group at the study end point. (I) Tumor volume in H plotted over 
time. Data from one experiment (n = 6 in each group) are shown. (J) The PDX tumors as described in I were removed for cell dissociation followed by flow 
cytometric analyses after the first treatment cycle (i.e., 11 d after initiation of the treatments). (Left) Shown are representative plots showing patterns of 
 2981
JEM Vol. 213, No. 13
cells co­injected with the MTD­PSCs rapidly and extensively 
developed liver, peritoneum, and lung metastasis (Fig. 9 G and 
not depicted). Indeed, whereas a systemic MTD­mimetic reg­
imen of gemcitabine treatment (Fig. 9 H) fostered the growth 
and dissemination of orthotopically implanted PANC­1 
pancreatic tumors co­injected with PSCs, those same mice 
treated with an LDM­mimetic regimen survived longer, and 
their tumors regressed significantly (Fig. 9, I and J).
Collectively, these findings argue that a standard of care 
MTD chemotherapy regimen activates STAT­1 and NF­κB 
in stromal fibroblasts to induce ELR+ chemokine expression 
that then drives tumor aggression and treatment resistance, at 
least in part by stimulating tumor neovascularization and the 
infiltration of TAMs and by fostering the transdifferentiation 
of carcinoma cells and the expansion of 
TICs (Fig. 10 A). Our 
results also demonstrate that these effects can be largely tem­
pered by adopting an LDM treatment approach and that the 
phenotype is not confined to one tumor type but is likely 
universal in nature (Fig. 10 B).
dIScuSSIon
In this study, we presented compelling evidence demonstrat­
ing that MTD chemotherapy used to treat human cancers 
can exert sustained effects on the tumor stroma that include 
the induction of an ELR+ chemokine–producing phenotype 
in CAFs, whereby they can subsequently promote tumor 
aggression. Our data revealed that ELR+ chemokine–pro­
ducing CAFs are abundant and readily detected in cancer 
tissues, even after multiple cycles of therapy. We further de­
termined that MTD chemotherapy induces a population of 
CXCR­2–dependent 
TICs through inducing the CAF ELR+ 
chemokine–cancer cell paracrine signaling process, which can 
be much tempered by switching to LDM therapy regimens. 
Thus, our findings emphasize the crucial contribution of the 
tissue stroma in cancer treatment and imply that LDM che­
motherapy may provide a new avenue for preventing stro­
mal activation to further enhance the therapeutic outcome 
in desmoplastic cancers.
It is increasingly recognized that systemic chemotherapy 
can activate the tumor stroma to modulate tumor behaviors 
in human cancers. In human prostate cancer, the genotoxic 
agent mitoxantrone was able to stimulate Wnt16B secretion 
by stromal fibroblasts, which then promoted the prolifera­
tion and invasion of the associated carcinoma cells (Sun et 
al., 2012). In human colorectal cancer, chemotherapy led 
to the enrichment of IL­17A–producing CAFs within the 
tumor stroma, which in turn promoted the self­renewal of 
TICs and tumor growth (Lotti et al., 2013). Echoing these 
findings, our study showed that, after chemotherapy treat­
ment, breast cancer CAFs chronically up­regulate several fac­
tors linked to cell­to­cell and/or cell­to­matrix interactions. 
Our mechanistic studies additionally dissect the functional 
alterations in chemo­treated CAFs. An unbiased expression 
profiling, followed by comprehensive bioinformatics analyses 
and molecular and functional studies, led to the identification 
of the ELR+ chemokine–CXCR­2 paracrine signaling pro­
cess, stimulated by chronically elevated STAT­1 and NF­κB 
transcriptional activity in CAFs, as an essential mechanism 
underlying the pro­oncogenic and pro­TIC activities of che­
mo­treated CAFs. Furthermore, and importantly, we demon­
strated the clinical significance of this finding by showing that 
there is a significant induction of the ELR chemokines in the 
stroma of neoadjuvant chemotherapy–treated human cancer 
tissues. It is worth noting that the expressions of several pre­
viously reported CAF­derived factors, including CXCL12 
(SDF­1α), G­CSF
, and VEGF­A (Orimo et al., 2005; McAl­
lister and Weinberg, 2014), were not significantly induced by 
MTD chemotherapy in CAFs (unpublished data). This indi­
cates that the chemotherapy­elicited stroma alterations are 
mediated by signaling pathways distinct from those function­
ing in incipient or chemo­naive tumors.
T
o date, several clinical trials have supported LDM che­
motherapy alone or in combination with targeted therapeu­
tics or antiangiogenic drugs as an effective approach in cancer 
treatment (Pasquier et al., 2010; Loven et al., 2013). For in­
stance, in patients with breast cancer, it has been estimated 
that LDM therapy yielded an average response rate of 39% 
and an average overall clinical benefit of 57%. Recently, a 
large and randomized phase III trial, the CAI 
RO3 trial, pro­
vided a solid support for the clinical benefits of LDM chemo­
therapy in metastatic colorectal cancer (Kerbel and Grothey, 
2015). The efficacy of LDM therapy has been thought to 
be mainly caused by its antiangiogenic effects (Kerbel and 
Kamen, 2004), such as direct cytotoxicity to endothelial cells 
(Bocci et al., 2002), reduced recruitment of endothelial pro­
genitors (Bertolini et al., 2003), and increased expression of 
the antiangiogenic factor thrombospondin­1 (Bocci et al., 
2003). Recent studies suggest that LDM therapy may also 
mediate its antitumor effect by inhibiting regulatory T cells 
(Lutsiak et al., 2005; Ghiringhelli et al., 2007), by triggering 
the maturation of tumor­infiltrating dendritic cells (Tanaka 
et al., 2009), or by disrupting cancer stem cell–promoting 
vascular niches (Folkins et al., 2007). Nonetheless, our study 
identified a new and important mechanism underlying the 
enhanced therapeutic efficacy of LDM therapy in CAF­abun­
dant, desmoplastic cancers, which is mediated through an 
attenuated STAT­1 and NF­κB activation in CAFs leading 
to a substantially reduced ELR+ chemokine production, 
thereby significantly tempering the therapy­triggered stromal 
pro­oncogenic activity. Of note, previous studies have indi­
CD298, CD44, and CD24 staining of carcinoma cells with the frequency of the boxed CD44+CD24−/low cell population as a percentage of CD298+ cancer cells 
shown. (Right) The percentages of CD298+CD44+CD24−/low cells relative to the CD298+ carcinoma cells isolated from the tumors. Data from three indepen-
dent experiments (n = 3 in each group) are shown. FSC, forward scatter. Data are mean ± SEM; Student’s t test. *, P < 0.05 vs. vehicle. †, P < 0.05 vs. MTD.
 Metronomic chemotherapy and ELR chemokines | Chan et al.
2982
cated that the antiangiogenic and antitumor effects of LDM 
chemotherapy are specifically observed in certain chemother­
apeutic agents, which does not include doxorubicin (Bocci et 
al., 2002). Nonetheless, in our CAF­abundant tumor model, 
which resembles human desmoplastic breast cancer, doxoru­
bicin treatments administered using an LDM­mimetic reg­
Figure 9. LdM chemotherapy enhances treatment response in desmoplastic PdAc. (A) Schematic showing in vitro gemcitabine treatment protocols 
that mimic MTD (20 µM × 30 min on the first day, followed by a drug-free interval of 9 d) and LDM (2 µM × 30 min daily for 10 consecutive days) che-
motherapy regimens. (B) The transcript levels of the ELR+ chemokines in vehicle (vehicle-PSC)-, MTD (MTD-PSC)-, or LDM-gemcitabine (LDM-PSC)–treated 
PSCs. Data from three independent experiments (n = 3 in each group; *, P < 0.05 vs. vehicle-gemcitabine; †, P < 0.05 vs. MTD-gemcitabine) are shown. (C) 
Vehicle-, MTD-, or LDM-PSCs were co-cultivated with PANC-1 carcinoma cells in a dual-chamber apparatus for 5 d, and the carcinoma cells were subjected 
to flow cytometric analyses. Shown are representative plots showing patterns of CD44 and CD133 staining of cells at different times in the co-culture, with 
the frequency of the boxed CD44+CD133+ cell population as a percentage of cancer cells shown. (D) The percentages of CD44+CD133+ carcinoma cells at 
different times in the co-culture in C. Data from three independent experiments (n = 3 in each group; *, P < 0.05 vs. vehicle-PSC; †, P < 0.05 vs. MTD-PSC) 
are shown. (E) The percentages of CD44+CD133+ or CD44+CD24+ carcinoma cells at day 5 in the co-culture. Data from three independent experiments (n = 3 
in each group; *, P < 0.05 vs. vehicle-PSC; †, P < 0.05 vs. MTD-PSC) are shown. (F) Vehicle-, MTD-, or LDM-PSCs were co-cultivated with primary SP-1 PDAC 
cells, and the percentages of CD44+CD133+ TICs were analyzed. Data from three independent experiments (n = 3 in each group; *, P < 0.05 vs. vehicle-PSC; 
†, P < 0.05 vs. MTD-PSC) are shown. (G) Vehicle-, MTD-, or LDM-PSCs were co-injected with FFLuc-transduced PANC-1 carcinoma cells into the pancreatic 
tails of NOG mice. Tumor bulk was then monitored using BLI. (Left) Shown is representative BLI of tumors at the indicated time after cell inoculation. (Right) 
Tumor bulk quantified as BLI normalized photon counts as a function of time. Data from one experiment (n = 6 in each group; *, P < 0.05 vs. vehicle-PSC; †, 
P < 0.05 vs. MTD-PSC) are shown. (H) PSCs were co-injected with PANC-1 cells into the pancreatic tails of HSC-hu-NOG mice. 10 d later, the tumor-bearing 
mice received intraperitoneal injections of vehicle or gemcitabine using an MTD (240 mg/kg every 9 d for 18 d followed by a 9-d rest and then another 
18-d treatment cycle)- or an LDM (80 mg/kg every 3 d for 18 d followed by a 9-d rest and then another 18-d treatment cycle)-mimetic regimen. (I, left) 
Representative BLI of tumors at the indicated time after initiation of the therapy as described in H. (Right) Tumor bulk quantified as BLI normalized photon 
counts as a function of time. Data from one experiment (n = 3 in each group; *, P < 0.05 vs. vehicle-gemcitabine; †, P < 0.05 vs. MTD-gemcitabine) are 
shown. (B, D–G, and I) Data are mean ± SEM; Student’s t test. (J) Percent survival as a function of time in mice described in I. The black bar indicates the 
duration of treatment. Data from one experiment (n = 3 in each group; the survival curves were compared using log-rank test; LDM vs. MTD) are shown.
 2983
JEM Vol. 213, No. 13
imen could greatly enhance the treatment response of the 
tumors. Thus, our results not only highlight the importance 
of CAF and stroma response in cancer therapy, but also may 
further broaden the clinical applicability of LDM therapy.
Recent evidence suggests that TICs exist in a dynamic 
equilibrium with their microenvironments, and the TIC 
phenotype is tightly regulated by cell­extrinsic factors de­
rived by their surrounding cells or the stroma. In keeping 
with this paradigm, inflammatory mediators, such as IL­6 
and IL­8, have been found to be critically involved in the 
regulation of TICs and their contribution to cancer inva­
sion and metastasis (Iliopoulos et al., 2011; Korkaya et al., 
2011, 2012). Nevertheless, these observations were made in 
untreated and chemo­naive tumors, whereas our results sug­
gest that, in chemo­treated tumors, ELR+ chemokines play 
a major role in the regulation of TICs especially those with 
mesenchymal­like properties. In this regard, the substantial 
amounts of these pro­TIC ELR+ chemokines produced by 
MTD­treated CAFs within the treated tumors may con­
tribute significantly to the significant enrichment of TICs 
in breast cancers after neoadjuvant chemotherapy (Li et al., 
2008; Creighton et al., 2009). Our study additionally sug­
gests that this CAF ELR+ chemokine phenotype is potently 
induced by MTD chemotherapy but can be largely avoided 
by switching to LDM therapy regimens. Our study thus may 
not only trigger more clinical trials dedicated to comparing 
the effects of MTD and LDM chemotherapy on the tumor 
stroma and TICs and examining their efficacy in human 
desmoplastic cancers, but also may help the identification of 
the cancer patients who will most likely benefit from LDM 
chemotherapy to guide the design of tumor­tailored and 
personalized chemotherapy regimens.
In summary, our findings suggest that systemic chemo­
therapy has a significant impact on the stroma that is associ­
ated with human desmoplastic cancers that includes sustained 
activation of CAFs leading to pro­oncogenic and pro­TIC 
paracrine signaling activities. 
We delineated the signaling path­
way that mediates this characteristic stromal response to che­
motherapy and identified an effective way to attenuate it by 
using LDM therapy regimens. Our results lend support to the 
emerging paradigm that maintains that stroma­derived signals 
contribute to tumor pathology and suggests that LDM ther­
apy or targeting the paracrine signaling mediated by chemo­ 
treated CAFs may be a valid approach for improving thera­
peutic outcome in desmoplastic cancers.
MAtErIALS And MEthodS
human cancer specimens, staining, and cell isolation
Tumor specimens were excised from a cohort of 15 breast 
cancer patients who had not received prior chemotherapy in 
the Tung’s Metro­harbor Hospital, Taiwan (the TMH cohort; 
Table S1). 
The specimens were processed within 3 h of tumor 
removal by mechanical dissociation, enzymatic digestion, and 
differential centrifugation, as described previously (Tsuyada et 
al., 2012), followed by sequential magnetic­assisted cell sort­
ing using antifibroblast MicroBeads and a magnetic­assisted 
cell­sorting Dead Cell Removal kit (Miltenyi Biotec). Fibro­
blasts were plated on collagen­coated tissue culture plates and 
maintained in DMEM (Invitrogen) supplemented with 15% 
FBS. Carcinoma cells were cultured in IMDM (Invitrogen) 
supplemented with glutamine, insulin, transferrin, selenium 
(all from Lonza), and 20% FBS (Tsuyada et al., 2012). Using 
this protocol, we were able to isolate three pairs of cognate 
carcinoma cells and CAFs that could be propagated for >15 
Figure 10. the beneficial effects of LdM 
chemotherapy in desmoplastic cancers. 
 
(A) Schematic showing the proposed mecha-
nisms underlying the pro-oncogenic functions 
of MTD-CAFs that serve to antagonize the an-
titumor efficacy and lead to tumor recurrence 
and/or metastasis, whereas chemotherapy at 
LDM therapy regimens can exempt the stroma 
from these treatment-elicited stromal-ep-
ithelial signaling events. (B) Both MTD and 
LDM chemotherapy can lead to regression of 
tumors with few CAFs in their stroma (i.e., 
pauci-CAF tumor), whereas in CAF-abundant 
(i.e., desmoplastic) tumors, MTD chemother-
apy induces strong and persistent stroma 
activation, which undermines the treatment 
response. MTD chemotherapy may paradox-
ically promote tumor progression in certain 
contexts depending on the treatment sensitiv-
ity of carcinoma cells and the relative abun-
dance of CAFs or other types of stroma cells. 
LDM chemotherapy can avoid the inadvertent 
activation of the tumor stroma, whereby it can 
enhance the treatment response.
 Metronomic chemotherapy and ELR chemokines | Chan et al.
2984
passages to permit subsequent experiments. Carcinoma cells 
were confirmed to be aneuploid according to karyotyping. 
All human tissues were collected using protocols approved 
by the Institutional Review Boards at Tung’ Taichung Metro­ 
harbor Hospital. Primary PDAC SP­1 cells were isolated from 
the malignant ascites of a patient with metastatic PDAC (a gift 
from Y
.­S. Shan, National Cheng Kung University Hospital, 
Tainan, Taiwan). HCC­1954, MCF­7, HCC­1806, HCC­
38, BT
­474, MDA­MB­436, PANC­1, and U­937 cells (all 
from ATCC) and PSCs (a gift from M. Löhr, German Can­
cer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany; Jesnowski et al., 
2005) were cultured and propagated according to the pro­
viders’ recommendations.
treatment of cAFs and PScs
Minimally passaged (less than three passages) primary breast 
CAFs were treated with doxorubicin, paclitaxel, or 4H­CPA 
(all from Sigma­Aldrich) according to the MTD­ or the 
LDM­mimetic scheme described in Fig. 1 B or Fig. 5 (A, 
C, and E) (Struck et al., 1987; Twelves et al., 1991; Fogli 
et al., 2002). PSCs were maintained in DMEM supple­
mented with 10% FBS and treated with gemcitabine (LIL 
LY France) according to the dose schemes described in 
Fig. 9 A. After the completion of treatments, fibroblasts 
were washed twice with Dulbecco’s PBS, replenished with 
drug­free culture media, and then allowed to recover for 14 
d after initiation of the treatment. Dead cells that had de­
tached from the culture surface were removed and excluded 
from subsequent experiments.
Immunoblot analysis
Immunoblot protein analysis was performed according to 
standard protocols. Antibodies used included anti–human 
α­SMA (1A4; Dako), p16 (DCS­50; Abcam), STAT­1 (1/
Stat1; BD), phospho–STAT­1 (T
yr701), NF­κB p65 (C22B4), 
phospho­IκBα (Ser32/36; 5A5; Cell Signaling T
echnol­
ogy), anti­IκBα (6A920), and histone 2B (FL­126; Santa 
Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.).
Gene expression profiling and clustering analysis
Total RNA samples were extracted using TRIzol (In­
vitrogen) and then purified using an RNeasy mini­kit 
(QIA 
GEN). Gene expression analysis was performed on 
a GeneChip platform (Human Genome U133A 2.0 Plus; 
Affymetrix) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 
The gene expression data were deposited in NCBI’s Gene 
Expression Omnibus (GEO) and are accessible under ac­
cession no. GSE23399. Differentially expressed genes were 
selected using Student’s t test or Tukey’s honestly signifi­
cant difference test (P < 0.05; fold­change > 2×). The 
genes were functionally annotated using DAV 
ID, and the 
enriched functional gene categories identified were fur­
ther processed and displayed using Cytoscape. Hierarchical 
clustering of the selected genes was performed using Clus­
ter and TreeView software.
Quantitative real-time Pcr (qrt-Pcr) and ELI 
SA analyses
qRT­PCR analysis was performed on the amplified RNA 
using the LightCycler FastStart DNA Masterplus SYBR 
Green I kit (Roche) according to the manufacturer’s instruc­
tions. Oligonucleotide primers were designed using Light­
Cycler Probe Design software (Roche) or Primer Bank. 
Transcript expression was quantified by normalizing the gene 
of interest copy number (per microliter) to absolute levels 
of an endogenous, stably expressed reference gene, ribosomal 
protein L13a (RPL13A). ELI 
SA was performed using kits ac­
cording to the manufacturer’s instructions (R&D Systems).
3d co-culture assay
Breast carcinoma cells were co­cultivated with CAFs on 
top of a multicomponent 3D extracellular matrix hydrogel 
consisting of growth factor–reduced reconstituted basement 
membrane (Matrigel) and type I collagen (both from BD) at 
a 1:1 ratio (Tsai et al., 2005).
cell death assay
Cell death was analyzed by a two­color fluorescence cell vi­
ability assay by counting the nuclei of dead cells using CYT 
OX­orange dye (Invitrogen) and normalizing dead cells 
to total cell number estimated by counterstaining nuclei 
with Hoechst 33342 (Invitrogen). In selected experiments 
(Fig. 1 C), cells were stained with active caspase­3 (E83­77; 
Abcam) for the detection of apoptosis.
In vivo tumor models and analyses
In the orthotopic mouse models of desmoplastic breast can­
cer, NHRI­BC­011, HCC­1954, or MDA­MB­436 cells 
were lentivirally transduced by a GFP and FFLuc fusion 
vector (UBC­EGFP­T2A­Luc; System Biosciences), and 
GFP­positive cells were enriched by FACS. In the orthotopic 
breast cancer model, 5 × 105 cells carcinoma cells and 106 
CAFs in 100 µl (1:1 Matrigel/cells) were inoculated into the 
mammary fat pads of female NOG mice or HSC­hu­NOG 
mice (National Institute of Infectious Diseases and Vaccinol­
ogy, Taiwan). Successful engraftment of HSCs was validated 
by determining the titers of human IgM and IgG and ac­
cessing human CD45+, CD3+, and CD19+ cells in the pe­
ripheral blood at 8–12 wk after HSC engrafting. In selected 
experiments (Figs. 4 D and 7 D), the cells were inoculated 
subcutaneously into the flanks of 8­wk­old female nude mice 
(National Laboratory Animal Center, National Applied Re­
search Laboratories, Taiwan). In the orthotopic mouse model 
of desmoplastic PDAC, 5 × 105 FFLuc­transduced PANC­1 
PDAC cells (ATCC) and 106 PSCs were inoculated into the 
pancreatic tail of NOG mice or HSC­hu­NOG mice. In 
selective experiments, the mice were given 0.5 mg/kg/day 
CXCR­2 inhibitor SB225002 by intraperitoneal injections 2 
d before and after chemotherapy treatments. Tumor mass was 
quantified weekly by bioluminescence (IVIS Imaging System; 
Caliper Life Sciences) according to the manufacturer’s direc­
tions. Protocols for animal care and experimentation were ap­
 2985
JEM Vol. 213, No. 13
proved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee 
of the National Health Research Institutes, Taiwan, and were 
adhered to the National Institutes of Health Guide for the 
Care and Use of Laboratory Animals.
In the PDX breast tumor model, NOD­SCID γ 
(NSG) mice bearing PDX breast tumors (TM00999) de­
rived from a triple­negative (ER−PR−HER2−) breast tumor 
were purchased from The Jackson Laboratory. When tumors 
became palpable, the mice were administered with MTD­ 
or LDM­doxorubicin or vehicle intraperitoneally accord­
ing to the protocol described in Fig. 7 C, and the tumors 
were calipered weekly to monitor growth kinetics. Tumor 
volumes were calculated using the formula 0.5 × length × 
 
(width)2. The animals were euthanized 31 d after initiation 
 
of the treatments.
LcM
LCM of breast tumor tissues obtained from the TMH cohort 
(Table S1) was performed as previously described (Finak et 
al., 2008) with modifications. In brief, three 7­µm sections 
each were serially cut from snap­frozen tumor tissues, placed 
onto a polyethylene naphthalate membrane slide, and stained 
with a HistoGene LCM Staining kit to isolate distinct CAF­ 
or cancer cell–enriched regions, as identified by an expert pa­
thologist (W
.­Y
. Chen), by using the 
Veritas automated LCM 
system (Arcturus Engineering). Approximately 1,500 cells 
were collected onto the Capsure Macro cap, and the RNA 
sample was extracted using a Picopure RNA Isolation kit. 
qRT
­PCR assay was performed as described.
transwell invasion assay
Cancer cell– or PMA (5 nM × 72 h)­primed U937 cells 
(for in vitro macrophage differentiation) were seeded on 
Transwell inserts (BD) with a thin layer of growth factor–re­
duced Matrigel (BD) coating with CAFs seeded in the lower 
compartments of the Transwell. After an incubation period of 
12 h, the cells that invaded through the insert membrane were 
fixed, stained with CYT 
OX­green (Invitrogen), and counted 
using a fluorescence microscope.
Immunofluorescent staining and confocal imaging
Immunofluorescent staining of cells grown on culture plastics 
was performed using standard protocols. Whole­culture im­
munofluorescence staining of cells grown in 3D co­culture 
was executed as previously described (Lee et al., 2007). Con­
focal imaging was performed using a confocal microscope 
system (Digital Eclipse C1; Nikon).
Immunohistochemical staining
Formalin­fixed, paraffin­embedded human or mouse tumor 
tissues were processed using standard protocols, stained 
with anti–α­SMA (for detection of CAFs; α sm­1; Abcam), 
anti­F4/80 (for detection of TAMs; Hycult Biotech), anti–
Fizz­1 (for detection of M2­subtype TAMs; Abcam), or 
anti–p–STAT­1 (for detection in CAFs; Cell Signaling T
ech­
nology) and then detected by using a Dako EnVision kit. All 
staining was evaluated by an expert pathologist (W
.­Y
. Chen).
reporter assay
Lentivirus­mediated expression of the STAT­1 or NF­κB lu­
ciferase reporter vector as well as the reporter assay were per­
formed according to the provider’s recommendations (Cignal 
Lenti Reporter; SABiosciences).
Manipulation of gene expression
Functional inhibition of STAT­1 or NF­κB activity in CAFs 
was achieved by generating lentiviral expression constructs 
for a phosphorylation­deficient mutant of STAT
­1–super­re­
pressor (STAT­1–SR; STAT­1–SRpLVX­puro–STAT­1–SR), 
or a phosphorylation­resistant mutant of IκBα (pLVX­puro­
IκB α­SR mutant; NFK 
BIA­SR; Kuperwasser et al., 2004) 
and infecting them in minimally passaged NHRI­BCAF­011 
CAFs. pLVX­puro–STAT­1–SR was generated by subclon­
ing eGFP–STAT­1–Y701F (Addgene) into the pLVX­IRES­
puro (Takara Bio Inc.), which was followed by a serine for 
leucine substation at amino acid 706 (L706S) to impair the 
phosphorylation, homodimerization, and nuclear transloca­
tion of STAT
­1 (Dupuis et al., 2001). Lentivirus production 
and cell infection were performed according to the manufac­
turer’s protocols (Takara Bio Inc.). The human B cell CLL/
lymphoma 2 (Bcl­2) expression construct pBABE­puro­Bcl2 
was obtained from Addgene. Amphotropic retrovirus was 
produced in Phoenix ampho cells (gift from G. Nolan, Stan­
ford University, Stanford, CA) using the packaging vectors 
pCgp and pVSV­G to boost viral titer.
Flow cytometry and tumorsphere assays
Cancer cells were dissociated, antibody labeled (1–2 µg per 
106 cells × 1 h), and resuspended in HBSS/2% FBS as pre­
viously described (Al­Hajj et al., 2003; Li et al., 2007). The 
antibodies used include APC–anti­CD44, PE–anti­CD44, 
FITC–anti­CD24, Alexa Fluor 647–anti­CD24 (all from 
BD), APC–anti­CD133 (Miltenyi Biotec), and anti­CD298 
(LNH­94; BioLegend). Flow cytometry was done using 
a FAC 
SCanto II flow cytometer (BD) with the electronic 
gating set according to cells stained with the corresponding 
isotype­matched control IgG. In selected experiments, can­
cer cells were cultured in the presence of 1 µM SB225002 
(EMD Millipore) or a neutralizing antibody directed against 
10 µg/ml CXCL­1 (clone 20326; R&D Systems), 10 µg/
ml CXCL­2 (Abcam), 10 µg/ml CXCL­5 (R&D Systems), 
or 10 µg/ml CXCL­6 (clone 60910; R&D Systems) before 
the flow cytometry analysis. The ALD 
EFL 
UOR assay (STE 
MCE 
LL 
T
echnologies) was performed according to the man­
ufacturer’s recommendation.
T
o assess the tumorsphere formation efficiency of TICs, 
CD44+CD24low/− cells and CD133+CD44+ cells were FACS 
sorted from breast cancer cells and PDAC cells, respectively, 
using a FAC 
SAria III cell sorter (BD). The tumorsphere assay 
for breast 
TICs was performed using the MammoCult Human 
 Metronomic chemotherapy and ELR chemokines | Chan et al.
2986
Medium kit (STE 
MCE 
LL T
echnologies). The tumorsphere 
assay for pancreatic TICs was performed as previously de­
scribed (Arensman et al., 2014). For limiting dilution assay, 
CD44+CD24low/− cells were plated in limiting dilution (200, 
100, and 50 cells per well) in 96­well plates in the respective 
culture media. 
The presence of spheres was evaluated after 5 d.
Statistical analysis
The statistical programming language R and SPSS 10.0 
software were used to conduct the statistical analysis of our 
data. A two­tailed Student’s t test was used for simple signif­
icance testing. Survival curves were generated using the Ka­
plan­Meier method. The curves were plotted and compared 
using the log­rank test using Prism 5.02 (GraphPad Software). 
The data from the limiting dilution assay were analyzed and 
plotted using ELDA software. The likelihood ratio test and χ2 
test were used to assess the significance.
online supplemental material
Fig. S1 shows the gating strategy and flow cytometric analy­
sis of CD44+CD24−/low breast carcinoma cells. Fig. S2 shows 
the strategy and flow cytometric analysis of CD44+CD24−/low 
carcinoma cells in PDX breast tumors. Fig. S3 shows the gat­
ing strategy and flow cytometric analysis of CD133+CD44+ 
PDAC cells. Fig. S4 shows the patterns of CD44 and CD133 
staining of primary SP­1 cells in the cancer cell/PSC co­cul­
ture. Table S1 shows clinical characteristics of the breast tu­
mors used for cell isolation and LCM experiments.
AcknowLEdGMEntS
This work was supported in part by grants from the Ministry of Science and 
Technology, Taiwan (MOST 102-2628-B-400-MY3, MOST 103-2314-B-400-019, 
MOST 104-2314-B-400-022-MY3, and MOST 105-2314-B-400-018-MY3 to K.K. 
Tsai), grants from the National Health Research Institutes, Taiwan (NHRI CA-
103-SP-01 and NHRI-014-A1-CASP01-014 to K.K. Tsai), grants from the US 
Department of Defense Breast Cancer Research Program (BC122990 to V.M. Weaver), 
a grant from Taipei Medical University, Wan Fang Hospital (104-wf-phd-01 to T.S. 
Chan), and grants from the National Cancer Institute at the National Institutes of 
Health, USA (R01 CA174929 and CA192914-01 to V.M. Weaver). S.S. Huang con-
ducted his thesis research under the auspices of the Graduate Program of Biotech-
nology in Medicine, National Tsing Hua University, and the National Health 
Research Institutes. 
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Submitted: 22 October 2015
Revised: 8 June 2016
Accepted: 21 October 2016
rEFErEncES
Al­Hajj, M., M.S. Wicha, A. Benito­Hernandez, S.J. Morrison, and M.F
. 
Clarke. 2003. Prospective identification of tumorigenic breast cancer 
cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 100:3983–3988. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.0530291100
Ali, S., and G. Lazennec. 2007. Chemokines: novel targets for breast cancer 
metastasis. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 26:401–420. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1007 
/s10555 
­007 
­9073 
­z
Arensman, M.D., A.N. Kovochich, R.M. Kulikauskas, A.R. Lay, P
.T. Yang, 
X. Li, T. Donahue, M.B. Major, R.T. Moon, A.J. Chien, and D.W
. 
Dawson. 2014. WNT7B mediates autocrine Wnt/β­catenin signaling 
and anchorage­independent growth in pancreatic adenocarcinoma. 
Oncogene. 33:899–908. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/onc 
.2013 
.23
Beck, B., G. Driessens, S. Goossens, K.K. Y
oussef, A. Kuchnio, A. Caauwe, 
P
.A. Sotiropoulou, S. Loges, G. Lapouge, A. Candi, et al. 2011. A vascular 
niche and a 
VEGF­Nrp1 loop regulate the initiation and stemness of skin 
tumours. Nature. 478:399–403. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nature10525
Bertolini, F
., S. Paul, P
. Mancuso, S. Monestiroli, A. Gobbi, Y
. Shaked, and 
R.S. Kerbel. 2003. Maximum tolerable dose and low­dose metronomic 
chemotherapy have opposite effects on the mobilization and viability of 
circulating endothelial progenitor cells. Cancer Res. 63:4342–4346.
Bocci, G., K.C. Nicolaou, and R.S. Kerbel. 2002. Protracted low­dose effects 
on human endothelial cell proliferation and survival in vitro reveal a 
selective antiangiogenic window for various chemotherapeutic drugs. 
Cancer Res. 62:6938–6943.
Bocci, G., G. Francia, S. Man, J. Lawler, and R.S. Kerbel. 2003. 
Thrombospondin 
1, a mediator of the antiangiogenic effects of low­dose metronomic 
chemotherapy. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 100:12917–12922. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.2135406100
Bruchard, M., G. Mignot, V
. Derangère, F
. Chalmin, A. Chevriaux, F
. Végran, 
W
. Boireau, B. Simon, B. Ryffel, J.L. Connat, et al. 2013. Chemotherapy­
triggered cathepsin B release in myeloid­derived suppressor cells 
activates the Nlrp3 inflammasome and promotes tumor growth. Nat. 
Med. 19:57–64. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nm 
.2999
Calabrese, C., H. Poppleton, M. Kocak, T.L. Hogg, C. Fuller, B. Hamner, E.Y
. 
Oh, M.W
. Gaber, D. Finklestein, M. Allen, et al. 2007. A perivascular 
niche for brain tumor stem cells. Cancer Cell. 11:69–82. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.ccr 
.2006 
.11 
.020
Chen, W
.J., C.C. Ho, Y
.L. Chang, H.Y
. Chen, C.A. Lin, T.Y
. Ling, S.L. Yu, 
S.S. Yuan, Y
.J. Chen, C.Y
. Lin, et al. 2014. Cancer­associated fibroblasts 
regulate the plasticity of lung cancer stemness via paracrine signalling. 
Nat. Commun. 5:3472.
Cheng, J.D., R.L. Dunbrack Jr., M. 
Valianou, A. Rogatko, R.K. Alpaugh, and 
L.M. Weiner. 2002. Promotion of tumor growth by murine fibroblast 
activation protein, a serine protease, in an animal model. Cancer Res. 
62:4767–4772.
Creighton, C.J., X. Li, M. Landis, J.M. Dixon, V
.M. Neumeister, A. Sjolund, 
D.L. Rimm, H. Wong, A. Rodriguez, J.I. Herschkowitz, et al. 2009. 
Residual breast cancers after conventional therapy display mesenchymal 
as well as tumor­initiating features. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. USA. 106:13820–
13825. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.0905718106
Daenen, L.G., J.M. Roodhart, M. van Amersfoort, M. Dehnad, W
. Roessingh, 
L.H. Ulfman, P
.W
. Derksen, and E.E. Voest. 2011. Chemotherapy 
enhances metastasis formation via VEG 
FR­1–expressing endothelial 
cells. Cancer Res. 71:6976–6985. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1158 
/0008 
­5472 
.CAN 
­11 
­0627
Dupuis, S., C. Dargemont, C. Fieschi, N. Thomassin, S. Rosenzweig, J. Harris, 
S.M. Holland, R.D. Schreiber, and J.L. Casanova. 2001. Impairment of 
mycobacterial but not viral immunity by a germline human STAT1 
mutation. Science. 293:300–303. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1126 
/science 
.1061154
Erez, N., M. Truitt, P
. Olson, S.T. Arron, and D. Hanahan. 2010. Cancer­
associated fibroblasts are activated in incipient neoplasia to orchestrate 
tumor­promoting inflammation in an NF­κB­dependent manner. 
Cancer Cell. 17:135–147. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.ccr 
.2009 
.12 
.041
Finak, G., N. Bertos, F
. Pepin, S. Sadekova, M. Souleimanova, H. Zhao, H. 
Chen, G. Omeroglu, S. Meterissian, A. Omeroglu, et al. 2008. Stromal 
gene expression predicts clinical outcome in breast cancer. Nat. Med. 
14:518–527. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nm1764
Fogli, S., R. Danesi, A. Gennari, S. Donati, P
.F
. Conte, and M. Del Tacca. 
2002. Gemcitabine, epirubicin and paclitaxel: pharmacokinetic and 
 2987
JEM Vol. 213, No. 13
pharmacodynamic interactions in advanced breast cancer. Ann. Oncol. 
13:919–927. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1093 
/annonc 
/mdf164
Folkins, C., S. Man, P
. Xu, Y
. Shaked, D.J. Hicklin, and R.S. Kerbel. 2007. 
Anticancer therapies combining antiangiogenic and tumor cell cytotoxic 
effects reduce the tumor stem­like cell fraction in glioma xenograft 
tumors. Cancer Res. 67:3560–3564. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1158 
/0008 
­5472 
.CAN 
­06 
­4238
Ghiringhelli, F
., C. Menard, P
.E. Puig, S. Ladoire, S. Roux, F
. Martin, E. 
Solary, A. Le Cesne, L. Zitvogel, and B. Chauffert. 2007. Metronomic 
cyclophosphamide regimen selectively depletes CD4+CD25+ regulatory 
T cells and restores T and NK effector functions in end stage cancer 
patients. Cancer Immunol. Immunother. 56:641–648. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1007 
/s00262 
­006 
­0225 
­8
Ginestier, C., M.H. Hur, E. Charafe­Jauffret, F
. Monville, J. Dutcher, M. 
Brown, J. Jacquemier, P
. Viens, C.G. Kleer, S. Liu, et al. 2007. ALDH1 is 
a marker of normal and malignant human mammary stem cells and a 
predictor of poor clinical outcome. Cell Stem Cell. 1:555–567. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.stem 
.2007 
.08 
.014
Gingis­Velitski, S., D. Loven, L. Benayoun, M. Munster, R. Bril, T. Voloshin, 
D. Alishekevitz, F
. Bertolini, and 
Y
. Shaked. 2011. Host response to short­
term, single­agent chemotherapy induces matrix metalloproteinase­9 
expression and accelerates metastasis in mice. Cancer Res. 71:6986–6996. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1158 
/0008 
­5472 
.CAN 
­11 
­0629
Goetz, J.G., S. Minguet, I. Navarro­Lérida, J.J. Lazcano, R. Samaniego, E. 
Calvo, M. Tello, T. Osteso­Ibáñez, T. Pellinen, A. Echarri, et al. 2011. 
Biomechanical remodeling of the microenvironment by stromal 
caveolin­1 favors tumor invasion and metastasis. Cell. 146:148–163. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cell 
.2011 
.05 
.040
Grunewald, R., H. Kantarjian, M. Du, K. Faucher, P
. 
Tarassoff, and 
W
. Plunkett. 
1992. Gemcitabine in leukemia: a phase I clinical, plasma, and cellular 
pharmacology study. J. Clin. Oncol. 10:406–413.
Hasnis, E., D. Alishekevitz, S. Gingis­Veltski, R. Bril, E. Fremder, T. Voloshin, 
Z. Raviv, A. Karban, and Y
. Shaked. 2014. Anti­Bv8 antibody and 
metronomic gemcitabine improve pancreatic adenocarcinoma treatment 
outcome following weekly gemcitabine therapy. Neoplasia. 16:501–510. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.neo 
.2014 
.05 
.011
Hidalgo, M., F
. Amant, A.V
. Biankin, E. Budinská, A.T. Byrne, C. Caldas, R.B. 
Clarke, S. de Jong, J. Jonkers, G.M. Mælandsmo, et al. 2014. Patient­
derived xenograft models: an emerging platform for translational cancer 
research. Cancer Discov. 4:998–1013. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1158 
/2159 
­8290 
.CD 
­14 
­0001
Hughes, R., B.Z. Qian, C. Rowan, M. Muthana, I. Keklikoglou, O.C. Olson, 
S. 
Tazzyman, S. Danson, C. Addison, M. Clemons, et al. 2015. Perivascular 
M2 macrophages stimulate tumor relapse after chemotherapy. Cancer Res. 
75:3479–3491. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1158 
/0008 
­5472 
.CAN 
­14 
­3587
Iliopoulos, D., H.A. Hirsch, G. 
Wang, and K. Struhl. 2011. Inducible formation 
of breast cancer stem cells and their dynamic equilibrium with non­stem 
cancer cells via IL6 secretion. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 108:1397–1402. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.1018898108
Jesnowski, R., D. Fürst, J. Ringel, 
Y
. Chen, A. Schrödel, J. Kleeff, A. Kolb, W
.D. 
Schareck, and M. Löhr. 2005. Immortalization of pancreatic stellate cells 
as an in vitro model of pancreatic fibrosis: deactivation is induced by 
matrigel and N­acetylcysteine. Lab. Invest. 85:1276–1291. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/labinvest 
.3700329
Jung, J.H., S.J. Lee, J. Kim, S. Lee, H.J. Sung, J. An, Y
. Park, and B.S. Kim. 
2015. CXCR2 and its related ligands play a novel role in supporting the 
pluripotency and proliferation of human pluripotent stem cells. Stem 
Cells Dev. 24:948–961. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1089 
/scd 
.2014 
.0381
Kalluri, R., and M. Zeisberg. 2006. Fibroblasts in cancer. Nat. Rev. Cancer. 
6:392–401. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nrc1877
Karnoub, A.E., A.B. Dash, A.P
. Vo, A. Sullivan, M.W
. Brooks, G.W
. Bell, A.L. 
Richardson, K. Polyak, R. 
Tubo, and R.A. 
Weinberg. 2007. Mesenchymal 
stem cells within tumour stroma promote breast cancer metastasis. 
Nature. 449:557–563. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nature06188
Kerbel, R.S., and A. Grothey. 2015. Gastrointestinal cancer: Rationale for 
metronomic chemotherapy in phase III trials. Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol. 
12:313–314. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nrclinonc 
.2015 
.89
Kerbel, R.S., and B.A. Kamen. 2004. 
The anti­angiogenic basis of metronomic 
chemotherapy. Nat. Rev. Cancer. 4:423–436. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/
nrc1369
Korkaya, H., S. Liu, and M.S. Wicha. 2011. Breast cancer stem cells, cytokine 
networks, and the tumor microenvironment. J. Clin. Invest. 121:3804–
3809. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1172 
/JCI57099
Korkaya, H., G.I. Kim, A. Davis, F
. Malik, N.L. Henry, S. Ithimakin, A.A. 
Quraishi, N. 
Tawakkol, R. D’Angelo, A.K. Paulson, et al. 2012. Activation 
of an IL6 inflammatory loop mediates trastuzumab resistance in HER2+ 
breast cancer by expanding the cancer stem cell population. Mol. Cell. 
47:570–584. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.molcel 
.2012 
.06 
.014
Kuperwasser, C., T. Chavarria, M. Wu, G. Magrane, J.W
. Gray, L. Carey, A. 
Richardson, and R.A. Weinberg. 2004. Reconstruction of functionally 
normal and malignant human breast tissues in mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
USA. 101:4966–4971. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.0401064101
Lawson, D.A., N.R. Bhakta, K. Kessenbrock, K.D. Prummel, Y
. Yu, K. Takai, 
A. Zhou, H. Eyob, S. Balakrishnan, C.Y
. Wang, et al. 2015. Single­cell 
analysis reveals a stem­cell program in human metastatic breast cancer 
cells. Nature. 526:131–135. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nature15260
Lee, G.Y
., P
.A. Kenny, E.H. Lee, and M.J. Bissell. 2007. Three­dimensional 
culture models of normal and malignant breast epithelial cells. Nat. 
Methods. 4:359–365. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nmeth1015
Levental, K.R., H. 
Yu, L. Kass, J.N. Lakins, M. Egeblad, J.T. Erler, S.F
. Fong, K. 
Csiszar, A. Giaccia, W
. Weninger, et al. 2009. Matrix crosslinking forces 
tumor progression by enhancing integrin signaling. Cell. 139:891–906. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cell 
.2009 
.10 
.027
Li, C., D.G. Heidt, P
. Dalerba, C.F
. Burant, L. Zhang, 
V
. Adsay, M. Wicha, M.F
. 
Clarke, and D.M. Simeone. 2007. Identification of pancreatic cancer 
stem cells. Cancer Res. 67:1030–1037. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1158 
/0008 
­5472 
.CAN 
­06 
­2030
Li, X., M.T. Lewis, J. Huang, C. Gutierrez, C.K. Osborne, M.F
. Wu, S.G. 
Hilsenbeck, A. Pavlick, X. Zhang, G.C. Chamness, et al. 2008. Intrinsic 
resistance of tumorigenic breast cancer cells to chemotherapy. J. Natl. 
Cancer Inst. 100:672–679. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1093 
/jnci 
/djn123
Liotta, L.A., and E.C. Kohn. 2001. 
The microenvironment of the tumour­host 
interface. Nature. 411:375–379. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/35077241
Liu, S., C. Ginestier, S.J. Ou, S.G. Clouthier, S.H. Patel, F
. Monville, H. 
Korkaya, A. Heath, J. Dutcher, C.G. Kleer, et al. 2011. Breast cancer 
stem cells are regulated by mesenchymal stem cells through cytokine 
networks. Cancer Res. 71:614–624. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1158 
/0008 
­5472 
.CAN 
­10 
­0538
Liu, S., Y
. Cong, D. Wang, Y
. Sun, L. Deng, Y
. Liu, R. Martin­Trevino, L. 
Shang, S.P
. McDermott, M.D. Landis, et al. 2014. Breast cancer stem cells 
transition between epithelial and mesenchymal states reflective of their 
normal counterparts. Stem Cell Rep. 2:78–91. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.stemcr 
.2013 
.11 
.009
Lotti, F
., A.M. Jarrar, R.K. Pai, M. Hitomi, J. Lathia, A. Mace, G.A. Gantt Jr., 
K. Sukhdeo, J. DeVecchio, A. 
Vasanji, et al. 2013. Chemotherapy activates 
cancer­associated fibroblasts to maintain colorectal cancer­initiating cells 
by IL­17A. J. Exp. Med. 210:2851–2872. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1084 
/jem 
.20131195
Loven, D., E. Hasnis, F
. Bertolini, and 
Y
. Shaked. 2013. Low­dose metronomic 
chemotherapy: from past experience to new paradigms in the treatment 
of cancer. Drug Discov. Today. 18:193–201. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.drudis 
.2012 
.07 
.015
Lutsiak, M.E., R.T. Semnani, R. De Pascalis, S.V
. Kashmiri, J. Schlom, 
and H. Sabzevari. 2005. Inhibition of CD4+25+ T regulatory cell 
 Metronomic chemotherapy and ELR chemokines | Chan et al.
2988
function implicated in enhanced immune response by low­dose 
cyclophosphamide. Blood. 105:2862–2868. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1182 
/
blood 
­2004 
­06 
­2410
McAllister, S.S., and R.A. Weinberg. 2014. The tumour­induced systemic 
environment as a critical regulator of cancer progression and metastasis. 
Nat. Cell Biol. 16:717–727. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/ncb3015
Nakasone, E.S., H.A. Askautrud, T. Kees, J.H. Park, V
. Plaks, A.J. Ewald, 
M. Fein, M.G. Rasch, Y
.X. Tan, J. Qiu, et al. 2012. Imaging tumor­
stroma interactions during chemotherapy reveals contributions of the 
microenvironment to resistance. Cancer Cell. 21:488–503. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.ccr 
.2012 
.02 
.017
Orimo, A., P
.B. Gupta, D.C. Sgroi, F
. Arenzana­Seisdedos, T. Delaunay, R. 
Naeem, V
.J. Carey, A.L. Richardson, and R.A. Weinberg. 2005. Stromal 
fibroblasts present in invasive human breast carcinomas promote tumor 
growth and angiogenesis through elevated SDF­1/CXCL12 secretion. 
Cell. 121:335–348. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cell 
.2005 
.02 
.034
Pasquier, E., M. Kavallaris, and N. André. 2010. Metronomic chemotherapy: 
new rationale for new directions. Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol. 7:455–465. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nrclinonc 
.2010 
.82
Rudnick, J.A., L.M. Arendt, I. Klebba, J.W
. Hinds, V
. Iyer, P
.B. Gupta, S.P
. 
Naber, and C. Kuperwasser. 2011. Functional heterogeneity of breast 
fibroblasts is defined by a prostaglandin secretory phenotype that 
promotes expansion of cancer­stem like cells. PLoS One. 6:e24605. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1371 
/journal 
.pone 
.0024605
Seifert, L., G. Werba, S. Tiwari, N.N. Giao Ly, S. Alothman, D. Alqunaibit, 
A. Avanzi, R. Barilla, D. Daley, S.H. Greco, et al. 2016. The necrosome 
promotes pancreatic oncogenesis via CXCL1 and Mincle­induced 
immune suppression. Nature. 532:245–249. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nature17403
Serebriiskii, I., R. Castelló­Cros, A. Lamb, E.A. Golemis, and E. Cukierman. 
2008. Fibroblast­derived 3D matrix differentially regulates the growth 
and drug­responsiveness of human cancer cells. Matrix Biol. 27:573–585. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.matbio 
.2008 
.02 
.008
Shaked, Y
., E. Henke, J.M. Roodhart, P
. Mancuso, M.H. Langenberg, M. 
Colleoni, L.G. Daenen, S. Man, P
. Xu, U. Emmenegger, et al. 2008. Rapid 
chemotherapy­induced acute endothelial progenitor cell mobilization: 
implications for antiangiogenic drugs as chemosensitizing agents. Cancer 
Cell. 14:263–273. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.ccr 
.2008 
.08 
.001
Sherman, M.H., R.T. Yu, D.D. Engle, N. Ding, A.R. Atkins, H. Tiriac, E.A. 
Collisson, F
. Connor, T. Van Dyke, S. Kozlov, et al. 2014. Vitamin D 
receptor­mediated stromal reprogramming suppresses pancreatitis and 
enhances pancreatic cancer therapy. Cell. 159:80–93. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cell 
.2014 
.08 
.007
Shiao, S.L., and L.M. Coussens. 2010. 
The tumor­immune microenvironment 
and response to radiation therapy. J. Mammary Gland Biol. Neoplasia. 
15:411–421. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1007 
/s10911 
­010 
­9194 
­9
Shree, T., O.C. Olson, B.T. Elie, J.C. Kester, A.L. Garfall, K. Simpson, K.M. 
Bell­McGuinn, E.C. Zabor, E. Brogi, and J.A. Joyce. 2011. Macrophages 
and cathepsin proteases blunt chemotherapeutic response in breast 
cancer. Genes Dev. 25:2465–2479. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1101 
/gad 
.180331 
.111
Sonnenberg, M., H. van der Kuip, S. Haubeis, P
. Fritz, W
. Schroth, G. Friedel, 
W
. Simon, T.E. Mürdter, and W
.E. Aulitzky. 2008. Highly variable 
response to cytotoxic chemotherapy in carcinoma­associated fibroblasts 
(CAFs) from lung and breast. BMC Cancer. 8:364. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1186 
/1471 
­2407 
­8 
­364
Struck, R.F
., D.S. Alberts, K. Horne, J.G. Phillips, Y
.M. Peng, and D.J. Roe. 
1987. Plasma pharmacokinetics of cyclophosphamide and its cytotoxic 
metabolites after intravenous versus oral administration in a randomized, 
crossover trial. Cancer Res. 47:2723–2726.
Sun, Y
., J. Campisi, C. Higano, T.M. Beer, P
. Porter, I. Coleman, L. True, 
and P
.S. Nelson. 2012. Treatment­induced damage to the tumor 
microenvironment promotes prostate cancer therapy resistance through 
WNT16B. Nat. Med. 18:1359–1368. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nm 
.2890
Tanaka, H., H. Matsushima, A. Nishibu, B.E. Clausen, and A. 
Takashima. 2009. 
Dual therapeutic efficacy of vinblastine as a unique chemotherapeutic 
agent capable of inducing dendritic cell maturation. Cancer Res. 
69:6987–6994. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1158 
/0008 
­5472 
.CAN 
­09 
­1106
te Poele, R.H., A.L. Okorokov, L. Jardine, J. Cummings, and S.P
. Joel. 2002. 
DNA damage is able to induce senescence in tumor cells in vitro and in 
vivo. Cancer Res. 62:1876–1883.
Tsai, K.K., E.Y
. Chuang, J.B. Little, and Z.M. 
Yuan. 2005. Cellular mechanisms 
for low­dose ionizing radiation­induced perturbation of the breast tissue 
microenvironment. Cancer Res. 65:6734–6744. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1158 
/0008 
­5472 
.CAN 
­05 
­0703
Tsuyada, A., A. Chow, J. Wu, G. Somlo, P
. Chu, S. Loera, T. Luu, A.X. Li, X. 
Wu, W
. Y
e, et al. 2012. CCL2 mediates cross­talk between cancer cells 
and stromal fibroblasts that regulates breast cancer stem cells. Cancer Res. 
72:2768–2779. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1158 
/0008 
­5472 
.CAN 
­11 
­3567
Twelves, C.J., N.A. Dobbs, M. Aldhous, P
.G. Harper, R.D. Rubens, and M.A. 
Richards. 1991. Comparative pharmacokinetics of doxorubicin given by 
three different schedules with equal dose intensity in patients with breast 
cancer. Cancer Chemother. Pharmacol. 28:302–307.
Vermeulen, L., F
. De Sousa E Melo, M. van der Heijden, K. Cameron, J.H. 
de Jong, T. Borovski, J.B. Tuynman, M. T
odaro, C. Merz, H. Rodermond, 
et al. 2010. Wnt activity defines colon cancer stem cells and is regulated 
by the microenvironment. Nat. Cell Biol. 12:468–476. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/ncb2048
Visvader, J.E., and G.J. Lindeman. 2008. Cancer stem cells in solid tumours: 
accumulating evidence and unresolved questions. Nat. Rev. Cancer. 
8:755–768. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nrc2499
Voloshin, T., D. Alishekevitz, L. Kaneti, V
. Miller, E. Isakov, I. Kaplanov, E. 
Voronov, E. Fremder, M. Benhar, M. Machluf, et al. 2015. Blocking IL1β 
pathway following paclitaxel chemotherapy slightly inhibits primary 
tumor growth but promotes spontaneous metastasis. Mol. Cancer Ther. 
14:1385–1394. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1158 
/1535 
­7163 
.MCT 
­14 
­0969
Wang, 
W
.Y
., C.C. Hsu, 
T.Y
. 
Wang, C.R. Li, 
Y
.C. Hou, J.M. Chu, C.T. Lee, M.S. 
Liu, J.J. Su, K.Y
. Jian, et al. 2013. A gene expression signature of epithelial 
tubulogenesis and a role for ASPM in pancreatic tumor progression. 
Gastroenterology. 145:1110–1120. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1053 
/j 
.gastro 
.2013 
.07 
.040
Yamauchi, K., M. Yang, K. Hayashi, P
. Jiang, N. Yamamoto, H. Tsuchiya, K. 
Tomita, A.R. Moossa, M. Bouvet, and R.M. Hoffman. 2008. Induction 
of cancer metastasis by cyclophosphamide pretreatment of host mice: an 
opposite effect of chemotherapy. Cancer Res. 68:516–520. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1158 
/0008 
­5472 
.CAN 
­07 
­3063
Zhang, M., A. Tsimelzon, C.H. Chang, C. Fan, A. Wolff, C.M. Perou, S.G. 
Hilsenbeck, and J.M. Rosen. 2015. Intratumoral heterogeneity in a 
Trp53­null mouse model of human breast cancer. Cancer Discov. 5:520–
533. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1158 
/2159 
­8290 
.CD 
­14 
­1101
