 Trans-ancestry meta-analyses identify rare and common variants 
associated with blood pressure and hypertension
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Corresponding authors: Joanna M M Howson, jmmh2@medschl.cam.ac.uk and Patricia B Munroe, p.b.munroe@qmul.ac.uk.
168Jointly supervised the work
URLs
Exome chip design information: http://genome.sph.umich.edu/wiki/Exome_Chip_Design
RareMetalWorker information: http://genome.sph.umich.edu/wiki/RAREMETALWORKER
Summary SNV association results: http://www.phenoscanner.medschl.cam.ac.uk
Databases used for variant annotation: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/SNP/ http://www.ensembl.org/info/docs/tools/index.html and 
http://evs.gs.washington.edu/EVS/
UCSC reference file used for annotation of variants with gene and exon information: http://hgdownload.soe.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/
hg19/database/refFlat.txt.gz
Databases used for pathway analysis: MAGENTA (https://www.broadinstitute.org/mpg/magenta/) and THOMSON REUTERS 
MetaCore™ Single Experiment Analysis workflow tool (http://thomsonreuters.com/en/products-services/pharma-life-sciences/
pharmaceutical-research/metacore.html).
Author contributions
Supervision and management of the project: JMHH and PBM. The following authors contributed to the drafting of the manuscript: 
JMMH, PBM, PSu, HW, ASB, FD, JPC, DRB, KW, MT, FWA, LVW, NJS, JD AKM, HY, CMM, NG, XS, TaT, DFF, MHs, OG, TF, 
VT. All authors critically reviewed and approved the final version of the manuscript. Statistical analysis review: JMMH, PSu, FD, 
HW, JPC, RY, NM, PBM, LVW, HY, TF, EMi, ADM, AM, AM, EE, ASB, FWA, MJC, CF, TF, SEH, ASH, JEH, JL, GM, JM, NM, 
APM, APo, NJS, RAS, LS, KE, MT, VT, TVV, NV, KW, AMY, WZg, NG, CML, AKM, XS, TT. Central Data QC: JMMH, ASB, 
PSu, RY, FD, HW, JPC, TF, LVW, PBM, EMi, NM, CML, NG, XS, AKM. Central Data analysis: JMMH, PSu, FD, HW, JPC, NG, 
CML, AKM, XS. Pathway analysis and literature review: JMMH, DRB, PBM, MT, KW, VT, OG, AT, FWA. GWAS lookups, 
eQTL analysis, GRS, variant annotation and enrichment analyses: JMMH, ASB, DRB, JRS, DFF, FD, MHr, PBM, FWA, TT, 
CML, AKM, SBu. Study Investigators in alphabetical order by consortium (CHD Exome+, ExomeBP and GoT2D): DSA, PA, 
EA, DA, ASB, RC, JD, JF, IF, PF, JWJ, FKe, ASM, SFN, BGN, DS, NSa, JV, FWA, PIWB, MJB, MJC, JCC, JMC, IJD, GD, AFD, 
PE, TE, PWF, GG, PH, CH, KH, EI, MJ, FKa, SK, JSK, LLi, MIM, OM, AMe, ADM, APM, PBM, MEN, SP, CP, OPo, DP, SR, OR, 
IR, VS, NJS, PSe, TDS, JMS, NJW, CJW, EZ, MB, IB, FSC, LG, TH, EKH, PJ, JKu, ML, TAL, AL, KLM, HO, OPe, RR, JT, MU. 
Study Phenotyping in alphabetical order by consortium (CHD Exome+, ExomeBP and GoT2D): PA, DA, SBl, MC, JF, JWJ, 
FKe, KK, SFN, BGN, CJP, AR, MS, NSa, JV, WZo, RAB, MJB, MJC, JCC, JMC, AFD, ASFD, LAD, TE, AF, GG, GH, PH, AS H, 
OLH, EI, MJ, FK, JSK, LLi, LLa, GM, AMc, PM, AMe, RMg, MJN, MEN, OPo, NP, FR, VS, NJS, TDS, AVS, JMS, MT, AV, NV, 
NJW, TiT, CC, LLH, MEJ, AK, PK, JL DPS, SM, ERBP, AS, TS, HMS, BT. Study Data QC and analysis in alphabetical order by 
consortium (CHD Exome+, ExomeBP and GoT2D): ASB, AJMC, JMMH, JK, SFN, BGN, MMN, SP, MP, PSu, ST, GV, SMW, RY, 
FWA, JPC, FD, AF, TF, CH, AMc, AMj, APM, PBM, CP, WR, FR, NJS, MT, VT, HW, HY, NG, AKM, XS. Exome chip data QC in 
alphabetical order by consortium (CHD Exome+, ExomeBP and GoT2D): ASB, JMMH, SFN, BGN, PSu, RY, FWA, PIWB, 
AIFB, JCC, JPC, PD, LAD, FD, EE, CF, TF, SEH, PH, SSH, KH, JEH, EK, AMj, GM, JM, NM, EMi, AMo, APM, PBM, CPN, MJN, 
CP, AP, WR, NRR, RAS, NS, LS, KES, MDT, VT, TVV, TVV, NV, HW, HY, AMY, EZ, WZg, NG, CML, AKM, XS. Exome chip 
Data analysis in alphabetical order by consortium (CHD Exome+, ExomeBP and GoT2D): JMMH, PSu, RY, FWA, PIWB, 
AIFB, RAB, MJC, JCC, JPC, PD, LAD, PE, EE, CF, TF, PWF, SF, CG, SEH, PH, ASH, CH, OLH, JEH, EI, MJ, FKa, JSK, DCML, 
LLi, JL, GM, RMr, JM, NM, MIM, PM, OM, CM, EMi, AMo, APM, RMg, PBM, CPN, MJN, TO, APo, APa, WR, NRR, NJS, RAS, 
NS, LS, TDS, KES, MDT, ET, VT, TVV, NV, LVW, NJW, HW, HY, AMY, EZ, HZ, WZg, LLB, APG, NG, MHs, JRH, AUJ, JBJ, 
CML, AKM, NN, XS, AS, AJS. GRS lookups: AEJ, EMa, HFM, HL, HMH, JFF, MTr, RSV, WL.
Conflict of interests
N. P. has received financial support from several pharmaceutical companies that manufacture either blood pressure lowering or lipid 
lowering agents, or both, and consultancy fees.
S. K. has received Research Grant-Merck, Bayer, Aegerion; SAB-Catabasis, Regeneron Genetics Center, Merck, Celera; Equity-San 
Therapeutics, Catabasis; Consulting-Novartis, Aegerion, Bristol Myers-Squibb, Sanofi, AstraZeneca, Alnylam.
P. Sever has received research awards from Pfizer Inc.
A. Malarstig and M. Uria-Nickelsen are full time employees of Pfizer.
D. Reily and M. Hoek are full time employees of Merck and co Inc.
M.J. Caulfield is Chief Scientist for Genomics England a UK Government company.
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Europe PMC Funders Group
Author Manuscript
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 12.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Genet. 2016 October ; 48(10): 1151–1161. doi:10.1038/ng.3654.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 A full list of authors and affiliations appears at the end of the article.
# These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract
High blood pressure is a major risk factor for cardiovascular disease and premature death. 
However, there is limited knowledge on specific causal genes and pathways. To better understand 
the genetics of blood pressure, we genotyped 242,296 rare, low-frequency and common genetic 
variants in up to ~192,000 individuals, and used ~155,063 samples for independent replication. We 
identified 31 novel blood pressure or hypertension associated genetic regions in the general 
population, including three rare missense variants in RBM47, COL21A1 and RRAS with larger 
effects (>1.5mmHg/allele) than common variants. Multiple rare, nonsense and missense variant 
associations were found in A2ML1 and a low-frequency nonsense variant in ENPEP was 
identified. Our data extend the spectrum of allelic variation underlying blood pressure traits and 
hypertension, provide new insights into the pathophysiology of hypertension and indicate new 
targets for clinical intervention.
Introduction
High blood pressure (BP) or hypertension is a highly prevalent chronic disorder. It is 
estimated to be responsible for a larger proportion of global disease burden and premature 
mortality than any other disease risk factor1. Elevated systolic and/or diastolic BP increases 
the risk of several cardiovascular disorders including stroke, coronary heart disease (CHD), 
heart failure, peripheral arterial disease and abdominal aortic aneurysms2. BP is a complex, 
heritable, polygenic phenotype for which genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have 
identified over 67 genetic regions associated with BP and/or hypertension to date3–11. 
These variants are common (minor allele frequency, MAF≥0.05), mostly map to intronic or 
intergenic regions, with the causal alleles and genes not readily identified due to linkage 
disequilibrium (LD)4,5, and explain only ~2% of trait variance12. Low-frequency 
(0.01<MAF<0.05) and rare (MAF≤0.01) single nucleotide variants (SNVs), predominantly 
unexplored by GWAS may have larger phenotypic effects than common SNVs13, and may 
help to explain the missing heritability, and identify causative genes as demonstrated 
previously14.
To identify novel coding variants and loci influencing BP traits and hypertension we 
performed the largest meta-analysis to date that included a total of ~350,000 individuals, 
directly genotyped with the Exome chip. The Exome chip contains ~240,000 mostly rare 
and low-frequency variants (Methods). A single-variant discovery analysis was performed, 
and candidate SNVs were taken forward for validation using independent replication 
samples. Gene-based tests were used to identify BP associated genes harboring multiple rare 
variant associations. We next assessed whether the newly identified BP associated SNVs 
were associated with expression levels of nearby genes, and tested these variants in 
aggregate for a causal association of BP with other cardiovascular traits and risk factors. Our 
findings highlight the contribution of rare variants in the aetiology of blood pressure in the 
general population, and provide new insights into the pathophysiology of hypertension.
Surendran et al.
Page 2
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Results
Discovery of single variant BP associations
We genotyped 192,763 individuals from 51 studies, and assessed association of 242,296 
SNVs with diastolic BP (DBP), systolic BP (SBP), pulse pressure (PP) and hypertension 
(HTN; Supplementary Tables 1, 2 and 3; Methods). An overview of the SNV discovery 
study design is given in Figure 1. A fixed effects meta-analysis for each trait was performed 
using study-level association summary statistics from i) samples of European (EUR) 
ancestry (up to 165,276 individuals), and ii) a trans-ethnic meta-analysis of the EUR and 
additional South Asian (SAS) ancestry samples (EUR_SAS; up to 192,763 individuals). Two 
analyses of DBP, SBP and PP were performed, one in which the trait was inverse normal 
transformed and a second in which the raw phenotype was analysed. Both sets of results 
were consistent (Methods), therefore to minimise sensitivity to deviations from normality in 
the analysis of rare variants, the results from the analyses of the transformed traits were used 
for discovery. Strong correlations between the BP traits were observed across studies 
(Methods), hence no adjustment of significance thresholds for independent trait testing was 
applied.
The discovery meta-analyses identified 51 genomic regions with genome-wide significant 
(GWS) evidence of association with at least one of the four BP traits tested (P<5x10-8; 
Supplementary Table 4). There were 46 regions associated in the EUR_SAS samples, of 
which 14 were novel (Supplementary Figure 1). An additional five regions were GWS in the 
EUR only meta-analyses of which three were novel (Supplementary Figure 2). In total, 17 
genomic regions were identified that were GWS for at least one BP trait that have not been 
previously reported.
Replication of single variant BP associations
Next we sought support for our findings, in an independent replication dataset comprising of 
18 studies, 15 of which were from the Cohorts for Heart and Aging Research in Genomic 
Epidemiology+ (CHARGE+) exome chip blood pressure consortium (Figure 1; Liu et al. 
Nature Genetics, submitted). Variants were selected for replication first using the larger 
(transformed) EUR_SAS data, with additional variants from the (transformed) EUR data 
also selected. SNVs were selected if they mapped outside of known BP genomic regions and 
had MAF≥0.05 and P<1x10-5 or MAF<0.05 and P<1x10-4 with at least one BP trait, i.e. 
choosing a lower significance threshold for the selection of rare variants (full details of the 
selection criteria are provided in the Methods). In total 81 candidate SNVs were selected for 
replication (Supplementary Table 5). Eighty variants were selected from EUR_SAS 
(transformed) results and one SNV at the ZNF101 locus from the EUR (transformed) 
analyses. The results for EUR_SAS and EUR were consistent (association statistics were 
correlated, ρ=0.9 across ancestries for each of the traits). Of the 81 variants, 30 SNVs were 
selected for association with DBP as the primary trait, 26 for SBP, 19 for PP and 6 for HTN, 
with the primary trait defined as the BP trait with the smallest association P-value in the 
EUR-SAS discovery analyses.
Surendran et al.
Page 3
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Meta-analyses were performed on results from analyses of untransformed DBP, SBP, PP and 
HTN (as only results of untransformed traits were available from CHARGE+) in (i) up to 
125,713 individuals of EUR descent, and (ii) up to 155,063 individuals of multiple 
ethnicities (4,632 of Hispanic descent, 22,077 of African American descent, 2,641 SAS 
samples with the remainder EUR; Figure 1). Given that a large proportion of the ancestries 
in the trans-ethnic meta-analyses were not included in our discovery samples, we used the 
EUR meta-analyses as the main data set for replication, but we also report any additional 
associations identified within the larger trans-ethnic dataset.
Novel BP-SNV associations were identified based on two criteria (Figure 1; Methods). 
Firstly, replication of the primary BP trait-SNV association was sought at a Bonferroni 
adjusted P-value threshold in the replication data (P≤6.17x10-4, assuming α=0.05 for 81 
SNVs tested and same direction of effect; Methods) without the need for GWS. Secondly, 
meta-analyses of discovery and replication results across all four (untransformed) BP traits 
were performed to assess the overall level of support across all samples for the 81 candidate 
SNVs; those BP-SNV associations that were GWS (with statistical support in the replication 
studies; P<0.05 and the same direction of effect) were also declared as novel.
Seventeen SNV-BP associations formally replicated with concordant direction of effect at a 
Bonferroni adjusted significance level for the primary trait. Fourteen were in the EUR meta-
analyses, and amongst these was a rare non-synonymous (ns) SNV mapping to COL21A1 
(Table 1, Supplementary Table 6). Three associations were in the trans-ethnic meta-analyses, 
these included two rare nsSNVs in RBM47 and RRAS (Table 1, Supplementary Table 7; 
Methods).
In addition to the 17 SNV-BP trait associations that formally replicated, we identified 13 
further SNV-associations that were GWS in the combined (discovery and replication) meta-
analyses. Ten of these were GWS in the combined EUR analyses, (Table 2; Supplementary 
Tables 6 and 8a), and three were GWS in the combined trans-ethnic meta-analyses (Table 2; 
Supplementary Tables 7 and 8b).
This gives a total of 30 novel SNV-BP associations (15 SNV-DBP, 9 SNV-SBP and 6 SNV-
PP; Tables 1 and 2; Supplementary Figures 3 and 4). Five of the SNVs were GWS with 
more than one BP trait (Figure 2: Tables 1 and 2; Supplementary Table 8). Four loci 
(CERS5, TBX2, RGL3 and OBFC1) had GWS associations with HTN in addition to GWS 
associations with DBP and SBP. The PRKAG1 locus had GWS associations with both SBP 
and PP.
Conditional analyses were performed to identify secondary signals of association within the 
novel BP loci. The RAREMETALWORKER (RMW) package (Methods)15 allows 
conditional analyses to be performed using summary level data. Hence, analyses of the 
transformed primary traits and HTN were re-run in RMW across the discovery studies 
(Figure 3). The results of the RMW single variant tests were consistent with the initial 
discovery analyses (Supplementary Information). Given the RMW analyses were based on 
our discovery samples, the larger EUR-SAS data was used as the main analysis to increase 
power, but we also report any additional associations with evidence in EUR.
Surendran et al.
Page 4
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 We identified secondary independent signals of association in four loci, PREX1, PRKAG1 
and RRP1B within the EUR_SAS analyses and COL21A1 in the EUR analyses 
(Pconditional<1x10-4, Bonferroni adjusted for ~500 variants within each region; Methods; 
Supplementary Tables 9 and 10). Three independent association signals were identified in 
the MYH6 locus in the EUR_SAS analyses (Supplementary Table 11).
Gene-based BP associations
To improve statistical power to detect associations in genes harbouring rare variants, 
analytical methods that combine effects of variants across a gene into a single test have been 
devised and are implemented in the RMW package15. We applied the gene-based sequence 
kernel association test (SKAT)16 and Burden tests17 to the RMW dataset (MAF<0.05 or 
MAF<0.01; Figure 3; Methods). One previously unidentified BP gene (A2ML1) was 
associated with HTN (P= 7.73x10-7) in the EUR_SAS studies and also in EUR studies 
(Supplementary Table 12; Bonferroni-corrected threshold of significance P<2.8x10-6, after 
adjusting for 17,996 genes tested, Methods). The gene showed residual association with the 
primary BP trait after conditioning on the most associated SNV in the gene 
(Pconditional=5.00x10-4; Supplementary Table 12), suggesting that the association is due to 
multiple rare variants in the gene. One nonsense variant (rs199651558, p.Arg893*, 
MAF=3.5x10-4) was observed, and there were multiple missense variants (Figure 4). 
A2ML1 encodes alpha-2-macroglobulin-like 1 protein, and is a member of the alpha 
macroglobulin superfamily, which comprises protease inhibitors targeting a wide range of 
substrates. Mutations in this gene are associated with a disorder clinically related to Noonan 
syndrome, a developmental disorder which involves cardiac abnormalities18. We sought 
replication in the CHARGE+ studies for this gene, however there was no evidence of 
association with HTN (P= 0.45). Given the very low frequencies of the variants involved, 
however, studies in which the variants are polymorphic will be required to replicate the 
association with HTN. The DBH gene was found to be associated with DBP using the SKAT 
test (P=2.88x10-6). However, this was not due to multiple rare variants as the association 
was driven by rs77273740 (Supplementary Table 5) and the SNV was not validated in the 
replication samples.
Rare and common variant associations in established BP loci
Of the 67 established BP loci, 35 loci were on the Exome chip (N=43 SNVs or close proxies 
r2>0.7). All 43 SNVs had at least nominal evidence of association with BP in our discovery 
samples (P<0.01; Supplementary Table 13). We also assessed if any of the established BP 
loci contained coding variants that are associated with BP traits and in LD (r2>0.2) with the 
known BP variants on the Exome chip (Supplementary Table 13), using the 1000G phase 3 
release for LD annotation. Focusing on SNVs that were GWS for any BP trait from our 
transformed discovery data for either ancestry, there were 25 coding variants, of which 6 
were predicted to be damaging at loci labelled CDC25A, SLC39A8, HFE, ULK4, ST7L-
CAPZA1-MOV10 and CYP1A1-ULK3. Three of these are published variants at loci 
labelled SLC39A8, HFE and ST7-CAPZA1-MOV10. At CYP1A1-ULK3, the coding variant 
was in moderate LD with the reported variant, but was less significantly associated with 
DBP in our EUR_SAS dataset (P=2.24x10-8 compared to P=1.68x10-15 for the published 
variant). At the ULK4 locus the predicted damaging coding variant had similar association 
Surendran et al.
Page 5
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 as the published coding variant (predicted to be benign), and prior work has already 
indicated several associated nsSNVs in strong LD in ULK4 19. The nsSNV within the 
CDC25A locus (rs11718350 in SPINK8) had similar association with DBP as the intergenic 
published SNV in our EUR_SAS dataset (P=2.00x10-8 compared to P=2.27x10-8 for the 
published variant). Overall at least 5 of the known loci are consistent with having a coding 
causal variant.
Gene-based SKAT tests of all genes that map within 1 Mb of a previously reported SNV 
association (Supplementary Table 14), indicated no genes with multiple rare or low-
frequency variant associations. Single variant conditional analyses showed that rs33966350, 
a rare nonsense variant in ENPEP (MAF=0.01) was associated with SBP 
(Pconditional=1.61x10-5) in the EUR_SAS samples (Supplementary Tables 14 and 15; 
Methods) independently of the known SNV (rs6825911). ENPEP encodes aminopeptidase A 
(APA) an enzyme of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) that converts 
angiotensin II (AngII) to AngIII.
There were no other established loci with convincing low-frequency or rare SNV 
associations in the EUR_SAS samples. However, HOXC4, had evidence of a second 
independent signal with a rare missense SNV in EUR samples (rs78731604; MAF=0.005, 
Pconditional= 5.76x10-5; Supplementary Table 15). The secondary signal in the HOXC4 
region, mapped to CALCOCO1, ~300kb from the known SNV. The gene association 
(MAF≤0.01, P=2.37x10-5) was below the required significance threshold and attributable to 
rs78731604, which is not predicted to have detrimental effects on protein structure. 
Therefore, replication of this association is required. Three loci (ST7L-CAPZA1-MOV10, 
FIGN-GRB14, and TBX5-TBX3) had evidence of a second independent signal in the region 
in EUR_SAS samples with a common variant (Pconditional<1x10-4; Supplementary Table 15) 
that has not been previously reported.
Having identified 30 novel loci associated with BP traits, as well as additional new 
independent SNVs at four novel loci and five known loci, we calculated the percent of the 
trait variance explained (Methods). This was 2.08%/2.11%/1.15% for SBP/DBP/PP for the 
43 previously reported BP-SNVs covered in our dataset, increasing to 3.38%/3.41%/2.08% 
respectively with the inclusion of the 30 lead SNVs from novel loci, plus new independent 
SNV-BP associations identified from novel and known loci.
Effect of BP SNVs on cardiovascular traits & risk factors
Amongst our novel BP-SNV associations, some have previously been reported to be 
associated with other cardiovascular traits and risk factors (Supplementary Table 16); these 
include coronary heart disease (CHD: PHACTR1, ABO)20,21, QT interval (RNF207)22, 
heart rate (MYH6)23, and cholesterol levels (2q36.3, ABO, ZNF101)24.
To test the impact of BP variants on cardiovascular endpoints and risk factors we created 
three weighted genetic risk scores (GRS) according to SBP/DBP/PP based on the newly 
identified and previously published BP variants (up to N=125; Methods). The GRS models 
were used to test the causal effect of BP on the following traits: ischemic stroke (including 
the subtypes, cardiometabolic, large and small vessel 25), CHD, heart failure,26 left 
Surendran et al.
Page 6
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 ventricular mass27, left ventricular wall thickness27, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol 
(HDL-c), low-density lipoprotein (LDL-c), triglycerides, total cholesterol, body mass index 
(BMI), waist-hip ratio adjusted BMI, height and estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) 
(Methods). As expected, BP was positively associated with increased CHD risk (OR [95% 
CI]=1.39[1.22-1.59] per 10mmHg increase in SBP, P=6.07×10-7; 1.62[1.28-2.05] per 
10mmHg increase in DBP, P=5.99x10-5; 1.70[1.34-2.16] per 10mmHg increase in PP, 
P=1.20x10-5; Table 3), and increased risk of ischemic stroke (OR [95% CI]=1.93[1.47-2.55] 
per 10mmHg increase in DBP, P=2.81×10-6; 1.57[1.35-1.84] per 10mmHg increase in SBP, 
P=1.16×10-8; 2.12[1.58-2.84] per 10mmHg increase in PP, P=5.35x10-7). The positive 
association with ischemic stroke was primarily due to large vessel stroke (Table 3). DBP and 
SBP were also positively associated with left ventricular mass (9.57 [3.98-15.17] gram 
increase per 10mmHg increase in DBP, P=8.02x10-4 and 5.13 [1.77-8.48] gram increase per 
10mmHg increase in SBP, P=0.0027) and left ventricular wall thickness (0.10 [0.06-0.13] 
cm increase per 10mmHg increase in DBP, P=1.88x10-8 and 0.05 [0.03-0.07] cm increase 
per 10mmHg increase in SBP, P=5.52x10-6, Table 3). There was no convincing evidence to 
support the BP associated variants having an effect on lipid levels (P>0.1), BMI (P>0.005), 
waist hip ratio adjusted BMI (P>0.1), height (P>0.06), eGFR (P>0.02) or heart failure 
(P>0.04). The causal associations with CHD, stroke, and left ventricular measures augment 
the results from a previous association analysis using 29 BP variants28. Our data strongly 
support the previous observations of no causal relationship between BP and eGFR. Lack of 
evidence of a BP effect with heart failure may only be due to lack of power, as the 
association was in the expected direction.
Possible functional variants at BP loci and candidate genes
Twenty-six of our newly discovered BP associated SNVs had MAF≥0.05 and therefore due 
to extensive LD with other SNVs not genotyped on the Exome array, identifying the causal 
genes requires additional information. If a SNV is associated with increased or decreased 
expression of a particular gene, i.e. it is an expression quantitative trait locus (eQTL) this 
suggests the gene on which the SNV acts could be in the causal pathway. To help identify 
potential candidate causal genes in the novel BP loci (Supplementary Table 9), information 
from publicly available eQTL databases was investigated (MuTHER for LCL, adipose and 
skin and GTEx for nine tissues including the heart and tibial artery; Methods).
The DBP increasing allele of the nsSNV, rs7302981-A, was associated with increased 
expression of CERS5 in: LCLs (PMuTHER=3.13x10-72) skin (PMuTHER=2.40x10-58) adipose 
(PMuTHER=2.87x10-54) and nerve (PGTEx=4.5x10-12) (Supplementary Figure 5). Additional 
testing (Methods) provided no evidence against colocalisation of the eQTL and DBP 
association signals, implicating CERS5 as a candidate causal gene for this DBP locus. 
CERS5 (LAG1 homolog, ceramide synthase 5) is involved in the synthesis of ceramide, a 
lipid molecule involved in several cellular signaling pathways. Cers5 knockdown has been 
shown to reduce cardiomyocyte hypertrophy in mouse models29. However, it is unclear 
whether the blood pressure raising effects at this locus are the cause or result of any potential 
effects on cardiac hypertrophy. Future studies investigating this locus in relation to 
parameters of cardiac hypertrophy and function (e.g. ventricular wall thickness) should help 
address this question.
Surendran et al.
Page 7
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 The DBP raising allele of the nsSNV (rs867186-A) was associated with increased 
expression of PROCR in adipose tissue (PMuTHER=3.24x10-15) and skin 
(PMuTHER=1.01x10-11) (Supplementary Figure 5). There was no evidence against 
colocalisation of the eQTL and DBP association thus supporting PROCR as a candidate 
causal gene. PROCR encodes the Endothelial Protein C receptor, a serine protease involved 
in the blood coagulation pathway, and rs867186 has previously been associated with 
coagulation and haematological factors.30,31 The PP decreasing allele of, rs10407022-T, 
which is predicted to have detrimental effects on protein structure (Methods) was associated 
with increased expression of AMH in muscle (PGTEx=9.95x10-15), thyroid 
(PGTEx=8.54x10-7), nerve (PGTEx=7.15x10-8), tibial artery (PGTEx=6.46x10-9), adipose 
(PGTEx=4.69x10-7), and skin (PGTEx=5.88x10-8) (Supplementary Figure 5). There was no 
evidence against colocalisation of the eQTL and PP association, which supports AMH as a 
candidate causal gene for PP. Low AMH levels have been previously associated with 
hypertensive status in women with the protein acting as a marker of ovarian reserve32. The 
intergenic SBP raising allele of rs4728142-A was associated with reduced expression of 
IRF5 in skin (PMuTHER=5.24x10-31) and LCLs (PMuTHER=1.39x10-34), whole blood 
(PGTEx=3.12x10-7) and tibial artery (PGTEx=1.71x10-7).
Three novel rare nsSNVs were identified that map to RBM47, RRAS (both associated with 
SBP) and COL21A1 (associated with PP). They had larger effect sizes than common variant 
associations (>1.5mmHg per allele; Supplementary Figure 6) and were predicted to have 
detrimental effects on protein structure (Supplementary Table 16; Methods). In RBM47, 
rs35529250 (p.Gly538Arg) is located in a highly conserved region of the gene and was most 
strongly associated with SBP (MAF=0.008; +1.59 mmHg per T allele; P=5.90x10-9). 
RBM47 encodes the RNA binding motif protein 47 and is responsible for post-
transcriptional regulation of RNA, through its direct and selective binding with the molecule.
33 In RRAS, rs61760904 (p.Asp133Asn) was most strongly associated with SBP 
(MAF=0.007; +1.51 mmHg per T allele; P=8.45x10-8). RRAS encodes a small GTPase 
belonging to the Ras subfamily of proteins H-RAS, N-RAS, and K-RAS and has been 
implicated in actin cytoskeleton remodelling, and controlling cell proliferation, migration 
and cycle processes34. The nsSNV in COL21A1 (rs200999181, p.Gly665Val) was most 
strongly associated with PP (MAF=0.001; +3.14 mmHg per A allele; P=1.93x10-9). 
COL21A1 encodes the collagen alpha-1 chain precursor of type XXI collagen, a member of 
the FACIT (fibril-associated collagens with an interrupted triple helix) family of proteins35. 
The gene is detected in many tissues, including the heart and aorta. Based on our results, 
these three genes represent good candidates for functional follow-up. However, due to the 
incomplete coverage of all SNVs across the region on the Exome chip, it is possible that 
other non-genotyped SNVs may better explain some of these associations. We therefore 
checked for variants in LD (r2>0.3) with these three rare nsSNVs in the UK10K + 1000G 
dataset36 to ascertain if there are other candidate SNVs at these loci (Supplementary Table 
17). There were no SNVs within 1Mb of the RBM47 locus in LD with the BP associated 
SNV. At the COL21A1 locus there were only SNVs in moderate LD, and these were 
annotated as intronic, intergenic or in the 5’UTR. At the RRAS locus, there were two SNVs 
in strong LD with the BP associated SNV, which both mapped to introns of SCAF1 and are 
not predicted to be damaging. All SNVs in LD at both loci were rare as expected 
Surendran et al.
Page 8
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 (Supplementary Table 17) supporting a role for rare variants. Hence, the rare BP associated 
nsSNVs at RBM47, COL21A1 and RRAS remain the best causal candidates.
Pathway and network analyses
To identify connected gene sets and pathways implicated by the BP associated genes we 
used Meta-Analysis Gene-set Enrichment of variant Associations (MAGENTA)37 and 
GeneGo MetaCore (Thomson Reuters, UK). MAGENTA tests for over-representation of BP 
associated genes in pre-annotated pathways (gene sets) (Methods and Supplementary Table 
18a). GeneGo Metacore identifies potential gene networks. The MAGENTA analysis was 
used for hypothesis generation and results were compared with the GeneGo Metacore 
outputs to cross-validate findings.
Using MAGENTA there was an enrichment (P<0.01 and FDR<5% in either the EUR_SAS 
or the EUR participants) of six gene sets with DBP, three gene sets with HTN and two gene 
sets for SBP (Supplementary Table 18b). The RNA polymerase I promoter clearance 
(chromatin modification) pathway showed the most evidence of enrichment with genes 
associated with DBP (PReactome=8.4x10-5, FDR=2.48%). NOTCH signalling was the most 
associated pathway with SBP (PReactome = 3.00x10-4, FDR = 5%) driven by associations at 
the FURIN gene. The inorganic cation anion solute carrier (SLC) transporter pathway had 
the most evidence of enrichment by HTN associated genes (PReactome=8.00x10-6, 
FDR=2.13%).
Using GeneGo MetaCore, five network processes were enriched (FDR<5%; Methods; 
Supplementary Tables 19 and 20). These included several networks with genes known to 
influence vascular tone and BP: inflammation signalling, P=1.14x10-4 and blood vessel 
development P=2.34x10-4. The transcription and chromatin modification network 
(P=2.85x10-4) was also enriched, a pathway that was also highlighted in the MAGENTA 
analysis, with overlap of the same histone genes (HIST1H4C, HIST1H2AC, HIST1H2BC, 
HIST1H1T) and has also been recently reported in an integrative network analysis of 
published BP loci and whole blood expression profiling38. Two cardiac development 
pathways were enriched: the oxidative stress-driven (ROS/NADPH) (P=4.12x10-4) and the 
Wnt/β-catenin/integrin-driven (P=0.0010). Both these cardiac development pathways 
include the MYH6, MYH7, and TBX2 genes, revealing a potential overlap with 
cardiomyopathies and hypertension, and suggesting some similarity in the underlying 
biological mechanisms.
Discussion
By conducting the largest ever genetic study of BP, we identified further novel common 
variants with small effects on BP traits, similar to what has been observed for obesity and 
height39,40. More importantly, our study identified some of the first rare coding variants of 
strong effect (>1.5mmHg) that are robustly associated with BP traits in the general 
population, complementing and extending the previous discovery and characterisation of 
variants underlying rare Mendelian disorders of blood pressure regulation 41. Using SNV 
associations in 17 genes reported to be associated with monogenic disorders of blood 
pressure (Methods) we found no convincing evidence of enrichment (Penrichment=0.044). 
Surendran et al.
Page 9
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 This suggests that BP control in the general population may occur through different 
pathways to monogenic disorders of BP re-enforcing the importance of our study findings. 
The identification of 30 novel BP loci plus further new independent secondary signals within 
four novel and five known loci (Methods) has augmented the trait variance explained by 
1.3%, 1.2% and 0.93% for SBP, DBP and PP respectively within our data-set. This suggests 
that with substantially larger sample sizes, for example through UK BioBank42, we expect 
to identify 1000s more loci associated with BP traits, and replicate more of our discovery 
SNV associations that are not yet validated in the current report.
The discovery of rare missense variants has implicated several interesting candidate genes, 
which are often difficult to identify from common variant GWAS, and should therefore lead 
to more rapidly actionable biology. A2ML1, COL21A1, RRAS and RBM47 all warrant 
further follow-up studies to define the role of these genes in regulation of BP traits, as well 
as functional studies to understand their mechanisms of action. COL21A1 and RRAS 
warrant particular interest since both are involved in blood vessel remodelling, a pathway of 
known aetiological relevance to hypertension.
We observed a rare nonsense SBP associated variant in ENPEP (rs33966350; p.Trp317* ): 
this overlaps a highly conserved region of both the gene and protein and is predicted to 
result in either a truncated protein with reduced catalytic function or is subject to nonsense 
mediated RNA decay. ENPEP converts angiotensin II (AngII) to Ang-III. AngII activates the 
angiotensin 1 (AT1) receptor resulting in vasoconstriction, while AngIII activates the 
angiotensin 2 (AT2) receptor that promotes vasodilation and protects against hypertension.
43 The predicted truncated protein may lead to predominant AngII signaling in the body, 
and increases in BP. This new observation could potentially inform therapeutic strategies. Of 
note, angiotensin-converting-enzyme (ACE) inhibitors are commonly used in the treatment 
of hypertension. However, patients who suffer from adverse reactions to ACE inhibitors, 
such as dry cough and skin rash, would benefit from alternative drugs that target RAAS. 
Murine studies have shown that in the brain, AngIII is the preferred AT1 agonist that 
promotes vasoconstriction and increases blood pressure, as opposed to AngII in the 
peripheral system. These results have motivated the development of brain specific APA 
inhibitors to treat hypertension44. Our results confirm APAs, such as ENPEP, as a valid 
target to modify blood pressure, but suggest that long-term systemic reduction in APA 
activity may lead to an increase in blood pressure. Future studies are needed to examine the 
effects of the p.Trp317* variant on the RAAS system, specifically in the brain and peripheral 
vasculature, in order to test the benefits of the proposed therapeutic strategy in humans.
In addition to highlighting new genes in pathways of established relevance to BP and 
hypertension, and identifying new pathways, we have also identified multiple signals at new 
loci. For example, there are three distinct signals at the locus containing the MYH6/MYH7 
genes, and we note that TBX2 maps to one of the novel regions. These genes are related to 
cardiac development and/or cardiomyopathies, and provide an insight into the shared 
inheritance of multiple complex traits. Unravelling the causal networks within these 
polygenic pathways may provide opportunities for novel therapies to treat or prevent both 
hypertension and cardiomyopathies.
Surendran et al.
Page 10
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Online Methods
Overview of discovery studies
The cohorts contributing to the discovery meta-analyses comprise studies from three 
consortia (CHD Exome+, ExomeBP, and GoT2D/T2D-GENES) with a total number of 
192,763 unique samples. All participants provided written informed consent and the studies 
were approved by their local Research Ethics Committees and/or Institutional Review 
Boards.
The CHD Exome+ consortium comprised 77,385 samples: eight studies (49,898 samples) of 
European (EUR) ancestry, two studies (27,487 samples) of South Asian (SAS) ancestry 
(Supplementary Table 1). The ExomeBP consortium included 25 studies (75,620 samples) 
of EUR ancestry (Supplementary Table 1). The GoT2D consortium comprised 14 studies 
(39,758 samples) of Northern EUR ancestry from Denmark, Finland, and Sweden 
(Supplementary Table 1). The participating studies and their characteristics including BP 
phenotypes are detailed in Supplementary Tables 1 and 2. Note, any studies contributing to 
multiple consortia were only included once in all meta-analyses.
Phenotypes
Four blood pressure (BP) traits were analysed: systolic blood pressure (SBP), diastolic blood 
pressure (DBP), pulse pressure (PP) and hypertension (HTN). For individuals known to be 
taking BP lowering medication, 15/10 mmHg was added to the raw SBP/DBP values, 
respectively, to obtain medication-adjusted SBP/DBP values45. PP was defined as SBP 
minus DBP, post-adjustment. For HTN, individuals were classified as hypertensive cases if 
they satisfied at least one of: (i) SBP≥140 mmHg, (ii) DBP≥90 mmHg, (iii) taking anti-
hypertensive or BP lowering medication. All other individuals were included as controls. 
The four BP traits were correlated (SBP:DBP correlations were between 0.6 and 0.8, and 
SBP:PP correlations were ~0.8). However, they measure partly distinct physiological 
features including, cardiac output, vascular resistance, and arterial stiffness, all measures for 
determining a cardiovascular risk profile. Therefore the genetic architecture of the individual 
phenotypes are of interest, and a multi-phenotype mapping approach was not adopted.
Genotyping
All samples were genotyped using one of the Illumina HumanExome Beadchip arrays 
(Supplementary Table 3). An Exome chip quality control Standard Operating Procedure 
(SOP) developed by Anubha Mahajan, Neil Robertson and Will Rayner at the Wellcome 
Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford was used by most studies for 
genotype calling and QC46 (Supplementary Table 3). All genotypes were aligned to the plus 
strand of the human genome reference sequence (Build37) prior to any analyses and any 
unresolved mappings were removed. Genotype cluster plots were reviewed for all the novel 
rare variants (both lead and secondary signals) and for rare variants that contributed to the 
gene-based testing.
Surendran et al.
Page 11
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Meta-analyses
Meta-analyses were performed using METAL47, for both discovery and replication 
analyses, using inverse variance weighted fixed effect meta-analysis for the continuous traits 
(SBP, DBP and PP) and sample size weighted meta-analysis for the binary trait (HTN).
Discovery SNV analyses
Analyses of both untransformed and inverse normal transformed SBP, DBP and PP were 
conducted within each contributing study. The analyses of the transformed traits were 
performed in order to minimise sensitivity to deviations from normality in the analysis of 
rare variants and for discovery of new SNV-BP associations. The residuals from the null 
model obtained after regressing the medication-adjusted trait on the covariates (age, age2, 
sex, BMI, and disease status for CHD) within a linear regression model, were ranked and 
inverse normalised. These normalised residuals were used to test trait-SNV associations. All 
SNVs that passed QC were analysed for association, without any further filtering by MAF, 
but a minor allele count of 10 was used for the analysis of HTN. An additive allelic effects 
model was assumed.
Two meta-analyses were performed for each trait, one with EUR and SAS ancestries 
combined (EUR_SAS) and another for EUR ancestry alone. Contributing studies used 
principal components (PCs) to adjust for population stratification. Consequently minimal 
inflation in the association test statistics, λ, was observed (λ=1.07 for SBP, 1.10 for DBP, 
1.04 for PP and <1 for HTN in the transformed discovery meta-analysis in EUR_SAS; λ= 
1.06 for SBP, 1.09 for DBP, 1.05 for PP and <1 for HTN in the transformed discovery meta-
analysis in EUR; Supplementary Figure 7). The meta-analyses were performed 
independently in two centres and results were found to be concordant between centres. 
Given the studies contributing to the discovery analyses were ascertained on CHD or T2D, 
we tested potential systematic bias in calculated effect estimates amongst these studies. No 
evidence of bias in the overall effect estimates was obtained.
The results for the transformed traits were taken forward and used to select candidate SNVs 
for replication. Results (P-values) from the transformed and untransformed analyses were 
strongly correlated (r2>0.9).
Replication SNV analyses
SNVs associated with any of the transformed traits (SBP, DBP, PP) or HTN were annotated 
using the Illumina SNV annotation file, humanexome-12v1_a_gene_annotation.txt, 
independently across two centres. Given the difference in power to detect common versus 
low frequency and rare variant associations, two different significance thresholds were 
chosen for SNV selection. For SNVs with MAF≥0.05, P≤1x10-5 was selected, while, 
P≤1x10-4 was used for SNVs with MAF < 0.05. By choosing a significance threshold of 
P<1x10-4 we maximized the opportunity to follow-up rare variants (making the assumption 
that any true signals at this threshold could replicate at Bonferroni adjusted significance, 
P≤6.17x10-4, assuming α=0.05 for 81 SNVs). All previously published BP associated SNVs 
and any variants in LD with them (r2>0.2), were removed from the list of associated SNVs 
as we aimed to replicate new findings only. SNVs for which only one study contributed to 
Surendran et al.
Page 12
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 the association result or showed evidence of heterogeneity (Phet<0.0001) were removed from 
the list as they were likely to be an artefact. Where SNVs were associated with multiple 
traits, to minimise the number of tests performed, only the trait with the smallest P-value 
was selected as the primary trait in which replication was sought. Where multiple SNVs 
fitted these selection criteria for a single region, only the SNV with the smallest P-value was 
selected. In total, 81 SNVs were selected for validation in independent samples. These 81 
SNVs had concordant association results for both transformed and non-transformed traits. 
Eighty SNVs were selected from EUR_SAS results (with consistent support in EUR), and 
one SNV from EUR results only. In the next step, we looked up the 81 SNV-BP associations 
using data from a separate consortium, the CHARGE+ exome chip blood pressure 
consortium (who had analysed untransformed SBP, DBP, PP and HTN), and UHP and 
Lolipop (ExomeBP consortium; Supplementary Tables 2 and 3). The analysed residuals 
from CHARGE+ were approximately normally distributed in their largest studies 
(Supplementary Figure 8).
Two meta-analyses of the replication datasets were performed: one of EUR samples, and a 
second of EUR, African American, Hispanics and SAS ancestries (“ALL”). Replication was 
confirmed if P (1-tailed) < 0.05/81=6.17x10-4 and the effect (beta) was in the direction 
observed in discovery meta-analyses for the selected trait. A combined meta-analysis was 
performed of discovery (untransformed results as only untransformed data was available 
from CHARGE+ exome chip blood pressure consortium) and replication results across the 
four traits to assess the overall support for each locus. For the combined meta-analyses, a 
GWS threshold of, P≤5x10-8, was used to declare a SNV as novel rather than a less stringent 
experiment wide threshold, as GWS is used to declare significance in GWAS and we wish to 
minimise the possibility of false positive associations. (Note that GWS is equivalent to an 
exome-wide threshold of P≤2x10-7 adjusted for four traits).
Note: all validated BP-associated variants were associated at P<10-5 in the discovery dataset 
(for the primary trait). Hence, we could have used the same inclusion criteria for both 
common and rare SNVs. Therefore the optimal threshold to choose for future experiments 
may need further consideration.
Conditional analyses and gene-based tests
The RAREMETALWORKER (RMW) tool15 (version 4.13.3) that does not require 
individual level data to perform conditional analyses and gene-based tests was used for 
conditional analyses. All studies that contributed to the SNV discovery analyses were re-
contacted and asked to run RMW. Only FENLAND, GoDARTS, HELIC-MANOLIS, 
UKHLS and EPIC-InterAct were unable to run RMW, while two new studies were included, 
INCIPE and NFBC1966 (Supplementary Table 1 and 2). In total, 43 studies (147,402 
samples) were included in the EUR analyses and 45 studies (173,329 samples) in the 
EUR_SAS analyses (Supplementary Tables 2 and 3). Comparison of discovery and RMW 
study level results were made (Supplementary Information).
For each novel locus, the genomic coordinates and size of the region were defined according 
to recombination rates (Supplementary Table 9) around the lead variant. For known loci, a 1 
Mb window was used (Supplementary Table 14). Conditional analyses were performed 
Surendran et al.
Page 13
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 across each region, in both EUR and EUR_SAS samples, for the transformed phenotype 
corresponding to the validated BP trait for novel loci and the published BP trait for known 
loci.
Gene based tests were performed in both the EUR and EUR_SAS datasets using the 
Sequence Kernel Association Test (SKAT)16 method implemented in RMW as it allows for 
the SNVs to have different directions and magnitudes of effect. Burden tests were also 
performed but are not presented as only SKAT provided significant results. The variants in 
the gene-based tests using SKAT were weighted using the default settings, i.e. a beta 
distribution density function to up-weight rare variants, Beta(MAFj,1,25) where MAFj 
represents the pooled MAF for variant j across all studies. Analyses were restricted to 
coding SNVs with MAF<5% and <1%. Genes were deemed to be associated if P <2.8x10-6 
(Bonferroni adjusted for 17,996 genes). To confirm the gene associations were not 
attributable to a solitary SNV, a gene-based test conditional on the most associated SNV was 
performed (Pconditional< 0.001). The QC of all SNVs contributing to the gene based tests 
including the number of samples and studies were checked prior to claiming association. We 
sought replication of associated genes in the CHARGE+ exome chip blood pressure 
consortium.
Pathway analyses with MAGENTA
We tested seven databases in MAGENTA37 (BioCarta, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and 
Genomes, Ingenuity, Panther, Panther Biological Processes, Panther Molecular Functions 
and Reactome) for overrepresentation of the SNV discovery results from both EUR and 
EUR_SAS ancestries. Each of the four BP phenotypes were tested. Pathways exhibiting 
P<0.01 and FDR<5% were considered statistically significant.
GeneGo MetaCore Network analyses
A set of BP genes based on previously published studies and our current results (locus 
defined as r2>0.4 and 500kb on either side of the lead SNV; Supplementary Table 19) were 
tested for enrichment using the THOMSON REUTERS MetaCore™ Single Experiment 
Analysis workflow tool. The data were mapped onto selected MetaCore ontology databases: 
pathway maps, process networks, GO processes and diseases / biomarkers, for which 
functional information is derived from experimental literature. Outputs were sorted based on 
P- and FDR-values. A gene set was considered enriched for a particular process if P<0.05 
and FDR<5%.
Genetic Risk Score
To assess the effect of BP on CHD, ischemic stroke (and subtypes: large vessel, small vessel 
and cardioembolic stroke) left ventricular mass, left ventricular wall thickness, heart failure, 
HDL-c, LDL-c, total cholesterol, triglycerides and eGFR, we performed a weighted 
generalized linear regression of the genetic associations with each outcome variable on the 
genetic associations with BP.
When genetic variants are uncorrelated, the estimates from such a weighted linear regression 
analysis using summarized data, and a genetic risk score analysis using individual-level data, 
Surendran et al.
Page 14
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 are equal48. We refer to the analysis as a genetic risk score (also known as a polygenic risk 
score) analysis as this is likely to be more familiar to applied readers. As some of the genetic 
variants in our analysis are correlated, a generalized weighted linear regression model is 
fitted that accounts for the correlations between variants, as follows: If βX are the genetic 
associations (beta-coefficients) with the risk factor (here, BP) and βY are the genetic 
associations with the outcome, then the causal estimate from a weighted generalized linear 
regression is (βXTΏ-1βX)-1 βXTΏ-1βY, with standard error,
where T is a matrix transpose, σ̂ is the estimate of the residual standard error from the 
regression model, and the weighting matrix Ώ has terms
, where σYj is the standard error of the genetic association with the outcome for the jth SNV, 
and ρj1j2 is the correlation between the j1th and j2 th SNVs. The presence of the estimated 
residual standard error allows for heterogeneity between the causal estimates from the 
individual SNVs as overdispersion in the regression model (in the case of underdispersion, 
the residual standard error estimate is set to unity). This is equivalent to combining the 
causal estimates from each SNV using a multiplicative random-effects model49.
For each of SBP, DBP and PP, the score was created using both the novel and known BP 
SNVs or a close proxy (r2>0.8). Both the sentinel SNV association and any secondary SNV 
associations that remained after adjusting for the sentinel SNV were included in the genetic 
risk score. For the 30 validated novel SNV-BP associations, βs were taken from the 
independent replication analyses (Table 1 and 2) to weight the SNV in the genetic risk score. 
For the secondary SNVs from the seven novel loci and five known loci, βs were taken from 
the discovery analyses (Supplementary Tables 10 and 15). For the 82 known SNVs, 43 were 
either genotyped or had proxies on the Exome chip and the βs were taken from discovery 
results (Supplementary Table 13), the remaining βs were taken from published effect 
estimates. This strategy for selecting betas for use in the GRS was taken to minimize the 
influence of winner’s curse. The associations between the BP variants with CHD, HDL-c, 
LDL-c, total cholesterol, log(triglycerides) and log(eGFR) were obtained using the CHD 
Exome+ Consortium studies, the associations with BMI, waist-hip ratio adjusted BMI and 
height from the GIANT consortium (unpublished data), ischemic stroke from 
METASTROKE25, and left ventricular mass, left ventricular wall thickness and heart failure 
from EchoGen27 and CHARGE-HF26. A causal interpretation of the association of GRS 
with the outcome as the effect of BP on the outcome assumes that the effects of genetic 
variants on the outcome are mediated via blood pressure and not via alternate causal 
pathways, for example via LV thickness. There are also limitations of the Mendelian 
randomization approach in distinguishing between the causal effects of different measures of 
blood pressure, due to the paucity of genetic variants associated with only one measure of 
blood pressure.
Surendran et al.
Page 15
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 eQTL analyses
The MuTHER dataset contains gene expression data from 850 UK twins for 23,596 probes 
and 2,029,988 (HapMap 2 imputed) SNVs. All cis–associated SNVs with FDR<1%, within 
each of the 30 novel regions (IMPUTE info score >0.8) were extracted from the MuTHER 
project dataset for, LCL (n=777), adipose (n=776) and skin (n=667) 50. The pilot phase of 
the GTEx Project (dbGaP Accession phs000424.v3.p1) provides expression data from up to 
156 individuals for 52,576 genes and 6,820,472 genotyped SNVs (imputed to 1000 
Genomes project, MAF≥5%)51. The eQTL analysis was focused on subcutaneous adipose 
tissue (n=94), tibial artery (n=112), heart (left ventricle) (n=83), lung (n=119), skeletal 
muscle (n=138), tibial nerve (n=88), skin (sun exposed, lower leg) (n=96), thyroid (n=105) 
and whole blood (n=156) which have >80 samples and genes expressed at least 0.1 RPKM 
in 10 or more individuals in a given tissue. All transcripts with a transcription start site 
(TSS) within one of the 30 new BP loci and for which there was a cis-associated SNV 
(IMPUTE info score >0.4) within 1Mb of the TSS at FDR<5%, were identified. Kidney was 
not evaluated because the sample size was too small (n=8). From each resource, we report 
eQTL signals, which reach the resource-specific thresholds for significance described above, 
for SNVs that are in LD (r2>0.8) with our sentinel SNV.
For identified eQTLs, we tested whether they colocalised with the BP associated SNV52. 
Colocalisation analyses were considered to be significant if the posterior probability of 
colocalisation was greater than 0.95.
Annotation of variants
In silico prediction of the functional effect of associated variants was based on the 
annotation from dbSNP, the Ensembl Variant Effect Predictor tool and the Exome Variant 
Server, NHLBI GO Exome Sequencing Project (ESP), Seattle, WA.
Trait variance explained
The percentage trait variance explained for SBP, DBP, PP was assessed with 5,861 
individuals with complete information for all phenotypes and covariates from the 
population-based cohort, 1958BC.
Two genetic models were investigated: one containing the 43 previously known BP 
associated SNVs covered on the Exome chip; the other additionally including the 30 novel 
lead SNVs and 9 conditionally independent SNVs from both novel and known loci. These 
nine conditionally independent SNVs were taken from the EUR results, as 1958BC is EUR. 
They included four from novel loci (PREX1, COL21A1, PRKAG1 and MYH6 (there was 
only 1 in EUR); Supplementary Table 10) and five from known loci (ST7L-CAPZA1-
MOV10, FIGN-GRB14, ENPEP, TBX5-TBX3 and HOXC4; Supplementary Table 15).
The residual trait was obtained by adjusting each of the BP traits in a regression model with 
sex and BMI variables (not age or age2 as all 1958BC individuals were aged 44 years). The 
residual trait was regressed on all SNVs within the corresponding model and adjusted for the 
first ten PCs. The R2 calculated from this regression model was used as the percentage trait 
variance explained.
Surendran et al.
Page 16
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Monogenic Enrichment analyses
To determine if sub-significant signals of association were present in a set of genes 
associated with monogenic forms of disease, we performed an enrichment analysis of the 
discovery single variant meta-analyses association results for all four traits, both for EUR 
and EUR_SAS datasets.
The monogenic gene set included: WNK1, WNK4, KLHL3, CUL3, PPARG, NR3C2, 
CYP11B1, CYP11B2, CYP17A1, HSD11B2, SCNN1A, SCNN1B, SCNN1G, CLCNKB, 
KCNJ1, SLC12A1, SLC12A33. The association results of coding SNVs in these genes were 
extracted and the number of tests with P<0.001 observed. In order to determine how often 
such an observation would be observed by chance, we constructed 1,000 matched gene sets. 
The matching criteria for each monogenic gene was the intersection of all genes in the same 
exon length quintile and all genes in the same coding variant count decile. Within the 
matched sets, the number of variants with P<0.001 was observed. The empirical P-value was 
calculated as the fraction of matched sets with an equal or larger number of variants less 
than 0.001.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Authors 
Praveen Surendran#1, Fotios Drenos#2,3, Robin Young#1, Helen Warren#4,5, James 
P Cook#6,7, Alisa K Manning#8,9,10, Niels Grarup#11, Xueling Sim#12,13,14, Daniel R 
Barnes1, Kate Witkowska4,5, James R Staley1, Vinicius Tragante15, Taru 
Tukiainen8,9,16, Hanieh Yaghootkar17, Nicholas Masca18,19, Daniel F Freitag1, 
Teresa Ferreira20, Olga Giannakopoulou21, Andrew Tinker21,5, Magdalena 
Harakalova15, Evelin Mihailov22, Chunyu Liu23, Aldi T Kraja24,25, Sune Fallgaard 
Nielsen26, Asif Rasheed27, Maria Samuel27, Wei Zhao28, Lori L Bonnycastle29, 
Anne U Jackson13,12, Narisu Narisu29, Amy J Swift29, Lorraine Southam30,20, 
Jonathan Marten31, Jeroen R Huyghe13,12, Alena Stančáková32, Cristiano 
Fava33,34, Therese Ohlsson33, Angela Matchan30, Kathleen E Stirrups21,35, Jette 
Bork-Jensen11, Anette P Gjesing11, Jukka Kontto36, Markus Perola36,37,22, Susan 
Shaw-Hawkins4, Aki S Havulinna36, He Zhang38, Louise A Donnelly39, Christopher 
J Groves40, N William Rayner40,20,30, Matt J Neville40,41, Neil R Robertson20,40, 
Andrianos M Yiorkas42,43, Karl-Heinz Herzig44,45, Eero Kajantie36,46,47, Weihua 
Zhang48,49, Sara M Willems50, Lars Lannfelt51, Giovanni Malerba52, Nicole 
Soranzo53,35,54, Elisabetta Trabetti52, Niek Verweij55,9,56, Evangelos 
Evangelou48,57, Alireza Moayyeri48,58, Anne-Claire Vergnaud48, Christopher P 
Nelson18,19, Alaitz Poveda59,60, Tibor V Varga59, Muriel Caslake61, Anton JM de 
Craen62,63, Stella Trompet62,64, Jian’an Luan50, Robert A Scott50, Sarah E 
Harris65,66, David CM Liewald65,67, Riccardo Marioni65,66,68, Cristina Menni69, Aliki-
Eleni Farmaki70, Göran Hallmans71, Frida Renström59,71, Jennifer E Huffman31,23, 
Maija Hassinen72, Stephen Burgess1, Ramachandran S Vasan23,73,74, Janine F 
Felix75, CHARGE-Heart Failure Consortium76, Maria Uria-Nickelsen77, Anders 
Surendran et al.
Page 17
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Malarstig78, Dermot F Reily79, Maarten Hoek80, Thomas Vogt80,81, Honghuang 
Lin23,82, Wolfgang Lieb83, EchoGen Consortium76, Matthew Traylor84, Hugh F 
Markus84, METASTROKE Consortium76, Heather M Highland85, Anne E Justice85, 
Eirini Marouli21, GIANT Consortium76, Jaana Lindström36, Matti Uusitupa86,87, Pirjo 
Komulainen72, Timo A Lakka72,88,89, Rainer Rauramaa72,89, Ozren Polasek90,91, 
Igor Rudan90, Olov Rolandsson92, Paul W Franks59,92,93, George Dedoussis70, 
Timothy D Spector69, EPIC-InterAct Consortium76, Pekka Jousilahti36, Satu 
Männistö36, Ian J Deary65,67, John M Starr65,94, Claudia Langenberg50, Nick J 
Wareham50, Morris J Brown4, Anna F Dominiczak95, John M Connell39, J Wouter 
Jukema64,96, Naveed Sattar95, Ian Ford61, Chris J Packard61, Tõnu Esko22,97,8,9, 
Reedik Mägi22, Andres Metspalu22,98, Rudolf A de Boer99, Peter van der Meer99, 
Pim van der Harst99,100,101, Lifelines Cohort Study76, Giovanni Gambaro102, Erik 
Ingelsson103,104, Lars Lind103, Paul IW de Bakker105,106, Mattijs E Numans107,106, 
Ivan Brandslund108,109, Cramer Christensen110, Eva RB Petersen111, Eeva Korpi-
Hyövälti112, Heikki Oksa113, John C Chambers48,49,114, Jaspal S Kooner49,115,114, 
Alexandra IF Blakemore42,43, Steve Franks116, Marjo-Riitta Jarvelin117,118,119,120, 
Lise L Husemoen121, Allan Linneberg121,122,123, Tea Skaaby121, Betina 
Thuesen121, Fredrik Karpe40,41, Jaakko Tuomilehto36,124,125,126, Alex SF Doney39, 
Andrew D Morris127, Colin NA Palmer39, Oddgeir Lingaas Holmen128,129, Kristian 
Hveem128,130, Cristen J Willer38,131,132, Tiinamaija Tuomi133,134, Leif Groop135,134, 
AnneMari Käräjämäki136,137, Aarno Palotie16,9,134,138, Samuli Ripatti134,139,30, 
Veikko Salomaa36, Dewan S Alam140, Abdulla al Shafi Majumder141, Emanuele Di 
Angelantonio1,54, Rajiv Chowdhury1, Mark I McCarthy40,41,20, Neil Poulter142, Alice 
V Stanton143, Peter Sever142, Philippe Amouyel144,145,146,147, Dominique 
Arveiler148, Stefan Blankenberg149,150, Jean Ferrières151, Frank Kee152, Kari 
Kuulasmaa36, Martina Müller-Nurasyid153,154,155, Giovanni Veronesi156, Jarmo 
Virtamo36, Panos Deloukas21,157, Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium76, Paul 
Elliott117, Understanding Society Scientific Group76, Eleftheria Zeggini30, Sekar 
Kathiresan56,158,159,9, Olle Melander33, Johanna Kuusisto32, Markku Laakso32, 
Sandosh Padmanabhan95, David Porteous66, Caroline Hayward31, Generation 
Scotland160, Francis S Collins29, Karen L Mohlke161, Torben Hansen11, Oluf 
Pedersen11, Michael Boehnke13,12, Heather M Stringham13,12, EPIC-CVD 
Consortium76, Philippe Frossard27, Christopher Newton-Cheh56,158, CHARGE+ 
Exome Chip Blood Pressure Consortium76, Martin D Tobin6, Børge Grønne 
Nordestgaard26, T2D-GENES Consortium76, GoT2DGenes Consortium76, 
ExomeBP Consortium76, CHD Exome+ Consortium76, Mark J Caulfield4,5, Anubha 
Mahajan20, Andrew P Morris20,7, Maciej Tomaszewski18,19,162, Nilesh J 
Samani18,19, Danish Saleheen#28,27,1, Folkert W Asselbergs#15,101,163, Cecilia M 
Lindgren#164,9,20, John Danesh#1,165,54, Louise V Wain#6, Adam S 
Butterworth#1,166, Joanna MM Howson#1,168, and Patricia B Munroe#4,5,168
Affiliations
1Cardiovascular Epidemiology Unit, Department of Public Health and Primary Care, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK 2Medical Research Council Integrative 
Epidemiology Unit, School of Social and Community Medicine, University of Bristol, 
Surendran et al.
Page 18
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Oakfield House, Oakfield Grove, Bristol, UK 3Centre for Cardiovascular Genetics, 
Institute of Cardiovascular Science, Rayne Building University College London, 
London, UK 4Clinical Pharmacology, William Harvey Research Institute, Queen 
Mary University of London, London, UK 5National Institute for Health Research 
Barts Cardiovascular Biomedical Research Unit, Queen Mary University of London, 
London, UK 6Department of Health Sciences, University of Leicester, Leicester, UK 
7Department of Biostatistics, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK 8Department of 
Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA 9Program in 
Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute, 7 Cambridge Center, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, USA 10Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA 11The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for 
Basic Metabolic Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of 
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark 12Center for Statistical Genetics, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA 13Department of Biostatistics, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA 14Saw Swee Hock School of Public Health, 
National University of Singapore, National University Health System, Singapore 
15Department of Cardiology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The 
Netherlands 16Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit, Department of Medicine, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA 17Genetics of 
Complex Traits, Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, University of Exeter 
Medical School, Exeter, UK 18Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, University of 
Leicester, Leicester, UK 19National Institute for Health Research Leicester 
Biomedical Research Unit in Cardiovascular Disease, Leicester, UK 20Wellcome 
Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of 
Oxford, Oxford, UK 21Heart Centre, William Harvey Research Institute, Barts and 
The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, 
London, UK 22Estonian Genome Center, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia 
23National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute’s and Boston University’s Framingham 
Heart Study, Framingham, Massachusetts, USA 24Division of Statistical Genomics, 
Center for Genome Sciences and Systems Biology, Washington University School 
of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA 25Department of Genetics, Washington 
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA 26Department of Clinical 
Biochemistry Herlev Hospital, Copenhagen University Hospital, Herlev, Denmark 
27Centre for Non-Communicable Diseases, Karachi, Pakistan 28Department of 
Biostatistics and Epidemiology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA 29Medical Genomics and Metabolic 
Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, NIH, Bethesda, 
Maryland, USA 30Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Genome Campus, Hinxton, UK 
31Medical Research Council Human Genetics Unit, Medical Research Council 
Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, 
UK 32Department of Medicine, University of Eastern Finland and Kuopio University 
Hospital, Kuopio, Finland 33University of Lund, Department of Clinical Sciences, 
Malmö, Sweden 34University of Verona, Department of Medicine, Verona, Italy 
35Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK 
Surendran et al.
Page 19
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 36Department of Health, National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland 
37Institute of Molecular Medicine FIMM, University of Helsinki, Finland 38Department 
of Internal Medicine, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Michigan, 
Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA 39Medical Research Institute, University of Dundee, 
Ninewells Hospital and Medical School, Dundee, UK 40Oxford Centre for Diabetes, 
Endocrinology, and Metabolism, Radcliffe Department of Medicine, University of 
Oxford, Oxford, UK 41National Institute for Health Research Oxford Biomedical 
Research Centre, Oxford University Hospital Trusts, Oxford, UK 42Section of 
Investigative Medicine, Imperial College London, London, UK 43Department of Life 
Sciences, Brunel University London, London, UK 44Institute of Biomedicine, 
Biocenter Oulu, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland 45Department of Gastroenterology 
and Metabolism, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland 46Hospital 
for Children and Adolescents, Helsinki University Central Hospital and University of 
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland 47Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Oulu 
University Hospital and University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland 48Department of 
Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Imperial College London, 
London, UK 49Department of Cardiology, Ealing Hospital, Middlesex, UK 50Medical 
Research Council Epidemiology Unit, University of Cambridge School of Clinical 
Medicine, Box 285 Institute of Metabolic Science, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, 
Cambridge, UK 51Department of Public Health and Caring Sciences, Uppsala 
University, Uppsala, Sweden 52Section of Biology and Genetics, Department of 
Neurosciences, Biomedicine and Movement Sciences, University of Verona, 
Verona, Italy 53Human Genetics, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, UK 
54The National Institute for Health Research Blood and Transplant Research Unit in 
Donor Health and Genomics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK 55University 
Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Department of Cardiology, The 
Netherlands 56Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA 57Department of Hygiene and Epidemiology, 
University of Ioannina Medical School, Ioannina, Greece 58Farr Institute of Health 
Informatics Research, Institute of Health Informatics, University College London, 
London, UK 59Department of Clinical Sciences, Genetic and Molecular 
Epidemiology Unit, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden 60Department of Genetics, 
Physical Anthropology and Animal Physiology, Faculty of Science and Technology, 
University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), Bilbao, Spain 61University of 
Glasgow, Glasgow, UK 62Department of Gerontology and Geriatrics, Leiden 
University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands 63Mr. De Craen suddenly 
passed away January 2016 64Department of Cardiology, Leiden University Medical 
Center, Leiden, The Netherlands 65Centre for Cognitive Ageing and Cognitive 
Epidemiology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK 66Centre for Genomic and 
Experimental Medicine, Medical Research Council Institute of Genetics and 
Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK 67Department of 
Psychology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK 68Queensland Brain Institute, 
The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia 69Department of 
Twin Research and Genetic Epidemiology, King’s College London, UK 
Surendran et al.
Page 20
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 70Department of Nutrition and Dietetics, School of Health Science and Education, 
Harokopio University, Athens, Greece 71Department of Biobank Research, Umeå 
University, Umeå, Sweden 72Kuopio Research Institute of Exercise Medicine, 
Kuopio, Finland 73Section of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Boston University 
Schools of Medicine and Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA 74Sections of 
Preventive Medicine and Epidemiology, Department of Medicine, Boston University 
Schools of Medicine and Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA 75Department 
of Epidemiology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, 
The Netherlands 76A full list of members and affiliations appears in the 
Supplementary Note 77Development Management and Planning, Pfizer Worldwide 
Research and Development 78Pfizer Worldwide Research and Development, 
Stockholm, Sweden 79Merck Research Laboratories, Genetics and 
Pharmacogenomics, Boston, Massachusetts, USA 80Merck Research Laboratories, 
Cardiometabolic Disease, Kenilworth, New Jersey, USA 81CHDI Management/CHDI 
Foundation, Princeton, New Jersey, USA 82Section of Computational Biomedicine, 
Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA 83Institute of Epidemiology and Biobank Popgen, Kiel 
University, Kiel, Germany 84Neurology Unit, University of Cambridge, Cambridge 
Biomedical Campus, Cambridge, UK 85University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 
Department of Epidemiology, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA 86Department of 
Public Health and Clinical Nutrition, University of Eastern Finland, Finland 
87Research Unit, Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio, Finland 88Institute of 
Biomedicine/Physiology, University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio Campus, Finland 
89Department of Clinical Physiology and Nuclear Medicine, Kuopio University 
Hospital, Kuopio, Finland 90Centre for Global Health Research, Usher Institute for 
Population Health Sciences and Informatics, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK 
91Faculty of Medicine, University of Split, Croatia 92Department of Public Health and 
Clinical Medicine, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden 93Department of Nutrition, 
Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA 94Alzheimer 
Scotland Research Centre, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK 95Institute of 
Cardiovascular and Medical Sciences, College of Medical, Veterinary and Life 
Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK 96The Interuniversity Cardiology 
Institute of the Netherlands, Utrecht, The Netherlands 97Division of Endocrinology, 
Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA 98Institute of Molecular 
and Cell Biology, Tartu, Estonia 99Department of Cardiology, University of 
Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands 
100Department of Genetics, University of Groningen, University Medical Center 
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands 101Durrer Center for Cardiogenetic 
Research, ICIN-Netherlands Heart Institute, Utrecht, The Netherlands 102Division of 
Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine and Medical Specialties, Columbus - 
Gemelli University Hospital, Catholic University, Rome, Italy 103Department of 
Medical Sciences, Molecular Epidemiology and Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala 
University, Uppsala, Sweden 104Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiovascular 
Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, USA 
Surendran et al.
Page 21
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 105Department of Medical Genetics, Center for Molecular Medicine, University 
Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands 106Department of Epidemiology, 
Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary Care, University Medical Center 
Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands 107Department of Public Health and Primary 
Care, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands 108Department of 
Clinical Biochemistry, Lillebaelt Hospital, Vejle, Denmark 109Institute of Regional 
Health Research, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark 110Medical 
Department, Lillebaelt Hospital, Vejle, Denmark 111Department of Clinical 
Immunology and Biochemistry, Lillebaelt Hospital, Vejle, Denmark 112South 
Ostrobothnia Central Hospital, Seinäjoki, Finland 113Tampere University Hospital, 
Tampere, Finland 114Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, London, UK 
115National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, UK 
116Institute of Reproductive and Developmental Biology, Imperial College London, 
London, UK 117Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Medical Research 
Council Public Health England Centre for Environment and Health, School of Public 
Health, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, St. Mary’s Campus, London, 
UK 118Centre for Life Course Epidemiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oulu, 
Oulu, Finland 119Biocenter Oulu, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland 120Unit of Primary 
Care, Oulu University Hospital, Oulu, Finland 121Research Centre for Prevention 
and Health, Capital Region of Denmark, Copenhagen, Denmark 122Department of 
Clinical Experimental Research, Glostrup University Hospital, Glostrup, Denmark 
123Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, 
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark 124Dasman Diabetes Institute, 
Dasman, Kuwait 125Centre for Vascular Prevention, Danube-University Krems, 
Krems, Austria 126King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia 127School of 
Molecular, Genetic and Population Health Sciences, University of Edinburgh, 
Medical School, Teviot Place, Edinburgh, UK 128HUNT Research Centre, 
Department of Public Health and General Practice, Norwegian University of Science 
and Technology, Levanger, Norway 129St. Olav Hospital, Trondheim University 
Hospital, Trondheim, Norway 130Department of Medicine, Levanger Hospital, Nord- 
Trøndelag Health Trust, Levanger, Norway 131Department of Computational 
Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA 
132Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, 
USA 133Folkhälsan Research Centre, Helsinki, Finland; Department of 
Endocrinology, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland 134Institute for 
Molecular Medicine Finland University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland 135Department 
of Clinical Sciences, Diabetes and Endocrinology, Lund University Diabetes Centre, 
Malmö, Sweden 136Department of Primary Health Care, Vaasa Central Hospital, 
Vaasa, Finland 137Diabetes Center, Vaasa Health Care Center, Vaasa, Finland 
138Psychiatric and Neurodevelopmental Genetics Unit, Department of Psychiatry, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA 139Department of 
Public Health, University of Helsinki, Finland 140ICDDR, B; Mohakhali, Dhaka, 
Bangladesh 141National Institute of Cardiovascular Diseases, Sher-e-Bangla Nagar, 
Dhaka, Bangladesh 142International Centre for Circulatory Health, Imperial College 
Surendran et al.
Page 22
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 London, UK 143Molecular and Cellular Therapeutics, Royal College of Surgeons in 
Ireland, Dublin, Ireland 144University of Lille, UMR1167, Risk Factors and Molecular 
Determinants of aging-related diseases, Lille, France 145Inserm, Lille, France 
146Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Lille, Public Health, Lille, France 147Institut 
Pasteur de Lille, Lille, France 148Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, EA 
3430, University of Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France 149Department of General and 
Interventional Cardiology, University Heart Center Hamburg, Germany 150University 
Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany 151Department of 
Epidemiology, UMR 1027- INSERM, Toulouse University-CHU Toulouse, Toulouse, 
France 152Director, UKCRC Centre of Excellence for Public Health, Queens 
University, Belfast, Northern Ireland 153Institute of Genetic Epidemiology, Helmholtz 
Zentrum München - German Research Center for Environmental Health, 
Neuherberg, Germany 154Department of Medicine I, University Hospital 
Grosshadern, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Munich, Germany 155DZHK (German 
Centre for Cardiovascular Research), partner site Munich Heart Alliance, Munich, 
Germany 156Research Center in Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, 
Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Insubria, Varese, 
Italy 157Princess Al-Jawhara Al-Brahim Centre of Excellence in Research of 
Hereditary Disorders (PACER-HD), King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia 
158Cardiovascular Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA 159Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA 160A Collaboration between the University Medical Schools 
and NHS, Aberdeen, Dundee, Edinburgh and Glasgow, UK 161Department of 
Genetics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA 162Institute 
of Cardiovascular Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK 163Faculty of 
Population Health Sciences, Institute of Cardiovascular Science, University College 
London, London, UK 164The Big Data Institute at the Li Ka Shing Centre for Health 
Information and Discovery, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK 165Wellcome Trust 
Sanger Institute, Hinxton, UK 166The National Institute for Health Research Blood 
and Transplant Research
Acknowledgements
(See Supplementary information)
References
1. Lim SS, et al. A comparative risk assessment of burden of disease and injury attributable to 67 risk 
factors and risk factor clusters in 21 regions, 1990-2010: a systematic analysis for the Global 
Burden of Disease Study 2010. Lancet. 2012; 380:2224–60. [PubMed: 23245609] 
2. Rapsomaniki E, et al. Blood pressure and incidence of twelve cardiovascular diseases: lifetime risks, 
healthy life-years lost, and age-specific associations in 1.25 million people. Lancet. 2014; 
383:1899–911. [PubMed: 24881994] 
3. Munroe PB, Barnes MR, Caulfield MJ. Advances in blood pressure genomics. Circ Res. 2013; 
112:1365–79. [PubMed: 23661711] 
Surendran et al.
Page 23
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 4. Ehret GB, et al. Genetic variants in novel pathways influence blood pressure and cardiovascular 
disease risk. Nature. 2011; 478:103–109. [PubMed: 21909115] 
5. Wain LV, et al. Genome-wide association study identifies six new loci influencing pulse pressure 
and mean arterial pressure. Nature Genetics. 2011
6. Johnson T, et al. Blood pressure loci identified with a gene-centric array. Am J Hum Genet. 2011; 
89:688–700. [PubMed: 22100073] 
7. Tomaszewski M, et al. Genetic architecture of ambulatory blood pressure in the general population: 
insights from cardiovascular gene-centric array. Hypertension. 2010; 56:1069–76. [PubMed: 
21060006] 
8. Tragante V, et al. Gene-centric meta-analysis in 87,736 individuals of European ancestry identifies 
multiple blood-pressure-related loci. Am J Hum Genet. 2014; 94:349–60. [PubMed: 24560520] 
9. Ganesh SK, et al. Loci influencing blood pressure identified using a cardiovascular gene-centric 
array. Hum Mol Genet. 2013
10. Simino J, et al. Gene-age interactions in blood pressure regulation: a large-scale investigation with 
the CHARGE, Global BPgen, and ICBP Consortia. Am J Hum Genet. 2014; 95:24–38. [PubMed: 
24954895] 
11. Zhu X, et al. Meta-analysis of Correlated Traits via Summary Statistics from GWASs with an 
Application in Hypertension. Am J Hum Genet. 2015; 96:21–36. [PubMed: 25500260] 
12. Salfati E, Morrison AC, Boerwinkle E, Chakravarti A. Direct Estimates of the Genomic 
Contributions to Blood Pressure Heritability within a Population-Based Cohort (ARIC). PLoS 
One. 2015; 10:e0133031. [PubMed: 26162070] 
13. Schork NJ, Murray SS, Frazer KA, Topol EJ. Common vs. rare allele hypotheses for complex 
diseases. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2009; 19:212–9. [PubMed: 19481926] 
14. Nejentsev S, Walker N, Riches D, Egholm M, Todd JA. Rare variants of IFIH1, a gene implicated 
in antiviral responses, protect against type 1 diabetes. Science. 2009; 324:387–9. [PubMed: 
19264985] 
15. Liu DJ, et al. Meta-analysis of gene-level tests for rare variant association. Nat Genet. 2014; 
46:200–4. [PubMed: 24336170] 
16. Wu MC, et al. Rare-variant association testing for sequencing data with the sequence kernel 
association test. Am J Hum Genet. 2011; 89:82–93. [PubMed: 21737059] 
17. Li B, Leal SM. Methods for detecting associations with rare variants for common diseases: 
application to analysis of sequence data. Am J Hum Genet. 2008; 83:311–21. [PubMed: 
18691683] 
18. Vissers LE, et al. Heterozygous germline mutations in A2ML1 are associated with a disorder 
clinically related to Noonan syndrome. Eur J Hum Genet. 2015; 23:317–24. [PubMed: 24939586] 
19. International Consortium for Blood Pressure Genome-Wide Association, S. Genetic variants in 
novel pathways influence blood pressure and cardiovascular disease risk. Nature. 2011; 478:103–
9. [PubMed: 21909115] 
20. Coronary Artery Disease Genetics Consortium C4D. A genome-wide association study in 
Europeans and South Asians identifies five new loci for coronary artery disease. Nat Genet. 2011; 
43:339–44. [PubMed: 21378988] 
21. Schunkert H, et al. Large-scale association analysis identifies 13 new susceptibility loci for 
coronary artery disease. Nat Genet. 2011; 43:333–8. [PubMed: 21378990] 
22. Arking DE, et al. Genetic association study of QT interval highlights role for calcium signaling 
pathways in myocardial repolarization. Nat Genet. 2014; 46:826–36. [PubMed: 24952745] 
23. den Hoed M, et al. Identification of heart rate-associated loci and their effects on cardiac 
conduction and rhythm disorders. Nat Genet. 2013; 45:621–31. [PubMed: 23583979] 
24. Global Lipids Genetics Consortium. et al. Discovery and refinement of loci associated with lipid 
levels. Nat Genet. 2013; 45:1274–83. [PubMed: 24097068] 
25. Traylor M, et al. Genetic risk factors for ischaemic stroke and its subtypes (the METASTROKE 
collaboration): a meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies. Lancet Neurol. 2012; 11:951–
62. [PubMed: 23041239] 
Surendran et al.
Page 24
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 26. Smith NL, et al. Association of genome-wide variation with the risk of incident heart failure in 
adults of European and African ancestry: a prospective meta-analysis from the cohorts for heart 
and aging research in genomic epidemiology (CHARGE) consortium. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 
2010; 3:256–66. [PubMed: 20445134] 
27. Vasan RS, et al. Genetic variants associated with cardiac structure and function: a meta-analysis 
and replication of genome-wide association data. JAMA. 2009; 302:168–78. [PubMed: 19584346] 
28. Ehret GB, et al. Genetic variants in novel pathways influence blood pressure and cardiovascular 
disease risk. Nature. 2011; 478:103–109. [PubMed: 21909115] 
29. Russo SB, et al. Ceramide synthase 5 mediates lipid-induced autophagy and hypertrophy in 
cardiomyocytes. J Clin Invest. 2012; 122:3919–30. [PubMed: 23023704] 
30. Oudot-Mellakh T, et al. Genome wide association study for plasma levels of natural anticoagulant 
inhibitors and protein C anticoagulant pathway: the MARTHA project. Br J Haematol. 2012; 
157:230–9. [PubMed: 22443383] 
31. Smith NL, et al. Novel associations of multiple genetic loci with plasma levels of factor VII, factor 
VIII, and von Willebrand factor: The CHARGE (Cohorts for Heart and Aging Research in 
Genome Epidemiology) Consortium. Circulation. 2010; 121:1382–92. [PubMed: 20231535] 
32. Bleil ME, Gregorich SE, McConnell D, Rosen MP, Cedars MI. Does accelerated reproductive 
aging underlie premenopausal risk for cardiovascular disease? Menopause. 2013; 20:1139–46. 
[PubMed: 23591257] 
33. Guan R, et al. rbm47, a novel RNA binding protein, regulates zebrafish head development. Dev 
Dyn. 2013; 242:1395–404. [PubMed: 24038582] 
34. Wozniak MA, Kwong L, Chodniewicz D, Klemke RL, Keely PJ. R-Ras controls membrane 
protrusion and cell migration through the spatial regulation of Rac and Rho. Mol Biol Cell. 2005; 
16:84–96. [PubMed: 15525681] 
35. Tuckwell D. Identification and analysis of collagen alpha 1(XXI), a novel member of the FACIT 
collagen family. Matrix Biol. 2002; 21:63–6. [PubMed: 11827793] 
36. Huang J, et al. Improved imputation of low-frequency and rare variants using the UK10K 
haplotype reference panel. Nat Commun. 2015; 6:8111. [PubMed: 26368830] 
37. Segre AV, et al. Common inherited variation in mitochondrial genes is not enriched for associations 
with type 2 diabetes or related glycemic traits. PLoS Genet. 2010; 6
38. Huan T, et al. Integrative network analysis reveals molecular mechanisms of blood pressure 
regulation. Mol Syst Biol. 2015; 11:799.
39. Locke AE, et al. Genetic studies of body mass index yield new insights for obesity biology. Nature. 
2015; 518:197–206. [PubMed: 25673413] 
40. Wood AR, et al. Defining the role of common variation in the genomic and biological architecture 
of adult human height. Nat Genet. 2014; 46:1173–86. [PubMed: 25282103] 
41. Park HW, et al. Serine-threonine kinase with-no-lysine 4 (WNK4) controls blood pressure via 
transient receptor potential canonical 3 (TRPC3) in the vasculature. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2011; 108:10750–5. [PubMed: 21670282] 
42. Sudlow C, et al. UK biobank: an open access resource for identifying the causes of a wide range of 
complex diseases of middle and old age. PLoS Med. 2015; 12:e1001779. [PubMed: 25826379] 
43. Te Riet L, van Esch JH, Roks AJ, van den Meiracker AH, Danser AH. Hypertension: Renin-
Angiotensin-aldosterone system alterations. Circ Res. 2015; 116:960–75. [PubMed: 25767283] 
44. Gao J, et al. A new strategy for treating hypertension by blocking the activity of the brain renin-
angiotensin system with aminopeptidase A inhibitors. Clin Sci (Lond). 2014; 127:135–48. 
[PubMed: 24697296] 
45. Tobin MD, Sheehan NA, Scurrah KJ, Burton PR. Adjusting for treatment effects in studies of 
quantitative traits: antihypertensive therapy and systolic blood pressure. Stat Med. 2005; 24:2911–
35. [PubMed: 16152135] 
46. Mahajan A, et al. Identification and Functional Characterization of G6PC2 Coding Variants 
Influencing Glycemic Traits Define an Effector Transcript at the G6PC2-ABCB11 Locus. PLoS 
Genet. 2015; 11:e1004876. [PubMed: 25625282] 
47. Willer CJ, Li Y, Abecasis GR. METAL: fast and efficient meta-analysis of genomewide association 
scans. Bioinformatics. 2010; 26:2190–1. [PubMed: 20616382] 
Surendran et al.
Page 25
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 48. Burgess S, Thompson SG. Multivariable Mendelian randomization: the use of pleiotropic genetic 
variants to estimate causal effects. Am J Epidemiol. 2015; 181:251–60. [PubMed: 25632051] 
49. Thompson SG, Sharp SJ. Explaining heterogeneity in meta-analysis: a comparison of methods. 
Stat Med. 1999; 18:2693–708. [PubMed: 10521860] 
50. Nica AC, et al. The architecture of gene regulatory variation across multiple human tissues: the 
MuTHER study. PLoS Genet. 2011; 7:e1002003. [PubMed: 21304890] 
51. GTEx, Consortium. Human genomics. The Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) pilot analysis: 
multitissue gene regulation in humans. Science. 2015; 348:648–60. [PubMed: 25954001] 
52. Giambartolomei C, et al. Bayesian test for colocalisation between pairs of genetic association 
studies using summary statistics. PLoS Genet. 2014; 10:e1004383. [PubMed: 24830394] 
Surendran et al.
Page 26
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 1. Study design and work flow diagram of single variant discovery analyses.
EUR=European, SAS=South Asian, HIS=Hispanic, AA=African American, 
HTN=hypertension, BP=blood pressure, SBP=systolic blood pressure, DBP= diastolic blood 
pressure, PP=pulse pressure, N=sample size, MAF=minor allele frequency, P=P-value 
significance threshold, SNV=single-nucleotide variant, GWS=genome-wide significance 
*Further details of the selection criteria are provided in the methods.
Surendran et al.
Page 27
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 2. Overlap of the 30 novel loci associations across SBP, DBP, PP and HTN.
The Venn diagram shows which of the 30 newly identified BP loci are associated with 
multiple BP traits. Only SNV-BP trait associations that were genome-wide significant (P < 
5x10-8) in the combined discovery and replication meta-analyses are listed for any given BP 
trait, within the corresponding ancestry dataset that the given locus was validated for (see 
Tables 1 and 2). The association of RRAS variant with SBP was replicated in the 
independent samples, but did not achieve GWS in the combined discovery and replication 
meta-analysis and is therefore only included for SBP. HTN=hypertension, SBP=systolic 
blood pressure, DBP= diastolic blood pressure, PP=pulse pressure.
Surendran et al.
Page 28
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 3. Study design for conditional analyses and rare variant gene-based discovery analyses.
RMW=RareMetalWorker, EUR=European, SAS = South Asian, HTN=hypertension, 
BP=blood pressure, SBP=systolic blood pressure, DBP= diastolic blood pressure, PP=pulse 
pressure. N=sample size, MAF=minor allele frequency, P=P-value significance threshold, 
Pcond=conditional P-value significance threshold
Surendran et al.
Page 29
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 4. Locus plot for A2ML1 and secondary amino acid structure of the gene product.
(a) Locus plot for A2ML1 associated with HTN identified through gene based tests. The 
variants’ positions along the gene (x axis, based on human genome build 37) and the –
log10(P-value of association) (y axis) are indicated. The variants are colour coded: nonsense 
(black), missense, predicted damaging (blue), and missense (orange). The schematic above 
the x-axis represents the intron / exon (black vertical bars) structure, the untranslated regions 
are shown as grey vertical bars.
Surendran et al.
Page 30
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 (b) The white box denotes the full-length amino acid sequence for each of the two gene 
products. Black numbers denote amino acid residue positions of note. Coloured boxes depict 
putative functional domains (see below). Coloured vertical lines indicate the amino acid 
substitutions corresponding to the variants depicted in the locus plots above using the same 
colour coding. Bold, italic indicates the SNV association with smallest P-value.
Dark grey – signal peptide sequence. Brown – regions of intramolecular disulfide bonds. For 
simplicity only those regions coinciding with variants described were indicated. Black – bait 
region described to interact with proteases. Purple – thiol ester sequence region aiding in 
interaction with proteases. Light grey – alpha helical regions thought to mediate A2ML1 
interaction with LRP1, facilitating receptor-mediated endocytosis.
Surendran et al.
Page 31
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 12.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
  Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Surendran et al.
Page 32
Table 1
Novel blood pressure trait associated loci. Variants with formal replication
Variant information
Discovery
Replication
Combined
Locus
rsID
Chr:Pos (EA:EAF)
Trait
Pt
PU
N
β
P
N
β
P
EUR
RNF207
rs709209
1:6.28 (A:0.655)
PP
4.57 x 10-6
1.60 x 10-6
122,780
0.17
5.83 x 10-4
284,683
0.20
9.62 x 10-9
C5orf56
rs12521868
5:131.78 (T:0.373)
DBP
1.59 x 10-6
3.03 x 10-7
122,795
-0.18
2.29 x 10-5
282,023
-0.19
6.12 x 10-11
PHACTR1
rs9349379
6:12.90 (A:0.566)
SBP
2.11 x 10-8
1.78 x 10-7
122,809
0.24
4.06 x 10-4
284,673
0.29
8.84 x 10-10
COL21A1
rs200999181†
6:55.94 (A:0.002)
PP
3.08 x 10-8
2.46 x 10-7
121,487
2.70
1.90 x 10-4
242,486
3.25
6.27 x 10-10
ABO
rs687621
9:136.14 (A:0.615)
DBP
8.80 x 10-8
2.55 x 10-7
122,798
0.16
1.96 x 10-4
276,014
0.19
5.45 x 10-10
ADO
rs10995311
10:64.56 (C:0.567)
DBP
1.86 x 10-6
1.14 x 10-6
122,798
0.23
8.47 x 10-8
266,456
0.21
1.12 x 10-12
LMO1
rs110419
11:8.25 (A:0.48)
DBP
9.41 x 10-6
2.22 x 10-5
122,798
0.16
1.81 x 10-4
279,935
0.16
3.04 x 10-8
OR5B12
rs11229457
11:58.21 (T:0.236)
SBP
1.58 x 10-6
4.62 x 10-5
122,809
-0.32
7.53 x 10-5
284,680
-0.31
2.70 x 10-8
CERS5
rs7302981
12:50.54 (A:0.361)
DBP
1.35 x 10-13
4.60 x 10-11
122,798
0.24
2.64 x 10-8
284,718
0.25
1.38 x 10-17
MYH6
rs452036
14:23.87 (A:0.327)
PP
4.59 x 10-11
2.80 x 10-13
122,780
-0.21
1.81 x 10-5
284,672
-0.28
2.96 x 10-16
DPEP1
rs1126464
16:89.70 (C:0.256)
DBP
1.19 x 10-9
4.35 x 10-11
118,677
0.24
1.68 x 10-6
261,564
0.28
1.02 x 10-15
TBX2
rs8068318†
17:59.48 (T:0.698)
DBP
7.46 x 10-13
5.71 x 10-10
122,798
0.26
3.23 x 10-8
281,978
0.26
1.95 x 10-16
RGL3
rs167479
19:11.53 (T:0.486)
DBP
2.22 x 10-23
1.97 x 10-22
122,797
-0.29
3.01 x 10-11
283,332
-0.33
1.99 x 10-31
PREX1
rs6095241
20:47.31 (A:0.452)
DBP
5.65 x 10-6
2.29 x 10-5
122,798
-0.18
2.56 x 10-5
281,322
-0.17
4.75 x 10-9
ALL ancestry
RBM47
rs35529250†
4:40.43 (T:0.01)
SBP
6.56 x 10-7
6.15 x 10-6
148,878
-1.43
5.02 x 10-4
306,352
-1.55
2.42 x 10-8
OBFC1
rs4387287
10:105.68 (A:0.157)
SBP
2.23 x 10-8
1.32 x 10-7
147,791
0.28
3.37 x 10-4
320,494
0.36
9.12 x 10-10
RRAS
rs61760904†
19:50.14 (T:0.008)
SBP
1.96 x 10-6
1.90 x 10-5
148,878
1.38
5.70 x 10-4
322,664
1.50
8.45 x 10-8
SNV-BP associations are reported for the newly identified BP loci that replicated at P < 6.2 x 10-4 (Bonferroni correction for the 81 variants 
selected for replication for a primary blood pressure trait; Methods). Loci are categorised into EUR and ALL ancestry based on the meta-analysis 
used to replicate the variants for the primary BP trait shown in columns labelled ‘Trait’. In the columns that contains the discovery meta-analyses 
results, Pt represents the P-value for association of the variant with the transformed primary BP trait in the EUR_SAS discovery meta-analyses 
(which was also used to select the variant for replication) and Pu represents the P-value for association with the untransformed primary BP trait in 
the ancestry in which the variant replicated. N, β and P, which denote the number of samples, estimated allelic effect and P-value for association 
with the primary BP trait, are provided for the untransformed primary BP trait in the replication data and also from the combined (discovery and 
replication) meta-analyses. NB: ALL ancestry corresponds to all ancestries in the combined (discovery + replication) meta-analyses
Locus – Gene or region containing the SNV, rsID - dbSNP rsID. Chr:Pos (EA:EAF) – Chromosome:NCBI Build 37 position in Mb (effect 
allele:effect allele frequency), Trait – primary blood pressure trait for which the variant was and also replicated, β - effect estimate, N:sample size, 
EUR - European.
†indicates it is a non-synonymous SNV (nsSNV) or is in linkage disequilibrium with a nsSNV (r2 > 0.8) that is predicted to be damaging
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 12.
  Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Surendran et al.
Page 33
Table 2
Novel blood pressure trait associated loci. Variants with GWS evidence of association in 
combined meta-analyses
Variant information
Discovery
Replication
Combined
Locus
rsID
Chr:Pos (EA:EAF)
Trait
Pt
PU
N
β
P
N
β
P
EUR
2q36.3
rs2972146
2:227.10 (T:0.652)
DBP§
(HTN)
1.51 x 10-9
2.47 x 10-7
122,798
0.13
2.20 x 10-3
275,610
0.17
8.40 x 10-9
ZBTB38
rs16851397
3:141.13 (A:0.953)
DBP§
(SBP)
6.87 x 10-6
3.20 x 10-5
122,798
-0.38
1.20 x 10-4
284,717
-0.38
3.01 x 10-8
PRDM6
rs1008058
5:122.44 (A:0.135)
SBP
5.09 x 10-7
1.01 x 10-8
43,109
0.46
3.61 x 10-3
176,362
0.55
2.99 x 10-10
GPR20
rs34591516
8:142.37 (T:0.055)
SBP§
(DBP)
1.54 x 10-6
1.01 x 10-7
122,807
0.51
4.20 x 10-4
282,009
0.64
6.10 x 10-10
HOXB7
rs7406910
17:46.69 (T:0.118)
SBP
6.07 x 10-10
2.74 x 10-9
122,809
-0.20
4.89 x 10-2
284,690
-0.46
3.80 x 10-8
AMH
rs10407022†
19:2.25 (T:0.82)
PP
1.63 x 10-7
1.73 x 10-7
118,656
-0.19
1.62 x 10-3
252,525
-0.26
5.94 x 10-9
ZNF101
rs2304130
19:19.79 (A:0.914)
DBP
1.66 x 10-8
1.92 x 10-8
122,798
-0.17
1.71 x 10-2
284,705
-0.29
1.53 x 10-8
PROCR
rs867186
20:33.76 (A:0.873)
DBP
1.44 x 10-6
4.15 x 10-7
122,798
0.21
2.48 x 10-3
284,722
0.26
1.19 x 10-8
RRP1B
rs9306160
21:45.11 (T:0.374)
DBP§
(SBP)
1.04 x 10-8
1.90 x 10-6
100,489
-0.16
4.30 x 10-4
249,817
-0.18
6.80 x 10-9
TNRC6B
rs470113
22:40.73 (A:0.804)
PP
1.48 x 10-10
1.31 x 10-9
122,780
-0.14
1.37 x 10-2
284,683
-0.25
1.67 x 10-9
ALL ancestry
7q32.1
rs4728142
7:128.57 (A:0.433)
SBP
8.10 x 10-6
4.21 x 10-6
150,542
-0.21
8.62 x 10-4
338,338
-0.24
3.45 x 10-8
PRKAG1
rs1126930†
12:49.40 (C:0.036)
PP
2.12 x 10-6
4.62 x 10-7
151,481
0.36
3.74 x 10-3
314,894
0.50
3.34 x 10-8
SBNO1
rs1060105
12:123.81 (T:0.209)
DBP
6.66 x 10-7
1.09 x 10-6
150,532
-0.15
2.67 x 10-3
336,413
-0.18
3.07 x 10-8
SNV-BP associations are reported for the newly identified BP loci that showed genome-wide significant association (P < 5 x 10-8) in the combined 
discovery and replication meta-analyses. In the columns that contain results from the discovery meta-analyses, Pt represents the P-value for 
association of the variant with the transformed primary BP trait in the EUR_SAS discovery meta-analyses (used to select the variant for replication) 
and Pu represents the P-value for association with the untransformed BP trait in the ancestry in which the variant was validated. Loci are 
categorised into EUR and ALL ancestry based on the ancestry in which the variant showed association with a blood pressure trait at P < 5 x 10-8. 
N, β and P, which denote the number of samples, estimated allelic effect and P-value for association with the validated BP trait, are provided for 
the untransformed BP trait in the replication data and also from the combined (discovery and replication) meta-analyses. NB: ALL ancestry 
corresponds to all ancestries in the combined (discovery + replication) meta-analyses.
Locus – Gene or region containing the SNV, rsID - dbSNP rsID. Chr:Pos (EA:EAF) – Chromosome:NCBI Build 37 position in Mb (effect 
allele:effect allele frequency), Trait - blood pressure trait for which association is reported, EUR - European.
§At four loci (2q36.3, ZBTB38, GPR20 and RRP1B) the primary trait used to select the variants for replication is given in parentheses because the 
variant associations were validated in the combined meta-analysis for the listed secondary trait. For these variants, Pt denotes the P-value for 
association with the primary trait, the other P-values provided are for the secondary trait.
†indicates it is a non-synonymous SNV (nsSNV) or is linkage disequilibrium with a nsSNV (r2 > 0.8) that is predicted to be damaging
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 12.
  Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Surendran et al.
Page 34
Table 3
Results of the genetic risk score analyses across CVD traits and risk factors.
Outcome
Units
N
DBP (per 10mmHg increase)
SBP (per 10mmHg increase)
PP (per 10mmHg increase)
Effect [95% CI]
P
Effect [95% CI]
P
Effect [95% CI]
P
CHD
OR
82,056
1.62 [ 1.28, 2.05]
5.99 x 10-5
1.39 [ 1.22, 1.59]
6.07 x 10-7
1.70 [ 1.34, 2.16]
1.20 x 10-5
Ischemic stroke
OR
25,799
1.93 [ 1.47, 2.55]
2.81 x 10-6
1.57 [ 1.35, 1.84]
1.16 x 10-8
2.12 [ 1.58, 2.84]
5.35 x 10-7
Cardioembolic stroke
OR
16,113
1.43 [ 0.86, 2.39]
0.1683
1.33 [ 0.99, 1.80]
0.0584
1.73 [ 1.00, 3.02]
0.0518
Large vessel stroke
OR
13,903
2.26 [ 1.25, 4.08]
0.0068
1.85 [ 1.32, 2.59]
3.61 x 10-4
3.05 [ 1.64, 5.68]
4.37 x 10-4
Small vessel stroke
OR
15,617
1.96 [ 1.13, 3.41]
0.0168
1.56 [ 1.13, 2.16]
0.0064
1.98 [ 1.09, 3.61]
0.0248
Heart failure
OR
13,282
1.48 [ 1.02, 2.17]
0.0409
1.25 [ 1.00, 1.57]
0.0512
1.33 [ 0.88, 2.02]
0.1757
Left ventricular mass
g
11,273
9.57 [ 3.98,15.17]
8.02 x 10-4
5.13 [ 1.77, 8.48]
0.0027
5.97 [-0.38,12.31]
0.0653
Left ventricular wall thickness
cm
11,311
0.10 [ 0.06, 0.13]
1.88 x 10-8
0.05 [ 0.03, 0.07]
5.52 x 10-6
0.05 [ 0.01, 0.09]
0.0187
HDL
mg/dl
80,395
0.25 [-1.00, 1.51]
0.6930
0.21 [-0.50, 0.92]
0.5622
0.47 [-0.79, 1.73]
0.4668
LDL
mg/dl
77,021
-1.57 [-5.20, 2.06]
0.3972
0.07 [-2.03, 2.16]
0.9498
1.87 [-1.86, 5.59]
0.3255
Total cholesterol
mg/dl
80,455
-1.34 [-5.90, 3.22]
0.5639
0.70 [-1.93, 3.32]
0.6029
3.68 [-0.97, 8.33]
0.1209
Triglycerides
mg/dl
77,779
0.02 [-0.03, 0.08]
0.3859
0.02 [-0.01, 0.05]
0.2697
0.03 [-0.03, 0.08]
0.3025
BMI
INVT
526,508
-0.10 [-0.18,-0.01]
0.0342
-0.07 [-0.13,-0.02]
0.0058
-0.12 [-0.23,-0.02]
0.0165
WHRadjBMI
INVT
344,369
0.03 [-0.04, 0.11]
0.4025
0.03 [-0.02, 0.08]
0.2170
0.06 [-0.03, 0.15]
0.1885
Height
INVT
458,927
0.02 [-0.15, 0.18]
0.8592
-0.04 [-0.15, 0.06]
0.4170
-0.18 [-0.37, 0.01]
0.0683
eGFR
INVT
51,039
-0.02 [-0.15, 0.11]
0.7810
-0.03 [-0.10, 0.04]
0.4080
-0.07 [-0.20, 0.06]
0.2741
CHD, coronary heart disease; HDL, high density lipoprotein; LDL, low density lipoprotein; eGFR, estimated glomerular filtration rate; DBP, diastolic blood pressure; SBP systolic blood pressure; PP, pulse 
pressure; OR, odds ratio; g, grams; INVT, inverse normally transformed (hence no units); N, sample size; P, P-value of association of BP with the trait listed; CI, confidence interval. Results are considered 
significant if P < 0.0038, which corresponds to a Bonferroni correction for 13 phenotypes tested.
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 12.
