 RESEARCH ARTICLE
A Community-Level Initiative to Prevent Obesity:
Results From Kaiser Permanente’s Healthy Eating
Active Living Zones Initiative in California
Allen Cheadle, PhD,1 Akpene Atiedu, MPH, MA,1 Suzanne Rauzon, MPH,2
Pamela M. Schwartz, MPH,3 Laura Keene, MPH,4 Mehrnaz Davoudi, MPH,3 Rebecca Spring, MPH,2
Michelle Molina, MA,6 Lynda Lee, MA,5 Kathryn Boyle, BA,3 Dana Williamson, MPH,3
Clara Steimberg, MHA,5 Roberta Tinajero, BA,5 Jodi Ravel, MPH,3 Jean Nudelman, MPH,3
Andrea Misako Azuma, MS,3 Elena S. Kuo, PhD, MPH,1 Loel Solomon, PhD3
Introduction: A growing number of health systems are leading health promotion efforts in their
wider communities. What impact are these efforts having on health behaviors and ultimately health
status? This paper presents evaluation results from the place-based Kaiser Permanente Healthy
Eating Active Living Zones obesity prevention initiative, implemented in 2011–2015 in 12 low-
income communities in Kaiser Permanente’s Northern and Southern California Regions.
Methods: The Healthy Eating Active Living Zones design targeted places and people through
policy, environmental, and programmatic strategies. Each Healthy Eating Active Living Zone is a
small, low-income community of 10,000 to 20,000 residents with high obesity rates and other health
disparities. Community coalitions planned and implemented strategies in each community. A
population-dose approach and pre and post surveys were used to assess impact of policy, program,
and environmental change strategies; the analysis was conducted in 2016. Population dose is the
product of reach (number of people affected by a strategy divided by target population size) and
strength (the effect size or relative change in behavior for each person exposed to the strategy).
Results: More than 230 community change strategies were implemented over 3 years, encompassing
policy, environmental, and programmatic changes as well as efforts to build community capacity to
sustain strategies and make changes in the future. Positive population-level results were seen for higher-
dose strategies, particularly those targeting youth physical activity. Higher-dose strategies were more
likely to be found in communities with the longest duration of investment.
Conclusions: These results demonstrate that strong (high-dose), community-based obesity preven-
tion strategies can lead to improved health behaviors, particularly among youth in school settings.
Supplement information: This article is part of a supplement entitled Building Thriving
Communities Through Comprehensive Community Health Initiatives, which is sponsored by Kaiser
Permanente, Community Health.
Am J Prev Med 2018;54(5S2):S150–S159. & 2018 American Journal of Preventive Medicine. Published by Elsevier Inc.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
INTRODUCTION
A
growing number of health systems are leading
efforts to promote health in the wider commun-
ities they serve.1 These efforts are driven both
by a community benefit imperative, addressing needs
identified in community health needs assessments,2
and a recognition that there are potential savings in
From the 1Center for Community Health and Evaluation, Kaiser Permanente
Washington Health Research Institute, Seattle, Washington; 2Nutrition Policy
Institute, University of California, Berkeley, California; 3Kaiser Permanente,
Oakland, California; 4Keene Insights, Los Angeles, California; 5Kaiser Perma-
nente, Pasadena, California; and 6Connecting Evidence, Los Angeles, California
Address correspondence to: Allen Cheadle, PhD, Center for Commu-
nity Health and Evaluation, Kaiser Permanente Washington Health
Research Institute, Seattle WA 98101. E-mail: cheadle.a@ghc.org.
0749-3797/$36.00
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2018.01.024
S150
Am J Prev Med 2018;54(5S2):S150–S159
& 2018 American Journal of Preventive Medicine. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is
an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
 healthcare utilization and costs by promoting healthier
environments and more health-promoting policies.
The obesity epidemic is one such health issue that
can benefit from a comprehensive, community-level
approach, using a portfolio of strategies at multiple
levels (e.g., individual, family, community) across
multiple sectors (e.g., school, worksite, neighborhood)
following the socioecologic model or some modifica-
tion of that framework.3,4 A comprehensive approach
recognizes that the epidemic is driven by many com-
plex and interrelated factors; food and physical activity
behaviors and weight gain are influenced by cultural,
economic, social, genetic, and environmental influen-
ces that are hard to disentangle and even harder to
change.5–8
This emphasis on a comprehensive or multicompo-
nent approach (i.e., multilevel, multisector) has shaped
several obesity prevention initiatives, including the W.K.
Kellogg Foundation’s Food and Fitness Initiative,9 the
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation’s Healthy Kids/
Healthy Communities initiative,10 and the DHHS’ Com-
munities Putting Prevention to Work Initiative funded
under the American Relief and Reinvestment Act of
2009.11
Published studies assessing the impact of comprehen-
sive community approaches have been mixed. A recent
“review of reviews” article found evidence of impact
among young children and the school setting and incon-
clusive evidence among adults and the general community
setting.12 Other studies looking at multicomponent ini-
tiatives targeting entire communities (i.e., including both
youth and adults) found some promising results for these
approaches, but noted a difficulty in determining the
specific strategies or combined effect of strategies that
work.13 A Cochrane review focusing on community-wide
physical interventions found few credible studies showing
impact at the population level, noting that this may be
because of the difficulty reaching enough people in a
community setting.14 Evidence is accumulating on indi-
vidual interventions (e.g., physical activity programs in
schools),15 and simulation studies have demonstrated that
specific strategies can be cost effective.16
This article presents evaluation results from a multi-
component initiative targeting both youth and adults:
the Kaiser Permanente (KP) Healthy Eating Active
Living (HEAL) Zones initiative, implemented in 2011–
2015 in 12 low-income communities in two KP regions:
Northern California (NCAL) and Southern California
(SCAL). The concept of population dose is used
to assess the impact of the initiative on the food
and physical activity behaviors of both adults and
youth in the communities; the analysis was conducted
in 2016.
METHODS
Program Description
KP is a nonprofit integrated healthcare delivery system that serves
≅12 million members in eight states and the District of Columbia.
In 2003, KP’s Community Benefit program created a multisector
place-based program—the Community Health Initiative (CHI)—
to promote obesity prevention policy and environmental change in
communities served by KP.17 To date, CHI programs have been
implemented in nearly 60 communities in five KP regions.
Overarching CHI principles include a place-based focus; an
emphasis on change at multiple levels, particularly environmental
and policy change; a multisectoral collaboration that involves
health care, neighborhood, schools, and work sites; and commun-
ity engagement and community ownership.
This paper focuses on CHI programs in two KP regions, NCAL
and SCAL, whose design and evaluations were closely aligned. The
two regional initiatives share some common features described in
the next section along with the ways in which they differ.
For both regions, the HEAL Zones design targeted places and
people through policy, environmental, and programmatic strat-
egies. Examples of these strategies include implementing a new
physical education curricula in kindergarten to 12th-grade schools
or installing a lighted walking trail to provide access to safe
physical activity. Each site or HEAL Zone is a small community of
10,000 to 20,000 residents with high obesity rates and other health
disparities, such as in rates of diabetes and cardiovascular disease.
Community coalitions planned and implemented strategies in
each community; coalition members included schools and school
districts, community-based organizations, employers, local busi-
nesses, local governmental agencies, faith-based organizations,
healthcare providers, and residents. The initiative evaluator
supported local evaluation efforts and provided guidance on the
HEAL
framework
as
well
as
strategy
development
and
improvement.
The most important difference between the two regional initiatives
was the duration of investment. That duration was significantly
longer in NCAL where KP has implemented two large-scale
initiatives since 2006: (1) the HEAL CHI initiative from 2006 to
2010, in three communities18; and (2) the HEAL Zones from 2011 to
2014, in six communities, including two of the original three HEAL
CHI communities that received funding from 2006 to 2014.
Although KP made some adjustments in approach between HEAL
CHI and HEAL Zones, they kept core elements consistent across
initiatives. By contrast, the SCAL initiative was launched more
recently—in January 2012—with the first phase ending in March
2016 (a second 3-year phase is currently underway).
The other regional difference was that in SCAL, a more formal
support structure was put in place to support the building of
effective coalitions. In particular, an outside technical assistance
provider supported coalition development and functioning, and
facilitated connections to needed resources. They also supported
cross-site learning through activities and events. In NCAL, a
separate technical assistant provider was not included in the HEAL
Zones initiative, and support for the coalitions was provided
largely by KP staff.
Evaluation Design
The evaluation goals were to describe implementation progress,
document population-level impact, and contribute to program
Cheadle et al / Am J Prev Med 2018;54(5S2):S150–S159
S151
May 2018
 improvement. The evaluators worked in close collaboration with
program staff and technical assistance partners. IRB approval for
the evaluation was obtained from KP Washington Health Research
Institute (formerly Group Health Research Institute) and Univer-
sity of California Davis (and Berkeley) IRB. Key evaluation
questions included the following: Were the HEAL Zones strategies
implemented? What was the impact of implemented strategies on
the people touched by them? Were strategies implemented with
sufficient dose to expect population-level impact? Did population-
level change occur and was it attributable to the initiative?
A logic model design was used to answer these questions,
particularly those related to attribution of population-level change.
Logic model designs19 create indicators for each step in the process
by which an initiative is intended to achieve its outcomes and then
examine whether the temporal pattern of change is consistent with
what is specified in the model. The key steps in the HEAL Zones
logic model were creating coalitions and implementing environ-
mental and policy changes in communities, which were then
expected to lead to population-level outcomes (e.g., physical
activity behaviors). The concept of population dose (or simply
dose)18,20,21 was used to examine the link in the logic model
between strategy implementation and population-level change.
Dose is defined as the product of reach (exposure or number of
people touched divided by target population size) and strength
(the effect size or relative change in behavior for each exposed
person). The dose of clusters of environmental and policy change
strategies in a given health target area were estimated (e.g., youth
physical activity) and then the association between higher-dose
strategies and measured population-level changes was examined
(e.g., self-reported minutes of physical activity among youth).
Measures
Table 1 lists the primary data sources used in the HEAL Zones
evaluation. Strategy status and implementation details were
gathered during monthly check-in calls where the HEAL Zone
project coordinator provided an update on the status of each
strategy and described recent accomplishments and challenges.
Additionally, key informant interviews and Photovoice22 with a
sample of community residents were conducted to gather the
community perspective on community impacts. Results from the
key informant interviews focusing on the role of the SCAL
community coalitions in the initiative will be presented in a
separate paper.
Population-level impact was tracked using self-administered
and phone surveys of youth and adults living in the HEAL Zones.
Survey questions were drawn from existing validated instruments
(e.g., the Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance Survey23), supple-
mented by questions about the school and neighborhood environ-
ment. NCAL schools were surveyed in 2012 and 2015 (2012:
n¼1,745, response rate¼83%; and 2015: n¼1,733, response
rate¼91%). SCAL schools were surveyed in 2013 and 2016
(2013: n¼2,932, response rate¼94%; and 2016: n¼2,739, response
rate¼90%).
Table 1. HEAL Zones Evaluation Data Sources
Method
Description
Strategy tracking
database
• Monthly check-in calls with site coordinators to gather information on strategy status, accomplishments,
reach, potential sustainability
• Information used to populate a strategy-tracking database: Documentation of Community Change (DOCC)
Adult surveys
• Self-administered mail survey with phone follow-up of non-responders
• Sample: 1,300 randomly selected HEAL Zones residents and a comparison group of 1,300 residents from
throughout KP’s Southern California region
• Survey questions: Food and physical activity behaviors; attitudes about, and social support for, healthy
eating and active living; demographic information
Youth surveys
• Self-administered survey
• Sample: fifth- and seventh-grade students in elementary and middle schools where HEAL work was taking
place
• Survey questions: Attitudes and behaviors related to food and physical activity and perceptions of school
and community environments
Key informant
interviews
• Semi-structured telephone interviews
• Sample: Partner organizations and residents involved in HEAL Zones work
• Questions: Project and coalition successes and challenges, perceptions of community changes, feedback
on the support provided by technical assistance provider
Coalition member
surveys
• Online or in-person self-administered survey
• Sample: All coalition members
• Questions: Coalition functioning including items related to shared vision and planning, community
participation, decision-making, leadership, sense of community, and sustainability
Teacher surveys
• Online survey
• Sample: All teachers in HEAL Zones schools
• Questions: Status of nutrition and physical activity in their school and their own physical health
Photovoice
• Participants used photos and captions to identify, from their perspective, the most significant
accomplishments from the initiative at both baseline and follow-up
Strategy-level
evaluations
• Variety of program evaluation methods used to capture impact of individual strategies on health behavior,
including surveys, observation, and school and clinic records (Table 4 provides details)
HEAL, Healthy Eating Active Living; KP, Kaiser Permanente.
Cheadle et al / Am J Prev Med 2018;54(5S2):S150–S159
S152
www.ajpmonline.org
 The adult survey instrument included questions drawn from the
Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System Survey24 related to
food and physical activity, along with demographic information
and questions about social support attitudes for HEAL. NCAL
adults were surveyed in 2012 and 2015 (2012: n¼1,867, response
rate¼19.5%; and 2015: n¼1,394, response rate¼14.5%). SCAL
adults were surveyed in 2013 and 2016 (2013: n¼1,685, response
rate¼18.1%; and 2016: n¼1,436, response rate¼15.4%).
Another key element in both regions was evaluating the impact
of individual strategies on health behaviors of people exposed to
each strategy. At the beginning of the initiative, evaluators met
with coordinators from each site to choose two to three strategies
to investigate more deeply based on evaluation feasibility/cost and
impact strategies were likely to have on health behaviors if fully
implemented. Strategy-level evaluation activities were typically
done in collaboration with the sites; methods included surveys of
people interacting with changing environments (e.g., shoppers in
grocery stores), observation of activity levels in parks and schools,
and records from clinics and cafeterias. NCAL strategy-level
evaluation results in corner stores and early childhood settings
are presented in separate papers in this issue.25,26
Statistical Analysis
Strategy implementation data were converted into reach, strength,
and dose estimates and then combined with the population-level
survey data to examine associations between dose and population-
level behavior change. This paper presents a high-level summary of
the analytic approach; more details, including examples of the dose
rating process, are published in an online dose toolkit.27
Dose is defined as the product of reach (exposure or number of
people touched divided by target population size) and strength
(the effect size or relative change in behavior for each exposed
person). Reach is the proportion of people in a community who are
touched by a strategy (e.g., the number of participants in an
exercise program divided by the community population). For
environmental changes, the community population (or numer-
ator) is the number of people who encounter the improved
environment on a regular basis and are assumed to be influenced
by it (e.g., the number of residents living near a newly renovated
park or playground).
Where possible, estimates of strategy strength were obtained
from published research or from evaluations conducted of
particular strategies; an example is using student surveys to assess
the impact of Safe Routes to School programs that encourage
walking and biking to school. When these sources were unavail-
able, strength ratings were based on frequency of exposure;
intensity of exposure (e.g., the magnitude of an environmental
change); and the degree to which the healthy choice is the only
choice (e.g., removing all unhealthy snacks from a closed-campus
school versus adding a few healthy snacks but leaving the
unhealthy ones in place).
Strategies were grouped into four strength categories for dose
calculations. Minimal-strength strategies included changes with
low frequency/intensity and limited or no evidence of effectiveness
(e.g., general health education/promotion, walking trails that were
minimally used; based on observations). Low-strength strategies
were also low-frequency/intensity but had some evaluation evi-
dence showing effect sizes of about 2% (e.g., Safe Routes to Schools
programs). Medium-strength strategies were programs and envi-
ronmental strategies with greater intensity/frequency of exposure,
with some evidence of effect sizes in the 5% range (e.g., active
recess programs in elementary schools). A rating of high strength
was given only to evidence-based strategies with demonstrated
effect sizes in the range of ≥10% (e.g., evidence-based school
physical education curricula). Multiple independent raters were
used to standardize the ratings as much as possible (see dose
toolkit for more details on the ratings of specific strategies27).
After computing the dose of the individual strategies, strategies
among youth or adults targeting similar outcomes (e.g., minutes of
physical activity) were combined into dose clusters approximating
the combined impact of multiple strategies. Table 2 illustrates the
dose calculations for youth physical activity strategies in one
HEAL Zone community.
Dose clusters were computed for each of the 12 HEAL Zone
communities (six NCAL, six SCAL) across four health target areas
and two populations (a total of 96 clusters). The health target areas
were physical activity, sugar-sweetened beverage (SSB) consump-
tion, fruit and vegetable consumption, and healthy food—a general
category including examples such as reduced-calorie snacks in
schools and junk food removal. The two populations were youth
(school-aged children ages 5–18 years) and community (i.e., the
Table 2. Example of a Community-Level Dose Cluster for Youth Physical Activity Strategies
Strategy
Reach,a %
Strength,b %
Dose,c %
Strategy description
Playground
improvements
100
2.0
2.0
New playground equipment installed in schools
Safe Routes to School
(SRTS)
74
1.3
1.0
Teachers trained in promoting walking and biking to
school
Classroom physical
activity (PA)
38
11.2
4.3
Trained teachers in “instant recess” in classroom
In one district, all fourth-grade teachers did 30
minutes’ PA with all children
Recess PA
21
4.2
0.9
Recess coaches trained and in place—program
sustained through variety of partnerships
Total dose
8.2
aReach ¼ Number exposed to the strategy divided by the number in the target population (school-age youth).
bStrength ¼ Estimated percent change in physical activity minutes for each person exposed (i.e., the effect size).
cDose ¼ Reach multiplied by strength.
Cheadle et al / Am J Prev Med 2018;54(5S2):S150–S159
S153
May 2018
 community as a whole as measured by surveying adults 418
years). The populations overlap somewhat because some com-
munity strategies can impact the entire family (e.g., if healthier
food is purchased). Overlap was avoided whenever possible; an
example is that community strategies primarily targeting kinder-
garten to 12th-grade youth (e.g., recreational center after school
physical activity programs) were assigned to youth.
Impact was attributed to the HEAL Zones if higher-dose clusters
of strategies were associated with a greater frequency of positive
population-level changes. Positive population-level change was
defined as change in the desired direction that was either statisti-
cally significant (po0.05) or trending toward significant (po0.10)
with an absolute percentage behavior change of 45% (note:
trending criteria were applied because fifth-grade survey data
had small sample sizes and corresponding limited power). State
and national trends were adjusted for using either comparison data
collected by the CHI evaluation team (for the adult survey) or
other secondary data sources; for example, the Youth Risk
Behavior Surveillance Survey.
For the two longer-duration sites in NCAL, there was concern
about missing the baseline in the population-level analysis by using
pre–post results from 2011 to 2014, when the sites had begun work
in 2006. For physical activity only, information was added from a
previous pre–post assessment of changes in physical activity18 to
approximate impact across the entire 8-year period. (Note: The
evaluation of the 2006–2010 period used different survey instru-
ments and methods so that data could not be directly combined.)
For longer duration sites, a positive population change was
assigned over the 8-year period if (1) there was a significant
increase in physical activity from 2006 to 2010; (2) the baseline
level of physical activity in 2011 was significantly greater than the
overall baseline for all sites combined; and (3) the pre–post
measure of physical activity showed improvement or stayed the
same from 2011 to 2014.
If dose computations for a cluster of strategies are based on
accurate reach and strength estimates, they will approximate the
population-level changes expected to result from implementing
those strategies. However, in practice it is difficult to accurately
estimate strength, so rather than attempting to correlate dose
with population change, the strategies were divided into two
categories—higher and lower dose—and the proportion of
positive population-level changes was examined within each
group. A cutpoint of 2% was used that corresponds to reaching
everyone in a community or school with a low-strength strategy.
For population-level initiatives, a 2% change in key risk
behaviors, such as diet and physical activity, can be clinically
significant in that the long-term change in downstream con-
ditions, such as diabetes and cardiovascular disease, can affect a
significant number of community residents (see simulation
models projecting significant long-term changes in health out-
comes from relatively modest behavior change interventions: e.g.,
Gortmaker et al.16).
RESULTS
Table 3 shows the distribution of the 233 implemented
HEAL Zone strategies organized by the levels of the
Social Ecological Model.4 The results confirm the empha-
sis of the initiative on environmental and policy changes:
93 strategies (40% of the total) involved organizational
policy change; 34 (15%) environmental change; and 14
(6%) public policy. Communities also implemented 29
Table 3. HEAL Zones Strategies by Levels of the Socio-Ecological Model
Category
Strategy examples
Policies: Organizational change (40%;
n¼93)a
• Adopt a policy removing flavored milk from school breakfast in elementary school
• Make changes to worksite physical activity environments, including point of decision
prompts in stairwells
• Implement new physical education curricula in K–12 schools
• Develop protocol for clinic staff to support patients with healthy eating and active living
Programs (12%; n¼29)
• Increase physical activity programs in community centers
• Create a promotora program to do community HEAL education
Environmental change (15%; n¼34)
• Install a lighted walking trail to provide access to safe physical activity
• Improve/build parks/physical activity areas that are safe and accessible
• Implement the “Good For Kids” restaurant certification program
• Increase purchase or distribution points for fresh fruits and vegetables in the community
Public policy (6%; n¼14)
• Work to implement a city soda tax initiative
• Impact the urban planning via the city general plans
• Implement city policies to promote school joint use agreements and Safe Routes to School
programs
Media campaigns, promotion (10%;
n¼23)
• Rethink Your Drink health education campaigns to discourage sugar-sweetened beverage
consumption
Community capacity buildingb (17%;
n¼40)
• Implement a Resident Leadership and Advocacy Program
• Establish active neighborhood groups and a youth council
• Build worksite sector leadership and infrastructure
aPercentage of total and total number of strategies in that category are in parentheses; the total number of strategies across all 12 HEAL Zone
communities was 233.
bThese are more generic capacity building strategies (e.g., community building activities), not directly related to obesity policies and programs.
HEAL, Healthy Eating Active Living.
Cheadle et al / Am J Prev Med 2018;54(5S2):S150–S159
S154
www.ajpmonline.org
 (12%) programmatic strategies and 40 (17%) community
capacity-building strategies.
Table 4 summarizes the SCAL strategy-level evalua-
tions examining the impact of implemented strategies on
those directly touched by them (i.e., participants in
programs and people exposed to policy, program, and
environmental changes). Strategies around active recess
and SSBs showed the greatest impact on behavior; and
clinic HEAL prescription strategies and environmental
improvements in child care settings also showed prom-
ising results. For other strategies implemented in parks,
grocery stores, and restaurants, the impact was mixed or
Table 4. Summary of Southern California Strategy-Level Evaluation Results
Strategy
Description of activities
Evaluation methods
Results
Active
recess
Parent volunteers, teachers, or YMCA
staff were trained to help engage
students in steady physical activity
during daytime school recess periods
Pre–post observation of student
activity levels during recess
• Increases in moderate or
vigorous physical activity (MVPA)
during recess in 3 of 4
communities
• Pre- to post-MVPA increases
ranged from 17% to 19%
Flavored
milk
removal
Community 1 removed flavored milk
during all meals at all 24 schools in
the district. Community 2 removed
flavored milk during breakfast at all
10 schools in their district
Cafeteria records showing
consumption of milk
• Children replaced the flavored
milk with nonfat or 1% regular
milk, with no overall decrease in
milk consumption
Child care
In Community 1, 24 small early
childhood care sites worked with a
YMCA Health Educator to increase
healthy offerings. In Community 2,
one center serving 144 children was
certified as a healthy site, by offering
more fruits and vegetables and
making other health-promoting
changes
Pre–post self-assessment using the
NAPSACC – Nutrition and Physical
Activity Self-Assessment for Child
Care instrument (Community B only)
Results for Community 1 showed
modest improvements:
• Mean number of healthy food
items served per day increased
by one
• Percentage of sites providing
more than 60 minutes of physical
activity increased from 56% to
71%
• Two sites were serving flavored
milk at pre; none at post
Parks
Five of the six HEAL Zones added
trails and new equipment to parks.
Some sites began promoting the new
equipment/trails through exercise
programs
Pre–post observation of activity
levels among park users
• No overall increase in intensity of
exercise among park users
• 15% of park users at one site
were observed using new
exercise equipment
Clinics
Clinics in three HEAL Zones
developed and began using a HEAL
prescription with patients. In several
locations, additional educational and
promotional strategies were provided
along with the prescription
Clinic electronic health record data
used to track uptake of BMI
screening and follow-up discussions
Significant uptake in the 3 clinics:
• Clinic 1: Increase from 42% to
82% of BMI screenings
• Clinic 2: HEAL prescription given
in 70% of encounters which
included fruit and vegetable
vouchers
• Clinic 3: HEAL prescription written
in 90% of encounters which
included PA incentives (e.g.,
soccer balls)
Corner
stores
Store environmental changes
included refrigeration units,
promotional materials, healthy food
labels
Pre–post shopper intercept surveys
• Increases in awareness of
healthy labeling
• No significant increases in
purchasing fruits and vegetables
or other healthy items
Restaurants
In Community 1, ten restaurants
created healthy menus for families
and youth. In Community 2, three
restaurants created healthy menus
for youth
Tracking of healthy menus,
restaurant participation
• After 6 months, only three of ten
Community 1 restaurants still
made the healthy menu
available. The strategy was
discontinued in Community 2
HEAL, Healthy Eating Active Living; PA, physical activity.
Cheadle et al / Am J Prev Med 2018;54(5S2):S150–S159
S155
May 2018
 negative. NCAL strategy-level evaluation results included
in other papers in this issue showed mixed findings for
corner store strategies26 and more positive results in early
childhood settings.25
Modest positive results were found for population
changes from the youth and adult surveys across the
entire initiative (data not shown). Of the 92 pre and post
comparisons (Note: one community in SCAL did not do
the school surveys, so there were 44 comparisons in
SCAL, not 48), just over one fifth (n¼20, 22%) were
positive—either statistically significant (po0.05, n¼11)
or trending (po0.10, n¼9)—and 7 (8%) were negative
and significant. Thus, there were only slightly more
statistically significant (po0.05) positive pre and post
changes versus negative (11 vs 7).
Given the logic model approach, the key question was,
Were positive population-level changes associated with
higher-dose strategies? As shown in Figure 1, among the
higher-dose strategy clusters, there were positive pop-
ulation changes in six of nine cases (67%) versus in only
14 of 83 cases (17%) for lower-dose strategy clusters
(po0.01 for the difference in proportions). All of these
six dose-aligned improvements occurred among youth in
schools and four of those were in the area of physical
activity.
As the counts in Figure 1 show, just 10% (9/92) of the
strategy clusters were of sufficient dose to reach the 2%
higher-dose threshold (all were in schools). Notably, the
two longer-duration communities in NCAL had the
highest proportion of higher-dose clusters: six of 16
(38%) of their strategies were higher dose compared with
just three of 76 (4%) for the other ten communities.
DISCUSSION
A population dose approach was used to assess the
impact of the HEAL Zones initiative, a multicomponent
obesity prevention initiative implemented by KP in its
NCAL and SCAL regions. More than 230 community
change strategies were implemented over 3 years,
encompassing policy, environmental, and programmatic
changes as well as efforts to build community capacity to
sustain strategies and make changes in the future.
Positive population-level results were seen for higher-
dose strategies, particularly those targeting youth phys-
ical activity.
Of the 14 (of 20) positive population-level changes that
were not accompanied by higher-dose strategies, seven
were in SSB consumption. It is likely that at least some of
this decrease in consumption can be attributed to the
significant downward time trends both at the state level
and nationally during the period of the initiative.28 But
there were questions about whether the HEAL Zones SSB
strategies were truly lower dose because recent litera-
ture29 suggests that SSB consumption may be more
sensitive than other health behaviors to modest, educa-
tional messaging. In the end, given the uncertainty about
the relative contribution of the HEAL Zones strategies,
the conclusion drawn was that the strategies may
have played a role in the observed changes in SSB
consumption.
Despite the relatively low threshold for higher dose
(2%), only 10% of the HEAL Zone strategy clusters met
or exceeded this threshold. Furthermore, of the 83 low-
dose clusters 78 (94%) were less than 1% and 60 (72%)
were less than 0.5%. The community strategies were
particularly low dose, with 88% of all community strategy
clusters having less than 0.5% dose (compared with 38%
in schools). One explanation for these modest imple-
mentation results is the relatively short (3-year) time
frame for most of the communities participating in the
initiative. It typically took 1 to 2 years to implement some
of the institutional changes required by the action plans,
and reach may increase over time as institutional changes
become more established. This may explain why the
longer-duration NCAL sites had significantly more
strategy clusters that were higher dose than the other
ten communities (38% vs 4%).
The findings showing the greatest impact among
youth, particularly with school-based strategies, are
broadly consistent with the existing literature. As noted
in the introduction, multicomponent initiatives targeting
Figure 1. Distribution of HEAL Zone strategy clusters by
dose and population-level change.
Note: Percentages show the percent of strategies in each dose category
(higher or lower dose) with positive population-level change and
negative or non-significant population-level change. Total number of
strategy clusters¼92 (9 higher-dose, 83 lower-dose).
HEAL, Healthy Eating Active Living.
Cheadle et al / Am J Prev Med 2018;54(5S2):S150–S159
S156
www.ajpmonline.org
 youth have been the most frequently reported as suc-
cessful, beginning with the school and community
initiative in Somerville, Massachussetts.30 The evaluation
of the HEAL CHI initiative—the predecessor to HEAL
Zones—showed positive results only for youth physical
activity using a similar dose methodology.18 The finding
on physical activity is consistent with a recent systematic
review that rated physical activity interventions in
schools as having a high strength of evidence.15 The
result on school healthy food supports research by
Gortmaker et al.16 showing that implementing nutrition
standards in schools is both evidence-based and cost
effective.
There are a number of good underlying reasons for
both targeting school-aged children and using school-
focused strategies. Children, especially in elementary
school, are a captive population with more limited food
choices while in school and there is greater opportunity
for in-class and recess physical activity. It is also relatively
easier to make changes in school building policies,
practices, and the environment that can impact all or
most children.
The results showing low-dose strategies and little
population-level change for community-level strategies
targeting adults are also consistent with the existing
literature.12 It is challenging to implement community-
wide interventions for many reasons. Community set-
tings are more fragmented and diverse, making it harder
to reach large segments of the population through single
strategies and harder to implement high-strength strat-
egies. Adult residents typically interact with environ-
ments outside the community setting (transit to work,
shop across town for groceries). For example, commun-
ity physical activity programs may significantly increase
activity among participants, but it is challenging to get
widespread, consistent, and frequent participation in
these programs by a large number of residents from a
community. Finally, many higher-reach environmental
strategies, such as in corner stores, have a modest effect
on those exposed because so many alternative food
options exist within and outside the HEAL Zone.
In addition to providing a lens for assessing initiative
impact, the dose concept proved useful in the program
planning and implementation. During their planning
phase, many of the HEAL Zone community collabora-
tives initially proposed more programmatic strategies
that
reached
small
segments
of
their
population.
Through conversations with evaluators, funders, and
community coordinators and their coalition members,
many incorporated the concept of dose and revised their
plans with strategies that were higher reach and likely to
have a more significant impact (strength) on those
reached. For example, communities began to partner
with institutions (e.g., schools, worksites, grocery stores)
that have broad reach in their communities and signifi-
cant daily interactions with residents (e.g., youth spend-
ing 6 hours per day in schools).
Limitations
Implementation tracking relied largely on progress
reporting from the community collaboratives and other
institutions involved (e.g., schools, worksites). These self-
reported accomplishments may have been biased in favor
of making changes appear to be more comprehensive and
sustainable than was true in practice. Where possible,
progress reporting was corroborated with secondary
data, such as strategy-level evaluations involving direct
observation and environmental assessments.
Ratings of the strength component of population dose
were often necessarily subjective given the lack of
information in the scientific literature or from strategy-
level evaluations about effect sizes for CHI environ-
mental and policy interventions. Multiple independent
raters were used to attempt to standardize the ratings as
much as possible, and a sensitivity analysis was con-
ducted to explore the impact of potential misclassifica-
tion on the final results. In addition, a number of
strategy-level evaluations were conducted to estimate
effect sizes and these are being used to further refine and
validate the ratings.
Response rates to the mail survey of adults were
relatively low—in the 15%–20% range. Because rates
were comparable pre- and post-survey it is plausible that
roughly the same biases applied on both occasions and
that the changes were estimated accurately. Finally, a true
baseline was not available for two of the NCAL com-
munities that began work in 2006, and triangulation of
several data sources was used to estimate the impact.
Quantifying the cumulative dose of strategies targeting
the same outcomes requires assumptions about how
overlapping strategies interact within a population. For
example, is interaction occurring and are the combined
effects of healthier food availability in corner stores,
restaurants, and worksites resulting in a greater healthy
eating increase than expected from the effect of each
strategy alone? Simply adding up dose may not account
for a potential larger impact as strategies reinforce each
other. Conversely, does adding up dose overestimate the
potential impact of multiple strategies that exceeds the
level of behavior change expected to reasonably achieve
in a population?
A final set of limitations concerns the population
surveys, particularly the youth surveys in elementary
schools (fifth grade). These data were collected in
elementary schools because most of the school strategies
were taking place in these schools, but some young
Cheadle et al / Am J Prev Med 2018;54(5S2):S150–S159
S157
May 2018
 children may report inaccurate recall responses. Further-
more, fifth-grade classes had relatively small sample sizes
compared with seventh and ninth grades. These smaller
sample sizes limited the power to detect small changes in
population outcomes that would be reasonably expected
given the dose of the strategies.
Despite the limitations, the dose methodology provides
a useful lens for interpreting population-level findings and
determining attribution to the initiative. In particular, the
approach can rule out chance findings in population-level
change by requiring that observed positive changes are
accompanied by high-dose strategies.
CONCLUSIONS
The HEAL Zones evaluation results show that the
initiatives in the two KP regions were generally successful
in achieving their goals of implementing policy and
environmental change strategies that have the potential
to change behaviors and impact long-term obesity rates.
The population-level results showed that where higher-
dose strategies were present, population-level improve-
ments occurred. The HEAL Zones initiative represents a
successful effort by a large health care system to influence
the health-promoting conditions in the communities
they serve. The initiative addressed a need prioritized
in many of the KP community health needs assessments,
and has the potential to reduce long-term health care
costs for both members and non-members living in the
communities served by KP.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This project was funded by Kaiser Permanente. The authors
acknowledge and thank Kaiser Permanente for financial support.
Cheadle contributed to the design and implementation of the
Healthy Eating Active Living (HEAL) Zones evaluation and wrote
the first draft of the paper. Atiedu, Keene, and Molina designed
and carried out the Southern California HEAL Zones evaluation,
contributed to sections of the paper, and reviewed and made
edits on draft versions. Davoudi, Lee, Steimberg, Tinajero, and
Azuma designed and implemented the Southern California
HEAL Zones intervention, contributed to the design of the
evaluation, and reviewed and made edits on draft versions of
the paper. Spring contributed to the design and carried out the
evaluation of the Northern California HEAL Zones intervention,
and made edits on draft versions of the paper. Boyle, William-
son, Ravel, and Nudelman designed and implemented the
Northern California HEAL Zones intervention, contributed to the
design of the evaluation, and reviewed and made edits on draft
versions of the paper. Rauzon, Schwartz, Kuo, and Solomon
contributed to the design of the evaluation, and reviewed and
made edits on draft versions of the paper.
No financial disclosures were reported by the authors of this
paper.
SUPPLEMENT NOTE
This article is part of a supplement entitled Building Thriving
Communities Through Comprehensive Community Health Ini-
tiatives: Evaluations from 10 Years of Kaiser Permanente's
Community Health Initiative to Promote Healthy Eating and
Active Living, which is sponsored by Kaiser Permanente,
Community Health.
REFERENCES
1. Prybil L, Scutchfield F, Killian R, et al. Improving Community Health
Through Hospital-Public Health Collaboration. Lexington, KY: Com-
monwealth Center for Governance Studies, 2014.
2. Rosenbaum S. Additional Requirements for Charitable Hospitals: Final
Rules on Community Health Needs Assessments and Financial
Assistance. Health Affairs Blog. http://healthaffairs.org/blog/2015/
01/23/additional-requirements-for-charitable-hospitals-final-rules-on-
community-health-needs-assessments-and-financial-assistance/. Pub-
lished 2015. Accessed October 20, 2016.
3. Cohen DA, Scribner RA, Farley TA. A structural model of health
behavior: a pragmatic approach to explain and influence health
behaviors at the population level. Prev Med. 2000;30(2):146–154.
https://doi.org/10.1006/pmed.1999.0609.
4. McLeroy KR, Bibeau D, Steckler A, Glanz K. An ecological perspective
on health promotion programs. Health Educ Q. 1988;15(4):351–377.
https://doi.org/10.1177/109019818801500401.
5. Ebbeling CB, Pawlak DB, Ludwig DS. Childhood obesity: public-health
crisis, common sense cure. Lancet. 2002;360(9331):473–482. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(02)09678-2.
6. Kumanyika SK, Obarzanek E, Stettler N, et al. Population-based prevention
of obesity: the need for comprehensive promotion of healthful eating,
physical activity, and energy balance: a scientific statement from American
Heart Association Council on Epidemiology and Prevention, Interdiscipli-
nary Committee for Prevention (formerly the expert panel on population
and prevention science). Circulation. 2008;118(4):428–464. https://doi.org/
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.189702.
7. U.S. Office of the Surgeon General. The Surgeon General’s Call to
Action to Prevent and Decrease Overweight and Obesity. Rockville, MD:
U.S. DHHS, 2001.
8. Woodward-Lopez G. Obesity: Dietary and Developmental Influences.
Boca Raton, FL: CRC/Taylor & Francis, 2006. https://doi.org/10.1201/
9781420008920.
9. W.K. Kellogg Foundation. Food and Community Initiative. www.wkkf.
org/what-we-do/healthy-kids/food-and-community. Published 2014.
10. Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. Healthy Kids, Healthy Commun-
ities. www.healthykidshealthycommunities.org/. Published 2014.
11. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Communities
Putting Prevention to Work. www.cdc.gov/communitiesputtingpreven
tiontowork/. Published 2013.
12. Brand T, Pischke CR, Steenbock B, et al. What works in community-
based interventions promoting physical activity and healthy eating?
A review of reviews. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2014;11:5866–
5888. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph110605866.
13. Ewart-Pierce E, Mejía Ruiz MJ, Gittelsohn J. Whole-of-community
obesity prevention: a review of challenges and opportunities in
multilevel, multicomponent interventions. Curr Obes Rep. 2016;5(3):
361–374. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13679-016-0226-7.
14. Baker PRA, Francis DP, Soares J, Weightman AL, Foster C.
Community-wide interventions for increasing physical activity. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2011;4:CD008366. https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.
CD008366.pub2.
15. Wang Y, Cai L, Wu Y, et al. What childhood obesity prevention
programmes work? A systematic review and meta-analysis. Obes Rev.
2015;16(7):547–565. https://doi.org/10.1111/obr.12277.
Cheadle et al / Am J Prev Med 2018;54(5S2):S150–S159
S158
www.ajpmonline.org
 16. Gortmaker SL, Wang YC, Long MW, et al. Three interventions that
reduce childhood obesity are projected to save more than they cost to
implement. Health Aff (Millwood). 2015;34(11):1932–1939. https://doi.
org/10.1377/hlthaff.2015.0631.
17. Cheadle A, Schwartz PM, Rauzon S, Beery WL, Gee S, Solomon L.
The Kaiser Permanente Community Health Initiative: overview
and evaluation design. Am J Public Health. 2010;100(11):2111–2113.
https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2010.300001.
18. Cheadle A, Rauzon S, Spring R, et al. Kaiser Permanente’s Community
Health Initiative in Northern California: evaluation findings and
lessons learned. Am J Health Promot. 2012;27(2):e59–e68. https://doi.
org/10.4278/ajhp.111222-QUAN-462.
19. Cheadle A, Beery WL, Greenwald HP, Nelson GD, Pearson D, Senter S.
Evaluating the California Wellness Foundation’s Health Improvement
Initiative: a logic model approach. Health Promot Pract. 2003;4(2):
146–156. https://doi.org/10.1177/1524839902250767.
20. Cheadle A, Schwartz PM, Rauzon S, Bourcier E, Senter S, Spring R. Using
the concept of “population dose” in planning and evaluating community-
level obesity prevention initiatives. Am J Eval. 2012;34(1):64–77.
21. Schwartz P, Rauzon S, Cheadle A. Dose matters: an approach to
strengthening community health strategies to achieve greater impact.
Washington, DC: Discussion paper, National Academy of Medicine, 2015.
22. Cheadle A, Samuels SE, Rauzon S, et al. Approaches to measuring the
extent and impact of environmental change in three California
community-level obesity prevention initiatives. Am J Public Health.
2010;100(11):2129–2136. https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2010.300002.
23. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Youth Risk
Behavior Surveillance System (YRBSS). www.cdc.gov/HealthyYouth/
yrbs/index.htm. Published 2013.
24. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Behavioral Risk
Factor Surveillance System Survey Data. www.cdc.gov/brfss/question
naires.htm#archive. Published 2013.
25. Kao J, Woodward-Lopez G, Kuo ES, et al. Improvements in physical
activity opportunities: results from a community-based family child
care intervention. Am J Prev Med. 2018;54(5S2):S178–S185.
26. Woodward-Lopez G, Kao J, Kuo ES, et al. Changes in consumer
purchases in stores participating in an obesity prevention initiative. Am
J Prev Med. 2018;54(5S2):S160–S169.
27. Center for Community Health and Evaluation. Healthy Dose: a toolkit
for boosting the impact of community health strategies, v.1.1. https://
share.kaiserpermanente.org/article/dose-creating-measuring-impact/.
Published 2016.
28. Kit BK, Fakhouri TH, Park S, Nielsen SJ, Ogden CL. Trends in sugar-
sweetened beverage consumption among youth and adults in the
United States: 1999–2010. Am J Clin Nutr. 2013;98(1):180–188. https:
//doi.org/10.3945/ajcn.112.057943.
29. James J, Thomas P, Cavan D, Kerr D. Preventing childhood obesity by
reducing consumption of carbonated drinks: cluster randomized
controlled trial. BMJ. 2004;328:1237–1243. https://doi.org/10.1136/
bmj.38077.458438.EE.
30. Economos CD, Hyatt RR, Goldberg JP, et al. A community inter-
vention reduces BMI z-score in children: shape up Somerville first year
results. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2007;15(5):1325–1336. https://doi.org/
10.1038/oby.2007.155.
Cheadle et al / Am J Prev Med 2018;54(5S2):S150–S159
S159
May 2018
