 Why Is Infant Mortality Higher in the United States Than in 
Europe?
Alice Chen,
USC
Emily Oster, and
Brown University and NBER
Heidi Williams
MIT and NBER
Abstract
The US has higher infant mortality than peer countries. In this paper, we combine micro-data from 
the US with similar data from four European countries to investigate this US infant mortality 
disadvantage. The US disadvantage persists after adjusting for potential di erential reporting of 
births near the threshold of viability. While the importance of birth weight varies across 
comparison countries, relative to all comparison countries the US has similar neonatal (<1 month) 
mortality but higher postneonatal (1-12 months) mortality. We document similar patterns across 
Census divisions within the US. The postneonatal mortality disadvantage is driven by poor birth 
outcomes among lower socioeconomic status individuals.
1 Introduction
In 2013, the US infant mortality rate (IMR) ranked 51st internationally, comparable to 
Croatia, despite an almost three-fold di erence in GDP per capita.1 One way to quantify the 
magnitude of this infant mortality disadvantage is to consider that the US IMR is about 3 
deaths per 1000 greater than in Scandinavian countries. Aggregating 4 million annual US 
births and taking a standard value of life estimate of US$7 million (Viscusi and Aldy, 2003) 
suggests that reducing the US IMR to that of Scandinavian countries would be worth on the 
order of US$84 billion annually. By this metric, it would be “worth it” to spend up to 
$21,000 on each live birth to lower the infant mortality risk to the level in Scandinavia.
While the US IMR disadvantage is widely discussed and quantitatively important, the 
determinants of this disadvantage are not well understood, hindering policy efforts.2 A key 
*We thank Franz Bilek, Anita Mikulasek, and Ursula Shuster for assistance in accessing the Austrian data; and Gissler Mika, Irmeli 
Penttilä, and Arto Vuori for assistance in accessing the Finnish data. We gratefully acknowledge comments from Dan Fetter, Amy 
Finkelstein, Michael Greenstone, Amanda Kowalski, Doug Miller, and seminar participants at Brown University, the NBER Health 
Care meeting, MIT, Northwestern University, UCLA, University of Chicago, University of Michigan, Stanford, and Wharton; research 
assistance from Toby Chaiken, Hailey Nguyen, and Sophie Sun; and financial support from the Neubauer Family (Oster), NIA Grant 
Number T32-AG000186 to the NBER (Williams), and NSF Grant Number 1151497 (Williams).
1Croatia's IMR in 2013 was 5.96, relative to 5.9 in the US; GDP per capita was $18,100 in Croatia and $50,100 in the US (CIA, 
2013).
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Am Econ J Econ Policy. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 04.
Published in final edited form as:
Am Econ J Econ Policy. 2016 May ; 8(2): 89–124. doi:10.1257/pol.20140224.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 constraint on past research has been the lack of comparable micro-datasets across countries. 
Cross-country comparisons of aggregate infant mortality rates provide very limited insight, 
for two reasons. First, a well-recognized problem is that countries vary in their reporting of 
births near the threshold of viability. Such reporting differences may generate misleading 
comparisons of how infant mortality varies across countries. Second, even within a 
comparably-reported sample, the observation that mortality rates differ one year post-birth 
provides little guidance on what factors are driving the US disadvantage. As a specific 
example, although a large literature has documented significant inequality in infant mortality 
outcomes across socioeconomic groups within the US (i.e. Currie, Shields and Price 2007; 
Case, Lubotsky and Paxson 2002; Miller 2003), it is less clear how much of the cross-
country US IMR disadvantage is explained by higher levels of inequality within the US.
We begin in this paper by relaxing this data constraint. We combine US natality micro-data 
with similar micro-data from Finland and Austria. In addition, we use data from the UK and 
Belgium which can be restricted to a comparably-reported sample and reported in 
aggregated cells based on birth weight and age at death. Using these data, we provide a 
detailed accounting of the US IMR disadvantage relative to these European comparisons, 
quantifying the importance of differential reporting, some conditions at birth (specifically, 
birth weight and gestational age), neonatal mortality (deaths in the first month), and 
postneonatal mortality (deaths in months 1 to 12). To the best of our knowledge, cross-
country micro-data has not previously been used to undertake this type of exercise.
This exercise yields a number of findings. First, consistent with past evidence (MacDorman 
and Mathews, 2009), differential reporting of births cannot offer a complete explanation for 
the US IMR disadvantage. However, accounting for differential reporting is quantitatively 
important. Compared to the average of the five European countries we analyze, limiting to a 
comparable sample lowers the apparent US IMR disadvantage from 2.5 deaths per 1000 
births to 1.5 deaths. This finding highlights the importance of conducting cross-country 
comparisons in a setting where reporting differences can be addressed, which is typically not 
possible in the types of aggregate statistics compiled by the World Health Organization and 
the World Development Indicators (World Health Organization, 2006; World Bank, 2013).
Second, we explore the importance of differences in health at birth. Worse health at birth is 
widely cited as the major driver of the US IMR disadvantage (MacDorman and Mathews, 
2009; National Research Council, 2013; Wilcox et al., 1995); we are able to investigate this 
issue after restricting attention to our comparably-reported sample. Consistent with past 
evidence that has focused on comparing the US with Scandinavian countries, we find that 
birth weight can explain around 75% of the US IMR disadvantage relative to Finland or 
Belgium. However, birth weight can only explain 30% of the US IMR disadvantage relative 
to Austria or the UK. Moreover, even normal birth weight infants have a substantial IMR 
disadvantage - 2.3 deaths per 1000 in the US, relative to 1.3 in Finland, 1.5 in Austria, 1.6 in 
the UK and 2.0 in Belgium.
2Economists have not written much on cross-country differences in infant mortality; when they have, it has often focused (most 
notably, Waldmann (1992)) on the relationship with income levels and income inequality across countries. The proximate causes of 
the US infant mortality disadvantage have been of more interest in the public health literature.
Chen et al.
Page 2
Am Econ J Econ Policy. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Third, our data allow us to distinguish between neonatal and postneonatal deaths in our 
comparably-reported sample. The neonatal/postneonatal distinction is informative because 
the relevant causes of death during these two time periods are quite different (Rudolph and 
Borker 1987). Previous comparisons of neonatal and postneonatal mortality in aggregate 
data (such as Kleinman and Kiely (1990)) are diffcult to interpret given the differential 
reporting concern: specifically, in an unrestricted sample the US has much higher neonatal 
mortality than any of the European comparisons we analyze (World Health Organization, 
2006), whereas our comparably-reported sample suggests that differences in reporting could 
be driving nearly all of that pattern.
In our comparably-reported sample, the US neonatal mortality disadvantage is quantitatively 
small and appears to be fully explained by differences in birth weight. In contrast, the US 
has a substantial disadvantage relative to all comparison countries during the postneonatal 
period even in our comparably-reported sample and even conditional on circumstances at 
birth. A simple illustration for the three countries with micro-data (the US, Finland and 
Austria) can be seen in Figure 2, which shows the cumulative probability of death over the 
first year. The infant mortality rate in the US is higher at all ages, but this difference 
accelerates after the first month of life. Importantly, this excess postneonatal mortality does 
not appear to be driven by the US “delaying” neonatal deaths: the postneonatal disadvantage 
appears strongly even among normal birth weight infants and those with high APGAR 
scores.
Hence, our cross-country analysis points to the importance of the postneonatal period as a 
driver of the US disadvantage and, on its own, may suggest support for policies which target 
this period of life. In the second part of the paper, we expand our analysis to consider 
geographic variation in infant mortality within the US, focusing on the nine US Census 
divisions. If the lowest mortality Census division (the North East) were a country on its own, 
it would have a mortality rate very similar to Austria.. In contrast, the worst off Census 
division (East South Central) has a one-year mortality rate twice as high as the North East. 
Replicating our cross-country decomposition across US Census regions again uncovers an 
important role for the postneonatal period: only 38% of deaths in the lowest-mortality 
Census division occur in the postneonatal period, but deaths during this period account for 
67% of the geographic differences in mortality. Reducing postneonatal mortality in each 
Census division to the level observed in the lowest-mortality division would reduce mortality 
rates, on average, by 0.72 deaths per 1000 births.
In the final section of the paper, we use a subset of the cross-country data, together with the 
within-US variation, to analyze the socioeconomic profile of the postneonatal mortality 
gaps. It is well known that infant mortality in the US varies strongly across socioeconomic 
groups (as documented by, for example, Case et al. (2002)). Given this, a natural question is 
whether the US IMR disadvantage relative to Europe is accounted for by higher cross-group 
IMR inequality in the US relative to Europe, or whether even highly advantaged Americans 
are in worse health than their counterparts in peer countries (as National Research Council 
2013 argues). We can ask a similar question about the cross-regional differences in the US. 
Our demographic data in Europe are limited to Austria and Finland so we focus on those 
two countries as our comparison.
Chen et al.
Page 3
Am Econ J Econ Policy. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 We first approach this question non-parametrically by estimating birthweight-adjusted 
postneonatal death rates by country (or Census division) and demographic group. We find 
that infant mortality differences, both across countries and across regions within the US, are 
driven by lower socioeconomic status groups. To give a concrete example: among the most 
educated group (college educated in the US or Austria, upper white collar worker in 
Finland) we find that the US has excess postneonatal mortality of 0.04 deaths per 1000 
compared to Finland, and 0.27 deaths per 1000 compared to Austria. However, among the 
lowest education group, the US has excess postneonatal mortality of 1.3 deaths relative to 
Finland, and 1.8 relative to Austria. A similar pattern appears across Census regions within 
the US.
We then take a slightly more parametric approach and define a high socioeconomic status 
group in each country based on education and other demographic characteristics. Infant 
mortality rates for mothers in our advantaged group are statistically indistinguishable in the 
US and elsewhere. However, there are very large differences across countries in infant 
mortality rates for mothers outside of this group. We see similar patterns across Census 
regions within the US. Effectively, either across countries or across regions within the US, 
we see that the observed geographic variation in postneontal mortality is heavily driven by 
variation in health gradients across socioeconomic groups.3 Notably, when we look at 
neonatal mortality we do not draw the same conclusions, suggesting that the inequalities we 
observe emerge especially strongly during the postneonatal period.
The final question we investigate is to what extent the differences in postneonatal mortality 
gradients by location reflect differences in resource gradients. That is, are the poor are more 
resource-poor in some regions than others, or is it that the relationship between resources 
and mortality differs across locations? We address this question as follows. Although data 
availability constraints prevent us from linking individuals in our birth data to their 
household income, we link individuals to a measure of the average income in their 
geographic area for individuals with their demographic profile (age, education, race, marital 
status). We are able to do this for the US and Finland, in both cases using Census data.4 
Using these linked data to divide births into income decile groups, and comparing across 
countries or across regions within a group, our analysis suggests that income per se explains 
very little of the difference either between the US and Finland, or across regions within the 
US. It is true, for example, that high postneonatal mortality regions in the US are also those 
with lower income on average. However, infants in these regions are more likely to die 
during the postneonatal period even compared to households with similar income levels in 
regions with lower mortality. Our decomposition suggests that income differences actually 
3Given that one of the most striking facts about infant mortality in the US is the disparity in mortality between black and white infants, 
it is important to note that the facts we document in this paper are essentially unchanged if we exclude US blacks from the sample. 
The literature investigating the black-white IMR gap has generally concluded that differential health at birth can account for the vast 
majority of the black-white gap, and that differences in postneonatal mortality are both less important and can be accounted for by 
differences in background characteristics (Miller 2003; Elder, Goddeeris and Haider 2011). In contrast, our findings suggest that 
differences in postneonatal mortality account for as much or more of the US IMR disadvantage relative to Europe than do differences 
in health at birth, and that these differences in postneonatal mortality are not eliminated by conditioning on a set of (albeit, limited) 
background characteristics. Taken together, the prior literature and our analysis thus suggest that the mechanisms explaining the black-
white IMR gap within the US may be different from the mechanisms explaining the US IMR disadvantage relative to Europe.
4Unfortunately, similar data for Austria are not easily available.
Chen et al.
Page 4
Am Econ J Econ Policy. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 exacerbate the IMR gap between the US and Finland (since the US is on average richer), and 
explain only about 30% of the differences across areas in the US.
This paper relates to two earlier literatures, one in medicine and one in economics. In the 
medical literature, most analyses have focused on differences in health at birth as the key 
explanation for the US IMR disadvantage (MacDorman and Mathews 2009; National 
Research Council 2013; Wilcox et al. 1995). As we note above, our data suggest this 
explanation is incomplete and that excess postneonatal mortality may be equally important. 
Consistent with that finding, Kleinman and Kiely (1990) document that the US had a 
disadvantage in aggregate postneonatal mortality during the 1980s. This suggests that the 
disparities in postneonatal mortality we document are long-standing, although those authors 
did not have access to international micro-data, which limits their ability to analyze 
comparably reported samples.
In the economics literature, this paper relates closely to the work of Case et al. (2002) who 
use various US survey datasets to investigate the changing relationship between health status 
and family income as children age (examining age ranges starting at 0-3 and ending at 
13-17). They document that health erodes more quickly with age for children from lower 
socioeconomic status families; as in our study, this fact is not altered by conditioning on 
measures of health at birth. Currie and Stabile (2003) document a similar finding in 
Canadian survey data, as do Case et al. (2008) (revisiting an earlier analysis by Currie et al. 
(2007)) in UK data.5 Our analysis suggests that the health gradient in the US largely 
emerges after the first month of life, which accords with Case and coauthors’ conclusion that 
the gradient increases with age in the US. However, our data from Europe provide stark 
evidence that no similar gradient emerges during the first year of life in those countries.
In terms of policy implications, these new facts together suggest that a sole focus on 
improving health at birth (for example, through expanding access to prenatal care) will be 
incomplete, and that policies which target disadvantaged groups during the postneonatal 
period may be a productive avenue for reducing infant mortality in the US. Further, our 
income evidence suggests that simply increasing resources may not be suffcient to achieve 
this goal. As we discuss more in the conclusion, one policy lever deserving of future 
research attention is home nurse visiting programs, which have been shown to reduce 
postneonatal mortality rates in randomized trials (Olds et al. 2007).
2 Data
2.1 Data description
Birth, death and demographic data—Our cross-country analysis relies on two types of 
data. For the US, Austria and Finland, we have access to micro-data. The US data come 
from the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) birth cohort linked birth and infant 
death files. Austrian data are provided by Statistics Austria, and Finnish data are extracted 
from the Finland Birth Registry and Statistics Finland. As in prior research that has focused 
5A broader literature has examined the relationship between health and socioeconomic status at older ages, such as Ford et al. (1994) 
and Power and Matthews (1997).
Chen et al.
Page 5
Am Econ J Econ Policy. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 on comparing the mortality outcomes of US infants with infants from Scandinavian 
countries such as Norway (Wilcox et al. 1995), Finland provides a sense of “frontier” infant 
mortality rates. We chose Austria as a second point of comparison because of the availability 
of micro-data. Notably, over the time period of our study, Austria's IMR is similar to much 
of continental Europe.
The data for each of these three countries consists of a complete Census of births from years 
2000-2005, linked to infant deaths occurring within one year of birth.6 While birth and death 
certificates in the US and Finnish data are centrally linked, we link the Austrian records 
using a unique identifier constructed from the thirty-six variables common to both the birth 
and death records.7 Each country's birth records provide information on a rich set of 
covariates, including the infant's conditions at birth (such as birth weight and gestational 
age), and some information on demographics of the mother. For infants who die within one 
year of birth, we observe age and cause of death.8 We exclude from our analyses 
observations which are missing data on birth weight or gestational age (1.0% in the US, 
none in Austria, 0.4% in Finland). For the analysis of variation by socioeconomic status we 
exclude observations which are missing any of our socioeconomic status covariates (2.2% in 
US, none in Austria, 10.9% in Finland). The higher share in Finland is primarily due to 
missing occupation data.
To complement this three-country comparison, we use the best available - albeit more 
aggregated - data from two additional countries: the UK and Belgium. It is possible to do the 
core of our analysis with somewhat aggregated data: we require that the data be limited to 
our comparable sample (as discussed in Section 3.1, this is singleton births at or after 22 
weeks of gestation and at least 500 grams in birth weight), and that birth and death counts be 
reported by 500 gram birth weight bins and detailed ages at death.
Data from the UK were generated through a special request to the UK Office of National 
Statistics. They limited the data to singleton births, at or after 22 weeks of gestation and at 
least 500 grams in birth weight and provided us with data on births by 500 gram bins 
matched to deaths at less than one day, 1 day to 1 week, 1 week to 1 month, 1 to 3 months, 3 
to 6 months and 6 to 12 months. The birth weight cells are capped at 4000 grams.
Data for Belgium were downloaded from online records through the Centre for Operational 
Research in Public Health. Data are provided in 100 gram bins with counts of births and 
deaths and the ability to limit to singleton births. Belgian reporting standards limit the data 
to gestational ages of at or after 22 weeks, and the birth weight cells allow us to restrict 
6The years 2000 – 2005 are the most recent available years with full data from all three countries from which we were able to obtain 
micro-data.
7All deaths are matched to a unique birth in the data.
8To code cause of death as consistently as possible across years, we use the NCHS General Equivalence Mappings (GEMs) to cross-
walk across ICD9 and ICD10 codes. After converting all ICD9 codes to ICD10 codes, we use the NCHS recode of the ICD10 – 
specified in the NCHS birth cohort linked birth and infant death documentation – to consistently code causes of death across all 
countries and all years. The GEM files are available here: ftp://ftp.cdc.gov/pub/Health_Statistics/NCHS/Publications/ICD10CM/
2010/2010_DiagnosisGEMs.zip. For Austria, causes of death prior to 2002 are ICD9 codes, and from 2002-2005 are ICD10 codes. 
For Finland, causes of death are ICD10 codes. For the US, the original cause of death variable is the NCHS ICD10 recode. A handful 
of observations have multiple matches from the ICD9 coding to the NCHS ICD10 recode; for these observations, we randomly select 
one NCHS recode value from the set of possible matches.
Chen et al.
Page 6
Am Econ J Econ Policy. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 attention to births at least 500 grams in birth weight. Information is provided on deaths in 
the first week, 1 week to 1 month, 1 to 6 months and 6 to 12 months.
For the within-US analysis we use the same NCHS linked files described above. These 
analyses use data from 2000 through 2003; the 2004 and 2005 NCHS data do not report su 
cient geographic detail to be useful for this analysis.9
Income data—In Section 5 we present analyses that rely on having some measure of 
household income matched to the birth data. Unfortunately it is not possible to directly 
match household income to the natality files in the US, or in any of the European countries. 
As an alternative, we match to income measures based on sub-national geographic groups 
crossed with demographics. We are able to do this for Finland and for the US; the data for 
the US can be used to extend the income analysis to within-US cross-region comparisons.
For the US, we use income data from the IPUMS combined for 2000 and 2005. We generate 
measures of median income for bins defined by the following characteristics of the mother: 
public use microdata area (PUMA), ten year age groups (<30, 31-40, 41-50, over 50), 
education (less than high school, high school degree, some college, college degree or more), 
marital status (married or not) and race. We link PUMAs to counties using a cross-walk, 
since county is reported in the NCHS files. In some cases, the NCHS files do not report 
county (small counties within a state are jointly reported). In these cases we create a 
“residual” geography for each state which aggregates the median income for PUMAs 
associated with counties which are not reported individually in the NCHS files. We collapse 
the IPUMS data to these geographic-demographic cells and merge with the NCHS data at 
the cell level. For the within-US comparisons we collapse to median income. When we 
compare the US to Finland we collapse to median income, adjusted to after-tax income for 
the US using the NBER TaxSim algorithm for comparability with our Finnish data (which 
reports after-tax income).
For Finland, we use data for 2000 through 2005 provided by Statistics Finland based on their 
household budget survey. The data are provided in summary cells of mothers’ 
characteristics: region, education (basic, upper secondary and lower tertiary, undergraduate 
or more), ten year age groups and marital status. The income measure provided is median 
after-tax income. We merge these data with the Finnish birth data, matching the three 
education bins to the three occupation bins available in the Finnish birth data.
2.2 Summary statistics
Summary statistics are shown in Table 1 for our cross-country data and Table 2 for our 
cross-Census division data. As expected, Table 1 documents that the US has the highest 
mortality among the countries considered. Panel A reports mortality, gestation (for Finland, 
Austria and the US), and birth weight in our restricted sample of singleton births at least 22 
weeks of gestation and weighing at least 500 grams (this sample restriction is discussed in 
more detail in Section 3.1). This sample restriction lowers the death rates in all five 
9Specifically, the 2004 and 2005 data do not report state or county so we cannot use them for the income analysis. Rather than 
changing samples, we simply exclude these years from the main analysis as well.
Chen et al.
Page 7
Am Econ J Econ Policy. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 countries. In terms of birth weight, arguably the most reliable estimate of conditions at birth 
(Dietz et al. 2007), the US looks similar to Austria, the UK and Belgium. Finland has much 
higher average birth weight than any of the other countries, with infants an average of 200 
grams heavier than elsewhere.
In Panel B we focus on the sub-sample for which we observe demographics and provide 
summary statistics on demographic covariates (available only for the US, Austria and 
Finland). This further sample restriction does not substantially change death rates, birth 
weight or gestational age. Mother's age is lowest in the US at 27 years, and closer to 29 
years in Austria and Finland. Fifteen percent of births in the US are to black mothers; race is 
reported only in the US. The share of births to married women is approximately 60 to 65 
percent in all three countries. Twenty-six percent of women in the US have a college degree 
or more, versus 12% in Austria. For Finland, we observe only occupation rank: we consider 
“upper white collar” workers as the highest socioeconomic status group; they make up 22% 
of the sample.
Table 2 shows the same summary statistics across Census divisions within the US. There is 
wide variation in death rates, birth weight and demographics across divisions. The North 
East has the lowest mortality rates and the highest birth weights.
3 Results: United States versus Europe
Our accounting exercise investigates four potential sources of the US IMR disadvantage: 
reporting, birth weight, neonatal mortality and postneonatal mortality.
3.1 Reporting differences
A well-known issue with cross-country comparisons of infant mortality is possible reporting 
differences for infants born near the threshold of viability. Extremely preterm births recorded 
as a live birth in some places may be considered miscarriages or stillbirths in other countries 
(Golding 2001; Graafmans et al. 2001; Sachs et al. 1995; Wegman 1996). Since survival 
before 22 weeks or under 500 grams is very rare, categorizing these births as live births 
would inflate reported infant mortality rates (which are reported as a share of live births).
Past literature (notably MacDorman and Mathews (2009)) has addressed this concern by 
limiting the sample to infants born after 22 weeks of gestation. Although previous literature 
has largely focused on the fact that this restriction does not substantially change the rank of 
the US IMR relative to other countries, it is nonetheless quite quantitatively important. This 
can be seen by comparing the first and second bars for Austria and Finland in Figure 1. The 
first bar shows the excess deaths in the US relative to other countries in the full sample. The 
second bar limits to infants born at or after 22 weeks of gestation. The US disadvantage 
declines once we impose this additional restriction.
Our data allow us to address two related issues which prior literature has not explored. First, 
many countries also have reporting requirements related to birth weight and may not report 
infants under 500 grams as live births (MacDorman and Mathews 2009). Second, the 
presence of assisted reproductive technologies has increased the frequency of multiple 
Chen et al.
Page 8
Am Econ J Econ Policy. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 births, which have higher mortality rates. Because the use of assisted reproductive 
technologies is a choice that we need not aim to fix via changes in policy or behavior, it 
seems appropriate to limit the sample to singleton births. The third column within each 
country in Figure 1 adds both of these sample restrictions. Adding these restrictions we are 
also able to look at the comparison with the UK and Belgium.
The US disadvantage shrinks further with these additional restrictions. Overall, limiting to a 
sample of singleton births at birth weights and gestational ages where reporting is not a 
concern reduces the excess US infant mortality in both magnitude and share terms. In the 
unrestricted samples, the US excess mortality ranges from 1.4 to 3.6 deaths per 1000, or 
between a 27% and a 110% increase in death rates relative to the European baseline. In the 
restricted sample, the magnitude range is 1.1 to 2.1 excess deaths per 1000 births, or 
between a 27% to 76% increase. However, even in this restricted sample there is significant 
excess mortality in the US.
3.2 Conditions at birth
In contrast to the dismissal of reporting differences as a complete explanation, past literature 
has argued that high preterm birth rates in the US are the major contributor to higher infant 
mortality rates (MacDorman and Mathews, 2009; Wilcox et al., 1995). This literature has 
generally compared the US to Scandinavian countries, which have among the lowest infant 
mortality rates in Europe, and has generally focused on gestational age (which is more 
readily available in aggregate datasets) rather than birth weight. Our data are able to expand 
this previous literature in two ways. First, incorporate comparisons with Austria, the UK and 
Belgium, which are more representative of the European distribution but still much better o 
than the US. Second, we add comparisons based on birth weight, which is typically more 
precisely measured than gestational age (Dietz et al. 2007).
As noted in the summary statistics, in our comparably-reported sample birth weight (and 
gestational age) in the US is worse than in Finland but close to the other countries 
considered. For the three countries with micro-data, Appendix Figures A.1a and A.1b show 
the full distribution of birth weight and gestational age. Similar to our observation based on 
the means, the most striking feature of these distributions is the di erence between Finland 
and either the US or Austria.10
To be more concrete, we consider how the US disadvantage relative to the comparison 
countries changes once we adjust for birth weight; this is done by comparing Columns (1) 
and (2) of Table 3. Each panel of this table compares the US to each European country in 
our data separately. The first column estimates regressions which limit to the comparable 
sample but include no covariates, only an indicator variable for the US. The coefficients 
therefore represent the baseline difference in infant mortality between the US and the other 
countries considered. In Column (2) of each panel we add birth weight controls (specifically, 
indicator variables for 500 gram birth weight bins). The coefficient in this column therefore 
10Although the US and Austria look almost identical in this figure, in fact Austria has a slightly more favorable birth weight 
distribution. This is driven by differences in the two countries in the lowest birth weight categories - under 1000 grams - which are too 
small to see in the distribution but matter for survival.
Chen et al.
Page 9
Am Econ J Econ Policy. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 represents the US infant mortality disadvantage once we adjust flexibly for birth weight. 
Conceptually, this follows the previous literature by calculating the excess mortality in the 
US if the birth weight distribution were the same as in Europe (MacDorman and Mathews 
2009). Relative to this existing literature, we adjust more precisely with birth weight bins 
rather than just indicators for normal or low birth weight (or indicators for preterm versus 
full term). The reduction in the coefficient moving from Column (1) to Column (2) in each 
panel tells us the share of the mortality difference across countries which is accounted for by 
birth weight.
The importance of birth weight varies across the comparison country. Birth weight accounts 
for about 75% of the gap between the US and Finland (Panel A) or between the US and 
Belgium (Panel D). However, it only accounts for about 30% of the gap between the US and 
Austria or the UK. This evidence confirms existing arguments that birth weight matters for 
the US infant mortality disadvantage, although it suggests that the prior literature's focus on 
Scandinavian countries may have overstated the importance of this explanation.
Even without this calibration, simple summary statistics make it clear that the conditions-at-
birth explanation is incomplete. Among normal birth weight infants in the US, the infant 
mortality rate is 2.3 deaths per 1000 births, versus just 1.3 for Austria, 1.5 for Finland, 1.6 
for the UK and 2.0 for Belgium.
3.3 Timing of the US IMR disadvantage: Neonatal and postneonatal mortality
We turn now to examine the timing of the US IMR disadvantage. It is here that the value of 
having disaggregated data – ideally, micro-data – becomes even clearer. The previous 
literature has been unable to compare mortality timing within the first year across countries 
in non-aggregate data which is crucial in light of the reporting differences highlighted above. 
In unrestricted 2005 data from the World Development Indicators, neonatal mortality in the 
European countries considered varied from 2.1 per 1000 live births (Finland) to 3.5 (the 
UK), whereas the US reports a neonatal mortality rate of 4.5 (World Bank, 2013). 
Postneonatal mortality differs less in this sample: 2.3 per 1000 live births in the US, versus a 
range of 1.3 to 2.0 in the European countries. However, differences in reporting could be an 
important driver of these trends - particularly for neonatal mortality - and from a policy 
perspective it is also important to understand whether these differences persist when 
comparing across infants with the same measured health at birth.
For the three countries with detailed micro-data, it is possible to show evidence on the 
timing of the US IMR disadvantage graphically. Figures 2 and 3 document the cumulative 
probability of death by age by country.11 In the full comparably-reported sample (Figure 2) 
the US 1-day IMR (in deaths per 1000 live births) is 0.23 higher than Austria and 0.40 
higher than Finland. Within the first week these differences increase only slightly – to 0.31 
and 0.48. However, between 1 month and 1 year these differences accelerate: the differences 
at 1 year are 1.70 and 2.00 for the comparisons with Austria and Finland, respectively.
11It is not possible to add the UK or Belgium to these graphs since the data on timing are not as fine. We will be able to use data from 
these countries in the tables when we aggregate to the first week, one week to one month and one to 12 months.
Chen et al.
Page 10
Am Econ J Econ Policy. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 This postneonatal mortality disadvantage is even more striking in Figure 3, which graphs the 
cumulative probability of death over the first year separately for normal (>=2500 grams) and 
low (<2500 grams) birth weight infants. As expected, within each group mortality rates at 1 
year in the US are higher than in Austria and Finland. Figure 3a clearly suggests that the US 
IMR disadvantage arises in the postneonatal period: the US has virtually identical mortality 
rates to Austria and Finland up to 1 month, and then much higher mortality after 1 month. 
The pattern of mortality differences among low birth weight infants in Figure 3b looks very 
similar to Figure 3a, the only difference being that the US actually seems to have lower 
mortality than Finland during the first month of life.
Columns (3) through (5) of Table 3 quantify the patterns in these figures, and adds analyses 
of the UK and Belgium data. In these estimates we focus on cross-country differences in 
marginal (non-cumulative) death rates at various ages over the first year, and condition on 
detailed measures of birth weight (as in Column (2), we use 500 grams bins).12
We estimate impacts in three timing bins: <1 week, 1 week to 1 month, and 1-12 months. 
The US has, on average, a mortality advantage in the earliest period. Over the first week of 
life, the US has significantly lower mortality rates than Finland or Belgium, and is roughly 
even with Austria and the UK. The first-week differences with respect to Finland and 
Belgium are reasonably large: a survival advantage of 0.3 deaths per 1000 births in the US. 
However, in the postneonatal period (from 1 month to 1 year) the US has a significant 
disadvantage relative to any of the comparison countries. The excess mortality in this period 
ranges from 0.45 deaths per 1000 (relative to Belgium) to 1.1 deaths per 1000 (relative to 
Austria). This postneonatal period explains between 30 and 65% of the overall US IMR 
disadvantage (i.e. as shown in Column (1)), comparable on average to the importance of 
birth weight.
There are of course a number of open questions about these timing of death results, some of 
which we can address with the microdata from Finland and Austria. Appendix Table A.1 
documents a series of robustness checks. The pattern we observe is not driven by very small 
infants: in Appendix Table A.1 (row 2) we show similar patterns if we exclude births less 
than 1000 grams. These patterns are also not driven by differences in average demographics 
across the three countries: in Appendix Table A.1 (row 3) we replicate these regressions 
controlling for maternal age, child sex and maternal demographics, with identical 
conclusions.
One possible theory is that the observed elevation in postneonatal mortality is driven by a 
delay of deaths in the US. If hospitals in the US are better at keeping very low birth weight 
newborns alive for a slightly longer period of time, this could show up in the data as low 
neonatal mortality and excess postneonatal mortality. It is clear from the fact that we see 
elevated US infant mortality at one year that this is not a complete explanation. In addition, 
this type of substitution will be less important among groups which have low rates of 
neonatal mortality, such as normal birth weight infants or infants with a high APGAR score. 
Yet these groups also have much elevated postneonatal mortality, as can be seen in Figure 3 
12Replacing the 500 gram birth weight bins with 100 gram birth weight bins yields virtually identical results.
Chen et al.
Page 11
Am Econ J Econ Policy. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 for normal birth weight infants, and row 4 of Appendix Table A.1 for infants with APGAR 
scores of 9 or 10. This suggests that this concern is unlikely to be quantitatively important.
The next section will focus on decomposing these results by demographic group, but it is 
important to note that our estimates are not driven by the mortality outcomes of black infants 
(who have long been observed to have relatively poor birth outcomes in the US): Appendix 
Table A.1 (row 5) excludes blacks from our US sample, and a similar postneonatal 
disadvantage is still evident.13
Relative to the average death rates, the US disadvantage in the postneonatal period is very 
large. Over the period from 1 to 12 months, the death rate in Austria was 0.81 per 1000. 
Based on the coefficients, the predicted death rate in the US given the same birth weight 
distribution would be 1.89 per 1000 births, more than twice as large. This is especially 
striking since Austria is very close to the US on birth weight distribution (see Appendix 
Figure A.1b) and also quite similar on neonatal mortality. Effectively, despite starting with 
very similar birth weight and very similar neonatal mortality outcomes, Austria vastly 
outpaces the US starting at 1 month of age.
Together, this evidence suggests that aggregate comparisons are misleading. Whereas in the 
aggregate data the US disadvantage appears to be more important during the neonatal period 
than during the postneonatal period, in fact the opposite appears to be true.
3.4 Causes of death
A natural question, following on the results above, is which causes of death account for the 
US disadvantage in the postneonatal period. In the Austrian, US and Finnish data we 
observe cause of death codes. A central issue – difficult to resolve – is differences in cause 
of death coding across countries. For example, Austria codes many postneonatal deaths as 
being due to low birth weight; virtually no deaths in either the US or Finland use this code 
during this time period. In all three countries a very large share of deaths – perhaps as much 
as a third – are in small categories which aggregate to “other” but are not very informative 
on their own. Further, because correct coding of SIDS deaths is difficult (Kim et al. 2012; 
Pearson et al. 2011) this cause may be difficult to interpret.
With these caveats, Table 4 shows postneonatal death rates in six cause of death categories. 
We calculate the postneonatal death rate (per 1000) for each cause group for each country 
and then calculate the US-Finland difference and the US-Austria difference. We also 
calculate the percent increase over the Finnish or Austrian death rate.
These cause of death results are similar for Austria and Finland. In raw difference terms 
SIDS and other sudden deaths are the most important, although this is largely because these 
causes account for the largest number of deaths. Accidents seem to play an important role in 
both raw and share terms. As a share, deaths from assault and respiratory infections (largely 
13An additional possibility is that the results could be driven by first births, if first-time mothers are less informed about appropriate 
care for newborns. The data suggest this explanation does not account for the patterns in the data: Appendix Table A.1 (row 6) 
excludes first births, and the resulting estimates are quite similar. Finally, row 7 of Appendix Table A.1 adds multiple births back into 
the sample, with again very similar results.
Chen et al.
Page 12
Am Econ J Econ Policy. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 pneumonia) are much higher in the US, although these represent a small number of deaths. 
Taken together, there is no clear smoking gun from this table.
4 Results: Within-US evidence
Our analysis thus far suggests that postneonatal mortality plays an important role in driving 
differences between the US and a number of countries in Europe. In this section we ask 
whether this result is paralleled when we consider geographic variation within the US.
We begin by noting, based on the summary statistics in Table 2, that there is tremendous 
variation in infant mortality rates across the US. This is true even though the geographic 
units we consider are Census divisions, which are quite broad; it would be even more true if 
we considered state- or county-level variation. Considering the comparable sample reported 
in Panel A of Table 2, one-year infant mortality in the North East is 3.16 deaths per 1000 
live births, whereas in the East South Central region (Oklahoma, Arkansas, Louisiana and 
Texas) this figure is 6.30 per 1000. Both the North East and the Pacific divisions have 
overall infant mortality rates within the distribution of the European countries considered. If 
the North East were a country, it would be similar to Austria.
As a first look at the role of timing, we replicate Figures 2 and 3 for the Census divisions in 
Figures 4 and 5. As with the cross-country data, it is evident that the gaps across divisions 
grow in the postneonatal period. In the overall sample, if we compare the lowest mortality 
(North East) to the highest mortality (East South Central) divisions, we find that between 
one day and one week of life, the difference in mortality rates only grows by 0.40 deaths per 
1000 births. Between 1 and 12 months, this di erence increases by 2.41 deaths per 1000 
births.
Table 5 replicates Table 3 but with indicator variables for Census division rather than 
country. The omitted division is the North East. Column (1) estimates the baseline 
differences across divisions and Column (2) adds controls for birth weight. Columns (3) 
through (5) retain the birth weight controls and estimate e ects by timing of death within the 
first year. Similar to the cross-country analysis, we would like to use these estimates to make 
summary statements about the importance of birth weight, and the relative importance of the 
various periods within the first year. To do this, we use the coefficient estimates in Table 5 to 
calculate the share of the cross-division differences which are explained by various factors. 
We calculate these shares for each division pair, and then average to produce an overall 
conclusion about the importance of each.
We consider first birth weight, comparing Columns (1) and (2) of Table 5. The importance 
of birth weight varies across the division-pairs. For some division-pairs controlling for birth 
weight increases the baseline gap. In others, the gap is in the opposite direction once we 
control for birth weight. As a summary measure, we calculate the share of the cross-division 
variation accounted for by birth weight differences for the median division-pair. This figure 
is 45%.
Turning to the timing of deaths in Columns (3) through (5), a simple analysis of the 
coefficient magnitudes suggests that the postneonatal period accounts for a larger share of 
Chen et al.
Page 13
Am Econ J Econ Policy. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 differences than the earlier periods; the coefficient magnitudes are much larger. By 
comparing Column (2) to Columns (3) through (5) we can assess what share of the birth-
weight adjusted gaps are accounted for by the first week of life, one week to one month of 
life and the postneonatal period. These figures are shown in the last row of Table 5. The first 
week of life accounts on average for about 17% of the gap, the period from a week to a 
month accounts for 16% and the postneonatal period accounts for 67%. The second-to-last 
row reports the share of deaths which occur in this period in the North East Census division, 
as a point of reference. A comparison of the two final rows makes clear that the postneonatal 
period accounts for an outsize share of the cross-division gap relative to its importance in the 
first year.
The relative performance of US Census divisions is similar across the first year of life. That 
is, unlike the European comparisons, we do not see evidence that the worst o areas do better 
early on. However, similar to the European comparison, we find the postneonatal period 
accounts for an outsize share of the geographic differences. As one summary statistic, 
lowering the postneonatal mortality rate of all Census divisions to the level experienced by 
the best-off division would reduce infant mortality in the US by 0.75 deaths per 1000 births.
5 Demographics of postneonatal disadvantage
It is well known that – relative to Europe – the US has higher inequality on many metrics 
(Bertola and Ichino, 1995). Similarly, there is significant variation across the US in the 
extent of income inequality by region (Frank, 2009). Given these patterns, a natural question 
is whether the variation across countries and across regions is explained by worse outcomes 
among relatively disadvantaged households in the US relative to Europe (or in some Census 
divisions relative to others).14 For example, a key focus of a recent National Research 
Council report was the question of whether even highly advantaged Americans are in worse 
health than their counterparts in peer countries, or whether worse average health outcomes in 
the US only reflect higher levels of health inequality (National Research Council, 2013).
In this section we focus on the postneonatal period and explore the demographics of the 
variation in this outcome. We first simply document the variation in postneonatal mortality 
across demographic groups, which provides a broad sense of which demographic groups are 
most important in accounting for mortality variation across space. We then put somewhat 
more structure on the question by defining an “advantaged” group in each country/region 
and asking - akin to the question in the National Research Council report - whether there is 
variation across regions even among a relatively more advantaged group. As we will see, 
these estimates suggest that disadvantaged groups account for an outsized share of the cross-
regional differences in postneonatal mortality rates. We then explore the extent to which 
these mortality gaps are a result of differences in resources (i.e. income) across region, as 
opposed to differences which arise after holding income constant.
14A large literature – see, for example Avendano (2012) – has estimated the cross-country relationship between income inequality and 
infant mortality, tending to find a strong positive cross-sectional correlation that is not always robust to alternative specifications (such 
as country fixed e ect models).
Chen et al.
Page 14
Am Econ J Econ Policy. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The cross-country analysis in this section focuses on the US, Finland and Austria; our data 
from the UK and Belgium unfortunately do not provide tabulations by socioeconomic status 
so we are not able to use these data in these analyses. In addition, as noted in the data 
section, our income data are available only for the US and Finland. We will therefore 
document the income analysis only comparing the US and Finland, and within the US.
5.1 Postneonatal mortality by demographic group
We begin by investigating how postneonatal mortality rates vary by demographic group. 
Figure 6a documents postneonatal death rates by education/socioeconomic status group, for 
which we observe four groups in the US and Austria and three groups in Finland. In the US, 
this is based on education: (1) less than a high school degree, (2) a high school degree, (3) 
some college and (4) college degree or more. In Austria, we also use educational data: (1) 
compulsory school, (2) vocational school, (3) high school with A-levels and (4) university or 
teaching college. In Finland, the groups are defined based on occupation: (1) blue collar, (2) 
lower white collar and (3) upper white collar or entrepreneur. The steeper socioeconomic 
gradient observed in postneonatal mortality within the US is striking relative to the 
socioeconomic gradients observed in Austria or Finland. Notably, the within-US gradient is 
not simply due to high mortality rates in the least educated group; there is wide variation 
across the distribution; in contrast, to the extent that there is any inequality by 
socioeconomic status in Austria or Finland, it appears to be driven by the lowest education 
or occupation group. Similar findings emerge in Figure 6b across regions within the US.
What this analysis does not directly address is the question of whether there are groups in 
the US that do as well as comparable groups in Europe. That is: do the most advantaged 
groups in the three countries – or in the nine Census divisions – look similar? To investigate 
this question, we focus attention on an “advantaged” demographic: mothers who are high 
education/occupation, married and white (US) or non-immigrant (Austria).15 We then 
compare the mortality profile of this group, and the corresponding less advantaged group, 
across the three countries. It is worth noting in this analysis that the comparison with Austria 
is likely to be the most informative because in both the US and Austria we have data on 
education; in Finland, we use occupation as a proxy for educational level, which is likely to 
be correlated with education but is less comparable.
We show visual evidence on the cross-country/cross-group comparison in Figure 7, which 
shows cumulative deaths rates in the three countries for the two education/occupation 
groups. In Figure 7a, the advantaged individuals, there appears to be virtually no difference 
in death rates. In contrast, for the lower portion of the distribution (Figure 7b) the US death 
rate is much higher. In the postneonatal period the death rate for this group in the US is 2.4 
per 1000, versus 0.83 in Austria and 0.97 in Finland.
We explore this in regression form by estimating regressions analogous to those in Column 
(5) of Table 3 but including an interaction between an indicator variable for the US and an 
indicator variable for our advantaged definition. We can then test whether individuals in the 
advantaged group have higher mortality in the US than elsewhere. This estimation is 
15This group accounts for 22% in the US, 7% in Austria and 16% in Finland.
Chen et al.
Page 15
Am Econ J Econ Policy. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 presented in Table 6. Panel A considers postneonatal mortality. Relative to both Austria 
(Column (1)) and Finland (Column (2)) the main effect of US is large and positive and the 
interaction is large and negative. The advantaged group in the US cannot be statistically 
distinguished from the advantaged group in either of the comparison countries.16
Although the primary focus in this section is on postneonatal mortality, in Panel B we 
demonstrate that the US does not show excess inequality in neonatal mortality. The main 
effect of the US in both columns is negative, indicating that disadvantaged groups in the US 
do better than their counterparts in Europe conditional on circumstances at birth (this is 
marginally significant for Finland). The interaction effect is small, statistically insignificant, 
and of differing sign across columns.
Table 7 documents an analogous set of estimates across Census divisions within the US. 
Column (1) focuses on postneonatal mortality. The first set of coefficients, which estimate 
the differences across the advantaged and non-advantaged group, suggests large differences 
across Census divisions.17 The negative interaction coefficients suggest that these 
differences shrink considerably (at least relative to the North East) when we look at the 
advantaged group. At the bottom of the table we provide a summary measure of the average 
difference across all division-pairs in the advantaged and non-advantaged groups. The 
average difference for the advantaged group is 0.16 deaths per 1000; for the non-advantaged, 
it is 0.55 per 1000. Another way to summarize these estimates is to note that the maximum 
difference among the non-advantaged group is 1.6 excess deaths per 1000 births (East South 
Central versus North East), whereas the maximum difference for the advantaged group is 0.4 
deaths per 1000.
As a comparison, Column 2 of this table estimates the same regressions for neonatal 
mortality. As in our comparison with Europe, across US regions we observe much less 
variation in neonatal mortality relative to postneonatal mortality. Perhaps more notable, 
however, is that the neonatal mortality gaps across advantaged and non-advantaged groups 
are virtually identical across Census divisions.
Overall, this evidence suggests that the observed higher US postneonatal mortality relative 
to Europe is due entirely, or almost entirely, to higher mortality among disadvantaged 
groups. Focusing on the cross-country results, well-off individuals in all three countries have 
similar infant mortality rates. Another way to state this is in the context of within country 
inequality. In both Finland and Austria, postneonatal mortality rates are extremely similar 
across groups with varying levels of advantage, either unconditionally or (more starkly) 
conditional on detailed birth weight. In contrast, there is tremendous inequality within the 
US, with lower socioeconomic status groups experiencing much higher postneonatal 
mortality rates.
16Appendix Tables A.2 and A.3 present analogous results after varying the definition of advantaged. Appendix Table A.2 uses only 
the education/occupation variable and A.3 uses education/occupation and married (but not race). The results are very similar. In 
particular, leaving race out of the definition makes virtually no difference, reinforcing our earlier argument that our estimates do not 
appear to be driven by black/white differences in the US.
17This analysis uses a linear probability model; results are similar with a probit approach.
Chen et al.
Page 16
Am Econ J Econ Policy. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 5.2 The role of income differences
One explanation for the excess variation across groups in the US (or within the poorer 
Census divisions) is excess variation in income. Income per se has been shown to impact 
birth weight, although impacts on infant mortality are less clear (see, e.g., Currie and Cole 
1993; Baker 2008; Almond, Hoynes and Schanzenbach 2011; Hoynes, Miller and Simon 
2012). More generally, Cutler and Lleras-Muney (2010) document evidence that income 
plays a role in accounting for some of the education-health gradient in both the US and the 
UK. If the poor in the US are worse off than the poor elsewhere, then it is possible this 
drives some of the effects we observe.18 On the other hand, it is possible that these 
differences arise even within groups with similar incomes. If this is the case, it would 
suggest that excess postneonatal mortality in the US is not a direct issue of income.
Ideally, we would address this question with individual-level data on income linked to birth 
outcomes. Unfortunately, such data are not accessible. As an alternative, we investigate this 
question using more aggregated data from the US and Finland. Note that we are more 
confident in using these data for within-US comparisons, given that our income data are 
more comparable within the US.
We approach this analysis, in both the cross-country and within-US case, by dividing 
individuals into deciles based on the mean income by their demographic cell. We then 
estimate the postneonatal mortality differences across countries and - separately - the 
average difference across division-pairs in postneonatal mortality for each income decile. To 
the extent that differences in income drive the postneonatal mortality differences across 
areas, we should see limited differences in postneonatal mortality within income groups.
The results are shown in Table 8. They do not suggest similar mortality rates within income 
groups, at least not for low income individuals. When we compare the US to Finland we find 
continued evidence of significantly elevated mortality rates in the US even among groups 
with comparable income. For example, in the second income decile, the US has a 
postneonatal mortality rate of 1.2 deaths per 1000 more than Finland, despite virtually 
identical median incomes in this group across countries. Consistent with our earlier 
evidence, at the higher income levels there is no statistically significant postneonatal 
mortality gap across countries.
The GDP per capita in Finland is, on average, lower than the US. As a result, if the US 
adopted the Finnish income distribution, along with the US schedule of postneonatal 
mortality by income, infant mortality would actually be expected to increase. These cross-
country results are, however, somewhat difficult to interpret given the vast differences in 
non-cash welfare provision by each country, which are not included in our income measures.
Comfortingly, the estimates from our within-US analysis, shown in the right panel Table 8, 
confirm the broad conclusions from our cross-country analysis. Even within fairly narrow 
income bins, there is large variation across Census divisions. In the poorest income decile, 
18A related issue is that some authors have argued income inequality per se drives poor US birth outcomes (Reagan et al. 2007), 
although the most recent evidence on this suggests it is probably not a robust relationship (Aizer, Higa and Winkler 2013).
Chen et al.
Page 17
Am Econ J Econ Policy. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the average difference across division-pairs is 1 death per 1000. Among the higher income 
groups there is less variation, consistent with the overall more limited variation in higher 
socioeconomic status groups demonstrated in Table 7.
We can summarize the importance of income in two ways. First, we estimate our basic 
regressions (i.e. Column (5) of Table 5) but include detailed controls for income (we use 
$1000 income bins); only 20% of the average division-pair gap is closed by the addition of 
these controls. Second, we ask what reduction in postneonatal mortality would be achieved 
if all Census divisions were endowed with the income distribution of the richest Census 
region (the North East); we estimate that this would close 30% of the postneonatal mortality 
gap. Overall, this discussion suggests variation in postneonatal mortality rates across areas 
does not appear to be due to differences in income per se; notably, this is largely consistent 
with an existing literature that finds that increasing resources per se does not have detectable 
e ects on infant mortality in the US (Baker 2008; Almond et al. 2011; Currie and Cole 1993; 
Hoynes et al. 2012).
6 Discussion and conclusion
Our ultimate goal in understanding the US infant mortality disadvantage relative to Europe 
is to better understand what policy levers might be effective in reducing infant mortality in 
the US. Our results on neonatal mortality strongly suggest that differential access to 
technology-intensive medical care provided shortly after birth is unlikely to explain the US 
IMR disadvantage. This conclusion is, perhaps, surprising in light of evidence that much of 
the decline in infant mortality in the 1950 to 1990 period was due to improvement in NICU 
technology (Cutler and Meara, 2000). However, a variety of evidence suggests that access to 
technology-intensive post-birth medical care should a ect mortality risks during the neonatal 
period, rather than during the post-neonatal period: median time spent in the NICU is 13 
days (March of Dimes 2011), and this care is thought to primarily affect neonatal mortality 
(see, for example, Rudolph and Borker (1987), Budetti et al. (1981), and Shaffer (2001)). 
Consistent with this assertion, Almond et al. (2010) analyze the mortality consequences of 
incremental increases in medical expenditures for at-risk infants (including NICU admission 
as well as other expenditures), and find that the mortality benefits of additional medical care 
are concentrated in the first 28 days of life. Our results suggest that if anything the US has a 
mortality advantage during the neonatal period.
Instead, the facts documented here suggest that, in general, policy attention should focus on 
either preventing preterm births or on reducing postneonatal mortality. Although the former 
has received a tremendous amount of policy focus (MacDorman and Mathews 2009; Wilcox 
et al. 1995), the latter has to the best of our knowledge received very little attention. Our 
estimates suggest that decreasing postneonatal mortality in the US to the level in Austria 
would lower US death rates by around 1 death per 1000. Applying a standard value of a 
statistical life of US$7 million, this suggests it would be worth spending up to $7000 per 
infant to achieve this gain. If policies were able to focus on individuals of lower 
socioeconomic status – given our estimates that advantaged groups do as well in the US as 
elsewhere – even higher levels of spending per mother targeted would be justified.
Chen et al.
Page 18
Am Econ J Econ Policy. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Identifying particular policies that could be effective in achieving these gains is beyond the 
scope of this paper and is an area that deserves more research attention. That said, one policy 
worth mentioning is home nurse visits. Both Finland and Austria, along with much of the 
rest of Europe, have policies which bring nurses or other health professionals to visit parents 
and infants at home. These visits combine well-baby checkups with caregiver advice and 
support. Notably, in light of our income results, these policies do not focus on alleviating 
resource constraints per se but rather on providing information and support targeted to 
mothers and infants. While such small scale programs exist in the US, they are far from 
universal, although provisions of the Affordable Care Act have expanded them to some 
extent. Randomized evaluations of such programs in the US have shown evidence of 
mortality reductions, notably from causes of death we identify as important such as SIDS 
and accidents (Olds et al. 2007). To the extent that programs of this type are among the few 
available policy levers that focus on providing support to mothers and infants in the period 
after they are out of the hospital system, our evidence suggests they may be a clear place for 
future research.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
References
Aizer, Anna; Higa, Florencia; Winkler, Hernan. The impact of rising inequality on health at birth. 
Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research. 2013
Almond, Douglas; Hoynes, Hilary W.; Whitmore Schanzenbach, Diane. Inside the war on poverty: The 
impact of food stamps on birth outcomes. The Review of Economics and Statistics. 2011; 93(2):
387–403.
Almond, Douglas; Doyle, Joseph; Kowalski, Amanda; Williams, Heidi. Estimating marginal returns to 
medical care: Evidence from at-risk newborns. Quarterly Journal of Economics. 2010; 125(2):591–
634. [PubMed: 20634927] 
Avendano, Mauricio. Correlation or causation? Income inequality and infant mortality in fixed effects 
models in the period 1960-2008 in 34 OECD countries. Social Science & Medicine. 2012; 75(4):
754–760. [PubMed: 22651898] 
Baker, Kevin. Do cash transfer programs improve infant health: Evidence from the 1993 expansion of 
the earned income tax credit. manuscript, University of Notre Dame. 2008
Bertola, Giuseppe; Ichino, Andrea. Bernanken, Ben; Rotemberg, JulioWage inequality and 
unemployment: United States versus Europe. NBER Macroeconomics Annual. 1995; 10
Budetti, Peter; Berrand, Nancy; McManus, Peggy; Ann Heinen, Lu. The costs and effectiveness of 
neonatal intensive care number. 1981; 10
Case, Anne; Lubotsky, Darren; Paxson, Christina. Economic status and health in childhood: The 
origins of the gradient. American Economic Review. 2002; 92(5):1308–1334.
Case, Anne; Lee, Diana; Paxson, Christina. The income gradient in children's health: A comment on 
Currie, Shields, and Wheatley Price. Journal of Health Economics. 2008; 27(3):801–807. [PubMed: 
18191487] 
CIA. The World Factbook, 2013-2014. Central Intelligence Agency; Washington, DC: 2013. 
Currie, Alison; Shields, Michael A.; Wheatley Price, Stephen. The child health family income 
gradient: Evidence from England. Journal of Health Economics. 2007; 26(2):213–232. [PubMed: 
16962191] 
Currie, Janet; Stabile, Mark. Socioeconomic status and child health: Why is the relationship stronger 
for older children? American Economic Review. 2003; 93(5):1813–1823.
Chen et al.
Page 19
Am Econ J Econ Policy. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Currie, Janet; Cole, Nancy. Welfare and child health: The link between AFDC participation and birth 
weight. The American Economic Review. 1993:971–985.
Cutler, David; Meara, Ellen. The technology of birth: Is it worth it? Frontiers in Health Policy 
Research. 2000; 3(1):33–67.
Cutler, David M.; Lleras-Muney, Adriana. Understanding differences in health behaviors by education. 
Journal of health economics. 2010; 29(1):1–28. [PubMed: 19963292] 
Dietz PM, England LJ, Callaghan WM, Pearl M ML Wier, Kharrazi M. A comparison of LMP-based 
and ultrasound-based estimates of gestational age using linked California livebirth and prenatal 
screening records. Paediatric Perinatal Epidemiology. 2007; 21(Supplement 2):62–71. [PubMed: 
17803619] 
Elder, Todd; Goddeeris, John; Haider, Steven. A deadly disparity: A unified assessment of the black-
white infant mortality gap. The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy. 2011; 11:1–42.
Ford, Graeme; Ecob, Russell; Hunt, Kate; Macintyre, Sally; West, Patrick. Patterns of class inequality 
in health through the lifespan: class gradients at 15, 35 and 55 years in the West of Scotland. 
Social Science & Medicine. 1994; 39(8):1037–1050. [PubMed: 7809657] 
Frank, Mark W. Inequality and growth in the United States: Evidence from a new state-level panel of 
income inequality measures. Economic Inquiry. 2009; 47(1):55–68.
Golding, Jean. Epidemiology of fetal and neonatal death. In: Keeling, Jean, editor. Fetal and Neonatal 
Pathology. 3ed. Springer-Verlag; 2001. p. 175-190.
Graafmans, Wilco; Richardus, Jan-Hendrik; Macfarlane, Alison; Rebagliato, Marisa; Blondel, 
Beatrice; Pauline Verloove-Vanhorick, S.; Mackenbach, Johan. Comparability of published 
perinatal mortality rates in Western Europe: The quantitative impact of differences in gestational 
age and birthweight criteria. BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics & Gynaecology. 2001; 
108:1237–1245. [PubMed: 11843385] 
Hoynes, Hilary W.; Miller, Douglas L.; Simon, David. Income, the earned income tax credit, and infant 
health. Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research. 2012
Kim, Shin; Shapiro-Mendoza, Carrie; Chu, Susan; Camperlengo, Lena; Anderson, Robert. 
Differentiating cause-of-death terminology for deaths coded as sudden infant death syndrome, 
accidental suffocation, and unknown cause: An investigation using US death certificates, 
2003-2004. Journal of Forensic Sciences. 2012; 57(2):364–369. [PubMed: 21981558] 
Kleinman, Joel; Kiely, John. Postneonatal mortality in the United States: An international perspective. 
Pediatrics. 1990; 86(6):1091–1097. [PubMed: 2243746] 
MacDorman, Marian; Mathews, TJ. Behind international rankings of infant mortality: How the United 
States compares with Europe. National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) Data Brief. 2009; 
(23):1–8.
March of Dimes. Special care nursery admissions. 2011. http://www.marchofdimes.com/peristats/
pdfdocs/nicu_summary_final.pdf
Miller, Douglas. mimeo. UC-Davis; 2003. What underlies the black-white infant mortality gap? The 
importance of birthweight, behavior, environment, and health care. 
National Research Council. U.S. Health in International Perspective: Shorter Lives, Poorer Health. The 
National Academies Press; 2013. 
Olds DL, Kitzman H, Hanks C, Cole R, Anson E, Sidora-Arcoleo K, Luckey DW, Henderson CR, 
Holmberg J, Tutt RA, Stevenson AJ, Bondy J. Effects of nurse home visiting on maternal and child 
functioning: age-9 follow-up of a randomized trial. Pediatrics. Oct; 2007 120(4):e832–845. 
[PubMed: 17908740] 
Pearson GA, Ward-Platt M, Kelly D. How children die: Classifying child deaths. Archives of Diseases 
in Childhood. 2011; 96(10):922–926. [PubMed: 20656738] 
Power, Chris; Matthews, Sharon. Origins of health inequalities in a national population sample. The 
Lancet. 1997; 350(9091):1584–1589.
Reagan, Patricia B.; Salsberry, Pamela J.; Olsen, Randall J. Does the measure of economic disadvan 
tage matter? Exploring the effect of individual and relative deprivation on intrauterine growth 
restriction. Social Science & Medicine. 2007; 64(10):2016–2029. [PubMed: 17379372] 
Rudolph, Claire; Borker, Susan. Regionalization: Issues in Intensive Care for High Risk Newborns and 
Their Families. Praeger; 1987. 
Chen et al.
Page 20
Am Econ J Econ Policy. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Sachs, Benjamin; Fretts, Ruth; Gardner, Roxane; Hellerstein, Susan; Wampler, Nina; Wise, Paul. The 
impact of extreme prematurity and congenital anomalies on the interpretation of international 
comparisons of infant mortality. Obstetrics & Gynecology. 1995; 85(6):941–946. [PubMed: 
7770264] 
Shaffer, Ellen. State Policies and Regional Neonatal Care, Report prepared for the March of Dimes. 
2001
Viscusi, Kip; Aldy, Joseph. The value of a statistical life: A critical review of market estimates 
throughout the world. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty. 2003; 27(1):5–76.
Waldmann, Robert J. Income distribution and infant mortality. The Quarterly Journal of Economics. 
1992:1283–1302.
Wegman, Myron. Infant mortality: Some international comparisons. Pediatrics. 1996; 98(6):1020–
1027. [PubMed: 8951249] 
Wilcox, Allen; Skjaerven, Rolv; Buekens, Pierre; Kiely, John. Birth weight and perinatal mortality. A 
comparison of the United States and Norway. Journal of the American Medical Association. 1995; 
273(9):709–711. [PubMed: 7853628] 
World Bank. World Development Indicators Online. Technical Report. 2013
World Health Organization. Technical Report. World Health Organization; 2006. Neonatal and 
Perinatal Mortality: Country, Regional and Global Estimates. 
Chen et al.
Page 21
Am Econ J Econ Policy. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
US IMR disadvantage: Full sample and restricted samples
Chen et al.
Page 22
Am Econ J Econ Policy. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. 
Cumulative probability of death, by country
Chen et al.
Page 23
Am Econ J Econ Policy. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. 
Cumulative probability of death, by country, by birth weight
Chen et al.
Page 24
Am Econ J Econ Policy. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. 
Cumulative probability of death, within US
Chen et al.
Page 25
Am Econ J Econ Policy. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. 
Cumulative probability of death, within US, by birth weight
Chen et al.
Page 26
Am Econ J Econ Policy. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. 
Gradient in postneonatal death rates by socioeconomic status and location
Chen et al.
Page 27
Am Econ J Econ Policy. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 7. 
Cumulative probability of death, by country, by socioeconomic group
Chen et al.
Page 28
Am Econ J Econ Policy. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Chen et al.
Page 29
Table 1
Cross-country summary statistics
(1) United States
(2) Austria
(3) Finland
(4) UK*
(5) Belgium*
death within 1 year, per 1000 births, full sample
6.78
3.98
3.21
5.33
4.40
# of births
24,484,028
466,227
339,312
Panel A: Main sample
death within 1 year, per 1000 births, restricted sample
4.65
2.94
2.64
3.43
3.67
gestational age (weeks)
38.8
38.6
39.4
birth weight (grams)
3,332
3,345
3,550
3,368
3,310
# of births
23,411,153
451,920
327,732
3,942,209
667,697
Panel B: Demographic sample
death within 1 year, per 1000 births, restricted sample
4.55
2.94
2.63
gestational age (weeks)
38.8
38.6
39.4
birth weight (grams)
3,333
3,345
3,553
male infant (%)
51.2%
51.2%
51.3%
mother's age (years)
27.40
28.75
29.51
mother is black [US] or immigrant [AU] (%)
14.9%
23.9%
–
mother is married (%)
65.3%
65.3%
59.9%
mother has at least college degree (%)
25.7%
11.9%
mother is “upper white collar” worker (%)
22.0%
# of births
23,113,240
451,920
292,786
Notes: Race is reported only in the US data. Data cover 2000 through 2005. The first row contains the full (unadjusted) sample. Panel A is limited 
to singleton births at ≥22 weeks of gestation and ≥500 grams with birth weight and gestational age observed. Panel B limits to observations with no 
missing demographic covariates.
*For the UK and Belgium the unadjusted death rates come directly from the World Development Indicators database; gestational age and 
demographic data are not available in the tabulations we obtained for these countries.
Am Econ J Econ Policy. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 04.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Chen et al.
Page 30
Table 2
Cross-Census division summary statistics
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
North East
Mid-Atlantic
East North Central
West North Central
South Atlantic
East South Central
West South Central
Mountain
Pacific
death within 1 year, per 
1000 births, full sample
5.27
6.36
7.60
6.66
7.96
8.85
6.60
6.09
5.37
# of births
689,261
2,052,697
2,472,299
1,074,249
2,917,487
953,341
2,107,572
1,204,992
2,747,287
death within 1 year, per 
1000 births, restricted 
sample
3.16
4.15
5.06
4.68
5.29
6.30
4.90
4.47
3.78
gestational age (weeks)
39.0
38.9
38.9
38.9
38.8
38.6
38.7
38.8
39.0
birth weight (grams)
3,402
3,349
3,355
3,386
3,309
3,277
3,303
3,304
3,389
# of births
657,149
1,968,975
2,380,996
1,034,506
2,814,862
919,404
2,033,140
1,167,269
2,532,336
death within 1 year, per 
1000 births, restricted 
sample
3.08
3.95
4.98
4.61
5.15
6.26
4.83
4.35
3.68
gestational age (weeks)
39.0
39.0
38.9
38.9
38.8
38.6
38.7
38.8
39.0
birth weight (grams)
3,403
3,351
3,356
3,387
3,310
3,277
3,304
3,305
3,389
male infant (%)
51.3%
51.2%
51.2%
51.2%
51.1%
51.2%
51.1%
51.2%
51.2%
mother's age (years)
33.78
32.29
32.27
32.39
32.27
31.18
31.49
32.06
32.32
mother is black [US] or 
immigrant [AU] (%)
8.8%
18.1%
15.1%
8.0%
26.3%
24.9%
15.1%
3.1%
5.5%
mother is married (%)
71.2%
66.1%
65.4%
69.5%
63.4%
63.2%
65.4%
68.2%
68.1%
mother has at least college 
degree (%)
38.8%
30.4%
26.5%
29.6%
25.9%
20.3%
18.9%
21.7%
23.3%
# of births
651,851
1,799,490
2,354,809
1,025,991
2,787,062
917,058
2,007,779
1,145,742
2,405,124
Notes: Race is reported only in the US data. Data cover 2000 through 2003. The first row contains the full (unadjusted) sample. Panel A is limited to singleton births at ≥22 weeks of gestation and ≥500 
grams with birth weight and gestational age observed. Panel B limits to observations with no missing demographic covariates.
Am Econ J Econ Policy. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 04.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Chen et al.
Page 31
Table 3
Cross country differences in mortality
Panel A: US vs. Finland
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
comparable sample, 
no controls
comparable sample, 
birthweight controls
comparable sample, 
birthweight controls
comparable sample, 
birthweight controls
comparable sample, 
birthweight controls
sample, controls:
mortality (in 1000s):
first year
first year
< 1 week
1 week to 1 month
1 to 12 months
United States
2.008 (0.091)
***
0.533 (0.088)
***
−0.276 (0.063)
***
0.164 (0.033)
***
0.647 (0.054)
***
cumulative effect, US
−0.276
−0.112
0.535
# of observations
23,738,885
23,738,885
23,738,885
23,695,461
23,677,125
Finland mortality level
1.352
0.351
0.938
cumulative mortality, Finland
1.352
1.703
2.641
Panel B: US vs. Austria
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
comparable sample, 
no controls
comparable sample, 
birthweight controls
comparable sample, 
birthweight controls
comparable sample, 
birthweight controls
comparable sample, 
birthweight controls
sample, controls:
mortality (in 1000s):
first year
first year
< 1 week
1 week to 1 month
1 to 12 months
United States
1.704 (0.082)
***
1.140 (0.077)
***
−0.019 (0.056)
0.068 (0.036)
*
1.083 (0.043)
***
cumulative effect, US
−0.019
0.049
1.132
# of observations
23,863,073
23,863,073
23,863,073
23,819,403
23,800,909
Austria mortality level
1.525
0.605
0.816
cumulative mortality, Austria
1.525
2.130
2.943
Am Econ J Econ Policy. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 04.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Chen et al.
Page 32
Panel C: US vs. UK
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
comparable sample, 
no controls
comparable sample, 
birthweight controls
comparable sample, 
birthweight controls
comparable sample, 
birthweight controls
comparable sample, 
birthweight controls
sample, controls:
mortality (in 1000s):
first year
first year
< 1 week
1 week to 1 month
1 to 12 months
United States
1.214 (0.033)
***
0.781 (0.031)
***
0.043 (0.021)
**
0.091 (0.014)
***
0.648 (0.020)
***
cumulative effect, US
0.043
0.134
0.782
# of observations
27,353,362
27,353,362
27,353,362
27,304,313
27,283,696
UK mortality level
1.539
0.609
1.289
cumulative mortality, UK
1.539
2.148
3.437
Panel D: US vs. Belgium
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
comparable sample, 
no controls
comparable sample, 
birthweight controls
comparable sample, 
birthweight controls
comparable sample, 
birthweight controls
comparable sample, 
birthweight controls
sample, controls:
mortality (in 1000s):
first year
first year
< 1 week
1 week to 1 month
1 to 12 months
United States
0.983 (0.075)
***
0.252 (0.072)
***
−0.264 (0.048)
***
0.042 (0.030)
0.458 (0.047)
***
cumulative effect, US
−0.264
−0.222
0.236
# of observations
24,078,850
24,078,850
24,078,850
24,034,786
24,016,169
Belgian mortality level
1.622
0.594
1.453
cumulative mortality, Belgium
1.622
2.216
3.669
Notes: This table shows differences across countries in mortality, using Finland (Panel A), Austria (Panel B), the UK (Panel C) or Belgium (Panel D) as the omitted country. Columns (1) and (2) analyze 
overall one-year mortality. Column (1) limits to the comparable sample but includes no controls. Column (2) adjusts for 500-gram birth weight category cells. Columns (3) through (5) include birth weight 
controls and look at deaths in various periods of life. The regression results in these columns are conditional on reaching the minimum age: deaths up to 1 week; deaths from 1 week to 1 month, conditional 
on surviving to 1 week, etc. Coefficients are in units of 1000 deaths: a coefficient of 1 indicates an increase of 1 death in 1000 births. For Columns (3) through (5), each panel also shows the cumulative 
effect by country (the sum of the coefficients up to that point). Robust standard errors in parentheses.
Data for all countries cover 2000-2005; as described in the text, the sample is limited to singleton births at ≥22 weeks of gestation and ≥500 grams with birth weight and gestational age observed.
***significant at 1% level
**significant at 5% level
*significant at 10% level.
Am Econ J Econ Policy. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 04.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Chen et al.
Page 33
Table 4
Postneonatal cause of death, by country
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
cause of death:
congenital abnormalities and 
low birthweight
respiratory
SIDS and other 
sudden deaths
accident
assault
other
US
0.380
0.068
0.699
0.208
0.064
0.613
Finland
0.325
0.021
0.226
0.044
0.003
0.287
Austria
0.377
0.007
0.185
0.030
0.013
0.175
US-Finland
raw difference
0.055
0.047
0.473
0.164
0.061
0.326
as share of Finland
17%
224%
209%
373%
2033%
114%
US-Austria
raw difference
0.003
0.061
0.514
0.178
0.051
0.438
as share of Austria
1%
871%
278%
593%
392%
250%
Notes: This table shows the difference in postneonatal mortality from each cause of death across countries. All means are computed on the sample 
of infants alive at 1 month. Means are in units of 1000 deaths. Data for all countries cover 2000-2005; as described in the text, the sample is limited 
to singleton births at ≥22 weeks of gestation and ≥500 grams with birth weight and gestational age observed.
Am Econ J Econ Policy. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 04.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Chen et al.
Page 34
Table 5
Cross-Census division differences in mortality
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
comparable sample, no 
controls
comparable sample, 
birthweight controls
comparable sample, 
birthweight controls
comparable sample, 
birthweight controls
comparable sample, 
birthweight controls
sample, controls:
mortality (in 1000s):
first year
first year
< 1 week
1 week to 1 month
1 to 12 months
Mid-Atlantic
0.996 (0.097)
***
0.547 (0.093)
***
0.072 (0.058)
0.163 (0.040)
***
0.320 (0.065)
***
East North Central
1.907 (0.095)
***
1.521 (0.091)
***
0.296 (0.056)
***
0.311 (0.039)
***
0.931 (0.063)
***
West North Central
1.521 (0.108)
***
1.496 (0.103)
***
0.374 (0.064)
***
0.256 (0.044)
***
0.874 (0.072)
***
South Atlantic
2.135 (0.093)
***
1.201 (0.089)
***
0.105 (0.055)
*
0.272 (0.038)
***
0.831 (0.062)
***
East South Central
3.146 (0.110)
***
1.926 (0.105)
***
0.092 (0.065)
0.360 (0.045)
***
1.475 (0.073)
***
West South Central
1.741 (0.097)
***
1.160 (0.093)
***
−.0237 (0.057)
0.256 (0.040)
***
0.920 (0.064)
***
Mountain
1.313 (0.105)
***
1.240 (0.101)
***
0.315 (0.062)
***
0.294 (0.043)
***
0.653 (0.070)
***
Pacific
0.621 (0.094)
***
0.870 (0.090)
***
0.198 (0.056)
***
0.215 (0.039)
***
0.467 (0.063)
# of observations
15,508,637
15,508,637
15,508,637
15,480,699
15,468,224
share of total explained
45.3%
share of deaths, North East
45.9%
15.3%
38.8%
share of birthweight-adjusted explained
17.3%
15.7%
67.1%
Notes: This table shows differences across US Census divisions in mortality; the omitted division is the North East. Columns (1) and (2) analyze overall one-year mortality. Column (1) limits to the 
comparable sample but includes no controls. Column (2) adjusts for 500-gram birth weight category cells. Columns (3) through (5) include birth weight controls and look at deaths in various periods of life. 
The regression results in these columns are conditional on reaching the minimum age: deaths up to 1 week; deaths from 1 week to 1 month, conditional on surviving to 1 week, etc. Coefficients are in units 
of 1000 deaths: a coefficient of 1 indicates an increase of 1 death in 1000 births. Shares reported in the final row are calculated based on each Census division pair and averaged. Robust standard errors in 
parentheses.
**significant at 5% level
Data for all countries cover 2000-2003; as described in the text, the sample is limited to singleton births at ≥22 weeks of gestation and ≥500 grams with birth weight and gestational age observed.
***significant at 1% level
*significant at 10% level.
Am Econ J Econ Policy. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 04.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Chen et al.
Page 35
Table 6
Cross country differences in postneonatal and neonatal mortality, by group
Panel A: Postneonatal mortality
(1)
(2)
US versus Austria
US versus Finland
United States
1.357 (0.046)
***
0.920 (0.064)
***
advantaged
−0.093 (0.144)
−0.296 (0.129)
**
United States × advantaged
−1.146 (0.145)
***
−0.941 (0.130)
***
# of observations
23,505,784
23,347,108
high SES, US vs. Europe
0.126
0.853
Panel B: Neonatal mortality
(1)
(2)
US versus Austria
US versus Finland
United States
0.024 (0.068)
−0.149 (0.083)
*
advantaged
−0.259 (0.218)
−0.080 (0.192)
United States × advantaged
0.063 (0.219)
−0.116 (0.193)
# of observations
23,565,160
23,406,026
high SES, US vs. Europe
0.675
0.128
Notes: This table shows differences across countries in mortality by advantaged versus disadvantaged group. The regressions adjust for 500-gram 
birth weight category cells. The regression results are conditional on surviving to 1 month of age. “Advantaged” is as defined in the text (mothers 
who are high education/occupation, married and white (in the US) or non-immigrant (in Austria)). Coefficients are in units of 1000 deaths: a 
coefficient of 1 indicates an increase of 1 death in 1000 births. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
Data for all countries cover 2000-2005; as described in the text, the sample is limited to singleton births at ≥22 weeks of gestation and ≥500 grams 
with no missing covariates. The last row in each panel reports the p-value from a test for equality between the advantaged group in the US relative 
to the advantaged group in the comparison country.
***significant at 1% level
**significant at 5% level
*significant at 10% level.
Am Econ J Econ Policy. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 04.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Chen et al.
Page 36
Table 7
Cross Census division differences in postneonatal and neonatal mortality, by group
(1)
(2)
postneonatal
neonatal
mortality (in 1000s):
1 to 12 months
< 1 month
Mid-Atlantic
0.336 (0.072)
***
0.218 (0.084)
***
Mid-Atlantic × advantaged
−0.341 (0.094)
***
−0.245 (0.147)
*
East North Central
1.068 (0.072)
***
0.635 (0.082)
***
East North Central × advantaged
−0.836 (0.095)
***
−0.154 (0.143)
West North Central
1.021 (0.085)
***
0.642 (0.092)
***
West North Central × advantaged
−0.706 (0.112)
***
−0.038 (0.162)
South Atlantic
0.912 (0.070)
***
0.335 (0.080)
***
South Atlantic × advantaged
−0.759 (0.093)
***
−0.0102 (0.141)
East South Central
1.589 (0.091)
***
0.497 (0.092)
***
East South Central × advantaged
−1.229 (0.130)
***
−0.067 (0.180)
West South Central
0.920 (0.073)
***
0.239 (0.082)
***
West South Central × advantaged
−0.613 (0.102)
***
0.008 (0.152)
Mountain
0.673 (0.079)
***
0.592 (0.089)
***
Mountain × advantaged
−0.604 (0.109)
***
−0.163 (0.165)
Pacific
0.440 (0.069)
***
0.393 (0.081)
***
Pacific × advantaged
−0.303 (0.093)
***
−0.127 (0.144)
advantaged
−0.645 (0.078)
***
−0.064 (0.123)
# of observations
15,056,924
15,094,906
average difference, advantaged
0.17
0.25
average difference, not advantaged
0.55
0.26
Notes: This table shows differences across Census divisions in mortality by advantaged versus disadvantaged group. The regressions adjust for 500-
gram birth weight category cells. The regression results are conditional on surviving to 1 month of age. “Advantaged” is as defined in the text 
(mothers who are high education/occupation, married and white). Coefficients are in units of 1000 deaths: a coefficient of 1 indicates an increase of 
1 death in 1000 births. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
**significant at 5% level
Data cover 2000-2003; as described in the text, the sample is limited to singleton births at ≥22 weeks of gestation and ≥500 grams with no missing 
covariates.
***significant at 1% level
*significant at 10% level.
Am Econ J Econ Policy. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 04.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Chen et al.
Page 37
Table 8
Postneonatal disadvantage within income groups
US vs. Finland
Within US across divisions
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
excess US mortality, 1 - 12 
months
median 
income, 
US [2005 
US$] 
(after 
taxes)
median 
income, 
Finland 
[2005 US$] 
(after 
taxes)
average difference 
across divisions, 
1-12 months
median 
income, 
richest 
division
median 
income, 
poorest 
division
income group 1
1.751 (0.214) [1,055,295]
***
$19,205
$20,583
0.987 [1,040,820]
$27,873
$23,421
income group 2
1.190 (0.397) [1,054,913]
***
$28,809
$27,892
0.631 [1,040,783]
$39,555
$37,284
income group 3
1.002 (0.289) [1,058,082]
***
$33,987
$34,367
0.580 [1,043,016]
$46,243
$45,101
income group 4
0.935 (0.239) [1,090,286]
***
$39,175
$38,788
0.366 [1,038,100]
$53,330
$52,622
income group 5
0.837 (0.380) [1,018,329]
**
$43,993
$43,149
0.520 [1,040,192]
$60,748
$60,217
income group 6
0.886 (0.256) [1,055,909]
***
$49,230
$49,944
0.335 [1,040,649]
$68,886
$67,770
income group 7
0.540 (0.568) [1,058,485]
$55,321
$57,139
0.276 [1,040,475]
$77,689
$76,507
income group 8
−0.348 (0.543) [1,054,957]
$62,491
$59,225
0.184 [1,040,587]
$88,098
$86,244
income group 9
−2.109 (1.779) [1,055,930]
$73,036
$71,529
0.185 [1,047,361]
$103,865
$101,755
income group 10
N/A [1,056,316]
$96,706
N/A
0.256 [1,033,599]
$153,357
$125,257
Notes: This table shows the postneonatal disadvantage by income group. Income data is defined for the households based on their location and 
demographic data. US income data comes from the IPUMS. Finnish income data comes from their Household Budget Survey. For the cross-
country comparison income is after tax for both countries; for the comparison within the US it is before-tax. Income deciles are defined based on 
the entire sample. All figures are in units of 1000 deaths: a coefficient of 1 indicates an increase of 1 death in 1000 births. Robust standard errors in 
parentheses. Number of observations on which the estimates are based are in square brackets.
*significant at 10% level.
Data for all countries cover 2000-2005; as described in the text, the sample is limited to singleton births at ≥22 weeks of gestation and ≥500 grams 
with no missing covariates.
***significant at 1% level
**significant at 5% level
Am Econ J Econ Policy. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 04.
