 1
Scientific RepoRts | 6:34477 | DOI: 10.1038/srep34477
www.nature.com/scientificreports
Exposure to the Functional 
Bacterial Amyloid Protein Curli 
Enhances Alpha-Synuclein 
Aggregation in Aged Fischer 344 
Rats and Caenorhabditis elegans
Shu G. Chen1, Vilius Stribinskis2, Madhavi J. Rane3, Donald R. Demuth4, Evelyne Gozal5, 
Andrew M. Roberts6, Rekha Jagadapillai5, Ruolan Liu7, Kyonghwan Choe1, 
Bhooma Shivakumar1, Francheska Son1, Shunying Jin3, Richard Kerber8, Anthony Adame9, 
Eliezer Masliah9 & Robert P. Friedland7
Misfolded alpha-synuclein (AS) and other neurodegenerative disorder proteins display prion-like 
transmission of protein aggregation. Factors responsible for the initiation of AS aggregation are 
unknown. To evaluate the role of amyloid proteins made by the microbiota we exposed aged rats 
and transgenic C. elegans to E. coli producing the extracellular bacterial amyloid protein curli. Rats 
exposed to curli-producing bacteria displayed increased neuronal AS deposition in both gut and brain 
and enhanced microgliosis and astrogliosis compared to rats exposed to either mutant bacteria unable 
to synthesize curli, or to vehicle alone. Animals exposed to curli producing bacteria also had more 
expression of TLR2, IL-6 and TNF in the brain than the other two groups. There were no differences 
among the rat groups in survival, body weight, inflammation in the mouth, retina, kidneys or gut 
epithelia, and circulating cytokine levels. AS-expressing C. elegans fed on curli-producing bacteria also 
had enhanced AS aggregation. These results suggest that bacterial amyloid functions as a trigger to 
initiate AS aggregation through cross-seeding and also primes responses of the innate immune system.
The neurodegenerative disorders Parkinson’s disease (PD), Alzheimer’s disease, fronto-temporal lobar degen-
eration, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and related disorders all involve the neuronal accumulation of pathogenic 
aggregated amyloid proteins with prion-like features1. The proteins deposited in the brain in these disorders 
alpha synuclein (AS), Amyloid beta (AB), tau and TDP-43 are transmissible from cell to cell, from one region 
of the body to another and from humans to susceptible animal hosts2. However the agent or agents responsi-
ble for the initiation of the protein misfolding is unknown. Prusiner3 and others have suggested that the initial 
event is stochastic, but the possibility that it is initiated by environment amyloids requires consideration4,5. The 
early development of constipation and anosmia and the deposition of aggregated AS in intestinal neurons up to 
20 years before diagnosis in PD suggests that the initiating factor comes from the gut (including mouth, nasal 
passages and intestines)6. This is also suggested by the early brain pathology in PD in the dorsal motor nucleus 
of the vagus in the medulla, which is a region affected early in scrapie7. Furthermore, inflammatory changes are 
found in neurodegenerative disorders with microgliosis, astrogliosis and activation of inflammatory cytokines 
1Dept. of Pathology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio, USA. 2Brown Cancer Center, University 
of Louisville School of Medicine, Louisville, Kentucky, USA. 3Dept. of Medicine, University of Louisville School of 
Medicine, Louisville, Kentucky, USA. 4Dept. of Oral Immunology and Infectious Diseases, University of Louisville 
School of Dentistry, Louisville, Kentucky, USA. 5Dept. of Pediatrics, University of Louisville School of Medicine, 
Louisville, Kentucky, USA. 6Dept. of Physiology, University of Louisville School of Medicine, Louisville, Kentucky, 
USA. 7Dept. of Neurology, University of Louisville School of Medicine, Louisville, Kentucky, USA. 8Dept. of 
Epidemiology and Population Health, University of Louisville School of Public Health, Louisville, Kentucky, USA. 
9Laboratory of Experimental Neuropathology, University of California, San Diego, California, USA. Correspondence 
and requests for materials should be addressed to R.P.F. (email: robert.friedland@louisville.edu)
Received: 08 June 2016
Accepted: 14 September 2016
Published: 06 October 2016
OPEN
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
2
Scientific RepoRts | 6:34477 | DOI: 10.1038/srep34477
and lymphocytes, but without leukocyte infiltration. The factors responsible for the variable expression of this 
sterile inflammation are also largely unknown.
Our gut presents the greatest opportunity for exposure to foreign organisms (our microbiota). It has been 
known since 2002 that the bacteria and fungi make functional extracellular amyloid proteins8. Bacterial amyloid 
proteins are highly conserved, are involved in biofilm formation and help the bacteria with invasion, host adhe-
sion, and resistance to destruction8,9. The best studied bacterial amyloid protein is curli made by Escherichia coli 
and its key element, CsgA, has been found to contain amyloidogenic peptide repeat motifs shared by yeast and 
human prions10 and AS11. Cross–seeding, in which one amyloidogenic protein (curli, Tau, AB or AS, yeast prions, 
silk protein) causes another to adopt a beta-sheet structure has been documented12. There is excellent precedent 
for amyloid misfolding to be initiated through gut exposure (i.e., bovine spongiform encephalopathy, serum 
amyloid A amyloidosis13).
The role of the immune system in neurodegeneration has now been well documented in both histopathologi-
cal as well as genetic studies14. It has recently been reported that circulating neutrophils contribute to AS pathol-
ogy in transgenic mice15. Nevertheless, the role of immune changes in production of disease phenotypes are not 
well understood. Several groups have found that many older persons with AB deposits do not have dementia16, 
which can be a result of lessened immune responses in some individuals17.
It has been firmly established that commensal microbiota plays a vital role in the regulation of the immune sys-
tem18. This is necessary because of the massive dose of foreign antigens present in the gut, requiring the immune 
system to be constantly vigilant of its contents. The first step of the immune response, the innate immune system, 
recognizes bacterial amyloid proteins using pathways involving TLR 2/1, NLRP3, CD14, NFkB and iNOS19. This 
is similar to the mechanisms involved in the immune system’s recognition of AS and AB. Toll like receptor 2 
is important for inflammatory processes in PD and other neurodegenerative disorders and plays an important 
role in enhancing AS aggregation through inhibition of autophagy20. Consequently, priming of microglia and 
enhancement of related immune responses to AB, AS, and other misfolded proteins produced by exposure to 
bacterial amyloid can thus contribute to the development of dementia16.
We have hypothesized that amyloid proteins made by our commensal partners function to trigger misfolding 
of amyloid proteins such as AS through cross-seeding, and cause priming of the innate immune system thereby 
enhancing inflammatory responses to AS4. In order to evaluate this hypothesis, we exposed aged rats and trans-
genic nematodes expressing human AS to bacteria producing curli. Control animals were exposed to mutant 
bacteria lacking the operons required for curli production. We assessed AS accumulation and aggregation and 
inflammation using immunocytochemistry and related techniques. Our results in both rodents and nematodes 
illustrate the ability of bacterial amyloid to influence important aspects of neurodegenerative processes.
Results
Exposure to curli-producing bacteria enhances AS aggregation in rat brain and AS deposition 
in gut. 
Aged Fischer 344 rats have been described to have aggregated AS in the intestinal submucosal plexus21. 
We used these animals to evaluate the influence of exposure to bacteria producing amyloid proteins on AS depo-
sition and aggregation in the gut as well as in the brain. Animals were exposed weekly via the oral route using an 
established method for bacterial exposure22. We found that rats exposed to wild-type bacteria producing the amy-
loid protein curli had enhanced AS deposition in gut ganglion cells (myenteric plexus and submucosa) (Fig. 1a, 
top panel). We also observed that rats exposed to wild-type bacteria producing curli had enhanced AS deposi-
tion in neurons in hippocampus (especially CA3) and striatum, as compared to rats exposed to mutant bacteria 
lacking the capacity to produce curli or to rats exposed only to vehicle (Fig. 1a). Deposits in neurons in the brain 
were proteinase K resistant, indicating the presence of aggregated AS (Fig. 2B,C). Quantitation showed that rats 
exposed to curli-producing bacteria had more AS deposition in the gut than the other 2 groups with an odds ratio 
of 2.5 (95% CI 4.4–239) demonstrating that exposed animals had a higher probability of having higher gut scores 
than unexposed animals (lower panel, Fig. 1a and Supplementary Figure 4). Alpha-synuclein aggregation was not 
related to length of exposure (2 or 3 months). AS deposits in the gut were proteinase K sensitive, suggesting the 
absence of AS aggregation in the gut.
Exposure to curli-producing bacteria enhances immune responses in rat brain. 
AS as well as the 
bacterial amyloid protein curli are recognized by the innate immune system with involvement of similar path-
ways (TLR2, CD14, NFkB, iNOS). We hypothesized that exposure to bacterial amyloid would cause priming of 
immune cells to create enhanced immune responses in the brain of exposed animals. Therefore we assessed mark-
ers of neuroinflammation, including microgliosis, astrogliosis and the pro-inflammatory cytokines interleukin-6 
(IL-6), interleukin-1 (IL-1) tissue necrosis factor (TNF) and TLR2. We observed that microgliosis (Iba-1, allograft 
inflammatory factor, Fig. 1b), as well as astrogliosis (GFAP, glial fibrillary acidic protein, Fig. 2A) in the striatum, 
hippocampus and neocortex was significantly higher in animals exposed to curli-producing bacteria as compared 
to the two control groups. Interleukin-6 (IL-6) expression was also higher in the hippocampus, stratum and 
substantia nigra of the animals exposed to curli than in the control groups (Fig. 2D). Toll like receptor 2 (TLR2) 
expression was also higher in the hippocampus and striatum in animals exposed to curli-producing bacteria as 
compared to the other 2 groups (Fig. 2F) and TNF expression was higher in striatum and substantia nigra of 
animals exposed to curli-producing bacteria than that in the other 2 groups (Fig. 2G). There were no significant 
differences in interleukin 1 expression (Fig. 2E). The results were not related to length of exposure.
The phenotypes observed in curli-exposed rats were not related to illness, aging or cellular 
immune responses. 
In order to evaluate the possibility that the effects of exposure noted above were caused 
by illness induced by the bacteria we examined the relationship of the findings to body weight, evidence of inflam-
matory infiltrates, and survival. There were no significant differences among the 3 groups in terms of survival, 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
3
Scientific RepoRts | 6:34477 | DOI: 10.1038/srep34477
Figure 1. Rats exposed to bacteria expressing curli have enhanced AS deposition in hippocampus, striatum 
and gut neurons and increased growth of microglia. (a) Alpha-synuclein (Syn-1) immunohistochemical 
staining in gut, striatum and hippocampus. Gut neurons containing AS deposits are indicated with arrows, 
and hippocampal neurons containing AS are indicated with arrowheads. Data are for animals exposed to 
mutant bacteria unable to produce curli (Mut Curli E. coli), curli-producing wild type bacteria (Curli E. coli) 
and Control (exposed only to vehicle). For the striatum and hippocampus images the bars are 20 μ 
m. For 
the bowel images the upper bar for the upper row of three bowel images is 250 μ 
m and the lower bar for the 
lower row of three bowel images is 150 μ 
m (higher magnification). Right panels represent quantification of the 
staining. *p < 0.05 when compared to control. (b) Iba1 (allograft inflammatory factor) staining of neocortex, 
hippocampus and striatum. The upper bar is 250 μ 
m and the lower bars are 20 μ 
m. The top images are lower 
magnification and the bottom three panels are higher magnification. *p < 0.05 when compared to control.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
4
Scientific RepoRts | 6:34477 | DOI: 10.1038/srep34477
body weight or cellular inflammation in oral tissues, kidneys, eyes, brain or gut (data not shown). We examined 
the retina in 12 eyes (4 eyes from each group) using standard histology and immunohistochemistry, as the eyes 
are located in proximity to oral tissues. The stratification of the retinal layers appeared similar across all eyes and 
groups. Frozen retinal sections (20 μ 
m thickness) immunolabeled with GFAP (labeling astrocytes and activated 
Müller cells) and vimentin (labeling Müller cells) were similar across all eyes and groups (see Supplementary 
data).
Figure 2. Rats exposed to bacteria expressing curli have increased astroglial growth, enhanced deposition 
of aggregated AS, and increased expression in brain of IL6, TLR2 and TNF. Immunohistochemical staining 
in neocortex, hippocampus, striatum and substantia nigra. Right panels represent quantification of the staining. 
Data are for animals exposed to bacteria unable to produce curli (Mut Curli E. coli), curli producing wild 
type bacteria (Curli E coli) and Control (exposed only to vehicle). Right panels represent quantification of the 
staining (A) Glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) staining of neocortex, hippocampus (CA3) striatum and 
substantia nigra. *p < 0.05. (B) Alpha synuclein (α 
-syn) staining, without proteinase K treatment. *p < 0.05. 
(C) Alpha synuclein (α 
-syn) staining following proteinase K treatment (PK+ 
). Arrows represent deposits of 
proteinase K resistant AS in neurons. *p < 0.05. (D) Interleukin 6 (IL6) staining in neocortex, hippocampus 
(CA3) striatum and Substantia nigra. *p < 0.05. (E) Interleukin1 (IL1) staining in neocortex, hippocampus 
(CA3) striatum and Substantia nigra. (F) Toll like receptor 2 (TLR2) staining in neocortex, hippocampus (CA3) 
striatum and Substantia nigra. *p < 0.05. (G) Tissue necrosis factor (TNF) staining in neocortex, hippocampus 
(CA3) striatum and Substantia nigra. *p < 0.05. For images (A–G) the bars are 20 um.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
5
Scientific RepoRts | 6:34477 | DOI: 10.1038/srep34477
Serum cytokines and TLR-2. 
Because of our interest in systemic immune responses we evaluated serum 
levels of several cytokines and related molecules. Serum levels of IL-1β 
, IL-6, IL-10, and TNF-α 
 were below detec-
tion levels. Serum INF-γ 
 was detectable but there was no difference among three groups. Serum TLR2 levels were 
trending higher in the rats exposed to curli than the other two groups but the differences did not reach statistical 
significance (Supplementary Figure 3). These data do not allow us to make conclusions concerning the presence 
of systemic immune responses to the exposures.
AS-expressing C. elegans fed with curli-producing bacteria displayed increased AS aggregates. 
 
In order to evaluate the influence of bacterial amyloid on AS aggregation in another organism we exposed AS 
expressing C. elegans to wild-type E coli expressing curli and mutant E. coli lacking the ability to synthesize curli. 
The nematode C. elegans naturally feeds on E. coli, and protein aggregation can be studied in vivo thus repre-
senting an attractive model organism to study how bacterial exposures influences AS aggregation. We utilized 
a transgenic (Tg) C. elegans line expressing human AS fused with YFP (AS-YFP) in body wall muscle, allowing 
for visualization of aggregated AS-YFP in live animals using fluorescence microscopy23. As shown in Fig. 3a,b 
AS-expressing C. elegans fed with curli-producing E. coli displayed increased AS deposits compared to those fed 
with the mutant E. coli lacking curli production. The Congo red stained deposits coincide with those of AS-YFP, 
confirming that AS-YFP forms amyloidogenic aggregates recognized by Congo red (Fig. 3c). AS-aggregates accu-
mulated in the head first and moved to the tail during adulthood. We also stained live worms with the cytosolic 
oxidative stress marker CellRox Red, but no difference was seen between worms exposed or not exposed to 
curli-producing bacteria. This suggests that enhanced AS aggregation was not due to increased oxidative stress in 
the cytosol. We also tested a mitochondrial oxidative stress marker MitoSox Red, but detected only weak staining 
in both groups. Swimming tests were also performed to evaluate locomotive activity and showed a trend toward 
decreased thrashing rate (~15–20%) in worms exposed to wild-type curli-producing E. coli vs. mutant E. coli 
lacking curli, which did not reach statistical difference (data not shown).
Figure 3. C. elegans exposed to E. coli expressing curli has enhanced AS aggregation. (a) Fluorescence 
microscopy of the anterior region of C. elegans expressing AS-YFP in the body wall muscle. Transgenic 
nematodes (Punc-54::AS::YFP) were age-synchronized and were fed for three days on lawns of either curli-
producing E. coli or its mutant strain unable to express curli (non-curli mutant). Fluorescence microscopy 
was performed on immobilized live nematodes and imaging was acquired under identical conditions for the 
nematode groups fed with different bacterial strains. C. elegans exposed to curli expressing bacteria (Curli) 
contained increased numbers of larger and brighter foci of AS-YFP as compared to those exposed to non-
curli expressing mutant bacteria (Mutant). Scale bar = 100 μ 
m. (b) Quantitative analysis of AS-YFP foci. The 
number of YFP foci in the head region (from the base of the second pharyngeal bulb to the nose) of C. elegans 
was plotted for a group of 15 animals each exposed to either curli-producing E. coli (Curli) or its corresponding 
mutant (Mutant). The horizontal lines represent the average number of AS-YFP foci. p < 0.01, unpaired t test. 
(c) Congo red staining of C. elegans expressing AS-YFP exposed to curli-producing E. coli. Congo red stained 
deposits (arrowheads) in the head region of C. elegans expressing AS-YFP in the body wall muscles colocalized 
with AS-YFP aggregates. Scale bar = 100 μ 
m.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
6
Scientific RepoRts | 6:34477 | DOI: 10.1038/srep34477
Discussion
We have shown that exposure to bacteria producing a functional extracellular amyloid protein enhances aggrega-
tion of AS in brain neurons in aged rats and in muscle cells in nematodes. In gut neurons the exposure increased 
levels of AS in the submucosa. The mechanism of these effects may involve upregulation of protein expression, 
which is well known to enhance aggregation. These effects can also have resulted from cross-seeding, which has 
been reported between bacterial amyloids, including curli, and mammalian proteins24. Lee and coworkers have 
demonstrated that AS aggregates seed aggregation of tau25. PrPSc has been reported to seed AB aggregation and 
curli seeds aggregation of serum amyloid A12. However, there have been no studies on how cross-seeding by exog-
enous bacterial amyloid affect the propagation and aggregation of endogenous amyloid proteins in living animals.
Our finding of enhanced AS deposition without aggregation in the gut but with aggregation in the brain is of 
interest. Perhaps the period of exposure was too short to allow for polymerization of AS in gut neurons. It can 
also be that the biophysical factors involved in induction of AS aggregation and the relationship between AS 
expression and aggregation are different in the gut and brain (due to pH and other factors). As the bacteria were 
delivered orally the pathway for induction of changes in the brain can involve the autonomic nervous system, 
particularly the vagus and other nerves. This is the route which is believed to be responsible, at least in part, for 
transmission of bovine spongiform encephalopathy and related prionoses7. Recent studies have also suggested 
the involvement of the vagus nerve in PD26. Brain alterations can also have been induced through oral tissues and 
their rich innervation as well as via a hematogenous route.
C. elegans is a genetically tractable organism for elucidating the critical events mediating interactions between 
bacterial amyloid proteins and AS in intestinal tissues and potential propagation of AS aggregates to neurons27. 
The finding that AS aggregation in worms is enhanced by exposure to curli expressing bacteria can also involve a 
cross-seeding mechanism. Since nematodes naturally take up microorganisms as food, they allow for mechanistic 
studies of cross-seeding by different microbial amyloid proteins expressed by distinct strains during feeding and 
throughout their lifespan.
Our findings of microgliosis, astrogliosis and enhanced expression of IL-6, TLR2 and TNF in the brain follow-
ing curli exposure suggest the occurrence of an enhanced local sterile inflammatory response to AS in the brain. 
These findings do not appear to be caused by T cell activation by bacterial amyloid, as cellular infiltrates were not 
found in the brain or other tissues. Activation of the immune system in both AD and PD have now been exten-
sively established28. The importance of the immune system in AD was first proposed by Braak and colleagues6, 
and has been recently supported by the association of immune system genes involved in neurodegeneration (for 
recent review see Colonna and Wang14). It has been shown that impaired microglial proliferation slows AD in 
Tg mice29. Bacterial amyloid is recognized as a pathogen associated molecular pattern (PAMP) with messengers 
including TLR2/1, CD14, NFkB and iNOS19. These messengers of the innate immune system are also involved in 
its recognition of AS, AB and also curli. Recently it has been shown that TLR2 inhibition prevents AS aggregation 
through activation of autophagy20, suggesting that TLR2 activation through exposure to bacterial amyloid is 
pathogenic. Microglial TLR2 activation has also been reported to increase cellular uptake of AB and is involved in 
AB stimulated microglial activation30. The co-receptor molecule CD14 has also been linked to oxidative damage 
and dendritic degeneration following innate immune system activation31.
Priming of immune cells to respond to these bacterial or other amyloids in the gut may cause enhanced 
responses to neuronal amyloids in the brain. Gallo et al.32 have recently observed that bacterial amyloid binds to 
bacterial and eukaryotic DNA and causes amyloid polymerization, as well as enhancement of autoimmunity. The 
intensity of the immune system’s response to cerebral amyloid deposition is important in determining the devel-
opment of dementia in AD and PD, as many older persons have been shown to have significant AB pathology 
without dementia and without microglial activation17.
The precise role of protein aggregation and inflammation in neurodegeneration remains unclear33. 
Aggregation of AS and production of toxic oligomers are pathogenic, but intracellular AS aggregation into fibrils 
can be protective34. Furthermore, it has been shown in studies of the molecular machinery for the production 
of curli, that the same protein accelerated the aggregation of one protein and inhibited the amyloid formation of 
another35. There is also evidence that an active immune response is neuroprotective, as suggested by the work on 
immunotherapy for AD. Immune responses participate in clearance of AB plaques and improved cognition in 
animal studies36 and microglia produce a barrier reducing the toxic effects of AB on neurotic dystrophy37. It has 
been proposed that the association of AD and PD with age is related to senescence of the immune system and 
lowered immune responses38. Thus it is conceivable that bacterial amyloids induce either a pathogenic or saluto-
genic effect of neurodegenerative processes in the brain39,40. Our study did not include behavioral measures and 
thus the effect of exposure to bacterial amyloid on the neurodegenerative phenotype resulting from the enhanced 
AS aggregation and immune response remains to be determined.
There is now a vast literature documenting the influence of the microbiota on metabolism, immunity, cancer, 
diabetes, obesity, intestinal diseases, heart disease and other conditions. Bacteria, fungi and other organisms 
comprising our microbiota make functional amyloid proteins. Biofilms are found in the body and up to 40% of 
bacterial biofilms have amyloids9. Evidence for a role for fungi in AD has recently been proposed, but the pos-
sible role for fungal amyloids has not yet been considered41. Although it is now documented that many bacteria 
that make amyloid proteins are components of our microbiota, the presence of these proteins in the body has 
not been comprehensively evaluated32. Although E coli is not a major component of our microbiota there are 
several other species that make amyloid proteins that are important commensal partners, including Streptococcus 
mutans, Staphlococcus aureus, Salmonella enterica, Mycobacterium tuberculosis and others8,42. Gene homologs 
encoding curli were recently determined also in four phyla: Bacteroidetes, Proteobacteria, Firmicutes, and 
Thermodesulfobacteria8. It is tempting to speculate that the various amyloids to which we are exposed influence 
misfolding of endogenous proteins with strain specificity, as has been reported for AS, AB and related proteins. 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
7
Scientific RepoRts | 6:34477 | DOI: 10.1038/srep34477
That is, certain bacterial amyloids are particularly important for inducing aggregation of certain strains of a neu-
rodegenerative disease protein, and this is reflected in distinct disease phenotypes43,44.
Our work suggests that protein misfolding and immune activation in neurodegenerative disorders are trig-
gered through cross-seeding by exposure to exogenous microbial amyloids in the nose, mouth and gut. We need 
to elucidate the molecular mechanisms responsible for the observed effects of exposure to bacterial amyloid. 
Cross-seeding of amyloidogenic proteins by bacterial amyloids has been documented in both in vivo12 and 
 
in vitro24 (e.g, curli can cause cross-seeding of serum amyloid A12). We provide evidence for our proposed mech-
anism for the induction of neuroinflammation in the brain: the innate immune system utilizes TLR2 to recognize 
bacterial amyloid45, and we demonstrate upregulation of TLR2 in the striatum and hippocampus of animals 
exposed to bacteria producing curli (Fig. 2F). The scope of our study did not include the influence of enhanced AS 
aggregation on the function of the animals or the impact of bacterial amyloid on oxidative toxicity. The pathway 
by which oral and intestinal bacterial amyloid influence brain processes also remains to be documented. We also 
do not know which of the many bacterial amyloids are of particular importance. A metaproteomic analysis of the 
amyloid proteins present in the mouth and intestines has not been accomplished and will be of great interest46.
Two recent studies have also provided evidence for the potential role of intestinal bacteria in neurodegenera-
tion. Minter and colleagues have shown that changes in the gut microbiota induced by antibiotics alter neuroin-
flammation and amyloid deposition in a mouse model of AD47. Harach et al. have observed that germ-free AD 
model mice have reduced AB pathology in the brain, compared to conventionally raised animals48. The possible 
contribution of bacterial amyloid to these findings has not been evaluated.
This is one of the first studies that evaluates the influence of bacterial amyloid on disease processes in living 
animals40. Our data suggest that amyloid proteins in the microbiota are involved in the origination and mainte-
nance of neurodegenerative disease. Further studies on the influence of our partner organisms on the brain are 
certainly indicated. If the results are supported by further analysis and experimentation there are a broad range of 
preventive and therapeutic measures that will be of value.
Experimental Procedures. 
Antibodies and chemicals. The protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails 
and Congo red were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St Louis, MO). Hypoestoxide was obtained from Immune 
Modulation, Inc. (Bloomington, CA). The following antibodies were used: α 
-synuclein (Syn-1; BD Bioscience, 
San Diego, CA); TNFα 
, glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) (GA5), TH, and NeuN (Millipore, County Cork, 
Ireland); β 
-actin (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO); NF-κ 
B p65 and phospho-NF-κ 
B p65 (Cell Signaling, Beverly, 
MA); IL-1β 
 and IL6 (Abcam, Cambridge, MA); α 
-synuclein (CT, Syn105) [18]; α 
-synuclein (syn211) (Life 
Technologies, Grand Island, NY); and Iba-1 (Wako, Richmond, VA).
Animals. 
Aged male Fischer 344 rats were obtained from the National Institute of Aging, NIH (M. Murthy). 
These rats were chosen because it has been described that their neurons in the gut develop deposits of AS with 
age, thus mimicking PD21. At the time of euthanasia via CO2 asphyxiation the rats were 22.5–25 months of age. 
All animal procedures were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the University 
of Louisville (Protocol 12022) and were also in compliance with United States Public Health Service standards 
and National Institutes of Health guidelines. The University of Louisville Animal Care Facility is accredited by 
AAALAC International.
Bacteria preparation and exposure. 
A wild-type E. coli strain LSR12 and the isogenic mutant lacking 
both curli operons (strain C600 with deletion of the curli operons) were obtained through the generosity of M. 
Chapman, University of Michigan. The identity of strains has been verified using PCR with oligonucleotides 
priming at individual curli genes and spanning the entire curli region (oligonucleotide sequences are available 
upon request). We also confirmed by Congo red (CR) staining that the wild-type strain is CR-positive while curli 
mutant is CR-negative (data not shown). The bacteria were otherwise identical. E. coli was grown in YESCA 
medium (1g/l Yeast Extract, 10g/l casamimo acids) at 37 °C. TSBYE which consists of 30 grams per liter trypticase 
soy broth (Difco) supplemented with 2% (w/v) yeast extract, 1 mg/ml hemin (final concentration), and 5 mg/ml 
menadione (final concentration) (10% CO2, 10% H2, and 80% N2) at 37 °C for 48 hours.
Oral exposure of rats was performed essentially as previously described by Baker et al.49. A total of 11–13 
rats per group were used per experiment. Animals were initially treated with sulfamethoxazole (MP Biomedical, 
Solon, OH) at a final concentration of 800 mg/ml and trimethoprim (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) at a final concentra-
tion of 400 mg/ml ad libitum for 10 days. Four days after the last antibiotic treatment, the rats were infected orally 
with bacteria (109 cfu) suspended in 1ml 2% carboxymethylcellulsoe (CMP; MP Biomedicsal, Solon, Oh) in ster-
ile PBS using a 2.25 feeding needle (Popper and Sons, Inc. New Hyde Park NY). Animals were inoculated orally 
every week for 2 months (N = 
 19) or 3 months (N = 
 14). Animals were studied in 3 groups: Vehicle only (N = 
 13); 
exposure to wild type bacteria (curli-producing) (N = 
 11); and exposure to mutant bacteria (lacking curli operon) 
(N = 9). The vehicle control group was treated with CMC without bacteria. Rats were weighed several times each 
month. At the end of 2–3 months rats were sacrificed and various organs and blood were collected and banked.
Serum cytokine analyses. 
Blood was collected from the hearts of the aged rats treated with or without 
curli-producing E. coli, and control rats without any treatments (N = 
 7–8 per group). The blood samples were 
centrifuged at 4 °C (1,000 × 
 g) for 30 min to extract the serum. The sera were stored in aliquots at − 
80 °C until use. 
ELISAs were performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Serums IL-1β 
, IL-6, IL-10, INF-γ 
, and TNF-α 
were measured by R&D Systems Quantikine ELISA kits and serum TLR-2 was determined by an ELISA kit from 
Antibodies-Online (Atlanta, Georgia). Data were expressed as optical density (O.D.) value at 450 nm with double 
wells per sample and the wavelength correction was set at 570 nm. A standard curve was created for each tested 
cytokine at each time to determine the concentration of the target cytokine concentration in each sample. The 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
8
Scientific RepoRts | 6:34477 | DOI: 10.1038/srep34477
concentration of the positive control sample was within the linear range of the standard curve. Results presented 
as means ± 
 SE, and statistical analysis was done using GraphPad Prism software. One-way analysis of variance 
(ANOVA) with Turkey post-hoc test was used for multiple comparisons among groups. p < 0.05 was considered 
statistically significant. Positive controls were tested to confirm the function of the assays.
Immunocytochemistry. 
The neuropathological studies were carried out on blinded specimens. The pro-
cedures for immunohistochemical, immunofluorescence, and neuropathological analysis have been described 
elsewhere50. Briefly, the right hemibrains were post-fixed in phosphate-buffered 4% paraformaldehyde at 4 °C for 
neuropathological analysis, blind-coded sagittal brain sections were incubated with primary antibodies at 4 °C 
for overnight following serial sectioning in the sagittal plane at 40 μ 
m with a Vibratome 2000 (Leica, Deerfield, 
IL) for neuropathological and immunocytochemical studies. The next day, sections were incubated with either 
biotinylated- or FITC-conjugated secondary antibodies and detected with avidin D-HRP HRP (ABC elite, Vector 
Laboratories, Burlingame, CA) and with Tyramide Signal Amplification Direct system (PerkinElmer, Waltham, 
MA), respectively. Analysis of AS accumulation was performed using free-floating, blind-coded sections51. To 
determine the neuroinflammation, neurodegeneration, accumulation of α 
-synuclein, and NF-κ 
B activation, we 
stained brain sections with Iba-1, GFAP, TNFα 
, IL- 1β 
, IL6, human α 
-synuclein, NF-κ 
B, and phosphorylated 
NF-κ 
B antibodies, respectively. Sections were imaged by Olympus BX41 microscope. All immunoreactivity levels 
were determined by optical density analysis using Image Quant 1.43 program (NIH) except the immunoreactivity 
of Iba-1. The cell numbers of Iba-1-positive cells were determined per field (230 μ 
mÅ ~ 184 μ 
m) of each animal 
based on cell body recognition using Image Quant 1.43 program (NIH). Immunohistochemistry was performed 
with antibody against full length AS, before and after proteinase K exposure. Sections were incubated overnight 
at 4 °C with antibodies against total a-syn (1:500, affinity purified rabbit polyclonal, Millipore)50, GFAP (mouse 
monoclonal, Millipore), Iba-1 (mouse monoclonal, Wako laboratories), IL6 (mouse monoclonal Cell Signaling), 
TLR2 (mouse monoclonal Millipore), TNFa (mouse monoclonal Cell Signaling), IL1beta (mouse monoclonal 
Abcam) followed by biotin-tagged anti-rabbit or anti-mouse IgG1 (1:100, Vector Laboratories, Inc., Burlingame, 
CA) secondary antibodies, Avidin D-HRP (1:200, ABC Elite, Vector), and visualized with diaminobenzidine. 
Sections were scanned with a digital Olympus bright field digital microscope (BX41).
Caenorhabditis elegans studies. 
Standard conditions were used for C. elegans propagation on NGM 
(nematode growth medium) plates seeded with E. coli OP50-1 at 20 °C. Transgenic (Tg) C. elegans line expressing 
human AS fused with YFP (AS-YFP) (strain NL5901, Punc-54::AS::YFP) in body wall muscle23 was obtained 
from the Caenorhabditis Genetics Center (CGC). The use of these animals allowed for visualization of aggre-
gated AS-YFP in live animals using fluorescence microscopy. Tg AS-YFP nematodes were age-synchronized by 
hypochlorite bleaching, hatched overnight and were subsequently cultured on NGM plates seeded with E. coli 
OP50-1 until larval stage L4 (adult day 0). They were then fed for three days solely on fresh NGM plates seeded 
with either curli-producing E. coli or mutant E. coli unable to produce curli (non-curli mutant). Fluorescence 
microscopy was performed on immobilized live animals to visualize AS-YFP using an eVOS microscope (Life 
Technologies) and imaging was acquired under identical conditions for nematodes fed with either wild-type or 
mutant bacteria. The experiments were repeated three times, each with 10 worms for each treatment group. As 
characterized previously23, AS aggregates are recognized as fluorescent foci of inclusions containing AS-YFP 
within muscle cells in this C. elegans model.
Congo red staining of worms was performed using the procedures modified from that described previously52. 
Worms were fixed by incubation in 4% paraformaldehyde in Dulbecco’s phosphate buffered saline for 15 h at 
4 °C, and were permealized at 37 °C for 15 h in a solution of 1% Triton X-100, 5% beta-mercaptoethanol, 125 mM 
Tris-HCl, pH 7.5. Worms were then mounted on glass slide and stained with 0.5 mg/ml Congo red in 50% etha-
nol for 1 min. Destaining was immediately carried out using several rinses of 50% ethanol until solution became 
colorless, and then one rinse each with 75% ethanol, 50% ethanol, and water. A drop of Fluoromount was applied 
and stained worms were visualized for red fluorescence using a Leica fluorescence microscope.
Statistical analysis. 
GraphPad Prism (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA) was used for statistical analysis. 
All data are presented as means ± 
 s.e.m and were analyzed for statistical significance by using either unpaired t 
test or two-way ANOVA (general linear model) followed by Bonferroni’s multiple comparison post-test. Ordinal 
logistic regression was used to compare the OR for gut AS deposition53. The statistical software package R was also 
used. One-way ANOVA poshoc Dunnet p < 0.05 was used when comparing to control.
References
1. Walker, L. C. & Jucker, M. Amyloid by default. Nature neuroscience 14, 669–670 (2011).
2. Desplats, P. et al. Inclusion formation and neuronal cell death through neuron-to-neuron transmission of alpha-synuclein. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 106, 13010–13015 (2009).
3. Prusiner, S. B. Cell biology. A unifying role for prions in neurodegenerative diseases. Science 336, 1511–1513 (2012).
4. Friedland, R. P. Mechanisms of molecular mimicry involving the microbiota in neurodegeneration. Journal of Alzheimer’s disease: 
JAD 45, 349–362 (2015).
5. Soto, C. Transmissible proteins: expanding the prion heresy. Cell 149, 968–977 (2012).
6. Braak, H. et al. Staging of brain pathology related to sporadic Parkinson’s disease. Neurobiology of aging 24, 197–211 (2003).
7. van Keulen, L. J., Vromans, M. E. & van Zijderveld, F. G. Early and late pathogenesis of natural scrapie infection in sheep. APMIS: 
acta pathologica, microbiologica, et immunologica Scandinavica 110, 23–32 (2002).
8. Hufnagel, D. A., Tukel, C. & Chapman, M. R. Disease to dirt: the biology of microbial amyloids. PLoS pathogens 9, e1003740 (2013).
9. Larsen, P. et al. Amyloid adhesins are abundant in natural biofilms. Environ Microbiol 9, 3077–3090 (2007).
10. Cherny, I. et al. The formation of Escherichia coli curli amyloid fibrils is mediated by prion-like peptide repeats. Journal of molecular 
biology 352, 245–252 (2005).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
9
Scientific RepoRts | 6:34477 | DOI: 10.1038/srep34477
11. Evans, M. L. et al. The bacterial curli system possesses a potent and selective inhibitor of amyloid formation. Mol Cell 57, 445–455 
(2015).
12. Lundmark, K., Westermark, G. T., Olsen, A. & Westermark, P. Protein fibrils in nature can enhance amyloid protein A amyloidosis 
in mice: Cross-seeding as a disease mechanism. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 102, 
6098–6102 (2005).
13. Solomon, A. et al. Amyloidogenic potential of foie gras. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America 104, 10998–11001 (2007).
14. Colonna, M. & Wang, Y. TREM2 variants: new keys to decipher Alzheimer disease pathogenesis. Nat Rev Neurosci 17, 201–207 
(2016).
15. Zenaro, E. et al. Neutrophils promote Alzheimer’s disease-like pathology and cognitive decline via LFA-1 integrin. Nature medicine 
21, 880–886 (2015).
16. Holmes, C. Review: systemic inflammation and Alzheimer’s disease. Neuropathology and applied neurobiology 39, 51–68 (2013).
17. Akiyama, H. et al. Inflammation and Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiology of aging 21, 383–421 (2000).
18. Lathrop, S. K. et al. Peripheral education of the immune system by colonic commensal microbiota. Nature 478, 250–254 (2011).
19. Tukel, C. et al. Toll-like receptors 1 and 2 cooperatively mediate immune responses to curli, a common amyloid from enterobacterial 
biofilms. Cellular microbiology 12, 1495–1505 (2010).
20. Kim, C. et al. Antagonizing Neuronal Toll-like Receptor 2 Prevents Synucleinopathy by Activating Autophagy. Cell Rep 13, 771–782 
(2015).
21. Phillips, R. J., Walter, G. C., Ringer, B. E., Higgs, K. M. & Powley, T. L. Alpha-synuclein immunopositive aggregates in the myenteric 
plexus of the aging Fischer 344 rat. Experimental neurology 220, 109–119 (2009).
22. Baker, P. J., Dixon, M. & Roopenian, D. C. Genetic control of susceptibility to Porphyromonas gingivalis-induced alveolar bone loss 
in mice. Infection and immunity 68, 5864–5868 (2000).
23. van Ham, T. J. et al. C. elegans model identifies genetic modifiers of alpha-synuclein inclusion formation during aging. PLoS genetics 
4, e1000027 (2008).
24. Hartman, K. et al. Bacterial curli protein promotes the conversion of PAP248-286 into the amyloid SEVI: cross-seeding of dissimilar 
amyloid sequences. PeerJ 1, e5 (2013).
25. Guo, J. L. & Lee, V. M. Seeding of normal Tau by pathological Tau conformers drives pathogenesis of Alzheimer-like tangles. The 
Journal of biological chemistry 286, 15317–15331 (2011).
26. Klingelhoefer, L. & Reichmann, H. Pathogenesis of Parkinson disease–the gut-brain axis and environmental factors. Nature reviews. 
Neurology 11, 625–636 (2015).
27. Nussbaum-Krammer, C. I. & Morimoto, R. I. Caenorhabditis elegans as a model system for studying non-cell-autonomous 
mechanisms in protein-misfolding diseases. Dis Model Mech 7, 31–39 (2014).
28. Allen Reish, H. E. & Standaert, D. G. Role of alpha-synuclein in inducing innate and adaptive immunity in Parkinson disease. 
 
J Parkinsons Dis 5, 1–19 (2015).
29. Olmos-Alonso, A. et al. Pharmacological targeting of CSF1R inhibits microglial proliferation and prevents the progression of 
Alzheimer’s-like pathology. Brain: a journal of neurology 139, 891–907 (2016).
30. Reed-Geaghan, E. G., Savage, J. C., Hise, A. G. & Landreth, G. E. CD14 and toll-like receptors 2 and 4 are required for fibrillar 
A{beta}-stimulated microglial activation. The Journal of neuroscience: the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 29, 
11982–11992 (2009).
31. Milatovic, D., Zaja-Milatovic, S., Montine, K. S., Shie, F. S. & Montine, T. J. Neuronal oxidative damage and dendritic degeneration 
following activation of CD14-dependent innate immune response in vivo. Journal of neuroinflammation 1, 20 (2004).
32. Gallo, P. M. et al. Amyloid-DNA Composites of Bacterial Biofilms Stimulate Autoimmunity. Immunity 42, 1171–1184 (2015).
33. Selkoe, D. J. & Hardy, J. The amyloid hypothesis of Alzheimer’s disease at 25 years. EMBO Mol Med (2016).
34. Poehler, A. M. et al. Autophagy modulates SNCA/alpha-synuclein release, thereby generating a hostile microenvironment. 
Autophagy 10, 2171–2192 (2014).
35. Chorell, E. et al. Bacterial Chaperones CsgE and CsgC Differentially Modulate Human alpha-Synuclein Amyloid Formation via 
Transient Contacts. PloS One 10, e0140194 (2015).
36. De Strooper, B. & Karran, E. The Cellular Phase of Alzheimer’s Disease. Cell 164, 603–615 (2016).
37. Condello, C., Yuan, P., Schain, A. & Grutzendler, J. Microglia constitute a barrier that prevents neurotoxic protofibrillar Abeta42 
hotspots around plaques. Nature communications 6, 6176 (2015).
38. Chen, A. et al. Multiplex analyte assays to characterize different dementias: brain inflammatory cytokines in poststroke and other 
dementias. Neurobiology of aging 38, 56–67 (2016).
39. Raby, A. C. et al. Soluble TLR2 reduces inflammation without compromising bacterial clearance by disrupting TLR2 triggering. 
 
J Immunol 183, 506–517 (2009).
40. Oppong, G. O. et al. Biofilm-associated bacterial amyloids dampen inflammation in the gut: oral treatment with curli fibres reduces 
the severity of hapten-induced colitis in mice. NPJ Biofilms Microbiomes 1 (2015).
41. Gilchrist, K. B., Garcia, M. C., Sobonya, R., Lipke, P. N. & Klotz, S. A. New features of invasive candidiasis in humans: amyloid 
formation by fungi and deposition of serum amyloid P component by the host. J Infect Dis 206, 1473–1478 (2012).
42. Schwartz, K. & Boles, B. R. Microbial amyloids–functions and interactions within the host. Current opinion in microbiology 16, 
93–99 (2013).
43. Aguzzi, A. Neurodegeneration: Alzheimer’s disease under strain. Nature 512, 32–34 (2014).
44. Peelaerts, W. et al. alpha-Synuclein strains cause distinct synucleinopathies after local and systemic administration. Nature 522, 
340–344 (2015).
45. Rapsinski G. J. et al. Toll-like receptor 2 and NLRP3 cooperate to recognize a functional bacterial amyloid, curli. Infect Immun 83, 
693–701 (2015).
46. Wilmes, P., Heintz-Buschart, A. & Bond, P. L. A decade of metaproteomics: where we stand and what the future holds. Proteomics 
15, 3409–3417 (2015).
47. Minter M. R. et al. Antibiotic-induced perturbations in gut microbial diversity influences neuro-inflammation and amyloidosis in a 
murine model of Alzheimer’s disease. Sci Rep. 21, 6:30028 (2016).
48. Harach T. et al. Reduction of Alzheimer’s disease beta-amyloid pathology in the absence of gut microbiota arXiv:1509.02273[q-bio.
MN] (2015).
49. Baker, P. J., DuFour, L., Dixon, M. & Roopenian, D. C. Adhesion molecule deficiencies increase Porphyromonas gingivalis-induced 
alveolar bone loss in mice. Infection and immunity 68, 3103–3107 (2000).
50. Hsu L. J. et al. Alpha-synuclein promotes mitochondrial deficit and oxidative stress. Am J Pathol. 157, 401–10 (2000).
51. Hsu, L. J., Jan, M. S. & Lin, Y. S. In vivo staphylococcal enterotoxin B (SEB)-primed murine splenocytes secrete mediators which 
suppress CD25(hi) expression and cell cycle progression of naive splenocytes in response to SEB in vitro. Cell Immunol 201, 50–57 
(2000).
52. Wu, Y. et al. Amyloid-beta-induced pathological behaviors are suppressed by Ginkgo biloba extract EGb 761 and ginkgolides in 
transgenic Caenorhabditis elegans. The Journal of neuroscience: the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 26, 13102–13113 
(2006).
53. McCullagh, P. Regression Models for Ordinal Data. J. R. Statist. Soc. 42, 109–142 (1980).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
10
Scientific RepoRts | 6:34477 | DOI: 10.1038/srep34477
Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by funding from the Michael J. Fox Foundation (New York, NY), the University 
of Louisville, Dr. W. Cowan and Mrs. S. Ford Grissom. The authors are grateful to M. Chapman (University of 
Michigan) for the contribution of materials. The authors are also grateful to H. Kaplan for evaluation of ocular 
tissues, P. O’Toole for helpful discussions and S. Nandi for technical assistance.
Author Contributions
R.P.F. conceived and designed the study. M.J.R., V.S., A.M.R., R.J., R.L. and S.J. performed the rat experiments 
and analyzed results. V.S., A.M.R., R.J. and R.L. interpreted the data. R.L. performed assays of serum cytokines. 
D.D. designed the methods for bacterial preparation and administration. E.M. and A.A. completed analyses of 
the rat tissues in San Diego. R.K. performed statistical analyses and E.G. provided oversight and guidance. S.G.C., 
K.C., B.S. and F.S. performed the work with C. elegans. The manuscript was written by R.P.F. with the help of the 
coauthors.
Additional Information
Supplementary information accompanies this paper at http://www.nature.com/srep
Competing financial interests: The authors declare no competing financial interests.
How to cite this article: Chen, S. G. et al. Exposure to the Functional Bacterial Amyloid Protein Curli Enhances 
Alpha-Synuclein Aggregation in Aged Fischer 344 Rats and Caenorhabditis elegans. Sci. Rep. 6, 34477;  
doi: 10.1038/srep34477 (2016).
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. The images 
or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, 
unless indicated otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons license, 
users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the material. To view a copy of this 
license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
 
© The Author(s) 2016
