 PD-L1 inhibits acute and chronic pain by suppressing 
nociceptive neuron activity via PD-1
Gang Chen1,2,6, Yong Ho Kim1,3,6, Hui Li4, Hao Luo1,4, Da-Lu Liu1, Zhi-Jun Zhang1, Mark 
Lay1, Wonseok Chang1, Yu-Qiu Zhang4, and Ru-Rong Ji1,4,5
1Department of Anesthesiology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, 27710
2Key Laboratory of Neuroregeneration of Jiangsu and Ministry of Education, Co-Innovation 
Center of Neuroregeneration, Nantong University, Nantong, Jiangsu 226001, China
3Department of Physiology, College of Medicine, Gachon University, Incheon, Korea
4Institute of Neurobiology, Institutes of Brain Science and State Key Laboratory of Medical 
Neurobiology, Collaborative Innovation Center for Brain Science, Fudan University, Shanghai 
200032, China
5Department of Neurobiology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, 27710
Abstract
Programmed cell death ligand-1 (PD-L1) is typically produced by cancer cells and suppresses 
immunity through PD-1 receptor expressed on T cells. However, the role of PD-L1/PD-1 in 
regulating pain and neuronal function is unclear. Here we report that both melanoma and normal 
neural tissues including dorsal root ganglia (DRG) produce PD-L1 that can potently inhibit acute 
and chronic pain. Intraplantar injection of PD-L1 evokes analgesia in naïve mice via PD-1, 
whereas PD-L1 neutralization or PD-1 blockade induces mechanical allodynia. Mice lacking Pd1 
exhibit thermal and mechanical hypersensitivity. PD-1 activation in DRG nociceptive neurons by 
PD-L1 induces SHP-1 phosphorylation, inhibits sodium channels, and causes hyperpolarization 
through activation of TREK2 K+ channels. PD-L1 also potently suppresses nociceptive neuron 
excitability of human DRGs. Remarkably, blocking PD-L1 or PD-1 elicits spontaneous pain and 
allodynia in melanoma-bearing mice. Our findings identify a previously unrecognized role of PD-
L1 as an endogenous pain inhibitor and a neuromodulator.
*Correspondence should be addressed: Ru-Rong Ji, PhD, Department of Anesthesiology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, 
North Carolina, 27710 Tel: 919-684-9387, ru-rong.ji@duke.edu, Or Yu-Qiu Zhang, Institute of Neurobiology, Institutes of Brain 
Science and State Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology, Collaborative Innovation Center for Brain Science, Fudan University, 
Shanghai 200032, China, yuqiuzhang@fudan.edu.cn.
6These authors contribute equally to this study.
All the authors have no financial interests in this study.
COMPETING FINANICIAL INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Note: Supplementary Information is also available in the online version of the paper.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
G.C. developed the project, performed behavioral and histochemical experiments, and prepared the final figures. Y.H.K. conducted 
electrophysiology in mouse and human DRG neurons. Hui.L. and Hao.L. performed spinal cord recordings and behavioral test in 
bonce caner model under the guidance of Y.-Q.Z. D.L. performed recordings in whole-mount mouse DRGs. Z.J.Z contributed to 
histochemistry in Pd1 knockout mice. M.L. did some in situ hybridization experiment. W.C conducted some electrophysiology in 
mouse DRG neurons. R.-R. J. and Y.-Q.Z. supervised the project. R.-R. J., G.C. and Y.-Q.Z. wrote the paper.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Neurosci. 2017 July ; 20(7): 917–926. doi:10.1038/nn.4571.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 INTRODUCTION
Cancer pain dramatically impairs the quality of life in patients. Breast, lung, and prostate 
cancers frequently metastasize to multiple bones and cause bone cancer pain, by releasing 
algogenic substances. These substances include protons, bradykinin, endothelins, 
prostaglandins, proteases, and growth factors such as nerve growth factor (NGF) and 
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)1–4 that can interact with peripheral nerve and 
cause increased hypersensitivity and excitability of nociceptive neurons3,5,6. NGF and 
VEGF also induce outgrowth of pain-conducting nerve fibers in cancer affected areas3,4. 
Despite current focus on cancer-produced pronocicepetive mediators7, early-stage cancers 
before metastasis to bone tissues are often not painful2,8 and pain in melanoma is not 
common prior to metastasis9. It is conceivable that different cancers and even the same 
cancers at different growth stages may produce different pain mediators that can 
differentially regulate pain sensitivity via positive or negative modulation10.
Mounting evidences suggests that cancers, such as melanoma express the checkpoint 
inhibitory protein PD-L1, which can suppress T cell function and induce immune tolerance 
via its receptor PD-111–14. Emerging immune therapy such as anti-PD1 and anti-PD-L1 
treatment has shown success in treating cancers such as melanoma8,15,16, as well as 
lymphoma, lung cancer, ovarian cancer, and head and neck cancers17–19. However, it is 
unclear whether and how the PD-L1/PD-1 pathway can regulate pain sensitivity via non-
immune modulation such as neuronal modulation. It is increasingly appreciated that primary 
nociceptive neurons (nociceptors) share similarities with immune cells and can both listen 
and talk to immune cells10,20,21. Nociceptors not only respond to immune mediators such as 
cytokines and chemokines and bacterial infection22 but also produce cytokines and 
chemokines and express Toll-like receptors (TLRs), key regulators of immunity20,23–25. In 
primary sensory neurons, TLRs rapidly regulate pain sensitivity via interacting with ion 
channels10,26. It remains unclear if nociceptive neurons express functional PD-1 receptor, an 
important immune regulator, in mouse and human dorsal root ganglion (DRG).
In this study, we assessed the expression and function of PD-1 in primary sensory neurons of 
mouse and human DRG. We find that activation of PD-1 by PD-L1 potently suppresses 
neuronal activities in mouse and human nociceptive neurons. Moreover, PD-L1 inhibits 
acute baseline pain and inflammatory pain and chronic neuropathic pain after nerve injury. 
In addition to malignant melanoma tissue, endogenous PD-L1 can be detected in normal 
neural tissues including spinal cord, DRG, nerve and skin. We also discovered that PD-L1 
potently suppresses spinal cord synaptic transmission in the pain circuit as a unique 
neuromodulator. Finally, PD-L1 masks pain in melanoma, and conversely, blocking PD-L1 
or PD-1 elicits spontaneous pain and allodynia in melanoma-bearing mice.
RESULTS
PD-L1 inhibits acute inflammatory pain and increases pain threshold in naïve animals
As a first step to address a role of PD-L1 in acute pain modulation, we examined the effects 
of PD-L1 in an acute inflammatory pain model. Intraplantar (i.pl) injection of formalin (5%) 
Chen et al.
Page 2
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 induced typical bi-phasic inflammatory pain as previously reported27, but the 2nd-phase pain 
(10–45 min) was substantially inhibited by PD-L1 pre-treatment (i.pl., 1–10 µg, P<0.05, 
One-Way ANOVA), in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. 1a). At high doses (5 and 10 µg), PD-
L1 also caused a mild inhibition of the 1st-phase pain (Fig. 1a).
Next, we tested if PD-L1 would also alter pain threshold in naïve mice. Von Frey test 
revealed a significant increase in paw withdrawal threshold after i.pl. injection of PD-L1 (5 
µg ≈ 0.1 nmol, P<0.05, Two-Way ANOVA). The threshold increase was rapid and evident at 
30 min and maintained for 3 h after the injection (Fig. 1b). Since PD-L1 (CD274) is a 
chimera protein fused with human IgG at the C-terminal, we used human IgG as an inactive 
control (http://www.abcam.com/recombinant-mouse-pd-l1-protein-fc-chimera-active-
ab180058.html). Notably, this human IgG had no effect on the pain threshold (Fig. 1b).
PD-L1 is an endogenous pain inhibitor and alters basal pain thresholds via PD-1
PD-L1 is produced by malignant tissues and serves as a predictive biomarker in cancer 
immunotherapy28. As expected, mouse B16 melanoma tissue has high expression levels of 
PD-L1 (≈450 ng/mg tissue, Fig. 2a), as evaluated by ELISA analysis. PD-L1 was also 
secreted in cultured medium of melanoma cells (Supplementary Fig. 1a). To determine if 
normal tissues also produce PD-L1, we compared PD-L1 contents in non-neural and neural 
tissues. Non-neural tissues, such as liver, spleen, and kidney have high levels of PD-L1 
(≈70–90 ng/mg tissue, Fig. 2a). Interestingly, neural tissues, including brain, spinal cord, 
and dorsal root ganglia (DRG) contact PD-L1 at levels around 50 ng/mg tissue (Fig. 2a). 
Furthermore, PD-L1 was detected in the sciatic nerve and hindpaw skin tissues (Fig. 2a), 
which contain pain-sensing nerve fibers. These results suggest that PD-L1 is broadly 
synthesized by neural and skin tissue. In agreement, in situ hybridization revealed Pdl1 
mRNA expression in mouse DRG neurons (Supplementary Fig. 1b,c).
To determine a role of endogenous PD-L1, produced by non-malignant tissues, in pain 
regulation, we tested mechanical pain after pharmacological blockade of either PD-L1 or 
PD-1 in naïve mice. Neutralization of hindpaw PD-L1 by i.pl. injection of soluble PD-1 
(sPD-1, 5 µg ≈ 0.1 nmol) induced a transient mechanical allodynia for 3 h (Fig. 2b), without 
causing spontaneous pain (Supplementary Fig. 2a). Blockade of PD-1 with a mouse anti-
PD-1 antibody, RMP1-14 (5 µg, ≈ 0.1 nmol, i.pl.), also induced mechanical allodynia for 3 h 
(Fig. 2b).
Nivolumab is a FDA-approved fully humanized IgG4 monoclonal antibody, which 
selectively targets PD-129 and has shown great success in treating melanoma, lymphoma, 
and lung cancer17,29,30. Of note Nivolumab (10 µg ≈ 0.07 nmol, i.pl.) but not control human 
IgG, induced marked mechanical allodynia for 5 h (Fig. 2b). PD-L1’s analgesic effects were 
blocked by both RMP-14 and Nivolumab (Supplementary Fig. 2b), suggesting that PD-L1 
inhibits pain via PD-1. As a human antibody Nivolumab showed cross-activity in mouse 
tissue and binding on DRG neurons and sciatic nerve fibers in wild-type (WT) mice, but this 
binding was absent in Pd1 knockout mice (KO, Pd1−/−, Supplementary Fig. 2c).
Next we tested baseline pain and PD-L1-induced analgesia in Pd1−/− mice with and without 
PD-L1 treatment. Interestingly, baseline pain sensitivity increased in naive Pd1−/− mice. 
Chen et al.
Page 3
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Compared with WT mice Pd1−/− mice displayed mechanical and thermal hypersensitivity, 
by showing decreased mechanical and thermal pain thresholds in von Frey test and hot plate 
test (Fig. 2c,d). This result indicates an essential role of PD-1 in regulating basal pain 
sensitivity. As expected, both PD-L1-induced analgesic effect and RMP1-14-induced 
hyperalgesic effect were abolished in Pd1−/− mice (Supplementary Fig. 3a,b). Notably, 
Pd1−/− mice showed no developmental defects in sensory neurons and their innervations. 
The central innervations of primary afferents in the spinal cord dorsal horn are comparable 
in WT and KO mice (Supplementary 4). The distribution patterns of primary sensory 
neurons, including small-sized nociceptive neurons (CGRP+ peptidergic neurons and IB4+ 
non-peptidergic neurons) and large-sized A-fiber DRG neurons (NF200+), as well as the 
total population of sensory neurons are also unaltered in DRG tissues of KO mice 
(Supplementary Fig. 5). Taken together, these findings in WT and Pd1−/− mice strongly 
suggest that 1) PD-L1 is an endogenous inhibitor of pain, 2) PD-L1 produces analgesia via 
PD-1, and 3) altered pain sensitivity in Pd1−/− mice is not a result of developmental defects 
in sensory neurons.
PD-1 receptor is expressed by primary sensory neurons in mouse DRGs
To determine peripheral mechanisms by which PD-L1 modulates pain, we examined Pd1 
mRNA and PD-1 protein expression in mouse DRG neurons. In situ hybridization showed 
Pd1 mRNA expression in majority of DRG neurons with various sizes (Fig. 3a,b). This 
expression was lost in Pd1−/− mice (Fig. 3c) and in DRG sections treated with sense control 
probe (Fig. 3d), confirming the specificity of Pd1 mRNA expression. Immunohistochemistry 
reveled PD-1 immunoreactivity (IR) in majority of DRG neurons (Fig. 3e). The specificity 
of the PD-1 antibody was validated by loss of PD-1 immunostaining in DRG neurons of 
Pd1−/− mice (Fig. 3e) and further confirmed by absence of staining in WT DRG after co-
incubation of the antibody with a blocking peptide (Fig. 3e). Size frequency analysis showed 
a broad expression of PD-1 by DRG neurons with small, medium, and large sizes (Fig. 3f). 
Double staining confirmed PD-1 expression in both large-diameter A-fiber neurons 
(NF200+) and small-diameter C-fiber neurons (NF200−, Fig. 3g). PD-1-IR was present in 
NF200+ and NF200− axons in the sciatic nerve, indicating an axonal transport of PD-1 from 
DRG cell bodies to peripheral axons (Fig. 3h). PD-1-IR axons co-express CGRP, a marker 
for nociceptive peptidergic neurons (Fig. 3i). Together, these results demonstrate that 
primary sensory neurons, including nociceptors and their axons, express PD-1, providing a 
neuronal base for PD-1 modulation of pain.
PD-L1 suppresses nociceptive neuron activity in mouse DRGs via PD-1
Activation and sensitization of nociceptive sensory neurons (nociceptors) often produces 
pain and pain hypersensitivity31–33. We postulated that PD-L1/PD-1 inhibits pain via direct 
modulation of nociceptor activity. We employed patch clamp recordings to evaluate 
excitability in dissociated small-diameter neurons (<25 µm, presumably nociceptors) in 
mouse DRGs. Notably, PD-L1, at a very low concentration (10 ng/ml ≈ 0.2 nM), evoked a 
potent and immediate inhibition of action potential induced by current injection and further 
increased rheobase, a minimum current to induce action potential (Fig. 4a). PD-L1 also 
induced hyperpolarization of the resting membrane potential (RMP) in DRG neurons (Fig. 
4b). These effects of PD-L1 on action potentials and RMPs were abrogated in Pd1−/− mice, 
Chen et al.
Page 4
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 indicating that PD-L1 modulates neuronal excitability through PD-l (Fig. 4a,b). 
Furthermore, Pd1-deficient nociceptive neurons displayed increased RMP and firing 
frequency of action potentials (Fig. 4c,d), suggesting that the intrinsic excitability of 
nociceptors is enhanced in Pd1 mutant mice.
To further assess the contribution of endogenous PD-L1 and PD-1 to neuronal excitability in 
WT neurons, we employed pharmacological approaches in a whole mount DRG preparation. 
Compared to dissociated DRG neurons, whole mount DRG preparation has advantage of 
retaining extracellular PD-L1. Neutralization of PD-L1 with sPD-1 (30 ng/ml ≈ 0.6 nM) 
increased the firing rate of action potentials in small-diameter DRG neurons (Fig. 4e). 
Blocking the function of PD-1 with Nivolumab, but not the control IgG (300 ng/ml ≈ 2 nM), 
also increased the firing rate (Fig. 4f). Together, both gain-of-function and loss-of-function 
approaches demonstrate a critical role of PD-L1/PD-1 in regulating excitability of 
nociceptive neurons.
PD-L1 inhibits neuronal hyperexcitability and neuropathic pain after nerve injury
Hyperexcitability of primary sensory neurons after nerve injury has been strongly implicated 
in chronic pain31,33–35. We used mount mouse DRG preparation to examine 
hyperexcitability in small-sized nociceptive neurons after chronic nerve constriction (CCI). 
As expected, nociceptive neurons fired more action potentials after CCI (Fig. 5a). Notably, 
nerve injury-induced hyperexcitability (i.e. increased firing rate of action potentials) of DRG 
neurons was dose-dependently suppressed by PD-L1 (1–10 ng/ml ≈ 0.02–0.2 nM, Fig. 5a,b).
The central axons of nociceptive neurons terminate in the spinal cord dorsal horn to form 
first-order synapses in the pain pathway33. PD-L1 in DRG neurons could be transported to 
central axon terminals to modulate spinal cord synaptic transmission and nociception. To 
test this hypothesis, we examined the effects of intrathecal (i.t.) injection of PD-L1 on CCI-
induced neuropathic pain in mice. PD-L1 reduced the CCI-induced mechanical allodynia at 
a low dose (100 ng, Fig. 5c). PD-L1 also significantly reduced CCI-induced heat 
hyperalgesia at a high dose (1 µg, P<0.05, Two-Way ANOVA, Fig. 5d). Randall-Selitto test 
further revealed that intrathecal PD-L1 increased paw withdrawal threshold in naïve mice 
(Fig. 5e).
PD-L1 inhibits synaptic transmission and injury-induced neuronal hyperactivities in the 
spinal cord
Patch clamp recordings in spinal cord slices showed that superfusion of PD-L1 rapidly 
(within 1 min) reduced the frequency and amplitude of spontaneous EPSCs (sEPSCs) in 
lamina IIo neurons (Supplementary Fig. 6a). These interneurons form a nociceptive circuit 
with C-fiber afferents and projection neurons36,37. By sharp contrast, exposure of spinal cord 
slices to sPD-1 (PD-L1 neutralization) and Nivolumab (PD-1 blockade) increased sEPSC 
frequency in lamina IIo neurons (Supplementary Fig. 6b,c). As expected, PD-L1’s inhibition 
of sEPSC frequency was blocked by Nivolumab (Supplementary Fig. 6d). Thus, PD-L1/
PD-1 also has an active role in modulating spinal nociceptive transmission.
Next, we tested the central effects of PD-L1 in a bone cancer model in rats38. PD-L1, given 
two weeks after tumor cell inoculation via i.t. route, reduced bone cancer-induced 
Chen et al.
Page 5
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 mechanical allodynia (P<0.05, Two-Way ANOVA, Supplementary Fig. 7a). Moreover, bone 
cancer-induced hyperexcitability of wide dynamic range (WDR) neurons in dorsal horn 
neurons was suppressed by PD-L1 (Supplementary Fig. 7b,c), whereas Nivolumab enhanced 
activities of WDR neurons (Supplementary Fig. 7d,e). Taken together, our data suggest that 
PD-L1 is a neuromodulator in both the peripheral and central nervous system; and in the 
spinal cord PD-L1 regulates acute and chronic pain by suppressing nociceptive synaptic 
transmission and injury-induced neuronal plasticity in dorsal horn neurons via PD-1 
receptor.
PD-L1 modulates sodium currents and TREK2 potassium channels via SHP-1
How does PD-L1 modulate neuronal excitability? Activation of PD-1 by PD-L1 recruits the 
tyrosine phosphatases SHP-1/SHP-2 (Src homology region 2 domain-containing 
phosphatase-1 and 2) to mediate PD-L1’s biological actions in immune cells13,39. 
Immunohistochemistry shows that PD-L1 is sufficient to activate SHP-1 in vivo after i.t. 
injection, leading to increased phosphorylation of SHP-1 (pSHP-1) in mouse DRG neurons 
(Fig. 6a). In agreement, pSHP-1 was co-localized with Pd1 mRNA in DRG neurons 
(Supplementary Fig. 8a,b). Moreover, PD-L1-induced SHP-1 phosphorylation was blocked 
by SHP-1 inhibitor sodium stibogluconate (SSG) in dissociated DRG neurons 
(Supplementary Fig. 8c). Intraplantar administration of PD-L1 induced analgesia by 
reducing paw withdrawal frequency in naïve animals; but this analgesic effect of PD-L1 was 
abolished by i.pl. SSG (Fig. 6b). Thus, SHP-1 is not only a downstream signaling event 
following PD-1 activation in DRG neurons but also contributes to PD-L1-evoked analgesia.
Given an important role of sodium channels in generating action potentials and pain40, we 
examined the effects of PD-L1 on transient sodium currents in mouse DRG neurons with 
small diameters. PD-L1 perfusion (10 ng/ml) caused a gradual and persistent inhibition of 
transient sodium currents (Fig. 6c). Moreover, PD-L1-induced inhibition of sodium currents 
was partially blocked by the SHP inhibitor SSG (Fig. 6c), supporting an involvement of 
SHP.
Two-pore K+ channel TREK2 plays a major role in regulating RMP in DRG nociceptive 
neurons of rats41. TREK2 also expressed in mouse DRG neurons (Supplementary Fig. 9a). 
We assessed if PD-L1 would modulate TREK2 activity in heterologous CHO cells. PD-L1 
caused hyperpolarization of RMP (ΔRMP ≈ 8 mV) in CHO cells co-expressing PD-1 
(encoded by PD1 or PDCD1) and TREK2 (encoded by KCNK10), but this change was 
blocked by SSG (Fig. 6d). PD-L1 also potentiated TREK2-induced currents and produced a 
negative shift in reversal potential (Erev) in PD-1/TREK2 co-expressing CHO cells; and both 
were abolished by SSG (Fig. 6e). However, PD-L1 alone was insufficient to alter the 
voltage-ramp currents and Erev in CHO cells expressing either TREK2 or PD-1 
(Supplementary Fig. 9b). Collectively, activation of PD-1 by PD-L1 might modulate 
neuronal excitability by suppressing the function of sodium channels and enhancing the 
function of potassium channels (TREK2) via SHP-1 (Supplementary Fig. 9c).
Chen et al.
Page 6
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Human DRG neurons express functional PD-1
A translational gap from rodents to humans was blamed for many failures in developing pain 
therapeutics42,43. To this end, we examined the PD-1 expression and function in human 
DRG neurons from non-diseased donors, as shown in our previous studies25,44. PD-1 IR was 
observed on cell surface of human DRG neurons with small and large sizes as well as in 
human spinal nerve axons (Fig. 7a, Supplementary Fig. 10a,b). This staining in human DRG 
and nerve sections was abolished by the immunizing blocking peptide (Supplementary Fig. 
10a,b). Both NF200 positive and negative axons of human spinal nerve expressed PD-1 
(Supplementary Fig. 10c).
Importantly, PD-1 receptor is functional in human DRG neurons: incubation of dissociated 
small-diameter nociceptive neurons (30–50 µm) with PD-L1 directly altered neuronal 
activities. At an concentration (10 ng/ml) that is effective in suppressing mouse nociceptive 
neuron activity (Fig. 4a,b), PD-L1 markedly inhibited the firing frequency of action 
potentials and further increased the threshold for action potential induction (rheobase) in 
human DRG neurons (Fig. 7b,c). PD-L1 also caused hyperpolarization of human nociceptive 
neurons by decreasing RMP (Fig. 7d). Additionally, PD-L1 perfusion (10 ng/ml) caused a 
gradual and persistent inhibition of transient sodium currents in human DRG neurons (Fig. 
7e). Notably, PD-L1-induced inhibition of sodium currents was partially blocked by SSG in 
mouse DRG neurons (Fig. 6c) but completely blocked by SSG in human DRG neurons (Fig. 
7e), supporting an important role of SHP in regulating PD-L1 signaling in human sensory 
neurons.
PD-L1 and PD-1 mask spontaneous pain and allodynia in a mouse melanoma model
Given the high expression of PD-L1 in melanoma (Fig. 2a), we examined the contribution of 
PD-L1 and PD-1 to altered pain sensitivity in a mouse model of melanoma. Intraplantar 
injection of mouse melanoma cells (5 × 105 cells in 20 µl) into C57BL/6 mice lead to time-
dependent tumor growth in a hindpaw, showing a 3-fold increase in paw volume 4 weeks 
after melanoma cell implantation (MCI-4w, Fig. 8a). Melanoma-bearing mice also exhibited 
increased PD-L1 levels in serum at MCI-4w (Fig. 8b). Despite profound tumor growth, we 
did not observe cardinal features of cancer pain, including mechanical allodynia and 
spontaneous pain (licking/flinching the tumor-bearing paw) in tumor-bearing hind paws 
(Fig. 8c, d).
Next, we tested the hypothesis that pain after melanoma could be masked by upregulated 
PD-L1 function. We employed several pharmacological approaches to block PD-L1/PD-1 
signaling. Strikingly, local neutralization of PD-L1, by i.pl. injection of soluble PD-1 
(sPD-1, 5 µg, MCI-4w), elicited marked spontaneous pain (Fig. 8e). The onset of 
spontaneous pain was very rapid: mice displayed licking/flinching behavior in melanoma-
bearing paws within 10–30 min after the injection. This spontaneous pain was also phasic, 
showing a peak every hour for the first 3 h (Supplementary Fig. 11a, Supplementary video 
1–2). The same sPD-1 treatment also induced mechanical allodynia (Supplementary Fig. 
11b). Conditioned place preference (CPP) is an operant measurement of ongoing pain35. 
Using a two-chamber test, we found that i.pl. sPD-1 treatment also resulted in marked CPP 
(Fig. 8f).
Chen et al.
Page 7
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Given an important role of PD-L1 in regulating the function of immune system, we also 
investigated the effects of sPD-1 treatment on T cell and inflammatory markers in the 
ipsilateral hindpaw skin surrounding melanoma and control skin in the contralateral paw. To 
correlate the changes of these immune markers with pain, we collected skin tissues in the 
acute phase, 3 h after the sPD-1 treatment when robust allodynia and spontaneous pain 
developed. MCI resulted in increased mRNA levels of T cell markers (CD2, CD3), 
macrophage marker (CD68), and inflammatory cytokine markers (TNF, IL-1B, IL-6, IFNG, 
CCL2) in the ipsilateral skin, compared with the contralateral skin (Supplementary Fig. 12). 
However, the mRNA levels of these immune/inflammatory markers did not alter after the 
sPD-1 treatment (Supplementary Fig. 12). This result further indicates that sPD-1 induces 
pain via non-immune modulation, at least in the acute phase (i.e. first 3 h).
To further test a peripheral and neuronal role of PD-1 in regulating pain in melanoma, we 
employed a gene therapy method we recently established27 in which small interfering RNA 
(siRNA) was used to knockdown PD-1 expression specifically in DRG neurons. This 
method allows siRNA uptake by DRG sensory neurons via axonal retrograde transport of 
siRNA27. Peri-sciatic injection of PD-1-targeting siRNA at MCI-4w induced marked and 
persistent mechanical allodynia for >4 days (Fig. 8g) and further evoked spontaneous pain in 
melanoma-bearing mice (Fig. 8h). Compared to non-targeting control siRNA, this Pd1-
targeitng siRNA partly but significantly reduced PD-1 expression in mouse DRG and sciatic 
nerve but not in spinal cord tissues (P<0.05, Supplementary Fig. 13). Thus, PD-1 expressed 
by DRG neurons could be sufficient to mask cancer pain.
Finally, we evaluated if anti-PD-1 antibodies would also unmask pain as sPD-1 and Pd1 
siRNA in the melanoma model. Intravenous injection of Nivolumab, but not the control 
human IgG4 (3–10 mg/kg), caused rapid, persistent, and dose-dependent mechanical 
allodynia and also elicited marked spontaneous pain (Fig. 8i,j). Furthermore, RMP1-14 (10 
mg/kg, i.v.), a mouse anti-PD-1 antibody, evoked remarkable spontaneous pain and 
mechanical allodynia (Supplementary Fig. 14a,b). In vivo recordings in the mouse sciatic 
nerve showed that i.v. Nivolumab significantly increased spontaneous discharges in nerve 
fibers (Fig. 8k,l), indicating that anti-PD-1 treatment can unmask pain by increasing the 
excitability of primary afferent fibers. Moreover, local injection of Nivolumab via intrathecal 
or intraplantar route each evoked mechanical allodynia in melanoma-bearing mice 
(Supplementary Fig. 14c,d). Blocking the downstream signaling of PD-1 with SHP-1 
inhibitor SSG also elicited spontaneous pain (Supplementary Fig. 14e). Together, these 
findings suggest that PD-L1 can mask pain in non-metastatic melanoma via PD-1 and SHP 
(Supplementary Fig. 14f).
DISCUSSION
The prevailing view in the field is cancers secrete pronociceptive mediators to activate or 
sensitize and primary afferent neurons in the cancer microenvironment. This 
microenvironment contains growth factors such as NGF and VEGF that cause sprouting of 
pain-sensing afferent fibers3,4. In this study, we have demonstrated that cancers also produce 
the anti-nociceptive mediator PD-L1 to suppress pain. In particular, we reveal PD-L1 as a 
previously unrecognized endogenous inhibitor of pain: PD-L1 is produce not only by 
Chen et al.
Page 8
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 melanoma but also by non-malignant tissues such as skin, DRG, and spinal cord. In naïve 
mice, exogenous application of PD-L1 induced analgesia, whereas blockade of endogenous 
PD-L1 and PD-1 signaling via sPD-L1, PD-1 antibodies, or Pd1 deletion resulted in 
hyperalgesia. PD-L1 increased pain threshold via PD-1 receptor, because the analgesic effect 
of PD-L1 was completely lost in mice lacking Pd1. In addition to physiological pain in naïve 
animals, PD-L1 potently suppressed formalin-induced acute inflammatory pain. 
Furthermore, PD-L1 effectively reduced chronic pain including nerve injury-induced 
neuropathic pain and bone cancer pain in rodents via both peripheral and central actions.
We have also demonstrated that PD-L1 is a novel neuromodulator that modulates neuronal 
excitability in mouse and human DRGs of the peripheral nervous system and synaptic 
transmission in the spinal cord of the central nervous system, through activation of PD-1 
receptor. It is generally believed that PD-1 is expressed by immune cells such as T cells13. 
However, non-immune cells such as melanoma cells also express PD-145. Our analyses 
using immunohistochemistry, in situ hybridization, and electrophysiology in dissociated 
DRG neurons clearly demonstrate the presence of anatomical and functional PD-1 receptor 
in mouse and human DRG neurons.
Mechanistically, our results show that activation of PD-1 by PD-L1 inhibited action potential 
induction and suppressed transient sodium currents in mouse and human DRG neurons. PD-
L1 also regulated RMPs and caused hyperpolarization, via PD-1/SHP activation and 
subsequent activation of two-pore K+ channel TREK2. Furthermore, PD-L1 was present in 
spinal cord tissue and bath application of PD-L1 suppressed excitatory synaptic transmission 
(sEPSC) in lamina IIo neurons in the spinal cord pain circuit. PD-L1 also inhibited bone 
cancer-induced hyperexcitability in spinal WDR neurons. These results strongly suggest that 
as a neuromodulator PD-L1 modulates pain sensitivity via both peripheral and central 
mechanisms. Because PD-L1 affects both the frequency and amplitude of sEPSCs in spinal 
cord slices (Supplementary Fig. 6), PD-1 may also be present in postsynaptic neurons in the 
spinal cord and brain. Future study is necessary to investigate signaling mechanisms by 
which PD-L1/PD-1 regulates synaptic transmission and synaptic plasticity in the spinal cord 
and brain. Given an important role of immune cells in chronic pain sensitization10,46, it is 
conceivable that PD-L1 could control chronic pain by suppressing T-cell activation and 
proinflammatory responses47. However, given the time scale of neuromodulation (minutes 
and hours), the rapid changes in pain behavior after the manipulations of the PD-L1/
PD-1/SHP pathway are likely to be mediated by neuronal activation. Growing evidence 
supports an important role of glial cells such as microglia and astrocytes in the pathogenesis 
of pain10,48–50. We should not exclude the possibility that PD-L1/PD-1 may also regulate 
glial signaling in persistent pain.
It is noteworthy that PD-L1 suppressed pathological pain not only in models of 
inflammatory, neuropathic, and bone cancer pain but also in a melanoma model, which 
exhibited high PD-L1 levels in circulation. We provided several lines of pharmacological 
and behavioral evidence to demonstrate a critical role of the PD-L1/PD-1 axis in masking 
pain in melanoma-bearing mice. First, inoculation of B16-melanoma cells resulted in robust 
melanoma growth but not spontaneous pain and mechanical allodynia. Second, intraplantar 
neutralization of PD-L1 with soluble PD-1 induced spontaneous pain, ongoing pain (CPP), 
Chen et al.
Page 9
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and mechanical allodynia; and furthermore, systemic or local injection of either human anti-
PD-1 antibody (Nivolumab) or mouse anti-PD-1 antibody (RMP1-14), or siRNA knockdown 
of PD-1 expression in DRGs each induced robust pain symptoms in melanoma-bearing 
hindpaw. Finally, inhibition of SHP also evoked spontaneous pain. It is of great interest to 
investigate whether PD-L1 can still mask pain after melanoma metastasis.
What is the biological significance of PD-L1 in suppressing the function of both immune 
system and nociceptive system? Because these two systems are important for host 
defense20,21, it is conceivable that tumor can shut off both defense systems via PD-L1 
secretion for optimal host invasion and cancer growth. Emerging immune therapies with 
anti-PD1 and anti-PD-L1 antibodies have shown efficacy in treating cancers such as 
melanoma8,15,16. Our findings suggest the importance of examining the pain caused by 
individual tumor sites in patients with melanoma and other malignancies before, after, and 
during immune therapies. On the other hand, it is also of great interest to identify novel pain 
inhibitors produced by cancer cells, which will open a new avenue to developing future pain 
medicine. Given the high potency of PD-L1 in suppressing activities of human nociceptive 
neurons, local targeting of PD-L1/PD-1 signaling in sensory neurons may lead to the 
development of novel analgesics.
ONLINE METHODS
Reagents
Mouse PD-1 (Catalog: 1021-PD-100) and Rat IgG2A Isotype control (Catalog: MAB006) 
was obtained from R&D. Mouse PD-L1 (Catalog: ab180058) and human IgG4 (Catalog: 
ab90286) were purchased from Abcam. Nivolumab (OPDIVO®), a humanized anti-PD-1 
antibody, was purchased from Bristol-Myers Squibb. Anti-mouse PD-1 antibody RMP1-14 
(Catalog: BE0146) was from Bio X Cell. Mouse Pd1-targeting siRNA (Catalog: 
L-040330-01-0005) and non-targeting siRNA (Catalog: D-0018100-01-20) were purchased 
from Thermo Scientific Dharmacon. RVG peptide was synthetized by Invitrogen and mixed 
with siRNA to increase neuronal uptake of siRNA by axons in the sciatic nerve27. SHP-1 
inhibitor sodium stibogluconate (SSG) was from Calbiochem (Catalog: 567565). PD1/
PDCD1 cDNA construct (SC117011, NM_005018) and TREK2/KCNK10 cDNA construct 
(SC110477, NM_021161) were purchased from Origene Technologies.
Animals
Adult mice (males, 8–10 weeks) were used for behavioral and biochemical studies. Pd1 
knockout mice with C57BL/6 background were purchased from the Jackson laboratory 
(Stock No: 021157) and maintained at Duke animal facility. Young mice (5–7 weeks of both 
sexes) were used for electrophysiological studies in DRG neurons. All the mouse procedures 
were approved by the Institutional Animal Care & Use Committee of Duke University. For 
bone cancer pain experiment, adult Wistar rats (females, 8 weeks) were obtained from 
Shanghai Experimental Animal Center of Chinese Academy of Sciences and the rat 
experiments were approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee of Fudan University. 
All animals were housed under a 12-hour light/dark cycle with food and water available ad 
libitum. No statistical method was used to predetermine sample size. No randomization was 
Chen et al.
Page 10
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 applied to the animal experiments. Sample sizes were estimated based on our previous 
studies for similar types of behavioral, biochemical, and electrophysiological 
analyses25,27,35. Two to five mice or rats were housed in each cage. Animal experiments 
were conducted in accordance with the National Institutes of Health Guide for the Care and 
Use of Laboratory Animals. The numbers of mice and rats used in different experiments 
were summarized in Supplementary Fig. 15.
Culture of murine melanoma cells
Murine melanoma cell line B16-F10 was obtained from ATCC (ATCC®CRL-6475, 
Rockville, Maryland). Melanoma cells were grown in Dulbecco's modified Eagle medium 
containing 4500 mg/l glucose, 100 mg/l penicillin, 100 mg/l streptomycin, and 
supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum in 5% CO2/95% air at 37 °C. Cells were 
collected for experiments following enzymatic digestion with trypsin.
Mouse and rat models of cancer and pain
We produced the following rodent models of pain.
Mouse model of melanoma—Murine B16-F10 melanoma cells (5×105 cells/20 µl, 
suspended in PBS) were subcutaneously injected into the plantar region of a left hindpaw of 
mouse.
Mouse model of inflammatory pain—Acute inflammatory pain was induced by 
intraplantar injection of 20 µl diluted formalin (5%).
Mouse model of neuropathic pain—Chronic constriction injury (CCI) model of 
neuropathic pain was produced under isoflurane anesthesia35. After the left sciatic nerve was 
exposed, three ligatures (7-0 prolene) were placed around the nerve proximal to the 
trifurcation with one millimeter between each ligature. The ligatures were loosely tied until 
a short flick of the ipsilateral hind limb was observed. Animals in the sham group received 
surgery identical to those described but without nerve ligation.
Rat bone cancer pain model—Tumor cells were extracted from the ascetic fluid of rats 
that received Walker 256 rat mammary gland carcinoma cells, and suspension of 1×108/ml 
tumor cells in PBS was prepared. The inoculation was performed as previously described38. 
Briefly, rats were anesthetized with sodium pentobarbital (50 mg/kg, intraperitoneal). The 
right leg was shaved, and the skin was disinfected with iodine tincture and 75% ethanol. A 
22-gauge needle was inserted at the site of the intercondylar eminence of the right tibia and 
was then replaced with a 10 µl microinjection syringe containing a 4 µl suspension of tumor 
cells (4 × 105). The contents of the syringe were slowly injected into the tibia cavity. To 
prevent leakage of cells outside the bone, the injection site was sealed with bone wax. For 
the sham group (control), 4 µl of PBS was injected instead of carcinoma cells into the tibia. 
At the end of the experiment, radiological, postmortem, and histological evaluations were 
performed. Rats that showed no obvious tumor growth and bone destruction after 
inoculation of tumor cells were excluded from the experiments.
Chen et al.
Page 11
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Drug injection
For intravenous injection, anti-PD-1 antibody (Nivolumab, 3 or 10 mg/kg or RMP1-14, 10 
mg/kg in 100 µl PBS) or control antibody (human IgG4 or rat IgG2A) was administered into 
the tail vein of mouse. For local intraplantar injection, drugs (20 µl PBS) were injected using 
a Hamilton microsyringe (Hamilton) with a 30-gauge needle. For intrathecal injection, 
spinal cord puncture was made with a 30-G needle between the L5 and L6 level to deliver 
reagents (10 µl) to the cerebral spinal fluid35. For peri-sciatic injection, a mixture of 2 µg 
siRNA and 1.5 µg of transfection reagent (Chimeric Rabies Virus Glycoprotein Fragment, 
RVG-9R27) in 6 µl D5W (5% dextrose in water) was injected with a 30-G needle under the 
mesoneurium of the left sciatic nerve at mid-thigh level. Care was taken to avoid solution 
entry into the epineurium of the sciatic nerve.
In situ hybridization
We used probes directed against mouse Pdl1 (NM_021893) and Pdcd1 (NM_008798) 
designed by Advanced Cell Diagnostics and the RNAscope multiplex fluorescent assay 
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Pre-hybridization, hybridization and washing 
were performed according to standard methods25.
Immunohistochemistry in mouse and human tissues and quantification
After appropriate survival times, mice were deeply anesthetized with isoflurane and perfused 
through the ascending aorta with PBS, followed by 4% paraformaldehyde. After the 
perfusion, the L4–L5 spinal cord segments, L4–L5 DRGs, sciatic nerves, and melanoma 
tissues were removed and postfixed in the same fixative overnight. Fresh human DRGs (L4–
L5) of 4 non-diseased donors from NDRI (National Disease Research Interchange)25 and the 
attached spinal nerves were immediately fixed upon delivery in fresh 4% paraformaldehyde 
overnight. Spinal cord, DRG, and nerve tissue sections (10 or 14 µm) and free-floating 
spinal cord and skin sections (30 µm) were cut in a cryostat. The sections were blocked with 
2% goat or donkey serum for 1 h at room temperature and then incubated overnight at 4°C 
with the following primary antibodies: anti-PD-1 (rabbit, 1:500, Sigma, Catalog: PRS4065), 
anti-phosphorylated SHP-1 (pSHP-1, rabbit, 1:500, Abcam, Catalog: ab51171), anti-NeuN 
(mouse, 1:1000, Millipore, Catalog: MAB377), anti-NF200 (mouse, 1:1000, Sigma, 
Catalog: N0142), anti-TREK2 (rabbit, 1:200, Alomone labs, Catalog: APC-055), and anti-
CGRP (goat, 1:500, Abcam, Catalog: ab36001) antibodies. After washing, the sections were 
incubated with cyanine 3(Cy3)- and/or FITC-conjugated secondary antibodies (1:400; 
Jackson ImmunoResearch) for 2 h at room temperature. For double immunofluorescence, 
sections were incubated with a mixture of polyclonal and monoclonal primary antibodies, 
followed by a mixture of Cy3- and FITC- conjugated secondary antibodies or FITC-
conjugated IB4 (10 µg/ml; Sigma-Aldrich, Catalog: L2895)25. In some cases, DAPI (1:1000, 
Vector laboratories, Catalog: H-1200) or Nissl staining (1:200, ThermoFisher Scientific, 
Catalog: N21483) was used to stain cell nuclei or neurons in tissue sections. The stained 
sections were examined with a Nikon fluorescence microscope, and images were captured 
with a CCD Spot camera. For high resolution images, sections were also examined under a 
Zeiss 510 inverted confocal microscope. To confirm the specificity of PD-1 antibody, 
blocking experiments were conducted in DRG, nerve, spinal cord, and skin sections using a 
Chen et al.
Page 12
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 mixture of anti-PD-1 antibody (1:500 ≈ 2 µg/ml) and immunizing blocking peptide (1:300 ≈ 
0.7 µg/ml, i.e. 10 fold of the mole concentration of the antibody, Sigma, Catalog: SBP4065), 
based on a protocol recommended for blocking with immunizing peptide (www.abcam.com/
technical).
To determine if there is neuronal loss in Pd1 deficient mice, we conducted semi-
quantification of different neuronal populations in DRGs of WT and Pd1−/− mice. All the 
series L4 DRG sections (14 µm) were collected and every 5th section was used for 
respective immunostaining (CGRP, NF200), IB4 staining, or Nissl staining. The number of 
positive neurons for each staining was counted and the percentage of the labeled population 
was calculated based on the Nissl-stained total population in DRG sections. To quantify 
immunostaining in the dorsal horn, immunofluorescence intensity in spinal cord sections of 
WT and KO mice (3–5 spinal sections/per mouse) were included.
ELISA
Mouse PD-L1 ELISA kit was purchased from US Biological (Catalog: 027620). ELISA was 
performed using culture medium, serum and different normal tissues including paw skin, 
sciatic nerve, gastrocnemius, DRG, brain, spinal cord, lung, thymus, kidney, spleen, liver, as 
well as malignant skin tissue baring melanoma. Cultured cells and tissues were 
homogenized in a lysis buffer containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Serum was 
obtained from whole blood, collected by cardiac puncture. After 30 minutes at room 
temperature, the clot was removed in a refrigerated centrifuge at 2,000 × g for 10 min to 
collect the supernatant (serum). For each ELISA assay, 50 µg proteins, 50 µl of culture 
medium, or 50 µl of serum were used. ELISA was conducted according to manufacturer’s 
instructions. The standard curve was included in each experiment.
Quantitative real-time RT-PCR
Hindpaw skins of MCI-4W mice were collected 3 h after the intraplantar injection. Total 
RNA was extracted using Direct-zol™ RNA MiniPrep Kit (Zymo Research Corporation) 
and 0.5–1 µg of RNA was reverse-transcribed using the iScript cDNA Synthesis® (Bio-
Rad). Specific primers including GAPDH control were designed using IDT SciTools Real-
Time PCR software. We performed gene-specific mRNA analyses using the MiniOpticon 
Real-Time PCR system (BioRad)35. Quantitative PCR amplification reactions contained the 
same amount of Reverse transcription (RT) product, including 7.5 µL of 2× iQSYBR-green 
mix (BioRad) and 100–300 nM of forward and reverse primers in a final volume of 15 µL. 
The primer sequences were shown in Supplementary Fig. 12b. Primer efficiency was 
obtained from the standard curve and integrated for calculation of the relative gene 
expression, which was based on real-time PCR threshold values of different transcripts and 
groups.
Western blot
Protein samples were prepared in the same way as for ELISA analysis, and 20–50 µg of 
proteins were loaded for each lane and separated by SDS-PAGE gel (4–15%; Bio-Rad). 
After the transfer, the blots were incubated overnight at 4°C with polyclonal antibody 
against PD-1 (1:1000, rabbit; Sigma, Catalog: PRS4065). For loading control, the blots were 
Chen et al.
Page 13
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 probed with GAPDH antibody (1:20000, mouse; Sigma, Catalog: G8795). These blots were 
further incubated with HRP-conjugated secondary antibody and developed in ECL solution 
(Pierce). Specific bands were evaluated by apparent molecular sizes. The intensity of the 
selected bands was analyzed using NIH Image J software. Uncut gels for the represented 
blots in were included in Supplementary Fig. 13.
Whole-cell patch clamp recordings in dissociated mouse DRG neuron
DRGs were aseptically removed from 4–7 week-old mice and digested with collagenase (0.2 
mg/ml, Roche)/dispase-II (3 mg/ml, Roche) for 120 min. Cells were placed on glass cover 
slips coated with poly-D-lysine and grown in a neurobasal defined medium (10% fetal 
bovine serum and 2% B27 supplement) at 37°C with 5% CO2/95% air for 24 h before 
experiments. Whole-cell voltage clamp recordings were performed at room temperature to 
measure transient sodium currents and action potentials, respectively, with an EPC10 
amplifier (HEKA) and an Axopatch-200B amplifier with a Digidata 1440A (Axon 
Instruments)25. The patch pipettes were pulled from borosilicate capillaries (Chase Scientific 
Glass Inc.). When filled with the pipette solution, the resistance of the pipettes was 4–5 MΩ. 
The recording chamber (300 µl) was continuously superfused (3–4 ml/min). Series 
resistance was compensated for (> 80%), and leak subtraction was performed. Data were 
low-pass-filtered at 2 KHz, sampled at 10 KHz. The pClamp10 (Axon Instruments) software 
was used during experiments and analysis. For sodium current recording, pipette solution 
contained (in mM): CsCl 130, NaCl 9, MgCl2 1, EGTA 10, HEPES 10, adjusted to pH 7.4 
with CsOH. The external solution was composed of (in mM): NaCl 131, TEACl 10, CsCl 
10, CaCl2 1, MgCl2 2, CdCl2 0.3, 4-aminopyridine 3, HEPES 10, glucose 10 adjusted to pH 
7.4 with NaOH. In voltage-clamp experiments, the transient sodium current (INa) was 
evoked by a test pulse to +0 mV from the holding potential, −70 mV25. For action potential 
and resting membrane potential (RMP) recordings, pipette solution contained (in mM): K-
gluconate 126, NaCl 10, MgCl2 1, EGTA 10, NaATP 2, and MgGTP 0.1, adjusted to pH 7.3 
with KOH. The external solution was composed of (in mM): NaCl 140, KCl 5, CaCl2 2, 
MgCl2 1, HEPES 10, glucose 10, adjusted to pH 7.4 with NaOH. In current-clamp 
experiments, the action potentials were evoked by current injection steps. RMP was 
measured without a current injection.
Whole-cell patch clamp recordings in whole mount DRGs of mice ex vivo
L4–L5 DRGs were carefully removed 4 days after sham surgery or CCI surgery and placed 
in cold oxygenated ACSF. The connective tissue was gently removed under a microscope 
and the ganglia were digested with a mixture of 0.4 mg/mL trypsin (Sigma) and 1.0 mg/ml 
type-A collagenase (Sigma) for 30 min at 37°C. The intact ganglia were then incubated in 
ACSF oxygenated with 95% O2 and 5% CO2 at 28 °C for at least 1 h before transferring 
them to the recording chamber. DRG neurons were visualized with a 40× water-immersion 
objective using a BX51WI microscope (Olympus). Whole-cell current and voltage 
recordings were acquired with an Axon700B amplifier. Patch pipettes (4–7 MΩ) were pulled 
from borosilicate glass capillaries on P-97 puller. The recording chamber (300 µl) was 
continuously superfused (3–4 ml/min). Series resistance was compensated for (> 80%), and 
leak subtraction was performed. The pipette solution contained (in mM): 140 KCl, 2 MgCl2, 
10 Hepes, 2 Mg-ATP, pH 7.4. Osmolarity was adjusted to 290–300 mOsm. Data was 
Chen et al.
Page 14
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 acquired with a Digidata 1322A acquisition system (molecular devices) using pCLAMP 9.0 
software. Signals were low-pass filtered at 5 kHz, sampled at 10 kHz and analyzed offline.
Primary cultures and patch clam recordings in human DRG neurons
Non-diseased human DRGs were obtained from donors through NDRI with permission of 
exemption from Duke IRB. Postmortem L3–L5 DRGs were dissected from 5 male donors at 
the age of 27, 31, 43, 54, and 67 and delivered in ice-cold culture medium to the laboratory 
at Duke University within 24–72 hours of death. Upon the delivery, DRGs were rapidly 
dissected from nerve roots and minced in a calcium-free HBSS (Gibco). Human DRG 
cultures were prepared as previously reported25. DRGs were digested at 37°C in humidified 
O2 incubator for 120 min with collagenase Type II (Worthington, 285 units/mg, 12 mg/ml 
final concentration) and dispase II (Roche, 1 unit/mg, 20 mg/ml) in PBS with 10 mM 
HEPES, pH adjusted to 7.4 with NaOH. DRGs were mechanically dissociated using fire-
polished pipettes, filtered through a 100 µM nylon mesh and centrifuged (500 × g for 5 min). 
The pellet was resuspended, plated on 0.5 mg/ml poly-D-lysine-coated glass coverslips, and 
cells were grown in Neurobasal medium supplemented with 10% FBS, 2% B-27 
supplement, 1% N-2 supplement, and 1% penicillin/streptomycin. Whole-cell patch clamp 
recordings in small-diameter DRG neurons (< 55 µm) were conducted at room temperature 
using patch pipettes with resistances of 2 – 3 MΩ. The recording chamber was continuously 
superfused (3–4 ml/min). The data were acquired at a rate of 10 kHz and filtered at 3 kHz 
using an EPC-10 amplifier (HEKA, Germany) and an Axopatch-200B amplifier with a 
Digidata 1440A (Axon Instruments). For sodium current recording, pipette solution 
contained (in mM): CsCl 130, NaCl 9, MgCl2 1, EGTA 10, HEPES 10, adjusted to pH 7.4 
with CsOH. The external solution was composed of (in mM): NaCl 131, TEACl 10, CsCl 
10, CaCl2 1, MgCl2 2, CdCl2 0.3, 4-aminopyridine 3, HEPES 10, glucose 10 adjusted to pH 
7.4 with NaOH. In voltage-clamp experiments, the transient sodium current (INa) was 
evoked by a test pulse to 0 mV from the holding potential of −70 mV. Pre-treatment of the 
SHP-1 inhibitor SSG was performed 30 min prior to whole-cell patch-clamp recordings. For 
action potential and RMP recordings, pipette solution contained (in mM): K-gluconate 126, 
NaCl 10, MgCl2 1, EGTA 10, NaATP 2, and MgGTP 0.1, adjusted to pH 7.3 with KOH. The 
external solution was composed of (in mM): NaCl 140, KCl 5, CaCl2 2, MgCl2 1, HEPES 
10, glucose 10, adjusted to pH 7.4 with NaOH. In current-clamp experiments, the action 
potentials were evoked by a current injection25. The resting membrane potential was 
measured without a current injection.
CHO cell culture, transfection and electrophysiology
CHO cell line was purchased from Duke Cell Culture Facility. Cells were cultured in high 
glucose (4.5 g/L) Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium containing 10% (v/v) fetal bovine 
serum (Gibco). Transfection (1 µg cDNA) was performed with Lipofectamine™ 2000 
Reagent (Invitrogen) at 70% confluency and the transfected cells were cultured in the same 
growth medium for 48 h before electrophysiological and biochemical studies. PD1/PDCD1 
cDNA construct (SC117011, NM_005018) and TREK2/KCNK10 cDNA construct 
(SC110477, NM_021161) were purchased from Origene Technologies. Whole-cell patch 
clamp recordings in transfected CHO cells were conducted at room temperature using patch 
pipettes with resistances of 5–6 MΩ. The recording chamber was continuously superfused 
Chen et al.
Page 15
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (3–4 ml/min). The data were acquired at a rate of 10 kHz and filtered at 3 kHz using an 
EPC-10 amplifier (HEKA, Germany). Pipette solution contained (in mM): K-gluconate 126, 
NaCl 10, MgCl2 1, EGTA 10, NaATP 2, and MgGTP 0.1, adjusted to pH 7.3 with KOH. The 
external solution was composed of (in mM): NaCl 140, KCl 5, CaCl2 2, MgCl2 1, HEPES 
10, glucose 10, adjusted to pH 7.4 with NaOH. In voltage-clamp recordings, TREK2-
induced currents were elicited by voltage-ramp from −120 mV to +100 mV every 10s 
interval. In current-clamp experiments, the resting membrane potential was measured 
without any membrane potential compensation.
Spinal cord slice preparation and patch clamp recordings in mice ex vivo
The L3–L5 lumbar spinal cord segment was removed from mice under urethane anesthesia 
(1.5 – 2.0 g/kg, i.p.) and kept in pre-oxygenated ice-cold artificial cerebrospinal fluid (aCSF) 
solution composed of (in mM): NaCl 126, KCl 3, MgCl2 1.3, CaCl2 2.5, NaHCO3 26; 
NaH2PO4 1.25; glucose 11. Transverse slices (300–400 µm) were cut on a vibrating 
microslicer. The slices were perfused with aCSF solution for at least 1 h prior to experiment. 
The whole cell patch-clamp recordings were made from lamina IIo neurons in voltage clamp 
mode27. After establishing the whole-cell configuration, neurons were held at −60 mV to 
record spontaneous EPSCs (sEPSCs) in the presence of 10 µM picrotoxin and 2 µM 
strychnine. The miniature EPSCs (mEPSCs) were recorded in some neurons in the presence 
of 10 µM picrotoxin, 2 µM strychnine, and 0.5 µM tetrodotoxin. The resistance of a typical 
patch pipette is 5–6 MΩ. Signals were filtered at 2 kHz and digitized at 10 kHz. The 
recording data were analyzed using Mini Analysis (Synaptosoft Inc.).
Spontaneous discharge recordings in mouse sciatic nerve in vivo
Adult male mice (25–32g) were anaesthetized with urethane (1.5 g/kg, i.p.) and monitored 
for loss of hind paw pinch reflex with additional injections of urethane (0.2 g/kg). The 
animals were artificially ventilated with oxygen on a respirator. The left thigh was shaved 
and an incision made parallel to the femur. The muscle was parted by blunt forceps 
dissection to expose the sciatic nerve proximal to the trifurcation. A cuff electrode 
(Microprobes) was placed loosely around the full circumference of the sciatic nerve. Skin 
flaps were raised to enclose a pool of mineral oil that covered the exposed regions of nerve. 
The spontaneous discharges in the sciatic nerve were recorded with a microelectrode AC 
amplifier (1800, A-M systems), filtered (low cut-off 100 Hz and hi cut-off 20 kHz) and 
digitized at 20 kHz (Digidata 1440A, Molecular Devices). Data were stored with a personal 
computer using pCLAMP 10 software and analyzed with Offline Sorter software (Plexon, 
Dallas, TX) and Origin pro 8.0 (Origin Lab). The spikes of sciatic nerve were characterized 
as previously reported25.
Extracellular recording in rat spinal cord in vivo
Rats were anesthetized with urethane (1.5 g/kg, i.p.), and the trachea was cannulated to 
allow artificial respiration. A laminectomy was performed at vertebrae T13–L1 to expose the 
lumbar enlargement of the spinal cord. An intrathecal catheter (PE-10) was made for drug 
injection. The vertebral column was rigidly fixed in the frame with clamps. The exposed 
spinal cord was covered by warm (37°C) saline solution. After surgery, the animal was 
immobilized and artificially ventilated (Capstar-100, IITC Life Science, USA). End-tidal 
Chen et al.
Page 16
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 CO2 was maintained at 3.5 to 4.5% and the rectal temperature at 37–38°C by a feedback 
controlled heating blanket. The electrocardiogram was monitored, and the heart rate was 
maintained at 250–300/min. As we reported previously38, single unit extracellular 
recordings were made at L4–5 segments, 300–700 mm from the surface of the spinal cord 
with a glass micropipette filled with 0.5 M sodium acetate (impedance 8–10 MΩ at 1000 
Hz). The micropipette was inserted perpendicularly to the spine into the dorsal horn from a 
point about mid-way between the midline and medial edge of the dorsal root entry zone. 
Each neuron was functionally identified as a wide dynamic range (WDR) neuron on the 
basis of their responses to innocuous or noxious mechanical stimulation to the receptive 
fields (RFs) in the plantar region of the hindpaw. WDR neurons responding to innocuous 
stimulation and to a greater degree, noxious stimulation of the RF were analyzed in the 
present study. The recorded signals were amplified with a microelectrode amplifier (1800 A-
M System, USA) and fed to computer via a CED 1401 interface for off-line analysis using 
the Spike 2 software (Cambridge Electronic Design, Cambridge, UK). For low-intensity 
mechanical stimulation, graded stimuli with von Frey filaments (4, 8, 15, and 26 g) were 
applied for 15s at 30s intervals. High-intensity (pinch) stimulation with pinch produced by a 
clip (150g) was also applied for 15 s. In pharmacological studies, only one cell was studied 
in each animal.
Measurement of hindpaw melanoma growth in mice
To assess tumor growth after melanoma cell implantation, paw volume was determined by 
water displacement plethysmometer (Ugo Basile, Italy). The Plethysmometer is a 
microcontrolled volume meter, specially designed for accurate measurement of the rodent 
paw swelling. It consists of a water filled Perspex cell into which the paw is dipped. A 
transducer of original design records small differences in water level, caused by volume 
displacement. The digital read-out shows the exact volume of the paw.
Behavioral analysis in mice and rats
The following behavioral measurements were conducted in a blinded manner and during 
daytime (light cycle) normally starting at 9 AM.
Spontaneous pain in mouse melanoma model—We measured the time (seconds) 
mice spent on licking or flinching the melanoma-bearing hindpaws for 1 or 3 hours.
Von Frey test for mechanical pain—Animals were habituated to the testing 
environment daily for at least 2 days before baseline testing. The room temperature and 
humidity remained stable for all experiments. For testing mechanical sensitivity, we 
confined mice in boxes placed on an elevated metal mesh floor and stimulated their 
hindpaws with a series of von Frey hairs with logarithmically increasing stiffness (0.02–
2.56g, Stoelting), presented perpendicularly to the central plantar surface. We determined 
the 50% paw withdrawal threshold by up-down method35.
Hargreaves test for thermal pain—Thermal sensitivity was tested using Hargreaves 
radiant heat apparatus (IITC Life Science), the basal paw withdrawal latency was adjusted to 
9–12 s, with a cutoff of 20 s to prevent tissue damage35.
Chen et al.
Page 17
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Rota-rod test for motor function—A Rota-rod system (IITC Life Science Inc.) was 
used to assess the motor function. Mice were tested for three trails separated by 10 min 
intervals. During the tests, the speed of rotation was accelerated from 2 to 20 r.p.m. in 3 min. 
The falling latency was recorded and averaged35.
Conditioned place preference (CPP) test for spontaneous/ongoing pain—We 
used a single trial conditioning protocol to measure CPP35. All mice underwent a 3-day pre-
conditioning habituation and animal behavior was video-recorded. Analyses of the pre-
conditioning (baseline) behavior showed no pre-existing chamber preference. On the 
conditioning day, mice received the vehicle (PBS, 20 µl, i.pl.) paired with a randomly chosen 
chamber in the morning, and PD-1 (5 µg in 20 µl PBS, i.pl.) paired with the other chamber 4 
h later. Chamber pairings were counterbalanced. On the test day, 20 h following the 
afternoon pairing, mice were placed in the CPP test box with access to both chambers and 
the behavior was recorded for 15 min and analyzed by ANY-maze software for chamber 
preference.
Statistical analyses
All the data were expressed as mean ± s.e.m, as indicated in the figure legends. The sample 
size for each experiment was based on our previous studies on such experiment25,35. 
Statistical analyses were completed with Prism GraphPad 5.0. Biochemical and behavioral 
data were analyzed using two-tailed student’s t-test (two groups) or Two-Way ANOVA 
followed by post-hoc Bonferroni test. Electrophysiological data were tested using one-way 
ANOVA (for multiple comparisons) or Two-Way ANOVA (for multiple time points) 
followed by post-hoc Bonferroni test or student’s t-test (two groups). The criterion for 
statistical significance was P < 0.05.
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author 
upon reasonable request.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
This study is supported by NIH RO1 grants NS87988, DE17794, and DE22743 and National Science Fund of 
China (NSFC) 31420103903. Y.H.K. was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) 
2013R1A6A3A04065858.
Reference List
1. Mantyh PW. Cancer pain and its impact on diagnosis, survival and quality of life. Nat. Rev. 
Neurosci. 2006; 7:797–809. [PubMed: 16988655] 
2. Mantyh P. Bone cancer pain: causes, consequences, and therapeutic opportunities. Pain. 2013; 
154(Suppl 1):S54–S62. [PubMed: 23916671] 
3. Selvaraj D, et al. A Functional Role for VEGFR1 Expressed in Peripheral Sensory Neurons in 
Cancer Pain. Cancer Cell. 2015; 27:780–796. [PubMed: 26058077] 
Chen et al.
Page 18
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 4. Jimenez-Andrade JM, Ghilardi JR, Castaneda-Corral G, Kuskowski MA, Mantyh PW. Preventive or 
late administration of anti-NGF therapy attenuates tumor-induced nerve sprouting, neuroma 
formation, and cancer pain. Pain. 2011; 152:2564–2574. [PubMed: 21907491] 
5. Cain DM, et al. Functional interactions between tumor and peripheral nerve: changes in excitability 
and morphology of primary afferent fibers in a murine model of cancer pain. J Neurosci. 2001; 
21:9367–9376. [PubMed: 11717370] 
6. Schweizerhof M, et al. Hematopoietic colony-stimulating factors mediate tumor-nerve interactions 
and bone cancer pain. Nat. Med. 2009; 15:802–807. [PubMed: 19525966] 
7. Schmidt BL. The neurobiology of cancer pain. Neuroscientist. 2014; 20:546–562. [PubMed: 
24664352] 
8. Brahmer JR, et al. Safety and activity of anti-PD-L1 antibody in patients with advanced cancer. N. 
Engl. J Med. 2012; 366:2455–2465. [PubMed: 22658128] 
9. Negin BP, et al. Symptoms and signs of primary melanoma: important indicators of Breslow depth. 
Cancer. 2003; 98:344–348. [PubMed: 12872355] 
10. Ji RR, Chamessian A, Zhang YQ. Pain regulation by non-neuronal cells and inflammation. 
Science. 2016; 354:572–577. [PubMed: 27811267] 
11. Sharma P, Allison JP. The future of immune checkpoint therapy. Science. 2015; 348:56–61. 
[PubMed: 25838373] 
12. Butte MJ, Keir ME, Phamduy TB, Sharpe AH, Freeman GJ. Programmed death-1 ligand 1 
interacts specifically with the B7-1 costimulatory molecule to inhibit T cell responses. Immunity. 
2007; 27:111–122. [PubMed: 17629517] 
13. Keir ME, Butte MJ, Freeman GJ, Sharpe AH. PD-1 and its ligands in tolerance and immunity. 
Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2008; 26:677–704. [PubMed: 18173375] 
14. Day CL, et al. PD-1 expression on HIV-specific T cells is associated with T-cell exhaustion and 
disease progression. Nature. 2006; 443:350–354. [PubMed: 16921384] 
15. Herbs RS, et al. Predictive correlates of response to the anti-PD-L1 antibody MPDL3280A in 
cancer patients. Nature. 2014; 515:563–567. [PubMed: 25428504] 
16. Topalian SL, et al. Safety, activity, and immune correlates of anti-PD-1 antibody in cancer. N. Engl. 
J Med. 2012; 366:2443–2454. [PubMed: 22658127] 
17. Ansell SM, et al. PD-1 blockade with nivolumab in relapsed or refractory Hodgkin's lymphoma. N. 
Engl. J Med. 2015; 372:311–319. [PubMed: 25482239] 
18. Hamanishi J, et al. Safety and Antitumor Activity of Anti-PD-1 Antibody, Nivolumab, in Patients 
With Platinum-Resistant Ovarian Cancer. J Clin. Oncol. 2015
19. Postow MA, et al. Nivolumab and ipilimumab versus ipilimumab in untreated melanoma. N. Engl. 
J. Med. 2015; 372:2006–2017. [PubMed: 25891304] 
20. Talbot S, Foster SL, Woolf CJ. Neuroimmunity: Physiology and Pathology. Annual review of 
immunology. 2016; 34:421–447.
21. McMahon SB, La Russa F, Bennett DL. Crosstalk between the nociceptive and immune systems in 
host defence and disease. Nature reviews. Neuroscience. 2015; 16:389–402. [PubMed: 26087680] 
22. Chiu IM, et al. Bacteria activate sensory neurons that modulate pain and inflammation. Nature. 
2013; 501:52–57. [PubMed: 23965627] 
23. Ji RR, Xu ZZ, Gao YJ. Emerging targets in neuroinflammation-driven chronic pain. Nat. Rev. Drug 
Discov. 2014; 13:533–548. [PubMed: 24948120] 
24. Li Y, et al. Toll-like receptor 4 signaling contributes to Paclitaxel-induced peripheral neuropathy. J 
Pain. 2014; 15:712–725. [PubMed: 24755282] 
25. Xu ZZ, et al. Inhibition of mechanical allodynia in neuropathic pain by TLR5-mediated A-fiber 
blockade. Nat. Med. 2015
26. Park CK, et al. Extracellular MicroRNAs Activate Nociceptor Neurons to Elicit Pain via TLR7 and 
TRPA1. Neuron. 2014; 82:47–54. [PubMed: 24698267] 
27. Berta T, et al. Extracellular caspase-6 drives murine inflammatory pain via microglial TNF-alpha 
secretion. J Clin. Invest. 2014; 124:1173–1186. [PubMed: 24531553] 
28. Patel SP, Kurzrock R. PD-L1 Expression as a Predictive Biomarker in Cancer Immunotherapy. 
Molecular cancer therapeutics. 2015; 14:847–856. [PubMed: 25695955] 
Chen et al.
Page 19
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 29. Weber JS, et al. Nivolumab versus chemotherapy in patients with advanced melanoma who 
progressed after anti-CTLA-4 treatment (CheckMate 037): a randomised, controlled, open-label, 
phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2015; 16:375–384. [PubMed: 25795410] 
30. Brahmer JR, Hammers H, Lipson EJ. Nivolumab: targeting PD-1 to bolster antitumor immunity. 
Future.Oncol. 2015; 11:1307–1326. [PubMed: 25798726] 
31. Hucho T, Levine JD. Signaling pathways in sensitization: toward a nociceptor cell biology. Neuron. 
2007; 55:365–376. [PubMed: 17678851] 
32. Reichling DB, Levine JD. Critical role of nociceptor plasticity in chronic pain. Trends Neurosci. 
2009; 32:611–618. [PubMed: 19781793] 
33. Basbaum AI, Bautista DM, Scherrer G, Julius D. Cellular and molecular mechanisms of pain. Cell. 
2009; 139:267–284. [PubMed: 19837031] 
34. Devor M, Wall PD, Catalan N. Systemic lidocaine silences ectopic neuroma and DRG discharge 
without blocking nerve conduction. Pain. 1992; 48:261–268. [PubMed: 1589245] 
35. Chen G, Park CK, Xie RG, Ji RR. Intrathecal bone marrow stromal cells inhibit neuropathic pain 
via TGF-beta secretion. J Clin. Invest. 2015; 125:3226–3240. [PubMed: 26168219] 
36. Todd AJ. Neuronal circuitry for pain processing in the dorsal horn. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2010; 
11:823–836. [PubMed: 21068766] 
37. Braz J, Solorzano C, Wang X, Basbaum AI. Transmitting Pain and Itch Messages: A 
Contemporary View of the Spinal Cord Circuits that Generate Gate Control. Neuron. 2014; 
82:522–536. [PubMed: 24811377] 
38. Yang Y, et al. Delayed Activation of Spinal Microglia Contributes to the Maintenance of Bone 
Cancer Pain in Female Wistar Rats via P2X7 Receptor and IL-18. J. Neurosci. 2015; 35:7950–
7963. [PubMed: 25995479] 
39. Hebeisen M, et al. SHP-1 phosphatase activity counteracts increased T cell receptor affinity. J Clin. 
Invest. 2013; 123:1044–1056. [PubMed: 23391724] 
40. Bennett DL, Woods CG. Painful and painless channelopathies. The Lancet. Neurology. 2014; 
13:587–599. [PubMed: 24813307] 
41. Acosta C, et al. TREK2 expressed selectively in IB4-binding C-fiber nociceptors hyperpolarizes 
their membrane potentials and limits spontaneous pain. J Neurosci. 2014; 34:1494–1509. 
[PubMed: 24453337] 
42. Woolf CJ. Overcoming obstacles to developing new analgesics. Nat. Med. 2010; 16:1241–1247. 
[PubMed: 20948534] 
43. Mogil JS. Animal models of pain: progress and challenges. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2009; 10:283–294. 
[PubMed: 19259101] 
44. Han Q, et al. SHANK3 Deficiency Impairs Heat Hyperalgesia and TRPV1 Signaling in Primary 
Sensory Neurons. Neuron. 2016
45. Kleffel S, et al. Melanoma Cell-Intrinsic PD-1 Receptor Functions Promote Tumor Growth. Cell. 
2015; 162:1242–1256. [PubMed: 26359984] 
46. Scholz J, Woolf CJ. The neuropathic pain triad: neurons, immune cells and glia. Nat. Neurosci. 
2007; 10:1361–1368. [PubMed: 17965656] 
47. Uceyler N, et al. Deficiency of the negative immune regulator B7-H1 enhances inflammation and 
neuropathic pain after chronic constriction injury of mouse sciatic nerve. Exp. Neurol. 2010; 
222:153–160. [PubMed: 20051242] 
48. Guan Z, et al. Injured sensory neuron-derived CSF1 induces microglial proliferation and DAP12-
dependent pain. Nature neuroscience. 2016; 19:94–101. [PubMed: 26642091] 
49. Grace PM, Hutchinson MR, Maier SF, Watkins LR. Pathological pain and the neuroimmune 
interface. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2014
50. Sorge RE, et al. Different immune cells mediate mechanical pain hypersensitivity in male and 
female mice. Nat. Neurosci. 2015; 18:1081–1083. [PubMed: 26120961] 
Chen et al.
Page 20
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Exogenous PD-L1 inhibits formalin-induced inflammatory pain and increases pain 
threshold in naïve mice
(a) Formalin-induced Phase-I and Phase-II inflammatory pain, as measured by duration of 
spontaneous pain behavior (flinching/licking) in every 5 min, is reduced by intraplantar 
(i.pl.) pretreatment of PD-L1 (1–10 µg). *P<0.05, vs. vehicle (PBS), One-Way ANOVA, n = 
7–10 mice/group. PD-L1 was administered 30 min prior to the formalin injection. (b) Basal 
mechanical pain assessed in von Frey test in naive mice. Notice an increase in paw 
withdrawal threshold after PD-L1 injection (1 and 5 µg, i.pl.). *P<0.05, vs. human IgG, 
repeated measures Two-Way ANOVA, n = 5 mice/group. Arrow indicates drug injection. 
Data are mean ± s.e.m.
Chen et al.
Page 21
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Endogenous PD-L1 regulates pain sensitivity in naive mice via PD-1
(a) ELISA analysis showing endogenous expression of PD-L1 in non-malignant tissues of 
naïve mice and melanoma tissue removed from a mouse hindpaw 4 w after melanoma cell 
inoculation. Note that PD-L1 is widely expressed in various non-malignant tissues. n = 3 
mice/group. (b) Inhibition of endogenous PD-L1 and PD-1 induces mechanical allodynia in 
naïve mice. PD-L1 was neutralized with soluble PD-1 (sPD-1, 5 µg, i.pl.), and PD-1 was 
blocked by monoclonal antibodies RMP1-14 (mouse anti-PD-1 antibody, 5 µg, i.pl.) and 
Nivolumab (human anti-PD-1 antibody, 10 µg, i.pl.). *P<0.05, vs. human IgG, repeated 
measures Two-Way ANOVA, n = 5 mice/group. Arrow indicates drug injection. (c,d) 
Reduced mechanical and thermal pain threshold in Pd1−/− mice, as shown in von Frey test 
(c) and hot plate test (d). *P<0.05, Two-tailed student t-test, n = 6 mice/group. Data are 
mean ± s.e.m.
Chen et al.
Page 22
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. PD-1 is expressed by mouse DRG neurons and nerve axons
(a–d) In situ hybridization (ISH) images showing Pd1 mRNA expression in DRG of wild-
type (WT) not Pd1 knockout (Pd1−/−) mice. (a) Low magnification image of ISH with anti-
sense probe showing Pd1 mRNA in DRG neurons of WT mice. Scale, 50 µm. (b) High 
magnification image of double ISH (red) and Nissl staining (green) in DRG sections. Scale, 
20 µm. (c) ISH image showing loss of Pd1 mRNA expression in DRG neurons in Pd1−/− 
mice. Scale, 50 µm. (d) ISH image of sense control probe. Scale, 50 µm. (e) Left, image of 
immunostaining showing broad PD-1 expression in mouse DRG neurons. Middle, PD-1 
expression is lost in Pd1−/− mice. Right, absence of PD-1 immunostaining by the treatment 
of a blocking peptide. Blue DAPI staining shows all the cell nuclei in DRG sections. Scale, 
50 µm. (f) Size frequency distribution of PD-1-positive and total neurons in mouse DRGs. A 
total of 1555 neurons from 4 WT mice were analyzed. (g,h) Double staining of PD-1 and 
NF200 in DRG (g) and sciatic nerve (h) sections of mice. Note that PD-1 expression in both 
NF200-positive and NF200-negative DRG neurons and sciatic nerve axons. Scales, 50 µm. 
(i) Double immunostaining of PD-1 and CGRP in mouse sciatic nerve. PD-1 is present in 
axons co-expressing CGRP. Scale, 50 µm. Arrows in g–i indicate the double-labeled neurons 
and axons.
Chen et al.
Page 23
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. PD-L1 suppresses neuronal excitability in mouse DRG neurons via PD-1
(a–f) Patch clamp recordings in dissociated (a–d) and whole-mount (e,f) mouse DRG 
neurons with small diameters (<25 µm). (a) Left, traces of action potentials (AP) showing an 
inhibitory effect of PD-L1 (10 ng/ml) in WT neurons. Current injection for AP induction 
starts from +10 pA and increases 10 pA per step. Right, rheobase change in WT and Pd1−/− 
mice. n = 6 neurons/2 mice. (b) PD-L1 induces hyperpolarization of the resting membrane 
potential (RMP). Right, change of RMP in WT and Pd1−/− mice. n = 6 neurons/2 mice. Note 
that PD-L1 fails to suppress action potential (a) and alter RMP (b) in Pd1−/− mice. (c,d) 
Altered RMP and increased excitability in DRG neurons of Pd1−/− mice. (c) RMP in WT 
and Pd1−/− mice. *P<0.05, paired two-tailed t-test, n = 30 neurons/2 mice. (d) Number of 
action potentials evoked by current injection in WT and Pd1−/− mice. *P<0.05, Two-Way 
ANOVA followed Bonferroni’s post-hoc test, n = 30 neurons/2 mice. (e) Whole-mount DRG 
recording showing increased action potential firing in small-sized DRG neurons after 
perfusion of sPD-1 (30 ng/ml). Left, traces of evoked action potential before and after sPD-1 
perfusion. Right, action potential frequency following sPD-1 perfusion. *P<0.05, paired 
two-tailed Student’s t-test, n = 11 neurons/3 mice. (f) Whole-mount DRG recording showing 
increased action potential firing in small-sized neurons following Nivolumab incubation (2 
h, 300 ng/ml). Left, traces of evoked action potential in neurons incubated with control 
(artificial CSF), human IgG and Nivolumab. Right, frequency of action potentials showing 
the effects of human IgG and Nivolumab. *P<0.05, vs. control and human IgG, One-Way 
ANOVA, followed by Bonferroni’s post-hoc test, n = 8–18 neurons/3 mice. Data are mean ± 
s.e.m.
Chen et al.
Page 24
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. PD-L1 inhibits neuronal hyperexcitability and neuropathic pain after nerve injury
(a,b) PD-L1 blocks the CCI-induced increases in action potential frequency in small-
diameter neurons of whole-mount DRG. (a) Traces of action potentials 4 d after chronic 
constriction injury (CCI) and the effects of PD-L1 (1 and 10 ng/ml). (b) Frequency of action 
potentials. *P<0.05, vs. sham control, #P<0.05, vs. control (no treatment), One-Way 
ANOVA, n = 6–9 neurons/group. (c,d) Intrathecal PD-L1 inhibits CCI-induced mechanical 
allodynia (c) and thermal hyperalgesia (d). *P < 0.05, vs. vehicle, repeated measures Two-
Way ANOVA, n = 5 mice/group. Arrow indicates drug injection. (e) Randall-Selitto test 
showing increased baseline mechanical pain threshold after intrathecal PD-L1 injection in 
naïve mice. *P < 0.05, vs. vehicle, #P < 0.05, vs. baseline (BL), repeated measures Two-Way 
ANOVA, n = 5 mice/group. Arrow indicates drug injection. Data are mean ± s.e.m.
Chen et al.
Page 25
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. PD-L1 modulates neuronal excitability and pain via SHP-1
(a) Intrathecal PD-L1 (i.t. 1 µg, 30 min) increased phosphorylation of SHP-1 (pSHP-1) in 
mouse DRG neurons. Left, images of pSHP-1 immunostaining in vehicle and PD-L1 treated 
group. Scale, 50 µm. Middle, enlarged images from the boxes. Scale, 50 µm. Right, intensity 
of immunofluorescence of pSHP-1+ neurons. *P<0.05, Two-tailed t-test, n = 4 mice/group. 
(b) Paw withdrawal frequency to a 0.6 g filament in naïve mice and the effects of i.pl. SSG 
(SHP-1 inhibitor), PD-L1, and PD-L1 plus SSG in naïve mice. Note that PD-L1 induced 
analgesia is abolished by SSG. *P<0.05, vs. vehicle (PBS), #P<0.05, vs. PD-L1, n.s., no 
significance, One-Way ANOVA, n = 5 mice/group. (c) Inhibition of transient sodium 
Chen et al.
Page 26
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 currents by PD-L1 (10 ng/ml) in dissociated DRG neurons and the effect of SSG (11 µM). 
Left, traces of sodium currents. Right, time course of relative sodium currents. *P<0.05, 
Two-Way repeated measures ANOVA, n = 6–9 neurons/2 mice. (d) Regulation of RMP by 
PD-L1 (10 ng/ml) and its blockade SSG (11 µM) in dissociated DRG neurons. *P<0.05, 
two-tailed Student’s t-test, n = 6–8 neurons/2 mice. (e) PD-L1 increases TREK2 activity via 
SHP-1 in CHO cells. Left, traces of TREK2-induced outward currents and the effects of PD-
L1 and SSG. Right, quantification of outward currents and RMP changes. *P<0.05, two-
tailed Student’s t-test, n = 6–8 cells/2 cultures. Data are mean ± s.e.m.
Chen et al.
Page 27
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 7. PD-L1 suppresses action potential firing and sodium currents and regulates resting 
membrane potentials in human DRG neurons
(a) PD-1 immunostaining in a human DRG section. Blue DAPI staining labels all nuclei of 
cells in DRG. Scale, 50 µm. (b,c) In vitro patch-clamp recording in dissociated small-
diameter human DRG neurons (30–50 µm). (b) Suppression of evoked action potential firing 
by PD-L1. Insert shows a human DRG neuron with a recording pipette. Scale, 25 µm. Blue 
and red arrows show the shift of RMP after the PD-L1 treatment. (c) Percentage change of 
action potential frequency (left) and rheobase change (right) following PD-L1 perfusion (10 
ng/ml). *P<0.05, vs. vehicle, Two-tailed Student’s t-test, n = 7–10 neurons/3 donors. (d) 
Chen et al.
Page 28
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Reduction of RMP after PD-L1 perfusion. Right, quantification of RMP change. *P<0.05, 
vs. vehicle, Two-tailed Student’s t-test, n = 13 and 17 neurons/3 donors. (e) Inhibited of 
transient sodium currents in dissociated human DRG neurons by PD-L1 (10 ng/ml) and the 
effect of SSG (11 µM). Left, traces of sodium currents. Right, time course of relative sodium 
currents showing time-dependent inhibition by PD-L1. *P<0.05, Two-Way repeated 
measures ANOVA, n = 5–8 neurons/2 donors. Data are mean ± s.e.m.
Chen et al.
Page 29
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 8. Blocking of PD-L1 or PD-1 signaling induces spontaneous pain and allodynia in a 
mouse melanoma model
(a) Tumor growth after melanoma cell inoculation (MCI) in a hindpaw. Left, images of 
ipsilateral hindpaw (red arrow) and contralateral hindpaw and an isolated melanoma (top) at 
MCI-4w. Scales, 5 mm. Right, time course of tumor growth after MCI, revealed by hindpaw 
volume change. BL, baseline. *P<0.05, vs. BL, One-Way ANOVA, n = 25 mice/group. (b) 
Serum PD-L1 levels in sham control mice and melanoma-bearing mice (MCI-4w). *P<0.05, 
two-tailed Student’s t-test. n= 6 mice/group. (c,d) Time course of mechanical pain (c) and 
spontaneous pain (duration of licking/flinching, d) after MCI. Note that tumor growth is not 
associated with the development of mechanical allodynia and spontaneous pain. n = 21 and 
25 mice/group. (e) Induction of spontaneous pain by soluble PD-1 (sPD-1) following i.pl. 
injection at MCI-4w. Note a rapid onset of spontaneous pain by sPD-1 within 30 min. 
*P<0.05, compared with vehicle, two-tailed Student’s t-test. n= 6 and 7 mic/group. (f) 
Induction of ongoing pain (CPP) in melanoma-bearing mice by sPD-1 (i.pl.). Left, paradigm 
for assessing CPP in a two-chamber test. Right, difference in time spent in drug-paired 
Chen et al.
Page 30
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 compartment between the pre-conditioning and post-conditioning phases. *P<0.05, two-
tailed Student’s t-test, n= 7–8 mice/group. (g,h) Induction of mechanical allodynia (g, n=11 
mice/group) and spontaneous pain (h, n=9 mice/group) by peri sciatic injection of PD-1-
targeting siRNA (2 µg) but not by control non-targeting siRNA (NT, 2 µg), given at MCI-4w. 
*P<0.05, repeated measures Two-Way ANOVA (g) and two-tailed Student’s t-test (h). (i,j) 
Intravenous Nivolumab (3 and 10 mg/kg), given at MCI-4w (indicated with an arrow), 
induces mechanical allodynia (i, n=4–6 mice/group) and spontaneous pain 3 h after the 
injection (j, n=6 mice/group). *P < 0.05, compared with control human IgG4, repeated 
measures Two-Way ANOVA (i) and two-tailed Student’s t-test (j). (k,l) Intravenous 
Nivolumab (10 mg/kg, MCI-4w) increases spontaneous firing of afferent fibers in the sciatic 
nerve 3 h after the injection. (k) Traces of discharges in melanoma-bearing mice treated with 
Nivolumab and human IgG4 control. (l) Number of spikes in 2 hours after the treatment. 
*P<0.05, two-tailed student’s t-test, n = 5 mice/group. Data are expressed as mean ± s.e.m.
Chen et al.
Page 31
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
