 Phosphoproteins in extracellular vesicles as candidate
markers for breast cancer
I-Hsuan Chena, Liang Xuea, Chuan-Chih Hsua, Juan Sebastian Paez Paeza, Li Panb, Hillary Andaluzc, Michael K. Wendtb,
Anton B. Iliukd, Jian-Kang Zhua,e,f,1, and W. Andy Taoa,b,c,g,1
aDepartment of Biochemistry, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907; bDepartment of Medicinal Chemistry & Molecular Pharmacology, Purdue
University, West Lafayette, IN 47907; cDepartment of Chemistry, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907; dDepartment of Innovations, Tymora
Analytical Operations, West Lafayette, IN 47906; eDepartment of Horticulture and Landscape Architecture, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907;
fShanghai Center for Plant Stress Biology and Center for Excellence in Molecular Plant Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201602, China; and
gPurdue Center for Cancer Research, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907
Contributed by Jian-Kang Zhu, February 1, 2017 (sent for review November 1, 2016; reviewed by Natalie G. Ahn, Bernd Bodenmiller, and Jim Bruce)
The state of protein phosphorylation can be a key determinant of
cellular physiology such as early-stage cancer, but the development
of phosphoproteins in biofluids for disease diagnosis remains
elusive. Here we demonstrate a strategy to isolate and identify
phosphoproteins in extracellular vesicles (EVs) from human plasma
as potential markers to differentiate disease from healthy states.
We identified close to 10,000 unique phosphopeptides in EVs iso-
lated from small volumes of plasma samples. Using label-free quan-
titative phosphoproteomics, we identified 144 phosphoproteins in
plasma EVs that are significantly higher in patients diagnosed with
breast cancer compared with healthy controls. Several biomarkers
were validated in individual patients using paralleled reaction mon-
itoring for targeted quantitation. This study demonstrates that
the development of phosphoproteins in plasma EV as disease
biomarkers is highly feasible and may transform cancer screening
and monitoring.
phosphoproteins | proteomics | extracellular vesicles | mass spectrometry |
biomarker
E
arly diagnosis and monitoring of diseases such as cancers
through blood tests has been a decades-long aim of medical
diagnostics. Because protein phosphorylation is one of the
most important and widespread molecular regulatory mecha-
nisms that controls almost all aspects of cellular functions
(1, 2), the status of phosphorylation events conceivably pro-
vides clues regarding disease status (3). However, few phos-
phoproteins have been developed as disease markers. Assays of
phosphoproteins from tissues face tremendous challenges be-
cause of the invasive nature of tissue biopsy and the highly dy-
namic nature of protein phosphorylation during the typically
long and complex procedure of tissue biopsy. Furthermore, biopsy
tissue from tumors is not available for monitoring patient response
over the course of treatment. Development of phosphoproteins as
disease biomarkers from biofluids is even more challenging
because of the presence of active phosphatases in high con-
centration in blood. With several highly abundant proteins
representing more than 95% of the mass in blood, few phos-
phorylated proteins in plasma/serum can be identified with
stable and detectable concentrations.
The recent discovery of extracellular vesicles (EVs), includ-
ing microvesicles and exosomes, and their potentially important
cellular functions in tumor biology and metastasis has pre-
sented them as intriguing sources for biomarker discovery and
disease diagnosis (4–6). Critical for immune regulation and
intercellular communication, EVs have many differentiating
characteristics of cancer cell-derived cargo, including muta-
tions, active miRNAs, and signaling molecules with metastatic
features (7, 8). The growing body of functional studies has provided
strong evidence that these EV-based disease markers can be
identified well before the onset of symptoms or physiological
detection of a tumor, making them a promising candidate for
early-stage cancer and other diseases (6, 9). Interestingly, EVs
are membrane-encapsulated nano- or microparticles, which
protects their inside contents from external proteases and other
enzymes (10–12). These features make them highly stable in a
biofluid for extended periods of time and also allow us to po-
tentially develop phosphoproteins in EVs for medical diagnoses.
The ability to detect the genome output (active proteins, and in
particular phosphoproteins) can provide more direct real-time
information about the organism’s physiological functions and
disease progression, particularly in cancers.
We aimed to develop EV phosphoproteins as potential disease
markers by focusing on breast cancer in this study. With tre-
mendous challenges facing mass spectrometry-based biomarker
discovery using biofluids, identification of EV phosphoproteins
presents a totally different path to disease diagnosis. To this end,
we isolated and identified the largest group of EV phospho-
proteins to date from both microvesicles and exosomes and
measured phosphorylation changes across patients with breast
cancer and healthy individuals. We subsequently identified mul-
tiple potential candidates and verified several among patients and
healthy controls. The EV phosphoproteomics approach demon-
strated here can be applied to other systems, and thus establish a
strategy for biomarker discovery.
Significance
Protein phosphorylation is a major regulatory mechanism for
many cellular functions, but no phosphoprotein in biofluids has
been developed for disease diagnosis because of the presence
of active phosphatases. This study presents a general strategy
to isolate and identify phosphoproteins in extracellular vesicles
(EVs) from human plasma as potential markers to differentiate
disease from healthy states. We identified close to 10,000 unique
phosphopeptides in EVs from small volumes of plasma samples
and more than 100 phosphoproteins in plasma EVs that are
significantly higher in patients diagnosed with breast cancer as
compared with healthy controls. This study demonstrates that
the development of phosphoproteins in plasma EVs as disease
biomarkers is highly feasible and may transform cancer screen-
ing and monitoring.
Author contributions: I.-H.C., L.P., A.B.I., J.-K.Z., and W.A.T. designed research; I.-H.C., L.X.,
C.-C.H., H.A., and A.B.I. performed research; I.-H.C., J.S.P.P., M.K.W., J.-K.Z., and W.A.T.
analyzed data; and I.-H.C. and W.A.T. wrote the paper.
Reviewers: N.G.A., University of Colorado; B.B., University of Zurich; and J.B., University
of Washington.
A.B.I. and W.A.T. are cofounders of Tymora Analytical Operations.
Freely available online through the PNAS open access option.
Data deposition: The mass spectrometric data have been deposited in the PRIDE partner
repository, www.ebi.ac.uk/pride (accession no. PXD005214).
1To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: jkzhu@purdue.edu and watao@
purdue.edu.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1618088114/-/DCSupplemental.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1618088114
PNAS
|
March 21, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 12
|
3175–3180
MEDICAL SCIENCES
 Results
Identification
of
9,643
Unique
Phosphopeptides
from
Plasma
Microvesicles and Exosomes. The workflow for the isolation of
EVs, enrichment of phosphopeptides, and EV phosphoproteome
analyses is illustrated in Fig. 1. Microvesicles and exosomes were
isolated from human plasma samples through high-speed and
ultra-high-speed centrifugations, respectively, an approach that
has been used in previous studies (13–15). For the initial
screening, the plasma samples were collected and pooled from
healthy individuals (n = 6) and from patients diagnosed with
breast cancer (n = 18). After lysis of EVs, proteins were
extracted and peptides generated using trypsin with the aid of
phase-transfer surfactants for better digestion efficiency and
fewer missed tryptic sites (16). Phosphopeptides were enriched
and analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spec-
trometry (LC-MS/MS) on a high-speed, high-resolution mass
spectrometer. For each phosphopeptide sample, three technical
replicates were performed. Label-free quantification was per-
formed to determine differential phosphorylation of EV pro-
teins in the plasma of control and breast cancer patient samples.
The strategy allowed us to identify 9,643 unique phospho-
peptides, including 9,225 from microvesicles and 1,014 from
exosomes, representing 1,934 and 479 phosphoproteins in
microvesicles and exosomes, respectively. On average, close to
7,000 unique EV phosphopeptides were identified from 1 mL
human plasma. As shown in Fig. 2A and Fig. S1A, more than
50% of exosome phosphopeptides were also identified in
microvesicles. Gene ontology analysis of the phosphoproteins
indicated overall similar cellular components and biological
functions between microvesicles and exosomes (Fig. 2B and
Fig. S1B). Although previous large-scale phosphoproteomics
studies revealed that phosphorylation preferentially targets
nuclear proteins (17, 18), a significant portion of the EV
phosphoproteomes are distinctively from membranes and or-
ganelles. As expected, proteins annotated as extracellular were
significantly overrepresented in the EV phosphoproteomes. We
also found that many EV phosphoproteins are involved in cell–
cell communication, stimulus response, and biogenesis.
The EV phosphoproteome analyses revealed that the distri-
bution of tyrosine, threonine, and serine phosphorylation (pY,
pT and pS) sites is 2.0%, 14.1%, and 83.9%, respectively, for
microvesicle phosphoproteins, which is similar to previously
reported site distribution in in vivo human phosphoproteomes
(19). Interestingly, the distribution of pY in exosomes is an order
of magnitude higher, at 13.7%, which is quite close to the dis-
tribution of pT, at 16.1% (Fig. 2C). This apparent discrepancy
may reflect the different origins of microvesicles and exosomes.
Microvesicles bud directly from the plasma membrane, whereas
exosomes are represented by endosome-associated proteins, in
which proteins such as integrins, hormone receptors, growth
factor receptors, receptor tyrosine kinases, and nonreceptor ty-
rosine kinases such as Src kinases are involved. A further motif
analysis of pS/T phosphorylation sites revealed overall similar
distribution of general motif to cellular phosphoproteome; for
example, the most abundant class of sites is acidophilic, followed
by proline-directed and basophilic (Fig. S2A). However, in the
exosome phosphoproteome, proline-directed phosphorylation
constitutes only half of that in microvesicles, and therefore the
motif assay does not show dominant –SP- motif in the exosome
phosphoproteome (Fig. S2B).
Cancer-Specific Phosphoproteins in EV. Label-free quantitation of
phosphopeptides with the probability score of phosphorylation
site location over 0.75 was used to identify differential phos-
phorylation events in patients with breast cancer from those in
healthy individuals. We quantified 3,607 and 461 unique phos-
phosites and identified 156 and 271 phosphosites with significant
changes [false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.05 and S0 = 0.2] in
microvesicles and exosomes, respectively (Fig. 3 A and B). Dif-
ferential phosphorylation may be a result of changes in protein
expression or changes of a particular site’s phosphorylation. To
distinguish these factors, we also performed label-free quantita-
tion of total proteomes for both microvesicles and exosomes. We
identified 1,996 proteins, 34.4% of which were also identified
with phosphopeptide enrichment. In comparison, 862 proteins
were detected in the phosphorylation data alone, indicating that
phosphoproteins are typically of low abundance, escaping de-
tection via the shotgun proteomics approach. Quantitative anal-
yses of EV proteomes revealed strikingly similar expression of
most proteins in healthy individuals and patients with cancer (Fig.
3A). In comparison, there are a larger number of phosphorylation
sites with significant changes in patient samples, indicating that
these phosphorylation differences between patients with cancer
and healthy individuals are not a result of changes in protein
expression, and thus reflect phosphorylation truly specific to pa-
tients with cancer. The result also justifies our approach to de-
veloping protein phosphorylation changes, instead of protein
expression changes, as the measurement of disease progression.
EV proteomic analyses also revealed that several protein markers
were only identified in microvesicles or exosomes specifically, but
at the same time, there are some protein markers identified in
both particles (Fig. S3). Western blotting was carried out with the
antibody against CD 31, which is considered an endothelial-
derived microvesicles marker. Although CD 31 was mainly
Fig. 1.
The workflow for EVs phosphoproteomics of plasma samples from
patients with breast cancer and healthy controls. EVs including microvesicles
and exosomes were isolated through sequential high-speed centrifugation,
followed by protein extraction, phase transfer surfactant digestion, and
phosphopeptide enrichment for LC-MS analyses.
3176
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1618088114
Chen et al.
 identified in microvesicles, the Western blotting (WB) experi-
ment and MS data indicated that the current isolation method
based on ultracentrifugation is not entirely specific.
We compared these phosphosites representing 197 unique
phosphopeptides that showed significant increase in patients
with breast cancer with all identified unique phosphopeptides in
EV phosphoproteomes (Figs. S4 and S5). Again, the disparity of
relative abundance of pY/pT/pS and sequence motif in micro-
vesicle and exosomes may be a result of their different origins.
Although phosphopeptides that showed a significant decrease in
patients with breast cancer might be interesting, it is conceivable
that these phosphopeptides were not necessarily down-regulated
in EV pools, as EVs from other cell sources could compensate
them. Therefore, we focused our attention on these 197 unique
phosphopeptides. Motif analyses of the corresponding phos-
phosites found that proline-directed motif (s/tP) decreased sig-
nificantly, whereas the AB motif increased. In terms of cellular
components, the up-regulated phosphoproteins showed a slightly
increased share of membrane proteins in MV, whereas there is
increase in extracellular proteins in exosome. We further com-
pared the 197 unique phosphopeptides with a recent compre-
hensive proteogenomic study in which breast phosphoproteomics
studies were carried out in tissues from 105 patients with breast
cancer (20). We found that a significant portion of these 197 phos-
phopeptides (>60%) were also identified by the proteogenomic
study (Fig. 4A), indicating that EV phosphoproteome is sensitive
and that quantitative analyses of EV phosphoproteomics can
identify phosphorylation events that are disease specific. How-
ever, because EVs can be released from diverse types of cells, the
difference could be the result of distinctive immune response or
other factors in healthy individuals and patients with cancer.
Nevertheless, the results highlight the advantage of analyzing
EV phosphoproteome through liquid biopsy over tissue biopsy,
which is invasive and subject to variation because of the long
procedure.
To better understand the biological roles of differential
phosphorylation events, we examined phosphoproteins specific
to patients with cancer, using STRING to identify enriched gene
ontology categories and signaling networks (21). We found that
several crucial functions related to cancer metastasis, membrane
reorganization, and intercellular communication were enriched
in cancer-specific EV phosphoproteins (Fig. 4B). It is interesting
to reveal the central role of SRC tyrosine kinase with multiple
phosphoproteins identified in the study, which is consistent with
previous studies linking an elevated level of activity of SRC to
cancer progression by promoting other signals. Please note that
although 16% of phosphoproteins that were up-regulated in
patients with cancer are membrane proteins, and because of
relative lack of protein–protein interaction data with membrane
proteins, these membrane proteins were not implicated in the
STRING analysis.
Verification of Phosphorylation Specific to Patients with Cancer,
Using Parallel Reaction Monitoring. Because breast cancer is ex-
tremely heterogeneous, the chance to identify a single diag-
nostic biomarker is likely rare. Instead, the identification of a
panel of candidate markers that reflect the onset and progres-
sion of key disease-related signaling events would be feasible to
offer better prognostic value. In an effort to validate the dif-
ferential phosphorylation of potential markers in patients with
Fig. 2.
(A) The Venn diagram showing the number of unique phosphopeptides identified in microvesicles and exosomes. (B) Classification of the identified
phosphoproteins based on cellular component and biological function. (C) The distribution of serine/threonine/tyrosine (S/T/Y) phosphopeptides in micro-
vesicles and exosomes.
Chen et al.
PNAS
|
March 21, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 12
|
3177
MEDICAL SCIENCES
 cancer, we applied parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) (22) to
quantify individual EV phosphopeptides in plasma from pa-
tients with breast cancer and healthy individuals. Because
phosphospecific antibodies suitable for construction of ELISA
are rarely available, targeted, quantitative MS approaches such as
PRM and MRM (multireaction monitoring) are essential for
initial validation. As a demonstration that PRM can be used to
initially verify candidate phosphoproteins, we selected four phos-
phoproteins: Ral GTPase-activating protein subunit alpha-2
(RALGAPA2), cGMP-dependent protein kinase1 (PKG1), tight
junction protein 2 (TJP2), and nuclear transcription factor, X
box-binding protein 1 (NFX1). These four proteins showed sig-
nificant phosphorylation up-regulation in patients with cancer,
were previously reported as phosphoproteins, and have been
implicated in multiple breast cancer studies (23–26).
Quantitative assays based on PRM were performed with
plasma EV samples from 13 patients with cancer (eight additional
patient samples) and seven healthy controls (one additional
control). The relative abundance data of phosphopeptides from
four individual proteins are presented as a linear box-and-whiskers
plot (Fig. 5). With reference from the figure, RALGAPA2, PKG1,
and TJP2 were observed to be significantly elevated in pa-
tients with breast cancer compared with in control patients.
However, the fold difference is noticeably smaller in PRM
than label-free quantification. In particular, NFX1 phos-
phorylation was only identified in breast cancer samples, and
not in healthy controls, but because of large variation among
individual samples, the difference of NFX1 phosphorylation
on the specific site is statistically inconclusive. The data may
be the reflection of dynamic suppression of targeted proteo-
mics such as MRM and PRM. Nevertheless, large variation
among clinical samples underscores current challenges facing
biomarker validation.
Discussion
MS-based proteomic profiling and quantitation holds enor-
mous promise for uncovering biomarkers. However, successful
applications to human diseases remain limited. This is, in large
part, a result of the complexity of biofluids that have an ex-
tremely wide dynamic range and are typically dominated by a
few highly abundant proteins. This prevents the development
of a coherent, practical pipeline for systemic screening and
validation. Here, we reported in-depth analyses of phospho-
proteomes in plasma EVs and demonstrated the feasibility of
developing phosphoproteins as potential disease biomarkers.
Previous studies typically could only identify a small number of
phosphoproteins in plasma, likely as a result of the presence of
phosphatases in the bloodstream, and the level of phosphor-
ylation does not have any clear meaningful connection to bi-
ological status (27, 28). We presented an MS-based strategy that
includes the isolation of EV particles from human blood, enrich-
ment of EV phosphopeptides, LC-MS/MS analyses, and PRM
quantification for biomarker discovery and quantitative verifica-
tion. We analyzed samples from patients with breast cancer, in
comparison with healthy controls, to identify candidate breast
cancer biomarkers. These candidates will need to be further
evaluated in larger, heterogeneous patient cohorts of defined
breast cancer subtypes in the future. The study highlights our
ability to isolate and identify thousands of phosphopeptides from
limited volumes of biobanked human plasma samples. These
findings provide a proof of principle for this strategy to be used to
explore existing resources for a wide range of diseases.
Recently, liquid biopsies (analysis of biofluids such as plasma
and urine) have gained much attention for cancer research and
clinical care, as they offer multiple advantages in clinical settings,
including their noninvasive nature, a suitable sample source for
longitudinal disease monitoring, better screenshot of tumor
heterogeneity, and so on. Current liquid biopsies primarily focus
on the detection and downstream analysis of circulating tumor
cells and circulating tumor DNA. A major obstacle with the cur-
rent methods is the heterogeneity and extreme rarity of the cir-
culating tumor cells and circulating DNA. EVs offer all the same
attractive advantages of a liquid biopsy, but without the sampling
limitation of circulating tumor cells and circulating tumor DNA.
At present, most of the studies on EVs focus on microRNAs and
a small portion on EV proteins. The ability to detect the genome
output, and in particular functional proteins such as phospho-
proteins, can arguably provide more useful real-time information
about the organism’s physiological functions and disease pro-
gression, such as in the early detection and monitoring of
cancers.
Fig. 3.
(A) The volcano plots representing the quantitative analyses of the
phosphoproteomes (Left) and proteomes (Right) of microvesicles and
exosomes in patients with breast cancer vs. in healthy controls. Significant
changes in proteins and phosphosites in breast cancer that were identified
through a permutation-based FDR t test (FDR = 0.05; S0 = 0.2), based on
three technical replicates. The significant up-regulated proteins and phos-
phosites are colored in red, and down-regulated are colored in black. (B) The
numbers of identified phosphopeptides (class 1), quantified phosphosites
(class 2), and significantly changed phosphosites (class 3) in label-free quanti-
fication. See supplementary figures and Dataset S1 for more detailed infor-
mation. (C) The Venn diagram showing the protein overlap between
phosphoproteomes and proteomes in microvesicles and exosome.
3178
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1618088114
Chen et al.
 Our study clearly indicates that EV phosphoproteomes can
be readily captured and analyzed. It is interesting to know that
EV phosphoproteins are stable over a long period of storage
time (the plasma samples from Indiana Biobank were col-
lected more than 5 y ago), which is critical for applications in
clinical tests. However, a thorough investigation on EV pho-
phoproteome stability might be necessary, as cellular phos-
phorylation events are extremely dynamic and EVs are
circulating in the blood for long periods of time. EV phos-
phoproteomes may mainly represent phosphorylation events
that are constitutively active, and therefore insensitive to
capturing acute events. All these questions can be addressed
with further studies on well-defined EV samples, possibly
using animal models.
Last, although we present here a feasible strategy to develop
phosphoproteins as potential disease markers, it relies on the
isolation of a good quantity of EVs with high reproducibility. At
this stage, the isolation of microvesicles and exosomes is pri-
marily based on differential high-speed centrifugation, which is
not highly specific and is unlikely suitable for clinical settings.
Immunoprecipitation of microvesicles and exosomes may in-
troduce bias and contaminations from plasma proteins. The
development of phosphoproteins as biomarkers is also severely
limited by the availability of phosphospecific antibodies. The
inability to develop ELISA or similar immunobased assays will
inevitably depend on alternative validation methods such as MS-
based targeted quantitation and nonantibody-based methods
(29, 30). The complexity of biofluids and the necessity of in-
cluding EV isolation and phosphopeptide isolation in a sample
preparation will no doubt add extra challenges to the accuracy
of MS-based targeted quantitation of heterogeneous clinical
samples.
Materials and Methods
Plasma samples were collected under approval from Purdue University Hu-
man Research Protection Program and Indiana University Human Subjects
Office Institutional Review Boards, and all patients were properly consented
before samples were collected. Details on EV isolation, protein extraction,
phosphopeptide enrichment, mass spectrometric data acquisition and data
analysis, and PRM quantitation are provided in SI Materials and Methods. All
the identified phosphopeptides are listed in supplementary tables, and all of
the mass spectrometric data have been deposited to the PRIDE partner re-
pository with the dataset identifier PXD005214 (31).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank the IU Simon Cancer Center at Indiana
University School of Medicine for the use of the Tissue Procurement &
Distribution Core, which provided us with the patient plasma samples.
Samples from the Susan G. Komen Tissue Bank at the IU Simon Cancer
Center were also used in this study. We thank contributors, including
Indiana University who collected samples used in this study, as well as donors
and their families, whose help and participation made this work possible. This
study was supported partially by NIH Grants 5R41GM109626, 1R01GM111788,
and 1R41CA210772 and by National Science Foundation Grant 1506752.
Additional support was provided by the Purdue University Center for Cancer
Research (NIH Grant P30 CA023168).
Fig. 4.
(A) The hierarchical clustering analysis of up-regulated phosphopeptides conveys the overlap between EVs in this study and breast cancer tissues by
Mertins et al. (20). The top bars show the clustering of different samples, and gray represents the tumor samples analyzed by Mertins et al., whereas blue bars
are replicates of MV analysis and cobalt green are exosome analyses in this study. The fold change is shown in log 2 value. (B) The STRING network analysis of
up-regulated phosphoproteins in EVs.
Fig. 5.
Four potential markers were validated in 13 patients with breast
cancer and seven healthy individuals, using PRM. Three potential mark-
ers, RALGAPA2, PRKG1, and TJP2, show significant difference (P < 0.05) in
patients with breast cancer compared with healthy controls.
Chen et al.
PNAS
|
March 21, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 12
|
3179
MEDICAL SCIENCES
 1. Hunter T (2000) Signaling–2000 and beyond. Cell 100(1):113–127.
2. Kabuyama Y, Resing KA, Ahn NG (2004) Applying proteomics to signaling networks.
Curr Opin Genet Dev 14(5):492–498.
3. Iliuk AB, Arrington JV, Tao WA (2014) Analytical challenges translating mass
spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics from discovery to clinical applications.
Electrophoresis 35(24):3430–3440.
4. Melo SA, et al. (2015) Glypican-1 identifies cancer exosomes and detects early pan-
creatic cancer. Nature 523(7559):177–182.
5. Gonzales PA, et al. (2009) Large-scale proteomics and phosphoproteomics of urinary
exosomes. J Am Soc Nephrol 20(2):363–379.
6. Boukouris S, Mathivanan S (2015) Exosomes in bodily fluids are a highly stable re-
source of disease biomarkers. Proteomics Clin Appl 9(3-4):358–367.
7. Zhang Y, Wang XF (2015) A niche role for cancer exosomes in metastasis. Nat Cell Biol
17(6):709–711.
8. Costa-Silva B, et al. (2015) Pancreatic cancer exosomes initiate pre-metastatic niche
formation in the liver. Nat Cell Biol 17(6):816–826.
9. Saraswat M, et al. (2015) N-linked (N-) glycoproteomics of urinary exosomes. [Cor-
rected]. Mol Cell Proteomics 14(2):263–276.
10. Sokolova V, et al. (2011) Characterisation of exosomes derived from human cells by
nanoparticle tracking analysis and scanning electron microscopy. Colloids Surf B
Biointerfaces 87(1):146–150.
11. Palmisano G, et al. (2012) Characterization of membrane-shed microvesicles from
cytokine-stimulated β-cells using proteomics strategies. Mol Cell Proteomics 11(8):
230–243.
12. Cocucci E, Meldolesi J (2015) Ectosomes and exosomes: Shedding the confusion be-
tween extracellular vesicles. Trends Cell Biol 25(6):364–372.
13. Jayachandran M, Miller VM, Heit JA, Owen WG (2012) Methodology for isolation,
identification and characterization of microvesicles in peripheral blood. J Immunol
Methods 375(1-2):207–214.
14. Kowal J, et al. (2016) Proteomic comparison defines novel markers to characterize
heterogeneous populations of extracellular vesicle subtypes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
113(8):E968–E977.
15. Kalra H, et al. (2013) Comparative proteomics evaluation of plasma exosome isolation
techniques and assessment of the stability of exosomes in normal human blood
plasma. Proteomics 13(22):3354–3364.
16. Masuda T, Saito N, Tomita M, Ishihama Y (2009) Unbiased quantitation of Escherichia
coli membrane proteome using phase transfer surfactants. Mol Cell Proteomics 8(12):
2770–2777.
17. Olsen JV, et al. (2006) Global, in vivo, and site-specific phosphorylation dynamics in
signaling networks. Cell 127(3):635–648.
18. Bodenmiller B, et al. (2007) PhosphoPep–a phosphoproteome resource for systems
biology research in Drosophila Kc167 cells. Mol Syst Biol 3:139.
19. Sharma K, et al. (2014) Ultradeep human phosphoproteome reveals a distinct regu-
latory nature of Tyr and Ser/Thr-based signaling. Cell Reports 8(5):1583–1594.
20. Mertins P, et al.; NCI CPTAC (2016) Proteogenomics connects somatic mutations to
signalling in breast cancer. Nature 534(7605):55–62.
21. Snel B, Lehmann G, Bork P, Huynen MA (2000) STRING: A web-server to retrieve and
display the repeatedly occurring neighbourhood of a gene. Nucleic Acids Res 28(18):
3442–3444.
22. Bourmaud A, Gallien S, Domon B (2016) Parallel reaction monitoring using
quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer: Principle and applications. Proteomics
16(15-16):2146–2159.
23. Peri S, et al. (2012) Defining the genomic signature of the parous breast. BMC Med
Genomics 5:46.
24. Gong Y, et al. (2014) Inhibition of phosphodiesterase 5 reduces bone mass by sup-
pression of canonical Wnt signaling. Cell Death Dis 5:e1544.
25. Nam S, et al. (2015) A pathway-based approach for identifying biomarkers of tumor
progression to trastuzumab-resistant breast cancer. Cancer Lett 356(2 Pt B):880–890.
26. Yi T, et al. (2014) Quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis reveals system-wide sig-
naling pathways downstream of SDF-1/CXCR4 in breast cancer stem cells. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 111(21):E2182–E2190.
27. Jaros JA, et al. (2012) Clinical use of phosphorylated proteins in blood serum analysed
by
immobilised
metal
ion
affinity
chromatography
and
mass
spectrometry.
J Proteomics 76(Spec No):36–42.
28. Hu L, et al. (2009) Profiling of endogenous serum phosphorylated peptides by tita-
nium (IV) immobilized mesoporous silica particles enrichment and MALDI-TOFMS
detection. Anal Chem 81(1):94–104.
29. Iliuk A, Liu XS, Xue L, Liu X, Tao WA (2012) Chemical visualization of phosphopro-
teomes on membrane. Mol Cell Proteomics 11(9):629–639.
30. Pan L, Iliuk A, Yu S, Geahlen RL, Tao WA (2012) Multiplexed quantitation of protein
expression and phosphorylation based on functionalized soluble nanopolymers. J Am
Chem Soc 134(44):18201–18204.
31. Hermjakob H, Apweiler R (2006) The Proteomics Identifications Database (PRIDE) and
the ProteomExchange Consortium: Making proteomics data accessible. Expert Rev
Proteomics 3(1):1–3.
32. Tyanova S, et al. (2016) The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive
analysis of (prote)omics data. Nat Methods 13(9):731–740.
33. Shannon P, et al. (2003) Cytoscape: A software environment for integrated models of
biomolecular interaction networks. Genome Res 13(11):2498–2504.
34. Bader GD, Hogue CW (2003) An automated method for finding molecular complexes
in large protein interaction networks. BMC Bioinformatics 4:2.
35. Masuda T, Sugiyama N, Tomita M, Ishihama Y (2011) Microscale phosphoproteome
analysis of 10,000 cells from human cancer cell lines. Anal Chem 83(20):7698–7703.
36. Tsai CF, et al. (2014) Sequential phosphoproteomic enrichment through comple-
mentary metal-directed immobilized metal ion affinity chromatography. Anal Chem
86(1):685–693.
37. Rappsilber J, Mann M, Ishihama Y (2007) Protocol for micro-purification, enrichment,
pre-fractionation and storage of peptides for proteomics using StageTips. Nat Protoc
2(8):1896–1906.
38. Cox J, Mann M (2008) MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, in-
dividualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification.
Nat Biotechnol 26(12):1367–1372.
39. O’Shea JP, et al. (2013) pLogo: A probabilistic approach to visualizing sequence mo-
tifs. Nat Methods 10(12):1211–1212.
40. Mi H, Poudel S, Muruganujan A, Casagrande JT, Thomas PD (2016) PANTHER version
10: Expanded protein families and functions, and analysis tools. Nucleic Acids Res
44(D1):D336–D342.
41. MacLean B, et al. (2010) Skyline: An open source document editor for creating and
analyzing targeted proteomics experiments. Bioinformatics 26(7):966–968.
3180
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1618088114
Chen et al.
