 Cheng et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaar4470 (2018)     15 August 2018
SCIE N C E TR A N S LA T I O NA L M EDI CI NE | RE SE ARCH ARTICL E
1 of 12
TUBERCULOSIS
Rapid and specific labeling of single live Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis with a dual-targeting fluorogenic probe
Yunfeng Cheng1*, Jinghang Xie1*, Kyung-Hyun Lee1,2, Rajiv L. Gaur3,4,5, Aiguo Song1,  
Tingting Dai1, Hongjun Ren6, Jiannan Wu7,8, Zhaogang Sun7,8, Niaz Banaei3,4,5,  
Demir Akin9, Jianghong Rao1†
Tuberculosis (TB) remains a public health crisis and a leading cause of infection-related death globally. Although 
in high demand, imaging technologies that enable rapid, specific, and nongenetic labeling of live Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis (Mtb) remain underdeveloped. We report a dual-targeting strategy to develop a small molecular probe 
(CDG-DNB3) that can fluorescently label single bacilli within 1 hour. CDG-DNB3 fluoresces upon activation of the 
-lactamase BlaC, a hydrolase naturally expressed in Mtb, and the fluorescent product is retained through covalent 
modification of the Mtb essential enzyme decaprenylphosphoryl--d-ribose 2′-epimerase (DprE1). This dual-targeting 
probe not only discriminates live from dead Bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) but also shows specificity for Mtb over 
other bacterial species including 43 nontuberculosis mycobacteria (NTM). In addition, CDG-DNB3 can image BCG 
phagocytosis in real time, as well as Mtb in patients’ sputum. Together with a low-cost, self-driven microfluidic 
chip, we have achieved rapid labeling and automated quantification of live BCG. This labeling approach should 
find many potential applications for research toward TB pathogenesis, treatment efficacy assessment, and diagnosis.
INTRODUCTION
Tuberculosis (TB), an infectious disease caused by the slow-growing 
pathogen Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb), kills an estimated 2 mil-
lion people per year according to World Health Organization (1–3). 
Emergence of multidrug resistance with synergistic interaction with 
HIV/AIDS pandemic exacerbated this problem and reactivated a 
global concerted effort on TB research (4, 5). Microbial cell culture 
is considered as the gold standard for TB diagnosis; however, it is 
time-consuming—usually taking 1 to 2 months to complete because 
of the extremely slow growth rate of Mtb. Although nucleic acid 
amplification technology for detecting the DNA material from Mtb 
has advanced (6–8), imaging technologies that allow rapid and specific 
labeling of live Mtb have seen little progress (9). Since the introduction 
of fluorochrome staining by Hagemann in 1937, auramine O has been 
widely adopted for Mtb fluorescent microscopic examination. Aura-
mine O interacts with the mycolic acids within the cell wall of acid- 
fast microorganisms like mycobacteria, but is not specific to Mtb 
and cannot discriminate viable from dead cells. Auramine O sensi-
tivity is also undesirable and varies because of tedious staining, de-
colorizing, and counterstaining procedures (10, 11). Replacing this 
century-old technology has proven not a trivial effort: Molecular 
probes for live Mtb labeling have been developed to target the cap-
sular components such as esterases (12, 13), the d-Ala-d-Ala motif 
of peptidoglycan (14, 15), trehalose mycolyltransesterases (16–19), 
and sulfatases (20), yet none has been shown to be specific for label-
ing Mtb. Esterases, the d-Ala-d-Ala motif, and sulfatases exist not 
only in mycobacteria but also in many other bacterial strains. Treha-
lose mycolyltransesterases are expressed in Actinobacteria phylum 
including mycobacteria; thus, trehalose-based probes do not have 
Mtb specificity either (19).
Recently, electron-deficient nitroaromatic compounds have been 
discovered as a new class of potent anti-TB agents (21–23) that target 
decaprenylphosphoryl--d-ribose 2′-epimerase (DprE1), a periplas-
mic enzyme highly conserved among actinobacteria and required 
for the synthesis of the cell wall arabinans. Specifically, DprE1 re-
duces one nitro group of these compounds to a nitroso derivative 
and covalently modifies this nitroso to form a stable semi-mercaptal 
complex using the cysteine residue in the active site. This mechanism 
presents a possibility to design a fluorescent probe to image Mtb at 
the single-cell level through DprE1-mediated signal retention.
Mtb is intrinsically resistant to nearly all -lactam antibiotics, 
largely because of the production of an ambler class A -lactamase 
named BlaC that is highly conserved through clinical isolates (24, 25). 
By engineering the core structure of a -lactam cephalosporin, we re-
cently developed a fluorogenic probe that is specific to BlaC (26–28), 
but because of signal diffusion, it cannot be used for single-cell Mtb 
labeling. Here, we report a fluorogenic probe that targets both BlaC 
and DprE1 to achieve specific labeling of single live Mtb in less than 
1 hour.
RESULTS
Design of dual-targeting fluorogenic probes
Our dual-targeting fluorogenic probes (CDG-DNBs) contain three 
functional units: a BlaC-sensing unit, a caged fluorescent reporter, 
and a DprE1-binding unit for signal trapping (Fig. 1A). We reasoned 
that CDG-DNBs would pass the Mtb cell wall (mycolate arabinoga-
lactan layer) through porins, because the uptake of cephalosporin 
1Departments of Radiology and Chemistry, Molecular Imaging Program at Stanford, 
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. 2Institute of Bio-
engineering and Nanotechnology, The Nanos, Singapore 138669, Singapore. 
3Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 
94305, USA. 4Clinical Microbiology Laboratory, Stanford University Medical Center, 
Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA. 5Division of Infectious Diseases and Geographic Medi-
cine, Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 
94305, USA. 6Department of Chemistry, Zhejiang Sci-Tech University, Hangzhou 
310018, P. R. China. 7National Tuberculosis Clinical Laboratory, Beijing Chest Hospital, 
Capital Medical University, Beijing 101149, P. R. China. 8Beijing Key Laboratory for 
Drug Resistance Tuberculosis Research, Beijing Tuberculosis and Thoracic Tumor 
Research Institute, Beijing 101149, P. R. China. 9Center for Cancer Nanotechnology 
Excellence, Department of Radiology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
†Corresponding author. Email: jrao@stanford.edu
Copyright © 2018 
The Authors, some 
rights reserved; 
exclusive licensee 
American Association 
for the Advancement 
of Science. No claim  
to original U.S. 
Government Works
 by guest on August 15, 2018
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Cheng et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaar4470 (2018)     15 August 2018
SCIE N C E TR A N S LA T I O NA L M EDI CI NE | RE SE ARCH ARTICL E
2 of 12
antibiotics in mycobacteria is reported to be mediated by porins 
(Fig. 1B) (29). BlaC and DprE1 enzymes located in the peptidogly-
can layer and at the outer membrane would react with the probes: 
BlaC would hydrolyze the lactam ring to activate the fluorophore, 
and DprE1 would covalently bind the anchor unit for fluorescence 
immobilization. The combined actions of BlaC and DprE1 would 
enable fluorescent labeling of single Mtb. Bacteria without any BlaC 
and/or DprE1 activity would not fluorescently label due to the lack 
of fluorescence activation (no BlaC) or signal retention (no DprE1) 
in cells (Fig. 1B).
Targeting DprE1 to label DprE1-expressing bacteria
DprE1 has been extensively studied as a target for anti-TB reagents 
but less explored for bacterial imaging (30). We started by prepar-
ing different electron-deficient nitroaromatic compounds conjugated 
with fluorophores (see synthesis in Supplementary Materials and 
Methods, figs. S1 to S7, and appendix S1) and assessed their labeling 
efficiency. Fluorophores including rhodol, fluorescein, and Tokyo 
Green (TG) were tethered with nitrobenzene analogs that have one 
or two nitro groups (Fig. 2A and figs. S1 and S2). The binding affinity 
upon covalent modification by these analogs was first studied in vitro 
with purified recombinant Mycobacterium smegmatis DprE1 (DprE1SM) 
(fig. S8). As shown in Fig. 2B, fluorophore-dinitrobenzene (DNB) 
analogs labeled DprE1SM with different efficiency: Mono-nitro probes 
(Rd-MNB and FI-MNB) showed negligible fluorescence compared to 
di-nitro analogs, and TG-DNB2 exhibited the highest DprE1SM label-
ing efficiency. This result is consistent with the literature indicating 
that an electron-withdrawing substituent in the meta position is re-
quired for DprE1SM binding (23). TG-DNB2 is favored because it 
closely resembles the optimal DprE1-binding candidate DNB1 
(Fig. 2A) (22). The covalent labeling of DprE1SM by TG-DNB2 was 
further validated with varying conditions. The fluorescent complex 
TG-DNB2-DprE1SM was observed only when DprE1SM, TG-DNB2, and 
the lysate were present simultaneously (Fig. 2C, lane 4). Conditions 
missing the lysate [thus the substrate decaprenylphosphoryl- 
-d-
ribofuranose (DPR) and the cofactor flavin adenine dinucleotide 
(FAD); lane 1], DprE1SM (lane 2), or the DNB function group 
(lane 3) failed to produce the fluorescent complex. As expected, 
Fig. 1. Strategy for specific labeling of Mtb by targeting BlaC and DprE1. (A) Structure of dual-targeting fluorogenic probes (CDG-DNBs) and their reaction with BlaC 
and DprE1: blue, DprE1-targeting group; gray, caged fluorophore; orange, BlaC-sensing group; red, the covalent bond formed between DprE1 and uncaged fluorophore. 
(B) Mechanism of Mtb imaging by CDG-DNBs: (I) CDG-DNBs specifically label Mtb complex expressing BlaC and DprE1 but not other bacterial species not expressing BlaC or 
DprE1. Gray bulb with a light string and an anchor, corresponding to CDG-DNBs structure in (A), indicates the lactam (orange) caged fluorophore (gray bulb) with a trap-
ping unit (blue). (II) Cartoon illustration of Mtb cell wall and membrane layer with glycolipids and mycolic acids (Mycomembrane), lipoarabinomannan (LAM), arabinoga-
lactan (Arabinan), peptidoglycan (PG), and cytoplasmic membrane (CM). CDG-DNBs traverse the mycolate arabinogalactan layer through porins and are activated by BlaC 
and DprE1. (III) Proposed dual processing of CDG-DNBs by BlaC and DprE1 in periplasm (dashed circle in II). Upon BlaC (yellow pacman) activation, the lactam is hydro-
lyzed to uncage the fluorophore, which restores fluorescing (the string is pulled away to switch the light bulb green). The uncaged flurophore is retained in Mtb through 
DprE1 modification (the green bulb is anchored on DprE1).
 by guest on August 15, 2018
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Cheng et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaar4470 (2018)     15 August 2018
SCIE N C E TR A N S LA T I O NA L M EDI CI NE | RE SE ARCH ARTICL E
3 of 12
functional DprE1SM protein was required: There was no labeling 
when it was denatured by heat (lane 5) or 7 M urea/dithiothreitol 
(DTT) reduction (lane 6). Preincubation with DNB1 also blocked 
the labeling of DprE1SM by TG-DNB2 (lane 7). Collectively, these 
data support that labeling of DprE1SM by TG-DNB2 proceeded 
through the reduction-covalent modification mechanism.
We further tested the fluorescence labeling and retention of 
TG-DNBs in different bacteria strains including M. smegmatis, 
Mycobacterium abscessus, Escherichia coli, Streptococcus pneumoniae, 
Staphylococcus aureus, and Corynebacteria diphtheriae. M. smegmatis 
is one of the most commonly used fast-growing mycobacteria in the 
laboratory. M. abscessus is a prevalent human-infecting nontuber-
culosis mycobacterium (NTM) (31). Unlike M. smegmatis containing 
Cys394 in the DprE1SM (MSMEG_6382) active pocket (Cys387 in Mtb), 
the active cysteine residue (Mabs_19977) in M. abscessus DprE1 is 
replaced by an alanine (Ala395; fig. S9); thus, M. abscessus is naturally 
resistant to TG-DNB modification. C. diphtheriae, the pathogenic 
bacterium also belonging to actinobacteria, carries a similar capsular 
structure to mycobacterium and the DprE1 homolog DIP1062 
(72% identical/82% similar to DprE1SM) that contains a conserved 
cysteine residue (Cys414) in its active site (fig. S9) (32). S. pneumoniae 
and S. aureus as human respiratory pathogens were included as 
control strains to test for specificity (33, 34). As shown in Fig. 2D, 
TG-DNB1 and TG-DNB2 both exhibited distinct fluorescence la-
beling in M. smegmatis and C. diphtheriae but not in other strains, 
whereas none of the phosphate-buffered saline (PBS)– or TG-treated 
bacteria showed any fluorescence retention (fig. S10). Confocal fluo-
rescence imaging of M. smegmatis after TG-DNB2 treatment revealed 
Fig. 2. TG-DNBs as the optimal candidates for labeling DprE1-expressing bacteria. (A) Structures of TG, DprE1 inhibitor DNB1, and designed fluorophore-DNB ana-
logs (TG-DNB1 and TG-DNB2). Red rectangle in TG-DNB2 indicates the structural similarity to DNB1. (B) Fluorescent labeling of DprE1SM by fluorescein-DNB (FI-DNB), 
rhodol- 
DNB (Rd-DNB), and TG-DNB analogs (10 M). The whole lysate of freshly cultured M. smegmatis provided the natural substrate DPR and the cofactor FAD that are 
essential for the generation of DNB-DprE1 covalent product. (C) Fluorescence labeling of DprE1SM by TG-DNB2 (10 M). 5*: DprE1SM was preheated at 90°C for 1 hour to 
denature the protein. 6**: Sample buffer was adjusted to 7 M urea and 20 mM DTT after incubation. These samples were further incubated for 1 hour at 37°C. 7***: DprE1SM 
was incubated with 50 M DNB1 before addition of TG-DNB2. (D) Overlaid confocal images (bright-field and green fluorescence; 63×/oil; excitation, 490 nm; emission, 
520 nm) of freshly cultured E. coli, S. pneumoniae, S. aureus, M. abscessus, C. diphtheriae, and M. smegmatis stained with 10 M TG, TG-DNB1, or TG-DNB2 at room tempera-
ture for 1 hour. (E) Confocal images of individual M. smegmatis bacilli treated with TG-DNB2 showing polarized localization of green fluorescence. Scale bars, 2 m. 
(F) Histogram of fluorescence-activated flow cytometry data from bacteria in (D). 1: TG-DNB1–treated group; 2: TG-DNB2–treated group. The relative fluorescence (F/FPBS) 
was calculated by normalizing the mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) against the autofluorescence intensity of PBS-treated bacteria (table S2).
 by guest on August 15, 2018
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Cheng et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaar4470 (2018)     15 August 2018
SCIE N C E TR A N S LA T I O NA L M EDI CI NE | RE SE ARCH ARTICL E
4 of 12
a polarized distribution of DprE1 in M. smegmatis (Fig. 2E). The 
treated bacteria were further analyzed by flow cytometry. Similar to 
the results of fluorescence microscopy, TG-DNB2 gave a 150-fold 
fluorescence enhancement relative to the PBS-treated M. smegmatis, 
and TG-DNB1 showed a 50-fold fluorescence enhancement (Fig. 2F). 
One-hour incubation with 10 M TG-DNB2 at room temperature 
could reach the maximal fluorescence in M. smegmatis without 
affecting its growth curve (figs. S11 and S12). An abolishment of 
the fluorescence by preincubating M. smegmatis with DNB1 before 
TG-DNB2 treatment further validated the specific retention through 
DprE1 covalent modification (fig. S13). Together, these data estab-
lished the use of DprE1 as the target for trapping fluorophores 
through a covalent adduct formation.
Evaluation of dual-targeting probes CDG-DNB1/2 for 
labeling mycobacteria
Because mycobacteria generally express -lactamases (BlaC in Mtb, 
BlaS in M. smegmatis, and Blamab in M. abscessus), we sought to 
convert TG-DNB1 and TG-DNB2 into fluorogenic probes that could 
fluoresce only upon -lactamase activation. Such dual-targeting 
strategy should further enhance selectivity and also lower the back-
ground from nonspecific interactions. On the basis of TG-DNB1 and 
TG-DNB2, we designed, synthesized, and tested two dual-targeting 
probes: CDG-DNB1 and CDG-DNB2 (Fig. 3A, see synthesis in figs. 
S5 and S6). Intense fluorescence was observed in M. smegmatis ex-
pressing both DprE1 and BlaS after incubating with CDG-DNB1 
(fig. S14A) and CDG-DNB2 (Fig. 3B). A control probe (CDG-1) 
without DprE1 targeting showed no fluorescence retention (fig. 
S14A). Flow cytometry analysis revealed that CDG-DNB2–treated 
M. smegmatis could generate an 80-fold enhancement in fluores-
cent intensity (Fig. 3C) and about 30-fold for CDG-DNB1, owing to 
lower DprE1SM labeling efficiency by its uncaged product TG-DNB1 
(fig. S14, B and D). Control strains expressing -lactamase but not 
DprE1 (-lactamase+/DprE1−) included TEM-1 -lactamase (TEM-1 
Bla) transformed E. coli (figs. S14 and 15A), S. pneumoniae, S. aureus, 
and M. abscessus (fig. S14). Although they could hydrolyze CDG-
DNB2 to uncage the fluorophore, no fluorescently labeled cells 
were observed because of the lack of or mutated DprE1 (Fig. 3B). 
C. diphtheriae (-lactamase−/DprE1+), on the other hand, was 
unable to release the caged fluorophore. An inhibition study with a 
-lactamase inhibitor (clavulanic acid) and DprE1 inhibitor (DNB1) 
decreased the fluorescent signals by 60% in M. smegmatis, offering 
further evidence supporting this dual-targeting mechanism (Fig. 3D). 
M. smegmatis expresses a major -lactamase called BlaS and a minor 
-lactamase called BlaE. BlaE is a type 1 -lactamase and is not as 
sensitive to the clavulanic acid inhibition (24), which may explain 
why some -lactamase activity remained in M. smegmatis in the pres-
ence of clavulanic acid.
Next, we tested CDG-DNB2 in freshly cultured Mycobacterium 
bovis Bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) and Mtb H37Rv, both of which 
expressed BlaC and DprE1. After 1-hour incubation at room tem-
perature, both bacilli exhibited sharp green fluorescence, but not in 
CDG-1– or PBS-treated groups (Fig. 3E and fig. S16). Further quan-
tification by flow cytometry showed an 80-fold increase in the fluo-
rescence intensity with CDG-DNB2–treated BCG and 52-fold 
increase in H37Rv (fig. S16). In a BlaC knockout (KO) H37Rv 
strain stained with CDG-DNB2, the fluorescence labeling was com-
promised by 55% but could be restored by BlaC transformation (fig. 
S17). We note that this BlaC KO strain was reported to have addi-
tional -lactamase activity (24), which may contribute to the re-
maining signal.
To demonstrate rapid labeling of live BCG, we tested a nonwash 
CDG-DNB2 staining protocol for real-time imaging. A time- 
dependent 
enhancement of green fluorescence was observed in continuous 
imaging at an interval of 2.5 min for 65 min (movies S1 and S2). 
Prominent green fluorescence in BCG was observed as early as 
15 min. This rapid labeling indicated fast penetration of CDG-DNB2 
into BCG (Fig. 3F), which prompted investigation into whether 
CDG-DNB2 could also label single Mtb in patient sputum. Four 
sputum specimens (two GeneXpert/smear-positive and two nega-
tive) were collected, processed and neutralized, and then stored at 
4°C for 2 days before incubation in 10 M CDG-DNB2/PBS solu-
tion at room temperature for 1 hour. Sediments by centrifugation 
were washed three times and then resuspended in acidic buffer for 
confocal imaging. Single rod-shaped bacilli with emerald green flu-
orescence were observed in both TB-positive specimens (fig. S18).
Rapid and specific labeling of live Mtb by CDG-DNB3
To enhance the specificity of dual-targeting probes for Mtb over other 
mycobacteria, we introduced a methoxy substitution to the lactam 
ring at 7- position on CDG-DNB2 (26, 27) to produce CDG-DNB3 
(Fig. 4A and fig. S7). The quantum yields of CDG-DNB3 (φ = 0.01) 
and its fluorogenic product TG-DNB2 (φ = 0.77) were measured in 
0.1 M phosphate buffer using fluorescein as a reference standard 
(φf l = 0.85; excitation, 490 nm) (35). When incubated with CDG-
DNB3, TEM-1 Bla showed negligible activity, whereas BlaC activated 
fluorescence at a 200-fold lower concentration. CDG-DNB2, in 
contrast, could be activated by both -lactamases (fig. S19). CDG-
DNB3 and its product TG-DNB2, with or without clavulanic acid 
or DNB1, showed little change in their fluorescence (fig. S20), 
which confirmed that observed fluorescence activation with CDG-
DNB3 was from the BlaC enzymatic activity. No fluorescence in-
crease was observed when CDG-DNB3 was treated with DprE1, 
indicating that DprE1 most likely plays the role of a signal-trapping 
unit and, alone, does not cause the fluorescence increase in CDG-
DNB3 (fig. S20). CDG-DNB3 was also characterized in bacteria. 
The findings were congruent with the enzymatic study—that CDG-
DNB3 selectively stained BCG but not M. smegmatis, TEM-1 Bla, or 
BlaC transformed E. coli (Fig. 4B and fig. S21).
Current staining probes, including auramine O and the trehalose 
probe, cannot differentiate Mtb from NTMs. To evaluate the selec-
tivity of CDG-DNB3 for Mtb over NTMs, we tested 45 live NTMs, 
including both rapidly and slowly growing mycobacteria (table S1), 43 
of which showed negligible fluorescent staining except Mycobacterium 
kansasii and Mycobacterium phlei, indicating the unprecedented 
selectivity of CDG-DNB3 toward Mtb. M. kansasii is a slowly grow-
ing mycobacterium and a common cause of pulmonary infections; 
however, M. phlei is a rapidly growing mycobacterium and does not 
cause pulmonary infections (36). Both M. kansasii and M. phlei carry 
DprE1 with a conserved cysteine residue at the active site (32) and 
are known for their excessive -lactamase activity (37). It is likely 
that their -lactamase activity may resemble that of BlaC. Illustration 
of their detailed mechanism may assist future probe optimization to 
discriminate M. kansasii.
As a unique dual-targeting, activity-based probe, the labeling 
mechanism of CDG-DNB3 suggests its potential to differentiate 
live from dead Mtb. We stained freshly cultured or heat-killed (auto-
claved) BCG and E. coli with carbol fuchsin (Ziehl-Neelsen stain), 
 by guest on August 15, 2018
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Cheng et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaar4470 (2018)     15 August 2018
SCIE N C E TR A N S LA T I O NA L M EDI CI NE | RE SE ARCH ARTICL E
5 of 12
auramine O, propidium iodide (PI), and CDG-DNB3 for comparison 
(Fig. 4C and fig. S22). The red fluorescence observed in PI-stained 
BCG and E. coli indicated the loss of membrane integrity after auto-
clave. Carbol fuchsin and auramine O could discriminate between 
BCG and E. coli; however, they were unable to differentiate live from 
dead Mtb. CDG-DNB3–labeled BCG showed an identical growth 
curve to unlabeled BCG, unlike auramine O staining with phenol that 
considerably compromised the viability of stained BCG (fig. S12B). 
We further examined whether CDG-DNB3 could fluorescently label 
BCG for macrophage infection. BCG was preincubated with CDG-
DNB3 before macrophage infection (two to three bacteria per mac-
rophage). As shown in Fig. 4D, green fluorescence of internalized 
individual bacilli in macrophages was observed after 4 hours of in-
fection (movie S3). Although Mtb may be genetically labeled with 
fluorescent proteins for real-time imaging of phagocytosis (38), the 
CDG-DNB3 method can be simply applied to wild-type (WT) Mtb 
and clinical isolates without any genetic manipulation that may pose 
unexpected effects such as changes in virulence.
Last, we applied CDG-DNB3 for staining of sputum. Single rod-
shaped and green fluorescent bacilli were observed in all three 
clinically confirmed positive processed sputum specimens (fig. S23). 
One of the TB patient’s sputum that labeled with CDG-DNB3 
(patient 5) was GeneXpert-positive but auramine O–negative, 
implicating higher sensitivity of CDG-DNB3 than auramine O.
Automated counting of the number of stained BCG with a 
microfluidic chip
Clinically, after smear staining with auramine O, slides are manually 
examined under a fluorescence microscope to count the number 
of stained Mtb, which is a tedious and labor-intensive process. To 
evaluate whether CDG-DNB3 labeling could provide a solution for 
rapid counting of Mtb in combination with microfluidic technology, 
Fig. 3. Characterization of the dual-targeting probe CDG-DNB2. (A) Structure of CDG-DNB2. (B) Overlaid confocal images (bright-field and green fluorescence; 
63×/oil; excitation, 490 nm; emission, 520 nm) of freshly cultured E. coli expressing TEM-1 -lactamase, S. pneumoniae, S. aureus, M. abscessus, C. diphtheriae, and M. smegmatis 
stained with 10 M CDG-DNB2 in PBS at room temperature for 1 hour. (C) Histogram of normalized fluorescence from fluorescence-activated flow cytometry data with 
bacteria in (B). (D) Normalized fluorescence from M. smegmatis treated with CDG-DNB2 with and without -lactamase inhibitor clavulanic acid (10 mM) and DNB1 (50 M), 
analyzed by flow cytometry. M. smegmatis treated with CDG-DNB2 exhibited an average 90-fold increase of MFI over PBS, which was arbitrarily set to 1 to normalize the 
other groups with inhibitors. (E) Overlaid confocal images of freshly cultured BCG and H37Rv Mtb stained with CDG-DNB2. (F) Real-time confocal imaging of CDG-DNB2–
treated BCG aggregates showing a time-dependent enhancement of green fluorescence.
 by guest on August 15, 2018
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Cheng et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaar4470 (2018)     15 August 2018
SCIE N C E TR A N S LA T I O NA L M EDI CI NE | RE SE ARCH ARTICL E
6 of 12
Fig. 4. Specific labeling of live Mtb by CDG-DNB3. (A) Structure of CDG-DNB3. (B) Histogram of fluorescence-activated flow cytometry analysis with freshly cultured 
E. coli (TOP10) expressing TEM-1 -lactamase, E. coli (TOP10) expressing BlaC, M. smegmatis, and BCG stained with 10 M CDG-DNB2 or CDG-DNB3 in PBS at room tempera-
ture for 1 hour. 1: CDG-DNB2–treated group; 2: CDG-DNB3–treated group. (C) Microscopic imaging of freshly cultured (top row) and 121°C autoclaved (bottom row) BCG 
stained by Ziehl-Neelsen reagents, auramine O (green; excitation, 490 nm; emission, 520 nm), PI (red; excitation, 535 nm; emission, 617 nm), or CDG-DNB3 (10 M, 1 hour). 
(D) Infection of macrophages by CDG-DNB3–labeled individual BCG bacilli: (I) bright-field image of BCG-infected macrophages (bacilli are indicated by arrows); (II) overlay 
of bright-field and fluorescence images showing the localization of CDG-DNB3–stained bacilli (green; excitation, 490 nm; emission, 520 nm); (III) overlay of fluorescence 
images showing the bacilli (green) and 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI)–stained nucleus (blue; excitation, 358 nm; emission, 461 nm); (IV) overlay of fluorescence 
image showing the bacilli, nucleus, and the macrophage plasma membrane (magenta; excitation, 649 nm; emission, 666 nm); (V to VII) orthogonal views (XY, XZ, and YZ ) 
of the bacilli indicated by arrows in (IV). ImageJ was used for image processing and stack projection.
 by guest on August 15, 2018
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Cheng et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaar4470 (2018)     15 August 2018
SCIE N C E TR A N S LA T I O NA L M EDI CI NE | RE SE ARCH ARTICL E
7 of 12
we designed a quantification strategy using a self-driven micro-
fluidic chip (Fig. 5 and fig. S24). When the CDG-DNB3–labeled 
BCG was loaded on the chip, the fluid was dragged to flow along the 
channel by the capillary pump with no need for any extra pumping 
device (“self-driven” feature) (Fig. 5, A and B). Four parallel 
channels across the detection window allowed for rapid detection 
and automatic counting of fluorescent BCG using a publicly avail-
able software (Fig. 5C). In an exemplary test run (movie S4), a total 
of 306 bacteria were detected in 2.42 s with a flow rate of 2.5 nl/s, 
corresponding to a concentration of 1.6 × 107 colony-forming units 
(CFU)/ml in a volume of 6 nl, consistent with calculation by 
measuring optical density of the BCG solution [optical density at 
600 nm (OD600)].
DISCUSSION
Noninvasive fluorescence imaging technologies for bacteria have re-
vealed greater insights into the small organisms (39), from membrane 
and intracellular structures to specific protein localization and traf-
ficking dynamics. A common approach for fluorescent labeling of 
live bacteria uses the genetic fusion of a fluorescent protein or epi-
tope tag to a protein of interest. In comparison, small-molecule fluo-
rescent probes can enable visualization of many nonprotein targets, 
but the small size and thick cell envelope of bacteria present big 
challenges for probe development. In particular, Mtb is known for 
having a nearly impenetrable cell wall. Here, we report a powerful 
dual-targeting approach in designing small-molecule probes for 
rapid and specific labeling of live Mtb.
We propose the use of two enzymes in the cell wall and mem-
brane layers of Mtb as imaging markers: BlaC, an ambler class A 
-lactamase highly conserved through clinical isolates, and DprE1, 
a periplasmic enzyme required for the biosynthesis of the cell wall 
arabinans and highly conserved among actinobacteria. BlaC has been 
explored for Mtb detection, and preliminary testing with sputum 
samples showed promises for TB diagnosis (27), but targeting BlaC 
alone does not allow for single Mtb labeling (fig. S14A). The combi-
nation of BlaC and DprE1 in a dual-targeting probe offers consider-
able advantages. As our results demonstrate, this strategy is specific 
for Mtb over other clinically prevalent strains, including 43 of 45 
closely related NTMs we tested. Fluorophore and lactam conjugates 
have been reported to target penicillin-binding proteins (PBPs) for 
bacterial labeling (40, 41). However, it is unknown whether PBPs 
can serve as the target for specific labeling of Mtb. It is unlikely that 
our probes are processed by PBPs due to the modifications on the 
lactam; those bacteria without -lactamase cannot be fluorescently 
labeled with our probes even with the expression of DprE1 (for 
example, C. diphtheriae).
Another important feature provided by the dual-targeting 
approach is the ability to label single-cell live Mtb. Live BCG was 
successfully labeled, without any genetic modification, to image 
phagocytosis by macrophages. It is likely that our probe could simi-
larly rapidly and specifically label live Mtb in clinical samples to detect 
and isolate labeled mycobacteria using cell sorting for further anal-
ysis, such as culturing or drug sensitivity assays. We also designed a 
microfluidic device and workflow to automate quantification of indi-
vidual fluorescently labeled BCG; it took about 20 min for a total 
volume of 10 l of stained bacteria mixture to flow through the de-
tection window. In principle, this method could lead to a detectable 
concentration of 100 CFU/ml, assuming one copy of BCG in the 
loading mixture. Further optimization, such as increasing the number 
of channels on the chip to load larger sample volumes, may allow an 
even more rapid detection and a lower detection limit. The materials 
and fabrication costs of each off-the-shelf chip are estimated to be 
$0.65 in an academic research setting but may be reduced by 5 to 
10 times in a large-scale manufacturing facility via the use of thermo-
plastic polymer chips and injection molding. The combination of rapid, 
specific CDG-DNB3 labeling and the low-cost microfluidic chip pro-
vide a simple and cost-effective solution to automated counting of 
live Mtb in samples.
In summary, this study reports a dual-targeting approach using 
the expression of BlaC and DprE1 in Mtb to develop CDG-DNB3, a 
fluorogenic probe that enables rapid, specific fluorescent labeling 
and quantification of single live Mtb. A series of biochemical assays 
and microscopic imaging experiments have successfully validated 
the BlaC/DprE1 dual-targeting mechanism and demonstrated that 
CDG-DNB3 can differentiate Mtb from other clinically prevalent 
strains, distinguish live from dead BCG, and image BCG infection 
in macrophages. Finally, a low-cost, self-driven microfluidic chip was 
successfully developed to rapidly count the number of CDG-DNB3– 
stained BCG. This rapid, noninvasive, specific labeling and counting 
of live Mtb positions CDG-DNB3 as a potentially powerful probe for 
pathogenesis study, drug and vaccine screening, drug susceptibility 
testing, treatment efficacy assessment, and diagnosis of TB.
Fig. 5. Rapid and specific quantification of live BCG with a microfluidic chip. 
(A) Overview of workflow. BCG was stained with CDG-DNB3 in PBS at room tem-
perature (RT) for 1 hour, and then 10 l of incubated mixture was applied onto the 
loading/sample collector in the chip. (B) Schematic of image capture using a 
microfluidic device. The capillary pump with a vent drove the flow of the sample 
from the loading/sample collector, whereas the collector and delay valves filtrated 
and retarded the mixture to allow single BCG imaging in detection chamber under 
fluorescence illumination. Cartoon shows a microscopic view of the channels with 
flowing BCG. LED, light-emitting diode. (C) Representative frame of image captured 
by the camera over the detection chamber (green fluorescence; excitation, 490 nm; 
emission, 520 nm) with fluorescence intensity peaks quantified in arbitrary units 
(a.u.) of up to 250 and 50 per scale (right). Yellow lines define the detection window 
used by the software to analyze the fluorescent signal. Each peak (red triangle) 
indicates one fluorescently labeled bacterium.
 by guest on August 15, 2018
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Cheng et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaar4470 (2018)     15 August 2018
SCIE N C E TR A N S LA T I O NA L M EDI CI NE | RE SE ARCH ARTICL E
8 of 12
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study design
The goal of this study was to develop a rapid and specific fluorogenic 
probe for the detection of Mtb in both laboratorial and clinical set-
tings. The probe CDG-DNB3 carries a caged fluorophore that fluo-
resces only upon enzymatic activation by Mtb-specific BlaC. The 
fluorescence product generated by BlaC cleavage was retained 
through a covalent modification at the cysteine residue 387 of 
DprE1, an essential enzyme for Mtb cell wall biosynthesis. To dis-
cover the optimal structure to label DprE1, we synthesized a series 
of fluorophore-conjugated dinitrobenzamide (DNB) analogs and 
tested them against various bacterial strains including DprE1+ myco-
bacterial and corynebacterial strains, and other clinically prevalent 
but DprE1− or cysteine-mutated bacterial and mycobacterial strains. 
Next, the DprE1-targeting unit was introduced into the BlaC-targeting 
cephalosporin derivative to generate CDG-DNB3, selective for Mtb 
over other non-Mtb mycobacterial strains (NTMs). As an enzyme- 
dependent probe, CDG-DNB3 was evaluated for differentiating 
NTMs and viability of BCG and labeling of live BCG for imaging 
phagocytosis in real time. The utility of the dual-targeting probes 
was also tested in two small groups of TB patient sputum. In the 
United States, fresh patient sputum specimens were collected by the 
Clinical Microbiology Laboratory at Stanford University Medical 
Center. Experiments in this work used discarded sputum samples, 
and no institutional review board approval was required. In China, 
ethics approval for the use of the six patient samples was provided 
by the Ethics Committee of the Beijing Chest Hospital affiliated to 
the Capital Medical University. The experiments with biohazard 
materials were designed and performed adhering to the biosafety 
guidelines at Stanford University and Beijing Chest Hospital. Finally, 
a portable microfluidic device was designed, and a workflow was 
applied for automated counting of CDG-DNB3–labeled BCG.
Expression and purification of M. smegmatis DprE1
The general expression and purification procedures were described 
previously (42). In brief, a single colony of BL21(DE3) containing the 
pET-SUMO-DprE1 plasmid was inoculated into 100 ml of lysogeny 
broth (LB) with kanamycin (50 g/ml), followed by incubation at 
37°C and 250 rpm overnight. The overnight culture was added into 
500 ml of fresh LB with kanamycin (50 g/ml) and 1 mM isopropyl 
-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside. After incubation for up to 6 hours at 
37°C and 250 rpm, bacteria were harvested and pellet was frozen at 
−80°C before resuspension in 22.5 ml of lysis buffer [25 mM Hepes 
(pH 7.4), 300 mM KCl, and 10% glycerol]. Lysozyme (2.5 ml of 7.5 mg 
of lysozyme per milliliter in lysis buffer) was used to lyse the bacteria. 
Halt proteinase inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was added 
to the bacterial lysate before two rounds of metal affinity purification 
using TALON metal affinity resin. The affinity-purified DprE1sm 
fraction was eluted using lysis buffer containing up to 500 mM imid-
azole. DprE1sm was then dialyzed into Hepes buffer [25 mM Hepes 
and 10% glycerol (pH 7.4)] and stored at −80°C. Tag cleavage was 
achieved by overnight incubation with SUMO protease (Thermo 
Fisher Scientific), followed by a third-round affinity purification to 
remove both His6-SUMO tag and SUMO protease.
Sample preparation for SDS-PAGE analysis
Typically, aliquots of the purified protein DprE1sm [50 M in 50 mM 
Hepes/10% glycerol (pH 7.5)] were incubated with 10 M FL, 
FL-DNB1/2, FL-MNB, Rd-Boc, Rd-DNB, Rd-MNB, or TG-DNB1/2 
[from 1 mM stock in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)] and 100-g 
whole lysate of M. smegmatis containing phenylmethylsulfonyl 
fluoride (1 mM) in a final volume of 30 l at 37°C for 1 hour. The 
whole lysate of freshly cultured M. smegmatis provided the natural 
substrate DPR and the cofactor FAD that are essential for the gen-
eration of DNB-DprE1 covalent products. As negative controls, (i) 
DprE1sm was preheated for 1 hour at 90°C to denature the protein. 
(ii) The sample buffer was adjusted to 7 M urea and 20 mM DTT 
after incubation. These samples were further incubated for 1 hour 
at 37°C. (iii) DprE1sm was incubated with 50 M DNB1 for 1 hour 
before addition of TG-DNB2. Samples were treated with 4× LDS 
loading buffer (Life Technologies) without heating and analyzed by 
SDS–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) (NuPAGE, Life 
Technologies). The analysis was performed in duplicate.
Bacteria growth and staining
BCG [American Type Culture Collection (ATCC) 35734], Mtb H37Rv 
(ATCC 25618), M. smegmatis MC2155 (ATCC 700084), S. pneumoniae 
(ATCC 49619), S. aureus (ATCC 25923), M. abscessus (ATCC 19977), 
and C. diphtheriae (ATCC 13812) were purchased from ATCC. All 
other NTMs were purchased from ATCC or other specified DSMZ 
(Deutsche Sammlung von Mikroorganismen und Zellkulturen).
In general, M. smegmatis, BCG, and H37Rv were cultured in Middle-
brook 7H9 broth supplemented with ADC enrichment and 0.1% 
Tween 80. E. coli (TOP10) was grown in LB medium. S. pneumoniae 
was grown on tryptic soy agar plates supplemented with defibri-
nated sheep blood at 5% CO2 and 37°C. S. aureus, M. abscessus, and 
C. diphtheriae were grown on tryptic soy agar plates supplemented 
with defibrinated sheep blood at 37°C. The unit CFU/ml was deter-
mined by measuring the optical absorbance at 600 nm (OD600).
For growth curve, M. smegmatis was pretreated with PBS, 10 M 
TG-DNB2, and 10 M CDG-DNB2 for 1 hour or 2% NaOH for 
20 min at room temperature. Culture of pretreated M. smegmatis 
was started at OD600 = 0.1 in 7H9 medium for all groups at 37°C and 
220 rpm. OD600 of each sample was measured every 2 hours over 
14 hours. Similarly, BCG was pretreated with PBS and 10 M CDG-
DNB3 at room temperature for 1 hour or auramine O (AlphaTec). 
Culture of pretreated BCG was started at OD600 = 0.4 to 0.5 in 7H9 
medium for all conditions at 37°C and 80 rpm. OD600 of each sample 
was measured daily for 10 days. Experiments were repeated three times.
For TG, TG-DNB1/2, and CDG-DNB2/3 analog staining in the 
laboratory, 500 M probes in pure DMSO were frozen at −80°C as 
stock solutions. Working solution (20 M) was prepared freshly by 
diluting stock solution in PBS. Staining was done by mixing bacteria 
in PBS resuspension and 20 M working solution in a 1:1 volume 
ratio, left in room temperature for 1 hour, then centrifuged at 3000g, 
and washed three times stringently with PBS. A light safe tube or foil 
wrap was used to prevent photobleaching during incubation. Bacteria 
were fixed in 10% formalin for 30 min before centrifugation and 
resuspension in saline for flow cytometry analysis. For CDG-DNB3 
staining to differentiate live and autoclaved BCG or E. coli, a wash 
step with alcohol/water was performed immediately after staining, and 
two additional PBS washes were performed before formalin fixing.
For Ziehl-Neelsen staining, briefly, freshly cultured or 121°C/20-min 
autoclaved BCG and E. coli were smeared and fixed by gentle heat 
on glass slides and then stained with carbol fuchsin for 3 min. The 
smears were decolorized with acidic alcohol and then rinsed with 
sterile water, followed by counterstaining with methylene blue for 1 to 
2 min, rinsing, and drying for immediate microscope imaging.
 by guest on August 15, 2018
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Cheng et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaar4470 (2018)     15 August 2018
SCIE N C E TR A N S LA T I O NA L M EDI CI NE | RE SE ARCH ARTICL E
9 of 12
For auramine O staining, briefly, freshly cultured or 121°C/20-min 
autoclaved BCG and E. coli were smeared and fixed by methanol on 
glass slides and then stained with auramine O for 15 min. Smears 
were rinsed with sterile water and decolorized by acidic alcohol for 
3 min. The smears were rinsed again with sterile water, counter-
stained by potassium permanganate for 4 min, and finally rinsed 
and dried for immediate microscope imaging.
For PI staining, briefly, freshly cultured or 121°C/20-min auto-
claved BCG and E. coli were incubated in 20 M PI solution at room 
temperature for 1 hour and then washed three times with PBS. 
Bacteria were fixed in 10% formalin solution for 30 min before 
inspected under a microscope.
Bacteria analysis using flow cytometry and microscope
Flow cytometry analysis was done with instrumentation and assist-
ance provided by the Stanford Shared FACS Facility. Bacteria were 
analyzed using a FACScan with a four-laser, 12-color DxP12 Cytek 
upgrade (Becton Dickinson, Cytek Biosciences) and evaluated 
according to their granularity [side scatter (SSC)] property on a log 
scale, excited by 488 nm later, and filtered with 560-nm short-pass 
filter and 525/50-nm band-pass filter. Flow cytometry data analysis 
was done using FlowJo v10 software. The MFI was collected and 
plotted against the natural autofluorescence of bacteria.
All bacteria images were taken either with a Zeiss AxioImager 
M1 upright widefield fluorescence/DIC microscope or with a Zeiss 
LSM710 inverted confocal microscope. Images were processed and 
converted by ImageJ.
Inhibition study with M. smegmatis
Freshly cultured M. smegmatis (100 l) was pretreated with PBS, 
clavulanic acid (2 mg/ml), 50 M DNB1, or clavulanic acid + DNB1 
at 37°C for 2 hours and then incubated with PBS or 10 M CDG-
DNB2 in a final volume of 200 l at room temperature for 3 hours. 
Cells were washed with PBS twice before analysis by flow cytom-
etry. M. smegmatis treated with CDG-DNB2 exhibited averagely 
90-fold increase of MFI over PBS, which was arbitrarily set to 1 to 
normalize the other samples with inhibitors. Inhibition study with 
TG-DNB2 by DNB1 was done under similar conditions.
Inhibition study with BlaC KO H37Rv
Two milliliters of freshly cultured WT, BlaC KO, and vector control 
H37Rv at OD600 = 1 was pelleted and pretreated with 50 M DNB1 
at 37°C in a 200-l volume for 1 hour. Two hundred microliters of 
(20 M) CDG-DNB2 was added into each tube to reach a 10 M 
final concentration and then incubated at room temperature for 
2 hours. Mycobacteria were washed three times with PBS, fixed in 
10% (v/v) formalin for 30 min, and then analyzed by flow cytometry. 
PBS-treated WT, BlaC KO, BlaC compensated, and vector control 
H37Rv were also analyzed to show the fold increase of fluorescence 
signal by CDG-DNB2. The fold increase of fluorescence in WT 
H37Rv by CDG-DNB2 over PBS was arbitrarily set to 1 to normalize 
the other groups.
Western blot analysis
The procedures for Western blot have been previously described 
(43). In brief, E. coli TOP10 strains expressing TEM-1 -lactamase 
(TEM-1) or BlaC were lysed with a bead beater in PBS containing 
proteinase inhibitors. Twenty-five micrograms of lysates was loaded 
on NuPAGE gel for electrophoresis at 200 V for 90 min. Wet transfer 
was performed using the Bio-Rad transfer kit at 300 mA for 90 min. 
The transferred nitrocellulose membrane was blocked in PBS con-
taining 5% bovine serum albumin and 0.1% Tween 20 for 1 hour. 
Primary antibody (His-probe mouse monoclonal IgG, Invitrogen) 
incubation (1:2000) was performed in the blocking buffer overnight 
at 4°C. The membrane was then washed four times with PBS con-
taining 0.1% Tween 20. Secondary antibody incubation (LI-COR don-
key anti-mouse IgG IRDye 680 or anti-rabbit IgG IRDye 800CW, 
1:10,000) was performed in the blocking buffer for 2 hours at room 
temperature. After washing four times with PBS containing 0.1% 
Tween 20, the membrane was analyzed using a LI-COR Odyssey 
imaging system.
Visualization of BCG in macrophage by CDG-DNB3
Mouse RAW 264.7 macrophages were grown on sterile coverslips 
in a six-well plate in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) 
containing 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum at 5% CO2 and 37°C to 70 
to 80% confluence. Freshly cultured BCG were treated with 10 M 
CDG-DNB3 at room temperature for 1 hour and then resuspended in 
serum-free DMEM to infect macrophages (two to three bacteria per 
macrophage). After 4 hours of infection, macrophages were washed 
to remove free bacteria and then incubated with CellMask Deep 
Red Cell Plasma staining reagent in 1× dilution at 37°C for 10 min. 
Cells were washed and fixed in 10% formalin. Cells were permeabi-
lized, then incubated with 300 nM DAPI solution for 5 to 10 min, 
and washed immediately before mounting for imaging. Images of 
infected macrophages were obtained by confocal microscopy (Zeiss 
LSM710 inverted confocal microscope) using a 63×/oil immersion 
objective. The bright-field image was from a single image capture. All 
fluorescence images were gathered sequentially and stacked. Essen-
tial sequential z sections of stained cells were recorded for genera-
tion of stacked images through cells. Multichannel three-dimensional 
projections of fluorescent images were constructed from sequential 
z sections of cells assembled in ImageJ. All collected fluorescence 
images were deconvoluted by ImageJ [W. Rasband, National Insti-
tutes of Health (NIH)]. Percentage colocalization of material was 
calculated using the colocalization function in ImageJ.
Staining of processed sputum by CDG-DNB2 and CDG-DNB3
Sputum specimens were processed with NaOH/N-acetyl-l-cysteine, 
neutralized, and stored in PBS at 4°C for 2 days before incubation in 
10 M CDG-DNB2/PBS solution at room temperature for 1 hour. 
Sediments were obtained by centrifugation at 4000g for 5 min be-
fore washing three times with PBS. Stained samples were fixed in 10% 
formalin for 30 min, washed once by PBS with last resuspension in 
citrate buffer (pH 3), and imaged with a Zeiss LSM710 inverted con-
focal microscope.
For CDG-DNB3, patients’ sputum specimens were collected freshly 
by the National Tuberculosis Clinical Laboratory at Beijing, China. 
Specimens were processed with NaOH/N-acetyl-l-cysteine, neutralized, 
and then incubated in 10 M CDG-DNB3/PBS solution at room tem-
perature for 1 hour. Sediments were obtained by centrifugation at 
4000g for 5 min, then washed three times with PBS before resuspen-
sion in citrate buffer (pH 3), and imaged with a Nikon fluorescence 
microscope.
Microfluidic device design and fabrication
The design and fabrication of the capillary pump–driven bacteria- 
counting microfluidic device were performed using photoresist molds 
 by guest on August 15, 2018
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Cheng et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaar4470 (2018)     15 August 2018
SCIE N C E TR A N S LA T I O NA L M EDI CI NE | RE SE ARCH ARTICL E
10 of 12
and standard soft lithography methods. The device layout was 
designed using a CAD drawing program, and the final design was 
printed on high-resolution transparency sheets, which were used as 
photolithography masks during the fabrication of the polydimethyl-
siloxane (PDMS; Dow Corning Sylgard 184) microfluidic chips with 
the features shown in fig. S24. The device has a sample loading area 
(a), a fluid flow delaying region (b), an observation chamber with four 
separate channels (c), and a capillary pump (d) that drives the fluid 
flow. The channel is 100 m wide and 100 m high in the flow- 
delaying region (b), and each channel is 30 m wide and 100 m high 
in the observation chamber (c). Briefly, a clean and dry silicon wafer 
(100 mm in diameter and 500 m in thickness) was treated with 
hexamethyldisilazane (Sigma-Aldrich) vapor for 2 min in a clean 
room environment. Subsequently, the wafer was spin-coated with 
photoresist (Shipley SJR 5740) at 2000 rpm (ramping time, 15 s; spin 
time, 60 s). The wafer was then soft-baked in an oven at 90°C for 
60 min. The transparency mask from above was used for the photo-
lithography. The wafer was then exposed to UV light and developed 
in 20% Microposit Developer 2401 for 1.5 min to form the final molds 
for elastomeric chip fabrication. The microfluidic devices were pre-
pared via negative casting on the molds using PDMS. Sylgard 184 A 
and B components were mixed at a ratio of 20:1 (w/w), degassed in 
a vacuum chamber, and spin-coated onto the photoresist molds at 
5000 rpm. The curing was carried out in an 80°C oven for 1 to 3 hours, 
and at the end of the curing period, the fabricated devices were peeled 
off from the molds gently and bonded to microscope slides imme-
diately by conformal contact pressure, followed by an additional 
baking at 100°C from 2 hours to overnight.
Optical setup, image capturing, and bacteria counting by 
image analysis
The bacteria-counting device on a standard glass microscope slide was 
mounted on an inverted microscope with a 63× objective (Olympus 
America Inc.) for observation under fluorescence illumination. The 
chip was then loaded with the BCG/PBS to be analyzed using the 
capillary pumping action of the microfluidic device. The florescence 
pictures of the stained bacteria were captured at rates of 33 frames/s 
by a digital video camera mounted on the microscope (ORCA- 
Flash4.0, Hamamatsu) and attached to a computer. In total, 80 frames 
were captured in 2.42 s. It took 11 frames (1/3 second) for a bacterium 
to pass through the imaging window (with a length of 210 m). 
Movie S4 contains a four times slower version of the captured video 
defined in green.
For counting the fluorescently stained bacteria, images were col-
lected in grayscale, analyzed, and processed by ImageJ. Every image 
was subtracted from its next frame to remove the background noise. 
The generated hyperstack was median-filtered with 2-pixel dimen-
sions to further remove the noise before the sum image of the stack 
was subtracted from each frame to highlight moving objects in the 
image. Then, the final frames were automatically analyzed by a custom 
plugin filter [Broadly Applicable Routines (BAR) for ImageJ] to find 
the peaks in the gray intensity profile plot values. A baseline threshold 
for each image stack was manually set to obtain the peak counts cor-
responding to bacterial counts for each frame, and this was tallied to 
a total count across the entire loaded sample volume processed.
Statistical analysis
GraphPad Prism 5 was used for plotting and statistical analysis. Sig-
nificant difference was determined by performing one-way (Fig. 3D 
and fig. S13C) or two-way (fig. S17) analysis of variance (ANOVA), 
followed by post hoc Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test to de-
termine the statistical significance with 95% confidence intervals, with 
*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and ***P < 0.001. All error bars in the figures 
represent ±SD (n = 3). Individual subject-level data are reported in 
table S2.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
www.sciencetranslationalmedicine.org/cgi/content/full/10/454/eaar4470/DC1
Materials and Methods
Fig. S1. Synthesis of FI-DNB1, FI-DNB2, and FI-MNB.
Fig. S2. Synthesis of Rd-DNB and Rd-MNB.
Fig. S3. Synthesis of TG-DNB1.
Fig. S4. Synthesis of TG-DNB2.
Fig. S5. Synthesis of CDG-DNB1.
Fig. S6. Synthesis of CDG-DNB2.
Fig. S7. Synthesis of CDG-DNB3.
Fig. S8. SDS-PAGE analysis of purified M. smegmatis DprE1.
Fig. S9. DprE1 DNA sequence alignment.
Fig. S10. Microscopic imaging and flow cytometry analysis of bacteria labeled by TG and 
TG-DNB analogs.
Fig. S11. Characterization of TG-DNB2 in M. smegmatis.
Fig. S12. Growth curve of M. smegmatis and BCG.
Fig. S13. Inhibition study of TG-DNB2 with DNB1.
Fig. S14. Characterization of CDG-1 and CDG-DNB analogs in bacteria.
Fig. S15. Western blots detecting the expression of TEM-1 Bla and BlaC in transformed E. coli.
Fig. S16. Labeling of BCG and H37Rv by CDG-DNB2.
Fig. S17. Inhibition study with BlaC KO, BlaC compensated, and control vector transformed 
H37Rv and DNB1.
Fig. S18. Labeling of Mtb in processed sputum by CDG-DNB2.
Fig. S19. Evaluation of selectivity of CDG-DNB2/3 for BlaC.
Fig. S20. Fluorescence intensity of CDG-DNB3 and TG-DNB2 with or without clavulanic acid, 
DNB1, or DprE1.
Fig. S21. Characterization of CDG-DNB3 in M. smegmatis, BCG, and TEM-1 Bla or BlaC 
transformed E. coli.
Fig. S22. Specific labeling of viable BCG by CDG-DNB3.
Fig. S23. Labeling of Mtb in processed sputum by CDG-DNB3.
Fig. S24. Overall layout and the functional regions of the microfluidic bacteria-counting device.
Table S1. List of NTMs stained with CDG-DNB3.
Table S2. List of individual subject-level data shown on bar graphs in all figures.
Movie S1. Real-time fluorescence imaging of CDG-DNB2–treated BCG aggregates.
Movie S2. Real-time bright-field imaging of CDG-DNB2–treated BCG aggregates in movie S1.
Movie S3. Infection of macrophages by CDG-DNB3–labeled individual BCG bacilli.
Movie S4. Automated counting of CDG-DNB3–labeled BCG bacilli with microfluidic chip.
Appendix S1. 1H and 13C nuclear magnetic resonance and mass spectroscopy spectra.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
 1. A. Zumla, M. Raviglione, R. Hafner, C. F. von Reyn, Tuberculosis. N. Engl. J. Med. 368, 
745–755 (2013).
 2. World Health Organization, Global Tuberculosis Report 2015 (World Health Organization, 
2016).
 3. C. Dye, A. Bassili, A. L. Bierrenbach, J. F. Broekmans, V. K. Chadha, P. Glaziou, P. G. Gopi, 
M. Hosseini, S. Kim, D. Manissero, I. Onozaki, H. L. Rieder, S. Scheele, F. van Leth, 
M. van der Werf, B. G. Williams, Measuring tuberculosis burden, trends, and the impact of 
control programmes. Lancet Infect. Dis. 8, 233–243 (2008).
 4. A. Zumla, I. Abubakar, M. Raviglione, M. Hoelscher, L. Ditiu, T. D. McHugh, S. B. Squire, 
H. Cox, N. Ford, R. McNerney, B. Marais, M. Grobusch, S. D. Lawn, G.-B. Migliori, P. Mwaba, 
J. O‘Grady, M. Pletschette, A. Ramsay, J. Chakaya, M. Schito, S. Swaminathan, Z. Memish, 
M. Maeurer, R. Atun, Drug-resistant tuberculosis—Current dilemmas, unanswered 
questions, challenges, and priority needs. J. Infect. Dis. 205, S228–S240 (2012).
 5. N. R. Gandhi, P. Nunn, K. Dheda, H. S. Schaaf, M. Zignol, D. van Soolingen, P. Jensen, 
J. Bayona, Multidrug-resistant and extensively drug-resistant tuberculosis: A threat to 
global control of tuberculosis. Lancet 375, 1830–1843 (2010).
 6. K. Dheda, M. Ruhwald, G. Theron, J. Peter, W. C. Yam, Point-of-care diagnosis of 
tuberculosis: Past, present and future. Respirology 18, 217–232 (2013).
 7. M. Bates, A. Zumla, The development, evaluation and performance of molecular 
diagnostics for detection of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Expert Rev. Mol. Diagn. 16, 
307–322 (2016).
 8. R. McNerney, P. Daley, Towards a point-of-care test for active tuberculosis: Obstacles and 
opportunities. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 9, 204–213 (2011).
 by guest on August 15, 2018
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Cheng et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaar4470 (2018)     15 August 2018
SCIE N C E TR A N S LA T I O NA L M EDI CI NE | RE SE ARCH ARTICL E
11 of 12
 9. J. Chan, S. C. Dodani, C. J. Chang, Reaction-based small-molecule fluorescent probes for 
chemoselective bioimaging. Nat. Chem. 4, 973–984 (2012).
 10. P. K. H. Hagemann, Fluoreszenzfärbung von tuberkelbakterien mit auramin. Munch. Med. 
Wochenschr. 85, 1066–1067 (1938).
 11. O. W. Richards, The staining of acid-fast tubercle bacteria. Science 93, 190 (1941).
 12. J. T. Kvach, J. R. Veras, A fluorescent staining procedure for determining the viability of 
mycobacterial cells. Int. J. Lepr. Other Mycobact. Dis. 50, 183–192 (1982).
 13. S. Datta, J. M. Sherman, M. A. Bravard, T. Valencia, R. H. Gilman, C. A. Evans, Clinical 
evaluation of tuberculosis viability microscopy for assessing treatment response.  
Clin. Infect. Dis. 60, 1186–1195 (2015).
 14. N. R. Thanky, D. B. Young, B. D. Robertson, Unusual features of the cell cycle in 
mycobacteria: Polar-restricted growth and the snapping-model of cell division. 
Tuberculosis 87, 231–236 (2007).
 15. D. Yang, F. Ding, K. Mitachi, M. Kurosu, R. E. Lee, Y. Kong, A fluorescent probe for 
detecting Mycobacterium tuberculosis and identifying genes critical for cell entry.  
Front. Microbiol. 7, 2021 (2016).
 16. K. M. Backus, H. L. Boshoff, C. S. Barry, O. Boutureira, M. K. Patel, F. D‘Hooge, 
S. S. Lee, L. E. Via, K. Tahlan, C. E. Barry III, B. G. Davis, Uptake of unnatural trehalose 
analogs as a reporter for Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Nat. Chem. Biol. 7, 228–235 
(2011).
 17. B. M. Swarts, C. M. Holsclaw, J. C. Jewett, M. Alber, D. M. Fox, M. S. Siegrist, J. A. Leary, 
R. Kalscheuer, C. R. Bertozzi, Probing the mycobacterial trehalome with bioorthogonal 
chemistry. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 134, 16123–16126 (2012).
 18. H. N. Foley, J. A. Stewart, H. W. Kavunja, S. R. Rundell, B. M. Swarts, Bioorthogonal 
chemical reporters for selective in situ probing of mycomembrane components in 
mycobacteria. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 55, 2053–2057 (2016).
 19. M. Kamariza, P. Shieh, C. S. Ealand, J. S. Peters, B. Chu, F. P. Rodriguez-Rivera, M. R. B. Sait, 
W. V. Treuren, N. Martinson, R. Kalscheuer, B. D. Kana, C. R. Bertozzi, Rapid detection of 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis in sputum with a solvatochromic trehalose probe.  
Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaam6310 (2018).
 20. K. E. Beatty, M. Williams, B. L. Carlson, B. M. Swarts, R. M. Warren, P. D. van Helden, 
C. R. Bertozzi, Sulfatase-activated fluorophores for rapid discrimination of 
mycobacterial species and strains. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 110, 12911–12916 
(2013).
 21. V. Makarov, G. Manina, K. Mikusova, U. Möllmann, O. Ryabova, B. Saint-Joanis, N. Dhar, 
M. R. Pasca, S. Buroni, A. P. Lucarelli, A. Milano, E. De Rossi, M. Belanova, A. Bobovska, 
P. Dianiskova, J. Kordulakova, C. Sala, E. Fullam, P. Schneider, J. D. McKinney, 
P. Brodin, T. Christophe, S. Waddell, P. Butcher, J. Albrethsen, I. Rosenkrands,  
R. Brosch, V. Nandi, S. Bharath, S. Gaonkar, R. K. Shandil, V. Balasubramanian, 
T. Balganesh, S. Tyagi, J. Grosset, G. Riccardi, S. T. Cole, Benzothiazinones kill 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis by blocking arabinan synthesis. Science 324, 801–804 
(2009).
 22. A. L. Ribeiro, G. Degiacomi, F. Ewann, S. Buroni, M. L. Incandela, L. R. Chiarelli, 
G. Mori, J. Kim, M. Contreras-Dominguez, Y.-S. Park, S.-J. Han, P. Brodin, G. Valentini, 
M. Rizzi, G. Riccardi, M. R. Pasca, Analogous mechanisms of resistance to 
benzothiazinones and dinitrobenzamides in Mycobacterium smegmatis. PLOS ONE 6, 
e26675 (2011).
 23. C. Trefzer, M. Rengifo-Gonzalez, M. J. Hinner, P. Schneider, V. Makarov, S. T. Cole, 
K. Johnsson, Benzothiazinones: Prodrugs that covalently modify the 
decaprenylphosphoryl--d-ribose 2′-epimerase dprE1 of Mycobacterium tuberculosis.  
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 132, 13663–13665 (2010).
 24. A. R. Flores, L. M. Parsons, M. S. Pavelka Jr., Genetic analysis of the -lactamases of 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis and Mycobacterium smegmatis and susceptibility to -lactam 
antibiotics. Microbiology 151, 521–532 (2005).
 25. S. G. Kurz, K. A. Wolff, A. M. Hujer, L. Nguyen, R. A. Bonomo, Sequence analysis of 
the beta-lactamase gene blac in clinical strains of Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
reveals a conserved therapeutic target. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 187, A3182 
(2013).
 26. H. Xie, J. Mire, Y. Kong, M. Chang, H. A. Hassounah, C. N. Thornton, J. C. Sacchettini, 
J. D. Cirillo, J. Rao, Rapid point-of-care detection of the tuberculosis pathogen using a 
BlaC-specific fluorogenic probe. Nat. Chem. 4, 802–809 (2012).
 27. Y. Cheng, H. Xie, P. Sule, H. Hassounah, E. A. Graviss, Y. Kong, J. D. Cirillo, J. Rao, 
Fluorogenic probes with substitutions at the 2 and 7 positions of cephalosporin are 
highly blaC-specific for rapid Mycobacterium tuberculosis detection. Angew. Chem.  
Int. Ed. Engl. 53, 9360–9364 (2014).
 28. H.-J. Yang, Y. Kong, Y. Cheng, H. Janagama, H. Hassounah, H. Xie, J. Rao, J. D. Cirillo, 
Real-time imaging of Mycobacterium tuberculosis, using a novel near-infrared fluorescent 
substrate. J. Infect. Dis. 215, 405–414 (2017).
 29. H. Nikaido, V. Jarlier, Permeability of the mycobacterial cell wall. Res. Microbiol. 142, 
437–443 (1991).
 30. K. Mikusova, V. Makarov, J. Neres, DprE1-from the discovery to the promising 
tuberculosis drug target. Curr. Pharm. Des. 20, 4379–4403 (2014).
 31. J. M. Bryant, D. M. Grogono, D. Rodriguez-Rincon, I. Everall, K. P. Brown, P. Moreno, 
D. Verma, E. Hill, J. Drijkoningen, P. Gilligan, C. R. Esther, P. G. Noone, O. Giddings, 
S. C. Bell, R. Thomson, C. E. Wainwright, C. Coulter, S. Pandey, M. E. Wood, 
R. E. Stockwell, K. A. Ramsay, L. J. Sherrard, T. J. Kidd, N. Jabbour, G. R. Johnson, 
L. D. Knibbs, L. Morawska, P. D. Sly, A. Jones, D. Bilton, I. Laurenson, M. Ruddy, S. Bourke, 
I. Bowler, S. J. Chapman, A. Clayton, M. Cullen, O. Dempsey, M. Denton, M. Desai, 
R. J. Drew, F. Edenborough, J. Evans, J. Folb, T. Daniels, H. Humphrey, B. Isalska, 
S. Jensen-Fangel, B. Jonsson, A. M. Jones, T. L. Katzenstein, T. Lillebaek, G. MacGregor, 
S. Mayell, M. Millar, D. Modha, E. F. Nash, C. O‘Brien, D. O‘Brien, C. Ohri, C. S. Pao, 
D. Peckham, F. Perrin, A. Perry, T. Pressler, L. Prtak, T. Qvist, A. Robb, H. Rodgers, 
K. Schaffer, N. Shafi, J. van Ingen, M. Walshaw, D. Watson, N. West, J. Whitehouse, 
C. S. Haworth, S. R. Harris, D. Ordway, J. Parkhill, R. A. Floto, Emergence and spread of a 
human-transmissible multidrug-resistant nontuberculous mycobacterium. Science 354, 
751–757 (2016).
 32. M. L. Incandela, E. Perrin, M. Fondi, A. L. Ribeiro, G. Mori, A. Moiana, M. Gramegna, R. Fani, 
G. Riccardi, M. R. Pasca, DprE1, a new taxonomic marker in mycobacteria. FEMS Microbiol. 
Lett. 348, 66–73 (2013).
 33. T. van der Poll, S. M. Opal, Pathogenesis, treatment, and prevention of pneumococcal 
pneumonia. Lancet 374, 1543–1556 (2009).
 34. A. M. Cole, S. Tahk, A. Oren, D. Yoshioka, Y.-H. Kim, A. Park, T. Ganz, Determinants of 
Staphylococcus aureus nasal carriage. Clin. Diagn. Lab. Immunol. 8, 1064–1069  
(2001).
 35. T. Ueno, Y. Urano, K. Setsukinai, H. Takakusa, H. Kojima, K. Kikuchi, K. Ohkubo, 
S. Fukuzumi, T. Nagano, Rational principles for modulating fluorescence properties of 
fluorescein. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 126, 14079–14085 (2004).
 36. L. García-Agudo, P. García-Martos, Clinical significance and antimicrobial susceptibility of 
rapidly growing mycobacteria, in Science Against Microbial Pathogens: Communicating 
Current Research and Technological Advances, A. Méndez-Vilas, Ed. (Formatex Research 
Center, 2011) pp. 363–377.
 37. H. H. Kwon, H. Tomioka, H. Saito, Distribution and characterization of -lactamases of 
mycobacteria and related organisms. Tuber. Lung Dis. 76, 141–148 (1995).
 38. S. Dhandayuthapani, L. E. Via, C. A. Thomas, P. M. Horowitz, D. Deretic, V. Deretic, Green 
fluorescent protein as a marker for gene expression and cell biology of mycobacterial 
interactions with macrophages. Mol. Microbiol. 17, 901–912 (1995).
 39. O. Kocaoglu, E. E. Carlson, Progress and prospects for small-molecule probes of bacterial 
imaging. Nat. Chem. Biol. 12, 472–478 (2016).
 40. G. S. Zhao, T. I. Meier, S. D. Kahl, K. R. Gee, L. C. Blaszczak, BOCILLIN FL, a sensitive and 
commercially available reagent for detection of penicillin-binding proteins. Antimicrob. 
Agents Chemother. 43, 1124–1128 (1999).
 41. O. Kocaoglu, R. A. Calvo, L.-T. Sham, L. M. Cozy, B. R. Lanning, S. Francis, 
M. E. Winkler, D. B. Kearns, E. E. Carlson, Selective penicillin-binding protein  
imaging probes reveal substructure in bacterial cell division. ACS Chem. Biol. 7, 
1746–1753 (2012).
 42. J. Xie, X. Huang, M. S. Park, H. M. Pham, W. K. Chan, Differential suppression of the aryl 
hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator-dependent function by an aryl hydrocarbon 
receptor PAS-A-derived inhibitory molecule. Biochem. Pharmacol. 88, 253–265 (2014).
 43. M. S. Park, F. Chu, J. Xie, Y. Wang, P. Bhattacharya, W. K. Chan, Identification of 
cyclophilin-40-interacting proteins reveals potential cellular function of cyclophilin-40. 
Anal. Biochem. 410, 257–265 (2011).
Acknowledgments: We thank K. Johnsson (École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, 
Switzerland) for providing pET-SUMO-DprE1, A. Olson at Stanford Neuroscience Microscopy 
Service (supported by NIH NS069375) for help on confocal imaging, C. Carswell-Crumpton at 
Stanford Shared FACS Facility for assistance with flow cytometry, Functional Genomics Facility 
at Stanford for access to LI-COR Odyssey for Western blots, and T. C. Doyle at Stanford Center 
for Innovation in In-Vivo Imaging (SCI3) for help on IVIS imaging. Funding: This work was 
supported by NIH grants 1R01AI125286-01A1, U54CA199075 (Center for Cancer 
Nanotechnology Excellence for Translational Diagnostics, CCNE-TD), and the Stanford Center 
at Peking University Faculty Fellowship. J.X. thanks the Molecular Imaging Program at Stanford 
for the Molecular Imaging Young Investigator (MIYI) Prize. T.D. thanks the support from the 
Center for Molecular Analysis and Design (CMAD) at Stanford. Z.S. thanks the Beijing Municipal 
Administration of Hospitals Clinical Medicine Development for special funding support 
(XMLX201812), Beijing Municipal Science & Technology Commission (Z181100001718181), 
and Capital’s Funds for Health Improvement and Research (2018-2Z-1042, 2016-2-1043). H.R. 
thanks the funding support from the Zhejiang 151 Talent Training Program. Author 
contributions: Y.C., J.X., and J.R. designed and led the study. Y.C. performed the probe 
synthesis, enzyme analysis, and quantum yield determination. A.S., T.D., and H.R. contributed 
to the probe synthesis and characterization. J.X. and K.-H.L. performed the DprE1, -lactamase 
expression and purification, DprE1 labeling and gel analysis, bacterial culture and staining, 
microscopy, and flow cytometry experiments. N.B. and R.L.G. assisted with the provision of 
bacteria and the processed sputum samples and performed staining of Mtb and the processed 
sputum in the United States. J.X. performed the study with macrophage. Z.S. led the patient 
 by guest on August 15, 2018
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Cheng et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaar4470 (2018)     15 August 2018
SCIE N C E TR A N S LA T I O NA L M EDI CI NE | RE SE ARCH ARTICL E
12 of 12
recruitment and assisted with clinical study in China. J.W. and J.X. cultured NTMs and 
performed CDG-DNB3 staining. D.A. and J.X. designed and fabricated the microfluidic chip, 
performed the experiments, and collected the video. D.A. developed the method for bacterial 
counting. Y.C., J.X., and J.R. analyzed all the data and wrote and edited the manuscript, which 
was approved by all authors. Competing interests: Y.C., J.X., and J.R. are inventors on U.S. 
patent application US20170044593A1 submitted by Leland Junior Stanford University that 
covers “Methods for rapid and specific detection of Mycobacterium tuberculosis with a dual 
targeting fluorogenic probe.” All other authors declare that they have no competing interests. 
Data and materials availability: All data associated with this study are present in the paper 
or Supplementary Materials. Materials are available and will be provided under the material 
transfer policies of Stanford University. These requests should be directed to the 
corresponding author. Requests for the option to license the technology can be addressed to 
the Stanford University Office of Technology Licensing.
Submitted 9 November 2017
Accepted 26 June 2018
Published 15 August 2018
10.1126/scitranslmed.aar4470
Citation: Y. Cheng, J. Xie, K.-H. Lee, R. L. Gaur, A. Song, T. Dai, H. Ren, J. Wu, Z. Sun, N. Banaei, 
 
D. Akin, J. Rao, Rapid and specific labeling of single live Mycobacterium tuberculosis with a 
dual-targeting fluorogenic probe. Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaar4470 (2018).
 by guest on August 15, 2018
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 dual-targeting fluorogenic probe
 with a
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Rapid and specific labeling of single live 
Zhaogang Sun, Niaz Banaei, Demir Akin and Jianghong Rao
Yunfeng Cheng, Jinghang Xie, Kyung-Hyun Lee, Rajiv L. Gaur, Aiguo Song, Tingting Dai, Hongjun Ren, Jiannan Wu,
DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aar4470
, eaar4470.
10
Sci Transl Med 
platform could aid in drug testing and diagnosis.
microfluidic chip to aid in automating live tuberculosis bacterial counts from sputum samples. This probe and chip
bacteria and dead bacteria, and was compatible with patient sputum samples. The authors also developed a 
formation of the bacterial cell wall. The probe could identify single live tuberculosis bacteria from nontuberculosis
enzyme in the bacteria, and fluorescence is retained by modification of a second bacterial enzyme required for 
. The probe fluoresces upon activation by an
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
developed an imaging probe specific for 
.
et al
Tuberculosis, a bacterial infection of the lungs, continues to plague countries worldwide. Cheng 
Tracking tuberculosis
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/10/454/eaar4470
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2018/08/13/10.454.eaar4470.DC1
CONTENT
RELATED 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/8/329/329ps7.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/6/253/253rv2.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/10/435/eaai7786.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/9/420/eaal2807.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/10/430/eaam6310.full
REFERENCES
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/10/454/eaar4470#BIBL
This article cites 41 articles, 6 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
 is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Science Translational Medicine
title 
licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive 
(ISSN 1946-6242) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science Translational Medicine 
 by guest on August 15, 2018
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
