 UC San Francisco
UC San Francisco Previously Published Works
Title
Active Surveillance for the Management of Localized Prostate Cancer (Cancer Care 
Ontario Guideline): American Society of Clinical Oncology Clinical Practice Guideline 
Endorsement
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7rd2v3h6
Journal
JOURNAL OF CLINICAL ONCOLOGY, 34(18)
ISSN
0732-183X
Authors
Chen, RC
Rumble, RB
Loblaw, DA
et al.
Publication Date
2016-06-20
DOI
10.1200/JCO.2015.65.7759
 
Peer reviewed
eScholarship.org
Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California
 JOURNAL OF CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
A S C O
S P E C I A L
A R T I C L E
Author affiliations appear at the end of this
article.
Published online ahead of print at
www.jco.org on February 16, 2016.
Clinical Practice Guideline Committee
approval: November 2, 2015.
Editor’s note: This American Society of
Clinical Oncology Clinical Practice
Guideline Endorsement provides
recommendations based on the review
and analysis of the relevant literature in
the Cancer Care Ontario Active
Surveillance for the Management of
Localized Prostate Cancer Clinical
Practice Guideline. Additional information,
which may include methodology and data
supplements, slide sets, patient versions,
frequently asked questions, and other
clinical tools and resources, is available at
www.asco.org/endorsements/
ActiveSurveillance and www.asco.org/
guidelineswiki.
Authors’ disclosures of potential conflicts
of interest are found in the article online at
www.jco.org. Author contributions are
found at the end of this article.
Corresponding author: Suneil Jain, MD,
PhD, c/o American Society of Clinical
Oncology, 2318 Mill Rd, Suite 800,
Alexandria, VA 22314; e-mail: guidelines@
asco.org.
© 2016 by American Society of Clinical
Oncology
0732-183X/16/3418w-2182w/$20.00
DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2015.65.7759
Active Surveillance for the Management of Localized Prostate
Cancer (Cancer Care Ontario Guideline): American Society
of Clinical Oncology Clinical Practice Guideline Endorsement
Ronald C. Chen, R. Bryan Rumble, D. Andrew Loblaw, Antonio Finelli, Behfar Ehdaie, Matthew R. Cooperberg,
Scott C. Morgan, Scott Tyldesley, John J. Haluschak, Winston Tan, Stewart Justman, and Suneil Jain
A
B
S
T
R
A
C
T
Purpose
To endorse Cancer Care Ontario’s guideline on Active Surveillance for the Management of Localized
Prostate Cancer. The American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) has a policy and set of pro-
cedures for endorsing clinical practice guidelines developed by other professional organizations.
Methods
The Active Surveillance for the Management of Localized Prostate Cancer guideline was reviewed
for developmental rigor by methodologists. The ASCO Endorsement Panel then reviewed the
content and the recommendations.
Results
The ASCO Endorsement Panel determined that the recommendations from the Active Surveillance
for the Management of Localized Prostate Cancer guideline, published in May 2015, are clear,
thorough, and based upon the most relevant scientific evidence. ASCO endorsed the Active
Surveillance for the Management of Localized Prostate Cancer guideline with added qualifying
statements. The Cancer Care Ontario recommendation regarding 5-alpha reductase inhibitors was
not endorsed by the ASCO panel.
Recommendations
For most patients with low-risk (Gleason score # 6) localized prostate cancer, active surveillance is the
recommended disease management strategy. Factors including younger age, prostate cancer vol-
ume, patient preference, and ethnicity should be taken into account when making management
decisions. Select patients with low-volume, intermediate-risk (Gleason 3 1 4 5 7) prostate cancer may
be offered active surveillance. Active surveillance protocols should include prostate-specific antigen
testing, digital rectal examinations, and serial prostate biopsies. Ancillary radiologic and genomic tests
are investigational but may have a role in patients with discordant clinical and/or pathologic findings.
Patients who are reclassified to a higher-risk category (Gleason score $ 7) or who have significant
increases in tumor volume on subsequent biopsies should be offered active therapy.
J Clin Oncol 34:2182-2190. © 2016 by American Society of Clinical Oncology
INTRODUCTION
Prostate cancer has the highest incidence rate of
any cancer (233,000 men representing 27% of all
new cases) and the fourth highest mortality rate
(29,480 men representing 10% of all deaths
resulting from cancer) in the United States, even
when considering both sexes.1 For this reason,
there is great interest in defining optimum strategies
for detection, treatment, and follow-up for this
patient population. Even in the absence of a formal
screening program,2 prostate cancer is detected
early in many cases, is indolent or nonprogressing,
and is unlikely to cause morbidity or mortality.3
To avoid the harms associated with unnecessary
treatment, active surveillance (AS) is an option for
patients with prostate cancer that is less likely to
cause mortality. In 2015, Cancer Care Ontario
(CCO) published a Clinical Practice Guideline on
Active Surveillance for the Management of Localized
Prostate Cancer,4 and the goal of this assessment
was to determine whether to endorse that CCO
guideline.
This American Society of Clinical Oncology
(ASCO) endorsement reinforces the recommen-
dations offered in the CCO guideline on Active
Surveillance for the Management of Localized
2182
© 2016 by American Society of Clinical Oncology
VOLUME
34
•
NUMBER
18
•
JUNE
20,
2016
169.230.248.131
Information downloaded from jco.ascopubs.org and provided by at CONS CALIFORNIA DIG LIB on July 28, 2016 from
Copyright © 2016 American Society of Clinical Oncology. All rights reserved.
 Prostate Cancer4 and acknowledges the effort put forth by CCO to
produce an evidence-based guideline that informs practitioners
who care for men with early-stage clinically localized prostate cancer
(stages T1 and T2 and Gleason score # 7).
The following are the five research questions on the role of AS
in men with localized prostate cancer that were addressed in the
original guideline as well as in this endorsement:
1. How does AS compare with immediate active treatments (e.g.,
RP, RT, brachytherapy, hormone therapy, cryotherapy, or
high-intensity focused ultrasound) as a management strategy
for patients with newly-diagnosed localized prostate cancer
(T1 and T2; Gleason score #7)?
2. In patients with localized prostate cancer undergoing AS,
which findings of the following tests predict increasing risk of
reclassification to a higher-risk disease state? What are their test
characteristics (i.e., positive and negative predictive values,
sensitivities, specificities, and likelihood ratios)?
• PSA kinetics (e.g., velocity or doubling time)
• DRE
• Imaging (e.g., magnetic resonance imaging [MRI] or
ultrasound [US])
• Prostate cancer antigen3 (PCA3)
3. In patients with localized prostate cancer undergoing AS,
how does supplementation with 5-alpha reductase inhibitors
(5ARIs) (e.g., finasteride or dutasteride) compare with no
supplementation?
4. In patients with localized prostate cancer undergoing AS, how do
clinical outcomes differ if treatment is managed by a: single doctor
versus a multidisciplinary team of clinicians, urologist versus
another oncologist (e.g., a radiation oncologist), university/
teaching hospital versus a community or private clinic/hospital?
5. In patients with localized prostate cancer who are candidates
for or who are undergoing AS, how does the offer, receipt, or
choice of treatment and patient compliance or adherence
differ based on (but not limited to) the following factors:
• AS protocol: order of and frequency of tests (PSA, DRE,
imaging), and other test/clinical factors?
• Care provider(s): single versus team of doctors; urologist
versus other oncologist?
• Care setting: clinic versus hospital?
• Patient factors: clinical, psychosocial?
• Social support: family or community?
• Socioeconomic or geographic variables?
The original CCO Recommendations are provided in Table 1
and online at http://www.cancercare.on.ca/common/pages/UserFile.
aspx?fileId5325696.
OVERVIEW OF THE ASCO GUIDELINE ENDORSEMENT PROCESS
ASCO has policies and procedures for endorsing practice guidelines that
have been developed by other professional organizations. The goal of
guideline endorsement is to increase the number of high-quality, ASCO-
vetted guidelines available to the ASCO membership. The ASCO
endorsement process involves an assessment by ASCO staff of candidate
guidelines for methodologic quality using the Rigour of Development
subscale of the Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and Evaluation II
instrument (see Methodology Supplement for more detail).
Disclaimer
The clinical practice guidelines and other guidance published
herein are provided by the American Society of Clinical Oncology,
Inc. (“ASCO”) to assist providers in clinical decision making. The
information therein should not be relied on as being complete or
accurate, nor should it be considered as inclusive of all proper
treatments or methods of care or as a statement of the standard of
care. With the rapid development of scientific knowledge, new
evidence may emerge between the time information is developed
and when it is published or read. The information is not continually
updated and may not reflect the most recent evidence. The infor-
mation addresses only the topics specifically identified therein and is
not applicable to other interventions, diseases, or stages of diseases.
This information does not mandate any particular course of medical
care. Furthermore, the information is not intended to substitute for
the independent professional judgment of the treating provider
because the information does not account for individual variation
among patients. Recommendations reflect high, moderate, or low
confidence that the recommendation reflects the net effect of a given
course of action. The use of words like “must,” “must not,” “should,”
and “should not” indicate that a course of action is recommended
or not recommended for either most or many patients, but there is
latitude for the treating physician to select other courses of action
in individual cases. In all cases, the selected course of action should
be considered by the treating provider in the context of treating the
individual patient. Use of this information is voluntary. ASCO
provides this information on an “as is” basis and makes no
warranty, expressed or implied, regarding the information. ASCO
specifically disclaims any warranties of merchantability or fitness
for a particular use or purpose. ASCO assumes no responsibility
for any injury or damage to persons or property arising from or
related to any use of this information or for any errors or
omissions.
Guideline and Conflicts of Interest
The Endorsement Panel (Appendix Table A1, online only) was
assembled in accordance with ASCO’s Conflict of Interest Policy
Implementation for Clinical Practice Guidelines (“Policy” found
at www.asco.org/rwc). All members of the Endorsement Panel
completed ASCO’s disclosure form, which requires disclosure of
financial and other interests, including relationships with commercial
entities that are reasonably likely to experience direct regulatory or
commercial impact as the result of promulgation of the guideline.
Categories for disclosure include employment; leadership; stock or
other ownership; honoraria; consulting or advisory role; speakers’
bureau; research funding; patents, royalties, other intellectual
property; expert testimony; travel, accommodations, expenses; and
other relationship. In accordance with the Policy, the majority of
the members of the Endorsement Panel did not disclose any
relationships constituting a conflict under the Policy.
ACTIVE SURVEILLANCE GUIDELINE FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF
LOCALIZED PROSTATE CANCER
Clinical Questions and Target Population
The CCO guideline4 addressed five research questions on the
role of AS in men with localized prostate cancer. The five research
www.jco.org
© 2016 by American Society of Clinical Oncology
2183
Active Surveillance in Prostate Cancer Guideline Endorsement
169.230.248.131
Information downloaded from jco.ascopubs.org and provided by at CONS CALIFORNIA DIG LIB on July 28, 2016 from
Copyright © 2016 American Society of Clinical Oncology. All rights reserved.
 Table 1. Original CCO and ASCO Endorsement Research Questions, Recommendations, and Qualifying Statements
CCO Research Question
CCO Recommendation
CCO Qualifying
Statement
ASCO Endorsement
Recommendation
ASCO Qualifying
Statement
RESEARCH QUESTION 1 How does
AS compare with immediate active
treatments (eg, RP, RT,
brachytherapy, hormone therapy,
cryotherapy, or high-intensity
focused ultrasound) as a
management strategy for patients
with newly diagnosed localized
prostate cancer (T1 and T2 and
Gleason score # 7)?
For patients with low-risk (Gleason
score # 6) localized prostate
cancer, AS is the preferred
disease management strategy.
It is known that there is heterogeneity within this
population and therefore factors such as younger
age, high-volume Gleason 6 cancer, and patient
preference must be taken into account in this
recommendation. Young patients (younger than age
55 years) with high-volume Gleason 6 cancer should
be closely scrutinized for the presence of higher-
grade cancer, and definitive therapy may be
warranted for select patients.
For most patients with low-risk
(Gleason score # 6) localized
prostate cancer, AS is the
recommended disease
management strategy.
It is known that there is
heterogeneity within this
population and therefore factors
such as younger age, high-volume
Gleason 6 cancer, patient
preference, and/or African
American ethnicity should be
taken into account in this
recommendation. Young patients
(younger than age 55 years) with
high-volume Gleason 6 cancer
should be closely scrutinized for
the presence of higher-grade
cancer, and definitive therapy may
be warranted for select patients.
For patients with limited life
expectancy (< 5 years) and low-
risk cancer, watchful waiting may
be more appropriate than AS.
RESEARCH QUESTION 2 In patients
with localized prostate cancer
undergoing AS, which findings of the
following tests predict increasing risk
of reclassification to a higher-risk
disease state? What are their test
characteristics (ie, positive and
negative predictive values,
sensitivities, specificities, and
likelihood ratios)?
• PSA kinetics (eg, velocity or
doubling time)
• DRE
• Imaging (eg, MRI or ultrasound)
• Prostate cancer antigen 3
Active treatment (RP or RT) is
appropriate for patients with
intermediate-risk (Gleason score
7) localized prostate cancer. For
select patients with low-volume,
intermediate-risk (Gleason 3 1 4
5 7) localized prostate cancer, AS
can be considered.
Patients with Gleason score 7/10 (3 1 4) being
considered for AS should include only those men
with focal Gleason pattern 4 pathology, accounting
for # 10% total tumor. Because of known
interobserver variability associated with the
identification of minor Gleason pattern 4 elements,
prospective intradepartmental consultation with
colleagues should be considered a cornerstone of
quality assurance in this area. Because volume and
distribution of disease in prostate biopsies are also
selection criteria for AS, pathologists should use
uniform methodology when assessing and reporting
the extent of cancer involvement in biopsy cores,
especially when dealing with discontinuously
involved cores.
Active treatment (RP or RT) is
recommended for most patients
with intermediate-risk (Gleason
score 7) localized prostate cancer.
For select patients with low-
volume, intermediate-risk
(Gleason 3 1 4 5 7) localized
prostate cancer, AS may be
offered.
Patients with Gleason score 7 (3 1 4)
being considered for AS should
include only those men with low-
volume Gleason pattern 4
pathology, and/or age older than
75 years. Because of known
interobserver variability associated
with the identification of minor
Gleason pattern 4 elements,
prospective intradepartmental
consultation with colleagues
should be considered a
cornerstone of quality assurance in
this area. For patients with limited
life expectancy (< 5 years),
watchful waiting may be more
appropriate than AS.
RESEARCH QUESTION 3 In patients
with localized prostate cancer
undergoing AS, how does
supplementation with 5ARIs (eg,
finasteride or dutasteride) compare
with no supplementation?
Daily 5ARIs may have a role in men
receiving AS.
It should be noted that the RCT had short follow-up of 3
years and detected no difference between groups in
survival rate outcomes.
Dutasteride is the only 5ARI that has been tested in an
RCT. However, it is the opinion of the CCO Expert
Panel that the evidence likely demonstrates a drug
class effect and that finasteride may also have a role
in men receiving AS.
Although the US Food and Drug Administration has
issued a warning about a possible low but increased
risk for high-grade prostate cancer with the use of
5ARIs based on two RCTs that did not meet
inclusion criteria for this guideline, it is the opinion of
the CCO Expert Panel members that the benefits of
5ARIs outweigh the risks, and they can be
prescribed to a patient undergoing AS as long as the
patient is adequately informed about the risks and
benefits of treatment. This is consistent with the
Canadian Consensus Conference statement.
Not endorsed.
Not endorsed.
(continued on following page)
2184
© 2016 by American Society of Clinical Oncology
JOURNAL OF CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Chen et al
169.230.248.131
Information downloaded from jco.ascopubs.org and provided by at CONS CALIFORNIA DIG LIB on July 28, 2016 from
Copyright © 2016 American Society of Clinical Oncology. All rights reserved.
 Table 1. Original CCO and ASCO Endorsement Research Questions, Recommendations, and Qualifying Statements (continued)
CCO Research Question
CCO Recommendation
CCO Qualifying
Statement
ASCO Endorsement
Recommendation
ASCO Qualifying
Statement
RESEARCH QUESTION 4 In patients
with localized prostate cancer
undergoing AS, how do clinical
outcomes differ if treatment is
managed by
• A single physician versus a
multidisciplinary team of
clinicians?
• A urologist versus another
oncologist (eg, a radiation
oncologist)?
• A university or teaching hospital
versus a community or private
clinic or hospital?
The AS protocol should include the
following tests: PSA test every 3
to 6 months, DRE every year, 12-
to 14-core confirmatory TRUS
biopsy (including anterior-
directed cores) within 6 to 12
months and then serial biopsy a
minimum of every 3 to 5 years
thereafter. The AS protocol may
include mpMRI. This is indicated
when a patient’s clinical findings
are discordant with the
pathologic findings, and it is
useful in identifying occult
cancers or changes indicative of
tumor progression in patients at
risk.
Decisions about frequency of biopsy need to take into
consideration individual patient factors including age,
risk of progression, comorbidities, and so on. The
repeat biopsy frequency recommendation of a
minimum of once every 3 to 5 years is based on the
series reported by Klotz et al5, which included 450
patients undergoing AS with a median follow-up of
6.8 years (range, 1 to 13 years). Overall survival rate
was 78.6%. The 10-year prostate cancer actuarial
survival rate was 97.2%. Compared with shorter
repeat biopsy intervals, this recommended
frequency potentially reduces the risk of
complications that are associated with TRUS biopsy,
including urosepsis, without negatively affecting
outcomes. A shorter interval between biopsies may
be reasonable in selected patients and should be at
the discretion of the ordering physician in
consultation with the patient. Serial biopsy should not
continue past the age of 80 years.
• The role of MRI in AS is evolving. Prospective
multicenter trials reporting the utility of MRI on
entrance into AS or in reclassification of disease
risk are lacking. Single-center publications
looking at all men undergoing biopsy have
found that mpMRI can reclassify patients when
combined with systematic biopsy by identifying
tumor targets missed with systematic biopsy.
• mpMRI is useful in identifying anterior and
higher-volume tumors, and it is good for
identifying findings that predict disease
reclassification. Whether this should be
performed on all patients or only on those in
whom there is discordance between clinical
findings such as PSA and DRE is an open
question. However, being cognizant of both the
high cost of mpMRI and its promise, it is
recommended that when a patient’s clinical
findings are discordant with the pathologic
findings, an mpMRI is indicated. When
indicated, it may be considered at entry or
during follow-up.
• Discordant findings between a patient’s clinical
course and pathologic findings can include
rapidly rising PSA, PSA density over 0.2, higher
PSA than expected for prostate size, DRE
abnormality, and very low PSA free:total ratio.
Presence of these findings requires further
investigation with mpMRI or earlier repeat
biopsy.
The AS protocol should include the
following tests:
• A PSA test every 3 to 6
months
• DRE at least every year
• At least a 12-core
confirmatory TRUS guided
biopsy (including anterior-
directed cores) within 6 to 12
months, and then serial
biopsy every 2 to 5 years
thereafter or more frequently
if clinically warranted. Men
with limited life expectancy
may transition to watchful
waiting and avoid further
biopsies.
The AS protocol may include
ancillary tests that are still under
investigation. These could include
mpMRI and/or genomic testing.
mpMRI and genomic testing may
be indicated when a patient’s
clinical findings are discordant with
the pathologic findings and could
be useful in identifying occult
cancers or changes indicative of
tumor progression in patients at
risk. These tests may also be
helpful when the decision
regarding AS versus active
treatment is uncertain (eg, in
cases of low-volume Gleason 3 1
4). mpMRI should not be used as a
replacement for rebiopsy.
(continued on following page)
www.jco.org
© 2016 by American Society of Clinical Oncology
2185
Active Surveillance in Prostate Cancer Guideline Endorsement
169.230.248.131
Information downloaded from jco.ascopubs.org and provided by at CONS CALIFORNIA DIG LIB on July 28, 2016 from
Copyright © 2016 American Society of Clinical Oncology. All rights reserved.
 Table 1. Original CCO and ASCO Endorsement Research Questions, Recommendations, and Qualifying Statements (continued)
CCO Research Question
CCO Recommendation
CCO Qualifying
Statement
ASCO Endorsement
Recommendation
ASCO Qualifying
Statement
RESEARCH QUESTION 5 In patients
with localized prostate cancer who
are candidates for or who are
undergoing AS, how does the offer,
receipt, or choice of treatment and
patient compliance or adherence
differ based on (but not limited to) the
following factors:
• AS protocol: order of and
frequency of tests (PSA, DRE,
imaging), and other test or
clinical factors?
• Care providers: single physician
versus team of clinicians or
urologist versus other
oncologist?
• Care setting: clinic versus
hospital?
• Patient factors: clinical or
psychosocial?
• Social support: family or
community?
• Socioeconomic or geographic
variables?
For patients undergoing AS who are
reclassified to a higher-risk
category, defined by repeat
biopsy showing Gleason score
$ 7 and/or significant increases
in the volume of Gleason 6
tumor, consideration should be
given to active therapy (eg, RP or
RT).
Because evidence to predict disease reclassification in
prostate cancer was conflicting for PSA level and
lacking for DRE and prostate cancer antigen 3 level,
these were not included in the recommendation. This
recommendation is based on a consensus of opinion
of the CCO Expert Panel members.
For patients undergoing AS who are
reclassified to a higher-risk
category, defined by repeat biopsy
showing Gleason score $ 7 and/or
significant increases in the volume
of Gleason 6 tumor, consideration
should be given to active therapy
(eg, RP or RT).
Note. ASCO qualifying statements to the original CCO recommendations and qualifying statements appear in bold italics. Abbreviations: 5ARI, 5-alpha reductase inhibitor; AS, active surveillance; CCO, Cancer Care
Ontario; DRE, digital rectal examination; mpMRI, multiparametric magnetic resonance imaging; PSA, prostate-specific antigen; RCT, randomized controlled trial; RP, radical prostatectomy; RT, radiotherapy; TRUS,
transrectal ultrasound.
2186
© 2016 by American Society of Clinical Oncology
JOURNAL OF CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Chen et al
169.230.248.131
Information downloaded from jco.ascopubs.org and provided by at CONS CALIFORNIA DIG LIB on July 28, 2016 from
Copyright © 2016 American Society of Clinical Oncology. All rights reserved.
 questions asked (1) How does AS compare with immediate active
treatments (eg, RP
, RT, brachytherapy, hormone therapy, cryotherapy,
or high-intensity focused US) as a management strategy? (2) Which
of the following tests predict increasing risk of reclassification to
a higher-risk disease state: PSA kinetics, DRE, imaging, or PCA3?
(3) How does supplementation with 5ARIs (eg, finasteride or
dutasteride) compare with no supplementation? (4) How do
clinical outcomes differ if treatment is managed by a single
physician versus a multidisciplinary team of clinicians, a urologist
versus another oncologist, or a university or teaching hospital
versus a community or private clinic or hospital? and (5) How does
the offer, receipt, or choice of treatment and patient compliance or
adherence differ based on (but not limited to) the AS protocol (eg,
the order of and frequency of tests [PSA, DRE, imaging] and other
test or clinical factors), care providers (single physician v a multi-
disciplinary team of clinicians; urologist v other oncologist), care
setting (eg, clinic v hospital), patient factors (eg, clinical, psychosocial),
social support (eg, family or community), and socioeconomic or
geographic variables? The complete set of clinical questions and
corresponding recommendations in the original CCO guideline
are provided in Table 1. The target population for the CCO guideline
is men with early-stage clinically localized prostate cancer (stages
T1 and T2 and Gleason score # 7).
Summary of the Active Surveillance for the
Management of Localized Prostate Cancer Guideline
Development Methodology
The CCO guideline4 was developed by a working group that
included experts in urology, pathology, radiation oncology, and
research methodology. A systematic review of the literature,
covering the years 1996 through 2013 was performed by using the
Ovid MEDLINE and EMBASE databases. In addition, conference
proceedings for the following were also searched for the years 2010
through 2012: ASCO Annual Meeting, ASCO Genitourinary Cancers
Symposium, American Urological Association, European Association
of Urology, Canadian Urological Association, and American Society
for Radiation Oncology. Details of the search strategies and the
study inclusion criteria and outcomes of interest are available at
http://www.cancercare.on.ca/common/pages/UserFile.aspx?fileId5325696.
The literature search identified 62 studies eligible for inclusion
in the guideline. The CCO working group reviewed data from
practice guidelines, systematic reviews, randomized controlled
trials, and other comparative studies that reported on AS in males
with newly diagnosed early-stage localized prostate cancer (stages
T1 and T2 and Gleason score # 7) that included 30 or more
patients. The panel provided evidence-based recommendations for
all clinical questions informed by expert consensus.
RESULTS OF THE ASCO METHODOLOGY REVIEW
The methodology review of the CCO guideline4 was completed
independently by two ASCO guideline staff members using the
Rigour of Development subscale from the Appraisal of Guidelines
for Research and Evaluation II instrument. Detailed results of the
scoring for this guideline are available upon request to guidelines@
asco.org. Overall, the Active Surveillance for the Management of
Localized Prostate Cancer guideline scored 6.5 of 7, with a Rigour of
Development score of 98%. The preliminary ASCO content re-
viewers of the Active Surveillance for the Management of Localized
Prostate Cancer guideline, as well as the ASCO Endorsement Panel,
found the recommendations well supported in the original
guideline. Each section, including the guideline recommendations,
the evidentiary base, the development methods, and external
review process, was clear and well referenced in the systematic
review.
This is the most recent information as of the publication date.
For updates and the most recent information and to submit new
evidence, please visit www.asco.org/endorsements/ActiveSurveillance
and the ASCO Guidelines Wiki (www.asco.org/guidelineswiki).
METHODS AND RESULTS OF ASCO UPDATED
LITERATURE REVIEW
ASCO guidelines staff updated the Active Surveillance for the
Management of Localized Prostate Cancer literature search. The
original CCO literature search strategy was rerun using MEDLINE
on March 19, 2015 (for 2012 through February 2015). The search
strategy can be found in the Data Supplement 1. The updated
search yielded 634 records. After reviewing the title and abstract for
each of these hits, 35 were ordered for full text review. Of these,
none were retained for discussion.
RESULTS OF ASCO CONTENT REVIEW
The ASCO Endorsement Panel reviewed the Active Surveillance for
the Management of Localized Prostate Cancer guideline and con-
curred that the recommendations are clear, thorough, and based on
the most relevant scientific evidence in this content area and present
options that will be acceptable to many patients. Overall, the ASCO
Endorsement Panel agrees with the recommendations as stated in the
guideline, with the minor qualifications discussed here.
DISCUSSION
The ASCO Endorsement Panel wants to highlight and qualify some
of the statements from the Active Surveillance for the Management
of Localized Prostate Cancer4 guideline.
The distinction between AS and watchful waiting is important
for clinical decision making. AS, which carries a curative intent
and involves regular monitoring with PSA, DRE, and biopsy (see
Recommendation 3), is appropriate for patients who have suffi-
cient life expectancy6 to benefit from active treatment if disease
progression is detected. Note that calculation of life expectancy
is based on a variety of individual factors and circumstances.
A number of life expectancy calculators (eg, http://www.socialsecurity.
gov/OACT/population/longevity.html) are available in the public
domain; however, ASCO does not endorse any one calculator over
another. For patients with a life expectancy of less than 5 years,
watchful waiting (cessation of routine monitoring with treatment
initiated only if symptoms develop) is appropriate and further
reduces the issue of overtreatment in prostate cancer, including
www.jco.org
© 2016 by American Society of Clinical Oncology
2187
Active Surveillance in Prostate Cancer Guideline Endorsement
169.230.248.131
Information downloaded from jco.ascopubs.org and provided by at CONS CALIFORNIA DIG LIB on July 28, 2016 from
Copyright © 2016 American Society of Clinical Oncology. All rights reserved.
 THE BOTTOM LINE
Active Surveillance for the Management of Localized Prostate Cancer (Cancer Care Ontario Guideline): American
Society of Clinical Oncology Clinical Practice Guideline Endorsement
The American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) endorses the Cancer Care Ontario (CCO) guideline on Active Surveillance for the
Management of Localized Prostate Cancer, with qualifying statements (in bold italics).
Guideline Questions
1. How does AS compare with immediate active treatments (e.g., RP, RT, brachytherapy, hormone therapy, cryotherapy, or
high-intensity focused ultrasound) as a management strategy for patients with newly-diagnosed localized prostate cancer
(T1 and T2; Gleason score #7)?
2. In patients with localized prostate cancer undergoing AS, which findings of the following tests predict increasing risk of
reclassification to a higher-risk disease state? What are their test characteristics (i.e., positive and negative predictive values,
sensitivities, specificities, and likelihood ratios)?
•
PSA kinetics (e.g., velocity or doubling time)
•
DRE
•
Imaging (e.g., magnetic resonance imaging [MRI] or ultrasound [US])
•
Prostate cancer antigen3 (PCA3)
3. In patients with localized prostate cancer undergoing AS, how does supplementation with 5-alpha reductase inhibitors
(5ARIs) (e.g., finasteride or dutasteride) compare with no supplementation?
4. In patients with localized prostate cancer undergoing AS, how do clinical outcomes differ if treatment is managed by a: single
doctor versus a multidisciplinary team of clinicians, urologist versus another oncologist (e.g., a radiation oncologist),
university/teaching hospital versus a community or private clinic/hospital?
5. In patients with localized prostate cancer who are candidates for or who are undergoing AS, how does the offer, receipt, or
choice of treatment and patient compliance or adherence differ based on (but not limited to) the following factors:
•
AS protocol: order of and frequency of tests (PSA, DRE, imaging), and other test/clinical factors?
•
Care provider(s): single versus team of doctors; urologist versus other oncologist?
•
Care setting: clinic versus hospital?
•
Patient factors: clinical, psychosocial?
•
Social support: family or community?
•
Socioeconomic or geographic variables?
Target Population
Men with early clinically localized prostate cancer (stages T1 and T2 and Gleason score # 7)
Target Audience
Clinicians and specialists providing care to patients with prostate cancer (ie, urologists, radiation oncologists, primary care physicians)
Methods
The ASCO Endorsement Panel was convened to consider endorsing the CCO guideline on Active Surveillance for the Management of Localized
Prostate Cancer that was based on a systematic review of the medical literature. The ASCO Endorsement Panel considered the methodology
used in the CCO guideline by considering the results from the Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and Evaluation II review instrument. The
ASCO Endorsement Panel carefully reviewed the CCO guideline content to determine appropriateness for ASCO endorsement.
ASCO Key Recommendations for Active Surveillance for the Management of Localized Prostate Cancer
ASCO qualifying statements are presented in bold italics. See Table 1 for the original CCO research questions and recommendations.
1. For most patients with low-risk (Gleason score # 6) localized prostate cancer, AS is the recommended disease management
strategy.
ASCO qualifying statement: It is known that there is heterogeneity within this population and therefore factors such as younger age,
high-volume Gleason 6 cancer, patient preference, and/or African American ethnicity should be taken into account in this
recommendation. Young patients (younger than age 55 years) with high-volume Gleason 6 cancer should be closely scrutinized
(continued on following page)
2188
© 2016 by American Society of Clinical Oncology
JOURNAL OF CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Chen et al
169.230.248.131
Information downloaded from jco.ascopubs.org and provided by at CONS CALIFORNIA DIG LIB on July 28, 2016 from
Copyright © 2016 American Society of Clinical Oncology. All rights reserved.
 biopsies which carry a small but nonzero risk of infection and
hospitalization.7
AS is the recommended disease management strategy for
low-risk prostate cancer. Older patients may start on AS,
potentially transition to watchful waiting if there is no disease
progression, and be able to avoid treatment altogether. However,
the ASCO Endorsement Panel recognizes that there is disease
heterogeneity, and select patients with low-risk prostate cancer
may appropriately choose immediate treatment instead of AS,
including patients who are younger, have high-volume Gleason 6
cancer,8 and have African American ethnicity,9 because these
patients have a higher likelihood for disease progression during
their lifetime. A potential drawback to AS is the use of more
intensive treatments when cancer progresses. That is, RT for
intermediate- or high-risk prostate cancer often involves con-
current androgen deprivation therapy or external beam RT with
or without brachytherapy boost; patients who undergo RP with
intermediate- or high-risk cancer may be more likely to need
adjuvant RT. However, this needs to be balanced against the
benefits of AS, including delaying treatment and associated short-
term and long-term adverse effects, and decisions need to take
patient preference into account.
Use of ancillary tests beyond DRE, PSA, and biopsy to improve
patient selection or as part of monitoring in an AS regimen remains
investigational. Although there is a potential for genomic tests10-12 that
use biopsy tissue to predict patients who are more rather than less likely
to have disease progression and cancer-specific mortality and for
multiparametric magnetic resonance imaging (mpMRI)13 to guide
biopsies to find more clinically aggressive disease,14 prospective vali-
dation of these tests is needed to assess their impact on patient outcomes
such as survival. Selective use of these ancillary tests in patients with
discordant clinical and/or pathologic findings may be appropriate.
There is no clear role for 5ARIs in a routine AS regimen.
5ARIs such as finasteride and dutasteride block the conversion of
testosterone to dihydrotestosterone.15 A randomized trial compared
dutasteride with placebo in 302 patients undergoing AS for low-
THE BOTTOM LINE (CONTINUED)
for the presence of higher-grade cancer, and definitive therapy may be warranted for select patients. For patients with limited life
expectancy (< 5 years) and low-risk cancer, watchful waiting may be more appropriate than active surveillance.
2. Active treatment (RP or RT) is recommended for most patients with intermediate-risk (Gleason score 7) localized
prostate cancer. For select patients with low-volume, intermediate-risk (Gleason 3 1 4 5 7) localized prostate
cancer, AS may be offered.
ASCO qualifying statement: Patients with Gleason score 7 (3 1 4) being considered for AS should include only those men with low-
volume Gleason pattern 4 pathology and/or age older than 75 years. Because of known interobserver variability associated with the
identification of minor Gleason pattern 4 elements, prospective intradepartmental consultation with colleagues should be considered a
cornerstone of quality assurance in this area. For patients with limited life expectancy (< 5 years), watchful waiting may be more
appropriate than AS.
3. The AS protocol should include the following tests:
• A PSA test every 3 to 6 months
• DRE at least every year
• At least a 12-core confirmatory transrectal ultrasound guided biopsy (including anterior directed cores) within 6 to
12 months, and then serial biopsy every 2 to 5 years thereafter or more frequently if clinically warranted. Men with
limited life expectancy may transition to watchful waiting and avoid further biopsies.
The AS protocol may include ancillary tests that are still under investigation. These could include multiparametric MRI (mpMRI) and/
or genomic testing. mpMRI and genomic testing may be indicated when a patient’s clinical findings are discordant with the pathologic
findings and could be useful in identifying occult cancers or changes indicative of tumor progression in patients at risk. These tests may
also be helpful when the decision regarding AS versus active treatment is uncertain (eg, in cases of low-volume Gleason 3 1 4). mpMRI
should not be used as a replacement for rebiopsy.
4. For patients undergoing AS who are reclassified to a higher-risk category, defined by repeat biopsy showing Gleason score $ 7
and/or significant increases in the volume of Gleason 6 tumor, consideration should be given to active therapy (eg, RP or RT).
Additional Resources
More information, which may include Data and Methodology Supplements, slide sets, and clinical tools and resources, is available at
www.asco.org/endorsements/ActiveSurveillance and www.asco.org/guidelineswiki. Patient information is available at www.cancer.net.
A link to the Active Surveillance for the Management of Localized Prostate Cancer guideline can be found at http://www.cancercare.on.
ca/common/pages/UserFile.aspx?fileId5325696.
ASCO believes that cancer clinical trials are vital to inform medical decisions and improve cancer care and that all patients should have
the opportunity to participate.
www.jco.org
© 2016 by American Society of Clinical Oncology
2189
Active Surveillance in Prostate Cancer Guideline Endorsement
169.230.248.131
Information downloaded from jco.ascopubs.org and provided by at CONS CALIFORNIA DIG LIB on July 28, 2016 from
Copyright © 2016 American Society of Clinical Oncology. All rights reserved.
 risk prostate cancer.16 After 3 years of follow-up, there was no
significant difference between the two groups with respect to
pathologic disease progression (defined as increase in either
disease volume and/or Gleason score; 29% dutasteride versus
33% placebo; P 5 .079).17 There was also no difference in
progression to Gleason 7 or higher disease. It should also be noted
that 5ARIs significantly alter PSA kinetics, and clinical decisions
regarding rebiopsy in patients taking these medications need to
take this into account. Although the CCO guideline included a
recommendation stating that daily 5ARIs may have a role in men
receiving AS, the ASCO Endorsement Panel chose not to include
this recommendation, because the evidence does not support the
routine use of 5ARIs in this setting.
The ASCO Endorsement Panel was in agreement with the CCO
guideline that there is currently insufficient evidence to make rec-
ommendations with regard to the personnel who should be responsible
for the management of AS protocols. However, in the opinion of the
ASCO Endorsement Panel, a multidisciplinary team approach should
be taken when a change to active treatment is considered.
ENDORSEMENT RECOMMENDATION
ASCO endorses all but one recommendation from CCO’s Active
Surveillance for the Management of Localized Prostate Cancer4
guideline published in the Canadian Urological Association Journal,
with qualifying statements.
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
More information, which may include a Data Supplement, a
Methodology Supplement, slide sets, and clinical tools and resources,
is available at www.asco.org/endorsements/ActiveSurveillance and
www.asco.org/guidelineswiki. Patient information is available at
www.cancer.net. Visit www.asco.org/guidelineswiki to provide
comments on the guideline or to submit new evidence.
AUTHORS’ DISCLOSURES OF POTENTIAL CONFLICTS
OF INTEREST
Disclosures provided by the authors are available with this article at
www.jco.org.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Administrative support: R. Bryan Rumble
Manuscript writing: All authors
Final approval of manuscript: All authors
REFERENCES
1. Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A: Cancer statistics,
2015. CA Cancer J Clin 65:5-29, 2015
2. Basch E, Oliver TK, Vickers A, et al: Screening
for prostate cancer with prostate-specific antigen
testing: American Society of Clinical Oncology Pro-
visional Clinical Opinion. J Clin Oncol 30:3020-3025,
2012
3. Dahabreh IJ, Chung M, Balk EM, et al: Active
surveillance in men with localized prostate cancer: A
systematic review. Ann Intern Med 156:582-590, 2012
4. Morash C, Tey R, Agbassi C, et al: Active
surveillance for the management of localized pros-
tate cancer: Guideline recommendations. Can Urol
Assoc J 9:171-178, 2015
5. Klotz L, Zhang L, Lam A, et al: Clinical results of
long-term follow-up of a large, active surveillance cohort
with localized prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol 28:126-131,
2010
6. Nam RK, Oliver TK, Vickers AJ, et al: Prostate-
specific antigen test for prostate cancer screening:
American Society of Clinical Oncology provisional
clinical opinion. J Oncol Pract 8:315-317, 2012
7. Nam RK, Saskin R, Lee Y, et al: Increasing
hospital admission rates for urological complications
after transrectal ultrasound guided prostate biopsy.
J Urol 183:963-968, 2010
8. Eggener SE, Badani K, Barocas DA, et al:
Gleason 6 prostate cancer: Translating biology into
population health. J Urol 194:626-634, 2015
9. Sundi D, Ross AE, Humphreys EB, et al:
African American men with very low-risk prostate
cancer exhibit adverse oncologic outcomes after
radical prostatectomy: Should active surveillance still
be an option for them? J Clin Oncol 31:2991-2997,
2013
10. Blume-Jensen P, Berman DM, Rimm DL, et al:
Development and clinical validation of an in situ
biopsy-based multimarker assay for risk stratification
in prostate cancer. Clin Cancer Res 21:2591-2600,
2015
11. Cuzick J, Berney DM, Fisher G, et al: Prog-
nostic value of a cell cycle progression signature for
prostate cancer death in a conservatively managed
needle biopsy cohort. Br J Cancer 106:1095-1099,
2012
12. Dall’Era MA, Denes B, Lawrence HJ, et al:
Clinical utility of a 17-gene genomic prostate score
(GPS) for treatment selection in men with newly
diagnosed prostate cancer (PCa). J Clin Oncol 33,
2015 (suppl; abstr e16124)
13. Schoots IG, Petrides N, Giganti F, et al:
Magnetic resonance imaging in active surveillance of
prostate cancer: A systematic review. Eur Urol 67:
627-636, 2015
14. Siddiqui MM, Rais-Bahrami S, Turkbey B, et al:
Comparison of MR/ultrasound fusion-guided biopsy
with ultrasound-guided biopsy for the diagnosis of
prostate cancer. JAMA 313:390-397, 2015
15. Roehrborn CG, Boyle P, Nickel JC, et al;
ARIA3001 ARIA3002 and ARIA3003 Study Inves-
tigators: Efficacy and safety of a dual inhibitor of 5-
alpha-reductase types 1 and 2 (dutasteride) in
men with benign prostatic hyperplasia. Urology
60:434-441, 2002
16. Fleshner NE, Lucia MS, Egerdie B, et al:
Dutasteride in localised prostate cancer manage-
ment: The REDEEM randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled
trial.
Lancet
379:1103-1111,
2012
17. Fleshner NE; REDEEM trial investigators:
Dutasteride and active surveillance of low-risk prostate
cancer. Lancet 379:1590, 2012
Affiliations
Ronald C. Chen, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC; R. Bryan Rumble, American Society of Clinical Oncology,
Alexandria, VA; D. Andrew Loblaw, Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre; Antonio Finelli, Princess Margaret Hospital, Toronto; Scott C.
Morgan, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario; Scott Tyldesley, The British Columbia Cancer Agency-Vancouver Centre, Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada; Behfar Ehdaie, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY; Matthew R. Cooperberg, University of
California San Francisco Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, San Francisco, CA; John J. Haluschak, Dayton Physicians
Network, Dayton, OH; Winston Tan, Mayo Clinic Florida, Jacksonville, FL; Stewart Justman, University of Montana, Missoula, MT; and
Suneil Jain, Queen’s University Belfast, Belfast, Northern Ireland, United Kingdom.
n n n
2190
© 2016 by American Society of Clinical Oncology
JOURNAL OF CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Chen et al
169.230.248.131
Information downloaded from jco.ascopubs.org and provided by at CONS CALIFORNIA DIG LIB on July 28, 2016 from
Copyright © 2016 American Society of Clinical Oncology. All rights reserved.
 AUTHORS’ DISCLOSURES OF POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
Active Surveillance for the Management of Localized Prostate Cancer (Cancer Care Ontario Guideline): American Society of Clinical Oncology
Clinical Practice Guideline Endorsement
The following represents disclosure information provided by authors of this manuscript. All relationships are considered compensated. Relationships are
self-held unless noted. I 5 Immediate Family Member, Inst 5 My Institution. Relationships may not relate to the subject matter of this manuscript. For more
information about ASCO’s conflict of interest policy, please refer to www.asco.org/rwc or jco.ascopubs.org/site/ifc.
Ronald C. Chen
Consulting or Advisory Role: Medivation/Astellas Pharma
Research Funding: Accuray
R. Bryan Rumble
Employment: Park Lane Terrace (I)
D. Andrew Loblaw
Honoraria: Amgen, AstraZeneca, Elekta, Paladin Labs, Sanofi,
GlaxoSmithKline (I), Merck (I), Bristol-Myers Squibb (I), Novartis (I),
Roche (I), Janssen Oncology, Astellas Pharma
Consulting or Advisory Role: GlaxoSmithKline (I), Merck (I), Bristol-
Myers Squibb (I), Novartis (I), Roche (I), Amgen, Astellas Pharma, Sanofi,
Janssen Oncology, Atlas Global Healthcare, Bayer, Ferring Pharmaceuticals
Patents, Royalties, Other Intellectual Property: Patent pending for prostate
immobilization device
Travel, Accommodations, Expenses: Janssen Oncology, Amgen, Astellas
Pharma
Antonio Finelli
Stock or Other Ownership: Pfizer, Sanofi, Merck, Novo Nordisk, Bristol-
Myers Squibb, Gilead Sciences, AbbVie, Actavis, Baxter
Honoraria: Amgen, Janssen Oncology, Astellas Pharma
Consulting or Advisory Role: Amgen, Janssen Oncology, Astellas Pharma
Behfar Ehdaie
Research Funding: NIH/NCI Cancer Center Support Grant P30
CA008748
Matthew R. Cooperberg
Honoraria: Takeda Pharmaceuticals
Consulting or Advisory Role: Myriad Genetics, Janssen, Astellas Pharma,
Dendreon
Research Funding: Myriad Pharmaceuticals (Inst), Genomic Health
(Inst), GenomeDx (Inst)
Scott C. Morgan
Honoraria: Bayer
Consulting or Advisory Role: Janssen, Accuray, Bayer, AbbVie, Astellas
Pharma, Ferring Pharmaceuticals, Sanofi
Scott Tyldesley
No relationship to disclose
John J. Haluschak
Stock or Other Ownership: Dayton Physicians Network
Honoraria: Dendreon
Consulting or Advisory Role: Pfizer
Research Funding: Signal Point Clinical Research Center
Travel, Accommodations, Expenses: Argos Therapeutics
Winston Tan
Research Funding: Novartis
Stewart Justman
Stock or Other Ownership: Various mutual funds
Suneil Jain
Honoraria: Janssen-Cilag, Ferring Pharmaceuticals
Consulting or Advisory Role: Janssen-Cilag, Ferring Pharmaceuticals
Speakers’ Bureau: Janssen-Cilag
Travel, Accommodations, Expenses: Astellas Pharma
www.jco.org
© 2016 by American Society of Clinical Oncology
Active Surveillance in Prostate Cancer Guideline Endorsement
169.230.248.131
Information downloaded from jco.ascopubs.org and provided by at CONS CALIFORNIA DIG LIB on July 28, 2016 from
Copyright © 2016 American Society of Clinical Oncology. All rights reserved.
 Acknowledgment
The ASCO Endorsement Panel thanks Nofisat Ismaila, MD, PhD, for assisting with the Methodology review, Craig Pollack, MD,
MHS, and Eric Singer, MD, MA, and the rest of the Clinical Practice Guidelines Committee for their thoughtful reviews and insightful
comments on this guideline endorsement, and the authors of the original Cancer Care Ontario Guideline (the Active Surveillance
Guideline Development Group: Chris Morash, MD; Rovena Tey, MSc; Chika Agbassi, MBBS, MSc, CCRA; Laurence Klotz, MD; Tom
McGowan, MD; John Srigley, MD; Andrew Evans, MD, PhD) for producing this guidance.
Appendix
Table A1. Active Surveillance for the Management of Localized Prostate Cancer (Cancer Care Ontario Guideline): American Society of Clinical Oncology Clinical Practice
Guideline Endorsement Panel Members
Member
Affiliation
Ronald C. Chen, MD, MPH, Co-chair
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC
Suneil Jain, MD, PhD, Co-chair
Queen’s University Belfast, Belfast, Northern Ireland, United
Kingdom
D. Andrew Loblaw, MD, MSc
Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Antonio Finelli, MD, MSc
Princess Margaret Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Behfar Ehdaie, MD, MPH
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY
Matthew R. Cooperberg, MD, MPH
University of California San Francisco Helen Diller Family
Comprehensive Cancer Center, San Francisco, CA
Scott C. Morgan, MD, MSc
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
Scott Tyldesley, MD
The British Columbia Cancer Agency-Vancouver Centre,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
John J. Haluschak, MD
Dayton Physicians Network, Dayton, OH
Winston Tan, MD
Mayo Clinic Florida, Jacksonville, FL
Stewart Justman, PhD
University of Montana, Missoula, MT
ASCO Staff: R. Bryan Rumble, MSc, Alexandria, VA.
© 2016 by American Society of Clinical Oncology
JOURNAL OF CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Chen et al
169.230.248.131
Information downloaded from jco.ascopubs.org and provided by at CONS CALIFORNIA DIG LIB on July 28, 2016 from
Copyright © 2016 American Society of Clinical Oncology. All rights reserved.
