 Annals of Oncology 27: 1423–1443, 2016
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdw213
ESMO European Consortium Study on the availability,
out-of-pocket costs and accessibility of antineoplastic
medicines in Europe
N. Cherny1*, R. Sullivan2, J. Torode3, M. Saar4 & A. Eniu5
1Cancer Pain and Palliative Medicine Service, Department of Medical Oncology, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel; 2Kings Health Partners Integrated
Cancer Centre, King’s College London, Institute of Cancer Policy, London, UK; 3Advocacy and Programmes, Union for International Cancer Control (UICC), Geneva,
Switzerland; 4Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia; 5Department of Breast Tumors, Cancer Institute Ion Chiricuta Cluj-Napoca, Cluj-Napoca, Romania
Received 14 March 2016; revised 13 April 2016 and 11 May 2016; accepted 13 May 2016
Background: The management of cancer is predicated on the availability and affordability of anticancer therapies, which
may be either curative or noncurative.
Aim: The primary aims of the study were to evaluate (i) the formulary availability of licensed antineoplastic medicines
across Europe; (ii) patient out-of-pocket costs for the medications and (iii) the actual availability of the medication for a
patient with a valid prescription.
Materials and methods: The survey tool was based on the previous ESMO studies that addressed the availability and
accessibility of opioids for the management of cancer pain. A total of 185 field reporters from 49 countries were invited to
participate. The preliminary set of data was posted on the ESMO website for open peer-review, and amendments have
been incorporated into the final report.
Results: There are substantial differences in the formulary availability, out-of-pocket costs and actual availability for many
anticancer medicines. The most profound lack of availability is in countries with lower levels of economic development,
particularly in Eastern Europe, and these are largely related to the cost of targeted agents approved in the last 10 years.
Discrepancies are less profound among medications on the WHO model essential medicines list (EML) for cancer and in
curative settings. However, medicine shortages also affect WHO EML medicines, with relevant therapeutic implications
for many patients.
Conclusions: The cost and affordability of anticancer treatments with recent market approval is the major factor contribut-
ing to inequity of access to anticancer medications. This is especially true with regards to new medications used in the man-
agement of EGFR- or ALK-mutated non-small-cell lung cancer, metastatic melanoma, metastatic renal cell cancer, RAS/RAF
wild-type metastatic colorectal cancer, HER2 overexpressed breast cancer and castration-resistant metastatic prostate
cancer.
Key words: anticancer medications, public policy, medication shortages, pharmaco-economics, cost of medications,
ESMO
introduction
Contemporary management of cancer is predicated on the avail-
ability and affordability, particularly personal affordability in
many countries, of anticancer therapies. These therapies may be
either curative or noncurative, and in the latter case, the aim of
treatment is to either prolong survival and/or improve the quality
of life. The repertoire of anticancer medicines has expanded sub-
stantially and rapidly in recent years. While this has considerably
improved long-term survival rates for some cancers, more often it
is duration and quality of survival that have improved. However,
improvements in outcomes have come at a very substantial cost,
and in the past decade, the average price of new anticancer agents
has more than doubled, from $4500 to >$10 000 per month [1, 2].
The accessibility of any medication is dependent upon a
complex sequence of processes: licensing; manufacture and/or
importation; procurement by government insurers or hospitals;
budget allocations for purchase by the public sector; the applica-
tion of evidence-based clinical practice guidelines and the degree
to which a medication is subsidized or reimbursed (which
impacts upon a patient’s out-of-pocket costs) [3]. This latter con-
sideration is critical since out-of-pocket expenses to patients
*Correspondence to: Dr Nathan I. Cherny, Cancer Pain and Palliative Medicine Service,
Department of Medical Oncology, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem 91031,
Israel. Tel: +972-508685780; Fax: +972-2-6666731; E-mail: feedback@esmo.org
Annals of Oncology
special articles
© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European Society for Medical Oncology.
All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1423/2237392 by guest on 01 June 2019
 contribute to financial distress [4, 5] or toxicity [6] associated
with treatment procurement and/or lack of realistic access. Out-
of-pocket costs are also due to price ‘mark-ups’ by wholesalers,
hospitals and sometimes even doctors and pharmacists [7, 8].
Furthermore, access to medication may be confounded by
requirements for preapproval for the provision of subsidized
medications, and this may, in some instances, cause substantial
delay in the initiation of treatment [9].
Europe is politically and economically heterogeneous. All of
the Western European economies and Israel are categorized by
the World Bank as high-income countries. In contrast, with the
exception of Hungary and the Czech Republic, all of the Eastern
European economies are considered upper-middle income [10].
Previous studies have highlighted that the cost of care delivery
[11], cost of anticancer medications [8], total expenditure on
cancer medicines and cancer outcomes [12–14] vary substan-
tially across Europe and that these are influenced by a country’s
level of economic and social development [14, 15].
The European Union (EU) has repeatedly expressed a com-
mitment to improving the equity of healthcare services across
Europe [16, 17]. This approach has been endorsed by the
European Society for Medical Oncology (ESMO), which aims
for high-level cancer care to be available in all European coun-
tries. An essential step in addressing inequalities in the provision
of medical oncology services is to collate a comprehensive base-
line dataset that includes the formulary availability and actual
availability of anticancer medications, as well as out-of-pocket
costs to patients.
There is general and evidence-based support for three common
issues regarding the availability of anticancer medicines for the
treatment of cancer in Europe: (i) formulary limitations: while
these have been generally described, there has been no compre-
hensive mapping of anticancer medicine formularies in Europe;
(ii) actual availability: there are well-documented instances of
shortages that have impaired care delivery in multiple sites in
Europe [18, 19] and (iii) barriers to access to new anticancer medi-
cations, either because of resource allocation issues or prohibitive
out-of-pocket expense to patients.
The primary aims of the study were to evaluate (i) the formu-
lary availability of licensed antineoplastic medicines across
Europe; (ii) patient out-of-pocket costs for the medications and
(iii) the actual availability of the medication for a patient with a
valid prescription. Secondary aims were to obtain information
relating to the factors adversely impacting the availability of
antineoplastic agents and reimbursement preapproval require-
ments and delays. This report focuses on the primary aims of
the study.
methodology
project development
The study was developed by ESMO with input and cooperation from the
ESMO Executive Board, ESMO National Representatives, ESMO EU Policy
Committee ESMO Education Committee, ESMO Practising Oncologists
Committee, the ESMO Global Policy Committee (formerly the Emerging
Countries Committee) as well as the ESMO Faculty and three collaborating
partners: the Union for International Cancer Control (UICC), the Institute
of Cancer Policy of King’s College London and the European Society of
Oncology Pharmacy (ESOP). Implementation and data analysis were carried
out by independent researchers from the collaborating partner organiza-
tions. The World Health Organization (WHO) was a supporting partner in
this project which is part of an ongoing 3-year work plan between ESMO
and the WHO.
study format and data collection.
The survey tool was based on the
previous ESMO collaborative studies that addressed the availability and
accessibility of opioids for the management of cancer pain [20, 21]. Additional
sections were added to address issues specific to anticancer agents and were
reviewed by the collaborating partner organizations.
The survey consisted of two parts: part one consisted of six general ques-
tions regarding the country’s healthcare system; and part two surveyed the
Table 1. Diseases surveyed
1) Breast cancer adjuvant
2) Breast cancer metastatic
3) Lung cancer
4) Colorectal cancer
5) Prostate cancer
6) Ovarian cancer
7) Sarcoma
8) Pancreatic cancer
9) Germ cell cancer
10) Renal cell cancer
11) Gastrointestinal germ cell tumors GIST
12) Urothelial cancers
13) Gastric and esophageal cancer
14) Melanoma
Table 2. Number of reporters for each country
Number of field
reporters
Western European countries
Eastern European countries
6
Holland, Spain (N = 2)
5
Austria, Holland, Belgium, Germany, Switzerland (N = 5)
4
Cyprus, Italy (N = 2)
Bulgaria, Croatia, Estonia, Hungary, Romania, Slovenia (N = 6)
3
Israel, Norway, Turkey (N = 3)
Belarus, Kyrgyzstan, Poland (N = 3)
2
France, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Sweden, UK (N = 6)
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Czech Republic, Malta, Russian
Federation, Serbia (N = 6)
1
Denmark, Finland, Luxemburg (N = 3)
Armenia, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kosovo, Latvia, Lithuania, Macedonia;
Montenegro, Slovakia, Turkmenistan, Ukraine (N = 12)
 | Cherny et al.
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
special articles
Annals of Oncology
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1423/2237392 by guest on 01 June 2019
 formulary of anticancer medications used to treat 14 common disease situa-
tions (Table 1). The list of anticancer medications for each disease entity was
derived from ESMO and National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN)
guidelines and ‘UpToDate’ subject reviews and included medications
approved by either the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) or the
European Medicines Agency (EMA) as of March 2014. Field reporters were
asked to indicate the following for each medication: whether it was permissible
to prescribe the cancer medicine for this indication; if the medication is reim-
bursed for this indication; the proportion of the full retail price the average
patient pays for the medication; preauthorization requirements and delays of
>4 weeks in the approval process; the actual availability of the medication for
most patients in the country under question and, in cases where the medica-
tion is not always available, the reason(s) for lack of availability.
ESMO and the collaborating partners sought to identify a minimum of two
field reporters through an iterative process for each country. The field repor-
ters were derived from either national or approved representatives of the pro-
fessional organizations collaborating in this project; they could be either
oncologists or oncology pharmacists. A total of 185 field reporters from 49
countries were invited to participate.
Electronic survey forms were developed on a Qualtrics platform, which
facilitated automatic data entry into an Excel spread sheet for analysis.
Data submitted between 4 April 2014 and 17 June 2014 by the two field
reporters from each country were crosschecked by the principle investiga-
tor (Nathan Cherny). When discrepancies between reporters were identi-
fied, clarifications were requested. When discrepancies persisted, priority
was given to the response provided by the most highly credentialed report-
er and where supportive data were presented. The principle investigator
tabulated and graphically presented the data in the format used in the pre-
vious ESMO surveys addressing opioid availability for the management of
cancer pain [20].
The results pertaining to the first two aims of the study are presented in
figures labeled ‘Formulary availability and out of pocket cost’. These color-coded
figures indicate (in black) medications that are not on formulary (aim 1), and for
drugs on formulary, the percentage of the full price that patients pay out-of-
pocket (after state or insurance reimbursement) (aim 2). The results pertaining
to aim 3 are presented in figures labeled ‘Actual availability’. These color-coded
figures indicate (in black) medications that are not on formulary, and for drugs
on formulary, the percentage of instances in which a patient with a valid pre-
scription can actually access the prescribed medication.
A preliminary report of the findings was presented at the ESMO Madrid
Congress in September 2014. The preliminary data were posted on the
ESMO website for external validation between November 2014 and February
2015. Invitations were sent to all members of the coordinating and collabor-
ating partner organizations to review the data and to submit any corrections
or amendments. Amendments were collated, crosschecked and incorporated
into the final report that was completed in May 2015.
For presentation purposes, data are presented for 27 ‘Eastern European’
countries and 21 ‘Western European’ countries including Cyprus, Israel and
Turkey, broadly based on the economic demarcation between ‘old’ and ‘new’
Europe. For clarity of presentation, and to highlight findings of inequity and
impact, disease entities were pragmatically classified as ‘broad disparity’,
‘segmental disparity’, ‘patchy disparity’ or ‘low disparity’ based upon the
degree of disparity in formulary availability, out-of-pocket cost and accessi-
bility of anticancer medicines used for each disease entity between Eastern
Figure 1. Melanoma medications: formulary availability and out-of-pocket costs.
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdw213 | 
Annals of Oncology
special articles
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1423/2237392 by guest on 01 June 2019
 and Western European country clusters and to emphasize those disease en-
tities that are most strongly affected by disparities.
results
Reports were submitted by 126 individual reporters from 48
countries (Table 2). The respondents included 31 oncology
pharmacists (from 22 countries) and 95 oncologists. Additional
peer-review data were submitted by a further 57 reporters from
17 countries.
diseases with high levels of disparity in
out-of-pocket cost and availability
High disparity refers to disease entities in which major disparities
in formulary availability, out-of-pocket cost and accessibility are
observed for most agents used in the contemporary treatment of
a disease. This was observed in melanoma and renal cell cancer.
melanoma. In contrast to the notable exceptions of interferon and
dacarbazine, which are older, less expensive and less effective
therapies, profound differences were observed between Western and
Eastern Europe in the availability and/or out-of-pocket cost to
patients of all the recent biological treatments for the management
of metastatic melanoma. In contrast to Western Europe, where
there was widespread availability of either free or highly subsidized
access to expensive and new biological and molecularly targeted
agents, with a few notable exceptions (Czech Republic, Montenegro
and Slovenia), many of these medications were either unavailable or
only available at full cost to patients in Eastern Europe (Figure 1).
The medications were almost always available in Western Europe
when prescribed, but much less so in Eastern Europe (Figure 2).
Only a minority of countries in both regions request preapproval
for reimbursement for these agents.
renal cell cancer (Figures 3 and 4). Profound differences were
observed between Western and Eastern Europe in the availability
and/or out-of-pocket cost of all the recent biological treatments
for the management of metastatic renal cell cancer. In contrast to
Western Europe, where there was widespread availability of either
free or highly subsidized access to expensive and new biological
and molecularly targeted agents, with a few notable exceptions
(Belarus, Czech Republic, Hungary, Montenegro, Slovenia and
Ukraine), many of these medications were either unavailable or
only available at full cost to patients in Eastern Europe (Figure 3).
The medications were almost always available in Western Europe
when prescribed, less so in Eastern Europe (Figure 4). Preapproval
for reimbursement for these agents was commonplace in both
regions, but this process resulted in treatment delays of >4 weeks
only in a few countries.
disease entities with segmental disparities in
out-of-pocket cost and availability
Segmental disparity refers to disease entities in which major
disparities in formulary availability, out-of-pocket cost and
Figure 2. Melanoma medications: actual availability.
 | Cherny et al.
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
special articles
Annals of Oncology
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1423/2237392 by guest on 01 June 2019
 accessibility are limited to distinct subgroups of patients defined
by their biological or disease status.
lung cancer. The disease-modifying therapies used in the
management of lung cancer can broadly be divided into
chemotherapy formulations and new molecularly targeted agents
used either in the management of EGFR- or ALK-mutated non-
small-cell lung cancer or for the reduction of morbidity from bone
metastases. Overall, most of the relevant chemotherapy options
were available and subsidized in Eastern and Western Europe.
Substantial discrepancies were seen among the chemotherapy
agents in a range of Eastern European countries, particularly
regarding the therapeutic options of etoposide tablets, pemetrexed,
topotecan and oral vinorelbine tablets. This discrepancy mainly
concerns a cluster of countries including Armenia, Georgia,
Kosovo, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lithuania and the Russian Federation.
Major discrepancies were observed in the availability of targeted
therapy for patients suffering from non-small-cell lung cancer
subtypes with either EGFR or ALK mutations [22] (Figures 5 and 6).
In contrast to Western Europe, where these medications are
widely available and generally fully subsidized, in many Eastern
European countries they were either unavailable or available only at
full cost to patients. Requirement for reimbursement preapproval is
commonplace in those countries in which new molecularly targeted
therapies are available and reimbursed. In Western Europe,
this requirement rarely leads to treatment delays of >4 weeks.
Substantial delays were more common in those Eastern European
countries where these medications were available and subsidized.
(Complete tables are available in supplementary file, available at
Annals of Oncology online.)
colorectal cancer. The core chemotherapy medications for the
management of colorectal cancer are 5-FU, capecitabine, irinotecan
and oxaliplatin, which are widely available and generally subsidized
in Eastern and Western Europe. Bevacizumab, which has modest
incremental benefit [22], is widely available in Eastern and Western
Europe. However, in Eastern Europe, it is available only at full cost
to patients in Armenia, Georgia, Latvia, Macedonia and Malta.
Figure 3. Renal cell cancer: formulary availability and out-of-pocket costs.
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdw213 | 
Annals of Oncology
special articles
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1423/2237392 by guest on 01 June 2019
 Three expensive agents of limited benefit (regorafenib, raltitrexed
and aflibercept) [22] are less available than other agents in Western
Europe and almost never available other than at full cost in Eastern
Europe. The most dramatic discrepancies are observed for the two
agents that have been shown to substantially improve overall
survival of patients with K-RAS, N-RAS and B-RAF wild-type
metastatic colorectal cancer: cetuximab and panitumumab [22]
(Figures 7 and 8). These are almost universally available and fully
subsidized in Western Europe, while in Eastern Europe they were
rarely subsidized other than in Bulgaria, the Czech Republic,
Montenegro, Poland, Slovenia, Slovakia and the Ukraine. Many
countries require reimbursement preapproval for expensive agents,
although delays of >4 weeks caused by this process were very
infrequent. (Complete tables are available in supplementary file,
available at Annals of Oncology online.)
metastatic breast cancer. The longitudinal management of
patients with metastatic breast cancer is complex and is
influenced by the underlying disease biology, in particular as to
whether tumors are sensitive to hormonal manipulations or if
they overexpress HER2. A broad range of therapeutic options
are generally available and highly subsidized for patients with
hormone-sensitive breast cancer in both Western and Eastern
Europe. Fulvestrant, usually used as a third-line hormonal
intervention, is either unavailable or available only at full cost in
most Eastern European countries (Figures 9 and 10). Most of the
older chemotherapy agents are available at no or minimal cost in all
Western European countries, except Malta, and most Eastern
European countries, except Armenia, Kyrgyzstan and Montenegro
where the patients need to pay full price for many of these agents.
Albumin-bound
paclitaxel,
eribulin,
everolimus,
liposomal
doxorubicin and ixabepilone, all of which are expensive agents with
modest clinical benefit [22], are generally available at no or low cost
in Western Europe and are either unavailable or available only at full
cost to patients in most Eastern European countries. Trastuzumab,
used in the management of HER2 overexpressed breast cancer, is
widely available at no cost in all Western European and most
Eastern European countries (except Armenia, Georgia, Kosovo and
Figure 4. Renal cell cancer: actual availability.
 | Cherny et al.
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
special articles
Annals of Oncology
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1423/2237392 by guest on 01 June 2019
 Uzbekistan). However, with few exceptions, other HER2 targeted
agents, including pertuzumab, TDM-1 and lapatinib, are only
available at full cost in most Eastern European countries, as well as
in Cyprus, Malta and Turkey (Figures 9 and 10). Preapproval is
commonly required in many countries when reimbursement was
available for expensive agents. This process infrequently causes
treatment delays of >4 weeks. (Complete tables are available in
supplementary file, available at Annals of Oncology online.)
prostate cancer. Whereas first-line therapy with LHRH agonists
and testosterone antagonists are widely available at minimal
out-of-pocket expense to patients, most Eastern European
countries do not subsidize cabazitaxel, abiraterone, enzalutamide
or radium 223, and availability of these agents is often limited
(Figures 11 and 12). (Complete tables are available in supplementary
file, available at Annals of Oncology online.)
diseases with patchy disparities
in out-of-pocket cost and availability
Patchy disparity refers to disease entities in which disparities in
formulary availability, out-of-pocket cost and accessibility are
limited or less severe.
Figure 5. EGFR-mutated non-small-cell lung cancer: formulary availability and out-of-pocket costs.
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdw213 | 
Annals of Oncology
special articles
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1423/2237392 by guest on 01 June 2019
 gastric and esophageal cancer. Out-of-pocket expense was greater,
and availability was slightly less for capecitabine and oxaliplatinum
in some Eastern European countries, in particular Armenia,
Kyrgyzstan, Lithuania and Uzbekistan, compared with Western
European countries. For those patients with tumors overexpressing
HER2, trastuzumab was widely available without out-of-pocket cost
in Western Europe but in Eastern Europe it was either unavailable
or only available at full cost in 11/27 of the countries surveyed
(Albania, Armenia, Belarus, Croatia, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Romania,
the Russian Federation, Serbia and Uzbekistan). (Complete tables
are available in supplementary file, available at Annals of Oncology
online.)
ovarian cancer. Minor discrepancies between Western and
Eastern Europe were observed regarding the availability and
out-of-pocket cost for patients for topotecan and etoposide
tablets. Major discrepancies were observed regarding the out-of-
pocket cost and availability of liposomal doxorubicin and
bevacizumab for the management of patients with high-risk
ovarian cancer. (Complete tables are available in supplementary
file, available at Annals of Oncology online.)
sarcoma. Major discrepancies between Eastern and Western
Europe were observed regarding the out-of-pocket cost for
patients and availability of the three more expensive agents
Figure 6. EGFR-mutated non-small-cell lung cancer: actual availability.
 | Cherny et al.
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
special articles
Annals of Oncology
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1423/2237392 by guest on 01 June 2019
 (pazopanib, trabectedin and liposomal doxorubicin) used for
this indication. (Complete tables are available in supplementary
file, available at Annals of Oncology online.)
gastrointestinal stromal tumors. Imatinib is widely available in
Eastern and Western Europe for the management of gastrointestinal
stromal tumors (GIST). Imatinib is generally available at no
out-of-pocket cost to patients, even in Eastern Europe. Alternative
tyrosine kinase inhibitors, including sunitinib, sorafenib and
regorafenib, have variable out-of-pocket cost and availability in both
Western and Eastern Europe. However, in general, these medicines
were associated with greater out-of-pocket expense and lower
availability in Eastern Europe. (Complete tables are available in
supplementary file, available at Annals of Oncology online.)
Figure 7. RAS/RAF wild-type metastatic colorectal cancer: formulary availability and out-of-pocket costs.
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdw213 | 
Annals of Oncology
special articles
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1423/2237392 by guest on 01 June 2019
 pancreatic cancer. Whereas gemcitabine and cisplatinum are
widely available at minimal out-of-pocket expense in all
countries, many Eastern European countries do not subsidize
irinotecan, oxaliplatin or capecitabine. The most extreme
disparities were observed regarding albumin-bound paclitaxel
which is subsidized and available in most Western European
countries (14/21), but only in 5/27 Eastern European countries.
(Complete tables are available in supplementary file, available at
Annals of Oncology online.)
diseases with lower levels of disparity in out-of-
pocket cost and availability
Low disparity refers to disease entities in which major dispar-
ities in formulary availability, out-of-pocket cost and accessibil-
ity are not observed.
breast
cancer
in
the
adjuvant
setting. With
very
few
exceptions, most of the agents used in adjuvant management
of early-stage breast cancer were highly subsidized and widely
Figure 8. RAS/RAF wild-type metastatic colorectal cancer: actual availability.
 | Cherny et al.
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
special articles
Annals of Oncology
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1423/2237392 by guest on 01 June 2019
 available in both Eastern and Western Europe. Importantly,
this was also true for trastuzumab, which is the most expensive
agent used in the adjuvant management of breast cancer.
Trastuzumab was not subsidized in four Eastern European
countries (Armenia, Georgia, Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan) and
is only available at full cost to patients in these countries.
There is no consensus regarding the merit of zoledronate in
the adjuvant setting, and this is reflected in greater variability
in out-of-pocket cost and availability for this single agent.
Reimbursement preapproval was commonly requested for
trastuzumab and other expensive agents, but this process rarely
caused delays in therapy of >4 weeks. (Complete tables are
available in supplementary file, available at Annals of Oncology
online.)
germ cell tumors. Germ cell tumors are highly curable using a
range of relatively inexpensive cytotoxic agents. What little variability
in cost and availability was observed was related to medications used
in the setting of highly refractory disease, such as taxanes and
gemcitabine. Reimbursement preapproval for agents used in this
setting was rarely required. (Complete tables are available in
supplementary file, available at Annals of Oncology online.)
urothelial cancers. The chemotherapeutic agents used in the
management of early-stage metastatic urothelial cancer are
relatively inexpensive. With the exception of Kyrgyzstan, these
agents are widely available and highly subsidized. (Complete
tables are available in supplementary file, available at Annals of
Oncology online.)
Figure 9. Metastatic breast cancer medications for third-line hormonal and HER2 amplified: cancers: formulary availability and out-of-pocket costs.
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdw213 | 
Annals of Oncology
special articles
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1423/2237392 by guest on 01 June 2019
 correlations with world health organization model
list of essential medicines
The WHO Model List of Essential Medicines, including cancer
medicines, has recently been updated in April 2015 [23]. This
update included the addition of 16 new medicines, including
capecitabine (for colorectal and breast cancer), oxaliplatin (for
adjuvant and metastatic colorectal cancer), irinotecan (for
metastatic colorectal cancer), vinorelbine (for non-small-cell
lung cancer and metastatic breast cancer), anastrozole (for adju-
vant and metastatic breast cancer) and two very high-cost medi-
cations: imatinib (for GIST tumors) and trastuzumab (for
adjuvant and metastatic HER2 overexpressed breast cancer).
With relatively few exceptions (most notably in Kyrgyzstan,
Armenia and Belarus), most of these medications are available
with no out-of-pocket cost to patients and are reported as being
always or usually available (Figures 13 and 14). However, pro-
blems impeding actual availability were reported more com-
monly in a cluster of Eastern European countries, including
Albania,
Armenia,
Belarus,
Georgia,
Hungary,
Kosovo,
Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Slovenia, Slovakia and Ukraine.
discussion
There are large and clinically significant differences in the for-
mulary availability, out-of-pocket costs and actual availability
for many anticancer medicines in Europe. These differences are
Figure 10. Metastatic breast cancer medications for third-line hormonal and HER2 amplified: cancers: actual availability.
 | Cherny et al.
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
special articles
Annals of Oncology
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1423/2237392 by guest on 01 June 2019
 most pronounced in countries with lower levels of economic de-
velopment and low GDP per capita, particularly in Eastern
Europe. The potential impact of these disparities is greatest in
the care of patients with incurable diseases where improved
gains in patient outcomes are dependent on the availability of
expensive anticancer agents. Such diseases include EGFR- and
ALK-mutated non-small-cell lung cancer, metastatic melanoma,
metastatic renal cell cancer, RAS/RAF wild-type colorectal
cancer, Her-2-mutated metastatic breast cancer and castration-
resistant metastatic prostate cancer. Cross-correlation of this
data with magnitude of clinical benefit data derived from the
ESMO Magnitude of Clinical Benefit Scale (ESMO-MCBS) indi-
cates that many of these medications are associated with signifi-
cant clinical benefit [22].
The discrepancies in formulary availability and out-of-pocket
costs are less pronounced between the Western European coun-
tries and among anticancer medicines on the WHO Model List
of Essential Medicines and among those used primarily in cura-
tive settings. This latter point is best illustrated by the study’s find-
ings in relation to trastuzumab in the setting of adjuvant breast
cancer for HER2-positive disease and imatinib for GIST which,
though expensive, are subsidized and available in most countries.
Figure 11. Castrate-resistant prostate cancer: formulary availability and out-of-pocket costs.
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdw213 | 
Annals of Oncology
special articles
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1423/2237392 by guest on 01 June 2019
 The discrepancies are least when curative treatments only require
classical anticancer medicines and not new molecularly targeted
agents, such as in the management of germ-cell tumors, urothe-
lial cancer and gastroesophageal cancer. However, there are also
serious gaps in availability of basic chemotherapeutic medicines
in many Central and Eastern European countries.
disclaimers
The information presented in this survey is a time-constrained
‘snapshot’ of the situation, as was reported during the survey
period, and it will be subject to change over time. Consequently,
this dataset does not incorporate newer immunotherapies that
were introduced to the therapeutic repertoire since the study
was designed and administered.
The data were derived from practicing clinicians and oncol-
ogy pharmacists working in the field and not from state author-
ities or statutory bodies. Reporting physicians were asked to
consult with regulatory authorities in circumstances, in which
they were unsure of cost or formulary issue. The accuracy of the
data is dependent on the reporting accuracy of field reporters
and their due diligence in verification of facts. Field reporters
were nominated on the basis of recognized involvement in on-
cology practice and, in many cases, in leadership positions in
oncology or in oncology pharmacy in their country. The meth-
odology incorporated measures to minimize error, including
multiple reporters and cross-checks between reporters, and a
process of open peer-review. Cross-checking between reporters
was not possible in 13/21 Western and 12/27 Eastern European
countries where submissions were received by one reporter, in
Figure 12. Castrate-resistant prostate cancer: actual availability.
 | Cherny et al.
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
special articles
Annals of Oncology
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1423/2237392 by guest on 01 June 2019
 which case additional verification was only possible in the open
peer-review process.
Regarding the scale for out-of-pocket cost, the cost bracket of
‘<25% cost’ represent a heterogeneous range between, at the low
end, some that are largely symbolic and some that have an annual
capitation (Switzerland) and some, at the high end, that represent
a very heavy economic burden on patients and their families.
The contents of the discussion regarding public policy impli-
cations of the findings (Below) are the independent opinions
and conclusions of the author/investigators whose’ conflicts of
interest are disclosed, and they should not be imputed to neces-
sarily represent the opinions of the collaborating organization
that have supported this study.
shortages as a barrier to access
Our study found that even some classical, low-cost, anticancer
medicines, e.g. tamoxifen and cisplatinum, were not always rou-
tinely available largely due to manufacturing and distribution
issues. This has been confirmed in a recent study by the
European Association of Hospital Pharmacists which found that
such shortages often cause problems in availability that last for
weeks [24]. It is speculated that there are not enough manufac-
turers producing certain medications, or companies marketing
and distributing them due to a lack of financial motivation to
produce these low-profit margin medicines. Consequently, med-
icines in short supply may also be preferentially distributed to
countries which offer higher profit opportunities. Taken to-
gether, these concerns prompted the EMA to publish a paper on
medicinal product supply shortages caused by manufacturing
issues [25] and to take active measures to prevent some of the
consequences [26]. A recent analysis of the problem highlighted
that Europe is far behind the USA in terms of a standardized
and transparent reporting mechanism about the reasons for
medicine shortages [18] and consequently the link between
shortages market attractiveness, and market availability remains
speculative.
Governments and the public sector also have critical responsi-
bilities to establish and maintain effective supply mechanisms
for essential medications [27, 28]. The observation of instances
of pervasive supply problems across many agents in a single
country, as was observed in several Eastern European countries,
suggests governance issues as a contributing factor.
expensive anticancer medications and inequity
of access
significance. The most striking examples of inequality in anticancer
medicine access and availability across Europe were found around
A
Figure 13.
(A) Anticancer medications on World Health Organization Essential Medicines List 2015: formulary availability and out-of-pocket costs.
(B) Anticancer medications on World Health Organization Essential Medicines List 2015: formulary availability and out-of-pocket costs.
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdw213 | 
Annals of Oncology
special articles
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1423/2237392 by guest on 01 June 2019
 new and very expensive anticancer agents used in the noncurative
setting. The significance of this finding is a matter of divergent
approaches. Some may argue that expensive, noncurative therapies
should not be a priority for national cancer control planning in the
resource-constrained environment of Europe’s middle-income
countries with low willingness to pay thresholds. In contrast, the
EU, in its aspirational documents, has repeatedly expressed a
commitment to improving the equity of access to healthcare
services across Europe [16, 17] but without substantive recourse
to addressing the economic implications of these aspirations.
ESMO has developed a nuanced approach emphasizing the role
of Health Technology Assessment (HTA) processes and the need
to confront the economic implications of high-cost medications
on sustainability. The ESMO vision statement for 2020 states:
‘Government authorities must increasingly seek a balance
between treatment costs and clinical benefit when assessing
reimbursement policies. Ensuring sustainability of, and access to,
optimal cancer care for all patients is essential’ [29].
economic factors limiting the possibility to subsidize or reimburse
all licenced medications. Since many healthcare systems across
Europe are underfunded and relatively fragile [30], cost-
effectiveness, affordability and sustainability are now critical
issues. While these issues are affected by other factors including
price markups by wholesalers, institutions and doctors, as well
as the rapidly increasing costs of other nonmedical technologies
[31] and structural problems in public financing of health care
in general and of cancer care more specifically [11, 32], the issue
of delivering affordable medicines with a focus on the price, cost
and value of new medicines is at the heart of the public policy
issues for accessibility, availability and affordability. This
assertion holds true irrespective of improvements in the
structure of healthcare systems and better public funding.
factors contributing/driving the high pricing. Manufacturers
pricing for medications are strongly influenced by Medicare
laws in the USA (the largest market) which compel Medicare
(or the private insurance plans that provide prescription drug
coverage under Medicare ‘Part D’) to provide all FDA-approved
cancer medications at the manufacturers’ list price and without
price negotiation [1, 8, 33–35]. This suspension of market forces
has contributed to the disconnect between the cost of medications
and healthcare
outcomes that they deliver [1,
8, 36–38].
International reference pricing, whereby countries negotiate local
pricing based on prices in other countries, incentivizes global
manufacturers to price new medications as high as the US market
will bear and to maintain other international prices within a
narrow range to avoid a downward spiral through the mechanism
of reference pricing [34, 39–41]. In addition to international
reference pricing, most European countries also employ some
forms of price negotiations [34, 39–42]. However, the negotiating
power of small and lower income countries is limited, and
B
Fig. 13 Continued
 | Cherny et al.
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
special articles
Annals of Oncology
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1423/2237392 by guest on 01 June 2019
 consequently, affordability tends to be negatively correlated with
market size and per capita GDP [39–41].
the scope of the price problem. Researchers from the UK
reported that in the past 15 years the average cost of a course of
therapy with a new anticancer agent has increased almost 450%,
and the average duration of benefit delivered by these
medications has increased by only one-tenth of that amount
[43]. Indeed, the progressive increase of medication prices over
the past 15 years has made the oncology sector the most
profitable sector in the pharmaceutical industry [8, 44, 45] at a
time when the pharmaceutical industry has become the most
profitable of the main industrial sectors in the USA and Europe
[46, 47]. These considerations underscore concerns expressed
by some critics of these pricing practices as ‘profiteering’ [1, 2, 8,
38, 48, 49].
economic and ethical imperative for change. There is broad
consensus that the current pricing structures are excessive and
unsustainable and that there is a need for a paradigm change
that will enhance affordability and augment the relationship
between price and healthcare outcomes while maintaining
adequate
incentives
to
capital
investment,
research
and
development [1, 8, 33, 37, 50–52]. For newer biological and
molecular targeted agents to be part of the solution for better
outcomes, and not part of the problem of inequity in care, there
needs to be a radical rethinking of the ‘business to bedside
model’ for new medicines in cancer. Europe must re-establish
normative ethical boundaries which place medicines as part of a
fiduciary relationship of beneficence, nonmaleficence and
justice [53–55], something that pure business ethics does not do
[56, 57]. This ethical approach has been the basis for public
campaigns to address high medication costs [52, 58–60].
normative approaches to reduce the prices of medication.
Advocates of ‘just pricing’ propose a price structure that reflects
the magnitude of patient benefits (value) and that ensures
‘reasonable’ profitability and ‘adequate’ incentives for private
sector research and development [1, 33, 36, 38, 52, 59, 61].
However, this requires Europe to adopt and accept value-based
pricing (VBP) [1, 50, 62]. Health technology assessment
authorities, who have responsibility for making decisions
regarding medication reimbursement, can use VBP to bridge
science and policy. Based on resource allocation considerations
reflecting societal values and resources, HTAs in individual
countries can fix the price they are willing to pay for each QALY
(for example, $50–100 000 per QALY) or for each level of
A
Figure 14. (A) Anticancer medications on World Health Organization Essential Medicines List 2015: actual availability. (B) Anticancer medications on
World Health Organization Essential Medicines List 2015: actual availability.
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdw213 | 
Annals of Oncology
special articles
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1423/2237392 by guest on 01 June 2019
 clinical benefit [63] as has been well modeled by The National
Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) in the UK [64].
Negotiated risk sharing is also becoming increasingly popular
and may offer middle-income European countries another
mechanism for accessing new and expensive agents. The payer
and manufacturer agree on a ‘pay for performance’ market
structure where the price level and/or nature of reimbursement
are related to the actual future performance of the medication
[65, 66]. Thus, in return for a guarantee of efficacy, a payer will
add a new product to its formulary that it would not have added
otherwise. Like VBP, negotiated risk sharing also aligns financial
incentives with improving health outcomes. For example, the
UK National Health Service implemented an arrangement to
provide gefitinib for patients with locally advanced or metastatic
non-small-cell lung cancer at a single-fixed cost of £12 200 per
patient responding after 3 months of treatment [67]. A recent
review identified 148 risk sharing arrangements, including 77
for oncology medications, mainly in Western Europe but also in
Australia, Brazil, Israel and China [65]. While the mechanisms
for this have been well developed, e.g. by NICE, it is most effect-
ive in countries or regions where there is a central purchaser in a
large volume economy, which presents a major challenge to
many European countries with different and mixed health econ-
omies [39–41].
Another mechanism that could assist with access is differen-
tial pricing, whereby there is adaptation of prices to the
economic resources of the country [34, 39, 68]. Effective appli-
cation of this approach requires identification of those countries
who otherwise could not afford the medication and also the
ability to restrict parallel export from low-priced markets to
high-priced markets (market segmentation), both of which have
proved challenging in practice. This model has mainly applied
to antiretroviral and antiviral medications with fewer examples
involving antineoplastic agents. Roche has developed a ‘second
brand strategy’ for emerging markets and in India for Herceptin
(trastuzumab) and Mabthera (rituximab), both of which were
recently included in the 2015 update of the WHO Model List of
Essential Medicines [23]. For least developed countries, Glaxo
Smith Kline has capped the prices of its patented oncology med-
icines at no >25% of prices in the UK [69], but this arrangement
does not apply to middle-income countries of Eastern Europe.
options of last resort. These issues are substantial, and without
suitable EU-wide resolution, it is conceivable that European
countries may start to undertake more punitive measures, either
through capitated budgets for anticancer medications (whereby
beyond a capitated budgetary allowance for this purpose some
expensive medications will not be available) [28, 70] or by
challenging patent monopolies [71–74]. The Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) agreements of
the World Trade Organization has provisions for compulsory
licensing as an option of last resort after attempts to negotiate a
B
Fig. 14 Continued
 | Cherny et al.
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
special articles
Annals of Oncology
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1423/2237392 by guest on 01 June 2019
 voluntary licence on reasonable commercial terms have failed
[68, 75–78], which has infrequently been invoked for cancer
medications. Thailand issued compulsory licensing of docetaxel,
letrozole, erlotinib and imatinib in 2008 [68, 78]. In India, local
precedent was set in 2012 when a compulsory licence was issued
for Nexavar (sorafenib; Roche) allowing a local producer to sell
it at 3% of the list price [78–80].
conclusions
There are disparities in the formulary availability, out-of-pocket
costs to patients and actual availability for many anticancer medi-
cines in Europe. Disparities are less among anticancer medicines
included in the WHO Model List of Essential Medicines and are
most profound in incurable diseases where gains in improved
patient outcomes are dependent on the availability of expensive
anticancer agents where major differences were seen in availabil-
ity and in out-of-pocket costs of these medications in the eco-
nomically less well-developed countries of Europe. In our
assessment, based on the findings of this study, the cost of antic-
ancer medications is a major contributing factor contributing to
these disparities in Europe, it is also disturbing to see that low-
cost medicines, included in the WHO Model List of Essential
Medicines, are not universally accessible.
Providing equal access to cancer care in Europe cannot be
achieved without addressing these issues. We applaud ESMO on
the appointment of a working group, to be led by Prof. Josep
Tabernero, to address the critical issue of medication costs, af-
fordability and accessibility. The findings of our study under-
score the importance of this task, which we recognize will not be
an easy one. The stakes are high and progress to address these
issues will require a courageous re-evaluation of long-held
vested interests and the constructive cooperation of all critical
stakeholders, including the pharmaceutical industry and their
investors, governments and their regulatory agencies, third-
party payers, professional organizations and patients. Future
high-resolution studies of specific European countries should be
undertaken to provide the necessary macro- and microeconom-
ic intelligence to support evidence-based policymaking.
acknowledgements
The authors wish to acknowledge the feedback and input of
representatives of the collaborating partner organizations who
critically
reviewed
earlier
versions
of
this
manuscript.
Acknowledgement also goes to the support and contributions of
the ESMO Executive Board, who authorized funding of this
project, and the logistic and organizational support provided by
ESMO Staff and in particular Gracemarie Bricalli, project
manager, with the assistance of her colleagues Tanya Kenny,
Nicola Latino and Marina Cogo. We also thank Gilberto de Lima
Lopes, Daniel Goldstein, Ian Haines, Leonard Saltz and Elizabeth
De Vries who reviewed and provided feedback on earlier versions
of the manuscript. The authors also thank and acknowledge the
wonderful field reporters who completed that survey and peer-
review. In supplementary Appendix SI, available at Annals of
Oncology online, we have listed the field reporters who have
agreed to place their names in this publication and we also thank
those who wished to remain anonymous.
funding
This project was funded by ESMO (no grant number applied).
disclosure
A.E. currently conducting research sponsored by Roche, GSK,
Novartis, Astra Zeneca, Celltrion and Apotex Inc. All remaining
authors have declared no conflicts of interest. N.C. received
funding from ESMO for project design and development, data
processing and writing the manuscript.
references
1. Kantarjian HM, Fojo T, Mathisen M, Zwelling LA. Cancer drugs in the United
States: Justum Pretium—the just price. J Clin Oncol 2013; 31: 3600–3604.
2. Hillner BE, Smith TJ. Efficacy does not necessarily translate to cost effectiveness: a
case study in the challenges associated with 21st-century cancer drug pricing. J
Clin Oncol 2009; 27: 2111–2113.
3. Bigdeli M, Jacobs B, Tomson G et al. Access to medicines from a health system
perspective. Health Policy Plan 2013; 28: 692–704.
4. Smith SK, Nicolla J, Zafar SY. Bridging the gap between financial distress and
available resources for patients with cancer: a qualitative study. J Oncol Pract
2014; 10: e368–e372.
5. de Souza JA, Wong YN. Financial distress in cancer patients. J Med Person 2013; 11:
73–77.
6. Zafar SY, Peppercorn JM, Schrag D et al. The financial toxicity of cancer
treatment: a pilot study assessing out-of-pocket expenses and the insured cancer
patient’s experience. Oncologist 2013; 18: 381–390.
7. Vogler S, Zimmermann N, Habl C. Understanding the components of
pharmaceutical expenditure-overview of pharmaceutical policies influencing
expenditure across European countries. GaBi J 2013; 2: 178–187.
8. Howard DH, Bach PB, Berndt ER, Conti RM. Pricing in the market for anticancer
drugs. J Econ Perspect 2015; 29: 139–162.
9. Cheema PK, Gavura S, Migus M et al. International variability in the
reimbursement of cancer drugs by publically funded drug programs. Curr Oncol
2012; 19: e165–e176.
10. United Nations development program. Human Development Reports. Geneva: United
Nations 2014. http://hdr.undp.org/en/data (June 2016, date last accessed).
11. Luengo-Fernandez R, Leal J, Gray A, Sullivan R. Economic burden of cancer
across the European Union: a population-based cost analysis. Lancet Oncol 2013;
14: 1165–1174.
12. De Angelis R, Sant M, Coleman MP et al. Cancer survival in Europe 1999–2007
by country and age: results of EUROCARE—5-a population-based study. Lancet
Oncol 2014; 15: 23–34.
13. Ferlay J, Steliarova-Foucher E, Lortet-Tieulent J et al. Cancer incidence and
mortality patterns in Europe: estimates for 40 countries in 2012. Eur J Cancer
2013; 49: 1374–1403.
14. Munro AJ. Comparative cancer survival in European countries. Br Med Bull 2014;
110: 5–22.
15. Gatta G, Trama A, Capocaccia R. Variations in cancer survival and patterns of care
across Europe: roles of wealth and health-care organization. J Natl Cancer Inst
Monographs 2013; 2013: 79–87.
16. European Commission. Communication from the Commission on Effective,
Accessible and Resilient Health Systems. Brussels 2014; 17. http://ec.europa.eu/
health/healthcare/docs/com2014_2215_final_en.pdf (June 2016, date last
accessed).
17. Huber M, Stanciole A, Wahlbeck K et al. Quality in and Equality of Access to
Healthcare Services. European Commission 2008; 160. http://www.euro.centre.
org/data/1237457784_41597.pdf (June 2016, date last accessed).
18. Pauwels K, Huys I, Casteels M, Simoens S. Drug shortages in European countries:
a trade-off between market attractiveness and cost containment? BMC Health Serv
Res 2014; 14: 438.
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdw213 | 
Annals of Oncology
special articles
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1423/2237392 by guest on 01 June 2019
 19. Pauwels K, Simoens S, Casteels M, Huys I. Insights into European drug shortages:
a survey of hospital pharmacists. PLoS One 2015; 10; doi:10.1371/journal.
pone.0119322.
20. Cherny NI, Baselga J, de Conno F, Radbruch L. Formulary availability and
regulatory barriers to accessibility of opioids for cancer pain in Europe: a report
from the ESMO/EAPC Opioid Policy Initiative. Ann Oncol 2010; 21: 615–626.
21. Cherny NI, Cleary J, Scholten W et al. The Global Opioid Policy Initiative (GOPI)
project to evaluate the availability and accessibility of opioids for the management
of cancer pain in Africa, Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean, and the Middle
East: introduction and methodology. Ann Oncol 2013; 24: xi7–xi13.
22. Cherny NI, Sullivan R, Dafni U et al. A standardised, generic, validated approach to
stratify the magnitude of clinical benefit that can be anticipated from anti-cancer
therapies: the European Society for Medical Oncology Magnitude of Clinical
Benefit Scale (ESMO-MCBS). Ann Oncol 2015; 26: 1547–1573.
23. World Health Organization. The Selection and Use of Essential Medicines: Report
of the WHO Expert Committee, 2015 In WHO Technical Report Series. Geneva:
World Health Association 2015; 553. http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/
189763/1/9789241209946_eng.pdf?ua=1 (June 2016, date last accessed).
24. European Association of Hospital Pharmacists. Medicines Shortages on European
Hospitals: The Evidence and Case for Action. Brussels: European Association of
Hospital Pharmacists 2014; 48. www.eahp.eu/sites/default/files/shortages_
report05online.pdf (June 2016, date last accessed).
25. European Medicines Agency. Reflection Paper on Medicinal Product Supply
Shortages Caused by Manufacturing/Good Manufacturing Practice Compliance
Problems. London: European Medicines Agency 2012. http://www.ema.europa.eu/
docs/en_GB/document_library/Other/2012/2011/WC500135113.pdf (June 2016,
date last accessed).
26. European Medicines Agency. Reflection Paper on Medicinal Product Supply
Shortages Caused by Manufacturing/Good Manufacturing Practice Compliance
Problems: Implementation Plan 2012–2015. London: European Medicines Agency
2012. http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/Other/2012/11/
WC500135113.pdf (June 2016, date last accessed).
27. von der Schulenburg F, Vandoros S, Kanavos P. The effects of drug market
regulation on pharmaceutical prices in Europe: overview and evidence from the
market of ACE inhibitors. Health Econ Rev 2011; 1: 18.
28. Prinja S, Kanavos P, Kumar R. Health care inequities in north India: role of public
sector in universalizing health care. Indian J Med Res 2012; 136: 421–431.
29. European Society for Medical Oncology. ESMO 2020 Vision. Lugano: ESMO
2015; 12. www.esmo.org/content/download/68849/1233986/file/ESMO-1232020-
vision-brochure.pdf (June 2016, date last accessed).
30. Karanikolos M, Mladovsky P, Cylus J et al. Financial crisis, austerity, and health in
Europe. Lancet 2013; 381: 1323–1331.
31. Sullivan R, Aggarwal A. Health policy: putting a price on cancer. Nat Rev Clin
Oncol 2016; 13: 137–138.
32. Leal J, Luengo-Fernandez R, Sullivan R, Witjes JA. Economic burden of bladder
cancer across the European Union. Eur Urol 2016; 69: 438–447.
33. Pfister DG. The just price of cancer drugs and the growing cost of cancer care:
oncologists need to be part of the solution. J Clin Oncol 2013; 31: 3487–3489.
34. Hoen E. A study of medicine pricing issues with recommendations for improving
access to cancer medication. OXFAM 2014; 54. https://www.oxfam.org/sites/
www.oxfam.org/files/file_attachments/rr-access-cancer-treatment-inequality-040215-
en.pdf (June 2016, date last accessed).
35. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. Pharmaceutical Pricing
Policies in a Global Market. In OECD Health Policy Studies 2008; pp219. http://
apps.who.int/medicinedocs/documents/s19834en/s19834en.pdf (June 2016, date
last accessed).
36. Kantarjian HM. Charging what the market will bear is inappropriate. Clin Adv
Hematol Oncol 2014; 12: 63.
37. Danzon P, Towse A, Mestre-Ferrandiz J. Value-based differential pricing: efficient
prices for drugs in a global context. Health Econ 2015; 24: 294–301.
38. Mailankody S, Prasad V. Five years of cancer drug approvals innovation, efficacy,
and costs. JAMA Oncol 2015; 1: 539–540.
39. Kalo Z, Annemans L, Garrison LP. Differential pricing of new pharmaceuticals in
lower income European countries. Expert Rev Pharmacoecon Outcomes Res
2013; 13: 735–741.
40. Vogler S, Vitry A, Babar Z-U-D. Cancer drugs in 16 European countries, Australia,
and New Zealand: a cross-country price comparison study. Lancet Oncol 2016;
17: 39–47.
41. van Harten WH, Wind A, de Paoli P et al. Actual costs of cancer drugs in 15
European countries. Lancet Oncol 2016; 17: 18–20.
42. Kanavos PG, Vandoros S. Determinants of branded prescription medicine prices in
OECD countries. Health Econ Policy Law 2011; 6: 337–367.
43. Savage P, Mahmoud S. Development and economic trends in cancer therapeutic
drugs: a 5-year update 2010–2014. Br J Cancer 2015; 112: 1037–1041.
44. IMS Institute for Healthcare Informatics. Developments in Cancer Treatments,
Market Dynamics, Patient Access and Value: Global Oncology Trend Report 2015.
Parsippany, NJ: IMS Institute for Healthcare Informatics 2015; 47.
45. EvaluatePharma®. EvaluatePharma® World Preview 2014, Outlook to 2020.
2014; 39. http://info.evaluategroup.com/rs/evaluatepharmaltd/images/EP240614.
pdf (June 2016, date last accessed).
46. Anderson R. Pharmaceutical Industry Gets High on Fat Profits. BBC Business
News 2014. http://www.bbc.com/news/business-28212223 (June 2016, date
last accessed).
47. Chen L. The Most Profitable Industries In 2015. Forbes 2015; Sept 23: http://www.
forbes.com/sites/liyanchen/2015/2009/2023/the-most-profitable-industries-in-2015/
#2198bd2016e07712 (June 2016, date last accessed).
48. Kantarjian H, Zwelling L. Cancer drug prices and the free‐market forces. Cancer
2013; 119: 3903–3905.
49. Kushnick H. Pricing cancer drugs: when does pricing become profiteering? AMA J
Ethics 2014; 17: 750–753.
50. Raftery J. Value based pricing: can it work? BMJ 2013; 347: f5941.
51. Danzon PM, Taylor E. Drug pricing and value in oncology. Oncologist 2010; 15
(Suppl. 1): 24–31.
52. Saltz LB. Perspectives on cost and value in cancer care. JAMA Oncol 2015; 2:
1–3.
53. McKneally MF, Dickens BM, Meslin EM, Singer PA. Bioethics for clinicians: 13.
Resource allocation. CMAJ 1997; 157: 163–167.
54. Emanuel LL. A professional response to demands for accountability: practical
recommendations regarding ethical aspects of patient care. Working group on
accountability. Ann Intern Med 1996; 124: 240–249.
55. Kahneman D, Knetsch JL, Thaler R. Fairness as a constraint on profit seeking:
entitlements in the market. Am Econ Rev 1986; 4: 728–741.
56. Gagnon MA. Corruption of pharmaceutical markets: addressing the misalignment
of financial incentives and public health. J Law Med Ethics 2013; 41: 571–580.
57. Parker-Lue S, Santoro M, Koski G. The ethics and economics of pharmaceutical
pricing. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 2015; 55: 191–206.
58. Balch CM, Saltz L, Wittes RE. In Cancer Care, Cost Matters. New York Times, OCT.
14. 2012; Online http://www.nytimes.com/2012/10/15/opinion/a-hospital-says-
no-to-an-11000-a-month-cancer-drug.html (June 2016, date last accessed).
59. Experts in Chronic Myeloid Leukemia. The price of drugs for chronic myeloid
leukemia (CML) is a reflection of the unsustainable prices of cancer drugs: from
the perspective of a large group of CML experts. Blood 2013; 121: 4439–4442.
60. Maraninchi D, Vernant J-P. L’urgence de maîtriser les prix des nouveaux
médicaments contre le cancer. Le Figaro 2016. March 14: http://sante.lefigaro.fr/
actualite/2016/2003/2014/24739-lurgence-maitriser-prix-nouveaux-medicaments-
contre-cancer (June 2016, date last accessed).
61. Ghinea N, Lipworth W, Kerridge I. Propaganda or the cost of innovation?
Challenging the high price of new drugs. BMJ 2016; 352: i1284.
62. Gandjour A. Convergence of decision rules for value-based pricing of new
innovative drugs. Expert Rev Pharmacoecon Outcomes Res 2015; 15: 209–213.
63. Fojo T, Lo AW. Price, value, and the cost of cancer drugs. Lancet Oncol 2016; 17:
3–5.
64. Faden RR, Chalkidou K. Determining the value of drugs—the evolving British
experience. N Engl J Med 2011; 364: 1289–1291.
65. Carlson JJ, Gries KS, Yeung K et al. Current status and trends in performance-
based risk-sharing arrangements between healthcare payers and medical product
manufacturers. Appl Health Econ Health Policy 2014; 12: 231–238.
66. Carlson JJ, Sullivan SD, Garrison LP et al. Linking payment to health outcomes:
a taxonomy and examination of performance-based reimbursement schemes
between healthcare payers and manufacturers. Health Policy 2010; 96: 179–190.
 | Cherny et al.
Volume 27 | No. 8 | August 2016
special articles
Annals of Oncology
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1423/2237392 by guest on 01 June 2019
 67. Greenhalgh J, Bagust A, Boland A et al. Erlotinib and gefitinib for treating non-
small cell lung cancer that has progressed following prior chemotherapy (review of
NICE technology appraisals 162 and 175): a systematic review and economic
evaluation. Health Technol Assess 2015; 19: 1–134.
68. de Lima Lopes G, Jr, de Souza JA, Barrios C. Access to cancer
medications in low- and middle-income countries. Nat Rev Clin Oncol 2013;
10: 314–322.
69. Glaxo Smith Kline. Health for All. 2014. http://no.gsk.com/media/274688/health-
for-all-factsheet.pdf (June 2016, date last accessed).
70. Ward A. Cancer drugs cut as UK budget clampdown bites. Financial Times
2015. http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/01ac9236-5327-9211e9235-b9029-
b9239d9250a9274fd9214.html#axzz9234AJ9298R9234rW
(June
2016,
date last accessed).
71. Ottersen OP, Dasgupta J, Blouin C et al. The political origins of health inequity:
prospects for change. Lancet 2014; 383: 630–667.
72. Boseley S. Pig Pharma’s Worst Nightmare. The Guardian 2016; Jan 26 2016. http://
www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/2026/big-pharmas-worst-nightmare (June
2016, date last accessed).
73. Murphy E. Panel: Compulsory Licensing Could Address High-Priced Medicines in
Europe. Intellectual Property Watch 2015. http://www.ip-watch.org/2015/2005/
2028/speakers-compulsory-licensing-could-address-high-priced-medicines-in-europe/
(June 2016, date last accessed).
74. El Said M, Kapczynski A. Access to medicines: the role of intellectual property law
and policy. Global Commission on HIV and the Law Working Paper, 2011; 19. http://
hivlawcommission.org/index.php/report-working-papers?task=document.viewdoc&
id=86 (June 2016, date last accessed).
75. World Trade Organization. Compulsory Licensing of Pharmaceuticals and
TRIPS.
https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/trips_e/public_health_faq_e.htm
(June 2016, date last accessed).
76. Herget G. WTO approves TRIPS amendment on importing under compulsory
licensing. HIVAIDS Policy Law Rev 2006; 11: 23–24.
77. Kapp C. World Trade Organisation reaches agreement on generic medicines. New
deal will make it easier for poorer countries to import cut-price generic drugs
made under compulsory licensing. Lancet 2003; 362: 807.
78. Beall R, Kuhn R. Trends in compulsory licensing of pharmaceuticals since the
Doha Declaration: a database analysis. PLoS Med 2012; 9: e1001154.
79. Wise J. Patent wars: affordable medicines versus intellectual property rights. BMJ
2014; 348: g1533.
80. Chaudhuri S. The larger implications of the Novartis-Glivec judgment. Econ Polit
Wkly 2013; 48: 10–12.
Annals of Oncology 27: 1443–1448, 2016
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdw192
Published online 3 May 2016
Consensus on precision medicine for metastatic
cancers: a report from the MAP conference
C. Swanton1,2, J.-C. Soria3,4, A. Bardelli5,6, A. Biankin7,8,9, C. Caldas10,11,12, S. Chandarlapaty13,
L. de Koning14, C. Dive15, J. Feunteun16, S.-Y. Leung17, R. Marais18, E. R. Mardis19,
N. McGranahan1, G. Middleton20,21, S. A. Quezada22, J. Rodón23, N. Rosenfeld10, C. Sotiriou24 &
F. André4*
1Translational Cancer Therapeutics Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, London; 2UCL Hospitals and Cancer Institute, London, UK; 3Drug Development Unit, Gustave
Roussy, Villejuif; 4Department of Medical Oncology, INSERM Unit U981, Faculté de medicine Paris-Sud XI, Kremlin-Bicêtre, Villejuif, France; 5Department of Oncology,
University of Torino, Candiolo, Torino; 6Candiolo Cancer Institute—FPO, IRCCS, Candiolo, Torino, Italy; 7Wolfson Wohl Cancer Research Centre, Institute of Cancer
Sciences, University of Glasgow, Bearsden, Glasgow, UK; 8South Western Sydney Clinical School, Faculty of Medicine, University of New South Wales, Liverpool,
New South Wales, Australia; 9West of Scotland Pancreatic Unit, Glasgow Royal Infirmary, Glasgow; 10Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge,
Li Ka Shing Centre, Cambridge; 11Department of Oncology, University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Cambridge; 12Cambridge Experimental Cancer Medicine
Centre and NIHR Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre, Cambridge, UK; 13Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, USA;
14Department of Translational Research, Institut Curie, PSL Research University, Paris, France; 15Clinical and Experimental Pharmacology, Cancer Research UK
Manchester Institute, The University of Manchester, Manchester, UK; 16Stabilité Génétique et Oncogenèse, Université Paris-Sud, Gustave-Roussy, Villejuif, France;
17Department of Pathology, The University of Hong Kong, Queen Mary Hospital, Pokfulam, Hong Kong; 18Molecular Oncology Group, Cancer Research UK Manchester
Institute, The University of Manchester, Manchester, UK; 19McDonnell Genome Institute, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, USA; 20Institute of
Immunology and Immunotherapy, University of Birmingham, Birmingham; 21Department of Oncology, University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust,
Birmingham; 22Cancer Immunology Unit, University College London Cancer Institute, University College London, London, UK; 23Vall d’Hebron Institute of Oncology (VHIO),
Barcelona, Spain; 24Breast Cancer Translational Research Laboratory—BCTL (ULB 290), Institut Jules Bordet, Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), Brussels, Belgium
Received 26 February 2016; revised 23 April 2016; accepted 29 April 2016
Recent advances in biotechnologies have led to the development of multiplex genomic and proteomic analyses for clinical
use. Nevertheless, guidelines are currently lacking to determine which molecular assays should be implemented in meta-
static cancers. The first MAP conference was dedicated to exploring the use of genomics to better select therapies in the
treatment of metastatic cancers. Sixteen consensus items were covered. There was a consensus that new technologies
*Correspondence to: Prof. Fabrice Andre, Institut Gustave Roussy Villejuif—Medicine,
INSERM U981, France. Tel: +33-142114371; E-mail: fandre@igr.fr, fabrice.andre@igr.fr
Annals of Oncology
special articles
© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European Society for Medical Oncology.
All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/27/8/1423/2237392 by guest on 01 June 2019
