 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 1 3 0
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 8   August 2016
Introduction
Chimeric antigen receptors (CARs) are synthetic receptors that 
retarget T cells to tumor surface antigens (1, 2). First-generation 
receptors typically link an antibody-derived tumor-binding ele-
ment to either CD3ζ or Fc receptor signaling domains to trigger 
T cell activation. The advent of second-generation CARs, which 
combine activating and costimulatory signaling domains, has 
led to encouraging results in patients with chemorefractory B 
cell malignancies (3–7). The translation of this clinical success to 
solid tumors will require overcoming multiple obstacles, which 
include achieving sufficient T cell infiltration into tumors and the 
prevention of tumor immune escape. To overcome the limitations 
of tumor infiltration and delayed activation observed with system-
ic T cell administration, we recently demonstrated the merits of 
regional administration of mesothelin-specific (MSLN-specific) 
CAR T cells in a clinically relevant model of pleural mesothelioma 
(8). MSLN is a tumor-associated cell-surface antigen, which we 
selected on the basis of its overexpression in several cancers and 
our observations of its association with tumor aggressiveness in 
mesothelioma and lung and breast cancer patients (9–17). Region-
al administration of MSLN-targeted CAR T cells establishes long-
term systemic immunosurveillance requiring 30-fold lower doses 
than intravenous administration (8). Aware of potential low T cell 
infiltration in solid tumors, we investigated CAR T cell efficacy 
when administered at very low doses.
To eliminate tumor cells, T cells must not only persist, but 
sustain cytolytic and proliferative function, eluding the inhibi-
tory signals encountered in the tumor microenvironment. The 
success of second-generation CAR T cells has been attributed 
to the enhanced T cell persistence afforded by costimulatory 
signaling domains, such as CD28 and the TNF receptor 4-1BB. 
However, T cells naturally undergo activation-induced upregu-
lation of coinhibitory pathways, which may limit the antitumor 
immune response. Programmed death-1 (PD-1), cytotoxic T-lym-
phocyte–associated protein 4 (CTLA-4), and other coinhibitory 
receptors are upregulated in T cells following antigen encounter, 
while tumor cells augment the expression of coinhibitory ligands 
such as PD-1 ligand (PD-L1) following exposure to T cell–secreted 
Th1 cytokines (18–20). The success of antibody therapy targeting 
immune checkpoints such as PD-1 and CTLA-4 underscores the 
therapeutic potential of counteracting immune inhibition (21–23). 
However, the success of antibody-mediated checkpoint blockade 
requires a relatively high mutation burden and the presence of 
infiltrating T cells (24–26). Adoptive transfer of tumor-targeted 
T cells may thus fill the void in patients with less immunogen-
ic or “noninflamed” tumors. As adoptively transferred T cells 
are themselves susceptible to immunoinhibition, strategies that 
combine adoptive T cell therapy with checkpoint antibody block-
ade have been investigated using mouse T cells (27–29). Anti-
body-mediated checkpoint blockade effectively provides reversal 
of immunoinhibition in a systemic fashion that may result in auto-
Following immune attack, solid tumors upregulate coinhibitory ligands that bind to inhibitory receptors on T cells. This 
adaptive resistance compromises the efficacy of chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cell therapies, which redirect T cells to solid 
tumors. Here, we investigated whether programmed death-1–mediated (PD-1–mediated) T cell exhaustion affects mesothelin-
targeted CAR T cells and explored cell-intrinsic strategies to overcome inhibition of CAR T cells. Using an orthotopic mouse 
model of pleural mesothelioma, we determined that relatively high doses of both CD28- and 4-1BB–based second-generation 
CAR T cells achieved tumor eradication. CAR-mediated CD28 and 4-1BB costimulation resulted in similar levels of T cell 
persistence in animals treated with low T cell doses; however, PD-1 upregulation within the tumor microenvironment inhibited 
T cell function. At lower doses, 4-1BB CAR T cells retained their cytotoxic and cytokine secretion functions longer than CD28 
CAR T cells. The prolonged function of 4-1BB CAR T cells correlated with improved survival. PD-1/PD-1 ligand [PD-L1] pathway 
interference, through PD-1 antibody checkpoint blockade, cell-intrinsic PD-1 shRNA blockade, or a PD-1 dominant negative 
receptor, restored the effector function of CD28 CAR T cells. These findings provide mechanistic insights into human CAR T 
cell exhaustion in solid tumors and suggest that PD-1/PD-L1 blockade may be an effective strategy for improving the potency 
of CAR T cell therapies.
Human CAR T cells with cell-intrinsic PD-1 checkpoint 
blockade resist tumor-mediated inhibition
Leonid Cherkassky,1,2 Aurore Morello,1,2 Jonathan Villena-Vargas,1,2 Yang Feng,3 Dimiter S. Dimitrov,3 David R. Jones,2  
Michel Sadelain,1 and Prasad S. Adusumilli1,2
1Center for Cell Engineering and 2Thoracic Service, Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, USA. 3Protein Interactions Section,  
Laboratory of Experimental Immunology, Cancer and Inflammation Program, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Frederick, Maryland, USA.
     Related Commentary: p. 2795
Authorship note: L. Cherkassky and A. Morello contributed equally to this work.
Conflict of interest: The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists.
Submitted: June 3, 2015; Accepted: May 19, 2016.
Reference information: J Clin Invest. 2016;126(8):3130–3144. doi:10.1172/JCI83092.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 1 3 1
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 8   August 2016
to withstand repeated antigen stimulation–induced exhaustion 
and analyzed one of the mechanisms of tolerance (i.e., PD-1 
receptor/PD-L1 engagement). We demonstrate that PD-1–medi-
ated CAR T cell exhaustion can be reversed by PD-1 antibody 
checkpoint blockade. We further describe a PD-1 dominant neg-
ative receptor (DNR) that, when cotransduced with a second-gen-
eration CAR, mediates enhanced T cell functional persistence 
immune responses. In contrast, T cell engineering allows one to 
transduce receptors that selectively counteract tumor-mediated 
inhibition in targeted T cells.
In this report, we establish that human CAR T cells are sub-
ject to inhibition of their cytolytic and cytokine secretion functions 
upon repeated antigen encounter in vivo. We document the differ-
ing abilities of different costimulatory strategies (4-1BB vs. CD28) 
Figure 1. CARs with CD28 or 4-1BB costimulation exhibit similar cytolytic functions, effector cytokine secretion, and proliferation in vitro upon initial 
antigen stimulation. (A) First- and second-generation CARs. (B) MSLN–targeted CARs contain the CD3ζ endodomain either alone (Mz, first-generation 
CAR) or in combination with the CD28 (M28z) or 4-1BB (MBBz) costimulatory domain (second-generation CAR). PSMA-directed CARs with CD28 costimu-
lation (P28z) as well as PSMA-expressing targets (PSMA+) are included in experiments as negative controls. CYT, cytoplasmic domain; LS, leader sequence; 
LTR, long terminal repeat; SA, splice acceptor; SD, splice donor; TM, transmembrane. (C–E) Antigen-specific effector functions of CAR-transduced T cells. 
(C) Lysis of MSLN-expressing targets (MSLN+), but not PSMA+ targets, as measured by chromium-release assays. (D) 4-1BB and CD28 costimulations 
enhance cytokine secretion, as assessed by Luminex assay, after coculture of CAR T cells with MSLN+ cells. (E) M28z and MBBz CARs facilitate robust T 
cell accumulation after stimulation with MSLN+ cells. (F) 4-1BB and CD28 costimulations decrease the rate of apoptosis as assessed by annexin V/7-AAD+ 
staining every 7 days after coculture with MSLN+ target. (D and E) ***P < 0.001, comparing costimulated CAR T cells (M28z or MBBz) with the first-genera-
tion receptor (Mz), by Student’s t test; significance was determined using the Sidak-Bonferonni correction for multiple comparisons. Data are representa-
tive of at least 3 independent experiments and represent the mean ± SEM (C and E) of 3 replicates or are plotted as individual points.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 1 3 2
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 8   August 2016
lyse MSTO MSLN+ cells, and MSLN-targeted CARs did not lyse 
EL4 PSMA+ cells — demonstrating that lysis is antigen specific. 
Validating the functionality of costimulatory signaling (31), M28z 
and MBBz CAR T cells secreted 2- to 15-fold higher levels of Th1 
cytokines (Figure 1D) and achieved 8- to 14-fold greater T cell 
accumulation upon repeated exposure to MSLN+ cells when com-
pared with Mz in the absence of exogenous IL-2 (Figure 1E). Fur-
thermore, CAR+ T cells expressing costimulatory molecules (M28z 
and MBBz) exhibited lower rates of cell death compared with Mz 
and P28z on day 7 and day 14. No significant difference in cell 
death was observed between M28z and MBBz (Figure 1F). Having 
established antigen specificity and validated the functionality of 
costimulatory signaling domains, we proceeded to evaluate the 
therapeutic potential of MSLN-targeted CAR T cells in mice bear-
ing established pleural tumors.
M28z is more prone to allowing tumor relapse than MBBz. In an 
orthotopic model of malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) pre-
viously established by our laboratory (15, 32–34), serial biolumines-
cence imaging (BLI) with firefly-luciferase–transduced (ffLuc-trans-
duced) MSTO-211H cells was used to confirm the establishment of 
tumor, to equalize tumor burden across intervention groups before 
the initiation of T cell therapy, and to measure the response to thera-
as well as T cell resistance to tumor-mediated T cell inhibition. 
Our results demonstrate the benefit of simultaneously provid-
ing costimulation and checkpoint blockade to counteract tumor- 
mediated T cell inhibition in MSLN-expressing solid tumors.
Results
CARs with CD28 or 4-1BB costimulation exhibit equivalent effec-
tor cytokine secretion and proliferation in vitro upon initial antigen 
stimulation. We constructed 3 CARs that incorporated a human 
MSLN-specific scFv (30) and either CD3ζ, CD28/CD3ζ, or 4-1BB/
CD3ζ signaling domains (Mz, M28z, MBBz) (Figure 1, A and B). 
The P28z CAR, which is specific for prostate-specific membrane 
antigen (PSMA), served as a negative effector to control for allo-
reactivity and xenoreactivity. Both CD4+ and CD8+ human periph-
eral blood T lymphocytes were effectively transduced using the 
SFG-retroviral vector (50%–70% transduction) (Supplemental 
Figure 1; supplemental material available online with this arti-
cle; doi:10.1172/JCI83092DS1). MSLN-transduced MSTO-211H 
(MSLN+) cells and PSMA-transduced EL-4 mouse lymphoma 
(MSLN–) cells served as MSLN-positive and -negative targets. 
Mz-, M28z-, and MBBz-transduced T cells demonstrated similar 
MSLN-specific lysis in vitro (Figure 1C). P28z CAR T cells did not 
Figure 2. Mice treated with M28z and MBBz CAR T cells demonstrate tumor eradication at a higher dose, whereas treatment with lower doses results in 
higher rate of tumor relapse with M28z. (A) In vivo BLI was used to monitor tumor burden (ffLuc+MSLN+) in NOD/SCID/γc
null mice. Mice with established 
pleural tumor were treated with a single dose of 1 × 105 (E:T 1:3,000), 8 × 104 (E:T1:3,750), or 5 × 104 (E:T 1:6,000) M28z or MBBz CAR T cells. Daggers indicate 
the deaths of mice. For A and B, 2 similar experiments with the same donor are combined for the illustration. n = 7–9 mice for each group treated with 
MSLN-targeted CAR T cells. (B) Mice were treated with 4 × 104 CAR T cells (E:T 1:7,500). The first generation Mz CAR and negative control P28z are includ-
ed. (C) Kaplan-Meier survival analysis comparing the in vivo efficacy of intrapleural administration of 4 × 104 Mz (n = 13, red), M28z (n = 15, blue), MBBz 
(n = 8, green), and P28z (n = 3, black) CAR T cells. Two independent experiments performed under similar conditions were combined. Median survival in 
days following T cell administration. The survival curve was analyzed using the log-rank test. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01. All data are representative of multiple 
experiments performed with multiple donors.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 1 3 3
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 8   August 2016
CAR, no costimulatory signaling included) CAR T cells showed an 
unsustainable response in terms of tumor burden (Figure 2B) and 
median survival was 29 days longer than that in the P28z-treated 
controls (median survival, 45 vs. 16 days, P28z represents a xeno-
reactivity and alloreactivity control targeting the PSMA antigen) 
(Figure 2C). Mice treated with M28z CAR T cells had a more uni-
form reduction in tumor burden and survived longer (median sur-
vival, 64 days) than mice treated with first-generation CAR T cells; 
however, all mice treated with M28z CAR T cells eventually died 
of progressing tumor. We confirmed that tumor outgrowth was not 
caused by tumor antigen escape (recurring tumors in mice were 
found to be MSLN+ by flow cytometric and histologic analysis; data 
not shown). In contrast, intrapleurally administered MBBz CAR T 
py. Both M28z and MBBz CAR T cells intrapleurally administered at 
a single dose of 1 × 105 (effector to target [E:T] ratio of 1:3,000, esti-
mated from tumor burden quantification) (33) were able to eradicate 
established pleural tumors in the majority of mice (Figure 2A). Since 
our goal in this study was to investigate the effect of tumor-induced 
immunoinhibition on T cell exhaustion, we administered CAR T 
cells to mice bearing established pleural tumors at successively low-
er doses. We hypothesized that at these lower doses, T cells would 
be especially susceptible to exhaustion, as they must retain function 
upon repeated antigen encounters in order to eliminate tumor. It is 
at these lower doses that we began to see tumor relapse, especially 
within the M28z cohort (Figure 2A). At the lowest dose tested of 4 × 
104 (E:T, 1:7,500), mice treated with intrapleural Mz (1st generation 
Figure 3. M28z- and MBBz-treated mice demonstrate similar early and long-term CAR T cell accumulation, and M28z-treated mice with progressing 
tumors contain persisting CAR T cells. (A) CD28 and 4-1BB costimulation enhance intratumoral CAR T cell accumulation to equal extents. The left panels 
show the results of tumor BLI after administration of a single dose of 8 × 104 CAR T cells. After 6 days, T cells were harvested from the tumor; x’s denote 
mice whose T cell counts are represented as data points. The right panel shows absolute CAR T cells per gram of tumor tissue. *P < 0.05. Student’s t tests 
were performed, and statistical significance was determined using the Sidak-Bonferonni correction for multiple comparisons. (B) CD28 and 4-1BB costim-
ulation enhance CAR T cell persistence, as measured in the spleen, to equal extents. Absolute CAR T cells per spleen are shown 74 days after intrapleural 
administration of CAR T cells (8 × 104). The left panels show the results of tumor BLI; x’s denote mice whose T cell counts are represented as data points. 
*P < 0.05. Student’s t tests were performed, and statistical significance was determined using the Sidak-Bonferonni correction for multiple comparisons. 
(C) Mice treated with a low dose of M28z T cells (4 × 104) display tumor recurrence with persisting CAR T cells in the spleen and tumor. The left panel shows 
the results of tumor BLI. Spleen and tumor from mice denoted by an x were harvested and used for FACS analysis (middle panel) and T cell quantification 
(right panel). Data are representative of multiple tested mice of at least 3 independent experiments.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 1 3 4
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 8   August 2016
12-fold greater for MBBz) (Figure 3A). Surprisingly, despite the 
differences in efficacy between M28z and MBBz CAR T cells, we 
observed similar numbers of tumor-infiltrating T cells between 
the 2 groups (Figure 3A). Furthermore, M28z and MBBz CAR 
T cells were equally persistent at long-term time points (Figure 
3B). Equal accumulation and persistence were observed for both 
CD4+ and CD8+ T cell subsets (Supplemental Figure 2). Tumor 
tissue and spleen from M28z-treated mice that initially had a 
treatment response but then died of progressing tumor con-
cells induced tumor eradication within 20 days of treatment, and 
the vast majority of mice (7 of 8) remained tumor free for more than 
100 days (median survival was not reached by day 100).
MBBz surpasses M28z CAR T cells at low T cell doses. Improve-
ments in CAR T cell efficacy afforded by costimulatory signal-
ing are typically attributed to improvements in CAR T cell pro-
liferation and/or persistence (2). As expected, M28z and MBBz 
CAR T cells achieved enhanced intratumoral T cell accumula-
tion compared with Mz CAR T cells (9-fold greater for M28z, 
Figure 4. CAR T cells become exhausted following in vivo antigen exposure, although MBBz CAR T cells preferentially retain effector cytokine secretion 
and cytotoxicity. (A) Six days after intrapleural administration of CAR T cells, M28z and MBBz CAR T cells were isolated from the tumor and spleen and 
subjected to ex vivo antigen stimulation. (B) Chromium-release assay upon ex vivo stimulation demonstrates a decrease in M28z but persistent MBBz 
cytolytic function (E:T ratio, 5:1). (C) Cytokine secretion measurements demonstrate decreases in effector cytokine secretion by CAR T cells, although MBBz 
CAR T cells are better able to retain secretion. (D) RT-PCR measurements of GRZB, IFNG, and IL2 expression by harvested CAR T cells correlate well with 
protein level measurements in panels A and B. Data represent the fold change relative to the mRNA expression of unstimulated M28z CAR T cell in vitro. 
Student’s t tests were performed, and statistical significance was determined using the Sidak-Bonferonni correction for multiple comparisons. *P < 0.05; 
**P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001. Data represent the mean ± SEM of 3 individual wells per condition. Results are reproduced in 2 separate cohorts of mice used for 
each of the 2 experiments.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 1 3 5
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 8   August 2016
tained circulating T cells as well as tumor-infiltrating T cells, 
including CAR-positive cells (Figure 3C). This finding demon-
strates that the mere persistence of T cells that can effectively 
traffic to the tumor is not sufficient to eliminate tumor and that 
the T cell functional status within the tumor microenviron-
ment may be the more critical determinant of clinical outcome. 
We therefore hypothesized that even costimulated T cells may 
become exhausted within tumor, especially at low T cell doses 
that correspond to low E:T ratios. Furthermore, MBBz CAR T 
cells, which were as persistent as M28z CAR T cells, may be bet-
ter able to resist exhaustion and retain T cell effector function in 
order to eliminate a large tumor burden.
MSLN CAR T cells become exhausted following in vivo antigen 
exposure. To assess whether there is ongoing immunoinhibition 
of CAR T cells and to compare the relative abilities of M28z and 
MBBz CAR T cells to overcome tumor-mediated immunoinhibi-
tion, we injected 1 × 106 CAR T cells into the pleural cavities of 
MSTO MSLN+ tumor–bearing mice, allowed sufficient time for T 
cell activation (confirmed by upregulation of the activation marker 
CD69; data not shown), and then performed ex vivo stimulation of 
harvested CD4+ or CD8+ CAR tumor-infiltrating or splenic T cells 
with MSLN+ targets (schematic shown in Figure 4A). Uninjected 
in vitro resting T cells (preinfusion cells) were used to establish the 
baseline level of function (before antigen exposure). Compared 
Figure 5. CAR T cells become exhausted upon repeated antigen stimulation in vitro, although MBBz CAR T cells preferentially retain effector cytokine 
secretion and cytotoxicity in vitro and upon tumor rechallenge in vivo. (A) Both M28z and MBBz CAR T cells retain proliferative capacity in vitro upon 
repeated antigen stimulation. T cells were also tested for cytotoxicity by chromium-release assay and for cytokine secretion by Luminex assay (B–D). (B) 
(Left) CAR T cells demonstrate equal killing at the first stimulation and loss of cytolytic function upon repeated antigen stimulation, although MBBz CAR 
T cells are better able to retain cytolytic function as measured by chromium-release assay. (C) Cytotoxic granule release as measured by CD107a expres-
sion correlates with chromium-release assay (B). Data represent the mean ± SD (triplicates) of the fold-change relative to the CD107a mean fluorescence 
intensity (MFI) of unstimulated CD8+ CAR T cells. (D) Cytokine secretion measurements similarly demonstrate loss of CAR T cell effector function upon 
repeated antigen encounter; again, MBBz CAR T cells are better able to preserve their function. (E) Persisting MBBz CAR T cells demonstrate superior 
efficacy in vivo and eradicate MSLN+ tumor cells following tumor rechallenge. Twenty-eight days after pleural tumor eradication (following a single dose 
of 1 × 105 CAR T cells), 1 × 106 MSLN+ tumor cells were injected into the pleural cavity (tumor rechallenge). Control (white circle) represents mice without 
any previous injections of tumor or T cells. MBBz CAR T cells prevented tumor growth in all mice, whereas tumor growth and death were observed in 2 of 
4 mice initially treated with M28z CAR T cells. Student’s t tests were performed, and statistical significance was determined using the Sidak-Bonferonni 
correction. *P < 0.05; ***P < 0.001. Data represent the mean ± SEM of 3 replicates or are plotted as individual points and are representative of at least 3 
independent experiments.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 1 3 6
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 8   August 2016
with resting M28z CD8+ CAR T cells, T cells exposed to MSLN 
antigen in vivo had lower levels of cytolytic function (Figure 4B) 
(preinfusion cell lysis, 20.5%; tumor-infiltrating T cell lysis, 13.1%; 
splenic T cell lysis, 8.7%). In contrast, MBBz CAR T cells retained 
cytolytic function (preinfusion cell lysis, 18.3%; tumor-infiltrating 
T cell lysis, 37.2%; splenic T cell lysis, 22.2%). Sorted CD4+ CAR T 
cells demonstrated a similar pattern of results. We also measured 
cytokine levels upon ex vivo stimulation of tumor-infiltrating 
and splenic CAR T cells and observed a decrease in Th1 cytokine 
secretion for CD4+ M28z CAR T cells exposed in vivo to MSLN+ 
antigen. CD4+ MBBz CAR T cells also demonstrated a decrease 
in Th1 cytokine secretion, although these cells were better able to 
retain cytokine secretion when compared with M28z CAR T cells 
(Figure 4C). CD8+ T cell supernatants contained significantly low-
er levels of cytokines compared with CD4+ T cell supernatants (a 
finding previously observed in our model; ref. 8). CD8+ T cells also 
had a decreased ability to secrete cytokines upon in vivo antigen 
exposure; CD8+ MBBz CAR T cells preferentially retained their 
ability to secrete IFN-γ. We next assessed mRNA levels of T cells 
harvested from tumor and spleen on day 3 after administration 
and found that the in vivo expression levels of GRZB, IL2, and 
IFNG were mostly greater for CD4+ and CD8+ MBBz CAR T cells 
than for M28z CAR T cells, with the exception of IL-2 expression 
in the CD8+ subset (Figure 4D).
MBBz CAR T cells show delayed exhaustion upon repeated anti-
gen exposure. Having demonstrated inhibition of both the cytolytic 
function and effector cytokine secretion in costimulated CAR T 
cells exposed to antigen in vivo, we reasoned that repeated anti-
gen stimulation may, similarly to that in models of chronic infec-
tion, play a role in T cell inhibition and that differing abilities to 
retain function upon repeated antigen encounter might explain 
enhanced efficacy of MBBz CAR T cells. We therefore tested Mz, 
M28z, and MBBz CAR T cells for their ability to withstand repeat-
ed antigen encounter in an in vitro model system, wherein cells 
were assessed for proliferation, cytolytic function, and cytokine 
secretion upon MSLN+ antigen stimulation every 7 days. M28z 
and MBBz CAR T cells had similar abilities to expand upon serial 
MSLN+ stimulation, expanding to levels 8- to 14-fold greater than 
those of Mz CAR T cells; they lost the ability to expand following 
the third stimulation (Figure 5A). Whereas lysis was equal among 
Figure 6. PD1 receptor and its ligands are upregulated in vivo. (A) Tumor-infiltrating M28z and MBBz CAR T cells overexpressed inhibitory receptors 
6 days after their administration. (B) MBBz CAR T cells express lower levels of PD-1 compared with M28z CAR T cells as shown by MFI of PD1 receptor 
expression of tumor-infiltrating CAR T cells (TIL) 6 days after intrapleural administration. Unstransduced tumor-infiltrating T cells (UT) express a low 
baseline level of PD1. (C) Relative expression of PD1 mRNA in CD4 and CD8 subsets of tumor-infiltrating CAR T cells 6 days after intrapleural adminis-
tration. Data are represented as fold change relative to the PD1 mRNA expression of unstimulated M28z CAR+ T cells. (D) Tumor-infiltrating M28z CAR T 
cells isolated from progressing tumors express inhibitory receptors PD1, TIM-3, and LAG-3. (E) Single-cell tumor suspensions harvested from mice treated 
with M28z CAR T cells express high levels of PD-1–binding ligands. (F) In vitro–cultured mesothelioma tumor cells express the ligands (PD-L1, PD-L2) for 
the PD1 receptor, and expression is further upregulated following incubation for 24 hours with IFN-γ and TNF-α. Data are representative of at least 2 to 3 
independent experiments.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 1 3 7
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 8   August 2016
antigen, hypothesizing that MBBz CAR T cells would demonstrate 
enhanced function upon tumor rechallenge. Mice with established 
MSLN+ pleural tumors were administered intrapleural M28z or 
MBBz CAR T cells (at a dose of 1 × 105, E:T ratio 1:3,000) to eradi-
cate pleural tumor (Figure 5E). Twenty days after the initial T cell 
injection, tumor rechallenge was performed by injecting MSLN+ 
tumor cells (1 × 106) into the pleural cavity of survivors; tumor bur-
den was monitored using BLI. Persisting MBBz CAR T cells were 
better able to control tumor burden (4 of 4 MBBz-treated mice had 
a BLI signal at baseline levels vs. 2 of 4 M28z-treated mice) (Figure 
5E). Furthermore, an independent experiment also demonstrated 
the ability of MBBz CAR T cells to eradicate MSLN+ tumor in vivo 
following 3 tumor rechallenges (data not shown).
Tumor-cell PD-L1 inhibits MSLN CAR T cell effector functions. 
Having established that CAR T cells are inhibited in vitro and 
in vivo following repeated antigen encounter, we next sought to 
assess the role that inhibitory receptor and ligand pathways play in 
our model. Tumor-infiltrating T cells in M28z-treated mice with 
tumor progression showed high levels of expression of PD-1, T cell 
membrane protein 3 (TIM-3), and lymphocyte-activation gene 3 
(LAG-3) (Figure 6A). Tumor-infiltrating MBBz CAR T cells har-
vested 6 days after administration demonstrated upregulation of 
inhibitory receptors as well, although they expressed significantly 
lower levels of PD-1 receptor at both the protein and the mRNA 
the 3 T cell groups at the first stimulation, by the third stimula-
tion, M28z lytic function was inhibited to a more pronounced 
level, MBBz CAR T cells were better able to retain lytic function 
at multiple E:T ratios (Figure 5B). Lytic function (as assessed 
by a degranulation assay measuring CD107a expression) at the 
third stimulation correlated with the results of chromium-release 
assays (Figure 5C). We next measured Th1 cytokine secretion and 
again noted similar levels between CD4+ M28z and MBBz CAR T 
cells at the first stimulation as well as a successive decrease with 
each stimulation. As with cytotoxicity, MBBz CAR T cells pref-
erentially retained cytokine secretion; cytokine concentrations 
decreased more than 30-fold for M28z and only around 2-fold 
for MBBz CAR T cells, when levels at the first and second stimu-
lations were compared (Figure 5D). Similar results were observed 
with CD8+ T cells. We then confirmed the differences in cytokine 
production by measuring intracellular levels of cytokines at the 
second stimulation (data not shown). Reverse-transcriptase PCR 
analysis of CAR T cells at the time of antigen stimulation revealed 
that MBBz CAR T cells expressed markers that correlate with low-
er levels of exhaustion and inhibition compared with M28z CAR 
T cells: MBBz CAR T cells expressed higher levels of TBET and 
EOMESODERMIN and lower levels of PD1 and FOXP3 (Sup-
plemental Figure 3). We then sought to test the in vivo function 
of persisting CAR T cells that had already been exposed to tumor 
Figure 7. PD-L1 inhibits CAR T cell effector function. (A) 3T3 fibroblasts were transduced to either express MSLN alone (MSLN+, left) or coexpress MSLN 
in addition to PD-L1 (MSLN+ PD-L1+, right). (B–D) M28z and MBBz CAR T cell effector functions were assessed after stimulation with 3T3 MSLN+ or MSLN+ 
PD-L1+ targets. PD-L1 inhibits M28z and MBBz CAR T cell accumulation upon repeated antigen stimulation (B), cytolytic function following 2 stimulations 
with MSLN+ PD-L1+ tumor cells (C), and Th1 effector cytokine secretion upon the first stimulation (D). Data represent the mean ± SEM of 3 replicates or are 
plotted as individual points and are representative of at least 2 independent experiments.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 1 3 8
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 8   August 2016
upon initial stimulation (data not shown), chromium-release assay 
performed with 3T3s as targets following 2 stimulations against 
MSTO MSLN+ tumor cells demonstrated decreased lytic function 
in both M28z and MBBz CAR T cells (Figure 7C).
PD-1 antibody therapy rescues M28z CAR T cell function. As 
PD-1–blocking antibodies demonstrated beneficial effects in the 
treatment of a variety of malignancies including solid tumors, 
we next analyzed the ability of PD-1–blocking antibody to res-
cue exhausted CAR T cells in our model. For this purpose, we 
selected a PD-1–blocking antibody (clone EH12.2H7) that binds 
PD-1 receptors on M28z T cells (Figure 8A) and can (a) slightly 
enhance accumulation (Figure 8B); (b) improve cytotoxic activity 
(Figure 8C); and (c) improve cytokine secretion (Figure 8D). Next, 
we evaluated the ability of the PD-1–blocking antibody to rescue 
M28z CAR T cells in vivo. For this purpose, we injected a single, 
very low dose of M28z CAR T cells (5 × 104, E:T ratio, 1:6,000) into 
mice with large established tumor burdens with the objective of 
inducing the exhaustion of CAR T cells. In these conditions, CAR 
T cells were able to stabilize the tumor for 30 days (Figure 8E). At 
day 30, the PD-1 antibody was administered intraperitoneally at 
10 mg/kg 3 times every 5 days (38–40). The marked decrease in 
tumor BLI following 3 doses of the antibody confirms that PD-1 is 
a relevant mechanism of CAR T cell inhibition in our model and 
suggests that PD-1 checkpoint blockade may be used to rescue 
exhausted M28z CAR T cells. However, tumor relapses observed 
following cessation of treatment suggest that efficacy is short 
lived and reliant upon repeated PD-1 antibody administration. We 
level (Figure 6, A-C). CD4+ T cells expressed higher levels of PD-1 
compared with CD8+ T cells (Figure 6, B and C). We also observed 
that a significant fraction of both M28z and MBBz CAR T cells 
coexpressed PD-1 and LAG-3 or PD-1 and TIM-3, suggesting that 
multiple inhibitory pathways could be functioning simultaneous-
ly (Supplemental Figure 4). We next assessed tumor-expressed 
ligands: PD-L1 and PD-L2 (ligands for PD-1), galectin-9 (ligand 
for TIM-3), and MHC class II (ligand for LAG-3). Only PD-1 
ligands were expressed on pleural tumor cells harvested after 
intrapleural administration of M28z CAR T cells (Figure 6E). As 
reported elsewhere (18, 19), coculture of tumor cells with IFN-γ 
and TNF-α (at concentrations similar to those secreted by T cells, 
as shown in Figures 1 and 5) resulted in a similar level of upregu-
lation of PD-L1 and PD-L2 expression on tumor cells (Figure 6F), 
reflecting an adaptation of tumor cells to resist immune attack 
(adaptive immunoresistance). The unique presence of expression 
of both PD-1 receptor and ligand in vivo suggests that this path-
way may play a significant inhibitory role. As some studies have 
suggested that costimulation may be sufficient to overcome inhi-
bition by PD-1 (35–37), we next assessed whether overexpressed 
PD-L1 can inhibit CAR T cell function in an in vitro model of 
PD-L1–mediated immunoinhibition (using 3T3 mouse fibroblasts 
transduced with either MSLN alone [MSLN+] or both MSLN and 
PD-L1 [MSLN+PD-L1+]) (Figure 7A). In both M28z and MBBz CAR 
T cells, PD-L1 overexpression resulted in decreased accumulation 
upon successive stimulation (Figure 7B) and Th1 effector cytokine 
secretion (Figure 7D). Although tumor-cell lysis was not inhibited 
Figure 8. PD-1–blocking antibody restores the effector function of exhausted M28z CAR T cells in vitro and in vivo. (A) M28z CAR T cells were stained 
with the PD-1–blocking antibody used for functional assays. For in vitro experiments (B–D), M28z CAR T cells were stimulated with MSLN+ tumor cells 
that had been treated with IFN-γ and TNF-α to upregulate PD-1 ligands. M28z CAR T cells treated with PD-1–blocking antibody (10 μg/ml) demonstrated 
a small enhancement in accumulation (B), an increase in cytolytic function upon the third stimulation (C), and enhanced effector cytokine secretion (D). 
Student’s t tests were performed for statistical significance. Data represent the mean ± SEM of triplicates and are representative of 2–3 independent 
experiments. (E) Injection of PD-1–blocking antibody rescues M28z CAR T cells in vivo as shown by tumor BLI in a model treating established high tumor 
burdens with a single low dose of intrapleurally administered M28z CAR T cells. PD-1–blocking antibody (10 mg/kg) was injected intraperitoneally 3 times 
on days 30, 35, and 40 or continuously injected every 5 days from day 0 to day 85 following T cell injection. n = 6–9 mice per group. *P < 0.05.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 1 3 9
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 8   August 2016
mCherry reporter (PD-1 DNR) or an empty vector containing only 
the reporter (EV) (Figure 9A). M28z CAR T cells cotransduced 
with the PD-1 DNR had slight but statistically significant advan-
tages in proliferative ability (Figure 9B) and enhanced cytotoxicity 
(Figure 9C) at multiple E:T ratios as well as augmented levels of 
IL-2 and IFN-γ secretion (Figure 9D). We next assessed whether 
intrapleural administration of M28z CAR T cells cotransduced 
with a genetically engineered PD-1 resistance would provide an 
in vivo advantage. Mice with established pleural MSLN+-express-
ing tumors were administered a single intrapleural dose of 5 × 
104 CAR+ M28z EV or M28z PD-1 DNR T cells, and treatment 
response was monitored by tumor burden measurements (using 
serial BLI) and median survival. Mice treated with M28z PD-1 
DNR T cells had significantly enhanced tumor burden control and 
prolonged median survival (Figure 9E); however, only some mice 
(7/16, 44%) had long-term tumor-free survival, suggesting that 
there are redundant mechanisms of immunoinhibition that must 
be overcome. To investigate an alternative genetic strategy for 
have indeed observed in the same experiment that a second cycle 
of treatment restores the antitumor efficacy of CAR T cells (data 
not shown), thereby suggesting the necessity of multiple cycles of 
PD-1 antibody treatment for sustained efficacy. As shown in Fig-
ure 8E, multiple, long-term injections of the PD-1 antibody are 
able to control tumor burden but unable to eradicate the tumor.
Cell-intrinsic PD-1 resistance rescues M28z CAR T cell function in 
vivo. Since our goal was to provide CAR T cell–specific checkpoint 
blockade that was not reliant on repeated dosing of systemically 
administered antibodies, we focused on genetically engineered 
methods of overcoming immunoinhibition. We first constructed a 
PD-1 DNR that contained the extracellular ligand-binding domain 
of the receptor fused to a CD8 transmembrane domain. Since the 
PD-1 DNR lacks any signaling domain, we hypothesized that suf-
ficiently overexpressed receptor would enhance T cell efficacy by 
saturating PD-1 ligands and thereby blocking signaling through 
the endogenous PD-1 receptor. We cotransduced M28z CAR 
T cells with either the PD-1 DNR linked by a P2A element to an 
Figure 9. Cotransduction of a PD-1 DNR rescues M28z CAR T cells from PD-1 ligand–mediated inhibition in vitro and in vivo. (A) (Left) Schematic repre-
sentations of CD28-costimulated T cells binding tumor ligand via the endogenous PD-1 receptor (transmitting a coinhibitory signal) or a cotransduced PD-1 
DNR lacking an inhibitory signaling domain. (Right) For in vitro and in vivo experiments, M28z CAR T cells were cotransduced with either EV (SFG-mCherry) 
or PD-1 DNR (SFG-2A-PD-1 DNR). CAR T cells sorted for mCherry expression were then incubated for 24 hours with MSLN+ tumor cells that had been treat-
ed with IFN-γ and TNF-α to upregulate PD-1 ligands. M28z PD-1 DNR CAR T cells demonstrated a small but statistically significant enhancement in accu-
mulation (B), an enhanced cytolytic function, as measured by chromium-release assay upon the third stimulation with MSLN+ PD-L1+ tumor cells (C), and 
an increased expression of Th1 cytokine secretion (D). Student’s t tests were performed, and statistical significance was determined using the Sidak-Bon-
feronni correction for multiple comparisons. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001. Data represent the mean ± SEM of triplicates and are representative of 
at least 3 independent experiments. (E) Tumor BLI (left) and Kaplan-Meier survival analysis (right) comparing the in vivo efficacy of a single dose of 5 × 
104 M28z EV (n = 19; grey) or M28z PD-1 DNR (n = 16; blue) pleurally administered. Data shown are a combination of 2 independent experiments. Daggers 
indicate deaths. Median survival is shown in days following T cell administration. The survival curve was analyzed using the log-rank test (P = 0.001). The 
log-rank test for each independent experiment was significant at the P < 0.05 level; 2 experiments are combined for illustration.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 1 4 0
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 8   August 2016
Although both 4-1BB and CD28 costimulatory signaling 
enhanced T cell persistence to a similar degree, at lower E:T 
ratios, only treatment with 4-1BB–costimulated T cells eradicat-
ed tumors. 4-1BB–costimulated T cells, while still sensitive to 
tumor-mediated inhibition, were relatively resistant to decline 
in T cell cytolytic function and cytokine secretion both following 
in vivo antigen exposure and upon repeated antigen stimulation 
in vitro. The relative resistance of 4-1BB signaling to immunoin-
hibition is associated with a PD-1loTBEThi, eomesoderminhi phe-
notype (45–49), which has been linked to less exhaustion and a 
more robust cytotoxic effector response in other tumor models 
and a model of chronic viral infection. This suggests that the cri-
teria for selecting a particular costimulatory signaling strategy 
among the options available (i.e., 4-1BB, CD28, OX40L, 4-1BBL, 
CD27, etc.) should extend beyond T cell persistence to functional 
persistence. The selection of optimal costimulatory pathways will 
depend on the unique patterns of costimulatory and coinhibitory 
ligand expression by the tumor, the antigen expression level or 
density, the affinity of scFv for the tumor antigen, the distance 
of the tumor epitope from the membrane, and other variations in 
construct design (such as spacer and transmembrane domains) (2, 
50–54). These variables — and not qualitative differences in sig-
naling — may ultimately explain the variability seen in preclinical 
trials, which alternately conclude that 4-1BB or CD28 is superior, 
depending on the target antigen and tumor context.
The relatively higher expression of PD-1 in M28z CAR T cells 
led us to focus on CD28-stimulated CAR T cells. On the basis of 
this analysis, we pursued genetic strategies for counteracting PD-1 
inhibitory signaling, such as generating a PD-1 DNR and shRNAs 
targeting PD-1. When expressed at sufficient levels, the PD-1 DNR 
competes with the endogenous PD-1 receptor for binding PD-1 
ligands (PD-L1 and PD-L2). CD28-costimulated T cells cotrans-
duced with PD-1 DNR demonstrated enhanced in vitro T cell func-
tions and in vivo T cell efficacy, suggesting that PD-1 signaling is 
a significant mechanism by which tumor cells evade CAR T cells 
in our tumor model. Our findings point to the therapeutic promise 
of adoptively transferred T cells that are genetically engineered 
to resist tumor-mediated immune inhibition. A DNR that targets 
TGF-β has been validated in preclinical models and is currently 
being tested in clinical trials (55, 56).
Enhanced M28z efficacy was also demonstrated with coad-
ministration of PD-1–targeting antibodies, further supporting 
PD-1 signaling as a significant mechanism of exhaustion in our 
model and posing an alternative therapeutic strategy for enhanc-
ing CAR T cell therapy. However, an obstacle that we observed 
in these preclinical studies and experienced in the clinic was the 
requirement for repeated antibody administration for optimal 
effect. This is in contrast to single administration of M28z PD-1 
DNR required for enhanced efficacy. Since multiple parameters 
(i.e., antibody affinity and regimen, dose and pharmacokinetics, 
and tumor microenvironment) may influence the efficacy of the 
PD-1 antibody and PD-1 DNR, these experiments should not be 
used to infer or determine the superior efficacy of either strategy 
and, instead, should serve as further evidence of the importance of 
the PD-1 inhibitory pathway on CAR T cell exhaustion. While one 
may prefer the genetically engineered strategy for its efficacy, sim-
plicity, and possible decreased risk profile, ultimately, both strat-
overcoming PD-1–mediated immunoinhibition, we cotransduced 
M28z CAR T cells with vectors expressing PD-1–targeting shRNAs 
(Supplemental Figure 5A), which generated more than 60% PD-1 
receptor knockdown at the protein level (Supplemental Figure 5B). 
In M28z CAR T cells, cotransduction with PD-1 shRNAs enhanced 
proliferative function upon MSLN+ antigen stimulation (Supple-
mental Figure 5C), augmented cytotoxicity (Supplemental Fig-
ure 5D), and enhanced cytokine secretion upon stimulation with 
either mesothelioma cells or MSLN+PDL1+ 3T3 mouse fibroblasts 
(Supplemental Figure 5E) compared with cotransduction with an 
shRNA targeting a nonmammalian gene (M28z KanR). M28z PD-1 
shRNA–transduced T cells did not achieve greater in vivo tumor 
rejection than M28z KanR T cells, but it is noteworthy that the lev-
el of knockdown was notably lower in vivo than in vitro. Thus, use 
of the PD1 DNR proved to be the more dependable strategy.
Discussion
We demonstrate here that CAR T cell therapy and PD-1 check-
point blockade are a rational combination in a solid tumor mod-
el. To directly counteract PD-1–mediated inhibition, we used 
retroviral vectors to combine CAR-mediated costimulation with 
a PD-1 DNR. This combinatorial strategy (costimulation and 
checkpoint blockade) enhanced T cell function in the presence of 
tumor PD-L1 expression, resulting in long-term tumor-free sur-
vival following infusion of a single low dose of CAR T cells. Our 
study is relevant to the clinical practice of adoptive T cell therapy 
and immediately translational for the following reasons: (a) the 
costimulatory signaling domains tested — CD28 and 4-1BB — are 
the 2 costimulatory domains used in ongoing clinical trials (Clin-
icalTrials.gov NCT02414269, NCT02159716, NCT01583686); 
(b) our models of pleural mesothelioma recapitulate human dis-
ease and use large, clinically relevant tumor burdens that elu-
cidate the relevance of T cell exhaustion (8, 15, 32, 33); and (c) 
our strategy of potentiating CAR T cells by genetically encoded 
checkpoint blockade uses human sequences that can be readily 
applied in the clinic (8, 30).
Our study demonstrates that human CAR T cells expressing 
second-generation CARs can be inhibited upon in vivo antigen 
exposure within the tumor microenvironment. Earlier studies 
have reported that agonistic costimulation alone can overcome 
some solid tumor–expressed inhibitory signaling, which may 
in part result from the use of immunosensitive in vivo models 
and the administration of high T cell doses that do not recapitu-
late the E:T ratios attained in patients with high tumor burdens 
 
(35–37). In the present experiments, high CAR T cell doses 
resulted in tumor eradication regardless of a CD28 or 4-1BB 
costimulatory domain. It is at the lower T cell doses (and result-
ing lower E:T ratios) that the effect of exhaustion became appar-
ent. Our findings illustrate the importance of using clinically 
relevant in vivo models and evaluating the impact of T cell dos-
es. The intrapleural T cell doses we used here (4 × 104 to 1 × 105 
per mouse, equivalent to 1.2 × 105 to 3 × 106/kg) were markedly 
lower than those used in other mesothelioma xenografts stud-
ies (41, 42) and are comparable to doses used in current clinical 
trials for hematologic malignancies (3, 6) and solid tumors (43, 
44). Our experimental design is thus particularly suited to char-
acterizing the role of exhaustion in CAR T cell therapy.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 1 4 1
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 8   August 2016
inhibitory signaling would use an immunocompetent model that 
includes elements such as myeloid-derived suppressor cells and 
endogenous T cells that have been shown to play important roles 
in tumor immune evasion.
On the basis of the data presented herein, we have established 
the importance of tumor-mediated inhibition of human CAR T 
cell effector functions. By performing a comprehensive analysis 
of T cell effector functions, we established that costimulated CAR 
T cells that exhibit enhanced persistence are subject to inhibition 
upon repeated antigen encounter, both in vitro and within the 
tumor microenvironment. We have demonstrated the promise of 
CAR T cell therapy to counteract inhibitory signaling, as it offers 
the flexibility to engineer signaling domains that provide optimal 
costimulation and directly counteract inhibitory signals such as 
PD-1. In our ongoing clinical trial, we are evaluating the upregula-
tion of inhibitory molecules on both the tumor and T cells within 
the tumor microenvironment. The knowledge acquired from this 
analysis in combination with the proof-of-principle preclinical 
experiments presented herein will be highly valuable in improving 
the efficacy of CAR T cell therapy for solid tumors. As with other 
solid malignancies, it may be that greater clinical benefit will be 
achieved by combined checkpoint blockade of multiple inhibitory 
pathways (e.g., PD-1, CTLA-4, LAG-3) (64). Ultimately, an ideal 
combination of costimulation with concurrent or adjuvant coin-
hibitory blockade will maximize CAR T cell potency; the chosen 
costimulatory and coinhibitory pathways may be tailored to the 
specific characteristics of tumor and patient.
Methods
General purpose. The purpose of this study was to characterize the 
mechanisms of tumor-mediated T cell inhibition and to enhance 
the efficacy of T cell immunotherapy for solid malignancies. We 
designed MSLN-targeted CARs that, when transduced into human T 
cells, provide tumor antigen recognition and antigen-specific effec-
tor function activation; we also designed signaling domains that pro-
vide costimulatory signaling and/or coinhibitory blockade. In vitro, 
we analyzed cytotoxicity, cytokine secretion, and T cell proliferation. 
In vivo experiments analyzed strategies for optimizing T cell therapy 
by use of a clinically relevant mouse model of orthotopic MPM. We 
used human cancer cells and human T cells to validate and facilitate 
the translation of our M28z CAR to the clinic, as we have previously 
demonstrated for CD19 (65) and PSMA (66) CAR T cells. Each exper-
iment was performed multiple times using different donor T cells. To 
avoid confounding variables — such as differences due to transduc-
tion efficiencies and donor-related variability — we present data using 
a representative experiment, with sample replicates of more than 3.
Cell lines. MSTO-211H human pleural mesothelioma cells (ATCC) 
were retrovirally transduced to express GFP and ffLuc fusion pro-
tein (MSTO GFP-ffLuc+). These cells were then transduced with the 
human MSLN variant 1 subcloned into an SFG retroviral vector to 
generate MSTO MSLN+ GFP-ffLuc+. Similarly, 3T3 murine fibroblasts 
(ATCC) were transduced with human MSLN variant 1 alone or with 
PD-L1 (OriGene cDNA subcloned into SFG vector) to generate 3T3 
MSLN+ and 3T3 MSLN+PD-L1+ cells.
γ-Retroviral vector construction and viral production. To generate 
MSLN-specific CARs, we engineered a cDNA encoding for a fully 
human scFv m912 specific for MSLN (provided by D. Dimitrov) (30) 
egies may be clinically used in concert — PD-1 antibodies used to 
disinhibit endogenous tumor-reactive T cells and the PD-1 DNR 
strategy used to boost adoptively transferred CAR T cell response.
Our proposed genetic strategy for coinhibitory blockade may 
overcome another obstacle limiting antibody therapy, the inci-
dence of immune-related adverse events. Because it provides 
blockade of inhibitory pathways that is limited to a tumor-target-
ed T cell repertoire, adoptive transfer of PD-1–insensitive T cells 
may limit the autoimmunity that results from a more broadly 
applied antibody checkpoint blockade. Nonetheless, additional 
safety strategies are necessary to limit or prevent potential aug-
mented autoimmunity of the genetically modified PD-1–insensi-
tive T cells. Suicide gene “safety switch” systems already in use in 
clinical trials, such as iCaspase-9 (57), EGFR mutation (58), and 
herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase (59), which mediate T cell 
elimination after administration of a prodrug or antibody, can be 
used in PD-1 DNR CAR T cells. We, in fact, have incorporated the 
iCaspase-9 safety switch within the CAR in our ongoing phase I 
clinical trial of intrapleural administration of MSLN-targeted CAR 
T cells (ClinicalTrials.gov NCT02414269).
Our study is unique when compared with other reports char-
acterizing CAR T cell exhaustion. Moon et al. characterize T cell 
hypofunction within an immunoresistant mesothelioma tumor 
(20); however, their characterization of inhibition rests on ex vivo 
experiments. In contrast, we confirm the presence of PD-1–mediat-
ed inhibition in vivo and demonstrate gene-engineered checkpoint 
blockade that can be employed in the clinic. Long et al. recently 
described CAR T cell exhaustion in a model of osteosarcoma (60) 
in that they describe an antigen-independent phenomenon that 
results from tonic signaling of aggregated CAR receptors. The T 
cells in their model became exhausted during ex vivo expansion, 
even prior to T cell transfer. Our results characterize a model of 
T cell exhaustion more akin to that developed in the chronic viral 
infection literature (61, 62) in which CAR T cell exhaustion is 
antigen dependent and results from exposure to repeated antigen 
encounters in an environment rich with inhibitory signaling.
Although we have identified one of the inhibitory mechanisms 
responsible for CAR T cell exhaustion and highlighted differences 
in the ability of costimulatory strategies to withstand immunoinhi-
bition, we did not perform an exhaustive assessment of all inhib-
itory pathways potentially limiting T cell function. That a propor-
tion of mice treated with M28z CAR T cells and PD-1 DNR or PD-1 
antibody died of tumor progression suggests the action of other 
inhibitory mechanisms that remain to be explored. Similarly, that 
PD-L1 expression inhibits MBBz and M28z in vitro but does not 
inhibit MBBz efficiently in vivo may suggest that PD-L1 sensitivity 
is not the main/only factor distinguishing activities of MBBz and 
M28z CARs. Indeed, we observed that MBBz CAR T cells are asso-
ciated with a more potent phenotype (TBEThi, eomesoderminhi, 
FOXP3lo) and also expressed less immunosuppressive cytokines, 
such as IL-10 and TGF-β, compared with M28z (data not shown). 
The literature on chronic infection suggests the existence of oth-
er mechanisms of inhibition, both cell intrinsic and cell extrinsic, 
which have only started to be addressed in tumor-targeted T cell 
therapies (20, 63). Thus, resistance of MBBz to exhaustion in vivo 
is possibly a multifactorial resistance to multiple inhibitory mech-
anisms. Finally, a more complete analysis of the role played by 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 1 4 2
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 8   August 2016
To analyze the proliferation, CAR+ T cells were stimulated on irra-
diated MSTO-211H cells or 3T3 cells expressing MSLN (and in the case 
of 3T3, with or without PD-L1) at an E:T ratio of 3:1 or 1:1 in triplicate. T 
cell numbers were counted 7 days following initial stimulation using a 
hemacytometer, with plotted numbers adjusted for CAR+ percentage 
as determined by flow cytometry. Subsequently, T cells were restimu-
lated under the same conditions and counted on day 14. To determine 
the rate of apoptosis for different CAR-transduced cells, T cells were 
collected at the time of seeding on day 0, day 7, and day 14 and stained 
for apoptosis markers (annexin V/7-AAD).
Orthotopic pleural mesothelioma animal model and ex vivo exper-
iments. To develop the orthotopic mouse model of pleural mesothe-
lioma, female NOD/SCIDγ mice (The Jackson Laboratory) aged 4 to 
6 weeks were used. Mice were anesthetized using inhaled isoflurane 
and oxygen, with bupivacaine administered for analgesia. Direct 
intrapleural injection of 1 × 105 to 1 × 106 tumor cells in 200 μl of 
serum-free medium via a right thoracic incision was performed to 
establish orthotopic MPM tumors (8, 15, 32). In total, 4 × 104 to 1 × 105 
transduced T cells (in 200 μl of serum-free medium) were adoptively 
transferred into tumor-bearing mice, into the thoracic cavity by direct 
intrapleural injection. PD-1–blocking antibody (clone EH12.2H7, 
Biolegend) was injected intraperitoneally at 10 mg/kg every 5 days. 
Tumor growth was monitored and quantified in vivo by BLI. BLI data 
were analyzed using Living Image software (version 2.6); BLI signal 
was reported as total flux (photons per second), which represents the 
average of ventral and dorsal flux. To analyze the functional capaci-
ty of CAR T cells ex vivo, tumor tissues and mouse spleen were pro-
cessed and analyzed by FACS for phenotyping, or CAR+ CD4+ or CD8+ 
T cells were sorted using a FACSAria sorter, then rested for 24 hours 
in RPMI with IL-2 (60 UI/ml), and 51Cr-release and cytokine-release 
assays were performed as described above.
Quantitative real-time PCR. The mRNA from CD4+LNGFR+ 
or CD8+LNGFR+ sorted T cells was extracted and reverse tran-
scribed into cDNA using μMACS One-Step cDNA Kit (MACS 
molecular, Miltenyi Biotech Inc.). Quantitative Real-Time PCR 
(RT-PCR) was performed with the TaqMan method using Applied 
Biosystems 7500 systems TaqMan Universal PCR Mastermix and 
TaqMan probes labeled with 6-carboxyfluorescein (FAM-MBG) and 
designed by Life Technologies: TBET (Hs00203436_m1); eomeso-
dermin (Hs00172872_m1); granzyme B (Hs01554355_m1); IFN-γ 
(Hs00989291_m1); IL-2 (Hs00174114_m1); and PD-1 (Hs01550088_
m1). The comparative Ct of the gene of interest was used and nor-
malized to the β2m housekeeping gene using the following formu-
la: ΔCt (sample) = Ct (gene of interest) – Ct (β2m). Then, the 2-ΔΔCt 
method was used to analyze the relative fold change expression com-
pared with the control condition and calculated as follows: 2-ΔΔCt = 2^- 
(ΔCt[sample] – ΔCt[control]).
Statistics. Data were analyzed using Prism (version 6.0; GraphPad 
Software) software and are presented as mean ± SEM, as stated in the 
figure legends. Results were analyzed using unpaired Student’s t test 
(2-tailed), with the Sidak-Bonferroni correction used to correct for 
multiple comparisons when applicable. Survival curves were analyzed 
using the log-rank test. Statistical significance was defined as P < 0.05. 
All statistical analyses were performed with Prism software.
Study approval. The experimental procedures for the animal stud-
ies were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Commit-
tee of Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center.
linked to the CD8/CD3ζ, CD28/CD3ζ, or CD8/4-1BB/CD3ζ domain, 
as previously described (67). The control PSMA-specific CAR was gen-
erated similarly (66). For construction of the PD-1 DNR, we used com-
mercial gene synthesis to encode the extracellular portion of the PD-1 
receptor fused to the CD8 transmembrane and hinge domains. The 
CAR sequence was inserted into the SFG γ-retroviral vector (provided 
by I. Riviere, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center) and linked to a 
P2A sequence to induce coexpression of the LNGFR reporter (truncat-
ed low-affinity nerve growth factor receptor) or, in the case of the PD-1 
DNR, the mCherry fluorescent protein reporter (68, 69). The CAR- 
and PD-1 DNR–encoding plasmids were then transfected into 293T 
H29 and 293VecRD114 packaging cell lines to produce the retrovirus, 
as previously described (70).
T cell isolation, gene transfer, and CD4/CD8 isolation. Peripher-
al blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated by low-density 
centrifugation on Lymphoprep (Stem Cell Technology) and activat-
ed with phytohemagglutinin (2 ug/ml; Remel). Two days after isola-
tion, PBMCs were transduced with 293VecRD114-produced retro-
viral particles encoding for CARs and PD-1 DNR and spinoculated 
for 1 hour at 1,800 g on plates coated with retronectin (15 μg/ml; 
 
r-Fibronectin, Takara). Transduced PBMCs were maintained in IL-2 
(20 UI/ml; Novartis). Transduction efficiencies were determined by 
flow cytometric analysis. Pure populations of CD4+ and CD8+ CAR+ 
T cells or mCherry-positive PD-1 DNR–expressing and mCher-
ry-positive EV–expressing CAR+ T cells were obtained by flow cyto-
metric–based sorting.
Flow cytometry. Human MSLN expression was detected using a 
phycoerythrin-conjugated anti–human MSLN rat IgG2a (R&D Sys-
tems). Expression of costimulation or inhibitory proteins on tumor 
cells was analyzed using the following antibodies: 4-1BBL (PE, clone 
5F4; BioLegend), MHC HLA-DR (PE, clone L203; R&D Systems), 
PD-L1 (APC, clone MIH1; eBioscience), PD-L2 (APC, clone MIH18; 
eBioscience), and galectin-9 (APC, clone 9M1-3; BioLegend). T cell 
phenotype and transduction efficiency were determined with mono-
clonal antibodies for CD3, CD4, CD8, and LNGFR. Expression of T 
cell inhibitory receptors was analyzed using PD-1 (APC, eBioJ105; 
eBioscience or EH12.2H7; Biolegend), TIM-3 (PE, clone 344823; R&D 
Systems), and LAG-3 (PE, clone C9B7W; BioLegend). Cell staining 
was analyzed using a BD LSRII flow cytometer and FlowJo analysis 
software (Tree Star Inc.).
T cell functional assays. The cytotoxicity of T cells transduced 
with a CAR or vector control was determined by standard 51Cr-release 
assays (71). To perform the luciferase-activity assay, CAR+ T cells and 
MSTO-211H cells expressing MSLN and ffLuc were incubated for 18 
hours at different E:T ratios. Tumor-cell quantity was determined by 
BLI using IVIS 100/lumina II, after the addition of 100 μl of d-lucif-
erin (15 mg/ml) per well, and was compared with the signal emitted 
by the tumor cells alone. CD107a and intracellular staining were per-
formed after incubation of effector cells and irradiated MSTO-211H 
MSLN tumor cells for 18 hours in 24-well plates at a ratio of 5:1. For 
the CD107a assay, 5 μl of CD107a-PeCy7 antibody and GolgiStop were 
added at the time of stimulation.
Cytokine-release assays were performed by coculturing 5 × 103 to 
1 × 106 T cells with target cells at a 1:1 to 5:1 ratio. After 6 to 24 hours 
of coculture, supernatants were collected. Cytokine levels were deter-
mined using a multiplex bead Human Cytokine Detection Kit in accor-
dance with the manufacturer’s instructions (Millipore).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 1 4 3
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 8   August 2016
Center, a Stand Up To Cancer — Cancer Research Institute Cancer 
Immunology Translational Cancer research grant (SU2C-AACR-
DT1012), the DallePezze Foundation, the Derfner Foundation, 
the American College of Surgeons resident research scholarship, 
and the ETC Edythe Griffinger Fellowship Program. Stand Up To 
Cancer is a program of the Entertainment Industry Foundation 
administered by the American Association for Cancer Research. 
We thank David Sewell and Alex Torres of the Memorial Sloan 
Kettering Cancer Center (MSK) Thoracic Surgery Service for their 
editorial assistance. We also thank Nina Lampen and Laurent 
Schmitt for the electron microscopy image.
Address correspondence to: Prasad S. Adusumilli, Center for Cell 
Engineering, Thoracic Service, Department of Surgery, Memori-
al Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York Avenue, New York, 
New York 10065, USA. Phone: 212.639.8093; E-mail: adusumip@
mskcc.org.
Author contributions
PSA conceived and designed the study. LC, AM, JVV, and PSA 
conducted the experiments. PSA, LC, AM, and MS analyzed and 
interpreted the data. YF and DSD provided the scFv. PSA, LC, AM, 
MS, and DRJ wrote the manuscript. AM, PSA, LC, JVV, YF, DSD, 
DRJ, and MS reviewed and revised the manuscript. PSA, MS, and 
DRJ provided administrative, technical, or material support. PSA 
supervised the study.
Acknowledgments
The authors’ laboratory work was supported in part by the Intramu-
ral Research Program of the Center for Cancer Research, Nation-
al Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health (NIH), grants 
from the NIH (P30 CA008748 and P50 CA086438-13), the US 
Department of Defense (PR101053, LC110202, and BC132124), 
Mr. William H. Goodwin and Alice Goodwin, the Commonwealth 
Foundation for Cancer Research, the Experimental Therapeutics 
 1. Sadelain M, Rivière I, Brentjens R. Targeting 
tumours with genetically enhanced T lympho-
cytes. Nat Rev Cancer. 2003;3(1):35–45.
 2. Sadelain M, Brentjens R, Rivière I. The basic 
principles of chimeric antigen receptor design. 
Cancer Discov. 2013;3(4):388–398.
 3. Brentjens RJ, et al. CD19-targeted T cells rapidly 
induce molecular remissions in adults with 
chemotherapy-refractory acute lymphoblastic 
leukemia. Sci Transl Med. 2013;5(177):177ra38.
 4. Brentjens RJ, et al. Safety and persistence of 
adoptively transferred autologous CD19-tar-
geted T cells in patients with relapsed or che-
motherapy refractory B-cell leukemias. Blood. 
2011;118(18):4817–4828.
 5. Davila ML, et al. Efficacy and toxicity man-
agement of 19-28z CAR T cell therapy in B cell 
acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Sci Transl Med. 
2014;6(224):224ra25.
 6. Grupp SA, et al. Chimeric antigen receptor-modi-
fied T cells for acute lymphoid leukemia. N Engl J 
Med. 2013;368(16):1509–1518.
 
7. Kalos M, et al. T cells with chimeric antigen 
receptors have potent antitumor effects and can 
establish memory in patients with advanced leu-
kemia. Sci Transl Med. 2011;3(95):95ra73.
 8. Adusumilli PS, et al. Regional delivery of meso-
thelin-targeted CAR T cell therapy generates 
potent and long-lasting CD4-dependent tumor 
immunity. Sci Transl Med. 2014;6(261):261ra151.
 9. Argani P, et al. Mesothelin is overexpressed in the 
vast majority of ductal adenocarcinomas of the 
pancreas: identification of a new pancreatic can-
cer marker by serial analysis of gene expression 
(SAGE). Clin Cancer Res. 2001;7(12):3862–3868.
 10. Frierson HF, et al. Large-scale molecular and 
tissue microarray analysis of mesothelin expres-
sion in common human carcinomas. Hum Pathol. 
2003;34(6):605–609.
 11. Gubbels JA, et al. Mesothelin-MUC16 binding is 
a high affinity, N-glycan dependent interaction 
that facilitates peritoneal metastasis of ovarian 
tumors. Mol Cancer. 2006;5(1):50.
 12. Kachala SS, et al. Mesothelin overexpression is a 
marker of tumor aggressiveness and is associated 
with reduced recurrence-free and overall survival 
in early-stage lung adenocarcinoma. Clin Cancer 
Res. 2014;20(4):1020–1028.
 13. Li M, et al. Mesothelin is a malignant factor and 
therapeutic vaccine target for pancreatic cancer. 
Mol Cancer Ther. 2008;7(2):286–296.
 14. Rizk NP, et al. Tissue and serum mesothelin are 
potential markers of neoplastic progression in Bar-
rett’s associated esophageal adenocarcinoma. Can-
cer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2012;21(3):482–486.
 15. Servais EL, et al. Mesothelin overexpression pro-
motes mesothelioma cell invasion and MMP-9 
secretion in an orthotopic mouse model and in 
epithelioid pleural mesothelioma patients. Clin 
Cancer Res. 2012;18(9):2478–2489.
 16. Tozbikian G, et al. Mesothelin expression in 
triple negative breast carcinomas correlates 
significantly with basal-like phenotype, distant 
metastases and decreased survival. PLoS ONE. 
2014;9(12):e114900.
 17. Morello A, Sadelain M, Adusumilli PS. Mesothe-
lin-targeted CARs: driving T cells to solid tumors. 
Cancer Discov. 2016;6(2):133–146.
 18. McGray AJ, et al. Immunotherapy-induced CD8+ 
T cells instigate immune suppression in the 
tumor. Mol Ther. 2014;22(1):206–218.
 19. Spranger S, et al. Up-regulation of PD-L1, IDO, 
and T(regs) in the melanoma tumor microenvi-
ronment is driven by CD8(+) T cells. Sci Transl 
Med. 2013;5(200):200ra116.
 20. Moon EK, et al. Multifactorial T-cell hypofunc-
tion that is reversible can limit the efficacy 
of chimeric antigen receptor-transduced 
human T-cells in solid tumors. Clin Cancer Res. 
2014;20(16):4262–4273.
 21. Hodi FS, et al. Improved survival with ipilimumab 
in patients with metastatic melanoma. N Engl  
J Med. 2010;363(8):711–723.
 22. Wolchok JD, et al. Nivolumab plus ipilim-
umab in advanced melanoma. N Engl J Med. 
2013;369(2):122–133.
 23. Topalian SL, et al. Safety, activity, and immune 
correlates of anti-PD-1 antibody in cancer. N Engl 
J Med. 2012;366(26):2443–2454.
 24. Ji RR, et al. An immune-active tumor microenviron-
ment favors clinical response to ipilimumab. Cancer 
Immunol Immunother. 2012;61(7):1019–1031.
 25. Rizvi NA, et al. Cancer immunology. Mutation-
al landscape determines sensitivity to PD-1 
blockade in non-small cell lung cancer. Science. 
2015;348(6230):124–128.
 26. Hamid O, et al. A prospective phase II trial 
exploring the association between tumor micro-
environment biomarkers and clinical activity of 
ipilimumab in advanced melanoma. J Transl Med. 
2011;9:204.
 27. John LB, et al. Anti-PD-1 antibody therapy 
potently enhances the eradication of established 
tumors by gene-modified T cells. Clin Cancer Res. 
2013;19(20):5636–5646.
 28. Strome SE, et al. B7-H1 blockade augments adop-
tive T-cell immunotherapy for squamous cell 
carcinoma. Cancer Res. 2003;63(19):6501–6505.
 29. Mayor M, Yang N, Sterman D, Jones DR, Adusu-
milli PS. Immunotherapy for non-small cell lung 
cancer: current concepts and clinical trials. Eur J 
Cardiothorac Surg. 2016;49(5):1324–1333.
 30. Feng Y, et al. A novel human monoclonal 
antibody that binds with high affinity to meso-
thelin-expressing cells and kills them by anti-
body-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity. Mol 
Cancer Ther. 2009;8(5):1113–1118.
 31. Brentjens RJ, et al. Genetically targeted T cells erad-
icate systemic acute lymphoblastic leukemia xeno-
grafts. Clin Cancer Res. 2007;13(18 Pt 1):5426–5435.
 32. Servais EL, Colovos C, Kachala SS, Adusumilli 
PS. Pre-clinical mouse models of primary and 
metastatic pleural cancers of the lung and breast 
and the use of bioluminescent imaging to moni-
tor pleural tumor burden. Curr Protoc Pharmacol. 
2011;Chapter 14:Unit14.21.
 33. Servais EL, et al. An in vivo platform for 
tumor biomarker assessment. PLoS ONE. 
2011;6(10):e26722.
 34. Adusumilli PS, et al. Imaging and therapy of 
malignant pleural mesothelioma using replica-
tion-competent herpes simplex viruses. J Gene 
Med. 2006;8(5):603–615.
 35. Carter L, et al. PD-1:PD-L inhibitory path-
way affects both CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells 
and is overcome by IL-2. Eur J Immunol. 
2002;32(3):634–643.
 36. Freeman GJ, et al. Engagement of the PD-1 immu-
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 1 4 4
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 8   August 2016
noinhibitory receptor by a novel B7 family mem-
ber leads to negative regulation of lymphocyte 
activation. J Exp Med. 2000;192(7):1027–1034.
 37. Koehler H, Kofler D, Hombach A, Abken H. 
CD28 costimulation overcomes transforming 
growth factor-beta-mediated repression of pro-
liferation of redirected human CD4+ and CD8+ 
T cells in an antitumor cell attack. Cancer Res. 
2007;67(5):2265–2273.
 38. Curran MA, Montalvo W, Yagita H, Allison 
JP. PD-1 and CTLA-4 combination block-
ade expands infiltrating T cells and reduces 
regulatory T and myeloid cells within B16 
melanoma tumors. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 
2010;107(9):4275–4280.
 39. Moon EK, et al. Blockade of programmed death 
1 augments the ability of human t cells engi-
neered to target NY-ESO-1 to control tumor 
growth after adoptive transfer. Clin Cancer Res. 
2016;22(2):436–447.
 40. Seung E, Dudek TE, Allen TM, Freeman GJ, Lus-
ter AD, Tager AM. PD-1 blockade in chronically 
HIV-1-infected humanized mice suppresses viral 
loads. PLoS ONE. 2013;8(10):e77780.
 41. Carpenito C, et al. Control of large, estab-
lished tumor xenografts with genetically 
retargeted human T cells containing CD28 
and CD137 domains. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 
2009;106(9):3360–3365.
 42. Zhao Y, et al. Multiple injections of electro-
porated autologous T cells expressing a chi-
meric antigen receptor mediate regression 
of human disseminated tumor. Cancer Res. 
2010;70(22):9053–9061.
 43. Louis CU, et al. Antitumor activity and long-
term fate of chimeric antigen receptor-positive 
T cells in patients with neuroblastoma. Blood. 
2011;118(23):6050–6056.
 44. Beatty GL, et al. Mesothelin-specific chimeric 
antigen receptor mRNA-engineered T cells 
induce anti-tumor activity in solid malignancies. 
Cancer Immunol Res. 2014;2(2):112–120.
 45. Curran MA, et al. Systemic 4-1BB activation 
induces a novel T cell phenotype driven by 
high expression of Eomesodermin. J Exp Med. 
2013;210(4):743–755.
 46. Hirschhorn-Cymerman D, et al. Induction 
of tumoricidal function in CD4+ T cells is 
associated with concomitant memory and ter-
minally differentiated phenotype. J Exp Med. 
2012;209(11):2113–2126.
 47. Song C, Sadashivaiah K, Furusawa A, Davila 
E, Tamada K, Banerjee A. Eomesodermin is 
required for antitumor immunity mediated by 
4-1BB-agonist immunotherapy. Oncoimmunology. 
2014;3(1):e27680.
 48. Schietinger A, Delrow JJ, Basom RS, Blattman JN, 
Greenberg PD. Rescued tolerant CD8 T cells are 
preprogrammed to reestablish the tolerant state. 
Science. 2012;335(6069):723–727.
 49. Kao C, et al. Transcription factor T-bet represses 
expression of the inhibitory receptor PD-1 and 
sustains virus-specific CD8+ T cell respons-
es during chronic infection. Nat Immunol. 
2011;12(7):663–671.
 50. James SE, et al. Antigen sensitivity of CD22- 
specific chimeric TCR is modulated by target epi-
tope distance from the cell membrane. J Immu-
nol. 2008;180(10):7028–7038.
 51. James SE, et al. Mathematical modeling of chi-
meric TCR triggering predicts the magnitude of 
target lysis and its impairment by TCR down-
modulation. J Immunol. 2010;184(8):4284–4294.
 52. Watanabe K, et al. Target antigen density governs 
the efficacy of anti-CD20-CD28-CD3 ζ chimeric 
antigen receptor-modified effector CD8+ T cells. 
J Immunol. 2015;194(3):911–920.
 53. Hombach AA, Schildgen V, Heuser C, Finnern R, 
Gilham DE, Abken H. T cell activation by anti-
body-like immunoreceptors: the position of the 
binding epitope within the target molecule deter-
mines the efficiency of activation of redirected T 
cells. J Immunol. 2007;178(7):4650–4657.
 54. Chmielewski M, Hombach A, Heuser C, Adams 
GP, Abken H. T cell activation by antibody-like 
immunoreceptors: increase in affinity of the 
single-chain fragment domain above threshold 
does not increase T cell activation against anti-
gen-positive target cells but decreases selectivity. 
J Immunol. 2004;173(12):7647–7653.
 55. Foster AE, et al. Antitumor activity of EBV- 
specific T lymphocytes transduced with a domi-
nant negative TGF-beta receptor. J Immunother. 
2008;31(5):500–505.
 56. Bollard CM, et al. Adapting a transforming 
growth factor beta-related tumor protection 
strategy to enhance antitumor immunity. Blood. 
2002;99(9):3179–3187.
 57. Di Stasi A, et al. Inducible apoptosis as a safety 
switch for adoptive cell therapy. N Engl J Med. 
2011;365(18):1673–1683.
 58. Wang X, et al. A transgene-encoded cell sur-
face polypeptide for selection, in vivo track-
ing, and ablation of engineered cells. Blood. 
2011;118(5):1255–1263.
 59. Ciceri F, et al. Infusion of suicide-gene-engineered 
donor lymphocytes after family haploidentical 
haemopoietic stem-cell transplantation for leukae-
mia (the TK007 trial): a non-randomised phase I-II 
study. Lancet Oncol. 2009;10(5):489–500.
 60. Long AH, et al. 4-1BB costimulation amelio-
rates T cell exhaustion induced by tonic sig-
naling of chimeric antigen receptors. Nat Med. 
2015;21(6):581–590.
 61. Barber DL, et al. Restoring function in exhaust-
ed CD8 T cells during chronic viral infection. 
Nature. 2006;439(7077):682–687.
 62. Mueller SN, Ahmed R. High antigen levels are 
the cause of T cell exhaustion during chron-
ic viral infection. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 
2009;106(21):8623–8628.
 63. Riese MJ, et al. Enhanced effector responses in 
activated CD8+ T cells deficient in diacylglycerol 
kinases. Cancer Res. 2013;73(12):3566–3577.
 64. Hellmann MD, Friedman CF, Wolchok JD. Com-
binatorial Cancer Immunotherapies. Adv Immu-
nol. 2016;130:251–277.
 65. Brentjens RJ, et al. Eradication of systemic B-cell 
tumors by genetically targeted human T lympho-
cytes co-stimulated by CD80 and interleukin-15. 
Nat Med. 2003;9(3):279–286.
 66. Gade TP, et al. Targeted elimination of prostate 
cancer by genetically directed human T lympho-
cytes. Cancer Res. 2005;65(19):9080–9088.
 67. Zhong XS, Matsushita M, Plotkin J, Riviere I, Sad-
elain M. Chimeric antigen receptors combining 
4-1BB and CD28 signaling domains augment 
PI3kinase/AKT/Bcl-XL activation and CD8+ 
T cell-mediated tumor eradication. Mol Ther. 
2010;18(2):413–420.
 68. Markley JC, Sadelain M. IL-7 and IL-21 are 
superior to IL-2 and IL-15 in promoting 
human T cell-mediated rejection of systemic 
lymphoma in immunodeficient mice. Blood. 
2010;115(17):3508–3519.
 69. Papapetrou EP, et al. Stoichiometric and temporal 
requirements of Oct4, Sox2, Klf4, and c-Myc 
expression for efficient human iPSC induction 
and differentiation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 
2009;106(31):12759–12764.
 70. Hollyman D, et al. Manufacturing validation of 
biologically functional T cells targeted to CD19 
antigen for autologous adoptive cell therapy.  
J Immunother. 2009;32(2):169–180.
 71. McCoy JL, Herberman RB, Rosenberg EB, 
Donnelly FC, Levine PH, Alford C. 51 Chromi-
um-release assay for cell-mediated cytotoxicity 
of human leukemia and lymphoid tissue-culture 
cells. Natl Cancer Inst Monogr. 1973;37:59–67.
