 The Role of PIEZO2 in Human Mechanosensation
Alexander T. Chesler, Ph.D., Marcin Szczot, Ph.D., Diana Bharucha-Goebel, M.D., Marta 
Čeko, Ph.D., Sandra Donkervoort, M.S., C.G.C., Claire Laubacher, B.A., Leslie H. Hayes, 
M.D., Katharine Alter, M.D., Cristiane Zampieri, Ph.D., Christopher Stanley, M.S., A. Micheil 
Innes, M.D., Jean K. Mah, M.D., Carla M. Grosmann, M.D., Nathaniel Bradley, B.S., David 
Nguyen, B.S., A. Reghan Foley, M.D., Claire E. Le Pichon, Ph.D., and Carsten G. 
Bönnemann, M.D.
National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health (A.T.C., M.S., M.C., C.L.), the National 
Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (D.B.-G., S.D., L.H.H., N.B., D.N., A.R.F
., C.E.L.P
., 
C.G.B.), and the Functional and Applied Biomechanics Section, Rehabilitation Medicine 
Department, Clinical Center (K.A., C.Z., C.S.), National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD; the 
Division of Neurology, Children’s National Health System, Washington, DC (D.B.-G.); the 
Department of Medical Genetics and Alberta Children’s Hospital Research Institute, Cumming 
School of Medicine (A.M.I.), and the Department of Clinical Neurosciences and Department of 
Pediatrics, Alberta Children’s Hospital Research Institute (J.K.M.), University of Calgary, Calgary, 
Canada; and the Departments of Neurosciences and Pediatrics, School of Medicine, University of 
California, San Diego, Rady Children’s Hospital, San Diego, CA (C.M.G.)
Abstract
BACKGROUND—The senses of touch and proprioception evoke a range of perceptions and rely 
on the ability to detect and transduce mechanical force. The molecular and neural mechanisms 
underlying these sensory functions remain poorly defined. The stretch-gated ion channel PIEZO2 
has been shown to be essential for aspects of mechanosensation in model organisms.
METHODS—We performed whole-exome sequencing analysis in two patients who had unique 
neuromuscular and skeletal symptoms, including progressive scoliosis, that did not conform to 
standard diagnostic classification. In vitro and messenger RNA assays, functional brain imaging, 
and psychophysical and kinematic tests were used to establish the effect of the genetic variants on 
protein function and somatosensation.
RESULTS—Each patient carried compound-inactivating variants in PIEZO2, and each had a 
selective loss of discriminative touch perception but nevertheless responded to specific types of 
gentle mechanical stimulation on hairy skin. The patients had profoundly decreased 
proprioception leading to ataxia and dysmetria that were markedly worse in the absence of visual 
Address reprint requests to Dr. Chesler at the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health, 35 Convent Dr., Bldg. 35A, 
Rm. 1D822, Bethesda, MD 20892-3711, or at alexander.chesler@nih.gov; or to Dr. Bönnemann at the National Institute of 
Neurological Disorders and Stroke, 35 Convent Dr., Bldg. 35B, Rm. 2A116, Bethesda, MD 20892-3705, or at 
carsten.bonnemann@nih.gov.
Drs. Szczot, Bharucha-Goebel, and Čeko and Ms. Donkervoort contributed equally to this article.
Videos showing the patients performing various tasks are available at NEJM.org
Disclosure forms provided by the authors are available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 23.
Published in final edited form as:
N Engl J Med. 2016 October 06; 375(14): 1355–1364. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1602812.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cues. However, they had the ability to perform a range of tasks, such as walking, talking, and 
writing, that are considered to rely heavily on proprioception.
CONCLUSIONS—Our results show that PIEZO2 is a determinant of mechanosensation in 
humans. (Funded by the National Institutes of Health Intramural Research Program.)
The ability to sense force, which is known as mechanosensation, provides humans and other 
animals with important information about the environment; it is crucial for social 
interactions, such as comforting or caressing, and is required for motor coordination. A 
number of anatomical classes of somatosensory neurons with distinct selectivity for 
mechanical stimuli have been identified, but the way in which these inputs combine to 
provide the richness of the human sense of touch remains unclear.1,2 Similarly, 
proprioception is considered to be essential for posture and controlled movement, but little is 
known about the underlying mechanisms and the precise role of this sense.3
At a molecular level, the identification of PIEZO proteins as mechanosensory ion channels4 
has advanced our understanding of touch detection.5,6 PIEZO2 is expressed in subsets of 
somatosensory neurons4,7 and Merkel cells.8,9 In mice, PIEZO2 has been shown to be 
essential for a variety of mechanosensory responses, including aspects of light touch7–10 and 
proprioception.11 Almost nothing is known about the role of PIEZO2 in humans, but it has 
been established that PIEZO2 is critically important for mechanotransduction in vitro,12 and 
genetic variants in PIEZO2, which are presumed to have gain-of-function effects on the 
protein, have been linked to arthrogryposis in patients.13 We describe two unrelated patients 
who carry inactivating variants in PIEZO2 and have prominent mechanosensory 
deficiencies.
METHODS
PATIENTS
We identified two patients with similar and highly unusual phenotypes at off-site 
consultative clinics for patients with undiagnosed neuromuscular disorders. The clinics were 
held by the Neuromuscular and Neurogenetic Disorders of Childhood Section of the 
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS), National Institutes of 
Health, in collaboration with Cure CMD and local clinical teams (in Canada and California). 
Patient 1 and the mother of Patient 2 provided written informed consent for participation in 
the study and for the publication of supplementary videos. Methods for whole-exome 
sequencing, RNA analyses, whole-cell recording, and functional magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) are provided in the Supplementary Appendix, available with the full text of 
this article at NEJM.org. The institutional review board at the NINDS approved this study.
SENSORY TESTING
Testing was performed on the hairy skin of the left volar forearm or on the glabrous skin of 
the left hand, unless otherwise indicated. Vibration sensitivity was tested with the 
administration of two sets of 10 sinusoidal vibration stimuli (by means of an in-house 
mechanical device with a 2-mm probe, at a frequency of 150 Hz, with a displacement of 
approximately 17 µm). The stimuli were administered in a pseudorandom order, and 
Chesler et al.
Page 2
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 detection was reported in a forced-choice manner (on vs. off). Thresholds of punctate-touch 
detection and pinprick pain were tested with the use of calibrated von Frey monofilaments 
that were designed to buckle at specific forces (in grams) and were calculated, respectively, 
as the geometric mean of five touch detections and the geometric mean of a series of pain-
threshold determinations (method of limits). The threshold of pressure pain was tested with 
the use of an algometer on the left thumbnail and was calculated as the mean result of three 
trials. Two-point touch discrimination was tested with the use of a three-tip aesthesiometer 
(Lafayette Instrument), with either one tip or two tips (separated by 10 to 13 mm) touching 
the skin in a pseudorandom order, and detection was reported in a forced-choice manner 
(one tip vs. two tips). Thresholds of thermal detection and pain were tested with the use of a 
Peltier-based thermode. The stimulus temperature was decreased or increased (in increments 
of 1°C from a baseline temperature of 32°C), and the participants verbally indicated when 
they perceived the slightest sensation of cooling (cool-detection threshold) or warming 
(warm-detection threshold) and the shift from hot to painfully hot (heat-pain threshold). 
Thresholds for each type of stimulus were calculated as the mean result of three trials. We 
tested proprioception by measuring the detection of the vector of a 10-degree vertical 
angular motion at the following joints: wrists, elbows, shoulders, ankles, knees, hips, and the 
interphalangeal joints of the hands and feet; detection was reported in a forced-choice 
manner (up vs. down). We tested detection of slow brushing by stroking a 6-cm area of the 
skin with a 7.5-cmdiameter goat-hair brush (at a rate of 3 cm per second for 6 seconds) for 
10 trials, and detection was reported in a forced-choice manner.
KINEMATIC REACHING TASK
Participants were instructed to use the dominant index finger to alternate between touching 
the nose and touching a target approximately 50 cm from the sternum, and the task was 
recorded with a three-dimensional motion-capture system (Nexus software, Vicon Motion 
Capture Systems). Three trials of multiple repetitions were performed, first with the eyes 
open and then with the eyes covered with a blindfold. Spatiotemporal data were analyzed 
with the use of custom MATLAB scripts (MathWorks). Motion to the target was divided into 
the ballistic phase (when the finger was >15 cm from the target) and the skilled phase (when 
the finger was ≤15 cm from the target), and the total path length was measured (in 
centimeters) from digitized trajectories.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Using the Shapiro-Wilk test, we determined that the electrophysiologic data obtained from 
transfected human embryonic kidney cells were non-normally distributed, a finding 
consistent with the work of others.27 We therefore analyzed these data using the 
nonparametric Mann–Whitney test.
We compared the sensory testing results for the two patients with the results for five control 
participants (the father of Patient 2 and four healthy adults age- and sex-matched to Patient 
1) using the Crawford–Howell t-test.28 This modified t-test is designed to compare data from 
one or a few patients with data from a control group regardless of the size of the control 
group. Because the sensory thresholds of persons in the control group matched those 
previously reported by others, we assumed that these data sets had normalized distributions. 
Chesler et al.
Page 3
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 We did not include age- and sex-matched controls for Patient 2 because this patient’s 
phenotype closely matched that of Patient 1.
We compared the kinematic reaching task results for the two patients with the results for 
three control participants (age- and sex-matched to Patient 1) using the Mann–Whitney test, 
because individual participants were tested across several weeks and thus data were not 
perfectly matched (as supported by the Shapiro–Wilks test of normality). We did not include 
age- and sex-matched controls for Patient 2 because this patient’s phenotype closely 
matched that of Patient 1.
We compared brain activation data (obtained through functional MRI) from Patient 1 with 
the data from six control participants (healthy adults age- and sex-matched to Patient 1) 
using a standard statistical package (FSL software). For whole-brain analysis, we identified 
the voxels that showed the greatest signal change from rest in response to brushing (top 1%) 
and that met a P value of less than 0.01, corresponding to a z score of 2.3. These voxels were 
considered to make up clusters of statistically significant activation only if they formed a 
contiguous space (clustered together). We considered clusters to be activated if they differed 
between rest and the application of stimulus at a P value of less than 0.05. For directed 
searches, peak brain activation values were extracted from each region of interest for each 
participant. Regions of interest were defined on the basis of previous research.14–16 These 
regions were considered to be activated if they contained voxels within the top 1% of signal 
change and met a P value of less than 0.01, corresponding to a z score of 2.3.
We used the same set of control participants for both the sensory testing and the functional 
MRI and a different set for the kinematic reaching task. The small sample sizes should be 
taken into consideration when interpreting the statistical inference procedures for the 
sensory testing, functional MRI, and kinematic reaching task.
RESULTS
CLINICAL AND GENETIC CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PATIENTS
Patient 1 presented at 18 years of age and Patient 2 at 8 years of age with similar skeletal 
deformations, including congenital hip dysplasia, finger contractures, foot deformities, and 
early severe progressive scoliosis (Fig. 1A and Table 1). Both patients had a history of 
hypotonia, with delayed head control and shallow breathing during infancy, delayed walking 
(neither patient achieved independent ambulation until between 6 and 7 years of age), and 
early impairments of fine motor skills. The parents reported that the patients also had 
difficulty with self-feeding and dressing. The family histories were unremarkable, and 
known medical, metabolic, and genetic causes were ruled out.
On examination, the patients were noted to have unsteady gaits (in Patient 2, walking was 
possible only with support). They each had increased stride-to-stride variability in force and 
step length, an inability to walk with eyes closed (see Video 1, available at NEJM.org), and 
the presence of Romberg’s sign; these findings are all consistent with a sensory ataxia. In 
addition, they had difficulties performing reaching tasks, which were exacerbated when eyes 
were closed, and pseudoathetosis (spontaneous movements of outstretched arms; see Video 
Chesler et al.
Page 4
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 2) (Table 1, and Table S1 in the Supplementary Appendix). The clinical sensory 
examinations revealed profoundly reduced proprioception and vibratory sense. The patients 
were unable to detect a Rydel–Seiffer tuning fork that was vibrating at the standard 
frequency of 128 Hz and at the maximum amplitude of 0/8. The Babinski sign was absent, 
as were tendon reflexes, except at the brachioradialis in Patient 2. There was no obvious 
weakness; however, strength on testing was variable and very dependent on the patients’ 
concentration and direct visual control of the task.
In both patients, there was no evidence, other than the progression of scoliosis, that the 
neurologic deficits were progressive. There was no evidence of impaired cognition. MRI of 
the head and spine was otherwise unremarkable, specifically without any abnormalities of 
the cerebellum or the dorsal columns. Electrodiagnostic testing revealed reduced amplitudes 
of sensorynerve action potentials (SNAPs) and borderline, low-to-normal sensory-nerve 
conduction velocities, findings consistent with mild sensory axonal neuropathies (Table S1 
in the Supplementary Appendix). Motor-nerve conduction studies showed normal motor 
amplitudes and distal latencies, and there was no evidence of denervation on 
electromyography.
We concluded that both patients had a unique phenotype, and we therefore performed 
whole-exome sequencing.17 Our analysis revealed that both patients carried at least one 
nonsense variant within the coding region of the same gene, PIEZO2. Further analysis 
revealed that Patient 1 was compound heterozygous for two alleles with premature stop 
codons (c.4723C→T, p.R1575* and c.5053C→T, p.R1685*) (Fig. 1B). Despite the fact that 
Patient 2 had a different ancestral origin from Patient 1 and had a different surrounding 
haplotype, Patient 2 also carried the nonsense variant c.5053C→T, p.R1685*. On the other 
allele, Patient 2 carried a missense variant affecting the same codon (c.5054G→C, 
p.R1685P) (Fig. 1B, and Table S2 in the Supplementary Appendix). Sanger sequencing of 
PIEZO2 in the two patients and in unaffected family members confirmed the presence of 
these variants and indicated recessive inheritance (Fig. 1B, and Fig. S1 in the Supplementary 
Appendix).
FUNCTIONAL CHARACTERIZATION OF THE PIEZO2 VARIANTS
Each of the premature stop codons in PIEZO2 occurred proximal to the region encoding the 
presumptive pore domain18,19 (Fig. S2A in the Supplementary Appendix) and proximal to 
the deletions created in Piezo2 in conditional knockout mice.7,8 To test the hypothesis that 
each of these variants inactivate the channel, we transfected a line of human embryonic 
kidney cells (HEK293) with plasmids encoding mouse Piezo2, in which each of the variants 
had been introduced into the homologous region of the gene. HEK293 cells were chosen 
because this cell line does not endogenously express PIEZO2 and has only minimal 
mechanically evoked currents (Fig. 1C). We considered this to be a reasonable test because 
human PIEZO2 and mouse PIEZO2 are highly homologous (91% identical and 95% 
similar), and the sequence flanking the putatively pathogenic variants is well-conserved (Fig. 
S3 in the Supplementary Appendix). We observed that the truncated mouse PIEZO2 proteins 
were translated but nonfunctional; heterologous expression of Piezo2 constructs in HEK293 
cells yielded measurements of mechanically gated inward currents above baseline noise only 
Chesler et al.
Page 5
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 in cells expressing the wild-type Piezo2 construct (P = 0.03 at indentations ≥5 µm, by the 
nonparametric Mann–Whitney test) (Fig. 1C; and Figs. S2, S3, and S4 in the Supplementary 
Appendix).
To test for the presence of alternatively spliced functional messenger RNA (mRNA) that 
lacks the variants, we performed reverse-transcriptase–polymerase-chain-reaction (RT-PCR) 
amplification of RNA purified from skin-biopsy samples, as PIEZO2 is normally expressed 
in Merkel cells. PIEZO2 transcripts were barely detectable in the sample from Patient 1, 
implying nonsense-mediated decay20 of PIEZO2 mRNA (Fig. 1D). We obtained a PCR 
product from Patient 2 that was derived from normally spliced PIEZO2 mRNA; sequencing 
analysis revealed that this product was derived predominantly from expression of the allele 
containing the missense variant (R1685P). Moreover, the transcripts amplified from 
complementary DNA from the parents of Patient 1 and from the mother of Patient 2 were 
highly enriched for the normal PIEZO2 allele, confirming the instability of PIEZO2 mRNA 
containing the premature stop codons p.R1575* and p.R1685*. (For further information, see 
Fig. S5 in the Supplementary Appendix.)
VIBRATION SENSING AND TOUCH DISCRIMINATION
We evaluated the patients’ performance on several sensory tests. We began by assessing 
mechanosensory responses on glabrous skin (e.g., skin on the palm and fingertips), which is 
highly sensitive to touch.21 Both patients had significantly diminished sensitivity to light 
punctate touch (geometric mean [±SD] threshold, 4.2±0.7 g in the two patients vs. 2.9±0.2 g 
in the control group; P<0.001 for Patient 1 and P = 0.007 for Patient 2) (Fig. 2A). Also, both 
patients were unable to correctly detect a probe that was vibrating at a frequency and 
amplitude tuned to activate pacinian corpuscles and calibrated so that the control participants 
could invariably sense it (mean percentage of vibrations correctly detected at 150 Hz, 40±14 
in the two patients vs. 98±0.5 in the control group; P<0.001 for both patients) (Fig. 2A).
To better understand the functional consequences of PIEZO2-dependent touch deficits, we 
performed a standard two-point touch discrimination test on glabrous skin. The control 
participants distinguished between a one-point stimulus and a two-point stimulus with 100% 
accuracy when the two points were separated by 10 to 13 mm, whereas the two patients had 
only 40% accuracy on this test, a rate no better than chance (P<0.001 for both patients) (Fig. 
2A). In contrast, the thresholds of mechanical (pinprick and pressure) pain in Patient 1 were 
similar to those in the control group (mean thresholds, 5.5±0.5 g in Patient 1 and 5.0±0.5 g 
in the control group for pinprick pain and 4.0±1.4 kg per square centimeter and 3.7±1.4 kg 
per square centimeter, respectively, for pressure pain) (Fig. 2C). Thresholds for thermal 
detection and pain in both patients were also similar to those in the control group (mean 
thresholds, 33.5±0.04°C in the two patients and 34.4±2.1°C in the control group for 
detection of warmth, 29.8±1.4°C and 30.1±1.2°C, respectively, for detection of coolness, 
and 47.8±2.3°C and 44.3±4.7°C, respectively, for heat pain) (Fig. 2D).
We next assessed mechanosensory responses on hairy skin. The PIEZO2-deficient patients 
were insensitive to vibration applied to the forearm (mean percentage of vibrations 
accurately detected, 50±28 in the two patients vs. 97±7.5 in the control group; P<0.001 for 
Patient 1 and P = 0.001 for Patient 2) but were nearly as sensitive to punctate touch as the 
Chesler et al.
Page 6
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 control group (mean threshold, 3.6±0.4 g in the two patients and 3.0±0.8 g in the control 
group) (Fig. 2B). Therefore, we can infer that human hairy skin is innervated by classes of 
low-threshold mechanoreceptors that do not require PIEZO2; this feature has been seen also 
in mice.7 We hypothesized that one such class might be C-low-threshold mechanoreceptors, 
since they exclusively innervate hairy skin and are activated by pleasurable caresslike 
stimuli.14 Consistent with our hypothesis, Patient 1 and Patient 2 could detect slow, gentle 
brushing with 100% accuracy on hairy forearm skin but with only 50% accuracy on the 
glabrous skin of the palms (P<0.001 for both patients) (Fig. 2E). We sought to confirm these 
observations on sensory testing with results of functional brain imaging14–16 and found that 
we could evoke statistically significant activity on functional MRI in Patient 1 when we 
brushed the hairy skin on the forearm and not when we brushed the glabrous skin (Figs. S6 
and S7 in the Supplementary Appendix). When asked to describe the sensation of having the 
forearm brushed, Patient 1 reported a pricking (but not painful) sensation that was not 
reported by any member of the control group when they were asked the same question. 
These differences in subjective ratings between Patient 1 and the control group were 
consistent with differences in activity on functional MRI.
PROPRIOCEPTION
We quantified each participant’s perception of large proximal and small distal joint 
movements spanning 10 degrees in the arms and legs. Control participants sensed the 
direction of the movements in their joints with 100% accuracy, whereas the PIEZO2-
deficient patients identified the direction of the movements with 40 to 60% accuracy, a rate 
no better than chance (P<0.001 for both patients) (Fig. S8 in the Supplementary Appendix). 
The two patients were able to correctly identify the direction of joint movements only when 
the movements spanned an arc greater than 20 degrees.
We next analyzed the paths and kinetics of motion using a simple learned motor task that 
involved reaching from the nose to a target placed at arm’s length (see Videos 3 through 6). 
With eyes open, the PIEZO2-deficient patients and the control participants were able to 
reliably hit the target with similar accuracy, although the two patients had unsteady 
approaches to the target (Fig. 3, and Fig. S9 in the Supplementary Appendix). With eyes 
covered, the two patients continued to accurately reach out in the general direction of the 
target during the ballistic phase (when the finger was >15 cm from the target),22 but during 
the skilled phase (when the finger was ≤15 cm from the target) they had corrective 
hypometric and hypermetric movements that resulted in profound dysmetria (mean total 
path length, 30.5±4.6 cm with eyes open vs. 70.9±39.7 cm with eyes covered; P<0.001 by 
the Mann–Whitney test). In contrast, in the control group, the accuracy during the skilled 
phase was far less affected by visual deprivation (mean total path length, 28.5±1.2 cm with 
eyes open vs. 30.9±5.4 cm with eyes covered; P<0.001) (Fig. 3A). In addition, the velocity 
of reaching was more than 10 times as variable in the PIEZO2-deficient patients when their 
eyes were covered as when their eyes were open and was also more than 10 times as variable 
in the blindfolded PIEZO2-deficient patients as in the blindfolded control participants (Fig. 
S10 in the Supplementary Appendix).
Chesler et al.
Page 7
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 DISCUSSION
We describe two patients with autosomal recessively inherited loss-of-function variants in 
PIEZO2, which encodes a stretch-gated ion channel. Clinically, we observed general losses 
in vibration detection, touch discrimination (specifically on glabrous skin), and joint 
proprioception. We conclude that PIEZO2 is required to transduce the mechanical forces at 
the sensory afferent terminals in these various contexts in humans. In mice, PIEZO2 is found 
in sensory ganglia, the specialized sensory endings in skin, and in muscle spindles but not in 
the dorsal columns. Mice lacking PIEZO2 expression in sensory neurons show no evidence 
of sensory neuron loss, and the morphologic features of their afferent sensory endings 
remain intact. These findings in mice, taken together with the fact that other senses 
(pressure, pain, itch, and temperature) were unaffected in the patients, make a 
ganglionopathy or a dysfunction of the posterior columns unlikely, and thus we conclude 
that these patients have a specific deficit in mechanotransduction.
Whereas in mice, homozygous inactivation of Piezo2 is associated with perinatal death,7 
humans can survive without this channel. The difference in outcome is due presumably to 
differences between mice and humans and remains to be fully explained. However, the fact 
that both patients were born with hip dysplasia suggests a function for PIEZO2 in utero in 
humans, as well. Some aspects of the joint and skeletal phenotypes in these patients 
resemble those described in persons carrying dominantly acting PIEZO2 alleles that affect 
channel dynamics and have been linked to distal arthrogryposis and Gordon’s syndrome; 
these conditions are otherwise associated with features that are different from those reported 
here.13,23 PIEZO2 may have a direct role in skeletal development. However, an equally 
plausible explanation is that loss of PIEZO2 function in Patient 1 and Patient 2 resulted in 
prenatal impairment of proprioception, which thus caused abnormal joint positioning and 
may be the primary cause of arthrogryposis, hip dysplasia, and progressive scoliosis.
Descriptions of persons with altered ability to sense pain have highlighted the importance of 
nociceptive input to health and survival.24,25 This study of PIEZO2-deficient patients offers 
similar insights into touch and proprioception. Patient 1 and Patient 2 have major deficits in 
discriminative touch perception and loss of proprioception that noticeably affect movement 
control and posture, but they remarkably are still able to perform complex movements by 
relying on compensatory inputs, such as vision. In addition, we found that both patients’ 
perception of other forms of somatosensation, including pain from high-threshold 
mechanical stimuli and the touch responses evoked by gentle stroking on hairy skin, remains 
intact. The findings of this study and those of others2 show the way in which distinct and 
independent peripheral lines of input1,26 combine to provide the rich sensory experience of 
human touch and the perception of our bodies in space.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Chesler et al.
Page 8
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Acknowledgments
Supported by National Institutes of Health Intramural Research Program funding from the National Center for 
Complementary and Integrative Health (to Dr. Chesler) and from the National Institute of Neurological Disorders 
and Stroke (to Dr. Bönnemann).
We thank Catherine Bushnell for support and guidance throughout the study, Nick Ryba and Mark Hoon for 
valuable advice and suggestions, Binquan Wang for assistance with functional magnetic resonance imaging, and 
members of the Exome Aggregation Consortium and the groups that provided exome variant data for comparison, 
as well as Anne Rutkowski (Cure CMD), the staff of the NIH Intramural Sequencing Center, Daniel MacArthur and 
Fengmei Zhao (Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit at Massachusetts General Hospital in collaboration with 
the Broad Institute of Harvard and Massachusetts Institute of Technology), Jahannaz Dastgir, Gilberto (Mike) 
Averion, Christopher Mendoza, Ying Hu, Daniel Ezzo, Alec Nickolls, Payam Mohassel, Robert Leshner, 
Chamindra Konersmann, Linda MacLaren, Sophia Ceulemans, Tanya Lehky, Pomi Yun, Andrew Gravunder, and 
Håkan Olausson.
References
1. Abraira VE, Ginty DD. The sensory neurons of touch. Neuron. 2013; 79:618–39. [PubMed: 
23972592] 
2. Frenzel H, Bohlender J, Pinsker K, et al. A genetic basis for mechanosensory traits in humans. PLoS 
Biol. 2012; 10(5):e1001318. [PubMed: 22563300] 
3. Azim E, Fink AJ, Jessell TM. Internal and external feedback circuits for skilled forelimb movement. 
Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 2014; 79:81–92. [PubMed: 25699987] 
4. Coste B, Mathur J, Schmidt M, et al. Piezo1 and Piezo2 are essential components of distinct 
mechanically activated cation channels. Science. 2010; 330:55–60. [PubMed: 20813920] 
5. Walsh CM, Bautista DM, Lumpkin EA. Mammalian touch catches up. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2015; 
34:133–9. [PubMed: 26100741] 
6. Katta S, Krieg M, Goodman MB. Feeling force: physical and physiological principles enabling 
sensory mechanotransduction. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 2015; 31:347–71. [PubMed: 26566115] 
7. Ranade SS, Woo SH, Dubin AE, et al. Piezo2 is the major transducer of mechanical forces for touch 
sensation in mice. Nature. 2014; 516:121–5. [PubMed: 25471886] 
8. Maksimovic S, Nakatani M, Baba Y, et al. Epidermal Merkel cells are mechanosensory cells that 
tune mammalian touch receptors. Nature. 2014; 509:617–21. [PubMed: 24717432] 
9. Woo SH, Ranade S, Weyer AD, et al. Piezo2 is required for Merkel-cell mechanotransduction. 
Nature. 2014; 509:622–6. [PubMed: 24717433] 
10. Ikeda R, Cha M, Ling J, Jia Z, Coyle D, Gu JG. Merkel cells transduce and encode tactile stimuli 
to drive Aβ-afferent impulses. Cell. 2014; 157:664–75. [PubMed: 24746027] 
11. Woo SH, Lukacs V, de Nooij JC, et al. Piezo2 is the principal mechanotransduction channel for 
proprioception. Nat Neurosci. 2015; 18:1756–62. [PubMed: 26551544] 
12. Schrenk-Siemens K, Wende H, Prato V, et al. PIEZO2 is required for mechanotransduction in 
human stem cell-derived touch receptors. Nat Neurosci. 2015; 18:10–6. [PubMed: 25469543] 
13. Coste B, Houge G, Murray MF, et al. Gain-of-function mutations in the mechanically activated ion 
channel PIEZO2 cause a subtype of distal arthrogryposis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013; 
110:4667–72. [PubMed: 23487782] 
14. Olausson H, Lamarre Y, Backlund H, et al. Unmyelinated tactile afferents signal touch and project 
to insular cortex. Nat Neurosci. 2002; 5:900–4. [PubMed: 12145636] 
15. Björnsdotter M, Loken L, Olausson H, Vallbo A, Wessberg J. Somatotopic organization of gentle 
touch processing in the posterior insular cortex. J Neurosci. 2009; 29:9314–20. [PubMed: 
19625521] 
16. Gordon I, Voos AC, Bennett RH, Bolling DZ, Pelphrey KA, Kaiser MD. Brain mechanisms for 
processing affective touch. Hum Brain Mapp. 2013; 34:914–22. [PubMed: 22125232] 
17. Ng SB, Buckingham KJ, Lee C, et al. Exome sequencing identifies the cause of a mendelian 
disorder. Nat Genet. 2010; 42:30–5. [PubMed: 19915526] 
Chesler et al.
Page 9
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 18. Coste B, Murthy SE, Mathur J, et al. Piezo1 ion channel pore properties are dictated by C-terminal 
region. Nat Commun. 2015; 6:7223. [PubMed: 26008989] 
19. Ge J, Li W, Zhao Q, et al. Architecture of the mammalian mechanosensitive Piezo1 channel. 
Nature. 2015; 527:64–9. [PubMed: 26390154] 
20. Baker KE, Parker R. Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay: terminating erroneous gene expression. 
Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2004; 16:293–9. [PubMed: 15145354] 
21. Mancini F, Bauleo A, Cole J, et al. Whole-body mapping of spatial acuity for pain and touch. Ann 
Neurol. 2014; 75:917–24. [PubMed: 24816757] 
22. Fink AJ, Croce KR, Huang ZJ, Abbott LF, Jessell TM, Azim E. Presynaptic inhibition of spinal 
sensory feedback ensures smooth movement. Nature. 2014; 509:43–8. [PubMed: 24784215] 
23. McMillin MJ, Beck AE, Chong JX, et al. Mutations in PIEZO2 cause Gordon syndrome, Marden-
Walker syndrome, and distal arthrogryposis type 5. Am J Hum Genet. 2014; 94:734–44. [PubMed: 
24726473] 
24. Cox JJ, Reimann F, Nicholas AK, et al. An SCN9A channelopathy causes congenital inability to 
experience pain. Nature. 2006; 444:894–8. [PubMed: 17167479] 
25. Waxman SG, Dib-Hajj SD. Erythromelalgia: a hereditary pain syndrome enters the molecular era. 
Ann Neurol. 2005; 57:785–8. [PubMed: 15929046] 
26. Le Pichon CE, Chesler AT. The functional and anatomical dissection of somatosensory 
subpopulations using mouse genetics. Front Neuroanat. 2014; 8:21. [PubMed: 24795573] 
27. Szczot M, Kisiel M, Czyzewska MM, Mozrzymas JW. α1F64 residue at GABAA receptor binding 
site is involved in gating by influencing the receptor flipping transitions. J Neurosci. 2014; 34(9):
3193–209. [PubMed: 24573278] 
28. Crawford JR, Howell DC. Comparing an individual’s test score against norms derived from small 
samples. Clin Neuropsychol. 1998; 12(4):482–6.
Chesler et al.
Page 10
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Clinical and Genetic Characteristics of Patients with Null Variants in PIEZO2
In Panel A, photographs of the patients’ hands (left side) and radiographs of the patients’ 
spines (right side; obtained when Patient 1 was 16 years of age and Patient 2 was 9 years of 
age) show skeletal malformations. Panel B shows PIEZO2 variants and segregation results in 
unaffected family members. Patient 1 is compound heterozygous for a paternally inherited 
p.R1575* null variant (red) and a maternally inherited p.R1685* null variant (red). Patient 2 
is compound heterozygous for a maternally inherited p.R1685* null variant (red) and a 
paternally inherited p.R1685P missense variant (pink). Wild-type alleles are shown in gray. 
Panel C shows quantification of the mechanically evoked currents recorded from a line of 
human embryonic kidney cells transfected with a wild-type mouse Piezo2 construct (from 
15 cells), cells transfected with constructs carrying the R1575*, R1685P, and R1685* 
variants in Piezo2 (from 7, 11, and 7 cells, respectively), and sham cells transfected with 
Chesler et al.
Page 11
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 green fluorescent protein (from 9 cells). I bars indicate standard errors. Panel D shows the 
results of reverse-transcriptase–polymerase-chain-reaction (RT-PCR) amplification of a 
fragment of PIEZO2 (788 base pairs, top) that spans all variants and was generated from 
total RNA from skin-biopsy specimens, as well as RT-PCR amplification of a control Merkel 
cell marker, ATOH1 (763 base pairs, bottom), generated from complementary DNA.
Chesler et al.
Page 12
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Results of Sensory Testing
Panel A shows the results of testing for punctate-touch detection, vibration detection, and 
two-point touch discrimination performed on glabrous skin, and Panel B shows the results of 
testing for punctate-touch detection and vibration detection performed on hairy skin. Panel C 
shows the thresholds of mechanical pain, including pinprick pain and pressure pain. Panel D 
shows the thresholds of thermal (cool and warm) detection and heat pain. Panel E shows the 
results of testing for the detection of slow brushing performed on hairy skin and on glabrous 
skin. For punctate-touch detection, mechanical pain, and thermal detection and pain, a 
higher threshold indicates lower sensitivity. I bars indicate standard deviations. P values are 
Chesler et al.
Page 13
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 derived from the Crawford–Howell t-test and are not shown for comparisons that did not 
reach statistical significance (i.e., with P values >0.05).
Chesler et al.
Page 14
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Results of the Kinematic Reaching Task
During the kinematic reaching task, participants were instructed to use the dominant index 
finger to alternate between touching the nose and touching a target approximately 50 cm 
from the sternum while their eyes were either open or covered. Shown are two-dimensional 
projections mapping the trajectory of the finger during the skilled phase (when the finger 
was ≤15 cm from the target), as well as for the total path (which includes both the ballistic 
phase [when the finger was >15 cm from the target] and the skilled phase), for a control 
participant (Panel A), Patient 1 (Panel B), and Patient 2 (Panel C). Results of the task 
performed with eyes open are shown in gray, and results with eyes covered are shown in 
green (in the control participant) or magenta (in the patients). Also shown are graphs of the 
Chesler et al.
Page 15
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 total path length with eyes open and eyes covered. (See Videos 3 through 6, available at 
NEJM.org.)
Chesler et al.
Page 16
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Chesler et al.
Page 17
Table 1
Clinical Characteristics of Patient 1 and Patient 2.
Characteristic
Patient 1
Patient 2
Age at most recent examination (yr)
19
10
Sex
Female
Female
Ancestry
Bangladeshi
Mixed European and Japanese
Onset of disorder
Congenital
Congenital
Initial symptoms
Reduced fetal movement, breech presentation, 
congenital hip dysplasia, and poor head control
Congenital hip dysplasia, bilateraltalipes 
equinovarus, and hypotonia*
Delays in gross motor skills
Yes
Yes
Age at first independent ambulation (yr)
6–7
6–7
Current independent ambulation
Yes (with eyes open)
No
Delays in fine motor skills
Yes
Yes
Cognition
Normal
Normal
Age at onset of scoliosis (yr)
4–5†
3
Results of MRI of the head
Normal
Normal
Results of MRI of the spine
Normal
Not performed
*In Patient 2, the talipes equinovarus was treated with casting when she was 7 weeks of age and was surgically repaired when she was 1 year of 
age; the congenital hip dysplasia was surgically repaired when she was 1 year of age and surgically revised when she was 5 and 7 years of age.
†In Patient 1, the scoliosis was surgically corrected when she was 17 years of age.
N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 23.
