 Massively parallel de novo protein design for targeted 
therapeutics
Aaron Chevalier1,2,*, Daniel-Adriano Silva1,2,*, Gabriel J. Rocklin1,2,*, Derrick R. Hicks1,2,3, 
Renan Vergara1,2,4, Patience Murapa5, Steffen M. Bernard6,7, Lu Zhang8,9, Kwok-Ho Lam10, 
Guorui Yao10, Christopher D. Bahl1,2, Shin-Ichiro Miyashita11,12, Inna Goreshnik1, James T. 
Fuller5, Merika T. Koday5,13, Cody M. Jenkins5, Tom Colvin1, Lauren Carter1,2, Alan Bohn5, 
Cassie M. Bryan1,2, D. Alejandro Fernández-Velasco4, Lance Stewart2, Min Dong11,12, 
Xuhui Huang9, Rongsheng Jin10, Ian A. Wilson6,7, Deborah H. Fuller5, and David Baker1,2
1Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA
2Institute for Protein Design, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA
3Molecular and Cellular Biology Program, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, 
USA
4Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM), Ciudad Universitaria, 
México City 04510, Mexico
5Department of Microbiology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98109, USA
6Department of Integrative Structural and Computational Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, 
10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, California 92037, USA
7The Skaggs Institute for Chemical Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey 
Pines Road, La Jolla, California 92037, USA
8State Key Laboratory of Structural Chemistry, Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of 
Matter, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Fuzhou, Fujian 350002, China
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to D.B. (dabaker@uw.edu).
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
Online Content Methods, along with any additional Extended Data display items and Source Data, are available in the online version 
of the paper; references unique to these sections appear only in the online paper.
Supplementary Information is available in the online version of the paper.
Author Contributions
A.C., D.-A.S., G.J.R., D.H.F. and D.B. designed the research; A.C., D.-A.S., and G.J.R. contributed equally; D.R.H., R.V., and P.M. 
contributed equally; A.C., D.-A.S., G.J.R., D.R.H., R.V, and C.D.B. designed proteins. A.C., D.-A.S., D.R.H., R.V., performed binding 
experiments; S.M.B. solved influenza co-crystal structures; P.M., M.T.K., A.B., C.M.J. and J.TF. performed influenza experiments; 
L.Z. performed molecular dynamics simulations; K.-H.L. and G.Y solved BoNT co-crystal structures; S.-I.M. performed BoNT 
neutralization assays; I.G. and C.M.B. prepared yeast and next generation sequencing; T.C. performed protease-resistance 
characterization; L.C. performed protein purification. All authors analysed data. D.A.F.-V., L.S., M.D., X.H., R.J., I.A.W., D.H.F. and 
D.B. supervised research. A.C., D.-A.S., G.J.R., D.R.H., D.H.F. and D.B. wrote the manuscript.
The authors declare competing financial interests: details are available in the online version of the paper. Readers are welcome to 
comment on the online version of the paper.
Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Reviewer Information
Nature thanks G. Nabel and the other anonymous reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 07.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2017 October 05; 550(7674): 74–79. doi:10.1038/nature23912.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 9Department of Chemistry and State Key Laboratory of Molecular Neuroscience, The Hong Kong 
University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China
10Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of California, Irvine, California 92697, USA
11Department of Urology, Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA
12Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology and Department of Surgery, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA
13Virvio Inc., Seattle, Washington 98195, USA
Abstract
De novo protein design holds promise for creating small stable proteins with shapes customized to 
bind therapeutic targets. We describe a massively parallel approach for designing, manufacturing 
and screening mini-protein binders, integrating large-scale computational design, oligonucleotide 
synthesis, yeast display screening and next-generation sequencing. We designed and tested 22,660 
mini-proteins of 37–43 residues that target influenza haemagglutinin and botulinum neurotoxin B, 
along with 6,286 control sequences to probe contributions to folding and binding, and identified 
2,618 high-affinity binders. Comparison of the binding and non-binding design sets, which are two 
orders of magnitude larger than any previously investigated, enabled the evaluation and 
improvement of the computational model. Biophysical characterization of a subset of the binder 
designs showed that they are extremely stable and, unlike antibodies, do not lose activity after 
exposure to high temperatures. The designs elicit little or no immune response and provide potent 
prophylactic and therapeutic protection against influenza, even after extensive repeated dosing.
Small (4–12 kDa) binding proteins have the potential to bridge the gap between monoclonal 
antibodies and small molecule drugs1–3, with advantages of stability and amenability to 
chemical synthesis over monoclonal antibodies, and of selectivity and designability over 
small molecules. Directed evolution, starting from naturally occurring small protein 
scaffolds, has previously been used to generate new binding proteins4. While powerful, such 
approaches have limitations: they cannot modify the overall shape of the starting scaffold 
protein(s), they can sample only a very small fraction of sequence space, and naturally 
occurring disulfide mini-proteins can be difficult to express. Computational protein design 
has the potential to overcome these limitations by efficiently sampling both shape and 
sequence space on a much larger scale, and by generating readily producible proteins, as 
recently demonstrated by the design of stapled mini-protein scaffolds with a wide range of 
shapes5. Despite this potential, the high cost of synthesizing genes for each designed protein 
has, until recently6, limited testing to small numbers (tens) of designs for any one 
application, which is too few to systematically explore the determinants of protein binding 
and folding and provide feedback to improve the computational model7,8.
Here, we describe an integrated computational and experimental approach that enables the 
rapid design and testing of tens of thousands of de novo mini-protein binders. Our approach 
exploits advances in both DNA manufacturing and protein design that have led to a fortunate 
convergence between the upper limit of the size of oligonucleotides (230 bp) that can be 
synthesized as pools of 10,000 or larger9,10, and the lower limit of the size of genetically 
Chevalier et al.
Page 2
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 encodable computationally designed proteins (roughly 40 amino acids). To generate binders 
for a given target, we used Rosetta11 to design thousands of protein scaffolds with varying 
shapes, dock these onto the target, optimize the residues at the interface for high-affinity 
binding, and identify, from the resulting pool of hundreds of thousands of designs, 
approximately 10,000 with high predicted stability and affinity. This large pool of 
computational designs, together with controls probing aspects of the design procedure, was 
then experimentally evaluated by encoding each individual sequence in a single 
oligonucleotide, manufacturing the oligonucleotides in parallel, sorting yeast libraries 
displaying the designs labelled with fluorescent targets, and using deep sequencing to 
identify the designs most enriched for binding (Fig. 1).
High-throughput computational design
As targets, we selected Influenza A H1 haemagglutinin (HA), as this virus remains a serious 
public health concern12, and botulinum neurotoxin B (BoNT/B), which causes the acute 
neuroparalytic syndrome of botulism and is one of the most lethal natural toxins known 
(with a lethal dose of approximately 1 ng per kg)13. We generated virtual scaffold libraries 
with over 4,000 backbone geometries in five different topologies: HHH, EHEE, HEE, 
EEHE, and HEEH (where H indicates an α-helix and E a β-strand) with or without5,6 
diverse disulfide connectivities (Fig. 1a). To design binding interfaces, we superimposed 
helical segments of the scaffolds on interface helices in previously solved HA and BoNT/B 
complexes (the previously designed HA binders HB36.6 and HB80.414–16, and the natural 
target of BoNT/B synaptotagmin-II (Syt-II)17), seeded the newly formed interfaces with 
hotspot residues from these helices (Extended Data Fig. 1) and designed the remainder of 
the residues to maximize binding affinity and monomer stability using Rosetta combinatorial 
sequence optimization (Supplementary Fig. 1). The designs interact with the targets in a 
myriad of ways (Fig. 1b), with a wide range of buried surface areas at the interface (Fig. 1c) 
resulting from variations in the Rosetta designed interactions outside the hotspot residues. 
As HA and BoNT differ in shape (the HA epitope is more concave and the BoNT epitope is 
flatter), the design protocol favoured different topologies in the two cases (α-β for HA and 
all α for BoNT).
For experimental characterization, we selected 7,276 designs against HA and 3,406 designs 
against BoNT (see Methods). To probe contributions to folding and binding, we also 
included a variety of control sequences in which the amino acids outside the helical interface 
motif were randomly permuted, the core residues were randomly permuted, all the core 
residues were mutated to valine, the loop residues were mutated to Gly-Ser, or the designed 
binding sites were omitted. Oligo pools encoding all of the design and control sequences 
(16,968 in total) were synthesized, amplified, and co-transformed into yeast, along with a 
linearized yeast display vector (Fig. 1d). The resulting yeast libraries, displaying the 16,968 
proteins, were incubated with a range of concentrations of fluorescently labelled target, in 
some cases after protease treatment to remove poorly folded designs. Cells displaying 
designs that bound the target were retrieved by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS, 
Fig. 1e). The frequency of each design and control sequence in each pool was determined by 
deep sequencing the sorted cell populations, and the sequences were categorized on the basis 
of the sorting condition in which they were most enriched (Extended Data Fig. 2).
Chevalier et al.
Page 3
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Deep sequencing of the initial yeast-transformed pools showed near complete representation 
of full-length genes; the HA pool contained 11,002 of the 11,657 sequences ordered (94.4%) 
and the BoNT pool contained 5,306 of the 5,311 sequences ordered (99.9%). Sorting the 
pools under conditions of increasing stringency (decreasing concentration of target) sharply 
reduced the number of distinct sequences recovered (Fig. 2). For the BoNT pool, after 
sorting at target concentrations of 100, 10 and 1 nM, the enriched binder populations 
contained 2,685, 987 and 355 distinct sequences, respectively; a final higher stringency 
screen that involved incubating with protease before assaying for binding (to favour highly 
stable designs) reduced the population to 57 distinct sequences. At 1 nM of BoNT with no 
protease treatment, 7.8% of the designed sequences, 5.1% of the scrambled core variants, 
1.4% of the valine core variants and none of the Gly-Ser loop variants were enriched. For the 
HA pool, after sorting against HA (from influenza strain A/PuertoRico/8/1934 (PR8)) 
concentrations of 1,000, 100 and 10 nM, the enriched populations contained 115, 41 and 29 
distinct sequences, respectively. For both targets, the population fraction of the 
computationally designed mini-proteins increased over that of the scrambled control 
sequences as selection stringency increased; computational design considerably increased 
the probability of binding the target with high affinity. The simplest explanation for this is 
that a substantial fraction of the proteins fold into the designed structures.
The design population included 3,264 BoNT designs with single disulfides and 3,594 HA 
designs with multiple disulfides in geometrically allowed positions. For both targets, designs 
containing disulfides had similar success rates to those in which disulfides were absent 
(26.2% versus 25.5% for BoNT and 0.5% versus 0.8% for HA), consistent with a late and 
non-instructive role for disulfides in protein folding. However, when the design libraries 
were treated with trypsin before binding selection, only disulfide-stabilized designs were 
recovered; although they do not guide protein folding, the disulfides clearly confer stability 
against proteolysis (Extended Data Table 1).
Assessment of the computational model
The measured binding activity of a design reflects both the extent to which the protein is 
folded and the binding affinity of its folded state to the target. In general, sequences with 
binding activity had lower computed folding energies and binding energies (Fig. 3a): this 
may be the largest-scale confirmation to date of the ability of a computational model to 
recapitulate protein-protein interactions. The second-order features most strongly associated 
with binding were local sequence- structure compatibility and the numbers of contacts 
across the interface (Fig. 3b). On the basis of these results, we updated the design protocol 
(see Methods) and generated 11,420 new HA designs for a second round of experimental 
testing (Fig. 3c), in which the success rate increased from 1.4% to 3.1% (producing 342 new 
HA binders). The improvement was particularly marked in the subset of HB2 seeded 
designs, improving the success rate almost tenfold from 0.23% to 1.9%. Iterations of this 
design–build–test cycle should reveal additional contributions that are missing in the current 
model, which can then be captured in the energy function and design protocol.
The large dataset provides an opportunity to determine whether extensive molecular 
dynamics simulations in explicit solvent can reproducibly distinguish binding and non-
Chevalier et al.
Page 4
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 binding designs. We simulated 143 randomly selected non-binders and 146 binders that were 
evenly split between HA and BoNT, for a total simulation time of 108 μs (see Methods). 
Although there was little correlation with the overall structural deviation from the design 
model, the interface hotspot residues fluctuated to a lesser extent in the binding designs than 
in the non-binding designs (Fig. 3d), suggesting that binding site preorganization is 
important for binding and that molecular dynamics simulations capture this property 
reasonably well (Extended Data Fig. 3).
To investigate the sequence dependence of folding and function in more detail, we generated 
and screened single-site saturation mutagen-esis (SSM) libraries for six HA and two BoNT 
designs, with every position mutated to every amino acid, one at a time (a total of 6,126 
mutants). Substitutions at the binding interface and in the protein core were more disruptive 
than substitutions at surface positions, and almost all the cysteines were highly conserved in 
designs containing disulfides (Fig. 3e–f and Supplementary Fig. 3a–h). Rosetta designed 
interactions outside the hotspot regions were found to make important contributions to 
binding (Supplementary Fig. 3a–h); mutations of the non-hotspot HB1.6928.2 residues 
Ala11, Trp19, and Tyr24 (see Fig. 4a), for example, greatly decreased binding affinity. The 
effects of each mutation on both binding energy and monomer stability were estimated using 
Rosetta design calculations, and a reasonable correlation was found between the predicted 
and experimentally determined susceptibility of positions to mutation for three of the six 
designs for HB1 and both of the two BoNT designs (Supplementary Fig. 2). Finally, the 
SSM datasets were used to guide generation of higher affinity HA and BoNT binders (see 
Extended Data Table 2 and Methods).
Individual characterization of designed binders
Eight BoNT and six HA binders, a mix of affinity-matured and original designs, were 
chemically synthesized or expressed in Escherichia coli, purified, and characterized in 
solution (Extended Data Table 2). All 14 designs had circular dichroism spectra consistent 
with the design models, and melting temperatures greater than 70 °C (Extended Data Fig. 
4a). Designs containing disulfides did not unfold at 95 °C and were resistant to trypsin 
(Extended Data Fig. 5); reduction of the disulfides with the reducing agent tris(2-
carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) considerably decreased their stability (Extended Data Fig. 
4b,c). The BoNT binders bound to HCB with affinities ranging from 1 to 20 nM by biolayer 
interferometry, and also bound the serotype G of botulinum neurotoxin (BoNT/G) (see 
Methods and Supplementary Fig. 4). The HA binders bound to HA proteins from two H1N1 
influenza strains, PR8 and A/California/04/2009 (CA09); the three affinity- matured binders 
had affinities against CA09 below 10 nM (Extended Data Table 2). We succeeded in solving 
crystal structures of both HA and BoNT HCB binders (HB1.6928.2.3 and Bot.671.2.1, 
respectively) in complex with their targets. In both cases the complexes were in excellent 
agreement with the computational design models (monomer-Cα root-mean-square deviation 
(r.m.s.d.) = 0.94 Å for HB1.6928.2.3, and 0.82 Å for Bot.671.2.1, see Fig. 4a–b, Extended 
Data Fig. 6 and Supplementary Tables 1 and 2).
To compare the ability of the designs to survive high temperature exposure with that of 
antibodies, we incubated HB1.6928.2.3, Bot.671.2.1, and the haemagglutinin-targeting 
Chevalier et al.
Page 5
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 antibody mAb FI6v3 at 80 °C for various times before performing binding assays to their 
respective targets. The mini-protein binders showed no detectable loss of binding after 1 
hour at high temperature, while FI6v3 binding activity was reduced by approximately 74% 
(Fig. 4c). These results suggest that therapeutics relying on small designed proteins could 
bypass the requirement for cold chain management for monoclonal antibodies.
In vitro assays were carried out for BoNT and influenza. HB1.6928.2.3, an affinity-matured, 
disulfide-containing design, strongly neutralized PR8 and CA09 influenza viruses after 48 
hours in culture, with a half-maximal effective concentration (EC50) value for Cal09 (CA09) 
more than 100-fold lower than the broadly neutralizing antibody FI6v318, or the previously 
designed HB36.614, on the basis of mass (Fig. 4d; the EC50 is similar to the antibody on a 
molar basis). Paralleling this, Bot.671.2 protected rat cortical neurons against the entry of 
the BoNT/B toxin and against cleavage of the vesicle-associated membrane protein 2 
(VAMP2; the intracellular target of BoNT/B) (Fig. 4e) at lower concentrations than Syt-II 
(the BoNT/B receptor), which contains the same hotspot residues (Extended Data Fig. 7). 
The increase in protection is likely to reflect both the reduction in conformational entropy of 
the binding motif and the additional designed interface contacts.
HB1.6928.2.3 protected mice from influenza both pre- and post-exposure. Intranasal 
administration of HB1.6928.2.3 twenty-four hours before lethal challenge with CA09 
influenza resulted in 100% survival at doses as low as 0.03 mg kg−1, which is 100-fold lower 
on the basis of mass than the dose of FI6v3 required for equivalent protection (Fig. 5a and 
Supplementary Fig. 6). Therapeutic administration of a single 3 mg kg−1 dose of 
HB1.6928.2.3 twenty-four hours after virus challenge resulted in 100% survival and little 
(less than 10%) weight loss (Fig. 5b); the same dose administered 72 hours after challenge 
imparted complete protection and 100% survival (Fig. 5b). Intravenous administration of 
HB1.6928.2.3, however, resulted in little protection, indicating that (as with the on-market 
drug Zanamivir19) intranasal administration is likely to be the optimal delivery route for 
these mini-proteins.
Three sequential doses of the mini-proteins, administered by intranasal or intravenous 
delivery every two weeks, induced little or no antibody response (Fig. 5c): the low levels of 
antibody detected were comparable to those induced by mouse IgG (negative control), and 
substantially less than levels induced by human IgG (positive control). Intranasal 
administration of the influenza mini-protein binders 24 hours prior to viral challenge still 
achieved 100% prophylactic efficacy even in mice that had previously received four repeated 
intranasal or intravenous doses of the mini-protein over a space of twelve weeks (Fig. 5d), 
indicating that any immune response and clearance is minimal and not sufficient to interfere 
with antiviral potency. The low immunogenicity is likely to be a consequence of the very 
small size and hyperstability of the mini-proteins, and suggests that the binders could be 
used for prophylactic protection against influenza over an extended period of time. To our 
knowledge, this is the first investigation of the immunogenicity of de novo designed 
proteins.
Chevalier et al.
Page 6
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Conclusions
The high throughput of our pipeline from computational design to experimental testing 
enables the characterization of computationally designed binding proteins on a scale that is 
orders of magnitude greater than those of previous studies, providing insights into the 
contributions to folding and binding on thousands of test cases simultaneously. For example, 
our observation that substituting designed loop sequences with generic Gly-Ser linkers 
reduced binding fitness to a greater degree than did substituting the designed core residues 
with valine (or scrambling their order) suggests that loops may play an underappreciated, 
instructive role in the folding of proteins of this size. Different topologies were found to be 
optimal for the BoNT and HA interfaces, supporting the hypothesis that no single protein 
topology or shape is the best fit for all interfaces. The massively parallel design process 
succeeded in generating folded high-affinity binding proteins despite uncertainties in 
designing 40-residue proteins with multiple hydrophobic residues (which potentially 
complicate folding) on their surfaces. Iteration between data-driven model improvement and 
experimental testing is likely to improve both the computational design methodology and 
our understanding of the determinants of folding and binding: the limited number of native 
protein structures from which much of our current knowledge is derived is dwarfed by the 
nearly unlimited number of de novo proteins that can be designed and tested using our 
approach.
De novo protein design has the potential to generate pharmaceutically superior molecules 
that combine the specificity of antibodies with the high stability and manufacturability of 
small molecules. Designed protein binders have previously been produced by re-engineering 
naturally occurring proteins; although these achieve some of the above goals (such as 
accurate site-specific binding), they are not more robust than antibodies. The de novo 
designed binders described here exhibit much greater stability to incubation at elevated 
temperatures and better neutralization than comparable antibodies and natural protein 
derivatives, have approximately 1/30th of the molecular weight, and are readily chemically 
synthesizable, which enables the introduction of a wide variety of chemical functionality. 
Probably as a result of their small size and very high stability, they elicit little immune 
response even without explicit negative design20, and the best of the HA designs provides 
prophylactic and therapeutic protection against influenza infection in vivo with a potency 
rivalling or surpassing that of antibodies. Unlike antibodies, the mini-proteins do not contain 
the effector recruiting IgG Fc region; our results show the latter is not required for potent 
protection against influenza, and therapeutics which lack the Fc could avoid issues of 
antibody enhanced infectivity. More generally, hyperstable designed mini-proteins show 
promise for both therapeutic and diagnostic applications.
METHODS
Unless stated otherwise, the experiments were not randomized and the investigators were not 
blinded to allocation during experiments and outcome assessment.
Chevalier et al.
Page 7
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Mini-protein binders design
Mini-protein design began by defining a variety of mixed α–β and α-only scaffold 
topologies using the RosettaRemodel ‘blueprint’ format21 with the requirement of at least 
one 10–14-residue helix. The blueprints were used to generate backbones using the Rosetta 
Monte Carlo-based fragment assembly protocol22,23. Between one and three disulfides were 
added to a subset of these backbones at geometrically allowed positions. Sequence design 
was performed using the FastDesign protocol with layer control active, alternating between 
side-chain rotamer optimization and gradient-descent-based energy minimization. For each 
topology, over 10,000 structures were generated and filtered on overall energy per residue 
and score terms related to backbone quality, compactness and disulfide quality (see 
Supplementary Appendix).
To match the mini-protein scaffolds with the desired target helix-binding motifs, we used the 
Rosetta MotifGraft Mover7,24. The inputs were composed of: (1) HB36, HB80 or Syt-II 
helical binding motifs (Protein Databank (PDB) IDs: 3R2X, 4EEF and 2NM1, respectively); 
(2) the context target protein (influenza HA or BoNT HCB); and (3) the above described 
library of de novo mini-protein scaffolds. Matching parameters were set to perform full 
backbone alignment of the input motif, with a maximum backbone r.m.s.d. = 1 Å, endpoints 
r.m.s.d. = 1 Å, clash_score_cutoff = 5 and enabling revert_graft_to_native_sequence. In the 
case of BoNT/B’s Syt-II binding domain, the hotspots were defined as: Met1, Phe2, Leu5, 
Lys6, Lys8, Phe9, Phe10, Glu12, Ile13 (see Extended Data Fig. 1). For the influenza HA 
HB80.4 (HB1) binding domain, the hotspots were defined as: Phe1, Ile5, Ile9, Phe13. For 
the influenza HA HB36.6 (HB2) binding domain, the hotspots were defined as: Phe1, Met5, 
Trp9, Phe13. Following MotifGraft, we performed Rosetta’s sequence repack of interface 
neighbouring residues (except hotspots), Cartesian minimization and filtering using the 
scoring function Talaris2013 or Talaris2014.
After the first round of HA design and testing, the Kolmogorov–Smirnov two-sample test 
was used to determine P values for the null hypothesis that the computational metrics of the 
binding versus non-binding designs were drawn from the same underlying distribution. 
Using the metrics that correlated strongly with success (such as those shown Fig. 3b), a 
second round of HA design was performed which incorporated more stringent filtering on a 
broader range of metrics. The metrics used to select the first round of HA designs were delta 
G of binding (ddg filter), shape complementarity (sc), and interface buried surface area 
(SASA). The additional metrics used to select the second generation HA designs and shown 
to be highly predictive of round one success in the logistic regression model (Fig. 3c inset) 
were average degree (degree), side-chain probability given phi-psi (p_aa_pp), per cent core 
by side-chain neighbours, phi-psi probability given side-chain (rama) and more stringent 
shape complementarity. Design models are available online (https://zenodo.org, http://
dx.doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.838815).
Software analysis
All amino acid sequences were reverse translated and codon optimized for yeast using 
DNAworks 2.025. Sequence identity calculations were performed with a subset of designs 
using PRALINE26 after PSI-BLAST global alignment. Sequencing pairing after Illumina 
Chevalier et al.
Page 8
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 deep sequencing was performed using PEAR27. Plots and visualizations were created using 
Seaborn statistical visualization tools28, Python (Python Software Foundation) and Python’s 
scikit- learn (INRIA).
Gene pools
Oligo library pools ordered from either CustomArray or Agilent with all genes 3′ and 5′ 
flanked with common 20-bp adaptor segments to allow amplification. We obtained 
conventional oligonucleotides (PCR primers and sequencing primers) from Integrated DNA 
Technologies. The raw oligonucleotide pools were amplified with Kapa HiFi Hotstart Ready 
Mix (Kapa Biosystems) using extension primers to add pETCON yeast homologous 
recombination segments (40 bp) to each end. All amplifications were performed using real-
time PCR on a MiniOpticon (Bio-Rad) for between 9 and 20 cycles. Quantitative PCR 
amplification was critical as over-amplification of gene pools resulted in low transformation 
efficiency. Amplified pools were size-selected on a 2% agarose gel and cleaned (Qiagen 
QIAquick Gel Extraction Kit). A second round of quantitative PCR amplification was 
performed with the same primers on the size-selected pools to generate 2–4μg of DNA. 
Yeast EBY100 cells were transformed with library DNA and linearized pETCON plasmid29 
using an established protocol30. After transformation (minimum 1 × 107 transformants), 
cells were grown overnight in SDCAA medium in 30-ml cultures at 30 °C, passaged once, 
and stored in 20 mM HEPES 150 mM NaCl pH 7.5, 20% (w/v) glycerol in 1 × 107-cell 
aliquots at −80°C.
Yeast display and deep sequencing
Cell aliquots were thawed on ice, centrifuged at 13,000 r.p.m. for 30 s, resuspended in 1 × 
107 cells per ml of C-Trp-Ura medium and grown at 30 °C for 16 h. Cells were then 
centrifuged at 13,000 r.p.m. for 1 min and resuspended at 1 × 107 cells per ml SGCAA 
medium and induced at 30 °C for 16–24 h. Cells were labelled with either biotinylated 
BoNT HCB, PR8 haemagglutinin, or CA09 haemagglutinin, washed, secondarily labelled 
with streptavidin- phycoerythrin (SAPE, Invitrogen) and anti-c-Myc fluorescein 
isothiocyanate (FITC, Miltenyi Biotech), and sorted by fluorescent gates under various 
stringency conditions using a Sony SH800. HA target proteins were produced as previously 
described16. Cells were recovered overnight at 2.5 × 105 collected cells per ml SDCAA 
medium, whereupon at least 1 × 107 cells were spun down at 13,000 r.p.m. for 1 min and 
stored as cell pellets at −80 °C before library preparation for deep sequencing. Between 1 × 
107 and 4 × 107 yeast cells were barcoded and prepared for deep sequencing for each library 
as previously described15. Enhanced score files including all sequences ordered, 
computational metrics, and enrichments are available online (https://zenodo.org, http://
dx.doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.838815).
SSM and affinity maturation
SSM libraries for eight designs (Supplementary Figs 2 and 3a–h) were constructed from 
Agilent gene pools, and yeast display selections performed as described above, using target 
protein concentrations of 1,000 nM, 100 nM, 10 nM and 1 nM for HA, and 100 nM, 10 nM, 
1 nM, 1nM + (trypsin at 18.5 μg ml−1) for BoNT HCB. Upon deep sequencing, the five most 
beneficial mutations at nine positions in each of the HA designs predicted to result in higher 
Chevalier et al.
Page 9
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 affinity were combined into high-diversity libraries (<1 × 107) using wobble bases as guided 
by SwiftLib31. A DNA library for each design was constructed from assembly PCR using 
Ultramer oligonucleotides (Integrated DNA Technology) to encode the variable region. 
Primers and sequences are listed in Supplementary Table 3. These libraries went through 
three increasing stringency sorts: rd1 100 nM, rd2 10 nM, and rd3 1 nM against CA09. 
Promising constructs were identified through Sanger sequencing of a subset of the final rd3 
pool. Versions of the BoNT designs were directly generated from SSMs by incorporating the 
best beneficial mutations to create high-affinity variants; no selections were used.
Mini-protein expression and peptide synthesis
Genes encoding the designed protein sequences were synthesized and cloned into pET
−28b(+) E. coli plasmid expression vectors (GenScript, N-terminal 6 × His tag and thrombin 
cleavage site). Plasmids were then transformed into chemically competent E. coli Lemo21 
cells (NEB). Protein expression was then induced with 1 mM of isopropyl β-D-
thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) at 18 °C. After overnight expression, cells were collected and 
purified by nickel affinity followed by size-exclusion fast protein liquid chromatography 
(Superdex 75 10/300 GL, GE Healthcare) and mass spectrum verification of the molecular 
weight of the species in solution (Thermo Scientific). Peptide sequences were synthesized 
from commercial vendors Biomatik or CS Bio in 50 mg quantities with 70% purity 
requirements. Sequences containing cysteines underwent standard natural oxidation 
performed by vendor.
Circular dichroism
Far-ultraviolet circular dichroism measurements were carried out with an AVIV 
spectrometer model 420 in PBS buffer (pH 7.4) in a 1 mm path-length cuvette with protein 
concentration of approximately 0.25 mg ml−1 (unless otherwise mentioned in the text). 
Temperature melts were from 25 to 95 °C and monitored absorption signal at 222 nm (steps 
of 2 °C per min, 30 s of equilibration by step). Wavelength scans (195–260 nm) were 
collected at 25 °C and 95 °C, and again at 25 °C after fast refolding (roughly 5 min). Four 
chemically synthesized, disulphide-containing mini-proteins (see Extended Data Fig. 4b) 
were also characterized at a concentration of approximately 0.2 mg ml−1 in the absence or 
presence of 2.5 mM of the reducing agent TCEP5.
Biolayer Interferometry
Binding data were collected in an Octet RED96 (ForteBio) and processed using the 
instrument’s integrated software using a 1:1 binding model. For BotNT/B binding proteins, 
the target BoNT heavy chain protein domains (HCB or HCG) were covalently linked to 
amine-reactive sensors (ARG2, ForteBio) at 5 μg ml−1 in acetate buffer for 300 s, while the 
binding proteins to assay were diluted from a concentrated stock into binding buffer (10 mM 
HEPES, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 3 mM EDTA, 0.05% surfactant P20, 0.5% non-fat dry 
milk). For influenza binding proteins, streptavidin-coated biosensors were dipped in wells 
containing biotinylated HA proteins (100 nM) in binding buffer for immobilization for 300 
s, while the binding proteins to assay were diluted from a concentrated stock into binding 
buffer (1 × phosphate buffered saline (PBS) pH 7.4, 0.01% BSA, 0.002% Tween 20). After 
baseline measurement in binding buffer alone, the binding kinetics were monitored by 
Chevalier et al.
Page 10
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 dipping the biosensors in wells containing defined concentrations of the designed protein 
(association) and then dipping the sensors back into baseline wells (dissociation). For heat-
time courses, the proteins were incubated for defined times at a concentration of 160 nM in 
PBS buffer (150 nM NaCl, pH = 7.4) and then diluted to 8 nM in the final buffer and 
assayed as described above.
BoNT/B (HCB) co-crystal structures
HCB was expressed and purified as previously described32. For X-ray crystallography, the 
HcB-Bot.671.2 complex was prepared by mixing HCB with the binder at a molar ratio of 
1:1.5 and the complex was further purified by a Superdex 200 SEC (GE Healthcare) in a 
buffer containing 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM Hepes pH 7.0, 1 mM TCEP Initial crystallization 
screens were carried out using a Gryphon crystallization robot (Art Robbins Instrument) and 
commercial high-throughput crystallization screen kits from Hampton Research and Qiagen. 
After extensive manual optimization, the best crystals were grown by sitting-drop vapour 
diffusion at 18 °C. The protein (5 mg ml− 1) was mixed in 2:1 ratio with a reservoir solution 
containing 100 mM Tris pH 8.0, 25% polyethylene glycol (PEG) 400. The crystals were 
cryoprotected in the original mother liquor and flash-cooled in liquid nitrogen. X-ray 
diffraction data were collected at 100 K at beamline 24-ID-E, Advanced Photon Source 
(APS). The data were processed using XDS32,33. The structure was determined by molecular 
replacement software Phaser using the structure of the HCB (PDB code: 2NM1) as the 
search model32. The manual model building and refinement were performed in COOT34 and 
PHENIX35 in an iterative manner. The refinement progress was monitored with the Rfree 
value36 using a 5% randomly selected test set. The structures were validated through the 
MolProbity web server36,37 and showed excellent stereochemistry. Data collection and 
structural refinement statistics are listed in Supplementary Table 1.
Influenza H1 co-crystal structure
For the HA-HB1.6928.2.3 complex, A/PuertoRico/8/1934 HA and HB1.6928.2.3 peptide (in 
25 mM Tris pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl) were mixed at a 1:4 molar ratio at a final concentration 
of 10 mg ml−1 HA in 25 mM Tris pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl. Crystals were grown with a well 
solution of 5% PEG 3000, 30% PEG 200, 100 mM MES pH 6.0 using the sitting drop 
vapour diffusion method and directly flash cooled in liquid nitrogen. Data were collected at 
ALS beamline 5.0.3 and processed with HKL200038. Phaser35,38 was used for molecular 
replacement within Phenix39 using a single protomer of PR8 H1 HA (PDB ID: 1RVX40) as 
a search model. The HB1.6928.2.3 peptide was manually built into FO—FC and 2FO—FC 
maps using clearly defined aromatic residues and disulfide bonds to confirm the register. The 
model was refined through iterative rounds of model building in COOT34 and refinement in 
Phenix. TLS groups were automatically identified by Phenix. Glycans and waters were 
manually added and edited in COOT. The final model was assessed with quality metrics 
within the Phenix.refine interface which utilizes MolProbity37. Data collection and 
refinement statistics are listed in Supplementary Table 2.
Molecular dynamics simulations
A total of 289 independent mini-protein binders (without the target) were simulated (143 for 
BoNT, and 146 for Influenza H1 HA see Extended Data Fig. 3) using Gromacs 5.0441 and 
Chevalier et al.
Page 11
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Amber99sb-ILDN force field42. Each protein was simulated in a triclinic box with explicit 
water solvent (TIP3P43), with box edges at least 10 Å from the protein. Counterions (Na+ 
and Cl−) were used to neutralize the system. Integration time step was 2 ps and LINCS44 
was applied to constrain all the bonds. Long-range electrostatics (greater than 12 Å) were 
treated with the particle-mesh Ewald method45. Van der Waals interactions were smoothly 
switched off between 10 Å and 12 Å. After minimization (10,000 steps), the system was 
position restrained for 200 ps in an NVT ensemble (only heavy atoms, restraint = 10 kJ per 
mol × Å−2, T = 310 K), followed by 500 ps of NPT (T = 310 K, restraint = 10 kJ per mol × 
Å−2, 1 bar) using Berendsen thermostat and barostat46. For each protein, we then performed 
five independent NPT production simulations (T = 310K, 1 bar) with 500 ps of initial 
temperature annealing (T0 = 50, Tfinal = 310 K) using V-rescale thermostat47 and Parrinello-
Rahman Barostat48. Each production simulation was in the length of 100 ns for BoNT and 
50 ns for influenza binders (see Supplementary Information). Snapshots were recorded every 
50 ps, and all of them were used for subsequent data analysis (Extended Data Fig. 3).
Influenza neutralization assays
One hundred TCID50 units of virus and half-log dilutions of binders were incubated in 
quadruplicate at 37 °C for two hours in 200 μl neutralization assay medium (‘NAM’: 
medium 199, 0.3% BSA, 10 mM HEPES, 1 mM CaCl2, penicillin-streptomycin). Ninety-
six-well plates with confluent monolayers of Madin–Darby canine kidney epithelial cells 
(ATCC) were washed twice with PBS followed by addition of 50 μl of 5 μg ml−1 TPCK-
trypsin in NAM and the virus/binder neutralization mix. Plates were incubated for 48 h and 
virus detected by combining 50 μl each of assay supernatants and 0.5% turkey red blood 
cells (TRBC). Virus-positive wells that haemagglutinated the TRBC were identified, and the 
EC50 was calculated using Reed–Muench method.
Botulinum neurotoxin neutralization assays
All procedures were conducted in accordance with the guidelines approved by the Institute 
Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) at Boston Children’s Hospital (#3030). Timed-
pregnant rats (Sprague Dawley strain, purchased from Charles River) were euthanized and 
primary rat cortical neurons were prepared from E18–19 embryos using a papain 
dissociation kit (Worthington Biochemical). For immunoblot analyses, neurons were 
exposed to BoNT/B (20 nM) or BoNT/A (10 nM) with GST-Syt-II or Bot.671.2 for 10 min 
in high [K+] buffer. Subsequently, the neurons were washed and incubated in culture 
medium for 10 h (BoNT/B) or 6 h (BoNT/A). Cells were then lysed (lysis buffer: PBS, 1% 
Triton X-100, 0.05% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), plus protease inhibitor cocktail 
(Roche)). Lysates were centrifuged (4 °C) for 5 min at maximum speed using a 
microcentrifuge. The supernatants were collected for immunoblot analysis against BoNT/A, 
BoNT/B or actin. For immunocytochemistry, the neurons were seeded on cover glass in 24-
well plates. The cells were then exposed to 20 nM BoNT/B for 10 min (middle panel, 
positive control), or with 20 nM BoNT/B and 600 nM Bot.671.2 for 10 min. Cells were 
washed with PBS and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 20 min. The cells were then 
blocked with PBS containing 10% goat serum for 45 min and exposed to primary antibody 
(rabbit anti-BoNT/B antibody) for 1 h and secondary antibody (Alexa-488) for 1 h. The 
Chevalier et al.
Page 12
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 coverslips were then mounted on a slide and images collected using a fluorescence 
microscope. See Extended Data Fig. 7.
In vivo immunogenicity and influenza challenge
Animal studies were approved by the University of Washington Institutional Animal Care 
and Use Committee. BALB/c mice (female, 6–8 weeks old, n=5–10 per group) were 
randomly separated into groups, anaesthetized and then were dosed either intranasally or 
intravenously with PBS (negative control), the antibody FI6 (SFFV-FI6v3 IgG, Molecular 
design & Therapeutics) or mini-protein binders (HB1.6928.2.3 or HB36.6). Between 24 and 
96 h after being dosed (see Fig. 5), the mice were anaesthetized with 2.5% isoflurane and 
challenged intranasally with 2 MLD50 of CA09. Following challenge, the mice were 
monitored twice daily for weight loss and survival until up to 14 days post-infection. 
Animals that lost 30% of their body weight (as a proportion of their initial weight) were 
euthanized by carbon dioxide in accordance with our animal protocols. For the 
immunogenicity experiment, BALB/c mice (female, 6–8 weeks old, n = 5 per group) were 
randomly separated into groups, anaesthetized and dosed with (intranasal or intravenous) 
PBS, mini-proteins (HB1.5702.3.3, HB1.6928.2.3, HB1.6394.2.3, HB36.6, Bot2110.4 or 
Bot3194.4), or monoclonal antibodies mIgG (Innovative IR-MSBC-GF) or hIgG (Innovative 
IR-HU-GF-ED). A total of three or four doses were administered two weeks apart for both 
the intranasal and intravenous doses. Blood was collected two weeks after each dose by retro 
orbital bleed using micro-haematocrit capillary tubes (Fisher). Serum was separated by 
centrifuging the blood samples in polymer gel chemistry tubes. For mouse experiments, 
researchers were not blinded to animal identity.
ELISA
HB36.6, HB1.6928.2.3, HB1.6394.2.3, Bot 2110.4, Bot 3194.4, mIgG, hIgG and BSA-
specific IgG antibody levels in mouse serum were assessed by ELISA. Maxisorp (Thermo 
Scientific-Nunc) were coated with 100 ng per well of HB36.6, HB1.5702.3.3, 
HB1.6928.2.3, HB1.6394.2.3, Bot 2110.4, Bot 3194.4, mIgG (Innovative IR-MSBC-GF), 
hIgG (Innovative IR-HU-GF-ED) or BSA (LAMPIRE Biological laboratories, cat no. 
7500804) in PBS overnight at 4 °C. Plates were blocked with 5% nonfat milk powder in 
PBS for 1 h at room temperature, and then washed three times with wash buffer (PBS-T; 
phosphate-buffered saline containing 0.05% Tween 20). Samples were diluted in a buffer 
containing 1% nonfat milk powder in PBS-T, added to the wells, and incubated for 1 hr at 
room temperature. Following three washes with PBS-T, plates were incubated with 
horseradish-peroxidase conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG (1/5,000 dilution) secondary 
antibodies (ThermoFisher 62–6520) for 1 h at room temperature. After five washes with 
PBS-T, TMB substrate (KPL 52-00-03) was added to the wells for 30 min at room 
temperature. Colour development was stopped by the addition of 50 μl HCl (1 M), and the 
plates were read at 450 nm to measure relative optical densities. The average optical density 
of blank wells was subtracted to calculate the reported values.
Statistical and power analyses
For animal studies, mice were randomly assigned to either treatment or control groups. In 
mouse influenza challenge studies, investigators were blinded to which treatment group each 
Chevalier et al.
Page 13
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 animal was assigned to during measurement of weight loss and survival. For all other 
analyses, investigators were not blinded to treatment groups or in the data analysis. A group 
size of n = 10 mice was determined based on power analysis, yielding 80% power to discern 
a difference of 5% weight-change between groups at an alpha value of 0.05, considering a 
standard deviation of 4% in weight-change at 4–7 days after infection. Survival analyses 
were performed using the Kaplan–Meier log–rank test. A P value of <0.05 was considered to 
be significant. For mice, the minimum group size was determined using weight loss data 
with 70% of control mice becoming infected with CA09. Comparisons in antibody 
responses were performed using unpaired student t-test. With a standard deviation of 2% in 
weight loss, a group size of n = 5 yields >80% power to detect a minimum of a 10% 
difference between groups in weight loss using a two-sided t-test with an alpha value of 
0.05.
Code availability
Computational protein designs and filtering were performed using RosettaScripts. The 
respective XML code is available as part of the Supplementary Information Appendices A–
C.
Data availability
Computational design models, Rosetta-metrics, and experimental results that support the 
findings in this study have been deposited in the online zenodo repository (https://
zenodo.org. http://dx.doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.838815). Structures have been submitted to 
the Research Collaboratory for Structural Bioinformatics Protein Databank under the codes 
5VLI (HB1.6928.2.3 co-crystal with influenza HA), 5VID (Bot.671.2 co-crystal with BoNT 
HCB) and 5VMR (Bot.2110.4 co-crystal with BoNT HCB).
Chevalier et al.
Page 14
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data
Extended Data Figure 1. Target proteins architecture and interactions with anti-BoNT/B and 
anti-influenza motifs
a, Full complex of BoNT, showing heavy chain binding domain (HCB) target epitope 
position in relation to catalytic and translocation domains. Inset shows inhibitory fragment 
Syt-II (in orange) bound to HCB with hotspots shown as sticks, and grey areas excluded 
from design calculations. b, Crystal structure of SC1918/H1 showing HA1 and HA2 
subunits in complex with HB36.3. Inset shows detailed view of HB36.3 (in green) bound to 
Chevalier et al.
Page 15
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 stem region epitope with hotspots shown as sticks, and grey areas excluded from design 
calculations. c, Crystal structure of SC1918/H1 showing HA1 and HA2 subunits in complex 
with HB80.4. Inset shows detailed view of HB80.4 (in magenta) bound to stem region 
epitope with hotspots shown as sticks, and grey areas excluded from design calculations.
Extended Data Figure 2. Categorization of binders from high- throughput sequencing data of 
yeast-display FACS-sorted yeast pools
a, Schematic representation of a resulting yeast pool experiment transformed with four 
genes, corresponding to four different binder designs (colours: blue, orange, grey, yellow). 
The first column represents the initial yeast pool, which presents some variability in the 
initial number of cells transformed with each gene. Subsequently, the cells are subject to 
different stringencies of selection condition (display, high, medium and low target 
concentrations). The number of cells selected during FACS (see Methods) is proportional to 
both the binding affinity and the fractional population of the design. b, Instead of observing 
a ‘classical’ readout where each measurement is directly proportional to the amount of 
binding, the result is a convoluted readout (using high-throughput sequencing of each FACS 
of selected yeast pools under different conditions, see Methods) of both the population 
fraction and the binding strength. c, Our method of analysing the strength of an individual 
design is to assign each of them to a binding condition (category) if they produce a peak in 
its enrichment (as compared to its own initial population in the unselected, but displaying, 
population). Since, at higher categories, ‘better’ binders will always out-compete weaker 
ones, this method clusters binders into categories of binding (for example, weak, medium, or 
strong). If protease is used to further select the populations for stability, the same concept 
applies (see Fig. 2).
Chevalier et al.
Page 16
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 3. Molecular dynamics simulations to assess the flexibility of mini-protein 
binder designs, their binding motifs and hotspots
a, Schematic representations of the helical segments and hotspots used to calculate the 
average r.m.s.d. for mini-protein binders containing binding motifs from HB36, HB80 and 
Syt-II. The four conserved hotspots (orange) used to calculate the average r.m.s.d. of each 
binding motif are also shown. b, Top, average r.m.s.d.s (with respect to the designed bound 
conformation) of the whole mini-proteins versus those of the hotspots. The results for non-
binders and binders are shown in black and red, respectively. Bottom panel, same as top, 
except that the x-axis displays the r.m.s.d.s of the entire helical motif. These results were 
obtained from an aggregation of 108 μs molecular dynamics simulations, from a 
representative sample of designs (143 for BoNT and 146 for influenza, see Methods for 
details). The r.m.s.d. values for hotspot residues were calculated using a subset of side-chain 
heavy atoms that are invariant to the rotation of the aromatic ring (CG and CZ for Phe and 
Tyr). The backbone heavy atoms were used for the r.m.s.d. calculations of ‘binding helical 
motif’ and ‘whole protein’. c, The convergence of molecular dynamics simulations 
discriminates binders and non-binders as a function of simulation length (30 ns, 40 ns, 50 ns 
and 100 ns), subject to a similar amount of total sampling. The results show that simulations 
of 50 ns in duration are sufficient to discriminate the stability of binders and non-binders, 
even though longer molecular dynamics simulations (such as 100 ns) may further improve 
the discrimination power. Ten randomly selected mini-proteins designed against BoNT 
(which are also included in b) were used in this figure. d, Similar to Fig. 3d, the normalized 
traces of the histograms (fitted using a normal probability density function) show that, for 
both targets, the designs that are binders (cyan, yellow and red lines) show trends with 
Chevalier et al.
Page 17
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 smaller fluctuations in hotspot residues than non-binders (blue lines); however, no particular 
trend is observed regarding strength of binding.
Extended Data Figure 4. Circular dichroism studies
a, Designed mini-proteins that were co-crystallized in complex with their respective targets 
(as shown in Fig. 4). Designed anti-HA mini-protein HB1.6928.2.3 does not denature up to a 
temperature of 95 °C. Designed anti-BoNT/B mini-protein shows partial denaturation at 
95 °C that is completely reversible after fast-cooling to 25 °C. Black shows the circular 
Chevalier et al.
Page 18
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 dichroism spectrum at 25 °C, red at 95 °C, and yellow at 25 °C (after fast refolding, 5 min). 
Proteins were measured at 0.25 mg ml−1 in PBS buffer pH 7 (see Methods). b, Proteins that 
were solubly expressed or chemically synthesized. Plots are analogous to a. HB1.10027.3 
contains two disulfides, HB1.6394.2.3 contains three disulfides, Bot.6782.4, Bot.6827.4, 
Bot.7075.4, Bot.4024.4, Bot.3318.4, Bot.5721.4, and Bot.5916.4, each contain one disulfide 
bond. The rest of the proteins were designed without disulfide bonds. c, Three disulfide-
containing proteins with and without reducing agent. Plots are analogous to a. Proteins were 
measured at 0.25 mg ml−1 in PBS buffer pH 7 without (top row) and with (bottom row) the 
reducing agent TCEP. The disulfides are shown to be crucial for the thermal stability of 
these disulfide-containing proteins (HB1.6928.2.3 contains two disulfides, Bot.2110.4 and 
Bot.3194.4 each contain one disulfide).
Extended Data Figure 5. Trypsin resistance of HA binders
Chemically synthesized HA binder (0.3 mg ml−1) was incubated in PBS with various 
dilutions of trypsin (52 μM stock) for 20 min at room temperature. Reactions were quenched 
with addition of 1% weight per volume BSA and samples run on SDS–PAGE gel. The 
relative concentrations of trypsin are shown at the top. ImageJ was used to quantify the 
intensity of each band (below the band). a, Both HB36.6 and HB1.5702.3 show weaker gel 
bands at trypsin concentrations higher than 0.055 stock (2.86 μM), indicating proteolytic 
degradation. HB1.6928.2 and HB1.6394.2, both of which contain disulfides, show no 
degradation at any trypsin concentration. b, Scatter plot of gel intensities in a.
Chevalier et al.
Page 19
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 6. Omit map of HB1.6928.2.3
a, A simulated annealing FO–FC omit map for HB1.6928.2.3 (green) residues 10–22 
(contoured at 3σ) shows clear density for amino-acid side chains at the interface (dark blue 
HA1, light blue HA2). A single residue (Asn32), in a loop between the first and second β–
strands, is not observed in the electron density. b, 2FO–FC map for Bot.671.2 (green) 
residues 2–13 (contoured at 2σ) shows clear density for side chains at the interface except 
for the flexible lysine residue. BoNT HCB is shown in dark blue. The entire backbone, 
interface, and core residues for Bot.671.2 are all well resolved in the electron density map.
Chevalier et al.
Page 20
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 7. In vitro neutralization of BoNT/B
a, b, Immunoblots of cultured primary rat cortical neurons that were exposed to BoNT/B (20 
nM) or BoNT/A (10 nM) with or without GST–Syt-II or Bot.671.2 (see Methods). The 
supernatants of lysed neurons were collected for immunoblot analysis to detect the indicated 
proteins, and actin served as control for loading. The designed mini-protein appears to 
confer protection against degradation of VAMP2, but not against degradation of the negative 
control, SNAP25 (the intracellular target of BoNT/A). c, Immunocytochemistry for 
detection of BoNT/B in neurons (see Methods). Left, negative control (no toxin); middle, 
positive control (cells incubated with 20 nM of BoNT/B for 10 min); right, near-total 
protective effect against 20 nM of BoNT/B conferred by co-incubating the cells with 600 
nM of the design Bot.671.2. Top panels show a representative image of fluorescence 
microscopy for the detection of BoNT/B; bottom panels show backfield illumination 
microscopy for the same area.
Chevalier et al.
Page 21
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 8. In vitro neutralization of influenza
Comparison of in vitro neutralization of influenza viruses by HB36.6, FI6v3 and the 
designed mini-protein HB1.6928.2.3. Each antiviral was compared for its efficiency (EC50) 
in inhibiting the infection of Madin– Darby canine kidney cells by a range of influenza 
strains. It is clear that HB1.6928.2.3 most efficiently inhibited infection for all of the 
group-1 influenza strains tested (H1N1, H5N1 and H6N2). As expected, no neutralization 
was observed against H3N2 (group 2). In all experiments, n = 3 independent samples were 
tested for each condition, except for T/Mass/1965 (H6N2) and HK/ X31 (H3N2), for which 
n = 2 samples were tested. Dots show raw values for independent tests and whiskers show 
± 1 s.d.
Chevalier et al.
Page 22
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Table 1
Number of designs and fraction surviving under each selection condition for mini-protein binders designed against influenza HA and BONT.
Influenza HA (Generation 1)
Scramble
Scramble +Disulfides
Designs
Designs +1−3 disulfides
# of designs (HB36 / HB80)/
%)
# of designs (HB36 / HB80)/
%)
# of designs (HB36 / HB80)/
%)
# of designs (HB36 / HB80)/
%)
All Designs
2259 (1104/1155)/
100.0 (48.9/51.1))
2122 (1079/1043)/
100.0 (51.8/49.2)
3682 (1807/1875)/
100.0 (49.1 / 50.9)
3594 (1629/1964)
100.0 (45.33/54.67)
Low Affinity(1000 nM)
5(2/3)/
0.22 (0.09/0.13)
2(0/2)/
0.09 (0.0/0.09)
55 (4/51)/
1.49 (0.11 /1.38)
53 (4/49) /
1.47 (0.11 /1.36))
Medium Affinity(100 nM)
1 (0/1)/
0.04 (0.0/0.04)
0(0/0)/
0.0 (0.0/0.0)
20 (1 /19)/
0.54 (0.03/0.51)
20 (2/18)/
0.56 (0.06/0.50)
High Affinity(10 nM)
1 (0/1)/
0.04 (0.0/0.04)
0(0/0)/
0.0 (0.0/0.0)
14(1 /13)/
0.38 (0.03/0.35)
14(2 12)/
0.39 (0.06/ 0.33)
BoNTHcB
Syt-II (incl. SSM)
Scaffolds
Scramble
Designs
+ GS Loops
+ Scramble Core
+ Valine core
Designs +1 disulfide
(# of designs/%)
(# of designs/%)
(# of designs/%)
(# of designs/%)
(# of designs /%)
(# of designs/%)
(# of designs /%)
(# of designs /%)
All Designs
250 / 100.0
127 / 100.0
284 / 100.0
142 / 100.0
828 / 100.0
274 / 100.0
142 / 100.0
3264 / 100.0
Low Affinity(100 nM)
0 / 0.0
0 / 0.0
57 / 20.07
87 / 61.27
239 / 28.86
169 / 61.68
52 / 36.62
2081 / 63.76
Medium Affinity (10 nM)
0 / 0.0
0 / 0.0
13 / 4.58
36 / 25.35
21 / 2.54
64 / 23.36
15 / 10.56
838 / 25.67
High Affinity(1 nM)
0 / 0.0
0 / 0.0
0 / 0.0
11 / 7.75
0 / 0.0
14 / 5.11
2 / 1.41
328 / 10.05
High Affinity (1 nM) and 
Protease Resistant
0/ 0.0
0 / 0.0
0 / 0.0
0 / 0.0
0 / 0.0
0 / 0.0
0 / 0.0
57 / 1.75
Chevalier et al.
Page 23
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Table 2
Physicochemical properties characterized in solution for a selected pool of top binding designs.
ID
Target
Size (a.a.)
Topology
s-s (#)
Rosetta
Experimental
Sequence
Monomer Energy (REU/a.a.)
DDG (REUiface/nm^2)
Tm (°C)
Kd (nM)
HB36.6
H1 HA*
91
HHHH
0
−3.3
−2.7
65
0.2
      *
FI6v3
H1 HA
434
lg Fold
4
−3.5
−2.3
*
<1.0
      *
HB1.6811.3
H1 HA*
40
EHEE
0
−2.8
−2.4
70
>300.0
TMTSITTSPFAAEIAARIWAEFGYTVRIETRGKTVHVTVD
HB1.5702.2
H1 HA*
40
EHEE
0
−2.6
−2.7
72
>300.0
TSRVRATSKFAALIAAEIAREFGYTVDVQEVNGQWEVTFD
HB1.5702.3.3
H1 HA*
40
EHEE
0
−2.7
−2.9
70
6.0
TSGVRATSKFAALIAAEIAREFGYTVDVQEKNGEWRVVFD
HB1.6394.2.3
H1 HA*
40
EHEE
3
−2.3
−2.9
>95
2.0
CQEYRFTNPFACQIALEILRDFGYACTVQTINGECRVRCC
&HB1.6928.2.3
H1 HA*
40
EHEE
2
−2.3
−2.2
>95
5.0
CIEQSFTTLFACQTAAEIWRAFGYTVKIMVDNGNCRLHVC
HB1.10027.3
H1 HA*
37
EHEE
4
−2.9
−2.6
80
>300.0
TTTCVRNNFAEAIRLKIECEFKGLEIREENGEVCCHG
&Bot.671.2
BoNT HCB
43
HHH
0
−3.4
−3.0
>95
2.8
^QPMFAELKAKFFLEIGDRDAARNALRKAGYSDEEAERIIRKYE
Bot.671.2.1
BoNT HCB
43
HHH
0
−3.3
−3.1
>95
1.6
^QPTFEELKWKFFLEIGDRDAARNALRKAGYSDEEAERIIRKYE
Bot.791.3
BoNT HCB
43
HHH
0
−3.2
−2.9
>95
6.8
^SEMFARLKAKFFLEIGDTEEARKALEKAGYSPDEAEEIIRRHL
Bot.791.3.1
BoNT HCB
43
HHH
0
−3.1
−2.8
>95
0.7
^SEMFERLKAKFFLEIGEYEEARKALEKAGYSPDEAEEIIRRHL
Bot.2110.4
BoNT HCB
43
HHH
1
−2.8
−3.1
>95
2.1
PDMFCALKIKFFLEIGDEDAARKAAKKCGYSEEQAERIIKKNL
Bot.3194.4
BoNT HCB
40
EHEE
1
−2.35
−2.0
65
0.5
AKATAADRMFAELKCKFFKEIGLEVEVREKNGTFICEAR
Bot.3318.4
BoNT HCB
43
HHH
1
−2.8
-3.0
>95
12.6
^QPMFAELKCKFFLEIGDRDAARNACRKAGYSDEEAERIIRKYE
Bot.4024.4
BoNT HCB
43
HHH
1
−3.2
−2.9
>95
6.6
^SEMFCRLKAKFFLEIGDTEEARKALEKCGYSPDEAEEIIRRHL
&Crystal structures are shown in Figure 4.
*Ca/09
^Protein expressed as fusion with N-terminal His-tag and thrombin-cleavable linker: MGSSHHHHHHSSGLVPRGSHM (see Methods).
Chevalier et al.
Page 24
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank M. Levitt and M. Zhang for discussions, A. Ford for data analysis advice, and Rosetta@Home 
participants for donating computing time. D.-A.S. thanks T J. Brunette, J. E. Hsu and M. J. Countryman for their 
assistance. R.J. thanks K. Perry for X-ray data collection. We acknowledge funding support from: Life Sciences 
Discovery Fund Launch grant 9598385 (A.C.); PEW Latin-American fellow in the biomedical sciences and a 
CONACyT postdoctoral fellowship (D.-A.S.); Merck fellow of the Life Sciences Research Foundation (G.J.R.); 
CONACyT and Doctorado en Ciencias Bioquimicas UNAM (R.V); NIH (R56AI117675) and Molecular Basis of 
Viral Pathogenesis Training Grant (T32AI007354-26A1) (S.M.B.); Investigator in the Pathogenesis of Infectious 
Disease award from the Burroughs Wellcome Fund and NIH (1R01NS080833) (M.D.); CoMotion Mary Gates 
Innovation Fellow program (TC.); generous gift from Rocky and Genie Higgins (C.B.); Shenzhen Science and 
Technology Innovation Committee (JCYJ20170413173837121), Hong Kong Research Grant Council C6009-15G 
and AoE/P-705/16 (X.H.); PAPIIT UNAM (IN220516), CONACyT (254514) and Facultad de Medicina UNAM 
(D.A.F.-V); NIAID grants (AI091823, AI123920, and AI125704) (R.J.); NIAID grant 1R41AI122431 (M.TK. and 
D.H.F.); NIAID grant 1R21AI119258 and Life Sciences Discovery Fund grant 20040757 (D.H.F). We acknowledge 
computing resources provided by the Supercomputing Laboratory at King Abdullah University of Science and 
Technology and the Hyak supercomputer system funded by the STF at the University of Washington. The Berkeley 
Center for Structural Biology is supported in part by the NIH, NIGMS, and HHMI. The Advanced Light Source is a 
DOE Office of Science User Facility under contract no. DE-AC02-05CH11231. The Northeastern Collaborative 
Access Team beamlines are funded by NIGMS grant P41 GM103403 and a NIH-ORIP HEI grant (S10OD021527). 
Advanced Photon Source is a U.S. DOE Office of Science User Facility operated by Argonne National Laboratory 
under Contract No. DE-AC02-06CH11357.
References
1. Kintzing JR, Cochran JR. Engineered knottin peptides as diagnostics, therapeutics, and drug 
delivery vehicles. Curr Opin Chem Biol. 2016; 34:143–150. [PubMed: 27642714] 
2. Gebauer M, Skerra A. Engineered protein scaffolds as next-generation antibody therapeutics. Curr 
Opin Chem Biol. 2009; 13:245–255. [PubMed: 19501012] 
3. Zahnd C, et al. Efficient tumor targeting with high-affinity designed ankyrin repeat proteins: effects 
of affinity and molecular size. Cancer Res. 2010; 70:1595–1605. [PubMed: 20124480] 
4. Vazquez-Lombardi R, et al. Challenges and opportunities for non-antibody scaffold drugs. Drug 
Discov Today. 2015; 20:1271–1283. [PubMed: 26360055] 
5. Bhardwaj G, et al. Accurate de novo design of hyperstable constrained peptides. Nature. 2016; 
538:329–335. [PubMed: 27626386] 
6. Rocklin GJ, et al. Global analysis of protein folding using massively parallel design, synthesis, and 
testing. Science. 2017; 357:168–175. [PubMed: 28706065] 
7. Berger S, et al. Computationally designed high specificity inhibitors delineate the roles of BCL2 
family proteins in cancer. eLife. 2016; 5:e20352. [PubMed: 27805565] 
8. Procko E, et al. A computationally designed inhibitor of an Epstein-Barr viral Bcl-2 protein induces 
apoptosis in infected cells. Cell. 2014; 157:1644–1656. [PubMed: 24949974] 
9. Cleary MA, et al. Production of complex nucleic acid libraries using highly parallel in situ 
oligonucleotide synthesis. Nat Methods. 2004; 1:241–248. [PubMed: 15782200] 
10. Sun MGF, Seo MH, Nim S, Corbi-Verge C, Kim PM. Protein engineering by highly parallel 
screening of computationally designed variants. Sci Adv. 2016; 2:e1600692. [PubMed: 27453948] 
11. Fleishman SJ, et al. RosettaScripts: a scripting language interface to the Rosetta macromolecular 
modeling suite. PLoS One. 2011; 6:e20161. [PubMed: 21731610] 
12. Hurt AC, et al. Antiviral resistance during the 2009 influenza A H1N1 pandemic: public health, 
laboratory, and clinical perspectives. Lancet Infect Dis. 2012; 12:240–248. [PubMed: 22186145] 
13. Blitzer A. Spasmodic dysphonia and botulinum toxin: experience from the largest treatment series. 
Eur J Neurol. 2010; 17(Suppl 1):28–30. [PubMed: 20590805] 
Chevalier et al.
Page 25
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 14. Koday MT, et al. A computationally designed hemagglutinin stem-binding protein provides in vivo 
protection from influenza independent of a host immune response. PLoS Pathog. 2016; 
12:e1005409. [PubMed: 26845438] 
15. Whitehead TA, et al. Optimization of affinity, specificity and function of designed influenza 
inhibitors using deep sequencing. Nat Biotechnol. 2012; 30:543–548. [PubMed: 22634563] 
16. Fleishman SJ, et al. Computational design of proteins targeting the conserved stem region of 
influenza hemagglutinin. Science. 2011; 332:816–821. [PubMed: 21566186] 
17. Berntsson, RPA., Peng, L., Dong, M., Stenmark, P. Structure of Botulinum neurotoxin B binding 
domain in complex with both synaptotagmin II and GD1a. RCSB Protein Data Bank. 2013. http://
dx.doi.org/10.2210/pdb4kbb/pdb
18. Corti D, et al. A neutralizing antibody selected from plasma cells that binds to group 1 and group 2 
influenza A hemagglutinins. Science. 2011; 333:850–856. [PubMed: 21798894] 
19. Cass LMR, Efthymiopoulos C, Bye A. Pharmacokinetics of zanamivir after intravenous, oral, 
inhaled or intranasal administration to healthy volunteers. Clin Pharmacokinet. 1999; 36(Suppl. 1):
1–11.
20. King C, et al. Removing T-cell epitopes with computational protein design. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
USA. 2014; 111:8577–8582. [PubMed: 24843166] 
21. Huang PS, et al. RosettaRemodel: a generalized framework for flexible backbone protein design. 
PLOS One. 2011; 6:e24109. [PubMed: 21909381] 
22. Lin YR, et al. Control over overall shape and size in de novo designed proteins. PROC Natl Acad 
Sei USA. 2015; 112:E5478–E5485.
23. Koga N, et al. Principles for designing ideal protein structures. Nature. 2012; 491:222–227. 
[PubMed: 23135467] 
24. Silva DA, Correia BE, Procko E. Motif-driven design of protein-protein interfaces. Methods Mol 
Biol. 2016; 1414:285–304. [PubMed: 27094298] 
25. Hoover DM, Lubkowski J. DNAWorks: an automated method for designing oligonucleotides for 
PCR-based gene synthesis. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002; 30:e43. [PubMed: 12000848] 
26. Bawono P, Heringa J. PRALINE: A versatile multiple sequence alignment toolkit. Methods in Mol 
Biol. 2013; 1079:245–262.
27. Zhang J, Kobert K, Flouri T, Stamatakis A. PEAR: a fast and accurate Illumina Paired-End reAd 
mergeR. Bioinformatics. 2014; 30:614–620. [PubMed: 24142950] 
28. Waskom, M., et al. seaborn: v0.7.1. 2016. http://dx.doi.org/:10.5281/zenodo.54844
29. Chao G, et al. Isolating and engineering human antibodies using yeast surface display. Nat 
Protocols. 2006; 1:755–768. [PubMed: 17406305] 
30. Benatuil L, Perez JM, Belk J, Hsieh CM. An improved yeast transformation method for the 
generation of very large human antibody libraries. Protein Eng Des Sel. 2010; 23:155–159. 
[PubMed: 20130105] 
31. Jacobs TM, Yumerefendi H, Kuhlman B, Leaver-Fay A. SwiftLib: rapid degenerate-codon-library 
optimization through dynamic programming. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015; 43:e34. [PubMed: 
25539925] 
32. Jin R, Rummel A, Binz T, Brunger AT. Botulinum neurotoxin B recognizes its protein receptor 
with high affinity and specificity. Nature. 2006; 444:1092–1095. [PubMed: 17167421] 
33. Kabsch W. XDS. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr. 2010; 66:125–132. [PubMed: 20124692] 
34. Emsley P, Cowtan K. Coot: model-building tools for molecular graphics. Acta Crystallogr D Biol 
Crystallogr. 2004; 60:2126–2132. [PubMed: 15572765] 
35. McCoy AJ, et al. Phaser crystallographic software. J Appl Crystallogr. 2007; 40:658–674. 
[PubMed: 19461840] 
36. Brünger AT. Free R value: a novel statistical quantity for assessing the accuracy of crystal 
structures. Nature. 1992; 355:472–475. [PubMed: 18481394] 
37. Chen VB, et al. MolProbity: all-atom structure validation for macromolecular crystallography. 
Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr. 2010; 66:12–21. [PubMed: 20057044] 
38. Otwinowski Z, Minor W. Processing of X-ray diffraction data collected in oscillation mode. 
Methods Enzymol. 1997; 276:307–326.
Chevalier et al.
Page 26
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 39. Adams PD, et al. The Phenix software for automated determination of macromolecular structures. 
Methods. 2011; 55:94–106. [PubMed: 21821126] 
40. Gamblin SJ, et al. The structure and receptor binding properties of the 1918 influenza 
hemagglutinin. Science. 2004; 303:1838–1842. [PubMed: 14764886] 
41. Van Der Spoel D, et al. GROMACS: fast, flexible, and free. J Comput Chem. 2005; 26:1701–1718. 
[PubMed: 16211538] 
42. Lindorff-Larsen K, et al. Improved side-chain torsion potentials for the Amber ff99SB protein 
force field. Proteins. 2010; 78:1950–1958. [PubMed: 20408171] 
43. Jorgensen WL, Chandrasekhar J, Madura JD, Impey RW, Klein ML. Comparison of simple 
potential functions for simulating liquid water. J Chem Phys. 1983; 79:926–935.
44. Hess B, Bekker H, Berendsen HJC, Fraaije JGEM. LINCS: A linear constraint solver for molecular 
simulations. J Comput Chem. 1997; 18:1463–1472.
45. Essmann U, et al. A smooth particle mesh Ewald method. J Chem Phys. 1995; 103:8577–8593.
46. Berendsen, HJC. Computer Simulation in Materials Science. Meyer, M., Pontikis, V., editors. 
Springer; 1991. p. 139-155.
47. Bussi G, Donadio D, Parrinello M. Canonical sampling through velocity rescaling. J Chem Phys. 
2007; 126:014101. [PubMed: 17212484] 
48. Nosé S, Klein ML. Constant pressure molecular dynamics for molecular systems. Mol Phys. 1983; 
50:1055–1076.
Chevalier et al.
Page 27
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Massively parallel binding protein design
a, Hundreds of 37–43 residue mini-protein backbones with different secondary structure 
elements, orientations and loop lengths were matched with hotspot binding motifs for HA 
(HB1 and HB2) and BoNT (Bot) by identifying compatible mini-protein local backbone 
segments, superimposing them onto the hotspot motif-target complex, and discarding docks 
with mini- protein/target backbone clashes. Each topology included designs with many 
different disulfide configurations; several possibilities are illustrated. b, For each non-
clashing dock of each scaffold onto each target, the monomer and interaction energies were 
optimized with Rosetta sequence design. Representative models are shown at the left of each 
column. Right columns show a top view of the target with the hotspot interaction areas 
coloured as above and new contact areas generated by Rosetta sequence design coloured 
yellow; the total number of unique designs generated is indicated at the bottom. c, Designed 
contacts substantially increase the interface buried surface area of the designs beyond the 
starting hotspot residues. d, Genes encoding 16,968 mini-protein designs, including 6,286 
controls, were synthesized using DNA oligo pool synthesis (see Methods). e, The oligo 
pools were recombined into yeast display vectors and transformed into yeast (see Methods), 
and binding of the designs HA or BoNT at different concentrations was assessed by FACS. 
For each sorting condition, enriched designs were identified by comparing the frequencies in 
the original and sorted populations using deep sequencing. These data were used to guide 
improvement of the computational design model, and the entire design, synthesis and testing 
cycle was iterated
Chevalier et al.
Page 28
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Massively parallel evaluation of binding
Vertical bars indicate FACS binding enrichment at different target concentrations for each of 
the 16,968 designs and 6,286 controls for Influenza H1 HA (a) and BoNT HCB (b). All α-
helical designs are in green; mixed α-β topologies, in orange. The mini-proteins are grouped 
by type as indicated by the horizontal bars and text at the top of the panels. ‘High+Protease’ 
indicates 5 min incubation with trypsin (18.5 μg ml−1) followed by incubation with 1 nM 
target. Right panels indicate normalized population fraction of each type of design (colour 
scheme as in corresponding left panel) for each of the selection conditions at the far left 
(Extended Data Table 2); the total number of surviving designs is indicated by the numbers 
at the far right. For example, after incubation of the HA mini-protein population with 100 
nM HA, FACS and deep sequencing, the population fractions of both non-disulfide (blue) 
and disulfide (yellow) designs doubled compared to the starting population, while that of the 
non-disulfide scrambles decreased approximately fivefold and the disulfide scrambles 
completely disappeared
Chevalier et al.
Page 29
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Experiment-based assessment of computational models
a, Computed energies of folding and binding for binding designs (orange) and non-binding 
designs (grey); x-axis is binding energy per nm2 and y-axis is monomer (folding) energy per 
residue, both in kcal per mol. b, Kernel density estimates for HA (top) and BoNT (bottom) 
show that designs that bind target (blue) have better local sequence-structure compatibility, 
quantified by the Rosetta side-chain probability score -p_aa_pp, and higher interface atom 
counts than non-binding designs (red). Design success rate (dark green) is shown with 1σ 
confidence interval (light green). c, Inset: Receiver–operator characteristic curve for 
discriminating first generation HA binders using a five-factor logistic regression. A second 
generation of HA binder design incorporating filtering on these five features (see Methods) 
had an increased success rate (y-axis); the numbers of successes are indicated above the 
bars. d, Interface residue fluctuations in molecular dynamics simulations are smaller for 
binding designs than non-binders (see Methods and Extended Data Fig. 3). e, f, Left, design 
models of Bot.671.2 (e) and HB1.6928.2.3 (f) bound to their targets, coloured by the mean 
change in binding at each position in the comprehensive mutagenesis pools; conserved 
residues (blue) are shown as sticks, non-conserved positions in red. Right, the 
experimentally observed mean changes in binding at each position (y-axis) correlate with 
those computed from the structures (x-axis) (Pearson cross-correlation test: e, r = 0.76; f, r = 
0.64).
Chevalier et al.
Page 30
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Characterization of structure, stability and activity of designs
a, Left, comparison of design model with X-ray structure of HB1.6928.2.3 in complex with 
PR8 H1 HA (HA used in design calculations is essentially identical to crystal structure and 
not shown). Right, close-up of the HB1.6928.2.3 X-ray structure with designed residues 
conserved in the SSMs outside of the hotspot seed indicated in sticks; these residues make 
both packing (e.g. W19 and Y24) and electrostatic interactions with HA. b, Left, as in a, but 
for Bot.671.2 in complex with BoNT HCB. c, Binding activity remaining following 
incubation of the indicated molecules at 80 °C for different durations (x-axis), measured by 
biolayer interferometry. The designs are considerably more robust than the mAb FI6v3 
antibody. d, HB1.6928.2.3 (HB1) more effectively prevents influenza infection of Madin-
Darby canine kidney cells than do FI6v3 or the previously designed binder HB36.6 (see also 
Extended Data Fig. 8). n = 3 independent virus titrations were performed for each condition. 
Dots show raw values for each test and whiskers show ± 1 s.d. e, Bot.671.2 better protects 
cultured rat cortical neurons against degradation of VAMP2 than does Syt-II, and it prevents 
binding of the toxin to neurons. n = 4 independent samples for each condition, dots show 
raw values for each condition and whiskers show ± 1 s.d.
Chevalier et al.
Page 31
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. In VIVO efficacy and immunogenicity
a, b, d, Weight change (top) and survival (bottom) of BALB/c mice receiving influenza 
binder. a, Prophylactic efficacy: mice received HB1.6928.2.3 (orange) or FI6v3 mAb (green) 
intranasally or intravenously 24 h before challenge with 2 MLD50 (fifty per cent mouse 
lethal dose) of H1N1 CA09 virus (n = 10, except 0.03 mg kg−1, n = 5), see also 
Supplementary Fig. 6. b, Therapeutic efficacy: mice were first challenged with 2 MLD50 of 
CA09 virus and then received HB1.6928.2.3 intranasally 1–4 days post-challenge (n = 5). 
The mini-proteins have remarkable therapeutic efficiency even if administered after three 
days. c, Immune (IgG) responses in BALB/c mice (n = 5) that received three intravenous 
doses (3 mg kg−1) of miniproteins, human IgG (hIgG) or mouse IgG (mIgG) spaced three 
weeks apart (left) or three intranasal doses of mini-proteins or bovine serum albumin (BSA; 
3 mg kg−1) spaced two weeks apart (right). IgG responses in both cases were measured by 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA, 1:500 serum) two weeks after each dose. d, 
Prophylactic efficacy is not reduced by repeated dosing: Mice received four doses (weeks 0, 
3, 6, and 12, 3 mg kg−1) of either HB1.6828.3.2, a Bot protein (mock dosing controls), or 
buffer (PBS), followed by a fifth intranasal dose of HB1.6828.3.2 or a Bot protein (0.3 mg 
kg−1) nine days after the fourth administration. Twenty-four hours after the fifth dose, mice 
were challenged with 2 MLD50 of H1N1 CA09 flu virus. HB1.6928.2.3 remains equally 
protective after repeated administration when compared to protection with no prior dosing. 
Chevalier et al.
Page 32
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 In all panels, whiskers show ± 1 s.e.m. Raw data for all the experiments in this figure are 
available in the Supplementary Information. i.n., intranasal; i.v., intravenous
Chevalier et al.
Page 33
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 07.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
