 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
986 
MMWR / September 22, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 37
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Respiratory and Ocular Symptoms Among Employees of an Indoor 
Waterpark Resort — Ohio, 2016
Sophia K. Chiu, MD1,2; Nancy C. Burton, PhD2; Kevin H. Dunn, ScD3; Marie A. de Perio, MD2
In July 2015, a municipal health department in Ohio 
received complaints of respiratory and ocular symptoms from 
patrons of an indoor waterpark resort. In response, the health 
department conducted an online survey in August 2015 
through which 19 (68%) patron and employee respondents 
reported eye burning, nose irritation, difficulty breathing, 
and vomiting. On August 11, 2015, the health department 
requested a health hazard evaluation by CDC’s National 
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health to characterize 
the prevalence of symptoms among employees and determine 
the etiology of work-related symptoms. In January 2016, CDC 
investigators performed a cross-sectional epidemiologic study, 
environmental sampling, and ventilation system assessment 
(1). Findings suggested that chlorine disinfection byproducts 
and environmental conditions contributed to a higher preva-
lence of work-related respiratory and ocular symptoms among 
employees in the waterpark compared with employees in other 
resort areas. Recommendations included servicing the ventila-
tion system, changing work practices to decrease the amount 
of disinfection byproduct precursors, and responding promptly 
to employee reports of symptoms.
Indoor waterparks are enclosed recreational environments 
that can be associated with illness caused by endotoxins and 
disinfection byproducts. Chlorine disinfection byproducts 
such as chloroform and chloramines are formed when chlo-
rine, the most commonly used disinfectant in aquatic venues 
(e.g., pools), reacts with other chemicals in the water. For 
example, chloramines form when chlorine combines with 
nitrogen-containing substances, such as urine, sweat, skin 
cells, and personal-care products from swimmers’ bodies 
(2). Levels of disinfection byproducts in aquatic venues and 
surrounding air depend on factors such as water chemistry, 
bather load and hygiene, amount of splashing and spray-
ing (i.e., disturbance of water surface), and ventilation (3). 
Disinfection byproducts can lead to water and air quality 
issues, particularly in indoor aquatic facilities, and can cause 
ocular and respiratory irritation.
Epidemiologic Investigation
As part of a 3-day site visit in January 2016, CDC inves-
tigators administered a questionnaire to resort employees 
concerning demographics, work and medical history, 
and specific work-related symptoms occurring during the 
preceding 4 weeks. Symptoms were considered work-related 
if they started at work and improved when away from work. 
Participants were asked to exclude symptoms associated with 
a cold or respiratory infection. Employees aged ≥18 years 
provided oral informed consent. Written informed consent for 
participation was obtained from parents or legal guardians of 
employees aged <18 years.
Resort employees in the aquatics department and the water-
park concession stand were classified as waterpark employees 
(exposed); employees working in other areas of the resort 
were classified as nonwaterpark employees (unexposed). The 
frequency of work-related symptoms was assessed. A case was 
defined as three or more work-related symptoms (eye irrita-
tion, nose irritation, cough, wheezing, shortness of breath, 
chest tightness, or sore throat) of any duration occurring in 
a resort employee during the preceding 4 weeks. An adjusted 
prevalence ratio and 95% confidence interval was calculated 
using log-binomial regression to assess variables associated with 
meeting the case definition.
Among 112 employees working at the resort during the 
site visit, 91 (81%) participated. Median age was 19 years 
(range = 15–65 years), and 47 (52%) were male. Forty-
eight (53%) employees reported any work-related symptom, 
among whom 12 (25%) had taken a median of 2 days off 
work (range = 1–5), and seven (15%) sought medical care for 
work-related symptoms in the preceding 4 weeks. The most 
frequently reported work-related symptoms among waterpark 
employees were eye irritation (62%), cough (56%), and nose 
irritation (51%) (Table).
Twenty-nine (32%) employees met the case definition, 24 
(83%) of whom were waterpark employees and five (17%) 
were nonwaterpark employees. Being a waterpark employee 
and having current asthma were associated with meeting the 
case definition, but age <18 years, male sex, and being a cur-
rent smoker were not. After adjusting for age as a continuous 
variable and current asthma, waterpark employees were more 
likely to meet the case definition than were nonwaterpark 
employees (adjusted prevalence ratio = 3.8; 95% confidence 
interval =1.4–16.2).
Environmental and Ventilation Investigation
In this facility, water features included a children’s play 
area, activity pool, rain fortress with a splash area and bucket 
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / September 22, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 37 
987
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
precursors (e.g., urine, sweat, skin cells, and personal-care 
products) that swimmers introduce into the water. CDC also 
recommends that swimmers take regular bathroom breaks. 
Other recommendations included encouraging prompt 
reporting of symptoms by employees to their supervisors and 
implementation of a system to track and follow up on reports 
by resort management to identify possible causes and take 
appropriate corrective actions.
Discussion
Although airborne concentrations of chlorine and chloro-
form in the aquatic resort were low, a constellation of work-
related symptoms consistent with disinfection byproduct 
exposure was approximately four times more common among 
waterpark employees than among nonwaterpark employees. 
Similar respiratory and ocular symptoms have been described 
in outbreaks at indoor aquatic venues implicating disinfection 
byproducts (6–8). Water chemistry tests indicated the presence 
of combined chlorine, including chloramines. HVAC systems, 
which play an important role in removing air contaminants, 
were poorly maintained and not operating properly. This was 
reflected by air temperatures below and relative humidity above 
recommended ranges. Endotoxin levels were low, and neither 
Legionella nor mycobacteria was detected during sampling, 
suggesting that these known causes of respiratory and ocular 
symptoms associated with aquatic facilities were less likely to 
have contributed to symptoms at this indoor waterpark than 
disinfection byproducts. Together, investigation findings sug-
gest that disinfection byproducts and environmental conditions 
likely contributed to the higher prevalence of symptoms among 
waterpark employees.
periodically dumping 1,000 gallons of water, four waterslides, 
and a hot tub and spa. The resort also included a hotel, confer-
ence center, bar, gift shop, arcade, concession stand, and office 
area. The same company had been operating the resort since 
2013. Area air samples for endotoxins, chlorine, and chloro-
form collected on 3 consecutive sampling days at six waterpark 
locations detected levels that were well below occupational 
exposure limits (1). Air temperature and relative humidity in 
the waterpark were logged each minute while the waterpark 
was open over 3 sampling days. Daily average air temperature 
was below and relative humidity was above the range recom-
mended for aquatic environments (4).
Water chemistry tests were performed using a standard color-
matching test kit at four waterpark locations. Concentrations 
of combined chlorine, of which chloramines are a subset, in 
the water were at or above the waterpark’s internal standard of 
0.2 ppm on all 3 days of the evaluation, indicating the presence 
of chloramines. No Legionella or mycobacteria were cultured 
from water samples from the hot tub and spa.
Assessment of the heating, ventilation, and air-conditioning 
(HVAC) system identified multiple areas of concern. According 
to blueprints, the HVAC system design should be able to meet 
current standards and guidelines in CDC’s Model Aquatic 
Health Code (5). However, on visual inspection, the fans of 
five of the waterpark’s six HVAC units were not operational, 
substantially reducing airflow in the waterpark. The waterpark 
air distribution system did not provide an airflow pattern with 
sufficient air movement just above the water surface and deck 
(where volatilized disinfection byproducts, which are heavier 
than air, accumulate) to direct contaminated air toward air 
return intakes. The return air was partially recirculated and 
the rest was exhausted out of the waterpark through stacks 
on the roof.
Recommendations
Recommendations based on the hierarchy of controls 
approach were provided to the resort.* Engineering controls 
such as maintenance and repair of the waterpark’s HVAC sys-
tems and possible reconfiguration of the air distribution system 
to improve removal of air contaminants just above the water 
surface and deck were advised, as was encouraging patrons 
and aquatics department employees to shower before enter-
ing the water to reduce the amount of disinfection byproduct 
* The hierarchy of controls is a framework that groups actions by their likely 
effectiveness in reducing or removing hazards from the workplace. Levels 
in the hierarchy include elimination, substitution, engineering controls, 
administrative or work-practice controls, and personal protective 
equipment. Additional information on the hierarchy of controls is available 
at https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/topics/hierarchy/.
TABLE. Work-related symptoms* reported by waterpark and 
nonwaterpark employees in the preceding 4 weeks — indoor 
waterpark resort, Ohio, January 2016
Symptom
No. (%)
Waterpark employees† 
(n = 45)
Nonwaterpark employees§ 
(n = 46)
Any symptom
37 (82)
11 (24)
Met case definition¶
24 (53)
5 (11)
Eye irritation
28 (62)
6 (13)
Cough
25 (56)
3 (7)
Nose irritation
23 (51)
3 (7)
Wheezing
19 (42)
2 (4)
Shortness of breath
14 (31)
3 (7)
Chest tightness
14 (31)
3 (7)
Sore throat
4 (9)
3 (7)
* Began while at work and improved away from work, not associated with a 
cold or respiratory infection.
† Employees in the aquatics department and the concession stand contained 
within the waterpark.
§ Employees in the other resort areas (hotel front desk, office, arcade, gift shop, 
and bar) or departments (housekeeping, security, and maintenance).
¶ Reported three or more work-related symptoms.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
988 
MMWR / September 22, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 37
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
The findings in this report are subject to at least three 
limitations. First, the evaluation occurred in the winter, a 
period of potentially lower exposure because the waterpark 
was open for fewer hours. However, this would likely result 
in underestimation of an effect. Second, personal air samplers 
for disinfection byproducts or endotoxins could not be placed 
on waterpark employees because they could interfere with job 
duties or get wet and malfunction. This limited the ability to 
evaluate associations between exposures and symptoms at the 
individual employee level. Finally, disinfection byproducts 
are a large class of compounds, but air levels of only one rep-
resentative member, chloroform, were assessed. Chloramines 
have been previously associated with irritation symptoms like 
those reported in this facility (9); however, no reliable analytic 
method to measure them in air or water currently exists (10).
Indoor waterparks constitute an expanding industry. The 
first indoor waterpark resort in the United States opened in 
1994. By 2015 there were an estimated 192 facilities nation-
wide, attracting millions of visitors each year. This investigation 
highlights the need for vigilant monitoring and maintenance 
of ventilation and water systems to prevent illness in these 
large, complex indoor aquatic facilities and for public health 
officials, clinicians, and operators of indoor waterparks to 
understand the risk for respiratory and ocular symptoms in 
patrons and employees.
Acknowledgments
Amanda Zabala, Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists/
CDC Applied Epidemiology Fellowship Program, Ohio Department 
of Health; Carolyn McCarty, Epidemic Intelligence Service, CDC, 
Ohio Department of Health; Chia-ping Su, Epidemic Intelligence 
Service, Division of Surveillance, Hazard Evaluations, and Field 
Studies, National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, 
CDC; Candice Johnson, Karl Feldmann, Jessica F. Li, Donnie 
Booher, Kevin A. Moore, Michelle J. Colvin, Denise Giglio, Division 
of Surveillance, Hazard Evaluations, and Field Studies, National 
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, CDC; Kadi Banjoko, 
Susan Walline, John Richter, Allen Emanuel, Leigh Nelson, Adam 
Holbrook, Luke Jacobs, Jeff Lyons, Columbus Public Health; Bureau 
Veritas North America Inc.; Microbiology Specialists Inc.
Conflict of Interest
No conflicts of interest were reported.
 1Epidemic Intelligence Service, CDC; 2Division of Surveillance, Hazard 
Evaluations, and Field Studies, National Institute for Occupational Safety and 
Health, CDC; 3Division of Applied Research and Technology, National Institute 
for Occupational Safety and Health, CDC.
Corresponding author: Sophia K. Chiu, schiu1@cdc.gov, 513-841-4289.
Summary
What is already known about this topic?
Indoor waterparks are complex environments where problems 
with air and water quality can result in illness. Chloramines, 
formed when disinfectant chlorine reacts with nitrogen-con-
taining substances (e.g., urine, sweat) from swimmers’ bodies, 
are known causes of ocular and upper respiratory symptoms in 
aquatic facilities.
What is added by this report?
Investigation of reported illness in an indoor waterpark resort in 
Ohio found that waterpark employees were approximately four 
times more likely to have work-related ocular and respiratory 
symptoms than were employees in other resort areas. 
Environmental assessment found that levels of combined 
chlorine, of which chloramines are a subset, in water exceeded 
recommended guidelines, but levels of chlorine and chloroform 
(a representative disinfection byproduct) in air were low. 
Improperly functioning ventilation systems, resulting in 
accumulation of disinfection byproducts and temperature 
below and relative humidity above recommended ranges, likely 
contributed to the higher prevalence of symptoms among 
waterpark employees compared with nonwaterpark employees.
What are the implications for public health practice?
To prevent recreational water–associated illness caused by 
endotoxins and disinfection byproducts in indoor waterparks, 
vigilant monitoring and maintenance of ventilation and water 
systems are needed. Employees and patrons of indoor water-
parks should promptly report symptoms, which might indicate 
that further attention to water and air quality and ventilation 
system functioning is needed. Showering before entering the 
water and taking regular bathroom breaks can reduce levels of 
disinfection byproduct precursors introduced into the water.
References
 1. Chiu S, Burton N, Dunn KH. Evaluation of eye and respiratory 
symptoms among employees at an indoor waterpark resort. Health hazard 
evaluation report no 2015-0148-3272. Atlanta, GA: US Department 
of Health and Human Services, CDC, National Institute for 
Occupational Safety and Health; 2017. https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/
cdc/44580/cdc_44580_DS1.pdf
 2. World Health Organization. Guidelines for safe recreational water 
environments. Volume 2: swimming pools and similar environments. 
Geneva, Switzerland; World Health Organization; 2006. http://www.
who.int/water_sanitation_health/bathing/srwe2full.pdf
 3. Parrat J, Donzé G, Iseli C, Perret D, Tomicic C, Schenk O. Assessment 
of occupational and public exposure to trichloramine in Swiss indoor 
swimming pools: a proposal for an occupational exposure limit. Ann 
Occup Hyg 2012;56:264–77.  https://doi.org/10.1093/annhyg/mer125
 4. American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning 
Engineers, Inc. ASHRAE handbook—HVAC applications. Atlanta, 
GA: American Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and Air-Conditioning 
Engineers, Inc.; 2015. https://www.ashrae.org/resources--publications/
handbook/description-of-the-2015-ashrae-handbook-hvac-applications 
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / September 22, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 37 
989
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
 5. CDC. 2016 model aquatic health code, code language. 2nd ed. Atlanta, 
GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2016. 
https://www.cdc.gov/mahc/pdf/2016-mahc-code-final.pdf 
 6. CDC. Respiratory and ocular symptoms among employees of a hotel 
indoor waterpark resort—Ohio, 2007. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly 
Rep 2009;58:81–5. https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/
mm5804a3.htm
 7. Kaydos-Daniels SC, Beach MJ, Shwe T, Magri J, Bixler D. Health effects 
associated with indoor swimming pools: a suspected toxic chloramine 
exposure. Public Health 2008;122:195–200. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
puhe.2007.06.011
 8. Chen L, Dang B, Mueller CA, et al. Investigation of employee symptoms 
at an indoor waterpark. Health hazard evaluation report no. 2007-0163-
3062. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, 
CDC, National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health; 2008. 
https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/ehs/docs/investigation_of_employee_
symptoms_at_an_indoor_waterpark.pdf
 9. Jacobs JH, Spaan S, van Rooy GB, et al. Exposure to trichloramine and 
respiratory symptoms in indoor swimming pool workers. Eur Respir J 
2007;29:690–8. https://doi.org/10.1183/09031936.00024706
 
10. Chen L, Eisenberg J, Durgam S, Mueller C. Evaluation of eye and 
respiratory symptoms at a poultry processing plant—Oklahoma. Health 
hazard evaluation report no. 2007-0284, 2007-0317-3155. Atlanta, GA: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC, National Institute 
for Occupational Safety and Health; 2012. https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/
hhe/reports/pdfs/2007-0284-0317-3155.pdf 
