 May 30, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e1054–e1091. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000490
e1054
BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Natriuretic peptides have led the way 
as a diagnostic and prognostic tool for the diagnosis and management of 
heart failure (HF). More recent evidence suggests that natriuretic peptides 
along with the next generation of biomarkers may provide added value to 
medical management, which could potentially lower risk of mortality and 
readmissions. The purpose of this scientific statement is to summarize 
the existing literature and to provide guidance for the utility of currently 
available biomarkers.
METHODS: The writing group used systematic literature reviews, 
published translational and clinical studies, clinical practice guidelines, and 
expert opinion/statements to summarize existing evidence and to identify 
areas of inadequacy requiring future research. The panel reviewed the 
most relevant adult medical literature excluding routine laboratory tests 
using MEDLINE, EMBASE, and Web of Science through December 2016. 
The document is organized and classified according to the American 
Heart Association to provide specific suggestions, considerations, or 
contemporary clinical practice recommendations.
RESULTS: A number of biomarkers associated with HF are well 
recognized, and measuring their concentrations in circulation can be a 
convenient and noninvasive approach to provide important information 
about disease severity and helps in the detection, diagnosis, prognosis, 
and management of HF. These include natriuretic peptides, soluble 
suppressor of tumorgenicity 2, highly sensitive troponin, galectin-3, 
midregional proadrenomedullin, cystatin-C, interleukin-6, procalcitonin, and 
others. There is a need to further evaluate existing and novel markers for 
guiding therapy and to summarize their data in a standardized format to 
improve communication among researchers and practitioners.
CONCLUSIONS: HF is a complex syndrome involving diverse pathways 
and pathological processes that can manifest in circulation as biomarkers. 
A number of such biomarkers are now clinically available, and monitoring 
their concentrations in blood not only can provide the clinician 
information about the diagnosis and severity of HF but also can improve 
prognostication and treatment strategies.
Sheryl L. Chow, PharmD, 
FAHA, Chair
Alan S. Maisel, MD, Vice Chair
Inder Anand, MD, DPhil, FAHA
Biykem Bozkurt, MD, PhD, 
FAHA
Rudolf A. de Boer, MD, PhD, 
FAHA
G. Michael Felker, MD, MHS, 
FAHA
Gregg C. Fonarow, MD, FAHA
Barry Greenberg, MD, FAHA
James L. Januzzi, Jr, MD
Michael S. Kiernan, MD
Peter P
. Liu, MD, FAHA
Thomas J. Wang, MD, FAHA
Clyde W. Yancy, MD, MSc, 
FAHA
Michael R. Zile, MD, FAHA
On behalf of the American  
Heart Association Clinical 
Pharmacology Committee 
of the Council on Clinical 
Cardiology; Council on Basic 
Cardiovascular Sciences; 
Council on Cardiovascu-
lar Disease in the Young; 
Council on Cardiovascular 
and Stroke Nursing; Council 
on Cardiopulmonary, Criti-
cal Care, Perioperative and 
Resuscitation; Council on 
Epidemiology and Preven-
tion; Council on Functional 
Genomics and Translational 
Biology; and Council on 
Quality of Care and Out-
comes Research
Role of Biomarkers for the Prevention, 
Assessment, and Management of Heart Failure
A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association
© 2017 American Heart 
Association, Inc.
Key Words: AHA Scientific 
Statements ◼ biomarkers  
◼ diagnosis ◼ heart failure ◼ patient 
care management ◼ prognosis  
◼ therapeutics
AHA SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Biomarkers in Heart Failure
Circulation. 2017;135:e1054–e1091. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000490 
May 30, 2017 e1055
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
S
ince the advent of natriuretic peptide testing for 
the evaluation of patients with suspected or prov-
en heart failure (HF) in the year 2000, interest in 
biomarkers has grown exponentially.1 Accordingly, a 
large number of preclinical and clinical analyses of bio-
markers in HF have been completed, and the volume 
of publications in peer-reviewed literature focused on 
HF biomarkers has risen dramatically.2 In addition, af-
ter the regulatory approval of the natriuretic peptides 
for clinical use, a number of newer biomarkers have 
received regulatory clearance for clinical testing in pa-
tients with HF,3 and several others are currently in late-
phase development. With such a rapid rise in the knowl-
edge base of biomarker testing in HF, performance of 
a systematic assessment of the evidence in the space 
is justified, with consensus recommendations when ap-
propriate.
The recommendations and suggestions/consider-
ations listed in this document are, whenever possible, 
evidence based. An extensive literature review was 
conducted through December 2016, with references 
selected as appropriate. Searches were limited to stud-
ies, reviews, and other evidence conducted in human 
subjects and published in English. In addition, the com-
mittee reviewed documents related to the subject mat-
ter previously published by clinical practice guideline 
task forces from the American College of Cardiology 
Foundation and American Heart Association (AHA). Ref-
erences selected and published in this document are 
representative but not all-inclusive. To provide clinicians 
with a representative evidence base, whenever deemed 
appropriate or when published, it was felt that critical 
appraisal of the quality of study be maintained4 and, 
whenever possible, robust statistical data be provided,5 
including interpretation of comparative studies between 
biomarkers.
ORGANIZATION OF THE WRITING COMMITTEE
The committee was composed of physicians and a 
pharmacist with a broad knowledge base in cardiac 
biomarker testing and deep expertise in the evalua-
tion, care, and management of patients with HF. The 
authors’ expertise included general cardiologists, HF 
specialists, clinical pharmacologists, and transplanta-
tion specialists, along with physicians with methodologi-
cal expertise. The committee included representatives 
from the AHA Council on Clinical Cardiology; Council on 
Basic Cardiovascular Sciences; Council on Cardiovas-
cular Disease in the Young; Council on Cardiovascular 
and Stroke Nursing; Council on Cardiopulmonary, Criti-
cal Care, Perioperative and Resuscitation; Council on 
Epidemiology and Prevention; Council on Functional Ge-
nomics and Translational Biology; and Council on Quality 
of Care and Outcomes Research.
DOCUMENT REVIEW AND APPROVAL
This document was reviewed by 2 official reviewers, 
each nominated by the AHA. All information on reviewers’ 
relationships with industry was distributed to the writing 
committee and is published in this document.
This document was approved for publication by the 
governing bodies of the AHA.
RECOMMENDATIONS AND SUGGESTIONS/
CONSIDERATIONS
To make certain that this document is aligned with the 
appropriate guideline statements but does not preempt 
those guidelines, the authors have opted to make refer-
ence to evidence-based clinical practice recommenda-
tions only and to refer the reader to the most recently 
published clinical practice guideline statement for more 
specific alignment with extant guidelines. Suggestions/
considerations are included when the evidence does not 
warrant recommendations but there is still a desire to 
provide some guidance to the community.
SCOPE OF THIS SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT WITH 
REFERENCE TO OTHER RELEVANT GUIDELINES 
OR STATEMENTS
This scientific statement focuses on the use of biomark-
ers in HF. Some topics may have been reviewed in other 
clinical practice guidelines and scientific statements 
published by other working groups, including the Ameri-
can College of Cardiology/AHA task forces. The writing 
committee saw no need to reiterate the recommenda-
tions contained in those guidelines but chose instead to 
provide current recommendations and to clarify previ-
ous discrepancies. Some recommendations from ear-
lier guidelines have been updated as warranted by new 
evidence or a better understanding of earlier evidence, 
whereas others that were no longer accurate or relevant 
or were overlapping were modified; recommendations 
from previous guidelines that were similar or redundant 
were eliminated or consolidated when possible.
DEFINITION OF A BIOMARKER
A 1998 National Institutes of Health working group on 
biomarkers definitions defined a biomarker as a biologi-
cal marker that is objectively measured and evaluated as 
an indicator of normal biological processes, pathological 
processes, or pharmacological responses to therapeutic 
interventions.6 A definition proposed by the World Health 
Organization is any substance, structure, or process that 
can be measured in the body or its products and influ-
ences or predicts the incidence of outcome or disease.6 
Although biomarkers include physiological parameters, 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Chow et al
May 30, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e1054–e1091. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000490
e1056
clinical images, and tissue specimen biopsies, this state-
ment focuses on circulating biomarkers other than those 
that are routinely determined as part of clinical care such 
as electrolytes or hemoglobin.7 Biomarkers can serve 
multiple roles. They can be used as a diagnostic tool for 
the identification of patients with an abnormal condition or 
as a tool for staging the extent of disease, as an indicator 
of disease prognosis, or for the prediction and monitoring 
of response to an intervention.6 Morrow and de Lemos8 
set criteria a biomarker should fulfill to be clinically useful. 
Specifically, a useful biomarker should allow repeated and 
accurate measurements with a rapid turnaround time at 
reasonable cost, should provide information that is not 
already available from careful clinical assessment and its 
performance should be superior to other available tests, 
and should assist decision making and enhance clinical 
care. In an updated editorial, Maisel9 suggested that a 
biomarker does not need to be both sensitive and specif-
ic, should have underlying pathophysiological relevance, 
and, if prognostic, should be used to either begin a cer-
tain treatment or monitor during that treatment.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGICAL ROLE OF BIOMARKERS 
IN HF
Biomarkers from blood can help detect the presence of 
HF, determine its severity, assess risk of future events, 
and guide therapy. The following discussion focuses on 
biomarkers that are not part of the routine clinical evalu-
ation of patients but rather are obtained specifically to 
further assess prognoses and possibly direct HF thera-
py. Individual biomarkers are categorized according to 
their primary pathophysiological mechanism, although 
multiple pathways may also be involved.
Neurohormones
Systemic neurohormonal activation is a fundamental 
mechanism involved in the progression of HF. Activation 
of neurohormonal systems such as the renin-angiotensin-
aldosterone system and sympathetic nervous system 
occurs in response to derangements in cardiovascular 
homeostasis. In particular, the stimulus for the produc-
tion and release of these neurohormones appears to be 
related to arterial underfilling,10 and it likely represents a 
primitive response to conditions that threaten the viabil-
ity of the organism such as dehydration or blood loss. 
Although neurohormone-mediated vasoconstriction of 
arteries and veins and retention of salt and water by the 
kidney have short-term beneficial aspects, sustained ac-
tivation (as occurs in HF) leads to increased load on the 
heart and ultimately drives maladaptive cardiac remodel-
ing and progression of cardiac failure.
In general, plasma levels of neurohormones reflect se-
verity of disease and, as a result, have been used as bio-
markers in patients with HF. As initially noted with plasma 
norepinephrine,11 worsening functional impairment is as-
sociated with higher levels of these neurohormones in the 
circulation.12 Even patients with asymptomatic left ven-
tricular (LV) dysfunction have elevated levels of neurohor-
mones in their blood. When symptoms of HF appear, they 
rise according to severity. Although a strong association 
between neurohormone levels in the blood and the clinical 
course of patients with HF has been recognized for some 
time,13 complex assays and handling procedures needed 
for processing neurohormones such as norepinephrine 
and epinephrine make clinical use impractical.
Markers of Extracellular Matrix Remodeling
Cardiac remodeling refers to a progressive series of 
changes in the size, shape, and function of the heart that 
are initiated by damage to the myocardium or increases 
in wall stress. Remodeling is a major factor in the devel-
opment and progression of HF. It involves changes in 
both the cardiomyocytes and the makeup of the extra-
cellular matrix (ECM). The latter consists of an intricate 
weave of (predominantly) collagen fibrils that play a vital 
role in maintaining the structural and functional integrity 
of the heart. ECM remodeling can be detected by mea-
suring molecules of ECM composition or activity that 
are released into the circulation. These include collagen 
metabolites, factors that promote fibrosis, and matrix 
remodeling enzymes (Figure 1).
Measures of collagen fragments in the blood corre-
late with the intensity of remodeling and development of 
fibrosis in the heart as levels of amino- and carboxy-ter-
minal propeptides increase as collagen is synthesized. 
Collagen degradation products such as carboxy terminal 
telopeptide of type I collagen released in the blood can 
also be used to assess remodeling.14
Although many enzymes are involved in regulating 
ECM deposition, a family of proteolytic enzymes that 
degrade fibrillar collagen, the matrix metalloproteinases 
(MMPs) and the tissue inhibitors of MMP, have been ex-
tensively studied in cardiovascular disease. Increased 
levels of MMPs or tissue inhibitors of MMP and the ratio 
between them have been associated with disease sta-
tus. A role for profiling pathways of ECM degradation 
of these molecules has been postulated as a means of 
providing prognostic information.15
Inflammatory Mediators and Markers of 
Oxidative Stress
Tissue injury initiates an inflammatory response in which 
proinflammatory cytokines (and their receptors), cell 
adhesion molecules, and chemokines all participate as 
part of an innate stress response to help repair tissue in-
jury (Figure 1). The response involves Toll-like receptors, 
which recognize endogenous host material released by 
cell injury or death, oxidized products, or damaged ECM 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Biomarkers in Heart Failure
Circulation. 2017;135:e1054–e1091. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000490 
May 30, 2017 e1057
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
proteins.16 Activation of these receptors leads to a pro-
inflammatory response that, when sustained, adversely 
affects cardiac structure and function. The increased 
spillover into the circulation of these molecules makes 
them potentially useful as biomarkers that can be used 
to assess risk and to provide important insights into the 
mechanisms involved in the pathogenesis of HF.
Cytokines activate target cells by interacting with spe-
cific receptors that are anchored to the cell surface. The 
ectodermal portion of these receptors can be cleaved from 
the cell by proteolytic “sheddase” enzymes, releasing them 
into the interstitial space where they can diffuse into the 
circulation. The mediators that have proved most useful as 
biomarkers include the proinflammatory cytokines tumor 
necrosis factor-α, IL (interleukin)-1, and IL-6 (Figure 1). GDF-
15 (growth differentiation factor 15), a member of the trans-
forming growth factor-β cytokine superfamily, is a marker 
of cell injury and inflammation. CRP (C-reactive protein), a 
member of the pentraxin family, is produced predominantly 
in the liver as part of the systemic response to inflam-
mation and has been used to assess patients with HF.17
ST2 (suppressor of tumorgenicity 2) exists in both 
membrane-bound and soluble forms and is a member 
of the IL-1 receptor family, which binds to IL-33, a me-
diator of inflammatory disease. IL-33/ST2 signaling is 
responsible for the maladaptive processes of myocyte 
hypertrophy and enhanced extracellular protein deposi-
tion in fibrosis. Binding of IL-33 to membrane ST2 pro-
duced by increased myocardial biomechanical force 
elicits an antihypertrophic and antifibrotic response. This 
cardioprotective effect is negated by the soluble form of 
ST2 (sST2), which acts as a decoy to prevent binding of 
IL-33 to membrane-bound ST2 (Figure 1). This leads to 
myocardial death and tissue fibrosis, reduced cardiac 
function, and acceleration of disease progression when 
concentrations of sST2 are elevated.18
Figure 1. Mechanisms and responses to injury in heart failure.  
BNP indicates B-type natriuretic peptide; CRP, C-reactive protein; cTn, cardiac troponin; ECM, extracellular matrix; GAL3, gelatinase-
associated lipocain-3; GDF-15, growth differentiation factor 15; IL, interleukin; MMP, matrix metalloproteinase; NT-proBNP, N-termi-
nal pro–B-type natriuretic peptide; PINP, procollagen I intact N-terminal; PTX3, pentraxin 3; sST2, soluble suppressor of tumorgenic-
ity 2; ST2L, ST2 membrane-bound receptor; TIMP, tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinase; and TNF-a, tumor necrosis factor-α.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Chow et al
May 30, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e1054–e1091. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000490
e1058
Gal-3 (galectin-3), a β-galactoside–binding lectin 
member of the galectin family,19 is also a marker of 
inflammatory response in HF. Expression of Gal-3 is in-
creased in activated macrophages and through interac-
tion with proteins and molecules in the heart. This ap-
pears to stimulate pathological remodeling, particularly 
by inducing fibroblast proliferation and collagen deposi-
tion20–23 (Figure 1).
Myocyte Injury and Myocyte Stress
In patients with HF, myocardial oxygen delivery may be 
compromised by low cardiac output or reduced diastolic 
blood pressure that results in a reduction in coronary per-
fusion. Elevations in ventricular filling pressures worsen 
the situation by reducing the driving gradient that moves 
blood through the coronary circulation. The oxygen sup-
ply is often decreased when demand is increased by 
elevations in ventricular wall stress and neurohormone-
mediated augmentation of heart rate and contractility. 
This “perfect storm” created by the imbalance between 
supply and demand results in myocardial ischemia, par-
ticularly in vulnerable subendocardial regions. Inflamma-
tion, oxidative stress, and neurohormonal activation have 
been postulated to play a role in causing cardiomyocyte 
injury,24 and cardiomyocyte apoptosis or development of 
hibernating myocardium may also be involved.25
Release of the myofibrillar proteins such as TnT (tro-
ponin T) and TnI (troponin I) occurs in patients with HF 
in the absence of an acute coronary event. Although 
many patients with HF have underlying coronary artery 
disease, a measurable rise or fall of troponin can oc-
cur in such patients, even in the absence of significant 
epicardial coronary artery stenosis, indicating that other 
factors are involved. Although the underlying mecha-
nisms have not been clearly delineated and may vary 
between patients, subendocardial ischemia, created by 
supply:demand mismatch, likely plays a major role.26
BNP (B-type natriuretic peptide) and its amino-terminal 
cleavage equivalent (NT-proBNP) are released into the 
circulation directly from myocardium as a result of end-
diastolic wall stress as a result of increases in volume 
or pressure.27–29 Unlike ANP (atrial natriuretic peptide), 
which is stored in granules in the atria, BNP appears 
to be synthesized in bursts. The initial product of the 
BNP gene, pre-proBNP1-134 undergoes rapid removal of 
26 amino acids to form proBNP108. This peptide is then 
cleaved by the proteolytic enzymes furin and corin, re-
sulting in the formation of NT-proBNP1-76 and BNP1-32, with 
only the latter molecule being biologically active.30–32 
Clearance of BNP1-32 is carried out by the natriuretic pep-
tide receptor-C and neutral endopeptidases in the circu-
lation and by passive excretion through the kidneys and 
other organs with high blood flow, whereas NT-proBNP 
appears to be cleared largely by organs with high blood 
flow such as muscle, liver, and kidney33–35 (Figure 1). Al-
though the kidneys appear able to clear both natriuretic 
peptides equally well, the half-life of NT-proBNP is longer 
than that of BNP (120 versus 20 minutes).36,37
Other Biomarkers
MicroRNAs are short, noncoding RNA sequences that 
regulate gene expression at the posttranscriptional 
level by targeting the 3′-untranslated region of mRNA 
sequences. They are stable in the circulation and have 
been explored as potential biomarkers in coronary ar-
tery disease, myocardial infarction, hypertension, diabe-
tes mellitus, viral myocarditis, and HF.38
ASSESSING RISK FOR INCIDENT HF
Predicting Incident HF Risk in the Community
The lifetime risk for HF is substantial. It is strongly age 
dependent, with incidence rates of <1% below the age 
of 50 and up to 30% at advanced age (>80 years).39 Be-
cause HF is a heterogeneous and multifactorial disease, 
the prediction of the risk for new-onset HF is difficult. 
However, in the past decade, several studies have ad-
dressed this issue, and several clinical parameters have 
emerged that, alone or in a model, may be of help to 
predict new-onset HF. These studies are, however, gen-
erally limited by sample size, by the inability to distin-
guish between HF with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF) 
and HF with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF), and 
by the absence of (one or several) biomarkers in the 
prediction models.
Natriuretic Peptides
Natriuretic peptides have demonstrated value for pre-
dicting new-onset HFrEF in a number of large, high-qual-
ity, prospective cohort studies. In the FHS (Framingham 
Heart Study), BNP and urinary albumin-to-creatinine ra-
tio emerged as key biomarkers in predicting new-onset 
HF.40 These biomarkers significantly improved the model 
C statistic and enhanced risk reclassification on top of 
a base model comprising age, sex, body mass index, 
systolic blood pressure, hypertension treatment, dia-
betes mellitus, current smoking, ratio of total to high-
density lipoprotein cholesterol, valvular heart disease, 
and prevalent myocardial infarction (Framingham Heart 
Score). Other data further support the potential utility 
of natriuretic peptides to predict the long-term develop-
ment of HF. Older adults with initially low biomarker con-
centrations that demonstrated a rise in both NT-proBNP 
>25% and cardiac troponin T (cTnT) >50% over time 
were found to be at greater risk for systolic dysfunction, 
HF events, and cardiovascular death.41
Another potential strategy explored a multimarker 
approach for predicting new-onset HF. In the PREVEND 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Biomarkers in Heart Failure
Circulation. 2017;135:e1054–e1091. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000490 
May 30, 2017 e1059
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
study (Prevention of Vascular and Renal End Stage Dis-
ease), a total of 13 biomarkers were evaluated for their 
value in the prediction of new-onset HF on top of a clinical 
base model.42,43 Again, the overall additive value of bio-
markers was small. Multivariably adjusted, NT-proBNP, 
midregional proANP, high-sensitivity (hs) TnT, cystatin-C, 
and urinary albumin excretion were predictive for new-
onset HF. In a subset of patients with high baseline risk 
determined by clinical parameters, the best model for 
prediction of new-onset HF included NT-proBNP, TnT, and 
urinary albumin excretion. Several other studies demon-
strated similar findings.41,44–48
With respect to superiority of one of the natriuretic 
peptides, aggregate evidence supports the best predic-
tive value of BNP and NT-proBNP, stronger than ANP 
and NT-proANP.49 Furthermore, in the CHS (Cardiovas-
cular Health Study), it was shown that physical activity 
decreased the likelihood for an increase in NT-proBNP 
and hs-troponin over time, and this was associated with 
a lower risk of new-onset HF.50
Troponins
In both apparently healthy individuals in the general popu-
lation (stage A HF) and asymptomatic individuals with 
stable cardiovascular disease (stage B HF), detectable 
levels of cTn have been demonstrated. With modern and 
widely used assays, the prevalence of detectable tropo-
nin in stage A and B HF is in the 1% to 5% range,51,52 
whereas with hs-assays, most studies have found that as 
many as 50% to 80% of asymptomatic individuals have 
levels above the limit of detection,53,54 with some levels 
at or above the 99th percentile.55,56 Higher troponin levels 
are associated with established HF risk factors, including 
diabetes mellitus, LV hypertrophy, chronic kidney disease, 
and elevated natriuretic peptide levels, but not prior myo-
cardial infarction or coronary calcium.51–53 Interestingly, 
elevated troponin concentrations generally have a stron-
ger relation with future risk of HF than ischemic events.54 
Serial measurements may improve risk classification.53
Markers of Renal Dysfunction
Renal dysfunction, expressed by creatinine or cystatin-
C, has been reported to be a strong predictor of new-
onset HF. Gottdiener et al57 and Lam and colleagues58 
reported that higher serum creatinine was associated 
with increased HF risk. In the FHS,40 among routine labo-
ratory biomarkers, urinary albumin-to-creatinine ratio 
emerged as an independent predictor for HF, whereas 
in the PREVEND study, urinary albumin excretion along-
side NT-proBNP and TnT was identified. In summary, re-
nal markers have consistently emerged as predictors of 
new-onset HF; however, further comparative studies are 
necessary to identify which renal biomarkers are best 
predictors of new-onset HF in the population.
Emerging Markers of Inflammation: Gal-3, sST2, 
and GDF-15
Wang et al58a explored the value of Gal-3 for predict-
ing new-onset HF in the FHS and found that in a fully 
adjusted model that included BNP and Gal-3, a modest 
independent predictive value was found for new-onset 
HF (hazard ratio [HR], 1.23 per 1-SD increase; P=0.02). 
In PREVEND, Gal-3 did not predict incident HF in the en-
tire cohort. However, in a subset with high-risk subjects, 
Gal-3 added marginally to the base model for predicting 
new-onset HF.42
Among 3428 subjects in the FHS,48 elevated concen-
trations of sST2, hs-TnI, GDF-15, and BNP were indepen-
dently associated with incident HF during a mean follow-
up of 11 years. Recent data from a population-based 
Finnish study48 with a follow-up of 15 years showed that 
baseline sST2 levels did not predict incident HF.59 Col-
lectively, these markers have additive prognostic value 
in risk models for new-onset HF. Furthermore, the addi-
tion of a multimarker score to clinical variables could 
potentially lead to an improvement in discrimination and 
reclassification.48
Other Biomarkers
Other biomarkers have been associated with new-onset 
HF. Higher levels of ceruloplasmin have been linked to 
new-onset HF in the ARIC study (Atherosclerosis Risk 
in Communities).60 Furthermore, inflammatory markers 
have been evaluated for predicting new-onset HF. In the 
ABC study (Health, Aging, and Body Composition), IL-6, 
tumor necrosis factor-α, and CRP were associated with 
new-onset HF, but when all 3 markers were added to the 
model, IL-6 emerged as the strongest marker.17
Suggestions/Considerations for Clinical Practice/
Public Health Initiatives
1. In community-based populations, measurement of 
natriuretic peptides (BNP or NT-proBNP) or mark-
ers of myocardial injury (TnI or TnT) alone adds 
prognostic information to standard risk factors for 
predicting new-onset HF.40,48,53,61–63
2. Measurement of several new biomarkers, including 
sST2, Gal-3, GDF-15, and markers of renal function, 
alone or in a multimarker strategy, may be useful 
for providing additional risk stratification.40,42,48,64
BIOMARKERS FOR THE DIAGNOSIS OF HF
Biomarkers in conjunction with the clinical and physical 
assessment can provide greater diagnostic accuracy 
than the physical assessment alone. The natriuretic pep-
tides are the best-established and best-evaluated mark-
ers to help in the proper diagnosis and exclusion of HF. 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Chow et al
May 30, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e1054–e1091. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000490
e1060
Numerous studies have addressed this issue, and 2 large 
meta-analyses have summarized the available data.65,66 
These data convincingly demonstrate that natriuretic 
peptide levels improve diagnostic performance in sev-
eral settings, including in patients with asymptomatic LV 
dysfunction,67,68 in patients presenting with dyspnea and 
fatigue,69–72 and in those presenting to the emergency 
department (ED) with acute dyspnea.73–85
The Role of Natriuretic Peptides in the Diagnosis 
of Decompensated Acute HF
Decompensated acute HF (AHF), regardless of the EF, 
often (if not always) is accompanied by cardiomyocyte 
injury. This injury may be reversible (no cell necrosis) or 
irreversible (with cell necrosis). Repetitive hospitaliza-
tions for HF are associated with increased morbidity and 
mortality, in part as a result of cardiomyocyte injury.
Natriuretic peptides are most commonly used to sup-
port the diagnosis of HF in patients with dyspnea.86 In the 
Breathing Not Properly study, BNP accurately diagnosed 
HF in patients presenting to the ED with dyspnea, with 
a sensitivity of 90% and specificity of 76% at a cutoff of 
100 pg/mL.75 NT-proBNP was found to have even higher 
sensitivity for excluding HF at a cutoff of 300 pg/mL.87 
The sensitivity and specificity of NT-proBNP were identi-
cal to those of BNP if an NT-proBNP threshold of 900 
pg/L was used, but to improve positive predictive value, 
age-related cutoffs of 450 pg/mL for <50 years, 900 
pg/mL for 50 to 75 years, and 1800 pg/mL for >75 
years88 are recommended.
The diagnostic strength of natriuretic peptides is their 
high sensitivity for ruling out HF; however, as the value 
increases, HF becomes more likely. Defining “rule-in” cut-
offs for HF is complicated because multiple factors influ-
ence natriuretic peptide levels (detailed below). Proposed 
rule-in cutoffs are the age-related values presented above 
for NT-proBNP and a value >400 pg/mL for BNP.88
Clearly, natriuretic peptides serve a key role in man-
aging HF; as with any biomarker, there are caveats to 
their interpretation (Table 1).89–91 Although natriuretic 
peptide values may be elevated in non-HF disease 
states, this does not reflect a false positive but a path-
ological process causing ventricular stress, which re-
quires a different interpretation of natriuretic peptides. 
This is analogous to “slight” elevations of hs-troponins, 
which do not reflect plaque rupture but rather myocyte 
injury and necrosis.
Interpreting natriuretic peptides in the setting of other 
confounders may be challenging. Underlying factors 
such as age and sex influence BNP, but their overall 
impact is less significant compared with comorbidities 
such as cardiac, pulmonary, and renal disease, which 
are likely to increase natriuretic peptides above current 
thresholds for HF. Therefore, cautious interpretation of 
concentrations is important, especially in the presence 
of ≥1 confounders. Elevations of BNP and NT-proBNP 
in the setting of pulmonary hypertension and pulmonary 
embolism are related to right ventricular dysfunction 
and have significant prognostic value independently of 
underlying LV dysfunction. Similarly, higher natriuretic 
peptide levels associated with mitral regurgitation are 
directly correlated with mortality and onset of HF and 
should be carefully considered. The accuracy of natri-
uretic peptides for the detection of HF is reduced in 
the setting of atrial fibrillation and sepsis, and careful 
interpretation is warranted.86 Concentrations of BNP or 
NT-proBNP can also be lower than expected in the set-
ting of presumed AHF. The chief caveat in this respect 
is the decrease seen with increasing body mass index.90 
In flash pulmonary edema, natriuretic peptides may be 
slightly elevated at presentation but can rise markedly 
over time despite adequate treatment. In many cases, 
adequate diuresis is required before natriuretic peptide 
concentrations are evaluated because euvolemic natri-
uretic peptide levels may be more accurate to predict 
prognosis and guide therapy.
Contemporary Clinical Practice 
Recommendation39,92
Measurement of BNP and NT-proBNP is useful to sup-
port clinical judgement for the diagnosis of ambulatory 
and acute decompensated patients, especially in the set-
ting of clinical uncertainty.93
Biomarkers for the Potential Diagnosis of HFpEF
The current diagnosis of HFpEF is one of exclusion that 
is based on the clinical presentation of HF but with EF 
values being normal or near-normal range on the basis 
of imaging evaluation. There is a need for appropriate 
Table 1. Confounders Influencing the Interpretation 
of Natriuretic Peptides
Higher Natriuretic Peptide 
Levels Than Expected
Lower Natriuretic Peptide 
Levels Than Expected
Increasing age*
Obesity
Acute coronary syndrome*
Flash pulmonary edema
Renal insufficiency
Pericarditis/tamponade
RV dysfunction*
Genetic polymorphisms
Atrial fibrillation
End-stage cardiomyopathy
Pulmonary hypertension*
Pulmonary embolism*
Anemia/high-output states*
Sepsis
Mitral regurgitation*
RV indicates right ventricular.
*Delineates likely elevation from ventricular stretch.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Biomarkers in Heart Failure
Circulation. 2017;135:e1054–e1091. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000490 
May 30, 2017 e1061
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
biomarkers that can properly diagnose HFpEF and pro-
vide pathophysiologically relevant classification. This is 
an area of active research.
Natriuretic Peptides
Circulating levels of natriuretic peptides are elevated in pa-
tients with HFpEF compared with subjects without HF but 
are lower than concentrations seen in patients with HFrEF. 
In patients with HFpEF, increased BNP or NT-proBNP is di-
rectly related to increased LV end-diastolic wall stress.29 In 
addition, levels of BNP and NT-proBNP fall when LV diastol-
ic pressure decreases in response to volume reduction. 
Patients with HFpEF have a small LV cavity and thick LV 
walls with end-diastolic wall stress being much lower than 
in HFrEF, even in the setting of high diastolic pressures, 
thus producing a lower stimulus for BNP production.
Partition values for diagnostic criteria of BNP ≥100 
pg/mL and NT-proBNP ≥800 pg/mL have been suggest-
ed to support the diagnosis of HFpEF.92 However, factors 
independent of LV diastolic pressure and diastolic stress 
may affect BNP levels in patients with HFpEF. As in pa-
tients with HFrEF, for any given LV diastolic pressure in 
patients with HFpEF, BNP levels are lower in obese pa-
tients and higher in women, older patients, and patients 
with concomitant pulmonary disease (chronic obstructive 
disease, pulmonary hypertension, pulmonary embolus), 
renal dysfunction, and atrial fibrillation. Patients with these 
significant comorbid states may have elevated BNP levels 
even in the absence of HFpEF. Therefore, partition values 
may need to be adjusted in patients with HFpEF and these 
comorbid states. For example, some obese patients with 
HFpEF have a BNP of 60 to 100 pg/mL when in symptom-
atic HF; BNP levels rise in these patients after weight loss 
from bariatric surgery to levels >100 pg/mL.94–96
Markers of Diastolic Dysfunction
A significant proportion of patients with HFpEF have dia-
stolic dysfunction.97 Cardiac stress releases marker can-
didates such as insulin growth factor–binding protein-7, 
which is released by the myocardium in the setting of 
abnormal filling pressure. Insulin growth factor–binding 
protein-7 has been correlated with echocardiographic 
parameters of diastolic dysfunction in both HFrEF and 
HFpEF.98,99 Insulin growth factor–binding protein-7 levels 
correlate with indicators of diastolic dysfunction such as 
increased E/E’, E/A ratios, left atrial volume index, and 
right ventricular systolic pressure. This may provide a 
means to identify patients with HFpEF and diastolic dys-
function in the future after further confirmation.
Collagen Homeostasis and Matrix Markers
Myocardial fibrillar collagen is composed primarily of col-
lagen I and III; changes in both are important. Fibrillar col-
lagen content results from the balance in the following 
processes: procollagen synthesis, postsynthetic procol-
lagen processing, and posttranslational collagen cross-
linking and collagen degradation. Biomarkers that reflect 
each of these steps in collagen homeostasis have been 
characterized; however, collagen synthesis and degra-
dation and determinants of degradation have thus far 
been the best studied in HFpEF.
MicroRNAs
In addition to protein and peptide biomarkers, a number 
of plasma microRNAs were examined in patients with 
HFpEF. MicroRNAs are products of noncoding genes 
that act to repress protein translation and can result in 
increased or decreased collagen content. Changes in 
microRNA 29a, 1, 21, and 133a were associated with 
myocardial fibrosis in patients with HFpEF. MicroRNAs 
have not yet been applied as diagnostic or prognostic 
biomarkers in patients with HFpEF.
Multibiomarker Panels
Although each individual biomarker can be considered a 
single entity, data suggest that the predictive accuracy 
is significantly increased when these biomarkers are 
used together in a multibiomarker panel. For example, 
a multibiomarker panel (selected from 17 biomarkers, 
including natriuretic peptides) of MMP-2, MMP-8, tissue 
inhibitor of MMP-4, and procollagen-III N-terminal pep-
tide provided a prediction algorithm for HFpEF with both 
good sensitivity and acceptable specificity (area under 
the curve=0.79).100 Taken together, this multibiomarker 
panel in patients with HFpEF suggested that the pres-
ence of a shift in collagen homeostasis to a profibrotic 
condition provides good diagnostic discrimination and 
carries a poor prognosis.
Novel Biomarker Candidates in HFpEF
Novel biomarkers candidates are urgently needed for HF-
pEF to improve its diagnosis and to better understand its 
pathophysiology. Specific markers that help to catego-
rize the patient population to permit targeted evaluation 
of novel therapies will represent a major step forward 
for this condition with currently limited options (Table 2).
BIOMARKERS AND PROGNOSIS IN HF
Chronic HF
In addition to the routinely obtained clinical laboratory 
values of hemoglobin, electrolytes, and renal and liver 
function, there is an increasing interest in the utility of 
other biomarkers that are implicated in pathogenesis of 
HF, reflecting hemodynamic, inflammatory, injury, and 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Chow et al
May 30, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e1054–e1091. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000490
e1062
neurohormonal changes and remodeling or stress profile 
of the myocardium, cardiac myocyte, ECM, or cardiovas-
cular system. These biomarkers have been identified as 
powerful adjuncts to standardized clinical care in deter-
mining the prognosis of chronic HF.
Natriuretic Peptides: BNP or NT-proBNP
Natriuretic peptides, specifically BNP and NT-proBNP, 
are useful for supporting clinical judgement for the di-
agnosis or exclusion of HF, especially in the setting of 
chronic ambulatory HF.121
Measurement of BNP or NT-proBNP is useful for es-
tablishing prognosis in chronic HF. Elevated BNP or NT-
proBNP levels parallel HF disease severity, assessment 
by New York Heart Association (NYHA) class, elevated 
filling pressures, or worse hemodynamics121–124 and are 
suggestive of worse clinical outcomes and mortality in 
chronic HF.125–128 Further data demonstrated that each 
100-pg/mL increase in BNP was associated with a 35% 
increase (95% confidence interval [CI], 22–49; P=0.096) 
in the relative risk of death.129
Biomarkers of Myocardial Injury: cTnT or Cardiac 
Troponin I
Modest elevations of circulating cTn levels are found in 
patients with HF without ischemia or coronary artery dis-
ease, suggesting ongoing myocyte injury or necrosis in 
affected patients.130–134 Elaboration of cTn is associated 
with impaired hemodynamics,130 progressive LV dysfunc-
tion,131 and increased mortality rates130,134 in patients 
with chronic HF. Decrease in levels over time with treat-
ment is associated with a better prognosis than persis-
tent elevation in patients with chronic HF131 or AHF.135
With a highly sensitive new assay, cTn levels are de-
tectable in the majority of the patients with HF,136,137 a 
finding that predicts adverse outcomes, including mor-
tality,136,137 and retains additional prognostic value at pre-
viously undetectable concentrations. In the Val-HeFT trial 
(Valsartan Heart Failure Trial) of 4053 stable patients 
with chronic HF without overt evidence of myocardial 
ischemia or infarction, detectable TnT levels were as-
sociated with an increased risk of death (HR, 2.08; 95% 
CI, 1.72–2.52) and first hospitalization for HF (HR, 1.55; 
95% CI, 1.25–1.93) at 2 years.137
Soluble ST2
Compared with other biomarkers such as natriuretic 
peptides, advantages of sST2 include that its concen-
tration is not affected by age, renal function, or body 
mass index. sST2 levels correlate with prognosis in HF. 
In an analysis of >1100 patients with chronic HF,138 pa-
tients with the highest decile of sST2 concentration had 
an HR of 3.2 (P<0.0001). A level of 35 pg/mL in the 
outpatient setting appears to clearly delineate low-risk 
patients from those with high risk. In a post hoc analysis 
of 1650 patients with HFrEF in the Val-HeFT trial, sST2 
Table 2. Summary of Applications of Biomarkers  
to HFpEF
Biomarker
Application to HFpEF
Reference
Markers of hemodynamic load
  
Natriuretic peptides
   
BNP, NT-
proBNP
Correlate with LVED wall stress
29
Support diagnosis
39, 92
Predict mortality, HF events
101, 102
Guide therapy
39, 103
Markers of diastolic dysfunction
  
Insulin growth 
factor–
binding 
protein 7
Correlates with diastolic 
dysfunction
98
Predicts mortality and functional 
capacity
99
Markers of inflammation
  
↑sST2
Correlates with elevated LVEDP
104
Supports diagnosis
105
Predicts mortality, HF events
48, 106, 107
  
↑Gal-3
Supports diagnosis
108
Predicts mortality, HF events
109–113
Markers of matrix turnover
  
Collagen propeptides
   
↑PICP, 
PINP, PIIINP
Support diagnosis
100, 114–117
Predict mortality
118
  
Collagen telopeptides
   
↑CITP
Supports diagnosis
114, 116, 119
Predicts HF events
117
  
MMPs
   
↑MMP-1
Supports diagnosis
115
   
↑MMP-2
Supports diagnosis
100, 114, 116
   
↑MMP-8
Supports diagnosis
100
   
↑MMP-9
Supports diagnosis
114, 116
  
 
TIMPs
   
↑TIMP-1
Supports diagnosis
115
   
↑TIMP-4
Supports diagnosis
115, 120
  
↑Osteopontin
Predicts mortality, HF events
118
BNP indicates B-type natriuretic peptide; CITP
, carboxy-terminal telopeptide 
of collagen type I; Gal-3, galectin-3; HF, heart failure; HFpEF, heart failure with 
preserved ejection fraction; LVED, left ventricular end-diastolic; LVEDP, left 
ventricular end-diastolic pressure; MMP, matrix metalloproteinase; NT-proBNP, 
N-terminal pro–B-type natriuretic peptide; PICP, procollagen I C-terminal 
propeptide; PINP, procollagen I intact N-terminal, serum; PIIINP, type III 
procollagen peptide; sST2, soluble form of suppressor of tumorgenicity 2; 
and TIMP, tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinase.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Biomarkers in Heart Failure
Circulation. 2017;135:e1054–e1091. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000490 
May 30, 2017 e1063
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
levels were mostly in the normal range.126 Neverthe-
less, sST2 was associated with features of worse HF 
and was nonlinearly associated with increased risk of 
adverse outcomes. However, in a multivariable model 
that included clinical variables and NT-proBNP, baseline 
sST2 did not improve the ability to discriminate patients 
who did or did not have a poor outcome, although it did 
increase the sensitivity of 1-year outcome predictions. 
Additionally, an increase in sST2 from baseline to 12 
months was associated with an increased subsequent 
risk of poor outcomes, suggesting that repeat measure-
ment of sST2 may be useful for monitoring patients.139 
In a similar fashion, Gaggin and colleagues140 examined 
concentrations of sST2 in carefully managed patients 
with chronic HFrEF. In this analysis, sST2 concentrations 
were superior to NT-proBNP, hs-TnT, and GDF-15 for pre-
dicting cardiovascular events. As with the Val-HeFT re-
sults, serial measurement added considerably to a base-
line value for sST2; those patients demonstrating a rise 
from <35 ng/mL to above this cutoff had an adjusted 
HR of 3.64 (P<0.001) for adverse outcome. In this same 
cohort, sST2 concentrations were found to interact with 
β-adrenergic blocker therapy.141
Galectin-3
In patients with chronic ambulatory HF, elevated levels 
of Gal-3 may be modestly associated with mortality110,142 
among both patients with HFrEF143 and those with HF-
pEF,110 although the association with outcome in chronic 
ambulatory HF is less strong than for other biomarkers.
Midregional Proadrenomedullin 
In the BACH study (Biomarkers in Acute Heart Failure),144 
MR-proADM (midregional proadrenomedullin) was as-
sociated with mortality at 3 months with a prognostic 
value beyond natriuretic peptides. In the Australia-New 
Zealand Heart Failure Study, above-median levels of MR-
proADM predicted increased risk of mortality (risk ratio, 
3.92; 95% CI, 1.76–8.7) and of HF hospitalization (risk 
ratio, 2.4; 95% CI, 1.3–4.5) independently of traditional 
clinical and echocardiographic factors.145 Treatment with 
carvedilol reduced the risk of death or HF hospitaliza-
tion in patients with above-median levels of NT-proBNP, 
MR-proADM, or both. Although promising for predicting 
short-term prognosis, more studies are needed to deter-
mine the utility and prognostic value of MR-proADM in HF.
Other Emerging Biomarkers
There is a large body of literature examining the role 
of other biomarkers such as proinflammatory cytokines 
and chemokines, biomarkers of remodeling or ventricu-
lar hypertrophy, biomarkers of oxidative stress, neuro-
hormones, and biomarkers of renal injury that may be 
involved in the pathogenesis, progression, decompensa-
tion, or complications in chronic HF (Table 1). Table 1 
provides a summary of such biomarkers that have been 
implicated in HF.
It is possible that multimarker strategies that combine 
biomarkers may ultimately prove beneficial in guiding HF 
therapy in the future. It should be kept in mind that to be 
useful for a large, general population, a screening test 
or biomarker should be sensitive, accurate, reliable, eas-
ily standardized, and inexpensive. The assay should be 
relatively easy to perform and analyze. Most emerging 
biomarkers currently do not fulfill these criteria.
Acute HF
Episodes of acutely decompensated HF are associated 
with decreased survival, high rates of rehospitalization, 
and high costs of care.146,147 In an analysis of the OPTI-
MIZE-HF registry (Organized Program to Initiate Life Sav-
ing Treatment in Hospitalized Patients With Heart Failure), 
the risk of death within 90 days of hospitalization was 
8.6%.148 Furthermore, approximately a third of patients 
are rehospitalized within 90 days of discharge,149 and 
the 1-year survival rate of ≈70% after HF hospitalization 
has not improved significantly over time.150
A challenge in the management of AHF syndromes is 
the accurate identification of patients at highest risk of 
these adverse events, death, and rehospitalization. The 
majority of patients with signs and symptoms of AHF 
undergo initial evaluation and treatment in the ED. Clini-
cians lack the ability to accurately assess prognosis, and 
patients who at are lower risk may end up hospitalized 
and those who are at higher risk may be discharged to 
home.151 Circulating biomarkers have emerged as cen-
tral not only to the diagnosis but also to the risk stratifi-
cation of patients with AHF.
In addition to routine clinical laboratory tests and phys-
iological findings, a number of biomarkers have gained 
acceptance for their utility to assist in HF prognostica-
tion. Several serum biomarkers are independently asso-
ciated with outcomes during the initial HF hospitalization 
and the postdischarge period. Cardiac biomarkers re-
flect the pathophysiological aspects of AHF and include 
natriuretic peptides (myocyte stretch), cTns (myocyte 
necrosis), CRP (inflammation), copeptin (neurohormonal 
upregulation, vasoconstriction, and water retention), MR-
proADM (vascular stress), and sST2 and galactin-3 (myo-
cardial remodeling and fibrosis).152
Outcomes may be improved by treatment intensifica-
tion among high-risk patients, and risk assessment is 
important to ensure that interventions such as aggres-
sive pharmacological or device-based therapy are ap-
propriately implemented. As an example, patients esti-
mated to be at the highest risk might benefit from more 
intensive monitoring in a critical care unit setting rather 
than a general medicine floor. Similarly, at time of dis-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Chow et al
May 30, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e1054–e1091. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000490
e1064
charge, risk assessment can identify patients who may 
derive the greatest benefit from palliative care services, 
referral for consideration of advanced HF therapies, or 
enrollment in disease management programs.153 Thus, 
biomarker-guided prognostication may aid resource al-
location.
Biomarker-assisted prognostication also facilitates 
patient-provider communication and the shared decision-
making process.154 Clear communication about prog-
nosis helps to establish patient-caregiver expectations 
about the short- and long-term goals of care. Finally, 
biomarker-guided risk prediction can aid patient selec-
tion for clinical trials by identifying patients at highest 
risk of clinical events.
Natriuretic Peptides
Values of BNP and NT-proBNP have modest correla-
tion,36,155 and either can be used in patient care settings, 
with the understanding that their absolute values and cut 
points are not interchangeable.39 Concentrations of BNP 
and NT-proBNP measured at either the time of admission 
or discharge can help to distinguish a patient’s level of 
risk for subsequent events.
Initial BNP level on presentation with dyspnea to an 
acute care setting is a powerful predictor of short- and 
long-term outcomes.145,155–159 Among the >48 
000 pa-
tients with a recorded BNP level enrolled in ADHERE 
(Acute Decompensated Heart Failure National Registry), 
there was a nearly linear relationship between admission 
BNP quartiles and in-hospital mortality.160 Compared with 
1.9% for patients in the lowest quartile, the rate of in-
hospital mortality was 6% for those in the highest quartile 
(odds ratio, 2.23; 95% CI, 1.91–2.62; P<0.0001). This 
relationship was independent of other standard markers 
of risk in this population. Furthermore, these findings 
were true for patients with HF with either preserved or 
reduced systolic function.158 In a study of 325 patients 
presenting to the ED with dyspnea, those with baseline 
BNP levels >480 pg/mL had a cumulative 6-month prob-
ability of an HF event of 51%159 compared with 2.5% in 
those with a BNP <230 pg/mL. Elevated BNP at presen-
tation is also associated with increased morbidity, and 
patients in ADHERE with a BNP ≥840 ng/mL were more 
likely to require mechanical ventilation, admission to the 
intensive care unit, and longer lengths of stay.88
Likewise, baseline NT-proBNP is also strongly pre-
dictive of outcomes.160,161 In a post hoc analysis of the 
PRIDE Study (ProBNP Investigation of Dyspnea in the 
Emergency Department), after multivariate adjustment, 
Januzzi et al160 identified initial NT-proBNP concentration 
>986 pg/mL as the strongest predictor of 1-year mor-
tality (HR, 2.88; 95% CI, 1.64–5.06; P≤0.001).
Both BNP and NT-proBNP levels improve with treat-
ment during HF hospitalization.146, 156,162–164 Studies have 
found predischarge BNP to be a stronger marker of 
postdischarge outcomes than either baseline or percent 
change in BNP during hospitalization.146,156,163,165 Linking 
data from OPTIMIZE-HF with Medicare claims, Kociol et 
al146 found that a Cox proportional hazards model includ-
ing discharge BNP performed best and that discharge 
BNP was the single most important characteristic for 
predicting 1-year mortality or death/HF hospitalization. 
In a separate cohort, predischarge BNP ≤430 pg/mL 
has similarly been demonstrated to have strong nega-
tive predictive value for 30-day readmission (96%; 95% 
CI, 80–100).156
Predischarge NT-proBNP is also more strongly asso-
ciated with outcomes than admission levels.162,164 In 182 
consecutive patients admitted with HF, the risk of death 
or readmission was higher for those who did not have 
a significant reduction in NT-proBNP, defined as a de-
crease >30%, compared with those who did (HR, 2.03; 
95% CI, 1.14–3.64).162 The risk was even higher for 
those who had a 30% increase compared with those who 
had a 30% decrease (HR, 5.69; 95% CI, 3.23–11.01).
Cardiac Troponins
Troponin levels add incremental prognostic information 
to that obtained from other clinical markers and physi-
cal examination findings and should be included in the 
initial evaluation of AHF as part of early risk assessment. 
Elevations in cardiac troponin I (cTnI) and cTnT both cor-
relate with poor prognosis and are associated with im-
paired hemodynamics, progressive decline in LV systolic 
function, and reduced survival.130,166–173 Among patients 
enrolled in ADHERE, a positive troponin was defined as 
either cTnI >1.0 μg/L or cTnT >0.1 μg/L.174 Of HF epi-
sodes, 6.2% were associated with a positive troponin, 
and in-hospital mortality for troponin-positive patients 
was 8.0% compared with 2.7% for those who were tro-
ponin negative (odds ratio, 2.55; 95% CI, 2.24–2.89; 
P<0.001).174 A separate analysis of 2025 patients hos-
pitalized with HF found that cTnI levels >0.5 μg/mL were 
independently associated with short-term mortality (ad-
justed HR, 1.49; 95% CI, 1.25–1.77; P<0.001).175 There 
was a dose-dependent response between troponin level 
elevation and subsequent outcomes. Troponin elevation 
during AHF is also associated with increased morbidity, 
and patients with detectable levels have required longer 
lengths of stay and increased resource use such as in-
tensive care unit level of care.174 Likewise, a negative 
troponin level can help to identify a lower-risk patient.174 
In an analysis of 538 patients presenting to an ED with 
HF, negative troponin and systolic blood pressure >160 
mm 
Hg were the only 2 independent markers of inability 
to discharge within 24 hours or adverse cardiac event 
within 30 days.176
In regard to serial measurement, troponin elevation at 
any time over the course of hospitalization confers sub-
stantial increased risk of mortality.135,177 In a small study 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Biomarkers in Heart Failure
Circulation. 2017;135:e1054–e1091. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000490 
May 30, 2017 e1065
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
of 62 patients, persistently elevated cTnT levels >0.02 
ng/mL were predictive of higher rates of death and hos-
pitalization for HF.172 One-year mortality was 71% for pa-
tients whose troponin remained elevated compared with 
45% for those whose level decreased (P<0.05).
Beyond natriuretic peptides and troponins, multiple 
other biomarkers are associated with prognosis among 
patients presenting with AHF. sST2 levels correlate with 
NYHA classification, left ventricular ejection fraction, 
creatinine clearance, BNP, NT-proBNP, and CRP.107,178 
However, unlike the natriuretic peptides, sST2 is not 
related to age, prior diagnosis of HF, body mass in-
dex, ischemic type of HF, or atrial fibrillation.107,179 The 
relative independence of sST2 from prevalent comor-
bidities represents a potential advantage of sST2 for 
prognostication over the commonly used natriuretic 
peptides.107
Patients with AHF who have elevated concentrations 
of sST2 are at increased risk of death.106,107,178–181 sST2 
concentrations can predict mortality as early as a few 
months from presentation and out through at least 1 
year. In a study of 593 patients admitted to the ED with 
dyspnea, Januzzi et al180 found that although sST2 was 
not as useful as NT-proBNP for predicting a diagnosis of 
HF, concentrations of sST2 were higher in patients with 
HF compared with those with dyspnea resulting from 
other causes (p < 0.01) and that an elevated sST2 con-
centration was independently associated with increased 
1-year mortality. In a separate study, sST2 was associ-
ated in a separate cohort with a 2-fold increase in 1-year 
mortality.107 Similar to chronic HF, serial measurement 
adds value to a baseline concentration of sST2. Several 
cohorts have now shown that posttreatment concentra-
tions of sST2 more powerfully predict death compared 
with baseline values182–184 and in general provide supe-
rior prognostic information to other markers, including 
BNP or NT-proBNP, in this regard.155
In addition to the natriuretic peptides, there is a sub-
stantial literature on other biomarkers at the time of AHF 
hospitalization and subsequent risk. cTns have been 
shown in some studies,175,177,185,186 but not others,187 to 
predict postdischarge events. Some of these variations 
may be the result of differences in patient characteris-
tics, troponin assay characteristics (which vary marked-
ly188), or possible publication bias. Biomarkers thought 
to reflect cardiac remodeling (sST2 and Gal-3) have 
also been evaluated as tools to predict early postdis-
charge events. Both baseline sST2 values at the time of 
hospitalization and changes in sST2 during short-term 
therapy have been associated with postdischarge outco
mes.107,180,182,183,189,190 High levels of Gal-3 at discharge 
also predict later events111,112 and have been shown to 
independently predict early HF rehospitalization in a 
pooled analysis.191 This could potentially be useful for 
selecting high-risk patients not previously identified with 
traditional risk factors. CRP and other inflammatory 
markers,192,193 endothelin,194 MR-proADM,195 and co-
peptin196,197 have also been shown to be independently 
associated with clinical outcome after AHF in some data 
sets. In general, studies analyzing the additive value 
of multiple markers typically find newer markers to be 
modestly complementary to standard risk factors and 
natriuretic peptide levels.155,190
Biomarker Panels
Studies have demonstrated that use of combined bio-
markers can improve risk stratification.88,130,145,155,167,198 
An analysis of ADHERE found that a multimarker strategy 
for assessment of patients hospitalized with HF added 
synergistic information.88 The interaction between BNP 
and troponin was not significant, and the combination 
these 2 biomarkers had additive prognostic value. In 
>42 
000 AHF hospitalizations, admission BNP and tro-
ponin were predictive of in-hospital mortality.88 Detect-
able troponin was defined as cTnI ≥1.0 ng/mL or a cTnT 
≥0.1 ng/mL.199 Mortality risk varied ≈5-fold on the basis 
of initial BNP and troponin levels.
Similarly, the prognostic value of sST2 has been 
shown to be additive to that of NT-proBNP such that 
patients with elevations in both biomarkers experienced 
the highest 1-year mortality and subjects with low val-
ues for both had the lowest.180 The association between 
sST2 and NT-proBNP remained intact out to 4 years from 
presentation. However, natriuretic peptides may not al-
ways predict mortality, particularly in the setting of a low 
sST2 level, and thus sST2 may enable reclassification of 
risk.107 The combination of Gal-3 and NT-proBNP for iden-
tifying those at highest risk also appears to be superior 
to evaluation of either biomarker alone.112 Accordingly, 
strategies of combining biomarkers have proven use-
ful for improving risk stratification.106 However, to guide 
clinical practice in the acute care setting as it relates to 
the evaluation of biomarkers for the purpose of risk as-
sessment, further research is necessary to define which 
biomarker panels optimize prognostication of short- and 
long-term outcomes.
HF With Preserved EF
Large, retrospective, community-based studies have re-
ported that outcomes are similar for patients with HFpEF 
and HFrEF.200,201 However, a more recent meta-analysis 
using individual patient data in >40 
000 patients found 
that although mortality and morbidity rates in patients 
with HFpEF were high, mortality was approximately a 
third lower in patients with HFpEF compared with those 
with HFrEF. Nevertheless, it is important to be able to 
predict outcomes in these patients, and several biomark-
ers have tested this association in patients with HFpEF 
and have been found to be useful to predict prognosis 
in HFpEF.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Chow et al
May 30, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e1054–e1091. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000490
e1066
Natriuretic Peptides
Several studies have shown that natriuretic peptides 
are independently associated with mortality and mor-
bidity in patients with HFrEF, but relatively fewer stud-
ies have tested their prognostic value in patients with 
HFpEF.202,203 A post hoc analysis of the I-Preserve 
study (Irbesartan in Heart Failure With Preserved Ejec-
tion Fraction) in 3480 well-characterized patients with 
HFpEF was the largest study to show that levels of NT-
proBNP are elevated in HFpEF but to a lesser extent 
than in HFrEF. However, the prognostic information 
provided by NT-proBNP appears to be similar in the 2 
types of HF. In a multivariable Cox regression model, 
NT-proBNP above the median of 339 pg/mL was inde-
pendently associated with a nearly 80% increase in the 
risk of the primary end point of all-cause mortality and 
prespecified cardiovascular hospitalizations, >100% 
increase in all-cause mortality, and 77% increase in 
hospitalization for worsening HF.204 Moreover, as ob-
served in HFrEF, changes in NT-proBNP over time were 
also associated with outcomes: A rise in NT-proBNP 
was associated with an increase in risk of cardiovascu-
lar death or HF hospitalization, and a fall was associ-
ated with a trend toward a decrease in risk, suggest-
ing that NT-proBNP may be a useful marker to monitor 
prognosis in this condition.102
Markers of Inflammation and Immune Signaling
Biomarkers such as Gal-3 and sST2 may reflect the de-
gree of immune activation and subsequent cardiac re-
modeling, including fibrosis.23,48,105,109,110,205,206 A number 
of studies have demonstrated that Gal-3 is increased in 
HFpEF and predicts worse outcomes in this population, 
but concentrations tend to be lower than in HFrEF.110 In 
patients with HFpEF, Gal-3 >17.8 ng/mL indicates low 
risk; Gal-3 of 17.9 to 25.9 ng/mL, intermediate risk; and 
Gal-3 >25.9 ng/mL, higher risk.110,142,207 Whether these 
values should be adjusted for comorbidities in HFpEF 
has not been established.
sST2 is increased in HFpEF and is associated with 
diastolic dysfunction, increased myocardial stiffness, fi-
brosis, and decompensation.208 In patients with HFpEF, 
sST2 partition values >32 ng/mL predict poor progno-
sis. Whether these should be adjusted for comorbidities 
in HFpEF has not been established.
Contemporary Clinical Practice 
Recommendations39
1. Measurement of BNP or NT-proBNP and cTn at the 
time of presentation is useful for establishing prog-
nosis or disease severity in patients with acutely 
decompensated HF.
2. Measurement of other clinically available tests 
such as biomarkers of myocardial injury or fibrosis is 
reasonable for additive risk stratification in patients 
with acutely decompensated HF.
Suggestions/Considerations for Clinical Practice/
Public Health Initiatives
1. Measurement of predischarge BNP or NT-proBNP 
during an HF hospitalization can be useful for 
establishing postdischarge prognosis.
OUTPATIENT MANAGEMENT OF HF
Biomarker assessment in the outpatient management of 
HF is of benefit for diagnostic and prognostic applica-
tions, whereas therapeutic applications remain under ac-
tive investigation. The diagnostic and prognostic utility of 
biomarker assessment has been addressed elsewhere 
in this document and is based on a robust evidence base 
with a high degree of certainty. Where the database is 
less certain, however, is in the use of biomarkers to 
guide or support the outpatient management of HF.
Establishing the Premise of Biomarker 
Assessment as Treatment Target for  
Ambulatory HF
Since the emergence of biomarkers as barometers of 
ventricular wall stress and remodeling, which in turn im-
plicate HF status, there has been hope that biomarker-
guided therapy might better facilitate not only attainment 
of optimal doses of evidence-based medical therapy for 
HF but also improved clinical outcomes. The heterogene-
ity of patients with HF has made it difficult to comfortably 
extrapolate the results of rigorously controlled random-
ized clinical trials to the everyday clinical environment, 
and the optimal doses of evidence-based therapy cannot 
be precisely identified for all patient cohorts. In addition, 
overzealous titration of hemodynamically active medica-
tions may result in harm. The use of a biomarker assay 
to better gauge the adequacy of medical therapy on the 
basis of modulation of ventricular wall stress might there-
fore ameliorate the negative consequences of blindly ti-
trating medical therapies to the point of hemodynamic 
instability and may optimize ideal clinical outcomes in 
response to lifesaving therapies for HF.
Reducing Risk of HF Through Biomarker 
Screening and Intervention
The STOP-HF trial (St. Vincent’s Screening to Prevent 
Heart Failure) evaluated the use of BNP as part of a 
screening program to identify an at-risk population, cou-
pled with a collaborative care program to implement HF 
prevention therapies. The study evaluated whether this 
strategy could reduce newly diagnosed HF and preva-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Biomarkers in Heart Failure
Circulation. 2017;135:e1054–e1091. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000490 
May 30, 2017 e1067
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
lence of significant LV systolic or diastolic dysfunction. 
There were 1374 participants with cardiovascular risk 
factors recruited from 39 primary care practices and ran-
domly assigned to receive usual primary care or screen-
ing with BNP testing. Intervention group participants with 
BNP levels ≥50 pg/mL underwent echocardiography and 
collaborative care between their primary care physician 
and specialist cardiovascular service. The intervention 
group underwent more cardiovascular testing and re-
ceived more renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system–based 
therapy at follow-up. The primary end point of new-onset 
HF was significantly reduced (odds ratio, 0.55; 95% CI, 
0.37–0.82; P=0. 003).209 These findings suggest that 
among patients at risk of HF, BNP-based screening and 
collaborative care reduced the combined rates of LV sys-
tolic dysfunction, diastolic dysfunction, and HF.210
Positive Biomarker-Guided HF Trials
One of the first and most provocative efforts at guided 
therapy for HF was published in 2000 in seminal work 
done by Troughton et al.211 In this early natriuretic pep-
tide–guided therapy study, 69 patients were randomized 
to either continued medical therapy–guided by clinical 
assessment or NT-proBNP–guided therapy with a target 
NT-proBNP reduction equivalent to <1700 pg/mL. The 
clinical assessment was predicated on a defined HF 
score based on several specific clinical parameters (ie, 
Framingham criteria for HF including orthopnea, parox-
ysmal nocturnal dyspnea, third heart sound, and jugular 
venous pressure) and attainment of an HF score <2. In 
both arms, a rigorous stepped-care algorithm was in-
corporated to normalize treatment options between the 
2 groups. This was a double-blind study; however, an 
investigator aware of the treatment assignment was re-
sponsible for adjustments in therapy. A multicomponent 
outcome of aggregate cardiovascular events, including 
death, was deemed to be sufficiently powered with 37 
patients in each group, anticipating a 50% difference in 
event rates. Fewer clinical events were noted in the BNP 
group than in the clinical group (19 versus 54; P=0.02). 
Death alone was nearly statistically significant, 1 versus 
7 (P =0.06). The most important treatment differences 
in the NT-proBNP group were higher doses of angioten-
sin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and loop diuretics 
and greater exposure to aldosterone antagonists. The 
accompanying editorial for the Troughton et al landmark 
study heralded the milestone this work represented but 
indicated that the entirety of the response could not be 
pinned on a reduction in filling pressures because higher 
doses of neurohormonal antagonists likely exert pleiotro-
phic effects on the ventricle that go beyond reduction of 
filling pressures and likely target gene expression, redox 
potential, and compliance.211a
These positive data led to a series of investigations 
addressing larger and more contemporary patient popu-
lations and not only the feasibility of guided therapy but 
the best accompanying strategy. The French Multicenter 
Randomized Study to Improve Outcomes in HF by Jour-
dain et al212 (also known as the STARS-BNP trial [Sys-
tolic HF Treatment Supported by BNP]), expanded on 
the Troughton et al211 study by including patients treated 
with β-blockers, a larger study population of 200 pa-
tients, and a more aggressive target BNP nadir in all pa-
tients of 100 pg/mL. In a mean treatment duration of 15 
months, this study was also positive with a reduction in 
HF-related deaths and hospitalization. Like the Troughton 
et al study, patients receiving guided natriuretic peptide 
therapy were on higher doses of ACE inhibitors, but in 
this study, a similarly higher dose of β-blocker therapy 
was also attained. Although this was a positive study, it 
is not clear that the study was sufficiently powered for 
the prespecified end points.
Neutral Biomarker-Guided HF Trials
Of the several biomarker-guided HF trials failing to reach 
the prespecified end point, PRIMA (Can Pro-Brain-Natri-
uretic Peptide Guided Therapy of Chronic HF Improve 
Heart Failure Morbidity and Mortality?) is prototypical. The 
PRIMA study by Eurlings et al213 enrolled 345 patients 
and targeted discharge NT-proBNP after HF hospitaliza-
tion or the observed lowest NT-proBNP in the 2 weeks 
after hospitalization. This more “individualized” approach 
was intended to minimize overtitration of therapies in pa-
tients with persistently elevated NT-proBNP. The primary 
end point in PRIMA was days alive and out of the hospital. 
The study failed to show a positive result, with similar 
outcomes between the 2 arms (P=0.49). The trigger for 
titration of evidence-based medical therapy in PRIMA was 
a change in NT-proBNP levels of >10% of the individual-
ized baseline and was ≥850 pg/mL. This led to fewer 
titrations, with only 23% of outpatient visits meeting the 
thresholds requiring drug titration, and raises the pos-
sibility that the threshold biomarker levels triggering evi-
dence-based medical therapy titration were uniformly too 
high. Nevertheless, the same observations applied as 
before: Higher doses of ACE inhibitor use were recorded 
but in this trial without an apparent clinical benefit.
Pivotal Biomarker-Guided HF Trials
The TIME-CHF randomized trial (Trial of Intensified vs. 
Standard Medical Therapy in Elderly Patients With Con-
gestive Heart Failure) evaluated treatment of HF guided 
by NT-proBNP levels with clinical assessment.214 In TIME-
CHF, the targeted NT-proBNP level was 400 pg/mL in 
those <75 years of age and 800 pg/mL in those >75 
years of age, and the clinical arm was symptom driven 
to NYHA class II or better. Importantly, this trial was 
conducted in older people dichotomized to <75 or >75 
years of age to address concerns that higher doses of 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Chow et al
May 30, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e1054–e1091. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000490
e1068
HF therapy might lead to unintended consequences in 
the older frail patient. The end point was survival free 
of all-cause hospitalization for HF and quality-of-life as-
sessment. There was no difference in survival free of 
all-cause hospitalization, and quality of life improved 
in both the NT-proBNP and clinically guided arms. For 
the secondary end point, survival free of HF hospitaliza-
tion, the NT-proBNP arm significantly benefited. Impor-
tantly, the benefits noted were seen only in the group 
<75 years of age. Doses of ACE inhibitors, angiotensin 
receptor antagonists, and β-blockers were all higher in 
the NT-proBNP group, and greater use of spironolactone 
was noted. The group >75 years of age experienced a 
lesser increase in β-blocker dosing. Of concern, more 
serious adverse events related to NT-proBNP–guided 
therapy versus symptom-guided therapy occurred in 
patients ≥75 years of age (10.5% versus 5.5%) but 
not in patients 60 to 74 years old (3.7% versus 4.9%). 
The interaction between age and treatment groups was 
P=0.01. It is noteworthy that post hoc analyses from 
the TIME-CHF study included the unexpected observa-
tion that biomarker-guided HF care was cost-effective 
(despite adverse events), regardless of age.215
The more recently completed PROTECT study (ProB-
NP Outpatient Tailored Chronic Heart Failure) pursued 
this question yet again but used a single center with ad-
vanced HF care and targeted an NT-proBNP threshold of 
<1000 pg/mL.216 The primary end point was total car-
diovascular events. The results were striking, with 58 
versus 100 events in the guided therapy versus the stan-
dard of care arm. The positive results extended to qual-
ity of life,217 EF, and indexes of LV volume.218 No dichot-
omy in outcome was seen in those <75 or >75 years of 
age.219 The predominant differences in medical therapy 
were greater use of aldosterone antagonists and less 
use of loop diuretics in the guided therapy group. The 
differences in the use of ACE inhibitors and β-blockers 
were not significant. Importantly, PROTECT did not fully 
randomize as an interim analysis, and the results of 
other contemporary studies prompted the investigators 
to end recruitment early. As with some other biomarker-
guided trials, the study was unblinded, although event 
adjudication was blinded. The studies completed to date 
are summarized in Table 3.
Unresolved Questions
This array of clinical trials plus others noted in the meta-
analysis by Savarese et al210 (Figure 2) and the individual 
patient data pooled analysis by Troughton et al221 more 
recently establish the validity and safety of guided thera-
py as a means to attain optimal doses of evidence-based 
medical therapy for HF but make it clear that there are 
insufficient data to date to definitely support guided ther-
apy as a means to improve clinical outcomes. The major 
questions to be resolved are the following:
Goal natriuretic peptide threshold? A nadir is needed 
that is sufficiently low that events are reduced or a per-
cent reduction that reflects a more individualized ap-
proach, but when in the course of disease is that thresh-
old set?
Augmented medical therapy? As some have opined, 
if the result is higher-dose therapy with ACE inhibitors 
or β-blockers, why not prescribe them empirically? Simi-
larly, if greater exposure to aldosterone antagonism is 
associated with better outcomes, then optimal imple-
mentation of the prevailing clinical practice guidelines 
would prompt use of aldosterone antagonists regard-
Table 3. Understanding the Heterogeneity of Guided Heart Failure Trials
 
Age
HFpEF?
Low Target  
Natriuretic Peptide?
Natriuretic Peptide  
Reduced Significantly?
Did Natriuretic Peptide 
Guidance Change Therapy?
STARBRITE
60
No
No
No
Yes
TIME-CHF
77
No
Yes
No
Yes
B’SCAR
76
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
PRIMA
72
Yes
No
No
No
SIGNAL
78
No
No
No
No
Troughton
70
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
STARS-BNP
65
No
Yes
Unknown
Yes
Berger
71
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
PROTECT
63
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
B’SCAR indicates BATTLESCARRED (NT-proBNP-Assisted Treatment to Lessen Serial Cardiac Readmissions and Death); HFpEF, heart failure with 
preserved ejection fraction; PRIMA, Primary Rituximab and Maintenance; PROTECT, ProBNP Outpatient Tailored Chronic Heart Failure; SIGNAL-HF, Swedish 
Intervention study–Guidelines and NT-proBNP Analysis in Heart Failure; STARBRITE, Strategies for Tailoring Advanced Heart Failure Regimens in the 
Outpatient Setting: Brain Natriuretic Peptide Versus the Clinical Congestion Score; STARS-BNP, Systolic HF Treatment Supported by BNP; and TIME-CHF, 
Trial of Intensified vs. Standard Medical Therapy in Elderly Patients With Congestive Heart Failure. Reprinted from Januzzi et al220 with permission from 
Elsevier. Copyright © 2011, Elsevier Inc.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Biomarkers in Heart Failure
Circulation. 2017;135:e1054–e1091. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000490 
May 30, 2017 e1069
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
less of BNP thresholds. The signal associated with less 
use of diuretics may be more important than previously 
realized. Observational data have consistently aligned 
higher-dose loop diuretic use with less good outcomes. 
Whether this is a risk marker for advanced disease or a 
risk factor through exaggerated neurohormonal activa-
tion remains unresolved but could be operative as the 
use of biomarker-guided therapy is further explored. Ul-
timately, there are not prevailing metrics to determine 
optimal dosing of evidence-based medical therapy at the 
patient threshold. The use of biomarkers as a surrogate 
for wall stress represents a reasonable alternative to em-
pirical targeting of historical dosing thresholds achieved 
in clinical trials.
A signal of harm? It is important that in the quest to 
optimize clinical outcomes as a function of the attained 
doses of evidence-based medical therapy, unforeseen 
consequences can be avoided. This is especially certain 
in the elderly, who are at risk for falls, cognitive dys-
function, and renal failure as blood pressure, orthostatic 
hypotension, and cerebral/renal blood flow become af-
fected by higher-dose medical therapy.
Cost-effectiveness? Is the more intensive therapy as-
sociated with guided therapy, including extra visits, a 
reasonable tradeoff for any realized gains?
HF phenotype? The previously completed guided 
therapy trials did not exclusively limit management to 
HFrEF. Given the absence of evidence-based therapy 
for HFpEF, the very premise of guided therapy, that is, 
titration of evidence-based medical therapy, cannot be 
accomplished.
Moving Forward: The Next Iteration of Guided HF 
Therapy
GUIDE-IT (Guiding Evidence Based Therapy Using Bio-
marker Intensified Treatment in Heart Failure) is a prospec-
tive, randomized, controlled, multicenter clinical trial de-
signed to randomize ≈1100 high-risk subjects with HFrEF 
to either usual care (optimized guideline-recommended 
therapy) or a strategy of adjusting therapy with the goal 
of achieving and maintaining a target NT-proBNP level of 
<1000 pg/mL (Figure 3).222 Like most studies before it, 
GUIDE-IT is an unblinded study. The primary end point is 
Figure 2. Meta-analysis of guided therapy heart failure trials.  
A-HEFT indicates African-American Heart Failure Trial; AREA IN-CHF, Antiremodelling Effect of Aldosterone Receptors Blockade 
With Canrenone in Mild Chronic Heart Failure; ASTRONAUT, Aliskiren Trial on Acute Heart Failure Outcomes; CARE-HF, Cardiac 
Resynchronization–Heart Failure; CI, confidence interval; COPERNICUS, Carvedilol Prospective Randomized Cumulative Survival; 
OR, odds ratio; PROTECT, ProBNP Outpatient Tailored Chronic Heart Failure Therapy; RESOLVD, Randomized Evaluation of Left 
Ventricular Dysfunction; TIME-CHF, Trial of Intensified vs. Standard Medical Therapy in Elderly Patients With Congestive Heart 
Failure; and VAL-HEFT, Valsartan Heart Failure Trial. Reprinted from Savarese et al210 with permission from the American College 
of Cardiology Foundation. Copyright © 2014, the American College of Cardiology Foundation. 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Chow et al
May 30, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e1054–e1091. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000490
e1070
time to cardiovascular death or first hospitalization for 
HF. Secondary end points include time to cardiovascular 
death and all-cause mortality, cumulative mortality, health-
related quality of life, resource use, cost-effectiveness, 
and safety. This was to be the first large, adequately pow-
ered study addressing the question of biomarker-guided 
HF therapy and cardiovascular outcomes but has been 
terminated prematurely because of a lack of difference 
in the primary outcome between treatment groups.223 Full 
details of the trial remain pending, and further analyses 
with respect to the impact of achieving biomarker targets 
through serial sampling in important subgroups are cur-
rently underway. Although terminated for futility, it is likely 
that the GUIDE-IT trial results will still be informative. Re-
sults from GUIDE-IT are expected to be published in 2017.
As noted by the foregoing comments, the focus 
of guided therapy in HF has been on NT-proBNP and 
BNP; that is, natriuretic peptides. Recently, data have 
emerged evaluating Gal-3, GDF-15, and ST2. Of these 
newer biomarkers, the most appeal is driven by sST2. 
The levels appear to vary less as a function of age, sex, 
body mass index, or renal function. Future efforts may 
focus on multimarker-guided therapy. Several studies 
evaluating sST2 have suggested additional utility beyond 
natriuretic peptides.
Serial assessment of natriuretic peptides in the am-
bulatory HF model is now limited by some insurance 
carriers, and full use of this approach may require regu-
latory and reimbursement adjustments in current deliv-
ery models. There remains reasonable interest to more 
capably deploy evidence-based medical therapy guided 
by serial clinical assessment, with biomarkers now be-
ing one of several strategies. It is evident, however, 
that many questions remain unresolved. The preliminary 
data were suggestive, but over time, larger data sets 
and more rigorous study designs have seen a regres-
sion to the mean, with the question now approaching 
the domain of precision medicine: which patient under 
which circumstances will respond favorably to a guided 
therapy approach.
Biomarkers as Therapeutics and the Effect of 
Natriuretic Peptide Therapeutics on Biomarker 
Assays
In addition to serving as biomarkers, natriuretic peptides 
may serve as therapeutics for both HFrEF and HFpEF. 
Natriuretic peptide levels could be increased either by 
preventing degradation by neutral endopeptidases such 
as in the former OVERTURE trial (Omapatrilat Versus 
Enalapril Randomized Trial of Utility in Reducing Events) 
or the more recent PARAMOUNT (Prospective Compari-
son of ARNI With ARB on Management of Heart Failure 
With Preserved Ejection Fraction) and PARADIGM-HF 
(Prospective Comparison of ARNI With ACEI to Deter-
Figure 3. GUIDE-IT (Guiding 
Evidence Based Therapy Using 
Biomarker Intensified Treatment 
in Heart Failure) study design.  
6MWT indicates 6-minute walk test; 
BNP, B-type natriuretic peptide; BUN, 
blood urea nitrogen; CV, cardiovascu-
lar; EF, ejection fraction; HF, heart fail-
ure; NT-proBNP, N-terminal pro–B-type 
natriuretic peptide; and QOL, quality 
of life. Reprinted from Felker et al222 
with permission from the American 
College of Cardiology Foundation. 
Copyright © 2014, the American Col-
lege of Cardiology Foundation.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Biomarkers in Heart Failure
Circulation. 2017;135:e1054–e1091. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000490 
May 30, 2017 e1071
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
mine Impact on Global Mortality and Morbidity in Heart 
Failure) studies224–226 or by the exogenous administration 
of BNP.224,227–229
Importantly, the impact of manipulation of endog-
enous or exogenous natriuretic peptides on measured 
biomarker levels must be addressed. Specifically, 
rather than being driven by decompensation of HF or 
increased wall stress in many cases, BNP1-32 levels may 
increase as a result of the therapeutic effects of nepri-
lysin inhibition or exogenous administration. However, 
the influence on natriuretic peptide biomarker levels 
appears not to be universal. NT-proBNP1-76 is not a sub-
strate for neprilysin and thus is not directly influenced 
by the administration of a neprilysin inhibitor. NT-proBNP 
is also not increased as a consequence of intravenous 
or subcutaneous therapy.226 Moreover, patients who 
achieved NT-proBNP ≤1000 pg/mL in PARADIGM-HF 
(not as a target of therapy per se) had a lower rate of 
cardiovascular death or HF hospitalizations compared 
with those who did not.230 BNP levels will, however, be 
affected, but the expected magnitude of increase in 
BNP1-32 concentration after neprilysin inhibition and the 
durability of increase in BNP1-32 concentrations remain 
unresolved. Whether any other natriuretic assays are 
affected equally by the effects of neprilysin inhibition is 
also unresolved.
In the PARAMOUNT study,224 valsartan/sacubitril sig-
nificantly reduced NT-proBNP by ≈15% compared with 
valsartan, and at 36 weeks, valsartan/sacubitril signifi-
cantly reduced left atrial volume by ≈5% and improved 
NYHA class compared with valsartan. Whether these 
effects would translate into improved outcomes will be 
tested in a large randomized trial (PARAGON-HF [Pro-
spective Comparison of ARNI With ARB Global Outcomes 
in Heart Failure With Preserved Ejection Fraction]).
Contemporary Clinical Practice 
Recommendations39
1. BNP- or NT-proBNP–guided HF therapy is of uncer-
tain benefit in clinical practice and cannot be uni-
versally advised. There are some data to support 
the use of serial measurement of biomarkers 
as a means to achieve ideal doses of guideline-
determined medical therapy, but the influence of 
this approach outside specialized HF centers with 
highly structured HF disease management pro-
grams is unknown.
2. The usefulness of serial measurement of BNP or 
NT-proBNP to reduce hospitalization or mortality in 
patients with HF is not well established.
3. The response of NT-proBNP to neprilysin inhibi-
tion with concomitant renin-angiotensin-aldo-
sterone system inhibition is associated with 
positive clinical outcomes but should not be 
used as a surrogate to guide treatment with an 
angiotensin-receptor/neprilysin inhibitor com-
pound until prospectively acquired randomized 
data are available.
MANAGEMENT OF HF HOSPITALIZATION
Dynamic Changes in Biomarkers During AHF 
Hospitalization
Biomarkers play a key role in the diagnosis and ini-
tial risk stratification of patients presenting with AHF 
(Biomarkers and Prognosis in Heart Failure). Hospi-
talization and treatment for AHF are associated with 
substantial dynamic changes in hemodynamic and 
clinical status, which are often reflected in changes in 
biomarkers of the disease state. In particular, hemody-
namic congestion is the most common cause of AHF 
hospitalization, and most initial therapies (eg, diuretics 
and vasodilators) are directed at relieving congestion. 
Of available biomarkers, dynamic changes in natriuret-
ic peptide levels are the best characterized. The pri-
mary determinant of natriuretic release from the myo-
cardium is myocardial wall stress,29 and as myocardial 
wall stress decreases during successful HF therapy, 
natriuretic peptide levels fall. These changes in natri-
uretic peptide levels appear to be related to general 
improvements in hemodynamic status rather than to 
the mechanism of action of specific treatments, having 
been observed with diuretics, vasodilators, and inotro-
pes. Decreases of natriuretic peptide level by 25% to 
40% are typically seen during successful in-hospital AHF 
therapy.124,162,165,177,231–235
cTns are also frequently elevated at the time of initial 
AHF hospitalization (Biomarkers and Prognosis in Heart 
Failure), even in the absence of overt clinical ischemia 
such as acute coronary syndromes.25,236 Troponin chang-
es during AHF therapy have been consistently observed, 
with most patients having gradual decreases in tropo-
nin levels over the course of hospitalization, although 
the clinical implications of these changes are less cle
ar.172,177,185–187,234,237 Differences in the sensitivity of vari-
ous assays have generally complicated interpretation of 
troponin values in the setting of AHF, although persis-
tently elevated or rising troponin values seem to be as-
sociated with greater risk.
Other biomarkers with relevance to HF include sST2 
and Gal-3, both of which are felt to reflect myocardial 
remodeling. Although ventricular remodeling is a con-
tinuously ongoing process, the time course of clinically 
evident changes in ventricular structure or function is 
typically weeks to months. It is therefore not surpris-
ing that biomarkers reflecting remodeling are gener-
ally less associated with dynamic changes than he-
modynamic markers such as the natriuretic peptides. 
However, sST2, the ligand for IL-33, is also a mediator 
of end-diastolic wall stress and inflammation. Hence, 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Chow et al
May 30, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e1054–e1091. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000490
e1072
dynamic changes in sST2 levels during short-term 
treatment of AHF have been described, and a drop in 
sST2 levels by at least 20% relate to improvement in 
subsequent outcomes.182,183 Gal-3 is also associated 
with myocardial fibrosis and remodeling but appears 
to change less dynamically with clinical changes dur-
ing AHF therapy, suggesting a limited role during acute 
hospitalization.238,239
Biomarkers of Renal Function and Kidney Injury 
During HF Hospitalization
Changes in renal function during AHF therapy have been 
a subject of substantial interest and controversy. Initial 
observational data demonstrated that worsening of re-
nal function (typically defined as a ≥25% decrease in 
glomerular filtration rate or an increase in creatinine by 
≥0.3 mg/dL) during AHF therapy occurs in 20% to 40% 
of patients with AHF and is generally associated with 
adverse short- and long-term outcomes.240,241 A formal-
ized framework for understanding these “cardiorenal 
syndromes” has been developed, proposing 5 specific 
subcategories that differ in pathophysiology and clini-
cal implications.242 Most relevant to the current topic 
is type I cardiorenal syndrome, in which acute worsen-
ing of cardiac function leads to acute renal dysfunction 
or injury.243 Although there has been significant focus 
on changes in creatinine, it is increasingly clear that 
modest increases in creatinine in the setting of effec-
tive decongestion therapy for AHF are not necessarily 
associated with worsened outcomes.244–247 There has 
been significant interest in developing biomarkers that 
might distinguish acute kidney injury from transient 
changes in renal function associated with deconges-
tion therapy. Cystatin-C is a marker of glomerular filtra-
tion rate that is not affected by body mass or protein 
intake and may be more sensitive to changes in renal 
function than creatinine. However, recent data do not 
suggest that cystatin-C is superior to more traditional 
measures such as blood urea nitrogen and creatinine 
in risk stratification in AHF.248,249 Several markers have 
been identified that are more specific for renal tubu-
lar injury, including urinary and serum neutrophil gela-
tinase-associated lipocalin, kidney injury molecule 1, 
N-acetyl-β-d-glucosaminidase, and IL-18.196,250 Although 
these tubular injury markers generally appear to be 
more sensitive and to occur earlier than changes in 
serum creatinine, their implications in terms of specific 
clinical interventions remain uncertain.
Biomarkers During Hospitalization and Risk of 
Postdischarge Events
In theory, biomarkers measured during inpatient treat-
ment could be used to inform decisions about the tim-
ing of hospital discharge and the required intensity 
of postdischarge follow-up. As with other clinical sce-
narios in HF, the majority of these data have focused 
on the natriuretic peptides. Observational data clearly 
demonstrate that the relationship between elevated na-
triuretic peptide levels at the time of AHF presentation 
and the level at discharge is closely associated with 
subsequent risk.251 Fewer data are available on the rela-
tionship between changes in natriuretic peptide levels 
during HF hospitalization and subsequent events. Early 
observational studies in single-center cohorts identified 
either absolute discharge natriuretic peptide levels or 
the relative decrease in natriuretic peptide during hos-
pitalization as being predictive of postdischarge out-
comes.162,165 Although there are substantial variations 
among specific studies, generally values of natriuretic 
peptides at the time of hospital discharge have been 
found to be more predictive of postdischarge events 
than earlier values (or the change in values) that occur 
during hospitalization. Similar data from the ESCAPE 
study (Evaluation Study of Congestive Heart Failure 
and Pulmonary Artery Catheterization Effectiveness) 
identified discharge BNP as among the most predictive 
variables for postdischarge outcomes.252 Natriuretic 
peptides have also been shown to predict longer-term 
outcomes after hospitalization. In an analysis of >7000 
patients in the OPTIMIZE-HF registry, admission BNP, 
discharge BNP levels, and the relative drop in BNP (ra-
tio of discharge to admission BNP) were predictive of 
1-year mortality or rehospitalization, but the best per-
formance was in models using discharge BNP levels.146 
Although these observational data on natriuretic pep-
tide levels during hospitalization and risk suggest the 
possibility that clinical decisions (eg, more intense hos-
pital treatment, the timing of hospital discharge, or the 
time of hospital follow-up) could rationally be made on 
the basis of natriuretic peptide testing, these hypoth-
eses have not been tested in a randomized controlled 
trial. A prospective trial to test a strategy of usual care 
versus a natriuretic peptide target (30% reduction in NT-
proBNP) in decision making about hospital discharge is 
ongoing.253
Contemporary Clinical Practice 
Recommendations39
Hospitalized/Acute
The usefulness of BNP- or NT-proBNP–guided therapy 
for acutely decompensated HF is not well established.
Suggestions/Considerations for Clinical Practice/
Public Health Initiatives
1. BNP or NT-proBNP concentrations collected after 
treatment may be useful for prognosis in hospital-
ized patients with acutely decompensated HF.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Biomarkers in Heart Failure
Circulation. 2017;135:e1054–e1091. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000490 
May 30, 2017 e1073
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
POTENTIAL APPLICATION OF BIOMARKERS IN 
CLINICAL TRIALS AND QUALITY ASSURANCE 
PROGRAMS
Biomarkers have increasing important applications in 
randomized clinical trials. Biomarkers have been used 
as part of clinical trial enrollment criteria to more reliably 
establish that enrolled subjects have HF, to establish dis-
ease severity, to selectively identify a higher-risk popula-
tion for enrollment, to provide insights into mechanisms 
of action, as clinical trial end points in early-phase trials, 
and to evaluate differential efficacy or safety. In addition 
to their role in clinical trials, biomarkers can be used in a 
variety of ways for HF performance improvement, quality 
assurance, and prevention programs.
Establishing a Diagnosis of HF for Clinical Trial 
Enrollment
Biomarkers have increasingly been used as compo-
nents of enrollment criteria of clinical trials in acute 
and chronic HF to better ensure that the subjects en-
rolled actually have HF, moving beyond potentially more 
subjective variables of clinical symptoms and physical 
examination findings as the sole basis for HF diagno-
sis for trial entry. Assays for BNP and NT-proBNP have 
been increasingly used in randomized clinical trials to 
establish the presence and severity of HF. Clinical trials 
for both acute and chronic HF have used BNP and NT-
proBNP to confirm a clinical diagnosis of HF requiring 
levels above a diagnostic cut point for patients to meet 
entry criteria. In general, BNP and NT-proBNP values 
are reasonably correlated, and either can be used in 
clinical trials. BNP and NT-proBNP are useful to sup-
port clinical trial enrollment criteria for the diagnosis or 
exclusion of HF in the setting of chronic ambulatory HF 
or the ED/hospital setting of AHF. Natriuretic peptide 
testing as part of trial entry criteria is particularly valu-
able for clinical trials early in the course of AHF when 
the cause of dyspnea may be not entirely clear. Lower 
values of BNP or NT-proBNP can effectively exclude 
the presence of HF, except in the presence of obesity. 
However, it should be noted that although higher val-
ues have reasonably high positive predictive value to 
diagnose HF, elevated plasma levels for both natriuretic 
peptides might be the result of a variety of cardiac and 
noncardiac causes. BNP and NT-proBNP levels may be 
affected by age, race, sex, body mass index, or comor-
bidities such as atrial fibrillation. A variety of different 
levels for natriuretic peptide have been used in differ-
ent clinical trials, and there are opportunities for better 
standardization.4
Other biomarkers may have a potential role for di-
agnostic purposes in clinical trials. In the BACH trial, 
midregional proANP at a prespecified threshold of 120 
pmol/L was noninferior to a BNP level of 100 pg/mL for 
the diagnosis of AHF. The use of both BNP and midre-
gional proANP slightly, but significantly, enhanced the 
diagnostic performance of BNP. Similar to BNP and NT-
proBNP, midregional proANP levels may be affected by 
age, race, sex, body mass index, or comorbidities such 
as atrial fibrillation.144 Confirmatory studies are needed 
to establish the role of other biomarkers as a diagnostic 
tool for clinical trial entry and to determine whether they 
have any potential advantages over BNP and NT-proBNP 
biomarkers.
Clinical Trial Risk Enhancement
With the increasing availability and use of evidence-based, 
guideline-directed therapies for HFrEF, event rates for 
the traditional hard end points of mortality and hospital-
ization have fallen. Clinical trials have increasingly used 
certain prognostic variables as components of study en-
try criteria to select a patient population at higher risk of 
clinical events to better ensure sufficient powering of the 
trial. Higher NYHA functional class, lower left ventricular 
ejection fraction, and recent HF or cardiovascular hospi-
talization have been used for this purpose. Biomarkers 
have also been successfully used for clinical trial risk 
enhancement. In the EMPHASIS-HF trial (Eplerenone in 
Mild Patients Hospitalization and Survival Study in Heart 
Failure), patients were included only if they had a verified 
cardiovascular hospitalization in the prior 6 months or if 
the BNP level was ≥250 pg/mL or NT-proBNP was ≥500 
pg/mL in men or ≥750 pg/mL in women.254 This trial 
was stopped early as a result of benefit. In the PARA-
DIGM-HF trial, patients were required to have a BNP level 
of ≥150 pg/mL or NT-proBNP of ≥600 pg/mL or, if the 
patient had been hospitalized for HF within the previous 
12 months, a BNP of ≥100 pg/mL or NT-proBNP ≥400 
pg/mL.225 This trial also was stopped early because of 
benefit. In the TOPCAT trial (Treatment of Preserved Car-
diac Function Heart Failure With an Aldosterone Antago-
nist), although event rates were below expectation and 
the prior end point was not met, the subgroup of patients 
enrolled on the basis of BNP criteria had event rates that 
met expectations, whereas those patients enrolled on 
the basis of prior hospitalization did not.255 Furthermore, 
for patients enrolled on the basis of prior hospitalization, 
spironolactone had no effect on the primary compos-
ite outcome (HR, 1.01; 95% CI, 0.84–1.21; P=0.92), 
whereas for those patients enrolled on the basis of el-
evated BNP levels, spironolactone showed a benefit ef-
fect (HR, 0.65; 95% CI, 0.49–0.87; P=0.003; P value 
for interaction=0.01).255 Because BNP, NT-proBNP, and 
Gal-3 have been shown to identify patients with HF at in-
creased risk for rehospitalization, these biomarkers may 
be useful for trials testing drugs, devices, or strategies 
for reducing rehospitalization, allowing enrollment of pa-
tients at higher risk of these events.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Chow et al
May 30, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e1054–e1091. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000490
e1074
Insights Into Therapeutic Mechanisms of Action
Analysis of biomarkers within clinical trials may be useful 
for gaining insights into mechanisms of action by which 
clinical benefits were obtained. Such studies may also al-
low more precise evaluation of the experimental therapy 
on the specific components of the HF molecular mecha-
nisms targeted. Analysis of serial measurements of bio-
markers in the HF-ACTION study (Heart Failure and a Con-
trolled Trial Investigating Outcomes of Exercise Training) 
provided insights into whether the impact of exercise in 
HF on functional status and risk of adverse of events was 
mediated by reductions in myocardial wall stress, inflam-
mation, and myonecrosis. This study found that plasma 
levels of NT-proBNP, hs-CRP, or cTnT did not significantly 
improve at 3 months with a structured exercise training 
program, even after accounting for baseline biomarker 
levels. Higher volume of exercise was also not associ-
ated with a reduction in serial levels.256 Findings from 
this study challenge the hypothesis that exercise training 
improves commonly evaluated cardiovascular biomark-
ers in patients with chronic HF.
The RELAX-AHF study (Relaxin in Acute Heart Failure) 
examined the effects of serelaxin in patients with AHF. 
In this study, serelaxin improved 1 of the 2 primary end 
points, dyspnea measured with a visual analog scale to 
day 5, but did not affect the Likert scale at 6, 12, and 24 
hours and did not reduce the rate of cardiovascular death 
or HF readmissions to day 60 or days alive and out of 
the hospital through day 60. However, the prespecified 
safety end point of the trial, all-cause 180-day mortality, 
was significantly reduced by serelaxin administration.257 
It was not readily apparent from the trial the mechanisms 
by which 180-day mortality could be reduced by this in-
travenous vasodilator infused over a limited duration of 
time. In a biomarker analysis of RELAX-AHF,234 serelaxin 
resulted in favorable changes in markers of cardiac 
(hs-cTnT), renal (creatinine and cystatin-C), and hepatic 
(aspartate transaminase and alanine transaminase) dam-
age and of decongestion (NT-proBNP), suggesting that 
this agent was resulting in faster decongestion and pre-
vention of organ damage, providing a plausible mecha-
nism for the improvement in 180-day survival.
Analysis of biomarkers in the PARADIGM-HF trial, 
which compared the angiotensin receptor neprilysin 
inhibitor LCZ696 (400 mg daily) with the ACE inhibitor 
enalapril (20 mg daily) in 8399 patients with HFrEF, 
provided additional insights into the effect of treatment 
on the clinical progression of HF in surviving patients. 
LCZ696 led to an early increase in BNP but a sustained 
reduction in other biomarkers of myocardial wall stress 
and injury (NT-proBNP and troponin) compared with enal-
april.225 These biomarker findings paralleled the clinical 
findings for HF disease progression, including the fact 
that fewer LCZ696-treated patients required intensifica-
tion of medical treatment for HF (P=0.003) or ED visits 
for worsening HF (P=0.001). They also had 23% fewer 
hospitalizations for worsening HF (P<0.001) and were 
18% less likely to require intensive care (P=0.005). In 
addition, worsening symptoms of HF were consistently 
less common compared with the enalapril group. The 
reduction in HF hospitalization with LCZ696 was evident 
within the first 30 days after randomization, paralleling 
the rapid change in biomarkers. Because troponin re-
lease reflects ongoing myocardial injury (possibly related 
to increased wall stress) and even small increases in the 
levels of troponin reflect a higher risk of disease pro-
gression in HF, these biomarker-based findings suggest 
that this may account for the more effective prevention 
of the clinical progression of HF by LCZ696 than enala-
pril. These findings also provide further support for the 
use of this new therapeutic approach to replace the cur-
rent use of inhibitors of the renin-angiotensin system in 
chronic HF.
Clinical Trial End Points
Selecting end points for clinical trials is critical. First, it is 
important for the success or failure of the trial in terms 
of determining efficacy and achieving approval of the 
therapy by regulatory agencies. Second, it has impor-
tant implications for effectiveness, economic value, and 
translation into clinical practice. Clinical trials to demon-
strate clinical efficacy and safety along with supporting 
regulatory approval require clinical end points such as 
mortality, morbidity, and, in some circumstance, func-
tional status.258 When it comes to phase III trials, bio-
markers are not viewed as acceptable surrogates for 
clinical outcomes by regulatory agencies.258 However, 
clinical trials in earlier phases of drug or device develop-
ment to support proof of concept, to demonstrate dose 
responsiveness, or to provide preliminary evidence of 
safety and efficacy may use biomarkers as end points to 
reflect manifestations of disease pathophysiology. Cer-
tain phase II trials have selected on-treatment levels or 
reductions in BNP or NT-proBNP as primary end points. 
Other existing or emerging biomarkers may be useful 
and allow evaluation of the specific HF molecular mecha-
nisms being targeted by the experimental intervention.
In addition, some biomarkers such as troponin, serum 
creatinine, cystatin-C, and hepatic transaminases can be 
used as indicators of safety.259–262 Troponin has been 
used to detect evidence of myocardial injury with estab-
lished or emerging inotropic agents. In the RELAX-AHF 
study, increased troponin, serum creatinine, cystatin-C, 
or hepatic transaminases were associated with a higher 
risk of 6-month mortality. In addition, larger decreases in 
NT-proBNP were associated with a lower risk of 6-month 
mortality. Patients randomized to serelaxin had signifi-
cantly lower levels of serum creatinine, blood urea nitro-
gen, and uric acid within the first 5 days after randomiza-
tion and a lower level of hepatic transaminases within the 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Biomarkers in Heart Failure
Circulation. 2017;135:e1054–e1091. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000490 
May 30, 2017 e1075
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
first 3 days after randomization compared with patients 
randomized to placebo.257 Although favorable effects 
on laboratory variables were associated with long-term 
clinical improvement, further study is required to deter-
mine whether a single or composite biomarker end point 
could be used as a safety end point for phase III trials.
Differential Efficacy and Safety in Clinical Trials
Biomarkers have been used frequently in post hoc sub-
group analyses of patients enrolled in clinical trials to 
determine whether the biomarker may be able to identify 
subgroups of patients with greater or lesser response to 
therapy or for which there may be different risk-to-benefit 
ratios. These analyses aim to demonstrate whether a 
given biomarker can classify patients into distinct sub-
groups who respond differently to therapy. They may 
also provide mechanistic insights. In the CORONA study 
(Controlled Rosuvastatin Multinational Trial in Heart Fail-
ure), patients with chronic HF and coronary artery dis-
ease were randomly assigned to rosuvastatin or placebo 
with no significant impact on the primary composite end 
point. However, it was observed post hoc that those pa-
tients with Gal-3 levels less than the median (19.0 ng/
mL) appeared to have benefited from statin therapy.263 
These results raised the hypothesis that Gal-3, a bio-
marker of myocardial fibrosis, might be used to identify 
a subgroup of patients with HF who would derive benefit 
from statin treatment.
Quality Assurance Programs
Because HF results in substantial morbidity, mortality, 
and healthcare expenditures, understanding and improv-
ing the quality of health care delivered to patients with 
HF is imperative. The rates adherence to national per-
formance measures for patients with HF is variable but 
improving, and certain targeted interventions to improve 
adherence HF measures have been successful. Biomark-
ers have a potential role in various aspects of quality as-
surance programs, including enhancing HF case finding, 
identifying higher-risk patients for more personalized dis-
ease management interventions, and identifying patients 
at risk for HF for targeted prevention efforts.
Biomarkers can be useful in quality assurance pro-
grams by assistance with case finding. BNP-based al-
gorithms have been used to identify patients with HF 
in the inpatient and outpatient settings to allow con-
current quality improvement efforts. Some quality as-
surance programs have used screening strategies to 
identify patients with elevated BNP or NT-proBNP lev-
els for secondary screening. Biomarkers can also be 
used to identify patients at higher risk for mortality, 
hospitalization, or rehospitalization. Current guidelines 
recommend use of HF disease management programs 
in patients at higher risk of rehospitalizations, and bio-
markers may be one of the more effective means to 
identify such patients.
Suggestions/Considerations for Clinical Practice/
Public Health Initiatives
1. In HF clinical trials, measurement of biomarkers 
may be useful as a component of study entry cri-
teria, in establishing disease severity, and in better 
identifying an at-risk population to be enrolled.
2. Use of biomarkers for providing mechanistic 
insights, identifying cohorts of patients with 
greater or lesser therapeutic responses or safety 
risks, or targeting certain mechanisms of action in 
clinical trials may be beneficial.
3. Use of biomarkers for identifying patients with or at 
risk for HF, establishing disease severity, and stratify-
ing risk can be helpful in quality assurance programs.
4. The use of biomarkers as primary end points in 
phase III randomized clinical trials as surrogates 
for clinical outcomes is not well established.
GENOMIC MARKERS: METABOLOMICS 
AND GENETIC, PROTEONOMIC, AND 
TRANSCRIPTOMIC MARKERS
Genetic factors likely contribute to the interindividual 
variation in the propensity to develop HF. For instance, 
in the FHS, individuals with a parental history of HF are 
≈70% more likely to develop HF compared with individu-
als without a parental history, even after adjustment for 
conventional risk factors.264 Although familial clustering 
may result from both genetic factors and shared envi-
ronment, the correlation of common substrates for HF 
(such as LV mass) is much higher between siblings than 
between spouses sharing a common environment.265
Efforts to unravel the genetic determinants of HF have 
focused largely on cardiomyopathies with mendelian in-
heritance patterns.266 This work has led to the identifica-
tion of a variety of causal mutations responsible for famil-
ial cardiomyopathies. Less is known about the genetics 
of common forms of HF such as that which arises in the 
background of coronary heart disease or hypertension. 
For a complex phenotype such as HF, it is possible that 
a significant heritable component could be attributable to 
an accumulation of common genetic variants (eg, minor 
allele frequency >5%) with modest individual effects. The 
identification of common genetic variation underlying com-
plex traits has been greatly accelerated with the advent of 
genome-wide genotyping arrays. Genome-wide associa-
tion studies have identified scores of common variants for 
many chronic diseases, although the mechanisms explain-
ing these associations are frequently unclear.
HF has proven to be a particularly challenging trait to 
interrogate with common variant approaches, possibly 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Chow et al
May 30, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e1054–e1091. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000490
e1076
because of its phenotypic heterogeneity. The largest 
published genome-wide association study for HF was 
performed by the CHARGE consortium (Cohorts for 
Heart and Aging Research in Genomic Epidemiology) and 
involved 20 
906 white individuals from 4 epidemiologi-
cal cohorts.267 The consortium identified only 1 locus at 
the genome-side significant P value threshold. The index 
single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) at the locus was 
rs10519210 (P=1.4×10−8, chromosomal region 15q22), 
which is intergenic between 2 genes, USP3 (ubiquitin-
specific peptidase 3) and CA12 (carbonic anhydrase XII). 
This variant was not associated with HF in a black sample 
(n=2895). Furthermore, replication of this SNP associa-
tion in a separate study has not yet been reported.
Other efforts to identify common genetic determinants 
of HF have involved “sub–genome-wide” approaches. The 
ITMAT/Broad/CARe (IBC) SNP array contains SNPs at 
≈2000 genes of predicted importance to cardiovascular 
disease. Cappola et al268 genotyped 1590 cases of HF 
recruited from 2 referral centers and 577 controls. They 
identified 1 SNP (rs1739843) in the HSPB7 gene associ-
ated with HF in the original sample, as well as in a repli-
cation sample. Interestingly, this SNP has also been as-
sociated with sporadic dilated cardiomyopathy in a study 
conducted by a European consortium.269 HSPB7 encodes 
a heat shock protein expressed in cardiac and skeletal 
muscle. However, the index SNP is in linkage disequilibri-
um with another gene, CLCNKA, that encodes a chloride 
channel in the kidney, providing an alternative explanation 
for the connection to HF. Additional resequencing studies 
have shown that a missense SNP in CLCNKA is associ-
ated with HF in 3 additional white cohorts.270 There are 
even fewer data on the contribution of genetic variation 
to outcomes in HF. The CHARGE consortium conducted 
a genome-wide association study of all-cause mortality 
in 2526 white and 466 black individuals with HF.271 One 
SNP in the CMTM7 gene was associated with mortality, 
with a value of P=3.2×10−7, just below the prespecified 
threshold. No replication of that SNP finding is available.
Although interesting for their potential to shed light on 
mechanisms of HF susceptibility, these studies underscore 
the limited clinical utility of genetic “biomarkers” of HF at 
the present time. Even for the most reproducible finding, at 
CLCNKA, the estimated increase in HF risk per copy of the 
minor allele is modest at 27%.270 Little is known about the 
utility of incorporating genotypic information into screening 
individuals for future HF risk, diagnosing suspected HF, 
or stratifying risk in patients with established HF.
Genomics is only one of the “-omics” technologies 
that can be leveraged to identify novel HF biomarkers. 
Proteomics and metabolomics refer to the global as-
sessment of proteins and metabolites, respectively, in a 
biospecimen. Clearly, proteins or peptides can be useful 
biomarkers in a variety of clinical settings, including HF 
(the natriuretic peptides) and myocardial infarction (tro-
ponins). Identification of informative circulating peptides 
from other pathways with proteomics is an appealing 
possibility. Nonetheless, proteomic analyses of plasma 
have inherent challenges resulting from the enormous 
quantity of proteins and peptides and the vast dynamic 
range of concentrations represented (up to 6 orders of 
magnitude).272
A recent proteomic study by Mebazaa and col-
leagues273 used mass spectrometry with upfront selec-
tion of only a single amino-terminal peptide per protein 
to reduce the complexity of the starting sample. Starting 
with 10 cases of acutely decompensated HF and 10 con-
trols, the investigators identified 49 candidate markers, 
including known markers such as NT-proBNP. Targeted 
assays were developed for 27 of these candidates and 
applied to an additional 267 samples. The investigators 
identified a novel candidate, quiescin Q6, levels of which 
were ≈50% higher in patients with acute decompensated 
HF compared with controls or those with stable HF. Ar-
eas under the receiver-operating characteristic curve for 
diagnosing HF (in patients with dyspnea) exceeded 0.85. 
The investigators also demonstrated that expression of 
this protein was increased in several animal models of 
ventricular overload or HF.
Metabolomics platforms quantify levels of smaller 
molecules, including amino acids and their derivatives, 
carbohydrates, lipids, organic anions, and other mole-
cules.272 Circulating metabolites may be the substrates 
or products of biochemical reactions. Thus, the me-
tabolome (or entire profile of metabolites) may respond 
more briskly to environmental or physiological shifts 
than proteins; this is certainly true when metabolites are 
compared with the genome, which is essentially fixed. 
Moreover, there are far fewer circulating metabolites 
compared with circulating peptides, by several orders 
of magnitude. Metabolomic profiles can be generated 
in a targeted (typically several hundred metabolites) or 
an untargeted (thousands of peaks) manner with either 
mass spectrometry or nuclear magnetic resonance.
Interest in the use of metabolomics to study HF has 
been spurred in part by the growing recognition that HF is 
accompanied by a variety of metabolic alterations, includ-
ing shifts in energy use and systemic insulin resistance. 
A study of 52 patients with HF and 57 controls demon-
strated differences in pseudouridine (modified nucleo-
tide), 2-oxoglutarate (tricarboxylic acid cycle), 2-hydroxy 
2-methylpropanoic acid, erythritol (a sugar alcohol), and 
2,4,6-trihydroxypyrimidine between cases and controls.274 
Another study examined differences in urinary metabolites 
between HF cases and controls (n=15 and 20, respective-
ly).275 Urinary acetate and acetone were nominally higher 
in cases. Furthermore, cases had higher levels of methyl-
malonic acid, cytosine, and phenylacetylglycine and lower 
levels of 1-methylnicotinamide (with P values ranging from 
<0.001 to 0.05). Differences in some of these metabo-
lites (including tricarboxylic acid intermediates) could re-
flect alterations in energy metabolism, as noted above. 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Biomarkers in Heart Failure
Circulation. 2017;135:e1054–e1091. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000490 
May 30, 2017 e1077
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
On the other hand, small sample sizes and lack of rep-
lication are important limitations of these early attempts 
at metabolite profiling in HF. Zheng and colleagues276 in-
vestigated the association of metabolomic profiles and 
incident HF in 1744 black participants in the ARIC study. 
After adjustment for both established risk factors, 6 me-
tabolites in a targeted metabolomic screen and 10 un-
known metabolites in an untargeted screen were found 
to be associated with incident HF. Four of the 6 known 
metabolites were involved in amino acid metabolism: N-
acetylalanine, p-cresol sulfate, phenylacetylglutamine, and 
pyroglutamine. The other 2 were prolylhydroxyproline (a 
dipeptide) and erythritol. After further adjustment for renal 
function, the associations of all 6 of the known metabo-
lites were attenuated, whereas 3 of the unknown metabo-
lites remained associated. These analyses illustrate the 
potential advantages and disadvantages of untargeted 
(or unbiased) approaches to biomarker identification. The 
chemical identification of unknown metabolites can be dif-
ficult, and the findings eventually require validation with 
targeted assays. On the other hand, this process could ul-
timately implicate previously unsuspected pathways in HF.
The application of proteomic or metabolomic ap-
proaches to biomarker discovery in HF is at an early 
stage. As with genetic studies, few data exist to validate 
the use of these biomarkers in prediction, diagnosis, or 
risk stratification in HF. Nonetheless, improvements in 
platform sensitivity and bioinformatic pipelines should 
yield novel biomarkers that are unlikely to be identified 
with traditional, “candidate pathway” approaches.
Suggestions/Considerations for Clinical Practice/
Public Health Initiatives
1. The routine use of genotyping or metabolomic pro-
files for screening, diagnosis, or risk stratification 
of patients with HF is not well established.
GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE FOR BIOMARKER 
APPLICATION
The global pandemic of HF is expected to worsen in sub-
sequent decades; thus, expedited development of novel 
diagnostics and therapeutics and changes in the delivery 
of such therapies are needed. The content of this state-
ment illustrates the rapid and remarkable growth in the 
understanding of biomarker testing in HF. Such biomark-
ers might be leveraged for better care of patients with 
HF, but obstacles exist.
The Challenges of Translating Biomarker Science 
to Bedside Use
With rapid evolution in biomarker science, inevitable chal-
lenges have come up with respect to the optimal means 
by which a candidate HF biomarker might be evaluated 
and ultimately used. Once a robust HF biomarker has a 
potential role identified, there are obstacles to overcome 
before widespread use of the biomarker occurs. Such ob-
stacles include cost, regulatory barriers, and challenges 
in optimal evaluation and deployment of biomarkers.
Although natriuretic peptides and hs-troponins are in 
use in many countries, they are not as widely adopted 
as they might be, often because of financial concerns. 
This is particularly an issue in countries with public and 
private payers. It is the responsibility of the in vitro diag-
nostics industry to develop more economical methods 
for biomarker measurement to disseminate potentially 
valuable technology more widely.
From a regulatory perspective, the US Food and Drug 
Administration and other governing bodies must use more 
realistic assessment assays. Lack of regulatory guidance 
with respect to the development and deployment of newer 
biomarkers may slow down the pipeline of newer assays; 
a close working relationship between regulators, industry, 
and clinical trialists is crucial. In addition, more streamlined 
assessment of how the use of HF biomarkers might aug-
ment therapeutic strategies for the diagnosis is crucial; 
with evolution in both areas, considerably greater adoption 
of biomarker testing into clinical practice guidelines and 
more widespread clinical use would be expected to occur.
We argue that a new paradigm for HF biomarker re-
search is needed. The current state of HF biomarker re-
search is that of exponential gains in information that far 
exceed the ability to contextualize findings.4 This is due 
in part to inconsistent research methodologies, restricted 
study sizes, and lack of clinical correlation.1 To facilitate a 
robust and rapid transition for a biomarker from bench to 
bedside, a call has recently been made for more standard-
ized methods for analyses.4 Study sizes must be increased 
significantly, and studies should have participants that 
reflect populations in which biomarkers might be tested. 
Statistical assessment of biomarkers should be rigorous, 
emphasizing not only discrimination and calibration (when 
appropriate) but also the value of a biomarker relative to 
clinical information with the use of reclassification assess-
ment.5 To overcome the inevitable challenges of study size 
and cost, collaborative consortia providing economy of 
scale are critically necessary. Such consortia should work 
collaboratively with governmental funding agencies, non-
governmental sources of support, and industry partners. 
It is through this form of collaboration that the translation 
of biological information to a clinically actionable result can 
be achievable in a timely fashion.
Thanks to high-throughput technologies, novel bio-
markers are being identified at a high rate, and an inevi-
table rise in the number of publications on HF biomark-
ers has been seen.2 It is our position that the quality 
of studies and how such studies might be able to lead 
to changes in how care is delivered should be heavily 
emphasized.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Chow et al
May 30, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e1054–e1091. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000490
e1078
Diagnostic studies of novel biomarkers have the pro-
portionally lowest “bar” to surmount in terms of accep-
tance and the face-value validity of result. The landmark 
studies of BNP and NT-proBNP for the identification or 
exclusion of HF are examples of such trials75,87,223; both 
biomarkers have highest-level support in recent clinical 
practice guidelines from the United States for this applica-
tion,39 reflecting reasonably widespread acceptance. Both 
BNP and NT-proBNP are highly sensitive for the presence 
of HF and are unlikely to be replaced as the gold standard 
for the diagnosis. Nonetheless, concerted efforts to de-
velop other biomarkers to improve the diagnostic speci-
ficity of the natriuretic peptides and to diagnose specific 
aspects of HF (eg, diastolic myocardial abnormalities98) in 
an accurate, cost-effective way would be welcome.
The majority of recent studies of HF biomarkers have 
focused on prognostic value. These studies have typi-
cally emphasized the role of such markers in patients 
with symptomatic HF, and several novel biomarkers for 
predicting risk for a broad range of complications, in-
cluding death, have been identified. Although it is rea-
sonably simple to demonstrate that a biomarker pre-
dicts risk for hazard beyond clinical variables or other 
biomarkers, variability in the quality of these studies is 
common. Furthermore, given the significant number of 
studies describing prognostic biomarkers, we suggest 
that it is critical to consider how such knowledge can 
be leveraged to improve the risk predicted by the bio-
marker. In other words, can a biomarker result lead to 
further diagnostic testing, modification of therapeutics, 
and cost-effective improvement in patient outcome? Is 
this prognostic biomarker actually predictive? If not, the 
value of such a biomarker is substantially reduced. Stud-
ies translating prognostic value to clinically actionable 
information in patients with symptomatic HF are thus 
highly encouraged. Ultimately, this “therapy guidance” is 
potentially the most robust future application of prognos-
tic biomarkers.
Strategies for biomarker-based therapy guidance are 
depicted in Figure 4. One approach is to select therapies 
only in those patients with an elevated concentration of 
a prognostic biomarker. Recent large-scale clinical trials 
such as PARADIGM-HF have used such an enrichment 
approach.225 The advantage of this design is that it em-
phasizes intervention in higher-risk subjects and evaluates 
whether such risk may be mitigated. The obvious draw-
back is that it does not evaluate therapy in biomarker-neg-
ative subjects. Another design is the use of biomarkers in 
a “strategy” design. In this approach, patients are treated 
with standard clinical approaches for HF therapy but with 
a parallel goal to target lower biomarker concentrations 
below a prognostic threshold. This strategy presupposes 
that a biomarker concentration reflects a remediable sig-
nal (eg, myocardial remodeling) and assumes that thera-
pies for HF reduce biomarker concentrations and, if such 
a reduction occurs, that an improved risk profile results.
As noted, an important area to emphasize for study 
is the use of prognostic biomarkers to assist in the rec-
ognition of apparently well patients at higher risk for HF 
onset and to guide therapy to reduce such risk. Studies 
of natriuretic peptides, sST2, hs-troponins, and other 
biomarkers in apparently well subjects suggest that the 
ability exists to identify asymptomatic molecular signa-
tures of myocardial disarray. Such signals ultimately 
manifest as symptomatic HF, but few data are yet avail-
able on whether such risk can be mitigated. Ultimately, 
the means by which biomarkers may be used for “pre-
cision” techniques to improve the outlook for patients 
across the entire spectrum of HF (from at risk to ad-
vanced symptomatic disease) must be accelerated be-
cause the incidence and prevalence of this highly morbid 
diagnosis are growing rapidly.
Figure 4. Different means by which 
biomarkers may be used to alter 
therapy choices in HF.  
A, Biomarker enrichment. Only those 
patients with an abnormal biomarker 
receive therapy. This is the design used in 
the recent PARADIGM-HF trial (Prospective 
Comparison of ARNI With ACEI to Determine 
Impact on Global Mortality and Morbidity in 
Heart Failure). B, Biomarker strategy. Those 
patients with an abnormal biomarker receive 
standard care but delivered in an intensi-
fied fashion with the goal of reverting the 
biomarker to normal. This is compared with 
those with a lower biomarker who receive 
standard care alone. This is the design 
of the ongoing GUIDE-IT HF trial (Guiding 
Evidence Based Therapy Using Biomarker 
Intensified Treatment in Heart Failure). 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Biomarkers in Heart Failure
Circulation. 2017;135:e1054–e1091. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000490 
May 30, 2017 e1079
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
FOOTNOTES
The American Heart Association makes every effort to avoid 
any actual or potential conflicts of interest that may arise as a 
result of an outside relationship or a personal, professional, or 
business interest of a member of the writing panel. Specifically, 
all members of the writing group are required to complete and 
submit a Disclosure Questionnaire showing all such relationships 
that might be perceived as real or potential conflicts of interest.
This statement was approved by the American Heart As-
sociation Science Advisory and Coordinating Committee on 
January 10, 2017, and the American Heart Association Execu-
tive Committee on  April 17, 2017. A copy of the document is 
available at http://professional.heart.org/statements by using 
either “Search for Guidelines & Statements” or the “Browse by 
Topic” area. To purchase additional reprints, call 843-216-2533 
or e-mail kelle.ramsay@wolterskluwer.com.
The American Heart Association requests that this docu-
ment be cited as follows: Chow SL, Maisel AS, Anand I, Bozkurt 
B, de Boer RA, Felker GM, Fonarow GC, Greenberg B, Januzzi 
JL Jr, Kiernan MS, Liu PP, Wang TJ, Yancy CW, Zile MR; on 
behalf of the American Heart Association Clinical Pharmacol-
ogy Committee of the Council on Clinical Cardiology; Council 
on Basic Cardiovascular Sciences; Council on Cardiovascular 
Disease in the Young; Council on Cardiovascular and Stroke 
Nursing; Council on Cardiopulmonary, Critical Care, Periopera-
tive and Resuscitation; Council on Epidemiology and Preven-
tion; Council on Functional Genomics and Translational Biology; 
and Council on Quality of Care and Outcomes Research. Role 
of biomarkers for the prevention, assessment, and manage-
ment of heart failure: a scientific statement from the American 
Heart Association. Circulation. 2017;135:e1054–e1091. doi: 
10.1161/CIR.0000000000000490.
Expert peer review of AHA Scientific Statements is conducted 
by the AHA Office of Science Operations. For more on AHA state-
ments and guidelines development, visit http://professional.
heart.org/statements. Select the “Guidelines & Statements” 
drop-down menu, then click “Publication Development.”
Permissions: Multiple copies, modification, alteration, enhance-
ment, and/or distribution of this document are not permitted with-
out the express permission of the American Heart Association. 
Instructions for obtaining permission are located at http://www.
heart.org/HEARTORG/General/Copyright-Permission-Guidelines_
UCM_300404_Article.jsp. A link to the “Copyright Permissions 
Request Form” appears on the right side of the page.
Circulation is available at http://circ.ahajournals.org.
DISCLOSURES
Writing Group Disclosures
Writing Group 
Member
Employment
Research 
Grant
Other 
Research 
Support
Speakers’ 
Bureau/
Honoraria
Expert 
Witness
Ownership 
Interest
Consultant/ 
Advisory Board
Other
Sheryl L. Chow
Western University of 
Health Sciences
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Alan S. Maisel
VA San Diego Healthcare 
System
Roche*
None
Critical DX*
None
None
Critical DX*
None
Inder Anand
University of Minnesota
None
None
Amgen†; 
Novartis†
None
None
ARCA*; Cyberonics*; 
Novartis†; Zensun†
None
Biykem Bozkurt
Baylor College of Medicine 
and MEDVAMC Medicine
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Rudolf A. de 
Boer
University of Groningen 
University Medical Center
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
G. Michael 
Felker
Duke Clinical Research 
Institute
Roche 
Diagnostics†
None
None
None
None
Roche Diagnostics*
None
Gregg C. 
Fonarow
UCLA Medical Center
None
None
None
None
None
Amgen*; Janssen*; 
Medtronic*; Novartis†; 
St. Jude*
None
Barry 
Greenberg
UCSD Medical Center
None
None
Novartis†; 
Otsuka*
None
None
Novartis†; Teva*; J 
and J*
None
James L. 
Januzzi, Jr.
Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Harvard Clinical 
Research Institute
Singulex†; 
Siemens†; 
Prevencio†; 
Roche 
Diagnostics†
None
None
None
None
Critical Diagnostics†; 
Novartis†; Roche 
Diagnostics†; Phillips†; 
Boehringer-Ingelheim†
None
Michael S. 
Kiernan
Tufts Medical Center
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
(Continued )
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Chow et al
May 30, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e1054–e1091. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000490
e1080
Reviewer Disclosures
Reviewer
Employment
Research Grant
Other 
Research 
Support
Speakers’  
Bureau/
Honoraria
Expert 
Witness
Ownership 
Interest
Consultant/
Advisory Board
Other
Eugene 
Braunwald
Brigham and 
Women’s Hospital, 
Harvard Medical 
School
AstraZeneca (research 
grants to my institution)†; 
Novartis (research grant 
to my institution)†; Merck 
(research grant to my 
institution)†; Daiichi Sankyo 
(research grant to my 
institution)†; Glaxo Smith 
Kline (research grant to 
my institution)†; Duke 
University (research grant to 
my institution for my role as 
chair of the NHLBI Heart
Failure Network)†
None
Daiichi Sankyo*; 
Menarini 
International*; 
Bayer*; 
Medscape*; Merck 
(uncompensated)*
None
None
Merck 
(uncompensated)*; 
Novartis
(uncompensated)*; 
The Medicines 
Company*; 
Theravance*
None
Faiez 
Zannad
Université de 
Lorraine, Centre 
Hospitalier 
Universitaire 
(France)
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
This table represents the relationships of reviewers that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as reported on the 
Disclosure Questionnaire, which all reviewers are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be “significant” if (a) the person receives 
$10 000 or more during any 12-month period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 5% or more of the voting stock or 
share of the entity, or owns $10 000 or more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to be “modest” if it is less than “significant” 
under the preceding definition.
*Modest.
†Significant.
Peter P. Liu
University of Ottawa  
Heart Institute
Genome 
Canada† 
(nonprofit)
None
None
None
None
None
None
Thomas J. 
Wang
Vanderbilt University  
School of Medicine
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Clyde W. Yancy
Northwestern University
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Michael R. Zile
Medical University  
of South Carolina and  
RHJ Department  
of Veterans Affairs  
Medical Center
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
This table represents the relationships of writing group members that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as 
reported on the Disclosure Questionnaire, which all members of the writing group are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be 
“significant” if (a) the person receives $10 000 or more during any 12-month period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 
5% or more of the voting stock or share of the entity, or owns $10  000 or more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to be 
“modest” if it is less than “significant” under the preceding definition.
*Modest.
†Significant.
Writing Group Disclosures Continued
Writing Group 
Member
Employment
Research 
Grant
Other 
Research 
Support
Speakers’ 
Bureau/
Honoraria
Expert 
Witness
Ownership 
Interest
Consultant/ 
Advisory Board
Other
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Biomarkers in Heart Failure
Circulation. 2017;135:e1054–e1091. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000490 
May 30, 2017 e1081
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
REFERENCES
 1. van Kimmenade RR, Januzzi JL Jr. Emerging biomarkers in 
heart failure. Clin Chem. 2012;58:127–138. doi: 10.1373/
clinchem.2011.165720.
 2. Januzzi JL Jr, Felker GM. Surfing the biomarker tsunami at JACC: 
heart failure. JACC Heart Fail. 2013;1:213–215. doi: 10.1016/j.
jchf.2013.03.007.
 3. Shah RV, Januzzi JL Jr. Soluble ST2 and galectin-3 in heart failure. Clin 
Lab Med. 2014;34:87–97, vi–vii. doi: 10.1016/j.cll.2013.11.009.
 4. Ahmad T, Fiuzat M, Pencina MJ, Geller NL, Zannad F, Cleland JG, 
Snider JV, Blankenberg S, Adams KF, Redberg RF, Kim JB, Ma-
scette A, Mentz RJ, O’Connor CM, Felker GM, Januzzi JL. Charting 
a roadmap for heart failure biomarker studies. JACC Heart Fail. 
2014;2:477–488. doi: 10.1016/j.jchf.2014.02.005.
 5. Januzzi JL Jr, van Kimmenade RR. Importance of rigorous 
evaluation in comparative biomarker studies. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2014;63:167–169. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2013.09.005.
 6. Biomarkers Definitions Working Group. Biomarkers and surrogate 
endpoints: preferred definitions and conceptual framework. Clin 
Pharmacol Ther. 2001;69:89–95.
 7. Braunwald E. Biomarkers in heart failure. N Engl J Med. 
2008;358:2148–2159. doi: 10.1056/NEJMra0800239.
 8. Morrow DA, de Lemos JA. Benchmarks for the assessment of 
novel cardiovascular biomarkers. Circulation. 2007;115:949–
952. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.683110.
 9. Maisel A. Biomarkers in heart failure: does prognostic utility trans-
late to clinical futility? J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007;50:1061–1063. 
doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2007.05.032.
 
10. Schrier RW, Abraham WT. Hormones and hemodynamics in 
heart failure. N Engl J Med. 1999;341:577–585. doi: 10.1056/
NEJM199908193410806.
 
11. Chidsey CA, Braunwald E, Morrow AG. Catecholamine excretion 
and cardiac stores of norepinephrine in congestive heart failure. 
Am J Med. 1965;39:442–451.
 
12. Francis GS, Benedict C, Johnstone DE, Kirlin PC, Nicklas J, Liang 
CS, Kubo SH, Rudin-Toretsky E, Yusuf S. Comparison of neuroendo-
crine activation in patients with left ventricular dysfunction with and 
without congestive heart failure: a substudy of the Studies of Left 
Ventricular Dysfunction (SOLVD). Circulation. 1990;82:1724–1729.
 
13. Cohn JN, Levine TB, Olivari MT, Garberg V, Lura D, Francis GS, 
Simon AB, Rector T. Plasma norepinephrine as a guide to progno-
sis in patients with chronic congestive heart failure. N Engl J Med. 
1984;311:819–823. doi: 10.1056/NEJM198409273111303.
 
14. López B, González A, Querejeta R, Díez J. The use of collagen-de-
rived serum peptides for the clinical assessment of hypertensive 
heart disease. J Hypertens. 2005;23:1445–1451.
 
15. Spinale FG, Zile MR. Integrating the myocardial matrix into heart 
failure recognition and management. Circ Res. 2013;113:725–
738. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.113.300309.
 
16. Hartupee J, Mann DL. Positioning of inflammatory biomarkers in 
the heart failure landscape. J Cardiovasc Transl Res. 2013;6:485–
492. doi: 10.1007/s12265-013-9467-y.
 
17. Kalogeropoulos A, Georgiopoulou V, Psaty BM, Rodondi N, Smith AL, 
Harrison DG, Liu Y, Hoffmann U, Bauer DC, Newman AB, Kritchevsky 
SB, Harris TB, Butler J; Health ABC Study Investigators. Inflamma-
tory markers and incident heart failure risk in older adults: the Health 
ABC (Health, Aging, and Body Composition) study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2010;55:2129–2137. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2009.12.045.
 
18. Kakkar R, Lee RT. The IL-33/ST2 pathway: therapeutic target and 
novel biomarker. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2008;7:827–840. doi: 
10.1038/nrd2660.
 
19. Barondes SH, Castronovo V, Cooper DN, Cummings RD, Dricka-
mer K, Feizi T, Gitt MA, Hirabayashi J, Hughes C, Kasai K, Leffler 
H, Liu F-T, Lolan R, Mercurio AM, Monsigny M, Pillai S, Poirer F, 
Raz A, Rigby PWJ, Rini JM, Wang JL. Galectins: a family of animal 
beta-galactoside-binding lectins. Cell. 1994;76:597–598.
 20. Liu YH, D’Ambrosio M, Liao TD, Peng H, Rhaleb NE, Sharma U, An-
dré S, Gabius HJ, Carretero OA. N-acetyl-seryl-aspartyl-lysyl-proline 
prevents cardiac remodeling and dysfunction induced by galec-
tin-3, a mammalian adhesion/growth-regulatory lectin. Am J Physiol 
Heart Circ Physiol. 2009;296:H404–H412. doi: 10.1152/ajp-
heart.00747.2008.
 
21. Sharma UC, Pokharel S, van Brakel TJ, van Berlo JH, Cleu-
tjens JP, Schroen B, André S, Crijns HJ, Gabius HJ, Maessen 
J, Pinto YM. Galectin-3 marks activated macrophages in failure-
prone hypertrophied hearts and contributes to cardiac dysfunc-
tion. Circulation. 2004;110:3121–3128. doi: 10.1161/01.
CIR.0000147181.65298.4D.
 
22. de Boer RA, Voors AA, Muntendam P, van Gilst WH, van Veldhuisen 
DJ. Galectin-3: a novel mediator of heart failure development and 
progression. Eur J Heart Fail. 2009;11:811–817. doi: 10.1093/
eurjhf/hfp097.
 
23. Yu L, Ruifrok WP, Meissner M, Bos EM, van Goor H, Sanjabi B, van 
der Harst P, Pitt B, Goldstein IJ, Koerts JA, van Veldhuisen DJ, Bank 
RA, van Gilst WH, Silljé HH, de Boer RA. Genetic and pharmacolog-
ical inhibition of galectin-3 prevents cardiac remodeling by inter-
fering with myocardial fibrogenesis. Circ Heart Fail. 2013;6:107–
117. doi: 10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.112.971168.
 
24. Muthu V, Kozman H, Liu K, Smulyan H, Villarreal D. Cardiac troponins: 
bench to bedside interpretation in cardiac disease. Am J Med Sci. 
2014;347:331–337. doi: 10.1097/MAJ.0b013e31829107ea.
 
25. Kociol RD, Pang PS, Gheorghiade M, Fonarow GC, O’Connor CM, 
Felker GM. Troponin elevation in heart failure prevalence, mecha-
nisms, and clinical implications. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010;56:1071–
1078. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2010.06.016.
 
26. De Boer RA, Pinto YM, Van Veldhuisen DJ. The imbalance be-
tween oxygen demand and supply as a potential mechanism in 
the pathophysiology of heart failure: the role of microvascular 
growth and abnormalities. Microcirculation. 2003;10:113–126. 
doi: 10.1038/sj.mn.7800188.
 
27. Nakagawa O, Ogawa Y, Itoh H, Suga S, Komatsu Y, Kishimoto 
I, Nishino K, Yoshimasa T, Nakao K. Rapid transcriptional activa-
tion and early mRNA turnover of brain natriuretic peptide in car-
diocyte hypertrophy: evidence for brain natriuretic peptide as an 
“emergency” cardiac hormone against ventricular overload. J Clin 
Invest. 1995;96:1280–1287. doi: 10.1172/JCI118162.
 
28. Yasue H, Yoshimura M, Sumida H, Kikuta K, Kugiyama K, Jougasa-
ki M, Ogawa H, Okumura K, Mukoyama M, Nakao K. Localization 
and mechanism of secretion of B-type natriuretic peptide in com-
parison with those of A-type natriuretic peptide in normal subjects 
and patients with heart failure. Circulation. 1994;90:195–203.
 
29. Iwanaga Y, Nishi I, Furuichi S, Noguchi T, Sase K, Kihara Y, Goto 
Y, Nonogi H. B-type natriuretic peptide strongly reflects diastol-
ic wall stress in patients with chronic heart failure: comparison 
between systolic and diastolic heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2006;47:742–748. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2005.11.030.
 30. Sudoh T, Kangawa K, Minamino N, Matsuo H. A new natri-
uretic peptide in porcine brain. Nature. 1988;332:78–81. doi: 
10.1038/332078a0.
 
31. Sawada Y, Suda M, Yokoyama H, Kanda T, Sakamaki T, Tanaka S, 
Nagai R, Abe S, Takeuchi T. Stretch-induced hypertrophic growth 
of cardiocytes and processing of brain-type natriuretic peptide 
are controlled by proprotein-processing endoprotease furin. J Biol 
Chem. 1997;272:20545–20554.
 
32. Yan W, Wu F, Morser J, Wu Q. Corin, a transmembrane cardiac 
serine protease, acts as a pro-atrial natriuretic peptide-converting 
enzyme. Proc Natl Acad Sci U 
S 
A. 2000;97:8525–8529.
 
33. Lainchbury JG, Nicholls MG, Espiner EA, Ikram H, Yandle TG, Rich-
ards AM. Regional plasma levels of cardiac peptides and their 
response to acute neutral endopeptidase inhibition in man. Clin 
Sci (Lond). 1998;95:547–555.
 
34. Richards AM, Crozier IG, Yandle TG, Espiner EA, Ikram H, Nich-
olls MG. Brain natriuretic factor: regional plasma concentrations 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Chow et al
May 30, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e1054–e1091. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000490
e1082
and correlations with haemodynamic state in cardiac disease. Br 
Heart J. 1993;69:414–417.
 35. Schou M, Dalsgaard MK, Clemmesen O, Dawson EA, Yoshiga CC, 
Nielsen HB, Gustafsson F, Hildebrandt PR, Secher NH. Kidneys extract 
BNP and NT-proBNP in healthy young men. J Appl Physiol (1985). 
2005;99:1676–1680. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00641.2005.
 
36. Kim HN, Januzzi JL Jr. Natriuretic peptide testing in heart failure. Circu-
lation. 2011;123:2015–2019. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA. 
110.979500.
 
37. Goetze JP, Mogelvang R, Maage L, Scharling H, Schnohr P, 
Sogaard P, Rehfeld JF, Jensen JS. Plasma pro-B-type natriuretic 
peptide in the general population: screening for left ventricular hy-
pertrophy and systolic dysfunction. Eur Heart J. 2006;27:3004–
3010. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehl406.
 
38. Tijsen AJ, Pinto YM, Creemers EE. Circulating microRNAs as di-
agnostic biomarkers for cardiovascular diseases. Am J Physiol 
Heart Circ Physiol. 2012;303:H1085–H1095. doi: 10.1152/
ajpheart.00191.2012.
 
39. Yancy CW, Jessup M, Bozkurt B, Butler J, Casey DE Jr, Drazner 
MH, Fonarow GC, Geraci SA, Horwich T, Januzzi JL, Johnson 
MR, Kasper EK, Levy WC, Masoudi FA, McBride PE, McMurray 
JJ, Mitchell JE, Peterson PN, Riegel B, Sam F, Stevenson LW, 
Tang WH, Tsai EJ, Wilkoff BL. 2013 ACCF/AHA guideline for the 
management of heart failure: a report of the American College 
of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force 
on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2013;128:e240–327. doi: 
10.1161/CIR.0b013e31829e8776. 
 
40. Velagaleti RS, Gona P, Larson MG, Wang TJ, Levy D, Benjamin EJ, 
Selhub J, Jacques PF, Meigs JB, Tofler GH, Vasan RS. Multimarker 
 
approach for the prediction of heart failure incidence in the 
community. Circulation. 2010;122:1700–1706. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.109.929661.
 
41. Glick D, DeFilippi CR, Christenson R, Gottdiener JS, Seliger SL. 
Long-term trajectory of two unique cardiac biomarkers and subse-
quent left ventricular structural pathology and risk of incident heart 
failure in community-dwelling older adults at low baseline risk. JACC 
Heart Fail. 2013;1:353–360. doi: 10.1016/j.jchf.2013.04.007.
 
42. Brouwers FP, van Gilst WH, Damman K, van den Berg MP, Gan-
sevoort RT, Bakker SJ, Hillege HL, van Veldhuisen DJ, van der 
Harst P, de Boer RA. Clinical risk stratification optimizes value 
of biomarkers to predict new-onset heart failure in a community-
based cohort. Circ Heart Fail. 2014;7:723–731. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCHEARTFAILURE.114.001185.
 43. Brouwers FP, de Boer RA, van der Harst P, Voors AA, Gansevoort RT, 
Bakker SJ, Hillege HL, van Veldhuisen DJ, van Gilst WH. Incidence and 
epidemiology of new onset heart failure with preserved vs. reduced 
ejection fraction in a community-based cohort: 11-year follow-up of 
PREVEND. Eur Heart J. 2013;34:1424–1431. doi: 10.1093/eur-
heartj/eht066.
 
44. Smith JG, Newton-Cheh C, Almgren P, Struck J, Morgenthaler NG, 
Bergmann A, Platonov PG, Hedblad B, Engström G, Wang TJ, Me-
lander O. Assessment of conventional cardiovascular risk factors 
and multiple biomarkers for the prediction of incident heart failure 
and atrial fibrillation. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010;56:1712–1719. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2010.05.049.
 
45. McKie PM, AbouEzzeddine OF, Scott CG, Mehta R, Rodeheffer 
RJ, Redfield MM, Burnett JC Jr, Jaffe AS. High-sensitivity tropo-
nin I and amino-terminal pro–B-type natriuretic peptide predict 
heart failure and mortality in the general population. Clin Chem. 
2014;60:1225–1233. doi: 10.1373/clinchem.2014.222778.
 
46. Wannamethee SG, Welsh P, Whincup PH, Lennon L, Papacosta O, 
Sattar N. N-terminal pro brain natriuretic peptide but not copeptin 
improves prediction of heart failure over other routine clinical risk 
parameters in older men with and without cardiovascular disease: 
population-based study. Eur J Heart Fail. 2014;16:25–32. doi: 
10.1093/eurjhf/hft124.
 
47. Agarwal SK, Chambless LE, Ballantyne CM, Astor B, Bertoni AG, 
Chang PP, Folsom AR, He M, Hoogeveen RC, Ni H, Quibrera PM, 
Rosamond WD, Russell SD, Shahar E, Heiss G. Prediction of inci-
dent heart failure in general practice: the Atherosclerosis Risk in 
Communities (ARIC) Study. Circ Heart Fail. 2012;5:422–429. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.111.964841.
 
48. Wang TJ, Wollert KC, Larson MG, Coglianese E, McCabe EL, 
Cheng S, Ho JE, Fradley MG, Ghorbani A, Xanthakis V, Kempf 
T, Benjamin EJ, Levy D, Vasan RS, Januzzi JL. Prognostic utility 
of novel biomarkers of cardiovascular stress: the Framingham 
Heart Study. Circulation. 2012;126:1596–1604. doi: 10.1161/ 
CIRCULATIONAHA.112.129437.
 49. McKie PM, Cataliotti A, Sangaralingham SJ, Ichiki T, Cannone V, Bai-
ley KR, Redfield MM, Rodeheffer RJ, Burnett JC Jr. Predictive utility of 
atrial, N-terminal pro-atrial, and N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic pep-
tides for mortality and cardiovascular events in the general commu-
nity: a 9-year follow-up study. Mayo Clin Proc. 2011;86:1154–1160.
 
50. deFilippi CR, de Lemos JA, Tkaczuk AT, Christenson RH, Carne-
thon MR, Siscovick DS, Gottdiener JS, Seliger SL. Physical ac-
tivity, change in biomarkers of myocardial stress and injury, and 
subsequent heart failure risk in older adults. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2012;60:2539–2547. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2012.08.1006.
 
51. Daniels LB, Laughlin GA, Clopton P, Maisel AS, Barrett-Connor 
E. Minimally elevated cardiac troponin T and elevated N-terminal 
pro-B-type natriuretic peptide predict mortality in older adults: 
results from the Rancho Bernardo Study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2008;52:450–459. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2008.04.033.
 
52. Wallace TW, Abdullah SM, Drazner MH, Das SR, Khera A, McGuire 
 
DK, Wians F, Sabatine MS, Morrow DA, de Lemos JA. Preva-
lence and determinants of troponin T elevation in the general 
population. Circulation. 2006;113:1958–1965. doi: 10.1161/ 
CIRCULATIONAHA.105.609974.
 
53. deFilippi CR, de Lemos JA, Christenson RH, Gottdiener JS, Kop 
WJ, Zhan M, Seliger SL. Association of serial measures of cardiac 
troponin T using a sensitive assay with incident heart failure and 
cardiovascular mortality in older adults. JAMA. 2010;304:2494–
2502. doi: 10.1001/jama.2010.1708.
 
54. Saunders JT, Nambi V, de Lemos JA, Chambless LE, Virani SS, 
Boerwinkle E, Hoogeveen RC, Liu X, Astor BC, Mosley TH, Folsom 
AR, Heiss G, Coresh J, Ballantyne CM. Cardiac troponin T measured 
by a highly sensitive assay predicts coronary heart disease, heart 
failure, and mortality in the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities 
Study. Circulation. 2011;123:1367–1376. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULA-
TIONAHA.110.005264.
 
55. Eggers KM, Venge P, Lindahl B, Lind L. Cardiac troponin I levels 
measured with a high-sensitive assay increase over time and are 
strong predictors of mortality in an elderly population. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2013;61:1906–1913. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2012.12.048.
 
56. Zeller T, Tunstall-Pedoe H, Saarela O, Ojeda F, Schnabel RB, 
Tuovinen T, Woodward M, Struthers A, Hughes M, Kee F, Salomaa 
V, Kuulasmaa K, Blankenberg S; MORGAM Investigators. High 
population prevalence of cardiac troponin I measured by a high-
sensitivity assay and cardiovascular risk estimation: the MORGAM 
Biomarker Project Scottish Cohort. Eur Heart J. 2014;35:271–
281. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/eht406.
 
57. Gottdiener JS, Arnold AM, Aurigemma GP, Polak JF, Tracy RP, 
Kitzman DW, Gardin JM, Rutledge JE, Boineau RC. Predictors of 
congestive heart failure in the elderly: the Cardiovascular Health 
Study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2000;35:1628–1637.
 
58. Lam CS, Lyass A, Kraigher-Krainer E, Massaro JM, Lee DS, Ho 
JE, Levy D, Redfield MM, Pieske BM, Benjamin EJ, Vasan RS. 
Cardiac dysfunction and noncardiac dysfunction as precursors 
of heart failure with reduced and preserved ejection fraction in 
the community [published correction appears in Circulation. 
2011;124:e458]. Circulation. 2011;124:24–30. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.110.979203.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Biomarkers in Heart Failure
Circulation. 2017;135:e1054–e1091. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000490 
May 30, 2017 e1083
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
 
58a. Ho JE, Liu C, Lyass A, Courchesne P, Pencina MJ, Vasan RS, 
Larson MG, Levy D. Galectin-3, a marker of cardiac fibrosis, pre-
dicts incident heart failure in the community. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2012;60:1249–1256. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2012.04.053.
 
59. Hughes MF, Appelbaum S, Havulinna AS, Jagodzinski A, Zeller 
T, Kee F, Blankenberg S, Salomaa V; FINRISK and Biomar-
CaRE Investigators. ST2 may not be a useful predictor for in-
cident cardiovascular events, heart failure and mortality. Heart. 
2014;100:1715–1721. doi: 10.1136/heartjnl-2014-305968.
 
60. Dadu RT, Dodge R, Nambi V, Virani SS, Hoogeveen RC, Smith NL, 
Chen F, Pankow JS, Guild C, Tang WH, Boerwinkle E, Hazen SL, 
Ballantyne CM. Ceruloplasmin and heart failure in the Atheroscle-
rosis Risk in Communities study. Circ Heart Fail. 2013;6:936–
943. doi: 10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.113.000270.
 
61. Wang TJ, Larson MG, Levy D, Benjamin EJ, Leip EP, Omland 
T, Wolf PA, Vasan RS. Plasma natriuretic peptide levels and 
the risk of cardiovascular events and death. N Engl J Med. 
2004;350:655–663. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa031994.
 
62. de Lemos JA, Drazner MH, Omland T, Ayers CR, Khera A, Ro-
hatgi A, Hashim I, Berry JD, Das SR, Morrow DA, McGuire DK. 
Association of troponin T detected with a highly sensitive assay 
and cardiac structure and mortality risk in the general population 
[published correction appears in JAMA. 2011;305:1200]. JAMA. 
2010;304:2503–2512. doi: 10.1001/jama.2010.1768.
 
63. Seliger SL, de Lemos J, Neeland IJ, Christenson R, Gottdiener 
J, Drazner MH, Berry J, Sorkin J, deFilippi C. Older adults, “ma-
lignant” left ventricular hypertrophy, and associated cardiac-
specific biomarker phenotypes to identify the differential risk 
of new-onset reduced versus preserved ejection fraction heart 
failure: CHS (Cardiovascular Health Study). JACC Heart Fail. 
2015;3:445–455. doi: 10.1016/j.jchf.2014.12.018.
 
64. Wang TJ, Gona P, Larson MG, Tofler GH, Levy D, Newton-Cheh 
C, Jacques PF, Rifai N, Selhub J, Robins SJ, Benjamin EJ, 
D’Agostino RB, Vasan RS. Multiple biomarkers for the prediction 
of first major cardiovascular events and death. N Engl J Med. 
2006;355:2631–2639. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa055373.
 
65. Mant J, Doust J, Roalfe A, Barton P, Cowie MR, Glasziou P, Mant 
D, McManus RJ, Holder R, Deeks J, Fletcher K, Qume M, Sohan-
pal S, Sanders S, Hobbs FD. Systematic review and individual 
patient data meta-analysis of diagnosis of heart failure, with mod-
elling of implications of different diagnostic strategies in primary 
care. Health Technol Assess. 2009;13:1–207, iii. doi: 10.3310/
hta13320.
 
66. Ewald B, Ewald D, Thakkinstian A, Attia J. Meta-analysis of B type 
natriuretic peptide and N-terminal pro B natriuretic peptide in the 
diagnosis of clinical heart failure and population screening for 
left ventricular systolic dysfunction. Intern Med J. 2008;38:101–
113. doi: 10.1111/j.1445-5994.2007.01454.x.
 
67. Hobbs FD, Davis RC, Roalfe AK, Hare R, Davies MK. Reliability 
of N-terminal proBNP assay in diagnosis of left ventricular sys-
tolic dysfunction within representative and high risk populations. 
Heart. 2004;90:866–870. doi: 10.1136/hrt.2003.014258.
 
68. Lim TK, Senior R. Noninvasive modalities for the assessment of 
left ventricular function: all are equal but some are more equal 
than others. J Nucl Cardiol. 2006;13:445–449. doi: 10.1016/j.
nuclcard.2006.05.011.
 
69. Cowie MR, Struthers AD, Wood DA, Coats AJ, Thompson SG, 
Poole-Wilson PA, Sutton GC. Value of natriuretic peptides in as-
sessment of patients with possible new heart failure in primary 
care. Lancet. 1997;350:1349–1353. doi: 10.1016/S0140-
6736(97)06031-5.
 
70. Fox KF, Cowie MR, Wood DA, Coats AJ, Poole-Wilson PA, Sutton 
GC. A Rapid Access Heart Failure Clinic provides a prompt diag-
nosis and appropriate management of new heart failure present-
ing in the community. Eur J Heart Fail. 2000;2:423–429.
 
71. Wright SP, Doughty RN, Pearl A, Gamble GD, Whalley GA, Walsh 
HJ, Gordon G, Bagg W, Oxenham H, Yandle T, Richards M, Sharpe 
N. Plasma amino-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide and accu-
racy of heart-failure diagnosis in primary care: a randomized, 
controlled trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2003;42:1793–1800.
 
72. Zaphiriou A, Robb S, Murray-Thomas T, Mendez G, Fox K, McDonagh 
T, Hardman SM, Dargie HJ, Cowie MR. The diagnostic accuracy of 
plasma BNP and NTproBNP in patients referred from primary care 
with suspected heart failure: results of the UK natriuretic peptide 
study. Eur J Heart Fail. 2005;7:537–541. doi: 10.1016/j.ej-
heart.2005.01.022.
 
73. Davis M, Espiner E, Richards G, Billings J, Town I, Neill A, Drennan 
C, Richards M, Turner J, Yandle T. Plasma brain natriuretic pep-
tide in assessment of acute dyspnoea. Lancet. 1994;343:440–
444.
 
74. Dao Q, Krishnaswamy P, Kazanegra R, Harrison A, Amirnovin R, 
Lenert L, Clopton P, Alberto J, Hlavin P, Maisel AS. Utility of B-type 
natriuretic peptide in the diagnosis of congestive heart failure in 
an urgent-care setting. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2001;37:379–385.
 
75. Maisel AS, Krishnaswamy P, Nowak RM, McCord J, Hollander JE, 
Duc P, Omland T, Storrow AB, Abraham WT, Wu AH, Clopton P, 
Steg PG, Westheim A, Knudsen CW, Perez A, Kazanegra R, Her-
rmann HC, McCullough PA; Breathing Not Properly Multinational 
Study Investigators. Rapid measurement of B-type natriuretic 
peptide in the emergency diagnosis of heart failure. N Engl J 
Med. 2002;347:161–167. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa020233.
 
76. Jourdain P, Funck F, Canault E, Bellorini M, Deschamps P, Duval 
G, Duboc D, Desnos M. Value of type B natriuretic peptide in 
the emergency management of patients with suspected cardiac 
failure: report of 125 cases [in French]. Arch Mal Coeur Vaiss. 
2002;95:763–767.
 
77. Villacorta H, Duarte A, Duarte NM, Carrano A, Mesquita ET, 
Dohmann HJ, Ferreira FE. The role of B-type natriuretic peptide 
in the diagnosis of congestive heart failure in patients presenting 
to an emergency department with dyspnea. Arq Bras Cardiol. 
2002;79:569–572, 564–568.
 
78. Morrison LK, Harrison A, Krishnaswamy P, Kazanegra R, Clopton 
P, Maisel A. Utility of a rapid B-natriuretic peptide assay in differ-
entiating congestive heart failure from lung disease in patients 
presenting with dyspnea. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2002;39:202–209.
 
79. Logeart D, Saudubray C, Beyne P, Thabut G, Ennezat PV, Chave-
las C, Zanker C, Bouvier E, Solal AC. Comparative value of Dop-
pler echocardiography and B-type natriuretic peptide assay in 
the etiologic diagnosis of acute dyspnea. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2002;40:1794–1800.
 
80. Lainchbury JG, Campbell E, Frampton CM, Yandle TG, Nicholls 
MG, Richards AM. Brain natriuretic peptide and n-terminal brain 
natriuretic peptide in the diagnosis of heart failure in patients with 
acute shortness of breath. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2003;42:728–735.
 
81. Knudsen CW, Omland T, Clopton P, Westheim A, Abraham WT, 
Storrow AB, McCord J, Nowak RM, Aumont MC, Duc P, Hollander 
JE, Wu AH, McCullough PA, Maisel AS. Diagnostic value of B-
type natriuretic peptide and chest radiographic findings in pa-
tients with acute dyspnea. Am J Med. 2004;116:363–368. doi: 
10.1016/j.amjmed.2003.10.028.
 
82. Barcarse E, Kazanegra R, Chen A, Chiu A, Clopton P, Maisel A. Com-
bination of B-type natriuretic peptide levels and non-invasive hemo-
dynamic parameters in diagnosing congestive heart failure in the 
emergency department. Congest Heart Fail. 2004;10:171–176.
 
83. Alibay Y, Beauchet A, El Mahmoud R, Schmitt C, Brun-Ney D, 
Benoit MO, Dubourg O, Boileau C, Jondeau G, Puy H. Plasma 
N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide and brain natriuretic pep-
tide in assessment of acute dyspnea. Biomed Pharmacother. 
2005;59:20–24. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2004.06.002.
 
84. El Mahmoud R, Alibay Y, Brun-Ney D, Boulard JC, Dubourg O, Puy 
H, Jondeau G. Type B natriuretic peptide (BNP) versus n-terminal 
type B natriuretic propeptide in the diagnosis of cardiac failure in 
the elderly over 75 population [in French]. Arch Mal Coeur Vaiss. 
2006;99:201–207.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Chow et al
May 30, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e1054–e1091. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000490
e1084
 
85. Ray P, Arthaud M, Lefort Y, Birolleau S, Beigelman C, Riou B; 
EPIDASA Study Group. Usefulness of B-type natriuretic peptide 
in elderly patients with acute dyspnea. Intensive Care Med. 
2004;30:2230–2236. doi: 10.1007/s00134-004-2469-0.
 
86. Burke MA, Cotts WG. Interpretation of B-type natriuretic peptide 
in cardiac disease and other comorbid conditions. Heart Fail Rev. 
2007;12:23–36. doi: 10.1007/s10741-007-9002-9.
 
87. Januzzi JL Jr, Camargo CA, Anwaruddin S, Baggish AL, Chen 
AA, Krauser DG, Tung R, Cameron R, Nagurney JT, Chae CU, 
Lloyd-Jones DM, Brown DF, Foran-Melanson S, Sluss PM, Lee-
Lewandrowski E, Lewandrowski KB. The N-terminal Pro-BNP 
Investigation of Dyspnea in the Emergency Department (PRIDE) 
study. Am J Cardiol. 2005;95:948–954. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard. 
2004.12.032.
 
88. Maisel A, Mueller C, Adams K Jr, Anker SD, Aspromonte N, 
Cleland JG, Cohen-Solal A, Dahlstrom U, DeMaria A, Di Somma 
S, Filippatos GS, Fonarow GC, Jourdain P, Komajda M, Liu PP, 
McDonagh T, McDonald K, Mebazaa A, Nieminen MS, Peacock 
WF, Tubaro M, Valle R, Vanderhyden M, Yancy CW, Zannad F, 
Braunwald E. State of the art: using natriuretic peptide levels in clini-
cal practice. Eur J Heart Fail. 2008;10:824–839. doi: 10.1016/j.
ejheart.2008.07.014.
 
89. Redfield MM, Rodeheffer RJ, Jacobsen SJ, Mahoney DW, Bailey 
KR, Burnett JC Jr. Plasma brain natriuretic peptide concentration: 
impact of age and gender. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2002;40:976–982.
 
90. Mehra MR, Uber PA, Park MH, Scott RL, Ventura HO, Harris BC, 
Frohlich ED. Obesity and suppressed B-type natriuretic peptide 
levels in heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2004;43:1590–1595.
 
91. Daniels LB, Maisel AS. Cardiovascular biomarkers and sex: 
the case for women. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2015;12:588–596. doi: 
10.1038/nrcardio.2015.105.
 
92. McMurray JJ, Adamopoulos S, Anker SD, Auricchio A, Böhm M, 
Dickstein K, Falk V, Filippatos G, Fonseca C, Gomez-Sanchez MA, 
Jaarsma T, Køber L, Lip GY, Maggioni AP, Parkhomenko A, Pieske 
BM, Popescu BA, Rønnevik PK, Rutten FH, Schwitter J, Seferovic 
P, Stepinska J, Trindade PT, Voors AA, Zannad F, Zeiher A; ESC 
Committee for Practice Guidelines. ESC guidelines for the diag-
nosis and treatment of acute and chronic heart failure 2012: the 
Task Force for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Acute and Chronic 
Heart Failure 2012 of the European Society of Cardiology [pub-
lished correction appears in Eur Heart J. 2013;34:158]. Eur 
Heart J. 2012;33:1787–1847. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehs104.
 
93. Steinhart B, Thorpe KE, Bayoumi AM, Moe G, Januzzi JL Jr, Mazer 
CD. Improving the diagnosis of acute heart failure using a vali-
dated prediction model. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009;54:1515–1521. 
doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2009.05.065.
 
94. Madamanchi C, Alhosaini H, Sumida A, Runge MS. Obesity and 
natriuretic peptides, BNP and NT-proBNP: mechanisms and diag-
nostic implications for heart failure. Int J Cardiol. 2014;176:611–
617. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2014.08.007.
 
95. Krauser DG, Lloyd-Jones DM, Chae CU, Cameron R, Anwaruddin S, 
Baggish AL, Chen A, Tung R, Januzzi JL Jr. Effect of body mass in-
dex on natriuretic peptide levels in patients with acute congestive 
heart failure: a ProBNP Investigation of Dyspnea in the Emergency 
Department (PRIDE) substudy. Am Heart J. 2005;149:744–750. 
doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2004.07.010.
 
96. Changchien EM, Ahmed S, Betti F, Higa J, Kiely K, Hernandez-
Boussard T, Morton J. B-type natriuretic peptide increases after gas-
tric bypass surgery and correlates with weight loss. Surg Endosc. 
2011;25:2338–2343. doi: 10.1007/s00464-010-1565-1.
 
97. Zile MR, Baicu CF, Gaasch WH. Diastolic heart failure: abnormalities 
in active relaxation and passive stiffness of the left ventricle. N Engl 
J Med. 2004;350:1953–1959. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa032566.
 
98. Gandhi PU, Gaggin HK, Sheftel AD, Belcher AM, Weiner RB, Bag-
gish AL, Motiwala SR, Liu PP, Januzzi JL Jr. Prognostic usefulness 
of insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 7 in heart failure with 
reduced ejection fraction: a novel biomarker of myocardial diastol-
ic function? Am J Cardiol. 2014;114:1543–1549. doi: 10.1016/j.
amjcard.2014.08.018.
 99. Gandhi PU, Gaggin HK, Redfield MM, Chen HH, Stevens SR, 
Anstrom KJ, Semigran MJ, Liu P, Januzzi JL Jr. Insulin-like 
growth factor-binding protein-7 as a biomarker of diastolic dys-
function and functional capacity in heart failure with preserved 
ejection fraction: results from the RELAX trial. JACC Heart Fail. 
2016;4:860–869. doi: 10.1016/j.jchf.2016.08.002.
 
100. Zile MR, Desantis SM, Baicu CF, Stroud RE, Thompson SB, McClure 
CD, Mehurg SM, Spinale FG. Plasma biomarkers that reflect determi-
nants of matrix composition identify the presence of left ventricular 
hypertrophy and diastolic heart failure. Circ Heart Fail. 2011;4:246–
256. doi: 10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.110.958199.
 
101. McKelvie RS, Komajda M, McMurray J, Zile M, Ptaszynska A, 
Donovan M, Carson P, Massie BM; I-Preserve Investigators. 
Baseline plasma NT-proBNP and clinical characteristics: re-
sults from the irbesartan in heart failure with preserved ejection 
fraction trial. J Card Fail. 2010;16:128–134. doi: 10.1016/j.
cardfail.2009.09.007.
 
102. Jhund PS, Anand IS, Komajda M, Claggett BL, McKelvie RS, Zile 
MR, Carson PE, McMurray JJ. Changes in N-terminal pro-B-type 
natriuretic peptide levels and outcomes in heart failure with pre-
served ejection fraction: an analysis of the I-Preserve study. Eur 
J Heart Fail. 2015;17:809–817. doi: 10.1002/ejhf.274.
 
103. Maisel A, Barnard D, Jaski B, Frivold G, Marais J, Azer M, Miyamoto 
MI, Lombardo D, Kelsay D, Borden K, Iqbal N, Taub PR, Kupfer K, 
Clopton P, Greenberg B. Primary results of the HABIT Trial (Heart 
Failure Assessment With BNP in the Home). J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2013;61:1726–1735. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2013.01.052.
 
104. Bartunek J, Delrue L, Van Durme F, Muller O, Casselman F, De 
Wiest B, Croes R, Verstreken S, Goethals M, de Raedt H, Sarma 
J, Joseph L, Vanderheyden M, Weinberg EO. Nonmyocardial pro-
duction of ST2 protein in human hypertrophy and failure is related 
to diastolic load. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2008;52:2166–2174. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2008.09.027.
 
105. Wang YC, Yu CC, Chiu FC, Tsai CT, Lai LP, Hwang JJ, Lin JL. 
Soluble ST2 as a biomarker for detecting stable heart failure with 
a normal ejection fraction in hypertensive patients. J Card Fail. 
2013;19:163–168. doi: 10.1016/j.cardfail.2013.01.010.
 
106. Manzano-Fernández S, Mueller T, Pascual-Figal D, Truong QA, 
Januzzi JL. Usefulness of soluble concentrations of interleukin 
family member ST2 as predictor of mortality in patients with 
acutely decompensated heart failure relative to left ventricu-
lar ejection fraction. Am J Cardiol. 2011;107:259–267. doi: 
10.1016/j.amjcard.2010.09.011.
 
107. Rehman SU, Mueller T, Januzzi JL Jr. Characteristics of the novel 
interleukin family biomarker ST2 in patients with acute heart fail-
ure. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2008;52:1458–1465. doi: 10.1016/j.
jacc.2008.07.042.
 
108. Gopal DM, Kommineni M, Ayalon N, Koelbl C, Ayalon R, Biolo 
A, Dember LM, Downing J, Siwik DA, Liang CS, Colucci WS. 
Relationship of plasma galectin-3 to renal function in patients with 
heart failure: effects of clinical status, pathophysiology of heart 
failure, and presence or absence of heart failure. J Am Heart 
Assoc. 2012;1:e000760. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.112.000760.
 
109. deFilippi CR, Felker GM. Galectin-3 in heart failure: linking fibro-
sis, remodeling and progression. Eur Cardiol. 2010;6:33–36.
 
110. de Boer RA, Lok DJ, Jaarsma T, van der Meer P, Voors AA, Hillege 
HL, van Veldhuisen DJ. Predictive value of plasma galectin-3 levels 
in heart failure with reduced and preserved ejection fraction. Ann 
Med. 2011;43:60–68. doi: 10.3109/07853890.2010.538080.
 
111. Shah RV, Chen-Tournoux AA, Picard MH, van Kimmenade RR, 
Januzzi JL. Galectin-3, cardiac structure and function, and long-
term mortality in patients with acutely decompensated heart failure. 
Eur J Heart Fail. 2010;12:826–832. doi: 10.1093/eurjhf/hfq091.
 
112. van Kimmenade RR, Januzzi JL Jr, Ellinor PT, Sharma UC, Bakker 
JA, Low AF, Martinez A, Crijns HJ, MacRae CA, Menheere PP, 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Biomarkers in Heart Failure
Circulation. 2017;135:e1054–e1091. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000490 
May 30, 2017 e1085
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Pinto YM. Utility of amino-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide, 
galectin-3, and apelin for the evaluation of patients with acute 
heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2006;48:1217–1224. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2006.03.061.
 
113. Carrasco-Sánchez FJ, Aramburu-Bodas O, Salamanca-Bautista P, 
Morales-Rull JL, Galisteo-Almeda L, Páez-Rubio MI, Arias-Jiménez 
JL, Aguayo-Canela M, Pérez-Calvo JI. Predictive value of serum 
galectin-3 levels in patients with acute heart failure with pre-
served ejection fraction. Int J Cardiol. 2013;169:177–182. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijcard.2013.08.081.
 
114. Martos R, Baugh J, Ledwidge M, O’Loughlin C, Conlon C, Patle 
A, Donnelly SC, McDonald K. Diastolic heart failure: evidence 
of increased myocardial collagen turnover linked to diastolic 
dysfunction. Circulation. 2007;115:888–895. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.106.638569.
 
115. González A, López B, Querejeta R, Zubillaga E, Echeverría 
T, Díez J. Filling pressures and collagen metabolism in hyper-
tensive patients with heart failure and normal ejection frac-
tion. Hypertension. 2010;55:1418–1424. doi: 10.1161/
HYPERTENSIONAHA.109.149112.
 
116. Martos R, Baugh J, Ledwidge M, O’Loughlin C, Murphy NF, Conlon 
C, Patle A, Donnelly SC, McDonald K. Diagnosis of heart failure 
with preserved ejection fraction: improved accuracy with the use 
of markers of collagen turnover. Eur J Heart Fail. 2009;11:191–
197. doi: 10.1093/eurjhf/hfn036.
 
117. Barasch E, Gottdiener JS, Aurigemma G, Kitzman DW, Han 
J, Kop WJ, Tracy RP. Association between elevated fibrosis 
markers and heart failure in the elderly: the Cardiovascular 
Health Study [published correction appears in Circ Heart Fail. 
2009;2:e4]. Circ Heart Fail. 2009;2:303–310. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCHEARTFAILURE.108.828343.
 
118. Krum H, Elsik M, Schneider HG, Ptaszynska A, Black M, Carson 
PE, Komajda M, Massie BM, McKelvie RS, McMurray JJ, Zile 
MR, Anand IS. Relation of peripheral collagen markers to 
death and hospitalization in patients with heart failure and pre-
served ejection fraction: results of the I-PRESERVE collagen 
substudy. Circ Heart Fail. 2011;4:561–568. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCHEARTFAILURE.110.960716.
 
119. Kitahara T, Takeishi Y, Arimoto T, Niizeki T, Koyama Y, Sasaki T, 
Suzuki S, Nozaki N, Hirono O, Nitobe J, Watanabe T, Kubota I. 
Serum carboxy-terminal telopeptide of type I collagen (ICTP) pre-
dicts cardiac events in chronic heart failure patients with preserved 
left ventricular systolic function. Circ J. 2007;71:929–935.
 
120. Ahmed SH, Clark LL, Pennington WR, Webb CS, Bonnema DD, 
Leonardi AH, McClure CD, Spinale FG, Zile MR. Matrix metallo-
proteinases/tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases: relationship 
between changes in proteolytic determinants of matrix compo-
sition and structural, functional, and clinical manifestations of 
hypertensive heart disease. Circulation. 2006;113:2089–2096. 
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.105.573865.
 
121. Tang WH, Girod JP, Lee MJ, Starling RC, Young JB, Van Lente F, 
Francis GS. Plasma B-type natriuretic peptide levels in ambula-
tory patients with established chronic symptomatic systolic heart 
failure. Circulation. 2003;108:2964–2966. doi: 10.1161/01.
CIR.0000106903.98196.B6.
 
122. Taub PR, Daniels LB, Maisel AS. Usefulness of B-type natriuretic 
peptide levels in predicting hemodynamic and clinical decom-
pensation. Heart Fail Clin. 2009;5:169–175. doi: 10.1016/j.
hfc.2008.11.009.
 
123. Forfia PR, Watkins SP, Rame JE, Stewart KJ, Shapiro EP. 
Relationship between B-type natriuretic peptides and pul-
monary capillary wedge pressure in the intensive care unit. 
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2005;45:1667–1671. doi: 10.1016/j.
jacc.2005.01.046.
 
124. Kazanegra R, Cheng V, Garcia A, Krishnaswamy P, Gardetto 
N, Clopton P, Maisel A. A rapid test for B-type natriuretic 
peptide correlates with falling wedge pressures in patients 
treated for decompensated heart failure: a pilot study. J Card 
Fail. 2001;7:21–29. doi: 10.1054/jcaf.2001.23355.
 
125. Berger R, Huelsman M, Strecker K, Bojic A, Moser P, Stanek 
B, Pacher R. B-type natriuretic peptide predicts sudden 
death in patients with chronic heart failure. Circulation. 
2002;105:2392–2397.
 
126. Anand IS, Fisher LD, Chiang YT, Latini R, Masson S, Maggioni AP, 
Glazer RD, Tognoni G, Cohn JN; for the Val-HeFT Investigators. 
Changes in brain natriuretic peptide and norepinephrine over 
time and mortality and morbidity in the Valsartan Heart Failure 
Trial (Val-HeFT). Circulation. 2003;107:1278–1283.
 
127. Neuhold S, Huelsmann M, Strunk G, Stoiser B, Struck J, 
Morgenthaler NG, Bergmann A, Moertl D, Berger R, Pacher R. 
Comparison of copeptin, B-type natriuretic peptide, and amino-
terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide in patients with chronic 
heart failure: prediction of death at different stages of the dis-
ease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2008;52:266–272. doi: 10.1016/j.
jacc.2008.03.050.
 
128. Richards AM, Doughty R, Nicholls MG, MacMahon S, Sharpe N, 
Murphy J, Espiner EA, Frampton C, Yandle TG; Australia-New 
Zealand Heart Failure Group. Plasma N-terminal pro-brain natri-
uretic peptide and adrenomedullin: prognostic utility and predic-
tion of benefit from carvedilol in chronic ischemic left ventricular 
dysfunction: Australia-New Zealand Heart Failure Group. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2001;37:1781–1787.
 
129. Doust JA, Pietrzak E, Dobson A, Glasziou P. How well does B-type 
natriuretic peptide predict death and cardiac events in patients 
with heart failure: systematic review. BMJ. 2005;330:625.
 
130. Horwich TB, Patel J, MacLellan WR, Fonarow GC. Cardiac tro-
ponin I is associated with impaired hemodynamics, progres-
sive left ventricular dysfunction, and increased mortality rates 
in advanced heart failure. Circulation. 2003;108:833–838. doi: 
10.1161/01.CIR.0000084543.79097.34.
 
131. Sato Y, Yamada T, Taniguchi R, Nagai K, Makiyama T, Okada 
H, Kataoka K, Ito H, Matsumori A, Sasayama S, Takatsu Y. 
Persistently increased serum concentrations of cardiac troponin 
T in patients with idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy are predic-
tive of adverse outcomes. Circulation. 2001;103:369–374.
 
132. Missov E, Calzolari C, Pau B. Circulating cardiac troponin I in se-
vere congestive heart failure. Circulation. 1997;96:2953–2958.
 
133. Setsuta K, Seino Y, Takahashi N, Ogawa T, Sasaki K, Harada 
A, Takano T, Kishida H, Hayakawa H. Clinical significance of el-
evated levels of cardiac troponin T in patients with chronic heart 
failure. Am J Cardiol. 1999;84:608–611, A9.
 
134. Hudson MP, O’Connor CM, Gattis WA, Tasissa G, Hasselblad V, 
Holleman CM, Gaulden LH, Sedor F, Ohman EM. Implications of 
elevated cardiac troponin T in ambulatory patients with heart fail-
ure: a prospective analysis. Am Heart J. 2004;147:546–552. 
doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2003.10.014.
 
135. Ather S, Hira RS, Shenoy M, Fatemi O, Deswal A, Aguilar D, 
Ramasubbu K, Bolos M, Chan W, Bozkurt B. Recurrent low-level 
troponin I elevation is a worse prognostic indicator than occasional 
injury pattern in patients hospitalized with heart failure. Int J Cardiol. 
2013;166:394–398. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2011.10.113.
 
136. Tentzeris I, Jarai R, Farhan S, Perkmann T, Schwarz MA, Jakl 
G, Wojta J, Huber K. Complementary role of copeptin and high-
sensitivity troponin in predicting outcome in patients with stable 
chronic heart failure. Eur J Heart Fail. 2011;13:726–733. doi: 
10.1093/eurjhf/hfr049.
 
137. Latini R, Masson S, Anand IS, Missov E, Carlson M, Vago T, 
Angelici L, Barlera S, Parrinello G, Maggioni AP, Tognoni G, Cohn 
JN; Val-HeFT Investigators. Prognostic value of very low plasma 
concentrations of troponin T in patients with stable chronic 
heart failure. Circulation. 2007;116:1242–1249. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.106.655076.
 
138. Ky B, French B, McCloskey K, Rame JE, McIntosh E, Shahi P, 
Dries DL, Tang WH, Wu AH, Fang JC, Boxer R, Sweitzer NK, 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Chow et al
May 30, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e1054–e1091. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000490
e1086
Levy WC, Goldberg LR, Jessup M, Cappola TP. High-sensitivity 
ST2 for prediction of adverse outcomes in chronic heart 
failure. Circ Heart Fail. 2011;4:180–187. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCHEARTFAILURE.110.958223.
 
139. Anand IS, Rector TS, Kuskowski M, Snider J, Cohn JN. 
Prognostic value of soluble ST2 in the Valsartan Heart Failure 
Trial. Circ Heart Fail. 2014;7:418–426. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCHEARTFAILURE.113.001036.
 
140. Gaggin HK, Szymonifka J, Bhardwaj A, Belcher A, De Berardinis 
B, Motiwala S, Wang TJ, Januzzi JL Jr. Head-to-head compari-
son of serial soluble ST2, growth differentiation factor-15, and 
highly-sensitive troponin T measurements in patients with chronic 
heart failure. JACC Heart Fail. 2014;2:65–72. doi: 10.1016/j.
jchf.2013.10.005.
 
141. Gaggin HK, Motiwala S, Bhardwaj A, Parks KA, Januzzi JL 
Jr. Soluble concentrations of the interleukin receptor fam-
ily member ST2 and β-blocker therapy in chronic heart fail-
ure. Circ Heart Fail. 2013;6:1206–1213. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCHEARTFAILURE.113.000457.
 
142. Lok DJ, Van Der Meer P, de la Porte PW, Lipsic E, Van Wijngaarden 
J, Hillege HL, van Veldhuisen DJ. Prognostic value of galectin-3, 
a novel marker of fibrosis, in patients with chronic heart failure: 
data from the DEAL-HF study. Clin Res Cardiol. 2010;99:323–
328. doi: 10.1007/s00392-010-0125-y.
 
143. Anand IS, Rector TS, Kuskowski M, Adourian A, Muntendam 
P, Cohn JN. Baseline and serial measurements of galectin-3 in 
patients with heart failure: relationship to prognosis and effect 
of treatment with valsartan in the Val-HeFT. Eur J Heart Fail. 
2013;15:511–518. doi: 10.1093/eurjhf/hfs205.
 
144. Maisel A, Mueller C, Nowak R, Peacock WF, Landsberg JW, 
Ponikowski P, Mockel M, Hogan C, Wu AH, Richards M, Clopton P, 
Filippatos GS, Di Somma S, Anand I, Ng L, Daniels LB, Neath SX, 
Christenson R, Potocki M, McCord J, Terracciano G, Kremastinos 
D, Hartmann O, von Haehling S, Bergmann A, Morgenthaler NG, 
Anker SD. Mid-region pro-hormone markers for diagnosis and 
prognosis in acute dyspnea: results from the BACH (Biomarkers 
in Acute Heart Failure) trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010;55:2062–
2076. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2010.02.025.
 
145. Zairis MN, Tsiaousis GZ, Georgilas AT, Makrygiannis SS, 
Adamopoulou EN, Handanis SM, Batika PC, Prekates AA, 
Velissaris D, Kouris NT, Mytas DZ, Babalis DK, Karidis KS, 
Foussas SG. Multimarker strategy for the prediction of 31 days 
cardiac death in patients with acutely decompensated chronic 
heart failure. Int J Cardiol. 2010;141:284–290. doi: 10.1016/j.
ijcard.2008.12.017.
 
146. Kociol RD, Horton JR, Fonarow GC, Reyes EM, Shaw LK, 
O’Connor CM, Felker GM, Hernandez AF. Admission, discharge, 
or change in B-type natriuretic peptide and long-term outcomes: 
data from Organized Program to Initiate Lifesaving Treatment 
in Hospitalized Patients with Heart Failure (OPTIMIZE-HF) linked 
to Medicare claims. Circ Heart Fail. 2011;4:628–636. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.111.962290.
 
147. Krumholz HM, Parent EM, Tu N, Vaccarino V, Wang Y, Radford 
MJ, Hennen J. Readmission after hospitalization for congestive 
heart failure among Medicare beneficiaries. Arch Intern Med. 
1997;157:99–104.
 
148. O’Connor CM, Abraham WT, Albert NM, Clare R, Gattis Stough W, 
Gheorghiade M, Greenberg BH, Yancy CW, Young JB, Fonarow 
GC. Predictors of mortality after discharge in patients hospital-
ized with heart failure: an analysis from the Organized Program 
to Initiate Lifesaving Treatment in Hospitalized Patients with Heart 
Failure (OPTIMIZE-HF). Am Heart J. 2008;156:662–673. doi: 
10.1016/j.ahj.2008.04.030.
 
149. Jencks SF, Williams MV, Coleman EA. Rehospitalizations among 
patients in the Medicare fee-for-service program [published cor-
rection appears in N Engl J Med. 2011;364:1582]. N Engl J Med. 
2009;360:1418–1428. doi: 10.1056/NEJMsa0803563.
 
150. Chen J, Normand SL, Wang Y, Krumholz HM. National and re-
gional trends in heart failure hospitalization and mortality rates 
for Medicare beneficiaries, 1998-2008. JAMA. 2011;306:1669–
1678. doi: 10.1001/jama.2011.1474.
 
151. Lee DS, Stitt A, Austin PC, Stukel TA, Schull MJ, Chong A, 
 
Newton GE, Lee JS, Tu JV. Prediction of heart failure 
 
mortality in emergent care: a cohort study. Ann Intern Med. 
 
2012;156:767–775, W-261, W-262. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819- 
156-11-201206050-00003.
 
152. Jumean MF, Kiernan MS. Determinants of survival following 
hospitalization for acute heart failure. Curr Heart Fail Rep. 
2014;11:201–211. doi: 10.1007/s11897-014-0190-z.
 
153. Ahmad T, Patel CB, Milano CA, Rogers JG. When the heart runs 
out of heartbeats: treatment options for refractory end-stage 
heart failure. Circulation. 2012;125:2948–2955. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.112.097337.
 
154. Allen LA, Stevenson LW, Grady KL, Goldstein NE, Matlock 
DD, Arnold RM, Cook NR, Felker GM, Francis GS, Hauptman 
PJ, Havranek EP, Krumholz HM, Mancini D, Riegel B, Spertus 
JA; on behalf of the American Heart Association Council 
on Quality of Care and Outcomes Research; Council on 
Cardiovascular Nursing; Council on Clinical Cardiology; Council 
on Cardiovascular Radiology and Intervention; and Council on 
Cardiovascular Surgery and Anesthesia. Decision making in ad-
vanced heart failure: a scientific statement from the American 
Heart Association. Circulation. 2012;125:1928–1952. doi: 
10.1161/CIR.0b013e31824f2173.
 
155. Lassus J, Gayat E, Mueller C, Peacock WF, Spinar J, Harjola VP, 
van Kimmenade R, Pathak A, Mueller T, Disomma S, Metra M, 
Pascual-Figal D, Laribi S, Logeart D, Nouira S, Sato N, Potocki 
M, Parenica J, Collet C, Cohen-Solal A, Januzzi JL Jr, Mebazaa 
A; GREAT-Network. Incremental value of biomarkers to clinical 
variables for mortality prediction in acutely decompensated heart 
failure: the Multinational Observational Cohort on Acute Heart 
Failure (MOCA) study. Int J Cardiol. 2013;168:2186–2194. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijcard.2013.01.228.
 
156. Cheng V, Kazanagra R, Garcia A, Lenert L, Krishnaswamy P, 
Gardetto N, Clopton P, Maisel A. A rapid bedside test for B-type 
peptide predicts treatment outcomes in patients admitted for 
decompensated heart failure: a pilot study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2001;37:386–391.
 
157. Fonarow GC, Abraham WT, Albert NM, Stough WG, Gheorghiade 
M, Greenberg BH, O’Connor CM, Pieper K, Sun JL, Yancy CW, 
Young JB; OPTIMIZE-HF Investigators and Hospitals. Factors iden-
tified as precipitating hospital admissions for heart failure and 
clinical outcomes: findings from OPTIMIZE-HF. Arch Intern Med. 
2008;168:847–854. doi: 10.1001/archinte.168.8.847.
 
158. Fonarow GC, Peacock WF, Phillips CO, Givertz MM, Lopatin 
M; ADHERE Scientific Advisory Committee and Investigators. 
Admission B-type natriuretic peptide levels and in-hospital mor-
tality in acute decompensated heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2007;49:1943–1950. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2007.02.037.
 
159. Harrison A, Morrison LK, Krishnaswamy P, Kazanegra R, Clopton 
P, Dao Q, Hlavin P, Maisel AS. B-type natriuretic peptide predicts 
future cardiac events in patients presenting to the emergency 
department with dyspnea. Ann Emerg Med. 2002;39:131–138.
 
160. Januzzi JL Jr, Sakhuja R, O’donoghue M, Baggish AL, Anwaruddin 
S, Chae CU, Cameron R, Krauser DG, Tung R, Camargo CA Jr, 
Lloyd-Jones DM. Utility of amino-terminal pro-brain natriuretic 
peptide testing for prediction of 1-year mortality in patients with 
dyspnea treated in the emergency department. Arch Intern Med. 
2006;166:315–320. doi: 10.1001/archinte.166.3.315.
 
161. van Kimmenade RR, Pinto YM, Bayes-Genis A, Lainchbury JG, 
Richards AM, Januzzi JL Jr. Usefulness of intermediate amino-
terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide concentrations for di-
agnosis and prognosis of acute heart failure. Am J Cardiol. 
2006;98:386–390. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2006.02.043.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Biomarkers in Heart Failure
Circulation. 2017;135:e1054–e1091. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000490 
May 30, 2017 e1087
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
 
162. Bettencourt P, Azevedo A, Pimenta J, Friões F, Ferreira S, Ferreira A. 
N-terminal-pro-brain natriuretic peptide predicts outcome after hospi-
tal discharge in heart failure patients. Circulation. 2004;110:2168–
2174. doi: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000144310.04433.BE.
 
163. Dhaliwal AS, Deswal A, Pritchett A, Aguilar D, Kar B, Souchek 
J, Bozkurt B. Reduction in BNP levels with treatment of decom-
pensated heart failure and future clinical events. J Card Fail. 
2009;15:293–299. doi: 10.1016/j.cardfail.2008.11.007.
 
164. O’Brien RJ, Squire IB, Demme B, Davies JE, Ng LL. Pre-discharge, 
but not admission, levels of NT-proBNP predict adverse progno-
sis following acute LVF. Eur J Heart Fail. 2003;5:499–506.
 
165. Logeart D, Thabut G, Jourdain P, Chavelas C, Beyne P, Beauvais 
F, Bouvier E, Solal AC. Predischarge B-type natriuretic peptide 
assay for identifying patients at high risk of re-admission after 
decompensated heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2004;43:635–
641. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2003.09.044.
 
166. Goto T, Takase H, Toriyama T, Sugiura T, Sato K, Ueda R, 
Dohi Y. Circulating concentrations of cardiac proteins indi-
cate the severity of congestive heart failure. Heart. 2003;89: 
1303–1307.
 
167. Ishii J, Nomura M, Nakamura Y, Naruse H, Mori Y, Ishikawa T, 
Ando T, Kurokawa H, Kondo T, Nagamura Y, Ezaki K, Hishida H. 
Risk stratification using a combination of cardiac troponin T and 
brain natriuretic peptide in patients hospitalized for worsening 
chronic heart failure. Am J Cardiol. 2002;89:691–695.
 
168. Löwbeer C, Gustafsson SA, Seeberger A, Bouvier F, Hulting J. 
Serum cardiac troponin T in patients hospitalized with heart fail-
ure is associated with left ventricular hypertrophy and systolic 
dysfunction. Scand J Clin Lab Invest. 2004;64:667–676. doi: 
10.1080/00365510410003002.
 
169. Del Carlo CH, O’Connor CM. Cardiac troponins in congestive 
heart failure. Am Heart J. 1999;138(pt 1):646–653.
 
170. Perna ER, Macin SM, Cimbaro Canella JP, Alvarenga PM, Pantich 
RE, Rios NG, Cialzeta JR, Farias EF, Badaracco JR, Brizuela M, 
Jantus E, Missov ED. High levels of troponin T are associated 
with ventricular remodeling and adverse in-hospital outcome in 
heart failure. Med Sci Monit. 2004;10:CR90–CR95.
 
171. Gattis WA, O’Connor CM, Hasselblad V, Adams KF Jr, Kobrin 
I, Gheorghiade M. Usefulness of an elevated troponin-I in pre-
dicting clinical events in patients admitted with acute heart 
failure and acute coronary syndrome (from the RITZ-4 trial). 
Am J Cardiol. 2004;93:1436–1437, A10. doi: 10.1016/j.
amjcard.2004.02.051.
 
172. Del Carlo CH, Pereira-Barretto AC, Cassaro-Strunz C, Latorre 
Mdo R, Ramires JA. Serial measure of cardiac troponin T levels 
for prediction of clinical events in decompensated heart failure. J 
Card Fail. 2004;10:43–48.
 
173. Gheorghiade M, Gattis Stough W, Adams KF Jr, Jaffe AS, 
Hasselblad V, O’Connor CM. The Pilot Randomized Study of 
Nesiritide Versus Dobutamine in Heart Failure (PRESERVD-HF). 
Am J Cardiol. 2005;96:18G–25G.
 
174. Peacock WF 4th, De Marco T, Fonarow GC, Diercks D, Wynne J, 
Apple FS, Wu AH; ADHERE Investigators. Cardiac troponin and 
outcome in acute heart failure. N Engl J Med. 2008;358:2117–
2126. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0706824.
 
175. You JJ, Austin PC, Alter DA, Ko DT, Tu JV. Relation between cardiac 
troponin I and mortality in acute decompensated heart failure. Am 
Heart J. 2007;153:462–470. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2007.01.027.
 
176. Diercks DB, Peacock WF, Kirk JD, Weber JE. ED patients with 
heart failure: identification of an observational unit-appropriate 
cohort. Am J Emerg Med. 2006;24:319–324.
 
177. Metra M, Nodari S, Parrinello G, Specchia C, Brentana L, Rocca 
P, Fracassi F, Bordonali T, Milani P, Danesi R, Verzura G, Chiari E, 
Dei Cas L. The role of plasma biomarkers in acute heart failure: 
serial changes and independent prognostic value of NT-proBNP 
and cardiac troponin-T. Eur J Heart Fail. 2007;9:776–786. doi: 
10.1016/j.ejheart.2007.05.007.
 
178. Shah RV, Chen-Tournoux AA, Picard MH, van Kimmenade RR, 
Januzzi JL. Serum levels of the interleukin-1 receptor family mem-
ber ST2, cardiac structure and function, and long-term mortality 
in patients with acute dyspnea. Circ Heart Fail. 2009;2:311–
319. doi: 10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.108.833707.
 
179. Mueller T, Dieplinger B, Gegenhuber A, Poelz W, Pacher R, 
Haltmayer M. Increased plasma concentrations of soluble ST2 
are predictive for 1-year mortality in patients with acute destabi-
lized heart failure. Clin Chem. 2008;54:752–756. doi: 10.1373/
clinchem.2007.096560.
 
180. Januzzi JL Jr, Peacock WF, Maisel AS, Chae CU, Jesse RL, Baggish 
AL, O’Donoghue M, Sakhuja R, Chen AA, van Kimmenade RR, 
Lewandrowski KB, Lloyd-Jones DM, Wu AH. Measurement of the 
interleukin family member ST2 in patients with acute dyspnea: re-
sults from the PRIDE (Pro-Brain Natriuretic Peptide Investigation 
of Dyspnea in the Emergency Department) study. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2007;50:607–613. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2007.05.014.
 
181. Dieplinger B, Gegenhuber A, Kaar G, Poelz W, Haltmayer M, 
Mueller T. Prognostic value of established and novel biomark-
ers in patients with shortness of breath attending an emergency 
department. Clin Biochem. 2010;43:714–719. doi: 10.1016/j.
clinbiochem.2010.02.002.
 
182. Boisot S, Beede J, Isakson S, Chiu A, Clopton P, Januzzi J, Maisel 
AS, Fitzgerald RL. Serial sampling of ST2 predicts 90-day mortal-
ity following destabilized heart failure. J Card Fail. 2008;14:732–
738. doi: 10.1016/j.cardfail.2008.06.415.
 
183. Breidthardt T, Balmelli C, Twerenbold R, Mosimann T, Espinola J, 
Haaf P, Thalmann G, Moehring B, Mueller M, Meller B, Reichlin T, 
Murray K, Ziller R, Benkert P, Osswald S, Mueller C. Heart failure 
therapy-induced early ST2 changes may offer long-term thera-
py guidance. J Card Fail. 2013;19:821–828. doi: 10.1016/j.
cardfail.2013.11.003.
 
184. Manzano-Fernández S, Januzzi JL, Pastor-Pérez FJ, Bonaque-
González JC, Boronat-Garcia M, Pascual-Figal DA, Montalban-
Larrea S, Navarro-Peñalver M, Andreu-Cayuelas JM, Valdés M. 
Serial monitoring of soluble interleukin family member ST2 in 
patients with acutely decompensated heart failure. Cardiology. 
2012;122:158–166. doi: 10.1159/000338800.
 
185. Xue Y, Clopton P, Peacock WF, Maisel AS. Serial changes in 
high-sensitive troponin I predict outcome in patients with decom-
pensated heart failure. Eur J Heart Fail. 2011;13:37–42. doi: 
10.1093/eurjhf/hfq210.
 
186. O’Connor CM, Fiuzat M, Lombardi C, Fujita K, Jia G, Davison 
BA, Cleland J, Bloomfield D, Dittrich HC, Delucca P, Givertz MM, 
Mansoor G, Ponikowski P, Teerlink JR, Voors AA, Massie BM, 
Cotter G, Metra M. Impact of serial troponin release on outcomes 
in patients with acute heart failure: analysis from the PROTECT 
pilot study. Circ Heart Fail. 2011;4:724–732. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCHEARTFAILURE.111.961581.
 
187. Felker GM, Hasselblad V, Tang WH, Hernandez AF, Armstrong 
PW, Fonarow GC, Voors AA, Metra M, McMurray JJ, Butler J, 
Heizer GM, Dickstein K, Massie BM, Atar D, Troughton RW, Anker 
SD, Califf RM, Starling RC, O’Connor CM. Troponin I in acute de-
compensated heart failure: insights from the ASCEND-HF study. 
Eur J Heart Fail. 2012;14:1257–1264. doi: 10.1093/eurjhf/
hfs110.
 
188. Apple FS. A new season for cardiac troponin assays: it’s time 
to keep a scorecard. Clin Chem. 2009;55:1303–1306. doi: 
10.1373/clinchem.2009.128363.
 
189. Bayes-Genis A, Pascual-Figal D, Januzzi JL, Maisel A, Casas T, 
Valdés Chávarri M, Ordóñez-Llanos J. Soluble ST2 monitoring 
provides additional risk stratification for outpatients with decom-
pensated heart failure. Rev Esp Cardiol. 2010;63:1171–1178.
 
190. Pascual-Figal DA, Manzano-Fernández S, Boronat M, Casas 
T, Garrido IP, Bonaque JC, Pastor-Perez F, Valdés M, Januzzi 
JL. Soluble ST2, high-sensitivity troponin T- and N-terminal 
pro-B-type natriuretic peptide: complementary role for risk 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Chow et al
May 30, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e1054–e1091. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000490
e1088
stratification in acutely decompensated heart failure. Eur J Heart 
Fail. 2011;13:718–725. doi: 10.1093/eurjhf/hfr047.
 
191. Meijers WC, Januzzi JL, deFilippi C, Adourian AS, Shah SJ, van 
Veldhuisen DJ, de Boer RA. Elevated plasma galectin-3 is associ-
ated with near-term rehospitalization in heart failure: a pooled 
analysis of 3 clinical trials. Am Heart J. 2014;167:853–860.e4. 
doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2014.02.011.
 
192. Mueller C, Laule-Kilian K, Christ A, Brunner-La Rocca HP, 
Perruchoud AP. Inflammation and long-term mortality in acute 
congestive heart failure. Am Heart J. 2006;151:845–850. doi: 
10.1016/j.ahj.2005.06.046.
 
193. Park JJ, Choi DJ, Yoon CH, Oh IY, Jeon ES, Kim JJ, Cho MC, 
Chae SC, Ryu KH, Yoo BS, Kang SM, Oh BH; KorHF Registry. 
Prognostic value of C-reactive protein as an inflammatory and 
N-terminal probrain natriuretic peptide as a neurohumoral marker 
in acute heart failure (from the Korean Heart Failure registry). Am 
J Cardiol. 2014;113:511–517. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2013. 
10.022.
 
194. Milo-Cotter O, Cotter-Davison B, Lombardi C, Sun H, Bettari L, 
Bugatti S, Rund M, Metra M, Kaluski E, Kobrin I, Frey A, Rainisio 
M, McMurray JJ, Teerlink JR, Cotter-Davison G. Neurohormonal 
activation in acute heart failure: results from VERITAS. Cardiology. 
2011;119:96–105. doi: 10.1159/000330409.
 
195. Peacock WF, Nowak R, Christenson R, DiSomma S, Neath SX, 
Hartmann O, Mueller C, Ponikowski P, Möckel M, Hogan C, 
Wu AH, Richards M, Filippatos GS, Anand I, Ng LL, Daniels LB, 
Morgenthaler N, Anker SD, Maisel AS. Short-term mortality risk 
in emergency department acute heart failure. Acad Emerg Med. 
2011;18:947–958. doi: 10.1111/j.1553-2712.2011.01150.x.
 
196. Cruz DN, Soni S, Slavin L, Ronco C, Maisel A. Biomarkers of 
cardiac and kidney dysfunction in cardiorenal syndromes. Contrib 
Nephrol. 2010;165:83–92. doi: 10.1159/000313747.
 
197. Maisel A, Xue Y, Shah K, Mueller C, Nowak R, Peacock WF, 
Ponikowski P, Mockel M, Hogan C, Wu AH, Richards M, Clopton P, 
Filippatos GS, Di Somma S, Anand IS, Ng L, Daniels LB, Neath SX, 
Christenson R, Potocki M, McCord J, Terracciano G, Kremastinos D, 
Hartmann O, von Haehling S, Bergmann A, Morgenthaler NG, Anker 
SD. Increased 90-day mortality in patients with acute heart failure 
with elevated copeptin: secondary results from the Biomarkers in 
Acute Heart Failure (BACH) study. Circ Heart Fail. 2011;4:613–620. 
doi: 10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.110.960096.
 
198. Fonarow GC, Horwich TB. Combining natriuretic peptides and 
necrosis markers in determining prognosis in heart failure. Rev 
Cardiovasc Med. 2003;4(suppl 4):S20–S28.
 
199. Ahmad T, Fiuzat M, Neely B, Neely ML, Pencina MJ, Kraus WE, 
Zannad F, Whellan DJ, Donahue MP, Piña IL, Adams KF, Kitzman 
DW, O’Connor CM, Felker GM. Biomarkers of myocardial stress 
and fibrosis as predictors of mode of death in patients with 
chronic heart failure. JACC Heart Fail. 2014;2:260–268. doi: 
10.1016/j.jchf.2013.12.004.
 
200. Bhatia RS, Tu JV, Lee DS, Austin PC, Fang J, Haouzi A, Gong Y, 
Liu PP. Outcome of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction 
in a population-based study. N Engl J Med. 2006;355:260–269. 
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa051530.
 
201. Owan TE, Hodge DO, Herges RM, Jacobsen SJ, Roger VL, 
Redfield MM. Trends in prevalence and outcome of heart failure 
with preserved ejection fraction. N Engl J Med. 2006;355:251–
259. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa052256.
 
202. Cleland JG, Taylor J, Tendera M. Prognosis in heart failure with a 
normal ejection fraction. N Engl J Med. 2007;357:829–830. doi: 
10.1056/NEJMc076179.
 
203. Grewal J, McKelvie RS, Persson H, Tait P, Carlsson J, Swedberg 
K, Ostergren J, Lonn E. Usefulness of N-terminal pro-brain natri-
uretic peptide and brain natriuretic peptide to predict cardiovas-
cular outcomes in patients with heart failure and preserved left 
ventricular ejection fraction. Am J Cardiol. 2008;102:733–737. 
doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2008.04.048.
 204. Anand IS, Rector TS, Cleland JG, Kuskowski M, McKelvie RS, 
Persson H, McMurray JJ, Zile MR, Komajda M, Massie BM, Carson 
PE. Prognostic value of baseline plasma amino-terminal pro-brain 
natriuretic peptide and its interactions with irbesartan treatment ef-
fects in patients with heart failure and preserved ejection fraction: 
findings from the I-PRESERVE trial. Circ Heart Fail. 2011;4:569–
577. doi: 10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.111.962654.
 205. Bhardwaj A, Januzzi JL Jr. ST2: a novel biomarker for heart fail-
ure. Expert Rev Mol Diagn. 2010;10:459–464. doi: 10.1586/
erm.10.25.
 206. van der Velde AR, Gullestad L, Ueland T, Aukrust P, Guo Y, Adourian 
A, Muntendam P, van Veldhuisen DJ, de Boer RA. Prognostic value 
of changes in galectin-3 levels over time in patients with heart fail-
ure: data from CORONA and COACH. Circ Heart Fail. 2013;6:219–
226. doi: 10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.112.000129.
 207. Felker GM, Fiuzat M, Shaw LK, Clare R, Whellan DJ, Bettari 
L, Shirolkar SC, Donahue M, Kitzman DW, Zannad F, Piña IL, 
O’Connor CM. Galectin-3 in ambulatory patients with heart failure: 
results from the HF-ACTION study. Circ Heart Fail. 2012;5:72–
78. doi: 10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.111.963637.
 208. Zile MR, Baicu CF, Ikonomidis JS, Stroud RE, Nietert PJ, Bradshaw 
AD, Slater R, Palmer BM, Van Buren P, Meyer M, Redfield MM, 
Bull DA, Granzier HL, LeWinter MM. Myocardial stiffness in pa-
tients with heart failure and a preserved ejection fraction: contri-
butions of collagen and titin. Circulation. 2015;131:1247–1259. 
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.114.013215.
 209. Ledwidge M, Gallagher J, Conlon C, Tallon E, O’Connell E, 
Dawkins I, Watson C, O’Hanlon R, Bermingham M, Patle 
A, Badabhagni MR, Murtagh G, Voon V, Tilson L, Barry M, 
McDonald L, Maurer B, McDonald K. Natriuretic peptide-based 
screening and collaborative care for heart failure: the STOP-
HF randomized trial. JAMA. 2013;310:66–74. doi: 10.1001/
jama.2013.7588.
 210. Savarese G, Musella F, D’Amore C, Vassallo E, Losco T, 
Gambardella F, Cecere M, Petraglia L, Pagano G, Fimiani L, 
Rengo G, Leosco D, Trimarco B, Perrone-Filardi P. Changes 
of natriuretic peptides predict hospital admissions in patients 
with chronic heart failure: a meta-analysis. JACC Heart Fail. 
2014;2:148–158. doi: 10.1016/j.jchf.2013.11.007.
 211. Troughton RW, Frampton CM, Yandle TG, Espiner EA, Nicholls 
MG, Richards AM. Treatment of heart failure guided by plasma 
aminoterminal brain natriuretic peptide (N-BNP) concentrations. 
Lancet. 2000;355:1126–1130.
 
211a.  
Dries DL, Stevenson LW. Brain natriuretic peptide as bridge to 
therapy for heart failure. Lancet. 2000;355:1.
 212.  
Jourdain P, Jondeau G, Funck F, Gueffet P, Le Helloco A, Donal 
E, Aupetit JF, Aumont MC, Galinier M, Eicher JC, Cohen-Solal A, 
Juillière Y. Plasma brain natriuretic peptide-guided therapy to 
improve outcome in heart failure: the STARS-BNP Multicenter 
Study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007;49:1733–1739. doi: 10.1016/j.
jacc.2006.10.081.
 213. Eurlings LW, van Pol PE, Kok WE, van Wijk S, Lodewijks-van der 
Bolt C, Balk AH, Lok DJ, Crijns HJ, van Kraaij DJ, de Jonge N, 
Meeder JG, Prins M, Pinto YM. Management of chronic heart 
failure guided by individual N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic 
peptide targets: results of the PRIMA (Can PRo-brain-natriuretic 
peptide guided therapy of chronic heart failure IMprove heart 
fAilure morbidity and mortality?) study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2010;56:2090–2100. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2010.07.030.
 214.  
Pfisterer M, Buser P, Rickli H, Gutmann M, Erne P, Rickenbacher 
P, Vuillomenet A, Jeker U, Dubach P, Beer H, Yoon SI, Suter T, 
Osterhues HH, Schieber MM, Hilti P, Schindler R, Brunner-La 
Rocca HP; TIME-CHF Investigators. BNP-guided vs symptom-
guided heart failure therapy: the Trial of Intensified vs Standard 
Medical Therapy in Elderly Patients With Congestive Heart 
Failure (TIME-CHF) randomized trial. JAMA. 2009;301:383–392. 
doi: 10.1001/jama.2009.2.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Biomarkers in Heart Failure
Circulation. 2017;135:e1054–e1091. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000490 
May 30, 2017 e1089
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
 
215. Sanders-van Wijk S, van Asselt AD, Rickli H, Estlinbaum W, Erne 
P, Rickenbacher P, Vuillomenet A, Peter M, Pfisterer ME, Brunner-
La Rocca HP; TIME-CHF Investigators. Cost-effectiveness of 
N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic-guided therapy in elderly heart 
failure patients: results from TIME-CHF (Trial of Intensified versus 
Standard Medical Therapy in Elderly Patients with Congestive 
Heart Failure). JACC Heart Fail. 2013;1:64–71. doi: 10.1016/j.
jchf.2012.08.002.
 
216. Januzzi JL Jr, Rehman SU, Mohammed AA, Bhardwaj A, Barajas 
L, Barajas J, Kim HN, Baggish AL, Weiner RB, Chen-Tournoux A, 
Marshall JE, Moore SA, Carlson WD, Lewis GD, Shin J, Sullivan 
D, Parks K, Wang TJ, Gregory SA, Uthamalingam S, Semigran 
MJ. Use of amino-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide to guide 
outpatient therapy of patients with chronic left ventricular sys-
tolic dysfunction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;58:1881–1889. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2011.03.072.
 
217. Bhardwaj A, Rehman SU, Mohammed AA, Gaggin HK, Barajas 
L, Barajas J, Moore SA, Sullivan D, Januzzi JL. Quality of life 
and chronic heart failure therapy guided by natriuretic peptides: 
results from the ProBNP Outpatient Tailored Chronic Heart Failure 
Therapy (PROTECT) study. Am Heart J. 2012;164:793–799.e1. 
doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2012.08.015.
 
218. Weiner RB, Baggish AL, Chen-Tournoux A, Marshall JE, Gaggin 
HK, Bhardwaj A, Mohammed AA, Rehman SU, Barajas L, 
Barajas J, Gregory SA, Moore SA, Semigran MJ, Januzzi JL 
Jr. Improvement in structural and functional echocardiographic 
parameters during chronic heart failure therapy guided by natri-
uretic peptides: mechanistic insights from the ProBNP Outpatient 
Tailored Chronic Heart Failure (PROTECT) study. Eur J Heart Fail. 
2013;15:342–351. doi: 10.1093/eurjhf/hfs180.
 
219. Gandhi PU, Szymonifka J, Motiwala SR, Belcher AM, Januzzi JL 
Jr, Gaggin HK. Characterization and prediction of adverse events 
from intensive chronic heart failure management and effect on 
quality of life: results from the pro-B-type natriuretic peptide out-
patient-tailored chronic heart failure therapy (PROTECT) study. J 
Card Fail. 2015;21:9–15. doi: 10.1016/j.cardfail.2014.10.008.
 
220. Januzzi JL Jr. Use of biomarkers to “guide” care in chronic heart 
failure: what have we learned (so far)? J Card Fail. 2011;17:622–
625. doi: 10.1016/j.cardfail.2011.06.373.
 
221. Troughton RW, Frampton CM, Brunner-La Rocca HP, Pfisterer 
M, Eurlings LW, Erntell H, Persson H, O’Connor CM, Moertl D, 
Karlström P, Dahlström U, Gaggin HK, Januzzi JL, Berger R, 
Richards AM, Pinto YM, Nicholls MG. Effect of B-type natriuretic 
peptide-guided treatment of chronic heart failure on total mor-
tality and hospitalization: an individual patient meta-analysis. Eur 
Heart J. 2014;35:1559–1567. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehu090.
 
222. Felker GM, Ahmad T, Anstrom KJ, Adams KF, Cooper LS, 
Ezekowitz JA, Fiuzat M, Houston-Miller N, Januzzi JL, Leifer 
ES, Mark DB, Desvigne-Nickens P, Paynter G, Piña IL, Whellan 
DJ, O’Connor CM. Rationale and design of the GUIDE-IT study: 
Guiding Evidence Based Therapy Using Biomarker Intensified 
Treatment in Heart Failure. JACC Heart Fail. 2014;2:457–465. 
doi: 10.1016/j.jchf.2014.05.007.
 
223. Januzzi JL, van Kimmenade R, Lainchbury J, Bayes-Genis A, 
Ordonez-Llanos J, Santalo-Bel M, Pinto YM, Richards M. NT-
proBNP testing for diagnosis and short-term prognosis in acute 
destabilized heart failure: an international pooled analysis of 
1256 patients: the International Collaborative of NT-proBNP 
Study. Eur Heart J. 2006;27:330–337. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/
ehi631.
 
224. Solomon SD, Zile M, Pieske B, Voors A, Shah A, Kraigher-
Krainer E, Shi V, Bransford T, Takeuchi M, Gong J, Lefkowitz 
M, Packer M, McMurray JJ; Prospective comparison of ARNI 
with ARB on Management Of heart failUre with preserved ejec-
tioN fracTion (PARAMOUNT) Investigators. The angiotensin 
receptor neprilysin inhibitor LCZ696 in heart failure with pre-
served ejection fraction: a phase 2 double-blind randomised 
controlled trial. Lancet. 2012;380:1387–1395. doi: 10.1016/
S0140-6736(12)61227-6.
 
225. McMurray JJ, Packer M, Desai AS, Gong J, Lefkowitz MP, 
Rizkala AR, Rouleau JL, Shi VC, Solomon SD, Swedberg K, Zile 
MR; PARADIGM-HF Investigators and Committees. Angiotensin-
neprilysin inhibition versus enalapril in heart failure. N Engl J Med. 
2014;371:993–1004. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1409077.
 
226. Packer M, McMurray JJ, Desai AS, Gong J, Lefkowitz MP, 
Rizkala AR, Rouleau JL, Shi VC, Solomon SD, Swedberg K, Zile 
M, Andersen K, Arango JL, Arnold JM, Bělohlávek J, Böhm M, 
Boytsov S, Burgess LJ, Cabrera W, Calvo C, Chen CH, Dukat 
A, Duarte YC, Erglis A, Fu M, Gomez E, Gonzàlez-Medina A, 
Hagège AA, Huang J, Katova T, Kiatchoosakun S, Kim KS, Kozan 
Ö, Llamas EB, Martinez F, Merkely B, Mendoza I, Mosterd A, 
Negrusz-Kawecka M, Peuhkurinen K, Ramires FJ, Refsgaard J, 
Rosenthal A, Senni M, Sibulo AS Jr, Silva-Cardoso J, Squire IB, 
Starling RC, Teerlink JR, Vanhaecke J, Vinereanu D, Wong RC; 
on behalf of the PARADIGM-HF Investigators and Coordinators. 
Angiotensin receptor neprilysin inhibition compared with enala-
pril on the risk of clinical progression in surviving patients with 
heart failure. Circulation. 2015;131:54–61. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.114.013748.
 
227. Baicu CF, Zhang Y, Van Laer AO, Renaud L, Zile MR, Bradshaw AD. 
Effects of the absence of procollagen C-endopeptidase enhanc-
er-2 on myocardial collagen accumulation in chronic pressure 
overload. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2012;303:H234–
H240. doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.00227.2012.
 
228. Chen HH, Glockner JF, Schirger JA, Cataliotti A, Redfield MM, 
Burnett JC Jr. Novel protein therapeutics for systolic heart failure: 
chronic subcutaneous B-type natriuretic peptide. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2012;60:2305–2312. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2012.07.056.
 
229. O’Connor CM, Starling RC, Hernandez AF, Armstrong PW, 
Dickstein K, Hasselblad V, Heizer GM, Komajda M, Massie BM, 
McMurray JJ, Nieminen MS, Reist CJ, Rouleau JL, Swedberg K, 
Adams KF Jr, Anker SD, Atar D, Battler A, Botero R, Bohidar 
NR, Butler J, Clausell N, Corbalán R, Costanzo MR, Dahlstrom 
U, Deckelbaum LI, Diaz R, Dunlap ME, Ezekowitz JA, Feldman 
D, Felker GM, Fonarow GC, Gennevois D, Gottlieb SS, Hill JA, 
Hollander JE, Howlett JG, Hudson MP, Kociol RD, Krum H, 
Laucevicius A, Levy WC, Méndez GF, Metra M, Mittal S, Oh BH, 
Pereira NL, Ponikowski P, Tang WH, Wilson WH, Tanomsup S, 
Teerlink JR, Triposkiadis F, Troughton RW, Voors AA, Whellan DJ, 
Zannad F, Califf RM. Effect of nesiritide in patients with acute 
decompensated heart failure [published correction appears in N 
Engl J Med. 2011;365:773]. N Engl J Med. 2011;365:32–43. 
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1100171.
 
230. Zile MR, Claggett BL, Prescott MF, McMurray JJ, Packer M, 
Rouleau JL, Swedberg K, Desai AS, Gong J, Shi VC, Solomon 
SD. Prognostic implications of changes in N-terminal pro-B-type 
natriuretic peptide in patients with heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2016;68:2425–2436. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2016.09.931.
 
231. Kociol RD, McNulty SE, Hernandez AF, Lee KL, Redfield MM, 
Tracy RP, Braunwald E, O’Connor CM, Felker GM; on behalf 
of the NHLBI Heart Failure Network Steering Committee and 
Investigators. Markers of decongestion, dyspnea relief and 
clinical outcomes among patients hospitalized with acute 
heart failure. Circ Heart Fail. 2013;6:240–245. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCHEARTFAILURE.112.969246.
 
232. Packer M, Colucci W, Fisher L, Massie BM, Teerlink JR, Young 
J, Padley RJ, Thakkar R, Delgado-Herrera L, Salon J, Garratt 
C, Huang B, Sarapohja T; REVIVE Heart Failure Study Group. 
Effect of levosimendan on the short-term clinical course of pa-
tients with acutely decompensated heart failure. JACC Heart Fail. 
2013;1:103–111. doi: 10.1016/j.jchf.2012.12.004.
 
233. Shah MR, Hasselblad V, Tasissa G, Christenson RH, Binanay C, 
O’Connor CM, Ohman EM, Stevenson LW, Califf RM. Rapid assay 
brain natriuretic peptide and troponin I in patients hospitalized 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Chow et al
May 30, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e1054–e1091. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000490
e1090
with decompensated heart failure (from the Evaluation Study of 
Congestive Heart Failure and Pulmonary Artery Catheterization 
Effectiveness Trial). Am J Cardiol. 2007;100:1427–1433. doi: 
10.1016/j.amjcard.2007.06.035.
 
234. Metra M, Cotter G, Davison BA, Felker GM, Filippatos G, 
Greenberg BH, Ponikowski P, Unemori E, Voors AA, Adams KF Jr, 
Dorobantu MI, Grinfeld L, Jondeau G, Marmor A, Masip J, Pang 
PS, Werdan K, Prescott MF, Edwards C, Teichman SL, Trapani A, 
Bush CA, Saini R, Schumacher C, Severin T, Teerlink JR; RELAX-
AHF Investigators. Effect of serelaxin on cardiac, renal, and 
hepatic biomarkers in the Relaxin in Acute Heart Failure (RELAX-
AHF) development program: correlation with outcomes. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2013;61:196–206. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2012.11.005.
 
235. Chow SL, O’Barr SA, Peng J, Chew E, Pak F, Quist R, Patel P, 
Patterson JH, Heywood JT. Modulation of novel cardiorenal 
and inflammatory biomarkers by intravenous nitroglycerin and 
nesiritide in acute decompensated heart failure: an explor-
atory study. Circ Heart Fail. 2011;4:450–455. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCHEARTFAILURE.110.958066.
 
236. Januzzi JL Jr, Filippatos G, Nieminen M, Gheorghiade M. Troponin 
elevation in patients with heart failure: on behalf of the third 
Universal Definition of Myocardial Infarction Global Task Force: 
Heart Failure Section. Eur Heart J. 2012;33:2265–2271. doi: 
10.1093/eurheartj/ehs191.
 
237. Kuwabara Y, Sato Y, Miyamoto T, Taniguchi R, Matsuoka T, 
Isoda K, Yamane K, Nishi K, Fujiwara H, Takatsu Y. Persistently 
increased serum concentrations of cardiac troponin in patients 
with acutely decompensated heart failure are predictive of ad-
verse outcomes. Circ J. 2007;71:1047–1051.
 
238. Shah RV, Chen-Tournoux AA, Picard MH, van Kimmenade RR, 
Januzzi JL. Galectin-3, cardiac structure and function, and long-
term mortality in patients with acutely decompensated heart fail-
ure. Eur J Heart Fail. 2010;12:826–832. doi: 10.1093/eurjhf/
hfq091.
 
239. Wu AB. Biological and analytical variation of clinical biomarker 
testing: implications for biomarker-guided therapy. Curr Heart 
Fail Rep. 2013;10:434–440.
 
240. Forman DE, Butler J, Wang Y, Abraham WT, O’Connor CM, 
Gottlieb SS, Loh E, Massie BM, Rich MW, Stevenson LW, Young 
JB, Krumholz HM. Incidence, predictors at admission, and impact 
of worsening renal function among patients hospitalized with 
heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2004;43:61–67.
 
241. Butler J, Forman DE, Abraham WT, Gottlieb SS, Loh E, Massie 
BM, O’Connor CM, Rich MW, Stevenson LW, Wang Y, Young JB, 
Krumholz HM. Relationship between heart failure treatment and 
development of worsening renal function among hospitalized 
patients. Am Heart J. 2004;147:331–338. doi: 10.1016/j.
ahj.2003.08.012.
 
242. Ronco C, Haapio M, House AA, Anavekar N, Bellomo R. 
Cardiorenal syndrome. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2008;52:1527–1539. 
doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2008.07.051.
 
243. Ronco C, Cicoira M, McCullough PA. Cardiorenal syndrome type 
1: pathophysiological crosstalk leading to combined heart and 
kidney dysfunction in the setting of acutely decompensated heart 
failure. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;60:1031–1042. doi: 10.1016/j.
jacc.2012.01.077.
 
244. Metra M, Davison B, Bettari L, Sun H, Edwards C, Lazzarini V, 
Piovanelli B, Carubelli V, Bugatti S, Lombardi C, Cotter G, Dei 
Cas L. Is worsening renal function an ominous prognostic sign in 
patients with acute heart failure? The role of congestion and its 
interaction with renal function. Circ Heart Fail. 2012;5:54–62. 
doi: 10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.111.963413.
 
245. Greene SJ, Gheorghiade M, Vaduganathan M, Ambrosy AP, Mentz 
RJ, Subacius H, Maggioni AP, Nodari S, Konstam MA, Butler J, 
Filippatos G; EVEREST Trial investigators. Haemoconcentration, 
renal function, and post-discharge outcomes among patients hos-
pitalized for heart failure with reduced ejection fraction: insights 
from the EVEREST trial. Eur J Heart Fail. 2013;15:1401–1411. 
doi: 10.1093/eurjhf/hft110.
 
246. Testani JM, Chen J, McCauley BD, Kimmel SE, Shannon RP. 
Potential effects of aggressive decongestion during the treat-
ment of decompensated heart failure on renal function and 
survival. Circulation. 2010;122:265–272. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.109.933275.
 
247. Felker GM, Lee KL, Bull DA, Redfield MM, Stevenson LW, 
Goldsmith SR, LeWinter MM, Deswal A, Rouleau JL, Ofili EO, 
Anstrom KJ, Hernandez AF, McNulty SE, Velazquez EJ, Kfoury 
AG, Chen HH, Givertz MM, Semigran MJ, Bart BA, Mascette 
AM, Braunwald E, O’Connor CM; NHLBI Heart Failure Clinical 
Research Network. Diuretic strategies in patients with acute de-
compensated heart failure. N Engl J Med. 2011;364:797–805. 
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1005419.
 
248. Tang WH, Dupont M, Hernandez AF, Voors AA, Hsu AP, Felker 
GM, Butler J, Metra M, Anker SD, Troughton RW, Gottlieb SS, 
McMurray JJ, Armstrong PW, Massie BM, Califf RM, O’Connor 
CM, Starling RC. Comparative assessment of short-term adverse 
events in acute heart failure with cystatin C and other estimates 
of renal function: results from the ASCEND-HF trial. JACC Heart 
Fail. 2015;3:40–49. doi: 10.1016/j.jchf.2014.06.014.
 
249. Chow SL, O’Barr SA, Peng J, Chew E, Pak F, Quist R, Patel P, 
Patterson JH, Heywood JT. Renal function and neurohormonal 
changes following intravenous infusions of nitroglycerin versus ne-
siritide in patients with acute decompensated heart failure. J Card 
Fail. 2011;17:181–187. doi: 10.1016/j.cardfail.2010.10.005.
 
250. Bellomo R, Kellum JA, Ronco C. Acute kidney injury. Lancet. 
2012;380:756–766. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(11)61454-2.
 
251. Maisel A, Xue Y, Greene SJ, Pang PS, Januzzi JL, Piña IL, DeFilippi 
C, Butler J. The potential role of natriuretic peptide-guided man-
agement for patients hospitalized for heart failure. J Card Fail. 
2015;21:233–239. doi: 10.1016/j.cardfail.2014.11.009.
 
252. O’Connor CM, Hasselblad V, Mehta RH, Tasissa G, Califf RM, Fiuzat 
M, Rogers JG, Leier CV, Stevenson LW. Triage after hospitaliza-
tion with advanced heart failure: the ESCAPE (Evaluation Study of 
Congestive Heart Failure and Pulmonary Artery Catheterization 
Effectiveness) risk model and discharge score. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2010;55:872–878. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2009.08.083.
 
253. Shah RV, McNulty S, O’Connor CM, Felker GM, Braunwald E, 
Givertz MM. Effect of admission oral diuretic dose on response 
to continuous versus bolus intravenous diuretics in acute heart 
failure: an analysis from diuretic optimization strategies in acute 
heart failure. Am Heart J. 2012;164:862–868. doi: 10.1016/j.
ahj.2012.08.019.
 
254. Zannad F, McMurray JJ, Krum H, van Veldhuisen DJ, Swedberg 
K, Shi H, Vincent J, Pocock SJ, Pitt B; EMPHASIS-HF Study 
Group. Eplerenone in patients with systolic heart failure and mild 
symptoms. N Engl J Med. 2011;364:11–21. doi: 10.1056/
NEJMoa1009492.
 
255. Pfeffer MA, Pitt B, McKinlay SM. Spironolactone for heart failure 
with preserved ejection fraction. N Engl J Med. 2014;371:181–
182. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1405715.
 
256. Ahmad T, Fiuzat M, Mark DB, Neely B, Neely M, Kraus WE, 
Kitzman DW, Whellan DJ, Donahue M, Zannad F, Piña IL, Adams 
K, O’Connor CM, Felker GM. The effects of exercise on cardiovas-
cular biomarkers in patients with chronic heart failure. Am Heart 
J. 2014;167:193–202.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2013.10.018.
 
257. Teerlink JR, Cotter G, Davison BA, Felker GM, Filippatos G, 
Greenberg BH, Ponikowski P, Unemori E, Voors AA, Adams KF 
Jr, Dorobantu MI, Grinfeld LR, Jondeau G, Marmor A, Masip J, 
Pang PS, Werdan K, Teichman SL, Trapani A, Bush CA, Saini R, 
Schumacher C, Severin TM, Metra M; RELAXin in Acute Heart 
Failure (RELAX-AHF) Investigators. Serelaxin, recombinant hu-
man relaxin-2, for treatment of acute heart failure (RELAX-AHF): a 
randomised, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 2013;381:29–39. 
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61855-8.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Biomarkers in Heart Failure
Circulation. 2017;135:e1054–e1091. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000490 
May 30, 2017 e1091
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
 
258. Zannad F, Garcia AA, Anker SD, Armstrong PW, Calvo G, Cleland 
JG, Cohn JN, Dickstein K, Domanski MJ, Ekman I, Filippatos GS, 
Gheorghiade M, Hernandez AF, Jaarsma T, Koglin J, Konstam 
M, Kupfer S, Maggioni AP, Mebazaa A, Metra M, Nowack C, 
Pieske B, Piña IL, Pocock SJ, Ponikowski P, Rosano G, Ruilope 
LM, Ruschitzka F, Severin T, Solomon S, Stein K, Stockbridge 
NL, Stough WG, Swedberg K, Tavazzi L, Voors AA, Wasserman 
SM, Woehrle H, Zalewski A, McMurray JJ. Clinical outcome end-
points in heart failure trials: a European Society of Cardiology 
Heart Failure Association consensus document. Eur J Heart Fail. 
2013;15:1082–1094. doi: 10.1093/eurjhf/hft095.
 
259. Fertin M, Hennache B, Hamon M, Ennezat PV, Biausque F, 
Elkohen M, Nugue O, Tricot O, Lamblin N, Pinet F, Bauters C. 
Usefulness of serial assessment of B-type natriuretic peptide, 
troponin I, and C-reactive protein to predict left ventricular re-
modeling after acute myocardial infarction (from the REVE-2 
study). Am J Cardiol. 2010;106:1410–1416. doi: 10.1016/j.
amjcard.2010.06.071.
 
260. Jungbauer CG, Riedlinger J, Buchner S, Birner C, Resch M, 
Lubnow M, Debl K, Buesing M, Huedig H, Riegger G, Luchner 
A. High-sensitive troponin T in chronic heart failure correlates 
with severity of symptoms, left ventricular dysfunction and prog-
nosis independently from N-terminal pro-b-type natriuretic pep-
tide. Clin Chem Lab Med. 2011;49:1899–1906. doi: 10.1515/
CCLM.2011.251.
 
261. Masson S, Anand I, Favero C, Barlera S, Vago T, Bertocchi F, 
Maggioni AP, Tavazzi L, Tognoni G, Cohn JN, Latini R; on be-
half of the Valsartan Heart Failure Trial (Val-HeFT) and Gruppo 
Italiano per lo Studio della Sopravvivenza nell’Insufficienza 
Cardiaca–Heart Failure (GISSI-HF) Investigators. Serial measure-
ment of cardiac troponin T using a highly sensitive assay in pa-
tients with chronic heart failure: data from 2 large randomized 
clinical trials. Circulation. 2012;125:280–288. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.111.044149.
 
262. Nikolaou M, Parissis J, Yilmaz MB, Seronde MF, Kivikko M, Laribi S, 
Paugam-Burtz C, Cai D, Pohjanjousi P, Laterre PF, Deye N, Poder 
P, Cohen-Solal A, Mebazaa A. Liver function abnormalities, clinical 
profile, and outcome in acute decompensated heart failure. Eur 
Heart J. 2013;34:742–749. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehs332.
 
263. Gullestad L, Ueland T, Kjekshus J, Nymo SH, Hulthe J, Muntendam 
P, Adourian A, Böhm M, van Veldhuisen DJ, Komajda M, Cleland 
JG, Wikstrand J, McMurray JJ, Aukrust P; CORONA Study Group. 
Galectin-3 predicts response to statin therapy in the Controlled 
Rosuvastatin Multinational Trial in Heart Failure (CORONA). Eur 
Heart J. 2012;33:2290–2296. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehs077.
 
264. Lee DS, Pencina MJ, Benjamin EJ, Wang TJ, Levy D, O’Donnell CJ, 
Nam BH, Larson MG, D’Agostino RB, Vasan RS. Association of 
parental heart failure with risk of heart failure in offspring. N Engl 
J Med. 2006;355:138–147. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa052948.
 
265. Post WS, Larson MG, Myers RH, Galderisi M, Levy D. Heritability of 
left ventricular mass: the Framingham Heart Study. Hypertension. 
 
1997;30:1025–1028.
 
266. Seidman JG, Seidman C. The genetic basis for cardiomyopathy: 
from mutation identification to mechanistic paradigms. Cell. 
2001;104:557–567.
 
267. Smith NL, Felix JF, Morrison AC, Demissie S, Glazer NL, Loehr 
LR, Cupples LA, Dehghan A, Lumley T, Rosamond WD, Lieb W, 
Rivadeneira F, Bis JC, Folsom AR, Benjamin E, Aulchenko YS, 
Haritunians T, Couper D, Murabito J, Wang YA, Stricker BH, 
Gottdiener JS, Chang PP, Wang TJ, Rice KM, Hofman A, Heckbert 
SR, Fox ER, O’Donnell CJ, Uitterlinden AG, Rotter JI, Willerson 
JT, Levy D, van Duijn CM, Psaty BM, Witteman JC, Boerwinkle 
E, Vasan RS. Association of genome-wide variation with the 
risk of incident heart failure in adults of European and African 
ancestry: a prospective meta-analysis from the Cohorts for Heart 
and Aging Research in Genomic Epidemiology (CHARGE) consor-
tium. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2010;3:256–266. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCGENETICS.109.895763.
 
268. Cappola TP, Li M, He J, Ky B, Gilmore J, Qu L, Keating B, Reilly 
M, Kim CE, Glessner J, Frackelton E, Hakonarson H, Syed F, 
Hindes A, Matkovich SJ, Cresci S, Dorn GW 2nd. Common vari-
ants in HSPB7 and FRMD4B associated with advanced heart 
failure. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2010;3:147–154. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCGENETICS.109.898395.
 
269. Stark K, Esslinger UB, Reinhard W, Petrov G, Winkler T, Komajda 
M, Isnard R, Charron P, Villard E, Cambien F, Tiret L, Aumont 
MC, Dubourg O, Trochu JN, Fauchier L, Degroote P, Richter A, 
Maisch B, Wichter T, Zollbrecht C, Grassl M, Schunkert H, Linsel-
Nitschke P, Erdmann J, Baumert J, Illig T, Klopp N, Wichmann 
HE, Meisinger C, Koenig W, Lichtner P, Meitinger T, Schillert A, 
König IR, Hetzer R, Heid IM, Regitz-Zagrosek V, Hengstenberg C. 
Genetic association study identifies HSPB7 as a risk gene for idio-
pathic dilated cardiomyopathy. PLoS Genet. 2010;6:e1001167. 
doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001167.
 
270. Cappola TP, Matkovich SJ, Wang W, van Booven D, Li M, Wang X, 
Qu L, Sweitzer NK, Fang JC, Reilly MP, Hakonarson H, Nerbonne 
JM, Dorn GW 2nd. Loss-of-function DNA sequence variant in the 
CLCNKA chloride channel implicates the cardio-renal axis in in-
terindividual heart failure risk variation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U 
S 
A. 
2011;108:2456–2461.
 
271. Morrison AC, Felix JF, Cupples LA, Glazer NL, Loehr LR, Dehghan 
A, Demissie S, Bis JC, Rosamond WD, Aulchenko YS, Wang YA, 
Haritunians T, Folsom AR, Rivadeneira F, Benjamin EJ, Lumley T, 
Couper D, Stricker BH, O’Donnell CJ, Rice KM, Chang PP, Hofman 
A, Levy D, Rotter JI, Fox ER, Uitterlinden AG, Wang TJ, Psaty BM, 
Willerson JT, van Duijn CM, Boerwinkle E, Witteman JC, Vasan RS, 
Smith NL. Genomic variation associated with mortality among 
adults of European and African ancestry with heart failure: the 
Cohorts for Heart and Aging Research in Genomic Epidemiology 
Consortium. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2010;3:248–255. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.109.895995.
 
272. Gerszten RE, Wang TJ. The search for new cardiovascular 
biomarkers. Nature. 2008;451:949–952. doi: 10.1038/
nature06802.
 
273. Mebazaa A, Vanpoucke G, Thomas G, Verleysen K, Cohen-
Solal A, Vanderheyden M, Bartunek J, Mueller C, Launay JM, 
Van Landuyt N, D’Hondt F, Verschuere E, Vanhaute C, Tuytten 
R, Vanneste L, De Cremer K, Wuyts J, Davies H, Moerman P, 
Logeart D, Collet C, Lortat-Jacob B, Tavares M, Laroy W, Januzzi 
JL, Samuel JL, Kas K. Unbiased plasma proteomics for novel 
diagnostic biomarkers in cardiovascular disease: identification of 
quiescin Q6 as a candidate biomarker of acutely decompensated 
heart failure. Eur Heart J. 2012;33:2317–2324. doi: 10.1093/
eurheartj/ehs162.
 
274. Dunn WB, Broadhurst DI, Deepak SM, Buch MH, McDowell G, 
Spasic I, Ellis DI, Brooks N, Kell DB, Neyses L. Serum metabo-
lomics reveals many novel metabolic markers of heart failure, 
including pseudouridine and 2-oxoglutarate. Metabolomics. 
2007;3:413–426.
 
275. Kang SM, Park JC, Shin MJ, Lee H, Oh J, Ryu DH, Hwang GS, 
Chung JH. 1H nuclear magnetic resonance based metabolic uri-
nary profiling of patients with ischemic heart failure. Clin Biochem. 
2011;44:293–299. doi: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2010.11.010.
 
276. Zheng Y, Yu B, Alexander D, Manolio TA, Aguilar D, Coresh J, 
Heiss G, Boerwinkle E, Nettleton JA. Associations between me-
tabolomic compounds and incident heart failure among African 
Americans: the ARIC Study. Am J Epidemiol. 2013;178:534–
542. doi: 10.1093/aje/kwt004.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
