 Surveillance Summaries / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
April 1, 2016 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
Prevalence and Characteristics of Autism Spectrum 
Disorder Among Children Aged 8 Years — Autism 
and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring 
Network, 11 Sites, United States, 2012
This report has been corrected and republished. Please click here to view the corrected report and click 
here to view the detailed changes to the report.
 Surveillance Summaries
The MMWR series of publications is published by the Center for Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Laboratory Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Atlanta, GA 30329-4027.
Suggested citation: [Author names; first three, then et al., if more than six.] [Title]. MMWR Surveill Summ 2016;65(No. SS-#):[inclusive page numbers].
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Thomas R. Frieden, MD, MPH, Director 
Harold W. Jaffe, MD, MA, Associate Director for Science 
Joanne Cono, MD, ScM, Director, Office of Science Quality 
Chesley L. Richards, MD, MPH, Deputy Director for Public Health Scientific Services
Michael F. Iademarco, MD, MPH, Director, Center for Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Laboratory Services 
MMWR Editorial and Production Staff (Serials)
Sonja A. Rasmussen, MD, MS, Editor-in-Chief
Charlotte K. Kent, PhD, MPH, Executive Editor 
Christine G. Casey, MD, Editor
Teresa F. Rutledge, Managing Editor
David C. Johnson, Lead Technical Writer-Editor
Jeffrey D. Sokolow, MA, Project Editor
Martha F. Boyd, Lead Visual Information Specialist
Maureen A. Leahy, Julia C. Martinroe, 
Stephen R. Spriggs, Moua Yang, Tong Yang,
Visual Information Specialists
Quang M. Doan, MBA, Phyllis H. King, Terraye M. Starr,
Information Technology Specialists
MMWR Editorial Board
Timothy F. Jones, MD, Chairman
Matthew L. Boulton, MD, MPH
Virginia A. Caine, MD 
Katherine Lyon Daniel, PhD
Jonathan E. Fielding, MD, MPH, MBA
David W. Fleming, MD 
William E. Halperin, MD, DrPH, MPH
King K. Holmes, MD, PhD 
Robin Ikeda, MD, MPH 
Rima F. Khabbaz, MD
Phyllis Meadows, PhD, MSN, RN
Jewel Mullen, MD, MPH, MPA
Jeff Niederdeppe, PhD
Patricia Quinlisk, MD, MPH 
Patrick L. Remington, MD, MPH 
Carlos Roig, MS, MA
William L. Roper, MD, MPH 
William Schaffner, MD
CONTENTS
Introduction ............................................................................................................2
Methods 
....................................................................................................................3
Results .......................................................................................................................6
Discussion ................................................................................................................8
Limitations ............................................................................................................ 11
Future Study Directions ................................................................................... 11
Conclusion ............................................................................................................ 12
References 
............................................................................................................. 12
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / April 1, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
1
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Prevalence and Characteristics of Autism Spectrum Disorder Among 
Children Aged 8 Years — Autism and Developmental Disabilities 
Monitoring Network, 11 Sites, United States, 2012
Deborah L. Christensen, PhD1
Jon Baio, EdS1
Kim Van Naarden Braun, PhD1
Deborah Bilder, MD2
Jane Charles, MD3
John N. Constantino, MD4
Julie Daniels, PhD5
Maureen S. Durkin, PhD6
Robert T. Fitzgerald, PhD4
Margaret Kurzius-Spencer, PhD7
Li-Ching Lee, PhD8
Sydney Pettygrove, PhD7
Cordelia Robinson, PhD9
Eldon Schulz, MD10
Chris Wells, PhD11
Martha S. Wingate, DrPH12
Walter Zahorodny, PhD13
Marshalyn Yeargin-Allsopp, MD1
1Division of Congenital and Developmental Disorders, National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities, CDC
2University of Utah, Salt Lake City
3Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston
4Washington University in St. Louis, Missouri
5University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill
6University of Wisconsin–Madison
7University of Arizona, Tucson
8Johns Hopkins University
9University of Colorado at Denver and Health Sciences Center
10University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock
11Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment, Denver
12University of Alabama at Birmingham
13Rutgers University–New Jersey Medical School, Newark
Abstract
Problem/Condition: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD).
Period Covered: 2012.
Description of System: The Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring (ADDM) Network is an active surveillance system 
that provides estimates of the prevalence and characteristics of ASD among children aged 8 years whose parents or guardians reside 
in 11 ADDM Network sites in the United States (Arkansas, Arizona, Colorado, Georgia, Maryland, Missouri, New Jersey, North 
Carolina, South Carolina, Utah, and Wisconsin). Surveillance to determine ASD case status is conducted in two phases. The first 
phase consists of screening and abstracting comprehensive evaluations performed by professional service providers in the community. 
Data sources identified for record review are categorized as either 1) education source type, including developmental evaluations to 
determine eligibility for special education services or 2) health care source type, including diagnostic and developmental evaluations. 
The second phase involves the review of all abstracted evaluations by trained clinicians to determine ASD surveillance case status. A 
child meets the surveillance case definition for ASD if one or more comprehensive evaluations of that child completed by a qualified 
professional describes behaviors that are consistent with the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, 
Text Revision diagnostic criteria for any of the following conditions: autistic disorder, pervasive developmental disorder–not otherwise 
specified (including atypical autism), or Asperger disorder. This 
report provides ASD prevalence estimates for children aged 
8 years living in catchment areas of the ADDM Network sites 
in 2012, overall and stratified by sex, race/ethnicity, and the type 
of source records (education and health records versus health 
Corresponding author: Deborah L. Christensen, Division of Congenital 
and Developmental Disorders. Telephone: 404-498-3836; E-mail: 
dchristensen@cdc.gov.
 Surveillance Summaries
2 
MMWR / April 1, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
records only). In addition, this report describes the proportion of children with ASD with a score consistent with intellectual disability 
on a standardized intellectual ability test, the age at which the earliest known comprehensive evaluation was performed, the proportion 
of children with a previous ASD diagnosis, the specific type of ASD diagnosis, and any special education eligibility classification.
Results: For 2012, the combined estimated prevalence of ASD among the 11 ADDM Network sites was 14.6 per 1,000 (one in 68) 
children aged 8 years. Estimated prevalence was significantly higher among boys aged 8 years (23.6 per 1,000) than among girls 
aged 8 years (5.3 per 1,000). Estimated ASD prevalence was significantly higher among non-Hispanic white children aged 8 years 
(15.5 per 1,000) compared with non-Hispanic black children (13.2 per 1,000), and Hispanic (10.1 per 1,000) children aged 8 years. 
Estimated prevalence varied widely among the 11 ADDM Network sites, ranging from 8.2 per 1,000 children aged 8 years (in the 
area of the Maryland site where only health care records were reviewed) to 24.6 per 1,000 children aged 8 years (in New Jersey, 
where both education and health care records were reviewed). Estimated prevalence was higher in surveillance sites where education 
records and health records were reviewed compared with sites where health records only were reviewed (17.1 per 1,000 and 10.7 
per 1,000 children aged 8 years, respectively; p<0.05). Among children identified with ASD by the ADDM Network, 82% had a 
previous ASD diagnosis or educational classification; this did not vary by sex or between non-Hispanic white and non-Hispanic 
black children. A lower percentage of Hispanic children (78%) had a previous ASD diagnosis or classification compared with non-
Hispanic white children (82%) and with non-Hispanic black children (84%). The median age at earliest known comprehensive 
evaluation was 40 months, and 43% of children had received an earliest known comprehensive evaluation by age 36 months. The 
percentage of children with an earliest known comprehensive evaluation by age 36 months was similar for boys and girls, but was 
higher for non-Hispanic white children (45%) compared with non-Hispanic black children (40%) and Hispanic children (39%).
Interpretation: Overall estimated ASD prevalence was 14.6 per 1,000 children aged 8 years in the ADDM Network sites in 2012. The 
higher estimated prevalence among sites that reviewed both education and health records suggests the role of special education systems in 
providing comprehensive evaluations and services to children with developmental disabilities. Disparities by race/ethnicity in estimated 
ASD prevalence, particularly for Hispanic children, as well as disparities in the age of earliest comprehensive evaluation and presence of 
a previous ASD diagnosis or classification, suggest that access to treatment and services might be lacking or delayed for some children.
Public Health Action: The ADDM Network will continue to monitor the prevalence and characteristics of ASD among children 
aged 8 years living in selected sites across the United States. Recommendations from the ADDM Network include enhancing 
strategies to 1) lower the age of first evaluation of ASD by community providers in accordance with the Healthy People 2020 
goal that children with ASD are evaluated by age 36 months and begin receiving community-based support and services by age 
48 months; 2) reduce disparities by race/ethnicity in identified ASD prevalence, the age of first comprehensive evaluation, and 
presence of a previous ASD diagnosis or classification; and 3) assess the effect on ASD prevalence of the revised ASD diagnostic 
criteria published in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition.
Introduction
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a developmental disability 
characterized by social and communication impairments and by 
restricted interests and repetitive behaviors (1). The first studies 
of the prevalence of autism were published in the 1960s and 
1970s, when autism was thought to be a very severe condition, 
usually accompanied by intellectual disability (2). These studies 
reported the prevalence to be approximately four to five cases 
per 10,000 children. Autism was first distinguished as a unique 
clinical diagnosis by the American Psychiatric Association with 
the publication in 1980 of the third edition of the Diagnostic 
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-III) (3), which 
provided diagnostic criteria for infantile autism and pervasive 
developmental disorder. Since that time, autism has become 
recognized as a spectrum of behavioral characteristics, which 
results in varying degrees of functional limitations. In 1994, 
the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth 
Edition (DSM-IV) introduced revised diagnostic criteria and 
five subtypes of autism, including autistic disorder, Asperger 
disorder, pervasive developmental disorder–not otherwise 
specified (PDD-NOS), childhood disintegrative disorder, and 
Rett’s disorder (4). The first three subtypes comprise autism 
spectrum disorder (ASD), whereas the latter two conditions 
belong to the wider category of pervasive developmental 
disorders. The fifth edition of DSM, which was published in 
2013 (5), redefined ASD as a single disorder, along with other 
changes in the diagnostic classification of ASD. For this report, 
the evaluations contained in children’s records were conducted 
no later than 2012, and therefore DSM-IV-TR diagnostic 
criteria were used in the ASD surveillance case definition to 
estimate ASD prevalence and characteristics.
Substantial increases in the estimated prevalence of ASD 
in the United States have been reported since the 1990s. Two 
studies conducted in the late 1980s that used DSM-III screening 
and diagnostic criteria for pervasive developmental disorder 
estimated prevalence as 3.3 cases per 10,000 children aged 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / April 1, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
3–18 years (6) and 3.6 cases per 10,000 children aged 8–12 years 
(7). Since then, increases in estimated ASD prevalence have 
been measured, using data from special education and other 
administrative records (8–10), national surveys (11–14), and 
active public health surveillance conducted through CDC’s 
Metropolitan Atlanta Developmental Disabilities Surveillance 
Program (MADDSP) and its extended surveillance network, the 
Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring (ADDM) 
Network. MADDSP first estimated ASD prevalence among 
children aged 3–10 years in 1996 to be 3.4 per 1,000 children 
aged 3–10 years (15). Subsequently, the larger ADDM Network 
estimated prevalence across multiple U.S. sites every 2 years 
during 2000–2010. The most recent prevalence estimate from 
the ADDM Network for children aged 8 years was 14.7 per 
1,000 children in 2010 (16), compared with 11.3 in 2008 (17), 
9.0 in 2006 (18), 6.6 in 2002 (19), and 6.7 in 2000 (20).
The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends that 
pediatric health care providers administer two ASD screenings, 
at ages 18 and 24 months, using a valid and reliable screening 
tool (21). Children whose screening results are concerning 
should subsequently receive a comprehensive developmental 
evaluation from a general or developmental pediatrician, child 
neurologist, child psychiatrist, or child psychologist, which can 
be obtained privately or through the Part C (ages 0–<3 years) 
or Part B (ages 3–21 years) programs of the Individuals with 
Disabilities Education Act (http://idea.ed.gov/explore/home) 
supported by each state. To support and measure progress in 
early identification, the Healthy People 2020 initiative includes a 
goal to increase the percentage of children with ASD who receive 
their first comprehensive evaluation by age 36 months by 10%, 
from the baseline of 42.7% in 2006 to the goal of 47.0% in 2020 
(22). ADDM Network ASD surveillance data for children aged 
8 years are used to evaluate progress toward this goal.
This report describes estimated ASD prevalence and 
characteristics among children aged 8 years in the ADDM 
Network in 2012. This includes 1) total estimated ASD 
prevalence as well as prevalence by surveillance site, sex, and 
race/ethnicity and 2) characteristics of children with ASD, 
including presence of intellectual disability, age at earliest known 
comprehensive evaluation, presence of a previous ASD diagnosis 
or educational classification, age at previous ASD diagnosis and 
diagnosis subtype, and special education eligibility classification. 
The intended audience for this report includes health care 
providers, early intervention service providers, therapists, school 
psychologists, educators, researchers, policymakers, and program 
administrators seeking to understand and provide for the needs 
of persons with ASD and their families. These data can be used to 
help plan for service needs, stimulate research into etiology and 
risk factors, and initiate and implement policies that promote 
optimal outcomes in health care and education.
Methods
ADDM Network Sites
The ADDM Network is an active surveillance system that 
provides estimates of the prevalence and characteristics of 
ASD among children aged 8 years whose parents or guardians 
reside within 11 ADDM sites in the United States (selected 
counties or parts of counties in Arkansas, Arizona, Colorado, 
Georgia, Maryland, Missouri, New Jersey, North Carolina, 
South Carolina, Utah, and Wisconsin). The ADDM Network 
uses multisite, multiple-source surveillance based on a review 
of behavioral descriptions and ASD diagnoses documented in 
comprehensive developmental evaluations present in children’s 
health and education records, using a model developed by 
CDC’s MADDSP (15,23). The ADDM Network sites were 
selected through a competitive process, with preference for a 
diverse population in terms of race/ethnicity. Each ADDM site 
functions as a public health authority under the Health Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 Privacy Rule and 
meets applicable local Institutional Review Board, privacy, and 
confidentiality requirements under 45 CFR 46 (24).
Case Ascertainment
Children eligible for case ascertainment were born in 2004, 
and their parents or guardians lived in site-specific ADDM 
Network surveillance catchment areas at some time during 
2012. At each site, surveillance data were linked to the state’s 
2004 birth certificate records to obtain data on race/ethnicity 
and other demographic characteristics. If a birth certificate 
match was not made, the child was assumed to have been born 
outside the state. No clinical examinations of children were 
performed by ADDM Network staff.
ADDM Network investigators use a two-phase surveillance 
approach to ascertain potential ASD cases. The first phase 
involves screening and abstracting records from multiple 
data sources in the community, including special education 
programs and health care providers who evaluate and treat 
children with developmental disabilities. Agreements to 
access records are made at the institutional level in the form 
of contracts, memoranda, or other formal agreements. In the 
second phase, all abstracted evaluations are compiled and 
reviewed by clinicians with specialized training in the evaluation 
and diagnosis of ASD, including physicians, psychologists, and 
speech/language pathologists. These clinician reviewers follow 
the ADDM surveillance protocol to determine ASD case status 
and to maintain reliability.
Data sources identified for record review are categorized 
as either 1) education source type, including developmental 
evaluations to determine eligibility for special education 
 Surveillance Summaries
4 
MMWR / April 1, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
services or 2) health care source type, including diagnostic and 
developmental evaluations. All ADDM Network sites have 
agreements in place to access records at health care sources. 
For the 2012 surveillance year, six sites (Arizona, Georgia, 
New Jersey, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Utah) also 
reviewed education records in all or most of the surveillance 
area. In the Maryland site, education records were reviewed in 
one of the six participating counties, and in the Colorado site, 
education records were reviewed for some of the public school 
districts in one of the seven counties in the surveillance area. 
For these two surveillance sites, only health care source type 
records were reviewed in the remaining counties. Three sites 
(Arkansas, Missouri, and Wisconsin) reviewed records only at 
health care sources.
In the first phase of surveillance, ADDM Network sites 
identify source records to review on the basis of a child’s 
year of birth and either 1) eligibility classifications in special 
education or 2) International Classification of Diseases, Ninth 
Revision, Clinical Modification (ICD-9-CM) billing codes for 
select childhood disabilities or conditions. Children’s records 
are screened to confirm year of birth and whether the parent 
or guardian of the child lived in the surveillance area at any 
time during the surveillance year. For children meeting age 
and residency requirements, the source files are screened 
for specific behavioral or diagnostic descriptions defined by 
ADDM as triggers for abstraction. These triggers include a 
documented ASD classification (either a diagnosis of ASD 
or a special education placement category of ASD) and/or 
descriptions of behaviors consistent with an ASD diagnosis 
(e.g., limited or no interaction with other children or prefers 
objects over persons). If abstraction triggers are found, available 
information from birth through the current surveillance year 
is abstracted, including: 1) information on demographic 
characteristics; 2) other medical conditions; 3) evaluation 
dates and verbatim descriptions of behaviors consistent with 
ASD from comprehensive developmental evaluations by 
community professionals; 4) community professional type and 
degree (e.g., MD [neurologist, psychiatrist, or developmental 
pediatrician], PhD [psychologist], or EdS [education specialist]); 
5) developmental history, including statements about parental 
or professional concerns that the child’s development was 
atypical; 6) special education service category; 7) scores from 
intelligence quotient (IQ), adaptive, and autism diagnostic 
tests; and 8) evaluation conclusions. The most recent eligibility 
classification for receiving special education services (e.g., autism 
or learning disability) is collected from special education records. 
For all abstracted evaluations, information from multiple sources 
is combined into one composite summary record for each child.
In the second phase of surveillance, referred to as “clinician 
review,” the abstracted composite evaluation records are 
deidentified and reviewed systematically by clinicians who have 
undergone standardized training to determine ASD case status 
using a coding scheme based on the DSM-IV-TR (1) criteria for 
ASD. A child meets the surveillance case definition for ASD if 
behaviors described in the composite record are consistent with 
the DSM-IV-TR diagnostic criteria for any of the following 
conditions: autistic disorder, PDD-NOS (including atypical 
autism), or Asperger disorder. ASD surveillance case criteria were 
based on DSM-IV-TR because surveillance was conducted using 
records generated before or during 2012, prior to publication of 
new diagnostic criteria in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 
of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5) (5). For the majority 
of children, one clinician reviews the composite record. If a child 
meets the surveillance case criteria, but the reviewer is uncertain 
whether ASD is the most appropriate classification, a second, 
independent review is done. Following the second review, the two 
reviewers meet and come to a consensus on the child’s case status.
Descriptive Characteristics
The diagnostic summaries from each evaluation record were 
abstracted for each child, including age at and subtype of any 
previous ASD diagnoses. Children were considered to have a 
previously documented ASD classification if the child received 
a DSM-IV-TR diagnosis of autistic disorder, Asperger disorder, 
PDD-NOS, or ASD-NOS, or if ASD was documented by an 
ICD-9-CM billing code at any time from birth through the 
year when the child reached age 8 years, or if the child received 
special education services under an autism eligibility during 
the surveillance year. Information was collected on children’s 
functional abilities, including scores on standardized tests of 
intellectual ability. The most recently recorded scores from 
tests of a child’s intellectual ability were used to categorize 
the child in the intellectual disability range if the intelligence 
quotient (IQ) score was ≤70, in the borderline range if the 
score was 71–85, and in the average to above-average range if 
the score was >85. The child’s age at the earliest comprehensive 
evaluation was documented and is reported as the median age 
at the earliest comprehensive evaluation in months and as the 
percentage of children with an earliest known comprehensive 
evaluation performed by age 36 months. Information also was 
recorded about the age at which developmental concerns were 
documented in the records. Analyses of the age at earliest known 
comprehensive evaluation and the age at which developmental 
concerns first were documented were restricted to children who 
were born in the state in which they resided at age 8 years. This 
restriction was imposed to reduce bias that might have resulted 
from the unavailability of evaluations performed early in life 
when the child was residing in a state other than the state in 
which the ADDM Network site was located. 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / April 1, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
5
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Quality Assurance
All ADDM Network sites follow the same quality assurance 
protocol. In the first phase of case ascertainment, screening 
and abstraction of source records are monitored for accuracy 
by means of a 10% random sample of records to check the 
accuracy of data collection as well as the appropriate selection 
of the record for abstraction. Initial interrater reliability 
among ASD clinician reviewers was established to a minimum 
standard of 90% agreement on their decision about whether 
the child meets the ASD surveillance case definition defined in 
the ADDM study protocol prior to the beginning of the second 
phase of case ascertainment. Subsequently, interrater reliability 
for clinician reviewers is monitored on an ongoing basis using 
a blinded, random 10% sample of abstracted records that are 
scored independently by two reviewers. The final interrater 
agreement for determining surveillance ASD case status (ASD 
case versus not ASD case) was 90.4% when reliability samples 
from all ADDM Network sites were combined (K = 0.8).
Analytic Methods
The prevalence estimate of ASD among children in the 
ADDM Network was calculated as the number of children aged 
8 years who met the surveillance ASD case definition across the 
11 ADDM Network sites in 2012 divided by the number of 
children aged 8 years residing in the counties comprising the 
11 surveillance sites. Population denominators used were obtained 
from CDC’s National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) 
vintage 2014 postcensal bridged-race population estimates for 
2012 (http://www.cdc.gov/nchs). In the Arizona site, only part of a 
county was included in the surveillance catchment area. Therefore, 
the number of children in this county who lived within the 
surveillance area was estimated in order to obtain the appropriate 
denominator. This was done by obtaining the third-grade school 
enrollment counts for the years 2012–2013 for the public school 
districts included in the surveillance area from the National Center 
for Education Statistics (https://nces.ed.gov). The number of 
third-grade students enrolled in the public school districts included 
in the surveillance area was divided by the number of third-grade 
students enrolled in all of the public school districts in the county 
to obtain the proportion of students enrolled in participating 
school districts. This proportion was then applied to the NCHS 
vintage 2014 postcensal bridged-race population estimate for 
each county in 2012 to obtain the relevant denominator. The 
bridged-race categories used in this report include non-Hispanic 
white, non-Hispanic black, Hispanic, American Indian/Alaska 
Native, and Asian/Pacific Islander. Data from all ADDM sites 
were pooled to produce combined ASD prevalence estimates. 
Prevalence estimates were stratified by surveillance site, sex, and 
race/ethnicity (i.e., non-Hispanic white, non-Hispanic black, and 
Hispanic). Other race/ethnicity groups were represented by too 
few children to generate stable estimates of ASD prevalence at all 
surveillance sites. The race/ethnicity of each child whose records 
were abstracted was determined from information contained in 
source records or, if not found in the source records, from birth 
certificates (when available). Hispanic refers to all children who 
are of Hispanic ethnicity, regardless of race. Overall prevalence 
estimates included all children identified with ASD regardless of 
sex, race/ethnicity, or intellectual ability and therefore were not 
limited to children with available data on these characteristics.
Statistical tests were used and confidence interval (CI) estimates 
were calculated following the assumption that the observed counts 
of ASD surveillance cases were drawn from an underlying Poisson 
sampling distribution. Pearson chi-square tests and prevalence 
ratios (PR) were used to examine the association between ASD 
prevalence estimates and characteristics of children with ASD by 
surveillance site, record source type, sex, and race/ethnicity. Exact 
tests were used when the number of children was fewer than five. 
The nonparametric median test was used to determine differences 
in median age at first evaluation for ASD and earliest known ASD 
diagnosis by sex and race/ethnicity. Statistical significance was set 
at p<0.05. All analyses were performed by using SAS statistical 
software (SAS Institute, Cary, North Carolina).
Evaluation Methods
Some children who were identified for screening could not 
be included in the ADDM Network ASD case determination 
process because some or all of the education and health records 
could not be found for review. Therefore, an analysis was 
performed to determine the potential effect of these missing 
records on ASD prevalence estimates. All children initially 
identified for screening were first stratified by two factors closely 
associated with final case status: information source (health 
source type only, education source type only, or both source 
types) and the presence or absence of either an autism special 
education eligibility or an ICD-9-CM code for ASD, collectively 
forming six strata. The potential number of cases that might 
have been identified if missing records had been included was 
estimated by assuming that within each of these six strata, the 
proportion of children with ASD in each stratum (with and 
without missing records) would be similar. Subsequently, the 
proportion of children meeting the ASD surveillance case 
definition was applied to the number of children with missing 
records in the same stratum to estimate the number of missed 
cases and the corresponding increase in prevalence. Estimates 
from all six strata were added to produce the total for each 
site. The analysis of the potential effect of missing records was 
performed for evaluation purposes, and the prevalence estimates 
presented in this report do not reflect this adjustment.
 Surveillance Summaries
6 
MMWR / April 1, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Comparison of Surveillance Sites between 
2010 and 2012
For eight sites (Arizona, Colorado, Georgia, Missouri, New 
Jersey, North Carolina, Utah, and Wisconsin), the geographic 
area covered and record source type reviewed were the same 
in 2012 and 2010. Therefore, these eight sites were included 
in analyses comparing estimated ASD prevalence in 2010 
and 2012. For two sites (Arkansas and Maryland), there 
was a change in geographic area and/or record source type. 
South Carolina contributed data in 2012 but not in 2010. 
An ADDM Network site located in Alabama conducted 
ASD surveillance for part of the 2012 surveillance year, but 
because of the loss of access to health care data sources, data 
from Alabama were not complete for the 2012 surveillance 
year and are not included in this report.
Results
Population Characteristics
The geographic surveillance area for the 11 ADDM 
Network sites in 2012 included 346,978 children aged 
8 years, which comprised 8.5% of the U.S. population 
of children aged 8 years for that year (Table 1). The 
population distribution of children by race/ethnicity 
varied by study site. In the pooled data, the population 
was 53.3% non-Hispanic white, 21.4% non-Hispanic 
black, 19.9% Hispanic, 4.8% Asian/Pacific Islander, and 
0.6% American Indian/Alaska Native.
Record Review
A total of 48,304 records for 38,038 children aged 8 years 
were reviewed from education and health care sources. Among 
these, the source records of 9,629 (19%) children met the 
criteria for abstraction and subsequently were reviewed by 
clinicians. Of these 9,629 children, 5,063 (53%) met the ASD 
surveillance case criteria.
Birth Certificate Linkage
Of the 5,063 children meeting the ASD surveillance case 
criteria, 3,881 children (77%) were born in the state where the 
ADDM Network surveillance site is located, as confirmed by 
a match to a birth certificate from that state. This percentage 
ranged from 68% (South Carolina) to 86% (Missouri). The 
percentage of children who were matched to a birth certificate 
did not vary by sex or race/ethnicity.
Overall ASD Prevalence Estimates
Overall estimated ASD prevalence for the 2012 surveillance 
year was 14.6 per 1,000 (one in 68) children aged 8 years, 
on the basis of pooled data from 11 ADDM sites (range: 8.2 
[Maryland, health records only reviewed] to 24.6 [in New 
Jersey]) (Table 2). Estimated ASD prevalence was highest in 
New Jersey (24.6), Maryland (education and health records 
reviewed, 18.2), Utah (17.3), and North Carolina (16.9). The 
seven areas (Arizona, Georgia, Maryland [education and health 
records reviewed], New Jersey, North Carolina, South Carolina, 
and Utah) with access to both education and health care sources 
had higher estimated ASD prevalence compared with the five 
areas (Arkansas, Colorado, Maryland [health records only 
reviewed], Missouri, and Wisconsin) with limited or no access to 
education records (17.1 and 10.7 per 1,000 children aged 8 years, 
respectively; PR: 1.6; 95% CI: 1.5–1.7; p<0.001) (Figure 1).
Prevalence by Sex and Race/Ethnicity
Across the 11 ADDM Network sites, estimated ASD 
prevalence among children aged 8 years was 23.6 per 1,000 
(one in 42) boys and 5.3 per 1,000 (one in 189) girls; site-
specific ASD estimates for boys ranged from 13.9 per 1,000 (in 
Maryland [health records only reviewed]) to 39.1 per 1,000 (in 
New Jersey), and for girls from 2.2 per 1,000 (in Maryland) to 
9.3 per 1,000 (in New Jersey) (Table 2). The overall prevalence 
ratio for boys compared with girls was 4.5 (95% CI: 4.2–4.8; 
p<0.001); site-specific male-to-female prevalence ratios ranged 
from 4.1 (in Colorado) to 6.3 (in Maryland [health records 
only reviewed]) and were all statistically significant (Table 2). 
Estimated prevalence among non-Hispanic white children 
(15.5 per 1,000) was significantly higher than it was among 
non-Hispanic black children (13.2 per 1,000; PR: 1.2, 95% CI: 
1.1–1.3; p<0.001), Asian/Pacific Islander children (11.3 per 
1,000; PR: 1.4, 95% CI: 1.2–1.6; p<0.001), and Hispanic 
children (10.1 per 1,000; PR: 1.5, 95% CI: 1.4–1.7; p<0.001) 
(Table 3). Prevalence ratios by sex and race/ethnicity were similar 
between the areas that reviewed education and health records 
and the areas that reviewed health records only (Tables 2 and 3).
Intellectual Ability
Nine ADDM Network areas (Arizona, Arkansas, Colorado, 
Georgia, Maryland [education and health records review area], 
New Jersey, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Utah) had 
data on intellectual ability for ≥70% of ASD cases (range: 
70% [Arkansas and New Jersey]–92% [in North Carolina]). 
In these nine areas, 3,390 (80%) of 4,234 children with 
ASD had data on intellectual ability; for most areas, this 
percentage did not vary by sex or race/ethnicity, with the 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / April 1, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
7
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
exception of Georgia, where the percentage of ASD cases 
with data on intellectual ability was significantly higher 
for boys compared with girls (87% and 79%, respectively; 
p<0.05). Among all 3,390 children, 31.6% were classified 
in the range of intellectual disability (IQ score ≤70 or the 
presence of an examiner’s statement of intellectual disability), 
24.5% were classified in the borderline range (IQ: 71–85), 
and 43.9% were classified in the average or above average 
range (IQ >85 or the presence of an examiner’s statement of 
average or above average intellectual ability) (Figure 2). The 
percentage of children classified in the intellectual disability 
range varied widely across the nine areas, ranging from 20% 
(in Utah) to 50% (in Arkansas). The percentage of ASD cases 
classified in the intellectual disability range was significantly 
higher among girls compared with boys in all nine areas 
combined (37% and 30%, respectively; p<0.01).
Combining data from all nine sites, the estimated prevalence 
of ASD with intellectual disability was 4.0 per 1,000 and 
ranged from 1.8 per 1,000 (in Colorado) to 5.3 per 1,000 (in 
North Carolina) (Figure 3). The estimated prevalence of ASD 
without intellectual disability was 8.7 per 1,000 and ranged 
from 4.2 per 1,000 (in Arkansas) to 12.2 per 1,000 (in New 
Jersey) (Figure 3). There was a greater male-to-female prevalence 
ratio for ASD without intellectual disability (PR: 5.1; 95% 
CI: 4.6–5.7; p<0.001) than for ASD with intellectual disability 
(PR: 3.7; 95% CI: 3.2–4.3; p<0.001) (Figure 4). The estimated 
prevalence of ASD with intellectual disability was significantly 
lower for non-Hispanic white children (3.3 per 1,000) compared 
with non-Hispanic black children (5.8 per 1,000; PR: 0.6; 95% 
CI: 0.5–0.7; p<0.001) (Figure 4).
Early Developmental Concerns and 
Earliest Comprehensive Evaluation
Analyses of the presence of early developmental concerns and 
earliest comprehensive evaluation were restricted to children 
born in the state where the ADDM Network surveillance 
site was located in order to reduce bias associated with the 
inability to review early evaluations for children who moved 
from their state of birth prior to ascertainment by the ADDM 
Network at age 8 years. Across all ADDM Network sites, 87% 
of children meeting the ASD surveillance case criteria had 
documentation of developmental concerns at age ≤36 months 
in a health or education record (Table 4). This percentage was 
similar for areas that reviewed education and health records 
compared with areas that reviewed health records only (87% 
and 88%, respectively); the percentage was significantly higher 
for non-Hispanic black children (91%) and for Hispanic 
children (89%) compared with non-Hispanic white children 
(86%; p<0.05). The percentage of children with developmental 
concerns at age ≤36 months was significantly higher for 
children with ASD and intellectual disability compared with 
children with ASD without intellectual disability (95% and 
84%, respectively; p<0.001).
Using combined data from all sites for children meeting 
the ASD surveillance case criteria and restricting to children 
born in the state where the ADDM Network surveillance 
site was located, the earliest known comprehensive 
evaluation occurred at age ≤36 months for 43% of children, 
between 37 and 48 months for 20% of children, and after 
48 months for the remaining 38% of children (Table 4). 
This percentage did not vary between boys and girls (42% 
and 45%, respectively; p>0.05), but was significantly higher 
for non-Hispanic white children (45%) compared with non-
Hispanic black children (40%; p<0.05) and with Hispanic 
children (39%; p<0.05) (data not shown). Children with 
ASD and intellectual disability were more likely to have an 
earliest known comprehensive evaluation by age 36 months 
compared with children with ASD without intellectual 
disability (55% and 39%, respectively; p<0.001) (data not 
shown). The median age at earliest known comprehensive 
evaluation was 40 months, ranging from 30 months (North 
Carolina) to 48 months (Arkansas) (data not shown).
Earliest Known ASD Diagnosis and 
Diagnosis Category
On the basis of pooled data from all ADDM Network sites, 
74% of children identified with ASD had an earliest known 
DSM-IV-TR ASD diagnosis of autistic disorder (46%), ASD-
NOS/PDD-NOS (44%), or Asperger disorder (10%) given 
by a community provider (Table 5). The median age at the 
earliest known diagnosis was 50 months overall and was lower 
for autistic disorder (46 months) compared with ASD-NOS/
PDD-NOS (49 months; p<0.01) and with Asperger disorder 
(74 months; p<0.001) (Table 5). Within each specific diagnosis 
subtype, there were no differences in median age at earliest 
known diagnosis by sex or race/ethnicity (data not shown).
Special Education Eligibility
The seven ADDM Network areas that reviewed records at 
education sources obtained data on the eligibility categories 
through which children with ASD were served in the public 
school special education system. Combined data from these 
seven areas indicate that 74% of children with ASD had 
special education records; this percentage ranged from 55% 
(Utah) to 92% (Arizona). Among these children, more than 
half had a primary special education eligibility classification of 
autism (range: 53% [in Utah]–70% [in Maryland education 
 Surveillance Summaries
8 
MMWR / April 1, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
and health records review area]) (Table 6). Combining data 
from all seven areas, the percentage of children with an 
autism eligibility classification did not vary between boys 
(61%) and girls (57%; p>0.05) or between non-Hispanic 
white (56%) and Hispanic children (56%; p>0.05) but was 
greater for non-Hispanic black children (65%) compared 
with non-Hispanic white (p<0.01) and Hispanic (p<0.01) 
children (data not shown).
Previously Documented ASD Classification
Across the 11 ADDM Network sites, 82% of children who 
met the ASD surveillance case criteria had either a previous 
diagnosis of ASD or a documented eligibility classification of 
autism in the special education system, 9% had a suspicion 
of ASD documented in an evaluation, and the remaining 
9% had no mention of ASD in the records (Figure 5). At 
individual ADDM Network sites, the percentage of children 
with a previous ASD diagnosis or eligibility classification 
ranged from 68% (Colorado) to 93% (Missouri) (Figure 5). 
The percentage of children with a previous ASD diagnosis or 
eligibility classification was the same for boys and girls (82%) 
and similar for non-Hispanic white and non-Hispanic black 
children (82% and 84%, respectively), but was significantly 
lower for Hispanic children (78%) compared with non-
Hispanic white children (p<0.01) and non-Hispanic black 
children (p<0.001) (data not shown).
Comparison of ASD Prevalence Estimates 
Between 2010 and 2012
For eight sites (Arizona, Colorado, Georgia, Missouri, New 
Jersey, North Carolina, Utah, and Wisconsin), the geographic 
areas covered and record source types reviewed were the same 
for 2010 and 2012. On the basis of combined data from these 
eight sites in each respective year, estimated ASD prevalence 
was 15.1 and 15.2 per 1,000 children aged 8 years in 2010 and 
2012, respectively (p>0.05) (Table 7). Estimated ASD prevalence 
for male, female, non-Hispanic white, non-Hispanic black, or 
Hispanic children did not differ significantly between 2010 and 
2012. Five of these eight sites collected data on intellectual ability 
for ≥70% of the children identified with ASD. On the basis 
of combined data from these five sites in each respective year, 
estimated ASD prevalence was 17.5 and 17.6 per 1,000 children 
aged 8 years in 2010 and  2012, respectively (p>0.05) and was 
similar between 2010 and 2012 for male, female, non-Hispanic 
white, non-Hispanic black, and Hispanic children (Table 8). 
Prevalence estimates were similar for 2010 and 2012 for children 
with ASD with intellectual disability and for children with ASD 
without intellectual disability.
Although overall estimated ASD prevalence between 2010 
and 2012 was similar across the eight sites that were comparable 
between these 2 years, the same was not true of all of the 
individual surveillance sites, three of which had significantly 
different prevalence estimates in 2012 compared with 2010. 
Between these two surveillance years, ASD prevalence increased 
by 16% in Wisconsin and by 12% in New Jersey and decreased 
by 19% in Missouri. 
Evaluation of the Effect of Missing Records
An evaluation of the effect of missing records suggested 
that estimated ASD prevalence might have increased by 0.1% 
(in Wisconsin) to 3.3% (in Utah) if missing records had 
been available for review. Across all 11 sites, estimated ASD 
prevalence might have increased by <1% in four sites (Arizona, 
Colorado, Missouri, and Wisconsin), by 1%–<2% in three sites 
(Georgia, North Carolina, and New Jersey) and by 2.0%–3.3% 
in four sites (Arkansas, Maryland, South Carolina, and Utah).
Discussion
Estimated ASD prevalence among children aged 8 years 
in the ADDM Network in 2012 was 14.6 per 1,000, or one 
in 68. Estimated prevalence was four and a half times higher 
among boys than among girls; estimated ASD prevalence was 
23.6 per 1,000 boys (one in 42 boys) and 5.3 per 1,000 girls 
(one in 189 girls). Prevalence estimates varied widely among the 
11 ADDM Network sites, ranging from 8.2 per 1,000 children 
aged 8 years (in the area of the Maryland site where health 
records only were reviewed) to 24.6 per 1,000 (in New Jersey, 
where both education and health records were reviewed). The 
estimated prevalence of ASD with intellectual disability was 4.0 
per 1,000 overall and ranged from 1.8 per 1,000 (in Colorado) 
to 5.3 per 1,000 (in North Carolina). The estimated prevalence 
of ASD without intellectual disability was 8.7 per 1,000 overall, 
ranged from 4.2 per 1,000 (in Arkansas) to 12.2 per 1,000 
(in New Jersey), and exceeded the estimated prevalence of 
ASD with intellectual disability in all sites. Across all ADDM 
Network sites, estimated ASD prevalence was 20% higher 
among non-Hispanic white compared with non-Hispanic 
black children, 40% higher among non-Hispanic white 
compared with Asian/Pacific Islander children, 50% higher 
among non-Hispanic white compared with Hispanic children, 
and 30% higher among non-Hispanic black compared with 
Hispanic children.
The overall prevalence estimate for 2012 was nearly 
identical to the reported estimate for the ADDM Network in 
2010 of 14.7 per 1,000, or one in 68 children aged 8 years. 
However, because of differences between 2010 and 2012 in the 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / April 1, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
9
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
geographic area covered and record source types reviewed for 
some individual ADDM Network sites, comparing the overall 
prevalence estimates might be misleading. For this reason, 
comparisons of ASD prevalence estimates between 2010 and 
2012 were restricted to the eight sites for which the geographic 
surveillance area and record source type reviewed were 
comparable between the two surveillance years, including five 
sites with sufficient information on intellectual ability among 
children with ASD for both years. When results were restricted 
to these eight sites, combined ASD prevalence estimates were 
similar for 2010 and 2012, including in subgroups defined by 
sex and race/ethnicity. In the five sites with data on intellectual 
ability, the estimated prevalence of ASD with and without 
intellectual disability was unchanged in 2012 compared with 
2010. This is notable given that the increase in estimated ASD 
prevalence that has occurred since 2002 has been accompanied 
by a greater increase in ASD without intellectual disability than 
ASD with intellectual disability.
Despite the similar findings when the population was 
restricted to these eight sites for 2010 and 2012 (15.1 and 15.2 
per 1,000, respectively), there were significant differences in 
ASD prevalence estimates between 2010 and 2012 for three 
of these sites. Significantly increased ASD prevalence estimates 
were observed in New Jersey (12%) and Wisconsin (16%). In 
Missouri, estimated ASD prevalence decreased significantly, 
by 19%, and at the remaining five sites (Arizona, Colorado, 
Georgia, North Carolina, and Utah), ASD prevalence estimates 
did not change. The factors underlying the prevalence estimate 
changes at individual ADDM Network sites are not clear. The 
two sites with the greatest change from 2010 to 2012 (Missouri 
and Wisconsin) both reviewed only health source type records 
for 2010 and 2012. The ability to obtain a comprehensive 
developmental evaluation through the health care system might 
be subject to greater local variation compared with evaluations 
performed through the education system because of changes in 
the number and availability of providers, changes in insurance 
coverage policies, or other factors. In addition, changes in 
record retention associated with migration to electronic health 
records could limit the availability of historical evaluations at 
some sources. The wide range of ASD prevalence estimates 
reported by sites participating in the 2012 ADDM Network 
coupled with the prevalence estimate increases at some sites 
suggest the need for caution in interpreting the similarity 
of overall estimated ASD prevalence between 2010 and 
2012. Data from additional surveillance years are needed to 
understand the trajectory of ASD prevalence.
Population-based estimates of ASD prevalence in the United 
States also are reported by two CDC surveys. The National 
Health Interview Study (NHIS) is a nationally representative 
household survey, and the National Survey of Children’s Health 
(NSCH) is a nationally representative survey of households 
with children aged 0–17 years in the United States. Both 
surveys base ASD prevalence estimates on parent or caregiver 
report of being told by a doctor or other health care provider 
that the child had ASD. Both NHIS and NSCH ask if the 
parent/caregiver was ever told that the child has ASD (“ever 
ASD”); NSCH also includes a follow-up question asking 
whether the child currently has ASD (“current ASD”). A 
previous analysis showed that 13% of parents who reported ever 
being told that the child had ASD also reported that the child 
did not currently have ASD; most of these parents attributed 
the lack of a current ASD diagnosis to new information, 
suggesting that basing prevalence estimates on ever ASD might 
overestimate prevalence compared with current ASD (25). For 
the 2014 NHIS, the prevalence of parent or caregiver-reported 
ever ASD was 22.4 per 1,000 children aged 3–17 years (26). 
For the 2011–2012 NSCH, the prevalence of parent or 
caregiver-reported current ASD was 20 per 1,000 children 
aged 6–17 years (11). The 2012 ADDM Network overall 
ASD prevalence estimate of 14.6 per 1,000 is lower than the 
overall estimates reported in these surveys; however, differences 
in the sample population and methodology should be taken 
into account when comparing results for these three studies. 
The 2011–2012 NSCH included children aged 6–17 years; 
when further stratified by age, ASD prevalence was 18.2 per 
1,000 children aged 6–9 years and 23.9 per 1,000 children 
aged 10–13 years. Although the difference in ASD prevalence 
between these two age groups in the NSCH was not statistically 
significant, the estimate for children aged 6–9 years (18.2 per 
1,000) is closer to the 2012 ADDM Network overall ASD 
prevalence estimate for children aged 8 years (14.6 per 1,000) 
and similar to the estimate for the 2012 ADDM Network sites 
that reviewed education and health care records (17.1 per 1,000). 
The ASD prevalence estimate from the 2007 NSCH (11.6 
per 1,000 children aged 6–17 years) (13) was similar to 2008 
ADDM Network prevalence estimate (11.3 per 1,000 children 
aged 8 years) (17). Taken as a whole, studies using different 
methodologies and in different populations have reported 
converging estimates for ASD prevalence in the United States. 
Future studies by the ADDM Network will incorporate DSM-5 
diagnostic criteria, and ongoing ADDM Network surveillance 
will provide information regarding ASD prevalence trends using 
DSM-IV-TR and DSM-5 diagnostic criteria.
Consistent with previous years of ADDM Network surveillance 
(16–20), the overall male-to-female ASD prevalence ratio was 
4.5 in 2012 and has remained largely unchanged across recent 
surveillance years: 4.5 in 2004 (18), 2006 (18), and 2010 (16) 
and 4.6 in 2008 (17). A similar male-to-female ASD prevalence 
ratio was found among school-age children in data from the 
2010–2011 NSCH (11). Observed differences in estimated 
 Surveillance Summaries
10 
MMWR / April 1, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
ASD prevalence by child characteristics such as sex and race/
ethnicity might indicate areas where ASD identification 
is incomplete and can provide data to inform policies and 
efforts to improve identification of ASD among subgroups, 
particularly female and nonwhite children who have historically 
had lower identified prevalence compared with male and non-
Hispanic white children. The higher estimated prevalence 
among boys might result from sex-specific differences in ASD 
risk (27,28) or differences in identification of girls with ASD 
arising from less well-recognized symptom profiles (29), or 
both. The lower male-to-female prevalence ratio for ASD with 
intellectual disability (PR: 3.7) compared with ASD without 
intellectual disability (PR: 5.1) is consistent with data from 
previous ADDM Network surveillance years. Continued 
attention should be paid to ensuring that all children with 
ASD are identified, regardless of functional status.
Results from ADDM Network ASD surveillance in 2012 
continue to indicate disparities in estimated ASD prevalence 
by race/ethnicity. Across all sites, estimated ASD prevalence 
among non-Hispanic white children was 20% higher compared 
with non-Hispanic black children, 40% higher compared with 
Asian/Pacific Islander children, and 50% higher compared 
with Hispanic children. In addition, a lower percentage of 
non-Hispanic black and Hispanic children had an earliest 
comprehensive evaluation by age 36 months compared with 
non-Hispanic white children. Observed prevalence differences 
by race/ethnicity might reflect differences in awareness of ASD 
or access to specialty diagnostic services (30). For the Hispanic 
population, studies have identified lack of awareness of ASD, 
stigma associated with disability, lack of access to health care 
services due to noncitizenship or low income, and language 
barriers as factors that might reduce the identification of 
ASD among Hispanic children (31–35). In the 2009–2010 
National Survey of Children with Special Health Care Needs 
(NSCSHCN), estimated ASD prevalence was nearly 50% 
higher for non-Hispanic white children (15.3 per 1,000) 
compared with non-Hispanic black children (10.4 per 1,000) 
and nearly 300% higher for non-Hispanic white children 
compared with Hispanic children living in households where 
the primary language was not English (5.2 per 1,000). In 
contrast, estimated ASD prevalence was similar for non-
Hispanic white children compared with Hispanic children 
living in households where the primary language was English 
(14.3 per 1,000) (32). Language differences could affect the 
administration and interpretation of developmental screening 
and monitoring, impede communication of parental concerns 
about a child’s development or a health care provider’s 
recommendation for further evaluation, and limit access to 
programs and campaigns aimed at increasing awareness of 
ASD. If lower prevalence in non-Hispanic black and Hispanic 
children indicates that not all non-Hispanic black and Hispanic 
children with ASD are being evaluated and/or diagnosed in 
the community, the children who are not identified might not 
receive ASD-related services and supports, including school 
supports to facilitate educational progress. Targeted strategies 
are needed to increase awareness and identification of ASD in 
minority communities.
The consistently greater ASD prevalence estimated with 
data from sites that reviewed education and health source 
type records underscores the role that public schools play 
in the equitable provision of comprehensive evaluations 
to children with developmental concerns. The Individuals 
with Disabilities Education Act mandates that states and 
school districts identify, locate, and evaluate all children 
with disabilities at no cost to the family, so comprehensive 
evaluations provided through school systems might be 
more accessible and affordable compared with evaluations 
performed through the health care system. However, results 
from these evaluations might not be reported to the health 
care provider or included in the health care provider records. 
Parents and caregivers should be encouraged to share the 
results of comprehensive evaluations performed through the 
school system with the child’s health care provider to improve 
continuity of care and ensure that the health care provider can 
make recommendations that are based on the child’s needs.
The early identification of ASD is a priority of the American 
Academy of Pediatrics, which recommends universal ASD 
screening at ages 18 and 24 months, and by the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services through the 
Healthy People 2020 goal of a 10% increase in the percentage 
of children with ASD who receive their first evaluation by age 
36 months (22). ADDM Network data are used to measure the 
goal that 47% of children with ASD have a first evaluation by 
age 36 months; the baseline percentage for this goal is 42.7%, 
as measured by ADDM Network data in 2006. Lowering the 
age at first evaluation is important because when impairments 
are identified through a comprehensive evaluation, referrals 
for specific services can be made, often without a formal 
diagnosis. On the basis of evidence linking early treatment 
to improved outcomes (36–39), it is important that children 
with developmental concerns be evaluated and referred to 
services as soon as possible. In 2010, the percentage of children 
aged 8 years with ASD residing the ADDM catchment area with 
an earliest known comprehensive evaluation by age 36 months 
was 43.8% (16), and the 2012 percentage was similar at 42.8%. 
Although several years remain before determination of whether 
the goal was achieved, the lack of progress from the baseline 
measured in 2006 through 2012 is disappointing. Of note, the 
age cohort represented here was born in 2004 and therefore the 
findings regarding the percentage of children with an earliest 
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / April 1, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
11
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
known evaluation by age 36 months reflect practices during 
2004–2007. Continued surveillance is necessary to monitor 
progress towards the Healthy People 2020 goal, particularly in 
light of the 2006 AAP screening recommendations, and to 
identify factors associated with later age at first evaluation so 
that strategies to improve early referral and evaluation can be 
developed. ADDM Network surveillance of ASD prevalence 
and characteristics among children aged 4 years, which began 
in 2010, can help to provide more timely data on early 
identification of children with ASD (40).
The availability of records containing developmental 
evaluations conducted to determine eligibility for special 
education services as well as those conducted through 
the health care system in response to concerns about a 
child’s development forms the basis for the public health 
surveillance of ASD conducted by the ADDM Network. 
By screening existing records then applying a consistent 
methodology by trained and research-reliable clinician 
reviewers to determine case status, the ADDM Network 
is able to conduct population-based surveillance of ASD 
in a large and diverse population. This methodology was 
validated, compared with direct examination of children, 
and the methods were found to result in a prevalence 
estimate that is likely conservative (41).
Limitations
The findings in this report are subject to at least seven 
limitations. First, data were limited to the information 
available in the source records. The amount and quality of 
the data define the potential to determine whether a child 
meets the ASD surveillance case definition and the extent 
to which the characteristics of the identified population 
can be described. In particular, data on intellectual ability 
were not available for all children, and the distribution of 
intellectual ability among the children with these data might 
not be generalizable to all children with ASD. Second, the 
types of source records varied across sites, and the inability 
to review education records at some sites might have led to 
an underestimate of ASD prevalence in those sites. Third, 
education records generally were not available for children 
attending private school or being home-schooled. Fourth, the 
surveillance areas were selected through a competitive process 
and were not selected to be representative of children aged 
8 years in the United States or the state where the surveillance 
site was located. Fifth, county-level population counts for 
children by sex and race/ethnicity are not available by single 
year of age in nondecennial census years. Population estimates 
published by the National Center for Health Statistics are 
used instead. There is evidence that the error in population 
estimates for the intervening years between decennial census 
counts increases with increasing years beyond the decennial 
census (in this case, 2010) (42). Sixth, the analysis of age 
at first comprehensive evaluation was restricted to children 
for whom linkage was made to birth certificates for the 
state where the ADDM Network site was located in an 
attempt to reduce bias resulting from the unavailability 
of early evaluations for children who moved after birth. 
However, a child might have moved out and back into this 
state between birth and ascertainment, so this restriction 
might not have completely eliminated this potential source 
of bias. Finally, race and ethnicity were defined broadly for 
this surveillance population, and results for a specific race 
or ethnic group might not be representative of results for 
all children in these groups. In addition, it was not possible 
to distinguish Hispanic children living in households in 
which the primary language was English from those with a 
different primary language.
Future Study Directions
In 2013, revised diagnostic criteria for ASD were published 
by the American Psychiatric Association in the DSM-5 (5). 
Beginning with the 2014 surveillance year, the ADDM 
Network will be able to estimate ASD case status on the basis 
of both DSM-5 and DSM-IV-TR. This evaluation is possible 
because of the data collection methods employed since the 
inception of the ADDM Network, including the abstraction 
of specific behaviors documented in children’s records. This 
unique component of ADDM Network ASD surveillance 
will enable the ADDM Network investigators to evaluate the 
change in estimated ASD prevalence that might arise from the 
change in diagnostic criteria. Previous analyses have suggested 
that fewer children will meet the behavioral criteria of DSM-5 
compared with DSM-IV-TR (43). However, DSM-5 criteria 
include a provision that children with a well-established 
diagnosis of one of the three autism spectrum disorder subtypes 
under DSM-IV-TR criteria are considered to have ASD under 
DSM-5 criteria. Therefore, at least for the initial years following 
the publication of DSM-5, ASD prevalence estimates that are 
based on DSM-5 criteria should include the children with a 
DSM-IV-TR-based diagnosis in order to accurately represent 
the number of children who are being treated and served 
for ASD by community providers. Because the surveillance 
methodology of the ADDM Network also includes collection 
of information on ASD diagnoses by community providers, 
future estimates of the prevalence of ASD under DSM-5 will 
be able to include children who meet DSM-5 criteria by virtue 
of a past DSM-IV-TR diagnosis as well as those meeting the 
DSM-5 behavioral criteria.
 Surveillance Summaries
12 
MMWR / April 1, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Conclusion
Approximately one in 68 children aged 8 years living in 
sites participating in the ADDM Network surveillance areas 
met the ASD case criteria for the 2012 surveillance year. 
Although the overall prevalence estimate is unchanged from 
surveillance year 2010, prevalence ranged widely across the 
ADDM Network and prevalence increases were reported at 
two sites, suggesting that it is premature to conclude that the 
rising prevalence of ASD observed during the first decade 
of the 21st century might be slowing. Ongoing surveillance 
of ASD prevalence through the ADDM Network is likely 
to provide the most accurate means to monitor trends in 
ASD prevalence over time, including those that are related to 
changes in the diagnostic criteria for ASD. ASD surveillance 
informs providers, particularly public schools, of upcoming 
service needs, and provides feedback on progress made 
toward early identification goals. The ADDM Network will 
continue to track age at first comprehensive evaluation to 
monitor progress toward the Healthy People 2020 goal of 
increasing the percentage of children with ASD who receive a 
first evaluation by age 36 months. Estimated ASD prevalence 
was substantially lower among Hispanic and non-Hispanic 
black children compared with non-Hispanic white children. 
In addition, non-Hispanic black and Hispanic children were 
less likely to have a first evaluation by age 36 months and 
Hispanic children were less likely to have a previous ASD 
diagnosis or classification. This finding suggests that a number 
of nonwhite children with ASD are not being identified and 
evaluated, and for those children who are evaluated, a later age 
at the first comprehensive evaluation likely delays initiation of 
services for these children. No intervention has been shown to 
reduce the prevalence of ASD; however, early treatment might 
maximize the ability of children to function and participate in 
their community. Initiation of school-based services prior to 
formal school entry might help to facilitate optimal educational 
progress. Continued efforts should be made to promote early 
identification of all children with ASD so that interventions 
can be initiated at the youngest age possible.
Acknowledgments
Data collection was coordinated at each site by ADDM 
Network project coordinators: Eric Lott, University of Alabama 
at Birmingham; Kristen Clancy Mancilla, University of Arizona, 
Tucson; Allison Hudson, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, 
Little Rock; Kelly Kast, MSPH, Colorado Department of Public 
Health and Environment, Denver; Kwinettaion Jolly, MS, Research 
Triangle Institute, Atlanta, Georgia; Anita Washington, MPH, Ann 
Ussery-Hall, MPH, Lisa Barritt, Gal Frenkel, MPH, Division of 
Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities, National Center on 
Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities, CDC; Ann Chang, 
Rebecca Harrington, PhD, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, 
Maryland; Rob Fitzgerald, PhD, Washington University, St. Louis, 
Missouri; Josephine Shenouda, MS, Rutgers University–New Jersey 
Medical School, Newark; Paula Bell, University of North Carolina, 
Chapel Hill; Andrea Boan, PhD, Walter Jenner, MS, Medical 
University of South Carolina; Colin Kingsbury, MS, Amanda 
Bakian, PhD, Amy Henderson, University of Utah, Salt Lake City; 
Pamela Imm, MS, University of Wisconsin–Madison. Additional 
assistance was provided by Russell Kirby, PhD, University of South 
Florida, Tampa; Heather Clayton, PhD, Alyson Goodman, MD, 
Lisa Wiggins, PhD, Division of Congenital and Developmental 
Disorders, National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental 
Disabilities, CDC; project staff including data abstractors, clinician 
reviewers, epidemiologists, and data management/programming 
support. Ongoing ADDM Network support was provided by Victoria 
Wright, Tineka Yowe-Conley, National Center on Birth Defects and 
Developmental Disabilities, CDC.
References
 1. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statistical manual of 
mental disorders. 4th ed. Text revision. Washington, DC: American 
Psychiatric Association; 2000.
 2. Gillberg C, Wing L. Autism: not an extremely rare disorder. Acta Psychiatr 
Scand 1999;99:399–406. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0447.1999.
tb00984.x
 3. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statistical manual 
of mental disorders. 3rd ed. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric 
Association; 1980.
 4. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statistical manual 
of mental disorders. 4th ed. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric 
Association; 1994.
 5. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statistical manual 
of mental disorders. 5th ed. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric 
Association; 2013.
 6. Burd L, Fisher W
, Kerbeshian J. A prevalence study of pervasive developmental 
disorders in North Dakota. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 1987;26:700–
3. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/00004583-198709000-00014
 7. Ritvo ER, Freeman BJ, Pingree C, et al. The UCLA-University of 
Utah epidemiologic survey of autism: prevalence. Am J Psychiatry 
1989;146:194–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1176/ajp.146.2.194
 8. Croen LA, Grether JK, Hoogstrate J, Selvin S. The changing prevalence 
of autism in California. J Autism Dev Disord 2002;32:207–15. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1023/A:1015453830880
 9. Newschaffer CJ, Falb MD, Gurney JG. National autism prevalence trends 
from United States special education data. Pediatrics 2005;115:e277–82. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1542/peds.2004-1958
 
10. California Department of Developmental Services. Autistic spectrum 
disorders: changes in the California caseload, an update: 1999 through 
2002. Sacramento, CA: California Health and Human Services Agency, 
Department of Developmental Services; 2003.
 
11. Blumberg SJ, Bramlett MD, Kogan MD, Schieve LA, Jones JR, Lu MC. 
Changes in prevalence of parent-reported autism spectrum disorder in 
school-aged U.S. children: 2007 to 2011–2012. Natl Health Stat Report 
2013;65:1–11.
 
12. Boyle CA, Boulet S, Schieve LA, et al. Trends in the prevalence of 
developmental disabilities in US children, 1997–2008. Pediatrics 
2011;127:1034–42. http://dx.doi.org/10.1542/peds.2010-2989
 
13. Kogan MD, Blumberg SJ, Schieve LA, et al. Prevalence of parent-
reported diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder among children in the 
US, 2007. Pediatrics 2009;124:1395–403. http://dx.doi.org/10.1542/
peds.2009-1522
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / April 1, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
13
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
 
14. Schieve LA, Rice C, Yeargin-Allsopp M, et al. Parent-reported prevalence 
of autism spectrum disorders in US-born children: an assessment of 
changes within birth cohorts from the 2003 to the 2007 National Survey 
of Children’s Health. Matern Child Health J 2012;16(Suppl 1):S151–7. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10995-012-1004-0
 
15. Yeargin-Allsopp M, Rice C, Karapurkar T, Doernberg N, Boyle C, 
Murphy C. Prevalence of autism in a US metropolitan area. JAMA 
2003;289:49–55. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/jama.289.1.49
 
16. Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network Surveillance 
Year 2010 Principal Investigators. Prevalence of autism spectrum disorder 
among children aged 8 years—Autism and Developmental Disabilities 
Monitoring Network, 11 sites, United States, 2010. MMWR Surveill 
Summ 2014;63(No. SS-2).
 
17. Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network 
Surveillance Year 2008 Principal Investigators. Prevalence of autism 
spectrum disorders—Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring 
Network, 14 sites, United States, 2008. MMWR Surveill Summ 
2012;61(No. SS-3):1–19.
 
18. Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network 
Surveillance Year 2006 Principal Investigators. Prevalence of autism 
spectrum disorders—Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring 
Network, United States, 2006. MMWR Surveill Summ 2009;58(No. 
SS-10):1–20.
 
19. Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network 
Surveillance Year 2002 Principal Investigators. Prevalence of autism 
spectrum disorders—Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring 
Network, 14 sites, United States, 2002. MMWR Surveill Summ 
2007;56(No. SS-1):12–28.
 
20. Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network 
Surveillance Year 2000 Principal Investigators. Prevalence of autism 
spectrum disorders—Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring 
Network, six sites, United States, 2000. MMWR Surveill Summ 
2007;56(No. SS-1):1–11.
 
21. Johnson CP
, Myers SM; American Academy of Pediatrics Council on 
Children with Disabilities. Identification and evaluation of children 
with autism spectrum disorders. Pediatrics 2007;120:1183–215. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1542/peds.2007-2361
 
22. US Department of Health and Human Services. Healthy people 2020. 
Washington, DC: US Department of Health and Human Services; 2010. 
http://www.healthypeople.gov
 
23. Yeargin-Allsopp M, Murphy CC, Oakley GP
, Sikes RK. A multiple-
source method for studying the prevalence of developmental disabilities 
in children: the Metropolitan Atlanta Developmental Disabilities Study. 
Pediatrics 1992;89:624–30.
 
24. US Department of Health and Human Services. Code of Federal 
Regulations. Title 45. Public Welfare CFR 46. Washington, DC: US 
Department of Health and Human Services; 2010. http://www.hhs.gov/
ohrp/humansubjects/guidance/45cfr46.html
 
25. Blumberg SJ, Zablotsky B, Avila RM, Colpe LJ, Pringle BA, Kogan 
MD. Diagnosis lost: differences between children who had and 
who currently have an autism spectrum disorder diagnosis. Autism 
2015:1362361315607724.
 
26. Zablotsky B, Black LI, Maenner MJ, Schieve LA, Blumberg SJ. Estimated 
prevalence of autism and other developmental disabilities following 
questionnaire changes in the 2014 National Health Interview Study. 
Natl Health Stat Report 2015;87:1–20.
 
27. Lai MC, Lombardo MV, Suckling J, et al.; MRC AIMS Consortium. 
Biological sex affects the neurobiology of autism. Brain 2013;136:2799–
815. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/brain/awt216
 
28. Werling DM, Geschwind DH. Understanding sex bias in autism 
spectrum disorder. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2013;110:4868–9. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1301602110
 
29. Andersson GW, Gillberg C, Miniscalco C. Pre-school children with 
suspected autism spectrum disorders: do girls and boys have the same 
profiles? Res Dev Disabil 2013;34:413–22. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
ridd.2012.08.025
 
30. Jarquin VG, Wiggins LD, Schieve LA, Van Naarden-Braun K. Racial 
disparities in community identification of autism spectrum disorders over 
time; Metropolitan Atlanta, Georgia, 2000–2006. J Dev Behav Pediatr 
2011;32:179–87. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/DBP
.0b013e31820b4260
 
31. Flores G, Abreu M, Tomany-Korman SC. Why are Latinos the most 
uninsured racial/ethnic group of US children? A community-based 
study of risk factors for and consequences of being an uninsured 
Latino child. Pediatrics 2006;118:e730–40. http://dx.doi.org/10.1542/
peds.2005-2599
 
32. Jo H, Schieve LA, Rice CE, et al. Age at autism spectrum disorder (ASD) 
diagnosis by race, ethnicity, and primary household language among 
children with special health care needs, United States, 2009–2010. 
Matern Child Health J 2015;19:1687–97. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s10995-015-1683-4
 
33. Zuckerman KE, Mattox K, Donelan K, Batbayar O, Baghaee A, 
Bethell C. Pediatrician identification of Latino children at risk for 
autism spectrum disorder. Pediatrics 2013;132:445–53. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1542/peds.2013-0383
 
34. Zuckerman KE, Sinche B, Cobian M, et al. Conceptualization of autism 
in the Latino community and its relationship with early diagnosis. 
J Dev Behav Pediatr 2014;35:522–32. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/
DBP
.0000000000000091
 
35. Zuckerman KE, Sinche B, Mejia A, Cobian M, Becker T, Nicolaidis C. 
Latino parents’ perspectives on barriers to autism diagnosis. Acad Pediatr 
2014;14:301–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.acap.2013.12.004
 
36. Dawson G, Rogers S, Munson J, et al. Randomized, controlled trial of 
an intervention for toddlers with autism: the Early Start Denver Model. 
Pediatrics 2010;125:e17–23. http://dx.doi.org/10.1542/peds.2009-0958
 
37. Eapen V, Crnčec R, Walter A. Clinical outcomes of an early intervention 
program for preschool children with Autism Spectrum Disorder in 
a community group setting. BMC Pediatr 2013;13:3. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1186/1471-2431-13-3
 
38. Reichow B, Barton EE, Boyd BA, Hume K. Early intensive behavioral 
intervention (EIBI) for young children with autism spectrum disorders 
(ASD). Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012;10:CD009260.
 
39. Rogers SJ, Estes A, Lord C, et al. Effects of a brief Early Start Denver 
model (ESDM)-based parent intervention on toddlers at risk for autism 
spectrum disorders: a randomized controlled trial. J Am Acad Child 
Adolesc Psychiatry 2012;51:1052–65. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
jaac.2012.08.003
 
40. Christensen DL, Bilder DA, Zahorodny W, et al. Prevalence and 
characteristics of autism spectrum disorder among 4-year-old children 
in the Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network. 
J Dev Behav Pediatr 2016;37:1–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/
DBP
.0000000000000235
 
41. Nonkin Avchen R, Wiggins LD, Devine O, et al. Evaluation of a records-
review surveillance system used to determine the prevalence of autism 
spectrum disorders. J Autism Dev Disord 2011;41:227–36. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10803-010-1050-7
 
42. Lazarus C, Autry A, Baio J, Avchen RN, Van Naarden Braun K. Impact 
of postcensal versus intercensal population estimates on prevalence of 
selected developmental disabilities—metropolitan Atlanta, Georgia, 
1991–1996. Am J Ment Retard 2007;112:462–6. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1352/0895-8017(2007)112[462:IOPVIP]2.0.CO;2
 
43. Maenner MJ, Rice CE, Arneson CL, et al. Potential impact of 
DSM-5 criteria on autism spectrum disorder prevalence estimates. 
JAMA Psychiatry 2014;71:292–300. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/
jamapsychiatry.2013.3893
 Surveillance Summaries
14 
MMWR / April 1, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
TABLE 1. Number* and percentage of children aged 8 years, by race/ethnicity and site — Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring 
Network, 11 sites, United States, 2012
Site
Site institution
Surveillance area
Total
White, 
non-Hispanic
Black, 
non-Hispanic
Hispanic
API, 
non-Hispanic
AI/AN, 
non-Hispanic
No.
No.
(%)
No.
(%)
No.
(%)
No.
(%)
No.
(%)
Arizona
University of Arizona
Part of 1 county in 
metropolitan 
Phoenix
32,615
15,525
(47.6)
1,856
(5.7)
13,180
(40.4)
1,276
(3.9)
778
(2.4)
Arkansas
University of Arkansas 
for Medical Sciences
16 counties in 
Arkansas
14,153
9,083
(64.2)
3,739
(26.4)
1,025
(7.2)
226
(1.6)
80
(0.6)
Colorado
Colorado Department  
of Public Health and 
Environment
7 counties including 
metropolitan 
Denver
40,538
22,370
(55.2)
2,469
(6.1)
13,448
(33.2)
2,029
(5.0)
222
(0.5)
Georgia
CDC
5 counties including 
metropolitan 
Atlanta
49,720
16,451
(33.1)
20,556
(41.3)
9,019
(18.1)
3,588
(7.2)
106
(0.2)
Maryland†
Johns Hopkins University 1 county in 
suburban 
Baltimore
9,577
5,019
(52.4)
3,171
(33.1)
656
(6.9)
696
(7.3)
35
(0.4)
Maryland§
Johns Hopkins University 5 counties in 
suburban 
Baltimore
18,154
12,293
(67.7)
3,042
(16.8)
1,384
(7.6)
1,383
(7.6)
52
(0.3)
Missouri
Washington University–
St. Louis
5 counties including 
metropolitan  
St. Louis
25,870
17,211
(66.5)
6,516
(25.2)
1,109
(4.3)
970
(3.7)
64
(0.2)
New Jersey
Rutgers University–New 
Jersey Medical School
4 counties including 
metropolitan 
Newark
32,581
13,829
(42.4)
7,100
(21.8)
9,787
(30.0)
1,781
(5.5)
84
(0.3)
North Carolina
University of North 
Carolina–Chapel Hill
11 counties in 
central North 
Carolina
38,913
20,789
(53.4)
9,544
(24.5)
6,517
(16.7)
1,906
(4.9)
157
(0.4)
South Carolina
Medical University of 
South Carolina
23 counties in coastal 
and Pee Dee regions
24,356
12,485
(51.3)
9,404
(38.6)
1,964
(8.1)
387
(1.6)
116
(0.5)
Utah
University of Utah
3 counties in 
northern Utah
24,945
18,217
(73.0)
568
(2.3)
4,851
(19.4)
1,151
(4.6)
158
(0.6)
Wisconsin
University of 
Wisconsin–Madison
10 counties in 
southeastern 
Wisconsin
35,556
21,758
(61.2)
6,342
(17.8)
5,915
(16.6)
1,392
(3.9)
149
(0.4)
Total
346,978 185,030
(53.3)
74,307
(21.4)
68,885
(19.9)
16,785
(4.8)
2,001
(0.6)
Abbreviations: AI/AN = American Indian/Alaska Native; API = Asian/Pacific Islander.
* Total numbers of children aged 8 years in each surveillance area were obtained from CDC’s July 1, 2012 bridged-race population estimates.
† Education and health records review area.
§ Health records only review area.
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / April 1, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
15
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
TABLE 2. Estimated prevalence* of autism spectrum disorder among 1,000 children aged 8 years, by sex — Autism and Developmental 
Disabilities Monitoring Network, 11 sites, United States, 2012
Site
Total
Total no. 
with ASD
Sex
Male-to-female 
prevalence ratio†
Total†
Male
Female
Prevalence (95% CI)
Prevalence (95% CI)
Prevalence (95% CI)
Arizona
32,615
494
15.2 (13.9–16.5)
24.2 (22.0–26.7)
5.7 (4.7–7.0)
4.2 (3.4–5.3)
Arkansas
14,153
170
12.0 (10.3–14.0)
19.2 (16.3–22.7)
4.6 (3.2–6.5)
4.2 (2.9–6.2)
Colorado
40,538
436
10.8 (9.8–11.8)
17.1 (15.4–19.0)
4.2 (3.4–5.2)
4.1 (3.2–5.2)
Georgia
49,720
771
15.5 (14.4–16.6)
25.6 (23.7–27.6)
5.2 (4.3–6.1)
4.9 (4.1–6.0)
Maryland§
9,577
174
18.2 (15.7–21.1)
29.4 (25.0–34.6)
6.2 (4.3–9.0)
4.7 (3.2–7.0)
Maryland¶
18,154
148
8.2 (6.9–9.6)
13.9 (11.7–16.5)
2.2 (1.4–3.5)
6.3 (3.9–10.0)
Missouri
25,870
297
11.5 (10.2–12.9)
18.9 (16.7–21.4)
3.8 (2.8–5.0)
5.0 (3.7–6.8)
New Jersey
32,581
800
24.6 (22.9–26.3)
39.1 (36.2–42.2)
9.3 (7.9–10.9)
4.2 (3.5–5.0)
North Carolina
38,913
656
16.9 (15.6, 18.2)
27.5 (25.3, 29.9)
6.0 (5.0, 7.2)
4.6 (3.8–5.6)
South Carolina
24,356
302
12.4 (11.1–13.9)
19.9 (17.6–22.5)
4.6 (3.5–6.0)
4.3 (3.2–5.8)
Utah
24,945
431
17.3 (15.7–19.0)
27.7 (24.9–30.7)
6.4 (5.1–8.0)
4.3 (3.4–5.5)
Wisconsin
35,556
384
10.8 (9.8–11.9)
17.2 (15.4–19.2)
4.1 (3.2–5.2)
4.2 (3.2–5.4)
Total
346,978
5,063
14.6 (14.2–15.0)
23.6 (22.9–24.3)
5.3 (4.9, 5.6)
4.5 (4.2–4.8)
Abbreviations: ASD = autism spectrum disorder; CI = confidence interval; E+H = education plus health.
 * Per 1,000 children aged 8 years.
 † All sites identified significantly higher prevalence among males compared with females (Pearson chi-square, p<0.01).
 § Education and health records review area.
 ¶ Health records only review area.
TABLE 3. Estimated prevalence* of autism spectrum disorder among 1,000 children aged 8 years, by race/ethnicity — Autism and Developmental 
Disabilities Monitoring Network, 11 sites, United States, 2012
Site
Race/Ethnicity
Prevalence ratio
White, non-Hispanic
Black, non-Hispanic
Hispanic
API, non-Hispanic
White-to-
black
White-to-
Hispanic
Black-to-
Hispanic
Prevalence (95% CI)
Prevalence (95% CI)
Prevalence (95% CI)
Prevalence (95% CI)
Arizona
16.9 (15.0–19.1)
19.4 (14.0–26.9)
11.3 (9.6–13.3)
13.3 (8.3–21.4)
0.9
1.5†
1.7†
Arkansas
12.8 (10.4–15.3)
9.9 (7.2–13.7)
—§
—
1.3
—
—
Colorado
12.2 (10.9–13.8)
10.5 (7.2–15.1)
6.5 (5.2–8.0)
8.4 (5.2–13.5)
1.2
1.9†
1.6†
Georgia
17.6 (15.6–19.7)
13.4 (11.9–15.1)
11.5 (9.5–14.0)
13.4 (10.1–17.8)
1.3†
1.5†
1.2
Maryland¶
18.5 (15.1–22.7)
18.6 (14.4–24.0)
12.2 (6.1–24.4)
10.1 (4.8, 21.1)
1.0
1.5
1.5
Maryland**
8.6 (7.1–10.4)
6.9 (4.5–10.6)
5.8 (2.9–11.6)
—
1.2
1.5
1.2
Missouri
12.0 (10.5–13.8)
9.0 (7.0–11.7)
8.1 (4.2–15.6)
—
1.3
1.5
1.1
New Jersey
26.6 (24.0–29.5)
23.7 (20.3–27.5)
17.6 (15.1–20.4)
21.9 (16.0–30.0)
1.1
1.5†
1.3†
North Carolina
18.9 (17.1, 20.8)
15.5 (13.2, 18.2)
9.1 ((7.0, 11.7)
18.4 (13.2, 25.6)
1.2†
2.1†
1.7†
South Carolina
12.7 (10.8–14.8)
10.6 (8.7–12.9)
6.6 (3.8–11.4)
—
1.2
1.9†
1.6
Utah
17.7 (15.8–19.7)
12.3 (5.9–25.8)
13.2 (10.3–16.9)
5.2 (2.3–11.6)
1.4
1.3†
0.9
Wisconsin
12.0 (10.6–13.5)
5.8 (4.2–8.0)
7.4 (5.5–10.0)
3.6 (1.5–8.6)
2.1†
1.6†
0.8
Total
15.5 (14.9–16.1)
13.2 (12.4–14.0)
10.1 (9.4–10.9)
11.3 (9.8, 13.0)
1.2†
1.5†
1.3†
Abbreviations: API = Asian/Pacific Islander; ASD = autism spectrum disorder; CI = confidence interval; E+H = education plus health.
 * Per 1,000 children aged 8 years.
 † Prevalence ratio significant at p<0.05.
 § Prevalence not calculated when n<5.
 ¶ Education and health records review area.
 ** Health records only review area.
Please note: An erratum has been published for this issue. To view the erratum, please click here.
 Surveillance Summaries
16 
MMWR / April 1, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
TABLE 4. Number and percentage of children aged 8 years* identified with autism spectrum disorder who received a comprehensive evaluation 
by a qualified professional at age ≤36 months, 37–48 months, or >48 months, and those with a mention of a developmental concern by age 
36 months — Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network, 11 sites, United States, 2012
Site
Earliest age when child received a comprehensive evaluation
Mention of a developmental 
concern by age 36 months
≤36 mos
37–48 mos
>48 mos
No. (%)
No. (%)
No. (%)
No. (%)
Arizona
149 (39.2)
70 (18.4)
161 (42.4)
341 (89.7)
Arkansas
33 (24.2)
38 (27.9)
65 (47.8)
119 (87.5)
Colorado
131 (40.6)
60 (18.6)
132 (40.9)
278 (86.1)
Georgia
222 (41.1)
113 (20.9)
205 (38.0)
473 (87.6)
Maryland†
83 (55.0)
27 (17.9)
41 (27.2)
143 (94.7)
Maryland§
34 (31.2)
22 (20.2)
53 (48.6)
101 (92.7)
Missouri
103 (40.6)
34 (13.4)
117 (46.1)
210 (82.7)
New Jersey
277 (42.9)
137 (21.1)
233 (36.0)
527 (81.5)
North Carolina
288 (59.8)
71 (14.7)
123 (25.5)
444 (92.1)
South Carolina
79 (38.5)
52 (25.4)
74 (36.1)
189 (92.2)
Utah
119 (37.5)
66 (20.8)
132 (41.6)
258 (81.4)
Wisconsin
133 (41.8)
63 (19.8)
122 (38.4)
286 (89.9)
Total
1,662 (42.8)
756 (19.5)
1,463 (37.7)
3,386 (87.2)
* Includes 3,881 children identified with autism spectrum disorder who were linked to an in-state birth certificate.
† Education and health records review area.
§ Health records only review area.
TABLE 5. Median age of earliest known autism spectrum disorder diagnosis and number and proportion within each diagnostic subtype — 
Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network, 11 sites, United States, 2012
Site
ASD subtype
Autistic disorder
ASD-NOS/PDD-NOS
Asperger disorder
Any ASD subtype
Median age 
(mos)
No. (%)
Median age 
(mos)
No. (%)
Median age 
(mos)
No. (%)
Median age 
(mos)
No. (%)
Arizona 
50.0
254 (74.5)
64.0
72 (21.1)
77.0
15 (4.4)
55.0
341 (69.0)
Arkansas
53.0
97 (72.9)
60.0
20 (15.0)
77.5
16 (12.0)
60.0
133 (78.2)
Colorado
48.0
184 (66.2)
59.0
55 (19.8)
80.0
39 (14.0)
55.0
278 (63.8)
Georgia
47.5
262 (48.0)
51.0
231 (42.3)
71.0
53 (9.7)
51.0
546 (70.8)
Maryland*
41.0
56 (40.6)
48.0
79 (57.2)
44.0
3 (2.2)
45.5
138 (79.3)
Maryland†
46.5
44 (33.5)
44.5
72 (58.1)
44.0
8 (6.4)
48.0
124 (83.8)
Missouri
50.0
67 (26.1)
51.0
145 (56.4)
78.0
45 (17.5)
58.0
257 (86.5)
New Jersey
44.5
192 (29.7)
43.0
378 (58.4)
74.0
77 (11.9)
47.0
647 (80.9)
North Carolina
37.0
207 (53.6)
55.5
156 (40.4)
72.0
23 (6.0)
48.0
386 (58.8)
South Carolina
45.0
143 (65.0)
58.0
70 (31.8)
74.0
7 (3.2)
48.0
220 (72.8)
Utah
45.0
114 (31.7)
48.0
178 (49.4)
63.5
68 (18.9)
50.0
360 (83.5)
Wisconsin
45.5
106 (34.8)
49.0
173 (56.7)
74.0
26 (8.5)
50.0
305 (79.4)
Total
46.0
1,726 (46.2)
49.0
1,629 (43.6)
74.0
380 (10.2)
50.0
3,735 (73.8)
Abbreviations: ASD-NOS = autism spectrum disorder–not otherwise specified; PDD-NOS = pervasive developmental disorder–not otherwise specified.
* Education and health records review area.
† Health records only review area.
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / April 1, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
17
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
TABLE 6. Number and percentage of children aged 8 years identified with autism spectrum disorder with available special education records, by 
primary special education eligibility category* — Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network, seven sites, United States, 2012
Primary special education eligibility 
category
Arizona
Georgia
Maryland†
New Jersey
North Carolina
South Carolina
Utah
Autism (%)
61.4
58.1
70.2
56.2
69.0
61.0
53.4
Emotional disturbance (%)
4.6
1.1
1.6
0.7
1.4
0
1.7
Specific learning disability (%)
6.8
3.1
8.1
4.6
7.9
4.9
8.5
Speech or language impairment (%)
6.8
1.6
0
10.3
2.8
2.7
18.6
Hearing or visual impairment (%)
0
0.6
0
0.3
0
0
0
Health or physical disability (%)
4.4
3.7
12.1
19.1
10.4
5.4
10.6
Multiple disabilities (%)
2.0
0
4.0
6.4
0.8
0
0
Intellectual disability (%)
8.2
2.6
3.2
1.0
3.8
3.6
4.2
Developmental delay/preschool (%)
5.7
29.2 
0.8
0.4
3.8
20.2
3.0
Other (%)
0
0
0
0.9
0.2
2.2
0
Total no. of ASD cases
494
771
174
800
656
302
431
Total no. (%) of ASD cases with special 
education records
454 (91.9)
621 (80.5)
124 (71.3)
698 (87.3)
507 (77.3)
223 (73.8)
236 (54.8)
Abbreviation: ASD = autism spectrum disorder.
* Some state-specific categories were recoded or combined to match current US Department of Education categories.
† Education and health records review area.
TABLE 7. Comparison of autism spectrum disorder prevalence among sites with comparable surveillance area in 2010 and 2012, by record 
source type, sex, and race/ethnicity, Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network, eight sites, United States
Characteristic
2010
2012
2012-to-2010 prevalence ratio 
(95% CI)
Prevalence (95% CI)
Prevalence (95% CI)
Record source
E+H areas*
17.5 (16.9–18.2)
17.6 (17.0–18.3)
1.01 (0.96–1.06)
HO areas†
10.8 (10.1–11.4)
11.0 (10.4–1.6)
1.02 (0.94–1.11)
E+H-to-HO prevalence ratio
1.6 (1.5–1.7)
1.6 (1.5–1.7)
—§
Site
Arizona
15.7 (14.4–17.1)
15.2 (13.9–16.5)
0.97 (0.85–1.10)
Colorado
9.9 (9.0–10.9)
10.8 (9.8–19.0)
1.09 (0.95–1.25)
Georgia
15.5 (14.3–16.8)
15.5 (14.4–16.6)
1.00 (0.90–1.10)
Missouri
14.2 (12.8–15.7)
11.5 (10.2–12.9)
0.81 (0.70–0.95)
New Jersey
21.9 (20.4–23.6)
24.6 (22.9–26.3)
1.12 (1.01–1.24)
North Carolina
17.3 (16.1–18.7)
16.9 (15.6–18.2)
0.97 (0.90–1.08)
Utah
18.6 (16.9–20.4)
17.3 (15.7–19.0)
0.93 (0.81–1.06)
Wisconsin
9.3 (8.3–10.3)
10.8 (9.8–11.9)
1.16 (1.01–1.35)
Sex
Male
24.4 (23.6–25.2)
24.5 (23.7–25.4)
1.02 (0.96–1.05)
Female
5.4 (5.0–5.8)
5.5 (5.1–5.9)
1.02 (0.92–1.13)
Male-to-female prevalence ratio
4.5 (4.2–5.0)
4.4 (4.1–4.8)
—
Race/Ethnicity
White, non-Hispanic
16.2 (15.5–16.8)
16.3 (15.7–17.0)
1.02 (0.96–1.07)
Black, non-Hispanic
12.9 (12.0–13.9)
13.9 (12.9–14.9)
1.07 (0.97–1.19)
Hispanic
11.2 (10.4–12.1)
10.4 (9.6, 11.2)
0.93 (0.83–1.03)
White-to-black prevalence ratio
1.3 (1.2–1.4)
1.2 (1.1–1.3)
—
White-to-Hispanic prevalence ratio
1.4 (1.3–1.6)
1.6 (1.4–1.7)
—
Black-to-Hispanic prevalence ratio
1.2 (1.0–1.3)
1.3 (1.2–1.5)
—
Total
15.1 (14.6–15.5)
15.2 (14.7–15.6)
1.01 (0.97–1.05)
Abbreviations: CI = confidence interval; E+H = education and health records review; HO = health records only review.
* Sites reviewing education and health records: Arizona, Georgia, New Jersey, North Carolina, and Utah.
† Sites reviewing health records only: Colorado, Missouri, and Wisconsin.
§ Ratios of prevalence ratios were not calculated.
 Surveillance Summaries
18 
MMWR / April 1, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
TABLE 8. Comparison of autism spectrum disorder prevalence among sites with comparable surveillance areas, by sex, race/ethnicity, and 
most recent score on intelligence quotient test, Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network, five sites,* United States, 
 
2010 and 2012
Characteristic
2010
2012
Prevalence ratio 2012 to 2010 
(95% CI)
Prevalence (95% CI)
Prevalence (95% CI)
Sex
Male
28.5 (27.4–29.6)
28.5 (27.4–29.6)
1.00 (0.95–1.06)
Female
6.2 (5.7–6.8)
6.3 (5.8–6.9)
1.02 (0.91–1.15)
Male-to-female prevalence ratio
4.6 (4.2–5.0)
4.5 (4.1–4.9)
—†
Race/Ethnicity
White, non-Hispanic
19.4 (18.5–20.4)
19.3 (18.4–20.3)
1.00 (0.93–1.07)
Black, non-Hispanic
15.2 (14.0–16.4)
16.2 (15.0–17.5)
1.06 (0.95–1.19)
Hispanic
13.5 (12.4–14.6)
12.1 (11.1–13.2)
0.90 (0.80–1.01)
White-to-black prevalence ratio
1.3 (1.2–1.4)
1.2 (1.1–1.3)
—
White-to-Hispanic prevalence ratio
1.4 (1.3–1.6)
1.6 (1.5–1.8)
—
Black-to-Hispanic prevalence ratio
1.1 (1.0–1.3)
1.4 (1.2–1.5)
—
IQ
≤70
4.6 (4.3–4.9)
4.3 (4.0–4.7)
0.94 (0.86–1.04)
>70
10.6 (10.1–11.1)
10.0 (9.6–10.5)
0.95 (0.89–1.01)
Unknown
2.4 (2.1–2.6)
3.3 (3.0–3.5)
1.39 (1.22–1.57)
>70-to-≤70 prevalence ratio
2.3 (2.1–2.5)
2.3 (2.1–2.5)
—
Total
17.5 (16.9–18.2)
17.6 (17.0–18.3)
1.01 (0.96–1.06)
Abbreviations: CI = confidence interval; IQ = intelligence quotient.
* Arizona, Georgia, New Jersey, North Carolina, and Utah.
† Ratios of prevalence ratios were not calculated.
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / April 1, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
19
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Maryland
(HO)
Wisconsin
Colorado
Missouri
Arkansas
South
Carolina
Arizona
Georgia
North
Carolina
Utah
Maryland
(E+H)
New Jersey
Prevalence
ADDM site
Sites accessing data from health records only  
Sites accessing data from education and health records 
Prevalence for all sites combined
FIGURE 1. Estimated prevalence* of autism spectrum disorder among children aged 8 years — Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring 
Network, 11 sites, United States, 2012
Abbreviations: ADDM = Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network; E+H = education and health records; HO = health records only.
* Cases per 1,000 children aged 8 years. Bars represent 95% confidence intervals.
 Surveillance Summaries
20 
MMWR / April 1, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
Total
Arizona
Arkansas
Colorado
Georgia
Maryland
(E+H)
New Jersey
ADDM site
North
Carolina
South
Carolina
Utah
All sites combined
Intellectually disabled range (IQ≤70)
Borderline range (IQ = 71–85)
Average or above average (IQ>85)
Percentage
FIGURE 2. Scores of most recent intelligence quotient tests for children identified with autism spectrum disorder for whom test data were 
available — Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network, nine sites,* United States, 2012
Abbreviations: ADDM = Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network; ASD = autism spectrum disorder; E+H = education and health records; 
IQ = intelligence quotient.
* Includes sites having information on intellectual ability available for ≥70% of children who met the ASD case definition (N = 3,390).
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / April 1, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
21
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
ADDM site
Prevalence
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Arizona
Arkansas
Colorado
Georgia
Maryland 
(E+H)
New Jersey
North 
Carolina
South 
Carolina
Utah
All sites
combined
IQ>70
IQ unknown
IQ≤70
FIGURE 3. Estimated prevalence* of autism spectrum disorder among children aged 8 years, by most recent intelligence quotient score and 
by site — Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network, nine sites,† United States, 2012
Abbreviations: ADDM = Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network; ASD = autism spectrum disorder; E+H = education and health records; 
 
 
IQ = intelligence quotient.
* Cases per 1,000 children aged 8 years.
† Includes sites having information on intellectual ability available for ≥70% of children who met the ASD case definition (N = 3,390).  Maryland source type is education 
and health records.
 Surveillance Summaries
22 
MMWR / April 1, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Male
Female
Sex
Race/ethnicity
White
non-Hispanic
Black
non-Hispanic
Hispanic
IQ>70
IQ unknown
IQ≤70
Prevalence
FIGURE 4. Estimated prevalence* of autism spectrum disorder among children aged 
8 years, by most recent intelligence quotient score, by sex and race/ethnicity — Autism 
and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network, nine sites,† United States, 2012
Abbreviations: ASD = autism spectrum disorder; IQ = intelligence quotient.
* Cases per 1,000 children aged 8 years.
† Includes nine sites (Arizona, Arkansas, Colorado, Georgia, Maryland [education and health records], 
New Jersey, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Utah) having information on intellectual ability 
available for ≥70% of children who met the ASD case definition (N = 3,390).
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / April 1, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 3 
23
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Arkansas
Arizona
Colorado
Georgia
Maryland
Missouri
North
Carolina
New Jersey
South
Carolina
Utah
Wisconsin
All sites
combined
Previous ASD classifcation on record
Suspicion of ASD noted
No mention of ASD
ADDM site
Percentage
FIGURE 5. Percentage of children with autism spectrum disorder at age 8 years who had previous autism spectrum disorder classification on 
record, suspicion of the disorder noted, or no mention of the disorder, by site — Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network, 
11 sites, United States, 2012
Abbreviations: ADDM = Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network; ASD = autism spectrum disorder.
   ISSN: 1546-0738 (Print)
The Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR) Series is prepared by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and is available free of 
charge in electronic format. To receive an electronic copy each week, visit MMWR’s free subscription page at http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/mmwrsubscribe.html. 
Paper copy subscriptions are available through the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC 20402; telephone 
202-512-1800.
Readers who have difficulty accessing this PDF file may access the HTML file at http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/65/ss/ss6503a1.htm?s_cid=ss6503a1_w. 
Address all inquiries about the MMWR Series, including material to be considered for publication, to Executive Editor, MMWR Series, Mailstop E-90, 
CDC, 1600 Clifton Rd., N.E., Atlanta, GA 30329-4027 or to mmwrq@cdc.gov. 
All material in the MMWR Series is in the public domain and may be used and reprinted without permission; citation as to source, however, is appreciated.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply endorsement of these organizations 
or their programs by CDC or the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content of these sites. URL addresses 
listed in MMWR were current as of the date of publication.
