 Maturation of the Infant Microbiome Community Structure and 
Function Across Multiple Body Sites and in Relation to Mode of 
Delivery
Derrick M. Chu1,2,3, Jun Ma1, Amanda L. Prince1, Kathleen M. Antony1, Maxim D. 
Seferovic1, and Kjersti M. Aagaard1,2,3,4,5
1Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, TX, United States
2Interdepartmental Program in Translational Biology and Molecular Medicine, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, TX, United States
3Medical Scientist Training Program, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States
4Department of Molecular & Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United 
States
5Department of Molecular & Cell Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States
Abstract
Human microbial communities are characterized by their taxonomic, metagenomic, and metabolic 
diversity, which varies by distinct body sites and influences human physiology. However, when 
and how microbial communities within each body niche acquire unique taxonomical and 
functional signatures in early life remains underexplored. We thus sought to assess the taxonomic 
composition and potential metabolic function of the neonatal and early infant microbiota across 
multiple body sites, and assess the impact of mode of delivery and its potential confounders or 
modifiers. A cohort of pregnant women in their early 3rd trimester (n=81) were prospectively 
enrolled for longitudinal sampling through 6 weeks post-delivery, and a second matched cross-
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Corresponding Author: Kjersti Aagaard, MD PhD, Vice Chair and Associate Professor, Baylor College of Medicine, Division of 
Maternal-Fetal Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Jones 314, Houston, TX, 77030, Phone: 713 798-8467. 
Author Contributions
D.M.C. and K.M.Aa. designed and conceived the study. K.M.Aa. and K.M.A. assembled the cohort and developed the infrastructure to 
obtain swabs, samples and clinical metadata from all samples. K.M.Aa, and K.M.A. recruited and sampled all subjects. A.L.P., D.M.C. 
and M.D.S. prepared samples for 16S rRNA gene sequencing and whole genome shotgun sequencing. D.M.C., J.M. and K.M.Aa. 
performed and supervised all analysis and statistical modeling. D.M.C. and K.M.Aa. wrote the manuscript, with contributions from 
J.M., A.L.P., K.M.A., and M.S.
Competing Financial Interest Statement
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Accession Codes
NCBI Sequence Read Archive (SRA) database: Bio project ID PRJNA322188, Bio project ID SRP078001
Data Availability
All specimens and associated sequence data were assigned a de-identified code and stored in controlled-access repositories. 16S rRNA 
gene sequence data was deposited to the NCBI Sequence Read Archive (SRA) database with Bio project ID PRJNA322188. WGS 
sequence data was deposited in the NCBI Sequence Read Archive (SRA) database with Bio project ID SRP078001.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Med. 2017 March ; 23(3): 314–326. doi:10.1038/nm.4272.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 sectional cohort (n=81) was additionally recruited for sampling once at delivery. Samples were 
collected for each maternal-infant dyad across multiple body sites, including stool, oral gingiva, 
nares, skin and vagina. 16S rRNA gene sequencing analysis and whole genome shotgun 
sequencing was performed to interrogate the composition and function of the neonatal and 
maternal microbiota. We found that the neonatal microbiota and its associated functional pathways 
were relatively homogenous across all body sites at delivery, with the notable exception of 
neonatal meconium. However, by 6 weeks, the infant microbiota structure and function had 
significantly expanded and diversified, with body site serving as the primary determinant of the 
bacterial community composition and its functional capacity. Although minor variations in the 
neonatal (immediately at birth) microbiota community structure were associated with Cesarean 
delivery in some body sites (oral, nares, and skin; R2 = 0.038), this was not true in neonatal stool 
(meconium, Mann-Whitney p>0.05) and there was no observable difference in community 
function regardless of delivery mode. By 6 weeks of age, the infant microbiota structure and 
function had expanded and diversified with demonstrable body site specificity (p<0.001, R2 = 
0.189), and no discernable differences in neither community structure nor function by Cesarean 
delivery were identifiable (p=0.057, R2 = 0.007). We conclude that within the first 6 weeks of life, 
the infant microbiota undergoes significant reorganization that is primarily driven by body site and 
not by mode of delivery.
Introduction
The human microbiome comprises a rich ecosystem of microbes that are essential to human 
health and physiology. In the adult, the microbiota inhabiting each body site is characterized 
by a distinct microbial community structure and function1–4. For instance, in the 
gastrointestinal tract, enteric microbes produce and modify numerous biologically active 
compounds that support host metabolism, including bile acids, vitamins and other 
macromolecules, while Lactobacillus species in the vagina support a low vaginal pH5,6. 
Indeed, the importance of microbiota to human health is underscored by the observation that 
dysbiotic shifts in these microbial communities have been associated with a number of 
human diseases, including obesity, inflammatory bowel disorders, autoimmune disease, and 
gastrointestinal cancer7–10. However, in order to understand how our microbiota may 
contribute to disease progression later in life, the mechanisms by which host-microbial 
symbiosis is established and maintained in early life requires further exploration.
Evidence from germ-free (GF) murine models has demonstrated that normal development is 
dependent on the presence of commensal microbiota, particularly in the gastrointestinal 
tract11. For example, GF mice exhibit an altered immune phenotype with deficits in both 
innate and adaptive immune components of the gut mucosa12,13. Reintroducing 
microorganisms post-natally (after birth) partially corrects many of these defects, though 
even a brief GF neonatal period can induce immunological changes that persist into 
adulthood12,14. Importantly, different bacterial species have been shown to distinctly 
modulate the host immune system, indicating that the presence of specific bacteria within a 
given developmental window is important for normal patterning of host immunity15–17.
Chu et al.
Page 2
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Work by the Human Microbiome Project Consortium and others have demonstrated that in 
the adult, distinct microbial communities uniquely inhabit each body site1,4. Even sites in 
close proximity (e.g. supragingival plaque vs. tongue) have discernable differences in 
microbial composition1 that may be due to differences in microenvironment conditions such 
as oxygen exposure and nutrient availability. A previous study in a small cohort of primarily 
preterm, very low birth-weight infants demonstrated that the microbiota of skin, saliva and 
stool rapidly diverged within the first three weeks of life18. However, more precise 
approximations of when body site differentiation is achieved have not been explored in 
larger cohorts of healthy term infants. Furthermore, how this assembly process is altered by 
exogenous factors, such as mode of delivery and breastfeeding practices, is not fully 
understood.
In recent years, the impact of mode of delivery (i.e. vaginal vs. Cesarean) on the infant 
microbiota has been subjected to scrutiny due to the increased rate of Cesarean deliveries 
worldwide and their potential association with allergic and autoimmune disease19–22. 
However, the clinical decision to deliver via Cesarean is often indicated by the underlying 
maternal or fetal medical diagnoses or co-morbidities, and is accompanied by varying use of 
medications, including antibiotics and anti-inflammatory pain analgesics23. Several previous 
studies identified distinct microbiota initially colonizing the neonatal microbiome 
differentially associated with either Cesarean or vaginal deliveries, but many of these were 
limited by small cohort sizes, potential for significant confounders, or a lack of longitudinal 
infant sampling24–26. A subsequent study by Azad et al. reported differences in the infant 
gut microbiota by virtue of the type of Cesarean delivery performed (emergent versus non-
labored/elective), suggesting that the differences associated with Cesarean births may be due 
to the underlying medical indication, rather than the surgical procedure per se27. Indeed, the 
overwhelming majority of Cesarean births in the United States are not by maternal request 
but are rather indicated (e.g. arrest of active labor, fetal malpresentation, severe preeclampsia 
& HELLP syndrome (Hemolysis, Elevated Liver Enzymes, Low Platelets), fetal 
macrosomia, and/or prior Cesarean delivery28) and yet the impact of such potential 
confounders on the offspring microbiota have not been established and remains 
underexplored23. In addition, while Cesarean deliveries can be classified based on whether 
or not the mother was in active labor prior to the Cesarean surgery (potentially indicating 
descent of the fetus into the vaginal canal or exposure to vaginal microbes), the impact of 
labored versus unlabored Cesarean on the offspring microbiota has been initially considered, 
but remains underexplored and often overlooked by many studies. Finally, since diet is 
known to be a potent and persistent modifier of the microbiota in both adults and 
children29,30, and human milk modifies the infant microbiota31–33, infant feeding practices 
in association with mode of delivery have been accounted for in some studies, but need to be 
more thoroughly evaluated
Given the complexities of the clinical context surrounding the decision to deliver an infant 
via Cesarean surgery, we conducted a large, population-based prospective cohort study of 
maternal-infant pairs to (1) assess the taxonomic composition and potential metabolic 
function of the early neonatal microbiota across multiple body sites and up to 6 weeks of 
age, then (2) determine the impact of Cesarean mode of delivery and its potential 
Chu et al.
Page 3
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 confounders or modifiers on the neonatal and infant microbiota structure and function. 
Mothers and their infants were sampled at two time points in early life across multiple body 
sites, and 16S rRNA gene sequencing and whole genome shotgun (WGS) sequencing was 
performed on collected samples to interrogate its bacterial composition and function.
Results
We enrolled a population-based cohort of mother-infant dyads for longitudinal sampling 
(delivery and 4 to 6 weeks postpartum) across multiple body sites (skin, oral cavity, nares, 
stool, posterior fornix, vaginal introitus; Fig. S1). An endpoint of approximately 4–6 weeks 
postpartum (hereon out referred to simply as 6 weeks) was chosen because at this age, 
infants still consume a relatively homogenous diet of human milk and/or formula, have 
limited person-to-person contact, and are not yet exposed to a wide variety of environmental 
sources of microbes (e.g. not yet attending daycare and not yet crawling). In all, a cohort of 
mother-neonate dyads (n=81) was prospectively enrolled from our county hospital (Ben 
Taub General Hospital, Harris Health System, Houston, Texas) and sampled starting in the 
early third trimester. The Dirichlet-multinomial distribution was used to power our study to 
detect a difference in the infant microbiota by virtue of mode of delivery at the 6 week time 
point. As subjects were enrolled, preliminary sequencing efforts demonstrated lower read 
counts in neonatal samples taken at delivery as opposed to postpartum (Table S1). Therefore, 
to increase our power to detect a difference based on mode of delivery at birth, we enrolled a 
matched cross-sectional cohort of gravidae (n=82) that was sampled once at the time of 
delivery (Fig. S1A). Of the longitudinally sampled cohort, two withdrew and four delivered 
at another site and thus were excluded. An additional fifteen subjects were lost to follow up. 
No losses were incurred in the cross-sectional cohort. In all, 157 mother-neonate dyads were 
sampled at delivery, with 60 dyads longitudinally sampled (Fig. S1A). As shown in Table S2 
and consistent with our delivery population, the enrolled cohort consisted of primarily 
Hispanic women (90.0%) who delivered singleton pregnancies (96.2%) at term (88.5%). The 
rate of Cesarean delivery was similar to the U.S. national incidence (33.1% vs. 32.7%, 
respectively, p=0.91)20. The baseline maternal characteristics of the two cohorts were 
similar, except for a greater proportion of gestational diabetes in mothers enrolled in the 
longitudinal cohort (44.0% vs. 17.1%, p<0.001, Table S2). Furthermore, the baseline 
maternal characteristics were similar between mothers who delivered vaginally (n=105) or 
by Cesarean (n=52) (all p>0.05), except for a greater proportion of twin pregnancies 
undergoing Cesarean delivery (Student’s t-test, p=0.008; Table S3). Finally, the rate of 
gestational diabetes (GDM) and occurrence of Class I-Class III obesity, mean pre-pregnancy 
BMI, and incidence of fetal macrosomia did not vary among women who underwent 
Cesarean surgery when compared to those who delivered their infants vaginally (Tables S2 
and S3). Overall, the characteristics of the enrolled cohort reflect the typical demographic of 
patients seen in most Maternal-Fetal Medicine clinics. However, as evidenced by the 
nationally comparable Cesarean delivery rate, intrapartum management of these subjects’ 
pregnancies was likely in line with the standard of care provided to the general population.
Neonates and mothers were sampled across five different body habitats (antecubital fossa, 
retro-auricular crease, keratinized gingiva, anterior nares and stool) representing four major 
body sites (skin, oral cavity, nares and gut). Samples from the maternal vagina (introitus and 
Chu et al.
Page 4
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 posterior fornix) were additionally obtained (Fig. S1B). A second set of samples was 
obtained for all subjects enrolled in the longitudinal cohort at a follow up visit (mean 43.6 
days, s.d. of 17.6 days post-delivery). After quality control and 16S rRNA gene sequencing 
analysis by 454 pyrosequencing, 1429 high quality samples were available for downstream 
analysis (mean 8579, s.d. 5681 filtered sequences per sample; Table S1). A summary of 
filtered sequences per sample by age, body habitat and time point is provided in Table S1.
Early life microbiota community structure
We first sought to examine how the neonatal microbiota varied across different body sites at 
the time of delivery and then at 6 weeks of age, using the maternal microbiota as a reference 
of the adult microbiota. Unlike the maternal microbiota, whose community structure was 
driven primarily by the major body site groupings (Adonis, p<0.001, R2=0.192, Fig. S2), the 
neonatal microbial community structure at delivery did not demonstrate strong body site 
differentiation (Fig. 1A). Only the neonatal meconium appeared to cluster separately from 
the skin, nares and oral cavity (Adonis p<0.001), with a small R2 value (0.038) suggestive of 
minimal body site variation. Pairwise Bray-Curtis dissimilarity comparisons between 
samples among subjects (beta diversity) further corroborated these observations. In maternal 
subjects, the beta diversity between maternal samples obtained from the same body site was 
significantly lower than that between different body sites (Fig. 1B, gray solid line vs. gray 
dotted line). Conversely, among neonatal subjects, Bray-Curtis distances were as dissimilar 
among samples from the same body site as they were between different body sites (Fig. 1B, 
red solid line vs. red dotted line).
Although many different taxa were present in neonates at the time of delivery, few were 
characteristic of a given body site. To measure the specificity of a taxa to a given site, we 
determined its Indicator Value (IndVal) Index, which considers the relative abundance of a 
taxa in a given site and its relative frequency of occurrence across all sites34. A maximum 
IndVal value represents taxa that are found in only a single site and are found within all 
individuals. Thus, taxa with a large IndVal can be thought of as a signature taxa for a given 
body site. Linear Discriminate Analysis Effect Size (LEfSe) analysis was additionally 
performed to further corroborate representative taxa (Fig. S3). For example, in the maternal 
subjects, Lactobacillus was both highly abundant and highly specific for the vagina (avg. 
abundance 64.7%, IndVal = 0.922; Fig. 1C; Table S4), while Bacteroides was prevalent and 
highly specific for the maternal stool (avg. abundance 27.8%, IndVal = 0.943; Fig. 1C; Table 
S4), which is consistent with previous observations by ourselves and others1,6,35. In contrast, 
few signature taxa were detected in the neonatal microbiota at delivery. Consistent with 
previous studies6,24, predominant members of the vaginal and skin microbiota of the adult, 
namely Lactobacillus, Propionibacterium, Streptococcus and Staphylococcus, were also the 
most abundant genera in the neonates across all body sites (Fig. 1C; Table S4). However, 
none of these taxa were specific to any body site (all IndVal < 0.5). Of interest, many 
neonatal meconium samples harbored Escherichia and Klebsiella (avg. abundance 14.3% 
and 6.4%, respectively), which was not seen in any other body site (all < 0.03%). Notably, 
these taxa are known facultative anaerobes typical of the early gastrointestinal tract30,36, 
which have been previously detected in the placenta and amniotic fluid by both 16S rRNA 
gene and WGS sequencing37–39.
Chu et al.
Page 5
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 By 6 weeks of age, however, the community structure of the infant microbiota appeared to 
be primarily driven by body site differences, similar to the maternal microbiota. The stool, 
oral and skin microbiota clustered distinctly with the nares bridging the oral and skin body 
sites (Adonis p<0.001, R2=0.189; Fig. 2A). Similarly, patterns of beta diversity (Fig. 2B) 
and signature taxa (Fig. 2C) were similar to maternal communities (Fig. 2B,C). For instance, 
the infants’ oral gingiva was similarly characterized by Streptococcus (60.7%, IndVal = 
0.73), while the infant’s skin and nares were similarly characterized by Staphylococcus and 
Corynebacterium (Table S5). More appreciable differences could be detected between the 
infant and maternal stool. As has been previously published35, the maternal stool was 
dominated by either Bacteroides or Prevotella, though only Bacteroides was considered a 
signature taxa for the maternal gut (Bacteroides IndVal = 0.92). In contrast, Escherichia and 
Klebsiella were both prominently abundant (~10% on average) and highly specific for the 
infant gut (IndVal, 0.95 and 0.75, respectively), which conforms to previous observations of 
the typical microbial constituents of infant stool at this age30,40 (Fig. 2C; Table S5). 
Although the infant and maternal microbiota as a whole shared similar community structure 
and genus level membership (Fig. 2), the microbial communities of the infant within most 
body habitats remained distinct at the OTU level. The infant nares, oral cavity and gut 
clustered distinctly from its maternal counterpart, while no difference could be detected 
between the infant and maternal skin (Fig. S4). Furthermore, measurements of taxa diversity 
within a sample revealed that at 6 weeks, with the exception of skin, the infant tended to 
harbor more simple communities than in mothers (Fig. S5). Thus, while body site 
differences appear to drive the reorganization of the infant microbiota across body habitats 
within the first 6 weeks of life, these site-specific communities are generally less 
ecologically rich and harbor unique communities from the mother.
Impact of Mode of Delivery on Microbiota Community Structure
Although patterns of microbial composition were influenced by mode of delivery at birth, 
these differences were absent at 6 weeks of age. By PCoA, we observed marginal significant 
clustering in the neonatal microbiota by virtue of mode of delivery only in the oral cavity, 
nares, and skin (Adonis R2 0.038), but not the meconium (Mann-Whitney p>0.05; Fig. 3A). 
Alpha diversity was similarly reduced in neonates at the time of birth born by Cesarean 
delivery in the oral cavity and skin microbiota (p<0.001), but not the nares or meconium 
(p>0.05; Fig. S6). These marginal differences appeared to be driven by an increased 
association of Propionibacterium and Streptococcus with Cesarean-born neonates while 
Lactobacillus was associated with those born vaginally (Fig. S7). Reflecting this 
observation, pairwise beta diversity comparisons between mother-neonate dyads revealed 
that neonates born vaginally tended to be more similar to the maternal vagina (Fig. S8), 
which was predominantly comprised of Lactobacillus at the time of delivery (Fig. 1C). 
However, at 6 weeks, the infant microbiota did not significantly cluster by mode of delivery 
at any body site (Fig. 3B), nor did alpha diversity significantly differ (Fig. S6). Hierarchical 
clustering of taxa at the genus level further demonstrated primary clustering by body site, 
but without appreciable clustering by mode of delivery (Fig. S9).
Cesarean mode of delivery has been demonstrated to impact patterns of maternal 
transmission of microbiota at delivery, though to what degree of significance and extent this 
Chu et al.
Page 6
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 is modified by other maternal or infant clinical co-variates or comorbities remains 
underexplored. Having extensively sampled multiple maternal body sites in parallel with 
equivalent neonatal and infant samples, we thus sought to perform SourceTracker analysis41 
to predict the most probable maternal origin of the neonatal microbiota. Samples from 
different maternal body sites were considered to be potential sources of OTUs for each 
neonatal sample. From this analysis, we obtained an estimated proportion of OTUs of a 
given neonatal sample predicted to originate from either the maternal skin, vagina, stool, 
nares, oral cavity or an unknown source (Fig. S10, S11). Because neonates delivered by 
Cesarean are thought to be populated by maternal skin microbiota rather than vaginal 
microbiota24,40, data were plotted on a ternary plot to highlight these two maternal body 
sites (Fig. 3C,D). Moreover, because differences in the neonatal microbiota have previously 
been shown by virtue of Cesarean indication (emergent vs. non-emergent)27, comparisons 
were further stratified by whether or not the mother had labored before the Cesarean 
procedure (here on out referred to as a labored or unlabored Cesarean delivery). For 
neonates delivered vaginally, most body sites demonstrated a bimodal pattern of maternal 
origin – while many sites were predominantly populated by microbiota originating of the 
mother’s vagina, a substantial number were predominantly populated by microbiota of the 
maternal skin (Fig. 3C). Notably, meconium samples additionally harbored OTUs predicted 
to originate from the maternal stool (Fig. S10). Thus, except for the infant gut, the maternal 
vagina and skin appear equally contribute to a majority of the early taxa of the vaginally 
delivered neonate. This bimodal pattern among vaginally born neonates was similarly seen 
in neonates delivered by a labored Cesarean, but not by an unlabored Cesarean (Fig. 3C). In 
the latter case, a majority of samples from neonates delivered by an unlabored Cesarean 
were primarily populated by microbiota found in the maternal skin. Thus, whether or not 
labor had occurred prior to delivery, rather than the Cesarean procedure itself, appeared to 
have the greatest impact on the maternal origin of microbiota.
By 6 weeks of age, however, infant samples were predominantly populated by microbiota 
from its corresponding maternal body site, irrespective of mode of delivery (Fig. 3D, Fig. 
S11). Although the maternal skin and vagina represented a substantial portion of taxa of the 
neonatal microbiota at delivery, most appeared to be replaced in favor of taxa more typical 
of the given body niche. For example, while either Propionibacterium or Lactobacillus 
largely comprised the neonatal oral microbiota at the time of delivery (Fig. S7), by 6 weeks 
of age, Streptococcus was the most prominent genera of nearly all infant oral samples (Fig. 
S9).
Previous studies24,40,42–44 have indicated that mode of delivery has the greatest influence on 
the presence and abundance of several notable taxa of the early infant gut microbiome, 
namely Bacteroides, Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium. We next sought to examine how 
these three genera were impacted by mode of delivery and other clinical variables at 6 weeks 
of age. The abundance of these three taxa were classified as either being undetectable (0%), 
sparsely present (>0.1%), appreciably present (>1%) or moderately abundant (>10%). 
Comparisons of the gut microbiota at delivery revealed that in all Cesarean and the majority 
of vaginally delivered infants, Lactobacillus, Bifidobacterium and Bacteroides were 
appreciably (i.e., not undetectable at greater than 0%) present at the time of delivery (Fig. 
4A–D). By 6 weeks of age, Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium continued to be appreciably 
Chu et al.
Page 7
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 present and similar by virtue of mode of delivery in the neonatal stool (Fig. 4A). By shotgun 
sequencing, Bacteroides were undetectable in just three infant stool samples, all of which 
belong to infants born not by Cesarean but rather by vaginal delivery (Fig. S12). To further 
interrogate if mode of delivery had a significant impact on the relative abundance of these 
three genera while controlling for other factors, we employed a generalized linear model. 
Based on previous literature, breastfeeding practices26,32,42, gestational age36, maternal and 
infant obesity/macrosomia45,46, maternal diet (% fat intake)47 and maternal gestational 
diabetes48 all have been reported to impact the very early infant microbiome; thus these 
were used in model creation. Of the imputed factors, breastfeeding practices was the only 
significant contributor to the abundance of Bacteroides in the infant stool at 4–6 weeks of 
age, with exposure to formula associated with increased levels of Bacteroides (Fig. S13, 
Table S6). We have recently published47 that increased maternal fat intake during gestation 
is significantly associated with decreased abundance of Bacteroides, but only after a 
potential outlier was excluded from analysis. No factors were significantly associated with 
altered Bifidobacterium or Lactobacillus abundance (Fig. S13, Table S6).
Expansion and Diversification of Microbial Community Function
We next sought to examine how the microbial metabolic and functional pathways of the 
early neonatal metagenome changed from delivery to 6 weeks across different body sites. 
Overall, the metagenomic profiles clustered by virtue of age and by body site (Fig. 5A and 
5B), indicating overall similarities in site-specific microbial activities. However, while the 
maternal gut metagenome appeared much more consistent and evenly diverse than 
taxonomic abundances (Fig. 5A, see also Table S5), a significant amount of heterogeneity 
was seen in the neonatal oral and gut metagenomes at delivery (Fig. S14). This was 
particularly apparent in the neonatal oral cavity. For example, the relative abundance of 
alanine, aspartate and glutamate metabolism in neonatal oral samples were undetectable in 
half of the sequenced samples (0% relative abundance), but present at greater than 2.3% in 
the other half (median abundance across all samples 2.4%, Table S7). However, at 6 weeks, 
both the infant oral and stool metagenomes were significantly more similar between body 
sites of different individuals (Fig. S14), indicating convergence toward a shared set of 
microbial metabolic pathways and activities unique to each body site. Comparisons of the 
infant stool and oral cavity metagenomes revealed that each was enriched for pathways that 
potentially reflected a selective advantage of specific microbiota to its local environment 
(Fig. 5D). For example, lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis is a key feature of gram-negative 
enteric bacteria and was fittingly increased in the infant stool metagenome compared to that 
of the oral cavity. Additionally, taurine and hypotaurine metabolism, which is critical for bile 
acid metabolism and conjugation49, was also increased in the infant stool metagenome 
compared to that of the infant oral cavity. In contrast, amino acid biosynthesis and 
metabolism was seen to be a predominant feature of the infant oral metagenome.
From delivery to 6 weeks, the number of unique species and microbial genes found within 
the infant gut metagenome was also significantly increased, indicating an overall expansion 
and diversification within this early time period (Fig. 5C). The neonatal meconium was 
enriched for several microbial pathways including the pentose phosphate pathway and the 
phophotransferase system (PTS), which participate in sequestering and utilizing glucose for 
Chu et al.
Page 8
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 anabolism of amino acids and cell wall components. In comparison, the infant gut 
metagenome at 6 weeks was significantly enriched for pathways related to co-factor 
metabolism and biosynthesis, including folate, biotin and vitamin B6, which are known to be 
important for growth, metabolism and neurodevelopment50. However, the infant gut 
metagenome was still greatly outnumbered by the maternal in both gene counts and unique 
species present (Fig. 5C). Furthermore, several pathways discriminated the infant and 
maternal gut metagenomes (Fig. 5D), including an enrichment of TCA cycle and amino acid 
metabolism in the maternal gut. Thus, while the infant gut metagenome was significantly 
expanded and diversified from birth, both its taxonomic composition and metabolic 
capability remained distinct from maternal gut.
In order to assess how the metabolic and functional pathways of the infant stool 
metagenome varied with Cesarean or vaginal mode of delivery, breast feeding practices and 
other clinical metadata, we fitted a generalized linear mixed model to infant stool samples to 
identify significantly differing pathways. This approached allowed us to quantify the 
contribution of each variable to the pathway abundances, while controlling for possible 
confounding between clinical metadata. Again based on previous literature, we considered 
mode of delivery, intrapartum antibiotics51, breastfeeding practices at 6 weeks of age32, 
gestational weight gain38, maternal gestational diabetes or pre-pregnancy BMI46, and 
gestational age36 at the time of delivery as possible fixed effects in our model. Of all of the 
pathways considered, no single pathway correlated with any clinical variable considered in 
our model, indicating that the relative frequency of most functions throughout the infant 
stool microbiota were consistent across individuals and robust to exogenous perturbations 
including Cesarean delivery (Fig. 6A). Similarly, few species in the infant stool identified by 
WGS sequencing were significantly altered in our model (Fig. S15). Intrapartum antibiotics 
appeared to have the greatest effect on pathway variation, as ten distinct pathways were 
either positively or negatively correlated with intrapartum antibiotic usage (Fig. 6B). In 
contrast, gestational age and pre-pregnancy BMI had little impact on pathway variation 
within the infant stool. Of particular interest, given co-linearity with antibiotic usage and 
breastfeeding practices, Cesarean mode of delivery per se did not bear a differential effect on 
the infant metagenome nor its function when subjected to robust linear mixed modeling 
controlling for covariates as fixed effects.
Discussion
In this large cohort of term infants reflective of characteristics common to the contemporary 
U.S. birth population, we found significant reorganization of the neonatal microbiota across 
multiple body sites within the first 6 weeks of life that was primarily shaped by the major 
body site groupings as seen previously in the adult1. Although the neonatal microbiota at the 
time of delivery was sparsely populated and predominantly comprised of taxa of the 
maternal skin and vaginal microbiota, by 6 weeks of age, the major patterns of community 
variation was most strongly associated with body site grouping with concomitant 
coalescence of functional and metabolic microbial pathways reflective of probable selection 
within or adaptations to a given body niche. However, while the infant skin most resembled 
the maternal microbiota, the stool, nares and oral cavity harbored distinct microbial 
communities from their maternal counterparts. These differences likely reflect age related 
Chu et al.
Page 9
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 physiological differences between the maternal and infant body habitats, including nutrient 
availability and oxygen exposure.
Overall, our data reach similar conclusions to those derived from observations of low birth 
weight infants18, which found that changes to microbiota composition within the first weeks 
of life is primarily shaped by body site. We similarly found that after several weeks, each 
body niche was enriched for taxa that were characteristic of their adult counterparts, such as 
Streptococcus in the oral cavity, likely indicating a common maturation process. However, 
our study further extends these observations though the generation of rich WGS data, which 
provides the benefit of interrogating both taxonomic abundances and community function 
within this early time period. Our results suggest that similar to microbiota abundance, site-
specific functional pathways emerge very early on in life, before extensive contact to 
environmental sources which may influence community membership and consequent 
function.
There are several distinctions between the characteristics of our study cohort and those of 
other studies which have reported a variation in the neonatal or infant microbiome by mode 
of delivery24,40,42,43,52. First, our cohort was ethnically homogenous (mostly Hispanic) and 
was comprised of primarily term infants; thus specific observations of the predominant 
taxonomic and pathway abundances of the infant metagenome may not be generalizable to 
preterm neonates or other ethnic populations. Previous observations have indicated that in 
adult and infant populations43, there are large differences between individuals of different 
ethnic populations residing in different countries and societal structures. Thus the specific 
taxa or functions that become enriched early on may vary depending on the environmental 
context. Nevertheless, considering that the adult microbiota is driven to a larger extent by 
body site habitat and not ethnicity, we anticipate that gross reorganization of the infant 
microbiota by body site within this early time period is generalizable across populations, 
though additional studies are needed to confirm this.
Second, reflective of our clinical population from which these women were recruited for our 
longitudinal cohort, we observed a high prevalence of gestational diabetes. However, the rate 
of gestational diabetes did not vary among women who later delivered their infants via 
Cesarean or vaginal birth (Table S2) and gestational diabetes (as well as other potential or 
likely confounders) were included in our GLM analysis. Since other studies have not 
reported maternal gestational nor Type II diabetes as characteristics of their cohort, we 
cannot directly compare nor speculate as to whether their findings might be a result of 
confounding or co-linearity24,40,42–44,52. This would necessarily include those 
characteristics and comorbidities which render risk or indication for Cesarean delivery, such 
as poorly controlled diabetes with resultant fetal macrosomia. As one such example, it is 
worthwhile noting that the landmark study of Dominquez-Bello et al does not report at-risk 
maternal characteristics such as diabetes nor BMI, but does describe infant birth weight 
ranges of up to 5.2 kg24. Thus, in their study comprised of 11 neonates from Venezuela (6 
born via Cesarean surgery), at least one neonate was macrosomic (“Babies weighed between 
2 and 5.2 kg (the smallest baby was the twin in second order of birth, after his 3-kg 
brother)”)24. A 5.2 kg infant would be 1.0 kg heavier than more than 98% of the birth 
population by WHO standards. While there are multiple underlying causes of fetal 
Chu et al.
Page 10
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 macrosomia, common causes include poorly controlled maternal diabetes. Additional causes 
include genetic and epigenetic overgrowth disorders, chronic caloric excess, and maternal 
obesity. These were excluded or controlled for in our study analysis, and our mean infant 
birthweight was 3.237 kg (±0.68 kg) with no significant difference in birthweight observed 
when comparing infants born vaginally to those delivered by Cesarean (p 0.85; Table S2 and 
S3). Notably, in our entire cohort of 162 infants, only one exceeded 5 kg (birthweight 5.085 
kg; Table S8).
Our observations of the early neonatal microbiota are consistent with the growing body of 
evidence that is challenging the notion of a sterile in utero environment. Previous studies 
have detected bacteria associated with the placenta and amniotic fluid of preterm and 
healthy, term pregnancies37,39,53–55 while work in murine models have demonstrated 
maternal transmission of bacteria to the fetal gut during gestation, consistent with microbial 
colonization of the mouse fetus occurring prior to delivery56. More recently, the neonate’s 
first intestinal discharge (meconium) has been shown to harbor a microbial community 
similar to that of the amniotic fluid and placenta39,57,58. Interestingly, the meconium 
microbiota was shown to vary with maternal glycemic control, but not mode of delivery, 
indicating that establishment of the neonatal microbiota can be potentially altered by 
gestational exposures48. Consistent with these findings, we observed that the meconium 
microbiota was markedly different from other neonatal body sites at the time of delivery, 
indicating a potentially different maternal origin. Additionally, unlike the skin, oral cavity or 
nares, the neonatal gut microbiota at the time of delivery did not significantly vary by mode 
of delivery. The content of the first meconium is hypothesized to reflect the in utero 
environment (whereby the infant is swallowing amniotic fluid continuously from mid to late 
gestation), and thus we speculate that these microbes were similarly transmitted from the 
mother to the fetus during gestation, suggesting that seeding of the early microbiota may 
occur earlier than was previously thought. However, additional studies are needed to 
evaluate potential mechanisms of transmission and its potential impact on fetal programming 
and the establishment of the infant gut microbiome long-term.
In agreement with previous observations24,25, mode of delivery was associated with 
differences in the neonatal microbiota immediately after delivery only within the nares, skin 
and oral cavity. However, this was not true of the gut microbiota, which appeared to have a 
distinct maternal origin from the rest of the body sites. A number of studies have indicated 
that the early composition of the gut may be influenced by maternal exposures or health 
status, which may account for the lack of separation by mode of delivery in our study. Our 
previously published work in a non-human primate model demonstrated that maternal diet 
during gestation and lactation has a persistent impact on the gut microbiota of the offspring 
at least up to one year of age. In conjunction with these findings, we’ve similarly seen in 
human cohorts that the composition of the early infant gut microbiome associated with 
maternal diet in the last trimester of pregnancy, independent of mode of delivery and 
maternal obesity47. In addition to maternal gestational diet, maternal pre-pregnancy obesity, 
and maternal glycemic control us have also been attributed to differences in the early infant 
gut microbiome. Notably, these maternal health states also increase the risk that the 
pregnancy will be delivered by Cesarean28. However, accounting for these potential 
confounders in our study, we did not find significant differences in infant gut microbiome 
Chu et al.
Page 11
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 which could be reliably nor significantly attributed to Cesarean nor vaginal mode of 
delivery.
We additionally sampled multiple body sites of both the neonate and mother, which allowed 
for an in depth interrogation of the potential maternal origin of neonatal microbiota. Division 
of Cesarean deliveries by indication (labored vs. unlabored) revealed that the differences in 
the neonatal microbiota at birth associated with mode of delivery was most pronounced 
when comparing unlabored Cesarean to vaginal deliveries. In our cohort, these unlabored 
Cesarean deliveries were generally among women with a history of prior Cesarean and 
electing for a repeat Cesarean, rather than a trial of labor with attempted vaginal birth after 
Cesarean. This is in agreement with the observations of Azad et al.27, which identified 
differences in the infant gut microbiome at 4 months of age when Cesarean deliveries were 
classified as either being emergent (typically labored) or elective (typically unlabored). This 
is not surprising, as Cesarean delivery is not a randomly allocated procedure but rather is 
indicated for an underlying maternal or fetal medical condition23. Ergo, prior small 
studies24,25 which do not account for underlying indication for the Cesarean surgery, may be 
prone to both Type I and Type II error resulting in misclassification of the attribution of 
Cesarean delivery per se as a driving force in any dysbiosis in the infant microbiota.
A number of perinatal and postnatal factors have been associated with relatively low 
neonatal and infant stool abundance of Bacteroides. These include: Cesarean 
delivery40,43,52, exclusive breastfeeding26,42,59, maternal high fat diet47, maternal obesity46, 
transition to solid foods30, and other yet unknown factors52. Based on the work of Bakhed et 
al.40, Bacteroides species can be acquired postnatally, with a notable increase at 4 months of 
age among both Cesarean and vaginally delivered infants. Ergo, any supposition relating 
relative abundance and less abundance to Cesarean delivery per se must be threaded with 
caution. This may include introduction of antibiotics postnatally51,52,60, formula 
feeding42,59, as well as solid foods30. In the current study, we focused on early exposures 
since they are most proximal to the intrauterine and intrapartum period of exposure, and 
least likely to be subjected to exogenous postnatal influences. We have now demonstrated 
with WGS data that both vaginally and Cesarean delivery infants can have low Bacteroides 
counts. In our cohort, and distinct from that of Bäcked40, no Bacteroides at birth at 6 weeks 
of age was found only among vaginally delivered infants (n=3) and every Cesarean delivered 
infant had detectable Bacteroides (Fig. S12). These findings are consistent with a recent 
publication by Yassour et al.60 which similarly observed low Bacteroides in 20% of 
vaginally delivered infants. Even when we extend our definition of significantly variant taxa 
to include those identified by Dominquez-Bello as being perturbed in Cesarean and only 
restored with vaginal wiping44, we failed to see significantly altered taxonomic profiles. 
Specifically, sequential definitions of low Bifidobacterium or high Lactobacillus were 
equally probable in vaginally and Cesarean delivered infants (Fig. S12). Finally, when we 
examined 4–6 week old infants with either absent or relatively low Bacteroides and assigned 
relative risk estimated for a number of antenatal factors, low Bacteroides were most likely to 
be delivered by vaginal birth (Fig. S12).
In sum, we have undertaken the largest study to date utilizing whole genome shotgun 
analysis to analyze both the composition and function of the neonatal and infant microbiota 
Chu et al.
Page 12
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 with paired maternal-infant across multiple body sites. We have observed that by 6 weeks of 
age, the microbial community structure and function has significantly expanded and 
diversified. We further demonstrate that there is no discernable impact of Cesarean mode of 
delivery on the early microbiota beyond the immediate neonatal period (and never inclusive 
of meconium nor stool), and that early taxonomic distinctions are not recapitulated by 
functional pathway analysis. These findings underscore the likely importance of 
interrogating not only the relative abundance of members of the microbiota, but their 
potentially overlapping metabolic pathways, when considering the impact of an intervention 
on diversity of the microbiota.
Methods
Experimental Design
The intent of this prospective cohort study was to characterize the neonatal microbiota in 
early life and subsequently compare the neonatal microbiota by virtue of mode of delivery. 
An overview of the study design is shown in Fig. S1A. An initial cohort of gravidae and 
their infants (n=81) were prospectively enrolled in the 3rd trimester from the Ben Taub 
County Hospital in Houston, Texas. Assuming a Cesarean rate equivalent to the U.S. 
national average (32%)20, this cohort size achieved a power of at least 0.80 to detect a 
difference in the taxonomic composition by virtue of mode of delivery at the 6 week time 
point, based on an estimated read count of at least 5000 and a small effect size (Φ=0.07 at an 
α=0.05). Power calculations were based on the Dirichlet-multinomial distribution as 
described in La Rosa et al.61. A second cross-sectional cohort (n=82) was additionally 
enrolled to increase the power to detect differences by virtue of mode of delivery at the time 
of delivery. This second cohort increased enrollment of Cesarean deliveries, thus capturing a 
larger number of types of Cesarean indications (labored vs. unlabored, n=26 for both, Table 
S9). All subjects were enrolled under Baylor College of Medicine Institutional Review 
Board (IRB) H-27393. Subjects included in this study had a viable pregnancy >28 weeks 
gestation, were 18 years of age or older, and willing to consent to all aspects of the protocol. 
Subjects were excluded if there was known HIV or Hepatitis C infection, known 
immunosuppressive disease, known use of cytokines or immunosuppressive agents within 
the last 6 months, a history of cancer except squamous or basal cell carcinoma of the skin 
managed by local excision, treatment of suspicion of ever having toxic shock syndrome, or 
major surgery of the GI tract except cholecystectomy or appendectomy in the past five years. 
During the consent process, subjects were informed of the potential risks of participation, 
including the minimal physical risks associated with specimen collection, and the possibility 
that protected health information or de-identified project data could be accidentally released. 
Several precautions described in the protocol and consent form were taken to reduce these 
risks.
Clinical Metadata
Clinical metadata for all subjects are listed in Supplementary Tables 6 and 7. The cohort that 
each subject was recruited is listed under Study as either longitudinal or cross-sectional. 
Gestational age at delivery is provided as weeks and days. Standard definitions of “neonate” 
(28 days or less) and “infant” (29 days or greater) were employed, albeit neonates were 
Chu et al.
Page 13
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 sampled within 1 hour of birth. Neonates were considered preterm if delivered <37 weeks 
gestational age. Twin births (multiples) are indicated. The indication for Cesarean delivery is 
provided as either being primary or repeat (first Cesarean or repeat Cesarean). Whether the 
mother was in labor prior to Cesarean delivery was also recorded (Labored vs. Unlabored). 
Antibiotic usage was noted if given antepartum or intrapartum (around the time of delivery). 
Breastfeeding practices were assessed by careful chart review and classified as either being 
exclusively formula fed, exclusively fed human milk, or fed both formula and human milk 
(partial human milk) within the first 6 weeks of life. Birth weight was provided in grams and 
percentile given as a function of gestational age and gender. Maternal diet during pregnancy 
was determined for the one month period prior to enrollment using the National Health and 
Examination Survey Dietary Screener Questionnaire as described previously47.
Sample Collection and Processing
Specimens were sterilely and uniformly collected by trained personnel according to a 
standardized protocol as previously described62. A summary of specimens collected at each 
time point from each maternal-infant pair is shown in Fig. S1B. All specimens were stored 
at 4°C and processed in the lab within 24 hours. In a decontaminated, sterile environment, 
genomic DNA was isolated from each specimen using the MOBIO PowerSoil DNA 
Isolation Kit (MOBIO) with the standard manufacturer’s protocol. Extracted DNA was 
prepared for sequencing according to the HMP consortium outlined protocol1 for 16S rRNA 
gene sequencing.
16S rRNA Gene Sequencing Analysis
To characterize the microbial composition of each specimen, the hypervariable regions (V) 
of the 16S ribosomal gene were sequenced from the extracted DNA as described in the 
Human Microbiome Project1,62. The V5-V3 region of the 16S rRNA gene was amplified by 
polymerase chain reaction using bar-coded universal primers 926R (R, Reverse Primer) and 
357F (F, Forward Primer). Amplicons were quantified by PicoGreen and pooled in 
equimolar amounts. Multiplex sequencing was performed on a 454-FLX Titanium 
Sequencer (Roche) at the Human Genome Sequencing Center (HGSC) at Baylor College of 
Medicine (BCM). In total, all samples were sequenced across 32 sequencing runs (Table 
S10). To reduce bias related to sequencing in different runs, samples from both mother and 
infant of all body sites were sequenced as they were obtained, blinded to subject clinical 
metadata. Given the nature of enrollment, samples from either the cross sectional and 
longitudinal cohort tended to be sequenced in different pools; however, as shown in Fig. 
S16, the data did not appear to strongly vary by virtue of cohort enrollment.
Raw 16S rRNA gene sequence data was processed using the QIIME platform63 (v 1.9.0) 
using the default parameters on the suggested pipeline (http://qiime.org/tutorials/
tutorial.html) with notable changes as described below. Sequences were preprocessed to 
remove sequences less than 200 nucleotides, greater than 700 nucleotides, or sequences with 
a minimum average quality score less than 25. Remaining sequences were trimmed of 
reverse primer sequences and trimmed at the first ambiguous base call. Sequences below 200 
nucleotides after trimming were subsequently removed. Retained high quality sequences 
were subsequently assigned to the sample of origin using the uniquely identifying barcode 
Chu et al.
Page 14
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 sequence and thereafter trimmed of the barcode and 5’ primer. To remove human 
contamination, high quality reads were mapped to the human genome (GRCh38) using 
DeconSeq (v 0.4.3) and highly similar sequences to the human genome reference were 
subsequently removed from the dataset64. Remaining sequence data and associated 
flowgram data were aggregated by body site and denoised to reduce sequencing errors using 
the QIIME denoising pipeline (denoise_wrapper.py). All denoised sequences were 
aggregated and de novo operational taxonomic unit (OTU) were identified. Sequences were 
clustered into distinct OTUs at 97% similarity using the UCLUST65 method. Chimeric 
sequences were identified and removed using ChimeraSlayer on the QIIME workflow script 
(v 1.9.0, identify_chimeric_seqs.py)66. The RDP classifier67 (v2.2) retrained against the 
May 8th 2013 version of the GreenGenes68 taxonomic database was used to assign 
taxonomy for each OTU at a confidence greater than 50% at the lowest level of assignment. 
Read counts for each OTU were tabulated for downstream analysis. In all, 2581 samples 
were collected from the maternal-infant pairs and used for 16S rRNA gene sequencing. 
After filtering of singletons and removal of samples with less than 100 sequences, 1429 
samples were retained for downstream analysis (mean 8578.5 s.d. 5680.9 filtered sequences 
per sample (Table S1).
The specificity of certain taxa to a given body site was assessed by calculating the indicator 
value index as previously described34. Each body grouping (skin, nares, oral cavity, stool, 
vagina) within the infant or mother was considered a different site. For each genera in each 
site, we computed the mean abundance of each taxa compared to all sites, multiplied by the 
frequency of appearance of that taxa (abundance > 0.0%) across all samples within the site. 
Bubble plots of relative taxonomic abundances were generated using the R package ggplot. 
Linear Discriminant Analysis Effect Size (LEfSe v1.0) was performed with a LDA cut off of 
2.0 with a significance value (p) of 0.0569. Diversity within samples (alpha diversity) and 
between samples (beta diversity) were evaluated on the operational taxonomic unit (OTU) 
table (16S) or KEGG pathway table (WGS) as indicated. For alpha diversity, samples were 
first rarefied at 2000 sequences before diversity indexes were calculated. Significance was 
determined by Mann Whitney U tests. To evaluate OTU discovery as a function of 
sequencing depth, reads per sample were plotted against the number of unique OTUs using 
PRISM (GraphPad Software, La Jolla, CA) and regression lines were fitted. Significance 
between linear regression slopes was determined by Student’s t-test. For beta diversity 
measurements, both phylogenetic (UniFrac) and non-phylogenetic (Bray-Curtis, Jaccard) 
distance matrixes were determined. Cumulative distribution plots of beta diversity distances 
were generated using PRISM. Principal component analysis (PCoA) was performed on 
distance matrices as indicated with significance of clustering determined by PERMANOVA 
or Adonis with 999 permutations. PCoA plots and confidence ellipses were generated by the 
R package ggplot. Heatmaps were generated using the R package pheatmap. Heirarchical 
clustering was performed using complete linkage on Jaccard similarity coefficients or Bray-
Curtis dissimilarity distances using the R package vegan as indicated. Phylogenetic trees 
were created with PhyloPhlAn (v0.99). Association of the metadata categories with the 
hierarchical clustering in the dataset was determined by a Chi-squared test. A generalized 
linear model with a normal distribution according to a log link function was fit by maximum 
Chu et al.
Page 15
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 likelihood using with JMP (v12.2.0). All statistical analysis was performed on the QIIME 
platform (v 1.9) or R (v 3.2.2) as indicated.
SourceTracker Analysis to Predict the Maternal Origin of OTUs in Neonatal Samples
SourceTracker analysis was performed on the QIIME platform to predict the likely origin of 
microbiota in the neonatal microbiota using the maternal microbiota as potential sources41. 
OTUs present in less than 1% of samples were first filtered, and the resultant OTU table was 
imputed using default parameters, with the neonatal samples identified as the “sink” and 
maternal samples identified as the “source”. Results were aggregated into 3 categories: skin 
(retroauricular crease and antecubital fossa), vagina (posterior fornix and vaginal introitus) 
and other (stool, nares, supragingival plaque). Data was visualized as ternary plots generated 
by the R package ggtern.
Whole Genome Shotgun (WGS) Sequencing and Analysis
Due to limiting sample volumes, whole genome shotgun sequencing and analysis was 
constrained to a subset of all samples. We focused our sequencing efforts on neonatal 
meconium (n=9), infant stool (n=36), maternal stool (n=24), neonatal oral samples obtained 
at delivery (n=11), and infant oral samples obtained at 6 weeks (n=11). A list of samples is 
provided in Table S10. Isolated genomic DNA was sheared and Illumina adapters ligated to 
the resultant fragments. The DNA was pooled and paired-end sequenced on the Illumina 
HiSeq 2500 platform at the HGSC at BCM. DNA was then processed and analyzed through 
in-house pipelines as described previously37. In brief, human contamination was identified 
and removed with Best Match Tagger according to the HMP Human Sequence Removal 
Standard Operating Procedure. The resultant filtered high-quality sequences were deposited 
in the NCBI Sequence Read Archive (SRA) database with Bio project ID SRP078001. 
Identification and quantification of taxa in each sample was determined using Metagenomic 
Phylogenic Analysis (MetaPhlAn) v1.7.770 while the relative abundance of microbial 
pathways was determined by The HMP Unified Metabolic Analysis Network (HUMAnN) v 
0.9971. The total counts of mapped reads by each algorithm are provided in Table S11. Gene 
counts and unique species counts were determined as described in the MetaHit project72. 
After quality filtering and removal of human contamination, reads were aligned against the 
MetaHIT gene catalog by using SOAPalign version 2.21 with parameters ‘-m 200 -x 600’. 
As long as the read could be aligned to a gene, the aligned gene was taken as one gene 
count. In order to assess the number of unique species, the collection of genes for each 
sample where then checked against the origin of species using the MetaHIT gene catalog 
taxonomic reference. Species were tabulated if any gene was represented in the data set.
Statistical modeling of Infant Gut Metagenome Pathway and Species Relative Abundance
Heatmaps for WGS based KEGG pathways and species were generated using Python 
seaborn package. Hierarchical clustering was performed using average linkage on Euclidean 
distance. To identify factors with a significant impact on either species relative abundance or 
gene pathway abundance while controlling for other factors, we fitted a generalized linear 
model for each pathway or taxa with a normal distribution and a linear link function by 
residual maximum likelihood using the lme4 package in R. The KEGG pathway or taxa 
abundance was treated as the dependent variable as a function of mode of delivery, feeding 
Chu et al.
Page 16
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 method (any formula vs. exclusive breastfeeding), gestational weight gain category (excess 
vs. normal), maternal age, pre-pregnancy BMI, GDM, antibiotic usage and gestational age 
as fixed effects. The categorical variables (mode of delivery, feeding and GWG) were 
represented using dummy variables. The base case for linear regression was set as vaginal 
delivery, exclusive breastfeeding, normal gestational weight gain and no antibiotic usage.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the NIH Director’s New Innovator Award (K.A., DP2 
DP21DP2OD001500), the NIH/NINR (K.A., NR014792-01), the NIH National Children’s Study Formative 
Research (N01-HD-80020), the Burroughs Welcome Fund Preterm Birth Initiative (K.A.), the March of Dimes 
Preterm Birth Research Initiative (K.A.), the Baylor College of Medicine Medical Scientist Training Program (D.C. 
and K.M.A., NIH NIGMS T32 GM007330), the National Institute of General Medical Sciences (D.C., 
T32GM088129), Baylor Research Advocates for Student Scientists (D.C.), and the Human Microbiome Project 
funded through the NIH Director’s Common Fund at the National Institutes of Health (as part of NIH RoadMap 
1.5). All sequencing and adaptation of protocols for whole genome shotgun sequencing were performed by the 
Baylor College of Medicine Human Genome Sequencing Center (BCM-HGSC), which is funded by direct support 
from the National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI) at NIH (U54HG004973 (BCM), Dr. Richard Gibbs, 
P.I.). The authors also thank the staff directly involved in clinical recruitment and specimen processing (Michelle 
Moller, Brigid Boggan, Renata Benjamin, Jia Chen, Claire Cook, and Dr. Diana Racusin). The authors are grateful 
to Drs. Michael Belfort, James Versalovic, Tor Savidge, Ruth Ann Luna, Diana Racusin, Melissa Suter, and Kristen 
Meyer for critical review of the manuscript.
Main text References
1. Human Microbiome Project Consortium. Structure, function and diversity of the healthy human 
microbiome. Nature. 2012; 486:207–214. [PubMed: 22699609] 
2. Arumugam M, et al. Enterotypes of the human gut microbiome. Nature. 2011; 473:174–180. 
[PubMed: 21508958] 
3. Aagaard K, et al. A metagenomic approach to characterization of the vaginal microbiome signature 
in pregnancy. PloS One. 2012; 7:e36466. [PubMed: 22719832] 
4. Costello EK, et al. Bacterial community variation in human body habitats across space and time. 
Science. 2009; 326:1694–1697. [PubMed: 19892944] 
5. Turnbaugh PJ, et al. An obesity-associated gut microbiome with increased capacity for energy 
harvest. Nature. 2006; 444:1027–131. [PubMed: 17183312] 
6. Ravel J, et al. Vaginal microbiome of reproductive-age women. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2011; 
(108 Suppl 1):4680–4687. [PubMed: 20534435] 
7. Ridaura VK, et al. Gut microbiota from twins discordant for obesity modulate metabolism in mice. 
Science. 2013; 341:1241214. [PubMed: 24009397] 
8. Qin J, et al. A metagenome-wide association study of gut microbiota in type 2 diabetes. Nature. 
2012; 490:55–60. [PubMed: 23023125] 
9. Morgan XC, et al. Dysfunction of the intestinal microbiome in inflammatory bowel disease and 
treatment. Genome Biol. 2012; 13:R79. [PubMed: 23013615] 
10. Schulz MD, et al. High-fat-diet-mediated dysbiosis promotes intestinal carcinogenesis 
independently of obesity. Nature. 2014; 514:508–512. [PubMed: 25174708] 
11. Gordon HA, Pesti L. The gnotobiotic animal as a tool in the study of host microbial relationships. 
Bacteriol. Rev. 1971; 35:390–429. [PubMed: 4945725] 
12. Olszak T, et al. Microbial exposure during early life has persistent effects on natural killer T cell 
function. Science. 2012; 336:489–493. [PubMed: 22442383] 
Chu et al.
Page 17
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 13. Wesemann DR, et al. Microbial colonization influences early B-lineage development in the gut 
lamina propria. Nature. 2013; 501:112–115. [PubMed: 23965619] 
14. Gomez de Aguero M, et al. The maternal microbiota drives early postnatal innate immune 
development. Science. 2016; 351:1296–1302. [PubMed: 26989247] 
15. Ivanov II, et al. Induction of Intestinal Th17 Cells by Segmented Filamentous Bacteria. Cell. 2009; 
139:485–498. [PubMed: 19836068] 
16. Smith PM, et al. The Microbial Metabolites, Short-Chain Fatty Acids, Regulate Colonic Treg Cell 
Homeostasis. Science. 2013; 341:569–573. [PubMed: 23828891] 
17. Atarashi K, et al. Induction of Colonic Regulatory T Cells by Indigenous Clostridium Species. 
Science. 2011; 331:337–341. [PubMed: 21205640] 
18. Costello EK, Carlisle EM, Bik EM, Morowitz MJ, Relman DA. Microbiome Assembly across 
Multiple Body Sites in Low-Birthweight Infants. mBio. 2013; 4:e00782–13. [PubMed: 24169577] 
19. Feng XL, Xu L, Guo Y, Ronsmans C. Factors influencing rising caesarean section rates in China 
between 1988 and 2008. Bull. World Health Organ. 2012; 90:30–39. [PubMed: 22271962] 
20. Osterman MJK, Martin JA. Trends in low-risk cesarean delivery in the United States, 1990–2013. 
Natl. Vital Stat. Rep. Cent. Dis. Control Prev. Natl. Cent. Health Stat. Natl. Vital Stat. Syst. 2014; 
63:1–16.
21. Almqvist C, Cnattingius S, Lichtenstein P, Lundholm C. The impact of birth mode of delivery on 
childhood asthma and allergic diseases--a sibling study. Clin. Exp. Allergy J. Br. Soc. Allergy 
Clin. Immunol. 2012; 42:1369–1376.
22. Black M, Bhattacharya S, Philip S, Norman JE, McLernon DJ. Planned Repeat Cesarean Section at 
Term and Adverse Childhood Health Outcomes: A Record-Linkage Study. PLoS Med. 2016; 
13:e1001973. [PubMed: 26978456] 
23. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (College). Safe prevention of the primary 
cesarean delivery. Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 2014; 210:179–193. [PubMed: 24565430] 
24. Dominguez-Bello MG, et al. Delivery mode shapes the acquisition and structure of the initial 
microbiota across multiple body habitats in newborns. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 2010; 107:11971–
11975. [PubMed: 20566857] 
25. Biasucci G, et al. Mode of delivery affects the bacterial community in the newborn gut. Early Hum. 
Dev. 2010; (86 Suppl 1):13–15.
26. Fallani M, et al. Intestinal microbiota of 6-week-old infants across Europe: geographic influence 
beyond delivery mode, breast-feeding, and antibiotics. J. Pediatr. Gastroenterol. Nutr. 2010; 51:77–
84. [PubMed: 20479681] 
27. Azad MB, et al. Gut microbiota of healthy Canadian infants: profiles by mode of delivery and 
infant diet at 4 months. Can. Med. Assoc. J. 2013; 185:385–394. [PubMed: 23401405] 
28. Barber EL, et al. Indications Contributing to the Increasing Cesarean Delivery Rate. Obstet. 
Gynecol. 2011; 118:29–38. [PubMed: 21646928] 
29. David LA, et al. Diet rapidly and reproducibly alters the human gut microbiome. Nature. 2014; 
505:559–563. [PubMed: 24336217] 
30. Koenig JE, et al. Succession of microbial consortia in the developing infant gut microbiome. Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. 2011; 108:4578–4585. [PubMed: 20668239] 
31. Jost T, Lacroix C, Braegger CP, Rochat F, Chassard C. Vertical mother-neonate transfer of maternal 
gut bacteria via breastfeeding. Environ. Microbiol. 2014; 16:2891–2904. [PubMed: 24033881] 
32. Azad M, et al. Impact of maternal intrapartum antibiotics, method of birth and breastfeeding on gut 
microbiota during the first year of life: a prospective cohort study. BJOG Int. J. Obstet. Gynaecol. 
2015 n/a-n/a. 
33. Ardeshir A, et al. Breast-fed and bottle-fed infant rhesus macaques develop distinct gut microbiotas 
and immune systems. Sci. Transl. Med. 2014; 6:252ra120.
34. Dufrene M, Legendre P. Species Assemblages and Indicator Species: The Need for a Flexible 
Asymmetrical Approach. Ecological Monographs. 1997; 67:345–366.
35. Koren O, et al. Host remodeling of the gut microbiome and metabolic changes during pregnancy. 
Cell. 2012; 150:470–480. [PubMed: 22863002] 
Chu et al.
Page 18
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 36. La Rosa PS, et al. Patterned progression of bacterial populations in the premature infant gut. Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2014; 111:12522–12527. [PubMed: 25114261] 
37. Aagaard K, et al. The placenta harbors a unique microbiome. Sci. Transl. Med. 2014; 6:237ra65.
38. Antony KM, et al. The preterm placental microbiome varies in association with excess maternal 
gestational weight gain. Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 2015; 212:653.e1–16. [PubMed: 25557210] 
39. Collado MC, Rautava S, Aakko J, Isolauri E, Salminen S. Human gut colonisation may be initiated 
in utero by distinct microbial communities in the placenta and amniotic fluid. Sci. Rep. 2016; 
6:23129. [PubMed: 27001291] 
40. Bäckhed F, et al. Dynamics and Stabilization of the Human Gut Microbiome during the First Year 
of Life. Cell Host Microbe. 2015; 17:852. [PubMed: 26308884] 
41. Knights D, et al. Bayesian community-wide culture-independent microbial source tracking. Nat. 
Methods. 2011; 8:761–763. [PubMed: 21765408] 
42. Penders J, et al. Factors influencing the composition of the intestinal microbiota in early infancy. 
Pediatrics. 2006; 118:511–521. [PubMed: 16882802] 
43. Vatanen T, et al. Variation in Microbiome LPS Immunogenicity Contributes to Autoimmunity in 
Humans. Cell. 2016; 165:842–853. [PubMed: 27133167] 
44. Dominguez-Bello MG, et al. Partial restoration of the microbiota of cesarean-born infants via 
vaginal microbial transfer. Nat. Med. 2016; 22:250–253. [PubMed: 26828196] 
45. Galley JD, Bailey M, Kamp Dush C, Schoppe-Sullivan S, Christian LM. Maternal obesity is 
associated with alterations in the gut microbiome in toddlers. PloS One. 2014; 9:e113026. 
[PubMed: 25409177] 
46. Mueller NT, et al. Birth mode-dependent association between pre-pregnancy maternal weight 
status and the neonatal intestinal microbiome. Sci. Rep. 2016; 6:23133. [PubMed: 27033998] 
47. Chu DM, et al. The early infant gut microbiome varies in association with a maternal high-fat diet. 
Genome Med. 2016; 8:77. [PubMed: 27503374] 
48. Hu J, et al. Diversified Microbiota of Meconium Is Affected by Maternal Diabetes Status. PLoS 
One. 2013; 8:e78257. [PubMed: 24223144] 
49. Ridlon JM, Kang DJ, Hylemon PB, Bajaj JS. Bile acids and the gut microbiome. Curr. Opin. 
Gastroenterol. 2014; 30:332–338. [PubMed: 24625896] 
50. Kennedy D. B Vitamins and the Brain: Mechanisms, Dose and Efficacy—A Review. Nutrients. 
2016; 8:68. [PubMed: 26828517] 
51. Gibson MK, et al. Developmental dynamics of the preterm infant gut microbiota and antibiotic 
resistome. Nat. Microbiol. 2016; 1:16024. [PubMed: 27572443] 
52. Bokulich NA, et al. Antibiotics, birth mode, and diet shape microbiome maturation during early 
life. Sci. Transl. Med. 2016; 8:343ra82–343ra82.
53. DiGiulio DB, et al. Microbial prevalence, diversity and abundance in amniotic fluid during preterm 
labor: a molecular and culture-based investigation. PloS One. 2008; 3:e3056. [PubMed: 18725970] 
54. Steel JH, et al. Bacteria and inflammatory cells in fetal membranes do not always cause preterm 
labor. Pediatr. Res. 2005; 57:404–411. [PubMed: 15659699] 
55. Jiménez E, et al. Isolation of commensal bacteria from umbilical cord blood of healthy neonates 
born by cesarean section. Curr. Microbiol. 2005; 51:270–274. [PubMed: 16187156] 
56. Jiménez E, et al. Is meconium from healthy newborns actually sterile? Res. Microbiol. 2008; 
159:187–193. [PubMed: 18281199] 
57. Ardissone AN, et al. Meconium microbiome analysis identifies bacteria correlated with premature 
birth. PloS One. 2014; 9:e90784. [PubMed: 24614698] 
58. Hansen R, et al. First-Pass Meconium Samples from Healthy Term Vaginally-Delivered Neonates: 
An Analysis of the Microbiota. PLOS One. 2015; 10:e0133320. [PubMed: 26218283] 
59. Fallani M, et al. Determinants of the human infant intestinal microbiota after the introduction of 
first complementary foods in infant samples from five European centres. Microbiology. 2011; 
157:1385–1392. [PubMed: 21330436] 
60. Yassour M, et al. Natural history of the infant gut microbiome and impact of antibiotic treatment on 
bacterial strain diversity and stability. Sci. Transl. Med. 2016; 8:343ra81–343ra81.
Chu et al.
Page 19
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Methods-only References
61. La Rosa PS, et al. Hypothesis Testing and Power Calculations for Taxonomic-Based Human 
Microbiome Data. PLoS One. 2012; 7:e52078. [PubMed: 23284876] 
62. Aagaard K, et al. The Human Microbiome Project strategy for comprehensive sampling of the 
human microbiome and why it matters. FASEB J. Off. Publ. Fed. Am. Soc. Exp. Biol. 2013; 
27:1012–1022.
63. Caporaso JG, et al. QIIME allows analysis of high-throughput community sequencing data. Nat. 
Methods. 2010; 7:335–336. [PubMed: 20383131] 
64. Schmieder R, Edwards R. Fast identification and removal of sequence contamination from 
genomic and metagenomic datasets. PloS One. 2011; 6:e17288. [PubMed: 21408061] 
65. Edgar RC. Search and clustering orders of magnitude faster than BLAST. Bioinforma. Oxf. Engl. 
2010; 26:2460–2461.
66. Haas BJ, et al. Chimeric 16S rRNA sequence formation and detection in Sanger and 454-
pyrosequenced PCR amplicons. Genome Res. 2011; 21:494–504. [PubMed: 21212162] 
67. Cole JR, et al. The Ribosomal Database Project: improved alignments and new tools for rRNA 
analysis. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009; 37:D141–D145. [PubMed: 19004872] 
68. DeSantis TZ, et al. Greengenes, a chimera-checked 16S rRNA gene database and workbench 
compatible with ARB. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2006; 72:5069–5072. [PubMed: 16820507] 
69. Segata N, et al. Metagenomic biomarker discovery and explanation. Genome Biol. 2011; 12:R60. 
[PubMed: 21702898] 
70. Segata N, et al. Metagenomic microbial community profiling using unique clade-specific marker 
genes. Nat. Methods. 2012; 9:811–814. [PubMed: 22688413] 
71. Abubucker S, et al. Metabolic reconstruction for metagenomic data and its application to the 
human microbiome. PLoS Comput. Biol. 2012; 8:e1002358. [PubMed: 22719234] 
72. Le Chatelier E, et al. Richness of human gut microbiome correlates with metabolic markers. 
Nature. 2013; 500:541–546. [PubMed: 23985870] 
Chu et al.
Page 20
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 1. Neonatal (at birth) microbial community structure
(A) Principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) on unweighted UniFrac distances between the 
neonatal microbiota is shown along the first two principal coordinate (PC) axes. Boxplots 
shown along each PC axis represents the distribution of samples along the given axis, 
representing the median and interquartile range with whiskers determined by Tukey’s 
method. Each point represents a single sample and is colored by body site: Meconium 
(Mec.), Orange; Skin, blue; Oral Cavity, red; Nares, green. Ellipses represent a 95% 
confidence interval around the cluster centroid. Clustering significance by virtue of body site 
was determined by Adonis (p<0.001). (B) Cumulative distribution of Bray-Curtis 
dissimilarity distances calculated pairwise between samples of the same body site (solid 
lines), and between different body sites (dashed lines). Distance comparisons for neonates 
and maternal samples are shown in red and gray, respectively. Smaller values indicate a 
greater similarity between samples. (C) The average relative abundance (circle size) of the 
most prevalent genera (y-axis) in each body site (x-axis) is plotted for neonates and mothers 
at delivery. The indicator value index (related to circle color shade darkness) represents the 
strength of association between a taxa and a given body site, with larger values indicating 
greater specificity.
Chu et al.
Page 21
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 2. The infant microbiota at 6 weeks demonstrates body site specificity
(A) PCoA on unweighted UniFrac distances between the infant microbiota is shown along 
the first two PC axes. Boxplots shown along each PC axis represents the distribution of 
samples along the given axis, representing the median and interquartile range with whiskers 
determined by Tukey’s method. Each point represents a single sample and is colored by 
body site: Stool, orange; Skin, blue; Oral cavity, red; Nares, green. Ellipses represent a 95% 
confidence interval around the cluster centroid. Clustering significance by virtue of body site 
was determined by Adonis (p<0.001). (B) Cumulative distribution of Bray-Curtis 
dissimilarity distances calculated pairwise between samples of the same body site (solid 
lines), and between different body sites (dashed lines). Distance comparisons for infant and 
maternal samples are shown in red and gray, respectively. Smaller values indicate a greater 
similarity between samples. (C) The average relative abundance (circle size) of the most 
prevalent genera (y-axis) in each body site (x-axis) is plotted for infants and mothers at 6 
weeks. The indicator value index (related to circle shade darkness) represents the strength of 
association between a taxa and a given body site, with larger values indicating greater 
specificity.
Chu et al.
Page 22
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 3. Failure to demonstrate a significant impact of mode of delivery on the infant microbiota 
across body sites and time
(A and B) PCoA on unweighted UniFrac distances between the neonatal microbiota at 
delivery (A) and 6 weeks (B). Data are stratified by body site, with mode of delivery 
indicated by color (Cesarean, red; vaginal, gray). Ellipses represent the 95% confidence 
interval around the cluster centroid. Significance of clustering, which was seen among 
neonatal (A, delivery) nasal, oral, and skin communities, but not meconium (Mann-Whitney 
test of PC1 values: p>0.05), was determined by an Adonis test by virtue of mode of delivery, 
stratified by body site (R2=0.038). Conversely, among infants (B,6 weeks), significant 
Chu et al.
Page 23
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 clustering was not observed (Adonis p=0.057, R2=0.007). (C and D) Three axes ternary 
plots indicating the proportion of OTUs within a neonatal sample (each point) predicted to 
originate from a maternal body site (indicated by the triangle vertices). Each point represents 
a neonatal sample while its position indicates the predicted relative contribution from either 
the maternal vagina (posterior fornix or introitus), maternal skin (retroauricular crease or 
antecubital fossa) or from another maternal site (supragingival plaque, anterior nares, stool, 
unknown). Points closer to the vertices indicate that a greater proportion of the samples 
OTUs are predicted to originate from the microbiota of the indicated maternal body site. 
Data for samples obtained at delivery (C) and at 6 weeks (D) are stratified by body site and 
by mode of delivery (Vaginal, Cesarean-Labored, or Cesarean-Unlabored). A 2D point 
density topography map (blue shading) for each plot is given to indicate the point density.
Chu et al.
Page 24
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 4. Taxonomic profiles of infant and maternal stool and oral microbiomes according to mode 
of delivery and time
A phylogenetic representation of the taxonomic composition in the infant stool (A), maternal 
stool (B), infant oral (C), and maternal oral (D) samples at delivery (inner two rings) and 6 
weeks postpartum (outer two rings). Each time point is further divided by mode of delivery 
(indicated by the label at the bottom of the rings. The average relative abundance of each 
genera are plotted within the concentric rings, represented by the shaded cells, with higher 
relative abundance indicated by a darker shade. The phyla to which each taxa belongs is 
Chu et al.
Page 25
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 indicated by the phylogenetic tree. Three notable taxa are indicated by the red outline, 
namely Bacteroides, Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus.
Chu et al.
Page 26
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 5. Expansion and diversification of the infant microbial community structure and function 
by 6 weeks of age
(A) Heatmap showing distinct microbial gene (KEGG pathway) profiles of the infant stool 
and oral metagenome at delivery and 6 weeks of age. The microbial gene profile for 
maternal stool is shown as a comparison. The relative abundance of a pathway in a given 
sample is colored by its row z-score ((value – row mean)/row standard deviation). The 
vertical color bar represents the higher order KEGG module to which each pathway belongs. 
(B) PCoA of Bray-Curtis distances based on pathway relative abundances demonstrates 
primarily clustering by body site and time point (PERMANOVA, p<0.001). (C) 
Chu et al.
Page 27
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Enumeration of the unique number of genes and species within the neonatal meconium 
(delivery), stool (6 weeks) and maternal stool (ANOVA, *** p<0.001 by post-hoc Tukey’s 
tests). (D) Results from Linear discriminate analysis Effect Size (LEfSe) analysis conducted 
to identify pathways that differentiated the infant stool metagenome at delivery and at 6 
weeks (top left), the infant and maternal stool metagenomes at 6 weeks (top right) and the 
infant oral and stool metagenomes at 6 weeks (bottom). Only significant pathways with an 
LDA score >3.0 are shown.
Chu et al.
Page 28
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 6. Infant microbial community function with clinical metadata in a generalized linear model
(A) Heatmap of the relative abundances of KEGG pathways found in infant stool samples as 
determined by WGS sequencing. The vertical bar on the left indicates mode of delivery, 
breastfeeding practices and intrapartum antibiotic usage. Dendrograms represent hierarchical 
clustering on Euclidean distances using average linkage. (B) A generalized linear mixed 
model was fitted for each pathway to identify pathways whose abundances differed 
significantly between individuals by virtue of mode of delivery, antibiotic usage, 
breastfeeding, gestational weight gain, BMI and gestational age. The strength of the linear 
Chu et al.
Page 29
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 model predictions for each pathway is represented by bar height. Significant correlations are 
indicated by the darker color (dark red or dark gray). Labels correspond to the following 
comparisons: Vaginal Delivery - pathways enriched in infants born vaginally (red, up) or by 
Cesarean (gray, down); Intrapartum Antibiotics - pathways enriched in infants exposed to 
intrapartum antibiotic usage (red, up) as opposed to no antibiotics (gray, down); Mixed 
Formula and Human Milk Feeding - pathways increased in partially breast fed (human milk 
and formula) infants (red, up) as opposed to exclusive human milk only (gray, down); 
Exclusive Formula Feeding - pathways higher in exclusively formula fed infants (red, up), as 
opposed to human milk only (gray, down); Excess Gestational Weight Gain - pathways 
higher in cases of excess maternal gestational weight gain (red, up), as opposed to normal 
weight gain (gray, down); Pre-pregnancy BMI & Gestational age - pathways positively (up, 
red) or negatively (down, gray) correlated with pre-pregnancy BMI or gestational age.
Chu et al.
Page 30
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
