 Host-protozoan interactions protect from mucosal infections 
through activation of the inflammasome
Aleksey Chudnovskiy1,2,3,10, Arthur Mortha1,2,3,9,10, Veronika Kana1,2,3, Andrea Kennard6, 
Juan David Ramirez5,6, Adeeb Rahman3,4, Romain Remark1,2,3, Ilaria Mogno4, Ruby Ng3, 
Sasha Gnjatic2,3, El-ad David Amir1,2,3, Alexander Solovyov2, Benjamin Greenbaum2, Jose 
Clemente3,4, Jeremiah Faith3,4, Yasmine Belkaid7,8, Michael E. Grigg6, and Miriam 
Merad1,2,3,11,*
1Department of Oncological Science, 1475 Madison Avenue New York, NY 10028
2The Tisch Cancer Institute, 1475 Madison Avenue New York, NY 10028
3The Immunological Institute, 1475 Madison Avenue New York, NY 10028
4Icahn Institute or Genomics and Multiscale Biology and Department of Genetics & Genomic 
Sciences Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 1475 Madison Avenue New York, NY 10028
5Grupo de Investigaciones Microbiologicas – UR (GIMUR), Universidad del Rosario, Bogotá, 
Colombia
6Molecular Parasitology Section, National Institutes of Health, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 
20892
7Mucosal Immunology Section, National Institutes of Health, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 
20892
8NIAID Microbiome Program, Laboratory of Parasitic Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and 
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892
Abstract
While conventional pathogenic protists have been extensively studied, there is an underappreciated 
constitutive protist microbiota that is an integral part of the vertebrate microbiome. The impact of 
these species on the host and their potential contributions to mucosal immune homeostasis remain 
poorly studied. Here, we show that the protozoan Tritrichomonas musculis activates the host 
*Correspondence : miriam.merad@mssm.edu (M.M.), Address : 1470 madison avenue, New york NY 10029.
9present address: Department of Immunology, University of Toronto, Toronto, 1 King’s College Cir, ON M5S 1A8, Canada.
10Co-first authors
11Lead Contact
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
Authors Contribution
A.C., A.M., V.K. designed and analyzed the experiments and wrote the manuscript. A.K., J.D.R., A.R., R.R., I.M., R.N. performed 
experiments and analyzed data. E.D.A. and A.S. analyzed the RNAseq data. S.G., B.G., J.C. and J.F. provided intellectual expertise. 
Y.B. designed and funded experiments. M.E.G. designed and funded experiments and contributed to writing the manuscript. M.M 
designed and funded the study and wrote the manuscript .
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Published in final edited form as:
Cell. 2016 October 6; 167(2): 444–456.e14. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2016.08.076.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 epithelial inflammasome to induce IL-18 release. Epithelial-derived IL-18 promotes dendritic cell-
driven Th1 and Th17 immunity and confers dramatic protection from mucosal bacterial infections. 
Along with its role as a “protistic” antibiotic, colonization with T. musculis exacerbates the 
development of T cell driven colitis and sporadic colorectal tumors. Our findings demonstrate a 
novel mutualistic host-protozoan interaction that increases mucosal host defenses at the cost of an 
increased risk of inflammatory disease.
Graphical Abstract
Introduction
The mammalian gut is host to a wide consortium of microbes from diverse phyla including 
viruses, prokaryotic bacteria and eukaryotic microbes. The latter, broadly referred to as the 
eukaryome (Lukes et al., 2015), is comprised of a myriad of fungi, helminths and protists. 
Several protists are known pathogens of the mouse and human intestine, these include the 
microsporidia (Encephalitizoan cuniculi) (Stentiford et al., 2016), Entamoeba histolytica 
(Moonah et al., 2013), Toxoplasma gondii (Molloy et al., 2013), Giardia spp. and 
Cryptosporidium spp. (Kotloff et al., 2013), and the host immune response induced upon 
colonization with these unicellular protozoan parasites is well studied in both patients and 
experimental settings. In contrast, it is increasingly evident that a constitutive protistic 
microbiota, which exists as an integral part of the vertebrate microbiome, inhabits 
mammalian intestinal tracts. The prevalence and classification of these protists, including 
stramenopiles (Blastocystis spp.), diplomonads (Enteromonas spp.), amoebozoa (Entamoeba 
dispar, Entamoeba coli) and parabasalids (Pentatrichomonas hominis, Dientamoeba fragilis), 
as commensal, pathobionts, or pathogens remains enigmatic and debated (Lukes et al., 
2015). The impact of these species on the host in general and, in particular, on the immune 
system has been practically neglected.
Chudnovskiy et al.
Page 2
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 In this study, we describe the critical contribution of the rodent parabasalid Tritrichomonas 
musculis (T.mu), a previously unrecognized commensal of the rodent microbial flora, in 
shaping the intestinal immune landscape. We show that intestinal colonization with T.mu 
leads to inflammasome activation in the epithelial compartment and the release of the 
inflammatory cytokine IL-18, which in turn contributes to host protection against mucosal 
bacterial infections but exacerbates disease sequelae in animal models of colitis and 
tumorogenesis. These results uncover a previously unappreciated mutualistic relationship 
between a protist and its host, and identify the critical contribution of protozoa to mucosal 
defenses.
Results
Identification of a gut protozoan commensal in mice
Routine phenotypic analysis of gut tissue revealed a significant expansion of the CD45+ 
hematopoietic cell compartment in the C57BL/6 (B6) mouse colony maintained “in-house” 
at the Mount Sinai animal facility (Fig. 1A–B) together with increased levels of IgA in the 
sera and colonic explants compared to commercially available mice purchased from Jackson 
Laboratories (Jax) (Fig. 1C). Remarkably, analysis of colonic luminal content revealed a 
large number of IgAintDAPI+ cells in in-house colonies, which were absent in commercial 
mice (Fig. 1D). Microscopic analysis of fecal material from in-house mice revealed the 
presence of unicellular flagellated microorganisms that resembled a parabasalid protozoan 
parasite (Fig. 1E) which were closely adherent to the intestinal epithelial surface (Fig. 1F). 
Molecular PCR-DNA sequencing at the 18S (Supplementary Fig. 1C) and ITS (Fig. 1H and 
Supplementary Fig. 1D–E) rDNA locus identified a new protozoan parasite referred to 
hereafter as Tritrichomonas musculis (T.mu), which is similar to, but distinct from, 
Tritrichomonas muris. Phylogenetic analysis of T.mu sequences obtained for GAPDH, a-
tubulin, EF1a and MDH from metagenomic sequences obtained from FACS-purified T.mu 
isolated from infected B6 mice established that T.mu is indeed unique, with close ancestry to 
Tritrichomonas foetus (Supplementary Figure 1F–I). T.mu was also identified within 4 
separate animal facilities within the intramural NIH animal facilities (Bethesda, MD) in 
addition to Mount Sinai animal facility indicating that the parasite was both widespread and 
common within East Coast research facilities.
D. fragilis is the closest human ortholog
Humans are likewise host to several enteric parabasalids, such as Pentatrichomonas hominis 
and Dientamoeba fragilis, but whether these protists are commensals, pathobionts, or 
pathogens is still debated. To determine if a T.mu orthologous sequence type is common in 
people, we screened 188 fecal samples collected from healthy adults with no gastro-
intestinal clinical symptoms obtained from 9 health districts as part of a Colombian NIH 
Health Survey. A heterogeneous array of Dientamoeba fragilis sequences was detected in all 
health districts sampled (31/188; 16.5%) with the highest incidence (6/19; 31.6%) in the 
Fomeque region (Supplementary Table 1). To assay whether enteric parabasalids were found 
globally, we screened available Giardia positive fecal material obtained from 96 human 
individuals collected from South America, Africa, Europe and Asia. We identified a 
Chudnovskiy et al.
Page 3
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 widespread distribution of the human T. mu ortholog (11/96; 11.5%) emphasizing the 
potentially unappreciated prevalence of T.mu orthologs in humans (Supplementary Fig. 1E).
Consistent with prior studies (Treuting et al., 2012), we found little if any T.mu in the small 
intestine of T.mu-bearing animals prompting us to focus mainly on immune changes in the 
colonic mucosa (data not shown). To directly address whether the presence of T.mu was 
responsible for the expansion of gut tissue-resident immune cells and increased IgA levels, 
we colonized commercial B6 mice with purified T.mu. We used fluorescent activated cell-
sorting (FACS) to purify the protozoan (Supplementary Fig. 1A and data not shown) which 
was quadruple sorted and we confirmed the purity and reproducibility of our sorting method 
using mass spectrometry analysis of the FACS-sorted T.mu from B6 mice (Supplementary 
Fig. 1B).
Commercial B6 mice were colonized using a single gavage of purified T.mu and analyzed at 
different times after colonization. The colonization was life-long, and persisted in the 
offspring of the colonized animals for several generations (data not shown). Importantly, 
T.mu colonization frequency was identical in mice inoculated via oral gavage to in-house 
T.mu infected animals (Fig. 1G). Strikingly, and despite the extensive expansion of gut 
tissue-resident hematopoietic cells we failed to detect histological signs of mucosal injury in 
T.mu bearing mice, although a mild epithelial and goblet cell hyperplasia was noted in 
infected animals compared to non-infected controls (Fig. 1I,J). Altogether these results 
establish that T.mu is a constituent member of the microbial flora of adult mice capable of 
colonizing mice with no acute harm to the host and regardless of the preexisting microbial 
communities present.
T.mu colonization rapidly shapes the colonic tissue immune landscape
To directly address whether T.mu was responsible for the expansion of gut tissue-resident 
hematopoietic cells, we characterized the immune cell composition of T.mu-colonized mice 
using Flow cytometry and Cytometry by Time of Flight (CyTOF) analysis of colonic lamina 
propria (LP) isolated at different times after colonization (Fig. 2A–C). We observed a 
substantial increase in Ly6Chi monocytes, CD103−CD11b+ DCs, macrophages and 
neutrophils as early as one week after colonization, compared to PBS-gavaged mice (Fig. 
2C–D). In contrast, migratory CD103+DCs and CD103+CD11b+ DCs were reduced in the 
colonic mucosa, in line with their superior ability to migrate to the mesenteric draining 
lymph nodes (MLNs) in response to inflammatory signals (Bogunovic et al., 2009; 
Bogunovic et al., 2012). Changes in myeloid cell composition were associated with 
increased production of tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFα) by macrophages and infiltrating 
Ly6Chi monocytes (Fig. 2D,E). In addition to changes of the innate myeloid compartment, 
T.mu colonization also affected innate lymphoid cells (ILC) (Spits et al., 2013). While ILC 
did not expand in T.mu-colonized mice, we observed a substantial increase of IL-5 and 
IL-13 producing ILC2 in the colonic mucosa, similar to a recent report in the small intestine 
of mice colonized with the protozoa Tritrichomonas spp (Howitt et al., 2016). However, we 
also found that activation of ILC2 in T.mu-colonized mice was associated with a significant 
increase of GM-CSF-producing ILC3 (Supplementary Fig. 2 A – C).
Chudnovskiy et al.
Page 4
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 We also detected a drastic expansion of interferon γ (IFNγ)-producing CD4+ T helper cells 
(Th1) cells as early as one week after T.mu colonization, whereas we failed to detect any 
expansion of IL-5, IL-13 or IL-4 producing Th2 cells (Fig. 2F–I). CD4+IFNγ+Th1 cells 
peaked and plateaued around 2 months post colonization (Fig. 2J). We also observed an 
expansion of interleukin-17 (IL-17)-producing CD4+ Th cells (Th17), which increased 
around 2–3 weeks after colonization, but to a lower level than Th1 cells (Fig. 2F, 2J). In 
addition, we found that the number of activated CD44hiCD4+ T cells increased in the MLN 
(data not shown) and colonic LP (Supplementary Fig. 2D), while the number of proliferating 
CD4+Ki67+ T cells and CXCR3+CD4+ T cells expanded in the colonic LP two weeks after 
T.mu colonization (Supplementary Fig. 2D–E). These results suggest that colonization with 
T.mu promotes the priming of tissue-specific T effector responses in the MLN, followed by 
the accumulation and/or expansion of effector T cells in the colonic LP. To assess whether 
the drastic colonic immune modulation observed upon T.mu colonization was not solely due 
to a collateral effect related to the transfer of endosymbiotic or contaminating bacterial taxa 
we inoculated T.mu free mice with purified T.mu cultured in the presence of 5 antibiotics 
(Abx), as previously described (Saeki et al., 1983). Importantly, we observed a similar 
induction of colonic Th1 and Th17 immune responses in mice inoculated with purified and 
cultured Abx treated T.mu or untreated FACS-sorted T.mu (Supplementary Fig. 2F and Fig. 
2F), suggesting that T.mu is the main driver of the colonic immune-modulatory effects 
observed in T.mu colonized animals. Consistent with the dominant Th1 cell induction, we 
observed a strong IFNγ-driven gene expression signature in the colonic mucosal epithelia of 
T.mu colonized mice (Supplementary Fig. 3), prompting us to probe the pathways that 
promoted T. mu-induction of Th1 and Th17 responses in mice.
Division of labor between distinct colonic tissue DC subsets helps shape mucosal 
immunity upon T.mu colonization
Tissue-resident DCs are most potent at driving mucosal-specific T cell effector responses 
upon migration, and antigen presentation in the T cell zone of tissue-draining LNs enriched 
in naïve T cells (Iwasaki, 2007). CCR7 is a chemokine receptor that controls DC migration 
from the mucosal tissues to the MLN, and Ccr7−/− mice lack migratory DCs in the MLN 
(Jang et al., 2006). Colonization with T.mu did not lead to Th1 and Th17 cell expansion in 
Ccr7-deficient mice (Fig. 3A), suggesting that DC migration may be required to promote T 
effector cell responses upon T.mu colonization in vivo. However, since CCR7 is also 
required for T cell entry into the LN (Forster et al., 1999), failure to induce effector cell 
responses in T.mu colonized Ccr7-deficient mice may also be due to T cell intrinsic defects.
LP DCs are heterogeneous and consist of functionally specialized subsets that arise from 
distinct differentiation lineages. CD103+CD11b+F4/80−Flt3+ DCs which require the 
transcription factor Interferon Regulatory Factor 4 (IRF4) for their differentiation, are more 
potent at driving Th2 and Th17 differentiation in the mucosal tissues (Gao et al., 2013; 
Murphy, 2013; Persson et al., 2013; Schlitzer et al., 2013; Tussiwand et al., 2015). 
CD103+CD11b−F4/80−Flt3+ DCs arise independently of IRF4 and require the transcription 
factors IRF8, Basic Leucine Zipper Transcription Factor ATF-like 3 (BATF3) and Inhibitor 
of DNA binding 2 (ID2) for their differentiation, and are more potent at driving CD8+ T cell 
immunity (Bogunovic et al., 2009; Edelson et al., 2010; Helft et al., 2010; Varol et al., 
Chudnovskiy et al.
Page 5
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 2009). To directly examine the contribution of each DC subset to the induction of T effector 
cells upon T.mu colonization, we used DC-specific knock-out lines that lack distinct DC 
subsets. We found that Batf3−/− mice that lack CD103+CD11b− DCs but not 
CD103+CD11b+ DCs in the colonic LP, failed to expand CD4+IFNγ+ Th cells upon T.mu 
colonization, whereas expansion of CD4+IL-17+ Th17 cells was intact and slightly increased 
in the colonic mucosa of T.mu-colonized mice, compared to mice free of T.mu (Fig. 3B,D). 
In addition to Batf3-deficient mice, Irf8-deficient mice should also be unable to mount 
T.mu-specific Th1 responses, since IRF8 is required for the differentiation of the CD103+ 
DC lineage (Helft et al., 2010). Because IRF8 has pleiotropic effects in hematopoietic cell 
differentiation, we crossed Cd11cCre mice with Irf8flox/flox mice (Irf8ΔDC mice) to 
specifically delete Irf8 in CD11c+ DCs. Importantly, similar to Batf3−/− mice, Irf8ΔDC mice 
lacked CD103+CD11b− DC and failed to expand CD4+IFNγ+ Th1 cells upon T.mu 
colonization (Fig. 3E–F), whereas CD4+IL-17+ Th17 cells expanded similarly in Irf8ΔDC 
and Irf8flox/flox mice colonized with T.mu. To probe the contribution of 
CD103+CD11b+F4/80−Flt3+ DC to immune changes induced upon T.mu-colonization, we 
deleted Irf4 in CD11c+ DCs (Cd11cCre x Irf4flox/flox (Irf4ΔDC)) leading to the depletion of 
CD103+CD11b+ DCs in the colonic LP (Fig. 3G). Two weeks post colonization with T.mu, 
expansion of CD4+IFNγ+ Th1 cells was similar in Irf4ΔDC and Irf4flox/flox mice, whereas 
CD4+IL-17+ Th17 cells expanded less prominently in the colonic mucosa of Irf4ΔDC mice 
(Fig. 3H). Altogether, these results establish the distinct contribution of CD103+CD11b− DC 
and CD103+CD11b+ DC to the induction of Th1 and Th17 immunity, respectively, upon 
T.mu colonization.
Given the significant accumulation of Ly6Chi monocytes observed in T.mu-colonized mice, 
we asked whether monocytes and macrophages help shape T cell responses observed after 
T.mu colonization. CCR2 is a chemokine receptor that is highly expressed on monocytes and 
is required for efficient monocyte egress from the bone marrow leading to reduced monocyte 
accumulation in tissues of Ccr2-deficient mice (Serbina and Pamer, 2006). Interestingly, 
while Ccr2-deletion led to a drastic reduction of colonic tissue-infiltrating monocytes, we 
did not observe any changes in the number of IFNγ+ and IL-17+ T effector cells at two 
weeks following T.mu colonization (Supplementary Fig. 4A), in addition T cell responses 
were independent of TLR5 signaling and Myd88 signaling in macrophages and intestinal 
epithelial cells (Supplementary Fig. 6). Importantly, T.mu engraftment efficiency was 
identical in mice lacking DC or monocytes populations suggesting that differences in T.mu 
colonization resistance were not responsible for the immune phenotype observed in these 
mice (Supplementary Fig. 4B). Altogether, these results reveal a critical role for tissue-
resident DC to the induction of a diverse effector response to T.mu-colonization.
To examine whether T.mu was directly responsible for the induction of Th1 and Th17 
responses in the colonic mucosa, we colonized germ-free (GF) mice with T.mu and probed 
the expansion of IFNγ and IL-17 T cells in the colonic mucosa two weeks after 
colonization. We found that similar to our observations in conventional mice, T.mu 
colonization led to an expansion of Th1 and Th17 cells in GF mice. Interestingly, T.mu 
colonization of GF mice led to a slightly stronger Th17 cell response compared to 
conventional mice, (Supplementary Fig. 5A–B). Increased Th17 response observed in these 
Chudnovskiy et al.
Page 6
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 mice may be due either to increased T.mu colonization (Supplementary Fig. 5C) or 
modulation of Th17 responses by the commensal bacterial flora.
T.mu shapes colonic adaptive immunity via ASC and IL-18 activation
The initiation of T helper responses requires the orchestrated actions of cytokines to induce 
and amplify their effector polarization. Interleukin-12 (IL-12) and IL-18 have been 
associated with induction of Th1 immunity (Boraschi and Dinarello, 2006; Sims and Smith, 
2010; Trinchieri, 2003). We found that IL-18 was released at high levels in the colonic tissue 
upon T.mu colonization (Fig. 4A) and that IL-18 receptor alpha (IL-18Rα) was expressed at 
high levels in colonic-infiltrating T cells (Supplementary Fig. 2G) prompting us to examine 
whether increased production of IL-18 contributed to the induction of Th1 response in T.mu 
colonized mice. We found that absence of IL-18 completely abrogated the expansion not 
only of CD4+IFNγ+ Th1 but also CD4+IL-17+ Th17 cells upon colonization with T.mu, 
compared to control mice (Fig. 4B). Abrogation of the Th1 and Th17 response observed in 
T.mu infected il18−/− mice was not due to reduced T.mu colonization as T.mu colonization 
efficiency was identical in il18−/− mice that have been either gavaged with purified T.mu or 
cohoused with T.mu infected mice (Supplementary Fig. 4B)
Release of mature and bioactive IL-18 requires cleavage of the precursor form of IL-18 by 
active Caspase-1 (Gu et al., 1997). Activation of Caspase-1 is driven by the assembly of 
cytosolic multiprotein complexes called ‘inflammasomes’ and requires, in most cases, the 
adaptor apoptosis-associated speck-like protein containing a CARD (ASC) (Schroder and 
Tschopp, 2010). IL-18 is produced by many different cell types including intestinal 
epithelial cells, stromal and hematopoietic cells (Boraschi and Dinarello, 2006; Dinarello et 
al., 2013; Sims and Smith, 2010). To examine the contribution of the epithelial or 
hematopoietic compartment to IL-18 production upon T.mu infection, we generated (Il18−/− 
-> wild type) bone marrow chimeric mice that specifically lack IL-18 in the mucosal 
hematopoietic compartment. We found that (Il18−/−-> wild type) bone marrow chimeric 
mice responded similarly to (wild type -> wild type) bone marrow chimeric controls to T.mu 
colonization, suggesting that epithelial production of IL-18 controlled T.mu driven Th1 and 
Th17 response in the colon (Fig. 4C).
To further probe the key role of IL-18 in host response to T.mu infection, we colonized 
Asc−/− mice that are unable to produce active Caspase 1 and bioactive IL-18. Consistent 
with the results observed in Il18−/− mice, Asc−/− mice failed to mount Th1 and Th17 
responses upon T.mu colonization, further establishing the key role of the inflammasome in 
T.mu-associated adaptive immune responses (Fig. 4D). ASC-driven Caspase 1 activation can 
also cleave the precursor form of IL-1β (Schroder and Tschopp, 2010; Sims and Smith, 
2010). However, we found that induction of CD4+IFNγ+ Th1 and CD4+IL-17+ Th17 
response upon T.mu colonization was less affected in mice lacking Il1r1 (Fig. 4E).
T.mu colonization protects from mucosal bacterial infection through activation of the 
inflammasome
The expansion of a strong Th1 immune response mostly in the large intestine and cecum of 
colonized mice led us to explore a potential mutualistic role for T.mu in shaping host 
Chudnovskiy et al.
Page 7
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 mucosal defenses. Thus, we probed the contribution of T.mu to modulating the clinical 
outcome of enterocolitis driven by Salmonella typhimurium infection, one of the leading 
causes of enterocolitis in developing countries (Barthel et al., 2003). Strikingly, we found 
that while Salmonella infection causes massive cecal inflammation in mice free of T.mu, the 
cecum of T.mu-colonized mice remained almost unaffected by the bacterial pathogen (Fig. 
5A), despite the fact that Salmonella colonized as efficiently T.mu-inoculated as T.mu-free 
mice (Fig. 5B). All pathological parameters including colonic infiltration of 
polymorphonuclear granulocytes, submucosal edema, reduction of goblet cells number and 
epithelial cell integrity were dramatically improved in mice that were colonized with T.mu 
prior to the infection with Salmonella (Fig. 5A). Accordingly, we found that Salmonella 
colony-forming units (CFU) were strongly reduced in the MLN and spleen of mice 
inoculated with T.mu compared to T.mu free animals (Fig. 5B). Since our results above 
established that epithelial release of IL-18 was critical to shape T.mu–induced immunity, we 
asked whether IL-18 contributed to T.mu-mediated protection against mucosal Salmonella 
infection. Importantly, we found that injection of neutralizing anti-IL-18 antibody strongly 
reduced the protective effects of the T.mu-colonization in Salmonella-infected mice 
compared to control mice reflected by increased inflammation (Fig. 5C) and increased 
Salmonella infection (Fig. 5D) observed in the group treated with IL-18 blocking antibody 
in comparison to isotype control treated mice. These data establish that the presence of T.mu 
in the microbial flora significantly protects against mucosal infection through the induction 
of inflammasome-driven IL-18 release by the colonic epithelium.
T.mu colonization increases susceptibility to pathogenic inflammation
The sustained levels of inflammatory molecules found in the colonic tissues prompted us to 
test whether T.mu could also contribute to pathogenic inflammation in infected mice. Thus, 
conventional or GF, immunodeficient recombination-activating gene 2 (Rag2−/−) mice were 
colonized with T.mu two weeks prior to injecting highly purified CD4+CD45RBhi effector T 
cells. Consistent with prior reports, injection of effector T cells in Rag2−/− animals led to 
consistent weight loss, associated with intestinal inflammation, whereas GF mice were 
protected from disease (Feng et al., 2010; Read and Powrie, 2001). Importantly, 
conventional and GF animals colonized with T.mu prior to T cell transfer had a more 
aggravated disease, with increased weight loss starting approximately two weeks after T cell 
transfer, which correlated with more severe pathological score compared to control mice 
(Fig. 6A).
Sustained tissue inflammation also prompted us to assess the impact of T.mu on epithelial 
cell damage. We found that as early as 30 days post-colonization, T.mu led to a significant 
increase in apoptotic epithelial cells at the tip of the villi and an increased number of 
proliferating epithelial cells at the villi crypts (Fig. 6B–C), confirming our finding of mild 
epithelial hyperplasia in T.mu infected mice (Fig. 1I–J). T.mu-induced epithelial cell 
activation was associated with increased expression levels of epithelial Nitric Oxide 
Synthase 2 (Nos2), TNFα (Tnfa) and IL-22 target genes (Fig. 6D and Supplementary Fig. 
3), which together with IL-17 have been implicated in exacerbating colorectal cancer (CRC) 
development (Grivennikov et al., 2012; Kirchberger et al., 2013; Popivanova et al., 2008; 
Shaked et al., 2012 ). The loss of the tumor suppressor gene Adenomatous polyposis coli 
Chudnovskiy et al.
Page 8
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (Apc) increases the development of intestinal tumors in humans. Apcmin/+ mice that carry a 
truncation mutation in the Apc gene are commonly used as a model of sporadic CRC (Heyer 
et al., 1999). Colonization of Apcmin/+ mice with T.mu revealed a significant increase in the 
burden, but not the size, of the colonic tumors around 3–4 months following colonization 
(Fig. 6F). These results demonstrate that prolonged T.mu colonization can exacerbate the 
development of tumors in the large intestine of its vertebrate host (Fig. 6E–F).
Discussion
Here we report the identification of a previously unknown mutualistic interaction between 
the intestinal protozoan commensal T.mu and its vertebrate host. We found that T.mu 
engrafts into an established ecosystem, leading to long-lasting colonization without causing 
any pathological injuries to its host. We also show that T.mu colonization completely 
remodeled the composition and functional state of the mucosal tissue-resident immune 
system and increased host protection against mucosal bacterial infections.
Colonization with T.mu led to a significant expansion of Th1 cells and Th17 effector cells in 
the colonic mucosa which was dependent on distinct DC subsets and their ability to migrate 
to the draining LN but also required the production of IL-18 by the epithelial cells. These 
results together with the high expression of IL-18Rα on colonic-infiltrating effector T cells 
(Supplementary Fig. 2G) suggest that T.mu-specific T cell immunity is likely initiated in the 
draining LN by migratory colonic DCs and is likely further propagated at the tissue site by 
epithelial IL-18.
It is well established that trichomonad flagellates of insects (i.e., Oxymonads, 
Trichonymphids and Cristomonads) form endosymbiotic partnerships with bacteria (Hongoh 
et al., 2008) (Noda et al., 2009), but it is less clear whether the same is true for flagellated 
trichomonads of the enteric cavities of animals. Whereas many animal-sourced flagellates 
can only be maintained as xenic cultures, others such as the oral and vaginal flagellates of 
humans, Trichomonas tenax and Trichomonas vaginalis respectively, can be readily adapted 
to grow axenically (Diamond, 1962). We found that T.mu cultured in vitro in Abx-rich 
media or isolated from Abx-treated mice harbor different bacterial taxa (data not shown) but 
yet produce an equivalent immunomodulation of the colonic mucosa as that from FACS-
sorted T.mu transferred from untreated mice, which argues against specific bacterial taxa as 
the sole agent(s) responsible for the modulation of colonic immunity and supports an 
instructive role for T.mu in remodeling the mucosal tissue-resident immune system. 
Regardless, whether the immunomodulatory phenotype observed in infected animals is 
mediated exclusively by T.mu, an associated microbial symbiont, or from the composite of a 
protozoan-microbial endosymbiotic interaction, it is our belief that the protist and any 
associated microbial symbiont should be treated as a single microbial unit that possesses 
distinct immunomodulatory properties. Importantly, differences in the microbial 
composition from different mouse strains did not influence T.mu colonization efficiency. 
Future studies, however, are needed to assess the degree to which shifts in microbial 
composition or function that naturally occur in response to T.mu colonization contribute to 
or modulate the colonic immune system. Importantly, the presence of T.mu in several East 
Coast research institutions and its highly immune-modulatory effects in the host further 
Chudnovskiy et al.
Page 9
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 emphasizes the need for animal cohousing in experimental immunology research. The cost 
of cohousing experiments would thus need to be taken into account by funding agencies to 
facilitate the implementation of these additional controls throughout our research 
community.
Interestingly, T.mu colonization induced the activation of ILC3 and ILC2. ILC2 activation 
observed in our study was consistent with recent data showing an expansion of IL-13 and 
IL-5 producing ILC2 in animals infected with Tritrichomonas spp, which was critical to 
restrain protozoan loads in mucosal sites (Howitt et al., 2016). We were unable to verify the 
degree of homology between the Tritrichomonas species described here and the one 
described in this recently published study, and thus it remains unclear at this stage how 
related these two protozoan species are. However, despite the consistent activation of ILC2 
in our study, Th2 effector cells were not expanded or activated in T.mu-colonized mice, 
whereas Th1 and Th17 responses dominated the colonic immune landscape of our mice.
Strikingly, we found that T.mu colonization conferred significant protection from 
Salmonella infection-driven enteritis in a manner that was fully dependent on the IL-18 
inflammasome. Altogether these results uncover a formidable symbiotic host-protozoan 
interaction that promotes the release of anti-parasitic cytokines to control protozoan loads 
(Howitt et al., 2016) while inducing a T effector response to strengthen mucosal defenses 
against collateral infections such as Salmonella. However while serving a mutualistic 
relationship, T.mu colonization also increased murine susceptibility to inflammatory disease 
and cancer, consistent with prior literature showing that the IL-18/IL-18 receptor axis 
increases susceptibility to IBD and cancer in patients (Zitvogel et al., 2012).
Protists are common members of the constitutive microbiota in humans. However, while 
most attention has been focused on their pathogenic role in mucosal disease, little is known 
about their symbiotic relationships with their hosts. Our study identified T.mu’s closest 
human ortholog as D. fragilis, a unicellular parasite capable of inducing gastro-intestinal 
symptoms in infected human individuals (Barratt et al., 2011). Controversies are ongoing 
whether D. fragilis, and for that matter, other protist species such as Enteromonas spp., 
Entamoeba dispar, Entamoeba coli and the related parabasalid Pentatrichomonas hominis 
are commensals, pathobionts, or pathogens of the human intestinal tract (Lukes et al., 2015). 
Certainly D. fragilis has been identified as an etiological agent of irritable bowel syndrome 
(IBS) (Stark et al., 2007), but it has also been recognized for its potential protective effect 
against disease flares in patients with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) (Petersen et al., 
2013). Our findings in the murine system demonstrate a host-protozoan interaction that 
increases mucosal host defenses at the cost of increased risk of inflammatory disease and 
this may gleen new perspective on the etiology of inflammation and immune homeostasis in 
individuals colonized with D. fragilis
The strong mutualistic relationship between the protist T.mu and its rodent hosts highlight 
the need to expand our understanding of host-protozoan relationships in humans and explore 
the potential key contributions of commensal protozoa in shaping animal and human 
mucosal defenses. Interestingly, DNA sequencing of T.mu and D. fragilis in mouse and 
human reveal a strong genetic diversification of the protist between infected carriers. 
Chudnovskiy et al.
Page 10
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Phylogenetic classification may thus uncover strong geographical heterogeneity on the 
species level and could furthermore inform about functional and pathogenic differences 
between subspecies.
STAR METHODS
CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING
Further information and requests for reagents may be directed to, and will be fulfilled by the 
corresponding author Miriam Merad (miriam.merad@mssm.edu)
EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
Animals
C57BL/6, B6.129P2(SJL)-Myd88tm1.1Defr/J (Myd88flox/flox), B6.129P2-Lyz2tm1(cre)Ifo/J 
(LysMCre), B6.Cg-Tg(Vil-cre) (VillinCre), B6.129S4-Ccr2tm1Ifc/J (Ccr2−/−), B6.129P2(C)-
Ccr7tm1Rfor/J (Ccr7−/−), C57BL/6J-ApcMin/J (Apc+/Min), B6.129S1-Irf4tm1Rdf/J 
(Irf4flox/flox), B6(Cg)-Irf8tm1.1Hm/J (Irf8flox/flox), B6.129S2-Ifnar1tm1Agt/Mmjax (Ifnar−/−), 
129S-Batf3tm1Kmm/J (Batf3−/−), NOD.Cg-Tg(Itgax-cre)1-1Reiz/PesaJ (CD11cCre), B6.129S1-
Tlr5tm1Flv/J (Tlr5−/−), B6.129S7-Il1r1-tm1lmx/J (Il1r1−/−) and B6.129P2-Il18r1-tm1Aki/J 
(Il18−/−) mice were purchased from Jackson Laboratory. B6.129S6-Rag2tm1FwaN12 
(Rag2−/−) mice were purchased from Taconic. Asc−/− mice were obtained from Millenium 
Inc. GF B6 and Rag2−/− mice were maintained in isolators at the Icahn School of Medicine 
at Mount Sinai Animal Facility. Unless otherwise stated, mice were used at 6–12 weeks of 
age. Experiments were carried out using age and gender matched groups. All animal 
procedures performed in this study were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use 
Committee (IACUC) of Mount Sinai School of Medicine.
Animals housed within the vivarium were maintained at specific pathogen free (SPF) health 
status in individually ventilated cage units that are changed on a weekly basis; cage bottoms 
are covered with autoclaved bedding and nesting material for enrichment. Mice were fed 
irradiated food and drink reverse osmosis water from autoclaved bottles or automatic 
watering system. All animals were manipulated under HEPA filtered air exchange stations or 
biosafety cabinets and users were required to use chlorine-based disinfectant (MB-10) on 
gloves and work surfaces within manipulations with animals. All animal users, non-animal 
users, and husbandry staff were required to wear personnel protection equipment (PPE) to 
enter the facility i.e. disposable gowns, gloves, head caps, and shoe covers.
Human Specimen
Assessing prevalence of T.mu orthologs in humans—Two human cohort 
populations were available for diagnostic screening. The first was comprised of fecal 
samples preserved in 100% ethanol collected from 188 otherwise healthy adult individuals 
from 9 regions in equatorial Colombia as part of a Colombian NIH health survey. The age of 
the individuals tested ranged between 16–41years-old. All samples were first screened by 
microscopy for the presence of Giardia spp., Entamoeba spp., Blastocystis hominis and 
Cryptosporidium spp. The second comprised 96 globally distributed fecal samples preserved 
Chudnovskiy et al.
Page 11
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 in 100% ethanol from patients diagnosed Giardia positive by microscopy 16 samples each 
were collected from China, Colombia, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, and South Africa. All 
fecal samples were collected from nine locations across Colombia from asymptomatic 
adults. The adults provided written informed consent and ethical clearance for this study 
followed the ethics of Helsinki declaration. The study protocol was approved by the ethics 
committee from Universidad INCCA de Colombia under the Number 237894
METHOD DETAILS
Isolation of lamina propria and mesenteric lymph nodes leukocytes
Lamina propria lymphocytes were isolated as described (Vonarbourg et al., 2010). Briefly, 
the large intestines were incubated in EDTA supplemented Hank’s balanced salt solution 
(HBSS) without Ca2+ and Mg2+(Gibco) for 15–20 min at 37°C with mild agitation. The 
epithelial cell layer was removed by vortexing. Remaining sheets of LP were digested in 
collagenase (Sigma) and DNaseI (Sigma). The cells were resuspended in 5ml of 40% 
Percoll (GE Healthcare) and overlaid onto 5ml of 80% Percoll in a 15ml tube. Lymphocytes 
were collected at the interphase of the Percoll gradient, washed once and resuspended in 
media. Mesenteric lymph nodes were removed and cleaned from remaining mesenteric fat 
and digested with collagenase (Sigma) in Hank’s balanced salt solution (HBSS) with Ca2+ 
and Mg2+(Gibco) and 10% FBS for 15–20 min at 37°C. Cells we re washed using FACS 
buffer and filtered through 70µm cell strainer.
Antibodies
CD3e (clone 145-2C11, eBioscience), CD4 (clone GK1.5, eBioscience), CD11b (clone 
M1/70, eBioscience), CD11c (clone N418, eBioscience), CD45 (clone 30F11, eBioscience ), 
CD45.2 (clone 104, eBioscience) CD45RB (clone C363.16A, eBioscience), CXCR3 (clone 
CXCR3-173, Biolegend), CD44 (clone IM7, eBioscience), CD62L (clone MEL-14, 
Biolegend), Ly6C (clone AL-21, BD), B220 (clone RA3-6B2, eBioscience), ICOS (clone 
C398.4A , Biolegend), KLRG1 (clone 2F1/KLRG1, Biolegend), RORγt (clone B2D, 
eBioscience) IgA (clone S107, SouthernBiotech), CD64 (clone X54-5/7.1, Biolegend), 
CD103 (clone 2E7, eBioscience), F4/80 (clone BM8, Biolegend), I-A/I-E (clone 
M5/114.15.2, eBioscience), IFNγ (clone XMG1.2, eBioscience), IL-17A (clone eBio17B7, 
eBioscience), IL-22 (clone IL22JOP, eBioscience) Ki67 (clone SolA15, eBioscience) GM-
CSF (clone MP1-22E9, eBioscience), IL-5 (clone TRFK5, eBioscience), IL-4 (clone 11B11, 
eBioscience), IL-13 (clone eBio1316H, eBioscience). Secondary antibodies, isotype controls 
and fluorophore-conjugated streptavidins were purchased from Biolegend and eBioscience.
Time of flight Mass cytometry (CyTOF) analysis
C57Bl/6 mice were gavaged with PBS or 2×106 highly purified T. mu prior to analysis. 14 
days after inoculation, colonic LP cells were isolated from 2 PBS-treated and 2 T. musculis 
inoculated mice.
Cells from individual samples were bar-coded with anti-CD45 antibodies, pooled and 
stained with the following antibodies: Ly6G (141 Pr), CD11c (142 Nd), TCRb (143 Nd), 
CD8 (146 Nd), CD11b (148 Nd), CD19 (149 Sm), CD24 (150 Nd), CD25 (151 Eu), Siglec-
Chudnovskiy et al.
Page 12
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 F (152 Sm), NKp46 (153 Eu), CD64 (156 Gd), Foxp3 (158 Gd), CD62L (160 Gd), Tbet 
(161 Dy), Ly6c (162 Dy), RORgt (163 Dy), CD103 (164 Dy), CD117 (166 Er), Gata3 (167 
Er), ST2 (168 Er), NK1.1 (170 Er), CD44 (171 Yb), CD4 (172 Yb), MHCII (174 Yb), 
CD127 (175 Lu), B220 (176 Yb), Cisplatin (195Pt)
All mass cytometry reagents were purchased from Fluidigm Inc. (former DVS) unless 
otherwise noted. LN and colons were dissociated into single-cell suspensions, washed with 
PBS containing 0.1% BSA and blocked with a commercial Fc-blocking reagent (BD 
Bioscience) to minimize non-specific antibody binding. The cells were then stained with a 
panel of metal-labeled antibodies against 26 cell surface markers for 30 minutes on ice, and 
then washed. All antibodies were either purchased pre-conjugated to metal tags, or 
conjugated in-house using MaxPar X8 conjugation kits according to the manufacturer’s 
instructions. After antibody staining, the cells were incubated with cisplatin for 5 minutes at 
RT as a viability dye for dead cell exclusion. The cells were then fixed and permeabilized 
with a commercial fix/perm buffer (BD Biosciences) and stained with antibodies against 
intracellular epitopes and stored in PBS containing 1.6% formaldehyde and a 1:4000 
dilution of Ir nucleic acid intercalator to label all nucleated cells. Immediately prior to 
acquisition, the cells were washed in PBS, then in diH20 and resuspended in diH20 
containing a 1/10 dilution of EQ 4 Element Calibration beads. After routine instrument 
tuning and optimization, the samples were acquired on a CyTOF2 Mass Cytometer in 
sequential 10 minute acquisitions at an acquisition rate of <500 events /s. The resulting FCS 
files were concatenated and normalized using a bead-based normalization algorithm in the 
CyTOF acquisition software and uploaded to Cytobank for analysis. FCS files were 
manually pre-gated on Ir193 DNA+ CD45+ events, excluding dead cells, doublets and 
DNA-negative debris, and the gated populations were then analyzed using viSNE (Amir el et 
al., 2013) based on all myeloid phenotypic markers. Putative cell populations on the 
resulting viSNE map were manually gated based on the expression of canonical markers, 
while allowing for visualization of additional heterogeneity within and outside of the labeled 
population bubbles.
Flow Cytometry analysis
Isolated cells were surface stained in FACS buffer (PBS w/o Ca2+ Mg2+ supplemented with 
2% heat inactivated FBS and 5mM EDTA) for 20–30 min on ice. Staining for CXCR3 was 
performed for 30min at room temperature. Multiparameter analysis was performed on a LSR 
II Fortessa (BD) and analyzed with FlowJo software (Tree Star). Dead cells and doublets 
were excluded from all analysis. For the detection of cytokines, cells were cultured in media 
in the presence of Brefeldin A (10µg/ml) for 4h at 37°C. Ex vivo stimulations were carried 
out in the presence of Brefeldin A, phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) (Sigma) and 
Ionomycin (Sigma). Cells were fixed post stimulation using Cytofix/Cytoperm buffer (BD). 
Intracellular staining with anti-IFNγ, anti-IL-17A and anti-IL-22 was performed in FACS 
buffer containing 0.5% Saponin (Sigma). For the detection of transcription factors, cells 
were fixed and stained using the Foxp3-staining kit (eBioscience) according to the 
manufacturer’s instructions.
Chudnovskiy et al.
Page 13
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Detection of bacterial bound IgA
The cecum of mice was isolated, cut open and luminal content was washed out into 25ml of 
fresh cold PBS. Content was vortexed and filtered 2–3 times through 70µm cell strainer. 
Flow through was spun for 10min at 4000rpm at 4°C. Colle cted content was resuspended in 
5–10ml of PBS and 500µl were stained with anti-IgA antibodies and DAPI. Cecal content 
from Rag2−/− mice served as a negative control for IgA binding.
Scanning Electron Microscopy
T.mu containing colonic and cecal tissue was fixed in 3% Glutaraldehyde/0.2M Sodium 
Cacodylate Buffer at pH7.3 for more than one hour. Fixative was washed away using 0.2M 
Sodium Cacodylate Buffer pH 7.3 for 10 minutes. Tissues were fixed in 1% Osmium 
Tetraoxide/0.2M Cacodylate Buffer pH 7.3 for one hour. After washing, tissues were 
dehydrated using increasing concentrations of Ethyl Alcohol (1× 10min 50%, 1× 10min 
70%, 1× 10min 95%, 3× 10min 100%). After dehydration, tissues were critical point dried, 
mounted and sputter coated prior to imaging. Scanning electron pictures were taken on a 
Hitachi Field Emission S4300 scanning electron microscope.
Giemsa staining
T.mu were triple sorted into PBS and spun onto glass slides. Cells were semi-dried and fixed 
in cold methanol. Cells were stained with Giemsa (Sigma) according to the manufacturer’s 
instructions.
Purification of Tritrichomonas musculis (T.mu) from cecal content
The cecal content of T. mu containing mice was harvested into 30ml of sterile PBS and 
filtered several times through a 70µm cell strainer. The suspension was spun at 1000rpm for 
5min at 4°C. The supernatant was discarded and the pellet was washed twice with 30ml 
PBS. The pellet was resuspended in sterile PBS after the final wash and cells were triple 
sorted into PBS on a FACS ARIA II using the 70µm nozzle at 70psi at 4°C. Purity was 
>99%. One to two million collected T. mu were gavaged into mice immediately after the 
sort.
Culture of Tritrichomonas musculis (T.mu)
Culture of T.musculis was performed as described in Saeki et al.(Saeki et al., 1983). Briefly, 
cecums of T.mu infected mice were flushed with PBS, passed through the 70 um cell 
strainers and spun down at 1000 rpm for 5 min. In order to enrich for T.mu containing 
fraction the 40/80 % percoll gradient centrifugation step was performed at 1000g for 15 
minutes with breaks off and the T.mu were collected at the interphase. The interphase 
containing T.mu was spun down again at 1750 rpm for 10 min and resuspended in T.mu 
culture medium. T.mu culture medium was prepared as described by Saeki et al with the 
following modifications. Briefly cecums of mice were harvested and homogenized in PBS 
with 25 volumes of PBS per corresponding cecum weights. In order to get homogeneous 
suspension the cecum extract was stirred at 4 °C for 6 hrs and then spun down at 3500rpm 
for 10 min and the supernatant was filtered. The filtered cecal extract was used to resuspend 
the TrichoselTM broth (Becton Dickinson) and titrated to pH 7 with NaOH. The medium 
Chudnovskiy et al.
Page 14
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 was then autoclaved prior to be supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated horse serum and 
with Abx against Gram positive and negative bacteria including vancomycin, gentamicin, 
streptomycin, penicillin and amphotericin B. 2 × 106 T.mu were inoculated per ml of growth 
media and cultured under anaerobic conditions for 3 days. After 3 days of cultures, the T.mu 
containing media was centrifuged at 1750 rpm for 10 min and 2 × 106 T.mu was inoculated 
per mouse as described above.
Quantification of T.mu colonization efficiency
Cecum of mice colonized with T.mu was excised weighted and cut longitudinally. Cecal 
content was harvested and resuspended in 10 ml of sterile PBS. Trophozoites were counted 
using hemocytometer and the numbers of T.mu trophozoites per gram of cecum were 
measured.
Pathological assessment of intestinal tissue
Cecums and colons were fixed, embedded in paraffin and sections were cut and stained with 
hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) and Periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) according to standard 
procedures. Pathological evaluation was performed by a pathologist assessing epithelial 
thickness, and epithelial integrity, submucosal edema, Goblet cell numbers, presence of 
polymorphonuclear granulocytes and a pathological score was assigned according to Barthel 
et al 2003.
Quantitative real-time PCR (Q-PCR)
Conventional reverse transcription, using the Sprint PowerScript reverse transcriptase 
(Clontech) was performed in accordance with the manufacturers’ instructions. Q-PCR was 
performed with SYBR GREEN on an ABI PRISM 7900HT Sequence Detection System 
(Applied Biosystems). The PCR protocol consisted of one cycle at 95°C (10 min) followed 
by 40 cycles of 95°C (15 s) and 58°C (1 min). Expressi on of hypoxanthine-guanine 
phosphoribosyltransferase (Hprt) was used as a standard. The average threshold cycle 
number (CRtR) for each tested mRNA was used to quantify the relative expression of each 
gene: 2^-[Ct(gene)-Ct(Hprt)]. Primers are listed below:
Hprt (Fwd)_CCTGGTTCATCATCGCTAATC
Hprt (Rev)_TCCTCCTCAGACCGCTTTT
Tnfa (Fwd) TCTTCTCATTCCTGCTTGTGG
Tnfa (Rev) GGTCTGGGCCATAGAACTGA
Nos2 (Fwd) GGGCTGTCACGGAGATCA
Nos2 (Rev) CCATGATGGTCACATTCTGC
Reg3b (Fwd) CAGACCTGGTTTGATGCAGA
Reg3b (Rev) GAAGCCTCAGCGCTATTGAG
Reg3g (Fwd) ATGGCTCCTATTGCTATGCC
Reg3g (Rev) GATGTCCTGAGGGCCTCTT
Chudnovskiy et al.
Page 15
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 ELISA
300–500µl of mouse blood was collected and serum was isolated using Serum/Gel Z/1.1 
serum separation tubes (SARSTEDT, Germany) according to the manufacturers protocol. 
Serum was stored at −80°C. Immunoglobulins were abs orbed on high-bound plates 
(NUNC) and anti-IgA ELISA was performed using the anti-mouse IgA-HRP antibody 
(Southern Biotech). 200–300µg of ascending colonic tissue were cultured in 500ul of 
complete RPMI at 37°C and 5% CO 2. Supernatant was collected 24h later, transferred into 
sterile tubes and stored at −80°C. Detection of IL-18 from overnight tissue explants was 
performed using the IL-18 ELISA kit (eBioscience) according to the manufacturers 
protocol.
MALDI-TOF
T.mu cells were quadrupel sorted into sterile PBS. The cells were pelleted for 3 minutes at 
15,000g. PBS was removed and the pellet resuspended in 100µL 70% ethanol. Fixed 
Trichomonas were pelleted again for 3 minutes at 15,000 g. The 70% ethanol was removed 
and the pellets were resuspended in 10µL 70% formic acid for lysis followed by the addition 
of 10µL acetonitrile. The formic acid and acetonitrile mixture was spun for 3 minutes at 
15,000g and 1µL of the supernatant was spotted into the MALDI-TOF target plate. After the 
lysate was dry, 1 µl of α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid matrix was added on top of each 
spot. The target was then analyzed with a MALDI TOF BioTyper (Bruker) according to 
manufacturer’s instructions. Repetitive recordings were collected and these spectra used to 
create a reference spectrum, which was used for future identification and quality control of 
the Trichomonas at other time points.
RNAseq analysis of epithelial cells
RNA sequencing was performed on RNA isolated from whole colonic tissues or epithelial 
cells. Groups of age and gender-matched mice were colonized with purified T.mu and RNA 
was isolated using Trizol. RNA was purified using phenol/chloroform extraction. 
Quantification was performed using the Qubit RNA assay kit HS according to the 
manufacturers protocol. RNA was sequenced at the Broad Technology Services using the 
High-throughput eukaryote 3’ DGE library. RNA count analysis and visualization was done 
in R (https://www.R-project.org/). RNA counts were converted to log2-counts per million 
using the voom package (Law et al., 2014). Differential expression was quantified using the 
lmFit function in the limma package (Ritchie et al., 2015). Gene sets were downloaded from 
the MSigDB mouse ortholog website (Subramanian et al., 2005) (http://bioinf.wehi.edu.au/
software/MSigDB/) and enrichment was computed using a hypergeometric test. Data was 
visualized using ggplot2. The reads were quality filtered as follows. First, the bases at the 
ends of the reads with quality less than 10 were trimmed. If the quality of the leftover part at 
the 20-th percentile was less than 5 or the length of the leftover part was less than 20 the 
read was discarded. If one of the paired end reads failed the quality control, the mate was 
discarded as well. Reads were aligned using STAR (Dobin et al., 2013) to the mouse 
genome. Counts for reads mapping to each gene were evaluated using the Subread package 
(Liao et al., 2013).
Chudnovskiy et al.
Page 16
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Phylogenetic and metagenomic sequencing of T.mu
DNA was isolated from FACS-purified protozoa and subjected to ITS PCR-DNA sequence 
analysis using pan-parabasalid primers anchored in the 18S 
[AATACGTCCCCTGCCCTTTGT] and 28S [TCCTCCGCTTAATGAGATGC] rDNA gene 
array that amplify across the polymorphic ITS region. PCR amplification consisted of 35 
cycles of 40 sec at 95° C, 40 sec at 58° C, and 40 sec at 72° C. Phylogenetic analysis was 
inferred using RAxML methodology after alignment to related parabasalid sequences 
downloaded from GenBank. The sequence deposited in GenBank has accession number 
(T.musculis_18S.sqn Tritrichomonas KX000921 and T.musculis_ITS.sqn Tritrichomonas 
KX000922).Branching support was assessed using ML bootstrap analysis (1000 
replications). Major groups are bracketed and labeled. The sequence placed the rodent 
parabasalid, which we hereafter refer to as T. musculis (T.mu), as distinct and sister to a 
clade comprising the Tritrichomonadidae that shared 95% identity with T. muris. T.mu was 
FACS-sorted and pulled from five in-house mice naturally colonized with T.mu. DNA was 
extracted using the Qiagen stool extraction kit according to manufacturer specifications. A 
paired-end TrueSeq nano DNA sequencing library (Illumina, Cat. No. 15041110) with an 
average insert size of 550 bp was prepared using 200 ng of input T.mu genomic DNA and 
run on an Illumina Mi-Seq platform. 35.61 million reads passed filtering T.mu sequences for 
the following genes alpha-Tubulin, EF1-alpha, GAPDH, and MDH were pulled from the 
metagenomic data for phylogenetic discrimination of T.mu from other enteric parabasailds 
as follows: reference sequences from the related parabasalids T. foetus and T.vaginalis for 
the 4 marker genes were downloaded from NCBI. BWA (v0.7.5a) was used to map reads 
against these 4 sequences. GATK (v3.5) in conjunction with Picard (v1.131) were used to 
select only high quality reads (average read depth for single copy loci was 20X) to produce a 
consensus sequence. No heterozygous SNP positions were identified in the regions mapped. 
Sequences were deposited in GenBank, with the following Accession IDs: KX492911, 12, 
13, 14.
Salmonella Infection
Groups of age and gender matched C57BL/6 mice were either left untreated or were orally 
gavaged with 2×106 purified T.mu. 14 days after treatment mice were orally gavaged with 
Streptomycin and infected with Salmonella typhimurium as previously described (Barthel et 
al., 2003), Infection and Immunity. Colony-forming units of S typhimurium in fecal pellets, 
the cecum, the spleen and the mesenteric lymph nodes were measured on MacConkey agar 
plates containing Streptomycin 48h after infection. Cecal weight was recorded and caeca 
were fixed, embedded in paraffin and sections were cut and stained with hematoxylin and 
eosin (H&E) according to standard procedures. Pathological evaluation was performed by a 
pathologist in a blinded manner and scored as previously described (Barthel et al., 2003). 
For neutralization of IL-18, groups of Trichomonas infected mice were injected 3 times with 
200µg of neutralizing anti-IL-18 antibody (YIGIF74-1G7, Bioxcell) prior to infection with 
Salmonella.
Chudnovskiy et al.
Page 17
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 T cell transfer colitis
Groups of age and gender matched SPF or GF Rag2−/− mice were either gavaged with PBS 
or 1–2×106 highly purified T.mu. Conventionalized GF Rag2−/− mice were colonized with 
SPF Rag2−/− flora through fecal transplantation 4 weeks prior to gavage with PBS or T. 
musculis. Two weeks after gavage, 0.75–1×106 highly purified CD4+ CD45RBhi T cells 
were injected i.p. into mice. To purify CD45RBhi T cells spleens and lymph nodes of 6–8 
week old mice were isolated and organs were mashed through a 70µm cell strainer. 
Leukocytes were obtained through red cell lysis and stained with biotinylated anti-CD4 
antibodies followed by incubation with magnetic anti-biotin beads. The enriched 
lymphocyte fraction was stained with DAPI, anti-TCRb, anti-CD4, anti-CD45RB and anti-
CD25 antibodies. TCRb+ CD4+ CD45RBhi CD25−cells were sorted on a BD FACS ARIA II 
into complete RPMI media containing 10% (heat inactivated) FBS. 0.75–1×106 T cells were 
injected i.p. into Rag2−/− mice.
Weight loss was monitored weekly and pathological evaluation of colons was performed as 
endpoint analysis on H&E stained sections of paraffin-embedded colons. Pathological scores 
were assessed by experimental pathologist in a blind fashion and calculated based on the 
previously established scoring method (Asseman et al., 1999).
Colorectal cancer model Apc+/min
Groups of 4-week-old Apc+/min mice were left untreated or were orally gavaged with 2×106 
purified T.mu. 3–4 months later, mice were analyzed and tumor burden and tumor size were 
measured.
Immunofluorescence analysis
TUNEL staining was performed using the TUNEL staining kit (Roche) according to the 
manufacturer’s protocol. Ki67 staining was performed using anti-Ki67 antibody (clone: 
VPRMO4 Vector Lab) on paraffin-embedded sections. Antigen retrieval was performed in 
Demasking Solution at 800W for 15min (Vector Lab H-3300).
QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
In each experiment, multiple mice were analyzed as biological replicates as indicated in all 
the figures. Graphs show mean ± SEM. Student’s t test or ONE-way ANOVA Bonferroni’s 
Multiple Comparison Test was used to determine significance. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p 
< 0.001.
DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY
Data Resources
The accession number for the sequencing data reported in this paper is GSE8611.
The T.mu sequences have been deposited to the GenBank. The accession number for the 
T.mu sequences are as follows; T.musculis_18S.sqn Tritrichomonas KX000921, 
T.musculis_ITS.sqn Tritrichomonas KX000922, T.musculis a-tubulin, KX492911; 
Chudnovskiy et al.
Page 18
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 T.musculis EF1a, KX492912; T.musculis GAPDH, KX492913; T.musculis, MDH, 
KX492914.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank the Merad laboratory for helpful discussions and input. We would like to thank Fiona Desland for critical 
review of the manuscript. We would like to thank Jordi Ochando and the Flow Cytometry facility for their excellent 
technical support and assistance with cell sorting. We would like to thank Steve Porcella (Genomics Unit, RTB, 
Rocky Mountain Labs, NIAID), Mariam Quinones (Bioinformatics and Computational Biology Branch, NIAID) 
and Jacquice Davis (NIAID Microbiome Program) for their assistance with metagenomic and 16S sequencing and 
analysis. This study used the Nephele platform from the NIAID Office of Cyber Infrastructure and Computational 
Biology (OCICB) in Bethesda, MD. M.M. is funded by NIH grants R01 CA154947A, R01 CA173861 and U01 
AI095611. This work was supported in part by the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National 
Institutes of Health (Y.B. and M.E.G.). M.E.G. Is a Scholar of the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research 
(CIFAR) Integrated Microbial Biodiversity Program
REFERENCES
Amir el AD, Davis KL, Tadmor MD, Simonds EF, Levine JH, Bendall SC, Shenfeld DK, 
Krishnaswamy S, Nolan GP, Pe’er D. viSNE enables visualization of high dimensional single-cell 
data and reveals phenotypic heterogeneity of leukemia. Nat Biotechnol. 2013; 31:545–552. 
[PubMed: 23685480] 
Asseman C, Mauze S, Leach MW, Coffman RL, Powrie F. An essential role for interleukin 10 in the 
function of regulatory T cells that inhibit intestinal inflammation. J Exp Med. 1999; 190:995–1004. 
[PubMed: 10510089] 
Barratt JL, Harkness J, Marriott D, Ellis JT, Stark D. The ambiguous life of Dientamoeba fragilis: the 
need to investigate current hypotheses on transmission. Parasitology. 2011; 138:557–572. [PubMed: 
21349214] 
Barthel M, Hapfelmeier S, Quintanilla-Martinez L, Kremer M, Rohde M, Hogardt M, Pfeffer K, 
Russmann H, Hardt WD. Pretreatment of mice with streptomycin provides a Salmonella enterica 
serovar Typhimurium colitis model that allows analysis of both pathogen and host. Infect Immun. 
2003; 71:2839–2858. [PubMed: 12704158] 
Bogunovic M, Ginhoux F, Helft J, Shang L, Hashimoto D, Greter M, Liu K, Jakubzick C, Ingersoll 
MA, Leboeuf M, et al. Origin of the lamina propria dendritic cell network. Immunity. 2009; 
31:513–525. [PubMed: 19733489] 
Bogunovic M, Mortha A, Muller PA, Merad M. Mononuclear phagocyte diversity in the intestine. 
Immunol Res. 2012
Boraschi D, Dinarello CA. IL-18 in autoimmunity: review. Eur Cytokine Netw. 2006; 17:224–252. 
[PubMed: 17353157] 
Diamond LS. Axenic Cultivation of Trichomonas tenax, the Oral Flagellate of Man. Journal of 
Eukaryotic Microbiology. 1962; 9:442–444.
Dinarello CA, Novick D, Kim S, Kaplanski G. Interleukin-18 and IL-18 binding protein. Front 
Immunol. 2013; 4:289. [PubMed: 24115947] 
Dobin A, Davis CA, Schlesinger F, Drenkow J, Zaleski C, Jha S, Batut P, Chaisson M, Gingeras TR. 
STAR: ultrafast universal RNA-seq aligner. Bioinformatics. 2013; 29:15–21. [PubMed: 23104886] 
Edelson BT, Kc W, Juang R, Kohyama M, Benoit LA, Klekotka PA, Moon C, Albring JC, Ise W, 
Michael DG, et al. Peripheral CD103+ dendritic cells form a unified subset developmentally 
related to CD8alpha+ conventional dendritic cells. J Exp Med. 2010; 207:823–836. [PubMed: 
20351058] 
Chudnovskiy et al.
Page 19
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Feng T, Wang L, Schoeb TR, Elson CO, Cong Y. Microbiota innate stimulation is a prerequisite for T 
cell spontaneous proliferation and induction of experimental colitis. J Exp Med. 2010; 207:1321–
1332. [PubMed: 20498021] 
Forster R, Schubel A, Breitfeld D, Kremmer E, Renner-Muller I, Wolf E, Lipp M. CCR7 coordinates 
the primary immune response by establishing functional microenvironments in secondary 
lymphoid organs. Cell. 1999; 99:23–33. [PubMed: 10520991] 
Gao Y, Nish SA, Jiang R, Hou L, Licona-Limon P, Weinstein JS, Zhao H, Medzhitov R. Control of T 
helper 2 responses by transcription factor IRF4-dependent dendritic cells. Immunity. 2013; 
39:722–732. [PubMed: 24076050] 
Grivennikov SI, Wang K, Mucida D, Stewart CA, Schnabl B, Jauch D, Taniguchi K, Yu GY, 
Osterreicher CH, Hung KE, et al. Adenoma-linked barrier defects and microbial products drive 
IL-23/IL-17-mediated tumour growth. Nature. 2012; 491:254–258. [PubMed: 23034650] 
Gu Y, Kuida K, Tsutsui H, Ku G, Hsiao K, Fleming MA, Hayashi N, Higashino K, Okamura H, 
Nakanishi K, et al. Activation of interferon-gamma inducing factor mediated by interleukin-1beta 
converting enzyme. Science. 1997; 275:206–209. [PubMed: 8999548] 
Helft J, Ginhoux F, Bogunovic M, Merad M. Origin and functional heterogeneity of non-lymphoid 
tissue dendritic cells in mice. Immunol Rev. 2010; 234:55–75. [PubMed: 20193012] 
Heyer J, Yang K, Lipkin M, Edelmann W, Kucherlapati R. Mouse models for colorectal cancer. 
Oncogene. 1999; 18:5325–5333. [PubMed: 10498885] 
Hongoh Y, Sharma VK, Prakash T, Noda S, Taylor TD, Kudo T, Sakaki Y, Toyoda A, Hattori M, 
Ohkuma M. Complete genome of the uncultured Termite Group 1 bacteria in a single host protist 
cell. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008; 105:5555–5560. [PubMed: 18391199] 
Howitt MR, Lavoie S, Michaud M, Blum AM, Tran SV, Weinstock JV, Gallini CA, Redding K, 
Margolskee RF, Osborne LC, et al. Tuft cells, taste-chemosensory cells, orchestrate parasite type 2 
immunity in the gut. Science. 2016; 351:1329–1333. [PubMed: 26847546] 
Iwasaki A. Mucosal dendritic cells. Annu Rev Immunol. 2007; 25:381–418. [PubMed: 17378762] 
Jang MH, Sougawa N, Tanaka T, Hirata T, Hiroi T, Tohya K, Guo Z, Umemoto E, Ebisuno Y, Yang 
BG, et al. CCR7 is critically important for migration of dendritic cells in intestinal lamina propria 
to mesenteric lymph nodes. J Immunol. 2006; 176:803–810. [PubMed: 16393963] 
Kirchberger S, Royston DJ, Boulard O, Thornton E, Franchini F, Szabady RL, Harrison O, Powrie F. 
Innate lymphoid cells sustain colon cancer through production of interleukin-22 in a mouse model. 
J Exp Med. 2013; 210:917–931. [PubMed: 23589566] 
Kotloff KL, Nataro JP, Blackwelder WC, Nasrin D, Farag TH, Panchalingam S, Wu Y, Sow SO, Sur D, 
Breiman RF, et al. Burden and aetiology of diarrhoeal disease in infants and young children in 
developing countries (the Global Enteric Multicenter Study, GEMS): a prospective, case-control 
study. Lancet. 2013; 382:209–222. [PubMed: 23680352] 
Law CW, Chen Y, Shi W, Smyth GK. voom: Precision weights unlock linear model analysis tools for 
RNA-seq read counts. Genome Biol. 2014; 15:R29. [PubMed: 24485249] 
Liao Y, Smyth GK, Shi W. The Subread aligner: fast, accurate and scalable read mapping by seed-and-
vote. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013; 41:e108. [PubMed: 23558742] 
Lukes J, Stensvold CR, Jirku-Pomajbikova K, Wegener Parfrey L. Are Human Intestinal Eukaryotes 
Beneficial or Commensals? PLoS Pathog. 2015; 11:e1005039. [PubMed: 26270819] 
Molloy MJ, Grainger JR, Bouladoux N, Hand TW, Koo LY, Naik S, Quinones M, Dzutsev AK, Gao 
JL, Trinchieri G, et al. Intraluminal containment of commensal outgrowth in the gut during 
infection-induced dysbiosis. Cell Host Microbe. 2013; 14:318–328. [PubMed: 24034617] 
Moonah SN, Jiang NM, Petri WA Jr. Host immune response to intestinal amebiasis. PLoS Pathog. 
2013; 9:e1003489. [PubMed: 23990778] 
Murphy KM. Transcriptional control of dendritic cell development. Adv Immunol. 2013; 120:239–
267. [PubMed: 24070387] 
Noda S, Hongoh Y, Sato T, Ohkuma M. Complex coevolutionary history of symbiotic Bacteroidales 
bacteria of various protists in the gut of termites. BMC Evol Biol. 2009; 9:158. [PubMed: 
19586555] 
Persson EK, Uronen-Hansson H, Semmrich M, Rivollier A, Hagerbrand K, Marsal J, Gudjonsson S, 
Hakansson U, Reizis B, Kotarsky K, Agace WW. IRF4 transcription-factor-dependent 
Chudnovskiy et al.
Page 20
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 CD103(+)CD11b(+) dendritic cells drive mucosal T helper 17 cell differentiation. Immunity. 2013; 
38:958–969. [PubMed: 23664832] 
Petersen AM, Stensvold CR, Mirsepasi H, Engberg J, Friis-Moller A, Porsbo LJ, Hammerum AM, 
Nordgaard-Lassen I, Nielsen HV, Krogfelt KA. Active ulcerative colitis associated with low 
prevalence of Blastocystis and Dientamoeba fragilis infection. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2013; 
48:638–639. [PubMed: 23528075] 
Popivanova BK, Kitamura K, Wu Y, Kondo T, Kagaya T, Kaneko S, Oshima M, Fujii C, Mukaida N. 
Blocking TNF-alpha in mice reduces colorectal carcinogenesis associated with chronic colitis. J 
Clin Invest. 2008; 118:560–570. [PubMed: 18219394] 
Read S, Powrie F. Induction of inflammatory bowel disease in immunodeficient mice by depletion of 
regulatory T cells. Curr Protoc Immunol. 2001 Chapter 15 Unit 15 13. 
Ritchie ME, Phipson B, Wu D, Hu Y, Law CW, Shi W, Smyth GK. limma powers differential 
expression analyses for RNA-sequencing and microarray studies. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015; 
43:e47. [PubMed: 25605792] 
Saeki H, Togo M, Imai S, Ishii T. A new method for the serial cultivation of Tritrichomonas muris. 
Nihon Juigaku Zasshi. 1983; 45:151–156. [PubMed: 6632453] 
Schlitzer A, McGovern N, Teo P, Zelante T, Atarashi K, Low D, Ho AW, See P, Shin A, Wasan PS, et 
al. IRF4 transcription factor-dependent CD11b+ dendritic cells in human and mouse control 
mucosal IL-17 cytokine responses. Immunity. 2013; 38:970–983. [PubMed: 23706669] 
Schroder K, Tschopp J. The inflammasomes. Cell. 2010; 140:821–832. [PubMed: 20303873] 
Serbina NV, Pamer EG. Monocyte emigration from bone marrow during bacterial infection requires 
signals mediated by chemokine receptor CCR2. Nat Immunol. 2006; 7:311–317. [PubMed: 
16462739] 
Shaked H, Hofseth LJ, Chumanevich A, Chumanevich AA, Wang J, Wang Y, Taniguchi K, Guma M, 
Shenouda S, Clevers H, et al. Chronic epithelial NF-kappaB activation accelerates APC loss and 
intestinal tumor initiation through iNOS up-regulation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012; 
109:14007–14012. [PubMed: 22893683] 
Sims JE, Smith DE. The IL-1 family: regulators of immunity. Nat Rev Immunol. 2010; 10:89–102. 
[PubMed: 20081871] 
Spits H, Artis D, Colonna M, Diefenbach A, Di Santo JP, Eberl G, Koyasu S, Locksley RM, McKenzie 
AN, Mebius RE, et al. Innate lymphoid cells - a proposal for uniform nomenclature. Nat Rev 
Immunol. 2013; 13:145–149. [PubMed: 23348417] 
Stark D, van Hal S, Marriott D, Ellis J, Harkness J. Irritable bowel syndrome: a review on the role of 
intestinal protozoa and the importance of their detection and diagnosis. Int J Parasitol. 2007; 
37:11–20. [PubMed: 17070814] 
Stentiford GD, Becnel JJ, Weiss LM, Keeling PJ, Didier ES, Williams BA, Bjornson S, Kent ML, 
Freeman MA, Brown MJ, et al. Microsporidia-Emergent Pathogens in the Global Food Chain. 
Trends in Parasitology. 2016; 32:336–348. April 2, 2016. [PubMed: 26796229] 
Subramanian A, Tamayo P, Mootha VK, Mukherjee S, Ebert BL, Gillette MA, Paulovich A, Pomeroy 
SL, Golub TR, Lander ES, Mesirov JP. Gene set enrichment analysis: a knowledge-based approach 
for interpreting genome-wide expression profiles. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005; 102:15545–
15550. [PubMed: 16199517] 
Treuting PM, Clifford CB, Sellers RS, Brayton CF. Of mice and microflora: considerations for 
genetically engineered mice. Vet Pathol. 2012; 49:44–63. [PubMed: 22173977] 
Trinchieri G. Interleukin-12 and the regulation of innate resistance and adaptive immunity. Nat Rev 
Immunol. 2003; 3:133–146. [PubMed: 12563297] 
Tussiwand R, Everts B, Grajales-Reyes GE, Kretzer NM, Iwata A, Bagaitkar J, Wu X, Wong R, 
Anderson DA, Murphy TL, et al. Klf4 expression in conventional dendritic cells is required for T 
helper 2 cell responses. Immunity. 2015; 42:916–928. [PubMed: 25992862] 
Varol C, Vallon-Eberhard A, Elinav E, Aychek T, Shapira Y, Luche H, Fehling HJ, Hardt WD, Shakhar 
G, Jung S. Intestinal lamina propria dendritic cell subsets have different origin and functions. 
Immunity. 2009; 31:502–512. [PubMed: 19733097] 
Vonarbourg C, Mortha A, Bui VL, Hernandez PP, Kiss EA, Hoyler T, Flach M, Bengsch B, Thimme R, 
Holscher C, et al. Regulated expression of nuclear receptor RORgammat confers distinct 
Chudnovskiy et al.
Page 21
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 functional fates to NK cell receptor-expressing RORgammat(+) innate lymphocytes. Immunity. 
2010; 33:736–751. [PubMed: 21093318] 
Zitvogel L, Kepp O, Galluzzi L, Kroemer G. Inflammasomes in carcinogenesis and anticancer immune 
responses. Nat Immunol. 2012; 13:343–351. [PubMed: 22430787] 
Chudnovskiy et al.
Page 22
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Identification of a new protistic commensal in mice
(A) Colonic LP cells were isolated from B6 mice obtained from commercial sources or bred 
at the Mount Sinai animal facility (in-house). Cells were stained with anti-CD45 antibodies 
and analyzed by flow cytometry. Colored contour plots show staining for CD45 on gated live 
LP cells. Numbers adjacent to gates represent percentages (+/− SEM). (B) Bar graph shows 
quantification of CD45.2+ cells. (C) Bar graph shows IgA concentrations in sera (mg/ml, 
left) or colonic tissue explants (mg/g, right). (D) Surface staining of IgA bound to intestinal 
microbes. Numbers adjacent to gates represent percentages. (E) Cytospins of sorted IgA+ 
cells in (D) were stained with Giemsa. Micrograph shows a representative staining of 
colonic lavage (40x magnification). Bar indicates 10µm. (F) Scanning electron microscopy 
(SEM) of colonic tissues from in-house mice. (G) Protozoa per gram of cecum were 
quantified in five in-house B6 animals naturally colonized with protozoa (B6 Nat) or five 
animals gavaged with 2 × 106 FACS sorted protozoa (B6 Gavage). Bar graph represents 
number of protozoa per gram of cecum. (H) DNA was isolated from FACS-purified protozoa 
and subjected to ITS PCR-DNA sequence analysis. Phylogenetic analysis was performed as 
described in Material and Methods. The sequence placed the rodent parabasalid, which we 
Chudnovskiy et al.
Page 23
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 hereafter refer to as T. musculis (T.mu), as distinct and sister to a clade comprising the 
Tritrichomonadidae that shared 95% identity with T. muris. (I) Intestinal tissues were 
isolated from B6 mice 2 weeks after inoculation with purified T. mu, and paraffin-embedded 
sections were stained with H&E and PAS. (J) Pathological scoring of T. mu-inoculated 
cecums and colons was performed, assesing combined pathological score for colon tissue 
and colonic goblet cell hyperplasia (left) and cecum tissue and cecum goblet cell hyperplasia 
(right). Red dashed bar denotes borderline pathological score found in normal mice (score 
0–2) (Barthel et al., 2003). Data shown represent 3 mice per group, whereof 4–5 high-power 
fields per tissue and animal were assessed. Statistical analysis was performed using unpaired 
Student’s t-test. Statistical significance is indicated by *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and ***P < 
0.001Scale bar 100 mm (A–C) Data shown is representative of at least two independent 
experiments with at least three animals per experimental group. All data are shown as mean 
± SEM. Student’s t-test was performed. Statistical significance is indicated by *P < 0.05, 
**P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001; ns, not significant. See also Supplementary Fig. 1 and 
Supplementary Table 1.
Chudnovskiy et al.
Page 24
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Colonization with T.mu remodels the colonic mucosal immune tone
(A) Groups of B6 mice were gavaged with 2 × 106 highly purified T.mu. Eight weeks later, 
colonic LP cells were stained with anti-CD45.2 antibodies and analyzed by flow cytometry. 
Colored contour plots show CD45+ cells. Numbers adjacent to gates represent percentages. 
(B) Bar graph shows absolute number of CD45.2+ cells in control (Ctrl) mice or mice 
inoculated with T.mu. (C) CyTOF analysis of colonic myeloid immune populations after 
colonization with purified T.mu. ViSNE dot plots show changes in immune cell composition 
after T.mu colonization. (D) Intracellular cytokine staining and flow cytometric analysis of 
TNFα-producing cells in the colonic tissue of T.mu colonized mice. Colored contour plots 
show staining for TNFα and MHCII within all CD45+ cells. Gates were drawn on TNFα+ 
MHCII+ cells and the expression of Ly6C and CD64 was analyzed. Numbers adjacent to 
gates represent percentages (E) Bar graphs show absolute numbers of all TNFα-producing 
cells and their distribution into the macrophage and monocyte population. (F–G) Mice were 
gavaged with purified T.mu and 14 days later, colonic LP CD4+ T cells were analyzed for 
the production of IL-17 and IFNγ (F) and for the production of IL-5 and IL-13 (G) by 
intracellular cytokine staining. Numbers adjacent to gates represent percentages. (H) Bar 
graphs show quantification of cytokine-producing cells. (I) Bar graphs show absolute 
numbers of IFNγ+, IL-17+ and IL-17+IFNγ+ (DP) Th cells. (J) IFNγ, IL-17 and 
Chudnovskiy et al.
Page 25
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 IL-17+IFNγ+, production by CD4+ T cells isolated 7 days, 14 days, 28 days and 56 days 
after colonization with T.mu. Bar graphs show absolute numbers of Th cell-subsets. Data 
shown is representative of at least two independent experiments with at least 3 mice per 
group and experiment. All data are shown as mean ± SEM. Student’s t-test was performed. 
Statistical significance is indicated by *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001; ns, not 
significant. See also Supplementary Figures 2 and 3.
Chudnovskiy et al.
Page 26
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Distinct DC subsets control T.mu associated immune responses
(A–G) Mice were gavaged with purified T.mu 14 days prior to analysis. Colonic LP cells 
were isolated from (A) Ccr7−/−, (B) Batf3−/−, (E) Irf8ΔDC, (H) Irf4ΔDC. Cells were incubated 
in the presence of brefeldin A, Ionomycin and PMA for 4h and stained with anti-CD45, 
CD3, CD4, IL-17 and IFNγ. IL-17 and IFNγ-producing CD4+ T cells were analyzed using 
flow cytometry. Bar graphs show quantification of absolute numbers of cytokine-producing 
colonic Th cells. Colonic LP cells isolated from indicated knock out mice were stained with 
anti-CD45, MHCII, CD11c, CD11b, CD103, CD64 and Ly6C. DC populations were 
analyzed by gating on CD45+ MHCII+ CD11c+ CD64− Ly6c− cells. (C, D, F and G) contour 
plots show the abundance of CD103+ DC, CD103+CD11b+ DC and CD103−CD11b+ DC 
within the colonic LP of WT, Batf3−/−, Irf8ΔDC, Irf4ΔDC mice. Data shown is representative 
of at least 3 independent experiments with at least 3 mice per experimental group for each 
genotype. All data are shown as mean ± SEM. Student’s t-test was performed. Statistical 
Chudnovskiy et al.
Page 27
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 significance is indicated by *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001; ns, not significant. See 
also Supplementary Figure 4.
Chudnovskiy et al.
Page 28
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Inflammasome activation promotes T.mu associated immune responses
(A) Tissue culture supernatants of tissue explants or RNA, isolated from total colonic tissue 
were analyzed. Supernatants were analyzed for the presence of IL-18 protein using ELISA. 
Quantitative RT-PCR was performed to measure IL-18 RNA on whole colonic tissue. Bar 
graphs show pg/ml of IL-18 or relative expression of Il18 normalized to Hprt. (B–E) Mice 
were gavaged with purified T.mu 14 days prior to analysis. Colonic LP cells were isolated 
from (B) Il18−/−, (C) Lethally irradiated bone marrow chimeric mice reconstituted with 
Il18+/+ or Il18−/−bone marrow cells, at least 8 weeks prior to inoculation with T.mu (D) 
Asc−/−, (E) Il1r1−/−, mice. Cells were incubated in the presence of brefeldin A, Ionomycin 
and PMA for 4h and then stained with anti-CD45, CD3, CD4, IL-17 and IFNγ. IFNγ and 
IL-17 production by CD4+ T cells was analyzed using flow cytometry. Bar graphs show 
quantification of colonic Th cells producing IFNγ only, IL-17 only or IL-17 and IFNγ 
(DP). Data shown is representative of at least 3 independent experiments with at least 3–4 
mice per experimental group for each genotype. All data are shown as mean ± SEM. 
Student’s t-test was performed. Statistical significance is indicated by *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, 
***P < 0.001; ns, not significant. See also Supplementary Figures 4 and 6.
Chudnovskiy et al.
Page 29
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. T.mu protects against mucosal infection through inflammasome activation
(A) Groups of mice were either gavaged with purified T.mu or left untreated 14 days prior to 
Salmonella typhimurium infection. Cecum weight was measured and pathological scoring 
was performed on H&E stained sections. Data shown is representative of 3 individual 
experiments with 5 mice per experiment and experimental condition. (B) S. typhimurium 
colony-forming units (CFU) were measured in the fecal pellet, the cecum, spleen and MLN 
48h after infection. (C) Groups of mice were gavaged with purified T.mu 14 days prior to S. 
typhimurium infection and injected for three consecutive days with 200 ug of either isotype 
control IgG or anti-IL18 neutralizing antibody right before S. typhimurium infection. Cecum 
weight was measured and pathological scoring was performed on H&E stained sections. (D) 
CFU of S. typhimurium were measured in the MLN and spleen 48h after infection. Data 
shown is representative of at least 2–3 independent experiments with at least 5 mice per 
group and experiment. All data are shown as mean ± SEM. Student’s t-test was performed. 
Statistical significance is indicated by *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001; ns, not 
significant. Scale bar 100 mm.
Chudnovskiy et al.
Page 30
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. T.mu exacerbates pathogenic inflammation
(A) Groups of GF Rag2−/− mice were left untreated (black), conventionalized (pink) or 
inoculated with quadruple sorted T.mu (blue). Groups of conventional Rag2−/− mice were 
left untreated (grey) or inoculated with purified T.mu (purple). Conventionalization of mice 
was carried out 4 to 6 weeks prior to adoptive transfer of sorted splenic CD45RBhi CD4+ T 
cells. Gavage with T.mu was performed 2 weeks prior to T cell transfer. Weight loss was 
monitored weekly and end-point assessment of the disease score was performed using 
histology assessing degree of inflammation, epithelial erosion, ulceration and hyperplasia, 
mucin depletion and goblet cell numbers. Pie charts and histology show the clinical 
assessment of colitis. Data shown is representative of at least 3–4 individual experiments 
with at least 3–4 mice per experimental group. Scale bar 100 mm. (B and C) Epithelial cell 
death and epithelial proliferation in colonic tissues of naïve or T.mu inoculated mice. 
Representative staining of DNA (DAPI blue) and TUNEL (green) in naïve (top row) or T.mu 
colonized (bottom row) groups. (C) Ki67 staining in colonic tissue of naïve or T.mu 
inoculated mice. Representative staining of DNA (DAPI blue) and Ki67 (red) in naïve (top 
row) or T.mu colonized (bottom row). Scatter dot plots show quantification of TUNEL+ cells 
and Ki67+ cells. (D) Quantitative RT-PCR on T.mu-driven intestinal target genes (Nos2, 
Chudnovskiy et al.
Page 31
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Tnfa, Reg3g and Reg3b), normalized to Hprt. (E and F) Apc+/min mice were left untreated or 
inoculated with purified T.mu. (E) Tumor burden and size was measured 8–12 weeks later. 
Micrographs of formalin-fixed colonic tissue counterstained with methylene blue (0.5% 
PBS) show representative tumor burden in Apc+/min mice untreated or inoculated with T.mu. 
(F) Bar graphs show tumor counts and size. Data shown is representative of at least 3 
individual experiments with 3–5 mice per experimental condition. All data are shown as 
mean ± SEM. Student’s t-test or One-way ANOVA Bonferroni’s multiple comparison T test 
was performed for (A) Statistical significance is indicated by *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and 
***P < 0.001. See also Supplementary Figure 5.
Chudnovskiy et al.
Page 32
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Chudnovskiy et al.
Page 33
Methods and Resources
KEY RESOURCES TABLE
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Antibodies
Anti-mouse Ly6G-141Pr
Biolegend
RRID:AB_1089179
Anti-mouse CD11c-142Nd
Fluidigm/DVS Sciences
Cat#:3142003C
Anti-mouse TCRb-143Nd
Fluidigm/DVS Sciences
Cat#:3143010B
Anti-mouse CD16/32-144Nd
Fluidigm/DVS Sciences
Cat#:3144009B
Anti-mouse CD8a-146Nd
Fluidigm/DVS Sciences
Cat#:3146003B
Anti-mouse CD45-147Sm
Fluidigm/DVS Sciences
Cat#:3147003B
Anti-mouse CD11b-148Nd
Fluidigm/DVS Sciences
Cat#:3148003B
Anti-mouse CD19-149Sm
Fluidigm/DVS Sciences
Cat#:3149002B
Anti-mouse IgM-151Eu
Fluidigm/DVS Sciences
Cat#:3151006B
Anti-mouse SiglecF-152Sm
eBioscience
RRID:AB_2572866
Anti-mouse NKP46-153Eu
Fluidigm/DVS Sciences
Cat#:3153006B
Anti-mouse CD64-156Gd
Biolegend
RRID:AB_314486
Anti-mouse FoxP3-158Gd
Fluidigm/DVS Sciences
Cat#:3158003A
Anti-mouse F4/80-159Tb
Fluidigm/DVS Sciences
Cat#:3159009B
Anti-mouse CD62L-160Gd
Fluidigm/DVS Sciences
Cat#:3160008B
Anti-human/mouse Tbet-161Dy
Biolegend
Cat#:644802
Anti-mouse Ly6C-162Dy
Biolegend
Cat#:128002
Anti-mouse RORgt-163Dy
eBioscience
RRID:AB_925759
Anti-mouse CD103-164Dy
Biolegend
RRID:AB_535944
Anti-mouse Gata3-167Er
Fluidigm/DVS Sciences
Cat#:3167007A
Anti-mouse ST2-168Er
Biolegend
RRID:AB_2561843
Anti-mouse NK1.1-170Er
Fluidigm/DVS Sciences
Cat#:3170002B
Anti-human/mouse CD44-171Yb
Fluidigm/DVS Sciences
Cat#:3171003B
Anti-mouse CD4-172Yb
Fluidigm/DVS Sciences
Cat#:3145002B
Anti-mouse I-A/I-E-174Yb
Fluidigm/DVS Sciences
Cat#:3174003B
Anti-mouse CD127-175Lu
Fluidigm/DVS Sciences
Cat#:3175006B
Anti-mouse CD45R/B220-176Yb
Fluidigm/DVS Sciences
Cat#:3160012B
CD3e clone 145-2C11
eBioscience
Cat#:45-0031-82
CD4 clone GK1.5
eBioscience
Cat#:25-0041-82
CD11b clone M1/70
eBioscience
Cat#:45-0112-82
CD11c clone N418
eBioscience
Cat#:25-0114-82
CD45 clone 30F11 CD45.2 clone 104
eBioscience eBioscience
Cat#:47-0451-82 Cat#:47-0454-82
CD45RB clone C363.16A
eBioscience
Cat#:17-0455-81
CXCR3 clone CXCR3-173
Biolegend
Cat#:126514
CD44 clone IM7
eBioscience
Cat#:25-0441-82
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Chudnovskiy et al.
Page 34
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
CD62L clone MEL-14
Biolegend
Cat#:104406
Ly6C clone AL-21
BD
Cat#:553104
B220 clone RA3-6B2
eBioscience
Cat#:45-0452-82
ICOS clone C398.4A
Biolegend
Cat#:313514
KLRG1 clone 2F1/KLRG1
Biolegend
Cat#:138410
RORγt clone B2D
eBioscience
Cat#:14-6981-82
IgA clone S107
SouthernBiotech
Cat#:1040-02
CD64 clone X54-5/7.1
Biolegend
Cat#:139306
CD103 clone 2E7
eBioscience
Cat#:12-1031-83
F4/80 clone BM8 I-A/I-E clone 
M5/114.15.2
Biolegend eBioscience
Cat#:123120 Cat#:48-5321-82
IFNγ clone XMG1.2
eBioscience
Cat#:12-7311-82
IL-17A eBio17B7
eBioscience
Cat#:17-7177-81
IL-22 clone IL22JOP
eBioscience
Cat#:17-7222-80
Ki67 clone SolA15
eBioscience
Cat#:12-5698-82
GM-CSF clone MP1-22E9
eBioscience
Cat#:12-7331-82
IL-5 clone TRFK5
eBioscience
Cat#:BMS179
IL-4 clone 11B11
eBioscience
Cat#:12-7041-81
IL-13 clone eBio1316H
eBioscience
Cat#:25-7133-82
CD3e clone 145-2C11
eBioscience
Cat#:45-0031-82
CD4 clone GK1.5
eBioscience
Cat#:25-0041-82
CD11b clone M1/70
eBioscience
Cat#:45-0112-82
CD11c clone N418
eBioscience
Cat#:25-0114-82
CD45 clone 30F11
eBioscience
Cat#:47-0451-82
CD45.2 clone 104 CD45RB clone 
C363.16A
eBioscience eBioscience
Cat#:47-0454-82 Cat#:17-0455-81
CXCR3 clone CXCR3-173
Biolegend
Cat#:126514
CD44 clone IM7
eBioscience
Cat#:25-0441-82
CD62L clone MEL-14
Biolegend
Cat#:104406
Ly6C clone AL-21
BD
Cat#:553104
B220 clone RA3-6B2
eBioscience
Cat#:45-0452-82
ICOS clone C398.4A
Biolegend
Cat#:313514
Chemicals, Peptides, and Recombinant Proteins
Brefeldin A
SIGMA
Cat#:B7651
Phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate
SIGMA
Cat#:79346
Ionomycin
SIGMA
Cat#:I0634
TRizol-reagent
Ambion
Cat#:15596026
Formic Acid
SIGMA
Cat#:94318-250ML-F
Acetonitrile
SIGMA
Cat#:34967-250ML
HCCA
Bruker
Cat#:255344
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Chudnovskiy et al.
Page 35
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Critical Commercial Assays
Foxp3 / Transcription Factor
Fixation/Permeabilization
Concentrate and Diluent
eBioscience
Cat#:00-5521-00
Foxp3 / Transcription Factor
Staining Buffer Set
eBioscience
Cat#:00-5523-00
Fixation/Permeabilization
Concentrate
eBioscience
Cat#:00-5123
Permeabilization Buffer
eBioscience
Cat#:00-8333
QIAquick 96 PCR Purification Kit
Qiagen
Cat#:28181
Deposited Data
Raw and analyzed data
This paper
GEO: GSE63473
B-RAF RBD (apo) structure
This paper
PDB: 5J17
human reference genome NCBI
build 37, GRCh37
Genome Reference Consortium
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/genome/assembly/grc/human/
Experimental Models: Cell Lines
n.a.
Experimental Models: Organisms/Strains
Salmonella enterica serovar
typhimurium
ATCC
Stock#:14028
B6.129P2(SJL)-Myd88tm1.1Defr/J
(Myd88flox/flox)
Jackson Laboratory
Stock#:006148
B6.129P2-Lyz2tm1(cre)Ifo/J (LysMCre)
Jackson Laboratory
Stock#:004781
B6.Cg-Tg(Vil-cre) (VillinCre)
Jackson Laboratory
Stock#:021504
B6.129S4-Ccr2tm1Ifc/J (Ccr2−/−)
Jackson Laboratory
Stock#:004999
B6.129P2(C)-Ccr7tm1Rfor/J (Ccr7−/−)
Jackson Laboratory
Stock#:006621
C57BL/6J–ApcMin/J (Apc+/Min)
Jackson Laboratory
Stock#:002020
B6.129S1-Irf4tm1Rdf/J (Irf4flox/flox)
Jackson Laboratory
Stock#:009380
B6(Cg)-Irf8tm1.1Hm/J (Irf8flox/flox)
Jackson Laboratory
Stock#:014175
B6.129S2-Ifnar1tm1Agt/Mmjax (Ifnar−/−)
Jackson Laboratory
Stock#:32045
129S–Batf3tm1Kmm/J (Batf3−/−)
Jackson Laboratory
Stock#:013755
NOD.Cg-Tg(Itgax-cre)1-1Reiz/PesaJ
(CD11cCre)
Jackson Laboratory
Stock#:008068
B6.129S1-Tlr5tm1Flv/J (Tlr5−/−)
Jackson Laboratory
Stock#:008377
B6.129S7-Il1r1-tm1lmx/J (Il1r1−/−)
Jackson Laboratory
Stock#:003245
B6.129P2-Il18r1-tm1Aki/J (Il18−/−)
Jackson Laboratory
Stock#:004130
B6.129S6-Rag2tm1FwaN12 (Rag2−/−)
Taconic
Stock#:RAGN12
Asc−/−
Millenium Inc.
n.a.
Recombinant DNA
n.a.
Sequence-Based Reagents
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Chudnovskiy et al.
Page 36
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Hprt
(Fwd)_CCTGGTTCATCATCGCTA
ATC
Sigma
n.a.
Hprt
(Rev)_TCCTCCTCAGACCGCTTTT
Sigma
n.a.
Tnfa (Fwd)
TCTTCTCATTCCTGCTTGTGG
Sigma
n.a.
Tnfa (Rev)
GGTCTGGGCCATAGAACTGA
Sigma
n.a.
Nos2 (Fwd)
GGGCTGTCACGGAGATCA
Sigma
n.a.
Nos2 (Rev)
CCATGATGGTCACATTCTGC
Sigma
n.a.
Reg3b (Fwd)
CAGACCTGGTTTGATGCAGA
Sigma
n.a.
Reg3b (Rev)
GAAGCCTCAGCGCTATTGAG
Sigma
n.a.
Reg3g (Fwd)
ATGGCTCCTATTGCTATGCC
Sigma
n.a.
Reg3g (Rev)
GATGTCCTGAGGGCCTCTT
Sigma
n.a.
Software and Algorithms
R
R Development Core Team 
(2008). R: A
language and environment for 
statistical
computing. R Foundation for 
Statistical
Computing, Vienna, Austria. 
ISBN 3-900051-07-
0
http://www.R-project.org
limma
Ritchie, M.E., Phipson, B., 
Wu, D., Hu, Y., Law, C.W., 
Shi, W., and Smyth, G.K. 
(2015). limma powers 
differential expression analyses 
for RNA-
sequencing and microarray 
studies. Nucleic
Acids Research 43(7), e47.
https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/limma.html
ggplot2
H. Wickham. ggplot2: Elegant 
Graphics for Data
Analysis. Springer-Verlag New 
York, 2009.
http://ggplot2.org/
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 06.
