 clinical article
T
he field of neurosurgery has undergone numerous 
advancements and changes that are constantly mod-
ifying the landscape. In particular, the paradigm for 
aneurysm treatment has experienced a shift toward endo-
vascular approaches. Having the capability and training 
to clip aneurysms remains essential, however, as certain 
aneurysms are currently not favorable for endovascular 
treatment. With the increased risk associated with surgi-
cal approaches to intracranial aneurysms, it is important 
to advance training that decreases complications and im-
abbreviations SRP = SuRgical Planner surgical rehearsal platform; VR = virtual reality.
sUbMitteD November 9, 2015. accePteD January 13, 2016.
inclUDe when citing Published online May 13, 2016; DOI: 10.3171/2016.1.JNS152576.
Use of a surgical rehearsal platform and improvement 
in aneurysm clipping measures: results of a prospective, 
randomized trial
a. Jessey chugh, bs,1 Jonathan r. Pace, MD,2 Justin singer, MD,2 curtis tatsuoka, PhD,3  
alan hoffer, MD,2 warren r. selman, MD,2 and nicholas c. bambakidis, MD2
1Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine; and Departments of 2Neurological Surgery and 3Neurology, University 
Hospitals Case Medical Center, Cleveland, Ohio
obJective The field of neurosurgery is constantly undergoing improvements and advances, both in technique and 
technology. Cerebrovascular neurosurgery is no exception, with endovascular treatments changing the treatment para-
digm. Clipping of aneurysms is still necessary, however, and advances are still being made to improve patient outcomes 
within the microsurgical treatment of aneurysms. Surgical rehearsal platforms are surgical simulators that offer the op-
portunity to rehearse a procedure prior to entering the operative suite. This study is designed to determine whether use 
of a surgical rehearsal platform in aneurysm surgery is helpful in decreasing aneurysm dissection time and clip manipu-
lation of the aneurysm. 
MethoDs The authors conducted a blinded, prospective, randomized study comparing key effort and time variables in 
aneurysm clip ligation surgery with and without preoperative use of the SuRgical Planner (SRP) surgical rehearsal plat-
form. Initially, 40 patients were randomly assigned to either of two groups: one in which surgery was performed after use 
of the SRP (SRP group) and one in which surgery was performed without use of the SRP (control group). All operations 
were videotaped. After exclusion of 6 patients from the SRP group and 9 from the control group, a total of 25 surgical 
cases were analyzed by a reviewer blinded to group assignment. The videos were analyzed for total microsurgical time, 
number of clips used, and number of clip placement attempts. Means and standard deviations (SDs) were calculated and 
compared between groups.
resUlts The mean (± SD) amount of operative time per clip used was 920 ± 770 seconds in the SRP group and 
1294 ± 678 seconds in the control group (p = 0.05). In addition, the mean values for the number of clip attempts, total 
operative time, ratio of clip attempts to clips used, and time per clip attempt were all lower in the SRP group, although the 
between-group differences were not statistically significant.
conclUsions Preoperative rehearsal with SRP increased efficiency and safety in aneurysm microsurgery as demon-
strated by the statistically significant improvement in time per clip used. Although the rest of the outcomes did not dem-
onstrate statistically significant between-group differences, the fact that the SRP group showed improvement in mean 
values for all measures studied suggests that preoperative rehearsal may increase the efficiency and safety of aneurysm 
microsurgery. Future studies aimed at improving patient outcome and safety during surgical clipping of aneurysms will 
be needed to keep pace with the quickly advancing endovascular field.
http://thejns.org/doi/abs/10.3171/2016.1.JNS152576
Key worDs aneurysm; surgical rehearsal platform; education; quality improvement; vascular disorders
©AANS, 2016
J neurosurg May 13, 2016
1
 a. J. chugh et al.
J neurosurg May 13, 2016
2
proves morbidity and mortality.3 The shift toward endo-
vascular treatment over 2 decades is supported by mul-
tiple studies demonstrating decreased referrals of less 
technically complex aneurysms and increased referrals of 
aneurysms not amenable to coil embolization approaches 
to tertiary care centers, presumably due to advancements 
in endovascular approaches.9 This trend, combined with 
work-hour restrictions, has limited trainees’ exposure to 
surgical approaches. Beyond this, however, is the desire 
to rehearse patient-specific techniques, which even expe-
rienced, well-trained surgeons will find valuable. As such, 
the need to introduce new techniques for adequate and ef-
ficient training and to promote retention of skill and im-
proved patient satisfaction in microsurgical procedures is 
more prominent than ever.
Surgical simulation is one such method that provides 
surgeons the opportunity to operate in a safe environment 
and gain the necessary proficiency to be able to perform 
procedures effectively and safely in actual patients. In ad-
dition, focused and concentrated simulations allow the 
training to be targeted and efficient. These surgical appli-
cations are of particular interest to neurosurgeons because 
the vulnerability and delicacy of nervous tissue signifi-
cantly reduces the margin for error.14 In a meta-analysis 
of virtual reality (VR) simulation in neurosurgery, it was 
found that there has been a significant increase in publi-
cations concerned with VR simulations over the last 22 
years, suggesting that the need for advancement in train-
ing is clearly being recognized throughout the field.17
Until now, most simulation in neurosurgery has largely 
been limited to specific task-oriented functions and has 
sacrificed realism for real-time interactivity or vice ver-
sa.10,16 Because of the challenge of accurately simulating 
the tactile feedback that surgeons experience and the 
forces associated with an actual case, the limited haptic 
feedback has subsequently lent support for these technolo-
gies in minimally invasive neurosurgery (i.e., endoscopic 
procedures).8,17 In addition, these technologies have been 
used in spinal surgery and dural repair procedures as 
well.2,12 Although endoscopic, laparoscopic, and endovas-
cular platforms have been constantly refined and updated, 
simulation training in neurosurgical microvascular cases 
is a relatively new concept.5 Several platforms, includ-
ing NeuroTouch (CAE Healthcare and National Research 
Council of Canada) and ImmersiveTouch, have been used 
in attempts to simulate specific patient cases based on ra-
diological data, but few have been targeted for microsurgi-
cal cerebrovascular or tumor surgery.4,11,13 In a 2013 study 
by Clarke and colleagues, a VR simulator based on Neuro-
Touch was used in the successful resection of a left frontal 
meningioma.7 In another study by Alaraj and colleagues, 
published in 2015, a VR aneurysm clipping simulator was 
developed using the ImmersiveTouch technology, and the 
results showed that most neurosurgical residents found the 
novel VR simulator to be helpful in their training.1
The SuRgical Planner (SRP), a novel surgical rehearsal 
platform developed by Surgical Theater LLC, is a surgical 
simulator that addresses some of the concerns discussed 
above and offers the opportunity to rehearse a surgery pri-
or to entering the operative suite. This study is designed to 
determine whether use of the SRP in aneurysm surgery is 
helpful in decreasing aneurysm dissection time and clip 
manipulation of the aneurysm (see Chowdhry et al: Surgi-
cal rehearsal to improve efficiency in clipping of cerebral 
aneurysms, presented at the Military Health System Re-
search Symposium, Fort Lauderdale, Florida, 2012). By 
incorporating images that depict specific key anatomical 
findings in actual patients, this simulation provides real-
istic rehearsal for any given case for residents as well as 
experienced surgeons. In addition, the extensive haptic 
feedback from instruments that is necessary to provide a 
realistic experience is an important aspect of this platform. 
Although in its infancy, the SRP has shown promise in the 
reduction of surgical time and number of clip applications 
associated with microvascular intracranial surgery.
Methods
study Design
This study is a blinded, prospective, randomized study 
comparing key effort and time variables in prospective 
SRP cases to the same variables in control cases. It is de-
signed to evaluate the efficiency and efficacy of this simu-
lation platform by comparing it with cases done without 
preoperative rehearsal. The study was approved by the 
University Hospitals Institutional Review Board. Ran-
domization occurred in groups of 4 to help balance the 
entry time into the study across treatment groups. Initially, 
the study population was to consist of 40 patients. Due to 
differences in complexity of some of the cases and the dif-
ferences in surgical approaches between the 2 attending 
surgeons who participated in this study, as well as patient 
opt-out, a total of 15 patients were excluded (Fig. 1). Of the 
remaining group, 8 patients were undergoing treatment for 
ruptured aneurysms, while the remaining 18 patients were 
undergoing elective procedures. The initial power analy-
ses were conducted based on assessment of clipping at-
tempts from a sample of neurosurgical video recordings of 
historical controls. Based on the following mean calcula-
tions—reduction of clipping attempts to 2 with a standard 
deviation (SD) of 3.0 compared with the pre-study sample 
mean of 5.4 (SD 5.384)—the projected power for a 2-sided 
Type I error of 0.05 with a sample of 20 SRP and 20 con-
trol cases was 0.714. With the reduction in sample sizes, 
the power was reduced to 0.48.
Descriptive statistics were calculated for both the SRP 
and the control groups. Two attending neurosurgeons per-
formed all surgeries with the assistance of a chief-level 
resident. Both attending neurosurgeons are experienced 
cerebrovascular neurosurgeons, and there was no signifi-
cant discrepancy in their amounts of surgical experience. 
Prior to surgery, the attending neurosurgeon and resident 
rehearsed preoperatively with the SRP for cases in which 
patients were assigned to the active treatment group. All 
microsurgical steps in study patients were performed ei-
ther by the attending neurosurgeon or by the resident un-
der direct supervision. To maximize the degree of learn-
ing expected for surgical rehearsal, the chief resident 
performed at least 50% of the microsurgical steps in all 
study cases, as determined by the total microsurgical op-
erating time. Following aneurysm clipping, analysis uti-
lizing indocyanine green videoangiography was used to 
 srP and aneurysm clipping measures
J neurosurg May 13, 2016
3
confirm aneurysm occlusion and normal vessel patency. A 
neurosurgeon who was blinded to group assignments and 
was not directly involved in the surgical cases performed 
the video analysis. This analysis was conducted for both 
the simulation and non-simulation groups and included 
measurements of total microsurgical time, number of clip 
attempts, and total number of clips used. Video analysis 
took place in 2 batches. The phenomenon of “batch ef-
fect” was controlled for and assessed when comparing 
treatment groups. It is important to note that this study 
was not designed to evaluate additional patient outcome 
measures such as adverse outcomes or complication rates 
attributable to lack of rehearsal. The goal of this study was 
to determine whether intraoperative performance is im-
proved with this rehearsal platform. Keeping this in mind, 
we tested the hypothesis that the intraoperative param-
eters mentioned above would all show significant reduc-
tions with the use of SRP.
simulation set-Up
Surgical Theater’s FDA-approved surgical rehearsal 
platform (SuRgical Planner [SRP]) provides a patient-
specific virtual surgery theater that allows neurosurgeons 
to plan, rehearse, and perform aneurysm clipping with in-
teractive tools in a 3D environment. FDA approval was 
granted on February 13, 2013 (510 K No. K123023), with 
indication for use as a software interface and image seg-
mentation system and as preoperative software for simula-
tion and evaluation of surgical treatment options.
There are multiple components of the SRP that allow it 
to function as a useful surgical platform. The entire system 
consists of the SRP software, 2 liquid-crystal diode moni-
tors, 3D controllers, and 3D glasses to allow for 3D visual 
representation of the pertinent surgical anatomy, allowing 
for a realistic simulation of the surgical environment. The 
SRP system also contains unique SensAble Technologies 
PHANTOM Omni haptic controllers to allow for real-
istic interaction and manipulation of the 3D model. The 
system further has the ability to display or hide various 
tissues based on Hounsfield units, thereby allowing for vi-
sualization of relevant surgical anatomy, including bone, 
blood vessel, brain, and soft tissues. Patient-specific data 
may be uploaded to the SRP, where the imaging modali-
ties are integrated into the dynamic model, which may be 
manipulated to display pertinent patient anatomy. The 3D 
glasses allow the surgeon and surgical team to view the 
anatomy in 3D, allowing for a more realistic visualization 
and rehearsal. The haptic controller allows the surgeon 
Fig. 1. Study design. Figure is available in color online only.
 a. J. chugh et al.
J neurosurg May 13, 2016
4
to alternate between multiple surgical instruments to re-
hearse surgical techniques based on the patient’s uploaded 
images (Figs. 2–4).3
results
The mean values of the descriptive parameters in ad-
dition to their significance values are displayed in Table 
1. As displayed, one of the variables (time per clip used) 
demonstrated statistical significance with a p value of 
0.05. This suggests improved performance and increased 
efficiency with the SRP. Specifically, reduction in time per 
clip is an indirect measurement of improved surgical ef-
ficiency. In addition, the ratio of the number of attempts at 
clip placement to the number of clips used (which trended 
toward significance) may be indicative of an elevated level 
of comfort with the instrumentation (Figs. 5–7).
Discussion
The use of simulation platforms in the field of neurosur-
gery has expanded greatly over the past several decades. 
Improvements in technologies (i.e., use of patient-specific 
images of pathology and haptic feedback from microsur-
gical instruments) have allowed for advancement from tra-
ditional uses in laparoscopic and endovascular procedures 
to the realm of microvascular procedures.3,5 In particular, 
the SRP was designed with the goal of providing trainee 
neurosurgeons with the opportunity to plan, rehearse, and 
perform aneurysm clipping procedures. The application 
goes beyond the initial education of trainees, however; 
with the ability to preoperatively rehearse patient-specific 
microneurosurgery, experienced surgeons may plan clip 
reconstruction for specific cases with more accuracy and 
ease. With the recent rise in endovascular procedures and 
Fig. 2. a: Preoperative CT angiogram depicting a pericallosal artery aneurysm. b–e: Varying views demonstrating application of 
clips during preoperative surgical planning with SRP. F: Intraoperative view demonstrating clip reconstruction based on preopera-
tive planning. Figure is available in color online only.
Fig. 3. Intraoperative view (a) and SRP (b) comparison demonstrating usefulness of the surgical rehearsal platform. Figure is 
available in color online only.
 srP and aneurysm clipping measures
J neurosurg May 13, 2016
5
a downward trend in the practice of aneurysm clipping, 
there is legitimate concern that current and future neuro-
surgical residents may not be adequately trained in this 
area; hence, advanced and efficient training in neurosurgi-
cal residencies is essential, with the goal of improving op-
erative performance and clinical outcomes.3,6,15 The SRP 
was designed to address this issue.
This study is the first of its kind to prospectively and 
blindly review operative videos of patients randomized to 
either a rehearsal group (SRP group) or a control group. 
Although the power in this study was limited due to the 
diminished sample size, the overall trend reflects the in-
creased efficiency in the SRP group. Mean values demon-
strate reduced time per clip placement attempt, time per 
clips used, and ratio of clip placement attempts to clips 
used. The lack of significance should be interpreted with 
caution, once again, due to the lack of statistical power. 
In addition, the presence of more complex cases (and the 
differences in surgical approaches that may have resulted 
due to this), varying operative techniques between the sur-
geons, and the presence of outliers could have certainly 
distorted the results as well. Several variables, including 
the ratio of the number of clip placement attempts to the 
number of clips used, demonstrated a trend toward sig-
nificance. A limiting factor in this study is the potential 
that varying complexity of cases was seen in the different 
treatment groups, potentially impacting the final results 
adversely given the small sample size. Posterior circula-
tion aneurysms were omitted in order to minimize this 
possibility. Nevertheless, outliers were noted in some of 
the remaining cases and seemed to be more prevalent in 
the rehearsal group. These could once again be attributed 
to differing levels of complexity resulting in an adverse 
effect on the results. In specific cases, these outliers were 
noted in the number of clips used and total microsurgical 
time—neither of which showed a statistically significant 
difference between the 2 groups. 
Analysis of aneurysm occlusion rates and complica-
tion rates was also performed. Both intraoperative indo-
cyanine green videoangiography and postoperative imag-
ing with CTA or conventional angiography demonstrated 
complete obliteration of all aneurysms with normal paten-
cy of parent vessels. Complication rates were also evalu-
ated by comparing the control and experimental arms. 
One patient in the SRP group developed altered mental 
Fig. 4. SRP (a) and intraoperative view (b) demonstrating how preoperative planning is used for clip selection and rehearsal. 
Figure is available in color online only.
table 1. comparison of mean values for variables assessed
Variable
Control Group
SRP Group 
p Value
No. of clip attempts
6.09 ± 3.7
5.07 ± 2.78
0.57
No. of clips used
1.36 ± 0.67
1.79 ± 0.97
0.32
Total time (secs)
1521 ± 598
1320 ± 884
0.15
Ratio of no. of clip attempts 
to no. of clips used
4.97 ± 3.7
3.13 ± 2.19
0.18
Time per clip used (secs)
1294 ± 678
920 ± 770
0.05
Time per clip attempt (secs)
376 ± 300
321 ± 223
0.89
Fig. 5. Total surgical time for the SRP group (14 cases) and the control 
group (11 cases). Figure is available in color online only.
 a. J. chugh et al.
J neurosurg May 13, 2016
6
status and encephalopathy of unknown etiology with no 
evidence of seizure, infarct, or metabolic derangement. 
Three patients in the control group developed infarcts fol-
lowing surgery. One of these 3 patients developed severe 
vasospasm not responsive to treatment and resultant in-
farction of the caudate head. The second and third patients 
developed infarcts unrelated to vasospasm or clip stenosis. 
All patients who developed complications were patients 
with ruptured aneurysms. The remaining patients had no 
significant complications and were discharged with good 
neurological and functional status, with modified Rankin 
Scale scores of 0–1.
Because this study only analyzes intraoperative perfor-
mance, long-term follow-up is needed to demonstrate im-
provement in clinical outcomes related to shorter operative 
times, shorter temporary clip occlusion, and less intraop-
erative error. With the goal of improving patient outcomes 
and safety during surgical clipping of aneurysms, future 
studies should involve multiple centers to achieve greater 
sample sizes and a more accurate view of outcomes and 
performance nationally. Larger-scale trials will be needed 
not only to validate the use of rehearsal platforms but also 
to keep pace with the quickly advancing endovascular 
field. The hope is that SRP and other similar platforms 
can provide a means of enhancing the microvascular train-
ing experience for young neurosurgeons at a time when 
the need is great. Eventually, this software will be adapted 
for the rehearsal of transnasal pituitary tumor resection, 
microvascular decompression, and resection of skull base 
meningiomas and acoustic neuromas—all modules that 
have already been developed for use within the SRP.
conclusions
Preoperative rehearsal with a surgical rehearsal plat-
form increased efficiency and safety in aneurysm mi-
crosurgery as demonstrated by strong trends toward de-
creased operative times, fewer clip application attempts, 
and decreased time per clip. Future studies aimed at im-
proving patient outcome and safety during surgical clip-
ping of aneurysms will be needed to keep pace with the 
quickly advancing endovascular field.
references
 1. Alaraj A, Luciano CJ, Bailey DP, Elsenousi A, Roitberg BZ, 
Bernardo A, et al: Virtual reality cerebral aneurysm clipping 
simulation with real-time haptic feedback. Neurosurgery 11 
(Suppl 2):52–58, 2015
 2. Anderson P: Surgical simulation: dural repair. CNSQ 12:16–
17, 2011
 3. Bambakidis NC, Selman WR, Sloan AE: Surgical rehearsal 
platform: potential uses in microsurgery. Neurosurgery 73 
(Suppl 1):122–126, 2013
 4. Banerjee PP, Luciano CJ, Lemole GM Jr, Charbel FT, Oh 
MY: Accuracy of ventriculostomy catheter placement using a 
head- and hand-tracked high-resolution virtual reality simu-
lator with haptic feedback. J Neurosurg 107:515–521, 2007
 5. Chan S, Conti F, Salisbury K, Blevins NH: Virtual reality 
simulation in neurosurgery: technologies and evolution. Neu-
rosurgery 72 (Suppl 1):154–164, 2013
 6. Choy I, Okrainec A: Simulation in surgery: perfecting the 
practice. Surg Clin North Am 90:457–473, 2010
 7. Clarke DB, D’Arcy RC, Delorme S, Laroche D, Godin G, 
Hajra SG, et al: Virtual reality simulator: demonstrated use 
in neurosurgical oncology. Surg Innov 20:190–197, 2013
 8. Cohen AR, Lohani S, Manjila S, Natsupakpong S, Brown N, 
Cavusoglu MC: Virtual reality simulation: basic concepts 
and use in endoscopic neurosurgery training. Childs Nerv 
Syst 29:1235–1244, 2013
 9. Colby GP, Lin LM, Paul AR, Huang J, Tamargo RJ, Coon 
AL: Cost comparison of endovascular treatment of anterior 
circulation aneurysms with the pipeline embolization device 
and stent-assisted coiling. Neurosurgery 71:944–950, 2012
10. Das P, Goyal T, Xue A, Kalatoor S, Guillaume D: Simulation 
training in neurological surgery. Austin Neurosurg Open 
Access 1:1004, 2014
11. Fenz W, Dirnberger J: Real-time surgery simulation of intra-
cranial aneurysm clipping with patient-specific geometries 
and haptic feedback. Proc SPIE 9415:94150H, 2015
12. Harrop J, Rezai AR, Hoh DJ, Ghobrial GM, Sharan A: Neu-
rosurgical training with a novel cervical spine simulator: 
Fig. 6. Number of clip placement attempts per clip used. Figure is avail-
able in color online only.
Fig. 7. Surgical time per clip used. The experimental group was sig-
nificantly faster compared with the control arm of the study (p = 0.05). 
Figure is available in color online only.
 srP and aneurysm clipping measures
J neurosurg May 13, 2016
7
posterior foraminotomy and laminectomy. Neurosurgery 73 
(Suppl 1):94–99, 2013
13. Luciano C, Banerjee P, DeFanti T: Haptics-based virtual 
reality periodontal training simulator. Virtual Real (Walth 
Cross) 13:69–85, 2009
14. Malone HR, Syed ON, Downes MS, D’Ambrosio AL, Quest 
DO, Kaiser MG: Simulation in neurosurgery: a review of 
computer-based simulation environments and their surgical 
applications. Neurosurgery 67:1105–1116, 2010
15. Martin RF: Simulation and surgical competency. Foreword. 
Surg Clin North Am 90:xiii–xv, 2010
16. Robison RA, Liu CY, Apuzzo ML: Man, mind, and machine: 
the past and future of virtual reality simulation in neurologic 
surgery. World Neurosurg 76:419–430, 2011
17. Schirmer CM, Mocco J, Elder JB: Evolving virtual reality 
simulation in neurosurgery. Neurosurgery 73 (Suppl 1):127–
137, 2013
Disclosures
Surgical Theater, which owns the SuRgical Planning (SRP) plat-
form, donated research support for the study. Dr. Selman reports 
an ownership relationship with Surgical Theater. Dr. Singer 
reports a consultant relationship with Surgical Theater.
author contributions
Conception and design: Bambakidis, Selman. Acquisition of 
data: Bambakidis, Chugh, Pace, Singer, Tatsuoka, Hoffer, Sel-
man. Analysis and interpretation of data: Bambakidis, Chugh, 
Pace, Singer, Tatsuoka, Hoffer. Drafting the article: Chugh, Pace. 
Critically revising the article: Bambakidis, Chugh, Pace, Singer, 
Tatsuoka, Selman. Reviewed submitted version of manuscript: 
Bambakidis, Pace. Approved the final version of the manuscript 
on behalf of all authors: Bambakidis. Administrative/technical/
material support: Chugh, Pace.
correspondence
Nicholas C. Bambakidis, Department of Neurological Surgery, 
University Hospitals, 11100 Euclid Ave., Cleveland, OH 44106. 
email: nicholas.bambakidis2@uhhospitals.org.
