 ARTICLE
OPEN
Komodo dragon-inspired synthetic peptide DRGN-1
promotes wound-healing of a mixed-biofilm infected wound
Ezra M. C. Chung1,4, Scott N. Dean2, Crystal N. Propst2, Barney M. Bishop3 and Monique L. van Hoek
2
Cationic antimicrobial peptides are multifunctional molecules that have a high potential as therapeutic agents. We have identified a
histone H1-derived peptide from the Komodo dragon (Varanus komodoensis), called VK25. Using this peptide as inspiration, we
designed a synthetic peptide called DRGN-1. We evaluated the antimicrobial and anti-biofilm activity of both peptides against
Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Staphylococcus aureus. DRGN-1, more than VK25, exhibited potent antimicrobial and anti-biofilm
activity, and permeabilized bacterial membranes. Wound healing was significantly enhanced by DRGN-1 in both uninfected and
mixed biofilm (Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Staphylococcus aureus)-infected murine wounds. In a scratch wound closure assay used
to elucidate the wound healing mechanism, the peptide promoted the migration of HEKa keratinocyte cells, which was inhibited by
mitomycin C (proliferation inhibitor) and AG1478 (epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitor). DRGN-1 also activated the EGFR-
STAT1/3 pathway. Thus, DRGN-1 is a candidate for use as a topical wound treatment. Wound infections are a major concern; made
increasingly complicated by the emerging, rapid spread of bacterial resistance. The novel synthetic peptide DRGN-1 (inspired by a
peptide identified from Komodo dragon) exhibits pathogen-directed and host-directed activities in promoting the clearance and
healing of polymicrobial (Pseudomonas aeruginosa & Staphylococcus aureus) biofilm infected wounds. The effectiveness of this
peptide cannot be attributed solely to its ability to act upon the bacteria and disrupt the biofilm, but also reflects the peptide’s
ability to promsote keratinocyte migration. When applied in a murine model, infected wounds treated with DRGN-1 healed
significantly faster than did untreated wounds, or wounds treated with other peptides. The host-directed mechanism of action was
determined to be via the EGFR-STAT1/3 pathway. The pathogen-directed mechanism of action was determined to be via anti-
biofilm activity and antibacterial activity through membrane permeabilization. This novel peptide may have potential as a future
therapeutic for treating infected wounds.
npj Biofilms and Microbiomes (2017) 3:9 ; doi:10.1038/s41522-017-0017-2
INTRODUCTION
The increasing prevalence of multidrug-resistant (MDR) pathogens
demands new antibiotics. Due to their potent and broad
antimicrobial activity, antimicrobial peptides (AMPs), and in
particular cationic antimicrobial peptides (CAMPs), are a possible
alternative to conventional antibiotics. Although the mode of
action of AMPs is not fully understood, it is believed that their
major targets are the cytoplasmic membrane and intracellular
molecules.1 In addition, AMPs can have both antimicrobial and
antibiofilm activities, and that antimicrobial and antibiofilm
activity may be independent mechanisms of the same pep-
tide.1–5 It is also believed that it is difficult for bacteria to develop
resistance against CAMPs that kill quickly through their actions on
the
cytoplasmic
membrane
or
that
act
through
complex
mechanisms inside the bacterial cell.5 Antimicrobial peptides
have been found to have a broad-spectrum activity, with active
peptides identified against both gram-positive and gram-negative
bacteria, membrane-bound viruses, and fungi. Antimicrobial
peptides can also have significant immunomodulatory activity
directed towards the host, which is likely to be an additional
critical aspect of their function in vivo.6–8 Some peptides have
been identified as having a role in promoting wound-healing.9 For
these reasons, AMPs are potentially useful in combating MDR
bacteria and may be useful as potential treatments for infected
wounds.
Animals are a promising source of CAMPs because of their
evolved defenses to bacteria. The American alligator and other
crocodilians are evolutionarily ancient animals, whose plasma and
leukocyte extracts have been previously shown to have anti-
microbial activity.10–12 Discovering and identifying CAMPs from
blood, however, is labor-intensive and expensive. We developed a
new bioprospecting-particle and proteomics approach to CAMP
discovery.13 This platform includes the ability to harvest efficiently
from small sample volumes (e.g., 100 µl), advanced middle-down
mass spectrometry techniques, and the identification of CAMPs
through de novo peptide sequencing.
In the present work, we applied this process to the discovery of
novel AMPs from plasma obtained from another reptile, the
Komodo dragon (Varanus komodoensis), a large species of lizard
found on the Indonesian island of Komodo. The saliva of wild
Komodo dragons is thought to contain many different strains of
bacteria, some of which are known to cause sepsis.14, 15 However,
this bacteria-laden saliva never sickens the Komodo dragon.
Investigators therefore hypothesized that proteins in the dragon's
Received: 6 June 2016 Revised: 14 December 2016 Accepted: 16 January 2017
Published online: 11 April 2017
1College of Science, George Mason University, Manassas, VA 20110, USA; 2School of Systems Biology, George Mason University, Manassas, VA 20110, USA and 3Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry, George Mason University, Manassas, VA 20110, USA
Correspondence: Monique L. van Hoek (mvanhoek@gmu.edu)
4Present address: Director of Research and Development, STCube Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 401 Professional Dr. Suite 108, Gaithersburg, MD 20879-3429, USA
www.nature.com/npjbiofilms
Published in partnership with Nanyang Technological University
 saliva or blood might provide immunity. Using our AMP discovery
bioprospector platform,13 we identified a Komodo dragon peptide
from Komodo plasma that we named VK25 (Fig. S1). Inspired by
this VK25 peptide, we designed and created a new short synthetic
peptide, which is a rearrangement of the two amino acids at the
N-terminal of the VK25 peptide, and which we named DRGN-1.
DRGN-1
exhibited
promising
antimicrobial
and
anti-biofilm
properties. Moreover, the DRGN-1 peptide significantly promoted
wound healing in vitro and in vivo, in both uninfected and mixed
biofilm infected wounds.
RESULTS
Antimicrobial activity of DRGN-1
To investigate whether DRGN-1 could exert antimicrobial effects,
we tested the activity of CAMPs against the gram-negative
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Francisella novicida and Burkholderia
thailandensis and the gram-positive Staphylococcus aureus. It
should be noted that VK25 is a histone H1-derived peptide from
Komodo, and histone peptides are generally weakly active or
inactive under minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) conditions,
but may still have activity under low-salt, phosphate buffer
conditions (EC50).16, 17 The results showed that DRGN-1 demon-
strated the antimicrobial activity in an EC50 assay against the
gram-negative bacterium P. aeruginosa (but not F. novicida or B.
thailandensis) as well as the gram-positive bacterium S. aureus
within the range of 0.77–7.1 µg/ml (0.50–4.62 µM). This was
compared to VK25, which was significantly less active with anti-
Pseudomonas activity in the range of 25–30 µg/ml and anti-
Staphylococcus activity of more than 100 µg/ml (Table 1). These
peptides do not show antimicrobial activity in full broth under MIC
conditions, as is known for many other peptides, including the
human cathelicidin LL-37.17, 18
Anti-biofilm activity of DRGN-1
Next, the ability of DRGN-1 to prevent the formation of biofilm
after 18 h was examined by crystal violet staining and confocal
microscopy (Fig. 1). When cultured in a polystyrene tube under
shaking conditions, P. aeruginosa and S. aureus form biofilms
along the sidewall of the culture tube, which was strongly
inhibited by DRGN-1 in a concentration-dependent manner
(Fig. 1a, b). For confocal imaging, DRGN-1 (final concentration,
25 μg/ml) was incubated with bacteria overnight in the wells of a
chamber slide. P. aeruginosa Green-fluorescent protein (GFP)+ and
S. aureus Red-fluorescent protein (RFP)+ were used for these
studies.19 The cells were incubated for 24 h in tryptic soy broth
(TSB) medium in the presence of DRGN-1. The next day, the wells
were rinsed and the development of a biofilm was compared with
a control well (without DRGN-1). Biofilms of both P. aeruginosa and
S. aureus were significantly reduced by DRGN-1. In mixed-culture
biofilms
grown
for
24 h
without
treatment,
P.
aeruginosa
significantly outgrows S. aureus,19 thus the appropriate starting
ratio was established as a 99:1 ratio S. aureus to P. aeruginosa.
Treatment with DRGN-1 had a significant inhibitory effect on the
mixed bacterial cultures in contrast with untreated control.
Ability of DRGN-1 to affect P. aeruginosa-infected HEKa
keratinocytes
To gain insight into the ability of DRGN-1 to exert activity against
internalized P. aeruginosa, HEKa keratinocytes were infected by P.
aeruginosa ATCC 9027, and subsequently treated with DRGN-1 or
VK25. As highlighted in Fig. 2, the killing of infected keratinocytes
was pronounced 2 h after their exposure to the bacteria,
presumably due to P. aeruginosa-induced apoptotic cell death,
which was strongly prevented by exogenous treatment with
DRGN-1 (Fig. 2a–d). Exogenous application of DRGN-1, but not
VK25, significantly reduced the number of internalized bacteria
with the peptide causing 64% reduction in survival of the
internalized bacteria at the concentration used (30 µg/ml) after
2 h (Fig. 2e). LL-37 treatment of infected HEKa cells also caused a
significant reduction in internalized P. aeruginosa cells. Both of
these
reductions
were
statistically
significant
compared
to
untreated or VK-25-treated cells. We conclude that DRGN-1
treatment of P. aeruginosa-infected HEKa keratinocytes leads to
increased killing of those bacteria, whether directly by the peptide
(direct antibacterial effect) or by a peptide-induced response of
the keratinocyte cells (host-directed effect).
The cytotoxic effect of DRGN-1 and VK25 on HEKa cells was
studied
using
an
MTT
(3-(4,
5-dimethylthiazolyl-2)-
2,5-
diphenyltetrazolium bromide) based assay. As shown in Fig. 2f,
both DRGN-1 and VK25 were devoid of toxic effects against these
mammalian cells at a concentration range of 12.5–100 µg/ml.
However, the control CAMP, LL-37, caused a significant decrease
in HEKa cell viability at concentrations ranging from 50–100 µg/ml
(Fig. 2f). DRGN-1 also did
not show any toxicity
against
erythrocytes in a hemolysis assay at a high concentration (Fig. S2).
Effects of DRGN-1 on membrane permeability
Measuring the uptake of the fluorescent probe, ethidium bromide
(EtBr), allowed us to assess the permeabilization of P. aeruginosa
Table 1.
Antimicrobial (EC50) activity of DRGN-1, VK25 and LL-37 against a panel of gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria
Species
DRGN-1
VK25
LL-37
EC50
(µM)
EC50
(µg/ml)
95% CI
(µg/ml)
EC50
(µM)
EC50
(µg/ml)
95% CI
(µg/ml)
EC50
(µM)
EC50
(µg/ml)
95% CI
(µg/ml)
P. aeruginosa PAO1
4.46
6.85
4.22–11.1
17.7
27.2
6.86–108
ND
ND
–
P. aeruginosa ATCC 9027
2.86
4.39
1.12–17.1
17.2
26.4
14.1–49.4
0.525a
2.36a
2.00–2.76
P. aeruginosa PAO1 (pTDK-
GFP)
4.62
7.10
3.46–14.6
20.0
30.8
11.2–84.5
0.599
2.69
1.32–5.50
F. novicida U112
>65
>100
–
>65
>100
–
0.0534b
0.24b
0.18–0.30
B. thailandensis E264
>65
>100
–
>65
>100
–
1.88
8.43c
5.37–13.2
S. aureus ATCC 25923
2.63
4.04
(wide)
>65
>100
–
0.552a
1.27a
0.44–3.70
S. aureus SH1000 (pAH9-
RFP)
0.50
0.77
0.25–2.4
>65
>100
–
ND
ND
–
This table indicates the EC50 and 95% confidence interval (CI) of the peptides (in µg/ml) against bacteria in an antimicrobial assay, and also in µM, n = 3
Previously determined by us: a from ref. 13, b from ref. 2, c from ref. 69
ND not determined
DRGN-1 heals polymicrobial-biofilm infected wounds
E MC Chung et al.
2
npj Biofilms and Microbiomes (2017) 9
Published in partnership with Nanyang Technological University
 ATCC 9027 by these peptides. EtBr will only fluoresce if it is able to
permeate both the inner and outer membranes through pores,
and intercalate into the bacterial nucleic acid. The uptake of EtBr
was significantly higher in the presence of DRGN-1 or LL-37 than
in the presence of VK25 or the untreated control (Fig. 3a),
suggesting significant disruption of the bacterial cytoplasmic
membrane.
The effect of CAMPs on the membrane potential was measured
by monitoring the membrane potential using the fluorescent dye
3,3'-dipropylthiadicarbocyanine
iodide
(DiSC3(5))
(Fig.
3b).20
DiSC3(5) dye is taken up by bacterial cell membranes in proportion
to the electrical potential gradient across the bacterial cytoplasmic
membrane. The dye concentrates in the cytoplasmic membrane,
where it is able to self-quench its own fluorescence. Any
compound that can permeabilize the cytoplasmic membrane
and thus depolarize the gradient, such as an antimicrobial
peptide, will lead to the release of DiSC3(5) and thus leads to an
increase in fluorescence.21 The peptides were tested against P.
aeruginosa ATCC 9027 at a concentration of 20 µg/ml, which was
expected to cause a large and immediate increase in fluorescence
(indicative of loss of membrane potential). DRGN-1 showed ~10%
depolarization relative to Triton X-100 (which served as the
“100%” positive control), while VK25 did not have any effect. These
results suggest that in addition to membrane disruption, DRGN-1,
much more than VK25, permeabilizes the membranes and slightly
depolarizes the membrane potential.
Structure analysis of DRGN-1 by circular dichroism (CD)
spectroscopy
The reversal of two N-terminal amino acids (ser–pro) in a histone
H1-derived peptide of V. komodoensis caused drastic changes in
antimicrobial
activity,
anti-biofilm
activity,
membrane
permeability,
and
DNA
binding.
Therefore,
we
sought
to
determine the secondary structure of the peptides in the
membrane-mimicking media, sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and
trifluoroethanol (TFE) (Fig. 4) using CD. Cathelicidin AMPs (such as
LL-37) maintain a random or disordered structure until associated
with a bacterial membrane or detergent micelle.22 The detergent
SDS is able to form micelles that have a negatively charged
surface,23 which mimics the bacterial membrane and forces the
CAMP into a more ordered conformation such as a helix.24, 25 TFE
is used in CD to promote a helical structure26 and stabilize
secondary structure.27
By qualitatively evaluating the spectra, we conclude that DRGN-
1 and VK25 showed a random coil conformation in aqueous
solution (10 mM phosphate buffer) and 60 mM SDS solution. The
α-helical content of DRGN-1 and VK25 were 22.3 and 32.8% in 50%
TFE, respectively, with the percent contribution to secondary
structure was measured using methods determined by Raussens
et al.28 Both DRGN-1 and VK25 have a very low hydrophobic
moment (0.013 and 0.088, respectively) compared with the highly
α-helical LL-37 (0.521), suggesting that DRGN-1 and VK25 are
not α-helical (Table 2). Nevertheless, DRGN-1 (0.64) displays a
slightly larger R2 value, the hallmark of the coiled-coil α-helical
structure in 50% TFE, than VK25 (0.44). It has been shown by
several groups that TFE can induce and support α-helical
structures in peptides.29, 30 These results suggest that the reversal
of amino acids at the N-terminal contributes to an overall
conformational change.
Efficacy of DRGN-1 on in vivo wound healing
We
have
demonstrated
that
DRGN-1
peptide
significantly
inhibited biofilms of P. aeruginosa and S. aureus separately, and
a mixed biofilm. Since biofilm may protect bacteria during
Fig. 1
Anti-biofilm activity of DRGN-1. a DRGN-1 anti-biofilm activity against S. aureus using three interdependent methods. The activity was
analyzed by crystal violet staining of biofilm in culture tube at 24 h. b DRGN-1 anti-biofilm activity against P. aeruginosa. Pictures (right inlet in a
and b) are a representative biofilm stained with crystal violet. P values were calculated using a two-tailed t test (assuming unequal variances)
comparing test strains to untreated control (*P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001). c Biofilm evaluation by confocal microscopy. Representative
images of biofilms of P. aeruginosa PAO1-pTDK-GFP expressing GFP, S. aureus SH1000 pAH9-RFP expressing RFP or mixed cultures exposed to
PBS (control) or DRGN-1 (25 µg/ml) for 24 h. DRGN-1-exposed biofilms are thinner and more sparse than untreated controls. Scale bar: 20 µm
DRGN-1 heals polymicrobial-biofilm infected wounds
E MC Chung et al.
3
Published in partnership with Nanyang Technological University
npj Biofilms and Microbiomes (2017) 9
 infection, we sought to test whether application of DRGN-1 to an
infected wound would promote clearance and healing.
To evaluate the impact of a mixed biofilm infection on an open
wound, we developed a wound model using BALB/c mice. We
have previously characterized P. aeruginosa and S. aureus-mixed
biofilms for their heterogeneity and composition;19 these biofilms
were generated and applied to a mouse wound. In our model, we
will test whether wound healing in P. aeruginosa and S. aureus
biofilm-infected skin wounds is significantly improved following
peptide treatment compared to an untreated, infected wound,
following the design of other published studies.31
We
have
previously
characterized
a
mixed
biofilm
of
P. aeruginosa and S. aureus,19 which is applied to the wound as
the source of infection. Using this model, we evaluated the
potential clinical application of DRGN-1 against P. aeruginosa/
S. aureus biofilm-infected wounds (Fig. 5). Full-thickness round
wounds of 6 mm in diameter were made between the shoulder
blades of mice and overlaid with a mixed biofilm of P. aeruginosa/
S. aureus grown on agar for 2 days.19 The kinetics of wound
closure was evaluated by measuring the original wound area
before and after treatment with peptides. DRGN-1, VK25, and LL-
37 (20 μg/wound) were applied topically to their specified groups
every other day until day 6. Reconstitution buffer was used as a
control in this experiment. Treatment with DRGN-1 on a mixed
biofilm-infected wound significantly reduced wound size com-
pared to the controls as soon as day 4 post treatment. When the
wound dressing was taken off on day 6, wound healing sped up in
both treated and untreated conditions as observed at day 9.
Wounds treated with DRGN-1 were consistently smaller than
wounds treated with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) buffer, VK25,
or LL-37 (Fig. 5b, Fig. S3). The results showed that the difference in
size was apparent by day 4 after the first treatment. By day 11, the
wounds treated with DRGN-1 were completely healed, while the
wounds treated with PBS, VK25, and LL-37 were not. After 6 days,
the first treatment (three treatments), the bacterial counts of
S. aureus and P. aeruginosa were significantly reduced in the
DRGN-1-treated and LL-37-treated groups compared to the
control group (Fig. 5c, d). In contrast, there was no significant
reduction in S. aureus and only a slight reduction in P. aeruginosa
in VK25-treated wound areas. These results indicate that DRGN-1
accelerates skin wound closure and healing, and reduction of
bacterial counts in the wounds of P. aeruginosa/ S. aureus biofilm-
infected mice. When the wound dressings were taken off on day 6,
wound healing was accelerated in both treated and untreated
conditions due to the air exposure, as observed at day 9 and 11
post treatment. In addition, hematoxylin–eosin staining of skin at
day 11 clearly demonstrated that the skin layers were completely
rehabilitated in the DRGN-1-treated wounds (Fig. S4).
To precisely dissect the effect of DRGN-1 on re-epithelialization
and new tissue formation in wound, we then investigated the
in vivo wound closure activity of DRGN-1 in a mouse full-thickness
skin (uninfected) wound model. In this study, we used a silicone
splint32 to avoid contraction of an extensive subcutaneous striated
muscle layer, which is specific to mice, called the panniculus
carnosus that is largely absent in humans.33 Full-thickness round
wounds of 6 mm in diameter were made between the shoulder
Uninfected 
Infected 
Untreated 
Infected 
DRGN-1 treated 
Infected 
VK-25 treated 
Fig. 2
Treatment of cells with peptide reduces intracellular P. aeruginosa bacteria. a Light microscopy images of uninfected HEKa
keratinocytes. b–d About 100,000 cells were infected with P. aeruginosa ATCC 9027 (1 × 107 CFU/ml) for 2 h, washed with PBS, treated with
gentamicin to remove extracellular bacteria for 1 h, and b not-treated, or c treated with DRGN-1 (30 µg/ml), or (D) VK25 (30 µg/ml) for 2 h at
37 °C. e Bacterial survival within infected HEKa keratinocytes upon peptide treatment at 2 h post treatment. 100% represents the number of
bacteria found inside of untreated HEKa cells. f Cytotoxicity testing: the peptides were tested for their cytotoxic effect against HEKa cells. The
number of metabolically active cells remaining was determined by the MTT assay and is expressed as percentage with respect to the non-
peptide-treated control cells. P values were calculated using a two-tailed t test (assuming unequal variances) comparing test strains to
untreated control (*P < 0.05; **P < 0.01)
DRGN-1 heals polymicrobial-biofilm infected wounds
E MC Chung et al.
4
npj Biofilms and Microbiomes (2017) 9
Published in partnership with Nanyang Technological University
 blades on mice, and the wound closure was evaluated by
measurement of original wound area (%). When DRGN-1 or
VK25 (20 μg/wound) was applied topically every 2 days post injury,
DRGN-1-treated wounds were consistently smaller than wounds
treated with PBS or VK25 (Fig. 6). At day 6, the wounds treated
with DRGN-1 were smaller in area (41% compared to original
wound area) than the control (65%) or VK25-treated (85%) wound.
These results indicate that DRGN-1 peptide directly accelerates
skin wound closure and healing in mice. In summary, wound
healing was significantly enhanced by DRGN-1 in both uninfected
and mixed biofilm (P. aeruginosa and S. aureus)-infected murine
wounds.
Efficacy of DRGN-1 on keratinocyte migration in a scratch-wound
closure assay
Some CAMPs also have host-directed functions and thus CAMPs
are also called host-defense peptides. One of the potential
functions of CAMPs is the activation of keratinocyte migration
resulting in the promotion of skin wound healing,9, 34, 35 which
may contribute to the in vivo results we observed. Therefore, we
tested the capacity of DRGN-1 to induce wound closure via this
mechanism.
We first investigated whether CAMPs induced the migration of
HEKa cells into a wound area using a scratch wound closure assay.
The migration of cells into the wounded area was significantly
increased in the presence of DRGN-1, as well as LL-37, compared
to migration in the control within 7 and 24 h after wounding
(Fig. 7a, b). There, significantly less wound closure activity was
observed in the presence of VK25, which was slightly more than
the
control
treatment
(peptide
reconstitution
buffer).
This
suggests that part of the wound-healing benefit of DRGN-1
peptide is the promotion of keratinocyte migration. Subsequently,
in order to determine whether the wound closure was influenced
by an increased proliferation of keratinocytes upon their exposure
to DRGN-1, the wound healing assay was carried out in the
presence of 20 μM mitomycin C to block cell proliferation. As
shown in Fig. 7c, d, mitomycin C strongly inhibited the migratory
activity of keratinocytes induced by DRGN-1 (10 μg/ml). This
suggests that the proliferation of HEKa cells highly contributes to
the wound-healing effect produced by DRGN-1. To further
understand the pathway by which DRGN-1 activates keratinocyte
migration and proliferation, epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) was selected as a potentially activated kinase, because it
has been reported to be central to the regulation of keratinocyte
migration and proliferation.35–37 Previous studies have shown that
LL-37 peptide can induce transactivation of the EGFR.35, 38
AG1478 is an inhibitor of EGFR tyrosine kinase, which blocks the
activation of EGFR.38, 39 Interestingly, pretreatment of HEKa cells
with 0.2 μM AG1478 prevented cell migration induced by DRGN-1.
To examine potential EGFR pathway activation by DRGN-1, we
investigated EGFR phosphorylation by Western blotting with an
anti-phospho-EGFR antibody. DRGN-1 treatment led to phosphor-
ylation of the EGFR at 5 min and the phosphorylation persisted for
20 min,
which
was
not
observed
in
AG1478-treated
cells
(Fig. 8a–c). The amount of EGFR protein did not change during
this time period and treatment with human keratinocyte growth
supplements (HKGS) containing 0.2 ng/ml of human epidermal
growth factor (EGF) was used as a positive control. EGFR signaling
pathway initiates several signal transduction cascades, such as
STAT3 (Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription) and Akt
with the functional consequence of enhanced cell migration.40
STAT3 was also phosphorylated 10–30 min after the addition of
DRGN-1 (Fig. 8d–f). From these results, we conclude that DRGN-1
induces
keratinocyte
migration
via
EGFR-STAT3
pathway
activation.
DISCUSSION
In this study, we evaluated the biological activities of the histone
H1-derived peptide, VK25 identified from Komodo dragon blood
and the N-terminally modified synthetic peptide DRGN-1. The
peptide DRGN-1 has broad-spectrum activity, and is highly potent
in antimicrobial and anti-biofilm assays. The bactericidal proper-
ties of a few histone-derived fragments (mainly H1 or H2B) have
been recently reported in the literature.41–45 Some histone H1-
derived CAMPs are found in various animals including fish44, 46 as
well as humans.47, 48 We previously identified a potential histone
H1-derived CAMP from Komodo dragons by a novel peptide-
identification bioprospector platform.13 VK25, a peptide contain-
ing a native sequence from Komodo histone H1, did not display
significant antimicrobial activity despite the predictive algorithm
indicating a high probability of antimicrobial activity (Table 2).
When the two N-terminal amino acids were switched from “SP” to
“PS” in a new synthetic peptide that we named DRGN-1, it
exhibited potent antimicrobial activity. Thus, we sought to
investigate why this reversal induced the activity.
One possibility is that this switch may induce overall structural
changes, thus enabling the peptides to exert differential activity.5
We determined the secondary structures of the peptides DRGN-1
and VK25 using CD spectroscopy. This data suggested that both
peptides have a similar secondary structure, displaying typical
random coil structure in aqueous solution. In the presence of 50%
TFE, the peptides underwent the conformational changes to α-
helical structure. However, the R2 ([θ]222:[θ]208 ratio) of DRGN-1 in
50% TFE was somewhat higher than VK25, suggesting a slightly
more organized structure of DRGN-1 in this solution.49 When we
examined the structure of CAMPs in a membrane-mimicking
environment (SDS), there was no conformational difference
between the peptides, supporting the idea that these CAMPs
have a random coil structure in aqueous solutions. Although CD
spectra suggest a slight conformational difference under TFE
conditions, this may not be sufficient to explain the significantly
different antimicrobial activity of these peptides.
Fig. 3
Membrane permeability, and membrane potential. a Fluor-
escent dye uptake for EtBr by the P. aeruginosa ATCC 9027 in the
presence of peptides (20 µg/ml). P values were calculated using a
two-tailed t test (assuming unequal variances) comparing with
untreated control at 20 min (**P < 0.01). b Membrane depolarization
was monitored by the change in the intensity of fluorescence
emission of the membrane-potential-sensitive dye DiSC3(5) (excita-
tion wavelength at 622 nm, emission wavelength at 670 nm) on
addition of 20 µg/ml peptides or 0.1% Triton X-100 for a positive
control
DRGN-1 heals polymicrobial-biofilm infected wounds
E MC Chung et al.
5
Published in partnership with Nanyang Technological University
npj Biofilms and Microbiomes (2017) 9
 Another potential explanation of VK25’s relative inactivity is
peptide degradation by the “N-end rule” pathway, which is
mediated by the molecular chaperones ClpXP or ClpS-ClpAP
systems in bacteria. Our data suggested the hypothesis that the
switching of the proline–serine sequence of the original VK25
peptide may contribute to DRGN-1 peptide’s antimicrobial activity,
perhaps by the “N-end rule”. Notably, the DRGN-1 peptide
displayed activities comparable to that of the “classic” AMP
human cathelicidin LL-37 (EC50 = 0.24–2.7 µg/ml; 0.05–0.60 µM).3, 4
The “N-end rule” states that the half-life of a protein is determined
by the nature of its N-terminal residue.50 Mogk et al. suggest that
in prokaryotic cells, there is a “proteasome-like” machinery that
includes an ATPase molecule (either ClpA, or ClpX) working with a
proteolytic molecule such as Lon that is either covalently attached
or such as ClpP, which is diffusible. This protein complex mediates
the proteolysis of misfolded or specially tagged proteins in the
bacterial cytosol.50 In particular, ClpXP system is able to recognize
5 motifs at the terminal regions: two located at the C terminus of
proteins, and three N-terminal motifs.51 The N-terminal regions of
Dps, σS and GlcB that start with serine (Ser) contain sequences that
are necessary (and sufficient) to target those proteins for
degradation by the ClpXP system.51 In this aspect, we speculate
that since VK25 starts with Ser at the N-terminus, it may be a
substrate for ClpXP. DRGN-1 starts with proline (pro) at the N-
terminus and exhibits significant antimicrobial activity, suggesting
it is resistant to ClpXP-mediated degradation. In addition, the
addition
of
Pro
at
the
N-terminus
of
the
cell-permeable
antimicrobial peptide Buforin II led to greater efficacy of this
CAMP against P. aeruginosa and S. aureus (Chung and van Hoek,
unpublished data). This implies alteration of CAMP degradation
(thus improving the CAMP stability) by the “N-end rule” pathway.
Further studies will be done to determine the contribution of the
Table 2.
Summary of CAMPs used in this study
CAMP
Sequence
Net
charge
MW
Hydro-phobicity
(H)a
Hydro-phobic
moment (µH)a
AMP probability
(SVM)b
DRGN-1
PSKKTKPVKPKKVA
+6
1535.95
−0.058
0.013
0.866
VK25
SPKKTKPVKPKKVA
+6
1535.95
−0.058
0.088
0.866
LL-37
LLGDFFRKSKEKIGKEFKRIVQRIKDFLRNLVPRTES
+6
4493.3
0.201
0.521
0.762
SVM support vector machine
a Physicochemical parameter (hydrophobicity and hydrophobic moment) were calculated by HeliQuest, a web server to screen sequences with specific alpha-
helical properties Gautier et al.68
b AMP probability was predicted by a web-based prediction tool CAMP (http://www.camp.bicnirrh.res.in/predict/) using support vector machine SVM
algorithm.
Fig. 4
CD spectra of peptides in the presence of SDS or TFE. a, b CD spectra of 100 μg/ml concentration of peptides in the presence of the
indicated concentrations of sodium phosphate buffer (PB), SDS or TFE. c Helical wheel plot of DRGN-1 predicted by HeliQuest. d Composition
of α-helix conformation calculated from the ellipticity value at 222 nm using the relation (% α-helix = ([θ222]−3000)/(−36000−3000)). The ratio
[θ]222/[θ]208 obtained by CD spectroscopy is defined as R2 value. R2 >1 is the hallmark of coiled-coil α-helical structure with >80% helical
content (32)
DRGN-1 heals polymicrobial-biofilm infected wounds
E MC Chung et al.
6
npj Biofilms and Microbiomes (2017) 9
Published in partnership with Nanyang Technological University
 “N-end rule” to improve the activity of the DRGN-1 AMPs, to
address remaining questions such as, the cytosolic location of
ClpXP vs. the membrane-targeting activities of the AMPs.
To study the modes of antimicrobial action of DRGN-1 peptide,
we first measured the intrinsic permeabilization of the bacterial
membrane by the peptides with EtBr uptake and dysregulation of
the membrane potential with DiSC3(5). EtBr uptake data indicated
that DRGN-1, much more than VK25, moderately disrupts the
cytoplasmic membrane causing leakage of intracellular compo-
nents (although less than LL-37). In contrast, DRGN-1 induced a
slow
dissipation
of
the
membrane
potential
when
an
environment-sensitive fluorescent probe DiSC3(5) was used. The
results showed that DRGN-1 could induce bacterial membrane
disruption, but does not drastically alter the proton motive force,
potentially
causing
structural
damage
to
the
cytoplasmic
membrane. Due to its random coil structure, DRGN-1 is likely to
be a pore-forming and membrane-permeable peptide. Thus, it
seems that the target sites of DRGN-1 are likely to be both the cell
membrane itself and potentially the nucleic acids inside of the cell.
A DNA
binding
assay
(results
not
shown)
supported
this
hypothesis, showing that DRGN-1 binds tightly to DNA, pre-
sumably resulting in inhibition of the macromolecular synthesis of
the cell once inside the bacteria, similar to the mechanism of
Buforin II52 and PR-39.53 Peptides such as DRGN-1 that have
multiple modes of action against bacteria are of significant
interest for potential future development, as it is less likely that
bacteria will be able to generate resistance mechanisms against
multiple modes of action.
DRGN-1 exhibited wound closure activity both in vitro and
in vivo through the proposed mechanism of promotion of
Fig. 5
Efficacy in wound healing of peptides in a mixed biofilm-infected mouse skin wound model. a Schematic experimental design that
includes the timing of infection, drug treatments, dressing off. b Effect of peptides on closure of P. aeruginosa/ S. aureus-infected wounds in
mice. Wounds shown are representative of the group. Six-millimeter-diameter excisions were made on the back of mice. Each wound was
infected with a mixed biofilm (P. aeruginosa/ S. aureus) grown on a polycarbonate membrane for 2 days. DRGN-1, VK25 or LL-37 (20 µg) was
topically treated every 2 days in 1% hypromellose (n = 6 mice per group). Mice were lightly anesthetized with isofluorane and photographed
on the indicated days following treatment. c, d Assessment of bacterial colonization in P. aeruginosa/ S. aureus-infected wounds. Wound tissue
samples were harvested on day 6 after treatment, and the number of CFU/wound was counted in a selective medium for each species. The
median value in each group is shown as a horizontal bar (n = 6; **p < 0.01 and ***P < 0.001)
DRGN-1 heals polymicrobial-biofilm infected wounds
E MC Chung et al.
7
Published in partnership with Nanyang Technological University
npj Biofilms and Microbiomes (2017) 9
 keratinocyte cell migration and proliferation. Thus, we have
demonstrated that in addition to its antimicrobial activities,
DRGN-1 has host-directed activities. DRGN-1 possesses potent,
direct wound closure activity in an in vitro wound scratch assay
using human keratinocytes. DRGN-1 elicited significantly stronger
wound closure activity than VK25 by inducing more HEKa cell
migration (similar to LL-37), accompanied by activation of EGFR.
DRGN-1 treatment also induced phosphorylation of EGFR and
STAT3 in HEKa cells. A recent study suggested that LL-37 can
activate EGFR and lead to phosphorylation of STAT3, leading to
keratinocyte migration38 through a mechanism of “transactiva-
tion”. That study demonstrated that LL-37 activates a metallopro-
teinase, which then cleaves the extracellular domain of heparin-
binding EGF (HB-EGF). The soluble-form of HB-EGF then binds to
and phosphorylates EGFR.38 Therefore, we postulate that DRGN-1
may act through EGFR, similar to the transactivation mechanism of
LL-37, which is mediated by HB-EGF. We are continuing to
determine the mechanism of DRGN-1 action on host cells.
In addition, topical application of DRGN-1 accelerated closure
and healing of full-thickness excisional wounds in mice. Consistent
with the in vitro scratch wound assay, there was no significant
wound reduction in VK25-applied wound areas compared to the
control wound. These results suggest that DRGN-1, significantly
more than VK25, is active for wound closure in the in vivo wound
environment,
although
the
precise
mechanistic
differences
between our two peptides towards the EGFR pathway has not
yet been elucidated.
Anti-biofilm activity is another biological function exhibited by
DRGN-1. Biofilms are structured multicellular communities of
microorganisms that are associated with surfaces and resistant to
antibiotic treatment.54 Our results showed that our short synthetic
peptide DRGN-1 significantly inhibited biofilms of P. aeruginosa
and S. aureus separately, as well as in mixed biofilms, similar to the
human cathelicidin LL-37.3, 4, 19 Since the formation of biofilm
protects bacteria during infection and allows for survival in a
hostile environment,55 the inhibition of biofilm formation by
DRGN-1 in a wound may serve as an additional mechanism to
prevent bacterial survival in the host and promote healing.6, 31
To evaluate in the infected wounds the impact of DRGN-1 on a
mixed biofilm infection of a wound, we developed a mouse model
using BALB/c mice. We have previously characterized P. aerugi-
nosa and S. aureus-mixed biofilms,19 which were applied to the
wound as a source of infection. In our model, wound healing in
P. aeruginosa and S. aureus biofilm-infected skin wounds was
significantly delayed compared to an uninfected wound. Treat-
ment with DRGN-1 on a mixed biofilm-infected wound signifi-
cantly reduced wound size compared to the controls as soon as
day 4 post treatment, and appeared to promote clearance of the
biofilm from the wound. When the wound dressing was taken off
on day 6, wound healing was faster in both treated and untreated
conditions as observed at day 9. This observation supports a
previously described hypothesis that oxygen is another essential
component of wound healing.56 Thus, treatment with DRGN-1
significantly promoted the healing of mixed-biofilm-infected
wounds in vivo.
One potential limitation of these experiments is that these
studies are performed on the mouse wound model, as a first
demonstration of in vivo activity prior to advancing towards
clinical studies. Another potential limitation of this study is that
our model of polymicrobial biofilm infection has two organisms, P.
aeruginosa and S. aureus, not the full repertoire of all six ESKAPE
pathogens that are known to potentially infect wounds. However,
these studies suggest that DRGN-1 is a good candidate for
additional
studies
and
possible
development
as
a
topical
therapeutic agent for infected wounds.
Taken together, our data on the antibacterial, anti-biofilm, and
wound closure activities suggest that DRGN-1, a synthetic
derivative of the histone H1-derived peptide VK25 from the
Komodo dragon, might be a potent wound healing agent in
polymicrobial infected wounds, with host-directed effects accom-
plished through the EGFR-STAT pathway as well as through anti-
biofilm activity against the bacteria. Furthermore, DRGN-1 did not
affect the viability of human keratinocytes and erythrocytes. These
features suggest that DRGN-1 might be developed as a topical
agent for infected wound treatment.
METHODS
Bacterial strains and peptides
Pseudomonas aeruginosa ATCC 9027, P. aeruginosa PAO1 ATCC 15692,
Escherichia coli O157:H7 ATCC 51659, and Staphylococcus aureus ATCC
25923 were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC,
Manassas, VA, USA). F. novicida U112 NR-13 was obtained from BEI
Resources (Manassas, VA, USA). P. aeruginosa PAO1 cells that constitutively
expressed GFP (PAO1 pTDK-GFP) and S. aureus SH1000 that expressed RFP
(SH1000 pAH9-RFP) were kindly provided by Dr. Weibel57 and Dr. Boles,58
respectively. DRGN-1 and VK25 were synthesized by the conventional
solid-phase
method
by
ChinaPeptides
(Suzhou,
China).
The
crude
compounds were purified to chromatographic homogeneity in the range
of >95% by using reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatogra-
phy with a mass spectrometer by the company. LL-37 was purchased from
Fig. 6
Wound healing of DRGN-1 in a mouse full-thickness skin
(uninfected) wound model. a Schematic experimental design that
includes the timing of drug treatments. b Effect of DRGN-1 on
closure of full-thickness excisional wounds (6-mm-diameter) in mice.
Each wound was treated with DRGN-1 or VK25 every 48 h (n = 5
mice per group). The same animal was lightly anesthetized and
photographed on the indicated days following injury. c Changes in
percentage of wound area at each time point in comparison to the
original wound area. *P < 0.05 and **P < 0.01
DRGN-1 heals polymicrobial-biofilm infected wounds
E MC Chung et al.
8
npj Biofilms and Microbiomes (2017) 9
Published in partnership with Nanyang Technological University
 DRGN-1 heals polymicrobial-biofilm infected wounds
E MC Chung et al.
9
Published in partnership with Nanyang Technological University
npj Biofilms and Microbiomes (2017) 9
 AnaSpec (Fremont, CA, USA). All peptides were reconstituted in a buffer
consisting of 20 mg bovine serum albumin and 10 µl acetic acid in 50 ml
PBS.59 Table 2 summarizes characteristics of peptides used in this study.
Assays for antimicrobial and anti-biofilm activity
P. aeruginosa and S. aureus were cultured in nutrient broth and mannitol
salt
broth,
E.
coli
was
cultured
in
Luria
broth
(LB),
and
F. novicida was cultured in tryptic soy broth containing 0.1% cysteine
overnight at 37 °C. Overnight-cultured bacteria were numerated by a
standard curve using optical density vs. colony forming units (CFU) per ml.
The culture was resuspended in 10 mM sodium phosphate buffer (PB) (pH
7.4) and adjusted to a final amount of 2 × 106 CFU/ml. For EC50
determination, peptides were used at variable concentrations (0.1–100
μg/ml) from a stock solution. Fifty microliters of each concentration of
peptide solution was added to each corresponding well of a 96-well plate
(BD Falcon, USA) and 50 μl of bacteria was added and incubated for 3 h at
37 °C. After dilution in the buffer, the bacteria were spotted on an agar
plate of the corresponding media and colonies were numerated. Anti-
biofilm activity was measured as previously described19 with the following
modifications. For the mixed biofilm inhibition assays in the 96 well plate
format, a 99:1 ratio of S. aureus and P. aeruginosa was used as the starting
inoculation. Two-fold diluted peptides in TSB medium were incubated with
bacteria (1:50 dilution in the same medium) overnight. A crystal violet
assay was used for biofilm formation as described.60 A tube-based biofilm
assay was performed as previously described.61
For confocal microscopy, bacteria (P. aeruginosa PAO1 pTDK-GFP and S.
aureus SH1000 pAH9-RFP) were grown on the Lab-Tek II chamber slide
(Thermo Scientific) for 24 h in TSB and incubated with the indicated
amount of peptide. Biofilms attached to the glass were observed with a
40× objective using a Nikon TE2000-U confocal laser scanning microscope
equipped with an argon ion laser.
Cell infection
Adult human epidermal keratinocytes (HEKa) (Invitrogen) cells were
seeded in 24-well plates (Corning) and grown until they reached
confluence (48 h) in EpiLife medium supplemented with HKGS containing
0.2% v/v bovine pituitary extract, 5 µg/ml bovine insulin, 0.18 μg/ml
hydrocortisone, 5 µg/ml bovine transferrin, and 0.2 ng/ml human EGF
(Invitrogen). The bacterial strain P. aeruginosa ATCC 9027 was grown in
brain heart infusion (BHI) media at 37 °C with mild shaking and then
harvested by centrifugation. Bacterial suspension (MOI 10) in EpiLife
medium was co-incubated with keratinocytes for 2 h at 37 °C and 5% CO2.
The medium was aspirated and the cells were washed three times with
PBS to remove non-adherent bacteria. In order to kill extracellular bacteria,
cells were incubated for 1 h in EpiLife without HKGS supplemented with
100 μg/ml of gentamicin. Afterwards, the medium was aspirated and the
infected cells were washed three times, as described above. Three hundred
microliters of peptide solution (30 µg/ml) in EpiLife without HKGS was
added to each well and the plate was incubated for 2 h at 37 °C and 5%
CO2. Then, the peptide solution was removed and the cells were washed
again with PBS three times and lysed with 100 μl of 0.1% Triton X-100 in
PBS for 5 min at room temperature. The resulting bacterial suspension was
sonicated in a water bath for 10 min, to break up possible clumps, and
appropriate dilutions were plated on agar plates for colony counts; the CFU
were counted after 24 h at 37 °C.
Membrane permeability
For intrinsic permeabilization of bacterial membrane, EtBr uptake was in
performed 10 mM potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7.2) as described62
with some modifications. Overnight cultures of P. aeruginosa ATCC 9027 in
BHI were transferred to fresh medium and grown to OD600 values of
0.5–0.6 (log phase). Cells were harvested and resuspended in 10 mM
potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7.2) at a final OD600 of 0.12–0.15. The cells
(40 µl) were added to 50 μl of 12 µM EtBr, followed by the peptide (20 µg/
ml final) samples after 30 s. Excitation and emission wavelengths were set
at 545 and 600 nm, respectively. The increase in fluorescence as a result of
partitioning of EtBr into the cytosol was measured 20 min after the
addition of peptides using a fluorescence spectrophotometer (Tecan
Safire2 Multi-detection Microplate Reader). Membrane potential was
measured by DiSC3(5) as described.63 Briefly, mid-log phase bacteria were
suspended in 5 mM HEPES (4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic
acid) buffer containing 20 mM glucose (OD = 0.05) and DiSC3(5) (1 µM final)
was added for 1 h at room temperature. Then KCl was added at 0.1 M of
final concentration. After addition with peptide (20 µg/ml) or TX-100 (final
0.1%), fluorescence was excited at 622 nm (bandwidth 5 nm) and
monitored at 670 nm for emission (bandwidth 20 nm).
Circular dichroism (CD) analysis
CD spectra of the peptides were collected using a Jasco J-1500
spectropolarimeter as previously described.3 Data was collected in a 0.1
cm
path
length
cuvette,
with
a
chamber
temperature
of
25 °C. The spectra were collected from 190 to 260 nm with 0.1-nm
intervals. Three scans per sample were averaged. All peptides were
analyzed at 100 μg/ml concentration in three different mediums: 10 mM
PB (pH 7), 50% (v/v) TFE in 10 mM PB (pH 7), and 60 mM SDS in 10 mM PB
(pH 7). The ellipticity at 222 nm is used as a means of providing a rough
estimate of the degree of peptide helicity under the three conditions
investigated (10 mM PB, 60 mM SDS, and 50% TFE) consistent with the
work reported by Raussens, et al.28 and as previously reported by our
group.22 We performed the CD scan across the wavelengths shown in
Fig. 4. In 10 mM PB and 60 mM SDS conditions, the peptides appeared to
show very low helical content, however the results in TFE suggest higher
helical character. Percent
contribution
to
secondary structure
was
measured using methods determined by Raussens et al.28 We have
applied a second approach to estimating helicity for the peptides in TFE.
We have used the ratios of the signals at 222 and 208 nm (R2 = [Θ]222 nm:
[Θ]208 nm), as has been reported by Graddis, et al.49 and Juba, et al., to
provide a second means of estimating potential for helical structure.
In vitro scratch wound closure assays
In vitro wound closure was assayed in confluent cell monolayers of HEKa
(Invitrogen) as described.34 Cells were seeded in 6-well plates (Corning, NY,
USA) and grown until they reached confluence (48 h) in EpiLife medium
supplemented with HKGS. Cells were starved for 18 h in EpiLife without
HKGS and then scratched once vertically with a 200-μl pipette tip to create
an artificial wound. For inhibitor studies, mitomycin C (20 µM final) and
AG1478 (0.2 µM final) were added 90 and 10 min prior to scratch
generation. After being washed twice with PBS to remove cellular debris,
cells were treated with 10 µg (Fig. 7a) or 1 and 10 µg (Fig. 7b) DRGN-1,
VK25 or LL-37. PBS was used as a negative control. Cells were
photographed before peptide treatment and 7 and 24 h after peptide
treatment using an EVOS® Cell Imaging Systems (Invitrogen). The same
image fields were captured and the wound areas were estimated by
ImageJ software.64
MTT assay
The toxic effect of the peptides on adult HEKa cells was evaluated using
the MTT dye colorimetric method.65 MTT’s intensity of the color is directly
proportional to the number of metabolically active cells. Keratinocytes
were plated in triplicate wells of a 96-well plate, at 4 × 104 cells/well in
Fig. 7
'Scratch' assay for HEKa cells. a Confluent cells in medium with HGKS were wounded by a scratch with a pipette tip, and ‘gap’ closure in
the presence of peptides (10 µg/ml) was monitored by light microscopy at 0, 7 and 24 h post peptide treatment. b Relative wound closure of
separate experiments using either 1 or 10 µg/ml of peptide as indicated was calculated from micrographs using ImageJ software. The results
shown are combined from three independent experiments; error bars represent the mean ± SD. The dotted lines indicate the control values for
easier comparison to the other bars. c HEKa cells were pre-incubated with 20 µM mitomycin C for 90 min or 0.2 µM AG1478 for 10 min and
subsequently treated or not with 10 μg/ml DRGN-1, as indicated. In parallel, cells treated with the peptide alone were included for comparison.
Cells incubated with medium served as a control (Ctrl). d Relative wound closure. All data are the means of at least three independent
experiments ± SE. The levels of statistical significance between groups are indicated as follows: *P < 0.05
DRGN-1 heals polymicrobial-biofilm infected wounds
E MC Chung et al.
10
npj Biofilms and Microbiomes (2017) 9
Published in partnership with Nanyang Technological University
 EpiLife medium supplemented with HKGS. After overnight incubation at
37 °C in a 5% CO2 atmosphere, the plate was incubated with the peptides
at different concentrations for 2 h, and 0.5 mg/ml of MTT was added. After
4 h of incubation, the formazan crystals were dissolved by adding 100 μl of
acidified isopropanol, and the absorbance of each well was measured at
570 nm using a microplate reader (PowerWave X, BioTek).
Hemolytic assay
The hemolytic activities of peptides was determined using sheep
erythrocytes66 in an assay adapted to a microtiter plate format. Briefly,
erythrocytes were prepared by centrifuging fresh defibrinated blood, re-
suspending the pelleted cells in sterile PBS. The cells were washed with
PBS three times. In the final wash, the cells were resuspended in 0.75 ml
PBS. A 2% erythrocyte suspension was prepared for the assay and
incubated with the indicated amount of peptide.
Western blotting
Semi-confluent HEKa cells were serum-starved for 3 h and then stimulated
with 10 µg/ml DRGN-1 or HKGS for 5–30 min at 37 °C. AG1478 (0.2 µM final)
was added 10 min prior to DRGN-1 or HKGS treatment. Cells were lysed
with 2× Laemli sample buffer (Bio-Rad) containing 5 mM sodium fluoride
and 2 mM sodium vanadate. Cell lysates were separated on a 4–12 % SDS-
PAGE gel and transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride membrane using an
iBlot system (Invitrogen). The membranes were probed with antibodies
specific to phospho-EGFR and EGFR (Cell Signaling). The membranes were
then treated with horseradish peroxidase-conjugated donkey anti-rabbit
IgG (Abcam) and developed by SuperSignal West Femto Chemilumines-
cent Substrate (Fisher Scientific) under GelDoc Imaging System (Bio-Rad).
Animal model of wound healing
Female BALB/c mice (12 weeks old) were purchased from Jackson
Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME, USA). The Institutional Animal Care and Use
Committee at George Mason University and ACURO approved all protocols
(Protocol No. 0271). The study adhered to the NIH Guide for the Care and
Use of Laboratory Animals. The mice were anesthetized with isoflurane and
the dorsal skin was shaved to remove hair. The next day, a superficial
wound was created between the shoulder blades of the mice using a 6-
mm biopsy punch. The wounds were topically treated with 20 μl of a gel
containing 20 μg DRGN-1 or VK25 in 1% hypromellose (hydroxy propyl
methyl cellulose, HPMC, Sigma) every 48 h (n = 5 animals per group) and
covered with a Tegaderm-type semiocclusive dressing (3M, St. Paul, MN)
attached to a silicone disc (0.5 mm thick, Life Technologies) by Mastisol
liquid (Eloquest Healthcare) for study involving only peptides. Each wound
site was digitally photographed at the indicated time intervals and wound
areas were determined on photographs using ImageJ. Changes in the
wound areas over time were expressed as the percentage of the original
wound areas.
For infected wounds, S. aureus ATCC 25923 and P. aeruginosa ATCC 9027
were mixed at an initial ratio of 1000:1 and grown on a 6-mm
polycarbonate filter on Nutrient agar plates overnight as previously
described.19 The resulting biofilm was applied to the biopsy wound and
covered with a Tegaderm dressing adhered to the skin with Mastisol liquid.
Mice were housed individually with ad libitum rodent chow and water for
2 days. The wounds (5 mice per group) were topically treated with 20 μl
containing 20 μg peptide with 1% hypromellose in 10 mM phosphate
buffer every 2 days until 6 days from the first treatment.67 Each wound site
was then digitally photographed at the indicated time intervals, and
wound areas were determined on photographs using ImageJ software.
Changes in wound areas over time were expressed as the percentage of
the original wound areas. To assess bacterial colonization, wounds were
harvested at day 6 post treatment and homogenized in PBS. Mannitol salt
agar was used to selectively culture S. aureus, and tryptic soy agar with
triclosan or centrimide agar was used to selectively culture P. aeruginosa.19
At day 11 post-treatment, all mice were sacrificed and tissue samples were
harvested in a 4% paraformaldehyde solution. The sections of fixed skin
were stained with hematoxylin and eosin for further histological analysis
by AML Laboratories (Baltimore, MD, USA).
Statistical analysis
P-values were calculated by one-way ANOVA or Student’s t-test. Statistical
significance was set at P < 0.05. Data are presented as arithmetic mean ±
SD. Each experiment was repeated at least three times independently.
Fig. 8
Activation of EGFR-STAT pathway by DRGN-1. a, b, d, e Subconfluent keratinocytes were starved for 2 h in HGKS-free medium and
stimulated with 10 µg/ml DRGN-1. b, e For EGFR inhibition, cells were preincubated with 0.2 µM AG1478 for 10 min and subsequently treated
with 10 μg/ml DRGN-1. The cells were harvested into lysis buffer at the indicated times. a, b, d, e The phosphorylation of EGFR (p-EGFR) and
STAT3 (p-STAT3) was analyzed by Western blotting. EGFR indicates total EGFR protein. STAT3 indicates total STAT3 protein. c, f Densitometric
analyses of the expression of phospho-protein relative to un-phosphorylated proteins from panels a & b, d & e above
DRGN-1 heals polymicrobial-biofilm infected wounds
E MC Chung et al.
11
Published in partnership with Nanyang Technological University
npj Biofilms and Microbiomes (2017) 9
 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors acknowledge the St. Augustine Alligator Farm and Zoological Park for
their contriubtion of samples. We are grateful for technical contributions of Megan
Devine and Drs. Paul Russo and Melanie Juba. We acknowledge Ryan Blower for
providing the B. thailandensis results, Stephanie Barksdale for Pseudomonas 9027 EC50
data and overall technical assistance, and Andrea George for administrative support.
We are also grateful to Dr. Joel Schnur for helpful discussions. This work was funded
by the Defense Threat Reduction Agency (contract number HDTRA1-12-C-0039),
which also partially supported E.M.C., S.N.D., C.N.P., B.B., and M.V.H. C.N.P was partially
supported by a graduate fellowship from Institute for Infectious Animal Diseases via
U.S. Department of Homeland Security under Cooperative Agreement Number DHS
2010-ST-061-AG0002.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
M.V.H. and B.B. conceived the study. M.C.C. and M.V.H. designed the experimental
studies. M.C.C. and M.V.H. wrote the manuscript. M.C.C., S.N.D. and C.N.P. performed
the experiments. All authors reviewed and approved the manuscript.
COMPETING INTEREST
The authors declare that they have no competing interests. We are currently filing a
patent on DRGN-1 peptide (“Antimicrobial peptides with wound healing activity”).
REFERENCES
1. de la Fuente-Nunez, C., Reffuveille, F., Haney, E. F., Straus, S. K. & Hancock, R. E.
Broad-spectrum anti-biofilm peptide that targets a cellular stress response. PLoS
Pathog. 10, e1004152 (2014).
2. Amer, L. S., Bishop, B. M. & van Hoek, M. L. Antimicrobial and antibiofilm activity
of cathelicidins and short, synthetic peptides against Francisella. Biochem. Bio-
phys. Res. Commun. 396, 246–251 (2010).
3. Dean, S. N., Bishop, B. M. & van Hoek, M. L. Natural and synthetic cathelicidin
peptides with anti-microbial and anti-biofilm activity against Staphylococcus
aureus. BMC Microbiol. 11, 114 (2011a).
4. Dean, S. N., Bishop, B. M. & van Hoek, M. L. Susceptibility of Pseudomonas aer-
uginosa biofilm to alpha-helical peptides: D-enantiomer of LL-37. Front. Microbiol.
2, 128 (2011b).
5. Fjell, C. D., Hiss, J. A., Hancock, R. E. & Schneider, G. Designing antimicrobial
peptides: form follows function. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 11, 37–51 (2011).
6. Duplantier, A. J. & van Hoek, M. L. The human cathelicidin antimicrobial peptide
LL-37 as a potential treatment for polymicrobial infected wounds. Front. Immunol.
4, 143 (2013).
7. Findlay, F., Proudfoot, L., Stevens, C. & Barlow, P. G. Cationic host defense pep-
tides; novel antimicrobial therapeutics against category A pathogens and
emerging infections. Pathog. Glob. Health 110, 137–147 (2016).
8. Mansour, S. C., Pena, O. M. & Hancock, R. E. Host defense peptides: front-line
immunomodulators. Trends. Immunol. 35, 443–450 (2014).
9. Steinstraesser, L. et al. Innate defense regulator peptide 1018 in wound healing
and wound infection. PLoS One 7, e39373 (2012).
10. Cassir, N., Rolain, J. M. & Brouqui, P. A new strategy to fight antimicrobial resis-
tance: the revival of old antibiotics. Front. Microbiol. 5, 551 (2014).
11. Darville, L. N., Merchant, M. E., Hasan, A. & Murray, K. K. Proteome analysis of the
leukocytes from the American alligator (Alligator mississippiensis) using mass
spectrometry. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. Part D Genomics Proteomics 5, 308–316 (2010).
12. Fernandez, L., Breidenstein, E. B., Song, D. & Hancock, R. E. Role of intracellular
proteases in the antibiotic resistance, motility, and biofilm formation of Pseu-
domonas aeruginosa. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 56, 1128–1132 (2012).
13. Bishop, B. M. et al. Bioprospecting the American alligator (Alligator mis-
sissippiensis) host defense peptidome. PLoS One 10, e0117394 (2015).
14. Goldstein, E. J. et al. Anaerobic and aerobic bacteriology of the saliva and gingiva
from 16 captive Komodo dragons (Varanus komodoensis): new implications for
the "bacteria as venom" model. J. Zoo Wildl. Med. 44, 262–272 (2013).
15. Montgomery, J. M., Gillespie, D., Sastrawan, P., Fredeking, T. M. & Stewart, G. L.
Aerobic salivary bacteria in wild and captive Komodo dragons. J. Wildl. Dis. 38,
545–551 (2002).
16. Park, C. B., Yi, K. S., Matsuzaki, K., Kim, M. S. & Kim, S. C. Structure-activity analysis
of buforin II, a histone H2A-derived antimicrobial peptide: the proline hinge is
responsible for the cell-penetrating ability of buforin II. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A
97, 8245–8250 (2000).
17. Wiegand, I., Hilpert, K. & Hancock, R. E. Agar and broth dilution methods to
determine the minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) of antimicrobial sub-
stances. Nat. Protoc. 3, 163–175 (2008).
18. Dorschner, R. A. et al. The mammalian ionic environment dictates microbial
susceptibility to antimicrobial defense peptides. FASEB J. 20, 35–42 (2006).
19. Dean, S. N., Walsh, C., Goodman, H. & van Hoek, M. L. Analysis of mixed biofilm
(Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa) by laser ablation elec-
trospray ionization mass spectrometry. Biofouling 31, 151–161 (2015).
20. Zhang, L., Dhillon, P., Yan, H., Farmer, S. & Hancock, R. E. Interactions of bacterial
cationic peptide antibiotics with outer and cytoplasmic membranes of Pseudo-
monas aeruginosa. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 44, 3317–3321 (2000).
21. Nagant, C. et al. Identification of peptides derived from the human antimicrobial
peptide LL-37 active against biofilms formed by Pseudomonas aeruginosa using
a library of truncated fragments. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 56, 5698–5708
(2012).
22. Barksdale, S. M., Hrifko, E. J., Chung, E. M. & van Hoek, M. L. Peptides from
American alligator plasma are antimicrobial against multi-drug resistant bacterial
pathogens including Acinetobacter baumannii. BMC Microbiol. 16, 189 (2016).
23. Nelson, C. A. The binding of detergents to proteins I. The maximum amount of
dodecyl sulfate bound to proteins and the resistance to binding of several
proteins. J. Biol. Chem. 246, 3895–3901 (1971).
24. Turner, J., Cho, Y., Dinh, N. N., Waring, A. J. & Lehrer, R. I. Activities of LL-37, a
cathelin-associated antimicrobial peptide of human neutrophils. Antimicrob.
Agents Chemother. 42, 2206–2214 (1998).
25. Wang, W., Smith, D. K., Moulding, K. & Chen, H. M. The dependence of membrane
permeability by the antibacterial peptide cecropin B and its analogs, CB-1 and
CB-3, on liposomes of different composition. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 27438–27448
(1998).
26. Formaggio, F. & Toniolo, C. Electronic and vibrational signatures of peptide
helical structures: a tribute to Anton Mario Tamburro. Chirality 22, E30–E39
(2010).
27. Roccatano, D., Colombo, G., Fioroni, M. & Mark, A. E. Mechanism by which 2,2,2-
trifluoroethanol/water mixtures stabilize secondary-structure formation in pep-
tides: a molecular dynamics study. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A. 99, 12179–12184
(2002).
28. Raussens, V., Ruysschaert, J. M. & Goormaghtigh, E. Protein concentration is not
an absolute prerequisite for the determination of secondary structure from
circular dichroism spectra: a new scaling method. Anal. Biochem. 319, 114–121
(2003).
29. Hirota, N., Mizuno, K. & Goto, Y. Group additive contributions to the alcohol-
induced α-helix formation of melittin: implication for the mechanism of the
alcohol effects on proteins. J. Mol. Biol. 275, 365–378 (1998).
30. Kinoshita, M., Okamoto, Y. & Hirata, F. Peptide conformations in alcohol and
water: analyses by the reference interaction site model theory. J. Am. Chem. Soc.
122, 2773–2779 (2000).
31. Roy, S. et al. Mixed-species biofilm compromises wound healing by disrupting
epidermal barrier function. J. Pathol. 233, 331–343 (2014).
32. Dunn, L., Prosser, H. C., Tan, J. T., Vanags, L. Z., Ng, M. K. & Bursill, C. A. Murine
model of wound healing. J. Vis. Exp. 75, e50265 (2013).
33. Wong, V. W., Sorkin, M., Glotzbach, J. P., Longaker, M. T. & Gurtner, G. C. Surgical
approaches to create murine models of human wound healing. J. Biomed. Bio-
technol. 2011, 969618 (2011).
34. Jung Kim, D. et al. Efficacy of the designer antimicrobial peptide SHAP1 in wound
healing and wound infection. Amino Acids 46, 2333–2343 (2014).
35. Yin, J. & Yu, F. S. LL-37 via EGFR transactivation to promote high glucose-
attenuated epithelial wound healing in organ-cultured corneas. Invest. Ophthal-
mol. Vis. Sci. 51, 1891–1897 (2010).
36. Minder, P., Bayha, E., Becker-Pauly, C. & Sterchi, E. E. Meprinalpha transactivates
the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) via ligand shedding, thereby
enhancing colorectal cancer cell proliferation and migration. J. Biol. Chem. 287,
35201–35211 (2012).
37. Niyonsaba, F., Ushio, H., Nakano, N., Ng, W., Sayama, K., Hashimoto, K., Nagaoka, I.,
Okumura, K. & Ogawa, H. Antimicrobial peptides human beta-defensins stimulate
epidermal keratinocyte migration, proliferation and production of proin-
flammatory cytokines and chemokines. J. Invest. Dermatol. 127, 594–604 (2007).
38. Tokumaru, S. et al. Induction of keratinocyte migration via transactivation of the
epidermal growth factor receptor by the antimicrobial peptide LL-37. J. Immunol.
175, 4662–4668 (2005).
39. Hoq, M. I. et al. Human catestatin enhances migration and proliferation of normal
human epidermal keratinocytes. J. Dermatol. Sci. 64, 108–118 (2011).
40. Andl, C. D., Mizushima, T., Oyama, K., Bowser, M., Nakagawa, H. & Rustgi, A. K.
EGFR-induced cell migration is mediated predominantly by the JAK-STAT path-
way in primary esophageal keratinocytes. Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol.
287, G1227–G1237 (2004).
41. Frohm, M. et al. Biochemical and antibacterial analysis of human wound and
blister fluid. Eur. J. Biochem. 237, 86–92 (1996).
42. Hirsch, J. G. Bactericidal action of histone. J. Exp. Med. 108, 925–944 (1958).
DRGN-1 heals polymicrobial-biofilm infected wounds
E MC Chung et al.
12
npj Biofilms and Microbiomes (2017) 9
Published in partnership with Nanyang Technological University
 43. Patrzykat, A., Zhang, L., Mendoza, V., Iwama, G. K. & Hancock, R. E. Synergy of
histone-derived peptides of coho salmon with lysozyme and flounder pleur-
ocidin. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 45, 1337–1342 (2001).
44. Richards, R. C., O'Neil, D. B., Thibault, P. & Ewart, K. V. Histone H1: an antimicrobial
protein of Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar). Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 284,
549–555 (2001).
45. Robinette, D. et al. Antimicrobial activity in the skin of the channel catfish Icta-
lurus punctatus: characterization of broad-spectrum histone-like antimicrobial
proteins. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 54, 467–475 (1998).
46. Fernandes, J. M., Molle, G., Kemp, G. D. & Smith, V. J. Isolation and characterisation
of oncorhyncin II, a histone H1-derived antimicrobial peptide from skin secretions
of rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss. Dev. Comp. Immunol. 28, 127–138 (2004).
47. Jacobsen, F. et al. Transient cutaneous adenoviral gene therapy with human host
defense peptide hCAP-18/LL-37 is effective for the treatment of burn wound
infections. Gene Ther. 12, 1494–1502 (2005).
48. Wang, Y., Griffiths, W. J., Jornvall, H., Agerberth, B. & Johansson, J. Antibacterial
peptides in stimulated human granulocytes: characterization of ubiquitinated
histone H1A. Eur. J. Biochem. 269, 512–518 (2002).
49. Graddis, T. J., Myszka, D. G. & Chaiken, I. M. Controlled formation of model
homo- and heterodimer coiled coil polypeptides. Biochemistry 32, 12664–12671
(1993).
50. Mogk, A., Schmidt, R. & Bukau, B. The N-end rule pathway for regulated proteo-
lysis: prokaryotic and eukaryotic strategies. Trends. Cell Biol. 17, 165–172 (2007).
51. Flynn, J. M., Neher, S. B., Kim, Y. I., Sauer, R. T. & Baker, T. A. Proteomic discovery of
cellular substrates of the ClpXP protease reveals five classes of ClpX-recognition
signals. Mol. Cell 11, 671–683 (2003).
52. Park, C. B., Kim, H. S. & Kim, S. C. Mechanism of action of the antimicrobial peptide
buforin II: buforin II kills microorganisms by penetrating the cell membrane
and inhibiting cellular functions. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 244, 253–257
(1998).
53. Boman, H. G., Agerberth, B. & Boman, A. Mechanisms of action on Escherichia coli
of cecropin P1 and PR-39, two antibacterial peptides from pig intestine. Infect.
Immun. 61, 2978–2984 (1993).
54. Costerton, J. W., Stewart, P. S. & Greenberg, E. P. Bacterial biofilms: a common
cause of persistent infections. Science 284, 1318–1322 (1999).
55. Donlan, R. M. & Costerton, J. W. Biofilms: survival mechanisms of clinically rele-
vant microorganisms. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 15, 167–193 (2002).
56. Mathieu, D. & Mani, R. A review of the clinical significance of tissue hypoxia
measurements in lower extremity wound management. Int. J. Low. Extrem.
Wounds 6, 273–283 (2007).
57. Flickinger, S. T. et al. Quorum sensing between Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilms
accelerates cell growth. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 133, 5966–5975 (2011).
58. Schwartz, K., Syed, A. K., Stephenson, R. E., Rickard, A. H. & Boles, B. R. Functional
amyloids composed of phenol soluble modulins stabilize Staphylococcus aureus
biofilms. PLoS Pathog. 8, e1002744 (2012).
59. Fox, M. A., Thwaite, J. E., Ulaeto, D. O., Atkins, T. P. & Atkins, H. S. Design and
characterization of novel hybrid antimicrobial peptides based on cecropin A, LL-
37 and magainin II. Peptides 33, 197–205 (2012).
60. Stepanovic, S., Vukovic, D., Dakic, I., Savic, B. & Svabic-Vlahovic, M. A modified
microtiter-plate test for quantification of staphylococcal biofilm formation. J.
Microbiol. Methods 40, 175–179 (2000).
61. Hassan, A., Usman, J., Kaleem, F., Omair, M., Khalid, A. & Iqbal, M. Evaluation of
different detection methods of biofilm formation in the clinical isolates. Braz. J.
Infect. Dis. 15, 305–311 (2011).
62. Zou, S. B. et al. Loss of elongation factor P disrupts bacterial outer membrane
integrity. J. Bacteriol. 194, 413–425 (2012).
63. Juba, M. L. et al. Large scale discovery and de novo-assisted sequencing of
cationic antimicrobial peptides (CAMPs) by microparticle capture and electron-
transfer dissociation (ETD) mass spectrometry. J. Proteome Res. 10, 4282–4295
(2015).
64. Schneider, C. A., Rasband, W. S. & Eliceiri, K. W. NIH Image to ImageJ: 25 years of
image analysis. Nat. Methods 9, 671–675 (2012).
65. Di Grazia, A., Luca, V., Segev-Zarko, L. A., Shai, Y. & Mangoni, M. L. Temporins A
and B stimulate migration of HaCaT keratinocytes and kill intracellular Staphy-
lococcus aureus. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 58, 2520–2527 (2014).
66. de Latour, F. A., Amer, L. S., Papanstasiou, E. A., Bishop, B. M. & van Hoek, M. L.
Antimicrobial activity of the Naja atra cathelicidin and related small peptides.
Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 396, 825–830 (2010).
67. Desbois, A. P., Sattar, A., Graham, S., Warn, P. A. & Coote, P. J. MRSA decolonization
of cotton rat nares by a combination treatment comprising lysostaphin and
the antimicrobial peptide ranalexin. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 68, 2569–2575
(2013).
68. Gautier, R., Douguet, D., Antonny, B. & Drin, G. HELIQUEST: a web server to screen
sequences with specific alpha-helical properties. Bioinformatics 24, 2101–2102
(2008).
69. Blower, R. J., Barksdale, S. M. & van Hoek, M. L. Snake Cathelicidin NA-CATH and
Smaller Helical Antimicrobial Peptides Are Effective against Burkholderia thai-
landensis. PLoS Negl. Trop. Dis. 9, e0003862 (2015).
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated
otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons
license, users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the
material. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/
© The Author(s) 2017
Supplementary Information accompanies the paper on the npj Biofilms and Microbiomes website (doi:10.1038/s41522-017-0017-2).
DRGN-1 heals polymicrobial-biofilm infected wounds
E MC Chung et al.
13
Published in partnership with Nanyang Technological University
npj Biofilms and Microbiomes (2017) 9
