 https://doi.org/10.1177/1529100617727266
Psychological Science in the
Public Interest
2017, Vol. 18(2) 72 
–145
© The Author(s) 2017
Reprints and permissions: 
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/1529100617727266
www.psychologicalscience.org/PSPI
What we call a beginning is often the end
and to make an end is to make a beginning.
The end is where we start from. . . .
We shall not cease from exploration
And the end of all our exploring
Will be to arrive where we started
And know the place for the first time.
—T. S. Eliot (1942)
Though no man can draw a stroke between the 
confines of day and night, yet light and darkness are 
upon the whole tolerably distinguishable.
—Edmund Burke (1770/1913, p.43)
727266 PPIXXX10.1177/1529100617727266Clark et al.Approaches to Classifying Mental Disorder
research-article2017
Corresponding Author:
Lee Anna Clark, Department of Psychology, University of Notre Dame, 
Notre Dame, IN 46556 
E-mail: la.clark@nd.edu
Three Approaches to Understanding  
and Classifying Mental Disorder: ICD-11, 
DSM-5, and the National Institute of Mental 
Health’s Research Domain Criteria (RDoC)
Lee Anna Clark1, Bruce Cuthbert2, Roberto Lewis-Fernández3, 
William E. Narrow4, and Geoffrey M. Reed5,6
1Department of Psychology, University of Notre Dame; 2Research Domain Criteria Unit, National Institute  
of Mental Health; 3Department of Psychiatry, Columbia University, New York State Psychiatric Institute;  
4Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of New Mexico School of Medicine;  
5Department of Mental Health and Substance Abuse, World Health Organization; and 6Global Mental  
Health Program, Columbia University Medical Center
Abstract
The diagnosis of mental disorder initially appears relatively straightforward: Patients present with symptoms or visible 
signs of illness; health professionals make diagnoses based primarily on these symptoms and signs; and they prescribe 
medication, psychotherapy, or both, accordingly. However, despite a dramatic expansion of knowledge about mental 
disorders during the past half century, understanding of their components and processes remains rudimentary. We provide 
histories and descriptions of three systems with different purposes relevant to understanding and classifying mental 
disorder. Two major diagnostic manuals—the International Classification of Diseases and the Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders—provide classification systems relevant to public health, clinical diagnosis, service provision, 
and specific research applications, the former internationally and the latter primarily for the United States. In contrast, the 
National Institute of Mental Health’s Research Domain Criteria provides a framework that emphasizes integration of basic 
behavioral and neuroscience research to deepen the understanding of mental disorder. We identify four key issues that 
present challenges to understanding and classifying mental disorder: etiology, including the multiple causality of mental 
disorder; whether the relevant phenomena are discrete categories or dimensions; thresholds, which set the boundaries 
between disorder and nondisorder; and comorbidity, the fact that individuals with mental illness often meet diagnostic 
requirements for multiple conditions. We discuss how the three systems’ approaches to these key issues correspond or 
diverge as a result of their different histories, purposes, and constituencies. Although the systems have varying degrees 
of overlap and distinguishing features, they share the goal of reducing the burden of suffering due to mental disorder.
Keywords
diagnosis, classification, mental disorder, International Classification of Diseases, ICD, Diagnostic and  
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, DSM, Research Domain Criteria, RDoC
 Approaches to Classifying Mental Disorder 
73
The classification of mental disorders has its roots in 
antiquity. Like most natural phenomena in early human 
history, mental illness was often attributed to super-
natural origins (e.g., demonic possession), although 
psychosocial causes such as traumatic stress also were 
posited. Perhaps the earliest natural-science theory of 
mental illness was Galen’s typology, in the 2nd century 
A.D., of four categories of temperament—choleric, san-
guine, melancholic, and phlegmatic—based on Hip-
pocrates’s theory, dating to the 5th or 4th century B.C., 
that health required a balance among the body’s pur-
ported “four humors”: yellow bile, blood, black bile, 
and phlegm. Each temperament had an associated 
pathology, which was the result of excess in one of 
those humors. Today, scientific theories on the biologi-
cal bases of mental illness1 reference brain structures 
and various biological processes rather than the four 
humors; supernatural causes are absent from profes-
sional nosologies (although nonscientific ideas about 
mental illness are still prominent worldwide); and we 
know considerably more about psychosocial influences. 
Yet our understanding of exactly how multiple factors 
influence the development and course of most common 
mental disorders is still incomplete. As a result, our 
major classification systems are based almost exclu-
sively on observable behaviors (signs) and self-reported 
feelings and thoughts (symptoms) rather than on their 
underlying causal mechanisms. Categories and the clas-
sification systems that are organized around them are 
important because they help us to make sense of com-
plex observations, but we seem to have reached the 
limits of understanding mental disorder through out-
wardly observable signs and internally experienced 
symptoms alone.
This article discusses the approaches to describing 
and classifying mental disorders taken by three key 
organizations: the World Health Organization (WHO),2 
which is in the process of developing the 11th revision 
of the International Classification of Diseases (ICD), 
scheduled to be released for use by WHO member 
states in 2018; the American Psychiatric Association 
(APA), which published the 5th edition of its Diagnos-
tic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) 
in 2013; and the U.S. National Institute of Mental 
Health (NIMH), which launched its Research Domain 
Criteria (RDoC)3 project in 2009. The approaches taken 
by these three organizations in understanding and 
classifying mental disorder have both points of overlap 
and clear differences, owing to their distinct institu-
tional goals and the distinct purposes of their systems. 
Most notably, the RDoC project does not provide a 
classification system intended for immediate clinical 
use. We include it because of its potential for increas-
ing our understanding of mental illness and, conse-
quently, improving mental-disorder classification. At 
times these three organizations have worked closely 
together, and at other times they have worked quite 
independently.
Our goal in this article is to lead readers to a more 
extensive understanding of psychopathology by 
describing the aims and purposes of these different 
approaches and the way in which each addresses four 
major challenges in defining, diagnosing, and furthering 
knowledge about mental disorders. We first briefly 
introduce these four major challenges and then describe 
each of the three organizations just mentioned, includ-
ing their relevant history, their similarities and differ-
ences, and their general approaches to diagnosing, 
classifying, and understanding mental disorder. Next, 
we discuss in more depth the four fundamental, inter-
related issues that complicate efforts to understand and 
classify psychopathology and explore how the 
approaches taken by the three institutions, informed by 
their varying perspectives, grapple with these issues. 
Finally, we offer a set of considerations to facilitate the 
related goals of (a) improving classification of mental 
illness, (b) advancing clinicians’ ability to identify and 
treat the diverse manifestations of psychopathology, 
and (c) deepening knowledge of how mental disorders 
develop, are maintained, and can be ameliorated. To 
facilitate the reading this lengthy article, we have pro-
vided a glossary of abbreviations/acronyms (see Appen-
dix 1). To highlight our “take-home messages,” we 
provide an executive summary with key conclusions 
and action items (see Box 1).
Four Key Issues
In our discussions leading up to the writing of this arti-
cle, we found ourselves returning time and again to four 
major issues that pose challenges for mental-disorder 
classification. Thus, the core of this article is organized 
around these issues. We introduce them briefly here and 
discuss each of them in more depth later.
Etiology
The alluring possibility of finding the cause of various 
mental disorders has given rise to vigorous nature-
versus-nurture debates about whether the single or 
predominant cause of mental illness is biological or 
sociocultural/interpersonal, hopeful searches for “the 
gene” responsible for specific mental disorders, and 
many theories about how parenting, trauma, or some 
 74 
Clark et al.
BOX 1. Executive Summary
Four Key Issues
Etiology (pp. 99–103; summary begins on p. 103)
• Mental disorder develops as the result of the influence of multiple factors—“from neurons to neighborhoods”—and no one 
level of analysis has causal primacy over the other.
• Ultimately, to understand mental illness in all its complexity, we must discover how all its causal forces—from individuals’ 
genes to their social cultures—interact over time.
Categories and Dimensions (pp. 104–111; summary on p. 111)
• Given its multidimensional complexity, mental-disorder categorization is necessary for human understanding and 
communication and for clinical decision making.
• Despite the necessity of mental-disorder categorization, we must resist the lure of reification and the illusion of distinct 
disorders.
Thresholds in Mental Disorder (pp. 111–119; summary on p. 119)
• Setting thresholds is an aspect of categorization and is necessary for clinical decision making.
• Unless further research proves otherwise, all thresholds in mental illness should be regarded as arbitrary.
Comorbidity (pp. 119–126; summary begins on p. 126)
• The rampant comorbidity of current mental-disorder diagnoses is artifactual but not random.
• Comorbidity is an indicator of an imperfect classification system; available steps should be taken to reduce it and clinically 
viable approaches sought to manage it.
Future Directions
For basic researchers (pp. 128–129)
• Regardless of your particular research focus, always keep in mind the goal of understanding how all the causal forces of 
mental illness interact over time.
For clinical researchers (pp. 129–130)
• Work toward discerning the most important dimensions of the psychopathology you study from the perspectives of 
understanding, preventing, and treating mental disorder.
• Develop reliable, valid, and clinically useful assessment measures for these dimensions.
• Work toward developing useful cut points in these measures for multiple clinical decision-making purposes.
For clinicians (p. 130)
• Acknowledge the limitations of current diagnostic classification systems and seek out approaches to assessment and treatment 
that transcend them.
• Stay abreast of research that furthers understanding of the processes that engender and maintain psychopathology and work 
to apply it in your practice.
• Advocate for “de-reification” of mental disorders in regulatory, legislative, and legal processes (e.g., by supporting diagnostic 
flexibility for insurance reimbursement purposes).
For clinical and research organizations (p. 130)
• Educate members about the limitations of current diagnostic classification systems, the use of dimensional assessments of 
psychopathology in clinical practice, and the value of thinking transdiagnostically when assessing and treating individuals 
with mental illness.
• Work toward broadening the focus of your society, its journals, and its internal organization to incorporate transdiagnostic, 
dimensional approaches to psychopathology
For universities and institutes (p. 130)
• Serve as an authority in educating researchers, clinicians, and the public about the dimensional nature of psychopathology.
• Take the lead in developing and disseminating transdiagnostic and dimensional approaches to preventing, assessing, and 
treating psychopathology.
• Consider how your institution’s organizational structure may contribute to narrow diagnostic thinking rather than broader 
transdiagnostic, dimensional approaches to mental illness.
For the media, the lay public, the groups above, and everyone else (p. 131)
• Recognize that mental disorders are not distinct conditions that someone “has”; rather, they are complex, multidimensional 
phenomena with multiple causal strands.
• Note that organizations that address issues related to mental illness have a common, long-term goal: To prevent, limit, and/
or ameliorate the development and severity of mental illness. Even so, these organizations have distinct purposes, strengths, 
limitations. and, therefore, short-term goals; nevertheless, they should be considered complementary, not competing.
other factor is “the cause” of specific mental disorders. 
Perhaps because classification of mental disorders in 
ICD and DSM is tied historically to classification of 
general medical disorders—many of which do have 
clear primary causal agents—or because those manuals 
list distinct mental disorders that correspond to clini-
cally identifiable syndromes in patient populations, 
their classification systems have sometimes been inter-
preted as representing the views that (a) mental disor-
ders are distinct diseases with defined boundaries in 
 Approaches to Classifying Mental Disorder 
75
the same way that cancer and malaria are distinct dis-
eases; (b) the causes of different mental disorders are 
similarly clear-cut; and (c) the proper classification—
and, by extension, treatment—of mental illness will be 
clear once we discover “the fundamental cause” of each 
disorder.
In contrast to these simplistic views, research has 
shown that psychopathology generally arises from mul-
tiple biological, behavioral, psychosocial, and cultural 
factors, all interacting in complex ways and filtered 
through an individual’s lifetime of experience. Research 
also has shown that the outcomes of these factors and 
their interactions are not clearly definable, distinct dis-
eases, but are instead complex and variable combina-
tions of psychological problems.
Understanding the specifics of these various influ-
ences and how they interact to result in the full panoply 
of psychopathology is a daunting task. The NIMH’s RDoC 
project was initiated specifically to take on this task, but 
reaching that elusive goal lies somewhere in the future. 
Another important goal is determining the extent to 
which mental-illness classification systems can—or even 
should—be based on or reflect those illnesses’ complex 
etiologies. But even supposing that we had full etiologi-
cal information, “translating” it to be useful to clinicians 
in daily practice would itself be a formidable task.
Categories and dimensions
Mental disorder is not an all-or-none phenomenon. 
Rather, it is continuously graded in severity, from its 
absence to severe psychopathology. The degree of 
severity of mental illness is one of its most important 
aspects, and its dimensional nature is not a problem 
from a conceptual perspective. For example, it is fully 
understood that such categories as infant, toddler, child, 
and so on represent semiarbitrary but useful divisions 
along the continuum of age. Likewise, we divide the 
continuum of intellectual ability into semiarbitrary but 
useful categories, ranging from severe intellectual dis-
ability to genius, for various purposes.
However, the dimensionality of mental disorders pres-
ents problems in another respect, both conceptually and 
in practice. In classical categorical systems, each entity 
is distinct and appears only once in a clearly defined 
place. With a few exceptions, ICD and DSM are such 
classical categorical systems. That is, both classify mental 
disorders as if they were distinct entities, even while 
acknowledging that people diagnosed with different dis-
orders often have various characteristics in common. 
Moreover, they do so despite the fact that we know that 
mental disorders are not distinct disorders but complex 
combinations of psychological problems, which them-
selves are dimensional. Clearly, reconciling the complex, 
multidimensional nature of mental illness with the struc-
ture of these classification systems is a major challenge.
Thresholds
Dividing continua into categories is not only common-
place; it is essential for reducing complex information 
to a level that people can process. However, setting 
thresholds for mental-disorder classification is difficult 
for several reasons. First, the very definition of mental 
disorder remains a subject of debate, an issue that we 
discuss more fully later. Second, the multidimensional 
nature of mental illness necessitates that thresholds be 
set for each component dimension. For example, major 
depressive disorder (MDD) has dimensions that are 
emotional (e.g., depressed mood), behavioral (e.g., 
psychomotor agitation or retardation), cognitive (e.g., 
difficulty concentrating), and physical (e.g., disrupted 
sleep). Determining whether individuals are suffering 
from MDD involves determining whether their difficul-
ties are sufficiently intense and/or persistent (i.e., 
“above threshold”) to be considered disordered on 
enough of these dimensions to meet the disorder’s diag-
nostic criteria. Many nonmental medical disorders are 
similarly multidimensional, but their diagnosis often 
involves the use of objective, quantifiable criteria, such 
as blood tests, whereas determinations regarding psy-
chological signs and symptoms are based primarily on 
individuals’ self-reports combined with clinicians’ expe-
rience and judgment. Third, thresholds for classifying 
mental illness are highly consequential given the many 
social ramifications of mental-disorder diagnoses. 
Importantly, the social ramifications may be either neg-
ative (e.g., stigma) or positive (e.g., eligibility for ser-
vices or third-party reimbursement for services).
Comorbidity
Typically, we think of individuals with mental illness 
as having a particular disorder, and we would like to 
believe that each disorder is distinct from all others. 
However, individuals diagnosed with one mental dis-
order have substantially increased odds of meeting the 
criteria for at least one other disorder, and many indi-
viduals can meet the diagnostic criteria for three or 
more disorders (Kessler et al., 1994).
This is related to the problem, just described, of apply-
ing classical categorical systems to multidimensional 
phenomena. For example, there are a limited number of 
robust personality-trait dimensions (e.g., agreeableness 
vs. antagonism; Markon, Krueger, & Watson, 2005) that 
are present in all people to greater or lesser degrees. 
Traits have pathological variants at their extremes, which 
are a large part of what is being captured with diagnoses 
 76 
Clark et al.
of personality disorder (PD; Tyrer, Reed, & Crawford, 
2015). People with severe PD often can be diagnosed 
with three or more PD categories, because severe PD 
tends to reflect multiple pathological traits and some 
traits are indicative of more than one PD diagnosis. For 
instance, in the DSM, the trait of suspiciousness charac-
terizes both paranoid and schizotypal PDs; thus, para-
noid and schizotypal PD “comorbidity” is more accurately 
described as an artifact stemming from the mismatch 
between the nature of PD and the structure of the cat-
egorical classification system, rather than as analogous 
to a person’s having both a stomach virus and arthritis.
Other examples of the artifactual nature of comor-
bidity occur commonly among clinical syndromes such 
as depression, anxiety, and substance use disorders, as 
well as between clinical syndromes and PD (L. A. Clark, 
2005). When the fact that mental disorders commonly 
co-occur first became widely known in the early 1980s, 
it was called “comorbidity,” which denotes the simulta-
neous co-occurrence of two distinct disorders (e.g., a 
stomach virus and arthritis). By the time it was realized 
that co-occurring mental disorders were rarely distinct, 
the term comorbidity had come to be used so frequently 
that it stuck, to the point that even authors who have 
roundly criticized its use (e.g., Lilienfeld, Waldman, & 
Israel, 1994) continue to use it (e.g., Lilienfeld, 2003; 
Waldman & Lilienfeld, 2001). In this article as well, we 
often use the term comorbidity as a synonym for coex-
istence and co-occurrence.
A significant challenge for both the ICD and DSM 
classification systems is finding ways to reduce artifactual 
comorbidity in order to represent disorders in a way that 
is more in keeping with the logic of classification, sci-
entifically more accurate, and clinically more useful. 
Comorbidity is less of an issue for RDoC, which explicitly 
focuses on the complex overlapping multidimensionality 
of mental illness. Indeed, it is hoped that research gener-
ated by the RDoC project will inform future revisions of 
classification systems regarding how they might better 
characterize this multidimensionality.
Three Current Approaches to 
Classification of Mental Disorder
We now present a historical overview of the ICD and 
DSM classification systems to provide a contextual 
framework for the rest of the article.
Precursors to and early  
histories of ICD and DSM
The ICD’s historical lineage traces back to the 19th 
century (e.g., Farr, 1839) and substantially predates the 
founding of the WHO (1992a).4 The first version of ICD 
had its proximate origin at the first International Statisti-
cal Congress, held in 1853 in Brussels, when William 
Farr of the United Kingdom and Marc d’Espine of Swit-
zerland were asked to prepare an internationally appli-
cable, uniform classification of causes of death. The 
resulting classification organized diseases by anatomical 
site and provided the conceptual basis for the subse-
quent International List of Causes of Death, which was 
adopted by the Institute of International Statistics 
(1900). Thereafter, revision meetings were convened 
by the French government approximately every decade 
until the 1938 conference, which produced the fifth 
revision of the mortality classification. At that point, 
there was growing recognition of the need to integrate 
work on the classification of morbidity (i.e., causes of 
illness) with that of mortality (WHO, 1992a). Subse-
quently, the U.S. Committee on Joint Causes of Death, 
which included representatives of the APA, together 
with representatives of the governments of Canada and 
the United Kingdom and of the Health Section of the 
League of Nations, proposed such an integrated clas-
sification, the Statistical Classification of Diseases, Inju-
ries and Causes of Death (U.S. Public Health Service, 
Division of Public Health Methods, 1944). The resulting 
classification was tested in field trials in the United 
States, the United Kingdom, and Canada and was modi-
fied on the basis of additional international input.
WHO was founded immediately following World War 
II as a specialized agency of the United Nations. Among 
the responsibilities it was assigned were establishing 
and revising international nomenclatures of diseases, 
causes of death, and public-health practices, as well as 
standardizing diagnostic procedures. Thus, preparation 
of the sixth revision of the International List of Causes 
of Death and establishment of the International Lists of 
Causes of Morbidity were assigned to the Interim Com-
mission of WHO in 1946 at the International Health 
Conference in the United States. The commission 
undertook an international review process and a revi-
sion of the 1944 classification mentioned above.
The resulting classification system, the International 
Classification of Diseases, Injuries, and Causes of Death, 
came to be known as ICD-6 (WHO, 1949). This version 
was the first to use the ICD title, to integrate mortality 
and morbidity, and, most importantly for our purposes, 
to include a classification of mental disorders. It was 
circulated for comment to national governments and 
was formally approved in 1948 by WHO’s governing 
body, the World Health Assembly.5 By international 
treaty, WHO’s member states agree to use ICD as a 
framework for reporting health information so that the 
data will be internationally comparable. Thus, the 
importance and impact of ICD arises from its function 
 Approaches to Classifying Mental Disorder 
77
as a global common language for defining and com-
municating about diseases and health conditions. More-
over, because WHO’s ultimate objective is “the 
attainment by all peoples of the highest possible level 
of health” (WHO, 2014, p. 2), a public-health focus has 
been fundamental to the goals and internal organization 
of ICD revisions since ICD-6.
In the United States, efforts to classify and count 
cases of mental disorders separately from national clas-
sifications of causes of mortality had been ongoing 
since at least 1840, when the U.S. Census started to 
collect information on “idiocy/insanity,” which was later 
expanded to include other, more specific categories 
(e.g., mania, melancholia, paresis, and epilepsy). Begin-
ning in the late 19th century, other mental-disorder 
classification systems were used to document the diag-
noses of the large populations in psychiatric hospitals. 
The APA, which was then known as the American 
Medico-Psychological Association, became involved in 
this process in 1917.6 Subsequent U.S. classification 
systems of mental disorders included the Statistical 
Manual for the Use of Institutions of the Insane (Ameri-
can Medico-Psychological Association, 1918), which 
evolved by its 10th edition (APA, 1942) into the Statisti-
cal Manual for the Use of Hospitals of Mental Diseases. 
Because such an institutionally focused classification 
did not suit its needs, the U.S. Army developed its own 
mental-disorder classification system, “Medical 203,” 
during World War II. This system was later modified for 
use by the Veterans Administration as the “Nomencla-
ture of Psychiatric Disorders and Reactions” in 1947 
(Cooper & Blashfield, 2016). The first version of the 
DSM (APA, 1952) was heavily influenced by both of 
these classification systems (APA, 2015), as well as by 
the ICD-6, to which APA’s representatives had contrib-
uted. Thus, with the publication of the first DSM edition 
of (DSM-I), the histories of DSM and ICD became 
intertwined.
Overlapping history of mental 
disorder classification: DSM-I to  
DSM-III-R and ICD-6 to ICD-9
In ICD-6, a chapter titled “Mental, Psychoneurotic, and 
Personality Disorders” included 26 categories, which 
were grouped into three broad clusters: psychoses, psy-
choneurotic disorders, and disorders of character, 
behavior, and intelligence. The ICD-6 included only 
category names and code numbers (for use across mul-
tiple languages), with a hierarchical organization indi-
cating subcategories of the 26 categories (e.g., Code 
300, Schizophrenia, had six subcategories, such as 300.0, 
Simple Type), along with lists of terms regarding con-
cepts that were to be included and excluded from each 
category. Other than inclusion and exclusion terms, no 
definitions or diagnostic guidance were provided.
DSM-I also was organized into three broad groups of 
disorders, but they were different from those in the 
ICD-6: disorders with an organic basis, subdivided into 
acute and chronic forms; disorders without an identified 
organic basis, subdivided into psychotic disorders, psy-
chophysiological disorders, psychoneurotic disorders, 
PDs, and transient situational PDs; and mental retarda-
tion (an outdated term for what are most commonly 
referred to currently as intellectual disabilities).7 To 
increase the clinical utility of the classification system, 
brief definitions were provided for most categories. 
Despite their inclusion of “mental retardation,” it is note-
worthy that the early versions of these systems provided 
little coverage of child and adolescent disorders.
The ICD classification of mental disorders did not 
change from ICD-6 to ICD-7, other than to amend errors 
and inconsistencies. Although most of ICD-6 and ICD-7 
was well received and widely adopted around the 
world, the mental-disorder classification was adopted 
by only a very small number of countries (Fulford & 
Sartorius, 2009). A report commissioned by WHO to 
determine why this was the case emphasized the need 
to separate theoretical constructs from descriptive (i.e., 
sign- and symptom-based) statements that provided a 
suitable basis for scientific classification (Stengel, 1959).
Over the next decade, there was substantial collabo-
ration between WHO and APA in developing the 
mental-disorder classifications in ICD-8 (WHO, 1967) 
and DSM-II (APA, 1968). As described in DSM-II,
This second edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-II) reflects the 
growth of the concept that the people of all nations 
live in one world. With the increasing success of 
the World Health Organization in promoting its 
uniform International Classification of Diseases, 
already used in many countries, the time came for 
psychiatrists of the United States to collaborate in 
preparing and using the new Eighth Revision of 
that classification (ICD-8) as approved by the WHO 
in 1966, to become effective in 1968. The rapid 
integration of psychiatry with the rest of medicine 
also helped create a need to have psychiatric 
nomenclature and classifications closely integrated 
with those of other medical practitioners. In the 
United States such classification has for some years 
followed closely the International Classification of 
Diseases. (p. vii)
Consequently, DSM-II and the mental-disorders chap-
ter of ICD-8 were nearly identical, using the same three 
broad categories: psychoses; neuroses, PDs, and other 
 78 
Clark et al.
nonpsychotic mental disorders; and “mental retarda-
tion.” The terminology, numerical coding system, and 
order of categories and even subcategories were also 
largely consistent between the two systems, with a few 
exceptions and minor variations in category order and 
specific subcategories (Blashfield, Keeley, Flanagan, & 
Miles, 2014). One difference carried over from previous 
versions was that ICD-8 provided only category names, 
code numbers, a hierarchical organization of categories, 
and inclusion and exclusion terms, whereas the DSM-II 
also provided brief definitions for most categories. In 
retrospect, it is clear that ICD-8 and DSM-II represented 
the high-water mark of harmonization between the two 
systems and that both WHO and APA have a legitimate 
historical claim to the intellectual foundations of mod-
ern classifications of mental disorders.
Following the approval of ICD-8, WHO decided that 
additional guidance was needed for meaningful appli-
cation of its categories in clinical settings and published 
a glossary of terms (WHO, 1974) that provided defini-
tions for most ICD-8 mental-disorder categories as well 
as other key diagnostic concepts. As stated in the glos-
sary’s introduction,
guidance to the [mental-disorders chapter] of  
ICD-8 has been added in the form of a glossary 
because it has become increasingly obvious that 
many key psychiatric terms are acquiring different 
meanings in different countries . . . [and] unless 
some attempt is made to encourage uniformity of 
usage of descriptive and diagnostic terms, very 
little meaning can be attributed to the diagnostic 
side of statistics of mental illness based on ICD 
and in many other ways communication between 
psychiatrists will become increasingly difficult.  
(p. 12)
This WHO statement about the purpose of the glos-
sary makes clear that ICD-8 was intended not only to 
serve as a statistical classification system but also to 
provide information that would be useful in assigning 
diagnoses in clinical settings, which then would provide 
the data to be aggregated for statistical reporting. The 
statement also acknowledges the need for standardiza-
tion of terms and concepts at a time when diagnostic 
practice across (and even within) countries was frag-
mented by idiosyncratic definitions.
The glossary was developed through an international 
consensus process and adopted a descriptive, opera-
tional approach rather than being based on theoretical 
constructs. Fulford and Sartorius (2009) provided a 
detailed account of its development, stating that it 
“became the first predominantly symptom-based mod-
ern classification of mental disorders” (p. 30), from 
which “current descriptive international classifications 
of mental disorders, the ICD and DSM, are ultimately 
derived” (p. 37). The glossary’s material was largely 
incorporated into the ICD-9 (WHO, 1979) chapter on 
mental disorders, which is the only ICD-9 chapter with 
operational definitions for each category, and was read-
ily adopted by nearly all WHO member states.
Parallel to these international efforts at standardiza-
tion were two noteworthy developments in the United 
States. First, E. Robins and Guze (1970) published a 
seminal article proposing a set of principles by which 
to establish the validity of clinical syndromes (e.g., 
distinctiveness from other disorders, a common clinical 
course, genetic aggregation), illustrating them using 
schizophrenia. Woodruff, Goodwin, and Guze (1974) 
then applied those principles to 12 diagnostic catego-
ries. Second, on the basis of this theoretical perspective, 
academic departments of psychiatry developed specific 
diagnostic criterion sets to standardize case identifica-
tion for research studies, the results of which could be 
used to improve and establish the criteria’s validity. The 
first such set was the “Feighner criteria” developed at 
Washington University (Feighner et al., 1972), followed 
by the Research Diagnostic Criteria (RDC) developed 
at Columbia University (Spitzer, Endicott, & Robins, 
1978). These efforts culminated in the DSM-III (APA, 
1980), in which the descriptive approach to psychiatric 
diagnosis was much more fully realized than in any 
previous mental-health classification system.
Specifically, in DSM-III, each mental disorder was 
operationally defined by a specific list of observable 
signs (e.g., weight loss of at least 25% of original body 
weight; defaults on debts or other financial responsi-
bilities) and patient-reported symptoms (e.g., halluci-
nations, loss of appetite); and by several types of 
specific thresholds for determining a disorder’s pres-
ence, including (a) number of signs and symptoms 
(e.g., “at least four of the following criteria”), (b) dura-
tion and course (e.g., “disturbance of at least 2 weeks”; 
“deterioration from a previous level of functioning in 
such areas as work, social relations and self-care”; 
“onset before age 15”), and (c) exclusion criteria, 
which stipulated, for example, that the signs and symp-
toms were not due to the effects of a substance or a 
general medical condition, in which case a different 
disorder would be diagnosed.
It was intended that the information needed to make 
a diagnosis could be elicited by any well-trained 
mental-health professional regardless of theoretical ori-
entation. Further, it was expected that the operational-
ized definitions would increase interrater reliability, 
resulting in improved communication among clinicians 
and more rigorous research standards. Given how radi-
cally different DSM-III was from previous editions and 
 Approaches to Classifying Mental Disorder 
79
from ICD-9, it was accepted surprisingly quickly by 
clinicians across mental-health disciplines. Medical 
insurance companies in the United States readily 
adopted DSM-III because its specific definitions could 
easily be incorporated into the “medical necessity” cri-
teria required for patients’ reimbursement for care. The 
specificity also facilitated the development of standard-
ized interviews—for example, the Diagnostic Interview 
Schedule (L. N. Robins, Helzer, Croughan, & Ratcliff, 
1981), a highly structured interview designed for admin-
istration by lay interviewers, which was used in large-
scale community epidemiological studies such as the 
NIMH Epidemiologic Catchment Area program (ECA; 
Regier et al., 1984); and the Structured Clinical Inter-
view for DSM-III (SCID; Spitzer, Williams, Gibbon, & 
First, 1992), which was widely used to specify patient 
populations in clinical research.
DSM-III diagnoses quickly became the standard for 
research funded by U.S. federal agencies, particularly 
NIMH, and for use in testing new drugs for approval 
and regulation by the U.S. Food and Drug Administra-
tion. Starting in the early 1980s, research based on 
DSM-III diagnoses led to a proliferation of new findings 
on multiple aspects of mental disorders including prev-
alence, course of illness, genetics, and many others. In 
addition to providing considerable evidence supporting 
the new approach to diagnosis, this research also 
revealed a number of inconsistencies and unclear or 
invalid criteria in the manual, so work on a fairly exten-
sive revision began within a few years, resulting in the 
publication of the volume’s revised third edition, the 
DSM-III-R (APA, 1987).
One of the primary changes from DSM-III to DSM-III-R 
was the removal of many hierarchical exclusion rules, 
which proscribed the diagnosis of certain disorders if 
they were considered to be “due to” other specific dis-
orders. We discuss this change in more detail in a later 
section, “Comorbidity.” The revision also reflected devel-
opers’ great efforts to review the substantial body of 
research that had been generated in the few years since 
the publication of DSM-III. An annotated bibliography 
of “all the data available to the APA’s Work Group to 
Review DSM-III 
” (Skodol & Spitzer, 1987, p. xi) included 
2,010 citations. Although the application of Robins’ and 
Guze’s principles to determine diagnostic validity was a 
major theoretical aspiration for DSM-III and DSM-III-R, 
field trials of diagnostic criteria conducted before the 
release of each DSM edition, and using increasingly rig-
orous methods, focused on the more attainable goals of 
examining reliability and clinical utility. Over the course 
of this article, we raise the question of whether the 
Robins and Guze principles are even theoretically appli-
cable to mental disorder.
DSM-IV and ICD-10
The development of DSM-III and DSM-III-R involved 
almost no international participation and little direct col-
laboration with WHO, although the DSM gained sub-
stantial international influence as a result of its resounding 
professional and commercial success worldwide 
(Blashfield et al., 2014). In contrast, there was consider-
able collaboration between the developers of ICD-10 
and DSM-IV (APA, 1994, 2000). In 1978, WHO and the 
U.S. Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administra-
tion (ADAMHA) entered into a long-term collaboration 
with the goal of improving international diagnostic clas-
sification of mental and substance use disorders (WHO 
& U.S. ADAMHA, 1985). One outcome of this collabora-
tion was the creation of major epidemiological and 
clinical diagnostic instruments (e.g., the Composite Inter-
national Diagnostic Interview: L. N. Robins et al., 1988); 
another was a systematic examination of cross-national 
diagnostic traditions and approaches. The resulting col-
laboration among WHO, ADAMHA, and APA over the 
next 16 years was instrumental in the development and 
harmonization of DSM-IV and ICD-10. As a result of this 
collaboration and of the increasing dominance of the 
descriptive model for classifying psychopathology, ICD-
10 and DSM-IV were conceptually very similar, though 
they still had important differences (First, 2009).
DSM-IV was a comprehensive update of DSM-III-R 
that used available research findings as the basis for 
changes, including structured literature reviews, reanal-
yses of existing data sets, and field trials (Widiger & 
Clark, 2000). The level of evidence required to make 
changes in DSM-IV was set quite high, however, such 
that Allen Frances, who chaired the revision, wrote, 
“the major innovation of DSM-IV will not be in its hav-
ing surprising new content but rather will reside in the 
systematic and explicit method by which DSM-IV will 
be constructed and documented” (Frances, Widiger, & 
Pincus, 1989, p. 375). The emphasis on making changes 
only on the basis of solid research findings was new 
for DSM; DSM-III had little relevant research to draw 
upon, so its diagnostic criteria were developed largely 
through expert consensus, whereas the research base 
for changes in DSM-III-R—given the short time span 
between the two editions—was neither comprehensive 
nor well established.
Because of the diversity of WHO’s constituencies, 
ICD-10 (WHO, 1992a), which remains the current clas-
sification system, was published in several different 
versions to meet a range of needs. The version that 
WHO member states use as the basis for reporting 
health statistics is called the International Statistical 
Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems. 
 80 
Clark et al.
This statistical version lists all health conditions and is 
intended for use by “coders or clerical workers and also 
serves as a reference point for compatibility with other 
classifications” (WHO, 1992b, p. 1). As in ICD-9, the 
“Mental and Behavioural Disorders” chapter is the only 
one in the ICD-10 statistical classification with glossary 
definitions for each condition.
WHO recognized that these definitions did not pro-
vide sufficient information for reliable implementation 
in clinical settings and stated directly that the statistical 
version of the classification was “not recommended for 
use by mental health professionals” (WHO, 1992b, 
 
p. 1). For that purpose, WHO developed the ICD-10 
Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders: 
Clinical Descriptions and Diagnostic Guidelines (CDDG; 
WHO, 1992b), “intended for general clinical, educa-
tional, and service use” (p. 1). The CDDG describes the 
main clinical and associated features of each mental-
disorder category, followed by more operationalized 
diagnostic guidelines to assist clinicians in making diag-
noses. The CDDG differs from DSM in offering more 
flexible guidance—that is, rather than listing specific 
criteria based on precise duration requirements and 
symptom counts, the CDDG provides more prototypic 
conceptualizations (see the example of social phobia 
in Appendix 2). This format is based partly on the need 
for globally applicable guidance that allows for cultural 
variation and clinical judgment in response to very dif-
ferent infrastructures and levels of available resources 
in health settings around the world (see First, Reed, 
Hyman, & Saxena, 2015, for a description of the devel-
opment of the CDDG).
WHO (1993) also published the ICD-10 Classifica-
tion of Mental and Behavioural Disorders: Diagnostic 
Criteria for Research (DCR-10), which contained spe-
cific, operationalized diagnostic criteria highly similar 
to those in DSM-IV (again, see the example in Appendix 
2). This similarity was explicitly permitted by a joint 
WHO-APA agreement allowing each organization to use 
the other’s material. Nonetheless, there are important 
differences between ICD-10 DCR and DSM-IV. In a 
detailed comparison, First (2009) reported that “of the 
176 diagnostic categories shared by the two systems, 
only one, transient tic disorder, is identical,” (p. 382) 
although he judged the differences between criterion 
sets to be conceptually based in only 21% of them.
Finally, WHO published a version of the ICD-10 
“Mental and Behavioural Disorders” chapter for use in 
global primary-care settings (WHO, 1996). That volume 
contains only 26 disorder categories; it excludes condi-
tions that are rare in primary-care settings—for example, 
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)—and combines 
disorders with similar management needs at the pri-
mary-care level (e.g., acute psychotic disorders). This 
version is meant to provide adequate coverage of the 
most prevalent conditions, those accounting for the 
highest disease burden, and those most commonly pre-
senting in primary-care settings. For each category, 
information on typical presenting complaints, key diag-
nostic features, and important differential diagnoses is 
provided. Also included are management guidelines for 
each disorder, designed for implementation by nonspe-
cialized health professionals in primary-care settings 
around the world. Management guidelines are important 
because referral to more specialized care is not an 
option in much of the world, and there is little point in 
identifying conditions with no options for treatment.
Use of ICD and DSM
Many—perhaps most—psychopathology researchers 
use the DSM’s specific, operational criteria, whereas 
those of the ICD-10 DCR were never widely adopted 
in research. In everyday practice (and, therefore, also 
in research that utilizes patients’ chart diagnoses), use 
of the ICD-10 CDDG is far more common. Moreover, 
practicing clinicians, including those who chart patients’ 
diagnoses in hospitals or outpatient settings, seldom 
adhere strictly to the specific DSM diagnostic criteria 
and even more rarely use structured interviews for diag-
nosis. Initially, when DSM-III and DSM-III-R were intro-
duced, the criteria for most diagnoses were necessarily 
based on clinical judgment because they had “not yet 
been fully validated” (APA, 1980, p. 8; APA, 1987, 
 
p. xxiv). By contrast, the DSM-IV and DSM-5 explicitly 
acknowledged the role of clinical judgment not only in 
the criteria’s original creation but also in their clinical 
application: “Diagnostic criteria are offered as guide-
lines for making diagnoses, and their use should be 
informed by clinical judgment” (APA, 2013, p. 21).
Most U.S. mental health professionals, and perhaps 
the lay public as well, likely imagine that DSM is the 
mental-disorder classification system that is used most 
widely throughout the world, but this is not the case. 
A survey of nearly 5,000 international psychiatrists in 
44 countries (Reed, Correia, Esparza, Saxena, & Maj, 
2011) found that for 70% of respondents, ICD-10 was 
the classification system used most in daily clinical 
work (likely in part because the governments of those 
respondents’ countries require its use for administrative 
and billing purposes; Maj, 2014); only 23% reported 
that they primarily used DSM-IV. Use of ICD-10 was 
particularly predominant in Europe, whereas DSM-IV 
use was nearly universal in the United States and com-
mon in several other countries that participated in the 
survey (e.g., Argentina, Australia, Kenya, Turkey). The 
few respondents who reported most commonly using 
a classification system other than ICD-10 or DSM-IV 
 Approaches to Classifying Mental Disorder 
81
generally used either ICD-9 or a country-level or regional 
adaptation of ICD-10 (e.g., The Chinese Classification of 
Mental Disorders: Chen, 2002; The Cuban Glossary of 
Psychiatry: Otero-Ojeda, 1998).
How countries use ICD. As noted, WHO member states 
are responsible for reporting health statistics based on 
ICD to WHO (e.g., causes of mortality and morbidity, 
prevalence). An example of how these national health 
statistics are used is the ongoing Global Burden of Dis-
ease (GBD) study. The most recent wave of this study 
showed that mental and behavioral disorders account for 
6.6% of total global disease burden as measured by 
disability-adjusted life years (GBD 2015 DALYs and HALE 
Collaborators, 2016), which represent a combination of 
prevalence, premature mortality, and disability. Vigo, 
Thornicroft, and Atun (2016) argued that the 6.6% total is 
an underestimate because the study attributes many out-
comes of mental and behavioral disorders to other causes, 
and that the true percentage is closer to 13.0%. The GBD 
study also showed that mental and behavioral disorders 
account for an even larger percentage (18.9%) of global 
disability and that the top 20 causes of global disability 
include anxiety disorders, schizophrenia, autism spec-
trum disorder (ASD), and substance use disorders, as 
well as other mental and behavioral disorders (GBD 2015 
Disease and Injury Incidence and Prevalence Collabora-
tors, 2016).
Over the past several decades, governments of WHO 
member states have increasingly integrated ICD into 
clinical processes and policies related to health care 
coverage and reimbursement, social services, and dis-
ability benefits (International Advisory Group for the 
Revision of ICD-10 Mental and Behavioural Disorders 
[IAG], 2011). In most countries, provision of medical 
services other than routine examinations or preventive 
services is contingent on a qualifying diagnosis. Thus, 
diagnoses are used to facilitate access to appropriate 
health care, and the lack of a qualifying ICD diagnosis 
is used (often appropriately, but sometimes inappropri-
ately) to deny services. This integration of ICD with 
clinical processes has increased as a result of more inten-
sive administrative management of health services, the 
development and integration of electronic-information 
infrastructure for health care (e.g., electronic health 
records), automated treatment algorithms and care path-
ways, and increased implementation of standards of care 
and “evidence-based clinical guidelines,” most of which 
are based on diagnostic categories (e.g., National Insti-
tute for Health and Care Excellence, U.K., 2015). The 
match between diagnosis and services received is also 
used to evaluate treatment delivery and outcomes. Like-
wise, national and private health-insurance policies often 
use ICD (again, in both appropriate and inappropriate 
ways) to define the scope of practice and reimbursement 
policies for specific groups of health professionals.
These applications of ICD in health care systems are 
governed by national and local laws and regulations as 
well as by health-system policies and are not directly 
determined by WHO. However, many countries, includ-
ing the United States, legally require the use of ICD (or 
national modifications of it) for the collection and 
reporting of diagnostic information as a part of health 
encounters. Country-level modifications usually include 
additional codes for hospital records, but they may also 
involve the addition or, less commonly, the deletion of 
diagnostic categories or subtypes. Changes in ICD, 
therefore, have major implications for national and 
health-system policies and processes and may require 
legislative or regulatory changes. As a result, WHO 
member states view themselves as major stakeholders 
in ICD revisions.
Use of ICD in the United States. The U.S. government 
has published ICD adaptations as frameworks for gov-
ernment morbidity and mortality statistics beginning with 
ICD-7. The National Center for Health Statistics and the 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services are currently 
responsible for developing and maintaining the adapta-
tions, which contain additional information to facilitate 
indexing by hospitals and to enable the coding of mor-
bidity and utilization data from patient records. These 
U.S. adaptations of ICD, called “Clinical Modifications” 
(CMs), initially had little direct relevance to U.S. health 
professionals. However, they became substantially more 
important when federal regulations required health pro-
fessionals to use ICD-CM codes on Medicare claims and, 
after the passage of the Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act (HIPAA) in 1996, on all electronic 
transactions for billing and reimbursement (U.S. Centers 
for Medicare and Medicaid Services, 2015). Effective 
October 1, 2015, 25 years after the approval of ICD-10 by 
the World Health Assembly, the U.S. government began 
requiring U.S. health professionals and health systems to 
use a new CM, ICD-10-CM (U.S. National Center for 
Health Statistics, 2015). The overlapping time frames of 
DSM-5, the U.S. ICD-10-CM, and WHO’s forthcoming 
ICD-11 have created substantial confusion among U.S. 
health professionals.
An obvious question is why the U.S. would require 
this expensive and time-consuming transition to ICD-10 
just before the completion of ICD-11. Not surprisingly, 
the answer is complex. The ICD-10-CM had been under 
development for years and was intended for substan-
tially earlier implementation, but objections from health 
systems, health insurers, and professional associations 
(e.g., the American Medical Association) regarding 
expense and burdensome administrative requirements 
 82 
Clark et al.
delayed implementation to the point that many sug-
gested that the United States skip implementation of 
ICD-10 and move directly to ICD-11 (Natale, 2014; 
Sullivan, 2012). However, the U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services argued that, first, the ICD-10-CM 
implementation was urgently needed to correct many 
ICD-9-CM deficiencies, and second, the development 
of a U.S. ICD-11-CM would require several additional 
years after the ICD-11’s approval by the World Health 
Assembly and its initial release, which is expected in 
2018. Congress eventually passed legislation requiring 
ICD-10-CM implementation.
When the United States will move to ICD-11 remains 
to be seen. On the one hand, those who resisted ICD-
10-CM almost certainly will resist a subsequent change. 
On the other hand, implementing ICD-11 after its com-
pletion and approval would be consistent with the 
United States’ responsibilities as a WHO member state 
and with the country’s leadership role in many WHO 
activities, including key aspects of ICD-11’s develop-
ment. The U.S. government has already modified ICD-
10-CM to make its categories and terminology more 
compatible with their DSM-5 counterparts. Some of 
these changes effectively move ICD-10-CM closer to 
ICD-11. However, a piecemeal process may result in a 
patchwork classification system that is far from ideal, 
as demonstrated in past efforts to update ICD-9-CM to 
accommodate the categories and terms of DSM-IV, so 
it would be better if a full update were made sooner 
rather than later.
Thus far, we have introduced the major concepts that 
we address in this article and provided a historical 
context for the remainder of the article by reviewing 
the development of ICD and DSM. We now turn to 
describing the current (or, in the case of ICD, impend-
ing) instantiations of the three descriptive systems of 
psychopathology that are our primary focus.
ICD-11
Since its initial publication, ICD-10 (WHO, 1992a) has 
been updated regularly through a formal intergovern-
mental process. For example, new categories have been 
added for emerging disease entities (e.g., severe acute 
respiratory syndrome) and emerging disease character-
istics (e.g., resistance to antimicrobial and antineoplas-
tic drugs). However, the current 25-year period is the 
longest in ICD history without a major revision. Respon-
sibility for coordinating the revision activities related 
to Chapter V, “Mental, Behavioural, and Neurodevelop-
mental Disorders,” was assigned to WHO’s Department 
of Mental Health and Substance Abuse, which appointed 
its international advisory group in 2006 for consultation 
throughout the revision process. This group made rec-
ommendations about early decisions and helped to 
articulate general principles that would govern the 
chapter’s development (IAG, 2011). The department 
views its mandate for developing ICD-11 Chapter V as 
a pragmatic one that relates to two fundamental 
questions:
1. Given the best evidence available, which mental 
and behavioral disorder categories and related 
health conditions does the world’s global health 
authority consider important for its member 
states to track as a basis for both health reporting 
and structuring clinical care; and
2. How should those categories be defined and 
operationalized?
These guiding questions have had a major effect on 
the development process of ICD-11 chapter on mental 
disorders and on decisions about the nature of the diag-
nostic guidance to be provided by WHO.
WHO public-health priorities for mental and beha-
vioral disorders. The priorities of WHO’s Department 
of Mental Health and Substance Abuse in developing the 
ICD-11 classification of mental and behavioral disorders 
are rooted in WHO’s public-health mission and objectives. 
The department has long been concerned about an unac-
ceptable global “mental health gap” (WHO, 2008). Despite 
the major contribution of mental disorders to global dis-
ease burden and disability, treatment for them remains 
unavailable or woefully inadequate in most of the world. 
The 2004 World Mental Health Survey found that in low- 
and middle-income countries, less than 25% of individuals 
with serious mental illness (e.g., schizophrenia, bipolar 
disorder, MDD) had received any treatment in the past 
year, and even in high-income countries (e.g., the U.S., 
Western European countries), the proportion was only a 
third to a half (World Health Organization World Mental 
Health Survey Consortium, 2004). In that same year, Kohn, 
Saxena, Levav, and Saraceno (2004) estimated that the 
global treatment gap between those who needed treat-
ment for mental disorder and those who received it ranged 
from 32% to 78%, depending on the disorder.
Moreover, it is well established that people with seri-
ous mental illness have a much higher prevalence of 
nonmental health conditions (e.g., cardiovascular, meta-
bolic, and respiratory diseases; De Hert, Correll, et al., 
2011; Svendsen, Singer, Foti, & Mauer, 2006), which 
contributes to disproportionately higher rates of mortal-
ity and a substantially reduced life expectancy (Cuijpers 
& Smit, 2002; Thornicroft, 2011, 2013; Walker, McGee, 
& Druss, 2015). There may be direct relations between 
mental disorders and specific health conditions, such 
as cardiovascular disease (e.g., Davidson, 2012; Scott 
et al., 2013). However, paradoxically, a possible indirect 
relation is that traditional institutional treatment for 
 Approaches to Classifying Mental Disorder 
83
mental disorders may aggravate modifiable risk factors 
such as smoking and obesity (Shin et al., 2012), which 
are the greatest contributors to poor physical health 
and excess mortality among people with mental disor-
ders (e.g., Cerimele & Katon, 2013; de Leon & Diaz, 
2005; Scott & Happell, 2011). In addition, common 
pharmacological treatments for mental disorders may 
have side effects that are damaging to overall health 
(Correll, 2007).
Major contributors to the mental-health treatment 
gap are specific patient, provider, treatment, and system 
factors that act as barriers to the recognition and man-
agement of physical diseases in people with mental 
disorder (De Hert, Cohen, et al., 2011). System factors 
include deficient resources in mental-health-care sys-
tems, issues of stigma, inadequate prevention program-
ming, and lack of parity in health financing, including 
through insurance coverage (Saxena, Thornicroft, 
Knapp, & Whiteford, 2007). Not surprisingly, the great-
est health disparities are found among underserved 
population groups, such as African Americans in the 
United States, who face increased morbidity as a result 
of their minority status when they experience mental 
disorder (Carliner et al., 2014; Das-Munchi et al., 2016; 
Mookhoek, deVries, Hovens, Bouwers, & Loone, 2001; 
Stecker, Fortney, Steffick, & Prajapati, 2006; Voruganti 
et al., 2007). Thornicroft (2011) has suggested that 
physical-health disparities among people with mental 
disorder contravene international conventions regard-
ing the “right to health.”
Another contributing factor to the mental-health 
treatment gap is the absence of specialized expertise 
and qualified mental-health service providers in most 
parts of the world. Data from WHO’s Mental Health 
Atlas (WHO, 2011) indicate that high-income countries 
are reasonably well supplied with mental-health profes-
sionals, with nearly 44 for every 100,000 people. But 
less than 20% of the world’s population lives in these 
countries (World Bank, 2015). In upper-middle-income 
countries (e.g., Brazil, China, Mexico), which represent 
about 33% of the world’s population, there are fewer 
than one-third as many mental health professionals—
less than 14 for every 100,000 people. Lower-middle-
income countries (e.g., India, Indonesia, Nigeria), 
which represent about 39% of the world’s population, 
have fewer than four mental-health professionals for 
every 100,000 people and, on average, nearly three of 
these are nurses. In low-income countries including 
much of sub-Saharan Africa, which represent 9% of the 
world’s population, mental-health professionals are 
essentially nonexistent. Simply put, these statistics 
mean that most people with mental disorder in the 
world are unlikely to see a mental-health professional 
at any time in their lives.
Clearly, the current status of health care provided to 
people with mental disorder around the world is an 
urgent public-health priority. To begin to address this 
situation, the World Health Assembly approved the 
global “Mental Health Action Plan 2013–2020” (WHO, 
2013a). The action plan and accompanying resolution 
represented a formal recognition by WHO member 
states of the importance of mental health and commit-
ted them to specific and measurable actions to improve 
mental health, including increasing service coverage 
for people with severe mental illness by 20%. The plan 
further moved away from “a wholly medical model to 
address income generation and education opportuni-
ties, housing and social services, and other social deter-
minants of mental health” (Saxena, Funk, & Chisholm, 
2013, p. 1971).
The ICD-11 classification of mental and behavioral 
disorders serves as a primary means for identifying 
individuals in need of services. As such, it is integrally 
connected to the WHO’s “Mental Health Action Plan,” 
which supports WHO’s Department of Mental Health 
and Substance Abuse’s overarching goal for revising the 
classification: that ICD-11 provide a better tool for help-
ing clinicians to identify not only the people in need 
of mental-health services but also the treatments and 
management strategies most likely to be effective, with 
the ultimate goal of helping WHO member states reduce 
the disease burden associated with mental disorder.
Another WHO product that is integrally related to 
the action plan is the Mental Health Gap Action 
Programme’s “mhGAP Intervention Guide for Mental, 
Neurological, and Substance Use Disorders in Non-
Specialized Health Settings,” now in its second edition 
(WHO, 2016a). This document includes evidence-based 
treatment guidelines designed to be implemented in 
primary-care settings in low- and middle-income coun-
tries for “priority” mental disorders, which are defined 
on the basis of disease burden, prevalence, and the 
extent to which evidence-based treatments can be 
implemented in such settings. Designed to be consistent 
with the ICD-11, the intervention guide provides guid-
ance for a range of conditions including depression, 
psychoses, child and adolescent mental and behavioral 
disorders, dementia, disorders due to substance use, 
and self-harm and suicide, as well as guidance on more 
broadly targeted psychosocial interventions. WHO has 
also developed similar guidelines for conditions specifi-
cally related to stress (e.g., posttraumatic stress disor-
der, or PTSD; WHO, 2013b).
Development of ICD-11 mental and behavioral dis-
orders. The public-health aims described above have 
substantially influenced the methods and priorities of the 
developers of ICD-11. To be a better tool for reducing the 
 84 
Clark et al.
disease burden of mental disorders, the new system will 
need to be useful and usable throughout the world at the 
points where people with mental-health needs are most 
likely to come into contact with opportunities for care. 
For this reason, WHO is particularly focused on issues of 
clinical utility and global applicability in developing the 
revision (Reed et al., 2013).
Clinical utility. The IAG (2011) and others (Reed, 
2010) have noted that the current revision is unlikely to 
yield major improvements in the validity of ICD mental-
disorder categories, as also was the case for DSM-5 
(Hyman, 2007, 2010). Importantly, however, they have 
pointed out that major problems with the clinical util-
ity of the ICD’s mental-disorder classifications can and 
should be addressed. To guide the revision and field test-
ing for it, WHO provided a definition of clinical utility 
(Reed, 2010; Reed et al., 2013), based on earlier defini-
tions (e.g., First et al., 2004), that refers to the extent 
to which a mental-disorder classification or diagnostic 
category (a) facilitates communication among users; (b) 
facilitates conceptualization and understanding of the 
entity or entities classified; (c) can be implemented eas-
ily and accurately by relevant health professionals (e.g., 
because the categories fit patients well, the system is easy 
to understand and use, or clinicians can easily reach a 
diagnostic conclusion); and (d) helps health profession-
als to select treatments and manage clinical conditions. 
Reed and colleagues (2013) pointed out that if imple-
menting the ICD-11 mental-disorder classification was 
difficult or cumbersome, then clinical practice would be 
guided by concepts other than the ICD-11’s standard-
ized, operationally defined categories; in turn, wide use 
of nonstandard concepts would undermine improvement 
in practice and the assessment of outcomes, and would 
not generate valid data for health programs and policies 
or for global health statistics.
Thus, not surprisingly, most of the proposed changes 
in ICD-11, particularly in the ICD-11 CDDG, are intended 
to enhance the categories’ clinical utility. First and col-
leagues (2015) provided an overview of the proposed 
structure and content of the ICD-11 CDDG for use by 
mental-health professionals in clinical settings. For each 
condition, the guidelines include a list of “essential fea-
tures,” which are the “symptoms or characteristics that 
a clinician could reasonably expect to find in all cases 
of the disorder” (First et al., 2015, p. 85). Although these 
lists superficially resemble diagnostic criteria, they are 
written in more flexible language (e.g., “minimum dura-
tion is about 2 weeks” in ICD vs. “symptoms have been 
present during the same 2-week period” in DSM) to 
allow greater scope for the exercise of clinical judgment 
in determining the diagnosis that best fits each patient, 
an approach that international users of both ICD and 
DSM overwhelmingly prefer to a strict criteria-based 
approach (Evans et al., 2013; Reed et al., 2011). Arbitrary 
cutoffs and precise requirements related to symptom 
counts and duration are generally avoided unless these 
have been empirically established across countries and 
cultures or there is another compelling reason to include 
them. The more flexible language of the ICD-11 diag-
nostic guidelines is intended to increase clinical utility 
by allowing for cultural variations in presentation as 
well as contextual and health-system factors that may 
affect diagnostic practice. (See First et al., 2015, for an 
example of the proposed CDDG version of the diagnos-
tic guidelines for PTSD.)
One of WHO’s core conclusions related to clinical 
utility is that a single version of the classification (e.g., 
the CDDG) cannot possibly meet the needs of all global 
settings, as was found to be the case for ICD-10. Thus, 
a primary-care version of the classification is being 
developed simultaneously. Its content and format are 
driven by similar clinical-utility considerations but are 
modified for use by health professionals in primary-care 
settings, with particular attention to low- and middle-
income countries (Goldberg, Prisciandaro, & Williams, 
2012).
WHO’s Department of Mental Health and Substance 
Abuse has developed a systematic program of field stud-
ies specifically focused on the clinical utility of the pro-
posed diagnostic guidelines for ICD-11’s “Mental, 
Behavioural, and Neurodevelopmental Disorders” chap-
ter (Keeley et al., 2016). This program of work contrasts 
with studies of previous classifications, which have 
focused on reliability. Specifically, the WHO field-studies 
program represents an integrated and complementary 
set of field-study strategies, including (a) large interna-
tional surveys of health professionals, (b) formative field 
studies examining how clinicians conceptualize relations 
among mental disorders and how mental disorders 
should be classified to correspond best to clinical prac-
tice, (c) studies using experimental methodologies based 
on standardized case material in the form of vignettes 
to evaluate the specific impact of proposed changes on 
the consistency and accuracy of clinicians’ diagnostic 
decision making, and (d) field studies of the guidelines 
in the global clinical settings in which they ultimately 
will be implemented. These studies are being conducted 
in both specialty mental-health and primary-care set-
tings, and their results already are being used to improve 
the structure and content of ICD-11 diagnostic guidelines 
(see Keeley et al., 2016, for examples).
Global applicability. Global applicability is related to 
clinical utility, but it also explicitly involves the extent to 
which a classification is useful in different regions and 
countries, languages, cultural contexts, and settings with 
 Approaches to Classifying Mental Disorder 
85
dramatically different levels of resources. Given the role 
and constituencies of WHO, the goal of global applica-
bility has guided WHO’s policies and methods for devel-
oping ICD-11 in several important ways. First, the IAG 
and all working groups for ICD-11 mental and behavioral 
disorders include representatives from all WHO global 
regions. Second, professional surveys (Evans et al., 2013; 
Reed et al., 2011) and formative studies to inform early 
decisions about the structure of the classification (Reed 
et al., 2013; Roberts et al., 2012) were conducted in mul-
tiple languages and with broadly international groups of 
participants. Third, diagnostic guidelines for the ICD-11 
CDDG will include a specific section on cultural issues 
related to the clinical presentation and diagnosis of each 
condition (see First et al., 2015, for an example). Fourth, 
initial field testing of the proposed ICD-11 diagnostic 
guidelines is being conducted via the Global Clinical 
 
Practice Network (GCPN; Reed et al., 2015), an interna-
tional network of more than 14,000 mental-health and 
primary-care professionals from more than 150 countries. 
(See Evans et al., 2015, and Keeley et al., 2016, for detailed 
descriptions of the methodology of GCPN studies.) Field 
testing using standardized case material with the GCPN 
is currently taking place in six languages: Chinese, Eng-
lish, French, Japanese, Russian, and Spanish. The final 
phase of field testing—the application of ICD-11 diag-
nostic guidelines to real patients in the clinical settings 
in which they receive care—emphasizes the participa-
tion of large middle-income countries (e.g., Brazil, China, 
India, Mexico, Nigeria), which represent nearly 50% of 
the world’s population. WHO’s field-testing program was 
designed specifically to examine linguistic and regional 
differences in the accuracy, consistency, and clinical util-
ity of the ICD-11 diagnostic guidelines to maximize their 
global applicability before the revision is finalized.
DSM-5
DSM-5 reflects the product of well over a decade of 
development and over 3 decades of research since 
DSM-III. Initial hopes that the rapidly increasing 
research base in biological psychiatry would contribute 
in a major way to the revision of the classification were 
dispelled in the early phases of the process. Thus, the 
focus was shifted toward incorporating important devel-
opments in other research areas (e.g., clinical, psycho-
pathological, epidemiological, gender related, cultural, 
and developmental) to produce a manual that would 
be a useful, more research-based upgrade to DSM-IV.
Rationale for the DSM-5 revision. Since the release 
of DSM-III in 1980, several problems with its diagnostic 
system (which for the most part also apply to the ICD 
classification; Sturt, 1981) had become evident. It also 
gradually became clear that the rapid and widespread 
adoption of DSM-III and its successors as the standard for 
funding federal grants, drug trials, and reimbursement for 
mental-health services had had several negative effects. 
One effect was reification of DSM categories and criteria 
as a direct reflection of the true nature of psychopathol-
ogy, and a second was their almost exclusive use in 
research evaluating treatment efficacy, which we discuss 
further below. The rapid pace of mental-health research 
in the 1990s and increasing concerns about correcting 
the DSM’s perceived deficiencies led to a meeting of the 
leadership of APA and NIMH in 1999 to discuss the pos-
sible next steps for DSM. This meeting set the DSM-5 
development process into motion.
Epidemiologic studies, starting with the Epidemio-
logic Catchment Area program (Boyd et al., 1984) and, 
later, the National Comorbidity Survey (Kessler, 1994) 
and its replication (Kessler & Merikangas, 2004), 
revealed high rates of comorbidity among DSM disor-
ders, especially when diagnostic-hierarchy require-
ments (in which Disorder X could not be diagnosed if 
it was “due to” Diagnosis Y) were ignored. Some comor-
bidity patterns were expected on the basis of presumed 
etiologic mechanisms and clinical observation; for 
example, various anxiety disorders were found to be 
comorbid with each other, perhaps as the result of a 
hypothesized common underlying dimension of sensi-
tivity and hyperreactivity to threat stimuli (e.g., T. A. 
Brown & Barlow, 1992). However, much of the comor-
bidity was unexpected or nonspecific—for example, 
56% of National Comorbidity Survey respondents with 
at least one mental disorder had two or more (Kessler 
et al., 1994), and anxiety disorders were comorbid not 
only with each other but also with various depressive 
(L. A. Clark & Watson, 1991) and alcohol-use disorders 
(Kushner, Sher, & Beitman, 1990). Although diagnostic 
hierarchies were largely discontinued in DSM-III-R, con-
cerns about the validity of DSM’s categorical diagnostic 
boundaries persisted for other reasons.
One particular issue is the specificity with which 
diagnoses direct treatments—a major rationale for any 
diagnostic system. For example, emerging research evi-
dence strongly suggested that the targets of psycho-
pharmacologic treatments did not fit neatly into specific 
DSM categories. New antidepressants, such as selective 
serotonin reuptake inhibitors (e.g., fluoxetine, better 
known as Prozac) and second-generation antipsychotic 
medications, were introduced in the 1980s and 1990s. 
As these therapies were subjected to further investiga-
tion, results showed that “antidepressants” were effec-
tive in the treatment of many disorders beyond 
depression, such as eating disorders and anxiety disor-
ders. Likewise, several of the second-generation anti-
psychotic medications were found to be effective alone 
 86 
Clark et al.
or as adjunctive treatments for nonpsychotic mood 
disorders.
Concurrently, psychotherapy research led to the 
introduction of “manualized” treatments—in particular, 
cognitive-behavioral and interpersonal therapies—that 
were standardized and could be disseminated for clini-
cal and research purposes. Cognitive-behavioral ther-
apy, originally developed to treat depression, has since 
been used successfully in a very wide range of mental 
disorders, including anxiety, obsessive-compulsive dis-
order, eating disorders, PDs, and substance use disorders 
(e.g., see https://www.div12.org/psychological-treat 
ments/treatments/). In sum, the nonspecificity of both 
pharmacological and psychosocial treatments called 
into question the specificity of the DSM disorders and 
their purported underlying mechanisms. Major ques-
tions were raised about the boundary between MDD 
and generalized anxiety disorder (GAD), and those 
among schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, MDD, and 
schizoaffective disorder, as well as between and among 
other pairs and groups of often co-occurring disorders 
(e.g., L. A. Clark, Watson, & Reynolds, 1995).
Similarly, another negative effect of the rapid and 
widespread adoption of the diagnostic categories of 
DSM-III and its successors was their almost exclusive 
use in research evaluating treatment efficacy, with the 
highest level of evidence seen as that coming from 
randomized controlled trials testing the effects of spe-
cific treatments in patient populations defined by spe-
cific DSM categories. Initially, DSM-III was heralded as 
providing an empirical basis for mental-disorder treat-
ments. However, as evidence of the nonspecificity of 
both pharmacological and psychosocial treatments 
accrued, the nearly exclusive reliance on DSM diagno-
ses in treatment research was criticized for limiting the 
ability of such research to cut across category boundar-
ies (Cuthbert & Insel, 2013; Hyman, 2010). It also sys-
tematically disadvantaged treatments with broad effects 
by requiring repetitive demonstrations of their efficacy 
in specific, narrowly defined patient populations, 
despite the fact that most treatments’ mechanisms of 
action are likely the same across many disorders 
(Tucker & Reed, 2008).
The requirement of repetitive demonstrations pre-
sented a particular barrier for psychological treatments 
(e.g., cognitive-behavioral therapy) as opposed to phar-
macological ones, given that psychological treatments 
generally lack the financial backing of organized com-
mercial interests that would support treatment trials 
with large samples (Tanenbaum, 2005). Compared with 
trials of psychological treatments, large-scale drug trials 
can be completed in relatively short time frames, 
because any licensed physician can prescribe a medica-
tion and “treatment sessions” can be brief and 
intermittent. Thus, the labor costs of pharmacological 
treatment trials are relatively low, and such studies are 
readily funded by pharmaceutical companies, which 
stand to profit considerably if a trial supports a drug’s 
efficacy. In contrast, training clinicians to administer a 
psychological treatment with a high level of reliability 
is time-consuming, and treatment sessions typically 
require a commitment of an hour or two weekly, so the 
labor costs are high and there are few to no financial 
incentives for companies to fund such studies.
To the extent that people tend to believe that 
response to a pharmacological agent means that a dis-
order has a biological cause, this situation also contrib-
uted to a self-perpetuating emphasis on biological 
causality. Although it is reasonable to assume that a 
complete and accurate understanding of biological cau-
sality will be important to developing more effective 
treatment strategies for mental and behavioral disor-
ders, an overemphasis on biological causality runs 
counter to increasing evidence regarding the multi-
causal nature of mental illness.
The growth in epidemiological studies worldwide 
since 1994 (Kessler, 1999) also revealed substantially 
more cross-national epidemiological variation in DSM-
IV disorder prevalence than expected. For example, 
social anxiety disorder showed a 34-fold variation in 
prevalence between the country with the highest preva-
lence and the country with the lowest prevalence 
despite use of the same instrument (the Composite 
International Diagnostic Interview for DSM-IV) and the 
same time frame of measurement (12 months; for other 
examples, see Hinton & Lewis-Fernández, 2011, and 
Lewis-Fernández et al., 2010). These findings raised the 
question of whether the diagnostic criteria underlying 
the epidemiological instruments were overly specific 
and thus could fail to identify different cultural expres-
sions of the same disorders (Lewis-Fernández et al., 
2010). It is always possible, of course, that the preva-
lence of particular disorders is highly variable or that 
lack of familiarity with the disorders resulting from 
lower access to mental health care and information in 
some settings leads to lower endorsement of symptoms. 
The APA’s DSM-5 Task Force opted to revise disorder 
criteria if the cross-cultural data warranted it. For exam-
ple, one criterion for the diagnosis of social anxiety 
disorder, fear of negative evaluation, was broadened to 
include alternative presentations that are typical in Asia. 
A separate section, “Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues,” 
was added to most DSM-5 disorders to facilitate cross-
cultural application of the nosology.
Some questions about the underlying mechanisms 
of DSM disorders were prompted by the inability to 
find laboratory markers or tests for the vast majority of 
disorders. A few initially promising tests were found 
 Approaches to Classifying Mental Disorder 
87
subsequently to be of little or no practical value for 
clinical practice. Currently, narcolepsy is the only mental 
condition that has a biomarker (hypocretin deficiency) 
as a criterion, although robust biomarkers for various 
causes of neurocognitive disorder have been found 
(e.g., Alzheimer’s disease) or are likely to be found in 
the relatively near future (e.g., prion disease) and may 
be added as criteria in future versions of the DSM.
Generally, the search for indicators of the construct 
validity of diagnoses as outlined in E. Robins and Guze’s 
(1970) classic article has been frustrating. Initially prom-
ising findings, such as a gene mutation associated with 
DSM-III bipolar disorder (Egeland et al., 1987), were 
later disproved (Ginns et al., 1992), deflating the opti-
mism that we might soon find “the gene for” various 
mental illnesses (Kendler, 2005, p. 1243). Endopheno-
types—measurable, typically biological, characteristics 
“along the pathway” between genes and clinical disor-
ders—were the next object of enthusiasm (e.g., 
Gottesman & Gould, 2003, p. 636), as it was hoped that 
they would “more clearly reflect the impact of specific 
genes” (Patrick, 2014, p. 1333). However, endopheno-
types are proving to be no simpler genetically than the 
clinical phenotypes with which they are associated 
(Iacono, Vaidyanathan, Vrieze, & Malone, 2014).
Nonetheless, the processes of seeking specific 
genetic influences and examining why early findings 
were disproved have led to more sophisticated research 
designs, technologies, and statistical methods. These 
improved research methods, in turn, have led to find-
ings that reveal significant genetic overlap among many 
DSM-IV diagnoses and may “provide valuable insights 
into the psychological and neural mechanisms” that 
give rise to psychopathology (Iacono et al., 2014, 
 
p. 1339)—a hope that is the foundation of NIMH’s RDoC 
project. For example, researchers recently found sig-
nificant variation in a particular cluster of genes that 
they were able to link both to a specific immune-system 
function—synaptic pruning—and to schizophrenia 
(Sekar et al., 2016). Related findings in the study showed 
that variation in the function’s expression affected 
mouse brains in a way that was consistent with observed 
characteristics in schizophrenia, indicating a potential 
neural mechanism contributing to the disorder’s 
development.
The limitations of DSM-IV diagnostic categories were 
also seen in clinical use. One of the most striking mani-
festations was the high rate of nonspecific diagnoses 
used in general clinical practice, expressed as disorders 
“not otherwise specified” (NOS). Certain NOS diagnoses 
were used particularly frequently, including NOS vari-
ants of PD (Verheul & Widiger, 2004), eating disorder 
(Smink, van Hoeken, & Hoek, 2013), dissociative dis-
order (Johnson, Cohen, Kasen, & Brook, 2006), and 
pervasive developmental disorder (Lauritsen, Mortensen, 
& Pedersen, 2004 The use of NOS diagnoses was 
acceptable for cases in which (a) a named syndrome 
was not classified in the DSM (e.g., a diagnosis of eat-
ing disorder NOS for cases of binge eating disorder); 
(b) a broad diagnosis could be made, but diagnostic 
criteria were not met for any specific diagnosis (e.g., 
PD-NOS); or (c) insufficient information was available 
for a specific diagnosis (e.g., a diagnosis of psychotic 
disorder NOS as a placeholder until general medical 
and substance-related causes could be ruled out). 
Although such usage was permitted, the high use of 
NOS categories indicated problems in diagnostic cover-
age (e.g., should binge eating disorder be added to the 
classification?) or criteria (e.g., is there a more useful 
way to describe the PDs and pervasive developmental 
disorders seen in clinical practice?).
Clinicians were also given limited ability to docu-
ment clinically significant symptoms that occurred out-
side the criteria of the patient’s primary diagnoses. For 
example, anxiety symptoms are frequently seen in 
patients with MDD and are associated with poorer out-
comes (Walker & Druss, 2015). However, there was no 
way to acknowledge these symptoms if they did not 
meet criteria for a specified anxiety disorder, despite 
their clear clinical effect. Likewise, sleep difficulty is a 
frequent experience of persons with a wide range of 
mental disorders and often is treated, despite being a 
symptom of only a few diagnoses (e.g., GAD, bipolar 
disorder, and MDD) outside sleep disorders themselves. 
The limited availability of ways to document these com-
monly associated symptoms hindered the overall ability 
of practitioners using DSM-IV to describe the diversity 
of patient presentations, to justify treatment decisions, 
and to follow important treatment outcomes.
DSM-5: Process and outcome. The overall consensus 
of the DSM-5 developers was that despite acknowledged 
advantages, the specificity of DSM diagnostic criteria was 
starting to hinder progress in the search for underlying 
mechanisms of mental disorders, and the criteria were 
not describing the clinical realities experienced by 
patients and treated by clinicians. Initially, it was thought 
that knowledge generated since the development of 
DSM-IV might be useful in improving the validity of DSM 
disorders—particularly, that findings in genetic epidemi-
ology, molecular genetics, and functional and structural 
imaging might help the manual move toward a more 
etiologically based classification. Accordingly, dimen-
sional models of diagnosis, a topic of interest that was 
abandoned as premature for DSM-IV development, was 
resurrected in early DSM-5 discussions (Kupfer, First, & 
Regier, 2002), and DSM-5 development started with com-
mitments to examine research evidence from multiple 
 88 
Clark et al.
scientific fields and an openness to complementary and 
alternative classifications systems (e.g., the Spectrum 
Project; Maser & Patterson, 2002).
The revision of DSM-IV was undertaken with several 
guiding principles. First, as with ICD-11, the highest 
priority in modifying DSM-IV was to optimize clinical 
utility. Second, revisions were to be guided by research 
evidence. A 5-year, NIH-funded series of research-
planning conferences was held before the appointment 
of the DSM-5 Task Force to synthesize research evidence 
in important areas and to identify gaps in research. Third, 
it was felt that continuity with DSM-IV should be main-
tained in DSM-5 to prevent upheaval in the field, although 
there were no a priori constraints on the degree of 
change that could be made between DSM-IV and DSM-5 
if the supporting research evidence was strong.
After the planning conferences, the DSM-5 Task 
Force, work groups, and cross-cutting study groups met 
for approximately 5 years. Proposals for changes were 
reviewed for the strength of their supporting research 
evidence and, when indicated, for their clinical, public 
health, and forensic implications. They also were 
reviewed by the APA Assembly and, finally, by the APA 
Board of Trustees, the two governing bodies of the APA. 
The Assembly’s members are selected by geographically 
based psychiatric societies across the United States, its 
territories, and Canada, with additional members rep-
resenting various constituencies (e.g., early-career psy-
chiatrists, underrepresented minority groups); approved 
allied organizations also sit on the Assembly. The group 
acts in an advisory capacity to the Board of Trustees, 
representing the needs of its constituents. The Board 
of Trustees is composed of officers elected by the APA 
general membership, representatives elected by mem-
bers in geographic areas, a limited number of past 
presidents, and additional members representing the 
Assembly and various other constituencies. The Board 
of Trustees is responsible for determining APA’s priori-
ties, policies, and budgets. The leadership and members 
of the APA Assembly and Board of Trustees tend to 
reflect the diverse membership of the organization and 
include researchers, academicians, and full-time clini-
cians in a range of practice settings. However, participa-
tion of the general membership in electing officers has 
been less than representative (e.g., fewer than 15% of 
members cast a vote for President-Elect of the Board 
of Trustees in 2016).
In the end, this process resulted in a revised manual 
that was considerably more conservative than had been 
envisioned more than 10 years earlier. The consensus 
from the early research-conference series was that, in 
general, current neuroscience findings would not be 
translatable to clinically useful diagnostic criteria, a 
conclusion that shut down hopes for a “paradigm shift” 
toward more etiologically based diagnostic criteria. 
Dimensional assessment measures of symptom and 
diagnostic severity and of disability were recommended 
by the DSM-5 Task Force for clinical use but were 
rejected by the Board of Trustees because of a lack of 
evidence on their utility in improving patient care and 
outcomes. The DSM-5 Personality and PD Work Group’s 
proposal of a radically different method to diagnose 
PDs, a hybrid categorical-dimensional model, was also 
rejected, largely because the Board of Trustees was not 
convinced that its clinical utility had been sufficiently 
well established despite many iterations in its develop-
ment to maximize usability and its acceptable perfor-
mance in the DSM-5 field trials.
Notable changes in DSM-5. In the end, the changes in 
DSM-5 were relatively conservative. Nonetheless, many 
evidence-based innovations were introduced that were 
expected to lay the groundwork for future diagnostic 
improvements. We discuss those involving reorganiza-
tion, introduction of the spectrum concept, elimination of 
the multiaxial system of diagnosis, and emphasis on 
developmental, gender-related, and cultural aspects of 
mental disorder.
Reorganization. First, in collaboration with WHO, as 
part of an effort to maximize the structural similarity of 
the DSM-5 and ICD-11, the chapter structure of DSM-5 
was altered and many disorders were regrouped. Several 
new chapter groupings were introduced—for example, 
“Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders” (OCRDs) 
and “Trauma- and Stressor-Related Disorders” (see Phillips 
et al., 2010, and Friedman, Resick, Bryant, & Brewin, 2011, 
respectively, for literature reviews that supported these 
organizational changes). These chapters mostly included 
diagnoses that had been classified in DSM-IV as anxiety 
disorders, but they also included disorders that previ-
ously had been grouped elsewhere or that were new in 
DSM-5. For example, two disorders classified as OCRDs 
were body dysmorphic disorder, which was classified as 
a somatoform disorder in DSM-IV, and the newly created 
hoarding disorder (see Phillips & Stein, 2015, for an over-
view of the OCRDs). Some broad disorder groupings were 
subdivided. For example, the DSM-IV “Mood Disorders” 
chapter was split into two separate chapters, “Depressive 
Disorders” and “Bipolar Disorders,” largely on the basis of 
a literature review (Goldberg, Andrews, & Hobbs, 2009) 
that considered 11 diagnostic validators.
Further, reflecting a more conscious developmental 
perspective that most mental disorders begin early in 
life, the former chapter of “Disorders Usually First Diag-
nosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence” was 
deleted. Most of its disorders were placed in a chapter 
for neurodevelopmental disorders, and the rest were 
 Approaches to Classifying Mental Disorder 
89
distributed to other chapters depending on their pri-
mary symptoms. For example, disorders from the 
deleted chapter’s section “Feeding and Eating Disorders 
of Infancy or Early Childhood” were placed in DSM-5’s 
“Feeding and Eating Disorders” chapter (formerly sim-
ply “Eating Disorders” in DSM-IV), and separation anxi-
ety disorder was placed in the “Anxiety Disorders” 
chapter.
The sequence of chapters also was changed so that 
related groups of disorders would be located near each 
other. For example, on the basis of epidemiological and 
neurobiological evidence of their relatedness, the “Neu-
rodevelopmental Disorders,” “Schizophrenia Spectrum 
and Other Psychotic Disorders,” “Bipolar Disorders,” 
and “Depressive Disorders” chapters were placed in 
sequence. Likewise, the sequence of chapters including 
“Depressive Disorders,” “Anxiety Disorders,” “OCRDs,” 
“Trauma- and Stressor-Related Disorders,” “Dissociative 
Disorders,” and “Somatic Symptom and Related Disor-
ders” reflects a growing recognition of the relatedness 
of many of these disorders. The next series of chapters 
all contain disorders with prominent physical manifes-
tations, such as “Feeding and Eating Disorders,” “Elimi-
nation Disorders,” “Sleep-Wake Disorders,” and “Sexual 
Dysfunctions.” Clinical considerations and the well-
justified objections of advocacy groups led to the sepa-
ration of gender dysphoria from sexual dysfunctions 
and paraphilic disorders, so these disorder groups are 
now in three separate chapters, with the “Gender Dys-
phoria” chapter preceded by the “Sexual Dysfunctions” 
chapter and followed by the “Paraphilic Disorders” 
chapter, which is the last chapter before chapters 
describing miscellaneous mental disorders, medication-
induced conditions (e.g., tardive dyskinesia), and any 
other conditions that may be a focus of clinical 
attention.
Introduction of spectra. Another set of changes related 
to the “spectrum” concept (Cassano et al., 1997; see also 
Maser & Akiskal, 2002, and the articles that follow in the 
same issue for a set of papers related to diagnostic spec-
tra). A well-accepted change was the use of the term 
“schizophrenia spectrum” as a chapter title. This term, 
in use in the research community for years, reflects the 
genetic and neurobiological relations among schizophre-
nia, schizoaffective disorder, and schizotypal PD. Although 
shared underlying vulnerabilities have also been suggested 
among the schizophrenia-spectrum disorders, bipolar dis-
order, and MDD with psychotic features, it was felt that 
further research was needed before combining these 
disorders into one chapter. Their relations were instead 
represented by a contiguous sequencing of the respective 
chapters.
The autism spectrum was also a frequently used 
concept by scientific, clinical, and lay groups to describe 
the group of DSM-IV pervasive developmental disorders 
that included autistic disorder, Rett syndrome, child-
hood disintegrative disorder, Asperger disorder, and the 
widely used pervasive developmental disorder not oth-
erwise specified (PDD-NOS). The separation of these 
various conditions into distinct diagnoses was not well 
supported by the research literature, which suggested 
that they represented a single underlying disorder with 
varying degrees of impairment in the domains of social 
communication and restrictive, repetitive behaviors 
(Lord & Jones, 2012). Nonetheless, the proposal to com-
bine these diagnoses formally into a single entity, ASD, 
with the ability to specify severity of impairment in the 
two domains, was met with resistance from various 
parent and patient groups as well as some clinical 
researchers. Among the concerns raised was that the 
symptoms presented by some patients might not meet 
the revised diagnostic criteria, which could cause them 
to lose access to services. This concern was addressed 
with a “grandfathering” stipulation that individuals who 
had received a well-established diagnosis of autistic 
disorder, Asperger’s disorder, or PDD-NOS before the 
release of DSM-5 should receive a diagnosis of ASD. 
To address concerns that individuals with marked defi-
cits in social communication alone would no longer 
receive a diagnosis of Asperger’s disorder, which would 
grant them eligibility for services, the suggestion was 
made to evaluate such individuals for social (pragmatic) 
communication disorder, a new disorder in DSM-5. 
Concerns that the ASD diagnosis would stigmatize rela-
tively high-functioning individuals with a DSM-IV diag-
nosis of Asperger’s disorder were considered but 
ultimately not acted upon, because the clinical and 
research benefits of recognizing the underlying com-
monalities of all individuals with ASD across the sever-
ity spectrum were predicted to overcome the potential 
effects of stigma.
Another prominent example of the use of the spec-
trum concept in DSM-5 was in the substance use dis-
orders. The work group studying these disorders was 
confronted with several problems in the long-standing 
convention of separating abuse and dependence. This 
separation was based on assumptions that evidence 
suggested were not true, namely that abuse was both 
a less severe condition than and a precursor to depen-
dence. Further, the validity of the abuse-dependence 
distinction was questioned in studies examining the 
underlying factor structure of the substance use disor-
ders. The work group’s review of published evidence 
and its own secondary data analyses of a diverse group 
of clinical and epidemiological data sets confirmed that 
abuse was not necessarily a precursor to dependence. 
Moreover, results of item-response-theory-based analyses 
of the data sets showed that symptoms of abuse were not 
necessarily less severe than those of dependence and 
 90 
Clark et al.
that there was no clear delimitation of the two disor-
ders—in fact, their symptoms were intermixed when 
listed by increasing severity (Hasin et al., 2013). There-
fore, separate substance-abuse and -dependence diag-
noses were eliminated in DSM-5. Instead, their 
symptoms were combined into a single list, with one 
symptom dropped (the abuse-specific symptom of legal 
problems) and one added (craving). Substantial empiri-
cal data indicated that a threshold of two symptoms 
was sufficient to diagnose the new DSM-5 disorder, 
named simply substance use disorder (SUD). The work 
group held that this unitary disorder could be described 
usefully across a spectrum of severity, with two to three 
symptoms (of 11) designated as mild SUD, four to five 
symptoms as moderate, and six or more as severe SUD.
Elimination of multiaxial diagnosis. DSM-III had 
introduced a multiaxial diagnostic system, which required 
five distinct assessments for a complete diagnosis. Each 
axis was designed to provide specific information about 
an individual’s signs and symptoms; psychological, phys-
ical, psychosocial, or environmental context; or function-
ing: Axis I, clinical syndromes; Axis II, PD and “mental 
retardation”; Axis III, general medical conditions; Axis IV, 
psychosocial and environmental problems; and Axis V, 
Global Assessment of Functioning. Eliminating this sys-
tem reflected both a desire to diagnose psychopathol-
ogy in a manner consistent with the medical diagnosis 
of nonmental health conditions, which lacks this mul-
tiaxial structure, and a recognition that elements of the 
multiaxial system had outlived their usefulness. More 
specifically, Axis II had been created to highlight the 
importance of PD and what we now call intellectual dis-
ability in the overall assessment of patients. In practice, 
it also was being used by payers to exclude treatment 
of PD from reimbursement, presumably because disor-
ders placed on Axis II were interpreted as less severe 
than the “major” mental disorders on Axis I. The increase 
of knowledge about both groups of Axis II disorders, 
treatment development, and the formation of advocacy 
groups for patients with these disorders also contributed 
to the lessening need for their segregation on a separate 
axis.
Regarding Axis III, which was designed to document 
general medical conditions relevant to understanding 
or managing individuals’ mental disorders, users of 
DSM-5 are advised simply to list them as such. Axis IV 
was viewed as a useful teaching tool but was seldom 
used in practice, at least by psychiatrists (Probst, 2014), 
and had limited reliability. In DSM-5, the chapter “Other 
Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention” 
lists, describes, and provides codes for relevant psy-
chosocial and environmental factors. They are to be 
included in the medical record if they are a reason for 
the current visit; help to explain the need for a test, 
procedure, or treatment; or provide information about 
circumstances that may affect patient care. Finally, Axis 
V’s Global Assessment of Functioning was problematic 
for several reasons, especially inadequate interrater reli-
ability and the ambiguity of scores due to the assess-
ment’s confounding of disability with symptom severity.
Attention to developmental, gender-related, and cul-
tural aspects of disorder. DSM-5 greatly increased the 
emphasis on the developmental, gender-related, and cul-
tural aspects of diagnostic criteria and textual descrip-
tions of individual disorders (Alarcón et al., 2002; Narrow, 
First, Sirovatka, & Regier, 2007). DSM-III and DSM-III-R 
included only brief reports of age of onset and sex ratio 
for many disorders. For most disorders, DSM-IV added a 
separate section on “Specific Culture, Age, and Gender 
Features” that contained information on how disorder 
onset, prevalence, and symptom presentations change 
over the course of development and vary depending 
on cultural characteristics and gender. DSM-5 expanded 
this focus, creating three new sections on “Develop-
ment and Course,” “Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues,” 
and “Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues” for nearly every 
disorder. Each section provided a summary of research 
findings that would help guide the diagnostic process, 
such as how individuals with anorexia nervosa may pres-
ent without an associated fear of weight gain in certain 
cultural contexts, particularly in Asia (Becker, Thomas, & 
Pike, 2009), or that females with attention-deficit/hyper-
activity disorder (ADHD) are more likely than males to 
present primarily with inattentive features (Biederman 
et al., 1999).
In a few cases, developmental considerations led to 
the stipulation of distinct criteria for younger age 
groups, such as simplified PTSD criteria for children 6 
years old and younger (Scheeringa, Zeanah, & Cohen, 
2011), differences in the required number of ADHD 
criteria for younger children versus older adolescents 
and adults (Wakschlag, Leventhal, Thomas, & Pine, 
2007), or differences in how long the symptoms of 
separation anxiety disorder were required to be pres-
ent. In essence, the continuity between youth and adult 
forms of psychopathology was expressed by describing 
two versions of the disorder in a single category. Finally, 
as in ICD-11, disorder groupings were ordered in DSM-
5 so as to correspond logically to developmental psy-
chopathology. For example, neurodevelopmental 
disorders that manifest early in life were placed first, 
and neurocognitive disorders that are most relevant in 
later life were placed near the end.
This greater focus on developmental, gender-related, 
and cultural aspects of diagnosis was intended to highlight 
how an individual’s specific symptom presentation is 
 Approaches to Classifying Mental Disorder 
91
partly related to a set of contextual factors. It was hoped 
that this information would counter the reification that 
often accompanies diagnostic practice and that suggests 
erroneously that disorders exist as independent entities 
irrespective of social and life-span considerations.
Section III. Emerging measures and models. Each iter-
ation of DSM has a different organization, and DSM-5 
parted notably from its predecessors by introducing a 
hierarchical structure. Following its introductory material, 
DSM-5 was divided into three sections plus an appendix, 
each of which was composed of multiple chapters. Sec-
tions I, II, and the appendix each had counterparts in 
previous DSMs (e.g., chapters in the main Section II con-
tained the diagnostic criteria, codes, and accompanying 
text). In contrast, Section III is entirely new in DSM-5 and 
contains several innovations intended to aid clinical deci-
sion making, increase sensitivity to the cultural context 
of mental disorder, introduce a dimensional approach to 
PD diagnosis, and propose criteria for a number of clini-
cal conditions for which there were insufficient data for 
inclusion as “official” diagnoses in Section II.
Assessment measures. The WHO Disability Assess-
ment Schedule 2.0 was recommended by the DSM-5 
Task Force as an alternative to the Global Assessment of 
Functioning, but it was not approved by the APA Board 
of Trustees, pending further data on its utility in improv-
ing patient care and outcomes. Likewise, the APA Board 
of Trustees did not approve the many patient-reported 
dimensional assessment measures that the DSM-5 Task 
Force recommended for clinical use. Specifically, a num-
ber of cross-cutting symptom measures with follow-up 
questions to probe domains that screening identified as 
relevant were compiled to provide a comprehensive over-
view of commonly seen psychiatric symptoms that could 
guide psychiatric assessment and treatment, and highlight 
potentially overlooked problems. For many disorders, 
diagnostic severity measures that focus on syndromes 
and were designed primarily for administration after a 
diagnosis had been made also were recommended. Both 
of these types of measures are discussed in a later sec-
tion. It is notable that DSM-5 does not include a quality-
of-life measure, which may be considered an oversight 
due to the relatively low level of patient involvement in 
the overall DSM-5 development process. Future testing of 
the DSM-5’s assessment measures should involve patients 
and their families to ensure that the measures are com-
prehensive and include domains that are important to 
them and not just to clinicians. If the published measures 
are found to be lacking in this regard, they should be 
supplemented.
Another assessment measure in Section III is the 
Cultural Formulation Interview (CFI; Lewis-Fernández, 
Aggarwal, Hinton, Hinton, & Kirmayer, 2016). The CFI 
converts the DSM-IV Outline for Cultural Formulation 
(OCF) into a set of standard questions and explicit 
instructions that can be used easily by busy clinicians. 
The main goal of the OCF in DSM-IV was to help clini-
cians identify how culture and context affect patients 
in ways that are relevant to diagnosis and treatment 
(Mezzich, Caracci, Fabrega, & Kirmayer, 2009). The CFI 
operationalizes the OCF framework as three sets of 
semistructured questionnaires: a core 16-item interview 
that can be used during a routine initial evaluation with 
any patient by any clinician in any setting; the CFI–
Informant version of the assessment, which is used to 
gather information from close associates of the patient 
(e.g., family members); and 12 supplementary modules 
that expand on these basic assessments if a compre-
hensive cultural assessment is needed (these supple-
mentary modules are available through the APA Web 
site at http://www.psychiatry.org/psychiatrists/practice/
dsm/dsm-5/online-assessment-measures). The core 
interview aims to enhance the person-centeredness of 
an evaluation by grounding it from the outset in the 
patient’s own experience of illness (Lewis-Fernández 
& Aggarwal, 2013).
The CFI was included in DSM-5 because culture 
affects every aspect of clinical care, including patients’ 
and families’ concepts of illness, the patterning of 
symptoms, help-seeking choices and treatment expecta-
tions, and even the models that clinicians use to inter-
pret and understand symptoms in terms of psychiatric 
diagnoses (Lewis-Fernández et al., 2016). All individu-
als, not only nondominant groups such as racial/ethnic 
minorities, are influenced by their cultural backgrounds 
and people draw upon different aspects of their back-
grounds at different times. To emphasize these issues 
and help guide implementation of the CFI, “culture” 
was defined in the instructions in a way that would 
apply to all people—as “the values, orientations, knowl-
edge, and practices that individuals derive from mem-
bership in diverse social groups,” “aspects of the 
person’s background that may affect his or her perspec-
tive,” and “the influence of family, friends, and other 
community members” (APA, 2013, p. 750). The CFI was 
included in Section III to help clinicians include basic 
information on the social context of individuals and 
their networks in diagnostic assessments, thereby help-
ing to reduce misdiagnosis, to calibrate the assessment 
of severity, and to facilitate patients’ engagement in 
treatment (Adeponle, Thombs, Groleau, Jarvis, & Kir-
mayer, 2012; Aggarwal, Nicasio, DeSilva, Boiler, & 
Lewis-Fernández, 2015).
Alternative DSM-5 model for personality disor-
ders. The APA Board of Trustees retained the DSM-IV 
 92 
Clark et al.
system for personality diagnosis in the main Section II 
and placed the Alternative DSM-5 Model for Personality 
Disorders (AMPD) developed by the Personality and PD 
Work Group in Section III “to preserve continuity with 
current clinical practice, while also introducing a new 
approach that aims to address numerous shortcomings of 
the current approach” (APA, 2013, p. 761). The two main 
criteria of the AMPD are “impairments in personality func-
tioning and pathological personality traits” (APA, 2013, 
 
p. 761; emphasis in original). The first criterion represents 
the core dysfunction of PD and consists of impairment 
in self-functioning (defined as problems in identity, self-
direction, or both) or in interpersonal functioning (defined 
as problems in empathy, intimacy, or both). The second 
criterion describes the way in which personality impair-
ment is expressed, operationalized as any one or more of 
25 specific traits (e.g., submissiveness, manipulativeness) 
or the five broad domains in which they are organized: 
negative affectivity, detachment, antagonism, disinhibi-
tion, and psychoticism. Both personality functioning and 
traits are dimensional, and the model provides guidelines 
to help clinicians and researchers determine whether a 
given criterion is above threshold for impairment, in the 
case of functioning, or pathology, in the case of traits.
In addition, the AMPD describes six specific PD types 
(of the 10 in Section II, the main section of DSM-5) 
—antisocial, avoidant, borderline, narcissistic, obsessive-
compulsive, and schizotypal—using particularized ver-
sions of the four subareas of personality impairment 
(i.e., identity, self-direction, empathy, and intimacy) and 
specific sets of traits. For example, the avoidant PD type 
is characterized by anxiousness and at least two of three 
other specific traits: withdrawal, anhedonia, and inti-
macy avoidance. These six PDs were chosen for inclu-
sion because each had a considerable empirical and 
clinical literature, whereas the other four did not. More-
over, the remaining PDs (paranoid, schizoid, histrionic, 
and dependent) could be characterized very simply 
using one or two of the AMPD’s specific traits. For 
example, submissiveness and insecure attachment 
together form dependent PD.
The AMPD also includes a “PD-trait specified” diag-
nosis, which the text states can be used “when a per-
sonality disorder is considered present, but the criteria 
for a specific disorder are not” (APA, 2013, p. 761). It 
also has the potential to describe any combination of 
personality impairment and pathological traits (even 
when the criteria for a specific disorder are met), and 
preliminary evidence suggests that an expanded defini-
tion of “PD-trait specified” would provide both compa-
rable coverage of the PD domain and greater specificity 
and flexibility in describing individuals’ personality 
pathology (L. A. Clark et al., 2015), as well as eliminate 
within-PD comorbidity by allowing for a single diag-
nosis, albeit one with myriad trait manifestations.
The AMPD is broadly congruent with what is pro-
posed for PD diagnosis in ICD-11, as described further 
in a later section, “Categories and Dimensions.”
Conditions for further study. The final chapter in Sec-
tion III contains criterion sets and supporting text for eight 
syndromes, disorders, or conditions that were proposed for 
DSM-5 but judged by the Task Force to have insufficient 
empirical evidence to warrant their inclusion in the main 
Section II (e.g., attenuated psychosis syndrome, internet 
gaming disorder, and nonsuicidal self-injury). They were 
included in Section III to facilitate research that will provide 
data for their consideration in a future DSM version.
Basic similarities and differences  
of ICD-11 and DSM-5
Structural similarities. Of the various criticisms of DSM-
IV that were considered by DSM-5’s developers, virtually all 
apply to ICD-10 and are being considered in ICD-11’s 
development as well. ICD-11’s developers have had the 
advantage of being able to consider both the initial DSM-5 
proposals and its final published version, as well as the evi-
dence used to support changes from DSM-IV to DSM-5. As 
with the DSM-5, the development of ICD-11 has involved a 
model of working groups, but these groups were required 
to be globally representative and multidisciplinary and typi-
cally included one or more members from parallel DSM-5 
work group to facilitate harmonization of the proposals. 
Therefore, in many instances, changes proposed for ICD-11 
have been similar to those made in DSM-5.
The overall architecture of DSM-5 and the proposed 
“Mental, Behavioural, and Neurodevelopmental Disor-
ders” chapter of ICD-11—that is, the broad groupings they 
contain and the order of those groupings—were the sub-
ject of a series of meetings between representatives of 
APA and WHO; the documents’ similarity is a tangible 
result of these harmonization efforts. For example, the 
new DSM-5 groupings of “Obsessive-Compulsive and 
Related Disorders” and “Disorders Specifically Associated 
with Stress” (in ICD-11) or “Trauma- and Stressor-Related 
Disorders” (in DSM-5) are part of a broader grouping in 
ICD-10 that includes anxiety disorders. Some proposed 
ICD-11 groupings have names slightly different from those 
of their DSM-5 counterparts, but they are conceptually 
similar. Further, the integration of forms of disorders that 
are seen as continuous across youth and adult psychopa-
thology has been accomplished in both classifications. 
Diagnostic-hierarchy requirements were eliminated in a 
previous version of the DSM and have been eliminated in 
the proposed ICD-11, although in a few specific instances, 
disorders that should not be simultaneously diagnosed 
are explicitly noted. Conversely, ICD has never had a 
multiaxial system, so this change in DSM-5 made it more 
similar to ICD-11.
 Approaches to Classifying Mental Disorder 
93
In some cases, the combination of substantive struc-
tural changes from ICD-10 to ICD-11 and related changes 
from DSM-IV to DSM-5 increased the similarity between 
the manuals. For example, the ICD-10 classification of 
sleep disorders reflects an inaccurate mind-body dualism: 
Ostensibly “nonorganic” sleep disorders were in the chap-
ter on “Mental and Behavioural Disorders,” whereas osten-
sibly “organic” sleep disorders were included in such 
chapters as “Diseases of the Nervous System” or “Diseases 
of the Respiratory System.” In contrast, a new and separate 
chapter has been proposed for ICD-11 that includes all 
sleep-wake disorders. Likewise, sexual dysfunctions that 
were divided in ICD-10 into “nonorganic” and “organic” 
forms are combined in a new ICD-11 chapter called “Con-
ditions Related to Sexual Health.” Parallel changes in DSM-
5—the elimination of DSM-IV’s primary/secondary and 
organic/nonorganic distinctions in both of these disorder 
groups—were less obvious but effectively rendered the 
two manuals more similar.
Structural differences. ICD-10’s gender identity disor-
ders have been substantially reformulated, renamed 
“gender incongruence” (Reed et al., 2016), and moved 
out of the mental disorders chapter.8 The ICD-11 Work-
ing Group deemed this a substantial improvement over 
the current classification of categories related to trans-
gender identity as mental disorders. Impulse control dis-
orders and disruptive behaviour and dissocial disorders 
are grouped in their own separate chapters in ICD-11 but 
are combined in DSM-5. PDs are placed earlier in the 
proposed ICD-11 classification structure than in DSM-5 
(where they are one of the last chapters) to reflect their 
more developmental sequence. Finally, mental and 
behavioral syndromes due to particular types of diseases 
or disorders are organized differently in ICD-11 than in 
DSM-5 because of differences in the way that the two 
classifications handle primary and secondary disorders.
Several categories have been recommended for 
inclusion in the ICD-11 that were considered but not 
included in the DSM-5, such as olfactory reference dis-
order (Stein et al., 2016), complex PTSD, and prolonged 
grief disorder (Maercker et al., 2013). Conversely, DSM-5 
 
contains several categories that have not been recom-
mended for inclusion in ICD-11, such as disruptive mood 
dysregulation disorder (Evans et al., 2017). ICD-11  
has retained ICD-10’s separate categories for harmful 
use of substances and substance dependence in order 
to reflect the public-health importance of harmful use, 
particularly for population-based prevention programs 
and early clinical interventions, such as in primary-care 
settings (Poznyak, Reed, & Clark, 2011).
Shared unintended consequences of classifying 
 
mental disorder. The origins of ICD and DSM as 
public-health-focused classification systems account for 
some of the characteristics that have contributed to subse-
quent problems in classifying mental disorders. We discuss 
these problems more fully in our four main topic sections, 
but it is fitting to describe the characteristics themselves 
here, in the context of the systems’ descriptions. Specifically, 
a main characteristic of both ICD and DSM is that they are 
classic hierarchical categorical systems, such as Carl Linnae-
us’s biological classification set forth almost 3 centuries ago.9 
Hierarchical categorical classification systems are exhaus-
tive, their elements are mutually exclusive, and lower levels 
of the structure are related systematically to specific higher 
levels. Every entity is distinct, must be classified in one and 
only one place in the system, and is more closely related to 
its near-neighbor entities than to those in more distant 
“branches.” The ICD and DSM systems are intended to have 
these qualities but, importantly, as applied to diseases, disor-
ders, or health conditions—that is, unlike the biological clas-
sification of living beings, these systems categorize not 
people with disorders but rather the disorders that people 
may develop. (In ICD, these disorders include all health 
conditions, whereas DSM is confined to mental disorders.)
Several characteristics of both ICD and DSM that 
stem largely from these structural requirements have 
received criticism. First, disorders can be represented 
in one and only one place, but the basis for assigning 
certain disorders to particular places in either system 
is arbitrary and not fully consistent with all available 
evidence. For example, in both systems, major depres-
sion and GAD are classified in different places, even 
though they are highly comorbid and the genetic con-
tribution to these disorders is essentially identical 
(Kendler, 1996, p. 68). Both DSM-5 and ICD-11 modi-
fied this structural requirement and cross-listed a few 
disorders so that the systems would better reflect the 
complexity of mental-disorder diagnosis. For example, 
DSM-5 placed schizotypal PD and antisocial PD with 
the other PDs; moreover, it also placed schizotypal PD 
with other schizophrenia-spectrum disorders and anti-
social PD with its required childhood precursor, conduct 
disorder. Similarly, ICD-11 classified Tourette syndrome 
both in the chapter “Diseases of the Nervous System,” with 
other tic disorders, and with the “Obsessive-Compulsive 
and Related Disorders,” because of comorbidity and 
shared familiality. 
Second, categorical systems are ideal when the enti-
ties being classified are taxa (i.e., unique, nonoverlap-
ping kinds), which, for the most part, mental disorders 
clearly are not (Haslam, Holland, & Kuppens, 2012). 
Such systems can classify dimension-based entities only 
by imposing cut points, which may be relatively arbi-
trary. This is not particularly problematic in the case of 
“simple” health conditions that are based on one or two 
dimensions, such as obesity or blood pressure, because 
 94 
Clark et al.
it is easy to understand, for example, that a person with 
a body mass index (BMI) of 29.9 will be classified as 
“overweight” and one with a BMI of 30.0 will be clas-
sified as “obese” for practical reasons, not because these 
two BMIs are fundamentally distinct. However, classify-
ing nontaxonic, multidimensional phenomena such as 
mental disorders, which can overlap in myriad ways, is 
not straightforward.
Third, because each disorder must be classified in 
one and only one place, there is a tendency to make 
each entity as distinct as possible, resulting in highly—
indeed, overly—specified categories. This issue is mani-
fested in several ways, each of which has associated 
problems that are among the core criticisms of ICD and 
DSM. For example, major depression can present with 
marked anxiety, psychotic features, or both, so to keep 
these three disorder presentations distinct, a compre-
hensive categorical system must do one or more of the 
following:
1. Specify exclusion rules (e.g., exclude a diagnosis 
of GAD if a person meets the criteria for major 
depression); this choice comes at the expense 
of incompletely capturing the clinical picture of 
many individuals.
2. Create either specified intermediate categories 
(e.g., “mixed anxiety–depressive disorder” and 
“schizoaffective disorder”) or use disorder speci-
fiers (e.g., “major depression with psychotic fea-
tures”). This tactic is problematic because such 
disorders also have to be classified in one and 
only one place, but placement near one disorder 
imposes a distance from the other, violating the 
hierarchical organizational principle according 
to which entities should be closely related to 
their near neighbors but not to those in more 
distant “branches” of the system. For instance, 
schizoaffective disorder is placed with 
schizophrenia-spectrum disorders, so it cannot 
also be placed with mood disorders; conversely, 
major depression with psychotic features is 
placed with the mood disorders, so it cannot 
placed with other psychotic disorders. This 
approach also results in the proliferation of diag-
nostic categories, because every important over-
lap between dimensions then requires the 
creation of specific diagnostic label.
3. Define disorders’ criteria specifically but permit 
multiple comorbidities (i.e., allow a person to 
meet the criteria for major depression, an anxiety 
disorder, and a psychotic disorder). Resulting 
diagnoses may misleadingly suggest that the 
individual has three disorders rather than a sin-
gle, complex mental disorder. We discuss these 
issues further in our sections on “Multidimen-
sionality” and “Comorbidity.”
4. Define disorders overly specifically, with the result 
that many individuals’ conditions fall into “waste-
basket” categories, such as “other depressive epi-
sodes” (ICD-10), “depressive disorder, unspecified” 
(ICD-10 and ICD-11), “depressive disorder, NOS” 
(DSM-IV), or “other specified depressive disorder” 
(DSM-5). Research literature reviews and meta-
analyses have shown that in some domains of psy-
chopathology, a greater percentage of individuals 
are more accurately characterized as having these 
types of diagnoses than meet the criteria for any 
specific disorder in the domain (e.g., Thomas, 
 
Vartanian, & Brownell, 2009, for eating disorder; 
Verheul & Widiger, 2004, for PD).
In addition to these various problems, an overarch-
ing unintended consequence of overspecification is that 
it contributes to the reification of disorders. That is, 
when disorders are highly specified, a natural assump-
tion is that there is an empirical basis for the precision 
with which they are defined, so they come to be 
regarded as representing real and distinct natural phe-
nomena. In turn, thinking about mental disorder in this 
way obscures the arbitrary nature of and lack of scien-
tific evidence for many distinctions among categories 
or between disorder and health, as well as inhibits 
inquiry into their interrelationships and common 
substrates.
In summary, despite the many changes and improve-
ments in ICD-11 and DSM-5 from their predecessors 
and the various differences between them, they both 
remain categorical classification systems that are fun-
damentally descriptive in nature, based primarily on 
self-reported symptoms, clinically observed signs, and 
a few tests (e.g., of intellectual functioning). In contrast, 
the perspective adopted by NIMH for its RDoC project, 
to which we turn next, diverges markedly from the 
conventions developed by ICD and DSM.
NIMH’s RDoC project
Context and background of the RDoC project. As 
discussed, the DSM-5 developers’ hope for a more 
neuroscience-based manual was quickly dashed by the 
facts that research findings indicated that biological fac-
tors not only cut across multiple disorders but also varied 
within disorders (Hyman, 2007) and there was insuffi-
cient research to support an alternative, empirically based 
organization. In no small part this was because, since the 
early 1980s, NIMH and other funding agencies had virtu-
ally mandated the use of DSM or ICD diagnostic catego-
ries. Thus, although the criterion-based approach of 
 Approaches to Classifying Mental Disorder 
95
DSM-III and ICD-9 led to voluminous research and 
important scientific advances that ultimately made RDoC’s 
alternative approach possible, this very research also 
showed that the two classifications’ methods and over-
reliance on narrow, symptom-based categories ran coun-
ter to the study of mental disorder with full consideration 
of its multiple interacting etiologies (L. A. Clark & Wat-
son, 1991; Hyman, 2010; Kapur, Phillips, & Insel, 2012; 
Owen, 2014; Sharma, Markon, & Clark, 2014).
The RDoC project was initiated in early 2009 in 
response to this changing landscape, including feed-
back received in late 2008 from researchers in the field 
as NIMH prepared its new strategic plan. An experi-
mental approach was deemed necessary, given the still-
nascent state of the science of mental disorder and the 
conceptual and empirical constraints of research based 
on current classifications. It was apparent that if devel-
opments in basic and translational science were to be 
applied to the science of mental disorder, a long-term 
approach would be needed. Such an approach would 
need to examine psychopathology with reference to 
behavioral and brain mechanisms rather than in terms 
of existing disorder categories. It was not that decades 
(or, indeed, centuries) of clinical observation and 
research should be discarded wholesale, but rather that 
an alternative research framework was needed to 
understand more fully the basic mechanisms that are 
disrupted in mental disorders.
The RDoC project thus was developed to respond to 
both of the difficulties that the groups revising DSM-5 
encountered: the hitherto predominant reliance on the 
DSM and ICD diagnostic categories to guide research on 
the causes and mechanisms of disorder, and the lack of 
a clear alternative in the face of the failure of this research 
to support existing diagnostic systems. Accordingly, RDoC 
differs from the DSM and ICD in two important ways. First, 
it is based upon a fundamentally different approach to 
dimensionality, one more in line with DSM-5’s AMPD than 
with current diagnostic procedures; the bulk of this sec-
tion elaborates RDoC’s dimensional approach. Second, 
the RDoC project was not intended for practical clinical 
use in the near future. Rather, it provides a framework 
for research. It does not formally incorporate any current 
ICD or DSM disorders and, in fact, does not define men-
tal disorder or any specific disorders. It was thought that 
such a radical departure was needed to create a research 
framework that could address the problems discussed 
above in trying to understand, diagnose, and treat mental 
disorder.
It is important to contextualize the RDoC project not 
only within the “political” domain of institutional tax-
onomies but also in response to prior and ongoing 
intellectual advances, particularly those in developmen-
tal psychopathology. Many behavioral and psychological 
problems in children and adolescents reflect early stages 
in the development of later psychopathology, yet there 
is reluctance to label still-maturing individuals as having 
a mental disorder. Taken together, these points may 
explain why reification of mental disorder in younger age 
groups (as opposed to in adults) developed more slowly 
and less strongly. Accordingly, the work of developmental 
psychopathologists was a rich intellectual source for 
many aspects of the RDoC project. For example, as early 
as the mid-1960s, Achenbach (1966) had proposed that 
psychopathology has a hierarchical structure; moreover, 
such concepts as equifinality (the idea that diverse devel-
opmental pathways can lead to the same or similar out-
comes) and multifinality (the idea that a given risk factor 
may result in different outcomes depending on the envi-
ronment) had been used for several decades to under-
stand the development of psychopathology as an outcome 
of person-environment interactions (e.g., Cicchetti & 
Rogosch, 1996; Sroufe & Rutter, 1984).
What is new about RDoC is the idea that to understand 
mental illness in all its complexity, the field needs a 
research framework that accommodates the study of all 
causal factors together. Although it is of course impos-
sible to incorporate all factors in any given study, what 
the RDoC project hopes to do is break researchers away 
from studying a few relevant factors in isolation—that is, 
without consideration of how they fit together with all 
the other relevant factors. Similarly, given the work of 
developmental psychopathologists, by the time the RDoC 
project was being designed, almost all mental illness had 
come to be regarded as neurodevelopmental—as being 
affected by, and also affecting, neural structures and pro-
cesses throughout development. The RDoC perspective, 
therefore, is that it is vital to incorporate a neurodevel-
opmental aspect in research programs, and yet the prob-
lems delineated above (e.g., overspecification and 
comorbidity) indicate that current disorder criteria miss 
or insufficiently reflect fundamental mechanisms that are 
important in the development and maintenance of mental 
illness. Until recently, it was difficult to investigate what 
these mechanisms might be. Now, new methods in neu-
roimaging, behavioral neuroscience, psychometric analy-
ses of behavior, and for examining the effects of various 
events and social contexts upon behavior and the brain 
are transforming our understanding of normal and abnor-
mal functioning.
These considerations provide important contexts for 
the RDoC project, which shares with DSM and ICD the 
quest for optimal classification—identifying the appro-
priate groupings and/or dimensions for study and, ulti-
mately, for treatment. However, rather than continuing 
the research tradition of seeking deeper understanding 
of the mental disorders in our current classification 
systems, the RDoC project is intended to provide a 
 96 
Clark et al.
research framework that will deepen our understanding 
of the neurological, biological, psychological, social, 
and cultural structures and processes that underlie men-
tal illness broadly speaking. In turn, this information 
can guide the evolution of the classification of mental 
illness into more valid groupings and dimensions, much 
as Linnaeus’s two-kingdom system of plants and ani-
mals has evolved into a six-kingdom system. The hope 
is that this approach also will facilitate development of 
improved methods for preventing and treating mental 
illness. Rather than a wholesale overturn of current 
diagnostic systems, RDoC is intended to provide an 
alternative perspective that eventually will inform the 
field as to which aspects of current approaches should 
be retained or minimally modified, and which should 
be replaced or greatly revised. Importantly, the current 
RDoC scheme is considered “Version 1.0” and is explic-
itly intended to evolve as research progresses.
The RDoC framework is intended to facilitate the 
study of brain-behavior relations across developmental 
and environmental contexts. In recent decades, research 
has increasingly specified major functional aspects of 
behavior and mental operations—fear, executive func-
tioning, and social attachment—and the neural systems 
that implement them. Given this trend, a research 
framework with a dual emphasis on brain and behavior 
seemed the most promising point of departure for an 
experimental program. However, there is no claim that 
the RDoC framework has “got it right.” Both the specific 
aspects of a neural-circuit-based framework and its 
overall organizational scheme are likely to change—
perhaps dramatically—as research in this new direction 
accumulates.
RDoC’s four major components. The RDoC research 
framework, depicted in Figure 1, has four major compo-
nents intended to provide guidance for clinical research. 
Two components—neurodevelopmental and environ-
mental factors—provide the broad context for the frame-
work as a whole. The other two—functional domains 
and their units of analysis—form the “RDoC matrix,” 
which is situated in the context of the neurodevelopmen-
tal and environmental components. Although RDoC’s 
contextual components have not received as much atten-
tion as its matrix, they are essential aspects to consider in 
programs of research. That is neurodevelopment’s inclu-
sion in the research framework does not mean that every 
study must include a longitudinal component, but inves-
tigators are encouraged to address potential antecedent 
or consequent aspects of development and to relate their 
results to these associated data. In turn, environmental 
factors are intended to encompass the totality of external 
Fig. 1. The framework of the National Institutes of Mental Health’s Research Domain 
Criteria. This figure depicts the five-by-seven RDoC matrix and its environmental and 
neurodevelopmental contexts.
 Approaches to Classifying Mental Disorder 
97
influences—both the effects of the broader environmen-
tal context, such as culture, family, class, and other social 
groupings and hierarchies, and also the effects of particu-
lar events, such as accidents and traumatic experiences. 
Environment also interacts significantly with neurodevel-
opmental processes, and its effects may differ by the age 
at which events occur or milieus are experienced. Thus, 
these two components constitute the broad—and indis-
pensable—contexts that must be considered in studying 
one or more aspects of behavior.
Within this essential context, RDoC calls for studying 
psychopathology with respect to basic functional 
dimensions, organized into five major domains. For 
example, in the domain of “negative valence systems,” 
dimensions such as the fear system perform the biologi-
cal function of enabling the organism to respond to 
aversive or threatening stimuli and contexts. These 
functional dimensions are conceived in terms of the 
continuous span of functioning from the normal, adap-
tive range to increasing degrees of abnormality in each 
system (e.g., mild fear to full-blown panic). They are 
assessed by measurements taken across several units 
of analysis, which range from measures of genetics and 
neural-circuit activation to measures of overt behavior 
and self-report assessments. The goal of studying these 
various units of analysis is not to explain behavior or 
cognitive activity in terms of molecular or cellular pro-
cesses (i.e., reductionism), but rather to understand 
more thoroughly the relations among the different 
activities of various systems. The five domains and their 
seven units of analysis, which together form the RDoC 
matrix, are currently the most fully articulated aspects 
of the RDoC project, but it is important to remember 
that the matrix must be considered within the essential 
frame of the neurodevelopmental-environmental 
context.
RDoC-based research projects that are focused on 
further articulating the matrix explore psychopathology 
through the study of one or more functional dimen-
sions, which are hypothesized to be related to specific 
kinds of symptoms that typically cut across two or more 
ICD or DSM disorders. For example, anxiety symptoms 
are hypothesized to be related to impairment in the 
dimension that has the function of responding to poten-
tial threat, whereas impaired social functioning and 
problems with concentration are hypothesized to be 
related to functional dimensions in the domains of, 
respectively, social processes and cognitive systems. 
Because cross-cutting symptoms such as anxiety, 
impaired social functioning, and concentration prob-
lems appear to be a major reason for much of the 
comorbidity that is particularly problematic in research 
studies, RDoC is agnostic to current diagnostic catego-
ries. RDoC’s vision for the matrix is to generate a 
research literature regarding relations among physio-
logical, behavioral, cognitive, and symptomatic mea-
sures that can inform future versions of ICD and DSM, 
with a particular potential to incorporate biological 
and/or psychometrically advanced measures of behav-
ior and cognition into a precise diagnostic assessment 
that points to more tailored treatments. Again, however, 
we must not lose sight of the fact that this research 
literature will be incomplete until it is understood in 
its neurodevelopmental-environmental context.
The RDoC matrix. The way in which the four major 
RDoC components just described are developed relates 
to RDoC’s role as a framework for research. The five 
major domains of functioning comprise the “rows” of the 
two-dimensional RDoC matrix:
1. Negative valence: systems that enable response 
to aversive stimuli or contexts (e.g., threat, loss, 
aggression due to frustration);
2. Positive valence: systems that mediate reward-
related activity (e.g., approach motivation, 
reward responsiveness);
3. Cognitive systems, such as attention, perception, 
and memory;
4. Social processes, such as affiliation and attach-
ment, facial expressions and other social com-
munication, and perception and understanding 
of the self and others; and
5. Arousal and modulatory systems, such as circa-
dian rhythms, sleep-wakefulness, and brain-stem 
activation and arousal systems.
Each of these five domains contains three to six 
specific dimensions, termed constructs (the customary 
term in psychology for a functional element of behavior 
or cognition). For instance, the cognitive-systems 
domain contains constructs for attention, perception 
(visual, auditory, etc.), working memory (the short-term 
storage of relevant information—e.g., remembering a 
phone number long enough to dial it), declarative 
memory (memory for general and personal facts and 
events), language behavior, and cognitive control (the 
ability to focus on goals and to inhibit unwanted 
behavior).
The constructs are the heart of the RDoC system, and 
each was defined in a series of workshops (one per 
domain) by subject-matter experts using three criteria: 
first, evidence for the validity of the construct as an 
affective, behavioral, and/or cognitive dimension; sec-
ond, an implementing neural system or circuit; and 
third, a presumed relation to one or more specific 
symptoms or other aspects of psychopathology. For 
instance, fear is a classic psychological construct that 
 98 
Clark et al.
has been measured in many ways (e.g., with self-
reports, observations of behavior, and physiological 
assessments); has a neural circuit that has been well 
delineated over the past 30 years, involving (at a mini-
mum) a potential-threat-recognition signal, a memory 
component, and an interpretation of the signal’s mean-
ing, which originate in the amygdala, hippocampus, 
and cortex, respectively (e.g., LeDoux & Pine, 2016); 
and is clearly important for fear-relevant behavior in 
many anxiety and posttraumatic disorders (Lang, Davis, 
& Öhman, 2000).
The units of analysis represented by the seven col-
umns of the RDoC matrix denote measures of genes, 
molecules, cells, neural-circuit activity, physiology (e.g., 
heart rate or cortisol level), behavior (quantitative rat-
ings of either spontaneous behavior or behavior in 
laboratory tasks), and self-reports (including clinician-
rated interviews). The aim is that experimental studies 
will use measures from several of these columns to 
study the constructs in an integrative way, relating the 
measurements to each other to achieve a more in-depth 
understanding of the particular dimensions being stud-
ied. In addition, there is an eighth column termed “para-
digms” (not shown in the figure) to reflect the fact that 
many measures in the other columns are gathered in 
the context of particular tasks or self-report assessment 
instruments.
As mentioned, the constructs and units of analysis 
are to be examined within the critical frame of neuro-
development and environment influences, both of 
which interact with the constructs and the units of 
analysis. The overall intent of RDoC is to increase atten-
tion to neurodevelopmental and environmental effects 
and to free investigators from having to use descrip-
tively oriented ICD/DSM categories, encouraging them 
instead to focus on basic mechanisms that are more 
relevant to etiology. However, the RDoC matrix does 
not explicitly delineate specific elements for the neu-
rodevelopmental and environmental components in the 
way that the domains/constructs and the units of analy-
sis are specified. Although this was intended to provide 
investigators with maximum flexibility in creating 
research designs that pursue the particular questions 
of their research, the lack of specification has been 
interpreted by many researchers as indicating less 
NIMH interest in these components; accordingly, NIMH 
is considering providing guidelines that may prove use-
ful to investigators and that will rectify the false impres-
sion that the contextual components may be ignored.
Basic differences between RDoC and the ICD-11 
and DSM-5 frameworks. It is important to examine 
differences between RDoC and current approaches to 
mental-disorder classification, as well as the implications 
of shifting to an alternative framework. First, in ICD-11 
and DSM-5, mental disorders are characterized primarily 
by a description of current symptoms and associated fea-
tures, such as age of onset, duration, and course. In con-
trast, as an experimental framework that is intended to 
generate new research hypotheses and data, RDoC is not 
bound by the need to produce a clinically usable docu-
ment. Rather, it can temporarily set aside the premises of 
the classical approach to diagnosis to try to address the 
limitations of this approach for mental illness that research 
has revealed. In essence, RDoC inverts the usual para-
digm for understanding mental illness. Its emphasis starts 
with elucidating basic dimensions of behavior and cogni-
tive/affective processing together with the neural systems 
that play a major role in implementing them, and then 
considers psychopathology in terms of abnormalities of 
various degrees in these systems.
The goal is not to explain current syndromes in terms 
of these dimensions; rather, it is to characterize the 
kinds of symptoms or disabilities that result from abnor-
mality in a given dimension or interacting set of dimen-
sions, such as the effects of fear upon cognitive 
processes, in their neurodevelopmental and environ-
mental contexts. The approach is fully and explicitly 
dimensional—not simply across the severity range of a 
diagnosed disorder but across the entire span of normal 
to abnormal functioning. This approach is currently 
recognized in the diagnosis of some domains of mental 
disorder, such as intellectual functioning and PD, and 
the cross-cutting symptom assessments in DSM-5’s Sec-
tion III, but not in most others.
Second, although DSM and ICD still use a classical 
approach, clinicians and researchers today do tend to 
accept that the causes of mental disorder are multifacto-
rial in nature, and yet etiological considerations are 
typically not a major focus in either diagnosis or treat-
ment formulation. In contrast, RDoC is specifically 
focused on etiology: A major goal of RDoC is to foster 
research that elaborates the complex interactions 
among genetic vulnerability, perturbations in neurode-
velopment, and bidirectional influences with various 
facets of the environment (broadly conceived), the 
effects of which also depend upon the time or times at 
which they occur. Similarly, RDoC encourages investiga-
tors to acquire data across multiple units of analysis 
(biological, cognitive-behavioral, self-reported) and to 
examine the results in a multivariate way (e.g., with 
computational modeling; Marquand, Rezek, Buitelaar, 
& Beckmann, 2016). The aim is to develop an integrated 
understanding of causal and other relations among neu-
ral systems, psychological operations, and relevant 
symptoms or impaired functioning. The long-term goal 
is not to pursue a reductionist model that explains all 
phenomena in terms of neural activity but rather to 
 Approaches to Classifying Mental Disorder 
99
arrive eventually at a more sophisticated account of 
how symptoms of psychopathology relate to quantifi-
able measures in other domains.
Finally, although—to their developers’ credit—
ICD-11 and DSM-5 have begun to include information 
concerning developmental and environmental factors, 
these are ancillary to their main purpose, whereas 
RDoC explicitly encourages theoretical models that 
include neurodevelopmental and environmental com-
ponents. From an RDoC perspective, the first aim is to 
develop a comprehensive literature about the conver-
gent and interacting roles of neurodevelopment and 
the environment as well as their relations with biologi-
cal, psychological, and social variables in the onset and 
course of impairment in various functional domains. At 
that point, we will be in a stronger empirical position 
to discuss more abstract questions such as how best to 
define mental illness and to classify mental disorder. 
Thus, for the present, the RDoC approach sets aside 
issues related to definition and classification, as well as 
how best to describe patients’ current status in the 
context of their development and past and current envi-
ronments. It is anticipated that RDoC will be able to 
offer relevant data to address these issues as it accrues 
information that can guide and be incorporated into 
future iterations of ICD and DSM.
Four Key Issues in Considering 
Classifications of Mental Disorder
We turn now to discussion of the four key issues we 
described briefly in the beginning of this article. For 
each issue, we start with a general introduction and 
then discuss how each of the three systems—ICD-11, 
DSM-5, and RDoC—addresses the topic.
Etiology
It is now well established that mental disorder has 
diverse causal factors. Individuals’ genetic composition 
plays a role that varies by the type of psychopathology—
for example, the cluster of conditions collectively called 
schizophrenia has a substantial genetic loading (Light 
et al., 2014; Tsuang, Glatt, & Faraone, 2003), whereas 
the heritability of much psychopathology that is 
grounded in emotion, such as unipolar depression and 
GAD, is considerably lower (Rutter, 2002). Life history 
is also very important. Even genetically identical twins 
may not be concordant for a given mental disorder 
because of differences in, for example, life stressors 
(Pitman et al., 2012). The timing and circumstances of 
life events also matter: Losing a parent is a key risk 
factor for depression when the loss occurs at an early 
age (Bifulco, Harris, & Brown, 1992; G. W. Brown, 
Harris, & Copeland, 1977), but not when it occurs later 
in life.
Individuals’ social position often plays a substantial 
role by aiding or hindering their access to key goods 
and services, including health-promoting resources, or, 
conversely, channeling individuals toward illness-
producing life circumstances (Metzl & Hansen, 2014). 
MDD, for example, is much more common among 
people of lower socioeconomic status (Lorant et al., 
2003), and changes in socioeconomic status can prompt 
changes in depression (Lorant et al., 2007). Moreover, 
changes in social position can have serious conse-
quences related to mental disorder. For example, 
although overall mortality rates in affluent countries 
worldwide fell from 2000 to 2015, those of less-
educated, middle-aged non-Hispanic Whites in the 
United States increased, primarily because of increases 
in drug- and alcohol-related problems and in suicides 
(Case & Deaton, 2015). The authors hypothesized that 
the observed increases were related to economic inse-
curity among members of this demographic group in 
the context of rising income inequality in the United 
States. Finally, the meaning of events and expectations 
of mental illness within a culture also influence the risk 
and form of psychopathology (Kleinman, 1977). Among 
Tibetan refugees, for example, having experienced tor-
ture was no more likely to be associated with mental 
illness than witnessing the intentional destruction of 
religious symbols (Sachs, Rosenfeld, Lhewa, Rasmussen, 
& Keller, 2008).
The multicausality of mental illness means that dis-
orders do not have a single origin. As a general prin-
ciple, for example, genetics has no more causal primacy 
than people’s experiences or the totality of their envi-
ronments. Rather, those who suffer from mental illness 
are at the nexus of multiple forces—contributions not 
only from their biology and personal life history but 
also from factors that transcend them as individuals, 
such as social structures and cultural systems. The influ-
ence of these various forces on individuals’ health and 
well-being is constantly in flux, given that individuals, 
families, and societies not only “inherit” them, both bio-
logically and socioculturally, but also reconfigure and 
recreate them in different ways throughout their lives.
Biologically, even at the molecular level, the study 
of epigenetics—changes in gene expression without 
change in the DNA template—has shown that environ-
mental factors shape the very chemistry and function 
of genes (Beauchaine & McNulty, 2013; Bogdan, Hyde, 
& Hariri, 2013; Halldorsdottir & Binder, 2017; Nigg, 
2016). Mental processes—such as how we interpret and 
make sense of the events in our lives, including internal 
events—have important effects on our physical and men-
tal health. These mental processes occur with varying 
 100 
Clark et al.
degrees of conscious awareness, from deliberate 
attempts to rethink aspects of our lives, as in psycho-
therapy, to gradual changes in the way we think about 
things in everyday life. Social forces also continually 
evolve. Thus, individuals’ risk factors for psychopathol-
ogy are not static but are contingent on multiple inter-
relations among diverse causal factors that themselves 
are in flux (Rutter, 2012; Turecki, Ota, Belangero, 
 
Jackowski, & Kaufman, 2014).
For many years, a diathesis–stress framework was the 
dominant model for understanding the interplay 
between individuals’ genetic/biological factors and 
other, primarily environmental, forces that resulted in 
psychopathology (e.g., Ingram & Luxton, 2005; Rende 
& Plomin, 1992). According to this model, the onset of 
psychopathology was related to the interaction between 
a person’s underlying vulnerability (diathesis) and the 
degree of disruption produced by a disturbing event or 
condition (stress). The vulnerability factor could be a 
specific gene or set of genes, a temperamental variable, 
or even an event or set of events (e.g., certain early-life 
experiences, such as the death of a parent, appear to 
increase vulnerability for later depression). However, 
recent developmental psychopathology research has 
shown that many genes previously thought to be risk 
factors are better conceptualized as “plasticity genes” 
(Belsky, Jonassaint, Pluess, Brummett, & Williams, 2009). 
That is, certain variants of these genes are more reactive 
than other variants, not only to adverse environmental 
effects but also to supportive or even simply benign 
environments. As a result, depending on whether their 
experiences are adverse or are supportive or benign, 
individuals with such gene variants have either worse 
or actually better outcomes, respectively, than those 
who have less reactive variants of the same genes. This 
new framework is known as the differential-susceptibility 
hypothesis. Much more knowledge than we currently 
have is needed to determine the relative contributions 
of each type of factor (i.e., genetics, individual life his-
tory, social structure, and cultural systems) to the onset 
and form of mental illness and, more importantly, how 
these factors interact to result in psychopathology.
The fact that we do not fully understand the causes 
of most mental disorders is sometimes used to question 
the entire diagnostic enterprise, even though mental 
disorders are not different from many medical condi-
tions (e.g., hypertension, migraine, myocardial infarc-
tion) whose risk factors are well established but whose 
cause at the individual level can rarely be determined 
with certainty. Moreover, currently available treatment 
strategies for mental disorders are often connected only 
loosely to their proposed causes.
For example, intellectual disability can be caused by 
a wide variety of infections, chromosomal abnormali-
ties, environmental insults, metabolic diseases, 
nutritional deficiencies, toxins, or traumatic injuries. In 
most cases, the specific cause is never clearly identified. 
Prevention or reversal of these cases would obviously 
require their specific identification, but the fact that we 
cannot currently offer cures for them does not suggest 
that etiological research on intellectual ability is unim-
portant. Of equal importance, the fact that the cause of 
a particular case of intellectual disability is unknown 
does not mean that the disability itself cannot be validly 
and reliably assessed or that there are not effective and 
cost-effective interventions that could enhance the indi-
vidual’s functioning, autonomy, and quality of life. 
These assessment and intervention strategies are gener-
ally unrelated to the cause of the disability. Likewise, 
the fact that cognitive-behavioral therapy is an effective 
treatment for a variety of mental and behavioral disor-
ders does not mean that the maladaptive thought pat-
terns targeted by such therapy constitute the cause of 
these disorders; for example, contrary to the cognitive 
model of depression (D. A. Clark, Beck, & Alford, 1999), 
which posits that depressive affect arises, at least in 
part, from maladaptive cognitions, there is evidence 
that cognitive change does not mediate symptom 
change in major depression (Vittengl, Clark, Thase, & 
Jarrett, 2014).
Thus, the significance of the multicausality of mental 
disorders is not that it marks a point of difference 
between mental disorders and many other health condi-
tions. Rather, it is important to raise issues of multicau-
sality because of continuing concerns that biological 
causes and treatments for mental disorders receive dis-
proportionate attention and resources, whereas psycho-
logical, social, and cultural factors are relatively 
unaddressed, despite compelling evidence for their 
importance. Therefore, the multicausality issue in rela-
tion to mental-disorder classification might be reframed 
as being about the ways in which these classifications 
offer systematic opportunities to note and record the 
influences of psycho-socio-cultural factors, thereby pro-
viding a basis for more research into them and for the 
development of additional assessment and intervention 
strategies. The three institutions discussed in this article 
tackle the problem of etiology in different ways; how-
ever, the efforts to harmonize DSM and ICD that have 
occurred since DSM-III have resulted in quite similar 
approaches to etiology, so we first discuss their shared 
aspects.
Shared aspects of ICD-11 and DSM-5 with regard to 
etiology. Both the third and fourth editions of the DSM 
and the eighth through tenth editions of the ICD included 
a few disorders for which evidence of a psychological 
causation was required. For example, conversion disor-
der was based on the psychoanalytic concept of defense 
mechanisms and involved the expression of unconscious 
 Approaches to Classifying Mental Disorder 
101
psychological conflicts as somatic symptoms (e.g., paral-
ysis). The DSM-IV required that “psychological factors are 
judged to be associated with the symptom or deficit 
because the initiation or exacerbation of the symptom or 
deficit is preceded by conflicts or other stressors” (APA, 
2000, p. 492), whereas ICD-10 was even more direct, 
requiring for a definitive diagnosis of dissociative (con-
version) disorders “evidence for psychological causation, 
in the form of clear association in time with stressful 
events and problems or disturbed relationships (even if 
denied by the individual)” (WHO, 1992b, p. 123). This 
criterion for conversion disorder was rewritten in DSM-5 
to eliminate one of the last remaining vestiges of “purely” 
psychologically defined etiology, now requiring simply 
that “clinical findings provide evidence of incompatibility 
between the symptom and recognized neurological or 
medical conditions” (APA, 2013, p. 318). Similar changes 
are proposed for ICD-11.
In addition, in recent versions of ICD and DSM-III to 
-IV, environmental causation in the form of exposure 
to one or more stressful life circumstances or traumatic 
events is a required part of several diagnoses (e.g., 
PTSD, acute stress disorder). Both ICD-11 and DSM-5 
have taken this criterion a step further and include a 
new section devoted to disorders specifically related to 
stress (trauma- and stressor-related disorders), which 
also includes adjustment disorder, reactive attachment 
disorder, and disinhibited social engagement disorder 
and, in ICD-11, complex PTSD and prolonged grief 
disorder. Exposure to a traumatic event or a stressor is 
a diagnostic requirement for these disorders and there-
fore a necessary element in their etiology. However, 
how the stress or trauma fits into a larger etiological 
framework that includes both pathophysiological pro-
cesses and cultural factors requires further investiga-
tion, as do relations among the various disorders 
specifically associated with stress, and even certain 
disorders for which stress is not a diagnostic require-
ment but that have overlapping phenomenology (e.g., 
mood and anxiety disorders). In contrast to the rela-
tively few diagnoses that include explicit psychological 
or environmental etiologies, ICD-11 and DSM-5 contain 
multiple examples of etiological thinking based on bio-
logical causation. The specific ways in which these are 
organized are somewhat different in the two manuals, 
so we discuss them separately below.
Another proposed revision for ICD-11 is elimination 
of the problematic organic/psychogenic dichotomy for 
sexual dysfunctions, which partly involved moving 
these to a separate chapter on “Conditions Related to 
Sexual Health.” DSM-5 made similar changes within the 
limits of the fact that it remains a classification of mental 
disorders. Each classification implemented an approach 
that recognizes the potential role of many factors in 
contributing to the development and maintenance of 
sexual dysfunctions. Likewise, ICD-11 and DSM-5 share 
an emphasis on the importance of illicit substances, 
prescribed medications, and general medical conditions 
in the causation of mental disorders, and practitioners 
should consider these factors as causes before making 
a definitive diagnosis and commencing treatment, 
because substance intoxication and withdrawal, adverse 
reactions to medication, and general medical conditions 
can result in symptoms indistinguishable from those of 
“primary” mental disorders.
Etiological issues in ICD-11. For the most part, the orga-
nization of ICD across all health conditions is not based on 
etiology. Rather, most of its chapters are organized according 
to organ systems (e.g., diseases of the circulatory system, 
diseases of the respiratory system) or their most characteris-
tic symptoms (e.g., sleep-wake disorders, mental and behav-
ioral disorders). Some chapters have multiple organization 
schemes. For example, the “Infectious Diseases” chapter 
contains groupings of disease categories based on the types 
of organisms that cause them (e.g., bacteria, viruses, fungi), 
their mode of transmission (e.g., predominantly sexually 
transmitted infections), the organ system they primarily affect 
(e.g., viral infections of the central nervous system), or their 
presenting symptoms (e.g., viral infections characterized by 
skin and mucous-membrane lesions).
Many diseases and health conditions in ICD are char-
acterized, like mental and behavioral disorders, by mul-
tiple, interacting causes (e.g., acute myocardial 
infarction, type 2 diabetes mellitus). Where they are 
placed in ICD may reflect only one of those causal fac-
tors or another organizing principle that is considered 
to be clinically important. For example, diabetic reti-
nopathy is classified with other forms of retinopathy 
under diseases of the visual system, even though it is 
known to be a consequence of diabetes mellitus, which 
is classified under endocrine, nutritional, and metabolic 
diseases. In fact, type 2 diabetes itself, even though 
insulin resistance is essential in its etiology, has treat-
ment ramifications that resemble those of cardiovascu-
lar disease. Given our considerable knowledge of the 
mechanisms or pathophysiology of many of these dis-
orders, however, their placement causes little to no 
difficulty in ICD. In contrast, even though we under-
stand that mental processes and mental events all have 
substrates in the brain, the chapters on “Mental, Behav-
ioural, and Neurodevelopmental Disorders” and “Dis-
eases of the Nervous System” are separate in ICD, likely 
for two main reasons: First, brain substrates are only 
one aspect of the etiology and phenomenology of these 
disorders, which primarily involve impairments in the 
higher order functions of cognition, emotion, and 
behavior and are influenced by interpersonal, social, 
and cultural factors; and second, our understanding of 
their causal mechanisms is still rudimentary.
 102 
Clark et al.
Further, the “Mental and Behavioural Disorders” 
chapter in ICD-10 is one of those with multiple orga-
nization schemes. Whereas some groupings are based 
on causation (e.g., mental and behavioral disorders due 
to psychoactive substance use), most are based on simi-
larity of symptoms and evidence of shared validators 
such as familiality (the tendency for mental disorders 
to run in families) and temperamental antecedents. 
Thus, mood disorders form one grouping, whereas 
schizophrenia, schizotypal, and delusional disorders 
constitute another. Still others are now seen as unhelp-
ful conglomerations of entities based on outdated theo-
retical perspectives and will be reorganized in ICD-11. 
For example, ICD-10’s grouping of neurotic, stress-
related, and somatoform disorders is proposed in ICD-11 
to be reorganized into several narrower groupings, none 
of which is referred to as “neurotic.”
Like ICD-10, ICD-11 will incorporate the classifica-
tion of specific causal factors when they are clearly 
relevant to treatment strategies. For example, separate 
categories are provided for mental and behavioral syn-
dromes that are symptomatically similar but caused by 
substances (illicit or prescribed) or an underlying medi-
cal condition (e.g., a brain tumor). Delirium is classified 
according to its etiology because the particular cause 
of a patient’s delirium is a critical factor in the imme-
diately necessary treatment response; likewise with 
dementia and other neurocognitive disorders, in that 
etiology guides the prediction of a case’s course and 
outcome and the selection of management strategies.
In some areas, the classification proposed for ICD-11 
goes considerably further than that of ICD-10 in incor-
porating etiology. For example, the ICD-10 classifica-
tion of sexual dysfunctions relies on an artificial 
dichotomy between “organic” sexual dysfunctions, clas-
sified mostly in the chapter “Diseases of the Genitouri-
nary System,” and “nonorganic sexual dysfunctions,” 
classified under mental and behavioral disorders. This 
mind-body split is not consistent with either current 
research or best practices, which are based on a view 
of sexual response as a complex interaction of psycho-
logical, interpersonal, social, cultural, physiological, 
and gender-influenced processes, any or all of which 
may contribute to the development of sexual dysfunc-
tions. For ICD-11, an integrated classification of sexual 
dysfunctions has been proposed and a system of etio-
logical qualifiers provided because of their relevance 
to treatment selection (Reed et al., 2016).
Further, as a broad classification of health conditions, 
ICD encompasses a variety of ways in which causal influ-
ences in mental disorders can be recorded. For example, 
one may note toxic environmental factors using categories 
from the chapter on “Injury, Poisoning and Certain Other 
Consequences of External Causes.” The chapter “Factors 
Influencing Health Status and Contact With Health 
 
Services” contains a wide range of categories for docu-
menting contributory factors to an individual’s illness, 
including potential health hazards related to socioeco-
nomic and psychosocial circumstances such as education 
and literacy, unemployment, problems related to the 
physical environment (e.g., occupational exposure, noise, 
pollution), the social environment (e.g., acculturation dif-
ficulty, social exclusion), housing, and negative events in 
childhood (WHO, 2016b). Further expansion of these 
categories has been proposed for ICD-11 (WHO, 2017). 
Moreover, ICD’s sibling classification, the International 
Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health 
(WHO, 2001), contains a comprehensive classification of 
environmental factors that may affect functioning and dis-
ability in the context of a given health condition, such as 
human-made environmental changes, supportive or non-
supportive relationships, and services, systems, and poli-
cies. The categories of the two classifications were 
designed to be used together to provide a more compre-
hensive picture of individuals’ health status and function-
ing (Reed, Spaulding, & Bufka, 2009).
In sum, WHO classifications offer a relatively compre-
hensive framework for identifying factors that may con-
tribute to the etiology and expression of mental disorders 
and other health conditions. These categories could be 
used as a framework for additional epidemiological and 
clinical research and further refined on this basis, but 
national health-data systems and reimbursement policies 
generally do not facilitate systematic collection and report-
ing of this type of information (e.g., by reimbursing health 
professionals to record it as a part of standard health-
encounter documentation), so the availability of these data 
for analysis on a global level is extremely limited. In 
general, WHO classification systems do not restrict the 
range of causes and contributory factors that may be con-
sidered in conceptualizing mental disorder. Rather, a spe-
cific subset of factors is prioritized in allocating resources 
for public-health data collection, research, and health-
service reimbursement. These decisions are most fre-
quently made at the level of national governments.
Etiological issues in DSM-5. By relying on a mix of 
etiological views that incorporate both biological and 
psychodynamic factors, pre–DSM-II U.S. classification 
explicitly acknowledged multiple causal factors in the 
development of mental disorders. A major emphasis in 
developing DSM-III was to be atheoretical with regard to 
etiology or pathophysiological process unless one or 
both of these were well established (e.g., in the “Organic 
Mental Disorders” section for adjustment disorder, which 
stated “the disturbance is a reaction to psychosocial 
stress”; APA, 1980, pp. 6–7). This stance was taken partly 
to shed earlier references to psychodynamic causation, as 
well as to acknowledge that the cause of most mental 
disorders was unknown. Moreover, the possibility of 
 Approaches to Classifying Mental Disorder 
103
multicausality was acknowledged: “Undoubtedly, with 
time, some of the disorders of unknown etiology will be 
found to have specific biological etiologies, others to 
have specific psychological causes, and still others to 
result mainly from a particular interplay of psychological, 
social and biological factors” (APA, 1980, p. 7). Identify-
ing either specific biological causes or a particular inter-
play of psychological, sociocultural, and biological 
factors has proved to be difficult, although there are a 
few disorders in DSM-5 that have subtypes with specific, 
identifiable causes (e.g., narcolepsy, major and mild neu-
rocognitive disorders).
Beginning with DSM-IV, etiological considerations 
were introduced into descriptive text sections devoted 
to risk and prognostic factors and culture- and gender-
related issues. The sections on risk and prognostic fac-
tors include explicit references to environmental 
causation when appropriate (e.g., the relevant section 
on PTSD references the severity of the trauma, personal 
injury, etc.) but typically indicate more general risk 
factors (e.g., season of birth and urban rearing in 
schizophrenia). The culture section includes discussion 
of the causal contribution of cultural systems. For exam-
ple, the relevant PTSD section states the following:
The risk of onset and severity of PTSD may differ 
across cultural groups as a result of . . . the impact 
on disorder severity of the meaning attributed to 
the traumatic event (e.g., inability to perform 
funerary rites after a mass killing), the ongoing 
sociocultural context (e.g., residing among 
unpunished perpetrators in postconflict settings) 
. . . (APA, 2013, p. 278)
Most such references, however, are purely probabilistic 
and offer little utility in diagnosing individuals.
In sum, as knowledge on the causes of mental disor-
ders has advanced, DSM-5 has been able to progress from 
the atheoretical stance of DSM-III. To the extent allowed 
by current knowledge, it describes biological (e.g., genet-
ics, neurodevelopment) and both general (e.g., culture) 
and specific (e.g., traumatic events) environmental factors 
that play a role in the onset and prognosis of mental ill-
ness. It also acknowledges the complexity of these causal 
factors, stating “the range of genetic/environmental inter-
actions over the course of human development affecting 
cognitive, emotional and behavioral function is virtually 
limitless” (APA, 2013, p. 19) and cautions that “a diagnosis 
does not carry any necessary implications regarding the 
etiology or causes of the individual’s mental disorder” 
(APA, 2013, p. 25).
Etiological issues in RDoC. RDoC is based in etiologi-
cal thinking. Indeed, a major emphasis of the project is to 
learn more about the causes and mechanisms of mental 
illness, ultimately integrating knowledge relating to all 
four of its components (i.e., functional domains and units 
of analysis in the contexts of neurodevelopment and all 
that “the environment” encompasses).
Recent studies on psychosis provide an example of 
an RDoC-themed approach to identifying and under-
standing etiological factors in a particular disorder spec-
trum. Schizophrenia has for some time been recognized 
as a neurodevelopmental disorder, with the overt symp-
toms of psychosis being the end state of an extended 
process (Rapoport, Giedd, & Gogtay, 2012). Various 
lines of investigation have explored possible avenues 
to understanding the aberrant development that leads 
to psychosis. One long-standing hypothesis is that syn-
aptic pruning—the reduction in cortical synapses that 
occurs as a part of normal development across adoles-
cence (e.g., Feinberg, 1982)—is excessive in schizo-
phrenia, such that there is an aberrant reduction in 
these synapses. Support for this hypothesis is accumu-
lating: Cannon et al. (2015) found accelerated loss of 
gray matter in the years leading up to an overt episode 
of psychosis (i.e., the schizophrenia prodrome) was a 
critical factor in disease onset, and a genetics study has 
provided evidence for one mechanism by which this 
excessive pruning may occur (Sekar et al., 2016).
Although these reports focused on schizophrenia, a 
recent groundbreaking study suggests a broader and 
more nuanced picture. The Bipolar and Schizophrenia 
Network on Intermediate Phenotypes is investigating 
patients diagnosed with schizophrenia, psychotic bipo-
lar disorder, or schizoaffective disorder, an intermediate 
category between the other two disorders (Clementz 
et al., 2016). Rather than comparing the three disorders 
against one another, the investigators set aside the 
patients’ different diagnoses and sought other measures 
that could sort them in novel ways. A clustering analysis 
returned two major factors of “cognitive control” (cogni-
tive and self-regulatory functioning) and “sensorimotor 
reactivity” (brain activity in response to simple stimuli 
such as tones and lights). Various combinations of these 
two factors resulted in three groups, labeled “biotypes,” 
each of which included patients from all three diagnos-
tic groups. The amount of gray-matter loss differed 
systematically across the three biotypes, but not as a 
function of their DSM diagnostic categories, and one 
biotype was associated with increased use of marijuana. 
Of course, no one study is conclusive, but these data 
illustrate the potential for biological and behavioral 
measures to identify intermediate phenotypes more 
directly related to interacting neurodevelopmental and 
environmental factors relevant for etiology.
Etiology: summary. As awareness has grown that vir-
tually all mental disorders result from many different fac-
tors, ICD and DSM have both acknowledged this complexity 
 104 
Clark et al.
and moved to incorporate etiological factors in the rela-
tively few instances in which they are known. In contrast, 
RDoC was developed in large part to support research 
into the etiologies of mental disorder. Its ambitious goal 
is to understand how functional deviations in various 
brain and behavioral response systems interact to result 
in mental disorder, while emphasizing that these pro-
cesses are developmental rather than static and that they 
occur in the context of individuals’ interpersonal, social, 
and cultural environments.
Categories and dimensions
Mental disorders are not all-or-none phenomena. First, 
the overall degree of severity of a person’s mental illness 
is one of its most critical aspects. In fact, recent evidence 
suggests the existence of a broad, general-psychopathology 
dimension (e.g., Caspi et al., 2014; Kotov et al., 2017; 
Laceulle, Vollebergh, & Ormel, 2015) that encompasses 
a wide range of—or even all—variations of psychopathol-
ogy, perhaps in a very fundamental way, much as general 
intelligence is a broad dimension that has multiple inter-
related components. (We discuss this further in the sec-
tion “Comorbidity.”) Second, many symptoms of mental 
disorder overlap with psychological states that are com-
mon in the general population (e.g., depressed mood) 
and range in severity, from relatively rare and circum-
stantial symptoms in generally healthy individuals to 
mild, transient disturbance to moderate symptoms that 
are components or reflections of mental disorder to 
severe and prolonged distress.
Third, some dimensions reflect bipolarity in which 
the optimal level is somewhere between opposing 
pathological extremes. Symptom dimensions best con-
ceptualized as continuous in this manner include
•
•
emotions, many of which have an optimal middle 
range, such as mood, for which healthy levels 
generally lie between depressed and elated 
extremes, and anxiety, which has what is known 
an “inverse U” relation to performance, such that 
performance is lower at both the low and the high 
extremes, whereas moderate levels of anxiety are 
associated with maximal performance (Yerkes-
Dodson law; e.g., Keeley, Zayac, & Correia, 2008);
•
•
cognitions, such as good reality testing versus 
hallucinations or delusional thought processes; 
attention control, which can range from distract-
ibility to hyperattentiveness; unwanted intrusive 
thoughts; dissociation; and impaired intellectual 
functioning;
•
•
behaviors, such as avoidance of feared objects or 
situations versus risk taking, and lethargy versus 
hyperactivity; and
•
•
physical symptoms, such as sleep disturbance, 
appetite disturbance, and physiological arousal.
Most manifestations of mental disorder can be 
described along a number of these symptom dimen-
sions. For example, panic disorder involves dimensions 
of emotional symptoms (i.e., fear) cognitive symptoms 
(i.e., derealization/depersonalization, fear of losing con-
trol or dying); behavioral dimensions (i.e., behavioral 
change designed to avoid having panic attacks, such as 
avoidance of unfamiliar situations); and physical symp-
toms (e.g., palpitations; sweating, trembling, or shaking; 
chest pain or discomfort; gastrointestinal distress).
In some contexts, the overall degree of severity is 
the most significant dimension in that it indicates which 
individuals are in the greatest or most immediate need 
of treatment. However, knowing only the severity of an 
individual’s mental illness may not be particularly help-
ful in determining the best type of treatment. In most 
cases, more specific information is needed, so clinicians 
typically assess the severity of various symptom dimen-
sions. Given the total number of symptom dimensions, 
there are too many possible combinations for the 
human mind to process them all simultaneously. A pri-
mary function of any classification system is to aid 
understanding of complexity by organizing important 
recurrent patterns into categories. In the case of mental 
disorder, diagnostic categories are intended to reflect 
meaningful, recurrent symptom patterns. To be sure, 
using diagnoses to describe the symptom profiles of 
individuals with mental illness facilitates assessment 
and conveys a considerable amount of information suc-
cinctly. However, because simplifying complex symp-
tom profiles into diagnoses does not perfectly reflect 
reality, the reification of diagnostic categories eventu-
ally impedes a deeper understanding of them (Hyman, 
2010). With the widespread acceptance of DSM-III, pro-
fessionals and lay people alike came to consider and 
treat mental disorder diagnoses as “true objects in 
nature” rather than convenient groupings of symptom 
dimensions.
Fortunately, science is self-correcting in the long run, 
partly because it typically involves looking at things in 
more than one way, which is one reason that the hege-
mony of DSM eventually became problematic. Research 
into patterns of comorbidity among categorical diagno-
ses eventually began to suggest the utility of studying 
more directly the interrelations among symptom dimen-
sions that make up commonly comorbid diagnoses. 
There has been an upsurge of such research since the 
turn of this century. Results indicate that current clas-
sification systems only partially reflect the empirical 
relational patterns of symptom dimensions (Markon, 
2010), raising the possibility of a more valid approach. 
 Approaches to Classifying Mental Disorder 
105
Importantly, both diagnostic comorbidity and symptom 
dimensions have been shown to have a hierarchical 
structure, with certain more specific diagnoses or symp-
tom dimensions being related systematically, such that 
they combine into broader diagnostic categories or 
symptom dimensions, respectively, similarly to how 
certain related biological species form broader genuses, 
related genuses form still broader families, and so on.
Out of 20 symptom dimensions, Markon (2010) found 
that four broad higher order factors across a wide range 
of clinical syndromes and PDs captured the covariation 
among them: an internalizing dimension (e.g., subjec-
tive, distressing experiences, such as feelings of depres-
sion and somatic symptoms), an externalizing dimension 
(e.g., observable behaviors that often directly affect oth-
ers, such as those related to substance use, attention 
seeking, and aggression), a dimension of thought dis-
order or cognitive disturbance (e.g., eccentric thought 
processes, paranoia, cognitive rigidity), and a patholog-
ical-introversion dimension composed of such symptom 
dimensions as social anxiety and unassertiveness/
dependency. Moreover, each of the 20 symptom dimen-
sions could be subdivided into component dimen-
sions—smaller clusters within a symptom dimension 
that are even more highly related. For example, the 
dimensions of worry, apprehension, and irritability 
formed the anxiety dimension. Together, the lower 
order, mid-level, and higher order factors constitute a 
multilevel dimensional hierarchy (see also Boschloo 
et al., 2015; Fullana et al., 2010; Watson et al., 2012).
Neither the validity nor the clinical utility of such a 
wholly symptom-dimension-based approach to under-
standing psychopathology has been studied as exten-
sively and systematically as those of the current 
diagnostic systems, but evidence is accruing that the 
approach has considerable value (e.g., Allardyce, 
McCreadie, Morrison, & van Os, 2007; Villalta-Gil et al., 
2006). For example, a large-scale study in the United 
Kingdom (Brittain et al., 2013) compared the predictive 
power of symptom dimensions versus diagnoses for 14 
clinical outcomes (e.g., aggressive behavior, relation-
ship problems, self-injury). There was no difference for 
eight outcomes, and symptom dimensions outpredicted 
diagnoses for five outcomes (aggressive behavior, non-
suicidal self-injury, problems due to hallucinations or 
delusions, depressed mood, and activities of daily liv-
ing). For example, the number of negative symptoms 
(e.g., restricted or blunted affect, poverty of thought) 
and disorganization symptoms (e.g., incoherent speech, 
bizarre behavior) better predicted problems with activi-
ties of daily living (e.g., bathing and dressing oneself) 
than did having a diagnosis of schizophrenia. Diagnoses 
outpredicted symptoms only for duration of inpatient 
stay, which may have been due to diagnosis-based 
hospital administrative processes (i.e., certain diagnoses 
were allowed longer hospitalization periods than 
others).
We said earlier that “current classification systems only 
partially reflect the empirical relational patterns of symp-
tom dimensions.” However, they do reflect them to some 
extent, and they currently represent our best option for 
clinical use. The three institutions that are our article’s 
focus all recognize and acknowledge the multidimen-
sional nature of mental disorder, but because they are 
responding to different constituencies with diverse needs 
and requirements, they take different approaches to 
address the dimensional aspects of mental disorder.
Categories and dimensions in ICD-11. The dimen-
sional nature of many, perhaps most, phenomena under-
lying mental disorders has long been clear to careful 
readers of the scientific literature and observers of clini-
cal phenomenology. However, ICD remains structured as 
a categorical taxonomic system because this format is 
necessary for its application as the classification system 
for global health statistics and, to a large extent, for its 
use in clinical systems (e.g., in treatment selection and 
the determination of eligibility for health care services). 
For this reason, ICD follows particular rules and conven-
tions that have deep historical roots and are well accepted 
as the basis for classification in other areas of medicine, 
even though one can point to many aspects of health 
conditions across diverse areas of medicine that are more 
accurately and precisely conceptualized as dimensions 
(e.g., blood pressure).
The ICD-11 classification of mental and behavioral 
disorders is required to follow the same set of structural 
and taxonomic rules as those used in the rest of ICD’s 
classification system. This requirement imposes differ-
ent and much stricter restrictions on its classification 
model for mental and behavioral disorders than is the 
case for RDoC or, theoretically, even for the DSM, the 
taxonomic focus of which is limited to mental and 
behavioral disorders. At the same time, WHO’s IAG 
(2011) has pointed out that the inclusion of mental 
disorders in ICD facilitates coordination with classifica-
tion of other disorders, including neurological and 
other medical conditions that are frequently comorbid 
with mental and behavioral disorders, and facilitates 
the search for related mechanisms of etiology, patho-
physiology, and comorbidity of disease processes. The 
representation of mental and behavioral disorders 
alongside other health conditions in the ICD-11 also 
provides a solid basis for the parity of the mental health 
field with the rest of medicine for clinical, administra-
tive, and financial functions in health care.
One way to integrate dimensional constructs into a 
categorical system is to divide a given dimension into 
 106 
Clark et al.
ordinal subcategories. For instance, ICD-10 included 
subcategories corresponding to the severity of a current 
depressive episode in depressive and bipolar disorders, 
which have been retained in ICD-11 with some refine-
ments. Other ICD-11 diagnoses have subcategories cre-
ated by imposing clinically important cutoffs on 
dimensional phenomena, such as dangerously low 
body weight in anorexia nervosa and extent of func-
tional language impairment in ASD.
Likewise, subcategories of “mental retardation” in ICD-
10 were based on the severity of intellectual impairment: 
mild, moderate, severe, and profound. Determination of 
these levels was based primarily on standardized tests of 
intellectual functioning (i.e., IQ), using cutoffs that were 
relatively well accepted when ICD-10 was developed in 
the late 1980s. The equivalent diagnostic categories in 
ICD-11, now called disorders of intellectual development, 
provides an example of a second strategy for incorporat-
ing dimensional information in a categorical system: 
being more explicit about the dimensions that clinicians 
must consider to arrive at a particular diagnostic deter-
mination. Specifically, to derive the appropriate severity-
based subcategory for a disorder of intellectual 
development in ICD-11, the clinician must make judg-
ments on multiple dimensions, considering both intel-
lectual functioning and adaptive behavior across the 
domains of conceptual, social, and practical skills.
The proposed changes in the ICD-11 diagnostic 
guidelines for paraphilic disorders, called disorders of 
sexual preference in ICD-10, provide another example 
of categories that incorporate multiple dimensional 
judgments. In ICD-10, the diagnostic guidelines for 
these disorders often merely described the behaviors 
they involved. In ICD-11, in keeping with the ICD’s 
central function as a global public-health tool that pro-
vides the framework for international public-health 
surveillance and reporting, a distinction has been made 
between conditions that are relevant to public health 
and indicate the need for health services and those that 
involve private behaviors without any appreciable 
 
public-health impact and for which treatment is neither 
indicated nor sought (Krueger et al., 2017). The core 
proposed diagnostic requirements for a paraphilic dis-
order in ICD-11 are, first, a sustained, focused, and 
intense pattern of sexual arousal—as manifested by 
persistent sexual thoughts, fantasies, urges, or behav-
iors—that involves others whose age or status renders 
them unwilling or unable to consent, and, second, the 
individual’s having acted on these thoughts, fantasies, 
or urges or having been markedly distressed by them. 
However, a paraphilic disorder diagnosis may also be 
assigned when the pattern of sexual arousal is associ-
ated with marked distress or significant risk of injury 
or death, even if it does not focus on nonconsenting 
individuals. This formulation thus implicitly requires 
that clinicians who are applying the guidelines assess 
several components of the diagnosis, each of which 
can be conceptualized along a dimension—degrees of 
arousal, consent, action, distress, and harm—to deter-
mine whether a diagnosis of a paraphilic disorder is 
warranted.
More fully dimensional characterizations of disorder 
entities proposed for ICD-11 have been made possible 
by specific structural innovations. (For a description of 
structural changes from ICD-10 to ICD-11, see First 
et al., 2015.) One example is the proposal to eliminate 
specific PDs in ICD-11 because of well-established 
problems with their validity and application in clinical 
systems and to replace these with a dimensional clas-
sification (Tyrer et al., 2015). Specifically, the proposed 
ICD-11 model contains, first, a set of essential features 
(i.e., features that must be present to make a diagnosis) 
that are centered on self- and interpersonal dysfunction. 
If the essential features are met, then the clinician makes 
a determination regarding how severe the disturbance 
is and assigns a diagnosis of mild, moderate, or severe 
PD. (A subclinical level—personality difficulty—is also 
included.)
PDs may then be described further through the use 
of six qualifiers. Five of these are trait-domain qualifi-
ers, which are a set of dimensions that correspond to 
the underlying structure of the full range of adaptive-
to-maladaptive personality traits: negative affectivity 
(the tendency to experience, and to have difficulty 
regulating, a wide range of distressing emotions and 
related cognitions), detachment (the tendency to main-
tain emotional and interpersonal distance), dissociality 
(the tendency to disregard social obligations and con-
ventions and the rights and feelings of others), disin-
hibition (the tendency to act impulsively in response 
to immediate external or internal stimuli without con-
sideration of longer term consequences), and anankas-
tia (the tendency to maintain a narrow focus on 
controlling one’s own and others’ behavior and situa-
tions to ensure conformity to one’s own “correct” stan-
dards). As many of these trait domains may be noted 
as are judged to be prominent and contributing to the 
PD and its severity. A borderline qualifier (the last of 
the six) is also included and may be used if a certain 
characteristic pattern of maladaptive functioning is 
evident.
Likewise, the ICD-10 subtypes of schizophrenia (e.g., 
paranoid, hebephrenic, catatonic) have been proposed 
for elimination in ICD-11 because of their lack of valid-
ity. They are to be replaced by a set of symptom ratings 
that may be applied not only to individuals with schizo-
phrenia but also those with other primary psychotic 
disorders (Gaebel, 2012). The rated dimensions include 
positive symptoms (delusions, hallucinations, disorga-
nized thinking and behavior; experiences of passivity 
 Approaches to Classifying Mental Disorder 
107
and control); negative symptoms (constricted, blunted, 
or flat affect; alogia, or paucity of speech; avolition; 
anhedonia), depressive mood symptoms, manic mood 
symptoms, psychomotor symptoms, and cognitive 
symptoms.
These proposals to incorporate more sophisticated 
dimensional elements in ICD-11 address a series of 
specific problems. For disorders of intellectual develop-
ment, for example, the proposal addresses an inade-
quate measurement model that takes insufficient 
account of how people actually function in daily life 
(Tassé, Luckasson, & Nygren, 2013). For paraphilic dis-
orders, the previous formulation led to overpathologiz-
ing private behaviors that lacked clinical relevance or 
public-health importance (Reed et al., 2016). The clas-
sification of specific PDs and subtypes of schizophrenia 
in ICD-10 (and similar elements in DSM-IV) had pro-
duced reified categories commonly seen as unchanging, 
lifetime diagnoses that identified specific types of peo-
ple. However, these ideal types were insufficiently 
informative for effective management of actual patients 
with personality pathology or schizophrenia, and the 
proposals for ICD-11 better represent current scientific 
evidence regarding the nature of these disorders 
(Gaebel, 2012; Tyrer et al., 2015).
At the same time, these proposals for dimensional 
classification are in some ways more complex than the 
purely categorical approach they are intended to 
replace, and they may impose increased clinical and 
administrative burdens on their users, at least initially, 
when the new system is unfamiliar. After a period of 
adjustment, however, clinicians may find that, overall, 
the new system is actually simpler than the one it is 
replacing. For example, ICD-10 defines 10 specific per-
sonality disorders, whereas the ICD-11 proposal has 
only three levels of severity and six optional specifiers, 
requiring a maximum of nine. Nonetheless, these new 
proposals have little hope of being adopted and widely 
implemented in clinical practice unless they provide 
useful information at the level of clinical encounters that 
justifies the time and effort that learning the new sys-
tems will involve. Moreover, they will be of little use for 
health statistics or other policy applications based on 
aggregated patient-encounter data if clinicians cannot 
apply them consistently (Reed et al., 2013), Whether 
clinicians can apply these dimensional assessments 
appropriately and consistently and whether they find 
that doing so yields clinically important information is 
currently being tested in field studies that will influence 
the final form of the ICD-11 diagnostic guidelines 
(Keeley et al., 2016).
Categories and dimensions in DSM-5. The limita-
tions of the categorical diagnostic system were clearly 
recognized by the developers of DSM-5. Early in the plan-
ning process, it was decided that the categorical system, 
despite its flaws, had an intrinsic appeal to clinicians—
especially psychiatrists, DSM’s key target audience—who 
are trained to determine patients’ diagnoses. Nonetheless, 
the loss of information inherent in categorical diagnoses 
was seen as a deficit worth ameliorating with supplemen-
tal dimensional approaches. Two key candidates for incor-
porating dimensions into a categorical diagnostic system 
were diagnostic severity and cross-cutting symptoms.
The DSM-IV contained a brief section defining diag-
nostic severity in its introduction and, like ICD-10, pro-
vided specific guidance for conduct disorder, MDD, and 
“mental retardation.” The importance of being able to 
note the severity of individuals’ symptoms when mak-
ing diagnoses is particularly well exemplified by the 
latter two disorders. Individuals whose MDD is of mild 
severity compared with those whose symptoms are 
moderate or severe have been shown to respond dif-
ferentially to certain treatments (Hollon & Ponniah, 
2010). Further, treatment research has long used change 
in severity (e.g., as measured by the Hamilton Depres-
sion Rating Scale; Hamilton, 1960), in addition to the 
less informative categorical presence or absence of the 
disorder, to assess outcomes. The severity levels of 
“mental retardation” have been used widely to gauge 
the level of support needed for individuals with this 
diagnosis. Not surprisingly, the service needs of an 
individual with profound or severe intellectual deficits 
are considerably more intensive than those of an indi-
vidual with mild deficits. Thus, diagnostic severity has 
implications for research, provision of treatment and 
rehabilitation services, service planning, and resource 
allocation.
Under the guidance of the Diagnostic Assessment 
Instruments Study Group, the DSM-5 work groups were 
tasked with identifying or developing measures to 
assess severity of a wider range of diagnoses. In con-
junction with the Impairment and Disability Study 
Group, the members of the former Study Group pro-
posed that these be based on the symptoms of the 
disorder and not on the extent of disability resulting 
from those symptoms. Disability—the effect of individu-
als’ symptoms on their ability for self-care and engage-
ment in social and other life activities—was recognized 
as an important consequence of disorder severity, but 
a domain to be measured separately. Likewise, the level 
of distress caused by symptoms was felt to be a conse-
quence of symptom severity and disability, and thus 
not a suitable indicator of diagnosis-specific severity. 
The study groups proposed that measurements of 
severity generally should either take the form of a 
symptom count, as did the guidelines for assessing 
severity in DSM-IV, or be based on a more fine-grained 
 108 
Clark et al.
assessment of symptom frequency, intensity, and/or 
duration.
To reduce clinicians’ burden, measures were to have 
a patient-administered format, although it was recog-
nized that clinician-completed measures might be nec-
essary for some disorders and symptoms. To be 
included, severity measures were to be freely available 
(i.e., not proprietary), short enough for use in busy 
clinical settings (containing approximately 10 items at 
most), and, for clinician-rated measures, able to be used 
without formal training in their administration. When 
severity instruments that met these requirements were 
not already available for a particular diagnosis, a DSM-5 
work group could develop one. Most of the severity 
measures recommended by the work groups were 
based on symptom frequency, intensity, or duration; 
some (e.g., the Patient Health Questionnaire–9; 
Kroenke, Spitzer, & Williams, 2001) were based directly 
on the diagnostic criteria for the disorder. Other instru-
ments measured severity as manifested through specific 
aspects of a disorder, such as BMI for anorexia nervosa. 
As proposed for ICD-11, severity of schizophrenia in 
DSM-5 is assessed through several of its associated 
symptoms, some of which (e.g., impaired cognition, 
depression, and mania) are not included in the disor-
der’s diagnostic criteria. Finally, because individuals can 
have clinically significant symptoms that do not meet 
full diagnostic criteria, the instructions for the diagnosis-
specific severity measures indicate that they may be 
used to assess individuals with such symptoms regard-
less of whether their symptoms are above threshold for 
diagnosis.
Soon after the publication of DSM-III, it was recog-
nized that rigid diagnostic categories often do not cor-
respond to clinical reality. Rather, patient presentations 
often include any number of clinically significant symp-
toms that are not among the criteria of a particular 
diagnosis. Some of these symptoms (e.g., sleep prob-
lems and anxiety) are seen frequently across a wide 
range of mental disorders. Others (e.g., suicidal ide-
ation, illicit drug use) are less frequent but are of high 
clinical significance when they do occur. Increasingly, 
these nondiagnostic, co-occurring symptoms (e.g., pres-
ence of anxiety symptoms in MDD or depressive symp-
toms in schizophrenia) are viewed as important 
predictors of patients’ treatment response and progno-
sis (Conley, Ascher-Svanum, Zhu, Faries, & Kinon, 2007; 
Fava et al., 2008).
The DSM-5 work groups developed measures of 
many of these nondiagnostic, cross-cutting symptoms 
for such symptom domains as depression, somatic com-
plaints, and substance use, and they serve two pur-
poses. First, they provide documentation of the presence 
and severity of extra-diagnostic symptoms to guide 
clinicians’ treatment decisions and allow them to follow 
patients’ outcomes. Second, when administered before 
a clinical visit (e.g., via patient self-ratings), the mea-
sures draw attention to symptoms that might otherwise 
be missed because they are outside patients’ formal 
diagnoses. The DSM-5 work groups and study groups 
provided input as to which cross-cutting symptom 
domains to include.
For ease of administration, the Diagnostic Assess-
ment Instruments Study Group recommended a two-
stage process using patient-rated—or parent-rated, for 
children—measures. The first stage, Level 1, includes a 
few screening questions for each symptom domain. For 
several domains, for example, a score of at least 2 on 
one 5-point rating scale (i.e., corresponding to at least 
“mild” severity) indicates the need for a Level 2 assess-
ment. The Level 2 assessments are more complete 
symptom assessments, which allows them to be used 
easily to assess outcomes, including change over mul-
tiple time points. Table 1 lists the Level 1 cross-cutting 
symptom domains and the corresponding Level 2 mea-
sures for adults, adolescents (ages 11–17), and children 
(aged 6–17, assessed through parent or guardian 
reports). Some Level 1 domains do not have associated 
Level 2 assessments. For these domains, scores above 
a predetermined threshold are “flags” for the clinician 
to conduct further individualized follow-up assess-
ments. It is noteworthy that many of the Level 2 mea-
sures are relatively pure assessments of clinically 
important symptoms rather than of diagnostic syn-
dromes, which often include heterogeneous groups of 
symptoms. As such, they may have use in bridging 
clinical practice and RDoC research on basic neurosci-
ence and behavioral domains.
The cross-cutting symptom measures were tested 
in the DSM-5 field trials and had generally good to 
excellent test-retest reliabilities in all three age groups 
(Narrow et al., 2013). Importantly, the diagnostic 
approach that was tested in the field trials—namely, 
using dimensional assessments in addition to categori-
cal diagnoses—was well accepted by clinicians. 
Patients and their parents or guardians found the self-
rated dimensional assessments useful for describing 
their symptoms and helping their clinicians under-
stand their experiences.
The cross-cutting and severity measures, which were 
mostly self-administered by patients, were intended for 
use at initial evaluation and at follow-up visits to help 
both clinicians and patients make treatment decisions 
and track treatment outcomes, consistent with the con-
temporary U.S. emphasis on measurement-based care 
and patient-reported outcome measurement. However, 
the APA Board of Trustees decided that there was not 
yet sufficient evidence that use of most of the 
 Approaches to Classifying Mental Disorder 
109
Table 1. Cross-Cutting Level 1 and Level 2 Symptom Assessments in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
 
Disorders, Fifth Edition
Level 1 domain and patient age group
Level 2 measure
Depression
 
 Adults
PROMIS Depression—Short Form
 Adolescents
PROMIS Depression—Pediatric Item Bank
 Children
PROMIS Depression—Parent Item Bank
Anxiety
 
 Adults
PROMIS Anxiety—Short Form
 Adolescents
PROMIS Anxiety—Pediatric Item Bank
 Children
PROMIS Anxiety—Parent Item Bank
Anger
 
 Adults
PROMIS Anger—Short Form
 Adolescents
PROMIS Calibrated Anger Measure—Pediatric
 Children
PROMIS Calibrated Anger Measure—Parent
Irritability
 
 Adults
N.A.
 Adolescents
Affective Reactivity Index (adapted)a
 Children
Affective Reactivity Index (adapted)a
Inattention
 
 Adults
N.A.
 Adolescents
N.A.
 Children
Swanson, Nolan, and Pelham Questionnaire–IV
Mania
 
 Adults
Altman Self-Rating Mania Scaleb
 Adolescents and children
Altman Self-Rating Mania Scale (adapted)
Somatic Symptoms
 
 Adults
Patient Health Questionnaire–15 Somatic Symptom Severity Scalec
 Adolescents and children
 
Psychosis
 
 Adults
None
 Adolescents and children
None
Sleep Problems
 
 Adults
PROMIS: Sleep Disturbance—Short Form
 Adolescents and children
PROMIS: Sleep Disturbance—Short Form
Repetitive Thoughts and Behaviors
 
 Adults
Florida Obsessive-Compulsive Inventory Severity Scale (Part B, adapted)d
 Adolescents
Children’s Florida Obsessive-Compulsive Inventory Severity Scale (Part B, adapted)e
 Children
N.A.
Substance Use
 
 Adults
NIDA-Modified Alcohol, Smoking and Substance Involvement Screening Test (adapted)f
 Adolescents and children
NIDA-Modified Alcohol, Smoking and Substance Involvement Screening Test (adapted)f
Suicidal Ideation/Attempts
 
 Adults
N.A.
 Adolescents and children
N.A.
Dissociation
 
 Adults
N.A.
Memory
 
 Adults
N.A.
Personality Functioning
 
 Adults
N.A.
Note: Adolescents are individuals between the ages of 11 and 17. Children are individuals between the ages of 6 and 17. All assessments for 
children shown in the table are completed by the child’s parent or guardian. N.A. = not applicable (i.e., no measure is available for a given age 
group). NIDA = National Institute on Drug Abuse; PROMIS = Patient Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System (see http://www 
.nihpromis.org).
aStringaris et al. (2012; http://www.kcl.ac.uk/ioppn/depts/cap/research/moodlab/ari.aspx). bAltman, Hedeker, Peterson, and Davis (1997). 
cKroenke, Spitzer, and Williams (2001). dStorch et al. (2007). eStorch et al. (2009). fNational Institute on Drug Abuse (2012).
 110 
Clark et al.
diagnostic-severity and cross-cutting symptom measures 
would improve clinical care and patient outcomes to 
warrant approval for general clinical use. Therefore, the 
Board of Trustees approved only a few simple scales 
for assessing severity—such as BMI for anorexia ner-
vosa, symptom counts for substance use disorders, and 
“setting counts” (indicating whether symptoms were 
seen in only one, only two, or three or more settings) 
for oppositional defiant disorder—for inclusion in the 
main Section II of DSM-5. A representative sample of 
other measures is included in DSM-5’s Section III as 
“emerging measures” needing further testing, and all 
measures are available online (https://www.psychiatry 
.org/psychiatrists/practice/dsm/educational-resources/
assessment-measures). Clinicians are encouraged to use 
the measures and report their experiences to the APA 
to provide evidence of the measures’ utility for clinical 
practice.
Finally, as mentioned previously, the proposed ICD-
11 system for PD is conceptually quite similar to the 
DSM-5 AMPD, but there are three notable differences 
between the ICD and DSM models. First, the DSM-5 
model has greater specification for both functional 
impairment and for traits, but this has resulted in a 
model that WHO considered to be too complex for 
implementation except in research or in the most spe-
cialized settings in high-resource countries. Second, the 
models each have five broad trait domains but share 
only four: negative affectivity, detachment, disinhibi-
tion, and a domain that is called antagonism in DSM-5 
and dissociality in ICD-11. Then, each has a fifth trait 
domain that the other does not: anankastia (a focus on 
the control and regulation of one’s own and others’ 
behavior to ensure conformity to one’s high standards) 
in ICD-11 and psychoticism (eccentric perceptions, cog-
nitions, beliefs, experiences, and behaviors) in DSM-5. 
This domain is not included in the ICD-11 proposal 
because schizotypal disorder is classified as part of the 
schizophrenia spectrum in ICD, whereas in DSM-5 
schizotypal PD’s primary placement is in the PD chap-
ter, and trait psychoticism is needed to characterize this 
PD. Third, the proposed ICD-11 model includes a bor-
derline qualifier, in contrast to the six combinations of 
traits forming specific PDs in DSM-5’s AMPD. This is 
not intended as a claim that the borderline pattern has 
unique ontological status. Rather, because this has been 
the most frequently diagnosed ICD-10 PD, its inclusion 
is specifically intended to facilitate the transition from 
a categorical to a dimensional PD model, and to give 
clinicians tools for documenting the variability in pre-
sentation of people who were previously considered 
to have BPD by also noting the particular trait domain(s) 
that characterize individuals’ PD presentation.
Categories and dimensions in RDoC. The RDoC 
research framework embodies a fully dimensional approach 
to mental disorder. This approach does not merely entail 
assessing severity dimensions of currently recognized 
disorders (e.g., a dimension of mild to moderate to severe 
MDD) but rather reflects the view that psychopathology 
should be studied with respect to the full range of opera-
tion of its various constructs, from healthy through 
severely pathological range.
There are multiple reasons for taking this approach. 
First, given RDoC’s emphasis on etiology, its near-term 
goal is not to improve current diagnoses or develop an 
alternative clinical nosology but rather to direct the 
research community toward a more comprehensive 
understanding of how a variety of factors intersect over 
time and across different contexts to yield various types 
and degrees of psychopathology. It is becoming increas-
ingly clear that most mental and behavioral functions 
in psychopathology are on continuous dimensions with 
functioning in the general population rather than quali-
tatively distinct. The pathological trait criteria of PD 
provide a clear elaboration of this continuity, as do 
some criteria of MDD (e.g., diminished interest or plea-
sure in activities) and GAD (e.g., excessive anxiety and 
worry; L. A. Clark, 2005) that are related to RDoC con-
structs. However, similar patterns hold for other mental 
functions that initially might seem to be more distinct 
from normality.
For instance, large community studies have shown 
that hallucinations and delusions are distributed con-
tinuously in the population (van Os, Linscott, Myin-
Germeys, Delespaul, & Krabbendam, 2009) and that the 
need for services is more correlated with the extent of 
these phenomena than with their simple presence ver-
sus absence (Kaymaz & van Os, 2010). Research also 
suggests that genetic loads may be continuous across 
clinical and nonclinical populations. For instance, par-
ents with a child diagnosed with ASD who had one or 
more unaffected siblings were asked to report on the 
psychosocial functioning of all their children, and they 
reported considerable overlap in the functioning levels 
of those with and without the disorder. Within the range 
of overlap, the relation between genetic loading and 
functioning level was virtually identical in both groups. 
These data suggest that the same genetic factors are 
operative in both typically developing and diagnosed 
children (Robinson et al., 2016).
Second, RDoC’s focus on dimensions of mental and 
behavioral functioning provides a more quantitative 
basis for prevention research. Scales that have been 
validated for various mental functions and behaviors 
can help identify individuals who are beginning to 
trend toward dysfunction that, if the trend were to 
 Approaches to Classifying Mental Disorder 
111
continue, could eventuate in disorder. This approach 
is directly comparable to approaches in other areas of 
medicine, such as the measurement of blood sugar, in 
which progressive divergence from normal levels 
prompts increasingly aggressive treatment options—
from lifestyle changes to medication or other, more 
intensive interventions. Thus, as with the rest of medi-
cine, assessment of symptom levels across the full 
normal-to-abnormal spectrum is fundamental to the 
development of preventive interventions.
An early example of the potential for this approach 
to mental disorders with respect to cognitive domains 
is provided by data from the Pennsylvania Neurodevel-
opmental Cohort study, in which children admitted to 
a hospital for a variety of reasons were given a large 
battery of neuroimaging and cognitive tasks and fol-
lowed for several years. A retrospective analysis of the 
youths who later developed psychotic symptoms 
showed that their cognitive functioning fell behind that 
of typically developing children at about 9 years of age 
and stayed about 1 year behind normal cognitive devel-
opment for the rest of the study (Gur et al., 2014). 
Studies aimed at understanding the nature of such 
developmental delays, and more precise means of iden-
tifying individuals at particular risk for psychosis, could 
eventually lead to targeted prevention interventions.
Categories and dimensions: summary. Both ICD 
and DSM, each in its own way, have made modifications 
to acknowledge the existence of dimensional features 
that are relevant to mental disorder and to incorporate 
dimensional features into their diagnostic and classifica-
tion systems. For example, DSM-5 incorporated the con-
cept of severity consistently across its classification system 
and added a set of cross-cutting symptom dimensions 
that can be used to provide a more complete clinical 
picture without using additional diagnoses that increase 
spurious comorbidity. Likewise, the developers of ICD-11 
have taken steps toward abandoning artificial subtypes 
by, for example, proposing a severity dimension as the 
primary basis for classifying PD, with trait dimensions as 
specifiers. They have also proposed to implement a more 
dimensional system of symptom expression in schizophre-
nia and other primary psychotic disorders. And yet both 
systems remain fundamentally categorical for reasons that 
are germane to the various purposes for which they were 
developed and still are primarily used: compilation of 
health statistics, allocation of mental-health resources, clin-
ical communication, and decision making in regulatory, 
legal, and health-insurance systems, all of which ultimately 
serve public mental health care needs. Providing a basis 
for decisions about what constitutes a case of mental dis-
order is a fundamental requirement of these systems, and 
such decisions are inevitably categorical.
In contrast, the RDoC system represents a fundamen-
tally different approach to mental illness, with the goal 
of identifying the basic brain and behavioral processes 
that, together with sociocultural forces, give rise to 
multiple dimensions that may become dysfunctional 
and constitute psychopathology. It seeks deeper under-
standing of the scientific basis of psychopathology 
through the integration of biological and behavioral 
measurements, while also recognizing that these pro-
cesses are developmental and embedded in interper-
sonal, social, and cultural contexts. NIMH’s overarching 
goal is to serve the public’s mental health care needs; 
with the RDoC system, it is pursuing this goal with a 
longer time horizon. Given the complexity of mental 
illness, the RDoC initiative sets forth a research program 
that may require many years before its findings materially 
affect current diagnostic and classification systems.
Thresholds in mental disorder
In the introduction to this article, we noted that setting 
thresholds in mental disorder is difficult for three rea-
sons: first, the very definition of mental disorder is still 
being debated; second, mental disorders are multidimen-
sional; and third, thresholds for mental disorder diagno-
ses carry considerable clinical and social ramifications. 
Here, we discuss each of these points in more detail.
Definition of mental disorder. How mental disorder 
is defined is critical for establishing the threshold between 
health and disorder, and several aspects of this issue war-
rant discussion. First, current guidance for assigning diag-
noses in ICD and DSM is based upon symptoms and 
signs of psychopathology, representing a descriptive 
approach to classification. This aspect of diagnostic clas-
sification is widely accepted. Further, like physical disor-
ders, mental disorders are diagnosed on the basis of 
various tests (e.g., chest X-rays, standardized assessments 
of intellectual functioning) as well as observable signs 
(e.g., swelling, suicidal gestures) and patient-reported 
symptoms (e.g., pain, hallucinations). However, there is a 
general perception that psychological assessments are 
less reliable and less valid than medical tests, even though 
there is substantial evidence that this is not necessarily 
the case (e.g., Kraemer, Kupfer, Clarke, Narrow, & Regier, 
2012; Meyer et al., 2001). To be sure, assessing the signs 
and symptoms of mental disorders requires considerable 
clinical judgment based on the observation of an indi-
vidual and on his or her self-reported mood, cognitive and 
sensory experiences, and behaviors; however, identifying 
and correctly classifying physical signs and symptoms to 
diagnose medical illnesses can also rely heavily on clinical 
judgment. Nonetheless, the availability of objective mea-
sures for many physical signs (e.g., assessments of liver 
 112 
Clark et al.
size using CT scans rather than palpations of the abdo-
men) creates a general—though not fully justified—sense 
that the diagnosis of general medical problems is more 
scientifically accurate than that of mental disorders.
Mental-disorder diagnoses generally rely heavily on 
patients’ reports of their own experiences, even though 
patients’ symptoms often affect their ability to report on 
their experiences. For example, depression affects one’s 
perspective on life events, so depressed people may view 
mildly negative experiences and events as being far more 
distressing than do nondepressed individuals; people 
with anorexia nervosa typically do not perceive how thin 
they are objectively; individuals with substance use dis-
orders often deny the extent to which their behavior 
affects others as well as themselves; and so on. Moreover, 
as previously discussed, many mental-disorder symptoms 
are common in the general population (e.g., Nuevo et al., 
2012) and exist along dimensions that are continuous 
with normal variation (e.g., Tyrer et al., 2015). These 
issues complicate the determination of where the thresh-
old lies between the healthy and psychopathological 
ranges of specific symptom presentations.
The difficulty and inherent arbitrariness of assigning 
a diagnostic threshold for mental disorders are widely 
agreed upon and not conceptually controversial. None-
theless, there is ongoing debate regarding the definition 
of mental disorder itself. Wakefield (e.g., 1992, 2007) 
has been a primary proponent of the view that to be 
labeled a disorder, an abnormal health condition must 
include an element of “harm” (e.g., personal distress or 
sociocultural difficulty, impairment, or disadvantage). 
Others have criticized this view for a number of rea-
sons, including its limited practical utility in clinical 
decision making (Jablensky, 2007). Moreover, in gen-
eral medicine, the degree to which signs and symptoms 
are distressing or impairing typically is considered 
extrinsic to the diagnostic process per se, although it 
may play a key role in determining treatment. Down 
syndrome and cataracts are examples of health condi-
tions that are diagnosed without regard for the presence 
or amount of distress or psychosocial dysfunction.
Abstract debates about defining mental disorder 
aside, ICD-11 and DSM-5 still must meet their users’ 
need to decide such things as who should be counted 
as having a particular disorder in national health statis-
tics and who should be eligible to receive and be cov-
ered financially for a particular type of heath service. 
In fact, determining “caseness”—whether or not a per-
son has a particular condition—explicitly involves set-
ting a threshold between disorder and nondisorder, and 
is perhaps the most fundamental requirement of these 
systems. Consistent with Wakefield’s view, classifica-
tions of mental disorder that are intended to guide 
determinations of eligibility for services or treatment 
decisions often have attempted to resolve the difficul-
ties inherent in setting diagnostic thresholds by requir-
ing that symptoms and signs be associated with 
clinically significant distress or impaired psychosocial 
functioning, a solution typically referred to, especially 
in relation to DSM, as the clinical significance criterion 
(note that this criterion implicitly acknowledges the 
presence of these symptoms and signs in the general 
population and their continuity with normal variation). 
We discuss the somewhat different stances that ICD-11 
and DSM-5 have taken regarding this issue in their 
respective sections below.
As for RDoC, it is just as agnostic to defining mental 
disorder as it is to current diagnostic categories. By 
providing a framework for the exploration of functional 
processes that extend from the healthy to the pathologi-
cal range, it aims to provide empirical data for estab-
lishing caseness in the long term rather than positing 
thresholds at this time.
Multidimensionality. There are a few mental disor-
ders that essentially consist of a unidimensional symp-
tom, such as trichotillomania, the primary symptom of 
which is recurrent pulling out of one’s hair, resulting in 
hair loss, despite repeated attempts to decrease or stop. 
However, as discussed, most mental disorders are multi-
dimensional, composed of multiple emotional, cognitive, 
and behavioral dimensions, many of which are shared 
across disorders, although some are unique. Further, dis-
order severity is an overarching dimension common to 
all disorders, although how it is manifested depends on 
individuals’ particular problems. To diagnose a mental 
disorder, therefore, one must determine what kind, what 
combination(s), and “how much” of different aspects of a 
patient’s clinical presentation are needed to constitute a 
particular disorder. Because most individuals with mental 
illness show a mix of symptoms, multiple thresholds typi-
cally need to be considered in the diagnostic process. To 
diagnose individuals with both mood disturbance and 
psychotic cognitions, for example, it is necessary to 
determine the sequence, relative duration, and severity of 
these two types of symptoms before choosing a diagno-
sis from among schizophrenia, mood disorder with psy-
chotic features, or schizoaffective disorder. Again, in their 
respective sections below, we discuss the somewhat (but 
not radically) different approaches of ICD-11 and DSM-5 
to dealing with specific aspects of mental disorders’ 
multidimensionality.
Consequences of thresholds. Important boundaries in 
everyday life are often somewhat arbitrary—for instance, 
the boundaries between states, countries, and time zones; 
between ages at which people are and are not of legal 
drinking age or eligible for Medicare; between tax brackets, 
 Approaches to Classifying Mental Disorder 
113
and so forth. This arbitrariness (or semiarbitrariness) is 
widely recognized, and although we may not like a particu-
lar threshold and may even fight to change it, we generally 
accept the idea that thresholds are pragmatically necessary. 
In the case of mental disorder also, establishing thresholds 
between health and disorder is accepted as pragmatically 
necessary, particularly when a major reason for doing so is 
to identify those individuals who should receive mental-
health services in the context of health systems with limited 
resources. However, regardless of their necessity, setting 
thresholds for mental disorder is highly consequential for 
multiple reasons. First, where thresholds are placed affects 
clinicians’ and researchers’ conceptualization of the rele-
vant phenomena, clinical care, and knowledge generation. 
“Misplaced” boundaries may even interfere with optimal 
clinical care and research efforts.
Second, threshold placement is highly consequential 
because of the many social ramifications of a mental-
disorder diagnosis. Diagnoses in general have conse-
quences that are both positive (e.g., access to and 
payment for treatment; the right to “reasonable accom-
modations” under the Americans with Disabilities Act) 
and negative (e.g., social stigma; loss of ability to per-
form certain occupations). For example, children and 
adolescents with ASD are eligible to receive certain 
educational accommodations in the United States 
(Carter, Skimkets, & Bornemann, 2014; Corrigan, Druss, 
& Perlick, 2014), but many individuals who had been 
diagnosed with Asperger’s disorder and their families 
were strongly opposed to the DSM-5’s inclusion of that 
disorder in the autism spectrum, at least partly because 
of the stigma associated with autism.
Third, diagnostic thresholds may also be highly con-
sequential in forensic settings—for example, insofar as 
they may be used to establish “diminished capacity,” 
which affects culpability for crimes; ineligibility for the 
death penalty as a result of intellectual disability; or 
need for civil commitment because of the high risk of 
reoffending associated with certain forms of mental 
disorder. Diagnostic thresholds also are a foundational 
aspect of epidemiology, with estimates of the incidence 
and prevalence of specific mental disorders used as a 
basis for policy and planning. Thus, from a public-
health perspective, major changes in thresholds (e.g., 
via revision of a diagnostic manual) have considerable 
implications for policy and resource allocation because 
they affect prevalence estimates. For example, diagnos-
tic thresholds are used to determine eligibility and reim-
bursement for health services, as well as for social and 
educational programs. If changing the diagnostic 
threshold for a particular disorder were to raise preva-
lence estimates from 5% to 25%, either considerably 
more resources would need to be directed toward its 
treatment or the level of severity required for service 
eligibility would need to be raised. Public-health agen-
cies are also concerned about the continuity of data. 
Continuous use of the same thresholds facilitates inter-
pretation of changes in prevalence estimates over 
time—for instance, assessments of the effectiveness of 
public-health campaigns to reduce teenage drug use 
that are based on changes in the prevalence of 
substance-use disorder among young adults.
Health professionals use either explicit or implicit 
thresholds to decide whether to assign a particular diag-
nosis or apply a particular treatment. Some treatments 
are relatively benign and unlikely to have negative side 
effects, such as cognitive-behavior therapy for anxiety 
disorders. Other treatments may have potentially dan-
gerous side effects, necessitating the patient’s full 
understanding of their risks and benefits, such as 
second-generation antipsychotic medications adminis-
tered to adults with schizophrenia. The consequences 
of false positives (diagnoses assigned when a mental 
disorder is not actually present, which increase when 
lower thresholds are used) and false negatives (diag-
noses not assigned when a disorder actually is present, 
which increase when higher thresholds are used) vary 
widely according to the specific circumstances sur-
rounding particular diagnostic decisions.
We next discuss the different approaches that our 
three focal institutions take to setting mental-disorder 
thresholds, particularly with respect to the definition 
of mental disorder, its multidimensionality, and the con-
sequential nature of mental-disorder diagnoses.
Threshold issues in ICD-11. The CDDG for ICD-10 
mental and behavioral disorders define a mental disorder 
as “a clinically recognizable set of symptoms or behaviors 
associated in most cases with distress and with interfer-
ence with personal functions” (WHO, 1992b, p. 11). “Clin-
ically recognizable” is a critical phase in this definition 
because it is not difficult to think of sets of symptoms or 
behaviors that typically are associated with distress or 
interfere with personal functioning but are not considered 
mental disorders (e.g., bereavement following the death 
of a loved one or anxiety following a job loss). After con-
siderable discussion, the IAG (2011) recommended retain-
ing this definition for ICD-11, favoring its simplicity over 
the more complex definition used in DSM-IV (discussed 
in the Threshold Issues in DSM-5 section), which was 
generally intended to encompass the same range of 
conditions.
This ICD-10 and ICD-11 definition is conceptually 
similar to the one subsequently adopted for DSM-5 
(APA, 2013), but the DSM-5 definition is more elabo-
rately worded and mentions exemptions for culturally 
approved responses to a common stressor or loss (e.g., 
bereavement) and social deviation. In the ICD-11, these 
 114 
Clark et al.
exemptions are made clear in the context of diagnostic 
guidelines for specific relevant disorders (e.g., bereave-
ment reactions should not be mistaken for depression; 
sexual behaviors should not be diagnosed as paraphilic 
disorders solely because they are socially stigmatized) 
but are not mentioned in the overall definition of men-
tal disorder. The difficulty inherent in distinguishing 
mental disorder from normal variation on the basis of 
symptoms and behaviors alone was described in the 
previous section, “Categories and Dimensions.” With 
most conditions, there simply is no clear line that sepa-
rates the two, so any threshold is to some extent arbi-
trary. Moreover, different thresholds may be appropriate 
for different purposes or in different settings. For exam-
ple, in primary-care settings in developing countries, 
the diagnosis of depression may focus on identification 
of those cases with the most severe symptoms and 
greatest functional impairment (WHO, 2016c).
General approach. The ICD-11’s CDDG for mental 
and behavioral disorders is intended primarily for use by 
mental-health professionals in a wide range of settings 
around the world. WHO’s IAG (2011) explicitly noted that 
diagnostic classification is only a part of patient assess-
ment, stating that “the focus of the ICD is on the classifi-
cation of disorders and not the assessment and treatment 
of people, who are frequently characterized by multiple 
disorders and diverse needs” (p. 91). Various additional 
factors must be considered in making decisions about 
patient care, such as associated disability, severity, risk of 
harm to self or others, exacerbating psychosocial factors, 
level of social support, and cultural factors, as well as 
the relative effectiveness of locally available treatments. 
Information about risk factors and protective factors may 
also be important in formulating population-based strate-
gies.
Thus, rather than attempting to establish discrete, 
specific cutoffs through the use of criteria, the CDDG 
describes the essential features of each disorder, provid-
ing explicit guidance about the symptoms and/or char-
acteristics that clinicians can reasonably expect to find 
in all cases of the disorder (First et al., 2015). This 
diagnostic approach is intended to enable more flexible 
application of clinical judgment and allow for cultural 
variation in symptom presentation. Although the ICD-
11’s lists of essential features superficially resemble 
diagnostic criteria in their overall format, they generally 
do not contain the precise symptom counts, duration 
thresholds, or polythetic sets of items (stipulating that, 
e.g., a patient must have three of a list of four symp-
toms) that characterize the diagnostic criterion sets in 
DSM-5 (First et al., 2015). Whereas DSM diagnoses gen-
erally attempt to set a precise threshold for every dis-
order to be applied across all settings, the ICD-11 
CDDG uses more flexible language in an effort to con-
form to the way clinicians typically make psychiatric 
diagnosis—that is, by exercising clinical judgment 
regarding the context and consequences of the specific 
decision that is being made. The aim of the ICD-11 
CDDG is to help clinicians identify the diagnostic for-
mulation that is most likely to be useful in making 
treatment and management decisions.
This also is the goal of the proposed primary-care 
version of the ICD-11, which consists of 27 mental 
disorders judged to be clinically important in primary-
care settings—both those that are commonly seen in 
such settings and less common but more severe men-
tal disorders that are important to recognize in these 
settings. In this version of the classification, disorders 
are described in a way that reflects primary-care pre-
sentations to facilitate their identification by primary-
care professionals. For most disorders, they identify 
a subset of the cases that would be identified by the 
application of the complete CDDG (Goldberg et al., 
2016).
Need for fully specified thresholds. The approach to 
thresholds taken in ICD-11’s CDDG and its primary-care 
version is consistent with WHO’s goal of improving the 
identification of people with mental-health needs who 
currently, at a global level, are unlikely to receive appro-
priate care and even less likely to see a psychiatrist in 
their lives. This approach also is consistent with WHO’s 
goal of reducing global disease burden, but it will not 
work for all purposes. For example, the CDDG could 
not be used as a basis for defining patient groups for 
research purposes that are homogeneous with respect to 
highly specified operational criteria, specifically because 
of its flexibility and the need for clinical judgment in 
its application. For studies in which this is important, a 
more fully operationalized adaptation of the guidelines 
would be needed, as had been provided for ICD-10 by 
the Diagnostic Criteria for Research (WHO, 1993). To cre-
ate an analogous version for the ICD-11, decisions would 
need to be made for every disorder about what specific 
number of which symptoms must be present over a spec-
ified period of time to warrant an individual’s inclusion 
in an experimental group for the purpose of a particular 
study. These requirements will likely vary across studies 
(a point that echoes the RDoC rationale). However, to 
the extent that they may have some uniformity, a struc-
tured interview for identifying more specifically defined 
research groups for a range of diagnoses is currently 
being developed.
Likewise, the CDDG is not intended for application 
to the general population in nonclinical settings by lay 
interviewers as a part of epidemiological studies. This 
is not only because its administration requires 
 Approaches to Classifying Mental Disorder 
115
the exercise of clinical judgment, but also because it 
implicitly uses clinical populations in mental-health set-
tings as its standard of comparison. In contrast, epide-
miological studies may require the use of stricter or 
otherwise modified thresholds based on the psycho-
metrics of particular cutoffs in relation to the commu-
nity-level prevalence of particular symptoms (Finn, 
1982; Kendler, Gallagher, Abelson, & Kessler, 1996; 
Vilagut, Forero, Barbaglia, & Aloso, 2016).
Functional impairment and distress. Compared with 
ICD-10, DSM-IV invoked the clinical significance criterion 
as a basis for distinguishing disorder from nondisorder in 
mental-disorder classification much more often. In fact, 
the criterion represented the most important source of 
differences between the two manuals (First, 2009). Per the 
clinical significance criterion, a person whose symptoms 
cause either distress or difficulty with functioning socially 
or in some other important way could be judged to have 
a mental disorder, whereas another person with the same 
symptoms who is not bothered or functionally impaired 
by them would not receive a diagnosis. The more fre-
quent use of an explicit distress- and impairment-based 
criterion in DSM compared with ICD may be due to the 
DSM’s emphasis on specified criteria to set thresholds 
for disorder; ICD’s more general descriptions of disor-
der may allow clinicians greater flexibility in determining 
whether a disorder is actually present.
In practice, the distress component of the clinical sig-
nificance criterion is typically easy to satisfy, given that 
various forms of psychological distress (e.g., anxiety) are 
themselves symptoms of many mental disorders and that 
individuals’ requests for mental-health services are gener-
ally taken as direct evidence of their distress or their 
concern about the effects of their current mental health 
on their functioning. There even are a number of catego-
ries in which distress is a central component of the clini-
cal phenomenology of the disorder. For example, most 
of the criteria for PTSD involve distress or avoidance of 
things that cause distress. Therefore, the distress criterion 
has practical implications that are especially relevant in 
epidemiological research among individuals who are not 
seeking mental health services, in that it provides a way 
to avoid assigning a diagnosis to individuals in the com-
munity whose symptoms are similar to those of individu-
als presenting in clinical settings but who deny being 
distressed by those symptoms. Whether one considers 
such cases to be false negatives (i.e., they actually should 
be assigned the diagnosis) or true negatives (i.e., not 
assigning the diagnosis is the correct decision) depends 
upon the purpose and goals of the assessment.
The issues related to functional impairment are even 
more complex. Recall that the definition of mental dis-
order in the ICD-10 CDDG, proposed for retention in 
the ICD-11, refers to functional impairment but does 
not require it. In fact, the ICD-10 CDDG states as a 
general principle that interference with the perfor-
mance of social roles (e.g., at home or at work) should 
not be used as a diagnostic guideline. The major prob-
lem with functional impairment as a diagnostic require-
ment is that it is more properly conceptualized as an 
outcome of a mental disorder or other health condition, 
and conflating the disorder itself with its consequences 
creates a variety of problems—for example, in evaluat-
ing the effectiveness of treatments.
Üstün and Kennedy (2009) took an extreme position 
on this, insisting on a complete separation of function-
ing and disability from diagnostic thresholds or ratings 
of disorder severity. However, IAG (2011) noted that 
this ideal would be impossible to implement in ICD-11 
given the current state of science and clinical practice, 
because of the lack of direct, objective disease indica-
tors for a wide range of mental disorders, as well as 
their continuity with normal variations in behavior. The 
advisory group recommended that the ICD-11 avoid 
incorporating functional impairment as a part of diag-
nostic guidelines whenever possible and, for categories 
in which inclusion of functional impairment in the diag-
nostic guidelines is needed, set a clearly identifiable 
threshold between disorder and nondisorder.
The ICD-11 approach reflects the perspective that if 
a disorder can be described adequately on the basis of 
its symptoms alone, without reference to distress or 
impairment, then it is more parsimonious to consider 
distress or impairment as consequences of the disorder, 
and, accordingly, these elements need not—indeed, 
should not—be included in its diagnostic criteria. The 
question in ICD is not whether disorders are associated 
with distress or impairment, because typically they are, 
but rather whether including distress or impairment as 
a diagnostic criterion alters what constitutes a “case” of 
a particular disorder. The development of assessments 
that conceptualize distress and functioning as outcomes 
rather than as inherent features of disorder is an area 
for future work (Robles et al., 2016).
Threshold issues in DSM-5
Thresholds in the definition of mental disorder. Begin-
ning with DSM-III, the threshold between normality and 
disorder in the DSM has been based largely on specific 
symptoms, requiring either all or a subset of symptoms 
for diagnosis. In DSM-III and DSM-III-R, the specific num-
ber of symptoms required (e.g., five of nine for MDD; 
four of 13 for panic disorder) was typically based on 
clinical heuristics given the absence of clear research evi-
dence. More recently, some diagnostic criteria have been 
established using a more substantial research base (e.g., 
for alcohol and other substance use disorders; Hasin 
 116 
Clark et al.
et al., 2013; Kerridge, Saha, Gmel, & Rehm, 2013). How-
ever, WHO has questioned the clinical and public-health 
utility of this approach (Poznyak et al., 2011), and some 
research findings challenge whether the current thresh-
olds (e.g., two of 11 symptoms for alcohol use disorder) 
are optimal or too low (e.g., Mewton, Slade, McBride, 
Grove, & Teesson, 2011).
Diagnostic criteria for many disorders in DSM-III and 
DSM-III-R made implicit or explicit reference to clinical 
significance, but the assumption was that “careful speci-
fication of symptom criteria for each disorder would 
suffice in establishing a disorder threshold” (Narrow, 
Kuhl, & Regier, 2009, p. 88). However, unexpectedly 
high rates of mental disorders were found in general 
population surveys. Therefore, to reduce the concern 
that the manual overdiagnosed mental disorders, DSM-
IV introduced the clinical significance criterion, which 
was typically worded “. . . causes clinically significant 
distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other 
important areas of functioning.” The stated rationale for 
its inclusion was that it “helps establish the threshold 
for the diagnosis of a disorder in those situations in 
which the symptomatic presentation by itself (particu-
larly in its milder forms) is not inherently pathological 
and may be encountered in individuals for whom a 
diagnosis of ‘mental disorder’ would be inappropriate” 
(APA, 2000, p. 8). The criterion’s addition did reduce 
the rates of mental disorder in community surveys 
(Narrow, Rae, Robins, & Regier, 2002), but a number of 
problems remained (Narrow et al., 2009).
First, what constituted clinically significant distress 
or impairment was not defined, and DSM-IV simply 
acknowledged that “assessing whether the criterion is 
met . . . is an inherently difficult clinical judgment” 
(APA, 2000, p. 8). A second problem was that the scale 
in DSM-IV for assessing functioning, the Global Assess-
ment of Functioning, intermingled symptom severity, 
social functioning, and assessments of dangerousness 
rather than considering these elements separately. 
Moreover, many “symptoms” in the diagnostic criteria 
themselves refer to psychosocial impairment (e.g., 
“often has difficulty organizing tasks and activities” is 
listed as a symptom of ADHD rather than a conse-
quence of the disorder).
In part because of the goal of “harmonizing” the ICD 
and DSM systems, it was widely debated whether the 
clinical significance criterion should be eliminated in 
DSM-5. Wakefield (2007) continued to advocate for the 
importance of retaining it, whereas Üstün and Kennedy 
(2009) argued that DSM-5 should adopt WHO’s position 
that disorders (defined by symptoms and signs) and 
their resulting disability should be assessed separately, 
although they should be considered together to deter-
mine caseness (WHO, 2001). Hyman (2010) expressed 
the concern that if the definition of mental disorder 
includes the criterion that the symptoms must cause 
clinically significant impairment or distress, “it denies an 
appropriate clinical status to early or milder symptom 
presentations . . . [and] illogically confounds a severity 
measure with a symptom list” (pp. 164–165).
We currently have little understanding of how dis-
ability and distress arise in individuals with mental 
disorder, including the roles of individual symptoms, 
environmental factors, and other intrinsic factors not 
directly related to specific symptom criteria. Further, 
the measurement or specification of the core symp-
toms of many disorders is lacking. For example, many 
of the criteria for ADHD reflect consequences of inat-
tention, hyperactivity, and impulsivity (e.g., “makes 
careless mistakes”) rather than direct measures of 
these domains because either there currently is no 
reliable and valid means of directly assessing the core 
symptoms or the assessments are not feasible in rou-
tine clinical practice. As another example, the fre-
quency, intensity, and duration of schizophrenia 
symptoms (delusions, hallucinations, disorganized 
speech, grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior, 
negative symptoms) have not been precisely specified; 
DSM-5 also requires a marked decline in “level of 
functioning in one or more major areas, such as work, 
interpersonal relations, or self-care” (APA, 2013, p. 99) 
for diagnosis.
Use of the clinical significance criterion means that 
a patient’s report of significant distress or significantly 
affected daily functioning becomes the de facto thresh-
old of many, if not most, mental disorders. Nonetheless, 
there was considerable resistance from the DSM-5 work 
groups to remove the criterion. A frequent concern was 
that without it, there would be inadequate thresholds 
between mild forms of the disorder and nondisorder, 
leading to overdiagnosis of mental disorders and, con-
sequently, increased public perception that the DSM-5 
pathologizes the emotional ups and downs of everyday 
life (e.g., Horwitz & Wakefield, 2007). In part, the clini-
cal significance criterion was deemed important because 
of the DSM developers’ commitment to a criterion-
based diagnostic approach that has been regarded as 
useful in increasing reliability. Reliability, in turn, was 
considered important for not only clinical but also prac-
tical reasons, such as those relating to forensic settings, 
reimbursement, and research. The ICD CDDG’s use of 
more prototypic conceptualizations to define disorders 
may allow clinicians greater flexibility in determining 
whether the disorder is present without an explicit clini-
cal significance criterion. Thus, the uses of the classifi-
cation systems also have a role in shaping them.
Ultimately, DSM-5 implemented a compromise. The 
definition of mental disorder used in DSM-III through 
 Approaches to Classifying Mental Disorder 
117
DSM-IV-TR was modified to emphasize that disorders 
reflect dysfunctional mental processes and are “usually 
associated with significant distress or disability in social, 
occupational, or other important activities” (APA, 2013, 
p. 20; emphasis added), substituting “are usually associ-
ated with” for DSM-IV’s “causes.” Effectively, this brings 
the DSM-5’s definition more in line with the definition 
used in ICD-10 and the forthcoming ICD-11. Moreover, 
individual work groups were allowed to decide whether 
to retain or remove the clinical significance criterion. 
Whereas some did opt to eliminate it, most disorders 
in DSM-5 retain the criterion. Therefore, ICD-11 and 
DSM-5 have approached this same issue from opposite 
directions, with ICD-11 including an impairment 
requirement only when it is deemed necessary and 
DSM-5 eliminating it when possible. As a result, the two 
systems have become more similar, although not identi-
cal, in the way that they describe distress and disability 
as required features for particular diagnoses.
Thresholds and multidimensionality. The multidimen-
sionality of mental disorder is reflected in some DSM-5 
diagnoses’ use of subcriteria. For example, the multi-
dimensionality of ADHD is apparent in its very name, 
which conveys its two primary criteria, each of which 
has nine subcriteria, with a diagnostic threshold of six 
items (five for those over the age of 17). Thus, a child 
or adolescent might receive an ADHD diagnosis by hav-
ing six or more inattentive symptoms (but fewer than six 
hyperactive/impulsive symptoms), six or more hyperac-
tive/impulsive symptoms (but fewer than six inattentive 
symptoms), or six or more symptoms of each type. It 
also is important to note that the nine criteria on each 
list are not fully independent from one another but are 
intended to represent possible behavioral manifestations 
of an underlying dimension. The two types of symptoms 
commonly co-occur and may shift over time within indi-
viduals; thus, including them in a single diagnostic cri-
terion set is intended to avoid comorbid diagnoses and 
unhelpful diagnostic changes over time for patients.
In some cases, criteria have different numbers of 
subcriteria and thresholds. For example, a diagnosis of 
PTSD in adults requires the following:
1. One or more of five intrusion symptoms (e.g., 
nightmares, flashbacks),
2. One or both cognitive or behavioral avoidance 
symptoms,
3. Two or more of seven possible alterations in 
cognitions (e.g., memory loss) or mood (e.g., 
anhedonia), and
4. Two or more of six arousal symptoms (e.g., sleep 
disturbance) or reactivity symptoms (e.g., exag-
gerated startle response).
This level of diagnostic flexibility has both benefits 
and costs: It accommodates a wide variety of symptom 
presentations, but it does so at the associated cost of 
increasing within-diagnosis heterogeneity and both fre-
quency and variation in overlap with other diagnoses. 
Again using PTSD as an example, Galatzer-Levy and 
Bryant (2013) calculated that there were 636,120 ways 
to meet DSM-5 criteria for PTSD. Moreover, Gallagher 
and Brown (2015) found that depending on which par-
ticular PTSD criteria individuals met, they were more 
likely also to meet criteria for a depressive disorder, an 
anxiety disorder, or both. In sum, as a result of the 
multidimensionality of PTSD and the use of specific 
thresholds for each of its dimensions, patients diag-
nosed with PTSD can present with a great variety of 
symptoms and patterns of comorbidity.
Partly in response to this problem, ICD-11 has pro-
posed a narrower operationalization of PTSD character-
ized by the required presence of three core symptoms 
(Maercker et al., 2013), which is being tested in a vari-
ety of studies (e.g., Danzi & La Greca, 2016; Hansen, 
Hyland, Armour, Shevlin, & Elklit, 2015). Whether or 
not the ICD-11 proposal will ultimately help to reduce 
diagnostic heterogeneity for PTSD, within-category het-
erogeneity that results from disorders’ multidimension-
ality remains a significant challenge for classification 
systems to address.
Consequences of thresholds. It is widely acknowledged 
that specific DSM-5 thresholds are often somewhat arbi-
trary and should be viewed with some flexibility in their 
application. For example, an individual whose symptoms 
do not fully meet the criteria for a diagnosis at a given 
time may nonetheless have a need for treatment, either 
to prevent the development of a more severe condition 
or to address urgent symptoms such as suicidal think-
ing. Of importance to research on the causes of men-
tal disorders, individuals who are “subthreshold” for a 
disorder may possess genetic and neurophysiological 
characteristics similar to those of individuals (e.g., family 
members) whose presentations are at or above a diag-
nostic threshold. The DSM has long attempted to accom-
modate subthreshold presentations through the use of 
NOS diagnoses in DSM-III, DSM-III-R, and DSM-IV, which 
became “other specified” and “unspecified” diagnoses in 
DSM-5. It also is widely acknowledged, albeit tacitly, that 
higher or lower diagnostic thresholds are needed for spe-
cific purposes (e.g., administrative, forensic, treatment 
related). Moreover, the scientific argument that different 
diagnostic thresholds may need to be specified based on 
the setting in which they are used has some empirical 
grounding (Finn, 1982).
However, because of the complexity of implementa-
tion, the reification of existing thresholds by U.S. 
 118 
Clark et al.
regulatory and research-funding agencies, and concerns 
about a breakdown in the “common language” that the 
DSM has promoted for decades, implementing different 
thresholds did not gain much traction and was not seri-
ously considered in DSM-5’s development. This marks 
a contrast between that manual and the ICD, in which 
thresholds differ among the CDDG, the primary-care 
version, and the Diagnostic Criteria for Research. As 
with previous editions of the DSM, the DSM-5 work 
groups instead implemented a single cut point for each 
diagnosis based on their evaluation of the available 
evidence.
The evolution of more reliable diagnostic systems 
via specific-criterion approaches was the basis for an 
explosion of knowledge about psychopathology in the 
years following DSM-III’s publication. Nonetheless, the 
near-ubiquitous use of the DSM’s specific criteria and 
thresholds limited the types of research questions 
asked. Of course, researchers could measure and ana-
lyze additional relevant dimensions, but as long as there 
was an expectation that DSM diagnoses would be used 
in NIMH-funded research, alternative approaches were 
constrained. Thus, the use not only of the DSM’s spe-
cific criteria but also its semiarbitrary thresholds had a 
huge influence on psychopathology research—for both 
good and ill.
In addition, the DSM is used in psychopathology 
training of mental-health professionals across many 
disciplines, most research establishing empirically 
based treatments is conducted using specific DSM diag-
noses, and the manual is used widely in administrative 
and billing systems in the United States and some other 
countries (e.g., The Netherlands). As a result, DSM 
thresholds have had a strong influence on clinicians’ 
approach to patients and their treatment, although 
many clinicians find the highly specified thresholds of 
DSM diagnoses clinically limiting and have developed 
ways to use the manual flexibly—for example, they may 
use diagnoses for administrative purposes but imple-
ment treatment on the basis of individual patients’ 
symptom profiles. Nonetheless, there still is widespread 
acceptance among clinicians of DSM disorders as non-
arbitrary (i.e., real or valid), at least quasi-discrete natu-
ral entities.
With both the research and clinical communities 
using the DSM system and its specific thresholds, the 
lay public has also widely embraced it, in large part 
because it provides reassuring clarity that the problems 
with which they or their loved ones suffer are “real” 
disorders and not “all in their heads,” and because 
researched treatments are available for many disorders. 
The media have also increasingly featured articles and 
news pieces about specific DSM diagnoses, further 
cementing the erroneous view that they are discrete, 
natural entities with nonarbitrary boundaries that are 
the same all over the world. Such articles ignore the 
fact that the vast majority of DSM-5–based research has 
been conducted in English-speaking countries or West-
ern Europe. In contrast, we believe that advancing the 
more nuanced view that DSM-5’s diagnostic thresholds 
are semiarbitrary will foster public understanding of 
mental disorders and help reduce the stigma that fol-
lows upon the false belief that there is a clear line 
between those with mental disorders and “the rest of 
us.” This perspective is conceptually consistent with 
that taken by ICD-11.
Threshold issues in RDoC. The RDoC approach to 
thresholds follows directly from a consideration of their 
consequences. As noted, the necessity of organizing 
research designs around DSM or ICD categories has con-
strained the kinds of research that can be conducted, 
particularly with respect to individuals with symptoms 
that fall below current thresholds for diagnosis. There 
certainly is clinical utility in setting at least some thresh-
olds, but the problem for researchers is to determine the 
particular kinds of criteria to use for setting thresholds 
(e.g., various symptoms or types of functioning) and 
where to set thresholds to facilitate empirically based 
decisions (e.g., whether to treat, hospitalize, or prescribe 
medication). These types of research questions constitute 
a critical part of the RDoC framework. An important aim 
is to support research that will provide systematic infor-
mation about the range of mental functioning and dis-
tress from typical levels through various levels of 
impairment, and about asymptomatic risk states indexed 
by biomarkers that may precede symptoms, such as corti-
cal thinning (e.g., Cannon et al., 2015). Relevant findings 
could be used to inform future revisions of the DSM and 
ICD on how and where to set treatment thresholds, 
including whether to establish more than one treatment 
range (e.g., mild, moderate, severe) and offer different 
treatment recommendations for each range.
This aim of RDoC has two implications for research. 
First, the emphasis upon particular functional con-
structs (e.g., fear, cognitive functioning) that can be 
measured by various means across different RDoC units 
(e.g., physiological responses, observed behaviors, sub-
jective reports) is intended to lay the groundwork for 
a strongly quantitative, psychometrically sound 
approach to assessment. Second, taking a dimensional 
approach will often necessitate research designs that 
involve an examination of psychopathology based upon 
continuous rather than categorical variables. For 
instance, rather than a design that involves patients with 
two subcategories of major depression (e.g., mild and 
severe) and controls, an RDoC design might include 
research participants with a range of mood or anxiety 
 Approaches to Classifying Mental Disorder 
119
symptoms (including those with minimal or no symp-
toms) to explore how changes in neural reward-system 
activity relate to reward-related behavior in a laboratory 
setting, or to the correlation between reward-related 
behavior and cognitive performance or clinical mood 
states. Thus, at the current time, RDoC does not have a 
strong position about thresholds as they apply to con-
temporary clinical practice. However, a major aim of 
RDoC is to promote a research literature that will help 
clinicians in the future provide more sensitive assess-
ments that, in turn, will lead to improved ways to deter-
mine thresholds (or ranges) for empirically based 
diagnosis, prevention, and treatment interventions.
Threshold issues: summary. Once again, we see that 
the public-health and clinical-use purposes shared by 
ICD and DSM have led them to adopt similar—although 
not identical—approaches to defining and using thresh-
olds in mental-disorder diagnosis, whereas RDoC can 
take a more flexible approach. That is, RDoC-based 
research can either set one or more thresholds if doing so 
is important for a particular research purpose, or not 
address threshold issues if they are not relevant for 
research purposes or applications in clinical settings or 
health policy. A long-term RDoC goal is to provide infor-
mation that will facilitate setting thresholds in diagnostic 
systems of mental disorder. This goal includes providing 
for the possibility that various thresholds will be needed 
for different purposes. To analogize from general medi-
cine, research has informed the setting of various thresh-
olds for the treatment of blood pressure and obesity (i.e., 
at lower levels, diet and exercise may be sufficient, 
whereas higher levels may require more “aggressive” 
treatment). However, at present, reasoned clinical judg-
ment is still required in most circumstances.
Comorbidity
For a person to have two or more disorders at the same 
time—that is, coexisting or comorbid disorders—is not 
conceptually problematic. Examples in physical medi-
cine abound: A person with carpal tunnel syndrome 
may also have the flu, and another with a herniated 
disk may also have appendicitis. In such cases, the two 
disorders have distinct signs, symptoms, and etiologies 
and can be considered random co-occurrences. Comor-
bid disorders also may be linked while still being clearly 
distinct; such phenomena are often said to be “compli-
cations of” or “secondary to” the disorder that was pres-
ent first. Again using examples from physical medicine, 
kidney disease is a common complication of diabetes, 
and ear infections are a common complication of mea-
sles, but each represents a distinct health condition with 
a distinct treatment.
The comorbidity seen in mental illness was initially 
presumed to follow one or the other of these medical 
models, particularly the complication model. However, 
beginning around 1990, and based on the widespread 
use of DSM-III and DSM-III-R in research, a plethora of 
findings revealed that comorbidity in mental disorders 
is the rule rather than the exception, that pure and 
uncomplicated symptom presentations are relatively 
rare, and that some putatively distinct disorders may 
be better described as different aspects of a single dis-
order, or as having shared risk factors. An example of 
putative comorbidity involves individuals with “double 
depression” (Keller & Shapiro, 1982): recurrent major 
depressive episodes that punctuate sustained depres-
sive symptoms that are significant but below the diag-
nostic threshold for a major depressive episode. It 
seems unlikely that such individuals have two distinct 
mood disorders, but capturing this presentation in ICD 
requires two diagnoses: recurrent depressive disorder 
and dysthymic disorder (further discussed in the fol-
lowing section, “Comorbidity Issues in ICD-11”). The 
DSM’s approach is even more complex, involving the 
use of two diagnoses to cover the major depressive epi-
sode and the persistent depressive disorder, plus addi-
tional specifiers for the persistent depressive disorder.
Research on rampant comorbidity also revealed that 
much mental-disorder comorbidity was not due to ran-
dom co-occurrence. Rather, there were systematic pat-
terns to comorbidity. To date, analyses of almost a 
dozen distinct data sets with a combined sample size 
of almost 100,000 individuals between the ages of 6 
and 65 have converged to indicate that DSM and ICD 
mental-disorder diagnoses can be organized hierarchi-
cally (see Kotov et al., 2017, for a synthesis of this lit-
erature). This structure of these mental-disorder 
diagnoses has a broad, very general factor of psycho-
pathology at its apex (as mentioned briefly in the sec-
tion “Categories and Dimensions”), followed by at least 
three broad dimensions of disorders at the next level, 
which correspond to three of the four dimensions of 
symptoms identified by Markon (2010): internalizing 
disorders, in which individuals’ subjective experience 
of distress is a major component (e.g., depressive dis-
orders, GAD); externalizing disorders, in which the 
primary manifestations are typically observable behav-
iors (e.g., alcohol and drug dependence, conduct dis-
order); and thought disorders or cognitive disturbance 
(e.g., schizophrenia-spectrum disorders, psychotic 
mood disorders).
Like Markon’s symptom-level dimensions, each 
higher level dimension divides into smaller dimensions 
that are based on subsets of disorders that more fre-
quently co-occur, which yields lower levels of the hier-
archy. For instance, the broad internalizing dimension 
 120 
Clark et al.
divides into two more specific dimensions (Krueger, 
1999; Slade & Watson, 2006; Vollebergh et al., 2001; 
Watson, 2005): one, typically labeled “distress” or “anx-
ious misery,” includes depressive disorders and GAD; 
the other, labeled “fear,” includes panic disorder and 
phobias. Genetic research has indicated that the comor-
bidity of particular disorders (e.g., MDD and GAD) may 
be explained entirely by shared genes and that differ-
ences between them may be due to individuals’ unique 
life experiences (see Mineka, Watson, & Clark, 1998, 
for review) and broad sociocultural trends. As discussed 
in the section “Etiology,” however, we lack a detailed 
explanation of how mental disorder arises from these 
various factors.
Research also has revealed a strong correlation 
between comorbidity and severity, such that the likeli-
hood of comorbidity is substantially higher when illness 
is more severe (L. A. Clark et al., 1995). The general 
psychopathology dimension at the apex of diagnostic 
structural analyses, dubbed the p factor (analogous to 
the g factor of general intelligence; Caspi et al., 2014), 
provides a possible explanation for this finding. If all 
mental disorders share a common dimension, then it 
makes sense that that the stronger this general factor 
is in an individual, the more ways in which it will be 
manifested, and the more severe these various mani-
festations will be. Of the three second-level dimensions 
of psychopathology, the p factor related most strongly 
to thought disorder and cognitive disturbance; impor-
tantly, it also was associated with increased impairment 
in daily functioning, greater familiality, worse develop-
mental histories, and more compromised early-life brain 
function, consistent with its being a general dimension 
that marks severity.
Evidence of such supraordinate dimensions—the 
 
p factor and of its subordinate internalizing, external-
izing, and thought-disorder/cognitive-disturbance fac-
tors—has many implications for understanding, 
classifying, treating, and perhaps even preventing men-
tal illness. For example, the p factor’s association with 
both compromised early-life brain function and thought 
disorder/ cognitive disturbance suggests that the level 
of functioning of certain of one’s basic brain processes 
may affect one’s level of susceptibility to a wide variety 
of mental illness. Thus, it may be more fruitful to search 
for common causes of all or major groups of mental 
illness than to use E. Robins and Guze’s (1970) prin-
ciples for establishing the validity of distinct clinical 
syndromes. The unified protocol for transdiagnostic 
treatment of emotional disorders (Barlow et al., 2011) 
illustrates this notion, emphasizing the commonalities 
in phenomenology, risk factors, and treatment response 
across a wide range of disorders, including all anxiety 
and mood disorders as well as PDs and many 
somatoform and dissociative disorders. This treatment 
is receiving increasing research support for its short- 
and long-term efficacy in reducing symptoms and dis-
tress and for increasing quality of life (e.g., Bullis, 
Fortune, Farchione, & Barlow, 2014; Gallagher, Sauer-
Zavala, et al., 2013; Lopez et al., 2014).
Neuroticism/negative affectivity is central in Barlow’s 
unified protocol, and Lahey (2009) noted that this per-
sonality trait “is a robust correlate and predictor of 
many different mental and physical disorders [and] of 
the quality and longevity of our lives” (p. 241). He 
further went on to say that “knowing why neuroticism 
predicts such a wide variety of seemingly diverse out-
comes should lead to improved understanding of com-
monalities among those outcomes and improved 
strategies for preventing them” (p. 241). Despite their 
breadth, neither Barlow’s unified protocol nor neuroti-
cism/negative affectivity encompasses all of psychopa-
thology, so additional research is needed to determine, 
for example, whether other commonalities (e.g., dys-
function in certain basic brain processes) have implica-
tions for an even wider range of psychopathology or 
whether a different set of brain processes has implica-
tions for the treatment of another subset of mental 
disorders.
In sum, data on comorbidity clearly indicate that very 
detailed, operational definitions of mental disorders, 
such as those in recent versions of the DSM, are overly 
specific. Of course, those data also indicate that current 
classification systems do at least partially reflect empiri-
cal patterns. If they did not, research would not have 
revealed a hierarchical structure; rather, it would have 
found that all symptoms and disorders were equally 
interrelated. As with other issues, and again because 
they have diverse purposes and constituencies, the 
three institutions discussed in this article tackle these 
challenges of comorbidity in different ways, which we 
now explore.
Comorbidity issues in ICD-11. As mentioned earlier, 
the first version of ICD to include a classification of men-
tal disorders—the ICD-6, approved by the World Health 
Assembly in 1948—grouped mental disorders into three 
classes: psychoses, psychoneurotic disorders, and disor-
ders of character, behavior, and intelligence. Psychoses 
were characterized by gross distortions of emotional and 
mental functioning, such as delusions and hallucinations, 
and corresponded to conditions viewed as constituting 
“insanity” or “madness.” Psychotic conditions included 
severe mental disorders such as schizophrenia, manic-
depressive reaction, and involutional melancholia (a very 
severe form of depression) and could be caused by 
organic processes (e.g., as in dementia) or by substances 
such as alcohol or cocaine. Psychoneurotic disorders 
 Approaches to Classifying Mental Disorder 
121
were viewed as milder mental disorders characterized by 
symptoms such as anxiety, depressed mood, or somatiza-
tion that did not involve major distortions in perceptions 
and experience of reality. Neurotic symptoms could 
occur in the context of psychoses, in which case they 
were considered to represent lesser manifestations of the 
more severe underlying disorder and not independent 
phenomena. In contrast, symptoms such as delusions, 
hallucinations, and other gross distortions of mental 
functioning were not characteristic of psychoneurotic 
disorders. In other words, these phenomena were viewed 
as hierarchical: A person with a psychotic disorder could 
not also be diagnosed as having a neurotic disorder. The 
third group of disorders, however, which included alco-
hol or other drug addiction, “mental deficiency” (disor-
ders of intellectual development in ICD-11), and PD, 
corresponded to entities that were independent of the 
psychotic/neurotic axis and could coexist with other 
forms of mental disorder. By the time ICD-8 was approved 
in 1965, substance-related disorders and PDs had been 
moved to an expanded neurotic-disorders grouping, with 
only “mental retardation” remaining in the third group-
ing. In ICD-9, approved in 1975, a distinction was made 
between organic psychotic disorders (those due to 
dementia, substance use, or delirium) and psychoses due 
to primary mental disorders, but the broad ICD-8 group-
ings were otherwise preserved. Throughout this time, the 
idea that symptoms of milder disorders were entirely 
attributable to more serious disorders and, therefore, 
diagnostically irrelevant remained the dominant view. 
Comorbidity was not a major issue for the field.
A major explosion in diagnostic classes—from four 
to 10—occurred with ICD-10, approved in 1990. Even 
so, some of ICD-10’s diagnostic classes represented 
clinically unhelpful conglomerations of disparate phe-
nomena, made necessary by the limitations imposed by 
ICD-10’s categorical system. For example, the section 
“Behavioural syndromes associated with physiological 
disturbances and physical factors” included eating dis-
orders, sleep disorders, and sexual dysfunctions, which 
have very little overlap in terms of signs, symptoms, 
etiology, or treatment. A hierarchical model of mental 
disorders was much more difficult to conceptualize in 
the context of this expanded array of options.
To preserve aspects of the hierarchical model, the 
ICD-10 CDDG contains many rules that were intended 
to assist clinicians in making choices among diagnoses, 
to reduce comorbidity rates, and to maximize parsi-
mony in accounting for presenting symptoms. For 
example, per the ICD-10 CDDG, for patients presenting 
with symptoms of both depressive and anxiety disor-
ders, depressive diagnoses should be given diagnostic 
primacy over anxiety diagnoses if the depression pre-
ceded the onset of the anxiety. Likewise, GAD should 
not be diagnosed in the presence of a depressive epi-
sode, a phobic anxiety disorder, panic disorder, or 
obsessive-compulsive disorder. (These hierarchical 
rules are akin those implemented in DSM-III for similar 
reasons.)
Other diagnostic formulations conveyed a theoretical 
position about relations between sets of symptoms. For 
example, the ICD-10 CDDG indicated that agoraphobia 
and panic disorder should not be diagnosed together. 
Rather, agoraphobia included the qualifiers with or with-
out panic disorder. Several new “combination” catego-
ries, such as schizoaffective disorder and mixed anxiety 
and depressive disorders, were introduced to avoid forc-
ing a diagnostic choice for or assigning multiple diag-
noses to a single presentation. Sometimes these decision 
rules or diagnostic conventions were tied to explicit 
clinical rationales (Maj, 2005), but usually they were 
theoretically based and lacked specific empirical sup-
port. These rules were also sometimes difficult to follow 
and logically inconsistent (Kogan et al., 2016), and they 
were increasingly ignored over time. Moreover, they 
came to be seen as conceptually incompatible with a 
criterion-based approach to classification. If disorders 
were determined by the presence of a particular number 
of specified symptoms, and this was a valid way of 
defining them, why would they not be considered pres-
ent because of the contemporaneous presence of 
another condition? (DSM-III’s hierarchical rules were 
largely abandoned in DSM-III-R for similar reasons.)
These and other factors (which primarily involved 
health conditions other than mental disorders) contrib-
uted to the use of multiple diagnostic codes to describe 
complex clinical presentations, which is now the glob-
ally dominant ICD (and DSM) convention in diagnostic 
coding and reporting. Contemporaneously, a model in 
ICD-10 for identifying primary and related disorders 
was universally unpopular and largely ignored, and has 
been abandoned in ICD-11. Therefore, the assignment 
of multiple diagnoses is often the best way to capture 
the complexity of clinical presentations and may be 
viewed in part as a marker of disorders’ severity. We 
mentioned earlier the problem of “double depression,” 
the combined diagnosis of recurrent depressive disor-
der and dysthymic disorder in ICD-10. The ICD-11 
Working Group on Mood and Anxiety Disorders con-
sidered alternative ways to address this issue but ulti-
mately chose to leave the two codes as they were, 
concluding that the assignment of two codes was the 
most accurate way of describing this clinical presenta-
tion even though the working group did not consider 
individuals with both diagnoses to have two indepen-
dent mood disorders.
Some psychopathology researchers are intellectually 
offended by the inelegance of a two-code approach to 
 122 
Clark et al.
what they view as a single mood disorder, but the fact 
is that at the level of brain mechanisms, we actually do 
not know whether the chronic state and the periodic 
episodes of exacerbated symptoms represent two pro-
cesses or one. Still, a conceptual and scientific problem 
is introduced when these two codes are interpreted as 
representing separate, objective disease entities rather 
than as capturing a particular presentation, especially 
when mental-health policies and research policies are 
structured on this basis (van Os, 2016). At a pragmatic 
level, an individual whose condition is characterized 
by both of these diagnoses is likely to require different, 
more complex, or more intensive interventions than an 
individual whose condition is described by either diag-
nosis alone.
The ICD-11 CDDG, therefore, adopted a relatively 
pragmatic approach to the issue of comorbidity that 
views the assignment of multiple diagnostic codes as 
sometimes necessary to describe complex clinical con-
ditions accurately, but does not intend this as a scien-
tific statement about the independence of reified 
co-occurring disease entities. This partly explains why 
the term “co-occurrence” rather than “comorbidity” is 
used in the ICD-11. The proposed ICD-11 CDDG does 
specify some exclusion rules, but many fewer than were 
in ICD-10, and those that are included tend to be based 
on explicit overlap of diagnostic features rather than 
on theoretical considerations. For example, the pro-
posed diagnostic guidelines for adjustment disorder 
note that it is common for episodes of other mental 
disorders to be triggered or exacerbated by stressful 
life experiences and that a diagnosis of adjustment dis-
order should not be assigned if the symptoms are suf-
ficiently severe or specific to meet the diagnostic 
requirements for another mental disorder, such as PTSD 
or a depressive or anxiety disorder. Likewise, the guide-
lines state that developmental language disorder with 
impairment of pragmatic language should not be diag-
nosed in the presence of ASD. This is because the 
pragmatic language impairment can be considered part 
of the characterization of ASD in the context of ASD’s 
broader pattern of symptoms.
The proposed ICD-11 diagnostic guidelines contain 
a section called “Boundary With Other Disorders” for 
each category (First et al., 2015) that describes the basis 
on which a given condition should be distinguished 
from common differential diagnoses and the circum-
stances under which it may be appropriate to assign 
co-occurring diagnoses. Sometimes, this decision is 
based on the clinical utility of an additional diagnosis 
in the context of a particular case and explicitly left to 
the judgment of the clinician. For example, the diag-
nostic guidelines for stereotyped movement disorders 
indicate that although repetitive and stereotyped motor 
movements can be a characteristic feature of ASD, 
assignment of both diagnoses may be warranted if the 
stereotyped motor movements constitute a separate 
focus of clinical attention (e.g., because of the potential 
for self-injury). Likewise, the diagnostic guidelines for 
complex PTSD acknowledge that characteristic symp-
toms of that disorder related to affect dysregulation, 
distorted view of the self, and difficulties in sustaining 
relationships may be similar to those observed in some 
individuals with PD. When individuals meet the diag-
nostic requirements for both disorders, decisions about 
whether to assign both diagnoses should be based on 
considerations of clinical utility.
At the same time, the developers of the ICD-11 
CDDG have taken specific steps to reduce problematic 
artifactual comorbidity. One example is in the classifica-
tion of PDs, described previously. Comorbidity among 
supposedly distinct PDs and, conversely, the high fre-
quency of such diagnoses as “other specific PD” and 
“PD, unspecified” in previous ICD versions were glaring 
problems—first, because a clear majority of individuals 
diagnosed with PD either meet criteria for two or more 
PDs or do not meet the criteria for any one, specific 
PD (thus meeting the criteria for one of the above 
nonspecific alternatives), and second, because individu-
als have only one personality,10 so PD comorbidity does 
not make conceptual sense. In addition, there is strong 
evidence that there is a general factor in PD (e.g., Sharp 
et al., 2015; Trull, Vergés, Wood, & Sher, 2013; Wright, 
Hopwood, Skodol, & Morey, 2016) and that the most 
important element in PD is its severity (e.g., Tyrer et al., 
2011; Tyrer et al., 2015).
As described earlier in the section “Categories and 
Dimensions in ICD-11,” the ICD-11 proposal for PD 
reflects this evidence by offering a single PD diagnosis 
divided into three subcategories marked by different 
levels of severity, plus a subthreshold category termed 
“personality difficulty.” This approach is fundamentally 
different from that of the ICD-10, which listed eight 
specific PDs, plus “other specific PD” and “PD, unspeci-
fied.” As also described previously, the proposed 
restructuring allows any of the ICD-11 diagnoses to be 
characterized further as prominently featuring one or 
more of five personality-trait dimensions, as well as 
providing a borderline qualifier. This formulation facili-
tates diagnosis of all individuals with personality 
pathology and allows clinicians to describe the nature 
of that pathology either quite simply (e.g., as “moderate 
PD”) or in considerable detail, using whatever combina-
tion of prominent trait dimensions and/or the border-
line qualifier best characterizes the person.
Across the ICD-11, additional features are being built 
into the classification, particularly for use with elec-
tronic coding applications. These features are intended 
 Approaches to Classifying Mental Disorder 
123
to enable conceptual relations between different parts 
of the classification with the goal of reducing the pro-
liferation of additional codes and artifactual comorbid-
ity. The first of these is multiple parenting, which allows 
a particular code or set of codes to appear in more than 
one place. For example, the diagnostic entities that 
represent the various etiologies for dementia are listed 
in both the “Diseases of the Nervous System” chapter 
and the “Mental and Behavioural Disorders” chapter, 
with the same code in both chapters. This obviates the 
need to create a partially redundant set of codes to 
represent the psychiatric or behavioral aspects of 
dementia while conveying that dementia is a legitimate 
part of the scope of practice of mental-health profes-
sionals. A second feature is cluster coding, which allows 
codes from different parts of the ICD-11, such as codes 
representing the multiple manifestations of conditions 
such as diabetes mellitus in different body systems, to 
be linked so that they are understood as being different 
aspects of the same underlying condition in a particular 
individual. Although we have not progressed to this 
point in our understanding of mental disorders, eventu-
ally it should be possible to link codes that represent 
the symptomatic manifestations of an underlying causal 
factor such as substance abuse or of a more general 
dimension such as externalizing or negative affectivity.
Comorbidity issues in DSM-5. As mentioned previ-
ously, around the time DSM-III was published, comorbid 
mental disorders were typically thought to be “ordered,” 
such that one was a complication of the other. On the 
basis of available information and clinical judgment, deci-
sions were made in DSM-III regarding which disorders 
were more likely to be complications of others. The final 
criterion for approximately 60% of disorders in DSM-III 
was “Not due to another mental disorder, such as . . .” 
(Boyd et al., 1984), followed by a list of disorders that 
presumably might be the “primary” disorder of which the 
disorder being considered was a complication. For exam-
ple, a criterion of GAD was “Not due to another mental 
disorder, such as a Depressive Disorder or Schizophre-
nia” (APA, 1980, p. 233). The manual offered neither a 
rationale to justify these hierarchical exclusion criteria 
nor guidance as to how to apply them, stating only that 
the phrase meant that the diagnosis was not to be given 
“if the characteristic symptoms are caused by [the other] 
disorder” (APA, 1980, p. 32).
However, clinicians and researchers alike found it 
difficult to determine whether one disorder was “due 
to” another, and not long after the release of DSM-III, 
researchers began to publish the results of studies that 
ignored the exclusion criteria and revealed widespread 
comorbidity (e.g., Boyd et al., 1984). Many exclusion 
criteria were eliminated in DSM-III-R (APA, 1987), thus 
permitting more comorbid diagnoses, and an explosion 
of research on comorbidity followed. Whereas from 
1980 to 1989, 110 articles and books with “comorbidity” 
as a keyword were published, in the ensuing two 
decades, the corresponding figures were 3,808 and 
14,057, respectively (values based on a PsycINFO 
search conducted November 9, 2017).
This research belied the notion that DSM disorders 
were distinct entities, and the challenge of comorbidity 
is frankly acknowledged in DSM-5:
Because the previous DSM approach considered 
each diagnosis as categorically separate from 
health and from other diagnoses, it did not capture 
the widespread sharing of symptoms and risk 
factors across many disorders that is apparent in 
studies of comorbidity. Earlier editions of DSM 
focused on excluding false-positive results from 
diagnoses; thus, its categories were overly narrow. 
. . . Indeed, the once plausible goal of identifying 
homogeneous populations for treatment and 
research resulted in narrow diagnostic categories 
that did not capture clinical reality. . . . The 
historical aspiration of achieving diagnostic 
homogeneity by progressive subtyping within 
disorder categories no longer is sensible. (APA, 
2013, p. 12)
At the same time, the DSM-5 Task Force aimed “to 
better fill the need of clinicians, patients, families, and 
researchers for a clear and concise description of each 
mental disorder organized by explicit diagnostic crite-
ria” (APA, 2013, p. 5) and recognized that “it is prema-
ture scientifically to propose alternative definitions for 
most disorders” (p. 13). Nonetheless, the Task Force 
strongly endorsed efforts to reduce diagnostic comor-
bidity through several lines of investigation. The first 
was the recognition of cross-cutting symptoms—fre-
quently occurring, frequently treated symptoms (e.g., 
sleep problems, anxiety). Their assessment was an alter-
native to assigning multiple comorbid diagnoses for 
treatment planning, justification of treatment to payers, 
and outcome tracking. Cross-cutting symptoms that 
need treatment but are clearly subordinate to a primary 
diagnosis can be documented without the need to make 
a comorbid diagnosis, which previously had often been 
a NOS diagnosis. For example, a clinician could add 
insomnia of moderate severity to the problem list for a 
patient with schizophrenia without needing to justify 
the treatment of insomnia with a diagnosis of insomnia 
disorder, other specified insomnia disorder, or unspeci-
fied insomnia disorder.
Another major step taken by the DSM-5 Task Force 
in relation to comorbidity was to re-examine how 
 124 
Clark et al.
disorders were grouped into chapters. The chapter 
structure of earlier versions of the DSM was based pri-
marily on clinical phenomena: Disorders with primary 
symptoms relating to mood, anxiety, and psychosis 
each had their own respective chapters. This symptom-
based structure made sense when research findings 
were scarce, and it became ingrained in the provision 
of clinical services and in research. For example, on the 
basis of the diagnoses contained in the DSM-III and -IV 
“Anxiety Disorders” chapter, anxiety clinics might have 
included patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder, 
the primary symptoms of which are quite distinct from 
those of other anxiety disorders, but not patients with 
sexual aversion disorder, even though they exhibit sig-
nificant underlying phobic and panic symptoms associ-
ated with anxiety disorders (Brotto, 2010).
Although these kinds of groupings made some sense 
for the provision of targeted treatment services, the 
DSM-5 Task Force was faced with emerging evidence 
that the existing symptom-based chapter structure was 
not entirely valid. The Diagnostic Spectra Study Group 
was formed to take a closer look at how the DSM-IV 
chapter structure might be revised to reflect not only 
symptom similarity but also related etiologies or patho-
physiology. Revising the DSM-IV chapter structure in 
this way was felt to be an initial step in correcting errors 
in the boundaries between disorders. With disorders 
grouped together more accurately, artificial comorbidi-
ties resulting from erroneous, overly fine-grained split-
ting of disorders might eventually be corrected with 
ongoing research. This study group worked closely with 
developers of ICD-11 to ensure cross-national harmo-
nization of the two systems’ chapter structures.
The Diagnostic Spectra Study Group selected 11 vali-
dators to investigate relations between disorders. Fol-
lowing E. Robins and Guze (1970), they reasoned that 
disorders could be considered closely related to the 
extent that their validators showed the same patterns. 
The specific presumptive criteria for grouping disorders 
were (a) high rates of comorbidity among disorders as 
currently defined, (b) familiality, (c) shared genetic 
and/or environmental risk factors, (d) shared tempera-
mental antecedents, (e) shared cognitive and emotional 
processing abnormalities, (f) shared neural substrates, 
and (g) shared biomarkers. Symptom similarity, the 
course of illness, and treatment response were also 
included as potential validators, but they alone could 
not be used to determine relatedness.
Some of the potential new diagnostic groups targeted 
for study were a group for OCRDs (e.g., Tourette syn-
drome), and two new groups formed largely from the 
current group of mood disorders: specifically, a group 
of unipolar depressive disorders and GAD, which 
would reflect the anxious-misery dimension mentioned 
previously, and a second group for bipolar disorders. 
It was thought that if OCD and GAD were assigned to 
new groups, then remaining anxiety disorders (e.g., 
panic disorder, phobic disorders, and PTSD and related 
disorders) might be grouped as fear-related anxiety 
disorders on the basis of their underlying neurocir-
cuitry. The study group also suggested that schizophre-
nia and related disorders such as schizotypal PD be 
examined for similarities with each other, as well as 
with bipolar disorders. The pervasive developmental 
disorders were seen as ripe for reexamination, particu-
larly given that autistic disorder and Asperger’s disorder 
were listed as two distinct disorders despite their many 
shared characteristics and validators, and that pervasive 
developmental disorder NOS was used frequently in 
clinical settings, suggesting the possibility of better 
specification with this broad domain. Addictive disor-
ders, for which there was evidence of shared neurocir-
cuitry, were another suggested grouping. Pathological 
gambling, an established DSM disorder with ties to 
substance use disorders, and various less established 
conditions, such as internet gaming addiction, were 
potential new additions to this group.
In the final, published version of DSM-5, several of 
these options were implemented on the basis of a close 
examination of the 11 validators. For example, the vari-
ous pervasive developmental disorders were combined 
into a single diagnosis, ASD, for which clinicians could 
specify the severity of symptoms in two domains: social 
communication and restricted, repetitive behaviors. 
Gambling disorder was included in the newly concep-
tualized chapter “Substance-Related and Addictive 
Disorders,” which encouraged research on other non-
substance-related “behavioral addictions,” such as 
severe overengagement in internet gaming. The OCRDs 
were given a chapter of their own, separate from anxi-
ety disorders, that included such disorders as trichotil-
lomania and body dysmorphic disorder, which 
previously had appeared in other chapters on the basis 
of their symptom presentation rather than their underly-
ing characteristics.
Other possibilities ultimately were rejected: Tourette 
syndrome and other tic disorders were placed in the 
“Neurodevelopmental Disorders” chapter rather than 
with OCRDs, a separate “Trauma and Stress-Related 
Disorders” chapter (which included, e.g., PTSD) was 
added, and GAD was kept with the anxiety disorders. 
The reasons for these decisions varied. For example, it 
was argued that the data were not sufficiently strong 
to consider tic disorders as OCRDs (Phillips & Stein, 
2015; Phillips et al., 2010); PTSD was not categorized 
with the anxiety disorders because, as currently defined, 
it is much more complex; and the decision not to clas-
sify GAD with MDD and related disorders was made in 
 Approaches to Classifying Mental Disorder 
125
large part because the forces of tradition and shared 
phenomenology were stronger than those of comorbid-
ity and genetics.
A third major effort to reduce artificial comorbidity 
in DSM diagnoses focused on implementing a dimen-
sional model for PD. As in prior versions of the ICD, 
PD comorbidity and the high frequency of PD-NOS 
diagnoses were major problems in DSM-III through 
DSM-IV. A trait-dimensional PD model was considered 
briefly for DSM-IV but was deemed premature. None-
theless, DSM-IV included a brief section, “Dimensional 
Models for Personality Disorder,” that listed a number 
of existing trait models with varying numbers of dimen-
sions, acknowledging that they “had much in common 
and together appear to cover the important areas of 
personality dysfunction” (APA, 2000, p. 690). Impor-
tantly, between the publication of DSM-IV and the 
beginning of the DSM-5 revision, research had shown 
that the large majority of what had been considered 
competing models of normal- and maladaptive-range 
personality could be integrated into a single hierarchi-
cal model, in which the dimensions of the five-factor 
model of personality (e.g., Benet-Martínez & John, 
1998; McCrae & Costa, 1987) formed the most differenti-
ated level (Markon et al., 2005). (Even more differenti-
ated levels—usually called “facets”—of the five major 
trait domains exist, but their integration across various 
personality models is incomplete.) Because all person-
ality configurations can be described using this hierar-
chical trait model, its implementation in DSM-5 was 
considered an important step in solving the artificial 
comorbidity problem in the PD domain. This integrated 
five-factor model is the starting point for the trait aspect 
of both the AMPD and the ICD-11 PD proposal so, as 
described earlier, they are largely similar.
Arguably, a trait model alone is insufficient for PD 
diagnosis because even extreme traits may be adaptive in 
certain environments (Livesley & Jang, 2005). This con-
sideration was the basis for the DSM-5 Personality and PD 
Work Group’s proposal that impairment in personality 
functioning be the first criterion for a PD diagnosis—spe-
cifically, individuals met this criterion if they were rated 
at or above a threshold of 2 on a 0-to-4 severity dimension 
of personality functioning, with 0 representing healthy 
functioning, 1 denoting subthreshold personality prob-
lems, and 2 through 4 representing moderate, severe, and 
extreme impairment, respectively. Note that these severity 
levels are conceptually quite similar to ICD-11’s no PD, 
personality difficulty, and mild, moderate, and severe PD, 
despite differences in their labels and in the particulars 
of how they are specified.
Finally, as described earlier in “Alternative Model for 
Personality Disorders,” the AMPD includes six specific con-
figurations of personality impairment plus pathological 
trait dimensions, which has the unfortunate consequence 
of retaining the problem of comorbidity. For example, a 
person could have severe personality impairment and 
exhibit a combination of pathological traits that warrants 
diagnosis of both antisocial and narcissistic PD. Comorbid 
PD diagnoses could be avoided entirely by expanding the 
definition of PD–trait specified (L. A. Clark et al., 2015), 
but the DSM-5 Task Force felt that specific PD configura-
tions would help clinicians transition from traditional cat-
egories to a more fully dimensional system in the future. 
As noted earlier, the APA Board of Trustees went even 
further and rejected the AMPD for placement in DSM-5’s 
main Section II, placing it instead in Section III, “Emerging 
Models and Measures.”
One of the findings of the voluminous research into 
mental-disorder comorbidity is that there is as much 
overlap between clinical syndromes and PDs as there is 
among clinical syndromes or among PDs (L. A. Clark, 
2005). Moreover, evidence indicates that common per-
sonality traits, which range from healthy to pathological, 
underlie both types of disorders and thus provide at least 
a partial explanation for both types of overlap. We men-
tioned earlier that comorbidity of MDD and GAD can be 
explained entirely by shared genes; importantly, the trait 
of negative affectivity (also known as neuroticism) also 
shares a significant portion of these common genes 
(Kendler, Gardner, Gatz, & Pedersen, 2007). Other 
research indicates that common personality traits link 
social anxiety disorder and avoidant PD (Watson, Clark, 
& Carey, 1988; Wilberg, Urnes, Friis, Pedersen, & 
Karterud, 1999), schizophrenia and schizotypal PD (e.g., 
Picchioni et al., 2010), and various externalizing disor-
ders (e.g., substance-use disorders and antisocial PD; 
Ruiz, Pincus, & Schinka, 2008). The extent of overlap 
between personality and both PD and clinical syndromes 
is such that personality is most likely an underlying cause 
of comorbidity (L. A. Clark, 2005). That is, different per-
sonality traits are risk factors for—or confer differential 
susceptibility to—specific subsets of mental disorders 
(Hettema, Neale, Myers, Prescott, & Kendler, 2006; Khan, 
Jacobson, Gardner, Prescott, & Kendler, 2005; Tackett, 
Waldman, Van Hulle, & Lahey, 2011).
Comparisons of ICD-11 and DSM-5 with regard to 
comorbidity. The more specified criterion-based approach 
of DSM and the less specified diagnostic-guidelines 
approach of ICD each have strengths and weaknesses with 
regard to reflecting comorbidity data. If DSM-5 criteria are 
strictly applied (e.g., by using a structured interview), 
comorbidity is higher than when a less structured approach 
is used. This is because practicing clinicians tend to focus 
on the most prominent or problematic aspects of the symp-
tom picture and tend not to document all possible comor-
bid disorders in an individual (Wilk et al., 2006). In this 
 126 
Clark et al.
sense, diagnostic practice is more consistent with the less 
highly specified ICD-11. Such an approach has the obvious 
advantage of addressing patients’ most prominent problems 
first, but it is disadvantageous if clinically important comor-
bidities are overlooked (e.g., a pattern of unexpected panic 
attacks in the context of social anxiety disorder). The DSM-5 
cross-cutting dimensions were developed in part to help 
draw attention to such overlooked conditions in diagnostic 
evaluations. Similar psychological and behavioral symptoms 
are also available for coding in the ICD-11 chapter on 
symptoms, signs, and clinical findings not elsewhere 
classified.
Both DSM-5 and ICD-11 have hierarchical categorical 
structures that place more specific disorders in broader 
groupings—for instance, placing specific phobia, social 
anxiety disorder, and panic disorder in a grouping of 
anxiety and fear-related disorders. The structure of ICD-
11 can be utilized for particular purposes (e.g., in 
primary-care settings) with more general diagnostic 
guidelines for the higher order categories. Specifically, 
ICD-11 has “parent” categories higher in the structure 
that subsume “child” categories lower in the structure. 
For example, the ICD-11 primary-care version facilitates 
use of less specific, higher order codes, whereas the 
version for specialist mental-health settings provides 
codes at a greater level of specification. DSM-5 is orga-
nized such that only what corresponds to the lower 
level of ICD-11 diagnoses can be used; if revisions to 
the DSM-5 were to follow ICD-11, they would require 
a more explicitly articulated hierarchical structure than 
DSM-5 now has.
Overall, there is substantial conceptual similarity in 
the ICD-11 and DSM-5 approaches to comorbidity. 
Nonetheless, in practical terms, the more highly speci-
fied criteria in DSM-5 can exacerbate the tendency for 
individuals to meet the requirements of multiple 
diagnoses.
Comorbidity issues in RDoC. As might be anticipated, 
RDoC is much more aligned with structural approaches 
to psychopathology than with the approaches of the two 
clinical manuals. Observed patterns of covariation in 
structural analyses of DSM disorders (e.g., Krueger, 1999; 
Watson, 2005) contributed to the outlines of RDoC 
domains, such as Negative Valence and Positive Valence. 
At a more detailed level, the RDoC construct of Acute 
Threat (“Fear”) is well aligned with the fear-disorders fac-
tor of structural psychopathology models, whereas the 
construct of Potential Threat (“Anxiety”) bears similarity 
to the distress and anxious-misery disorders. If an indi-
vidual has dysfunction in, for example, the fear circuit—
perhaps as a result of hyperreactivity or deficient emotion 
regulation—it is not unlikely for that individual to present 
with a range of symptoms that meet criteria for multiple 
ICD/DSM anxiety disorders, such as specific phobia, 
social phobia, or panic disorder.
Another aspect of psychopathology concerns the 
externalizing construct, which has largely been related 
to the ability to exert control over behavior. Deficient 
inhibitory control, commonly called impulsivity, is 
linked to substance use disorders, ADHD, borderline 
PD, antisocial PD/psychopathy, childhood behavior 
disorders (e.g., conduct disorder), binge eating, risky 
sexual behaviors, excessive gambling, and criminal 
behavior. Thus, if individuals are pathologically low in 
their ability to inhibit behavior, that tendency will likely 
be observed in multiple spheres of behavior and may 
lead to a number of different “comorbid” ICD or DSM 
diagnoses.
An example of this kind of transdiagnostic, construct-
based approach is provided by a study of children 
diagnosed with ADHD that included measurement of 
temperament factors (Karalunas et al., 2014). A cluster-
ing statistic was used to divide the children into three 
groups on the basis of parents’ reports of their child’s 
temperament. One group had only mild symptoms of 
ADHD and essentially normal temperament. The other 
two groups had equal scores on measures of attention 
problems, reflecting greater impairment, but they dif-
fered in that one group was characterized as having an 
extraverted temperament, characterized by high activity 
level and high levels of positive emotions such as ela-
tion and excitement, whereas the other group was char-
acterized as having an irritable temperament, high 
levels of negative emotions such as anger, and difficulty 
returning to baseline when upset, agitated, or sad.
Although the authors did not report comorbid diag-
noses, the irritable group would be expected to include 
children who met the criteria for such diagnoses as 
conduct disorder and oppositional-defiant disorder 
(Evans et al., 2017), whereas extreme cases in the extra-
verted group might have met the criteria for a diagnosis 
of bipolar disorder (e.g., Masi et al., 2006). Clearly, 
these data suggest that observed symptomatic comor-
bidities may emerge as a result of relations among 
multiple temperamental factors, which can be studied 
systematically. On the basis of their findings, the authors 
suggested that “a biologically informed temperament-
based typology . . . provides a superior description of 
heterogeneity in the ADHD population than does any 
current clinical nosologic criteria” (Karalunas et al., 
2014, p. E1). Results such as these are promising for 
pursuing a nosology based on the underlying dimen-
sions of psychopathology.
Comorbidity: summary. As we have seen with the 
other key issues discussed, the approaches that the three 
institutions take to addressing comorbidity are aligned 
 Approaches to Classifying Mental Disorder 
127
with their basic purposes—WHO and APA to provide 
information for public-health statistics and clinical care, 
and NIMH to increase understanding of the mechanisms 
and processes through which mental disorders arise. 
Because the ICD and DSM classification systems are nec-
essarily based on extant knowledge, they must acknowl-
edge the comorbidity implied by this knowledge, even if 
that means giving a patient multiple diagnoses to provide 
a complete clinical picture. To their credit, the developers 
of each classification have taken steps to reduce artifac-
tual comorbidity that unnecessarily complicates rather 
than clarifies patients’ mental-health conditions. Insofar 
as ICD and DSM differ, they do so in ways that are con-
sistent with their different histories and responsive to 
their different constituents and purposes. In particular, 
ICD must have utility in a much wider range of socioeco-
nomic and cultural environments than DSM. In contrast, 
inherent in RDoC’s goal to extend current knowledge is 
the challenge of discovering the complex causes that cre-
ate the phenomenon known as comorbidity. It is hoped 
that the knowledge gained from RDoC-based research 
eventually will provide information that will be useful in 
improving future diagnostic and classification systems.
Summary, Conclusions, and Future 
Directions
At the outset of this article, we said that we would extract 
from our deliberations a set of considerations intended 
to facilitate the related goals of improving classification 
of mental illness, advancing clinicians’ ability to identify 
and treat the diverse manifestations of psychopathology, 
and deepening knowledge of how mental disorders 
develop, are maintained, and can be ameliorated. In this 
concluding section, we first summarize the historical con-
text and current status of the understanding of mental 
disorder and then offer a road map for future research 
directions that will facilitate these goals.
Historical context and current status
Recognition of phenomena we now call collectively 
mental illness, as well as efforts to understand and 
categorize its various manifestations, date back over 
2,500 years, but the modern era of the study of mental 
illness began less than 250 years ago. Early modern 
classification systems were developed primarily for gov-
ernments’ and hospitals’ statistical and record-keeping 
purposes, but by the mid-20th century, these purposes 
had expanded to include a wide range of public-health 
concerns. The two major clinical nosologies that 
emerged from this process, ICD and DSM, share many 
features (e.g., a categorical structure) that respond to 
the purposes for which they were developed and are 
primarily used, which include compilation of health 
statistics, allocation of mental-health resources, clinical 
communication, and decision making in regulatory, 
legal, and health-insurance systems, all ultimately in 
service of public mental-health-care needs. Yet ICD and 
DSM also have idiosyncratic differences, which stem 
from their distinct histories, developmental processes, 
and primary constituencies.
For example, WHO has prioritized the local applica-
bility of ICD in very diverse global environments, result-
ing in specific nosologies for distinct uses and settings 
(e.g., statistical reporting, primary care, research, and 
clinical and educational practice), and the use of pro-
totypical descriptions of disorders rather than lists of 
criteria, to facilitate accommodation of both cultural 
variations in phenomenology and contextual and 
health-system factors that may affect diagnostic prac-
tice. In contrast, APA has made a strong commitment 
to using a single classification system for all purposes, 
anchored by criterial definitions of mental disorders. 
This facilitates reliability across time points and indi-
viduals making diagnoses, with the associated benefit 
of clear communication to all constituents of a single 
set of standardized descriptions of mental illness. How-
ever, this approach also can reduce the flexible applica-
tion of definitions of disorders in diverse sociocultural 
and clinical settings, resulting in potential misdiagnosis. 
As discussed, each approach promotes certain goals as 
well as creating particular constraints.
RDoC, in turn, has emerged from this history of 
nosological developments; it attempts to overcome 
some of their constraints by taking a novel approach 
to the study of the basic brain and behavioral processes 
that in specific environmental contexts give rise to the 
full range of healthy to psychopathological experience. 
In doing so, however, RDoC postpones its clinical and 
health-systems applicability until these fundamental 
processes have been elucidated.
We have described how the trajectory of nosological 
development in psychiatry across the 20th century has 
spanned a diversity of approaches, illustrated in the 
histories of the three institutions we have described. 
Earlier in the century, the prevailing clinical focus was 
not on diagnostic categories but on more narrative case 
formulations grounded in various theoretical models. 
Beginning around 1970, concerted efforts were made 
to describe mental disorders on the basis of observable 
and patient-reported phenomena, without regard to 
theories of how they developed. The underlying 
assumption in this shift was that mental disorders were 
discrete entities that could be reliably diagnosed for 
research and clinical purposes, and that these descrip-
tive definitions would stimulate research on the validity 
of the mental disorders and their diagnoses. At the time, 
 128 
Clark et al.
the prevailing understanding was that mental disorders 
operated on a diathesis-stress model—that is, that they 
resulted from certain genetic diatheses interacting with 
sufficient, and in some cases specific, environmental 
stressors. These various forces gave rise to the highly 
specified criterion sets of DSM-III, which further intensi-
fied research to clarify both the classification of mental 
disorders and the factors that engendered them. Within 
30 years, this research had revealed a more complex 
picture, indicating that, rather than discrete entities with 
single causes such as specific gene mutation, mental 
disorders are multidimensional phenomena that emerge 
from a combination of general, overlapping, and only 
partially determinative genetic causes interacting in 
complex ways with individuals’ personal, social, and 
cultural context and experiences.
ICD-11 and DSM-5. In response to this body of 
research, DSM-5 and ICD-11
•
•
were restructured so that the classification sys-
tems’ organizations would align better with the 
empirical structure of psychopathology;
•
•
introduced diagnoses that combined disorders 
that formerly had been considered distinct into 
single spectra (e.g., PD in ICD-11, ASD in both 
systems);
•
•
provided various “extra-diagnostic” ways to cap-
ture patients’ complex symptom presentations 
(e.g., identification of specific functional prob-
lems as well as associated symptoms in ICD-11 
and cross-cutting symptom dimensions in 
DSM-5);
•
•
addressed the underlying continuity of symptom 
and disorder dimensions, from healthy to severely 
pathological, in various ways (e.g., ICD-11’s cat-
egory of personality difficulty, which captures 
subthreshold conditions that nevertheless affect 
functioning; DSM-5’s diagnostic severity mea-
sures); and
•
•
described in more detail the ways in which devel-
opmental, gender-related, and sociocultural pro-
cesses affect the onset and form of mental illness 
(e.g., ICD-11’s and DSM-5’s sections on culture-
related issues and DSM-5’s Cultural Formulation 
Interview in Section III).
Effort also was expended to harmonize the two sys-
tems. This was most successfully achieved in relation 
to the overall structure of both systems, although some 
substantive differences remain. The level of responsive-
ness to research-based findings in the development of 
both the ICD-11 and the DSM-5 clearly indicates that 
both systems are intended to be research-based and 
iterative in terms of their processes for defining psy-
chopathological conditions and the diagnoses that 
result from applying those definitions. It remains to be 
seen whether these processes will produce greater con-
vergence or greater divergence in the future.
Of course, both classification systems also continue 
to provide a defined set of traditional mental disorders 
that together form a vitally important framework for 
clinical use in diagnosing individuals with mental dis-
order; that help patients and their families make sense 
of their distressing experiences by providing both 
names for—and, more importantly, an organized corpus 
of information about—their condition; and that are 
intended to provide the most useful information avail-
able for essential clinical, public-health, and statistical 
record-keeping purposes.
RDoC. In contrast, the NIMH developed the RDoC as a 
new framework for psychopathology research. This 
framework is fundamentally multidimensional, focused 
on discovering causal mechanisms, and centered on 
brain circuitry and brain/cognitive functions. From this 
center, it extends both “down” to genes/molecules and 
“up” to macro-level behavior and self-reports, and is con-
textualized in terms of both individuals’ development 
and their sociocultural environments. Finally, it is agnos-
tic as to the nature and form of the resultant psychopa-
thology, neither rejecting nor embracing the diagnostic 
entities of current categorical systems. The hope for this 
initiative is that it will lead to a better understanding of 
“basic dimensions of functioning underlying the full 
range of human behavior from normal to abnormal” 
(https://www.nimh.nih.gov/research-priorities/rdoc/
index.shtml) and that from this understanding will emerge 
a more valid system of mental-disorder classification.
Future directions
For basic researchers. The RDoC framework is pre-
liminary—an initial set of hypotheses that need to be 
tested and refined. Considerable research is needed both 
to test the validity of specific implications of RDoC as it 
currently is formulated and to develop and test alterna-
tive hypotheses that no doubt will lead to changes in 
RDoC. Neuroscience certainly holds great promise for 
increasing our understanding of psychopathology, but 
the embeddedness of brain processes in sociocultural 
contexts must not be minimized (Gallagher, Hutto, Slaby, 
& Cole, 2013). Mental health and illness are inherently 
multilevel, multicausal phenomena that require inte-
grated frameworks linking different levels of research—
for example, psychophysiological, sociophysiological, and 
psychosocial (Paris & Kirmayer, 2016). Through epigenetic 
and other mechanisms, brain function is remodeled to 
 Approaches to Classifying Mental Disorder 
129
adapt to particular social circumstances; emergent prop-
erties of neurobiological structures can lead to healthy 
adaptation or pathology across different environments; 
and self-reflection, narrative interpretation of experience, 
and patterns of interaction with others (called the inter-
actome after the connectome, which maps brain inter-
connections) can affect the form, onset, and course of 
disorder (Berrios & Marková, 2015; Kirmayer & Crafa, 
2014; Lilienfeld, 2014; Meloni, 2014; Paris & Kirmayer, 
2016; van Os, Lataster, Delespaul, Wichers, & Myin-
Germeys, 2014). As work on RDoC proceeds, it will nec-
essarily focus on these consequences of multicausality. 
Thus, we need basic researchers studying both sociocul-
tural processes and brain circuitry, as well as their inter-
action. Acquisition of basic knowledge about genomics, 
environmental effects, neurodevelopmental trajectories, 
neurocircuitry and its processes is critical; however, for 
RDoC to achieve its purpose, we also need to devise new 
research strategies to examine how multiple factors—
“from neurons to neighborhoods”—simultaneously and 
interactively affect the development of psychological 
health and psychopathology.
In particular, phylogenetically older brain circuits that 
mediate basic emotional and cognitive processes (e.g., 
in the midbrain and limbic system) interact with newer 
brain systems that mediate interpretive and context-
dependent processes (e.g., in the cerebral cortices). This 
fundamental interactivity means that the symptoms that 
constitute multiple mental disorders (e.g., alterations in 
sleep, appetite, attention, and perception) are deter-
mined in part by individuals’ interpretations of their 
experiences. It is possible, for example, to develop an 
illness from the meaning ascribed to emotional experi-
ences. PTSD, for example, may emerge as a result of 
witnessing the accidental death of a loved one, and 
major depression from the loss of a parent in childhood 
(Bifulco, Brown, & Harris, 1987). In such cases, it is 
typically the closeness of the patient’s interpersonal rela-
tionship with the person that modulates the pathological 
effect. Because interpretation is always mediated by the 
sociocultural contexts and meaning traditions in which 
the person is immersed, the study of brain processes 
needs to take into account the interpretive contexts and 
cognitive-emotional assumptions in which research 
assessments are embedded.
Most comorbidity is likely due to shared, “transdiag-
nostic” mechanisms, so we need to identify those mech-
anisms and determine both the extent to which they 
account for similarities in the relevant syndromes and 
what variance remains unexplained. Phrased differently, 
we need studies that cut across current diagnostic cat-
egories within a multidimensional perspective, as well 
as research to identify both the general and specific 
mechanisms of current treatments, asking not only what 
works or whether Treatment X works but, even more 
importantly, how treatments work. Clearly, fulfilling the 
promise of RDoC is a complex endeavor that will take 
time as well as considerable resources and effort.
For clinical researchers. In the relative short term—
that is, largely on the basis of current knowledge—a set 
of clinically relevant dimensions is needed to supplement 
current classification systems. Attempts to introduce 
dimensions into the DSM-5 diagnostic framework met 
political and professional opposition. Such resistance has 
also begun to emerge in relation to ICD-11 and may be 
stimulated by initial attempts at implementation. Reasons 
for this resistance, such as clinicians’ unfamiliarity with or 
lack 
of 
knowledge 
about 
specific 
dimensional 
approaches, 
can be addressed largely through education, but the lack 
of established thresholds that would allow for specific 
decisions based on dimensional information needs to be 
rectified by clinical research. Beneficial directions would 
include (a) identifying the most useful dimensions and 
appropriate cut points for aspects of care that require 
categorical decisions—from “purely practical” issues, 
such as defining caseness for administrative purposes 
(e.g., billing, insurance coverage, and disability determi-
nation), to treatment decisions, such as whether to hospi-
talize patients or treat them on an outpatient basis—and 
(b) identifying the most useful dimensions for aspects of 
care that are more variable, such as types of treatment 
and their respective durations. These dimensions may be 
fairly directly tied to current diagnoses (e.g., subthresh-
old vs. mild, moderate, and severe levels of syndromes 
such as depressive illnesses), may be symptom based 
(e.g., subclinical vs. mild, moderate, and severe levels of 
specific symptoms, such as anhedonia or behavioral 
avoidance), or may reflect functional processes (e.g., 
dimensions of different types of cognitive processes that 
cut across current disorders).
There has been considerable progress in the devel-
opment of dimensional self- and other- (e.g., parent-) 
report instruments with strong convergent and discrimi-
nant validity (Kotov et al., 2017, provide a broad, albeit 
not comprehensive, list), but few of these have been 
disseminated into wide clinical use. Most were devel-
oped for research and lack validated cut points for 
clinical use. The DSM-5 dimensional assessment mea-
sures themselves have not undergone rigorous research 
scrutiny beyond the DSM-5 field trials to determine how 
they may be most useful clinically. The research litera-
ture has been accruing since the publication of these 
measures in 2013, but slowly, because it is difficult to 
obtain funding for this type of practical, applied clinical 
research.
 130 
Clark et al.
Measures also are needed that do not depend on self- 
or other-reports for patients, from those based in behav-
ioral tasks to biological assessments across many 
levels—from physiology to molecular genetics. Successful 
examples of behavioral measures do exist (e.g., measures 
of intelligence and neuropsychological assessments), but 
most other behavioral measures have been developed for 
research use, and their clinical utility has not been estab-
lished. Finally, how best to measure “the environment” 
and “development” for integrated, multilevel research has 
proved quite challenging and remains largely unresolved. 
It is important to note that the brevity of this paragraph 
belies the complexity and difficulty of these tasks.
Looking toward the more distant future, it will not be 
sufficient simply to accrue more fundamental knowledge 
about genomics, environmental effects, neurodevelop-
mental trajectories, and processes related to neurocir-
cuitry, as discussed above. In addition, we will need to 
determine how to use this knowledge in complex, real-
world situations—that is, how to translate basic research 
findings into practical methods for assessment and treat-
ment that can be implemented in clinical settings. Even if 
we came to understand a great deal more than we cur-
rently do about psychopathological processes and mecha-
nisms of change, to be most helpful in determining, for 
example, which of several treatments would be most ben-
eficial for a particular patient, we would need treatment 
trials to test hypotheses about how these processes and 
mechanisms are linked to each other and to manifesta-
tions of mental disorder.
We also would need practically feasible, reliable, and 
valid assessment methods for patients’ psychopathology 
that are based on research findings but do not necessarily 
require clinicians to understand the underlying mecha-
nisms in detail. (Analogously, physicians who treat cancer 
do not necessarily understand the complex cellular pro-
cesses that give rise to malignant tumors, but as long as 
the nature of the tumor is diagnosed reliably and validly, 
they know what treatment options are most likely to be 
beneficial.) Finally, at the clinic or population level, we 
also would need to determine which implementation strat-
egies best facilitate the uptake, fidelity, and sustainability 
of the range of interventions developed for particular dis-
orders. This seemingly late stage is in fact crucially infor-
mative at the onset of the intervention-development 
process (Carroll & Rounsaville, 2003). From a public-health 
perspective, novel interventions or high-resource assess-
ment methods (e.g., neuroimaging) that can be used with 
only a minority of the population are no more than mini-
mally effective. Thus, as our basic knowledge increases, 
there will be considerable applied work yet to do.
For clinicians. It is difficult to overstate that strong forces 
are operating to maintain current diagnostic practices and 
classification systems, or to overemphasize how difficult 
changing them will be. The current categorical diagnos-
tic system is entrenched not only in research but also 
in drug-approval, legal, insurance-reimbursement, and 
health-service delivery systems, such that clinicians can-
not avoid using it. However, on a practical level, most 
clinicians implicitly recognize the limitations of diagnos-
tic categories in treating their patients, so after making diag-
noses for administrative purposes, clinicians often select 
treatments on the basis of their patients’ most prominent 
symptoms, including symptoms that are not listed in the 
criteria of the recorded diagnoses.
For clinical and research organizations. It is impor-
tant that clinicians and the organizations that represent 
and serve them—APA and WHO, along with local psychi-
atric and psychological associations worldwide—con-
tinue to evolve in the way they approach their classification 
efforts. This includes acknowledging the limitations of 
current diagnostic and classification systems, supporting 
RDoC and other research efforts that will clarify the diag-
nostic issues we have described, and advocating for 
appropriate steps to “de-reify” mental disorders in regula-
tory, legislative, and legal processes. Organizations repre-
senting clinicians also play a key role in disseminating 
new clinical directions to their members, and this dis-
semination must include education about the use of 
dimensional assessments of psychopathology in clinical 
practice and the value of thinking transdiagnostically 
when considering treatments. To their credit, many clini-
cians already have embraced these principles.
For universities and institutes. As systemic changes 
are made to incorporate the dimensionality of psychopa-
thology into classification systems, scholarly organiza-
tions should be in the vanguard of reflecting these 
changes, and universities should be in the vanguard of 
training professionals to use dimensional systems. Cur-
rently, the field is organized in ways that reflect the extant 
diagnostic systems. For example, many scholarly organi-
zations reflect the current categorical system of disorders 
(e.g., the Eating Disorders Research Society, the Interna-
tional Society for the Study of Personality Disorders), as 
do a panoply of journals covering specific categories of 
disorders (e.g., the Journal of Depression and Therapy, 
Alcoholism and Drug Addiction; Autism Research) and 
many academic medical centers in which clinical services 
are organized around diagnostic categories (e.g., clinics for 
mood disorders, substance use disorders, and eating disor-
ders). Concerning the last case, clinical research is typically 
carried out only with the patients in these clinics, with lit-
tle crossover. Such a narrow approach to research inhib-
its study of the points of overlap and distinction among 
these diagnostic groupings. The landscape is changing, 
 Approaches to Classifying Mental Disorder 
131
however. A PsycINFO search found two articles with the 
term “transdiagnostic” anywhere in the record before 
2000; it found 89 in the first decade of the 21st century 
and, in the current decade, 1,200 already have been 
published. Moreover, the electronic marketplace, being 
nimbler than print-based publishers, is already leading 
the way: Journals such Ecological Psychology show up 
in our browsers when we go online to learn about the 
most recent scientific work.
For the media, the lay public, the groups above, 
and everyone else. As we worked together over many 
months to develop this article, we found ourselves com-
ing back time and again to the four key issues that all 
three systems must and do address in various ways. In 
the first part of the article, therefore, we described the 
three systems to provide the historical and contemporary 
contexts within which they address these issues: etiology, 
categories and dimensions, thresholds, and comorbidity. 
We then provided in-depth discussion of each key issue, 
first from a general perspective and then from the per-
spective of each institution and its corresponding system 
of describing mental disorder.
As we discussed and wrote about these key issues, 
we gradually arrived at what we agreed was our most 
fundamental “take-home message”: The way one 
approaches the entire topic of mental disorder and, 
consequently, the way one grapples with, and tenta-
tively resolves, these key issues depend largely, if not 
entirely, upon the purposes for which one is doing so. 
Put simply, the three approaches to mental illness that 
are this article’s focus each have both strengths and 
limitations and should be considered complementary 
rather than competing.
We further thought that the media and, more gener-
ally, the public may have viewed the purpose of diag-
nosis and classification of mental disorder to be only, or 
at least primarily, to provide descriptions of a set of 
well-defined disorders to guide clinicians in determining 
which of these disorders each patient “has.” We wish to 
broaden this view to encompass awareness that, first, 
although we know far more about mental disorders that 
we did a half century ago, they still are not fully under-
stood; second, even describing mental disorder is a com-
plex task, to say nothing of understanding how various 
factors combine to cause its many manifestations; and 
third, again, the various ways to think about mental 
disorder described in this article are each important for 
their own purposes. These purposes include describing 
mental disorders on the basis of the best available evi-
dence for use by patients, their families, and their clini-
cians and for various governmental functions, as well as 
furthering the understanding of the causes of mental 
illness and ways to ameliorate it, and, ultimately, prevent 
its development or minimize its severity.
At the very beginning of this article, we provide two 
quotes, each of which is an analogy for aspects of our 
message. One, by Edmund Burke, reminds us that 
although both processes and dimensions are continu-
ous and without clear boundaries, we nonetheless can 
distinguish and categorize them. The other, by T. S. 
Eliot, suggests that as we deepen our understanding of 
mental disorder, we will not gain knowledge that is 
altogether unrecognizable; rather, we will gain a new 
and clear perspective on what we now only dimly 
understand. It is our hope that the approaches to men-
tal disorder taken by the three systems described in this 
article eventually will arrive at the same clear point of 
understanding. That day may yet be a long way off, but 
it is the goal toward which we strive.
Appendix 1: Glossary of Acronyms and 
Terminology
ADAMHA: Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health 
Administration
ADHD: attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
AMPD: Alternative DSM-5 Model for Personality Disorders
APA: American Psychiatric Association
ASD: autism spectrum disorder
BMI: body mass index
CDDG: Clinical Descriptions and Diagnostic Guidelines
CFI: Cultural Formulation Interview
CM: Clinical Modification
Clinical and associated features: Clinical features are the 
symptoms and signs that are common to a diagnosis and 
collectively constitute its diagnostic criteria; associated 
features are symptoms and signs that are often seen in 
patients with a disorder but that do not contribute to its 
diagnosis.
Clinical syndrome: A commonly co-occurring set of clini-
cal signs and symptoms that collectively represent a rec-
ognizable clinical entity; the term encompasses officially 
recognized disorders but also includes common clinical 
entities that are not associated with an official diagnosis. 
The term is most typically used in contrast to personality 
disorder.
DCR: Diagnostic Criteria for Research
DSM: Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disor-
ders (subsequent numbers indicate editions; “R” indicates 
a revision)
General medical disorders: Conditions that are listed in 
ICD outside the “Mental, Behavioural, and Neurodevel-
opmental Disorders” chapter.
GAD: generalized anxiety disorder
GBD: Global Burden of Disease
GCPN: Global Clinical Practice Network
 132 
Clark et al.
ICD: International Classification of Diseases (subsequent 
numbers indicate editions)
MDD: major depressive disorder
mhGAP: Mental Health Gap Action Programme
NIH: National Institutes of Health
NIMH: National Institute of Mental Health
NOS: not otherwise specified
OCF: Outline for Cultural Formulation
OCRDs: obsessive-compulsive and related disorders
PD: personality disorder
PTSD: posttraumatic stress disorder
RDoC: Research Domain Criteria
SUD: substance use disorder
WHO: World Health Organization
Appendix 2: Diagnostic Criteria for 
Social Phobia/Social Anxiety Disorder
ICD-10: Clinical Description and 
Diagnostic Guidelines
Clinical Description and Diagnostic Guidelines for 
Social Phobias, International Classification of Diseases 
and Related Health Problems, Tenth Revision (World 
Health Organization, 1992b, pp. 113–114).
Social phobias often start in adolescence and are 
centered around a fear of scrutiny by other people 
in comparatively small groups (as opposed to 
crowds), usually leading to avoidance of social 
situations. Unlike most other phobias, social phobias 
are equally common in men and women. They may 
be discrete (i.e., restricted to eating in public, to 
public speaking, or to encounters with the opposite 
sex) or diffuse, involving almost all social situations 
outside the family circle. A fear of vomiting in 
public may be important. Direct eye-to-eye 
confrontation may be particularly stressful in some 
cultures. Social phobias are usually associated with 
low self-esteem and fear of criticism. They may 
present as a complaint of blushing, hand tremor, 
nausea, or urgency of micturition, the individual 
sometimes being convinced that one of these 
secondary manifestations of anxiety is the primary 
problem; symptoms may progress to panic attacks. 
Avoidance is often marked, and in extreme cases 
may result in almost complete social isolation.
Diagnostic guidelines:
All of the following criteria should be fulfilled for 
a definite diagnosis:
(a) the psychological, behavioural, or autonomic 
symptoms must be primarily manifestations of 
anxiety and not secondary to other symptoms such 
as delusions or obsessional thoughts;
(b) the anxiety must be restricted to or predomi-
nate in particular social situations; and
(c) the phobic situation is avoided whenever 
possible.
ICD-10: Diagnostic Criteria  
for Research
Diagnostic Criteria for Social Phobias, The ICD-10 Clas-
sification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders: Diag-
nostic Criteria for Research (World Health Organization, 
1993, pp. 110–111).
A. Either (1) or (2):
(1) marked fear of being the focus of attention, or 
fear of behaving in a way that will be embarrassing 
or humiliating;
(2) marked avoidance of being the focus of atten-
tion or situations in which there is fear of behaving 
in an embarrassing or humiliating way.
These fears are manifested in social situations, 
such as eating or speaking in public; encountering 
known individuals in public; or entering or 
enduring small group situations, such as parties, 
meetings and classrooms.
B. At least two symptoms of anxiety in the feared 
situation at some time since the onset of the 
disorder, as defined in criterion B for F40.0 
(Agoraphobia), and in addition one of the 
following symptoms:
(1) Blushing.
(2) Fear of vomiting.
(3) Urgency or fear of micturition or defecation.
Significant emotional distress due to the symptoms 
or to the avoidance.
D. Recognition that the symptoms or the avoidance 
are excessive or unreasonable.
E. Symptoms are restricted to or predominate in 
the feared situation or when thinking about it.
F. Most commonly used exclusion criteria: Criteria 
A and B are not due to delusions, hallucinations, 
or other symptoms of disorders such as organic 
mental disorders (F0), schizophrenia and related 
disorders (F20–F29), affective disorders (F30–F39), 
 Approaches to Classifying Mental Disorder 
133
or obsessive compulsive disorder (F42), and are 
not secondary to cultural beliefs.
ICD-11: Essential Features from the 
Proposed Diagnostic Guidelines (CDDG)
Proposed Diagnostic Guidelines for Social Anxiety Dis-
order, International Classification of Diseases and 
Related Health Problems, Eleventh Revision (Kogan 
et al., 2016, p. 1145).
Proposed essential features from diagnostic guidelines 
for Social Anxiety Disorder:
•
•
Marked and excessive fear or anxiety that occurs 
consistently in one or more social situations such 
as social interactions (e.g., having a conversation), 
doing something while feeling observed (e.g., eat-
ing or drinking in the presence of others), or per-
forming in front of others (e.g., giving a speech).
•
•
The individual is concerned that he or she will 
act in a way, or show anxiety symptoms, that will 
be negatively evaluated by others (i.e., be humili-
ating, embarrassing, lead to rejection, or be 
offensive).
•
•
Relevant social situations are consistently avoided 
or endured with intense fear or anxiety.
•
•
The symptoms are not transient; that is, they per-
sist for an extended period of time (e.g., at least 
several months).
•
•
The symptoms are not better accounted for by 
another Mental and Behavioural Disorder (e.g., 
Agoraphobia)
•
•
The symptoms are sufficiently severe to result in 
significant distress about experiencing persistent 
anxiety symptoms or result in significant impair-
ment in personal, family, social, educational, occu-
pational, or other important areas of functioning.
DSM-IV: Diagnostic Criteria
Diagnostic Criteria for Social Phobia, DSM-IV (American 
Psychiatric Association, 2000, p. 456). Copyright © 2000 
American Psychiatric Association.
A. A marked and persistent fear of one or more 
social or performance situations in which the person 
is exposed to unfamiliar people or to possible scru-
tiny by others. The individual fears that he or she 
will act in a way (or show anxiety symptoms) that 
will be humiliating or embarrassing.
B. Exposure to the feared social situation almost 
invariably provokes anxiety, which may take the 
form of a situationally bound or situationally predis-
posed Panic Attack.
C. The person recognizes that the fear is excessive 
or unreasonable. Note: In children, this feature may 
be absent.
D. The feared social or performance situations are 
avoided or else are endured with intense anxiety or 
distress.
E. The avoidance, anxious anticipation, or distress 
in the feared social or performance situation(s) inter-
feres significantly with the person’s normal routine, 
occupational (academic) functioning, or social activi-
ties or relationships, or there is marked distress about 
having the phobia.
F. In individuals under age 18 years, the duration 
is at least 6 months.
G. The fear or avoidance is not due to the direct 
physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of 
abuse, a medication) or a general medical condition 
and is not better accounted for by another mental 
disorder (e.g., Panic Disorder With or Without Ago-
raphobia, Separation Anxiety Disorder, Body Dys-
morphic Disorder, a Pervasive Developmental 
Disorder, or Schizoid Personality Disorder).
H. If a general medical condition or another mental 
disorder is present, the fear in Criterion A is unre-
lated to it, e.g., the fear is not of Stuttering, trembling 
in Parkinson’s disease, or exhibiting abnormal eating 
behavior in Anorexia Nervosa or Bulimia Nervosa.
DSM-5: Diagnostic Criteria
Diagnostic Criteria for Social Anxiety Disorder (Social 
Phobia) Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders, Fifth Edition (American Psychiatric Associa-
tion, 2013). Copyright © 2013 American Psychiatric 
Association.
A. Marked fear or anxiety about one or more social 
situations in which the individual is exposed to pos-
sible scrutiny by others. Examples include social 
interactions (e.g., having a conversation, meeting 
unfamiliar people), being observed (e.g., eating or 
drinking), and performing in front of others (e.g., 
giving a speech).
Note: In children, the anxiety must occur in peer 
settings and not just during interactions with adults.
B. The individual fears that he or she will act in a 
way or show anxiety symptoms that will be nega-
tively evaluated (i.e., will be humiliating or embar-
rassing; will lead to rejection or offend others).
C. The social situations almost always provoke fear 
or anxiety.
 134 
Clark et al.
Note: In children, the fear or anxiety may be 
expressed by crying, tantrums, freezing, clinging, 
shrinking, or failing to speak in social situations.
D. The social situations are avoided or endured 
with intense fear or anxiety.
E. The fear or anxiety is out of proportion to the 
actual threat posed by the social situation and to the 
sociocultural context.
F. The fear, anxiety, or avoidance is persistent, typi-
cally lasting for 6 months or more.
G. The fear, anxiety, or avoidance causes clinically 
significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning.
H. The fear, anxiety, or avoidance is not attributable 
to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a 
drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical 
condition.
I. The fear, anxiety, or avoidance is not better 
explained by the symptoms of another mental dis-
order, such as panic disorder, body dysmorphic dis-
order, or autism spectrum disorder.
J. If another medical condition (e.g., Parkinson’s 
disease, obesity, disfigurement from burns or injury) 
is present, the fear, anxiety, or avoidance is clearly 
unrelated or is excessive.
Author Contributions
L. A. Clark, B. Cuthbert, R. Lewis-Fernández, W. E. Narrow, 
and G. M. Reed all contributed to the writing of the manuscript 
and approved the final version for publication. They are listed 
alphabetically in the byline. L. A. Clark was the lead author.
Acknowledgments
G. M. Reed is a member of the WHO Secretariat, Department 
of Mental Health and Substance Abuse. However, unless spe-
cifically stated, the views expressed in this article are those 
of the authors and do not represent the official policies or 
positions of WHO. We acknowledge the generous assistance 
of Jack Maser for his many contributions to their discussions 
and his considerable editing of countless versions of the 
manuscript. We also thank Eloise Clark for her eagle editing 
eye and comments that helped us to clarify obscure points.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The authors declared that they had no conflicts of interest with 
respect to their authorship or the publication of this article.
Notes
1. 
Formal uses of the terms disorder, illness, and disease vary 
across disciplines and institutions, and there are also variations 
in how these terms are used and understood by the lay public. 
With respect to mental disorder, the distinctions among these 
terms are blurry and not consistently meaningful, even within 
disciplines. We generally have used these terms in a manner 
that is consistent with their use in the respective contexts of 
the three key organizations around which this article is orga-
nized. We caution readers not to infer too precise a meaning 
from the usages of each term. Similarly, we use the terms in 
both the singular and plural (e.g., mental disorder and mental 
disorders), using the former when we focus on the domain 
as a whole and the latter when we are referencing the set of 
distinguishable elements that form the domain.
2. 
All acronyms used in this report can be found in the 
Glossary on pages 131 and 132.
3. 
The name is an acknowledgment of the earlier Research 
Diagnostic Criteria, which provided the foundation for 
DSM-III and spurred efforts to validate mental-disorder 
definitions on the basis of E. Robins and Guze’s (1970) 
principles.
4. 
Volume Two of ICD-10 (WHO, 1992a) contains a detailed 
historical account of the public-health innovations related to 
classification that provided the early foundation for the ICD.
5. 
The World Health Assembly is made up of the ministers of 
health of all 194 WHO member states (countries), includ-
ing the United States. The U.S. representative to the World 
Health Assembly is the Secretary of Health and Human 
Services.
6. 
For purposes of historical accuracy, we note that the pres-
ent American Psychiatric Association was known by sev-
eral other names from its founding in 1844 until 1921.
7. 
Throughout the manuscript, when referencing a particular 
version of ICD or DSM, we use the terms that were used 
at that time, some of which may now be considered pejo-
rative. The first time we use such terms, we also provide 
the currently used term, except in cases for which there is 
no obvious corresponding term (e.g., neuroses); thereafter, 
we use quotation marks around the term.
8. 
The ICD-11 working group did not adopt DSM-5’s term, 
“gender dysphoria,” because “dysphoria” refers to a state of 
unhappiness or psychological distress; using a name that 
seemed to define distress as the central feature of the diag-
nosis was seen as inconsistent with the recommendation to 
remove it from ICD-11’s chapter on mental and behavioral 
disorders (Evans et al., 2017).
9. 
In 1735, Linnaeus classified living organisms into an 
arrangement of seven hierarchical layers—kingdoms, 
phyla, classes, orders, families, genera, and species—laying 
the groundwork for modern taxonomic systems in biology.
10. Multiple personality disorder, called dissociative identity 
disorder in the DSM-5, is one possible exception.
References
Achenbach, T. M. (1966). The classification of children’s psy-
chiatric symptoms: A factor-analytic study. Psychological 
Monographs: General and Applied, 80(7), 1–37. doi:10.1037/ 
h0093906
Adeponle, A. B., Thombs, B. D., Groleau, D., Jarvis, E., & 
Kirmayer, L. J. (2013). Using the cultural formulation to 
resolve uncertainty in diagnoses of psychosis among 
ethnoculturally diverse patients. Psychiatric Services, 63, 
147–153. doi:10.1176/appi.ps.201100280
 Approaches to Classifying Mental Disorder 
135
Aggarwal, N. K., Nicasio, A. V., DeSilva, R., Boiler, M., & 
Lewis-Fernández, R. (2015). Does the Cultural Formulation 
Interview for the fifth revision of the diagnostic and 
statistical manual of mental disorders (DSM-5) affect 
medical communication? A qualitative exploratory study 
from the New York site. Ethnicity and Health, 20(1), 
1–28. doi:10.1080/13557858.2013.857762
Alarcón, R. D., Alegría, M., Bell, C. C., Boyce, C., Kirmayer, 
L. J., Lin, K. M., . . . Wisner, L. W. (2002). Beyond the 
funhouse mirrors: Research agenda on culture and psy-
chiatric diagnosis. In D. J. Kupfer, M. B. First, & D. A. 
Regier (Eds.), A research agenda for DSM-V (pp. 219–281). 
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.
Allardyce, J., McCreadie, R. G., Morrison, G., & van Os, J. 
(2007). Do symptom dimensions or categorical diagnoses 
best discriminate between known risk factors for psycho-
sis? Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 42, 
429–437. doi:10.1007/s00127-007-0179-y
Altman, E. G., Hedeker, D., Peterson, J. L., & Davis, J. M. (1997). 
The Altman Self-Rating Mania Scale. Biological Psychiatry, 
42, 948–955. doi:10.1016/S0006-3223(96)00548-3
American Medico-Psychological Association. (1918). Statistical 
manual for the use of institutions for the insane. New 
York, NY: National Committee for Mental Hygiene.
American Psychiatric Association. (1942). Statistical manual 
for the use of hospitals for mental diseases. Utica, NY: State 
Hospitals Press.
American Psychiatric Association. (1952). Diagnostic and statisti-
cal manual of mental disorders. Washington, DC: Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (1968). Diagnostic and sta-
tistical manual of mental disorders (2nd ed.). Washington, 
DC: Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (1980). Diagnostic and sta-
tistical manual of mental disorders (3rd ed.). Washington, 
DC: Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (1987). Diagnostic and 
statistical manual of mental disorders (3rd ed., Rev.). 
Washington, DC: Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and sta-
tistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed.). Washington, 
DC: Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and sta-
tistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed., text rev.). 
Washington, DC: Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and sta-
tistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Washington, 
DC: Author.
American 
Psychiatric 
Association. 
(2015). 
DSM: History of the man-
ual. Retrieved from http://www.psychiatry.org/practice/ 
dsm/dsm-history-of-the-manual
Barlow, D. H., Farchione, T. J., Fairholme, C. P., Ellard, K. K., 
 
Boisseau, C. L., Allen, L. B., . . . Ehrenreich-May, J. (2011). 
Unified protocol for transdiagnostic treatment of emo-
tional disorders: Therapist guide. New York, NY: Oxford 
University Press.
Beauchaine, T. P., & McNulty, T. (2013). Comorbidities and 
continuities as ontogenic processes: Toward a develop-
mental spectrum model of externalizing psychopathol-
ogy. Development and Psychopathology, 25, 1505–1528. 
doi:10.1017/S0954579413000746
Becker, A. E., Thomas, J. J., & Pike, K. M. (2009). Should 
non-fat-phobic anorexia nervosa be included in DSM-V? 
International Journal of Eating Disorders, 42, 620–635. 
doi:10.1002/eat.20727
Belsky, J., Jonassaint, C., Pluess, M., Stanton, M., Brummett, B., 
& Williams, R. (2009). Vulnerability genes or plasticity genes? 
Molecular Psychiatry, 14, 746–754. doi:10.1038/mp.2009.44
Benet-Martínez, V., & John, O. P. (1998). Los Cinco Grandes 
across cultures and ethnic groups: Multitrait-multimethod 
analyses of the Big Five in Spanish and English. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 729–750. 
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.75.3.729
Berrios, G. E., & Marková, I. (2015). Toward a new epistemol-
ogy of psychiatry. In L. J. Kirmayer, R. Lemelson, & C. A. 
Cummings (Eds.), Re-visioning psychiatry: Cultural phenom-
enology, critical neuroscience and global mental health (pp. 
41–64). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Biederman, J., Faraone, S. V., Mick, E., Williamson, S., 
Wilens, T. E., Spencer, T. J., . . . Zallen, B. (1999). 
Clinical correlates of ADHD/ADD in females: Findings 
from a large group of girls ascertained from pediatric 
and psychiatric referral sources. Journal of the American 
Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 38, 966–975. 
doi:10.1097/00004583-199908000-00012
Bifulco, A., Harris, T., & Brown, G. W. (1992). Mourning or 
early inadequate care? Reexamining the relationship of 
maternal loss in childhood with adult depression and 
anxiety. Development and Psychopathology, 4, 433–449. 
doi:10.1017/S0954579400000882
Bifulco, A. T., Brown, G. W., & Harris, T. O. (1987). Childhood 
loss of parent, lack of adequate parental care and adult 
depression: A replication. Journal of Affective Disorders, 
12, 115–128. doi:10.1016/0165-0327(87)90003-6
Blashfield, R. K., Keeley, J. W., Flanagan, E. H., & Miles, 
S. R. (2014). The cycle of classification: DSM-I through 
DSM-5. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 10, 25–51. 
doi:10.1146/annurev-clinpsy-032813-153639
Bogdan, R., Hyde, L. W., & Hariri, A. R. (2013). A neurogenet-
ics approach to understanding individual differences in 
brain, behavior, and risk for psychopathology. Molecular 
Psychiatry, 18, 288–299. doi:10.1038/mp.2012.35
Boschloo, L., van Borkulo, C. D., Rhemtulla, M., Keyes, K. M., 
Borsboom, D., & Schoevers, R. A. (2015). The network 
structure of symptoms of the Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders. PLOS ONE, 10(9), Article 
e0137621. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0137621
Boyd, J. H., Burke, J. D., Gruenberg, E., Holzer, C. E., Rae, D. S., 
 
George, L. K., . . . Nestadt, G. (1984). Exclusion criteria 
of DSM-III: A study of co-occurrence of hierarchy-free 
syndromes. Archives of General Psychiatry, 41, 983–989. 
doi:10.1001/archpsyc.1984.01790210065008
Brittain, P. J., Lobo, S. E. M., Rucker, J., Amarasinghe, M., 
Anilkumar, A. P. P., Baggaley, M., . . . Schumann, G. 
(2013). Harnessing clinical psychiatric data with an elec-
tronic assessment tool (OPCRIT+): The utility of symptom 
dimensions. PLOS ONE, 8(3), Article e58790. doi:10/137/
journal/pone.0058790
Brotto, L. A. (2010). The DSM diagnostic criteria for sexual 
aversion disorder. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 39, 271–
277. doi:10.1007/s10508-009-9534-2
 136 
Clark et al.
Brown, G. W., Harris, T., & Copeland, J. R. (1977). Depression 
and loss. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 130, 1–18. 
doi:10.1017/S0954579400000882
Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D. H. (1992). Comorbidity among 
anxiety disorders: Implications for treatment and DSM-IV. 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 60, 835–
844. doi:10.1037/0022-006X.60.6.835
Bullis, J. R., Fortune, M. R., Farchione, T. J., & Barlow, D. H.  
(2014). A preliminary investigation of the long-term out-
come of the unified protocol for transdiagnostic treatment 
of emotional disorders. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 55, 
1920–1927. doi:10.1016/j.comppsych.2014.07.016
Cannon, T. D., Chung, Y., He, G., Sun, D., Jacobson, A., 
van Erp, T. G. M., . . . Heinssen, R. (2015). Progressive 
reduction in cortical thickness as psychosis develops: 
A multisite longitudinal neuroimaging study of youth at 
elevated clinical risk. Biological Psychiatry, 77, 147–157. 
doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2014.05.023
Carliner, H., Collins, P. Y., Cabassa, L. J., McNallen, A., Joestl, 
S. S., & Lewis-Fernández, R. (2014). Prevalence of cardio-
vascular risk factors among racial and ethnic minorities 
with schizophrenia spectrum and bipolar disorders: A 
critical literature review. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 55, 
233–247. doi:10.1016/j.comppsych.2013.09.009
Carroll, K. M., & Rounsaville, B. J. (2003). Bridging the gap: 
A hybrid model to link efficacy and effectiveness research 
in substance abuse treatment. Psychiatric Services, 54, 
333–339.
Carter, R., Skimkets, R. P., & Bornemann, T. H. (2014). Creating 
and changing public policy to reduce the stigma of mental 
illness. Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 15(2), 
35–36. doi:10.1177/1529100614546119
Case, A., & Deaton, A. (2015). Rising morbidity and mortality in 
midlife among white non-Hispanic Americans in the 21st 
century. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
USA, 112, 15078–15083. doi:10.1073/pnas.1518393112
Caspi, A., Houts, R. M., Belsky, D. W., Goldman-Mellor, S., 
Harrington, H., Israel, S., . . . Moffitt, T. E. (2014). The 
p factor: One general psychopathology factor in the 
structure of psychiatric disorders? Clinical Psychological 
Science, 2, 119–137. doi:10.1177/2167702613497473
Cassano, G., Michelini, S., Shear, M. K., Coli, E., Maser, J., & 
Frank, E. (1997). The panic-agoraphobic spectrum: A new 
approach to the assessment and treatment of subtle symp-
tomatology. American Journal of Psychiatry, 154(6), 27–38.
Cerimele, J. M., & Katon, W. J. (2013). Associations between 
health risk behaviors and symptoms of schizophrenia and 
 
bipolar disorder: A systematic review. General Hospital 
Psychiatry, 35(1), 16–22. doi:10.1016/j.genhosppsych 
.2012.08.001
Chen, Y.-F. (2002). Chinese Classification of Mental 
Disorders (CCMD-3): Towards integration in interna-
tional classification. Psychopathology, 35(2–3), 171–175. 
doi:10.1159/000065140
Cicchetti, D., & Rogosch, F. A. (1996). Equifinality and multi-
finality in developmental psychopathology. Development 
and Psychopathology, 8, 597–600. doi:10.1017/S0954579 
400007318
Clark, D. A., Beck, A. T., & Alford, B. A. (1999). Scientific 
foundations of cognitive theory of depression. New York, 
NY: Wiley.
Clark, L. A. (2005). Temperament as a unifying basis for 
personality and psychopathology. Journal of Abnormal 
Psychology, 114, 505–521. doi:10.1037/0021-843X.114.4.505
Clark, L. A., Vanderbleek, E., Shapiro, J., Nuzum, H., Allen, X., 
Daly, E., . . . Ro, E. (2015). The brave new world of per-
sonality disorder-trait specified: Effects of additional defi-
nitions on prevalence and comorbidity. Psychopathology 
Review, 2(1), 52–82. doi:10.5127/pr.036314
Clark, L. A., & Watson, D. (1991). Tripartite model of anxiety 
and depression: Psychometric evidence and taxonomic 
implications. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 100, 316–
336. doi:10.1037/0021-843X.100.3.316
Clark, L. A., Watson, D., & Reynolds, S. K. (1995). Diagnosis and 
classification of psychopathology: Challenges to the current 
system and future directions. Annual Review of Psychology, 
46, 121–153. doi:10.1146/annurev.psych.46.1.121
Clementz, B. A., Sweeney, J. A., Hamm, J. P., Ivleva, E. L., 
Ethridge, L. E., Pearlson, G. D., . . . Tamminga, C. A. 
(2016). Identification of distinct psychosis biotypes using 
brain-based biomarkers. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
173, 373–384.
Conley, R. R., Ascher-Svanum, H., Zhu, B., Faries, D. E., & 
Kinon, B. J. (2007). The burden of depressive symptoms 
in the long-term treatment of patients with schizophrenia. 
Schizophrenia Research, 90, 186–197.
Cooper, R., & Blashfield, R. K. (2016). Re-evaluating DSM-I. 
 
Psychological Medicine, 46, 449–456. doi:10.1017/
S0033291715002093
Correll, C. U. (2007). Acute and long-term adverse effects 
of antipsychotics. CNS Spectrums, 12(Suppl. 21), 10–14. 
doi:10.1017/S1092852900015959
Corrigan, P. W., Druss, B. G., & Perlick, D. A. (2014). The impact 
of mental illness stigma on seeking and participating in 
mental health care. Psychological Science in the Public 
Interest, 15(2), 37–70. doi:10.1177/1529100614531398
Cuijpers, P., & Smit, F. (2002). Excess mortality in depres-
sion: A meta-analysis of community studies. Journal 
of Affective Disorders, 72, 227–236. doi:10.1016/S0165-
0327(01)00413-X
Cuthbert, B. N., & Insel, T. R. (2013). Toward precision medi-
cine in psychiatry: The NIMH Research Domain Criteria 
project. In D. S. Charney, P. Sklar, J. D. Buxbaum, & E. J. 
 
Nestler (Eds.), Neurobiology of mental illness (4th ed., 
pp. 1076–1088). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Danzi, B., & La Greca, A. M. (2016). DSM-IV, DSM-5, and ICD-
11: Identifying children with posttraumatic stress disorder 
after disasters. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry. 
Advance online publication. doi:10.1111/jcpp.12631
Das-Munchi, J., Stewart, R., Morgan, C., Nazroo, J., Thornicroft, 
G., & Prince, M. (2016). Reviving the “double jeopardy” 
hypothesis: Physical health inequalities, ethnicity and severe 
mental illness. British Journal of Psychiatry, 209, 183–185.
Davidson, K. (2012). Depression and coronary heart dis-
ease. ISRN Cardiology, 2012, Article 743813. doi:10.5402/ 
2012/743813
 Approaches to Classifying Mental Disorder 
137
De Hert, M., Cohen, D., Bobes, J., Cetkovich-Bakmas, M., 
Leucht, S., Ndetei, D. M., . . . Correll, C. U. (2011). Physical 
illness in patients with severe mental disorders. II. Barriers 
to care, monitoring and treatment guidelines, plus rec-
ommendations at the system and individual level. World 
Psychiatry, 10, 138–151. doi:10.1002/j.2051-5545.2011 
.tb00036.x
De Hert, M., Correll, C. U., Bobes, J., Cetkovich-Bakmas, M., 
Cohen, D., Asai, I., . . . Leucht, S. (2011). Physical illness 
in patients with severe mental disorders. I. Prevalence, 
impact of medications and disparities in health care. World 
Psychiatry, 10(1), 52–77. doi:10.1002/j.2051-5545.2011 
.tb00014.x
de Leon, J., & Diaz, F. J. (2005). A meta-analysis of world-
wide studies demonstrates an association between 
schizophrenia and tobacco smoking behaviors. 
Schizophrenia Research, 76(2–3), 135–157. doi:10.1016/j 
.schres.2005.02.010
Egeland, J. A., Gerhard, D. S., Pauls, D. L., Sussex, J. N., Kidd, 
K. K., Allen, C. R., . . . Housman, D. E. (1987). Bipolar 
affective disorders linked to DNA markers on chromo-
some 11. Nature, 325, 783–787. doi:10.1038/325783a0
Evans, S. C., Burke, J. D., Roberts, M. C., Fite, P. J., Lochman, 
J. E., de, la, Peña, F. R., & Reed, G. M. (2017). Irritability 
in child and adolescent psychopathology: An integrative 
review for ICD-11. Clinical Psychology Review, 53, 29–45. 
doi:10.1016/j.cpr.2017.01.004
Evans, S. C., Reed, G. M., Roberts, M. C., Esparza, P., Watts, 
A. D., Correia, J. M., . . . Saxena, S. (2013). Psychologists’ 
perspectives on the diagnostic classification of mental 
disorders: Results from the WHO-IUPsyS Global Survey. 
International Journal of Psychology, 48, 177–193. doi:10
.1080/00207594.2013.804189
Evans, S. C., Roberts, M. C., Keeley, J. W., Blossom, J. B., 
Amaro, C. M., Garcia, A. M., . . . Reed, G. M. (2015). 
Using vignette methodologies for study clinicians’ deci-
sion-making: Validity, utility, and application in ICD-11 
field studies. International Journal of Clinical and Health 
Psychology, 15, 160–170. doi:10.1016/j.ijchp.2014.12.001
Farr, W. (1839). First annual report. London, England: 
Registrar General of England and Wales.
Fava, M., Rush, A. J., Alpert, J. E., Balasubramani, G. K., 
Wisniewski, S. R., Carmin, C. N., . . . Trivedi, M. H. 
(2008). Difference in treatment outcome in outpatients 
with anxious versus nonanxious depression: A STAR*D 
report. American Journal of Psychiatry, 165, 342–351.
Feighner, J. P., Robins, E., Guze, S. B., Woodruff, R. A., Jr., 
 
Winokur, G., & Munoz, R. (1972). Diagnostic cri-
teria for use in psychiatric research. Archives of 
General Psychiatry, 26(1), 57–63. doi:10.1001/arch 
psyc.1972.01750190059011
Feinberg, I. (1982). Schizophrenia: Caused by a fault 
in programmed synaptic elimination during adoles-
cence? Journal of Psychiatric Research, 17, 319–334. 
doi:10.1016/0022-3956(82)90038-3
Finn, S. E. (1982). Base rates, utilities, and DSM-III: 
Shortcomings of fixed-rule systems of psychodiag-
nosis. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 91, 294–302. 
doi:10.1037/0021-843X.91.4.294
First, M. B. (2009). Harmonization of ICD-11 and DSM-V: 
 
Opportunities and challenges. British Journal of 
Psychiatry, 195, 382–390. doi:10.1192/bjp.bp.108.060822
First, M. B., Pincus, H. A., Levine, J. B., Williams, J. B. W., 
Ustun, B., & Peele, R. (2004). Clinical utility as a criterion 
for revising psychiatric diagnoses. American Journal of 
Psychiatry, 161, 946–954. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.161.6.946
First, M. B., Reed, G. M., Hyman, S. E., & Saxena, S. (2015). 
The development of the ICD-11 clinical descriptions and 
diagnostic guidelines for mental and behavioral disorders. 
World Psychiatry, 14, 82–90. doi:10.1002/wps.20189
Frances, A. J., Widiger, T. A., & Pincus, H. A. (1989). The 
development of DSM-IV. Archives of General Psychiatry, 
46, 373–375. doi:10.1001/archpsyc.1989.01810040079012
Friedman, M. J., Resick, P. A., Bryant, R. A., & Brewin, C. 
R. (2011). Considering PTSD for DSM-5. Depression and 
Anxiety, 28, 750–769. doi:10.1002/da.20767
Fulford, K. W. M., & Sartorius, N. (2009). The secret history 
of ICD and the hidden future of DSM. In M. Broome & 
L. Bortolotti (Eds.), Psychiatry as cognitive neuroscience: 
Philosophical perspectives (pp. 29–48). Oxford, England: 
Oxford University Press.
Fullana, M. A., Vilagut, G., Rojas-Farreras, S., Mataix-Cols, 
D., de Graaf, R., Demyttenaere, K., . . . Alonso, J. (2010). 
Obsessive–compulsive symptom dimensions in the gen-
eral population: Results from an epidemiological study 
in six European countries. Journal of Affective Disorders, 
124, 291–299. doi:10.1016/j.jad.2009.11.020
Gaebel, W. (2012). Status of psychotic disorders in ICD-11. 
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 38, 895–898. doi:10.1093/schbul/
sbs104
Galatzer-Levy, I., & Bryant, R. A. (2013). 636,120 ways to have 
posttraumatic stress disorder. Perspectives on Psychological 
Science, 8, 651–662. doi:10.1177/1745691613504115
Gallagher, M. W., & Brown, T. A. (2015). Bayesian analysis 
of current and lifetime comorbidity rates of mood and 
anxiety disorders in individuals with posttraumatic stress 
disorder. Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral 
Assessment, 37, 60–66. doi:10.1007/s10862-014-9436-z
Gallagher, M. W., Sauer-Zavala, S., Boswell, J. F., Carl, J. R., 
Bullis, J., Farchione, T. J., . . . Barlow, D. H. (2013). The 
impact of the unified protocol for emotional disorders on 
quality of life. International Journal of Cognitive Therapy, 
6, 57–72. doi:10.1521/ijct.2013.6.1.57
Gallagher, S., Hutto, D. D., Slaby, J., & Cole, J. (2013). The 
brain as part of an enactive system. Behavioral & Brain 
Sciences, 36, 421–422. doi:10.1017/S0140525X12002105
GBD 2015 DALYs and HALE Collaborators. (2016). Global, 
regional, and national disability-adjusted life-years 
(DALYs) for 315 diseases and injuries and healthy life 
expectancy (HALE), 1990–2015: A systematic analysis for 
the Global Burden of Disease Study 2015. The Lancet, 
388, 1603–1658. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(16)31460-X
GBD 2015 Disease and Injury Incidence and Prevalence 
Collaborators. (2016). Global, regional, and national inci-
dence, prevalence, and years lived with disability for 310 
diseases and injuries, 1990–2015: A systematic analysis 
for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2015. The Lancet, 
388, 1545–1602. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(16)31678-6
 138 
Clark et al.
Ginns, E. I., Egeland, J. A., Allen, C. R., Pauls, D. L., Falls, K., 
Keith, T. P., & Paul, S. M. (1992). Update on the search 
for DNA markers linked to manic-depressive illness in 
the Old Order Amish. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 26, 
305–308. doi:10.1016/0022-3956(92)90037-O
Goldberg, D. P., Andrews, G., & Hobbs, M. J. (2009). Where 
should bipolar disorder appear in the meta-structure? 
Psychological Medicine, 39, 2071–2081. doi:10.1017/
S0033291709990304
Goldberg, D. P., Prisciandaro, J. J., & Williams, P. (2012). The 
primary health care version of ICD-11: The detection of 
common mental disorders in general medical settings. 
General Hospital Psychiatry, 34, 665–670. doi:10.1016/j 
.genhosppsych.2012.06.006
Goldberg, D. P., Reed, G. M., Robles, R., Bobes, J., Iglesias, C., 
 
Fortes, S., & Saxena, S. (2016). Multiple somatic symp-
toms in primary care: A field study for ICD-11 PHC, 
WHO’s revised classification of mental disorders in pri-
mary care. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 91, 48–54. 
doi:10.1016/j.jpsychores.2016.10.002
Gordon, J. A. (2016). On being a circuit psychiatrist. Nature 
Neuroscience, 19, 1385–1386. doi:10.1038/nn.4419
Gottesman, I. I., & Gould, T. D. (2003). The endophenotype 
concept in psychiatry: Etymology and strategic inten-
tions. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 160, 636–645. 
doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.160.4.636
Grant, B. F., Stinson, F. S., Dawson, D. A., Chou, S. P., Dufour, 
M. C., Compton, W., . . . Kaplan, K. (2004). Prevalence 
and co-occurrence of substance use disorders and inde-
pendent mood and anxiety disorders: Results from the 
National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related 
Conditions. Archives of General Psychiatry, 61, 807–816. 
doi:10.1001/archpsyc.61.8.807
Gur, R. C., Calkins, M. E., Satterthwaite, T. D., Ruparel, K., 
 
Bilker, W. B., Moore, T. M., . . . Gur, R. E. (2014). 
Neurocognitive growth charting in psychosis spectrum 
youths. JAMA Psychiatry, 71, 366–374. doi:10.1001/jama 
psychiatry.2013.4190
Halldorsdottir, T., & Binder, E. B. (2017). Gene × Environment 
interactions: From molecular mechanisms to behavior. 
Annual Review of Psychology, 68, 215–241. doi:10.1146/
annurev-psych-010416-044053
Hamilton, M. (1960). A rating scale for depression. Journal 
of Neurology, Neurosurgery & Psychiatry, 23, 56–62. 
doi:10.1136/jnnp.23.1.56
Hansen, M., Hyland, P., Armour, C., Shevlin, M., & Elklit, A. 
(2015). Less is more? Assessing the validity of the ICD-11 
model of PTSD across multiple trauma samples. European 
Journal of Psychotraumatology, 6, 28766. doi:10.3402/
ejpt.v6.28766
Hasin, D. S., O’Brien, C. P., Auriacombe, M., Borges, G., 
Bucholz, K., Budney, A., . . . Grant, B. F. (2013). DSM-5 
criteria for substance use disorders: Recommendations 
and rationale. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 170, 
834–851. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.2013.12060782
Haslam, N., Holland, E., & Kuppens, P. (2012). Categories 
versus dimensions in personality and psychopathology: A 
quantitative review of taxometric research. Psychological 
Medicine, 42, 903–920. doi:10.1017/S0033291711001966
Hettema, J. M., Neale, M. C., Myers, J. M., Prescott, C. A., 
& Kendler, K. S. (2006). A population-based twin study 
of the relationship between neuroticism and internaliz-
ing disorders. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 163, 
857–864. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.163.5.857
Hinton, D. E., & Lewis-Fernández, R. (2011). The cross-cultural 
validity of posttraumatic stress disorder: Implications for 
DSM-5. Depression and Anxiety, 28, 783–801. doi:10.1002/
da.20753
Hollon, S. D., & Ponniah, K. (2010). A review of empirically sup-
ported psychological therapies for mood disorders in adults. 
Depression and Anxiety, 27, 891–932. doi:10.1002/da.20741
Horwitz, A. V., & Wakefield, J. C. (2007). The loss of sadness: 
How psychiatry transformed normal sorrow into depressive 
disorder. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Hyman, S. E. (2007). Can neuroscience be integrated into 
the DSM-V? Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 8, 725–732. 
doi:10.1038/nrn2218
Hyman, S. E. (2010). The diagnosis of mental disorders: The 
problem of reification. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 
6, 155–179. doi:10.1146/annurev.clinpsy.3.022806.091532
Iacono, W. G., Vaidyanathan, U., Vrieze, S. I., & Malone, S. M. 
 
(2014). Knowns and unknowns for psychophysiologi-
cal endophenotypes: Integration and response to com-
mentaries. Psychophysiology, 51, 1339–1347. doi:10.1111/
psyp.12358
Ingram, R. E., & Luxton, D. D. (2005). Vulnerability-
stress models. In B. L. Hankin & J. R. Z. Abela (Eds.), 
Development of psychopathology: A vulnerability-stress 
perspective (pp. 32–46). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
doi:10.4135/9781452231655.n2
Institute of International Statistics. (1900). International list of 
causes of death. Bulletin of the Institute of International 
Statistics, 12, 280.
International Advisory Group for the Revision of ICD-10 
Mental and Behavioural Disorders. (2011). A conceptual 
framework for the revision of the ICD-10 classification of 
mental and behavioural disorders. World Psychiatry, 10, 
86–92. doi:10.1002/j.2051-5545.2011.tb00022.x
Jablensky, A. (2007). Does psychiatry need an overarching 
concept of “mental disorder”? World Psychiatry, 6, 157–
158.
Johnson, J. G., Cohen, P., Kasen, S., & Brook, J. S. (2006). 
Dissociative disorders among adults in the commu-
nity, impaired functioning, and axis I and II comor-
bidity. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 40, 131–140. 
doi:10.1016/j.jpsychires.2005.03.003
Kapur, S., Phillips, A. G., & Insel, T. R. (2012). Why has it 
taken so long for biological psychiatry to develop clinical 
tests and what to do about it? Molecular Psychiatry, 17, 
1174–11779. doi:10.1038/mp.2012.105
Karalunas, S. L., Fair, D., Musser, E. D., Aykes, K., Iyer, 
S. P., & Nigg, J. T. (2014). Subtyping attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder using temperament dimensions: 
Toward biologically based nosologic. JAMA Psychiatry, 
71, 1015–1024. doi:10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2014.763
Kaymaz, N., & van Os, J. (2010). Extended psychosis phe-
notype - yes: Single continuum - unlikely. Psychological 
Medicine, 40, 1963–1966. doi:10.1017/S0033291710000358
 Approaches to Classifying Mental Disorder 
139
Keeley, J. W., Reed, G. M., Roberts, M. C., Evans, S. C., 
Medina-Mora, M. E., Robles, R., . . . Saxena, S. (2016). 
Developing a science of clinical utility in diagnostic clas-
sification systems: Field study strategies for ICD-11 Mental 
and Behavioural Disorders. American Psychologist, 71(1), 
3–16. doi:10.1037/a0039972
Keeley, J. W., Zayac, R., & Correia, C. (2008). Curvilinear 
relationships between statistics anxiety and performance 
among undergraduate students: Evidence for optimal 
anxiety. Statistics Education Research Journal, 7(1), 4–15.
Keller, M. B., & Shapiro, R. W. (1982). “Double depression”: 
Superimposition of acute depressive episodes on chronic 
depressive disorders. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 
139, 438–442. doi:10.1176/ajp.139.4.438
Kendler, K. S. (1996). Major depression and generalised anxi-
ety disorder same genes, (partly) different environments—
Revisited. British Journal of Psychiatry, 168(Suppl. 30), 
68–75. doi:10.1001/archpsyc.1992.01820090044008
Kendler, K. S. (2005). “A gene for “: The nature of gene action 
in psychiatric disorders. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
162, 1243–1252.
Kendler, K. S., Gallagher, T. J., Abelson, J. M., & Kessler, 
R. C. (1996). Lifetime prevalence, demographic risk fac-
tors, and diagnostic validity of nonaffective psychosis as 
assessed in a U.S. community sample. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 53, 1022–1031.
Kendler, K. S., Gardner, C. O., Gatz, M., & Pedersen, N. L.  
(2007). The sources of co-morbidity between major 
depression and generalized anxiety disorder in a Swedish 
national twin sample. Psychological Medicine, 37, 453–
462. doi:10.1017/S0033291706009135
Kendler, K. S., Prescott, C. A., Myers, J., & Neale, M. C. (2003). 
The structure of genetic and environmental risk factors for 
common psychiatric and substance use disorders in men 
and women. Archives of General Psychiatry, 60, 929–937.
Kerridge, B. T., Saha, T. D., Gmel, G., & Rehm, J. (2013). 
Taxometric analysis of DSM-IV and DSM-5 alcohol use 
disorders. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 129(1–2), 60–
69. doi:10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2012.09.010
Kessler, R. (1999). The World Health Organization 
International Consortium in Psychiatric Epidemiology 
(ICPE): Initial work and future directions – the NAPE 
lecture 1998. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 99, 2–9. 
doi:10.1111/j.1600-0447.1999.tb05378.x
Kessler, R. C. (1994). The national comorbidity survey of 
the United States. International Review of Psychiatry, 6, 
365–376. doi:10.3109/09540269409023274
Kessler, R. C., McGonagle, K. A., Zhao, S., Nelson, C. B., 
Hughes, M., Eshleman, S., . . . Kendler, K. S. (1994). 
Lifetime and 12-month prevalence of DSM-III-R psychiat-
ric disorders in the United States: Results from the national 
comorbidity study. Archives of General Psychiatry, 51, 
8–19. doi:10.1001/archpsyc.1994.0395001000800
Kessler, R. C., & Merikangas, K. R. (2004). The national comor-
bidity survey replication (NCS-R): Background and aims. 
International Journal of Methods in Psychiatric Research, 
13(2), 60–68. doi:10.1002/mpr.166
Khan, A. A., Jacobson, K. C., Gardner, C. O., Prescott, C. A., 
 
& Kendler, K. S. (2005). Personality and comorbidity 
of common psychiatric disorders. The British Journal of 
Psychiatry, 186, 190–196. doi:10.1192/bjp.186.3.190
Kirmayer, L. J., & Crafa, D. (2014). What kind of science 
for psychiatry? Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8, 435. 
doi:10.3389/fnhum.2014.00435
Kleinman, A. (1977). Depression, somatization and the “new 
cross-cultural psychiatry.” Social Science and Medicine, 
11(1), 3–9. doi:10.1016/0037-7856(77)90138-X
Kogan, C. S., Stein, D. J., Maj, M., First, M. B., Emmelkamp, 
 
P. M. G., & Reed, G. M. (2016). The classification of anxiety 
and fear-related disorders in the ICD-11. Depression and 
Anxiety. Advance online publication. doi:10.1002/da.22530
Kohn, R., Saxena, S., Levav, I., & Saraceno, B. (2004). The 
treatment gap in mental health care. Bulletin of the World 
Health Organization, 82, 858–866. doi:10.1590/S0042-
96862004001100011
Kotov, R., Krueger, R. F., Watson, D., Achenbach, T. M., 
 
Althoff, R. R., Bagby, R. M., . . . Zimmerman, M. 
(2017). The hierarchical taxonomy of psychopathology 
(HiTOP): A dimensional alternative to traditional nosol-
ogies. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 126, 454–477. 
doi:10.1037/abn0000258
Kotov, R., Ruggero, C. J., Krueger, R. G., Watson, D., Yuan, Q., 
 
& Zimmerman, M. (2011). New dimensions in the 
quantitative classification of mental illness. Archives of 
General Psychiatry, 68, 1003–1011. doi:10.1001/archgen 
psychiatry.2011.107
Kraemer, H. C., Kupfer, D. J., Clarke, D. E., Narrow, W. E., 
& Regier, D. A. (2012). DSM-5: How reliable is reliable 
enough? The American Journal of Psychiatry, 169(1), 
13–15. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.2011.11010050
Kroenke, K., Spitzer, R. L., & Williams, J. B. (2001). The PHQ-9: 
 
Validity of a brief depression severity measure. Journal 
of General Internal Medicine, 16, 606–613. doi:10.1046/j 
.1525-1497.2001.016009606.x
Krueger, R. B., Reed, G. M., First, M. B., Marais, A., Kismodi, E., 
 
& Briken, P. (2017). Proposals for paraphilic disorders 
in the International Classification of Disease and related 
health problems, Eleventh Revision (ICD-11). Archives of 
Sexual Behavior. Advance online publication. doi:10.1007/
s10508-017-0944-2.
Krueger, R. F. (1999). The structure of common mental 
disorders. Archives of General Psychiatry, 56, 921–926. 
doi:10.1001/archpsyc.56.10.921
Krueger, R. F., & Markon, K. E. (2006). Reinterpreting 
comorbidity: A model-based approach to understand-
ing and classifying psychopathology. Annual Review of 
Clinical Psychology, 2, 111–133. doi:10.1146/annurev.
clinpsy.2.022305.095213
Kupfer, D. J., First, M. B., & Regier, D. (Eds.). (2002). A 
research agenda for DSM-V. Arlington, VA: American 
Psychiatric Association.
Kushner, M. G., Sher, K. J., & Beitman, B. D. (1990). The 
relation between alcohol problems and the anxiety disor-
ders. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 147, 685–695. 
doi:10.1176/ajp.147.6.685
Laceulle, O. M., Vollebergh, W. A. M., & Ormel, J. (2015). 
The structure of psychopathology in adolescence: 
Replication of a general psychopathology factor in the 
 140 
Clark et al.
trails study. Clinical Psychological Science, 3, 850–860. 
doi:10.1177/2167702614560750
Lahey, B. B. (2009). Public health significance of neuroti-
cism. American Psychologist, 64, 241–256. doi:10.1037/
a0015309
Lahey, B. B., Applegate, B., Hakes, J. K., Zald, D. H., Hariri, 
A. R., & Rathouz, P. J. (2012). Is there a general factor 
of prevalent psychopathology during adulthood? Journal 
of Abnormal Psychology, 121, 971. doi:10.1037/a0028355
Lahey, B. B., Rathouz, P. J., Keenan, K., Stepp, S. D., Loeber, R., 
 
& Hipwell, A. E. (2015). Criterion validity of the general 
factor of psychopathology in a prospective study of girls. 
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 56, 415–422. 
doi:10.1111/jcpp.12300
Lang, P. J., Davis, M., & Öhman, A. (2000). Fear and anxiety: 
Animal models and human cognitive psychophysiology. 
Journal of Affective Disorders, 61, 137–159. doi:10.1016/
S0165-0327(00)00343-8
Lauritsen, M. B., Mortensen, P. B., & Pedersen, C. B. (2004). 
The incidence and prevalence of pervasive develop-
mental disorders: A Danish population-based study. 
Psych 
ol 
ogical Medicine, 34, 1339–1346. doi:10.1017/
S0033291704002387
LeDoux, J. E., & Pine, D. S. (2016). Using neuroscience to help 
understand fear and anxiety: A two-system framework. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 173, 1083–1093.
Lewis-Fernández, R., & Aggarwal, N. K. (2013). Culture 
and psychiatric diagnosis. Advances in Psychosomatic 
Medicine, 33, 15–30. doi:10.1159/000348725
Lewis-Fernández, R., Aggarwal, N. K., Hinton, L., Hinton, D. E., 
 
& Kirmayer, L. K. (Eds.). (2016). The DSM-5 handbook 
on the Cultural Formulation Interview. Washington, DC: 
American Psychiatric Publishing.
Lewis-Fernández, R., Hinton, D. E., Laria, A. J., Patterson, E. H., 
Hofmann, S. G., Craske, M. G., . . . Liao, B. (2010). Culture 
and the anxiety disorders: Recommendations for DSM-V. 
Depression and Anxiety, 27, 212–229. doi:10.1002/da.20647
Light, G., Greenwood, T. A., Swerdlow, N. R., Calkins, M. E., 
 
Freedman, R., Green, M. F., . . . Braff, D. L. (2014). 
Comparison of the heritability of schizophrenia and endo-
phenotypes in the COGS-1 family study. Schizophrenia 
Bulletin, 40, 1404–1411. doi:10.1093/schbul/sbu064
Lilienfeld, S. O. (2003). Comorbidity between and within 
childhood externalizing and internalizing disorders: 
Reflections and directions. Journal of Abnormal Child 
Psychology, 31, 285–291. doi:10.1023/A:1023229529866
Lilienfeld, S. O. (2014). The Research Domain Criteria (RDoC): 
An analysis of methodological and conceptual challenges. 
Behaviour Research & Therapy, 62, 129–139. doi:10.1016/j 
.brat.2014.07.019
Lilienfeld, S. O., Waldman, I. D., & Israel, A. C. (1994). A 
critical examination of the use of the term and con-
cept of comorbidity in psychopathology research. 
Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 1, 71–83. 
doi:10.1111/j.1468-2850.1994.tb00007.x
Livesley, J., & Jang, K. L. (2005). Differentiating normal, 
abnormal, and disordered personality. European Journal 
of Personality, 19, 257–268. doi:10.1002/per.559
Lopez, M. E., Stoddard, J. A., Noorollah, A., Zerbi, G., Payne, L. A., 
 
Hitchcock, C. A., . . . Ray, D. B. (2014). Examining the effi-
cacy of the unified protocol for transdiagnostic treatment 
of emotional disorders in the treatment of individuals with 
borderline personality disorder. Cognitive and Behavioral 
Practice, 22, 522–533. doi:10.1016/j.cbpra.2014.06.006
Lorant, V., Croux, C., Weich, S., Deliège, D., Mackenbach, J., 
& Ansseau, M. (2007). Depression and socio-economic 
risk factors: 7-year longitudinal population study. The 
British Journal of Psychiatry, 190, 293–298. doi:10.1192/
bjp.bp.105.020040
Lorant, V., Deliège, D., Eaton, W., Robert, A., Philippot, P., & 
Ansseau, M. (2003). Socioeconomic inequalities in depres-
sion: A meta-analysis. American Journal of Epidemiology, 
157, 98–112. doi:10.1093/aje/kwf182
Lord, C., & Jones, R. M. (2012). Annual research review: 
Re-thinking the classification of autism spectrum dis-
orders. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 53, 
490–509. doi:10.1111/j.1469-7610.2012.02547.x
Maercker, A., Brewin, C. R., Bryant, R. A., Cloitre, M., van 
Ommeren, M., Jones, L. M., . . . Reed, G. M. (2013). 
Diagnosis and classification of disorders specifically asso-
ciated with stress: Proposals for ICD-11. World Psychiatry, 
12, 198–206. doi:10.1002/wps.20057
Maj, M. (2005). ‘Psychiatric comorbidity’: An artefact of cur-
rent diagnostic systems? British Journal of Psychiatry, 186, 
182–184. doi:10.1192/bjp.186.3.182
Maj, M. (2014). The media campaign on the DSM-5: Recurring 
comments and lessons for the future of diagnosis in psy-
chiatric practice. Epidemiology and Psychiatric Sciences, 
24, 197–202. doi:10.1017/S2045796014000572
Markon, K. E. (2010). Modeling psychopathology struc-
ture: A symptom-level analysis of axis I and II disor-
ders. Psychological Medicine, 40, 273–288. doi:10.1017/
S0033291709990183
Markon, K. E., Krueger, R. F., & Watson, D. (2005). Delineating the 
structure of normal and abnormal personality: An integra-
tive hierarchical approach. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 88, 139–157. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.88.1.139
Marquand, A. F., Rezek, I., Buitelaar, J., & Beckmann, C. F. 
(2016). Understanding heterogeneity in clinical cohorts 
using normative models: Beyond case-control studies. 
Biological Psychiatry, 80, 552–561. doi:10.1016/j.bio 
psych.2015.12.023
Maser, J. D., & Akiskal, H. (2002). Preface: Spectrum con-
cepts in major mental disorder. Psychiatric Clinics of North 
America, 25(4), xi–xiii. doi:10.1016/S0193-953X(02)00034-5
Maser, J. D., & Patterson, T. (2002). Spectrum and nosol-
ogy: Implications for DSM-V. Psychiatric Clinics of North 
America, 25, 855–885. doi:10.1016/S0193-953X(02)00022-9
Masi, G., Perugi, G., Toni, C., Millepiedi, S., Mucci, M., Bertini, 
N., & Pfanner, C. (2006). Attention-deficit hyperactivity 
disorder—bipolar comorbidity in children and adoles-
cents. Bipolar Disorders, 8, 373–381. doi:10.1111/j.1399-
5618.2006.00342.x
McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T. (1987). Validation of the five-fac-
tor model of personality across instruments and observers. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52(1), 81.
 Approaches to Classifying Mental Disorder 
141
Meloni, M. (2014). The social brain meets the reactive genome: 
Neuroscience, epigenetics and the new social biology. 
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8, 309. doi:10.3389/
fnhum.2014.00309
Metzl, J. M., & Hansen, H. (2014). Structural competency: 
Theorizing a new medical engagement with stigma and 
inequality. Social Science & Medicine, 103, 126–133. 
doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2013.06.032
Mewton, L., Slade, T., McBride, O., Grove, R., & Teesson, M. 
(2011). An evaluation of the proposed DSM-5 alcohol use 
disorder criteria using Australian national data. Addiction, 
106, 941–950. doi:10.1111/j.1360-0443.2010.03340.x
Meyer, G. J., Finn, S. E., Eyde, L. D., Kay, G. G., Moreland, 
K. L., Dies, R. R., . . . Reed, G. M. (2001). Psychological 
testing and psychological assessment: A review of evi-
dence and issues. American Psychologist, 56, 128–165. 
doi:10.1037/0003-066X.56.2.128
Mezzich, J. E., Caracci, G., Fabrega, H., & Kirmayer, L. J. 
(2009). Cultural formulation guidelines. Transcultural 
Psychiatry, 46, 383–405. doi:10.1177/1363461509342942
Mineka, S., Watson, D. W., & Clark, L. A. (1998). 
Psychopathology: Comorbidity of anxiety and unipolar 
mood disorders. Annual Review of Psychology, 49, 377–
412. doi:10.1146/annurev.psych.49.1.377
Mookhoek, E. J., deVries, W. A., Hovens, J. E. J. M., Brouwers, 
J. R. B. J., & Loonen, A. J. M. (2011). Risk factors for 
overweight and diabetes mellitus in residential psychiatric 
patients. Obesity Facts, 4, 341–345. doi:10.1159/000333420
National Institute on Drug Abuse. (2012). Resource guide: 
Screening for drug use in general medical settings. 
Retrieved from the NIDA Web site: https://www.druga 
buse.gov/publications/resource-guide-screening-drug-
use-in-general-medical-settings/nida-quick-screen
Narrow, W. E., Clarke, D. E., Kuramoto, S. J., Kraemer, H. C., 
 
Kupfer, D. J., Greiner, L., . . . Regier, D. A. (2013). 
DSM-5 field trials in the United States and Canada, 
Part III: Development and reliability testing of a cross-
cutting symptom assessment for DSM-5. American 
Journal of Psychiatry, 170, 71–82. doi:10.1176/appi 
.ajp.2012.12071000
Narrow, W. E., First, M. B., Sirovatka, P. J., & Regier, D. A. 
(Eds.). (2007). Age and gender considerations in psychi-
atric diagnosis: A research agenda for DSM-V. Arlington, 
VA: American Psychiatric Association.
Narrow, W. E., Kuhl, E. A., & Regier, D. A. (2009). DSM-V 
perspectives on disentangling disability from clinical sig-
nificance. World Psychiatry, 8, 88–89.
Narrow, W. E., Rae, D. S., Robins, L. N., & Regier, D. A. (2002). 
Revised prevalence based estimates of mental disorders 
in the United States: Using a clinical significance crite-
rion to reconcile 2 surveys’ estimates. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 59, 115–123. doi:10.1001/archpsyc.59.2.115
Natale, C. (2014, April 23). Is ICD-11 talk just a tactic to stall 
ICD-10? Government Health IT. Retrieved from http://www 
.govhealthit.com/news/ICD-11-advocates-say-skip-ICD-10
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, U.K. (2015). 
Guidance list. Retrieved from http://www.nice.org.uk/
guidance/published?type=cg
Nigg, J. T. (2016). Where do epigenetics and developmental 
origins take the field of developmental psychopathol-
ogy? Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 44, 405–419. 
doi:10.1007/s10802-015-0121-9
Nuevo, R., Chatterji, S., Verdes, E., Naidoo, N., Arango, C., & 
Ayuso-Mateos, J. L. (2012). The continuum of psychotic 
symptoms in the general population: A cross-national 
study. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 38, 475–485. doi:10.1093/
schbul/sbq099
Ormel, J., Raven, D., van Oort, F., Hartman, C. A., Reijneveld, 
S. A., Veenstra, R., . . . Oldehinkel, A. J. (2014). Mental 
health in Dutch adolescents: A TRAILS report on preva-
lence, severity, age of onset, continuity and co-morbidity 
of DSM disorders. Psychological Medicine, 45, 345–360. 
doi:10.1017/S0033291714001469
Otero-Ojeda, A. (1998). Third Cuban glossary of psychiatry 
[Spanish]. Havana, Cuba: Hospital Psiquiátrico de La Habana.
Owen, M. J. (2014). New approaches to psychiatric diag-
nostic classification. Neuron, 84, 564–571. doi:10.1016/j 
.neuron.2014.10.028
Paris, J., & Kirmayer, L. J. (2016). The National Institute of 
Mental Health Research Domain criteria: A bridge too 
far. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 204, 26–32. 
doi:10.1097/NMD.0000000000000435
Patrick, C. J. (2014). Genetics, neuroscience, and psycho-
pathology: Clothing the emperor. Psychophysiology, 51, 
1333–1334. doi:10.1111/psyp.12356
Phillips, K. A., & Stein, D. J. (2015). Introduction and major 
changes for the obsessive-compulsive and related dis-
orders in DSM-5. In K. A. Phillips & D. J. Stein (Eds.), 
Handbook on obsessive-compulsive and related disorders 
(pp. 1–24). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing.
Phillips, K. A., Stein, D. J., Rauch, S. L., Hollander, E., Fallon, 
B. A., Barsky, A., . . . Leckman, J. (2010). Should an 
obsessive-compulsive spectrum grouping of disorders be 
included in DSM-V? Depression and Anxiety, 27, 528–555. 
doi:10.1002/da.20705
Picchioni, M. M., Walshe, M., Toulopoulou, T., McDonald, 
C., Taylor, M., Waters-Metenier, S., . . . Rijsdijk, F. (2010). 
Genetic modelling of childhood social development and 
personality in twins and siblings with schizophrenia. 
Psychological Medicine, 40, 1305–1316. doi:10.1017/
S0033291709991425
Pitman, R. K., Rasmusson, A. M., Koenen, K. C., Shin, L. M., 
Orr, S. P., Gilbertson, M. W., . . . Liberzon, I. (2012). 
Biological studies of post-traumatic stress disorder. Nature 
Reviews: Neuroscience, 13, 769–787. doi:10.1038/nrn3339
Poznyak, V., Reed, G. M., & Clark, N. (2011). Applying an inter-
national public health perspective to proposed changes 
for DSM-V. Addiction, 106, 868–870. doi:10.1111/j.1360-
0443.2011.03381.x
Probst, B. (2014). The life and death of axis IV: Caught in the 
quest for a theory of mental disorder. Research on Social 
Work Practice, 24, 123–131. doi:10.1177/1049731513491326
Rapoport, J. L., Giedd, J. N., & Gogtay, N. (2012). 
Neurodevelopmental model of schizophrenia: Update 
2012. Molecular Psychiatry, 17, 1228–1238. doi:10.1038/
mp.2012.23
 142 
Clark et al.
Reed, G. M. (2010). Toward ICD-11: Improving the clinical 
utility of WHO’s international classification of mental dis-
orders. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 
41, 457–464. doi:10.1037/a0021701
Reed, G. M., Correia, J., Esparza, P., Saxena, S., & Maj, M. 
(2011). The WPA-WHO global survey of psychiatrists’ 
attitudes towards mental disorders classification. World 
Psychiatry, 10, 118–131. doi:10.1002/j.2051-5545.2011.
tb00034.x
Reed, G. M., Drescher, J., Krueger, R. B., Atalla, E., Cochran, 
S. D., First, M. B., . . . Saxena, S. (2016). Disorders related 
to sexuality and gender identity in the ICD-11: Revising 
the ICD-10 classification based on current scientific evi-
dence, best clinical practices, and human rights consid-
erations. World Psychiatry, 15, 205–221.
Reed, G. M., Rebello, T. J., Pike, K. M., Medina-Mora, M. E., 
 
Gureje, O., Zhao, M., . . . Saxena, S. (2015). WHO’s 
Global Clinical Practice Network for mental health. Lancet 
Psychiatry, 2, 379–380. doi:10.1016/S2215-0366(15)00183-2
Reed, G. M., Roberts, M. C., Keeley, J., Hooppell, C., 
Matsumoto, C., Sharan, P., . . . Medina-Mora, M. E. (2013). 
Mental health professionals’ natural taxonomies of mental 
disorders: Implications for the clinical utility of the ICD-
11 and the DSM-5. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 69, 
1191–1212. doi:10.1002/jclp.22031
Reed, G. M., Spaulding, W. D., & Bufka, L. F. (2009). The rel-
evance of the International Classification of Functioning, 
Disability and Health (ICF) to mental disorders and their 
treatment. ALTER: The European Journal of Disability 
Research, 3, 340–359. doi:10.1016/j.alter.2008.11.003
Regier, D. A., Myers, J. K., Kramer, M., Robins, L. N., Blazer, D. G., 
 
Hough, R. L., . . . Locke, B. Z. (1984). The NIMH epi-
demiologic catchment area program: Historical context, 
major objectives, and study population characteristics. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 41, 934–941. doi:10.1001/
archpsyc.1984.01790210016003
Rende, R., & Plomin, R. (1992). Diathesis-stress models of psy-
chopathology: A quantitative genetic perspective. Applied 
& Preventive Psychology, 1, 177–182. doi:10.1016/S0962-
1849(05)80123-4
Roberts, M. C., Reed, G. M., Medina-Mora, M. E., Keeley, J. W., 
 
Sharan, P., Johnson, D. K., . . . Saxena, S. (2012). A 
global clinicians’ map of mental disorders to improve 
ICD-11: Analysing meta-structure to enhance clinical util-
ity. International Review of Psychiatry, 24, 578–590. doi: 
10.3109/09540261.2012.736368
Robins, E., & Guze, S. B. (1970). Establishment of diagnostic 
validity in psychiatric illness: Its application to schizo-
phrenia. American Journal of Psychiatry, 126, 983–986. 
doi:10.1176/ajp.126.7.983
Robins, L. N., Helzer, J. E., Croughan, J. L., & Ratcliff, K. S.  
(1981). National institute of mental health diagnostic inter-
view schedule: Its history, characteristics, and validity. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 38, 381–389. doi:10.1001/
archpsyc.1981.01780290015001
Robins, L. N., Wing, J., Wittchen, H. U., Helzer, J. E., Babor, 
T. F., Burke, J., . . . Towle, L. H. (1988). The compos-
ite international diagnostic interview: An epidemiologic 
instrument suitable for use in conjunction with different 
diagnostic systems and in different cultures. Archives of 
General Psychiatry, 45, 1069–1077. doi:10.1001/arch-
psyc.1988.01800360017003
Robinson, E. B., St. Pourcain, B., Anttila, V., Kosmicki, J. A., 
 
Bulik-Sullivan, B., Grove, J., . . . Walters, R. (2016). 
Genetic risk for autism spectrum disorders and neuro-
psychiatric variation in the general population. Nature 
Genetics, 48, 552–555. doi:10.1038/ng.3529
Robles, R., Frésan, A., Vega-Ramírez, H., Cruz-Islas, J., 
Rodríguez-Pérez, V., Domínguez-Martínez, T., . . . Reed, 
G. M. (2016). Removing transgender identity from the 
classification of mental disorders: A Mexican field study 
for ICD-11. Lancet Psychiatry, 3, 850–859. doi:10.1016/
S2215-0366(16)30165-1
Ruiz, M. A., Pincus, A. L., & Schinka, J. A. (2008). Externalizing 
pathology and the Five-Factor Model: A meta-analysis of 
personality traits associated with antisocial personality 
disorder, substance use disorder, and their co-occurrence. 
Journal of Personality Disorders, 22, 365–388. doi:10.1521/
pedi.2008.22.4.365
Rutter, M. (2002). The interplay of nature, nurture, and devel-
opmental influences: The challenge ahead for mental 
health. Archives of General Psychiatry, 59, 996–1000. 
doi:10.1001/archpsyc.59.11.996
Rutter, M. (2012). Gene–environment interdependence. 
European Journal of Developmental Psychology, 9, 391–
412. doi:10.1080/17405629.2012.661174
Sachs, E., Rosenfeld, B., Lhewa, D., Rasmussen, A., & Keller, 
A. (2008). Entering exile: Trauma, mental health, and cop-
ing among Tibetan refugees arriving in Dharamsala, India. 
Journal of Traumatic Stress, 21, 199–208. doi:10.1002/
jts.20324
Saxena, S., Funk, M., & Chisholm, D. (2013). World Health 
Assembly adopts Comprehensive Mental Health Action 
Plan 2013–2020. The Lancet, 381, 1970–1971. doi:10.1016/
S0140-6736(13)61139-3
Saxena, S., Thornicroft, G., Knapp, M., & Whiteford, H. 
(2007). Resources for mental health: Scarcity, inequity, 
and inefficiency. The Lancet, 370, 878–889. doi:10.1016/
S0140-6736(07)61239-2
Scheeringa, M. S., Zeanah, C. H., & Cohen, J. A. (2011). 
PTSD in children and adolescents: Toward in empirically 
based algorithm. Depression and Anxiety, 28, 770–782. 
doi:10.1002/da.20736
Scott, D., & Happell, B. (2011). The high prevalence of poor 
physical health and unhealthy lifestyle behaviours in indi-
viduals with severe mental illness. Issues in Mental Health 
Nursing, 32, 589–597. doi:10.3109/01612840.2011.569846
Scott, K. M., de Jonge, P., Alonso, J., Viana, M. C., Lui, Z., O’Neill, 
S., . . . Kessler, R. C. (2013). Associations between DSM-IV 
mental disorders and subsequent heart disease onset: 
Beyond depression. International Journal of Cardiology, 
168, 5293–5299. doi:10.1016/j.ijcard.2013.08.012
Sekar, A., Bialas, A. R., de Rivera, H., Davis, A., Hammond, T. R., 
 
Kamitaki, N., . . . McCarroll, S. A. (2016). Schizophrenia 
risk from complex variation of complement component 
4. Nature, 530, 177–183. doi:10.1038/nature16549
 Approaches to Classifying Mental Disorder 
143
Sharma, L., Markon, K. E., & Clark, L. A. (2014). Toward a theory 
of distinct types of “impulsive” behaviors: A meta-analysis 
of self-report and behavioral measures. Psychological 
Bulletin, 140, 374–408. doi:10.1037/a0034418
Sharp, C., Wright, A. G. C., Fowler, J. C., Frueh, B. C., Allen, 
J. G., Oldham, J., . . . Clark, L. A. (2015). The structure 
of personality pathology: Both general (‘g’) and specific 
(‘s’) factors? Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 124, 387. 
doi:10.1037/abn0000033
Shin, J. K., Barron, C. T., Chiu, Y. L., Jang, S. H., Touhid, S., 
& Bang, H. (2012). Weight changes and characteristics 
of patients associated with weight gain during inpatient 
psychiatric treatment. Issues in Mental Health Nursing, 33, 
505–512. doi:10.3109/01612840.2012.683931
Shin, L. M., & Liberzon, I. (2010). The neurocircuitry of fear, 
stress, and anxiety disorders. Neuropsychopharmacology, 
35, 169–191. doi:10.1038/npp.2009.83
Skodol, A. E., & Spitzer, R. L. (1987). Introduction. In A. E. 
Skodol & R. L. Spitzer (Eds.), An annotated bibliogra-
phy of DSM-III (pp. xi–xiv). Washington, DC: American 
Psychiatric Press.
Slade, T., & Watson, D. (2006). The structure of common 
DSM-IV and ICD-10 mental disorders in the Australian 
general population. Psychological Medicine, 36, 1593–
1600. doi:10.1017/S0033291706008452
Smink, F. R. E., van Hoeken, D., & Hoek, H. W. (2013). 
Epidemiology, course, and outcome of eating disorders. 
Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 26, 543–548. doi:10.1097/
YCO.0b013e328365a24f
Spitzer, R. L., Endicott, J., & Robins, E. (1978). Research 
diagnostic criteria: Rationale and reliability. Archives 
of General Psychiatry, 35, 773–782. doi:10.1001/
archpsyc.1978.01770300115013
Spitzer, R. L., Williams, J. B., Gibbon, M., & First, M. B. 
(1992). The structured clinical interview for DSM-III-R 
(SCID): I. History, rationale, and description. Archives 
of General Psychiatry, 49, 8624–8629. doi:10.1001/arch 
psyc.1992.01820080032005
Spitzer, R. L., & Williams, J. B. W. (1988). The revision of 
DSM-III: Process and changes. In J. E. Mezzich & M. von 
Cranach (Eds.), International classification in psychia-
try: Unity and diversity (pp. 263–283). New York, NY: 
Cambridge University Press.
Sroufe, L. A., & Rutter, M. (1984). The domain of developmen-
tal psychopathology. Child Development, 55(1), 17–29. 
doi:10.2307/1129832
Stecker, T., Fortney, J. C., Steffick, D. E., & Prajapati, S. (2006). 
The triple threat for chronic disease: Obesity, race, and 
depression. Psychosomatics, 47, 513–518. doi:10.1176/
appi.psy.47.6.513
Stein, D. J., Kogan, C. S., Atmaca, M., Fineberg, N. A., 
Fontenelle, L. F., Grant, J., . . . Reed, G. M. (2016). The 
classification of obsessive-compulsive and related disor-
ders in the ICD-11. Journal of Affective Disorders, 190, 
663–674. doi:10.1016/j.jad.2015.10.061
Stengel, E. (1959). Classification of mental disorders. Bulletin 
of the World Health Organization, 21, 601–663.
Storch, E. A., Bagner, D., Merlo, L. J., Shapira, N. A., Geffken, 
G. R., Murphy, T. K., & Goodman, W. K. (2007). Florida 
Obsessive-Compulsive Inventory: Development, reli-
ability, and validity. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 63, 
851–859. doi:10.1002/jclp.20382
Storch, E. A., Khanna, M., Merlo, L. J., Loew, B. A., Franklin, 
M., Reid, J. M., . . . Murphy, T. K. (2009). Children’s Florida 
obsessive compulsive inventory: Psychometric proper-
ties and feasibility of a self-report measure of obses-
sive–compulsive symptoms in youth. Child Psychiatry 
and Human Development, 40(3), 467-483. doi:10.1007/
s10578-009-0138-9
Stringaris, A., Goodman, R., Ferdinando, S., Razdan, V., 
Muhrer, E., Leibenluft, E., & Brotman, A. (2012). The 
Affective Reactivity Index: A concise irritability scale for 
clinical and research settings. Journal of Psychology and 
Psychiatry, 53, 1109–1117.
Sturt, E. (1981). Hierarchical patterns in the distribution of 
psychiatric symptoms. Psychological Medicine, 11, 783–
794. doi:10.1017/S0033291700041283
Sullivan, T. (2012, February 16). Could the U.S. skip ICD-
10 and leapfrog directly to ICD-11? Healthcare Payer 
News. Retrieved from http://www.healthcarepayernews 
.com/content/could-us-skip-ICD-10-and-leapfrog-
directly-ICD-11#.VZkeSKZSmXs
Svendsen, D., Singer, P., Foti, M. E., & Mauer, B. (2006). 
Morbidity and mortality in people with serious mental illness. 
Alexandria, VA: National Association of State Mental Health 
Program Directors (NASMHPD) Medical Directors Council.
Tackett, J. L., Waldman, I. D., Van Hulle, C. A., & Lahey, B. B. 
(2011). Shared genetic influences on negative emotional-
ity and major depression/conduct disorder comorbidity. 
Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent 
Psychiatry, 50, 818–827. doi:10.1016/j.jaac.2011.05.007
Tanenbaum, S. J. (2005). Evidence-based practice as mental 
health policy: Three controversies and a caveat. Health 
Affairs, 24, 163–173. doi:10.1377/hlthaff.24.1.163
Tassé, M. J., Luckasson, R., & Nygren, M. (2013). AAIDD 
proposed recommendations for ICD-11 and the condition 
previously known as mental retardation. Intellectual and 
Developmental Disabilities, 51, 127–131. doi:10.1352/1934-
9556-51.2.127
Thomas, J. J., Vartanian, L. R., & Brownell, K. D. (2009). The 
relationship between eating disorder not otherwise speci-
fied (EDNOS) and officially recognized eating disorders: 
Meta-analysis and implications for DSM. Psychological 
Bulletin, 135, 407–433. doi:10.1037/a0015326
Thornicroft, G. (2011). Physical health disparities and men-
tal illness: The scandal of premature mortality. British 
Journal of Psychiatry, 199, 441–442. doi:10.1192/bjp 
.bp.111.092718
Thornicroft, G. (2013). Premature death among people 
with mental illness. British Medical Journal, 346, f2969. 
doi:10.1136/bmj.f2969
Trull, T. J., Vergés, A., Wood, P. K., & Sher, K. J. (2013). The 
structure of DSM-IV-TR personality disorder diagnoses in 
NESARC: A reanalysis. Journal of Personality Disorders, 
27, 727–734. doi:10.1521/pedi_2013_27_107
Tsuang, M. T., Glatt, S. J., & Faraone, S. V. (2003). Genetics 
and genomics in schizophrenia. Primary Psychiatry, 10, 
37–40, 50.
 144 
Clark et al.
Tucker, J. A., & Reed, G. M. (2008). Evidentiary pluralism as 
a strategy for research and evidence-based practice in 
rehabilitation psychology. Rehabilitation Psychology, 53, 
269–283. doi:10.1037/a0012963
Turecki, G., Ota, V. K., Belangero, S. I., Jackowski, A., & 
Kaufman, J. (2014). Early life adversity, genomic plas-
ticity, and psychopathology. The Lancet Psychiatry, 1, 
461–466. doi:10.1016/S2215-0366(14)00022-4
Tyrer, P., Crawford, M., Mulder, R., Blashfield, R., Farnam, A., 
Fossati, A., . . . Reed, G. M. (2011). The rationale for the 
reclassification of personality disorder in the 11th revision 
of the international classification of diseases (ICD-11). 
Personality and Mental Health, 5, 246–259. doi:10.1002/
pmh.190
Tyrer, P., Reed, G. M., & Crawford, M. J. (2015). Classification, 
assessment, prevalence and effect of personality dis-
order. The Lancet, 385, 717–726. doi:10.1016/S0140-
6736(14)61995-4
U.S. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2015). 
Transaction and code sets standards. Retrieved from 
http://www.cms.gov/Regulations-and-Guidance/ 
Administrative-Simplification/HIPAA-ACA/Adopted 
StandardsandOperatingRules.html
U.S. National Center for Health Statistics. (2015). International 
classification of diseases, 10th revision, clinical modifi-
cation. Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/icd/
icd10cm.htm
U.S. Public Health Service, Division of Public Health Methods. 
(1944). Manual for coding causes of illness according 
to a diagnosis code for tabulating morbidity statistics 
(Miscellaneous Publication No. 32). Washington, DC: 
Government Publishing Office.
Üstün, B., & Kennedy, C. (2009). What is “functional impair-
ment”? Disentangling disability from clinical significance. 
World Psychiatry, 8, 82–85. doi:10.1002/j.2051-5545.2009.
tb00219.x
van Os, J. (2016). “Schizophrenia” does not exist. British 
Medical Journal, 352, i375. doi:10.1136/bmj.i375
van Os, J., Lataster, T., Delespaul, P., Wichers, M., & Myin-
Germeys, I. (2014). Evidence that a psychopathology 
interactome has diagnostic value, predicting clinical 
needs: An experience sampling study. PLOS ONE, 9, 
e86652. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0086652
van Os, J., Linscott, R. J., Myin-Germeys, I., Delespaul, P., & 
Krabbendam, L. (2009). A systematic review and meta-
analysis of the psychosis continuum: Evidence for a 
psychosis proneness–persistence–impairment model of 
psychotic disorder. Psychological Medicine, 39, 179–195. 
doi:10.1017/S0033291708003814
Verheul, R., & Widiger, T. A. (2004). A meta-analysis of the 
prevalence and usage of the personality disorder not oth-
erwise specified (PDNOS) diagnosis. Journal of Personality 
Disorders, 18, 309–319. doi:10.1521/pedi.18.4.309.40350
Vigo, D., Thornicroft, G., & Atun, R. (2016). Estimating the 
true global burden of mental illness. Lancet Psychiatry, 
3, 171–178. doi:10.1016/S2215-0366(15)00505-2
Vilagut, G., Forero, C. G., Barbaglia, G., & Aloso, J. (2016). 
Screening for depression in the general population with 
the Center for Epidemiological Studies Depression (CES-
D): A systematic review with meta-analysis. PLOS ONE, 
11, e0155431. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0155431
Villalta-Gil, V., Vilaplana, M., Ochoa, S., Haro, J. M., Dolz, 
M., Usall, J., & Cervilla, J. (2006). Neurocognitive perfor-
mance and negative symptoms: Are they equal in explain-
ing disability in schizophrenia outpatients? Schizophrenia 
Research, 87, 246–253. doi:10.1016/j.schres.2006.06.013
Vittengl, J. R., Clark, L. A., Thase, M. E., & Jarrett, R. B. (2014). 
Are improvements in cognitive content and depressive 
symptoms correlates or mediators during acute-phase cog-
nitive therapy for recurrent MDD. International Journal of 
Cognitive Therapy, 7, 251–271. doi:10.1521/ijct.2014.7.3.251
Vollebergh, W. A. M., Iedema, J., Bijl, R. V., de Graaf, R., 
Smit, F., & Ormel, J. (2001). The structure and stability of 
common mental disorders: The NEMESIS Study. Archives 
of General Psychiatry, 586, 597–603.
Voruganti, L. P., Punthakee, Z., Van Lieshout, R. J., 
MacCrimmon, D., Parker, G., Awad, A. G., & Gerstein, H. C.  
(2007). Dysglycemia in a community sample of people 
treated for schizophrenia: The Diabetes in Schizophrenia 
in Central-south Ontario (DiSCO) study. Schizophrenia 
Research, 96, 215–222. doi:10.1016/j.schres.2007.07.016
Wakefield, J. C. (1992). The concept of mental disorder: On 
the boundary between biological facts and social values. 
American Psychologist, 47, 373–388. doi:10.1037/0003-
066X.47.3.373
Wakefield, J. C. (2007). The concept of mental disorder: 
Diagnostic implications of the harmful dysfunction analy-
sis. World Psychiatry, 6, 149–156.
Wakschlag, L. S., Leventhal, B. L., Thomas, J., & Pine, D. S.  
(2007). Disruptive behavior disorders and ADHD in 
preschool children. In W. E. Narrow, M. B. First, P. J. 
Sirovatka, & D. A. Regier (Eds.), Age and gender consid-
erations in psychiatric diagnosis: A research agenda for 
DSM-V (pp. 243–257). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric 
Association.
Waldman, I. D., & Lilienfeld, S. O. (2001). Applications of tax-
ometric methods to problems of comorbidity: Perspectives 
and challenges. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 
8, 520–527. doi:10.1093/clipsy/8.4.520
Walker, E. R., & Druss, B. G. (2015). Rate and predictors 
of persistent MDD in a nationally representative sam-
ple. Community Mental Health Journal, 51, 701–707. 
doi:10.1007/s10597-014-9793-9
Walker, E. R., McGee, R. E., & Druss, B. G. (2015). Mortality in 
mental disorders and global disease burden implications: 
A systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA Psychiatry, 
72, 334–341. doi:10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2014.2502
Watson, D. (2005). Rethinking the mood and anxiety disor-
ders: A quantitative hierarchical model for DSM-V. Journal 
of Abnormal Psychology, 114, 522–536. doi:10.1037/0021-
843X.114.4.522
Watson, D., Clark, L. A., & Carey, G. (1988). Positive and 
negative affectivity and their relation to anxiety and 
depressive disorders. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 
97, 346–353. doi:10.1037/0021-843X.97.3.346
Watson, D., O’Hara, M. W., Naragon-Gainey, K., Koffel, 
E., Chmielewski, M., Kotov, R., . . . Ruggero, C. J. 
(2012). Development and validation of new anxiety 
 Approaches to Classifying Mental Disorder 
145
and bipolar symptom scales for an expanded version 
of the IDAS (the IDAS-II). Assessment, 19, 399–420. 
doi:10.1177/1073191112449857
Widiger, T. A., & Clark, L. A. (2000). Toward DSM-V and the 
classification of psychopathology. Psychological Bulletin, 
126, 946–963. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.126.6.946
Widom, C. (1999). Posttraumatic stress disorder in abused 
and neglected children grown up. American Journal of 
Psychiatry, 156, 1223–1229.
Wilberg, T., Urnes, Ø., Friis, S., Pedersen, G., & Karterud, 
S. (1999). Borderline and avoidant personality disorders 
and the five-factor model of personality: A compari-
son between DSM-IV diagnoses and NEO-PI-R. Journal 
of Personality Disorders, 13, 226–240. doi:10.1521/
pedi.1999.13.3.226
Wilk, J. E., West, J. C., Narrow, W. E., Marcus, S., Rubio-
Stipec, M., Rae, D. S., . . . Regier, D. A. (2006). 
Comorbidity patterns in routine psychiatric practice: Is 
there evidence of under-detection and under-diagnosis? 
Comprehensive Psychiatry, 47, 258–264. doi:10.1016/j 
.comppsych.2005.08.007
Woodruff, R. A., Goodwin, D. W., & Guze, S. B. (1974). 
Psychiatric diagnosis. New York, NY: Oxford University 
Press.
World Health Organization. (1949). International statistical 
classification of diseases, injuries, and causes of death, 
6th revision. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
World Health Organization. (1967). International statistical 
classification of diseases, injuries, and causes of death, 
8th revision. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
World Health Organization. (1974). Glossary of mental disor-
ders and guide to their classification. Geneva, Switzerland: 
Author.
World Health Organization. (1979). International statistical 
classification of diseases, injuries, and causes of death, 
9th revision. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
World Health Organization. (1992a). International statistical 
classification of diseases and related health problems, 10th 
revision. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
World Health Organization. (1992b). The ICD-10 classification 
of mental and behavioral disorders: Clinical descriptions 
and diagnostic guidelines. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
World Health Organization. (1993). The ICD-10 classification 
of mental and behavioural disorders: Diagnostic criteria 
for research. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
World Health Organization. (1996). Diagnostic and manage-
ment guidelines for mental disorders in primary care: ICD-
10 Chapter V Primary Care Version. Göttingen, Germany: 
WHO - Hogrefe and Huber.
World Health Organization. (2001). International classifi-
cation of functioning, disability, and health. Geneva, 
Switzerland: Author.
World Health Organization. (2008). mhGAP—Mental Health 
Gap Action Programme: Scaling up care for mental, 
neurological, and substance use disorders. Geneva, 
Switzerland: Author.
World Health Organization. (2011). Mental Health Atlas 2011. 
Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
World Health Organization. (2013a). Mental Health Action 
Plan 2013-2020. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
World Health Organization. (2013b). Assessment and manage-
ment of conditions specifically related to stress: mhGAP 
Intervention Guide module. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
World Health Organization. (2014). Constitution of the World 
Health Organization. In World Health Organization basic 
documents (48th ed.). Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
World Health Organization. (2016a). ICD-11 Beta Draft (Joint 
Linearization for Mortality and Morbidity Statistics). 
Geneva: Author. Retrieved from http://apps.who.int/clas 
sifications/icd11/browse/l-m/en
World Health Organization. (2016b). International Statistical 
Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems, 
10th Revision. ICD-10 Version: 2016. Geneva, Switzerland: 
Author. Retrieved from http://apps.who.int/classifica 
tions/icd10/browse/2016/en
World Health Organization. (2016c). mhGAP Intervention 
guide for mental, neurological, and substance use dis-
orders in non-specialized health settings. Geneva, 
Switzerland: Author.
World Health Organization & U.S. Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and 
Mental Health Administration. (1985). Mental disorders, 
alcohol, and drug-related problems: International per-
spectives on their diagnosis and classification. Oxford, 
England: Elsevier Science.
World Health Organization World Mental Health Survey 
Consortium. (2004). Prevalence, severity, and unmet need 
for treatment of mental disorders in the World Health 
Organization World Mental Health Surveys. Journal 
of the American Medical Association, 291, 2581–2590. 
doi:10.1001/jama.291.21.2581
Wright, A. G. C., Hopwood, C. J., Skodol, A. E., & Morey, L. C. 
 
(2016). Longitudinal validation of general and specific 
structural features of personality pathology. Journal of 
Abnormal Psychology, 125, 1120. doi:10.1037/abn0000165
Young, G., Lareau, C., & Pierre, B. (2014). One quintillion 
ways to have PTSD comorbidity: Recommendations for 
the disordered DSM-5. Psychological Injury and Law, 
7(1), 61–74. doi:10.1007/s12207-014-9186-y
