 CRLX101 nanoparticles localize in human tumors and
not in adjacent, nonneoplastic tissue after
intravenous dosing
Andrew J. Clarka, Devin T. Wileya, Jonathan E. Zuckermana,b, Paul Websterc, Joseph Chaod, James Line, Yun Yenf,1,
and Mark E. Davisa,1
aDivision of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125; bDepartment of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095; cOak Crest Institute of Science, Pasadena, CA 91107; dDepartment of Medical Oncology, City of
Hope Comprehensive Cancer Center, Duarte, CA 91010, eDivision of Gastroenterology, City of Hope Comprehensive Cancer Center, Duarte, CA 91010;
and fGraduate Institute for Cancer Biology and Drug Discovery, Taipei Medical University, Taipei 11031, Taiwan
Contributed by Mark E. Davis, February 23, 2016 (sent for review February 3, 2016; reviewed by Omid Farokhzad and David V. Schaffer)
Nanoparticle-based therapeutics are being used to treat patients
with solid tumors. Whereas nanoparticles have been shown to
preferentially accumulate in solid tumors of animal models, there
is little evidence to prove that intact nanoparticles localize to solid
tumors of humans when systemically administered. Here, tumor
and adjacent, nonneoplastic tissue biopsies are obtained through
endoscopic capture from patients with gastric, gastroesopha-
geal, or esophageal cancer who are administered the nanoparticle
CRLX101. Both the pre- and postdosing tissue samples adjacent to
tumors show no definitive evidence of either the nanoparticle or its
drug payload (camptothecin, CPT) contained within the nanopar-
ticle. Similar results are obtained from the predosing tumor samples.
However, in nine of nine patients that were evaluated, CPT is
detected in the tumor tissue collected 24–48 h after CRLX101 admin-
istration. For five of these patients, evidence of the intact deposition
of CRLX101 nanoparticles in the tumor tissue is obtained. Indications
of CPT pharmacodynamics from tumor biomarkers such as carbonic
anhydrase IX and topoisomerase I by immunohistochemistry show
clear evidence of biological activity from the delivered CPT in the
posttreatment tumors.
nanomedicine | clinical trial | gastric cancer | tumor targeting |
nanoparticles
N
anoparticle-based experimental therapeutics are being used
to deliver a variety of different drug molecules to patients
with solid tumors (1). Nanoparticle delivery seeks to improve
pharmacokinetic (PK) properties (e.g., enhanced solubility of the
drug, increased circulation times), alter biodistribution of the
drug molecules to have low amounts of drugs in nontarget tissues
and increased amounts in tumors, and enhance pharmacody-
namics (PD) (e.g., tunable release of the drug at the site of action
in the tumor) to produce enhanced efficacy while simultaneously
reducing side effects (and most importantly, introducing no new
side effects due to the nanoparticle) in patients. These properties
can: (i) enable drug combinations formerly prohibited by toxicity
limits, (ii) enable new classes of drug delivery [for example, short
interfering RNAs (siRNAs)], and (iii) provide cell-specific tar-
geting within a tumor.
Delivery of drugs to solid tumors using nanoparticle technology
relies on the enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect.
The mechanistic data regarding the EPR effect come from animal
models, primarily xenografted human tumors in mice. Because
these xenografted tumors poorly recapitulate the architecture of
true human tumors, there is skepticism about whether or not in-
tact nanoparticles can localize in human tumors. Radiolabeled
liposomes have been used to assess tumor accumulation in humans
(2, 3). In those studies, the amounts of radioactivity accumulated in
tumors did correlate with the number of microvessels measured
from nine patient biopsies (3). Increased microvessel density may
be an indication of increasing potential for the EPR effect. Also,
Davis et al. demonstrated dose-dependent deposition of the
CALAA-01 polymer–siRNA nanoparticle system in human s.c.
melanoma metastases using a stain specific for the nanoparticle
(4); Eliasof et al. showed the presence of the camptothecin (CPT)
component of CRXL101 in a single human gastric tumor biopsy
(5); and Weiss et al. provided a single biopsy showing CRLX101
and CPT in a human breast cancer (6). Thus, there remains a need
for further evidence of intact nanoparticle localization in solid,
human tumors when they are systemically administered to cancer
patients.
Here, we use fluorescence microscopy to demonstrate the pres-
ence of an intact polymer-drug nanoparticle (CRLX101) in human
gastric tumors that have been obtained from endoscopic capture
before, and 24–48 h after, dosing. Adjacent, nonneoplastic tis-
sues are also obtained to assist in determining the specificity for
tumor localization. Further, immunohistochemistry (IHC) was
used to label various biomarkers within the tumor tissue to better
understand the pharmacodynamics effect of CRLX101 on solid
human tumors.
CRLX101 is a nanoparticle consisting of a cyclodextrin-containing
polymer conjugate of CPT. The individual polymer strands self-
assemble into nanoparticles (approximately five strands) of
Significance
Nanoparticle-based therapeutics rely on the enhanced perme-
ability and retention effect to localize in solid tumors and not
healthy tissue. These phenomena are rationalized from animal
models of human disease. Since these models poorly represent
human tumors, there is a need to obtain information from hu-
mans to better understand how nanoparticle-based therapeutics
perform in humans. Here, we collected tumor and nonneoplastic
tissue biopsies from cancer patients who have been administered
CRLX101 and show that the intact nanoparticles localize in hu-
man tumors and not in adjacent tissues. Sufficient concentrations
reach the tumors to cause down-regulation of topoisomerase
I and carbonic anhydrase IX. These results will aid in better un-
derstanding how nanoparticle therapeutics function in humans
and how to better design future therapeutics.
Author contributions: A.J.C., D.T.W., J.E.Z., P.W., J.C., Y.Y., and M.E.D. designed research;
A.J.C., D.T.W., J.E.Z., P.W., J.C., and J.L. performed research; A.J.C., D.T.W., J.E.Z., P.W., J.C.,
Y.Y., and M.E.D. analyzed data; and A.J.C., J.E.Z., Y.Y., and M.E.D. wrote the paper.
Reviewers: O.F., Harvard Medical School; and D.V.S., University of California, Berkeley.
Conflict of interest statement: M.E.D. is a consultant to Cerulean Pharma Inc. and owns
stock in the company.
Freely available online through the PNAS open access option.
1To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: mdavis@cheme.caltech.edu or
yyen@tmu.edu.tw.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1603018113/-/DCSupplemental.
3850–3854
|
PNAS
|
April 5, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 14
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1603018113
 ∼20- to 30-nm diameter and 10 wt% CPT by multiple, in-
terstrand, inclusion complex formation between cyclodextrin
and the CPT molecules (Fig. 1A). CRLX101 is currently in a
number of human cancer phase II trials (early results from
some of the phase I/II trials are available) (6, 7). Here, a clinical
trial was performed at and sponsored by the City of Hope
Comprehensive Cancer Center (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier:
NCT01612546). CRLX101 was supplied by Cerulean Pharma
Inc. The primary endpoint of this study was to test the hy-
pothesis that intact CRLX101 nanoparticles localize in primary
human tumors and not adjacent, nonneoplastic tissue after i.v.
administration. The results presented here show that CRLX101
does localize in tumor tissue and not the nonneoplastic tissue
leading to the expected pharmacodynamics effect.
Results
Trial Design and Tissue Biopsies. Patients with progression on at
least one prior line of systemic therapy were enrolled in a pilot
study to assess CRLX101 activity in gastric, esophageal, or gas-
troesophageal adenocarcinoma or squamous cell carcinoma (Fig.
1B). Patients consented to have endoscopic-assisted biopsies of
both their primary tumor and nonneoplastic, adjacent tissue
before, and 24–48 h after, the first dose of CRLX101. The first
dose of CRLX101 for all patients was given at the recommended
phase II dosing of 15 mg/m2. Three individual samples of both
tumor and nonneoplastic tissue were acquired and divided in the
following ways: (i) frozen in optimized cutting temperature
compound (Tissue-Tek OCT) for fluorescence microcopy stud-
ies, (ii) fixed in 10% formalin for antibody staining, or (iii)
placed in formalin for standard histology. A total of 10 patients
consented for this study, of which 9/10 had histologically con-
firmed tumor tissue present in both pre- and post-CRLX101
treatment biopsies.
Detection of CRLX101 Fluorescence in Human Gastric Tumors. The
pharmacologically active component of CRLX101—CPT—has
intrinsic fluorescence (Excitationmax = 370 nm and Emissionmax =
435 nm), and can be used for the detection of CRLX101 in tissue
via fluorescence microscopy (5, 6, 8). Fig. 2A illustrates detection
of CPT fluorescence in two different types of human tumor xe-
nografts in mice 24 h after i.v. dosing of CRLX101. The fluo-
rescence signal has a patchy distribution throughout the tumor
with some areas of densely clustered punctate fluorescence sig-
nal, whereas other areas are devoid of signal.
Fig. 2 B and C illustrates detection of CPT fluorescence in
human gastric tumor biopsy specimens. The CPT signal observed
was qualitatively similar to that obtained from the xenograft
tumors (examples of CPT signal observed in other patients are
shown in SI Appendix, Fig. S1). Distribution of CPT fluorescence
was focal and punctate. To verify that observed signal was indeed
CPT, regions of interest were repeatedly scanned using the
confocal laser. CPT is a weak fluorophore and rapidly photo-
bleaches upon repeated interrogation, compared with non-
specific tissue autofluorescence. Thus, punctate fluorescence
that rapidly diminished upon multiple scans was determined to
be from CPT (SI Appendix, Fig. S2). In total, CPT fluorescence
was detected in all nine posttreatment tumors. No definitive CPT
fluorescent signal was observed in any of the adjacent nontumor
biopsy specimens (Table 1). One patient showed potential CPT
signal in the posttreatment nontumor tissue biopsy; however, this
Fig. 1.
Schematic of CRLX101 and study design. (A) CRLX101 nanoparticle design and particle formation including image of particles under cryoelectron
microscopy. (B) Design of clinical trial.
Clark et al.
PNAS
|
April 5, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 14
|
3851
MEDICAL SCIENCES
 signal did not fully quench from repeated laser scans, thereby not
meeting our criteria for definitive CPT signal (SI Appendix, Fig.
S3). Fluorescence was considerably rarer in the patient samples
than in the xenograft tumors. However, the patient biopsies were
only a fraction of the size of pieces of xenograft tumor that we
investigated. Tissue samples were also stained with an antibody
against the PEG component of CRLX101 (Fig. 3). In five of nine
patients, the PEG antibody colocalized with the CPT fluores-
cence, suggesting intact nanoparticles were present within the
posttreatment tumors.
Pharmacodynamics Investigation of CRLX101 in Human Gastric Tumors.
To confirm the pharmacokinetic observations, a pharmacody-
namics study was performed. A hematoxylin and eosin (H&E)
stain was performed first to verify the quality of existing tumors
and surrounding, uninvolved tissue (SI Appendix, Fig. S4). The
carbonic anhydrase IX (CA IX) antibody stain showed high in-
tracellular expression in pretreated tumor samples, whereas the
posttreatment samples revealed much less staining, suggesting a
decrease in HIF-1α, a transcription factor upstream of CA IX (9)
(Fig. 4A). The topoisomerase I (Topo-I) stain showed reduced
staining from pretreatment to posttreatment samples (Fig. 4B).
This result suggests CPT, released from the nanoparticle, bound
Topo-I and triggered its degradation.
Discussion
The ability of intact nanoparticles to extravasate and deposit
within tumor tissue is fundamental to their therapeutic activity
Fig. 2.
Detection of camptothecin (CPT) fluorescence following CRLX101 treatment in mice and humans. (A) Presence of CPT in mice bearing two different
human tumor xenografts. CPT is apparent 24 h after a single CRLX101 dose and appears as bright, punctate dots (green dots) with a patchy distribution
throughout the tissue. (B) CPT signal in nonneoplastic and tumor tissue of a single patient under different dosing states. Positive CPT signal (green dots) is
seen only in the posttreatment tumor tissue. (C) CPT signal in posttreatment nonneoplastic and tumor tissue for three other patients.
Table 1.
Summary of biopsy investigation results for each patient
Patient
Tumor
differentiation
Pretreatment
nonneoplastic
tissue
Pretreatment
tumor tissue
Posttreatment
nonneoplastic
tissue
Posttreatment
tumor tissue
2
Poor
0
0
0
++
3
Well
0
0
0
++*
4
Moderate to poor
0
0
0
+++*
5
Moderate
0
0
0
++*
6
Poor
0
0
0
++*
7
Poor
0
0
0
++
8
Moderate
0
0
+
++*
9
Moderate to poor
0
0
0
++
10
Poor
0
0
0
++
Tumor quality was determined using standard histological techniques. CPT signal in the tissue sample was graded in the
following ways: 0 indicates no CPT signal was observed in the tissue; + indicates potential CPT signal was observed in the tissue,
but did not meet both requirements used to determine true CPT signal [(i) observed signal was punctate and patchy in
distribution and (ii) signal rapidly diminished upon repeated confocal laser scans]; ++ indicates definitive CPT signal was
observed but only in a minority of images acquired; and +++ indicates definitive signal was observed in the majority of images
acquired. Tissues marked by an * indicate CPT signal colocalization with PEG stain was observed. Patient 1 was not included in
the analysis because no tumor tissue was identified in the biopsy samples both pre and post-CRLX101 treatment.
3852
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1603018113
Clark et al.
 and selectivity. This mechanism of tumor deposition, known as
the EPR effect, has only ever been demonstrated directly in ani-
mal models, specifically in xenograft tumors in mice that, in gen-
eral, do not faithfully represent the true architecture of human
tumors. There is considerable debate in the literature surrounding
the existence of this phenomenon in human tumors. Because most
nanoparticle therapeutics have been designed from the optimi-
zation of delivery to xenografted human tumors in mice, it is im-
portant to show that similar mechanisms of deposition take place
in human tumors.
Here, we demonstrate through matched sets of pre- and
postnanoparticle dosing biopsies of tumor and adjacent, non-
neoplastic tissue evidence of intact nanoparticle deposition in
human tumors after i.v. administration. All nine tumor-bearing
patients showed evidence of CPT in the posttreatment tumor
tissue. Furthermore, no definitive CPT signal was observed in
adjacent, nonneoplastic tissue. Interestingly, the signal observed
within the human tumors appeared to be solely due to drug within
the tumor parenchyma. If drug were retained within the micro-
vasculature following tissue fixation and processing, we would
expect to see some signal in the normal tissue, but this was not
observed. Due to poorly preserved tissue architecture of the fresh-
frozen biopsy samples following processing, identification of drug
signal within different tumor compartments (e.g., intracellular vs.
interstitial) was not possible. An understanding of how uniformly
and deeply CRLX101 diffuses throughout the tumor and how
this affects free drug concentration within the tumor is critical to
maximizing CRLX101 efficacy.
Although there was detectable CPT signal in the posttreatment
tumors, it was significantly lower than what we have previously
experienced in mouse xenografts (Fig. 2). CRLX101 first enters
mouse model xenografts within 6 h of i.v. administration and
slowly diffuses away from blood vessels and deeper into tumors
over several days (5). Therefore, the quantity of CPT present in
the patient samples 24 h after treatment may strongly depend on
location of the biopsy relative to vasculature. The biopsies were
acquired randomly from a patient’s primary tumor and measured
only ∼3 mm3, which is just a fraction of the total tumor volume. In
contrast, it is possible to isolate entire xenografts and readily identify
vasculature and areas of high drug signal. Human tumors also
express a high degree of heterogeneity (10, 11). In patients with
gastric cancer, the tumor microvascular density can significantly
vary depending on the extent of invasion to surrounding tissues as
well as gross tumor morphology (12). Factors that influence vas-
cular density and heterogeneity within human tumors may affect
the magnitude and reproducibility of the EPR effect in humans.
To investigate whether intact nanoparticles were present within
the human tumors, an antibody against the PEG component of
CRLX101 was used (Fig. 3). In five of nine patients, colocalization
of the CPT signal with the PEG stain was observed, suggesting
that at least some drug is still retained within intact nanoparticles
in these tissues. In vitro investigation of CPT release from
CRLX101 has shown only 30% of loaded CPT released from the
nanoparticle at neutral pH after 24 h with that value dropping to
10% at the tumor microenvironment pH (pH 6.5–6.9) (13). These
kinetics suggest a significant portion of the loaded CPT should be
retained within the nanoparticle core when the posttreatment
biopsies were acquired. Experiments using PET with radiolabeled
CRLX101 in mice have shown increasing, selective accumulation
of the nanoparticle within tumors over the first 24 h after an initial
dose (8). A similar result was found using MRI where CRLX101
showed increasing apparent diffusion coefficient over the first
7 d after dosing in tumor-bearing mice (14). Both these in vivo
results indicate intact nanoparticles are likely accumulating within
the human tumors over the first 24–48 h. The lack of colocalized
CRLX101 polymer-CPT signal in four of the nine patients may be
explained by poor sensitivity of the anti-PEG antibody stain used.
Several PEG mAbs were investigated and all showed significantly
decreased affinity to the CRLX101 polymer component after ex-
posure to tissue fixation agents. This likely limited the ability to
detect the CRLX101 polymer within the fixed tissue sections.
Combined with the scarcity of positive CPT signal in most tumor
biopsies, this factor may have caused false negative colocalization
results for the four patients. It is also possible that these patients
experienced less overall nanoparticle deposition into the tumor
due to tumor characteristics that are unfavorable—compared with
the six positive patients—to nanoparticle extravasation, reducing
potential binding sites for the PEG antibody.
Despite relatively low CPT signal in the human tumor compared
with mouse xenograft tissue, investigation of tumor biomarkers
showed clear pharmacodynamic effects of the drug within tumors.
CA IX expression is driven directly by HIF-1α and can be used to
measure HIF-1α activity. The decreased expression of CA IX in
the posttreatment tumors is consistent with the inhibitor effect of
CRLX101 on HIF-1α expression, which has been previously ob-
served (7, 15). CPT has been known to cause rapid degradation of
Topo-I through the ubiquitin–proteasome system in tissue culture
(16–20). Our result reveals this may also be occurring in vivo as
evident by the lower staining of Topo-I in the posttreatment tu-
mors. This finding, to our knowledge, would be the first result
demonstrating down-regulation of Topo-I by CPT in human tu-
mors collected from clinical trials.
In summary, we show evidence of the nanoparticle CRLX101
accumulating within gastric tumors in humans but not adjacent,
nonneoplastic tissue. This result supports the hypothesis
that nanoparticle therapeutics can localize within human solid
Fig. 3.
CPT–PEG colocalization. Tissue samples were stained with an anti-
PEG antibody to identify the polymer component of CRLX101. Evidence of
colocalized CPT signal (bright green dots) and PEG stain (red dots) were
observed in five of nine patients. White arrows indicate points of stain
colocalization.
Fig. 4.
Pharmacodynamics investigation of tumor biomarkers. Tumor tissues
of six patients were stained for two different tumor biomarkers (CA IX and
Topo-I) before and after treatment with CRLX101. The results shown here are
indicative of the trend observed in the six individual tissue series.
Clark et al.
PNAS
|
April 5, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 14
|
3853
MEDICAL SCIENCES
 tumors, and this may occur via the EPR effect. Colocalization of
the CPT and PEG components of CRLX101 was observed in
several patients, indicating intact nanoparticles are reaching tumors
in humans. Although signal observed from the CPT component of
CRLX101 was lower than what had been previously observed in
xenografts, this decrease might be due to biopsy sampling location
and tumor heterogeneity, and in particular, microvascular density.
IHC revealed changes in two tumor biomarkers consistent with the
biological activity of CPT within tumors.
Materials and Methods
Mice Studies. All mice were treated according to the National Institutes of
Health Guidelines for Animal Care and Use (21) as approved by the Caltech
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Mice were treated with
CRLX101 via lateral tail vein injection, then euthanized after 24 h. Their tu-
mors were resected, embedded in optimal cutting temperature compound,
and frozen for fluorescence microscopy.
Patient Enrollment and CRLX101 Treatment. Patients with advanced gastric,
gastroesophageal junctional, esophageal adenocarcinoma carcinoma, or
squamous cell carcinoma, who had progressed on at least one prior line of
systemic therapy, were enrolled in a pilot clinical trial to assess preferential
uptake of CRLX101 in tumor tissue versus healthy, adjacent tissue (ClinicalTrials.
gov identifier: NCT01612546). All systemic therapy for patients was discon-
tinued at least 4 wk before receiving CRLX101. Pretreatment biopsies were
acquired by endoscopy 6–21 d before receiving the first i.v. infusion of 15
mg/m2 CRLX101. The posttreatment biopsies were performed between 24
and 48 h after receiving CRLX101.
Human Gastric Tissue Sample Acquisition and Preparation. Human gastric tis-
sue samples were obtained from patients enrolled in a CRLX101 pilot trial
with consent in accordance with City of Hope Institutional Review Board (IRB)
guidelines (City of Hope IRB Protocol 11276). Biopsy specimens used for
fluorescence were immediately embedded in optimal cutting temperature
media and frozen on dry ice. Biopsies acquired for IHC were immediately
placed in 4% (wt/vol) paraformaldehyde. All specimens were transferred to
the City of Hope Translational Research Laboratory before processing. The
clinical trial was sponsored by the City of Hope. CRLX101 was supplied by
Cerulean Pharma Inc.
Tissue Immunofluorescence. Fresh frozen tissue samples were sectioned,
washed briefly in PBS, and fixed for 10 min with 10% formalin. Slides were
blocked for 1 h in 5% (vol/vol) normal goat serum in PBS and followed by
overnight stain at 4 °C with an anti-PEG antibody (1:100 dilution, Abcam
ab94764). Slides were then washed and stained for 1 h with an Alexa Fluor
488-conjugated secondary antibody (1:500 dilution, Invitrogen A-21212) and
mounted using ProLong Gold antifade reagent. Tissues were imaged with
a Zeiss LSM 510 inverted confocal scanning microscope using a Zeiss Plan
Neofluar 63×/1.25 oil objective. The excitation wavelength for camptothecin
was 710 nm (two-photon laser) and 488 nm for detection of PEG. The cor-
responding emission filters were 390–465 nm and 565–615 nm, respectively.
Images were adjusted to have equivalent mean brightness using the
brightness adjustment tool in LSM 5 Image Browser (Leica).
Tumor Biomarker Immunohistochemistry. Tumor tissues were fixed with 10%
formalin and embedded in paraffin. Tissues sections, 5 μm in thickness, were
prepared and deparaffinized in xylenes followed by rehydration in graded
alcohols. The sections were baked in 0.01 M sodium citrate buffer, pH 6.0,
for 15 min for antigen retrieval. Endogenous peroxidase was quenched with
3% (vol/vol) hydrogen peroxide at room temperature (20–25 °C). Primary
rabbit Topo-I (Santa Cruz) and rabbit CA IX (Proteintech) were applied
overnight at 4 °C with final concentrations of 1:200 (Topo-1) and 1:2,000 (CA
IX). The sections were counterstained with hematoxylin, followed by de-
hydration in graded alcohols and xylenes. Tissue sections were then de-
veloped using horseradish peroxidase DAB Quanto kit according to the
manufacturer’s instructions (Thermal Scientific). Sections containing no pri-
mary antibody stain were processed simultaneously and used as negative
controls, whereas samples known to strongly express Topo-I and CA IX
served as positive controls. Photomicrographs were taken on a Leica mi-
croscope equipped with a CCD camera (Leica Microsystems).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank the patients and families who participated
in this study. This work was supported by National Cancer Institute Grants
CA 151819 and L30 CA179788-01, National Institutes of Health Grant
2K12CA001727-21, and by Cerulean Pharma Inc.
1. Davis ME, Chen ZG, Shin DM (2008) Nanoparticle therapeutics: An emerging treat-
ment modality for cancer. Nat Rev Drug Discov 7(9):771–782.
2. Harrington KJ, et al. (2001) Effective targeting of solid tumors in patients with locally
advanced cancers by radiolabeled pegylated liposomes. Clin Cancer Res 7(2):243–254.
3. Koukourakis MI, et al. (1999) Liposomal doxorubicin and conventionally fractionated
radiotherapy in the treatment of locally advanced non-small-cell lung cancer and
head and neck cancer. J Clin Oncol 17(11):3512–3521.
4. Davis ME, et al. (2010) Evidence of RNAi in humans from systemically administered
siRNA via targeted nanoparticles. Nature 464(7291):1067–1070.
5. Eliasof S, et al. (2013) Correlating preclinical animal studies and human clinical trials of
a multifunctional, polymeric nanoparticle. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110(37):15127–15132.
6. Weiss GJ, et al. (2013) First-in-human phase 1/2a trial of CRLX101, a cyclodextrin-
containing polymer-camptothecin nanopharmaceutical in patients with advanced
solid tumor malignancies. Invest New Drugs 31(4):986–1000.
7. Pham E, et al. (2015) Translational impact of nanoparticle-drug conjugate CRLX101
with or without bevacizumab in advanced ovarian cancer. Clin Cancer Res 21(4):808–818.
8. Schluep T, et al. (2009) Pharmacokinetics and tumor dynamics of the nanoparticle IT-
101 from PET imaging and tumor histological measurements. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
106(27):11394–11399.
9. Kaluz S, Kaluzová M, Liao S-Y, Lerman M, Stanbridge EJ (2009) Transcriptional control
of the tumor- and hypoxia-marker carbonic anhydrase 9: A one transcription factor
(HIF-1) show? Biochim Biophys Acta 1795(2):162–172.
10. Maeda H (2015) Toward a full understanding of the EPR effect in primary and
metastatic tumors as well as issues related to its heterogeneity. Adv Drug Deliv Rev
91:3–6.
11. McGranahan N, Swanton C (2015) Biological and therapeutic impact of intratumor
heterogeneity in cancer evolution. Cancer Cell 27(1):15–26.
12. Araya M, et al. (1997) Microvessel count predicts metastasis and prognosis in patients
with gastric cancer. J Surg Oncol 65(4):232–236.
13. Cheng J, Khin KT, Jensen GS, Liu A, Davis ME (2003) Synthesis of linear, β-cyclodextrin-
based polymers and their camptothecin conjugates. Bioconjug Chem 14(5):1007–1017.
14. Ng TSC, et al. (2013) Serial diffusion MRI to monitor and model treatment response of
the targeted nanotherapy CRLX101. Clin Cancer Res 19(9):2518–2527.
15. Gaur S, et al. (2014) Pharmacodynamic and pharmacogenomic study of the nanoparticle
conjugate of camptothecin CRLX101 for the treatment of cancer. Nanomedicine (Lond)
10(7):1477–1486.
16. Desai SD, Liu LF, Vazquez-Abad D, D’Arpa P (1997) Ubiquitin-dependent destruction
of topoisomerase I is stimulated by the antitumor drug camptothecin. J Biol Chem
272(39):24159–24164.
17. Fu Q, Kim SW, Chen HX, Grill S, Cheng YC (1999) Degradation of topoisomerase I
induced by topoisomerase I inhibitors is dependent on inhibitor structure but in-
dependent of cell death. Mol Pharmacol 55(4):677–683.
18. Lin C-P, Ban Y, Lyu YL, Liu LF (2009) Proteasome-dependent processing of
topoisomerase I-DNA adducts into DNA double strand breaks at arrested
replication forks. J Biol Chem 284(41):28084–28092.
19. Zhang H-F, et al. (2004) Cullin 3 promotes proteasomal degradation of the
topoisomerase I-DNA covalent complex. Cancer Res 64(3):1114–1121.
20. Desai SD, et al. (2003) Transcription-dependent degradation of topoisomerase I-DNA
covalent complexes. Mol Cell Biol 23(7):2341–2350.
21. Committee on Care and Use of Laboratory Animals (1996) Guide for the Care and Use
of Laboratory Animals (Natl Inst Health, Bethesda), DHHS Publ No (NIH) 85–23.
3854
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1603018113
Clark et al.
