 Aesthetic Surgery Journal
2017, Vol 37(3) 285–289
© 2017 The American Society for
Aesthetic Plastic Surgery, Inc.
Reprints and permission:
journals.permissions@oup.com
DOI: 10.1093/asj/sjw259
www.aestheticsurgeryjournal.com
Breast Surgery
Special Topic
NCCN Consensus Guidelines for the Diagnosis 
and Management of Breast Implant-Associated 
Anaplastic Large Cell Lymphoma
Mark W. Clemens, MD; and Steven M. Horwitz, MD
Abstract
Published case series demonstrate a lack of treatment standardization for breast implant-associated anaplastic large cell lymphoma (BIA-ALCL) with a 
wide variety of therapeutic strategies being employed at all stages of disease. The National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) annually publishes 
Clinical Practice Guidelines for Non-Hodgkin Lymphomas. For the first time, BIA-ALCL management will be included which signifies an important and 
needed guideline addition. The new BIA-ALCL guideline was achieved by a consensus of lymphoma oncologists, plastic surgeons, radiation oncologists, 
and surgical oncologists. NCCN guidelines focus on the diagnosis and management throughout the stages of many lymphoma subtypes based upon the 
most current data available. This article summarizes the essential recommendations and optimal therapeutic strategies of the NCCN guidelines critical to 
the plastic surgery community. We encourage international adoption of these BIA-ALCL treatment standards by our specialty societies across the oncology 
and surgery disciplines.
Editorial Decision date: November 22, 2016.
Breast implant-associated anaplastic large cell lymphoma 
(BIA-ALCL) is a rare T-cell lymphoma typically occurring 
in a delayed fluid collection around a textured implant 
or surrounding scar capsule.1,2 In 2016, the World Health 
Organization for the first time provisionally classified 
BIA-ALCL as a newly recognized entity and highlighted 
the importance of surgical management of the disease.3 
However, recent case series demonstrate rare treatment 
standardization for BIA-ALCL with a wide variety of regi-
mens such as surgery, chemotherapeutic agents, radiation 
therapy, and stem cell transplant being employed at all 
stages of disease.4-8 The NCCN non-Hodgkin lymphoma 
(NHL) committee has developed a new consensus guide-
line for the diagnosis and treatment of BIA-ALCL included 
in the 2017 update. This article summarizes the essential 
recommendations and therapeutic strategies of the NCCN 
guidelines critical to the plastic surgery community.
NCCN is an alliance of 27 of the nation’s leading can-
cer centers, which forms recommendations for the pre-
vention, diagnosis, and management of malignancies.9 
The NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology 
(NCCN Guidelines) represent the authoritative oncology 
standards utilized worldwide, which apply to approxi-
mately 97% of cancer patients. Guidelines are intended 
to facilitate decision making by treating physicians, pay-
ers, and patients. NCCN guidelines on NHL focus on 
the diagnosis and management throughout the stages 
of many NHL subtypes based upon the most current 
data available and expert consensus, and are widely 
recognized as a standard for clinical practice. The new 
Dr Clemens is an Associate Professor, Department of Plastic 
Surgery, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX. Dr Horwitz 
is an Attending Medical Oncologist of Lymphoma, Department of 
Hematology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY.
Corresponding Author:
Dr Mark W. Clemens, Department of Plastic Surgery, 1400 Pressler 
Street, Unit 1488, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, 
USA. 
E-mail: mwclemens@mdanderson.org
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/asj/article-abstract/37/3/285/2981931 by guest on 02 June 2019
 286 
Aesthetic Surgery Journal 37(3)
BIA-ALCL guidelines were achieved by a consensus of 
lymphoma oncologists, plastic surgeons, radiation oncol-
ogists, and surgical oncologists from the NCCN mem-
ber institutions. Due to copyright agreement, the actual 
NCCN BIA-ALCL algorithms cannot be reprinted in a 
journal, but can be found online (www.nccn.org). This 
manuscript represents a summary and explanation of the 
new guidelines.
INITIAL DIAGNOSIS AND PATHOLOGIC 
WORKUP
BIA-ALCL patients most commonly present with a spon-
taneous peri-prosthetic fluid collection or capsular mass 
at an average of eight to ten years following implantation 
with a breast implant for either cosmetic or reconstruc-
tive indications. A vast majority of cases were encoun-
tered with a clinical history of a textured implant.10 Other 
described symptoms have included breast enlargement, 
skin rash, capsular contracture, and lymphadenopathy. 
Initial workup of an enlarged breast should include ultra-
sound evaluation for fluid collection, breast masses, as 
well as enlarged regional lymph nodes (axillary, supraclav-
icular, and internal mammary). For BIA-ALCL patients, the 
sensitivity and specificity of ultrasound for detecting an 
effusion (84% and 75%) or a mass (46% and 100%) were 
found to be similar or better than computed tomography 
or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).11 If ultrasound is 
indeterminate or requires further confirmation, physicians 
may also utilize an MRI or positron emission tomography 
(PET) scan in select cases.
Peri-prosthetic fluid collections should undergo fine 
needle aspiration. At time of aspiration, ultrasound may 
aid in implant displacement and protection, and aspi-
ration can be performed either in a clinic setting or by 
interventional radiology. A suspicious mass requires 
tissue biopsy and evaluation is best made by a hema-
topathologist. Specimens should be sent for cytology. 
Essential to the diagnosis of BIA-ALCL is immunohis-
tochemistry and flow cytometry for T-cell markers, spe-
cifically CD30 cell surface protein is highly expressed in 
Figure 1. Determination of clinical and pathologic BIA-ALCL staging is essential for treatment strategies. This figure represents 
a BIA-ALCL tumor, lymph node, metastasis (TNM) staging system modeled after the American Joint Committee on Cancer 
(AJCC) TNM staging system for solid tumors. Adapted from original illustration by Dave Arten, MA, CMI, in Clemens et al.5
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/asj/article-abstract/37/3/285/2981931 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Clemens and Horwitz 
287
ALCL as well as some lymphoproliferative disorders12-14 
and is necessary to establish the diagnosis of BIA-ALCL. 
As BIA-ALCL is a rare disease at most medical centers, 
inclusion of a clinical history and directions to the 
pathologist to “rule out BIA-ALCL” is beneficial and sug-
gested. If after pathology evaluation, diagnosis of lym-
phoma is indeterminate, secondary hematopathology 
consultation is recommended at a tertiary cancer center 
with experience in this disease. If the pathology is neg-
ative, the patient should be referred to a plastic surgeon 
for management as a benign seroma. In accordance with 
the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
recommendation,15 histologic confirmation of BIA-ALCL 
should be reported to the BIA-ALCL PROFILE registry 
(www.thepsf.org/profile) of the American Society of 
Plastic Surgeons.
LYMPHOMA WORKUP AND STAGING
Following confirmation of BIA-ALCL diagnosis, a multi-
disciplinary team is recommended for managing patients. 
Routine laboratory blood tests include a complete blood 
count (CBC) with differential, comprehensive metabolic 
panel, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), and Hepatitis B 
testing (if adjuvant chemotherapy is being considered). 
Women of child-bearing age should be tested for preg-
nancy prior to embarking on oncologic treatment. For 
BIA-ALCL confirmed cases, a bone marrow biopsy may 
be performed but is most often not necessary except 
in select cases with evidence or suspicion of systemic 
spread, and can be left to the oncologist’s discretion. For 
confirmed cases of BIA-ALCL, a PET scan is often benefi-
cial for demonstrating associated capsular masses, chest 
wall involvement, and is the preferred test to evaluate 
for systemic spread to regional or distant lymph nodes, 
and/or organ involvement.11 Active BIA-ALCL is positive 
on PET scan. Staging of BIA-ALCL may be performed 
either by a lymphoma or solid tumor staging system. 
The Lugano revision to the Ann Arbor staging system 
is a lymphoma staging with stage IE disease limited to a 
single extranodal site such as breast or capsule involve-
ment only, with stage IIE disease defining spread to local 
lymph nodes.16 Using this system, nearly all BIA-ALCL 
patients have early-stage disease, either stage 1E (83%-
84%) or stage IIE (10%-16%) vs stage IV disease (0%-
7%).4,5 An MD Anderson (MDA) solid tumor BIA-ALCL 
tumor, lymph node, metastasis (TNM) staging system 
has been proposed and modeled after the American 
Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) TNM (Tumor, lymph 
Node, Metastasis). (Figure 1, Table 1) Using this sys-
tem, BIA-ALCL patients have a spectrum of disease from 
IA (35.6%, effusion only), IB (11.5%), IC (13.8%), IIA 
(25.3%), IIB (4.6%), III (9.2%), to stage IV (0%).5 In the 
same study of 87 BIA-ALCL patients, the overall survival 
(OS) rate was 94% and 91% at 3 and 5 years, respec-
tively, and the 3-year and 5-year event free survival 
(EFS) rates were both 49%. Complete surgical excision 
prolonged OS (P = .001) and EFS (P = .001) compared 
with all other therapeutic interventions. Patients with 
stage I disease have better EFS than those with higher 
stages (P = .003), and the rate of disease events is 2.6-
fold higher for stage II disease and 2.7-fold higher for 
stage III disease compared with stage I disease.5 The rate 
of disease events following complete surgical excision 
was 14.3% for patients with T4 stage and was 0% for 
patients with T1 and T2 stages (P = .001). Within this 
study, the MDA TNM staging system predicted OS for 
BIA-ALCL patients more accurately than did the Ann 
Arbor Lymphoma staging system (P = .007).5
Table 1. BIA-ALCL Tumor, Lymph Node, and Metastasis (TNM) Staging and Stages. Adapted from Clemens et al.5
Staging
Tumor size
T1
T2
T3
T4
T
Confined to effusion
Early capsule invasion
Mass aggregate, confined to capsule
Tumor locally invasive 
out of capsule
Lymph Nodes
NO
N1
N2
N
No lymph node involvement
One regional lymph node
Multiple regional lymph nodes
Metastasis
MO
M1
M
No distant spread
Other organs/distant sites
Stages
Stage IA: T1N0M0                                                                                                            Stage IIA: T4N0M0                                                                                 Stage III: TanyN2M0, T4N1M0
Stage IB: T2N0M0                                                                                                            Stage IIB: T1-3N1M0                                                                              Stage IV: TanyNanyM1
Stage IC: T3N0M0
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/asj/article-abstract/37/3/285/2981931 by guest on 02 June 2019
 288 
Aesthetic Surgery Journal 37(3)
SURGICAL AND ADJUVANT TREATMENT
The new NCCN BIA-ALCL guidelines confirm that timely 
diagnosis and complete surgical excision of lymphoma, 
implants, and the surrounding fibrous capsule is the 
optimal approach for the management of patients with 
this disease. Disease localized to the capsule (Lugano IE, 
MDA IA-IIA) may be treated with surgery alone in the 
majority of cases. Surgical goals are a total capsulectomy 
with removal of the breast implant with excision of any 
associated capsular mass and excisional biopsy of suspi-
cious lymph node(s). At present, there is no clear role for 
radical mastectomy, sentinel lymph node biopsy, or full 
axillary dissection. Surgeons may consider removal of the 
contralateral implant as approximately 4.6% of cases have 
demonstrated incidental lymphoma in the contralateral 
breast.5 Consultation with a surgical oncologist may be 
beneficial for plastic surgeons unaccustomed to surgical 
ablation of a malignancy. For patients with localized and 
resected disease the outcomes have been excellent with 
the great majority remaining long term progression free.
There is limited data to guide an optimal approach for 
patients who are unable to have a complete excision or 
who present with disseminated disease. Those with local 
residual disease, positive margins, or unresectable disease 
with chest wall invasion may benefit from radiation ther-
apy. Extended disease with lymph node involvement war-
rants systemic therapy (Lugano II-IV
, MDA IIB-IV). While 
data is limited, physicians may consider either a standard 
approach for systemic ALCL (see NCCN guidelines for first 
line therapy of a peripheral T-cell lymphoma) such as com-
bination anthracycline-based chemotherapy, or alternatively 
Brentuximab vedotin for which promising anecdotal activ-
ity has been observed for BIA-ALCL, and reported in clini-
cal trials for systemic ALCL.17,18 Brentuximab vedotin is an 
antibody-drug conjugate consisting of a chimeric anti-CD30 
monoclonal antibody attached to a microtubule inhibitor 
exerting a potent antitumor activity. Prospective trials of BIA-
ALCL patients at major referral centers may help delineate 
chemotherapeutic sensitivity and efficacy of novel agents. 
Outcomes of chemotherapeutic regimens in BIA-ALCL are 
from small retrospective case series and a treatment plan 
must take into account the patient’s comorbidities, previous 
chemotherapy exposure, and overall goals of care. NCCN 
believes that the best management of any patient with can-
cer is in a clinical trial, and therefore participation in clinical 
trials, when available, is especially encouraged.
DISEASE SURVEILLANCE
Patients are observed with a clinical follow-up, history, 
and physical every three to six months for two years and 
then as clinically indicated. Physicians may include chest/
abdominal/pelvic computerized tomography (CT) scans 
with contrast or PET scan every 6 months for 2 years then 
only as clinically indicated.
CONCLUSIONS
In summary, key points for NCCN guidelines on BIA-ALCL 
include:
• Symptomatic peri-prosthetic effusions greater than one 
year after implantation should be aspirated and screened 
for CD30 immunohistochemistry and flow cytometry.
• BIA-ALCL localized to the capsule may be treated 
with surgery alone in the majority of cases.
• Extended BIA-ALCL with lymph node involvement 
warrants adjuvant chemotherapy.
• Local residual or unresectable disease may require 
radiation therapy treatment to the chest wall in the 
salvage setting.
• Distant organ metastasis follows established NCCN 
guideline regimens for systemic ALCL treatment.
BIA-ALCL is a rare peripheral T-cell lymphoma and a stand-
ardized diagnosis and treatment approach helps ensure 
patients are appropriately managed in a timely fashion. 
BIA-ALCL NCCN guidelines include the most recent impor-
tant advances in our understanding of the disease that 
directly impacts our diagnostic approach and therapeu-
tic strategies. New insights into the biology of BIA-ALCL 
have allowed for more targeted and effective therapies. We 
encourage international adoption of these BIA-ALCL treat-
ment standards by our societies across the oncology and 
surgery disciplines.
Acknowledgements
The 
authors 
gratefully 
acknowledge 
the 
National 
Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) and the Non-
Hodgkin Lymphoma NCCN Guideline Panel Members for 
their contribution in the development of the BIA-ALCL 
recommendations.
Disclosures
Drs Clemens and Horwitz serve as Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma 
Panel Members for the National Comprehensive Cancer 
Network.
Funding
The authors received no financial support for the research, 
authorship, and publication of this article.
REFERENCES
 1. Anaplastic Large Cell Lymphoma (ALCL) In Women 
with Breast Implants: Preliminary FDA Findings and 
Analyses. http://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/Products 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/asj/article-abstract/37/3/285/2981931 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Clemens and Horwitz 
289
andMedicalProcedures/ImplantsandProsthetics/Breast 
Implants/ucm239996.htm. Accessed March 1 2016.
 2. Clemens MW, Miranda RN. Coming of age: Breast 
implant-associated 
anaplastic 
large 
cell 
lympho-
ma after 18 years of investigation. Clin Plast Surg. 
2015;42(4):605-613.
 3. Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Pileri SA, et al. The 2016 revision 
of the World Health Organization classification of lym-
phoid neoplasms. Blood. 2016;127(20):2375-2390.
 4. Miranda RN, Aladily TN, Prince HM, et al. Breast im-
plant-associated anaplastic large-cell lymphoma: long-term 
follow-up of 60 patients. J Clin Oncol. 2014;32(2):114-120.
 5. Clemens MW, Medeiros LJ, Butler CE, et al. Complete sur-
gical excision Is essential for the management of patients 
with breast iImplant-associated anaplastic large-cell lym-
phoma. J Clin Oncol. 2016;34(2):160-168.
 6. Srinivasa DR, Miranda RN, Kaura A, et al. Global Adverse 
Event Reports of Breast Implant-Associated ALCL: 
An International Review of 40 Government Authority 
Databases. Plast Reconstr Surg. IN PRESS.
 7. Clemens MW, Nava MB, Rocco N, Miranda RN. 
Understanding rare adverse sequelae of breast implants: 
anaplastic large-cell lymphoma, late seromas, and double 
capsules. Gland Surg 2016. doi: 10.21037/gs.2016.11.03
 8. Doren EL, Miranda RN, Selber JC, Garvey PB, Liu J, 
Medeiros LJ, Butler CE, Clemens MW. United States 
Epidemiology of Breast Implant-Associated Anaplastic 
Large Cell Lymphoma. Plast Reconstr Surg. 139(5): 2017.
 9. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. https://www.
nccn.org/about. Accessed October 1 2016.
 
10. Brody GS, Deapen D, Taylor CR, et al. Anaplastic large cell 
lymphoma occurring in women with breast implants: anal-
ysis of 173 cases. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2015;135(3):695-705.
 
11. Adrada BE, Miranda RN, Rauch GM, et al. Breast im-
plant-associated anaplastic large cell lymphoma: sensi-
tivity, specificity, and findings of imaging studies in 44 
patients. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2014;147(1):1-14.
12. Kempf W
, Pfaltz K, Vermeer MH, et al. EORTC, ISCL, 
and 
USCLC 
consensus 
recommendations 
for 
the 
treatment of primary cutaneous CD30-positive lymphop-
roliferative disorders: lymphomatoid papulosis and pri-
mary cutaneous anaplastic large-cell lymphoma. Blood. 
2011;118(15):4024-4035.
13. Chott A, Vonderheid EC, Olbricht S, Miao NN, Balk SP, 
Kadin ME. The dominant T cell clone is present in multi-
ple regressing skin lesions and associated T cell lympho-
mas of patients with lymphomatoid papulosis. J Invest 
Dermatol. 1996;106(4):696-700.
14. Kadin ME, Deva A, Xu H, et al. Biomarkers provide clues 
to early events in the pathogenesis of breast implant-as-
sociated anaplastic large cell lymphoma. Aesthet Surg J. 
2016;36(7):773-781.
15. US Food and Drug Administration. Anaplastic Large Cell 
Lymphoma (ALCL) http://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/
ProductsandMedicalProcedures/ImplantsandProsthetics/
BreastImplants/ucm239995.htm. Accessed July 6, 2016.
16. Cheson BD, Fisher RI, Barrington SF, et al.; Alliance, 
Australasian Leukaemia and Lymphoma Group; Eastern 
Cooperative Oncology Group; European Mantle Cell 
Lymphoma Consortium; Italian Lymphoma Foundation; 
European Organisation for Research; Treatment of Cancer/
Dutch Hemato-Oncology Group; Grupo Español de Médula 
Ósea; German High-Grade Lymphoma Study Group; 
German Hodgkin’s Study Group; Japanese Lymphorra 
Study Group; Lymphoma Study Association; NCIC Clinical 
Trials Group; Nordic Lymphoma Study Group; Southwest 
Oncology Group; United Kingdom National Cancer 
Research Institute. Recommendations for initial evalua-
tion, staging, and response assessment of Hodgkin and 
non-Hodgkin lymphoma: the Lugano classification. J Clin 
Oncol. 2014;32(27):3059-3068.
17. Younes A, Bartlett NL, Leonard JP, et al. Brentuximab 
vedotin (SGN-35) for relapsed CD30-positive lymphomas. 
N Engl J Med. 2010;363(19):1812-1821.
18. Pro B, Advani R, Brice P, et al. Brentuximab vedotin (SGN-
35) in patients with relapsed or refractory systemic ana-
plastic large-cell lymphoma: results of a phase II study. J 
Clin Oncol. 2012;30(18):2190-2196.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/asj/article-abstract/37/3/285/2981931 by guest on 02 June 2019
