 Leading Edge
Review
Gut-Brain Cross-Talk in Metabolic Control
Christoffer Clemmensen,1,2 Timo D. Mu
¨ ller,1,2 Stephen C. Woods,3 Hans-Rudolf Berthoud,4 Randy J. Seeley,5
and Matthias H. Tscho
¨ p1,2,*
1Institute for Diabetes and Obesity, Helmholtz Diabetes Center & German Center for Diabetes Research (DZD), Helmholtz Zentrum Mu
¨ nchen,
German Research Center for Environmental Health (GmbH), 85764 Neuherberg, Germany
2Division of Metabolic Diseases, Department of Medicine, Technische Universita
¨ t Mu
¨ nchen, 80333 Munich, Germany
3Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neuroscience, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45220, USA
4Pennington Biomedical Research Center, Louisiana State University System, Baton Rouge, LA 70803, USA
5Departments of Surgery, Internal Medicine, and Nutritional Sciences at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA
*Correspondence: tschoep@helmholtz-muenchen.de
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2017.01.025
Because human energy metabolism evolved to favor adiposity over leanness, the availability of
palatable, easily attainable, and calorically dense foods has led to unprecedented levels of obesity
and its associated metabolic co-morbidities that appear resistant to traditional lifestyle interven-
tions. However, recent progress identifying the molecular signaling pathways through which the
brain and the gastrointestinal system communicate to govern energy homeostasis, combined
with emerging insights on the molecular mechanisms underlying successful bariatric surgery, gives
reason to be optimistic that novel precision medicines that mimic, enhance, and/or modulate
gut-brain signaling can have unprecedented potential for stopping the obesity and type 2 diabetes
pandemics.
Introduction
Our ancestral environment pressured an intertwined evolution
between the human brain and the gastrointestinal (GI) tract
(Aiello and Wheeler, 1995). Over the past 4 million years, the
hominid brain has grown from an interior cranium volume of
�500–600 cm3 for our early ancestors to �1,300–1,400 cm3
for modern humans. In order to maintain a relatively stable meta-
bolic rate, this massive brain expansion was associated with cor-
responding adjustments in gut-size. Increasing availability of
easily digestible energy and nutrient-rich food sources might
have been the key prerequisite for this gut-brain coevolution
(Leonard et al., 2007), which was paralleled by an analogous
evolution of reciprocally coordinated metabolic cues between
peripheral tissues and the CNS. Yet, whether or not genetic pre-
disposition to storing excess energy continues to be an adaptive
advantage selected by natural selection remains a topic of
debate.
Over the last three decades, considerable progress has been
made in understanding how diet-induced peripheral signals are
integrated by neurobiological circuitries that govern energy
metabolism and feeding behavior. Nutrient intake and content
are
immediately
sensed
and
converted
into
gut-derived
humoral and neural signals. The CNS receives and integrates
this information, and in conjunction with environmental cues
including visual, taste, and olfactory stimuli as well as with in-
ternal cues related to adiposity, stress, past experience, and
many others, generates appropriate behavioral, autonomic,
and endocrine output completing the energy homeostatic
loop. Ironically, and despite our exponentially growing insight
into the molecular control of metabolism and systems biology,
modern humans have (mis)used the legacy of superior brain-
power to engineer a dietary environment that supersedes
peripherally derived satiation and adiposity signals, exploits
the limbic system, is ‘‘unnaturally’’ energy-dense and hyper-
palatable, and comes in virtually unlimited quantities. This
‘‘evolution’’ of our environment has, in less than a century,
overwritten millions of years of biological optimization and
has rapidly transformed Homo sapiens into an obese species
(Figure 1). Even worse, this transformation may already be im-
pacting future generations via deleterious epigenetic program-
ming (Huypens et al., 2016).
Reversing the pathological processes underlying obesity
and metabolic co-morbidities represents an essential task for
21st century biomedical research. Thus far, the most effective
treatment for severe obesity and diabetes is surgical re-orga-
nization of the gastrointestinal (GI) system. Bariatric surgeries,
such as gastric bypass, result in a multitude of metabolic
benefits that for a majority of patients lead to a remission of
their lifestyle-induced complications including obesity, type 2
diabetes, and cardiovascular disease (Mingrone et al., 2015;
Schauer et al., 2014). Importantly, the physiological and mo-
lecular underpinnings of the metabolic benefits of the bariatric
surgeries are beginning to emerge (Seeley et al., 2015), offer-
ing insights for inventing more effective pharmacotherapies
that could replace these invasive and irreversible surgical in-
terventions.
In this review, we highlight recent advances in unraveling
essential cross-talk between the GI system and the brain
circuits that govern homeostatic and hedonic components of en-
ergy balance. Notable advances include insights resulting from
bariatric surgery as a key model of understanding human meta-
bolic physiology, insights that allow differentiating essential
from redundant gut-brain communication pathways. Impor-
tantly, these insights have now enriched and accelerated drug
758
Cell 168, February 23, 2017 ª 2017 Elsevier Inc.
 development programs, including advanced polypharmacy con-
cepts as well as the first metabolic-precision medicines (Finan
et al., 2016a; Ku
¨ hnen et al., 2016; Oral et al., 2002).
Brain Control of Energy Homeostasis
In the middle of the 20th century, a series of elegant brain-lesion
studies revealed the existence of distinct hypothalamic areas
that foster increased food intake and weight gain (lateral hypo-
thalamic area [LHA]) and reduced food intake and weight loss
(ventromedial hypothalamic nucleus [VMH]), respectively (Bro-
beck, 1946). In parallel, it was speculated that an adipose tis-
sue-derived factor communicates the availability of peripherally
stored energy to these same hypothalamic areas (Kennedy,
1953, 1966). Inventive parabiosis experiments confirmed this
idea. Experiments utilizing VMH-lesioned rats and mouse strains
harboring mutations in obese (ob) or diabetic (db) alleles demon-
strated that both a circulating factor and a CNS sensor for this
factor are fundamental for the regulation of body fat (Coleman,
1973; Coleman and Hummel, 1969; Hervey, 1959). Decades
later, the responsible mutations were genetically identified lead-
ing to the discovery of leptin (Zhang et al., 1994) and the leptin
receptor (Lepr) (Tartaglia et al., 1995). Leptin was soon after
shown to target the brain (Maffei et al., 1995) and to act in the
brain to decrease body weight (Green et al., 1995). While the dis-
covery of leptin did not immediately translate into a cure for
human obesity, it ignited keen interest of scientists worldwide
in uncovering other signals and circuits governing metabolic pro-
cesses in health and disease. Insights from bariatric surgery,
breakthrough advancements in research on molecular meta-
bolism, technical revolutions transforming neuroscience, and a
wealth of information generated by Genome-Wide Association
Studies (GWAS), corroborated the important role of the CNS
for the pathogenesis of obesity and are now positioning gut-
Figure 1. Contribution of Genetic Heritage
and Modern Lifestyle to Body Weight
Body weight and metabolic health are determined
by the interaction of genetic susceptibility and
environmental influences. Major contributors to
human
adiposity
include
dietary
quality
and
palatability, exercise habits, smoking, alcohol
consumption, age, sleep, and pharmacology.
These factors both directly and indirectly impact
energy intake and/or energy expenditure to govern
energy homeostasis.
brain communication as a prime target
for developing superior therapeutics for
metabolic diseases.
Hypothalamic Integration of
Metabolic Status
The hypothalamic arcuate nucleus (ARC)
is located so as to directly receive circu-
lating hormonal and nutrient signals, and
ARC cells accordingly express a multi-
tude of hormone receptors and nutrient
sensors. The exceptional position for the
ARC to serve as a sensing and orches-
trating conduit is based in part on its
proximity to the neighboring median eminence, which as a cir-
cumventricular organ, is not fully protected by a functional
blood-brain barrier (Schwartz et al., 2000). One area where
particularly significant progress has been made in the last two
decades concerns the physiological and molecular roles of
sub-populations of ARC neurons that have distinct neuropeptide
expression and consequently functional profiles, including those
that express the orexigenic Agouti-related protein (Agrp) and
the anorexigenic pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC), respectively,
neuropeptides that are prototypical regulators of energy meta-
bolism. These neurons are highly sensitive to metabolic status
and adjust energy intake through bimodal melanocortin-4 recep-
tor (MC4R) modulation. Another potent orexigenic peptide,
neuropeptide Y (NPY), is co-expressed with AGRP. AGRP/NPY
neurons project directly to POMC neurons and upon stimulation
inhibit POMC firing through inhibitory Y1 and GABA receptors
among likely multiple other levels of intercellular communication
(reviewed in Waterson and Horvath, 2015).
Coordinated activity of POMC relative to AGRP and NPY is a
major determinant of feeding behavior and body weight regula-
tion. Identifying the significance of MC4Rs located in the nearby
hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus (PVN) to integratethisinfor-
mation into a larger neural feeding circuitry represents a hallmark
success of modern obesity research: loss-of-function mutations
in the MC4R gene lead to severe obesity in both rodents (Huszar
et al., 1997) and humans (Farooqi et al., 2003; Yeo et al., 1998).
Consequently, several drug development initiatives have been
initiated to advance efficacious MC4R agonists (Fani et al.,
2014). Despite these efforts and the recognized role of MC4R in
energy homeostasis, the exact neuronal circuitry downstream of
MC4R remains remarkably uncharted (Krashes et al., 2016).
In addition to receiving input from the ARC, the PVN also inte-
grates information from the LHA, the VMH, and the dorsomedial
Cell 168, February 23, 2017
759
 nucleus (DMN). The intercommunication among neurons in these
distinct hypothalamic nuclei is multidirectional, and through sys-
tematic and persistent efforts, researchers are currently working
to delineate the complex intrahypothalamic wiring governing en-
ergy homeostasis and systemic metabolism (Branco et al., 2016;
Garcı
´a-Ca
´ ceres et al., 2016; Koch et al., 2015; Stanley et al.,
2016; Steculorum et al., 2015; Tan et al., 2016).
Hindbrain Sensing of Gut-Derived Satiation Factors
Whereas the hypothalamus plays an essential role in directly
sensing and integrating peripheral inputs denoting nutrients in
the blood with hormonal signals indicating the amount of fat
stored in the adipose tissue (leptin and insulin), the regulation of
energy homeostasis is actually coordinated by a complex neuro-
circuitry involving multiple brain regions. In particular, the caudal
brainstem represents another major integrative gut-brain hub.
During the course of a meal, this brain region is flooded with
afferent information pertaining to the composition and quantity
of nutrients being ingested (Grill and Hayes, 2012). The area post-
rema (AP), a circumventricular organ analogous to the hypotha-
lamic ARC, is located on the caudal brainstem and ideally situated
to receive and integrate circulating metabolic signals including
leptin, amylin, cholecystokinin (CCK), glucagon-like peptide-1
(GLP-1), peptide YY (PYY), ghrelin, and others, each of which
can influence satiation, or how much food will be consumed
in the ongoing meal. The AP projects to the adjacent nucleus
tractus solitarius (NTS) that in turn relays visceral information via
monoamine-expressing neuronal projections to other brain areas
including several hypothalamic nuclei (Grill and Hayes, 2012).
As discussed in detail in the next section, the NTS receives a
continuous flow of information from the gut, in part from vagal
afferent fibers that innervate large parts of the intestinal wall
and gastric mucosa and that convey the volume and composi-
tion of food being ingested by secreting peptide hormones
such as CCK and GLP-1. These then act in a paracrine fashion
on their receptors located on the surface of local vagal afferent
fibers in the intestine that project to the NTS; these vagal neurons
thus convert nutrient-dependent changes in the gut-hormonal
milieu into electro-chemical information that is relayed to the
NTS (Berthoud and Morrison, 2008). Neurons in the NTS inte-
grate the incoming vagal information with other neuroendocrine
signals, including locally synthesized GLP-1 and CCK, such that
the magnitude of the incoming responses to the gut-derived
signals
can
be
enhanced
or
suppressed
before
being
relayed from the NTS to other brain areas (Barrera et al., 2011;
D’Agostino et al., 2016; Herbert and Saper, 1990; Larsen et al.,
1997). Thus, multiple layers of perpetual gut-derived information
on nutrient availability and metabolic balance highlights that
mammals, including Homo sapiens, have evolved a highly com-
plex metabolic control system.
Role of Hedonic Eating and Food Reward in Energy
Homeostasis
Around 80 AD, the philosopher Musonius Rufus observed that:
‘‘pleasure associated with eating a gourmet cuisine creates a
desire for overeating and humans will choose food that is
pleasant over food that is nutritious’’ (Cynthia, 2010). Today,
we refer to this as hedonic food intake involving ‘‘food reward,’’
a phenomenon describing the consumption of palatable foods
beyond the need-based energy requirements of the organism
(Kenny, 2011). Animals and humans given a choice between
rewarding and non-rewarding foods disproportionally over-
consume the palatable rewarding food, often in quantities
beyond their energetic needs (Rising et al., 1992; Sclafani and
Springer, 1976). Intriguingly, despite having free access to nutri-
tious but less appealing food, animals willingly endure consider-
able discomfort such as cold to obtain rewarding and palatable
foods (Cabanac and Johnson, 1983; Oswald et al., 2011), under-
lining the potent impact of the reward system and its temporal
uncoupling from energy need-based circuits.
Ample evidence supports the concept that neurons located in
the midbrain that project anteriorly to the nucleus accumbens
(i.e., the mesoaccumbens dopamine system) play an essential
role for integrating and incorporating the rewarding properties
of foods into ingestive behavior. Notably, the prototypical endo-
crine regulators of energy homeostasis, such as leptin, insulin,
ghrelin, and GLP-1, besides acting in the hypothalamus and
NTS, also directly act upon these dopaminergic neurons in the
midbrain to influence hedonic feeding (Dickson et al., 2012; Far-
ooqi et al., 2007; Figlewicz, 2016; Fulton et al., 2006; Skibicka
et al., 2012). This information appears to be intertwined with
emotion-related information arising from the limbic system and
energy-need cues coming from the LHA, and all of this informa-
tion is relayed to cortical regions where it processed to execute
an appropriate behavioral response such as eating or satiation.
The Overfed Brain: Neuronal Perturbations Leading to
Obesity
For the first time in history, we have reached a situation where
our planet harbors more obese than underweight humans (Di An-
gelantonio et al., 2016). The whole-body energy homeostasis
model implies that biological processes have emerged to main-
tain stable fuel availability independent of environmental condi-
tions (Schwartz et al., 2000). Despite the fact that many individ-
uals maintain a relatively constant body weight without heeding
energy intake or expenditure, the doubling of the prevalence of
obesity in just 30 years arguably implies that human ‘‘energy ho-
meostasis’’ may be an oxymoron. Instead, humans may have
evolved a regulatory system biased toward defending body fat
over leanness (Chakravarthy and Booth, 2004; Schwartz et al.,
2003). The drifty gene hypothesis suggests that weight gain
was released from selection pressure when our ancestors
evolved from the risk of predation around 2 million years ago
(Speakman, 2014). Consistent with this view, the neuronal cir-
cuitry defending body weight arguably predominates the cir-
cuitry defending against weight gain (Henry et al., 2015; Wu
et al., 2012). Further, the majority of the genetic polymorphisms
linked to obesity relate to proteins either expressed in the brain
or exerting their most important functions in the CNS to control
feeding behavior or relevant components of systemic meta-
bolism (Locke et al., 2015).
Although researchers are struggling to comprehend the
full scope of the genetic and epigenetic factors, patterns, and
processes
driving
the
obesity
pandemic,
our
knowledge
of the immediate neuronal response following exposure to
an energy-rich palatable diet has grown exponentially over the
last 20 years. However, interpretive complications and unfore-
seen complexities arise as rapidly as new information comes
in. For example, whereas a decrease of leptin, the adipose
760
Cell 168, February 23, 2017
 tissue-derived hormone secreted in direct proportion to body fat,
potently initiates overfeeding and weight gain, excess leptin gen-
erates only moderate physiological responses, limiting leptin’s
therapeutic potential as a weight-loss agent (Heymsfield et al.,
1999; Zelissen et al., 2005). As another example, in addition to
influencing satiation and energy homeostasis via their energetic
value, individual nutrients are increasingly acknowledged as
signaling molecules that increase brain (including hypothalamic)
inflammatory responses that secondarily interfere with the regu-
lation of energy balance (Valdearcos et al., 2015). Finally, there is
a disconnect between the long-held concept that body fat is ho-
meostatically defended, sometimes referred to as the set-point
model of adiposity, and the reality that palatable diets, stress,
experience, and a multitude of other factors determine the actual
amount of fat that is achieved and defended (Ramsay and
Woods, 2014). Despite the nuances of these complexities, it is
increasingly clear that reward, hedonic, and energy need-based
circuits are closely interconnected and reciprocally influence one
another (Figure 2).
Gastrointestinal Control of Energy Homeostasis
The GI tract is involved in several aspects of energy homeosta-
sis. First, the alimentary canal is essential for nutrient absorption
and the delivery of fuels to the organism. Like other vital func-
tions, such as breathing, nutrient processing and absorption
are largely automatic, relying on elaborate hormonal and neural
feedback systems that have evolved over millions of years.
The alimentary tract even has its own ‘‘enteric’’ brain containing
as many neurons as the spinal cord and capable of executing all
basic functions in the absence of input from the brain and other
organs (Furness, 2012). Second, the gastrointestinal tract utilizes
a significant portion of energy for itself, and this is due to
its considerable mass and the constant turnover of epithelial
Figure 2. Gut-Brain Cross-Talk in Eating
Behavior
Gut hormones and afferent neurons are key signals
in gut-brain communication and human energy
metabolism. Brain regions, traditionally divided
into homeostatic (hypothalamus and NTS) and
hedonic (VTA – Nac), sense diverse humoral fac-
tors and generate signals in cooperation with
cognitive processes and information arising from
visual, gustatory and olfactory stimuli to influence
feeding behavior. PFC, prefrontal cortex; NAc,
nucleus
accumbens;
VTA,
ventral
tegmental
area; Hypo, hypothalamus; NTS, nucleus tractus
solitaries.
cells that, in humans, have the surface
area of a tennis court (Madara, 2011).
Third, nutrient absorption and subse-
quent metabolic processing determines
the thermic effect of food, a small but sig-
nificant portion of total energy expendi-
ture (de Jonge and Bray, 1997).
Enteroendocrine Cells Are Primary
Nutrient Sensors
The regulation of energy balance by
the brain requires accurate information
regarding the influx of energy. This is accomplished by nutrient
sensor mechanisms distributed along the entire alimentary ca-
nal, starting with the gustatory system in the mouth and terminat-
ing with sensors in the hepatic portal vein (Berthoud, 2008a).
Throughout the GI tract, specialized endothelial cells called en-
teroendocrine cells sense the luminal content and trans-epithe-
lial flux of nutrients and consequently release hormones and
paracrine factors (Gribble and Reimann, 2016) informing the
brain and other organs either directly through the circulation or
by affecting sensory neurons projecting to the brain.
More than 100 years ago, secretin was the first GI hormone
discovered, and the list is now quite long and includes the incre-
tins GIP and GLP-1 as well as the satiation peptides CCK and
ghrelin (Gribble, 2012; Rehfeld, 1998). All are secreted from en-
teroendocrine cells interspersed among the enterocytes lining
the gut lumen. The existence of different combinations of G pro-
tein-coupled receptors and transporters in these enteroendo-
crine cells, and their differential distribution along the gut, enable
them to sense all major nutrients (Reimann et al., 2012).
Intrinsic and Extrinsic Innervation of the Gut
The GI tract is innervated by both the sympathetic and parasym-
pathetic nervous systems as well as by primary sensory nerves.
The densest and most widespread innervation comes from vagal
afferent neurons located in the nodose ganglia (Berthoud and
Neuhuber, 2000; Berthoud et al., 1997). These bipolar neurons
innervate all layers of the gut wall from esophagus to colon
and their proximal extensions terminate in the NTS. Sensory ter-
minals innervating the external muscle layers and the myenteric
plexus of the gut act as mechanical stretch and tension sensors,
respectively (Berthoud and Powley, 1992; Zagorodnyuk et al.,
2001) while terminals in the mucosa are thought to be mainly
chemosensors (Berthoud et al., 1995; Berthoud and Patterson,
1996; Blackshaw and Grundy, 1990; Powley et al., 2011).
Cell 168, February 23, 2017
761
 Functions of the GI tract, pancreas, and liver are all also modu-
lated by efferent vagal (parasympathetic) and sympathetic motor
outflow, with vagal input generally accelerating and sympathetic
input generally slowing intestinal transit and absorptive capacity.
These autonomic inputs indirectly control food intake and energy
balance by changing sensory and hormonal signaling to the brain
(Berthoud, 2008b).
Gut Nutrient Sensing Can Be Both Satiating and
Appetizing
There is no doubt that gut and brain intimately communicate with
each other. What has been less clear is how much this communi-
cation contributes to the controls of food intake and energy
expenditure and to the regulation of energy homeostasis. While
early views focused almost exclusively on the satiating action
of post-oral nutrients (Gibbs et al., 1973; Smith, 1996), it is now
recognized that nutrients in the gut, and even in the circulation,
also act to stimulate appetite and food intake (for review see Scla-
fani and Ackroff, 2012). This is based on studies using the ‘‘elec-
tronic esophagus,’’ wherein rodents can choose to lick from
either of two bottles containing different flavored non-nutritive
solutions, with each lick triggering intragastric or intraduodenal
infusions of glucose, fat, or saline. In many conditions, licking
particular solutions leads to a learned preference for the flavor
associated with the nutrient (Lucas and Sclafani, 1989; Sclafani,
2004). In distinction to the feed-back mechanisms of satiation,
the term ‘‘appetition’’ was coined for this feed-forward phenom-
enon (Sclafani, 2013). Using this paradigm, it was demonstrated
that the sodium-glucose transporter-1 (SGLT1) is required for
post-oral glucose (Sclafani et al., 2016), andthe fatty acid sensors
GPR40 and GPR120 for post-oral fat (Sclafani et al., 2013), to
mediate the development of preferences for flavors associated
with glucose or fats, respectively. Interestingly, in contrast to
the satiating post-oral effects of carbohydrates and fats, neither
vagal afferents nor sensory fibers in the splanchnic nerve are
essential for these ‘‘appetition’’ effects (Sclafani et al., 2003).
Further, ghrelin signaling, which is known to stimulate appetite
when administered systemically, is not necessary for sugar or
fat to condition flavor preferences (Sclafani et al., 2015).
More recently, sugar sensing in the gut has been linked to
the brain’s dopamine/positive hedonic circuits that drive food
intake. Specifically, infusion of glucose into the gut, but not
into the mouth, triggered dopamine release in the dorsal stria-
tum, a forebrain reward area, whereas glucose or non-caloric
sweeteners infused into the mouth triggered dopamine release
only in the ventral striatum (nucleus accumbens and ventral pal-
lidum) (Tellez et al., 2016). Importantly, the dorsal striatal dopa-
minergic circuit sensitive to the nutritional value of glucose in
the gut was able to override any inhibitory signals generated
by the mouth. If confirmed, this logic may explain why, over
the long term, energy content trumps taste when it comes to
food choice. The same group of researchers demonstrated
that surgically bypassing the duodenum and jejunum in mice
abolished the dopamine-stimulating and appetite-enhancing
effects of intragastric glucose (Han et al., 2016), suggesting
this as a critical mechanism underlying the reduced sweet
craving and carbohydrate intake after bariatric surgery in rodents
(Shin and Berthoud, 2011; Tichansky et al., 2011; Wilson-Pe
´ rez
et al., 2013b).
The Overfed Gut: Desensitization of Nutrient-Sensing
Pathways
Chronic exposure to high-fat diets (HFDs) can lead to structural
and functional changes in the gut nutrient-sensing pathways ex-
tending from the mucosa to the brain (for recent reviews see
Brandsma et al., 2015; Teixeira et al., 2012). HFD-induced
changes generally increase as a function of time on the diet,
with changes after 1 week being fully reversible, but with changes
after several weeks not being reversible and correlating with the
onset of obesity (Hamilton et al., 2015). Importantly, offspring of
HFD-induced obese mothers also have impaired gut barrier func-
tions and increased oxidative stress markers (Xue et al., 2014).
Impairment of intestinal barrier function activates the innate im-
mune system and ultimately leads to obesity, insulin resistance,
and hepatic steatosis. Reduced secretion of gut hormones
responsible for the incretin effect and satiation may mediate these
effects. In addition, reduced sensitivity of vagal afferent neurons
to gut nutrient signaling may enhance hyperphagiaandimpair gly-
cemic control (de Lartigue et al., 2014). However, because vagal
deafferentation with capsaicin at the beginning of a HFD regimen
in rats led to a modest decrease, rather than an increase, in
visceral fat accumulation (Stearns et al., 2012), the contribution
of vagal afferents to the pathogenesis of obesity remains unclear.
Attempts to capitalize on extrinsic and intrinsic enteric nervous
system innervation of the gut as targets for neuromodulation
strategies in the prevention or reversal of obesity and metabolic
diseases have had relatively little success. The recently approved
V-Bloc device, which uses high-frequency stimulation of the
abdominal vagal trunks to block all (sensory and motor) vagal
communication between the gut and the brain, has only modest
effects on body weight (Ikramuddin et al., 2014). Similarly, gastric
pacing through implanted serosal electrodes that likely affect
enteric nervous system activity has not brought the expected re-
sults on body weight control (Hasler, 2009). These rather disap-
pointing outcomes are likely due to the non-specificity of the
nerve manipulations. Autonomic and sensory innervation of pe-
ripheral organs is not an all-or-none phenomenon and rather is
functionally highly specific. Until we understand this functional
specificity, such crude manipulation attempts are premature
and ill-conceived. The modern genetics-based neural manipula-
tion techniques that revolutionized central nervous circuit map-
ping (Sternson and Roth, 2014; Wouterlood et al., 2014) are
now ready to be applied to the peripheral and enteric nervous
systems. Early reports with deletion or stimulation of selective
populations of vagal afferents demonstrate the potential of this
strategy (Udit and Gautron, 2013). This should lead to more
informed and specific neuromodulation strategies for more pro-
found and sustained effects on body weight regulation.
In sum, the brain and the gut are each endowed with a rich
neural and hormonal intrinsic control system, the two governing
separate but overlapping aspects of energy balance. While these
two organ systems can function independently of one another,
there is normally a highly complex exchange of information be-
tween the two that is both neurally and hormonally mediated.
Identifying the key signaling mechanisms underlying the normal
functioning of all parts of the gut-brain axis, and devising ways to
intervene with them, is a major goal and challenge for tackling
metabolic disorders.
762
Cell 168, February 23, 2017
 Bariatric Surgeries: Toward Understanding Gut-Brain
Signaling and Cooperation
Some of the most compelling evidence for a role of the gut-brain
axis to regulate multiple aspects of metabolism comes from the
clinical effects of bariatric surgery. In fact, nothing currently avail-
able in the clinic is nearly as effective as bariatric procedures to
produce large and sustained weight loss. Interestingly, the dra-
matic efficacy of these procedures was not the result of careful
hypothesizing about cross-talk between the gut and other organ
systems. Rather, the effects of procedures such as the Roux-en-
Y gastric bypass (RYGB) were secondary effects observed when
they were used to treat ulcers. Observant surgeons noticed
distinct weight loss and improved metabolic endpoints in pa-
tients that received a RYGB (Celio and Pories, 2016).
These observations led some surgeons to advocate for
greater use of bypass procedures in obese patients, as well as
to hypothesize how it is that surgical rearrangement of the GI
tract can result in such profound effects. Not surprisingly, these
surgeons focused their hypotheses on the mechanical aspects
of the surgery itself. RYGB involves creating a small gastric
pouch just below the distal end of the esophagus, thereby ‘‘re-
stricting’’ patients from overeating by limiting the size of individ-
ual bouts of ingestion. RYGB also reroutes calories because the
jejunum becomes linked directly to the small gastric pouch, the
alimentary canal now bypassing the rest of the stomach and up-
per duodenum. With the absorptive capacity of the duodenum
lost, the procedure was also thought to result in ‘‘malabsorp-
tion,’’ with some otherwise absorbable calories lost in the feces
(Celio and Pories, 2016).
These mechanical hypotheses about bariatric surgery have
generated a powerful narrative that remains the dominant para-
digm for explaining surgical effects, including to patients. It also
happens to be almost entirely false. In fact, a basic understand-
ing of how body weight is regulated presents conundrums for the
mechanical explanations. Body weight loss is typically counter-
acted by powerful responses that include increased hunger in
response to falling leptin and insulin levels (Schwartz et al.,
2000). If surgery made it harder to ingest or absorb calories, pa-
tients would become dramatically hungrier. What is observed,
however, is that despite pronounced weight loss, patients report
being less hungry (le Roux and Bueter, 2014).
Other evidence comes from comparing surgical procedures,
which result in relatively comparable and profound efficacy. In
vertical sleeve gastrectomy (VSG), 80% of the stomach is
removed along the greater curvature. This is often considered
a ‘‘restrictive’’ procedure due to the greatly reduced size of the
remaining stomach; however, with no rerouted calories, caloric
absorption should be normal. Relative to RYGB, VSG creates
only a portion of the restriction (i.e., the remaining stomach is
much larger than RYGB pouch) and it does not result in malab-
sorption. Further, in some reports, VSG has comparable efficacy
as RYGB in terms of weight loss and resolution of type 2 diabetes
(Colquitt et al., 2014).
Further
evidence
that
mechanical
explanations
do
not
adequately explain the effects of these procedures comes
from rodent models that mimic the weight loss and improved
metabolism observed in humans. First, following either RYGB
or VSG, rodents resume eating the same number of calories as
the sham-surgery controls within 2 months (Stefater et al.,
2010). They maintain the weight loss but do so with normal
food intake despite no evidence of dilation of the restrictive ele-
ments of the surgery that might undermine its efficacy from a me-
chanical perspective (Chambers et al., 2011). Moreover, rodents
defend this new lower body weight in the same manner as unop-
erated control animals. When further food restriction is forced
upon the animal, it loses weight as expected. However, once
ad lib food is returned, it overeats and recovers the lost weight,
thus defending body weight, and this occurs after both RYGB
and VSG (Stefater et al., 2010). If the lost weight were primarily
the result of restriction, animals should be unable to further in-
crease their intake because they were already ‘‘underweight’’
compared to their sham-operated controls. As there is nothing
physically preventing them from consuming additional calories,
the key point is that animals choose not to overeat after the
surgery, presumably because of altered signals from the gut indi-
cating that this new reduced weight is appropriate.
Lastly, other biological circumstances that increase food
intake in unoperated controls also do so in animals with surgical
interventions. For example, female rats with a VSG gain weight
during pregnancy in a manner identical to that of sham-operated
controls (Grayson et al., 2013). Moreover, once the litter arrives
and the dam now has to feed 10–12 hungry mouths through
lactation, VSG females can double their caloric intake to
keep up with the increased caloric demand just as happens in
sham-operated controls.
The important point is that while it may seem obvious that
surgery results in a mechanical alteration of the gastrointestinal
tract, it is less obvious that this mechanical alteration (restriction
and/or malabsorption) actually underlies its effect. The alterna-
tive is to hypothesize that bariatric surgery’s effects are the result
of altered gut signals that act in the brain and other organs to
alter the physiological system that regulates body weight and
other important aspects of metabolism. Changes in the relative
levels of various gut hormones represent one such potential
signal and have received considerable attention as potential me-
diators of the effects of bariatric surgery (Makaronidis and Bat-
terham, 2016). The evidence for an important role of classic
gut hormones such as GLP-1, PYY, or ghrelin are decidedly
mixed. In genetic mouse models, loss of function of the GLP-1
receptor or of ghrelin does not impair the effects of either VSG
or RYGB (Chambers et al., 2013; Wilson-Pe
´ rez et al., 2013a).
In humans, however, acute blockade of the GLP-1R is at least
partly efficacious at reversing the impact of RYGB on classical
incretin effects, including effects to increase insulin secretion
(Salehi et al., 2011). A causal role of altered gut hormones
remains an area of great controversy and a full explication of
that controversy is beyond the scope of the present review.
Nevertheless, the mouse data point to the possibility that there
are mechanisms beyond these classic hormone systems that
are important contributors to surgical effects on weight and
metabolism (Figure 3).
Role of Bile Acids to the Metabolic Benefits of Bariatric
Surgery
Bile acids are made in the liver and, particularly in response to
the ingestion of fatty foods, are secreted into the duodenum
where they are essential for lipid absorption. Bile acids can be
Cell 168, February 23, 2017
763
 absorbed into the blood from the gut and then function as hor-
mones by acting on nuclear receptors such as FXR and cell-sur-
face receptors such as TGR5 (Kawamata et al., 2003; Wang
et al., 1999). Both VSG and RYGB increase the circulating levels
of bile acids, as well as alter their composition, in both rodents
and humans (Kohli et al., 2013; Patti et al., 2009), suggesting
the intriguing possibility that altered bile acid dynamics may
underlie some of the effects of these procedures. Whole-body
deletion of FXR results in mice that gain less weight on a HFD
but nevertheless have reduced responses to VSG for long-
term weight loss, reductions in food intake, and improvements
in glucose tolerance (Ryan et al., 2014). Mice with no TGR5
signaling have normal body weight loss following VSG, but
have less improvements in glucose regulation (McGavigan
et al., 2017). The point is that molecular targeting of bile acid
signaling provides evidence that alterations in bile acids are an
important physiological mechanism by which surgical interven-
tion can alter energy balance and metabolism.
A key question is how bariatric surgery alters these physiolog-
ical systems, including gut hormone secretion and bile acid dy-
namics, to enable such enduring improvements in body weight
and glycemic control (Figure 3). The most obvious possibility in
the case of RYGB is the presentation of under-digested chyme
into the distal GI tract. Such chyme is then hypothesized to acti-
vate nutrient signaling on entroendocrine cells to drive increased
Figure 3. Gut-Brain Adjustments following
Bariatric Surgery
Cartoon overview of the biological adjustments in
the gut-brain axis following bariatric surgery in
obese subjects. In the gut, meal-induced peptides
and microbiota are significantly altered following
bariatric surgery. These adjustments contribute
to improved glycemic control and to numerous
behavioral adjustments that collectively contribute
to reduced caloric intake following the surgery.
secretion of gut hormones such as GLP-1
and PYY. However, intestinal rerouting
cannot
be
the
only
mechanism
by
which the GI tract alters signals to brain
and other organs. For example, greatly
enhanced secretion of GLP-1 is observed
in VSG even though there is no rerouting
of the chyme (Chambers et al., 2011; Stei-
nert et al., 2013). Thus, a critical issue
is just how the gut adapts to its new surgi-
cally altered reality and whether there are
their commonalities among successful
procedures that may suggest common
underlying mechanisms for their effects.
Brain Adaptations following
Bariatric Surgery
The
earliest
observations
suggested
that following RYGB, patients changed
their hedonic and emotional rapport with
food—they were less preoccupied with
thinking about food and began to prefer
low-calorie foods such as fruits and vege-
tables over high-calorie foods such as French fries and ice cream
(Ernst et al., 2009; Schultes et al., 2010). More vigorously
controlled human studies confirmed a reduced hedonic impact
of palatable foods (Ullrich et al., 2013), and rodent studies found
reduced ‘‘liking’’ and ‘‘wanting’’ of sweet and oily foods (Shin
et al., 2011) as well as a shift in preference away from fat and
to carbohydrate (Wilson-Pe
´ rez et al., 2013b).
Neural correlates of these hedonic shifts after RYGB were
identified in fMRI studies demonstrating weaker responses to
the sight of high-calorie foods and stronger responses to pic-
tures of low-calorie foods in corticolimbic and other brain struc-
tures compared to responses in obese subjects (Frank et al.,
2014; Ochner et al., 2012; Scholtz et al., 2014). In addition, one
PET study reported decreased dopamine receptor-2 availability
in the dorsal striatum 6 weeks after RYGB surgery in female pa-
tients (Dunn et al., 2010) (see Steele et al. [2010] for opposite
outcome). However, and importantly, all of these studies were
observational and associative. No study has directly tested the
importance of such changes in brain activity for the beneficial
effects of bariatric surgeries.
Potential Role for Gut Microbiota in Influencing
Gut-Brain Signaling and Energy Balance
The human gut is inhabited by trillions of microbes. Understand-
ing the symbiotic relationship between the gut microbiota and
764
Cell 168, February 23, 2017
 the human host—and the possible functional contributions of
this ecosystem to human physiology and health—is currently
being actively pursued. The gut microbiome co-evolved with
our human ancestors, and gut bacteria have likely played a
vital complementary role for extracting energy and nutrients
from dissimilar food sources throughout our evolutionary history
(Schnorr et al., 2014) and they likely interact with gut-brain
signaling. For example, in response to a HFD, increased micro-
biota acetate production has been suggested to drive a patho-
logical feedback loop of overeating involving direct stimulation
of the parasympathetic nervous system and ghrelin secretion
(Perry et al., 2016). Conversely, prebiotic-induced microbiota
modulation may amplify GLP-1 and PYY secretion, exemplifying
that cross talk between enteroendocrine anorectic hormones
and gut bacteria might be exploited to benefit metabolic control
(Cani and Delzenne, 2009). Finally, insights into a gut-brain cir-
cuitry involving microbiota and bile acid signaling suggest poten-
tial opportunities for innovative therapeutic intervention points
(Degirolamo et al., 2014; Sayin et al., 2013). However, most re-
ports find metabolic changes to be either rather modest in
size, linked merely by association, or still awaiting replication,
and massive alterations of gut microbiota in clinical studies
have recently been documented not to impact energy homeo-
stasis or systemic metabolism in humans (Mikkelsen et al.,
2015; Reijnders et al., 2016).
Therapeutic Applications: Emerging Treatment
Avenues for Metabolic Diseases Based on Gut-Brain
Signaling
Converging evidence suggests that the metabolic benefits of
bariatric surgery are consequential to complex gastrointestinal
adjustments that generate signals ‘‘educating’’ the brain on the
new gut-environment, and these altered gut-brain signals some-
how lower the defended level of body fat and restore glycemic
control. Identifying and mimicking these altered signals should
be a major focus of research aimed to thwart the obesity/dia-
betes pandemic. Here, we provide an overview of a few promi-
nent pre-clinical avenues and highlight opportunities—and
knowledge-gaps—in the ongoing enterprise of transforming
our heightened understanding of the gut-brain axis into effective
and safe pharmacotherapies.
Mimicking Bariatric Surgical Enteroendocrine
Responses with Polypharmacy
Successful bariatric surgeries are associated with altered circu-
lating levels of numerous gut-derived factors including GLP-1
(Korner et al., 2007), CCK (Dirksen et al., 2013), PYY (Chan et al.,
2006),GIP(Na
¨ slundetal.,1998),bileacids(Pattietal.,2009),ghre-
lin (Cummings et al., 2002), neurotensin (Ratner et al., 2016),
FGF19, and FGF21 (Jansen et al., 2011). Because each of these
factors influences appetite and substrate metabolism, mapping
out the alterations in gut hormone secretion following bariatric
surgery has received sizeable attention over the last decade
(Madsbad et al., 2014). In context, this endeavor is considered
an appropriate starting point for designing novel pharmacother-
apies that could mimic the metabolic benefits of the surgeries.
Gut Peptide-Based Combinatorial Strategies
Perhaps the most outstanding endocrine adjustment following
bariatric surgery is amplification of postprandial GLP-1 secretion
(Falke
´ n et al., 2011; Romero et al., 2012). GLP-1 targets the CNS
to promote satiation and the pancreas to intensify insulin secre-
tion, and through laborious pharmacological optimization, GLP-
1-based therapies have now obtained pharmacological pole-po-
sition for the dual treatment of obesity and diabetes (Clemmen-
sen et al., 2016). As a stand-alone therapy for type 2 diabetes,
GLP-1R agonists provide relevant yet insufficient metabolic ben-
efits that are limited by a dose-dependent increase in adverse GI
events. Thus, combining GLP-1R agonism with suitable endo-
crine partners aiming for additive or synergistic metabolic bene-
fits without compromising safety may provide an optimal path
toward an incretin-based cure for obesity and its sequelae (Finan
et al., 2015a).
Secretion of both CCK and PYY are augmented by bariatric
surgery and each has thus been suggested to contribute to the
satiating effects resulting from the procedure. Whereas adminis-
tration of CCK together with GLP-1 has been reported to bestow
no additional benefits on satiation (Brennan et al., 2005; Gutzwil-
ler et al., 2004), co-infusion studies using GLP-1 and PYY report
additive lowering of food intake in animals (Neary et al., 2005)
and humans (De Silva et al., 2011), and this is further potentiated
by the addition of neurotensin (Grunddal et al., 2016). Nonethe-
less, co-administration of GLP-1 and PYY (with or without an
appropriate third agent) has yet to be tested in a controlled clin-
ical setting. The fact that both GLP-1 and PYY dose-dependently
increase nausea limits therapeutic utility of the combination.
A major obstacle to the development of efficacious weight
loss drugs is counter-regulatory biological adjustments to
pharmacotherapy-induced perturbations in energy balance. Tar-
geting anorectic pathways decreases energy expenditure and,
conversely, targeting energy expenditure stimulates appetite.
Thus, in order to sustain energy expenditure in the weight-
reduced state, administration of a thermogenic agent may be
useful. This would also imply that polypharmacy solely targeting
anorectic mechanisms (such as PYY and GLP-1 co-administra-
tion) might not offer sufficiently broad joint action profiles to
successfully treat obesity.
Glucagon agonism has recently been discovered to offer
the previously missing potential for safe and chemically achiev-
able addition of energy expenditure on top of incretin biology.
Indeed, mounting evidence based on innovative chemistry
and extensive biological studies now positions glucagon as a
relevant candidate to uphold energy expenditure in pharmaco-
therapy-induced weight loss (Day et al., 2009; Habegger et al.,
2010).
Novel
single-molecule
glucagon/GLP-1
co-agonists
cause superior weight reduction relative to GLP-1 mono-ago-
nism (Day et al., 2009). In pre-clinical models, these dual-com-
pounds achieved benefits similar to bariatric surgery but without
apparent side effects. Follow-up studies confirmed this phe-
nomenon in rodent studies (Pocai et al., 2009) as well as by using
co-infusion of GLP-1 and glucagon in humans (Cegla et al., 2014;
Tan et al., 2013). Consequently, numerous clinical trials based
on GLP-1R and glucagon-receptor co-agonism are now ongoing
(Tscho
¨ p et al., 2016), and translational efficacy is based on
promising data from non-human primate studies (Tscho
¨ p
et al., 2016).
Another thermogenic agent that has gained momentum as a
gut-derived drug candidate is the fibroblast growth factor-21
Cell 168, February 23, 2017
765
 (FGF21). FGF21 is predominantly derived from the liver to stim-
ulate energy utilization (Xu et al., 2009), and pharmacological
FGF21 is currently being evaluated in clinical trials for treating
obesity and diabetes (Kharitonenkov and DiMarchi, 2015). Rele-
vantly, glucagon is a powerful FGF21 secretagogue, and the pre-
clinical success of GLP-1/glucagon co-agonism may partially be
based on the involvement of a glucagon-FGF21 axis (Habegger
et al., 2013). Albeit causality is uncharted, both glucagon and
FGF-21 are increased following bariatric surgery (Jacobsen
et al., 2012; Jansen et al., 2011). Interestingly, recent data
demonstrate immune-metabolic dependency between GLP-1
and FGF21 (Lynch et al., 2016), and the metabolic efficacy of
pharmacologically inhibiting FGF21 degradation is blunted in
GLP-1R-deficient mice (Sa
´ nchez-Garrido et al., 2016), empha-
sizing the hormonal interplay between GLP-1 and FGF21.
While many obese patients might benefit from glucagon/GLP1
dual agonism, patients with severe comorbid type 2 diabetes
might profit more from the combination of GLP-1 with the incretin
GIP. Whereas GLP-1 pharmacology offers to offset undesirable
effects of glucagon on glycemic control, combining GLP-1 with
companion GIP delivers superior glycemic control relative to
mono-incretin treatment (Finan et al., 2016b). The first so-called
‘‘twincretin’’ molecule, an intermixed peptide GLP-1/GIP hybrid
with balanced potency at each cognate receptor, was generated
in 2013 and found to have superior anti-diabetic efficacy and,
perhaps unexpectedly, also to achieve superior body weight
loss in obesity, relative to GLP-1R mono-agonism (Finan et al.,
2013). This triggered a broad series of follow-up studies that
are now re-characterizing previously underappreciated GIP as
an important gut hormone offering metabolic benefits beyond
the action profile of GLP-1 (Finan et al., 2016b). Noteworthy,
the glycemic benefits of GLP-1/GIP dual activation translate
into primates including humans (Finan et al., 2013). Unraveling
the exact mechanistic underpinnings of how GIP amplifies the
anorectic efficacy of GLP-1, and vice versa, is an imperative
task that will provide relevant novel insight to be exploited phar-
macologically.
The enhanced performance of GLP-1/glucagon and GLP-1/
GIP co-agonism to reverse obesity and diabetes, respectively,
and the structural similarity of these members of the same pep-
tide family, facilitated the engineering of the first single-molecule
triagonist (Finan et al., 2015b). In rodent models of obesity
and diabetes, the first unimolecular GcgR/GLP-1R/GIPR triple-
agonist produced unprecedented reversal of metabolic compli-
cations. In fact, the efficacy of the tri-agonist to correct obesity
and diabetes rivals what can be achieved with bariatric surgery.
Clinical studies are now evaluating if this pre-clinical success,
which includes validation in primates, can be replicated in obese
diabetic patients (Tscho
¨ p et al., 2016).
Studies looking at other possible polypharmacological strate-
gies implicating GLP-1 are currently being explored. Co-admin-
istration GLP-1 and gastrin, and a GLP-1-gastrin dual agonist,
appears to offer promising effects to prevent progressive deteri-
oration of beta cell functional mass in rodent models of diabetes
(Fosgerau et al., 2013; Suarez-Pinzon et al., 2008; Tamaki et al.,
2010). A heightened understanding of the involvement of gut mi-
crobiota in metabolic diseases has revived interest in exploiting
the gut barrier-protecting effects of GLP-2. However, the first
pre-clinical studies with mixed GLP-1/GLP-2 co-agonists have
revealed limited efficacy to improve metabolic parameters (Finan
et al., 2015a). Nonetheless, it is paramount to continue to explore
different combinations of gut-hormone mixtures for ameliorating
metabolic diseases. History has taught this research community
not to discard endocrine factors based on their (lack of) efficacy
as single agents. It is indisputable that the prandial endocrine
gut response has evolved to work in a coordinated, concerted
fashion, and parsing this in further detail may continue to unlock
superior blueprints for pharmacological mimicry.
Mimicking Bariatric Surgery-Induced Bile Acid
Adjustments with Pharmacology
As discussed above, the discovery that bile acids are substan-
tially altered following both RYGB (Patti et al., 2009) and VSG
(Myronovych et al., 2014) has positioned bile acids and bile-
acid
transducers
as
critical
instruments
coordinating
the
enteroendocrine orchestra governing energy homeostasis. In
particular, the bile acid receptors FXR and TGR5 continue to
be pursued as potential drug targets that might offer ways to
mimic the metabolic benefits of bariatric surgery (Penney et al.,
2015). Consistent with that approach, the relatively gut-selective
dual TGR5 and FXR agonist fexaramine substantially increases
energy expenditure and reverses the metabolic syndrome in
obese mice (Fang et al., 2015). Conversely, however, the small
molecule Gly-MCA, that inhibits intestinal FXR signaling, re-
verses diet-induced and genetic obesity in mice, leaving the
optimal strategy to target gut FXR unsettled (Jiang et al.,
2015). The bile acid chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA) increases
brown adipose tissue (BAT) activity and whole-body energy
expenditure in humans (Broeders et al., 2015). Mechanistic anal-
ysis points to BAT-TGR5 signaling as the mediating entity, which
might in turn influence other metabolic pathways including thy-
roid hormone action (Watanabe et al., 2006), thereby empha-
sizing the widespread potential of targeting bile acid receptors
pharmacologically.
Of note, ileal-FXR activation leads to increased production
and release of the gut hormone FGF19 (mouse ortholog
FGF15). FGF19 is increased following bariatric surgery (Gerhard
et al., 2013; Jansen et al., 2011) and acts as a negative feedback
signal to suppress hepatic bile acid synthesis (Holt et al., 2003;
Inagaki et al., 2005). In addition, via activating hypothalamic
FGFR1, FGF19 constitutes a key gut-brain axis signal that has
been reported to contribute to the regulation of energy and
glucose homeostasis (Morton et al., 2013; Ryan et al., 2013).
Therefore, an increasing rationale for incorporating selective
targeting of bile acid metabolism-related receptors such as
FGFRs, FXR, and/or TGR5 in next-generation metabolic phar-
macology is emerging. To mention one more example, activation
of the FGF1R-bKlotho complex, together with GLP-1-based
multi-agonists, appears to provide metabolic benefits that
approximate the post-surgical endocrine milieu.
Gut-Hormone Potentiation of the Brain’s Melanocortin
System
Despite the fact that leptin treatment has a negligible effect
on appetite and body weight in diet-induced obesity, growing
evidence supports the concept that specific enteroendocrine
hormones may offer potential to act as central leptin sensi-
tizers. Accordingly, gut-hormone-based pharmacotherapies
766
Cell 168, February 23, 2017
 are increasingly being evaluated for their ability to restore or
enhance central leptin actions (Quarta et al., 2016). Obese
mice shifted from a high-fat, high sugar diet to a low-fat chow
diet and treated with a GLP-1R agonist (Exendin-4) have
restored exogenous leptin responsiveness (Mu
¨ ller et al., 2012).
Amylin, which is co-secreted from beta cells along with insulin,
has also been established as a powerful leptin sensitizer (Trevas-
kis et al., 2010), and reports of central interactions between leptin
and other gut-hormones including PYY and CCK are indicative of
combinatorial potential (Unniappan and Kieffer, 2008; Wang
et al., 2000). Recently, GLP-1R/GcgR co-agonism was found
to elicit unprecedented sensitization of leptin actions (Clemmen-
sen et al., 2014). Four weeks of combined GLP-1/glucagon and
leptin treatment resulted in a 45% reduction in body weight in
obese mice with free access to a hyper-palatable and energy-
dense diet. Such weight loss potency is equivalent to what can
be achieved with bariatric surgery and only rivaled by a few other
pre-clinical agents (Finan et al., 2015b; Liu et al., 2015).
Considerable effort has been invested in therapeutic modula-
tion of the second-order neuronal integrator of hypothalamic
leptin action, MC4R. Unfortunately, most attempts have failed
due to safety issues, particularly a negative impact on the cardio-
vascular system (Fani et al., 2014). Encouragingly, however, a
recently developed selective MC4R agonist (setmelanotide)
was reported to reverse obesity in monkeys and humans without
compromising cardiovascular safety (Chen et al., 2015; Kievit
et al., 2013). This same compound was recently employed to
successfully treat human POMC deficiency (Ku
¨ hnen et al.,
2016). Finally, corroborating the emerging paradigm that co-
targeting anorectic and thermogenic pathways is a superior me-
dicinal strategy, dual MC4R and GLP-1R agonism administered
to HFD-induced obese mice caused a greater improvement in
reversing obesity and dyslipidemia as well as restoring glycemic
control relative to each mono-agonist (Clemmensen et al.,
2015). Yet, contrasting the obvious benefits of combining drugs
that target diverse non-redundant metabolic pathways, the abil-
ity of gut-factors to potentiate melanocortin-linked satiation
or centrally-regulated thermogenic circuits, remains compara-
tively understudied.
Pharmacological Targeting of Hedonic Feeding and
Food Reward Circuits
The potential of targeting behavioral feeding circuitries is evident
by the capacity of selective cannabinoid receptor type-1 (CB1)
inhibition to ameliorate rodent (Ravinet Trillou et al., 2004) and
human (Pi-Sunyer et al., 2006; Ravinet Trillou et al., 2004)
obesity. Numerous previous and current anti-obesity drugs
directly act on neural pathways that influence eating behavior
(Gautron et al., 2015). Accordingly, targeting of food hedonics
in combination with the archetypical anorectic and thermogenic
pathways is likely to yield hitherto unparalleled pharmacological
efficacy to reverse human obesity and to maintain a leaner
phenotype. However, indirect impact, via modulating endoge-
nous gut-brain signals, on behavioral neuro-circuits likely offers
superior specificity with lower risk for side effects and toxicity.
Several gut-hormones including GLP-1, PYY, and ghrelin
directly affect mesolimbic dopaminergic tone and modulate
food reward (Abizaid et al., 2006; Batterham et al., 2007; Dossat
et al., 2011; Fulton et al., 2006). Yet, it remains to be determined
if, for example, the therapeutic benefits of GLP-1R agonism are
in part attributable to effects on behavioral circuits. Indeed, there
is an unmet demand for exploring how gut-derived peptides in-
fluence relevant neuronal intervention points beyond the caudal
brainstem and the hypothalamus to modulate energy homeosta-
sis. Such insights may facilitate the design of refined polyphar-
macy that relevantly targets food hedonics without severe off-
target effects that are currently frequently linked to behavioral
pharmacology.
Therapeutic Challenges and Opportunities: A Look to
the Future
We are currently witnessing important progress in transforming
basic research into novel therapeutics for obesity and diabetes.
However, if granted spotlight exposure, several less traveled
avenues might provide additional opportunities (Figure 4).
Perhaps surprisingly, the most challenging obstacle in obesity
treatment may not be losing excess adipose mass, but rather
maintaining a lower body weight once it has been re-established.
Thus, weight loss and weight loss maintenance may be un-
coupled biological challenges and require different pharma-
cology. For example, calorie-restriction-induced weight loss
disproportionally reduces metabolic rate, which contributes
to the powerful counter-regulatory ‘‘homeostatic’’ mechanisms
driving weight regain (Bray, 1969; Leibel et al., 1995). Probing
innovative strategies that efficaciously dampen CNS-perceived
‘‘under-weight’’ seems critical to maintain a healthy level of
body fat in spite of a history of obesity.
While the incorporation of glucagon in weight loss polyphar-
macy relevantly supplements a thermogenic component, other
factors could be (re)-considered for successful pharmacolog-
ical weight loss maintenance. Inarguably, thyroid hormone
plays a central role in human energy metabolism. Thyroid
hormone increases ATP turnover and reduces the thermody-
namic efficiency of ATP synthesis resulting in heat production
(Mullur et al., 2014). Reduced thyroid hormone levels are a
hallmark metabolic adaptation to weight loss and may play a
fundamental role for ‘‘pathological’’ weight regain (Rosenbaum
et al., 2000). Yet, the use of thyroid hormones to treat obesity
has, for decades, been largely discarded due to severe
adverse effects on the cardiovascular system, bone, and skel-
etal muscle (Baxter and Webb, 2009). Recent technological
advances may permit circumventing the off-target effects of
thyroid hormone and enable safely harvesting the metabolic
benefits on body weight and lipid metabolism (Tscho
¨ p et al.,
2016). Thus, via using peptide hormones as shuttles, it is
possible to selectively target nuclear hormones to tissues
harboring the peptide-receptors (Finan et al., 2012). Recently,
glucagon was employed to deliver thyroid hormone to hepato-
cytes and adipocytes. This pharmacological approach utilizes
the metabolic benefits of both hormonal constituents to
reverse diet-induced and genetic dyslipidemia, ramp up meta-
bolic futile cellular cycles and consequently reverse obesity
(Finan et al., 2016a). Importantly, using glucagon to restrict
thyroid hormone actions circumvents adverse cardiovascular
events, emphasizing the promising potential of this targetable
pharmacological strategy.
The efficacy of bariatric surgery to introduce diabetes remis-
sion independent of weight loss has stipulated hope to cure
Cell 168, February 23, 2017
767
 diabetes with pharmacology. Now, baffling pre-clinical results
are hinting that this is not science fiction and may be achievable
in the not-so-distant future. Scarlett et al. (2016) found that a sin-
gle central administration of FGF1 reverses diabetes in rodent
models. Consistent with this, peripheral FGF1 administration de-
livers admirable effects on glycemic control in rodent models
(Suh et al., 2014). Understanding the molecular details and the
potential pharmacological utility of FGF1 in energy and glucose
metabolism is pertinent and warrants further investigation.
Conclusions and Future Directions
Our species is on the verge of transcending biologically deter-
mined limits. Natural selection has provided humans with a dis-
proportionally large playing field, and with the rise of sophisti-
cated gene-editing techniques and other biotechnological
advances, we are standing at a crossroads. Evident by the esca-
lating obesity and diabetes epidemics as well as the multitude of
associated co-morbidities, we have, from the perspective of
optimal health, inarguably over-engineered our lives. Conse-
quently, the demand for solutions is intensifying.
In a counterproductive manner, overweight and obese people
are still frequently being accused of having self-inflicted compli-
cations, mirroring their (poor) choice of lifestyle. This is not the
case. As with most major diseases, a complex interaction be-
tween environmental factors and genetic predisposition, rather
than personal responsibility, is driving the disease etiologies.
Figure 4. Understanding Gut-Brain Cross-
Talk: Therapeutic Targets for Treating Meta-
bolic Disease
Current and promising therapeutic targets for
treating obesity, type 2 diabetes, and associated
co-morbidities are summarized. Future efforts hope
to identify refined polypharmacy approaches in-
tended to match the efficacy of the bariatric sur-
geries to cure obesity and diabetes. LepR, leptin
receptor; InsR, insulin receptor; TrkB, tyrosine re-
ceptor kinase B; IGF1R, insulin-like growth factor 1
receptor; GLP-1R, glucagon-like peptide-1 recep-
tor; FGFRs, fibroblast growth factor receptors;
MC4R, melanocortin receptor 4; GHSR, growth
hormone secretagogue receptor; D2R, dopamine
receptor D2; 5-HTR, serotonin receptors; AChR,
acetylcholinereceptors;CB1,cannabinoidreceptor
type 1; NPY-R, neuropeptide Y receptors; CTR,
calcitonin receptor; BRS-3, Bombesin receptor
subtype 3; AJP, Apelin receptor; GcGR, glucagon
receptor; TNFR, tumor necrosis factor receptors;
LDLR, low-density lipoprotein receptor; CaSR, cal-
cium sensing receptor; GPR, G protein-coupled
receptor;
TRPM5,
transient
receptor
potential
cation channel subfamily M member 5; CCK-B,
cholecystokinin B receptor; SSTR, somatostatin
receptor; ACh-M, muscarinic acetylcholine re-
ceptors;
GIP-R,
gastric
inhibitory
polypeptide
receptor; CX3CR1, fractalkine receptor.
Whereas
the
genetic
components
of
obesity point to CNS circuits as the major
culprit of the pathogenesis, the gut has
emerged as
a significant
therapeutic
intervention point. In particular, the ca-
pacity of bariatric surgeries to effectively
reverse obesity and diabetes has placed
a spotlight on the gut-brain axis as a holistic, multifaceted, bidi-
rectional control system governing energy metabolism.
In recent developments, new clinical guidelines for the treat-
ment of type 2 diabetes recommend that bariatric surgery should
be included as a standard treatment option for eligible candi-
dates (Rubino et al., 2016). This radical amendment is following
clinical trials consistently reporting that surgery improves glyce-
mic control more effectively than lifestyle or pharmacological
interventions—and in many cases produces long-term disease
remission. However, risks and costs of surgery, and not yet fully
understood long-term complications caused by the intervention,
required specialized medical units and the necessity for trained
surgeons and medical personnel needs to be added to the
equation. The math just does not add up, and offering bariatric
surgery to hundreds of millions of patients is not the solution to
the growing epidemics of obesity and diabetes. Likely, there
will be specific indication to perform surgery on defined small
subsets of patients as a part of metabolic-precision medicine
in the future, but the majority of obese and diabetic subjects
will have to be cured—or ideally prevented—by novel medicines.
Tremendous progress in delineating the perpetual bimodal
gut-brain cross talk is ongoing, and if the current momentum to-
ward unraveling the molecular underpinnings of these signals can
be maintained across academia, biotech companies, and the
pharmaceutical industry, efficacious and safe precision medi-
cines for obesity and type 2 diabetes may soon become a reality.
768
Cell 168, February 23, 2017
 AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
C.C. conceptualized the review, generated substantial text, and provided edits
for all sections. T.D.M generated substantial text, and provided edits for all
sections. S.C.W. generated substantial text, and provided edits for all sec-
tions. H.R.B. generated substantial text, and provided edits for all sections.
R.J.S. generated substantial text, and provided edits for all sections. M.H.T
co-conceptualized the review, generated substantial text, and provided edits
for all sections.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to acknowledge and thank the numerous colleagues and collab-
orators with whom we have interacted over the years. C.C. received support
from the Alfred Benzon Foundation and the Lundbeck Foundation. T.D.M.
and M.H.T. received support from Helmholtz Alliance ICEMED, the Helm-
holtz Initiative on Personalized Medicine iMed, and the Helmholtz cross-
program topic ‘‘Metabolic Dysfunction’’. M.H.T. received support from the
Alexander von Humboldt Foundation, the German Research Foundation DFG
(SFB1123) and the European Research Council ERC (AdG HypoFlam no.
695054). H.R.B. was supported by NIH grant R01 DK047348. R.J.S. was sup-
ported by NIH grant R01 DK107652and is apaid consultant for Ethicon Surgical
Care, Novo Nordisk, Novartis, Daiichi Sankyo, Janssen/Johnson & Johnson,
Zafgen, Paul Hastings Law Firm, Takeda, Boehringer-Ingelheim, and Sanofi.
REFERENCES
Abizaid, A., Liu, Z.W., Andrews, Z.B., Shanabrough, M., Borok, E., Elsworth,
J.D., Roth, R.H., Sleeman, M.W., Picciotto, M.R., Tscho
¨ p, M.H., et al. (2006).
Ghrelin modulates the activity and synaptic input organization of midbrain
dopamine neurons while promoting appetite. J. Clin. Invest. 116, 3229–3239.
Aiello, L., and Wheeler, P. (1995). The expensive-tissue hypothesis: the brain
and the digestive system in human and primate evolution. Curr. Anthropol.
36, 199–221.
Barrera, J.G., Sandoval, D.A., D’Alessio, D.A., and Seeley, R.J. (2011). GLP-1
and energy balance: an integrated model of short-term and long-term control.
Nat. Rev. Endocrinol. 7, 507–516.
Batterham, R.L., ffytche, D.H., Rosenthal, J.M., Zelaya, F.O., Barker, G.J.,
Withers, D.J., and Williams, S.C. (2007). PYY modulation of cortical and
hypothalamic brain areas predicts feeding behaviour in humans. Nature 450,
106–109.
Baxter, J.D., and Webb, P. (2009). Thyroid hormone mimetics: potential appli-
cations in atherosclerosis, obesity and type 2 diabetes. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov.
8, 308–320.
Berthoud, H.R. (2008a). Vagal and hormonal gut-brain communication: from
satiation to satisfaction. Neurogastroenterol. Motil. 20(Suppl 1), 64–72.
Berthoud, H.R. (2008b). The vagus nerve, food intake and obesity. Regul. Pept.
149, 15–25.
Berthoud, H.R., and Morrison, C. (2008). The brain, appetite, and obesity.
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 59, 55–92.
Berthoud, H.R., and Neuhuber, W.L. (2000). Functional and chemical anatomy
of the afferent vagal system. Auton. Neurosci. 85, 1–17.
Berthoud, H.R., and Patterson, L.M. (1996). Anatomical relationship between
vagal afferent fibers and CCK-immunoreactive entero-endocrine cells in the
rat small intestinal mucosa. Acta Anat. (Basel) 156, 123–131.
Berthoud, H.R., and Powley, T.L. (1992). Vagal afferent innervation of the rat
fundic stomach: morphological characterization of the gastric tension recep-
tor. J. Comp. Neurol. 319, 261–276.
Berthoud, H.R., Kressel, M., Raybould, H.E., and Neuhuber, W.L. (1995). Vagal
sensors in the rat duodenal mucosa: distribution and structure as revealed by
in vivo DiI-tracing. Anat. Embryol. (Berl.) 191, 203–212.
Berthoud, H.R., Patterson, L.M., Neumann, F., and Neuhuber, W.L. (1997).
Distribution and structure of vagal afferent intraganglionic laminar endings
(IGLEs) in the rat gastrointestinal tract. Anat. Embryol. (Berl.) 195, 183–191.
Blackshaw, L.A., and Grundy, D. (1990). Effects of cholecystokinin (CCK-8) on
two classes of gastroduodenal vagal afferent fibre. J. Auton. Nerv. Syst. 31,
191–201.
Branco, T., Tozer, A., Magnus, C.J., Sugino, K., Tanaka, S., Lee, A.K., Wood,
J.N., and Sternson, S.M. (2016). Near-Perfect Synaptic Integration by Nav1.7
in Hypothalamic Neurons Regulates Body Weight. Cell 165, 1749–1761.
Brandsma, E., Houben, T., Fu, J., Shiri-Sverdlov, R., and Hofker, M.H. (2015).
The immunity-diet-microbiota axis in the development of metabolic syndrome.
Curr. Opin. Lipidol. 26, 73–81.
Bray, G.A. (1969). Effect of caloric restriction on energy expenditure in obese
patients. Lancet 2, 397–398.
Brennan, I.M., Feltrin, K.L., Horowitz, M., Smout, A.J., Meyer, J.H., Wishart, J.,
and Feinle-Bisset, C. (2005). Evaluation of interactions between CCK and
GLP-1 in their effects on appetite, energy intake, and antropyloroduodenal
motility in healthy men. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 288,
R1477–R1485.
Brobeck, J.R. (1946). Mechanism of the development of obesity in animals
with hypothalamic lesions. Physiol. Rev. 26, 541–559.
Broeders, E.P., Nascimento, E.B., Havekes, B., Brans, B., Roumans, K.H.,
Tailleux, A., Schaart, G., Kouach, M., Charton, J., Deprez, B., et al. (2015).
The bile acid chenodeoxycholic acid increases human brown adipose tissue
activity. Cell Metab. 22, 418–426.
Cabanac, M., and Johnson, K.G. (1983). Analysis of a conflict between palat-
ability and cold exposure in rats. Physiol. Behav. 31, 249–253.
Cani, P.D., and Delzenne, N.M. (2009). The role of the gut microbiota in energy
metabolism and metabolic disease. Curr. Pharm. Des. 15, 1546–1558.
Cegla, J., Troke, R.C., Jones, B., Tharakan, G., Kenkre, J., McCullough, K.A.,
Lim, C.T., Parvizi, N., Hussein, M., Chambers, E.S., et al. (2014). Coinfusion of
low-dose GLP-1 and glucagon in man results in a reduction in food intake. Dia-
betes 63, 3711–3720.
Celio, A.C., and Pories, W.J. (2016). A History of Bariatric Surgery: The Matu-
ration of a Medical Discipline. Surg. Clin. North Am. 96, 655–667.
Chakravarthy, M.V., and Booth, F.W. (2004). Eating, exercise, and ‘‘thrifty’’ ge-
notypes: connecting the dots toward an evolutionary understanding of modern
chronic diseases. J. Appl. Physiol. 96, 3–10.
Chambers, A.P., Jessen, L., Ryan, K.K., Sisley, S., Wilson-Pe
´ rez, H.E.,
Stefater, M.A., Gaitonde, S.G., Sorrell, J.E., Toure, M., Berger, J., et al.
(2011). Weight-independent changes in blood glucose homeostasis after
gastric bypass or vertical sleeve gastrectomy in rats. Gastroenterology 141,
950–958.
Chambers, A.P., Kirchner, H., Wilson-Perez, H.E., Willency, J.A., Hale, J.E.,
Gaylinn, B.D., Thorner, M.O., Pfluger, P.T., Gutierrez, J.A., Tschop, M.H.,
et al. (2013). The effects of vertical sleeve gastrectomy in rodents are ghrelin
independent. Gastroenterology 144, 50–52.
Chan, J.L., Mun, E.C., Stoyneva, V., Mantzoros, C.S., and Goldfine, A.B.
(2006). Peptide YY levels are elevated after gastric bypass surgery. Obesity
(Silver Spring) 14, 194–198.
Chen, K.Y., Muniyappa, R., Abel, B.S., Mullins, K.P., Staker, P., Brychta, R.J.,
Zhao, X., Ring, M., Psota, T.L., Cone, R.D., et al. (2015). RM-493, a melanocor-
tin-4 receptor (MC4R) agonist, increases resting energy expenditure in obese
individuals. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 100, 1639–1645.
Clemmensen, C., Chabenne, J., Finan, B., Sullivan, L., Fischer, K., Ku
¨ chler, D.,
Sehrer, L., Ograjsek, T., Hofmann, S.M., Schriever, S.C., et al. (2014). GLP-1/
glucagon coagonism restores leptin responsiveness in obese mice chronically
maintained on an obesogenic diet. Diabetes 63, 1422–1427.
Clemmensen, C., Finan, B., Fischer, K., Tom, R.Z., Legutko, B., Sehrer, L.,
Heine, D., Grassl, N., Meyer, C.W., Henderson, B., et al. (2015). Dual melano-
cortin-4 receptor and GLP-1 receptor agonism amplifies metabolic benefits in
diet-induced obese mice. EMBO Mol. Med. 7, 288–298.
Clemmensen, C., Mu
¨ ller, T.D., Finan, B., Tscho
¨ p, M.H., and DiMarchi, R.
(2016). Current and Emerging Treatment Options in Diabetes Care. Handb.
Exp. Pharmacol. 233, 437–459.
Cell 168, February 23, 2017
769
 Coleman, D.L. (1973). Effects of parabiosis of obese with diabetes and normal
mice. Diabetologia 9, 294–298.
Coleman, D.L., and Hummel, K.P. (1969). Effects of parabiosis of normal with
genetically diabetic mice. Am. J. Physiol. 217, 1298–1304.
Colquitt, J.L., Pickett, K., Loveman, E., and Frampton, G.K. (2014). Surgery for
weight loss in adults. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. (8), CD003641.
Cummings, D.E., Weigle, D.S., Frayo, R.S., Breen, P.A., Ma, M.K., Dellinger,
E.P., and Purnell, J.Q. (2002). Plasma ghrelin levels after diet-induced weight
loss or gastric bypass surgery. N. Engl. J. Med. 346, 1623–1630.
Cynthia, K. (2010). Musonius Rufus (Lectures and Sayings. CreateSpace Inde-
pendent Publishing Platform).
D’Agostino, G., Lyons, D.J., Cristiano, C., Burke, L.K., Madara, J.C., Camp-
bell, J.N., Garcia, A.P., Land, B.B., Lowell, B.B., Dileone, R.J., and Heisler,
L.K. (2016). Appetite controlled by a cholecystokinin nucleus of the solitary
tract to hypothalamus neurocircuit. eLife 5, e12225.
Day, J.W., Ottaway, N., Patterson, J.T., Gelfanov, V., Smiley, D., Gidda, J., Fin-
deisen, H., Bruemmer, D., Drucker, D.J., Chaudhary, N., et al. (2009). A new
glucagon and GLP-1 co-agonist eliminates obesity in rodents. Nat. Chem.
Biol. 5, 749–757.
de Jonge, L., and Bray, G.A. (1997). The thermic effect of food and obesity: a
critical review. Obes. Res. 5, 622–631.
de Lartigue, G., Ronveaux, C.C., and Raybould, H.E. (2014). Vagal plasticity
the key to obesity. Mol. Metab. 3, 855–856.
De Silva, A., Salem, V., Long, C.J., Makwana, A., Newbould, R.D., Rabiner,
E.A., Ghatei, M.A., Bloom, S.R., Matthews, P.M., Beaver, J.D., and Dhillo,
W.S. (2011). The gut hormones PYY 3-36 and GLP-1 7-36 amide reduce
food intake and modulate brain activity in appetite centers in humans. Cell
Metab. 14, 700–706.
Degirolamo, C., Rainaldi, S., Bovenga, F., Murzilli, S., and Moschetta, A.
(2014). Microbiota modification with probiotics induces hepatic bile acid syn-
thesis via downregulation of the Fxr-Fgf15 axis in mice. Cell Rep. 7, 12–18.
Di Angelantonio, E., Bhupathiraju, ShN., Wormser, D., Gao, P., Kaptoge, S.,
Berrington de Gonzalez, A., Cairns, B.J., Huxley, R., Jackson, ChL., Joshy,
G., et al.; Global BMI Mortality Collaboration (2016). Body-mass index and
all-cause mortality: individual-participant-data meta-analysis of 239 prospec-
tive studies in four continents. Lancet 388, 776–786.
Dickson, S.L., Shirazi, R.H., Hansson, C., Bergquist, F., Nissbrandt, H., and
Skibicka, K.P. (2012). The glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) analogue,
exendin-4, decreases the rewarding value of food: a new role for mesolimbic
GLP-1 receptors. J. Neurosci. 32, 4812–4820.
Dirksen, C., Jørgensen, N.B., Bojsen-Møller, K.N., Kielgast, U., Jacobsen,
S.H., Clausen, T.R., Worm, D., Hartmann, B., Rehfeld, J.F., Damgaard, M.,
et al. (2013). Gut hormones, early dumping and resting energy expenditure
in patients with good and poor weight loss response after Roux-en-Y gastric
bypass. Int. J. Obes. 37, 1452–1459.
Dossat, A.M., Lilly, N., Kay, K., and Williams, D.L. (2011). Glucagon-like pep-
tide 1 receptors in nucleus accumbens affect food intake. J. Neurosci. 31,
14453–14457.
Dunn, J.P., Cowan, R.L., Volkow, N.D., Feurer, I.D., Li, R., Williams, D.B., Kess-
ler, R.M., and Abumrad, N.N. (2010). Decreased dopamine type 2 receptor
availability after bariatric surgery: preliminary findings. Brain Res. 1350,
123–130.
Ernst, B., Thurnheer, M., Wilms, B., and Schultes, B. (2009). Differential
changes in dietary habits after gastric bypass versus gastric banding opera-
tions. Obes. Surg. 19, 274–280.
Falke
´ n, Y., Hellstro
¨ m, P.M., Holst, J.J., and Na
¨ slund, E. (2011). Changes in
glucose homeostasis after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass surgery for obesity at
day three, two months, and one year after surgery: role of gut peptides.
J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 96, 2227–2235.
Fang, S., Suh, J.M., Reilly, S.M., Yu, E., Osborn, O., Lackey, D., Yoshihara, E.,
Perino, A., Jacinto, S., Lukasheva, Y., et al. (2015). Intestinal FXR agonism pro-
motes adipose tissue browning and reduces obesity and insulin resistance.
Nat. Med. 21, 159–165.
Fani, L., Bak, S., Delhanty, P., van Rossum, E.F., and van den Akker, E.L.
(2014). The melanocortin-4 receptor as target for obesity treatment: a system-
atic review of emerging pharmacological therapeutic options. Int. J. Obes. 38,
163–169.
Farooqi, I.S., Keogh, J.M., Yeo, G.S., Lank, E.J., Cheetham, T., and O’Rahilly,
S. (2003). Clinical spectrum of obesity and mutations in the melanocortin 4 re-
ceptor gene. N. Engl. J. Med. 348, 1085–1095.
Farooqi, I.S., Bullmore, E., Keogh, J., Gillard, J., O’Rahilly, S., and Fletcher,
P.C. (2007). Leptin regulates striatal regions and human eating behavior. Sci-
ence 317, 1355.
Figlewicz, D.P. (2016). Expression of receptors for insulin and leptin in the
ventral tegmental area/substantia nigra (VTA/SN) of the rat: Historical perspec-
tive. Brain Res. 1645, 68–70.
Finan, B., Yang, B., Ottaway, N., Stemmer, K., Mu
¨ ller, T.D., Yi, C.X., Habegger,
K., Schriever, S.C., Garcı
´a-Ca
´ ceres, C., Kabra, D.G., et al. (2012). Targeted es-
trogen delivery reverses the metabolic syndrome. Nat. Med. 18, 1847–1856.
Finan, B., Ma, T., Ottaway, N., Mu
¨ ller, T.D., Habegger, K.M., Heppner, K.M.,
Kirchner, H., Holland, J., Hembree, J., Raver, C., et al. (2013). Unimolecular
dual incretins maximize metabolic benefits in rodents, monkeys, and humans.
Sci. Transl. Med. 5, 209ra151.
Finan, B., Clemmensen, C., and Mu
¨ ller, T.D. (2015a). Emerging opportunities
for the treatment of metabolic diseases: Glucagon-like peptide-1 based
multi-agonists. Mol. Cell. Endocrinol. 418, 42–54.
Finan, B., Yang, B., Ottaway, N., Smiley, D.L., Ma, T., Clemmensen, C., Chab-
enne, J., Zhang, L., Habegger, K.M., Fischer, K., et al. (2015b). A rationally de-
signed monomeric peptide triagonist corrects obesity and diabetes in rodents.
Nat. Med. 21, 27–36.
Finan, B., Clemmensen, C., Zhu, Z., Stemmer, K., Gauthier, K., Muller, L., De
Angelis, M., Moreth, K., Neff, F., Perez-Tilve, D., et al. (2016a). Chemical
hybridization of glucagon and thyroid hormone optimizes therapeutic impact
for metabolic disease. Cell 167, 843–857.
Finan, B., Mu
¨ ller, T.D., Clemmensen, C., Perez-Tilve, D., DiMarchi, R.D., and
Tscho
¨ p, M.H. (2016b). Reappraisal of GIP pharmacology for metabolic dis-
eases. Trends Mol. Med. 22, 359–376.
Fosgerau, K., Jessen, L., Lind Tolborg, J., Østerlund, T., Schæffer Larsen, K.,
Rolsted, K., Brorson, M., Jelsing, J., and Skovlund Ryge Neerup, T. (2013). The
novel GLP-1-gastrin dual agonist, ZP3022, increases b-cell mass and prevents
diabetes in db/db mice. Diabetes Obes. Metab. 15, 62–71.
Frank, S., Wilms, B., Veit, R., Ernst, B., Thurnheer, M., Kullmann, S., Fritsche,
A., Birbaumer, N., Preissl, H., and Schultes, B. (2014). Altered brain activity in
severely obese women may recover after Roux-en Y gastric bypass surgery.
Int. J. Obes. 38, 341–348.
Fulton, S., Pissios, P., Manchon, R.P., Stiles, L., Frank, L., Pothos, E.N., Mar-
atos-Flier, E., and Flier, J.S. (2006). Leptin regulation of the mesoaccumbens
dopamine pathway. Neuron 51, 811–822.
Furness, J.B. (2012). The enteric nervous system and neurogastroenterology.
Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 9, 286–294.
Garcı
´a-Ca
´ ceres, C., Quarta, C., Varela, L., Gao, Y., Gruber, T., Legutko, B.,
Jastroch, M., Johansson, P., Ninkovic, J., Yi, C.X., et al. (2016). Astrocytic in-
sulin signaling couples brain glucose uptake with nutrient availability. Cell 166,
867–880.
Gautron, L., Elmquist, J.K., and Williams, K.W. (2015). Neural control of energy
balance: translating circuits to therapies. Cell 161, 133–145.
Gerhard, G.S., Styer, A.M., Wood, G.C., Roesch, S.L., Petrick, A.T., Gabriel-
sen, J., Strodel, W.E., Still, C.D., and Argyropoulos, G. (2013). A role for fibro-
blast growth factor 19 and bile acids in diabetes remission after Roux-en-Y
gastric bypass. Diabetes Care 36, 1859–1864.
Gibbs, J., Young, R.C., and Smith, G.P. (1973). Cholecystokinin elicits satiety
in rats with open gastric fistulas. Nature 245, 323–325.
Grayson, B.E., Schneider, K.M., Woods, S.C., and Seeley, R.J. (2013).
Improved rodent maternal metabolism but reduced intrauterine growth after
vertical sleeve gastrectomy. Sci. Transl. Med. 5, 199ra112.
770
Cell 168, February 23, 2017
 Green, E.D., Maffei, M., Braden, V.V., Proenca, R., DeSilva, U., Zhang, Y.,
Chua, S.C., Jr., Leibel, R.L., Weissenbach, J., and Friedman, J.M. (1995).
The human obese (OB) gene: RNA expression pattern and mapping on the
physical, cytogenetic, and genetic maps of chromosome 7. Genome Res. 5,
5–12.
Gribble, F.M. (2012). The gut endocrine system as a coordinator of postpran-
dial nutrient homoeostasis. Proc. Nutr. Soc. 71, 456–462.
Gribble, F.M., and Reimann, F. (2016). Enteroendocrine cells: chemosensors
in the intestinal epithelium. Annu. Rev. Physiol. 78, 277–299.
Grill, H.J., and Hayes, M.R. (2012). Hindbrain neurons as an essential hub in the
neuroanatomically distributed control of energy balance. Cell Metab. 16,
296–309.
Grunddal, K.V., Ratner, C.F., Svendsen, B., Sommer, F., Engelstoft, M.S.,
Madsen, A.N., Pedersen, J., Nøhr, M.K., Egerod, K.L., Nawrocki, A.R., et al.
(2016). Neurotensin is coexpressed, coreleased, and acts together with
GLP-1 and PYY in enteroendocrine control of metabolism. Endocrinology
157, 176–194.
Gutzwiller, J.P., Degen, L., Matzinger, D., Prestin, S., and Beglinger, C. (2004).
Interaction between GLP-1 and CCK-33 in inhibiting food intake and appetite
in men. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 287, R562–R567.
Habegger, K.M., Heppner, K.M., Geary, N., Bartness, T.J., DiMarchi, R., and
Tscho
¨ p, M.H. (2010). The metabolic actions of glucagon revisited. Nat. Rev.
Endocrinol. 6, 689–697.
Habegger, K.M., Stemmer, K., Cheng, C., Mu
¨ ller, T.D., Heppner, K.M., Ott-
away, N., Holland, J., Hembree, J.L., Smiley, D., Gelfanov, V., et al. (2013).
Fibroblast growth factor 21 mediates specific glucagon actions. Diabetes
62, 1453–1463.
Hamilton, M.K., Boudry, G., Lemay, D.G., and Raybould, H.E. (2015). Changes
in intestinal barrier function and gut microbiota in high-fat diet-fed rats are dy-
namic and region dependent. Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol. 308,
G840–G851.
Han, W., Tellez, L.A., Niu, J., Medina, S., Ferreira, T.L., Zhang, X., Su, J., Tong,
J., Schwartz, G.J., van den Pol, A., and de Araujo, I.E. (2016). Striatal dopamine
links gastrointestinal rerouting to altered sweet appetite. Cell Metab. 23,
103–112.
Hasler, W.L. (2009). Methods of gastric electrical stimulation and pacing: a re-
view of their benefits and mechanisms of action in gastroparesis and obesity.
Neurogastroenterol. Motil. 21, 229–243.
Henry, F.E., Sugino, K., Tozer, A., Branco, T., and Sternson, S.M. (2015). Cell
type-specific transcriptomics of hypothalamic energy-sensing neuron re-
sponses to weight-loss. eLife 4. http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.09800.
Herbert, H., and Saper, C.B. (1990). Cholecystokinin-, galanin-, and cortico-
tropin-releasing factor-like immunoreactive projections from the nucleus of
the solitary tract to the parabrachial nucleus in the rat. J. Comp. Neurol. 293,
581–598.
Hervey, G.R. (1959). The effects of lesions in the hypothalamus in parabiotic
rats. J. Physiol. 145, 336–352.
Heymsfield, S.B., Greenberg, A.S., Fujioka, K., Dixon, R.M., Kushner, R., Hunt,
T., Lubina, J.A., Patane, J., Self, B., Hunt, P., and McCamish, M. (1999). Re-
combinant leptin for weight loss in obese and lean adults: a randomized,
controlled, dose-escalation trial. JAMA 282, 1568–1575.
Holt, J.A., Luo, G., Billin, A.N., Bisi, J., McNeill, Y.Y., Kozarsky, K.F., Donahee,
M., Wang, D.Y., Mansfield, T.A., Kliewer, S.A., et al. (2003). Definition of a novel
growth factor-dependent signal cascade for the suppression of bile acid
biosynthesis. Genes Dev. 17, 1581–1591.
Huszar, D., Lynch, C.A., Fairchild-Huntress, V., Dunmore, J.H., Fang, Q., Ber-
kemeier, L.R., Gu, W., Kesterson, R.A., Boston, B.A., Cone, R.D., et al. (1997).
Targeted disruption of the melanocortin-4 receptor results in obesity in mice.
Cell 88, 131–141.
Huypens, P., Sass, S., Wu, M., Dyckhoff, D., Tscho
¨ p, M., Theis, F., Marschall,
S., Hrab�
e de Angelis, M., and Beckers, J. (2016). Epigenetic germline inheri-
tance of diet-induced obesity and insulin resistance. Nat. Genet. 48, 497–499.
Ikramuddin, S., Blackstone, R.P., Brancatisano, A., Toouli, J., Shah, S.N.,
Wolfe, B.M., Fujioka, K., Maher, J.W., Swain, J., Que, F.G., et al. (2014). Effect
of reversible intermittent intra-abdominal vagal nerve blockade on morbid
obesity: the ReCharge randomized clinical trial. JAMA 312, 915–922.
Inagaki, T., Choi, M., Moschetta, A., Peng, L., Cummins, C.L., McDonald, J.G.,
Luo, G., Jones, S.A., Goodwin, B., Richardson, J.A., et al. (2005). Fibroblast
growth factor 15 functions as an enterohepatic signal to regulate bile acid
homeostasis. Cell Metab. 2, 217–225.
Jacobsen, S.H., Olesen, S.C., Dirksen, C., Jørgensen, N.B., Bojsen-Møller,
K.N., Kielgast, U., Worm, D., Almdal, T., Naver, L.S., Hvolris, L.E., et al.
(2012). Changes in gastrointestinal hormone responses, insulin sensitivity,
and beta-cell function within 2 weeks after gastric bypass in non-diabetic
subjects. Obes. Surg. 22, 1084–1096.
Jansen, P.L., van Werven, J., Aarts, E., Berends, F., Janssen, I., Stoker, J., and
Schaap, F.G. (2011). Alterations of hormonally active fibroblast growth factors
after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass surgery. Dig. Dis. 29, 48–51.
Jiang, C., Xie, C., Lv, Y., Li, J., Krausz, K.W., Shi, J., Brocker, C.N., Desai, D.,
Amin, S.G., Bisson, W.H., et al. (2015). Intestine-selective farnesoid X receptor
inhibition improves obesity-related metabolic dysfunction. Nat. Commun.
6, 10166.
Kawamata, Y., Fujii, R., Hosoya, M., Harada, M., Yoshida, H., Miwa, M., Fuku-
sumi, S., Habata, Y., Itoh, T., Shintani, Y., et al. (2003). A G protein-coupled
receptor responsive to bile acids. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 9435–9440.
Kennedy, G.C. (1953). The role of depot fat in the hypothalamic control of food
intake in the rat. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 140, 578–596.
Kennedy, G.C. (1966). Food intake, energy balance and growth. Br. Med. Bull.
22, 216–220.
Kenny, P.J. (2011). Reward mechanisms in obesity: new insights and future
directions. Neuron 69, 664–679.
Kharitonenkov, A., and DiMarchi, R. (2015). FGF21 Revolutions: Recent
Advances Illuminating FGF21 Biology and Medicinal Properties. Trends Endo-
crinol. Metab. 26, 608–617.
Kievit, P., Halem, H., Marks, D.L., Dong, J.Z., Glavas, M.M., Sinnayah, P.,
Pranger, L., Cowley, M.A., Grove, K.L., and Culler, M.D. (2013). Chronic treat-
ment with a melanocortin-4 receptor agonist causes weight loss, reduces in-
sulin resistance, and improves cardiovascular function in diet-induced obese
rhesus macaques. Diabetes 62, 490–497.
Koch, M., Varela, L., Kim, J.G., Kim, J.D., Herna
´ ndez-Nun
˜ o, F., Simonds, S.E.,
Castorena, C.M., Vianna, C.R., Elmquist, J.K., Morozov, Y.M., et al. (2015).
Hypothalamic POMC neurons promote cannabinoid-induced feeding. Nature
519, 45–50.
Kohli, R., Setchell, K.D., Kirby, M., Myronovych, A., Ryan, K.K., Ibrahim, S.H.,
Berger, J., Smith, K., Toure, M., Woods, S.C., and Seeley, R.J. (2013). A sur-
gical model in male obese rats uncovers protective effects of bile acids
post-bariatric surgery. Endocrinology 154, 2341–2351.
Korner, J., Bessler, M., Inabnet, W., Taveras, C., and Holst, J.J. (2007). Exag-
gerated glucagon-like peptide-1 and blunted glucose-dependent insulino-
tropic peptide secretion are associated with Roux-en-Y gastric bypass but
not adjustable gastric banding. Surg. Obes. Relat. Dis. 3, 597–601.
Krashes, M.J., Lowell, B.B., and Garfield, A.S. (2016). Melanocortin-4 recep-
tor-regulated energy homeostasis. Nat. Neurosci. 19, 206–219.
Ku
¨ hnen, P., Cle
´ ment, K., Wiegand, S., Blankenstein, O., Gottesdiener, K.,
Martini, L.L., Mai, K., Blume-Peytavi, U., Gru
¨ ters, A., and Krude, H. (2016).
Proopiomelanocortin deficiency treated with a melanocortin-4 receptor
agonist. N. Engl. J. Med. 375, 240–246.
Larsen, P.J., Tang-Christensen, M., Holst, J.J., and Orskov, C. (1997). Distri-
bution of glucagon-like peptide-1 and other preproglucagon-derived peptides
in the rat hypothalamus and brainstem. Neuroscience 77, 257–270.
le Roux, C.W., and Bueter, M. (2014). The physiology of altered eating behav-
iour after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. Exp. Physiol. 99, 1128–1132.
Leibel, R.L., Rosenbaum, M., and Hirsch, J. (1995). Changes in energy expen-
diture resulting from altered body weight. N. Engl. J. Med. 332, 621–628.
Cell 168, February 23, 2017
771
 Leonard, W.R., Snodgrass, J.J., and Robertson, M.L. (2007). Effects of brain
evolution on human nutrition and metabolism. Annu. Rev. Nutr. 27, 311–327.
Liu, J., Lee, J., Salazar Hernandez, M.A., Mazitschek, R., and Ozcan, U. (2015).
Treatment of obesity with celastrol. Cell 161, 999–1011.
Locke, A.E., Kahali, B., Berndt, S.I., Justice, A.E., Pers, T.H., Day, F.R., Powell,
C., Vedantam, S., Buchkovich, M.L., Yang, J., et al.; LifeLines Cohort Study;
ADIPOGen Consortium; AGEN-BMI Working Group; CARDIOGRAMplusC4D
Consortium; CKDGen Consortium; GLGC; ICBP; MAGIC Investigators;
MuTHER Consortium; MIGen Consortium; PAGE Consortium; ReproGen
Consortium; GENIE Consortium; International Endogene Consortium (2015).
Genetic studies of body mass index yield new insights for obesity biology.
Nature 518, 197–206.
Lucas, F., and Sclafani, A. (1989). Flavor preferences conditioned by intragas-
tric fat infusions in rats. Physiol. Behav. 46, 403–412.
Lynch, L., Hogan, A.E., Duquette, D., Lester, C., Banks, A., LeClair, K., Cohen,
D.E., Ghosh, A., Lu, B., Corrigan, M., et al. (2016). iNKT cells induce FGF21 for
thermogenesis and are required for maximal weight loss in GLP1 therapy. Cell
Metab. 24, 510–519.
Madara, J.L. (2011). Functional morphology of epithelium of the small intes-
tine. In Handbook of Physiology: The Gastrointestinal System, Intestinal Ab-
sorption and Secretion (Wiley-Blackwell).
Madsbad, S., Dirksen, C., and Holst, J.J. (2014). Mechanisms of changes in
glucose metabolism and bodyweight after bariatric surgery. Lancet Diabetes
Endocrinol. 2, 152–164.
Maffei, M., Fei, H., Lee, G.H., Dani, C., Leroy, P., Zhang, Y., Proenca, R.,
Negrel, R., Ailhaud, G., and Friedman, J.M. (1995). Increased expression in ad-
ipocytes of ob RNA in mice with lesions of the hypothalamus and with muta-
tions at the db locus. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 92, 6957–6960.
Makaronidis, J.M., and Batterham, R.L. (2016). Potential mechanisms medi-
ating sustained weight loss following Roux-en-Y gastric bypass and sleeve
gastrectomy. Endocrinol. Metab. Clin. North Am. 45, 539–552.
McGavigan, A.K., Garibay, D., Henseler, Z.M., Chen, J., Bettaieb, A., Haj, F.G.,
Ley, R.E., Chouinard, M.L., and Cummings, B.P. (2017). TGR5 contributes to
glucoregulatory improvements after vertical sleeve gastrectomy in mice. Gut
66, 226–234.
Mikkelsen, K.H., Frost, M., Bahl, M.I., Licht, T.R., Jensen, U.S., Rosenberg, J.,
Pedersen, O., Hansen, T., Rehfeld, J.F., Holst, J.J., et al. (2015). Effect of an-
tibiotics on gut microbiota, gut hormones and glucose metabolism. PLoS ONE
10, e0142352.
Mingrone, G., Panunzi, S., De Gaetano, A., Guidone, C., Iaconelli, A., Nanni,
G., Castagneto, M., Bornstein, S., and Rubino, F. (2015). Bariatric-metabolic
surgery versus conventional medical treatment in obese patients with type 2
diabetes: 5 year follow-up of an open-label, single-centre, randomised
controlled trial. Lancet 386, 964–973.
Morton, G.J., Matsen, M.E., Bracy, D.P., Meek, T.H., Nguyen, H.T., Stefanov-
ski, D., Bergman, R.N., Wasserman, D.H., and Schwartz, M.W. (2013). FGF19
action in the brain induces insulin-independent glucose lowering. J. Clin.
Invest. 123, 4799–4808.
Mu
¨ ller, T.D., Sullivan, L.M., Habegger, K., Yi, C.X., Kabra, D., Grant, E., Ott-
away, N., Krishna, R., Holland, J., Hembree, J., et al. (2012). Restoration of lep-
tin responsiveness in diet-induced obese mice using an optimized leptin
analog in combination with exendin-4 or FGF21. J. Pept. Sci. 18, 383–393.
Mullur, R., Liu, Y.Y., and Brent, G.A. (2014). Thyroid hormone regulation of
metabolism. Physiol. Rev. 94, 355–382.
Myronovych, A., Kirby, M., Ryan, K.K., Zhang, W., Jha, P., Setchell, K.D., Dex-
heimer, P.J., Aronow, B., Seeley, R.J., and Kohli, R. (2014). Vertical sleeve gas-
trectomy reduces hepatic steatosis while increasing serum bile acids in a
weight-loss-independent manner. Obesity (Silver Spring) 22, 390–400.
Na
¨ slund, E., Backman, L., Holst, J.J., Theodorsson, E., and Hellstro
¨ m, P.M.
(1998). Importance of small bowel peptides for the improved glucose meta-
bolism 20 years after jejunoileal bypass for obesity. Obes. Surg. 8, 253–260.
Neary, N.M., Small, C.J., Druce, M.R., Park, A.J., Ellis, S.M., Semjonous, N.M.,
Dakin, C.L., Filipsson, K., Wang, F., Kent, A.S., et al. (2005). Peptide YY3-36
and glucagon-like peptide-17-36 inhibit food intake additively. Endocrinology
146, 5120–5127.
Ochner, C.N., Laferre
` re, B., Afifi, L., Atalayer, D., Geliebter, A., and Teixeira, J.
(2012). Neural responsivity to food cues in fasted and fed states pre and post
gastric bypass surgery. Neurosci. Res. 74, 138–143.
Oral, E.A., Simha, V., Ruiz, E., Andewelt, A., Premkumar, A., Snell, P., Wagner,
A.J., DePaoli, A.M., Reitman, M.L., Taylor, S.I., et al. (2002). Leptin-replace-
ment therapy for lipodystrophy. N. Engl. J. Med. 346, 570–578.
Oswald, K.D., Murdaugh, D.L., King, V.L., and Boggiano, M.M. (2011). Motiva-
tion for palatable food despite consequences in an animal model of binge
eating. Int. J. Eat. Disord. 44, 203–211.
Patti, M.E., Houten, S.M., Bianco, A.C., Bernier, R., Larsen, P.R., Holst, J.J.,
Badman, M.K., Maratos-Flier, E., Mun, E.C., Pihlajamaki, J., et al. (2009).
Serum bile acids are higher in humans with prior gastric bypass: potential
contribution to improved glucose and lipid metabolism. Obesity (Silver Spring)
17, 1671–1677.
Penney, N.C., Kinross, J., Newton, R.C., and Purkayastha, S. (2015). The role
of bile acids in reducing the metabolic complications of obesity after bariatric
surgery: a systematic review. Int. J. Obes. 39, 1565–1574.
Perry, R.J., Peng, L., Barry, N.A., Cline, G.W., Zhang, D., Cardone, R.L.,
Petersen, K.F., Kibbey, R.G., Goodman, A.L., and Shulman, G.I. (2016). Ace-
tate mediates a microbiome-brain-b-cell axis to promote metabolic syndrome.
Nature 534, 213–217.
Pi-Sunyer, F.X., Aronne, L.J., Heshmati, H.M., Devin, J., and Rosenstock, J.;
RIO-North America Study Group (2006). Effect of rimonabant, a cannabi-
noid-1 receptor blocker, on weight and cardiometabolic risk factors in over-
weight or obese patients: RIO-North America: a randomized controlled trial.
JAMA 295, 761–775.
Pocai, A., Carrington, P.E., Adams, J.R., Wright, M., Eiermann, G., Zhu, L., Du,
X., Petrov, A., Lassman, M.E., Jiang, G., et al. (2009). Glucagon-like peptide
1/glucagon receptor dual agonism reverses obesity in mice. Diabetes 58,
2258–2266.
Powley, T.L., Spaulding, R.A., and Haglof, S.A. (2011). Vagal afferent innerva-
tion of the proximal gastrointestinal tract mucosa: chemoreceptor and mech-
anoreceptor architecture. J. Comp. Neurol. 519, 644–660.
Quarta, C., Sa
´ nchez-Garrido, M.A., Tscho
¨ p, M.H., and Clemmensen, C.
(2016). Renaissance of leptin for obesity therapy. Diabetologia 59, 920–927.
Ramsay, D.S., and Woods, S.C. (2014). Clarifying the roles of homeostasis and
allostasis in physiological regulation. Psychol. Rev. 121, 225–247.
Ratner, C., Skov, L.J., Raida, Z., Ba
¨ chler, T., Bellmann-Sickert, K., Le Foll, C.,
Sivertsen, B., Dalbøge, L.S., Hartmann, B., Beck-Sickinger, A.G., et al. (2016).
Effects of peripheral neurotensin on appetite regulation and its role in gastric
bypass surgery. Endocrinology 157, 3482–3492.
Ravinet Trillou, C., Delgorge, C., Menet, C., Arnone, M., and Soubrie
´ , P. (2004).
CB1 cannabinoid receptor knockout in mice leads to leanness, resistance
to diet-induced obesity and enhanced leptin sensitivity. Int. J. Obes. Relat.
Metab. Disord. 28, 640–648.
Rehfeld, J.F. (1998). The new biology of gastrointestinal hormones. Physiol.
Rev. 78, 1087–1108.
Reijnders, D., Goossens, G.H., Hermes, G.D., Neis, E.P., van der Beek, C.M.,
Most, J., Holst, J.J., Lenaerts, K., Kootte, R.S., Nieuwdorp, M., et al. (2016).
Effects of gut microbiota manipulation by antibiotics on host metabolism
in obese humans: a randomized double-blind placebo-controlled trial. Cell
Metab. 24, 341.
Reimann, F., Tolhurst, G., and Gribble, F.M. (2012). G-protein-coupled recep-
tors in intestinal chemosensation. Cell Metab. 15, 421–431.
Rising, R., Alger, S., Boyce, V., Seagle, H., Ferraro, R., Fontvieille, A.M., and
Ravussin, E. (1992). Food intake measured by an automated food-selection
system: relationship to energy expenditure. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 55, 343–349.
Romero, F., Nicolau, J., Flores, L., Casamitjana, R., Ibarzabal, A., Lacy, A., and
Vidal, J. (2012). Comparable early changes in gastrointestinal hormones after
sleeve gastrectomy and Roux-En-Y gastric bypass surgery for morbidly obese
type 2 diabetic subjects. Surg. Endosc. 26, 2231–2239.
772
Cell 168, February 23, 2017
 Rosenbaum, M., Hirsch, J., Murphy, E., and Leibel, R.L. (2000). Effects of
changes in body weight on carbohydrate metabolism, catecholamine excre-
tion, and thyroid function. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 71, 1421–1432.
Rubino, F., Nathan, D.M., Eckel, R.H., Schauer, P.R., Alberti, K.G., Zimmet,
P.Z., Del Prato, S., Ji, L., Sadikot, S.M., Herman, W.H., et al.; Delegates of
the 2nd Diabetes Surgery Summit (2016). Metabolic surgery in the treatment
algorithm for type 2 diabetes: a joint statement by international diabetes orga-
nizations. Diabetes Care 39, 861–877.
Ryan, K.K., Kohli, R., Gutierrez-Aguilar, R., Gaitonde, S.G., Woods, S.C., and
Seeley, R.J. (2013). Fibroblast growth factor-19 action in the brain reduces
food intake and body weight and improves glucose tolerance in male rats.
Endocrinology 154, 9–15.
Ryan, K.K., Tremaroli, V., Clemmensen, C., Kovatcheva-Datchary, P., Myrono-
vych, A., Karns, R., Wilson-Pe
´ rez, H.E., Sandoval, D.A., Kohli, R., Ba
¨ ckhed, F.,
and Seeley, R.J. (2014). FXR is a molecular target for the effects of vertical
sleeve gastrectomy. Nature 509, 183–188.
Salehi, M., Prigeon, R.L., and D’Alessio, D.A. (2011). Gastric bypass surgery
enhances glucagon-like peptide 1-stimulated postprandial insulin secretion
in humans. Diabetes 60, 2308–2314.
Sa
´ nchez-Garrido, M.A., Habegger, K.M., Clemmensen, C., Holleman, C.,
Mu
¨ ller, T.D., Perez-Tilve, D., Li, P., Agrawal, A.S., Finan, B., Drucker, D.J.,
et al. (2016). Fibroblast activation protein (FAP) as a novel metabolic target.
Mol. Metab. 5, 1015–1024.
Sayin, S.I., Wahlstro
¨ m, A., Felin, J., Ja
¨ ntti, S., Marschall, H.U., Bamberg, K.,
Angelin, B., Hyo
¨ tyla
¨ inen, T., Ore�
si�
c, M., and Ba
¨ ckhed, F. (2013). Gut micro-
biota regulates bile acid metabolism by reducing the levels of tauro-beta-mur-
icholic acid, a naturally occurring FXR antagonist. Cell Metab. 17, 225–235.
Scarlett, J.M., Rojas, J.M., Matsen, M.E., Kaiyala, K.J., Stefanovski, D., Berg-
man, R.N., Nguyen, H.T., Dorfman, M.D., Lantier, L., Wasserman, D.H., et al.
(2016). Central injection of fibroblast growth factor 1 induces sustained remis-
sion of diabetic hyperglycemia in rodents. Nat. Med. 22, 800–806.
Schauer, P.R., Bhatt, D.L., Kirwan, J.P., Wolski, K., Brethauer, S.A., Navanee-
than, S.D., Aminian, A., Pothier, C.E., Kim, E.S., Nissen, S.E., and Kashyap,
S.R.; STAMPEDE Investigators (2014). Bariatric surgery versus intensive med-
ical therapy for diabetes–3-year outcomes. N. Engl. J. Med. 370, 2002–2013.
Schnorr, S.L., Candela, M., Rampelli, S., Centanni, M., Consolandi, C., Basa-
glia, G., Turroni, S., Biagi, E., Peano, C., Severgnini, M., et al. (2014). Gut
microbiome of the Hadza hunter-gatherers. Nat. Commun. 5, 3654.
Scholtz, S., Miras, A.D., Chhina, N., Prechtl, C.G., Sleeth, M.L., Daud, N.M.,
Ismail, N.A., Durighel, G., Ahmed, A.R., Olbers, T., et al. (2014). Obese patients
after gastric bypass surgery have lower brain-hedonic responses to food than
after gastric banding. Gut 63, 891–902.
Schultes, B., Ernst, B., Wilms, B., Thurnheer, M., and Hallschmid, M. (2010).
Hedonic hunger is increased in severely obese patients and is reduced after
gastric bypass surgery. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 92, 277–283.
Schwartz, M.W., Woods, S.C., Porte, D., Jr., Seeley, R.J., and Baskin, D.G.
(2000). Central nervous system control of food intake. Nature 404, 661–671.
Schwartz, M.W., Woods, S.C., Seeley, R.J., Barsh, G.S., Baskin, D.G., and
Leibel, R.L. (2003). Is the energy homeostasis system inherently biased toward
weight gain? Diabetes 52, 232–238.
Sclafani, A. (2004). Oral and postoral determinants of food reward. Physiol.
Behav. 81, 773–779.
Sclafani, A. (2013). Gut-brain nutrient signaling. Appetition vs. satiation. Appe-
tite 71, 454–458.
Sclafani, A., and Ackroff, K. (2012). Role of gut nutrient sensing in stimulating
appetite and conditioning food preferences. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr.
Comp. Physiol. 302, R1119–R1133.
Sclafani, A., and Springer, D. (1976). Dietary obesity in adult rats: similarities to
hypothalamic and human obesity syndromes. Physiol. Behav. 17, 461–471.
Sclafani, A., Ackroff, K., and Schwartz, G.J. (2003). Selective effects of vagal
deafferentation and celiac-superior mesenteric ganglionectomy on the rein-
forcing and satiating action of intestinal nutrients. Physiol. Behav. 78, 285–294.
Sclafani, A., Zukerman, S., and Ackroff, K. (2013). GPR40 and GPR120
fatty acid sensors are critical for postoral but not oral mediation of fat
preferences in the mouse. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 305,
R1490–R1497.
Sclafani, A., Touzani, K., and Ackroff, K. (2015). Ghrelin signaling is not essen-
tial for sugar or fat conditioned flavor preferences in mice. Physiol. Behav. 149,
14–22.
Sclafani, A., Koepsell, H., and Ackroff, K. (2016). SGLT1 sugar transporter/
sensor is required for post-oral glucose appetition. Am. J. Physiol. Regul.
Integr. Comp. Physiol. 310, R631–R639.
Seeley, R.J., Chambers, A.P., and Sandoval, D.A. (2015). The role of gut adap-
tation in the potent effects of multiple bariatric surgeries on obesity and dia-
betes. Cell Metab. 21, 369–378.
Shin, A.C., and Berthoud, H.R. (2011). Food reward functions as affected by
obesity and bariatric surgery. Int. J. Obes. 35(Suppl 3), S40–S44.
Shin, A.C., Zheng, H., Pistell, P.J., and Berthoud, H.R. (2011). Roux-en-Y
gastric bypass surgery changes food reward in rats. Int. J. Obes. 35, 642–651.
Skibicka, K.P., Hansson, C., Egecioglu, E., and Dickson, S.L. (2012). Role of
ghrelin in food reward: impact of ghrelin on sucrose self-administration and
mesolimbic dopamine and acetylcholine receptor gene expression. Addict.
Biol. 17, 95–107.
Smith, G.P. (1996). The direct and indirect controls of meal size. Neurosci.
Biobehav. Rev. 20, 41–46.
Speakman, J.R. (2014). If body fatness is under physiological regulation, then
how come we have an obesity epidemic? Physiology (Bethesda) 29, 88–98.
Stanley, S.A., Kelly, L., Latcha, K.N., Schmidt, S.F., Yu, X., Nectow, A.R.,
Sauer, J., Dyke, J.P., Dordick, J.S., and Friedman, J.M. (2016). Bidirectional
electromagnetic control of the hypothalamus regulates feeding and meta-
bolism. Nature 531, 647–650.
Stearns, A.T., Balakrishnan, A., Radmanesh, A., Ashley, S.W., Rhoads, D.B.,
and Tavakkolizadeh, A. (2012). Relative contributions of afferent vagal fibers
to resistance to diet-induced obesity. Dig. Dis. Sci. 57, 1281–1290.
Steculorum, S.M., Paeger, L., Bremser, S., Evers, N., Hinze, Y., Idzko, M.,
Kloppenburg, P., and Bru
¨ ning, J.C. (2015). Hypothalamic UDP increases
in obesity and promotes feeding via p2y6-dependent activation of AgRP neu-
rons. Cell 162, 1404–1417.
Steele, K.E., Prokopowicz, G.P., Schweitzer, M.A., Magunsuon, T.H., Lidor,
A.O., Kuwabawa, H., Kumar, A., Brasic, J., and Wong, D.F. (2010). Alterations
of central dopamine receptors before and after gastric bypass surgery. Obes.
Surg. 20, 369–374.
Stefater, M.A., Perez-Tilve, D., Chambers, A.P., Wilson-Perez, H.E., Sandoval,
D.A., Berger, J., Toure, M., Tschop, M., Woods, S.C., and Seeley, R.J. (2010).
Sleeve gastrectomy induces loss of weight and fat mass in obese rats, but
does not affect leptin sensitivity. Gastroenterology 138, 2426–2436.
Steinert, R.E., Peterli, R., Keller, S., Meyer-Gerspach, A.C., Drewe, J., Peters,
T., and Beglinger, C. (2013). Bile acids and gut peptide secretion after bariatric
surgery: a 1-year prospective randomized pilot trial. Obesity (Silver Spring) 21,
E660–E668.
Sternson, S.M., and Roth, B.L. (2014). Chemogenetic tools to interrogate brain
functions. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 37, 387–407.
Suarez-Pinzon, W.L., Power, R.F., Yan, Y., Wasserfall, C., Atkinson, M., and
Rabinovitch, A. (2008). Combination therapy with glucagon-like peptide-1
and gastrin restores normoglycemia in diabetic NOD mice. Diabetes 57,
3281–3288.
Suh, J.M., Jonker, J.W., Ahmadian, M., Goetz, R., Lackey, D., Osborn, O.,
Huang, Z., Liu, W., Yoshihara, E., van Dijk, T.H., et al. (2014). Endocrinization
of FGF1 produces a neomorphic and potent insulin sensitizer. Nature 513,
436–439.
Tamaki, M., Fujitani, Y., Uchida, T., Hirose, T., Kawamori, R., and Watada, H.
(2010). Combination treatment of db/db mice with exendin-4 and gastrin pre-
serves b-cell mass by stimulating b-cell growth and differentiation. J. Diabetes
Investig. 1, 172–183.
Cell 168, February 23, 2017
773
 Tan, T.M., Field, B.C., McCullough, K.A., Troke, R.C., Chambers, E.S., Salem,
V., Gonzalez Maffe, J., Baynes, K.C., De Silva, A., Viardot, A., et al. (2013).
Coadministration of glucagon-like peptide-1 during glucagon infusion in hu-
mans results in increased energy expenditure and amelioration of hyperglyce-
mia. Diabetes 62, 1131–1138.
Tan, C.L., Cooke, E.K., Leib, D.E., Lin, Y.C., Daly, G.E., Zimmerman, C.A., and
Knight, Z.A. (2016). Warm-sensitive neurons that control body temperature.
Cell 167, 47–59.
Tartaglia, L.A., Dembski, M., Weng, X., Deng, N., Culpepper, J., Devos, R., Ri-
chards, G.J., Campfield, L.A., Clark, F.T., Deeds, J., et al. (1995). Identification
and expression cloning of a leptin receptor, OB-R. Cell 83, 1263–1271.
Teixeira, T.F., Collado, M.C., Ferreira, C.L., Bressan, J., and Peluzio, Mdo.C.
(2012). Potential mechanisms for the emerging link between obesity and
increased intestinal permeability. Nutr. Res. 32, 637–647.
Tellez, L.A., Han, W., Zhang, X., Ferreira, T.L., Perez, I.O., Shammah-Lagnado,
S.J., van den Pol, A.N., and de Araujo, I.E. (2016). Separate circuitries encode
the hedonic and nutritional values of sugar. Nat. Neurosci. 19, 465–470.
Tichansky, D.S., Glatt, A.R., Madan, A.K., Harper, J., Tokita, K., and Boughter,
J.D. (2011). Decrease in sweet taste in rats after gastric bypass surgery. Surg.
Endosc. 25, 1176–1181.
Trevaskis, J.L., Parkes, D.G., and Roth, J.D. (2010). Insights into amylin-leptin
synergy. Trends Endocrinol. Metab. 21, 473–479.
Tscho
¨ p, M.H., Finan, B., Clemmensen, C., Gelfanov, V., Perez-Tilve, D.,
Mu
¨ ller, T.D., and DiMarchi, R.D. (2016). Unimolecular polypharmacy for treat-
ment of diabetes and obesity. Cell Metab. 24, 51–62.
Udit, S., and Gautron, L. (2013). Molecular anatomy of the gut-brain axis re-
vealed with transgenic technologies: implications in metabolic research. Front.
Neurosci. 7, 134.
Ullrich, J., Ernst, B., Wilms, B., Thurnheer, M., and Schultes, B. (2013). Roux-
en Y gastric bypass surgery reduces hedonic hunger and improves dietary
habits in severely obese subjects. Obes. Surg. 23, 50–55.
Unniappan, S., and Kieffer, T.J. (2008). Leptin extends the anorectic effects of
chronic PYY(3-36) administration in ad libitum-fed rats. Am. J. Physiol. Regul.
Integr. Comp. Physiol. 295, R51–R58.
Valdearcos, M., Xu, A.W., and Koliwad, S.K. (2015). Hypothalamic inflamma-
tion in the control of metabolic function. Annu. Rev. Physiol. 77, 131–160.
Wang, H., Chen, J., Hollister, K., Sowers, L.C., and Forman, B.M. (1999).
Endogenous bile acids are ligands for the nuclear receptor FXR/BAR. Mol.
Cell 3, 543–553.
Wang, L., Barachina, M.D., Martı
´nez, V., Wei, J.Y., and Tache
´ , Y. (2000). Syn-
ergistic interaction between CCK and leptin to regulate food intake. Regul.
Pept. 92, 79–85.
Watanabe, M., Houten, S.M., Mataki, C., Christoffolete, M.A., Kim, B.W., Sato,
H., Messaddeq, N., Harney, J.W., Ezaki, O., Kodama, T., et al. (2006). Bile
acids induce energy expenditure by promoting intracellular thyroid hormone
activation. Nature 439, 484–489.
Waterson, M.J., and Horvath, T.L. (2015). Neuronal regulation of energy ho-
meostasis: beyond the hypothalamus and feeding. Cell Metab. 22, 962–970.
Wilson-Pe
´ rez, H.E., Chambers, A.P., Ryan, K.K., Li, B., Sandoval, D.A.,
Stoffers, D., Drucker, D.J., Pe
´ rez-Tilve, D., and Seeley, R.J. (2013a). Vertical
sleeve gastrectomy is effective in two genetic mouse models of glucagon-
like Peptide 1 receptor deficiency. Diabetes 62, 2380–2385.
Wilson-Pe
´ rez, H.E., Chambers, A.P., Sandoval, D.A., Stefater, M.A., Woods,
S.C., Benoit, S.C., and Seeley, R.J. (2013b). The effect of vertical sleeve gas-
trectomy on food choice in rats. Int. J. Obes. 37, 288–295.
Wouterlood, F.G., Bloem, B., Mansvelder, H.D., Luchicchi, A., and Deisseroth,
K. (2014). A fourth generation of neuroanatomical tracing techniques: exploit-
ing the offspring of genetic engineering. J. Neurosci. Methods 235, 331–348.
Wu, Q., Clark, M.S., and Palmiter, R.D. (2012). Deciphering a neuronal circuit
that mediates appetite. Nature 483, 594–597.
Xu, J., Lloyd, D.J., Hale, C., Stanislaus, S., Chen, M., Sivits, G., Vonderfecht,
S., Hecht, R., Li, Y.S., Lindberg, R.A., et al. (2009). Fibroblast growth factor
21 reverses hepatic steatosis, increases energy expenditure, and improves in-
sulin sensitivity in diet-induced obese mice. Diabetes 58, 250–259.
Xue, Y., Wang, H., Du, M., and Zhu, M.J. (2014). Maternal obesity induces gut
inflammation and impairs gut epithelial barrier function in nonobese diabetic
mice. J. Nutr. Biochem. 25, 758–764.
Yeo, G.S., Farooqi, I.S., Aminian, S., Halsall, D.J., Stanhope, R.G., and
O’Rahilly, S. (1998). A frameshift mutation in MC4R associated with dominantly
inherited human obesity. Nat. Genet. 20, 111–112.
Zagorodnyuk, V.P., Chen, B.N., and Brookes, S.J. (2001). Intraganglionic
laminar endings are mechano-transduction sites of vagal tension receptors
in the guinea-pig stomach. J. Physiol. 534, 255–268.
Zelissen, P.M., Stenlof, K., Lean, M.E., Fogteloo, J., Keulen, E.T., Wilding, J.,
Finer, N., Ro
¨ ssner, S., Lawrence, E., Fletcher, C., and McCamish, M.; Author
Group (2005). Effect of three treatment schedules of recombinant methionyl
human leptin on body weight in obese adults: a randomized, placebo-
controlled trial. Diabetes Obes. Metab. 7, 755–761.
Zhang, Y., Proenca, R., Maffei, M., Barone, M., Leopold, L., and Friedman,
J.M. (1994). Positional cloning of the mouse obese gene and its human homo-
logue. Nature 372, 425–432.
774
Cell 168, February 23, 2017
