 T cell oxygen-sensing proteins establish an immunologically 
tolerant metastatic niche
David Clever1,2, Rahul Roychoudhuri1,3, Michael G Constantinides4, Michael H Askenase4, 
Madhusudhanan Sukumar1, Christopher A Klebanoff1, Robert L Eil1, Heather D Hickman6, 
Zhiya Yu1, Jenny H Pan1, Douglas C Palmer1, Anthony T Phan7, John Goulding7, Luca 
Gattinoni8, Ananda W Goldrath7, Yasmine Belkaid4,5, and Nicholas P Restifo1
1Surgery Branch, National Cancer Institute (NCI), National Institutes of Health (NIH), MD, USA
2Medical Scientist Training Program, The Ohio State University College of Medicine, OH, USA
3Laboratory of Lymphocyte Signaling and Development, Babraham Institute, Cambridge, UK
4Mucosal Immunology Section, Laboratory of Parasitic Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and 
Infectious Diseases (NIAID), NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA
5NIAID Microbiome Program Initiative, NIAID/NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA
6Laboratory of Viral Diseases, NIAID, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA
7Division of Biological Sciences, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA
8Experimental Transplantation Immunology Branch, NCI, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA
Summary
Cancer cells must evade immune responses at distant sites to establish metastases. The lung is a 
frequent site for metastasis. We hypothesized that lung-specific immunoregulatory mechanisms 
create an immunologically permissive environment for tumor colonization. We found that T cell-
intrinsic expression of the oxygen-sensing prolyl-hydroxylase (PHD) proteins is required to 
maintain local tolerance against innocuous antigens in the lung, but powerfully licenses 
colonization by circulating tumor cells. PHD proteins limit pulmonary type helper (Th)-1 
responses, promote CD4+-regulatory T (Treg) cell induction, and restrain CD8+ T cell effector 
function. Tumor colonization is accompanied by PHD protein-dependent induction of pulmonary 
Treg cells and suppression of IFN-γ-dependent tumor clearance. T cell-intrinsic deletion or 
pharmacological inhibition of PHD proteins limits tumor colonization of the lung and improves 
the efficacy of adoptive cell transfer immunotherapy. Collectively, PHD proteins function in T 
Correspondence: D.C. (david.clever@osumc.edu) or N.P.R (restifo@nih.gov). 
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
Author Contributions
Conceptualization, D.C. and N.P.R. Methodology, D.C. and R.R. Investigation, D.C., R.R., M.G.C., M.H.A., M.S., R.L.E., H.H., Z.Y, 
and J.H.P. Resources, A.W.G, A.T.P., and J.G. Review and Editing, N.P.R., Y.B., R.R., A.W.G., C.A.K., D.C.P., and L.G. Supervision, 
N.P.R. and Y.B.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 25.
Published in final edited form as:
Cell. 2016 August 25; 166(5): 1117–1131.e14. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2016.07.032.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cells to coordinate distinct immunoregulatory programs within the lung that are permissive to 
cancer metastasis.
Graphical abstract
Introduction
Metastasis is the cause of more than 90% of cancer deaths and is a major obstacle for 
curative therapy (Valastyan and Weinberg, 2011). Metastatic dissemination involves a 
complex interaction between circulating tumor cells and the site of secondary colonization. 
Local immunity is an important feature of metastatic sites, and circulating tumor cells must 
evade local immune responses for successful metastasis (Massague and Obenauf, 2016). The 
lung is a common metastatic site for numerous cancer types including malignant melanoma 
(Minn et al., 2005). The extensive capillary network perfusing the lung parenchyma provides 
an anatomical mechanism for dissemination to this site. We hypothesized that the lungs also 
form an immunologically favorable site for cancer metastasis.
T cells play a critical role in coordinating immune function. Whereas effector T (Teff) cells 
promote immune activation and can drive clearance of infections and cancer, regulatory T 
(Treg) cells, dependent upon the transcription factor Foxp3, suppress their function, 
preventing excessive autoimmune and allergic reactions (Gavin et al., 2007; Sakaguchi et al., 
1985). Inflammatory Teff cell responses are restrained in the lung despite continuous 
exposure to innocuous foreign antigens (Holt et al., 2008). While many specialized cell 
types are important regulators of pulmonary tolerance (de Heer et al., 2004; Stumbles et al., 
1998), T cell-intrinsic molecular programs may also influence site-specific immunity in the 
lung.
The prolyl hydroxylase domain containing family of proteins, comprised of PHD1, PHD2, 
and PHD3, function as intracellular sensors of oxygen (Bruick and McKnight, 2001; Epstein 
Clever et al.
Page 2
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 et al., 2001). PHD enzymes are Fe2+-dependent dioxygenases that use a conserved two-
histidine, one-carboxylate motif to coordinate Fe2+, 2-oxoglutarate, and free oxygen at the 
active site (Kaelin and Ratcliffe, 2008). In well-oxygenated environments the PHD enzymes 
catalyze post-translational hydroxylation of substrate proteins, including hypoxia inducible 
factors HIF1α and HIF2α (collectively HIFα), which are then degraded (Jaakkola et al., 
2001). In T cells HIFα can drive effector responses by promoting differentiation of CD4+ 
Th17 cells (Dang et al., 2011; Shi et al., 2011), CD8+ T cell effector function (Doedens et 
al., 2013), and IFN-γ production within T regulatory cells (Lee et al., 2015). This led us to 
hypothesize that the oxygen-sensing PHD proteins might influence T cell differentiation and 
function, particularly in the oxygen-rich environment of the lung.
Here, we show that T cell-intrinsic expression of the PHD proteins suppresses pulmonary 
inflammation against innocuous foreign antigens, but powerfully licenses tumor colonization 
of the lung. Upon tumor colonization PHD proteins promote Treg cell expansion and restrain 
IFN-γ-dependent clearance of tumors. Importantly, genetic and pharmacological disruption 
of PHD proteins limits tumor colonization of the lung and improves the efficacy of T cell-
based adoptive cell therapy (ACT). These results indicate that T cell-intrinsic expression of 
the oxygen-sensing PHD proteins coordinates a tissue-specific immunoregulatory program 
that suppresses mild inflammatory pathology but readily permits cancer metastasis in the 
lung.
Results
PHD proteins function within T cells to limit pulmonary effector responses
Pulmonary tolerance requires suppression of inflammatory T cell responses under 
physiologic conditions. We asked whether T cell-intrinsic expression of the oxygen-sensing 
PHD proteins contributes to site-specific tolerance in the lung. We generated mice harboring 
a T cell-specific deletion of all three PHD proteins (henceforth PHD-tKO). Cd4-driven Cre 
recombinase expression resulted in significant reduction of Egln1, Egln2, and Egln3 mRNA 
transcripts, which encode PHD2, PHD1, and PHD3 proteins respectively, in CD4+, CD8+, 
and NKT T cells, but not in other lymphoid cell subsets (Figure S1A). Upon gross 
evaluation we observed a patchy hemorrhagic appearance within the lungs of PHD-tKO 
mice that was not present amongst WT littermates (Figure 1A). Histologic examination 
revealed the presence of diffuse alveolar hemorrhage (DAH) of variable severity in PHD-
tKO mice (Figure 1B–C). PHD-tKO mice had increased serum autoantibodies, which can be 
elevated upon immune-mediated tissue damage (Figure S1B). Pathology in PHD-tKO mice 
was only observed in the lung, and we did not detect abnormal liver and pancreas enzymes 
in the blood (Figure 1D).
PHD-tKO animals showed no defects in thymocyte number or phenotypic distribution 
(Figure S1C). Similar numbers of CD4+ and CD8+ T lymphocytes were detected in 
peripheral blood and secondary lymphoid organs (Figure S1D). In the bone marrow of PHD-
tKO mice there was a slight reduction in CD8+ T cells but similar numbers of CD4+ T cells 
(Figure S1D). As the bone marrow is a reservoir of memory T cells, we evaluated the 
differentiation state of T cells in WT and PHD-tKO mice. There was a similar distribution of 
naïve and effector CD4+ T cells in WT and PHD-tKO mice (Figure S1E). However, 
Clever et al.
Page 3
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 increased frequencies of terminally differentiated CD8+ T cells were observed in the 
peripheral blood, spleen, and bone marrow of PHD-tKO mice (Figure S1E–F). This might 
explain the reduction of CD8+ T cells in the bone marrow of PHD-tKO mice and suggests a 
role for the PHD proteins in restraining terminal CD8+ T cell differentiation.
T cells can drive immunopathology in the lung. We observed increased numbers of 
pulmonary CD4+ and CD8+ T cells in PHD-tKO mice (Figure S1G). Additionally, 
pulmonary T cells in PHD-tKO mice had increased expression of the activation markers 
CD44 (Figure S1H), CD25, CTLA-4, and GITR (Figure S1I). Importantly, in PHD-tKO 
mice we measured increased expression of IFN-γ by CD4+ and CD8+ T cells isolated from 
multiple lymphoid and non-lymphoid organs, yet this was most pronounced in the lung 
(Figure 1E–H and Figure S1G). Elevated IFN-γ production was more significant in the lung, 
including among pulmonary tissue resident memory (TRM) T cells, than in T cells residing 
in mediastinal lymph nodes (meLN) (Figure 1F, H). These data suggest that the PHD 
proteins predominantly restrain T cell effector function in the lung parenchyma and airway-
associated lymphoid tissue. We also measured increased expression of cytolytic effector 
molecules in pulmonary CD4+ and CD8+ T cells in PHD-tKO mice (Figure S1J). 
Additionally, we observed increased expression of IFN-γ, but not other effector cytokines, 
in pulmonary NKT cells from PHD-tKO mice (Figure S1K). Thus, T cell-intrinsic 
expression of PHD proteins limits effector T cell function and prevents mild spontaneous 
immune pathology in the lung.
PHD proteins maintain pulmonary Nrp-1Lo Treg cells
Treg cells suppress deleterious effector T cell responses directed against self and innocuous 
foreign antigens (Strickland et al., 2006). We asked whether increased effector function 
observed in pulmonary T cells from PHD-tKO mice is secondary to a local deficit in Treg 
cells. Pulmonary Treg cell frequency and absolute number was similar in PHD-tKO mice 
compared to WT controls (Figure 1I and Figure S1G). The overall phenotypic profile thus 
revealed a significantly elevated IFN-γ+ Teff to Treg cell ratio in lungs of PHD-tKO mice 
(Figure 1J).
The stability of Foxp3+ Treg cells is an important parameter in their immunoregulatory 
function. Treg cell stability is proportional to the level of demethylation within the Treg 
specific demethylated region (TSDR) of the Foxp3 locus (Floess et al., 2007). TSDR CpG 
methylation was similar in WT and PHD-tKO Treg cells (Figure S1L). Consistently, the 
stability of Foxp3 expression was similar in WT and PHD-tKO Treg cells following 
restimulation in vitro or upon in vivo transfer into Rag1−/− hosts (Figure S1M–O).
Treg cell populations are comprised of thymically-derived Treg (tTreg) cells and peripherally 
induced iTreg cells (Bluestone and Abbas, 2003). iTreg cells are particularly important in 
suppressing effector T cell responses at mucosal sites (Josefowicz et al., 2012). Neuropilin-1 
(Nrp-1) has been proposed as a marker to distinguish tTreg cells from iTreg cells (Weiss et 
al., 2012; Yadav et al., 2012). We detected a reduction in the frequency and number of 
Nrp-1Lo Treg cells in the lungs of PHD-tKO mice (Figure 1K). Nrp-1 expression can be 
induced on Treg cells in inflammatory environments (Weiss et al., 2012). This raised the 
possibility that the observed reduction in pulmonary Nrp-1Lo Treg cells in PHD-tKO mice is 
Clever et al.
Page 4
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the result of induced Nrp-1 expression in the inflamed lung environment. To exclude this 
possibility, we tested whether differences in Nrp-1 expression between WT and PHD-tKO 
Treg cells exist when cells are exposed to an identical pulmonary environment. We 
reconstituted lethally ablated Rag1−/− mice with bone marrow isolated from congenically 
distinguishable WT or PHD-tKO mice in a 1:1 mixture and evaluated pulmonary Treg cells 
following reconstitution. Importantly, we observed a reduced frequency of Nrp-1Lo cells 
within PHD-tKO pulmonary Treg cells (Figure 1L). Thus, the reduced frequency of Nrp-1Lo 
Treg cells in lungs of PHD-tKO mice is not secondary to the inflamed environment, but 
instead is a cell-intrinsic phenomenon.
PHD proteins restrain Th1 inflammation against innocuous foreign antigens
Respiratory surfaces are chronically exposed to immunogenic and normally non-pathogenic 
environmental antigens. These stimuli predominantly induce non-inflammatory 
immunosuppressive Treg cell responses or Th2 responses, which in certain instances can lead 
to the development of asthma (Strickland et al., 2006; Stumbles et al., 1998). We 
hypothesized that the mild steady-state pathology observed in lungs of PHD-tKO mice was 
caused by excessive inflammatory responses against innocuous environmental antigens. To 
test this, we sensitized and challenged the airway of WT and PHD-tKO mice with house 
dust mite (HDM) extract.
HDM challenge promoted similar expansion of pulmonary CD4+ T cells in WT and PHD-
tKO mice (Figure S2A). HDM challenge induced a robust expansion of pulmonary Th2 cells 
in WT mice (Figure 2A, C), but failed to do so in PHD-tKO mice. Remarkably, we instead 
observed a dramatic increase in IFN-γ+ Th1 cells in lungs of PHD-tKO mice upon HDM 
challenge (Figure 2A, C). Additionally, HDM challenge induced accumulation of pulmonary 
Treg cells that was reduced in PHD-tKO mice compared to WT controls (Figure 2B–C). 
PHD-tKO mice also exhibited greater expansion of CD8+ T cells and induction of IFN-γ 
expression amongst these cells upon HDM challenge (Figure 2D–E, Figure S2B). 
Consequently, PHD-tKO mice suffered from more severe inflammation following chronic 
HDM exposure that was consistent with Th1 rather than Th2 driven immunopathology 
including vasculitis and diffuse tissue damage leading to alveolar hemorrhage (Figure 2F–
H). Thus, the PHD proteins coordinate a T cell-intrinsic program that restrains inflammatory 
T cell effector responses against innocuous foreign antigens in the lung.
PHD proteins regulate reciprocal iTreg and Th1 differentiation programs
The decrease in steady state pulmonary Nrp-1Lo Treg cells and reduction in HDM-induced 
Treg cell accumulation suggested that the PHD proteins might promote iTreg cell 
differentiation. Stimulation of naïve CD4+ T cells in the presence of IL-2 and TGF-β 
promotes the development of iTreg cells in vitro and in vivo (Chen et al., 2003; Li et al., 
2006). To determine if PHD proteins are required for iTreg cell differentiation, we evaluated 
the gene expression profile of PHD-tKO and WT CD4+ T cells primed in vitro in conditions 
favoring iTreg cell generation. RNA sequencing revealed widespread gene expression 
differences between PHD-tKO and WT cells (545 upregulated and 344 downregulated genes 
in PHD-tKO). Importantly, a significant reduction in Foxp3 expression and induction of 
genes encoding the Th1 lineage specifying transcription factor T-bet (Tbx21) and effector 
Clever et al.
Page 5
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cytokine IFN-γ (Ifng) was observed in PHD-tKO cells (Figure 3A). By contrast, genes 
encoding Th2 and Th17 lineage specifying transcription factors and effector cytokines were 
expressed at similar levels in WT and PHD-tKO cells (Figure 3A). Competitive antagonism 
of PHD protein enzymatic activity using a pan-PHD inhibitor, dimethyloxalylglycine 
(DMOG), caused similar changes in global gene expression as those observed in PHD-tKO 
T cells (Figure S3A–B).
To further evaluate the requirement for PHD proteins in iTreg cell differentiation, we 
stimulated naïve CD4+ T cells isolated from WT and PHD-tKO mice in the presence of 
titrated concentrations of TGF-β. PHD proteins were required for TGF-β-driven induction of 
Foxp3 and repression of T-bet (Figure 3B–D). Consistently, higher amounts of IFN-γ were 
detected in supernatants collected from PHD-tKO cell cultures (Figure 3E). Naïve PHD-tKO 
CD4+ T cells also demonstrated impaired iTreg conversion in vivo following transfer into 
Rag1−/− recipient animals (Figure S3C). These results indicate that PHD proteins regulate 
reciprocal iTreg and Th1 differentiation programs.
Foxp3+ iTreg cells derived from PHD-tKO cells or WT cells stimulated in the presence of 
DMOG expressed high levels of T-bet (Figure 3B, F). T-bet expression can be induced in 
Treg cells in response to IFN-γ (Koch et al., 2012). Indeed, blockade of IFN-γ limited T-bet 
expression in PHD-tKO Foxp3+ iTreg cells (Figure S3D). Foxp3+ T-bet+ Treg cells exert 
suppressive function, especially in inflammatory contexts (Koch et al., 2009). Consistently, 
FACS-purified Foxp3-GFP+ iTreg cells generated in the presence of DMOG, which express 
high levels of T-bet, were as suppressive in vitro as T-betLo iTreg cells (Figure S3E–F).
Downstream substrates of PHD enzymatic activity including HIF1α have been implicated in 
Th17 differentiation and CD8+ T cell effector function (Dang et al., 2011; Doedens et al., 
2013). We evaluated whether PHD proteins restrain differentiation and function of these 
lineages. IL-17A production was similar in CD4+ T cells isolated from the lung and small 
intestine LP of WT and PHD-tKO mice (Figure S3G). Moreover, no differences in RORγt 
expression or IL-17A production were detected between WT and PHD-tKO T cells 
stimulated under Th17 polarizing conditions in vitro (Figure S3H). Consistent with the 
increased frequency of effector CD8+ T cells in PHD-tKO mice, we observed increased 
terminal differentiation and production of cytolytic molecules amongst PHD-tKO CD8+ T 
cells stimulated in vitro (Figure S3I–J).
Collectively, these results demonstrate that PHD proteins function within the CD4+ T cell 
lineage to promote iTreg cell differentiation while restraining the differentiation of Th1 cells. 
Within the CD8+ T cell lineage, PHD proteins restrain the acquisition of effector cytokine 
and cytolytic functions.
Extracellular oxygen promotes iTreg cell differentiation in a PHD-dependent manner
Local environmental factors influence immune responses in a site-specific manner. Orally 
ingested food antigens, vitamins, and commensal microbes and their metabolite byproducts 
promote local iTreg cell differentiation in the small intestine (Arpaia et al., 2013; Atarashi et 
al., 2011; Mucida et al., 2005; Sun et al., 2007). T cells in the lung reside in an oxygen rich 
environment (≥13% O2) (Semenza, 2010). We asked whether extracellular oxygen 
Clever et al.
Page 6
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 availability influences the efficiency of iTreg and Th1 cell differentiation. WT CD4+ T cells 
were stimulated in vitro under fixed extracellular oxygen concentrations. Cells stimulated 
under higher oxygen tensions demonstrated increased iTreg and reduced Th1 cell 
differentiation, and this phenomenon was dependent on the oxygen-sensing PHD proteins 
(Figure 3F–H). High extracellular oxygen also promoted human iTreg cell differentiation in a 
PHD dependent manner (Figure 3I–J). Thus, PHD proteins enable T cell-intrinsic detection 
of environmental oxygen, which influences reciprocal iTreg and Th1 cell differentiation 
efficiency.
PHD proteins are functionally redundant in T lymphocytes
Many biologic systems exhibit functional redundancy. We asked whether a single PHD 
protein is functionally predominant in T cells, or if they function in a redundant manner. We 
generated mice with T cell-specific deletions of one, two, or all three PHD proteins. We 
hypothesized that if any one PHD protein was functionally predominant, then removal of 
this factor should phenocopy the effect of deletion of all three. Deletion of one or two PHD 
proteins did not significantly affect IFN-γ production or Nrp-1Lo Treg cell frequency 
amongst pulmonary CD4+ T cells (Figure 4A–B). Only loss of all three PHD proteins 
resulted in a dramatic increase in the pulmonary IFN-γ+ Teff to Nrp-1Lo Treg cell ratio 
(Figure 4E). Elevated IFN-γ production in pulmonary CD8+ T cells was only detected when 
all three PHD proteins were ablated (Figure 4C–D). Deletion of one PHD protein or the 
combined removal of PHD1/PHD2 or PHD1/PHD3 did not affect iTreg cell differentiation in 
vitro. PHD2/3 dKO T cells demonstrated a modest reduction in iTreg cell differentiation and 
reciprocal increase in Th1 cell differentiation. However, this defect was most pronounced in 
PHD-tKO cells (Figure S4A–C). Collectively, these results provide evidence that PHD 
proteins function redundantly in T cells.
PHD proteins repress HIF-driven glycolytic metabolism to mediate T cell fate specification
We next asked how PHD proteins mediate reciprocal iTreg and Th1 cellular differentiation 
programs. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) of the global transcriptional differences 
between PHD-tKO and WT CD4+ T cells activated in vitro revealed significant enrichment 
of genes involved in hypoxic responses and transcriptional targets of hypoxia inducible 
factors in PHD-tKO cells (Figure S5A). Nuclear accumulation of HIFα proteins correlates 
inversely with PHD hydroxylase activity (Kaelin and Ratcliffe, 2008). We therefore 
measured the dynamics of HIF1α mRNA and protein expression in WT and PHD-tKO T 
cells. Naïve and activated WT and PHD-tKO CD4+ T cells had similar expression of Hif1a 
mRNA (Figure S5B). HIF1α protein expression was similar in naïve cells, but significantly 
elevated in PHD-tKO T cells upon activation (Figure S5C). Consistent with their functional 
redundancy, each PHD protein limited HIF1α accumulation in T cells (Figure 5A). 
Furthermore, HIF1α accumulation was suppressed in CD4+ T cells stimulated in high 
oxygen environments in a PHD dependent manner (Figure 5B).
We asked whether PHD-mediated suppression of HIF1α accumulation is required for 
appropriate control of iTreg and Th1 cell differentiation. We analyzed HIF1α, Foxp3, and T-
bet protein expression in CD4+ T cells isolated from each PHD KO genotype. HIF1α 
accumulation inversely correlated with iTreg cell differentiation (Figure 5C) and positively 
Clever et al.
Page 7
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 correlated with Th1 effector cell differentiation (Figure 5D). Moreover, loss of HIF1α and 
HIF2α partially rescued iTreg cell differentiation and reversed excessive Th1 differentiation 
when the enzymatic activity of PHD proteins was inhibited using DMOG (Figure 5E–G). 
Loss of HIF1α alone only partially reversed the phenotype induced by DMOG, while loss of 
HIF2α had little effect on the phenotype (Figure 5F–G, Figure S5D–E). Thus, PHD proteins 
regulate CD4+ T cell differentiation in part by controlling the expression of HIFα proteins.
HIF transcriptional activity drives expression of genes involved in multiple cellular 
programs including glycolysis. Expression of components of the glycolytic machinery were 
elevated in PHD-tKO and DMOG treated WT T cells in a HIFα dependent manner (Figure 
5H, Figure S5F–G). T cells stimulated in the presence of TGF-β demonstrated a PHD 
dependent reduction in extracellular acidification rate (ECAR), a measure of glycolytic 
activity (Figure 5I). PHD-tKO CD4+ T cells demonstrated increased glucose uptake (Figure 
S5H) and adopted an anaerobic metabolic signature (Figure 5J). PHD proteins also 
restrained glycolysis in CD8+ T cells (Figure S5I).
Metabolic programs direct T cell fate specification and effector function (Chang et al., 2013; 
Cui et al., 2015; Gerriets et al., 2015). We asked whether PHD-mediated repression of 
glycolysis is required for appropriate iTreg and Th1 cell specification. Strikingly, 
pharmacological blockade of mTOR-driven glycolytic programs or glycolysis with 
rapamycin and 2-deoxyglucose, respectively, completely abrogated spontaneous Th1 
differentiation and IFN-γ production and partially restored iTreg cell differentiation in PHD-
tKO T cells (Figure 5K–L, Figure S5J). Collectively, these findings suggest that PHD 
proteins coordinate a transcriptional and metabolic program that regulates the reciprocal 
differentiation of Th1 and iTreg cells.
T cell-intrinsic expression of PHD proteins licenses tumor colonization of the lung
We found that PHD proteins coordinate a T cell-intrinsic immunoregulatory program to 
sustain tolerance against harmless environmental antigens in the lung. We reasoned that 
infiltrating pre-metastatic cancer cells might resemble innocuous foreign antigens through 
their expression of mutated neoantigenic epitopes. We therefore hypothesized that PHD 
proteins limit effector responses against infiltrating tumor cells in the lung. We evaluated the 
ability of circulating tumor cells to colonize lungs of WT and PHD-tKO mice. As a control, 
we also evaluated subcutaneous tumor growth. WT and PHD-tKO mice were injected with 
B16 melanoma tumors subcutaneously in the flank and intravenously (IV) through the tail 
vein to introduce tumor cells at each site within the same animal (Figure 6A). Strikingly, 
while subcutaneous tumor growth was similar in WT and PHD-tKO mice (Figure 6B), PHD-
tKO mice were significantly protected from tumor colonization in the lung. PHD-tKO 
animals had fewer detectable lung tumors upon gross and microscopic evaluation (Figure 
6C–D), resulting in a significant reduction in total pulmonary tumor burden (Figure 6E).
We next analyzed the immune phenotype of CD4+ T cells in WT and PHD-tKO mice that 
were injected IV with B16 melanoma. The frequency of splenic Treg cells was similar in WT 
and PHD-tKO mice (Figure 6F). However, we observed an increase in the frequency of 
pulmonary Treg cells following IV tumor administration that was absent in PHD-tKO mice 
(Figure 6F–G). Additionally, we detected increased frequencies of IFN-γ expressing 
Clever et al.
Page 8
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 pulmonary CD4+ T cells in PHD-tKO mice compared to WT controls upon tumor 
colonization (Figure 6F, H).
Th1 cells play an important role in orchestrating anti-tumor immunity (Pardoll and Topalian, 
1998). We asked whether PHD proteins support pulmonary tumor colonization through 
suppression of IFN-γ mediated anti-tumor immunity. PHD-tKO mice were injected 
intravenously with B16 melanoma and received IFN-γ neutralizing or control antibodies at 
serial time points following tumor implantation. Strikingly, the protection from lung tumor 
colonization observed in PHD-tKO mice was abrogated by IFN-γ neutralization (Figure 6I). 
Thus, PHD proteins limit IFN-γ-mediated tumor clearance in the lung.
These results indicate that T cell-intrinsic expression of PHD proteins restrains anti-tumor 
immunity in the lung, thus creating favorable conditions for metastatic tumor colonization.
Inhibition of PHD proteins improves adoptive cell transfer immunotherapy
Our findings suggested that inhibition of PHD proteins in T cells may improve the efficacy 
of cancer immunotherapy. To explore this hypothesis we utilized the TRP-1 TCR-transgenic 
system to model adoptive cell transfer immunotherapy (ACT) (Muranski et al., 2008). In this 
model, antigen specific TRP-1 CD4+ T cells are expanded ex vivo and transferred into mice 
bearing established subcutaneous or pulmonary B16 melanoma tumors (Figure 7A).
We expanded TRP-1 CD4+ T cells in the presence or absence of DMOG. DMOG treated 
cultures (TRP-1 DMOG) demonstrated increased Th1 differentiation and IFN-γ production 
compared to vehicle treated cultures (TRP-1 VEH) (Figure 7A–B). Cells were adoptively 
transferred into WT mice that had established B16 melanoma metastases in the lung. 
Consistent with their enhanced effector phenotype at the time of infusion, TRP-1 DMOG 
cells mediated superior clearance of lung metastases (Figure 7C–D). Additionally, TRP-1 
DMOG cells mediated superior regression of established subcutaneous tumors (Figure 7E). 
This led to an increase in overall survival of tumor bearing mice (Figure 7F). We have 
previously found that Th1 cells are more effective than Th0 cells at inducing tumor rejection 
(Muranski et al., 2008). Augmented anti-tumor function in mice administered TRP-1 
DMOG cells is consistent with the induction of a Th1 phenotype in these cells. Indeed, 
TRP-1 DMOG cells were as effective in mediating tumor regression as cells polarized under 
conventional Th1 cell specifying conditions (Figure S6A–B). Thus, inhibition of PHD 
proteins provides a novel strategy to enforce Th1 cell differentiation under conditions 
conventionally used for ACT, thereby providing a potential means to improve the efficacy of 
ACT.
Discussion
In this study we have demonstrated that three proteins comprising the PHD protein family 
function redundantly within T cells to promote pulmonary immune homeostasis in the face 
of innocuous foreign antigens. However, this immunoregulatory mechanism drives 
deleterious immunosuppression upon invasion of the lung by circulating tumor cells. Over a 
century ago Stephen Paget developed the “seed and soil” hypothesis, according to which 
properties of pre-metastatic cancer cells (“seed”) and secondary sites (“soil”) are required 
Clever et al.
Page 9
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 for the development and distribution of cancer metastases. While many studies have focused 
on cancer cell-intrinsic programs that contribute to metastatic potential, our investigations 
indicate that PHD proteins function within T cells to establish the lung as an 
immunologically permissive metastatic site. These results provide an immunological basis 
for the predisposition of many cancers to metastasize to the lung.
It is reasonable to hypothesize that cancers preferentially metastasize to sites where local 
immune responses are suppressed. From an evolutionary perspective the selective pressure 
to restrain pathologic inflammation likely outweighed the pressure to protect against tumor 
cell metastasis. T cells in the lung experience continuous exposure to innocuous foreign 
antigens. The default immune response against these stimuli is non-inflammatory and 
immunosuppressive. Our findings reveal a T cell-intrinsic program whereby the PHD 
proteins contribute to pulmonary tolerance by restraining inflammatory CD4+ and CD8+ T 
cell responses and permitting immunosuppressive iTreg cell differentiation. Infectious 
respiratory pathogens can bypass the “default state” as pathogen-associated molecular 
pattern antigen stimulate pulmonary dendritic cells to promote inflammatory T cell 
responses (Wikstrom and Stumbles, 2007). Elucidating whether PHD proteins influence T 
cell responses against respiratory pathogens will be an important area of investigation.
We observed a local PHD-dependent increase in Treg cell frequency and number following 
pulmonary challenge with HDM or B16 melanoma. Whether this is the result of de novo 
induction of antigen specific iTreg cells, expansion of existing pulmonary Treg cells, or 
recruitment of Treg cells from distant sites is incompletely resolved. The antigen driven 
increase in pulmonary Treg cells was absent in PHD-tKO animals, which have normal 
baseline tTreg cells but reduced iTreg cells and differentiation potential. These findings raise 
the possibility that de novo specification of iTreg cells following exposure to innocuous 
antigens or colonizing cancer cells is required to maintain pulmonary tolerance and support 
metastasis to the lung.
PHD proteins restrain CD4+ and CD8+ T cell effector function in many tissues, yet this was 
most pronounced in the lung – even when compared to mediastinal lymph nodes. However, 
these data do not exclude the possibility that PHD proteins also play a role in effector cell 
specification in secondary lymphoid organs. Moreover, we only detected increased numbers 
of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells in the lungs of PHD-tKO mice, but not other organs, suggesting 
that PHD proteins are involved in lymphocyte trafficking or site-specific survival and 
proliferation. This may be related to increased T-bet expression, which drives T cell effector 
differentiation and localization to peripheral non-lymphoid tissues (Joshi et al., 2007; Lord 
et al., 2005). The development of lung pathology in PHD-tKO mice is likely caused by 
inappropriate inflammatory responses against innocuous antigens in a well-oxygenated 
tissue. T cells in the gut also experience continuous antigen exposure. However, in the less 
well oxygenated gut microenvironment, PHD-independent mechanisms are the predominant 
mediators of tolerance. PHD proteins also appear dispensable for steady-state immune 
tolerance in sterile tissues. However, PHD proteins might restrain inflammation in these 
organs upon the introduction of antigen, such as an infectious pathogen or a metastasizing 
cancer cell.
Clever et al.
Page 10
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 PHD proteins limit HIF-driven glycolytic programs to inhibit spontaneous Th1 
differentiation in conditions that promote iTreg cell commitment. PHD proteins also suppress 
NFκB signaling through the hydroxylation and inactivation of IKKβ (Cummins et al., 
2006). Thus, in addition to constitutive HIF activity, PHD-tKO or DMOG-treated WT cells 
may experience increased NFκB signaling, which in excess can prevent iTreg cell 
differentiation (Molinero et al., 2011). Elucidating new and existing PHD substrates and 
dissecting the contributions of each in T cell differentiation will be an important area of 
future study.
Genetic and pharmacological inhibition of T cell-intrinsic PHD proteins limits tumor 
dissemination into the lung and improves the efficacy of ACT. Inhibition of PHD proteins 
could offer a viable clinical strategy to limit lung metastasis. However, systemic 
administration of a PHD inhibitor may not be effective. HIF has been shown to increase 
proliferation in some cancer types (Keith et al., 2012). HIF also promotes the development 
of immunosuppressive macrophages (Colegio et al., 2014; Doedens et al., 2010). Instead, a 
clinical strategy that permits PHD inhibition selectively in T cells, such as ACT, should be 
considered. In models of ACT that depend on therapeutic vaccination, inhibition of 
glycolysis in vitro improves expansion and anti-tumor efficacy in vivo (Sukumar et al., 
2013). However, in the non-vaccine setting, which is more similar to ACT protocols in 
humans, enforcing effector capacity ex vivo might improve the anti-tumor efficacy of tumor 
specific lymphocytes. Promoting glycolytic metabolism might also improve their ability to 
compete for nutrients in the tumor microenvironment (Chang et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2015). 
Consistently, T cells expanded in the presence of DMOG were highly glycolytic, 
spontaneously acquired Th1 effector properties, and ultimately mediated superior tumor 
regression in mouse models of ACT. Addition of a PHD inhibitor to established clinical 
expansion protocols for human ACT using tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL) or chimeric 
antigen receptor (CAR) transduced T cells is a feasible and potentially effective therapeutic 
strategy to improve the functional quality of tumor-specific T cells.
In summary, our findings provide an understanding of how site-specific immunoregulatory 
mechanisms contribute to the permissivity of distinct anatomical locations to tumor 
colonization in a manner amenable to therapeutic intervention.
METHODS AND RESOURCES
CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING
Further information and requests for reagents may be directed to, and will be fulfilled by the 
corresponding author Nicholas P Restifo (restifo@nih.gov).
EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
Mice—Experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees 
of the NCI and performed in accordance with NIH guidelines. C57BL/6J, Rag1−/− 
(B6.129S7-Rag1tm1Mom/J), Ly5.1+/+ (B6.SJL-PtprcaPepcb/BoyJ), TRP-1 (B6.Cg-
Rag1tm1MomTyrp1B−wTg(Tcra,Tcrb)9Rest/J), and Cd4-Cre (Tg(CD4-Cre)1Cwi/BfluJ) were 
purchased from The Jackson Laboratory. The following mice have been described: Egln1fl/fl, 
Clever et al.
Page 11
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Egln2fl/fl, and Egln3fl/fl mice (Takeda et al., 2006), Hif1afl/fl mice (Ryan et al., 2000), 
Epas1fl/fl mice (Gruber et al., 2007). Deletion of loxP-flanked genes in T cells was achieved 
by crossing to Cd4-Cre mice to obtain animals with homozygous loxP-flanked alleles 
without Cre or hemizygous for Cre. All mice were previously backcrossed over ten 
generations to the C57BL/6 background. For all in vivo studies (experimental metastasis, 
house dust mite challenge) age and sex matched WT and PHD-tKO mice were used with at 
least 5 mice per genotype.
METHOD DETAILS
In vitro T cell differentiation—CD4+ T cells from spleens and lymph nodes of 6–12-
week-old mice were purified by negative magnetic selection (Miltenyi) followed by sorting 
of naive CD4+ CD62L+ CD44− CD25− cells using a FACSAria II sorter (BD). Naive CD4+ 
T cells were activated with plate-bound anti-CD3 and soluble anti-CD28 (5 μg ml−1 each; 
eBioscience) in media for 72h either under: Th0 conditions (media alone); Th1 conditions 
(IL-12 (10 ng ml−1, R&D Systems), anti-IL-4 neutralizing antibodies (10 μg ml−1); Th17 
conditions (IL-6 (20 ng ml−1, R&D Systems), human TGF-β1 (0.2 ng ml−1, R&D Systems), 
anti-IFN-γ neutralizing antibodies (10 μg ml−1) and anti-IL-4 neutralizing antibodies (10 μg 
ml−1); or iTreg conditions (human TGF-β1 (0–2 ng ml−1, as indicated)). For human in vitro 
iTreg induction assays, naïve CD4+CD45RA+CD45RO−CD62L+CCR7+ cells were FACS 
purified from three biologically independent healthy donor buffy coats and activated with 
plate-bound human anti-CD3 and soluble anti-CD28 (5 μg ml−1 each; eBioscience) with 
human TGF-β1 (5 ng mL−1, R&D Systems) and recombinant human IL-2 (20 CU). Mouse 
and human cells were cultured under standard incubator conditions or 5% or 2% oxygen as 
indicated (Thermo Scientific-Hera Cell incubator equipped to replace oxygen with nitrogen) 
through the entire duration of culture. Where indicated, the PHD protein inhibitor DMOG 
(0.5 – 1.0 mM, Sigma-Aldrich), Rapamycin (50 nM, Sigma-Aldrich), or 2-deoxyglucose (1 
μM, Sigma-Aldrich) was added for the duration of in vitro culture.
Histopathology—Lungs were isolated from WT and PHD-tKO mice and fixed in 10% 
formalin, embedded in methylacrylate, sectioned, and H&E stained. Sections were blindly 
evaluated by a veterinary pathologist. The presence of chronic, active inflammation, 
vasculitis, and hemorrhage in the alveoli was quantified on a standardized severity score 
system (0 least severe, 3 most severe).
House Dust Mite Airway Challenge—WT and PHD-tKO mice were sensitized with 
25μg of house dust mite (HDM, D. Pteronyssinus; low-endotoxin, Greer) delivered to the 
retropharyngeal space in sterile PBS on days 0, 1 and 2. Animals were challenged with 5μg 
of HDM on days 15, 16, 17 and 18, and euthanized on day 19.
Antibodies and flow cytometry—The following fluorescent dye-conjugated antibodies 
against surface and intracellular antigens were used: anti-FOXP3 (FJK-16s), anti-IL-17A 
(eBio17B7), anti-IFN-γ (XMG1.2), anti-Tbet (eBio4B10), anti-Ror gamma (t) (B2D), anti-
CD304 (Nrp-1, 3DS304M), anti-mouse TCR-beta (H57-597), anti-IL-13 (eBio13A), anti-
Granzyme B (NGZB), and anti-Perforin (eBioOMAK-D) (eBioscience); anti-CD45.1 (A20), 
anti-CD4 (RM4-5), anti-CD25 (PC61), anti-CD62L (MEL-14), anti-CD44 (IM7), anti-CD8a 
Clever et al.
Page 12
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (53-6.7), anti-CD152 (CTLA4, UC10-4F10-11), anti-GITR (DTA-1), anti-IL-4 (11B11), 
anti-IL-5 (TRFK5) (BD Biosciences); Anti-mouse IgG Fab2 (Cell Signaling); Anti-mouse 
HIF1α (Abcam). For the identification of NKT cells, α-galactosyl ceramide loaded, PE-
conjugated recombinant CD1d tetramers were used (Proimmune). Cells were incubated with 
specific antibodies for 30 min on ice in the presence of 2.4G2 monoclonal antibody to block 
FcγR binding. All samples were acquired with a Fortessa or LSR flow cytometer (Becton 
Dickinson) and analyzed using FlowJo software (TreeStar). Intranuclear staining was carried 
out using the FOXP3 staining kit (eBioscience). To determine cytokine expression, cellular 
suspensions containing T cells were stimulated in media containing phorbol 12-myristate 
13-acetate, ionomycin and brefeldin-A (Leukocyte activation cocktail with Golgiplug; BD 
biosciences) for 4 h. After stimulation, cells were stained an amine-reactive exclusion-based 
viability dye (Invitrogen) and with antibodies against cell-surface antigens, fixed and 
permeabilized followed by intracellular staining with specific anti-cytokine antibodies. 
Single-cell suspensions from lung tissues were prepared by mechanical disruption 
(GentleMACS, Miltenyi). Countbright beads were spiked-in for the flow cytometric 
quantification of absolute cell number (Invitrogen).
RNA Sequencing and analysis—All RNA-Seq analyses were performed using ≥2 
biological replicates. Raw data from replicate measurements are publically available from 
the GEO repository. Total RNA was prepared from cells using the RNeasy Plus Mini kit 
(Qiagen). 200 ng of total RNA was subsequently used to prepare RNA-Seq library by using 
TruSeq RNA sample prep kit (Illumina) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Paired-
end RNA sequencing was performed on a HiSeq 2000 (Illumina). Sequenced reads were 
aligned to the mouse genome (NCBI37/mm9) with Tophat 2.0.11(Kim and Salzberg, 2011) 
and uniquely mapped reads were used to calculate gene expression. RefSeq gene database 
(mm9) was downloaded from the UCSC genome browser for RNA-Seq analysis. RNA-Seq 
reads were mapped to mm9 (UCSC) using Bowtie. Gene expression of annotated transcripts 
was calculated from mapped RNA-Seq reads using Cuffdiff to obtain RPKM-normalized 
gene expression values (Trapnell et al., 2012). Two-tailed t tests were performed to identify 
differentially expressed genes after applying the Benjamini-Hochberg correction for multiple 
testing. Gene set enrichment analysis was performed as previously described (Subramanian 
et al., 2005). RNA-sequencing data have been deposited under the Gene Expression 
Omnibus (GEO) accession code GSExxxxx.
Autoantibody enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)—For measurement 
of antinuclear (ANA) and anti-dsDNA autoantibodies, ELISA assays were performed on 
mouse serum according to manufacturer’s instructions (Alpha Diagnostic International). 
ELISA quantification of IFN-γ in cell supernatants collected after 72h or stimulation was 
performed according to manufacturer’s instructions (Ebioscience).
Quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT–PCR)—
Cells were sorted or transferred into RNALater solution (Ambion) and stored at −80 °C. 
Total RNA from pelleted cells was isolated using the RNeasy Plus mini kit (Qiagen). First-
strand cDNA synthesis was performed using random priming with the high-capacity cDNA 
synthesis kit (Applied Biosystems) in the presence of SuperaseIn RNase inhibitor (Ambion). 
Clever et al.
Page 13
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cDNA was used as a template for quantitative PCR reactions using Taqman primer-probes 
against specified mRNA transcripts (Applied Biosystems). Reactions were performed using 
Universal PCR Mastermix (Applied Biosystems). FAM channel intensity were normalized to 
ROX intensity, and Ct values were calculated using automatically determined threshold 
values using SDS software (Applied Biosystems).
Immunoblot analysis—Nuclear extracts were isolated (NE-PER kit; Pierce) and ~15 μg 
protein was loaded in each lane of a mini-protean precast TGX gel (Biorad). Protein was 
transferred onto activated PVDF membrane (Biorad), blocked with 5% BSA in TBST at RT 
for 1h, and incubated in 1° antibody at 4° C overnight. HIF1 α (NB100-449, Novus) and 
loading control HDAC1 (10E2, Cell Signaling Technology) antibodies were used at 1:1000 
dilution in TBST. Samples were washed 5× with TBST, incubated with 2° antibody at 
1:5000 dilution in TBST for 2h, and washed 5× with TBST. Protein was visualized with 
enhanced chemiluminescence (ThermoScientific) and autoradiography film. Densitometry 
was calculated using ImageJ software.
Bone marrow chimeras—For bone marrow reconstitution experiments, Rag1−/− mice 
were administered 1,000 Gy total-bodγ-radiation from a 137Cs source before intravenous 
injection of BM cells depleted of mature lineages from single-cell bone-marrow preparations 
using antibody-coupled magnetic beads (Miltenyi). Bone marrow from 6–10-week-old 
donor mice were used.
In vivo iTreg induction—Rag1−/− mice were injected intravenously with 4 × 105 CD4+ 
CD25− CD45RBhigh cells from wild-type or PHD-tKO mice. On day 21 to 23, transferred 
cells were isolated and analyzed for FoxP3 expression by flow cytometry.
In vivo Treg stability—Rag1−/− mice were injected intravenously with 4 × 105 CD4+ 
CD25+ cells from wild-type or PHD-tKO mice. On day 7, transferred cells were isolated and 
analyzed for FoxP3 expression by flow cytometry.
In vitro Treg stability—CD4+ CD25+ Treg cells were FACS purified from wild-type or 
PHD-tKO mice and stimulated in vitro with anti-CD3 (1 μg mL−1) in the presence of IL-2 
(100 IU). Foxp3 expression was analyzed by flow cytometry 72h post-stimulation.
In vitro suppression assay—Naïve CD4+ T cells were FACS purified from Foxp3-GFP 
mice and stimulated in vitro in the presence of TGF-β ± DMOG for 72h. Foxp3-GFP+ iTreg 
cells were then FACS purified from VEH and DMOG treated cultures. VEH and DMOG 
iTreg cells were cultured in 96-well round-bottom plates with 5×104 CFSE-labelled naïve 
CD45.1 CD4+ CD25− (Tresp) cells along with 1×104 CD11c+ dendritic cells used as antigen-
presenting cells, isolated by immunomagnetic selection (Miltenyi). Cells were stimulated 
with anti-CD3 antibody (1 μg mL−1, BD Biosciences) for 72h at 37 and 5% CO2. Tresp cell 
proliferation was measured by CFSE dilution by flow cytometry.
Extracellular Acidification Rate and Glucose Uptake—Extracellular acidification 
rates (ECAR) and oxygen consumption rates (OCR) were measured at 37°C using an XF24 
extracellular analyzer (Seaho rse Bioscience). ECAR was measured in XF media 
Clever et al.
Page 14
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (nonbuffered RPMI 1640 containing 25 mM glucose, 2 mM L-glutamine, and 1 mM sodium 
pyruvate) under basal conditions. To determine glucose uptake, T cells were incubated with 
100 μM 2-NBDG (Invitrogen) for 2 hours before measuring fluorescence by flow cytometry.
Foxp3 TSDR Methylation—500 ng of sample DNA from WT and PHD-tKO FACS 
purified CD4+ CD25+ Treg and CD4+ CD25− non-Treg cells was bisulfite treated 
(Epigendx) and column purified (Zymogen). PCR amplification of the Foxp3 TSDR locus 
region (nucleotides −2369 to −2207 relative to Foxp3 start codon) was performed using 
biotinylated PCR primer (Epigendx). PCR products were bound to Streptavidin Sepharose 
HP (GE Healthcare Life Sciences), washed, and denatured with NaOH. Pyrosequencing 
primer was annealed to the purified single-stranded PCR product and sequencing was 
performed using the Pyrosequencing PSQ96 HS System according to manufacturer’s 
instructions (Pyrosequencing, Qiagen). The methylation status of each locus was analyzed 
individually as a T/C SNP using QCpG software (Pyrosequencing, Qiagen).
Experimental Metastasis—B16F10 (B16) melanoma cell line was obtained from the 
NCI tumor repository and passaged in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (Invitrogen) 
supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum. 2.5×105 B16 cells were injected subcutaneously in 
flanks and intravenously through the tail vein. Tumor implantation experiments were 
performed in littermate mice of 8–12 weeks of age. Subcutaneous tumors were measured at 
serial time points following implantation using digital calipers and the tumor area was 
calculated as the product of perpendicular diameter. Lung tumor nodules were enumerated 
by gross count of visible sites of disease. Micrometastatic lesions were quantified following 
H&E stain of lung sections, and sections consistent with melanoma histology were 
circumscribed by a certified veterinarian. All subcutaneous and pulmonary tumor 
measurements were performed in a blinded manner. IFN-γ depletion was performed using 
intraperitoneal injection of 250 μg anti-IFN-γ (XMG1.2, BioXcell) at indicated time points.
Adoptive Cell Transfer—Mice 6 to 12 weeks of age (n = 6–10 for all groups) were 
injected intravenously or subcutaneously with 2.5×105 B16 melanoma cells. 5–10 days later 
mice were treated with adoptively transferred TRP-1 specific CD4+ T cells derived from 
TCR transgenic splenocytes and stimulated in vitro in the presence or absence of the PHD 
inhibitor DMOG. At the time of ACT mice received 500 Gy total body irradiation.
QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Statistical parameters including the exact value of n, the definition of center, dispersion and 
precision measures (mean ± SEM) and statistical significance are reported in the Figures and 
Figure Legends. Data is judged to be statistically significant when p < 0.05 by two-tailed 
Student’s T-test. In figures, asterisks denote statistical significance as calculated by 
Student’s T-test (*, p < 0.05; **, p < 0.01; ***, p < 0.001; ****, p < 0.0001). Survival 
significance in adoptive cell transfer studies was determined by a Log-rank Mantel-Cox test. 
Statistical analysis was performed in GraphPad PRISM 6.
Clever et al.
Page 15
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY
Data Resources—Raw data files for the RNA sequencing analysis have been deposited in 
the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus under accession number XXXXXX.
TABLE FOR AUTHOR TO COMPLETE
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Antibodies
Anti-Mouse/Rat Foxp3 (clone FJK-16s)
Ebioscience
Cat# 17-5773
Anti-Mouse IFN-γ (clone XMG1.2)
Ebioscience
Cat# 17-7311
Anti-Mouse/Rat IL-17A (clone eBio17B7)
Ebioscience
Cat# 25-7177
Anti-Human/Mouse T-bet (clone eBio4B10)
Ebioscience
Cat# 12-5825
Anti-Mouse ROR gamma (t) (clone B2D)
Ebioscience
Cat# 12-6981
Anti-Mouse CD304 (Neuropilin-1) (clone 3DS304M)
Ebioscience
Cat# 25-3041
Anti-Mouse TCR beta (clone H57-597)
Ebioscience
Cat# 47-5961
Anti-Mouse IL-13 (clone eBio13A)
Ebioscience
Cat# 12-7133
Anti-Mouse Granzyme B (clone NGZB)
Ebioscience
Cat# 12-8898
Anti-Mouse Perforin (clone eBioOMAK-D)
Ebioscience
Cat# 12-9392
Anti-Human Foxp3 (PCH101)
Ebioscience
Cat# 17-4776
Anti-Mouse CD45.1 (clone A20)
BD Biosciences
Cat# 558701
Anti-Mouse CD4 (clone RM4-5)
BD Biosciences
Cat# 563727
Anti-Mouse CD25 (clone PC61)
BD Biosciences
Cat# 553866
Anti-Mouse CD62L (clone MEL-14)
BD Biosciences
Cat# 553150
Anti-Mouse CD44 (clone IM7)
BD Biosciences
Cat# 559250
Anti-Mouse CD8a (clone 53-6.7)
BD Biosciences
Cat# 553035
Anti-Mouse CD152 (CTLA4) (clone UC10-4F10-11)
BD Biosciences
Cat# 553720
Anti-Mouse GITR (clone DTA-1)
BD Biosciences
Cat# 558119
Anti-Mouse IL-4 (clone 11B11)
BD Biosciences
Cat# 562044
Anti-Mouse IL-5 (clone TRFK5)
BD Biosciences
Cat# 554395
Anti-Human CD4 (clone RPA-T4)
BD Biosciences
Cat# 560158
Anti-Human CD45RO (clone UCHL1)
BD Biosciences
Cat# 562791
Anti-Human CD45RA (clone HI100)
BD Biosciences
Cat# 555489
Anti-Human CD62L (clone DREG-56)
BD Biosciences
Cat# 555544
Anti-Human CD197 (CCR7) (clone 3D12)
BD Biosciences
Cat# 560548
Anti-Mouse IgG Fab2
Cell Signaling Technology
Cat# 4410S
Mouse monoclonal HDAC1 (clone 10E2)
Cell Signaling Technology
Cat# 5356S
Mouse polyclonal HIF-1 alpha
Novus Biologicals
Cat# NB100-479
InVivoMAb anti-mouse IFN-γ neutralizing antibody (clone XMG1.2)
BioXCell
Cat# BE0055
InVivoMAb anti-mouse IL-4 neutralizing antibody (clone 11B11)
BioXcell
Cat# BE0045
Anti-Mouse CD3 Functional Grade Purified (clone 17A2)
Ebioscience
Cat# 14-0032
Anti-Mouse CD28 Functional Grade Purified (clone 37.51)
Ebioscience
Cat# 16-0281
Anti-Human CD3 Functional Grade Purified (clone OKT3)
Ebioscience
Cat# 16-0037
Anti-Human CD28 Functional Grade Purified (clone CD28.2)
Ebioscience
Cat# 16-0289
Chemicals, Peptides, and Recombinant Proteins
α-GalCer Loaded Recombinant CD1d Tetramer
Proimmune
Cat# E001-2A
Dimethyloxalylglycine (DMOG)
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat# D3695
Clever et al.
Page 16
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Rapamycin
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat# R8781
2-Deoxy-D-glucose (2-DG)
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat# D6134
2-Deoxy-2-[(7-nitro-2,1,3-benzoxadiazol-4-yl)amino]-D-glucose (2-NBDG)
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat# 72987
Recombinant Human IL-2 Protein
R&D Systems
Cat# 202-IL
Recombinant Human IL-12 Protein
R&D Systems
Cat# 219-IL
Recombinant Human IL-6 Protein
R&D Systems
Cat# 206-IL
Recombinant Human TGF-β Protein
R&D Systems
Cat# 240-B
House Dust Mite extract (D. Pteronyssinus; low-endotoxin)
Stallergenes Greer
Cat# B70
Taqman PCR Master Mix, no AmpErase UNG
Applied Biosystems
Cat# 4324018
Critical Commercial Assays
RNeasy Plus Mini Kit
Qiagen
Cat# 74134
TruSeq RNA Library Preparation Kit v2
Illumina
Cat# RS-122-2001
Mouse anti-dsDNA Ig’s ELISA kit
Alpha Diagnostic
Cat# 5110
Mouse Anti-Nuclear Antigens (ANA/ENA) Ig’s
Alpha Diagnostic
Cat# 5210
High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit with RNase Inhibitor
Applied Biosystems
Cat# 4374966
Mouse IFN gamma ELISA Ready-SET-Go
Ebioscience
Cat#
NE-PER Nuclear and Cytoplasmic Extraction Reagents
Thermo Scientific
Cat# 78833
Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit
Thermo Scientific
Cat# 23225
Seahorse Bioassay
Agilent Technologies
Cat# 102416
Mouse Foxp3 Methylation Panel
EpigenDx
http://epigendx.com/d/products/methylation-assay-panels/foxp3-panel/
Deposited Data
Raw data files for RNA sequencing
NCBI Gene Expression 
Omnibus
GEOxxxx
 
 
 
 
 
Experimental Models: Cell Lines
Mouse: B16-F10 melanoma
ATCC
Cat# CRL-6475
Mouse: primary T lymphocytes
This paper
N/A
Human: primary healthy donor T lymphocytes
This paper
N/A
 
 
 
Experimental Models: Organisms/Strains
Mouse: C57BL/6J
The Jackson Laboratory
Stock No: 000664
Mouse: B6.129S7-Rag1tm1Mom/J
The Jackson Laboratory
Stock No: 002216
Mouse: B6.Cg-Rag1 tm1Mom Tyrp1B−w Tg(Tcra,Tcrb)9Rest/J
The Jackson Laboratory
Stock No: 008684
Mouse: Tg(CD4-cre)1Cwi/BfluJ
The Jackson Laboratory
Stock No: 017336
Mouse: Egln1fl/fl
Takeda et al., 2006
N/A
Mouse: Egln2fl/fl
Takeda et al., 2006
N/A
Mouse: Egln3fl/fl
Takeda et al., 2006
N/A
Mouse: Hif1afl/fl
Ryan et al., 2000
N/A
Mouse: Epas1fl/fl
Gruber et al., 2007
N/A
Clever et al.
Page 17
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Recombinant DNA
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sequence-Based Reagents
 
 
 
 
 
 
Software and Algorithms
TopHat (v2.0.11)
Kim and Salzberg et al., 
2011
https://ccb.jhu.edu/software/tophat/index.shtml
Cufflinks (v2.12.0)
Trapnell et al., 2012
http://cole-trapnelllab.github.io/cufflinks/
GSEA (v2.2.2)
Broad Institute
http://software.broadinstitute.org/gsea/index.jsp
 
 
Other
 
 
 
 
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the Intramural Research Programs of the NCI and NIAID and by charitable gifts 
from Li Jinyuan and the Tiens Charitable Foundation and the Milstein Family Foundation. R.R. was supported by 
the Wellcome Trust/Royal Society and the UK Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council. M.G.C. is 
a Cancer Research Institute Irvington Fellow supported by the Cancer Research Institute. We thank G.H. Fong for 
providing Egln1-3fl/fl mice, D. Haines for pathologic analysis of H&E stained tissues, R. Johnson, A. Palazon, and 
P. Tyrakis for technical advice.
References
Arpaia N, Campbell C, Fan X, Dikiy S, van der Veeken J, deRoos P, Liu H, Cross JR, Pfeffer K, Coffer 
PJ, et al. Metabolites produced by commensal bacteria promote peripheral regulatory T-cell 
generation. Nature. 2013; 504:451–455. [PubMed: 24226773] 
Clever et al.
Page 18
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Atarashi K, Tanoue T, Shima T, Imaoka A, Kuwahara T, Momose Y, Cheng G, Yamasaki S, Saito T, 
Ohba Y, et al. Induction of colonic regulatory T cells by indigenous Clostridium species. Science. 
2011; 331:337–341. [PubMed: 21205640] 
Bluestone JA, Abbas AK. Natural versus adaptive regulatory T cells. Nature reviews Immunology. 
2003; 3:253–257.
Bruick RK, McKnight SL. A conserved family of prolyl-4-hydroxylases that modify HIF. Science. 
2001; 294:1337–1340. [PubMed: 11598268] 
Chang CH, Curtis JD, Maggi LB Jr, Faubert B, Villarino AV, O’Sullivan D, Huang SC, van der Windt 
GJ, Blagih J, Qiu J, et al. Posttranscriptional control of T cell effector function by aerobic 
glycolysis. Cell. 2013; 153:1239–1251. [PubMed: 23746840] 
Chang CH, Qiu J, O’Sullivan D, Buck MD, Noguchi T, Curtis JD, Chen Q, Gindin M, Gubin MM, van 
der Windt GJ, et al. Metabolic Competition in the Tumor Microenvironment Is a Driver of Cancer 
Progression. Cell. 2015; 162:1229–1241. [PubMed: 26321679] 
Chen W, Jin W, Hardegen N, Lei KJ, Li L, Marinos N, McGrady G, Wahl SM. Conversion of 
peripheral CD4+CD25− naive T cells to CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells by TGF-beta induction of 
transcription factor Foxp3. The Journal of experimental medicine. 2003; 198:1875–1886. [PubMed: 
14676299] 
Colegio OR, Chu NQ, Szabo AL, Chu T, Rhebergen AM, Jairam V, Cyrus N, Brokowski CE, 
Eisenbarth SC, Phillips GM, et al. Functional polarization of tumour-associated macrophages by 
tumour-derived lactic acid. Nature. 2014; 513:559–563. [PubMed: 25043024] 
Cui G, Staron MM, Gray SM, Ho PC, Amezquita RA, Wu J, Kaech SM. IL-7-Induced Glycerol 
Transport and TAG Synthesis Promotes Memory CD8+ T Cell Longevity. Cell. 2015; 161:750–761. 
[PubMed: 25957683] 
Cummins EP, Berra E, Comerford KM, Ginouves A, Fitzgerald KT, Seeballuck F, Godson C, Nielsen 
JE, Moynagh P, Pouyssegur J, et al. Prolyl hydroxylase-1 negatively regulates IkappaB kinase-
beta, giving insight into hypoxia-induced NFkappaB activity. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2006; 103:18154–18159. [PubMed: 
17114296] 
Dang EV, Barbi J, Yang HY, Jinasena D, Yu H, Zheng Y, Bordman Z, Fu J, Kim Y, Yen HR, et al. 
Control of T(H)17/T(reg) balance by hypoxia-inducible factor 1. Cell. 2011; 146:772–784. 
[PubMed: 21871655] 
de Heer HJ, Hammad H, Soullie T, Hijdra D, Vos N, Willart MA, Hoogsteden HC, Lambrecht BN. 
Essential role of lung plasmacytoid dendritic cells in preventing asthmatic reactions to harmless 
inhaled antigen. The Journal of experimental medicine. 2004; 200:89–98. [PubMed: 15238608] 
Doedens AL, Phan AT, Stradner MH, Fujimoto JK, Nguyen JV, Yang E, Johnson RS, Goldrath AW. 
Hypoxia-inducible factors enhance the effector responses of CD8(+) T cells to persistent antigen. 
Nature immunology. 2013; 14:1173–1182. [PubMed: 24076634] 
Doedens AL, Stockmann C, Rubinstein MP, Liao D, Zhang N, DeNardo DG, Coussens LM, Karin M, 
Goldrath AW, Johnson RS. Macrophage expression of hypoxia-inducible factor-1 alpha suppresses 
T-cell function and promotes tumor progression. Cancer research. 2010; 70:7465–7475. [PubMed: 
20841473] 
Epstein AC, Gleadle JM, McNeill LA, Hewitson KS, O’Rourke J, Mole DR, Mukherji M, Metzen E, 
Wilson MI, Dhanda A, et al. C. elegans EGL-9 and mammalian homologs define a family of 
dioxygenases that regulate HIF by prolyl hydroxylation. Cell. 2001; 107:43–54. [PubMed: 
11595184] 
Floess S, Freyer J, Siewert C, Baron U, Olek S, Polansky J, Schlawe K, Chang HD, Bopp T, Schmitt E, 
et al. Epigenetic control of the foxp3 locus in regulatory T cells. PLoS Biol. 2007; 5:e38. 
[PubMed: 17298177] 
Gavin MA, Rasmussen JP, Fontenot JD, Vasta V, Manganiello VC, Beavo JA, Rudensky AY. Foxp3-
dependent programme of regulatory T-cell differentiation. Nature. 2007; 445:771–775. [PubMed: 
17220874] 
Gerriets VA, Kishton RJ, Nichols AG, Macintyre AN, Inoue M, Ilkayeva O, Winter PS, Liu X, 
Priyadharshini B, Slawinska ME, et al. Metabolic programming and PDHK1 control CD4+ T cell 
subsets and inflammation. J Clin Invest. 2015; 125:194–207. [PubMed: 25437876] 
Clever et al.
Page 19
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Gruber M, Hu CJ, Johnson RS, Brown EJ, Keith B, Simon MC. Acute postnatal ablation of Hif-2alpha 
results in anemia. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America. 2007; 104:2301–2306. [PubMed: 17284606] 
Ho PC, Bihuniak JD, Macintyre AN, Staron M, Liu X, Amezquita R, Tsui YC, Cui G, Micevic G, 
Perales JC, et al. Phosphoenolpyruvate Is a Metabolic Checkpoint of Anti-tumor T Cell 
Responses. Cell. 2015; 162:1217–1228. [PubMed: 26321681] 
Holt PG, Strickland DH, Wikstrom ME, Jahnsen FL. Regulation of immunological homeostasis in the 
respiratory tract. Nature reviews Immunology. 2008; 8:142–152.
Jaakkola P, Mole DR, Tian YM, Wilson MI, Gielbert J, Gaskell SJ, von Kriegsheim A, Hebestreit HF, 
Mukherji M, Schofield CJ, et al. Targeting of HIF-alpha to the von Hippel-Lindau ubiquitylation 
complex by O2-regulated prolyl hydroxylation. Science. 2001; 292:468–472. [PubMed: 
11292861] 
Josefowicz SZ, Niec RE, Kim HY, Treuting P, Chinen T, Zheng Y, Umetsu DT, Rudensky AY. 
Extrathymically generated regulatory T cells control mucosal TH2 inflammation. Nature. 2012; 
482:395–399. [PubMed: 22318520] 
Joshi NS, Cui W, Chandele A, Lee HK, Urso DR, Hagman J, Gapin L, Kaech SM. Inflammation 
directs memory precursor and short-lived effector CD8(+) T cell fates via the graded expression of 
T-bet transcription factor. Immunity. 2007; 27:281–295. [PubMed: 17723218] 
Kaelin WG Jr, Ratcliffe PJ. Oxygen sensing by metazoans: the central role of the HIF hydroxylase 
pathway. Molecular cell. 2008; 30:393–402. [PubMed: 18498744] 
Keith B, Johnson RS, Simon MC. HIF1alpha and HIF2alpha: sibling rivalry in hypoxic tumour growth 
and progression. Nature reviews Cancer. 2012; 12:9–22.
Kim D, Salzberg SL. TopHat-Fusion: an algorithm for discovery of novel fusion transcripts. Genome 
biology. 2011; 12:R72. [PubMed: 21835007] 
Koch MA, Thomas KR, Perdue NR, Smigiel KS, Srivastava S, Campbell DJ. T-bet(+) Treg cells 
undergo abortive Th1 cell differentiation due to impaired expression of IL-12 receptor beta2. 
Immunity. 2012; 37:501–510. [PubMed: 22960221] 
Koch MA, Tucker-Heard G, Perdue NR, Killebrew JR, Urdahl KB, Campbell DJ. The transcription 
factor T-bet controls regulatory T cell homeostasis and function during type 1 inflammation. 
Nature immunology. 2009; 10:595–602. [PubMed: 19412181] 
Lee JH, Elly C, Park Y, Liu YC. E3 Ubiquitin Ligase VHL Regulates Hypoxia-Inducible Factor-1alpha 
to Maintain Regulatory T Cell Stability and Suppressive Capacity. Immunity. 2015; 42:1062–1074. 
[PubMed: 26084024] 
Li MO, Sanjabi S, Flavell RA. Transforming growth factor-beta controls development, homeostasis, 
and tolerance of T cells by regulatory T cell-dependent and -independent mechanisms. Immunity. 
2006; 25:455–471. [PubMed: 16973386] 
Lord GM, Rao RM, Choe H, Sullivan BM, Lichtman AH, Luscinskas FW, Glimcher LH. T-bet is 
required for optimal proinflammatory CD4+ T-cell trafficking. Blood. 2005; 106:3432–3439. 
[PubMed: 16014561] 
Massague J, Obenauf AC. Metastatic colonization by circulating tumour cells. Nature. 2016; 529:298–
306. [PubMed: 26791720] 
Minn AJ, Gupta GP, Siegel PM, Bos PD, Shu W, Giri DD, Viale A, Olshen AB, Gerald WL, Massague 
J. Genes that mediate breast cancer metastasis to lung. Nature. 2005; 436:518–524. [PubMed: 
16049480] 
Molinero LL, Miller ML, Evaristo C, Alegre ML. High TCR stimuli prevent induced regulatory T cell 
differentiation in a NF-kappaB-dependent manner. J Immunol. 2011; 186:4609–4617. [PubMed: 
21411734] 
Mucida D, Kutchukhidze N, Erazo A, Russo M, Lafaille JJ, Curotto de Lafaille MA. Oral tolerance in 
the absence of naturally occurring Tregs. The Journal of clinical investigation. 2005; 115:1923–
1933. [PubMed: 15937545] 
Muranski P, Boni A, Antony PA, Cassard L, Irvine KR, Kaiser A, Paulos CM, Palmer DC, Touloukian 
CE, Ptak K, et al. Tumor-specific Th17-polarized cells eradicate large established melanoma. 
Blood. 2008; 112:362–373. [PubMed: 18354038] 
Clever et al.
Page 20
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Pardoll DM, Topalian SL. The role of CD4+ T cell responses in antitumor immunity. Current opinion 
in immunology. 1998; 10:588–594. [PubMed: 9794842] 
Ryan HE, Poloni M, McNulty W, Elson D, Gassmann M, Arbeit JM, Johnson RS. Hypoxia-inducible 
factor-1alpha is a positive factor in solid tumor growth. Cancer research. 2000; 60:4010–4015. 
[PubMed: 10945599] 
Sakaguchi S, Fukuma K, Kuribayashi K, Masuda T. Organ-specific autoimmune diseases induced in 
mice by elimination of T cell subset. I. Evidence for the active participation of T cells in natural 
self-tolerance; deficit of a T cell subset as a possible cause of autoimmune disease. The Journal of 
experimental medicine. 1985; 161:72–87. [PubMed: 3871469] 
Semenza GL. Oxygen homeostasis. Wiley interdisciplinary reviews Systems biology and medicine. 
2010; 2:336–361. [PubMed: 20836033] 
Shi LZ, Wang R, Huang G, Vogel P, Neale G, Green DR, Chi H. HIF1alpha-dependent glycolytic 
pathway orchestrates a metabolic checkpoint for the differentiation of TH17 and Treg cells. The 
Journal of experimental medicine. 2011; 208:1367–1376. [PubMed: 21708926] 
Strickland DH, Stumbles PA, Zosky GR, Subrata LS, Thomas JA, Turner DJ, Sly PD, Holt PG. 
Reversal of airway hyperresponsiveness by induction of airway mucosal CD4+CD25+ regulatory 
T cells. The Journal of experimental medicine. 2006; 203:2649–2660. [PubMed: 17088431] 
Stumbles PA, Thomas JA, Pimm CL, Lee PT, Venaille TJ, Proksch S, Holt PG. Resting respiratory 
tract dendritic cells preferentially stimulate T helper cell type 2 (Th2) responses and require 
obligatory cytokine signals for induction of Th1 immunity. The Journal of experimental medicine. 
1998; 188:2019–2031. [PubMed: 9841916] 
Subramanian A, Tamayo P, Mootha VK, Mukherjee S, Ebert BL, Gillette MA, Paulovich A, Pomeroy 
SL, Golub TR, Lander ES, et al. Gene set enrichment analysis: a knowledge-based approach for 
interpreting genome-wide expression profiles. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
of the United States of America. 2005; 102:15545–15550. [PubMed: 16199517] 
Sukumar M, Liu J, Ji Y, Subramanian M, Crompton JG, Yu Z, Roychoudhuri R, Palmer DC, Muranski 
P, Karoly ED, et al. Inhibiting glycolytic metabolism enhances CD8+ T cell memory and 
antitumor function. The Journal of clinical investigation. 2013; 123:4479–4488. [PubMed: 
24091329] 
Sun CM, Hall JA, Blank RB, Bouladoux N, Oukka M, Mora JR, Belkaid Y. Small intestine lamina 
propria dendritic cells promote de novo generation of Foxp3 T reg cells via retinoic acid. The 
Journal of experimental medicine. 2007; 204:1775–1785. [PubMed: 17620362] 
Takeda K, Ho VC, Takeda H, Duan LJ, Nagy A, Fong GH. Placental but not heart defects are 
associated with elevated hypoxia-inducible factor alpha levels in mice lacking prolyl hydroxylase 
domain protein 2. Molecular and cellular biology. 2006; 26:8336–8346. [PubMed: 16966370] 
Trapnell C, Roberts A, Goff L, Pertea G, Kim D, Kelley DR, Pimentel H, Salzberg SL, Rinn JL, 
Pachter L. Differential gene and transcript expression analysis of RNA-seq experiments with 
TopHat and Cufflinks. Nature protocols. 2012; 7:562–578. [PubMed: 22383036] 
Valastyan S, Weinberg RA. Tumor metastasis: molecular insights and evolving paradigms. Cell. 2011; 
147:275–292. [PubMed: 22000009] 
Weiss JM, Bilate AM, Gobert M, Ding Y, Curotto de Lafaille MA, Parkhurst CN, Xiong H, Dolpady J, 
Frey AB, Ruocco MG, et al. Neuropilin 1 is expressed on thymus-derived natural regulatory T 
cells, but not mucosa-generated induced Foxp3+ T reg cells. The Journal of experimental 
medicine. 2012; 209:1723–1742. S1721. [PubMed: 22966001] 
Wikstrom ME, Stumbles PA. Mouse respiratory tract dendritic cell subsets and the immunological fate 
of inhaled antigens. Immunol Cell Biol. 2007; 85:182–188. [PubMed: 17262055] 
Yadav M, Louvet C, Davini D, Gardner JM, Martinez-Llordella M, Bailey-Bucktrout S, Anthony BA, 
Sverdrup FM, Head R, Kuster DJ, et al. Neuropilin-1 distinguishes natural and inducible 
regulatory T cells among regulatory T cell subsets in vivo. The Journal of experimental medicine. 
2012; 209:1713–1722. S1711–1719. [PubMed: 22966003] 
Clever et al.
Page 21
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. PHD proteins function within T cells to suppress spontaneous pulmonary inflammation
(A) Gross morphology of lungs from Egln1fl/fl Egln2fl/fl Egln3fl/fl CD4Cre+/− triple 
knockout (PHD-tKO) and Cre-negative wild-type (WT) littermate mice.
(B) Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stains of WT and PHD-tKO lungs demonstrating diffuse 
alveolar hemorrhage (n=7 mice per group).
(C) Histopathology scoring of lung tissue from WT and PHD-tKO mice (n = 7 mice per 
group).
Clever et al.
Page 22
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (D) Titers of hepatic AST and ALT and pancreatic amylase in the sera of WT and PHD-tKO 
mice
(E–F) IFN-γ production by CD4+ T cells from spleen, small intestine lamina propria (LP), 
mediastinal lymph node (meLN), lung, and pulmonary tissue resident memory (TRM) cells 
in WT and PHD-tKO mice. Representative flow cytometry (E) and replicate values (F) are 
shown. Fold increase in frequency of CD4+ IFN-γ+ T cells in PHD-tKO mice normalized to 
WT is provided for each organ. (G–H) IFN-γ production by CD8+ T cells in the indicated 
organs in WT and PHD-tKO mice. Representative flow cytometry (G) and replicate values 
(H) are shown. Fold increase in frequency of CD8+ IFN-γ+ T cells in PHD-tKO mice 
normalized to WT is provided for each organ.
(I) Frequency of pulmonary Foxp3+ Treg cells in WT and PHD-tKO mice.
(J) Ratio of total numbers of CD4+ and CD8+ IFN-γ+ Teff cells to Foxp3+ Treg cells in the 
lungs of WT and PHD-tKO mice.
(K) Distribution of Nrp-1 -Hi and -Lo populations amongst pulmonary Foxp3+ Treg cells in 
WT and PHD-tKO mice. Representative flow cytometry and absolute numbers of Nrp-1Lo 
Treg cells are shown.
(L) Representative flow cytometry of Nrp-1 expression by WT and PHD-tKO pulmonary 
Foxp3+ Treg cells from WT and PHD-tKO mixed bone marrow chimeric mice.
Data are representative of ≥ 2 independent experiments with ≥ 3 mice per genotype. Mice 
were analyzed at 3 months of age unless otherwise specified. Bars and error represent mean 
±SEM of replicate measurements. *P<0.05, **P<0.01, ***P<0.001, ****P<0.0001 
(Student’s t-test).
See also Figure S1.
Clever et al.
Page 23
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. T cell-intrinsic PHD proteins restrain Th1 inflammation against innocuous antigens
(A–B) Flow cytometry analysis of Th1 and Th2 cytokine production (A) and Foxp3 
expression (B) by pulmonary CD4+ T cells from naïve and house dust mite (HDM) 
challenged WT and PHD-tKO mice.
(C) Total numbers of pulmonary Th2, Th1, and Treg cells in naïve and HDM challenged WT 
and PHD-tKO mice.
Clever et al.
Page 24
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (D–E) IFN-γ production by pulmonary CD8+ T cells from HDM challenged WT and PHD-
tKO mice. Representative flow cytometry (D) and total numbers of CD8+ IFN-γ+ T cells (E) 
are shown.
(F) Representative hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stains of WT and PHD-tKO lungs 
following airway sensitization and challenge with house dust mite extract. a, arteriole; b, 
bronchiole.
(G) Representative bronchoalveolar lavage fluid appearance from WT and PHD-tKO mice.
(H) Histopathology scoring of lung tissue from HDM challenged WT and PHD-tKO mice
Data are representative of ≥ 2 independent experiments with ≥ 3 mice per group. Bars and 
error represent mean ±SEM of replicate measurements. *P<0.05, **P<0.01, ***P<0.001, 
****P<0.0001 (Student’s t-test).
See also Figure S2.
Clever et al.
Page 25
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. PHD proteins regulate reciprocal iTreg and Th1 differentiation programs
(A) Volcano plot of expressed transcripts (RPKM≥1) in PHD-tKO compared with WT CD4+ 
T cells stimulated in vitro. Transcripts significantly (p<0.01) over-expressed (FC≥2, red) and 
under-expressed (FC≤0.5, blue) in PHD-tKO cells are indicated.
(B–D) Foxp3 and T-bet expression in WT and PHD-tKO CD4+ T cells stimulated in vitro in 
the presence of indicated amounts of TGF-β. Representative flow cytometry (B) and 
replicate values for Foxp3 (C) and T-bet (D) are shown.
Clever et al.
Page 26
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (E) ELISA quantification of IFN-γ in culture supernatants from WT and PHD-tKO CD4+ T 
cells stimulated as described in (B).
(F–H) Foxp3 and T-bet expression in WT CD4+ T cells stimulated in vitro under the 
indicated environmental oxygen concentrations ± DMOG. Representative flow cytometry 
(F) and replicate values (G–H) shown.
(I–J) Foxp3+ iTreg fate specification of human CD4+ T cells stimulated in vitro under the 
indicated environmental oxygen concentrations ± DMOG. Representative flow cytometry 
histograms (I) and replicate values are shown (J).
Data are representative of ≥ 2 independent experiments. Bars and error represent mean 
±SEM of replicate measurements. *P<0.05, **P<0.01, ***P<0.001, ****P<0.0001 
(Student’s t-test).
See also Figure S3.
Clever et al.
Page 27
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. PHD proteins are functionally redundant in T lymphocytes
(A–B) Phenotype of pulmonary CD4+ T cells in mice with indicated PHD protein 
deficiency. Representative flow cytometry of IFN-γ expression (A) and Nrp-1 expression by 
Foxp3+ Treg cells (B).
(C–D) IFN-γ expression by pulmonary CD8+ T cells in mice with indicated PHD protein 
deficiency. Representative flow cytometry (C) and replicate values (E) are shown.
(E) Ratio of CD4+ IFN-γ+ Teff cells to Nrp-1Lo Foxp3+ Treg cells of total pulmonary CD4+ 
T cells in mice with the indicated PHD protein deficiency.
Clever et al.
Page 28
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Data are representative of ≥ 2 independent experiments with ≥ 3 mice per genotype. Bars and 
error represent mean ±SEM of replicate measurements. *P<0.05, ***P<0.001 (Student’s t-
test).
See also Figure S4.
Clever et al.
Page 29
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. PHD proteins control T cell differentiation through repression of HIF-driven glycolytic 
metabolism
(A) Flow cytometry detection of HIF1α expression in CD4+ T cells isolated from mice with 
the indicated PHD KO genotype and stimulated in vitro. Average HIF1α MFI is shown.
(B) Immunoblot of HIF1α and HDAC1 from nuclear lysate of WT CD4+ T cells stimulated 
in vitro in the indicated environmental oxygen concentrations ± DMOG. Numbers indicate 
densitometry quantification of HIF1α band intensity relative to HDAC1 loading control. All 
Clever et al.
Page 30
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 values are normalized to HIF1α/HDAC1 density in cells stimulated in 20% oxygen in the 
absence of DMOG (Lane 1).
(C–D) Correlation between HIF1α and Foxp3 (C) and T-bet (D) expression in CD4+ T cells 
isolated from the indicated PHD KO genotype and stimulated as described in (A).
(E) Representative flow cytometry of Foxp3 and T-bet expression in WT and HIF1,2α 
double knockout (HIF1,2 dKO) CD4+ T cells stimulated in vitro in the presence of TGF-β ± 
DMOG.
(F–G) Foxp3 (F) and T-bet (G) expression in CD4+ T cells isolated from HIF1α sKO, 
HIF2α sKO, HIF1,2α dKO, or WT mice and stimulated in vitro in the presence of TGF-β ± 
DMOG. Protein expression levels in DMOG treated cells are normalized to vehicle. Black 
dots represent biologic replicates.
(H) mRNA expression of glycolytic genes in CD4+ T cells isolated from the indicated PHD 
KO genotype and stimulated in vitro. Heatmap normalized to row minimum and maximum 
for each gene.
(I–J) ECAR (I) and OCR:ECAR ratio (J) as determined by Seahorse bioassay in CD4+ T 
cells isolated from WT and PHD-tKO mice and stimulated in vitro.
(K) Foxp3 and T-bet expression in WT and PHD-tKO CD4+ T cells stimulated in vitro in the 
presence of TGF-β with or without the addition of compounds which inhibit glycolysis 
directly (2-DG) or indirectly (Rapamycin).
(L) IFN-γ ELISA from supernatants of WT and PHD-tKO CD4+ T cells stimulated in vitro 
as described in (K).
Data are representative of ≥ 2 independent experiments. Bars and error represent mean 
±SEM of replicate measurements. *P<0.05, **P<0.01, ***P<0.001, ****P<0.0001 
(Student’s t-test).
See also Figure S5.
Clever et al.
Page 31
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. T cell-intrinsic expression of PHD proteins licenses tumor colonization of the lung
(A) Experimental schema of primary subcutaneous and secondary pulmonary tumor 
colonization in WT and PHD-tKO mice.
(B) Growth kinetics of subcutaneous B16 melanoma in PHD-tKO or WT mice.
(C) Gross morphology and H&E analysis of lungs from PHD-tKO or WT mice following 
intravenous injection of B16 melanoma. Micrometastatic lesions are outlined in red.
(D–E) Quantification of total metastatic nodules (D) and total area of tumor burden (E) in 
lung H&E sections from mice described in (C).
Clever et al.
Page 32
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (F–H) Foxp3 and IFN-γ expression in CD4+ T lymphocytes isolated from the spleen and 
lungs of PHD-tKO and WT mice following IV B16 melanoma injection. Representative flow 
cytometry (D) and replicate values for Foxp3 (F) and IFN-γ (G) are shown.
(I) Quantification of pulmonary tumor nodules in PHD-tKO or WT mice injected 
intravenously with B16 melanoma and administered IFN-γ neutralizing or IgG control 
antibodies.
Data are representative of ≥ 2 independent experiments with > 5 mice per group. Bars and 
error represent mean ±SEM of replicate measurements. *P<0.05, **P<0.01, ***P<0.001, 
****P<0.0001 (Student’s t-test).
Clever et al.
Page 33
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 7. Inhibition of PHD proteins improves adoptive cell transfer immunotherapy
(A) Experimental schema of adoptive cell transfer immunotherapy (ACT). Pre-transfer 
levels of T-bet and Foxp3 expression is shown.
(B) IFN-γ ELISA from culture supernatants of TRP-1 splenocytes stimulated in vitro ± 
DMOG.
(C–D) Pulmonary tumor burden in mice receiving ACT of indicated cells. Representative 
H&E (C) and total lung tumor metastatic nodules (D) are shown. Black arrows indicate 
representative area of tumor burden.
Clever et al.
Page 34
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (E–F) Subcutaneous tumor growth in mice receiving ACT of indicated cells. Tumor area (E) 
and overall survival (F) are shown. Survival significance was assessed by a Log-rank 
Mantel-Cox test.
Data are representative of ≥ 2 independent experiments with > 5 mice per group. Bars and 
error represent mean ±SEM of replicate measurements. **P<0.01, ****P<0.0001 (Student’s 
t-test).
See also Figure S6.
Clever et al.
Page 35
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
