 Clites et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaap8373 (2018)     30 May 2018
SCIE N C E TR A N S LA T I O NA L M EDI CI NE | RE SE ARCH ARTICL E
1 of 13
NEUROPROSTHETICS
Proprioception from a neurally controlled  
lower-extremity prosthesis
Tyler R. Clites,1,2 Matthew J. Carty,1,3 Jessica B. Ullauri,1 Matthew E. Carney,1,4 Luke M. Mooney,1 
Jean-François Duval,1 Shriya S. Srinivasan,1,2 Hugh. M. Herr1,2,3,4*
Humans can precisely sense the position, speed, and torque of their body parts. This sense is known as proprio-
ception and is essential to human motor control. Although there have been many attempts to create human- 
mechatronic interactions, there is still no robust, repeatable methodology to reflect proprioceptive information 
from a synthetic device onto the nervous system. To address this shortcoming, we present an agonist-antagonist 
myoneural interface (AMI). The AMI is composed of (i) a surgical construct made up of two muscle-tendons—an 
agonist and an antagonist—surgically connected in series so that contraction of one muscle stretches the other 
and (ii) a bidirectional efferent-afferent neural control architecture. The AMI preserves the dynamic muscle rela-
tionships that exist within native anatomy, thereby allowing proprioceptive signals from mechanoreceptors within 
both muscles to be communicated to the central nervous system. We surgically constructed two AMIs within the 
residual limb of a subject with a transtibial amputation. Each AMI sends control signals to one joint of a two-degree- 
of-freedom ankle-foot prosthesis and provides proprioceptive information pertaining to the movement of that 
joint. The AMI subject displayed improved control over the prosthesis compared to a group of four subjects having 
traditional amputation. We also show natural reflexive behaviors during stair ambulation in the AMI subject that 
do not appear in the cohort of subjects with traditional amputation. In addition, we demonstrate a system for 
closed-loop joint torque control in AMI subjects. These results provide a framework for integrating bionic systems 
with human physiology.
INTRODUCTION
Proprioception is the sense of the relative spatial positioning of one’s 
body parts and of the amount of force exerted on the environment 
(1). It is essential to human motor control, gait adaptation, and joint 
stability (2, 3). In humans, proprioceptive feedback is primarily me-
diated by a complex relationship between sensory organs within 
muscles and tendons (1). Although a large body of literature exists 
surrounding the biological structures involved in proprioceptive sen-
sation, including stretch receptors in the skin (4–6) and movement 
receptors in the joints (7–9), there is substantial evidence highlighting 
muscle spindles and Golgi tendon organs (10) as the predominant 
mediators of joint proprioception (1). Muscle spindles and Golgi 
tendon organs represent only a portion of the larger proprioceptive 
system; however, studies in vibration-induced illusory kinesthesia 
have indicated that isolated activation of muscle afferent receptors 
is sufficient to promote sensations of joint position, movement, and 
torque (11, 12). Further evidence indicates that the dynamic rela-
tionships within agonist-antagonist muscle pairs are fundamental to 
natural sensations of joint movement (13). The complexity of this 
afferent (neural pathways that relay information from a muscle or 
other end organ to the central nervous system) feedback system 
poses a challenging hurdle for the development of bionic limbs that 
benefit from bidirectional neural communication.
The clinical standard of care for limb amputation surgery has not 
changed in almost two centuries and is not currently optimized to 
facilitate neural integration with bionic limbs. In a typical amputa-
tion procedure, muscle tissues in the residual limb are configured 
isometrically to create padding for a prosthetic socket (14), severing 
the dynamic relationship between agonist-antagonist muscle pairs 
and limiting the ability of the muscle spindles and Golgi tendon 
organs within these tissues to communicate meaningful informa-
tion to the central nervous system. Muscles, tendons, skin, bones, 
and other tissues distal to the amputation site are typically dis-
carded, despite their potential capacity to contribute to reconstruc-
tion of the amputated residuum. Nerves that cross the amputation 
boundary are cut under tension and then buried into fat tissue or 
deep in the residuum in an effort to prevent the formation of inap-
propriate nerve tissue growths, called neuromas, which can cause 
pain or other phantom sensations (15). Although sometimes effec-
tive in preventing neuropathic pain, this technique creates a hurdle 
for neural interfaces because of the limited longitudinal viability of 
direct contact between synthetic interfaces and peripheral nerve tis-
sues, especially for neural recording (16, 17). Robotic prostheses 
have been designed around these limitations and fall short of repro-
ducing the biological control experience. The present state-of-the-
art commercial technology for persons with below-knee amputation 
is a powered ankle joint that is unable to fully reproduce the mo-
tions of the biological ankle and subtalar joints and does not have 
any direct connection to the nervous system (18).
Many attempts have been made to overcome the limitations of state-
of-the-art amputation surgical techniques and commercial prosthetic 
systems. Direct stimulation of upstream peripheral nerves through im-
plantable electrodes has shown great promise in restoring cutaneous 
touch perception and, in some cases, isolated kinesthetic sensations 
(19–25). However, partly because of a mismatch between the complex-
ity of proprioceptive afferent signaling and the relatively low resolu-
tion and precision of implantable stimulation methodologies, none of 
these approaches is engineered to provide, with high-probability, sta-
ble and natural proprioceptive percepts. Vibration-induced illusory 
kinesthesia (12) has been explored as a means of providing joint state 
1Center for Extreme Bionics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Media 
Lab, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. 2Harvard–MIT Division of Health Sciences and 
Technology, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. 3Division of Plastic and Reconstruc-
tive Surgery, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA. 4Depart-
ment of Media Arts and Sciences, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
*Corresponding author. Email: hherr@media.mit.edu
Copyright © 2018 
The Authors, some 
rights reserved; 
exclusive licensee 
American Association 
for the Advancement 
of Science. No claim  
to original U.S. 
Government Works
 by guest on June 5, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Clites et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaap8373 (2018)     30 May 2018
SCIE N C E TR A N S LA T I O NA L M EDI CI NE | RE SE ARCH ARTICL E
2 of 13
information through activation of cutaneous stretch receptors; un-
fortunately, translation of this approach has been a major hurdle. Re-
generative peripheral nerve interfaces have emerged as a means of 
stifling neuroma formation, preventing phantom pain, increasing 
the number of independent neural control targets, and conveying cu-
taneous sensory information (26, 27). Targeted muscle reinnervation 
has a strong track record of improving controllability of myoelectric 
prostheses but is not designed to close the control loop with proprio-
ceptive sensation (28, 29). Prosthetic hardware has also seen dramatic 
improvement in recent years (29–35), including substantial improve-
ments to myoelectric control architectures (20, 27–29, 34, 36).
As a methodology of improving efferent (neural pathways that re-
lay commands from the central nervous system to a muscle or other 
end organ) prosthetic control and providing afferent proprioceptive 
sensation, we present an agonist-antagonist myoneural interface 
(AMI). An AMI is made up of an agonist and an antagonist muscle- 
tendon connected mechanically in series: When the agonist con-
tracts, the antagonist is stretched and vice versa (37, 38). The purpose 
of an AMI is to control and interpret proprioceptive feedback from 
a bionic joint. This approach was first validated in several experiments 
using animal models. An AMI was constructed from musculature 
with intact innervation and vascular supply in a rat distal hindlimb 
(39). Graded afferent signals were then recorded from the agonist 
muscle’s innervation nerve during closed-loop functional electrical 
stimulation of the antagonist, demonstrating the capacity of the AMI 
to provide natural proprioceptive feedback. In another murine study, 
we demonstrated that a functional AMI could be constructed from 
small denervated and devascularized muscle grafts placed in the vi-
cinity of transected motor nerves (40). A caprine experiment fur-
ther validated that the principles demonstrated in (39) are scalable 
to larger animal models (41).
On the basis of these previous studies, we hypothesized that the 
AMI procedure and rehabilitation protocol would enable improved 
control of a multi-degree-of-freedom prosthesis while reflecting nat-
ural proprioceptive sensation pertaining to each prosthetic joint onto 
the central nervous system. In the case study presented herein, we test 
this hypothesis in a human subject having a unilateral transtibial am-
putation. We first describe the implementation of two AMIs within 
the subject’s residuum and connection via synthetic electrodes to 
an external prosthetic leg with powered artificial ankle and subtalar 
joints. The ability of this AMI patient (subject A) to volitionally and 
reflexively control the prosthesis in free space was evaluated and com-
pared to a cohort of four participants having traditional transtibial 
amputation (group T, composed of subjects T1 to T4). We conclude 
with an evaluation of a functional electrical stimulation (FES) meth-
odology for providing torque feedback from a prosthesis to the pe-
ripheral nervous system of subject A.
RESULTS
AMI surgical construction
Two AMIs were constructed in the residual limb of a 53-year-old 
male at the time of his elective unilateral transtibial amputation. One 
AMI, composed of the tibialis posterior and the peroneus longus, 
was designed to control the bionic subtalar joint responsible for 
prosthetic inversion and eversion movements (Fig. 1, A1 and A2). 
A second AMI, composed of the lateral gastrocnemius and the tibialis 
anterior, was designed to control the bionic ankle joint, responsible 
for prosthetic plantar flexion and dorsiflexion movements (Fig. 1, 
A3 and A4). In each AMI, each muscle was mechanically linked to 
its partner via a tendon, which passed through a synovial canal, har-
vested from the amputated ankle joint at the time of amputation. 
One synovial canal was anchored to the medial flat of the tibia for 
each AMI and served as a biological pulley for that AMI, enabling the 
tendon to slide relative to the anchored sheath such that force pro-
duction in one muscle caused stretch in the other. The AMI muscles 
were surgically coapted (connected via suture) with each muscle set 
at its resting tension, such that the default sensory state of each AMI 
reflected a neutral joint position.
At about 1-year postoperation, ultrasound imaging was used to 
interrogate motion of each AMI during volitional cyclical movement 
of the phantom limb. Movement commands were communicated to 
the subject in terms of phantom limb motion (“dorsiflex your ankle”), 
rather than activation of a specific muscle (“contract your tibialis 
anterior”). Fascicle strains were estimated from ultrasound video, 
recorded from the antagonist muscle as the subject volitionally con-
tracted the agonist. Electromyography (EMG) was simultaneously 
recorded from the contracting agonist. Ultrasound fascicle data 
showed physiologically relevant strains (up to 16%) in the antago-
nist during volitional activation of the agonist. Cross-correlation of 
the agonist- 
integrated EMG signal and antagonist fascicle strain 
showed a strong relationship between agonist muscle activation and 
antagonist muscle stretch, with a correlation coefficient of 0.94 for 
inversion (Fig. 1B) and 0.91 for plantar flexion (Fig. 1C). Coupled 
motion was also preserved during cyclical alternating contraction 
of the agonist and the antagonist muscles at both low and high fre-
quencies (movie S1). Additional video was recorded with the ultra-
sound probe positioned adjacent to the synovial canals; these videos 
showed sliding along the medial tibia, confirming coupled move-
ment within each AMI (movie S1).
Control architecture: Prosthesis not in the loop
All experiments were carried out using a prototype ankle-foot pros-
thesis with powered ankle and subtalar joints (see the “Prosthetic hard-
ware design” section in the Supplementary Materials for a description 
of the robotic hardware). When the AMI subject (subject A) wishes 
to move the bionic limb, he contracts the AMI muscles associated 
with his intended motion. Muscle activation is estimated from EMG 
collected via four bipolar surface electrodes on the surface of the skin, 
where each electrode is affixed adjacent to one of the four muscles 
comprising the two AMIs. These estimates are used to independently 
control position and impedance (mechanical stiffness) of the pros-
thetic ankle and subtalar joints (for a complete discussion of EMG 
processing and efferent control architecture, see the “Efferent con-
trol architecture” section and fig. S1). Because the AMI agonist and 
antagonist muscles are mechanically coupled within the residual limb 
of our subject, volitional contraction of an agonist passively stretches 
that muscle’s antagonist. The natural neural responses from muscle 
spindles within both muscles are then interpreted by the central ner-
vous system as sensations of joint position and speed, associated with 
movement of the prosthesis (Fig. 2A). During volitional movement 
of his phantom limb, subject A reported natural proprioceptive sen-
sation throughout his phantom joint space, closely matching move-
ment of the prosthesis.
In this free-space control architecture, there is no direct feedback 
line from the prosthesis to the AMI (hence, “prosthesis not in the 
loop”). However, the subject receives proprioceptive afferent feedback 
describing his intended movement command through agonist-antagonist 
 by guest on June 5, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Clites et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaap8373 (2018)     30 May 2018
SCIE N C E TR A N S LA T I O NA L M EDI CI NE | RE SE ARCH ARTICL E
3 of 13
stretch relationships within the AMI. In free space, where no external 
torques are applied to the prosthetic joints, the efferent control system 
is designed to ensure that movement of the prosthesis is reliably syn-
chronized with these natural afferent sensations; in this way, there is 
limited functional difference between sensations of intended and ac-
tual joint motion.
Before beginning the experiments, we found that by tuning con-
troller gains, we could adjust sensitivity of the prosthesis to make it 
Fig. 1. Agonist-antagonist myoneural interface. (A) Two AMIs were surgically constructed within the left leg residuum of a patient to enable control of prosthetic 
subtalar and ankle joint movements. Prosthetic subtalar and ankle movements are shown in (A1) and (A2), and (A3) and (A4), respectively. In (A1), the prosthetic subtalar 
joint everts (arrow) when the peroneus longus contracts, stretching the tibialis posterior; in (A2), the subtalar joint inverts (arrow) when the tibialis posterior contracts, 
stretching the peroneus longus. In (A3), the prosthetic ankle joint dorsiflexes (arrow) when the tibialis anterior contracts, stretching the lateral gastrocnemius; in (A4), 
the ankle joint plantar-flexes (arrow) when the lateral gastrocnemius contracts, stretching the tibialis anterior. Dashed arrows indicate muscle contraction and stretch. 
(B) Ultrasound strain and EMG data for the subtalar AMI, showing coupled motion when the peroneus longus is stretched during volitional contraction of the tibialis 
posterior [inversion movement (A2)]. The correlation coefficient of these two signals is 0.94. (C) Ultrasound strain and EMG data for the ankle AMI, showing coupled 
motion when the tibialis anterior is stretched during volitional contraction of the lateral gastrocnemius [plantar flexion movement (A4)]. The correlation coefficient of 
these two signals is 0.91. (B) and (C) are representative traces from subject A (n = 5 trials per motion). EMG values are normalized to calibrated maxima for each muscle.
 by guest on June 5, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Clites et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaap8373 (2018)     30 May 2018
SCIE N C E TR A N S LA T I O NA L M EDI CI NE | RE SE ARCH ARTICL E
4 of 13
Fig. 2. Volitional control of joint position and impedance. (A) Schematic showing how subject A activates the AMI muscle associated with his intended motion. This 
activation is recorded as EMG and generates a movement command for the motors within the prosthesis. The subject can stiffen a prosthetic joint by simultaneously 
coactivating both the agonist and the antagonist muscles within the AMI associated with that joint. Afferent signals describing prosthetic joint movement are communicated 
to the patient’s nervous system via muscle spindle response to differential stretch relationships within each AMI muscle. (B) Average performance maps for volitional 
control tasks (n = 100 samples from subject A, n = 350 samples from group T). The scores for each metric are presented by target area; the location of each rectangle 
within the axis represents the target area in joint space, ranging from full plantar flexion (PF) to full dorsiflexion (DF) and from full eversion (EV) to full inversion (IN). The 
shade of the rectangle indicates the subject’s score in that target area, where lighter shades are indicative of better performance. (C) Representative sample traces of joint 
position (angle), EMG, and ankle stiffness during free-space volitional control experiments for subject A (n = 100 total samples) and one subject from group T (subject T2, 
n = 50 total samples). Dashed vertical lines divide the trial into segments by target motion, indicated by the text at the top of each segment. The shaded region of each 
plot represents the portion of that trial in which the subject was instructed to stiffen the joint. The range of ankle angles shown is the full range of the prosthetic ankle: 
from 15 degrees of PF to 10 degrees of DF. The range of subtalar angles shown is the full range of the prosthetic subtalar: from 15 degrees of EV to 15 degrees of IN. Ankle 
and subtalar angle plots show target position (black) and actual position (purple). The ankle EMG plot shows signal recorded from the lateral gastrocnemius (light blue) 
and the tibialis anterior (dark blue). The subtalar EMG plot shows signal recorded from the tibialis posterior (light green) and the peroneus longus (dark green). EMG values 
are normalized to calibrated maxima for each muscle. Stiffness values are normalized such that a value of 1 represents coactivation of the tibialis anterior and the lateral 
gastrocnemius at each muscle’s calibrated maximum.
 by guest on June 5, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Clites et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaap8373 (2018)     30 May 2018
SCIE N C E TR A N S LA T I O NA L M EDI CI NE | RE SE ARCH ARTICL E
5 of 13
more or less reactive to muscle activity than the phantom limb. If the 
gains were too high, our subject described movement of the prosthesis 
as “jumpy.” Conversely, if they were too low, he described the pros-
thesis as “sluggish” and “nonresponsive.” Once the gains were well 
tuned, movement of the prosthesis and perceived movement of the 
phantom limb came into alignment. Control subjects having tradi-
tional unilateral transtibial amputation (group T), using the same pros-
thesis under identical conditions, did not report similar sensations. 
Despite ample gain adjustments and tuning, none of the control sub-
jects felt that motion of the prosthetic joints closely matched sensation 
in the phantom limb. One subject (subject T2) specifically attributed 
this discrepancy in part to an unintended simultaneous antagonis-
tic cocontraction during volitional activation of muscles within his 
residuum. All subjects in group T described a perception of limited 
motion throughout their phantom joint space.
Independent control of joint position and impedance
For all subjects, volitional control experiments were carried out after 
about 1 hour of tuning and free control of the device. These experi-
ments evaluated each subject’s ability to independently modulate 
prosthetic joint position and impedance while performing volitional 
control tasks with the prosthesis in free space. A graphical interface 
was generated to visualize prosthesis joint angles in real time as a 
point location in two-dimensional joint space (plantar flexion and 
dorsiflexion on the vertical axis and inversion and eversion on the 
horizontal). While wearing the prosthesis and watching the graphi-
cal interface, each subject was instructed to complete the following 
tasks: (i) move the prosthesis to within a predetermined window of 
joint angles, represented graphically as a rectangle in joint angle 
space; (ii) hold the prosthesis within this joint angle window for 3 s; 
(iii) stiffen the prosthesis by cocontracting the AMI muscles, while 
maintaining the joint position within the joint angle window; and 
(iv) return the prosthesis to its rest position.
After being introduced to the experimental paradigm and allowed 
one practice attempt, each subject repeatedly performed tasks 1 to 4 at 
10 different locations across the full prosthesis joint angle space, in a 
randomly generated order. All trials were carried out within the same 
2-hour session. Three metrics were selected to evaluate performance 
during volitional control experiments. For each metric, each subject’s 
average performance was calculated across all trials performed by 
that subject to give an overall subject score. Scores for subject A (n = 
100 samples from 10 trials) were compared to the average of the four 
subject scores from group T (n = 350 samples from 35 trials).
Identical experiments were also performed on a cohort of limbs 
with intact biological anatomy (n = 390 samples from 39 trials). This 
cohort included three of the four unaffected limbs from subjects in 
group T, as well as one limb of an additional subject with two intact 
biological limbs. For these experiments, subjects controlled the pros-
thesis with EMG signals measured from surface electrodes placed 
over the muscles in their intact biological limb. In this way, the per-
formance metrics for this cohort are not meant to characterize the 
fully biological control system, but instead to capture performance 
of ideal muscular anatomy working in concert with the designed 
robotic platform. In addition, scores from subject A’s unaffected leg 
(n = 100 samples from 10 trials) were compared with scores from the 
intact limb cohort to account for the possibility that subject A was 
uncharacteristically skilled at the particular experimental task.
The performance metrics used to assess volitional prosthetic con-
trol were path nonideality, time in target, and total wasted motion. 
All subjects successfully completed all tasks at all locations, with some 
target locations consistently more difficult than others (Fig. 2B; per-
formance metrics for each individual subject are reported in table S1).
Path nonideality indicates the distance in angle space traversed 
by the prosthetic joints during the initial movement of the prosthesis 
from the rest angle to the target angle (task 1), normalized to the 
ideal distance from the rest angle to the center of the target square. 
Better performance in this metric is indicated by a lower score. Sub-
ject A’s path nonideality score was 1.65 compared to an average score 
of 2.7 (±0.45) for subjects in group T. This represents a 39% im-
provement in performance. The average path nonideality score for 
the intact limb cohort was 1.68 (±0.87), and the score for subject A’s 
unaffected limb was 1.56.
Time in target indicates ability to hold the prosthesis in the tar-
get window and is reported as the total time for which each subject 
maintained the prosthesis within the target during the 3-s hold task 
(task 2). Better performance in this metric is indicated by a higher 
score. Subject A’s time in target score was 2.04 s compared to an aver-
age score of 1.53 s (±0.30) for subjects in group T. This represents a 
33% improvement in performance. The average time in target score 
for the intact limb cohort was 2.16 s (±0.33), and the score for subject 
A’s unaffected limb was 2.49 s.
Total wasted motion provides insight into stability and movement 
efficiency during joint motion and stiffening throughout all active 
portions of the trial (tasks 1 to 3). This is reported as the total angle- 
space distance traversed by the prosthetic joints, normalized to the 
minimum travel distance required to complete the tasks. Better per-
formance in this metric is indicated by a lower score. Subject A’s total 
wasted motion score was 7.45 compared to an average score of 21.74 
(±2.68) for subjects in group T. This represents a 66% improvement 
in performance. The average total wasted motion score for the intact 
limb cohort was 8.79 (±3.17), and the score for subject A’s unaffected 
limb was 7.33.
The representative sample traces in Fig. 2C qualitatively highlight 
the improved stability and path efficiency of subject A compared to 
subjects in group T during these volitional control experiments. These 
trends were also apparent in gait-related tasks requiring volitional 
control (Fig. 3 and movie S2). While wearing the prosthesis, subject A 
and each subject from group T were asked to step on the side of a 4-cm 
block placed in their path, such that the lateral edge (outside) of the 
prosthetic foot was in contact with the block, whereas the medial edge 
(inside) of the foot remained in contact with the floor. The block was 
placed on the floor at the location of expected foot strike of the sub-
ject’s affected leg to force the prosthetic foot into an everted position 
(Fig. 3). All subjects were uniformly instructed to volitionally move 
the prosthetic ankle and subtalar joints during the swing phase of 
a single step such that the prosthetic subtalar would be everted ap-
propriately for contact with the block. In subject A, we observed 
volitional repositioning of the subtalar into full eversion during the 
swing phase, consistent across all trials (n = 10). Swing-phase behav-
iors within group T were nonuniform, with high intersubject vari-
ability (n = 32 trials). Late swing eversion, defined as the maximum 
eversion angle achieved between 80 and 100% of the swing phase, 
was calculated for each trial. These values were then averaged to give 
an overall subject score. Subject A averaged 8.8 degrees of eversion, 
whereas the average score for group T was 4.8 (±5.9) degrees of in-
version. Summary data are reported in Table 1.
Reflexive behaviors
Reflexive activity was evaluated during stair ascent and descent tasks, 
in which humans reflexively modulate swing-phase joint angle (42, 43). 
 by guest on June 5, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Clites et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaap8373 (2018)     30 May 2018
SCIE N C E TR A N S LA T I O NA L M EDI CI NE | RE SE ARCH ARTICL E
6 of 13
Subject A and all subjects from group T were instructed to walk as 
naturally as possible and to avoid active volitional movement of the 
prosthesis. Instructions were carefully designed and delivered uni-
formly with intent to be clear, concise, consistent, and free from bias. 
While ascending stairs, subject A (n = 10 trials) first reflexively plantar- 
flexed the prosthetic ankle as the prosthesis left the ground and then 
dorsiflexed during swing to appropriately position the foot before 
placing it on the step (Fig. 4A and movie S3). He described these 
actions as automatic. These behaviors were not observed in subjects 
from group T (n = 32 trials). Late swing dorsiflexion, defined as the 
maximum dorsiflexion angle achieved between 80 and 100% of the 
swing phase, was calculated for each trial, and comparisons were 
made as above. Subject A averaged 7.3 degrees of dorsiflexion com-
pared to 7.0 (±3.8) degrees of plantar flexion in group T. Summary 
data are reported in Table 1.
While descending stairs (prosthetic leg leading), subject A exhib-
ited plantar flexion in late swing to prepare for foot-ground contact 
(Fig. 4B and movie S3). This behavior is fundamental to normalized 
stair-descent gait (42, 43). Late swing plantar flexion was not appre-
ciable in three of the four subjects from group T. The fourth subject 
(T3) consistently plantar-flexed beginning before toe-off, and the 
degree of plantar flexion lessened as the subject moved through the 
swing phase. Late swing plantar flexion was defined as the maximum 
plantar flexion angle achieved between 80 and 100% of the swing 
phase. Subject A averaged 11.9 degrees of plantar flexion compared 
to 2.3 (±3.2) degrees of plantar flexion in group T. Summary data are 
reported in Table 1.
Control architecture: Prosthesis in the loop
The final set of experiments was designed to evaluate whether FES 
can provide usable torque information from the prosthetic device to 
a subject having AMIs. To close the control loop around the pros-
thesis, afferent feedback of prosthetic joint torque was provided to 
subject A through stimulation of the AMI muscles (Fig. 5A). In re-
sponse to torque measured on the prosthesis, microprocessors on 
the bionic leg commanded artificial stimulations to the antagonist 
muscle within each AMI, controlling the force borne on the mechan-
ically coupled agonist. To validate this feedback modality in isola-
tion, stimulation was first applied to the tibialis anterior—the muscle 
linked to prosthetic dorsiflexion—in absence of the prosthesis. Subject 
Fig. 3. Simultaneous subtalar and ankle control during a gait task requiring volitional eversion. Joint position and EMG during the swing phase of gait, as subject 
A (n = 10 trials) and each subject from group T (n = 32 trials) step onto the side of a block positioned on the floor to require eversion (arrow) of the prosthetic subtalar joint, 
as shown in the schematic. Shaded traces indicate mean ± 1 SD. Positive and negative subtalar angles correspond to eversion (EV) and inversion (IN), respectively. Positive 
and negative ankle angles correspond to dorsiflexion (DF) and plantar flexion (PF), respectively. The subtalar EMG plot shows signal recorded from the peroneus longus 
(light green) and the tibialis posterior (dark green). The ankle EMG plot shows signal recorded from the lateral gastrocnemius (light blue) and the tibialis anterior (dark 
blue). EMG values are normalized to calibrated maxima for each muscle.
 by guest on June 5, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Clites et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaap8373 (2018)     30 May 2018
SCIE N C E TR A N S LA T I O NA L M EDI CI NE | RE SE ARCH ARTICL E
7 of 13
A qualitatively described the sensation associated with this stimulation 
as “standing at the edge of a step, with [his] weight pushing down,” 
forcing his phantom ankle into a dorsiflexed state. By volitionally ac-
tivating his calf muscles, he counteracted the perceived dorsiflexion 
and felt the phantom ankle return to a neutral position, as if he had 
done a calf-raise exercise while still standing at the step’s edge. Subject 
A acknowledged the absence of cutaneous sensation and described 
perceiving the stimulation as “involuntary contraction” in the artifi-
cially stimulated tibialis anterior. However, he felt that these were mi-
nor distractions, to which he would grow accustomed with repeated 
use of the prosthesis.
Characterization of perception
Two psychometric evaluations were performed to quantify subject 
A’s perception of torque intensity in absence of the prosthesis. First, 
a magnitude estimation experiment was carried out in a manner sim-
ilar to experiments previously described in the literature (19, 25). 
Stimulation was delivered to the tibialis anterior at randomly selected 
current amplitudes of integer values between 0 and 4 mA. Subject A 
was blinded to all stimulation parameters throughout the experiment. 
During each trial, the subject was instructed to remain at rest until he 
felt stimulation pulling his phantom ankle into a dorsiflexed position. 
He was then asked to counteract this perceived ankle torque by voli-
tionally plantar-flexing his phantom ankle until the perceived joint 
angle returned to its neutral state. After stimulation had subsided, the 
subject verbally rated the magnitude of perceived torque (Fig. 5B). 
There was a significant correlation between perceived dorsiflexion 
torque and stimulation amplitude (P < 0.0001, R2 = 0.96, n = 25).
In the second psychometric evaluation, a forced-choice paradigm 
was used to establish the just-noticeable difference (JND) for stimu-
lation intensity, following the protocol outlined in (25). During each 
trial, a pair of stimuli were applied to the tibialis anterior in a pseu-
dorandom order; one of the two stimuli was delivered at a reference 
amplitude (2 mA), and the other was delivered at 1 of 11 possible stim-
ulus values ranging from 0 to 4 mA. Each pair of stimuli was pre-
sented a total of 20 times in a pseudorandomly generated order, for a 
total of 220 individual trials. After each pair was presented, subject A 
was asked to indicate which of the two stimuli he perceived as stronger. 
Both subject A and the experimenter were blinded to stimulus ampli-
tudes. A cumulative normal distribution was fit to the raw discrimina-
tion data to obtain a psychometric function. Two estimates of JND 
were calculated from this function as the change in stimulus amplitude 
that resulted in 75% judgment accuracy: one for increases relative to 
the reference value and the other for decreases relative to the reference 
value. These two values were then averaged to give a single estimate of 
JND. The psychometric curve for subject A was smooth, and the JND 
specific to this reference amplitude was 0.065 mA (Fig. 5C).
Closed-loop torque control
Afferent feedback of prosthetic torque through stimulation of the 
AMI antagonist improved performance during torque control tasks. 
In these experiments, subject A plantar-flexed the prosthetic ankle in 
response to verbal commands of percent effort (25, 50, 75, and 100%), 
thereby applying torque to a linear rotary-spring foot pedal. Sample 
trial plots (Fig. 5D) show the relationship between EMG activity, 
torque measured on the foot pedal, and stimulation amplitude. Sum-
mary results from these experiments are shown in Fig. 5E. With stim-
ulation, subject A consistently generated four distinct torques at each 
of the four effort levels (P < 0.025, Tukey-Kramer, n = 79). Without 
muscle stimulation feedback, the torques generated at 50 and 75% 
effort and 75 and 100% effort did not differ significantly (P > 0.1, 
Tukey-Kramer, n = 79). Torques produced at 25, 50, and 100% effort 
were significantly different between the stimulation on and stimula-
tion off cases (P < 0.02, t test), whereas those produced at 75% effort 
did not show a significant difference (P = 0.73). In his unaffected 
limb, subject A generated significantly different torques at each of 
the four effort levels (P < 0.001, Tukey-Kramer, n = 80).
Descriptions of the control experience
After each session, study participants were asked to comment on the 
experience of controlling the prototype prosthesis. Subject A described 
feeling as if the prosthesis was “his leg,” referring to his missing biolog-
ical limb. He explained, “My [conventional] prosthesis doesn’t have 
the same sort of animation to it. This feels like it’s alive.” Over the 
course of this study, we observed subject A’s candid interactions with 
the prosthesis during experimental downtime. On one occasion, at 
the end of the first trial day, we noticed that he was unconsciously 
fidgeting with the prosthetic foot while seated and engrossed in con-
versation (movie S4). On the second trial day, after standing on the 
device for only a few minutes, we watched as he wiggled his pros-
thetic foot to dislodge a roll of tape that had adhered to the bottom 
of his shoe (movie S4). These small behaviors provide evidence to 
support the subject’s claim that the prosthesis had become embodied. 
Two days after the first trial day, in an email sent spontaneously to the 
research team, subject A explained, “Two days later and what trans-
pired is still slowly sinking in. I keep trying to describe the sensation 
to people. Then this morning [my daughter] asked me if I felt like a 
cyborg. The answer was ‘no, I felt like I had a foot’. I think that in just 
the short time I had it wired in and mounted to me it was quickly 
becoming part of me.”
Subjects from group T described a remarkably different subjec-
tive control experience. Subjects T1 and T4 both felt that their inter-
action with the device was similar to the interaction one might have 
playing a video game for the first time. Subject T2 explained that the 
prosthesis sometimes “behaved in a way that was somewhat surpris-
ing” and acknowledged that he felt “a bit of disconnect” with the 
device. He postulated that this disconnect would shrink over time, as 
Table 1. Summary data for terrain traversal trials. The metric in the 
second column was calculated for each trial of the task named in the first 
column and averaged within each subject to give an overall subject score. 
Subject A’s overall subject score for each task (from n = 10 trials per task)  
is reported in the third column. The fourth column reports mean ± 1 
intersubject SD for group T (n = 4 subjects, n = 32 total trials per task). Late 
swing eversion, late swing dorsiflexion, and late swing plantar flexion 
were calculated as the maximum eversion, dorsiflexion, and plantar 
flexion angles, respectively, achieved between 80 and 100% of the swing 
phase of the relevant task. 
Task
Metric
Subject A  
(n = 1)
Group T (n = 4)
Eversion block
Late swing  
    eversion
8.8 degrees of  
    eversion
4.8 (±5.9) degrees  
    of inversion
Stair ascent
Late swing  
    dorsiflexion
7.3 degrees of  
    dorsiflexion
7.0 (±3.8) degrees  
    of plantar  
    flexion
Stair descent
Late swing  
    plantar  
    flexion
11.9 degrees  
    of plantar 
    flexion
2.3 (±3.2) degrees  
    of plantar  
    flexion
 by guest on June 5, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Clites et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaap8373 (2018)     30 May 2018
SCIE N C E TR A N S LA T I O NA L M EDI CI NE | RE SE ARCH ARTICL E
8 of 13
he learned to control the joints in a more predictable way. Upon fur-
ther questioning, he revealed that his connectedness with any prosthe-
sis was directly linked to the “sensation he received from it.” Although 
this subject was pleased to be able to feel the device moving, which he 
perceived through shifts in momentum and vibrations carried through 
his socket, he noted that these sensations were only present while the 
joints were in motion. In his words, “I can feel it in the passage from 
point A to point B, but once it’s at point B, or once it’s resting at point 
A, there’s no sensation.” Subject T3 described “not really trusting” the 
device. Universal to the correspondence of subjects from group T was 
a distinct lack of ownership of the prosthesis or emotion associated 
with controlling it. The discrepancy in experience between subject A 
and group T may highlight the fundamental role of natural afferent 
sensation in prosthesis embodiment (44–47).
DISCUSSION
Proprioceptive sensation pertaining to a synthetic appendage was re-
flected onto the nervous system of a subject with two AMIs surgically 
constructed in his transtibial residuum. This subject (subject A) showed 
improved stability and motion path efficiency in free-space volitional 
control tasks, as compared to the cohort of four subjects having tradi-
tional transtibial amputation (group T). While ascending and de-
scending stairs, subject A also demonstrated reflexive swing-phase 
behaviors that were absent in group T. In addition, we characterized 
a methodology for closed-loop torque control with afferent proprio-
ceptive feedback of joint torque from a prosthetic limb in persons 
having one or more AMIs. This feedback improved performance on 
torque control tasks.
One possible explanation of performance gaps between subject 
A and group T during volitional control tasks is a lack of fine con-
trol over residual muscle activation in the latter group. Several of the 
subjects in group T described involuntary cocontraction as a prom-
inent source of efferent control difficulty; accompanying volitional 
activation of a muscle in the residual limb is a consistent unintended 
contraction in that muscle’s antagonist. Consequently, these subjects 
must increase the volitional activation of their agonist to overpower 
the unintended antagonistic activation. This likely played a role in a 
Fig. 4. Reflexive control during stair tasks. Ankle position and EMG while each subject (A) ascends and (B) descends stairs. Shaded traces indicate mean ± 1 SD for 
subject A (n = 10 trials for each of ascent and descent) and each subject from group T (n = 32 trials for each of ascent and descent). The ankle EMG plots show signal re-
corded from the lateral gastrocnemius (light blue) and the tibialis anterior (dark blue). Arrow indicates direction of movement. EMG values are normalized to calibrated 
maxima for each muscle.
 by guest on June 5, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Clites et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaap8373 (2018)     30 May 2018
SCIE N C E TR A N S LA T I O NA L M EDI CI NE | RE SE ARCH ARTICL E
9 of 13
perception that EMG output was binary (on or off) and in the instability 
that plagued all subjects in group T while attempting to generate 
graded volitional movement commands during the volitional control 
experiments.
Cocontraction during gait in patients having unilateral lower- 
extremity amputations has been documented in several independent 
studies (48, 49). In these studies, it is hypothesized that cocontrac-
tion is the result of an effort to stabilize the residual limb within the 
prosthetic socket during the swing phase of gait. However, increased 
levels of involuntary cocontraction have also been observed in upper- 
extremity amputees during volitional control tasks (50–52). We posit 
that these complications may be attributed, at least in part, to limita-
tions of the traditional clinical amputation procedure and rehabilitation 
protocol. Because the muscles in the residual limb of all subjects in 
Fig. 5. Closed-loop torque control. (A) Schematic of the prosthesis-in-the-loop control architecture, in which afferent feedback of prosthetic joint torque is provided via 
FES of the antagonist muscle. The patient perceives this stimulation as a natural sensation of ankle torque. (B) Magnitude estimation of perceived dorsiflexion torque as 
a function of stimulation current delivered to the tibialis anterior. Perceived torques are normalized to the maximum reported value. For clarity in plotting, each point 
represents the mean value of five independent trials. Error bars represent the SE, and the R2 coefficient reported on the plot is that of the mean values. (C) Discrimination 
performance as a function of differences in stimulation current. The reference current for all forced choice trials was 2 mA. Points indicate percentage of test stimuli cor-
rectly identified as stronger or weaker than the reference over 20 pairwise trials, and the green line represents a cumulative normal distribution fit to the raw data. 
(D) Representative sample traces of lateral gastrocnemius EMG (blue), torque (purple), and stimulation current (green) during closed-loop torque control trials for the 
“stimulation on” (n = 79 total trials) and “stimulation off” (n = 79 total trials) cases. Numbers at the top of the plot correspond to percent effort commands. Stimulation cur-
rents are normalized to 9 mA. EMG values are normalized to calibrated maxima for each muscle. (E) Summary data for closed-loop torque control trials in each of the stim-
ulation on (n = 79 trials), stimulation off (n = 79 trials), and “unaffected limb” (n = 80 trials) cases. An asterisk above a bar indicates that the bar is significantly different from 
all other bars in the plot (P < 0.025). Where no significance was seen, a P value for the comparison is shown. Error bars represent a 99.9% confidence interval on the mean.
 by guest on June 5, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Clites et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaap8373 (2018)     30 May 2018
SCIE N C E TR A N S LA T I O NA L M EDI CI NE | RE SE ARCH ARTICL E
10 of 13
group T are anchored at fixed lengths, the dynamic muscle relation-
ships that exist within a biological limb with intact anatomy are bro-
ken. These relationships are fundamental to fine motor control and 
functional joint stability (30, 53–55) and play a significant role in re-
ciprocal reflex inhibition (56–58). In their absence, traditional inhib-
itory reflex arcs may be disrupted, which would increase unintended 
antagonistic coactivation, and have a profound impact on a patient’s 
ability to generate independent and separable muscle commands. 
The AMI has the potential to resolve this limitation by restoring the 
agonist-antagonist muscle relationships that are essential to appro-
priate reflexive muscle activation and by providing feedback of move-
ment commands in the form of proprioceptive sensation. Supported 
by ultrasound data and patient testimonials, it is our hypothesis that 
dynamic agonist-antagonist stretch relationships in the residuum of 
subject A provide a proprioceptive affirmation of muscle activity 
within his residuum; each time he seeks to move his phantom limb, 
subject A receives confirmation of correct muscle activation as stretch 
receptors within the AMI muscles send signals to his brain.
Swing-phase adjustments to joint position and impedance play a 
critical role in the adaptation of gait to varying terrains (42, 43), and 
their absence has a significant impact on gait symmetry (59, 60). Rep-
licating these adaptations has long been a goal of lower-extremity 
prosthetic research, with the majority of efforts focused on intrinsic 
or EMG-based terrain prediction and recognition methodologies 
(61–63). Unfortunately, both the accuracy and versatility of these 
state-of-the-art approaches pale in comparison to the human central 
nervous system, with its unparalleled ability to synthesize data streams 
from a vast array of biological sensors into a cogent motor control 
framework. While traversing various terrains, subjects in group T did 
not consistently demonstrate reflexive swing-phase modulation of pros-
thetic joint angle that would result in natural gait adaptations. These 
findings are in line with several studies examining EMG profiles in 
persons having transtibial amputation. In one study, it was shown 
that there is little intersubject consistency in muscle activation pro-
files during level ground walking and that muscle recruitment pat-
terns do not match those in persons with two intact biological limbs 
(49). In another study, it was concluded that persons having trans-
tibial amputation are more prone to cocontraction within the resid-
ual ankle musculature than healthy controls (48), which is consistent 
with our observations in several subjects from group T. In contrast, 
subject A reflexively modulated swing-phase joint angle in a manner 
appropriate to each terrain without training. These findings under-
score the potential of the AMI to reinstate the central nervous system 
as the primary mediator of gait adaptation by providing the afferent 
proprioceptive sensations that are crucial to this function.
Here, we characterize a methodology to communicate sensations 
of joint torque from a bionic limb directly to the nervous system in a 
patient having an AMI. This feedback is perceived by subject A as 
natural torque about his phantom ankle and improves his perfor-
mance in a task requiring torque modulation. Reliable closed-loop 
control of joint torque has the potential to provide an array of func-
tionality to prosthetic users that was heretofore impossible. However, 
for these visions to become a reality, it will be necessary to improve 
viability of the stimulation delivery mechanism. The fine-wire elec-
trodes used in this study are not a feasible long-term solution, be-
cause they are placed acutely for each experimental session and are 
not sufficiently anchored within the muscle to withstand the large 
shear forces associated with socket use. These issues can be resolved 
with a shift to permanently implanted intramuscular or epimysial 
electrodes that are fixed in place on the muscle to deliver repeatable 
stimulation (16, 17). In addition, it is worth noting that stimulation 
of residual muscles may also improve performance during torque- 
control tasks in persons with traditional amputation; however, the 
mechanism behind any potential improvement resulting from such 
an approach, which would involve stimulating muscles that are fixed 
isometrically, would fundamentally differ from the agonist-antagonist 
relationships that drive perception within the natural limb.
Another key difference between the experiences of subject A and 
group T is rooted in their subjective descriptions of their relation-
ship with the prosthesis. Subject A felt an immediate and lasting 
connection with the device, whereas subjects in group T described 
a distinct disconnect. On the basis of their accounts, we believe that 
the difference in embodiment is attributable to two primary factors, 
namely, (i) robustness and intuitiveness of efferent control and (ii) 
reliability of afferent feedback. It is our position that each correctly 
executed volitional or reflexive behavior, reinforced by natural pro-
prioceptive sensation, has the potential to deepen the relationship 
between human and machine. In this way, a bionic system that in-
tegrates more completely with a patient’s sense of self has the poten-
tial to improve usage and satisfaction (44).
In this case study, the AMI described was implemented in an ideal 
surgical setting. The elective nature of the amputation made it possible 
to carefully plan our surgical approach. The muscular anatomy and 
limited degrees of freedom of the ankle and subtalar joints simplified 
the procedure relative to what would be necessary at the above-knee 
level or in the upper extremity. Even the patient’s indication for ampu-
tation was advantageous; nonresolving bone injury represents an op-
timal availability of healthy distal soft tissue. However, it is important 
to note that the benefits of the AMI are not restricted to this limited 
patient population. Research is already underway to explore con-
struction of AMIs at other amputation levels, as well as in the upper 
extremity. A recent study demonstrated the potential to leverage re-
generative capabilities of nerve and muscle tissue in the construction 
of AMIs in settings where distal tissues are no longer available, such 
as traumatic amputations or revisions to existing amputations (40). 
It is worth noting that, even with these advancements, the imple-
mentation of the AMI may not be appropriate in patients requiring 
amputation due to advanced peripheral vascular disease. Patients in 
this population typically exhibit neuropathy and microvascular com-
promise, which may negate the benefits of the AMI and inhibit proper 
wound healing. Nevertheless, even if this population were excluded 
entirely, a majority of the remaining estimated 46% of patients indi-
cated for amputation (64) would be eligible for an AMI procedure. It 
is also noteworthy that the study presented herein does not separate 
the impact of the AMI procedure from the visualization exercises that 
were added to the rehabilitation protocol with the intent of preserv-
ing muscle sliding (for details, see the “Subject selection, surgery, and 
rehabilitation” section). This is a feature inherent to a case study design 
that relies on a historic control group. Because this is a first-in-human 
case study, the results presented herein serve to highlight the poten-
tial of the AMI to improve volitional and reflexive neural control of a 
prosthetic device; a larger trial in a greater number of patients is nec-
essary to definitively understand the degree of improvement that can 
be attributed specifically to the AMI procedure.
Proprioceptive insensibility has long been a stumbling block for 
integration of bionic devices with human physical identity. The AMI 
is fundamentally distinct from other approaches in that its implemen-
tation begins with a reengineering of the musculoskeletal anatomy 
 by guest on June 5, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Clites et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaap8373 (2018)     30 May 2018
SCIE N C E TR A N S LA T I O NA L M EDI CI NE | RE SE ARCH ARTICL E
11 of 13
within the residuum. This approach is built upon an expanded under-
standing of what comprises a “neural interface” to incorporate not only 
synthetic components but also biological tissues (26, 65). Because of 
the inherent capacity of muscle tissue to amplify efferent neural sig-
nals and mechanoreceptors within muscle and tendon to communi-
cate afferent proprioceptive information to the nervous system, these 
native biological transducers are ideally suited to act as the bidirec-
tional interface between the nerve and the prosthesis. The AMI was 
designed with the intent of optimizing this biological interface. The 
results presented herein demonstrate the potential of such a bionic 
system to improve functional outcomes and embodiment when com-
pared with a traditional approach to amputation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study design
The primary hypothesis investigated in this case study is that the AMI 
procedure and rehabilitation protocol (i) enables independent control 
of prosthetic joint angle and impedance and (ii) reflects proprioceptive 
afferent sensation pertaining to each joint of a two-degree-of-freedom 
ankle-foot prosthesis onto the central nervous system. The experiments 
presented were designed to demonstrate the AMI’s potential to im-
prove volitional, free-space control, restore swing-phase reflexes while 
traversing various terrains, and perform closed-loop torque control 
tasks. This was a first-in-human, nonrandomized case study. The ex-
perimental subject (subject A) served as his own control where possi-
ble. Where control subjects having a traditional amputation were 
needed, four subjects were selected (group T), representing a 
wide array of patient demographics. None of the patients reported 
or showed signs of any complicating nerve or muscle damage within 
the residual limb.
Subject selection, surgery, and rehabilitation
The AMI operation and clinical follow-up were performed with informed 
consent at Brigham and Women’s Hospital, under the approval of the 
Partner’s Health System Institutional Review Board. All other exper-
iments were carried out with informed consent at the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology (MIT), under the approval of the Committee 
on the Use of Humans as Experimental Subjects. Subject A was se-
lected for participation based primarily on his need for elective uni-
lateral transtibial amputation, indicated due to a traumatic Hawkins 
type 4 talus fracture and persistent nerve pain. He was 53 years old at 
the time of his primary amputation in July 2016. During this primary 
amputation, two AMIs were constructed within his residual limb by 
one of the study authors (M.J.C.). The amputation osteotomy was 
performed at 12 cm distal to the patellar ligament, resulting in a 
residuum of standard length. Acute rehabilitation began at 6 weeks 
postoperation. In addition to standard rehabilitation protocols, the 
patient regularly performed exercises focused on preserving motion 
within the AMI constructs. During these exercises, the patient was 
asked to visualize his phantom limb and focus on moving his phan-
tom foot through the four primary ankle and subtalar joint motions 
(plantar flexion and dorsiflexion, inversion and eversion). No direct 
feedback of muscle activity was provided to the patient during reha-
bilitation exercises. Experimental sessions with the bionic pros-
thesis began in late April 2017 (9 to 10 months postoperation) and 
continued through November 2017 (16 to 17 months postoperation).
All subjects in group T were men with unilateral transtibial am-
putation, selected to incorporate a range of patient age (range, 37 to 
47 years), time since amputation (range, 1 to 24 years), and body 
mass index (range, 24 to 33 kg/m2). For more details about these 
subjects, see the “Subject selection (group T)” section in the Supple-
mentary Materials.
Surface electrode placement and EMG processing
EMG was recorded via bipolar surface electrodes, placed acutely 
over each of the four target muscles: lateral gastrocnemius for plan-
tar flexion, tibialis anterior for dorsiflexion, tibialis anterior for in-
version, and peroneus longus for eversion. An identical electrode 
placement protocol was followed for all experimental subjects. For 
further details, see the Supplementary Materials.
Efferent control architecture
The efferent control paradigm explored in this study was designed to 
allow direct control of prosthetic joint position and impedance. In 
this control approach, EMG signal amplitudes recorded from the ag-
onist and antagonist AMI muscles were interpreted as desired torques 
produced in opposite directions about a virtual dynamic joint, which 
was constructed with physiologically relevant values for virtual paral-
lel spring stiffness, virtual damping, and virtual inertia. The differ-
ence of these estimated torques was then applied to the virtual joint, 
causing it to move. The position of the virtual joint controlled the 
desired position of the associated prosthetic joint (fig. S1). Prosthetic 
joint stiffness was directly modulated by the mean activation of the 
agonist and antagonist muscles, as modeled in (53). This control ar-
chitecture enables independent modulation of joint position and im-
pedance. As with all EMG-based proportional control systems, there 
is a trade-off between joint stability and latency; typically, the partic-
ulars of this trade-off are buried in filter design. One benefit to the 
virtual-joint architecture is that filter parameters take on intuitive 
physical meaning and can be set to near-physiologic values. For a de-
scription of controller tuning, see the Supplementary Materials.
Although stimulation was active for prosthetic joint torque feed-
back, the stimulated muscle was assumed to be at zero activation, 
and input from that muscle to the controller was blocked (fig. S1). 
Although this design eliminates the ability to actively move the joint 
in the same direction as an applied load, the scenarios in which this 
action would be desirable are likely to be extremely limited.
Fine-wire electrode placement and stimulation
Fine-wire electrodes were placed acutely (M.J.C.) at the start of each 
trial day, according to the technique presented in (66). For all trials, 
the tibialis anterior muscle was stimulated with a 50-Hz, current- 
controlled, charge-balanced, asymmetric, biphasic pulse train (NL800, 
Digitimer). The pulse width of the cathodic phase was 200 s and 
that of the anodic phase was 400 s. For the closed-loop torque con-
trol experiments, the cathodic current amplitude was modulated in 
linear proportionality to prosthetic torque (measured or simulated) 
and ranged from 0 to 9 mA. For a full description of the electrode 
placement protocol, stimulation parameters, and evidence of proper 
electrode placement, see the Supplemental Materials, fig. S2, and 
movie S5.
Closed-loop torque control experimental setup
During the closed-loop torque control experiments, the prosthesis 
was mounted to an assembly that held it in contact with the foot 
pedal, remote from the subject, to eliminate the possibility of con-
founding force feedback through the prosthetic socket. The subject 
 by guest on June 5, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Clites et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaap8373 (2018)     30 May 2018
SCIE N C E TR A N S LA T I O NA L M EDI CI NE | RE SE ARCH ARTICL E
12 of 13
was acoustically isolated with noise-canceling headphones worn 
over ear plugs and visually isolated with a sleep mask. He performed 
eight total trial groups under two different conditions; four of these 
trial groups were performed with torque feedback through stimula-
tion of the AMI, and four were performed without such stimula-
tion. Under the stimulation on condition, the tibialis anterior was 
stimulated with a current amplitude proportional to the plantar 
flexion torque measured on the prosthesis. Under the stimulation 
off condition, no such feedback was provided. Each trial group con-
sisted of 20 commands (5 at each effort level), presented in a ran-
dom order. Within a single trial group, all trials were carried out 
under the same condition, but the order of trial group conditions 
was selected at random. This format was chosen to account for bias 
in one condition having been consistently evaluated before the 
other, while preventing the possible scenario in which the subject 
applies excess torque in anticipation of a stimulus that never comes. 
The experiment was repeated without stimulation in subject 
A’s unaffected limb to set a performance baseline. In these trials, 
subject A applied torque to the pedal with his right biological foot 
directly contacting the pedal. Pedal torque was streamed from the 
pedal’s load cell to a data acquisition system (USB-6009, National 
Instruments).
Statistical analysis
Time-synchronized joint angle, EMG, and joint stiffness data were 
collected from the prosthesis in real time for all trials. Statistical 
comparisons were made within a given subject using the Tukey- 
Kramer multiple comparisons tests at a significance level of  = 
0.025. In cases where a single comparison was appropriate, a t test 
was used at a significance level of  = 0.025. All statistical analysis 
was performed in MATLAB R2017a (The MathWorks). All EMG 
signals are normalized to calibrated maxima for each muscle. All 
shaded traces indicate mean ± 1 SD.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
www.sciencetranslationalmedicine.org/cgi/content/full/10/443/eaap8373/DC1
Materials and Methods
Fig. S1. Control diagrams showing how EMG from the AMI muscles drives movement of the 
prosthetic joint.
Fig. S2. Raw EMG recorded from fine-wire electrodes during volitional movement of the 
phantom limb.
Movie S1. Ultrasound video of coupled AMI motion.
Movie S2. Volitional control.
Movie S3. Reflexive control.
Movie S4. Candid videos showing prosthesis embodiment.
Movie S5. Visual confirmation of stimulated muscle contraction.
Table S1. Individual subject data for volitional control tasks.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
 1. U. Proske, S. C. Gandevia, The proprioceptive senses: Their roles in signaling body 
shape, body position and movement, and muscle force. Physiol. Rev. 92, 1651–1697 
(2012).
 2. B. L. Riemann, S. M. Lephart, The sensorimotor system, Part II: The role of proprioception 
in motor control and functional joint stability. J. Athl. Train. 37, 80–84 (2002).
 3. E. R. Kandel, J. H. Schwartz, T. M. Jessell, in Principles of Neural Science (McGraw-Hill, 2013), 
vol. 4, 1414 pp.
 4. J. J. Ochoa, E. E. Torebjörk, Sensations evoked by intraneural microstimulation of single 
mechanoreceptor units innervating the human hand. J. Physiol. 342, 633–654 (1983).
 5. G. Macefield, S. C. Gandevia, D. Burke, Perceptual responses to microstimulation of single 
afferents innervating joints, muscles and skin of the human hand. J. Physiol. 429, 
113–129 (1990).
 6. D. F. Collins, K. M. Refshauge, G. Todd, S. C. Gandevia, Cutaneous receptors contribute to 
kinesthesia at the index finger, elbow, and knee. J. Neurophysiol. 94, 1699–1706 (2005).
 7. I. A. Boyd, T. D. M. Roberts, Proprioceptive discharges from stretch-receptors in the 
knee-joint of the cat. J. Physiol. 122, 38–58 (1953).
 8. S. Skoglund, Anatomical and physiological studies of knee joint innervation in the cat. 
Acta Physiol. Scand. Suppl. 36, 1–101 (1956).
 9. D. Burke, S. C. Gandevia, G. Macefield, Responses to passive movement of receptors in 
joint, skin and muscle of the human hand. J. Physiol. 402, 347–361 (1988).
 10. L. Jami, Golgi tendon organs in mammalian skeletal muscle: Functional properties and 
central actions. Physiol. Rev. 72, 623–666 (1992).
 11. G. Eklund, Position sense and state of contraction; the effects of vibration. J. Neurol. 
Neurosurg. Psychiatry 35, 606–611 (1972).
 12. G. M. Goodwin, D. I. McCloskey, P. B. C. Matthews, The contribution of muscle afferents to 
kinaesthesia shown by vibration induced illusions of movement and by the effects of 
paralysing joint afferents. Brain 95, 705–748 (1972).
 13. E. Ribot-Ciscar, J.-P. Roll, Ago-antagonist muscle spindle inputs contribute together to 
joint movement coding in man. Brain Res. 791, 167–176 (1998).
 14. B. J. Brown, M. L. Iorio, M. R. Klement, M. R. Conti Mica, A. El-Amraoui, P. D. O’Halloran, 
C. E. Attinger, Outcomes after 294 transtibial amputations with the posterior 
myocutaneous flap. Int. J. Low. Extrem. Wounds 13, 33–40 (2014).
 15. P. Cao, P. De Rango, in Rutherford’s Vascular Surgery (Saunders Elsevier, 2010), vol. 2,  
pp. 1469–1486.
 16. M. Ortiz-Catalan, R. Brånemark, B. Håkansson, J. Delbeke, On the viability of implantable 
electrodes for the natural control of artificial limbs: Review and discussion. Biomed. Eng. 
Online 11, 33 (2012).
 17. X. Navarro, T. B. Krueger, N. Lago, S. Micera, T. Stieglitz, P. Dario, A critical review of 
interfaces with the peripheral nervous system for the control of neuroprostheses and 
hybrid bionic systems. J. Peripher. Nerv. Syst. 10, 229–258 (2005).
 18. S. K. Au, J. Weber, H. Herr, Powered ankle–foot prosthesis improves walking metabolic 
economy. IEEE Trans. Robot. 25, 51–66 (2009).
 19. D. W. Tan, M. A. Schiefer, M. W. Keith, J. R. Anderson, J. Tyler, D. J. Tyler, A neural 
interface provides long-term stable natural touch perception. Sci. Transl. Med. 6, 
257ra138 (2014).
 20. M. Ortiz-Catalan, B. Hakånsson, R. Brånemark, An osseointegrated human-machine 
gateway for long-term sensory feedback and motor control of artificial limbs. Sci. Transl. 
Med. 6, 257re6 (2014).
 21. S. Raspopovic, M. Capogrosso, F. M. Petrini, M. Bonizzato, J. Rigosa, G. Di Pino, 
J. Carpaneto, M. Controzzi, T. Boretius, E. Fernandez, G. Granata, C. M. Oddo, L. Citi, 
A. L. Ciancio, C. Cipriani, M. C. Carrozza, W. Jensen, E. Guglielmelli, T. Stieglitz, 
P. M. Rossini, S. Micera, Restoring natural sensory feedback in real-time bidirectional 
hand prostheses. Sci. Transl. Med. 6, 222ra19 (2014).
 22. M. A. Schiefer, D. Tan, S. M. Sidek, D. J. Tyler, Sensory feedback by peripheral nerve 
stimulation improves task performance in individuals with upper limb loss using a 
myoelectric prosthesis. J. Neural Eng. 13, 16001 (2016).
 23. K. Horch, S. Meek, T. G. Taylor, D. T. Hutchinson, Object discrimination with an artificial 
hand using electrical stimulation of peripheral tactile and proprioceptive pathways with 
intrafascicular electrodes. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 19, 483–489 (2011).
 24. G. S. Dhillon, K. W. Horch, Direct neural sensory feedback and control of a prosthetic arm. 
IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 13, 468–472 (2005).
 25. E. L. Graczyk, M. A. Schiefer, H. P. Saal, B. P. Delhaye, S. J. Bensmaia, D. J. Tyler, The neural 
basis of perceived intensity in natural and artificial touch. Sci. Transl. Med. 8, 362ra142 
(2016).
 26. T. A. Kung, N. B. Langhals, D. C. Martin, P. J. M. Johnson, P. S. Cederna, M. G. Urbanchek, 
Regenerative peripheral nerve interface viability and signal transduction with an 
implanted electrode. Plast. Reconstr. Surg. 133, 1380–1394 (2014).
 27. Z. T. Irwin, K. E. Schroeder, P. P. Vu, D. M. Tat, A. J. Bullard, S. L. Woo, I. C. Sando, 
M. G. Urbanchek, P. S. Cederna, C. A. Chestek, Chronic recording of hand prosthesis 
control signals via a regenerative peripheral nerve interface in a rhesus macaque.  
J. Neural Eng. 13, 46007 (2016).
 28. T. A. Kuiken, G. Li, B. A. Lock, R. D. Lipschutz, L. A. Miller, K. A. Stubblefield, K. B. Englehart, 
Targeted muscle reinnervation for real-time myoelectric control of multifunction artificial 
arms. JAMA 301, 619–628 (2009).
 29. L. J. Hargrove, A. M. Simon, A. J. Young, R. D. Lipschutz, S. B. Finucane, D. G. Smith, 
T. A. Kuiken, Robotic leg control with EMG decoding in an amputee with nerve transfers. 
N. Engl. J. Med. 369, 1237–1242 (2013).
 30. E. J. Rouse, L. J. Hargrove, E. J. Perreault, T. A. Kuiken, Estimation of human ankle 
impedance during the stance phase of walking. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 22, 
870–878 (2014).
 31. H. M. Herr, A. M. Grabowski, Bionic ankle–foot prosthesis normalizes walking gait for 
persons with leg amputation. Proc. Biol. Sci. 279, 457–464 (2012).
 32. R. D. Bellman, M. A. Holgate, T. G. Sugar, SPARKy 3: Design of an active robotic ankle 
prosthesis with two actuated degrees of freedom using regenerative kinetics, in 
Proceedings of the 2nd Biennial IEEE/RAS-EMBS International Conference on Biomedical 
Robotics and Biomechatronics, Biorob 2008 (IEEE, 2008), pp. 511–516.
 by guest on June 5, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Clites et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaap8373 (2018)     30 May 2018
SCIE N C E TR A N S LA T I O NA L M EDI CI NE | RE SE ARCH ARTICL E
13 of 13
 33. F. Sup, A. Bohara, M. Goldfarb, Design and control of a powered transfemoral prosthesis. 
Int. J. Rob. Res. 27, 263–273 (2008).
 34. S. Huang, J. P. Wensman, D. P. Ferris, An experimental powered lower limb prosthesis 
using proportional myoelectric control. J. Med. Device. 8, 24501 (2014).
 35. H. Huang, T. A. Kuiken, R. D. Lipschutz, A strategy for identifying locomotion modes using 
surface electromyography. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 56, 65–73 (2009).
 36. L. J. Hargrove, A. M. Simon, R. D. Lipschutz, S. B. Finucane, T. A. Kuiken, Real-time 
myoelectric control of knee and ankle motions for transfemoral amputees. JAMA 305, 
1542–1544 (2011).
 37. H. M. Herr, R. R. Riso, K. W. Song Jr., R. J. Casler, M. J. Carty, Peripheral Neural Interface Via 
Nerve Regeneration to Distal Tissues (Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2016).
 38. H. M. Herr, T. R. Clites, B. Maimon, A. Zorzos, M. J. Carty, J.-F. Duval, Method and System for 
Providing Proprioceptive Feedback and Functionality Mitigating Limb Pathology 
(Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2016).
 39. T. R. Clites, M. J. Carty, S. Srinivasan, A. N. Zorzos, H. M. Herr, A murine model of a novel 
surgical architecture for proprioceptive muscle feedback and its potential application to 
control of advanced limb prostheses. J. Neural Eng. 14, 036002 (2017).
 40. S. S. Srinivasan, M. J. Carty, P. W. Calvaresi, T. R. Clites, B. E. Maimon, C. R. Taylor, 
A. N. Zorzos, H. Herr, On prosthetic control : A regenerative agonist-antagonist 
myoneural interface. Sci. Robot. 2, eaan2971 (2017).
 41. T. R. Clites, M. J. Carty, H. M. Herr, Plastic Surgery Research Council (PSRC, 2017), 119 pp.
 42. B. J. McFadyen, D. A. Winter, An integrated biomechanical analysis of normal stair ascent 
and descent. J. Biomech. 21, 733–744 (1988).
 43. R. Riener, M. Rabuffetti, C. Frigo, Stair ascent and descent at different inclinations.  
Gait Posture 15, 32–44 (2002).
 44. U. Wijk, I. Carlsson, Forearm amputees’ views of prosthesis use and sensory feedback.  
J. Hand Ther. 269–277 (2015).
 45. H. H. Ehrsson, B. Rosén, A. Stockselius, C. Ragnö, P. Köhler, G. Lundborg, Upper limb 
amputees can be induced to experience a rubber hand as their own. Brain 131, 
3443–3452 (2008).
 46. A. Guterstam, V. I. Petkova, H. H. Ehrsson, The illusion of owning a third arm. PLOS ONE 6, 
e17208 (2011).
 47. M. Botvinick, J. Cohen, Rubber hands ‘feel’ touch that eyes see. Nature 391, 756 (1998).
 48. M. Seyedali, J. M. Czerniecki, D. C. Morgenroth, M. E. Hahn, Co-contraction patterns of 
trans-tibial amputee ankle and knee musculature during gait. J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. 9, 29 
(2012).
 49. S. Huang, D. P. Ferris, Muscle activation patterns during walking from transtibial amputees 
recorded within the residual limb-prosthetic interface. J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. 9, 55 (2012).
 50. G. A. García, R. Okuno, in Electrodiagnosis in New Frontiers of Clinical Research 
(IntechOpen, 2013), pp. 269–285.
 51. E. Scheme, K. Englehart, Electromyogram pattern recognition for control of powered 
upper-limb prostheses: State of the art and challenges for clinical use. J. Rehabil. Res. Dev. 
48, 643–660 (2011).
 52. B. A. Lock, A. E. Schultz, T. A. Kuiken, Clinically practical applications of pattern 
recognition for myoelectric prostheses, in Proceedings of the 2008 MyoElectric Controls/
Powered Prosthetics Symposium (MEC, 2008), pp. 0–5.
 53. N. Hogan, Adaptive control of mechanical impedance by coactivation of antagonist 
muscles. IEEE Trans. Automat. Contr. 29, 681–690 (1984).
 54. H. Lee, N. Hogan, in ASME 2010 Dynamic Systems and Control Conference (ASME, 2010), 
pp. 6–8.
 55. W. T. Edwards, Effect of joint stiffness on standing stability. Gait Posture 25, 432–439 (2007).
 56. A. M. Smith, The coactivation of antagonist muscles. Can. J. Physiol. Pharmacol. 59, 
733–747 (1981).
 57. C. J. De Luca, B. Mambrito, Voluntary control of motor units in human antagonist 
muscles: Coactivation and reciprocal activation. J. Neurophysiol. 58, 525–542 (1987).
 58. M. Dimitriou, Human muscle spindle sensitivity reflects the balance of activity between 
antagonistic muscles. J. Neurosci. 34, 13644–13655 (2014).
 59. M. T. Nahorniak, G. E. Gorton III, M. E. Gannotti, P. D. Masso, Kinematic compensations as 
children reciprocally ascend and descend stairs with unilateral and bilateral solid AFOs. 
Gait Posture 9, 199–206 (1999).
 60. S. Sienko Thomas, C. E. Buckon, S. Jakobson-Huston, M. D. Sussman, M. D. Aiona, Stair 
locomotion in children with spastic hemiplegia: The impact of three different ankle foot 
orthosis (AFOs) configurations. Gait Posture 16, 180–187 (2002).
 61. H. Huang, F. Zhang, L. J. Hargrove, Z. Dou, D. R. Rogers, K. B. Englehart, Continuous 
locomotion-mode identification for prosthetic legs based on neuromuscular–mechanical 
fusion. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 58, 2867–2875 (2011).
 62. A. J. Young, T. A. Kuiken, L. J. Hargrove, Analysis of using EMG and mechanical sensors to 
enhance intent recognition in powered lower limb prostheses. J. Neural Eng. 11, 56021 
(2014).
 63. R. Stolyarov, G. Burnett, H. Herr, Translational motion tracking of leg joints for enhanced 
prediction of walking tasks. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 65, 736–769 (2017).
 64. K. Ziegler-Graham, E. J. MacKenzie, P. L. Ephraim, T. G. Travison, R. Brookmeyer, 
Estimating the prevalence of limb loss in the United States: 2005 to 2050. Arch. Phys. Med. 
Rehabil. 89, 422–429 (2008).
 65. T. A. Kuiken, L. A. Miller, R. D. Lipschutz, B. A. Lock, K. Stubblefield, P. D. Marasco, P. Zhou, 
G. A. Dumanian, Targeted reinnervation for enhanced prosthetic arm function in a 
woman with a proximal amputation: A case study. Lancet 369, 371–380 (2007).
 66. T. A. Park, G. F. Harris, “Guided” intramuscular fine wire electrode placement: A new 
technique. Am. J. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 75, 232–234 (1996).
Acknowledgments: We thank A. Zorzos for his contribution to the design of the surgical 
procedure, as well as J. Ernst for her work advancing the FES system. We acknowledge the 
contributions of C. Ricciardi and the MIT Clinical Research Center, both in securing institutional 
review board approval and in providing access to clinical spaces. All original figure artwork 
was created by S. Ku. We recognize all those who have played a role in this work and especially 
thank the subjects and their families for their sacrifice and dedication to improving the lives of 
persons living with amputation. Funding: This work was supported by the MIT Media Lab 
Consortia, the Stepping Strong Innovator Fund, and a generous gift from Google, Inc. 
Prosthetic design and fabrication were funded in part by the U.S. Army Medical Research and 
Materiel Command (W81XWH-14-C-0111). Author contributions: T.R.C. contributed to 
conceptualization and preclinical validation of the AMI operation; designed and implemented 
the efferent control and afferent stimulation paradigms; designed the experiments; collected, 
processed, and analyzed the data; and wrote the manuscript. M.J.C. contributed to 
conceptualization and preclinical validation of the AMI architecture and operation, performed 
both the traditional and AMI amputation procedures, and contributed to experimental design 
and data collection. J.B.U. assisted with experimental design and data collection and 
developed experimental tools. M.E.C. assisted with implementation of the prosthetic hardware 
and embedded systems. L.M.M. conceived, designed, and developed the two-degree-of-
freedom foot-ankle prosthesis. J.-F.D. designed and programmed the embedded system. S.S.S. 
contributed to conceptualization and preclinical validation of the AMI operation, analyzed 
experimental ultrasound data, and assisted in writing the manuscript. H.M.H. conceived the 
AMI architecture and contributed to conceptualization and preclinical validation of the AMI 
operation, controller design, experimental design, and writing of the manuscript. 
Competing interests: H.M.H. and M.J.C. hold a patent on the AMI concept entitled “Peripheral 
Neural Interface via Nerve Regeneration to Distal Tissues” (U.S. Patent US20160346099). 
H.M.H., T.R.C., and M.J.C. have filed a patent on the AMI operation and associated control 
strategies, entitled “Method and System for Providing Proprioceptive Feedback and 
Functionality Mitigating Limb Pathology” (U.S. Pending Patent 62/276422). All other authors 
declare that they have no competing interests. Data and materials availability: Please 
address requests for more information to H.M.H. (hherr@media.mit.edu).
Submitted 6 September 2017
Resubmitted 9 December 2017
Accepted 3 May 2018
Published 30 May 2018
10.1126/scitranslmed.aap8373
Citation: T. R. Clites, M. J. Carty, J. B. Ullauri, M. E. Carney, L. M. Mooney, J.-F. Duval, S. S. Srinivasan, 
H. M. Herr, Proprioception from a neurally controlled lower-extremity prosthesis. Sci. Transl. 
Med. 10, eaap8373 (2018).
 by guest on June 5, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Proprioception from a neurally controlled lower-extremity prosthesis
S. Srinivasan and Hugh. M. Herr
Tyler R. Clites, Matthew J. Carty, Jessica B. Ullauri, Matthew E. Carney, Luke M. Mooney, Jean-François Duval, Shriya
DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aap8373
, eaap8373.
10
Sci Transl Med 
Agonist-antagonist myoneural interfaces could help restore natural sensation to prosthetic joints.
of his prosthesis and expressed a strong sense of embodiment (identifying the prosthesis as part of him). 
walking. The subject noted little delay between intentional activation of the muscles in his residuum and movement
electrodes to his powered prosthesis) exhibited greater joint placement control and reflexive behavior during stair 
who received two agonist-antagonist myoneural interfaces in his residuum (which were connected via synthetic
of below-knee amputation in a human subject. Compared to four subjects with traditional amputations, the subject 
. tested autologous muscle-nerve interfaces created at the time
et al
sense and control a prosthesis. Here, Clites 
Amputation severs bone, nerves, and muscles used for limb movement, limiting an amputee's ability to
A leg up for neuroprosthetics
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/10/443/eaap8373
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2018/05/25/10.443.eaap8373.DC1
CONTENT
RELATED 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/10/462/eaat9892.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/10/462/eaat9897.full
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/360/6392/998.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/6/257/257re6.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/5/210/210ps15.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/6/222/222ra19.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/6/257/257ra138.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/8/362/362ra142.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/10/432/eaao6990.full
REFERENCES
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/10/443/eaap8373#BIBL
This article cites 56 articles, 6 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
 is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Science Translational Medicine
title 
licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive 
(ISSN 1946-6242) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science Translational Medicine 
 by guest on June 5, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
