  
 
New strategies in sport nutrition to increase
exercise performance
Close, G.l.; Hamilton, D.l.; Philp, A.; Burke, L.m.; Morton, J.P.
DOI:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2016.01.016
License:
Creative Commons: Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs (CC BY-NC-ND)
Document Version
Peer reviewed version
Citation for published version (Harvard):
Close, GL, Hamilton, DL, Philp, A, Burke, LM & Morton, JP 2016, 'New strategies in sport nutrition to increase
exercise performance' Free Radical Biology and Medicine. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2016.01.016
Link to publication on Research at Birmingham portal
Publisher Rights Statement:
Eligibility for Repository: checked 19/04/16
General rights
Unless a licence is specified above, all rights (including copyright and moral rights) in this document are retained by the authors and/or the
copyright holders. The express permission of the copyright holder must be obtained for any use of this material other than for purposes
permitted by law.
•�Users may freely distribute the URL that is used to identify this publication.
•�Users may download and/or print one copy of the publication from the University of Birmingham research portal for the purpose of private
study or non-commercial research.
•�User may use extracts from the document in line with the concept of ‘fair dealing’ under the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 (?)
•�Users may not further distribute the material nor use it for the purposes of commercial gain.
Where a licence is displayed above, please note the terms and conditions of the licence govern your use of this document.
When citing, please reference the published version.
Take down policy
While the University of Birmingham exercises care and attention in making items available there are rare occasions when an item has been
uploaded in error or has been deemed to be commercially or otherwise sensitive.
If you believe that this is the case for this document, please contact UBIRA@lists.bham.ac.uk providing details and we will remove access to
the work immediately and investigate.
Download date: 02. Jun. 2019
 Author’s Accepted Manuscript
New Strategies in Sport Nutrition to Increase
Exercise Performance
GL Close, L Hamilton, A Philp, L Burke, JP
Morton
PII:
S0891-5849(16)00030-7
DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2016.01.016
Reference:
FRB12727
To appear in:
Free Radical Biology and Medicine
Received date: 16 November 2015
Revised date:
19 January 2016
Accepted date: 21 January 2016
Cite this article as: GL Close, L Hamilton, A Philp, L Burke and JP Morton,
New Strategies in Sport Nutrition to Increase Exercise Performance, Free
Radical 
Biology 
and 
Medicine,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2016.01.016
This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for
publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of
the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and
review of the resulting galley proof before it is published in its final citable form.
Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which
could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
www.elsevier.com
 New strategies in sport nutrition to increase exercise performance 
 
 
Close, GL1*, Hamilton, L2, Philp, A3, Burke, L4 and Morton, JP1 
 
1. Research Institute for Sport and Exercise Science (RISES), Liverpool John Moores 
University, Liverpool, United Kingdom. 
2. Health and Exercise Sciences Research Group, University of Stirling, Stirling, United 
Kingdom 
3. School of Sport, Exercise and Rehabilitation Sciences, University of Birmingham, 
Birmingham, United Kingdom. 
4. Sports Nutrition, Australian Institute of Sport, Canberra, ACT, Australia 
 
 
*Corresponding Author:, Dr. Graeme L. Close, Research Institute for Sport and Exercise 
Science, , Liverpool John Moores University, Tom Reilly Building, , Byrom Street,, Liverpool, , 
L3 3AF, g.l.close@ljmu.ac.uk  
 
ABSTRACT  
 
Despite over 50 years of research, the field of sports nutrition continues to grow at a rapid 
rate. Whilst the traditional research focus was one that centred on strategies to maximize 
competition performance, emerging data in the last decade has demonstrated how both 
macronutrient and micronutrient availability can play a prominent role in regulating those 
cell signalling pathways that modulate skeletal muscle adaptations to endurance and 
resistance training. Nonetheless, in the context of exercise performance, it is clear that 
carbohydrate (but not fat) still remains king and that carefully chosen ergogenic aids (e.g. 
caffeine, creatine, sodium bicarbonate, beta-alanine, nitrates) can all promote performance 
in the correct exercise setting. In relation to exercise training, however, it is now thought 
that strategic periods of reduced carbohydrate and elevated dietary protein intake may 
enhance training adaptations whereas high carbohydrate availability and antioxidant 
supplementation may actually attenuate training adaptation. Emerging evidence also 
suggests that vitamin D may play a regulatory role in muscle regeneration and subsequent 
hypertrophy following damaging forms of exercise. Finally, novel compounds (albeit largely 
examined in rodent models) such as epicatechins, nicotinamide riboside, resveratrol, β-
hydroxy β-methylbutyrate, phosphatidic acid and ursolic acid may also promote or 
attenuate skeletal muscle adaptations to endurance and strength training. When taken 
 together, it is clear that sports nutrition is very much at the heart of the Olympic motto, 
Citius, Altius, Fortius (faster, higher, stronger). 
 
 
1. Introduction into the growing role of sport nutrition  
 
In keeping with the Olympic motto “Citius, Altius, Fortius”, the traditional research focus in 
the field of sports nutrition has been one that has largely centred on those strategies that 
may improve performance on competition day. In this way, over 50 years of research has 
investigated strategies to prepare for competition (e.g. pre-exercise fuelling), promote 
performance during competition (e.g. fluid intake and carbohydrate feeding) and recover 
from competition (e.g. carbohydrate and protein feeding to promote muscle recovery).  
Additionally, many investigators have researched those ergogenic aids that may improve 
exercise performance and/or fatigue through modulating either central or peripheral 
aspects of fatigue. When taken together, it is clear that those competition nutrition 
strategies that focus on sufficient macronutrient intake and ergogenic aids to promote 
energy availability and delay the biochemical determinants of fatigue are now largely based 
on sound scientific evidence. 
 
However, in the last decade of research, accumulating data have now demonstrated a 
potent role of both macro- and micro-nutrient availability in regulating those exercise-
induced cell-signalling pathways that are thought to regulate skeletal muscle adaptations to 
exercise training. As such, both researchers and practitioners alike are now beginning to 
treat “competition nutrition” and “training nutrition” as two separate entities, the former 
having an obvious performance focus but the latter having an adaptive focus. For example, 
in the case of endurance exercise, emerging data suggest that deliberate periods of reduced 
carbohydrate availability (and potentially, high fat availability) can enhance those 
adaptations fundamental to endurance performance including mitochondrial biogenesis, 
increased lipid oxidation and increased fatigue resistance. Similarly, many novel compounds 
are also emerging (albeit from rodent studies) that can also regulate those signalling 
pathways inherent to endurance training adaptations.  In the context of resistance exercise, 
it is also now well known that increased dietary protein is a necessary nutrient to promote 
muscle growth by providing those necessary amino acids to both activate and promote 
muscle protein synthesis.   
 
 In the present paper, we review the current developments in sports nutrition by providing a 
narrative that simultaneously discusses traditional and novel strategies that serve to 
enhance exercise performance and training adaptations. We begin by providing an overview 
of the molecular regulation of skeletal muscle adaptations to endurance and resistance 
training and discuss where appropriate, the role of carbohydrate, fat and protein in 
modulating performance and training adaptations. We then proceed to review our latest 
thinking on evidence-based supplements that can promote performance. Finally, we close 
by outlining a variety of potential novel compounds that may also regulate training 
adaptations. 
 
 
 
 
2. Nutrition gene interactions   
 
Multiple molecular pathways are activated by exercise and these pathways have been 
shown to contribute to the adaptive remodelling of skeletal muscle [1, 2]. These same 
pathways are shared with a number of the nutrient sensing mechanisms [3, 4]. This cross-
talk between nutrient sensitive and exercise sensitive pathways opens up the possibility that 
nutrient provision strategies could influence not only acute exercise performance through 
fuelling the activity, but also the magnitude of the adaptive response following a period of 
structured exercise training. In the following sections we will discuss some of these nutrient-
gene interactions and the potential for exploiting these interactions through strategically 
delivered or withheld nutrition to enhance the adaptive stimulus and ultimately to improve 
exercise and athletic performance. 
 
2.1 The molecular regulation of endurance training adaptation. Endurance training is 
typically defined by rhythmically performing relatively low intensity contractions for a 
relatively long period of time [5], however recent studies show that short duration high 
intensity interval training may in fact result in similar adaptations to typical endurance 
exercise [6]. Structured endurance training leads to improvements in fatigue resistance 
partly by altering the phenotype of the skeletal muscle performing the work [7]. At the level 
of the muscle a period of endurance training leads to improvements in blood flow, 
mitochondrial content and an improved ability to extract and utilise oxygen during exercise 
[7]. These adaptive processes are driven by transcriptional changes in response to each bout 
of exercise [2, 8]. The transcriptional changes accumulate over time such that the protein 
 expression profile of muscle is changed resulting in an altered phenotype [2, 8]. The 
question then remains as to how contracting skeletal muscle senses the work and conveys 
that signal to a gene expression change, ultimately resulting in improved fatigue resistance. 
 
The answer may lie partly in the metabolite changes in skeletal muscle during contraction. 
Of primary importance for this review are the changes in intramuscular AMP levels, glycogen 
stores and fatty acid flux (Figure 1). AMP is a product of the adenylate kinase reaction which 
works to maintain the ATP:ADP ratio by converting two ADP molecules to one ATP and one 
AMP molecule [9]. The exercise dependent increase in skeletal muscle AMP [10] is thought 
to not only allosterically activate glycolysis [11] but also activate the evolutionary conserved 
fuel gauge protein AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) [12]. When the AMP:ATP ratio 
increases the probability of AMPK being in the AMP bound state increases. This allosterically 
activates AMPK [13] and makes AMPK a more efficient substrate for its upstream kinase 
LKB1, phosphorylation by which leads to full activation of the kinase [14]. Activated AMPK 
phosphorylates and inhibits its downstream substrate Acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC) [12]. 
The inhibition of ACC by AMPK leads to a reduction in the levels of manonyl CoA, which 
allows for the activation of the mitochondrial fatty acid transporter Carnitine 
palmitoyltransferase I (CPT1) allowing for a greater flux of fatty acids into the mitochondria 
for oxidation [15]. In addition to this event exercise induced AMPK is also thought to 
phosphorylate and inhibit the Rab-GAP proteins TBC1D1/TBC1D4 [16-18]. The reduced 
activity of these Rab-GAPs allows for more of the Rabs that control glucose transporter 4 
(GLUT4) translocation to be in the GTP bound state which increases the translocation of 
GLUT4 to the plasma membrane increasing glucose uptake and oxidation [19]. In addition to 
being a direct AMP:ATP ratio sensor, AMPK also has the capacity to be modulated by the 
glycogen storage status of a cell [20]. The β-subunit of AMPK binds to specific branch points 
on glycogen inhibiting the enzyme and preventing it from being phosphorylated by 
upstream kinases [20]. These data suggest that when glycogen is depleted AMPK is more 
active. Indeed substantial experimental evidence in humans supports this. For example, 
when exercise is commenced in the glycogen depleted state the phosphorylation of AMPK is 
greater in the post exercise recovery when muscle glycogen is low [21-23]. Interestingly, in 
rodent studies when exercise occurs in the low glycogen state AMPK nuclear content is 
increased [24]. Partly through these mechanisms the exercise dependent increases in 
AMP:ATP ratio and depletion of glycogen lead to a co-ordinated metabolic response, partly 
 through AMPK activation, which increases substrate uptake and oxidation to fuel the activity 
(Figure 1). 
 
AMPK also plays a key role in controlling running capacity and certain adaptive processes in 
response to endurance exercise training [25, 26]. In a feed forward fashion AMPK can 
translocate to the nucleus [24, 27] where it regulates Histone de-aceytlases, transcription 
factors and transcriptional co-activators such as histone deacetylase 5 (HDAC5), myocyte 
enhancing factor 2 (MEF2) and peroxisome proliferator activated receptor-γ co-activator-1α 
(PGC-1α) respectively (Figure 1) [28-30]. The AMPK dependent regulation of HDAC5 leads to 
the nuclear export of this de-acetylase [30]. HDAC5 functions to acetylate histones, causing 
the chromatin to be wound tighter restricting the access of transcription factors to promoter 
regions [31]. The nuclear export of HDAC5 therefore leads to a relaxation of the chromatin 
and in an unknown manner leads to increases in transcription of GLUT4 [30]. The AMPK 
dependent phosphorylation of PGC-1α additionally is associated with an increase in the 
expression of mitochondrial genes [28]. As we mentioned PGC-1α acts as a transcriptional 
co-activator where it moderates the activity of multiple transcription factors including the 
PPAR’s (PPAR-γ, PPAR-α and PPAR-δ), mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM), nuclear 
respiratory factors 1/2 (NRF1/2) and estrogen related receptor-α (ERR-α) (Figure 1) [32]. The 
PPAR’s are also of interest with regard to nutritional interventions as they are sensitive to 
changes in fatty acid levels in that increased free fatty acid (FFA) availability leads to 
increases in the activity of these transcription factors which control the expression of FFA 
metabolism genes [33]. 
 
2.2. Is carbohydrate still king? 
The principle of ensuring adequate carbohydrate (CHO) availability to promote exercise 
performance is the foundation of which contemporary sports nutrition practices have 
typically been built upon.  Indeed, the importance of muscle glycogen as a determinant of 
exercise capacity was first recognized as early as the late 1960s with the introduction of the 
muscle biopsy technique into exercise physiology research [34]. Since this landmark study, a 
wealth of studies conducted over the next 40 years unequivocally confirmed that high pre-
exercise muscle glycogen stores (i.e. >500 mmol.kg-1 dw) can improve endurance and team 
sport performance in those instances where exercise duration is >60-90 minutes [35]. As 
such, elite athletes are now advised to consume at least 6-12 g/kg body mass of CHO in the 
24-36 h prior to competition so as to adequately “CHO load” for competition day [36]. 
  
In addition to high endogenous pre-exercise muscle glycogen stores, it is widely accepted 
that exogenous CHO feeding during exercise also improves physical, cognitive and technical 
elements of performance [37]. Whereas it was generally accepted that exogenous CHO 
oxidation rates were thought to be limited at approximately 1 g/min due to saturation of 
intestinal glucose transporters, it is now known that exogenous CHO oxidation rates can 
increase to 1.8 g/min with the addition of sucrose or fructose to the CHO blend [38].  When 
taken together, it is currently thought that CHO feeding during exercise may therefore 
augment exercise performance via multiple mechanisms consisting of muscle glycogen 
sparing [39], liver glycogen sparing [40] and maintenance of plasma glucose and CHO 
oxidation rates [41]. It is noteworthy, however, that exogenous CHO feeding during exercise 
also improves performance when exercise duration is <60 minutes [42], an effect that is not 
apparent when glucose is directly infused to the bloodstream during exercise [43]. Such data 
suggest that CHO feeding may also improve exercise performance via non-metabolic effects 
but through direct effects on the central nervous system [44].  To this end, the last decade 
of research has resulted in a growing body of literature demonstrating that simply “rinsing” 
CHO in the oral cavity (for 10-second periods every 5-10 minutes during exercise) is also 
ergogenic to performance [45], an effect that is independent of sweetness [46] and that is 
especially apparent in the absence of a pre-exercise CHO meal [47] and low pre-exercise 
muscle glycogen [48]. 
 
The conventional approach to CHO fuelling during exercise is to consume 6-8% CHO 
beverages, although relying solely on this approach does not allow for flexibility in terms of 
individual variations in body mass or actual fluid requirements given variations in ambient 
conditions [49]. As such, many athletes rely on a CHO fuelling approach that is based on a 
combination of solids (e.g. bars), semi-solids (e.g. gels) and fluids (e.g. sports drinks) so as to 
collectively meet their personalized exogenous CHO targets, typically in the region of 30-90 
g/h depending on exercise duration [38]. Nevertheless, although there is little difference in 
exogenous CHO oxidation rates (albeit in fluid matched conditions) between the 
aforementioned sources [50, 51], it is noteworthy that many athletes experience 
gastrointestinal discomfort when attempting to hit these targets, possibly related to 
extreme differences in osmolality between commercially available CHO gels [52] as well as 
the presence of fibre, fat and protein in energy bars [53].  As such, it is now advised that 
 athletes should clearly practice their approach to in-competition fuelling during those 
training sessions of similar intensity and duration as competition [54]. 
 
Although CHO guidelines for competition are now generally accepted, considerable 
controversy exists as to the optimal targets of endogenous and exogenous CHO availability 
for which to adhere to during both moderate and intensive training periods.  Indeed, whilst 
both low endogenous [55] and exogenous [56] CHO availability can undoubtedly impair 
training intensity, accumulating data have now demonstrated a potent effect of reduced 
carbohydrate availability in modulating those acute exercise-induced increase in cell 
signalling and gene expression responses that regulate endurance training adaptations [57, 
58].  In this regard, we and others have collectively observed that reducing endogenous 
and/or exogenous CHO availability during short-term (e.g. 3-10 week) endurance training 
increases mitochondrial enzyme activity and protein content [55, 59, 60] increases both 
whole body [55] and intramuscular lipid oxidation [61] and in some instances, improves 
exercise capacity [62, 63]. These data have therefore led to the innovative “train-low (or 
smart), compete-high” model surmising that athletes deliberately complete a portion of 
their training programme with reduced CHO availability so as to augment training 
adaptation but yet always ensure high CHO availability prior to and during competition in an 
attempt to promote maximal performance [64]. The augmented training response observed 
with training-low strategies are currently thought to be regulated via the enhanced 
activation of upstream cell signalling kinases including both AMPK [23] and p38MAPK [65] 
that ultimately converge on the downstream regulation of key transcription factors and co-
activators such as PGC-1α [66], p53 [21] and PPARδ [24] (Figure 1). In this way, training with 
low CHO availability thereby leads to a co-ordinated up-regulation of both the nuclear and 
mitochondrial genomes. 
 
Despite the theoretical rationale for the training-low paradigm, potential pitfalls to long-
term training with low CHO availability include perturbations to immune function [67] 
impaired training intensity [55], reduced ability to oxidise exogenous CHO during 
competition [68] and increased muscle protein oxidation [69].  As such, many challenges 
remain as to how best to periodise train-low into an elite athlete’s training programme 
without increasing the risk of the aforementioned maladaptive responses. At present, 
research studies examining the efficacy of train-low strategies have largely adopted fasted 
training protocols [60], protein only sessions [70], training twice per day models [62] 
 reducing CHO intake in the post-exercise period [71] and most recently, both sleeping and 
training (i.e. sleep low-train low models) on the subsequent morning with reduced CHO 
intake [21, 72].  Ultimately, the simplest advice at present may be to adopt the practical 
concept of “fuelling for the work required” in that completing pre-determined training 
workloads that can be readily performed with reduced muscle glycogen and without 
exogenous CHO feeding may represent a strategic approach for which to implement day-to-
day nutrient-exercise periodization protocols.  Alternatively, when the goals of the training 
session are to complete the highest workload possible, then adequate CHO should be 
provided in the 24 h period prior to and during the specific training session. Despite many 
unanswered questions to the precise molecular mechanisms underpinning the enhanced 
training adaptations associated with training-low as well as optimal practical application 
models, it is now readily apparent that we can no longer think of CHO as a simple fuel source 
of which, depletion causes of fatigue. Rather, we must now add the term of ‘training 
regulator’ to its known functions. 
 
Figure 1. Overview of the molecular signalling pathways activated in skeletal muscle in 
response to endurance exercise. Contraction results in alterations in AMP, Ca2+ and NAD 
which activate numerous cellular energy sensing proteins (AMPK, CaMKII, p38 MAPK, 
SIRT1). These signalling proteins converge on the transcriptional co-activator PGC-1α 
which leads to increases in mitochondrial biogenesis through the activation of numerous 
nuclear transcription factors (TFAM, PPARs, NRF1/2, ERRα). Carbohydrate restriction 
and/or glycogen depletion during exercise leads to further enhances in mitochondrial 
biogenesis through increased activity of AMPK, p38 and SIRT1. In addition, the small 
compounds epicatechins, nicotinamide riboside (NR) and resveratrol have all been 
suggested to enhance endurance-training responses in skeletal muscle through a number 
of signalling pathways (blue). 
 
  
 
 
2.3 Adaptation to high fat diets and exercise performance.  
 
Endurance athletes develop a high capacity to fuel exercise via fat oxidation as an 
adaptation to their training.  However, there have been cycles of interest in strategies that 
can further up-regulate the contribution of fat as a substrate for exercise; specifically, the 
chronic consumption of a low-carbohydrate, high-fat (LCHF) diet.  Models have included 
moderate (<20% of energy) to extreme (< 50 g/d) carbohydrate restriction, with fat 
increasing to ~65% or ~80% of energy respectively [73].  Such regimens, which should not be 
confused with other popular high-protein, CHO-reduced diets such as the Paleo Diet, have 
claimed benefits to sports performance via an enhanced exercise utilisation of the relatively 
large body fat stores as well as other effects from chronic adaptation to high levels of 
 circulating ketones (“keto-adaptation”) [74]. 
 
Original interest in LCHF for sports performance stemmed from an 1983 study which 
measured exercise capacity in 5 well-trained cyclists before and after 4 weeks of a ketogenic 
LCHF diet [75]. Despite conditions that should have favoured a benefit to endurance 
(additional 4 weeks of training, overnight fasting and water only during cycling, very 
moderate intensity ~60% VO2max workloads), there was no mean improvement in time to 
exhaustion over the baseline values completed with a high carbohydrate diet. Moreover, the 
results were skewed by a large increase in endurance in one subject, and the authors also 
noted that the enhanced utilisation of fat and sparing of carbohydrate at moderate intensity 
was “a limitation of the intensity of exercise that can be performed” and a “throttling of 
function near VO2max” [75]. 
 
During the period from 1995-2005, researchers from a number of laboratories examined the 
effect of non-ketogenic LCHF diets on exercise/sports performance [73].  Results confirmed 
the lack of a clear effect on performance despite marked changes in ability to utilise fat, but 
identified some scenarios, such as submaximal exercise carried out with depleted muscle 
glycogen stores, in which some benefits might be observed.  The finding that shifts in 
substrate utilisation during exercise occurred in as little as 5 days of exposure to the LCHF 
paved the way for a further series of studies in which athletes first undertook such “fat 
adaptation”, then restored carbohydrate availability just before and during an exercise bout 
with the intention of promoting performance via optimized contributions of both fat and 
carbohydrate pathways [73].  Here, it should be noted that a shift in measurements of 
respiratory exchange ratio during exercise, which are often used to mark shifts in substrate 
utilization, can reflect the prevailing availability of substrate rather than a true adaptation in 
the muscle.  However, several studies confirmed that exposure to the LCHF diet achieved a 
robust alteration to regulatory factors in fat utilisation; changes include an increase in 
muscle triglyceride stores, increased activity of hormone sensitive lipase [HSL] which 
mobilizes triglycerides in muscle and adipose tissue, and increases in key fat transport 
molecules such as fatty acid translocase [FAT-CD36] and Carnitine Palmitoyl Transferase 
(CPT) [76]. Furthermore, the increases in fat utilisation during exercise persisted in the face 
of abundant carbohydrate supplies. However, again, these investigations failed to find 
evidence of universal performance benefits, but uncovered mechanisms to explain 
metabolic changes in the muscle as well as information on scenarios in which fat adaptation 
 might be useful/benign and those in which it would, in fact, impair sports performance 
[73].   
 
A landmark study investigated the effect of fat adaptation and carbohydrate restoration on 
a real-life simulation of sports performance which involved the completion of a 100 km 
cycling time trial during which subjects were required to complete “sprints” at intensities of 
>90% peak power output [77]. Although the overall result was a (non-significant) benefit of ~ 
3 min in the control trial, the striking outcome was the observation that the cyclist’s ability 
to exercise at higher intensities was impaired following the fat-adaptation strategy.  A 
separate investigation completed around the same time provided the unifying mechanistic 
explanation of all the previous literature: chronic intake of the LCHF diet specifically impairs 
rather than spares glycogen utilisation during exercise by reducing glycogenolysis and 
reducing the active form of pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDHa) to down-regulate the entry of 
carbohydrate into the citric acid cycle [78]. This finding elicited the opinion that the LCHF 
had little role to play in the preparation of competitive athletes since it would likely impair 
their capacity for the high-intensity exercise that is a pre-requisite for success in the majority 
of conventional sports [79]. 
 
A renewed and fervent interest in the ketogenic version of the LCHF has recently emerged, 
supported by peer-reviewed summaries of theoretical claims for health and sports 
performance [74], but largely promoted by the phenomenon of social media.  While this 
merits further examination, it is difficult to make different conclusions in the absence of new 
data.  However, it has been noted that a further frustration around this topic is a relentless 
misrepresentation of the current sports nutrition guidelines by proponents of the LCHF 
movement [73].  Rather than promoting “high carbohydrate diets for all athletes”, both the 
guidelines and the practices of contemporary sports nutritionists have moved away from 
such a universal message. Instead they promote an individualized and periodized approach 
to avoid unnecessary and excessive intake of carbohydrate per se, to optimise training 
outcomes via modification of the timing, amount and type of carbohydrate-rich foods and 
drinks to balance periods of low and high carbohydrate availability and to adopt well-
practiced competition strategies that provide appropriate carbohydrate availability 
according to the needs and opportunities provided by the event and individual experience 
[73] [see section 2.2]. Further research is needed to continue to evolve these models, 
including examination of scenarios in which the LCHF diet may be beneficial or at least not 
 detrimental to sports performance.    
 
 
2.4 The molecular regulation of resistance training adaptation. Resistance training is 
typically defined as performing relatively high intensity contractions against an external 
resistance for a relatively short period of time [5]. Resistance exercise is usually performed 
utilising weights and is used as an adjunct to almost all sports with some sports such as 
Olympic weight lifting or para-power lifting performing the same or variations of the lifts in 
training as in the sport. In other sports such as rugby, weight lifting is used to add/maintain 
functional weight to the athlete and improve power on sport specific tasks is critical. An 
appropriately structured resistance training program will lead to improved strength partly 
through improvements in muscle mass [80]. An individual’s strength is highly, but not wholly 
dependent upon muscle mass [81, 82]. Resistance exercise builds muscle mass by increasing 
the remodelling of muscle proteins and by sensitising the skeletal muscle protein synthesis 
machinery to subsequent meals [83]. As with endurance exercise, nutrition can play a critical 
role in augmenting the adaptive stimulus that comes from resistance exercise [84]. Whilst 
endurance exercise adaptations are believed to be driven primarily by transcriptional 
responses [2, 8], the muscle growth adaptation to resistance exercise is driven primarily by 
changes in translation, in particular by increases in mRNA activity (protein produced per unit 
of mRNA) [85-87]. The multi-protein complex mechanistic Target of Rapamycin Complex 1 
(mTORC1) is a key controller of protein synthesis through the control that it exerts on mRNA 
activity via increasing protein translation initiation [88] (Figure 2). 
 
The mechanically sensitive pathways that respond to loading across the muscle to increase 
MPS converge with those that respond to increases in intracellular amino acid 
concentrations and insulin at mTORC1 [88] (Figure 2). mTORC1 is well defined as essential to 
loading induced muscle growth in rodents [89] and stimulus induced increases in MPS in 
humans [90, 91]. Activation of mTORC1 is required for increases in protein synthesis with 
amino acids [90] and resistance exercise [91]. When mTORC1 activity [89] or the activity of 
its down stream target p70S6K1 [92, 93] are impaired then muscle mass is impinged. It 
therefore is logical to assume that increases in muscle protein synthesis could be enhanced 
by enhancing the activation of mTORC1. This can be achieved nutritionally in several ways, 
1) with high quality protein or essential amino acids and 2) with carbohydrate driven 
increases in insulin. 
 
 The activity of the catalytic component of mTORC1, mTOR, against its substrates is highly 
dependent upon the formation of the mTOR complex. This complex consists of a number of 
different proteins, mTOR, GbetaL, raptor, GTP bound Rheb in addition to an apparent 
required association with lysosomal membranes [94]. Furthermore, mTORC1 has a number 
of repressors, which must be dissociated from the complex to allow it to become active, 
such as PRAS40 and DEPTOR [94]. Finally the amino acid sensitive lipid kinase hVPS34 also 
plays a key role in mTORC1 activation [95] as does the MAPK family member MAP4K3 [96] 
(Figure 2). Cell based work has shown that this amino acid sensing system is incredibly 
sensitive with an ~7% increase in intracellular leucine leading to 50% maximal activation of 
mTORC1 [97]. Furthermore, only a fraction of maximal mTORC1 activity (~30%) is required 
to fully saturate muscle protein synthesis [98, 99]. The amino acid sensing by mTORC1 also 
seems to be driven not by extracellular, but instead by intracellular amino acid 
concentrations [100]. The mechanisms by which this occurs are incredibly complex and not 
yet fully defined. However, some key events seem to relate to the GTP loading status of a 
number of GTPases. Through an unknown mechanism the GTPase activity of the RagGTPases 
(RagA/B and RagC/D) is sensitive to the intracellular amino acid content [101]. When amino 
acids are above a certain threshold these Rags dimerise with the correct GTP loading status 
in such a way as to allow mTORC1 complex assembly [101]. As we mentioned the amino acid 
induced activation of mTORC1 is distinct from the mechanical activation of mTORC1, which 
again is not yet fully defined, but is thought to be dependent upon the secondary messenger 
phosphatidic acid (PA) derived from diacylglycerol kinase (DGK) [102]. Because the 
mechanically sensitive pathways and the resistance exercise pathways are distinct, 
consuming essential amino acids following resistance exercise significantly activates 
mTORC1 above resistance exercise alone [103]. We have known for several decades that 
consuming essential amino acids in close proximity to resistance exercise can enhance the 
protein synthetic response in the skeletal muscle [104] and we now know that ~20g of high 
quality protein in the fasted [105] or fed [106] state is sufficient to saturate the protein 
synthetic 
response 
following 
resistance 
exercise 
in 
young 
men. 
Furthermore 
supplementation of protein during a program of resistance training is well proven to 
enhance lean mass/muscle gains [84].  
 
The key trigger for the protein feeding induced increases in MPS seems to be the leucine 
content of the digested protein [107] and possibly the leucine metabolite HMB (β-Hydroxy 
β-methylbutyrate) [108]. Both of which activate mTORC1 in human skeletal muscle when 
 consumed [108]. It therefore seems that amino-acids and resistance exercise enhance MPS 
via a dual effect on increasing mTORC1 activity (Figure 2). However, not all stimuli that 
activate mTORC1 lead to improved protein synthesis. As we mentioned earlier, carbohydrate 
driven increases in insulin may increase mTORC1 activity. However, when insulin is infused 
to supra-physiological levels mTORC1 is potently activated without a concomitant increase 
in muscle protein synthesis [99]. So while the data are clear that mTORC1 is required for 
load-induced growth [89], resistance exercise [91] and feeding [90], it is still very unclear if 
manipulating mTORC1 above what occurs physiologically will lead to enhanced muscle 
growth.  
 
 
2.5. New/Underexplored areas in protein nutrition?  
 
A key question in the sports nutrition field has always been, “how much protein do I need to 
maximise muscle growth?” Several protein dose response studies have demonstrated that 
~20g of high quality protein (egg white protein or whey protein) following resistance 
exercise with a small amount of muscle mass (single leg training) is sufficient to maximally 
stimulate MPS in the trained leg [105, 106]. These studies have gone a long way to 
optimising post exercise nutrition. However, no study has assessed if increasing the amount 
of muscle mass worked, or if the size of the individual, plays any role in the protein 
requirements post exercise. Recently however, work from Stu Phillips laboratory has 
retrospectively analysed a series of studies on muscle protein synthesis (MPS) in an attempt 
to identify if maximum rates are dependent upon body mass. This retrospective analysis has 
suggested that the optimal dose of protein post exercise in healthy young men may be best 
quantified in a g/kg basis or even a g/kg lean mass basis with ~0.25 g/kg body mass and 0.25 
g/kg lean mass appearing to elicit the maximum rates of MPS [109]. 
 
In addition to the benefits of consuming high quality proteins on muscle mass and exercise 
recovery, foods rich in high quality protein also tend to be rich in other nutrients [110]. 
These other nutrients can potentially have benefits beyond the protein content [110]. In 
particular dairy protein sources, due to the high calcium content has been lauded for this 
reason [111]. Additionally, a number of studies have highlighted the benefits of milk-based 
protein, particularly whey, over plant based proteins for stimulating muscle protein 
synthesis [112]. This finding is thought to be due to the higher leucine content of whey. 
However, an area that has been highly speculated about, but very underexplored is the 
possibility of digested peptides from ingested proteins having beneficial, biological activities 
 [113]. Milk based proteins in particular can be digested via gastrointestinal peptidases to 
tryptophan containing peptides, which in cell and biochemical based assays can have 
biological activities which may positively impact human physiology from blood pressure 
control to satiation [114]. Finally, protein-containing foods also contain fat and the role that 
the fat fraction plays in regulating the feeding response to the protein is very underexplored. 
For instance, whole milk consumed after resistance exercise may be more effective at 
stimulating amino acid incorporation into skeletal muscle than fat free milk [115]. These 
points demonstrate that, for the field of protein nutrition, there is still much to do to 
optimise the source and quantity of protein to support human health and performance.  
 
Figure 2. Overview of the molecular signalling pathways activated in skeletal muscle in 
response to resistance exercise. Resistance exercise increases protein synthesis in skeletal 
muscle via 3 distinct processes that converge on the protein kinase mTOR. Insulin/IGF1 is 
thought to activate mTOR through AKT mediated phosphorylation of TSC1/2 and PRAS40. 
In parallel, mechanical loading of skeletal muscle activates mTOR through the generation 
of phosphatidic acid in addition to unknown mechanisms. Finally, mTOR is activated 
through an amino acid pathway via the activation of VPS34, MAP4K3 and the Rag A-D 
proteins. The small compounds HMB, PA and ursolic acid (UA) have all been suggested to 
enhance resistance-training responses in skeletal muscle through a number of signalling 
pathways (blue). 
 
 
 
 3. Traditional Sports Supplements – the ones that still work in 2015  
 
Although supplements are still an integral part of an elite athletes daily routine [116, 117] 
there is a growing shift in priorities with many athletes now adopting a “food first” 
approach. Given the risk of supplement contamination and the potential for failed drug tests 
[118] supplements are now often only given when there is a clear rationale for their use 
combined with the availability of independently drug-tested products. It is beyond the scope 
of this review to cover all supplements therefore the most popular ones are categorized 
according to the level of evidence supporting their benefit and summarized in Table 1. 
Supplements have been divided into those claimed to increase endurance performance, 
strength/size adaptions or boost general health. There is however considerable evidence 
behind the effectiveness of caffeine, creatine, nitrates, beta alanine, antioxidants and 
vitamin D and therefore these have been given special consideration. 
 
Table 1. Summary of some of the most common supplements grouped as Green – Strong 
evidence of a performance effect, Amber – moderate or emerging evidence or Red – Lack 
of evidence, high risk of contamination and/or currently prohibited by WADA based upon 
authors interpretation of the existing published literature. 
 
 
Green 
Amber 
Red 
Endure 
Caffeine 
Carbohydrate Gels/drinks 
Beta-alanine 
Beetroot Juice 
Sodium Bicarb/Citrate 
Antioxidants 
Taurine 
Cherry Active 
L-Carnitine 
Ephedrine 
Methylhaxanemine 
Herbal Supplements 
Citruline Malate 
L-Arginine 
Synephrine 
Strength/Size 
Creatine 
Protein  
 
Leucine 
BCAAs 
 
ZMA 
Anything ‘Anabolic’ 
Testosterone 
Boosters 
Herbal Supplements 
Colostrum 
Health 
Probiotics 
Electlytes 
Vitamin D 
 
Vitamin C 
Multi Vitamin 
Glucosamine 
Quercetin 
Glutamine 
Fish Oil 
Collagen 
Magnesium 
Herbal Supplements 
 
 
 
Caffeine, tri-methyl xanthine, is a naturally occurring compound in plant foods which has 
 been used for many centuries across many cultures to promote well-being and work 
capacity. Today, about 90 percent of adults regularly consume commonly available dietary 
sources such as coffee, tea and cola or energy drinks for a mixture of social, cultural and 
lifestyle enhancement reasons [119]. Meanwhile, athletes have more than 500 peer-
reviewed publications and entire textbooks [119] to guide their more specific use of 
caffeinated sports products and functional foods (including gum, gels, confectionery and 
drinks) to achieve sporting goals [120]. The most relevant of caffeine's many 
pharmacological and physiological effects as an adenosine receptor antagonist and modifier 
of muscle contractility is the reduced perception of effort, fatigue or pain associated with 
exercise [120]. Recent changes to knowledge and practice around caffeine and sports 
performance include recognition that benefits apply across a large range of sports (high-
intensity events of 1-60 min, endurance/ultra-endurance events and team/racket/combat 
sports with intermittent efforts) [121].  Caffeine may also enhance training outcomes, 
especially when used to allow the athlete to train harder during key sessions that are 
deliberately fatiguing [122] (for example when training in a low carbohydrate state as 
discussed in section 2.2). A range of protocols involving small-moderate doses of caffeine (3 
mg/kg) before and during the event, according to practical considerations and athlete 
experience, may be used [119, 121]. Following its 2004 removal from the WADA Prohibited 
List, caffeine can be considered safe, effective and legal when used according to established 
and practiced protocols. Athletes should avoid risky and unnecessary practices such as 
taking unnecessarily high doses and/or mixing caffeine with other stimulants. Furthermore, 
evolving confirmation of genetic and other sources of individual variability in caffeine 
metabolism provides support for the well-known observations that some athletes are low-
responders [123] to caffeine or suffer side effects. 
 
 
 
Creatine is an amino acid derived metabolite found predominantly in skeletal muscle from 
both endogenous synthesis and dietary intake (meat).  Since 1992, when the first scientific 
publication regarding creatine supplementation [124] aligned with testimonials regarding its 
use by successful athletes from the Barcelona Olympic Games, creatine sales and science 
have both flourished.  Muscle creatine stores are elevated by ~ 20% to a threshold level by 
oral creatine supplementation, either by loading protocols (5 d @ 20 g/d in split doses) or by 
longer periods (~4 weeks) of a maintenance dose (~3 g/d) [125]. Despite the marketing of 
exotic creatine compounds, creatine monohydrate remains an effective form of 
 supplemental creatine, with muscle uptake being optimized by its co-ingestion with 
carbohydrate [125].  By increasing the muscle phosphocreatine reservoir, creatine 
supplementation can enhance the rapid regeneration of ATP during brief high-intensity 
exercise bouts, particularly when they are repeated with short recovery intervals.  This can 
acutely benefit the performance of sports involving such work patterns (e.g. team sports), as 
well as chronically enhance the athlete’ capacity to undertake training sessions of this 
nature (e.g. resistance or interval training) [125].  Although creatine loading is most 
associated with sports involving increased muscle mass, strength, power or intermittent 
activity, other less well-explored actions on cellular osmolarity (e.g. increases in gene 
expression and glycogen storage) may extend its value to other sports or exercise scenarios 
[126].  Creatine supplementation may have important clinical roles and benefits to ageing 
populations [127].  Despite publicity around safety aspects, careful studies of established 
creatine supplementation protocols have not found evidence of increased health risks4 and 
have reported reduced rather than increased prevalence of muscle damage or impaired 
thermoregulation associated with exercise [128]. 
 
 
 
Beetroot juice (BJ) has become a recent addition to the athlete’s armoury of evidence-based 
supplements, with commercial preparations providing a safe, cost-effective and reliable 
source of inorganic nitrate in countries where the use of sodium nitrate is not permitted 
[129].  Both acute (2.5 h pre-exercise) and chronic (6 d) of intake of ~ 8 mmol of dietary 
nitrate has been shown to increase plasma nitrate concentrations and increase the capacity 
of the nitrate-nitrite-NO pathway to produce NO2. In addition to a number of health and 
benefits in clinical populations, enhanced NO availability appears to be responsible for 
improved exercise capacity via mechanisms including an increase in oxygen economy and 
direct effects on muscle contractility [130].  However, the situations in which this results in 
benefits to sports performance are presently unclear, particularly in the case of elite 
athletes who seem to be less responsive to nitrate supplementation protocols [131, 
132].   Reasons for this observation include a greater dietary nitrate intake and/or greater 
capacity for arginine-derived production of NO in highly trained individuals, as well as better 
genetic and training-supported characteristics in the muscle, which enhance oxygen delivery 
and buffer metabolic acidosis, thus reducing the conditions under which the nitrate-nitrite-
NO pathway may be important [130].  Nevertheless, there seems good evidence that 
nitrate/BJ supplementation can enhance sports performance in moderate caliber athletes 
 and individuals among elite athlete populations [130], with emphasis on adequate 
supplementation protocols and sports or scenarios which rely on the recruitment of the less-
oxidative type II muscle fibres, and local or environmental conditions of hypoxia or acidosis 
(e.g. exercise at high altitude, sports involving high-intensity exercise or involvement of a 
small muscle mass) [131, 132].    
 
 
 
Sodium bicarbonate. Performance of sports requiring high rates of energy production from 
anaerobic glycolysis is often limited by excessive accumulation of hydrogen ions (H+) in the 
muscle. This includes sustained high-intensity events lasting 1-7 minutes, but also sports 
involving repeated sprints (e.g team sports) or longer (30-60 min) sustained efforts just 
below the “lactate threshold” in which there are surges in pace.  Supplements that enhance 
intracellular and/or extracellular buffering capacity may benefit these sports by managing 
the progressive increase in intracellular acidosis. 
  
The extracellular anion bicarbonate largely manages pH and electrolyte gradients between 
intra and extracellular environments.  Acute ingestion of dietary bicarbonate, if it achieves a 
meaningful albeit temporary increase in blood bicarbonate concentrations and pH, can 
enhance extracellular disposal of the H+ efflux from the working muscle.  Typical protocols 
involve intake of 300 mg/kg BM of bicarbonate, 1-2 hours prior to the targeted exercise 
[133].  Powered sodium bicarbonate is a cheap and widely available household product, but 
alternative forms include pharmaceutical urinary alkalizers used for discomfort relief with 
urinary tract infections [133].  
  
A comprehensive meta-analysis of the lengthy history of bicarbonate supplementation and 
sports performance found a moderate (1.7 ± 2.0%, 90%CL) enhancement of a single 1-
minute sprint in male athletes with the typical protocol [134].  This increases by ~0.5% 
(±0.5%) with a larger (+0.1 mg/kg) dose or five extra sprint bouts, and reduces by a similar 
magnitude with each 10-fold increase in test duration (e.g. 1-10 minutes) or 
females.  Gastrointestinal disturbances often occur with bicarbonate use, but can be 
managed by consuming the dose in a split protocol with the intake of a small meal/snack 
[135]. 
  
 
Beta-alanine. More recently, muscle concentrations of the dipeptide carnosine have been 
 shown to respond to supplementation with β-alanine, the rate-limiting precursor for 
carnosine synthesis. The optimal loading protocol is unknown but intakes of 3-6 g/d for 4-12 
weeks increase this intracellular buffer by 50-85% [136].  To date, no threshold for carnosine 
concentrations has been found, but a daily intake of ~ 1.2 g appears to maintain muscle 
carnosine elevations and a return to baseline may require 6-20 weeks of supplement 
withdrawal [137].  Dietary beta-alanine includes meat from animals that are highly 
anaerobic (e.g. breast meat from poultry) or live in hypoxic environments (e.g. 
whale).  Supplementation with doses > 800 mg of purified b-alanine is associated with 
symptoms of paresthesia (skin tingling), but this sometimes unpleasant side-effect can be 
managed with slow-release tablets or spreading doses over the day [136].  Theoretically this 
chronically applied supplement can enhance the performance of a single competition, but 
also support the training process.  Indeed, review of the accumulating literature shows some 
support for the benefits of beta-alanine supplementation on high-intensity exercise and a 
potential additive effect when combined with bicarbonate supplementation. However, 
further work is needed to define specific applications including targeted sporting events, 
benefits to elite vs recreational athletes, and whether other muscle carnosine actions such 
as Ca handling are also responsible [138]. 
 
  
 
Vitamin D. Over the past decade interest in Vitamin D has exploded. The reason for this 
increase in interest is partly due to the re-emergence of the debilitating bone disease 
rickets, but also due to a better understanding of the many biological roles of this 
‘prohormone’. It is now known that many tissues in the human body express the vitamin D 
receptor suggesting that Vitamin D (or more specifically active vitamin D metabolites) play a 
fundamental physiological role that have previously been somewhat ignored [reviewed by 
139]. It is now clear that both innate and acquired immune function, cardiovascular health 
and even muscle growth and repair may be regulated by vitamin D. This emerging 
knowledge, combined with a plethora of research suggesting that many athletes are vitamin 
D deficient [140], largely due to a sun-shy lifestyle and poor dietary sources of vitamin D, 
even those living in sunny climates [141] has resulted in vitamin D being one of the most 
widely supplemented vitamins in sports nutrition. 
 
It must be stressed that direct evidence indicating a performance enhancing effect of 
vitamin D in athletic populations is at best equivocal [142]. Whilst some studies have shown 
improved markers of muscle function the majority have failed to show any meaningful 
 effects. Perhaps the main reason for the discrepancies lies with the baseline vitamin D 
concentration. Classification of vitamin D deficiency is complex and subject to significant 
debate. Currently the US Institute of Medicine state that >50nmol/L is sufficient although 
many leading researchers seriously question this as being too conservative [143, 144]. In our 
laboratory, we have reported detrimental effects on muscle function when concentrations 
are below 30nmol/L [140] with no performance enhancing effects of vitamin D supplements 
if the starting concentration is around 50nmol/L [145]. In terms of a supplemental dose, the 
EFSA have recently stated that 4000iU is the maximum dose that should be used which we 
have also shown to be an effective dose in correcting deficiencies [146].  Recent work from 
our group [147] has also demonstrated that vitamin D deficiencies may impair muscle 
regeneration and perhaps more importantly this effect may occur even when vitamin D 
concentrations are around 50nmol/L. It is clear that much research is required on vitamin D 
and athletic performance with future studies likely to assess if different biological functions 
require differing vitamin D concentrations. Perhaps at present the best advice is to check 
athletes to ensure deficiencies are identified and corrected although we would add a word 
of caution that emerging work form our group is beginning to suggest that high dose 
supplementation, in non-deficient individuals, could have negative consequences related to 
the function of the vitamin D endocrine system. 
 
 
 
 
Antioxidants It is now well recognized that exercise-induced disruptions in skeletal muscle 
homeostasis regulate exercise adaptations with repeated activation [148, 149] (Figure 1) 
This is best exemplified by the notion that decreasing reactive oxygen species (ROS) 
generation with nutritional antioxidants, attenuates exercise-induced redox signalling, and 
thereby blunts exercise adaptation [150, 151]. Over the last decade research has therefore 
somewhat switched focus from looking at exercise-induced ROS generation as being 
damaging at all times with nutrition focused on prevent any increase in ROS production 
[152] to now appreciating this generation as being an essential signaling process in skeletal 
muscle adaptation [153, 154]. In the sport and exercise world, there is still a great deal of 
confusion when it come to exercise-induced ROS generation and as a consequence the 
advice often offered to athletic populations is at best misguided and at worst, detrimental to 
performance and even long term health [155].  Confusion generally stems from three major 
important issues: 
 
 1. Inappropriate methodological techniques. ROS are facile species and are inherently 
difficult to measure directly [156]. Unfortunately, many of the assays in the sports 
science literature merely serve to create confusion as they are fundamentally ill 
suited to deciphering whether a compound with antioxidant activity is actually 
acting as an antioxidant. For example, the vast majority of sport science research 
has used blood markers of “total antioxidant status” an inappropriate assay to assay 
antioxidant status in vivo [157] or “TBARS” a purported marker of lipid peroxidation 
that is generated by several non-redox regulated means and is prone to 
methodological artefact to the extent that it is no longer recommended for use in 
the parent discipline [158]. It is therefore not surprising that inapposite conclusions 
are drawn when a non-specific antioxidant does or does not affect some non-
specific blood borne markers. To really advance this field of research sport science 
needs to collaborate with redox biologists and combine the skills of both sets of 
scientists. 
2. Antioxidants are heterogeneous [159] they work in distinct ways and importantly 
they do not solely regulate ROS. This is important because just because one is using 
an antioxidant it is not to say that it is acting as an antioxidant, which is especially 
important for nutritional antioxidants. To eliminate confusion we recommend that 
findings from one antioxidant or combination thereof are not automatically 
extrapolated to others [148]. 
3. Context: perhaps most importantly when formulating recommendations context is 
everything. For example, NAC blunts training adaptations [160] but enhances acute 
performance [161, 162]. Thus when adaptation is inconsequential (e.g., competitive 
events) short-term NAC supplementation may be beneficial although it should be 
stressed that effective doses may result in gastro-intestinal discomfort [161]. At 
present it may be best to consider exercise as 2 distinct outcomes, one being 
training adaptions and one being athletic performance and judge the need for 
supplementation based on the exact context of the required stimuli. There could 
also be a case for some polyphenolic compounds to be supplemented post-exercise, 
such as tart cherry juice [163] to attenuate muscle soreness although if this is 
through a direct scavenging effect remains unclear (see point 2 above and reference 
[148] for criteria that need to fulfilled to satisfy a scavenging affect).  
We recommend that more work is done to decipher whether nutritional antioxidants are in 
fact working in an antioxidant fashion and at present supplementation to athletes should be 
 undertaken with caution. A final note is that to date there have been no data to suggest that 
eating high quality fruit and vegetables attenuates adaptations to exercise so it may be best 
to advise athletes to consume a high quality diet and avoid mega dose micronutrient 
supplementation, it really could be that simple [164]. 
 
 
 
4. Novel compounds  
 
4.1 Supporting endurance training adaptation  
 
 
 
(-)-Epicatechins. Consumption of dark chocolate has been reported to have multiple health 
benefits in humans [165]. The active ingredient of dark chocolate that appears to induce this 
metabolic remodeling is the cocoa-derived (-)-epicatechin. Noguiera et al. (2011) were the 
first to report that fifteen days (-)-epicatechin supplementation increased skeletal muscle 
fatigue resistance, mitochondrial volume and angiogenesis in mice compared to activity-
matched controls [166]. Importantly, (-)-epicatechin supplementation was not as potent as 
endurance exercise in remodeling skeletal muscle, however (-)-epicatechin supplementation 
in combination with exercise training had a synergistic effect. As such these results indicate 
that (-)-epicatechin supplementation may be a nutritional approach to enhance skeletal 
muscle adaptation to endurance training (Figure 1). The first translation of these rodent 
studies into human investigation was recently performed by Gutierrez-Salmean and 
colleagues (2014), who investigated the effects of epicatechin supplementation on post-
prandial fat metabolism in normal and overweight adults [167]. Following supplementation 
of (-)-epicatechin (1 mg/kg), participants displayed a lower RER, indicative of increased lipid 
oxidation. In addition, lower plasma glucose concentrations were observed following the 
supplementation [167]. From the available data, it would appear that cocoa-derived -(-
)epicatechin is a promising ergogenic aid for increasing mitochondrial biogenesis and lipid 
oxidation. However, it is currently unknown whether (-)-epicatechin supplementation can 
promote mitochondrial biogenesis and enhance endurance-training adaptation in human 
skeletal muscle. 
 
 
Nicotinamide riboside (NR). Vitamin B3 (niacin) is a naturally occurring substance found in 
meat, poultry, fish, eggs, and green vegetables [168]. Niacin is a combination of Nicotinic 
acid (NA) and nicotinamide (NAM), whereas Nicotinamide Riboside (NR) is a pyridine-
nucleoside form of niacin containing an associated ribose bond in addition to nicotinamide 
 [168]. NR has garnered recent attention, as it is a direct precursor for NAD+ synthesis in 
skeletal muscle through the Nicotinamide Riboside Kinase 1/2 (NRK1/2) pathway [169]. As a 
dietary derived NAD+ donor in skeletal muscle, NR is thought to impact skeletal muscle 
mitochondrial function through the NAD+/SIRT1/PGC-1α signaling cascade [170] (Figure 1). 
Recently, Canto et al (2012) who showed that NR supplementation in C2C12 myotubes 
increased NAD+ content, whilst NR feeding to mice (400 mg/kg/day) resulted in modest 
increases in skeletal muscle NAD+ (~5%) following 1-week supplementation [171]. The 
authors proposed that the metabolic action of NR supplementation was mediated through 
SIRT1, as the adaptive response of C2C12 myotubes to NR supplementation was lost 
following SIRT1 siRNA mediated knockdown. Interestingly, NR supplementation protected 
mice from the deleterious effects of 8 weeks high fat feeding, principally through an 
increase in energy expenditure and a reduction in cholesterol levels [171]. In parallel to 
metabolic adaptation, endurance capacity also increased by ~25% in the NR supplemented 
mice, coupled to an increase in mitochondrial to nuclear DNA ratios (a marker of 
mitochondrial mass) and increased mitochondrial protein content. Thus NR supplementation 
appears capable of altering skeletal muscle NAD+ content which in turn increases skeletal 
muscle mitochondrial biogenesis through a SIRT1-dependent process [171] (Figure 1). To 
date, no studies have examined the effect of NR supplementation on mitochondrial 
adaptation in human skeletal muscle. 
 
 
Resveratrol. Resveratrol, a stilbenoid polyphenol, belongs to the phenylpropanoid family 
commonly found in red wine [172]. As the prototypical SIRT1 activator, numerous reports 
have identified resveratrol as a potent activator of mitochondrial biogenesis in skeletal 
muscle (Figure 1), in addition to protecting skeletal muscle from the deleterious effects of 
high fat feeding in mice [173]. Further, Resveratrol has been shown to promote fat oxidation 
and enhance endurance performance in mice [174]. Translational studies in obese male 
volunteers have suggested that 30 days resveratrol supplementation (150mg/day resVida) 
can reduce intrahepatic lipid content, circulating glucose, triglycerides, alanine-
aminotransferase, and inflammation markers in addition to improving estimates of insulin 
sensitivity [175]. In parallel resveratrol supplementation increased skeletal muscle citrate 
synthase activity without a change in mitochondrial content, and improved muscle 
mitochondrial respiration in response to a fatty acid-derived substrate [175]. As such, there 
is growing support that resveratrol may be a beneficial approach to remodel skeletal muscle 
in humans. Whilst the data from Timmers et al (2011) was encouraging, recently Scribbans 
and colleagues (2014) reported that resveratrol supplementation during exercise training in 
 healthy individuals can result in a maladaptive response in exercise-stimulated gene 
expression [176]. In agreement with this observation, Gliemann et al. (2013) showed that 
resveratrol supplementation in combination with high-intensity training in older men not 
only blunted the increase in maximal oxygen uptake observed in the placebo group, but also 
eradicated the effects of the exercise to reduce low-density lipoprotein, total cholesterol 
and triglyceride concentrations in the blood [177]. Using a similar protocol, Olesen et al. 
(2014) recently showed that resveratrol supplementation also blunted training-induced 
decreases in protein carbonylation and tumour necrosis factor α (TNF ) mRNA within older 
individuals’ skeletal muscle [178]. Thus, there are clear discrepancies between cell, rodent 
and human studies investigating resveratrol supplementation and it is currently unclear as to 
why resveratrol supplementation may display a negative effect on whole body/skeletal 
muscle adaptation when combined with endurance-exercise training in healthy individuals. 
Certainly the human research to date suggests that resveratrol does not have the metabolic 
benefits in vivo as previously proposed in cell and rodent studies. Clearly further research 
into the overlapping effects of exercise and resveratrol in humans is warranted. 
 
4.2 Novel compounds supporting resistance training adaptations  
 
 
β-hydroxy β-methylbutyrate (HMB). As discussed in previous sections, the BCAA leucine is a 
potent regulator of protein balance in skeletal muscle [179]. As such, there has been 
considerable interest in the metabolism of leucine in skeletal muscle, and the design of 
nutritional approaches to maximize this signaling cascade in the context of resistance 
training adaptation [179]. One of the key leucine intermediates appears to be the derivative 
β-hydroxy β-methylbutyrate (HMB), which like leucine appears to have potent anabolic 
properties in skeletal muscle [179] (Figure 2). Supplementation of HMB (3g/day) has 
previously been shown to enhance gains in fat-free mass following 6 weeks of resistance 
training [180]. This adaptive response appeared to be mediated by prevention in exercise-
induced proteolysis (as assessed via urine 3-methylhistidine appearance), muscle damage 
and resulted in larger gains in muscle function associated with resistance training [180]. To 
examine the synergy between leucine and HMB-mediated increases in Myofibrillar Protein 
Synthesis (MPS), Wilkinson et al. (2013) directly compared the effects of leucine and HMB 
on [108]. Interestingly, the authors demonstrated that oral consumption of HMB (3.42 g 
free-acid (FA-HMB) providing 2.42 g of pure HMB) exhibited rapid bioavailability in plasma 
and muscle and, similarly to 3.42 g Leucine (Leu), stimulated muscle protein synthesis (MPS; 
HMB +70% vs. Leu +110%). HMB consumption also attenuated muscle protein breakdown 
 (MPB; -57%) in an insulin-independent manner [108]. Further, HMB supplementation 
increased mTORC1 activity (as assessed via the phosphorylation of mTORC1 substrates 
S6K1Thr389 and 4E-BP1Ser65/Thr70 phosphorylation) in a similar manner to Leu, however mTORC1 
activation was more pronounced in the Leu group compared to HMB [108] suggesting that 
the mechanism of Leu action may function in additional processes compared to HMB (Figure 
2). Further long-term training studies are clearly warranted to assess the efficacy of HMB 
supplementation for use in human resistance-exercise training studies.  
 
Phosphatidic acid (PA). The diacyl-glycerophospholipid, Phosphatidic acid (PA) is a precursor 
for the synthesis of numerous lipids [181]. As such, PA plays a fundamental role in the 
regulation of cellular metabolism [181]. As discussed in previous sections, in addition to its 
metabolic role, PA has also emerged as a key signaling intermediate in skeletal muscle 
following the observation that PA can activate mTORC1 and by extension increase protein 
synthesis in vitro [182] (Figure 2). Whilst the interaction between PA and mTORC1 has been 
well established in cell and rodent models, the ability of PA to activate mTORC1 in human 
skeletal muscle is less clear. Recently, Hoffman et al. (2012) examined whether the oral 
ingestion (750mg/day) of a commercially available PA supplement (MediatorTM: Chemi 
Nutra, USA) could enhance adaptation to an 8-week resistance-training program [183]. 
Following the training period, the authors reported a 12.7% increase in squat strength and a 
2.6% increase in LBM in the PA group, compared to a 9.3% improvement in squat strength 
and a 0.1% change in LBM in the placebo group. In a subsequent study from the same group, 
Joy et al. (2014) reported that in contrast to their previous study [183], PA supplementation 
(750mg/day) during 8 weeks resistance training lead to significant increases in lean body 
mass (+2.4 kg), skeletal muscle cross sectional area (+1.0 cm), and leg press strength 
(+51.9 kg) when compared to placebo [184]. Finally, Mobley et al (2015) recently examined 
the effect of PA, whey protein concentrate (WPC) and a combination of PA+WPC 
administration on acute signaling responses in rat skeletal muscle [185]. Interestingly, WPC 
ingestion was the only intervention that significantly increased MPS 3h post administration, 
whilst PA actually lead to an ~50% reduction in the WPC-mediated MPS response. Thus, 
based on the current data available, it would appear that PA supplementation (750mg/day) 
might enhance resistance training mediated increases in mass and function (Figure 2). 
However, the fact that PA has also been reported to have no effect on resistance training 
[183], or even have a negative effect on WPC-stimulated protein synthesis would suggest 
 that further, well controlled human studies are required to define the role of PA 
supplementation in skeletal muscle adaptation to resistance training in humans. 
 
 
Ursolic acid (UA). Ursolic acid (UA) is a natural, water-insoluble, pentacyclic triterpenoid 
carboxylic acid found widely in leaf extracts including rosemary plant and holy basil [186]. 
Interest in the efficacy of UA as a nutritional aid to augment muscle mass has sparked 
following the observations from Kunkel et al (2011) that UA supplementation in mice (200 
mg / kg via i.p. injection twice daily for 7 days) reduced muscle atrophy following 
denervation, whilst 5 weeks of supplemented diet (0.27% UA) induced hypertrophy [187]. 
UA appeared to mediate its effects through enhancement of insulin/IGF-I signaling and a 
reduction in the expression of the atrophy-associated genes MuRF1 and MAFbx [187] 
(Figure 2). Ogasawara et al (2013) recently reported that UA administration enhanced 
S6K1Thr389 phosphorylation 6 hours following a single bout of resistance exercise in rats [188], 
indicating that UA might also enhance mTORC1 activity in skeletal muscle. Whether UA 
administration promotes skeletal muscle hypertrophy in human skeletal muscle is less clear. 
Bang et al. (2014) recently reported that supplementation of UA (1350mg/day) reduced 
body fat percentage, increased maximal leg strength and IGF-1 activation following 8 weeks 
resistance training in healthy male participants [189]. However, a recent study failed to 
translate the findings from Ogasawara et al (2013) into humans, with the observation that 
UA ingestion (3000mg) had no effect on AktThr308, IGF-1Try1131, S6KThr389 or mTORC1Ser2448 
phosphorylation following a single bout of resistance exercise [190]. Therefore, it is 
presently unclear whether UA supplementation in humans can reproduce the anti-atrophy 
or pro-hypertrophic data reported previously [187]. However, given the potent effect of UA 
in rodent skeletal muscle, future translational research in humans is clearly warranted.  
 
5. Summary and future directions  
 
It is clear that sport nutrition is rapidly evolving and we are now entering a new era, one that 
could be best described as “targeted nutritional periodization”. In terms of nutrition and the 
elite athlete it is essential that the purpose of the exercise session is clearly defined in the 
days and hours prior to the session in order to maximize performance or adaptation. It is 
also essential that coaches and athletes appreciate that the nutritional strategies to enhance 
performance or adaptation are quite different and at times are not always compatible. This 
is perhaps best demonstrated by the growing literature that carbohydrate restriction may 
enhance mitochondrial biogenesis and potentially long term adaption although it may also 
impair performance in a given training session.  This growing need for “targeted nutritional 
 periodization” requires that sports teams work with sport nutritionists / dieticians who have 
a solid understanding of exercise biochemistry to allow such strategies to be correctly 
implemented and is also beginning to highlight the need for sporting teams to employ full 
time nutrition support.  
 
Despite the growing research in sport nutrition this review has highlighted that there 
remains many unanswered questions, which must be addressed to further improve athletic 
performance. These questions include, but are not limited to 1) What is the best way to 
implement the train low (carbohydrate) strategy, 2) are there scenarios where fat adaption 
may enhance performance and if so how long does it take to fat adapt, 3) will the novel 
compounds that are emerging in rodent models translate to human performance, 4) given 
that the vast majority of research is on non elite performers, how much of this review 
directly translates to the elite athlete? These questions, amongst many others, will no doubt 
be addressed in the coming years ultimately helping athletes to continually be “Citius, 
Altius, Fortius”. 
 
 
Acknowledgments 
 
The authors would like to thank BBSRC New Investigator Award (BB/L023547/1), HH Sheikh 
Mansour Bin Zayed Al Nahyan Global Arabian Horse Flat Racing Festival and Science in Sport, 
for their financial and Dr James Cobley, Abertay University for his careful review of the 
manuscript.  
 
References 
 
 
[1] 
Baar, K. The signaling underlying FITness. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab 
34:411-419; 2009. 
[2] 
Egan, B.; Zierath, J. R. Exercise metabolism and the molecular regulation 
of skeletal muscle adaptation. Cell Metab 17:162-184; 2013. 
[3] 
Weigl, L. G. Lost in translation: regulation of skeletal muscle protein 
synthesis. Curr Opin Pharmacol 12:377-382; 2012. 
[4] 
Hardie, D. G. Sensing of energy and nutrients by AMP-activated protein 
kinase. Am J Clin Nutr 93:891S-896; 2011. 
[5] 
Booth, F. W.; Thomason, D. B. Molecular and cellular adaptation of muscle 
in response to exercise: perspectives of various models. Physiol Rev 71:541-585; 
1991. 
[6] 
Gibala, M. J.; Little, J. P.; van Essen, M.; Wilkin, G. P.; Burgomaster, K. A.; 
Safdar, A.; Raha, S.; Tarnopolsky, M. A. Short-term sprint interval versus 
 traditional endurance training: similar initial adaptations in human skeletal 
muscle and exercise performance. J Physiol 575:901-911; 2006. 
[7] 
Rivera-Brown, A. M.; Frontera, W. R. Principles of exercise physiology: 
responses to acute exercise and long-term adaptations to training. PM R 4:797-
804; 2012. 
[8] 
Perry, C. G.; Lally, J.; Holloway, G. P.; Heigenhauser, G. J.; Bonen, A.; Spriet, 
L. L. Repeated transient mRNA bursts precede increases in transcriptional and 
mitochondrial proteins during training in human skeletal muscle. J Physiol 
588:4795-4810; 2010. 
[9] 
Tamura, T.; Shiraki, H.; Nakagawa, H. Purification and characterization of 
adenylate kinase isozymes from rat muscle and liver. Biochim Biophys Acta 
612:56-66; 1980. 
[10] 
Meyer, R. A.; Terjung, R. L. AMP deamination and IMP reamination in 
working skeletal muscle. Am J Physiol 239:C32-38; 1980. 
[11] 
Trigun, S. K.; Singh, S. N. Changes in the modulations of kinetics and 
allosteric properties of muscle phosphofructokinase of young and old rats. Arch 
Gerontol Geriatr 7:239-247; 1988. 
[12] 
Winder, W. W.; Hardie, D. G. Inactivation of acetyl-CoA carboxylase and 
activation of AMP-activated protein kinase in muscle during exercise. Am J 
Physiol 270:E299-304; 1996. 
[13] 
Gowans, G. J.; Hawley, S. A.; Ross, F. A.; Hardie, D. G. AMP is a true 
physiological regulator of AMP-activated protein kinase by both allosteric 
activation and enhancing net phosphorylation. Cell Metab 18:556-566; 2013. 
[14] 
Sakamoto, K.; Goransson, O.; Hardie, D. G.; Alessi, D. R. Activity of LKB1 
and AMPK-related kinases in skeletal muscle: effects of contraction, phenformin, 
and AICAR. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 287:E310-317; 2004. 
[15] 
Alam, N.; Saggerson, E. D. Malonyl-CoA and the regulation of fatty acid 
oxidation in soleus muscle. Biochem J 334 ( Pt 1):233-241; 1998. 
[16] 
Pehmoller, C.; Treebak, J. T.; Birk, J. B.; Chen, S.; Mackintosh, C.; Hardie, D. 
G.; Richter, E. A.; Wojtaszewski, J. F. Genetic disruption of AMPK signaling 
abolishes both contraction- and insulin-stimulated TBC1D1 phosphorylation and 
14-3-3 binding in mouse skeletal muscle. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 
297:E665-675; 2009. 
[17] 
Howlett, K. F.; Mathews, A.; Garnham, A.; Sakamoto, K. The effect of 
exercise and insulin on AS160 phosphorylation and 14-3-3 binding capacity in 
human skeletal muscle. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 294:E401-407; 2008. 
[18] 
Howlett, K. F.; Sakamoto, K.; Garnham, A.; Cameron-Smith, D.; Hargreaves, 
M. Resistance exercise and insulin regulate AS160 and interaction with 14-3-3 in 
human skeletal muscle. Diabetes 56:1608-1614; 2007. 
[19] 
Sakamoto, K.; Holman, G. D. Emerging role for AS160/TBC1D4 and 
TBC1D1 in the regulation of GLUT4 traffic. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 
295:E29-37; 2008. 
[20] 
McBride, A.; Ghilagaber, S.; Nikolaev, A.; Hardie, D. G. The glycogen-
binding domain on the AMPK beta subunit allows the kinase to act as a glycogen 
sensor. Cell Metab 9:23-34; 2009. 
[21] 
Bartlett, J. D.; Louhelainen, J.; Iqbal, Z.; Cochran, A. J.; Gibala, M. J.; Gregson, 
W.; Close, G. L.; Drust, B.; Morton, J. P. Reduced carbohydrate availability 
enhances exercise-induced p53 signaling in human skeletal muscle: implications 
 for mitochondrial biogenesis. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 304:R450-
458; 2013. 
[22] 
Wojtaszewski, J. F.; MacDonald, C.; Nielsen, J. N.; Hellsten, Y.; Hardie, D. G.; 
Kemp, B. E.; Kiens, B.; Richter, E. A. Regulation of 5'AMP-activated protein kinase 
activity and substrate utilization in exercising human skeletal muscle. Am J 
Physiol Endocrinol Metab 284:E813-822; 2003. 
[23] 
Yeo, W. K.; McGee, S. L.; Carey, A. L.; Paton, C. D.; Garnham, A. P.; 
Hargreaves, M.; Hawley, J. A. Acute signalling responses to intense endurance 
training commenced with low or normal muscle glycogen. Exp Physiol 95:351-
358; 2010. 
[24] 
Philp, A.; MacKenzie, M. G.; Belew, M. Y.; Towler, M. C.; Corstorphine, A.; 
Papalamprou, A.; Hardie, D. G.; Baar, K. Glycogen content regulates peroxisome 
proliferator activated receptor- partial differential (PPAR- partial differential) 
activity in rat skeletal muscle. PLoS One 8:e77200; 2013. 
[25] 
Tanner, C. B.; Madsen, S. R.; Hallowell, D. M.; Goring, D. M.; Moore, T. M.; 
Hardman, S. E.; Heninger, M. R.; Atwood, D. R.; Thomson, D. M. Mitochondrial and 
performance adaptations to exercise training in mice lacking skeletal muscle 
LKB1. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 305:E1018-1029; 2013. 
[26] 
Fentz, J.; Kjobsted, R.; Kristensen, C. M.; Hingst, J. R.; Birk, J. B.; Gudiksen, 
A.; Foretz, M.; Schjerling, P.; Viollet, B.; Pilegaard, H.; Wojtaszewski, J. F. 
AMPKalpha is essential for acute exercise-induced gene responses but not for 
exercise training-induced adaptations in mouse skeletal muscle. Am J Physiol 
Endocrinol Metab:ajpendo 00157 02015; 2015. 
[27] 
McGee, S. L.; Howlett, K. F.; Starkie, R. L.; Cameron-Smith, D.; Kemp, B. E.; 
Hargreaves, M. Exercise increases nuclear AMPK alpha2 in human skeletal 
muscle. Diabetes 52:926-928; 2003. 
[28] 
Jager, S.; Handschin, C.; St-Pierre, J.; Spiegelman, B. M. AMP-activated 
protein kinase (AMPK) action in skeletal muscle via direct phosphorylation of 
PGC-1alpha. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104:12017-12022; 2007. 
[29] 
McGee, S. L.; Sparling, D.; Olson, A. L.; Hargreaves, M. Exercise increases 
MEF2- and GEF DNA-binding activity in human skeletal muscle. FASEB J 20:348-
349; 2006. 
[30] 
McGee, S. L.; van Denderen, B. J.; Howlett, K. F.; Mollica, J.; Schertzer, J. D.; 
Kemp, B. E.; Hargreaves, M. AMP-activated protein kinase regulates GLUT4 
transcription by phosphorylating histone deacetylase 5. Diabetes 57:860-867; 
2008. 
[31] 
McGee, S. L.; Hargreaves, M. Histone modifications and exercise 
adaptations. J Appl Physiol (1985) 110:258-263; 2011. 
[32] 
Gilde, A. J.; Van Bilsen, M. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors 
(PPARS): regulators of gene expression in heart and skeletal muscle. Acta Physiol 
Scand 178:425-434; 2003. 
[33] 
Muoio, D. M.; Koves, T. R. Skeletal muscle adaptation to fatty acid depends 
on coordinated actions of the PPARs and PGC1 alpha: implications for metabolic 
disease. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab 32:874-883; 2007. 
[34] 
Bergstrom, J.; Hermansen, L.; Hultman, E.; Saltin, B. Diet, muscle glycogen 
and physical performance. Acta Physiol Scand 71:140-150; 1967. 
[35] 
Hawley, J. A.; Schabort, E. J.; Noakes, T. D.; Dennis, S. C. Carbohydrate-
loading and exercise performance. An update. Sports Med 24:73-81; 1997. 
 [36] 
Burke, L. M.; Hawley, J. A.; Wong, S. H.; Jeukendrup, A. E. Carbohydrates 
for training and competition. J Sports Sci 29 Suppl 1:S17-27; 2011. 
[37] 
Stellingwerff, T.; Cox, G. R. Systematic review: Carbohydrate 
supplementation on exercise performance or capacity of varying durations. Appl 
Physiol Nutr Metab 39:998-1011; 2014. 
[38] 
Jeukendrup, A. A step towards personalized sports nutrition: 
carbohydrate intake during exercise. Sports Med 44 Suppl 1:S25-33; 2014. 
[39] 
Stellingwerff, T.; Boon, H.; Gijsen, A. P.; Stegen, J. H.; Kuipers, H.; van Loon, 
L. J. Carbohydrate supplementation during prolonged cycling exercise spares 
muscle glycogen but does not affect intramyocellular lipid use. Pflugers Arch 
454:635-647; 2007. 
[40] 
Gonzalez, J. T.; Fuchs, C. J.; Smith, F. E.; Thelwall, P. E.; Taylor, R.; 
Stevenson, E. J.; Trenell, M. I.; Cermak, N. M.; van Loon, L. J. Ingestion of Glucose 
or Sucrose Prevents Liver but not Muscle Glycogen Depletion During Prolonged 
Endurance-type Exercise in Trained Cyclists. Am J Physiol Endocrinol 
Metab:ajpendo 00376 02015; 2015. 
[41] 
Coyle, E. F.; Coggan, A. R.; Hemmert, M. K.; Ivy, J. L. Muscle glycogen 
utilization during prolonged strenuous exercise when fed carbohydrate. J Appl 
Physiol 61:165-172; 1986. 
[42] 
Jeukendrup, A.; Brouns, F.; Wagenmakers, A. J.; Saris, W. H. Carbohydrate-
electrolyte feedings improve 1 h time trial cycling performance. Int J Sports Med 
18:125-129; 1997. 
[43] 
Carter, J. M.; Jeukendrup, A. E.; Mann, C. H.; Jones, D. A. The effect of 
glucose infusion on glucose kinetics during a 1-h time trial. Med Sci Sports Exerc 
36:1543-1550; 2004. 
[44] 
Carter, J. M.; Jeukendrup, A. E.; Jones, D. A. The effect of carbohydrate 
mouth rinse on 1-h cycle time trial performance. Med Sci Sports Exerc 36:2107-
2111; 2004. 
[45] 
Burke, L. M.; Maughan, R. J. The Governor has a sweet tooth - mouth 
sensing of nutrients to enhance sports performance. Eur J Sport Sci 15:29-40; 
2015. 
[46] 
Chambers, E. S.; Bridge, M. W.; Jones, D. A. Carbohydrate sensing in the 
human mouth: effects on exercise performance and brain activity. J Physiol 
587:1779-1794; 2009. 
[47] 
Lane, S. C.; Bird, S. R.; Burke, L. M.; Hawley, J. A. Effect of a carbohydrate 
mouth rinse on simulated cycling time-trial performance commenced in a fed or 
fasted state. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab 38:134-139; 2013. 
[48] 
Kasper, A. M.; Cocking, S.; Cockayne, M.; Barnard, M.; Tench, J.; Parker, L.; 
McAndrew, J.; Langan-Evans, C.; Close, G. L.; Morton, J. P. Carbohydrate mouth 
rinse and caffeine improves high-intensity interval running capacity when 
carbohydrate restricted. Eur J Sport Sci:1-9; 2015. 
[49] 
Lee, M. J.; Hammond, K. M.; Vasdev, A.; Poole, K. L.; Impey, S. G.; Close, G. 
L.; Morton, J. P. Self-selecting fluid intake while maintaining high carbohydrate 
availability does not impair half-marathon performance. Int J Sports Med 
35:1216-1222; 2014. 
[50] 
Pfeiffer, B.; Stellingwerff, T.; Zaltas, E.; Jeukendrup, A. E. CHO oxidation 
from a CHO gel compared with a drink during exercise. Med Sci Sports Exerc 
42:2038-2045; 2010. 
 [51] 
Pfeiffer, B.; Stellingwerff, T.; Zaltas, E.; Jeukendrup, A. E. Oxidation of solid 
versus liquid CHO sources during exercise. Med Sci Sports Exerc 42:2030-2037; 
2010. 
[52] 
Zhang, X.; O'Kennedy, N.; Morton, J. P. Extreme Variation of Nutritional 
Composition and Osmolality of Commercially Available Carbohydrate Energy 
Gels. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 25:504-509; 2015. 
[53] 
Pfeiffer, B.; Stellingwerff, T.; Hodgson, A. B.; Randell, R.; Pottgen, K.; Res, 
P.; Jeukendrup, A. E. Nutritional intake and gastrointestinal problems during 
competitive endurance events. Med Sci Sports Exerc 44:344-351; 2012. 
[54] 
de Oliveira, E. P.; Burini, R. C.; Jeukendrup, A. Gastrointestinal complaints 
during exercise: prevalence, etiology, and nutritional recommendations. Sports 
Med 44 Suppl 1:S79-85; 2014. 
[55] 
Yeo, W. K.; Paton, C. D.; Garnham, A. P.; Burke, L. M.; Carey, A. L.; Hawley, J. 
A. Skeletal muscle adaptation and performance responses to once a day versus 
twice every second day endurance training regimens. J Appl Physiol 105:1462-
1470; 2008. 
[56] 
Widrick, J. J.; Costill, D. L.; Fink, W. J.; Hickey, M. S.; McConell, G. K.; Tanaka, 
H. Carbohydrate feedings and exercise performance: effect of initial muscle 
glycogen concentration. J Appl Physiol (1985) 74:2998-3005; 1993. 
[57] 
Hawley, J. A.; Morton, J. P. Ramping up the signal: promoting endurance 
training adaptation in skeletal muscle by nutritional manipulation. Clin Exp 
Pharmacol Physiol 41:608-613; 2014. 
[58] 
Bartlett, J. D.; Hawley, J. A.; Morton, J. P. Carbohydrate availability and 
exercise training adaptation: too much of a good thing? Eur J Sport Sci 15:3-12; 
2015. 
[59] 
Morton, J. P.; Croft, L.; Bartlett, J. D.; Maclaren, D. P.; Reilly, T.; Evans, L.; 
McArdle, A.; Drust, B. Reduced carbohydrate availability does not modulate 
training-induced heat shock protein adaptations but does upregulate oxidative 
enzyme activity in human skeletal muscle. J Appl Physiol 106:1513-1521; 2009. 
[60] 
Van Proeyen, K.; Szlufcik, K.; Nielens, H.; Ramaekers, M.; Hespel, P. 
Beneficial metabolic adaptations due to endurance exercise training in the fasted 
state. J Appl Physiol (1985) 110:236-245; 2011. 
[61] 
Hulston, C. J.; Venables, M. C.; Mann, C. H.; Martin, C.; Philp, A.; Baar, K.; 
Jeukendrup, A. E. Training with low muscle glycogen enhances fat metabolism in 
well-trained cyclists. Med Sci Sports Exerc 42:2046-2055; 2010. 
[62] 
Hansen, A. K.; Fischer, C. P.; Plomgaard, P.; Andersen, J. L.; Saltin, B.; 
Pedersen, B. K. Skeletal muscle adaptation: training twice every second day vs. 
training once daily. J Appl Physiol (1985) 98:93-99; 2005. 
[63] 
Cochran, A. J.; Myslik, F.; MacInnis, M. J.; Percival, M. E.; Bishop, D.; 
Tarnopolsky, M. A.; Gibala, M. J. Manipulating Carbohydrate Availability Between 
Twice-Daily Sessions of High-Intensity Interval Training Over 2 Weeks Improves 
Time-Trial Performance. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 25:463-470; 2015. 
[64] 
Burke, L. M. Fueling strategies to optimize performance: training high or 
training low? Scand J Med Sci Sports 20 Suppl 2:48-58; 2010. 
[65] 
Cochran, A. J.; Little, J. P.; Tarnopolsky, M. A.; Gibala, M. J. Carbohydrate 
feeding during recovery alters the skeletal muscle metabolic response to 
repeated sessions of high-intensity interval exercise in humans. J Appl Physiol 
108:628-636; 2010. 
 [66] 
Psilander, N.; Frank, P.; Flockhart, M.; Sahlin, K. Exercise with low 
glycogen increases PGC-1alpha gene expression in human skeletal muscle. Eur J 
Appl Physiol 113:951-963; 2013. 
[67] 
Nieman, D. C. Marathon training and immune function. Sports Med 
37:412-415; 2007. 
[68] 
Cox, G. R.; Clark, S. A.; Cox, A. J.; Halson, S. L.; Hargreaves, M.; Hawley, J. A.; 
Jeacocke, N.; Snow, R. J.; Yeo, W. K.; Burke, L. M. Daily training with high 
carbohydrate availability increases exogenous carbohydrate oxidation during 
endurance cycling. J Appl Physiol (1985) 109:126-134; 2010. 
[69] 
Howarth, K. R.; Moreau, N. A.; Phillips, S. M.; Gibala, M. J. Coingestion of 
protein with carbohydrate during recovery from endurance exercise stimulates 
skeletal muscle protein synthesis in humans. J Appl Physiol 106:1394-1402; 
2009. 
[70] 
Impey, S. G.; Smith, D.; Robinson, A. L.; Owens, D. J.; Bartlett, J. D.; Smith, 
K.; Limb, M.; Tang, J.; Fraser, W. D.; Close, G. L.; Morton, J. P. Leucine-enriched 
protein feeding does not impair exercise-induced free fatty acid availability and 
lipid oxidation: beneficial implications for training in carbohydrate-restricted 
states. Amino Acids 47:407-416; 2015. 
[71] 
Pilegaard, H.; Osada, T.; Andersen, L. T.; Helge, J. W.; Saltin, B.; Neufer, P. D. 
Substrate availability and transcriptional regulation of metabolic genes in human 
skeletal muscle during recovery from exercise. Metabolism 54:1048-1055; 2005. 
[72] 
Lane, S. C.; Camera, D. M.; Lassiter, D. G.; Areta, J. L.; Bird, S. R.; Yeo, W. K.; 
Jeacocke, N. A.; Krook, A.; Zierath, J. R.; Burke, L. M.; Hawley, J. A. Effects of 
sleeping with reduced carbohydrate availability on acute training responses. J 
Appl Physiol (1985) 119:643-655; 2015. 
[73] 
Burke, L. Re-Examining High-Fat Diets for Sports Performance: Did We 
Call the 'Nail in the Coffin' Too Soon? . Sports Med. Nov 9:epub ahead of print; 
2015. 
[74] 
Volek, J. S.; Noakes, T.; Phinney, S. D. Rethinking fat as a fuel for endurance 
exercise. Eur J Sport Sci 15:13-20; 2015. 
[75] 
Phinney, S. D.; Bistrian, B. R.; Evans, W. J.; Gervino, E.; Blackburn, G. L. The 
human metabolic response to chronic ketosis without caloric restriction: 
preservation of submaximal exercise capability with reduced carbohydrate 
oxidation. Metabolism 32:769-776; 1983. 
[76] 
Yeo, W. K.; Carey, A. L.; Burke, L.; Spriet, L. L.; Hawley, J. A. Fat adaptation 
in well-trained athletes: effects on cell metabolism. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab 
36:12-22; 2011. 
[77] 
Havemann, L.; West, S. J.; Goedecke, J. H.; Macdonald, I. A.; St Clair Gibson, 
A.; Noakes, T. D.; Lambert, E. V. Fat adaptation followed by carbohydrate loading 
compromises high-intensity sprint performance. J Appl Physiol (1985) 100:194-
202; 2006. 
[78] 
Stellingwerff, T.; Spriet, L. L.; Watt, M. J.; Kimber, N. E.; Hargreaves, M.; 
Hawley, J. A.; Burke, L. M. Decreased PDH activation and glycogenolysis during 
exercise following fat adaptation with carbohydrate restoration. Am J Physiol 
Endocrinol Metab 290:E380-388; 2006. 
[79] 
Burke, L. M.; Kiens, B. "Fat adaptation" for athletic performance: the nail 
in the coffin? J Appl Physiol (1985) 100:7-8; 2006. 
 [80] 
Faigenbaum, A. D.; Lloyd, R. S.; MacDonald, J.; Myer, G. D. Citius, Altius, 
Fortius: beneficial effects of resistance training for young athletes. Br J Sports 
Med; 2015. 
[81] 
Moritani, T.; deVries, H. A. Neural factors versus hypertrophy in the time 
course of muscle strength gain. Am J Phys Med 58:115-130; 1979. 
[82] 
Seynnes, O. R.; de Boer, M.; Narici, M. V. Early skeletal muscle hypertrophy 
and architectural changes in response to high-intensity resistance training. J Appl 
Physiol (1985) 102:368-373; 2007. 
[83] 
Churchward-Venne, T. A.; Burd, N. A.; Phillips, S. M. Nutritional regulation 
of muscle protein synthesis with resistance exercise: strategies to enhance 
anabolism. Nutr Metab (Lond) 9:40; 2012. 
[84] 
Cermak, N. M.; Res, P. T.; de Groot, L. C.; Saris, W. H.; van Loon, L. J. Protein 
supplementation augments the adaptive response of skeletal muscle to 
resistance-type exercise training: a meta-analysis. Am J Clin Nutr 96:1454-1464; 
2012. 
[85] 
Baar, K.; Esser, K. Phosphorylation of p70(S6k) correlates with increased 
skeletal muscle mass following resistance exercise. Am J Physiol 276:C120-127; 
1999. 
[86] 
Chen, Y. W.; Nader, G. A.; Baar, K. R.; Fedele, M. J.; Hoffman, E. P.; Esser, K. 
A. Response of rat muscle to acute resistance exercise defined by transcriptional 
and translational profiling. J Physiol 545:27-41; 2002. 
[87] 
Chesley, A.; MacDougall, J. D.; Tarnopolsky, M. A.; Atkinson, S. A.; Smith, K. 
Changes in human muscle protein synthesis after resistance exercise. J Appl 
Physiol (1985) 73:1383-1388; 1992. 
[88] 
McCarthy, J. J.; Esser, K. A. Anabolic and catabolic pathways regulating 
skeletal muscle mass. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care 13:230-235; 2010. 
[89] 
Bodine, S. C.; Stitt, T. N.; Gonzalez, M.; Kline, W. O.; Stover, G. L.; Bauerlein, 
R.; Zlotchenko, E.; Scrimgeour, A.; Lawrence, J. C.; Glass, D. J.; Yancopoulos, G. D. 
Akt/mTOR pathway is a crucial regulator of skeletal muscle hypertrophy and can 
prevent muscle atrophy in vivo. Nat Cell Biol 3:1014-1019; 2001. 
[90] 
Dickinson, J. M.; Fry, C. S.; Drummond, M. J.; Gundermann, D. M.; Walker, 
D. K.; Glynn, E. L.; Timmerman, K. L.; Dhanani, S.; Volpi, E.; Rasmussen, B. B. 
Mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 activation is required for the 
stimulation of human skeletal muscle protein synthesis by essential amino acids. 
J Nutr 141:856-862; 2011. 
[91] 
Drummond, M. J.; Fry, C. S.; Glynn, E. L.; Dreyer, H. C.; Dhanani, S.; 
Timmerman, K. L.; Volpi, E.; Rasmussen, B. B. Rapamycin administration in 
humans blocks the contraction-induced increase in skeletal muscle protein 
synthesis. J Physiol 587:1535-1546; 2009. 
[92] 
Mieulet, V.; Roceri, M.; Espeillac, C.; Sotiropoulos, A.; Ohanna, M.; 
Oorschot, V.; Klumperman, J.; Sandri, M.; Pende, M. S6 kinase inactivation impairs 
growth and translational target phosphorylation in muscle cells maintaining 
proper regulation of protein turnover. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 293:C712-722; 
2007. 
[93] 
Ohanna, M.; Sobering, A. K.; Lapointe, T.; Lorenzo, L.; Praud, C.; 
Petroulakis, E.; Sonenberg, N.; Kelly, P. A.; Sotiropoulos, A.; Pende, M. Atrophy of 
S6K1(-/-) skeletal muscle cells reveals distinct mTOR effectors for cell cycle and 
size control. Nat Cell Biol 7:286-294; 2005. 
 [94] 
Zheng, X.; Liang, Y.; He, Q.; Yao, R.; Bao, W.; Bao, L.; Wang, Y.; Wang, Z. 
Current models of mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) 
activation by growth factors and amino acids. Int J Mol Sci 15:20753-20769; 
2014. 
[95] 
Mackenzie, M. G.; Hamilton, D. L.; Murray, J. T.; Baar, K. mVps34 is 
activated by an acute bout of resistance exercise. Biochem Soc Trans 35:1314-
1316; 2007. 
[96] 
Dodd, K. M.; Tee, A. R. Leucine and mTORC1: a complex relationship. Am J 
Physiol Endocrinol Metab 302:E1329-1342; 2012. 
[97] 
Christie, G. R.; Hajduch, E.; Hundal, H. S.; Proud, C. G.; Taylor, P. M. 
Intracellular sensing of amino acids in Xenopus laevis oocytes stimulates p70 S6 
kinase in a target of rapamycin-dependent manner. J Biol Chem 277:9952-9957; 
2002. 
[98] 
Crozier, S. J.; Kimball, S. R.; Emmert, S. W.; Anthony, J. C.; Jefferson, L. S. 
Oral leucine administration stimulates protein synthesis in rat skeletal muscle. J 
Nutr 135:376-382; 2005. 
[99] 
Greenhaff, P. L.; Karagounis, L. G.; Peirce, N.; Simpson, E. J.; Hazell, M.; 
Layfield, R.; Wackerhage, H.; Smith, K.; Atherton, P.; Selby, A.; Rennie, M. J. 
Disassociation between the effects of amino acids and insulin on signaling, 
ubiquitin ligases, and protein turnover in human muscle. Am J Physiol Endocrinol 
Metab 295:E595-604; 2008. 
[100] Beugnet, A.; Tee, A. R.; Taylor, P. M.; Proud, C. G. Regulation of targets of 
mTOR (mammalian target of rapamycin) signalling by intracellular amino acid 
availability. Biochem J 372:555-566; 2003. 
[101] Bar-Peled, L.; Sabatini, D. M. Regulation of mTORC1 by amino acids. 
Trends Cell Biol 24:400-406; 2014. 
[102] You, J. S.; Lincoln, H. C.; Kim, C. R.; Frey, J. W.; Goodman, C. A.; Zhong, X. P.; 
Hornberger, T. A. The role of diacylglycerol kinase zeta and phosphatidic acid in 
the mechanical activation of mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling 
and skeletal muscle hypertrophy. J Biol Chem 289:1551-1563; 2014. 
[103] Apro, W.; Moberg, M.; Hamilton, D. L.; Ekblom, B.; Rooyackers, O.; 
Holmberg, H. C.; Blomstrand, E. Leucine does not affect mechanistic target of 
rapamycin complex 1 assembly but is required for maximal ribosomal protein s6 
kinase 1 activity in human skeletal muscle following resistance exercise. FASEB J; 
2015. 
[104] Tipton, K. D.; Ferrando, A. A.; Phillips, S. M.; Doyle, D., Jr.; Wolfe, R. R. 
Postexercise net protein synthesis in human muscle from orally administered 
amino acids. Am J Physiol 276:E628-634; 1999. 
[105] Moore, D. R.; Robinson, M. J.; Fry, J. L.; Tang, J. E.; Glover, E. I.; Wilkinson, S. 
B.; Prior, T.; Tarnopolsky, M. A.; Phillips, S. M. Ingested protein dose response of 
muscle and albumin protein synthesis after resistance exercise in young men. Am 
J Clin Nutr 89:161-168; 2009. 
[106] Witard, O. C.; Jackman, S. R.; Breen, L.; Smith, K.; Selby, A.; Tipton, K. D. 
Myofibrillar muscle protein synthesis rates subsequent to a meal in response to 
increasing doses of whey protein at rest and after resistance exercise. Am J Clin 
Nutr 99:86-95; 2014. 
[107] Breen, L.; Churchward-Venne, T. A. Leucine: a nutrient 'trigger' for muscle 
anabolism, but what more? J Physiol 590:2065-2066; 2012. 
 [108] Wilkinson, D. J.; Hossain, T.; Hill, D. S.; Phillips, B. E.; Crossland, H.; 
Williams, J.; Loughna, P.; Churchward-Venne, T. A.; Breen, L.; Phillips, S. M.; 
Etheridge, T.; Rathmacher, J. A.; Smith, K.; Szewczyk, N. J.; Atherton, P. J. Effects of 
leucine and its metabolite beta-hydroxy-beta-methylbutyrate on human skeletal 
muscle protein metabolism. J Physiol 591:2911-2923; 2013. 
[109] Moore, D. R.; Churchward-Venne, T. A.; Witard, O.; Breen, L.; Burd, N. A.; 
Tipton, K. D.; Phillips, S. M. Protein ingestion to stimulate myofibrillar protein 
synthesis requires greater relative protein intakes in healthy older versus 
younger men. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 70:57-62; 2015. 
[110] Phillips, S. M.; Fulgoni, V. L., 3rd; Heaney, R. P.; Nicklas, T. A.; Slavin, J. L.; 
Weaver, C. M. Commonly consumed protein foods contribute to nutrient intake, 
diet quality, and nutrient adequacy. Am J Clin Nutr; 2015. 
[111] Phillips, S. M.; Zemel, M. B. Effect of protein, dairy components and energy 
balance in optimizing body composition. Nestle Nutr Inst Workshop Ser 69:97-
108; discussion 108-113; 2011. 
[112] Devries, M. C.; Phillips, S. M. Supplemental protein in support of muscle 
mass and health: advantage whey. J Food Sci 80 Suppl 1:A8-A15; 2015. 
[113] Nongonierma, A. B.; FitzGerald, R. J. Bioactive properties of milk proteins 
in humans: A review. Peptides 73:20-34; 2015. 
[114] Nongonierma, A. B.; FitzGerald, R. J. Milk proteins as a source of 
tryptophan-containing bioactive peptides. Food Funct 6:2115-2127; 2015. 
[115] Elliot, T. A.; Cree, M. G.; Sanford, A. P.; Wolfe, R. R.; Tipton, K. D. Milk 
ingestion stimulates net muscle protein synthesis following resistance exercise. 
Med Sci Sports Exerc 38:667-674; 2006. 
[116] Knapik, J. J.; Steelman, R. A.; Hoedebecke, S. S.; Austin, K. G.; Farina, E. K.; 
Lieberman, H. R. Prevalence of Dietary Supplement Use by Athletes: Systematic 
Review and Meta-Analysis. Sports Med; 2015. 
[117] Knapik, J. J.; Steelman, R. A.; Hoedebecke, S. S.; Farina, E. K.; Austin, K. G.; 
Lieberman, H. R. A systematic review and meta-analysis on the prevalence of 
dietary supplement use by military personnel. BMC Complement Altern Med 
14:143; 2014. 
[118] Outram, S.; Stewart, B. Doping through supplement use: a review of the 
available empirical data. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 25:54-59; 2015. 
[119] Burke, L.; Desbrow, B.; Spriet, L. Caffeine for sports performance. 
Champaign Illinois: Human Kinetics; 2013. 
[120] Spriet, L. L. Exercise and sport performance with low doses of caffeine. 
Sports Med 44 Suppl 2:S175-184; 2014. 
[121] Burke, L. M. Caffeine and sports performance. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab 
33:1319-1334; 2008. 
[122] Lane, S. C.; Areta, J. L.; Bird, S. R.; Coffey, V. G.; Burke, L. M.; Desbrow, B.; 
Karagounis, L. G.; Hawley, J. A. Caffeine ingestion and cycling power output in a 
low or normal muscle glycogen state. Med Sci Sports Exerc 45:1577-1584; 2013. 
[123] Womack, C. J.; Saunders, M. J.; Bechtel, M. K.; Bolton, D. J.; Martin, M.; 
Luden, N. D.; Dunham, W.; Hancock, M. The influence of a CYP1A2 polymorphism 
on the ergogenic effects of caffeine. J Int Soc Sports Nutr 9:7; 2012. 
[124] Harris, R. C.; Soderlund, K.; Hultman, E. Elevation of creatine in resting 
and exercised muscle of normal subjects by creatine supplementation. Clin Sci 
(Lond) 83:367-374; 1992. 
 [125] Buford, T. W.; Kreider, R. B.; Stout, J. R.; Greenwood, M.; Campbell, B.; 
Spano, M.; Ziegenfuss, T.; Lopez, H.; Landis, J.; Antonio, J. International Society of 
Sports Nutrition position stand: creatine supplementation and exercise. J Int Soc 
Sports Nutr 4:6; 2007. 
[126] Safdar, A.; Yardley, N. J.; Snow, R.; Melov, S.; Tarnopolsky, M. A. Global and 
targeted gene expression and protein content in skeletal muscle of young men 
following short-term creatine monohydrate supplementation. Physiol Genomics 
32:219-228; 2008. 
[127] Gualano, B.; Roschel, H.; Lancha-Jr, A. H.; Brightbill, C. E.; Rawson, E. S. In 
sickness and in health: the widespread application of creatine supplementation. 
Amino Acids 43:519-529; 2012. 
[128] Dalbo, V. J.; Roberts, M. D.; Stout, J. R.; Kerksick, C. M. Putting to rest the 
myth of creatine supplementation leading to muscle cramps and dehydration. Br 
J Sports Med 42:567-573; 2008. 
[129] Burke, L. M. To beet or not to beet? J Appl Physiol (1985) 115:311-312; 
2013. 
[130] Jones, A. M. Dietary nitrate supplementation and exercise performance. 
Sports Med 44 Suppl 1:S35-45; 2014. 
[131] Jonvik, K. L.; Nyakayiru, J.; van Loon, L. J.; Verdijk, L. B. Can elite athletes 
benefit from dietary nitrate supplementation? J Appl Physiol (1985) 119:759-
761; 2015. 
[132] Hultstrom, M.; Amorim de Paula, C.; Antonio Peliky Fontes, M.; Porcelli, S.; 
Bellistri, G.; Pugliese, L.; Rasica, L.; Marzorati, M.; Pavei, G.; Ferguson, S. K.; 
Holdsworth, C. T.; Musch, T. I.; Poole, D. C.; Bourdillon, N.; Hoon, M. W.; Burke, L. 
M.; Michielli, D. W.; Faiss, R.; Millet, G. P.; Corona, B. T.; Green, M. S.; da Silveira, A. 
L.; Sindler, A. L.; Casey, D. P.; Johnson, B. D.; Wheatley, C. M.; Kunces, L. J.; Bescos, 
R.; Cody, L. C.; Martens, C. R.; Justice, J. N.; Ballak, S. B.; Ballak, D. B.; Wanner, S. P.; 
Rehman, S. Commentaries on Viewpoint: Can elite athletes benefit from dietary 
nitrate supplementation? J Appl Physiol (1985) 119:762-769; 2015. 
[133] Burke, L. Practical considerations for bicarbonate loading and sports 
performance. In: Tipton, K.; van Loon, L., eds. Nutritional strategy to modulate 
training efficiency; 2013: 15-12. 
[134] Carr, A. J.; Hopkins, W. G.; Gore, C. J. Effects of acute alkalosis and acidosis 
on performance: a meta-analysis. Sports Med 41:801-814; 2011. 
[135] Carr, A. J.; Slater, G. J.; Gore, C. J.; Dawson, B.; Burke, L. M. Effect of sodium 
bicarbonate on [HCO3-], pH, and gastrointestinal symptoms. Int J Sport Nutr 
Exerc Metab 21:189-194; 2011. 
[136] Stellingwerff, T.; Decombaz, J.; Harris, R. C.; Boesch, C. Optimizing human 
in vivo dosing and delivery of beta-alanine supplements for muscle carnosine 
synthesis. Amino Acids; 2012. 
[137] Stegen, S.; Bex, T.; Vervaet, C.; Vanhee, L.; Achten, E.; Derave, W. beta-
Alanine dose for maintaining moderately elevated muscle carnosine levels. Med 
Sci Sports Exerc 46:1426-1432; 2014. 
[138] Blancquaert, L.; Everaert, I.; Derave, W. Beta-alanine supplementation, 
muscle carnosine and exercise performance. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care 
18:63-70; 2015. 
[139] Demay, M. B. Mechanism of vitamin D receptor action. Annals of the New 
York Academy of Sciences 1068:204-213; 2006. 
 [140] Close, G. L.; Russell, J.; Cobley, J. N.; Owens, D. J.; Wilson, G.; Gregson, W.; 
Fraser, W. D.; Morton, J. P. Assessment of vitamin D concentration in non-
supplemented professional athletes and healthy adults during the winter months 
in the UK: implications for skeletal muscle function. J Sports Sci 31:344-353; 
2013. 
[141] Hamilton, S. A.; McNeil, R.; Hollis, B. W.; Davis, D. J.; Winkler, J.; Cook, C.; 
Warner, G.; Bivens, B.; McShane, P.; Wagner, C. L. Profound Vitamin D Deficiency 
in a Diverse Group of Women during Pregnancy Living in a Sun-Rich 
Environment at Latitude 32 degrees N. Int J Endocrinol 2010:917428; 2010. 
[142] Owens, D. J.; Fraser, W. D.; Close, G. L. Vitamin D and the athlete: emerging 
insights. Eur J Sport Sci 15:73-84; 2015. 
[143] Vieth, R.; Bischoff-Ferrari, H.; Boucher, B. J.; Dawson-Hughes, B.; Garland, 
C. F.; Heaney, R. P.; Holick, M. F.; Hollis, B. W.; Lamberg-Allardt, C.; McGrath, J. J.; 
Norman, A. W.; Scragg, R.; Whiting, S. J.; Willett, W. C.; Zittermann, A. The urgent 
need to recommend an intake of vitamin D that is effective. Am J Clin Nutr 
85:649-650; 2007. 
[144] Zittermann, A. Vitamin D in preventive medicine: are we ignoring the 
evidence? British Journal of Nutrition 89:552-572; 2003. 
[145] Owens, D. J.; Webber, D.; Impey, S. G.; Tang, J.; Donovan, T. F.; Fraser, W. 
D.; Morton, J. P.; Close, G. L. Vitamin D supplementation does not improve human 
skeletal muscle contractile properties in insufficient young males. Eur J Appl 
Physiol 114:1309-1320; 2014. 
[146] Agostoni, C.; Bresson, J.; Fairweather-Tait, S.; Flynn, A.; Golly, I.; Korhonen, 
H.; Lagiou, P.; Lovik, M.; Marchelli, R.; Martin, A.; Moseley, B.; Neuhauser-
Berthold, M.; Przyrembel, H.; Salminen, S.; Sanz, Y.; Strain, S.; Strobel, S.; Tetens, 
I.; Tome, D.; van Loveren, H.; Verhagen, H. Scientific Opinion on the Tolerable 
Upper Intake Level of vitamin D. European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) Journal 
10:2813; 2012. 
[147] Owens, D. J.; Sharples, A. P.; Polydorou, I.; Alwan, N.; Donovan, T. F.; Tang, 
J.; Cooper, R. G.; Fraser, W. D.; Morton, J. P.; Stewart, C.; Close, G. L. A Systems 
Based Investigation into Vitamin D and Skeletal Muscle Repair, Regeneration and 
Hypertrophy. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab:ajpendo 00375 02015; 2015. 
[148] Cobley, J. N.; McHardy, H.; Morton, J. P.; Nikolaidis, M. G.; Close, G. L. 
Influence of vitamin C and vitamin E on redox signaling: Implications for exercise 
adaptations. Free Radic Biol Med 84:65-76; 2015. 
[149] Cobley, J. N.; Margaritelis, N. V.; Morton, J. P.; Close, G. L.; Nikolaidis, M. G.; 
Malone, J. K. The basic chemistry of exercise-induced DNA oxidation: oxidative 
damage, redox signaling, and their interplay. Front Physiol 6:182; 2015. 
[150] Paulsen, G.; Hamarsland, H.; Cumming, K. T.; Johansen, R. E.; Hulmi, J. J.; 
Borsheim, E.; Wiig, H.; Garthe, I.; Raastad, T. Vitamin C and E supplementation 
alters protein signalling after a strength training session, but not muscle growth 
during 10 weeks of training. J Physiol 592:5391-5408; 2014. 
[151] Morrison, D.; Hughes, J.; Della Gatta, P. A.; Mason, S.; Lamon, S.; Russell, A. 
P.; Wadley, G. D. Vitamin C and E supplementation prevents some of the cellular 
adaptations to endurance-training in humans. Free Radic Biol Med 89:852-862; 
2015. 
[152] Thompson, D.; Williams, C.; McGregor, S. J.; Nicholas, C. W.; McArdle, F.; 
Jackson, M. J.; Powell, J. R. Prolonged vitamin C supplementation and recovery 
from demanding exercise. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 11:466-481; 2001. 
 [153] Gomez-Cabrera, M. C.; Vina, J.; Ji, L. L. Interplay of oxidants and 
antioxidants during exercise: implications for muscle health. Phys Sportsmed 
37:116-123; 2009. 
[154] Gomez-Cabrera, M. C.; Borras, C.; Pallardo, F. V.; Sastre, J.; Ji, L. L.; Vina, J. 
Decreasing xanthine oxidase-mediated oxidative stress prevents useful cellular 
adaptations to exercise in rats. J Physiol 567:113-120; 2005. 
[155] Ristow, M.; Zarse, K.; Oberbach, A.; Kloting, N.; Birringer, M.; Kiehntopf, 
M.; Stumvoll, M.; Kahn, C. R.; Bluher, M. Antioxidants prevent health-promoting 
effects of physical exercise in humans. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106:8665-8670; 
2009. 
[156] Halliwell, B.; Whiteman, M. Measuring reactive species and oxidative 
damage in vivo and in cell culture: how should you do it and what do the results 
mean? Br J Pharmacol 142:231-255; 2004. 
[157] Sies, H. Total antioxidant capacity: appraisal of a concept. J Nutr 
137:1493-1495; 2007. 
[158] Forman, H. J.; Augusto, O.; Brigelius-Flohe, R.; Dennery, P. A.; 
Kalyanaraman, B.; Ischiropoulos, H.; Mann, G. E.; Radi, R.; Roberts, L. J., 2nd; Vina, 
J.; Davies, K. J. Even free radicals should follow some rules: a guide to free radical 
research terminology and methodology. Free Radic Biol Med 78:233-235; 2015. 
[159] Murphy, M. P.; Holmgren, A.; Larsson, N. G.; Halliwell, B.; Chang, C. J.; 
Kalyanaraman, B.; Rhee, S. G.; Thornalley, P. J.; Partridge, L.; Gems, D.; Nystrom, 
T.; Belousov, V.; Schumacker, P. T.; Winterbourn, C. C. Unraveling the biological 
roles of reactive oxygen species. Cell Metab 13:361-366; 2011. 
[160] Petersen, A. C.; McKenna, M. J.; Medved, I.; Murphy, K. T.; Brown, M. J.; 
Della Gatta, P.; Cameron-Smith, D. Infusion with the antioxidant N-acetylcysteine 
attenuates early adaptive responses to exercise in human skeletal muscle. Acta 
Physiol (Oxf) 204:382-392; 2012. 
[161] Cobley, J.; McGlory, C.; Morton, J.; Close, G. L. N-Acetylcysteine's 
attenuation of fatigue after repeated bouts of intermittent exercise: practical 
implications for tournament situations Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 21:451-461; 
2011. 
[162] Reid, M. B. Free radicals and muscle fatigue: Of ROS, canaries, and the IOC. 
Free Radic Biol Med 44:169-179; 2008. 
[163] Howatson, G.; McHugh, M. P.; Hill, J. A.; Brouner, J.; Jewell, A. P.; van 
Someren, K. A.; Shave, R. E.; Howatson, S. A. Influence of tart cherry juice on 
indices of recovery following marathon running. Scand J Med Sci Sports 20:843-
852; 2010. 
[164] Close, G. L.; Jackson, M. J. Antioxidants and exercise: a tale of the 
complexities of relating signalling processes to physiological function? J Physiol 
592:1721-1722; 2014. 
[165] Buijsse, B.; Weikert, C.; Drogan, D.; Bergmann, M.; Boeing, H. Chocolate 
consumption in relation to blood pressure and risk of cardiovascular disease in 
German adults. Eur Heart J 31:1616-1623; 2010. 
[166] Nogueira, L.; Ramirez-Sanchez, I.; Perkins, G. A.; Murphy, A.; Taub, P. R.; 
Ceballos, G.; Villarreal, F. J.; Hogan, M. C.; Malek, M. H. (-)-Epicatechin enhances 
fatigue resistance and oxidative capacity in mouse muscle. J Physiol 589:4615-
4631; 2011. 
[167] Gutierrez-Salmean, G.; Ortiz-Vilchis, P.; Vacaseydel, C. M.; Rubio-Gayosso, 
I.; Meaney, E.; Villarreal, F.; Ramirez-Sanchez, I.; Ceballos, G. Acute effects of an 
 oral supplement of (-)-epicatechin on postprandial fat and carbohydrate 
metabolism in normal and overweight subjects. Food Funct 5:521-527; 2014. 
[168] MacKay, D.; Hathcock, J.; Guarneri, E. Niacin: chemical forms, 
bioavailability, and health effects. Nutr Rev 70:357-366; 2012. 
[169] Bieganowski, P.; Brenner, C. Discoveries of nicotinamide riboside as a 
nutrient and conserved NRK genes establish a Preiss-Handler independent route 
to NAD+ in fungi and humans. Cell 117:495-502; 2004. 
[170] Canto, C.; Menzies, K. J.; Auwerx, J. NAD(+) Metabolism and the Control of 
Energy Homeostasis: A Balancing Act between Mitochondria and the Nucleus. 
Cell Metab 22:31-53; 2015. 
[171] Canto, C.; Houtkooper, R. H.; Pirinen, E.; Youn, D. Y.; Oosterveer, M. H.; Cen, 
Y.; Fernandez-Marcos, P. J.; Yamamoto, H.; Andreux, P. A.; Cettour-Rose, P.; 
Gademann, K.; Rinsch, C.; Schoonjans, K.; Sauve, A. A.; Auwerx, J. The NAD(+) 
precursor nicotinamide riboside enhances oxidative metabolism and protects 
against high-fat diet-induced obesity. Cell Metab 15:838-847; 2012. 
[172] Pervaiz, S. Resveratrol: from grapevines to mammalian biology. FASEB J 
17:1975-1985; 2003. 
[173] de Ligt, M.; Timmers, S.; Schrauwen, P. Resveratrol and obesity: Can 
resveratrol relieve metabolic disturbances? Biochim Biophys Acta 1852:1137-
1144; 2015. 
[174] Murase, T.; Haramizu, S.; Ota, N.; Hase, T. Suppression of the aging-
associated decline in physical performance by a combination of resveratrol 
intake and habitual exercise in senescence-accelerated mice. Biogerontology 
10:423-434; 2009. 
[175] Timmers, S.; Konings, E.; Bilet, L.; Houtkooper, R. H.; van de Weijer, T.; 
Goossens, G. H.; Hoeks, J.; van der Krieken, S.; Ryu, D.; Kersten, S.; Moonen-
Kornips, E.; Hesselink, M. K.; Kunz, I.; Schrauwen-Hinderling, V. B.; Blaak, E. E.; 
Auwerx, J.; Schrauwen, P. Calorie restriction-like effects of 30 days of resveratrol 
supplementation on energy metabolism and metabolic profile in obese humans. 
Cell Metab 14:612-622; 2011. 
[176] Scribbans, T. D.; Ma, J. K.; Edgett, B. A.; Vorobej, K. A.; Mitchell, A. S.; Zelt, J. 
G.; Simpson, C. A.; Quadrilatero, J.; Gurd, B. J. Resveratrol supplementation does 
not augment performance adaptations or fibre-type-specific responses to high-
intensity interval training in humans. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab 39:1305-1313; 
2014. 
[177] Gliemann, L.; Schmidt, J. F.; Olesen, J.; Bienso, R. S.; Peronard, S. L.; 
Grandjean, S. U.; Mortensen, S. P.; Nyberg, M.; Bangsbo, J.; Pilegaard, H.; Hellsten, 
Y. Resveratrol blunts the positive effects of exercise training on cardiovascular 
health in aged men. J Physiol 591:5047-5059; 2013. 
[178] Olesen, J.; Gliemann, L.; Bienso, R.; Schmidt, J.; Hellsten, Y.; Pilegaard, H. 
Exercise training, but not resveratrol, improves metabolic and inflammatory 
status in skeletal muscle of aged men. J Physiol 592:1873-1886; 2014. 
[179] Atherton, P. J.; Smith, K. Muscle protein synthesis in response to nutrition 
and exercise. J Physiol 590:1049-1057; 2012. 
[180] Nissen, S.; Sharp, R.; Ray, M.; Rathmacher, J. A.; Rice, D.; Fuller, J. C., Jr.; 
Connelly, A. S.; Abumrad, N. Effect of leucine metabolite beta-hydroxy-beta-
methylbutyrate on muscle metabolism during resistance-exercise training. J Appl 
Physiol (1985) 81:2095-2104; 1996. 
 [181] Athenstaedt, K.; Daum, G. Phosphatidic acid, a key intermediate in lipid 
metabolism. Eur J Biochem 266:1-16; 1999. 
[182] Fang, Y.; Vilella-Bach, M.; Bachmann, R.; Flanigan, A.; Chen, J. Phosphatidic 
acid-mediated mitogenic activation of mTOR signaling. Science 294:1942-1945; 
2001. 
[183] Hoffman, J. R.; Stout, J. R.; Williams, D. R.; Wells, A. J.; Fragala, M. S.; 
Mangine, G. T.; Gonzalez, A. M.; Emerson, N. S.; McCormack, W. P.; Scanlon, T. C.; 
Purpura, M.; Jager, R. Efficacy of phosphatidic acid ingestion on lean body mass, 
muscle thickness and strength gains in resistance-trained men. J Int Soc Sports 
Nutr 9:47; 2012. 
[184] Joy, J. M.; Gundermann, D. M.; Lowery, R. P.; Jager, R.; McCleary, S. A.; 
Purpura, M.; Roberts, M. D.; Wilson, S. M.; Hornberger, T. A.; Wilson, J. M. 
Phosphatidic acid enhances mTOR signaling and resistance exercise induced 
hypertrophy. Nutr Metab (Lond) 11:29; 2014. 
[185] Mobley, C. B.; Hornberger, T. A.; Fox, C. D.; Healy, J. C.; Ferguson, B. S.; 
Lowery, R. P.; McNally, R. M.; Lockwood, C. M.; Stout, J. R.; Kavazis, A. N.; Wilson, J. 
M.; Roberts, M. D. Effects of oral phosphatidic acid feeding with or without whey 
protein on muscle protein synthesis and anabolic signaling in rodent skeletal 
muscle. J Int Soc Sports Nutr 12:32; 2015. 
[186] Ikeda, Y.; Murakami, A.; Ohigashi, H. Ursolic acid: an anti- and pro-
inflammatory triterpenoid. Mol Nutr Food Res 52:26-42; 2008. 
[187] Kunkel, S. D.; Suneja, M.; Ebert, S. M.; Bongers, K. S.; Fox, D. K.; Malmberg, 
S. E.; Alipour, F.; Shields, R. K.; Adams, C. M. mRNA expression signatures of 
human skeletal muscle atrophy identify a natural compound that increases 
muscle mass. Cell Metab 13:627-638; 2011. 
[188] Ogasawara, R.; Sato, K.; Higashida, K.; Nakazato, K.; Fujita, S. Ursolic acid 
stimulates mTORC1 signaling after resistance exercise in rat skeletal muscle. Am 
J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 305:E760-765; 2013. 
[189] Bang, H. S.; Seo, D. Y.; Chung, Y. M.; Oh, K. M.; Park, J. J.; Arturo, F.; Jeong, S. 
H.; Kim, N.; Han, J. Ursolic Acid-induced elevation of serum irisin augments 
muscle strength during resistance training in men. Korean J Physiol Pharmacol 
18:441-446; 2014. 
[190] Church, D.; Schwartz, N.; Spillane, M.; McKinley, S.; Andre, T.; Willoughby, 
D. S. A comparison of the effects of ursolic acid and l-leucine supplementation on 
IGF-1 receptor and AKT-mTOR signaling in response to resistance exercise in 
trained men. J Int Soc Sports Nutr 11:19; 2014. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
