 Take free quizzes online at acsjournals.com/ce
ONLINE CONTINUING EDUCATION ACTIVITY
After reading the article “American Cancer Society Head and Neck Cancer Survivorship Care Guideline,” the learner should be able to:
1. Describe potential long-term and late effects of head and neck cancer and its treatment.
2. Discuss ACS recommendations for clinical follow-up care of head and neck cancer survivors by primary care clinicians.
ARTICLE TITLE: American Cancer Society Head and Neck Cancer Survivorship Care Guideline
CONTINUING MEDICAL EDUCATION ACCREDITATION AND DESIGNATION STATEMENT:
Blackwell Futura Media Services is accredited by the Accreditation Council for Continuing Medical Education to provide continuing medical education (CME)
for physicians.
Blackwell Futura Media Services designates this enduring material for a maximum of 2.0 AMA PRA Category 1 Credit™. Physicians should only claim credit
commensurate with the extent of their participation in the activity.
CONTINUING NURSING EDUCATION ACCREDITATION AND DESIGNATION STATEMENT:
The American Cancer Society (ACS) is accredited as a provider of continuing nursing education (CNE) by the American Nurses Credentialing Center’s Commission on
Accreditation.
Accredited status does not imply endorsement by the ACS or the American Nurses Credentialing Center of any commercial products displayed or discussed in
conjunction with an educational activity. The ACS gratefully acknowledges the sponsorship provided by Wiley for hosting these CNE activities.
EDUCATIONAL OBJECTIVES: 
ACTIVITY DISCLOSURES: 
This journal article was supported, in part, by Cooperative Agreement #5U55DP003054 from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Its contents are solely 
the responsibility of the authors and do not necessarily represent the official views of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. No industry funding was used 
to support this work.
ACS CONTINUING PROFESSIONAL EDUCATION COMMITTEE DISCLOSURES:
Editor, Director of Continuing Professional Education, and ACS Director of Medical Content:
Ted Gansler, MD, MBA, MPH, has no financial relationships or interests to disclose.
Deputy Editor and ACS Director of Cancer Control Intervention:
Durado Brooks, MD, MPH, has no financial relationships or interests to disclose.
Lead Nurse Planner and Associate Editor:
Marcia Grant, RN, PhD, FAAN, has no financial relationships or interests to disclose.
Associate Editor and ACS Chief Cancer Control Officer:
Richard C. Wender, MD, has no financial relationships or interests to disclose.
Maureen Berg, RN, has no financial relationships or interests to disclose.
Susan Jackson, RN, MPH, has no financial relationships or interests to disclose.
Barbara Lesser, BSN, MSN, has no financial relationships or interests to disclose.
AUTHOR DISCLOSURES: 
NURSING ADVISORY BOARD DISCLOSURES:
Nicole L. Erb, BA, Kerry L. Beckman, MPH, CHES, and Mandi L. Pratt Chapman, MA, report cooperative agreement funding from the American Cancer Society/Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention for the National Cancer Survivorship Resource Center project. Ezra E. W. Cohen, MD, reports consulting fees from Astra-Zeneca, Bayer,
Celgene, Eisai, Merck, and Pfizer outside the submitted work. Katherine A. Hutcheson, PhD, reports grant support from the MD Anderson Institutional Research Grant
Program, the National Cancer Institute (R03 CA188162-01A1), the National Institute of Craniofacial and Dental Research (R56DE025248-01), and Cancer Research United
Kingdom (C36244/A17161) outside the submitted work. Dennis M. Abbott, DDS, reports personal fees, including salary, from Dental Oncology Professionals; honoraria
for speaking/lectures from Henry Schein Dental, Seattle Study Clubs, PerioSciences, LLC, and Dental EZ/Star Dental; and a nonpaid position on the Advisory Board of
the American Academy of Dental Oncology outside the submitted work. Mandi L. Pratt-Chapman, MA, reports research grants from Genentech; consulting fees from Pfizer;
 and event sponsorship support from Amgen Oncology, Takeda Oncology, and Genentech outside the submitted work. Samuel J. LaMonte, MD, FACS, Nader Sadeghi, MD,
Michael D. Stubblefield, MD, Penelope S. Fisher, MS, RN, CORLN, Kevin D. Stein, PhD, and Gary H. Lyman, MD, MPH, FASCO, FACP, have no financial relationships or
interests to disclose.
CNE
CME
SCORING:
A score of 70% or better is needed to pass a quiz containing 10 questions (7 correct answers), or 80% or better for 5 questions (4 correct answers).
INSTRUCTIONS ON RECEIVING CME CREDIT:
This activity is intended for physicians. For information concerning the applicability and acceptance of CME credit for this activity, please consult your professional
licensing board.
This activity is designed to be completed within 2.0 hours; physicians should claim only those credits that reflect the time actually spent in the activity. To successfully
earn credit, participants must complete the activity during the valid credit period, which is up to 2 years from the time of initial publication.
CME
INSTRUCTIONS ON RECEIVING CNE CREDIT:
This activity is intended for nurses. For information concerning the applicability and acceptance of CNE credit for this activity, please consult your professional
licensing board.
This activity is designed to be completed within 2.0 hours; nurses should claim only those credits that reflect the time actually spent in the activity. To successfully
earn credit, participants must complete the activity during the valid credit period, which is up to 2 years from the time of initial publication.
FOLLOW THESE STEPS TO EARN CREDIT:
•  Log on to acsjournals.com/ce.
•  Read the target audience, educational objectives, and activity disclosures. 
•  Read the activity contents in print or online format. 
•  Reflect on the activity contents. 
•  Access the examination, and choose the best answer to each question. 
•  Complete the required evaluation component of the activity. 
•  Claim your certificate.
This activity will be available for CME/CNE credit for 1 year following its launch date. At that time, it will be reviewed and potentially updated and
extended for an additional 12 months. 
All CME/CNE quizzes are offered online FREE OF CHARGE. Please log in at acsjournals.com/ce. New users can register for a FREE account. Registration will allow
you to track your past and ongoing activities. After successfully completing each quiz, you may instantly print a certificate, and your online record of completed
courses will be updated automatically. 
CNE
SPONSORED BY THE AMERICAN CANCER SOCIETY, INC.
VOLUME 66  |  NUMBER 3  |  MAY/JUNE 2016
 American Cancer Society Head and Neck Cancer
Survivorship Care Guideline
Ezra E. W. Cohen, MD1; Samuel J. LaMonte, MD, FACS2; Nicole L. Erb, BA3; Kerry L. Beckman, MPH, CHES4;
Nader Sadeghi, MD5; Katherine A. Hutcheson, PhD6; Michael D. Stubblefield, MD7; Dennis M. Abbott, DDS8;
Penelope S. Fisher, MS, RN, CORLN9; Kevin D. Stein, PhD10; Gary H. Lyman, MD, MPH, FASCO, FACP11;
Mandi L. Pratt-Chapman, MA12
The American Cancer Society Head and Neck Cancer Survivorship Care Guideline was developed to assist primary care clinicians and
other health practitioners with the care of head and neck cancer survivors, including monitoring for recurrence, screening for second pri-
mary cancers, assessment and management of long-term and late effects, health promotion, and care coordination. A systematic review
of the literature was conducted using PubMed through April 2015, and a multidisciplinary expert workgroup with expertise in primary care,
dentistry, surgical oncology, medical oncology, radiation oncology, clinical psychology, speech-language pathology, physical medicine and
rehabilitation, the patient perspective, and nursing was assembled. While the guideline is based on a systematic review of the current litera-
ture, most evidence is not sufficient to warrant a strong recommendation. Therefore, recommendations should be viewed as consensus-
based management strategies for assisting patients with physical and psychosocial effects of head and neck cancer and its treatment. CA
Cancer J Clin 2016;66:203-239. V
C 2016 American Cancer Society.
Keywords: care coordination, clinical follow-up care, guidelines, head and neck cancer, late effects, long-term effects, pri-
mary care, quality of life, survivorship, survivorship care plan
To earn free CME credit or nursing contact hours for successfully completing the online quiz based on this article, go to
acsjournals.com/ce.
Introduction
Head and neck cancer (HNC) will account for an estimated 61,760 new cancer cases in the United States in 2016.1 Cur-
rently, there are approximately 436,060 (3%) HNC survivors living in the United States,2 accounting for 3% of all cancer
survivors, and long-term survival is becoming more common in this population.3
Additional supporting information may be found in the online version of this article.
1Medical Oncologist, Moores Cancer Center, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA; 2Retired Head and Neck Surgeon, Former Associate Professor
of Otolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, Louisiana State University Health and Science Center, New Orleans, LA; 3Program Manager, National Cancer
Survivorship Resource Center, American Cancer Society, Atlanta, GA; 4Research Analyst-Survivorship, American Cancer Society, Atlanta, GA; 5Professor of Sur-
gery, Division of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Cancer Surgery, and Director of Head and Neck Surgical Oncology, George Washington University, Washing-
ton, DC; 6Associate Professor, Department of Head and Neck Surgery, Section of Speech Pathology and Audiology, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX; 7Medical Director for Cancer Rehabilitation, Kessler Institute for Rehabilitation, West Orange, NJ; 8Chief Executive Officer, Dental
Oncology Professionals, Garland, TX; 9Clinical Instructor of Otolaryngology and Nurse, Miller School of Medicine, Department of Otolaryngology, Division of
Head and Neck Surgery, University of Miami, Miami, FL; 10Vice President, Behavioral Research, and Director, Behavioral Research Center, American Can-
cer Society, Atlanta, GA; 11Co-Director, Hutchinson Institute for Cancer Outcomes Research, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, and Professor of Medi-
cine, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA; 12Director, The George Washington University Cancer Institute, Washington, DC
Corresponding author: Nicole L. Erb, BA, Program Manager, National Cancer Survivorship Resource Center, American Cancer Society, Inc., 250 Williams Street,
NW, Suite 600, Atlanta, GA, 30303; nicole.erb@cancer.org
DISCLOSURES: This journal article was supported, in part, by Cooperative Agreement #5U55DP003054 from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Its con-
tents are solely the responsibility of the authors and do not necessarily represent the official views of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. No industry fund-
ing was used to support this work. Nicole L. Erb, Kerry L. Beckman, and Mandi L. Pratt Chapman report cooperative agreement funding from the American Cancer
Society/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention for the National Cancer Survivorship Resource Center project. Ezra E. W. Cohen reports consulting fees from Astra-
Zeneca, Bayer, Celgene, Eisai, Merck, and Pfizer outside the submitted work. Katherine A. Hutcheson reports grant support from the MD Anderson Institutional Grant
Program, National Cancer Institute (R03 CA188162-01A1), National Institute of Craniofacial and Dental Research (R56DE025248-01), and Cancer Research United King-
dom (C36244/A17161), outside the submitted work. Dennis M. Abbott reports personal fees, including salary, from Dental Oncology Professionals; honoraria for speak-
ing/lectures from Henry Schein Dental, Seattle Study Clubs, PerioSciences, LLC, and Dental EZ/Star Dental, and a nonpaid position on the Advisory Board of the
American Academy of Dental Oncology outside the submitted work. Mandi L. Pratt-Chapman reports research grants from Genentech; consulting fees from Pfizer; and
event sponsorship support from Amgen Oncology, Takeda Oncology, and Genentech outside the submitted work. Samuel J. LaMonte, Nader Sadeghi, Michael D. Stub-
blefield, Penelope S. Fisher, Kevin D. Stein, and Gary H. Lyman report no conflicts of interest.
doi: 10.3322/caac.21343. Available online at cacancerjournal.com
204
CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians
ACS HNC Survivorship Care Guideline
 Tobacco use4 and alcohol consumption combine to
account for an estimated 75% of HNC cases.5,6 In addition,
the human papillomavirus (HPV) accounts for as many as
70% of oropharyngeal cancers.5 HPV-related HNC is a
biologically and clinically distinct disease from tobacco-
related HNC, with now well described differences in
molecular alterations, clinical presentation, and progno-
sis.7,8 Approximately 20% of the population is positive for
exposure to high-risk HPV.9
Standard management of HNC is based largely on ana-
tomic considerations and TNM (tumor, lymph nodes,
metastasis) stage. Early stage disease (stage I and II) is
treated with a single modality—surgery or radiotherapy
(RT)—depending primarily on tumor location but also on
tumor extent, anticipated cure rate, and functional and
esthetic outcome.10 About 80% to 90% of early stage
patients will go into remission. Advanced stage patients
(stage III, IVa, and IVb) are treated with multimodal ther-
apy, including surgery, RT, and chemotherapy.10 The
sequencing and combination of therapies are based on stage,
tumor location, expertise of treating physicians, and patient
preference.10
Despite
more
aggressive
treatment
for
advanced stage disease, cure rates remain low primarily
because of locoregional recurrence. However, HPV-related
HNC is associated with a significantly better prognosis even
with stage IV disease, especially in never smokers. Cure
rates, often based on 5-year survival rates, for HPV-related
HNC in some large studies approaches 90%.11
Much of the current research in HNC is focused on per-
sonalizing therapy based on molecular phenotypes, improv-
ing treatment efficacy, and reducing long-term morbidity.
The latter is predominantly being studied in HPV-related
HNC, where reductions in radiation dose or volume are
being studied with an aim to reduce acute and chronic
toxicities.
Nearly a decade ago, a landmark report from the Insti-
tute of Medicine, From Cancer Patient to Cancer Survivor:
Lost in Transition, highlighted the unique issues facing all
cancer survivors as well as the growing need for guidance
with respect to quality survivorship care.12 The National
Cancer Survivorship Resource Center (cancer.org/survivor-
shipcenter), a collaboration between the ACS, The George
Washington University Cancer Institute, and the Centers
for Disease Control (CDC) and Prevention, which is
funded by a 5-year cooperative agreement from the CDC,
developed these guideline recommendations in response to
the need for guidance on how best to care for the growing
number of HNC survivors.13 For the purposes of this
guideline, HNC includes the following cancer sites: oral
cavity, larynx, tongue, lip, and pharynx, although many of
the principles apply to cancers of the salivary glands, nasal
and paranasal sinuses, and nasopharynx. Cancers of the
brain, thyroid, and esophagus were not included because
these cancers are very different in their symptoms and treat-
ment than the previously listed cancers of the head and
neck (HN).
Guideline Questions
The clinical practice guideline addresses 5 key areas of
HNC survivorship care to provide recommendations on
best practices in the management of adults after HNC
treatment, focusing on the role of primary care clinicians
and other clinicians who care for posttreatment HNC sur-
vivors. The 5 areas covered include: 1) surveillance for
HNC recurrence, 2) screening for second primary cancers
(SPCs), 3) assessment and management of physical and
psychosocial long-term and late effects of HNC and treat-
ment, 4) health promotion, and 5) care coordination and
practice implications (see Table 1).
Methods
Methods used to develop this guideline were influenced by
the American Cancer Society (ACS) cancer screening15
and survivorship16 care guidelines. Where appropriate, this
guideline builds upon the recently published American
Society
of
Clinical
Oncology
(ASCO)
symptom-
based guidelines for adult cancer survivors.17-19 ASCO has
symptom-based
guidelines
specific
to
fatigue,19
chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy,17 and anxi-
ety and depressive symptoms.18
Panel Formation
A multidisciplinary expert workgroup was formed and
tasked with drafting the ACS Head and Neck Cancer Sur-
vivorship Care Guideline. Workgroup members had exper-
tise in primary care, dentistry, surgical oncology, medical
oncology, radiation oncology, clinical psychology, speech
language pathology, physical medicine and rehabilitation,
and nursing. In addition, an HNC cancer survivor was
included to provide a patient perspective.
Literature Review
The literature review began with an environmental scan
of existing guidelines and guidance developed by other
organizations (eg, the National Comprehensive Cancer
NetworkV
R [NCCNV
R],20,21 ASCO17-19), specific medical
centers (eg, The University of Texas MD Anderson Clini-
cal Tools and Resources Head and Neck Cancer Survivor-
ship algorithm, US Preventive Services Task Force22), and
those available from other countries (eg, Australian Cancer
Survivorship Centre).
CA CANCER J CLIN 2016;66:203–239
VOLUME 66 _ NUMBER 3 _ MAY/JUNE 2016
205
 Literature Search Strategy
A systematic review of the literature was conducted using
PubMed for 2004 through April 2015. Studies on childhood
cancers, qualitative studies, and non-English publications
were excluded. Also excluded were studies that consisted
of entirely non-North American populations, because
HNC prevalence is higher in some countries due to life-
style causes and differing etiology. Search terms included:
cancer survivor AND review OR meta-analysis OR sys-
tematic review OR guidelines; guidance AND head and
neck cancer OR head and neck cancer survivor; head and
neck cancer patient post-treatment AND symptom man-
agement OR late effects OR long-term effects OR psy-
chosocial care OR palliative care OR health promotion
OR surveillance OR screening for new cancers OR self-
management OR guidelines OR guidance OR follow up
OR follow-up OR side effects OR (chemotherapy AND
side effects) OR (radiation AND side effects), OR surgery
OR treatment complications OR genetic counseling and
testing OR survivor or patient interventions OR provider
interventions OR provider education OR barriers. Addi-
tional search attempts included head and neck cancer OR
head and neck cancer survivor OR head and neck cancer
patient post-treatment AND (symptom-specific terms,
such as swallowing, body image, neck dissection, etc).
The highest priority was given to articles that met the fol-
lowing criteria: peer-reviewed publication in English since
2004 unless a seminal article published before that date still
carried the most weight, including randomized controlled
trials (RCTs), prospective cohort studies, and population-
based case-control studies; studies of more than 50 cancer
cases analyzed and with high-quality assessment of covariates
and analytic methods; and analyses controlled for important
confounders (eg, preexisting comorbid conditions).
Workgroup members were also asked to consider the
specific level of evidence (LOE) criteria (see Table 2: Lev-
els of Evidence) along with consistency across studies and
study designs; dose-response when presenting treatment
impacts; race/ethnicity differences; and SPCs for which
survivors are at high risk because of treatment and behav-
ioral considerations. After finalization by the workgroup,
the guideline manuscript was sent to additional internal
and external experts for review and comment before sub-
mission for publication. The guideline summarizes litera-
ture with the highest level of evidence. A comprehensive
list of evidence is available online (see Supporting Informa-
tion Table 1). This is the most recent information as of the
publication date. For updates and the most recent informa-
tion, please visit cancer.org/professionals. On the basis of
formal review of the emerging literature, the ACS will
determine the need to update on a regular basis. At mini-
mum, it will be updated every 5 years.
Guideline Disclaimer
The clinical practice guideline published herein is provided
by the ACS to assist providers in clinical decision making.
This information should not be relied upon as being com-
plete or accurate, nor should it be considered as inclusive of
all proper treatments or methods of care or as a statement of
the standard of care. With the rapid development of scien-
tific knowledge, new evidence may emerge between the time
information is developed and when it is published or read.
The information is not continually updated and may not
reflect the most recent evidence. The information addresses
only the topics specifically identified therein and is not appli-
cable to other interventions, diseases, or stages of diseases.
This information does not mandate any particular course
of medical care. Furthermore, the information is not
intended to substitute for the independent professional
judgment of the treating provider, as the information does
not account for individual variation among patients. The
use of words like “must,” “must not,” “should,” and “should
not” indicates that a course of action is recommended or
not recommended for either most or many patients, but
there is latitude for the treating physician to select other
courses of action in individual cases. In all cases, the
selected course of action should be considered by the treat-
ing provider in the context of treating the individual
patient. Use of the information is voluntary. The ACS pro-
vides this information on an “as is” basis and makes no war-
ranty, express or suggested, regarding the information. The
ACS specifically disclaims any warranties of merchantabil-
ity or fitness for a particular use or purpose. The ACS
assumes no responsibility for any injury or damage to per-
sons or property arising out of or related to any use of this
information, or for any errors or omissions.
Guideline and Conflicts of Interest
The expert panel was assembled in accordance with the
ACS Conflict of Interest Procedures. Members of the
panel completed the ACS Guidelines Development Partic-
ipant Disclosure Form and the International Committee of
Medical Journal Editors Form for Disclosure of Potential
Conflicts of Interest, which requires disclosure of financial
and other interests that are relevant to the subject matter of
the guideline, including relationships with commercial
entities that are reasonably likely to experience direct regu-
latory or commercial impact as a result of promulgation of
the guideline. Categories for disclosure include employ-
ment; leadership; stock or other ownership; honoraria, con-
sulting, or advisory role; speaker’s bureau; research funding;
patents, royalties, other intellectual property; expert testi-
mony; travel, accommodations, expenses; and other rela-
tionships. In accordance with the procedures, the majority
ACS HNC Survivorship Care Guideline
206
CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians
 TABLE 1.
The Bottom Line: Recommendations for the American Cancer Society Head and Neck Cancer Survivorship
Care Guideline
Target population: Adult posttreatment head and neck cancer (HNC) survivors
Target audience: Primary care clinicians, medical oncologists, and other clinicians caring for HNC survivors
Methods: An expert panel was convened to develop clinical practice guideline recommendations based on a systematic review of the medical literature
ACS key recommendations for HNC survivorship care
Surveillance for HNC recurrence
History and physical
Recommendation 1.1. It is recommended that primary care clinicians: a) should individualize clinical follow-up care provided to HNC survivors based on age,
specific diagnosis, and treatment protocol as recommended by the treating oncology team (LOE 5 2A); b) should conduct a detailed cancer-related history
and physical examination every 1–3 mo for the first y after primary treatment, every 2–6 mo in the second y, every 4–8 mo in y 3–5, and annually after 5 y
(LOE 5 2A);10 c) should confirm continued follow-up with otolaryngologist or HNC specialist for HN-focused examination (LOE 5 2A).
Surveillance education
Recommendation 1.2. It is recommended that primary care clinicians: a) should educate and counsel all HNC survivors about the signs and symptoms of
local recurrence. (LOE 5 0); b) should refer HNC survivors to an HNC specialist if signs and symptoms of local recurrence are present (LOE 5 0).
Screening and early detection of second primary cancers (SPCs)
Recommendation 2.1. It is recommended that primary care clinicians: a) should screen HNC survivors for other cancers as they would for patients in the
general population by adhering to the ACS Early Detection Recommendations (cancer.org/professionals; LOE 5 0); b) should screen HNC survivors for lung
cancer according to ASCO or NCCN14 recommendations for annual lung cancer screening with LDCT for high-risk patients based on smoking history (LOE
5 2A); c) should screen HNC survivors for another HN and esophageal cancer as they would for patients of increased risk (LOE 5 0, IIA).
Assessment and management of physical and psychosocial long-term and late effects of HNC and its treatment
Recommendation 3.1. It is recommended that primary care clinicians should assess for long-term and late effects of HNC and its treatment at each follow-
up visit (LOE 5 0).
Spinal accessory nerve (SAN) palsy
Recommendation 3.2. It is recommended that primary care clinicians should refer HNC survivors with SAN palsy occurring postradical neck dissection to a
rehabilitation specialist to improve range of motion and ability to perform daily tasks (LOE 5 IA).
Cervical dystonia/muscle spasms/neuropathies
Recommendation 3.3. It is recommended that primary care clinicians: a) should assess HNC survivors for cervical dystonia, which is characterized by painful
dystonic spasms of the cervical muscles and can be caused by neck dissection, radiation, or both (LOE 5 0); b) should refer HNC survivors to a rehabilita-
tion specialist for comprehensive neuromusculoskeletal management if cervical dystonia or neuropathy is found (LOE 5 0); c) should prescribe nerve-
stabilizing agents, such as pregabalin, gabapentin, and duloxetine, or refer to a specialist for botulinum toxin type A injections into the affected muscles
for pain management and spasm control as indicated (LOE 5 0, IIA).
Shoulder dysfunction
Recommendation 3.4. It is recommended that primary care clinicians: a) should conduct baseline assessment of HNC survivor shoulder function posttreatment
for strength, range of motion, and impingement signs, and continue to assess as follow-up for ongoing complications or worsening condition (LOE 5 IIA);
b) should refer HNC survivors to a rehabilitation specialist for improvement to pain, disability, and range of motion where shoulder morbidity exists (LOE 5
IA).
Trismus
Recommendation 3.5. It is recommended that primary care clinicians: a) should refer HNC survivors to rehabilitation specialists and dental professionals to
prevent trismus and to treat trismus as soon as it is diagnosed (LOE 5 0); b) should prescribe nerve-stabilizing agents to combat pain and spasms, which
may also ease physical therapy and stretching devices (LOE 5 IIA).
Dysphagia/aspiration/stricture
Recommendation 3.6. It is recommended that primary care clinicians: a) should refer HNC survivors presenting with complaints of dysphagia, postprandial
cough, unexplained weight loss, and/or pneumonia to an experienced speech-language pathologist for instrumental evaluation of swallowing function to
assess and manage dysphagia and possible aspiration (LOE 5 IIA); b) should recognize potential for psychosocial barriers to swallowing recovery and refer
HNC survivors to an appropriate clinician if barriers are present (LOE 5 IIA); c) should refer to a speech-language pathologist for videofluoroscopy as the
first-line test for HNC survivors with suspected stricture due to the high degree of coexisting physiologic dysphagia (LOE 5 IIA); d) should refer HNC survi-
vors with stricture to a gastroenterologist or HN surgeon for esophageal dilation (LOE 5 IIA).
Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD)
Recommendation 3.7. It is recommended that primary care clinicians: a) should monitor HNC survivors for developing or worsening GERD, as it prevents
healing of irradiated tissues and is associated with increased risk of HNC recurrence or SPCs (LOE 5 IIA); b) should counsel HNC survivors on an increased
risk of esophageal cancer and the associated symptoms (LOE 5 IIA); c) should recommend PPIs or antacids, sleeping with a wedge pillow or 3-inch blocks
under the head of the bed, not eating or drinking fluids for 3 h before bedtime, tobacco cessation, and avoidance of alcohol (LOE 5 IIA); d) should refer
HNC survivors to a gastroenterologist if symptoms are not relieved by treatments listed in 3.7c (LOE 5 IIA).
Lymphedema
Recommendation 3.8. It is recommended that primary care clinicians: a) should assess HNC survivors for lymphedema using the NCI CTCAE v.4.03, or referral
for endoscopic evaluation of mucosal edema of the oropharynx and larynx, tape measurements, sonography, or external photographs (LOE 5 IIA); b) should
refer HNC survivors to a rehabilitation specialist for treatment consisting of MLD and, if tolerated, compressive bandaging (LOE 5 IIA).
CA CANCER J CLIN 2016;66:203–239
VOLUME 66 _ NUMBER 3 _ MAY/JUNE 2016
207
 TABLE 1. Continued
Fatigue
Recommendation 3.9. It is recommended that primary care clinicians: a) should assess for fatigue and treat any causative factors for fatigue, including ane-
mia, thyroid dysfunction, and cardiac dysfunction (LOE 5 0); b) should offer treatment or referral for factors that may impact fatigue (eg, mood disorders,
sleep disturbance, pain, etc) for those who do not have an otherwise identifiable cause of fatigue (LOE 5 I); c) should counsel HNC survivors to engage in
regular physical activity and refer for CBT as appropriate (LOE 5 I).
Altered or loss of taste
Recommendation 3.10. It is recommended that primary care clinicians should refer HNC survivors with altered or loss of taste to a registered dietitian for
dietary counseling and assistance in additional seasoning of food, avoiding unpleasant food, and expanding dietary options (LOE 5 IIA).
Hearing loss, vertigo, vestibular neuropathy
Recommendation 3.11. It is recommended that primary care clinicians should refer HNC survivors to appropriate specialists (ie, audiologists) for loss of
hearing, vertigo, or vestibular neuropathy related to treatment (LOE 5 IIA).
Sleep disturbance/sleep apnea
Recommendation 3.12. It is recommended that primary care clinicians: a) should screen HNC survivors for sleep disturbance by asking HNC survivors and
partners about snoring and symptoms of sleep apnea (LOE 5 0); b) should refer HNC survivors to a sleep specialist for a sleep study (polysomnogram) if
sleep apnea is suspected (LOE 5 0); c) should manage sleep disturbance similar to patients in the general population (LOE 5 0); d) should recommend
nasal decongestants, nasal strips, and sleeping in the propped-up position to reduce snoring and mouth-breathing; room cool-mist humidifiers can aid sleep
as well by keeping the airway moist (LOE 5 0); e) should refer to a dental professional to test the fit of dentures to ensure proper fit and counsel HNC
survivors to remove dentures at night to avoid irritation (LOE 5 0).
Speech/voice
Recommendation 3.13. It is recommended that primary care clinicians: a) should assess HNC survivors for speech disturbance (LOE 5 0); b) should refer
HNC survivors to an experienced speech-language pathologist if communication disorder exists (LOE 5 IA, IIA).
Hypothyroidism
Recommendation 3.14. It is recommended that primary care clinicians should evaluate HNC survivor thyroid function by measuring TSH every 6–12 mo
(LOE 5 III).
Oral and dental surveillance
Recommendation 3.15. It is recommended that primary care clinicians: a) should counsel HNC survivors to maintain close follow-up with the dental professio-
nal and reiterate that proper preventive care can help reduce caries and gingival disease (LOE 5 IA); b) should counsel HNC survivors to avoid tobacco, alco-
hol (including mouthwash containing alcohol), spicy or abrasive foods, extreme temperature liquids, sugar-containing chewing gum or sugary soft drinks, and
acidic or citric liquids (LOE 5 0); c) should refer HNC survivors to a dental professional specializing in the care of oncology patients (LOE 5 0).
Caries
Recommendation 3.16. It is recommended that primary care clinicians: a) should counsel HNC survivors to seek regular professional dental care for routine
examination and cleaning and immediate attention to any intraoral changes that may occur (LOE 5 0); b) should counsel HNC survivors to minimize intake
of sticky and/or sugar-containing food and drink to minimize risk of caries (LOE 5 0); c) should counsel HNC survivors on dental prophylaxis, including
brushing with remineralizing toothpaste, the use of dental floss, and fluoride use (prescription 1.1% sodium fluoride toothpaste as a dentifrice or in cus-
tomized delivery trays; LOE 5 IA, 0).
Periodontitis
Recommendation 3.17. It is recommended that primary care clinicians: a) should refer HNC survivors to a dentist or periodontist for thorough evaluation
(LOE 5 0); b) should counsel HNC survivors to seek regular treatment from and follow recommendations of a qualified dental professional and reinforce
that proper examination of the gingival attachment is a normal part of ongoing dental care (LOE 5 0).
Xerostomia
Recommendation 3.18. It is recommended that primary care clinicians: a) should encourage use of alcohol-free rinses if an HNC survivor requires mouth
rinses (LOE 5 0); b) should counsel HNC survivors to consume a low-sucrose diet and to avoid caffeine, spicy and highly acidic foods, and tobacco (LOE
5 0); c) should encourage HNC survivors to avoid dehydration by drinking fluoridated tap water, but explain that consumption of water will not eliminate
xerostomia (LOE 5 0).
Osteonecrosis
Recommendation 3.19. It is recommended that primary care clinicians: a) should monitor HNC survivors for swelling of the jaw and/or jaw pain, indicating
possible osteonecrosis (LOE 5 0); b) should administer conservative treatment protocols, such as broad-spectrum antibiotics and daily saline or aqueous
chlorhexidine gluconate irrigations, for early stage lesions.(LOE 5 0); c) should refer to an HN surgeon for consideration of hyperbaric oxygen therapy for
early and intermediate lesions, for debridement of necrotic bone while undergoing conservative management, or for external mandible bony exposure
through the skin (LOE 5 0).
Oral infections/candidiasis
Recommendation 3.20. It is recommended that primary care clinicians: a) should refer HNC survivors to a qualified dental professional for treatment and
management of complicated oral conditions and infections (LOE 5 0); b) should consider systemic fluconazole and/or localized therapy of clotrimazole
troches to treat oral fungal infections (LOE 5 0).
Body and self-image
Recommendation 3.21. It is recommended that primary care clinicians: a) should assess HNC survivors for body and self-image concerns (LOE 5 IIA);
b) should refer for psychosocial care as indicated (LOE 5 IA).
ACS HNC Survivorship Care Guideline
208
CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians
 TABLE 1. Continued
Distress/depression/anxiety
Recommendation 3.22. It is recommended that primary care clinicians: a) should assess HNC survivors for distress/depression and/or anxiety periodically (3
mo posttreatment and at least annually), ideally using a validated screening tool (LOE 5 I); b) should offer in-office counseling and/or pharmacotherapy
and/or refer to appropriate psycho-oncology and mental health resources as clinically indicated if signs of distress, depression, or anxiety are present (LOE
5 I); c) should refer HNC survivors to mental health specialists for specific QoL concerns, such as to social workers for issues like financial and
employment challenges or to addiction specialists for substance abuse (LOE 5 I).
Health promotion
Information
Recommendation 4.1. It is recommended that primary care clinicians: a) should assess the information needs of the HNC survivor related to HNC and its
treatment, side effects, other health concerns, and available support services (LOE 5 0); b) should provide or refer HNC survivors to appropriate resour-
ces to meet identified needs (LOE 5 0).
Healthy weight
Recommendation 4.2. It is recommended that primary care clinicians: a) should counsel HNC survivors to achieve and maintain a healthy weight (LOE 5 III);
b) should counsel HNC survivors on nutrition strategies to maintain a healthy weight for those at risk for cachexia (LOE 5 0); c) should counsel HNC survivors if
overweight or obese to limit consumption of high-calorie foods and beverages and increase physical activity to promote and maintain weight loss (LOE 5 IA).
Physical activity
Recommendation 4.3. It is recommended that primary care clinicians should counsel HNC survivors to engage in regular physical activity consistent
with the ACS guideline, and specifically: a) should avoid inactivity and return to normal daily activities as soon as possible after diagnosis (LOE 5 III);
b) should aim for at least 150 min of moderate or 75 min of vigorous aerobic exercise per week (LOE 5 I, IA); (c) should include strength training
exercises at least 2 d/wk (LOE 5 IA).
Nutrition
Recommendation 4.4. It is recommended that primary care clinicians: a) should counsel HNC survivors to achieve a dietary pattern that is high in vegeta-
bles, fruits, and whole grains, low in saturated fats, sufficient in dietary fiber, and avoids alcohol consumption (LOE 5 IA, III); b) should refer HNC survi-
vors with nutrition-related challenges (eg, swallowing problems that impact nutrient intake) to a registered dietician or other specialist (LOE 5 0).
Tobacco cessation
Recommendation 4.5. It is recommended that primary care clinicians should counsel HNC survivors to avoid tobacco products and offer or refer patients
to cessation counseling and resources (LOE 5 I).
Personal oral health
Recommendation 4.6. It is recommended that primary care clinicians: a) should counsel HNC survivors to maintain regular dental care, including frequent
visits to dental professionals, early interventions for dental complications, and meticulous oral hygiene (LOE 5 0); b) should test fit dentures to ensure
proper fit and counsel HNC survivors to remove them at night to avoid irritation (LOE 5 0); c) should counsel HNC survivors that nasal strips can reduce
snoring and mouth-breathing and that room humidifiers and nasal saline sprays can aid sleep as well (LOE 5 0); d) should train HNC survivors to do
at-home HN self-evaluations and be instructed to report any suspicions or concerns immediately (LOE 5 0).
Care coordination and practice implications
Survivorship care plan
Recommendation 5.1. It is recommended that primary care clinicians should consult with the oncology team and obtain a treatment summary and
survivorship care plan (LOE 5 0, III).
Communication with other providers
Recommendation 5.2. It is recommended that primary care clinicians: a) should maintain communication with the oncology team throughout diagnosis,
treatment, and posttreatment care to ensure care is evidence-based and well coordinated (LOE 5 0); b) should refer HNC survivors to a dentist to pro-
vide diagnosis and treatment of dental caries, periodontal disease, and other intraoral conditions, including mucositis and oral infections, and communi-
cate with the dentist on follow-up recommendations and patient education (LOE 5 0); c) should maintain communication with specialists referred to for
management of comorbidities, symptoms, and long-term and late effects (LOE 5 0).
Inclusion of caregivers
Recommendation 5.3. It is recommended that primary care clinicians should encourage the inclusion of caregivers, spouses, or partners in usual HNC sur-
vivorship care and support (LOE 5 0).
More resources
More resources to support guideline implementation are available at cancer.org/professionals.
ACS indicates American Cancer Society; ASCO, American Society of Clinical Oncology; CBT, cognitive behavioral therapy; GERD, gastroesophageal reflux dis-
ease; HN, head and neck; HNC, head and neck cancer; HRQoL, health-related quality of life; LDCT, low-dose computed tomography; LOE, level of evidence;
MLD, manual lymphatic drainage; NCCN, National Comprehensive Cancer Network; NCI CTCAE, National Cancer Institute Common Toxicity Criteria for Adverse
Events; PPIs, proton pump inhibitors; QoL, quality of life; SAN, spinal accessory nerve; TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone.
CA CANCER J CLIN 2016;66:203–239
VOLUME 66 _ NUMBER 3 _ MAY/JUNE 2016
209
 of the members of the panel did not disclose any such
relationships.
Results
Of the total number of 2081 articles identified by the
search, 349 (see Supporting Information Table 1) met
inclusion criteria; and, after full text review, 184 were
included as the evidence base. Less than 2% of eligible
articles were rated as level I evidence, less than 4% were
rated as level IA evidence, less than 1% were rated as level
IC evidence, and less than 3% were rated as level IIA evi-
dence. The majority of evidence was rated as level III
(28%) and level 0 (64%). Recommendations provided in
this guideline are based on current evidence in the literature
and expert consensus opinion. Clinical interpretation of the
included evidence follows each recommendation, along
with a rating of the level of evidence (LOE) supporting
each recommendation. Recommendations provided in this
guideline are based on current evidence in the literature,
but most evidence is not sufficient to warrant a strong,
evidence-based recommendation. Rather, recommenda-
tions should be largely viewed as possible management
strategies given the current evidence base and the logistical
challenges
of
comprehensively
adhering
to
these
recommendations.
Recommendations
Surveillance for HNC Recurrence
See Table 3: Recommendations for Surveillance for Head
and Neck Cancer Recurrence.
History and physical
Recommendation 1.1. It is recommended that primary
care clinicians: a) should individualize clinical follow-up
care provided to HNC survivors based on age, specific diag-
nosis, and treatment protocol as recommended by the treat-
ing oncology team (LOE 5 2A); b) should conduct a
detailed cancer-related history and physical examination
every 1 to 3 months for the first year after primary treat-
ment, every 2 to 6 months in the second year, every 4 to 8
months in years 3 through 5, and annually after 5 years
(LOE 5 2A);10 and c) should confirm continued follow-up
with an otolaryngologist or HNC specialist for head and
neck (HN)-focused examination (LOE 5 2A).
Clinical interpretation. Surveillance for HNC recurrence
(locally, regionally in the neck, or distant metastasis) and
second primary HNC, as well as SPCs in other high-risk
sites (lung, esophagus), is an essential component of evalua-
tion.23 Physical examination of the HN should include
(direct) nasopharyngolaryngoscopy by an otolaryngologist
or HNC specialist of the entire upper aerodigestive tract
(oral cavity, oropharynx, hypopharynx, and larynx) and pal-
pation of the neck. Posttreatment baseline imaging of the
primary site and regional lymph node basins is recom-
mended within 6 months of the initial treatment and is
within the purview of the treating team. NCCN recom-
mends baseline imaging in T3/T4 or N2/N3 disease for
oropharyngeal, hypopharyngeal, glottic, supraglottic, and
nasopharyngeal cancers. Routine reimaging is not recom-
mended in the absence of any clinical symptoms and sign of
recurrence.
Outcome for recurrent HNC is very poor, with the nota-
ble exception of those whose HNC was early stage and those
TABLE 2.
Level of Evidence
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE
CRITERIA
I
Meta-analyses of RCTs
IA
RCT of HNC survivors
IB
RCT based on cancer survivors across multiple cancer sites
IC
RCT not based on cancer survivors but on general population experiencing a specific long-term or late effect (eg, managing
fatigue, etc)
IIA
Non-RCTs based on HNC survivors
IIB
Non-RCTs based on cancer survivors across multiple sites
IIC
Non-RCTs not based on cancer survivors but on general population experiencing a specific long-term or late effect (eg, manag-
ing fatigue, etc)
III
Case-control study or prospective cohort study
0
Expert opinion, observational study (excluding case-control and prospective cohort studies), clinical practice, literature review,
or pilot study
2A
NCCN Category 2A: Based upon lower-level evidence, there is uniform NCCN consensus that the intervention is appropriate
HNC indicates head and neck cancer; NCCN, National Comprehensive Cancer Network; RCTs, randomized controlled trials.
ACS HNC Survivorship Care Guideline
210
CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians
 with local only recurrence. Hence, salvage therapy for recur-
rent disease may preferentially benefit this subset.24
The literature is not definitive on the optimal frequency of
surveillance, and it is unclear whether surveillance provides
any survival advantage.25 However, NCCN Clinical Practice
Guidelines in Oncology (NCCN GuidelinesV
R) for HNC
provide a schedule for follow-up evaluation (see Recommen-
dation 1.1).10 Primary care clinician monitoring is important,
because one large study showed diminishing frequency of
follow-up by oncologists over time.25
Surveillance education
Recommendation 1.2. It is recommended that primary
care clinicians: a) should educate and counsel all HNC sur-
vivors about the signs and symptoms of local recurrence
(LOE 5 0); and b) should refer HNC survivors to an
HNC specialist if signs and symptoms of local recurrence
are present (LOE 5 0).
Clinical interpretation. Primary care clinicians should edu-
cate and counsel patients about the signs and symptoms of
recurrence, including swelling anywhere in the HN or in an
area that does not heal; red or white patch in the mouth;
lumps, bumps or masses; persistent sore throat; foul oral
cavity odor independent of hygiene practices; persistent
nasal obstruction or congestion; frequent nose bleeds;
unusual discharge from the nose; difficulty breathing; dou-
ble vision; numbness/weakness; ear or jaw pain; difficulty
chewing, swallowing, or moving the jaw or tongue; blood
in saliva or phlegm; loose teeth; ill-fitting dentures; and
unexplained weight loss and/or fatigue (cancer.net/cancer-
types/head-and-neck-cancer/symptoms-and-signs; accessed
January 29, 2016). Patients may present with these symp-
toms, and the primary care clinician should ask about them
during routine office visits. If these symptoms are present,
refer to an HNC specialist. Evaluation of patient-reported
symptoms thorough HN upper aerodigestive tract examina-
tion, including flexible nasopharyngolaryngoscopy, is essen-
tial in detecting a recurrence as early as possible, which may
impact survival.
Screening for SPCs
See Table 4: Recommendations for Screening and Early
Detection of Second Primary Cancers.
Recommendation 2.1. It is recommended that primary
care clinicians: a) should screen HNC survivors for other
cancers as they would patients in the general population by
adhering to the ACS Early Detection Recommendations
(cancer.org/professionals; LOE 5 0); b) should screen
HNC survivors for lung cancer according to ASCO or
NCCN14 recommendations for annual lung cancer screen-
ing with low-dose computed tomography (LDCT) for
high-risk patients based on smoking history (LOE 5 2A);
and c) should screen HNC survivors for another HNC and
esophageal cancer as they would for patients of increased
risk (LOE 5 0, IIA).
Clinical interpretation. Approximately 23% of HNC survi-
vors will develop one or multiple SPCs. The sites at highest
risk are HN, lung, and esophagus,26 accounting for 89%
TABLE 3.
Guideline for Surveillance for Head and Neck Cancer Recurrence
RECOMMENDATION
LEVEL OF EVIDENCEa,b
It is recommended that primary care clinicians:
1.1. History and physical
2Aa (H&P), 0b (education)
a) Should individualize clinical follow-up care provided to HNC survivors based on age, specific
diagnosis, and treatment protocol as recommended by the treating oncology team
b) Should conduct a detailed cancer-related history and physical examination every 1–3 mo for the
first y after primary treatment, every 2–6 mo in the second y, every 4–8 mo in y 3–5, and annually
after 5 y10
c) Should confirm continued follow-up with otolaryngologist or HNC specialist for HN-focused
examination
1.2. Surveillance education
a) Should educate and counsel all HNC survivors about the signs and symptoms of local recurrence
b) Should refer HNC survivors to an HNC specialist if signs and symptoms of local recurrence are
present
H&P indicates history and physical; HN, head and neck; HNC, head and neck cancer. aNational Comprehensive Cancer Network Category 2A: Based upon
lower-level evidence, there is uniform NCCN consensus that the intervention is appropriate. Reproduced with permission from the NCCN Clinical Practice
Guidelines in Oncology (NCCN Guidelines) for Head and Neck Cancers V.1.2015. V
C 2015 National Comprehensive Cancer Network, Inc. All rights reserved.
The NCCN Guidelines and illustrations herein may not be reproduced in any form for any purpose without the express written permission of the NCCN. To
view the most recent and complete version of the NCCN Guidelines, go online to NCCN.org. NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE CANCER NETWORK, NCCN, NCCN
GUIDELINES, and all other NCCN content are trademarks owned by the National Comprehensive Cancer Network, Inc. bLevel of evidence: I, meta-analyses of
randomized controlled trials (RCTs); IA, RCT of HNC survivors; IB, RCT based on cancer survivors across multiple sites; IC, RCT based not on cancer survivors
but on the general population experiencing a specific long-term or late effect (eg, managing fatigue, etc); IIA, non-RCT based on HNC survivors; IIB, non-RCT
based on cancer survivors across multiple sites; IIC,non-RCT not based on cancer survivors but on the general population experiencing a specific long-term or
late effect (eg, managing fatigue, etc); III, casecontrol or prospective cohort study; 0, expert opinion, observation, clinical practice, literature review, or pilot
study.
CA CANCER J CLIN 2016;66:203–239
VOLUME 66 _ NUMBER 3 _ MAY/JUNE 2016
211
 of SPCs. Approximately 20% will develop one SPC, 3%
will develop two SPCs, and less than 1% will develop three
SPCs. The risk of SPC has increased since 1975 for all sub-
sites of the primary HNC with the notable exception of
oropharyngeal cancer.27 Since 1991, there has been a docu-
mented increase in incidence of HPV-associated oropha-
ryngeal cancers and a decrease in tobacco-associated
oropharyngeal cancers, resulting in a decline in SPC risk
for patients with index oropharyngeal cancers.27 Patients
with an index HNC of the hypopharynx and larynx are
more likely to develop an SPC in the lung, while those
with an index HNC in the oral cavity or oropharynx are
more likely to get an SPC in other HN sites.27,28 HNC
survivors with an SPC have a poor prognosis, with a
median survival of 12 months after diagnosis of SPC.29
Early detection and aggressive treatment are strategies that
might be used for improving survival.28
Among long-term survivors of HNC beyond 3 years, 15%
die within 5 years of initial diagnosis, and 41% die within 10
years. The leading causes of death in this group are late recur-
rence or second primary HNC (29%), non-HN SPC (23%),
cardiovascular disease (21%), and other causes (23%).30
HN sites are the second most common site of SPC
among HNC survivors, accounting for 23% of SPCs.26 HN
SPCs are associated more with oral cavity and non-HPV–
related oropharyngeal cancer.28 When a patient’s signs or
symptoms raise concerns of potential recurrence or second
HN primary cancer, the primary care clinician should refer
the patient to the primary treating specialist.
Lung is the most common site of SPC among HNC sur-
vivors (33% of all SPCs), particularly in patients with a his-
tory of tobacco exposure.26 Five percent of survivors of
HNC will go on to develop a new primary lung cancer.31
This is three times higher than the cumulative incidence of
second primary lung cancers for survivors of lung cancer.31
Survival in this group is worse than in the overall population
of patients with lung cancer. Patients who have hypophar-
yngeal and laryngeal cancer are at higher risk of developing
second primary lung cancer compared with those who have
cancer of other HN sites. The National Lung Screening
Trial (NLST) showed reduced mortality from lung cancer
among current or former heavy smokers ages 55 to 74 years
when LDCT scanning of the lungs was used for screening
compared with single-view chest x-ray (CXR),32 suggesting
LDCT as the screening modality of choice. A systematic
review of the evidence regarding the benefits and harms of
lung cancer screening using LDCT indicates that LDCT
screening may benefit individuals who meet NLST inclusion
criteria and are at an increased risk for lung cancer.33 How-
ever, other well known risk factors for lung cancer, such as
tobacco-related HNC, may not meet the NLST inclusion
criteria, and patients with these risk factors may benefit from
screening. The screening shows benefit in high-volume can-
cer centers. Due to potential harms from LDCT screening,
such as death related to interventions in benign nodules, or
deaths related to follow-up procedures, such as bronchoscopy
and needle biopsy within 2 months of the screening (3.4%
per 10,000 screened by LDCT and 2.2 per 10,000 screened
TABLE 4.
Guideline for Screening and Early Detection of Second Primary Cancers
RECOMMENDATION
LEVEL OF EVIDENCEa
It is recommended that primary care clinicians:
2.1. Screening and early detection of second primary cancers
0 (screening, other cancers); 2A (screening, lung cancer)b; 0, IIA
(screening, another HN or esophageal cancer)
a) Should screen HNC survivors for other cancers as they would
for patients in the general population by adhering to the ACS
Early Detection Recommendations (cancer.org/professionals)
b) Should screen HNC survivors for lung cancer according to
ASCO or NCCN14 recommendations for annual lung cancer
screening with LDCT for high-risk patients based on smoking
history
c) Should screen HNC survivors for another HN and esophageal
cancer as they would for patients of increased risk
ACS indicates American Cancer Society; ASCO, American Society of Clinical Oncology; HN, head and neck; HNC, head and neck cancer; LDCT, low-dose com-
puted tomography; NCCN, National Comprehensive Cancer Network. aLevel of evidence: I, meta-analyses of randomized controlled trials (RCTs); IA, RCT of
HNC survivors; IB, RCT based on cancer survivors across multiple sites; IC, RCT based not on cancer survivors but on the general population experiencing a
specific long-term or late effect (eg, managing fatigue, etc); IIA, non-RCT based on HNC survivors; IIB, non-RCT based on cancer survivors across multiple sites;
IIC, non-RCT not based on cancer survivors but on the general population experiencing a specific long-term or late effect (eg, managing fatigue, etc); III, case-
control or prospective cohort study; 0, expert opinion, observation, clinical practice, literature review, or pilot study. bNational Comprehensive Cancer Network
Category 2A: Based upon lower-level evidence, there is uniform NCCN consensus that the intervention is appropriate. Adapted with permission from the
NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology (NCCN Guidelines) for Lung Cancer Screening V.1.2016. V
C 2015 National Comprehensive Cancer Network, Inc.
All rights reserved. The NCCN Guidelines and illustrations herein may not be reproduced in any form for any purpose without the express written permission
of the NCCN. To view the most recent and complete version of the NCCN Guidelines, go online to NCCN.org. NATIONAL COMPREHENSIVE CANCER NET-
WORK, NCCN, NCCN GUIDELINES, and all other NCCN content are trademarks owned by the National Comprehensive Cancer Network, Inc.
ACS HNC Survivorship Care Guideline
212
CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians
 by CXR), there is uncertainty regarding the generalizability
of results.33
Current NCCN Guidelines for Lung Cancer Screen-
ing14 recommend LDCT for individuals ages 55 to 74 years
who have a history of smoking 30-pack-years or more and
are current smokers or have quit smoking within the last 15
years, and for individuals aged 50 years or older who have a
history of smoking 20-pack-years or more and one
TABLE 5.
Summary of Potential Long-Term and Late Effects of Head and Neck Cancer and its Treatment by
Treatment Type
TREATMENT TYPE
LONG-TERM EFFECTS
LATE EFFECTS
Surgery (neck dissection, laryngectomy)
Shoulder function
l Spinal nerve abnormalities
l Shoulder mobility, pain
l Lymphedema
l Neuropathy
Oral health complications
l Cervical radiculopathy
l Xerostomia
l Dysphagia
l Oral infections
Musculoskeletal effects
l Trismus
l Impaired neck motion, pain
l Stricture
Radiation (IMRT, mediastinal RT)
Oropharyngeal
Vision
l Xerostomia
l Dysphagia
l Premature cataracts
Cardiovascular
Neuromuscular
l Carotid obstruction
l Cervical dystonia
l Trismus
l Baroreceptor failure
Oropharyngeal
Musculoskeletal
l Xerostomia
l Shoulder dysfunction
l Dysphagia
l Dysarthria
Integumentary
l Radiation dermatitis
Pulmonary
l Pulmonary fibrosis
Lymphovascular
l Lymphedema
Neuromuscular
l Cervical dystonia
Oral health complications
l Trismus
l Xerostomia
l Brachial plexopathy
l Oral infections
l Cervical radiculopathy
Musculoskeletal
l Osteonecrosis
Lymphovascular
l Lymphedema
l Carotid stenosis
Sensory complications
l Hearing loss
l Ocular issues
l Altered or loss of taste
Chemotherapy
Neuromuscular
Neuromuscular
l Sensory/motor neuropathy
l Sensory ataxia
l Cardiac abnormality, cardiomyopathy
l Gait dysfunction
Other
l Vertigo
l Osteoporosis, fractures
l Metabolic syndrome
Other effects
l Hot flushes/sweats
l Cardiovascular disease—possible increased
risk of myocardial infarction
l Weight gain, abdominal obesity
l Fatigue/decreased activity
l Diabetes; decreased sensitivity to insulin
and oral glycemic agents
l Anemia
l Increased cholesterol
l Body hair loss
l Dry eyes
l Increased fat mass and decreased lean
muscle mass/muscle wasting
l Venous thromboembolism
l Vertigo
l Cognitive dysfunction
CA CANCER J CLIN 2016;66:203–239
VOLUME 66 _ NUMBER 3 _ MAY/JUNE 2016
213
 additional risk, such as prior HNC.14 The NCCN Guide-
lines recommend chest imaging (computed tomography
[CT]) for surveillance of HNC patients as clinically indi-
cated.10,14 These indications are as defined for lung cancer
screening based on smoking history, for HNC patients
with smoking history, for those with hypopharyngeal and
laryngeal cancer who have a higher risk of second primary
lung cancer, and for any HNC patient who continues to
smoke tobacco after diagnosis of the index HNC.
The esophagus is the third most common site of
SPC24,26 among HNC survivors and is most commonly
associated with oral cavity, oropharyngeal, and hypophar-
yngeal cancer. The risk of SPC in the esophagus is
declining in HNC survivors. Routine surveillance imag-
ing by barium swallow esophagogram or CT scan of the
chest for second primary esophageal cancer among HNC
survivors is not recommended. In patients who have new
onset of esophageal dysphagia symptoms after completion
of HNC treatment, esophageal evaluation with esopha-
goscopy should be performed by an HN surgeon or gas-
troenterologist. Findings on esophagoscopy in HNC
survivors include a 4% prevalence of esophageal carci-
noma in addition to peptic esophagitis (63%), stricture
(23%), candidiasis (9%), Barrett esophagus (8%), and gas-
tritis (4%).34
Assessment and management of physical and
psychosocial long-term and late effects of HNC
and treatment
Recommendation 3.1. It is recommended that primary
care clinicians should assess for long-term and late effects
of HNC and its treatment at each follow up visit (LOE
5 0) (see Table 5: Summary of Potential Long-Term and
Late Effects of HNC and its treatment by Treatment
Type).
The risk of physical long-term and late effects after ther-
apy for HNC is determined by several factors, including:
a) type of treatment(s), b) duration and dose of treat-
ment(s) (increasing cumulative dose and duration of ther-
apy increases the potential risk), c) specific type of
chemotherapy,
d)
age
of
patient
during
treatment,
e) location of primary tumor, and f) use of tobacco prod-
ucts. Modalities of treatment include surgery, RT, chemo-
therapy, and targeted therapy. Primary care clinicians
should refer to the patient’s cancer treatment summary, if
available, for specific drugs and doses (see Recommenda-
tion 5.1).
The treatment of HNC often creates both acute and
chronic disability. This can manifest in many ways,
including dry mouth, dysphagia, sleep difficulty, obstruc-
tive sleep apnea (OSA), pain, weight loss, and loss of
work.
Pretreatment psychological status and caregiver support
play significant roles in the magnitude of distress during
and after treatment. It is critical that surveillance of the
psychological status from both survivor’s and caregiver’s
perspective be assessed and distress actively managed. In
addition, the survivor’s financial status, family responsibil-
ities, and support for the survivor impact the patient’s post-
treatment psychological status.
Table 5 lists potential physical and psychosocial long-
term and late effects associated with surgery, radiation and
chemotherapy. Long-term effects are medical problems
that develop during active treatment and persist after the
completion of treatment; whereas late effects are medical
problems that develop or become apparent months or years
after treatment is completed. Whereas various levels of evi-
dence exist to demonstrate the presence of these effects
during survivorship, there is limited information on the
time interval to onset or prevalence in the posttreatment
phase among survivors. This guideline combines evidence
with expert consensus to assist primary care clinicians in
managing HNC survivorship. Recommendations for the
assessment and management of specific physical and
GENERAL PSYCHOSOCIAL LONG-TERM AND LATE EFFECTS
l Depression, depressive symptoms
l Distress—multifactorial unpleasant experience of psychological, social, and/or spiritual nature
l Worry, anxiety
l Fear of recurrence
l Pain-related concerns
l End-of-life concerns: Death and dying
l Changes in sexual function and/or desire
l Challenges with body image (secondary to surgery, laryngectomy, radiation)
l Challenges with self-image
l Relationship and other social role difficulties
l Return to work concerns and financial challenges
IMRT indicates intensity-modulated radiation therapy; RT, radiation therapy.
TABLE 5. Continued
ACS HNC Survivorship Care Guideline
214
CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians
 TABLE 6.
Guideline for Assessment and Management of Physical and Psychosocial Long-Term and Late Effects of
Head and Neck Cancer and Its Treatment
RECOMMENDATION
LEVEL OF EVIDENCEa
It is recommended that primary care clinicians:
Assessment and management of physical and psychosocial long-term and late effects of HNC
and its treatment
3.1. Assessment and management of effects
0
Should assess for long-term and late effects of HNC and its treatment at each follow-up
visit
Physical effects: Musculoskeletal and neuromuscular
IA
3.2. Spinal accessory nerve palsy
Should refer HNC survivors with SAN palsy occurring postradical neck dissection to a
rehabilitation specialist to improve range of motion and ability to perform daily tasks
3.3. Cervical dystonia/muscle spasms/neuropathies
0 (assessment, referral), 0 (nerve-stabilizing
agents), IIA (injections)
a) Should assess HNC survivors for cervical dystonia, which is characterized by painful
dystonic spasms of the cervical muscles and can be caused by neck dissection, radiation,
or both
b) Should refer HNC survivors to a rehabilitation specialist for comprehensive neuromus-
culoskeletal management if cervical dystonia or neuropathy is found
c) Should prescribe nerve-stabilizing agents, such as pregabalin, gabapentin, and duloxe-
tine, or refer to a specialist for botulinum toxin type A injections into the affected
muscles for pain management and spasm control as indicated (LOE 5 0, IIA)
3.4. Shoulder dysfunction
IIA (assessment); IA (referral)
a) Should conduct baseline assessment of HNC survivor shoulder function posttreatment
for strength, ROM, and impingement signs and continue to assess as follow-up for
ongoing complications or worsening condition
b) Should refer HNC survivors to a rehabilitation specialist for improvement to pain, dis-
ability, and range of motion where shoulder morbidity exists
3.5. Trismus
0 (referral); IIA (nerve-stabilizing agents)
a) Should refer HNC survivors to rehabilitation specialists and dental professionals to pre-
vent trismus and to treat trismus as soon as it is diagnosed
b) Should prescribe nerve-stabilizing agents to combat pain and spasms, which may also
ease physical therapy and stretching devices
Physical effects: General
3.6. Dysphagia/aspiration/stricture
IIA
a) Should refer HNC survivors presenting with complaints of dysphagia, postprandial
cough, unexplained weight loss, and/or pneumonia to an experienced speech-language
pathologist for instrumental evaluation of swallowing function to assess and manage
dysphagia and possible aspiration
b) Should recognize potential for psychosocial barriers to swallowing recovery and refer
HNC survivors to an appropriate clinician if barriers are present
c) Should refer to a speech-language pathologist for videofluoroscopy as the first-line
test for HNC survivors with suspected stricture due to the high degree of coexisting phys-
iologic dysphagia
d) Should refer HNC survivors with stricture to a gastroenterologist or head and neck
surgeon for esophageal dilation
3.7. Gastroesophageal reflux disease
IIA
a) Should monitor HNC survivors for developing or worsening GERD, as it prevents heal-
ing of irradiated tissues and is associated with increased risk of HNC recurrence or SPC
b) Should counsel HNC survivors on an increased risk of esophageal cancer and the
associated symptoms
c) Should recommend PPIs or antacids, sleeping with a wedge pillow or 3-inch blocks
under the head of the bed, not eating or drinking fluids for 3 h before bedtime, tobacco
cessation, and avoidance of alcohol
CA CANCER J CLIN 2016;66:203–239
VOLUME 66 _ NUMBER 3 _ MAY/JUNE 2016
215
 TABLE 6. Continued
RECOMMENDATION
LEVEL OF EVIDENCEa
d) Should refer HNC survivors to a gastroenterologist if symptoms are not relieved by
treatments listed in 3.7c.
3.8. Lymphedema
IIA
a) Should assess HNC survivors for lymphedema using the NCI CTCAE v.4.03, or referral
for endoscopic evaluation of mucosal edema of the oropharynx and larynx, tape meas-
urements, sonography, or external photographs
b) Should refer HNC survivors to a rehabilitation specialist for treatment consisting of
MLD and, if tolerated, compressive bandaging
3.9. Fatigue
0 (assessment); I (referral, physical activity)
a) Should assess for fatigue and treat any causative factors for fatigue, including anemia,
thyroid dysfunction, and cardiac dysfunction
b) Should offer treatment or referral for factors that may impact fatigue (eg, mood disor-
ders, sleep disturbance, pain, etc) for those who do not have an otherwise identifiable
cause of fatigue
c) Should counsel HNC survivors to engage in regular physical activity and refer for CBT
as appropriate
3.10. Altered or loss of taste
IIA
Should refer HNC survivors with altered or loss of taste to a registered dietitian for die-
tary counseling and assistance in additional seasoning of food, avoiding unpleasant
food, and expanding dietary options
3.11. Hearing loss, vertigo, vestibular neuropathy
IIA
Should refer HNC survivors to appropriate specialists (ie, audiologists) for loss of hearing,
vertigo, or vestibular neuropathy related to treatment
3.12. Sleep disturbance/sleep apnea
0
a) Should screen HNC survivors for sleep disturbance by asking HNC survivors and part-
ners about snoring and symptoms of sleep apnea
b) Should refer HNC survivors to a sleep specialist for a sleep study (polysomnogram) if
sleep apnea is suspected
c) Should manage sleep disturbance similar to patients in the general population
d) Should recommend nasal decongestants, nasal strips, and sleeping in the propped-up
position to reduce snoring and mouth-breathing; room cool-mist humidifiers can aid
sleep as well by keeping the airway moist
e) Should refer to a dental professional to test the fit of dentures to ensure proper fit
and counsel HNC survivors to remove dentures at night to avoid irritation
3.13. Speech/voice
0 (assessment); IA, IIA (referral)
a) Should assess HNC survivors for speech disturbance
b) Should refer HNC survivors to an experienced speech-language pathologist if commu-
nication disorder exists
3.14. Hypothyroidism
III
Should evaluate HNC survivor thyroid function by measuring TSH every 6–12 mo
Physical effects: Oral health
3.15. Oral and dental surveillance
IA (follow-up with dental professional), 0 (avoid
specific foods; referral)
a) Should counsel HNC survivors to maintain close follow-up with the dental professional
and reiterate that proper preventive care can help reduce caries and gingival disease
b) Should counsel HNC survivors to avoid tobacco, alcohol (including mouthwash con-
taining alcohol), spicy or abrasive foods, extreme temperature liquids, sugar-containing
chewing gum or sugary soft drinks, and acidic or citric liquids
c) Should refer HNC survivors to a dental professional specializing in the care of oncol-
ogy patients
3.16. Caries
0 (regular professional dental care; minimize
specific foods), IA, 0 (dental prophylaxis)
ACS HNC Survivorship Care Guideline
216
CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians
 TABLE 6. Continued
RECOMMENDATION
LEVEL OF EVIDENCEa
a) Should counsel HNC survivors to seek regular professional dental care for routine
examination and cleaning, and immediate attention to any intraoral changes that may
occur
b) Should counsel HNC survivors to minimize intake of sticky and/or sugar-containing
food and drink to minimize risk of caries
c) Should counsel HNC survivors on dental prophylaxis, including brushing with reminer-
alizing toothpaste, the use of dental floss, and fluoride use (prescription 1.1% sodium
fluoride toothpaste as a dentifrice or in customized delivery trays)
3.17. Periodontitis
0
a) Should refer HNC survivors to a dentist or periodontist for thorough evaluation
b) Should counsel HNC survivors to seek regular treatment from and follow recommen-
dations of a qualified dental professional and reinforce that proper examination of the
gingival attachment is a normal part of ongoing dental care
3.18. Xerostomia
0
a) Should encourage use of alcohol-free rinses if an HNC survivor requires mouth rinses
b) Should counsel HNC survivors to consume a low-sucrose diet, avoid caffeine, spicy
and highly acidic foods, and tobacco
c) Should encourage HNC survivors to avoid dehydration by drinking fluoridated tap
water, but explain that consumption of water will not eliminate xerostomia
3.19. Osteonecrosis
0
a) Should monitor HNC survivors for swelling of the jaw and/or jaw pain, indicating pos-
sible osteonecrosis
b) Should administer conservative treatment protocols, such as broad-spectrum antibiotics
and daily saline or aqueous chlorhexidine gluconate irrigations, for early stage lesions
c) Should refer to a head and neck surgeon for consideration of hyperbaric oxygen ther-
apy for early and intermediate lesions, for debridement of necrotic bone while under-
going conservative management, or for external mandible bony exposure through the
skin
3.20. Oral infections/candidiasis
0
a) Should refer HNC survivors to a qualified dental professional for treatment and man-
agement of complicated oral conditions and infections
b) Should consider systemic fluconazole and/or localized therapy of clotrimazole troches
to treat oral fungal infections
Psychosocial effects
3.21. Body and self-image
IIA (assessment), IA (referral)
a) Should assess HNC survivors for body and self-image concerns
b) Should refer for psychosocial care as indicated
3.22. Distress/depression/anxiety
I
a) Should assess HNC survivors for distress/depression and/or anxiety periodically (3 mo
posttreatment and at least annually) ideally using a validated screening tool
b) Should offer in-office counseling and/or pharmacotherapy and/or refer to appropriate
psycho-oncology and mental health resources as clinically indicated if signs of distress,
depression, or anxiety are present
c) Should refer HNC survivors to mental health specialists for specific QoL concerns, such
as to social workers for issues like financial and employment challenges or to addiction
specialists for substance abuse
CBT indicates cognitive behavioral therapy; GERD, gastroesophageal reflux disease; HNC, head and neck cancer; LOE, level of evidence; MLD, manual lym-
phatic drainage; NCI CTCAE, National Cancer Institute Common Toxicity Criteria for Adverse Events; PPIs, proton pump inhibitors; QoL, quality of life; ROM,
range of motion; SAN, spinal accessory nerve; SPC, second primary cancer; TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone. aLevel of evidence: I, meta-analyses of random-
ized controlled trials (RCTs); IA, RCT of HNC survivors; IB, RCT based on cancer survivors across multiple sites; IC, RCT based not on cancer survivors but on
the general population experiencing a specific long-term or late effect (eg, managing fatigue, etc); IIA, non-RCT based on HNC survivors; IIB, non-RCT based on
cancer survivors across multiple sites; IIC, non-RCT not based on cancer survivors but on the general population experiencing a specific long-term or late
effect (eg, managing fatigue, etc); III, case-control or prospective cohort study; 0, expert opinion, observation, clinical practice, literature review, or pilot study.
CA CANCER J CLIN 2016;66:203–239
VOLUME 66 _ NUMBER 3 _ MAY/JUNE 2016
217
 psychosocial long-term and late effects most commonly
experienced by HNC survivors are detailed in Table 6
(Guideline for Assessment and Management of Physical
and Psychosocial Long-Term and Late Effects of HNC
and Its Treatment).
Physical Effects: Musculoskeletal and
Neuromuscular
Spinal accessory nerve palsy
Recommendation 3.2. It is recommended that primary
care clinicians should refer HNC survivors with spinal
accessory nerve (SAN) palsy occurring after radical neck
dissection (RND) to a rehabilitation specialist to improve
range of motion (ROM) and ability to perform daily tasks
(LOE 5 IA).
Clinical interpretation. While the overall incidence of
injury is unknown, damage to the SAN and subsequent
perturbation of shoulder motion is a major cause of
shoulder dysfunction and pain in HNC survivors, especially
in those undergoing neck dissection. Preservation of the
SAN during modified RND (MRND) has been associated
with improved shoulder function.35 One study demon-
strated denervation and neurogenic compromise of the
SAN at 4 to 6 months postoperatively in all groups of
patients who underwent neck dissection including RND,
MRND, and selective neck dissection (SND).36 Electro-
myographic activity of the upper trapezius and middle tra-
pezius
is
significantly
decreased
compared
with
the
unaffected side in patients who have undergone neck dis-
section. Upper limb dysfunction reportedly was mild in
54% of patients, moderate in 15%, and severe in 8%,
whereas only 23% reported no issues.37
Patients with SAN dysfunction should be referred to a
rehabilitation specialist to strengthen the affected shoulder
girdle muscles, to improve or maintain ROM, and to
improve overall function. Patients with impaired ability to
perform activities of daily living should be referred to a
rehabilitation specialist. Patients with a more complex clin-
ical situation, who face diagnostic challenges regarding
shoulder and neck pain or who fail physical or occupational
therapy, should be referred to a physical medicine and reha-
bilitation physician for expert assessment.
Cervical dystonia/muscle spasms/neuropathies
Recommendation 3.3. It is recommended that primary
care clinicians: a) should assess HNC survivors for cervical
dystonia, which is characterized by painful dystonic spasms
of the cervical muscles and can be caused by neck dissec-
tion, radiation, or both (LOE 5 0); b) should refer HNC
survivors for comprehensive neuromusculoskeletal manage-
ment if cervical dystonia or neuropathy is found; this may
include referral to a rehabilitation specialist (LOE 5 0);
and c) should prescribe nerve-stabilizing agents, such as
pregabalin, gabapentin, and duloxetine, or refer to a spe-
cialist for botulinum toxin type A (BTX-A) injections into
the affected muscles for pain management and spasm con-
trol as indicated (LOE 5 0, IIA).
Clinical interpretation. Painful dystonic spasms of the cer-
vical muscles may be present in some HNC survivors. The
sternocleidomastoid (if preserved), scalene, and trapezius
muscles are most often involved. This painful condition is
best termed cervical dystonia, but it differs clinically and
pathophysiologically from the cervical dystonia that results
from central nervous system disorders and degenerative
conditions, in that the dystonic activity after HNC treat-
ment is often progressive, which is in contrast to idiopathic
and other central nervous system-mediated cervical dysto-
nias and thus may be amenable to treatment options aimed
at stretching and strengthening muscles and stabilizing
neuromuscular units through targeted physical modalities.
There are no standardized diagnostic criteria for post-
HNC acquired cervical dystonia, but symptoms typically
involve more than one of the following: rotation of the
neck, elevation of a shoulder, repetitive flexion of the neck,
pain that is worse with stress, and relief of symptoms
through sensory “tricks,” such as touching the chin. Cervi-
cal dystonia in HNC patients can result from neck dissec-
tion that disrupts the cervical anatomy and damages the
cervical plexus and nerve roots. Subsequent uncontrolled
ectopic activity in these neural structures causes painful
spasms in the muscles they innervate. The condition may
worsen as scarring progresses. Radiation to the neck can
cause progressive fibrosis of the nerve roots and plexus as
well as any peripheral nerves and muscles in the radiation
field, with adverse effects on these structures that further
exacerbate propensity for painful spasm. The effect of
spasm and progressive radiation fibrosis can lead to severe
neck contracture. Radiation fibrosis syndrome is the clinical
manifestation of progressive tissue fibrosis that results from
radiation.38
Radiation treatment techniques can impact the risk of side
effects. A prospective, randomized study comparing the out-
comes and toxicities of intensity-modulated RT (IMRT)
versus conventional 2-dimensional RT for the treatment of
nasopharyngeal
carcinoma
reported
the
percentage
of
patients with neck fibrosis as 2.3% after IMRT and 11.3%
after conventional 2-dimensional RT.39 The mean follow-
up was 42 months (range, 1-83 months). Another study
evaluating late toxicity after conventional radiation in naso-
pharyngeal carcinoma found that 169 of 771 patients (22%)
had neck fibrosis.40 No definitive diagnostic criteria are
available for the diagnosis of neck fibrosis, making it difficult
to accurately ascertain incidence rates.
ACS HNC Survivorship Care Guideline
218
CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians
 The primary treatment modality for acquired cervical
dystonia
requires
a
comprehensive
musculoskeletal
approach emphasizing neuromuscular reeducation, proprio-
ceptive retraining, myofascial release, lymphedema man-
agement, and restoration of ROM. As such, treatment
often must involve a multidisciplinary team, which may
include physiatry, physical therapy, occupational therapy,
and speech-language pathology. Nerve-stabilizing agents,
such as pregabalin, gabapentin,41 and duloxetine, may be
added to control neuropathic pain and spasm. Opioids may
be necessary for acute flares of pain in severe cases.38,42
Botulinum toxin has both analgesic and muscle-relaxing
properties.43 While several formulations of botulinum toxin
are approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for
the treatment of cervical dystonia, there are few data on the
use of botulinum toxin to treat radiation-induced cervical
dystonia or cervical dystonia associated with neck dissec-
tion.
BTX-A
has
demonstrated
efficacy
in
treating
radiation-induced cervical dystonia in HNC patients in a
small retrospective study.44 A smaller retrospective review
demonstrated improvement of cervical disability scores in
six HNC patients who were injected with BTX-A into the
sternocleidomastoid muscle and three patients who were
injected into the pectoralis major pedicle flap.45 Another
small study demonstrated the efficacy of BTX-A infiltra-
tion in alleviating muscle spasms in pectoralis major flaps
after reconstruction of HNC patients.46 BTX-A may also
be useful in alleviating the neuropathic pain associated with
neck dissection in HNC patients.47
Shoulder dysfunction
Recommendation 3.4. It is recommended that primary
care clinicians: a) should conduct baseline assessment of
HNC survivor shoulder function posttreatment to assess
for strength, ROM, and impingement signs and continue
to assess as follow-up for ongoing complications or worsen-
ing condition (LOE 5 IIA); and b) should refer HNC sur-
vivors to a rehabilitation specialist for improvement to pain,
disability, and ROM where shoulder morbidity exists
(LOE 5 IA).
Clinical interpretation. Shoulder pain and dysfunction are
present in as many as 70% of patients after neck dissec-
tion.48 While there are many contributing factors to
shoulder pain and dysfunction, the primary cause is likely
damage to the SAN from neck dissection. Perturbation of
shoulder motion from weakness of the trapezius and other
denervated shoulder girdle muscles can lead to rotator cuff
tendonitis, adhesive capsulitis, myofascial pain, and more.49
RT can also damage the SAN and other neuromuscular
structures. The clinical manifestations of radiation fibrosis
syndrome may take months or years to develop.38 Primary
care clinicians should assess shoulder function by a directed
history and physical examination after HNC treatment and
continue to assess patients for emerging pain or functional
impairment.
HNC survivors with shoulder pain and dysfunction
should be referred to a rehabilitation specialist familiar with
this complex patient population. Progressive resistance train-
ing (PRT) for HNC patients with SAN neurapraxia/neurec-
tomy-related shoulder dysfunction seemed to be better than
standard physical therapy in a small RCT in terms of
improving active shoulder external rotation, shoulder pain,
and overall scores for shoulder pain and disability.50 HNC
survivors with SAN damage and shoulder dysfunction who
underwent a PRT program had significantly reduced
shoulder pain and disability as well as improved upper
extremity muscular strength and endurance compared with
those who underwent a standardized therapeutic exercise
protocol.51 A Cochrane review concluded that there was
limited evidence that PRT is more effective than standard
physical therapy for shoulder dysfunction in patients treated
for HNC in terms of improving pain, disability, and ROM
at the shoulder joint, but there was not sufficient evidence to
conclude that quality of life (QoL) is improved.50-53
In addition to strengthening programs, restrictions like
adhesive capsulitis may need to be addressed with further
medical intervention. Although there are no specific recom-
mendations for shoulder dysfunction in the HNC popula-
tion, recommendations for shoulder dysfunction from the
general population may include an intraarticular corticoste-
roid injection for pain modulation, capsular distension under
ultrasound or fluoroscopic guidance, or 3-quadrant ultra-
sound to deep heat collagen structures.54,55 For patients who
completed HNC treatment relatively recently, sonographic
heating of the shoulder should only be done with medical
supervision because of the theoretical chance of tumor spread
due to increased blood flow brought on by heating. For
impairments like myofascial pain, trigger-point injections
may be beneficial in reducing focal dystonia and pain.56
Trismus
Recommendation 3.5. It is recommended that primary
care clinicians: a) should refer HNC survivors to rehabilita-
tion specialists and dental professionals to prevent trismus
and to treat trismus as soon as it is diagnosed (LOE 5 0);
and b) should prescribe nerve-stabilizing agents to combat
pain and spasms, which may also ease physical therapy and
stretching devices (LOE 5 IIA).
Clinical interpretation. Trismus is defined as the inability
to fully open the mouth. Quantitatively, a �35 mm maxi-
mum interincisal distance (MID) cutoff point for defining
trismus has a sensitivity of 0.71 and a specificity of 0.98.57
Other studies have validated the �35 mm cutoff point for
defining trismus.58 The 3-finger test is a quick clinical
CA CANCER J CLIN 2016;66:203–239
VOLUME 66 _ NUMBER 3 _ MAY/JUNE 2016
219
 surrogate (where trismus is suspected in any patient who
cannot place 3 vertically stacked fingers between the
incisors).
Trismus is a common complication of the treatment of
HNC especially in patients with oral and oropharyngeal
cancers and has a deleterious impact on QoL in this popu-
lation.59 Patients with trismus may have difficulty with eat-
ing, speaking, maintaining oral hygiene, being examined
for cancer recurrence, engaging in oral intimacy, and a vari-
ety of other important aspects of daily life. One study found
the incidence of trismus for multiple types of HNC was 9%
pretreatment and 28% 1-year posttreatment when defined
as �35 mm.60 The highest prevalence of trismus (38%) was
observed 6 months after treatment. Patients with tonsillar
tumors were most likely to develop trismus.60 Another
study demonstrated that about half of patients who under-
went primary treatment for oral or oropharyngeal cancer
developed trismus (MID <35 mm) and reported problems
opening the mouth, dental occlusion, problems eating and/
or drinking, dry mouth, voice problems, or speech prob-
lems.61 Trismus in patients treated for oral and oropharyn-
geal
cancer
is
strongly
associated
with
clinical
T-
classification (tumor in situ [Tis]/T1-T2, 35 mm; T3-T4,
24 mm), RT (no, 30 mm; yes, 27 mm), and type of primary
surgery (primary closure, 38 mm; soft tissue flaps, 30 mm;
composite flaps, 24 mm).62
Physical therapy is often primary treatment for trismus;
however, trismus because of HNC is difficult to treat with
physical therapy alone.63 A combination of physical therapy
and stretching with a jaw motion rehabilitation appliance
has been shown to slow progression of trismus in patients
with nasopharyngeal carcinoma after RT.64 Other splinting
devices have also shown promise in reducing trismus.44
Nerve-stabilizing agents, such as pregabalin, gabapentin,
and duloxetine, may be helpful in treating neuropathic pain
and spasm associated with radiation-induced trismus.
Gabapentin demonstrated benefit in an RCT, and pentoxi-
fyline improved jaw opening by 4.5 mm in a non-RCT,65
although pain was not an outcome measure in that study.
BTX-A showed benefit in reducing pain, but not in
improving jaw opening,66 as an adjunctive treatment for
select neuromuscular and musculoskeletal complications of
radiation fibrosis syndrome related to cancer treatment,
including trismus, in a small retrospective case series.38
Referral to a rehabilitation specialist for medication man-
agement or botulinum toxin injection may be helpful.
Physical Effects: General
Dysphagia/aspiration/stricture
Recommendation 3.6. It is recommended that primary care
clinicians: a) should refer HNC survivors presenting with
complaints of dysphagia, postprandial cough, unexplained
weight loss, and/or pneumonia to an experienced speech-
language pathologist for instrumental evaluation of swal-
lowing function to assess and manage dysphagia and possi-
ble aspiration (LOE 5 IIA); b) should recognize potential
for psychosocial barriers to swallowing recovery and refer
HNC survivors to an appropriate clinician if barriers are
present (LOE 5 IIA); c) should refer to a speech-language
pathologist for videofluoroscopy as the first-line test for
HNC survivors with suspected stricture because of the high
degree of coexisting physiologic dysphagia (LOE 5 IIA);
and d) should refer HNC survivors with stricture to a gas-
troenterologist or HN surgeon for esophageal dilation
(LOE 5 IIA).
Clinical interpretation. Persistent or chronic dysphagia in
HNC survivorship is a challenging clinical problem. The
type, severity, and risk of dysphagia vary, depending on the
site of HNC and the treatment regimen. Chronic dyspha-
gia is relatively infrequent in patients who were treated
with small-field radiation or single-modality surgery for
early stage (T1-T2 N0) HNC but is frequently encoun-
tered after multimodality treatment for advanced-stage
HNC. Even in modern practice with highly conformal RT
(eg, intensity-modulated RT [IMRT]) and less invasive
surgical techniques (eg, transoral surgery), it is estimated
that almost half of patients treated with multimodality
therapy for locoregionally advanced-stage disease suffer
some degree of chronic dysphagia.67 Psychosocial factors,
such as depression, cognitive impairment, and lack of care-
giver support, and sensory changes, such as altered taste or
mucosal pain, may also interfere with oral intake in HNC
survivorship. Persistent dysphagia is not fully reversible, but
functional gains can be achieved with appropriate swallow-
ing therapy.68-70 Swallowing therapy may include or com-
bine
compensations,
exercise,
biofeedback,
and/or
esophageal dilation. Evaluation procedures to allocate
appropriate therapies are detailed below.
Dysphagia in HNC survivors is most commonly charac-
terized by inefficiency moving a solid food bolus through
the mouth or pharynx; however, in more severe cases, it
may result in chronic aspiration. Aspiration typically occurs
when drinking liquids. Primary care clinicians should be
alert to a high risk of subclinical (“silent”) aspiration. More
than 50% of chronic aspirators after HNC treatment do so
silently with no outward cough or symptom of airway
entry.71-73 Silent aspiration is only detected and effectively
treated using instrumental swallowing studies (eg, the vid-
eofluoroscopic swallow study—also known as the modified
barium swallow or the fiberoptic endoscopic evaluation of
swallow). Aspiration detected on instrumental testing is an
independent predictor of pneumonia in cancer survivor-
ship74 and can be lessened with training in individualized
(typically straightforward) compensatory techniques by a
ACS HNC Survivorship Care Guideline
220
CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians
 speech-language pathologist. On the basis of numerous
level IIA studies, it is recommended that patients present-
ing with complaints of dysphagia, postprandial cough,
unexplained weight loss, and/or pneumonia be referred to
an experienced speech-language pathologist for instrumen-
tal evaluation of swallowing function to assess and manage
dysphagia and possible aspiration. Early recognition and
referral is recommended.75-77 The time posttreatment is a
significant, negative predictor of response to swallowing
therapy, with particularly disappointing response to therapy
for survivors who start therapy 2 years or more after treat-
ment of their index HNC. If no speech-language patholo-
gist is available, refer to an HN surgeon for evaluation and
therapeutic referrals. Sudden-onset or rapidly progressing
dysphagia may be a symptom of locoregional tumor recur-
rence or second primary HNC; primary care clinicians
should refer these HNC survivors to the HN surgeon to
rule out new disease.
Risk of stricture (structural narrowing) of the pharynx
and/or esophagus occurs in 7% of patients treated with HN
RT based on a pooled analysis of over 4700 patients treated
with a variety of RT techniques using single or multimo-
dality treatment regimens for HNC. Higher risk groups
include those treated with IMRT who had a 16% risk of
stricture in the meta-analysis, perhaps explained by differ-
ences in dose distributions at the esophageal inlet.78 Risk of
stricture is also higher among patients treated with total
laryngectomy (19%).79 Most treatment-related strictures
are effectively managed by esophageal dilation. Serial dila-
tion is often required for long-term management. Solid
food dysphagia, difficulty belching/vomiting, and pharyn-
geal sticking are common symptoms of patients with stric-
ture.
Based
on
numerous
level
IIA
studies,
it
is
recommended that patients with stricture be referred to a
gastroenterologist or HN surgeon for esophageal dilation.
Gastroesophageal reflux disease
Recommendation 3.7. It is recommended that primary
care clinicians: a) should monitor HNC survivors for devel-
oping
or
worsening
gastroesophageal
reflux
disease
(GERD), as it prevents healing of irradiated tissues and is
associated with increased risk of HNC recurrence or SPC
(LOE 5 IIA); b) should counsel HNC survivors on an
increased risk of esophageal cancer and the associated
symptoms (LOE 5 IIA); c) should recommend proton
pump inhibitors or antacids, sleeping with a wedge pillow
or 3-inch blocks under the head of the bed, not eating or
drinking fluids for 3 hours before bedtime, tobacco cessa-
tion, and avoidance of alcohol (LOE 5 IIA); and d) should
refer HNC survivors to a gastroenterologist if symptoms
are not relieved by the treatments listed in Recommenda-
tion 3.7c (LOE 5 IIA).
Clinical interpretation. Gastroesophageal reflux is very
common in HNC survivors. With compromise of the air-
way from treatment modalities, strictures of the hypophar-
ynx, dysphagia with silent or apparent aspiration, and
swelling of the aerodigestive anatomy, reflux during the
daytime or sleep can worsen these already challenging prob-
lems. Chronic reflux can also injure the teeth by damaging
the enamel. If symptoms of reflux are present or persist
despite common treatments, endoscopy by a gastroenterol-
ogist might be indicated.
Lymphedema
Recommendation 3.8. It is recommended that primary
care clinicians: a) should assess HNC survivors for lymphe-
dema using the National Cancer Institute’s Common Tox-
icity Criteria for Adverse Events (NCI CTCAE) v.4.03 or
refer for endoscopic evaluation of mucosal edema of the
oropharynx and larynx, tape measurements, sonography, or
external photographs (LOE 5 IIA); and b) should refer
HNC survivors to a rehabilitation specialist for treatment
consisting of manual lymphatic drainage (MLD) and, if
tolerated, compressive bandaging (LOE 5 IIA).
Clinical interpretation. Secondary lymphedema is a com-
mon late effect of the treatment of HNC, but it is some-
times seen acutely after surgery or RT. Lymphedema in
HNC survivors may be underdiagnosed because of the sub-
clinical nature of edema, because it may not be as obvious
as extremity edema and may develop as a late effect both
externally (face, neck, chest) or internally (larynx, pharynx,
oral cavity). Lymphedema not only has adverse cosmetic
and psychosocial consequences, but can cause pain, muscu-
loskeletal and neurologic dysfunction, infections, breathing
or swallowing difficulties, or a variety of other profound
sequelae.80
There have been few studies to determine the prevalence
of HN lymphedema in HNC patients. In one study of 81
HNC patients, 75.3% (61 of 81 patients) were found to
have some form of late-effect, secondary lymphedema. Of
those, 9.8% (6 of 61 patients) had isolated internal lymphe-
dema (IL), 39.4% (24 of 61 patients) had isolated external
lymphedema (EL), and 50.8% (31 of 61 patients) had com-
bined EL/IL.81
The severity of IL and EL in HNC patients has been
found to be associated with physical and psychosocial
symptoms.82 Patients with more severe EL are more likely
to have decreased neck rotation.82 The more severe com-
bined EL/IL is associated with hearing impairment and
decreased QoL.82 Several factors were found to be signifi-
cantly associated with the presence of secondary EL and IL
in HNC patients, including the following: 1) tumor loca-
tion (pharyngeal sites were worse than other sites) was asso-
ciated with EL and combined EL/IL; 2) a longer time
CA CANCER J CLIN 2016;66:203–239
VOLUME 66 _ NUMBER 3 _ MAY/JUNE 2016
221
 since the end of HNC treatment was associated with EL
and combined EL/IL; 3) a higher total RT dose was associ-
ated with the presence of combined EL/IL; 4) radiation
status of the surgical bed (surgery alone was associated with
lower risk and was better than surgery with postoperative
radiation and [salvage] surgery in the irradiated field) was
associated with the presence of IL, including surgery with
postoperative radiation and salvage surgery in the irradiated
field; and 5) the greater number of treatment modalities
used was associated with EL, IL, and combined EL/IL.83
Days of radiation were also associated with the presence of
combined EL/IL.
There are no standard diagnostic criteria for HN lym-
phedema in HNC patients, making it challenging to diag-
nose. Methods that have been used include: a) the NCI
CTCAE, V 4.03, b) endoscopic evaluation of mucosal
edema of the oropharynx and larynx, c) tape measurements,
d) sonography, and e) external photographs.80 Primary care
clinicians unfamiliar or uncomfortable with these methods
of diagnosis should consider referral to a rehabilitation spe-
cialist or HN surgeon.
There are no trials demonstrating the efficacy of isolated
MLD in the management of lymphedema of the HN in
HNC patients. Despite this, MLD remains the standard of
care. One trial has demonstrated the efficacy of sequential
therapy of MLD and compression garments, with patients
learning how to perform MLD and using stretches as a part
of their therapy.84 A large cohort study of 700 HNC survi-
vors suggests that 60% respond85 to complete decongestive
therapy combining MLD and compression, with no signifi-
cant adverse events. Compression garments, however, can
be poorly tolerated, and customization may be required for
routine use.80
Fatigue
Where appropriate, these recommendations build upon the
ASCO guideline for screening, assessment, and treatment
of cancer-related fatigue (CRF) among adult cancer
survivors.
Recommendation 3.9. It is recommended that primary
care clinicians: a) should assess for fatigue and treat any
causative factors for fatigue, including anemia, thyroid dys-
function, and cardiac dysfunction (LOE 5 0); b) should
offer treatment or referral for factors that may impact
fatigue (eg, mood disorders, sleep disturbance, pain, etc) for
those who do not have an otherwise identifiable cause of
fatigue (LOE 5 I); and c) should counsel HNC survivors
to engage in regular physical activity and refer for cognitive
behavioral therapy (CBT) as appropriate (LOE 5 I).
Clinical interpretation. CRF is very common among those
treated for cancer, especially those who undergo treatment
with RT and chemotherapy.86 For some, fatigue lasts long
after treatment and can significantly interfere with QoL.
Recommendations for how to screen and assess for fatigue
are provided online (see Supporting Information Table 1)
and come from the ASCO guideline.18 Treatable causes of
fatigue include anemia, thyroid dysfunction, OSA, and car-
diac dysfunction.18 For those who do not have an identifia-
ble physical cause of fatigue, contributing factors, such as
mood disorders, poor sleep hygiene, and pain, should be
addressed.18 Additional information related to distress/
depression can be found under Recommendation 3.22.
A regular exercise regimen can help reduce fatigue, help
patients feel better physically and emotionally, and help
them cope (see Recommendation 4.3).18,87 CBT may also
lessen fatigue.88,89 There are minimal data to support using
pharmacologic agents to manage fatigue in this population,
with larger RCTs indicating that neurostimulant medica-
tion does not significantly reduce fatigue.18 Exercise inter-
ventions should be tailored to the needs and abilities of the
individual HNC survivor. ASCO provides more detailed
information on the management of fatigue for cancer
survivors (instituteforquality.org/screening-assessment-and-
management-fatigue-adult-survivors-cancer-american-society-
clinical).18 The NCCN Guidelines for CRF can be found
at NCCN.org.90
Altered or loss of taste
Recommendation 3.10. It is recommended that primary
care clinicians should refer HNC survivors with altered or
loss of taste to a registered dietitian for dietary counseling
and assistance in additional seasoning of food, avoiding
unpleasant food, and expanding dietary options (LOE 5
IIA).
Clinical interpretation. Dysgeusia, or altered taste, is
among the most common and burdensome acute toxicities
of HN RT.91,92 Dysgeusia depends on dose and volume of
the irradiated tongue and is seen most often in patients
with oral or oropharyngeal cancer.93,94 Taste disturbance is
most pronounced around 2 months after the end of RT,
and partial recovery is expected over the course of years. No
pharmacological therapy is proven effective for dysgeusia in
HNC survivors. Collectively, level III evidence suggest sig-
nificant burden of taste disturbance early after HN RT
with negative effects on QoL and oral intake in survivor-
ship. Refer patients for dietary counseling for assistance
with food seasoning, selection, and expansion of food
choices in the setting of taste disturbance.
Hearing loss, vertigo, vestibular neuropathy
Recommendation 3.11. It is recommended that primary
care clinicians should refer HNC survivors to appropriate
specialists (ie, audiologists) for loss of hearing, vertigo, or
vestibular neuropathy related to treatment (LOE 5 IIA).
ACS HNC Survivorship Care Guideline
222
CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians
 Clinical interpretation. HNC survivors with a history of
ototoxic drug exposure (eg, cisplatin cumulative dose
>100 mg/m2) are at risk for chronic, potentially progres-
sive sensorineural hearing loss.95 Ototoxic agents first
affect the high-frequency range (frequencies above those
needed for speech processing). For this reason, hearing
loss may not be detected until it progresses to the lower
frequency range and interferes with routine communica-
tion. Hearing loss may also occur from local effects of sur-
gery or RT from persistent swelling of the Eustachian
tube. Treatment-related hearing loss can progress over
time. Late neurotoxic effects of both cytotoxic agents and
RT on the cochlear nerve, over and above normal age-
related hearing loss, are implicated as the source of pro-
gressive hearing loss years after initial treatment in long-
term HNC survivors.96 On the basis of level III studies, it
is recommended that HNC survivors with hearing loss be
referred to an audiologist.97 Proactive baseline and on-
treatment monitoring for ototoxicity is favored for early
recognition and management of hearing loss. Complete
audiologic examination includes tympanometry, pure tone
testing (air conduction and bone conduction), speech
reception threshold and word-recognition testing, and
distortion product otoacoustic emissions.98,99 Audiologic
intervention may include education to reduce noise expo-
sure or fitting of hearing aids.
Sleep disturbance/sleep apnea
Recommendation 3.12. It is recommended that primary
care clinicians: a) should screen HNC survivors for sleep
disturbance by asking HNC survivors and partners about
snoring and symptoms of sleep apnea (LOE 5 0);
b) should refer HNC survivors to a sleep specialist for a
sleep study (polysomnogram) if sleep apnea is suspected
(LOE 5 0); c) should manage sleep disturbance similar to
patients in the general population (LOE 5 0); d) should
recommend nasal decongestants, nasal strips, and sleeping
in the propped-up position to reduce snoring and mouth-
breathing. Room cool mist humidifiers can aid sleep as
well by keeping the airway moist (LOE 5 0); and
e) should refer to a dental professional to test the fit of
dentures to ensure proper fit and counsel HNC survivors
to remove dentures at night to avoid irritation (LOE 5 0).
Clinical interpretation. OSA appears to be common in
HNC patients.100 Primary radiation or chemotherapy can
create long-term swelling of the tongue and larynx in these
patients. Reconstructive techniques, especially flaps replac-
ing the posterior tongue, can compromise the airway even
after a tracheostomy is allowed to close. Radiation fibrosis
may also restrict neck ROM and affect positioning during
sleep. Recognition of any preexisting airway difficulties
should be assessed, as these patients will be especially at
risk.
The complications of OSA include hypoxia, hyperten-
sion, cardiac arrhythmias, and cardiopulmonary stress. It
can lead to myocardial infarction, pulmonary hypertension,
heart failure, and stroke. Sleep deprivation from the conse-
quences of apnea will create excessive fatigue, daytime
drowsiness, and cognitive difficulties. It may also slow reac-
tion time, potentially contributing to motor vehicle acci-
dents and falls. OSA can amplify recovery difficulties in
HNC survivors.
Interventions can include continuous positive airway pres-
sure (CPAP),100 referral to behavioral therapy, education,
weight-loss programs emphasizing diet and exercise, com-
plementary therapy (eg, aromatherapy, guided imagery), and
possible managed pharmacologic interventions.
Speech/voice
Recommendation 3.13. It is recommended that primary
care clinicians: a) should assess HNC survivors for speech
disturbance (LOE 5 0); and b) should refer HNC survi-
vors to an experienced speech-language pathologist if com-
munication disorder exists (LOE 5 IA, IIA).
Clinical interpretation. Speech, voice, and/or resonance
disturbance may alter understandability or acceptability of
verbal communication in HNC survivorship.101 New or
progressive hoarseness or dysarthria can indicate new cancer
and should be evaluated first by the HN surgeon. While
rare (prevalence, <5%), de novo, radiation-associated,
lower cranial neuropathies may cause delayed speech or
voice deterioration in long-term survivors (eg, typically cra-
nial nerve XII palsy causing dysarthria and cranial nerve X
causing dysphonia).102,103 Behavioral voice/speech thera-
pies and prosthetic rehabilitation options should be consid-
ered. On the basis of two level IA RCTs and various level
IIA studies, HNC survivors with communication disorders
should be referred to a speech-language pathologist for
assessment and management of speech, voice, and reso-
nance disturbance. Early assessment and intervention are
preferred.104,105 In certain clinical scenarios, prosthetic
rehabilitation is supported by numerous level IIA studies.
Tracheoesophageal voice using a valved voice prosthesis
optimizes QoL and intelligibility of speech after a total lar-
yngectomy.106 Tracheoesophageal prostheses are managed
by speech-language pathologists. Prosthetic obturators fab-
ricated by maxillofacial prosthodontists can improve speech
resonance in patients with palatal defects, and palatal drop
prostheses can improve articulation after subtotal or total
glossectomy.107 Prosthetic rehabilitation can be costly, and
outcomes are highly dependent on familiarity of the pro-
vider (level 0); thus, referring clinicians are encouraged to
seek expert teams for these specialty services.
CA CANCER J CLIN 2016;66:203–239
VOLUME 66 _ NUMBER 3 _ MAY/JUNE 2016
223
 Hypothyroidism
Recommendation 3.14. It is recommended that primary
care clinicians should evaluate HNC survivor thyroid func-
tion by measuring thyroid-stimulating hormone levels every
6 to 12 months (LOE 5 III).
Clinical interpretation. In patients whose treatment has
included RT of the neck, hypothyroidism is a significant
and frequent permanent sequela. Hypothyroidism can
occur as early as 4 weeks and as late as 10 years after treat-
ment with a median time to hypothyroidism of 1.8 years.108
After RT, the prevalence is 20% at 5 years and 27% to 59%
in 10 years (depending on the technique of RT).108-110
After surgery, the prevalence is 7% at 5 years and 39% at 10
years, which appears to be comparable to the general popu-
lation.110 RT to both sides of the neck increases the risk of
hypothyroidism as does the addition of surgery or when
surgery involves the thyroid.108 Lifelong thyroid hormone-
replacement therapy will need to be instituted in those
patients found to be hypothyroid.
Physical Effects: Oral Health
Oral and dental surveillance
Recommendation 3.15. It is recommended that primary
care clinicians: a) should counsel HNC survivors to main-
tain close follow-up with the dental professional and reiter-
ate that proper preventive care can help reduce caries and
gingival disease (LOE 5 IA); b) should counsel HNC sur-
vivors to avoid tobacco, alcohol (including mouthwash con-
taining
alcohol),
spicy
or
abrasive
foods,
extreme
temperature liquids, sugar-containing chewing gum or sug-
ary soft drinks, and acidic or citric liquids (LOE 5 0); and
c) should refer HNC survivors to a dental professional spe-
cializing in the care of oncology patients (LOE 5 0).
Clinical interpretation. Ongoing, diligent attention to oral
health is essential in HNC survivors previously treated with
RT. Many of the effects of RT to the HN may persist
throughout the survivor’s lifetime and present clinically
challenging situations that necessitate ongoing communica-
tion and collaboration between primary care clinicians and
dental professionals.111 Dental specialists who have suffi-
cient training and experience with HNC patients provide
optimal oral care for these patients.112 Ideally, the dental
specialist should be included from the time of diagnosis to
treat preexisting dental disease and to prevent and treat oral
and dental complications that arise during and after
treatment.
There are several factors that may influence the incidence
and severity of oral complications in HNC survivors. One of
the most controllable factors affecting oral health challenges
in cancer survivorship is dental and oral health status before
HNC treatment. Comorbid states that will potentially
increase the severity of oral side effects must be considered
and include poor nutritional status, diabetes, alcohol abuse,
tobacco use, and poor general health status. Patient instruc-
tions should include: a) brushing with a very soft tooth-
brush and using dental floss after each meal; b) daily
fluoride treatments using prescription 1.1% sodium fluoride
toothpaste as a dentifrice or in customized delivery trays;
c) timing and frequency of visual examinations, a check on
dental occlusion, dental cleanings by a dental hygienist,
dental x-rays, and inspection for recurrence and/or new oral
primary cancers.
The main issues to be evaluated during the assessment of
potential oral complications include dental caries, gingival
status, periodontal abnormalities, oral mucosa health, taste,
production of saliva, pain from mucositis, and ability to ini-
tiate swallowing. Long-term oral side effects from treat-
ment include neurosensory alteration, loss of saliva and
taste, and other functional changes.111 Oral and dental
infections are not uncommon, especially in patients receiv-
ing either radiation or chemotherapy and experiencing
long-term xerostomia as a result of therapy. Osteonecrosis
of the jaw is a rare but devastating side effect of treatment
and may lead to pain, increased infection risk, and trismus.
Pretreatment assessment of dental status and treatment of
preexisting dental and gingival disease can prevent osteo-
necrosis. In patients with pain syndrome related to
radiation-induced oral mucositis in cases of concomitant
chemotherapy, gabapentin has been shown to significantly
reduce oral pain.113
Caries
Recommendation 3.16. It is recommended that primary
care clinicians: a) should counsel HNC survivors to seek
regular professional dental care for routine examination and
cleaning and immediate attention for any intraoral changes
that may occur (LOE 5 0); b) should counsel HNC survi-
vors to minimize intake of sticky and/or sugar-containing
food and drink to minimize the risk of caries (LOE 5 0);
and c) should counsel HNC survivors on dental prophy-
laxis, including brushing with remineralizing toothpaste,
the use of dental floss, and fluoride use (prescription 1.1%
sodium fluoride toothpaste as a dentifrice or in customized
delivery trays; LOE 5 IA, 0).
Clinical interpretation. HNC survivors are at increased risk
of dental caries secondary to disruption of salivary flow and
composition as well as direct damage to dental structures
from
treatment
(eg,
chemotherapy-associated
vomit-
ing).111,114-116 Close monitoring of dental and oral health
should continue as long as salivary flow is reduced or sali-
vary composition is abnormal, as caries can progress rapidly
with these changes.112,117
ACS HNC Survivorship Care Guideline
224
CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians
 Periodontitis
Recommendation 3.17. It is recommended that primary
care clinicians: a) should refer HNC survivors to a general
dentist or periodontist for thorough evaluation (LOE 5 0);
and b) should counsel HNC survivors to seek regular treat-
ment from and follow recommendations of a qualified den-
tal professional and reinforce that proper examination of
the gingival attachment is a normal part of ongoing dental
care (LOE 5 0).
Clinical interpretation. Loss of gingival attachment within
the radiation field can lead to subsequent dental infections,
loss of teeth, and osteonecrosis, which can become a sys-
temic health issue.118 This condition can go unnoticed by
the patient, as it is not usually painful, and signs of
advancement cannot be readily detected upon visual exami-
nation of the oral cavity. Rapid deterioration of the sup-
porting structures of the teeth is sometimes seen after HN
RT and may lead to deep periodontal pockets, which can
subsequently lead to infection or tooth loss.119 This situa-
tion can increase the risk of osteoradionecrosis, a devastat-
ing complication with loss of the jawbone requiring
debridement, hyperbaric oxygen treatments, and eventually
reconstruction. Preextration and postextraction hyperbaric
oxygen treatments from a certified facility should be consid-
ered if a tooth extraction becomes necessary. Management
of advancing periodontal disease requires intervention and
ongoing management by a qualified dental professional.112
Xerostomia
Recommendation 3.18. It is recommended that primary
care clinicians: a) should encourage use of alcohol-free
rinses if an HNC survivor requires mouth rinses to
rehydrate the mucosa, neutralize pH, break-up mucus,
and prevent crusting of the oral mucosa (a simple rinse
can be made by adding one-half teaspoon of baking soda
and one-fourth teaspoon of salt to 1 quart of water; other
nonalcoholic
rinses,
such
as
aqueous
chlorhexidine
gluconate 0.12%, can be used according to the needs of
the patient; LOE 5 0); b) should counsel HNC survivors
to consume a low-sucrose diet and to avoid caffeine, spicy
and highly acidic foods, and tobacco (LOE 5 0); and
c) should encourage HNC survivors to avoid dehydration
by drinking fluoridated tap water, but explain that
consumption of water will not eliminate xerostomia
(LOE 5 0).
Clinical interpretation. One major issue affecting most
HNC survivors treated with RT is xerostomia120 because of
reduction in salivary flow.114 Most patients treated for naso-
pharyngeal, oral cavity, oropharyngeal, and hypopharyngeal
tumors will be at risk for xerostomia. While some salivary
gland tissue can be spared with newer techniques, dry
mouth complications should still be expected. The direct
effect of ionizing radiation on the salivary glands may be
transient or permanent115 and depends upon a variety of
factors, including location of the primary tumor; the total
amount of radiation received by the salivary glands; any
other oncology treatments (eg, chemotherapy); comorbid-
ities, such as autoimmune diseases; and those medical issues
controlled by xerostomia-inducing medications, such as
anticholinergics, antihypertensives, antihistamines, neurol-
ogy and nervous system drugs, and decongestants. Patients
who experience surgical ablation of the salivary glands or
associated ducts will most often present with a lifetime of
salivary hypofunction.111 In addition to its negative impact
on QoL, xerostomia can also have catastrophic effects on
the dental and oral health and, subsequently, on the
patient’s general health.
Saliva, in its appropriate composition, offers many nec-
essary protective benefits to dentition and oral homeosta-
sis.111 Salivary changes, whether resulting in dry mouth
or thick, ropey saliva, compromise these protective fea-
tures and can result in increased incidence of dental
caries, sensitivity of nondecayed teeth, attrition and ero-
sion of the dentition, mucosal injury, dysgeusia and hypo-
geusia, inability to wear dental prostheses, and increased
incidence of oral infection. Primary care clinicians should
not consider the presence of some saliva as resolution of
the dry mouth issue and should refer patients complain-
ing of thick or ropey saliva to a dental specialist trained to
manage such conditions.112 Patients with decreased sali-
vary flow are at risk for rapid development of dental
caries, many of which cannot be easily detected upon sim-
ple visual inspection of the oral cavity until the condition
is advanced.
Xerostomia can create great difficulty in wearing den-
tures or dental appliances. Xerostomia increases the likeli-
hood of mucosal injury from loss of proper dental occlusion
or even rough foods.
Because xerostomia-induced dental caries are among the
most common oral health issues observed in HNC survi-
vors, primary care clinicians should rely upon the skills of a
dental professional to procure and review dental radio-
graphs, to properly assess the presence or risk for such den-
tal caries to potentially avoid costly restorations, and to
assess the possibility of tooth loss and its associated risks in
this population.112 Late-stage dental caries can quickly
advance to a dental infection or abscess and become a sys-
temic health risk if not adequately and properly treated.
Dental pain may be a late symptom; therefore, patients
should be educated about subtle dental signs or symptoms,
such a strange taste or gum swelling.
Medications such as pilocarpine and cevimeline have
shown promise in improving oral hydration and salivary
flow in patients with xerostomia caused by graft-versus-host
CA CANCER J CLIN 2016;66:203–239
VOLUME 66 _ NUMBER 3 _ MAY/JUNE 2016
225
 disease and should be considered for use in HNC survivors.
More studies are needed.121,122
Osteonecrosis
Recommendation 3.19. It is recommended that primary
care clinicians: a) should monitor HNC survivors for swel-
ling of the jaw and/or jaw pain, indicating possible osteo-
necrosis (LOE 5 0); b) should administer conservative
treatment protocols, such as broad-spectrum antibiotics
and daily saline or aqueous chlorhexidine gluconate irriga-
tions for early stage lesions (LOE 5 0); and c) should refer
to an HN surgeon for consideration of hyperbaric oxygen
therapy for early and intermediate lesions, for debridement
of necrotic bone while undergoing conservative manage-
ment, or for external mandible bony exposure through the
skin (LOE 5 0).
Clinical interpretation. Osteonecrosis occurs usually from
dental complications, lack of proper dental care, and tooth
extraction. RT to the oral cavity and salivary glands
increases the risk of osteonecrosis. Osteonecrosis can
become a serious condition, and disease progression may
ultimately lead to pathologic mandible fracture. Early
osteonecrosis may manifest itself as small areas of intraoral
exposed mandible. Early management of the condition
with localized use of aqueous chlorhexidine gluconate
0.12% and systemic, broad-spectrum antibiotics, such as
amoxicillin or erythromycin; appropriate dental care by a
dentist; and localized smoothing of bone and conservative
removal of sequestra (fragments of necrotic bone) can pre-
vent disease progression.111
Oral infections/candidiasis
Recommendation 3.20. It is recommended that primary
care clinicians: a) should refer HNC survivors to a qualified
dental professional for treatment and management of com-
plicated oral conditions and infections (LOE 5 0); and
b) should consider systemic fluconazole and/or localized
therapy of clotrimazole troches to treat oral fungal infec-
tions (LOE 5 0).
Clinical interpretation. There are many aerobic, anaerobic,
and
facultative
anaerobic
Gram-positive
and
Gram-
negative bacteria that exist as part of the normal flora of the
oral cavity. With treatment-related mucositis and resultant
xerostomia, the normal bacterial flora of the mouth is dis-
turbed,116 resulting frequently in fungal overgrowth in the
oral and hypopharyngeal areas, which may cause aggrava-
tion or recurrence of mucositis during or after treatment
and present as a red or gray membrane that may easily bleed
and be painful. This mucositis may be aggravated by preex-
isting dental and gingival disease and may make eating and
swallowing very difficult. Although pain medicine will
likely be necessary, topical and/or systemic treatments that
may be necessary include antibacterial and antifungal medi-
cations or gabapentin.111,113 Primary care clinicians should
be aware that oral antibiotics for unrelated, systemic infec-
tions increase the likelihood of fungal overgrowth and
infection in the oral cavity.
There are instances when oral candidiasis presents in an
erythematous form that is almost invisible upon visual
inspection of the oral cavity. Patients with this form will
often complain of a burning or scalding sensation on the
tongue and the oral mucosa with little or no clinical mani-
festation visibly apparent. Similarly, patients presenting
with persistent angular cheilitis may be suffering from an
underlying, untreated fungal infection, which can be
resolved with proper antifungal therapy.
With an increasingly painful mouth, patients may
become reluctant to maintain proper dental hygiene. Light
use of a very soft, dry toothbrush and irrigation with rec-
ommended alcohol-free rinses may be of benefit until a
normal hygiene routine can resume. Dental consultation is
indicated if resolution does not occur.112 Treatment with
systemic fluconazole or topical therapy with clotrimazole
troches may be recommended. Commonly prescribed nys-
tatin is not the preferred treatment for these cases, because
the drug is administered in suspension with high sugar con-
tent. Regular administration of a high-sugar solution in a
xerostomic mouth is contraindicated because of the risk of
increased dental caries.
If a patient wears a denture or dental appliance, it must
be treated simultaneously with the mouth to avoid reinfec-
tion. Similarly, the patient should be instructed to change
the toothbrush and remove the very end of any lip balm
stick or lip cosmetics applicator.
Oral infections are not solely because of fungal species.
Although herpes simplex viruses 1 and 2 have not been
shown to reactivate specifically by oropharyngeal radia-
tion,123 if immunosuppressive agents are used, reactivation
may occur.111 Bacterial infections may be encountered
because of the high population of cariogenic and periodon-
tal bacterial pathogens that are normally present in the oral
cavity. Proper management of infections of any kind is
especially important in HNC survivors.
Psychosocial Effects
Psychosocial long-term and late effects in HNC survivors
require awareness and management from both the specialist
and the primary care clinician.
Health-related QoL concerns include altered eating,
speech, esthetics, social disruption, depressive symptoms,
and general health. In one study of HNC survivors, even
among the highest functioning group, social disruption was
reported at 80.8%, and depressive symptoms were reported
at 71.5%.124 Disruption of the control of daily life can lead
ACS HNC Survivorship Care Guideline
226
CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians
 to feelings of diminished self and subsequent negative psy-
chosocial impacts.125
Body and self-image
Recommendation 3.21. It is recommended that primary
care clinicians: a) should assess HNC survivors for body
and self-image concerns (LOE 5 IIA); and b) should refer
for psychosocial care as indicated (LOE 5 IA).
Clinical interpretation. HNC and its treatment may dra-
matically change body appearance and alter the HNC sur-
vivor’s perception of self. These concerns may decrease
QoL outcomes related to sexual function and intimacy and
social role disturbances, such as avoidance of social interac-
tion because of altered speech, inability to eat in public,
facial differences, and self-imposed embarrassment.124-126
Such concerns when blended with possible physical changes
may
also
contribute
to
employment
and
financial
challenges.124
Prevalence of body image concerns and diminished self-
perception among HNC survivors is high. Researchers126
studied body image in 280 HNC patients undergoing sur-
gical interventions and found that younger HNC patients
were at a higher risk for body image concerns. Approxi-
mately 75% of HNC patients surveyed felt “concerned or
embarrassed” by body changes after diagnosis. Fifty percent
had frequent thoughts about appearance changes, 38%
reported avoiding social activities, and 33% had behavioral
concerns regarding grooming. Importantly, 69% indicated
dissatisfaction with information provided by clinicians
related to body image.
A metaanalysis125 found that diminished sense of self
was associated with impairments in functions, alterations to
self-beliefs in one’s destiny, encounters of rejection and
injustice, and self-blame for the disease.125 HNC survivors
may need assistance with strategies to reestablish sense of
self, value, and purpose. Counseling, support, and therapies
should be considered for concerns over functional impair-
ments, such as eating, speaking, socializing, maintaining
and developing relationships, and employment.
Distress/depression/anxiety
Recommendation 3.22. It is recommended that primary
care clinicians: a) should assess HNC survivors for distress,
depression, and/or anxiety periodically (3 months posttreat-
ment and at least annually), ideally using a validated screen-
ing tool (see Table 720,127-130) (LOE 5 I); b) should offer
in-office counseling and/or pharmacotherapy and/or refer
to appropriate psychooncology and mental health resources
as clinically indicated if signs of distress, depression, or anx-
iety are present (LOE 5 I); and c) should refer HNC sur-
vivors to mental health specialists for specific QoL
concerns, such as to social workers for issues like financial
and employment challenges or to addiction specialists for
substance abuse (LOE 5 I).
Clinical
interpretation.
Many cancer survivors report
ongoing difficulties in recovery and returning to “normal”
after treatment.2,131,132 Some survivors of cancer experi-
ence fear of recurrence,133 which contributes to significant
mental health problems for which they already have an
increased risk, including distress, depression, and anxi-
ety.134,135 Prevalence estimates for anxiety, depression, and
distress in cancer survivors are widely variable—the result
of inconsistency in the use of measurement tools and dif-
ferences in methodological approaches, such as the choice
of comparators from the general population. However,
among cancer survivors in general, the estimated preva-
lence of anxiety and depression is 17.9% and 11.6%,
respectively.136
Evidence to support a higher level of distress in HNC
survivors is demonstrated in several studies. Distress for
HNC patients includes worry, anxiety, sadness, emotional
concerns,137 social disruption,124 fear of recurrence, and
posttraumatic distress disorder.138 One study139 reported
that HNC patients had a prevalence of 15% to 50% for
depressive disorders compared with 15% to 25% for cancer
patients in general. Investigators137 studied distress in 89
HNC patients and found that 75% reported emotional
concerns and over 50% acknowledged feelings of worry. In
a study140 of 774 HNC patients, the most commonly
reported reasons for distress were interpersonal relation-
ships, uncertainty, and interference in activities. HNC
patients also identified distress related to disease and treat-
ment, stigma, and existential stress with moderate fre-
quency. Fear of recurrence is also a concern among HNC
survivors, because the risk of recurrence and/or second pri-
maries for HNC survivors is high at 36%.141
To provide timely and appropriate support for patients
with a history of HNC, primary care clinicians should be
familiar with the mental health concerns they may experi-
ence, the tools to screen for and assess these problems, and
the resources to care for patients (see Table 7: Validated
Tools to Assess for Distress/Depression/Anxiety). A recent
ASCO guideline adaptation comprehensively describes
screening, assessment, and management of anxiety and
depressive symptoms in adults with cancer.17
ASCO has algorithms for both depression and anxiety
with scoring and patient print material on both (institute-
forquality.org/screening-assessment-and-care-anxiety-and-
depressive-symptoms-adults-cancer-american-society). The
NCCN Guidelines for Distress Management20 provide an
algorithm for distress and depressive orders (nccn.org). The
NCI also publishes a PDQ Guideline for care of depression
(cancer.gov/about-cancer/coping/feelings/depression-pdq).
The American Psychosocial Oncology Society Web site
CA CANCER J CLIN 2016;66:203–239
VOLUME 66 _ NUMBER 3 _ MAY/JUNE 2016
227
 (apos-society.org/) can help primary care clinicians identify
resources for patients.142
Health Promotion
See Table 8: Guideline for Health Promotion.
Information
Recommendation 4.1. It is recommended that primary care
clinicians: a) should assess the information needs of the HNC
survivor related to HNC and its treatment, side effects, other
health concerns, and available support services (LOE 5 0);
and b) should provide or refer HNC survivors to appropriate
resources to meet identified needs (LOE 5 0).
Clinical interpretation. The information needs of HNC
survivors and caregivers should be routinely assessed, and
information about the long-term and late effects of HNC
treatment, as well as information on health risk reduction
and health promotion, should be provided. Resources
that may be beneficial to share with patients include
the ACS Survivorship Center Web site (cancer.org/survi-
vorshipcenter), the ACS Web site (cancer.org), Journey
Forward (journeyforward.org), the ASCO survivor and
caregiver
site
(cancer.net),
and
the
NCCN
patient
and caregiver resources (nccn.org/patients/default.aspx).
Community-based organizations and patient advocacy
groups often have helpful cancer survivorship information
and resources for your local community. Survivorship Care
Plans (see Recommendation 5.1) should also provide
patients with information regarding long-term follow-up,
potential late effects, and access to providers.
Healthy weight
Recommendation 4.2. It is recommended that primary
care clinicians: a) should counsel HNC survivors to achieve
and maintain a healthy weight (LOE 5 III); b) should
counsel HNC survivors on nutrition strategies to maintain
a healthy weight for those at risk for cachexia (LOE 5 0);
and c) should counsel HNC survivors if overweight or
obese to limit consumption of high-calorie foods and bev-
erages and increase physical activity to promote and main-
tain weight loss (LOE 5 IA).
Clinical interpretation. The ACS Nutrition and Physical
Activity Guidelines for Cancer Survivors87 are a resource
for all cancer survivors, and the guidelines include recom-
mendations to address the unique needs of HNC survivors.
HNC survivors often experience significant, highly visible
facial disfigurement and notable treatment-induced prob-
lems with eating, swallowing, breathing, and speech. HNC
survivors may also experience loss of taste and smell, exces-
sive dry mouth, and other deficits of functioning in the oral
cavity. These effects of treatment can be debilitating for
patients, as they may negatively impact appearance, com-
munication, and ability to eat. As a result, HNC survivors
may have difficulty gaining and maintaining a healthy
weight. Avoiding wasting should be a primary aim of
health promotion with these patients.
Primary care clinicians should intervene early to address
eating issues, swallowing problems, and pain management
to help HNC survivors maintain a healthy weight.
TABLE 7.
Validated Tools for Assessment of Distress/Depression/Anxiety
TOOL
INTENDED USE
HOW IT WORKS
Beck Stress Inventory (BSI)
Screen for anxiety
Patient grades 21 items on a scale from 0 (not
problematic) to 3 (problematic)
Center for Epidemiological Studies Depression
Scale (CES-D)127-129; cesd-r.com
Screen for depression
Patient self-reports scores from 0 to 3 concerning
emotions and feelings over the past week; score
of 16 or higher suggests clinical depression
Generalized Anxiety Disorder (GAD)-
7;phqscreeners.com/
Screen for anxiety
Patient self-reports scores from 0 to 3 for 7 items
for total score ranging from 0 to 21; score of 15
or above indicates severe anxiety
Hospital Anxiety Depression Scale (HADS)130
Screen for depression and anxiety
Patients self-report scores from 0 to 3 for 14 items
with a final score between 0 and 21; score of 9
or higher suggests clinical significance
NCCN Distress Thermometer20; nccn.org
Screen for distress
Patient rates distress on a score from 0 (no dis-
tress) to 10 (extreme distress); score of 4 or higher
is clinically significant
Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ)-9;
phqscreeners.com/
Screen for depression
Patient self-report scores from 0 to 3 over 9 items
for a total score ranging from 0 to 27; score of 20
or above indicates severe depression
NCCN indicates National Comprehensive Cancer Network.
ACS HNC Survivorship Care Guideline
228
CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians
 Physical activity
Recommendation 4.3. It is recommended that primary
care clinicians should counsel HNC survivors to engage in
regular physical activity consistent with the ACS guideline,
and specifically: a) should avoid inactivity and return to
normal daily activities as soon as possible after diagnosis
(LOE 5 III); b) should aim for at least 150 minutes of
moderate or 75 minutes of vigorous aerobic exercise per
week (LOE 5 I, IA); and c) should include strength train-
ing exercises at least 2 days per week (LOE 5 IA).
TABLE 8.
Guideline for Health Promotion
RECOMMENDATION
LEVEL OF EVIDENCEa
It is recommended that primary care clinicians:
4.1. Information
0
a) Should assess the information needs of the HNC survivor related to
HNC and its treatment, side effects, other health concerns, and available
support services
b) Should provide or refer HNC survivors to appropriate resources to
meet identified needs
4.2 Healthy weight
III (healthy weight), 0 (cachexia), IA (weight loss)
a) Should counsel survivors to achieve and maintain a healthy weight
b) Should counsel HNC survivors on nutrition strategies to maintain a
healthy weight for those at risk for cachexia
c) Should counsel HNC survivors if overweight or obese to limit consump-
tion of high-calorie foods and beverages and increase physical activity to
promote and maintain weight loss
4.3. Physical activity
III (avoid inactivity), I, IA (aerobic exercise), IA (strength training)
Should counsel HNC survivors to engage in regular physical activity con-
sistent with the ACS guideline, and specifically:
a) Should avoid inactivity and return to normal daily activities as soon
as possible after diagnosis
b) Should aim for at least 150 min of moderate or 75 min of vigorous
aerobic exercise per week
c) Should include strength training exercises at least 2 d/wk
4.4. Nutrition
IA, III (dietary pattern), 0 (referral)
a) Should counsel HNC survivors to achieve a dietary pattern that is high
in vegetables, fruits, and whole grains, and low in saturated fats, suffi-
cient in dietary fiber and avoids alcohol consumption
b) Should refer HNC survivors with nutrition-related challenges (eg, swal-
lowing problems that impact nutrient intake) to a registered dietician or
other specialist
4.5. Tobacco cessation
I
Should counsel HNC survivors to avoid tobacco products and offer or
refer patients to cessation counseling and resources
4.6. Personal oral health
0
a) Should counsel HNC survivors to maintain regular dental care, includ-
ing frequent visits to dental professionals, early interventions for dental
complications, and meticulous oral hygiene
b) Should test fit dentures to ensure proper fit and counsel HNC survivors
to remove them at night to avoid irritation
c) Should counsel HNC survivors that nasal strips can reduce snoring and
mouth-breathing and that room humidifiers and nasal saline sprays can
aid sleep as well
d) Should train HNC survivors to do at-home HN self-evaluations and be
instructed to report any suspicions or concerns immediately
ACS indicates American Cancer Society; HN, head and neck; HNC, head and neck cancer. aLevel of evidence: I, meta-analyses of randomized controlled trials
(RCTs); IA, RCT of HNC survivors; IB, RCT based on cancer survivors across multiple sites; IC, RCT based not on cancer survivors but on the general population
experiencing a specific long-term or late effect (eg, managing fatigue, etc); IIA, non-RCT based on HNC survivors; IIB, non-RCT based on cancer survivors
across multiple sites; IIC, non-RCT not based on cancer survivors but on the general population experiencing a specific long-term or late effect (eg, managing
fatigue, etc); III, case-control or prospective cohort study; 0, expert opinion, observation, clinical practice, literature review, or pilot study.
CA CANCER J CLIN 2016;66:203–239
VOLUME 66 _ NUMBER 3 _ MAY/JUNE 2016
229
 Clinical interpretation. Few HNC survivors participate in
moderate or vigorous exercise, and more than 50% are sed-
entary.143 HNC survivors should be advised to avoid inac-
tivity and return to normal daily activities as soon as
possible after diagnosis and continue to engage in regular
physical activity.87,144 HNC survivors should strive to exer-
cise at least 150 minutes moderately or 75 minutes vigo-
rously per week and include strength training exercises at
least 2 days per week, as is recommended for the general
population by the ACS.87 Preliminary evidence from an
RCT with 48 HNC survivors suggests that an individually
tailored, supervised exercise program may improve func-
tional capacity and QoL of HNC survivors undergoing
chemoradiotherapy.145
Few studies have focused specifically on strategies to help
HNC survivors meet recommended physical activity guide-
lines. HNC introduces unique and debilitating problems
that may inhibit a survivor’s ability to meet recommended
levels of exercise. Researchers146 conducted an RCT in
which HNC survivors were assigned to either a 12-week
progressive resistance exercise training program or a stand-
ardized therapeutic exercise program meant to address
shoulder pain and dysfunction. The results indicated gener-
ally good adherence to the resistance program (91%),
although the authors acknowledge that the generalizability
of study findings to community-based settings is limited.
Survivors who received more extensive neck dissection pro-
cedures and those who consumed alcohol daily were less
likely to adhere to the exercise training program. Higher
adherence was associated with nerve-sparing neck dissec-
tion and avoidance or limitation of alcohol intake.
Other studies have also found that higher levels of alcohol
consumption interfere with adherence to self-care behaviors
in noncancer populations.147 The authors recommend that
tailored interventions to increase exercise should address
alcohol use and other unhealthy behaviors (eg, smoking).
Primary care clinicians are also encouraged to note the
degree of neck dissection treatment patients have received,
recognizing that there may be added problems with adher-
ence among those who underwent RND compared with
those who underwent MRND or SND. Attention should be
paid to anxiety, depression, and overall QoL, which also
emerged as significant predictors of poorer exercise adher-
ence. In lieu of an acceptable level of HNC-specific studies,
primary care clinicians are encouraged to rely upon research
with survivors of other cancers when counseling patients
with HNC about physical activity. In general, it should be
noted that any exercise is better than no exercise, and there
are not necessarily specific exercises this population should
perform. If specific impairments are identified (shoulder dys-
function, cervical radiculopathy, etc), referral to a rehabilita-
tion specialist may be warranted.
Nutrition
Recommendation 4.4. It is recommended that primary
care clinicians: a) should counsel HNC survivors to
achieve a dietary pattern that is high in vegetables, fruits,
and whole grains and low in saturated fats, sufficient in
dietary fiber, and avoids alcohol consumption (LOE 5 IA,
III); and b) should refer HNC survivors with nutrition-
related challenges (eg, swallowing problems that impact
nutrient intake) to a registered dietician or other specialist
(LOE 5 0).
Clinical interpretation. Dietary counseling should take into
account common functional problems that impact eating in
HNC survivorship (eg, dry mouth, dysphagia, taste dis-
turbance). Patients with dysphagia have particular difficulty
consuming vegetables and whole grains and more easily eat
high-calorie foods. Patients with nutrition-related chal-
lenges, such as dry mouth, taste disturbance, or swallowing
problems that impact nutrient intake, should be referred to
a registered dietitian for assessment and personalized die-
tary counseling. Primary care clinicians should be aware
that trouble with eating can result from multiple sources
and lead to social isolation, depression, and other negative
health consequences. Some of these sources include: dys-
phagia, stricture, dental extractions, trismus, xerostomia,
taste disturbance, or psychological issues. Refer HNC sur-
vivors to specialists and resources according to the source of
eating problems. According to most sources, about 75% of
all HNCs are related to tobacco and alcohol use.6 Thus, in
addition to encouraging healthful eating, it is particularly
important to emphasize avoiding tobacco (see Recommen-
dation 4.5) and alcohol. One study148 found that drinking
more than three drinks a day was associated with an
increased risk of HNC for both men and women. However,
there is a need for more research to better understand the
association between alcohol consumption and HNC risk.
Specifically, many studies have small sample sizes, so they
have collapsed HNC into a single, broad category and have
not adjusted for tobacco use among study participants.
Alcohol was originally established as a cause of upper diges-
tive tract cancers (oral cavity, pharynx, larynx, and esopha-
gus) in 1988,149 and this was reaffirmed in a 2010
review.150 The review noted that daily consumption of
about 50 g of ethanol per day (a little more than three
drinks) increases the risk for these cancers 2-fold to 3-fold
compared with nondrinkers. Moreover, there seem to be
synergistic effects of alcohol drinking and smoking on risk.
This evidence is relevant to HNC survivors because of their
substantial risk of developing a second primary HNC.25
Despite substantial evidence that alcohol increases risk of
these cancers, consumption of up to one drink per day for
women and two drinks per day for men might lower the
risk of heart disease. For cancer survivors, clinicians must
ACS HNC Survivorship Care Guideline
230
CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians
 carefully consider several clinical and prognostic factors
when advising survivors about alcohol consumption. For
HNC survivors, avoiding consumption during treatment,
particularly RT, is important, because it can lead to mucosi-
tis. Moreover, there is some evidence that HNC patients
who continue alcohol consumption (and smoking) after
diagnosis have lower survival rates than those who stop
drinking.151
Tobacco cessation
Recommendation 4.5. It is recommended that primary
care clinicians should counsel HNC survivors to avoid
tobacco products and offer or refer patients to cessation
counseling and resources (LOE 5 I).
Clinical interpretation. A recent study152 suggests that
approximately 48% of oral cavity and pharynx cancer deaths
are attributable to smoking.4 Although a large proportion
of HNC patients will attempt to quit smoking before or
during treatment,153 14% to 60% will relapse.154-157 Con-
tinued smoking is associated with several negative out-
comes, including increased risk of other smoking-related
illnesses (eg, coronary artery disease) as well as higher rates
of SPCs and recurrence of the original primary can-
cer.158-160 In addition, smoking reduces treatment effi-
cacy161,162; worsens treatment side effects163-166; and,
ultimately, negatively impacts QoL, morbidity, and mortal-
ity.158,167 Due to the numerous medical and psychosocial
advantages of smoking cessation, primary care clinicians
should strongly encourage and support patients to quit or
maintain abstinence.
One study168 found that, after controlling for several
demographic and psychosocial variables, depression was a
significant predictor of continued smoking among HNC
survivors, surpassing lower levels of QoL and social sup-
port. In fact, among cancer survivors who continued to
smoke, the prevalence of depression was much higher at
63.8% compared with only 26.7% among those who quit
smoking after cancer diagnosis. Other research supports
this finding—depressed smokers are 40% less likely to quit
than smokers who are not depressed. Continued postsur-
gery abstinence has been associated with lower levels of
depression among HNC survivors.169 Collectively, these
results suggest that primary care clinicians should pay keen
attention to depressive symptoms in HNC survivors who
are attempting to maintain abstinence from smoking. Pri-
mary care clinicians are encouraged to emphasize the nega-
tive consequences of smoking on medical and psychosocial
outcomes when counseling patients.168
Timing of cessation appears to be critically important—
in one study,170 only 13% of the patients who were absti-
nent before surgery relapsed, whereas there was a 60%
relapse rate among those patients who reported smoking in
the week before cancer surgery. In addition, there were dif-
ferent predictors of relapse for these two groups. Among
those who quit smoking before surgery, higher perceived
difficulty and lower cancer-related risk perceptions pre-
dicted smoking relapse. For those who smoked before sur-
gery, the biggest predictors were lower quitting self-
efficacy, higher depression, and greater fears of cancer
recurrence. Thus, primary care clinicians should encourage
early cessation at diagnosis, address potential barriers to
maintain abstinence (eg, quitting self-efficacy), and con-
tinue to provide support to promote long-term success of
cessation efforts.
The majority of these recommendations for primary care
clinicians are consistent across all forms of HNC. However,
it should be noted that there are important differences
between survivors of HPV-related and non-HPV–related
HNC. Overall prognosis is worse among current or former
smokers with HPV-related cancers, and they may be at
increased risk for recurrence compared with HPV-related
survivors who never smoked; therefore, encouraging survi-
vors of HPV-related cancers to quit using tobacco products
supports survival outcomes. HNC survivors should avoid
the use of any tobacco products. Primary care clinicians
should identify HNC survivors who use tobacco products
and educate and counsel patients to quit through cessation
programs, brochures and pamphlets, counseling, pharmaco-
therapy, and regular follow-up.171
Personal oral health
Recommendation 4.6. It is recommended that primary
care clinicians: a) should counsel HNC survivors to main-
tain regular dental care, including frequent visits to dental
professionals, early interventions for dental complications,
and meticulous oral hygiene (LOE 5 0); b) should test fit
dentures to ensure proper fit and counsel HNC survivors to
remove them at night to avoid irritation (LOE 5 0);
c) should counsel HNC survivors that nasal strips can
reduce snoring and mouth breathing and that room
humidifiers and nasal saline sprays can aid sleep as well
(LOE 5 0); and d) should train HNC survivors to do at-
home HN self-evaluations and instruct patients to report
any suspicions or concerns immediately (LOE 5 0).
Clinical interpretation. Much has been said previously in
this article about the importance of oral health in HNC
survivors (see Physical Effects: Oral Health, above). It
should be noted that the primary care clinician should
emphasize the importance of meticulous dental hygiene
practices at home in addition to regularly scheduled dental
visits,111,112 as the patient is the one on the front line of
dental and oral health. Patients should not discontinue the
use of prescription fluoride until instructed to do so by the
dental professional. Patients are often lulled into a false
CA CANCER J CLIN 2016;66:203–239
VOLUME 66 _ NUMBER 3 _ MAY/JUNE 2016
231
 sense of security that, once any moisture reappears in
the mouth after treatment, everything is fine. This is
most often not the case, as the first saliva to return after
HN RT is not protective to the teeth or the oral
mucosa.
If the patient is edentulous or partially edentulous and
wears removable appliances such as a denture or partial
denture, it is important that proper fit be evaluated on a
regular basis.111 Many HNC survivors with edentulous
areas will experience a remodeling of the supportive ridge
for the appliance, causing the denture to become loose and
ill-fitting, and will rub the gums, tongue, or oral mucosa to
the point of ulceration. Dentures or partials still in good
repair may be relined by the dental professional to improve
fit. The patient should be encouraged to take the appliances
out overnight to give the oral tissues a rest and prevent noc-
turnal bruxing (grinding and clenching of teeth) if the den-
tures are ill-fitting. The dentures should be kept moist
while out of the patient’s mouth.
Mouth breathing can exacerbate xerostomia, recurrent
oral mucositis, and oral infections, not to mention causing
desiccation of the teeth and rapid advancement of dental
caries.111 Dentulous patients who mouth breathe will
notice a more rapid formation of dental plaque and calcu-
lus. Efforts should be made to facilitate nasal respiration.
Patients using a CPAP or other similar device to treat sleep
apnea should be aware that vigilant attention to dental and
oral health is of the utmost importance to avoid caries lead-
ing to abscesses that could develop into risks of osteoradio-
necrosis. Also, careful cleaning of the CPAP device is
important to avoid contaminating the airway.
Care Coordination and Practice Implications
See Table 9: Guideline for Care Coordination and Practice
Implications.
There are no clear guidelines for the shared care and co-
management of patients with HNC after the completion of
active treatment. The time for optimal transition from
oncology to primary care is unknown and should be based
on the individual risk profile, the treating clinician’s exper-
tise, and resource constraints. HNC survivors may continue
to see the oncology team for follow-up disease surveillance;
however, they should also be seen by the primary care clini-
cian for health maintenance and management of comorbid-
ities that may or may not be related to cancer diagnosis and
treatment.172,173
Survivorship care plan
Recommendation 5.1. It is recommended that primary
care clinicians should consult with the oncology team and
obtain a treatment summary and survivorship care plan
(SCP) (LOE 5 0, III).
Clinical interpretation. SCPs are recommended as an
important tool to facilitate communication and allocation
of responsibility during the transition from active treatment
to survivorship care.12,174 A summary of a patient’s diagno-
sis and treatment received should be provided by the oncol-
ogy team when a patient with HNC transitions care to
other providers. A treatment summary should describe the
type and stage/side of the cancer, the type of surgery, the
name of the chemotherapy/hormones/biologics and cumu-
lative doses of chemotherapy, and the types and cumulative
TABLE 9.
Guideline for Care Coordination and Practice Implications
RECOMMENDATION
LEVEL OF EVIDENCEa
It is recommended that primary care clinicians:
5.1. Survivorship care plan
0, III
Should consult with the oncology team and obtain a treatment summary and SCP
5.2. Communication with other providers
0
a) Should maintain communication with the oncology team throughout
diagnosis, treatment, and posttreatment care to ensure care is evidence-based and well coordinated
b) Should refer HNC survivors to a dentist to provide diagnosis and treatment of dental caries, peri-
odontal disease, and other intraoral conditions, including mucositis and oral infections, and communi-
cate with the dentist on follow-up recommendations and patient education
c) Should maintain communication with specialists referred to for management of comorbidities, symp-
toms, and long-term and late effects
5.3. Inclusion of caregivers
0
Should encourage the inclusion of caregivers, spouses, or partners in usual HNC survivorship care and
support
HNC indicates head and neck cancer; SCP, survivorship care plan. aLevel of evidence: I, meta-analyses of randomized controlled trials (RCTs); IA, RCT of HNC
survivors; IB, RCT based on cancer survivors across multiple sites; IC, RCT based not on cancer survivors but on the general population experiencing a specific
long-term or late effect (eg, managing fatigue, etc); IIA, non-RCT based on HNC survivors; IIB, non-RCT based on cancer survivors across multiple sites; IIC,
non-RCT not based on cancer survivors but on the general population experiencing a specific long-term or late effect (eg, managing fatigue, etc); III, case-
control or prospective cohort study; 0, expert opinion, observation, clinical practice, literature review, or pilot study.
ACS HNC Survivorship Care Guideline
232
CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians
 doses of RT, including the fields and extent of the
radiation.12,175
Ideally, the oncology and primary care teams should
work together with the patient to develop an individualized
cancer SCP that provides recommendations for the type
and timing of follow-up scans, laboratory tests, and office
visits. The care plan should include information on the risk
for late effects of treatment and what to watch for specifi-
cally based on the type of cancer and treatment received.
Patients should be assessed for the presence of these physi-
cal and psychosocial effects and be referred to the appropri-
ate
providers
and
services
as
indicated
in
the
recommendations detailed above. For various SCP tem-
plates, visit cancer.org/survivorshipcareplans.
Communication with other providers
Recommendation 5.2. It is recommended that primary
care clinicians: a) should maintain communication with the
oncology team throughout diagnosis, treatment, and post-
treatment care to ensure that care is evidence-based and
well coordinated (LOE 5 0); b) should refer HNC survi-
vors to a dentist to provide diagnosis and treatment of den-
tal
caries,
periodontal
disease,
and
other
intraoral
conditions, including mucositis and oral infections, and
communicate with the dentist on follow-up recommenda-
tions and patient education (LOE 5 0); and c) should
maintain communication with specialists referred to for
management of comorbidities, symptoms, and long-term
and late effects (LOE 5 0).
Clinical interpretation. Communication and cooperation
among providers and HNC survivors is critical, with the
oncology team providing concrete recommendations for
care when needed or requested by other providers.172 Clear
communication regarding the respective roles of different
members of the health care team is critical to a successful
transition to survivorship care.
The primary care clinician should serve as a general med-
ical care coordinator throughout the spectrum of cancer
detection and aftercare, focusing on evidence-based preven-
tive care and the management of preexisting comorbid con-
ditions; regularly addressing the patient’s overall physical
and psychosocial status; making appropriate referrals for
psychosocial, rehabilitative, or other specialist care as
needed; and coordinating those components of survivorship
care that are agreed upon with the treating clinicians.
Treatment of HNC is complex; therefore, decisions about
and coordination of cancer treatment should be left to the
oncology team.
Inclusion of caregivers
Recommendation 5.3. It is recommended that primary
care clinicians should encourage the inclusion of caregivers,
spouses, or partners in usual HNC survivorship care and
support (LOE 5 0).
Clinical interpretation. Caregivers have to cope with the
physical aftermath of the survivors’ treatment and help
manage long-term and late effects, in addition to the care-
giver’s own psychosocial and physical unmet needs.176 Suc-
cessful
coordination
of
care
involves
not
only
a
comprehensive care team, including primary care clinicians,
but also the informal caregivers (usually the spouse/partner/
family member) who provide ongoing care to cancer survi-
vors in the home.177 Furthermore, most caregivers are older
adults who are also managing health problems. When pos-
sible, primary care clinicians should include caregivers of
HNC survivors in all follow-up care appointments to opti-
mize survivor wellness.
Limitations
A significant limitation of this guideline is the limited evi-
dence base to provide clear and specific recommendations
for the prevention and management of long-term and late
effects of cancer survivors. There are few prospective RCTs
testing interventions among HNC survivors. The majority
of the citations characterizing the risk and magnitude of
risk of late effects and management recommendations rely
predominantly on case-control studies with fewer than 500
participants and reviews that combine studies with various
outcome measures. There were several cohort studies that
used population-based data to estimate the risk of late
effects.
Another limitation is the reliance on previous guidelines
for surveillance and symptom management. In addition,
the literature review was not managed by a clinical epi-
demiologist because of limited resources and, instead, was
conducted by project staff and an ACS librarian. Further-
more, the guidelines did not result directly from the devel-
opment of specific clinical questions asked before the
literature review, and guidelines included in the literature
review were not evaluated through an instrument such as
the Rigor of Development subscale of the Appraisal for
Guidelines for Research and Evaluation (AGREE II)
Instrument. Recommendations are based on current evi-
dence in the literature, but most evidence is not sufficient
to warrant a strong recommendation. Rather, recommen-
dations should be largely seen as possible management
strategies given the current limited evidence base.
Although the ACS clinical practice guidelines represent
expert recommendations on the best practices in disease
management to provide the highest level of cancer care, it is
important to note that many patients have limited access to
medical care.178 Racial and ethnic disparities in health care
contribute significantly to this problem in the United States.
CA CANCER J CLIN 2016;66:203–239
VOLUME 66 _ NUMBER 3 _ MAY/JUNE 2016
233
 Patients with cancer who are members of racial/ethnic
minorities suffer disproportionately from comorbidities,
experience more substantial obstacles to receiving care,
are more likely to be uninsured, and are at greater risk
of
receiving
poor-quality
care
than
other
Ameri-
cans.179-182 Many other patients lack access to care
because of their geographic location and distance from
appropriate treatment facilities.183 Awareness of these
disparities in access to care should be considered in the
context of this clinical practice guideline, and health care
providers should strive to deliver the highest level of
cancer care to these vulnerable populations. The ACS
believes cancer clinical trials are vital to inform medical
decisions
and improve cancer care,
and
all patients
should have the opportunity to participate. Clinicians
should be aware of trials for interventions other than
cancer-directed treatments, and it is important to con-
sider trials of interventions for palliative and supportive
care, surveillance methods, etc, when available.
A complicating factor of creating evidence-based recom-
mendations is the frequent presence in patients of two or
more chronic conditions—referred to as multiple chronic
conditions (MCCs).184 Patients with MCCs are a complex
and heterogeneous population, making it difficult to account
for all of the possible permutations to develop specific rec-
ommendations for care. The best available evidence for treat-
ing index conditions like cancer is often from clinical trials in
which study selection criteria may exclude patients with
MCCs to avoid potential interaction effects or confounding
of results. Consequently, the reliability of outcome data from
these studies may be limited, thereby creating constraints for
expert groups to make recommendations for care in this het-
erogeneous patient population. Because many patients for
whom
guideline
recommendations
apply
present
with
MCCs, any treatment plan needs to take into account the
complexity and uncertainty created by the presence of
MCCs and should highlight the importance of shared deci-
sion making regarding guideline use and implementation.
Therefore, in consideration of recommended care for the tar-
get index condition, clinicians should review all other
chronic conditions present in the patient and take those con-
ditions into account when formulating the treatment and
follow-up plan. This may mean that some or all of the rec-
ommended care options are modified or not applied.
External Review
After finalization by the workgroup, the guideline was sent
to additional internal experts and external experts for review
and comment before submission for publication. Com-
ments were reviewed by the expert panel and integrated
into the final article before approval by the Clinical Practice
Guideline Committee.
Guideline Implementation
ACS guidelines are developed for implementation across
health settings. Barriers to implementation include the
need to increase awareness of the guideline recommenda-
tions among front-line practitioners and survivors of cancer
and caregivers and also to provide adequate services in the
face of limited resources. This guideline will be distributed
widely through the ACS health systems network. The
ACS guidelines are posted on the ACS Web site at cancer.
org/professionals.
Summary
HNC survivors face potentially significant effects from can-
cer and its treatment and deserve high-quality, comprehen-
sive, coordinated clinical follow-up care. Primary care
clinicians should consider each patient’s individual risk pro-
file and preferences of care to address physical and psychoso-
cial effects. Patients should be provided support and referral
to specialty providers to address physical, psychosocial, and
practical effects after treatment. HNC survivors also need to
be counseled on health promotion strategies to minimize
and mitigate long-term and late effects and comorbid health
conditions, to potentially increase survival.
To clarify the roles of all clinicians working with cancer
survivors, we concur with the Institute of Medicine that
cancer survivors and primary care clinicians should receive a
survivorship care plan that includes a concise summary of
treatment as well as a clinical follow-up care plan. Ideally,
this plan would be constructed in partnership with the sur-
vivor to identify and prioritize goals for survivorship care
and would be communicated to the patient to ensure their
understanding of individual risks; recommended tests, pro-
cedures, and supportive-care strategies; and how to opti-
mize wellness. Survivorship care should be coordinated
with treating cancer specialists.
More Resources
In addition to this guideline, tools and resources are avail-
able to assist primary care clinicians in implementing these
recommendations. CA offers a Patient Page (onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/enhanced/doi/10.3322/caac.21344/)
to
help
patients understand how to use this guideline to talk to
the primary care clinician about surveillance and screening,
symptom management, healthy behaviors, and care coor-
dination. CA also offers free continuing medical education
and free continuing nursing education for this article at
acsjournals.com/ce as an additional resource for physicians
and nurses. The Survivorship Center also offers The
George Washington University Cancer Institute’s Cancer
Survivorship E-Learning Series for Primary Care Pro-
viders (The E-Learning Series), a free, innovative, online,
ACS HNC Survivorship Care Guideline
234
CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians
 continuing-education program to educate primary care
clinicians about how to better understand and care for sur-
vivors in the primary care setting. Continuing education
credits are available at no cost to physicians, nurse practi-
tioners, nurses, and physician assistants for each 1-hour
module. Learn more about The E-Learning Series at can-
cersurvivorshipcentereducation.org. For these resources
and more to support guideline implementation, visit can-
cer.org/professionals.
Acknowledgements
In addition to the authors of the article, many thanks to the
members of the Head and Neck Cancer Survivorship Care
Expert Workgroup for their contribution to the develop-
ment of the Head and Neck Cancer Survivorship Care
Guideline: Joseph Califano, MD (Department of Otolar-
yngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Johns Hopkins Hospi-
tal, Baltimore, MD); Alan J. Christensen, PhD (Professor
and Chair, Department of Psychology; and Professor,
Department of Internal Medicine, University of Iowa
Health Care, Iowa City, IA); Neal Futran, MD, DMD
(Professor and Chair; and Director of Head and Neck Sur-
gery, Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Sur-
gery, University of Washington, Seattle, WA); Gerry F.
Funk, MD (Otolaryngologist, University of Iowa, Iowa
City, IA); Ann M. Gillenwater, MD (Professor, Depart-
ment of Head and Neck Surgery, The University of Texas
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX); Bonnie S.
Glisson, MD (Professor of Medicine; and Internist, Tho-
racic/Head and Neck Medical Oncology, The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX);
Hilary I. Gomolin, MD (Medical Oncologist, Center for
Hematology/Oncology, Boca Raton, FL); Lucy Hynds
Karnell, PhD (Associate Research Scientist, Department of
Otolaryngology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA);
Wayne Koch, MD (Professor of Otolaryngology; and
Director, Head and Neck Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins
Hospital, Baltimore, MD); Jeffrey S. Moyer, MD, FACS
(Assistant Professor and Division Chief of Facial Plastic
and Reconstructive Surgery, Department of Otolaryngol-
ogy, University of Michigan Medical Center, Center for
Facial Cosmetic Surgery, Livonia, MI); Barbara A. Mur-
phy, MD (Medical Oncologist; Professor of Medicine;
Director, Cancer Supportive Care Program; and Director,
Head and Neck Research Program, Vanderbilt University,
Vanderbilt-Ingram
Cancer
Center,
Nashville,
TN);
Rebecca Cowens-Alvarado, MPH (Vice President, South
Atlantic
Health
Systems,
American
Cancer
Society,
Atlanta, GA); and Rachel S. Cannady, BS (Strategic
Director, Cancer Caregiver Support, American Cancer
Society, Atlanta, GA).
We also thank the following individuals for their helpful
review and comments on this article: Catherine M. Alfano,
PhD (Vice President, Survivorship, American Cancer Society,
Atlanta, GA); Lewis E. Foxhall, MD (Vice President, Health
Policy, Office of the Executive Vice President, Cancer Network,
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Hous-
ton, TX); Ted Gansler, MD, MPH, MBA (Director, Medical
Content, American Cancer Society, Atlanta, GA); Susan Gap-
stur, MPH, PhD (Vice President, Epidemiology, American
Cancer Society, Atlanta, GA); Corinne R. Leach, PhD, MS,
MPH (Strategic Director, Cancer and Aging Research, Ameri-
can Cancer Society, Atlanta, GA); Matthew C. Miller, MD,
FACS (Associate Professor of Otolaryngology and Neurosur-
gery, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY);
Thomas K. Oliver (Director, Guidelines, Quality and Guidelines,
American Society of Clinical Oncology, Alexandria, VA); Steven
R. Patierno, PhD (Deputy Director, Duke Cancer Institute; Pro-
fessor of Medicine; Professor of Pharmacology and Cancer Biol-
ogy; and Professor in Community and Family Medicine,
Department of Medicine, Duke University School of Medicine,
Durham, NC); Katherine B. Sharpe, MTS, CPH (Senior Vice
President, Patient and Caregiver Support, American Cancer
Society, Atlanta, GA); Sean Smith, MD (Director of the Cancer
Rehabilitation Program, University of Michigan, Department of
Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Ann Arbor, MI); and Vic-
toria Stevens, PhD (Strategic Director, Laboratory Services,
American Cancer Society, Atlanta, GA). �
References
1. Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A. Cancer sta-
tistics, 2016. CA Cancer J Clin. 2016;66:7-
30.
2. DeSantis CE, Lin CC, Mariotto AB, et al.
Cancer treatment and survivorship statis-
tics, 2014. CA Cancer J Clin. 2014;64:252-
271.
3. Ganz PA. Survivorship: adult cancer survi-
vors. Primary Care. 2009;36:721-741.
4. IARC Working Group on the Evaluation of
Carcinogenic Risks to Humans. Personal
habits and indoor combustions. Volume
100 E. A review of human carcinogens.
IARC Monogr Eval Carcinog Risks Hum.
2013;100(pt E):1-538.
5. Chaturvedi AK, Engels EA, Pfeiffer RM,
et al. Human papillomavirus and rising
oropharyngeal cancer incidence in the
United States. J Clin Oncol. 2011;29:4294-
4301.
6. Blot WJ, McLaughlin JK, Winn DM, et al.
Smoking and drinking in relation to oral
and pharyngeal cancer. Cancer Res. 1988;
48:3282-3287.
7. Young D, Xiao CC, Murphy B, Moore M,
Fakhry C, Day TA. Increase in head and
neck cancer in younger patients due to
human papillomavirus (HPV). Oral Oncol.
2015;51:727-730.
8. Seiwert TY, Zuo Z, Keck MK, et al. Inte-
grative and comparative genomic analysis
of HPV-positive and HPV-negative head
and neck squamous cell carcinomas. Clin
Cancer Res. 2015;21:632-641.
9. Chung CH, Bagheri A, D’Souza G. Epide-
miology of oral human papillomavirus
infection. Oral Oncol. 2014;50:364-369.
10. Pfister D, et al. NCCN Clinical Practice
Guidelines in Oncology (NCCN Guide-
lines
V
R)
for
Head
and
Neck
Cancers.
V.1.2015. V
C National Comprehensive Can-
cer Network, Inc 2015. All rights reserved.
Available at NCCN.org. Accessed January
27, 2016.
11. Benson E, Li R, Eisele D, Fakhry C. The
clinical impact of HPV tumor status upon
CA CANCER J CLIN 2016;66:203–239
VOLUME 66 _ NUMBER 3 _ MAY/JUNE 2016
235
 head and neck squamous cell carcinomas.
Oral Oncol. 2014;50:565-574.
12. Institute of Medicine. From Cancer Patient
to Cancer Survivor: Lost in Transition.
Washington,
DC:
National
Academies
Press; 2005.
13. Cowens-Alvarado
R,
Sharpe
K,
Pratt-
Chapman M, et al. Advancing survivor-
ship care through the National Cancer Sur-
vivorship
Resource
Center:
developing
American Cancer Society guidelines for
primary care providers. CA Cancer J Clin.
2013;63:147-150.
14. Wood D, et al. NCCN Clinical Practice
Guidelines in Oncology (NCCN Guide-
lines
V
R)
for
Lung
Cancer
Screening.
V.1.2016. V
C National Comprehensive Can-
cer Network, Inc 2015. All rights reserved.
Available at NCCN.org. Accessed January
27, 2016.
15. Brawley O, Byers T, Chen A, et al. New
American Cancer Society process for creat-
ing trustworthy cancer screening guide-
lines. JAMA. 2011;306:2495-2499.
16. Skolarus TA, Wolf AM, Erb NL, et al.
American Cancer Society prostate cancer
survivorship care guidelines. CA Cancer J
Clin. 2014;64:225-249.
17. Hershman DL, Lacchetti C, Dworkin RH,
et al. Prevention and management of
chemotherapy-induced peripheral neurop-
athy in survivors of adult cancers: Ameri-
can Society of Clinical Oncology clinical
practice guideline. J Clin Oncol. 2014;32:
1941-1967.
18. Andersen BL, Rowland JH, Somerfield
MR. Screening, assessment, and care of
anxiety
and
depressive
symptoms
in
adults with cancer: an American Society
of Clinical Oncology guideline adaptation.
J Clin Oncol. 2015;11:133-134.
19. Bower JE, Bak K, Berger A, et al. Screen-
ing,
assessment,
and
management
of
fatigue in adult survivors of cancer: an
American Society of Clinical Oncology
clinical
practice
guideline
adaptation.
J Clin Oncol. 2014;32:1840-1850.
20. Denlinger CS, et al. NCCN Clinical Practice
Guidelines in Oncology (NCCN Guide-
lines
V
R )
for
Survivorship.
V.2.2015.
V
C
National Comprehensive Cancer Network,
Inc 2015. All rights reserved. Available at
NCCN.org. Accessed January 27, 2016.
21. Holland JC, et al. NCCN Clinical Practice
Guidelines in Oncology (NCCN Guide-
lines
V
R )
for
Distress
Management.
V.3.2015. V
C National Comprehensive Can-
cer
Network,
Inc
2015.
All
rights
reserved. Available at NCCN.org. Accessed
January 27, 2016.
22. Helfand M, Carson S. Screening for Lipid
Disorders in Adults: Selective Update of
2001 US Preventive Services Task Force
Review. Report No. 09–05114-EF-1. Rock-
ville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research
and Quality (US); 2008.
23. Manikantan K, Khode S, Dwivedi RC,
et al. Making sense of post-treatment sur-
veillance in head and neck cancer: when
and what of follow-up. Cancer Treat Rev.
2009;35:744-753.
24. Agrawal A, Hammond TH, Young GS,
Avon AL, Ozer E, Schuller DE. Factors
affecting long-term survival in patients
with recurrent head and neck cancer may
help define the role of post-treatment sur-
veillance. Laryngoscope. 2009;119:2135-
2140.
25. Morton RP, Hay KD, Macann A. On com-
pletion of curative treatment of head and
neck cancer: why follow up? Otolaryngol
Head Neck. 2004;12:142-146.
26. Morris LG, Sikora AG, Hayes RB, Patel SG,
Ganly I. Anatomic sites at elevated risk of
second primary cancer after an index head
and neck cancer. Cancer Cause Control.
2011;22:671-679.
27. Morris LG, Sikora AG, Patel SG, Hayes RB,
Ganly I. Second primary cancers after an
index head and neck cancer: subsite-
specific
trends
in
the
era
of
human
papillomavirus-associated
oropharyngeal
cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2011;29:739-746.
28. Atienza JA, Dasanu CA. Incidence of sec-
ond primary malignancies in patients with
treated head and neck cancer: a compre-
hensive review of literature. Curr Med Res
Opin. 2012;28:1899-1909.
29. Rennemo E, Zatterstrom U, Boysen M.
Impact of second primary tumors on sur-
vival in head and neck cancer: an analysis
of 2,063 cases. Laryngoscope. 2008;118:
1350-1356.
30. Baxi SS, Pinheiro LC, Patil SM, Pfister DG,
Oeffinger KC, Elkin EB. Causes of death in
long-term survivors of head and neck can-
cer. Cancer. 2014;120:1507-1513.
31. Jayaprakash V, Cheng C, Reid M, et al.
Previous head and neck cancers portend
poor prognoses in lung cancer patients.
Ann Thorac Surg. 2011;92:1056-1060; dis-
cussion 1060–1051.
32. National Lung Screening Trial Research
Team, Church TR, Black WC, et al. Results
of initial low-dose computed tomographic
screening for lung cancer. N Engl J Med.
2013;368:1980-1991.
33. Bach PB, Mirkin JN, Oliver TK, et al. Bene-
fits and harms of CT screening for lung
cancer: a systematic review. JAMA. 2012;
307:2418-2429.
34. Farwell DG, Rees CJ, Mouadeb DA, et al.
Esophageal pathology in patients after
treatment for head and neck cancer. Oto-
laryngol Head Neck Surg. 2010;143:375-
378.
35. Umeda M, Shigeta T, Takahashi H, et al.
Shoulder mobility after spinal accessory
nerve-sparing modified radical neck dis-
section in oral cancer patients. Oral Surg
Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod.
2010;109:820-824.
36. Erisen L, Basel B, Irdesel J, et al. Shoulder
function
after
accessory
nerve-sparing
neck dissections. Head Neck. 2004;26:967-
971.
37. Carr SD, Bowyer D, Cox G. Upper limb
dysfunction following selective neck dis-
section:
a
retrospective
questionnaire
study. Head Neck. 2009;31:789-792.
38. Stubblefield MD. Radiation fibrosis syn-
drome: neuromuscular and musculoskel-
etal complications in cancer survivors. PM
R. 2011;3:1041-1054.
39. Peng G, Wang T, Yang KY, et al. A pro-
spective,
randomized
study
comparing
outcomes
and
toxicities
of
intensity-
modulated radiotherapy vs. conventional
two-dimensional
radiotherapy
for
the
treatment of nasopharyngeal carcinoma.
Radiother Oncol. 2012;104:286-293.
40. Tuan JK, Ha TC, Ong WS, et al. Late toxic-
ities after conventional radiation therapy
alone
for
nasopharyngeal
carcinoma.
Radiother Oncol. 2012;104:305-311.
41. Moore RA, Wiffen PJ, Derry S, Toelle T,
Rice AS. Gabapentin for chronic neuro-
pathic pain and fibromyalgia in adults
[serial online]. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev. 2014;4:CD007938.
42. Gaskell H, Moore RA, Derry S, Stannard
C. Oxycodone for neuropathic pain and
fibromyalgia
in
adults
[serial
online].
Cochrane
Database
Syst
Rev.
2014;6:
CD010692.
43. Stubblefield MD, Levine A, Custodio CM,
Fitzpatrick T. The role of botulinum toxin
type A in the radiation fibrosis syndrome:
a preliminary report. Arch Phys Med Reha-
bil. 2008;89:417-421.
44. Stubblefield MD, Manfield L, Riedel ER. A
preliminary report on the efficacy of a
dynamic jaw opening device (dynasplint
trismus system) as part of the multimodal
treatment of trismus in patients with head
and neck cancer. Arch Phys Med Rehabil.
2010;91:1278-1282.
45. Bach CA, Wagner I, Lachiver X, Baujat B,
Chabolle F. Botulinum toxin in the treat-
ment of post-radiosurgical neck contrac-
ture in head and neck cancer: a novel
approach. Eur Ann Otorhinolaryngol Head
Neck Dis. 2012;129:6-10.
46. Trignano E, Dessy LA, Fallico N, et al.
Treatment of pectoralis major flap myo-
spasms with botulinum toxin type A in
head
and
neck
reconstruction
[serial
online]. J Plast Reconst Aesthet Surg. 2012;
65:e23-e28.
47. Wittekindt
C,
Liu
WC,
Preuss
SF,
Guntinas-Lichius O. Botulinum toxin A for
neuropathic pain after neck dissection: a
dose-finding study. Laryngoscope. 2006;
116:1168-1171.
48. Dijkstra PU, van Wilgen PC, Buijs RP,
et al. Incidence of shoulder pain after neck
dissection: a clinical explorative study for
risk factors. Head Neck. 2001;23:947-953.
49. Stubblefield MD. Cancer rehabilitation.
Semin Oncol. 2011;38:386-393.
50. McNeely ML, Parliament M, Courneya KS,
et al. A pilot study of a randomized con-
trolled trial to evaluate the effects of pro-
gressive resistance exercise training on
shoulder dysfunction caused by spinal
accessory
neurapraxia/neurectomy
in
head and neck cancer survivors. Head
Neck. 2004;26:518-530.
51. McNeely ML, Parliament MB, Seikaly H,
et al. Effect of exercise on upper extremity
pain and dysfunction in head and neck
cancer survivors: a randomized controlled
trial. Cancer. 2008;113:214-222.
52. Lauchlan DT, McCaul JA, McCarron T,
Patil S, McManners J, McGarva J. An
exploratory trial of preventative rehabilita-
tion on shoulder disability and quality of
life in patients following neck dissection
surgery. Eur J Cancer Care. 2011;20:113-
122.
53. Carvalho AP, Vital FM, Soares BG. Exer-
cise interventions for shoulder dysfunc-
tion in patients treated for head and neck
cancer [serial online]. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev. 2012;4:CD008693.
54. Uppal HS, Evans JP, Smith C. Frozen
shoulder: a systematic review of therapeu-
ACS HNC Survivorship Care Guideline
236
CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians
 tic options. World J Orthop. 2015;6:263-
268.
55. Noten S, Meeus M, Stassijns G, Van
Glabbeek F, Verborgt O, Struyf F. The effi-
cacy of different types of mobilization
techniques in patients with primary adhe-
sive capsulitis of the shoulder: a system-
atic review [published online ahead of
print 2015]. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2015.
doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2015.07.025.
56. Gerber LH, Shah J, Rosenberger W, et al.
Dry needling alters trigger points in the
upper trapezius muscle and reduces pain
in subjects with chronic myofascial pain.
PM R. 2015;7:711-718.
57. Dijkstra PU, Huisman PM, Roodenburg
JL. Criteria for trismus in head and neck
oncology. Int J Oral Max Surg. 2006;35:
337-342.
58. Stubblefield MD, Keole N. Upper body
pain and functional disorders in patients
with breast cancer. PM R. 2014;6:170-183.
59. Louise Kent M, Brennan MT, Noll JL, et al.
Radiation-induced trismus in head and
neck cancer patients. Support Care Cancer.
2008;16:305-309.
60. Pauli N, Johnson J, Finizia C, Andrell P.
The incidence of trismus and long-term
impact on health-related quality of life in
patients with head and neck cancer. Acta
Oncol. 2013;52:1137-1145.
61. Weber C, Dommerich S, Pau HW, Kramp
B. Limited mouth opening after primary
therapy of head and neck cancer. J Oral
Maxillofac Surg. 2010;14:169-173.
62. Scott B, Butterworth C, Lowe D, Rogers
SN.
Factors
associated
with
restricted
mouth opening and its relationship to
health-related quality of life in patients
attending a maxillofacial oncology clinic.
Oral Oncol. 2008;44:430-438.
63. Dijkstra
PU,
Sterken
MW,
Pater
R,
Spijkervet FK, Roodenburg JL. Exercise
therapy for trismus in head and neck can-
cer. Oral Oncol. 2007;43:389-394.
64. Tang Y, Shen Q, Wang Y, Lu K, Wang Y,
Peng Y. A randomized prospective study
of rehabilitation therapy in the treatment
of radiation-induced dysphagia and tris-
mus. Strahlenther Onkol. 2011;187:39-44.
65. Chua DT, Lo C, Yuen J, Foo YC. A pilot
study of pentoxifylline in the treatment of
radiation-induced
trismus.
Am
J
Clin
Oncol. 2001;24:366-369.
66. Hartl
DM,
Cohen
M,
Julieron
M,
Marandas P, Janot F, Bourhis J. Botuli-
num toxin for radiation-induced facial
pain and trismus. Otolaryngol Head Neck.
2008;138:459-463.
67. Francis
DO,
Weymuller
EA
Jr,
Parvathaneni U, Merati AL, Yueh B. Dys-
phagia, stricture, and pneumonia in head
and neck cancer patients: does treatment
modality matter? Ann Otol Rhinol Larynol.
2010;119:391-397.
68. Crary MA, Carnaby GD, LaGorio LA,
Carvajal PJ. Functional and physiological
outcomes from an exercise-based dyspha-
gia therapy: a pilot investigation of the
McNeill
Dysphagia
Therapy
Program.
Arch Phys Med Rehab. 2012;93:1173-1178.
69. Lan Y, Ohkubo M, Berretin-Felix G, Sia I,
Carnaby-Mann GD, Crary MA. Normaliza-
tion of temporal aspects of swallowing
physiology after the McNeill dysphagia
therapy program. Ann Otol Rhinol Lary-
nol. 2012;121:525-532.
70. Crary MA, Carnaby Mann GD, Groher ME,
Helseth E. Functional benefits of dyspha-
gia therapy using adjunctive sEMG bio-
feedback. Dysphagia. 2004;19:160-164.
71. Oliver LJ, Keeton M, Wilson EL. Regula-
tion and secretion of plasminogen activa-
tors and their inhibitors in a human
leukemic cell line (K562). Blood. 1989;74:
1321-1327.
72. Eisbruch A, Lyden T, Bradford CR, et al.
Objective assessment of swallowing dys-
function and aspiration after radiation
concurrent with chemotherapy for head-
and-neck cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys. 2002;53:23-28.
73. Hutcheson KA, Lewin JS, Holsinger FC,
et al. Long-term functional and survival
outcomes after induction chemotherapy
and
risk-based
definitive
therapy
for
locally advanced squamous cell carcinoma
of the head and neck. Head Neck. 2014;36:
474-480.
74. Hunter KU, Lee OE, Lyden TH, et al. Aspi-
ration pneumonia after chemo-intensity-
modulated radiation therapy of oropha-
ryngeal carcinoma and its clinical and
dysphagia-related predictors. Head Neck.
2014;36:120-125.
75. Murphy BA, Gilbert J. Dysphagia in head
and neck cancer patients treated with radi-
ation: assessment, sequelae, and rehabili-
tation. Semin Radiat Oncol. 2009;19:35-
42.
76. Cousins
N,
MacAulay
F,
Lang
H,
MacGillivray S, Wells M. A systematic
review of interventions for eating and
drinking problems following treatment for
head and neck cancer suggests a need to
look beyond swallowing and trismus. Oral
Oncol. 2013;49:387-400.
77. McCabe D, Ashford J, Wheeler-Hegland K,
et al. Evidence-based systematic review:
oropharyngeal dysphagia behavioral treat-
ments. Part IV—impact of dysphagia treat-
ment
on
individuals’
postcancer
treatments. J Rehabil Res Dev. 2009;46:
205-214.
78. Wang JJ, Goldsmith TA, Holman AS,
Cianchetti M, Chan AW. Pharyngoesopha-
geal stricture after treatment for head and
neck cancer. Head Neck. 2012;34:967-973.
79. Sweeny
L,
Golden
JB,
White
HN,
Magnuson JS, Carroll WR, Rosenthal EL.
Incidence and outcomes of stricture for-
mation
postlaryngectomy.
Otolaryngol
Head Neck. 2012;146:395-402.
80. Deng J, Ridner SH, Murphy BA. Lymphe-
dema in patients with head and neck can-
cer [serial online]. Oncol Nurs Forum.
2011;38:E1-E10.
81. Deng J, Ridner SH, Dietrich MS, et al.
Prevalence of secondary lymphedema in
patients
with
head
and
neck
cancer.
J Pain Symptom Manage. 2012;43:244-
252.
82. Deng J, Murphy BA, Dietrich MS, et al.
Impact of secondary lymphedema after
head and neck cancer treatment on symp-
toms, functional status, and quality of life.
Head Neck. 2013;35:1026-1035.
83. Deng J, Ridner SH, Dietrich MS, et al. Fac-
tors associated with external and internal
lymphedema in patients with head-and-
neck cancer [serial online]. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 2012;84:e319-e328.
84. Piso
DU,
Eckardt
A,
Liebermann
A,
Gutenbrunner C, Schafer P, Gehrke A.
Early rehabilitation of head-neck edema
after curative surgery for orofacial tumors.
Am J Phys Med Rehabil. 2001;80:261-269.
85. Smith BG, Hutcheson KA, Little LG, et al.
Lymphedema outcomes in patients with
head and neck cancer. Otolaryngol Head
Neck. 2015;152:284-291.
86. Bower JE. Cancer-related fatigue—mecha-
nisms, risk factors, and treatments. Nat
Rev Clin Oncol. 2014;11:597-609.
87. Rock CL, Doyle C, Demark-Wahnefried
W, et al. Nutrition and physical activity
guidelines for cancer survivors. CA Cancer
J Clin. 2012;62:243-274.
88. Gielissen MF, Verhagen CA, Bleijenberg
G.
Cognitive
behaviour
therapy
for
fatigued cancer survivors: long-term fol-
low-up. Br J Cancer. 2007;97:612-618.
89. Duijts SF, Faber MM, Oldenburg HS, van
Beurden M, Aaronson NK. Effectiveness of
behavioral techniques and physical exer-
cise
on
psychosocial
functioning
and
health-related quality of life in breast can-
cer patients and survivors—a meta-analy-
sis. Psychooncology. 2011;20:115-126.
90. Berger A, et al. NCCN Clinical Practice
Guidelines in Oncology (NCCN Guide-
lines
V
R )
for
Cancer-Related
Fatigue.
V.1.2016. V
C National Comprehensive Can-
cer Network, Inc 2015. All rights reserved.
Available at NCCN.org. Accessed January
27, 2016.
91. Rosenthal DI, Mendoza TR, Fuller CD,
et al. Patterns of symptom burden during
radiotherapy or concurrent chemoradio-
therapy for head and neck cancer: a pro-
spective analysis using the University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center Symp-
tom Inventory-Head and Neck Module.
Cancer. 2014;120:1975-1984.
92. Baharvand M, ShoalehSaadi N, Barakian
R, Moghaddam EJ. Taste alteration and
impact on quality of life after head and
neck radiotherapy. J Oral Pathol Med.
2013;42:106-112.
93. Mossman KL. Gustatory tissue injury in
man: radiation dose response relation-
ships and mechanisms of taste loss. Br J
Cancer Suppl. 1986;7:9-11.
94. Fernando IN, Patel T, Billingham L, et al.
The effect of head and neck irradiation on
taste dysfunction: a prospective study.
Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol). 1995;7:173-
178.
95. Hitchcock YJ, Tward JD, Szabo A, Bentz
BG, Shrieve DC. Relative contributions of
radiation and cisplatin-based chemother-
apy to sensorineural hearing loss in head-
and-neck cancer patients. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 2009;73:779-788.
96. Theunissen EA, Zuur CL, Bosma SC, et al.
Long-term hearing loss after chemoradia-
tion in patients with head and neck can-
cer. Laryngoscope. 2014;124:2720-2725.
97. Hutcheson KA, Lewis CM. Head and neck
cancer
survivorship
management.
In:
Foxhall LE, Rodriguez MA, eds. Advances
in Cancer Survivorship Management. Part
II: Surveillance. MD Anderson Cancer
Care Series. New York: Springer; 2015:
145-166.
CA CANCER J CLIN 2016;66:203–239
VOLUME 66 _ NUMBER 3 _ MAY/JUNE 2016
237
 98. Lonsbury-Martin BL, Martin GK. Evoked
otoacoustic emissions as objective screen-
ers for ototoxicity. Semin Hear. 2001;22:
377-392.
99. Fausti S. Audiologic monitoring for ototox-
icity and patient management. In:
Camp-
bell KC, ed. Pharmacology and Ototoxicity
for Audiologists. Clifton Park, NY: Thomas
Delmar Learning; 2006:230-251.
100. Zhou J, Jolly S. Obstructive sleep apnea
and fatigue in head and neck cancer
patients. Am J Clin Oncol. 2015;38:411-
414.
101. van der Molen L, van Rossum MA, Jacobi
I, et al. Pre- and posttreatment voice and
speech
outcomes
in
patients
with
advanced head and neck cancer treated
with chemoradiotherapy: expert listeners
and patient’s perception [serial online].
J Voice. 2012;26:664.e625–e633.
102. Luk YS, Shum JS, Sze HC, Chan LL, Ng
WT, Lee AW. Predictive factors and radio-
logical features of radiation-induced cra-
nial
nerve
palsy
in
patients
with
nasopharyngeal carcinoma following radi-
cal radiotherapy. Oral Oncol. 2013;49:49-
54.
103. Awan MJ, Mohamed AS, Lewin JS, et al.
Late radiation-associated dysphagia (late-
RAD) with lower cranial neuropathy after
oropharyngeal radiotherapy: a prelimi-
nary dosimetric comparison. Oral Oncol.
2014;50:746-752.
104. Tuomi L, Andrell P, Finizia C. Effects of
voice rehabilitation after radiation therapy
for laryngeal cancer: a randomized con-
trolled study. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2014;89:964-972.
105. van Gogh CD, Verdonck-de Leeuw IM,
Langendijk JA, Kuik DJ, Mahieu HF.
Long-term efficacy of voice therapy in
patients with voice problems after treat-
ment of early glottic cancer. J Voice. 2012;
26:398-401.
106. Xi S. Effectiveness of voice rehabilitation
on
vocalisation
in
postlaryngectomy
patients: a systematic review. Int J Evid
Based Healthc. 2010;8:256-258.
107. Marunick M, Tselios N. The efficacy of
palatal
augmentation
prostheses
for
speech and swallowing in patients under-
going glossectomy: a review of the litera-
ture. J Prosthet Dent. 2004;91:67-74.
108. Tell R, Lundell G, Nilsson B, Sjodin H,
Lewin F, Lewensohn R. Long-term inci-
dence of hypothyroidism after radiother-
apy
in
patients
with
head-and-neck
cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2004;
60:395-400.
109. Miller MC, Agrawal A. Hypothyroidism in
postradiation
head
and
neck
cancer
patients: incidence, complications, and
management.
Curr
Opin
Otolaryngol.
2009;17:111-115.
110. Smith GL, Smith BD, Garden AS, et al.
Hypothyroidism in older patients with
head and neck cancer after treatment with
radiation: a population-based study. Head
Neck. 2009;31:1031-1038.
111. Epstein JB, Thariat J, Bensadoun RJ, et al.
Oral complications of cancer and cancer
therapy: from cancer treatment to survi-
vorship. CA Cancer J Clin. 2012;62:400-
422.
112. Epstein JB, Guneri P, Barasch A. Appropri-
ate and necessary oral care for people
with cancer: guidance to obtain the right
oral and dental care at the right time. Sup-
port Care Cancer. 2014;22:1981-1988.
113. Bar Ad V, Weinstein G, Dutta PR, et al.
Gabapentin for the treatment of pain syn-
drome related to radiation-induced muco-
sitis in patients with head and neck cancer
treated with concurrent chemoradiother-
apy. Cancer. 2010;116:4206-4213.
114. Kumar S, Ram S, Navazesh M. Salivary
gland and associated complications in
head and neck cancer therapy. J Calif
Dent Assoc. 2011;39:639-647.
115. Duke RL, Campbell BH, Indresano AT,
et al. Dental status and quality of life in
long-term head and neck cancer survivors.
Laryngoscope. 2005;115:678-683.
116. Epstein JB, Chin EA, Jacobson JJ, Rishiraj
B, Le N. The relationships among fluoride,
cariogenic oral flora, and salivary flow
rate during radiation therapy. Oral Surg
Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod.
1998;86:286-292.
117. Papas A, Russell D, Singh M, Kent R, Triol
C, Winston A. Caries clinical trial of a
remineralising
toothpaste
in
radiation
patients. Gerodontology. 2008;25:76-88.
118. Marques MA, Dib LL. Periodontal changes
in
patients
undergoing
radiotherapy.
J Periodontol. 2004;75:1178-1187.
119. Epstein JB, Lunn R, Le N, Stevenson-
Moore P. Periodontal attachment loss in
patients after head and neck radiation
therapy. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol
Oral Radiol Endod. 1998;86:673-677.
120. Friedman PK, Isfeld D. Xerostomia: the
“invisible” oral health condition. J Mass
Dent Soc. 2008;57:42-44.
121. Nagler RM, Nagler A. Pilocarpine hydro-
chloride relieves xerostomia in chronic
graft-versus-host disease: a sialometrical
study. Bone Marrow Transplant. 1999;23:
1007-1011.
122. Carpenter PA, Schubert MM, Flowers ME.
Cevimeline reduced mouth dryness and
increased salivary flow in patients with
xerostomia
complicating
chronic
graft-
versus-host disease. Biol Blood Marrow
Transplant. 2006;12:792-794.
123. Epstein JB, Gorsky M, Hancock P, Peters
N, Sherlock CH. The prevalence of herpes
simplex virus shedding and infection in
the oral cavity of seropositive patients
undergoing head and neck radiation ther-
apy. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral
Radiol Endod. 2002;94:712-716.
124. Funk GF, Karnell LH, Christensen AJ.
Long-term health-related quality of life in
survivors of head and neck cancer. Arch
Otolaryngol. 2012;138:123-133.
125. Lang H, France E, Williams B, Humphris
G, Wells M. The psychological experience
of living with head and neck cancer: a sys-
tematic review and meta-synthesis. Psy-
chooncology. 2013;22:2648-2663.
126. Fingeret MC, Yuan Y, Urbauer D, Weston
J, Nipomnick S, Weber R. The nature and
extent of body image concerns among sur-
gically treated patients with head and
neck
cancer.
Psychooncology.
2012;21:
836-844.
127. Lewinsohn PM, Seeley JR, Roberts RE,
Allen NB. Center for Epidemiologic Stud-
ies Depression Scale (CES-D) as a screen-
ing
instrument
for
depression
among
community-residing older adults. Psychol
Aging. 1997;12:277-287.
128. Radloff LS. The CES-D scale: a self-report
depression scale for research in the gen-
eral population. Appl Psychological Meas.
1977;1:385-401.
129. Krebber AM, Buffart LM, Kleijn G, et al.
Prevalence
of
depression
in
cancer
patients: a meta-analysis of diagnostic
interviews and self-report instruments.
Psychooncology. 2014;23:121-130.
130. Zigmond AS, Snaith RP. The hospital anxi-
ety and depression scale. Acta Psychiatr
Scand. 1983;67:361-370.
131. Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A. Cancer statis-
tics, 2015. CA Cancer J Clin. 2015;65:5-29.
132. Howlader N, Noone AM, Krapcho M, et al.
eds. SEER Cancer Statistics Review, 1975–
2012, based on November 2014 SEER data
submission. Bethesda, MD: National Can-
cer Institute; 2014. seer.cancer.gov/csr/
1975_2012. Accessed January 27, 2016.
133. Simard S, Thewes B, Humphris G, et al.
Fear of cancer recurrence in adult cancer
survivors: a systematic review of quantita-
tive studies. J Cancer Surviv. 2013;7:300-
322.
134. Boyes
AW,
Girgis
A,
Zucca
AC,
Lecathelinais C. Anxiety and depression
among long-term survivors of cancer in
Australia: results of a population-based sur-
vey. Comment. Med J Aust. 2009;191:295.
135. Hoffman KE, McCarthy EP, Recklitis CJ,
Ng AK. Psychological distress in long-term
survivors of adult-onset cancer: results
from a national survey. Arch Intern Med.
2009;169:1274-1281.
136. Mitchell AJ, Ferguson DW, Gill J, Paul J,
Symonds P. Depression and anxiety in
long-term cancer survivors compared with
spouses and healthy controls: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Lancet Oncol.
2013;14:721-732.
137. Buchmann L, Conlee J, Hunt J, Agarwal J,
White S. Psychosocial distress is prevalent
in head and neck cancer patients. Laryn-
goscope. 2013;123:1424-1429.
138. Posluszny DM, Dougall AL, Johnson JT,
et al. Posttraumatic stress disorder symp-
toms in newly diagnosed patients with
head and neck cancer and their partners.
Head Neck. 2015;37:1282-1289.
139. Lydiatt WM, Moran J, Burke WJ. A review
of depression in the head and neck cancer
patient. Clin Adv Hematol Oncol. 2009;7:
397-403.
140. Devins GM, Payne AY, Lebel S, et al. The
burden of stress in head and neck cancer.
Psychooncology. 2013;22:668-676.
141. Chuang SC, Scelo G, Tonita JM, et al. Risk
of second primary cancer among patients
with head and neck cancers: a pooled
analysis of 13 cancer registries. Int J Can-
cer. 2008;123:2390-2396.
142. Kim SA, Roh JL, Lee SA, et al. Pretreat-
ment depression as a prognostic indicator
of
survival
and
nutritional
status
in
patients with head and neck cancer. Can-
cer. 2016;122:131-140.
143. Rogers LQ, Courneya KS, Robbins KT,
et al. Physical activity and quality of life in
head and neck cancer survivors. Support
Care Cancer. 2006;14:1012-1019.
ACS HNC Survivorship Care Guideline
238
CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians
 144. Hashibe M, Hunt J, Wei M, Buys S, Gren
L, Lee YC. Tobacco, alcohol, body mass
index, physical activity, and the risk of
head and neck cancer in the Prostate,
Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian (PLCO)
cohort. Head Neck. 2013;35:914-922.
145. Samuel
SR,
Maiya
GA,
Babu
AS,
Vidyasagar MS. Effect of exercise training
on functional capacity & quality of life in
head & neck cancer patients receiving che-
moradiotherapy. Indian J Med Res. 2013;
137:515-520.
146. McNeely ML, Parliament MB, Seikaly H,
et al. Predictors of adherence to an exer-
cise program for shoulder pain and dys-
function
in
head
and
neck
cancer
survivors. Support Care Cancer. 2012;20:
515-522.
147. Ahmed AT, Karter AJ, Liu J. Alcohol con-
sumption
is
inversely
associated
with
adherence to diabetes self-care behav-
iours. Diabet Med. 2006;23:795-802.
148. Freedman ND, Schatzkin A, Leitzmann
MF, Hollenbeck AR, Abnet CC. Alcohol
and head and neck cancer risk in a pro-
spective study. Br J Cancer. 2007;96:1469-
1474.
149. IARC Working Group on the Evaluation of
Carcinogenic Risks to Humans. Alcohol
drinking.
IARC
Monogr
Eval
Carcinog
Risks Hum. 1988;44:1-378.
150. IARC Working Group on the Evaluation of
Carcinogenic Risks to Humans. Alcohol
consumption and ethyl carbamate. IARC
Monogr Eval Carcinog Risks Hum. 2010;
96:3-1383.
151. Howren MB, Christensen AJ, Karnell LH,
Funk GF. Psychological factors associated
with head and neck cancer treatment and
survivorship: evidence and opportunities
for behavioral medicine. J Consult Clin
Psychol. 2013;81:299-317.
152. Siegel RL, Jacobs EJ, Newton CC, et al.
Deaths due to cigarette smoking for 12
smoking-related cancers in the United
States. JAMA. 2015;175:1574-1576.
153. Ostroff JS, Jacobsen PB, Moadel AB, et al.
Prevalence and predictors of continued
tobacco use after treatment of patients
with head and neck cancer. Cancer. 1995;
75:569-576.
154. Gritz ER, Nisenbaum R, Elashoff RE,
Holmes EC. Smoking behavior following
diagnosis in patients with stage I non-
small cell lung cancer. Cancer Causes Con-
trol. 1991;2:105-112.
155. Dresler
CM,
Bailey
M,
Roper
CR,
Patterson GA, Cooper JD. Smoking cessa-
tion and lung cancer resection. Chest.
1996;110:1199-1202.
156. Davison AG, Duffy M. Smoking habits of
long-term survivors of surgery for lung
cancer. Thorax. 1982;37:331-333.
157. Walker
MS,
Larsen
RJ,
Zona
DM,
Govindan R, Fisher EB. Smoking urges
and relapse among lung cancer patients:
findings from a preliminary retrospective
study. Prev Med. 2004;39:449-457.
158. Parsons A, Daley A, Begh R, Aveyard P.
Influence of smoking cessation after diag-
nosis of early stage lung cancer on progno-
sis: systematic review of observational
studies with meta-analysis [serial online].
BMJ. 2010;340:b5569.
159. Kawahara M, Ushijima S, Kamimori T,
et al. Second primary tumours in more than
2-year disease-free survivors of small-cell
lung cancer in Japan: the role of smoking
cessation. Br J Cancer. 1998;78:409-412.
160. Do KA, Johnson MM, Doherty DA, et al.
Second primary tumors in patients with
upper aerodigestive tract cancers: joint
effects of smoking and alcohol (United
States). Cancer Causes Control. 2003;14:
131-138.
161. Browman GP, Wong G, Hodson I, et al.
Influence of cigarette smoking on the effi-
cacy of radiation therapy in head and neck
cancer. N Engl J Med. 1993;328:159-163.
162. Zhang J, Kamdar O, Le W, Rosen GD,
Upadhyay D. Nicotine induces resistance
to chemotherapy by modulating mito-
chondrial signaling in lung cancer. Am J
Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2009;40:135-146.
163. Zevallos JP, Mallen MJ, Lam CY, et al.
Complications of radiotherapy in laryngo-
pharyngeal cancer: effects of a prospective
smoking cessation program. Cancer. 2009;
115:4636-4644.
164. Arcavi L, Benowitz NL. Cigarette smoking
and infection. Arch Intern Med. 2004;164:
2206-2216.
165. Moller
AM,
Pedersen
T,
Villebro
N,
Schnaberich A, Haas M, Tonnesen R. A
study of the impact of long-term tobacco
smoking on postoperative intensive care
admission. Anaesthesia. 2003;58:55-59.
166. Smith JB, Fenske NA. Cutaneous manifes-
tations and consequences of smoking.
J Am Acad Dermatol. 1996;34(5 pt 1):717-
732; quiz 733–714.
167. Jerjes W, Upile T, Radhi H, et al. The
effect of tobacco and alcohol and their
reduction/cessation on mortality in oral
cancer
patients:
short
communication
[serial online]. Head Neck Oncol. 2012;4:6.
168. Berg CJ, Thomas AN, Mertens AC, et al.
Correlates of continued smoking versus
cessation among survivors of smoking-
related cancers. Psychooncology. 2013;22:
799-806.
169. Bloom EL, Oliver JA, Sutton SK, Brandon
TH, Jacobsen PB, Simmons VN. Post-opera-
tive smoking status in lung and head and
neck
cancer
patients:
association
with
depressive
symptomatology,
pain,
and
fatigue. Psychooncology. 2015;24:1012-1019.
170. Simmons VN, Litvin EB, Jacobsen PB, et al.
Predictors of smoking relapse in patients
with thoracic cancer or head and neck can-
cer. Cancer. 2013;119:1420-1427.
171. Nayan S, Gupta MK, Strychowsky JE,
Sommer DD. Smoking cessation interven-
tions and cessation rates in the oncology
population: an updated systematic review
and meta-analysis. Otolaryngol Head Neck
Surg. 2013;149:200-211.
172. Mao JJ, Bowman MA, Stricker CT, et al.
Delivery of survivorship care by primary
care physicians: the perspective of breast
cancer patients. J Clin Oncol. 2009;27:933-
938.
173. Dawes AJ, Hemmelgarn M, Nguyen DK,
et al. Are primary care providers prepared
to care for survivors of breast cancer in
the safety net? Cancer. 2015;121:1249-
1256.
174. Palmer SC, Stricker CT, Panzer SL, et al.
Outcomes and satisfaction after delivery of
a breast cancer survivorship care plan:
results of a multicenter trial. J Clin Oncol.
2015;11:e222-e229.
175. Stricker CT, Jacobs LA, Risendal B, et al.
Survivorship care planning after the Insti-
tute of Medicine recommendations: how
are we faring? J Cancer Surviv. 2011;5:
358-370.
176. Kim Y, Kashy DA, Spillers RL, Evans TV.
Needs assessment of family caregivers of
cancer survivors: three cohorts compari-
son. Psychooncology. 2010;19:573-582.
177. Given BA, Given CW, Sherwood PR. Fam-
ily and caregiver needs over the course of
the cancer trajectory. J Support Oncol.
2012;10:57-64.
178. Daraei P, Moore
CE. Racial
disparity
among the head and neck cancer popula-
tion. J Cancer Educ. 2015;30:546-551.
179. US
Cancer
Statistics
Working
Group.
United States Cancer Statistics: 1999–2011
Incidence
and
Mortality
Web-based
Report. Atlanta, GA: US Department of
Health and Human Services, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, National
Cancer
Institute;
2014.
cdc.gov/uscs.
Accessed January 27, 2016.
180. American Cancer Society. Cancer Facts &
Figures for African Americans 2013–2014.
Atlanta, GA: American Cancer Society; 2013.
181. National Cancer Institute, Surveillance,
Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER)
Program. SEER Cancer Statistics Review,
1975–2011.
seer.cancer.gov/archive/csr/
1975_2011/. Accessed January 27, 2016.
182. Mead H, Cartwright-Smith L, Jones K,
Ramos C, Woods K, Siegel B. Racial and
Ethnic Disparities in US Health Care: A
Chartbook.
New
York:
The
Common-
wealth Fund; 2008.
183. Rereddy SK, Jordan DR, Moore CE. Dying
to be screened: exploring the unequal bur-
den of head and neck cancer in health pro-
vider shortage areas. J Cancer Educ. 2015;
30:490-496.
184. American Geriatrics Society Expert Panel
on the Care of Older Adults with Multi-
morbidity. Patient-centered care for older
adults with multiple chronic conditions: a
stepwise approach from the American
Geriatrics
Society:
American
Geriatrics
Society Expert Panel on the Care of Older
Adults with Multimorbidity. J Am Geriatr
Soc. 2012;60:1957-1968.
CA CANCER J CLIN 2016;66:203–239
VOLUME 66 _ NUMBER 3 _ MAY/JUNE 2016
239
