 There are increasing expectations of public protection from
violent and other high-risk behaviours. Forensic and general
psychiatrists are requested to carry out risk assessments, and
healthcare and criminal justice professionals can be criticised if
they make wrong decisions on release and detention of offenders.
Risk assessment instruments can classify individuals according to
probability of violence and are considered superior to clinical
judgement. The most commonly used are actuarial instruments
and structured professional judgement. Actuarial assessments are
criticised because the group average method on which they are
constructed means they cannot estimate risks with a high level
of certainty when applied to an individual.1 An increasing number
of structured professional judgement instruments have been
developed, with the aim of improving risk management. However,
most items in these instruments are not independently predictive.2
Furthermore, meta-analysis demonstrated that if the intention is
to predict violence, these instruments cannot predict better than
‘moderate’ levels of accuracy and are essentially interchangeable.3
Psychopathy is a rare personality disorder, affecting less than
0.5% of the population, but has a disproportionate impact on
violence
at
population
level compared with
other
mental
disorders,4 with exceptionally high levels of criminal recidivism.
Unfortunately, evidence suggests that predictive efficacy of risk
assessment instruments may be reduced among patients with
diagnoses of personality disorder and drug dependence compared
with those with major mental disorder.5 We tested predictive
accuracy of three instruments specifically developed to assess risk
of future violent behaviour, according to different categories of
mental disorder in a large, high-risk sample of released male
prisoners in England and Wales. We aimed to investigate how
confident clinicians can be in making their decisions when guided
by structured risk assessment methods.
Method
Study setting and participants have previously been described.6
Briefly, male prisoners in England and Wales (n = 1396), aged
518 years, were interviewed 6–12 months before release by
trained interviewers if serving a determinate sentence of 52 years
for a sexual or violent offence.
The Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis II
personality disorders diagnosed personality disorder, a module
of the Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia
identified
lifetime
schizophrenia,
drug
use
disorders
and
depressive disorder. Alcohol use disorder was measured using
the Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test. Psychopathy scores
using the Psychopathy Checklist Revised (PCL-R) were divided
into high, medium and low score ranges, where 530 indicates a
psychopathic personality.
Outcome was a binary indicator for having at least one
conviction for a violent offence within 3 years recorded in the
UK Police National Computer.
We tested three instruments commonly used in research and
clinical practice: the Violence Risk Assessment Guide (VRAG),7 a
12-item actuarial instrument; the 20-item Historical, Clinical, Risk
Management-20 (HCR-20),8 a structured professional judgement;
and the Offenders Group Reconviction Scale-II (OGRS-II),9 a
statistical risk score. Although designed to assess risk of any
offending, it has good predictive accuracy for future violent
offending among men.6
Reliability of the HCR-20 and PCL-R were good with
intraclass correlation coefficients of 0.98 and 0.85 respectively.6
Results
Online Table DS1 shows predictive accuracy of the three
instruments using area-under-the-curve (AUC) measures in a final
sample of 1224 male prisoners. Instrument total scores were used
for calculation of AUC statistics. Since there is no pre-specified
cut off for the VRAG and the OGRS-II, the median of each
instrument was applied conventionally as threshold for predicting
individuals as violent/non-violent for the purpose of calculating
percentage correctly classified, positive (PPV) and negative
predictive values (NPV).
As shown in Table DS1, the performance of each instrument
was moderate to good when no mental disorder was present, no
more than moderate for participants diagnosed with schizo-
phrenia and depression, with some further reduction among those
with substance use disorders. For participants with antisocial and
other personality disorder, their predictive efficacy ranged from
poor to no more than chance. No instrument was statistically
better than chance for individuals with psychopathy.
We performed a formal statistical test (chi-squared test using
command roccomp in Stata version 12 for Windows) to investigate
whether the AUCs of the instruments were statistically different in
each diagnostic group. The OGRS-II and VRAG demonstrated
significantly higher levels of predictive accuracy than the HCR-20
for all diagnostic categories except schizophrenia (online Table DS2).
387
Predicting future violence among individuals
with psychopathy
Jeremy W. Coid, Simone Ullrich and Constantinos Kallis
Summary
Structured risk assessment aims to help clinicians classify
offenders according to likelihood of future violent and
criminal behaviour. We investigated how confident clinicians
can be using three commonly used instruments (HCR-20,
VRAG, OGRS-II) in individuals with different diagnoses.
Moderate to good predictive accuracy for future violence
was achieved for released prisoners with no mental disorder,
low to moderate for clinical syndromes and personality
disorder, but accuracy was no better than chance for
individuals with psychopathy. Comprehensive diagnostic
assessment should precede an assessment of risk. Risk
assessment instruments cannot be relied upon when
managing public risk from individuals with psychopathy.
Declaration of interest
None.
The British Journal of Psychiatry (2013)
203, 387–388. doi: 10.1192/bjp.bp.112.118471
Short report
 Online Table DS3 provides information on PPV and NPV of
the three instruments. All PPVs were below 50.0 indicative that
problems in accuracy of prediction occurred primarily due to false
positives.
Discussion
Our findings have major implications for risk assessment in
criminal populations. Routine use of these risk assessment
instruments will have major limitations in settings with high
prevalence
of
severe
personality
disorder,
such
as
secure
psychiatric hospitals and prisons. These instruments are more
accurate for use with patients in community mental health
services, general psychiatric in-patient units, primary care and in
the general population where prevalences are much lower.
However, their level of accuracy with an individual with
psychopathy is no better than flipping a coin. Both actuarial risk
instruments
demonstrated
significant
but
clinically
modest
superiority over the HCR-20 which covers more potential risk
and dynamic factors. However, most instruments demonstrate
shrinkage of accuracy when applied to populations with different
characteristics from those on which they were standardised.
Furthermore, the HCR-20 and VRAG were developed to predict
future violence and not specifically violent reconviction, whereas
the OGRS-II was designed for prediction of general criminal
recidivism. However, standardised instruments lack outcome
specificity, with those designed to predict violence predicting
general recidivism and vice versa. Structured risk assessment
instruments may be limited to measuring a general construct
of criminal risk rather than specific tendencies to violence as
originally intended.10
The prisoner cohort included a large sample, prospectively
interviewed prior to release. However, it did not include life-
sentence prisoners as it would not have been possible to assess
them prospectively in anticipation of their release date. The
generalisability of the findings is therefore restricted to similar
populations. Furthermore, violent outcome was defined on the
basis of criminal records, did not include self-report, and may
have therefore underestimated the occurrence of violence during
follow-up. Application of the HCR-20 differs in clinical practice
where an overall estimate of risk is given avoiding the assignment
of scores. Future research should establish whether this approach
is superior in predicting violence in people with psychopathy.
Both general and forensic psychiatrists who are requested to
carry out risk assessments for violence should be mindful of
the limitations of some risk assessment instruments when
assessing
those
with
psychopathy/psychopathic
traits.
Our
findings correspond to previous research showing lower accuracy
among psychiatric patients with pesonality disorder and drug
dependence, with AUCs of comparable magnitude.5 Taken
together, our findings emphasise that the first step in any
assessment should be a comprehensive diagnostic assessment
before assessing risk of future violence.
Our findings do not explain whether failure of three risk
assessment instruments to predict violence in individuals with
psychopathy was due to inherent limitations in their construction
and standardisation or the inherent and unpredictable behaviour
of these individuals, characteristic of their life course. One possible
explanation is that items included in the three instruments
demonstrate little variation in psychopathic offenders and,
therefore, are unsuitable to differentiate those at high and low risk
for violent reoffending. Alternatively, the ability of individuals
with psychopathy to lie convincingly, con and manipulate even
experienced clinicians may mean that accuracy can only be
achieved with new actuarial tools excluding any items requiring
subjective clinical judgement.
Jeremy W. Coid, MD, Simone Ullrich, PhD, Constantinos Kallis, PhD,
Queen Mary University of London, Barts and The London School of Medicine
and Dentistry, Wolfson Institute of Preventive Medicine, Forensic Psychiatry Research
Unit, London, UK
Correspondence: Jeremy W. Coid, Queen Mary University London, Barts
and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Wolfson Institute of
Preventive Medicine, Forensic Psychiatry Research Unit, William Harvey House,
61 Bartholomew Close, London EC1A 7BE, UK. Email: j.w.coid@qmul.ac.uk
First received 26 Jul 2012, final revision 10 Jul 2013, accepted 18 Jul 2013
Funding
The Ministry of Justice (formerly the Home Office) funded the Prisoner Cohort Study
awarded to J.W.C. J.W.C., C.K. and S.U. are funded by the National Institute of
Health Research under its Programme Grants for Applied Research funding stream
(PP-PG-0407-10500). The views expressed in this article are those of the authors and
not necessarily those of the Ministry of Justice, the NHS, the National Institute of Health
Research or the Department of Health.
References
1 Hart SD, Michie C, Cooke DJ. Precision of actuarial risk assessment
instruments: Evaluating the ‘margins of error’ of group v. individual
predictions of violence. Br J Psychiatry 2007; 190 (suppl 49): s60–5.
2 Coid J, Yang M, Ullrich S, Zhang T, Sizmur S, Farrington DP, et al. Most items
in structured risk assessment instruments do not predict violence. J Forensic
Psychiatr Psychol 2011; 22: 3–21.
3 Singh JP, Grann M, Fazel S. A comparative study of violence risk assessment
tools: a systematic review and meta-regression analysis of 68 studies
involving 25,980 participants. Clin Psychol Rev 2011; 31: 499–513.
4 Coid J, Yang M. The impact of psychopathy on violence among the
household population of Great Britain. Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol
2010; 46: 473–80.
5 Gray NS, Taylor J, Snowden RJ. Predicting violence using structured
professional judgment in patients with different mental and behavioural
disorders. Psychiatry Res 2011; 187: 248–53.
6 Coid J, Yang M, Ullrich S, Zhang T, Sizmur S, Roberts C, et al. Gender
differences in structured risk assessment: comparing the accuracy
of five instruments. J Consult Clin Psychol 2009; 7: 337–48.
7 Quinsey VL, Harris GT, Rice ME, Cormier CA. Violent Offenders: Appraising
and Managing Risk. American Psychological Association, 1998.
8 Webster CD, Douglas KS, Eaves D, Hart SD. Assessing Risk of Violence
(Version 2). Mental Health Law and Policy Institute, Simon Fraser University,
1997.
9 Taylor R. Predicting Reconviction for Sexual and Violent Offences using
the Revised Offender Group Reconviction Scale. Home Office, 1999.
10 Glover A, Nicholson D, Hemmati T, Bernfield G, Quinsey V. A comparison
of predictions of general and violent recidivism among high risk federal
offenders. Crim Justice Behav 2002; 29: 235–49.
388
Coid et al
