 Title: Are green cities healthy and equitable? Unpacking the Relationship between health, green 
space and gentrification 
 
Authors: 
 
Helen Cole, DrPH1 
Melissa Garcia Lamarca, PhD1 
James Connolly, PhD1 
Isabelle Anguelovski, PhD1, 2 
 
Affiliations: 
1. Barcelona Lab for Urban Environmental Justice and Sustainability, Institut Hospital del 
Mar d'Investigacions Mèdiques and Institut de Ciѐncia i Tecnologia Ambientals, 
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona 
2. Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats 
 
Corresponding Author: 
 
Helen Cole, DrPH 
Dr. Aiguader, 88, 112.02 
Barcelona, Spain 08003 
 
Email: helen.cole@uab.cat 
Phone: +34 663 574380 
 
Disclaimer: The views presented in this editorial reflect our own and are not an official position 
of our institutions or funders. 
 
Source of Support: This paper was supported by funding from ERC Grant Agreement 678034. 
 
Word Count: 2019 
Number of Figures: 1 
Number of Tables: 0 
References: 27  
 
Conflict of Interest Statement: None of the authors have conflicts of interest to report. 
 
Key Words: green gentrification, health inequalities, environmental health, health promotion 
 
 
 
Post-print of: Cole, H., et al. "Are green cities healthy and equitable?" Unpacking the 
relationship between health, green space and gentrification" in Journal of epidemiology 
and community health (Ed. BMJ). Published online 19 Aug. 2017. The final version is 
available at DOI 10.1136/jech-2017-209201
 Abstract 
 
While access and exposure to green spaces has been shown to be beneficial for the health of 
urban residents, interventions focused on augmenting such access may also catalyze 
gentrification processes, also known as green gentrification. Drawing from the fields of public 
health, urban planning and environmental justice, we argue that public health and epidemiology 
researchers should rely on a more dynamic model of community that accounts for the potential 
unintended social consequences of upstream health interventions. In our example of green 
gentrification, the health benefits of greening can only be fully understood relative to the social 
and political environments in which inequities persist. We point to two key questions regarding 
the health benefits of newly added green space: Who benefits in the short and long term from 
greening interventions in lower-income or minority neighborhoods undergoing processes of 
revitalization? And, can green cities be both healthy and just? We propose the Green 
Gentrification and Health Equity model which provides a framework for understanding and 
testing whether gentrification associated with green space may modify the effect of exposure to 
green space on health. 
 
Introduction 
 
In recent decades, the field of urban public health has experienced a shift toward an emphasis 
on upstream interventions, and a broader understanding within the policy-making world of the 
concept of “health in all policies”- that is that all social and environmental policies have health 
implications. However, the potential unintended consequences of interventions on social and 
environmental conditions within cities have remained understudied and discussed. One 
example of this dilemma is the case of green gentrification, or gentrification processes 
accompanying improvements in access to urban green space. While new or improved green 
spaces benefit residents by providing opportunities for physical activity, improving social 
cohesion, and reducing air pollution, accompanying gentrification may result in contentious local 
social relations, and may actually exacerbate inequities in health and other outcomes by 
determining who benefits from these amenities, and who doesn’t, transforming these new green 
amenities into what we call GreenLULUs and a green paradox.[1] Such impacts thus require the 
use of complex thinking in promoting urban health equity, and in considering such processes in 
environmental and social epidemiologic research. While unintended consequences have always 
been important in the ethical evaluation of public health interventions, considering the 
unintended consequences of structural environmental changes such as greening is particularly 
important given the shift toward more upstream interventions with greater proclivity to change 
social conditions. Here, we understand urban greening as the creation or restoration of green 
amenities (i.e., parks, gardens, ecological corridors that connect natural areas, greenways, 
playgrounds and other recreational spaces, etc) in local neighborhoods. 
 
Within this framework, two key questions arise regarding the health benefits of this newly added 
green space: Who benefits in the short and long term from greening interventions in lower-
income or minority neighborhoods undergoing processes of revitalization? And, can green cities 
be both healthy and just? In order to answer these questions, research must account for the 
 reciprocal relationship between greening as a public health intervention and gentrification 
process as a socio-economic process and (at times) political project, which have been shown to 
accompany new urban greening initiatives. Merging the fields of public health, urban planning 
and environmental justice, we argue that because the health effects of greening can only be 
fully understood relative to the social and political environments in which inequities persist, 
epidemiologic research needs a dynamic model of community that accounts for potential 
unintended social consequences.  
 
Implementing greening Initiatives 
 
It is well documented that neighborhood environments, both social and physical, affect health 
and well-being. Many epidemiologic studies document the importance of socioeconomic and 
racial spatial segregation in the study of health inequities and geographies, by creating vastly 
inequitable exposure to worse neighborhood social and physical environments, concentrated 
poverty, and fewer economic and educational opportunities.[2] In addition, physical aspects of 
neighborhoods such as the presence or absence of parks, pedestrian infrastructure, or retail 
outlets providing healthy foods, may also impact residents’ health.[3, 4] Efforts to improve 
physical and natural environments in cities, for example through the creation of new parks and 
gardens, are hypothesized to improve health through promoting physical activity, fostering 
social support, reducing stress, and lowering exposure to air pollution and other environmental 
toxins.[5] These green interventions, often described as sustainability or resilience measures, 
are central to the “healthy city” approach and continue a long history of planning and building 
municipal infrastructure around improved healthy urban environments and improved health 
outcomes for residents.[6] Meanwhile, environmental justice studies demonstrate that the 
greatest burden of negative effects from the environment is concentrated among lower-income 
and racial or ethnic minorities.[7-12]  
 
Structural changes to the physical urban environment, such as greening, move toward the 
upstream end of the health intervention spectrum, addressing a relatively distal cause of 
disease, rather than targeting individualistic behavior changes such as promoting physical 
activity or improving diets. At the same time, such interventions maintain distance from the 
political nature of policy interventions designed to change social conditions, which would lie 
even further upstream. This political nature may also be a barrier to implementing effective 
upstream interventions.[13] Urban planning processes are indeed influenced by a hierarchy of 
organized interests which control land use decisions, such as where new parks or other open 
spaces may be placed, where commercial or residential developments may be authorized, and, 
even, where industry may remain. This hierarchy traditionally places economic growth-oriented 
interests at the top, leaving other interests such as social equity, environmental sustainability 
and health promotion in a subordinate position. In addition, poor stakeholder communications 
and a tendency toward land use planning that fails to address the comprehensive development 
of a neighborhood or a district, and the varying needs of its residents, also contribute to 
planning decisions which do not address health in a comprehensive manner.  
 
 Meanwhile, some city plans and planners use health as an apolitical outcome by which to justify 
municipal expenditures on greening initiatives, in many cases bridging social equity and 
environmental sustainability,[14] and as a potential benchmark by which to deem such initiatives 
as beneficial. Yet, researchers in political ecology, urban planning, and urban geography have 
recently brought to light the potential social injustices of gentrification linked to green initiatives 
in cities.[8, 9, 15] These socio-spatial dynamics complicate the nature of greening as a “win-win” 
intervention. In addition, public health practitioners are researchers advocating for greening 
initiatives who often cite the health benefits of greening without regard to such dynamics, and 
without heeding the implications of this relationship for health equity in cities. 
 
Green Space and Gentrification: Causality or Reciprocal Determinism? 
 
New or intensified urban socio-spatial inequities have been shown to accompany urban 
greening agendas and interventions, such as greenways, parks, community gardens, ecological 
corridors, or restored waterfronts.[16] Much remains unknown about the long-term racial and 
spatial distribution of the benefits of greening interventions. One central distributional issue is 
the finding that greening initiatives are sometimes associated with gentrification in historically 
marginalized neighborhoods.[1, 15, 16] Such “green gentrification” results when parks or 
gardens, for example, become catalysts for neighborhood revitalization that produce changes in 
demographic, real estate, and consumption patterns such that the area becomes accessible 
only for people from more privileged social and ethnic backgrounds.[17, 18] By changing the 
social environments of neighborhoods, this process may increase stress due to increased local 
cost of living, changes in local culture and demographics, and potentially force displacement of 
long term residents, particularly among the most vulnerable urban residents. These 
gentrification processes may reinforce segregation by race or socioeconomic status, despite 
initial changes appearing to make neighborhoods more diverse by attracting wealthier or whiter 
residents.[19] Green gentrification may exclude socially and economically vulnerable residents, 
both through forced displacement, leading to the re-segregation of vulnerable residents to other 
areas, and due to changes in neighborhood social environments that may alienate these 
residents making them feel unwelcome. 
 
Although the causal direction of the relationship between green space and gentrification is 
uncertain, the association between the creation or restoration of green amenities and increases 
in the share of college graduates or higher-income residents (both being indicators of 
gentrification) has been demonstrated.[20] The economic “benefits” of green space is also 
touted in city plans, building on research demonstrating that property values tend to rise after 
new green spaces are produced – with further tax benefits and income harnessed by 
municipalities.[21] That said, it might also be true that resources eventually applied to the 
creation or improvement of green space may instead be a result of gentrification processes 
bringing greater economic resources into previously distressed neighborhoods. Regardless of 
the direction of this relationship, minorities or residents of lower socioeconomic position are 
known to be particularly sensitive to rising costs and changing social conditions[15] and these 
may present barriers to remaining in their neighborhoods and benefiting from green spaces.  
 
 Gentrification and Health 
 
Gentrification, which has no one cause, is a complex and often contentious topic in the social 
sciences. As with many social issues, its exact definition, and thus its operationalization in 
research is varied. Generally, gentrification describes an increase in neighborhood-level 
affluence, marked by higher housing costs, changes in neighborhood amenities such as the 
types of stores in a neighborhood, ultimately leading to an increased cost of living in an 
area.[22] While lower income residents in gentrifying neighborhoods may be displaced by these 
higher living costs, those who remain in gentrifying neighbors are also affected by changes. 
Limited research in the public health literature have cited the health effects of both 
displacement, and of living in gentrified or gentrifying neighborhoods. The displacement of 
vulnerable residents may result in increases in disrupted social ties and the perpetuation of 
geographically concentrated poverty, accompanied by increased exposure to chronic stress, 
leading to worse health outcomes among displaced residents.[23, 24] Furthermore, in the case 
of green gentrification, displaced residents are thereby excluded from the potential benefits of 
the environmental amenity. Gentrification may also create new stresses such as raising prices, 
and changes to protective neighborhood social environments (such as a reduction in social 
ties), and eventually reduce the positive health impacts of living in proximity to green space, 
particularly for more vulnerable residents who are not displaced.  
 
Few studies to date have evaluated the impact of gentrification on health among those who are 
not displaced, but emerging evidence indicates a potential interaction between race (as a 
measure of social stratification) and gentrification, indicating that gentrification may have 
benefits for more privileged residents while harming vulnerable residents. Such interactions 
between gentrification and race have been found in studies of preterm birth,[25] and of general 
self-rated health.[26] In both cases, while gentrification itself had either no effect, or a modest 
positive impact on the outcome for residents at large, negative impacts of gentrification were 
found for blacks. Although the CDC hypothesizes an impressive list of social determinants of 
health with potential negative health outcomes which may result from gentrification 
processes,[27] few studies have empirically evaluated these claims. Their list includes health 
effects, which could result from limited access to affordable housing, healthy food choices, 
transportation choices, quality schools, pedestrian infrastructure, and social networks. They also 
hypothesize that gentrification may lead to increases in stress levels, injuries, violence and 
crime, poor mental health, and changes in social and environmental justice. 
 
Proportionate Universalism 
 
In addition to the scale at which community health interventions are designed, debate also 
remains regarding the proportionate universalism of new initiatives. Should interventions target 
segments of society that are most vulnerable or those who exhibit the worst health outcomes? 
Or should they aim to improve the health of the entire population, hoping for trickle-down effects 
to the most socially vulnerable residents? Is it better to change the shape of the curve, or shift it 
in its current form toward better health, inequities and all? The unintended consequences of 
upstream interventions may result in interventions that do neither. Although green spaces can 
 easily be conceptualized as a universal intervention, aiming to improve the health of all 
residents of a neighborhood, as described above, displacement, changing social environments 
and the additional stresses of living in a gentrifying neighborhood may cause the exclusion of 
vulnerable residents from the benefits of new green spaces. Likely, the benefits of such 
interventions, when mediated by gentrification processes, may produce a more complex pattern 
of health and social outcomes which should not be ignored. This pattern may create a reverse 
proportionate universalism, where the benefits are universally felt, but are concentrated among 
those that are least vulnerable. 
 
 
What’s next? 
 
The Green Gentrification and Health Equity model we propose here (see Figure 1) provides a 
framework for understanding and testing whether gentrification associated with green space 
may modify the effect of green space on health. We aim to contextualize the general 
understanding of the relationship between green space and health within the current 
sociopolitical environment and develop new empirical research testing the relationships 
presented here – including the role of gentrification in mediating the relationship between green 
space and health outcomes. By doing so, we do not wish to discourage the creation or 
improvement of green space in cities, which is known to improve the environment and health, 
but rather to promote complex and nuanced thinking regarding urban physical and social 
environments, and to understand how such interventions may be supported by policies to 
ensure equitable and sustainable benefits for all.  
 
 
  
 
Figure Legend: A dotted line indicates influences primarily in the North American context. 
 
Licence for Publication 
 
The Corresponding Author has the right to grant on behalf of all authors and does grant on 
behalf of all authors, an exclusive licence (or non exclusive for government employees) on a 
worldwide basis to the BMJ Publishing Group Ltd to permit this article (if accepted) to be 
published in JECH and any other BMJPGL products and sublicences such use and exploit all 
subsidiary rights, as set out in our licence (http://group.bmj.com/products/journals/instructions-
for-authors/licence-forms). 
 
Competing Interest: None declared. 
 
Ethics Approval: This paper is not based on human subjects research and did not require 
ethics approval. 
 
 Contributorship: All authors contributed to the conceptual framework of the paper. HC wrote 
the first draft and refined the manuscript. IA, JC, and MGL provided substantive feedback and 
edits 
 
 References 
 
1. 
Anguelovski I: From Toxic Sites to Parks as (Green) LULUs? New Challenges of 
Inequity, Privilege, Gentrification, and Exclusion for Urban Environmental Justice. 
CPL bibliography 2016, 31(1):23-36. 
2. 
White K, Borrell LN: Racial/ethnic residential segregation: framing the context of 
health risk and health disparities. Health Place 2011, 17(2):438-448. 
3. 
Moore LV, Diez Roux AV, Nettleton JA, Jacobs DR, Franco M: Fast-food 
consumption, diet quality, and neighborhood exposure to fast food: the multi-
ethnic study of atherosclerosis. Am J Epidemiol 2009, 170(1):29-36. 
4. 
Popkin BM, Duffey K, Gordon-Larsen P: Environmental influences on food choice, 
physical activity and energy balance. Physiol Behav 2005, 86(5):603-613. 
5. 
Hartig T, Mitchell R, de Vries S, Frumkin H: Nature and health. Annu Rev Public Health 
2014, 35:207-228. 
6. 
Melosi MV: The Sanitary City: Urban Infrastructure in America from Colonial Times 
to the Present. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press; 2000. 
7. 
Dahmann N, Wolch J, Joassart-Marcelli P, Reynolds K, Jerrett M: The active city? 
Disparities in provision of urban public recreation resources. Health Place 2010, 
16(3):431-445. 
8. 
Pham T-T-H, Apparicio P, Séguin A-M, Landry S, Gagnon M: Spatial distribution of 
vegetation in Montreal: An uneven distribution or environmental inequity? 
Landscape and Urban Planning 2012, 107(3):214-224. 
9. 
Landry SM, Chakraborty J: Street Trees and Equity: Evaluating the Spatial 
Distribution of an Urban Amenity. Environment and Planning A 2009, 41(11):2651-
2670. 
10. 
Heynen N, Perkins HA, Roy P: The Political Ecology of Uneven Urban Green Space. 
Urban Affairs Review 2006, 42(1):3-25. 
11. 
Hastings A: Territorial Justice and Neighbourhood Environmental Services: A 
Comparison of Provision to Deprived and Better-off Neighbourhoods in the UK. 
Environment and Planning C: Government and Policy 2007, 25(6):896-917. 
12. 
Boone CG, Buckley GL, Grove JM, Sister C: Parks and People: An Environmental 
Justice Inquiry in Baltimore, Maryland. Annals of the Association of American 
Geographers 2009, 99(4):767-787. 
13. 
Freudenberg N, Franzosa E, Chisholm J, Libman K: New approaches for moving 
upstream: how state and local health departments can transform practice to 
reduce health inequalities. Health Educ Behav 2015, 42(1 Suppl):46S-56S. 
14. 
Myers TA, Nisbet MC, Maibach EW, Leiserowitz AA: A public health frame arouses 
hopeful emotions about climate change. Climatic Change 2012, 113(3):1105-1112. 
15. 
Pearsall H: From brown to green? Assessing social vulnerability to environmental 
gentrification in New York City. Environment and Planning C: Government and Policy 
2010, 28:872-886. 
16. 
Gould KA, Lewis TL: Green Gentrification. New York City: Routledge; 2017. 
17. 
Smith N: Gentrification, the Frontier and the Restructuring of Urban Space. In: 
Gentrification in the City. edn. Edited by Smith N, Williams P. London, UK: Unwin 
Hyman; 1986: 15-34. 
18. 
Smith N: Gentrification and the Rent-gap. Annals of the Association of American 
Geographers 1987, 77(3):462-465. 
19. 
Anguelovski I, Connolly J, Masip L, Pearsall H: Assessing environmental 
gentrification impacts of neighborhood greening in historically disenfranchised 
 areas: A longitudinal and spatial analysis through the municipal area of 
Barcelona. Urban Geography 2017, (Accepted). 
20. 
Gamper-Rabindran S, Timmins C: Hazardous Waste Cleanup, Neighborhood 
Gentrification, and Environmental Justice: Evidence from Restricted Access 
Census Block Data. American Economic Review 2011, 101(3):620-624. 
21. 
Checker M: Wiped Out by the “Greenwave”: Environmental Gentrification and the 
Paradoxical Politics of Urban Sustainability. City & Society 2011, 23:210-229. 
22. 
Kennedy M, Leonard P: Dealing with Neighborhood Change: A Primer on 
Gentrification and Policy Choices. In. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution; 2001. 
23. 
Keene DE, Geronimus AT: "Weathering" HOPE VI: the importance of evaluating the 
population health impact of public housing demolition and displacement. J Urban 
Health 2011, 88(3):417-435. 
24. 
Fullilove MT, Wallace R: Serial forced displacement in American cities, 1916-2010. J 
Urban Health 2011, 88(3):381-389. 
25. 
Huynh M, Maroko AR: Gentrification and preterm birth in New York City, 2008-2010. 
J Urban Health 2014, 91(1):211-220. 
26. 
Gibbons J, Barton MS: The Association of Minority Self-Rated Health with Black 
versus White Gentrification. J Urban Health 2016, 93(6):909-922. 
27. 
Health Effects of Gentrification 
[https://www.cdc.gov/healthyplaces/healthtopics/gentrification.htm] 
 
 
 