 A Polyphenol-Rich Fraction Obtained from Table Grapes 
Decreases Adiposity, Insulin Resistance, and Markers of 
Inflammation and Impacts Gut Microbiota in High-Fat Fed Mice
Brian Collins1,#, Jessie Hoffman1,#, Kristina Martinez2, Mary Grace3, Mary Ann Lila3, Chase 
Cockrell2, Anuradha Nadimpalli2, Eugene Chang2, Chia-Chi Chuang4, Wei Zhong5, Jessica 
Mackert1, Wan Shen1, Paula Cooney1, Robin Hopkins1, and Michael McIntosh1,*
1Department of Nutrition, University of North Carolina at Greensboro (UNCG), Greensboro, NC
2Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL
3Plants for Human Health Institute, NCSU-NCRC, Kannapolis, NC
4Department of Internal Medicine/Section on Molecular Medicine, Wake Forest School of 
Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC
5Center for Translational Biomedical Research, UNCG-NCRC, Kannapolis, NC Version 12-7-15 
JNB 15-631 revised
Abstract
The objective of this study was to determine if consuming an extractable or non-extractable 
fraction of table grapes reduced the metabolic consequences of consuming a high-fat, American-
type diet. Male C57BL/6J mice were fed a low fat (LF) diet, a high fat (HF) diet, or a HF diet 
containing whole table grape powder (5% w/w), an extractable, polyphenol-rich (HF-EP) fraction, 
a non-extractable, polyphenol-poor (HF-NEP) fraction, or equal combinations of both fractions 
(HF-EP+NEP) from grape powder for 16 weeks. Mice fed the HF-EP and HF-EP+NEP diets had 
lower percentages of body fat and amounts of white adipose tissue (WAT) and improved glucose 
tolerance compared to the HF-fed controls. Mice fed the HF-EP+NEP diet had lower liver weights 
and triglyceride (TG) levels compared to the HF-fed controls. Mice fed the HF-EP+NEP diets had 
higher hepatic mRNA levels of hormone sensitive lipase and adipose TG lipase, and decreased 
expression of c-reactive protein compared to the HF-fed controls. In epididymal (visceral) WAT, 
the expression levels of several inflammatory genes were lower in mice fed the HF-EP and HF-EP
+NEP diets compared to the HF-fed controls. Mice fed the HF diets had increased 
myeloperoxidase activity and impaired localization of the tight junction protein zonula 
occludens-1 in ileal mucosa compared to the HF-EP and HF-NEP diets. Several of these treatment 
effects were associated with alterations in gut bacterial community structure. Collectively, these 
*To whom correspondence should be addressed: Michael K. McIntosh, Ph.D., R.D., Department of Nutrition, 318 Stone Building, PO 
Box 26170, University of North Carolina Greensboro, Greensboro, NC 27402-6170, Phone: 336/256-0325; Fax: 336/334-4129; 
mkmcinto@uncg.edu.
#Authors contributed equally to this manuscript
No conflicts of interest: Brian Collins, Jessie Hoffman, Kristina Martinez, Mary Grace, Mary Ann Lila, Chia-Chi Chuang, Chase 
Cockrell, Anuradha Nadimpalli, Eugene Chang, Jessica Mackert, Wan Shen, Paula Cooney, Robin Hopkins, and Michael McIntosh
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
J Nutr Biochem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Published in final edited form as:
J Nutr Biochem. 2016 May ; 31: 150–165. doi:10.1016/j.jnutbio.2015.12.021.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 data demonstrate that the polyphenol-rich, EP fraction from table grapes attenuated many of the 
adverse health consequences associated with consuming a HF diet.
Keywords
grapes; obesity; steatosis; inflammation; intestines; microbiota
 1. Introduction
Obesity has been on the rise since the 1960s, affecting approximately one third of the adult 
population [1, 2]. Obesity is associated with chronic inflammatory conditions that contribute 
to the metabolic syndrome (e.g., type 2 diabetes, hypertension, and cardiovascular disease) 
[3]. Over consumption of calories coinciding with a lack of physical activity are the major 
risk factors for obesity development resulting in expansion of white adipose tissue (WAT). 
WAT expansion elicits inflammatory signals that recruit macrophages and other immune 
cells into the WAT [4]. This inflammatory scenario disrupts metabolic processes, resulting in 
impaired glucose and fatty acid uptake and metabolism, thereby contributing to the 
development of metabolic diseases.
Recently, the role that gut microbes play in the development of the metabolic syndrome has 
received attention due to their sensitivity to environmental changes that can trigger obesity 
[5], chronic inflammation [6–8], and insulin resistance [reviewed in 9]. Diets high in fat 
decrease gut microbial diversity and barrier-protecting bacteria while increasing the 
abundance of deleterious bacteria [reviewed in 10]. For example, an increase in the ratio of 
Firmicutes to Bacteriodetes is positively correlated with the development of obesity and 
insulin resistance [11]. Diets rich in saturated fat [11, 12], particularly from milk [13], 
increase the abundance of sulfidogenic bacteria like Bilophila wadsworthia and 
Desulfovibrionaceae spp. These bacteria generate the genotoxic and cytotoxic gas hydrogen 
sulfide gas, which has been linked to ulcerative colitis, gut inflammation, irritable bowel 
syndrome, and colon cancer [13–15]. Notably, the effects of high fat (HF) diets on body 
weight gain are repressed in microbiota-free mouse models as well as in human fecal 
microbiota transplants from healthy donors into obese subjects [16].
The use of non-digestible carbohydrates, fiber, or polyphenols as prebiotics shows promise 
as potential interventions for the metabolic consequences of obesity [13, reviewed in 17–20]. 
Fiber, in particular inulin-type fructans, has been shown to increase the abundance of 
Bifidobacteria which was positively correlated with decreased hyperglycemia, endotoxemia, 
and systemic cytokine levels [21, 22]. Similar effects have been reported in obese subjects 
with short-term supplementation of gluco-oligosaccharides [23], and are associated with the 
production of specific short chain fatty acids (SCFA) that regulate the synthesis of 
gastrointestinal (GI) peptides. These peptides influence energy intake and metabolism 
through interactions with G-protein receptors (Gpr) 41, 43, and 119 [reviewed in 20].
Polyphenols found in fruits and vegetables may improve GI health [24–26, reviewed in 27]. 
Absorption of polyphenols is poor in the upper gastrointestinal tract, leading to increased 
availability in the lower GI tract [reviewed in 27] that may influence microbiota taxa and 
Collins et al.
Page 2
J Nutr Biochem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 their metabolites [reviewed in 28]. Indeed, the anti-inflammatory, anti-oxidant, and anti-
microbial actions of polyphenols have been reported to positively influence gut microbes 
and host inflammation [reviewed in 29].
Grapes and other berries are rich in polyphenols including anthocyanins [reviewed in 29], 
which are known to have anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidant effects [30]. These beneficial 
effects of grapes have been associated with reduced cytokine levels via suppression of 
nuclear factor kappa B (NFκB) and increased peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor 
(PPAR)α/γ [31]. Similarly, we demonstrated that C57BL/6J mice consuming a HF diet (i.e., 
60% kcals from lard) supplemented with whole powdered California table grapes (3%, w/w) 
had improved glucose tolerance after 5 weeks and decreased markers of inflammation ~20–
50% in serum and WAT after 18 weeks [32]. We also showed that consuming a moderate fat 
diet (i.e., 34% of kcals, primarily from butter fat) supplemented with whole powdered grapes 
(3% or 5% w/w) reduced adiposity, improved liver triglyceride (TG) levels, modestly 
reduced WAT inflammatory gene expression, and lowered the cecum levels of sulfidogenic 
bacteria, while tending to increase the abundance of Akkermansia muciniphila and 
Allobaculum in the proximal colon and cecum, respectively [33].
However, the identities of the bioactive fractions in whole table grapes and the role that gut 
microbiota play in improvements in diet-induced obesity in mice fed grapes are unknown. 
Therefore, the objective of this study was to determine the extent to which consuming 
extractable, polyphenol-rich and non-extractable, polyphenol-poor fractions of table grapes 
improved intestinal and systemic health in mice fed a HF, American-type diet. The 
lyophilized whole grape powder was extracted with acidified methanol, and sugars were 
removed to afford the extractable polyphenol-rich (EP) fraction. The residual plant material 
after methanol extraction constituted the non-extractable, polyphenol-poor (NEP) fraction. 
This separation scheme allowed us to compare the effects of the more soluble polyphenols in 
the EP fraction compared to insoluble polyphenols typically bound to fiber in the NEP 
fraction. These fractions were incorporated into a HF, American-type diet [34]. This HF diet 
was fed alone or in combination with the EP fraction, the NEP fraction, both fractions (EP
+NEP), or whole grape powder (GP; 5%, w/w) for 16 weeks.
 2. Materials and Methods
 2.1 Plant materials and chemicals
The lyophilized (i.e., powdered) table grapes were kindly provided by the California Table 
Grape Commission and consisted of a mixture of red, green, and purple seeded and seedless 
grapes. Reference compounds procyanidin B2 (PAC-B2), catechin and epicatechin were 
purchased from Chromadex (Irvine, CA). 4-dimethylaminocinnamaldehyde (DMAC), Folin-
Ciocalteu reagent, and trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Inc. 
(St. Louis, MO). All organic solvents were HPLC grade and obtained from VWR 
International (Suwanee, GA).
Collins et al.
Page 3
J Nutr Biochem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
  2.2 Extraction and polyphenol enrichment
Freeze-dried grape powder (200 g × 5 batches) was blended each with 1 L 50% acidified 
methanol (0.1% TFA). The mixture was centrifuged (Sorvall RC-6 plus, Asheville, NC) at 
3,452 × g for 10 min, and the supernatant was collected. The combined supernatants (2 L) 
were evaporated to remove the organic solvent, and then loaded to Amberlite XDA-7 resin. 
The resin was washed with water to get rid of all free sugars and organic acids. The 
polyphenols were eluted from the resin with 100% methanol, organic solvent was 
evaporated under vacuum, and the remaining aqueous extract was freeze-dried to afford the 
EP fraction. The pelleted material (plant debris after extraction) was put in a vacuum oven 
(45 °C) to get rid of the organic solvent before freeze-drying to afford the NEP fraction.
 2.3 Alkaline hydrolysis of NEP fraction
Alkaline hydrolysis of the NEP fraction was performed according to Yang et al. [35] with 
some modifications. In 15 mL centrifuge tube, 2.0 mL of 4 mol/L NaOH were added to 0.5 
g NEP, flushed with nitrogen, closed and incubated for 1 h at room temperature. The mixture 
was adjusted to pH 7 with drops of concentrated hydrochloric acid, then loaded onto a 
column packed with celite at a ratio 1:2 v/w. The hydrolyzed polyphenols were eluted with 
30 mL methanol-ethyl acetate (20:80 v/v), and evaporated to dryness.
 2.4 Determination of total phenolics, anthocyanins and proanthocyanidins
Total phenolics (TP) were determined in EP and NEP hydrolysate fractions with Folin-
Ciocalteu reagent [36]. Concentrations were expressed as mg/L gallic acid equivalents. Total 
monomeric anthocyanin (ANC) content was measured in EP using the pH differential 
spectrophotometric method [37], and expressed as cyanidin3-O-glucoside equivalents. Total 
proanthocyanidin content (PAC) was determined in EP using the DMAC method as 
previously described [38], and quantified as procyanidin B2 equivalents.
 2.5 HPLC profile analyses of anthocyanins and proanthocyanidins
HPLC analyses were conducted according to the previously reported protocols [39].
 2.6 Animals
Four-week old, male C57BL/6J mice were obtained from Jackson Laboratories (Bar Harbor, 
ME, USA) and acclimated on a standard chow diet for 1 week. Mice were housed in pairs, 
maintained at a temperature of 22°C with 50% humidity, and exposed to a 12 h light/12 h 
dark cycle. Mice received food and water ad libitum and measures of body weight and food 
intake were conducted once and twice per week, respectively. All experimental procedures 
were performed under ethical standards and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and 
Use Committee of the University of North Carolina at Greensboro.
 2.7 Diets and western blotting supplies
Animals were randomly assigned to one of six dietary treatments (n=10 per treatment group) 
as follows: low fat (LF; 10% of energy from fat), HF (44% of energy from fat), HF plus 
extractable, polyphenol-rich fraction (HF-EP), HF plus non-extractable, polyphenol-poor 
fraction (HF-NEP), HF plus extractable and non-extractable polyphenol fraction (HF-EP
Collins et al.
Page 4
J Nutr Biochem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 +NEP) and HF plus 5% powdered grapes (HF-grape powder) (Supplemental Table 1). The 
LF diet consisted of 5.5% energy from soybean oil and 4.5% from lard. The HF diets 
consisted of approximately 10.5% energy from soybean oil, 9.6% of energy from butter, 
7.6% energy from lard, 12.0% energy from shortening, and 4.3% energy from beef tallow 
[34, 40]. Thus, the HF diets were rich in fat with the proportion of the sources of fat 
mimicking an American-type diet [34]. Compared to the LF diet, the HF diets also had a 
greater percentage of energy from saturated and monounsaturated fats and a lesser 
percentage of energy from polyunsaturated fats. The amounts of EP and NEP fractions that 
were added to the HF diets were equal to their relatively amounts in the 5% powdered whole 
grape diet (i.e., grape powder contained 2.3% and 6.9% EP and NEP, respectively). The 5% 
dietary level of grapes is comparable to 15 human servings of grapes [33]. Because the 
extraction process removes the sugar fraction in grapes, a mixture of fructose and glucose 
was added to the HF, HF-EP, HF-NEP, and HF-EP+NEP diets to control for the sugar 
content of the powdered grape diet.
Immunoblotting buffers and precast gels were purchased from Invitrogen by Life 
Technologies (Carlsbad, CA). Polyclonal antibodies for anti-glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate 
dehydrogenase (GAPDH; #sc20357) and a monoclonal antibody for anti-PPARγ 
(sc#2443S)were obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA). AMPK 
(#2532), phospho-AMPK (Thr172; #2535), phospho-acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC; Ser79; 
#11818), phospho-hormone sensitive lipase (HSL; Ser563; #4139), phospho-nuclear factor 
kappa B (NFκB) p65 (Ser536, #3033) and anti-rabbit IgG horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-
linked (#7074) antibodies were purchased from Cell Signaling Technologies (Beverly, MA).
 2.8 Plasma markers of insulin resistance and inflammation
Intraperitoneal (i.p.) GTTs were performed on weeks 7, 12, and 16 on non-anesthetized, 
fasted mice as previously described [33]. Plasma insulin levels were detected using an 
ultrasensitive mouse insulin kit (Crystal Chem, Inc, Downers Grove, IL). The homeostasis 
model of assessment (HOMA) for insulin resistance (IR) was calculated as described [32, 
33].
Plasma monocyte chemoattractant protein (MCP)-1 was measured using an ELISA kit from 
R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA (#MJE00). Plasma lipopolysaccharide (LPS) 
binding protein (LBP), an acute-phase protein that initiates recognition of LPS and activates 
host immune responses, was determined using an ELISA kit from Cell Sciences, Canton, 
MA (#CKM043).
 2.9 Body fat measurements via Dual X-Ray Absorptiometry (DEXA)
Percent body fat was measured using DEXA on a GE Lunar Prodigy Advanced System (GE 
Healthcare, Milwaukee, WI) at weeks 6, 11, and 15 as previously described [33].
 2.10 Tissue collection
After 16 weeks of dietary intervention, mice were fasted for 8 h and euthanized via 
isoflurane-induced anesthesia followed by cardiac puncture. Plasma was collected at the 
time of harvest. Four WAT depots were collected; epididymal, mesenteric, inguinal, and 
Collins et al.
Page 5
J Nutr Biochem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 retroperitoneal. Additionally, livers were harvested and intestinal mucosa and digesta were 
collected from the duodenum, jejunum, ileum, cecum, or proximal or distal colon. Weights 
of the WAT depots and livers were recorded and all collected samples were immediately 
snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80°C until analysis.
 2.11 Liver and plasma TG levels
Liver TG content was measured as previously described [41]. Briefly, lipids were extracted 
from liver samples (~50–100 mg) using chloroform:methanol (vol:vol = 2:1). Next, 
sulphuric acid (0.05 %) was added to split the phase. After centrifugation (1000 × g for 5 
min at room temperature), the bottom/organic phase was transferred to a new glass tube and 
triton X-100 (1% in chloroform) was added. Samples were dried down at 60°C under 
nitrogen gas and water was added into each sample (1 ml of 1% Triton X-100 in chloroform: 
0.5 ml of water). Liver TGs were measured using commercial enzymatic reagents (Wako 
Diagnostics L-Type TG M; Richmond, VA). Plasma TG content was determined using a 
commercial assay from Thermo Scientific (Infinity TG assay #TR22421 and TG standards 
#TG22923; Norcross, GA).
 2.12 Liver Oil-Red-O staining
Liver tissues were frozen in OCT compounds, cut at 5 μm, and mounted on slides. The 
sections were then fixed, washed, and subjected to Oil-Red-O staining and imaging as 
previously described [33].
 2.13 RNA extraction and qPCR
Adipose and intestinal samples were homogenized and total RNA extracted as previously 
described [33]. For hepatic samples, a QIAgen mini universal kit from Qiagen was used. The 
quality and concentration of RNA were examined, complementary cDNA synthesized, and 
qPCR conducted as we described [33]. The expression of genes related to inflammation, 
lipogenesis, and lipolysis in WAT depots and liver were measured using Taqman Gene 
expression assays purchased from Applied Biosystems. TATA-binding protein (Tbp) was the 
endogenous reference gene utilized for all assays and fold differences in gene expression 
were calculated as 2−ΔΔCt as previously described [33].
 2.14 Intestinal myeloperoxidase (MPO) and alkaline phosphatase (IAP) activities, and 
ZO-1 staining
MPO activity was measured as described by Kim et al. [42]. Results were expressed as the 
change in absorbance per minute per gram protein. Briefly, 25 mg of either ileum or 
proximal colon tissue was homogenized in a potassium phosphate buffer (50 mM, pH=6.0) 
with hexadecyltrimethylammonium bromide on ice. The homogenate was centrifuged for 6 
min at 13,400 × g at 4°C. The resulting supernatant was collected, loaded onto 96 well 
plates, and the activity monitored at 450 nm for 30 min following the addition of 0.167 g/ml 
o-dianisidine and 0.005% H2O2.
IAP activity was measured in the duodenum mucosa using a SensoLyte p-nitrophenyl 
phosphate (pNPP) Alkaline Phosphatase Assay Kit (no. 72146; Anaspec, Fremont, CA) 
[43]. Duodenal mucosa was homogenized with lysis buffer (i.e., 400 μl/50 mg tissue) and 
Collins et al.
Page 6
J Nutr Biochem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 centrifuged for 15 min at 10,000 × g at 4°C. The supernatant was diluted 1:100 and 
transferred to a 96-well plate. Total protein was measured using the BCA protocol. Samples 
were incubated with pNPP substrate solution for 15 min, and absorbance was read at 405 
nm. Activity was expressed as μg per mL of alkaline phosphatase per mg of protein.
The localization of the tight junction protein zonula occludens-1 (ZO-1) was determined in 
ileal mucosa samples as previously described [33]. Three to four samples from each group 
were analyzed by Image J software. Each photo was corrected by its own background and 
then adjusted by DAPI.
 2.15 Short chain fatty acid (SCFA) measurement
SCFAs were extracted from cecal digesta as previously described [44]. Snap frozen cecal 
digesta samples were collected, weighed (~20–70 mg/sample), and homogenized in water 
followed by centrifugation at 13,000 × g. Supernatants were acidified with 50% H2SO4 and 
isobutyric acid (3 mmol/L) was added (internal standard) to each sample. SCFAs were 
extracted using diethyl ether, derivatized using MTBS-TFA, and run on a Varian Saturn 2000 
GC-MS-MS.
 2.16. PCR amplification of 16S rRNA and functional gene targets
qPCR amplification of 16S rRNA and functional gene targets was performed with a Roche 
480 II Light Cycler. 16S rRNA gene-specific primers were used to target specific bacterial 
genera; 16s rRNA (F- 5′-TCC TAC GGG AGG CAG CAG T -3′ (R-5′ –GGA CTA CCA 
GGG TAT CTA ATC CTG TT -3′), dissimulatory sulfate reductase (dsr)AB (F- 5′-CCA 
ACA TGC ACG GYT CCA -3′) (R- 5′-CGT CGA ACT TGA ACT TGA ACT TGT AG -3′), 
taurine-pyruvate aminotransferase (tpa; Bilophila specific): (F-5′ –ACT TCT GTT CGA 
CGG TGG TG -3′) (R-5′ – GCA AGA CCT CTC GCT CCT TC -3′), butyrate kinase (buk) 
(F- 5′-TCT TGT WGT TGG WAG AGG YGG A -3′) (R- 5′-GCA ACI GCY TTT TGA TTT 
AAT GCA TGG -3′), hydroxybutyrate-CoA transferase (but): (Forward: 5′-TCG ATA GAC 
ATA TGC CAK GAG -3′; Reverse: 5′-TCG ATA CCG GAC ATA TGC CAK GAG -3′). 
Genes were quantified by determining a standard curve for gene copy number by cloning 
primer sequences into pCR4-TOPO plasmids and gene copy number was determined from 
cecum mucosa as previously described [45,46].
 2.17. Sequencing of 16S rRNA gene using Illumina Mi-Seq platform
To assess bacterial community structure, primers specific for 16S rRNA V4–V5 region 
(Forward: 338F: 5′-GTGCCAGCMGCCGCGGTAA-3′ and Reverse: 806R: 5′-
GGACTACHVGGGTWTCTAAT-3′) that contained Illumina 3′ adapter sequences as well as 
a 12-bp barcode were used. Sequences were generated by an Illumina MiSeq DNA platform 
at Argonne National Laboratory and analyzed by the program Quantitative Insights Into 
Microbial Ecology (QIIME) [47]. Operational Taxonomic Units (OTUs) were picked at 97% 
sequence identity using open reference OTU picking against the Greengenes database (05/13 
release) [48]. OTUs were quality filtered based on default parameters set in the open-
reference OTU command in QIIME and sequences were rarified to an equal sampling depth 
of 5000 reads per sample. Representative sequences were aligned via PyNAST [47], 
taxonomy assigned using the RDP Classifier [49], and a phylogenetic tree was built using 
Collins et al.
Page 7
J Nutr Biochem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 FastTree [50]. Beta Diversity is represented by measuring UniFrac distances calculated 
using both weighted and unweighted algorithms and visualized with PCoA plots generated 
in Emperor.
 2.18 Statistical analysis
Data were analyzed using a one-way ANOVA and Student’s t-tests to compute individual 
pairwise comparisons of means (p<0.05). Bonferroni’s posthoc tests were also performed for 
specific comparisons where appropriate. Analyses were conducted using the JMP software 
program version 10.0 for Windows (SAS, Cary, NC) for all data except for the gut microbes. 
Significant changes in relative OTU abundance were assessed using Kruskal Wallis test 
(FDR correction p ≤ 0.05). Multivariate statistical tests include ADONIS, ANOSIM, and 
PERMANOVA tests [47]. Spearman correlations and Principal Component Analysis (PCA) 
were run using MATLAB software. Relative abundances generated from 16s rRNA 
sequencing were analyzed in GraphPad Prism Version 6 using one-way ANOVA followed 
by Student’s t- tests. Alpha diversity analyses of microbial data were analyzed using QIIME 
1.8 Software [47]. Data are expressed as means + S.E.M.
 3. Results
 3.1 Polyphenol content and profile of EP, NEP, and grape powder
The percentage yield of the EP and NEP fractions were 2.26% and 6.91%, respectively 
(Supplemental Table 2). The EP fraction contained 180.0 mg/g total phenolics as gallic acid 
equivalents (GAE), while the NEP fraction contained 10.5 mg/g. Total anthocyanin and 
proanthocyanidin content of the EP fraction were 37.8 mg/g (as cyaniding-3-O-glucoside 
equivalent) and 305.5 mg/g (as procyanidin B2 equivalent), respectively, whereas these 
polyphenols were not detectable in the NEP fraction (Supplemental Table 2). Individual 
anthocyanin analysis revealed that the most abundant anthocyanins present in the EP fraction 
were peonidin-3-O-glucoside (36.6 u/mg), malvidin-3-O-glucoside (30.8 u/mg), and 
peondin-3-O-cis (6″-O-p-coumaryl)-glucoside (28.5 u/mg) (Table 1). The profile of the 
degree of polymerization of the proanthocyanidins in the EP fraction is shown in 
Supplemental Fig. 1.
 3.2 EP fraction with or without NEP fraction lowers body fat gain
Body weight gains and energy intakes were greater in all HF-fed mice compared to the LF 
controls (Table 2). There was no difference in the energy intake between the HF-fed mice, 
with the exception of the HF-EP+NEP group that consumed approximately 10% fewer 
calories than the HF controls (Table 2). Mice fed the HF-EP and HF-EP+NEP diets had 
lower body weight gains (Table 2; ~28% and 40%, respectively) and body fat percentages 
than the HF controls (Fig. 1; 27% and 37%, respectively). Mice fed the HF-EP, HF-NEP and 
HF-EP+NEP diets had lower total WAT depot weights compared to the HF controls (Fig. 1). 
Paradoxically, mice fed the HF-grape powder diet did not have improvements in body fat 
percentage, body weight, and total WAT depot weights compared to the HF controls.
Collins et al.
Page 8
J Nutr Biochem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
  3.3 EP fraction improves glucose disposal, insulin resistance, hypertriglyceridemia, and 
plasma MCP-1 and LPS binding protein levels
GTTs were conducted at weeks 7, 12, and 16, and fasting plasma insulin and HOMA-IR 
were measured at week 16, respectively, to assess the impact of grape consumption on 
glucose disposal and insulin resistance,. Mice consuming the HF control diet had impaired 
GTTs at all three time points compared to the LF controls (Fig. 2A). This HF-mediated 
impairment was attenuated at all three time points in mice fed the HF-EP diet. Mice fed the 
HF-NEP and HF-EP+NEP diets had improved GTTs at weeks 12 and 16 compared to the 
HF controls. HOMA-IR scores at week 16 indicated that mice consuming the HF-EP+NEP 
fraction had improved insulin sensitivity compared to the HF controls (Fig. 2B). 
Surprisingly, consuming grapes did not significantly improve GTT, fasting plasma insulin, 
and HOMA-IR scores. Mice fed the HF-EP and the HF-EP+NEP diets had lower plasma TG 
levels compared to the HF controls (Fig. 2C). Notably, mice consuming the HF diet had 
increased plasma levels of MCP-1, which were lower in mice consuming the HF-EP and 
HF-EP+NEP diets (Fig. 2D). Mice consuming the HF diet had higher levels of plasma LPS 
binding protein, an indicator of circulating LPS levels, compared to controls. LPS binding 
protein was lower in HF-NEP fed mice compared to HF-fed control mice (Fig. 2E).
 3.4 Grape fraction consumption lowers hepatic TG levels and alters the expression of 
genes associated with lipid metabolism and inflammatory signaling
Liver tissue was analyzed to assess the impact of the diets on liver TG levels and markers of 
lipogenesis, lipolysis, fatty acid oxidation, and inflammation. Mice consuming the HF 
control diet had greater liver weights (Fig. 3A) and TG content (Fig. 3B, 3C) compared to 
the LF-fed mice. These outcomes were lower in mice consuming the HF-EP+NEP diet 
compared to HF-fed control mice. Consistent with these data, the expression of the lipogenic 
transcription factor Pparγ was higher in the HF-fed mice compared to the LF-fed mice, and 
was lower in mice consuming the HF-EP and HF-EP+NEP diets (Fig. 4). Compared to LF 
controls, HF-feeding also increased gene expression of fatty acid synthase (Fas), stearoyl 
regulatory element binding protein 1 (Srebp-1c), and stearoyl-CoA desaturase 1 (Scd1; data 
not shown), which were not affected by grape or grape fraction consumption (Fig. 4).
HF feeding increased the hepatic mRNA levels of the inflammatory marker C-reactive 
protein 1 (Crp1), which was attenuated by HF-EP and HF-EP+NEP feeding (Fig. 4). Mice 
fed the HF-EP and HF-EP+NEP diets had greater mRNA levels of lipolytic enzyme 
hormone sensitive lipase (Hsl), while mice fed the HF-EP+NEP diet had higher mRNA 
levels of adipose triglyceride lipase (Atgl) compared to HF controls (Fig. 4). No treatment 
differences were detected in the expression of carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1-a (Cpt1a) 
(data not shown). Similarly, no treatment differences were detected in the protein levels of 
AMPK-P, PPARγ, P-ACC-1, HSL-P, or NFκB-p65,
 3.5 EP fraction with or without NEP fraction improves the expression of WAT genes 
associated with inflammatory signaling and lipodystrophy
To determine if the negative metabolic effects caused by HF-feeding were associated with 
inflammation in WAT, mRNA levels of several proinflammatory genes were measured in 
inguinal (subcutaneous), epididymal (visceral), and mesenteric (visceral) WAT. In inguinal 
Collins et al.
Page 9
J Nutr Biochem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 WAT, mice fed the HF control diet had greater mRNA levels of cluster of differentiation 11c 
(Cd11c) and monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 (Mcp1) compared to LF controls (Fig. 
5A). This increase was attenuated in mice fed the HF-EP and HF-EP+NEP diets. In 
epididymal WAT, HF-feeding increased the mRNA levels of epidermal growth factor-like 
module containing mucin-like hormone receptor 1 (Erm1; F4/80 human orthologue), Cd11c, 
toll-like receptor-4 (Tlr4), inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNos), Mcp1, and tumor necrosis 
factor alpha (TNFα) compared to the LF controls (Fig. 5B). Consistent with the inguinal 
data, mice fed the HF-EP and HF-EP+NEP diets had lower mRNA levels of these genes 
with the exception of iNos (HF-EP only) compared to the HF controls. Similar with the 
epididymal data, HF-feeding increased mRNA levels of F4/80, Cd11c, Tlr4, and Mcp1 in 
the mesenteric WAT compared to the LF controls, which were attenuated in mice fed the 
HF-EP, HF-NEP, and HF-EP+NEP diets, with the exception of Mcp1 (HF-EP diet only; Fig. 
5C). Although Cd11c and Tlr4 mRNA levels were lower in HF-GP fed mice compared to 
the HF controls, F4/80 and Mcp1 levels were not attenuated by the consumption of whole 
grape powder.
To determine if the reduction in adiposity by consuming grape fractions was associated with 
alterations in lipid metabolism, inguinal and epididymal WAT were examined for markers 
of; (i) lipogenesis (i.e., Pparγ, Srebp1c, Scd1, acylglycerol-3-phosphate-O-acyltransferase 2 
(Agpat2), fatty acid synthase (Fas), glycerol-3-phosphate acyltransferase2 (Gpat2)), (ii) 
lipolysis (i.e., Atgl), (iii) beta-oxidation (i.e., carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1-b (Cpt1b), 
Pparα)), (iv) SCFA receptors (i.e. Gpr43, 41, 119), and (v) plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 
(Pai-1). In inguinal WAT, mice fed the HF diet had greater expression of Agpat2, a gene 
encoding for a protein associated with TG biosynthesis, which was lower in the HF-EP and 
HF-EP+NEP groups (Fig. 6A). The expression of Cpt1p, a beta-oxidation marker, was lower 
in mice fed the whole grape powder and grape fractions compared to the HF controls. No 
treatment differences in gene expression were observed for Srebp1c, Scd1, Fas, Gpat2, Atgl, 
and Pparα (data not shown).
In epididymal WAT, mice consuming the HF diet had higher mRNA levels of Agpat2 
compared to LF controls (Fig. 6B). Consumption of the HF-EP+NEP diet attenuated this 
HF-induced increase in Agpat2 expression. Additionally, mice fed the HF diet with or 
without grapes had lower levels of Pparγ compared to LF controls. The expression of Pparα, 
a marker of beta oxidation, was lower in mice fed the HF control and the grape powder diets 
compared to LF controls. Surprisingly, HF-feeding increased the mRNA levels of Cpt1b, 
which was reduced by HF-EP and HF-EP+NEP feeding. Additionally, mice fed the HF-EP
+NEP diet had lower mRNA levels of Gpr43, a SCFA-activated receptor associated with 
increased energy harvest, compared to HF and LF controls. Gpr119, a cannabinoid-inducible 
gene, was markedly increased in the HF-EP group compared to all other treatments. No 
differences in gene expression in epididymal WAT were observed for Srebp-1c, Scd1, Fas, 
Gpat2, and Atgl (data not shown).
Collins et al.
Page 10
J Nutr Biochem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
  3.6 HF-feeding increases the activity of MPO and impairs the localization of the tight 
junction protein ZO-1
Given the reported adverse effects of consuming diets rich in saturated fats on intestinal 
health [reviewed in 10], and potential prebiotic impact of grapes [reviewed in 29], we 
measured the effects of the diets on; (i) the activity of MPO, an enzyme associated with 
neutrophil infiltration, (ii) IAP, an enzyme that deactivates LPS, (iii) ZO-1 localization, a 
tight junction protein that maintains gut barrier integrity, and (iv) the expression of several 
inflammatory genes in ileum and proximal colon mucosa. The localization of ZO-1 in the 
apical area of the ileal epithelium surface was impaired in HF-fed control mice compared to 
the LF-fed mice, and improved in mice fed the HF-EP and HF-NEP diets (Fig. 7A, B). 
Consistent with these data, the activity of MPO, but not IAP (data not shown), was greater in 
the intestinal mucosa of mice consuming the HF diet compared to the LF diet, and 
attenuated in mice consuming HF diets supplemented with grapes and grape fractions (Fig. 
7C). Of the inflammatory genes measured in ileum and proximal colon mucosa (i.e., Cd11c, 
Cd68, Erm1, Mcp1, Tnfα, Tlr4, iNos, and Il1β; Supplemental Fig. 2 A, B), only Cd11c and 
Cd68 were increased by HF-feeding in the proximal colon; and only Cd68 expression was 
decreased by the HF-EP+NEP and HF-GP diets.
 3.7 Influence of grape fractions on epithelial cell gene expression and cecal digesta 
levels of SCFA
Intestinal microbial metabolites impact local and systemic health, in part, by influencing 
epithelial cell (e.g., antimicrobial peptide secretion) and microbial products (e.g., SCFA 
production) that impact energy harvest, and the GPR-mediated release of endocrine signals 
from L-cells (e.g., glucagon like peptides, PYY) located in the mucosa epithelium. Locally, 
these metabolites influence microbial metabolism, the integrity of the mucosa barrier, and 
carbohydrate and lipid metabolism systemically [20]. Therefore, we determined the 
influence of the dietary treatments on the induction of epithelial genes associated with 
dysbiosis (e.g., Reg3γ; [51]), SCFA receptor activation (e.g., Gpr41, -43, and -119), and two 
of their downstream targets (e.g., Glp and Pyy) that have been reported to improve insulin 
secretion or sensitivity.
Although HF-feeding had no impact on the expression of Gpr41, Grp43, Gpr 119, Reg3γ, 
Pyy, or Glp in the ileum mucosa (Fig. 8A, Supplemental Fig. 3), Gpr43 mRNA levels were 
higher in the HF-NEP and HF-EP+NEP groups compared to the HF controls (Fig. 8A). Mice 
fed the HF-EP+NEP and the HF-GP diets had lower mRNA levels of Gpr41 in the ileum 
mucosa compared to the HF controls (Supplemental Fig. 3). Mice fed the HF-GP diet had 
the highest levels of Glp and Gpr119 compared to all other treatments (Supplemental Fig. 3). 
Notably, HF-fed mice supplemented with EP and grape powder had higher levels of Reg3γ 
compared to the HF-fed controls (Fig. 8A). Reg3γ encodes for an intestinal protein that 
protects against infection from Gram-positive bacteria due to its bactericidal activity [51].
In contrast to the ileum mucosa data, mice fed the HF control diet had higher mRNA levels 
of Gpr43, Gpr119, and Pyy in the proximal colon mucosa compared to the LF controls (Fig. 
8B; Supplemental Fig. 3). Supplementing HF-fed mice with NEP and EP-NEP or EP-NEP 
alone decreased Gpr43 and Pyy expression, respectfully, compared to HF control mice (Fig. 
Collins et al.
Page 11
J Nutr Biochem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 8B). Although there were no differences between the LF and HF control groups, mice fed 
the HF-GP diet had higher levels of the SCFAs acetate, propionate, and butyrate in the cecal 
contents compared to mice fed the HF-EP+NEP diet (Fig. 9). Furthermore, mice fed the HF-
EP+NEP diet had lower levels of cecal acetate, a substrate for lipogenesis, compared to the 
HF controls. Notably, the abundance of genes encoding dissimilatory sulfite reductase (dsra) 
and taurine-pyruvate aminotransferase (tpa), markers of Bilophila wadsworthia that produce 
noxious sulfur metabolites, were increased in the HF control group, but decreased in the HF-
GP group (Fig. 10A). Interestingly, the abundance of genes encoding butyrate-producing 
enzymes including hydroxybutyrate-CoA transferase (but) and butyrate kinase (buk) were 
elevated in the HF-EP group compared LF or HF controls (Fig. 10B).
 3.8. Sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene reveals alterations in microbial structure
In order to better understand the impact of grape extract feeding on gut bacterial community 
structure, an untargeted approach was used by sequencing the 16S rRNA gene in cecum 
mucosal samples. Sequencing was performed on an Illumina MiSeq platform using primers 
targeting the V4–V5 region of the 16S rRNA gene [47]. Alpha Diversity analyses revealed 
that the HF control group significantly reduced the number of observed species compared to 
the LF group, whereas the HF-GP diet restored this reduction (Fig. 11A, B). Notably, 
consuming HF diets supplemented with EP or NEP partially restored the HF diet-mediated 
reduction in diversity, but not significantly (Fig. 11B). These results suggest that the whole 
composition of grape powder is necessary to maintain diversity of the microbial community. 
Principal Coordinate Analysis (PCoA) of weighted UniFrac distances did not reveal obvious 
differences in beta diversity or community structure across diet groups, but there was clear 
separation between the LF, HF, and HF-EP groups based on unweighted UniFrac distances 
(Supplemental Fig. 4). To further interrogate differences between diet groups, multivariate 
statistical tests including ADONIS, ANOSIM, and PERMANOVA were conducted. 
Significant differences were found among unweighted and weighted UniFrac distances 
across diet groups (Table 3). Next, a Kruskal Wallis test was performed to determine 
significant differences in relative abundance of taxa between groups. Here, it was found that 
several bacterial taxa were significantly altered based on diet (Fig. 12). For instance, the 
family Lachnospiraceae from the Firmicutes phylum (Fig. 12A) was decreased in mice 
consuming the HF control diet, but significantly increased in the HF-EP and in HF-EP+NEP 
groups. Belonging to the family Lachnospiraceae, the genus Coprococcus was selectively 
increased in the HF-NEP and HF-EP+NEP groups (Fig. 12A). Concurrently, the HF-EP
+NEP group had a suppressive effect on genus Ruminococcus and family Mogibacteriaceae. 
Differential effects were seen among other phyla such as Bacteroidetes, Actinobacteria, and 
Tenericutes (Fig. 12B).
To assess differences between specific diet groups, PCA [52, 53] was conducted and clear 
clustering was evident between the HF group and the HF-NEP, HF-EP+NEP, and HF-GP 
groups (Supplemental Fig. 5). PCA between the HF diet and other aforementioned groups 
revealed that ~35% of the variance in relative bacterial abundance between the groups is 
explained with Principal Component 1 (PC1). Principal component 2 (PC2) explained an 
additional ~17% of the variance between groups. When comparing the HF and HF-EP 
groups, the variance explained by PC1 was primarily associated with Lactobacillus and 
Collins et al.
Page 12
J Nutr Biochem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 rc4-4 (Supplemental Table 3). Between the HF and HF-NEP groups, the variance explained 
by PC1 was primarily associated with Akkermansia. The family S24-7, belonging to the 
Bacteroidetes phylum, was the primary factor explaining the variance along PC2 when 
comparing the HF and HF-NEP groups, and along PC1 when comparing the HF and HF-EP
+NEP groups. The family Ruminoccoccaceae and the order Clostridiales explained the 
variance along PC1 between HF and HF-GP groups (Supplemental Table 3). Taken together, 
different taxa explain the variance between the HF control diet and HF diets supplemented 
with EP and NEP, explaining that each dietary component has a specific impact on the 
microbial community.
Lastly, Spearman Correlation analysis revealed a significant negative correlation between the 
family Lachnospiraceae (R2 = 0.42; p =0.001) and body fat percentage (Table 4), whereas 
Clostridiales (R2 = 0.45, p = 0.0004) and the genus Ruminococcus (R2 = 0.38, p = 0.004; 
also belonging to the order Clostridiales) were positively associated with body fat 
percentage (Table 4). These taxa were similarly correlated with inguinal, mesenteric, and 
total fat mass (data not shown). Interestingly, significant correlations also existed between 
several taxa and the expression of Reg3γ, a gene encoding for an epithelial secreted protein 
with antimicrobial properties (Table 5) [51]. For instance, the families Clostridiaceae and 
Mogibacteriaceae were negatively associated with Reg3γ expression, while the genus 
Allobaculum was positively associated with Reg3γ expression. We speculate that a direct 
host-microbe interaction exists between Allobaculum and Reg3γ expression, and will be a 
focus of future research.
 4. Discussion
 4.1 Rationale and significance of this study
We previously demonstrated that feeding whole GP (i.e., 3% and 5% GP; w/w in the diet) in 
conjunction with a HF diet (i.e., 34% kcals from fat; 31% of which came from milk fat) for 
10 weeks modestly; (i) reduced adiposity (3% and 5% GP), hepatic steatosis (5% GP), and 
the ileal mucosa abundance of the deleterious sulfidogenic bacterium species DSB and a 
sulfidogenic gene drsA-Bw (3% GP), (ii) increased the proximal colon mucosa abundance 
of the beneficial bacterium Akkermansia muciniphila (5% GP), and (iii) improved the 
localization of the tight junction protein ZO-1 on the apical epithelial surface of the ileum 
(3% and 5% GP) [33]. However, consuming the HF diet for 10 weeks only modestly 
increased adiposity, insulin resistance, and several markers of inflammation in epididymal 
(visceral) WAT, and had no effects on markers of intestinal inflammation.
Therefore, we conducted the current 16 week study using a higher level of dietary fat (i.e., 
44% kcals) and a fatty acid profile that was similar to Americans in the 75th percentile (i.e., 
soybean oil, butter, lard, shortening, and beef tallow) to enhance the metabolic consequences 
of diet-induced obesity [34]. The sugar content (i.e., 18% of kcals) was also similar to that 
of Americans in the 75th percentile. We also wanted to know which fraction of GP was 
responsible for reducing adiposity and its potential metabolic complications. Accordingly, 
we examined the effects of whole GP (5% or 15 human servings) and two isolated fractions 
of grapes, which were fed at amounts equal to those in 5% GP, on the development of 
Collins et al.
Page 13
J Nutr Biochem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 obesity, glucose intolerance, steatosis, WAT inflammation, and intestinal dysbiosis in 
C57BL/6J mice fed a HF diet.
The EP fraction accumulated approximately 17 times more total phenolics, particularly 
anthocyanins and proanthocyanidins, compared to GP or the NEP fraction (Table 1, 
Supplemental Table 2). The results indicate that in the context of HF-feeding, consumption 
of the polyphenol-rich EP fraction, alone or in combination with the polyphenol-poor NEP 
fraction, attenuated diet-induced obesity, insulin resistance, steatosis, and chronic 
inflammation in WAT while altering the bacterial structure of the cecum mucosa. 
Paradoxically, consuming GP had no beneficial impact on the host outcomes measured. 
However, GP supplementation had a positive impact on preserving microbial diversity in the 
face of HF-feeding (Fig. 11A) and reduced the abundance of the dsra and tpa genes induced 
by HF diet (Fig. 10A).
 4.2 Potential mechanisms by which the EP fraction suppresses adiposity and 
inflammation and improves insulin sensitivity
Anthocyanins and proanthocyanidins are groups of flavonoids present in relatively large 
amounts in table grapes. Our phenolic analysis indicated that the most abundant 
anthocyanins found in our table grapes were peonidin-3-O-glycosides, malvidin-3-O-
glucoside, and cyanidin-3-O-glucoside (Table 1). While studies have demonstrated anti-
obesity and anti-diabetic effects of anthocyanins [reviewed in 54], studies focusing on the 
effects of feeding whole grapes and grape fractions in subjects consuming a diet similar in 
fat amount and types to the American diet are lacking. Consistent with our anthocyanin-rich 
EP data, mice consuming a HF diet (i.e., 60% kcals from fat, primarily lard) supplemented 
with anthocyanin-rich muscadine grape or wine extracts for 15 weeks had lower body 
weights, plasma glucose and TG levels, insulin resistance, and CRP levels compared to 
controls [55]. In addition, supplementation of grape seed procyanidins prevented body 
weight gain, reduces WAT inflammatory markers (i.e. Tnfα, Il-6, Crp) in high-fat-fed rats 
[56]. Similar effects were observed with grape seed extract supplementation in HF-fed mice 
[57], and in high fructose-fed rats [58]. These findings are consistent with our data 
demonstrating that EP-fed mice had decreased body weight gain, reduced WAT weights, 
improved insulin sensitivity, lower plasma levels of TG and MCP-1, and reduced markers of 
inflammation in epididymal WAT (i.e. F4/80, Cd11c, Tlr4, iNos, Mcp1, and Tnfα).
Anthocyanins have been reported to exert anti-inflammatory and anti-obesity effects in vitro, 
and in some instances in vivo. For example, anthocyanins from black soybeans reversed 
weight gain, reduced the levels of serum TG and cholesterol, and increased the levels of 
high-density lipoproteins [59]. Anthocyanins from purple corn prevented HF-induced 
increases in body weight and WAT weights in mice [60]. Similarly, in HF (i.e., 60% kcals 
from lard)-fed mice, purified anthocyanins from blueberries prevented body weight and fat 
gain [61]. Tart cherries, which have an anthocyanin profile similar to grapes,, reduced fat 
mass and WAT markers of inflammation including Il6 and Tnfα. [62]. In vitro, 3T3-L1 
preadipocytes treated with anthocyanins had decreased TG accumulation and gene and 
protein expression of Pparγ and Fas [63]. While we did not observe alterations in expression 
Collins et al.
Page 14
J Nutr Biochem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 of Pparγ and Fas within the WAT, we did observe that mice fed the EP fraction had reduced 
expression of the lipogenic gene Agpat2.
We also demonstrated that mice fed the anthocyanin-rich EP fraction had improved glucose 
tolerance and insulin sensitivity compared to the HF controls. Similar beneficial 
improvements in glucose tolerance were observed with supplementation of anthocyanins 
from Maqui Berry in HF-fed mice [64] and with supplementation of anthocyanins from 
Cornelian cherry in HF-fed mice [65]. Cyanidin-3-O-glucoside supplementation improved 
insulin sensitivity in diabetic mice via down-regulation of retinol binding protein and up-
regulation of GLUT4 gene expression [66]. This could be a potential mechanism by which 
the EP fraction improved glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity. One novel finding of our 
study was that the EP fraction increased expression of Hsl, a gene associated with lipolysis, 
and reduced expression the lipogenic-related gene Pparγ in the liver. This indicates that the 
EP fraction may reduce steatosis through up-regulation of lipolytic pathways and 
suppression of lipogenic pathways.
 4.3 Beneficial effects of the NEP fraction
The NEP diet contained non-extractable polyphenols and fiber. As shown in Supplemental 
Table 2, the NEP fraction contained approximately 17-fold less total phenolics, none of 
which were detected as anthocyanins or proanthocyanidins. We did not determine what kind 
of phenolics were in the NEP fraction. However, compared to the HF controls, mice 
consuming the NEP fraction had; (i) lower body (Table 2) and WAT depot weights (Fig. 1B), 
(ii) improved GTTs at wks 12 and 16 (Fig. 2A), lower plasma LPS binding protein (Fig. 2E), 
(iii) lower liver weights (3A), (iv) lower expression levels of macrophage markers in MES 
WAT (e.g., F4/80, Cdllc, and Tlr4; Fig. 5C), and (v) higher ZO-1 and lower MPO levels in 
ileum mucosa (Fig. 7B, C). Thus, we speculate that either the non-extractable phenolics 
(e.g., hydrolysable gallotannins and ellagitannins) or fiber in the NEP fraction reduced some 
of the detrimental effects of the HF diet.
 4.4 Relationship of intestinal to systemic inflammation
Consuming supra-physiological levels of saturated fat is known to increase body fat mass 
and consistently induce chronic, low-grade inflammation systemically [reviewed in 67]. In 
the current study, feeding a more physiological level of fat increased MPO activity and 
impaired ZO-1 localization in intestinal mucosa, and increased LPS binding protein in 
plasma, which were improved in mice consuming GP or its fractions, depending on the 
outcome measured. However, HF-feeding did not increase mRNA markers of inflammation 
in the ileum or proximal colon or IAP activity in duodenal mucosa after 16 weeks. In 
contrast, other research has shown that feeding non-physiological levels of saturated fat 
triggers intestinal inflammation that contribute to increase systemic inflammation and 
insulin resistance, possibly due to intestinal dysbiosis and barrier dysfunction [7–13, 18, 19, 
68–70].
Alternatively, the intestinal linkage to systemic effects of HF- and grape fraction-feeding 
may be due to changes in gut microbiota as shown in the current study and our previous 
study [33]. For instance, we found that HF diets supplemented with EP, NEP, the 
Collins et al.
Page 15
J Nutr Biochem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 combination, or GP partially or fully rescued HF-mediated reduction in observed microbial 
species in the cecal mucosa. Depending on the grape polyphenol fraction, particular taxa 
were selectively altered (Fig. 12). For example, the inclusion of EP resulted in a significant 
increase in the relative abundance of Lachnospiraceae compared to HF diet alone (Fig. 12A). 
These results support findings that grapes or their polyphenol constituents significantly 
impact microbial structure, diversity, and relative abundance [71].
Causal relationships have been established between gut microbiota and adiposity. For 
example, fecal microbiota transplant from lean donors improved insulin sensitivity in 
humans with metabolic syndrome [72]. Conversely, transfer of obese human microbiota to a 
germ free recipient mouse resulted in increased adiposity [73]. One proposed mechanism for 
this relationship is HF diet-mediated impairment of gut barrier function, leading to 
endotoxemia [74, 75] and impaired regulation of energy metabolism [reviewed in 76]. 
Elevated circulating inflammatory cytokines and chemokines contribute to insulin resistance 
[77–79]. Conversely, consumption of dietary fiber and polyphenols may reduce intestinal 
and systemic inflammation through regulation of energy intake and improved intestinal 
barrier function [reviewed in 29]. For example, red wine grape polyphenols given to humans 
for 4 weeks increased the number of Enterococcus, Prevotella, Bacteriodetes, and 
Bifidobacterium bacteria, which correlated to improved blood pressure, and serum levels of 
TG, total cholesterol, and CRP [80]. Similarly, rats given grape pomace had increased fecal 
counts of Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium which was correlated with increased 
concentrations of primary bile acids, cholesterol, and cholesterol metabolites and decreased 
concentrations of secondary bile acids [81]. This suggests that alteration of the microflora by 
grape polyphenols may inhibit cholesterol absorption thus improving circulating levels. 
Indeed, fermentation of fiber and polyphenols by colonic microbes into SCFA regulates 
energy intake and metabolism through stimulating the release of glycoproteins (e.g., Glp-1, 
Glp-2, and Pyy) or cannabinoids by activating Gpr43 and Gpr41 or Gpr119, respectively 
[reviewed in 82]. Consistent with these data, butyrate is beneficial to intestinal homeostasis 
as an endothelial energy source as well as through increasing tight junction protein synthesis 
and mucin secretions [83, 84].
In the current study, the expression of several markers of enteroendocrine cell secretions 
associated with SCFA activation were upregulated. However, these results were conflicting 
between the ileum (i.e., Gpr43 mRNA levels increased by the EP, NEP, EP+NEP diets) and 
the proximal colon (i.e., Gpr43 mRNA levels increased by HF diet only). Notably, the levels 
of SCFAs, particularly acetate, were reduced in mice fed HF-EP+NEP compared to the LF 
and HF-grape powder diets. Diet-mediated changes in the level of these microbial 
metabolites support functional changes of the gut microbiota upon supplementation with 
grape polyphenols. In contrast to the SCFA data, the HF-EP diet selectively increased the 
abundance of genes that regulate microbial production of butyrate, suggesting a potential 
beneficial impact of grape anthocyanins on butyrate-producing microbes. Future analysis of 
protein levels of Gprs, Pyy, and Glp1/2 levels, and gut barrier function should provide more 
insight about the consumption of grape powder or grape fractions on host-microbe 
interactions that influence these intestinal biomarkers. Of particular interest was the finding 
that HF-EP robustly induced the mRNA levels of Reg3γ, a gene encoding for an 
antimicrobial peptide, that was positively correlated with the genus Allobaculum. Healthy 
Collins et al.
Page 16
J Nutr Biochem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 metabolic phenotypes and LF-feeding have been previously associated with elevated 
abundance of Allobaculum [33] and could represent a bacterium that drives beneficial host-
microbe interactions by conferring anti-microbial capacity against pathogenic bacteria. 
Future experiments will examine a direct interaction between grape polyphenols, 
Allobaculum, and Reg3γ levels in the host.
 4.5 Limitations and unanswered questions
The beneficial systemic effects of consuming the EP grape fraction may be due to its rich 
anthocyanin content. They may also be due to other polyphenols including quercetin, which 
is abundant in table grapes [32]. However, the whole grape powder diet did not have the 
same positive outcomes as the EP or NEP diets, or as in our previous study [33]. There were 
several design differences between these studies that may have contributed to these 
conflicting results. The previous study was shorter (10 versus 16 weeks) and had a different 
content of fat (i.e., primarily butter fat at 31% kcals versus a combination of butter, lard, 
shortening, and beef tallow at 44% kcals from fat, respectively) and fiber (50 g versus 40 g 
cellulose, respectively). The additional 6 weeks in length of the current study may have 
caused any potential health benefits of the whole grape diet to have diminished.
There may have been a different interaction between the grape powder and the four types of 
fats in the current study versus the sole fat source (butter) in the previous study, thereby 
influencing fat absorption [85]. Furthermore, the extraction process used to obtain the EP 
fraction may have increased the bioaccessibility and subsequent bioavailability of the 
polyphenols by liberating them from interactions within the grape powder matrix, making 
them more susceptible to interactions with brush boarder enzymes that enhanced their 
absorption in the small intestine. Similarly, liberation of the polyphenols may have altered 
the luminal environment, thereby improving the confluence of beneficial bacteria.
The reduced dietary fiber in the HF diets in the current study may have influenced gut 
microbiota, as fiber is a primary energy source for a vast majority of microbes in this 
environment. As such, the reduced fiber may have impacted the production of SCFAs as 
well as reduce the diversity of the microbiota. Future studies should focus on feeding single 
anthocyanins and their combinations (i.e., malvidin or peonidin-3-O-glucoside/glucuronide) 
in conjunction with a HF diet to determine if they are responsible, in part, to the beneficial 
effects of the EP fraction.
 Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
 Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the California Table Grape Commission for providing the grape powder.
 Abbreviations
Agpat2
acylglycerol-3-phosphate-O-acyltransferase 2
Collins et al.
Page 17
J Nutr Biochem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 ANC
anthocyanin
Atgl
adipose triglyceride lipase
AUC
area under the curve
B. wadsworthia
Bilophila wadsworthia
BWG
body weight gain
Cd36
cluster of differentiation 36
Cd11c
cluster of differentiation 11c
Cpt
carnitine palmitoyltransferase
Crp
c-reactive protein
DEXA
dual-energy X-ray
DMAC
4-dimethylaminocinnamaldehyde
DP
degree of polymerization
DBB
Desulfobulbus spp
DFM
Desulfotomaculum spp
DSB
Desulfobacter spp
dsrA-Bw
B. wadsworthia specific dissimilatory sulfite reductase
DSV
Collins et al.
Page 18
J Nutr Biochem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Desulfovibrio spp
EPI
epididymal
Erm1 (F4/80 human orthologue)
epidermal growth factor-like module containing mucin-like hormone receptor 1
EP
extractable polyphenol
Fas
fatty acid synthase
Fabp4
fatty acid binding protein 4
FCE
food conversion efficiency
Gpat2
glycerol-3-phosphate acyltransferase
Glp
glucagon-like peptide
GP
grape powder
Gpr
G-protein receptor
GTT
glucose tolerance test
HF
high fat
HOMA-IR
homeostasis model assessment method for insulin resistance
Hsl
hormone sensitive lipase
ING
inguinal
IL
interleukin
Collins et al.
Page 19
J Nutr Biochem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 LPS
lipopolysaccharide
LBP
LPS binding protein
LF
low fat
Mcp
monocyte chemoattractant protein
MPO
myeloperoxidase
NKT
natural killer T
NEP
non-extractable polyphenol
NF-κB
nuclear factor kappa B
OTU
operational taxonomic units
PAC
proanthocanidin
PCA
primary component analysis
Pck
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase
PPAR
peroxisome proliferator activated receptor
PAC-A2
procyanidin A2
Pyy
peptide yy
Scd1
stearoyl-CoA desaturase 1
Srebp
sterol regulatory element binding protein
Collins et al.
Page 20
J Nutr Biochem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Tbp
TATA-binding protein (TBP)
TG
triglyceride
Tlr4
toll-like receptor 4
Tnf
tumor necrosis factor
TFA
trifluoroacetic acid
TP
Total phenolics
WAT
white adipose tissue
ZO-1
zonula occludens-1
References
1. Ogdan CL, Carroll MD, Kit BK, Flegal KM. Prevalence of Childhood and Adult Obesity in the 
United States, 2011–2012. JAMA. 2014; 311(8):806–814. DOI: 10.1001/jama.2014.732 [PubMed: 
24570244] 
2. WHO. Obesity. http://www.who.int/topics/obesity/en/. Viewed April 4, 2014
3. NIH. Obesity. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmedhealth/PMH0004552/. Last reviewed: May 12, 
2012
4. Strissel KJ, DeFuria J, Shaul ME, Bennett G, Greenberg AS, Obin MS. T-cell recruitment and Th1 
polarization in adipose tissue during diet-induced obesity in C57BL/6 mice. Obesity (Silver Spring). 
2010; 18(10):1918–25. [PubMed: 20111012] 
5. Ding S, Chi M, Scull M, Rigby R, Schwerbrock N, Magness S, et al. High fat diet: bacterial 
interactions promote intestinal inflammation which precedes and correlates with obesity and insulin 
resistance in mice. PLOS One. 2010; 5:e12191. [PubMed: 20808947] 
6. Garrett WS, Lord GM, Punit S, Lugo-Villarino G, Mazmanian SK, Ito S, et al. Communicable 
ulcerative colitis induced by T-bet deficiency in the innate immune system. Cell. 2007; 131(1):33–
45. [PubMed: 17923086] 
7. Cani P, Amar J, Iglesias M, Poggi M, Knauf C, Bastelica D, Neyrinck N, et al. Metabolic 
endotoxemia initiates obesity and insulin resistance. Diabetes. 2007; 56:1761–1772. [PubMed: 
17456850] 
8. Cani P, Bibiloni R, Knauf C, Waget A, Neyrinck A, Delzenne N, Burcelin R. Changes in gut 
microbiota control metabolic endotoxemia-induced inflammation in high-fat diet-induced obesity 
and diabetes in mice. Diabetes. 2008; 57:1470–1481. [PubMed: 18305141] 
9. Delzenne N, Cani P. Gut microbiota and pathogenesis of insulin resistance. Curr Diab Rep. 2011; 
11:154–159. [PubMed: 21431853] 
10. Shen W, Gaskins HR, McIntosh M. Influence of dietary fat on intestinal microbes, inflammation, 
barrier function, and metabolic outcomes. J Nutr Biochem. 2014; 25:270–280. [PubMed: 
24355793] 
Collins et al.
Page 21
J Nutr Biochem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 11. Zhang C, Zhang M, Wang S, Han R, Cao Y, Hua W, et al. Interactions between gut microbiota, 
host genetics, and diet relevant to development of metabolic syndromes in mice. The ISME 
Journal. 2010; 4:232–241. [PubMed: 19865183] 
12. Shen W, Wolf PG, Carbonero F, Zhong W, Reid T, Gaskins HR, McIntosh MK. Intestinal and 
systemic inflammatory responses are positively associated with sulfidogenic bacteria abundance in 
high-fat-fed male C57BL/6J mice. J Nutr. 2014; 144(8):1181–1187. [PubMed: 24919690] 
13. Devkota S, Wang Y, Musch M, Leone V, Fehlner-Peach Hl, Nadimpalli A, et al. Dietary-fat-
induced taurocholic acid promotes pathobiont expansion and colitis in IL10−/− mice. Nature. 
2012; 487:104–108. [PubMed: 22722865] 
14. Cabonero F, Benefiel AC, Alizadeh-Ghamsari AH, Gaskins HR. Microbial pathways in colonic 
sulfur metabolism and links with health and disease. Front Physiol. 2012; 3:448.doi: 10.3389/
fphys.2012.00448 [PubMed: 23226130] 
15. Rowan FE, Docherty NG, Coffey JC, O’Connell PR. Sulphate-reducing bacteria and hydrogen 
sulphide in the aetiology of ulcerative colitis. Br J Surg. 2009; 96(2):151–158. [PubMed: 
19160346] 
16. Backhed F, Manchester J, Semenkovich C, Gordon J. Mechanisms underlying the resistance to 
diet-induced obesity in germ-free mice. Proc Nat Acad Sci. 2007; 104:979–984. [PubMed: 
17210919] 
17. Delzenne N, Neyrinck A, Backhed F, Cani P. Targeting gut microbiota in obesity: effects of 
prebiotics and probiotics. Nat Rev Endocrin. 2011; 7:639–646.
18. Delzenne N, Cani P. Interaction between obesity and gut microbiota: relevance to nutrition. Ann 
Rev Nutr. 2011; 31:15–31. [PubMed: 21568707] 
19. Delzenne N, Neyrinck A, Cani P. Modulation of the gut microbiota by nutrients with prebiotic 
properties: consequences for host health in the context of obesity and metabolic syndrome. 
Microbial Cell Fact. 2011; 10:S10.
20. Geurts L, Neyrnick A, Delzenne N, Knaug C, Cani P. Gut microbiota controls adipose tissue 
expansion, gut barrier and glucose metabolism: novel insights into molecular targets and 
interventions using prebiotics. Beneficial Microbes. 2014; 5:3–17. [PubMed: 23886976] 
21. Cani P, Neyrinck N, Fava F, Knauf C, Burcelin R, Tuophy K, et al. Selective increases of 
bifidobacteria in the gut microbiota improve high-fat-diet induced diabetes in mice through a 
mechanisms involving endotoxemia. Diabetolgia. 2007; 50:2374–2383.
22. Dewulf EM, Cani PD, Neyrinck AM, Possemiers S, Holle AV, Muccioli GG, et al. Inulin-type 
fructans with prebiotic properties counteract grape powderR43 overexpression and PPARgamma-
related adipogenesis in the white adipose tissue of high-fat diet-fed mice. J Nut Biochem. 2011; 
22:712–722.
23. Serino M, Luche E, Gres S, Baylac A, Berge M, Cenac C, et al. Metabolic adaptation to a high-fat 
diet is associated with a change in the gut microbiota. Gut. 2012; 61:543–553. [PubMed: 
22110050] 
24. Keperman R, Bolca S, Roger L, Vaughan E. Novel approaches for analyzing gut microbes and 
dietary polyphenols: challenges and opportunities. Microbiology. 2010; 156:3224–3231. [PubMed: 
20724384] 
25. Neyrinck A, Van Hee V, Bindels L, Possemiers S, de Backer F, Cani P, et al. Polyphenol-rich 
extract of pomegranate peel alleviates tissue inflammation and hypercholesterolemia in high-fat-
induced obese mice: potential implication of the gut microbiota. Br J Nutr. 2013; 109:802–809. 
[PubMed: 22676910] 
26. Benn T, Kim B, Park YK, Wegner C, Harness E, Nam TG, et al. Polyphenol-rich blackcurrant 
extract prevents inflammation in diet-induced obese mice. J Nutr Biochem. 2014; 25:1019–1025. 
[PubMed: 25034502] 
27. Van Duynhoven J, Vaughan E, Jacobs D, Kemperman R, van Velzen E, Gross G, et al. Metabolic 
fate of polyphenols in the human superorganism. Proc Nat Acad Sci. 2011; 108:4531–4538. 
[PubMed: 20615997] 
28. Selma M, Espin J, Tomas-Barberan F. Interactions between phenolics and gut microbiota: role in 
human health. J Agric Food Chem. 2009; 57:6485–6501. [PubMed: 19580283] 
Collins et al.
Page 22
J Nutr Biochem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 29. Chuang CC, McIntosh MK. Potential mechanisms by which polyphenol-rich grapes prevent 
obesity-mediated inflammation and metabolic diseases. Ann Rev Nutr. 2011; 31:155–176. 
[PubMed: 21548775] 
30. Seymour E, Singer A, Bennink M, Parikh R, Kirakosyan A, Kaufman P, Broiling S. Chronic intake 
of phytochemical-enriched diet reduces cardiac fibrosis and diastolic dysfunction caused by 
prolonged salt-sensitive hypertension. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2008; 63:1034–1042. 
[PubMed: 18948553] 
31. Seymour EM, Bennink MR, Watts SW, Bolling SF. Whole grape intake impacts cardiac 
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor and nuclear factor kappaB activity and cytokine 
expression in rats with diastolic dysfunction. Hypertension. 2010; 55:1179–85. [PubMed: 
20231522] 
32. Chuang CC, Shen W, Chen H, Xie G, Jia W, Chung S, McIntosh M. Differential effects of grape 
powder and its extract on glucose tolerance and chronic inflammation in high fat-fed obese mice. J 
Agric Food Chem. 2012; 60:12458–12468. [PubMed: 23210691] 
33. Baldwin, J.; Collins, B.; Wolf, PG.; Martinez, K.; Shen, W.; Chuang, C-C., et al. Table grape 
consumption reduces adiposity and markers of hepatic lipogenesis and alters gut microbiota in 
butter fat-fed mice. J Nutr Biochem. 2015. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jnutbio.2015.08.027
34. U.S. Department of Agriculture; Agricultural Research Service; Beltsville Human Nutrition 
Research Center; Food Surveys Research Group (Beltsville MD) and; U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; National Center for Health 
Statistics (Hyattsville MD). What We Eat in America, NHANES 2011–2012. 
35. Yang J, Hai Liu R, Halim L. Antioxidant and antiproliferative activities of common edible nut 
seeds. LWT - Food Sci Tech. 2009; 42:1–8.
36. Singleton VL, Orthofer R, Lamuela-Raventos RM. Analysis of total phenols and other oxidation 
substrates and antioxidants by means of Folin-Ciocalteu reagent. Methods Enzymol. 1999; 
299:152–178.
37. Lee J, Durst RW, Wrolstad RE. Determination of total monomeric anthocyanin pigment content of 
fruit juices, beverages, natural colorants, and wines by the pH differential method: collaborative 
study. J AOAC Int. 2005; 88:1269–1278. [PubMed: 16385975] 
38. Prior RL, Fan E, Ji H, Howell A, Nio C, Payne MJ, Reed J. Multi-laboratory validation of a 
standard method for quantifying proanthocyanidins in cranberry powders. J Sci Food Agric. 2010; 
90:1473–1478. [PubMed: 20549799] 
39. Grace MH, Esposito D, Dunlap K, Lila MA. Comparative analysis of phenolic content and profile, 
antioxidant capacity, and anti-inflammatory bioactivity in wild Alaskan and commercial 
Vaccinium berries. J Agric Food Chem. 2014; 62:4007–4017. [PubMed: 24219831] 
40. Hintze KJ, Benninghoff AD, Ward RE. Formulation of the Total Western Diet (TWD) as a Basal 
Diet for Rodent Cancer Studies. J Agric Food Chem. 2012; 60:6736–6742. [PubMed: 22224871] 
41. Shen W, Chuang CC, Martinez K, Reid T, Brown JM, Xi L, et al. Conjugated Linoleic Acid 
Reduces Adiposity and Increases Markers of Browning and Inflammation in White Adipose Tissue 
of Mice. J Lipid Research. 2013; 54:909–922. [PubMed: 23401602] 
42. Kim JJ, Shajib MS, Manocha MM, Khan WI. Investigating intestinal inflammation in DSS-induced 
model of IBD. J Vis Exp. 2012; 60:e3678.doi: 10.3791/3678
43. de La Serre CB, Ellis CL, Lee J, Hartman AL, Rutledge JC, Raybould HE. Propensity to high-fat 
diet-induced obesity in rats is associated with changes in the gut microbiota and gut inflammation. 
Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2010; 299:G440–G448. [PubMed: 20508158] 
44. Renom G, Bulois P, Hafraoui S, Colombel JF, Degand PM. Simple gas chromatography analysis of 
faecal butyrate: Application to patients at risk of pouchitis. Clin Chem Lab Med. 2001; 391:15–19. 
[PubMed: 11256793] 
45. Vital M, Penton CR, Wang Q, Young VB, Antonopoulos DA, Sogin ML, Morrison HG, Raffals L, 
Chang EB, Huffnagle GB, et al. A gene-targeted approach to investigate the intestinal butyrate- 
producing bacterial community. Microbiome. 2013; 1:8–21. [PubMed: 24451334] 
46. Louis P, Young P, Holtrop G, Flint HJ. Diversity of human colonic butyrate-producing bacteria 
revealed by analysis of the butyryl-CoA:acetate CoA-transferase gene. Environ Microbiol. 2010; 
12:304–314. [PubMed: 19807780] 
Collins et al.
Page 23
J Nutr Biochem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 47. Caporaso JG, Kuczynski J, Stombaugh J, et al. QIIME allows analysis of high-throughput 
community sequencing data. Nat Methods. 2010; 7:335–336. [PubMed: 20383131] 
48. McDonald D, Price MN, Goodrich J, Nawrocki EP, DeSantis TZ, Probst A, Andersen GL, Knight 
R, Hogenholtz P. An improved Greengenes taxonomy with explicit ranks for ecological and 
evolutionary analyses of bacteria and archaea. The ISME J. 2012; 6:610–618. [PubMed: 
22134646] 
49. Wang Q, Garrity GM, Tiedje JM, Cole JR. Naïve Bayesian Classifier for Rapid Assignment of 
rRNA Sequences into the New Bacterial Taxonomy. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2007; 73:5261–
5267. [PubMed: 17586664] 
50. Price MN, Dehal PS, Arkin AP. FastTree 2 – Approximately Maximum-Likelihood Trees for Large 
Alignments. PLoS One. 2010; 5:e9490. [PubMed: 20224823] 
51. Loonen L, Stolte E, Jaklofsky M, Meijerink M, Dekker J, van Baarlen P, Well J. Reg3g-decient 
mice have alter mucus distribution and increase mucosal inflammatory responses to the microbiota 
and enteric pathogens in the ileum. Mucosal Immunology. 2014; 7:939–948. [PubMed: 24345802] 
52. Aitchison J. Principal component analysis of compositional data. Biometrika. 70(1):57–65. 198. 
53. Filzmoser P, Hron K, Reimann C. Principal component analysis for compositional data with 
outliers. Environmetrics. 2009; 20(6):621–632.
54. He J, Giusti M. Anthocyanins: natural colorants with health-promoting properties. Ann Rev Food 
Sci Technol. 2010; 1:163–187. [PubMed: 22129334] 
55. Gourineni V, Shay NF, Chung S, Sandhu AK, Gu L. Muscadine grape (Vitis rotundifolia) and wine 
phytochemicals prevented obesity-associated metabolic complications in C57BL/6J mice. J Agric 
Food Chem. 2012; 60(31):7674–81. [PubMed: 22788667] 
56. Terra X, Pallares V, Ardèvol A, Bladré Cinta, Fernández-Larrea J, Pujadas G, et al. Modulatory 
effect of grape-seed procyanidins on local and systemic inflammation in diet-induced obesity in 
rats. J Nutr Biochem. 2010; 22(4):380–87. [PubMed: 20655715] 
57. Park SH, Park TS, Cha YS. Grape seed extract (Vitis vinifera) partially reverses high fat diet-
induced obesity in C57BL/6J mice. Nutr Res Pract. 2008; 2(4):227–33. [PubMed: 20016723] 
58. Suwannaphet W, Meeprom A, Yibchok-Anun S, Adisakwattana S. Preventive effect of grape seed 
extract against high-fructose diet-induced insulin resistance and oxidative stress in rats. Food 
Chem Toxicol. 2010; 48(7):1853–7. [PubMed: 20412828] 
59. Kwon SH, Ahn IS, Kim SO, Kong CS, Chung HY, Do MS, Park KY. Anti-obesity and 
hypolipidemic effects of black soybean anthocyanins. J Med Food. 2007; 10(3):552–6. [PubMed: 
17887951] 
60. Tsuda T, Horio F, Uchida K, Aoki H, Osawa T. Dietary cyaniding 3-O-beta-D-glucoside-rich 
purple corn color prevents obesity and ameliorates hyperglycemia in mice. J Nutr. 2003; 133(7):
2125–30. [PubMed: 12840166] 
61. Prior RL, Wu X, Gu L, Hager TJ, Hager A, Howard LR. Whole berries versus berry anthocyanins: 
interactions with dietary fat levels in the C57BL/6J mouse model of obesity. J Agric Food Chem. 
2008; 56(3):647–53. [PubMed: 18211017] 
62. Seymour EM, Lewis SK, Urcuyo-Llanes DE, Tanone II, Kirakosyan A, Kaufman PB, Bolling SF. 
Regular tart cherry intake alters abdominal adiposity, adipose gene transcription, and inflammation 
in obesity-prone rats fed a high fat diet. J Med Food. 2009; 12(5):935–42. [PubMed: 19857054] 
63. Lee B, Lee M, Lefevre M, Kim HR. Anthocyanins inhibit lipogenesis during adipocyte 
differentiation of 3T3-L1 preadipocytes. Plant Foods Hum Nutr. 2014; 69(2):137–141. [PubMed: 
24682657] 
64. Rojo LE, Ribnicky D, Logendra S, Poulev A, Rojas-Silva P, Kuhn P, et al. In vitro and in vivo anti-
diabetic effects of anthocyanins from Maqui Berry (Aristotelia chilensis). Food Chem. 2011; 
131(2):387–396. [PubMed: 26279603] 
65. Jayaprakasam B, Olson LK, Schutzki RE, Tai MH, Nair MG. Amelioration of obesity and glucose 
intolerance in high fat fed C57BL/6 mice by anthocyanins and ursolic acid in Cornelian cherry 
(Cornus mas). J Agric Food Chem. 2006; 54(1):243–248. [PubMed: 16390206] 
66. Sasaki R, Nisimura N, Hoshino H, Isa Y, Kadowaki M, Ichi T, et al. Cyanidin 3-glucoside 
ameliorates hyperglycemia and insulin sensitivity due to downregulation of retinol binding protein 
4 expression in diabetic mice. Biochem Pharmacol. 2007; 74(11):1619–27. [PubMed: 17869225] 
Collins et al.
Page 24
J Nutr Biochem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 67. Shen W, Gaskins HR, McIntosh M. Influence of dietary fat on intestinal microbes, inflammation, 
barrier function, and metabolic outcomes. J Nutr Biochem. 2014; 25:270–280. [PubMed: 
24355793] 
68. Goodrich KM, Fundaro G, Griffin LE, Grant A, Hulver MW, Ponder MA, Neilson AP. Chronic 
admistration of dietary grape seed extract increases colonic expression of gut tight junction protein 
occludin and reduces fecal calprotectin: a secondary analysis of healthy Wistar Furth rats. Nutr 
Res. 2012; 32:787–794. [PubMed: 23146776] 
69. Wang YH, Ge B, Yang XL, Zhai J, Yang LN, Wang XX, et al. Pranthocyanidins from grape seed 
modulates the nuclear factor-kappa B signal transduction pathways in rats with TNBS-induced 
recurrent ulcerative colitis. Int Immunopharm. 2011; 11:1620–1627.
70. Paiotti AP, Neto RA, Marchi P, Silva RM, Pazine VL, Noguti J, et al. The anti-inflammatory 
potential of phenolic compounds in grape juice concentrate (G8000™) on 2, 4,6-trinitrobenzene 
sulphonic acid-induced colitis. Br J Nutr. 2013; 110(6):973–80. [PubMed: 23517616] 
71. Roopchand DE, Carmody RN, Kuhn P, Moskal K, Rojas-Silva P, Turnbaugh T, Raksin I. Dietary 
polyphenols promote growth of the gut bacterium Akkermansia muciniphila and attenuate high-fat 
diet induced metabolic syndrome. Diabetes. 2015; 64:2847–2858. [PubMed: 25845659] 
72. Turnbaugh PJ, Ridaura VK, Faith JJ, Rey FE, Knight R, Gordon JI. The effect of diet on the human 
gut microbiome: a metagenomic analysis in humanized gnotobiotic mice. Sci Transl Med. 2009; 
1(6):6ra14.
73. Vrieze A, Van Nood E, Holleman F, Salojarvi J, Kootte RS, Bartelsman JF, et al. Transfer of 
intestinal microbiota from lean donors increases insulin sensitivity in individuals with metabolic 
syndrome. Gastroenterology. 2012; 143(4):913–6 e7. [PubMed: 22728514] 
74. Lam YY, Ha CW, Campbell CR, Mitchell AJ, Dinudom A, Oscarsson J, et al. Increased gut 
permeability and microbiota change associate with mesenteric fat inflammation and metabolic 
dysfunction in diet-induced obese mice. PLoS One. 2012; 7(3):e34233. [PubMed: 22457829] 
75. Cani PD, Possemiers S, Van de Wiele T, Guiot Y, Everard A, Rottier O, et al. Changes in gut 
microbiota control inflammation in obese mice through a mechanism involving GLP-2-driven 
improvement of gut permeability. Gut. 2009; 58:1091–103. [PubMed: 19240062] 
76. Reybould HE. Gut microbiota, epithelial function and derangements in obesity. J Physiol. 2012; 
590(3):441–46. [PubMed: 22183718] 
77. Turnbaugh PJ, Bäckhed F, Fulton L, Gordon JI. Diet-induced obesity is linked to marked but 
reversible alterations in the mouse distal gut microbiome. Cell Host Microbe. 2008; 3:213–23. 
[PubMed: 18407065] 
78. Serino M, Luche E, Gres S, Baylac A, Bergé M, Cenac C, Waget A, Klopp P, et al. Metabolic 
adaptation to a high-fat diet is associated with a change in the gut microbiota. Gut. 2012; 61(4):
543–53. [PubMed: 22110050] 
79. Jumpertz R, LED, Turnbaugh P, Trinidad C, Bogardus C, Gordon J, et al. Energy-balance studies 
reveals associations between gut microbes, caloric load, and nutrient absorption in humans. Am J 
Clin Nutr. 2011; 94:58–65. [PubMed: 21543530] 
80. Queipo-Ortuño MI, Boto-Ordóñez M, Murri M, Gomez-Zumaquero JM, Clemente-Postigo M, 
Estruch R, et al. Influence of red wine polyphenols and ethanol on the gut microbiota ecology and 
biochemical biomarkers. Am J Clin Nutr. 2012; 95:1323–34. [PubMed: 22552027] 
81. Sembries S, Dongowski G, Mehrlander K, Will F, Dietrich H. Physiological effects of extraction 
juices from apple, grape, and red beet pomaces in rats. J Agric Food Chem. 2006; 54:10269–
10280. [PubMed: 17177570] 
82. Bleau C, Karelis AD, St-Pierre DH, Lamontagne L. Crosstalk between intestinal microbiota, 
adipose tissue and skeletal muscle as an early event in systemic low-grade inflammation and the 
development of obesity and diabetes. Diabetes Metab Res Rev. 2014; E-pub. doi: 10.1002/dmrr.
2617
83. Hatayama H, Iwashita J, Kuwajima A, Abe T. The short chain fatty acid, butyrate, stimulates 
MUC2 mucin production in the human colon cancer cell line, LS174T. Biochem Biophys Res 
Commun. 2007; 356(3):599–603. [PubMed: 17374366] 
Collins et al.
Page 25
J Nutr Biochem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 84. Segain JP, Raingeard, de la Blétière D, Bourreille A, Leray V, Gervois N, Rosales C, et al. Butyrate 
inhibits inflammatory responses through NFkappaB inhibition: implications for Crohn’s disease. 
Gut. 2000; 47(3):397–403. [PubMed: 10940278] 
85. Ribnicky D, Roopchand D, Oren A, Grace M, Pouleve A, Lila MA, et al. Effects of a high fat meal 
matrix and protein complexation on the bioaccessibility of blueberry anthocyanins using TNO 
gastrointestinal model (TIM-1). Food Chem. 2014; 142:349–357. [PubMed: 24001852] 
Collins et al.
Page 26
J Nutr Biochem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
Adiposity indices of C57BL/6J mice fed a low fat (LF), high fat (HF) diet, or a HF diet 
containing extractable (HF-EP) or non-extractable (HF-NEP) polyphenols, an equal 
combination of the EP and NEP fractions (HF-EP+NEP), or grape powder (HF-GP) for 16 
weeks. Body fat percentages were measured at weeks 6, 11, and 15 using dual energy x-ray 
absorptiometry (DEXA). At week 16, the inguinal, retroperitoneal, epididymal, and 
mesenteric white adipose tissue (WAT) depots were excised and weighed. The weights of the 
inguinal, retroperitoneal, epididymal, and mesenteric depots were measured, and their sum 
labelled total WAT. Means ± SEM (n = 9–10) without a common lowercase letter differ 
(p<0.05) using one-way ANOVA and Student’s test.
Collins et al.
Page 27
J Nutr Biochem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. 
Glucose tolerance tests (GTT)s (A), the homeostatic model assessment of insulin resistance 
(HOMA-IR) (B), plasma TG levels (C), plasma MCP-1 (D), and plasma LPS binding 
protein (E) in C57BL/6J mice fed a low fat (LF), high fat (HF) diet, or a HF diet containing 
extractable (HF-EP) or non-extractable (HF-NEP) polyphenols, an equal combination of the 
EP and NEP fractions (HF-EP+NEP), or grape powder (HF-GP) for 16 weeks. At weeks 7, 
12, and 16, GTTs were conducted on mice fasted for 8 h and injected i.p. with a 20% 
glucose solution. Fasting plasma insulin was collected at week 16 and used to calculate the 
HOMA-IR index. Data are expressed as total area under the curve (AUC) for the GTT bar 
Collins et al.
Page 28
J Nutr Biochem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 graphs. Means ± SEM (n=9–10) without a common lowercase letter differ (p<0.05) using 
one-way ANOVA and Student’s test.
Collins et al.
Page 29
J Nutr Biochem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. 
Liver weights (A), liver triglyceride content (B), and Oil red O staining of liver tissue (C) of 
C57BL/6J mice fed a low fat (LF), high fat (HF) diet, or a HF diet containing extractable 
(HF-EP) or non-extractable (HF-NEP) polyphenols, an equal combination of the EP and 
NEP fractions (HF-EP+NEP), or grape powder (HF-GP) for 16 weeks. At week 16, liver 
tissues were excised and frozen in OCT compounds, cut at 5 μm, mounted on slides, and 
stained with Oil red O solution. Means ± SEM (n=9–10) without a common lowercase letter 
differ (p<0.05) using one-way ANOVA and Student’s test.
Collins et al.
Page 30
J Nutr Biochem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. 
Liver gene expression of markers of inflammation, lipolysis, and lipogenesis in liver of 
C57BL/6J mice fed a low fat (LF), high fat (HF) diet, or a HF diet containing extractable 
(HF-EP) or non-extractable (HF-NEP) polyphenols, an equal combination of the EP and 
NEP fractions (HF-EP+NEP), or grape powder (HF-GP) for 16 weeks. qPCR was conducted 
to measure mRNA abundance of genes associated with hepatic inflammation, lipolysis, or 
lipogenesis. Means ± SEM (n=9–10) without a common lowercase letter differ (p<0.05) 
using one-way ANOVA and Student’s test.
Collins et al.
Page 31
J Nutr Biochem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. 
The expression of markers of inflammation in (A) inguinal (ING; subcutaneous), (B) 
epididymal (EPI; visceral), and (C) mesenteric (MES; visceral) WAT of C57BL/6J mice fed 
a low fat (LF), high fat (HF) diet, or a HF diet containing extractable (HF-EP) or non-
extractable (HF-NEP) polyphenols, an equal combination of the EP and NEP fractions (HF-
EP+NEP), or grape powder (HF-GP) for 16 weeks. qPCR was conducted to measure mRNA 
abundance of genes associated with inflammation in three WAT depots. Means ± SEM 
(n=9–10) without a common lowercase letter differ (p<0.05) using one-way ANOVA and 
Student’s test.
Collins et al.
Page 32
J Nutr Biochem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. 
The expression of markers of lipogenesis, lipolysis, or fatty-acid oxidation in inguinal (ING) 
(A) and epididymal (EPI) (B) WAT of C57BL/6J mice fed a low fat (LF), high fat (HF) diet, 
or a HF diet containing extractable (HF-EP) or non-extractable (HF-NEP) polyphenols, an 
equal combination of the EP and NEP fractions (HF-EP+NEP), or grape powder (HF-GP) 
for 16 weeks. qPCR was conducted to measure mRNA abundance of genes associated with 
lipogenesis, lipolysis, and fatty-acid oxidation in inguinal (A; subcutaneous) and epididymal 
(B; visceral) WAT depots. Means ± SEM (n=9–10) without a common lowercase letter differ 
(p<0.05) using one-way ANOVA and Student’s test.
Collins et al.
Page 33
J Nutr Biochem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 7. 
Localization (A) and quantification (B) of the tight junction protein ZO-1 at the apical area 
of the ileum epithelium and activity of MPO (C) in the ileum mucosa of C57BL/6J mice fed 
a low fat (LF), high fat (HF) diet, or a HF diet containing extractable (HF-EP) or non-
extractable (HF-NEP) polyphenols, an equal combination of the EP and NEP fractions (HF-
EP+NEP), or grape powder (HF-GP) for 16 weeks. Means ± SEM (n=9–10) without a 
common lowercase letter differ (p<0.05) using one-way ANOVA and Student’s t test. 
Localization of ZO-1 was visualized by immunostaining of ileum samples, the staining was 
quantified by J1 software, and is representative of at least three mice per treatment. Arrows 
indicated impairment in localization of ZO-1.
Collins et al.
Page 34
J Nutr Biochem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 8. 
The expression of Gpr43, Reg3γ, and Pyy in the ileum (A) or proximal colon mucosa (B) of 
C57BL/6J mice fed a low fat (LF), high fat (HF) diet, or a HF diet containing extractable 
(HF-EP) or non-extractable (HF-NEP) polyphenols, an equal combination of the EP and 
NEP fractions (HF-EP+NEP), or grape powder (HF-GP) for 16 weeks. qPCR was conducted 
to measure mRNA abundance of genes associated with regulation of energy balance (Gpr43 
and Pyy) and dysbiosis (Reg3γ) in ileum mucosa and proximal colon mucosa. Means ± SEM 
(n=9–10) without a common lowercase letter differ (p<0.05) using one-way ANOVA and 
Student’s test.
Collins et al.
Page 35
J Nutr Biochem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 9. 
Levels of SCFAs acetate, propionate, and butyrate were measured via GC-MS-MS from 
cecal contents of C57BL/6J mice fed a low fat (LF), high fat (HF) diet, or a HF diet 
containing extractable (HF-EP) or non-extractable (HF-NEP) polyphenols, an equal 
combination of the EP and NEP fractions (HF-EP+NEP), or grape powder (HF-GP) for 16 
weeks. Means ± SEM (n=8–10) are shown and significant differences between groups are 
indicated by * (p<0.05), ** (p<0.01), *** (p<0.001), or **** (p<0.0001) using Student’s t-
test.
Collins et al.
Page 36
J Nutr Biochem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 10. 
Abundance of sulfidogenic and butyrate-producing bacteria in the intestinal mucosa of 
C57BL/6J mice fed a low fat (LF), high fat (HF) diet, or a HF diet containing extractable 
(HF-EP) or non-extractable (HF-NEP) polyphenols, an equal combination of the EP and 
NEP fractions (HF-EP+NEP), or grape powder (HF-GP) for 16 weeks. (A) Abundance of 
the sulfidogenic bacteria expressing dissimilatory sulfate reductase (dsrA) or taurine-
pyruvate aminotransferase (tpa) were measured using qPCR targeting dsrA and tpa in the 
colonic mucosa. (B) The abundance of genes regulating butyrate production including 
hydroxybutyrate-CoA transferase (but) and butyrate kinase (buk) were measured in the 
colonic mucosa. Means ± SEM (n=8–10) are shown and significant differences between 
groups are indicated by * (p<0.05), ** (p<0.01), *** (p<0.001), or **** (p<0.0001) using 
Student’s t-test.
Collins et al.
Page 37
J Nutr Biochem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 11. 
Observed bacterial species in cecum mucosa of C57BL/6J mice fed a low fat (LF), high fat 
(HF) diet, or a HF diet containing extractable (HF-EP) or non-extractable (HF-NEP) 
polyphenols, an equal combination of the EP and NEP fractions (HF-EP+NEP), or grape 
powder (HF-GP) for 16 weeks. (A) Rarefaction curves of observed species are shown. 
Samples were rarified to 5,000 sequencing reads per sample. (B) Area under the curve 
(AUC) of rarefaction curves shown for each diet group. Means ± SEM (n=8–10) are shown 
and significant differences between groups are indicated by * (p<0.05), ** (p<0.01), *** 
(p<0.001), or **** (p<0.0001) using Student’s t-test.
Collins et al.
Page 38
J Nutr Biochem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 12. 
Significantly altered relative abundances of microbial taxa (i.e., Firmicutes (A), 
Bacteroidetes (B), Actinobacteria (C), and Tenericutes (D)) found across C57BL/6J mice fed 
a low fat (LF), high fat (HF) diet, or a HF diet containing extractable (HF-EP) or non-
extractable (HF-NEP) polyphenols, an equal combination of the EP and NEP fractions (HF-
EP+NEP), or grape powder (HF-GP) for 16 weeks. Taxa shown were significantly altered 
based on Kruskal Wallis test run using QIIME software following rarefaction at 5000 
sequences per sample. FDR corrected p values based on this analysis are shown on bottom 
left of each graph. Means ± SEM (n=8–10) are shown and significant differences between 
groups are indicated by * (p<0.05), ** (p<0.01), *** (p<0.001), or **** (p<0.0001) using 
Student’s t-test.
Collins et al.
Page 39
J Nutr Biochem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Collins et al.
Page 40
Table 1
Anthocyanin Concentration in Grape Powder and the Extractable Polyphenol(EP) Fraction.
Peak #
Identification
Grape Powder Concentrations (mg/kg)
EP Concentrations (μg/mg)
1
Delphinidin-3-O-glucoside
4.93
2
Pyanidin-3-O-glucoside
10.56
3
Petunidin-3-O-glucoside
4.91
4
Peonidin-3-O-glucoside
36.56
5
Malvidin-3-O-glucoside
145.2
30.83
6
Malvidin-3-O-(6″-O-acetyl-glucoside)
3.70
7
Petunidin-3-O-cis-(6″-p-coumaryl-glucoside)
2.56
8
Cyanidin-3-O-(6″-O-p-coumaryl-glucoside)
125.0
2.21
9
Petunidin-3-O-trans-(6″-O-p-coumaryl-glucoside)
3.24
10
Peonidin-3-O-cis-(6″-p-coumaryl-glucoside
31.7
2.73
11
Malvidin-3-O-cis(6″-p-coumaryl-glucoside
2.83
12
Peonidin-3-O-cis-(6″-O-p-coumaryl-glucoside)
28.460
13
Malvidin-3-O-trans-(6″-O-p-coumaryl-glucoside)
4.93
Total anthocyanins
133.52
J Nutr Biochem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Collins et al.
Page 41
Table 2
Initial Body Weight (BW), Final BW, Body Weight Gain (BWG), Food Conversion Efficiency (FCE), and Total Calorie Intake per Treatment Group.*
Diets
Initial BW (g)
Final BW (g)
BWG (g)
FCE (per cage, g food/g BW)
Kcal Intake (per cage)
LF
19.2±0.3ab
30.7±0.6d
11.4±0.5d
28.7±1.2a
2,502±82c
HF
19.6±0.4a
44.8±0.9a
24.8±1.0a
13.7±0.3cd
3,254±99a
EP
18.9±0.2b
36.5±0.8bc
17.8±0.9b
18.4±0.5b
3,136±165ab
NEP
19.2±0.3ab
39.3±1.0b
20.2±0.9b
16.0±0.6c
3,065±121ab
EP+NEP
19.1±0.3ab
34.3±0.8c
15.0±0.9c
20.7±1.2b
2,915±63b
grape powder
19.2±0.4ab
44.1±1.1a
24.9±1.0a
13.3±0.3d
3,145±98a
*LF, low fat control; HF, high fat sugar control; EP, extractable polyphenol fraction; NEP, non-extractable polyphenol fraction; grape powder, California Table Grape powder.
J Nutr Biochem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Collins et al.
Page 42
Table 3
Statistical Analyses of UniFrac Distances
Weighted
R2
P value
Adonis
0.28072
0.001
Anosim
0.2462
0.001
Pseudo F Statistic
P value
Permanova
4.059
0.001
Unweighted
R2
P value
Adonis
0.15215
0.001
Anosim
0.4484
0.001
Pseudo F Statistic
P value
Permanova
1.8663
0.001
J Nutr Biochem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Collins et al.
Page 43
Table 4
Taxa Associated with Body Fat Percentage.
Taxa Associated with Body Fat Percentage: (Phylum; Class; Order; Family; Genus)
Correlation
P Value
Fimicutes; Clostridia; Clostridiales
0.454822
0.000435
Firmicutes; Clostridia; Clostridiales; Lachnospiraceae
−0.420729
0.001231
Firmicutes; Clostridia; Clostridiales; Lachnospiraceae; Ruminococcus
0.377041
0.004059
J Nutr Biochem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Collins et al.
Page 44
Table 5
Taxa Associated with Ileal Reg3 Gene Expression.
Taxa Associated with Body Fat Percentage: (Phylum; Class; Order; Family; Genus)
Correlation
P Value
Firmicutes; Clostridia; Clostridiales; Clostridiaceae; Other
−0.593189
1.75E-05
Firmicutes; Clostridia; Clostridiaceae
−0.6450593
1.72E-06
Firmicutes; Clostridia; Clostridiales; Mogibacteriaceae
−0.5933202
1.74E-05
Firmicutes; Erysipelotrichi; Erysipelotrichales; Erysipelotrichaceae; Allobaculum
0.588010
2.16E-05
J Nutr Biochem. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 01.
