 1 
 
Neuropathic Pain 
Colloca L1, Ludman T1, Bouhassira D2, Baron R3, Dickenson AH4, Yarnitsky D5, Freeman R6, 
Truini A7, Attal N8, Finnerup NB9, Eccleston C10, Kalso E11, Bennett DL12, Dworkin RH13,  Raja 
SN14 
 
1Department of Pain and Translation Symptom Science School of Nursing and 
Department of Anesthesiology School of Medicine, University of Maryland 
Baltimore, USA  
2 INSERM, Unit 987, mbroise Paré Hospital, UVSQ, Boulogne Billancourt, 
France 
3Department of Neurology, Division of Neurological Pain Research and Therapy,  
Klinik fur Neurologie Christian-Albrechts-Universität Kiel, Kiel, Germany 
4Department of Neuroscience, Physiology and Pharmacology University College 
London, UK 
5Department of Neurology, Rambam Health Care Campus, Technion Faculty of 
Medicine, Haifa, Israel  
6Department of Neurology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA  
7Department of Neurological Science, University of Sapienza, Italy 
 
 
8,2Pain Evaluation and Treatment Centre of Hôpital Ambroise Paré, Paris, France  
9Department of Clinical Medicine - The Danish Pain Research Center, Aarhus 
University, Denmark 
10 Centre for Pain Research, University of Bath, United Kingdom and  
Department of Clinical and Health Psychology, Ghent University, Belgium  
11 Department of Anesthesiology, Division of Pain Medicine, Intensive Care and 
Pain Medicine, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, Finland  
12 Nuffield Department of Clinical Neuroscience, University of Oxford, UK  
13 Department of Anesthesiology, School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, 
NY, USA 
14Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, USA 
 
Correspondence to: Luana Colloca, University of Maryland, 655 W. Lombard Street 21201 
Baltimore, MD; Phone: +1 410-706-8244; fax: +1 410-706-5427; email: 
colloca@son.umaryland.edu 
Word Count – Abstract (198); Text (7,947); Reference Count – 190; Figures: 8; Tables: 2 
 
 
 
 2 
 
ABSTRACT 
Neuropathic pain is caused by a lesion or disease of the somatosensory system and affects 7-10% 
of the general population.  Neuropathic pain will likely become more common because of the 
ageing of the global population, increased incidence of diabetes and survival from cancer.  The 
burden of chronic neuropathic pain appears to be related to the number of neuropathic symptoms 
more than the intensity or duration of pain, highlighting the peculiarity of this chronic pain 
disorder.  A significant increase of drug prescriptions and visits to health care providers is 
observed and the quality of life is more impaired in patients suffering from neuropathic chronic 
pain than in those with non-neuropathic chronic pain. 
Progress in our understanding of the pathophysiology of neuropathic pain provides enthusiasm 
for the development of new diagnostic procedures and personalized interventions.  
We critically provide a current update about the epidemiology, mechanisms, pathophysiology, 
classification, diagnosis, screening, prevention and management of neuropathic pain.  We 
present the recent up-to-date diagnostic criteria and describe the advances in targeted 
pharmacological and non-pharmacological treatments. Finally, we describe approaches which 
will lead to better personalized therapeutic strategies and incorporate evidence emphasizing the 
need for a multidisciplinary approach to the management of neuropathic pain.  
 
 
 3 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Distinct definitions of neuropathic pain have been used over the years, leading researchers to call 
for a unified nomenclature. Recently, neuropathic pain has been defined as "pain caused by a 
lesion or disease of the somatosensory system", a definition that has since been widely accepted1. 
Importantly, neuropathic pain may be mechanistically dissimilar to other chronic pain conditions 
and is therefore diagnosed and treated differently. 
Neuropathic pain will likely become more common because of the ageing of the global 
population, increased incidence of diabetes, and cancer survival.  Neuropathic pain is associated 
with a significant increase of drug prescriptions and visits to health care providers 2, 3. Sleep 
disturbances, anxiety and depression are frequent and severe in patients suffering from 
neuropathic pain and quality of life is more impaired in patients with chronic neuropathic pain 
than in those with chronic non-neuropathic pain 2, 4. The burden of chronic neuropathic pain 
appears to be related to the number of neuropathic symptoms more than the intensity or duration 
of pain, highlighting the peculiarity of this chronic pain disorder 2, 4. 
Recent progress in our understanding of the pathophysiology of neuropathic pain provides 
optimism for the development of new diagnostic procedures and personalized interventions with 
favorable therapeutic outcomes despite an increased failure rate of randomized clinical trials in 
the past ten years 5, 6, 7,8. 
This review critically presents a current update about the presentation, causes, diagnosis, and 
treatment of neuropathic pain.  We provide up-to-date diagnostic criteria, describe the recent 
advance in targeted treatments that may lead to better personalized therapeutic strategies and 
incorporate evidence indicating that the management of neuropathic pain should be based upon a 
multidisciplinary approach.  
 
EPIDEMIOLOGY  
The estimation of the incidence and prevalence of neuropathic pain has been difficult because of 
the variety of diagnostic tools and definitions. Furthermore, the epidemiology of neuropathic 
pain has not been carefully studied until recently. The prevalence of neuropathic pain in the 
chronic pain population has been mainly estimated on the basis of retrospective and prospective 
studies 9 conducted by specialized centers with a focus on specific conditions such as post-
 4 
 
herpetic neuralgia 10, 11, painful diabetic polyneuropathy 12-15, post-surgery neuropathic pain 16, 
multiple sclerosis 17, 18, spinal cord injury 19, stroke 20 and cancer 21, 22.   
Another approach to estimating the prevalence of neuropathic pain is based on the use of  
validated screening tools in the form of simple questionnaires 23. Despite some limitations, 
inherent to the  variety of definitions and diagnostic criteria of neuropathic pain, several large 
epidemiological surveys conducted in different countries (UK, France, US and Brazil), using 
these tools, have provided valuable new information on the general prevalence of neuropathic 
pain 3. Using similar methodologies and screening tools such as the Douleur Neuropathique 4 
(DN4) or the Leeds Assessment of Neuropathic Symptoms and Signs (LANSS) pain scale 24, 25 
the population prevalence of chronic neuropathic pain has been estimated to range from 7% to 
10% 3, 26-28. Chronic neuropathic pain is more frequent in women and in older patients and, most 
commonly affects the lower back and lower limbs, neck and upper limbs. Lumbar and cervical 
painful radiculopathies are the most frequent cause of chronic neuropathic pain. Consistent with 
these data, a survey of more than 12,000 chronic pain patients with both nociceptive and 
neuropathic pain types, referred to pain specialists in Germany29 , revealed that 40% of all 
patients experience at least some characteristics of neuropathic pain (especially patients with 
chronic back pain and radiculopathy).  
 
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY/MECHANISMS 
Translational research: from basic science to clinical studies 
A lesion or disease of the peripheral somatosensory nervous system leads to altered and 
disordered transmission of sensory signals into the spinal cord (Figure 1). Preclinical science has 
described a number of changes from the periphery through to higher centers of the central 
nervous system (CNS) that appears to relate to neuropathic pain in patients. These changes result 
from alterations in ion channels within the affected nerve with increased function of sodium 
channels leading to increased excitability coupled with a loss of potassium channels which 
normally modulate neural activity. At the spinal central ending of the sensory nerves, there is 
increased expression and function of calcium channels leading to increased transmitter release. If 
a fiber is disconnected from the periphery there will be sensory loss but the fibers at the injury 
site can generate ectopic activity, e.g., neuroma afferents, and so pain from a numb area results 
30.  The remaining intact fibers are hyperexcitable, so called “irritable nociceptors” 31. Overall, 
 5 
 
there is a combination of ongoing pain, numbness and evoked pains.  Altered sodium channel 
function within damaged peripheral nerves is the rationale for the use of drugs such as lidocaine 
and carbamazepine for neuropathic pain. Recently, oxcarbazepine was shown to be more 
effective in patients with “irritable nociceptor” phenotype, where abnormal sodium channel 
activity could be assumed 32. The altered inputs into the spinal cord coupled with increased 
calcium channel function, best understood by enhanced expression of their alpha-2 delta subunit 
which causes greater expression of the channel in the terminal, now results in increased 
transmitter release and enhanced excitability of spinal neurons. This subunit is the site of action 
of the drugs, gabapentin and pregabalin 33. The spinal cord outputs to the brain with projections 
to the thalamus and cortex and parallel pathways to the limbic brain. Thus patients report high 
pain ratings as a consequence of the former projections and anxiety, depression and sleep 
problems as painful messages start to dominate limbic function. The main substrate for the 
central sensitization is activation of the NMDA receptor for glutamate. Hyperexcitable spinal 
neurons exhibit increased responses to many sensory modalities and expand their receptive 
fields, central sensitization 34, 35. This is the most plausible explanation for dynamic, static and 
cold allodynia and is reflected by enhanced thalamic neuronal coding 36. Hyperexcitability is 
compounded by a loss of GABA mediated inhibitions at spinal levels 37 and there are less well 
understood functional changes in non-neuronal cells within the spinal cord such as microglia 
which contribute to the development of hypersensitivity 38. Consequently, the brain receives 
altered and abnormal sensory messages. Areas such as the cingulate cortex and amygdala have 
been implicated in the ongoing aversive state and comorbidities associated with neuropathic pain 
39. Projections from these forebrain areas now alter descending controls running from the 
periaqueductal grey to the brain stem. Under normal conditions, there is a balance between 
descending inhibitions and excitations, but after peripheral neuropathy, the latter now dominate. 
A number of studies have shown that the brainstem excitatory pathways are more important in 
the maintenance rather than induction of the pain state. 
 
Noradrenergic inhibitions, through spinal alpha-2 receptors are attenuated and enhanced 5HT 
facilitations through 5HT2 and 3 receptors gain the upper hand 40. Descending inhibitions can be 
assessed through Diffuse Noxious Inhibitory controls (DNIC) the animal counterpart of the 
human Conditioned Pain Modulation (CPM, Figure 2A), where one pain inhibits another through 
 6 
 
descending pathways. DNIC is mediated by the noradrenergic inhibitory system and both DNIC 
and CPM are lost after neuropathy. Animals that recruit noradrenergic inhibitions have markedly 
reduced hypersensitivity after neuropathy despite identical levels of nerve damage. Thus at 
peripheral, spinal and central levels there is a gain of excitation and facilitation and a loss of 
inhibition. These shift the sensory pathways to a state of hyperexcitability. It appears that there 
may be a sequence of changes over time from the periphery to the brain as the neuropathic pain 
state becomes chronic.  
These events have been deduced from the use of animal models of neuropathy, the majority of 
which use surgical lesions of peripheral sensory nerves 41. The animal models use ligation of 
parts or branches of peripheral nerves, constriction and transection. The majority of animals 
show hypersensitivity (most often mechanical as assessed with von Frey testing, but which also 
can include hot and cold) which contrasts to patients but this is most likely due to the 
homogeneity of the genetic strain of animal. Models of diabetic neuropathy have been bedeviled 
by ill health of the animals but these are improving. 
Recently, clinical research is revealing ectopic activity in primary afferents as having a key role 
in the maintenance of neuropathic pain following peripheral nerve injury. Patients with painful 
diabetic polyneuropathy and traumatic peripheral nerve injury showed a complete abolition of 
ipsilateral spontaneous and evoked pain when treated with a peripheral nerve block with 
lidocaine 42. Similarly, a blockade of the dorsal root ganglion by intraforaminal epidural 
administration of lidocaine resulted in relief of painful and non-painful sensations in patients 
with phantom pain 43. Microneurography studies have also indicated a spontaneous activity in C-
nociceptors related to pain supporting a peripheral mechanism for neuropathic pain 44, 45. 
 
Human pain modulation mechanisms  
Individuals experience and cope with chronic neuropathic pain differently; some are mildly 
affected, while others suffer debilitating dysfunction. Individuals also vary substantially in their 
responses to therapeutic interventions; for some, pharmacological treatments are highly 
efficacious and in others only modest reductions in pain occur. A key factor in this variability 
may be the way the pain message is modulated in the CNS. While ascending from its entry port, 
the dorsal horn, into the CNS, until arriving at the cerebral cortex, the area critical for 
consciousness, the signal may be augmented or reduced, modifying the assumed correlation 
 7 
 
between the extent of the peripheral pathology, and the extent of the pain syndrome. Most pain 
patients express a pro-nociceptive pain modulation profile, i.e. pain messages are augmented in 
their central system 46.  Pronociception can be inhibitory due to less efficient CPM, facilitatory 
due to enhanced summation, or both, less efficient CPM and enhanced temporal summation 
(Figure 2B). The temporal summation is augmented in neuropathic and non-neuropathic pain. 
Neuropathic  pain patients present with a higher slope of increase 46. CPM has been shown to be 
less efficient in a variety of pain syndromes compared to healthy controls 47.  
 
Studies have shown that the pain modulation profile predicts the development and extent of 
chronic post-operative pain 48-50. The prospect of harnessing pain modulation seems promising 
for a more individualized approach to pain management. A ‘fix the dysfunction’ principle has 
been advocated, suggesting that patients who express a facilitatory pro-nociceptive profile could 
be treated by a drug that reduces the facilitation, e.g., gabapentinoids, and patients who express 
an inhibitory pro-nociceptive profile could be treated with an SNRI, that is expected to enhance 
the inhibitory capacity by reuptake inhibition of noradrenaline 48. It is likely that patients 
expressing both less efficient CPM and enhanced temporal summation may need a combination 
of treatments. Indeed, the level of CPM predicts the efficacy of duloxetine in patients and is 
restored by both duloxetine and tapentadol, both having norepinephrine reuptake inhibition 
(NRI) actions. Actions on these descending controls underlie the actions of TCA and SNRI in 
neuropathic pain patients 40. Moreover, an altered patient’s pain modulation profile can be 
reversed towards normality when pain is treated such as in osteoarthritis patients treated with 
arthroplasty surgery. In the case when the diseased joint is replaced, the majority of patients will 
be free of pain and the central and peripheral processes normalize 42, 51, 52.   
 
Notably, pain modulation is highly influenced by expectancy-induced analgesia, referring to 
changes due to patients and providers’ beliefs and desires 53, 54  affecting response to treatment 
for neuropathic pain. In laboratory settings, expectancy-induced analgesia influences clinical 
pain in Irritable Bowel Syndrome 55-57, idiopathic and neuropathic pain 58. Recently, Petersen et 
al. tested expectancy-induced analgesia in patients who developed neuropathic pain after 
thoracotomy 59, 60. Patients received lidocaine in an open (e.g. patients were told: ‘The agent you 
have just been given is known to powerfully reduce pain in some patients) and hidden (“This is a 
 8 
 
control condition for the active medication ) fashion in accordance with a previously described 
protocol 61 showed large significant reduction  of ongoing pain, maximum wind-up-like pain and 
area of hyperalgesia (Figure 3) 58, 59. These findings point to a clinically relevant endogenous 
pain inhibitory mechanism with relevant implications for clinical trial designs and practices. 
These effects should be reduced in clinical trials and intentionally enhanced in daily clinical 
practices as a strategy to optimize pain management. 
 
Classification of central and peripheral neuropathic pain 
The pathology of the peripheral disorders causing neuropathic pain predominantly involves the 
small lightly or unmyelinated peripheral nerves, namely the A delta and C fibers 4 (Figure 4).  
An approach to classifying these peripheral disorders is to subdivide them into those that have a 
generalized (usually symmetrical) and those that have a focal (usually asymmetrical) distribution 
(Table 1).   
The most clinically important painful generalized peripheral neuropathies include those due to 
diabetes, pre-diabetes and other metabolic dysfunctions, human immunodeficiency virus, 
chemotherapeutic agents, immune-system and inflammatory disorders, inherited neuropathies 
and channelopathies.  No definite cause is found in many patients with a painful peripheral 
neuropathy – a disorder called idiopathic small fiber neuropathy. The topography of the pain in 
these disorders typically encompasses the distal extremities, often called a “glove and stocking” 
distribution.  This pattern is characteristic of dying-back, length-dependent, distal peripheral 
neuropathies.  Less frequently, the pain has a proximal distribution.  This pattern occurs when 
the pathology involves the sensory ganglia. Painful focal peripheral disorders are due to 
pathological processes that involve one or more peripheral nerves or nerve roots.  These 
disorders include post-herpetic neuralgia, post-traumatic neuropathy, post-surgical neuropathy, 
cervical and lumbar polyradiculopathies, complex regional pain syndrome type 2 and trigeminal 
neuralgia 62.   
 
Central neuropathic pain is due to a lesion or disease of the spinal cord or brain. Cerebrovascular 
disease affecting the central somatosensory pathways (post-stroke pain) and neurodegenerative 
diseases, most notably Parkinson’ disease, are brain disorders that often cause central 
neuropathic pain 63. Spinal cord lesions or diseases that cause neuropathic pain include spinal 
 9 
 
cord injury, syringomyelia and demyelinating diseases such as multiple sclerosis, transverse 
myelitis and neuromyelitis optica 64.  
 
 
DIAGNOSIS/SCREENING AND PREVENTION  
 
 
 
 
Grading system and screening tools to assess sensory symptoms 
Chronic neuropathic pain is characterized by a lesion or a disease of the nervous system and 
should be distinguished from other chronic pain syndromes. This distinction is of particular 
importance since specific treatment recommendations exist for neuropathic pain.  
A grading system was proposed which is intended for determining the level of certainty with 
which the pain in question is neuropathic 4 (Figure 5A). If the patient's history suggests that there 
is a neurological lesion or disease and the pain could be related to such (e.g. by using validated 
screening tools, see below) and the pain distribution is neuroanatomically plausible the pain is 
termed possible neuropathic pain. Probable neuropathic pain requires supporting evidence 
obtained by a clinical examination of sensory signs (e.g. bed-side testing, quantitative sensory 
testing, see below). Definite neuropathic pain requires that an objective diagnostic test confirms 
the lesion or disease of the somatosensory nervous system (e.g. neurophysiological tests, skin 
biopsies as detailed below). The separation of neuropathic pain from other chronic pain 
syndromes is relevant for using the correct treatment. A grading system should be used to 
determine the certainty with which the pain in question is neuropathic. A finding of probable 
neuropathic pain in a given individual patient should lead to treatment according to the 
neuropathic pain treatment guidelines.  
 
Based on the assumption that characteristic qualities of sensory perceptions exist, that are 
indicative of neuropathic pain, several screening tools have been developed to identify 
neuropathic pain conditions or neuropathic components to chronic pain syndromes 65.These 
simple to use patient-reported questionnaires, e.g. DN4 or painDETECT 25, 66 assess 
characteristic neuropathic pain symptoms (e.g., burning, tingling, sensitivity to touch, pain 
caused by light pressure, electric shock like pain, pain to cold or heat, numbness) and can 
distinguish between neuropathic and non-neuropathic pain with high specificity and specificity. 
 
 10 
 
Psychophysical and objective diagnostic tests to demonstrate nerve damage 
Different psychophysical and diagnostic tests are available for investigating somatosensory 
pathway function, including bedside evaluation and assessment of sensory signs as well as 
neurophysiological techniques, skin biopsy, and corneal confocal microscopy (Figure 5B). 
 
- 
Bedside sensory assessment of sensory signs 
In addition to sensory symptoms patients with neuropathic pain also demonstrate a variety of 
distinct sensory symptoms and signs that can coexist in combinations 67. Diagnostic sensory bed-
side examinations should include the following modalities: touch, pinprick, pressure, cold, heat, 
vibration, temporal summation and after sensations 68. To assess either a loss (negative) or a gain 
of somatosensory function (positive sensory signs) the responses can be graded as normal, 
decreased or increased. The stimulus-evoked (positive) pain types are classified as hyperalgesic 
or allodynic, and according to the dynamic or static character of the stimulus. 
 
- 
Quantitative sensory testing 
A psychophysical technique to test the afferent nociceptive and non-nociceptive systems in the 
periphery and the central nervous system is quantitative sensory testing (QST) which uses 
standardized mechanical and thermal stimuli (graded v. Frey hairs, several pinprick stimuli, 
pressure algometers, quantitative thermotesting). An advantage of QST is that it assesses a loss 
as well as a gain of function of the whole spectrum of different afferent fiber classes 69. A 
standardized protocol for QST was proposed by the nationwide German Network on Neuropathic 
Pain 70 including 13 parameters of sensory testing procedures for the analysis of the exact 
somatosensory phenotype of neuropathic pain patients. To evaluate plus or minus signs in 
patients, an age- and gender-matched database for absolute and relative QST reference data was 
established for healthy human subjects. For most variables pathological values of positive and 
negative signs can be detected on the basis of reference data. 
 
- 
Neurophysiological techniques 
 11 
 
The Aβ-fiber mediated standard neurophysiological techniques (i.e. nerve conduction studies, 
trigeminal reflexes and somatosensory evoked potentials) do not provide information on 
nociceptive pathway. However, they are still useful to identify damage along the somatosensory 
pathways and are widely used for assessing peripheral and central nervous system diseases 
causing neuropathic pain 71. Laser evoked potentials (LEPs) are the easiest and most reliable 
neurophysiological technique for assessing nociceptive pathway function 68, 72). Laser-generated 
radiant heat pulses selectively excite Aδ and C nociceptors in the superficial skin layers 73. LEPs 
related to Aδ-fibers activation have been standardized for clinical application. They consist of a 
lateralized component (N1), generated in the SII area and in the insular cortex bilaterally, and a 
vertex potential consisting of a N2–P2 complex 74.  In diseases associated with nociceptive-
pathway damage, LEPs can be absent, reduced in amplitude or delayed in latency75, 76,77.  
- 
Skin biopsy 
Skin punch biopsies assesses epidermal innervation consisting mainly of unmyelinated C-fiber 
terminals, with relatively few small myelinated A-fibers that lose their myelin sheath and reach 
the epidermis as unmyelinated free nerve endings 78, 79. The technique is regarded as the most 
sensitive tool for diagnosing small-fiber neuropathies 80, the relationship between skin biopsy 
data and neuropathic pain is, however, still unclear. One study in 139 patients with peripheral 
neuropathy suggested that a partial sparing of intraepidermal nerve fibers, as assessed with skin 
biopsy is associated with provoked pain 81.  
 
- 
Corneal confocal microscopy  
The corneal innervation consists of small-myelinated Aδ and C-fibers. Corneal confocal 
microscopy is a non-invasive, in vivo, technique, useful for assessing corneal innervation and 
quantifying corneal nerve fiber damage in patients with peripheral neuropathies82, 83.  
Although corneal confocal microscopy represents a novel and promising tool for investigating 
small nerve fiber damage in patients with peripheral neuropathy, this technique has several 
limitations, such as the high cost and the reduced availability in most clinical centers. It is still 
unclear the influence of some conditions such as sicca syndrome, eye diseases or previous eye 
surgery on the corneal confocal variables. No study has reliably investigated the association 
between corneal confocal microscopy variables and neuropathic pain. 
 12 
 
 
PREVENTION 
Existing treatments have meaningful but modest benefits, and interventions that prevent 
neuropathic pain can therefore have a substantial impact on public health. The identification of 
risk factors is essential to preventing neuropathic pain.  Primary prevention of neuropathic pain 
involves interventions administered to generally healthy individuals who are at risk for 
developing neuropathic pain. An important example is provided by the live attenuated 84 and 
subunit adjuvanted 85 herpes zoster vaccines, which reduce the likelihood of developing herpes 
zoster in older individuals and thereby prevent postherpetic neuralgia. Secondary prevention 
involves administering preventive interventions to individuals who are experiencing an illness, 
injury, or treatment that can cause chronic neuropathic pain. Examples of this approach include 
the peri-operative treatment of surgical patients to prevent chronic post-surgical pain 86 and 
antiviral or analgesic treatment in patients with herpes zoster to prevent postherpetic neuralgia 87. 
Proper management of health conditions, such as diabetes, that cause neuropathic pain, may 
prevent neuropathic pain before it even presents 88. Increased attention to prevention has great 
potential to reduce the suffering and disability experienced by many patients with chronic 
neuropathic pain. Leading a healthy lifestyle and education regarding pain-causing health 
conditions are important components of prevention, especially in those who are at greater risk of 
developing neuropathic pain 89. Prevention programs that would combine mutually reinforcing 
medical and behavioral interventions may lead to greater preventive benefits. 
 
MANAGEMENT  
Pharmacological approach  
Different drug classes for the treatment of peripheral or central neuropathic pain have been 
evaluated in randomized controlled trials 4, 90. In this section we will only present drugs given in 
single or repeated dose administration and with long-term efficacy (Figure 6; Table 2).  
- 
Drugs effective in neuropathic pain  
Antidepressants and antiepileptics have been the most studied drugs in neuropathic pain. Among 
antidepressants, tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), particularly amitriptyline, and serotonin–
norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), particularly duloxetine, have confirmed efficacy in 
 13 
 
various neuropathic pain conditions. Their analgesic efficacy seems largely mediated by their 
action on descending modulatory inhibitory controls, but other mechanisms have been proposed, 
particularly an action on beta-2 adrenoceptors 91. Among antiepileptics, the efficacy of 
pregabalin and gabapentin, including extended release formulations, is best established for the 
treatment of peripheral neuropathic pain, and to a lesser extent spinal cord injury pain. However 
the number of negative trials has increased over the last 5 years. Their analgesic effects are 
mainly related to a decrease in central sensitization through binding to the alpha2-delta subunit 
of calcium channels 92.  
Opioids have also been found effective, mainly in peripheral NP. Tramadol, a weak opioid with 
serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibition, seems to have less potential for misuse and 
abuse than stronger opioids but should be used with caution in the elderly. Opioid agonists, 
particularly oxycodone and morphine, are moderately effective, but there is concern about 
prescription opioid-associated overdose diversion, misuse and morbidity 93.   
An additional effect of pregabalin or gabapentin combined with TCAs or opioids as compared to 
monotherapy has been reported in peripheral neuropathic pain 94, 95, 96. However, in a large study 
with a trial design reflecting clinical practice the efficacy and side effect profile of monotherapy 
at high dosages (600 mg pregabalin or 120 mg duloxetine) were similar to those of combination 
therapy at moderate dosages (300 mg pregabalin and 60 mg duloxetine daily) in patients with 
diabetic neuropathic pain not responding to monotherapy at moderate dosages 97.  
 
Topical agents (lidocaine and capsaicin patches) are also prescribed. Lidocaine is believed to act 
on ectopic neuronal discharges through its sodium channel–blocking properties. The efficacy of 
lidocaine 5% patches has been assessed in focal peripheral NP, particularly post-herpetic 
neuralgia, but their therapeutic gain is modest compared with placebo 98, 99. Capsaicin initially 
activates transient receptor potential vanilloid 1 (TRPV1) ligand-gated channels on nociceptive 
fibers leading to TRPV1 desensitization and defunctionalization. The sustained efficacy (up to 3 
months) of a single application of high-concentration capsaicin patch (8%) has been reported in 
PHN and diabetic and non-diabetic painful neuropathies. The long-term safety of repeated 
applications seems favorable based on open studies, but there are no long-term data on the 
effects on epidermal nerve fibers in patients.  
 14 
 
Botulinum toxin type A (BTX-A), a potent neurotoxin commonly used for the treatment of focal 
muscle hyperactivity, has shown efficacy in neuropathic pain for up to 3 months after a single 
set of injections, possibly through a central or mechanotransduction effect. A recent larger-scale 
trial has confirmed the efficacy of repeated administrations over 6 months, with enhanced 
effects of the second injection 90.  
- 
Drugs with inconsistent results or lack of efficacy  
Studies of antiepileptics other than alpha2delta ligands (for example, topiramate, oxcarbazepine, 
carbamazepine, valproate, zonisamide, lacosamide, levetiracetam) have reported negative, weak 
or inconsistent results in neuropathic pain, although some are probably effective in subgroups of 
patients. Oromucosal cannabinoids (2.7 mg delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol/2.5 mg cannabidiol) 
have been found variably effective, particularly in multiple sclerosis–associated pain, but 
several unpublished trials were negative on the primary outcome. Results for selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) antagonists, mexiletine and topical 
clonidine have generally been inconsistent or negative except in patient subgroups.  
 
- 
Emerging drug treatments  
A few drugs targeting novel mechanisms of action are under clinical development for the 
treatment of peripheral neuropathic pain. These include in particular subtype selective sodium 
blocking agents particularly Nav1.7 antagonists 100 and EMA 401, a novel angiotensin type II 
antagonist that has been found effective in a phase II clinical trial in postherpetic neuralgia 101.  
 
- 
Therapeutic recommendations  
Numerous therapeutic recommendations for neuropathic pain have been proposed in recent years 
102-107. Based on a new systematic review and meta-analysis of all drug studies published since 
1966, including unpublished trials 108, pregabalin, gabapentin and SNRIs, particularly duloxetine 
and TCAs, have strong recommendations for use and are recommended as first-line drugs for the 
treatment of peripheral and central neuropathic pain. High-concentration capsaicin patches, 
lidocaine patches and tramadol have weak quality of evidence and are recommended as second-
line treatment for peripheral neuropathic pain only. Strong opioids and BTX-A (for specialists 
only) also have weak recommendations for use. There are weak, against or inconclusive 
recommendations for the use of all other drug treatments for neuropathic pain in general.   
 15 
 
- 
Recommendations for future therapeutic trials in neuropathic pain  
The outcome of clinical trials in neuropathic pain is modest, with numbers needed to treat (NNT) 
for 50% pain relief (the number of patients necessary to treat to obtain one responder as 
compared with placebo) ranging from 6 to 8 for positive studies in the latest meta-analysis 108. 
Several reasons may account for these results 90, including high placebo responses (which may 
underestimate drug effects), the paucity of use of validated diagnostic criteria for neuropathic 
pain in clinical trials, and trial failures. Thus, it has been proposed over the past decade that a 
preferable therapeutic approach to neuropathic pain should focus mainly on stratifying patients 
according to clinical phenotypes (symptoms and signs) 67, 109, 110 10, 67, 77, 111, 112, which are 
suggestive of specific mechanisms, whereas most trials have essentially been conducted in 
patients classified according to their etiology. A number of recently well-conducted prospective 
trials tend to support the relevance of phenotypic subgrouping of patients, which should lead to a 
more personalized pain therapy in the future 90, 99, 113 114. In particular, two often combined 
phenotypes, the presence of mechanical allodynia and preserved nociceptive function, seem to 
predict the response to systemic or topical sodium channel blockers, BTX-A and clonidine gel in 
distinct clinical trials 90, 99, 113.  
 
Interventional therapies for neuropathic pain 
Pharmacological treatments for chronic neuropathic pain  are effective in <50% of patients and 
may be associated with adverse effects that limit their clinical utility 115. Interventional 
treatments, such as invasive procedures to deliver drugs to targeted areas or ablation/modulation 
of specific neural structures or pathways provide alternative treatment strategies in selected 
patients with refractory neuropathic pain 116, 117 (Figure 7). 
 
- 
Neural Blockade and Steroid Injections 
Local anesthetic nerve blocks have been used as a diagnostic tool to determine if a particular 
nerve or nerve root is involved in pain signaling or is the source of ectopic activity that leads to 
neuropathic pain. The results of these procedures, however, need to be interpreted with caution, 
as their predictive value in defining treatment is uncertain.  Perineural injection of steroids 
provides transient relief (1-3 months) for trauma- and compression-related peripheral 
neuropathic pain118. Epidural and paravertebral local anesthetic and steroid nerve blocks were 
 16 
 
given a weak recommendation by NeuPSIG (Neuropathic Pain Special Interest Group, 
International Association for the Study of Pain) for the treatment of acute zoster-associated 
neuropathic pain117.  Epidural steroid injections are commonly used in the treatment of cervical 
and lumbar radiculopathies, but their efficacy and safety remain controversial. An evidence-
based review of randomized trials on epidural steroid injection suggested a modest effect size 
with pain relief lasting <3 months, 119  consistent with NeuPSIG’s weak recommendation for its 
use in radiculopathy secondary to a lumbar herniated disc. Transforaminal epidural steroid 
injections were more likely to yield positive results than caudal and interlaminar techniques. 
Recent controlled trials provide moderate evidence that subcutaneous injection of botulinum 
toxin A has a beneficial role in the treatment of peripheral neuropathic pain (e.g., diabetic 
neuropathic pain, postherpetic and trigeminal neuralgia) 90, 120, 121. Although sympathetic 
ganglion blocks have been used to treat pain some patients with complex regional pain 
syndromes (CRPS; causalgia, reflex sympathetic dystrophy), the evidence for long-term benefit 
is weak. 
- 
Neurostimulation Therapies 
Spinal Cord Stimulation (SCS)  
The relative safety and reversibility of SCS, as well as its cost-effectiveness over the long term, 
has made it an attractive strategy for managing patients with refractory, chronic NP 122-124. 
Systematic reviews, randomized controlled trials, and several case series provide evidence for 
long-term efficacy of SCS relative to conventional medical management in patients with CRPS 
type I and treatment-refractory failed back surgery syndrome (FBSS) with radicular symptoms 
125-127 SCS offered better pain relief, health-related quality of life, and functional capacity that 
were sustained at 24 months of treatment 128, 129. Both NeuPSIG and the European Academy of 
Neurology gave a weak recommendation to SCS use in CRPS type I and FBSS with 
radiculopathy on the basis of the moderate evidence from controlled trials 116, 117, 130.  The NICE 
guidance also recommended SCS as a possible treatment for adults with chronic pain of 
neuropathic origin17.  The NeuPSIG report considered the evidence for the efficacy of SCS in 
diabetic neuropathic pain to be low and made an “inconclusive” recommendation. Two 
subsequent randomized trials of SCS in subjects with painful diabetic neuropathy provide 
additional evidence for its efficacy, with greater reduction in pain and improvements in quality 
 17 
 
of life measures compared to a control group 131, 132. Although SCS is used to treat several other 
neuropathic pain states, (e.g., post-amputation stump and phantom pains, post-herpetic neuralgia, 
spinal cord injury, and traumatic peripheral neuralgias), the evidence for its effectiveness is 
based primarily on small observational studies. The success of SCS for neuropathic pain may 
depend on appropriate selection of patients, based on psychological traits, sensory phenotype, 
and pain mechanism 133, 134. 
Traditional SCS parameters use a monophasic, square-wave pulse at a frequency in the 30–100-
Hz range that results in paresthesia in the painful region135.   Newer stimulation parameters, such 
as burst (40-Hz burst with 5 spikes at 500 Hz per burst) and high-frequency (10 kHz with 
sinusoidal wave forms) SCS, provide paresthesia-free stimulation and equivalent or better pain 
relief compared to traditional SCS 136, 137.  
 
Dorsal Root Ganglion (DRG), Peripheral Nerve, and Peripheral Nerve Field Stimulation 
Neurostimulation of afferent fibers outside the spinal cord (e.g., DRG and peripheral nerves) and 
subcutaneous peripheral nerve field stimulation have been reported to provide pain relief in a 
variety of chronic neuropathic pain states, such as postsurgical and post-traumatic neuralgia, 
CRPS, occipital neuralgia, and postherpetic neuralgia 138, 139. A multicenter, prospective, cohort 
study in subjects with chronic neuropathic pain reported that DRG stimulation provided 56% 
pain reduction with a 60% responder rate (>50% reduction in pain) 140.  These preliminary 
observations require further validation with controlled trials.  
SCS and peripheral nerve stimulation are generally safe and reversible therapies. However, 
hardware-related, biological complications such as infections and programming- or treatment-
related adverse effects (e.g., painful paresthesias) have been reported in 30-40% of patients 141, 
142. Systematic reviews have reported the most common hardware-related complication, lead 
migration, to have rates of 20-27% 143.  Other hardware-related complications include lead 
fracture and malfunction (6-10%), and battery failure. Pain over the device components has a 
reported incidence of 1-12% across studies.  Wound infection (2.5-10%) and wound breakdown 
are major complications associated with DRG stimulation that sometimes require removal of the 
device.   
 
Epidural and Transcranial Cortical Neurostimulation 
 18 
 
Stimulation of the pre-central motor cortex (M1) below motor threshold using invasive (epidural, 
[EMCS]) or transcranial noninvasive techniques (e.g., repetitive transcranial magnetic 
stimulation [rTMS], transcranial direct current stimulation [tDCS]), has been proposed for drug-
resistant peripheral and central neuropathic pain 144-146.   M1 rTMS and EMCS may reduce pain-
related thalamic hyperactivity or activate descending inhibitory pathways.  Meta-analysis reports 
suggest that 60-65% of patients respond (>40% pain reduction) to EMCS 146.  Repetitive sessions 
(5-10 over 1-2 weeks) with high-frequency rTMS (5-20 Hz) of contralateral M1 have shown 
benefits in a mixture of central, peripheral, and facial neuropathic pain states, with effects lasting 
>2 weeks after the stimulation.  Anodal tDCS over M1 has been reported to be beneficial in 
reducing several neuropathic conditions (phantom pain, trigeminal neuralgia, diabetic 
neuropathy, post-stroke pain, and pain associated with multiple sclerosis).  The primary 
advantage of noninvasive neurostimulation techniques is their excellent safety profile; hence 
they have been suggested as complementary therapies in patients with chronic refractory 
neuropathic pain. Relative contraindications of TMS include a history of epilepsy and the 
presence of aneurysm clips, deep brain electrodes, or cochlear implants. 
 
Deep Brain Stimulation (DBS) 
The use of chronic intracranial stimulation for neuropathic pain remains controversial. Multiple 
DBS sites, including the internal capsule, various nuclei in the sensory thalamus, periaqueductal 
and periventricular gray, motor cortex, septum, nucleus accumbens, posterior hypothalamus, and 
anterior cingulate cortex, have been examined as potential brain targets for pain control 147.  The 
NICE guidelines recognize that the procedure may be efficacious in some patients refractory to 
other forms of pain control, but current evidence on the safety of DBS shows serious potential 
risks 148. Contrary to NICE, the EAN guidelines give inconclusive recommendations to DBS 130. 
 
- 
Intrathecal Therapies  
Intrathecal therapies have been suggested as a targeted drug delivery option in patients with 
severe and chronic pain refractory to conservative treatments, including psychological, physical, 
pharmacological and neuromodulation therapies 149, 150.  The Polyanalgesic Consensus 
Conference report highlighted that this therapy is associated with risks for serious morbidity and 
mortality and made recommendations to reduce the incidence of these serious adverse effects 151.  
 19 
 
The only two FDA approved drugs are morphine and ziconitide, an N-type calcium channel 
antagonist 152. The most frequently reported adverse reactions associated with intrathecal 
ziconitide are dizziness, nausea, confusional state, memory impairment, nystagmus, and 
elevation of serum creatine kinase.  Ziconitide is contraindicated in patients with a history of 
psychosis and patients should be monitored for evidence of cognitive impairment, hallucinations, 
or changes in mood and consciousness. 
 
 
Psychological therapies 
Psychological therapies are likely to play an increasingly important role in our attempts to help 
people adapt to neuropathic pain. People with chronic pain are not passive; they actively attempt 
to change the causes of pain and change their own behavior in response to pain. But, for many 
patients change without therapeutic help is unachievable, and repeated misdirected attempts to 
solve the problem of pain drive them further into a cycle of pain, depression, and disability 153  
Psychological interventions are designed to promote the management of pain and to reduce its 
adverse consequences. Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) has received most research 
attention; however CBT is not a single treatment, and can usefully be thought of as a family of 
techniques woven together by a clinical narrative of ‘individual change’ delivered by therapists 
actively managing treatment. The targets of treatment go beyond the analgesic to domains of 
affect, function, and social engagement. Secondary outcomes are sometimes reported because 
they are deemed important to treatment delivery (e.g., therapeutic alliance; self-efficacy), or 
because they are valued by one or more stakeholder (e.g., return to work; analgesic use). 
Trials of CBT reflect clinical practice: they are largely undertaken with samples heterogeneous 
by medical diagnosis, but homogenous in the extent of depression, anxiety, disability, social 
withdrawal, and difficulty self-managing pain. The most recent Cochrane systematic review of 
psychological interventions for chronic pain identified sixty-five trials, of which analyzable data 
were available from thirty-five. There are studies of both specific Behavioral Therapies (BT) and 
programs of CBT across multiple comparisons in different domains of outcome (pain, disability, 
mood), which taken together give a clear picture—there are small to moderate effects of CBT 
over comparisons 154. In a companion review of fifteen trials delivering treatment using the 
internet, a similar broadly positive conclusion emerged, although the confidence in the estimates 
 20 
 
of effects was low 155. Psychological treatments other than BT and CBT were included in this 
review, but there were no trials of sufficient quality to include. More recently a specific 
Cochrane review of trials specifically undertaken with neuropathic pain patients found no 
evidence, reporting only two small trials 156.  There is no evidence base for or against the 
efficacy and safety of psychological interventions for chronic neuropathic pain. That the 
evidence for the efficacy of psychological interventions for chronic neuropathic pain is either 
missing or underwhelming is not surprising, and is in line with the evidence for non-
psychological interventions 157. There is an urgent need for studies of treatments designed 
specifically for patients with neuropathic pain, in particular those with painful diabetic 
neuropathy 158. It is likely that these studies will be different to those that went before in both 
content and design. First, needed are studies of CBT with content specifically designed to meet 
the psychosocial needs of patients with neuropathy, in particular with regard to the multiple 
sensory challenge, co-morbidity, and polypharmacy 159. A recognition that neuropathic pain 
increases with age will also mean that an understanding of later life accommodation to illness 
will be important 160. Second, a methodological focus on individual experience and trajectories 
of change is needed, either through single case experiments or through ecological momentary 
assessment 161. Third, communication technology, in particular the use of mobile health 
innovation, is likely to play an important role in future solutions. The computing technology 
already exists to deliver behavior change interventions to patients distant from therapists. What is 
missing is the basic behavioral science of how to manage effective therapeutic relationships at a 
distance, and how technology can augment and improve face-to-face CBT 162. Technical 
psychological variables—such as catastrophic thinking, acceptance, or readiness to change—
should be relegated to process variables. Conversely, essential will be a pragmatic focus on 
patient reported outcomes with the scope of reducing pain, improving mood, and reducing 
disability which ultimately results in improving quality of life. CBT remains an excellent 
candidate treatment for development. 
 
QUALITY OF LIFE 
Neuropathic pain can significantly impair quality of life as it often associates with other 
problems such as loss of function, anxiety, depression, disturbed sleep, and impaired cognition. 
Health Related Quality of Life (HRQoL) is a measure that captures broad dimensions of health 
 21 
 
including physical, mental, emotional and social functioning. HRQoL is increasingly used when 
assessing the efficacy of different interventions to manage chronic neuropathic and non-
neuropathic pain. It is particularly useful when calculating quality-adjusted life years (QALYs) 
necessary for cost-utility analyses.  
The most commonly used HRQoL instruments are presented below. Some of them are general 
whereas others have been designed to assess HRQoL in neuropathic pain.   Meyer-Rosberg and 
colleagues validated both the SF-36 and Nottingham Health Profile (NHP) in the assessment of 
HRQoL in neuropathic pain related to peripheral nerve or root lesion in patients attending 
multidisciplinary pain clinics 163. The scores of all eight dimensions in the Short Form 36 Health 
Survey (SF-36) were significantly lower in the neuropathic pain patients compared with the 
general population in line with another study 164. 
The onset of neuropathy in diabetic patients has been shown to significantly decrease all aspects 
of quality of life 165. If diabetic polyneuropathy is accompanied by pain, both physical and 
mental components of quality of life are further affected 166. A recent study also showed that 
both EuroQol five dimensions (EQ-5D) and Short Form-6 dimension (SF-6D) questionnaires can 
discriminate between chronic pain patients with or without neuropathic pain 167. The role of 
psychological factors in impairing quality of life in neuropathic pain has been analyzed in two 
recent studies 168, 169.   One of them showed that pain catastrophizing associated with decreased 
HRQoL in neuropathic pain 168. 
The SF-36 and the EQ-5D have been the most commonly used instrument in clinical trials e.g.  
to assess the efficacy of gabapentin in post-herpetic neuralgia170, diabetic polyneuropathy 171, or 
neuropathic pain due to peripheral nerve injury 164, the efficacy of duloxetine in diabetic 
peripheral neuropathy 172, and the efficacy of spinal cord stimulation in diabetic 
polyneuropathy173,172 174. Improvement in pain scores was positively correlated with 
improvement in quality of life. The largest improvements were in patients achieving ≥50% pain 
relief. General HRGoL instruments enable comparison of neuropathic pain with other conditions 
and the general population. A sensitive HRQoL instrument specifically developed for 
neuropathic pain would help to analyze factors that are affected by neuropathic pain and help to 
focus management to all domains that are affected. 
 
 
 22 
 
OUTLOOK  
Limitations of existing neuropathic pain treatments provide a compelling impetus for the 
development of novel interventions with improved efficacy and tolerability, but there have been 
few major advances. The explanations for this slow progress that are receiving the greatest 
attention are inadequate clinical trial assay sensitivity and the need to target treatment to patients 
who are most likely to respond. Assay sensitivity refers to the ability of a clinical trial to 
distinguish an efficacious treatment from placebo (or another comparator). The possibility that 
recent neuropathic pain clinical trials may suffer from limited assay sensitivity is consistent with 
the observation that a considerable number of recent negative trials investigated medications 
with well-established efficacy5, 175. Research designs, methodological features, patient 
characteristics, outcome measures, statistical analysis methods, and statistical power may all play 
a role in accounting for difficulties in demonstrating the benefits of efficacious treatments vs. 
placebo 176, 177. The essence of an evidence-based approach to the design of clinical trials is to 
first examine associations between clinical trial characteristics and study outcomes to identify 
modifiable factors associated with assay sensitivity, and to then apply that knowledge 
prospectively in the design of new trials. An example is provided by a recent analysis of 
neuropathic pain trials that showed that assay sensitivity was compromised by patients with 
highly variable baseline pain ratings 178 which suggests that trials might have greater assay 
sensitivity if highly variable baseline pain ratings were an exclusion criterion 101. 
Another critically important approach to increasing clinical trial assay sensitivity and to 
accelerating the development of personalized pain treatments involves selecting patients who 
have an increased likelihood of treatment response 179. The strongest evidence showing that 
profiles of symptoms and signs can identify treatment responders is a trial in which patients who 
were defined as having an “irritable nociceptor” phenotype had a larger decrease in pain with 
oxcarbazepine vs. placebo than those without this phenotype 32. This is the only trial in which a 
pre-specified primary analysis demonstrated a difference in treatment vs. placebo response in 
patient subgroups identified by phenotyping. These results are very promising, but require 
replication as well as use of phenotyping measures that would be suitable for larger confirmatory 
trials and use in clinical practice 180, 181. Phenotyping could also be used to test whether certain 
patients have a more robust response to non-pharmacologic treatments, for example, invasive, 
psychological, and complementary interventions 180, as well as to identify which patients are 
 23 
 
most likely to respond to combinations of treatments. Indeed, given the importance of 
expectations and psychological and social factors — including adaptive coping and 
catastrophizing — in the development and maintenance of chronic pain, it would not be 
surprising if phenotyping has as great a role to play in demonstrating the efficacy of 
psychological interventions as it does for medications (Figure 8). 
To advance the design, execution, analysis, and interpretation of clinical trials of pain treatments, 
several public-private partnerships have undertaken systematic efforts to increase assay 
sensitivity and provide validated approaches for phenotyping patients and identifying those most 
likely to respond to treatment. These efforts—which include ACTTION (www.acttion.org), 
EuroPain (www.imieuropain.org), and the German Research Network on Neuropathic Pain 
(www.neuro.med.tu-muenchen.de/dfns/e_index.html )—are providing an evidence-based 
foundation for the design of future neuropathic pain clinical trials and for the development of 
mechanism-based approaches to personalized neuropathic pain treatment. 
 
The emergence of personalized pain medicine 
Personalized medical care refers to the principle that patients can be stratified such that each 
patient receives the most effective and tolerable treatment for their individual needs. Patients can 
be stratified on a number of levels: clinical phenotype, detailed sensory profiling, genetics and 
potentially (in the future) using cellular models. Close consultation with the patient is required 
and this involves complex discussions around the uncertainties of genetic risk and the balance 
between efficacy and tolerability of potential treatments. Human genetics has demonstrated that 
Nav1.7 is a critical pain target 182 and therapeutics aimed at targeting Nav1.7  provide an example 
of a situation in which testing for specific genetic mutations can inform patient care. Loss of 
function mutations lead to congenital insensitivity to pain and gain of function mutations cause 
rare inherited pain disorders including: inherited erythromelalgia (IEM, pain and erythema of the 
extremities, exacerbated by warmth) 183, paroxysmal extreme pain disorder (PEPD, pain and 
erythema affecting the sacrum and mandible) 184 and idiopathic small fiber neuropathy (SFN, 
pain and small-fiber degeneration in the extremities) 185.  
Genetic information can therefore inform diagnostics however the interpretation of genetic 
results is complex and aided by functional analysis of ion channels 186 for instance in the context 
of SFN in which mutations may not be fully penetrant. Finding a mutation in Nav1.7 may have 
 24 
 
immediate implications for treatment in choosing a drug with activity against VGSCs (not 
normally first line agents in the treatment of neuropathic pain). For example, mexiletine is not 
recommended in the treatment of neuropathic pain but exception is made in IEM in which 
mexiletine has proven efficacy in normalizing abnormal channel properties in vitro 187 and 
clinical efficacy in individual cases.  A further step has been taken in using structural modelling 
of Nav1.7 to predict what treatment a specific mutation will respond to 188 and this was recently 
used to predict efficacy of carbamazepine in IEM associated with the S241T mutation 189. By 
taking a blood sample or skin biopsy from a patient it is now possible to generate nociceptors in 
vitro. In rare Mendelian pain disorders (such as IEM) these nociceptors have been shown to be 
hyper-excitable 190. Treatments such as selective inhibitors of Nav1.7 can be screened in such 
cellular models and related to clinical efficacy in Mendelian pain disorders as proof of concept 
prior to their use in acquired neuropathic pain conditions. Genetic stratification is more 
challenging in common acquired neuropathic pain states such as painful diabetic neuropathy 
which are polygenic with a significant environmental interaction. Despite these limitations the 
prospect of personalized medicine is a step forward towards promising pain management 
strategies.  
 
Conclusions 
Neuropathic pain is a notable health concern since it impairs quality of life and functioning. 
Nervous system mechanisms underlying chronic neuropathic pain have been uncovered through 
animal and human research. Major progressive strides have been made, particularly with the 
utilization of genetics which can guide diagnostics and treatment choices. Technological 
advances have helped improve the efficacy of invasive and non-invasive neurostimulation 
techniques for the treatment of select neuropathic pain states. Moreover, increased understanding 
of pain modulatory mechanisms (e.g. CPM, placebo effects) and psychological therapies, such as 
CBT, is the key for improving patient-oriented outcomes. New and more effective therapeutic 
targets, specifically those that have been individualized based on genotypic and phenotypic 
profiles, are promising and have opened many doors for progressing neuropathic pain basic and 
translational research.  
 
 
 25 
 
Acknowledgements 
This manuscript was supported in part by the UMB and National Institutes of Health, NIDCR 
(R01, LC); Wellcome Trust Pain Consortium (AD and DLB); EU Project No 633491: DOLOR-
isk, IMI Europain, Pfizer, Genzyme GmbH, Grünenthal GmbH, Mundipharma (RB); Israel 
Science Foundation, European Horizons 2020; US Department of Defense (DY) and National 
Institutes of Health (NS26363, SR). 
 
Author contributions 
Introduction (LC and TD); Epidemiology (DB); Mechanisms/pathophysiology (AD, LC, DY and 
RF); Diagnosis, screening and prevention (RB, AT and RD); Management (NA, NF, SR and 
CE); Quality of life (EK); Outlook (RD and DLB). Critical revision of the manuscript (All 
authors). 
Competing interests 
LC received research funding, lecture honoraria and acted as speaker or consultant for 
Grünenthal and Emmi Solution.  
TL declared no competing interests.  
RB is an industry member of Astra Zeneca, Pfizer, Esteve, UCB-Pharma, Sanofi Aventis, 
Grünenthal GmbH, Eli Lilly, and Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH&Co.KG;  German 
Federal Ministry of Education and Research member (ERA_NET NEU-RON / IM-PAIN 
Project) and German Research Net-work on Neuropathic Pain, NoPain system biology German 
Research Foundation (DFG); RB received lecture honoraria from Pfizer, Genzyme GmbH, 
Grünenthal GmbH, Mundipharma, Sanofi Pasteur, Medtronic Inc. Neuromodulation, Eisai 
Co.Ltd., Lilly GmbH, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH&Co.KG, Astellas, Desitin, Teva 
Pharma, Bayer-Schering, MSD GmbH, Seqirus and served as a consultant for Pfizer, Genzyme 
GmbH, Grünenthal GmbH, Mundipharma, Allergan, Sanofi Pasteur, Medtronic Inc. 
Neuromodulation, Eisai Co.Ltd., Lilly GmbH, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH&Co.KG, 
Astellas, Novartis, Bristol-Myers-Squibb, Biogenidec, AstraZeneca, Merck, Abbvie, Daiichi 
Sankyo, Glenmark Pharmaceuticals, Seqirus, Teva Pharma, Genentech and Galapagos NV. 
AD has acted as speaker or consultant for Seqirus, Grünenthal, Allergan and Mundipharma.  
 26 
 
DB acted as a consultant for Grünenthal, Pfizer, and Indivior. 
DLB has acted as a consultant for Abide, Eli-Lilly, Mundi-pharma, Pfizer and TEVA.  
DY received a lecture honorarium from Pfizer and holds equity in the BrainsGate and Theranica 
companies.  
RF acted as advisory board member for Abide, Astellas, Biogen, Glenmark, Hydra, Novartis and 
Pfizer. 
AT declared no competing interests. 
NA received honoraria for participation in advisory boards or speaker bureau by Astellas, Teva, 
Mundipharma, Johnson and Johnson, Novartis and Sanofi Pasteur MSD. 
NBF has received honoraria for participation in advisory board from Teva Pharmaceuticals, 
Novartis, and Grünenthal and research support from EUROPAIN Investigational Medicines 
Initiative (IMI).  
CE declared no competing interests.  
EK has served in the advisory boards of Orion Pharma and Grunenthal and received lecture 
honoraria from Orion Pharma and Astra Zeneca.  
RHD received research grants and contracts from the US Food and Drug Administration and US 
National Institutes of Health, and compensation for activities involving clinical trial research 
methods from Abide, Aptinyx, Astellas, Boston Scientific, Centrexion, Dong-A, Eli Lilly, 
Glenmark, Hope, Hydra, Immune, Novartis, NsGene, Olatec, Phosphagenics, Quark, Reckitt 
Benckiser, Relmada, Semnur, Syntrix, Teva, Trevena, and Vertex. 
SR received a research grant from Medtronic Inc. and honoraria for participation in advisory 
boards of Allergan, Daiichi-Sankyo, and Grünenthal USA Inc. 
 
 
 27 
 
References 
1. 
Jensen, T.S. et al. A new definition of neuropathic pain. Pain 152, 2204-5 (2011). 
2. 
Attal, N., Lanteri-Minet, M., Laurent, B., Fermanian, J. & Bouhassira, D. The specific disease 
burden of neuropathic pain: results of a French nationwide survey. Pain 152, 2836-43 (2011). 
3. 
Torrance, N., Smith, B.H., Bennett, M.I. & Lee, A.J. The epidemiology of chronic pain of 
predominantly neuropathic origin. Results from a general population survey. J Pain 7, 281-9 
(2006). 
4. 
Finnerup, N.B. et al. Neuropathic pain: an updated grading system for research and clinical 
practice. Pain 157, 1599-606 (2016). 
This paper presents a grading system helping health care providers and researhcers to improve the 
classification and grading of neuropathic pain in the daily clinical practice 
5. 
Tuttle, A.H. et al. Increasing placebo responses over time in U.S. clinical trials of neuropathic 
pain. Pain 156, 2616-26 (2015). 
6. 
Dolgin, E. Fluctuating baseline pain implicated in failure of clinical trials. Nat Med 16, 1053 
(2010). 
7. 
Bartfai, T. & Lees, G.V. Pharma TARP: a troubled asset relief program for novel, abandoned 
projects in the pharmaceutical industry. ScientificWorldJournal 11, 454-7 (2011). 
8. 
Katz, J., Finnerup, N.B. & Dworkin, R.H. Clinical trial outcome in neuropathic pain: relationship to 
study characteristics. Neurology 70, 263-72 (2008). 
9. 
van Hecke, O., Austin, S.K., Khan, R.A., Smith, B.H. & Torrance, N. Neuropathic pain in the 
general population: a systematic review of epidemiological studies. Pain 155, 654-62 (2014). 
10. 
Bouhassira, D. et al. Patient perspective on herpes zoster and its complications: an observational 
prospective study in patients aged over 50 years in general practice. Pain 153, 342-9 (2012). 
11. 
Helgason, S., Petursson, G., Gudmundsson, S. & Sigurdsson, J.A. Prevalence of postherpetic 
neuralgia after a first episode of herpes zoster: prospective study with long term follow up. BMJ 
321, 794-6 (2000). 
12. 
Daousi, C. et al. Chronic painful peripheral neuropathy in an urban community: a controlled 
comparison of people with and without diabetes. Diabet Med 21, 976-82 (2004). 
13. 
Davies, M., Brophy, S., Williams, R. & Taylor, A. The prevalence, severity, and impact of painful 
diabetic peripheral neuropathy in type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 29, 1518-22 (2006). 
14. 
Bouhassira, D., Letanoux, M. & Hartemann, A. Chronic pain with neuropathic characteristics in 
diabetic patients: a French cross-sectional study. PLoS One 8, e74195 (2013). 
15. 
Abbott, C.A., Malik, R.A., van Ross, E.R., Kulkarni, J. & Boulton, A.J. Prevalence and 
characteristics of painful diabetic neuropathy in a large community-based diabetic population in 
the U.K. Diabetes Care 34, 2220-4 (2011). 
16. 
Jensen, M.P., Chodroff, M.J. & Dworkin, R.H. The impact of neuropathic pain on health-related 
quality of life: review and implications. Neurology 68, 1178-82 (2007). 
17. 
Solaro, C. et al. The prevalence of pain in multiple sclerosis: a multicenter cross-sectional study. 
Neurology 63, 919-21 (2004). 
18. 
Osterberg, A., Boivie, J. & Thuomas, K.A. Central pain in multiple sclerosis--prevalence and 
clinical characteristics. Eur J Pain 9, 531-42 (2005). 
19. 
Siddall, P.J., McClelland, J.M., Rutkowski, S.B. & Cousins, M.J. A longitudinal study of the 
prevalence and characteristics of pain in the first 5 years following spinal cord injury. Pain 103, 
249-57 (2003). 
20. 
Klit, H., Finnerup, N.B., Andersen, G. & Jensen, T.S. Central poststroke pain: a population-based 
study. Pain 152, 818-24 (2011). 
 28 
 
21. 
Rayment, C. et al. Neuropathic cancer pain: prevalence, severity, analgesics and impact from the 
European Palliative Care Research Collaborative-Computerised Symptom Assessment study. 
Palliat Med 27, 714-21 (2013). 
22. 
Bennett, M.I. et al. Prevalence and aetiology of neuropathic pain in cancer patients: a systematic 
review. Pain 153, 359-65 (2012). 
23. 
Bouhassira, D. & Attal, N. Diagnosis and assessment of neuropathic pain: the saga of clinical 
tools. Pain 152, S74-83 (2011). 
24. 
Bennett, M. The LANSS Pain Scale: the Leeds assessment of neuropathic symptoms and signs. 
Pain 92, 147-57 (2001). 
25. 
Bouhassira, D. et al. Comparison of pain syndromes associated with nervous or somatic lesions 
and development of a new neuropathic pain diagnostic questionnaire (DN4). Pain 114, 29-36 
(2005). 
26. 
Yawn, B.P. et al. The prevalence of neuropathic pain: clinical evaluation compared with 
screening tools in a community population. Pain Med 10, 586-93 (2009). 
27. 
Bouhassira, D., Lanteri-Minet, M., Attal, N., Laurent, B. & Touboul, C. Prevalence of chronic pain 
with neuropathic characteristics in the general population. Pain 136, 380-7 (2008). 
28. 
de Moraes Vieira, E.B., Garcia, J.B., da Silva, A.A., Mualem Araujo, R.L. & Jansen, R.C. Prevalence, 
characteristics, and factors associated with chronic pain with and without neuropathic 
characteristics in Sao Luis, Brazil. J Pain Symptom Manage 44, 239-51 (2012). 
29. 
Freynhagen, R. et al. Screening of neuropathic pain components in patients with chronic back 
pain associated with nerve root compression: a prospective observational pilot study (MIPORT). 
Curr Med Res Opin 22, 529-37 (2006). 
30. 
Tesfaye, S., Boulton, A.J. & Dickenson, A.H. Mechanisms and management of diabetic painful 
distal symmetrical polyneuropathy. Diabetes Care 36, 2456-65 (2013). 
31. 
Fields, H.L., Rowbotham, M. & Baron, R. Postherpetic neuralgia: irritable nociceptors and 
deafferentation. Neurobiol Dis 5, 209-27 (1998). 
32. 
Demant, D.T. et al. The effect of oxcarbazepine in peripheral neuropathic pain depends on pain 
phenotype: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled phenotype-stratified study. Pain 
155, 2263-73 (2014). 
33. 
Patel, R. & Dickenson, A.H. Mechanisms of the gabapentinoids and alpha 2 delta-1 calcium 
channel subunit in neuropathic pain. Pharmacol Res Perspect 4, e00205 (2016). 
34. 
Woolf, C.J. Central sensitization: implications for the diagnosis and treatment of pain. Pain 152, 
S2-15 (2011). 
35. 
Baron, R., Hans, G. & Dickenson, A.H. Peripheral input and its importance for central 
sensitization. Ann Neurol 74, 630-6 (2013). 
36. 
Patel, R. & Dickenson, A.H. Neuronal hyperexcitability in the ventral posterior thalamus of 
neuropathic rats: modality selective effects of pregabalin. J Neurophysiol 116, 159-70 (2016). 
37. 
Gagnon, M. et al. Chloride extrusion enhancers as novel therapeutics for neurological diseases. 
Nat Med 19, 1524-8 (2013). 
38. 
Tsuda, M., Beggs, S., Salter, M.W. & Inoue, K. Microglia and intractable chronic pain. Glia 61, 55-
61 (2013). 
39. 
Navratilova, E., Atcherley, C.W. & Porreca, F. Brain Circuits Encoding Reward from Pain Relief. 
Trends Neurosci 38, 741-50 (2015). 
40. 
Bannister, K. & Dickenson, A.H. What the brain tells the spinal cord. Pain (2016). 
41. 
Burma, N.E., Leduc-Pessah, H., Fan, C.Y. & Trang, T. Animal models of chronic pain: Advances 
and challenges for clinical translation. J Neurosci Res (2016). 
42. 
Haroutounian, S. et al. Primary afferent input critical for maintaining spontaneous pain in 
peripheral neuropathy. Pain 155, 1272-9 (2014). 
 29 
 
43. 
Vaso, A. et al. Peripheral nervous system origin of phantom limb pain. Pain 155, 1384-91 (2014). 
44. 
Serra, J. et al. Microneurographic identification of spontaneous activity in C-nociceptors in 
neuropathic pain states in humans and rats. Pain 153, 42-55 (2012). 
45. 
Kleggetveit, I.P. et al. High spontaneous activity of C-nociceptors in painful polyneuropathy. Pain 
153, 2040-7 (2012). 
46. 
Yarnitsky, D. Role of endogenous pain modulation in chronic pain mechanisms and treatment. 
Pain 156 Suppl 1, S24-31 (2015). 
47. 
Lewis, G.N., Rice, D.A. & McNair, P.J. Conditioned pain modulation in populations with chronic 
pain: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Pain 13, 936-44 (2012). 
48. 
Yarnitsky, D., Granot, M., Nahman-Averbuch, H., Khamaisi, M. & Granovsky, Y. Conditioned pain 
modulation predicts duloxetine efficacy in painful diabetic neuropathy. Pain 153, 1193-8 (2012). 
49. 
Wilder-Smith, O.H., Schreyer, T., Scheffer, G.J. & Arendt-Nielsen, L. Patients with chronic pain 
after abdominal surgery show less preoperative endogenous pain inhibition and more 
postoperative hyperalgesia: a pilot study. J Pain Palliat Care Pharmacother 24, 119-28 (2010). 
50. 
Petersen, K.K., Graven-Nielsen, T., Simonsen, O., Laursen, M.B. & Arendt-Nielsen, L. 
Preoperative pain mechanisms assessed by cuff algometry are associated with chronic 
postoperative pain relief after total knee replacement. Pain 157, 1400-6 (2016). 
51. 
Kosek, E. & Ordeberg, G. Lack of pressure pain modulation by heterotopic noxious conditioning 
stimulation in patients with painful osteoarthritis before, but not following, surgical pain relief. 
Pain 88, 69-78 (2000). 
52. 
Graven-Nielsen, T., Wodehouse, T., Langford, R.M., Arendt-Nielsen, L. & Kidd, B.L. Normalization 
of widespread hyperesthesia and facilitated spatial summation of deep-tissue pain in knee 
osteoarthritis patients after knee replacement. Arthritis Rheum 64, 2907-16 (2012). 
53. 
Colloca, L. & Miller, F.G. Role of expectations in health. Curr Opin Psychiatry 24, 149-55 (2011). 
54. 
Colloca, L. Placebo, nocebo, and learning mechanisms. Handb Exp Pharmacol 225, 17-35 (2014). 
55. 
Hall, K.T. et al. Conscientiousness is modified by genetic variation in catechol-O-
methyltransferase to reduce symptom complaints in IBS patients. Brain Behav 5, 39-44 (2015). 
56. 
Kaptchuk, T.J. et al. Components of placebo effect: randomised controlled trial in patients with 
irritable bowel syndrome. BMJ 336, 999-1003 (2008). 
57. 
Vase, L., Robinson, M.E., Verne, G.N. & Price, D.D. The contributions of suggestion, desire, and 
expectation to placebo effects in irritable bowel syndrome patients. An empirical investigation. 
Pain 105, 17-25 (2003). 
58. 
Vase, L., Skyt, I. & Hall, K.T. Placebo, nocebo, and neuropathic pain. Pain 157 Suppl 1, S98-105 
(2016). 
59. 
Petersen, G.L. et al. Placebo manipulations reduce hyperalgesia in neuropathic pain. Pain 153, 
1292-300 (2012). 
60. 
Petersen, G.L. et al. Expectations and positive emotional feelings accompany reductions in 
ongoing and evoked neuropathic pain following placebo interventions. Pain 155, 2687-98 
(2014). 
61. 
Colloca, L., Lopiano, L., Lanotte, M. & Benedetti, F. Overt versus covert treatment for pain, 
anxiety, and Parkinson's disease. Lancet Neurol 3, 679-84 (2004). 
62. 
Freeman, R. Not all neuropathy in diabetes is of diabetic etiology: differential diagnosis of 
diabetic neuropathy. Curr Diab Rep 9, 423-31 (2009). 
63. 
Borsook, D. Neurological diseases and pain. Brain 135, 320-44 (2012). 
64. 
Watson, J.C. & Sandroni, P. Central Neuropathic Pain Syndromes. Mayo Clin Proc 91, 372-85 
(2016). 
65. 
Bennett, M.I. et al. Using screening tools to identify neuropathic pain. Pain 127, 199-203 (2007). 
 30 
 
66. 
Freynhagen, R., Baron, R., Gockel, U. & Tolle, T.R. painDETECT: a new screening questionnaire to 
identify neuropathic components in patients with back pain. Curr Med Res Opin 22, 1911-20 
(2006). 
67. 
Baron, R., Forster, M. & Binder, A. Subgrouping of patients with neuropathic pain according to 
pain-related sensory abnormalities: a first step to a stratified treatment approach. Lancet 
Neurol 11, 999-1005 (2012). 
This paper describes the importance of sensory phenotyping to a stratified treatment approach and 
ultimately to personalised treatment.68. 
Cruccu, G. et al. EFNS guidelines on neuropathic 
pain assessment: revised 2009. Eur J Neurol 17, 1010-8 (2010). 
69. 
Backonja, M.M. et al. Value of quantitative sensory testing in neurological and pain disorders: 
NeuPSIG consensus. Pain 154, 1807-19 (2013). 
70. 
Rolke, R. et al. Quantitative sensory testing in the German Research Network on Neuropathic 
Pain (DFNS): standardized protocol and reference values. Pain 123, 231-43 (2006). 
71. 
Garcia-Larrea, L. Objective pain diagnostics: clinical neurophysiology. Neurophysiol Clin 42, 187-
97 (2012). 
72. 
Haanpaa, M. et al. NeuPSIG guidelines on neuropathic pain assessment. Pain 152, 14-27 (2011). 
73. 
Truini, A. et al. Pathophysiology of pain in postherpetic neuralgia: a clinical and 
neurophysiological study. Pain 140, 405-10 (2008). 
74. 
Valeriani, M., Pazzaglia, C., Cruccu, G. & Truini, A. Clinical usefulness of laser evoked potentials. 
Neurophysiol Clin 42, 345-53 (2012). 
75. 
Truini, A. et al. Differential involvement of A-delta and A-beta fibres in neuropathic pain related 
to carpal tunnel syndrome. Pain 145, 105-9 (2009). 
76. 
Truini, A. et al. Mechanisms of pain in distal symmetric polyneuropathy: a combined clinical and 
neurophysiological study. Pain 150, 516-21 (2010). 
77. 
Truini, A., Garcia-Larrea, L. & Cruccu, G. Reappraising neuropathic pain in humans--how 
symptoms help disclose mechanisms. Nat Rev Neurol 9, 572-82 (2013). 
78. 
Lauria, G. et al. European Federation of Neurological Societies/Peripheral Nerve Society 
Guideline on the use of skin biopsy in the diagnosis of small fiber neuropathy. Report of a joint 
task force of the European Federation of Neurological Societies and the Peripheral Nerve 
Society. Eur J Neurol 17, 903-12, e44-9 (2010). 
79. 
Nolano, M. et al. Cutaneous innervation of the human face as assessed by skin biopsy. J Anat 
222, 161-9 (2013). 
80. 
Tesfaye, S. et al. Diabetic neuropathies: update on definitions, diagnostic criteria, estimation of 
severity, and treatments. Diabetes Care 33, 2285-93 (2010). 
81. 
Truini, A. et al. Does the epidermal nerve fibre density measured by skin biopsy in patients with 
peripheral neuropathies correlate with neuropathic pain? Pain 155, 828-32 (2014). 
82. 
Papanas, N. & Ziegler, D. Corneal confocal microscopy: Recent progress in the evaluation of 
diabetic neuropathy. J Diabetes Investig 6, 381-9 (2015). 
83. 
Ziegler, D. et al. Early detection of nerve fiber loss by corneal confocal microscopy and skin 
biopsy in recently diagnosed type 2 diabetes. Diabetes 63, 2454-63 (2014). 
84. 
Oxman, M.N. et al. A vaccine to prevent herpes zoster and postherpetic neuralgia in older 
adults. N Engl J Med 352, 2271-84 (2005). 
85. 
Lal, H. et al. Efficacy of an adjuvanted herpes zoster subunit vaccine in older adults. N Engl J 
Med 372, 2087-96 (2015). 
This research outlines the role of an adjuvanted herpes zoster subunit vaccine in preventing 
development of neuropathic pain in elderly. 
86. 
Gewandter, J.S. et al. Research design considerations for chronic pain prevention clinical trials: 
IMMPACT recommendations. Pain 156, 1184-97 (2015). 
 31 
 
87. 
Dworkin, R.H. et al. Recommendations for the management of herpes zoster. Clin Infect Dis 44 
Suppl 1, S1-26 (2007). 
88. 
Smith, A.G. et al. Lifestyle intervention for pre-diabetic neuropathy. Diabetes Care 29, 1294-9 
(2006). 
89. 
Smith, B.H. & Torrance, N. Epidemiology of neuropathic pain and its impact on quality of life. 
Curr Pain Headache Rep 16, 191-8 (2012). 
90. 
Attal, N. et al. Safety and efficacy of repeated injections of botulinum toxin A in peripheral 
neuropathic pain (BOTNEP): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Neurol 
15, 555-65 (2016). 
91. 
Yalcin, I. et al. beta(2)-adrenoceptors are critical for antidepressant treatment of neuropathic 
pain. Ann Neurol 65, 218-25 (2009). 
92. 
Luo, Z.D. et al. Upregulation of dorsal root ganglion (alpha)2(delta) calcium channel subunit and 
its correlation with allodynia in spinal nerve-injured rats. J Neurosci 21, 1868-75 (2001). 
93. 
Fischer, B., Jones, W., Urbanoski, K., Skinner, R. & Rehm, J. Correlations between prescription 
opioid analgesic dispensing levels and related mortality and morbidity in Ontario, Canada, 2005-
2011. Drug Alcohol Rev 33, 19-26 (2014). 
94. 
Gilron, I., Jensen, T.S. & Dickenson, A.H. Combination pharmacotherapy for management of 
chronic pain: from bench to bedside. Lancet Neurol 12, 1084-95 (2013). 
95. 
Gilron, I., Tu, D., Holden, R.R., Jackson, A.C. & DuMerton-Shore, D. Combination of morphine 
with nortriptyline for neuropathic pain. Pain 156, 1440-8 (2015). 
96. 
Holbech, J.V. et al. Imipramine and pregabalin combination for painful polyneuropathy: a 
randomized controlled trial. Pain 156, 958-66 (2015). 
97. 
Tesfaye, S. et al. Duloxetine and pregabalin: high-dose monotherapy or their combination? The 
"COMBO-DN study"--a multinational, randomized, double-blind, parallel-group study in patients 
with diabetic peripheral neuropathic pain. Pain 154, 2616-25 (2013). 
98. 
Binder, A. et al. Topical 5% lidocaine (lignocaine) medicated plaster treatment for post-herpetic 
neuralgia: results of a double-blind, placebo-controlled, multinational efficacy and safety trial. 
Clin Drug Investig 29, 393-408 (2009). 
99. 
Demant, D.T. et al. Pain relief with lidocaine 5% patch in localized peripheral neuropathic pain in 
relation to pain phenotype: a randomised, double-blind, and placebo-controlled, phenotype 
panel study. Pain 156, 2234-44 (2015). 
100. 
Emery, E.C., Luiz, A.P. & Wood, J.N. Nav1.7 and other voltage-gated sodium channels as drug 
targets for pain relief. Expert Opin Ther Targets 20, 975-83 (2016). 
101. 
Rice, A.S. et al. EMA401, an orally administered highly selective angiotensin II type 2 receptor 
antagonist, as a novel treatment for postherpetic neuralgia: a randomised, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled phase 2 clinical trial. Lancet 383, 1637-47 (2014). 
102. 
Attal, N. et al. EFNS guidelines on pharmacological treatment of neuropathic pain. Eur J Neurol 
13, 1153-69 (2006). 
103. 
Dworkin, R.H. et al. Pharmacologic management of neuropathic pain: evidence-based 
recommendations. Pain 132, 237-51 (2007). 
104. 
Moulin, D. et al. Pharmacological management of chronic neuropathic pain: revised consensus 
statement from the Canadian Pain Society. Pain Res Manag 19, 328-35 (2014). 
105. 
Tan, T., Barry, P., Reken, S., Baker, M. & Guideline Development, G. Pharmacological 
management of neuropathic pain in non-specialist settings: summary of NICE guidance. BMJ 
340, c1079 (2010). 
106. 
Attal, N. et al. EFNS guidelines on the pharmacological treatment of neuropathic pain: 2010 
revision. Eur J Neurol 17, 1113-e88 (2010). 
107. 
(June 24, 2013). 
 32 
 
108. 
Finnerup, N.B. & Attal, N. Pharmacotherapy of neuropathic pain: time to rewrite the rulebook? 
Pain Manag 6, 1-3 (2016). 
109. 
Attal, N. et al. Assessing symptom profiles in neuropathic pain clinical trials: can it improve 
outcome? Eur J Pain 15, 441-3 (2011). 
110. 
Bouhassira, D. & Attal, N. Translational neuropathic pain research: A clinical perspective. 
Neuroscience (2016). 
111. 
Finnerup, N.B. & Jensen, T.S. Mechanisms of disease: mechanism-based classification of 
neuropathic pain-a critical analysis. Nat Clin Pract Neurol 2, 107-15 (2006). 
112. 
von Hehn, C.A., Baron, R. & Woolf, C.J. Deconstructing the neuropathic pain phenotype to reveal 
neural mechanisms. Neuron 73, 638-52 (2012). 
113. 
Campbell, C.M. et al. Randomized control trial of topical clonidine for treatment of painful 
diabetic neuropathy. Pain 153, 1815-23 (2012). 
114. 
Attal, N. & Bouhassira, D. Pharmacotherapy of neuropathic pain: which drugs, which treatment 
algorithms? Pain 156 Suppl 1, S104-14 (2015). 
115. 
Finnerup, N.B. et al. Pharmacotherapy for neuropathic pain in adults: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Lancet Neurol 14, 162-73 (2015). 
116. 
Cruccu, G. et al. EFNS guidelines on neurostimulation therapy for neuropathic pain. Eur J Neurol 
14, 952-70 (2007). 
117. 
Dworkin, R.H. et al. Interventional management of neuropathic pain: NeuPSIG 
recommendations. Pain 154, 2249-61 (2013). 
118. 
Bhatia, A., Flamer, D. & Shah, P.S. Perineural steroids for trauma and compression-related 
peripheral neuropathic pain: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Can J Anaesth 62, 650-62 
(2015). 
119. 
Cohen, S.P., Bicket, M.C., Jamison, D., Wilkinson, I. & Rathmell, J.P. Epidural steroids: a 
comprehensive, evidence-based review. Reg Anesth Pain Med 38, 175-200 (2013). 
120. 
Shackleton, T. et al. The efficacy of botulinum toxin for the treatment of trigeminal and 
postherpetic neuralgia: a systematic review with meta-analyses. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 
Oral Radiol 122, 61-71 (2016). 
121. 
Lakhan, S.E., Velasco, D.N. & Tepper, D. Botulinum Toxin-A for Painful Diabetic Neuropathy: A 
Meta-Analysis. Pain Med 16, 1773-80 (2015). 
122. 
Manca, A. et al. Quality of life, resource consumption and costs of spinal cord stimulation versus 
conventional medical management in neuropathic pain patients with failed back surgery 
syndrome (PROCESS trial). Eur J Pain 12, 1047-58 (2008). 
123. 
Kumar, K. & Rizvi, S. Cost-effectiveness of spinal cord stimulation therapy in management of 
chronic pain. Pain Med 14, 1631-49 (2013). 
124. 
Deer, T.R. et al. The appropriate use of neurostimulation: new and evolving neurostimulation 
therapies and applicable treatment for chronic pain and selected disease states. 
Neuromodulation Appropriateness Consensus Committee. Neuromodulation 17, 599-615; 
discussion 615 (2014). 
125. 
North, R.B. et al. Spinal cord stimulation versus re-operation in patients with failed back surgery 
syndrome: an international multicenter randomized controlled trial (EVIDENCE study). 
Neuromodulation 14, 330-5; discussion 335-6 (2011). 
126. 
Kumar, K. et al. Spinal cord stimulation versus conventional medical management for 
neuropathic pain: a multicentre randomised controlled trial in patients with failed back surgery 
syndrome. Pain 132, 179-88 (2007). 
127. 
Simpson, E.L., Duenas, A., Holmes, M.W., Papaioannou, D. & Chilcott, J. Spinal cord stimulation 
for chronic pain of neuropathic or ischaemic origin: systematic review and economic evaluation. 
Health Technol Assess 13, iii, ix-x, 1-154 (2009). 
 33 
 
128. 
Kumar, K. et al. The effects of spinal cord stimulation in neuropathic pain are sustained: a 24-
month follow-up of the prospective randomized controlled multicenter trial of the effectiveness 
of spinal cord stimulation. Neurosurgery 63, 762-70; discussion 770 (2008). 
129. 
Kemler, M.A., De Vet, H.C., Barendse, G.A., Van Den Wildenberg, F.A. & Van Kleef, M. The effect 
of spinal cord stimulation in patients with chronic reflex sympathetic dystrophy: two years' 
follow-up of the randomized controlled trial. Ann Neurol 55, 13-8 (2004). 
130. 
Cruccu, G. et al. EAN guidelines on central neurostimulation therapy in chronic pain conditions. 
Eur J Neurol (2016). 
131. 
de Vos, C.C. et al. Spinal cord stimulation in patients with painful diabetic neuropathy: a 
multicentre randomized clinical trial. Pain 155, 2426-31 (2014). 
132. 
Slangen, R. et al. Spinal cord stimulation and pain relief in painful diabetic peripheral 
neuropathy: a prospective two-center randomized controlled trial. Diabetes Care 37, 3016-24 
(2014). 
133. 
Campbell, C.M., Jamison, R.N. & Edwards, R.R. Psychological screening/phenotyping as 
predictors for spinal cord stimulation. Curr Pain Headache Rep 17, 307 (2013). 
134. 
Campbell, C.M. et al. Dynamic Pain Phenotypes are Associated with Spinal Cord Stimulation-
Induced Reduction in Pain: A Repeated Measures Observational Pilot Study. Pain Med 16, 1349-
60 (2015). 
135. 
Yearwood, T.L., Hershey, B., Bradley, K. & Lee, D. Pulse width programming in spinal cord 
stimulation: a clinical study. Pain Physician 13, 321-35 (2010). 
136. 
De Ridder, D., Plazier, M., Kamerling, N., Menovsky, T. & Vanneste, S. Burst spinal cord 
stimulation for limb and back pain. World Neurosurg 80, 642-649 e1 (2013). 
137. 
Russo, M. & Van Buyten, J.P. 10-kHz High-Frequency SCS Therapy: A Clinical Summary. Pain Med 
16, 934-42 (2015). 
138. 
Krames, E.S. The role of the dorsal root ganglion in the development of neuropathic pain. Pain 
Med 15, 1669-85 (2014). 
139. 
Petersen, E.A. & Slavin, K.V. Peripheral nerve/field stimulation for chronic pain. Neurosurg Clin N 
Am 25, 789-97 (2014). 
140. 
Liem, L. et al. One-year outcomes of spinal cord stimulation of the dorsal root ganglion in the 
treatment of chronic neuropathic pain. Neuromodulation 18, 41-8; discussion 48-9 (2015). 
141. 
Mekhail, N.A. et al. Retrospective review of 707 cases of spinal cord stimulation: indications and 
complications. Pain Pract 11, 148-53 (2011). 
142. 
Eldabe, S., Buchser, E. & Duarte, R.V. Complications of Spinal Cord Stimulation and Peripheral 
Nerve Stimulation Techniques: A Review of the Literature. Pain Med (2015). 
143. 
Taylor, R.S., Van Buyten, J.P. & Buchser, E. Spinal cord stimulation for chronic back and leg pain 
and failed back surgery syndrome: a systematic review and analysis of prognostic factors. Spine 
(Phila Pa 1976) 30, 152-60 (2005). 
144. 
Sukul, V.V. & Slavin, K.V. Deep brain and motor cortex stimulation. Curr Pain Headache Rep 18, 
427 (2014). 
145. 
Moore, N.Z., Lempka, S.F. & Machado, A. Central neuromodulation for refractory pain. 
Neurosurg Clin N Am 25, 77-83 (2014). 
146. 
Lefaucheur, J.P. Cortical neurostimulation for neuropathic pain: state of the art and 
perspectives. Pain 157 Suppl 1, S81-9 (2016). 
147. 
Keifer, O.P., Jr., Riley, J.P. & Boulis, N.M. Deep brain stimulation for chronic pain: intracranial 
targets, clinical outcomes, and trial design considerations. Neurosurg Clin N Am 25, 671-92 
(2014). 
148. 
in Interventional procedure guidance. (London, 2011). 
 34 
 
149. 
Prager, J. et al. Best practices for intrathecal drug delivery for pain. Neuromodulation 17, 354-
72; discussion 372 (2014). 
150. 
Bolash, R. & Mekhail, N. Intrathecal pain pumps: indications, patient selection, techniques, and 
outcomes. Neurosurg Clin N Am 25, 735-42 (2014). 
151. 
Deer, T.R. et al. Polyanalgesic Consensus Conference--2012: recommendations to reduce 
morbidity and mortality in intrathecal drug delivery in the treatment of chronic pain. 
Neuromodulation 15, 467-82; discussion 482 (2012). 
152. 
Pope, J.E., Deer, T.R., Bruel, B.M. & Falowski, S. Clinical Uses of Intrathecal Therapy and Its 
Placement in the Pain Care Algorithm. Pain Pract (2016). 
153. 
Eccleston, C. & Crombez, G. Worry and chronic pain: a misdirected problem solving model. Pain 
132, 233-6 (2007). 
154. 
Williams, A.C., Eccleston, C. & Morley, S. Psychological therapies for the management of chronic 
pain (excluding headache) in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 11, CD007407 (2012). 
155. 
Eccleston, C. et al. Psychological therapies (Internet-delivered) for the management of chronic 
pain in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev, CD010152 (2014). 
156. 
Eccleston, C., Hearn, L. & Williams, A.C. Psychological therapies for the management of chronic 
neuropathic pain in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev, CD011259 (2015). 
157. 
Moore, A., Derry, S., Eccleston, C. & Kalso, E. Expect analgesic failure; pursue analgesic success. 
BMJ 346, f2690 (2013). 
158. 
Otis, J.D. et al. A randomized controlled pilot study of a cognitive-behavioral therapy approach 
for painful diabetic peripheral neuropathy. J Pain 14, 475-82 (2013). 
159. 
Eccleston, C. Embodied: the psychology of physical sensation (ed. Press, O.U.) (Oxford, 2016). 
160. 
Eccleston C, T.A., Edwards RT, Keogh EM. Psychological approaches to coping with pain in later 
life. Clinics in Geriatric Pain Management (In press). 
161. 
Morley, S., Williams, A. & Eccleston, C. Examining the evidence about psychological treatments 
for chronic pain: time for a paradigm shift? Pain 154, 1929-31 (2013). 
162. 
Duggan, G.B. et al. Qualitative evaluation of the SMART2 self-management system for people in 
chronic pain. Disabil Rehabil Assist Technol 10, 53-60 (2015). 
163. 
Meyer-Rosberg, K. et al. Peripheral neuropathic pain--a multidimensional burden for patients. 
Eur J Pain 5, 379-89 (2001). 
164. 
Gordh, T.E. et al. Gabapentin in traumatic nerve injury pain: a randomized, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled, cross-over, multi-center study. Pain 138, 255-66 (2008). 
165. 
Ahroni, J.H. & Boyko, E.J. Responsiveness of the SF-36 among veterans with diabetes mellitus. J 
Diabetes Complications 14, 31-9 (2000). 
166. 
Van Acker, K. et al. Prevalence and impact on quality of life of peripheral neuropathy with or 
without neuropathic pain in type 1 and type 2 diabetic patients attending hospital outpatients 
clinics. Diabetes Metab 35, 206-13 (2009). 
167. 
Torrance, N. et al. Estimating the burden of disease in chronic pain with and without 
neuropathic characteristics: does the choice between the EQ-5D and SF-6D matter? Pain 155, 
1996-2004 (2014). 
168. 
Geelen, C.C., Kindermans, H.P., van den Bergh, J.P. & Verbunt, J.A. Perceived Physical Activity 
Decline as a Mediator in the Relationship Between Pain Catastrophizing, Disability, and Quality 
of Life in Patients with Painful Diabetic Neuropathy. Pain Pract (2016). 
169. 
Poulin, P.A. et al. The relationship between mindfulness, pain intensity, pain catastrophizing, 
depression, and quality of life among cancer survivors living with chronic neuropathic pain. 
Support Care Cancer (2016). 
170. 
Backonja, M. et al. Gabapentin for the symptomatic treatment of painful neuropathy in patients 
with diabetes mellitus: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 280, 1831-6 (1998). 
 35 
 
171. 
Rowbotham, M., Harden, N., Stacey, B., Bernstein, P. & Magnus-Miller, L. Gabapentin for the 
treatment of postherpetic neuralgia: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 280, 1837-42 (1998). 
172. 
Ogawa, K., Fujikoshi, S., Montgomery, W. & Alev, L. Correlation between pain response and 
improvements in patient-reported outcomes and health-related quality of life in duloxetine-
treated patients with diabetic peripheral neuropathic pain. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat 11, 2101-7 
(2015). 
173. 
Duarte, R.V., Andronis, L., Lenders, M.W. & de Vos, C.C. Quality of life increases in patients with 
painful diabetic neuropathy following treatment with spinal cord stimulation. Qual Life Res 25, 
1771-7 (2016). 
174. 
Moore, R.A. et al. Fibromyalgia: Moderate and substantial pain intensity reduction predicts 
improvement in other outcomes and substantial quality of life gain. Pain 149, 360-4 (2010). 
175. 
Dworkin, R.H. et al. Assay sensitivity and study features in neuropathic pain trials: an ACTTION 
meta-analysis. Neurology 81, 67-75 (2013). 
176. 
Dworkin, R.H. et al. Considerations for improving assay sensitivity in chronic pain clinical trials: 
IMMPACT recommendations. Pain 153, 1148-58 (2012). 
177. 
Gewandter, J.S. et al. Research designs for proof-of-concept chronic pain clinical trials: 
IMMPACT recommendations. Pain 155, 1683-95 (2014). 
178. 
Farrar, J.T. et al. Effect of variability in the 7-day baseline pain diary on the assay sensitivity of 
neuropathic pain randomized clinical trials: an ACTTION study. Pain 155, 1622-31 (2014). 
179. 
Dworkin, R.H., McDermott, M.P., Farrar, J.T., O'Connor, A.B. & Senn, S. Interpreting patient 
treatment response in analgesic clinical trials: implications for genotyping, phenotyping, and 
personalized pain treatment. Pain 155, 457-60 (2014). 
180. 
Edwards, R.R. et al. Patient phenotyping in clinical trials of chronic pain treatments: IMMPACT 
recommendations. Pain (2016). 
181. 
Themistocleous, A.C. et al. The Pain in Neuropathy Study (PiNS): a cross-sectional observational 
study determining the somatosensory phenotype of painful and painless diabetic neuropathy. 
Pain 157, 1132-45 (2016). 
182. 
Bennett, D.L. & Woods, C.G. Painful and painless channelopathies. Lancet Neurol 13, 587-99 
(2014). 
183. 
Yang, Y. et al. Mutations in SCN9A, encoding a sodium channel alpha subunit, in patients with 
primary erythermalgia. J Med Genet 41, 171-4 (2004). 
184. 
Fertleman, C.R. et al. SCN9A mutations in paroxysmal extreme pain disorder: allelic variants 
underlie distinct channel defects and phenotypes. Neuron 52, 767-74 (2006). 
185. 
Faber, C.G. et al. Gain of function Nanu1.7 mutations in idiopathic small fiber neuropathy. Ann 
Neurol 71, 26-39 (2012). 
186. 
Waxman, S.G. et al. Sodium channel genes in pain-related disorders: phenotype-genotype 
associations and recommendations for clinical use. Lancet Neurol 13, 1152-60 (2014). 
187. 
Cregg, R., Cox, J.J., Bennett, D.L., Wood, J.N. & Werdehausen, R. Mexiletine as a treatment for 
primary erythromelalgia: normalization of biophysical properties of mutant L858F NaV 1.7 
sodium channels. Br J Pharmacol 171, 4455-63 (2014). 
188. 
Carvas, J.M. et al. Period2 gene mutant mice show compromised insulin-mediated endothelial 
nitric oxide release and altered glucose homeostasis. Front Physiol 3, 337 (2012). 
189. 
Geha, P. et al. Pharmacotherapy for Pain in a Family With Inherited Erythromelalgia Guided by 
Genomic Analysis and Functional Profiling. JAMA Neurol 73, 659-67 (2016). 
190. 
Cao, L. et al. Pharmacological reversal of a pain phenotype in iPSC-derived sensory neurons and 
patients with inherited erythromelalgia. Sci Transl Med 8, 335ra56 (2016). 
 
