 Environmental Research Letters
LETTER • OPEN ACCESS
Linking ‘toxic outliers’ to environmental justice
communities
To cite this article: Mary B Collins et al 2016 Environ. Res. Lett. 11 015004
 
View the article online for updates and enhancements.
Related content
Household-level disparities in cancer risks
from vehicular air pollution in Miami
Timothy W Collins, Sara E Grineski and
Jayajit Chakraborty
-
Which came first, people or pollution? A
review of theory and evidence from
longitudinal environmental justice studies
Paul Mohai and Robin Saha
-
Who benefits from environmental policy?
An environmental justice analysis of air
quality change in Britain, 2001–2011
Gordon Mitchell, Paul Norman and Karen
Mullin
-
Recent citations
Assessing the US sulfur reduction
programme in Massachusetts from an
environmental justice framework: is there
evidence of disproportionality?
Devon Lynch et al
-
Impaired Water Hazard Zones: Mapping
Intersecting Environmental Health
Vulnerabilities and Polluter
Disproportionality
Raoul Liévanos
-
Climate research priorities for policy-
makers, practitioners, and scientists in
Georgia, USA
Murray A. Rudd et al
-
This content was downloaded from IP address 77.173.35.219 on 02/06/2019 at 15:09
 Environ. Res. Lett. 11 (2016) 015004
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/1/015004
LETTER
Linking ‘toxic outliers’ to environmental justice communities
Mary B Collins1,2,4, Ian Munoz2 and Joseph JaJa3
1 Department of Environmental Studies, State University of New York College of Environmental Science and Forestry, 1 Forestry Drive,
106 Marshall Hall, Syracuse, NY 13210, USA
2 National Socio-Environmental Synthesis Center, University of Maryland, 1 Park Place, Suite 300 Annapolis, MD 21401, USA
3 Institute for Advanced Computer Studies, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Maryland, College Park,
MD 20742, USA
4 Author to whom any correspondence should be addressed.
E-mail: mbcollin@esf.edu, imunoz@sesync.org and joseph@umiacs.umd.edu
Keywords: environmental justice, disproportionality, quantitative methods
Abstract
Several key studies have found that a small minority of producers, polluting at levels far exceeding
group averages, generate the majority of overall exposure to industrial toxics. Frequently, such
patterns go unnoticed and are understudied outside of the academic community. To our knowledge,
no research to date has systematically described the scope and extent of extreme variations in
industrially based exposure estimates and sought to link inequities in harm produced to inequities in
exposure. In an analysis of all permitted industrial facilities across the United States, we show that
there exists a class of hyper-polluters—the worst-of-the-worst—that disproportionately expose
communities of color and low income populations to chemical releases. This study hopes to move
beyond a traditional environmental justice research frame, bringing new computational methods and
perspectives aimed at the empirical study of societal power dynamics. Our findings suggest the
possibility that substantial environmental gains may be made through selective environmental
enforcement, rather than sweeping initiatives.
1. Introduction
As many have noted, society’s impact on the environ-
ment is best characterized by its unevenness—both
within and between groups. For example, some
societies pollute significantly more than other societies
(Chambers et al 2000); some groups within society use
far more resources than others (Baer 2009); and some
individuals produce much more environmental harm
(Ash and Boyce 2011). Freudenburg coined the term
disproportionality to describe this pattern, defined as
‘the strikingly unequal patterns of privileged access to
environmental rights and resources’ that characterize
modern societies and economies (Freudenburg 2005,
p 89). Although highly skewed patterns in pollution
intensity within industrial sectors were documented as
early as the mid-1990s (Streitwieser 1994), a clear
understanding of why such highly reproducible and
extreme unevenness exists (and persists) remains
understudied or simply overlooked by researchers and
practitioners. The research herein strives to lay
foundational groundwork related to the characteriza-
tion and description of both highly unequal patterns
of pollution production among US industries and
links to disproportionate exposure among environ-
mental justice (EJ) communities. If we are to make
strides against today’s most wicked environmental
problems (Rittel and Webber 1973), we must know
more about what gives rise to these observed patterns.
Disproportionality
has
two
dimensions—dis-
proportionality in the production of environmental
harm, polluter disproportionality, and disproportionality
in exposure, often discussed within the broader frame-
work of EJ (Collins 2011). Of these two dimensions, the
latter has received the most attention, covered exten-
sively by EJ scholars who explore the social structures
linking race and class to limited access to environmental
‘goods’ and harmful exposure to environmental ‘bads’
(Mohai et al 2009; see also: Boyce 1994). On the other
hand, polluter disproportionalities, or extreme varia-
tions in polluter-based production, have received only
sporadic attention since the early 1990s. Although
OPEN ACCESS
RECEIVED
30 May 2015
REVISED
4 December 2015
ACCEPTED FOR PUBLICATION
9 December 2015
PUBLISHED
26 January 2016
Original content from this
work may be used under
the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 3.0
licence.
Any further distribution of
this work must maintain
attribution to the
author(s) and the title of
the work, journal citation
and DOI.
© 2016 IOP Publishing Ltd
 notable findings exist, which will be outlined later, this
body of scholarship falls short of answering questions
related to why such unevenness may exist. To our
knowledge, the study herein is the first large-scale study
to show industrial polluter disproportionality patterns
across both a broad study area and a diverse group of
polluters. Although we recognize that a complete under-
standing of why such patterns exist is likely dependent
on a wide range of factors (such as facility characteristics,
environmental context, regulatory climate, etc), we find
striking evidence that extreme emitters are likely
impacting EJ communities even more significantly than
typicalEJscholarshipmightpredict.
We ask the following questions:
(I) Are producer disproportionalities present and
consistent across the study area?
(II) Are particular communities (low income and/or
those of color) disproportionately impacted
by producers who generate a disproportionate
amount of pollution?
Our findings suggest affirmative answers to both
these questions. Using public data and open-source
software, we assess industrially based exposure esti-
mates and proximate socio-demographic character-
istics on a polluter-by-polluter basis across the
continental United States. We find a highly skewed
distribution of polluter-based harm generation with
fewer than 10% of the nearly 16 000 study area facil-
ities generating greater than 90% of estimated
exposure (question (I)). When describing the socio-
demographic
exposure
profiles,
we
show
that
although polluters are likely to disproportionately
impact poor and nonwhite communities, these dis-
proportionalities become even more pronounced
when considering the smaller group of facilities who
generate the majority of exposure risk (question (II)).
We refer to this small group of disproportionate gen-
erators as toxic outliers.
An implication from our study is that these two
sides of disproportionality are connected in a ‘double
disproportionality’ framework. This type of connec-
tion has both applied and scholarly significance. First,
double disproportionality would predict that indus-
trial impacts overall, and in EJ communities specifi-
cally, would decrease if toxic outliers could be
compelled to reduce their emissions. Second, double
disproportionality adds to our understanding of how
society’s polluter-industrial complex works by expli-
citly incorporating measurable power dynamics.
Future studies should consider disaggregating pollu-
ters rather than looking at polluters in the aggregate.
Our paper proceeds as follows: first, we briefly
review the young, evolving body of work related to
polluter disproportionality and make links to the
more established body of EJ scholarship. Following
this, we share methodological details, present analysis
results, and provide a brief discussion to contextualize
our findings both in terms of the existing science and
with respect to potential new research directions.
2. Polluter inequalities and EJ: a double
disproportionality?
A disproportionality perspective challenges several
fundamental assumptions regarding the nature and
meaning of environmental harm production while
questioning prevailing theoretical perspectives about
human-environmental relationships in a postindus-
trial world. For example, in many social science
disciplines, it is common to assume that environmen-
tal harm is proportional to economic well-being. This
proportionate assumption is commonly represented
in the formula for analyzing the effects of human
activities on the environment: I=PAT, where ‘I’
represents impacts, ‘P’ is population, ‘A’ is affluence,
and ‘T’ is technology. IPAT emerged out of the Ehrlich
and Holdren (1971)/Commoner (1972) debate in the
1970s as a way to define the anthropogenic forces that
drive environmental impacts. There have been cri-
tiques of this formula, most recently in terms of the
possible benefits of technological advancement, but
few find problems with the assumption that all growth
in population or affluence is problematic. Since this
time, there have been surprisingly few focused efforts
to test this proposition (Freudenburg 2005). The
remainder of this section presents initial evidentiary
support showing that, rather than problematizing
increases in population and affluence in the aggregate,
it may be more accurate to view anthropogenic
impacts as being driven by just a few privileged actors.
More specifically, the disproportionality perspec-
tive centers on the significance and consequences of
‘the socially structured and strikingly disproportionate
patterns that characterize human access to the biophy-
sical environment, both in terms of benefiting
from ‘goods’ (resources and rights) and in terms of
avoiding ‘bads’ (wastes and responsibilities)’ (Freu-
denburg 2005, p 90). Such inequalities, or ‘privileged
access’ (Freudenburg 2005, p 90) to the environmental
commons, are often overlooked and unchallenged
because many people assume that the harm is eco-
nomically necessary for jobs, incomes, or the produc-
tion of essential products. In fact, there is little
evidence to support a positive association between
degree of environmental harm and economic good.
To test this empirically within societies and
across/within economic sectors, Freudenburg (2005,
p 93) looked at the ‘differential access to the assim-
ilative capacity of the biophysical environment’. He
found that approximately 60% of all toxic emissions in
the United States resulted from the chemicals and pri-
mary metals sectors, which together contributed less
than 5% of the gross national product and only 1.4%
of the nation’s jobs. Moving to intrasectoral analyses,
2
Environ. Res. Lett. 11 (2016) 015004
 he also found striking disproportionalities, with the
major polluters being poor economic performers both
in terms of overall emissions/jobs ratios and in com-
parison to peer companies in the same sector. At an
even finer level of analysis—facilities under common
corporate ownership—overall levels of pollution were
driven by individual facilities that were emitting far
more than their ‘share’ of toxins. The revealed patterns
of disproportionality hold or become more extreme
when one considers related factors of interest, such as
the relative toxicity of releases, the relationship to
income equality within nations, technological impera-
tives, and other economic controls. As Freudenburg
points out, early studies by others have shown that
arguments that attempt to explain or justify observed
disproportionalities are unsupported: such poor
environmental performance does not seem to be due
to facilities being engaged in the production of ‘cri-
tical’ materials; more stringent regulation of the prime
polluters would not tend to cause them to go out of
business or to shift their operations to countries with
weaker standards; and would not bring economic
ruin to the larger society. In a broader analysis of
the significance of such findings, Freudenburg notes
that there have been few attempts by social scientists
to understand the social construction of environ-
mental privileges as opposed to environmental pro-
blems, or to analyze the societal and communicative
mechanisms that support the perpetuation of related
inequities.
Empirical work on disproportionality was taken
one step further by Berry (2007) when she was able to
show that many policies do not recognize the fact that
a few outliers tend to be responsible for a large fraction
of environmental harms. This means that, at least in
some cases, the disproportionality perspective holds
and implies that economic-environmental relation-
ships will approximate a log-normal distribution
(rather than standard Gaussian normal distribution),
making it possible to achieve dramatic improvements
in
environmental
quality
with
low
economic
costs. There is a clear need for future research to exam-
ine the degree of disproportionality in other areas
of economic–environmental relationships, but it
is equally clear that the proportionality assumption
can no longer be considered empirically credible
(Freudenburg 2006).
The disproportionality perspective provides an
interesting overlay to some of the most prominent the-
ories in environmental sociology. It directly challenges
an important although generally unstated assumption
within the theoretical perspective of ecological moder-
nization, that is, the assumption that all types of early
development efforts (economic and industrial) are
environmentally harmful and that this initial harm
then decreases as society becomes modern and tech-
nologically savvy. The disproportionality perspective
challenges the universality of this idea by positing that
it is not that all development is environmentally harm-
ful, but rather that a select few actors drive the major-
ity of the environmental harm. Further, in regard to
the treadmill of production (Schnaiberg 1980)—
another prominent theory—the disproportionality
perspective does not necessarily find capital invest-
ment and capitalism to be a problem. Rather, it ques-
tions a few capitalists rather than the system at large as
drivers of environmental degradation. As pointed out
by Dunlap (2008, p 53), the disproportionality per-
spective represents a much needed ‘finer-grained’
approach for investigating the links between economic
activity and environmental degradation. It may also
lead to greater unification of the predominant theories
in environmental sociology today, including the rele-
vance of environmental state theory and the relation-
ship of emissions levels to measures of ecological
efficiency (see Fisher and Freudenburg 2004). Regard-
ing the perpetuation of environmental inequalities,
and in particular the tendency to focus on dis-
proportionalities in environmental problems rather
than environmental privileges, the social constructivist
perspective also offers insight. As originally noted by
Turk (1982, p 252) ‘it is likely that status-quo inequal-
ities will be maintained ‘mainly by ideological power,
secondarily by political and economic power, and only
minimally and occasionally by the threat and use of
violence’.
Empirical work along these lines is relatively rare,
but certainly identifiable. Several studies have found
dramatic disproportionalities in the production of
environmental harm both within a given polluting
sector and among the major polluters within commu-
nities or regions (Bouwes et al 2001, Nowak et al 2006,
Abel 2008, Berry 2007, Ash and Boyce 2011, Prechel
and Zheng 2012, Prechel and Touche 2014). Con-
sistent with Freudenburg’s work, these studies have
found that a small minority of firms can drive overall
pollution levels. Such findings also hold when con-
sidering community-based health risk. For example,
Bouwes et al (2001) found a significant correlation
between minority status and cumulative risk in spe-
cific spatial areas, with high risk facilities having aver-
age risk scores 320 times greater than their lower risk
counterparts. In the same study, researchers found
that the vast majority of facilities actually had very low
risk scores, while a select few had scores up to thou-
sands of times greater than a standardized mean. A
study by Ash and Boyce (2011) was one of the first at
the intersection of EJ and corporate responsibility.
They found that of the 100 worst polluters, the top ten
imposed disproportionate impacts on disadvantaged
communities. They found that minorities living in
communities surrounding these ten polluters were
bearing more than half of the human health risk gen-
erated in the region. In 2008, Abel conducted a case
study in urban St. Louis, MO, showing that minority
and low-income residents live closer to industrial
3
Environ. Res. Lett. 11 (2016) 015004
 polluters compared to their non-minority counter-
parts, and that 20% of the region’s air pollution expo-
sure risk generated over the last decade was spatially
concentrated among only six facilities. Nowak et al
(2006) found that environmental behaviors interacted
with biophysical variables to explain variations in
levels of phosphorous loading in Lake Mendota, WI
(see also Cabot and Nowak 2005, Harlan et al 2008). In
recent work, Freudenburg et al (2009) maintained that
the damage done in Hurricane Katrina was not a ‘nat-
ural disaster,’ but rather a case of a small number of
economic beneficiaries creating extreme environ-
mental harm that left marginalized populations in the
region subject to catastrophe (see also: Bullard and
Wright 1987).
Explication of the disproportionality perspective is
an important step toward shedding light on potentially
overlooked dynamics regarding how environmental
domination of the powerless by the powerful happens.
Grant et al (2002, 2010) suggest that research at the
intersection of polluters and those who bear the brunt
of pollution should analyze environmental actors
individually (rather than in aggregate), and also treat
the relationship between organizations, organizational
structures, and issues of environmental privilege in a
more nuanced fashion. Herein, we look for pollution
disproportionalities on a polluter-by-polluter basis
across the US and link such disproportionalities to EJ
impacts.
3. Data and methods
This research relies on two data sources—the US
Environmental Protection Agency’s Risk Screening
Environmental
Indicators-Geographic
Microdata
(RSEI-GM) from 2007 and the US Census of Population
and Households from 2000. Additional information
about these data sources is provided below as well as a
briefdescriptionofthemethodsleadingtoourresults.
3.1. RSEI
Although we rely solely on the RSEI-GM, it is useful to
first describe the EPAs aggregated version of RSEI,
herein referred to as RSEI public-release.
3.1.1. RESI public-release data
Exposure estimates to airborne toxics originating from
industrial facilities across the US are generated by the
US EPA’s RSEI project. The RSEI project uses release-
based data of more than 600 chemicals reported
annually by permitted industrial facilities in the US.
These reports are mandated by EPA’s toxics release
inventory (TRI) program. The TRI program tracks the
release of toxic chemicals, which may pose both
environmental and human health threats. As per TRI
reporting requirements, facilities across industrial
sectors must report how much of each chemical is
released to the environment and/or managed through
recycling, energy recovery and treatment on an annual
basis5. Although a touted resource in itself, TRI
information does have some shortcomings; of most
relevance, TRI reports do not account for differences
in chemical toxicity (pound-for-pound, chemicals can
vary widely) thereby making between chemical com-
parisons difficult or simply impossible.
EPAs RSEI project addresses TRI-based chemical-
to-chemical comparison limitations. On a release-by-
release basis, RSEI estimates exposure, accounting for
environmental fate and transport and chemical toxi-
city. More specifically, for each chemical release, a
Gaussian-plume
fate-and-transport
model
is
employed, which estimates how the chemical spreads
from its point of release to the surrounding geography.
Geography, in the RSEI case, is delineated into a net-
work of non-overlapping grid cells of 810 m2 in size.
This network of grid cells extends over the entirety of
the continental US. The modeling results in exposure
estimates for each reported release for each grid cell.
To produce such exposure estimates, EPA combines
data on temperature and local wind patterns with
facility-specific information (stack heights, exit velo-
cities) and chemical specifics (molecular weights,
decomposition rates). Estimates represent an ambient
exposure concentration. The RSEI project then over-
lays the grid of toxicity-weighted exposure concentra-
tions on population figures from the US Census.
RSEI’s population weights account for age and sex,
since the volume of air inhaled per unit body weight is
known to depend on these characteristics. Since the
main purpose of the RSEI program is to aid in the
prioritization of facilities for enforcement, only facil-
ity-based estimates are publically released (public
release ‘RSEI scores,’ are a measure of human health
hazard aggregated over every release-grid cell impac-
ted by each industrial facility). RSEI public-release
data does not include information on a cell-by-cell
basis. EPA does provide such cell-by-cell estimates to
the research community by request.
3.1.2.
Risk
screening
environmental
indicators–
geographic microdata
Our measure of exposure relies on the RSEI-GM
which provide disaggregated industrial toxicity expo-
sure estimates (unlike RSEI public-release). The RSEI-
GM raw data provide an exposure estimate on a
release-grid cell basis. This means that for every
chemical release reported by every facility in a given
year (nearly one billion releases in 2007, our study
5 TRI does not include all facilities, rather facilities must meet all of
the following criteria: (1) the facility must be classified into a ‘TRI-
covered’ North American Classification System (NAICS) code; (2)
the facility must have ten or more full-time employees (or employee
equivalents); and (3) the facility must manufacture, process, or use a
chemical mentioned by section 313 in quantities greater than the
currently established threshold. section 313 chemicals are those
thought to cause cancer, chronic human health effects, significant
non-cancer adverse acute human effects, or significant adverse
environmental effects.
4
Environ. Res. Lett. 11 (2016) 015004
 year), RSEI-GM provides an exposure estimate for the
network of 810 m2 grid cells extending over the
continental US. Exposure estimates account for envir-
onmental conditions, facility characteristics and che-
mical
specifics,
per
the
RSEI
program
model
mentioned in the previous section. Since our analysis
is not chemical specific, we aggregate across all
chemicals up to the 810 m2 grid cell-level resulting in
an exposure estimate for each 810 m2 grid cell. The
following formula represents how we accomplished
this aggregation. We will use ToxicConcf,c,g to denote
the exposure estimate of chemical, c, generated by
facility, f, within grid cell, g. By adding over all facilities
and all chemicals, we end up with a grid cell-based
exposure estimate
ToxicConc
ToxicConc
,
f c g
g
f
c
, ,
å å
=
ToxicConc
ToxicConc
.
f c g
f
g
c
, ,
å å
=
In addition to aggregation at the grid cell-level,
data can also be aggregated to the facility-level
(ToxicConcf). This type of aggregation was used to
assess producer disproportionalities, prior to theef-
forts made to link extreme polluters to EJ demo-
graphics (research question (I)).
Unlike the aggregated RSEI public-release data, we
do not employ the age and sex weighting and instead,
link to race and class demographic characteristics
when answering research question (II).
3.2. United States 2000 census of population and
households
Socio-demographic information to support evalua-
tion of question (II) comes from the US Census of
population and households. The US constitution
mandates that a census of population and households
be conducted every 10 years. Besides its use in
determining the number of seats per state in the US
House ofRepresentatives, census data are an extremely
important source of information for population
scientists. The census data are available at various
scales, from statistics at a large national scale, to those
at the state and county levels; to those at extremely fine
geographic areas such as blocks (approximately one
city-block) or block-groups (corresponding approxi-
mately to neighborhoods). For our purposes, we use
population demographics available at the block (race
variable) and block-group (income variable) levels.
The study year is 2000.
3.3. Study area stratified random sampling: linking
pollution to demographics
In order to link RSEI-GM-based exposure estimates
and local socio-demographic characteristics (research
question (II)) we generated a large sample (over four
million points) across the study area. Our sample is
stratified by population density at the US county-level.
Our sample reaches every county in the United States
and includes chemical releases from every facility. For
each of our 4, 172, 835 sample points, we note the
following characteristics: (1) the exposure estimate of
each release impacting the grid cell in which the point
is located; (2) the number of facilities that contribute
releases to the grid cell in which the point is located (3)
the total population in the census block in which the
point is located; (4) the total number of people who
report their race as ‘white alone’ in the census block in
which the point is located; (5) the total number of
households in the census block group in which the
point is located; and (6) the total household income of
all households in the census block group in which the
point is located. A schematic presenting a visual
representation of this procedure is shown in figure 1.
The mean income associated with sample points is
$64 581 and mean proportion reported ‘white alone’
as their race is 82.5%. These figures are comparable to
US Census figures, indicating that our sample can be
considered representative of the US population.
3.4. Computing strategy
These computations are carried out on more than
100 GB of exposure estimate data (RSEI-GM) and
population data (US Census). Conducting and visua-
lizing our analyses proved to be a highly demanding
task, both in terms of processing power and data
management. Although other national scope studies
exist (Bullard et al 2007, Clark et al 2014), leveraging
the RSEI-GM data at this scale requires some strategic
computing efforts. Our main platform is an open-
source Ubuntu Linux environment. Our particular
machine had 24 GB RAM and 16 CPUs running
Ubuntu 14.04 Trusty. To perform analyses, we used a
highly indexed PostgreSQL database with a PostGIS
spatial extension. As a point of reference, our analysis
includes over 1billion chemical releases spanning 8,
080, 464 810 m2 grid cells originating from 15 758
facilities. Using RStudio server, running R version 3.02
and several helpful packages, we used explicitly parallel
algorithms to aggregate and compile sample statistics.
4. Results and discussion
As stated earlier, our central aim is to document the
extent to which industrial hyper-polluters, or toxic
outliers, exist nationwide and whether they have
disproportionate effects on EJ communities. Toward
this end, we systematically evaluate the proportional
contribution of all facilities included in our study
(research question (I)) and the relationship between
pollution generation extremes and local EJ variables
(research question (II)).
4.1. Finding the toxic outliers
Results provide strong support for research question
(I): that toxic outliers exist. We examine the distribu-
tion of facility-based exposure estimates to determine
5
Environ. Res. Lett. 11 (2016) 015004
 Figure 1. Sampling methodology schematic.
Figure 2. Disproportionality evaluation.
Figure 3. Stratified sample statistics: comparing release intensity groups regarding disproportionate demographic impacts.
6
Environ. Res. Lett. 11 (2016) 015004
 the degree of variation and disproportionality. A
common way to measure this is with the Gini
coefficient. A Gini coefficient of 0.96, our finding,
indicates extreme distributional unevenness—provid-
ing strong support for our first research question. In
point of fact, 90% of toxic concentration present in the
study area is generated by only 809 (about 5%) of
facilities. Results are presented in figure 2. These 809
facilities span many sectors, which provides additional
support for earlier intrasectoral studies (Freuden-
burg 2005). They are geographically distributed across
the study area.
4.2. Sampling: linking disproportionate exposure to
EJ demography
To link demographic characteristics and exposure
estimates, we sampled across the study area, noting
exposure estimates and population information at
every point. Figure 3 shows three probability density
function (PDF) plots. The left most plot includes all
sample points, the middle plot includes only points
that account for the most severe 25% of those sampled,
and the third includes only points that account for the
most severe 10% of those sampled. Within each of the
intensity groups, we present a race-income PDF. In
each case, as we isolate the points with the highest
exposure estimates, we find a greater density of low
income households and nonwhite populations. Most
EJ studies do not disaggregate in this way, thereby
masking some of the most significant effects.
We also include a summary plot (figure 4) illus-
trating how demographic impacts change when
you consider a small group of the most toxic polluters
as compared to the entire group of polluters. In
this plot, all facilities are ranked from highest log expo-
sure estimate to lowest log exposure estimate and we
assess the proportion of sample points impacting
communities with below average income and fewer
than average reporting ‘white alone’ as their race.
To restate, as more facilities are considered, below
average impacts decrease, meaning that the small
group of the most toxic facilities are located in places
where residents tend to be lower income and people of
color.
5. Conclusion
We are interested in drawing attention to polluter
disproportionality in general and in exploring how it
might relate to EJ measures. These two sides of
environmental inequality are rarely drawn together in
integrated research designs, yet we find evidence of
their connection. We contend that an explication of
these relationships is important in gaining a deeper
understanding of the theoretical underpinnings of
environmental injustice and in identifying potential
solutions.
Although some researchers recognize the relation-
ship between socially structured factors (i.e. privilege,
power, etc) (see: Grant et al 2002, 2010) and
facility-based
variations
in
industrial
pollution
(see: Streitwieser 1994, Grant et al 2002, Prechel and
Zheng 2012, Prechel and Touche 2014), meaningful
Figure 4. Stratified sample statistics: double disproportionality summary.
7
Environ. Res. Lett. 11 (2016) 015004
 operationalization of such concepts in a broad quanti-
tative framework is often difficult or outside of the
research scope. Herein, we strive to link such socially
structured factors to pollution production dis-
proportionalities, suggesting that environmental pri-
vilege is inherently intertwined with environmental
disadvantage. For example, our results support the
possibility of Lerner-style sacrifice zones—or high min-
ority, low income neighborhoods where toxic outliers
can exist without the focus they might receive in other
locations (Lerner 2010). If so, the ability of such facil-
ities to impose health risk on populations with the
least capacity to resist would contribute to the persis-
tence of these patterns and, potentially, help inform
our understanding of the societal machinery that sup-
ports such unequal patterns.
Current EJ studies have been criticized as having
potentially weak theoretical underpinnings (Pel-
low 2000). Work is needed to reinforce this base and to
give the EJ body of knowledge greater sophistication
and policy relevance. Other fruitful EJ research areas
include stronger social class analyses; better integra-
tion with social movement theory, environmental
sociology, history and ethnic studies; research that
takes advantage of alliances between community acti-
vists and scholars; and studies focused on identifying
solutions rather than quantifying problems (Pellow
and Brulle 2005, Brulle and Pellow 2006). Sze and
London (2008, p 1344) contend that research is nee-
ded that ‘weaves together multi-leveled, multi-scalar,
and multi-method analyses of historical, spatial, poli-
tical, economic, and ecological factors’ and cite the
disproportionality perspective as one such approach.
At the intersection of power, pollution, and envir-
onmental policy, Boyce (1994) puts forth two hypoth-
eses
that
seem
especially
applicable:
(1)
that
environmental degradation depends on the balance of
power where winners derive benefits and losers bear
net costs; and (2) that all else equal, greater inequality
in power and wealth leads to more environmental
degradation. His analyses focus on which groups win
and which lose, and why the winners are able to
impose the consequences of their activities on the
losers. The losers, in this context, could be future gen-
erations or populations that are unaware of the
damage that they are absorbing, but Boyce is most
interested in a third category of loser: those without
sufficient power to prevent the winners from impos-
ing the costs on them. He hypothesizes that in societies
with powerful winners and powerless losers, more
environmental degradation will occur because the
winners are likely to be unconcerned with the effects of
their actions on the losers.
More recent studies embody Boyce-style societal
power dynamics, linking inequity to issues of environ-
mental quality. For example, in a historical analysis of
the relationship between environmental policy and
societal power in the US, Prechel (2012) found that
political mobilization of powerful organizations serves
to weaken existing policy (and presumably leads to
poorer environmental quality) and is inexorably inter-
twined with economic agendas. In a synthesis, Cush-
ing et al (2015) reviews existing evidence related to
health disparities, concluding that social inequality in
the US is not only bad for the environment, but also
may contribute to what, in some cases, are surprisingly
poor population health outcomes.
While the global implications of environmental
inequalities have been largely beyond the scope of our
work, such issues obviously represent paramount con-
cerns for the future. In relation to global climate
change and environmental politics, issues of inequal-
ity in environmental and economic impacts are at the
forefront. O’Brien and Leichenko (2000, p 221) have
pointed to the dual factors of climate change and eco-
nomic globalization as leading to ‘winners’ and
‘losers’. In a reflection of the disproportionality per-
spective, Robbins (1996) and others have emphasized
the role of the transnational corporations as high emit-
ters of greenhouse gases and as power brokers in global
environmental governance. At the same time, studies
on the imposition of disproportionate environmental
burdens on marginalized populations are increasingly
focusing on areas outside the US, such as in Asia,
Africa, and Latin America. Such studies need to
include not only the transnational toxics trade (see
also: Pellow 2007) but the disproportionate effects of
weather related ‘unnatural disasters’ (Freudenburg
et al 2009).
In an age where large amounts of environment data
are available, scholars are increasingly able to gain more
insight into how the winners win and who the losers
really are. It is our hope that a synthesis of available
knowledge coupled with innovative methodologies will
guide us toward a deeper understanding and potential
solutionsforthepeopleunderneath thestatistics.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank ERL reviewers for the
thoughtful and careful review of this manuscript. This
work benefited by support from the University of
Maryland and National Science Foundation award
number DBI-1052875 to the National Socio-Environ-
mental Synthesis Center (SESYNC).
References
Abel T D 2008 Skewed riskscapes and environmental injustice: a
case study of metropolitan St. Louis Environ. Manage. 42
232–48
Ash M and Boyce J K 2011 Measuring corporate environmental
justice performance Corporate Social Responsibility and
Environmental Management 18 61–79
Baer P 2009 Equity in climate–economy scenarios: the importance
of subnational income distribution Environ. Res. Lett. 4
015007
8
Environ. Res. Lett. 11 (2016) 015004
 Berry L M 2007 Inequality in the creation of environmental harm:
looking for answers from within Equity and the Environment
(Research in Social Problems and Public Policy vol 15) ed
R C Wilkinson and W R Freudenburg (Bingley: Emerald
Group) pp 239–65
Bouwes N W, Hassur S M and Shapiro M D 2001 Empowerment
through risk-related information: EPA’s risk screening
environmental indicators project PERI Working Papers 2
Boyce J K 1994 Inequality as a cause of environmental degradation
Ecological Econ. 11 169–78
Brulle R J and Pellow D N 2006 Environmental justice: human
health and environmental inequalities Annu. Rev. Public
Health 27 103–24
Bullard R D, Mohai P, Saha R and Wright B 2007 Toxic Wastes and
Race at Twenty: 1987–2007 United Church of Christ Report
Bullard R D and Wright B 1987 Environmentalism and the politics
of equity: emergent trends in the black community Mid-Am.
Rev. Soc. 12 21–38
Cabot P E and Nowak P 2005 Planned versus actual outcomes as a
result of animal feeding operation decisions for managing
phosphorus J. Environ. Qual. 34 761
Chambers N, Simmons C and Wackernagel M 2000 Sharing
Nature’s Interest: Ecological Footprints as an Indicator of
Sustainability (New York: Earthscan)
Clark L P, Millet D B and Marshall J D 2014 National patterns in
environmental injustice and inequality: outdoor NO2 air
pollution in the United States PLOS ONE 9 e94431
Collins M B 2011 Risk-based targeting: identifying
disproportionalities in the sources and effects of industrial
pollution Am. J. Public Health 101 231–7
Commoner B 1972 The environmental cost of economic growth
Chemistry in Britain 8 52
Cushing L, Morello-Frosch R, Wander M and Pastor M 2015 The
haves, the have-nots, and the health of everyone: the
relationship between social inequality and environmental
quality Annu. Rev. Public Health 36 193–209
Dunlap R E 2008 Current trends in American environmental
sociology Flows and Networks of Environmental Sociology ed
T P Karjalainen et al (Oulu, FI: Thule Institute, University of
Oulu) pp 49–68
Ehrlich P R and Holdren J P 1971 Impact of population growth
Science 171 1212–7
Fisher D and Freudenburg W R 2004 Postindustrialization and
environmental quality: an empirical analysis of the
environmental state Soc. Forces 83 157–88
Freudenburg W R 2005 Privileged access, privileged accounts:
toward a socially structured theory of resources and
discourses Soc. Forces 84 89–114
Freudenburg W R 2006 Environmental degradation,
disproportionality, and the double diversion: reaching
out, reaching ahead, and reaching beyond Rural Sociol. 71
3–32
Freudenburg W R, Gramling R B, Laska S and Erikson K 2009
Catastrophe in the Making: the Engineering of Katrina and the
Disasters of Tomorrow (Washington, DC: Island Press)
Grant D, Trautner M N, Downey L and Thiebaud L 2010 Bringing
the polluters back in: environmental inequality and the
organization of chemical production Am. Sociological Rev. 75
479–504
Grant D S, Bergesen A J and Jones A W 2002 Organizational size and
pollution: the case of the U S chemical industry Am.
Sociological Rev. 67 389–407
Harlan S L, Brazel A J, Jenerette G D, Jones N S, Larsen L,
Prashad L and Stefanov W L 2008 In the shade of affluence:
the inequitable distribution of the urban heat island Research
in Social Problems and Public Policy 15 173–202
Lerner S 2010 Sacrifice Zones: The Front Lines of Toxic Chemical
Exposure in the United States (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press)
Mohai P, Pellow D and Roberts J T 2009 Environmental Justice
Annu. Rev. Environ. Resour. 34 405–30
Nowak P, Bowen S and Cabot P E 2006 Disproportionality as a
framework for linking social and biophysical systems Soc.
Nat. Resour. 19 153–73
O’Brien K L and Leichenko R M 2000 Double exposure: assessing
the impacts of climate change within the context of economic
globalization Glob. Environ. Change 10 221–32
Pellow D and Brulle R 2005 Power, justice, and the environment:
toward critical environmental justice studies Power, Justice,
and the Environment: A Critical Appraisal of the
Environmental Justice Movement (Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press) pp 1–19
PellowDN2000Environmentalinequalityformationtowardatheoryof
environmentalinjusticeAm.Behav.Sci.43581–601
Pellow D N 2007 Resisting Global Toxics: Transnational
Movements for Environmental Justice (Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press)
Prechel H 2012 Corporate power and US economic and
environmental policy, 1978–2008 Camb. J. Reg. Economy Soc.
5 357–75
Prechel H and Touche G 2014 The effects of organizational
characteristics and state environmental policies on sulfur-
dioxide pollution in US electrical energy corporations Soc.
Sci. Q. 95 76–96
Prechel H and Zheng L 2012 Corporate characteristics, political
embeddedness and environmental pollution by large US
corporations Soc. Forces 90 947–70
Rittel H W J and Webber M M 1973 Dilemnas in a general theory of
planning Policy Sci. 4 155–69 (December 1969)
Robbins P 1996 TNCs and global environmental change: a review of
the UN benchmark corporate environmental survey Glob.
Environ. Change 6 235–44
Schnaiberg A 1980 The Environment: From Surplus to Scarcity
(Oxford: Oxford University Press)
Streitwieser M L 1994 Cross Sectional Variation in Toxic Waste
Releases From the US Chemical Industry Bureau of the Census
Sze J and London J 2008 Environmental justice at the crossroads
Sociol. Compass 2 1331–54
Turk A 1982 Social control and social conflict Social Control: Views
from the Social Sciences ed J P Gibbs vol 51 (Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage)
9
Environ. Res. Lett. 11 (2016) 015004
