 Statements of Agreement From the Targeted
Evaluation and Active Management (TEAM)
Approaches to Treating Concussion Meeting
Held in Pittsburgh, October 15-16, 2015
BACKGROUND: Conventional management for concussion involves prescribed rest
and progressive return to activity. Recent evidence challenges this notion and
suggests that active approaches may be effective for some patients. Previous
concussion consensus statements provide limited guidance regarding active
treatment.
OBJECTIVE: To describe the current landscape of treatment for concussion and to
provide summary agreements related to treatment to assist clinicians in the treatment
of concussion.
METHODS: On October 14 to 16, 2015, the Targeted Evaluation and Active Man-
agement (TEAM) Approaches to Treating Concussion meeting was convened in
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Thirty-seven concussion experts from neuropsychology,
neurology, neurosurgery, sports medicine, physical medicine and rehabilitation,
physical therapy, athletic training, and research and 12 individuals representing sport,
military, and public health organizations attended the meeting. The 37 experts indi-
cated their agreement on a series of statements using an audience response system
clicker device.
RESULTS: A total of 16 statements of agreement were supported covering (1) Sum-
mary of the Current Approach to Treating Concussion, (2) Heterogeneity and Evolving
Clinical Profiles of Concussion, (3) TEAM Approach to Concussion Treatment: Specific
Strategies, and (4) Future Directions: A Call to Research. Support (ie, response of agree
or somewhat agree) for the statements ranged from to 97% to 100%.
CONCLUSION: Concussions are characterized by diverse symptoms and impairments
and evolving clinical profiles; recovery varies on the basis of modifying factors, injury
severity, and treatments. Active and targeted treatments may enhance recovery after
concussion. Research is needed on concussion clinical profiles, biomarkers, and the
effectiveness and timing of treatments.
KEY WORDS: Concussion, mTBI, Rehabilitation, Treatment
Neurosurgery 79:912–929, 2016
DOI: 10.1227/NEU.0000000000001447
www.neurosurgery-online.com
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Purpose of the Statement
• To challenge common misconceptions about
treating concussion
• To review the current state of treatment for
concussion
• To describe and discuss interdisciplinary,
targeted evaluation and active management
approaches for treating concussion
Michael W. Collins, PhD*
Anthony P. Kontos, PhD*
David O. Okonkwo, MD, PhD‡
Jon Almquist, ATC, VATL, ITAT§
Julian Bailes, MD¶
Mark Barisa, PhDk
Jeffrey Bazarian, MD, MPH#
O. Josh Bloom, MD, MPH**
David L. Brody, MD, PhD‡‡
Robert Cantu, MD§§
Javier Cardenas, MD¶¶
Jay Clugston, MDkk
Randall Cohen, DPT, ATC##
Ruben Echemendia, PhD***
R.J. Elbin, PhD‡‡‡
Richard Ellenbogen, MD§§§
Janna Fonseca, ATC**
Gerard Gioia, PhD¶¶¶
Kevin Guskiewicz, PhD, ATCkkk
Robert Heyer, MD###
Gillian Hotz, PhD****
Grant L. Iverson, PhD‡‡‡‡
Barry Jordan, MD, MPH§§§§
Geoffrey Manley, MD¶¶¶¶
Joseph Maroon, MD‡
Thomas McAllister, MDkkkk
Michael McCrea, PhD####
Anne Mucha, DPT*****
Elizabeth Pieroth, PsyD‡‡‡‡‡
Kenneth Podell, PhD§§§§§
Matthew Pombo, MD¶¶¶¶¶
Teena Shetty, MDkkkkk
Allen Sills, MD#####
Gary Solomon, PhD#####
Danny G. Thomas, MD,
MPH*####******
Tamara C. Valovich McLeod,
PhD, ATC, FNATA‡‡‡‡‡‡
Tony Yates, MD§§§§§§
Ross Zafonte, DO‡‡‡‡
Received, December 11, 2015.
Accepted, July 8, 2016.
Published Online, October 12, 2016.
Copyright © 2016 by the
Congress of Neurological Surgeons.
ABBREVIATIONS: ARS, audience response system;
CDC, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention;
DoD, Department of Defense; mTBI, mild traumatic
brain injury; NCAA, National Collegiate Athletic
Association; NFL, National Football League; NIH,
National Institutes of Health; RCT, randomized
controlled trial; RTP, return to play; SRC, sport-
and recreation-related concussion; TBI, traumatic
brain injury; TEAM, Targeted Evaluation and Active
Management
SPECIAL ARTICLE
SPECIAL ARTICLE
912 | VOLUME 79 | NUMBER 6 | DECEMBER 2016
www.neurosurgery-online.com
Copyright © Congress of Neurological Surgeons. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/neurosurgery/article-abstract/79/6/912/2837415 by guest on 04 June 2019
 • To describe empirical gaps in existing research related to the
treatment and rehabilitation of concussion
• To identify areas requiring further research
Importance of the Statement
• Many clinicians and the public do not recognize that
concussions are a treatable injury.
• Evidence-based guidance on effective treatments for concus-
sion is lacking, making it difficult for clinicians to determine
how best to treat patients with this injury.
• Clinicians from a variety of healthcare disciplines and with
various degrees and backgrounds commonly treat patients with
concussions.
• Conventional treatment for concussion focuses on an
approach involving prescribed rest and progressive return
to activity.
• Despite general perceptions to the contrary, although
exertion may occasionally exacerbate symptoms after con-
cussion, it is unlikely to cause additional brain damage/
injury.
• Concussions are individualized injuries characterized by
diverse and variable physical, cognitive, emotional, and
sleep-related symptoms and impairment.
• Patient-centered treatments for concussion involving active
approaches may benefit recovery for certain patients.
• This statement may be useful in guiding the treatment of
concussions that result from sport and recreational activities,
motor vehicle collisions, falls, and assaults and those occurring
during military service.
KEY POINTS OF AGREEMENT
Summary of the Current Approach to Treating
Concussion
1. Prior expert consensus for management of concussion
included the following: no same-day return to play
(RTP), prescribed physical and cognitive rest until asymp-
tomatic,
accommodations
at
school/work
as
needed,
and progressive aerobic exertion-based RTP based on
symptoms.
2. Previous consensus statements have provided limited guidance
with regard to the active treatment of concussion.
3. There is limited empirical evidence for the effectiveness of
prescribed physical and cognitive rest, and there has been no
multisite randomized controlled trial (RCT) for prescribed
rest after concussion.
4. Prescribed physical and cognitive rest may not be an effective
strategy for all patients after concussion.
5. Strict brain rest (eg, stimulus deprivation, “cocoon” therapy) is
not indicated and may have detrimental effects on patients
after concussion.
6. Although most individuals follow a rapid course of recovery
over several days to weeks after injury, concussions may
involve varying lengths of recovery.
7. Recovery from concussion is influenced by modifying factors,
the severity of injury, and the type and timing of treatment
that is applied.
Heterogeneity and Evolving Clinical Profiles of
Concussion
8. Concussions are characterized by diverse symptoms and
impairments in function resulting in different clinical profiles
and recovery trajectories.
9. Thorough multidomain assessment is warranted to properly
evaluate the clinical profiles of concussion.
10. A multidisciplinary treatment team offers the most compre-
hensive approach to treating the clinical profiles associated
with concussion.
Targeted Evaluation and Active Management Approach
to Concussion: Specific Strategies
11. Concussion is treatable.
*Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, UPMC Sports Medicine Concussion Program, ‡Department of Neurological Surgery, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania;
§Fairfax Family Practice Comprehensive Concussion Center, Fairfax, Virginia; ¶Department of Neurosurgery, NorthShore University Health System, Chicago, Illinois; kBaylor
Institute for Rehabilitation, Frisco, Texas; #Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Rochester, Rochester, New York; **Carolina Sports Concussion Clinic, Cary, North
Carolina; ‡‡Department of Neurology, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri; §§Dr. Robert C. Cantu Concussion Center, Emerson Hospital, Boston University, Concord,
Massachusetts; ¶¶Department of Neurology, Barrow Neurological Institute, Phoenix, Arizona; kkCommunity Health and Family Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida;
##Athletics Department, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona; ***Psychological and Neurobehavioral Associates, State College, Pennsylvania; ‡‡‡Office for Sports Concussion
Research, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, Arkansas; §§§Department of Neurological Surgery University of Washington, Seattle, Washington; ¶¶¶Division of Neuropsychology,
Children’s National Health System, Washington, District of Columbia; kkkCollege of Arts and Sciences, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina; ###Carolinas
Medical Center, Charlotte, North Carolina; ****Neuroscience Center, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, Florida; ‡‡‡‡Department of Physical Medicine &
Rehabilitation, Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital, Massachusetts General Hospital, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts;
§§§§Neurorehabilitation, Burke Rehabilitation & Research, White Plains, New York; ¶¶¶¶Department of Neurological Surgery, University of California at San Francisco, San
Francisco, California; kkkkDepartment of Psychiatry, Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana; ####Department of Neurology, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee,
Wisconsin; *****University of Pittsburgh Medical Center Centers for Rehabilitation Services, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; ‡‡‡‡‡Neurological Institute, NorthShore University Health
System, Chicago, Illinois; §§§§§Houston Methodist Concussion Center, Houston Methodist Hospital, Houston, Texas; ¶¶¶¶¶Department of Orthopedics, Emory University
Healthcare, Atlanta, Georgia; kkkkkDepartment of Neurology, Hospital for Special Surgery, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York City, New York; #####Department of
Neurosurgery, Vanderbilt University, Vanderbilt Sports Concussion Center, Nashville, Tennessee; ******Pediatric Emergency Medicine, Children’s Hospital of Wisconsin,
Wauwatosa, Wisconsin; ‡‡‡‡‡‡Department of Athletic Training, A.T. Still University, Kirksville, Missouri; §§§§§§Pittsburgh Steelers, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Correspondence: Michael W. Collins, PhD, UPMC Rooney Sports Complex, 3200 S Water St, Pittsburgh, PA 15203. E-mail: collinsmw@upmc.edu
STATEMENT FROM THE TEAM APPROACHES TO TREATING CONCUSSION MEETING
NEUROSURGERY
VOLUME 79 | NUMBER 6 | DECEMBER 2016 | 913
Copyright © Congress of Neurological Surgeons. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/neurosurgery/article-abstract/79/6/912/2837415 by guest on 04 June 2019
 12. Preliminary evidence suggests that active rehabilitation may
improve symptom recovery more than prescribed rest alone
after concussion.
13. Active treatment strategies may be initiated early in recovery
after concussion.
14. Matching targeted and active treatments to clinical profiles
may improve recovery trajectories after concussion.
15. Patients returning to school/work while recovering from
concussion benefit from individualized management strategies.
16. Pharmacological therapy may be indicated in selected
circumstances to treat certain symptoms and impairments
related to concussion.
Future Directions: A Call to Research
• There is growing empirical support for the heterogeneity of
this injury and clinical profiles, but additional research in these
areas is warranted.
• The clinical benefits (more rapid recovery time, more complete
restoration of function, reduced risk of repeat injury, etc) of
prescribed active interventions require further study, ideally
through RCTs.
• Complementary and integrative therapies for concussion
require additional research.
• The role of modifying factors on the effectiveness of treatments
warrants further investigation.
• Multisite, prospective studies of concussion treatments across
various postinjury time points are needed.
• There are a need and a role for empirically and clinically based
treatment and rehabilitation approaches as we await validation
through prospective studies.
• There is a need for further research on biomarkers (eg,
neuroimaging, blood) to assess concussion and the effective-
ness of any proposed treatments.
BACKGROUND
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) have
labeled concussion a major public health issue because of the short-
term and potential long-term effects associated with this injury.
Sport- and recreation-related concussions (SRCs) in particular
have increased in incidence, with �1.6 to 3.8 million SRCs
occurring every year in the United States.1 Emergency depart-
ment visits for SRC doubled between 1997 and 2007 for children
8 to 13 years of age and increased 200% for adolescents 14 to 19
years of age.2 Recent epidemiological studies document increases
in the reported incidence rates for SRC at both the college and
high school levels.3 Knowledge about concussion has increased
significantly over the past decade with respect to the definition of
signs and symptoms,4 assessment approaches,5 risk factors,6-10
and prognosis.11,12 However, the treatment and management of
concussion have received little attention in the literature during
this time period. This progression is a natural phenomenon in
medicine, with the initial phase focusing largely on the definition
of the condition and its identification/diagnosis, followed by
a later focus on its treatment.13 The limited research related to
treatment has focused on the effectiveness of prescribed cognitive
and physical rest.14,15 Moreover, the approach to treating and
managing concussion is largely a uniform approach based on
a conceptual framework as a homogeneous injury.16 This is
surprising, given that current consensus statements highlight the
individualized nature of concussion.17 In short, many clinicians
are treating patients with concussion much the same way today as
they did a decade ago: using a rest-based approach.
The notion of treating a concussion more actively than
prescribed rest is also not recognized by the public. In fact, in
a recent Harris Poll, a majority (71%) of .2000 US adults
surveyed did not recognize that concussions are treatable.18 In
this same report, 1 in 3 adults reported that their child received
no prescribed treatment after a concussion. Among those
receiving treatment, the most commonly reported treatments
were prescribed rest (51%), hydration (34%), and over-the-
counter medicine (28%).18
OBJECTIVES
The preceding findings underscore the need to better align
clinical practice with emerging concussion research. To that end,
a group of concussion experts was convened October 14 to 16,
2015, in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, to determine areas of agree-
ment regarding the current state of concussion treatment. In this
document, we present the results of this 2-day effort. This
document is designed to foster an understanding among clinicians,
scientists, and laypeople that concussion symptoms and impair-
ment are treatable with more active and targeted approaches than
prescribed rest alone. The agreement statements that emerged
from this meeting may be useful in guiding the treatment of
concussions that result from a variety of causes,including sportand
recreational activities, motor vehicle collisions, falls, and assaults
and those occurring during military service. It is important to note
that the focus of this meeting, this document, and concomitant
statements was on agreement and not consensus per se. In contrast
to meetings such as the 4th International Conference on
Concussion, which used formal consensus meeting guidelines
from the Consensus Development Program in the Office of
Disease Prevention of the US National Institutes of Health (NIH),
which have since been retired by the NIH, the current meeting
used a majority voting approach to determining agreement on each
statement. We used a method of voting similar to that used by
Smith and colleagues19 (see Methods section below for additional
information).
PURPOSE
The primary purpose of this document is to review the current
state of treatment for concussion and to provide summary agree-
ments to assist clinicians in the treatment of this injury. Additional
COLLINS ET AL
914 | VOLUME 79 | NUMBER 6 | DECEMBER 2016
www.neurosurgery-online.com
Copyright © Congress of Neurological Surgeons. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/neurosurgery/article-abstract/79/6/912/2837415 by guest on 04 June 2019
 purposes are to summarize current expert consensus and empirical
gaps in the research related to treating concussion, to present and
describe clinical approaches to conceptualizing and classifying
concussion, to discuss targeted evaluation and active management
approaches for treating concussion, and to identify key areas
regarding concussion treatment that require further research and
support. For both the meeting and this document, the term
concussion was defined per the 4th International Conference on
Concussion.17 The current document was intended to build on
previous statements that provide guidelines for definitions, signs/
symptoms, evaluation, RTP, and other issues related to concus-
sion. The reader is therefore referred to the articles discussed later
for additional information about these topics. The paper is
organized into 4 primary sections that reflect the content of the
presentations and focus of the meeting: Summary of the Current
Approach to Treating Concussion; Heterogeneity and Evolving
Clinical Profiles of Concussion; Targeted Evaluation and Active
Management Approach to Concussion Treatment: Specific
Strategies; and Future Directions: A Call to Research.
METHODS
For the reasons outlined above, on October 14 to 16, 2015, the
Targeted Evaluation and Active Management (TEAM) Approaches to
Treating Concussion meeting was convened in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
The meeting was supported through grants from the National Football
League (NFL) and University of Pittsburgh Medical Center. Neither
organization influenced the content of the meeting or this document.
Concussion experts from neuropsychology, neurology, neurosurgery,
sports medicine, physical medicine and rehabilitation, physical therapy,
athletic training, and research (referred to as authors throughout this
document), as well as individuals representing sports, the military, and
public health organizations (referred to as participants throughout this
document), attended the meeting. A total of 38 authors, representing 33
clinical and academic institutions, and 14 participants, representing 12
sport, military, and public health organizations, attended the meeting.
Before the meeting, the statements of agreement, along with supporting
information and references, were drafted by the primary authors and
circulated to contributing authors for review and comment. All primary
authors, contributing authors, and invited participants were required to
sign an International Committee of Medical Journal Editors Form for
Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest. Detailed information related
to each author’s affiliations and conflicts of interests has been disclosed.
After an initial day of presentations by experts in the relevant areas and
discussion of this document with the author and participants, key
statements of agreement were voted on, evaluated, and revised by the
authors. During the month after the meeting, authors were assigned (by the
primary authors on the basis of expertise and meeting group assignments) in
groups of 2 to 3 to develop 1 to 2 statements of agreement and subsequently
revise a supporting section. After 2 rounds of revisions with authors, the
primary authors edited and compiled a final document that was then
reviewed and approved by all primary and contributing authors.
Determining Agreement for Each Statement
Each of the authors was provided with an audience response system
(ARS) clicker device to register their agreement level with each statement.
Invited participants, although active in the meeting and discussions of
each statement of agreement, were not provided with ARS devices to avoid
conflicts with their positions within their representative organizations.
The ARS devices were tested before each session to make sure that they
were working correctly. After topical presentations and a panel discussion
related to each statement of agreement, authors indicated their agreement
with each statement using a 4-point Likert-type response scale (1 =
disagree, 2 = somewhat disagree, 3 = somewhat agree, 4 = agree). All
statements of agreement for a particular section were voted on before the
results were revealed to the audience. All votes were anonymous, and
a summary of group response data for each item were provided to all
authors and invited participants immediately after the conclusion of
voting in each section. The authors and invited participants discussed
each statement of agreement and vote in an open forum. During these
open forum discussions, authors were able to propose new statements of
agreement for consideration. At this time, statements were revised on the
basis of suggestions and feedback from the authors and invited
participants. These revisions and any newly proposed statements were
discussed further during breakout sessions that included authors
representing each of the sections of the document (see section author
list). Statements that received .50% combined “disagree” and
“somewhat disagree” ratings or those that were unclear were revised
for a second vote. However, voting results indicated that none of the
statements of agreement met the preceding criteria. The voting sessions
were open only to authors. Subsequent to all revisions as agreed on by the
authors from each session, all statements of agreement were subject to an
additional round of voting on the second day of the meeting. Any
authors who had to leave the meeting before this second round of voting
were allowed to submit an absentee vote via e-mail. It is important to
note that for 12 of 16 statements of agreement (75%), a 100% response
rate was attained. However, 1 author (2.7%) abstained from voting for
statements 9 and 11, and 2 authors (5.4%) abstained from voting for
statements 10 and 12, resulting in a response rate of 94.6% to 97.3%. A
summary of the final voting results for each statement of agreement is
provided in Table 1. Voting results for the Future Directions statements
of agreement are presented later in this document. None of the authors
abstained from voting on any of the Future Directions statements of
agreement, resulting in a 100% response rate.
SUMMARY OF THE CURRENT APPROACH TO
TREATING CONCUSSIONS
1. Prior expert consensus for management of concussion
included no same-day RTP, prescribed physical and
cognitive rest until asymptomatic, accommodations at
school/work as needed, and progressive aerobic exertion-
based RTP based on symptoms.
2. Previous consensus statements have provided limited
guidance with regard to the active treatment of concussion.
Current concussion consensus statements advocate for concus-
sion management strategies including the following: no RTP or
activity for individuals with a suspected concussion, prescribed
cognitive and physical rest until asymptomatic, accommodations
at school/work as needed, and progressive aerobic exertion-based
RTP or activity based on symptoms.17,20-23 A majority of athletes
respond well to this management approach and have a favorable
return to full activity. However, some individuals experience
persistent symptoms that do not respond to these conventional
management strategies.
STATEMENT FROM THE TEAM APPROACHES TO TREATING CONCUSSION MEETING
NEUROSURGERY
VOLUME 79 | NUMBER 6 | DECEMBER 2016 | 915
Copyright © Congress of Neurological Surgeons. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/neurosurgery/article-abstract/79/6/912/2837415 by guest on 04 June 2019
 TABLE 1. Summary of Final Voting Results for Each Statement of Agreementa
Key Point
Disagree,
n (%)
Somewhat
Disagree, n (%)
Somewhat
Agree, n (%)
Agree, n
(%)
Abstain,
n (%)
1. Prior expert consensus for management of concussion included no RTP on same day, prescribed physical
and cognitive rest until asymptomatic, accommodations at school/work as needed, and progressive aerobic
exertion-based RTP based on symptoms.
0 (0)
0 (0)
3 (8.1)
34 (91.9)
0 (0)
2. Previous consensus statements have provided limited guidance with regard to the active treatment of
concussion.
0 (0)
0 (0)
1 (2.7)
36 (97.3)
0 (0)
3. There is limited empirical evidence for the effectiveness of prescribed physical and cognitive rest, with no
multisite RCT for prescribed rest after concussion.
0 (0)
0 (0)
3 (8.1)
34 (91.9)
0 (0)
4. Prescribed physical and cognitive rest may not be an effective strategy for all patients after concussion.
0 (0)
1 (2.7)
8 (21.6)
28 (75.7)
0 (0)
5. Strict brain rest (eg, stimulus deprivation, cocoon therapy) is not indicated and may have detrimental effects
on patients after concussion.
0 (0)
1 (2.7)
8 (21.6)
28 (75.7)
0 (0)
6. Although most individuals follow a rapid course of recovery over several days to weeks after injury,
concussions may involve varying lengths of recovery.
0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)
37 (100)
0 (0)
7. Recovery from concussion is influenced by modifying factors, the severity of injury, and the type and timing
of treatment that is applied.
0 (0)
0 (0)
4 (10.8)
33 (89.2)
0 (0)
8. Concussions are characterized by diverse symptoms and impairments in function resulting in different
clinical profiles and recovery trajectories.
0 (0)
0 (0)
2 (5.4)
35 (94.6)
0 (0)
9. Thorough multidomain assessment is warranted to properly evaluate the clinical profiles of concussion.
0 (0)
0 (0)
0 (0)
36 (97.3)
1 (2.7)
10. A multidisciplinary treatment team offers the most comprehensive approach to treating the clinical profiles
associated with concussion.
0 (0)
0 (0)
6 (16.2)
29 (78.4)
2 (5.4)
11. Concussion is treatable.
0 (0)
0 (0)
2 (6.00)
34 (91.9)
1 (2.7)
12. Preliminary evidence suggests that active rehabilitation may improve symptom recovery more than
prescribed rest alone after concussion.
0 (0)
0 (0)
7 (18.9)
28 (75.7)
2 (5.4)
13. Active treatment strategies may be initiated early in recovery after concussion.
0 (0)
0 (0)
4 (10.8)
33 (89.2)
0 (0)
14. Matching targeted and active treatments to clinical profiles may improve recovery trajectories after
concussion.
0 (0)
0 (0)
4 (10.8)
33 (89.2)
0 (0)
15. Patients returning to school/work while recovering from concussion benefit from individualized
management strategies.
0 (0)
0 (0)
7 (18.9)
30 (81.1)
0 (0)
16. Pharmacological therapy may be indicated in selected circumstances to treat certain symptoms and
impairments related to concussion.
0 (0)
0 (0)
2 (5.5)
35 (94.5)
0 (0)
aRCT, randomized controlled trial; RTP, return to play.
COLLINS ET AL
916 | VOLUME 79 | NUMBER 6 | DECEMBER 2016
www.neurosurgery-online.com
Copyright © Congress of Neurological Surgeons. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/neurosurgery/article-abstract/79/6/912/2837415 by guest on 04 June 2019
 Most concussion consensus documents have focused on SRC. A
summary of statements regarding management of concussion from
each of these sport-specific consensus documents is provided in
Table 2. Although some of these statements mention that there
may be other symptom-based approaches to treating concussion,
they provide little in the way of specific, targeted treatment
strategies or guidance with respect to the process of active
treatment across recovery. The majority of current consensus
statements endorse an approach to managing concussion (ie,
prescribed rest followed by progressive return to activity) that is
dependent on spontaneous resolution of symptoms and impair-
ments rather than active treatment.17,20,22,23 The most active
aspect of previous consensus statements pertains to the use of
education strategies and medications, primarily in the subacute
recovery phase, to help manage specific symptoms (eg, Broglio
et al20 and Harmon et al23). To date, the focus of consensus
documents has not included emerging, active treatment strategies
for concussion, resulting in a limited foundation for clinicians
treating patients with this injury.
3. There is limited empirical evidence for the effectiveness of
prescribed physical and cognitive rest, with no multisite
RCT for prescribed rest after concussion.
Although the current concussion consensus and position
statements suggest that patients may benefit from an initial period
of physical and cognitive rest,17,20,22,23,26 these recommendations
have been formulated primarily from anecdotal evidence because
there have been few high-quality prospective studies conducted
on the effectiveness of rest. Recommendations for physical rest,
which suggest that the phased RTP progression does not begin
until the patient is asymptomatic or back to baseline symptoms at
rest, are included in most RTP guidelines.17,20,22,23,26 Healthcare
providers routinely use prescribed physical rest in a variety of
clinical settings.27,28 In contrast, healthcare providers prescribe
cognitive rest less frequently.29,30 In a survey of pediatric
providers, cognitive rest was included as a written recommen-
dation for only 11% of pediatric patients.30 Similarly, researchers
reported that cognitive rest was not recommended to any patient
seen in the emergency department before 2008 and was
recommended to only 12% of patients in 2012.29
Evidence for physical and cognitive rest has been characterized
in retrospective study designs of small samples of primarily male
patients from a single practice15,31-34 resulting in equivocal
findings. Researchers noted that patients with the highest and
lowest levels of activity had worse outcomes31 and took longer to
recover,32 suggesting that too much or too little physical and
cognitive activity could be detrimental to recovery. In contrast,
researchers have reported that a 1-week period of cognitive and
physical rest decreased symptoms and increased cognitive scores
in nearly 60% of patients even when used several weeks or
months after injury.33 Other researchers have reported no
association between prescribed rest and decrease of symptoms34
or recovery time.14 Only 1 small RCT of cognitive and physical
rest after concussion has been published.35 These researchers
reported that 5 days of strict rest after injury resulted in longer
symptom duration and a higher number of symptoms compared
with usual care recommendations. Collectively, the limited body
of evidence appears to be equivocal; however, some studies
suggest that too little30,31 and too much32,34 physical and
cognitive rest may delay recovery, whereas an initial brief period
of rest may be beneficial. These findings, although preliminary,
clearly underscore the need for prospective, multisite RCTs to
inform the use and timing of prescribed rest compared with active
treatments after concussion.
4. Prescribed physical and cognitive rest may not be an
effective strategy for all patients after concussion.
The theory underpinning prescribed rest after concussion has
been based on 2 tenets: Rest decreases exposure to additional head
impacts and thus decreases the risk of reinjury during a vulnerable
postinjury period,36 and physical activity and cognitive activity
often exacerbate symptoms and associated impairments in the
postinjury period, thereby prolonging recovery.37,38 However, it
is important to note that avoiding contact during the vulnerable
period after concussion and prescribed rest represent 2 separate
strategies. Therefore, avoiding contact during this time is always
recommended to avoid further head impacts. In contrast,
although prescribed noncontact, subacute, physical rest and
cognitive rest may exacerbate symptoms, they do not appear to
worsen pathophysiological injury or cause additional injury.39
The use of prescribed rest to treat patients with concussion has
been based largely on expert consensus opinion.17,20,21 Factors
that optimize the effects of prescribed rest (what type, how long,
etc) remain unclear. Anecdotally, athletes with certain symptoms
and impairment may tolerate increased early activity, whereas
others may benefit from longer and more complete physical and
cognitive rest during the acute postinjury period (see Nos. 8, 12,
13). Both early activity and rest approaches may aid recovery and
result in favorable outcomes after concussion. However, there is
increased concern that too much rest may have negative
consequences for patients who are slow to recover.
The deleterious effects of prolonged rest in patients with chronic
conditions are well documented in the literature and reported in
several chronic conditions ranging from low back pain40,41 to
brain injury.42 More than 30 years ago, Relander et al42
randomized adult patients admitted to the hospital from the
emergency department with mild traumatic brain injury (mTBI)
to bed-rest vs active therapy and reported that subjects in the
active therapy group were able to return to work 14 days earlier
than the bed rest group. Relander et al42 concluded that this
active treatment was better for patients “who had exaggerated
fears about their condition.” More recently, de Kruijk et al43
compared 6 days of bed rest with no bed rest in a randomized
clinical study of bed rest for the treatment of concussion and
showed no benefit to rest.43 In a retrospective study, Majerske
et al31 reported that patients who reported low levels of postinjury
physical and cognitive activity in the first month after injury had
negative outcomes, whereas patients who reported moderate
activity had the best outcomes at follow-up.31 Thomas et al35
randomized adolescents discharged with mTBI to 5 days of
STATEMENT FROM THE TEAM APPROACHES TO TREATING CONCUSSION MEETING
NEUROSURGERY
VOLUME 79 | NUMBER 6 | DECEMBER 2016 | 917
Copyright © Congress of Neurological Surgeons. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/neurosurgery/article-abstract/79/6/912/2837415 by guest on 04 June 2019
 TABLE 2. Summary of Recommendations for Management of Concussion in Sport From Current Consensus Documentsa
Immediate Treatment
Medications
Behavioral
Academic
Accommodations
RTP Protocol
Other Therapies
American
Academy of
Neurology
(2013)21
No same-day RTP
No evidence
based
intervention
for
concussions
Cognitive restructuring to
prevent PCS
Individualized grade plans
for cognitive activity
Supervised, graded exertion
program, asymptomatic
off medication
. . .
American
Medical
Society for
Sports
Medicine
(2013)23
No same-day RTP;
appropriate
disposition to home,
emergency
department, etc;
frequent awakenings
no longer
recommended
Acetaminophen Relative physical and cognitive
rest; in the early stages,
athlete should not engage in
physical or cognitive
activities that result in an
increase in symptoms; dim,
quiet environment
No standardized guidelines
for returning athletes to
school; if symptoms
develop, athlete may
need reduced workload,
extended test taking,
shortened school day
Individualized, gradual, and
progressive; normal
cognitive/balance
evaluation
. . .
American
Academy of
Pediatrics
(2010)22
No same-day RTP;
athlete should be
monitored for
several hours to
determine whether
emergency
department is
warranted
No evidence-
based
research for
medications
Discourage activities that
require concentration and
attention; withhold physical
activity until asymptomatic
Cognitive rest, including
absence from school,
shortening school day,
reduction of workload,
allowance of more time
Graded RTP
Assessment of mental
health problems;
patients with PCS
may benefit from
exercise training
International
Consensus
Statement
(2013)17
No same-day RTP;
physical and
cognitive rest until
symptoms resolve
Treatment for
specific
symptoms
Gradual return to school and
social activities, before sport
. . .
Graded RTP
Low-level exercise for
those slow to recover;
multidisciplinary
management for
“difficult” patients
National
Athletic
Trainers’
Association
(2014)20
No same-day RTP; do
not awaken patient
unless prolonged
loss of
consciousness/
amnesia; no aspirin
Over-the-
counter, as
needed, for
symptoms
Avoid physical activity and limit
cognitive activity to not
exacerbate concussion
symptoms; activities of daily
living that do not exacerbate
symptoms may be beneficial
and allowed
Temporary accommodations
should be allowed
Should not begin until
patient no longer reports
symptoms, has normal
clinical examination, and
has normal neurocognitive
functioning/motor;
exercise progression
. . .
National
Collegiate
Athletic
Association
(2013)24
No same-day RTP;
provide instructions;
athletes should not
be left alone; avoid
alcohol, aspirin;
determine whether
imaging is needed
. . .
Physical and cognitive rest until
the acute symptoms resolve
Some athletes may require
academic
accommodations such as
reduced workload,
extended test-taking time,
days off or shortened day
Supervised, graded program
of exertion
Treatment for PCS and
depression is different
than for acute
concussion
(Continues)
COLLINS ET AL
918 | VOLUME 79 | NUMBER 6 | DECEMBER 2016
www.neurosurgery-online.com
Copyright © Congress of Neurological Surgeons. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/neurosurgery/article-abstract/79/6/912/2837415 by guest on 04 June 2019
 prescribed physical and cognitive rest vs usual care and found that
early, prolonged rest recommendations were associated with
delayed recovery and more daily postconcussive symptoms,
specifically more physical symptoms early in recovery and
emotional symptoms throughout recovery.35 In this study,
researchers also reported that patients diagnosed with mTBI
on the basis of postconcussive symptoms alone and patients with
a history of concussion were more likely to have negative
outcomes when randomized to 5 days of prescribed physical and
cognitive rest. This study informs future research efforts to
determine how rest may influence other subgroups of concussed
patients. In addition, these data are supported in basic TBI
neuroscience studies that document increased blood flow, brain
growth factors, and synaptic plasticity after subacute physical (eg,
running) and cognitive (enriched environment) activity.44,45
The efficacy and utility of prescribed rest are challenged in the
literature. Prescribed rest may exert a negative influence through
hypervigilance on symptoms, preoccupation with ordered restric-
tions, reinforcement of negative expectations, social isolation, and
removal from patients’ normal routines.46-48 For some patients,
prescribed physical and cognitive rest may contribute to an
increased symptom burden and prolonged recovery; therefore,
alternative (ie, more active) acute treatment paradigms should be
considered.
5. Strict brain rest (eg, stimulus deprivation, cocoon therapy)
is not indicated and may have detrimental effects on
patients after concussion.
Cocoon therapy or strict brain rest refers to avoidance of all
visual, auditory, light, social, intellectual, and physical exer-
tion/stimulation.49 Although it is generally agreed that most
concussed patients benefit from some form of initial physical
and cognitive rest, prolonged strict brain rest can lead to social
isolation, anxiety, and problems with self-esteem, as well as
potential loss of academic standing in students.50 Additional
adverse effects of a strict brain rest protocol include anxiety
and depression, “nocebo” effect contributing to the exacerba-
tion of symptoms, physical deconditioning, school delays, and
other academic problems related to accumulating workload.
Strict brain rest may also result in a cycle of symptoms caused
by prolonged periods of rest owing to the self-perpetuation of
symptoms in the context of strict brain rest.51 It is also
important to note that individualized physical and cognitive
activity restriction does not equate to strict brain rest. In
conclusion, strict brain rest involving avoidance of nearly all
brain stimulation is not empirically supported after concussion
and may have unintended adverse effects on patients with this
injury.
6. Although most individuals follow a rapid course of
recovery over several days to weeks after injury, concus-
sions may involve varying lengths of recovery.
It has been generally accepted that patients with concussions
recover within 7 to 14 days after injury.17,21 However, an
increasing number of studies suggest that concussion recovery
may take longer for some patients and is influenced by
TABLE 2. Continued
Immediate Treatment
Medications
Behavioral
Academic
Accommodations
RTP Protocol
Other Therapies
Team
Physician
Consensus
Statement-
American
College of
Sports
Medicine
(2011)25
No same-day RTP;
determine
disposition;
communicate with
parents/coaches, etc
. . .
Team physicians should
facilitate academic
accommodations
No medications that mask
symptoms;
neuropsychological
testing normal (if
performed); progressive
aerobic and resistance
exercise training
. . .
aPCS, postconcussion syndrome; RTP, return to play.
STATEMENT FROM THE TEAM APPROACHES TO TREATING CONCUSSION MEETING
NEUROSURGERY
VOLUME 79 | NUMBER 6 | DECEMBER 2016 | 919
Copyright © Congress of Neurological Surgeons. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/neurosurgery/article-abstract/79/6/912/2837415 by guest on 04 June 2019
 demographic modifying factors, including age (,18 years),52-54
sex (female),53,55 and history of concussion (.2).53,56-59
Furthermore, concussions are heterogeneous, with varying levels
of severity and injury-related modifying factors (eg, on-field
dizziness, posttraumatic migraine) that may affect recovery (see
No. 7). In short, some patients report symptom recovery within
a few days, whereas others report symptom recovery over a period
of months to years.60
Previous research documenting concussion recovery has typi-
cally included a homogeneous demographic group such as male
football players and focused on recovery as measured by symptoms
and cognitive performance. As a result, the generalizability of
previous findings to the wider community of athletes and
individuals with non–sport-related concussions may be limited.
Studies of recovery time after concussion have incorporated
varying definitions of recovery, including symptom resolu-
tion,9,32,34 date of medical clearance (National Collegiate Athletic
Association [NCAA] concussion guidelines), return to baseline
performance,53,61-65 and statistical recovery.54,66,67 Moreover,
there has been considerable variability in the observed length of
recovery across studies, depending on which criteria or assessment
approaches were used to determine recovery. Concussion
recovery appears to resolve within 7 days when brief immediate
assessments of cognition and postural stability are used (eg,
Balance Error Scoring System, Standardized Assessment of
Concussion),64,65,68-71 and assessments using symptom reports
reveal an interval of recovery from 564,65,69,72,73 to 14 days.74-77
Cognitive recovery is even more variable, with recovery reported
between 764,65,69,70,78 and 21 days.61,75,79 Meta-analytic reviews
suggest that neurocognitive deficits persist beyond 14 days across
studies.68 However, an earlier meta-analysis supported a 7-day
time period for these same deficits.80 On an individual basis,
factors including litigation, worker’s compensation, and the
population affected (eg, sport, military, civilian) may influence
differences in these and other concussion-related outcomes.
Recently, researchers have reported that when comprehensive
assessment approaches are used that include symptoms, cognitive,
and vestibular-oculomotor reports, concussion recovery may
extend up to 21 to 28 days in high school– and college-aged
athletes.66 The findings from this study also indicate that
concussion recovery may be domain specific (ie, cognitive
recovery persists longer than self-reported symptoms and
vestibular/oculomotor assessment) and is influenced by certain
modifying factors such as sex (ie, females demonstrate a longer
recovery). Although the majority of studies use common clinical
tools that assess a variety of domains to determine recovery,
recent neuroimaging studies report persistent findings in con-
cussed patients that may reflect even longer recovery times.81-83
In summary, these findings suggest that recovery after concussion
may vary considerably, depending on the variables used to
identify recovery and the populations being examined.
7. Recovery from concussion is influenced by modifying
factors, the severity of injury, and the type and timing of
treatment that is applied.
Consensus statements17,20-23,84 and researchers suggest that
demographic and injury-related modifying factors and the type
and timing of certain treatments can influence concussion
recovery.14,51,85 The frequency, severity, and recovery from
concussion are influenced by demographic (eg, age [,18
years],53,54 sex [female],53,86-88 concussion history58,89-93) and
premorbid factors, including migraine,94 depression,95 anxiety,96
learning disability,78 hyperactivity disorders,97 sleep distur-
bance,55,98 and overall symptom burden.99 In addition, factors
related to symptom severity, including posttraumatic amne-
sia,9,100 loss of consciousness,101 on-field dizziness,102 post-
traumatic migraine,11,103,104 acute symptom burden,69,77,105,106
and neurocognitive impairment,75,76 have been associated with
prolonged recovery. The severity of biomechanical forces and
trauma is associated with prolonged recovery in patients with
mTBI in both civilian84 and military107 populations; however,
this relationship in sport and recreation populations is tenuous
because of a limited number of studies and the difficulty in
reliably connecting biomechanical impacts to concussion
diagnosis and recovery outcomes.108-112 The type and timing
of concussion treatments (eg, educational, behavioral, ocular-
motor, vestibular, physical, and pharmacological) may expedite
recovery85,113 but, if not executed properly, may unintention-
ally prolong recovery.14,31,35 For example, prescribed cognitive
and physical rest is recommended in consensus statements as the
initial treatment approach for concussion17,20-23; however,
these statements provide very little guidance on the timing
and type of rest.
In summary, concussions are highly individualized injuries in
part because of the effects of modifying factors, the severity of the
injury, the type and timing of treatment, sociocultural factors, and
the clinical symptoms and diverse functional impairments ex-
hibited by the patient. Clinicians should consider these factors
when evaluating concussions; educating the patient, family,
teachers, and employers; and devising and implementing an active
treatment approach to concussion care.
Heterogeneity and Evolving Clinical Profiles
of Concussion
8. Concussions are characterized by diverse symptoms and
impairments in function resulting in different clinical
profiles and recovery trajectories.
As discussed in previous sections, concussions are heteroge-
neous and characterized by varied symptom presentation, which
calls into question the general recommendation that all patients
with concussion be prescribed physical and cognitive rest until
they are asymptomatic. Recently, clinical researchers have
attempted to characterize or classify concussion into specific
clinical profiles.114,115 Collins et al114 categorized concussions
into 6 clinical profiles: vestibular, ocular-motor, cognitive/
fatigue, posttraumatic migraine, cervical, and anxiety/mood.
These clinical profiles can be applied in the first week after
injury are not mutually exclusive and may overlap and involve
primary, secondary, and tertiary profiles. Each concussion profile
COLLINS ET AL
920 | VOLUME 79 | NUMBER 6 | DECEMBER 2016
www.neurosurgery-online.com
Copyright © Congress of Neurological Surgeons. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/neurosurgery/article-abstract/79/6/912/2837415 by guest on 04 June 2019
 carries specific evaluation and treatment/rehabilitation recom-
mendations. Ellis et al115 proposed a conceptual framework with
3 main postconcussion disorders: physiological, vestibulo-ocular,
and cervicogenic. In addition, these researchers describe 2
postconcussion modifying factors: posttraumatic mood disorders
and migraine. In this model, a period of 3 weeks is required
before patients can be categorized, and the determination requires
evaluation of the patient’s clinical history and the physical and
symptom-based response to exercise treadmill testing. Potential
overlap among the 3 main concussion profiles is not discussed.115
Both models provide direction for treatment based on a hetero-
geneous injury classification system. The adoption of concussion
profiles may align the management of SRCs with that of nonsport
concussions. For example, guidelines from civilian and military
mTBI have begun to address the heterogeneous nature of
concussion. In 2009, the Veterans Administration and the
Department of Defense (DoD) recommended evaluation and
individualized treatment based on the presentation of certain
symptoms, including posttraumatic headache, insomnia, cogni-
tive dysfunction, and mood-related symptoms, in service members
with persistent symptoms beyond 7 days.116 In 2011, the Ontario
Neurotrauma Foundation and the Canadian MTBI Consensus
group both recommended a targeted evaluation and treatment of
posttraumatic headache, insomnia, cognition, mood, balance,
vision, and fatigue but only for those with symptoms persisting
.3 months.117,118 The pediatric version of the Ontario Neuro-
trauma Foundation guidelines published in 2014 also included
a targeted, subject-specific evaluation for patients with symptoms
lasting .1 month.119
The identification of clinical profiles may prove useful by
emphasizing the need for multidimensional assessment and
developing treatment approaches that are targeted to symptom
presentation and findings from clinical evaluation. However, care
must be exercised not to minimize individualized approaches by
attempting to place patients into rigid profiles because profiles
often overlap. The use of clinical profiles to characterize symptoms
and impairment provides the framework for targeted treatments to
match specific concussion profiles and recovery trajectories. It is
important to note that although clinical profiles are both intuitive
and supported anecdotally, to date, they have not been empirically
validated. Therefore, more research and clinical evidence are
required to examine current and emerging concussion clinical
profiles to further refine this targeted, active treatment approach.
9. Thorough multidomain assessment is warranted to
properly evaluate the clinical profiles of concussion.
Concussion is a complex, heterogeneous injury that presents
with a variety of functional deficits and clinical findings that
warrant a thorough evaluation to appropriately assess and treat the
injury. Both the immediate assessment of a potential concussion
and subsequent evaluations should involve a systematic, careful
examination. The primary goal of the immediate evaluation is to
determine whether a concussion has occurred and to implement
immediate steps for care. The goals of the subsequent evaluation
are to characterize the clinical presentation and profiles of the
injury, including multidomain levels of functioning, and to
prescribe an individualized treatment plan.17,21,23,114,115,120
Although clinical presentations are highly variable, certain
clinical profiles are often identifiable via the use of a multidomain
assessment, which may include the following:
• Review of mechanism of injury, specifically location, force, and
direction of trauma17,21,23,114,115,120
• Relevant medical history, including age, sex, prior concussion
history, and comorbid “concussion risk factors”77,95,102,121
• Symptom
identification
through
the
use
of
symptom
checklists17,21,23,114,115,120
• Neurocognitive
screening
or
neuropsychological
evalua-
tion61,75,76,93,102,122-126
• Balance assessment58,123,127,128
• Vestibular screening or examination85,115,129
• Assessment or screening of ocular motor function115,129-131
• Neurological examination17,21,23,114,115,120
• Examination of the cervical spine114,120,132
• Consideration of neuroimaging if indicated133-135
• Evaluation
of
psychological
factors
associated
with
concussion17,136,137
It is important to recognize that this list is not exhaustive and
that each of the above components represents 1 aspect of
a comprehensive concussion evaluation approach and should not
be used in a stand-alone manner. Taken together, the evaluation of
each of these components provides a thorough, multidomain
assessment. This approach allows clinicians to better define the
injury, thereby providing appropriate direction and education
regarding recovery expectations, rehabilitation measures, treat-
ment options, and potential prescriptive therapeutic interventions.
10. A multidisciplinary treatment team offers the most
comprehensive approach to treating the clinical profiles
associated with concussion.
The heterogeneous presentation and clinical profiles of con-
cussion may require access to an array of healthcare specialists from
multiple disciplines to help design and execute targeted treatment
plans and to educate individuals and their families. The formation
of multidisciplinary approaches to concussion care and healthcare
provider networks may result in improved standardization of care
and decreased resource use and better ensure the provision of
services for concussion.138-140 At the core of the multidisciplinary
team is the coordinating healthcare provider, typically a physician
(ie, neurologist, neurosurgeon, primary care/sports medicine
physician, emergency medicine physician, physical medicine and
rehabilitation physician) or clinical neuropsychologist.139 In
addition, other healthcare specialties may be involved in specific
aspects of the care for patients with concussion, including the
physical or vestibular therapist, athletic trainer, optometrist or
ophthalmologist, speech and language pathologist, clinical or
sport psychology professional, or occupational therapist. Lastly, it
is important to note that the creation of multidisciplinary teams
may vary on the basis of the resources locally available. For
example, in rural areas, individuals from multiple specialties may
not be readily accessible, which may necessitate the development
STATEMENT FROM THE TEAM APPROACHES TO TREATING CONCUSSION MEETING
NEUROSURGERY
VOLUME 79 | NUMBER 6 | DECEMBER 2016 | 921
Copyright © Congress of Neurological Surgeons. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/neurosurgery/article-abstract/79/6/912/2837415 by guest on 04 June 2019
 of consultative relationships and emerging technologies, includ-
ing telehealth.
Targeted Evaluation and Active Management Approach
to Concussion: Specific Strategies
11. Concussion is treatable.
Although there are no recognized treatments for the underlying
pathophysiology of concussion, there is agreement among experts
that the clinical spectrum of concussion symptoms and impair-
ments are treatable.141 There is already published empirical
evidence that concussion is treatable through active approaches
involving earlier activity,35 aerobic exertion,142 vestibular,85,132
and vision143 therapies. Overall, these studies demonstrate that
active treatments are more effective than rest-based approaches.
A major focus of current clinical efforts that involves associating
a comprehensive examination of the symptoms, impairments, and
clinical profiles of concussion may lead to the identification of
targeted treatment pathways that may expedite recovery.16,114,138
The treatment of concussion symptoms and impairments is
evolving. Past practice of prolonged rest (see the article by
DiFazio et al50) has advanced to current hypotheses on the
benefits of more active approaches to rehabilitation, including
vestibular,132,144 oculomotor/vision,143,145 and behavioral146
therapies. Active rehabilitation involves an interdisciplinary
approach directed at addressing and treating the specific
individual symptoms, impairments, and clinical profiles that
may be identified at clinical presentation.
The role of active rehabilitation and treatment strategies in
changing the underlying concussion pathophysiology and con-
comitant recovery process in the brain needs further study. A
detailed history and clinical examination, together with a multidi-
mensional assessment of patients with concussion, may help
identify distinct clinical profiles that can guide treatment and
potentially improve the trajectory of recovery (see No. 9).114,138 As
with other diseases and injuries, many treatments are directed at
alleviating the signs and symptoms while the underlying disease
or injury process runs its course (eg, common cold, minor
sprains). However, those same treatments may not alter/treat the
underlying disease or injury process. Similarly, treatments for
concussion are directed at symptoms and impairments and are
vital to current individualized concussion management.
The current consensus is that evidence-based treatments for the
underlying pathophysiology of concussion are lacking. Moreover,
until more data are available, healthcare providers should
be mindful of overusing or advertising unproven treatments that
lack empirical support and validation and may lead to complica-
tions. Additional evidence-based research is needed to better
determine the mechanism and effectiveness of targeted active
interventions on the underlying pathophysiology of concussion.
Nonetheless, emerging evidence indicates that active treatment of
concussion is effective for some patients.
12. Preliminary evidence suggests that active rehabilitation
may improve symptom recovery more than prescribed rest
alone after concussion.
13. Active treatment strategies may be initiated early in
recovery after concussion.
Active treatment with a patient can be initiated on the day of the
injury. Three studies provide evidence for the effectiveness of
concussion education in the emergency department on managing
injury expectations in adults147 and children.148,149 Patients and
families who received explicit discharge education and manage-
ment strategies related to their symptoms exhibited more positive
recovery outcomes than control participants. There is limited
empirical evidence for the presumed relationship of prescribed
physical and cognitive rest to a subsequent decrease in symptoms
and cognitive impairment.33 Therefore, more active approaches
to treating concussion may be effective for certain patients (see
No. 4). Findings from animal studies demonstrate that an
“enriched environment” of physical and cognitive stimulation
enhances histologic, cognitive, and behavioral recovery from
TBI.150-152 An enriched environment consists of opportunities to
participate in physical activities, social networks, and intellectual
activities, most of which are restricted when rest is prescribed for
patients. In contrast, impoverished environments, particularly
during brain maturation, are reported to stunt synaptic plasticity
and cognitive development.153,154
Emerging empirical research suggests that exposing patients
with persistent postconcussive injury to supervised low-level
physical activity is not only safe153 but effective.13,31,155-159 Brief
submaximal (60% submaximal capacity) aerobic training, sport-
specific light coordination activity, vestibular therapy, treadmill
exercise, visualization, and home exercises have been used safely
as exertional activity in patents with persistent concussion
symptoms.155-157 The report of the Institute of Medicine of
the National Academies on concussion in sport stated that “there
is little evidence regarding the efficacy of rest following
concussion or to inform the best timing and approach for return
to activity. . .” and recommended RCTs to determine the efficacy
of physical/cognitive rest.160 Although the specifics of timing and
exertion type have yet to be determined empirically, it is the
agreed opinion of the authors that preliminary clinical evidence
suggests that supervised, individually tailored active physical and
cognitive rehabilitation may improve symptom recovery more
than prescribed rest alone after concussion and that active
treatment strategies may be initiated early during recovery from
concussion. Regardless of this opinion, additional RCTs are
warranted to compare the benefits of prescribed physical rest to
more physically active (ie, physical exertion) treatments.
14. Matching targeted and active treatments to clinical
profiles may improve recovery trajectories after concussion.
Although there are no clear evidence-based treatments for
concussion, emerging clinical research and observations suggest
that recovery after concussion may be facilitated when targeted,
active interventions are matched to the patient’s clinical profile on
the basis of presentation and history.16,114,115,138 For example,
patients who present with postconcussion vestibular impairment
and symptoms (eg, dizziness, vertigo, impaired balance, visual
COLLINS ET AL
922 | VOLUME 79 | NUMBER 6 | DECEMBER 2016
www.neurosurgery-online.com
Copyright © Congress of Neurological Surgeons. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/neurosurgery/article-abstract/79/6/912/2837415 by guest on 04 June 2019
 motion sensitivity) may benefit from vestibular rehabilitation
exercises that treat benign paroxysmal positional vertigo and
improve balance, gaze stability, eye-head coordination, and
gait.144 Similarly, vision therapy was recently reported to be
beneficial for patients with concussion and mTBI who exhibited
common oculomotor issues such as reading difficulty, vergence,
accommodation, saccade, or pursuit impairment.143,145 Vision
therapy (orthoptics) uses a variety of vision exercises and tools
designed to improve oculomotor control, focusing, coordination,
and teaming. In addition to vestibular rehabilitation and vision
therapy, exercise prescribed as an adjunct to other therapies or
medication may reduce symptoms of depression and anxi-
ety161,162 and may prevent or modify the intensity of migraines
that often accompany concussion.11,103,163-165 As another exam-
ple, patients who are slow to recover after concussion may benefit
from the addition of exertion training programs.155,156,166
Patients experiencing psychological and behavioral effects after
concussion such as anxiety96,167,168 and depression11,167,169 may
benefit from cognitive behavioral therapy and other psychother-
apeutic and behavioral interventions.121 Finally, cervical dysfunc-
tion and cervicogenic headaches occurring after concussion may
be managed with manual therapy to the cervical spine and head/
neck proprioceptive retraining.115,132
No single treatment strategy will be effective for all patients after
concussion because of the individualized nature of the injury and
its clinical consequences. Multiple active rehabilitation strategies
are now available with growing evidentiary basis for efficacy when
matched to specific symptoms and impairments.
15. Patients returning to school/work while recovering from
concussion benefit from individualized management
strategies.
After concussion, the active return to school and work is a major
priority for the recovering patient.26 Appropriate individualized
supports must be in place to facilitate recovery for the symptomatic
student/employee.170 To support this return, symptom- and
clinical profile–targeted accommodative supports and adjustments
may be necessary to balance the goals of recovery and return to
productivity. For example, in patients with vestibular dysfunction,
modifications in the school environment to lessen the triggers for
their symptoms such as removal from gym or dance class, band/
orchestra, or school assemblies may be used. Injured students with
oculomotor dysfunction may require delaying their tests/quizzes
and reducing the amount of homework during the initial recovery
period. Support should be individualized on the basis of clinical
presentation, symptoms and impairment, patient history, and
assessment results. It is important to support the recovering student
but also to ensure that modifications are not prolonged when no
longer necessary or do not provide an unfair advantage to the
injured student. These issues can be determined by serial
multidomain assessment and monitoring of the patient’s status.
Currently, no multisite clinical trials have been conducted to
validate which specific treatments, their timing, or their duration
will facilitate successful return to school and work. Although
clinical recommendations provide clinicians and school personnel
with practical and logical suggestions, their application requires
further research to demonstrate optimal benefit and to avoid
excessive or unnecessary use. The premise underlying these
interventions is that active, progressive school-based management
with concussion clinical profile–targeted recommendations may
mitigate adverse effects on school learning and work productivity,
reduce patient concerns on the impact of the injury on
performance, and lower the risk of prolonged recovery. In the
school context, Gioia et al170 advocate for explicit training of
medical and school systems to facilitate the student’s individu-
alized program of gradual return, identifying key symptom targets
tied to accommodation strategies, monitoring progress, and
applying systematic criteria for progression to the next less
restrictive level of support. Prolonged absence from the school or
work environment must be avoided to reduce the risk of
secondary adverse social and emotional effects (eg, anxiety) from
disengagement and lack of involvement in previously enjoyed
activities. To inform treatment-relevant targets, Ransom et al171
provide initial evidence for the impact of concussion on academic
learning and performance (eg, headaches and fatigue interfering
with learning, greater difficulty understanding new material).
Several clinically based support systems are available to guide
symptom-targeted school interventions, including the CDC’s
“Heads Up to Schools: Know Your Concussion ABC’s”172;
Colorado’s Remove/Reduce, Educate, Adjust/Accommodate,
Pace program173; BrainSTEPS174; and The Brain 101 School-
wide Concussion Management program.146 The Brain 101
program was first implemented through an RCT. The program
incorporates skills training, guidelines on creating a concussion
management team, and symptom-targeted strategies for sup-
porting students in the classroom. Students in the Brain 101
intervention group received more individualized/customized
academic accommodations than students in control schools.
This study demonstrated significant increases in sports concus-
sion knowledge, knowledge of academic management strategies,
and plans to implement these concussion management strate-
gies.146 Additional evidence from a multisite pediatric concus-
sion
education
program
in
the
emergency
department
demonstrated that early education via focused concussion
discharge instructions and a return-to-school letter increased
implementation of academic supports at school.149 Evidence-
based systematic protocols for return to work after concussion do
not currently exist, although clinical recommendations for
returning employees are provided on the Acute Concussion
Evaluation Care Plan-Work version in the CDC Heads Up to
Healthcare Providers,175 including schedule considerations (eg,
shortened workday, more frequent breaks) and safety consid-
erations (eg, not lifting heavy loads, operating risky machinery).
Continued investigation of effective, targeted interventions
based on symptoms and impairment for return to school and
work via multi-site RCTs is warranted.
16. Pharmacological therapy may be indicated in selected
circumstances to treat certain symptoms and impairments
related to concussion.
STATEMENT FROM THE TEAM APPROACHES TO TREATING CONCUSSION MEETING
NEUROSURGERY
VOLUME 79 | NUMBER 6 | DECEMBER 2016 | 923
Copyright © Congress of Neurological Surgeons. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/neurosurgery/article-abstract/79/6/912/2837415 by guest on 04 June 2019
 There are few randomized controlled data on the effectiveness of
pharmacological therapies in patients with concussion. Nonethe-
less, in the collective clinical experience of the authors with a wide
variety of patients with concussion over many years, optimal
treatment can be obtained with a combination of 3 elements:
active treatment and rehabilitation, lifestyle management, and
pharmacological therapies. Pharmacological therapies should
target specific symptoms and impairments. For example, cognitive
deficits might be treated with direct or indirect stimulants, whereas
migraine symptoms might be treated with triptans. We should
note that a blanket approach to treating all patients with
concussion using the same pharmacological therapy is contra-
indicated and should be avoided. Although there is limited
empirical evidence for pharmacological therapies (eg, for amanta-
dine113), many of these approaches are discussed in recent
reviews6,16 and concussion care guides. We encourage the reader
to review these guides for more specific recommendations for
pharmacological therapies. The timing of pharmacological
therapies may be influenced by preexisting conditions. For
example, a patient with a history consistent with migraine
headaches may benefit from earlier administration of a migraine
prophylactic medication. Similarly, a patient with a history
consistent with depression may benefit from earlier administra-
tion of an antidepressant. Additionally, patients already on such
medications may benefit from a temporary increase in their
medication. Conversely, decreasing or discontinuing a patient’s
medication in the setting of concussion may exacerbate symp-
toms. However, it is also important to avoid certain pharmaco-
logical therapies that can, on the basis of our collective clinical
experience, worsen overall recovery after concussion. In general, it
is recommended that clinicians avoid the following: routine
(defined as .3 d/wk for $2 weeks) use of narcotics, butalbital
preparations, and pain medication; neuroleptics, excess alcohol,
benzodiazepines, and anticholinergics such as diphenhydramine
as routine treatments for insomnia; levetiracetam in patients with
mood instability; and sedating medications in patients with severe
fatigue and hypersomnia. In conclusion, collective clinical
experience indicates that judicious pharmacological therapies
can in many cases provide symptomatic benefit after concussion.
However, the lack of empirical data to support specific pre-
scription guidelines for the use of pharmacological therapies for
patients with concussion highlights the need for additional
research in this area.
Future Directions: A Call to Research
An important objective of this document and the preceding
meeting was to provide suggestions for researchers and clinicians to
consider as next steps to build on the statements of agreement
above. To that end, the future directions statements of agreement
in Table 3 were developed and supported. We also believe that to
capitalize on the momentum of this document, sport, military,
and public health organizations should act on the future directions
in Table 3 by directing funding to expand our understanding of
TABLE 3. Summary of Final Voting Results for Future Directions Statements of Agreementa
Future Directions
Disagree,
n (%)
Somewhat
Disagree, n (%)
Somewhat
Agree, n (%)
Agree, n
(%)
Abstain,
n (%)
1. There is growing empirical support for the heterogeneity of this injury and clinical subtypes, but additional
research in these areas is warranted.
1 (2.7)
2 (5.4)
4 (10.8)
30 (81.1)
0 (0)
2. The clinical benefits (eg, more rapid recovery time, more complete restoration of function, reduced risk of
repeat injury) of prescribed active interventions require further study, ideally through RCTs.
0 (0)
0 (0)
5 (13.5)
32 (86.5)
0 (0)
3. Complementary and integrative therapies for concussion require additional research.
0 (0)
2 (5.4)
8 (21.6)
27 (74.0)
0 (0)
4. The role of modifying factors on the effectiveness of treatments warrants further investigation.
0 (0)
0 (0)
6 (16.2)
31 (83.8)
0 (0)
5. Little is known about the effectiveness of early (ie, acute, subacute) interventions and treatments for patients
with concussion.
2 (5.4)
11 (29.7)
11 (29.7)
13 (35.1)
0 (0)
6. Multisite, prospective studies of concussion treatments across various postinjury time points are needed.
0 (0)
0 (0)
2 (5.4)
35 (94.6)
0 (0)
7. There is a need as well as a role for empirically and clinically based treatment and rehabilitation approaches
as we await validation through prospective studies.
0 (0)
0 (0)
7 (18.9)
30 (81.1)
0 (0)
aRCT, randomized controlled trial.
COLLINS ET AL
924 | VOLUME 79 | NUMBER 6 | DECEMBER 2016
www.neurosurgery-online.com
Copyright © Congress of Neurological Surgeons. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/neurosurgery/article-abstract/79/6/912/2837415 by guest on 04 June 2019
 the symptoms and impairments for concussion clinical profiles,
biomarkers to assess injury and recovery, and the effectiveness of
targeted, active treatments. It is important to note that although it
was outside of the scope of this document and meeting, we believe
that there is a need for further research on biomarkers
(eg, neuroimaging, blood) to assess concussion and the effective-
ness of any proposed treatments.
CONCLUSION
Recent evidence challenges the prevailing notion that manage-
ment of concussion should be based primarily on prescribed
cognitive and physical rest. Furthermore, a uniform approach
involving prescribed rest may not be effective for all patients; strict
brain rest is contraindicated and may exacerbate the effects of this
injury. Surprisingly, there has been limited focus in the literature
and previous consensus meetings on active approaches to treating
concussion. Concussions are characterized by diverse symptoms
and impairments, and recovery from this injury may vary,
depending on modifying factors, injury severity, and treatments.
Emerging concussion clinical profiles determined via a compre-
hensive multidomain assessment may help inform more targeted
approaches to treating this injury. Concussion symptoms and
impairments are treatable, and active rehabilitations involving
a multidisciplinary treatment team may enhance recovery.
Matching treatments to specific symptoms, impairments, and
clinical profiles may also improve recovery after concussion.
Return to school/work after concussion presents a unique chal-
lenge to clinicians that can be enhanced through an individualized
approach. In certain instances, the judicious application of
pharmacotherapies may be effective for patients with certain
clinical profiles. Additional research is needed to validate concus-
sion clinical profiles, to identify biomarkers to assess the
effectiveness of treatments, and to determine the best timing of
specific concussion treatments.
Disclosures
The TEAM Approaches to Treating Concussion Meeting was supported by
grants from the National Football League and University of Pittsburgh Medical
Center. Dr Collins is a consultant for the Pittsburgh Steelers and Pittsburgh
Penguins and a developer and shareholder in ImPACT (Immediate Post
Concussion Assessment and Cognitive Testing) Applications Inc. He receives
research funding from the DoD, NCAA, NIH, and GE-NFL. Dr Okonkwo
receives research funding from the NIH, DoD, and GE-NFL. He is a paid
consultant for Lanx. J. Almquist receives an honorarium for presentations from
ImPACT Applications, Inc and is owner of JLA Consulting LLC and codeveloper
of BrainTrax. Dr Barisa is on the ImPACT speakers’ bureau. Dr Bazarian receives
grant/research support from Banyan Biomarkers and Brainscope; is a consultant
for Banyan Biomarkers and a virtual shares stockholder in Black Biometrics; and is
on the data safety and monitoring board for Neuren Pharmaceuticals. Dr Brody
receives grant/research support from Health South and Pfizer and is a consultant
for Pfizer Inc, Intellectual Ventures, Signum Nutralogix, Kypha Inc, Sage
Therapeutics, iPerian Inc, and Avid Radiopharmaceuticals (Eli Lily & Co). Dr
Cantu serves as vice president for the National Operating Committee on
Standards for Athletic Equipment; is cofounder, chairman, and medical director
for Sports Legacy (SLI, Waltham, MA); and is senior advisor to the NFL’s Head,
Neck and Spine Committee, providing expert witness testimony in trials. Dr
Cardenas has an Arizona Super Bowl Host Committee grant for a domestic
violence program, is a consultant in the NFL unaffiliated neurotrauma consultant
program, and serves on the ImPACT application scientific advisory board. Dr
Clugston receives grant/research support from Banyan Biomarkers, Inc and the
NCAA-DoD CARE Consortium. Dr Elbin receives grant/research support from
Brainscope Co, Inc. Dr Ellenbogen receives grant/research support from NIH and
MCI; is an unpaid consultant for NFL-GE and a member of the NFL Head, Neck
and Spine Committee; and is a scientific consultant for the VICIS helmet
company. J. Fonseca is a consultant for ImPACT Applications, Inc. Dr Gioia is
a test author for Psychological Assessment Resources, Inc and a consultant for the
Washington Capitals and Baltimore Ravens. Dr Heyer is a consultant for the
Carolina Panthers and is president of the NFL Physicians Society. Dr Hotz
receives grant/research support from GE-NFL. Dr Iverson receives grant/research
support from several organizations for mTBI. He is a salaried as an independent
practitioner in neuropsychology, including giving expert testimony, for Neuro-
Health Research and Rehabilitation, Inc, NeuroHealth LLC. He receives
reimbursements from government, professional scientific bodies, and commercial
organizations for discussing/presenting mTBI. Dr Manley receives grant/research
support from NIH, DoD, and Abbott. Dr Maroon is employed by the University
of Pittsburgh Medical Center, which has received grants from the National
Football League and the Pittsburgh Steelers. He is an unpaid consultant for the
Pittsburgh Steelers football club. He has been the team neurosurgeon for the
Pittsburgh Steelers since 1981 and the medical director for World Wrestling
Entertainment Corp since 2008 for the management of spine and brain-related
injury. He also has served on the NFL’s Head, Neck and Spine Committee since
2007 and is currently a consultant to the committee. He is a founder and
shareholder in ImPACT, and the World Wrestling Entertainment has partnered
with ImPACT to provide concussion management. He has served as an expert
witness in medical legal cases involving concussions. Dr McCrea receives grant/
research support from GE-NFL Head Health Challenge I. He is a GE Healthcare
consultant and a member of the NFL Head, Neck and Spine Committee. Dr
Mucha has received speaker’s fees/honoraria from CE Speakers’ Bureau-American
Physical Therapy Association, Medbridge Education, ImPACT Applications, Inc,
Brainsteps, Inova, and various healthcare and/or educational societies. Dr Podell
receives grant/research support from GE-NFL Head Initiative and Brainscope. Dr
Shetty receives grant/research support from GE-NFL, Chembio, and Abbott and is
on the GE-NFL Medical Advisory Board. Dr Solomon receives DoD grant/research
support; is a consultant for the University of Tennessee Athletics, Tennessee Tech
Athletics, Tennessee Titans, and Nashville Predators; and is on the Advisory Board
of ImPACT Applications, Inc. He has received speaking honoraria from the
American Academy of Neurology, American Medical Society for Sports Medicine,
and American Associations of Neurological Surgeons. Dr Zafonte receives grant/
research support from NIH, DoD, National Institute on Disability, Independent
Living, and Rehabilitation Research, and NFL Players Association and is
a consultant for Harvard football. He has relationships with Oakstone Publishing,
Demos Publishing, Oxeia Biopharma, and Myomo Orthotic Devices.
The following authors have no personal, financial, or institutional interest in any
of the drugs, materials, or devices described in this article. Dr Kontos receives
research funding fromthe NIH, NCAA, DoD,and GE-NFL. Dr Bailes is chairman
for the Pop Warner Football medical advisory board. Dr Bloom is a consultant for
the Carolina Hurricanes. Dr Echemendia is a consultant to the NHL, Major League
Soccer, the US Soccer Federation, and Princeton University. He is principal
investigator or coprincipal investigator on grants funded by National Operating
Committee on Standards for Athletic Equipment, American Medical Society for
Sports Medicine, and the New Jersey Commission on Brain Injury Research. Dr
Guskiewicz is a member of the NCAA Health and Safety Advisory Committee for
Concussion, is a member of the NFL Head, Neck and Spine Committee, has given
paid expert testimonials for TBI cases, and receives research funding from NIH,
NCAA, NFL, USA Hockey, and National Athletic Trainers’ Association. Dr
Jordan is a paid consultant for NFL Benefits Association for Neurocognitive
Disability Benefit. He receives compensation from Innovative CEUs for coaching
STATEMENT FROM THE TEAM APPROACHES TO TREATING CONCUSSION MEETING
NEUROSURGERY
VOLUME 79 | NUMBER 6 | DECEMBER 2016 | 925
Copyright © Congress of Neurological Surgeons. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/neurosurgery/article-abstract/79/6/912/2837415 by guest on 04 June 2019
 their education program and is chief medical officer of the New York State
Athletic Association. Dr McAllister receives research funding from the NCAA-
DoD. Dr Pieroth is a consultant for the Chicago Bears, White Sox, and
Blackhawks. Dr Sills is on the Medical Board of the Federation Equestrian
Internationale; is an unpaid consultant for the US Equestrian Foundation,
Southeastern Conference, and the Nashville Predators; and is an unaffiliated
neurotrauma consultant for the NFL. Dr Yates is the team physician for the
Pittsburgh Steelers and a member of the NFL Head, Neck and Spine Committee.
Drs Cohen, Pombo, Thomas, and Valovich have no funding to disclose.
REFERENCES
1. Langlois JA, Rutland-Brown W, Wald MM. The epidemiology and impact of
traumatic brain injury: a brief overview. J Head Trauma Rehabil. 2006;21(5):
375-378.
2. Bakhos LL, Lockhart GR, Myers R, Linakis JG. Emergency department visits for
concussion in young child athletes. Pediatrics. 2010;126(3):e550–e556.
3. Rosenthal JA, Foraker RE, Collins CL, Comstock RD. National high school
athlete concussion rates from 2005-2006 to 2011-2012. Am J Sports Med. 2014;
42(7):1710-1715.
4. Kurowski B, Pomerantz WJ, Schaiper C, Gittelman MA. Factors that influence
concussion knowledge and self-reported attitudes in high school athletes.
J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2014;77(3 suppl 1):S12-S17.
5. Baillargeon A, Lassonde M, Leclerc S, Ellemberg D. Neuropsychological and
neurophysiological assessment of sport concussion in children, adolescents and
adults. Brain Inj. 2012;26(3):211-220.
6. Elbin R, Covassin T, Gallion C, Kontos AP. Factors influencing risk and recovery
from sport-related concussion: reviewing the evidence. Perspect Neurophysiol
Neurogenic Speech Lang Disord. 2015;25:4-16.
7. Abrahams S, Fie SM, Patricios J, Posthumus M, September AV. Risk factors for sports
concussion: an evidence-based systematic review. Br J Sports Med. 2014;48(2):91-97.
8. Asplund CA, McKeag DB, Olsen CH. Sport-related concussion: factors
associated with prolonged return to play. Clin J Sport Med. 2004;14(6):339-343.
9. Chrisman SP, Rivara FP, Schiff MA, Zhou C, Comstock RD. Risk factors for concussive
symptoms 1 week or longer in high school athletes. Brain Inj. 2013;27(1):1-9.
10. Collins MW, Iverson GL, Lovell MR, McKeag DB, Norwig J, Maroon J. On-
field predictors of neuropsychological and symptom deficit following sports-
related concussion. Clin J Sport Med. 2003;13(4):222-229.
11. Kontos AP, Elbin RJ, Lau B, et al. Posttraumatic migraine as a predictor of
recovery and cognitive impairment after sport-related concussion. Am J Sports
Med. 2013;41(17):1497-1504.
12. Kostyun RO, Hafeez I. Protracted recovery from a concussion: a focus on gender
and treatment interventions in an adolescent population. Sports Health. 2015;7
(1):52-57.
13. Schneider KJ, Iverson GL, Emery CA, McCrory P, Herring SA, Meeuwisse WH.
The effects of rest and treatment following sport-related concussion: a systematic
review of the literature. Br J Sports Med. 2013;47(5):304-307.
14. Buckley TA, Munkasy BA, Clouse BP. Acute cognitive, physical rest may not
improve concussion recovery time. J Head Trauma Rehabil. 2016;31(4):233-241.
15. Moser RS, Schatz P, Glenn M, Kollias KE, Iverson GL. Examining prescribed
rest as treatment for adolescents who are slow to recover from concussion. Brain
Inj. 2015;29(1):58-63.
16. Broglio SP, Collins MW, Williams RM, Mucha A, Kontos AP. Current and
emerging rehabilitation for concussion: a review of the evidence. Clin Sports Med.
2015;34(2):213-231.
17. McCrory P, Meeuwisse WH, Aubry M, et al. Consensus statement on
concussion in sport: the 4th International Conference on Concussion in Sport,
Zurich, November 2012. J Athl Train. 2013;48(4):554-575.
18. Harris Poll. How knowledgeable are Americans about concussions? Assessing and
recalibrating the public’s knowledge. 2015. Available at: http://rethinkconcussions.
com/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/harris-poll-report.pdf.
Accesed
January
15,
2016.
19. Smith A, Stuart M, Greenwald R, et al. Proceedings from the Ice Hockey Summit
on concussion: a call to action. Clin Neuropsychol. 2011;25(5):689-701.
20. Broglio SP, Cantu RC, Gioia GA, et al. National Athletic Trainers’ Association
position statement: management of sport concussion. J Athl Train. 2014;49(2):
245-265.
21. Giza CC, Kutcher JS, Ashwal S, et al. Summary of evidence-based guideline
update: evaluation and management of concussion in sports: report of the
Guideline Development Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology.
Neurology. 2013;80(24):2250-2257.
22. Halstead ME, Walter KD; Council on Sports Medicine and Fitness. American
Academy of Pediatrics. Clinical report: sport-related concussion in children and
adolescents. Pediatrics. 2010;126(3):597-615.
23. Harmon KG, Drezner JA, Gammons M, et al. American Medical Society for
Sports Medicine position statement: concussion in sport. Br J Sports Med. 2013;
47(1):15-26.
24. National Collegiate Athletic Association. Concussion guidelines. NCAA; 2013.
Available at: http://www.ncaa.org/sport-science-institute/concussion-guidelines.
Accessed January 15, 2016.
25. Herring SA, Cantu RC, Guskiewicz KM, Putukian M, Kibler BW. Concussion
and the team physician: a consensus statement: 2011 update. Med Sci Sports
Exerc. 2011;43(12):2412-2422.
26. Halstead ME, McAvoy K, Devore CD, et al. Returning to learning following
a concussion. Pediatrics. 2013;132(5):948-957.
27. Lynall RC, Laudner KG, Mihalik JP, Stanek JM. Concussion-assessment and
-management techniques used by athletic trainers. J Athl Train. 2013;48(6):844-850.
28. Covassin T, Elbin RJ III, Stiller-Ostrowski JL, Kontos AP. Immediate post-
concussion assessment and cognitive testing (ImPACT) practices of sports
medicine professionals. J Athl Train. 2009;44(6):639-644.
29. Upchurch C, Morgan CD, Umfress A, Yang G, Riederer MF. Discharge
instructions for youth sports-related concussions in the emergency department,
2004 to 2012. Clin J Sport Med. 2015;25(3):297-299.
30. Arbogast KB, McGinley AD, Master CL, Grady MF, Robinson RL,
Zonfrillo MR. Cognitive rest and school-based recommendations following
pediatric concussion: the need for primary care support tools. Clin Pediatr (Phila).
2013;52(5):397-402.
31. Majerske CW, Mihalik JP, Ren D, et al. Concussion in sports: postconcussive
activity levels, symptoms, and neurocognitive performance. J Athl Train. 2008;43
(3):265-274.
32. Brown NJ, Mannix RC, O’Brien MJ, Gostine D, Collins MW, Meehan WP III.
Effect of cognitive activity level on duration of post-concussion symptoms.
Pediatrics. 2014;133(2):e299-e304.
33. Moser RS, Glatts C, Schatz P. Efficacy of immediate and delayed cognitive and
physical rest for treatment of sports-related concussion. J Pediatr. 2012;161(5):922-
926.
34. Gibson S, Nigrovic LE, O’Brien M, Meehan WP
III. The effect of
recommending cognitive rest on recovery from sport-related concussion. Brain
Inj. 2013;27(7-8):839-842.
35. Thomas DG, Apps JN, Hoffmann RG, McCrea M, Hammeke T. Benefits of
strict rest after acute concussion: a randomized controlled trial. Pediatrics. 2015;
135(2):213-223.
36. Schnadower D, Vazquez H, Lee J, Dayan P, Roskind CG. Controversies in the
evaluation and management of minor blunt head trauma in children. Curr Opin
Pediatr. 2007;19(3):258-264.
37. Giza CC, Griesbach GS, Hovda DA. Experience-dependent behavioral plasticity
is disturbed following traumatic injury to the immature brain. Behav Brain Res.
2005;157(1):11-22.
38. Griesbach GS, Hovda DA, Molteni R, Wu A, Gomez-Pinilla F. Voluntary
exercise following traumatic brain injury: brain-derived neurotrophic factor
upregulation and recovery of function. Neuroscience. 2004;125(1):129-139.
39. Leddy J, Hinds A, Sirica D, Willer B. The role of controlled exercise in
concussion management. PM R. 2016;8(3 suppl):S91–S100.
40. Malmivaara A, Hakkinen U, Aro T, et al. The treatment of acute low back pain:
bed rest, exercises, or ordinary activity? N Engl J Med. 1995;332(6):351-355.
41. Deyo RA, Diehl AK, Rosenthal M. How many days of bed rest for acute low back
pain? A randomized clinical trial. N Engl J Med. 1986;315(17):1064-1070.
42. Relander M, Troupp H, Af Bjorkesten G. Controlled trial of treatment for
cerebral concussion. Br Med J. 1972;4(5843):777-779.
43. de Kruijk JR, Leffers P, Meerhoff S, Rutten J, Twijnstra A. Effectiveness of bed
rest after mild traumatic brain injury: a randomised trial of no versus six days of
bed rest. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2002;73(2):167-172.
44. Griesbach GS, Hovda DA, Molteni R, Gomez-Pinilla F. Alterations in BDNF
and synapsin I within the occipital cortex and hippocampus after mild traumatic
COLLINS ET AL
926 | VOLUME 79 | NUMBER 6 | DECEMBER 2016
www.neurosurgery-online.com
Copyright © Congress of Neurological Surgeons. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/neurosurgery/article-abstract/79/6/912/2837415 by guest on 04 June 2019
 brain injury in the developing rat: reflections of injury-induced neuroplasticity.
J Neurotrauma. 2002;19(7):803-814.
45. Kline AE, Wagner AK, Westergom BP, et al. Acute treatment with the 5-HT 1A
receptor agonist 8-OH-DPAT and chronic environmental enrichment confer
neurobehavioral benefit after experimental brain trauma. Behav Brain Res. 2007;
177(2):186-194.
46. Cacioppo JT, Hawkley LC, Norman GJ, Berntson GG. Social isolation. Ann N Y
Acad Sci. 2011;1231:17-22.
47. Colloca L, Finniss D. Nocebo effects, patient-clinician communication, and
therapeutic outcomes. JAMA. 2012;307(6):567-568.
48. Ponsford JL, Ziino C, Parcell DL, et al. Fatigue and sleep disturbance following
traumatic brain injury: their nature, causes, and potential treatments. J Head
Trauma Rehabil. 2012;27(3):224-233.
49. Lee MA, Fine B. Adolescent concussions. Conn Med. 2010;74(3):149-156.
50. Karlin AM. Concussion in the pediatric and adolescent population: “different
population, different concerns.” PM R. 2011;3(10 suppl 2):S369-S379.
51. DiFazio M, Silverberg ND, Kirkwood MW, Bernier R, Iverson GL. Prolonged
activity restriction after concussion: are we worsening outcomes. Clin Pediatr
(Phila). 2016;55(5):443-451.
52. Cantu RC, Guskiewicz K, Register-Mihalik JK. A retrospective clinical analysis of
moderate to severe athletic concussions. PM R. 2010;2(12):1088-1093.
53. Covassin T, Elbin RJ
III, Larson E, Kontos AP. Sex and age differences in
depression and baseline sport-related concussion neurocognitive performance and
symptoms. Clin J Sport Med. 2012;22(2):98-104.
54. Field M, Collins MW, Lovell MR, Maroon J. Does age play a role in recovery
from sports-related concussion? A comparison of high school and collegiate
athletes. J Pediatr. 2003;142(5):546-553.
55. Kostyun RO, Milewski MD, Hafeez I. Sleep disturbance and neurocognitive
function during the recovery from a sport-related concussion in adolescents. Am J
Sports Med. 2015;43(3):633-640.
56. Covassin T, Swanik CB, Sachs ML. Sex differences and the incidence of
concussions among collegiate athletes. J athletic Train. 2003;38(3):238-244.
57. Eisenberg MA, Andrea J, Meehan W, Mannix R. Time interval between
concussions and symptom duration. Pediatrics. 2013;132(1):8-17.
58. Guskiewicz KM, McCrea M, Marshall SW, et al. Cumulative effects associated
with recurrent concussion in collegiate football players: the NCAA Concussion
Study. JAMA. 2003;290(19):2549-2555.
59. Meehan WP III, Zhang J, Mannix R, Whalen MJ. Increasing recovery time
between injuries improves cognitive outcome after repetitive mild concussive
brain injuries in mice. Neurosurgery. 2012;71(4):885-891.
60. Morgan CD, Zuckerman SL, King LE, Beaird SE, Sills AK, Solomon GS. Post-
concussion syndrome (PCS) in a youth population: defining the diagnostic value
and cost-utility of brain imaging. Child’s Nervous Syst. 2015;31(12):2305-2309.
61. Iverson GL, Brooks BL, Collins MW, Lovell MR. Tracking neuropsychological
recovery following concussion in sport. Brain Inj. 2006;20(3):245-252.
62. Lovell MR, Collins MW, Iverson GL, et al. Recovery from mild concussion in
high school athletes. J Neurosurg. 2003;98(2):296-301.
63. McClincy MP, Lovell MR, Pardini J, Collins MW, Spore MK. Recovery from sports
concussion in high school and collegiate athletes. Brain Inj. 2006;20(1):33-39.
64. McCrea M, Barr WB, Guskiewicz K, et al. Standard regression-based methods for
measuring recovery after sport-related concussion. J Int Neuropsychol Soc. 2005;
11(1):58-69.
65. McCrea M, Guskiewicz KM, Marshall SW, et al. Acute effects and recovery time
following concussion in collegiate football players: the NCAA Concussion Study.
JAMA. 2003;290(19):2556-2563.
66. Henry LC, Elbin RJ, Collins MW, Marchetti G, Kontos AP. Examining recovery
trajectories after sport-related concussion with a multimodal clinical assessment
approach. Neurosurgery. 2016;78(2):232-241.
67. Pellman EJ, Lovell MR, Viano DC, Casson IR. Concussion in professional football:
recovery of NFL and high school athletes assessed by computerized neuropsychological
testing–Part 12. Neurosurgery. 2006;58(2):263-274; discussion 263-274.
68. Broglio SP, Puetz TW. The effect of sport concussion on neurocognitive function, self-
report symptoms and postural control: a meta-analysis. Sports Med. 2008;38(1):53-67.
69. McCrea M, Iverson GL, Echemendia RJ, Makdissi M, Raftery M. Day of injury
assessment of sport-related concussion. Br J Sports Med. 2013;47(5):272-284.
70. Prichep LS, McCrea M, Barr W, Powell M, Chabot RJ. Time course of clinical
and electrophysiological recovery after sport-related concussion. J Head Trauma
Rehabil. 2013;28(4):266-273.
71. Quatman-Yates C, Hugentobler J, Ammon R, Mwase N, Kurowski B, Myer GD.
The utility of the balance error scoring system for mild brain injury assessments in
children and adolescents. Phys Sportsmed. 2014;42(3):32-38.
72. Fazio VC, Lovell MR, Pardini JE, Collins MW. The relation between post
concussion symptoms and neurocognitive performance in concussed athletes.
NeuroRehabilitation. 2007;22(3):207-216.
73. Makdissi M, Cantu RC, Johnston KM, McCrory P, Meeuwisse WH. The
difficult concussion patient: what is the best approach to investigation and
management of persistent (.10 days) postconcussive symptoms? Br J Sports Med.
2013;47(5):308-313.
74. Eisenberg MA, Meehan WP
III, Mannix R. Duration and course of post-
concussive symptoms. Pediatrics. 2014;133(6):999-1006.
75. Lau B, Lovell MR, Collins MW, Pardini J. Neurocognitive and symptom
predictors of recovery in high school athletes. Clin J Sport Med. 2009;19(3):
216-221.
76. Lau BC, Collins MW, Lovell MR. Cutoff scores in neurocognitive testing and
symptom clusters that predict protracted recovery from concussions in high
school athletes. Neurosurgery. 2012;70(2):371-379; discussion 379.
77. Meehan WP III, Mannix RC, Stracciolini A, Elbin RJ, Collins MW. Symptom
severity predicts prolonged recovery after sport-related concussion, but age and
amnesia do not. J Pediatr. 2013;163(3):721-725.
78. Collins MW, Grindel SH, Lovell MR, et al. Relationship between concussion
and neuropsychological performance in college football players. JAMA. 1999;282
(10):964-970.
79. Covassin T, Elbin RJ, Nakayama Y. Tracking neurocognitive performance
following concussion in high school athletes. Phys Sportsmed. 2010;38(4):87-93.
80. Belanger HG, Vanderploeg RD. The neuropsychological impact of sports-related
concussion: a meta-analysis. J Int Neuropsychol Soc. 2005;11(4):345-357.
81. Dean PJ, Sato JR, Vieira G, McNamara A, Sterr A. Long-term structural changes
after mTBI and their relation to post-concussion symptoms. Brain Inj. 2015:1-8.
82. Lange RT, Panenka WJ, Shewchuk JR, et al. Diffusion tensor imaging findings
and postconcussion symptom reporting six weeks following mild traumatic brain
injury. Arch Clin Neuropsychol. 2015;30(1):7-25.
83. Zhu DC, Covassin T, Nogle S, et al. A potential biomarker in sports-related
concussion: brain functional connectivity alteration of the default-mode network
measured with longitudinal resting-state fMRI over thirty days. J Neurotrauma.
2015;32(5):327-341.
84. Dikmen SS, Corrigan JD, Levin HS, Machamer J, Stiers W, Weisskopf MG.
Cognitive outcome following traumatic brain injury. J Head Trauma Rehabil.
2009;24(6):430-438.
85. Alsalaheen BA, Mucha A, Morris LO, et al. Vestibular rehabilitation for dizziness
and balance disorders after concussion. J Neurol Phys Ther. 2010;34(2):87-93.
86. Broshek DK, Kaushik T, Freeman JR, Erlanger D, Webbe F, Barth JT. Sex
differences in outcome following sports-related concussion. J Neurosurg. 2005;
102(5):856-863.
87. Covassin T, Elbin RJ, Bleecker A, Lipchik A, Kontos AP. Are there differences in
neurocognitive function and symptoms between male and female soccer players
after concussions? Am J Sports Med. 2013;41(12):2890-2895.
88. Frommer LJ, Gurka KK, Cross KM, Ingersoll CD, Comstock RD, Saliba SA. Sex
differences in concussion symptoms of high school athletes. J athletic Train.
2011;46(1):76-84.
89. Collins MW, Lovell MR, Iverson GL, Cantu RC, Maroon JC, Field M.
Cumulative effects of concussion in high school athletes. Neurosurgery. 2002;51
(5):1175-1179; discussion 1180-1181.
90. Colvin AC, Mullen J, Lovell MR, West RV, Collins MW, Groh M. The role of
concussion history and gender in recovery from soccer-related concussion. Am J
Sports Med. 2009;37(9):1699-1704.
91. Covassin T, Stearne D, Elbin R. Concussion history and postconcussion
neurocognitive performance and symptoms in collegiate athletes. J athletic Train.
2008;43(2):119-124.
92. Guskiewicz KM, Marshall SW, Bailes J, et al. Association between recurrent
concussion and late-life cognitive impairment in retired professional football
players. Neurosurgery. 2005;57(4):719-726; discussion 719-726.
93. Iverson GL, Gaetz M, Lovell MR, Collins MW. Cumulative effects of concussion
in amateur athletes. Brain Inj. 2004;18(5):433-443.
94. Heyer GL, Young JA, Rose SC, McNally KA, Fischer AN. Post-traumatic
headaches correlate with migraine symptoms in youth with concussion.
Cephalalgia. 2016;36(4):309-316.
STATEMENT FROM THE TEAM APPROACHES TO TREATING CONCUSSION MEETING
NEUROSURGERY
VOLUME 79 | NUMBER 6 | DECEMBER 2016 | 927
Copyright © Congress of Neurological Surgeons. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/neurosurgery/article-abstract/79/6/912/2837415 by guest on 04 June 2019
 95. Kontos AP, Covassin T, Elbin RJ, Parker T. Depression and neurocognitive
performance after concussion among male and female high school and collegiate
athletes. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2012;93(10):1751-1756.
96. Covassin T, Crutcher B, Bleecker A, Heiden EO, Dailey A, Yang J. Postinjury
anxiety and social support among collegiate athletes: a comparison between
orthopaedic injuries and concussions. J athletic Train. 2014;49(4):462-468.
97. Nelson LD, Guskiewicz KM, Marshall SW, et al. Multiple self-reported
concussions are more prevalent in athletes with ADHD and learning disability.
Clin J Sport Med. 2016;26(2):120-127.
98. Sufrinko A, Johnson EW, Henry LC. The influence of sleep duration and sleep-
related symptoms on baseline neurocognitive performance among male and
female high school athletes. Neuropsychology. 2016;30(4):484-491.
99. Custer A, Sufrinko AS, Elbin RJ, Covassin T, Collins MW, Kontos AP. Do
athletes with high post-concussion symptoms scores at baseline experience worse
outcomes following a concussion? J Athl Train. 2016;51(2):136-141.
100. Collins MW, Field M, Lovell MR, et al. Relationship between postconcussion
headache and neuropsychological test performance in high school athletes. Am J
Sports Med. 2003;31(2):168-173.
101. Erlanger D, Kaushik T, Cantu R, et al. Symptom-based assessment of the severity
of a concussion. J Neurosurg. 2003;98(3):477-484.
102. Lau BC, Kontos AP, Collins MW, Mucha A, Lovell MR. Which on-field signs/
symptoms predict protracted recovery from sport-related concussion among high
school football players? Am J Sports Med. 2011;39:2311-2318.
103. Mihalik JP, Register-Mihalik J, Kerr ZY, Marshall SW, McCrea MC,
Guskiewicz KM. Recovery of posttraumatic migraine characteristics in patients
after mild traumatic brain injury. Am J Sports Med. 2013;41(7):1490-1496.
104. Mihalik JP, Stump JE, Collins MW, Lovell MR, Field M, Maroon JC.
Posttraumatic migraine characteristics in athletes following sports-related
concussion. J Neurosurg. 2005;102(5):850-855.
105. Casson IR, Sethi NK, Meehan WP III. Early symptom burden predicts recovery
after sport-related concussion. Neurology. 2015;85(1):110-111.
106. Merritt VC, Arnett PA. Premorbid predictors of postconcussion symptoms in
collegiate athletes. J Clin Exp Neuropsychol. 2014;36(10):1098-1111.
107. Kontos AP, Elbin RJ, Kotwal RS, et al. The effects of combat-related mild
traumatic brain injury (mTBI): does blast mTBI history matter? J Trauma Acute
Care Surg. 2015;79(4 suppl 2):S146-S151.
108. Broglio SP, Eckner JT, Kutcher JS. Field-based measures of head impacts in high
school football athletes. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2012;24(6):702-708.
109. Broglio SP, Eckner JT, Martini D, Sosnoff JJ, Kutcher JS, Randolph C. Cumulative
head impact burden in high school football. J Neurotrauma. 2011;28(10):2069-2078.
110. Broglio SP, Eckner JT, Surma T, Kutcher JS. Post-concussion cognitive declines
and symptomatology are not related to concussion biomechanics in high school
football players. J Neurotrauma. 2011;28(10):2061-2068.
111. Eckner JT, Sabin M, Kutcher JS, Broglio SP. No evidence for a cumulative impact
effect on concussion injury threshold. J Neurotrauma. 2011;28(10):2079-2090.
112. Guskiewicz KM, Mihalik JP. Biomechanics of sport concussion: quest for the
elusive injury threshold. Exerc Sport Sci Rev. 2011;39(1):4-11.
113. Reddy CC, Collins M, Lovell M, Kontos AP. Efficacy of amantadine treatment
on symptoms and neurocognitive performance among adolescents following
sports-related concussion. J Head Trauma Rehabil. 2013;28(4):260-265.
114. Collins MW, Kontos AP, Reynolds E, Murawski CD, Fu FH. A comprehensive,
targeted approach to the clinical care of athletes following sport-related
concussion. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc. 2014;22(2):235-246.
115. Ellis MJ, Leddy JJ, Willer B. Physiological, vestibulo-ocular and cervicogenic
post-concussion disorders: an evidence-based classification system with directions
for treatment. Brain Inj. 2015;29(2):238-248.
116. The Management of Concussion/mTBI Working Group. 2009 VA/DoD
Clinical practice guideline for management of concussion/mild traumatic brain
injury. J. Rehab. Res. Develop. 4, CP1.
117. Zemek R, Duval S, Dematteo C. Guidelines for mild traumatic brain injury and
persistent symptoms. 2013. Available at: http://onf.org/documents/guidelines-for-
concussion-mtbi-persistent-symptoms-second-edition. Accessed January 15, 2016.
118. Zemek R, Duval S, Dematteo C. Guidelines for concussion/mTBI & persistent
symptoms.
2011.
Available
at:
http://onf.org/documents/guidelines-for-
concussion-mtbi-persistent-symptoms. Accessed January 15, 2016.
119. Zemek R, Duval S, Dematteo C. Guidelines for diagnosing and managing pediatric
concussion. 2014. Available at: http://www.onf.org/documents/guidelines-for-pediatric-
concussion. Accessed January 15, 2016.
120. Bloom J, Blount JG. Sideline evaluation of concussion. Available at: http://www.
uptodate.com/contents/sideline-evaluation-of-concussion. Accessed January 15, 2016.
121. Elbin RJ, Schatz P, Lowder HB, Kontos AP. An empirical review of treatment
and rehabilitation approaches used in the acute, sub-acute, and chronic phases of
recovery following sports-related concussion. Curr Treat Options Neurol. 2014;16
(11):320.
122. Bleiberg J, Cernich AN, Cameron K, et al. Duration of cognitive impairment after
sports concussion. Neurosurgery. 2004;54(5):1073-1078; discussion 1078-1080.
123. Guskiewicz KM, Ross SE, Marshall SW. Postural stability, neuropsycho-
logical deficits after concussion in collegiate athletes. J athletic Train. 2001;36
(3):263-273.
124. Iverson GL, Lovell MR, Collins MW. Interpreting change on ImPACT following
sport concussion. Clin Neuropsychol. 2003;17(4):460-467.
125. Moser RS, Iverson GL, Echemendia RJ, et al. Neuropsychological evaluation in
the diagnosis and management of sports-related concussion. Arch Clin Neuro-
psychol. 2007;22(8):909-916.
126. Van Kampen DA, Lovell MR, Pardini JE, Collins MW, Fu FH. The “value
added” of neurocognitive testing after sports-related concussion. Am J Sports Med.
2006;34(10):1630-1635.
127. Register-Mihalik JK, Mihalik JP, Guskiewicz KM. Balance deficits after sports-
related concussion in individuals reporting posttraumatic headache. Neurosurgery.
2008;63(1):76-80; discussion 80-82.
128. Sosnoff JJ, Broglio SP, Shin S, Ferrara MS. Previous mild traumatic brain injury
and postural-control dynamics. J Athl Train. 2011;46(1):85-91.
129. Mucha A, Collins MW, Elbin RJ, et al. A brief vestibular/ocular motor screening
(VOMS) assessment to evaluate concussions: preliminary findings. Am J Sports
Med. 2014;42(10):2479-2486.
130. Pearce KL, Sufrinko A, Lau BC, Henry L, Collins MW, Kontos AP. Near point
of convergence after a sport-related concussion: measurement reliability and
relationship to neurocognitive impairment and symptoms. Am J Sports Med.
2015;43(12):3055-3061.
131. Poltavski DV, Biberdorf D. Screening for lifetime concussion in athletes:
importance of oculomotor measures. Brain Inj. 2014;28(4):475-485.
132. Schneider KJ, Meeuwisse WH, Nettel-Aguirre A, et al. Cervicovestibular
rehabilitation in sport-related concussion: a randomised controlled trial. Br J
Sports Med. 2014;48(17):1294-1298.
133. Difiori JP, Giza CC. New techniques in concussion imaging. Curr Sports Med
Rep. 2010;9(1):35-39.
134. Toledo E, Lebel A, Becerra L, et al. The young brain and concussion: imaging as
a biomarker for diagnosis and prognosis. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2012;36(6):1510-1531.
135. Yuh EL, Cooper SR, Mukherjee P, et al. Diffusion tensor imaging for outcome
prediction in mild traumatic brain injury: a TRACK-TBI study. J Neurotrauma.
2014;31(17):1457-1477.
136. Echemendia RJ, Iverson GL, McCrea M, et al. Advances in neuropsychological
assessment of sport-related concussion. Br J Sports Med. 2013;47(5):294-298.
137. Kontos AP, McAllister-Deitrick J, Reynolds E. Mental health implications and
consequences following sport-related concussion. Br J Sports Med. 2016;50(3):139-140.
138. Reynolds E, Collins MW, Mucha A, Troutman-Ensecki C. Establishing a clinical
service for the management of sports-related concussions. Neurosurgery. 2014;75
(suppl 4):S71-S81.
139. Stewart GW, McQueen-Borden E, Bell RA, Barr T, Juengling J. Comprehensive
assessment and management of athletes with sport concussion. Int J Sports Phys
Ther. 2012;7(4):433-447.
140. Wilkins SA, Shannon CN, Brown ST, et al. Establishment of a multidisciplinary
concussion program: impact of standardization on patient care and resource
utilization. J Neurosurg Pediatr. 2014;13(1):82-89.
141. Leddy JJ, Baker JG, Willer B. Active rehabilitation of concussion and post-
concussion syndrome. Phys Med Rehabil Clin N Am. 2016;27(2):437-454.
142. Kurowski BG, Hugentobler J, Quatman-Yates C, et al. Aerobic exercise for
adolescents with prolonged symptoms after mild traumatic brain injury: an
exploratory randomized clinical trial [published online ahead of print April 26,
2016].
J
Head
Trauma
Rehabil.
doi:
10.1097/HTR.0000000000000238.
Available
at:
http://journals.lww.com/headtraumarehab/pages/articleviewer.aspx?
year=9000&issue=00000&article=99632&type=abstract.
Accessed
January
15,
2016.
143. Thiagarajan P, Ciuffreda KJ. Versional eye tracking in mild traumatic brain
injury (mTBI): effects of oculomotor training (OMT). Brain Inj. 2014;28(7):
930-943.
COLLINS ET AL
928 | VOLUME 79 | NUMBER 6 | DECEMBER 2016
www.neurosurgery-online.com
Copyright © Congress of Neurological Surgeons. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/neurosurgery/article-abstract/79/6/912/2837415 by guest on 04 June 2019
 144. Alsalaheen BA, Whitney SL, Mucha A, Morris LO, Furman JM, Sparto PJ.
Exercise prescription patterns in patients treated with vestibular rehabilitation
after concussion. Physiother Res Int. 2013;18(2):100-108.
145. Ciuffreda KJ, Rutner D, Kapoor N, Suchoff IB, Craig S, Han ME. Vision
therapy for oculomotor dysfunctions in acquired brain injury: a retrospective
analysis. Optometry. 2008;79(1):18-22.
146. Glang AE, Koester MC, Chesnutt JC, et al. The effectiveness of a web-based
resource in improving postconcussion management in high schools. J Adolesc
Health. 2015;56(1):91-97.
147. Ponsford J, Willmott C, Rothwell A, et al. Impact of early intervention on
outcome following mild head injury in adults. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry.
2002;73(3):330-332.
148. Ponsford J, Willmott C, Rothwell A, et al. Impact of early intervention on
outcome after mild traumatic brain injury in children. Pediatrics. 2001;108(6):
1297-1303.
149. Zuckerbraun NS, Atabaki S, Collins MW, Thomas D, Gioia GA. Use of
modified acute concussion evaluation tools in the emergency department.
Pediatrics. 2014;133(4):635-642.
150. Frasca D, Tomaszczyk J, McFadyen BJ, Green RE. Traumatic brain injury and
post-acute decline: what role does environmental enrichment play? A scoping
review. Front Hum Neurosci. 2013;7:31.
151. Kovesdi E, Gyorgy AB, Kwon SK, et al. The effect of enriched environment on
the outcome of traumatic brain injury; a behavioral, proteomics, and histological
study. Front Neurosci. 2011;5:42.
152. Nithianantharajah J, Hannan AJ. Enriched environments, experience-dependent
plasticity and disorders of the nervous system. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2006;7(9):697-
709.
153. Diamond MC, Ingham CA, Johnson RE, Bennett EL, Rosenzweig MR. Effects
of environment on morphology of rat cerebral cortex and hippocampus. J
Neurobiol. 1976;7(1):75-85.
154. Murtha S, Pappas BA, Raman S. Neonatal and adult forebrain norepinephrine
depletion and the behavioral and cortical thickening effects of enriched/
impoverished environment. Behav Brain Res. 1990;39(3):249-261.
155. Leddy JJ, Kozlowski K, Donnelly JP, Pendergast DR, Epstein LH, Willer B. A
preliminary study of subsymptom threshold exercise training for refractory post-
concussion syndrome. Clin J Sport Med. 2010;20(1):21-27.
156. Gagnon I, Grilli L, Friedman D, Iverson G. A pilot study of active rehabilitation
for adolescents who are slow to recover from sport-related concussion. Scand J
Med Sci Sports. 2016;26(3):299-306.
157. Leddy JJ, Sandhu H, Sodhi V, Baker JG, Willer B. Rehabilitation of concussion
and post-concussion syndrome. Sports Health. 2012;4(2):147-154.
158. Silverberg ND, Iverson GL. Is rest after concussion “the best medicine?”:
recommendations for activity resumption following concussion in athletes,
civilians, and military service members. J Head Trauma Rehabil. 2013;28(4):250-
259.
159. Zafonte R. Diagnosis and management of sports-related concussion: a 15-year-
old athlete with a concussion. JAMA. 2011;306(1):79-86.
160. Graham R, Rivara FP, Ford MA, Spicer CM. Sports-Related Concussions in Youth:
Improving the Science, Changing the Culture: Washington, DC: National
Academies Press; 2014.
161. Bandelow B, Lichte T, Rudolf S, Wiltink J, Beutel ME. The diagnosis of and
treatment recommendations for anxiety disorders. Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2014;111
(27-28):473-480.
162. Brown HE, Pearson N, Braithwaite RE, Brown WJ, Biddle SJ. Physical activity
interventions and depression in children and adolescents: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Sports Med. 2013;43:195-206.
163. Andersen LL, Mortensen OS, Zebis MK, Jensen RH, Poulsen OM. Effect of
brief daily exercise on headache among adults: secondary analysis of a randomized
controlled trial. Scand J Work Environ Health. 2011;37(6):547-550.
164. Santiago MD, Carvalho Dde S, Gabbai AA, Pinto MM, Moutran AR, Villa TR.
Amitriptyline and aerobic exercise or amitriptyline alone in the treatment of
chronic migraine: a randomized comparative study. Arq Neuropsiquiatr. 2014;72
(11):851-855.
165. Varkey E, Cider A, Carlsson J, Linde M. Exercise as migraine prophylaxis:
a randomized study using relaxation and topiramate as controls. Cephalalgia
2011;31(14):1428-1438.
166. Baker JG, Freitas MS, Leddy JJ, Kozlowski KF, Willer BS. Return to full
functioning after graded exercise assessment and progressive exercise treatment of
postconcussion syndrome. Rehabil Res Pract. 2012;2012:705309.
167. Yang J, Peek-Asa C, Covassin T, Torner JC. Post-concussion symptoms of
depression and anxiety in division I collegiate athletes. Dev Neuropsychol. 2015;40
(1):18-23.
168. Covassin T, Moran R, Wilhelm K. Concussion symptoms and neurocognitive
performance of high school and college athletes who incur multiple concussions.
Am J Sports Med. 2013;41(12):2885-2889.
169. Mainwaring LM, Hutchison M, Bisschop SM, Comper P, Richards DW.
Emotional response to sport concussion compared to ACL injury. Brain Inj.
2010;24(4):589-597.
170. Gioia GA, Glang AE, Hooper SR, Eagan Brown B. Building statewide infrastructure
for the academic support of students with mild traumatic brain injury [published
online ahead of print December 24, 2015]. J Head Trauma Rehabil. doi: 10.1097/
HTR.0000000000000205. Available at: http://journals.lww.com/headtraumarehab/
pages/articleviewer.aspx?year=9000&issue=00000&article=99653&type=abstract. Ac-
cessed January 15, 2016.
171. Ransom DM, Vaughan CG, Pratson L, Sady MD, McGill CA, Gioia GA.
Academic effects of concussion in children and adolescents. Pediatrics. 2015;135
(6):1043-1050.
172. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. HEADS up to School Sports. 2015.
Available
at:
http://www.cdc.gov/headsup/highschoolsports/index.html.
Ac-
cessed January 15, 2016.
173. McAvoy K. REAP the Benefits of Good Concussion Management. In: Concussion
RMSMICf. Centennial, CO; 2009. Available at: http://www.concussiontreatment.
com/images/REAP_Program.pdf. Accessed January 15, 2016.
174. Brown BE, Vaccaro M. Pennsylvania’s BrainSTEPS program: the return to
school & academics statewide concussion management team (CMT) Project.
Brain Inj. 2014:69-77; 838-839.
175. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. HEADS UP to Providers. 2015.
Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/headsup/providers/index.html. Accessed January
15, 2016.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to acknowledge the following individuals who were
participating investigators who attended the meeting, assisted in the development
of the statements of agreement, and provided feedback on the manuscript: Debra
Babcock, MD, PhD (NIH, Washington, District of Columbia), Jeneita Bell, MD
(CDC, Atlanta, GA), George Chiampas, DO (US Soccer, Chicago, Illinois),
Peter Chiarelli, Gen (Ret.) (One Mind, Seattle, Washington), Joan Demetriades
(One Mind, Seattle, Washington), Dallas Hack, MD, Col (Ret.) (Brain Health
Consultant; NCAA, Indianapolis, Indiana), Brian Hainline, MD (NCAA,
Indianapolis, Indiana), Col Sidney R. Hinds II, MD (Defense and Veterans Brain
Injury Center, Silver Spring, Maryland), Hamish Kerr, MD (USA Rugby,
Albany, New York), Patrick Kersey, MD (USA Football, Indianapolis, Indiana),
Jennifer Langton (NFL, New York, New York), Mark Lovell, PhD (ImPACT
Applications, Inc, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania), Jeff Miller, JD (NFL, New York,
New York), Kelly Ryder, DC (The Ryder Clinic, Dallas, Texas), Richard Shoge,
PhD (US Army Medical Research and Material Command at Ft. Detrick,
Maryland), and Capt Jeffrey Timby, MD (US Marine Corps Health Services
Headquarters, Arlington, Virginia). The authors would like to thank the fol-
lowing individuals from Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, UPMC Sports
Medicine
Concussion
Program,
University
of
Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania, for their contributions to the meeting and the paper: Jamie
McAllister-Deitrick, PhD; Alicia Sufrinko, PhD; Melissa N. Womble, PhD;
Valerie Reeves, PhD; and Cyndi Holland, MPH.
STATEMENT FROM THE TEAM APPROACHES TO TREATING CONCUSSION MEETING
NEUROSURGERY
VOLUME 79 | NUMBER 6 | DECEMBER 2016 | 929
Copyright © Congress of Neurological Surgeons. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/neurosurgery/article-abstract/79/6/912/2837415 by guest on 04 June 2019
