 nutrients
Review
The Role of Avocados in Complementary and
Transitional Feeding
Kevin B. Comerford 1,*, Keith T. Ayoob 2,†, Robert D. Murray 3,† and Stephanie A. Atkinson 4,†
1
Department of Nutrition, University of California at Davis, Davis, CA 95616, USA
2
Department of Pediatrics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA;
keith.ayoob@einstein.yu.edu
3
Department of Human Sciences, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA;
murrayMD@live.com
4
Department of Pediatrics, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON L8S 4KI, Canada; satkins@mcmaster.ca
*
Correspondence: kbcomerford@ucdavis.edu; Tel.: +1-707-799-0699
†
These authors contributed equally to this work.
Received: 18 February 2016; Accepted: 29 March 2016; Published: 21 May 2016
Abstract: Infant dietary patterns tend to be insufficient sources of fruits, vegetables, and fiber, as well
as excessive in salt, added sugars, and overall energy. Despite the serious long-term health risks
associated with suboptimal fruit and vegetable intake, a large percentage of infants and toddlers in
the U.S. do not consume any fruits or vegetables on a daily basis. Since not all fruits and vegetables
are nutritionally similar, guidance on the optimal selection of fruits and vegetables should emphasize
those with the greatest potential for nutrition and health benefits. A challenge is that the most
popularly consumed fruits for this age group (i.e., apples, pears, bananas, grapes, strawberries)
do not closely fit the current general recommendations since they tend to be overly sweet and/or
high in sugar. Unsaturated oil-containing fruits such as avocados are nutritionally unique among
fruits in that they are lower in sugar and higher in fiber and monounsaturated fatty acids than most
other fruits, and they also have the proper consistency and texture for first foods with a neutral
flavor spectrum. Taken together, avocados show promise for helping to meet the dietary needs of
infants and toddlers, and should be considered for inclusion in future dietary recommendations for
complementary and transitional feeding.
Keywords:
avocado; monounsaturated fat; fiber;
infant; toddler complementary feeding;
transitional feeding
1. Introduction
Proper nutrition is one of the most influential factors for insuring normal growth and
development during a child’s first years of life, yet there are currently very few research-based
dietary recommendations for parents and caregivers regarding this critical time period [1]. Currently,
U.S. dietary guidelines do not differentiate between age groups of children under two years old
even though the nutritional requirements of infants and toddlers differ from each other, and from
the nutritional requirements of older children, adolescents, and adults. Without age-appropriate
dietary guidelines from birth to 24 months of age, the diets of infants and toddlers often reflect the
dietary preferences and nutrient composition of their parents’ and caregivers’ diets, which tend to lack
adequate sources of fiber-rich and nutrient-dense fruits and vegetables and contain excessive sodium
and sugar [1].
Nutrition delivery to infants is influenced by physiological development, growth demands,
and to some extent by family dietary practices. During the first six months after birth, breast milk is
recommended as the exclusive source of nutrition necessary for early infant health and development [2],
Nutrients 2016, 8, 316; doi:10.3390/nu8050316
www.mdpi.com/journal/nutrients
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 316
2 of 16
especially because during the early stages of development, a baby’s swallowing and digestive systems
are not yet fully developed for the intake and processing of non-liquid food sources [3]. As an infant
grows and develops, it experiences physiological shifts in nutrient and energy requirements that can
no longer be supported by breast milk alone [2]. Additionally, as an infant transitions from a strictly
maternal-sourced food supply to a varied diet and familial table foods, the emphasis on energy and
nutrient requirements is placed on a whole new set of dietary options—many of which are not ideal
for young children.
Although the timeframes for complementary and transitional feeding are not officially defined,
for this review, the complementary feeding period is considered to start when the first foods (other
than breast milk or formula) are consumed and continues throughout the infant’s first year of life
(approximately six to 12 months), while the transitional feeding period covers a toddler’s dietary
pattern during their second year of life (13–24 months). Nutrient and energy deficiencies during the
early developmental stages can have lasting effects on the health of the offspring [4–6]. Therefore,
nutrient-rich foods that are also moderately energy-dense (while being low in sugar content) are
ideal early foods for infants [7,8]. The first food exposures should meet the infant’s/toddler’s high
nutritional requirements for energy, certain fatty acids, and key vitamins and minerals, such as vitamin
A/provitamin A carotenoids, several B vitamins, iodine, iron, and zinc [9,10]. Deficiencies in any of
these nutrients during the critical times of development can have both immediate and long-lasting
effects on the health of the offspring.
Fruits and vegetables are some of the most consistently recommended early food options, but few
of the most popular fruit options such as apples, bananas and grapes have the characteristics of being
both moderate in energy-density and low in sugar content. Avocados—technically classified as fleshy,
single-seeded berries—differ from most other fruits, however, in that they are a source of several
promising non-essential compounds, such as fat-soluble antioxidants and monounsaturated fatty acids
(MUFA). The sugar content is less than 1 g per serving, which is the lowest amount compared to all
other fresh fruits. A 1-ounce (30 g) serving of avocado is higher in key developmental nutrients such
as folate, vitamin E, and lutein compared to a Nutrition Labeling and Education Act (NLEA) serving
size of the most popular complementary and transitional feeding fruits (i.e., apples, pears, bananas,
grapes, strawberries, and peaches) (Table 1) [11–13]. A standard serving of avocados is also less than
one fourth the weight of any of the other commonly consumed fruits, making them a very efficient
vehicle food for delivering essential nutrition in a portion size that an infant or toddler would more
likely be able to consume in one sitting. Avocado is also higher in unsaturated fatty acids compared
to most fruits and vegetables [14] (Table 1). The fatty acids in avocados allow for greater absorption
of fat-soluble nutrients, either inherent in the fruit or from other foods eaten with avocado, when
compared to other fruits and vegetables that are low in fat (or fat-free) [15,16].
This paper is the second of a two-part series on ideal food and nutrient intake and related health
outcomes covering the first 1000 days of life (i.e., from the time of conception to the end of a toddler’s
second year). The first paper in the series provides evidence for the regular inclusion of key nutrients
as well as low-glycemic fruits and vegetables, such as avocados, in a maternal diet for improving birth
outcomes and various aspects of maternal health extending from the pre-conceptional period through
pregnancy and lactation [17]. This report provides further evidence regarding the regular inclusion of
such key nutrients and their food sources, including avocados, on many potential early- and later-life
health benefits, as well as explore the potential beneficial effects of monounsaturated fatty acids
and bioactive compounds during the complementary and transitional feeding periods. The paper
also addresses nutrition topic questions posed by the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) and
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) expert work groups that comprise the Birth
to 24 months and Pregnant Women Dietary Guidance Development Project—specifically Work Group
2–Infancy: Period of Complementary Feeding (6–12 months) and Work Group 3–Period of Transitional
Feeding (12–24 months):
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 316
3 of 16
‚
What types and amounts of complementary foods are necessary for infants fed human milk,
formula, or mixed feedings to promote favorable health outcomes, such as (1) growth and
physical development; (2) cognitive, behavioral or neuromotor development?
‚
What strategies can be used to improve dietary quality and micronutrient intake in infants
six to 12 months of age?
‚
What are the evidence-based strategies to enhance acceptance of nutrient-dense foods like fruits
and vegetables?
‚
Does exposure (timing, quantity, frequency) to nutrient-dense foods in weaned infants increase
acceptance of nutrient-dense foods?
‚
Does increased acceptance/preference for nutrient-dense foods in the first year of life persist?
Does it improve dietary intake of nutrient-dense foods at 12–24 months?
‚
Does the intake of foods with added salt and sugar in infancy influence the preference and
analgesic appeal of dietary salt and sweet in infants, young children, and adults?
‚
What are the energy requirements for toddlers, ages 12–24 months, to promote optimal growth
and physical development?
‚
What is the relationship between observed intakes of fiber, vitamin A, and folate and the estimated
average requirement (EAR) and upper limits (UL) for toddlers 12–24 months of age?
‚
What food characteristics (e.g., taste/flavor characteristics, portion size, energy, nutrient-density,
novel or familiar) impact the development of food preferences and dietary intake?
Table 1. Meeting the developmental needs of infants and toddlers. Comparison of a serving (30 g) of
avocado versus a Nutrition Labeling and Education Act (NLEA) serving (Range: 126–242 g) of the most
popular complementary and transitional fruits.
Per NLEA Serving
Apples
(242 g)
Avocados
(30 g)
Bananas
(126 g)
Grapes
(126 g)
Peaches
(147 g)
Pears
(166 g)
Strawberries
(147 g)
>150 mg potassium/serving
‘
‘
‘
‘
‘
‘
‘
>25 µg folate/serving
‘
‘
‘
>0.50 mg α-tocopherol/serving
‘
‘
>80 µg Lutein + zeaxanthin/serving
‘
‘
‘
>40 IU vitamin A/serving
‘
‘
‘
‘
‘
‘
>6 µg vitamin K/serving
‘
‘
‘
>2.5 g MUFA/serving
‘
ě2 g fiber/serving
‘
‘
‘
‘
‘
‘
Data sourced from: USDA Agricultural Research Service, National Nutrient Database for Standard Reference
Release 27 [18]. Basic Report: 09003, apples, raw, with skin; 09038, avocados, raw, California; 09040, bananas,
raw; 09131, grapes, American type (slip skin) raw; 09236, peaches, yellow, raw; 09252, pears, raw; 09316,
strawberries, raw.
2. Background Information and General Recommendations for Complementary
Feeding (6 to 12 Months)
Current guidance from the World Health Organization (WHO) and other leading developed
countries is consistent in the recommendations that complementary feedings should begin at about six
months of age to support sufficient infant growth and development [19–22], and should last through
the end of the first year of life. During this period breastfeeding should still remain a primary source
of nutrition [23]. Therefore, breastfeeding mothers should pay careful attention to the quality of their
own diets, since for some nutrients (especially vitamins and fatty acids), the foods mothers eat directly
influence the nutrient profile of the milk consumed by their infants [24]. When introducing new
foods to an infant, experts recommend that parents and caregivers offer a variety of nutrient-dense,
soft- and mixed-textured fruits, vegetables, cereals, and meats that contain little or no added sugar
or salt [3,7,25]. The WHO recommends that infants start receiving complementary foods in addition
to breast milk two to three times a day from six to eight months of age, and three to four times a day
from nine months of age through the end of the complementary feeding period [26].
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 316
4 of 16
A consensus statement from the American Heart Association (AHA) on dietary recommendations
for children acknowledged that only a small percentage of infants in the U.S. remain exclusively
breastfed after four months of age [27]. Corroborating the AHA findings, a recent Hass Avocado Board
(HAB) funded survey (HAB Caregiver Survey) conducted among 338 caregivers of infants between the
ages of four and 24 months also shows nearly half of the respondents introduced fruits and vegetables
between four and six months of age, while approximately one-third introduced protein foods (meat,
beans, eggs, peanut butter), grains or dairy in that same time period [28].
Infants will usually triple their body weight between birth and the end of their first year, and
much of this growth occurs in the complementary feeding period [29]. In order to accomplish the
high rate of growth and development, infants must consume both adequate amounts of energy and
essential nutrients. Foods consumed throughout the complementary feeding stage should balance
the nutrients from milk or formula, without imposing excess intakes of energy or nutrients [30].
Since complementary foods are initially consumed in very small quantities, caregivers should offer
moderately energy-dense foods, rich in multiple nutrients that are key for proper infant health and
development (i.e., iron, zinc, calcium, provitamin A/carotenoids, vitamin C, and folate) [8].
3. Background Information and General Recommendations for Transitional
Feeding (13 to 24 Months)
Similarly to complementary feeding, transitional feeding (13 to 24 months) is defined as all solid
and liquid foods consumed other than breast milk and infant formula. The main differences between
complementary foods and transitional foods are: (1) the timeframe in which they are consumed (i.e.,
first year versus second year of life); (2) the texture and consistency of foods recommended, which
require more developed mastication and digestive abilities; and (3) the portions consumed, based
on individual appetite, breast milk and/or formula consumption, and nutritional needs. Toddlers
typically consume an increasingly complex diet, moving further away from milk and/or formula
towards a diet more focused on a variety of table foods, especially those consumed by other family
members [31]. On average, approximately two-thirds of a toddler’s energy intake from 12 to 24 months
comes from transitional foods [20,23], more than double the energy intake from table foods when
compared to the last months of the complementary period [32].
Currently, little research exists on nutrition and health in the toddler age group (13–24 months).
The existing evidence is further complicated by datasets that do not distinguish between age groups
and combine one- and two-year-olds together without teasing out the differences between these age
groups [1]. This gap in scientific knowledge is reflected in the DRI for toddlers, which were generally
derived by extrapolating data from studies involving infants or adults [33]. Toddlers’ nutrition needs
are different however. They are less dependent on breast milk for their nutrients and need more fiber,
while experiencing greater growth velocity than older children [1]. Therefore ideal toddler foods
should contain adequate energy, as well as fiber and key nutrients not found in sufficient amounts in
breast milk or other popular family foods [23,34].
4. Ideal Complementary and Transitional Foods: Recommendations versus Reality
Many of the nutrient-rich foods recommended by the 2015 Dietary Guidelines for Americans
(DGA) [35] for child and adult health have been linked to allergy development and are thought
to be contraindicated in the complementary feeding period for infants. These foods include seafood,
nuts, and eggs [36,37], although recent evidence has challenged the early exposure hypothesis linking
these foods to the development of allergies [38,39]. Other nutrient-dense food options contain too
much saturated fat, added salt, sugar, spices, preservatives, additives or artificial ingredients [8,20].
Furthermore, in addition to their nutritional properties, ideal complementary and transitional foods
should also have specific physical and chemical attributes such as a proper texture and consistency,
along with natural and relatively neutral flavors, to encourage toddlers to develop familiarity and
taste preferences for them [20,31].
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 316
5 of 16
Data from the landmark Feeding Infants and Toddlers Studies (FITS I and FITS II) along with
recent National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) data (from children over two
years old) show that young children consume nearly 40% of their total energy from foods like refined
grains, sugar-sweetened beverages, and fruit juice. [40,41]. The findings also showed a general decline
in fruit and vegetable intake, especially fiber-rich fruits and vegetables as children age from infancy into
toddlerhood [27]. The data also showed that infants and toddlers were much more likely to consume
sweets, such as cookies or candies rather than nutrient-rich options such as fruits or vegetables [5].
This trend continued through the end of the transitional feeding period, when approximately one-third
of U.S. toddlers consumed no fruit on a daily basis [42] and deep yellow vegetable intake went from
being consumed by nearly 40% of infants during the middle of the complementary feeding period
down to 13% by the time they reached the end of the transitional feeding period [31]. Nutrient- and
antioxidant-dense dietary options were consistently replaced by lower-nutrient and higher-energy
options such as candies, desserts, and sugar-sweetened beverages [31,43].
The most popular fruits consumed by infants were apples, bananas, peaches, and pears [42], and
often times these were in forms that contained added sugars. Apples, bananas, grapes, peaches, and
strawberries ranked as the most popular in a child’s second year of life [41,42]. Apples and bananas
were also the most popular fruits among infants [28]. In summary, despite the popularity of these fruits,
only avocados, actually meet almost all of the expert recommendations (i.e., nutrient-rich, colorful,
naturally soft texture, low in sugar/not overly sweet, low-glycemic). This positions avocados as both a
unique and ideal food for infants and toddlers.
5. Fruits and Vegetables: Early Exposure Can Lead to Life Long Benefits
Fruits and vegetables are vital to a healthy eating pattern as they contain essential nutrients,
various forms of fiber, and potentially beneficial bioactive components such as antioxidants and
phytosterols [44,45]. Yet, increasing fruit and vegetable exposure and intake among infants/toddlers
remains a challenge for both caregivers and dietetic professionals [46,47]. Both fruit and vegetable
intake in children of all ages remains below recommendations in most countries worldwide [48], and a
large percentage of U.S. infants from six to 12 months of age do not consume any fruits or vegetables
on a daily basis [42,49]. A practical goal would be simple dietary changes focused on exchanging
empty-calorie foods and beverages for nutrient-rich, high-fiber fruits and vegetables containing no
added sugar.
Experts suggest that vegetables and low-sugar fruits, such as avocados, should be introduced in
the early stages in order to avoid invoking an early preference for sweet foods, which may influence
early childhood and later life eating behaviors [7,8]. The dietary patterns of infants and young children
have been shown to correlate to patterns in later childhood [50,51] and even to adulthood [52]; adult
health factors, such as cholesterol metabolism, may be programmed from the lipids consumed in
infancy [53].
Observational studies have demonstrated later health benefits of healthful early nutrition choices.
Better body weights in later years were observed in infants who consumed higher amounts of fruits
and/or vegetables and thus less total energy in their diets [5]. Infants given home-prepared fruits or
vegetables more frequently at six months of age were more likely to eat more fruits and vegetables
several years later compared to infants who were given similar foods less often [54]. Furthermore,
frequent fruit and vegetable consumption by younger children was associated with lower blood
pressure and a lower risk of stroke in their adult years [55,56], and a lower risk for some cancers [6].
While these studies showed associations between early and later life dietary patterns and health
outcomes, very little research has addressed the introduction of specific fruits and vegetables in the
complementary and transitional feeding periods, or how consumption of specific “ideal” or popular
complementary foods or specific nutrients in those foods (e.g., iron-fortified cereal grains, bananas,
apples, avocados, potatoes) may promote long-term health, help build good dietary habits, or assist in
reducing health risks. Avocados, and other foods that fit the description of an “ideal complementary
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 316
6 of 16
food” deserve more clinical research attention, especially since the health status of an infant in its first
year of life affects its risk for certain chronic diseases in later years [57].
6. Macronutrients: Amount and Specific Structural/Functional Characteristics are Key for Infant
and Toddler Health
6.1. Dietary Fat: Quantity and Quality Both Matter for Growth and Development
In infancy, fat should comprise about 50% of energy intake in order to provide adequate energy
for rapid growth and the essential fatty acids for brain development [58]. With the introduction of
complementary foods, energy intake may become inadequate as foods such as fruits, vegetables and
cereal grains are generally very low in fat. Complementary foods that are a good source of both fat
and energy are important to maintain energy intake. Once in the toddler period, the percentage of fat
in the diet may be reduced; however, the total energy and nutrients, including essential fatty acids,
must increase to cover the energy cost of activity and growth. Achieving adequate fat intake may
be a challenge since in the FITS II data, total fat intakes were below the acceptable macronutrient
distribution range in one in four toddlers from the U.S. [59]. Diets of infants and toddlers that are
low fat are associated with lower vitamin and mineral intakes [58], and lower fat-soluble vitamin
absorption [60]. A Joint Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)/WHO Expert Consultation report
underlined the importance of not only the quantity, but also the quality of fat for proper infant health
and development [60].
A joint statement from Health Canada, the Canadian Pediatric Society, Dietitians of Canada, and
Breastfeeding Committee for Canada suggests that parents and caregivers should provide adequate
amounts of healthy fats in addition to breast milk, and specifically includes avocados as an example
of a nutritious fat-containing food for infant health [20]. Avocados are unique among the commonly
recommended complementary and transitional fruits and vegetables in that they contain 3.5 g of
unsaturated fats per 1-ounce (30 g) serving, accounting for more than 75% of their fat content.
The unsaturated fatty acids are primarily in the form of the MUFA oleic acid (C18:1; n = 9), while
a lesser amount comes from other MUFA, polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA), and saturated fatty
acids (SFA). Although oleic acid is not considered an essential fatty acid because the human body can
synthesize it from other fatty acids, it is the most abundant fatty acid in breast milk [61]. MUFA, such as
oleic acid, has also been shown to be important for the normal growth and development of the central
nervous system and brain [62], as well as being beneficial for fat-soluble nutrient absorption [15,16].
A 30 g serving of avocado contains approximately 0.5 g of the PUFA linoleic acid (18:2n-6) [14], which
comprises roughly 10%–15% of the fatty acid content in avocados [63]. Evidence exists showing that
as little as 3%–4.5% of total energy intake from linoleic acid is associated with optimal growth and
development for infants and toddlers [60].
Since avocados provide energy, MUFA, and PUFA, they would contribute to achieving nutrient
balance in infant diets, as well as aiding in absorption of fat-soluble nutrients, providing a source of
antioxidants, and thereby potentially contributing to health benefits [16,64,65].
6.2. Fiber: Balancing Intake for Optimal Health
Breast milk contains various non-digestible oligosaccharides, which are small-chain prebiotic
fiber compounds that are important for infant gut health and immune development [66,67]. While
other infant foods are not rich sources of non-digestible oligosaccharides, many fruits and vegetables
are rich sources of both soluble and insoluble fibers (e.g., non-digestible carbohydrates and lignin),
which may have health benefits even in young children [68]. Currently, there is no infant adequate
intake (AI) established for fiber, but it has been suggested by the American Academy of Pediatrics
that the amount be gradually increased to provide roughly 5 g per day by the end of the first year of
life [69,70].
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 316
7 of 16
Neither the appropriate amount nor type of fiber for infants is as yet determined, with both too
little and too much dietary fiber posing their own unique set of problems. Too little fiber can lead to
constipation [71], and excessive fiber intake has the potential to negatively impact energy and nutrient
intake by increasing fecal energy losses, extending satiety (therefore leading to lower energy and
nutrient intakes), and binding up minerals through fiber-associated phytates and oxalates [71–73].
However, fiber intakes of about 4 g/day in infants at 8 months and 7 g/day in infants at 13 months
of age have been positively associated with energy intake and weight gain [74]. Additionally, higher
dietary fiber intake in infancy was associated with higher intakes of vitamins and minerals compared
to lower fiber intakes [74]. In the FITS I data, infants in the highest quartile of fiber intake were also in
the highest quartile of energy and macronutrient intake from table foods, providing further evidence
that higher fiber intakes in infancy are not associated with under eating [32].
Concern is expressed by practitioners and researchers about both too much fiber intake in the early
feeding periods, and inadequate fiber consumption throughout every life stage thereafter [20,68,69,75].
A decline in fiber intake from the complementary period to transitional period was demonstrated
in Finnish infants in which 55%–70% of the fiber in an infant’s diet was from fruits and vegetables,
while only 40%–45% of fiber in a toddler’s diet comes from fruits and vegetables [76]. In American
infants in FITS I the top sources of dietary fiber for toddlers were primarily refined grains such as
non-infant cereals and breads, rolls, biscuits, bagels, and tortillas, along with carbohydrate-rich fruits
and vegetables such as bananas and white potatoes [76].
Avocados could contribute to infant fiber intake as they have approximately 2 g of fiber in a 30 g
serving [14], which is equal to or greater than nearly all other commonly consumed complementary
or transitional foods or fruits by weight [11]. Of the total fiber in avocados, 30%–40% is soluble
while 60%–70% is insoluble [14]. When the fiber content of more than 30 fruits and vegetables were
compared, avocados stood out as the only food source with relatively high amounts of both soluble
fiber (2.1% by weight) and insoluble fiber (2.7% by weight). Additionally, avocados also contain
lower levels of phytates and oxalates compared to the most popular fiber sources such as cereal fibers,
vegetables, and legumes, thus minimizing loss of calcium and other key essential minerals due to
binding by such substances [77].
The higher soluble fiber content of avocados compared to other fruits may be of benefit to the
development of an infant’s/toddler’s gut microflora as it is fermented by the colonic microflora to a
greater extent. While fermentable soluble fibers (i.e., prebiotics such as oligosaccharides) from breast
milk are known to have potent beneficial effects on infant health [78], the dose response and potential
effects of plant-based soluble fiber sources on infant health requires further research. The soluble fiber
in avocados may also contribute an energy source for infants since the fermentable nature of soluble
fiber allows the colonic microflora to metabolize undigested polysaccharides and produce various
short-chain fatty acids (e.g., acetic acid, butyric acid and propionic acid), which are then able to be
absorbed [79–81].
7. Micronutrients: Avoiding Deficiencies during the Complementary and Transitional
Feeding Periods
7.1. Nutrients for Building the Blood
The selection of complementary foods to meet the micronutrient needs of infants is challenging as
essential nutrients like iron are present in low concentrations in typical infant foods, even in breast
milk [82]. Avocados, while low in iron, contain folate, vitamin C, riboflavin, and vitamin B6 that are all
essential to various aspects of iron absorption, red blood cell formation and/or hemoglobin function.
Vitamin C enhances non-heme iron absorption and is a key factor in its bioavailability [83–85]. Folate
is critical for the proper synthesis of red blood cells; and is therefore important for prevention of
megaloblastic anemia [86]. Vitamin B6 plays a role in the synthesis of hemoglobin and in oxygen
transport, and a deficiency in vitamin B6 can lead to microcytic hypochromic anemia. Riboflavin is
required for the enzymatic activation of folate and vitamin B6 as well as for red blood cell production,
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 316
8 of 16
and a deficiency in riboflavin can lead to normocytic anemia. Foods such as avocados, should be
considered as providing a unique combination of several blood-building nutrients that can act as
iron-absorption enhancers and/or function in red blood cell synthesis.
7.2. Potassium
As infants and toddlers begin to consume less electrolyte-rich breast milk, complementary food
sources must provide a balance of electrolytes necessary to maintain proper fluid balance and bone
turnover. However, it is observed that about 45%–80% of toddlers exceed the recommended sodium
intake levels, and only 5% of toddlers meet the recommended intake levels for potassium [59,87].
To reduce sodium and provide potassium, complementary foods like avocados offer not only a
sodium-free, complementary food, but they are also rich in potassium (Table 1) [14].
7.3. Enhanced Fat-Soluble Nutrient Absorption
Natural food sources of lipid-soluble vitamins and antioxidant compounds are important to
identify as it is known that toddlers receive a substantial amount of nutrients, such as vitamin A,
from supplements and fortified foods instead of from unprocessed whole foods [76]. More than 60%
of toddlers in the U.S. consume less vitamin E than the EAR [59]. Avocados contribute three of the
four fat-soluble vitamins such that a 1-ounce serving of avocado provides more provitamin A in the
form of carotenoids than almost all other fruits, as well as small amounts of vitamin E and vitamin K
(Table 1). Absorption of fat-soluble vitamins is enhanced in the presence of adequate fat intake, which
is known to be less than adequate in the toddler age group [58]. The MUFA content of avocados is
unique among other fruits and vegetables as fatty acids help fat-soluble vitamins and carotenoids
(e.g., lutein, lycopene, alpha-carotene, and beta-carotene) be more effectively absorbed from other
foods [15,16]. Avocado consumption can also enhance the efficiency of conversion of carotenoids to
vitamin A by two to six fold [16].
8. Avocado Dietary Bioactive Components: Playing an Important Role in Infant Health
Breast milk is known to have numerous bioactive properties (i.e., properties above and beyond
their nutritive roles) that are associated with infant health and development [88–90]. Complementary
and transitional foods contain bioactive components such as fiber, antioxidants, electrolytes,
carotenoids, and flavonoids [14,91]. Avocados also contain many lipophilic phytochemicals and
bioactive compounds that may confer health benefits (e.g., sterols, polyhydroxylated fatty alcohols
(PFA), alkaloids, acetogenins, and volatile oils) [91–93]. While understanding of the interplay of
antioxidant, prebiotic and sterol components in foods and food combinations is just emerging, it has
been suggested that a wide variety of bioactive compounds are responsible for the health benefits
of fruits and vegetables through additive and synergistic interactions by targeting multiple signal
transduction pathways [94].
For early infant foods, such as fruits and vegetables, the health effects are attributed to
different bioactive compounds such as vitamin C, carotenoids, and various phenolic compounds [95].
The antioxidant potential of components like carotenoids (beta-carotene, lutein and zeaxanthin) in
fruits and vegetables not only provide the precursors for vitamin A (which is essential for proper
growth, development, vision, immunity, hair and skin health, and mucous membrane formation) [25],
but may also act as free-radical scavenging antioxidants [96]. Additionally, these carotenoids have
functional roles in the tissues of the infant brain [97].
Lutein accounts for the majority of infant brain carotenoids, representing approximately 60%
of total carotenoids [98]. Recent metabolomics studies on post-mortem infants showed correlations
between brain lutein concentrations and energy metabolite pathways, lipid metabolite pathways, and
amino acid neurotransmission pathways [99]. Further, formula-fed infants compared to breast-fed
infants had significantly lower lutein concentrations in their blood [100]. Lutein was approved by the
FDA for use in infant formulas, despite it not being officially classified as an essential nutrient. As
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 316
9 of 16
complementary foods begin to displace breast milk or formula in the diet, adequate sources of lutein
from complementary foods may be important to infant health [99]. Avocados contain some of the
highest levels of lutein and dietary fat of any fruit or vegetable (Table 1), along with the added benefit
of a dietary MUFA fat source to aid absorption of the fat-soluble lutein [15,16].
Phytosterols and PFA are two other lipid-soluble compounds that account for a large portion of the
lipid content of avocados but their potential benefits have not been studied in infants or toddlers [25].
In adults, both phytosterols and PFA have been shown to support a healthy inflammatory response [25].
Lipophilic acetogenins in avocados [92] are a group of antioxidants that are synthesized from fatty acid
precursors that have promise for their anti-proliferative and apoptotic effects on cancer cells [101–103].
The amino-acid based antioxidant glutathione, also in avocados in higher concentration (8.4 mg/30 g)
that any other fruit [104], is involved in immune function, lipid metabolism, detoxification, and several
aspects of cellular defense and replication [105]. Since heating and processing reduces glutathione
levels in foods, foods which are commonly consumed raw, such as avocados, contain higher levels of
this antioxidant compound. Future research is required to identify the types of foods with fat-soluble
nutrient absorption-enhancing properties that may optimize infant and toddler health, as well as
provide protection against free-radical damage and future chronic disease risk [95].
9. Food Preferences: Early Exposure to Flavor and Texture Can Influence Acceptability
Beyond choosing the most ideal nutrient-rich foods to feed their infants and toddlers, parents and
caregivers should also understand the roles that the flavors and textures of foods play in transitional
and complementary feeding. Food learning and flavor preferences start in utero and are heavily
influenced by breastfeeding and the infant’s complementary diet in the first year of life [106]. The early
taste preferences appear to be biologically driven with certain flavors, such as sweetness indicating
available calories, and bitter flavors indicating potentially dangerous compounds present in the
food [106].
These preferences have been shown to be somewhat malleable and dependent on
environmental factors such as repeated exposures to flavors [1,107]. Once established, many of
the early dietary preferences and habits tend to have a long-lasting influence [47], even into adulthood
where there is a tendency to favor foods the way they were initially introduced [8]. Therefore, proper
early food exposure is important for laying the foundation of a long-term varied diet. Beyond taste
and texture, early exposure to a myriad of food taste and texture profiles also teaches societal and
familial ideals, attitudes, and beliefs about food and eating behaviors [108].
In order to establish a varied eating pattern—which includes neutral, sour, and bitter taste
acceptance—the ideal initial foods should be those that are both nutritious and have a low to moderate
sweet and salty flavor profile [8]. Such presentation takes advantage of the plasticity of early flavor
learning [106]. Additionally, infants who have positive early experiences with fruits and vegetables
are significantly more likely to choose and consume those foods later in life [109–111]. Unfortunately,
findings from the HAB Caregiver Survey indicate that this approach is not being readily followed.
Nearly 60% of infants and toddlers were described as picky eaters, and the most common foods offered
and consumed early in life were sweet fruits and starchy vegetables [28]. Further, the caregivers’
overarching goal was to give “foods that the infant/toddler really enjoyed eating”, while the actual
nutritional value of the food provided ranked lower on their agendas [28]. In order to combat the
overly sweet and salty flavors of the standard American diet without offending the child’s innate
dislikes for bitter and sour, some pediatricians recommend introducing mild foods (i.e., neither sweet,
salty, sour, or bitter) with a neutral flavor profile in the early complementary period [7]. Avocados
can provide children with the types of nutrients and phytochemicals found in many sweet-tasting,
sugar-rich fruits and bitter-tasting vegetables.
In addition to flavor preferences, infants also have texture preferences due to their developing
abilities to chew and swallow. When foods are being introduced to infants it is important that caregivers
provide a variety of soft textures—such as creamy, lumpy, tender, pureed, mashed or ground—in order
to properly develop oro-sensory functions and the swallowing mechanism [20]. Different textures
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 316
10 of 16
are necessary to gradually introduce the baby to solid foods while reducing the risk of choking or
swallowing large chunks of food that are difficult to digest. Soft fruit and vegetable consumption—such
as from peaches, bananas, and avocados—is consistent with several recommendations from the federal
feeding assistance program Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children
(WIC) for infant feeding (although peaches and bananas do not have an ideal sweetness/sugar factor).
Soft, neutral-flavored, and nutrient-dense avocado—which does not need to be cooked and can
easily be stored—appears to be one of the most ideal complementary and transitional foods available.
In essence, the avocado’s natural characteristics match what health professionals and caregivers are
most likely to consider important for an infant’s first food offerings [28].
10. Future Guidelines for Complementary and Transitional Feeding: Importance of Clear and
Specific Recommendations
A consistent message from recent literature is that fruit and vegetable intake needs to be increased
in infant and toddler dietary patterns; selection of those foods that are lower in sugar and higher
in fiber should be recommended above varieties that are higher in sugar and overly sweet. Most
specific recommendations for parents and caregivers suggest offering a wide variety of fruits and
vegetables on a daily basis, with an emphasis on colorful fruits and dark green, leafy, and deep yellow
vegetables [31]. For fruit, recommendations could be clearer to ensure caregivers are making the best
choices by specifically calling out: “colorful fruits that are a good source of fiber and low in sugar”.
Further, naming of specific examples of these types of fruits would limit confusion and clearly point
caregivers to the best options for infants and toddlers.
Avocados are a good example of a fruit that could be specifically recommended as an optimal
transitional food. Beyond its texture, flavor and nutrient profile, avocado consumption among infants
and toddlers may be able to displace empty calorie offerings more effectively than other nutrient-rich
complementary and transitional foods due to their higher amount of appetite suppressing fatty acids
and fiber [112,113]. According to the American Dietetic Association (now the Academy of Nutrition
and Dietetics), “foods that are rich in energy and nutrients such as avocado should be used when
the infant is being weaned [34]”. Therefore, the avocado with its fiber-content, MUFA, moderate
energy-density, more than 20 vitamins and minerals, and array of phytonutrients appears to one of the
most ideal fruits—and possibly foods—for complementary and transitional feeding [114].
11. Conclusions
Major transitions occur in the dietary patterns of infants and toddlers over the first two years
of life. Exposure to certain foods and nutrients during the first two years may impact their future
health through metabolic programming or development of specific tastes [115]. The most ideal
complementary and transitional foods—nutritionally and physiochemically—should be offered
regularly to infants and toddlers in order to ensure their optimal health, as well to expand their
range of flavor preferences and acceptance for nutrient-rich dietary options. As detailed in this paper,
avocados are unique among complementary and transitional foods in that they:
‚
Contain a spectrum of essential and non-essential nutrients with potential health benefits that
minimize undesirable components such as sodium, empty calories, and unhealthy fats.
‚
Provide an ideal source of energy (high in healthy unsaturated fats and low in sugar) to meet the
increasing energy and growth demands of weaning infants and toddlers.
‚
By weight and serving size, contain some of the highest levels of the antioxidants lutein,
zeaxanthin, and glutathione among complementary and transitional foods.
‚
Are rich in unsaturated fatty acids,
which significantly enhance the absorption of
lipid-soluble compounds.
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 316
11 of 16
‚
Contain more total fiber and soluble fiber per gram than almost all other complementary and
transitional foods, and at the same time contain less mineral-binding phytates and oxalates than
other popular high-fiber foods.
‚
Have a neutral flavor and smooth consistency that is ideal for early infant foods.
At present, the current infant feeding recommendations tend to be based on anecdotal and
observational findings, which are largely dependent on an infant’s learned preference for sweet foods.
Future development of complementary and transitional feeding recommendations should utilize
evidence from controlled studies that investigate the critical nutrient needs of infants and toddlers,
and should progress toward identifying the most ideal foods (i.e., those that meet the majority of
recommended guidelines). Future research on ideal infant and toddler foods, including avocados, is
warranted to further explore their potential in both early life and later life health outcomes.
Acknowledgments: This research was funded by the Hass Avocado Board.
Author Contributions: K.B.C. drafted the manuscript. K.T.A., R.D.M., and S.A.A. provided expert guidance,
review and feedback throughout the manuscript development process.
Conflicts of Interest: All authors received consulting fees from the Hass Avocado Board. All conclusions are
those of the authors.
References
1.
Birch, L.L.; Doub, A.E. Learning to eat: Birth to age 2 years. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2014, 99, 723S–728S. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
2.
Solomons, N.W.; Vossenaar, M. Nutrient Density in Complementary Feeding of Infants and Toddlers. Eur. J.
Clin. Nutr. 2013, 67, 501–506. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3.
USDA. Food and Nutrition Service: Feeding Infants: A Guide for Use in Child Nutrition Programs; USDA:
Alexandria, VA, USA, 2002.
4.
Gale, C.R.; Martyn, C.N.; Marriott, L.D.; Limond, J.; Crozier, S.; Inskip, H.M.; Godfrey, K.M.; Law, C.M.;
Cooper, C.; Robinson, S.M.; et al. Dietary Patterns in Infancy and Cognitive and Neuropsychological Function
in Childhood. J. Child Psychol. Psychiatry 2009, 50, 816–823. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5.
Saavedra, J.M.; Deming, D.; Dattilo, A.; Reidy, K. Lessons from the Feeding Infants and Toddlers Study in
North America: What Children Eat, and Implications for Obesity Prevention. Ann. Nutr. Metab. 2013, 62
(Suppl. 3), 27–36. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6.
Maynard, M.; Gunnell, D.; Emmett, P.; Frankel, S.; Davey Smith, G. Fruit, Vegetables, and Antioxidants in
Childhood and Risk of Adult Cancer: The Boyd Orr Cohort. J. Epidemiol. Community Health 2003, 57, 218–225.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
7.
Stettler, N.; Bhatia, J.; Parish, A.; Stallings, V.A. Feeding Healthy Infants, Children, and Adolescents.
In Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics, 19th ed.; Kliegman, R.M., Stanton, B.M.D., Geme, J.S., Schor, N.F.,
Behrman, R.E., Eds.; Elsevier & Saunders: Philadelphia, PA, USA, 2011; Chapter 42.
8.
Monte, C.M.; Giugliani, E.R. Recommendations for the Complementary Feeding of the Breastfed Child.
J. Pediatr. (Rio J.) 2004, 80, S131–S141. [CrossRef]
9.
Ramakrishnan, U.; Grant, F.; Goldenberg, T.; Zongrone, A.; Martorell, R. Effect of Women’s Nutrition before
and During Early Pregnancy on Maternal and Infant Outcomes: A Systematic Review. Paediatr. Perinat.
Epidemiol. 2012, 26 (Suppl. 1), 285–301. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10.
Cetin, I.; Berti, C.; Calabrese, S. Role of Micronutrients in the Periconceptional Period. Hum. Reprod. Update
2010, 16, 80–95. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11.
USDA. National Nutrient Database for Standard Reference Release 27: Fiber, Total Dietary (G): “Compared
to Fruits and Fruit Juices”. 2014. Available online: https://ndb.nal.usda.gov/ (accessed on 23 August 2015).
12.
USDA. National Nutrient Database for Standard Reference Release 27: Sugars, Total (G): “Compared to
Fruits and Fruit Juices”. 2014. Available online: https://ndb.nal.usda.gov/ (accessed on 23 August 2015).
13.
USDA. National Nutrient Database for Standard Reference Release 27: Fatty Acids, Total Monounsaturated
(G): “Compared to Fruits and Fruit Juices”. 2014. Available online: https://ndb.nal.usda.gov/ (accessed on
23 August 2015).
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 316
12 of 16
14.
Dreher, M.L.; Davenport, A.J. Hass Avocado Composition and Potential Health Effects. Crit. Rev. Food Sci.
Nutr. 2013, 53, 738–750. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15.
Unlu, N.Z.; Bohn, T.; Clinton, S.K.; Schwartz, S.J. Carotenoid Absorption from Salad and Salsa by Humans Is
Enhanced by the Addition of Avocado or Avocado Oil. J. Nutr. 2005, 135, 431–436. [PubMed]
16.
Kopec, R.E.; Cooperstone, J.L.; Schweiggert, R.M.; Young, G.S.; Harrison, E.H.; Francis, D.M.; Clinton, S.K.;
Schwartz, S.J. Avocado Consumption Enhances Human Postprandial Provitamin a Absorption and
Conversion from a Novel High-Beta-Carotene Tomato Sauce and from Carrots. J. Nutr. 2014, 144, 1158–1166.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
17.
Comerford, K.B.; Ayoob, K.T.; Murray, R.D.; Atkinson, S.A. The Role of Avocados in Maternal Diets During
the Periconceptional Period, Pregnancy, and Lactation. Nutrients 2016. [CrossRef]
18.
US Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, Nutrient Data Laboratory. USDA National
Nutrient Database for Standard Reference, Release 27. 2014. Available online: http://www.ars.usda.gov/
nea/bhnrc/ndl (accessed on 23 August 2015).
19.
Michaelsen, K.F.; Larnkjaer, A.; Lauritzen, L.; Molgaard, C. Science Base of Complementary Feeding Practice
in Infancy. Curr. Opin. Clin. Nutr. Metab. Care 2010, 13, 277–283. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
20.
Health Canada: Infant Feeding Joint Working Group. Nutrition for Healthy Term Infants: Recommendations
from Six to 24 months, 2014.
Available online: http://www.Hc-Sc.Gc.Ca/Fn-an/Nutrition/Infant-
Nourisson/Recom/Recom-6-24-Months-6-24-Mois-Eng.Php#A3 (accessed on 21 August 2015).
21.
Australia National Health and Medical Research Council. Infant Feeding Guidelines Information for
Health Workers. 2012. Available online: http://www.Eatforhealth.Gov.Au/Sites/Default/Files/Files/the_
Guidelines/N56_Infant_Feeding_Guidelines.Pdf (accessed on 21 August 2015).
22.
National Health Service: Pregnancy and Baby. 2015. Available online: http://www.Nhs.Uk/Conditions/
Pregnancy-and-Baby/Pages/Solid-Foods-Weaning.Aspx#Close (accessed on 21 August 2015).
23.
WHO. Infant and Young Child Feeding: Model Chapter for Textbooks for Medical Students and Allied Health
Professionals; WHO: Geneva, Switzerland, 2009.
24.
Champ, M.; Hoebler, C. Functional Food for Pregnant, Lactating Women and in Perinatal Nutrition: A Role
for Dietary Fibres? Curr. Opin. Clin. Nutr. Metab. Care 2009, 12, 565–574. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25.
USDA. Food and Nutrition Service: Woman, Infants and Children (Wic). Infant Nutrition and Feeding: A
Guide for Use in the Wic and Csf Programs. 2009. Available online: http://www.Nal.Usda.Gov/Wicworks/
Topics/Fg/Completeifg.Pdf (accessed on 23 August 2015).
26.
WHO. Nutrition: Complementary Feeding. 2014. Available online: http://www.Who.Int/Nutrition/Topics/
Complementary_Feeding/En/ (accessed on 23 August 2015).
27.
Gidding, S.S.; Dennison, B.A.; Birch, L.L.; Daniels, S.R.; Gillman, M.W.; Lichtenstein, A.H.; Rattay, K.T.;
Steinberger, J.; Stettler, N.; Van Horn, L.; et al. Dietary Recommendations for Children and Adolescents: A
Guide for Practitioners: Consensus Statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation 2005, 112,
2061–2075. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
28.
Hass Avocado Board:
Infant & Toddler Caregiver Survey.
2014.
Available online:
http://www.
Hassavocadoboard.Com (accessed on 6 June 2015).
29.
Kathy, C. Complementary Feeding for Infants 6 to 12 months. J. Fam. Health Care 2010, 20, 20–23. [PubMed]
30.
Kuo, A.A.; Inkelas, M.; Slusser, W.M.; Maidenberg, M.; Halfon, N. Introduction of Solid Food to Young
Infants. Mater. Child Health J. 2011, 15, 1185–1194. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
31.
Fox, M.K.; Pac, S.; Devaney, B.; Jankowski, L. Feeding Infants and Toddlers Study: What Foods Are Infants
and Toddlers Eating? J. Am. Diet. Assoc. 2004, 104, s22–s30. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32.
Briefel, R.R.; Reidy, K.; Karwe, V.; Jankowski, L.; Hendricks, K. Toddlers’ Transition to Table Foods: Impact
on Nutrient Intakes and Food Patterns. J. Am. Diet. Assoc. 2004, 104, s38–s44. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33.
Otten, J.J.; Hellwig, J.P.; Meyers, L.D. Dietary Reference Intakes: The Essential Guide to Nutrient Requirements;
Medicine, I.O., Ed.; National Academies Press: Washington, DC, USA, 2006.
34.
Craig, W.J.; Mangels, A.R.; American Dietetic, A. Position of the American Dietetic Association: Vegetarian
Diets. J. Am. Diet. Assoc. 2009, 109, 1266–1282. [PubMed]
35.
U.S. Department of Health, Human Services, U.S. Department of Agriculture. 2015–2020 Dietary Guidelines
for Americans, 8th ed.
Available online: http://www.cnpp.usda.gov/2015-2020-dietary-guidelines-
americans (accessed on 26 January 2016).
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 316
13 of 16
36.
Fiocchi, A.; Assa’ad, A.; Bahna, S. Food Allergy and the Introduction of Solid Foods to Infants: A Consensus
Document. Adverse Reactions to Foods Committee, American College of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology.
Ann. Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2006, 97, 10–21. [CrossRef]
37.
Chin, B.; Chan, E.S.; Goldman, R.D. Early Exposure to Food and Food Allergy in Children. Can. Fam. Phys.
2014, 60, 338–339.
38.
Pham-Thi, N.; Bidat, E. Solid Food Introduction and Allergic Risk. Arch. Pediatr. 2014, 21, 1392–1395.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
39.
Abrams, E.M.; Becker, A.B. Food Introduction and Allergy Prevention in Infants. CMAJ 2015, 187, 1297–1301.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
40.
Reedy, J.; Krebs-Smith, S.M. Dietary Sources of Energy, Solid Fats, and Added Sugars among Children and
Adolescents in the United States. J. Am. Diet. Assoc. 2010, 110, 1477–1484. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
41.
Fox, M.K.; Condon, E.; Briefel, R.R.; Reidy, K.C.; Deming, D.M. Food Consumption Patterns of Young
Preschoolers: Are They Starting off on the Right Path? J. Am. Diet. Assoc. 2010, 110, S52–S59. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
42.
Siega-Riz, A.M.; Deming, D.M.; Reidy, K.C.; Fox, M.K.; Condon, E.; Briefel, R.R. Food Consumption Patterns
of Infants and Toddlers: Where Are We Now? J. Am. Diet. Assoc. 2010, 110, S38–S51. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
43.
Mennella, J.A.; Ziegler, P.; Briefel, R.; Novak, T. Feeding Infants and Toddlers Study: The Types of Foods Fed
to Hispanic Infants and Toddlers. J. Am. Diet. Assoc. 2006, 106, S96–S106. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44.
Slavin, J.L.; Lloyd, B. Health Benefits of Fruits and Vegetables. Adv. Nutr. 2012, 3, 506–516. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
45.
Poiroux-Gonord, F.; Bidel, L.P.; Fanciullino, A.L.; Gautier, H.; Lauri-Lopez, F.; Urban, L. Health Benefits of
Vitamins and Secondary Metabolites of Fruits and Vegetables and Prospects to Increase Their Concentrations
by Agronomic Approaches. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2010, 58, 12065–12082. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
46.
Ashman, A.M.; Collins, C.E.; Hure, A.J.; Jensen, M.; Oldmeadow, C. Maternal Diet During Early Childhood,
but Not Pregnancy, Predicts Diet Quality and Fruit and Vegetable Acceptance in Offspring. Mater. Child Nutr.
2014. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
47.
Hetherington, M.M.; Schwartz, C.; Madrelle, J.; Croden, F.; Nekitsing, C.; Vereijken, C.M.; Weenen, H.
A Step-by-Step Introduction to Vegetables at the Beginning of Complementary Feeding. The Effects of Early
and Repeated Exposure. Appetite 2015, 84, 280–290. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
48.
de Lauzon-Guillain, B.; Jones, L.; Oliveira, A.; Moschonis, G.; Betoko, A.; Lopes, C.; Moreira, P.; Manios, Y.;
Papadopoulos, N.G.; Emmett, P.; et al. The Influence of Early Feeding Practices on Fruit and Vegetable Intake
among Preschool Children in 4 European Birth Cohorts. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2013, 98, 804–812. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
49.
Young, B.E.; Krebs, N.F. Complementary Feeding: Critical Considerations to Optimize Growth, Nutrition,
and Feeding Behavior. Curr. Pediatr. Rep. 2013, 1, 247–256. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
50.
Northstone, K.; Emmett, P.M. Are Dietary Patterns Stable Throughout Early and Mid-Childhood? A Birth
Cohort Study. Br. J. Nutr. 2008, 100, 1069–1076. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
51.
Golley, R.K.; Smithers, L.G.; Mittinty, M.N.; Emmett, P.; Northstone, K.; Lynch, J.W. Diet Quality of U.K.
Infants Is Associated with Dietary, Adiposity, Cardiovascular, and Cognitive Outcomes Measured at 7–8
years of Age. J. Nutr. 2013, 143, 1611–1617. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
52.
Mikkila, V.; Rasanen, L.; Raitakari, O.T.; Pietinen, P.; Viikari, J. Consistent Dietary Patterns Identified from
Childhood to Adulthood: The Cardiovascular Risk in Young Finns Study. Br. J. Nutr. 2005, 93, 923–931.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
53.
Owen, C.G.; Whincup, P.H.; Kaye, S.J.; Martin, R.M.; Davey Smith, G.; Cook, D.G.; Bergstrom, E.; Black, S.;
Wadsworth, M.E.; Fall, C.H.; et al. Does Initial Breastfeeding Lead to Lower Blood Cholesterol in Adult Life?
A Quantitative Review of the Evidence. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2008, 88, 305–314. [PubMed]
54.
Coulthard, H.; Harris, G.; Emmett, P. Long-Term Consequences of Early Fruit and Vegetable Feeding
Practices in the United Kingdom. Public Health Nutr. 2010, 13, 2044–2051. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
55.
Moore, L.L.; Singer, M.R.; Bradlee, M.L.; Djousse, L.; Proctor, M.H.; Cupples, L.A.; Ellison, R.C. Intake
of Fruits, Vegetables, and Dairy Products in Early Childhood and Subsequent Blood Pressure Change.
Epidemiology 2005, 16, 4–11. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 316
14 of 16
56.
Ness, A.R.; Maynard, M.; Frankel, S.; Smith, G.D.; Frobisher, C.; Leary, S.D.; Emmett, P.M.; Gunnell, D.
Diet in Childhood and Adult Cardiovascular and All Cause Mortality: The Boyd Orr Cohort. Heart 2005, 91,
894–898. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
57.
U.S. Department of Agriculture; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Dietary Guidelines for
Americans, 7th ed.; U.S. Government Printing Office: Washington, DC, USA, 2010.
58.
Picciano, M.F.; Smiciklas-Wright, H.; Birch, L.L.; Mitchell, D.C.; Murray-Kolb, L.; McConahy, K.L. Nutritional
Guidance Is Needed During Dietary Transition in Early Childhood. Pediatrics 2000, 106, 109–114. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
59.
Butte, N.F.; Fox, M.K.; Briefel, R.R.; Siega-Riz, A.M.; Dwyer, J.T.; Deming, D.M.; Reidy, K.C. Nutrient Intakes
of Us Infants, Toddlers, and Preschoolers Meet or Exceed Dietary Reference Intakes. J. Am. Diet. Assoc. 2010,
110, S27–S37. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
60.
Fats and Fatty Acids in Human Nutrition. Proceedings of the Joint Fao/Who Expert Consultation. 10–14
November 2008. Geneva, Switzerland. Ann. Nutr. Metab. 2009, 55, 5–300.
61.
Saphier, O.; Blumenfeld, J.; Silberstein, T.; Tzor, T.; Burg, A. Fatty Acid Composition of Breastmilk of Israeli
Mothers. Indian Pediatr. 2013, 50, 1044–1046. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
62.
Martysiak-Zurowska, D.; Zoralska, K.; Zagierski, M.; Szlagtys-Sidorkiewicz, A. Fatty Acid Composition in
Breast Milk of Women from Gdansk and the Surrounding District in the Course of Lactation. Med. Wieku
Rozwoj. 2011, 15, 167–177. [PubMed]
63.
Lu, Q.Y.; Zhang, Y.; Wang, Y.; Wang, D.; Lee, R.P.; Gao, K.; Byrns, R.; Heber, D. California Hass Avocado:
Profiling of Carotenoids, Tocopherol, Fatty Acid, and Fat Content During Maturation and from Different
Growing Areas. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2009, 57, 10408–10413. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
64.
Stunkard, A.J.; Berkowitz, R.I.; Schoeller, D.; Maislin, G.; Stallings, V.A. Predictors of Body Size in the First
2 years of Life: A High-Risk Study of Human Obesity. Int. J. Obes. Relat. Metab. Disord. 2004, 28, 503–513.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
65.
Heppe, D.H.; Kiefte-de Jong, J.C.; Durmus, B.; Moll, H.A.; Raat, H.; Hofman, A.; Jaddoe, V.W. Parental, Fetal,
and Infant Risk Factors for Preschool Overweight: The Generation R Study. Pediatr. Res. 2013, 73, 120–127.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
66.
Kapiki, A.; Costalos, C.; Oikonomidou, C.; Triantafyllidou, A.; Loukatou, E.; Pertrohilou, V. The Effect of a
Fructo-Oligosaccharide Supplemented Formula on Gut Flora of Preterm Infants. Early Hum. Dev. 2007, 83,
335–339. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
67.
Euler, A.R.; Mitchell, D.K.; Kline, R.; Pickering, L.K. Prebiotic Effect of Fructo-Oligosaccharide Supplemented
Term Infant Formula at Two Concentrations Compared with Unsupplemented Formula and Human Milk.
J. Pediatr. Gastroenterol. Nutr. 2005, 40, 157–164. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
68.
Kranz, S.; Brauchla, M.; Slavin, J.L.; Miller, K.B. What Do We Know About Dietary Fiber Intake in Children
and Health? The Effects of Fiber Intake on Constipation, Obesity, and Diabetes in Children. Adv. Nutr. 2012,
3, 47–53. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
69.
Agostoni, C.; Riva, E.; Giovannini, M. Dietary Fiber in Weaning Foods of Young Children. Pediatrics 1995, 96,
1002–1005. [PubMed]
70.
Committee on Nutrition, American Academy of Pediatrics. Pediatric Nutrition Handbook, 4th ed.; American
Academy of Pediatrics: Elk Grove Village, IL, USA, 1998.
71.
Stewart, M.L.; Schroeder, N.M. Dietary Treatments for Childhood Constipation: Efficacy of Dietary Fiber
and Whole Grains. Nutr. Rev. 2013, 71, 98–109. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
72.
Hambidge, K.M. Micronutrient Bioavailability: Dietary Reference Intakes and a Future Perspective.
Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2010, 91, 1430S–1432S. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
73.
Moilanen, B.C. Vegan Diets in Infants, Children, and Adolescents. Pediatr. Rev. 2004, 25, 174–176. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
74.
Ruottinen, S.; Lagstrom, H.K.; Niinikoski, H.; Ronnemaa, T.; Saarinen, M.; Pahkala, K.A.; Hakanen, M.;
Viikari, J.S.; Simell, O. Dietary Fiber Does Not Displace Energy but Is Associated with Decreased Serum
Cholesterol Concentrations in Healthy Children. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2010, 91, 651–661. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
75.
Donini, L.M.; Savina, C.; Cannella, C. Nutrition in the Elderly: Role of Fiber. Arch. Gerontol. Geriatr. 2009, 49
(Suppl. 1), 61–69. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
76.
Fox, M.K.; Reidy, K.; Novak, T.; Ziegler, P. Sources of Energy and Nutrients in the Diets of Infants and
Toddlers. J. Am. Diet. Assoc. 2006, 106, S28–S42. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 316
15 of 16
77.
Kasidas, G.P.; Rose, G.A. Oxalate Content of Some Common Foods: Determination by an Enzymatic Method.
J. Hum. Nutr. 1980, 34, 255–266. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
78.
Bode, L. Human Milk Oligosaccharides: Every Baby Needs a Sugar Mama. Glycobiology 2012, 22, 1147–1162.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
79.
Cummings, J.H.; Englyst, H.N. Fermentation in the Human Large Intestine and the Available Substrates.
Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 1987, 45, 1243–1255. [PubMed]
80.
Kaji, I.; Karaki, S.; Kuwahara, A. Short-Chain Fatty Acid Receptor and Its Contribution to Glucagon-Like
Peptide-1 Release. Digestion 2014, 89, 31–36. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
81.
den Besten, G.; van Eunen, K.; Groen, A.K.; Venema, K.; Reijngoud, D.J.; Bakker, B.M. The Role of Short-Chain
Fatty Acids in the Interplay between Diet, Gut Microbiota, and Host Energy Metabolism. J. Lipid Res. 2013,
54, 2325–2340. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
82.
Dewey, K.G. The Challenge of Meeting Nutrient Needs of Infants and Young Children During the Period of
Complementary Feeding: An Evolutionary Perspective. J. Nutr. 2013, 143, 2050–2054. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
83.
Vitolo, M.R.; Bortolini, G.A. Iron Bioavailability as a Protective Factor against Anemia among Children Aged
12 to 16 months. J. Pediatr. (Rio J.) 2007, 83, 33–38. [CrossRef]
84.
Hazell, T. Vitamin C Has a Key Physiological Role in Facilitating the Absorption of Non-Heme Iron from the
Diet. Hum. Nutr. Appl. Nutr. 1987, 41, 286–287. [PubMed]
85.
Cook, J.D.; Reddy, M.B. Effect of Ascorbic Acid Intake on Nonheme-Iron Absorption from a Complete Diet.
Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2001, 73, 93–98. [PubMed]
86.
Pacheco, M.M.; Gomez, R.L.; Garciglia, R.S.; Calderon, M.R.; Muñoz, R.E.M. Folates and Persea americana
Mill (Avocado). Emir. J. Food Agric. 2011, 23, 204–213.
87.
Tian, N.; Zhang, Z.; Loustalot, F.; Yang, Q.; Cogswell, M.E. Sodium and Potassium Intakes among US Infants
and Preschool Children, 2003–2010. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2013, 98, 1113–1122. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
88.
Casazza, K.; Hanks, L.J.; Fields, D.A. The Relationship between Bioactive Components in Breast Milk and
Bone Mass in Infants. Bonekey Rep. 2014, 3, 577. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
89.
Lonnerdal, B. Bioactive Proteins in Breast Milk. J. Paediatr. Child Health 2013, 49 (Suppl. 1), 1–7. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
90.
McEvoy, B. Transfer of Bioactive Substances in Breast Milk. Med. J. Aust. 1984, 141, 196. [PubMed]
91.
Yasir, M.; Das, S.; Kharya, M.D. The Phytochemical and Pharmacological Profile of Persea Americana Mill.
Pharmacogn. Rev. 2010, 4, 77–84. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
92.
Rodriguez-Sanchez, D.; Silva-Platas, C.; Rojo, R.P.; Garcia, N.; Cisneros-Zevallos, L.; Garcia-Rivas, G.;
Hernandez-Brenes, C. Activity-Guided Identification of Acetogenins as Novel Lipophilic Antioxidants
Present in Avocado Pulp (Persea Americana). J. Chromatogr. B Anal. Technol. Biomed. Life Sci. 2013, 942–943,
37–45. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
93.
Rodriguez-Sanchez, D.G.; Flores-Garcia, M.; Silva-Platas, C.; Rizzo, S.; Torre-Amione, G.; De la Pena-Diaz, A.;
Hernandez-Brenes, C.; Garcia-Rivas, G. Isolation and Chemical Identification of Lipid Derivatives from
Avocado (Persea Americana) Pulp with Antiplatelet and Antithrombotic Activities. Food Funct. 2014, 6,
193–203. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
94.
Liu, R.H. Dietary Bioactive Compounds and Their Health Implications. J. Food Sci. 2013, 78 (Suppl. 1),
A18–A25. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
95.
Carbonell-Capella, J.M.; Barba, F.J.; Esteve, M.J.; Frigola, A. Quality Parameters, Bioactive Compounds and
Their Correlation with Antioxidant Capacity of Commercial Fruit-Based Baby Foods. Food Sci. Technol. Int.
2014, 20, 479–487. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
96.
Lee, J.; Koo, N.; Min, D.B. Reactive Oxygen Species, Aging, and Antioxidative Nutraceuticals. Compr. Rev.
Food Sci. Food Saf. 2004, 3, 21–33. [CrossRef]
97.
Moukarzel, A.A.; Bejjani, R.A.; Fares, F.N. Xanthophylls and Eye Health of Infants and Adults. J. Med. Liban.
2009, 57, 261–267. [PubMed]
98.
Vishwanathan, R.; Kuchan, M.J.; Sen, S.; Johnson, E.J. Lutein and Preterm Infants with Decreased
Concentrations of Brain Carotenoids. J. Pediatr. Gastroenterol. Nutr. 2014, 59, 659–665. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
99.
Lieblein-Boff, J.C.; Johnson, E.J.; Kennedy, A.D.; Lai, C.S.; Kuchan, M.J. Exploratory Metabolomic Analyses
Reveal Compounds Correlated with Lutein Concentration in Frontal Cortex, Hippocampus, and Occipital
Cortex of Human Infant Brain. PLoS ONE 2015, 10, e0136904.
 Nutrients 2016, 8, 316
16 of 16
100. Bettler, J.; Zimmer, J.P.; Neuringer, M.; DeRusso, P.A. Serum Lutein Concentrations in Healthy Term Infants
Fed Human Milk or Infant Formula with Lutein. Eur. J. Nutr. 2010, 49, 45–51. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
101. Silva-Platas, C.; Garcia, N.; Fernandez-Sada, E.; Davila, D.; Hernandez-Brenes, C.; Rodriguez, D.;
Garcia-Rivas, G. Cardiotoxicity of Acetogenins from Persea Americana Occurs through the Mitochondrial
Permeability Transition Pore and Caspase-Dependent Apoptosis Pathways. J. Bioenerg. Biomembr. 2012, 44,
461–471. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
102. Kojima, N.; Fushimi, T.; Tatsukawa, T.; Yoshimitsu, T.; Tanaka, T.; Yamori, T.; Dan, S.; Iwasaki, H.;
Yamashita, M. Structure-Activity Relationships of Hybrid Annonaceous Acetogenins: Powerful Growth
Inhibitory Effects of Their Connecting Groups between Heterocycle and Hydrophobic Carbon Chain Bearing
Thf Ring on Human Cancer Cell Lines. Eur. J. Med. Chem. 2013, 63, 833–839. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
103. Matsui, Y.; Takeuchi, T.; Kumamoto-Yonezawa, Y.; Takemura, M.; Sugawara, F.; Yoshida, H.; Mizushina, Y.
The Relationship between the Molecular Structure of Natural Acetogenins and Their Inhibitory Activities
Which Affect DNA Polymerase, DNA Topoisomerase and Human Cancer Cell Growth. Exp. Ther. Med. 2010,
1, 19–26. [PubMed]
104. Jones, D.P.; Coates, R.J.; Flagg, E.W.; Eley, J.W.; Block, G.; Greenberg, R.S.; Gunter, E.W.; Jackson, B.
Glutathione in Foods Listed in the National Cancer Institute’s Health Habits and History Food Frequency
Questionnaire. Nutr. Cancer 1992, 17, 57–75. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
105. Michel, S.H.; Maqbool, A.; Hanna, M.D.; Mascarenhas, M. Nutrition Management of Pediatric Patients Who
Have Cystic Fibrosis. Pediatr. Clin. N. Am. 2009, 56, 1123–1141. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
106. Ventura, A.K.; Worobey, J. Early Influences on the Development of Food Preferences. Curr. Biol. 2013, 23,
R401–R408. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
107. Beauchamp, G.K.; Mennella, J.A. Early Flavor Learning and Its Impact on Later Feeding Behavior. J. Pediatr.
Gastroenterol. Nutr. 2009, 48 (Suppl. 1), S25–S30. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
108. Thompson, A.L.; Bentley, M.E. The Critical Period of Infant Feeding for the Development of Early Disparities
in Obesity. Soc. Sci. Med. 2013, 97, 288–296. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
109. Ahern, S.M.; Caton, S.J.; Bouhlal, S.; Hausner, H.; Olsen, A.; Nicklaus, S.; Moller, P.; Hetherington, M.M.
Eating a Rainbow. Introducing Vegetables in the First Years of Life in 3 European Countries. Appetite 2013,
71, 48–56. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
110. Anzman, S.L.; Rollins, B.Y.; Birch, L.L. Parental Influence on Children’s Early Eating Environments and
Obesity Risk: Implications for Prevention. Int. J. Obes. (Lond.) 2010, 34, 1116–1124. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
111. Mennella, J.A.; Nicklaus, S.; Jagolino, A.L.; Yourshaw, L.M. Variety Is the Spice of Life: Strategies for
Promoting Fruit and Vegetable Acceptance During Infancy. Physiol. Behav. 2008, 94, 29–38. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
112. Karhunen, L.J.; Juvonen, K.R.; Huotari, A.; Purhonen, A.K.; Herzig, K.H. Effect of Protein, Fat, Carbohydrate
and Fibre on Gastrointestinal Peptide Release in Humans. Regul. Pept. 2008, 149, 70–78. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
113. Paniagua, J.A.; de la Sacristana, A.G.; Sanchez, E.; Romero, I.; Vidal-Puig, A.; Berral, F.J.; Escribano, A.;
Moyano, M.J.; Perez-Martinez, P.; Lopez-Miranda, J.; et al. A Mufa-Rich Diet Improves Posprandial Glucose,
Lipid and Glp-1 Responses in Insulin-Resistant Subjects. J. Am. Coll. Nutr. 2007, 26, 434–444. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
114. Chang, K.T.; Lampe, J.W.; Schwarz, Y.; Breymeyer, K.L.; Noar, K.A.; Song, X.; Neuhouser, M.L. Low Glycemic
Load Experimental Diet More Satiating Than High Glycemic Load Diet. Nutr. Cancer 2012, 64, 666–673.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
115. Zalewski, B.M.; Patro, B.; Veldhorst, M.; Kouwenhoven, S.; Escobar, P.C.; Lerma, J.C.; Koletzko, B.;
Van Goudoever, J.B.; Szajewska, H. Nutrition of Infants and Young Children (1–3 years) and Its Effect
on Later Health: A Systematic Review of Current Recommendations (Earlynutrition Project). Crit. Rev. Food
Sci. Nutr. 2015. in presss. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
© 2016 by the authors; licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC-BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
