 nutrients
Review
Gene–Dairy Food Interactions and Health Outcomes:
A Review of Nutrigenetic Studies
Kevin B. Comerford *
and Gonca Pasin
California Dairy Research Foundation (CDRF), 501 G Street, Ste. 203, Davis, CA 95616, USA; pasin@cdrf.org
* Correspondence: kbcomerford@cdrf.org; Tel.: +1-530-753-0681
Received: 18 May 2017; Accepted: 3 July 2017; Published: 6 July 2017
Abstract: Each person differs from the next by an average of over 3 million genetic variations
in their DNA. This genetic diversity is responsible for many of the interindividual differences
in food preferences, nutritional needs, and dietary responses between humans.
The field of
nutrigenetics aims to utilize this type of genetic information in order to personalize diets for
optimal health. One of the most well-studied genetic variants affecting human dietary patterns
and health is the lactase persistence mutation, which enables an individual to digest milk sugar
into adulthood. Lactase persistence is one of the most influential Mendelian factors affecting
human dietary patterns to occur since the beginning of the Neolithic Revolution. However, the
lactase persistence mutation is only one of many mutations that can influence the relationship
between dairy intake and disease risk. The purpose of this review is to summarize the available
nutrigenetic literature investigating the relationships between genetics, dairy intake, and health
outcomes. Nonetheless, the understanding of an individual’s nutrigenetic responses is just one
component of personalized nutrition. In addition to nutrigenetic responses, future studies should
also take into account nutrigenomic responses (epigenomic, transcriptomic, proteomic, metabolomic),
and phenotypic/characteristic traits (age, gender, activity level, disease status, etc.), as these factors
all interact with diet to influence health.
Keywords: nutrigenetics; gene–diet interactions; precision nutrition; polymorphisms; inter-individual
response; dairy; milk; lactase persistence; obesity; cardiometabolic disease
1. Introduction
The fields of nutrigenetics and nutrigenomics both aim to elucidate how the genome interacts with
nutrition to influence health. They differ in that nutrigenetics focuses on how gene variants influence
responses to diet, while nutrigenomics focuses on how diet affects gene expression. The intended end
goals of these sciences, which both fall under the umbrella of nutritional genomics, are to improve
health through the application of personalized nutrition [1]. At present, most of the well-studied
nutritional genomic relationships are nutrigenetic. More specifically, the most well-known examples
can all be classified as monogenic relationships, consisting of the interactions between a single
gene mutation and single dietary component. For example, a mutation in the gene coding for
the enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase leads to an inability to properly metabolize the amino acid
phenylalanine, resulting in the life-threatening disease phenylketonuria (PKU) [2]. A mutation in the
alcohol dehydrogenase gene leads to a reduced ability to process alcohol and has been associated
with addiction [3]. Mutations in the 5,10-methylene tetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene affect
folate metabolism and are linked to increased risk for birth defects and chronic diseases including
cardiovascular disease (CVD) and cancer [4]. Mutations in the lactase gene (LCT) can result in lactase
persistence (LP), which is the extended ability to produce the lactase enzyme into adulthood. Lactase
assists in the breakdown of milk sugar in the small intestine and is associated with a variety of complex
health and disease outcomes in different populations [5,6].
Nutrients 2017, 9, 710; doi:10.3390/nu9070710
www.mdpi.com/journal/nutrients
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 710
2 of 17
The vast majority of genetic variants that have nutrigenetic consequences are loss of function
mutations in which the ability to properly digest or metabolize dietary compounds are diminished.
LP stands apart from the majority of monogenic mutations in that it is a gain of function mutation
in which the ability to break down lactose into adulthood is gained. Nutrigenetic loss of function
mutations tend to restrict or reduce dietary options, but LP does the opposite and increases the
available number of dietary options that can be digested. This ability has resulted in LP becoming
one of the strongest positive selective pressures in human history [7], reinforcing the importance of
gene–dairy food interactions in relation to human reproductive success and survival [8].
LP polymorphisms have occurred independently in Northern Europe, Africa and the Middle East.
This dominant trait provided these populations with the ability to greatly expand their cuisines and
improve their access to energy, nutrients, and dietary sources of potable water [9,10]. LP gene variants
have also dramatically influenced gene–culture co-evolution between humans and cattle through
the practices of dairy herding, domestication, and farming [7,11]. Many of the implications of these
interrelationships have yet to be discovered. While LP mutations have been advantageous for the
survival of certain populations over the last several millennia, only recently have the scientific tools
become available to investigate how the nutrigenetic relationships between gene variants and dairy
intake affect human health. The purpose of this review is to summarize the available nutrigenetic
literature investigating the relationships between genetics, dairy intake, and health outcomes in order
to further explore the concept of personalized nutrition. The PubMed database was searched through
the end of April 2017 for studies that examined the relationships between genetic variants, dairy intake,
and health outcomes. We only included studies that reported at least one measure of dairy intake.
Seventeen studies on LP polymorphisms and nine studies on metabolic and hormonal gene variants
were included in the review and summarized in table form.
2. Lactase Persistence, Dairy Intake, and Health Outcomes
The LCT-13910 C > T single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) at intron 13 is the most prevalent and
most studied LP polymorphism. Traditionally, a person with two CC alleles is considered to be lactose
intolerant, also known as lactase non-persistent (lactase activity <10 units/g protein) [12]. A majority of
humans, especially those without Northern European ancestry, have the CC genotype. A person with
one or more T alleles (CT or TT) is considered to be lactose tolerant, also known as lactase persistent
(lactase activity ≥10 units/g protein). Recent evidence suggests that there is a stepwise relationship
between the number of LP dominant T alleles a person inherits and their ability to digest lactose [13].
However, the LCT-13910 gene variant is not the only variant that can confer LP. Several mutations
at different loci on the lactase gene (i.e., A-22018, C-14010, G-13907, and G-13915) result in an LP
phenotype [14]. It is currently unclear as to if and how these different gene variants affect lactase form
and function. Future research on how different LP variants, LP genotypes, and LP haplotypes interact
with dairy intake patterns and health outcomes would contribute greatly to the basic understanding of
gene–dairy interactions. However, at present, the available nutrigenetic research on LP, dairy intake,
and health is still in the early stages and limited in its ability to inform personalized dietary advice
(Table 1).
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 710
3 of 17
Table 1. Nutrigenetic studies on lactase persistence, dairy intake, and health outcomes in adults.
Reference
Study Design
Population
Variables
Outcomes
Obesity and Cardiometabolic Disease
Lehtimäki et al., 2008. [15]
Observational, longitudinal—participants
followed for an average of 21 years
2109 young and healthy adults
from Finland
Milk and Dairy Intake
Carotid intima-media thickness,
carotid artery compliance, brachial
artery flow-mediated dilation
No significant association between LP and carotid
intima-media thickness, carotid artery compliance or
brachial artery flow-mediated dilation were found
after adjustment for the use dairy products.
Almon et al., 2012. [16]
Meta-analysis, observational,
cross-sectional
551 adults of European descent
from the Canary Islands Nutrition
Survey (ENCA) in Spain
Milk Intake
BMI, obesity
LP was associated with higher BMI, while lactase
non-persistence was not after adjustment for
milk intake.
Almon et al., 2010. [17]
Meta-analysis, observational,
cross-sectional
551 adults of European descent
from the Canary Islands Nutrition
Survey (ENCA) in Spain
Milk Intake
Metabolic Syndrome risk markers
LP was associated with a higher odds ratio for
metabolic syndrome than lactase non-persistence
after adjustment for milk intake. This relationship
was stronger for women than men.
Corella et al., 2011. [18]
Observational, cross-sectional
940 elderly Spanish adults with
high risk for CVD
Milk and Dairy Intake
BMI, obesity
LP was associated with obesity risk. These
associations were found to be significant only among
those consuming moderate or high lactose intakes.
Lamri et al., 2013. [19]
Observational, longitudinal—participants
followed for an average of 9 years
3575 Caucasians born in
mainland France
Dairy Intake
Metabolic Syndrome risk markers
LP was associated with higher BMI mainly in those
consuming high amounts of dairy products. LP was
associated with higher risk for metabolic syndrome,
but this association disappeared after adjustment
for BMI.
Bergholdt et al., 2015. [20]
Observational, cross-sectional and
longitudinal—participants followed for an
average of 5.5 years
97,811 adults from the Danish
general population
Milk Intake
Overweight, obesity, T2D risk
High milk intake was not associated with risk of T2D
or overweight-obesity, observationally or genetically
via LP.
Bergholdt et al., 2015. [21]
Observational, cross-sectional and
longitudinal—participants followed for an
average of 5.4 years
98,529 adults of Danish descent
Milk Intake
Ischemic heart disease,
myocardial infarction
LP was not associated with plasma levels of total
cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol,
high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, triglycerides or
glucose, nor with blood pressure. Milk intake was not
associated with risk of ischemic heart disease or
myocardial infarction, observationally or genetically.
Hartwig et al., 2016. [22]
Meta-analysis, observational,
longitudinal—participants followed for an
average of 30 years
2843 adults from the 1982 Pelotas
(Southern Brazil) Birth Cohort
Milk Intake
BMI, obesity, systolic and diastolic
blood pressure
LP was associated with higher BMI and higher odds
of overweight-obesity. Milk intake was not
consistently associated with changes in
blood pressure.
Smith et al., 2016. [23]
Meta-analysis, multiple study designs
included
20,089 adults of American
(Hispanics, African-Americans and
Whites) and Mediterranean
descent
Milk Intake
CVD biomarkers, mortality
Milk intake was not associated with CVD biomarkers,
CVD or mortality either generally or in sub-groups.
Lactase persistence was inconsistently associated
with glucose and lipids, and not associated with CVD
or total mortality in the whole population. LP was
associated with higher CVD and mortality risk in
women but not in men.
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 710
4 of 17
Table 1. Cont.
Reference
Study Design
Population
Variables
Outcomes
Ding et al., 2017. [24]
Meta-analysis, multiple study designs
included
197,322 adults from Europe, the US,
and Australia
Dairy Intake
Systolic blood pressure,
hypertension
LP was not associated with systolic blood pressure or
risk of hypertension. No associations were found
between dairy intake and blood pressure.
Colorectal, Prostate, and Renal Cell Cancer
Szilagyi et al., 2006. [25]
Meta-analysis, observational, cohort and
case-control
Data from 80 studies (27 cohort
and 53 case-control reports)
Dairy Intake
Colorectal cancer
The highest level of dairy food consumption protects
subjects in both high and low lactase non-persistence
regions, but not in regions with significant mixed LP
and non-persistent populations.
Torniainen et al., 2007. [12]
Observational, case-control
LP study: 4153 Finnish and
Swedish patients and 2315 controls.
Milk intake study: 1499 Swedish
prostate cancer patients and
1130 controls
Milk Intake
Prostate cancer
LP showed no association with prostate cancer risk.
High intake of low-fat milk was associated with a
significantly increased relative risk of prostate cancer,
whereas no association was observed between dietary
intakes of total milk, high-fat milk, all dairy products,
or dairy products high or low in lactose and risk of
prostate cancer.
Timpson et al., 2010. [26]
Observational, case-control
915 cases and 2346 controls from
adults of Eastern Europe and
Russian descent
Milk Intake
Renal cell carcinoma
In cancer cases, LP was associated with higher milk
intake, but was not associated with renal cell
carcinoma. In controls, milk consumption was
associated with confounding factors, including
smoking and education.
Travis et al., 2013. [13]
Observational, case-control
630 European men with prostate
cancer and 873 matched controls
Milk and Dairy
Intake Prostate cancer
LP was associated with greater milk intake, but was
not significantly associated with prostate cancer risk.
Bone Density, Fractures, and Osteoporosis
Obermayer-Pietsch et al.,
2004. [27]
Observational, cross-sectional
258 postmenopausal women
from Austria
Milk Intake
Bone mineral density and bone
fractures
LP was associated with higher milk intake, fewer
bone fractures, and higher bone mineral density at
the hip and the lumbar spine compared to lactase
non-persistence.
Enattah et al., 2005. [28]
Observational, cross-sectional, case-control
453 elderly Finnish women. 52
elderly Finnish women with
osteoporotic fractures. 59 controls
without osteoporosis
Dairy Intake
Osteoporosis, bone mineral density,
and fractures
Lactose mal-digestion and lactose intolerance were
not risk factors for osteoporosis, if calcium intake
from diet and/or supplements remained sufficient.
Yang et al., 2017. [29]
Meta-analysis, observational,
mixed design
Five studies of 102,750 adults of
mixed descent
Milk and Dairy
Intake Osteoporosis, ischemic heart
disease, T2D
LP and milk consumption were not clearly associated
with bone mineral density, ischemic heart disease,
or T2D.
Abbreviations: Lactase Persistence (LP), Cardiovascular Disease (CVD), Type 2 Diabetes (T2D), Body Mass Index (BMI).
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 710
5 of 17
2.1. Body Mass Index (BMI), Overweight, Obesity
The study of nutrigenetics is expanding rapidly as researchers are now investigating the polygenic
nature of several disease states. In fact, only a small percentage of obesity cases have been shown to be
monogenic [30]. Rather, inherited predispositions to obesity are primarily polygenic and involve both
dietary and non-dietary factors [30,31]. However, if a researcher decided to select only a single gene
mutation to study in relation to body weight, the LP mutation might be a good candidate to interrogate
due to its strong selective advantage and frequency of occurrence in countries with high obesity rates.
In fact, several studies have found correlations between LP and higher body mass index (BMI) [32,33].
However, many of these studies use LP as a proxy for dairy intake rather than actually measuring
or recording dairy intake. At first glance, using LP as a proxy for milk or dairy intake appears to be
a common and reasonable assumption to make for European populations. Yet, this proxy may not
actually represent what any particular individual in the population is consuming since dairy intake
and LP prevalence both vary considerably from one European country to the next [13]. Furthermore,
LP may not be an accurate proxy for overall dairy intake in most countries since many low-lactose
and fermented dairy products are consumed by individuals who are lactose intolerant [34]. For this
research paper, we have chosen to focus on studies that have included both LP genotype data and milk
or dairy intake data, rather than rely solely on data that used LP as a proxy milk or dairy intake.
In agreement with the epidemiological data, several nutrigenetic studies of mixed design which
did measure dairy intake also found the LCT-13910 C > T SNP to be correlated with higher dairy
intake and BMI [16,18,19,22]. Most of these studies were relatively small, ranging in size from
551 to 3575 participants. In contrast to these findings, a recent Mendelian randomization study
consisting of over 97,000 participants found no evidence linking the LP mutation and dairy intake to
overweight or obesity measures [20]. These conflicting results on LP, dairy intake, and body weight
offer further evidence that there are many additional variables, such as other gene variants, other
dietary components, lifestyle factors, and environmental factors that may interact to influence the
relationship between LP and body weight. Although a single gene mutation resulting in a phenotype
such as LP can have significant effects on dietary patterns, the nutrigenetic effects of that mutation will
differ considerably based on the types, amounts, frequencies, and combinations of foods consumed.
Dairy is a complex food group, which contains many products that differ in their macronutrient,
micronutrient, and bioactive compound composition. Several of these nutrients and bioactives may
protect against chronic disease independently of any effects on body weight [35,36]. Additionally, the
lactose content of dairy foods differs considerably depending on the product consumed. A closer look
at how different dairy foods interact with different genetic mutations is the logical next step in better
understanding the relationships between genetics, dairy intake, and body weight.
2.2. Cardiometabolic Disease
Overweight and obesity increase the risk for cardiometabolic disorders such as metabolic
syndrome, CVD, and type 2 diabetes (T2D). The majority of dairy intake studies have consistently
provided evidence of neutral or protective associations related to metabolic syndrome risk factors
(e.g., glucose intolerance, dyslipidemia, and hypertension) and chronic diseases such as CVD and
T2D [37–41]. These findings suggest that dairy intake may favorably affect cardiometabolic risk
in certain populations despite augmenting BMI, or possibly, that dairy-associated gains in BMI
may also involve gains in lean mass or alterations to gut bacteria that are associated with reduced
cardiometabolic risk factors [42–44].
A study of 551 participants of European descent found that the LCT-13910 C > T polymorphism
in combination with higher dairy intake could increase the risk for metabolic syndrome, but only in
women [17]. These findings suggest that other major genetic factors such as gender can moderate
the relationships between dietary intake and cardiometabolic risk factors to greater extent than LP.
Research on over 2100 healthy adults from Finland found no associations between LP, dairy intake,
and multiple measures of coronary artery disease (carotid intima-media thickness, carotid artery
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 710
6 of 17
compliance, and brachial artery flow-mediated dilation) [15]. The findings did not differ based on
gender, but the subjects who were lactose intolerant consumed significantly more alcohol (and less milk)
than those who were lactose tolerant, suggesting that non-dairy factors (e.g., alcohol consumption)
which can affect health may also be influenced by LP status. Moderate alcohol intake can beneficially
influence cardiovascular health, but excessive intake is linked to an array of cardiovascular disease
states [45].
A Mendelian randomization study of over 20,000 participants from multiple racial and ethnic
groups including American (Hispanics, African-American and Whites) and Spanish populations
assessed the relationship between a different and less commonly studied LP polymorphism
(the MCM6-rs3754686 polymorphism at intron 15). The researchers found no associations between LP
and CVD or total mortality rates [23]. The researchers also reported a lack of associations between
milk intake and lipid levels, CVD, or mortality rates. A Mendelian randomization meta-analysis of
32 studies involving over 197,000 adults from Europe, the US, and Australia found that LP genotype
and dairy consumption were not associated with systolic blood pressure or risk of hypertension [24].
Observational studies from this meta-analysis did show that each additional serving of dairy per
day was associated with lower systolic blood pressure, but these findings were not confirmed by the
intervention studies included in the report, which showed no relationship between dairy intake and
systolic blood pressure or hypertension. Similarly, a Mendelian randomization study of over 98,000
Danish adults which followed its participants for over five years, found no associations between the
LCT-13910 C > T polymorphism or milk intake with ischemic heart disease, myocardial infarction,
or any major cardiovascular risk factor measured (i.e., total cholesterol, LDL, HDL, triglycerides,
or blood pressure) [21]. The same researchers also did not find any associations between the LCT-13910
C > T polymorphism or milk intake with T2D [20]. However, the researchers did note that LP subjects
who did not consume milk had a slightly higher risk for T2D compared to those LP subjects who
habitually consumed milk, suggesting that an LP genotype may be able to affect health independently
of dairy intake. No mechanistic explanations were reported for this finding; rather the researchers
suggested the relationship between abstinence from milk intake, LP status, and T2D could be
potentially explained by selection bias in the study instead of biological differences between the
study participants. Another Mendelian randomization study which meta-analyzed genetic data
from several studies comprised of mixed populations also investigated the relationship between the
LCT-13910 C > T polymorphism, milk intake, and cardiometabolic disease [29]. This study confirmed
the results from earlier studies, in that the researchers reported a lack of associations between LP status,
milk intake, and cardiometabolic disease (i.e., ischemic heart disease and T2D).
2.3. Cancer
Epidemiological studies have provided mixed results regarding dairy intake and cancer risk [46–50],
but these relationships begin to become clearer when specific dairy products, LP gene variants, and
different types of cancer are considered. For example, colorectal cancer is one of the types of cancer most
heavily influenced by dietary patterns since colorectal tissue comes into direct and prolonged contact
with dietary components and products of digestion on a consistent basis. The colon also contains the
majority of the gut microbiota that can modulate colonic exposure to carcinogenic toxins.
Large prospective cohort studies and meta-analyses provide evidence for protective associations
of dairy intake on colorectal cancer that often depend on the type and amount of dairy products
consumed [49,51,52]; however, these types of studies do not usually take into account LP status.
Importantly, LP status is a major factor determining the type and amount of dairy products consumed
as well as the dairy-derived end-products that are exposed to the colorectal tissue (i.e., lactose moves
into the large intestine in lactose intolerant individuals, while lactose is broken down to glucose
and galactose and absorbed in the small intestine in lactose tolerant individuals). A nutrigenetic
meta-analysis of 80 studies regarding dairy intake and colorectal cancer showed key differences are
dependent on dairy intake amount and LP status [25]. In fact, the researchers reported a protective
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 710
7 of 17
role of higher dairy intake in both high LP prevalent and high non-LP prevalent populations. In other
words, this research suggests that the potential anti-colorectal cancer benefits associated with dairy
intake may not be limited to those who can digest lactose. Rather, higher lactose intakes in lactose
intolerant individuals may lead to the production of favorable substrates that can be used by protective
colonic microflora.
Prostate cancer is one of the most common cancers in men [12]. In contrast to the colorectal
tissues, the prostate does not come into direct contact with the gut microbiota or gastrointestinal
contents. Several indirect mechanisms have been proposed for how diet can affect cell replication and
cancer risk. One hypothesis is that the circulating lactose breakdown products glucose and galactose,
which are generally higher in LP dairy consumers, may affect cancer development or progression in
certain tissues [53,54]. A Swedish case-cohort study (1499 cases and 1130 controls) which tested the
associations between LP status, overall dairy intake, and prostate carcinoma, reported no associations
between these variables [12]. The researchers did find an association between low-fat milk intake and
prostate cancer risk, but this relationship did not appear to be influenced by LP status. When LP status,
dairy intake, and prostate cancer risk were assessed in the European Prospective Investigation into
Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC) study, the researchers found that both LP genotypes (CT and TT) and
higher dairy intake were not associated with prostate cancer risk [13].
Relatively few nutrigenetic studies have been conducted on LP status, dairy intake, and cancer
types residing outside of the digestive or reproductive systems. A recent study in nearly 23,000
Swedish adults with lactose intolerance found a decreased risk of lung, breast, and ovarian cancers
compared to individuals who were lactose tolerant [55]. The authors of this research hypothesize that
the decreased cancer risk in lactose intolerant individuals could be associated with lower intakes of:
(1) lactose or lactose-containing products; (2) various non-lactose components of dairy, and/or (3) other
protective foods and beverages consumed in place of dairy foods. Unfortunately, dietary intakes were
not recorded for this study, so it is not possible to determine their effects on cancer risk. Furthermore,
the study design used symptomology rather than genotype to diagnose lactose intolerance, so it is
also not clear as to what percentage of individuals in this study were genetically considered lactase
non-persistent. A Mendelian randomization study of nearly 1100 Eastern European and Russian
adults that did take into account milk intake and LP genotype found that milk intake was associated
with a slightly higher risk for renal cell carcinoma, but LP genotype was not [26]. The researchers of
this study concluded that it is wise to exercise caution when interpreting observational associations
between milk consumption and cancer risk since any perceived relationships between the two may be
due to confounding by other dietary and lifestyle factors.
2.4. Bone Health
Total dairy intake [56], dairy protein intake [57,58], and dairy mineral intake [59–61] are all
associated with bone health markers such as bone mineral density (BMD) and bone turnover.
The relationship between lactose intake and bone health is a little less clear. Lactose intake has
not been directly associated with bone strength or structure, but the ability to digest lactose is
associated with higher intake of overall dairy intake, dairy protein intake, and dairy mineral intake—all
factors consistently linked to improvements in BMD and reduced bone turnover. In agreement with
this concept, lactose intolerance can increase the risk for osteoporosis and bone fractures in certain
populations [62].
Researchers investigating the relationships between milk intake, LP status, and bone health in 258
postmenopausal women from Austria found that LP genotype influenced BMD and bone fractures [27].
The CC genotype, which is associated with lactose intolerance/lactase non-persistence was associated
with the lowest hip and spine BMD measures and highest fracture rate. The CT genotype, which
confers an intermediate level of lactose tolerance/lactase persistence, was associated with lower BMD
scores compared to the TT genotype (which confers the greatest level of lactose tolerance/lactase
persistence). The researchers suggested that the improved bone integrity found in LP individuals
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 710
8 of 17
was not due to higher calcium intake alone, but rather due to the additive effects of calcium and
other dairy components such as dairy proteins. In contrast to these findings, a cross-sectional study
of two postmenopausal cohorts from Northern Europe found no differences in adjusted BMD or
in fracture incidence between lactose tolerant and lactose intolerant women [28]. The researchers
of this study came to very different conclusions, suggesting that there were no differences between
these post-menopausal populations as long as the non-dairy consumers got enough calcium from
other foods and supplements. A recent Mendelian randomization meta-analysis investigating the
relationship between the Northern European LCT-13910 C > T gene variant, milk intake, and bone
health also reported a lack of associations between the LP mutation and bone mineral density [29].
These researchers also cast doubt on the ability of dietary calcium to improve bone health by itself,
and implied that there are additional factors (e.g., protein intake and vitamin D fortification) that need
to be considered in relation to dairy intake and bone health.
Recent investigations into the associations between LP status, dairy intake, and health outcomes
have provided nuanced findings that are moderated by factors including LP genotype, the type and
amount of dairy product consumed, age, gender, body weight, and the specific pathology of the
disease being assessed. Additionally, numerous other variables such as mutations in non-LP genes,
whole dietary patterns, and environmental factors affect the nutrigenetic relationship between lactase
persistence, dairy intake, and health. The science of nutrigenetics is quickly moving beyond the single
candidate gene approach, and it is becoming clear that LP mutations are not the only mutations that
have the potential to moderate the relationships between dairy intake and disease.
3. Metabolic and Hormonal Gene Variants, Dairy Intake, and Health Outcomes
In addition to lactose, dairy products contain a diverse set of constituents (i.e., proteins, fats,
vitamins, minerals, and bioactives) that can affect human health. The digestion, metabolism, transport,
and excretion of these compounds are all dependent on gene products (i.e., RNAs, and proteins such
as enzymes, receptors, peptide hormones, binding proteins, and transport proteins). Therefore, genetic
variants that result in altered metabolic and hormonal gene products may influence the relationship
between dairy intake and disease risk. The gene variants that have been studied so far in relation to
dairy intake include polymorphisms in genes related to lipid metabolism, hormone receptor function,
and vitamin D receptor function (Table 2).
Table 2. Nutrigenetic studies on non-lactase polymorphisms, dairy intake, and health outcomes
in adults.
Reference
Study Design
Population
Gene Variants
Variables
Outcomes
Lipid Metabolism SNPs
Smith CE et al.,
2013. [10]
Observational,
cross-sectional
955 adults from the
Boston Puerto Rican
Health Study and 1116
adults from the Genetics
of Lipid Lowering Drugs
and Diet Network study
APOA2-265 T > C
(rs5082)
Total dairy, higher-fat
dairy (>1%), and
low-fat dairy (≤1%)
BMI, Body Weight
There was a significant
interaction between the
APOA2-265 T > C
polymorphism and dairy food
intake. Individuals with the
CC genotype who consumed
more higher-fat dairy products
had a higher BMI compared
with those consuming less
higher-fat dairy products.
Loria-Kohen et al.,
2014. [63]
Intervention,
randomized
trial (1 year)
161 middle-aged
Spanish adults
14 SNPs in 9 genes
related to lipid
metabolism were
examined
500 mL per day of
skimmed or
semi-skimmed milk
for 1 year in addition
to their usual diets.
CVD risk markers
A TT genotype for PPARA
rs135549 was associated with
a reduction in the total
cholesterol/HDL and
LDL/HDL ratios after 1 year
of skimmed milk intake.
No differences were observed
after consuming either
skimmed or semi-skimmed
milk in the C allele carriers.
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 710
9 of 17
Table 2. Cont.
Reference
Study Design
Population
Gene Variants
Variables
Outcomes
Abdullah et al.,
2016. [64]
Intervention,
RCT (4 weeks)
101 middle-aged
Canadian adults
ABCG5, CYP7A1,
DHCR7
3 servings per day
of dairy or
energy-matched
control on
background
of a prudent diet.
Serum lipids
Genetic variations in ABCG5,
CYP7A1, and DHCR7 may
contribute to differing
responses of serum cholesterol
to dairy intake among
healthy adults.
Vitamin D Receptor SNPs
Hubner et al., 2008.
[65]
Sub-study of an
RCT using
aspirin and
folate for the
prevention of
colorectal
adenoma
recurrence
480 participants in the
United Kingdom
Colorectal Adenoma
Prevention trial
Cdx2, FokI, BsmI,
ApaI and TaqI
Milk and Dairy
Product Intake
Colorectal cancer
VDR polymorphism genotypes
and haplotypes did not
directly alter colorectal cancer
recurrence risk, but the
reduction in risk associated
with high dairy product intake
was confined to individuals
with ApaI aA/AA genotype.
Neyestani et al.,
2013. [66]
Intervention,
RCT (12 weeks)
140 middle-aged Iranian
adults with T2D
FokI
500 mL yogurt drink
(doogh) per day
fortified with 1000 IU
vitamin D
T2D; glycemic status,
lipid profiles,
inflammatory
biomarkers
The FF genotype group had
the largest decrease of
C-reactive protein and
interleukin-6 compared with
the Ff and ff groups. The
vitamin D response of the ff
genotype group was the
lowest after consuming the
vitamin D fortified doogh.
Shab-Bidar et al.,
2015. [67]
Intervention,
RCT (12 weeks)
140 middle-aged Iranian
adults with T2D
FokI
500 mL yogurt drink
(doogh) per day
fortified with 1000 IU
vitamin D or control
yogurt drink with no
vitamin D
Oxidative stress
biomarkers
No significant association
between FokI genotypes and
oxidative stress biomarkers,
but the the ff variant subgroup
showed the weakest response
to vitamin D fortified doogh.
Shab-Bidar et al.,
2015. [68]
Intervention,
RCT (12 weeks)
60 middle-aged Iranian
adults with T2D
Cdx2
500 mL yogurt drink
(doogh) per day
fortified with 1000 IU
vitamin D or control
yogurt drink with no
vitamin D
T2D, glycemic and
adiposity biomarkers
Daily intake of vitamin D
fortified doogh for 12 weeks
improved the central obesity
indices in T2D subjects, and
the improvement was more
pronounced in the carriers of
the AA genotype of
VDR-Cdx2.
Hormone and Hormone Receptor SNPs
Sotos-Prieto et al.,
2010. [69]
Observational,
cross-sectional
945 high-CVD risk older
subjects participating in
the PREDIMED–Valencia
Study
rs1466113 G > C in
SSTR2
All food groups,
including dairy
BMI, obesity
Homozygous subjects for the C
allele had significantly lower
BMI and odds ratio for obesity
than G-allele carriers. There
were also significant
differences in dairy product
and protein intakes between
CC- and G-allele carriers.
InterAct
Consortium 2016.
[70]
Observational,
case-cohort,
average follow
up of 12.5 years
18,638 middle-aged,
normal weight adults
from EPIC-InterAct study
TCF7L2 rs12255372,
TCF7L2 rs7903146,
KCNQ1 rs163171,
KCNQ1 rs163184,
KCNQ1 rs2237892,
GIPR rs10423928,
WFS1 rs10010131
Intake of whey-
containing dairy
products
T2D risk, incretins
No significant differences
between any of the possible
genotypes investigated and
risk of T2D per one serving per
day increment of
Whey-containing dairy
(150 g/day).
Abbreviations: Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP), Randomized Controlled Trial (RCT), Body Mass Index
(BMI), Cardiovascular Disease (CVD), Type 2 Diabetes (T2D), High-Density Lipoprotein (HDL), Low-Density
Lipoprotein (LDL), Vitamin D Receptor (VDR), Somatostatin Receptor 2 (SSTR2), Peroxisome Proliferator-Activated
Receptor Alpha (PPARA), Apolipoprotein A2 (APOA2), Cholesterol 7α-Hydroxylase (CYP7A1), ATP-Binding
Cassette Subfamily G, Member 5 (ABCG5), 7-Dehydrocholesterol Reductase (DHCR7),Transcription Factor 7-like 2
(TCF7L2), Gastric Inhibitory Polypeptide Receptor (GIPR), Potassium Voltage-Gated Channel Subfamily Q Member
1 (KCNQ1), Wolframin ER Transmembrane Glycoprotein (WFS1).
3.1. Lipid Metabolism SNPs
Saturated fat is one of the most commonly studied dietary compounds in relation to genetic
polymorphisms and health, primarily having to do with cholesterol levels and CVD risk [10]. Saturated
fat is also one of the main compounds that differ considerably between dairy products, with commonly
consumed products ranging from <1% saturated fat (fat-free milk) to over 50% saturated fat (butter).
For decades, nutrition studies have provided mixed results regarding the health effects of saturated
fats. These inconclusive results have often been attributed to factors such as study design, researcher
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 710
10 of 17
bias, and the specific type of saturated fats consumed [64]. Until recently, another major factor has
often been omitted from these studies, and that is the genetic predispositions of the subjects being
studied. The recent advances in nutrigenetic research show that genetic inter-individual variability in
how humans respond to dietary fats could help explain why hundreds of past studies have failed to
provide a consensus understanding on the effects of saturated fat intake on human health.
A gene-candidate study involving 2000 ethnically diverse participants (Americans of Northern
European ancestry and Americans of Puerto Rican origin) was conducted to determine the interactions
between an apolipoprotein A2 gene (APOA2) gene variant, dairy product intake, and BMI [10]. In this
study, a CC genotype was associated with a higher BMI, but only in those subjects consuming the
highest amount of dairy fat. On the other hand, greater dairy fat intake was not associated with a higher
BMI in subjects with a CT or TT genotype. Upon further analysis, females with the CC genotype from
the American section of the study were also shown to have a higher BMI when consuming the lowest
amount of low-fat dairy products. These findings reinforce the idea that the dairy intake and BMI
relationship is not solely dependent on any single dietary or genetic factor. Rather, several variables
including ethnicity and gender play key roles in how individuals respond to dietary patterns.
A year-long randomized trial of 161 Spanish adults investigated the relationship between dairy
fat intake and 14 SNPs within nine different candidate lipid metabolism genes [63]. The participants
were randomly assigned to ingest either 500 mL per day of skimmed milk (1 g of saturated fat) daily,
or an equivalent amount of semi-skimmed milk (6.7 g of saturated fat) along with their normal diets.
The results showed no differences in lipid biomarkers between the different groups even though the
groups consumed a difference of more than 5 g/day of saturated dairy fat. When the different SNPs
were assessed and corrections were made for multiple testing, only one of the 14 SNPs tested showed
an association with dairy fat intake. The TT genotype for peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
alpha (PPARA) rs135549 correlated with reduced total cholesterol/HDL and LDL/HDL-C ratios, while
CC and CT genotypes did not. A more recent assessment of dairy intake and candidate SNPs in
cholesterol-related genes was performed in 101 Canadian adults [64]. This randomized crossover
study assigned participants to consume a prudent diet for four weeks along with either three daily
servings of dairy foods (low-fat milk, low-fat yogurt, and cheese) or a non-dairy control matched for
total energy but lower in saturated fat. The researchers found multiple SNPs associated with varying
lipid responses to the different diets. The GG genotype for the ATP-binding cassette subfamily G,
member 5 (ABCG5) rs6720173 was associated with higher total cholesterol and LDL levels compared
to CG and CC genotypes. GG and GT genotypes for cholesterol 7α-hydroxylase (CYP7A1) rs3808607
were associated with higher total cholesterol and LDL levels compared to the TT genotype. AA and
AG genotypes for 7-dehydrocholesterol reductase (DHCR7) rs760241 were associated with higher LDL
levels compared to subjects with the GG genotype. When considered all together, these studies show
that individuals with mutations in particular lipid metabolism genes (e.g., APOA2 rs5082, PPARA
rs135549, ABCG5 rs6720173, CYP7A1 rs3808607, DHCR7 rs760241) may show differential sensitivity to
the health effects of dairy food intake, especially when it comes to the intake of products with different
levels of saturated fats.
3.2. Hormone and Hormone Receptor SNPs
In addition to lipid metabolism SNPs, hormone and hormone receptor SNPs have also been
studied in the context of dairy intake and health outcomes. Researchers from the InterAct Consortium
investigated the relationships between incretin hormone SNPs, whey-containing dairy intake, and risk
for T2D in 18,638 European adults [70]. Whey-containing dairy foods were chosen for this analysis
since whey protein has been shown to influence the secretion of the incretins glucagon-like peptide-1
(GLP-1) and glucose-dependent insulinotropic peptide (GIP) to a greater degree than other protein
sources. After more than 12 years of follow-up, the researchers found no associations between any
of the seven incretin gene variants, whey-containing dairy servings, and T2D risk. A genetic risk
score assessment was conducted on the participants from this study and also showed no interactions
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 710
11 of 17
between the incretin gene variants, whey-containing dairy intake, and T2D risk. In simpler terms,
a single serving per day of whey-containing dairy foods did not affect T2D risk even in the subjects
who had the highest number of incretin-related allele SNPs.
A gene-candidate study involving 945 European adults at high risk for CVD from the
PREDIMED-Valencia Study was conducted to determine if a particular genetic polymorphism in
the somatostatin receptor 2 (SSTR2) gene interacts with dietary or anthropometric variables [69].
Among other functions, the somatostatin system (which includes its receptors) can inhibit the secretion
of growth hormone, gut hormones, and pancreatic hormones; affecting cell growth, pituitary gland
function, body weight regulation, and neuro-endocrine function [69,71]. The PREDIMED-Valencia
study results showed that the rs1466113 C > G polymorphism tracked with both dairy intake and
obesity. Individuals with one or more dominant G alleles tended to have a higher BMI and consumed
a greater amount of dairy, while those with the CC genotype had a lower BMI, a lower odds ratio for
obesity, and consumed a smaller amount of dairy. In addition to consuming less dairy, the CC group
also consumed less total protein, meat, and legumes on a daily basis, suggesting that this particular
gene might be associated with regulating protein intake, and that this particular SNP could influence
several aspects of dietary intake and body weight beyond that of dairy consumption.
3.3. Vitamin D Receptor SNPs
Studies on vitamin D receptor (VDR) polymorphisms and dairy intake have provided key insights
into how different polymorphisms in the same gene interact with diet to influence health outcomes.
Indeed, while one VDR polymorphism might affect receptor-binding activity, another might pertain
to receptor binding strength or substrate affinity. These differences can affect how the receptors will
interact with dietary constituents, and in turn will affect how those dietary constituents are absorbed,
transported, metabolized, and excreted.
A 12-week long intervention study investigated the relationships between VDR FokI
polymorphism, vitamin D fortified dairy intake, and inflammatory and antioxidative markers in
140 Iranian subjects with T2D [66,67]. Subjects were assigned to ingest either 500 mL of vitamin D
fortified yogurt per day (1000 IU of vitamin D), or a control yogurt beverage that was not fortified
with vitamin D. The subjects who consumed the fortified yogurt had higher vitamin D levels and
lower inflammatory markers (high-sensitivity C-reactive protein, interleukin-4, and interleukin-6) [66],
and higher antioxidative markers (glutathione and total antioxidant capacity) [67], compared to
subjects who consumed the plain yogurt. When genotype was assessed, subjects with the FF genotype
had higher vitamin D levels than the ff genotype, and those with a FF genotype also had the greatest
reduction in high-sensitivity C-reactive protein and interleukin-6 compared to both the Ff and ff
genotypes. These findings suggest that FokI gene variants may influence the ability to utilize vitamin
D from dairy foods and could thereby ameliorate the inflammatory response in diabetic subjects.
A similar 12-week long study was conducted by the same researchers to determine the
relationships between a different VDR polymorphism (Cdx2 polymorphism), vitamin D fortified
yogurt intake, and central obesity in 60 Iranian subjects with T2D [68]. The subjects were randomly
assigned to consume either 500 mL of 1000 IU vitamin D fortified yogurt per day or the same amount
of an unfortified control yogurt. At the end of the study, all subjects who consumed the fortified yogurt
had higher vitamin D levels and reduced central adiposity measures compared to those who consumed
the unfortified yogurt. When the Cdx2 genotype (AA, AG, GG) was assessed, circulating vitamin D
levels were increased and central adiposity measures were decreased to a greater degree in the AA
group, compared to the G-allele carriers. Overall, these results suggest that vitamin D fortification
improves the health benefits of dairy products when consumed by type 2 diabetic subjects, but these
effects appear to be moderated by specific genetic variants in the vitamin D receptors.
When multiple VDR polymorphism (FokI, Cdx2, ApaI, BsmI, TaqI) and dairy intake were
investigated in relation to colorectal cancer recurrence in 480 subjects from the United Kingdom [65],
only certain Apal genotypes appeared to interact with dairy intake and health outcomes. The AA
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 710
12 of 17
and Aa Apal genotypes interacted with higher dairy product consumption to reduce colorectal cancer
recurrence, but the aa genotype did not. Many of dairy’s effects on colorectal cancer recurrence in
this study were dependent on the type of dairy product consumed, with milk being more protective
than other dairy products. Interestingly, these effects also appear limited to dairy-derived vitamin D,
with intake of vitamin D from food and/or supplements not showing the same beneficial influence on
colorectal cancer recurrence reduction.
In combination with the findings from LP and dairy intake studies, studies on non-LP gene
variants and dairy intake provide convincing evidence that an array of gene variants are responsible
for significant interindividual variations in dietary intake patterns and metabolic responses. Many of
these gene–diet interactions converge to influence body weight, cardiometabolic disease risks, cancer
risk and bone health. Further findings from the investigations of gene–dairy–disease interactions will
contribute greatly to the development of more genetically informed and personalized recommendations
regarding dairy product intake and disease risk management.
4. Conclusions
A major aim of personalized nutrition is to turn a person’s nutrigenetic and nutrigenomic
information into highly specific dietary advice that can be used to improve or maintain health. This type
of dietary advice has the potential to revolutionize the fields of nutrition and healthcare. However,
at present, the science of personalized nutrition is just scratching the surface of its potential, and we
must be careful not to label it a panacea before proving its efficacy. While this review of nutrigenetic
studies has focused solely on one food group and a few select genetic mutations, it has clearly shown
the complexities of understanding and utilizing the information gathered from studies of gene–diet
interactions. Nutrigenetic studies that have included data on dairy intake provide mixed results on
health outcomes. Many of these studies show that LP is associated with higher dairy intake and
BMI, but they also tend to show that LP and higher dairy intake are not consistently associated with
cardiometabolic disease risk, certain types of cancer occurrence, or bone health. Nutrigenetic studies
investigating the effects of polymorphisms in genes related to lipid metabolism, hormone receptor
function, and vitamin D receptor function also show mixed results and the potential for differential
sensitivity between genotypes to the health effects of dairy food intake. More research is necessary
on polygenic and multifactorial relationships in the context of diet and disease. In the end, these
nutrigenetic relationships are likely dependent on many other factors besides the individual SNPs
tested, such as the type and amount of dairy product consumed, gender, age, ethnicity, and other
genetic mutations that affect the metabolism, transport, or storage of nutrients in the body.
The interindividual variation between humans is on the magnitude of millions of SNPs, so the
insights gained from a limited focus on a few SNPs having to do with dairy intake reveal only a small
part of a person’s nutrigenetic story. Furthermore, additional research is needed on the relationships
between different gene variants and their abilities to interact and influence each other in antagonistic,
additive, or synergistic ways. In summary, nutrigenetic research which is focused on the relationships
between single SNPs (of which there are millions) and single food groups (which may be comprised
of a diverse array of products with varying combinations and amounts of nutrients and bioactives),
may provide great insights into improving the science of personalized nutrition. However, this type of
research is only part of the personalized nutrition equation. Nutrigenomic responses (epigenomics,
transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics) to different types and amounts of dairy products, along
with microbiome data, and phenotypic/characteristic traits (age, gender, activity level, disease status,
etc.) must also be accounted for, since these factors can all interact with the diet to influence health.
Acknowledgments: All authors have read and approved the final manuscript. This research was funded by the
California Dairy Research Foundation.
Author Contributions: Kevin B. Comerford drafted the manuscript. Gonca Pasin provided expert guidance,
review, and feedback throughout the manuscript development process.
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 710
13 of 17
Conflicts of Interest: Gonca Pasin is the executive director of the California Dairy Research Foundation.
Kevin B. Comerford received consulting fees from the California Dairy Research Foundation. All conclusions are
the work of the authors.
Abbreviation
LCT
Lactase Gene
LP
Lactase Persistence
SNP
Single Nucleotide Polymorphism
PKU
Phenylketonuria
MTHFR
5,10-Methylene Tetrahydrofolate Reductase
BMI
Body Mass Index
CVD
Cardiovascular Disease
T2DM
Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus
BMD
Bone Mineral Density
VDR
Vitamin D Receptor
APOA2
Apolipoprotein A2
ABCG5
ATP-Binding Cassette Subfamily G, Member 5
CYP7A1
Cholesterol 7α-Hydroxylase
DHCR7
7-Dehydrocholesterol Reductase
PPARA
Peroxisome Proliferator-Activated Receptor Alpha
SSTR2
Somatostatin Receptor 2
GLP-1
Glucagon-Like Peptide-1
GIP
Glucose-Dependent Insulinotropic Peptide
References
1.
Ferguson, L.R.; De Caterina, R.; Gorman, U.; Allayee, H.; Kohlmeier, M.; Prasad, C.; Choi, M.S.; Curi, R.;
de Luis, D.A.; Gil, A.; et al. Guide and Position of the International Society of Nutrigenetics/Nutrigenomics
on Personalised Nutrition: Part 1—Fields of Precision Nutrition. J. Nutrigenet. Nutrigenom. 2016, 9, 12–27.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
2.
Neeha, V.S.; Kinth, P. Nutrigenomics Research: A Review. J. Food Sci. Technol. 2013, 50, 415–428. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
3.
Blum, K.; Downs, B.W.; Dushaj, K.; Li, M.; Braverman, E.R.; Fried, L.; Waite, R.; Demotrovics, Z.;
Badgaiyan, R.D. The Benefits of Customized DNA Directed Nutrition to Balance the Brain Reward Circuitry
and Reduce Addictive Behaviors. Precis. Med. 2016, 1, 18–33.
4.
Liew, S.C.; Gupta, E.D. Methylenetetrahydrofolate Reductase (Mthfr) C677t Polymorphism: Epidemiology,
Metabolism and the Associated Diseases. Eur. J. Med. Genet. 2015, 58, 1–10. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5.
Smith, G.D.; Lawlor, D.A.; Timpson, N.J.; Baban, J.; Kiessling, M.; Day, I.N.; Ebrahim, S. Lactase
Persistence-Related Genetic Variant: Population Substructure and Health Outcomes. Eur. J. Hum. Genet.
2009, 17, 357–367. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6.
Szilagyi, A.; Leighton, H.; Burstein, B.; Xue, X. Latitude, Sunshine, and Human Lactase Phenotype
Distributions May Contribute to Geographic Patterns of Modern Disease: The Inflammatory Bowel Disease
Model. Clin. Epidemiol. 2014, 6, 183–198. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7.
Gerbault, P.; Liebert, A.; Itan, Y.; Powell, A.; Currat, M.; Burger, J.; Swallow, D.M.; Thomas, M.G. Evolution
of Lactase Persistence: An Example of Human Niche Construction. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci.
2011, 366, 863–877. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
8.
Bersaglieri, T.; Sabeti, P.C.; Patterson, N.; Vanderploeg, T.; Schaffner, S.F.; Drake, J.A.; Rhodes, M.; Reich, D.E.;
Hirschhorn, J.N. Genetic Signatures of Strong Recent Positive Selection at the Lactase Gene. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 2004, 74, 1111–1120. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
9.
Szilagyi, A. Adaptation to Lactose in Lactase Non Persistent People: Effects on Intolerance and the
Relationship between Dairy Food Consumption and Evalution of Diseases. Nutrients 2015, 7, 6751–6779.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 710
14 of 17
10.
Smith, C.E.; Tucker, K.L.; Arnett, D.K.; Noel, S.E.; Corella, D.; Borecki, I.B.; Feitosa, M.F.; Aslibekyan, S.;
Parnell, L.D.; Lai, C.Q.; et al. Apolipoprotein A2 Polymorphism Interacts with Intakes of Dairy Foods to
Influence Body Weight in 2 U.S. Populations. J. Nutr. 2013, 143, 1865–1871. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11.
Beja-Pereira, A.; Luikart, G.; England, P.R.; Bradley, D.G.; Jann, O.C.; Bertorelle, G.; Chamberlain, A.T.;
Nunes, T.P.; Metodiev, S.; Ferrand, N.; et al. Gene-Culture Coevolution between Cattle Milk Protein Genes
and Human Lactase Genes. Nat. Genet. 2003, 35, 311–313. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12.
Torniainen, S.; Hedelin, M.; Autio, V.; Rasinpera, H.; Balter, K.A.; Klint, A.; Bellocco, R.; Wiklund, F.; Stattin, P.;
Ikonen, T.; et al. Lactase Persistence, Dietary Intake of Milk, and the Risk for Prostate Cancer in Sweden and
Finland. Cancer Epidemiol. Prev. Biomark. 2007, 16, 956–961. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13.
Travis, R.C.; Appleby, P.N.; Siddiq, A.; Allen, N.E.; Kaaks, R.; Canzian, F.; Feller, S.; Tjonneland, A.; Fons
Johnsen, N.; Overvad, K.; et al. Genetic Variation in the Lactase Gene, Dairy Product Intake and Risk for
Prostate Cancer in the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition. Int. J. Cancer 2013, 132,
1901–1910. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14.
Lukito, W.; Malik, S.G.; Surono, I.S.; Wahlqvist, M.L. From ‘Lactose Intolerance’ to ‘Lactose Nutrition’.
Asia Pac. J. Clin. Nutr. 2015, 24, S1–S8. [PubMed]
15.
Lehtimaki, T.; Hutri-Kahonen, N.; Kahonen, M.; Hemminki, J.; Mikkila, V.; Laaksonen, M.; Rasanen, L.;
Mononen, N.; Juonala, M.; Marniemi, J.; et al. Adult-Type Hypolactasia Is Not a Predisposing Factor for the
Early Functional and Structural Changes of Atherosclerosis: The Cardiovascular Risk in Young Finns Study.
Clin. Sci. (Lond.) 2008, 115, 265–271. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16.
Almon, R.; Alvarez-Leon, E.E.; Serra-Majem, L. Association of the European Lactase Persistence Variant
(Lct-13910 C > T Polymorphism) with Obesity in the Canary Islands. PLoS ONE 2012, 7, e43978. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
17.
Almon, R.; Alvarez-Leon, E.E.; Engfeldt, P.; Serra-Majem, L.; Magnuson, A.; Nilsson, T.K. Associations
between Lactase Persistence and the Metabolic Syndrome in a Cross-Sectional Study in the Canary Islands.
Eur. J. Nutr. 2010, 49, 141–146. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
18.
Corella, D.; Arregui, M.; Coltell, O.; Portoles, O.; Guillem-Saiz, P.; Carrasco, P.; Sorli, J.V.; Ortega-Azorin, C.;
Gonzalez, J.I.; Ordovas, J.M. Association of the Lct-13910c > T Polymorphism with Obesity and Its
Modulation by Dairy Products in a Mediterranean Population. Obesity 2011, 19, 1707–1714. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
19.
Lamri, A.; Poli, A.; Emery, N.; Bellili, N.; Velho, G.; Lantieri, O.; Balkau, B.; Marre, M.; Fumeron, F. The
Lactase Persistence Genotype Is Associated with Body Mass Index and Dairy Consumption in the D.E.S.I.R.
Study. Metabolism 2013, 62, 1323–1329. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
20.
Bergholdt, H.K.; Nordestgaard, B.G.; Ellervik, C. Milk Intake Is Not Associated with Low Risk of Diabetes or
Overweight-Obesity: A Mendelian Randomization Study in 97,811 Danish Individuals. Am. J. Clin. Nutr.
2015, 102, 487–496. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
21.
Bergholdt, H.K.; Nordestgaard, B.G.; Varbo, A.; Ellervik, C. Milk Intake Is Not Associated with Ischaemic
Heart Disease in Observational or Mendelian Randomization Analyses in 98,529 Danish Adults. Int. J.
Epidemiol. 2015, 44, 587–603. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
22.
Hartwig, F.P.; Horta, B.L.; Smith, G.D.; de Mola, C.L.; Victora, C.G. Association of Lactase Persistence
Genotype with Milk Consumption, Obesity and Blood Pressure: A Mendelian Randomization Study in the
1982 Pelotas (Brazil) Birth Cohort, with a Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Int. J. Epidemiol. 2016, 45,
1573–1587. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23.
Smith, C.E.; Coltell, O.; Sorli, J.V.; Estruch, R.; Martinez-Gonzalez, M.A.; Salas-Salvado, J.; Fito, M.; Aros, F.;
Dashti, H.S.; Lai, C.Q.; et al. Associations of the Mcm6-Rs3754686 Proxy for Milk Intake in Mediterranean and
American Populations with Cardiovascular Biomarkers, Disease and Mortality: Mendelian Randomization.
Sci. Rep. 2016, 6, 33188. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24.
Ding, M.; Huang, T.; Bergholdt, H.K.; Nordestgaard, B.G.; Ellervik, C.; Qi, L.; Consortium, C. Dairy
Consumption, Systolic Blood Pressure, and Risk of Hypertension: Mendelian Randomization Study. BMJ
2017, 356, j1000. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25.
Szilagyi, A.; Nathwani, U.; Vinokuroff, C.; Correa, J.A.; Shrier, I. The Effect of Lactose Maldigestion on the
Relationship between Dairy Food Intake and Colorectal Cancer: A Systematic Review. Nutr. Cancer 2006, 55,
141–150. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 710
15 of 17
26.
Timpson, N.J.; Brennan, P.; Gaborieau, V.; Moore, L.; Zaridze, D.; Matveev, V.; Szeszenia-Dabrowska, N.;
Lissowska, J.; Mates, D.; Bencko, V.; et al. Can Lactase Persistence Genotype Be Used to Reassess the
Relationship between Renal Cell Carcinoma and Milk Drinking? Potentials and Problems in the Application
of Mendelian Randomization. Cancer Epidemiol. Prev. Biomark. 2010, 19, 1341–1348. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27.
Obermayer-Pietsch, B.M.; Bonelli, C.M.; Walter, D.E.; Kuhn, R.J.; Fahrleitner-Pammer, A.; Berghold, A.;
Goessler, W.; Stepan, V.; Dobnig, H.; Leb, G.; et al. Genetic Predisposition for Adult Lactose Intolerance and
Relation to Diet, Bone Density, and Bone Fractures. J. Bone Miner. Res. 2004, 19, 42–47. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
28.
Enattah, N.; Pekkarinen, T.; Valimaki, M.J.; Loyttyniemi, E.; Jarvela, I. Genetically Defined Adult-Type
Hypolactasia and Self-Reported Lactose Intolerance as Risk Factors of Osteoporosis in Finnish
Postmenopausal Women. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 2005, 59, 1105–1111. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
29.
Yang, Q.; Lin, S.L.; Au Yeung, S.L.; Kwok, M.K.; Xu, L.; Leung, G.M.; Schooling, C.M. Genetically
Predicted Milk Consumption and Bone Health, Ischemic Heart Disease and Type 2 Diabetes: A Mendelian
Randomization Study. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 2017. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
30.
Hinney, A.; Vogel, C.I.; Hebebrand, J. From Monogenic to Polygenic Obesity: Recent Advances. Eur. Child
Adolesc. Psychiatry 2010, 19, 297–310. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
31.
Stein, Q.P.; Mroch, A.R.; De Berg, K.L.; Flanagan, J.D. The Influential Role of Genes in Obesity. South Dak.
Med. 2011, 12–15, 17.
32.
Kettunen, J.; Silander, K.; Saarela, O.; Amin, N.; Muller, M.; Timpson, N.; Surakka, I.; Ripatti, S.; Laitinen, J.;
Hartikainen, A.L.; et al. European Lactase Persistence Genotype Shows Evidence of Association with
Increase in Body Mass Index. Hum. Mol. Genet. 2010, 19, 1129–1136. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33.
Manco, L.; Dias, H.; Muc, M.; Padez, C. The Lactase-13910 C > T Polymorphism (Rs4988235) Is Associated
with Overweight/Obesity and Obesity-Related Variables in a Population Sample of Portuguese Young
Adults. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 2017, 71, 21–24. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34.
Savaiano, D.A.; Levitt, M.D. Milk Intolerance and Microbe-Containing Dairy Foods. J. Dairy Sci. 1987, 70,
397–406. [CrossRef]
35.
Phelan, M.; Kerins, D. The Potential Role of Milk-Derived Peptides in Cardiovascular Disease. Food Funct.
2011, 2, 153–167. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36.
Meisel, H. Multifunctional Peptides Encrypted in Milk Proteins. Biofactors 2004, 21, 55–61. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
37.
Sluijs, I.; Forouhi, N.G.; Beulens, J.W.; van der Schouw, Y.T.; Agnoli, C.; Arriola, L.; Balkau, B.; Barricarte, A.;
Boeing, H.; Bueno-de-Mesquita, H.B.; et al. The Amount and Type of Dairy Product Intake and Incident Type
2 Diabetes: Results from the EPIC-Interact Study. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2012, 96, 382–390. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
38.
Talaei, M.; Pan, A.; Yuan, J.M.; Koh, W.P. Dairy Intake and Risk of Type 2 Diabetes. Clin. Nutr. 2017.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
39.
Drouin-Chartier, J.P.; Cote, J.A.; Labonte, M.E.; Brassard, D.; Tessier-Grenier, M.; Desroches, S.; Couture, P.;
Lamarche, B. Comprehensive Review of the Impact of Dairy Foods and Dairy Fat on Cardiometabolic Risk.
Adv. Nutr. 2016, 7, 1041–1051. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
40.
Astrup, A. Yogurt and Dairy Product Consumption to Prevent Cardiometabolic Diseases: Epidemiologic
and Experimental Studies. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2014, 99, 1235S–1242S. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
41.
Drouin-Chartier, J.P.; Brassard, D.; Tessier-Grenier, M.; Cote, J.A.; Labonte, M.E.; Desroches, S.; Couture, P.;
Lamarche, B. Systematic Review of the Association between Dairy Product Consumption and Risk of
Cardiovascular-Related Clinical Outcomes. Adv. Nutr. 2016, 7, 1026–1040. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
42.
Pasiakos, S.M. Metabolic Advantages of Higher Protein Diets and Benefits of Dairy Foods on Weight
Management, Glycemic Regulation, and Bone. J. Food Sci. 2015, 80, A2–A7. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
43.
McGregor, R.A.; Poppitt, S.D. Milk Protein for Improved Metabolic Health: A Review of the Evidence. Nutr.
Metab. (Lond.) 2013, 10, 46. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44.
Bourrie, B.C.; Willing, B.P.; Cotter, P.D. The Microbiota and Health Promoting Characteristics of the
Fermented Beverage Kefir. Front. Microbiol. 2016, 7, 647. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45.
Bell, S.; Daskalopoulou, M.; Rapsomaniki, E.; George, J.; Britton, A.; Bobak, M.; Casas, J.P.; Dale, C.E.;
Denaxas, S.; Shah, A.D.; et al. Association between Clinically Recorded Alcohol Consumption and Initial
Presentation of 12 Cardiovascular Diseases: Population Based Cohort Study Using Linked Health Records.
BMJ 2017, 356, j909. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 710
16 of 17
46.
Yang, Y.; Wang, X.; Yao, Q.; Qin, L.; Xu, C. Dairy Product, Calcium Intake and Lung Cancer Risk: A Systematic
Review with Meta-Analysis. Sci. Rep. 2016, 6, 20624. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
47.
Zang, J.; Shen, M.; Du, S.; Chen, T.; Zou, S. The Association between Dairy Intake and Breast Cancer in
Western and Asian Populations: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. J. Breast Cancer 2015, 18, 313–322.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
48.
Aune, D.; Navarro Rosenblatt, D.A.; Chan, D.S.; Vieira, A.R.; Vieira, R.; Greenwood, D.C.; Vatten, L.J.;
Norat, T. Dairy Products, Calcium, and Prostate Cancer Risk: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of
Cohort Studies. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2015, 101, 87–117. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
49.
Aune, D.; Lau, R.; Chan, D.S.; Vieira, R.; Greenwood, D.C.; Kampman, E.; Norat, T. Dairy Products and
Colorectal Cancer Risk: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Cohort Studies. Ann. Oncol. 2012, 23,
37–45. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
50.
Genkinger, J.M.; Hunter, D.J.; Spiegelman, D.; Anderson, K.E.; Arslan, A.; Beeson, W.L.; Buring, J.E.;
Fraser, G.E.; Freudenheim, J.L.; Goldbohm, R.A.; et al. Dairy Products and Ovarian Cancer: A Pooled
Analysis of 12 Cohort Studies. Cancer Epidemiol. Prev. Biomark. 2006, 15, 364–372. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
51.
Murphy, N.; Norat, T.; Ferrari, P.; Jenab, M.; Bueno-de-Mesquita, B.; Skeie, G.; Olsen, A.; Tjonneland, A.;
Dahm, C.C.; Overvad, K.; et al. Consumption of Dairy Products and Colorectal Cancer in the European
Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC). PLoS ONE 2013, 8, e72715. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
52.
Huncharek, M.; Muscat, J.; Kupelnick, B. Colorectal Cancer Risk and Dietary Intake of Calcium, Vitamin D,
and Dairy Products: A Meta-Analysis of 26,335 Cases from 60 Observational Studies. Nutr. Cancer 2009, 61,
47–69. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
53.
Singh, G.; Lakkis, C.L.; Laucirica, R.; Epner, D.E. Regulation of Prostate Cancer Cell Division by Glucose.
J. Cell. Physiol. 1999, 180, 431–438. [CrossRef]
54.
Rock, C.L. Milk and the Risk and Progression of Cancer. Nestle Nutr. Workshop Ser. Pediatr. Program. 2011, 67,
173–185. [PubMed]
55.
Ji, J.; Sundquist, J.; Sundquist, K. Lactose Intolerance and Risk of Lung, Breast and Ovarian Cancers:
Aetiological Clues from a Population-Based Study in Sweden. Br. J. Cancer 2015, 112, 149–152. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
56.
Fardellone, P.; Sejourne, A.; Blain, H.; Cortet, B.; Thomas, T.; Committee, G.S. Osteoporosis: Is Milk
a Kindness or a Curse? Jt. Bone Spine 2016, 84, 275–281. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
57.
Durosier-Izart, C.; Biver, E.; Merminod, F.; van Rietbergen, B.; Chevalley, T.; Herrmann, F.R.; Ferrari, S.L.;
Rizzoli, R. Peripheral Skeleton Bone Strength Is Positively Correlated with Total and Dairy Protein Intakes in
Healthy Postmenopausal Women. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2017, 105, 513–525. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
58.
Bowen, J.; Noakes, M.; Clifton, P.M. A High Dairy Protein, High-Calcium Diet Minimizes Bone Turnover in
Overweight Adults During Weight Loss. J. Nutr. 2004, 134, 568–573. [PubMed]
59.
Wlodarek, D.; Glabska, D.; Kolota, A.; Adamczyk, P.; Czekajlo, A.; Grzeszczak, W.; Drozdzowska, B.;
Pluskiewicz, W. Calcium Intake and Osteoporosis: The Influence of Calcium Intake from Dairy Products on
Hip Bone Mineral Density and Fracture Incidence—A Population-Based Study in Women over 55 Years of
Age. Public Health Nutr. 2014, 17, 383–389. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
60.
Wadolowska, L.; Sobas, K.; Szczepanska, J.W.; Slowinska, M.A.; Czlapka-Matyasik, M.; Niedzwiedzka, E.
Dairy Products, Dietary Calcium and Bone Health: Possibility of Prevention of Osteoporosis in Women:
The Polish Experience. Nutrients 2013, 5, 2684–2707. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
61.
Martin Jimenez, J.A.; Consuegra Moya, B.; Martin Jimenez, M.T. Nutritional Factors in Preventing
Osteoporosis. Nutr. Hosp. 2015, 32, 49–55. [PubMed]
62.
Buzas, G.M. Lactose Intolerance: Past and Present. Part II. Orvosi Hetil. 2015, 156, 1741–1749.
63.
Loria-Kohen, V.; Espinosa-Salinas, I.; Ramirez de Molina, A.; Casas-Agustench, P.; Herranz, J.; Molina, S.;
Fonolla, J.; Olivares, M.; Lara-Villoslada, F.; Reglero, G.; et al. A Genetic Variant of PPARA Modulates
Cardiovascular Risk Biomarkers after Milk Consumption.
Nutrition 2014, 30, 1144–1150.
[CrossRef]
[PubMed]
64.
Abdullah, M.M.; Cyr, A.; Lepine, M.C.; Eck, P.K.; Couture, P.; Lamarche, B.; Jones, P.J. Common Variants in
Cholesterol Synthesis- and Transport-Related Genes Associate with Circulating Cholesterol Responses to
Intakes of Conventional Dairy Products in Healthy Individuals. J. Nutr. 2016, 146, 1008–1016. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 710
17 of 17
65.
Hubner, R.A.; Muir, K.R.; Liu, J.F.; Logan, R.F.; Grainge, M.J.; Houlston, R.S.; Members of UKCAP Consortium.
Dairy Products, Polymorphisms in the Vitamin D Receptor Gene and Colorectal Adenoma Recurrence. Int. J.
Cancer 2008, 123, 586–593. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
66.
Neyestani, T.R.; Djazayery, A.; Shab-Bidar, S.; Eshraghian, M.R.; Kalayi, A.; Shariatzadeh, N.; Khalaji, N.;
Zahedirad, M.; Gharavi, A.; Houshiarrad, A.; et al. Vitamin D Receptor Fok-I Polymorphism Modulates
Diabetic Host Response to Vitamin D Intake: Need for a Nutrigenetic Approach. Diabetes Care 2013, 36,
550–556. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
67.
Shab-Bidar, S.; Neyestani, T.R.; Djazayery, A. The Interactive Effect of Improvement of Vitamin D Status and
VDR Foki Variants on Oxidative Stress in Type 2 Diabetic Subjects: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Eur. J.
Clin. Nutr. 2015, 69, 216–222. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
68.
Shab-Bidar, S.; Neyestani, T.R.; Djazayery, A. Vitamin D Receptor Cdx-2-Dependent Response of Central
Obesity to Vitamin D Intake in the Subjects with Type 2 Diabetes: A Randomised Clinical Trial. Br. J. Nutr.
2015, 114, 1375–1384. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
69.
Sotos-Prieto, M.; Guillen, M.; Guillem-Saiz, P.; Portoles, O.; Corella, D. The Rs1466113 Polymorphism in the
Somatostatin Receptor 2 Gene Is Associated with Obesity and Food Intake in a Mediterranean Population.
Ann. Nutr. Metab. 2010, 57, 124–131. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
70.
InterAct, C. Investigation of Gene-Diet Interactions in the Incretin System and Risk of Type 2 Diabetes:
The EPIC-Interact Study. Diabetologia 2016, 59, 2613–2621.
71.
Eigler, T.; Ben-Shlomo, A. Somatostatin System: Molecular Mechanisms Regulating Anterior Pituitary
Hormones. J. Mol. Endocrinol. 2014, 53, R1–R19. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
© 2017 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
