 Lectin-type oxidized LDL receptor-1 distinguishes population of 
human polymorphonuclear myeloid-derived suppressor cells in 
cancer patients
Thomas Condamine1,10, George A. Dominguez1, Je-In Youn1,11, Andrew V. Kossenkov1, 
Sridevi Mony1, Kevin Alicea-Torres1, Evgenii Tcyganov1, Ayumi Hashimoto1, Yulia 
Nefedova1, Cindy Lin1, Simona Partlova1,12, Alfred Garfall2,5, Dan T. Vogl2,5, Xiaowei Xu2,5, 
Stella C. Knight3, George Malietzis3,4, Gui Han Lee3,4, Evgeniy Eruslanov2, Steven M. 
Albelda2,5, Xianwei Wang6, Jawahar L. Mehta6, Meenakshi Bewtra5, Anil Rustgi2,5, Neil 
Hockstein7, Robert Witt7, Gregory Masters7, Brian Nam7, Denis Smirnov8, Manuel A. 
Sepulveda8, and Dmitry I. Gabrilovich1,9
1The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA
2Abramson Cancer Center, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA
3Antigen Presentation Research Group, Imperial College London, London, UK HA1 3UJ
4St. Mark’s Hospital, Harrow, UK, HA1 3UJ
5Division of Gastroenterology, Departments of Medicine and Genetics, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA
6Department of Medicine, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, USA
7Helen F. Graham Cancer Center & Research Institute, Christiana Care Health System, Newark, 
DE 19713, USA
8Janssen Oncology Therapeutic Area, Janssen Research and Development, LLC, 
Pharmaceutical Companies of Johnson & Johnson, Spring House, PA, 19477, USA
9Address for correspondence: Dmitry I. Gabrilovich, The Wistar Institute, 3601 Spruce Street, room 118, Philadelphia, PA, 19104; 
phone: 215-495-6955; Fax: 215-495-6948 dgabrilovich@wistar.org.
10Current address: Incyte Corporation, 1801 Augustine Cut-Off, Wilmington, DE 19803
11Current address: Wide River Institute of Immunology, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Seoul National University College of 
Medicine, Seoul 03080, South Korea,
12Current address: SOTIO a. s., Prague, Czech Republic
Supplemental material
Eight supplemental figures and one table describing details results of microarray analysis and gating strategies by flow cytometry.
Figure S1. Gene expression differences between PMN-MDSCs and PMN cells from cancer patients and healthy donors
Figure S2. CD16 and LOX-1 staining in PMN
Figure S3. Siglec-8 staining of CD15+ PMN
Figure S4. Typical staining of healthy donors neutrophils
Figure S5. List of genes and their relative expression targeted by 93 microarray probes shown to be highly differentially expressed 
(FDR<5%, fold>2) for both LOX-1+/LOX-1- and PMN-MDSC/PMN comparisons
Figure S6. LOX-1 antibody does not induce immune suppressive activity of PMN
Figure S7. LOX-1 expression in mouse PMN-MDSC
Figure S8. LOX-1 expression is not associated with mouse PMN-MDSC
Table S1. Canonical pathways identified by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) among genes significantly differentially expressed 
between PMN-MDSC and PMN cells.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Sci Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 25.
Published in final edited form as:
Sci Immunol. 2016 August ; 1(2): . doi:10.1126/sciimmunol.aaf8943.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Abstract
Polymorphonuclear myeloid-derived suppressor cells (PMN-MDSC) are important regulators of 
immune responses in cancer and have been directly implicated in promotion of tumor progression. 
However, the heterogeneity of these cells and lack of distinct markers hampers the progress in 
understanding of the biology and clinical importance of these cells. Using partial enrichment of 
PMN-MDSC with gradient centrifugation we determined that low density PMN-MDSC and high 
density neutrophils from the same cancer patients had a distinct gene profile. Most prominent 
changes were observed in the expression of genes associated with endoplasmic reticulum (ER) 
stress. Surprisingly, low-density lipoprotein (LDL) was one of the most increased regulators and 
its receptor oxidized LDL receptor 1 OLR1 was one of the most overexpressed genes in PMN-
MDSC. Lectin-type oxidized LDL receptor 1 (LOX-1) encoded by OLR1 was practically 
undetectable in neutrophils in peripheral blood of healthy donors, whereas 5–15% of total 
neutrophils in cancer patients and 15–50% of neutrophils in tumor tissues were LOX-1+. In 
contrast to their LOX-1− counterparts, LOX-1+ neutrophils had gene signature, potent immune 
suppressive activity, up-regulation of ER stress, and other biochemical characteristics of PMN-
MDSC. Moreover, induction of ER stress in neutrophils from healthy donors up-regulated LOX-1 
expression and converted these cells to suppressive PMN-MDSC. Thus, we identified a specific 
marker of human PMN-MDSC associated with ER stress and lipid metabolism, which provides 
new insight to the biology and potential therapeutic targeting of these cells.
Introduction
The accumulation of relatively immature and pathologically activated myeloid-derived 
suppressor cells (MDSC) with potent immunosuppressive activity is common in tumors. 
MDSC have the ability to support tumor progression by promoting tumor cell survival, 
angiogenesis, invasion of healthy tissue by tumor cells, and metastases (reviewed in (1)). 
There is now ample evidence of the association of accumulation of immune suppressive 
MDSC with negative clinical outcomes in various cancers (2). MDSC have been implicated 
in resistance to anticancer therapies with kinase inhibitor (3), chemotherapy (4–7), and 
immune therapy (8–12). Two large populations of MDSC are currently described: 
polymorphonuclear (PMN-MDSC) and monocytic cells (M-MDSC) (13). PMN-MDSC is 
the most abundant population of MDSC in most types of cancer, phenotypically and 
morphologically similar to neutrophils (PMN)(14). These cells share the 
CD11b+CD14−CD15+/CD66b+ phenotype. Currently, these cells can be separated only in 
peripheral blood (PB) and only by density gradient. Distinction between PMN-MDSC and 
PMN in tumor tissues is not possible. Since gradient centrifugation may enrich not only for 
true PMN-MDSC but also for activated PMN without suppressive activity the heterogeneity 
of PMN-MDSC population raised the questions of whether PMN-MDSC and PMN are truly 
cells with distinct features. It is not clear what defines the specific functional state of human 
PMN-MDSC vis-à-vis PMN in the same patient. More importantly, the mechanisms 
responsible for acquisition of pathological activity by human neutrophils in cancer remained 
unclear. In this study we attempted to address these questions by evaluating populations of 
PMN-MDSC and PMN from the same patients. We identified genomic signature of PMN-
Condamine et al.
Page 2
Sci Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 MDSC and surface marker specific for these cells. We found that induction of ER stress 
response was sufficient to convert neutrophils to PMN-MDSC.
Results
Human PMN-MDSC have a distinct gene expression profile from neutrophils
To compare PMN-MDSC and PMN from PB of the same patients with non-small cell lung 
cancer (NSCLC) and head and neck cancer (HNC) we used dual-density Histopaque 
gradient, the standard method of isolation of PMN-MDSC (15). Low density PMN-MDSC 
are co-purified with PBMC, whereas high density PMN are collected from lower gradient 
(16). As a control, PMN from healthy donors were used. Both, low-density PMN-MDSCs 
and high-density PMN were purified further with CD15 magnetic beads to achieve similar 
high purity of both cell populations (Fig. 1A). Immune suppressive activity of PMN-MDSC, 
the main characteristics of these cells, was confirmed in allogeneic mixed leukocyte reaction 
(MLR) (Fig. 1B) and in autologous system with T cells activated by CD3/CD28 antibodies 
(Fig. 1C). As expected, PMN were not suppressive (Fig. 1B,C)
In order to study overall differences and similarities between patients’ PMN and PMN-
MDSC as well as PMNs from healthy donors, we performed whole-genome analysis using 
Illumina HumanHT-12 v4 bead arrays. The direct pair-wise comparison identified 1870 
array probes significantly differentially expressed (FDR<5%) between PMN-MDSC and 
PMN in the same patients (Fig. S1A) and 36 probes showed difference of at least 5 fold (Fig. 
S1B). Hierarchical clustering of the samples using expression of the 985 most differentially 
expressed genes (fold>2, p<0.05, Fig. 1D) revealed that PMN-MDSC samples have a unique 
expression profile and PMN from cancer patients are very similar to healthy donor PMN 
samples, as they grouped within the same cluster for HNC and NSCLC patients (Figure 1E). 
Specifically, of the 985 genes different between any pair of groups, the majority (74%) 
showed significant differences (false discovery rate, FDR<5%) between patients’ PMN-
MDSC and PMN, while no genes were significantly different when corrected for multiple 
testing (best FDR=19%) between PMN from healthy donors and PMN from cancer patients, 
with only 12% of the genes significantly different at nominal p<0.05, which indicates a high 
similarity of PMN samples between cancer patients and healthy donors.
Using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis, we identified 14 pathways significantly enriched in 
PMN-MDSCs, including eukaryotic Translation Initiation Factors 2 and 4 (eIF2 and eIF4) 
pathways and mTOR signaling (Table. S1). The regulators of genes enriched in PMN-
MDSC included regulators of ER stress response, MAPK pathway, CSF1, IL-6, IFN-γ, NF-
κB. Interestingly, these molecules were previously directly implicated in MDSC biology, 
primarily PMN-MDSC (reviewed in (17)). Surprisingly, one of the most significant changes 
was associated with low-density lipoprotein (LDL) (Fig. 1F). Thus, PMN-MDSC had a 
distinct genomic profile from PMN isolated from the same cancer patients and PMN from 
healthy donors. Genes associated with ER stress and immune responses were among the 
most up-regulated in PMN-MDSC.
Condamine et al.
Page 3
Sci Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 LOX-1 is differentially expressed on PMN-MDSC and PMN
To search for potential markers of PMN-MDSC we evaluated differentially expressed genes, 
which encoded surface molecules and compared expression of various surface molecules 
between PMN-MDSC and PMN from the same patients and PMN from healthy donors. 
More than 20 genes encoded surface molecules were found to be differentially expressed in 
PMN-MDSC and PMN (Fig. 2A). In an attempt to validate these observations we tested 
surface expression of some of the proteins using available antibodies and flow cytometry. 
Unexpectedly, the differences were found in the expression of lectin-like oxidized low-
density lipoprotein receptor-1 (LOX-1), a 50kDa transmembrane glycoprotein encoded by 
the OLR1 gene (oxidized LDL receptor 1) (18). In our analysis OLR1 was one of the mostly 
up-regulated genes in PMN-MDSC (Fig. S1B). LOX-1 is one of the main receptors for 
oxidized- LDL (oxLDL) (19). It also binds other ligands including other modified 
lipoproteins, advanced glycation end products, aged red blood cells, apoptotic cells and 
activated platelets (20). LOX-1 is expressed on endothelial cells, macrophages, smooth 
muscle cells, and some intestinal cell lines (18). However, it has not been associated with 
neutrophils.
We evaluated LOX-1 expression in high density PMN and low-density PMN-MDSC in 
cancer patients (Fig. 2B). LOX-1 was practically undetectable in PMN but expressed in 
about 1/3 of PMN-MDSC fraction (Fig. 2C). Since LOX-1 can be expressed on platelets 
(21) and it is known that platelets can adhere to activated PMN we asked whether increased 
expression of LOX-1 in PMN-MDSC fraction was the result of increased adherence of 
platelets. However, LOX-1− and LOX-1+ cells in low density PMN-MDSC population had 
the same small proportion of cells that express platelets markers CD41a and CD42b (Fig. 
2D). We asked whether LOX-1 expression on PMN correlated with CD16 expression 
associated with neutrophil activation (22, 23). Almost all PMN in cancer patients were 
CD16hi and expression of LOX-1 on PMN was not associated with CD16 expression (Fig. 
S2).
These results suggested that LOX-1 could be associated with PMN-MDSC. We asked 
whether LOX-1 can be a marker of PMN-MDSC. Cell density as a criterion for separation of 
PMN-MDSC from PMN has serious limitations. It may be changed during handling of cells. 
In addition, gradient centrifugation may enrich not only for PMN-MDSC but also for 
activated PMN without suppressive activity, which contribute to well established 
heterogeneity of PMN-MDSC population. Therefore, we avoided the use of gradient 
centrifugation and labeled cells in PB directly with granulocyte-specific CD15 antibody and 
evaluated expression of LOX-1 among all CD15+ cells (Fig. 2E). In preliminary experiments 
we found no differences in the results obtained with CD15 or CD66b antibodies. We referred 
to CD15+ cells as PMN since Siglec-8+ eosinophils represented very small proportion of 
CD15+ cells and no differences in the presence of eosinophils between CD15+LOX-1+ and 
CD15+LOX-1− cells was seen (Fig. S3). The proportion of LOX-1+ cells among all PMN in 
healthy donors was very low (range 0.1–1.5, mean 0.7%) (Fig. 2F and Fig. S4). In patients 
with NSCLC it increased to 4.9% (p<0.001), in patients with HNC to 6.4% (p<0.0001), and 
in patients with colon cancer (CC) to 6.5% (p=0.0035) (Fig. 2F). In all three types of cancer 
>75% of patients had proportion of LOX-1+ PMN higher than the range established for 
Condamine et al.
Page 4
Sci Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 healthy donors. We also assessed the changes in LOX-1+PMN in tumor-free patients with 
inflammatory conditions: eosinophilic esophagitis, ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease. 
Only patients with Crohn’s disease had a small increase in the proportion of these cells (Fig. 
2G). Thus, LOX-1 expression defined distinct population of neutrophils in cancer patients 
and was associated with accumulation of PMN-MDSC.
LOX-1 defines the population of PMN-MDSC among neutrophils
Next, we addressed the question whether LOX-1 can be considered as marker of human 
PMN-MDSC. LOX-1+ and LOX-1− PMN were sorted directly from PB of the same patients. 
LOX-1− PMN had the typical morphology of mature neutrophils, whereas LOX-1+ PMN 
displayed more immature morphology with band shape nuclei (Fig. 3A). Whole gene 
expression array was performed on LOX-1+ and LOX-1− PMN and compared with that of 
PMN and PMN-MDSC. Analysis of gene expression revealed 639 genes significantly 
different between LOX-1+ and LOX-1− (FDR<5%, fold>2) and based on expression of those 
genes LOX-1+ PMN clustered together with PMN-MDSC, whereas LOX-1− PMN were very 
similar to patients’ and healthy donor’s PMN (Fig. 3B). Overall, 92% of those genes had the 
same direction of change between LOX1+/LOX1− as between PMN-MDSC/PMN with 93 
probes significantly upregulated (FDR<5%) at least 2 fold or more in both PMN-MDSC and 
LOX-1+ PMN (Fig. 3C and Fig. S5). Thus, LOX-1+ PMN from cancer patients had gene 
expression profile similar to that of PMN-MDSC.
The hallmark of PMN-MDSC is their ability to suppress T-cell function. We isolated 
LOX-1− and LOX-1+ PMN directly from PB of cancer patients and used them in T-cell 
suppression assay. LOX-1+ PMN suppressed T-cell proliferation, whereas LOX-1− PMN did 
not (Fig. 3D). We asked whether the LOX-1 antibody used for isolation of PMN-MDSC 
could directly affect the functional activity of PMN. PMN isolated from cancer patients were 
cultured with T cells in the presence of LOX-1 antibody or IgG isotype control. LOX-1 
antibody did not make PMN to acquire immune suppressive function (Fig. S6). We asked 
whether LOX-1 neutralizing antibody (R&D Systems) could block suppressive activity of 
LOX-1+ PMN. LOX-1+ and LOX-1− PMN were isolated from two patients with NSCLC 
and added to MLR in the presence LOX-1 antibody at concentration (10 µg/ml) that block 
more than 90% of LOX-1 binding or the same amount of mouse IgG. In both experiments 
LOX-1 antibody did not abrogate suppressive activity of LOX-1+ PMN. LOX-1− PMN had 
no suppressive activity in any experiments. (Fig. 3E).
We then evaluated possible mechanisms responsible for LOX-1+ PMN-MDSC suppression. 
We tested several common mechanisms implicated in PMN-MDSC function. LOX-1+ PMN-
MDSC had significantly higher production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) than LOX-1− 
PMN (Fig. 3F). Whole genome array showed that LOX-1+ PMN-MDSC had higher 
expression of ARG1, the gene directly associated with PMN-MDSC function, than LOX-1− 
PMN. These differences were not statistically significant (FDR=7%). However, direct 
evaluation of ARG1 expression by qPCR revealed significantly higher expression of this 
gene in LOX-1+ PMN-MDSC than in LOX-1− PMN (Fig. 3G). Expression of NOS2 in 
PMN was much lower than that of ARG1. However, it was still significantly higher in 
LOX-1+ PMN-MDSC than in LOX-1− PMN (Fig. 3G). We tested the contribution of ROS 
Condamine et al.
Page 5
Sci Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and ARG1 to immune suppression mediated by LOX-1+ PMN-MDSC. Both, ROS scavenger 
N-acetylcysteine (NAC) and catalase significantly decreased suppressive activity of LOX-1+ 
PMN (Fig. 4A). Inhibitor of Arg1 Nor-NOHA abrogated suppressive activity of these cells 
(Fig. 4B). Thus, taken together these data demonstrate that LOX-1+ PMN indeed represent a 
population of PMN- MDSC. Therefore, for clarity in this study we further refer to these cells 
as LOX-1+ PMN-MDSC.
We investigated the possible role of LOX-1 as marker of mouse PMN-MDSC. Similar to 
human PMN, CD11b+Ly6CloLy6G+ mouse PMN had very low expression of LOX-1. 
However, in contrast to human PMN-MDSC, spleen, BM, or tumor PMN-MDSC from mice 
bearing EL-4 lymphoma or Lewis Lung Carcinoma (LLC) did not up-regulate LOX-1 
expression (Fig. S7). To evaluate the possible role of LOX-1 in PMN-MDSC function we 
used bone marrow (BM) cells from LOX-1 knockout olr1−/) mice (24). Lethally irradiated 
wild-type recipients were reconstituted with congenic bone marrow cells isolated from wild-
type or olr1−/− mice. Ten weeks after reconstitution donor’s cells represented more than 95% 
of all myeloid cells. LLC tumor was implanted s.c. and mice evaluated 3 weeks later. No 
differences in the presence of PMN-MDSC in spleens or tumors were observed between 
mice reconstituted with WT and LOX-1 KO BM (Fig. S8A). WT and olr1−/− PMN-MDSC 
suppressed T-cell proliferation equally well (Fig. S8B). Gene expression profile 
demonstrated no differences between WT and olr1−/− PMN-MDSC. WT PMN-MDSC had 
the same undetectable level of olr1 expression as olr1−/− PMN-MDSC. Thus, in contrast to 
humans, mouse LOX-1 is not associated with PMN-MDSC.
ER stress regulates LOX-1 expression in PMN-MDSC
What could induce LOX-1 up-regulation in PMN-MDSC? Based on the fact that in 
endothelial cells LOX-1 can be induced by pro-inflammatory cytokines (25), we tested the 
effect of several cytokines as well as tumor-cell conditioned medium (TCM) on LOX-1 
expression in PMN isolated from healthy donors. None of the tested pro-inflammatory 
cytokines (IL-1β, TNFα, IL-6) or TCM induced upregulation of LOX-1 in PMN after 24 hr 
culture (GM-CSF was added to protect PMN viability) (Fig. 4C).
Our previous observations (16) and data obtained in this study demonstrated that PMN-
MDSC in cancer patients displayed signs of ER stress response. LOX-1+ and LOX-1− PMN 
were isolated from PB of cancer patients and expression of genes associated with ER-stress 
were evaluated. LOX-1+PMN-MDSC had significantly higher expression of sXBP1 and its 
target gene SEC61a than LOX-1− PMN. Expression of ATF4 and its target gene ATF3 was 
also higher in LOX-1+ PMN-MDSC. No changes in the expression of CHOP were observed 
(Fig. 4D). To test the effect of ER-stress on expression of LOX-1, PMN from healthy donors 
were treated with ER stress inducers: thapsigargin (THG) or dithiothreitol (DTT) overnight 
in the presence of GM-CSF. At selected doses (THG -1 µM, DTT – 1mM) cell viability 
remained above 95%. Both, THG and DTT caused dramatic up-regulation of LOX-1 
expression in PMN (Fig. 4E).
Overnight THG treatment of PMN caused acquisition of potent immune suppressive activity 
by the PMN (Fig. 5A). Since LOX-1+ PMN-MDSC have increased expression preferentially 
of one of ER stress sensors – sXBP1, we verified the role of ER stress using recently 
Condamine et al.
Page 6
Sci Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 developed selective inhibitor of sXBP1 – B-I09 (26). In the presence of B-I09 THG failed to 
induce up-regulation of LOX-1 (Fig. 5B) and immune suppressive activity of PMN (Fig. 
5C). THG treatment did not affect typical polymorphonuclear morphology of these cells 
(Fig. 5D). Thus, induction of ER stress in control neutrophils converted these cells to 
immune suppressive PMN-MDSC, which was associated with up-regulation of LOX-1 
expression.
Up-regulation of intracellular Ca2+ and reactive oxygen (ROS) are among of the 
consequences of THG treatment. We asked whether activation of neutrophils with agents 
that cause up-regulation of intracellular Ca2+ and ROS may also result to similar up-
regulation of LOX-1 and suppressive activity as THG. We used two compounds: N-
Formylmethionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine (fMLP) and phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA). 
Both, fMLP and PMA caused massive up-regulation of LOX-1 expression on control PMN 
within 60 min after the start of the treatment (Fig. 5E). However, in contrast to THG, 
expression of LOX-1 in fMLP treated PMN returned to control (untreated cells) level after 
overnight culture despite the presence of fMLP in the culture (Fig. 5E). PMN did not survive 
overnight treatment with PMA. PMN treated for 60 min with fMLP or PMA were washed 
and used in T-cell suppression assay. No suppressive activity was observed (Fig. 5F). In 
another set of experiments PMN were cultured with fMLP for 18 hr before used in 
suppressive assay. However, this treatment also did not result in the development of 
suppressive activity by PMN (Fig. 5F). These data indicate that transient up-regulation of 
LOX-1 as a result of PMN activation was not associated with immune suppressive activity.
LOX-1 defines PMN-MDSC in tumor tissues
It is known that LOX-1 is shed from the surface of the cells and can be detected in plasma 
(27). We evaluated correlation between the presence of PMN-MDSC in cancer patients and 
soluble LOX-1 in plasma. In NSCLC and CC patients, the proportion of PMN-MDSC was 
associated with soluble LOX-1 (Fig. 6A) suggesting that these cells may be an important 
source of LOX-1 in plasma of cancer patients.
There is now sufficient evidence demonstrating that tumor MDSC are more suppressive than 
cells in PB (reviewed in(28)). We asked whether the population of PMN-MDSC is more 
prevalent among all PMN in tumors than in PB. The proportion of LOX-1+ cells in CD15+ 
PMN isolated from tumors of patients with HNC and NSCLC was > 3-fold higher than in 
CD15+ PMN from PB of the same patients (p<0.001) (Fig. 6B). Cells in blood and tumor 
tissues were subjected to the same digestion protocol. However, to exclude possible effect of 
tissue digestions and isolation on LOX-1 expression, we also evaluated patients with 
multiple myeloma (MM) where the tumor is located in bone marrow (BM). We previously 
have shown substantial increase of PMN-MDSC in both BM and PB of MM patients (29). 
Similar to solid tumors, the proportion of LOX-1+ PMN-MDSC in BM was 3–4-fold higher 
than in PB of the same patients (p=0.004) (Fig. 6C). LOX-1+ PMN-MDSC isolated from 
BM of patients with MM had profound immune suppressive activity, whereas LOX-1− PMN 
did not suppress T cells (Fig. 6D) supporting the conclusion that LOX-1+ PMN represent 
PMN-MDSC at the tumor site.
Condamine et al.
Page 7
Sci Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 To evaluate the presence of LOX-1+ PMN-MDSC in tumor tissues, we have developed a 
method of immune fluorescent staining of paraffin-embedded tissues with combination of 
LOX-1 and CD15 antibody (Fig. 6E). Control tissues from normal skin, colon and lymph 
nodes had similar low numbers of LOX-1+CD15+ PMN-MDSC (Fig. 6F). No statistical 
differences were found in the presence of these cells in melanoma samples, which is 
consistent with findings that M-MDSC but not PMN-MDSC are the predominant population 
of MDSC in these patients (2). The number of LOX-1+CD15+ PMN-MDSC in colon 
carcinoma increased more than 8-fold, in HNC more than 10-fold, and in NSCLC almost 8-
fold (Fig. 6F). Thus, LOX-1 expression defines the population of PMN-MDSC in tumor 
tissues.
OLR-1 expression and the presence of LOX-1+PMN-MDSC are associated with clinical 
parameters
Using ONCOMINE and TCGA databases we evaluated the association of OLR1 expression 
in tumor tissues with clinical parameters in different types of cancer. Significant 
upregulation of OLR1 was observed in many types of cancer (Fig. 7A). The notable 
exception was lung cancer where normal lung tissues showed dramatically higher expression 
of OLR1 than other normal tissues (Fig. 7B), apparently due to cells with high expression of 
OLR1 (possibly lung epithelium). OLR1 expression positively correlated with clinical stage 
in patients with bladder cancer and clear cell kidney cancer. The positive correlation with 
tumor size was found in patients with prostate adenocarcinoma, colon adenocarcinoma, 
bladder cancer, and rectum adenocarcinoma (Fig. 7C). Higher expression of OLR1 was 
associated with worse survival in patients with HNC (Fig. 7D). Although these results are 
suggestive, their interpretation as reflecting PMN-MDSC presence has some limitation due 
to the fact that OLR1 can be expressed on different cells in the tumor microenvironment. We 
focused on evaluation of LOX-1+ PMN-MDSC in tumor tissues and PB.
In patients with NSCLC we evaluated the possible link between stage of the disease and the 
proportion of LOX-1+ PMN-MDSC in PB. Patients with both early (I/II) and late (III/IV) 
stages of NSCLC had significantly higher proportion of LOX-1+ PMN-MDSC than in 
healthy donors. There was no statistical significant difference between these two groups of 
patients (Fig. 7E). However, whereas 85.7% of all patients with late stages of NSCLC had an 
increase in LOX-1+ PMN-MDSC population, only 50% of patients with early stages showed 
elevated level of these cells (Fig. 7E). Significant association of the presence of LOX-1+ 
PMN-MDSC in PB of cancer patients was found with size of the tumors. Only patients with 
large tumors (T2-T3) had significantly higher proportion of LOX-1+ PMN-MDSC than 
healthy donors, whereas patients with small tumors (T1) had similar very low level of 
LOX-1+ PMN-MDSC as healthy donors. Patients with large tumors had significantly more 
LOX-1+ PMN-MDSC than patients with small tumors (Fig. 7F). Using a NSCLC 
adenocarcinoma tissue array, we evaluated the association between the presence of LOX-1+ 
PMN-MDSC in tumor tissues and tumor size. Similar to the data obtained in PB no 
significant association was found with stage of the disease. However, the number of LOX-1+ 
PMN-MDSC was higher in larger (T2 vs. T1) tumors (Fig. 7G).
Condamine et al.
Page 8
Sci Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Discussion
The goal of this study was to address the issue of heterogeneity of human PMN-MDSC, 
which limits the progress of our understanding of the biology of these cells. Currently, only 
partially enriched population of PMN-MDSC isolated on Ficoll gradient can be evaluated. 
This population contains not only suppressive PMN-MDSC but also non-suppressive 
activated PMN. Separation of PMN-MDSC and PMN in tumor tissues is not possible, which 
further complicates the analysis of these cells. Here, we report that PMN-MDSC have a 
unique gene expression profile, which is substantially different from that of PMN from the 
same patients and from healthy donors. This directly supports the notion that PMN-MDSC 
represent a distinct functional state of pathological activation of neutrophils in cancer (30, 
31) and is consistent with the analysis of gene expression performed in mice, which 
demonstrated differences in transcriptome between granulocytes isolated from naïve mice 
and PMN-MDSC from tumor-bearing mice (32). Up-regulation of genes associated with ER 
stress response was prominent feature of PMN-MDSC. The ER stress response is developed 
to protect cells from various stress conditions including hypoxia, nutrient deprivation, low 
pH and includes three major signaling cascades initiated by three protein sensors: 
PERK(protein kinase RNA (PKR)-like ER kinase), IRE-1 (inositol-requiring enzyme 1) and 
ATF6 (activating transcription factor 6) (33). PERK phosphorylates eukaryotic protein 
synthesis initiation factor 2 alpha (eIF2α), which controls the initiation of mRNA translation 
and inhibits the flux of synthesized proteins. eIF2α induces the expression of ATF4 and its 
downstream targets, including the pro-apoptotic transcription factor CHOP. IRE1 cleaves the 
mRNA encoding for the transcription factor X-box-binding protein-1 (XBP1) (34). Spliced 
XBP1 (sXBP1) mRNA is then ligated by a RNA ligase and translated to produce sXBP1 
transcription factor that regulates many target genes including SEC61a (35).
ER stress response was previously shown to be transmitted to dendritic cells and 
macrophages from tumor cells and was associated with up-regulation of arginase-1 in 
macrophages (36–38). Constitutive activation of XBP1 in tumor-associated dendritic cells 
promoted ovarian cancer progression by blunting anti-tumor immunity (39). We have 
recently found activation of the ER stress response in MDSC by demonstrating that MDSC 
isolated from tumor-bearing mice or cancer patients overexpress sXBP1 and CHOP and 
displayed an enlarged endoplasmic reticulum, one of the hallmarks of the ER stress (16). 
Another study implicated CHOP in the suppressive activity of MDSC in tumor site (40). 
Consistent with these observations, administration of an ER stress inducer to tumor-bearing 
mice increased the accumulation of MDSC and their suppressive activity (41).
In this study, we have discovered that expression of LOX-1 receptor was associated with 
PMN-MDSC. LOX-1 is a class E scavenger receptor expressed on macrophages and 
chondrocytes, as well as endothelial and smooth muscle cells (42). Expression of this 
receptor on neutrophils has not been previously described. We have found that neutrophils 
from healthy donors and cancer patients have practically undetectable expression of LOX-1. 
Our data suggested that LOX-1 expression is not just associated but actually defines the 
population of PMN-MDSC in cancer patients. This conclusion is supported by several lines 
of evidence: 1) LOX-1+ PMN had gene expression profile similar to that of enriched PMN-
MDSC isolated using gradient centrifugation, while LOX-1− PMN had profile similar to 
Condamine et al.
Page 9
Sci Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 neutrophils; 2) LOX-1+ but not LOX-1− PMN potently suppressed T-cell responses; 3) 
LOX-1+ PMN had significantly higher expression of ARG1 and production of ROS, typical 
characteristics of PMN-MDSC. We also found that in tumor tissues, only LOX-1+ PMN 
were immune suppressive and could be considered as PMN-MDSC. This opens an 
opportunity for a direct identification of PMN-MDSC in PB and tumor tissues.
These observations, although unexpected, fit overall concept of the critical role of ER stress 
response in MDSC biology. It was recently demonstrated that in human endothelial cells 
oxLDL induced expression of LOX-1 through activation of ER stress sensors IRE1 and 
PERK (43). In contrast, ER stress induced by tunicamycin in hepatic L02 cells caused down-
regulation of LOX-1. Knock down of IRE1 or XBP-1 restored LOX-1 expression in these 
cells (44). In our experiment we found that induction of ER stress in neutrophils caused 
dramatic up-regulation of LOX-1. More importantly, this was associated with acquisition of 
immune suppressive activity by these cells, indicating that induction of ER stress response 
could convert neutrophils to PMN-MDSC. MDSC accumulate as the result of convergences 
of two only partially overlapping groups of signals: the signals that promote myelopoiesis 
(primarily via growth factors and cytokines produced by tumors) and the signals that induce 
suppressive activity in these cells (believed to be associated with pro-inflammatory 
cytokines) (45). ER stress emerged as important factor in the second group. We did not find 
morphological evidence that PMN de-differentiate during the culture with THG. However, in 
our experiments we targeted mature neutrophils. It is possible that ER stress may have much 
broader effect on precursor or progenitor cells.
In our study we did not investigate whether signaling through LOX-1 is responsible for 
acquisition of immune suppressive activity by neutrophils. However, it is likely that it 
contributes to this process. Engagement of LOX-1 can lead to induction of oxidative stress, 
apoptosis, and activation of the NF-κB pathway (18). These pathways are known to be 
important for PMN-MDSC function. The ER stress response pathway has been shown to 
regulate inflammation by activating the NF-κB pathway (35, 46, 47). LOX-1 up-regulation 
has been observed during cellular transformation into cancer cell and can have a pro-
oncogenic effect by activating the NF-κB pathway, by increasing DNA damage through 
increase ROS production and by promoting angiogenesis and cell dissemination (48, 49). It 
is possible that LOX-1 signaling may drive pathological activation of PMN towards PMN-
MDSC. Cell surface LOX-1 expression can be elevated by multiple stimuli including 
reactive oxygen species (ROS), inflammatory cytokines (TNF-α, TGF-β) as well as oxLDL 
(50). These factors are produced in cancer and it is possible that they can affect 
differentiation of granulocytes from precursors leading to acquisition of LOX-1 expression. 
The question is why only 4–7% of neutrophils acquire LOX-1 expression and suppressive 
activity to become PMN-MDSC. This is unresolved issue at this moment mainly because the 
nature of factors that convert neutrophils to PMN-MDSC remains unclear. Based on mouse 
studies it is possible that PMN-MDSC may have different precursors than most of 
neutrophils and those precursors are more sensitive to ER stress inducible factors.
Our study has obvious limitations derived from the nature of human studies and the nature of 
neutrophils as short lived differentiated cells. This restrained our ability to provide deeper 
insight to mechanism of the observed phenomenon of LOX-1 up-regulation. More 
Condamine et al.
Page 10
Sci Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 information can be generated from the experiments studying progenitors and precursors of 
neutrophils. For example, we used neutralizing LOX-1 antibody in an attempt to block 
signaling through this receptor. This approach may not be sufficient due to the fact that 
PMN-MDSC in peripheral blood may not be amendable for such regulation. However, 
LOX-1 can be involved in regulation of PMN precursors and antibody may have effect. 
PMN progenitors could be manipulated genetically, which would allow for more precise 
analysis of this pathway.
We could not find an association between LOX-1 expression and PMN-MDSC in two mouse 
models. These results are rather unexpected, since these models (EL and LLC) are 
associated with inflammation and expansion of PMN-MDSC. It is possible that such 
association can be found in other tumor model. However, it is more likely expression of 
LOX-1 in mice and humans is regulated differently. The mechanism remains unclear.
Combination of neutrophil markers with LOX-1 potentially allow for detection of PMN-
MDSC in tissues. We observed dramatic increase in the number of PMN-MDSC in tumors 
of patients with HNC, colon cancer, and NSCLC. Interestingly, no such increase was 
observed in melanoma patients. It is possible that relatively low accumulation of PMN-
MDSC in melanoma patients may contribute to this observation. Our data demonstrated that 
patients have variable amount of LOX-1+ PMN-MDSC, which at least in patients with 
NSCLC was associated with size of the tumors. Further prospective studies are needed to 
determine whether the presence of these cells in tumor tissues can predict clinical outcome. 
Expression of LOX-1 on PMN-MDSC opens an opportunity for selective targeting of these 
cells, since antibody targeting LOX-1 have been already tested in cardiovascular diseases in 
mice (51, 52).
Material and Methods
Study Design
The purpose of this study was to better characterize human PMN-MDSC and to identify 
specific marker that allow distinguishing these cells from neutrophils. We performed whole 
gene expression array using triplicate of samples. LOX-1 expression was measured by flow 
cytometry in variable number of replicates indicated in figure legends. Experiments were 
performed in a controlled and non-blinded manner. No randomization was performed 
because of the observational nature of the study. Sample size of patient cohorts was 
determined based on the results of initial experiments with LOX-1 expression and 
calculations of expected differences between mean and expected standard deviation.
Human Samples
Samples of peripheral blood and tumor tissues were collected from patients at Helen F. 
Graham Cancer Center and University of Pennsylvania. The study was approved by 
Institutional Review Boards of the Christiana Care Health System at the Helen F. Graham 
Cancer Center, University of Pennsylvania and The Wistar Institute. All patients signed 
approved consent forms. Peripheral blood was collected from:
Condamine et al.
Page 11
Sci Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 1).
26 patients with different stages of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) – 12 
females, 18 males, age 59–79 (median 69). 13 patients had squamous cell 
carcinoma, 13 patients - adenocarcinoma;
2).
21 patients with head and neck cancer (HNC) – 8 females, 13 males, age 32–82 
(median 65). 19 patients had squamous cell carcinoma and 2 patients - 
adenocarcinoma;
3).
38 patients with colon cancer (CC) (adenocarcinoma) – 20 females, 18 males, 
age 28–88 (median 58).
4).
6 patients with multiple myeloma (MM) – 1 female, 5 males, age 58–81 (median 
75).
All patients were either previously untreated or received treatment (chemotherapy or 
radiation therapy) at least 6 months before collection of blood. In some patients tumor 
tissues were collected during the surgery. In addition 6 patients with eosinophilic colitis, 3 
patients with ulcerative colitis, and 8 patients with Crohn’s disease were evaluated.
Peripheral samples of blood from 18 healthy volunteers 12 females, 6 males age 35–56 
(median 42 years) were used as control.
All samples were evaluated within 3 hours after collection.
Lung cancer tumor microarrays were produced from formalin-fixed paraffin embedded 
tissue. Each block was examined by a pathologist and three cores were obtained from tumor-
containing areas and three blocks from non-tumor involved lung regions. Samples were 
obtained from 32 patients with adenocarcinoma. Clinical data obtained included tumor 
histology, size, stage, and time to recurrence (all patients followed for 5 years).
De-identified samples from normal colonic biopsies colon were obtained from St. Mark’s 
Hospital, Harrow, UK. Samples were taken from patients after obtaining informed consent 
and with the approval of the Outer West London Research Ethics Committee (UK). Paraffin-
embedded tissues blocks of samples of normal skin, lymph nodes, and melanoma were 
retrieved using an approved IRB protocol for de-identifed archived skin biopsies through the 
Department of Dermatology NIH SDRC Tissue Acquisition Core (P30-AR057217), 
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA.
Cell isolation and culture
PMN-MDSC and PMN were isolated by centrifugation over a double density gradient 
Histopaque (Sigma) (1.077 to collect PBMC and 1.119 to collect PMN) followed by 
labeling with CD15-PE mAb (BD Biosciences) and then separated using anti-PE beads and 
MACS column (Miltenyi).
Tissues were first digested with human tumor dissociation kit (Miltenyi) and then red blood 
cell lysed. Cells were then culture in RPMI (Biosource International) supplemented with 
10% FBS, 5 mM glutamine, 25 mM HEPES, 50µM β-mercaptoethanol and 1% antibiotics 
(Invitrogen). In some experiments, recombinant GM-CSF (Peprotech) was added to the 
culture media at a concentration of 10 ng/mL
Condamine et al.
Page 12
Sci Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Isolation of Lox1+ PMN from peripheral blood and suppression assay
Whole blood was enriched for PMNs using MACSxpress® Neutrophil Isolation Kit 
(Miltenyi) following the protocol provided by the manufacturer. Cells were then labeled with 
anti-Lox1-PE mAb (Biolegend) and then separated using anti-PE beads and MACS column 
(Miltenyi). For the three-way allogenic MLR suppression assay, T lymphocytes from one 
healthy donor were purified using the Human CD3+ T Cell Enrichment Column Kit (R&D 
Systems) and used as responder cells. Dendritic cells were generated from adherent 
monocytes from another healthy donor in the presence of 25 ng/mL GM-CSF and 25 ng/mL 
IL-4 (Peprotech) for 6 days and used as stimulator cells. Responder and stimulator cells 
were then mixed at a 10:1 ratio followed by the addition of Lox1+ or Lox1− PMNs. T 
lymphocyte proliferation was assessed after 5 days of culture by thymidine incorporation.
Concurrently, T-lymphocytes were isolated from the PBMC of the same patient as LOX-1+ 
PMN using human CD3+ T Cell Enrichment Column Kit. PMNs were plated at different 
ratios with 105 T lymphocytes in a 96-well plate coated with 10 µg/ml anti-CD3 (clone 
UCHT1; BD Biosciences) followed by the addition of 1 µg/ml of soluble anti-CD28 (clone 
CD28.2; BD Biosciences). T lymphocyte proliferation was assessed after 3 days of culture 
by thymidine incorporation. In some experiments, 1 µM N-acetyl cysteine (NAC; Sigma) or 
20 µM of Nω- hydroxy-nor-arginine (nor-NOHA; Cayman Chemical) or 10 µg/ml of 
monoclonal human LOX-1 antibody (R&D Systems) was added to the culture media to 
block ROS or agrinase I activity, respectively. T lymphocyte proliferation was assessed after 
5 days of culture by thymidine incorporation.
In vitro PMN Lox-1 induction
PMNs from healthy donors were isolated on a Histopaque gradient. 5×105 cells/ml were 
cultured for 12 hrs with 10 ng/ml of GM-CSF in the presence of dithiothreitol (DTT) (0.5, 1, 
2 mM; Sigma), tunicamycin (0.5, 1, and 2 µg/ml; Sigma-Aldrich), or thapsigargin (0.5, 1, 
and 2 µM; Sigma). In some instances, 20 µM of the XBP-1 inhibitor B-IO9 was added 3 
hours prior to culture. Cells were then stained for flow cytometry or used for functional 
assays as described above. For fMLP and PMA stimulation, PMN were isolated from 
healthy donors and cultured for 1 or 18 hours with either 10 nM fMLP (Sigma Alrich) or 20 
nM PMA (Sigma Aldrich). Cells were then washed and LOX1 expression was measured by 
flow cytometry or used for functional assays as described above. For overnight cultures, 10 
ng/ml of GM-CSF was added to the culture.
Flow cytometry
Flow cytometry data were acquired using a BD LSR II flow cytometer and analyzed using 
FlowJo software (Tree Star).
Immunofluorescent microscopy
Following deparaffinization and rehydration, heat induced antigen retrieval was performed 
using Tris-EDTA buffer pH 9. Followed by blocking with 5% BSA, tissues were stained 
with Lox1 antibody (Abcam; Cat no ab126538) and CD15 antibody (BD biosciences; Cat no 
555400) at 1: 200 dilution in 5% BSA each for 1 hour at room temperature. The following 
secondary antibodies were used Alexa Fluor anti-rabbit A647 (1: 200 dilution in 5% BSA, 
Condamine et al.
Page 13
Sci Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Life technologies) for Lox1 and anti-mouse A514 (1: 400 dilution in 5% BSA, Life 
technologies) for CD15 staining. CD15 staining was pseudo colored red and Lox1 staining 
was pseudo colored green. Nucleus was stained using DAPI (1:5000 dilution in PBS, Life 
technologies). Images were obtained using Leica TCS SP5 Confocal microscope. Cell 
counts from 16 frames were used to calculate counts per sq. mm.
Microarray analysis
For sample preparation and hybridization, total RNA from purified cells was isolated with 
TRIzol reagent according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. RNA quality was 
assessed with a Bioanalyzer (Agilent). Only samples with RIN numbers>8 were used. Equal 
amount (400 ng) of total RNA was amplified as recommended by Illumina and was 
hybridized to the Illumina HumanHT-12 v4 human whole-genome bead arrays.
For data preprocessing, Illumina GenomeStudio software was used to export expression 
values and calculated detection p-values for each probe of each sample. Signal-intensity data 
were log2 transformed and quantile-normalized. Only probes with a significant detection p-
value (p < 0.05) in at least one of sample were considered. The data was submitted to GEO 
and is accessible using accession number GSE79404.
Differential expression for probes was tested using SAM ('significance analysis of 
microarrays') method (53). Multiple groups were compared using “Multiclass” option and 
matched patient samples groups were compared using “Two sample paired” option. False 
discovery rate was estimated using Storey et. al procedure (54). Genes with a false-discovery 
rate of <5% were considered significant unless stated otherwise. Hierarchical cluster was 
performed using standardized Euclidean distance with average linkage. Genes that had GO 
annotation GO:0005886 (plasma membrane) and either GO:0004872 (receptor activity) or 
GO:0009897 (external side of plasma membrane) were considered as a candidate for a 
surface molecule marker. For expression heatmaps samples from the same patient were 
additionally normalized to the average between them, and samples from healthy donors were 
normalized to average between all patient samples. Enrichment analyses were done using 
QIAGEN’s Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software (IPA®, QIAGEN Redwood City, 
www.qiagen.com/ingenuity). Pathway results with FDR<5% and p<10−5 were considered 
significant. Only regulators that passed p<10−8 threshold with significantly predicted (Z>2) 
activation state in PMN-MDSCs were reported. For OLR1 gene expression association with 
cancer, Oncomine (https://www.oncomine.org) was used with “Cancer vs. Normal” gene 
report without any additional filters. Additionally, TCGA RNAseqV2 level 3 data (https://
tcga-data.nci.nih.gov) was used and RPKM expression values were compared between 
cancer and normal tissues (where available) using t-test. Association with survival was done 
using univariate cox regression and Kaplan-Meier curves were plotted for patients split into 
two groups using median expression. Results with p<0.05 were considered significant.
qRTPCR
Total RNA was prepared with E.Z.N.A total RNA isolation Kit I (Omega Biotek) and cDNA 
was synthesized with High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Applied 
Biosystems). Quantitative RT-PCR was performed with Power SYBR Green PCR Master 
Condamine et al.
Page 14
Sci Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Mix (Applied Biosystems). The relative amount of mRNA was estimated by the comparative 
threshold cycle method with gapdh as reference gene. For the analysis of gene expression 
the following primers were used:
sXBP-1 – 5′-CTGAGTCCGCAGCAGGTG-3′; 5′-
AGTTGTCCAGAATGCCCAACA-3′
DDIT3 (CHOP) – 5’-GCACCTCCCAGAGCCCTCACTCTCC-3’; 5’- 
GTCTACTCCAAGCCTTCCCCCTGCG-3’,
ATF4 – 5’-TTCCTGAGCAGCGAGGTGTTG-3’; 5’- 
TCCAATCTGTCCCGGAGAAGG-3’,
ATF3 – 5'-TGCCTCGGAAGTGAGTGCTT-3'; 5'-
GCAAAATCCTCAAACACCAGTG-3',
SEC61A – 5'-GGATGTATGGGGACCCTTCT-3'; 5'-
CTCGGCCAGTGTTGACAGTA-3',
ARGI–5’-CTTGTTTCGGACTTGCTCGG-3’; 5’-
CACTCTATGTATGGGGGCTTA-3’,
NOS2–5’- CAGCGGGATGACTTTCCAA-3’; 5’- 
AGGCAAGATTTGGACCTGCA-3’,
GADPH– 5’- GGAGTCAACGGATTTGGTCGTA-3’; 5’- 
GGCAACAATATCCACTTTACCAGAGT-3’.
Statistics
Statistical analysis was performed using a 2-tailed Student’s t-test or Mann-Whitney test 
after the analysis of distribution of variables. Significance determined at p < 0.05 with 
normal-based 95% CI mean ± 2SD. Analysis of gene expression was adjusted for multiple 
variables and false discovery rate (FDR) was estimated as described (54). All calculations 
were made using GraphPad Prism 5 software (GraphPad Software Inc.).
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by NIH grants CA084488, CA100062, and Janssen Pharmaceutical to D.I.G; NCI 
P01 CA 098101, American Cancer Society RP-10-033-01-CCE to AR. This work has been supported in part by the 
flow cytometry and bioinformatics core facilities at the Wistar Institute. The authors declare no competing interests. 
We thank Dr. Liu for help with statistical analysis. The data for this study have been deposited in the database GEO 
and are accessible using accession number GSE79404.
TC – designed and performed most of the experiments, and analyzed data; GAD – performed experiments, 
analyzed data, and wrote manuscript, JIY, SM, KAT, ET, AH, CL, SP –performed experiments, AVK – performed 
bioinformatics analysis, YN – analyzed data, wrote manuscript, AG, DTV, XX, SCK, GM, GHL, EE, SMA, MB, 
AR, NH, RW, GM, BN – provided clinical material and analyzed clinical correlates, XW, JLM – provided 
LOX-1−/− bone marrow for the experiment, DS, MAS – designed experiments and analyzed data, DIG – designed 
the concept of the study and experiments, analyzed data, and wrote paper.
Condamine et al.
Page 15
Sci Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 References
1. Condamine T, Ramachandran I, Youn JI, Gabrilovich DI. Regulation of tumor metastasis by 
myeloid-derived suppressor cells. Annu Rev Med. 2015; 66:97–110. [PubMed: 25341012] 
2. Messmer MN, Netherby CS, Banik D, Abrams SI. Tumor-induced myeloid dysfunction and its 
implications for cancer immunotherapy. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2015; 64:1–13. [PubMed: 
25432147] 
3. Finke J, Ko J, Rini B, Rayman P, Ireland J, Cohen P. MDSC as a mechanism of tumor escape from 
sunitinib mediated anti-angiogenic therapy. Int Immunopharmacol. 2011; 11:856–861. [PubMed: 
21315783] 
4. Feng PH, Lee KY, Chang YL, Chan YF, Kuo LW, Lin TY, Chung FT, Kuo CS, Yu CT, Lin SM, 
Wang CH, Chou CL, Huang CD, Kuo HP. CD14(+)S100A9(+) monocytic myeloid-derived 
suppressor cells and their clinical relevance in non-small cell lung cancer. American journal of 
respiratory and critical care medicine. 2012; 186:1025–1036. [PubMed: 22955317] 
5. Vetsika E-K, Koinis F, Gioulbasani M, Aggouraki D, Koutoulaki A, Skalidaki E, Mavroudis D, 
Georgoulias V, Kotsakis A. A Circulating Subpopulation of Monocytic Myeloid-Derived Suppressor 
Cells as an Independent Prognostic/Predictive Factor in Untreated Non-Small Lung Cancer Patients. 
Journal of Immunology Research. 2014; 2014:659294. [PubMed: 25436215] 
6. Liu CY, Wang YM, Wang CL, Feng PH, Ko HW, Liu YH, Wu YC, Chu Y, Chung FT, Kuo CH, Lee 
KY, Lin SM, Lin HC, Wang CH, Yu CT, Kuo HP. Population alterations of L-arginase- and 
inducible nitric oxide synthase-expressed CD11b+/CD14(−)/CD15+/CD33+ myeloid-derived 
suppressor cells and CD8+ T lymphocytes in patients with advanced-stage non-small cell lung 
cancer. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2010; 136:35–45. [PubMed: 19572148] 
7. Diaz-Montero CM, Salem ML, Nishimura MI, Garrett-Mayer E, Cole DJ, Montero AJ. Increased 
circulating myeloid-derived suppressor cells correlate with clinical cancer stage, metastatic tumor 
burden, and doxorubicin-cyclophosphamide chemotherapy. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2009; 
58:49–59. [PubMed: 18446337] 
8. Meyer C, Cagnon L, Costa-Nunes CM, Baumgaertner P, Montandon N, Leyvraz L, Michielin O, 
Romano E, Speiser DE. Frequencies of circulating MDSC correlate with clinical outcome of 
melanoma patients treated with ipilimumab. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2014; 63:247–257. 
[PubMed: 24357148] 
9. Tarhini AA, Edington H, Butterfield LH, Lin Y, Shuai Y, Tawbi H, Sander C, Yin Y, Holtzman M, 
Johnson J, Rao UNM, Kirkwood JM. Immune Monitoring of the Circulation and the Tumor 
Microenvironment in Patients with Regionally Advanced Melanoma Receiving Neoadjuvant 
Ipilimumab. PloS one. 2014; 9:e87705. [PubMed: 24498358] 
10. Wang Z, Zhang Y, Liu Y, Wang L, Zhao L, Yang T, He C, Song Y, Gao Q. Association of myeloid-
derived suppressor cells and efficacy of cytokine-induced killer cell immunotherapy in metastatic 
renal cell carcinoma patients. J Immunother. 2014; 37:43–50. [PubMed: 24316555] 
11. Finkelstein SE, Carey T, Fricke I, Yu D, Goetz D, Gratz M, Dunn M, Urbas P, Daud A, DeConti R, 
Antonia S, Gabrilovich D, Fishman M. Changes in dendritic cell phenotype after a new high-dose 
weekly schedule of interleukin-2 therapy for kidney cancer and melanoma. J Immunother. 2010; 
33:817–827. [PubMed: 20842055] 
12. Kimura T, McKolanis JR, Dzubinski LA, Islam K, Potter DM, Salazar AM, Schoen RE, Finn OJ. 
MUC1 vaccine for individuals with advanced adenoma of the colon: a cancer immunoprevention 
feasibility study. Cancer Prev Res. 2013; 6:18–26.
13. Youn JI, Nagaraj S, Collazo M, Gabrilovich DI. Subsets of myeloid-derived suppressor cells in 
tumor-bearing mice. J Immunol. 2008; 181:5791–5802. [PubMed: 18832739] 
14. Poschke I, Kiessling R. On the armament and appearances of human myeloid-derived suppressor 
cells. Clinical immunology. 2012; 144:250–268. [PubMed: 22858650] 
15. Mandruzzato S, Brandau S, Britten CM, Bronte V, Damuzzo V, Gouttefangeas C, Maurer D, 
Ottensmeier C, Burg SH, Welters MJP, Walter S. Toward harmonized phenotyping of human 
myeloid-derived suppressor cells by flow cytometry: results from an interim study. Cancer 
Immunology, Immunotherapy. 2016; 65:161–169. [PubMed: 26728481] 
Condamine et al.
Page 16
Sci Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 16. Condamine T, Kumar V, Ramachandran IR, Youn JI, Celis E, Finnberg N, El-Deiry WS, Winograd 
R, Vonderheide RH, English NR, Knight SC, Yagita H, McCaffrey JC, Antonia S, Hockstein N, 
Witt R, Masters G, Bauer T, Gabrilovich DI. ER stress regulates myeloid-derived suppressor cell 
fate through TRAIL-Rmediated apoptosis. J Clin Invest. 2014; 124:2626–2639. [PubMed: 
24789911] 
17. Condamine T, Mastio J, Gabrilovich DI. Transcriptional regulation of myeloid-derived suppressor 
cells. J Leukoc Biol. 2015; 98:913–922. [PubMed: 26337512] 
18. Al-Banna N, Lehmann C. Oxidized LDL and LOX-1 in experimental sepsis. Mediators of 
inflammation. 2013; 2013:761789. [PubMed: 24000272] 
19. Sawamura T, Kume N, Aoyama T, Moriwaki H, Hoshikawa H, Aiba Y, Tanaka T, Miwa S, Katsura 
Y, Kita T, Masaki T. An endothelial receptor for oxidized low-density lipoprotein. Nature. 1997; 
386:73–77. [PubMed: 9052782] 
20. Taye A, El-Sheikh AA. Lectin-like oxidized low-density lipoprotein receptor 1 pathways. Eur J 
Clin Invest. 2013; 43:740–745. [PubMed: 23594336] 
21. Yoshimoto R, Fujita Y, Kakino A, Iwamoto S, Takaya T, Sawamura T. The discovery of LOX-1, its 
ligands and clinical significance. Cardiovascular drugs and therapy / sponsored by the 
International Society of Cardiovascular Pharmacotherapy. 2011; 25:379–391.
22. Moldovan I, Galon J, Maridonneau-Parini I, Roman Roman S, Mathiot C, Fridman WH, Sautes-
Fridman C. Regulation of production of soluble Fc gamma receptors type III in normal and 
pathological conditions. Immunol Lett. 1999; 68:125–134. [PubMed: 10397167] 
23. Banerjee A, Mondal NK, Das D, Ray MR. Neutrophilic inflammatory response and oxidative 
stress in premenopausal women chronically exposed to indoor air pollution from biomass burning. 
Inflammation. 2012; 35:671–683. [PubMed: 21769440] 
24. Mehta JL, Sanada N, Hu CP, Chen J, Dandapat A, Sugawara F, Satoh H, Inoue K, Kawase Y, 
Jishage K, Suzuki H, Takeya M, Schnackenberg L, Beger R, Hermonat PL, Thomas M, Sawamura 
T. Deletion of LOX-1 reduces atherogenesis in LDLR knockout mice fed high cholesterol diet. 
Circ Res. 2007; 100:1634–1642. [PubMed: 17478727] 
25. Pirillo A, Norata GD, Catapano AL. LOX-1, OxLDL, and atherosclerosis. Mediators Inflamm. 
2013; 2013:152786. [PubMed: 23935243] 
26. Tang CH, Ranatunga S, Kriss CL, Cubitt CL, Tao J, Pinilla-Ibarz JA, Del Valle JR, Hu CC. 
Inhibition of ER stress-associated IRE-1/XBP-1 pathway reduces leukemic cell survival. J Clin 
Invest. 2014; 124:2585–2598. [PubMed: 24812669] 
27. Sawamura T, Kakino A, Fujita Y. LOX-1: a multiligand receptor at the crossroads of response to 
danger signals. Current opinion in lipidology. 2012; 23:439–445. [PubMed: 22777292] 
28. Kumar V, Patel S, Tcyganov E, Gabrilovich D. The nature of myeloid-derived suppressor cells in 
the tumor microenvironment. Trends Immunol. 2016 in press. 
29. Ramachandran IR, Martner A, Pisklakova A, Condamine T, Chase T, Vogl T, Roth J, Gabrilovich 
D, Nefedova Y. Myeloid-derived suppressor cells regulate growth of multiple myeloma by 
inhibiting T cells in bone marrow. J Immunol. 2013; 190:3815–3823. [PubMed: 23460744] 
30. Gabrilovich DI, Ostrand-Rosenberg S, Bronte V. Coordinated regulation of myeloid cells by 
tumours. Nat Rev Immunol. 2012; 12:253–268. [PubMed: 22437938] 
31. Marvel D, Gabrilovich DI. Myeloid-derived suppressor cells in the tumor microenvironment: 
expect the unexpected. J Clin Invest. 2015; 125:3356–3364. [PubMed: 26168215] 
32. Fridlender ZG, Sun J, Mishalian I, Singhal S, Cheng G, Kapoor V, Horng W, Fridlender G, Bayuh 
R, Worthen GS, Albelda SM. Transcriptomic analysis comparing tumor-associated neutrohpils 
with granulocytic myeloid-derived suppressor cells and normal neutrophils. PloS one. 2012; 
7(2):e31524. [PubMed: 22348096] 
33. Holcik M, Sonenberg N. Translational control in stress and apoptosis. Nature reviews. Molecular 
cell biology. 2005; 6:318–327. [PubMed: 15803138] 
34. Ron D, Walter P. Signal integration in the endoplasmic reticulum unfolded protein response. 
Nature reviews. Molecular cell biology. 2007; 8:519–529. [PubMed: 17565364] 
35. Claudio N, Dalet A, Gatti E, Pierre P. Mapping the crossroads of immune activation and cellular 
stress response pathways. The EMBO Journal. 2013; 32:1214–1224. [PubMed: 23584529] 
Condamine et al.
Page 17
Sci Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 36. Mahadevan NR, Anufreichik V, Rodvold JJ, Chiu KT, Sepulveda H, Zanetti M. Cell-extrinsic 
effects of tumor ER stress imprint myeloid dendritic cells and impair CD8(+) T cell priming. PloS 
one. 2012; 7:e51845. [PubMed: 23272178] 
37. Mahadevan NR, Rodvold J, Sepulveda H, Rossi S, Drew AF, Zanetti M. Transmission of 
endoplasmic reticulum stress and pro-inflammation from tumor cells to myeloid cells. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A. 2011; 108:6561–6566. [PubMed: 21464300] 
38. Mahadevan NR, Zanetti M. Tumor stress inside out: cell-extrinsic effects of the unfolded protein 
response in tumor cells modulate the immunological landscape of the tumor microenvironment. J 
Immunol. 2011; 187:4403–4409. [PubMed: 22013206] 
39. Walter P, Ron D. The unfolded protein response: from stress pathway to homeostatic regulation. 
Science. 2011; 334:1081–1086. [PubMed: 22116877] 
40. Thevenot PT, Sierra RA, Raber PL, Al-Khami AA, Trillo-Tinoco J, Zarreii P, Ochoa AC, Cui Y, 
Del Valle L, Rodriguez PC. The stress-response sensor chop regulates the function and 
accumulation of myeloid-derived suppressor cells in tumors. Immunity. 2014; 41:389–401. 
[PubMed: 25238096] 
41. Lee BR, Chang SY, Hong EH, Kwon BE, Kim HM, Kim YJ, Lee J, Cho HJ, Cheon JH, Ko HJ. 
Elevated endoplasmic reticulum stress reinforced immunosuppression in the tumor 
microenvironment via myeloid-derived suppressor cells. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:12331–12345. 
[PubMed: 25514597] 
42. Taye A, El-Sheikh AA. Lectin-like oxidized low-density lipoprotein receptor 1 pathways. 
European journal of clinical investigation. 2013; 43:740–745. [PubMed: 23594336] 
43. Hong D, Bai YP, Gao HC, Wang X, Li LF, Zhang GG, Hu CP. Ox- LDL induces endothelial cell 
apoptosis via the LOX-1-dependent endoplasmic reticulum stress pathway. Atherosclerosis. 2014; 
235:310–317. [PubMed: 24911634] 
44. Hong D, Li LF, Gao HC, Wang X, Li CC, Luo Y, Bai YP, Zhang GG. High-Density Lipoprotein 
Prevents Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress-Induced Downregulation of Liver LOX-1 Expression. 
PloS one. 2015; 10:e0124285. [PubMed: 25923692] 
45. Condamine T, Mastio J, Gabrilovich DI. Transcriptional regulation of myeloid-derived suppressor 
cells. J Leukoc Biol. 2015
46. Bettigole SE, Glimcher LH. Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress in Immunity. Annu Rev Immunol. 
2014
47. Zhang K, Kaufman RJ. From endoplasmic-reticulum stress to the inflammatory response. Nature. 
2008; 454:455–462. [PubMed: 18650916] 
48. Hirsch HA, Iliopoulos D, Joshi A, Zhang Y, Jaeger SA, Bulyk M, Tsichlis PN, Shirley Liu X, 
Struhl K. A transcriptional signature and common gene networks link cancer with lipid 
metabolism and diverse human diseases. Cancer Cell. 2010; 17:348–361. [PubMed: 20385360] 
49. Lu J, Mitra S, Wang X, Khaidakov M, Mehta JL. Oxidative stress and lectinlike ox-LDL-receptor 
LOX-1 in atherogenesis and tumorigenesis. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2011; 15:2301–2333. 
[PubMed: 21338316] 
50. Wang X, Phillips MI, Mehta JL. LOX-1 and angiotensin receptors, and their interplay. 
Cardiovascular drugs and therapy / sponsored by the International Society of Cardiovascular 
Pharmacotherapy. 2011; 25:401–417.
51. De Siqueira J, Abdul Zani I, Russell DA, Wheatcroft SB, Ponnambalam S, Homer-Vanniasinkam 
S. Clinical and Preclinical Use of LOX-1-Specific Antibodies in Diagnostics and Therapeutics. 
Journal of cardiovascular translational research. 2015; 8:458–465. [PubMed: 26385009] 
52. Mehta JL, Khaidakov M, Hermonat PL, Mitra S, Wang X, Novelli G, Sawamura T. LOX-1: a new 
target for therapy for cardiovascular diseases. Cardiovascular drugs and therapy / sponsored by the 
International Society of Cardiovascular Pharmacotherapy. 2011; 25:495–500.
53. Zhang S. A comprehensive evaluation of SAM, the SAM R-package and a simple modification to 
improve its performance. BMC bioinformatics. 2007; 8:230. [PubMed: 17603887] 
54. Storey JD, Tibshirani R. Statistical significance for genomewide studies. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S 
A. 2003; 100:9440–9445. [PubMed: 12883005] 
Condamine et al.
Page 18
Sci Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. PMN-MDSC have distinct genomic signature
A. Typical phenotype of PMN-MDSC and PMN isolated from peripheral blood of cancer 
patients using gradient centrifugation and CD15 beads; B. Suppression assay of PMN and 
PMN-MDSC isolated from the same patient with HNC. Allogeneic mixed leukocyte 
reaction was performed as described in Methods. Cell proliferation was evaluated in 
triplicates using 3H-thymidine uptake. Mean and SD are shown. p values are calculated in t-
test from control – T cell proliferation without the presence of PMN or PMN-MDSC and 
shown on the graph, n=3 different patients. C. Suppression assay of PMN and PMN-MDSC 
Condamine et al.
Page 19
Sci Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 isolated from the same patient with NSCLC. T-cell proliferation in response to CD3/CD28 
was performed as described in Methods. Cell proliferation was evaluated in triplicates 
using 3H-thymidine uptake. Mean and SD are shown. p values are calculated in t-test from 
control – T cell proliferation without the presence of PMN or PMN-MDSC and shown on 
the graph, n=3 different patients. D. Relative expression heatmap and gene/sample clustering 
based on expression of 985 genes significantly differentially expressed (p<0.05, fold>2) 
between cancer patients’ PMN, PMN-MDSCs and PMN of healthy donors. E. Hierarchical 
clustering of PMN-MDSCs from HNC and NSCLC cancer patients indicates gene 
expression signature specific to PMN-MDSCs and similarities of PMN from cancer patients 
and PMN from healthy donors. F. Upstream Regulators identified by Ingenuity Pathway 
Analysis (IPA) among genes significantly differentially expressed between PMN-MDSC and 
PMN cells. N=number of genes from the category, Z=z-score of predicted activation state 
calculated by IPA.
Condamine et al.
Page 20
Sci Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. LOX-1 as a marker of PMN-MDSC
A. List and a heatmap of relative expression of candidate surface markers specific to the 
PMN-MDSCs. B. Typical phenotype of high density PMN and low density PMN-MDSC in 
cancer patient. C. Proportion of LOX-1 positive PMN and PMN-MDSC in peripheral blood 
of 15 cancer patients. Top panel - example of staining of PMN-MDSC and PMN with 
LOX-1 antibody. Cells were isolated using density gradient as described in Methods and the 
proportion of LOX-1+ cells was calculated among CD15+ cells. Bottom panel - individual 
results for each patient are shown as well as Mean and SE. p values (t-test) are shown. D. 
Condamine et al.
Page 21
Sci Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Example of staining with CD41a and CD42b antibody (top panel). Cumulative results of 7 
patients with NSCLC (bottom panel). Mean and SD are shown. E. Typical example of the 
analysis of PMN in cancer patient. F. Proportion of LOX-1+ cells among PMN in 
unseparated PB from 16 healthy donors (HD), 20 patients with NSCLC, 21 patients with 
HNC, and 19 patients with CC. p values in t-test are shown. G. Proportion of LOX-1+ cells 
among PMN in unseparated PB from 16 healthy donors (HD), 6 patients with eosinophilic 
colitis (EE), 3 patients with ulcerative colitis (UC), and 7 patients with Crohn’s Disease 
(CD). p values in t-test are shown.
Condamine et al.
Page 22
Sci Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. LOX-1 expression defines bona-fide PMN-MDSC
A. Typical morphology of sorted LOX-1+ and Lox-1− PMN from patient with HNC. Scale 
bar = 20 µm. B. Hierarchical clustering of samples based on expression levels of genes 
differentially expressed between LOX-1+ and LOX-1− PMN. C. List and relative expression 
values of the most changed known genes overlapped between LOX-1+ and PMN-MDSC 
cells. D. Suppressive activity of LOX-1+ and LOX-1− PMN isolated from peripheral blood 
of patient with HNC in allogeneic MLR. Cell proliferation was evaluated in triplicates 
using 3H-thymidine uptake. Mean and SE are shown. p values in t-test from T cell 
Condamine et al.
Page 23
Sci Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 proliferation without the presence of PMN are shown. Experiments with similar results were 
performed with samples from 9 patients with HNC and NSCLC. E. Effect of neutralizing 
LOX-1 antibody on suppressive activity of LOX-1+ PMN. PMN were isolated from two 
patients with NSCLC. LOX-1+ and LOX-1− PMN were isolated as described in Material and 
Methods and then added to allogeneic MLR in the presence of 10 µg/ml neutralizing mouse 
anti-human LOX-1 antibody or mouse IgG. Cell proliferation was evaluated in triplicates 
using 3H-thymidine uptake. Mean and SE are shown. p values in t-test from T cell 
proliferation without the presence of PMN are shown. F. ROS production in LOX-1+ and 
LOX-1− PMN from 7 patients with HNC and NSCLC. ROS production was measured by 
staining with DCFDA. G. Expression of ARG1 and NOS2 in LOX-1+ and LOX-1− PMN 
from 6 patients with HNC and MM measured by qPCR. P values in t-test are shown.
Condamine et al.
Page 24
Sci Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Mechanism regulating LOX-1 expression on PMN-MDSC
A.B. Effect of 1 µM of N-acetyl L-cysteine (NAC) (left panel), 1000 U/ml of catalase (right 
panel) (A) and 20 µM Nor-NOHA (B) on immune suppressive activity of LOX-1+ PMN-
MDSC. Allogeneic MLR was used in all experiments. Cell proliferation was measured in 
triplicates by 3H-thymidine incorporation. 1:2 PMN : T cell ratio was used in all 
experiments. Three experiments with similar results were performed. P values in t-test are 
shown. C. Percentage of LOX-1+ PMN and expression of LOX-1 in PMN isolated from 4 
healthy donors and treated with indicated cytokines. Range of concentrations based on 
Condamine et al.
Page 25
Sci Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 reported data were tested and only one for each cytokine is shown. Conditioned medium 
from PCI30 tumor cells (TCM) was used at 20% v/v concentration. Mean and SD are 
shown. D. Expression of genes involved in ER stress response in PMN from 8 patients with 
HNC and NSCLC. P values in t-test (for ATF3 in Munn-Whitney test) are shown. E. 
Percentage of LOX-1+ PMN and expression of LOX-1 in PMN isolated from 4 healthy 
donors and treated with 1µM THG and 1 mM DTT. Mean and SD are shown. P values 
calculated in t-test.
Condamine et al.
Page 26
Sci Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. ER stress induce LOX-1 expression and suppressive activity in PMN
A. ER stress inducer THG converted PMN to PMN-MDSC. PMN isolated from healthy 
donors were treated overnight with 1µM THG, extensively washed and then used in CD3/
CD28 induced T-cell proliferaiton. T cell proliferation was measured in triplicates by 3H-
thymidine uptake. Three experiments with similar results were performed. P values in t-test 
are shown, n=3. B,C. sXBP1 inhibitor B-IO9 abrogated THG inducible up-regulation of 
LOX-1 and T cells suppression in PMN from healthy donors. PMN were incubated together 
with 20 µM B-IO9 and THG overnight followed by evaluation of LOX-1 expression (B) or 
Condamine et al.
Page 27
Sci Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 suppression activity (C). PMN from three healthy donors were used in these experiments. P 
values between treated and untreated PMN (t-test, n=3). D. Morphology of heathy donor’s 
PMN after 18 hr incubation with 10 ng/ml GM-CSF and THG. Giemsa stain. Scale bar = 20 
µm. E. Healthy donor’s PMN were cultured for 1 hr or 18 hrs with 10 nM fMLP or 20 nM 
PMA in the presence of 10 ng/ml GM-CSF. The proportion of LOX-1+ cells was evaluated. 
P values were calculated in t-test (n=3). Analysis of PMA effect after 18 hrs was not 
performed because of undetectable number of viable cells. F. PMN treated with fMLP or 
PMA as described in Fig. 5E were extensively washed after 1 hr or 18 hr (fMLP only) 
incubation and tested in T-cell suppression assay. Each experiment was performed in 
triplicates. Three donors were tested.
Condamine et al.
Page 28
Sci Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. LOX-1+ PMN-MDSC in tumor tissues
A. Correlation of soluble LOX1 in plasma of NSCLC and HNC with the presence of PMN-
MDSC in PBMC fraction of PB. B. Presence of LOX-1+ PMN in PB and tumor tissues of 10 
patients with HNC and NSCLC. P values are calculated in t-test. C. Presence of LOX-1+ 
PMN in PB and BM of 7 patients with MM. P values are calculated in t-test. D. Suppressive 
activity of LOX-1+ PMN in BM of patient with MM tested in allogeneic MLR. P (in t-test) 
from values without the presence of PMN are shown. Three patients were tested with the 
same results. E. Typical staining of tumor tissues. Scale bar = 100µm. F. LOX-1+ PMN in 
Condamine et al.
Page 29
Sci Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 tissues from 4 normal skin samples, 4 samples of tumor-free lymph nodes, 4 samples of 
normal colon, as well as tumor tissues from 8 patients with melanoma, 8 patients with HNC 
patients, 8 patients with NSCLC, and 9 patients with CC. Mean and SD shown. P values 
calculated in t-test show difference between tumor samples and samples from control 
tissues.
Condamine et al.
Page 30
Sci Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 7. Clinical association of OLR1 expression and LOX-1+ PMN-MDSC accumulation in 
cancer patients
A. Number of independent data sets from Oncomine database that showed OLR1 
upregulated (up) or downregulated (down) in Cancer vs Normal tissues. P-value and fold 
change for Cancer/Normal comparison from TCGA database. na=data not available; B. 
Average expression values (FPKM values) for cancer and normal tissues for different 
cancers indicates high baseline expression level of OLR1 in normal lung tissues. C. 
Association of OLR1 expression with clinical stage (overall) or tumor size (T) in patients 
Condamine et al.
Page 31
Sci Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 with different types of cancer. D. Kaplan-Meier survival curves for HNC squamous cell 
carcinoma patients survival stratified by median OLR1 expression indicates decreased 
survival for subjects with high OLR1 expression. p=cox-regression p value, HR=hazard 
ratio, E. Proportion of LOX-1+ PMN-MDSC in PB of 12 patients with stage I-II; 7 patients 
with stage III-IV of NSCLC, and 16 healthy donors. P values calculated in Mann-Whitney 
test. F. Proportion of LOX-1+ PMN-MDSC in PB of NSCLC patients segregated based on 
tumor size. P values calculated in Mann-Whitney test. F. Amount of LOX-1+ CD15+ PMN-
MDSC in tumor tissues from NSCLC patients segregated based on tumor size. P values 
calculated in t-test.
Condamine et al.
Page 32
Sci Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
