  
 
This is an Accepted Article that has been peer-reviewed and approved for publication in the The 
Journal of Physiology, but has yet to undergo copy-editing and proof correction. Please cite this 
article as an 'Accepted Article'; doi: 10.1113/JP275472. 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
DOI: 10.1113/JP275472 
Title: Increased susceptibility to cardiovascular disease in offspring born from dams of advanced 
maternal age 
 
Christy-Lynn M. Cooke,1,2,4* Amin Shah,1,2,3* Raven D. Kirschenman,1,2,3 Anita L. Quon, 1,2,3 Jude S. 
Morton,1,2,3 Alison S. Care,1,2,3.6† Sandra T. Davidge1,2,3,5† 
* co-first authors 
† co-senior authors 
1. Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology; 2. Women and Children’s Health Research Institute; 3. 
Cardiovascular Research Centre, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada; 4. Lois Hole 
Hospital for Women, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada; 5. Department of Physiology, University of 
Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada; 6. Robinson Research Institute, University of Adelaide, 
Adelaide, Australia. 
Running Title: Effect of advanced maternal age on adult offspring cardiovascular risk 
Key words: advanced maternal age, developmental programming, cardiovascular dysfunction  
Corresponding Author: 
Dr. Sandra T. Davidge,  
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,  
University of Alberta  
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada, T6G 2S2 
Tel: 780-492-1864; Fax: 780-492-1308 
Email: sandra.davidge@ualberta.ca 
  
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
2 
KEY POINTS SUMMARY  

Advanced maternal age increases the risk of pregnancy complications such as fetal growth 
restriction, hypertension, and premature birth. 

Offspring born from compromised pregnancies are at increased risk of cardiovascular disease as 
adults. However, the effect of advanced maternal age on later-onset disease in offspring has not 
been investigated. 

In adulthood, male but not female, offspring born to dams of advanced maternal age had impaired 
recovery from cardiac ischemia/reperfusion injury. 

Endothelium-dependent relaxation was also impaired in male, but not female, offspring born from 
aged dams. 

Oxidative stress may play a role in the developmental programming of cardiovascular disease in 
this model. 

Given the increasing trend toward delayed parenthood, these findings have significant population 
and health care implications and warrant further investigation.  
 
ABSTRACT 
Exposure to prenatal stressors, including hypoxia, micro- and macro-nutrient deficiency, and 
maternal stress, increases the risk of cardiovascular disease in adulthood. It is unclear whether being 
born from a mother of advanced maternal age (≥ 35 years old) may also constitute a prenatal stress 
with cardiovascular consequences in adulthood. We previously demonstrated growth restriction in 
fetuses from a rat model of advanced maternal age, suggesting exposure to a compromised in utero 
environment. Thus, we hypothesized that male and female offspring from aged dams would exhibit 
impaired cardiovascular function as adults. In 4-month-old offspring, we observed impaired 
endothelium-dependent relaxation in male (P<0.05), but not female, offspring born from aged dams. 
The antioxidant pegSOD improved relaxation only in arteries from male offspring of aged dams (delta 
Emax: young dam -1.63±0.80 vs. aged dam 11.75±4.23, P<0.05). Further, EDH-dependent relaxation 
was reduced in male, but not female, offspring of aged dams (P<0.05). Interestingly, there was a 
significant increase in nitric oxide contribution to relaxation in females born from aged dams (delta 
Emax: young dam -24.8±12.1 vs. aged dam -68.7±7.7, P<0.05), which was not observed in males. 
Recovery of cardiac function following an ischemia-reperfusion insult in male offspring born from 
aged dams was reduced by ~57% (P<0.001), an effect that was not evident in female offspring. These 
data illustrate that offspring born from aged dams have an altered cardiovascular risk profile that is 
  
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
3 
sex-specific. Given the increasing trend toward delaying pregnancy, these findings may have 
significant population and health care implications and warrant further investigation.  
 
ABBREVIATIONS LIST: I/R, ischemia/reperfusion; IUGR, intrauterine growth restriction; GD, 
gestational day; LV, left ventricle; SERCA2a, sarcoendoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ ATPase 2a; DHE, 
dihydroethidium; DCFH-DA, dichlorodihydrofluorescein diacetate; EDH, endothelium derived 
hyperpolarization; INDO, indomethacin; NOS, nitric oxide synthase; TXA2-R, thromboxane receptor; 
PGHS, prostaglandin H synthase; YD, young dam; AD, aged dam; MCh, methacholine.  
 
INTRODUCTION 
The age at which women deliver their first child has been steadily increasing in Western 
Societies. In Canada and the United States, births occurring among women of advanced maternal age 
(defined as ≥ 35 years at delivery) account for approximately 8% and 11% of all first births, 
respectively (Martin et al., 2009; Statistics Canada, 2012). Advanced maternal age is associated with 
an increased risk of pregnancy complications leading to maternal and perinatal morbidity and 
mortality (van Katwijk & Peeters, 1998; Jacobsson et al., 2004; Cleary-Goldman et al., 2005). 
Importantly, this population is also at an increased risk of delivering an infant that is premature (<37 
weeks of gestation) (Jacobsson et al., 2004; Cleary-Goldman et al., 2005) and/or small for gestational 
age (Lamminpaa et al., 2012).  
Our previous study in a rat model of advanced maternal age showed that female rats that were 
aged to 9.5-10 months before mating (aged dams) recapitulated many of the salient clinical features 
observed during pregnancy in women of advanced age, such as fetal growth restriction and increased 
rates of pregnancy loss (Care et al., 2015). The cause of these pregnancy complications were due, in 
part, to the development of maternal hypertension and altered vascular function in aged dams. Both 
uterine and mesenteric arteries isolated from aged dams displayed enhanced myogenic responses, 
suggesting a more constrictive phenotype in the arteries of pregnant rats of advanced age compared to 
young pregnant rats (young dams) (Care et al., 2015). These data begin to unravel the mechanisms 
behind pregnancy complications associated with increased maternal age. Postponement of 
childbearing is, however, becoming commonplace; thus it is important to understand whether 
delaying pregnancy might also have adverse consequences for offspring into adulthood.  
  
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
4 
The work of Barker and colleagues found that low birth weight positively correlates with 
cardiovascular disease risk in adulthood (Barker, 1992; Barker, 1994; Barker, 2000) (reviewed in 
(Rueda-Clausen et al., 2011a; Morton et al., 2016)). Since then, much research has demonstrated that 
many prenatal factors contribute to an impoverished prenatal environment and that the potential 
impact on later life health extends beyond fetal growth restriction or prematurity (Bourque et al., 
2008; Rueda-Clausen et al., 2009; Morton et al., 2010a). For example, fetal hypoxia, maternal micro- 
and macro-nutrient deficiency (Moore & Davies, 2005; Christian & Stewart, 2010; Bourque et al., 
2013; Boersma et al., 2014), maternal obesity (Armitage et al., 2005; Roberts et al., 2015), paternal 
obesity (McPherson et al., 2014) and psychological stress (Moisiadis & Matthews, 2014) are amongst 
the many developmental determinants that may contribute to programming of adult onset disease. 
Such incursions affect offspring physiology and susceptibility to adult cardiovascular disease 
(Boersma et al., 2014; Morton et al., 2016). Whether being born from a mother of advanced maternal 
age constitutes a prenatal stress, however, has not yet been investigated; although some 
epidemiological evidence exists which supports a possible role for maternal age in fetal programming 
(Gillman et al., 2004). 
Our laboratory has previously investigated how pregnancy complications affect the later 
cardiovascular health of offspring in a model of hypoxia-induced intrauterine growth restriction 
(IUGR). Young adult male and female offspring affected by hypoxia-induced growth restriction have 
impaired cardiac function recovery following ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury (Xu et al., 2006; 
Rueda-Clausen et al., 2011b) as well as impaired flow-mediated vascular relaxation (Morton et al., 
2011). Mechanisms leading to vascular dysfunction may be related to an imbalance in endothelium-
dependent pathways (Morton et al., 2010a). There may also be a role for oxidative stress in 
cardiovascular programming. Indeed, clinical studies have shown that growth-restricted offspring 
resulting from pregnancy complications had increased markers of oxidative stress in cord blood 
(Gupta et al., 2004) Similarly, rat offspring exposed to prenatal hypoxia exhibited increased cardiac 
and vascular oxidative stress (Evans et al., 2012; Giussani et al., 2012; Rueda-Clausen et al., 2012), 
while antioxidant supplementation improves cardiac and vascular function in animal models of 
developmental programming (Cambonie et al., 2007; Kane et al., 2013). It has also been shown that 
IUGR offspring born to nutrient-restricted rat dams had an alteration in cardiac calcium handling 
proteins such as SERCA2a (Harvey et al., 2015). Indeed, calcium handling proteins have been shown 
to play a significant role in cardiac pathophysiology, including I/R injury (Talukder et al., 2008) via 
mechanisms that may involve enhanced oxidation (Bidwell et al., 2018). Thus, oxidative stress-
mediated pathways have the potential to play a role in cardiovascular programming in adult offspring 
from aged dams.  
  
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
5 
There are a myriad of other investigators using various animal models of prenatal insults in 
which the offspring develop cardiac and vascular phenotypes, supporting the (patho) physiological 
significance of developmental programing of adult cardiovascular disease (reviewed in (Morton et al., 
2016)). While these data illustrate the significant effect of prenatal stressors on long-term adult onset 
cardiovascular disease, the impact of maternal age on fetal programming remains to be determined. In 
the present study, using a rat model of advanced maternal age, we hypothesized that male and female 
offspring born from aged dams would demonstrate impaired endothelium-dependent vasodilation and 
an increased susceptibility to cardiac dysfunction in adulthood.   
METHODS 
Ethical approval 
The experimental protocols described herein were approved by the University of Alberta 
Health Sciences Animal Policy and Welfare Committee in accordance with the Canadian Council on 
Animal Care guidelines and conformed to the principles and regulations as described by Grundy 
(Grundy, 2015)   
Animals and treatments 
Female Sprague Dawley rats were purchased from Charles River (St. Constant, QC) at 12 
weeks of age, and housed in the animal care facility at the University of Alberta, which maintained a 
10:14h light:dark cycle at an ambient temperature of 22 ± 1°C. All rats were given at least 1 week to 
acclimatize to their surroundings prior to mating.  
Rats were randomly allocated to a young dam or aged dam group for mating to generate 
offspring from young or advanced maternal age mothers. The protocol for aged rats has been 
described previously (Care et al., 2015). Briefly, rats in the advanced maternal aged group were 
maintained on a controlled-feeding regime until pregnancy in order to limit the development of 
obesity (which would constitute an added confounder), while young rats had ad libitum access to 
chow. Controlled feeding involved providing rats with 6 pellets of chow/day/rat, based on National 
Research Council recommendations for caloric and nutrient intake (National Research Council 
Subcommittee on Laboratory Animal, 1995). Rats in the aged pregnancy group were 9.5-10 months of 
age at the time of conception, which is approximately equivalent to 35 years of age in humans. This 
approximation takes into account milestones such as weaning, skeletal maturity, and reproductive 
senescence (Sengupta, 2011). Young rats were aged between 3-4 months at conception, which is 
equivalent to early reproductive maturity in humans. Both young (N = 13) and aged (N = 10) females 
  
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
6 
were mated with young male rats (aged 3-5 months). Pregnancy was confirmed by the presence of 
sperm in vaginal smears which was designated as gestational day (GD) 0.  
Following conception, handling of dams was kept to a minimum. Dams delivered offspring on 
GD22 and following delivery, litters were reduced to 8 pups (4 males and 4 females). Since there were 
not always 4 males in a litter from aged dams, additional females were left until weaning to keep the 
number of pups that were nursing consistent. In litters born from aged dams that had less than 8 pups, 
there was no intervention with the litter. At 21 days of age, pups were weaned and housed in same-sex 
pairs until 4 months of age, the time of experimentation. Male and female offspring were chosen for 
each experimental procedure such that no two animals in one procedure were from the same litter. 
The number of animals of each sex used for each experiment ranged from 6 – 10 per group, as 
identified in the figure or table legend.  
Blood pressure assessments 
Blood pressure was measured in male and female offspring using tail-cuff plethysmography 
(CODA, Kent Scientific Corporation, Torrington, Connecticut, USA). Following a 1-week training 
period, rats were placed in restraint tubes and left for 20 minutes to warm and acclimatize (tail skin 
surface temperature ~30°C). An average was taken of at least ten blood pressure measurements 
performed over a period of 10 minutes. Blood pressure measurements were taken approximately 1 
week prior to cardiac and vascular function experiments.  
Wire myography 
Rats were anesthetized with isoflurane (dosed to effect by inhalation) and euthanized by 
exsanguination via a cardiac puncture or the heart was rapidly excised for isolated working heart 
experiments. Vascular function was assessed in mesenteric resistance arteries from 4-month-old male 
and female offspring from young and aged dams. Second order mesenteric arteries were rapidly 
excised and cleaned of surrounding connective tissues in ice cold, HEPES-buffered physiological 
saline solution [PSS; in mM: 142 NaCl, 4.7 KCl, 1.17 MgSO4, 4.7 CaCl2, 1.18 K2PO4, 10 HEPES, 5.5 
glucose, pH 7.4]. Arteries were mounted on an isometric myograph system (8 baths; DMT, 
Copenhagen, Denmark), using 40 μm tungsten wire. Arteries were normalized through a series of 
stepwise increases in diameter to determine the 0.8L100. Following a 30-minute equilibration period, 
all vessels were treated twice with phenylephrine (PE; 10 μM; Sigma) and once with methylcholine 
(MCh; 3 μM; Sigma) to assess functionality of the vascular smooth muscle and endothelium 
respectively.  
  
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
7 
Following a washout period, cumulative concentration response curves were assessed to two 
vasoconstrictors in separate vessels; PE (0.01 – 100 μM) and U46619 (thromboxane mimetic, Sigma: 
0.001 – 30 μM). Following a second washout period, arteries were incubated for 30 minutes with 
inhibitors added to the bathing PSS medium prior to preconstriction with an EC80 concentration of PE 
and stimulation with cumulative doses of MCh (0.003 – 3 μM, Sigma). The influence of the following 
inhibitors on MCh-induced vasorelaxation was each tested in separate vessels: NG-nitro-L-arginine 
methyl ester (L-NAME, 100 μM, Sigma), a pan inhibitor of NO synthase (NOS); indomethacin 
(INDO, 5 μM, Sigma), a non-selective inhibitor of prostaglandin H synthase (PGHS); a combination 
of the potassium channel blockers apamin (Apa, 100 nM, Sigma), a small-conductance, Ca2+-activated 
potassium channel (SKCa) blocker and 1-[(2-chlorophenyl) diphenylmethyl]-1H-pyrazole (TRAM-34, 
10 μM, Sigma) an intermediate-conductance, Ca2+-activated potassium channel (IKCa) blocker; 
polyethylene glycol superoxide dismutase (pegSOD, 50 units/mL, Sigma), a superoxide scavenger or 
SQ24856 (10 μM, Sigma) a thromboxane A2 receptor antagonist. Each pharmacologic agent was used 
in a separate vessel bath, with two arteries used as controls (no drug pre-treatment). 
At the end of the experiment, the bathing medium was changed to a 124 mM potassium 
chloride solution (high KCl buffer; in mM: 10 HEPES, 24 NaCl, 124 KCl, 2.4 MgSO4, 4.9 CaCl2, 
1.18 KH2PO4, 5.5 glucose; pH 7.4) to assess maximal, non-receptor-induced constriction in all 
vessels. 
Isolated working heart preparation  
Isolated working hearts were prepared using a previously described method (Shah et al., 
2016). The heart was rapidly excised from anesthetized rats and kept in ice-cold modified Krebs-
Henseleit solution [120 mM NaCl, 25 mM NaHCO3, 5.5 mM glucose, 4.7 mM KCl, 1.2 mM 
KH2PO4, 1.2 mM MgSO4 and 2.5 mM CaCl2 (pH 7.4)]. The aorta was inserted onto a cannula and 
ligated with silk. Hearts were perfused with oxygenated Krebs-Henseleit solution for 10 minutes in 
retrograde Langendorff mode. During this time, excess pericardial tissues were removed and the left 
atrium was cannulated and ligated with silk. After stabilization, hearts were perfused in anterograde 
working mode for 30 minutes (pre-ischemia period) followed by 10 minutes of global ischemia and 
40 minutes (post-ischemia period) of reperfusion. Cardiac function was reported as cardiac power, 
calculated as: (peak systolic pressure, mmHg – maximal preload, mmHg) x cardiac output, mL/min x 
0.13/dry weight, joules/min/g dry wt). Cardiac parameters were recorded using Hugo Sachs 
Electronik (HSE) data acquisition system and ISOHEART software for Windows 2000 (Harvard 
Apparatus, Canada). Cardiac power was calculated every 10 minutes for a period of 80 minutes. 
Hearts which experienced non-reversible arrhythmia during the experiment were excluded from the 
study. 
  
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
8 
Molecular analyses: Western blot and immunofluorescence  
Following completion of the ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) protocol, sections of LV tissues were 
either directly snap frozen in liquid nitrogen or embedded in optimal cutting temperature medium 
compound (OCT) and snap frozen for subsequent analysis. Mesenteric arteries were similarly stored 
following dissection and removal of surrounding connective tissues. LV tissue or mesenteric artery 
tissue (50 – 100 µg) homogenates were prepared in lysis buffer [in mM: 20 Tris (pH 7.4), 5 EDTA, 10 
sodium pyrophosphate tetrabasic, 100 sodium, 9 fluoride, and 1% NP-40] containing protease 
(Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (1X Halt TM 200 protease inhibitor, 201 Thermo Scientific, USA) and 1 
mM PMSF, Fluka Biochemika) and phosphatase inhibitors (2 mM Sodium Orthovanadate, Sigma). 
Total protein concentration of the lysate was determined by the bicinchoninic acid assay (Pierce, 
Rockford IL USA).  
Protein was loaded and separated on 10% SDS-polyacrylamide gels for detection of the 
thromboxane A2 receptor (TXA2-R), on 7.5% SDS-polyacrylamide gels for detection of prostaglandin 
H synthase 1 (PGHS1), sarcoendoplasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPase 2a (SERCA2a) and eNOS. Gels 
were then transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane (0.2 µm: Bio-Rad, Mississauga, ON, Canada). 
Membranes were incubated with 50% blocking reagent for 1 hour at room temperature. After washing 
with phosphate-buffered saline solution, the membrane was incubated overnight at 4ºC with primary 
antibodies for SERCA2a (LV tissue, 1:2500, Santa Cruz Biotechnology), PGHS1 (mesenteric arteries, 
1:1500 rabbit polyclonal, Abcam Inc., Toronto, ON, Canada), eNOS (mesenteric arteries, mouse 
monoclonal antibody, 1:250, BD Biosciences), TXA2-R (mesenteric arteries, 1:250 rabbit polyclonal, 
Caymen Chemical Company, Ann Arbor), α-tubulin (mesenteric arteries, 1:20 000 mouse monoclonal 
antibody, GenScript, Piscataway NJ) or β-actin (LV tissue, 1:1000 – 1500; Santa Cruz 
Biotechnology). The membranes were then incubated with the appropriate secondary antibody: IRDye 
800CW donkey anti-mouse and IRDye 680RD goat anti-rabbit IgG secondary antibodies IgG or 
IRDye 800CW donkey anti-rabbit IgG and IRDye 680RD donkey anti-mouse IgG (1:10000 – 
1:20000; Li-Cor Biosciences, Lincoln NE USA) or anti-mouse (Alexa Fluor 750, 1:20000, 
Invitrogen). Blots were then visualized using a Li-cor Odyssey Bioimager and quantified by 
densitometry with Odyssey V3.0 software (Li-cor Biosciences). All data were expressed as percent 
increase or decrease over the corresponding control (tissue from young dam for each sex).  
Tissues embedded in OCT were cut at 20 μm (mesenteric arteries) or 10 μm (LV tissue), 
mounted on glass slides at −20°C, and stored at −80°C until use. Evidence of oxidative stress 
(superoxide or reactive oxygen species [ROS]) was measured by staining with dihydroethidium 
(DHE, 20 µmol/l for arteries or 200 µmol/l for LV tissue) or dichlorodihydrofluorescein diacetate 
(DCFH-DA, 200 umol/l). DHE is cell permeable and reacts with intracellular and extracellular 
  
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
9 
superoxide to yield ethidium bromide, which binds to nuclear DNA and generates nuclear red 
fluorescence (Peshavariya et al., 2007). Non-fluorescent DCFH-DA is cell-permeable and is de-
esterified intracellularly yielding a highly fluorescent 2′,7′-dichlorofluorescein upon oxidation. 
Briefly, slides were thawed, washed thrice with Hank’s balanced salt solution (HBSS, containing 
calcium and magnesium), and incubated with HBSS for 10 minutes at 37°C. Subsequently, the 
respective dyes (DHE or DCFH-DA) were added, incubated for 30 minutes at 37°C, washed to 
remove excess dye on the surface of the section, cover-slipped and imaged. Images were captured 
using a fluorescence microscope (IX81 Olympus, Japan) with CoolSNAP HQ2 CCD camera 
(Photometrics, USA) operated by cellSens Dimensions 1.9 software (Olympus Canada Inc., Canada). 
Images were analyzed with ImageJ software (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA). 
Evidence of oxidative stress, assessed via DHE or DCFH-DA staining, were measured as absolute 
mean intensity after normalizing to offspring from young dams for each sex. 
A footprint of peroxynitrite generation is the formation of nitrotyrosine residues. To detect 
nitrotyrosine in mesenteric arteries, slides were prepared as above. Briefly, slides were then thawed, 
fixed in ice-cold acetone for 20 minutes, washed in PBS and blocked for 1 hour in 1% BSA. Slides 
were then incubated overnight at 4°C with a primary antibody for nitrotyrosine (mouse anti-
nitrotyrosine antibody, 1:150, Abcam) and subsequently incubated for 1 hour with a goat anti-mouse 
secondary (Alexa Fluor 488, 1:250, Invitrogen). Peroxynitrite generation, assessed via nitrotyrosine 
staining, was measured as percent increase or decrease in vessels from aged dams over vessels from 
young dams (control) for each sex. 
Statistical analyses 
Offspring were chosen for each experimental procedure such that no two animals in one 
procedure were from the same litter. Male and female offspring were analyzed separately due to their 
profound differences in phenotype (e.g. body size). Data were plotted and analyzed using GraphPad 
Prism software version 6.0 and are presented as mean ± SEM. Data were tested for normal 
distribution using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test and outliers were detected using the Grubbs test. In 
order to compare vascular function data between groups, concentration-response curves were fitted to 
the Hill equation from which a sigmoid plot was generated by non-linear least squares regression 
analysis. The negative log of the mean effective concentration that produced 50% of the maximal 
response (pEC50) or the difference between percent maximal relaxation (delta Emax) for each treatment 
was then determined. Comparisons of summary Emax, pEC30, pEC50, and delta Emax data were made 
using a Student’s t-test or two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s post-hoc test for multiple 
comparisons, as required. Determination of analyses parameters for vascular function was based on 
the pharmacokinetics that were affected by each pharmacological inhibitor (i.e. either altered 
  
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
10 
sensitivity [pEC50] or efficacy [Emax]). Offspring characteristics (body weight, blood pressure), cardiac 
function recovery after I/R, and molecular data were analyzed using Student’s t-test. A P-value of < 
0.05 was considered statistically significant. 
RESULTS 
Offspring weight and blood pressure 
A previous study from our lab using this model demonstrated that fetuses from advanced 
maternal aged dams were smaller at GD20 than those from young dams, despite smaller litter sizes 
(Care et al., 2015). In the current study, we demonstrate that by adulthood, there was no significant 
difference in body weight of offspring born from either young or aged dams (Table 1). There were 
also no differences in mean (MAP), systolic (SBP) or diastolic blood pressure (DBP) in either males 
or females at 4 months of age (Table 1). 
Vascular function 
At 4 months of age, maximal endothelium-dependent relaxation of mesenteric arteries was 
reduced in male offspring from aged dams, an effect which was not observed in female offspring 
(Figure 1). The role of oxidative stress in vascular dysfunction was assessed by pre-incubation with 
the antioxidant pegSOD. Indeed, pegSOD improved maximal relaxation only in male offspring from 
aged dams, thus allowing vessels to relax to a similar extent as male offspring from young dams 
(Table 2). Analysis of the delta MCh Emax demonstrated that the contribution of superoxide anion to 
vascular function was significantly increased in male offspring from aged compared to young dams 
(Figure 2A). Pre-treatment of vessels with pegSOD did not affect relaxation in vasculature from 
female offspring in either group, thus analysis of the delta Emax did not show a significant difference 
(Figure 2D). Increased production of superoxide anions may affect vascular function through 
scavenging of nitric oxide (NO), thus, we investigated the role of NO-dependent relaxation in 
mesenteric arteries by pre-incubation with L-NAME (a pan-NOS inhibitor). Inhibition of NOS with 
L-NAME reduced maximal MCh-induced relaxation in all male and female groups (Table 2). 
However, although we observed a greater modulation of vascular function by superoxide anion in 
male offspring from aged dams, analysis of the change in maximal relaxation (delta Emax) 
demonstrated no significant difference in NO-dependent relaxation in male offspring from aged dams 
(Figure 2B). Interestingly, the contribution of NO-dependent relaxation was significantly increased in 
female offspring from aged compared to young dams (Figure 2E).  
  
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
11 
Endothelium-derived hyperpolarization (EDH) was also assessed in mesenteric arteries from 
male and female offspring. Sensitivity to MCh-induced relaxation was significantly decreased after 
pre-treatment with apamin and TRAM-34 in female offspring from both young and aged dams and in 
male offspring from young dams, but not in male offspring from aged dams (MCh pEC50 control vs. 
Apa/TRAM: young dam male; 7.04±0.07 vs. 6.75±0.08, P<0.05: aged dam male; 7.17± 0.09 vs. 
7.01±0.10, N.S). Analysis of the change in MCh efficacy (delta Emax) demonstrated a significant 
decrease in EDH-dependent relaxation in male offspring from aged dams (Figure 2C), but not in 
females (Figure 2F), suggesting a possible loss of EDH-mediated relaxation in male offspring from 
aged dams. 
In order to investigate the potential role of a PGHS-derived vasoconstrictor (such as 
thromboxane) on vascular function in male and female offspring from young and aged dams, we 
assessed vascular reactivity in the presence or absence of the thromboxane A2 receptor (TXA2-R) 
antagonist SQ29548. MCh-induced relaxation was enhanced in the presence of SQ29548 in all groups 
(Figure 3A&B). However, inhibition of the TXA2-R caused a greater shift in sensitivity to MCh in 
male offspring from aged dams compared to young dams (Figure 3A&C). This aged dam effect was 
not observed in female offspring (Figure 3D). The non-specific PGHS inhibitor, indomethacin, had no 
significant effect on vascular relaxation in either male or female offspring (data not shown). 
Responses to the thromboxane mimetic (U46619) were also not affected (pEC50: male young dam 
7.11±0.07 vs. aged dam 7.00±0.10, N.S.; female young dam 6.79±0.13 vs. aged dam 6.89±0.07, 
N.S.). Vascular sensitivity to phenylephrine was not different between offspring groups (data not 
shown). 
Vascular molecular analyses 
Despite the effect of pegSOD on improving relaxation vessels from male offspring from aged 
dams, assessment for markers of oxidative stress in mesenteric arteries, including DHE (Figure 
4A&D) and nitrotyrosine (data not shown) were not altered in either male or female offspring from 
young compared to aged dams. eNOS protein levels were also not different between groups (Figure 
4B&E). Interestingly, there was a trend for increased expression of PGHS1 in male offspring from 
aged dams (Figure 4C; P = 0.08), without any change in TxA2-R protein levels (young dam 0.34±0.16 
a.u., aged dam 0.24±0.09 a.u.; N.S.). PGHS1 (Figure 4F) and TXA2-R (young dam 0.28±0.12 a.u., 
aged dam 0.17±0.02 a.u.; N.S.) protein levels were not altered in mesenteric arteries from female 
offspring born from young or aged dams.  
Ex vivo cardiac function 
  
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
12 
Offspring born to either young or aged dams were subjected to an ex vivo I/R protocol to 
assess recovery of cardiac function. Baseline cardiac function during pre-ischemia was comparable in 
adult male and female offspring born to young or aged dams (male, Figure 5A; female, Figure 5B). 
However, in male offspring born to dams of advanced maternal age, recovery of cardiac function after 
I/R was significantly decreased compared to male offspring born to young dams (Figure 5C). 
Interestingly, recovery of cardiac function after I/R was not affected in female offspring born to either 
young or aged dams (Figure 5D); implying a level of cardioprotection in the susceptibility to I/R 
injury in female offspring born to aged dams compared to their male counterparts.  
Cardiac molecular analyses 
We have previously observed cardiac dysfunction and increased cardiac superoxide levels after 
I/R injury in adult male and female offspring exposed to prenatal hypoxia compared to normoxic 
counterparts (Shah et al., 2016). In the current study, cardiac superoxide levels, a marker of oxidative 
stress, were similar in male offspring born from aged compared to young dams (Figure 6A). However, 
a small but significant increase in cardiac superoxide levels was observed in female offspring born 
from advanced maternal aged dams compared to offspring born to young dams (~10% increase; 
Figure 6C). Further assessment of oxidative stress using DCF revealed no significant difference in 
cardiac ROS levels between the groups in male or female offspring (mean fluorescence intensity: 
male young dam 100.0±25.9 a.u., aged dam 105.0±8.2 a.u.; N.S.; female young dam 100.0±11.5 a.u., 
aged dam 103.2±9.0 a.u.; N.S.). As calcium handling proteins such as SERCA2a have been shown to 
be altered in IUGR offspring (Harvey et al., 2015) and involved in I/R injury (Talukder et al., 2008), 
we assessed SERCA2a in LV tissue. However, these cardiac SERCA2a protein levels were not altered 
between the groups in male or female offspring. (Figure 6B&D). 
DISCUSSION 
The aim of this study was to determine whether offspring born from dams of advanced 
maternal age show evidence of adverse cardiovascular outcomes in adulthood. Cardiovascular health 
in adult offspring can be influenced by many complications occurring during pregnancy. Whether 
delaying pregnancy to an advanced maternal age has an adverse impact on cardiovascular disease 
susceptibility in adult offspring has not been investigated to date. Our data demonstrated that adult 
rats born from aged dams have cardiovascular dysfunction that was impacted through sex-specific 
mechanisms. Notably, recovery of cardiac function after an I/R insult was impaired in only male 
offspring born from dams of advanced age, while maximal endothelium-dependent relaxation was 
also uniquely reduced in this group.  
  
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
13 
The developmental programming of adult onset cardiovascular disease is becoming a well 
characterized determinant of long-term health. Indeed, it is internationally recognized that 
prenatal/maternal health is a critical pathway for improvement of societal health (CIHI, 2011; WHO, 
2011). Much epidemiological data exists that a poor in utero environment impacts fetal development 
not only in the short term but also into adulthood (reviewed in (Barker, 1994)). This concept has 
expanded beyond the fetal complications of IUGR, malnutrition and hypoxia to also include maternal 
medical comorbidities such as obesity and preeclampsia. However, although advanced maternal age is 
becoming more prevalent, whether or not children born from women of advanced maternal age are at 
an increased risk of adult onset disease remains to be determined. Notably, it has been shown that 
infant systolic blood pressure is directly correlated with maternal age (Gillman et al., 2004). Further, 
epidemiologic studies have illustrated increased fasting glucose levels in children born from women 
of advanced maternal age (Fall et al., 2015). Therefore, the impact of maternal age on adult 
cardiovascular function in our study (in which the only difference between groups was the age of the 
dam during pregnancy) supports a role for maternal age in the developmental programming of adult 
onset disease. 
The underlying vascular endothelial cell pathways that were involved in developmental 
programming in our model of advanced maternal age were investigated and found to be altered in a 
sex-specific manner. Indeed, the lack of overall difference in endothelium-dependent relaxation in 
female offspring from aged dams may be due to a compensatory increase in NO contribution to 
relaxation, supported by evidence that NOS-inhibition had the greatest effect in this group. However, 
this sex-specific outcome does not appear to be due to increased eNOS expression since protein levels 
of eNOS in mesenteric arteries were not different between groups. In male offspring from aged dams 
we speculate that vascular relaxation may be impacted by oxidative stress-mediated pathways. Our 
data illustrate that pre-incubation with pegSOD improved endothelium-dependent relaxation in male 
offspring from aged dams, such that the maximal relaxation became similar to that in vessels from 
male offspring of young dams. Others have shown similar beneficial effects of antioxidants in 
enhancing maximal endothelium-dependent relaxation in a hypoxic rat model of developmental 
programming (Allison et al., 2016). Although we did not find differences in vascular oxidative stress 
between groups, this may be related to technical limitations of the assays or may be related to acute 
versus chronic changes in pro-oxidant levels. For example, DHE provides a snapshot of superoxide 
anion levels in frozen tissues, but does not illustrate functionality in vivo nor temporal fluctuations. 
Further, the sensitivity of the nitrotyrosine antibody to detect differences in peroxynitrite levels may 
be limited by the small vessel size and location of the oxidative stress, for example cytosolic versus 
mitochondrial.  
  
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
14 
Vascular relaxation in male offspring from aged dams may be additionally impacted by 
reduced EDH-dependent relaxation. Pre-incubation of arteries with EDH inhibitors had a minimal 
effect in males from aged dams, as shown by a decreased delta Emax, suggesting a blunted role for this 
pathway in mediating vasorelaxation in males, while EDH-mediated relaxation was preserved in 
female offspring born from aged dams. Supporting this theory, in mesenteric arteries from a rat model 
of utero-placental insufficiency, vascular relaxation was impaired in male offspring via decreased 
EDH (Tare et al., 2012); however, female offspring were not assessed in that study and thus the 
specificity of this pathway to male offspring in their model is unknown.  
Evidence of an altered balance of vasorelaxant endothelial cell pathways has been observed 
both in our own investigations in a prenatal hypoxia model (Morton et al., 2010b) and by others. 
While EDH was not affected in mesenteric arteries from aged control and hypoxia-exposed IUGR 
offspring, NO-mediated relaxation was impaired in aged female but not male offspring (Morton et al., 
2010a). In a prenatal high fat diet mouse model, the contribution of EDH was affected in offspring, 
while those exposed to a ‘second hit’ of postnatal high fat diet had enhanced NO and prostaglandin 
mediated relaxation as compensatory mechanisms (Stead et al., 2016). In fetal sheep coronary 
arteries, Shukla et al. showed that maternal nutrient restriction induced a loss of EDH, which was 
associated with an upregulation of NO-mediated vasodilation (Shukla et al., 2014). Again, sex-
specific effects were not assessed in that study, although evidence exists that vessels from female 
animals have a greater contribution of the EDH pathway compared to males in young adulthood 
(Leung & Vanhoutte, 2017). In the current study, we demonstrated a significant increase in NO-
mediated relaxation in females and a loss of EDH-mediated relaxation in males from aged dams, 
which may at least partially explain the sex-specific endothelial dysfunction. 
The current study also demonstrated a potential increased role of thromboxane in contributing 
to the overall impaired vascular function in male offspring born from aged dams; although this 
appeared to be more of a subtle phenotype whereby our data demonstrated an enhanced effect of 
thromboxane receptor inhibition in male offspring of advanced age dams. Similarly, in a diabetic rat 
model of developmental programming inhibition of the thromboxane receptor restored impaired 
vascular relaxation in mesenteric arteries from offspring of diabetic pregnant rats (Ramos-Alves et al., 
2012). Interestingly, indomethacin, an upstream PGHS inhibitor, did not alter vascular function in any 
offspring group, likely due to its effect on inhibition of both vasoconstrictor and vasodilator 
prostaglandins, whereas SQ29548 inhibits TxA2-R, thus blocking only the vasoconstrictor pathway. 
Molecular analysis of mesenteric vessels supports this theory. PGHS protein levels demonstrated a 
trend in increased expression, while there was no difference in the TxA2-R density in male offspring 
from aged dams. These data suggest that there may be enhanced production of a PGHS-dependent 
  
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
15 
vasoconstrictor, which is impacted downstream of the TxA2-R. Overall, our findings illustrate the fine 
balance between vasoactive agents in mediating overall vascular reactivity and that the complexity 
behind this regulation may be differentially affected in models of developmental programming. 
 Sex-specific mechanisms behind the developmental programming of cardiac disease have 
become a well-established paradigm (Dasinger & Alexander, 2016). Indeed, in a variety of animal 
models including the maternal low-protein rat (McMullen & Langley-Evans, 2005), sheep (Tang et 
al., 2010), and hypoxic rat (Rueda-Clausen et al., 2009; Xue & Zhang, 2009) the mechanisms leading 
to an increased susceptibility to cardiac dysfunction are differentially regulated in male and female 
offspring. In the present study, we demonstrated sex-specific adult cardiac outcomes in offspring born 
to mothers of advanced maternal age. We found that female offspring born to dams of advanced 
maternal age had greater cardiac tolerance to I/R injury compared to their male counterparts. In line 
with our findings, others have observed cardioprotection in female compared to male offspring born 
to either normoxia or prenatal hypoxia mothers when exposed to ex vivo I/R injury (Xue & Zhang, 
2009). On the other hand, previous studies in our lab have shown that male and female IUGR 
offspring are both susceptible to cardiac dysfunction following I/R injury (Rueda-Clausen et al., 
2011b). These opposing results may be secondary to the severity of the prenatal insult, suggesting the 
developmental programming effect of advanced maternal age may be milder than that of prenatal 
hypoxia.  
Studies have previously shown that fetal programming of cardiovascular disease is associated 
with increased markers of oxidative stress in offspring (Gupta et al., 2004; Rueda-Clausen et al., 
2012). Our data show that although cardiac recovery was significantly reduced, left ventricular 
superoxide levels were not different in male offspring from aged dams after I/R injury. Intriguingly, in 
female offspring from aged dams, cardiac superoxide anion levels were increased by ~10%, despite 
the fact that cardiac recovery was not impacted in this group. However, further assessment of 
oxidative stress using DCFH-DA revealed no differences between groups in either sex. Hence the 
physiological significance of increased cardiac oxidative stress in this group remains uncertain. 
Sarcoendoplasmic reticulum calcium handling, particularly SERCA2a, plays a significant role in 
cardiac pathophysiology, including I/R injury (Talukder et al., 2008). There is evidence of altered 
cardiac extracellular matrix composition and impaired Ca2+ handling in neonatal and adult offspring 
born from both hypoxic (Xu et al., 2006; Tong et al., 2011) and nutrient-restricted dams (Harvey et 
al., 2015). In the current study, we did not find any differences in cardiac SERCA2a protein levels 
between the groups in either male or female offspring. Thus, it appears that the overall sex-specific 
cardiac function outcomes after I/R injury cannot be attributed to differentially affected cardiac 
  
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
16 
oxidative stress or cardiac SERCA2a levels and might involve other complex mechanisms which 
depend on prenatal insults such as hypoxia, maternal malnutrition or advanced maternal age.   
In summary, this study is amongst the first to demonstrate a long-term programming effect on 
offspring born to dams of advanced maternal age. Male offspring appear to be particularly susceptible 
to vascular dysfunction and impaired cardiac function recovery following I/R insult in adulthood. 
These pathophysiologic effects are sex-specific since female offspring did not demonstrate the same 
cardiac susceptibility after I/R, while endothelium-dependent vascular pathways were differentially 
altered in females compared to male offspring. These diverging phenotypes highlight the complex 
mechanisms leading to developmental programming of cardiovascular diseases. Our data emphasize 
the need for ongoing clinical monitoring and improved health care for this growing population of 
children being born to women of advanced age. Further research is needed to determine the 
pathophysiological mechanisms behind the developmental origins of cardiovascular disease in 
advanced maternal age models. 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION: 
Competing Interests: 
The authors have no competing interests to declare.  
Author Contributions: 

Conception or design of the work: CC, AS, AC, JM, SD  

Acquisition or analysis or interpretation of data for the work: CC, AS, AC, RK, AQ, JM, SD  

Drafting the work or revising it critically for important intellectual content: CC, AS, AC, RK, 
AQ, JM, SD  

Final approval of the version to be published: CC, AS, AC, RK, AQ, JM, SD  

Agreement to be accountable for all aspects of the work: CC, AS, AC, RK, AQ, JM, SD 
Funding: 
This work is funded by grants from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR: MOP 
133675, FS 154313) and the Women and Children’s Health Research Institute (WCHRI) through the 
generous contributions of the Stollery Children’s Hospital Foundation (SCHF) and the Royal 
Alexandra Hospital Foundation (RAHF). AC is supported by fellowship grants from the National 
Health and Medical Research Council of Australia (APP1092191), the Heart and Stroke Foundation 
of Canada and Alberta Innovates Health Solutions Canada (201200909). AS is supported by a 
  
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
17 
fellowship grant from the Molly Towell Foundation (RES0031751). SD is a Canada Research Chair 
in Maternal and Perinatal Cardiovascular Health. 
REFERENCES 
 
Allison BJ, Kaandorp JJ, Kane AD, Camm EJ, Lusby C, Cross CM, Nevin-Dolan R, Thakor AS, Derks JB, 
Tarry-Adkins JL, Ozanne SE & Giussani DA. (2016). Divergence of mechanistic pathways 
mediating cardiovascular aging and developmental programming of cardiovascular disease. 
FASEB journal : official publication of the Federation of American Societies for Experimental 
Biology 30, 1968-1975. 
 
Armitage JA, Taylor PD & Poston L. (2005). Experimental models of developmental programming: 
consequences of exposure to an energy rich diet during development. The Journal of 
physiology 565, 3-8. 
 
Barker D. (1994). Mother, babies and disease in later life. BMJ Publishing Greoup, London. 
 
Barker DJ. (1992). The fetal origins of adult hypertension. J Hypertens Suppl 10, S39-44. 
 
Barker DJ. (2000). In utero programming of cardiovascular disease. Theriogenology 53, 555-574. 
 
Bidwell PA, Liu GS, Nagarajan N, Lam CK, Haghighi K, Gardner G, Cai WF, Zhao W, Mugge L, Vafiadaki 
E, Sanoudou D, Rubinstein J, Lebeche D, Hajjar R, Sadoshima J & Kranias EG. (2018). HAX-1 
regulates SERCA2a oxidation and degradation. Journal of molecular and cellular cardiology 
114, 220-233. 
 
Boersma GJ, Bale TL, Casanello P, Lara HE, Lucion AB, Suchecki D & Tamashiro KL. (2014). Long-term 
impact of early life events on physiology and behaviour. J Neuroendocrinol 26, 587-602. 
 
Bourque SL, Gragasin FS, Quon AL, Mansour Y, Morton JS & Davidge ST. (2013). Prenatal hypoxia 
causes long-term alterations in vascular endothelin-1 function in aged male, but not female, 
offspring. Hypertension (Dallas, Tex : 1979) 62, 753-758. 
 
  
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
18 
Bourque SL, Komolova M, Nakatsu K & Adams MA. (2008). Long-term circulatory consequences of 
perinatal iron deficiency in male Wistar rats. Hypertension (Dallas, Tex : 1979) 51, 154-159. 
 
Cambonie G, Comte B, Yzydorczyk C, Ntimbane T, Germain N, Le NL, Pladys P, Gauthier C, Lahaie I, 
Abran D, Lavoie JC & Nuyt AM. (2007). Antenatal antioxidant prevents adult hypertension, 
vascular dysfunction, and microvascular rarefaction associated with in utero exposure to a 
low-protein diet. American journal of physiology Regulatory, integrative and comparative 
physiology 292, R1236-1245. 
 
Care AS, Bourque SL, Morton JS, Hjartarson EP & Davidge ST. (2015). Effect of advanced maternal 
age on pregnancy outcomes and vascular function in the rat. Hypertension (Dallas, Tex : 
1979) 65, 1324-1330. 
 
Christian P & Stewart CP. (2010). Maternal micronutrient deficiency, fetal development, and the risk 
of chronic disease. J Nutr 140, 437-445. 
 
CIHI. (2011). In Due Time: Why Maternal Age Matters. Canadian Institute for Health Information. 
 
Cleary-Goldman J, Malone FD, Vidaver J, Ball RH, Nyberg DA, Comstock CH, Saade GR, Eddleman KA, 
Klugman S, Dugoff L, Timor-Tritsch IE, Craigo SD, Carr SR, Wolfe HM, Bianchi DW & D'Alton 
M. (2005). Impact of maternal age on obstetric outcome. Obstet Gynecol 105, 983-990. 
 
Dasinger JH & Alexander BT. (2016). Gender differences in developmental programming of 
cardiovascular diseases. Clinical science (London, England : 1979) 130, 337-348. 
 
Evans LC, Liu H, Pinkas GA & Thompson LP. (2012). Chronic hypoxia increases peroxynitrite, MMP9 
expression, and collagen accumulation in fetal guinea pig hearts. Pediatric research 71, 25-
31. 
 
Fall CH, Sachdev HS, Osmond C, Restrepo-Mendez MC, Victora C, Martorell R, Stein AD, Sinha S, 
Tandon N, Adair L, Bas I, Norris S, Richter LM & investigators C. (2015). Association between 
maternal age at childbirth and child and adult outcomes in the offspring: a prospective study 
in five low-income and middle-income countries (COHORTS collaboration). Lancet Glob 
Health 3, e366-377. 
  
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
19 
 
Gillman MW, Rich-Edwards JW, Rifas-Shiman SL, Lieberman ES, Kleinman KP & Lipshultz SE. (2004). 
Maternal age and other predictors of newborn blood pressure. J Pediatr 144, 240-245. 
 
Giussani DA, Camm EJ, Niu Y, Richter HG, Blanco CE, Gottschalk R, Blake EZ, Horder KA, Thakor AS, 
Hansell JA, Kane AD, Wooding FB, Cross CM & Herrera EA. (2012). Developmental 
programming of cardiovascular dysfunction by prenatal hypoxia and oxidative stress. PloS 
one 7, e31017. 
 
Grundy D. (2015). Principles and standards for reporting animal experiments in The Journal of 
Physiology and Experimental Physiology. The Journal of physiology 593, 2547-2549. 
 
Gupta P, Narang M, Banerjee BD & Basu S. (2004). Oxidative stress in term small for gestational age 
neonates born to undernourished mothers: a case control study. BMC Pediatr 4, 14. 
 
Harvey TJ, Murphy RM, Morrison JL & Posterino GS. (2015). Maternal Nutrient Restriction Alters 
Ca2+ Handling Properties and Contractile Function of Isolated Left Ventricle Bundles in Male 
But Not Female Juvenile Rats. PloS one 10, e0138388. 
 
Jacobsson B, Ladfors L & Milsom I. (2004). Advanced maternal age and adverse perinatal outcome. 
Obstet Gynecol 104, 727-733. 
 
Kane AD, Herrera EA, Camm EJ & Giussani DA. (2013). Vitamin C prevents intrauterine programming 
of in vivo cardiovascular dysfunction in the rat. Circ J 77, 2604-2611. 
 
Lamminpaa R, Vehvilainen-Julkunen K, Gissler M & Heinonen S. (2012). Preeclampsia complicated by 
advanced maternal age: a registry-based study on primiparous women in Finland 1997-2008. 
BMC pregnancy and childbirth 12, 47. 
 
Leung SW & Vanhoutte PM. (2017). Endothelium-dependent hyperpolarization: age, gender and 
blood pressure, do they matter? Acta Physiol (Oxf) 219, 108-123. 
 
  
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
20 
Martin JA, Hamilton BE, Sutton PD, Ventura SJ, Menacker F, Kirmeyer K & Mathews TJ. (2009). Births: 
Final Data for 2006. National vital statistics reports 57. 
 
McMullen S & Langley-Evans SC. (2005). Maternal low-protein diet in rat pregnancy programs blood 
pressure through sex-specific mechanisms. American journal of physiology Regulatory, 
integrative and comparative physiology 288, R85-90. 
 
McPherson NO, Fullston T, Aitken RJ & Lane M. (2014). Paternal obesity, interventions, and 
mechanistic pathways to impaired health in offspring. Ann Nutr Metab 64, 231-238. 
 
Moisiadis VG & Matthews SG. (2014). Glucocorticoids and fetal programming part 2: Mechanisms. 
Nat Rev Endocrinol 10, 403-411. 
 
Moore VM & Davies MJ. (2005). Diet during pregnancy, neonatal outcomes and later health. Reprod 
Fertil Dev 17, 341-348. 
 
Morton JS, Cooke CL & Davidge ST. (2016). In Utero Origins of Hypertension: Mechanisms and 
Targets for Therapy. Physiol Rev 96, 549-603. 
 
Morton JS, Rueda-Clausen CF & Davidge ST. (2010a). Mechanisms of endothelium-dependent 
vasodilation in male and female, young and aged offspring born growth restricted. American 
journal of physiology Regulatory, integrative and comparative physiology 298, R930-938. 
 
Morton JS, Rueda-Clausen CF & Davidge ST. (2010b). Mechanisms of endothelium-dependent 
vasodilation in male and female, young and aged offspring born growth restricted. American 
Journal of Physiology Regulatory, Integrative and Comparative Physiology 298, R930-R938. 
 
Morton JS, Rueda-Clausen CF & Davidge ST. (2011). Flow-mediated vasodilation is impaired in adult 
rat offspring exposed to prenatal hypoxia. J Appl Physiol (1985) 110, 1073-1082. 
 
National Research Council Subcommittee on Laboratory Animal N. (1995). In Nutrient Requirements 
of Laboratory Animals: Fourth Revised Edition, 1995. National Academies Press (US) 
  
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
21 
(c) 1995 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved., Washington (DC). 
 
Peshavariya HM, Dusting GJ & Selemidis S. (2007). Analysis of dihydroethidium fluorescence for the 
detection of intracellular and extracellular superoxide produced by NADPH oxidase. Free 
Radical Research 41, 699-712. 
 
Ramos-Alves FE, de Queiroz DB, Santos-Rocha J, Duarte GP & Xavier FE. (2012). Effect of age and 
COX-2-derived prostanoids on the progression of adult vascular dysfunction in the offspring 
of diabetic rats. British journal of pharmacology 166, 2198-2208. 
 
Roberts VH, Frias AE & Grove KL. (2015). Impact of maternal obesity on fetal programming of 
cardiovascular disease. Physiology (Bethesda) 30, 224-231. 
 
Rueda-Clausen CF, Morton JS & Davidge ST. (2009). Effects of hypoxia-induced intrauterine growth 
restriction on cardiopulmonary structure and function during adulthood. Cardiovascular 
research 81, 713-722. 
 
Rueda-Clausen CF, Morton JS & Davidge ST. (2011a). The early origins of cardiovascular health and 
disease: who, when, and how. Seminars in reproductive medicine 29, 197-210. 
 
Rueda-Clausen CF, Morton JS, Lopaschuk GD & Davidge ST. (2011b). Long-term effects of 
intrauterine growth restriction on cardiac metabolism and susceptibility to 
ischaemia/reperfusion. Cardiovascular research 90, 285-294. 
 
Rueda-Clausen CF, Morton JS, Oudit GY, Kassiri Z, Jiang Y & Davidge ST. (2012). Effects of hypoxia-
induced intrauterine growth restriction on cardiac siderosis and oxidative stress. J Dev Orig 
Health Dis 3, 350-357. 
 
Sengupta P. (2011). A Scientific Review of Age Determination for a Laboratory Rat: How Old is it in 
Comparison with Human Age. Biomedicine International 2, 81-89. 
 
  
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
22 
Shah A, Reyes LM, Morton JS, Fung D, Schneider J & Davidge ST. (2016). Effect of resveratrol on 
metabolic and cardiovascular function in male and female adult offspring exposed to 
prenatal hypoxia and a high-fat diet. The Journal of physiology 594, 1465-1482. 
 
Shukla P, Ghatta S, Dubey N, Lemley CO, Johnson ML, Modgil A, Vonnahme K, Caton JS, Reynolds LP, 
Sun C & O'Rourke ST. (2014). Maternal nutrient restriction during pregnancy impairs an 
endothelium-derived hyperpolarizing factor-like pathway in sheep fetal coronary arteries. 
American journal of physiology Heart and circulatory physiology 307, H134-142. 
 
Statistics Canada. (2012). Births 2009. Statistics Canada, Ottawa, ON, Canada. 
 
Stead R, Musa MG, Bryant CL, Lanham SA, Johnston DA, Reynolds R, Torrens C, Fraser PA & Clough 
GF. (2016). Developmental conditioning of endothelium-derived hyperpolarizing factor-
mediated vasorelaxation. J Hypertens 34, 452-463; discussion 463. 
 
Talukder MA, Kalyanasundaram A, Zuo L, Velayutham M, Nishijima Y, Periasamy M & Zweier JL. 
(2008). Is reduced SERCA2a expression detrimental or beneficial to postischemic cardiac 
function and injury? Evidence from heterozygous SERCA2a knockout mice. Am J Physiol 
Heart Circ Physiol 294, H1426-1434. 
 
Tang L, Bi J, Valego N, Carey L, Figueroa J, Chappell M & Rose JC. (2010). Prenatal betamethasone 
exposure alters renal function in immature sheep: sex differences in effects. American 
journal of physiology Regulatory, integrative and comparative physiology 299, R793-803. 
 
Tare M, Parkington HC, Bubb KJ & Wlodek ME. (2012). Uteroplacental insufficiency and lactational 
environment separately influence arterial stiffness and vascular function in adult male rats. 
Hypertension (Dallas, Tex : 1979) 60, 378-386. 
 
van Katwijk C & Peeters LL. (1998). Clinical aspects of pregnancy after the age of 35 years: a review 
of the literature. Hum Reprod Update 4, 185-194. 
 
WHO. (2011). World Health Organization: Global Atlas on Cardiovascular Disease Prevention and 
Control, ed. Mendis S PP, Norrving B. Geneva. 
  
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
23 
 
Xu Y, Williams SJ, O'Brien D & Davidge ST. (2006). Hypoxia or nutrient restriction during pregnancy in 
rats leads to progressive cardiac remodeling and impairs postischemic recovery in adult male 
offspring. FASEB J 20, 1251-1253. 
 
Xue Q & Zhang L. (2009). Prenatal hypoxia causes a sex-dependent increase in heart susceptibility to 
ischemia and reperfusion injury in adult male offspring: role of protein kinase C epsilon. J 
Pharmacol Exp Ther 330, 624-632. 
 
 
 
TABLES: 
Table 1: Offspring body weights and blood pressure. 
 
Male Offspring 
 
Female Offspring 
 
Young Dam 
Aged Dam 
 
Young Dam 
Aged Dam 
BW, g 
637 ± 33 
711 ± 20 
 
361 ± 10 
369 ± 8 
DBP, mmHg 
109.2 ± 5.8 
121.1 ± 5.3 
 
97.7 ± 3.3 
101.1 ± 3.4 
SBP, mmHg 
151.4 ± 5.7 
162.3 ± 5.0 
 
136.9 ± 3.4 
138.5 ± 3.7 
MAP, mmHg 
123.0 ± 5.7 
135.8 ± 4.6 
 
110.4 ± 3.2 
113.3 ± 3.4 
Data were analyzed by Student’s t-test (for each sex separately) and are expressed as mean ± SEM, N 
= 6 – 9 per group. There were no statistically significant differences between the groups. 
  
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
24 
 
Table 2: Vascular function in mesenteric arteries from offspring born to young and aged dams.  
 
Male Offspring 
 
Female Offspring 
 
Young Dam 
Aged Dam 
 
Young Dam 
Aged Dam 
Control, % relaxation 
96.7 ± 0.8 
78.7 ± 6.3 
 
97.3 ± 1.4 
90.4 ± 3.8 
L-NAME, % relaxation 
   57.8 ± 11.9* 
   24.7 ± 15.1* 
 
72.1 ± 9.5* 
   38.9 ± 15.1* 
pegSOD, % relaxation 
99.6 ± 2.8 
 93.3 ± 3.9* 
 
100.3 ± 1.9 
94.2 ± 2.1 
Apa/TRAM, % relaxation 
72.6 ± 6.2* 
71.0 ± 10.3 
 
80.9 ± 10.0 
64.5 ± 5.7* 
Data is presented as maximal relaxation (Emax) ± SEM to methylcholine in the presence or absence of 
pharmacological inhibitors (N = 6 – 13 per group). A two-way ANOVA was used to evaluate effect of 
the inhibitor on vascular function in offspring from young compared to aged dams. *P < 0.05 to 
indicate statistically significant drug effect vs. control; bold indicates significant effect of aged vs. 
young dam (P < 0.05). 
  
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
25 
FIGURE LEGENDS: 
Figure 1: Maximal endothelium-dependent relaxation in response to methylcholine was impaired in 
mesenteric arteries in male (A), but not female (B), offspring born from aged compared to young 
dams. Inset: summary Emax data. **P<0.01 using Student’s t-test. N = 6 – 10 per group. 
 
  
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
26 
Figure 2: Effect of superoxide anion scavenging (A, D) and inhibition of nitric oxide (NO) 
production (B, E) or endothelium-derived hyperpolarization (EDH) (C, F) on vascular relaxation in 
mesenteric arteries from male and female offspring from young and aged dams. Data are analysed as 
the delta Emax of MCh responses with or without inhibitor. Pre-incubation with the antioxidant 
pegylated superoxide dismutase (pegSOD) improved endothelium-dependent relaxation in male, but 
not female, offspring from aged dams. Inhibition of nitric oxide synthase (NOS) demonstrated an 
increased contribution of NO to relaxation in female, but not male, offspring. Inhibition of small and 
large conductance calcium activated potassium channels demonstrated a reduced contribution of EDH 
to relaxation in male, but not female, offspring of aged dams. *P < 0.05 using Student’s t-test. N = 6 – 
10 per group. 
 
 
  
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
27 
Figure 3: Role of prostaglandin-derived constriction on vascular function in mesenteric arteries from 
male (A, C) and female (B, D) offspring from young and aged dams. Pre-incubation with the 
thromboxane receptor inhibitor SQ29548 improved vascular relaxation in both male and female 
offspring. However, analysis of the pEC50 values demonstrated that there was an enhanced sensitivity 
to thromboxane receptor blockade in male offspring from aged dams. There was no significant effect 
of dam age on pEC50 values in female offspring. Two-way ANOVA; **P<0.01, ****P < 0.001 of 
group effect, post-hoc analysis - different letters signify statistical difference from each other, P < 
0.05. N = 6 – 10 per group. 
 
  
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
28 
Figure 4: Analysis of oxidative stress via dihydroethidium (DHE) staining in mesenteric arteries from 
(A) male and (D) female offspring demonstrated no significant differences with maternal age. 
Protein levels of endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) were unaltered in (B) male or (E) female 
offspring. Protein levels of PGHS1 tended to be increased in (C) male offspring from aged dams but 
not in (F) female offspring. Blots were quantitated using Odyssey software. Data were collected as 
triplicates for each sample and were normalized to -tubulin. All groups were compared using a 
Student’s t-test. N = 4-5 per group. 
 
  
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
29 
Figure 5: Ex vivo assessment of cardiac function after ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury using 
Langendorff heart system in male and female offspring from young and aged dams. Absolute cardiac 
power and percent change of reperfusion cardiac power after I/R are shown in male (A, C) and female 
(B, D) offspring. *** P < 0.001 using a Student’s t-test; isch, ischemia, N = 5 per group. 
 
  
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
30 
Figure 6. Analysis of oxidative stress via dihydroethidium (DHE) staining in cardiac LV tissue after I/R 
injury in male (A) and female (C) offspring. Superoxide levels were significantly increased in female, 
but not male, offspring. Data were expressed as mean intensity/cell normalized to the young dam 
control. Cardiac SERCA2a protein levels were unaltered by maternal age in male (B) and female (D) 
offspring. *** P < 0.001 using a Student’s t-test. N = 5 per group. 
 
  
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
31 
Christy-Lynn Cooke gained a passion for research while completing her PhD at the 
University of Alberta. Dr. Cooke subsequently completed clinical training in Maternal-Fetal 
Medicine and her current faculty position bridges discovery research with clinical practice; 
the ultimate goal of a clinician-scientist. Her research interests include studying mechanisms 
of developmental programming of cardiovascular disease through collaborations with Dr. 
Sandra Davidge; a career highlight being co-author on an article for Physiological Reviews 
on this fascinating subject. 
 
  
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
32 
 
Amin Shah is a postdoctoral fellow at the University of Alberta.  He obtained his Medical 
Sciences doctoral degree from Chonbuk National University, South Korea. His broad 
research interests include cardiac natriuretic peptide system, renin-angiotensin system, and 
developmental origins of adult diseases. Currently, his research focuses on fetal programming 
of cardiovascular and metabolic diseases and potential therapeutic interventions during 
postnatal life. He received fellowships from Heart and Stroke Foundation and Molly Towell 
Perinatal Research Foundation, Canada.  
 
 
 
