 Continuing Education examination available at  
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/cme/conted_info.html#weekly. 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
Weekly / Vol. 65 / No. 32 
August 19, 2016
INSIDE
821 Tobacco Advertising and Promotional Expenditures 
in Sports and Sporting Events — United States, 
1992–2013
826 CDC Grand Rounds: Public Health Strategies to 
Prevent Preterm Birth
831 Announcement
832 QuickStats
Contact Lens Health Week — 
August 22–26, 2016
August 22–26, 2016, marks the third annual Contact 
Lens Health Week. In collaboration with partners from 
clinical, public health, industry, and regulatory sectors, 
CDC is promoting healthy contact lens wear and care 
practices to reduce the risk for eye infections among the 
approximately 41 million persons in the United States who 
wear contact lenses. Research after outbreaks of rare but 
serious eye infections in the United States have indicated 
that these infections occur most often in contact lens 
wearers who do not take proper care of their contact lenses, 
indicating a need to promote safer wear and care (1,2).
A report in this issue of MMWR analyzed 1,075 contact 
lens–related eye infections reported to the Food and Drug 
Administration’s Medical Device Report database. Nearly 
20% of the reports described a patient who had eye damage, 
and approximately 25% of the reports described potentially 
modifiable factors that might have put patients at risk for 
a contact lens–related corneal infection, such as sleeping in 
lenses or wearing lenses for longer periods than prescribed.
Although most contact lens wearers receive the benefits 
of vision correction, contact lenses can pose an infection 
risk, especially if they are not worn and cared for properly. 
Practicing proper contact lens hygiene and regularly visiting 
an eye care provider are important actions for keeping contact 
lens wearers’ eyes healthy. Additional information on Contact 
Lens Health Week and the proper wear and care of contact 
lenses is available at http://www.cdc.gov/contactlenses.
References
1. Verani JR, Lorick SA, Yoder JS, et al. National outbreak of 
Acanthamoeba keratitis associated with use of a contact lens solution, 
United States. Emerg Infect Dis 2009;15:1236–42. http://dx.doi.
org/10.3201/eid1508.090225
2. Chang DC, Grant GB, O’Donnell K, et al. Multistate outbreak of 
Fusarium keratitis associated with use of a contact lens solution. JAMA 
2006;296:953–63. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/jama.296.8.953
Contact Lens–Related Corneal 
Infections — United States, 
2005–2015
Jennifer R. Cope, MD1; Sarah A. Collier, MPH1; Krithika Srinivasan, 
MD1; Erkinay Abliz, PhD2; Ann Myers2; Courtney J. Millin, PhD2; 
Andrew Miller2; MS; Michelle E. Tarver, MD, PhD2
Keratitis (inflammation of the cornea) can result from con-
tact lens wear or other causes. Keratitis from all causes, includ-
ing contact lens wear, results in approximately 1 million clinic 
and emergency department visits annually, with an estimated 
cost of $175 million in direct health care expenditures in 2010 
(1). Approximately 41 million U.S. residents wear contact 
lenses, and in 2014, >99% of contact lens wearers surveyed 
reported at least one behavior that puts them at risk for a 
contact lens–related eye infection (2). The Center for Devices 
and Radiological Health at the Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) regulates contact lenses as medical devices, and certain 
adverse events related to contact lenses are reported to FDA’s 
Medical Device Report (MDR) database. To describe contact 
lens–related corneal infections reported to the FDA, 1,075 
contact lens–related MDRs containing the terms “ulcer” or 
“keratitis” reported to FDA during 2005–2015 were analyzed. 
Among these 1,075 reports, 925 (86.0%) were reported by a 
contact lens manufacturer and 150 (14.0%) by an eye care 
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
818 
MMWR / August 19, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 32
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
The MMWR series of publications is published by the Center for Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Laboratory Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Atlanta, GA 30329-4027.
Suggested citation: [Author names; first three, then et al., if more than six.] [Report title]. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2016;65:[inclusive page numbers].
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Thomas R. Frieden, MD, MPH, Director 
Harold W. Jaffe, MD, MA, Associate Director for Science 
Joanne Cono, MD, ScM, Director, Office of Science Quality 
Chesley L. Richards, MD, MPH, Deputy Director for Public Health Scientific Services
Michael F. Iademarco, MD, MPH, Director, Center for Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Laboratory Services 
MMWR Editorial and Production Staff (Weekly)
Sonja A. Rasmussen, MD, MS, Editor-in-Chief
Charlotte K. Kent, PhD, MPH, Executive Editor 
Jacqueline Gindler, MD, Editor
Teresa F. Rutledge, Managing Editor 
Douglas W. Weatherwax, Lead Technical Writer-Editor
Soumya Dunworth, PhD, Teresa M. Hood, MS,  
Technical Writer-Editors
Martha F. Boyd, Lead Visual Information Specialist
Maureen A. Leahy, Julia C. Martinroe, 
Stephen R. Spriggs, Moua Yang, Tong Yang,
Visual Information Specialists
Quang M. Doan, MBA, Phyllis H. King, Terraye M. Starr,
Information Technology Specialists
MMWR Editorial Board
Timothy F. Jones, MD, Chairman
Matthew L. Boulton, MD, MPH
Virginia A. Caine, MD 
Katherine Lyon Daniel, PhD
Jonathan E. Fielding, MD, MPH, MBA
David W. Fleming, MD 
William E. Halperin, MD, DrPH, MPH
King K. Holmes, MD, PhD 
Robin Ikeda, MD, MPH 
Rima F. Khabbaz, MD
Phyllis Meadows, PhD, MSN, RN
Jewel Mullen, MD, MPH, MPA
Jeff Niederdeppe, PhD
Patricia Quinlisk, MD, MPH 
Patrick L. Remington, MD, MPH 
Carlos Roig, MS, MA
William L. Roper, MD, MPH 
William Schaffner, MD
provider or patient. Overall, 213 (19.8%) reports described a 
patient who had a central corneal scar, had a decrease in visual 
acuity, or required a corneal transplant following the event. 
Among the reports, 270 (25.1%) described modifiable fac-
tors known to be associated with an increased risk for contact 
lens–related corneal infections, including sleeping in contact 
lenses or poor contact lens hygiene; the remainder did not 
provide details that permitted determination of associated fac-
tors. Continued efforts to educate contact lens wearers about 
prevention of contact lens–related eye infections are needed.
FDA’s MDR database contains reports submitted by man-
datory reporters (manufacturers, importers, and device user 
facilities*) and voluntary reporters (health care professionals, 
patients, and consumers). FDA uses MDRs to monitor device 
performance, detect potential device-related safety issues, and 
develop benefit/risk assessments of these devices. An MDR 
contains standardized device and patient problem codes, as 
well as a narrative description of the adverse event. A contact 
lens MDR was included in this analysis if it was submitted by 
a U.S. reporter during 2005–2015 and contained the terms 
“ulcer” or “keratitis” anywhere in the MDR; these terms were 
selected after reviewing a subset of MDRs indicating that these 
terms reliably identified reports of apparent microbial keratitis. 
Each MDR narrative was reviewed by at least two reviewers, 
and data pertaining to modifiable risk factors, outcomes, and 
etiologic agents were abstracted. Discrepancies related to data 
interpretation were discussed by the study team and resolved 
by consensus. Frequencies of modifiable risk factors, outcomes, 
and etiologic agents were calculated for both standard variables 
and variables created from abstracted narrative data.
The final data set included 1,075 MDRs, representing 62% 
of all contact lens MDRs from U.S. reporters during 2005–
2015. Overall, 925 (86.0%) MDRs were reported to FDA by 
contact lens manufacturers, and 150 (14.0%) were reported by 
an eye care provider or patient. A total of 615 (57.2%) reports 
were associated with soft daily wear lenses,† 381 (35.4%) with 
soft extended-wear lenses,§ 36 (3.3%) with daily disposable 
lenses,¶ and 43 (4.0%) with rigid gas-permeable lenses.** 
Thirty-three (3.1%) reports were associated with decorative or 
cosmetic lenses.†† Sixteen (1.5%) reports indicated purchase 
of lenses without a prescription, from an unapproved source 
such as a flea market or costume shop. One hundred thirty 
* A device user facility is a hospital, ambulatory surgical facility, nursing home, 
or outpatient facility (including urgent care clinics and emergency departments).
 † Soft daily wear lenses are contact lenses made of soft, flexible, plastics that 
allow oxygen to pass through to the cornea. They are worn daily and removed, 
cleaned, and stored prior to sleeping.
 § Soft extended wear lenses are contact lenses made of soft, flexible plastics that 
allow oxygen to pass through to the cornea. They can be worn overnight or 
continuously for up to 30 days.
 ¶ Daily disposable lenses are contact lenses that are worn once and discarded daily.
 
** Rigid gas-permeable lenses are contact lenses made of durable materials 
resistant to deposit buildup.
 
†† Decorative or cosmetic lenses are contact lenses that change the look of the 
eye but might not correct vision. These lenses can be daily disposable, soft 
daily, soft extended wear, or rigid gas permeable lenses.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / August 19, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 32 
819
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(12.1%) reports described patients who went to an emergency 
department or urgent care clinic for their condition, and 25 
(2.3%) reported patients who were hospitalized. Eye damage, 
defined as having a central corneal scar or a decrease in visual 
acuity, or needing a corneal transplant, was indicated in 213 
(19.8%) reports (Table 1).
Two hundred seventy (25.1%) reports described potentially 
modifiable factors that might have put the patient at risk for a 
contact lens–related corneal infection. Extended wear of lenses 
(defined as routine wearing of lenses continuously or overnight, 
whether prescribed for extended wear or not) was noted in 121 
(11.3%) reports, and often prompted the provider to discon-
tinue their use. Other behaviors reported included occasional 
overnight wear or napping in lenses (7.0%), overwear of lenses 
(wearing lenses for longer than the prescribed period) (7.9%), 
using expired lenses or products (0.7%), storing lenses in tap 
water (0.8%), and wearing lenses while swimming (0.9%) 
(Table 2). The pathogen causing the infection was reported 
in 137 (12.7%) MDRs. The most commonly mentioned 
pathogens were, in order of frequency, Pseudomonas (48, 
4.5%), Acanthamoeba (34, 3.2%), Fusarium (24, 2.2%), and 
Staphylococcus species (15, 1.4%). Analysis of narrative sec-
tions of reports of patients who ultimately recovered revealed 
frequent visits to their eye care provider (sometimes daily), 
frequent administration of prescribed treatment (including 
hourly administration of eye drops), and missed work or school 
during the acute phase of their infection. 
Discussion
During the reporting period included in this analysis, 
25.1% of MDRs that included the terms “ulcer” or “keratitis” 
mentioned a modifiable risk factor, including occasionally 
sleeping in contact lenses or extended wear of lenses, whereas 
few reports were associated with problems with the contact 
lens itself, such as the lens being ripped or torn. Other studies 
have shown that sleeping in contact lenses, whether occasion-
ally or as part of a prescribed wearing schedule (i.e., extended 
wear lenses), increases the risk for contact lens–related eye 
infections by sixfold to eightfold (3,4). In addition, 19.8% of 
analyzed MDRs described eye damage after the contact lens–
related infection. However, the actual proportion of contact 
lens–related infections that result in eye damage cannot be 
determined from the MDR database because of the passive 
nature of this surveillance system.
The MDR narratives reviewed for this analysis, which 
described frequent visits to eye care providers, frequent admin-
istration of prescribed treatments, and missed work or school 
give a more patient-focused view of the impact of microbial 
keratitis, qualitatively corroborating previous findings using 
large databases (1) and demonstrating substantial morbidity, 
even among patients who ultimately recover. MDR regulations 
mandate reporting of adverse events and product problems 
by manufacturers, importers, and device user facilities such as 
hospital emergency departments and urgent care facilities (5).
A high percentage of reports noted extended wear or sleeping 
in contact lenses. Habitual or occasional sleeping in contact 
lenses has been shown to increase risk for microbial keratitis 
(3,6). Conversely, wearers of daily disposable lenses have been 
shown to have a lower risk for eye infections (3), and in this 
analysis, daily disposable lenses were infrequently listed in 
reports for microbial keratitis.
The findings in this report are subject to at least four limita-
tions. Although MDRs are a valuable source of information, 
they represent a passive surveillance system that includes the 
potential submission of incomplete, inaccurate, untimely, 
unverified, or biased information. Second, neither the 
TABLE 1. Number and percentage of patients with contact lens–
related eye infections (N = 1,075), by selected characteristics and 
outcomes — Food and Drug Administration’s Medical Device Report 
Database, 2005–2015
Characteristic
No. (%)
Female sex (n = 960*)
637 (66.4)
Type or source of lens
Daily disposables
36 (3.4)
Soft daily wear
615 (57.2)
Soft extended wear
381 (35.4)
Rigid gas permeable
43 (4.0)
Decorative or cosmetic lens†
33 (3.1)
Purchased from unlicensed source (i.e., flea market 
or costume shop)
16 (1.5)
Outcome
Emergency department or urgent care clinic visit
130 (12.1)
Hospitalized
25 (2.3)
Eye damage§
213 (19.8)
Corneal transplant
47 (4.4)
* Sex was unknown for 115 patients.
† Decorative or cosmetic lenses can include any type of lens (i.e., daily 
disposables, soft daily wear, soft extended wear, or rigid gas permeable).
§ Having a central corneal scar or a decrease in visual acuity, or requiring a 
corneal transplant.
TABLE 2. Modifiable factors known to increase the risk for contact 
lens–related eye infections mentioned in reports of patients with 
infectious keratitis (N = 1,075) — Food and Drug Administration’s 
Medical Device Report Database, 2005–2015.
Risk factor*
No. (%)
Any modifiable risk factor
270 (25.1)
Extended wear†
121 (11.3)
Occasional sleeping in contact lenses
75 (7.0)
Overwear (i.e., longer than the prescribed period)
85 (7.9)
Using expired lenses or products
8 (0.7)
Storing lenses in tap water
9 (0.8)
Wearing lenses while swimming
10 (0.9)
Unspecified hygiene problem
12 (1.1)
* These categories are not mutually exclusive.
† Defined as routine wearing of lenses continuously or overnight, whether the 
use is prescribed or not.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
820 
MMWR / August 19, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 32
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
incidence nor prevalence of contact lens–related infections 
can be determined from this reporting system alone because 
of potential underreporting of events and lack of information 
regarding frequency of device use. Third, because cases involv-
ing patients with more severe outcomes are more likely to be 
reported, outcomes of infections reported to the MDR database 
are potentially more severe than typical contact lens–related 
eye infections. Finally, a small number of reports submitted to 
the system provided information about more than one patient 
or more than one problem per patient, and in other cases, 
multiple reports were submitted for one patient (one report 
for each eye or contact lens lot number involved). Therefore, 
the 1,075 reports cannot be interpreted as representing 1,075 
cases of contact lens–related corneal infection.
Although contact lenses are a safe and effective form of 
vision correction if worn and cared for as directed, they pose 
an infection risk to wearers if not worn and cared for properly. 
Health promotion activities should focus on informing contact 
lens wearers of common behaviors that might put them at 
risk for eye infections, such as sleeping in contact lenses and 
exposing lenses to tap water, distilled water, or recreational 
water (7). Additionally, prompt reporting of adverse events can 
help FDA identify and understand the risks associated with 
the use of contact lenses. Patients or eye care providers who 
suspect or experience a problem with contact lenses or their 
care products, should file an MDR report through the FDA 
Safety Information and Adverse Event Reporting program at 
http://www.fda.gov/medwatch.
 1Division of Foodborne, Waterborne, and Environmental Diseases, National 
Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC; 2Center for 
Devices and Radiological Health, Food and Drug Administration.
Corresponding author: Jennifer R. Cope, jcope@cdc.gov, 404-718-4878.
References
1. Collier SA, Gronostaj MP
, MacGurn AK, et al. Estimated burden of 
keratitis—United States, 2010. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2014;63:1027–30.
2. Cope JR, Collier SA, Rao MM, et al. Contact lens wearer demographics 
and risk behaviors for contact lens–related eye infections—United States, 
2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2015;64:865–70. http://dx.doi.
org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6432a2
3. Stapleton F, Keay L, Edwards K, et al. The incidence of contact lens-related 
microbial keratitis in Australia. Ophthalmology 2008;115:1655–62. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ophtha.2008.04.002
4. Stapleton F, Edwards K, Keay L, et al. Risk factors for moderate and severe 
microbial keratitis in daily wear contact lens users. Ophthalmology 
2012;119:1516–21. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ophtha.2012.01.052
5. Food and Drug Administration. Mandatory reporting requirements: 
manufacturers, importers, and device user facilities. Silver Spring, MD: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, Food and Drug 
Administration; 2015. http://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/
DeviceRegulationandGuidance/PostmarketRequirements/
ReportingAdverseEvents/default.htm
6. Dart JK, Radford CF, Minassian D, Verma S, Stapleton F. Risk factors 
for microbial keratitis with contemporary contact lenses: a case-control 
study. Ophthalmology 2008;115:1647–54. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
ophtha.2008.05.003
7. CDC. Healthy contact lens wear and care. Atlanta, GA: US Department 
of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2015. http://www.cdc.gov/
contactlenses/protect-your-eyes.html
Summary
What is already known about this topic?
Approximately 41 million persons in the United States wear 
contact lenses, a safe and effective form of vision correction if 
worn and cared for as directed. Contact lenses are medical 
devices that are regulated by the Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA). Adverse events related to contact lenses are reported to 
FDA’s Medical Device Report (MDR) database.
What is added by this report?
During 2005–2015, a total of 1,075 MDRs describing contact 
lens–related corneal infections were reported to the FDA MDR 
database. Approximately 20% of these MDRs described a 
patient who suffered eye damage. Approximately 25% of the 
1,075 MDRs described potentially modifiable factors that might 
have put the patient at risk for a contact lens–related corneal 
infection, such as sleeping in lenses or wearing lenses longer 
than for the prescribed period.
What are the implications for public health practice?
Prompt reporting of adverse events can help the FDA identify 
and understand the health risks related to the use of contact 
lenses. Contact lens wearers can reduce their risk for contact 
lens–related infections by improving their hygiene behaviors, 
such as not sleeping in contact lenses unless prescribed and 
replacing their contact lenses as prescribed. If patients or eye 
care providers suspect or experience a problem with contact 
lenses or their care products, they are encouraged to file an 
MDR report through the FDA Safety Information and Adverse 
Event Reporting program
