 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
Weekly / Vol. 67 / No. 32 
August 17, 2018
INSIDE
882 Prevalence of Disabilities and Health Care Access by 
Disability Status and Type Among Adults — United 
States, 2016
888 Prevalence of Five Health-Related Behaviors for 
Chronic Disease Prevention Among Sexual and Gender 
Minority Adults — 25 U.S. States and Guam, 2016
894 Emergence of Localized Serogroup W 
Meningococcal Disease in the 
United States — Georgia, 2006–2016
898 Contraceptive Use Among Women at Risk for 
Unintended Pregnancy in the Context of Public 
Health Emergencies — United States, 2016
904 QuickStats
Continuing Education examination available at  
https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/cme/conted_info.html#weekly. 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Contact Lens Health Week — 
August 20–24, 2018
August 20–24, 2018, marks the fifth annual Contact Lens 
Health Week. In collaboration with partners from clinical, 
public health, industry, and regulatory sectors, CDC is pro-
moting healthy contact lens wear and care practices to reduce 
the risk for eye infections among the approximately 45 million 
persons in the United States who wear contact lenses. Research 
after outbreaks of rare but serious eye infections in the United 
States has indicated that these infections occur most often in 
contact lens wearers who do not take proper care of their contact 
lenses, indicating a need to promote safer wear and care (1,2).
A report in this issue of MMWR reviews cases of contact 
lens–related eye infections associated with sleeping in con-
tact lenses. Other reported habits in addition to sleeping 
while wearing lenses were swimming while wearing lenses 
and not replacing lenses and storage cases as often as recom-
mended. Some of the patients sought care in an emergency 
department where it is more costly to receive care, and some 
of the infections led to serious adverse health outcomes.
Contact lenses can pose an infection risk, especially if 
they are not worn and cared for properly. Practicing proper 
contact lens hygiene is important for keeping contact lens 
wearers’ eyes healthy.
Additional information on Contact Lens Health Week 
and the proper wear and care of contact lenses is available 
at https://www.cdc.gov/contactlenses.
CDC receives an annual contribution from the Contact 
Lens Institute to support CDC’s Healthy Contact Lens 
Program. The Contact Lens Institute had no involvement 
in the drafting or review of this report.
References
1. Verani JR, Lorick SA, Yoder JS, et al.; Acanthamoeba Keratitis 
Investigation Team. National outbreak of Acanthamoeba keratitis 
associated with use of a contact lens solution, United States. Emerg 
Infect Dis 2009;15:1236–42. https://doi.org/10.3201/eid1508.090225
2. Chang DC, Grant GB, O’Donnell K, et al.; Fusarium Keratitis 
Investigation Team. Multistate outbreak of Fusarium keratitis associated 
with use of a contact lens solution. JAMA 2006;296:953–63. https://
doi.org/10.1001/jama.296.8.953
Corneal Infections Associated with 
Sleeping in Contact Lenses — Six 
Cases, United States, 2016–2018
Jennifer R. Cope, MD1; Nuadum Muriel Konne, MPH1; Deborah S. 
Jacobs, MD2; Deepinder K. Dhaliwal, MD3; Michelle K. Rhee, MD4;  
Jia Yin, MD, PhD2; Thomas L. Steinemann, MD5,6
Contact lenses, when worn and cared for properly, are a safe 
and effective form of vision correction used by an estimated 
45 million Americans. However, contact lens wearers are at 
risk for contact lens–related eye infections, especially when 
wearers do not practice proper contact lens wear and care 
habits. These infections, affecting the cornea and known as 
microbial keratitis (Figure), can lead to serious adverse health 
outcomes. Because contact lenses are regulated by the Food 
and Drug Administration (FDA) as medical devices, contact 
lens–related corneal infections should be reported to FDA as 
an adverse event. To illustrate their serious health implica-
tions, six cases of contact lens–related corneal infection, in 
which sleeping in lenses was reported as the main risk factor, 
are presented. Consequences of infection reported among the 
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
878 
MMWR / August 17, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 32
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
The MMWR series of publications is published by the Center for Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Laboratory Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Atlanta, GA 30329-4027.
Suggested citation: [Author names; first three, then et al., if more than six.] [Report title]. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2018;67:[inclusive page numbers].
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Robert R. Redfield, MD, Director
Anne Schuchat, MD, Principal Deputy Director
Leslie Dauphin, PhD, Acting Associate Director for Science 
Joanne Cono, MD, ScM, Director, Office of Science Quality 
Chesley L. Richards, MD, MPH, Deputy Director for Public Health Scientific Services
William R. Mac Kenzie, MD, Acting Director, Center for Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Laboratory Services 
MMWR Editorial and Production Staff (Weekly)
Charlotte K. Kent, PhD, MPH, Acting Editor in Chief, Executive Editor 
Jacqueline Gindler, MD, Editor
Mary Dott, MD, MPH, Online Editor
Teresa F. Rutledge, Managing Editor 
Douglas W. Weatherwax, Lead Technical Writer-Editor
Glenn Damon, Soumya Dunworth, PhD, Teresa M. Hood, MS,  
Technical Writer-Editors
Martha F. Boyd, Lead Visual Information Specialist
Maureen A. Leahy, Julia C. Martinroe, 
Stephen R. Spriggs, Tong Yang,
Visual Information Specialists
Quang M. Doan, MBA, Phyllis H. King, 
Terraye M. Starr, Moua Yang, 
Information Technology Specialists
MMWR Editorial Board
Timothy F. Jones, MD, Chairman
Matthew L. Boulton, MD, MPH
Virginia A. Caine, MD 
Katherine Lyon Daniel, PhD
Jonathan E. Fielding, MD, MPH, MBA
David W. Fleming, MD 
William E. Halperin, MD, DrPH, MPH
Robin Ikeda, MD, MPH 
Phyllis Meadows, PhD, MSN, RN
Jewel Mullen, MD, MPH, MPA
Jeff Niederdeppe, PhD
Patricia Quinlisk, MD, MPH 
Patrick L. Remington, MD, MPH 
Carlos Roig, MS, MA
William Schaffner, MD
identified cases included the need for frequent administration 
of antibiotic eye drops, multiple follow-up medical appoint-
ments, and permanent eye damage. Health education measures 
directed toward contact lens wearers should emphasize raising 
awareness of the risks of sleeping in contact lenses as well as 
adherence to all recommendations for the wear and care of 
contact lenses. Additional measures are needed to educate eye 
care professionals about the need to report contact lens–related 
corneal infections to MedWatch, the FDA Safety Information 
and Adverse Event Reporting program (https://www.fda.gov/
MedWatch/).
Outside of MedWatch, no formal surveillance for contact 
lens–related corneal infections exists in the United States; in 
2010, an estimated 1 million outpatient and emergency depart-
ment visits were reported for keratitis of all types (1). Despite 
this high estimated annual prevalence, over an 11-year period, 
only 1,075 reports of contact lens–related corneal infections 
were reported to FDA’s MedWatch database (2). Among the 
many behaviors that increase the risk for a contact lens–related 
corneal infection, sleeping in lenses is one of the riskiest and 
one of the most commonly reported behaviors among ado-
lescent and adult contact lens wearers (3). Approximately one 
third of contact lens wearers report sleeping or napping in their 
lenses. Sleeping in lenses, whether inadvertently, occasionally, 
or as part of a prescribed wearing schedule (i.e., extended wear 
lenses), increases the risk for contact lens–related eye infections 
six- to eightfold (4).
In collaboration with the Eye and Contact Lens Association 
(formerly known as the Contact Lens Association of 
Ophthalmologists), six cases of contact lens–related corneal 
infections were identified that were diagnosed in the last 2 years 
in which sleeping in lenses was reported as a risk factor. Patients 
were evaluated and treated by practicing ophthalmologists in 
four major academic medical centers. Clinical presentation, 
risk factors, treatment, and outcomes were reviewed.
FIGURE.  Findings characteristic of a contact lens–related corneal 
infection*
Photo/Deborah S. Jacobs, Jia Yin
* There is moderate injection, a notable paracentral white opacity with overlying 
ulceration, and surrounding haze.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / August 17, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 32 
879
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Case Reports
Case 1. A man aged 34 years with a 17-year history of soft 
contact lens use was evaluated for left eye redness and blurry 
vision. He reported sleeping in his contact lenses 3–4 nights 
per week and swimming with contact lenses. He was treated 
for bacterial and fungal microbial keratitis for 2 months with-
out improvement. He was evaluated at an academic medical 
center, where confocal microscopy, a technique that provides 
serial images of sections through the cornea,* revealed find-
ings suggestive of Acanthamoeba keratitis. He was treated with 
topical polyhexamethylene biguanide and chlorhexidine hourly 
that was tapered over 6 months. The infection resolved with 
final spectacle-corrected visual acuity of 20/40, requiring rigid 
contact lenses for correction to 20/20.
Case 2. A man aged 59 years wore his soft contact lenses 
overnight during a 2-day hunting trip and developed eye pain 
on the third day. He used over-the-counter eye drops with 
minimal response. On initial evaluation, he was diagnosed 
with a corneal abrasion and treated with a bandage contact lens 
to promote healing, along with tobramycin/dexamethasone 
drops prescribed four times daily. With worsening symptoms, 
his treatment was changed to ofloxacin drops every 2 hours. 
While in the shower, he wiped his eyes with a towel, then heard 
a popping sound and felt a painful sensation in his left eye. 
He was referred to ophthalmology where a large perforated 
corneal ulcer was diagnosed. An urgent corneal transplant was 
performed to reestablish the integrity of the eye, and he was 
treated with broad-spectrum topical antibiotics postoperatively. 
He recovered useful vision, which improved to 20/25 after 
cataract surgery 1 year later.
Case 3. A woman aged 34 years was evaluated for 3 days 
of sharp right eye pain. She routinely slept in her soft contact 
lenses and used lenses for longer than the recommended 
monthly replacement schedule. She reported not seeing an 
eye care professional in years and refilling her contact lens 
prescription through an online contact lens retailer for at least 
5 years. Examination of the right eye revealed a paracentral 
1.5 mm infiltrate with surrounding edema and trace anterior 
chamber cells. Symptoms and signs were improved the day 
after treatment with topical moxifloxacin. She was instructed 
to continue moxifloxacin but failed to return for a 1-week 
follow-up appointment as instructed.
Case 4. A man aged 57 years was evaluated in the emergency 
department with bilateral reduced vision and eye pain. He 
reported wearing the same soft contact lenses continuously for 
approximately 2 weeks. He did not disinfect his lenses daily, 
slept in them on a regular basis, and did not replace them 
* h t t p s : / / w w w. s c i e n c e d i r e c t . c o m / s c i e n c e / a r t i c l e / p i i /
S0002939409004577?via%3Dihub.
regularly. On examination, uncorrected visual acuity was light 
perception in the right eye and hand motion in the left eye. 
The right eye revealed a central corneal infiltrate and perfora-
tion of the cornea. The left eye revealed a central infiltrate with 
two infiltrates paracentrally and a hypopyon (leukocytes in the 
anterior chamber of the eye). He received a diagnosis of bilateral 
bacterial keratitis. Hourly fortified tobramycin and vancomycin 
drops were required for treatment. A corneal transplant was 
required to save the right eye. The left eye responded to topical 
therapy with visual acuity of 20/40 and a central stromal scar.
Case 5. An adolescent female aged 17 years who slept in a soft 
contact lens purchased without a prescription at a chain store 
developed a right corneal ulcer; a culture grew Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa. She was started on fortified tobramycin and van-
comycin eye drops. Her vision was light perception in the 
right eye, and the cornea showed a central white dense ulcer, 
stromal infiltrates, and 0.5 mm hypopyon. On follow-up, her 
vision had improved to 20/100, pinhole to 20/60. She had a 
stromal scar with thinning.
Case 6. A man aged 18 years went to the emergency depart-
ment with a 3-day history of pain, redness, light sensitivity, 
and tearing in his left eye. He had a 1-year history of wearing 
decorative soft contact lenses† obtained at a local store without 
a prescription. He also reported sleeping in his lenses. He was 
given fluoroquinolone eye drops in the emergency department 
and subsequently was seen at a local eye clinic, at which time 
bacterial keratitis was suspected. His vision was 20/25 in the 
right eye and 20/50 in the left. His left eye showed moderate 
injection with a central ulcer, edema, and moderate inflam-
matory reaction. Cultures were obtained, and hourly fortified 
cephalosporin and aminoglycoside drops were prescribed. 
Follow-up cultures of the patient’s eye, his lenses, and lens 
case each yielded heavy growth of Klebsiella pneumoniae and 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Ten days later his symptoms were 
better; vision in the left eye had improved to 20/25, but a 
stromal scar remained.
Discussion
This case series of contact lens–related corneal infections 
highlights the burden these infections place on contact lens 
wearers and the serious outcomes associated with them. All 
of the patients required treatment with antibiotic eye drops, 
sometimes requiring administration hourly for weeks or 
months. This finding is consistent with a previous analysis of 
administrative health care data, which indicated that 76% of 
keratitis patient encounters were associated with an antimi-
crobial prescription (1). Some of the patients described in this 
† Decorative or cosmetic lenses are contact lenses that change the look of the eye 
but might not correct vision. These lenses can be daily disposable, soft daily, 
soft extended wear, or rigid gas permeable lenses.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
880 
MMWR / August 17, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 32
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
series sought care in an emergency department, where it is more 
costly to receive care (1). One patient was lost to follow-up 
care, suggesting possible complete resolution of disease, but also 
highlighting the challenge of complying with medical care by 
patients who might be busy with work, school, or household 
obligations. Two patients required surgery, and most were left 
with permanent eye damage or vision loss. Contact lens wearers 
are younger on average than nonwearers and bear a burden of 
disease despite being viewed as healthy.
Exam findings in these patients were indicative of active 
infection including stromal opacification, anterior chamber 
reaction, and hypopyon. Cultures and diagnostic testing identi-
fied various organisms, including Pseudomonas aeruginosa and 
Acanthamoeba spp., which might suggest contamination of 
contact lenses and supplies with tap water.
In three of the six cases, contact lenses were purchased 
without a valid prescription. In one case, they were decorative 
lenses, which are lenses that alter the appearance of the eye (e.g., 
change the color) but might not improve vision. Decorative 
lenses, similar to lenses that are prescribed for vision correc-
tion, are classified as medical devices. The sale of all contact 
lenses is regulated and should require a valid prescription from 
an eye care professional. In the United States, contact lens 
prescriptions are valid for only 1–2 years, depending on the 
state. Visits with an eye care professional to renew a prescrip-
tion serve as opportunities for reeducation about safe contact 
lens wear and care practices.
Sleeping in contact lenses is one of the most frequently 
reported contact lens risk behaviors and one with a high 
relative risk for corneal infection (3,4). Sleeping in lenses has 
been shown to be a risk factor regardless of lens material and 
frequency, with even occasional overnight use conferring risk 
(5,6). Although some contact lenses are approved by FDA for 
overnight wear, the increased risk for infection is acknowl-
edged by their classification as a Class 3 medical device, which 
includes medical devices with the greatest risk for harm such as 
intraocular lenses and implantable pacemakers. Postmarketing 
surveillance of drugs and devices is important to the health and 
safety of the general public. Whereas medical device manu-
facturers are required to report adverse events, not all adverse 
events come to the attention of manufacturers (7). Patients 
and physicians can fill this gap.
The findings in this report are subject to at least three limita-
tions. First, cases were chosen by practicing ophthalmologists 
(who can perform eye surgery), and are likely referred cases 
of contact lens–related eye infections that are more serious 
and might require surgical intervention. Therefore, the cases 
presented here are not necessarily representative of the typical 
contact lens–related eye infection. Second, as a case series, there 
are no definitive statements that can be made regarding the 
association of the reported risk factors and the contact lens–
related eye infections. Finally, the patients in the cases reported 
here might have had an innate susceptibility to developing an 
eye infection; other contact lens wearers with the same habits 
might be able to sleep in lenses without adverse outcomes.
Cases of contact lens–related infections, such as those 
described here, should be reported as adverse events to the FDA 
Safety Information and Adverse Event Reporting Program at 
http://www.fda.gov/MedWatch. The Eye and Contact Lens 
Association is working to promote contact lens safety for 
patients by encouraging eye care professionals and patients 
to voluntarily report contact lens–related eye infections to 
FDA. Using the data accumulated in the adverse event report-
ing program, contact lens stakeholders (industry, regulatory 
authorities, eye care professionals, and public health) can work 
together to determine what improvements can be made to 
contact lenses, care products, manufacturer guidelines, and 
labeling. Health education measures directed toward contact 
lens wearers should emphasize raising awareness of the risks 
of sleeping in contact lenses as well as adherence to all recom-
mendations for the wear and care of contact lenses.
Conflict of Interest
CDC receives an annual contribution from the Contact Lens 
Institute to support CDC’s Healthy Contact Lens Program. The 
Contact Lens Institute had no involvement in the drafting or review 
of this report. No other conflicts of interest were reported.
Summary
What is already known about this topic?
Sleeping in contact lenses increases the risk for contact 
lens–related eye infections by six- to eightfold. Approximately 
one third of contact lens wearers report sleeping or napping in 
their lenses.
What is added by this report?
This report of six contact lens–related corneal infections 
associated with sleeping in lenses demonstrates that corneal 
infections might require surgical intervention and result in 
corneal damage and possible permanent vision loss.
What are the implications for public health practice?
It is important that contact lens wearers follow their eye care 
professional’s recommendations for contact lens use, including 
use during sleep. Cases of contact lens–related infections 
should be reported as adverse events to the Food and Drug 
Administration’s MedWatch (http://www.fda.gov/MedWatch).
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / August 17, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 32 
881
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
 1Division of Foodborne, Waterborne, and Environmental Diseases, National 
Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC; 2Massachusetts 
Eye and Ear Infirmary, Boston, Massachusetts; 3University of Pittsburgh Medical 
Center Eye Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; 4New York Eye and Ear Infirmary 
of Mount Sinai, New York, New York; 5MetroHealth Medical Center, 
Cleveland, Ohio; 6Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, 
Cleveland, Ohio.
Corresponding author: Jennifer R. Cope, jcope@cdc.gov, 404-718-4878.
References
1. Collier SA, Gronostaj MP
, MacGurn AK, et al. Estimated burden of 
keratitis—United States, 2010. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2014;63:1027–30.
2. Cope JR, Collier SA, Srinivasan K, et al. Contact lens–related corneal 
infections—United States, 2005–2015. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2016;65:817–20. https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6532a2
3. Cope JR, Collier SA, Nethercut H, Jones JM, Yates K, Yoder JS. Risk 
behaviors for contact lens–related eye infections among adults and 
adolescents—United States, 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2017;66:841–5. https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6632a2
4. Dart JK, Radford CF, Minassian D, Verma S, Stapleton F. Risk factors 
for microbial keratitis with contemporary contact lenses: a case-control 
study. Ophthalmology 2008;115:1647–54.e3. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ophtha.2008.05.003
5. Stapleton F, Edwards K, Keay L, et al. Risk factors for moderate and severe 
microbial keratitis in daily wear contact lens users. Opthalmology 
2012;119:1516–21.
6. Sauer A, Meyer N, Bourcier T; French Study Group for Contact Lens–
Related Microbial Keratitis. Risk factors for contact lens-related microbial 
keratitis: a case-control multicenter study. Eye Contact Lens 
2016;42:158–62.
7. Food and Drug Administration. Mandatory reporting requirements: 
manufacturers, importers, and device user facilities. Silver Spring, MD: 
US Department of Health and Human Services, Food and Drug 
Administration; 2015. https://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/
DeviceRegulationandGuidance/PostmarketRequirements/
ReportingAdverseEvents/default.htm
