 Brief Report
Self-sanitizing copper-impregnated surfaces for bioburden reduction
in patient rooms
John D. Coppin MPH, BS a, Frank C. Villamaria MPH, MS a, Marjory D. Williams PhD, RN b,
Laurel A. Copeland PhD c,d,e, John E. Zeber PhD d,e,f, Chetan Jinadatha MD, MPH e,f,*
a Department of Research, Central Texas Veterans Healthcare System, Temple, TX
b Department of Nursing, Central Texas Veterans Health Care System, Temple, TX
c VA Central Western Massachusetts Healthcare System, Leeds, MA
d Center for Applied Health Research, Temple, TX
e Department of Medicine, College of Medicine, Texas A&M Health Science Center, Bryan, TX
f Department of Medicine, Central Texas Veterans Health Care System, Temple, TX
Key Word:
Surface disinfection
Novel self-sanitizing copper oxide-impregnated solid surfaces have the potential to influence bioburden
levels, potentially lowering the risk of transmission of pathogens in patient care environments. Our study
showed persistently lower microbial burden over a 30-hour sampling period on a copper-impregnated
tray table compared with a standard noncopper surface in occupied patient rooms after thorough initial
disinfection.
Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of Association for Professionals in Infection Control and
Epidemiology, Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Surface contamination plays a role in the transmission and spread
of health care-acquired infections.1 Patients admitted to rooms where
previous patients were positive for methicillin-resistant Staphylo-
coccus aureus, vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus, or Clostridium
difficile are at 2-3 times higher risk for acquiring these organisms
compared with patients in rooms where the previous occupant was
not positive.2 Although studies have shown that surface disinfec-
tion through standard cleaning practices decreases environmental
contamination with these pathogens, standard disinfection prac-
tices alone have generally been shown to be inadequate.3 As a result,
several novel, no-touch disinfection technologies, such as mercury-
based or pulsed xenon ultraviolet (UV) light disinfection, have been
incorporated into hospital cleaning protocols to enhance the dis-
infection process.3 However, these technologies have their own
limitations. For example, UV light cannot reach surfaces in shadows,
and UV light devices cannot be used when a patient is in the room.3,4
Copper oxide-impregnated self-sanitizing solid surfaces (SSSCu) may
provide a promising strategy for keeping bioburden low at all times.5
Currently, there is a lack of evidence on the effectiveness of SSSCu
in reducing surface contamination in a real-world hospital setting.6
This study examined the effect of a novel SSSCu surface on micro-
bial burden of tray tables in a real-world hospital setting.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
This study was conducted at a 120-bed Veterans Affairs hospi-
tal in Temple, TX. The research protocol was approved by expedited
review by the institutional review board and safety committee at
the Central Texas Veterans Health Care System (Temple, TX). Samples
for aerobic bacterial colony (ABC) count were obtained 3 times per
day over a 2-day period from an SSSCu bedside tray table (treat-
ment) (EOSCu Surfaces LLC, Norfolk, VA) placed inside 11 occupied
patient rooms, and from a non-SSSCu tray table covered with stan-
dard laminate (control) placed inside 11 occupied patient rooms.
The arm attribution was based on convenience determined by avail-
ability of the sampler and nursing information that a patient would
stay for at least 2 days. Control rooms included 5 nonisolation pre-
caution and 6 isolation precaution rooms, whereas treatment rooms
included 6 nonisolation precaution and 5 isolation precaution rooms.
All isolation patients were under methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
* Address correspondence to Chetan Jinadatha, MD, MPH, Department of Medicine,
Central Texas Veterans Healthcare System, 1901 S Veterans Dr, Temple, TX 76504.
E-mail address: chetan.jinadatha@va.gov (C. Jinadatha).
This work was supported by the Central Texas Veterans Health Care System
(Temple, TX).
The copper-impregnated over-bed tabletop used in this study was donated to
Central Texas Veterans Health Care System by EOS surfaces under a cooperative re-
search and development agreement. EOSCu Surfaces LLC, Norfolk, VA, did not
participate in the study design or in the collection, analysis, and interpretation of
data, the writing of the report, or in the decision to submit the manuscript for pub-
lication.
Conflicts of interest: None to report.
0196-6553/Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of Association for Professionals in Infection Control and Epidemiology, Inc. This is an open access article under the CC
BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ajic.2017.01.012
American Journal of Infection Control 45 (2017) 692-4
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
American Journal of Infection Control
journal homepage: www.ajicjournal.org
American Journal of 
Infection Control
 aureus precautions per hospital policy. Immediately before sam-
pling at hour 0, the tray table was cleaned with 10% sodium
hypochlorite wipes (Clorox Healthcare, Oakland, CA). Samples were
taken at hours 0, 3, 6, 24, 27, and 30. The environment samples were
collected from adjacent areas using Rodac tryptic soy agar contact
plates (Hardy Diagnostics, Santa Maria, CA) for ABC with a surface
area of 25 cm2. After collection, the samples were incubated at 35°C
for 24 hours. Colony forming units were counted and recorded. Anal-
ysis was completed using an unbiased Random Effects/EM (RE-EM)
regression tree for longitudinal data modeling ABC count as a func-
tion of treatment condition, isolation status, and time, with a random
intercept for tray table identification number. Regression trees are
nonparametric techniques with power comparable to traditional re-
gression methods but with added ability to model complex
interactions that cannot be modeled using traditional regression
methods. This analysis was performed using the unbiased RE-EM
tree proposed by Fu and Siminoff7 using the package “party” in R
version 3.2.3 (R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria).8
RESULTS
Plots of the microbial burden over time for non-SSSCu and SSSCu
tray tables are shown in Figure 1.
The mean ABC count (95% confidence interval based on 30,000
bootstrap replicates) for 6 occasions over 30 hours for 22 rooms
ranged from 0.2 CFU/25 cm2 (95% CI, 0-0.4 CFU/25 cm2) for SSSCu
and 1.9 CFU/25 cm2 (95% CI, 0-4.9 CFU/25 cm2) for non-SSSCu at hour
0, to a count of 18.9 CFU/25 cm2 (95% CI, 11.0-32.5 CFU/25 cm2) for
SSSCu and a count of 98.2 CFU/25 cm2 (95% CI, 56.2-176.3 CFU/
25 cm2) for non-SSSCu at hour 30.
In the RE-EM regression tree, there was no statistically signifi-
cant difference in ABC count between the SSSCu and the non-
SSSCu surfaces at hours 0, 3, and 6, because the difference between
hour 0 and hours 3-6 was determined by time (P = .002), not treat-
ment group (Fig 2). For hours 24, 27, and 30, there was a statistically
significant difference (P = .002) in ABC count between the SSSCu
(mean, 36.5 CFU/25 cm2) and the non-SSSCu tray table. The ABC count
for non-SSSCu tray tables in isolation status rooms (mean, 61.9 CFU/
25 cm2) was significantly different (P = .014) from counts for the non-
SSSCu tray table in nonisolation rooms (mean, 162.5 CFU/25 cm2).
This isolation status effect was not seen for the SSSCu tray table.
DISCUSSION
Our study showed that the SSSCu surfaces accumulated lower
bioburden over time compared with the non-SSSCu surfaces.
Fig 1. Microbial burden over time for 11 copper oxide-impregnated self-sanitizing solid surfaces (SSSCu) and 11 non-SSSCu tray tables.
Fig 2. Unbiased Random Effects/EM (RE-EM) tree.
693
J.D. Coppin et al. / American Journal of Infection Control 45 (2017) 692-4
 Although the 2 surfaces had similar bioburdens during the first few
hours after artificially resetting the counts to zero by cleaning, they
showed marked differences in bioburden accumulation on the second
day (hours 24-30). Thus for hours 24, 27, and 30, there was a sta-
tistically significant difference between the ABC counts for SSSCu
compared with non-SSSCu surfaces.
Within the SSSCu surface samples and within the non-SSSCu
samples, the ABC counts were similar at hours 24, 27, and 30, in-
dicating a possible ceiling to bioburden accumulation. Our findings
are consistent with published literature on copper-alloy surfaces.
Schmidt et al9 saw an increase in bioburden over the first 6-9 hours.
In a separate study, Schmidt et al10 found the microbial burden ceiling
at day 7 was around 700-800 CFU/100 cm2 of ABC for noncopper
alloy surfaces and 150-200 CFU/100 cm2 for copper alloy surfaces,
which is similar to our findings. These results suggest that al-
though inoculation of the surfaces is similar (as reflected by similar
bioburden within the first few hours) after an adequate incuba-
tion time, the microbial burden increases on non-SSSCu surfaces
and reaches a ceiling, whereas remaining the same or decreasing
slightly on SSSCu surfaces.9 In addition, our results show that iso-
lation status is an important predictor of ABC count for non-
SSSCu surfaces but not for SSSCu surfaces. Although this study is
too small to draw conclusions, these results also suggest that an
SSSCu surface may mitigate an isolation status effect where rooms
without isolation precautions accumulate more bioburden than
rooms with isolation precautions. A possibility is that contact pre-
cautions limit the introduction of bacteria from health care workers
to patient environments, but further research is needed to explain
this finding.
Our pilot study was devised to study bioburden accumulation
on 2 different surfaces in a real-world hospital environment. We did
not control or account for variability in processes. Further, this small
study was limited to assessing the microbial burden of ABC on tray
tables. Results may differ for other high-touch surfaces. In addi-
tion, the sample size was small and the microbial burden was
assessed at only 6 time points over a 2-day period for most rooms
(91%).
CONCLUSIONS
Despite these limitations, the results suggest that a novel SSSCu
solid surface may indeed result in persistently lower microbial
burden compared with a standard noncopper surface in a real-
world hospital setting.
References
1. Han JH, Sullivan N, Leas BF, Pegues DA, Kaczmarek JL, Umscheid CA. Cleaning
hospital room surfaces to prevent health care-associated infections: a technical
brief. Ann Intern Med 2015;163:598-607.
2. Huang SS, Datta R, Platt R. Risk of acquiring antibiotic-resistant bacteria from
prior room occupants. Arch Intern Med 2006;166:1945-51.
3. Jinadatha C, Quezada R, Huber TW, Williams JB, Zeber JE, Copeland LA. Evaluation
of a pulsed-xenon ultraviolet room disinfection device for impact on
contamination levels of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. BMC Infect
Dis 2014;14:187.
4. Hacek DM, Ogle AM, Fisher A, Robicsek A, Peterson LR. Significant impact of
terminal room cleaning with bleach on reducing nosocomial Clostridium difficile.
Am J Infect Control 2010;38:350-3.
5. Monk AB, Kanmukhla V, Trinder K, Borkow G. Potent bactericidal efficacy of
copper oxide impregnated non-porous solid surfaces. BMC Microbiol 2014;14:57.
6. O’
Gorman J, Humphreys H. Application of copper to prevent and control infection.
Where are we now? J Hosp Infect 2012;81:217-23.
7. Fu E, Simonoff JS. Unbiased regression trees for longitudinal and clustered data.
Comput Stat Data Anal 2015;88:53-74.
8. Hothorn T, Hornik K, Zeileis A. Unbiased recursive partitioning: a conditional
inference framework. J Comput Graph Stat 2006;15:651-74.
9. Schmidt MG, Attaway HH, Fairey SE, Steed LL, Michels HT, Salgado CD. Copper
continuously limits the concentration of bacteria resident on bed rails within
the intensive care unit. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2013;34:530-3.
10. Schmidt MG, Attaway HH, Sharpe PA, John J Jr, Sepkowitz KA, Morgan A, et al.
Sustained reduction of microbial burden on common hospital surfaces through
introduction of copper. J Clin Microbiol 2012;50:2217-23.
694
J.D. Coppin et al. / American Journal of Infection Control 45 (2017) 692-4
