 State of the art thoracic ultrasound: intervention
and therapeutics
John P Corcoran,1,2 Rachid Tazi-Mezalek,3 Fabien Maldonado,4 Lonny B Yarmus,5
Jouke T Annema,6 Coenraad F N Koegelenberg,7,8 Victoria St Noble,9
Najib M Rahman1,2,10
ABSTRACT
The use of thoracic ultrasound outside the radiology
department and in everyday clinical practice is becoming
increasingly common, having been incorporated into
standards of care for many specialties. For the majority
of practitioners, their experience of, and exposure to,
thoracic ultrasound will be in its use as an adjunct to
pleural and thoracic interventions, owing to the widely
recognised benefits for patient safety and risk reduction.
However, as clinicians become increasingly familiar with
the capabilities of thoracic ultrasound, new directions for
its use are being sought which might enhance practice
and patient care. This article reviews the ways in which
the advent of thoracic ultrasound is changing the
approach to the investigation and treatment of
respiratory disease from an interventional perspective.
This will include the impact of thoracic ultrasound on
areas including patient safety, diagnostic and therapeutic
procedures, and outcome prediction; and will also
consider potential future research and clinical directions.
INTRODUCTION
Thoracic ultrasound (TUS) has, in recent years,
become as essential a tool as the stethoscope in the
management of patients with respiratory disease.
There has been a change in attitude among physi-
cians with growing recognition that clinical examin-
ation
and
plain
chest
radiography
are
often
imprecise.1 2 This evolution of clinical practice has
been facilitated in part by technological progress,
with the increasing availability of high-specification
portable ultrasound machines that can be easily
brought to the patient’s bedside. Alongside this, the
incorporation of ultrasound training standards into
postgraduate medical curricula3–5 has led to a new
generation of clinicians emerging with a set of clin-
ical skills and interests that mean the use of TUS is
continually expanding and evolving.
This revolution is clearly seen in the field of
interventional pulmonology, where the advent of
TUS has dramatically altered the range of proce-
dures and the way in which they are performed.
For many practitioners, TUS may be considered as
little more than a means of confirming the presence
or absence of pleural fluid before intervention. In
this review article we aim to demonstrate how and
why this way of thinking is only the beginning;
inviting
the
reader
to
consider
the
current
capabilities of TUS, alongside the way in which
ongoing work is changing the way we investigate
and treat patients with respiratory disease. W
e will
examine the practicalities of using TUS in everyday
clinical work, and the evidence relevant to patient
safety that underpins this. The impact of TUS on
basic
and
more
advanced
procedures
will
be
described, together with an overview of how
outcome prediction and future research will con-
tinue to change the way we practise in years to
come.
PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS
Clinical practitioners who regularly use TUS must
have completed training according to an approved
syllabus3–5
under
appropriate
supervision,
and
maintain a record of practice that is subject to audit
(internal or external) and demonstrates continued
competence. All practitioners must recognise their
own limitations, those of colleagues and of their
working environment; ideally, there should be a
clear upward referral pathway that allows access to
the support of experienced colleagues either in the
radiology department or via a multidisciplinary
team interaction. The skills and experience a practi-
tioner needs to acquire in the use of TUS will vary
according to their specialty and geographical area
of practice. Much will depend on what is needed
for an individual’s everyday clinical responsibilities,
and what their workload is likely to allow them to
maintain competence in performing.
Conventional
brightness
(B)-mode
ultrasound
provides the operator with sufficient information
for the majority of thoracic TUS applications and
interventions, but most modern machines will offer
the operator a selection of other options, including
motion (M)-mode and colour flow Doppler scan-
ning.
A
low-frequency
(2–5 MHz)
curvilinear
probe is the most useful if only one can be selected,
allowing both superficial and deep structures to be
evaluated as a consequence of the tissue penetra-
tion on offer. This is at the expense of image
quality, and if depth can be sacrificed (eg, when
assessing chest wall and/or parietal pleural disease)
then a high-frequency (5–10 MHz) linear probe
will provide additional detail and resolution. If
default or preset ultrasound settings are offered by
the machine, these should be chosen to suit the
work being done—‘abdominal’ mode will serve for
interventions where depth of view is important (eg,
assessment of pleural effusions and distal structures,
such as lung and mediastinum); whereas ‘thyroid’
or ‘musculoskeletal’ mode should be selected for
proximal work dealing with the chest wall or super-
ficial lymph nodes. In many cases, further optimisa-
tion of image quality can be achieved by spending
time at the start of any ultrasound assessment
840  
Corcoran JP, et al. Thorax 2017;72:840–849. doi:10.1136/thoraxjnl-2016-209340
State of the art review
To cite: Corcoran JP, Tazi-
Mezalek R, Maldonado F, 
et al. Thorax 
2017;72:840–849.
1Oxford Centre for Respiratory 
Medicine, Oxford University 
Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, 
Oxford, UK
2University of Oxford Respiratory 
Trials Unit, Churchill Hospital, 
Oxford, UK
3Department of Thoracic 
Oncology, Pleural Diseases and 
Interventional Pulmonology, 
Hôpital Nord, Aix-Marseille 
University, Marseille, France
4Division of Allergy, Pulmonary 
and Critical Care Medicine, 
Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer 
Center, Vanderbilt University 
School of Medicine, Nashville, 
Tennessee, USA
5Division of Pulmonary and 
Critical Care Medicine, John 
Hopkins University, Baltimore, 
Maryland, USA
6Department of Pulmonology, 
Academic Medical Centre, 
University of Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
7Division of Pulmonology, 
Department of Medicine, 
Stellenbosch University, Cape 
Town, South Africa
8Tygerberg Academic Hospital, 
Cape Town, South Africa
9Department of Radiology, 
Oxford University Hospitals NHS 
Foundation Trust, Oxford, UK
10NIHR Oxford Biomedical 
Research Centre, University of 
Oxford, Oxford, UK
Correspondence to
Dr John P Corcoran, University 
of Oxford Respiratory Trials Unit, 
Churchill Hospital, Oxford OX3 
7LE, UK;  
 
jpcorcoran@ 
doctors. 
org. 
uk
Received 23 August 2016
Revised 14 March 2017
Accepted 23 March 2017
Published Online First 
13 April 2017
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://thorax.bmj.com/
Thorax: first published as 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2016-209340 on 14 April 2017. Downloaded from 
 adjusting parameters, such as gain, depth and time-gain com-
pensation—the success of such fine tuning will depend on the
experience of the operator and their familiarity with the
characteristics of a specific machine.
Achieving a safe and controlled environment for intervention,
including optimal patient positioning, is important yet often
underappreciated. Many practitioners will be familiar with
emergency ‘point of care’ diagnostic TUS in the acutely unwell
patient, where scanning is unpredictable and performed at all
hours, usually by a single bedside operator with the patient in a
supine position and using a zonal approach.6 By contrast, inter-
ventional TUS is largely used in an elective theatre or clean
room setting by a clinical team where consideration can be
given to the patient’s position according to the area of potential
interest, determined in advance from prior imaging (eg, CT).
This may require the patient to be scanned while sitting upright
and leaning forward (posterior chest wall); in a lateral decubitus
position (lateral chest wall); or semi-supine (anterior chest wall
including superior sulcus). Minimising patient movement and
the time delay between initial TUS assessment and the subse-
quent procedure is critical to the success of any intervention
from a diagnostic, therapeutic and safety perspective. Still
images and, ideally, short video clips should be archived for all
ultrasound scans for training, quality and medicolegal purposes.
W
e would encourage clinicians to develop a standardised
method of reporting the results of TUS scans for their centre,
thereby facilitating consistency and ease of handover between
individual practitioners involved in a patient’s care from one
day to the next.
PATIENT SAFETY
There is little doubt that concerns about patient safety in pleural
interventions have been a major driving force behind the
increased uptake of TUS by clinicians other than radiologists
over the past decade. The risks associated with even simple thor-
acentesis have long been recognised,7 but it was the UK
National Patient Safety Agency alert in 20088 which highlighted
the need for a change in clinical practice given the extent of
avoidable iatrogenic harm caused by ‘blind’ pleural intervention.
Basic use of TUS allows the safe and accurate identification of
pleural fluid and other relevant anatomical structures, such as
the underlying lung, heart, diaphragm and abdominal viscera.
The global evidence that supports the use of TUS as an adjunct
to pleural intervention and the associated reduction in risk to
patients is overwhelming.9–12 Unless resource availability or
emergent circumstances present an insurmountable barrier, TUS
assessment should be considered an essential ‘gold standard’
before any pleural intervention for suspected fluid.
However, TUS has the potential to further enhance patient
safety beyond the basic determination of whether there is an
effusion present or not. The use of TUS does not guarantee
appropriate site selection for intervention and might encourage
clinicians to venture outside the anatomical safe triangle, since
fluid is often most easily seen posteriorly where the costodiaph-
ragmatic recess permits the greatest accumulation and apparent
depth of fluid to be seen on TUS with the patient sitting
upright. A more posterior approach during pleural intervention
increases the risk of injury to the intercostal vessels, owing to
increased tortuosity and variable location within the rib space
with greater proximity to the spinal midline.13 14 In turn, this
may lead to a life-threatening iatrogenic complication even from
an
apparently
simple
small-bore
needle
aspiration.15
16
Published data suggest that TUS can identify the intercostal
vessels and positions within an individual rib space using colour
Doppler assessment,17 18 allowing the operator to select the
safest site for subsequent pleural intervention and minimising
the likelihood of vascular injury.19 Large-scale studies are
needed to assess the utility of this technique, given the relative
infrequency with which this complication occurs and additional
skills required for widespread practice.
The role played by TUS in improving patient safety does not
end when the procedure begins. Other than providing the
ability to allow real-time guidance of any pleural intervention,
TUS also offers the operator an opportunity to identify any
iatrogenic complications as early as possible. This allows appro-
priate treatment to be instituted promptly, limiting the risk of
further harm. Postprocedural ultrasound screening at the site of
intervention can identify either active bleeding from the parietal
pleural surface20 or the rapid accumulation of highly echogenic
fluid within the pleural space, demonstrating a swirling or gradi-
ent effect as heavier cellular material is deposited in the more
dependent part of the collection.21
A number of studies have also shown that TUS can be used to
recognise iatrogenic pneumothorax following procedures such as
thoracentesis, transbronchial lung biopsy or image-guided lung
biopsy,22–24 using key ultrasonographic features such as the pres-
ence of a lung point, or absence of B-lines and lung sliding. This
last feature is best assessed using standard B-mode ultrasound, but
has also been described on M-mode imaging as the ‘stratosphere’
sign (seen with pneumothorax) as compared with the ‘seashore’
(normal lung sliding). TUS has some limitations in the diagnosis of
pneumothorax; it is largely a binary test (ie, pneumothorax
present or not) and has only limited efficacy in determining size
through the identification and ‘tracking’ of a lung point, while its
accuracy is questionable in patients with underlying emphysema.25
However, the available data suggest that TUS has a sensitivity, spe-
cificity and accuracy that may outperform plain chest radiography
in the postprocedural setting22–24 and has the clear advantage of
being immediately available at the bedside. It may also prove to be
better than plain chest radiography in ascertaining the subsequent
success of any therapeutic intervention that follows,26 although
this is work that needs to be replicated as part of future research.
NON-EXPANDABLE LUNG
Non-expandable lung (NEL) is an umbrella term used to
describe a situation in which the lung is physically restricted by
a pathological process and can no longer fully expand to allow
apposition of the visceral and parietal pleural surfaces; this
creates a potential space for the recurrent accumulation of
pleural fluid. NEL can result from either ‘trapped lung’ or ‘lung
entrapment’; terms that sound similar and are frequently used
in place of one another, but describe distinct, albeit related,
processes.27
Pragmatically, the clinical problems that arise are broadly
similar whether NEL is caused by proximal bronchial obstruc-
tion, a large parenchymal soft tissue lesion, the primary devel-
opment of fibrous visceral pleural thickening in the absence of
an obvious external stimulus (trapped lung) or secondary react-
ive visceral pleural thickening in the presence of active pleural
inflammation, infection or malignancy (lung entrapment). The
presence of NEL is likely to make any attempt at pleurodesis
futile owing to either a lack of sufficient pleural apposition to
allow adhesion formation, or the inherent tendency of the
affected lung to recoil from the chest wall. Any effusion asso-
ciated with NEL is likely to recur quickly as a result of the
potential space caused by failure of the lung to expand and take
the place of any fluid removed. The symptomatic benefit from
draining an effusion secondary to NEL can be highly variable,
841
Corcoran JP, et al. Thorax 2017;72:840–849. doi:10.1136/thoraxjnl-2016-209340
State of the art review
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://thorax.bmj.com/
Thorax: first published as 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2016-209340 on 14 April 2017. Downloaded from 
 and may even be minimal if the fluid has not caused the
mechanics of the chest wall or diaphragm to be impaired.28
Indeed, excessive fluid drainage in the context of NEL may
worsen a patient’s condition as the resultant negative intra-
pleural pressure can cause distressing symptoms such as chest
pain and intractable cough, and result in significant pneumo-
thorax ex vacuo or re-expansion pulmonary oedema.
The end result is a situation in which clinicians have no
robust prospective means of predicting which patients with a
large effusion have underlying NEL, or indeed which patients
with NEL will benefit symptomatically from pleural drainage.
Currently available strategies are dependent on the patient
having an initial pleural intervention, usually large-volume thor-
acentesis, to allow either the use of pleural manometry,29 and/or
the demonstration of pneumothorax ex vacuo on a post-
drainage chest radiograph, to confirm the presence of NEL.
However, a recent proof of concept study30 of the advanced
ultrasonographic assessment of patients presenting with pleural
effusion has been shown to be potentially useful in identifying
the likely presence of NEL before any invasive procedure is
necessary (figure 1).
That study30 hypothesised that NEL would less readily trans-
mit the cardiac impulse and have more restricted movement
within a pleural effusion. In order to prove this, both M-mode
ultrasonography and speckle tracking imaging analysis were
used, with the aim of measuring tissue displacement and strain
pattern (deformation), respectively, within the lung. Pleural
manometry was performed during subsequent drainage of the
effusion to provide a reference test for NEL using currently
available technology; the diagnosis of NEL was then confirmed
by consensus evaluation of post-draining imaging studies by two
independent physicians. In a study of 81 patients, both speckle
tracking (area under receiver operator curve, AUROC 0.86) and
M-mode (AUROC 0.79) imaging outperformed pleural mano-
metry (AUROC 0.69) in the diagnosis of NEL.
These results30 are yet to be replicated in a larger separate
study, although subsequent observational data suggest that the
same technique can be easily incorporated into everyday clinical
practice.31 Furthermore, its widespread adoption would require
the majority of TUS-competent clinicians to develop skills
beyond those currently used in normal everyday practice in the
acquisition, analysis and interpretation of TUS findings. There
are also no data on how the results might correlate with patient-
related outcomes—notably, symptomatic relief from drainage.
However, the ability to diagnose NEL non-invasively and before
any pleural intervention, would be a significant step forward. It
would allow clinicians to select at an earlier stage the most
appropriate management pathway (ie, indwelling pleural cath-
eter as opposed to pleurodesis) and inform patients of the likely
outcomes of their treatment.
DIAGNOSTIC TRANSTHORACIC PROCEDURES
There is a burgeoning evidence to support the use of TUS as an
adjunct to a variety of diagnostic transthoracic interventions for
chest wall, pleural and lung parenchymal pathology. This
requires a clear distinction to be drawn between ultrasound
‘assisted’ and ‘guided’ procedures. The former term usually
describes a process whereby ultrasound is employed solely to
mark out a site for subsequent intervention; as opposed to the
latter, where ultrasound is used freehand and in real time to
direct the passage of a needle or other device. Both approaches
have their place and advantages: ultrasound assistance is less
time consuming to learn and perform, whereas real-time guid-
ance facilitates more complex interventions and allows the
operator to visually confirm precisely what is being sampled at
any given moment. The use of a needle-guide attachment for
the ultrasound transducer can further simplify the learning
process and performance of guided procedures, allowing accur-
ate sampling to occur with minimal time or fuss.
Pleural biopsy
The technique of closed pleural biopsy as a means of obtaining
diagnostic tissue is long established32
33 and has remained
popular owing to its accessibility and acceptability to patients
and clinicians, particularly as an alternative to thoracoscopy in
those areas where healthcare resources are limited. There are
good quality data to suggest that the use of image guidance, be
that with CT or ultrasound, greatly improves both diagnostic
yield and patient safety.34 Increasing access to TUS has in turn
allowed interventional pulmonologists to successfully deliver
this service with outcomes comparable to those of their radi-
ology colleagues35–37 (figure 2). TUS has advantages over CT of
being non-ionising, quicker to use and capable of allowing the
operator to compensate for respiratory movement in real time
without the need for breath-hold manoeuvres; however, CT can
target pleurally based lesions that might otherwise be inaccess-
ible on TUS (eg, behind ribs or other bony structures). Other
factors that may influence diagnostic yield include the under-
lying pathology (infectious, notably TB vs malignant; and type
of malignancy), extent of disease (localised vs diffuse), number
of samples taken and operator experience.
There are no robust data to allow a distinction between
whether a traditional reverse bevel (eg, Abrams) or core-cutting
needle improves sample quality or diagnostic yield. The largest
published
study
dealing
with
this
question35
used
an
ultrasound-assisted technique in 89 patients with suspected
tuberculous pleuritis, randomising patients to either Abrams or
core-cutting needle biopsies. Although the results implied that
Abrams needle biopsy was associated with a better diagnostic
yield, the study was criticised for its early cessation, which
meant the significance and validity of any findings could be
called into question.38 The use of an assisted, as opposed to
guided, technique may also have had a greater adverse effect on
the efficacy of the core-cutting needle biopsies in comparison
with the larger Abrams needle. It is worth noting that other
physician-based studies of core-cutting needle pleural biop-
sies36 37 that employed a guided technique have reported a
higher diagnostic yield (90.6% and 84.0%, respectively) than
seen in this randomised trial (78.7%).35
Published data allowing a direct comparison between ultra-
sound and CT-guided biopsy for pleural disease are limited.
A recently published randomised trial,39 comparing CT-guided
Abrams needle with ultrasound-assisted core-cutting needle
biopsy in the investigation of 150 patients with pleural disease,
reported superiority of the former technique with a diagnostic
sensitivity of 82.4% vs 66.7% (p=0.029). However, the deci-
sion to use different biopsy needles across the two study arms
and an ultrasound-assisted rather than guided technique means
that the findings cannot be easily extrapolated to inform every-
day clinical practice. A larger retrospective study40 compared
outcomes from CT and ultrasound-guided core-cutting needle
biopsies for both pleural (n=86) and peripheral lung parenchy-
mal (n=187) lesions, demonstrating no significant difference in
diagnostic sensitivity between the two techniques, and that the
use of ultrasound was quicker, cheaper and associated with a
lower risk of iatrogenic pneumothorax.
On the basis of the data currently available, the authors suggest
that TUS can generally be regarded as an appropriate and
842
Corcoran JP, et al. Thorax 2017;72:840–849. doi:10.1136/thoraxjnl-2016-209340
State of the art review
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://thorax.bmj.com/
Thorax: first published as 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2016-209340 on 14 April 2017. Downloaded from 
 equivalent alternative to CT when performing image-guided
pleural biopsies, with the caveat that the operator should be trained
in the use of real-time TUS guidance. Between 6 and 10 biopsy
specimens should be taken, ideally in different planes of orienta-
tion, to ensure adequate sampling. In the absence of any overt
pleural abnormalities, favouring a lower (supradiaphramgatic)
Figure 1
Ultrasonographic assessment of lung movement using M-mode: (A) panel of images showing pre- and post-drainage chest X-ray (CXR)
with non-expandable lung; corresponding pre-drainage thoracic ultrasound (TUS) with consolidated, poorly collapsing lung and poor transmission of
cardiac impulse; (B) panel of images showing pre- and post-drainage CXR with normally expanding lung; corresponding pre-drainage TUS shows
normal atelectatic lung with good transmission of cardiac impulse (note the clear arterial waveform with dicrotic notch).
Figure 2
Thoracic ultrasound
(TUS)-guided pleural biopsy: (A) sterile
theatre procedural set-up with
operator, patient in lateral decubitus
position and ultrasound machine in
line; (B) close up of ultrasound probe
and needle demonstrating real-time
in-plane technique; (C) Abrams and
core-cutting biopsy needles; (D) TUS
image showing core-cutting biopsy
needle crossing chest wall and pleural
thickening (solid white arrows) with tip
of needle visible in small effusion.
843
Corcoran JP, et al. Thorax 2017;72:840–849. doi:10.1136/thoraxjnl-2016-209340
State of the art review
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://thorax.bmj.com/
Thorax: first published as 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2016-209340 on 14 April 2017. Downloaded from 
 location is more likely to yield a positive diagnosis;41 this is prob-
ably because metastatic disease favours the lower part of the par-
ietal pleura owing to the distribution of stomata responsible for
draining the pleural space into adjacent lymphatics. Pending
further comparative studies, clinicians are advised to use the type
of biopsy needle that they are most familiar and comfortable with
from their everyday practice.
Lung aspirate and biopsy
Image-guided percutaneous lung sampling techniques have been
used for diagnosis in a number of respiratory conditions for
over half a century, with the investigation of suspected malig-
nancy being the most widely recognised indication. Although
CT-guided biopsy is, by some margin, the most common
approach, it is worth noting that TUS-guided sampling of per-
ipheral lung lesions is an equally long-established method,42 and
may even be advantageous in specific circumstances for reasons
similar to those outlined for pleural biopsy. The use of
TUS-guided lung biopsy or aspirate for peripheral lung lesions
requires appropriate case selection in advance; the mass or
nodule must be adjacent to the chest wall with no aerated lung
interposed between the two in order to be visualised ultrasono-
graphically (figure 3). The extent of the pleural contact made by
the lesion of interest is likely to have a direct influence on diag-
nostic yield.43 Prior CT imaging should be reviewed to simplify
and correlate anatomical localisation of the target lesion(s). The
majority of lesions will be hypoechoic with clear echogenic
demarcation at the interface with surrounding aerated lung;
further ultrasonographic assessment may be feasible in larger
masses to allow the identification of both necrotic areas, accord-
ing to echotexture, and highly vascularised areas using colour
Doppler. This in turn allows directed sampling under real-time
TUS guidance with the intention of maximising diagnostic
yield.44
The majority of early data on the use of TUS-guided biopsy
of lung lesions related to the procedure as performed by
specialist radiologists; a recently published literature review and
pooled analysis45 reported an overall diagnostic accuracy of
88.7%
for
the
technique,
as
compared
with
92.1%
for
CT-guided biopsy. Iatrogenic complications, notably pneumo-
thorax, were less frequent with TUS-guided procedures (4.4%
vs 20.5% for CT-guided biopsy), although this may simply be
because only lower-risk peripheral lesions were amenable to
ultrasound assessment and sampling. Nonetheless, there is a
growing body of literature describing the use of TUS-guided
lung biopsy by interventional pulmonologists,46 47 reflecting the
increased access to, and skill with, ultrasound in this group,
together with the need to provide a joined-up and efficient diag-
nostic
service
for
patients
with
suspected
intrathoracic
malignancy.
Although less well recognised, TUS-guided lung sampling has
a potential diagnostic role outside the sphere of suspected
malignancy. Pneumonia is the most common infectious disease
worldwide and responsible for a significant and increasing
burden of mortality and morbidity across all age groups.48 In
the majority of cases a causative organism will never be identi-
fied, leaving patients and clinicians dependent on ‘best guess’
broad spectrum antibiotics. The risk of an adverse outcome is
greatly increased in those individuals in whom this initial treat-
ment proves ineffective. Furthermore, in an era of increasing
bacterial resistance the ability to target therapy and maintain
antibiotic stewardship is likely to become ever more important.
The technique of transthoracic needle aspiration (TTNA) or
‘lung tap’ is well described in the literature in both adults and
children,49–52 with a high microbiological yield of around 50%
and low complication rates of <5% (most commonly localised
pneumothorax
or
transient
haemoptysis)
even
for
non-
radiologically guided sampling. The procedure itself is relatively
quick and straightforward, requiring only the insertion of an
ultrafine (usually ≤22 G) needle into consolidated lung and sub-
sequent aspiration under aseptic conditions. The growing evi-
dence for the use of TUS as a front-line diagnostic tool for
pneumonia in the hospital setting53 54 naturally lends itself to
the concurrent delivery of TTNA to inform subsequent treat-
ment choices. A pilot study assessing the feasibility and safety of
TUS-guided TTNA in pneumonia55 has demonstrated promising
results; further evaluation in a larger prospective study is now
needed to determine how this might influence key clinical
outcomes.
Lymph node sampling
The ability to recognise and sample abnormal thoracic and cer-
vical lymphadenopathy that is accessible to ultrasonographic
evaluation should be considered a key skill for the interventional
pulmonologist and lung cancer physician. This has been recog-
nised by its inclusion in the more advanced levels of some TUS
training standards.3 It allows the responsible clinician to both
diagnose and, in the case of suspected malignancy, potentially
stage a patient’s disease, with implications for subsequent treat-
ment.56 The process of scanning for and, if necessary, sampling
lymph nodes is often straightforward enough to be performed
in the outpatient setting at the time of a patient’s initial clinical
evaluation, thereby streamlining the diagnostic pathway and
potentially preventing the need for more invasive procedures at
a later stage.
In-depth assessment of lymphadenopathy requires a high-
frequency (8–12 MHz), usually linear transducer rather than the
low-frequency (2–5 MHz) curvilinear probes commonly used
for thoracic work. Characterising features, including size, shape,
margin, echogenicity and vascularization, all help to distinguish
between benign and pathological lymph nodes (figure 4). The
former will tend to appear as ovoid or triangular structures with
a hypoechoic cortex and hyperechoic medulla, representing the
central fatty hilum. In an acute inflammatory response a node
may become enlarged, although rarely beyond 2 cm in diameter,
with a large echogenic hilum secondary to the ongoing healing
process. Gross enlargement, rounding of shape with loss of the
hilum, asymmetrical or nodular cortical thickening, necrotic
change, capsular irregularity or disruption and hypervascularity
should all be considered features suggesting the possibility of
malignant involvement and warranting sampling, either by fine
needle aspiration or core-cutting needle biopsy.
Although the ultrasonographic assessment and sampling of
cervical
and
supraclavicular
lymphadenopathy
is
widely
acknowledged and used,56 it is worth mentioning that a number
of mediastinal stations can also be evaluated and accessed trans-
cutaneously under direct ultrasound guidance.57 58 However,
with the increasing availability of endobronchial and endoscopic
ultrasound as alternatives to surgical mediastinoscopy, these
newer techniques have become the gold-standard diagnostic
investigations in the staging of lung cancer59 and rendered TUS
somewhat redundant in this setting. Nonetheless, one prospect-
ive study60 reported a diagnostic success of 93.3% from a com-
bined ultrasound-assisted fine needle aspirate and cutting needle
biopsy procedure in the investigation of patients (n=45) with
anterosuperior mediastinal masses. This physician-led study
reported no major complications after intervention and pre-
cluded the need for a surgical procedure in the majority of
844
Corcoran JP, et al. Thorax 2017;72:840–849. doi:10.1136/thoraxjnl-2016-209340
State of the art review
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://thorax.bmj.com/
Thorax: first published as 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2016-209340 on 14 April 2017. Downloaded from 
 cases; these promising results merit further consideration and
evaluation of the technique in an appropriately selected patient
population.
Medical thoracoscopy
Medical thoracoscopy (also described as local anaesthetic thora-
coscopy or pleuroscopy) has become a gold standard investiga-
tion for the patient with suspected pleural malignancy and/or a
unilateral effusion of unknown aetiology.61 It provides both
diagnostic and therapeutic value, and is widely acknowledged as
being a generally safe and well-tolerated procedure.62 The
majority of medical thoracoscopies will be performed in patients
with moderate to large effusions, thereby facilitating easy access
to the pleural space as the underlying lung is collapsed and kept
clear of the chest wall. However, for more advanced practi-
tioners the use of TUS as an adjunct to the procedure can facili-
tate safer and more complex intervention in patients with
pleural disease but little or no associated fluid, who might previ-
ously
have
required
a
surgical
procedure
under
general
anaesthesia.
Accessing the pleural space in the absence of any fluid gener-
ally requires the induction of an artificial pneumothorax in
order to create a working area for the thoracoscope. This in
turn requires there to be no adhesions present between visceral
and parietal pleural surfaces that might otherwise prevent the
underlying lung from collapsing. A number of studies63–66 have
correlated the reduction or absence of normal lung sliding on
TUS with the presence of significant pleural adhesions that
might either prevent or complicate a thoracoscopic procedure,
quoting sensitivities and specificities for the technique of
>80%. This can allow patients to be counselled in advance on
the need for a more complex or open surgical intervention that
permits dissection apart of the pleural surfaces, or conversion to
an
alternative
diagnostic
approach
such
as
image-guided
biopsy.36
Assuming that pleural adhesions can be successfully excluded,
the periprocedural use of real-time TUS can then be used to
facilitate the safe induction of an artificial pneumothorax by
means of blunt dissection67 or Boutin needle introduction68
before placement of the trocar and port (figure 5). This allows
the operator to directly visualise on TUS the passage of instru-
ments through the chest wall, limiting the risk of injury to the
underlying lung; and also to observe the development of a suc-
cessful pneumothorax through the loss of both lung sliding and
Figure 3
Non-small cell lung cancer:
(A) axial CT image showing right lower
lobe mass and adjacent pleural
effusion; (B) thoracic ultrasound image
in same patient demonstrating simple
effusion and underlying tumour within
lung tissue, with areas of necrosis and
multiple hypoechoic channels
consistent with fluid-filled bronchi.
Figure 4
Lymph nodes: (A) reactive lymph node with echogenic fatty hilum and hilar pattern of blood flow; (B) malignant lymph node with loss of
hilar architecture and hypervascularity with multiple feeding vessels; (C) necrotic lymph node with rounded, diffusely hypoechoic appearance and
largely peripheral vascular pattern; (D) ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration (solid white arrows) of enlarged cervical lymph node (LN) with
adjacent carotid artery (CA) and jugular vein ( JV).
845
Corcoran JP, et al. Thorax 2017;72:840–849. doi:10.1136/thoraxjnl-2016-209340
State of the art review
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://thorax.bmj.com/
Thorax: first published as 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2016-209340 on 14 April 2017. Downloaded from 
 B-lines, alongside the identification of cardinal ultrasonographic
features (eg, air-fluid level for hydropneumothorax; stratosphere
sign on M-mode assessment for complete pneumothorax).
OUTCOME PREDICTION
The ability to predict the likely success of any medical interven-
tion at the outset of treatment is crucial to clinicians since it
allows patients to be appropriately counselled in advance and, if
necessary, contingency plans considered in the event of potential
failure. There is a substantial evidence to suggest that findings
on TUS for different pleural conditions can give clinicians an
insight into a patient’s probable response to treatment.
There is considerable variation in the symptomatic benefit of
drainage to patients with pleural effusions of all causes, particu-
larly in those cases where cardiac and respiratory morbidities
coexist. Very often, clinicians are left with no option but to
perform a large-volume thoracentesis in order to assess response
and before planning definitive treatment in the event of future
recurrence. Although older data suggested that thoracentesis
had little impact on either lung volumes or gas exchange,69 70
we now know that patients in whom an effusion is associated
with flattening, inversion or paradoxical motion of the ipsilat-
eral hemidiaphragm on TUS will almost always experience sig-
nificant symptomatic benefit from having their fluid drained due
to the improvement in respiratory mechanics.71 72 This does not
always require complete drainage of the effusion, but rather
removal of enough fluid to reduce intrapleural pressure and
restore the normal anatomical configuration and function of the
hemidiaphragm. The identification of inversion or paradoxical
movement of the diaphragm in association with an effusion on
TUS, should therefore prompt the responsible clinician to con-
sider swift action in the knowledge that drainage will be highly
likely to alleviate a patient’s dyspnoea, even if the volume of
fluid present does not appear to be particularly substantial.
The ultrasonographic identification of septations within a
pleural effusion also has the potential to predict the outcome of
subsequent clinical treatment. Pleural infection is increasingly
common in both adult and paediatric populations, and con-
tinues to be associated with significant morbidity and mortality
despite
apparent
diagnostic
and
therapeutic
advances.73
Standard initial treatment consists of broad-spectrum antibiotics
and percutaneous drainage via tube thoracostomy.74 At present
there are no robust means of predicting at baseline presentation
which patients are likely to have a worse clinical outcome, and
might therefore be suitable for escalation of their initial treat-
ment; in particular, the early use of more aggressive strategies,
such as surgical clearance or intrapleural fibrinolytic agents.
Intuitively, the identification on TUS of either loculation (mul-
tiple non-communicating pockets of fluid within the hemi-
thorax) or septation (the formation of internal fibrinous strands
within a fluid collection) in an active pleural infection might be
expected to result in a more complicated treatment course. A
number of retrospective studies in both adults75 76 and chil-
dren77 have reported an association of these more complex effu-
sions with poorer outcomes, including the failure of initial
medical treatment and percutaneous drainage, an increased need
for thoracic surgical intervention and mortality from pleural
infection. These data must be interpreted with caution given
their
retrospective
nature,
and
further
prospective
studies
should examine the question of whether TUS findings in
infected pleural collections are a true predictor of key clinical
outcomes.
The recently reported TIME3 study78 examined the issue of
septated malignant pleural effusions and whether the use of
intrapleural urokinase had an influence on dyspnoea relief and
pleurodesis success. This randomised controlled trial demon-
strated that the use of intrapleural fibrinolytic agents had no sig-
nificant impact on either of the two primary outcome measures,
and indeed that these patients (n=71) had a substantial mortal-
ity rate of 50% within 60 days of enrolment. The study authors
concluded that patients with septated malignant effusions which
do not drain following tube thoracostomy should not be sub-
jected
to
subsequent
intrapleural
fibrinolytic
therapy,
and
instead that alternative palliative measures should be started to
provide symptomatic relief.78
The successful use of TUS to identify the presence of pleural
adhesions before thoracoscopic intervention63–66 has been dis-
cussed earlier in this article. However, the same technique has
also been used in small animal79 and human80 81 studies to
predict outcomes in cases of chemical pleurodesis, implying that
the use of TUS to confirm the continued presence or absence of
lung sliding could predict longer-term treatment success or
failure. The majority of patients with malignant pleural effusion
continue to be managed with intercostal chest tube drainage and
Figure 5
Thoracic ultrasound-guided
pneumothorax induction for
thoracoscopy: (A) Boutin needle with
sharp and blunt trocars; (B)
pre-intervention ultrasound showing
small effusion and lung adjacent to
chest wall in majority of field of view;
(C) Boutin needle (solid white arrows)
breaching parietal pleura and being
introduced into effusion; (D) induction
of pneumothorax as air is entrained
through open Boutin needle, causing
bilateral lung points (solid white
arrows) around needle tip.
846
Corcoran JP, et al. Thorax 2017;72:840–849. doi:10.1136/thoraxjnl-2016-209340
State of the art review
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://thorax.bmj.com/
Thorax: first published as 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2016-209340 on 14 April 2017. Downloaded from 
 subsequent talc slurry pleurodesis, a process that necessitates a
1-week stay in hospital, on average, and is associated with an
approximately 20–30% failure rate.82 Early identification of
those patients in whom pleurodesis has, or is likely to have,
failed would allow clinicians to expedite the discussion and
planning of alternative management strategies such as indwelling
pleural catheter insertion, while the ultrasonographic confirm-
ation of adhesion formation might facilitate early hospital dis-
charge of those patients with treatment success. A recently
opened
randomised
controlled
trial
(ISRCTN
16441661)
addressing the role of TUS in predicting pleurodesis success in
malignant pleural effusion management will hopefully answer
these questions in the near future.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
The speed of change that has been seen in the interventional
use of TUS in recent years means that training standards have
become obsolete in some areas and do not necessarily reflect
current practice at either a basic or more advanced level. The
inclusion of basic ultrasound training in medical undergraduate
curricula is also likely to become commonplace and will further
increase the uptake and use of TUS by a wide range of clini-
cians.83 Consequently, there is a growing need for an inter-
nationally based expert panel to draw up recommendations that
will standardise both training requirements and nomenclature.
Curricula that focus on the specific needs of a subspecialty
group of clinicians84 and use high-fidelity simulation training
for interventions85 are likely to become more common, as is the
incorporation into training programmes of structured assess-
ment tools for competence in both TUS assessment86 87 and
associated procedures.88 89
There are a number of clinical questions relating to TUS that
are either already the subject of specific clinical studies or may
be answered by other routes in the coming years. The use of
TUS to predict key outcomes from a variety of pathologies and
therapeutic interventions shows most promise—in particular,
whether the baseline presence or subsequent development or
resolution of septations in the case of an infected or malignant
pleural collection can predict morbidity or mortality; and
whether early changes in lung sliding are a prospective marker
of longer-term pleurodesis success. Patient-reported outcome
measures are of increasing interest and importance, particularly
in patients with malignant pleural disease where the majority of
interventions are carried out with the aim of achieving symptom
control. Specific features on TUS, notably diaphragm function,
have been proposed to predict the probability of symptomatic
benefit from a subsequent intervention—these merit further
assessment in a prospective study.90 There has not yet been a
robust prospective study of whether TUS or CT-guided biopsy is
better for the diagnosis of pleural or indeed peripheral lung par-
enchymal disease. TUS-guided fine needle aspiration of the lung
may also have diagnostic value in parenchymal lung infection
and appears to be safe and well-tolerated in small pilot studies;
again, a large multicentre trial is needed to determine whether
this can change relevant outcomes, such as hospital stay, rate of
positive microbiological yield, antibiotic selection and duration.
Research is continuing into ways of overcoming the natural lim-
itations of TUS in the assessment of lung pathology; in particular,
for the identification and sampling of peripheral soft tissue lesions.
Small-scale
feasibility
studies
using
contrast-enhanced
ultra-
sound91–93 and tissue elastography94 95 to characterise subpleural
nodules or masses and, if appropriate, sample them for diagnostic
purposes, have shown early promise in improving diagnostic
accuracy by distinguishing viable from necrotic tissue. However, in
the absence of comparative data, it is unclear how these techniques
provide additional value. Previous work in this field has looked at
the timing, pattern and extent of contrast enhancement to allow
TUS to separate out different benign and malignant processes, pre-
dominantly in lung parenchymal tissue.96 There has been little or
no focus on whether contrast-enhanced ultrasound might have an
impact on the diagnosis and evaluation of pleural disease; in par-
ticular, the recognised problem of patients given a false-negative
diagnosis of non-specific pleuritis following thoracoscopic or per-
cutaneous biopsy.97 This problem is already being dealt with by a
randomised study using PET-CT to guide further pleural biopsies
in patients with a negative first sample (ISRCTN 14024829);
however, it would be of interest to see whether contrast-enhanced
TUS could offer an alternative by identifying similarly vascular or
metabolically active tissue and allow an immediate targeted
intervention.
The use of second-order analysis of ultrasound imaging,
looking at features such as grey-scale texture, is increasingly
used in other subspecialty fields but has thus far found limited
use within the thorax.98 Finding a way of applying this tech-
nique in real time during a procedure is likely to be crucial to
its success, and will require a software algorithm that allows an
ultrasound machine to evaluate a region of interest and inform
the operator immediately before diagnostic or therapeutic inter-
vention. Detailed grey-scale analysis is likely to have potential
applications throughout the chest; TUS practitioners are already
familiar with, for example, the basic use of echogenicity and
heterogeneity versus homogeneity to differentiate exudative and
transudative pleural fluid. Acquiring a more detailed analysis of
grey-scale patterns within different types of pleural fluid, lung
and/or pleural lesions may in time facilitate more rapid diagnosis
and targeted interventions using TUS. At the preclinical level,
there is interest in whether high-intensity focused ultrasound
can be used effectively in the lung as a means of safely targeting
tumours while limiting damage to normal surrounding tissue.99
Further studies are needed to establish the technique’s safety
and efficacy before pilot clinical studies can be considered.
CONCLUSION
TUS is being used daily by an increasing number of clinicians as
part of routine practice. This is particularly apparent in the field
of interventional pulmonology, where access to portable high-
specification ultrasound equipment has encouraged practitioners
to enhance old ways and develop new ways of working. As a
new generation of clinicians who have grown up with ultra-
sound emerges, the idea that it is little more than a tool for con-
firming the presence of pleural fluid before intervention will
become defunct. Understanding how ultrasound can enhance
and inform clinical practice and patient care will be crucial over
the coming years, and it is likely that research, training and
assessment standards in TUS and how it should be used in the
interventional setting will have to evolve rapidly to reflect this
changing world.
Contributors The article was conceived by JPC, RT-M, VSN and NMR. JPC was
responsible for the initial draft preparation and revision. All authors were involved in
reviewing each draft and approving the final manuscript. JPC and NMR are
responsible for the overall content as guarantors.
Competing interests None declared.
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
REFERENCES
1
Lichtenstein D, Goldstein I, Mourgeon E, et al. Comparative diagnostic
performances of auscultation, chest radiography, and lung ultrasonography in acute
respiratory distress syndrome. Anesthesiology 2004;100:9–15.
847
Corcoran JP, et al. Thorax 2017;72:840–849. doi:10.1136/thoraxjnl-2016-209340
State of the art review
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://thorax.bmj.com/
Thorax: first published as 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2016-209340 on 14 April 2017. Downloaded from 
 2
Inglis AJ, Nalos M, Sue KH, et al. Bedside lung ultrasound, mobile radiography and
physical examination: a comparative analysis of diagnostic tools in the critically ill.
Crit Care Resusc 2016;18:124.
3
Board of the Faculty of Clinical Radiology. Ultrasound training recommendations for
Medical and Surgical Specialties. 2012. http://www.rcr.ac.uk/docs/radiology/pdf/
BFCR(12)17_ultrasound_training.pdf
4
Mayo PH, Beaulieu Y, Doelken P, et al. American College of Chest Physicians/La
Societe de Reanimation de Langue Francaise statement on competence in critical
care ultrasonography. Chest 2009;135:1050–60.
5
European Federation of Societies for Ultrasound in Medicine and Biology. Minimum
training recommendations for the practice of medical ultrasound 2007 [10 February
2012]. http://www.efsumb.org/uploads/mintraining-Feb2006.pdf
6
Volpicelli G, Elbarbary M, Blaivas M, et al. International evidence-based
recommendations for point-of-care lung ultrasound. Intensive Care Med
2012;38:577–91.
7
Seneff MG, Corwin RW, Gold LH, et al. Complications associated with
thoracocentesis. Chest 1986;90:97–100.
8
Rapid response report: risks of chest drain insertion. National Patient Safety Agency,
2008, NPSA/2008/RRR003. http://www.nrls.npsa.nhs.uk/resources/?
entryid45=59887
9
Diacon AH, Brutsche MH, Solèr M. Accuracy of pleural puncture sites: a prospective
comparison of clinical examination with ultrasound. Chest 2003;123:436–41.
10
Duncan DR, Morgenthaler TI, Ryu JH, et al. Reducing iatrogenic risk in
thoracentesis: establishing best practice via experiential training in a zero-risk
environment. Chest 2009;135:1315–20.
11
Mercaldi CJ, Lanes SF. Ultrasound guidance decreases complications and improves
the cost of care among patients undergoing thoracentesis and paracentesis. Chest
2013;143:532–8.
12
Gordon CE, Feller-Kopman D, Balk EM, et al. Pneumothorax following
thoracentesis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Arch Intern Med
2010;170:332–9.
13
Helm EJ, Rahman NM, Talakoub O, et al. Course and variation of the intercostal
artery by CT scan. Chest 2013;143:634–9.
14
Dewhurst C, O’Neill S, O’Regan K, et al. Demonstration of the course of the
posterior intercostal artery on CT angiography: relevance to interventional radiology
procedures in the chest. Diagn Interv Radiol 2012;18:221–4. doi:10.4261/
1305-3825.DIR.4366-11.1
15
Psallidas I, Helm EJ, Maskell NA, et al. Iatrogenic injury to the intercostal artery:
aetiology, diagnosis and therapeutic intervention. Thorax 2015;70:802–4.
16
Kanai M, Sekiguchi H. Avoiding vessel laceration in thoracentesis: a role of vascular
ultrasound with color Doppler. Chest 2015;147:e5–7.
17
Koyanagi T, Kawaharada N, Kurimoto Y, et al. Examination of intercostal arteries
with transthoracic Doppler sonography. Echocardiography 2010;27:17–20.
18
Salamonsen M, Ellis S, Paul E, et al. Thoracic ultrasound demonstrates variable
location of the intercostal artery. Respiration 2012;83:323–9.
19
Salamonsen M, Dobeli K, McGrath D, et al. Physician-performed ultrasound can
accurately screen for a vulnerable intercostal artery prior to chest drainage
procedures. Respirology 2013;18:942–7.
20
Corcoran JP, Psallidas I, Ross CL, et al. Always worth another look? Thoracic
ultrasonography before, during, and after pleural intervention. Ann Am Thorac Soc
2016;13:118–21. doi:10.1513/AnnalsATS.201508-559CC
21
Wiesen J, Raman D, Adams J, et al. A patient with lung cancer presenting with
respiratory failure and shock. Chest 2013;144:e1–4.
22
Reissig A, Kroegel C. Accuracy of transthoracic sonography in excluding
post-interventional pneumothorax and hydropneumothorax. Comparison to chest
radiography. Eur J Radiol 2005;53:463–70.
23
Sartori S, Tombesi P, Trevisani L, et al. Accuracy of transthoracic sonography in
detection of pneumothorax after sonographically guided lung biopsy:
prospective comparison with chest radiography. AJR Am J Roentgenol
2007;188:37–41.
24
Shostak E, Brylka D, Krepp J, et al. Bedside sonography for detection of
postprocedure pneumothorax. J Ultrasound Med 2013;32:1003–9. doi:10.7863/
ultra.32.6.1003
25
Slater A, Goodwin M, Anderson KE, et al. COPD can mimic the appearance of
pneumothorax on thoracic ultrasound. Chest 2006;129:545–50.
26
Galbois A, Ait-Oufella H, Baudel JL, et al. Pleural ultrasound compared with chest
radiographic detection of pneumothorax resolution after drainage. Chest
2010;138:648–55.
27
Doelken P. Clinical implications of unexpandable lung due to pleural disease.
Am J Med Sci 2008;335:21–5.
28
Thomas R, Jenkins S, Eastwood PR, et al. Physiology of breathlessness associated
with pleural effusions. Curr Opin Pulm Med 2015;21:338–45.
29
Huggins JT, Doelken P. Pleural manometry. Clin Chest Med 2006;27:229–40.
30
Salamonsen MR, Lo AK, Ng AC, et al. Novel use of pleural ultrasound can identify
malignant entrapped lung prior to effusion drainage. Chest 2014;146:1286–93.
31
Corcoran JP, Talwar A, Hallifax RJ, et al. P2 incorporation of an in-depth thoracic
ultrasound assessment into routine pre-procedural evaluation of patients with
pleural effusions. Thorax 2016;71:A83–4.
32
Abrams LD. A pleural-biopsy punch. Lancet. 1958;1:30–1.
33
Cope C. New pleural biopsy needle; preliminary study. J Am Med Assoc
1958;167:1107–8.
34
Rahman NM, Gleeson FV. Image-guided pleural biopsy. Curr Opin Pulm Med
2008;14:331–6.
35
Koegelenberg CF, Bolliger CT, Theron J, et al. Direct comparison of the diagnostic
yield of ultrasound-assisted Abrams and Tru-Cut needle biopsies for pleural
tuberculosis. Thorax 2010;65:857–62.
36
Hallifax RJ, Corcoran JP, Ahmed A, et al. Physician-based ultrasound-guided biopsy
for diagnosing pleural disease. Chest 2014;146:1001–6.
37
Chang DB, Yang PC, Luh KT, et al. Ultrasound-guided pleural biopsy with Tru-Cut
needle. Chest 1991;100:1328–33.
38
Rahman NM, Davies RJ. Relearning an old lesson: stopping trials early. Thorax
2010;65:851–3.
39
Metintas M, Yildirim H, Kaya T, et al. CT scan-guided Abrams’ needle pleural biopsy
versus ultrasound-assisted cutting needle pleural biopsy for diagnosis in patients
with pleural effusion: a randomized, controlled trial. Respiration 2016;91:
156–63.
40
Sconfienza LM, Mauri G, Grossi F, et al. Pleural and peripheral lung lesions:
comparison of US- and CT-guided biopsy. Radiology 2013;266:930–5.
41
Koegelenberg CF, Irusen EM, von Groote-Bidlingmaier F, et al. The utility of
ultrasound-guided thoracentesis and pleural biopsy in undiagnosed pleural exudates.
Thorax 2015;70:995–7.
42
Chandrasekhar AJ, Reynes CJ, Churchill RJ. Ultrasonically guided percutaneous
biopsy of peripheral pulmonary masses. Chest 1976;70:627–30.
43
Jeon KN, Bae K, Park MJ, et al. US-guided transthoracic biopsy of peripheral lung
lesions: pleural contact length influences diagnostic yield. Acta Radiol
2014;55:295–301.
44
Pan JF, Yang PC, Chang DB, et al. Needle aspiration biopsy of malignant lung
masses with necrotic centers. Improved sensitivity with ultrasonic guidance. Chest
1993;103:1452–6.
45
DiBardino DM, Yarmus LB, Semaan RW. Transthoracic needle biopsy of the lung.
J Thorac Dis 2015;7(Suppl 4):S304–16.
46
Targhetta R, Bourgeois JM, Marty-Double C, et al. Peripheral pulmonary lesions:
ultrasonic features and ultrasonically guided fine needle aspiration biopsy.
J Ultrasound Med 1993;12:369–74.
47
Meena N, Bartter T. Ultrasound-guided percutaneous needle aspiration by
pulmonologists: a study of factors with impact on procedural yield and
complications. J Bronchology Interv Pulmonol 2015;22:204–8.
48
Quan TP, Fawcett NJ, Wrightson JM, et al. Increasing burden of
community-acquired pneumonia leading to hospitalisation, 1998-2014. Thorax
2016;71:535–42.
49
Vuori-Holopainen E, Peltola H. Reappraisal of lung tap: review of an old method for
better etiologic diagnosis of childhood pneumonia. Clin Infect Dis 2001;32:715–26.
50
Vuori-Holopainen E, Salo E, Saxen H, et al. Etiological diagnosis of childhood
pneumonia by use of transthoracic needle aspiration and modern microbiological
methods. Clin Infect Dis 2002;34:583–90.
51
Dorca J, Manresa F, Esteban L, et al. Efficacy, safety, and therapeutic relevance of
transthoracic aspiration with ultrathin needle in nonventilated nosocomial
pneumonia. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1995;151:1491–6.
52
Ishida T, Hashimoto T, Arita M, et al. Efficacy of transthoracic needle aspiration in
community-acquired pneumonia. Intern Med 2001;40:873–7.
53
Pereda MA, Chavez MA, Hooper-Miele CC, et al. Lung ultrasound for the diagnosis
of pneumonia in children: a meta-analysis. Pediatrics 2015;135:714–22.
54
Chavez MA, Shams N, Ellington LE, et al. Lung ultrasound for the diagnosis of
pneumonia in adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Respir Res
2014;15:50.
55
Wrightson JMC DWM, Rahman NM, Chapman SJ. S42 safety and acceptability of
bedside ultrasound-guided transthoracic lung needle aspiration (TLNA) in
pneumonia. Thorax 2014;69:A24.
56
Prosch H, Strasser G, Sonka C, et al. Cervical ultrasound (US) and US-guided lymph
node biopsy as a routine procedure for staging of lung cancer. Ultraschall Med
2007;28:598–603.
57
Wernecke K, Vassallo P, Pötter R, et al. Mediastinal tumors: sensitivity of detection
with sonography compared with CT and radiography. Radiology 1990;175:
137–43.
58
Hirche TO, Wagner TO, Dietrich CF. [Mediastinal ultrasound: technique and possible
applications]. Med Klin (Munich) 2002;97:472–9.
59
Silvestri GA, Gonzalez AV, Jantz MA, et al. Methods for staging non-small cell lung
cancer: diagnosis and management of lung cancer, 3rd ed: American College of
Chest Physicians evidence-based clinical practice guidelines. Chest 2013;143(5
Suppl):e211S–50S.
60
Koegelenberg CF, Diacon AH, Irusen EM, et al. The diagnostic yield and safety of
ultrasound-assisted transthoracic biopsy of mediastinal masses. Respiration
2011;81:134–41.
61
Hooper C, Lee YC, Maskell N, Group BTSPG. Investigation of a unilateral pleural
effusion in adults: British Thoracic Society Pleural Disease Guideline 2010. Thorax
2010;65(Suppl 2):ii4-17.
848
Corcoran JP, et al. Thorax 2017;72:840–849. doi:10.1136/thoraxjnl-2016-209340
State of the art review
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://thorax.bmj.com/
Thorax: first published as 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2016-209340 on 14 April 2017. Downloaded from 
 62
Rahman NM, Ali NJ, Brown G, et al. Local anaesthetic thoracoscopy: British
Thoracic Society Pleural Disease Guideline 2010. Thorax 2010;65(Suppl 2):ii54–60.
doi:10.1136/thx.2010.137018
63
Sasaki M, Kawabe M, Hirai S, et al. Preoperative detection of pleural adhesions by
chest ultrasonography. Ann Thorac Surg 2005;80:439–42.
64
Wei B, Wang T, Jiang F, et al. Use of transthoracic ultrasound to predict pleural
adhesions: a prospective blinded study. Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2012;60:101–4.
65
Cassanelli N, Caroli G, Dolci G, et al. Accuracy of transthoracic ultrasound for the
detection of pleural adhesions. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 2012;42:813–18. discussion 8.
66
Medford AR, Agrawal S, Bennett JA, et al. Thoracic ultrasound prior to medical
thoracoscopy improves pleural access and predicts fibrous septation. Respirology
2010;15:804–8.
67
Marchetti G, Valsecchi A, Indellicati D, et al. Ultrasound-guided medical
thoracoscopy in the absence of pleural effusion. Chest 2015;147:1008–12.
68
Corcoran JP, Psallidas I, Hallifax RJ, et al. Ultrasound-guided pneumothorax
induction prior to local anaesthetic thoracoscopy. Thorax 2015;70:906–8.
69
Brown NE, Zamel N, Aberman A. Changes in pulmonary mechanics and gas
exchange following thoracocentesis. Chest 1978;74:540–2.
70
Perpina M, Benlloch E, Marco V, et al. Effect of thoracentesis on pulmonary gas
exchange. Thorax 1983;38:747–50.
71
Wang JS, Tseng CH. Changes in pulmonary mechanics and gas exchange after
thoracentesis on patients with inversion of a hemidiaphragm secondary to large
pleural effusion. Chest 1995;107:1610–14.
72
Wang LM, Cherng JM, Wang JS. Improved lung function after thoracocentesis in
patients with paradoxical movement of a hemidiaphragm secondary to a large
pleural effusion. Respirology 2007;12:719–23.
73
Corcoran JP, Wrightson JM, Belcher E, et al. Pleural infection: past, present, and
future directions. Lancet Respir Med 2015;3:563–77.
74
Davies HE, Davies RJ, Davies CW, Group BTSPDG. Management of pleural infection
in adults: British Thoracic Society Pleural Disease Guideline 2010. Thorax 2010;65
(Suppl 2):ii41–53.
75
Chen KY, Liaw YS, Wang HC, et al. Sonographic septation: a useful prognostic
indicator of acute thoracic empyema. J Ultrasound Med 2000;19:837–43.
76
Chen CH, Chen W, Chen HJ, et al. Transthoracic ultrasonography in predicting the
outcome of small-bore catheter drainage in empyemas or complicated
parapneumonic effusions. Ultrasound Med Biol 2009;35:1468–74.
77
Ramnath RR, Heller RM, Ben-Ami T, et al. Implications of early sonographic
evaluation of parapneumonic effusions in children with pneumonia. Pediatrics
1998;101(Pt 1):68–71.
78
Eleanor KM, Amelia OC, Genevieve W, et al. The Third Therapeutic Intervention in
Malignant Effusion Trial (TIME3): a randomised controlled trial to assess dyspnea
relief and pleurodesis success following intrapleural urokinase in patients with
non-draining malignant pleural effusion. D110 UNUSUAL TUMORS OF THE CHEST.
American Thoracic Society International Conference Abstracts: American Thoracic
Society; 2016. p. A7937-A.
79
Zhu Z, Donnelly E, Dikensoy O, et al. Efficacy of ultrasound in the diagnosis of
pleurodesis in rabbits. Chest 2005;128:934–9.
80
Leo F, Dellamonica J, Venissac N, et al. Can chest ultrasonography assess pleurodesis
after VATS for spontaneous pneumothorax? Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 2005;28:47–9.
81
Alayouty HD, Hasan TM, Alhadad ZA, et al. Mechanical versus chemical pleurodesis
for management of primary spontaneous pneumothorax evaluated with thoracic
echography. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg 2011;13:475–9.
82
Roberts ME, Neville E, Berrisford RG, et al. Group BTSPDG. Management of a
malignant pleural effusion: British Thoracic Society Pleural Disease Guideline 2010.
Thorax 2010;65(Suppl 2):ii32–40.
83
Patel SG, Benninger B, Mirjalili SA. Integrating ultrasound into modern medical
curricula. Clin Anat
84
Williamson JP, Twaddell SH, Lee YC, et al. Thoracic ultrasound recognition of
competence: a position paper of the Thoracic Society of Australia and New Zealand.
Respirology 2017;22:405–8.
85
McSparron JI, Michaud GC, Gordan PL, et al. Skills-based Working Group of the
American Thoracic Society Education Committee. Simulation for skills-based
education in pulmonary and critical care medicine. Ann Am Thorac Soc
2015;12:579–86.
86
Salamonsen M, McGrath D, Steiler G, et al. A new instrument to assess physician
skill at thoracic ultrasound, including pleural effusion markup. Chest
2013;144:930–4.
87
Skaarup SH, Laursen CB, Bjerrum AS, et al. Objective and structured assessment of
lung ultrasound competence: a multispecialty Delphi consensus and construct
validity study. Ann Am Thorac Soc 2017;14, 555–60.
88
Salamonsen MR, Bashirzadeh F, Ritchie AJ, et al. A new instrument to assess
physician skill at chest tube insertion: the TUBE-ICOMPT. Thorax 2015;70:
186–8.
89
Shefrin AE, Khazei A, Hung GR, et al. The TACTIC: development and validation of
the Tool for Assessing Chest Tube Insertion Competency. CJEM 2015;17:140–7.
90
Thomas R, Azzopardi M, Muruganandan S, et al. Protocol of the PLeural Effusion
And Symptom Evaluation (PLEASE) study on the pathophysiology of breathlessness
in patients with symptomatic pleural effusions. BMJ Open 2016;6:e013213. doi:10.
1136/bmjopen-2016-013213
91
Caremani M, Benci A, Lapini L, et al. Contrast enhanced ultrasonography (CEUS) in
peripheral lung lesions: a study of 60 cases. J Ultrasound 2008;11:89–96.
92
Cao BS, Wu JH, Li XL, et al. Sonographically guided transthoracic biopsy of
peripheral lung and mediastinal lesions: role of contrast-enhanced sonography.
J Ultrasound Med 2011;30:1479–90.
93
Wang J, Zhou D, Xie X, et al. Utility of contrast-enhanced ultrasound with SonoVue
in biopsy of small subpleural nodules. Int J Clin Exp Med 2015;8:15991–8.
94
Adamietz BR, Fasching PA, Jud S, et al. Ultrasound elastography of pulmonary
lesions - a feasibility study. Ultraschall Med 2014;35:33–7. doi:10.1055/
s-0033-1355893
95
Sperandeo M, Trovato FM, Dimitri L, et al. Lung transthoracic ultrasound
elastography imaging and guided biopsies of subpleural cancer: a preliminary
report. Acta Radiologica 2015;56:798–805.
96
Görg C, Bert T, Kring R, et al. Transcutaneous contrast enhanced sonography of the
chest for evaluation of pleural based pulmonary lesions: experience in 137 patients.
Ultraschall Med 2006;27:437–44.
97
Davies HE, Nicholson JE, Rahman NM, et al. Outcome of patients with nonspecific
pleuritis/fibrosis on thoracoscopic pleural biopsies. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg
2010;38:472–7.
98
Nguyen P, Bashirzadeh F, Hundloe J, et al. Optical differentiation between
malignant and benign lymphadenopathy by grey scale texture analysis of
endobronchial ultrasound convex probe images. Chest 2012;141:709–15.
99
Wolfram F, Boltze C, Schubert H, et al. Effect of lung flooding and high-intensity
focused ultrasound on lung tumours: an experimental study in an ex vivo human
cancer model and simulated in vivo tumours in pigs. Eur J Med Res 2014;19:1.
849
Corcoran JP, et al. Thorax 2017;72:840–849. doi:10.1136/thoraxjnl-2016-209340
2017;30:452–60.
State of the art review
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://thorax.bmj.com/
Thorax: first published as 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2016-209340 on 14 April 2017. Downloaded from 
