 The Effect of Breakfast in the Classroom on Obesity and 
Academic Performance: Evidence from New York City
Sean P. Corcoran,
Associate Professor of Educational Economics at the Steinhardt School of Culture, Education, 
and Human Development, New York University, 246 Greene Street, Suite 300, New York, NY 
10003
Brian Elbel, and
Associate Professor of Population Health and Health Policy at the New York University School of 
Medicine and the New York University Robert F
. Wagner Graduate School of Public Service, 227 
East 30th Street, 6th Floor, New York, NY 10016
Amy Ellen Schwartz
Daniel Patrick Moynihan Professor of Public Affairs at the Maxwell School, Syracuse University, 
426 Eggers Hall, Syracuse, NY 13244
Sean P
. Corcoran: sean.corcoran@nyu.edu; Brian Elbel: brian.elbel@nyumc.org; Amy Ellen Schwartz: 
amyschwartz@syr.edu
Abstract
Participation in the federally subsidized school breakfast program often falls well below its 
lunchtime counterpart. To increase take-up, many districts have implemented Breakfast in the 
Classroom (BIC), offering breakfast directly to students at the start of the school day. Beyond 
increasing participation, advocates claim BIC improves academic performance, attendance, and 
engagement. Others caution BIC has deleterious effects on child weight. We use the 
implementation of BIC in New York City (NYC) to estimate its impact on meals program 
participation, body mass index (BMI), achievement, and attendance. While we find large effects 
on participation, our findings provide no evidence of hoped-for gains in academic performance, or 
of feared increases in obesity. The policy case for BIC will depend upon reductions in hunger and 
food insecurity for disadvantaged children, or its longer-term effects.
INTRODUCTION
The federal School Breakfast Program (SBP) has subsidized breakfasts for needy children 
since 1966, with the aims of reducing food insecurity, improving nutrition, and facilitating 
learning (Bhattacharya, Currie, & Haider, 2006; Frisvold, 2015; Millimet, Tchernis, & 
Husain, 2010; Poppendieck, 2010). Participation in the SBP, however, typically falls well 
below that of its lunchtime counterpart (Bartfeld & Kim, 2010; Basch, 2011; Dahl & Scholz, 
2011; Schanzenbach & Zaki, 2014). In New York City, for example, less than a third of all 
students take a breakfast each day, even though it has been offered free to all students since 
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
J Policy Anal Manage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 09.
Published in final edited form as:
J Policy Anal Manage. 2016 ; 35(3): 509–532.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 2003 and roughly three in four students live in low-income households (Leos-Urbel et al., 
2013).1
To increase participation in the SBP, a number of school districts have adopted Breakfast in 
the Classroom (BIC), a program that offers free breakfast to students in the classroom at the 
start of the school day, rather than providing it in the cafeteria before school. The intent is to 
reach students unable or unwilling to arrive early to school, and to reduce stigma associated 
with visiting the cafeteria before school for a subsidized meal. New York City (NYC), the 
largest provider of school meals in the country and a national leader in school food policy, 
began implementing BIC in 2007. Today the program is offered in nearly 300 of the city’s 
1,700 public schools, with more than 30,000 BIC breakfasts served per day.2
Advocates argue that moving breakfast from the cafeteria to the classroom provides myriad 
benefits, including improved academic performance, attendance, and engagement, in 
addition to reducing hunger and food insecurity among disadvantaged children. Indeed, 
there is evidence that the consumption, timing, and nutritional quality of breakfast can affect 
cognitive performance (e.g., Hoyland, Dye, & Lawton, 2009; Rampersaud et al., 2005; 
Wesnes et al., 2003). While there has been less work evaluating BIC in particular, at least 
one study found that moving breakfast to the classroom substantially improved math and 
reading performance (Imberman & Kugler, 2014).3 At the same time, others have raised 
concerns that BIC will contribute to weight gain and obesity, as participants consume more 
daily calories or less healthy food than they otherwise would. In NYC, the Bloomberg 
administration temporarily halted the expansion of BIC when an internal study found BIC 
students were more likely to eat two breakfasts, one at home and another during school (Van 
Wye et al., 2013).4 There is, however, scant research available to guide policymakers in 
resolving these conflicting claims, and virtually no evidence on the impact of BIC on student 
weight.
In this paper, we use the staggered implementation of BIC in NYC together with 
longitudinal data on student height, weight, achievement, and attendance to estimate the 
program’s impact on body mass index (BMI), obesity, academic performance, and 
attendance. We begin by investigating whether BIC had a significant impact on schools’ 
average daily participation in the breakfast and lunch programs. Then, we use longitudinal 
student data to estimate the impact of BIC on BMI and other outcomes. These analyses use a 
difference-in-difference design, contrasting observationally similar students in schools that 
did and did not adopt BIC, before and after implementation. We also estimate impacts 
through an event study specification, using a series of indicators identifying years before and 
after BIC adoption to capture potential differences in outcome trajectories prior to adoption.
5 Importantly, all estimated effects are interpreted as intent-to-treat, since the treatment here 
1A 2012 report from the Food Research and Action Center rated NYC last out of 26 urban school districts in breakfast participation 
among subsidy-eligible students (FRAC, 2012).
2“It’s a Hit: Breakfast in the Classroom,” The New York Times, November 17, 2008, A21.
3A second, unpublished paper found similar results for test scores in a subset of schools in San Diego (Dotter, 2012), although two 
more recent studies did not (Anzman-Frasca et al., 2015; Schanzenbach & Zaki, 2014). These studies are described next.
4“Hiccup in the Most Important Meal,” The New York Times, April 19, 2012, A1.
5We provide graphical evidence that outcomes in BIC and non-BIC schools were on similar trajectories prior to schools’ adoption of 
BIC, a necessary condition for the difference in difference specification to provide unbiased estimates of causal effects.
Corcoran et al.
Page 2
J Policy Anal Manage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 is the offer of BIC to all or some students in a school. As is true in most studies, we do not 
observe individual student meal consumption or classroom level participation in BIC (and 
some schools partially implemented the program, as explained later). Rather, treatment 
status is measured using ordered categories representing the extent of BIC implementation at 
the school level, or alternately, the amount of time an individual student has been offered 
BIC at their school. Intent-to-treat effects are of interest to policymakers weighing the 
adoption of BIC, given schools’ (and students’) discretion to participate or not.
We find that NYC schools offering BIC saw a substantial increase in school breakfast 
participation with no spillover effects on lunch participation. There is no evidence BIC 
increased BMI or the incidence of obesity among affected students. We find small and 
statistically imprecise effects on reading and math achievement in grades 4 through 8, in 
sharp contrast with Imberman and Kugler (2014), and no effects on attendance rates, in 
contrast with Dotter (2012). While our data do not permit us to examine impacts on 
individual student eating behaviors, our findings are consistent with recent experimental 
evidence showing BIC has, at best, small effects on net breakfast consumption and nutrition 
(Schanzenbach & Zaki, 2014).
BACKGROUND
The Effects of School Meals on Health and Academic Achievement
There is evidence that the availability and quality of school meals programs can affect the 
nutritional intake and academic outcomes of participating students. For example, in a study 
of the SBP, Bhattacharya, Currie, and Haider (2006) used detailed survey data from the 
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) III to investigate how access 
to the SBP affected children’s breakfast consumption and nutrient intake. They found no 
impact of the SBP on total calories consumed or the likelihood of eating breakfast, but found 
large effects on the nutritional quality of breakfasts eaten, with fewer calories from fat, and 
higher serum levels of vitamins C, E, and folate. Schanzenbach (2009) examined the body 
weight of students participating in the school lunch program and found that children eating 
school lunches were more likely to be obese than those bringing their own lunch, a finding 
she attributed to higher caloric intake among students taking school lunches. A study by 
Millimet, Tchernis, and Husain (2010) corroborated this finding for school lunches, but—
consistent with Bhattacharya, Currie, and Haider (2006)—found that SBP participation was 
associated with lower rates of obesity.
Evidence on the causal impact of school meals on educational outcomes is more mixed 
(Hoyland, Dye, & Lawton, 2009). In one study of the long-run effects of the national school 
lunch program, Hinrichs (2010) found sizable effects on the educational attainment of adults 
who were exposed to the program early in life. Frisvold (2015) likewise found that state 
mandates to offer breakfast in high-poverty schools had a positive effect on achievement. On 
the other hand, using administrative data from Chile, McEwan (2013) found no short-run 
effects on test scores, school attendance, and grade repetition of providing free high-calorie 
meals to poor children. Similarly, Dunifon and Kowaleski-Jones (2003) found little 
association between school lunch program participation in the United States and 
achievement after accounting for selection into the program.6 It is important to point out that 
Corcoran et al.
Page 3
J Policy Anal Manage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 even where positive effects of school meals programs are found, it is difficult to separate 
their direct effect (through meals consumption) from indirect effects (via increased 
attendance or improved behavior, for example; see Hoyland, Dye, & Lawton, 2009; 
Adolphus, Lawton, & Dye, 2013).
A clever study examining schools’ responses to test-based accountability in Virginia found 
evidence that schools under accountability pressure increased the caloric content of their 
meals on test days and saw larger increases in passing rates as a result (Figlio & Winicki, 
2005). Consistent with this type of short-run effect, Imberman and Kugler (2014) found the 
introduction of BIC into a large urban school district had large positive effects on reading 
and math achievement, even when the program was implemented a short time before the 
test. (We describe this study in greater detail in the next section.)
Experimental studies have also found that the consumption and quality of breakfast can have 
at least a short-run effect on child cognitive performance.7 For example, a study in the 
United Kingdom randomly assigned 10-year-old students to different breakfast regimens at 
home and found students receiving a higher energy breakfast scored higher on tests of 
creativity and number checking (Wyon et al., 1997). They were also less likely to report 
feeling bad or hungry. Wesnes et al. (2003) randomly assigned students to receive one of 
four types of breakfast on successive days (one of two types of cereal, a glucose drink, or no 
breakfast) and found that students eating a cereal breakfast performed better on a series of 
tests of attention and memory over the course of the morning. Simeon and Grantham-
McGregor (1989) conducted a small experiment in which undernourished children in the 
West Indies were randomly assigned to receive a breakfast or a cup of tea on alternate days. 
After consuming breakfast, students performed better on cognitive tests of arithmetic and 
problem solving than when drinking only tea.
Relevant to BIC, one study we identified found that when breakfast is consumed relates to 
its effects on cognitive performance. In a randomized control trial, Vaisman et al. (1996) 
found that 11- to 13-year-old students who ate a regular breakfast before school (two hours 
before testing) performed no better than a control group on tests of cognitive functioning. 
However, students who ate a cereal and milk breakfast in class 30 minutes before testing 
performed significantly better.
Breakfast in the Classroom
BIC alters the traditional SBP by offering a free breakfast in class at the start of the school 
day, rather than in the cafeteria before school hours (FRAC, 2012). The intent is to increase 
breakfast participation among students who are unable or unwilling to arrive early to school, 
and to reduce stigma associated with visiting the cafeteria before school for a subsidized 
meal. BIC advocates have argued the program also provides an opportunity to integrate 
nutrition into the curriculum, as teachers can use the time to teach good eating habits. 
6More comprehensive reviews of this literature can be found in Briefel et al. (1999), Hoyland, Dye, and Lawton (2009), Ponza et al. 
(1999), and Rampersaud et al. (2005).
7A more thorough review can be found in Pollitt and Matthews (1998) and Hoyland, Dye, and Lawton (2009).
Corcoran et al.
Page 4
J Policy Anal Manage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Proponents tout the social aspects of the program as well, citing the benefits of communal 
eating.8
BIC breakfasts are typically offered during the first 10 to 20 minutes of class. Meals are 
often bagged the prior evening by school food staff, placed into insulated containers, and 
refrigerated overnight. They are then delivered to classrooms in the morning, or distributed 
to students as they arrive (Grab and Go). Because breakfasts are typically assembled the 
night before, BIC menus generally differ from those prepared in the cafeteria. Specifically, 
BIC meals usually consist of cold, prepacked items such as cereal, fresh fruit, or bagels. 
Cafeteria breakfasts, on the other hand, include hot meals such as pancakes or egg omelets.9 
Though they may differ in menu offerings, BIC meals are required to meet the same federal 
nutritional guidelines as cafeteria breakfasts. For federal reimbursement purposes, they are 
accounted for in the same way as traditional cafeteria breakfasts.
The Food Research and Action Center (FRAC), a national advocate for the SBP in general 
and BIC in particular, credits BIC for high rates of SBP participation in urban school 
districts such as Detroit, Houston, Newark, San Antonio, Washington, DC, and Providence 
in 2012. There have been few studies, however, on BIC’s effects on breakfast participation, 
academic or behavioral outcomes, or weight. One evaluation of a 2003/04 BIC pilot in 
upstate New York found SBP participation doubled after implementation of the program, 
and found modest improvements in attendance, behavior, and tardiness (Murphy, Drake, & 
Weineke, 2005). The study, however, lacked a control group and involved only a small 
number of schools. Anzman-Frasca et al. (2015) examined the effects of BIC on SBP 
participation in a large urban school district and estimated that BIC increased participation 
by 30 percentage points, relative to matched non-BIC schools. Similarly, in reanalyzing data 
from an earlier U.S. Department of Agriculture experiment, Schanzenbach and Zaki (2014) 
found that BIC had a large positive effect on SBP participation and increased the likelihood 
that students ate a “nutritionally substantive” breakfast. They found the effect of BIC on 
participation was considerably larger than the offer of free breakfast alone.
Imberman and Kugler (2014) provide strong quasi-experimental evidence on the intent-to-
treat effects of BIC on achievement. That study examined the impact of BIC on math and 
reading scores in 5th grade, and attendance and report card marks in grades 1 through 5. 
Their setting was an urban district that—like NYC—had previously offered free breakfast to 
all students, regardless of subsidy eligibility (Leos-Urbel et al., 2013). The district 
implemented BIC in 85 schools over a period of 11 weeks in 2009/10, which enabled the 
authors to contrast outcomes in early adopter schools (those implementing BIC before the 
test) with those in late adopting schools (implementing after the test). They found substantial 
effects of BIC on reading and math achievement (0.10 standard deviations (SD)), with larger 
effects for initially low-achieving students (0.13 to 0.14 SD), Hispanics (0.14 to 0.15 SD), 
and low-BMI students (0.26 SD). As many students already participated in the SBP, the 
8See http://www.healthyeating.org/Schools/Tips-Trends/Article-Viewer/Article/142/breakfast-at-school-a-communal-meal-that-
makes-a-difference.aspx.
9Not all schools in NYC have kitchen facilities for preparing hot meals. These schools would likely have served cold breakfasts prior 
to adopting BIC. Schools with kitchens may have offered cold items as menu options.
Corcoran et al.
Page 5
J Policy Anal Manage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 treatment effect of BIC on the treated in this district was potentially much higher. They 
found no impact of BIC on attendance rates or report card grades.
Interestingly, the achievement effects found in Imberman and Kugler did not vary with the 
amount of time students had been offered BIC. Thus, even schools that adopted BIC as little 
as one week prior to testing experienced gains in test performance. While seemingly 
implausible at first, their finding mirrors Figlio and Winicki (2005), who found that 
increasing caloric content of lunch on test day can improve test performance. It also aligns 
with the experimental evidence described earlier on the short-run effects of breakfast 
consumption and content on cognitive performance. Imberman and Kugler’s finding of no 
impact on grades but a large impact on test scores supports a short-run caloric effect and 
lack of a sustained, long-run impact on achievement, but the study’s short duration makes it 
difficult to rule out long-run effects.
Like Imberman and Kugler (2014), an unpublished study by Dotter (2012) used the 
introduction of BIC in San Diego over a four-year period to estimate its effects on 
achievement in grades 2 through 6, attendance, and classroom behavior. In contrast to NYC 
and the district in Imberman and Kugler (2014), San Diego had only previously offered 
universal-free breakfasts in schools with Provision 2 status under the National School Lunch 
Act (UFM schools).10 All others offered breakfast free or at a reduced rate to subsidy-
eligible students and at full price to other students. BIC in San Diego thus coincided with a 
shift to universal-free breakfast in schools that were not already UFM, making it difficult to 
disentangle the BIC and price effects. Like Imberman and Kugler, Dotter found large intent-
to-treat effects of BIC on achievement (0.11 SD in reading and 0.15 SD in math), but only in 
schools that did not already offer free breakfast to all students. Thus, the effect should be 
interpreted as the combined effect of BIC and free breakfast. He found no effect on 
attendance, but large positive effects on teacher-reported classroom behavior, such as 
exhibiting “respect for people and property.”
Finally, a third quasi-experimental study by Anzman-Frasca et al. (2015) examined the 
impact of BIC on meals program participation and achievement in a large urban school 
district in 2012/13. They found a large effect of the program on SBP participation (noted 
above), but unlike the other two studies described here, found no impact on student 
achievement in second to sixth grade. Anzman-Frasca et al. (2015) did find a positive, 
statistically significant effect of BIC on attendance, but the effect size was very small.
These three studies offer strong evidence on the academic impacts of BIC, and go far beyond 
what was previously available. However, they have several limitations. First, none provided 
evidence of the program’s effect on student weight, an important outstanding question in the 
literature. Second, two of the three relied on relatively small samples of elementary schools. 
Imberman and Kugler’s main estimates use fifth graders in approximately 85 treatment and 
19 control schools; Dotter looked at a broader range of grade levels, but a smaller number of 
10Under Provision 2, a school may certify children as eligible for free or reduced-price meals for up to four consecutive years—
without collecting annual data on eligibility—and provide meals free of charge to all students. The intent is to reduce the 
administrative burden on schools and parents related to proving income eligibility. For details see http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/
CFR-2012-title7-vol4/pdf/CFR-2012-title7-vol4-part245.pdf.
Corcoran et al.
Page 6
J Policy Anal Manage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 schools (45 treatment and 22 control). His sample of non-UFM schools—where the only 
significant effects were found—was smaller (19 treatment and 16 control). Third, only 
Dotter is able to say much about long-run effects, up to four years after the first BIC 
implementation. Imberman and Kugler provide a clean estimate of the short-run impact of 
BIC, but their results may say more about caloric intake and the short-term malleability of 
test performance than about the long-run consequences of adjusting children’s eating habits. 
Our analysis improves on prior work by incorporating annual student-level measures of BMI 
and a larger sample of students and BIC schools at both the elementary and middle school 
level.11
Three studies that we are aware of have looked at the relationship between BIC and calorie 
consumption or weight, although only one has a design that can support causal claims. 
Baxter et al. (2010) collected cross-sectional data on BMI, breakfast program participation, 
and energy intake (from researcher observations) for a sample of fourth grade students in 17 
schools, seven of which had adopted BIC. They found children in BIC consumed more 
calories at breakfast and had higher BMIs, on average, than children eating breakfast in the 
cafeteria. Van Wye et al. (2013) surveyed students in nine BIC and seven comparison 
schools in NYC and found students offered BIC were more likely to eat more than once in 
the morning, consuming 95 more calories, on average, than students in schools not offering 
BIC. Access to student-specific data on food consumption is an obvious advantage of these 
studies. However, both were correlational with a small number of schools that did not 
address selection into BIC. Schanzenbach and Zaki (2014) provide stronger evidence of the 
program’s effects on breakfast consumption and obesity by reanalyzing data from an 
experiment conducted by the U.S. Department of Agriculture in the early 2000s (Bernstein 
et al., 2004). In the original experiment, treatment schools offered universal free breakfast 
and could choose to serve it in the cafeteria or in the classroom. In a comparison of BIC and 
control schools that did not offer free breakfast, the authors found large effects of BIC on 
participation, and a five percentage point increase in the likelihood of eating more than one 
breakfast, but modest effects on breakfast consumption, and no effect on BMI or nutrition. 
They conclude that—for most students—BIC changed the location and timing of breakfast 
rather than the propensity to consume it. Not surprisingly in light of this, they find BIC had 
no impact on achievement or behavior. While randomization of free breakfast is an 
important feature of this study, it is worth noting the decision to offer BIC was not random, 
making the comparison of BIC and other treated schools (offering free breakfast only) 
nonexperimental. Further, the number of BIC schools (18) was small relative to the cafeteria 
group (61). The community context for schools in the USDA study was also quite different 
from ours.12 Thus, there are open questions about the efficacy of BIC in schools offering 
universal free breakfast in the cafeteria—the context increasingly relevant for urban school 
districts nationwide.
11Some high schools in NYC have implemented BIC. However, as we explain in the next section, our BMI data on high school 
students were measured differently than that for elementary and middle school.
12The participating school districts included Boise, ID; Shelby County, AL; Harrison County, MS; Phoenix, AZ; Santa Rosa, CA; and 
Wichita, KS.
Corcoran et al.
Page 7
J Policy Anal Manage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 DATA
Data Sources, Outcomes, and Sample Definitions
We draw on four primary data sources, all provided by the New York City Department of 
Education (NYCDOE) and its Office of School Food. The first is a database of BIC 
participation that includes program start dates for schools that ever adopted BIC, and 
information about the extent of coverage in the school (e.g., grades served and the number of 
BIC and total classrooms). The second is longitudinal school-level data on breakfast and 
lunch participation for all regular public schools that served elementary grades, middle 
grades, or both between 2001/02 and 2011/12. These data provide annual counts of meals 
served, average daily attendance (ADA), and Provision 2 (UFM) status, and include 1,000 to 
1,100 schools enrolling 713,000 to 730,000 students, depending on the year. The third is 
administrative data for the universe of students in NYC public schools between 2006/07 and 
2011/12, including demographics, educational needs and program participation, 
standardized test scores, and attendance rates. Finally, the fourth is annual student height and 
weight measurements collected through the city’s Fitnessgram program; these are used to 
compute BMI and indicators of obesity, as described below. We exclude high schools, 
private, charter, prekindergarten, alternative, and other special schools and programs.13
The student-level administrative data track students longitudinally as they progress through 
school. These data include school of record, state test scores in English Language Arts 
(ELA) and mathematics (both in grades 3 through 8 only), gender, race/ethnicity, age, 
household income eligibility for free or reduced price meals, recent immigrant status, days 
in attendance, days enrolled, and participation in other educational programs (e.g., special 
education and English language learner (ELL)). We standardized ELA and math scores 
within grade, subject, and testing year. Grade 3 test scores are used only as lagged outcomes 
for students in 4th grade. We calculated student attendance rates as the number of days 
present as a percentage of days enrolled.
NYC schools have conducted the Fitnessgram since 2005/06 as part of the district’s 
standards-based physical education program.14 NYC’s Fitnessgram program requires all 
schools to collect students’ height and weight annually, and to assess students’ aerobic 
fitness, muscle strength, endurance, and flexibility. At the end of the year, students receive a 
report that summarizes their performance and suggests ways for them to reach their 
“Healthy Fitness Zone,” targets for better health based on their age and gender. While school 
coverage rates were lower in the early years of the Fitnessgram, by 2012 nearly 1,700 
schools were participating each year, providing data on more than 860,000 students in all 
grades.
Though there is an ongoing conversation in the public health literature on the best measure 
of adiposity in children (e.g., Cole et al., 2005; Mooney, Baecker, & Rundle, 2013), BMI is 
13Conversations with the NYCDOE and the NYC Department of Health and Mental Health raised concerns about the Fitnessgram 
measurement of height and weight in high school during this period. While measurements in elementary and middle schools were 
taken by school staff (e.g., the school nurse or P.E. teacher), they were frequently self-reported in high school. This led us to exclude 
high school students from this analysis.
14See Rundle et al. (2012) and Plowman (2013).
Corcoran et al.
Page 8
J Policy Anal Manage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the most common. From the Fitnessgram we used students’ weight (in pounds) and height 
(in inches) to compute the standard BMI measure (weight/height2) × 703. Biologically 
implausible values—defined as more than 4 SD below or 5 SD above the mean for the 
students’ gender and age in months—were set to missing (fewer than 20 cases per year). We 
classified children as obese if their BMI was at or above the 95th percentile for their gender 
and age in months, based on CDC growth charts.15 In our analyses of student weight, we 
use two outcome measures: BMI standardized by gender and age, using all students in the 
New York City Fitnessgram data (z-BMI), and a 0 to 1 indicator for BMI above the CDC 
obesity threshold.
Our analytic samples for BMI/obesity, achievement, and attendance overlap, but differ in 
two key ways. First, the included grade levels vary, depending on data availability. Models 
for BMI and attendance include students in grades K through 8, while the models for 
achievement include only grades 4 through 8. Second, the BMI sample excludes students in 
school years where Fitnessgram participation was lower than 50 percent. These students 
were not excluded from the other models. In allowing these analytic samples to differ, we 
make full use of available data. (The Appendix reports estimates from models estimated 
using a fixed sample of students. The results are very similar.)16
BIC Adoption in New York City
Figure 1 shows the cumulative number of NYC schools that adopted BIC, by month, 
between 2007/08 and 2011/12. (The figure is limited to public schools enrolling grades K 
through 8, and excludes private and charter schools.) The largest number of adoptions 
occurred in early 2010/11, although a significant number of schools began offering BIC in 
2008/09 and 2009/10. By the end of 2011/12, 284 elementary and middle schools had 
adopted the program, with an average daily participation of more than 30,000 students. It is 
worth noting that some schools adopted BIC in the middle of the school year, suggesting its 
full effect on annually measured outcomes may not be observed until the following year.
Not every school adopted BIC schoolwide, which has implications for how we define 
“treatment.” In some cases, BIC was offered only to specific grades or a subset of 
classrooms within the school.17 Lacking data linking specific students or classrooms to BIC, 
we used information on the approximate number of BIC classrooms, participating grades 
(where available), and school grade span to create three ordered categories of program 
coverage in a school.18 The first includes schools offering BIC in fewer than 25 percent of 
classrooms, which may include schools piloting the program with a relatively small number 
of students. The second category consists of schools offering BIC in 25 percent or more 
15CDC percentiles are estimated using data from several waves of the NHANES, and are the most commonly used growth charts in 
the United States. See http://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts/2000growthchart-us.pdf.
16All appendices are available at the end of this article as it appears in JPAM online. Go to the publisher’s Web site and use the search 
engine to locate the article at http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com.
17Our conversations with the Office of School Food and school personnel suggest that the timing and extent of participation in BIC 
depended, in part, on the physical layout of the school, which determines the logistics for delivering breakfast to classrooms.
18BIC adoption is based on data collected by the NYC Office of School Food in November 2009, March 2011, and October 2012. 
Each wave provided contemporaneous information about BIC participation and start date. We used information from all three waves to 
construct our treatment variables. See Appendix Figure A1 for the distribution of reported BIC coverage (classrooms offering BIC as a 
percentage of all classrooms). All appendices are available at the end of this article as it appears in JPAM online. Go to the publisher’s 
Web site and use the search engine to locate the article at http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com.
Corcoran et al.
Page 9
J Policy Anal Manage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 classrooms, but not schoolwide. Finally, the third category includes schools reporting they 
offered BIC schoolwide (“full BIC”). The bars in Figure 1 show the cumulative number of 
schools that adopted BIC in each category. The majority of schools are in the first group, but 
by the end of 2011/12, 80 elementary and middle schools offered BIC to at least 25 percent 
of classrooms, and 41 offered it schoolwide.
While data from the Office of School Food included some information about specific grades 
and the percentage of classrooms in each school offering BIC, we were not confident enough 
in the precision of these data to use them as our primary measure of treatment exposure. 
This led us to adopt the broader categories described here. Results from models that use as-
reported grade-specific treatment indicators or the (continuous) percentage of classrooms 
offering BIC do not yield different results, and are available from the authors upon request.
Table 1 reports baseline mean characteristics for schools that never (or ever) adopted BIC; 
the latter are split into the three categories of coverage defined above. On a number of 
dimensions, BIC schools were more disadvantaged than those that never adopted the 
program. For example, full BIC schools enrolled a greater percentage of students eligible for 
free meals (80.6 versus 67.3 percent in “never BIC” schools) and had higher concentrations 
of black, Hispanic, and ELL students. Standardized test scores were lower, on average, in 
full BIC schools, both in reading (−0.28 SD) and in math (−0.31 SD), and were comparably 
low in schools that adopted BIC in 25 percent or more classrooms, but not schoolwide. 
Schools in all five boroughs adopted BIC, though BIC schools were overrepresented in the 
Bronx. Average daily participation in the SBP was comparable in schools that adopted BIC 
versus those that did not, despite higher rates of eligibility for subsidized meals. Finally, 
students in BIC schools had a higher BMI, on average, at baseline than those attending non-
BIC schools, especially in schools with greater BIC coverage. Roughly one in four students 
were obese in schools that adopted BIC schoolwide, compared with roughly one in five in 
non-BIC schools.
Empirical Strategy
Our empirical approach uses difference-in-differences regressions at the school or student 
level (depending on the outcome), which compare outcomes in schools that did and did not 
adopt BIC, before and after implementation. Included covariates and school-fixed effects 
account for nonrandom selection of schools into the program on the basis of observed 
characteristics or time-invariant factors correlated with the outcome of interest. We address 
the possibility that BIC and non-BIC schools were on different trajectories prior to adoption 
of BIC through event study models, described below and shown graphically in Figures 2 and 
3.
The impact of BIC on meals program participation is estimated using annual data at the 
school level. The following model is estimated for breakfast and lunch participation for all 
schools combined and separately for elementary and middle schools:
(1)
Corcoran et al.
Page 10
J Policy Anal Manage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 In equation (1), the dependent variable is the average daily participation rate for meal m 
(breakfast or lunch) in school s and year t, defined as the average number of m meals served 
per school day (ADPm) divided by average daily attendance (ADA) and multiplied by 100. 
This can be interpreted as the percentage of students in attendance who take a meal m on an 
average day in school s in year t. BICst is a vector of indicators corresponding to the three-
ordered categories of BIC coverage, equal to one if school s had adopted BIC at that level of 
coverage prior to the end of school year t (and zero otherwise). γs and αt are school and year 
effects, respectively, and Wst is a vector of school-level covariates, including total 
enrollment, percent female, percent by race/ethnicity, percent ELL, percent in special 
education, and percent eligible for free or reduced price meals. vst is an error term, and 
standard errors are adjusted for clustering by school. In alternative specifications of equation 
(1) shown in the Appendix, we add school-specific linear time trends to allow for differential 
trends over time in the outcomes.19
The intent-to-treat impact of BIC on student outcomes is estimated using data at the student 
level, again with separate models for elementary and middle school students, given prior 
literature that suggests the impact of school meals programs may vary by age, for both 
biological and behavioral reasons (e.g., stigma). Each model takes the following form for 
outcome Yigst (BMI, obesity, math/reading score, and attendance) for student i in grade g, 
school s, and year t:
(2)
BICst, γs, and αt are defined in the same manner as in equation (1), θg is a grade-level effect 
(interacted with the year effects in the achievement models), and Xit is a vector of student 
covariates potentially related to both the outcome and the adoption of BIC in school s. These 
include eligibility for free or reduced price meals, race and ethnicity, limited English 
proficiency, special education status, age in months (as of the date of BMI measurement and 
in the Fitnessgram models only), and lagged math or reading scores (in the math and reading 
models, respectively).20 uit is a student-year error term, and standard errors are adjusted for 
clustering by school. As before, BICst is defined using separate indicators for the three-
ordered categories of coverage. In a second set of specifications, we allow the effect of BIC 
to vary by the cumulative number of days, in hundreds, that an individual student has 
attended a school offering BIC prior to the date their outcome was measured in year t.21 
Note that this treatment variable can vary at the student level within school.
19All appendices are available at the end of this article as it appears in JPAM online. Go to the publisher’s Web site and use the search 
engine to locate the article at http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com.
20A single variable in the model indicates whether the student is eligible for free or reduced price meals, or whether the student is 
enrolled in a UFM school. In cases where eligibility status is missing, this variable is equal to zero. We include an additional indicator 
variable equal to one for students with missing eligibility information.
21This treatment is intended to capture heterogeneity in student exposure to BIC, and—like the school-level treatment—is 
implemented using the three-ordered categories of BIC coverage. To the extent BIC takes time to have an effect, this specification may 
be more appropriate. We have experimented with variations on these treatment definitions. These are described later in the paper, when 
appropriate. Estimates from these alternative models are available in the Appendix. All appendices are available at the end of this 
article as it appears in JPAM online. Go to the publisher’s Web site and use the search engine to locate the article at http://
onlinelibrary.wiley.com.
Corcoran et al.
Page 11
J Policy Anal Manage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 To test the identifying assumption that outcomes in BIC and non-BIC schools were on 
similar trajectories prior to adoption of the program, we estimate “event study” versions of 
models equations (1) and (2). In these regression models, we replace the BIC treatment 
variables with a set of indicators corresponding to specific years before and after BIC 
adoption, interacted with the BIC treatment variables. (The reference period for BIC schools 
is the first year of the program.) All other covariates from equations (1) and (2) are included 
in these models. Any significant differences in mean outcomes that we observe in the 
pretreatment period could reflect differential trends in BIC schools prior to adoption of the 
program. Differences in mean outcomes in the posttreatment period can also be used to test 
for differential effects over time (as in Dotter, 2012).
RESULTS
The Impact of BIC on School Meals Program Participation
Table 2 reports estimates of model (1) for the impact of BIC on average daily school 
breakfast and lunch program participation. Each column and panel in this table represents a 
separate regression, for the given meal type (breakfast or lunch) and school sample 
(elementary, middle, or all). Coefficients and standard errors are reported for the 
postadoption period for each of the three BIC coverage levels. Again, all models include 
school- and year-fixed effects, and school-level covariates.
The point estimates in Table 2 show a large increase in breakfast program participation in 
schools offering BIC, with no corresponding change in lunch participation. As expected, we 
observe larger effects on participation where BIC coverage is greater. Across all schools 
serving elementary and middle grades, we find BIC increased SBP participation rates by 4.4 
percentage points, on average, when BIC is offered in fewer than 25 percent of classrooms. 
On a baseline rate of 20.1, this represents an increase of 22 percent. When BIC is offered in 
25 percent or more classes but not schoolwide, the increase in participation is 19.5 points—a 
near doubling. Finally, in schools reporting that they offered BIC schoolwide, we observe a 
30.2 point increase in the SBP participation rate. Point estimates from separate elementary 
and middle school regressions are comparable, although the effect in middle school is 
proportionately larger, given a lower baseline rate (12 percent versus 23.6 in elementary 
schools).22 All coefficient estimates for breakfast program participation effects are 
statistically significant at the 0.01 level or better. Differences by program coverage provide 
some empirical support for our three-tiered classifications of BIC coverage, as well as a 
strong “first stage” effect of BIC on program take-up that would be needed if BIC were to 
have an effect on other student-level outcomes.23
22In Table 2, the count of schools appearing in the “all schools” regressions is larger than the sum of schools appearing in the 
“elementary” and “middle school” only regressions, since the former includes schools serving both elementary and middle grades. 
Unfortunately, meals served data are not disaggregated by grades within schools.
23As another check on our data, we were able to obtain high-frequency point of sale (POS) data for three BIC schools, which allowed 
us to observe how daily meal service changed with implementation of BIC. The advantage of POS data is that it is generated by 
student transactions, not school counts. In two of the three schools, we observe a substantial increase in SBP participation immediately 
after BIC adoption, at 36 and 53 points, respectively. (The third school, which was demographically quite different from the other two, 
saw no increase.) This analysis is provided in the Appendix. While only three schools, this detailed look provides additional 
confidence in the validity of the meals served data and in BIC implementation dates. All appendices are available at the end of this 
article as it appears in JPAM online. Go to the publisher’s Web site and use the search engine to locate the article at http://
onlinelibrary.wiley.com.
Corcoran et al.
Page 12
J Policy Anal Manage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 In contrast, we find that offering BIC had no significant impact on lunch program 
participation. The coefficient estimates for lunch participation in Table 2 are small—usually 
less than one percentage point—and with the exception of one case, statistically 
insignificant. (We find a small negative effect of 3.6 points on lunch participation in middle 
schools with 25 percent or more coverage, on a baseline of 62.9 percent participation.) 
Taken together, there is little evidence to suggest BIC crowded out lunch program 
participation or encouraged greater participation (say, by reducing stigma associated with 
subsidized meals).
The difference in difference estimates are valid as causal effects only if BIC and non-BIC 
schools were experiencing similar trends in meals program participation prior to the 
adoption of BIC. In Figure 2, we show coefficients from event study regression models, in 
which separate indicator variables are included for BIC schools in years prior to and 
following BIC adoption. (Reference year zero is the year prior to adoption.) For clarity, the 
figure shows the coefficients and confidence interval bounds for the two most intensive BIC 
categories (more than 25 percent BIC and schoolwide). We observe virtually no trend in 
regression-adjusted participation rates prior to the adoption of BIC. The hypothesis that 
breakfast and lunch participation rates were equal to those in the reference year cannot be 
rejected, up to seven years prior to BIC adoption. After adoption, participation rates in BIC 
schools were 7 to 13 percentage points higher in the first year, depending on the extent of 
BIC coverage, and 14 to 27 percentage points higher in the second year. In schools where 
BIC was adopted schoolwide, breakfast program participation continued to increase three to 
four years later. By comparison, the event study analysis for lunch shows no discernible 
change in participation rates for any year following BIC adoption. (While the estimation 
sample for Figure 2 was an unbalanced panel, repeating the analysis with a smaller balanced 
panel of schools produced a nearly identical result.)
Using school-specific linear time trends in the models in Table 2 had only modest effects on 
these estimated impacts (see the Appendix).24 For example, among all schools, the effects 
on breakfast participation rates were 2.7, 15.6, and 26.9 percentage points for the three 
treatment intensities, respectively. All remain statistically significant at the 0.01 level. The 
negative effect on lunch program participation for middle schools in the second tier of 
coverage becomes insignificant when school-specific time trends are included.
The Impact of BIC on BMI and Obesity
Estimates of the impact of BIC on student BMI and obesity are shown in Table 3. In this 
table, the estimated coefficients and standard errors for the three BIC treatment categories 
are reported (less than 25 percent of classrooms, 25 percent or more of classrooms but not 
schoolwide, and full BIC). Each panel and column differs in the outcome measure, 
estimation sample (grades K through 5 or 6 through 8), and specification of the treatment 
(pre–post indicator for school s, or cumulative days of exposure for student i, measured in 
hundreds). Impact estimates for z-BMI are shown in panel A, while estimates for the 
24All appendices are available at the end of this article as it appears in JPAM online. Go to the publisher’s Web site and use the search 
engine to locate the article at http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com.
Corcoran et al.
Page 13
J Policy Anal Manage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 dichotomous obesity outcome are in panel B. Results in later subsections are organized in an 
analogous manner.
We find no compelling evidence that the offer of BIC increased BMI or the prevalence of 
obesity in NYC schools. Many of the point estimates in Table 3 are negative, which if taken 
at face value would indicate that students have lower BMI and lower rates of obesity when 
their school offers BIC than observationally similar students attending the same schools 
when not offering BIC. (One notable exception is the cumulative days estimate for K 
through five students in the weakest BIC category, which is positive and significant at the 
0.05 level.) All effect sizes are small and imprecise, however, and we cannot rule out very 
small positive effects on BMI. Focusing on the difference-in-difference results in the first 
two columns, the point estimates tend to be largest (in absolute value) for full BIC schools, 
as would be predicted if a treatment effect were present and were more likely in a school 
with greater BIC coverage. That said, we cannot reject the hypothesis that the coefficients 
are the same across the different treatment intensities.
As noted, we experimented with a number of alternative specifications for BIC treatment.25 
For example, we set the cumulative days of exposure to zero if the student was not currently 
in a BIC school; in most cases, these point estimates were smaller in absolute value than 
those in Table 3. Alternatively, we defined cumulative days of exposure as the number of 
treated days prior to measurement in year t only, with a separate dummy variable indicating 
BIC treatment in prior years. The point estimates were again closer to zero than in Table 3. 
Finally, we estimated separate models for each category of BIC coverage. None of the 
results were materially different from those in Table 3.
The Impact of BIC on Student Achievement
Table 4 reports our estimates of the impact of BIC on student achievement in ELA and 
mathematics. As in Table 3, each panel and column reports the estimated coefficients and 
standard errors for the three treatment categories, with comparable samples and treatment 
variable definitions. The main difference in Table 3 is that the estimation sample for the 
elementary school models consists of grades 4 and 5 only, since testing begins in third grade 
and lagged achievement is included as a covariate.
We find no evidence of an impact of BIC on achievement in either subject. Point estimates 
are again small in absolute value, imprecisely estimated, and vary in sign. The only 
statistically significant effect we observe is for middle school math, for schools with at least 
25 percent of classrooms covered (but not full BIC), a positive 0.007 SD per 100 days (P < 
0.05). However, a large sample and multiple models can be expected to produce some 
statistically significant results. As in Table 3, point estimates for the effect of BIC on 
achievement tend to be larger in schools with greater BIC coverage, although we cannot 
reject the hypothesis that the effects are the same across categories. On balance, we see no 
convincing evidence of an impact of BIC on academic performance. More importantly, all of 
the point estimates here are considerably smaller than those estimated in Imberman and 
25Results using these alternative specifications are available in the appendix. All appendices are available at the end of this article as it 
appears in JPAM online. Go to the publisher’s Web site and use the search engine to locate the article at http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com.
Corcoran et al.
Page 14
J Policy Anal Manage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Kugler (2014) and Dotter (2012). In the concluding section of the paper, we suggest several 
potential explanations for the divergent findings.
We experimented with the same alternative specifications of the BIC treatment variable for 
our achievement models as we did for BMI and obesity. In no case were the results 
materially different (see the Appendix).26 Additionally, because the estimation sample 
differs for the BMI/obesity and achievement outcomes, we estimated both sets of models 
with a fixed, identical sample of students with sufficient data to be included in all models.27 
Again, the results were qualitatively very similar.
The Impact of BIC on Attendance
Table 5 reports estimates of the impact of BIC on attendance rates, measured as the number 
of days present as a percent of days enrolled. As in earlier tables, each panel and column 
reports the estimated treatment effects and standard errors for the three treatment categories, 
with comparable estimation samples and treatment variable specifications. For attendance, 
the estimation sample for elementary school includes all grades K through 5 (not just those 
taking state tests). The middle school sample continues to include grades 6 through 8.
Across models and samples, the estimated effects of BIC on attendance are small and 
statistically insignificant. The point estimate is never larger than 0.005 (or half a percentage 
point). In elementary school, attendance rates are already high—about 92 percent in schools 
that ever adopted BIC—and in middle school about four points lower, on average (88 
percent). Assuming a 180-day school year, a 0.50 percentage point increase in attendance 
translates into 0.9 school days. Thus, the largest point estimate found here—if taken at face 
value—amounts to about one quarter to less than one full school day a year.
In complementary work (shown in the Appendix), we looked at the potential “socializing 
effects” of BIC by testing for effects on responses of middle school students to NYC’s 
School Environment Survey.28 This survey aims to capture student attitudes toward their 
school, classroom, and teachers, with items such as “I feel welcome in my school,” “Most of 
the adults I see at school every day know my name or who I am,” “I am safe in my classes,” 
and so on. We did not find any consistent effects of BIC on responses to any of these survey 
items.
Student-Level Event Study Models
As we did for school breakfast and lunch participation earlier, we estimated event study 
regression models for each of the student-level outcomes, school levels, and categories of 
BIC coverage. The results are shown in Figure 3. For clarity of presentation, this figure 
shows only the event study coefficients for the intermediate category of BIC program 
adoption (greater than 25 percent BIC but not full school). (Figures using the other 
26All appendices are available at the end of this article as it appears in JPAM online. Go to the publisher’s Web site and use the search 
engine to locate the article at http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com.
27For instance, students in grades K through 3 contribute to the BMI/obesity and attendance estimates in Tables 3 and 5, but not to the 
achievement estimates in Table 4, since they lack a current and lagged test score. Moreover, some students with test scores did not 
have Fitnessgram data and thus did not contribute to the BMI estimates.
28All appendices are available at the end of this article as it appears in JPAM online. Go to the publisher’s Web site and use the search 
engine to locate the article at http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com.
Corcoran et al.
Page 15
J Policy Anal Manage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 definitions of treatment are similar, and provided in the Appendix.29) Year zero is again the 
year prior to the student’s school adopting BIC.
As in Figure 2, we see no evidence of a differential trend in math and ELA achievement in 
BIC schools prior to program adoption. Differences from year zero are small in magnitude 
and statistically insignificant. The same holds for BMI, obesity, and attendance, especially in 
grades K through 5. In grades 6 through 8, there is somewhat of an upward trend in BMI and 
obesity prior to program adoption, which halts after BIC adoption, although differences from 
year zero are again statistically insignificant. Consistent with our main results in Tables 3 
through 5, we find no evidence that BIC significantly affected BMI, achievement, or 
attendance.
DISCUSSION
BIC has been widely adopted by school districts across the United States, with the goal of 
increasing SBP participation and ensuring no child starts the school day hungry. Advocates 
argue moving breakfast from the cafeteria to the classroom will provide myriad other 
benefits as well, including improved attendance, engagement, and academic performance. 
One recent study supports the latter claim, finding a substantial impact on math and reading 
performance (Imberman & Kugler, 2014). Whether these effects represent short-run boosts 
in test scores or sustained, long-run impacts on academics remains unclear.
At the same time, others have warned that BIC will have deleterious effects on students’ 
weight, increasing BMI, and obesity, as participants consume more daily calories or less 
nutritious food than they otherwise would. BIC expansion in NYC was temporarily 
suspended over this very claim. The evidence base on BIC’s impact on obesity, however, is 
thin. Our analysis using longitudinal Fitnessgram measures of student BMI indicates these 
fears are largely unwarranted. We find no evidence BIC increased BMI or the incidence of 
obesity among students attending schools in New York City offering the program. Nearly all 
of our point estimates suggest lower average body mass in schools when students are offered 
BIC, though these effects are small and statistically imprecise, and we cannot rule out very 
small positive effects. While these estimates are interpreted as “intent-to-treat”—and the 
treatment was weaker in BIC schools with lower coverage—they are close to zero even in 
cases where BIC was offered schoolwide.
While there is no evidence of an effect on BMI, our study finds large positive effects of BIC 
on SBP participation, an effect that did not come at the expense of lower lunch participation. 
We find no evidence of an impact on reading and math achievement in schools that adopted 
BIC, suggesting that class time devoted to BIC did not adversely affect achievement and is 
encouraging. But in no case do our estimates suggest the positive effects found in two of the 
three prior quasi-experimental studies (all of which were also intent-to-treat). They do, 
however, align with a recent re-analysis of experimental data showing BIC has small net 
effects on breakfast consumption and in turn no effect on achievement.
29All appendices are available at the end of this article as it appears in JPAM online. Go to the publisher’s Web site and use the search 
engine to locate the article at http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com.
Corcoran et al.
Page 16
J Policy Anal Manage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 There are a number of reasons why our achievement effects may depart from those in earlier 
quasi-experimental studies. First, the “first stage” impact of BIC on program participation 
may have been weaker in NYC than in other settings. Table 2 revealed a substantial increase 
in SBP take-up in BIC schools, but this increase was smaller than that observed in San 
Diego (Dotter, 2012). In that study, SBP participation in BIC schools exceeded 90 percent, 
well above what we observe in NYC.30 As expected, we did not observe as large an impact 
on schoolwide participation in NYC schools that adopted BIC in a smaller subset of 
classrooms, which may contribute to our overall null finding on achievement. However, we 
also found no effects in schools that offered BIC schoolwide, where the impact on 
participation was much larger. Understanding variability in the effects of BIC on take-up 
across contexts will be an important question for future research. Second, NYC was already 
offering free breakfast to students citywide prior to BIC (Leos-Urbel et al., 2013). Dotter 
(2012) found effects on achievement in San Diego schools, but only in those that did not 
already offer universal free breakfast. This is consistent with our findings, and may suggest 
few added benefits of BIC—at least for achievement—beyond those provided by free 
breakfast.
While our study improves on existing work in a number of ways, it has several limitations. 
First, a lack of data on classroom-level implementation of the program led us to adopt three 
relatively broad categories of BIC coverage representing the extent to which BIC is offered 
in a school. These categories are validated by an increasingly strong relationship with SBP 
participation postimplementation, but could be improved with classroom- or individual-
specific meals data. In ongoing work, we are using newly acquired POS data provided by the 
NYC Office of School Food to track individual daily student breakfast participation for a 
subset of schools. Second, the number of schools in NYC that reported schoolwide 
implementation of BIC was limited to 38. Others offered BIC to a majority of classrooms, 
however, and we observe large increases in SBP participation in these schools as well. We 
view the NYC case as relevant to other school districts where the extent of BIC 
implementation varies across schools. Finally, any potential effects estimated here must be 
viewed as the net effect of BIC’s direct and indirect impacts (Adolphus, Lawton, & Dye, 
2013; Hoyland, Dye, & Lawton 2009). While the net effect is arguably of greatest interest to 
policymakers, more research will be needed on the mechanisms by which BIC affects 
students.
Despite these limitations, our study is one of the first to examine the effects of offering BIC 
on BMI and obesity. It uses annual student-level data on obesity from New York City, the 
largest school district in the country, where nearly 300 schools adopted BIC by 2011/12 (and 
roughly 200 schools serving grades K through 8 were used in our models). These data 
include observations on students as many as four years post-BIC implementation, allowing 
us to potentially detect longer-run effects. BIC has received considerable scrutiny and media 
attention in NYC, and school districts nationwide have followed its roll-out closely. Our 
investigation of the impact of BIC yields evidence of significant increases in SBP 
30Imberman and Kugler (2014) do not estimate the impact of BIC on breakfast participation in their district but highlight a pilot study 
that documented 80 percent participation in BIC schools (vs. 41 percent in all other schools). Both rates are higher than those observed 
in NYC.
Corcoran et al.
Page 17
J Policy Anal Manage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 participation, with no effect on lunch participation, academic performance, attendance, or 
BMI. Thus, the modest positive impacts of BIC do not appear to come at the cost of 
worsening childhood obesity.
Acknowledgments
This project was supported by Award Number 1R01HD070739 from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute 
of Child Health & Human Development. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not 
necessarily represent the official views of the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health & Human 
Development or the National Institutes of Health. We would like to thank the New York City Department of 
Education, and especially the Office of School Food, for providing necessary data and support. Stephen O’Brien 
and Armando Taddei at the Office of School Food and Melissa Pflugh Prescott at NYU have been particularly 
valuable resources to this project. Siddhartha Aneja, Michele Leardo, and Elizabeth Debraggio provided 
outstanding research assistance.
APPENDIX
Figure A1. Percent of Classrooms Offering BIC
Notes: Includes regular public schools serving any of the elementary and middle grades that 
offered BIC to at least one classroom prior to June 30, 2012 (n = 288). In the few cases 
where BIC coverage changed over time, we classified schools according to their greatest 
extent of coverage.
Corcoran et al.
Page 18
J Policy Anal Manage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure A2. Effect of BIC by Year, Event Study Regressions (Comparable to Figure 3, but Using 
Full BIC Schools as Treatment)
Note: Baseline year zero is the year prior to BIC adoption.
Corcoran et al.
Page 19
J Policy Anal Manage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure A3. Daily Breakfast Participation before and after BIC Adoption Using Daily POS Data 
in Three Schools
Note: See panel B of Table A2 for characteristics of these three schools.
Corcoran et al.
Page 20
J Policy Anal Manage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Table A1
Impact of BIC adoption on meals program participation, 2001/12—Models using school 
specific linear time trends (compare to Table 2).
All schools
Elementary
Middle
Breakfast
 Post BIC adoption: school with <25% coverage
 0.027***
(0.006)
 0.026***
(0.007)
 0.034***
(0.013)
 Post BIC adoption: school with >25% coverage, not full
 0.156***
(0.019)
 0.168***
(0.022)
 0.152***
(0.043)
 Post BIC adoption: full school
 0.269***
(0.033)
 0.277***
(0.042)
 0.311***
(0.037)
Lunch
 Post BIC adoption: school with <25% coverage
−0.005
(0.007)
−0.002
(0.006)
−0.003
(0.018)
 Post BIC adoption: school with >25% coverage, not full
 0.002
(0.011)
 0.012
(0.010)
−0.038
(0.021)
 Post BIC adoption: full school
 0.005
(0.020)
−0.014
(0.023)
 0.041
(0.038)
N – breakfast (school × year)
  12,407
   7,833
   2,598
Mean breakfast participation pre-2008
 0.201
 0.236
 0.120
N – lunch (school × year)
  12,062
   7,518
   2,565
Mean lunch participation 2008
 0.732
 0.813
 0.629
Notes: See notes to Table 2 in the paper.
Table A2
Impact of BIC on daily breakfast participation using daily POS data from three schools.
School A
School B
School C
(A) Regression discontinuity models
BIC implementation
 0.36***
(0.02)
 0.53***
(0.02)
−0.01
(0.01)
Daily time trend
 0.00
(0.00)
 0.00
(0.00)
 0.00
(0.00)
Days post-BIC
−0.01***
(0.01)
 0.00**
(0.01)
 0.00**
0.00
Constant
 0.10***
(0.01)
 0.10***
(0.02)
 0.14***
(0.01)
N
19,147
10,619
23,575
(B) School characteristics
Percent white
  0.0
  3.0
51.0
Percent black
33.0
17.0
14.0
Percent Hispanic
62.0
78.0
26.0
Percent free or reduced price meals
86.0
84.0
35.0
Percent overweight
43.6
43.8
22.9
Percent obese
17.5
24.0
12.5
Enrollment
    472
    259
    610
UFM school
     Y
     N
     N
Corcoran et al.
Page 21
J Policy Anal Manage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 School A
School B
School C
Borough
  Bronx
  Bronx
Manhattan
Grade range
    5–8
   PK–4
     K–5
BIC implementation date
12/7/2010
2/9/2011
1/31/2011
BIC coverage
     Full
  >25%
   >25%
Notes: Panel (A) shows coefficient estimates from a regression discontinuity model focused on the 20 days before and after 
the BIC implementation date. The unit of observation is a student-day, and the outcome is a binary variable equal to 1 if the 
student took a breakfast, taken from point-of-sale transaction data. Each model controls for a daily time trend, day-of-the-
week fixed effects, and the number of days after BIC implementation. Standard errors are clustered at the student level. All 
three of the above schools adopted BIC in 2010/11.
Table A3
Impact of BIC on ELA and math achievement—models excluding lagged test score.
Grades 4–5
Pre-post
Grades 6–8
Pre-post
Grades 4–5
Cumulative days
Grades 6–8
Cumulative days
ELA
Math
ELA
Math
ELA
Math
ELA
Math
Post BIC 
adoption: school 
with <25% 
coverage
 0.0021
(0.0118)
 0.0062
(0.0147)
 0.0082
(0.0152)
 0.0168
(0.0191)
 0.0116**
(0.0045)
 0.0107
(0.0055)
 0.0106*
(0.0053)
 0.0170*
(0.0069)
Post BIC 
adoption: school 
with >25% 
coverage, not full
−0.0106
(0.0200)
−0.0277
(0.0224)
 0.0037
(0.0181)
 0.0067
(0.0270)
 0.0054
(0.0052)
 0.0040
(0.0066)
 0.0082
(0.0042)
 0.0161**
(0.0061)
Post BIC 
adoption: full 
school
−0.0126
(0.0351)
 0.0409
(0.0499)
−0.0190
(0.0283)
−0.0521
(0.0327)
 0.0081
(0.0131)
 0.0233
(0.0155)
−0.0017
(0.0060)
 0.0048
(0.0092)
Observations
783,933
798,018
1,182,336
1,204,078
783,933
798,018
1,182,336
1,204,078
Notes: Compare to Table 4 of the paper. Regression models exclude control for lagged test score.
Table A4a
Impact of BIC on BMI and obesity—cumulative days set to zero if student’s current school 
does not offer BIC (compare to Table 3).
Cumulative days
Grade K–5
Grade 6–8
Panel A: Impact on z-BMI
 Post BIC adoption: school with <25% coverage
 0.0125
(0.0064)
 0.0026
(0.0064)
 Post BIC adoption: school with >25% coverage, not full
 0.0012
(0.0086)
 0.0045
(0.0105)
 Post BIC adoption: full school
−0.0275
(0.0193)
 0.0095
(0.0098)
Panel B: Impact on obesity
 Post BIC adoption: school with <25% coverage
 0.0032
(0.0017)
 0.0018
(0.0023)
 Post BIC adoption: school with >25% coverage, not full
 0.0028
(0.0025)
 0.0002
(0.0039)
 Post BIC adoption: full school
−0.0035
(0.0065)
 0.0040
(0.0032)
Observations
2,131,479
980,088
Corcoran et al.
Page 22
J Policy Anal Manage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Notes: Sets cumulative days to zero if student is not currently offered BIC.
Table A4b
Impact of BIC on ELA and math achievement—cumulative days set to zero if student’s 
current school does not offer BIC (compare to Table 4).
Grades 4–5
Cumulative days
Grades 6–8
Cumulative days
ELA
Math
ELA
Math
Post BIC adoption: school with <25% coverage
 0.0023
(0.0035)
−0.0009
(0.0048)
 0.0024
(0.0041)
 0.0032
(0.0061)
Post BIC adoption: school with >25% coverage, not full
−0.0056
(0.0039)
−0.0051
(0.0051)
−0.0024
(0.0034)
 0.0121*
(0.0047)
Post BIC adoption: full school
−0.0069
(0.0091)
 0.0133
(0.0105)
−0.0031
(0.0055)
 0.0085
(0.0127)
Observations
717,486
744,934
1,097,593
1,126,258
Notes: Sets cumulative days to zero if student is not currently offered BIC.
Table A4c
Impact of BIC on attendance—cumulative days set to zero if student’s current school does 
not offer BIC (compare to Table 5).
Cumulative days
Grade K–5
Grade 6–8
Post BIC adoption: school with <25% coverage
 0.0008***
(0.0002)
0.0009
(0.0005)
Post BIC adoption: school with >25% coverage, not full
 0.0009*
(0.0004)
0.0019*
(0.0008)
Post BIC adoption: full school
 0.0008
(0.0005)
0.0008
(0.0013)
Observations
2,496,321
1,228,769
Notes: Sets cumulative days to zero if student is not currently offered BIC.
Table A5a
Impact of BIC on BMI and obesity—cumulative days this year only (compare to Table 3).
Days this year
Grade K–5
Grade 6–8
Panel A: Impact on z-BMI
 Post BIC adoption: school with <25% coverage
−0.0001
(0.0002)
0.0002
(0.0002)
 Previously in BIC (0, 1)
−0.0028
(0.0134)
0.0147
(0.0110)
 Post BIC adoption: school with >25% coverage, not full
0.0001
(0.0002)
0.0004
(0.0004)
 Previously in BIC (0, 1)
−0.0058
(0.0194)
0.0191
(0.0178)
 Post BIC adoption: full school
−0.0001
(0.0003)
−0.0005*
(0.0002)
 Previously in BIC (0, 1)
0.0208
(0.0308)
−0.0070
(0.0252)
Panel B: Impact on obesity
Corcoran et al.
Page 23
J Policy Anal Manage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Days this year
Grade K–5
Grade 6–8
 Post BIC adoption: school with <25% coverage
−0.0000
(0.0001)
0.0001
(0.0001)
 Previously in BIC (0, 1)
−0.0006
(0.0037)
0.0032
(0.0041)
 Post BIC adoption: school with >25% coverage, not full
0.0000
(0.0001)
0.0001
(0.0001)
 Previously in BIC (0, 1)
−0.0000
(0.0066)
0.0076
(0.0072)
 Post BIC adoption: full school
0.0000
(0.0001)
−0.0001
(0.0001)
 Previously in BIC (0, 1)
−0.0037
(0.0107)
−0.0023
(0.0110)
Observations
2,131,479
980,088
Notes: Days this year, with a dummy for student previously in BIC.
Table A5b
Impact of BIC on reading and math achievement—cumulative days this year only (compare 
to Table 4).
Grades 4–5
Days this year
Grades 6–8
Days this year
ELA
Math
ELA
Math
Post BIC adoption: school with <25% coverage
−0.0000
(0.0001)
−0.0001
(0.0001)
0.0001
(0.0001)
0.0001
(0.0001)
Previously in BIC (0, 1)
−0.0262*
(0.0127)
−0.0234
(0.0144)
−0.0023
(0.0072)
0.0045
(0.0101)
Post BIC adoption: school with >25% coverage, not full
−0.0001
(0.0001)
−0.0001
(0.0001)
−0.0001
(0.0001)
0.0000
(0.0001)
Previously in BIC (0, 1)
−0.0099
(0.0178)
−0.0156
(0.0185)
−0.0211*
(0.0093)
−0.0134
(0.0105)
Post BIC adoption: full school
−0.0002
(0.0002)
0.0003
(0.0003)
−0.0001
(0.0002)
−0.0001
(0.0002)
Previously in BIC (0, 1)
−0.0095
(0.0256)
0.0238
(0.0280)
−0.0199
(0.0165)
0.0485**
(0.0182)
Observations
717,486
744,752
1,097,593
1,125,898
Notes: Days this year, with a dummy for student previously in BIC.
Table A5c
Impact of BIC on attendance—cumulative days this year only (compare to Table 5).
Days this year
Grade K–5
Grade 6–8
Post BIC adoption: school with
<25% coverage
−0.0000
(0.0000)
0.0000
(0.0000)
Previously in BIC (0, 1)
−0.0039***
0.0005
Post BIC adoption: school with >25% coverage, not full
(0.0011)
0.0000
(0.0013)
0.0000
Previously in BIC (0, 1)
(0.0000)
(0.0000)
Corcoran et al.
Page 24
J Policy Anal Manage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Days this year
Grade K–5
Grade 6–8
Post BIC adoption: full school
−0.0083***
(0.0020)
−0.0045*
(0.0021)
Previously in BIC (0, 1)
0.0000
(0.0000)
0.0000
(0.0000)
Previously in BIC (0, 1)
−0.0179***
(0.0030)
−0.0076*
(0.0031)
Observations
2,496,321
1,228,769
Notes: Days this year, with a dummy for student previously in BIC.
Table A6a
Impact of BIC on BMI and obesity—cumulative days in 2010 only (compare to Table 3).
Days this year
Grade K–5
Grade 6–8
Panel A: Impact on z-BMI
 Post BIC adoption: school with <25% coverage
−0.0004
(0.0008)
0.0006
(0.0003)
 Post BIC adoption: school with >25% coverage, not full
0.0006
(0.0007)
0.0006
(0.0006)
 Post BIC adoption: full school
0.0019
(0.0017)
−0.0006
(0.0018)
Panel B: Impact on obesity
 Post BIC adoption: school with <25% coverage
−0.0001
(0.0002)
0.0001
(0.0002)
 Post BIC adoption: school with >25% coverage, not full
0.0001
(0.0002)
0.0001
(0.0002)
 Post BIC adoption: full school
0.0005
(0.0004)
−0.0002
(0.0006)
Observations
371,111
175,697
Notes: Uses cumulative days this year only, for the cross section of schools that began BIC in 2010.
Table A6b
Impact of BIC on reading and math achievement—cumulative days in 2010 only (compare 
to Table 4).
Grades 4–5
Days this year
Grades 6–8
Days this year
ELA
Math
ELA
Math
Post BIC adoption: school with <25% coverage
−0.0006***
 (0.0002)
−0.0012***
 (0.0003)
−0.0002
 (0.0005)
  0.0001
 (0.0003)
Post BIC adoption: school with >25% coverage, not full
−0.0002
 (0.0004)
−0.0004
 (0.0007)
−0.0005*
 (0.0002)
−0.0004
 (0.0004)
Post BIC adoption: full school
−0.0006*
 (0.0002)
  0.0010**
 (0.0004)
−0.0004
 (0.0003)
−0.0006
 (0.0004)
Observations
  119,025
  120,607
 179,503
 181,926
Notes: Uses cumulative days this year only, for the cross section of schools that began BIC in 2010.
Corcoran et al.
Page 25
J Policy Anal Manage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Table A6c
Impact of BIC on attendance—cumulative days in 2010 only (compare to Table 4).
Days this year
Grade K–5
Grade 6–8
Post BIC adoption: school with <25% coverage
−0.0001***
 (0.0000)
  0.0000
 (0.0000)
Post BIC adoption: school with >25% coverage, not full
  0.0000
 (0.0000)
−0.0001
 (0.0001)
Post BIC adoption: full school
  0.0001**
 (0.0000)
−0.0000
 (0.0001)
Observations
  397,693
  193,677
Notes: Uses cumulative days this year only, for the cross section of schools that began BIC in 2010.
Table A7a
Impact of BIC on BMI and obesity—cumulative days in 2010 only, models with school 
effects and 2007/10 data (compare to Table 3).
Days this year
Grade K–5
Grade 6–8
Panel A: Impact on z-BMI
Post BIC adoption: school with <25% coverage
−0.0004  
(0.0008)
0.0006
(0.0003)
 Post BIC adoption: school with >25% coverage, not full
0.0007
(0.0007)
0.0006
(0.0005)
 Post BIC adoption: full school
−0.0019  
(0.0017)
−0.0007  
(0.0018)
Panel B: Impact on obesity
 Post BIC adoption: school with <25% coverage
−0.0001  
(0.0002)
0.0002
(0.0002)
 Post BIC adoption: school with >25% coverage, not full
0.0001
(0.0002)
0.0001
(0.0002)
 Post BIC adoption: full school
0.0005
(0.0004)
−0.0002  
(0.0006)
Observations
1,304,810
590,004
Notes: Uses cumulative days this year only, when school began BIC in 2010; includes school fixed effects and 2007/10 
data.
Table A7b
Impact of BIC on reading and math achievement—cumulative days in 2010 only, models 
with school effects and 2007/10 data (compare to Table 4).
Grades 4–5
Days this year
Grades 6–8
Days this year
ELA
Math
ELA
Math
Post BIC adoption: school with <25% coverage
−0.0006***
(0.0002)
−0.0011***
(0.0003)
−0.0001
(0.0001)
0.0001
(0.0003)
Post BIC adoption: school with >25% coverage, not full
−0.0003
(0.0003)
−0.0005
(0.0006)
−0.0005**
(0.0001)
−0.0004
(0.0004)
Corcoran et al.
Page 26
J Policy Anal Manage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Grades 4–5
Days this year
Grades 6–8
Days this year
ELA
Math
ELA
Math
Post BIC adoption: full school
−0.0007**
(0.0003)
0.0009*
(0.0004)
−0.0004
(0.0003)
−0.0006
(0.0004)
Observations
  465,619
  488,589
 723,101
744,770
Notes: Uses cumulative days this year only, when school began BIC in 2010; includes school fixed effects and 2007/10 
data.
Table A7c
Impact of BIC on attendance—cumulative days in 2010 only, models with school effects and 
2007/10 data (compare to Table 5).
Days this year
Grade K–5
Grade 6–8
Post BIC adoption: school with <25% coverage
−0.0001***
(0.0000)
 0.0000
(0.0000)
Post BIC adoption: school with >25% coverage, not full
0.0000
(0.0000)
−0.0001
(0.0001)
Post BIC adoption: full school
 0.0001**
(0.0000)
−0.0000
(0.0001)
Observations
1,605,387
800,262
Notes: Uses cumulative days this year only, when school began BIC in 2010; includes school fixed effects and 2007/10 
data.
Table A8a
Impact of BIC on BMI and obesity—fixed sample of students across outcomes (compare to 
Table 3).
Pre-post
Cumulative days
Grade 4–5
Grade 6–8
Grade 4–5
Grade 6–8
Panel A: Impact on z-BMI
 Post BIC adoption: school with <25% coverage
−0.0154
(0.0121)
−0.0190
(0.0170)
 0.0027
(0.0046)
 0.0051
(0.0052)
 Post BIC adoption: school with >25% coverage, not full
−0.0019
(0.0216)
−0.0151
(0.0381)
−0.0006
(0.0098)
 0.0075
(0.0076)
 Post BIC adoption: full school
−0.0555
(0.0381)
−0.0292
(0.0166)
−0.0278
(0.0178)
−0.0006
(0.0091)
Panel B: Impact on obesity
 Post BIC adoption: school with <25% coverage
−0.0094*
(0.0038)
−0.0070
(0.0061)
−0.0012
(0.0018)
 0.0022
(0.0019)
 Post BIC adoption: school with >25% coverage, not full
−0.0001
(0.0082)
−0.0093
(0.0145)
 0.0010
(0.0032)
 0.0029
(0.0030)
 Post BIC adoption: full school
−0.0195
(0.0138)
−0.0045
(0.0052)
−0.0075
(0.0075)
−0.0001
(0.0034)
Observations
617,865
892,926
617,865
892,926
Notes: Compare to Table 3 of the paper.
Corcoran et al.
Page 27
J Policy Anal Manage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Table A8b
Impact of BIC on ELA and math achievement—fixed sample of students across outcomes 
(compare to Table 4).
Grades 4–5
Pre-post
Grades 6–8
Pre-post
Grades 4–5
Cumulative days
Grades 6–8
Cumulative days
ELA
Math
ELA
Math
ELA
Math
ELA
Math
Post BIC adoption: 
school with <25% 
coverage
−0.0012
(0.0098)
−0.0021
(0.0112)
 0.0091
(0.0102)
 0.0158
(0.0135)
−0.0014
(0.0035)
−0.0024
(0.0048)
−0.0008
(0.0033)
 0.0037
(0.0048)
Post BIC adoption: 
school with >25% 
coverage, not full
−0.0104
(0.0172)
−0.0019
(0.0220)
−0.0178*
(0.0087)
 0.0192
(0.0188)
−0.0061
(0.0041)
−0.0048
(0.0058)
−0.0047
(0.0028)
 0.0093*
(0.0039)
Post BIC adoption: full 
school
−0.0443
(0.0270)
 0.0343
(0.0370)
−0.0039
(0.0228)
−0.0106
(0.0305)
−0.0058
(0.0094)
 0.0146
(0.0100)
−0.0024
(0.0052)
 0.0130
(0.0076)
Observations
617,865
617,865
892,926
892,926
617,865
617,865
892,926
892,926
Notes: Compare to Table 4 of the paper.
Table A8c
Impact of BIC on attendance—fixed sample of students across outcomes (compare to Table 
5).
Pre-post
Cumulative days
Grade 4–5
Grade 6–8
Grade 4–5
Grade 6–8
Post BIC adoption: school with <25% coverage
−0.0001
(0.0005)
−0.0001
(0.0002)
 0.0000
(0.0002)
 0.0001
(0.0004)
Post BIC adoption: school with >25% coverage, not full
 0.0000
(0.0011)
 0.0003
(0.0003)
 0.0002
(0.0003)
 0.0009
(0.0005)
Post BIC adoption: full school
 0.0006
(0.0015)
−0.0000
(0.0006)
−0.0002
(0.0006)
−0.0003
(0.0009)
Observations
617,865
892,926
617,865
892,926
Notes: Compare to Table 5 of the paper.
Table A9
Impact of BIC on fitness measures (pushups and curl ups).
Grades 4–5
Pre-post
Grades 6–8
Pre-post
Grades 4–5
Days this year
Grades 6–8
Days this year
Pushups
Curlups
Pushups
Curlups
Pushups
Curlups
Pushups
Curlups
Post BIC adoption: 
school with <25% 
coverage
−0.118
(0.247)
−0.069
(0.777)
−0.240
(0.319)
 0.059
(1.160)
−0.025
(0.103)
 0.154
(0.349)
−0.074
(0.077)
−0.072
(0.261)
Post BIC adoption: 
school with >25% 
coverage, not full
−0.019
(0.479)
 0.647
(1.265)
 0.173
(0.573)
−0.190
(0.998)
−0.155
(0.135)
−0.131
(0.394)
−0.061
(0.083)
 0.106
(0.179)
Post BIC adoption: 
full school
−0.4182
(0.731)
 2.057
(2.736)
 0.868**
(0.322)
 1.388
(1.156)
 0.073
(0.261)
 1.197
(1.337)
−0.063
(0.106)
 0.122
(0.309)
Observations
688,420
688,128
946,749
946,853
688,420
688,128
946,749
946,853
Notes: Standard errors robust to clustering at the school level shown in parentheses (*** p < 0.005, ** p < 0.01, * p < 0.05). 
The mean number of pushups in the data is 9.6 for students in grades 5 and under, and 11.1 for students in grades 6 and 
over. The mean number of curlups is 20 for students in grades 5 and under, and 28 for students in grades 6 and over. Both 
distributions are positively skewed; the median pushups and curlups is smaller than the mean.
Corcoran et al.
Page 28
J Policy Anal Manage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Table A10
Impact of BIC on perceptions of school environment.
Question 2: I feel welcome in my school.
Question 3: Most of the adults I see at school every day know my name or who I am.
Question 6: My teachers encourage me to succeed.
Grade 6–8
Pre/post
Cum days
Panel A: Question 2
 Post BIC adoption: school with <25% coverage
 0.0099*
(0.0044)
 0.0030*
(0.0014)
 Post BIC adoption: school with >25% coverage, not full
 0.0053
(0.0069)
 0.0008
(0.0017)
 Post BIC adoption: full school
−0.0158
(0.0149)
−0.0069
(0.0054)
Panel B: Question 3
 Post BIC adoption: school with <25% coverage
 0.0168**
(0.0052)
 0.0036*
(0.0017)
 Post BIC adoption: school with >25% coverage, not full
 0.0026
(0.0082)
−0.0010
(0.0022)
 Post BIC adoption: full school
−0.0045
(0.0094)
−0.0024
(0.0023)
Panel C: Question 6
 Post BIC adoption: school with <25% coverage
 0.0084**
(0.0031)
 0.0025*
(0.0010)
 Post BIC adoption: school with >25% coverage, not full
 0.0039
(0.0043)
 0.0010
(0.0011)
 Post BIC adoption: full school
−0.0112
(0.0071)
−0.0035**
(0.0012)
Observations
1,015,889
1,015,889
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses, robust to clustering at the school level. All models include student covariates, grade, 
school, and year effects. Covariates include age, gender, race/ethnicity, low income status, LEP, immigrant, and special 
education status. Low income is measured by eligibility for free or reduced price meals or enrollment in a Universal Free 
Meal school. We exclude charter school students, students attending citywide special education schools (District 75) and 
students in schools where survey coverage is less than 50 percent.
References
Adolphus K, Lawton CL, Dye L. The effects of breakfast on behavior and academic performance in 
children and adolescents. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience. 2013; 7:1–28. [PubMed: 23355817] 
Anzman-Frasca S, Djang HC, Halmo MM, Dolan PR, Economos CD. Estimating impacts of a 
breakfast in the classroom program on school outcomes. Journal of the American Medical 
Association Pediatrics. 2015; 169:71–77. [PubMed: 25420110] 
Bartfeld J, Kim M. Participation in the school breakfast program: New evidence from the ECLS-K. 
Social Service Review. 2010; 84:541–562. [PubMed: 21488319] 
Basch CE. Breakfast and the achievement gap among urban minority youth. Journal of School Health. 
2011; 81:635–640. [PubMed: 21923876] 
Baxter SD, Hardin JW, Guinn CH, Royer JA, Mackelprang AJ, Devlin CM. Children’s body mass 
index, participation in school meals, and observed energy intake at school meals. International 
Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity. 2010; 7:1–8. [PubMed: 20145731] 
Bernstein, LS.; McLaughlin, JE.; Crepinsek, MK.; Daft, LM.; Murphy, JM. Evaluation of the School 
Breakfast Program pilot project: Final report. Alexandria, VA: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Corcoran et al.
Page 29
J Policy Anal Manage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Food and Nutrition Service, Office of Analysis, Nutrition, and Evaluation; 2004. Nutrition 
Assistance Program Report Series No CN-04-SBP
Bhattacharya J, Currie J, Haider SJ. Breakfast of champions? The School Breakfast Program and the 
nutrition of children and families. Journal of Human Resources. 2006; 41:445–466.
Briefel, R.; Murphy, JM.; Kung, S.; Devaney, B. Universal-free school breakfast program evaluation 
design project: Review of literature on breakfast and learning. Princeton, NJ: Mathematica Policy 
Research; 1999. 
Cole TJ, Faith MS, Pietrobelli A, Heo M. What is the best measure of adiposity change in growing 
children: BMI, BMI %, BMI z-score or BMI centile? European Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 2005; 
59:419–425. [PubMed: 15674315] 
Dahl, MW.; Scholz, JK. The National School Lunch Program and School Breakfast Program: Evidence 
on participation and noncompliance. University of Wisconsin; Madison, WI: 2011. Working 
paperRetrieved from http://www.econ.wisc.edu/~scholz/Research/Lunch.pdf
Dotter, D. Breakfast at the desk: The impact of universal breakfast programs on academic 
performance. Department of Economics, University of California; San Diego, CA: 2012. Working 
paperRetrieved June 1, 2013 from http://econweb.ucsd.edu/~ddotter/pdfs/
Dotter_JMP_Manuscript.pdf
Dunifon R, Kowaleski-Jones L. The influences of participation in the National School Lunch Program 
and food insecurity on child well-being. Social Service Review. 2003; 77:72–92.
Figlio DN, Winicki J. Food for thought: The effects of school accountability plans on school nutrition. 
Journal of Public Economics. 2005; 89:381–394.
Frisvold DE. Nutrition and cognitive achievement: An evaluation of the School Breakfast Program. 
Journal of Public Economics. 2015; 124:91–104. [PubMed: 25918449] 
Hinrichs P. The effects of the National School Lunch Program on education and health. Journal of 
Policy Analysis and Management. 2010; 29:479–505. [PubMed: 20722187] 
Hoyland A, Dye L, Lawton CL. A systematic review of the effect of breakfast on the cognitive 
performance of children and adolescents. Nutrition Research Reviews. 2009; 22:220–243. 
[PubMed: 19930787] 
Imberman SA, Kugler AD. The effect of providing breakfast in class on student performance. Journal 
of Policy Analysis and Management. 2014; 33:669–699.
Leos-Urbel J, Schwartz AE, Weinstein M, Corcoran SP. Not just for poor kids: The impact of universal 
free school breakfast on meal participation and student outcomes. Economics of Education 
Review. 2013; 36:88–107. [PubMed: 24465073] 
McEwan PJ. The impact of Chile’s school feeding program on education outcomes. Economics of 
Education Review. 2013; 32:122–139.
Millimet DL, Tchernis R, Husain M. School nutrition programs and the incidence of childhood 
obesity. Journal of Human Resources. 2010; 45:640–654.
Mooney SJ, Baecker A, Rundle AG. Comparison of anthropometric and body composition measures as 
predictors of components of the metabolic syndrome in a clinical setting. Obesity Research & 
Clinical Practice. 2013; 7:e55–e66. [PubMed: 24331682] 
Murphy, JM.; Drake, JE.; Weineke, KM. Academics & breakfast connection pilot: Final report on New 
York’s classroom breakfast project. Albany, NY: Hunger Solutions New York; 2005. Retrieved 
May 5, 2013, from http://hungersolutionsny.org/documents/FinalABCupdated.pdf
Plowman, SA. Muscular Strength, Endurance, and Flexibility Assessments. In: Plowman, SA.; 
Meredith, MD., editors. Fitnessgram/Activitygram Reference Guide. 4th. Dallas, TX: The Cooper 
Institute; 2013. p. 8-1-8-55.pp. Internet Resource
Pollitt E, Mathews R. Breakfast and cognition: An integrative summary. American Journal of Clinical 
Nutrition. 1998; 67:804S–813S. [PubMed: 9537633] 
Ponza, M. Universal-free school breakfast program evaluation design project: Final evaluation design. 
Princeton, NJ: Mathematica Policy Research; 1999. Retrieved May 5, 2013, from http://
www.fns.usda.gov/ora/menu/DemoProjects/sbppilot/SBPdesign.PDF
Poppendieck, J. Free for all: Fixing school food in America. Berkeley, CA: University of California 
Press; 2010. 
Corcoran et al.
Page 30
J Policy Anal Manage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Rampersaud GC, Pereira MA, Girard BL, Adams J, Metzl JD. Breakfast habits, nutritional status, body 
weight, and academic performance in children and adolescents. Journal of the American Dietetic 
Association. 2005; 105:743–760. [PubMed: 15883552] 
Rundle A, Richards C, Bader MDM, Schwartz-Soicher O, Lee KK, Quinn J, Lovasi GS. Individual- 
and school-level sociodemographic predictors of obesity among New York City public school 
children. American Journal of Epidemiology. 2012; 176:986–994. [PubMed: 23132672] 
Schanzenbach DW. Do school lunches contribute to childhood obesity? Journal of Human Resources. 
2009; 44:684–709.
Schanzenbach, DW.; Zaki, M. Expanding the school breakfast program: Impacts on children’s 
consumption, nutrition and health. National Bureau of Economic Research; 1050 Massachusetts 
Ave., Cambridge, MA 02138: 2014. Working paper no. 20308
Simeon DT, Grantham-McGregor S. Effects of missing breakfast on the cognitive functions of school 
children of differing nutritional status. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 1989; 49:646–653. 
[PubMed: 2929486] 
The Food Research and Action Center. School breakfast scorecard: School year 2010–2011. 
Washington, D.C.: 2012. Prepared by Jessie Hewins and Madeleine Levin
Vaisman N, Akivis A, Vakil E, Voet H. Effect of breakfast timing on the cognitive functions of 
elementary school students. Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine. 1996; 150:1089–1092. 
[PubMed: 8859144] 
Van Wye G, Seoh H, Adjoian T, Dowell D. Evaluation of the New York City breakfast in the classroom 
program. American Journal of Public Health. 2013; 103:e59–e64. [PubMed: 23947326] 
Wesnes KA, Pincock C, Richardson D, Helm G, Hails S. Breakfast reduces declines in attention and 
memory over the morning in schoolchildren. Appetite. 2003; 41:329–331. [PubMed: 14637332] 
Wyon DP, Abrahamsson L, Järtelius M, Fletcher RG. An experimental study of the effects of energy 
intake at breakfast on the test performance of 10-year-old children in school. International Journal 
of Food Sciences and Nutrition. 1997; 48:5–12. [PubMed: 9093544] 
Corcoran et al.
Page 31
J Policy Anal Manage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Cumulative BIC Adoptions by Month, New York City
Notes: Reflects all schools adopting BIC prior to June 30, 2012 that offered BIC to any of 
the grades K through 8. Only regular public schools are included; private, charter, 
alternative, and special education (District 75) schools are excluded, as are suspension or 
other special programs. As of April 2012, there were 163 schools offering BIC with <25 
percent coverage; 80 schools offering BIC with ≥25 percent coverage (but not full school); 
and 41 schools offering BIC schoolwide.
Corcoran et al.
Page 32
J Policy Anal Manage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Estimated Impact of BIC on Annual Breakfast and Lunch Participation Rates: 
Elementary and Middle Schools
Notes: Event study coefficients from school-level regressions. Meals program participation 
is measured as average daily meals served divided by ADA. All models include school and 
year effects. Covariates include total school enrollment, percent ELL, percent receiving 
special education services, percent of students by race/ethnicity, percent female, percent 
eligible for free meals, and percent eligible for reduced price meals. Separate indicator 
variables are included for three categories of BIC schools: (1) those that offered BIC to 
fewer than 25 percent of all classrooms; (2) those that offered BIC to 25 percent or more of 
Corcoran et al.
Page 33
J Policy Anal Manage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 classrooms, but did not offer it schoolwide; (3) those that reported offering BIC schoolwide. 
These category variables are interacted with indicators for years before and after BIC 
adoption. Only results for categories (2) and (3) are pictured. Dashed and dotted lines 
represent a robust 95 percent confidence interval.
Corcoran et al.
Page 34
J Policy Anal Manage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Estimated Impact of BIC by Year, Event Study Regressions
Notes: Baseline year zero is the year prior to BIC adoption. For clarity of presentation only 
results for the second category of BIC coverage are shown (>25 percent of classrooms, but 
not school wide). Dashed lines represent a robust confidence interval.
Corcoran et al.
Page 35
J Policy Anal Manage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Corcoran et al.
Page 36
Table 1
Mean school characteristics by BIC treatment status, baseline (2006/07).
Never BIC
Ever BIC
(<25%)
Ever BIC
(>25% but not full)
Ever BIC
(full school)
Breakfast participation rate
   24.5
   22.9
   23.5
   24.6
Lunch participation rate
   76.5
   77.6
   82.7
   82.4
BMI z-score
     0.008
   −0.006
     0.095
     0.160
Percent obese
   21.1
   20.5
   21.9
   26.2
Reading z-score (grades 3–8)
     0.016
   −0.036
   −0.247
   −0.276
Math z-score (grades 3–8)
     0.001
   −0.064
   −0.285
   −0.307
Attendance rate
   92.1
   91.8
   89.7
   91.2
Percent eligible for free lunch
   67.3
   68.9
   81.8
   80.6
Percent ELL
   11.7
   12.8
   11.9
   14.5
Percent special education
   13.9
   14.1
   14.6
   17.1
Percent Asian
   12.4
   11.6
     3.1
     4.8
Percent black
   33.5
   34.8
   43.4
   34.6
Percent Hispanic
   38.5
   38.5
   49.4
   55.9
Percent white
   14.7
   14.2
     3.2
     3.5
Percent male
   50.7
   51.4
   50.1
   50.0
Percent enrollment grades K–5
   60.1
   57.2
   59.5
   65.1
Percent in Brooklyn
   33.2
   32.1
   30.8
     7.9
Percent in Manhattan
   17.3
   17.0
   17.9
   42.1
Percent in Queens
   24.3
   23.0
     6.4
   10.5
Percent in Staten Island
     4.8
     7.3
     0.0
     0.0
Percent in Bronx
   20.3
   20.6
   44.9
   39.5
Percent UFM school
   45.1
   40.1
   45.5
   45.9
School starting time
8:20 a.m.
8:18 a.m.
8:22 a.m.
8:19 a.m.
Total enrollment
 657
 754
 695
 660
N (observed in 2007)
 807
 165
   78
   38
Notes: Only regular public schools serving any of the elementary and middle grades are included in the above. All means are for the 2006/07 
academic year, and thus are prior to any school’s adoption of BIC. “Never BIC” refers to schools that had not adopted BIC as of June 30, 2012. 
“Ever BIC” refers to any school that adopted BIC prior to June 30, 2012. Schools that ever adopted BIC are divided into three categories: (1) those 
that offered BIC to fewer than 25 percent of all classrooms; (2) those that offered BIC to 25 percent or more of classrooms, but did not offer it 
schoolwide; (3) those that reported offering BIC schoolwide. In the few cases where BIC coverage changed over time, we classified schools 
according to their greatest extent of coverage.
J Policy Anal Manage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 09.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Corcoran et al.
Page 37
Table 2
Impact of BIC adoption on meals program participation, 2001/02.
All schools
Elementary
Middle
Breakfast
 Post-BIC adoption: school with <25% coverage
 0.044***
(0.006)
 0.045***
(0.007)
 0.042***
(0.011)
 Post-BIC adoption: school with >25% coverage, not full
 0.195***
(0.018)
 0.197***
(0.021)
 0.226***
(0.040)
 Post-BIC adoption: full school
 0.302***
(0.032)
 0.333***
(0.043)
 0.336***
(0.032)
Lunch
 Post-BIC adoption: school with <25% coverage
 0.006
(0.007)
 0.009
(0.006)
−0.009
(0.017)
 Post-BIC adoption: School with >25% coverage, not full
−0.008
(0.008)
 0.011
(0.007)
−0.036*
(0.018)
 Post-BIC adoption: full school
−0.005
(0.018)
−0.001
(0.018)
0.045
(0.048)
N—breakfast (school × year)
 12,407
 7,833
 2,598
Mean breakfast participation pre-2008
 0.201
 0.236
 0.120
N—lunch (school × year)
 12,062
 7,518
 2,565
Mean lunch participation 2008
 0.732
 0.813
 0.629
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses, robust to clustering at the school level (***P < 0.001; **P < 0.01; *P < 0.05). Meals program participation is 
measured as the average daily breakfasts or lunches served divided by ADA. All models include school and year effects. Covariates include total 
school enrollment, percent Limited English proficient (LEP), percent receiving special education services, percent of students by race/ethnicity, 
percent female, percent eligible for free meals, and percent eligible for reduced price meals. Schools that ever adopted BIC are divided into three 
categories: (1) those that offered BIC to fewer than 25 percent of all classrooms; (2) those that offered BIC to 25 percent or more of classrooms, but 
did not offer it schoolwide; and (3) those that reported offering BIC schoolwide.
J Policy Anal Manage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 09.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Corcoran et al.
Page 38
Table 3
Impact of BIC on obesity and BMI.
Pre–post
Cumulative days
Grade K–5
Grade 6–8
Grade K–5
Grade 6–8
Panel A: impact on z-BMI
 Post-BIC adoption: school with < 25% coverage
−0.0008
 (0.0143)
−0.0263
 (0.0169)
0.0107*
 (0.0053)
0.0080
 (0.0045)
 Post-BIC adoption: school with >25% coverage, not full
−0.0045
 (0.0159)
−0.0171
 (0.0393)
−0.0017
 (0.0067)
0.0109
 (0.0082)
 Post-BIC adoption: full school
−0.0164
 (0.0304)
−0.0301
 (0.0187)
−0.0236
 (0.0175)
0.0040
(0.0087)
Panel B: impact on obesity
 Post-BIC adoption: school with < 25% coverage
−0.0013
 (0.0037)
−0.0085
 (0.0062)
 0.0029*
 (0.0014)
0.0029
 (0.0016)
 Post-BIC adoption: school with >25% coverage, not full
0.0011
 (0.0047)
−0.0100
 (0.0154)
0.0018
 (0.0020)
0.0035
 (0.0032)
 Post-BIC adoption: full school
−0.0023
 (0.0086)
−0.0053
 (0.0066)
−0.0032
 (0.0059)
0.0015
 (0.0033)
Count of program schools
 With <25% coverage
114
78
114
78
 With >25% coverage, not full
55
35
55
35
 Full school
32
15
32
15
Observations
2,131,469
980,088
2,131,469
980,088
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses, robust to clustering at the school level. Obese is defined as being above the 95th percentile nationally for 
one’s gender and age in months, based on the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) growth charts. All models include student 
covariates, grade, school, and year effects. Covariates include age, gender, race/ethnicity, low income status, LEP, immigrant, and special education 
status. Low income is measured by eligibility for free or reduced price meals or enrollment in a Universal Free Meal school. Age is measured in 
months at the time of the Fitnessgram. We exclude charter school students, students attending citywide special education schools (District 75), 
students in schools where Fitnessgram coverage is less than 50 percent, and students with biologically implausible BMIs.
J Policy Anal Manage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 09.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Corcoran et al.
Page 39
Table 4
Impact of BIC on ELA and math achievement.
Grades 4–5
Pre–post
Grades 6–8
Pre–post
Grades 4–5
Cumulative days
Grades
6–8Cumulative days
ELA
Math
ELA
Math
ELA
Math
ELA
Math
Post-BIC adoption: school with < 25% coverage
−0.004
  (0.009)
−0.004
  (0.011)
0.008
(0.010)
0.009
(0.013)
−0.002
  (0.003)
−0.003
  (0.004)
0.001
(0.003)
0.002
(0.005)
Post-BIC adoption: school with > 25% coverage, not full
−0.012
  (0.015)
−0.019
  (0.019)
−0.019
  (0.010)
0.010
(0.017)
−0.005
  (0.004)
−0.006
  (0.005)
−0.005
  (0.003)
 0.007*
(0.004)
Post-BIC adoption: full school
−0.043
  (0.026)
0.023
(0.037)
−0.016
  (0.019)
−0.005
  (0.034)
−0.008
  (0.009)
0.013
(0.010)
−0.006
  (0.004)
0.013
(0.009)
Count of program schools
 With <25% coverage
115
114
85
83
115
114
85
83
 With >25% coverage, not full
52
52
42
41
52
52
42
41
 Full school
28
28
16
15
28
28
16
15
Observations
717,486
744,934
1,097,593
1,126,258
717,486
744,934
1,097,593
1,126,258
Notes: Standard errors robust to clustering at the school level shown in parentheses (*P < 0.05). All models include student covariates, grade-by-year, and school effects. Covariates include lagged z-score, 
gender, race/ethnicity, low income status, LEP, immigrant, and special education status. Low income is measured by eligibility for free or reduced price meals or enrollment in a Universal Free Meal school. 
Excludes charter school students and students attending citywide special education schools (District 75).
J Policy Anal Manage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 09.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Corcoran et al.
Page 40
Table 5
Impact of BIC on attendance.
Pre–post
Cumulative days
Grade K–5
Grade 6–8
Grade K–5
Grade 6–8
Post-BIC adoption: school with < 25% coverage
<0.001
  (0.001)
0.001
(0.001)
<0.001
  (0.001)
  0.001
  (0.001)
Post-BIC adoption: school with > 25% coverage, not full
 0.001
 (0.001)
0.004
(0.002)
  0.001
  (0.001)
  0.001
  (0.001)
Post-BIC adoption: full school
0.001
(0.001)
0.005
(0.003)
<0.001
  (0.001)
<0.001
  (0.001)
Count of program schools
 With <25% coverage
120
86
120
86
 With >25% coverage, not full
55
42
55
42
 Full school
31
15
31
15
Observations
2,496,321
1,228,769
2,496,321
1,228,769
Notes: Standard errors robust to clustering at the school level shown in parentheses. All models include student covariates, grade, school, and year 
effects. Covariates include gender, race/ethnicity, low-income status, LEP, immigrant, and special education status. Low income is measured by 
eligibility for free or reduced-price meals or enrollment in a Universal Free Meal school. Excludes charter school students and students attending 
citywide special education schools (District 75).
J Policy Anal Manage. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 August 09.
