 Safety and Efficacy of Allogeneic Lung Spheroid Cells
in a Mismatched Rat Model of Pulmonary Fibrosis
JHON CORES
,a,e M. TAYLOR HENSLEY,e KATHRYN KINLAW,f S. MICHAELA RIKARD,a
PHUONG-UYEN DINH,e DIPTI PAUDEL,g JUNNAN TANG,e,k ADAM C. VANDERGRIFF,a,e TYLER A. ALLEN,e
YAZHOU LI,h JIANHUA LIU,i BO NIU,i YUEPENG CHI,j THOMAS CARANASOS,b LEONARD J. LOBO,c
KE CHENGa,d,e
Key Words. Fibrosis • Pulmonary • Syngeneic • Allogeneic • Stem cells
ABSTRACT
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis is a devastating interstitial lung disease characterized by the relent-
less deposition of extracellular matrix causing lung distortions and dysfunctions. The prognosis
after detection is merely 3–5 years and the only two Food and Drug Administration-approved
drugs treat the symptoms, not the disease, and have numerous side effects. Stem cell therapy is a
promising treatment strategy for pulmonary fibrosis. Current animal and clinical studies focus on
the use of adipose or bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells. We, instead, have established
adult lung spheroid cells (LSCs) as an intrinsic source of therapeutic lung stem cells. In the present
study, we compared the efficacy and safety of syngeneic and allogeneic LSCs in immuno-
competent rats with bleomycin-induced pulmonary inflammation in an effort to mitigate fibrosis
development. We found that infusion of allogeneic LSCs reduces the progression of inflammation
and fibrotic manifestation and preserves epithelial and endothelial health without eliciting signifi-
cant immune rejection. Our study sheds light on potential future developments of LSCs as an allo-
geneic cell therapy for humans with pulmonary fibrosis. STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
2017;9:1905–1916
SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT
We have demonstrated the safety and efficacy of allogeneic lung spheroid cell (LSC) treatment
in attenuating the progression and severity of pulmonary fibrosis, decreasing apoptosis, protect-
ing alveolar structures, and increasing angiogenesis in rats. The use of allogeneic stem cells can
potentially change the way we perform cell therapies by allowing for the growth of large quan-
tities of cells from numerous sources, including donated lungs not used for transplantations,
surgical discards, and lungs from recently deceased cadavers. Our study demonstrates the
potential of allogeneic LSCs as a viable future therapy option for patients suffering from idio-
pathic pulmonary fibrosis.
INTRODUCTION
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a chronic,
progressive, life-threatening disease, character-
ized by thickening, stiffening, and scarring of the
lung interstitium, resulting in poor oxygen acqui-
sition and exertional dyspnea. The prevalence of
IPF in the U.S. has been estimated to be
between 14 and 43 per 100,000 persons, and
its rate of incidence between 7 and 16 per
100,000 persons [1]. As recently as 2014, treat-
ment of IPF was limited to oxygen therapy, pul-
monary
rehabilitation,
and
eventual
lung
transplantation. As of October 2014, two Food
and Drug Administration approved pharmaceuti-
cals, Esbriet and Ofev, were added to the arse-
nal of tools available to combat the disease. The
drugs, however, are palliative not curative, and
come with a number of side effects, including
rashes, nausea, diarrhea, and lack of energy [2].
Stem cell therapy has emerged as a promising
alternative to pharmacological treatments for
various diseases [3–8]. Clinical and preclinical
research focuses on mesenchymal stem cells
(MSCs) derived from bone marrow or adipose tis-
sue. Our group, instead, has established adult
lung spheroid cells (LSCs) as an intrinsic source of
therapeutic lung stem cells. In a xenogeneic trans-
plantation model, we demonstrated the regenera-
tive potential of human LSCs in immunodeficient
mice with bleomycin-induced interstitial lung dis-
ease [9]. We have also demonstrated the superior
performance of LSCs over adipose-derived MSCs
in a syngeneic rat model that sought to slow the
aDepartment of Biomedical
Engineering, University of
North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC,
USA, North Carolina State
University, Raleigh, NC, USA;
bDivision of Cardiothoracic
Surgery and; cDivision of
Pulmonary Diseases and Critical
Care Medicine; dDivision of
Pharmacoengineering and
Molecular Pharmaceutics,
University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, NC, USA;
eDepartment of Molecular
Biomedical Sciences and
Comparative Medicine
Institute; fDepartment of
Biology; gDepartment of
Molecular and Structural
Biochemistry, North Carolina
State University, Raleigh, NC,
USA; hThe Third Hospital of
Hebei Medical University,
Shijiazhuang, Hebei, People’s
Republic of China; iChildren’s
Hospital of Hebei Province,
Shijiazhuang, Hebei, People’s
Republic of China; jHebei Chest
Hospital, Shijiazhuang, Hebei,
People’s Republic of China;
kFirst Affiliated Hospital of
Zhengzhou University, Henan,
People’s Republic of China
Correspondence: Ke Cheng,
Ph.D., 1060 William Moore Drive,
Raleigh, North Carolina 27607,
USA. Telephone: 919-513-6157;
Fax: 919-513-7301; e-mail: ke_
cheng@ncsu.edu or
ke_cheng@unc.edu or Leonard
Jason Lobo M.D., 8006 Burnett-
Womack Building Chapel Hill,
North Carolina 27514, USA.
Telephone: 919-966-2531; Fax:
984-974-6822; e-mail: jason_
lobo@med.unc.edu
Received August 10, 2016;
accepted for publication June 1,
2017; first published August 7,
2017.
http://dx.doi.org/
10.1002/sctm.16-0374
This is an open access article
under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCom-
mercial-NoDerivs License, which
permits use and distribution in
any medium, provided the origi-
nal work is properly cited, the use
is non-commercial and no modifi-
cations or adaptations are made.
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE 2017;6:1905–1916 www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2017 The Authors
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
TISSUE ENGINEERING AND REGENERATIVE MEDICINE
 rate of development and severity of lung fibrosis [9]. A major
drawback of autologous therapy is the need for patients to wait
for their cells to expand after an intrusive biopsy procedure. It is
not clear, however, whether allogeneic LSC therapy will trigger
immune rejection and, if so, whether side effects can be managed
with an acceptable benefit/risk ratio. To that end, we sought to
determine the safety and efficacy of allogeneic LSCs in attenuating
the progression of pulmonary fibrosis in a rat model. To create a
stringent model of allogeneic cell transplantation, we used rats
from highly-inbred, immunologically-divergent strains character-
ized by complete mismatch of major histocompatibility complex
(MHC) antigens. Male Wistar-Kyoto (WKY) rats (MHC haplotype,
RTI) were used as LSC donors while female WKY and Brown Nor-
way (BN) rats (MHC haplotype, RTII) were used as syngeneic and
allogeneic recipients, respectively.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
LSC Culture
Healthy rat lung tissues were excised from three 6-week-old syn-
geneic Wistar Kyoto rats. Approximately 5–10 mm samples of dis-
tal lung tissue were separated and washed with phosphate-
buffered saline (PBS) (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, http://
www.lifetechnologies.com) to remove excess blood. The tissue
samples where then cut into smaller 2 mm pieces, washed three
times with PBS, and enzymatically digested at 378C in 5 mg/ml
collagenase type IV solution (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, http://
www.sigmaaldrich.com). Collagenase digestion was inactivated
after 5 minutes using an equal volume of Iscove’s modified Dul-
becco’s medium (IMDM; Life Technologies) containing 20% fetal
bovine serum (FBS; Corning Life Sciences, Acton, MA, http://www.
corning.com/). Subsequently, the tissue samples were minced
into smaller tissue bits (0.5–1 mm) before being plated onto
150 mm fibronectin-coated petri dishes in 2 ml of 20% FBS IMDM
overnight to allow tissue-plate adhesion to take place. The next
day, 20 ml of media were added into the dish. The tissues were
kept in media for approximately 1 week (or until cells began to
outgrow from the tissue explants) during which media was
changed once every other day. At a confluence of approximately
70%–80%, outgrowth cells were harvested from the petri dishes
via 5–10 minutes of incubation with TryPLE Select (Life Technolo-
gies). The cells were passaged into ultra-low attachment flasks
(Corning Life Sciences) at a density of 100,000 cells per cm2 and
cultured with 10% FBS IMDM. Within 24–36 hours, spontaneous
spheroid formation was observed and allowed to mature for up to
a week. Lung spheroids were then collected and replated onto
fibronectin-coated flasks (Corning Life Sciences) to generate
adherent LSCs. These were cultured in 20% FBS IMDM containing
50 mg/ml gentamicin (Life Technologies), 2 mmol/l L-glutamine
(Life Technologies), and 0.1 mmol/L 2-mercaptoethanol (Life Tech-
nologies). The growth rate of the cells was assessed in terms of
cumulative doublings per time.
Flow Cytometry
Flow cytometry was used to determine the antigenic phenotypes
of LSCs. Rat LSCs were incubated with anti CD105, CD90, Surfac-
tant Protein C (SFTPC), and Club Cell Secretory Protein (CCSP) anti-
bodies, the four LSC markers established previously in human LSCs
[9]. Expression of MHC classes I and II was also studied. Cells were
subjected to membrane fixation and permeabilization (Cytofix/
Cytoperm; BD Biosciences, San Diego, CA, http://www.bdbioscien-
ces.com) prior to SFTPC and CCSP antibody incubation to account
for documented intracellular expression [10, 11]. All antibodies
were incubated with 5 3 105 LSCs for 60 minutes at 48C.The cross
expression of MHC class I and II was recorded using Alexa Fluor
488- and PE-conjugated antibodies with compensation. Nonla-
beled cells were used as negative controls and isotype-identical
antibodies served as nonspecific binding controls. All flow cytome-
try was performed on a CytoFlex Flow Cytometer (Beckman
Coulter, Brea, CA, https://www.beckmancoulter.com) and all data
were analyzed with FCS Express software (De Novo Software,
Glendale, CA, https://www.denovosoftware.com).
Immunocytochemistry on Lung Spheroids and LSCs
LSCs were plated onto fibronectin-coated 4-chamber Millicell cul-
ture slides (EMD Millipore, Billerica, Massachusetts, http://www.
emdmillipore.com). They were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde
(PFA) and blocked/permeabilized with Dako Protein Block Solution
(Dako, Carpinteria, CA, http://www.dako.com) containing 0.1%
saponin. Subsequently, the cells were treated with anti CD105,
CD90, SFTPC, CCSP, and Aquaporin 5 antibodies overnight at 48C
followed by incubation with secondary antibodies. Lung spheroids
were frozen in O.C.T. compound (Sakura Finetek, Tokyo, Japan,
http://www.sakura-finetek.com) and cryosectioned into 5 lm sec-
tions. Sections were then incubated with antibodies against
SFTPC, CCSP, CD105, CD90, Aquaporin 5, Keratin 5, CD31, and
CD45. Alexa Fluor 488 and Texas Red conjugated secondary anti-
bodies (Abcam, Cambridge, MA, http://www.abcam.com) were
used for detection. Images were taken with an epifluorescent
microscope (Olympus IX81; Olympus, Center Valley, PA, http://
www.olympusamerica.com).
In Vitro Endothelial Tube Formation Assay
Proangiogenic effects of rat LSCs were demonstrated through an
endothelial cell tube-formation assay. Human umbilical vein endo-
thelial cells (HUVECs, American Type Culture Collection, Manassas,
VA, http://www.atcc.org) were seeded onto growth factor-
reduced Matrigel in 96-well plates at a density of 10,000 cells per
well. The cells were cultured in 100 ml of either IMDM or LSC-
conditioned IMDM. Ten hours later, the wells were imaged with a
Nikon TE-200 white light microscope (Nikon, Tokyo, Japan, http://
www.nikon.com). HUVECS produced tubules that were measured
in length (mm) with NIH Image J software.
Animal Procedures
Six to eight-week-old female WKY or BN rats were randomized
into 4 treatment groups. (a) WKY Control (Bleo 1 saline): intratra-
cheal instillation of 1.5 U/kg body weight bleomycin (EMD Milli-
pore, Bilerica, MA, http://www.emdmillipore.com/) in 250 ml of
PBS, followed by tail vein injection of 300 ml PBS after 24 hours;
(b) BN Control (Bleo 1 saline): intratracheal instillation of 1.5 U/kg
body weight bleomycin in 250 ml of PBS, followed by tail vein
injection of 300 ml PBS after 24 hours; (c) WKY syngeneic therapy
(Bleo 1 synLSC): intratracheal instillation of 1.5 U/kg body weight
bleomycin in 250 ml of PBS, followed by tail vein injection of 5 3
106 WKY LSCs in 300 ll PBS after 24 hours. (d) BN allogeneic ther-
apy (Bleo 1 alloLSC): intratracheal instillation of 1.5 U/kg body
weight bleomycin in 250 ml of PBS, followed by tail vein injection
of 5 3 106 WKY LSCs in 300 ml PBS after 24 hours. All tracheal
instillations were done using a syringe and gavage needle. A
cohort of rats was injected with EGFP (Vector Biolabs, Malvern,
1906
Allogeneic Lung Spheroid Cell Treatment
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 PA, www.vectorbiolabs.com) transfected cells to enable histologi-
cal detection of transplanted cells. After 14 days, all rats were
euthanized, blood was drawn, and lungs were harvested for histo-
logical and PCR analysis. Rat lungs were frozen in Tissue-Tek O.C.T.
compound and cryosectioned (5 lm thickness).
Histology
Immunofluorescence (IF) was performed on 4% PFA-fixed lung
cryosections (5–10 lm). Samples were permeabilized and blocked
with Dako Protein Block Solution containing 0.1% saponin at room
temperature for one 1 hour and then incubated with primary anti-
bodies overnight at 48C. The samples were then incubated with
secondary antibodies for 1.5 hours at room temperature. 40,6-dia-
midino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) was applied for 10 minutes before
mounting. All wash steps were performed with nonsterile PBS.
The following antibodies were used for tissue IF: Aquaporin 5,
SFTPC, von Willebrand Factor (vWF), CD3, and CD8. Cryosections
were also stained with Hematoxylin and Eosin for Ashcroft scor-
ing, Masson’s trichrome for the detection of connective tissue,
and Picrosirius Red for the detection of collagen. Apoptotic cells
were detected with terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP
nick-end labeling (TUNEL) assay (Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim,
Germany, http://www.roche-applied-science.com).
Cytokine Array
To measure systemic inflammation and immune reaction, a rat
cytokine antibody array assay (Ray Biotech, Inc. Norcross, GA,
www.raybiotech.com) was performed for the detection of 19 rat
proteins in serum. Briefly, rat serum was obtained by centrifuga-
tion of WKY and BN rat whole blood at 2,000g for 10 minutes.The
serum of three rats from the syngeneic group and three rats from
the allogeneic group was diluted fivefold with blocking buffer. A
1 ml sample of each serum was incubated with the cytokine array
membranes overnight at 48C. A series of washes was followed by
incubation of biotinylated antibodies for 2 hours at room temper-
ature. The membranes were then treated with HRP-Streptavidin
overnight at 48C before being exposed to chemiluminescent
buffer. Chemiluminescence was detected with the Biorad Chemi-
Doc MP Imaging System (Bio-Rad, CA, USA, http://www.bio-rad.
com). Cytokine arrays were analyzed using Image Lab software.
The relative expressions of individual proteins were standardized
to the positive control signal.
Cell Retention Analysis by Quantitative PCR
Quantitative PCR was performed 24 hours after cell injection in
five animals from each cell-injected group to quantify cell reten-
tion/engraftment. We injected LSCs from male donor WKY rats
into WKY or BN female recipients to use the detection of the SRY
gene located on the Y chromosome as target. The whole lung was
harvested, weighed, and homogenized. Genomic DNA was iso-
lated from aliquots of the homogenate corresponding to 12.5 mg
of pulmonary tissue, using commercial kits (DNA Easy minikit, Qia-
gen, Germantown, MD, https://www.qiagen.com). The TaqMan
assay (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, http://www.appliedbio-
systems.com) was used to quantify the number of transplanted
cells with the rat SRY gene as template (forward primer: 50-GGA
GAG AGG CAC AAG TTG GC-30, reverse primer: 50-TCC CAG CTG
CTT GCT GAT C-30, TaqMan probe: 6FAM CAA CAG AAT CCC AGC
ATG CAG AAT TCA G TAMRA, Applied Biosystems). A standard
curve was generated with multiple dilutions of genomic DNA iso-
lated from male lungs to quantify the absolute gene copy
numbers. All samples were spiked with equal amounts of female
genomic DNA as control. The copy number of the SRY gene at
each point of the standard curve was calculated with the amount
of DNA in each sample and the mass of the rat genome per cell.
For each reaction, 50 ng of template DNA was used. Real time
PCR was performed with an Applied Biosystems 7900 HT Fast real-
time PCR System. All experiments were performed in triplicate.
Cell numbers per mg of lung tissue and percentages of retained
cells were calculated.
Statistics
All results are presented as means 6 SD unless otherwise speci-
fied. Comparisons between any two groups were performed using
2-tailed unpaired Student’s t tests with a 95% confidence interval.
One-way ANOVA analysis of variance was used to compare means
among more than two groups, followed by post hoc Bonferroni
correction. Statistical significance was achieved at p < .05.
Study Approval
All animal work was compliant with the Institutional Animal Care
and Use Committee at North Carolina State University.
RESULTS
Growth Potential and Antigenic Phenotypes of LSCs
A schematic of overall tissue-to-cell processing and rat injection
procedure are presented in Figure 1A. Lung tissue explants were
plated on fibronectin-coated petri dishes to allow cells to outgrow
(Fig. 1BI). The outgrowth cells were collected and plated into low
attachment flasks for the formation of lung spheroids (or LSs) (Fig.
1BII). The LSs were collected and replated onto fibronectin-coated
flasks to dissociate into LSCs (Fig. 1BIII), which are the final cell
therapy products. LSCs were able to undergo 4 to 6 doublings in 3
passages (Fig. 1C).
Immunocytochemistry was used to identify the cell pheno-
types in LSs. CD1051 and CD901 stromal cells formed an outer
shell around clustered SFTPC1 (alveolar type II epithelial cells)
and CCSP1 (club cells) lung progenitor cells (Fig. 1DI–1DIV).
Expression of epithelial markers (e.g., AQP51, KRT51) were evi-
dent throughout the spheres (Fig. 1DV, 1DVI). Endothelial
marker CD31 and hematopoietic marker CD45 were not
expressed (Fig. 1DVII, 1DVIII). As derivatives of lung spheroids,
LSCs expressed CD105, CD90, SFTPC, and CCSP (Fig. 1EI–1EIV).
In addition, stromal CD901 cells were costained with AQP51
and SFTPC1 cells to demonstrate the heterogeneous composi-
tion of the LSCs (Fig. 1EV, 1EVI). Flow cytometry analysis con-
firmed the expressions of those markers (Fig. 1F) and the
increased expression of progenitor markers CCSP and SFTPC in
LSCs compared to explant derived cells (EDCs; Supporting Infor-
mation Fig. 1) Double staining showed that rat LSCs express
MHCI, an intracellular histocompatibility marker found in all
nucleated cells, but very little extracellular MHCII, which is only
expressed in antigen presenting cells (Fig. 1G).
LSCs Promote Angiogenesis and Release Antifibrotic
Factors
Mounting lines of evidence suggest that the therapeutic effects of
stem cell treatments are owed in large part to paracrine mecha-
nisms rather than direct regeneration [12–16]. The promising
stem cell injections in rats in our lab prompted us to explore
Cores, Hensley, Kinlaw et al.
1907
www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 proteins released by LSCs. As part of a related study, mass spec-
troscopy was run on the LSC conditioned media, revealing a myr-
iad of pro-angiogenic and antifibrotic proteins (Supporting
Information Fig. 2), possible agents for therapy that will be further
evaluated in subsequent studies. Human umbilical vein endothe-
lial cells (HUVECs) were cultured in LSC-conditioned media (Fig.
Figure 1.
Generation of lung spheroids and LSCs. (A): A schematic showing the design of overall cell processing and animal injections. Lung
outgrowth cells are harvested from the distal region of excised lungs from WKY rats. The cells are allowed to self-aggregate in an ultra-low
attachment flask where they form spheroids before being plated back onto a fibronectin coated flask where they disassociate into the final
injectable product: rat LSCs. (B): Lung explant cells are shown migrating away from the bulk tissue (BI), agglomerating into spheroids (BII), and
being re-plated as LSCs (BIII). (C): A cumulative growth curve of population doubling over time showing the growth potential of rat LSCs. (D, E):
Representative fluorescent micrographs showing the expressions of various cellular markers in lung spheroids and LSCs. (F): Flow cytometry his-
togram and bar graph showing the relative expressions of CD90, CD105, SFTPC, and CCSP in rat LSCs. (G): Flow cytometry dot plot and bar graph
showing the relative expressions of MHCI and MHCII in rat LSCs. Abbreviations: BN, Brown Norway; CCSP, club cell secretory protein; DAPI, 40,6-
diamidino-2-phenylindole; LSCs, lung spheroid cells; MHC, major histocompatibility complex; SFTPC, surfactant protein C; WKY, Wistar-Kyoto.
1908
Allogeneic Lung Spheroid Cell Treatment
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 Figure 2.
Benefits of intravenous delivery of allogenic LSCs and in vitro LSC-conditioned media assay. (A): Illustrated summary of animal
study design and experimental groups. (B): Representative fluorescent imaging of excised lungs showing the effective delivery of LSCs
(red) via intravenous tail vein injection. (C): Bar graph showing the relative engraftment of rat LSCs in main organs post intravenous injec-
tion. (D): A schematic illustrating the culture of HUVECS in LSC-conditioned media. (E): Bar graph summarizing the effects of LSC condi-
tioned media on HUVEC tube length. (F): Representative white-light micrographs showing the HUVEC tube formations in plain IMDM and
rat LSC conditioned media. (G): Representative H&E stained micrographs of excised rat lungs 14 days after LSC or saline treatments. (H,
I): Bar graphs summarizing the Ashcroft (fibrotic thickening) scores after saline or LSC treatment. (J): Bar graph summarizing the relative
interstitial area from H&E histology for the saline and LSC treatments. (K): Bar graph summarizing the relative fibrotic area from Picrosir-
ius Red histology for the saline and LSC treatments. (L): Bar graph comparing the treatment efficacies from allogeneic and syngeneic
LSCs as normalized to the corresponding control groups. * indicates p < .05 when compared to the control group. Abbreviations: BN,
Brown Norway; HUVEC, human umbilical vein endothelial cells; IMDM, Iscove’s modified Dulbecco’s medium; LSCs, lung spheroid cells;
PBS, phosphate-buffered saline; WKY, Wistar-Kyoto.
Cores, Hensley, Kinlaw et al.
1909
www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 2D) to evaluate the in vitro effects of the pro-angiogenic factors.
The average tube lengths of HUVECs cultured in LSC conditioned
media were greater than those cultured in IMDM (375.76 9.9
mm vs. 268.4 6 7.2 mm; Fig. 2E, 2F). Taken together, the data sug-
gest that LSCs have the potential to reduce fibrosis through para-
crine mechanisms while promoting angiogenesis.
Intravenous Delivery of Allogeneic LSCs Attenuates
Fibrotic Progression
The animal study design is illustrated and summarized in Figure
2A. To create the pulmonary fibrosis model, bleomycin was given
to WKY (syngeneic group) or BN (allogeneic group) rats intratra-
cheally on Day 0. On Day 1, the rats were injected intravenously
(via the tail vein) with LSCs derived from WKY rats. Control ani-
mals received intravenous injection of saline. On Day 14, all ani-
mals were sacrificed for histology. Fluorescent imaging revealed
that intravenous injection successfully delivered LSCs (DiI-labeled)
into the lungs (Fig. 2B). Quantitative PCR was used to determine
the cell retention dynamics in the liver, spleen, lung, heart, and
kidneys. Roughly 44% of all cells injected remained in the lungs 24
hours post injection (Fig. 2C). Another 26% of cells were lost in
the liver and 9% in the spleen. H&E staining revealed severe
fibrotic thickening in the saline-injected group (Fig. 2G). Ashcroft
scoring (indicating the degree of fibrotic thickening) confirmed
that, compared to the saline control, both allogeneic (7.5 6 0.2
vs. 5.6 6 0.3) and syngeneic (6.1 6 0.3 vs. 5.16 0.2) LSCs reduced
fibrotic thickening (Fig. 2H, 2I). The H&E histology was quantified
for relative interstitial tissue area using Image J software (Fig. 2J).
A more advanced progression of fibrosis was seen in the controls
for both allogeneic (88.01% 6 10.18% vs 52.46% 6 3.806%) and
syngeneic (71.10% 6 4.814% vs 51.96% 6 4.919%) treatment. In
addition, picrosirius red histology was quantified for collagen dep-
osition. The relative fibrotic areas where counted (allogeneic
(21.20% 6 3.044% vs 7.695% 6 1.838%); syngeneic (17.47% 6
1.792% vs 11.08% 6 1.827%)) and follow a comparable pattern to
the interstitial area counts (Fig. 2K), reflecting a possible correla-
tion between the interstitial thickening and increased collagen
deposition. A head-to-head comparison between allogeneic and
syngeneic LSC treatment showed no significant difference in
fibrotic thickening when normalized to the corresponding PBS
control group (Fig. 2L). This data suggests that allogeneic LSCs are
equally effective as syngeneic LSCs in mitigating the onset of fibro-
sis in rats.
LSC Treatment Attenuates Connective Tissue and
Collagen Buildup in Post-Injury Lungs
The overall connective tissue deposition in the lungs treated with
LSCs is evidently less than that of the lungs injected with just PBS
as shown in the low power Masson’s trichrome staining in Figure
3A. The same result is demonstrated at higher magnifications,
with more emphasis on the blue-stained regions of connective tis-
sue (Fig. 3C). Similarly, the lungs injected with LSCs show less per-
vasive deposition of collagen (deep red/pink), as exemplified by
the Picrosirius Red staining in Figure 3B and three-dimensional
(3D) at low and high magnifications, respectively. Picrosirius stain-
ing was additionally quantified in Figure 2K to assess relative
fibrotic areas.
Allogeneic LSC Therapy Protects Endogenous
Pneumocytes in Post-Injury Lungs
The expression of aquaporin-5 membrane protein (labeling alveo-
lar Type I pneumocytes) was significantly higher in the allogeneic
LSC-treated groups (0.186 0.054 vs. 0.02 6 0.004 pixels/total pix-
els)
and
syngeneic
LSC-treated
groups
(0.55 6 0.032
vs.
0.15 6 0.030 pixels/total pixels) as compared to the correspond-
ing control groups (Fig. 4A–4C). Such protective effects were more
profound in regions around the engrafted LSC foci (red, Fig. 4A).
Similar protection was also seen for SFTPC1 alveolar Type II pneu-
mocytes. The allogeneic (7.1 6 0.60 vs. 3.84 6 0.45) and synge-
neic (14.02 6 1.63 vs. 8.27 6 0.65) LSC treatments resulted in
higher SFTPC counts compared to the saline control (Fig. 4E–4G).
When normalized to their saline controls, there was no significant
difference between allogeneic and syngeneic LSC treatments (Fig.
4D, 4H). This suggests allogeneic LSCs are equally effective as syn-
geneic LSCs in protecting pneumocytes after the bleomycin-
induced injury in rats.
Allogeneic LSC Therapy Inhibits Apoptosis and
Promotes Angiogenesis in Post-Injury Lungs
TUNEL assay analysis of excised rat lungs revealed that cell apo-
ptosis was significantly higher in the saline-treated control groups
(Fig. 5A). Compared to controls, TUNEL expression is significantly
lower with the allogeneic (9.96% 6 2.02% vs. 2.17% 6 0.42%) and
syngeneic (1.40% 6 0.18% vs. 0.83% 6 0.16%) LSC treatments
(Figs. 5C, 5D). Pulmonary vWF (Fig. 5B) expression (endothelial
marker) was much denser after allogeneic (0.032 6 0.007 vs.
0.062 6 0.011) and syngeneic (0.039 6 0.003 vs. 0.090 6 0.016)
LSC treatment (Fig. 5E, 5F).When normalized to the saline control,
there is no significant difference in TUNEL or vWF expression
between allogeneic and syngeneic LSC treatment (Fig. 5G, 5H),
suggesting allogeneic LSCs are equally effective as syngeneic LSCs
in inhibiting pulmonary apoptosis and promoting angiogenesis.
Allogeneic LSC Therapy Elicits No Significant Systemic or
Local Immune-Rejection
On Day 14, cytokine array analysis on 19 well-known inflamma-
tory, immune response, wound healing, and epithelium prolifera-
tion cytokines revealed there were no significant differences
between serum samples from allogeneic LSC- and syngeneic LSC-
treated animals (Fig. 6A, 6B), suggesting that no systemic rejection
had occurred. The numbers of CD3- and CD8-positive Tcells in the
lungs (Fig. 6C) were assessed to determine local immune rejec-
tion. The data showed no significant difference between the allo-
geneic LSC and syngeneic LSC groups for either CD3 (4.866 0.36
allo. vs. 5.20 6 0.42 syn., Fig. 6D) or CD8 (0.21 6 0.05 allo. vs.
0.27 6 0.05 syn., Fig. 6E) expression. These datasets suggest allo-
geneic LSC transplantation did not elicit systemic or local immune
rejection.
DISCUSSION
The transplantation of autologous stem cells in animal models has
been validated extensively in literature in a wide berth of patholo-
gies [3, 5, 17]. Consequently, the success rate of the autologous
paradigm, driven by its low propensity for graft-vs.-host disease,
has facilitated its transition into clinical treatments. However,
autologous cell therapy products are expensive and time consum-
ing to make. In addition, patient age and disease progression can
1910
Allogeneic Lung Spheroid Cell Treatment
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 Figure 3.
LSC treatment attenuates connective tissue and collagen buildup. (A): Low power micrographs showing connective tissue build-
up in Masson’s trichrome stained lung sections. (B): Low power micrographs showing collagen deposition in Picrosirius Red stained lung sec-
tions. (C, D): High power micrographs of lung sections stained with Masson’s Trichrome for connective tissue and Picrosirius Red for collagen,
respectively. Abbreviations: LSCs, lung spheroid cells; PBS, phosphate-buffered saline.
Cores, Hensley, Kinlaw et al.
1911
www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 result in variations in cell potency [18]. In this study, we demon-
strated the safety and efficacy of an intrinsic lung-derived cell
therapy product in a bleomycin-induced rat model of pulmonary
fibrosis. Allogeneic cell therapy for lung diseases has been pur-
sued in previous research endeavors and current phase I clinical
trials, but almost exclusively with MSCs [5, 19–21]. In contrast, the
use of intrinsic distal lung-derived cells represents a new approach
[20]. LSCs benefit from a self-agglomerating 3D sphere culture sys-
tem which has been shown to recapitulate the in vivo environ-
ment and enhance the innate stemness of cells [22]. The cultured
spheres have been shown to self-organize in niche-like layers that
bring out their stem cell qualities (Supporting Information Fig. 1)
through cell-cell interactions, which are built upon by the hetero-
geneity of the cell populations in the spheres [23]. The prominent
markers expressed in LSCs are CD105, CD90, SFTPC, and CCSP,
indicating a stromal-epithelial mixture in which progenitor type II
alveolar epithelial cells, together with club cells, can build on the
well-documented benefits of mesenchymal cells native to the
lung parenchyma [24]. Based on the expression of progenitor
markers as well as the general lack of MHCII expression, LSCs can
elicit abundant regenerative potential but overall immune quies-
cence [25, 26]. Once intravenously injected, most of the cells end
up in the lungs, as demonstrated by the quantitative PCR analysis
in Figure 2C. Previous researchers have documented the efficacy
Figure 4.
Allogeneic LSC treatment protects endogenous pneumocytes. (A): Representative micrographs showing Aquaporin 5-positive
pneumocytes (green) and LSC engraftment (red with white arrows). (B, C): Bar graphs showing the effects of allogeneic and syngeneic LSC
treatment on Aquaporin 5-positive pneumocytes compared with each control group. (E): Representative micrographs showing SFTPC positive
pneumocytes (green) and LSC engraftment (red with white arrows). (F, G): Bar graphs summarizing the count of SFTPC positive pneumocytes
(green) and LSC engraftment (red with white arrows). (D, H): Bar graph showing the control-normalized expression of Aquaporin-5 and SFTPC,
respectively, after rat allogeneic and syngeneic LSC treatment. * indicates p < .05 when compared with the control group. Abbreviations:
DAPI, 40,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole; LSCs, lung spheroid cells; PBS, phosphate-buffered saline; SFTPC, surfactant protein C.
1912
Allogeneic Lung Spheroid Cell Treatment
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 of the i.v. route for stem cell delivery to the lung as a result of the
pulmonary first-pass effect [27, 28]. In the future, to avoid the
introduction of undefined proteins into human patients and pre-
vent antibiotic resistant pathogens, it will be necessary to culture
the cells in low to no FBS media with little to no antibiotics. This is
especially true for the EDC and LSC stages, where 20% FBS is used.
A large body of pathological studies indicate that IPF is charac-
terized by continuous debilitation of the alveolar epithelium, which
is then accompanied by abnormal fibroblast activation and colla-
gen deposition [26, 29] In this study, the health of the alveolar epi-
thelium is evaluated, in part, by the quantification of endogenous
Type I and II epithelial cells, which can be traced by the Aquaporin
5 and SFTPC markers, respectively (Fig. 4A–4H). The higher den-
sities of Type I and II pneumocytes in the allogeneic and syngeneic
LSC-treated lungs reflect the benefits of LSC therapy over the
saline controls in protecting pneumocytes after the bleomycin-
induced lung injury. This result is supported by H&E staining show-
ing lower relative interstitial areas (Fig. 2J), more porosity (i.e.,
greater surface area for gas exchange,) and less fibrotic thickening
in the LSC-treated groups (Fig. 2G–2I). In addition, the lungs
treated with LSC’s show less connective tissue and collagen deposi-
tion (Fig. 4A–4D), as well as less relative fibrotic areas (Fig. 2K).
Figure 5.
Allogeneic LSC treatment inhibits apoptosis but promotes angiogenesis in bleomycin-induced fibrotic lungs. (A): Representative
fluorescent micrographs showing TUNEL-positive apoptotic cells (red). (B): Representative fluorescent micrographs showing vWF-positive
endothelial cells (green). (C, D): Bar graphs summarizing the TUNEL-positive cells for the saline control and LSC groups in both allogeneic and
syngeneic experiments. (E, F): Bar graphs summarizing the vWF expression for the saline control and LSC groups in both allogeneic and synge-
neic experiments. (G, H): Bar graph showing the control-normalized expression of TUNEL and vWF, respectively, after rat allogeneic and syn-
geneic LSC treatment. * indicates p < .05 when compared to the control group. Abbreviations: DAPI, 40,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole; LSCs,
lung spheroid cells; PBS, phosphate-buffered saline; vWF, von Willebrand Factor.
Cores, Hensley, Kinlaw et al.
1913
www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 It is not just the epithelium, however, that suffers in fibrotic
lungs [30]. In the bleomycin model, damage to the venous and
arterial endothelium manifests in the accumulation of interstitial
edema which eventually leads to capillary attenuation and cell
swelling, a common precursor to apoptosis [31–33]. If follows
then, that in searching for therapeutic options to combat the pro-
gression or achieve the reversal of pulmonary fibrosis, it is neces-
sary to reestablish the health of damaged endothelium [34–36].
One way of assessing endothelial health is to look for the forma-
tion of new blood vessels (angiogenesis) as part of the healing pro-
cess in damaged tissue post treatment [37]. The measurements of
pulmonary vessel densities with external diameters less than 100
mm demonstrate the therapeutic potential of allogeneic LSCs in
protecting original and/or generating new endothelium in fibrotic
lungs (Fig. 5B, 5E, 5F, 5H; Supporting Information Fig. 3). The
HUVEC tube formation assay (Fig. 2D–2F) performed using cell
media conditioned with rat LSCs further confirms the pro-
angiogenic nature of LSCs. Our previous studies suggest that
secreted factors from adult stem cells play an important role in
stem cell-mediated tissue repair [38, 39].
To rule out systemic immunogenicity from allogeneic LSC treat-
ment, we performed a cytokine array assay on blood serum samples
from syngeneic and allogeneic LSC-treated rats. The comparison
revealed no significant difference in the levels of immune response
Figure 6.
Systemic and local immunogenicity by allogeneic LSC treatment. (A, B): Quantitation and representative protein arrays showing
immune response and inflammatory cytokines in the sera of rats treated with allogeneic or syngeneic LSCs. (C): Representative fluorescent
micrographs showing CD3- and CD8-positive T cells in the lungs treated with allogeneic or syngeneic LSCs. (D, E): Bar graphs summarizing the
CD3 and CD8 expression (counts), respectively, in allogeneic and syngeneic treatment. Abbreviations: BN, Brown Norway; WKY, Wistar-Kyoto;
DAPI, 40,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole.
1914
Allogeneic Lung Spheroid Cell Treatment
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 (cinc2, cinc3, GM-CSF, IFN gamma, IL-4, IL-6, LIX, TNF-Alpha) and
inflammatory response cytokines (cinc2, cinc3, Fractalkine, IL-1 a, IL-
1 b, IL-4, IL-6, LIX, MCP1, MIP-3, TNF-Alpha) (Fig. 6A, 6B). Proteins
involved in wound healing (Factalkine, TIMP-1, and VEGF) and epi-
thelial cell proliferation (GM-CSF and IL-6) also showed similar
expression levels between allogeneic and syngeneic groups (Fig. 6A,
6B). To assess local immune response, we quantified CD3- and CD8-
positive Tcells in the lung and found there were no significant differ-
ences between allogeneic and syngeneic LSC treatment (Fig. 6C–6E).
The collective data on T lymphocyte expression in lung tissue and
the cytokine levels in serum samples confirm there is no significant
immunological/inflammatory response resulting from allogeneic LSC
treatment. It is possible that the histocompatibility characteristics of
the LSCs (discussed above) are playing a role in the apparent
immune quiescence. The lack of MHCII antigens inhibits T-Helper
Cell recognition of LSCs while the presence of MHCI antigen pro-
vides protection from natural killer Cell-mediated responses [40].
Moreover, the mesenchymal subpopulation in LSCs may be
immuno-evasive [41]. The lack of immune reactivity facilitates and
favors the translation of this allogeneic cell therapy in human
patients who would otherwise require immunosuppressant medica-
tion to accept the cells. This preclinical study in rats paves the way
for investigational new drug (IND)-enabled human studies using
autologous or allogeneic LSCs for the treatment of IPF. Future stud-
ies will focus on the elucidation of mechanisms underlying the ther-
apeutic benefits of allogeneic LSCs and should also explore the
application of LSCs for other lung diseases such as COPD and fibro-
cavernous pulmonary tuberculosis.
CONCLUSION
We have demonstrated the safety and efficacy of allogeneic LSC
treatment in attenuating the progression and severity of fibrosis,
decreasing apoptosis, protecting alveolar structures, and increas-
ing angiogenesis in a rat model of pulmonary fibrosis. The use of
allogeneic stem cell treatments has the potential to change the
way we perform cell therapies. It would allow for the growth of
large quantities of cells from a number of sources, including
donated lungs not used for transplantations, surgical discards, and
lungs from recently deceased cadavers [40]. These cells could be
expanded in a centralized, quality-controlled facility and stored for
future use, potentially making the therapeutic process much
faster and more cost-effective. Our results warrant further
research in large animal models of pulmonary fibrosis and as part
of IND-enabled human studies before transitioning into the clinical
arena.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This study was supported by the U.S. National Institute of
Health (HL123920, HL137093), a UNC General Assembly
Research Opportunities Initiative award, a NC State Chancellor’s
Innovation Fund, a NC State Comparative Medicine Institute
Seed Grant, and National Natural Science Foundation of China
81370216.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
J.C., P-U.D., M.T.H., K.K., M.R., D.P
., and K.C.: conception, design,
analysis, and interpretation of data; J.C., and K.C.: manuscript writ-
ing; K.C.: final approval of manuscript; J.C., M.T.H., K.K., M.R., J.T.,
P-U.D., A.V., T.A., Y.L., J.L., B.N., Y.C., T.C., L.J.L., D.P., and K.C.:
accountability for all aspects of the work.
DISCLOSURE OF POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors indicated no potential conflicts of interest.
REFERENCES
1
Raghu G, Weycker D, Edelsberg J et al.
Incidence and prevalence of idiopathic pulmo-
nary fibrosis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2006;
174:810–816.
2
Ratner M. Landmark approvals in idio-
pathic pulmonary fibrosis. Nat Biotechnol
2014;32:1069–1070.
3
Baker AH, Sica V, Work LM et al.
Brain
protection
using
autologous
bone
marrow cell, metalloproteinase inhibitors,
and metabolic treatment in cerebral ische-
mia. Proc Natl Acad of Sci USA 2007;104:
3597–3602.
4
Hong KU, Reynolds SD, Watkins S et al.
Basal cells are a multipotent progenitor capa-
ble of renewing the bronchial epithelium. Am
J Pathol 2004;164:577–588.
5
Lee JW, Fang X, Gupta N et al. Allogeneic
human mesenchymal stem cells for treatment
of E. coli endotoxin-induced acute lung injury
in the ex vivo perfused human lung. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2009;106:16357–16362.
6
Tremp M, Meyer zu Schwabedissen M,
Kappos EA et al. The Regeneration potential
after human and autologous stem cell trans-
plantation in a rat sciatic nerve injury model
can be monitored by MRI. Cell Transplant
2015;24:203–211.
7
Gorin NC. Autologous stem cell trans-
plantation in acute myelocytic leukemia. J Am
Soc Hematol 1998;76:655–663.
8
Tang YL, Zhao Q, Zhang YC et al. Autolo-
gous mesenchymal stem cell transplantation
induce VEGF and neovascularization in ische-
mic myocardium. Regul Pept 2004;117:3–10.
9
Henry E, Cores J, Hensley MT et al. Adult
lung spheroid cells contain progenitor cells
and mediate regeneration in rodents with
bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis. STEM
CELLS TRANSL MED 2015;4:1–10.
10
Thurm T, Kaltenborn E, Kern S et al.
SFTPC mutations cause SP-C degradation and
aggregate formation without increasing ER
stress. Eur J Clin Invest 2013;43:791–800.
11
Teisanu RM, Lagasse E, Whitesides JF
et al. Prospective isolation of bronchiolar stem
cells
based upon
immunophenotypic
and
autofluorescence characteristics. STEM
CELLS
2009;27:612–622.
12
Baraniak PR, McDevitt TC. Paracrine
actions in stem cells and tissue regeneration.
Regen Med 2010;5:121–143.
13
Gnecchi M, Zhang Z, Ni A et al. Para-
crine mechanisms in adult stem cell signal-
ing and therapy. Circ Res 2008;103:1204–
1219.
14
Linero I, Chaparro O. Paracrine effect of
mesenchymal stem cells derived from human
adipose tissue in bone regeneration. PLoS One
2014;9:1–12.
15
Yao LT, Zhao Q, Qin X et al. Paracrine
action enhances the effects of autologous mes-
enchymal stem cell transplantation on vascular
regeneration in rat model of myocardial infarc-
tion. Ann Thorac Surg 2005;80:229–237.
16
Zhou S. Paracrine effects of haemato-
poietic cells on human mesenchymal stem
cells. Sci Rep 2015;5:10573.
17
Akı S
¸Z, Sucak GT, €
Ozkurt ZN et al. Allo-
geneic stem cell transplantation for severe
aplastic anemia: Graft rejection remains a
problem. Transfus Apher Sci 2009;40:5–11.
18
Dimmeler S, Leri A. Aging and disease
as modifiers of efficacy of cell therapy. Circ
Res 2008;102:1319–1330.
19
Kavanagh H, Mahon BP. Allogeneic
mesenchymal stem cells prevent allergic air-
way inflammation by inducing murine regula-
tory T cells. Allergy 2011;66:523–531
20
Wang Z, Zhang X, Kang Y et al. Stem cell
therapy for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis:
How far are we from the bench to the bed-
side? J Biomed Sci Eng 2013;6:24–31.
21
Clinica Universidad de Navarra, Univer-
sidad de Navarra. Study of autologous mes-
enchymal
stem
cells
to
treat
idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis (CMM/FPI). In: Clinical-
Trials.gov. Bethesda, MD: National Library of
Cores, Hensley, Kinlaw et al.
1915
www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 Medicine (US). 2000. Available at: https://
clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT01919827
NLM
Identifier: NCT01919827. Accessed June 13,
2016.
22
Cesarz Z, Tamama K. Spheroid culture
of mesenchymal stem cells. Stem Cells Int
2016;2016.
23
Davis DR, Zhang Y, Smith RR et al. Vali-
dation of the cardiosphere method to culture
cardiac progenitor cells from myocardial tis-
sue. PLoS One 2009;4:e7195.
24
Toonkel RL, Hare JM, Matthay MA et al.
Mesenchymal stem cells and idiopathic pul-
monary fibrosis potential for clinical testing.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2013;188:133–140.
25
LeGuern C, Akiyama Y, Germana S et al.
Intracellular MHC class II controls regulatory
tolerance to allogeneic transplants. J Immunol
2010;184:2394–2400.
26
Bagnato G, Harari S. Cellular interac-
tions in the pathogenesis of interstitial lung
diseases. Eur Respir Rev 2015;24:102–114.
27
Harting MT, Jimenez F, Xue H et al.
Intravenous mesenchymal stem cell therapy
for traumatic brain injury. J Neurosurg 2009;
110:1189–1197.
28
Fischer UM, Harting MT, Jimenez F
et al. Pulmonary passage is a major obstacle
for intravenous stem cell delivery: The pulmo-
nary first-pass effect. Stem Cells Dev 2009;18:
683–692.
29
Adamson IY, Young L, Bowden DH. Rela-
tionship of alveolar epithelial injury and repair
to the induction of pulmonary fibrosis. Am J
Pathol 1988;130:377–383.
30
Fernando MJ, Safrin S, Weycker D et al.
The clinical course of patients with idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis. Ann Intern Med 2005;142:
963–967.
31
Adamson IY, Bowden DH. The pathoge-
nesis of bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis
in mice. Am J Pathol 1974;77:185–197.
32
Moeller A, Ask K, Warburton D et al.
The bleomycin animal model: a useful tool to
investigate treatment options for idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis? Int J Biochem Cell Biol
2008;40:362–382.
33
Chaudhary NI, Schnapp A, Park JE. Phar-
macologic differentiation of inflammation and
fibrosis in the rat bleomycin model. Am J
Respir Critical Care Med 2006;173:769–776.
34
Magro CM, Waldman WJ, Knight DA
et al. Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis related to
endothelial injury and antiendothelial cell
antibodies. Human Immunol 2006;67:284–
297.
35
Malli F, Koutsokera A, Paraskeva E et al.
Endothelial progenitor cells in the pathogenesis
of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: An evolving con-
cept. PLoS One 2013;8:1–8.
36
Adamson IYR, Bowden DH. Endothelial
injury and repair in radiation-induced pulmo-
nary fibrosis. Lung Inj Repair 1983;112:224–
230.
37
Gauldie J, Jordana M, Cox G. Cytokines
and pulmonary fibrosis. Thorax 1993;48:931–
935
38
Tang J, Shen, D, Caranasos TG et al.
Therapeutic microparticles functionalized with
biomimetic cardiac stem cell membranes and
secretome. Nat Commun 2017;8:13724.
39
Luo L, Tang J, Nishi K et al. Fabrication
of synthetic mesenchymal stem cells for the
treatment of acute myocardial infarction in
mice. Circ Res 2017;120:1768–1775
40
Malliaras K, Li TS, Luthringer D et al.
Safety and efficacy of allogeneic cell therapy
in
infarcted
rats
transplanted
with
mis-
matched cardiosphere-derived cells. Circula-
tion 2012;125:100–112.
41
Ankrum JA, Ong JF, Karp JM. Mesen-
chymal stem cells: immune evasive, not
immune privileged. Nat Biotechnol 2014;32:
252–260.
See www.StemCells.com for supporting information available online.
1916
Allogeneic Lung Spheroid Cell Treatment
O
c 2017 The Authors STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
