 Living with ‘melanoma’…for a day: a phenomenological analysis of
Living with ‘melanoma’…for a day: a phenomenological analysis of
medical students’ simulated experiences
medical students’ simulated experiences
Corr, M., Roulston, G., King, N., Dornan, T., Blease, C., & Gormley, G. J. (2017). Living with ‘melanoma’…for a
day: a phenomenological analysis of medical students’ simulated experiences. British Journal of Dermatology.
https://doi.org/10.1111/bjd.15402
Published in:
Published in:
British Journal of Dermatology
Document Version:
Document Version:
Peer reviewed version
Queen's University Belfast - Research Portal:
Queen's University Belfast - Research Portal:
Link to publication record in Queen's University Belfast Research Portal
Publisher rights
Publisher rights
© 2017 British Association of Dermatologists. This work is made available online in accordance with the publisher’s policies. Please refer to
any applicable terms of use of the publisher.
General rights
General rights
Copyright for the publications made accessible via the Queen's University Belfast Research Portal is retained by the author(s) and / or other
copyright owners and it is a condition of accessing these publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated
with these rights.
Take down policy
Take down policy
The Research Portal is Queen's institutional repository that provides access to Queen's research output. Every effort has been made to
ensure that content in the Research Portal does not infringe any person's rights, or applicable UK laws. If you discover content in the
Research Portal that you believe breaches copyright or violates any law, please contact openaccess@qub.ac.uk.
Download date:03. Jun. 2019
  
 
1 
 
TITLE
TITLE 
Living with ‘melanoma’…for a day: a phenomenological analysis of medical students’ simulated 
experiences 
 
RUNNING HEADER
RUNNING HEADER 
Simulating melanoma patients’ life experiences 
 
NAMES OF 
NAMES OF AUTHORS
AUTHORS 
M Corr1*, G Roulston2*, N King3, T Dornan2, C Blease4, GJ Gormley2 
1) Foundation Programme, Northern Ireland Deanery  
2) Centre for Medical Education, Queen’s University Belfast, Northern Ireland 
3) School of Human and Health Sciences, University of Huddersfield, England  
4) School of Philosophy, University College Dublin, Ireland and Program in Placebo Studies, Beth 
Israel Deaconess Medical Center/Harvard Medical School, Boston. 
* Joint first author 
 
CORRESPONDING AUTHOR
CORRESPONDING AUTHOR 
Dr Gerard J Gormley 
Department of General Practice (QUB) 
Dunluce Health Centre (4th Floor) 
1 Dunluce Avenue, Belfast BT9 7HR 
g.gormley@qub.ac.uk  
 
FUNDING SOURCE
FUNDING SOURCE 
Small research grant from the Irish Network of Medical Educators (INMED) 
 
CONFLICTS 
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
OF INTEREST 
The authors declare no conflict of interests 
 
 
  
 
2 
 
BULLET STATEMENTS
BULLET STATEMENTS 
What’s already known about this topic? 
Despite the rising incidence of melanoma, medical students have progressively fewer 
opportunities to encounter patients with this form of cancer. Beyond diagnosing and managing 
such patients, it is important to consider the impact that such a condition can have on their lives. 
Experiential learning opportunities can provide a powerful experience, but are limited when 
relating to cancer.   
 
What does this study add? 
Temporary melanoma transfer tattoos, in combination with a patient’s account of receiving their 
diagnosis, can afford medical students a modest but potentially important immersive 
introduction to some of the lived experiences of having melanoma.  
 
What are the clinical implications of this work? 
Such an inexpensive simulation modality shows promise in prompting medical students to reflect 
critically on how they could treat patients with melanoma more empathetically in the future. 
  
RESEARCH ETHICS
RESEARCH ETHICS 
This study received ethical approval by the Research Ethics Committee (School of Medical, 
Dentistry and Biomedical Sciences, QUB) (Ref 14/37v2). Written informed consent was obtained 
from all subjects in this study.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
3 
 
ABSTRACT
ABSTRACT 
Background
Background 
Despite the rising incidence of melanoma, medical students have progressively fewer 
opportunities to encounter patients with this important condition.  Curricula tend to attach the 
greatest value to intellectual forms of learning. Compared to intellectual learning, however, 
experiential learning affords students deep insights about a condition. Doctors who experience ill 
health are more empathic towards patients. However opportunities to learn about cancer 
experientially are limited. Temporary transfer tattoos can simulate the ill health associated with 
melanoma. We reasoned that, if doctors who have been sick are more empathic, temporarily 
‘having’ melanoma might have a similar effect. 
 
Objectives
Objectives 
Explore the impact of wearing a melanoma tattoo on medical students’ understanding of 
patienthood and attitudes towards patients with melanoma. 
 
Methods
Methods 
Ten fourth year medical students were recruited to a simulation. They wore a melanoma tattoo 
for 24 hours and listened to a patient’s account of receiving their diagnosis. Data were captured 
using audio-diaries and face-to-face interviews, transcribed, and analysed phenomenologically 
using the template analysis method. 
 
Results 
Results  
There were four themes: 1) Melanoma simulation: opening up new experiences;  
2) Drawing upon past experiences; 3) A transformative introduction to patienthood;  
4) Doctors in the making: seeing cancer patients in a new light. 
 
Conclusions
Conclusions 
By means of a novel simulation, medical students were introduced to lived experiences of having 
a melanoma. Such an inexpensive simulation can prompt students to reflect critically on the 
empathetic care of such patients in the future.   
 
 
 
 
  
 
4 
 
INTRODUCTION
INTRODUCTION 
The empathy challenge
The empathy challenge 
Compassion should be intrinsic to healthcare, but it is ever harder to promote this under the 
pressures of today’s clinical education and practice [1-4].  Formal curricula and training may lead 
to a further disconnect between biomedical knowledge and empathic care. A wealth of evidence 
suggests that medical students’ levels of empathy declines during medical school and residency 
[5-8], although this may not be true of all medical schools and students [9]. The apparent decline 
in empathic care has implications for (among other things) healthcare outcomes, patient 
satisfaction, and medico-legal risk [5-7]. Experiential learning is one forum, which may help to 
mitigate declines in empathy, by fostering deeper understanding of patient perspectives, and 
transforming how learners behave [10-12]. We already know, for example, that ill doctors’ 
experiences of patienthood can make them more empathic by reconciling their intellectual and 
emotional responses [13-16]. Medical education is therefore challenged to find ways to improve 
empathic care. 
 
Simulating ‘patienthood’
Simulating ‘patienthood’ 
Simulating illness gives healthy learners vicarious experiences of patienthood [17, 18]. Wearing 
body suits, for example, simulates physical debility [19]. Cancer generates enormous fear and 
concern [20] but is hard to simulate because its symptoms can be non-specific. Malignant 
melanoma is an exception. It can be a life-limiting if not diagnosed early [21-23]. Lectures and 
online learning materials teach facts about it, but students may never encounter melanoma during 
all-too-short clinical attachments [24-25]. Practical and ethical barriers prevent real patients with 
newly diagnosed melanoma participating in clinical teaching with large cohorts of medical 
students.  
 
Temporary transfer tattoos [26] can be applied to simulated patients to test students’ ability to 
recognise melanoma and empathically communicate the diagnosis [27]. The educational benefits 
of wearing tattoos have not, however, been explored. We reasoned that, if doctors who have been 
sick are more empathic, temporarily ‘having’ melanoma might have a similar effect [28].  
 
 
  
 
5 
 
OBJECTIVE
OBJECTIVE 
We set out to explore the impact of wearing a melanoma tattoo on medical students’ 
understanding of patienthood and attitudes towards patients with this form of cancer. 
 
METHODS
METHODS 
Ethical approval was given by the School of Medicine’s Research Ethic Committee, Queen’s 
University Belfast (QUB) (Ref 14/37v2). 
 
Conceptual orientation
Conceptual orientation 
Interpretive phenomenology is a well-established approach to the analysis of first-person 
experience, which can produce valid knowledge [29]. Through qualitative analysis of first-person 
accounts, phenomenology examines people’s reported experiences in order to understand a 
phenomenon as it exists in their consciousness. This provided an appropriate conceptual 
framework for examining and interpreting the richness of student experiences. More specifically, 
the validity of our interpretation rests on Merleau-Ponty’s theory of embodied experience [30]. 
This focuses not just on objective bodily (i.e. physiological) experiences, but also on perceptual, 
intentional and embodied dimensions of experiences, embedded in their sociocultural contexts. . 
 
Setting, Recruitment and Sampling
Setting, Recruitment and Sampling 
Students’ dermatology education is in the third year of QUB’s five-year medical undergraduate 
programme and consists of a mixture of online learning, lectures, and clinic attendance. As is 
typical of phenomenological research, our sample size was deliberately small (10 students) so that 
the depth of the analysis was not compromised by sheer volume of text [29].  
 
We emailed fourth-year medical students (n=83) who were taking part in a General Practice 
module (in academic year 2014-2015) inviting them to take part, and entered the demographic 
characteristics of willing participants into a sampling matrix (Table 1
Table 1). We purposefully recruited a 
sample that represented the age, gender, and maturity of the whole of the year group. Participants 
gave informed, written consent. We selected fourth year students to ensure that all had received 
dermatology teaching in the previous year.  
 
 
  
 
6 
 
Pseudonym
Pseudonym 
Age
Age 
(years) 
Sex 
Sex  
(M/F) 
Graduate Entry 
Graduate Entry 
Status (Y/N) 
George 
21 
M 
N 
Thomas 
23 
M 
N 
Amy 
21 
F 
N 
Sarah 
25 
F 
Y 
Jane 
22 
F 
N 
Victoria 
22 
F 
N 
Kevin 
24 
M 
Y 
Katy 
21 
F 
N 
Mark 
22 
M 
N 
Claire 
22 
F 
N 
Table 1. Participant demographic details and pseudonyms
Table 1. Participant demographic details and pseudonyms 
 
The immersive 
The immersive simulation
simulation 
A patient gave permission for an image of their newly diagnosed melanoma to be turned into a 
transfer tattoo (Fig
Fig 1-2) and audio-recorded an account about receiving the diagnosis.  
 
 
 
Figure 1
igure 1. Image of patient’s malignant melanoma made into a 
. Image of patient’s malignant melanoma made into a temporary transfer tattoo
temporary transfer tattoo 
  
 
7 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2
igure 2. Image of a melanoma transfer tattoo applied to a participant
. Image of a melanoma transfer tattoo applied to a participant’s arm.
s arm. 
 
During 30-minute briefings, one of us applied a tattoo to participants’ forearms (Figure 
Figure 2), played 
the recorded narrative, and instructed them to go about their normal lives for the next 24 hours.  
  
 
8 
 
 
*Figure 3
Figure 3. Illustration of a medical student wearing a melanoma tattoo 
. Illustration of a medical student wearing a melanoma tattoo - whilst listening to a patient’s narrative of their 
whilst listening to a patient’s narrative of their 
experience receiving a diagnosis of a melanoma 
experience receiving a diagnosis of a melanoma  
*(Patient
*(Patient’s name on display a
s name on display a Pseudonym)
Pseudonym) 
 
We asked them to reflect critically on the experience of receiving a diagnosis of malignant 
melanoma. After 24 hours they were asked to remove the temporary tattoo using soapy water.  
 
Data Capture
Data Capture 
Participants were asked to audio-record reflections on their experiences four times at regular 
intervals over the 24 hours they wore the tattoo, and then give one-to-one, exploratory, open-
ended audio-recorded interviews immediately afterwards. They were also asked to reflect back 
on their experience in an audio-recording 3 months later. Ten participants took part in the study 
generating 173 minutes of audio-diary and 193 minutes of interview data. Recordings were 
transcribed verbatim and participant’s assigned pseudonyms (see Table 1
see Table 1). Citations, below, give 
pseudonyms and are coded: Int
Int=Interview; AD
AD=audio-diary.  
 
  
 
9 
 
Analysis
Analysis 
Our approach was within the broad interpretive phenomenological tradition [31], using Template 
Analysis [32] as our analytical procedure. Template Analysis is a generic form of thematic analysis 
which may be used from a variety of methodological positions [33], including phenomenology [34-
36]. It involves the construction of an initial coding template, usually on the basis of a subset of 
the data; this is then applied to further data, modified as necessary, and reapplied until all data 
are coded to a final version of the template. In accordance with a phenomenological orientation, 
we ensured our analysis focused on immediate experience, rather than drawing on prior theory. 
Four of the researchers worked together to develop an initial template based on four transcripts.  
A colleague who was not part of the research team also contributed to this stage, providing an 
external critical perspective on the developing template. The template was then developed 
iteratively through application to further transcripts, with a mixture of face-to-face and remote 
input from different members of the team. This regular communication between researchers 
heightened their reflexivity and guarded against undue influence of any one person’s perspective. 
We sent the interpretation to participants and invited comments as a further validation step.  
 
RESULTS
RESULTS 
Analysis yielded four main themes: 1)
1) Melanoma simulation: opening up new experiences; 2) 
2) 
Drawing upon past experiences; 3)
3) A transformative introduction to patienthood;  
4)
4) Doctors in the making: seeing cancer patients in a new light.  
 
Melanoma simulation: 
Melanoma simulation: opening up new experiences
opening up new experiences 
Experience of the simulation technologies and techniques 
The simulation gave an immersive, distinctive and personal experience. This engaged participants, 
in their imaginations, in the experience of having a melanoma. 
 
“…I found myself worrying … about it, even though I know that it’s not actually real…. 
there is something about when you look at it, just because of the nature of it, it does 
stand out and at times it did feel real….” [Mark, AD]
[Mark, AD] 
 
Participants toggled between seeing the simulation as a novelty role-play, and having a sense of 
suspended disbelief. Unsurprisingly, the visual presence of the tattoo dominated their experience 
  
 
10 
 
and this impact lasted throughout the 24 hours. As the melanoma tattoo remained in situ for 24 
hours, there was a persistency to the visual stimulus and cues provided by the image. When the 
simulation role-play was not in the forefront of participants’ minds, catching sight of the 
melanoma tattoo provided a strong cue and drew their attention to the simulation.   
 
“If I hadn’t been able to see it I’d have forgotten about it. If it had been on the back of 
my…. I don’t think it would have played on my mind as much…... But definitely, 
obviously driving the car you could see it, doing the dishes you could see it” [Sarah, Int]
[Sarah, Int] 
 
The tattoo being a direct copy of a real patient’s melanoma was an important mediator of 
participants’ experiences, which was reinforced by the audio narrative 
 
“….the fact that it was …. a melanoma that someone actually had, I think had much 
more of an impact than if it had just sort of been graphically designed.”   
[Mark, Int]
[Mark, Int] 
 
In addition to the visual experience, the audio narrative provided by the actual patient provided 
an important dimension to the simulation. 
 
“The narrative made it very real, that it’s not just a sticker but there’s actually a person 
and it affected this person. I think hearing the narrative definitely helped as well.” 
[Sarah, Int]
[Sarah, Int] 
 
The tattoo stimulated participants physically as well as visually, triggering a deep, visceral 
experience. 
 
“… I just felt something weird to do with my left arm. It was very fleeting moments, … 
you could almost just feel… I don’t even know how to describe it but you were just aware 
of something physical, that even if your jumper was on it you just knew that if you pulled 
the jumper up that it would be there.”  [Mark, Int]
[Mark, Int] 
 
  
 
11 
 
‘A dirty mark’ 
The tattoo provoked a strong sense of being ‘marked’, which made participants’ self-conscious. 
They wanted to hide it from themselves and others. 
 
“People would have looked at it, 'what is that?' Is it dirty?' I think a lot of people would 
see it and (think) 'what is wrong with them?’ …. So … I wasn't showing it off freely.” 
[Claire, Int]
[Claire, Int] 
 
Reaction by others: extending the simulation experience  
The simulation extended participants’ learning beyond the classroom into their daily social 
interactions. Other individuals’ reactions, in those wider settings, was often emotive. 
 
“I was speaking with my housemate…….and I showed him the mole and he immediately 
said “that looks worrying, you should see your doctor”. You know he did seem genuinely 
worried, which is good to know that he actually, genuinely worried about me!” [Kevin, 
[Kevin, 
AD]
AD] 
 
Drawing upon past experiences
Drawing upon past experiences 
The simulation triggered participants to draw upon earlier life experiences unrelated to their 
status as trainee health professionals; either personal to themselves: 
 
“As I said it made me remember about a mole I had on my back that I had which I haven’t 
seen since I got it checked out two or three years ago….. So the fact that, if I imagined this 
to be a real melanoma, it would cause me to present a lot sooner.”   [Mark, AD]
[Mark, AD] 
 
Or to others they knew:  
 
“It brought back memories of cancer experiences in my family…my grandmother had 
cancer…and I would have taken her to the [Cancer] suite to get her chemotherapy… so 
we got to know everybody in the place, and I would have been talking to young guys, 
25, 35, who had skin cancer and were receiving chemotherapy. So it brought back all 
those memories” [Thomas, Int]
Thomas, Int] 
 
 
  
 
12 
 
As senior medical students, it was natural for participants to explore earlier educational 
experiences.  
 
“I suppose as medical students we’re aware of things like that, and maybe would be 
more sensitive and would do things like check our moles and maybe be more aware of 
that, whereas for the general public it’s not so much to their attention, and they maybe 
wouldn’t think about it.” [Amy, AD]
[Amy, AD] 
 
Participants also drew on humanistic aspects of patients they had encountered as well as clinical 
aspects of melanoma.  
 
“… I guess maybe over the last number of years we’ve become slightly numb to seeing 
certain things, in terms of we’ve seen lots of pictures in text books and things like that.”  
[Mark, Int]
[Mark, Int] 
 
 
A transformative introduction to patienthood 
A transformative introduction to patienthood  
‘Walking around in patients’ shoes’ 
Participants reflected on the emotions of a melanoma being diagnosed. They experienced aspects 
of fear and some anxiety.   
 
“I know that it’s a temporary tattoo, but I’m really conscious that it’s there on my arm. 
So I see why patients would worry, and….having to wait for a diagnosis could be 
horrible for them. But they just have to wait….and not really knowing what’s going on.” 
[Sarah, AD]
Sarah, AD] 
 
The disruption to patients’ lives came into perspective. Participants empathised with them and 
their families and friends. 
 
“I think it … just … kind of hit home again…..the worry involved … it’s not just that it 
affects you, it affects your family as well.” [George, Int]
[George, Int] 
 
 
  
 
13 
 
The emotional impact of exploring patients’ imagined lifeworlds (i.e. all of the immediate 
experiences, activities, and interactions that make up an individual’s life) was tempered by the 
relief that this was a temporary state. ‘Real’ melanoma patients cannot ‘wash their cancer away’.   
 
“I washed the melanoma tattoo off in the shower this morning and there was definitely 
a good sigh of relief ….I didn’t have to look at it anymore…. Real patients don’t get that 
option” [Mark, AD]
[Mark, AD] 
 
Participants felt vicariously guilty for bad habits that had caused their imagined melanoma.  
 
“I suppose you would automatically … start blaming yourself. Thinking why did I not 
notice this mole earlier? Is this because I spent too much time in the sun? You know 
sort of blaming yourself…. and thinking that you should have prevented this ... feeling 
angry at yourself, feeling guilty is only going to make the whole process even more 
traumatic and distressing.” [Amy, AD]
[Amy, AD] 
 
Participants also felt guilty about the impact on others close to them. Closely aligned to this 
awareness was a sense of loss.   
 
“… when you see families, see people dropping their kids off to schools and you’ll think 
to yourself, I’m not going to have that. I have a cancer, my whole world is falling to 
pieces, all my plans, all my ideas, all my hopes in this world is just going to stop for the 
meantime….I don’t think that would be a nice thing.” [Kevin, AD]
[Kevin, AD] 
 
These negative emotions made them appreciate aspects of their lives, particularly relationships. 
 
“….and you appreciate things a lot more, I think, and life is short as it is but when it’s 
as short as that you prioritise the important things. Your mobile phone isn’t the most 
important thing in life …, it’s your friends, it’s your family, it’s spending time with 
people...” [Thomas, Int]
[Thomas, Int] 
 
 
 
  
 
14 
 
Doctors in the making: 
Doctors in the making: seeing cancer patients in a new light
seeing cancer patients in a new light 
Being medical students was integral to participants’ experiences. They reflected critically on their 
professional development and the ways they hoped to interact with patients in the future.  
 
 
“So it’s definitely been a valuable experience and I will no doubt reflect on it and hope 
to implement on it in my own practice and just remember what it felt like to have 
something that, even though it wasn’t, even though I knew it was harmless, it still 
caused worry.” [Mark, AD]
[Mark, AD] 
 
 
 
Participants’ reflections on their experiences opened up their imaginative sensibility to the patient 
‘behind’ the melanoma and the social dimension of the diagnosis. They recognised that doctors 
need to be mindful of this.  
 
“As they always say, you're treating a patient, not the condition.  So that's what it sort 
of made me feel like. You don't think about the patient. Well, you should think about 
the patient even after they leave the room, what their life is. You don't think about their 
daily interactions or what people will say to them ... I think it does maybe make you 
think a bit differently.” [Katy, Int]
Katy, Int] 
 
Experiencing the simulation prompted participants to consider how they could best interact 
empathically with future patients.  
 
“Maybe just give them more time to express... You need to have someone to listen to 
you, more time to express how they feel about actually having a melanoma…. I feel like 
patients might keep things inside and not discuss it. So maybe give them the 
opportunity to talk about it.” [Katy, Int]
Katy, Int] 
 
Participants’ enhanced appreciation of patients as people persisted three months after the 
simulation. They continued to reflect on how best to empathise with patients.  
 
“So I began integrating this experience into some of the sessions that I have with the 
patients on the wards, asking them open questions and truly, truly wanting to know 
what they are doing with their experience, with that genuineness that I really…. want 
to know about their experience, and surprisingly they open up to me and I found that I 
got more than what I initially intended to learn from them.” [Jane, AD]
[Jane, AD] 
  
 
15 
 
 
DISCUSSION 
DISCUSSION  
This study shows how simulation can help medical students experience, and empathise with 
experiences of patients diagnosed with melanoma. It did not recreate the experience; however, it 
broadened and deepened their perspectives and understanding. Reflecting critically about what it 
would be like to have melanoma fostered patient-centred attitudes towards the experience of 
having this important form of cancer. 
 
Simulating a melanoma diagnosis: 
Simulating a melanoma diagnosis: Fake, ‘genuine fake’
Fake, ‘genuine fake’, or real? 
or real?  
Transfer tattoos, coupled with a patient’s account of having a melanoma, provided an immersive 
learning experience. It mattered not only that the melanoma tattoo was prominently located but 
also that the image used was of a real melanoma. The synergy between visual and audio 
dimensions of the simulation helped students make a deep connection with a patient with 
melanoma. Crucial to this experience was the persistency to the simulation throughout 24 hours. 
During this time, students merged their simulation experience into their daily routines. Simulation 
technology, especially the use of plastic manikins, can dehumanize learning experiences [37-39]. 
In this simulation, however, learners’ self-acting as a patient with a melanoma brought a very 
human, personal dimension. Reactions by others provided an important extra layer of realism.  
 
Opening a door to patienthood 
Opening a door to patienthood  
Participants toggled between being a doctor-in-training and a ‘melanoma’ patient. This elicited 
powerful emotions and experiences, especially among such young individuals.  They learned 
sociological and psychological perspectives on patienthood that went beyond the biomedical 
dimension of having a melanoma. Participants grounded these experiences by looked inwardly to 
themselves and what it might be like to have a melanoma diagnosis. They learned the meaning 
and emotional impact of illness on people’s lives, including how it constrains their actions.  
 
As with actual cancer patients, a sense of loss, guilt and stigma were prominent experiences [20, 
40]. In the safe space of a learning experience, students began to explore a less protected view of 
life and mortality. As with illness, this simulation appeared to disrupt (albeit in a careful and 
restricted way) the naïve belief that well-being is a given. Through this experience, a number of 
students reflected – if only briefly – on what they took for granted in their own lives – a realisation 
  
 
16 
 
often experienced by cancer patients [40, 41]. The stigma that can be associated with illness, 
particularly the visible disfigurement of a skin lesion, was also experienced. This was especially 
evident in, and in the anticipation of, social interactions. The visibility of the melanoma provided 
the opportunity for students to experience the obtrusiveness of the physical representation of a 
genuine malignant melanoma. Such an experience prompted students to reflect critically on their 
personal experience and the undesired attitude that others had, or might have, towards them as 
someone with a visible melanoma.  
  
Impact on attitudes as future doctors
Impact on attitudes as future doctors 
Medical education aims to instil in students both personal and professional self-awareness; where 
they are capable of reflectively evaluating themselves so that they pursue and self-direct their 
further development. Simulation has the potential to allow learners to explore the boundaries of 
their clinical competence in order that they might draw upon these experiences in the interest of 
their professional development. As such, simulation pedagogy can afford students an opportunity 
to ‘know thyself’ and critically reflect on this in their identity formation as future doctors. 
 
Through this simulation experience, students got to consider some of the ways that they, as future 
doctors, could demonstrate compassion to patients.  More often what resonated with students 
was that often ‘the small things’ really counted. What might appear as trivial may actually be of 
considerable importance to patients – for example, doctors spending more time with patients and 
exploring their feelings and worries.  
 
Strengths and limitations 
Strengths and limitations of study
of study 
This study had a number of strengths. Firstly, the number of patients being diagnosed and living 
with melanoma is steadily increasing and there is an imperative to advance pedagogical methods 
of how best we train healthcare professionals in caring for these patients [21]. Secondly, the 
simulation techniques used in this study are novel, reproducible and relatively inexpensive 
(material cost of c.£0.01 per tattoo) [26]. Lastly, we deployed a mixed approach to data capture in 
this study; either method could compensate for any deficiencies of the other method. 
 
However the strengths of the study have to be considered alongside its limitations. Given the 
theoretical orientation in this study, generalisability was never an objective. Moreover, this study 
  
 
17 
 
was exploratory in nature, illuminating the fine-grained nuances of medical students’ lived 
experience of simulating a melanoma diagnosis. Finally, whether the attitudinal changes generated 
by the simulation produce long-term changes, especially in clinical practice, remains to be seen, 
and was beyond the remit of this study. 
 
Implications for practice and future research
Implications for practice and future research 
This relatively inexpensive form of simulation is reproducible and readily complementary to 
traditional forms of dermatology teaching both for medical students and potentially other 
healthcare professionals such as GP trainees.  It would be of interest to consider patients’ 
experiences of medical students who have engaged in such a dermatology simulation-based 
learning activity.  
 
CONCLUSI
CONCLUSIONS 
ONS  
The findings of this study indicate that by means of a novel simulation-based learning activity, it is 
possible to afford medical students a modest but potentially important introduction to some of 
the lived experiences of a patient who has a melanoma. Beyond the biological account from 
traditional teaching, the experience provides insights to patients’ lifeworlds. Overall, this 
simulation modality could complement traditional dermatology teaching methods, providing a 
greater appreciation of the patient, and their lifeworlds, behind the melanoma skin lesion.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We are particularly grateful to the patient who kindly offered the image of his melanoma and an 
audio account of him receiving his diagnosis. The authors would like to thank Dr Finbar McGrady 
who provided dermatology advice with this project and Professor Karen Mann for constructive 
feedback on this research manuscript.  Finally we would like to thank the medical students who 
participated in this research. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
18 
 
REFERENCES
REFERENCES 
1. Francis R. (2013) Report of the Mid Staffordshire NHS Foundation Trust Public Inquiry. 
The Stationary Office, England. 
2. de Zuleeta P. Suffering, compassion and 'doing good medical ethics'. J Med Ethics 
2015;41:87-90 
3. Smajdor A, Stöckl A and Salter C. The limits of empathy: problems in medical education 
and practice. J Med Ethics 2011;37:380-383 
4. Blease C. In defence of utility: the medical humanities and medical education. Medical 
Humanities. 2016; 1;42(2):103-108 
5. Moore PJ, Adler NE, Robertson PA. Medical malpractice: the effect of doctor-patient 
relations on medical patient perceptions and malpractice intentions. Western Journal of 
Medicine. 2000;173(4):244 
6. Hojat M, Mangione S, Nasca TJ, Rattner S, Erdmann JB, Gonnella JS, Magee M. An 
empirical study of decline in empathy in medical school. Medical Education. 
2004;38(9):934-941 
7. Neumann M, Edelhäuser F, Tauschel D, Fischer MR, Wirtz M, Woopen C, Haramati A, 
Scheffer C. Empathy decline and its reasons: a systematic review of studies with medical 
students and residents. Acad Med. 2011;86(8):996-1009 
8. Hojat, M., Vergare, M.J., Maxwell, K., Brainard, G., Herrine, S.K., Isenberg, G.A., Veloski, J. 
and Gonnella, J.S. The devil is in the third year: a longitudinal study of erosion of empathy 
in medical school. Academic Medicine. 2009;84(9):1182-1191. 
9. Quince TA, Parker RA, Wood DF, Benson JA. Stability of empathy among undergraduate 
medical students: a longitudinal study at one UK medical school. BMC medical education. 
2011;11(1):1. 
10. Afghani B, Besimanto S, Amin A, Shapiro J. Medical students' perspectives on clinical 
empathy training. Educ Health 2011;24(1):544 
11. Cook DA, Hatala R, Brydges R, Zendejas B, Szostek JH, Wang AT, Erwin PJ, Hamstra SJ. 
Technology-enhanced simulation for health professions education: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis. JAMA 2011;306(9):978-988 
12. Issenberg SB, McGaghie WC, Petrusa ER, Lee Gordon D, Scalese RJ. Features and uses of 
high-fidelity medical simulations that lead to effective learning: a BEME systematic 
review. Medical Teacher 2005;27:10–28 
  
 
19 
 
13. Klitzman R. Improving Education on Doctor–Patient Relationships and Communication: 
Lessons from Doctors Who Become Patients. Academic Medicine 2006;81:447-453 
14. Heymann J. Equal Partners: A Physician’s Call for a New Spirit of Medicine. Boston: Little 
Brown, 1995. 
15. Mandell H, Spiro H, (eds). When Doctors Get Sick. New York: Plenum, 1987. 
16. Fromme EK, Hebert RS, Carrese JA. Self-doctoring: a qualitative study of physicians with 
cancer. J Fam Pract 2004;53:299–306 
17. Welborn TA, Duncan N. Diabetic staff simulation of insulin-dependent diabetic life. 
Diabetes Care 1980;3(6):679-681 
18. Dearing KS, Steadman S. Challenging stereotyping and bias: a voice simulation study. J 
Nurs Educ 2008;47(2):59-65. 
19. Eymard AS, Crawford BD, Keller TM. “Take a Walk in My Shoes:” Nursing students take a 
walk in older adults’ shoes to increase knowledge and empathy. Geriatr Nurs. 
2010;31(2):137–141 
20. Simard S, Thewes B, Humphris G, Dixon M, Hayden C, Mireskandari S, Ozakinci G. Fear of 
cancer recurrence in adult cancer survivors: a systematic review of quantitative studies J 
Cancer Surviv 2013;7:300–322 
21. Cancer Research UK. Skin cancer incidence statistics. London: Cancer Research UK. 
Available online from: http://www.cancerresearchuk.org/cancer-
info/cancerstats/types/skin/incidence/ Last accessed October 2016 
22. de Vries E, Coebergh JW. Cutaneous malignant melanoma in Europe. Eur J Cancer 
2004;40(16):2355–2366 
23. Dennis LK. Analysis of the melanoma epidemic, both apparent and real: data from the 
1973 through 1994 surveillance, epidemiology, and end results program registry. Arch 
Dermatol 1999;135(3):275–280 
24. Chiang YZ, Tan KT, Chiang YN, Burge SM, Griffiths CE, Verbov JL. Evaluation of educational 
methods in dermatology and confidence levels: a national survey of UK medical students. 
Int J Dermatol 2011;50:198–202 
25. Burge S. Teaching dermatology to medical students: a survey of current practice in the 
UK. Br J Dermatol 2002;146:295–303 
26. Gormley GJ, Menary A, Layard B, Hart N, McCourt C. Temorary Tattoos: a novel OSCE 
assessment tool. The Clinical Teacher 2013;10(4):251-257 
  
 
20 
 
27. Langley RGB, Tyler SA, Ornstein AE, Sutherland AE, Mosher LM. Temporary tattoos to 
simulate skin disease: report and validation of a novel teaching tool. Acad Med 
2009;84:950–953 
28. Klitzman R. When doctors become patients. Oxford University Press; 2007 
29. Lopez KA, Willis, DG. Descriptive Versus Interpretive Phenomenology: Their Contributions 
to Nursing Knowledge. Qualitative Health Research 2004;14(5):726-735 
30. Merleau-Ponty, M. Phenomenology of Perception. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 
1962. 
31. Langdridge, D. (2004) Phenomenological Psychology: Theory, Research and Method. 
Harlow: Pearson Education. 
32. King, N. Doing template analysis. In G.Symon and C.Cassell (eds) Qualitative 
Organizational Research: Core Methods and Current Challenges. London: Sage, 2012. 
33. Brooks, J., McCluskey, S., Turley, E. and King, N. (2015) The utility of template analysis in 
qualitative psychology research, Qualitative Research in Psychology, 12 (2), pp.202-222. 
34. Hardy B, King N, Rodriguez A. The experiences of patients and carers in the daily 
management of care at the end of life. International Journal of Palliative Nursing 
2014;20(12):591-598. 
35. King, N, Carroll, C, Newton, P & Dornan, T (2002) ‘You can’t cure it so you have to endure 
it’: The experience of adaptation to diabetic renal disease. Qualitative Health Research. 
12 (3), 329-346. 
36. Turley, E. (2016) ‘Like nothing I’ve ever experienced before’: understanding consensual 
BDSM as embodied experience. Psychology and Sexuality, 7 (2), 149-162. 
37. Issenberg SB, McGaghie WC, Hart IR, Mayer JW, Felner JM, Petrusa ER, Waugh RA, Brown 
DD, Safford RR, Gessner IH, Gordon DL, Ewy GA. Simulation Technology for Health Care 
Professional Skills Training and Assessment. JAMA. 1999;282(9):861-866 
38. Milton CL. Ethical Issues Surrounding Interprofessional Collaboration. Nursing Science 
Quarterly 2013;26(4)316–318  
39. Walsh M. Narrative pedagogy and simulation: Future directions for nursing education. 
Nurse Education in Practice 2011;11(3):216-219 
40. Carel HH. Illness, phenomenology, and philosophical method. Theoretical medicine and 
bioethics. 2013;34(4):345-357 
41. Carel HH. Illness: The cry of the flesh. Stocksfield, UK: Acumen, 2008.  
  
 
21 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
