 Enabling Technologies for Cell-Based Clinical Translation
V-Maf Musculoaponeurotic Fibrosarcoma Oncogene
Homolog A Synthetic Modified mRNA Drives
Reprogramming of Human Pancreatic Duct-Derived
Cells Into Insulin-Secreting Cells
ELISA CORRITORE,a YONG-SYU LEE,a VALENTINA PASQUALE,b DANIELA LIBERATI,b MEI-JU HSU,a
CATHERINE ANNE LOMBARD,a PATRICK VAN DER SMISSEN,c AMEDEO VETERE,d SUSAN BONNER-WEIR,e
LORENZO PIEMONTI,b ETIENNE SOKAL,a PHILIPPE A. LYSYa,f
Key Words. Diabetes x Insulin-producing cells x SCID-beige mice x Synthetic modified mRNA x
V-Maf musculoaponeurotic fibrosarcoma oncogene homolog A (MAFA)
ABSTRACT
b-Cell replacement therapy represents the most promising approach to restore b-cell mass and
glucose homeostasis in patients with type 1 diabetes. Safety and ethical issues associated with plu-
ripotent stem cells stimulated the search for adult progenitor cells with endocrine differentiation
capacities. We have already described a model for expansion and differentiation of human pancre-
atic duct-derived cells (HDDCs) into insulin-producing cells. Here we show an innovative and robust
in vitro system for large-scale production of b-like cells from HDDCs using a nonintegrative RNA-
based reprogramming technique. Synthetic modified RNAs for pancreatic transcription factors
(pancreatic duodenal homeobox 1, neurogenin3, and V-Maf musculoaponeurotic fibrosarcoma on-
cogene homolog A [MAFA]) were manufactured and daily transfected in HDDCs without strongly
affecting immune response and cell viability. MAFA overexpression was efficient and sufficient
to induce b-cell differentiation of HDDCs, which acquired a broad repertoire of mature b-cell
markers while downregulating characteristic epithelial-mesenchymal transition markers. Within
7 days, MAFA-reprogrammed HDDC populations contained 37% insulin-positive cells and a propor-
tion of endocrine cells expressing somatostatin and pancreatic polypeptide. Ultrastructure anal-
ysis of differentiated HDDCs showed both immature and mature insulin granules with light-
backscattering properties. Furthermore, in vitro HDDC-derived b cells (called b-HDDCs) secreted
human insulin and C-peptide in response to glucose, KCl, 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine, and tolbu-
tamide stimulation. Transplantation of b-HDDCs into diabetic SCID-beige mice confirmed their
functional glucose-responsive insulin secretion and their capacity to mitigate hyperglycemia.
Our data describe a new, reliable, and fast procedure in adult human pancreatic cells to gener-
ate clinically relevant amounts of new b cells with potential to reverse diabetes. STEM CELLS
TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE 2016;5:1525–1537
SIGNIFICANCE
b-Cell replacement therapy represents the most promising approach to restore glucose homeosta-
sis in patients with type 1 diabetes. This study shows an innovative and robust in vitro system for
large-scale production of b-like cells from human pancreatic duct-derived cells (HDDCs) using a
nonintegrative RNA-based reprogramming technique. V-Maf musculoaponeurotic fibrosarcoma
oncogene homolog A overexpression was efficient and sufficient to induce b-cell differentiation
and insulin secretion from HDDCs in response to glucose stimulation, allowing the cells to mitigate
hyperglycemia in diabetic SCID-beige mice. The data describe a new, reliable, and fast procedure in
adult human pancreatic cells to generate clinically relevant amounts of new b cells with the poten-
tial to reverse diabetes.
INTRODUCTION
Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is a chronic autoimmune
disease characterized by T cell-mediated destruc-
tion of insulin-producing b cells and subsequent
imbalance of blood glucose homeostasis [1].
Proof-of-concept for b-cell replacement therapy
was established with whole-organ or islet trans-
plantation [2, 3], but organ shortage and midterm
graft dysfunction are recurrent barriers to clinical
aPediatric Research
Laboratory, Institut de
Recherche Exp´
erimentale et
Clinique, cde Duve Institute,
and fPediatric Endocrinology
Unit, Cliniques Universitaires
Saint Luc, Universit´
e
Catholique de Louvain,
Brussels, Belgium; bDiabetes
Research Institute, Istituti di
Ricovero e Cura a Carattere
Scientifico, San Raffaele
Scientific Institute, Milan,
Italy; dChemical Biology
Program, Broad Institute of
Harvard and MIT, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, USA; eIslet
Cell and Regenerative
Biology, Joslin Diabetes
Center, Harvard Medical
School, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA
Correspondence:PhilippeA.Lysy,
M.D., Ph.D., Avenue Hippocrate
10, B-1200 Brussels, Belgium.
Telephone: 32-2-764-5285; E-Mail:
philippe.lysy@uclouvain.be
Received November 3, 2015;
accepted for publication May 12,
2016; published Online First on
July 12, 2016.
©AlphaMed Press
1066-5099/2016/$20.00/0
http://dx.doi.org/
10.5966/sctm.2015-0318
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE 2016;5:1525–1537 www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES FOR CELL-BASED CLINICAL
TRANSLATION
 use. Reprogramming of progenitor cells represents an attractive
alternative, with embryonic and induced pluripotent stem cells
(PSCs) being closest to clinical grade because of unlimited supply
and in vivo glucose-regulated insulin secretion capacities [4–6].
Recent data suggest the possibility to foster in vitro maturation
of PSCs [7], which per se might improve diabetes outcome after
transplantation. Unfortunately, the use of PSCs remains associ-
ated with ethically sensitive sampling and/or costly propagation
procedures. Moreover, the risk for overgrowth or metastasis
of undifferentiated cells may not be totally avoided by selec-
tion strategies [8], which encouraged the development of
macro-encapsulation techniques in the setting of clinical tri-
als (NCT02239354). There is thus a need to identify new sour-
ces of cells that have b-cell differentiation potential and
expansion capacities and that maintain a stable differenti-
ated phenotype in vivo.
In the past decade, somatic cells in the pancreas (e.g., duct
cells [DCs]), acinar cells, and a cells [9–11]) were shown to have
capacities to generate insulin-producing cells. Among those
lineages, DCs are attractive because they give rise to all pancre-
atic epithelial cells during embryonic development [12] and be-
cause they participate in b-cell turnover after injury [13]. Recent
data on a-to-b transdifferentiation revealed a crucial role of the
pancreatic duct lining in the recruitment of newly formed b cells
[14] and the involvement of a preliminary duct-to-a switch
occurring after a transitory state of epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT). Because human DCs—like all epithelial lineages—
undergo early loss of proliferation and of epithelial phenotype in
vitro, we previously developed a new strategy to culture and ex-
pand human DCs via the forcing of a partial EMT [15]. The result-
ingcells, called human pancreatic duct-derived cells (HDDCs),had
potential for b-cell differentiation, with glucose-unresponsive in-
sulinsecretiondetectedinpopulationscontaining2%–3%insulin-
positive (insulin+) cells.
Murine loss-of-function models revealed the essential role of
transcription factors (TFs) in controlling pancreas specification,
endocrinedifferentiation,andb-cellmaturation.Thethreeprom-
inent TFs implicated in these milestones are pancreatic duodenal
homeobox 1 (PDX1), neurogenin3 (NGN3), and V-Maf musculoa-
poneurotic fibrosarcoma oncogene homolog A (MAFA) [9, 16–20].
MAFA, a basic-leucine zipper TF expressed in mature b cells only,
regulates insulin secretionby specifically bindingthe RIPE3b/C1 in-
sulin promoter region [21].
To improve the timing and efficiency of b-cell differentia-
tion of HDDCs, we developed a TF-based reprogramming strat-
egy using synthetic modified mRNAs (smRNAs). The smRNA
technology was used to induce pluripotency or transdifferen-
tiation in various settings [22–26] and showed its superiority
to virus-based protocols [27]. Concerns about smRNA degrada-
tion, stability problems, and activation of immune mechanisms
against single-stranded RNAs were addressed, and current
synthesis protocols allow robust protein expression and main-
tenance of cell viability after consecutive transfections [28, 29].
In our study, we show a novel and safe method to induce b-cell
differentiation from expanded HDDCs using MAFA smRNA-based
reprogramming. The resulting cells showed glucose-dependent in-
sulin secretion both in vitro and after transplantation into diabetic
animals, where they lead to significant and prompt reduction of
blood glucose levels. To our knowledge, this is the first demonstra-
tionofefficientsmRNA-basedb-cellreprogrammingusinganadult
human primary cell model.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell Isolation and Culture
Human pancreatic DCs were isolated from 32 cadaveric donors
age 1 month to 68 years. The exocrine tissue was obtained
through the collaboration with the Diabetes Research Insti-
tute, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy, within
a human islet distribution program for basic research sup-
ported by the Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation [30].
DCs were isolated within 48 hours using MACS Separation
columns to purify CA19-9+ DCs as previously described [15].
CA19-9+ DCs were initially plated at 3 3 105 cells per cm2 in
EGM-2-MV medium (Lonza, Allendale, NJ, http://www.lonza.
com) without hydrocortisone. The medium was changed every
72 hours and the cells were cultured in 37°C humidified atmo-
sphere containing 5% CO2. When the confluence reached
80%, DCs and HDDCs were passaged using 0.05% trypsin (Cell-
Gro; CellGenix, Freiburg, Germany, http://www.cellgenix.
com) and seeded at 5,000 cells per cm2 into culture-treated
plates. HDDCs were cryopreserved at each passage in ali-
quots containing 1 3 106 cells with fetal bovine serum (FBS;
Thermo Fisher Scientific Life Sciences, Waltham, MA, http://
www.thermofisher.com) containing 10% dimethyl sulfoxide
(Sigma-Aldrich).
In Vitro Production of Synthetic Modified mRNA
A “ready-to-use” plasmid (pRTU) containing 59 and 39 untrans-
lated regions (UTRs) and a cloning sitein a pIDTSmart Amp (IDT)
backbone (Figure 1) was designed to generate the templates
for in vitro transcription (IVT). The 59 UTR incorporated a T7
promoter and a strong Kozak site to improve translation effi-
ciency, whereas the 39 UTR contained a murine a-globin
oligo(dT) sequence. The open reading frames (ORFs) of inter-
est (Addgene, Cambridge, MA, https://www.addgene.org)
were cloned into the pRTU and digested using SbfI and AgeI
restriction enzymes (Thermo Fisher Scientific Life Sciences).
Subsequently, the linearized templates were amplified by po-
lymerase chain reaction (PCR) using tailed primers to generate
polyA sequences. IVTs were performed using a Megascript T7
kit (Ambion, Thermo Fisher Scientific Life Sciences) and 1.6 mg
of PCR products that were capped with 15 mM of cap analog
(New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA, https://www.neb.com)
to increase the stability of synthetic mRNAs. Complete substi-
tution of 5-methyl cytidine bases for cytidine triphosphate and
of pseudouridine for uridine-59-triphosphate was performed
to reduce immunogenicity of the molecules. Synthesized RNAs
were purified using genomic DNA eliminator columns (RNA ex-
traction kit, Qiagen, Hilden, Germany, https://www.qiagen.
com) and then treated with Antarctic Phosphatase (New Eng-
land Biolabs) for 30 minutes at 37°C to remove immunogenic
59-triphosphates. RNAs were quantified by Nanodrop 2000
spectrophotometer(Thermo FisherScientific LifeSciences)and ali-
quoted in volumes of 100 ng/ml in Tris-EDTA endotoxin-free water
(Qiagen).
smRNA Transfection
Differentiation experiments were performed by five to seven
daily smRNA transfections using jetPEI (Polyplus Transfec-
tion, Illkirch, France, http://www.polyplus-transfection.com).
After each transfection, HDDCs were incubated with the
1526
MAFA Differentiates HDDCs Toward b Cells
©AlphaMed Press 2016
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 reprogramming medium for 24 hours. Transfection solution con-
sisted of 1.2 mg smRNA diluted in 100 ml Opti-MEM basal me-
dium (Thermo Fisher Scientific Life Sciences) containing 1.2 ml
of jetPEI reagent. The mix was incubated for 15 minutes at
room temperature (RT) before being dispended in 1 ml differen-
tiation medium composed by DMEM low glucose (Thermo Fisher
Scientific Life Sciences) without antibiotics supplemented
by 10% FBS, 5 mM A83-01 (Tocris, Britsol, UK, https://www.
tocris.com/), 1 mM valproic acid (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis,
MO, http://www.sigmaaldrich.com), 100 ng/ml bFGF (Pepro-
Tech, Rocky Hill, NJ, https://www.peprotech.com), and 200 ng/ml
B18R (eBioscience, San Diego, CA, http://www.ebioscience.com).
At the end of incubation, HDDCs were collected using 0.05%
trypsin/EDTA (CellGro) for processing.
RNA Extraction, Reverse Transcription, and
Quantitative PCR Analysis
Total RNA was extracted from cultured cells using Tripure isola-
tion reagent (Roche, Basel, Switzerland, http://www.roche.
com). The concentration was determined by using a Nanodrop
2000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Life Sci-
ences). Reverse transcription was obtained by using a High Ca-
pacity cDNA Reverse Transcription kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific
Life Sciences). The quantitative PCR was carried out using pri-
mers of interest (supplemental online Table 1), Power SYBR
Green PCR master mix (Thermo Fisher Scientific Life Sciences)
and StepOnePlus Real-Time PCR System (Thermo Fisher Scien-
tific Life Sciences). Primers for detection of exogenous smRNAs
were designed to recognize the modified UTR regions of syn-
thetic molecules. Results were analyzed by the comparative
ΔCT method [31] and normalized to TATA-binding protein.
Immunofluorescence and Immunohistochemistry
Differentiated HDDCs were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde
at RT for 20 minutes and then permeabilized by using 1% Tri-
ton X-100 (Sigma-Aldrich) in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS)
for15minutes.Nonspecificsiteswereblocked using1%lambserum
(Immunosource, Schilde, Belgium, http://www.immunosource.
com) for 1 hour at RT. Subsequently, cells were washed and incu-
batedat4°Covernightwithprimaryantibodiesatdesiredconcentra-
tions (supplemental online Table 2). After washing, cells were
incubated at RT for 2 hours with secondary antibodies and with
1:5000 49,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) (Sigma-Aldrich). Kid-
ney tissues were fixed overnight at RT with 4% formaldehyde, em-
bedded in paraffin, and sectioned (5 mm) for histological analysis.
Before staining, paraffin was removed from the sections, rehy-
drated, and subjected to antigen retrieval by treatment with Dako
target retrieval buffer (catalog no. S1699, Dako, Glostrup, Denmark,
http://www.dako.com) 20 minutes in microwave at 350 W. The an-
tibodies concentrations are described in supplemental online
Table 2. The images were acquired in fluorescent modeusing a Zeiss
Axiovision A1 microscope (Carl Zeiss Inc., Thornwood, NY, http://
www.zeiss.com)and aCellObserverSpinningDiskconfocalmicro-
scope. Cell frequencies were evaluated by counting positive cells in
four to six different random fields at 340 magnification
(supplemental online Table 3).
Annexin V Assay
Cellsweretrypsinizedandanalyzedbyflowcytometrytoevaluate
cell viability after seven daily transfections. About 105 cells were
suspended in 100 ml Annexin V binding buffer (Pharmingen
Annexin V-FITC Apoptosis Detection kit, BD Biosciences, Franklin
Lakes, NJ, http://www.bdbiosciences.com/) containing 5 ml
Annexin V antibody and 5 ml DAPI solutions. The mix was incu-
bated for 15 minutes at RT before addition of 400 ml Annexin V
binding buffer. The analyses were performed by using a BD FACS
Canto II cytometer (BD Biosciences) and BD FACSDiva Software.
Intracellular MAFA smRNA detection
Cells transfected with smRNA for 5 consecutive days were incu-
bated overnight for 16 hours with MAFA Hu-Cy5 SmartFlare
RNA Detection Probe (SF-3118, EMD Millipore, Billerica, MA,
http://www.emdmillipore.com) in 10% FBS-containing DMEM
low glucose without antibiotics. After incubation, differentiated
HDDCs were analyzed by using Zeiss Axiovision A1 microscope.
Luciferase Assay
HEK293 and MIN6 cell lines were plated into white 96-well
plates before being transfected using jetPEI reagent at day
1 with 100 ng of a vector expressing luciferase under the con-
trol of the insulin promoter or with an empty control vector to
measure background signal (SwitchGear Genomics, Menlo
Park, CA, http://www.switchgeargenomics.com). At day 2,
HEK293 were transfected with 100 ng of MAFA smRNA. At
day 3, both HEK293 and MIN6 cells were incubated in dark
condition for 30 minutes at RT with 100 ml Light Switch Assay
Solution (SwitchGear Genomics) containing the luciferase
substrate. Luciferase activity was measured for 10 seconds
by using a Victor 34 plate reader (PerkinElmer, Waltham,
MA, http://www.perkinelmer.com).
Figure 1.
Plasmid template for generation of synthetic modified
RNAs. Structural diagram shows “ready-to-use” plasmid containing
59 and 39 UTR sequences used to generate smRNAs of interest. The
ORFs for PDX1, NGN3, and MAFA were cloned and subsequently ex-
cised outwardly to the UTR regions using Acc65I and SphI enzymes. A
polyA tail was added to the template with a polymerase chain reac-
tion, and the amplicons were then used for in vitro transcription.
Abbreviations: ORF, open reading frame; pUC, origin of replication;
smRNA, synthetic modified mRNA; UTR, untranslated region.
Corritore, Lee, Pasquale et al.
1527
www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
 Electron Microscopy
Ultrastructure analysis was performed on differentiated HDDCs
fixed with 1% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer
for 2 hours at 4°C, pH 7.4. The cells were then washed in 0.1 M
sodium cacodylate and postfixed for 2 hours at 4°C in 1% osmium
tetroxide. After a further washing, the cells were dehydrated in
series of graded ethanol and embedded in Spurr. Cut sections
of the samples were analyzed, colored with lead citrate, and ura-
nyl acetate for 10 minutes each at RT, and observed in the trans-
mission electron microscope at 80 kV (CM12, FEI, Eindhoven, The
Netherlands, http://www.fei.com).
Laser Scanning Confocal Microscopy
HDDCs were plated into m-slides glass bottom (Ibidi, Planegg/
Martinsried, Germany, http://www.ibidi.com) and transfected
with MAFA smRNA for 5 consecutive days. After 24 hours from
the last transfection, the cells were analyzed with the LSM510 la-
ser scanning confocal. The backscatter signal was obtained by us-
ing a 633-nm laser. Scanning speed and laser intensity were
adjusted to minimize the labeling in the nontransfected cells.
Calcium Signaling Detection
The smRNA transfections were performed on HDDCs plated onto
eight-well glass chamber slides. After treatment, cells were
washed in Krebs Ringer Bicarbonate HEPES buffer (137 mM NaCl,
4.8 mM KCl, 1.2 mM KH2PO4, 1.2 mM MgSO40.7H2O, 2.5 mM
CaCl20.2H2O, 5 mM NaHCO3, 16 mM HEPES, 0.1% bovine serum
albumin, pH 7.4) and incubated with Fluo4-AM (Thermo Fisher
Scientific Life Sciences) for 60 minutes at 37°C. Cells were then
washed in Krebs buffer for an additional 15 minutes to remove
nonspecific dye. The images were acquired by using a Zeiss Axio-
vision A1 microscope after consecutive incubations of HDDCs
with low (2.8 mM) glucose, high (20.2 mM) glucose, and low-
glucose Krebs buffer containing 30 mM KCl for 30 minutes.
Glucose-Stimulated Insulin Secretion Assay
The cells were plated onto a 6-well plate and transfected with
smRNA for 7 consecutive days. Subsequently, the cells were
washed with PBS and incubated in 500 ml Krebs Ringer bicarbon-
ateHEPESsolutionfor24hoursinbasalandstimulatedconditions
(2.8 mM and 20.2 mM glucose, respectively). The supernatant
was collected and stored at 280°C until analysis. Insulin secretion
was measured by using the Bio-Plex Pro Assays kit (Bio-Rad, Her-
cules,CA, http://www.bio-rad.com). Fluorescence was measured
by using a Bio-Plex 200 system (BioRad).
Insulin Content Measurement
CelLytic M reagent (Sigma-Aldrich) was used to extract insulin
content. Protein content was consecutively measured using Bio-
Plex Pro Assays kit (Bio-Rad). Fluorescence was measured using
a Bio-Plex 200 system (BioRad).
Transplantation Studies
Experimental diabetes was induced in immunosuppressed SCID-
beige male mice aged 8–10 weeks by intraperitoneal injection of
streptozotocin (STZ) (180 mg/kg body weight). Animals were con-
sidered diabetic only if morning-fed blood glucose exceeded
350 mg/dl. A week after STZ injection, 1 3 106 of differentiated or
undifferentiated HDDCs were transplanted under kidney capsules
of the animals under isoflurane anesthesia. Animals were main-
tained on a 12 hours light/dark cycle during all the experimental
procedure. Glycemia and body weight were monitored every
24 hours during follow-up period. At specific time points, intra-
peritoneal glucose tolerance assay was performed by IP injection
of 2 g/kg body weight D-(+)-glucose and glycemic levels of the an-
imals were measured at time 0 and 30 minutes after injection,
whereas serum was collected to measure human insulin at 0,
15, and 30 minutes from glucose administration. Serum human
insulin were measured by using Bio-Plex Pro Assays kit (Bio-
Rad), with fluorescence read on a Bio-Plex 200 system (BioRad).
At selected times, animals were sacrificed and kidneys were re-
moved for graft analysis. All experiments were performed under
approval of the ethical committee of our institution.
Statistical Analysis
Results are expressed as mean 6 SEM, and statistically significant
differences were assessed using an unpaired Student’s t test. All
data were analyzed by Prism 5 software (GraphPad, San Diego,
CA, http://www.graphpad.com).
RESULTS
Messenger RNAs for PDX1, NGN3, and MAFA were manufactured
using a ready-to-use plasmid (pRTU) to avoid the need for splint re-
actions(Fig.1).Afterdigestion,UTR-flanked ORFswerepolyA-tailed
togeneratetemplatesforIVT.PurifiedsmRNAswerethentreated
with phosphatase to remove immunogenic residues. Although
our initial HDDC populations were devoid of insulin or amylase
expression from passage (P) 1 onward (data not shown),
transfection experiments were carried out on HDDCs from
P 2 to 5 to avoid the possibility of contamination with b or ac-
inar cells. As described elsewhere [15], HDDCs are a uniform
lineage of cells arising from purified CA19-9+ human pancre-
atic ductal cells and presenting partial EMT features with
coexpression
of
mesenchymal
and
ductal
epithelium
markers. HDDCs have advantageous characteristics in terms
of proliferation [15] and resistance to cryopreservation, as
we calculated a recovery rate of 73.2% 6 9.9% (n = 5) after
one cycle of cryopreservation at 2196°C.
For transfection experiments, the jetPEI cationic vehicle was
chosen fromamongother reagents(RNAiMAX andLipofectamine
2000 [Thermo Fisher Scientific Life Sciences], X-treme GENE
[Roche], polyethylenimine; data not shown) for its superior effi-
cacy and minor toxicity. Reprogramming protocols were assayed
after daily transfections (n = 7) to ensure sustained ectopic RNA
and protein expression [32]. Study of the uptake kinetics (Fig. 2A,
supplemental online Fig. 1) showed that peak cytoplasmic con-
centrationsofsmRNAoccurred48hoursaftersingletransfections
before being progressively degraded and undetectable after 5
days. Dose-response experiments were performed to evaluate
the amounts of daily transfections required for differentiation
to occur while maintaining viable cells. Our data showed that
smRNAs for PDX1, NGN3, and MAFA were detected without var-
iation of expression levels after 5, 7, or 10 daily transfections
(respectively, 6.7 6 3.2-fold, 11 6 6.5-fold, 22.9 6 7.0-fold
untransfected controls; n = 5-11), suggesting a noncumulative
effect of consecutive transfections after 5 days, when HDDCs
achieved confluence. However, stability of MAFA smRNA was
1528
MAFA Differentiates HDDCs Toward b Cells
©AlphaMed Press 2016
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 higher in HDDCs after 7 days as compared with PDX1 and NGN3
smRNAs (Fig. 2B).
Further experiments validated the efficiency of the smRNA
system and the biological activity of cytoplasmic smRNAs. First,
we studied the integrity of MAFA smRNA by evaluating its capac-
ity to hybridize with a complementary base pair sequence of hu-
man MAFA gene. For this purpose, we used the Smart-Flare
technology (EMD Millipore), which uncovered hybridization of
the probes with MAFA by emission of cyanine 5 fluorescence in
HDDCs(7.6%61.2%)afteraseriesof5dailysmRNAtransfections
(Fig. 2D and 2E). Second, we evaluated protein translation of ex-
ogenous smRNA via the production of a template encoding for
enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP), and we observed
fluorescencein45.3%618.4%ofHDDCs(n=3)after5dailytrans-
fections (Fig. 2F and 2G). In addition, MAFA protein expression
was detected with nuclear localization in 39.3% 6 6.2% HDDCs
after 5 daily transfections (Figs. 3D, 3E, 4F–4I). Third, to verify
whether the overexpressed MAFA protein had an insulin pro-
moter binding capacity, we performed a luciferase assay using
the HEK293 cell line. After a single MAFA smRNA transfection,
we observed a 5.9 6 0.8-fold increased luciferase activity as com-
pared with untransfected cells, whereas no luciferase activity
could be detected with MIN6 cells (Fig. 2C), suggesting specificity
to exogenous human MAFA protein. Fourth, in all experiments in-
volving PDX1, NGN3, and MAFA smRNA transfections, HDDCs
showed upregulation of endogenous biological targets related
to each TF. Endogenous NGN3 and MAFA were respectively upre-
gulated after PDX1 and NGN3 smRNA overexpression (data not
shown), whereas endogenous pyruvate carboxylase (PC) and pro-
lactin receptor (PRLR) expression increased after MAFA smRNA
transfection (Fig. 4B).
Because cytoplasmic delivery of single-strand RNAs in mam-
malian cells may trigger cellular immune response with induction
of apoptosis pathways, we evaluated whether smRNA transfec-
tion affected HDDCs expression profile and viability. When ana-
lyzed after 7 daily MAFA smRNA transfections, HDDCs activated
the expression of interferon-a (IFNa), protein kinase R (PKR),
and retinoic acid-inducible gene 1 (RIG-1) at low levels compared
with control cells incubated with transfection reagent only (CTL
+JP condition) (Fig. 3A). By immunostaining, we observed that
high proportions of HDDCs coexpressed PKR and MAFA proteins
(44.9% 6 16.1%, n = 3), whereas only 20.5% 6 4.5% (n = 3) of
MAFA+/PKR2 HDDCs were observed (Fig. 3B–3E). No evidence
was found of PKR+/MAFA2 cells. Although the innate immune
response was triggered in HDDCs by smRNAs, we detected
acceptable levels of cell toxicity after transfections. Using flow
cytometry, we detected 65.3% 6 13.8% (n = 3) of viable HDDCs af-
ter 7 daily MAFA smRNA transfections, compared with 82.5% 6
1.9% (n = 3) and 83.0% 6 0.4% (n = 3), respectively, in CTL+JP
condition or control cells without any treatment (CTL) (Fig.
3F, 3G). B18R was added in our reprogramming media, although
its omission did not significantly alter cell viability (supplemental
online Fig. 2A).
For differentiation purposes, we first evaluated the common
potential of PDX1, NGN3, and MAFA smRNAs to induce b-cell
reprogramming and observed that protocols where TFs were
combined or sequentially dispensed failed to modify HDDCs ex-
pression profile, without significantly affecting cell viability (data
not shown). In contrast, HDDCs transfected with single TFs ac-
quired some characteristics of b cell-like derivatives, with the
highest expression levels obtained after MAFA overexpression
(Fig. 4A). MAFA smRNA transfection induced the expression of
Figure 2.
Validation of the smRNA system. (A): Time course showing kinetics and stability of MAFA smRNA after single transfection on human
pancreatic duct-derived cells (HDDCs) at passages 2–5 (n = 3). (B): Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction shows the detection of
exogenous PDX1, NGN3, and MAFA smRNAs on HDDCs (passages 2–5) after 7 consecutive daily transfections (n = 5–11). (C): Luciferase assays
showed the binding of exogenous MAFA protein to human insulin promoter after transfection on HEK293. MIN6 cells were used as negative
control (n = 3–5). (D, E): Fluorescent hybridization probes allowed detection of cytoplasmic MAFA smRNA (red) in 7.6% 6 1.2% of HDDCs after 5
transfections. (F, G): After 5 daily transfections with EGFP smRNA, 47.6% 6 27.4% of HDDCs sustained green fluorescence emission. Scale bars =
400 mm (F), 50 mm (D, G), and 25 mm (E). Abbreviations: eGFP, enhanced green fluorescent protein; MAFA, V-Maf musculoaponeurotic fibro-
sarcoma oncogene homolog A; smRNA, synthetic modified mRNA.
Corritore, Lee, Pasquale et al.
1529
www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
 a repertoire of b-cell markers in HDDCs, including NEUROD,
NKX2.2,NKX6.1,GATA4,PAX6,glucokinase(GCK),GLUT2(SLCA2),
and FOXA2 (Fig. 4B). Control experiments were performed to dis-
tinguish the effects of MAFA-induced differentiation from those
provoked by the inflammatory response to smRNA transfection.
Gene expression analysis showed the absence of significant b-cell
differentiation of HDDCs after 7 daily consecutive transfections
with EGFP smRNA (1.3 6 0.2-fold and 1.9 6 0.3-fold undifferen-
tiated HDDCs [n = 3], respectively, for insulin and synaptophysin
expression, DDCt) or after 72-hour incubation with IFNa (0.8 6
0.3-fold and 1.1 6 0.6-fold undifferentiated HDDCs [n = 3], re-
spectively, for insulin and synaptophysin expression, DDCt)
(supplemental online Fig. 2B).
Because undifferentiated HDDCs showed mesenchymal and
EMT features [15], we evaluated whether these were affected
by MAFA-induced reprogramming. After 7 daily MAFA transfec-
tions,HDDCsshowedsignificantdownregulation ofEMTmarkers,
such as N-cadherin (CDH2) and Snail1, and upregulation of
fibroblast-specific protein 1 (FSP-1) (supplemental online Fig.
3A). Characteristic partial expression of mesenchymal markers
(vimentin, aSMA, and CD73/CD90/CD105 triad) was unchanged
(supplemental online Fig. 3A). Furthermore, HDDCs resulting
from MAFA-induced differentiation (called b-HDDCs) globally de-
creased their expression of mesenchymal proteins as compared
with undifferentiated HDDCs: whereas only a trend toward de-
creased aSMA expression was observed (from 71% 6 13.4% to
50.5% 6 24.7%, n = 3–4; p = .4), nestin was significantly downre-
gulated (from 98.4% 6 1.6% to 73.9% 6 17.6%, n = 3; p ˂ .05) and
vimentin expression was lost in b-HDDCs (supplemental online
Fig. 3C–3I).
By immunostaining, we observed that b-HDDC populations
contained 37.3% 6 4.8% insulin+ cells (n = 5) (Fig. 4D, 4E),
whereas control populations were devoid of insulin expression.
High proportions of differentiated HDDCs showed coexpression
ofb-cellproteins: afterMAFA-induced reprogramming, wefound
31.8% 6 8.2% insulin+/MAFA+ cells (n = 5) (Fig. 4F–4I), 46.0% 6
5.3% PDX1+ cells (n = 3) (Fig. 4L), and 36.3% 6 2.16% insulin+/
GLUT2+ cells (n = 3) (Fig. 4M). Moreover, 50.3% 6 6.6% (n = 3) of
insulin+ b-HDDCs coexpressed Ki67 (supplemental online Fig. 3J),
confirming cell proliferation in these cells during MAFA-induced
endocrine reprogramming. All insulin-positive cells coexpressed
PKR (31.0% 6 3.18% insulin+/PKR+ cells, n = 3) (Fig. 3C) in
our differentiated population, whereas no insulin2/PKR+ and
insulin+/PKR2 cells were detected.
According to previous studies [33], b cell-like derivatives
obtained after reprogramming or transdifferentiation may differ
from bona fide b cells by expression and/or secretion of multiple
pancreatic endocrine hormones. Similarly, our data suggested
that b-HDDCs acquired somatostatin (SST) (38.5 6 11.7-fold con-
trols, n = 5) and pancreatic polypeptide (PP) (8.66 6 4.3-fold con-
trols, n = 3) gene expression (Fig. 5A). b-HDDC populations
contained 13.3% 6 7.2% SST+ cells (Fig. 5B), and colocalization
of islet hormones was observed by immunostaining with
25.2% 6 5.9% of b-HDDCs coexpressing insulin and PP (n = 3)
(Fig. 5C, 5D). Only negligible quantities of human SST (0.8 6
0.4 pmol/106 cells, n = 3 [Fig. 5E]) were secreted by b-HDDCs.
Furthermore, our b-like cells did not show any significant gluca-
gon (GCG) gene (1.5 6 0.44-fold, n = 5) (Fig. 5A) or protein (data
not shown) expression.
Structural changes were observed in HDDCs after MAFA-
induced differentiation. Using flow cytometry, we observed
that MAFA overexpression led to morphological switch of
HDDCs with increased cell size and granularity, as com-
pared with HDDCs transfected with EGFP or untreated cells
(supplemental online Fig. 4). Ultrastructure analysis showed
presence of cytoplasmic insulin secretory granules in differenti-
ated HDDCs. Both mature crystallized insulin granules and im-
mature light vesicles without dense core were observed (Fig.
5F–5H). In contrast, no abnormal endocrine granules were
found in our cell population. Additionally, we investigated the
Figure3.
EffectsofsyntheticmodifiedmRNAs(smRNAs)oncellularinnateimmuneresponse.(A):IncreasedlevelsofPKR,IFNa,andRIG-1gene
expression were detected on human pancreatic duct-derived cells (HDDCs) after 7 transfections (n = 3–6). (B–E): PKR protein expression was
detected after smRNAtransfection. (F,G): Flow cytometry analysis showed similar cell viabilityin smRNA-transfected HDDCs andcontrol HDDCs
incubated with jetPEI (n = 3). p, p , .05 compared with control HDDCs. Scale bars = 100 mm (B–D) and 25 mm (E). Abbreviations: CTL + JP, control
HDDCs incubated with transfection reagent only (jetPEI); DAPI, 49,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole; FITC, fluorescein isothiocyanateins; INS, insulin;
MAFA, V-Maf musculoaponeurotic fibrosarcoma oncogene homolog A; PKR, protein kinase R.
1530
MAFA Differentiates HDDCs Toward b Cells
©AlphaMed Press 2016
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 presence of b-cells and insulin granules evaluating the intrin-
sic capacity of light scattering of the cells. This property in pan-
creatic islets depends on the abundance of hormone-containing
secretory granules, which are composed of dense crystal struc-
tures [34]. When assessed for their scattering feature, HDDCs
showed increased signal after MAFA differentiation (Fig. 5I),
whereas in control populations the backscatter capacity was
negligible.
To determine whether b-HDDCs secreted insulin and
C-peptide in response to stimulated conditions, we performed
glucose stimulated insulin secretion assays showing that our
b-like cells released significant amounts of human insulin in the
Figure 4.
In vitro b-cell differentiation of human pancreatic duct-derived cells (HDDCs) . (A): HDDCs individually transfected with PDX1, NGN3,
and MAFA show upregulation of INS and SYN gene expression with highest detection levels observed in MAFA transfection conditions (n = 3–6).
pp, p , .01 compared with PDX1 and NGN3 conditions. (B): Real-time polymerase chain reaction analysis also shows upregulation of several b-cell
markers (NeuroD, NKX2.2, GATA4, PAX6, GCK, GLUT-2, FOXA2, NGN3, MAFA, PDX1, NKX6.1) and MAFA biological target genes (Pc, Prlr) after
transfections withMAFAsynthetic modifiedmRNA(n=3–11).Logarithmicscaleispresentedas powersof10.(C):INSexpressionon HDDCsafter
5 transfections with NGN3 smRNA. (D, E): Immunostaining for INS (green) in HDDCs after 5 transfections with MAFA smRNA. (F–I): After MAFA
differentiation, HDDCs coexpressed insulin and MAFA localized into the nucleus. (J–L): Positive staining for PDX1 (J) and coexpression of INS
(green) and GLUT-2 (red) (K and L) were observed on HDDCs after 5 transfections with MAFA smRNA. Staining images are representative of 3–5
different experiments. Scale bars = 200 mm (D, F, J–L), 100 mm (C), 50 mm (G, H), and 20 mm (E, I). Abbreviations: DAPI, 49,6-diamidino-2-phenyl-
indole; INS, insulin; MAFA, V-Maf musculoaponeurotic fibrosarcoma oncogene homolog A; PDX1, pancreatic duodenal homeobox 1.
Corritore, Lee, Pasquale et al.
1531
www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
 mediarespectivelyinbasal(2.8mMofglucose)(4.961.9ng/ml/mg
protein, n = 4) and stimulated conditions using high (20.2 mM) glu-
cose (8.9 6 0.4 ng/ml/mg protein, n = 4), KCl (10.4 6 1.6 ng/ml/mg
protein, n = 5), and 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine (IBMX) (8.9 6
0.4 ng/ml/mg protein, n = 4) (Fig. 6A). b-HDDCs secreted C-
peptide in basal (7.5 6 1.5 pg/ml/mg protein, n = 4) and stimu-
lated conditions with KCl (1417.5 6 606.8 pg/ml/mg protein,
n = 4), IBMX (1170.8 6 164.2 pg/ml/mg protein, n = 3), and tol-
butamide (3039.5 6 493.0 pg/ml/mg protein, n = 3) (Fig. 6B).
Surprisingly, diazoxide did not decrease insulin and C-peptide
secretion levels (data not shown). Total insulin content of
b-HDDCs was 12.0 6 7.4 ng/mg DNA (n = 4) (Fig. 6C), which is
slightly lower than the expected range for human islet prepara-
tions (from 75 to 454 ng/mg DNA [35]).
Consistent with the insulin secretion analysis, increased levels
of intracellular calcium concentrations were observed by monitor-
ingcytoplasmicinflux. Although lowlevels ofcalcium ions werede-
tected in basal (2.8 mM) condition, differentiated HDDCs showed
increased intracellular calcium concentration after incubation in
high glucose (20.2 mM) (Figs. 6D–6H). These data suggest that dif-
ferentiated HDDCs secreted insulin in low-glucose conditions and
significantly responded to increased levels of glucose stimulation.
To assess the function of b-HDDCs in vivo, we transplanted 1 3
106 differentiated cells under the kidney capsule of STZ-treated
SCID-beige mice. Within the first week after transplantation,
b-HDDCs induced a significant reduction of blood glucose levels
in nonfasted condition as compared with control mice transplanted
with 1 3 106 undifferentiated HDDCs (Fig. 7A). Body weight of
b-HDDC-transplantedmicewassignificantlyimproved1and3weeks
after transplantation (Fig. 7B). During a follow-up period of 23 days,
blood glucose values varied whereas mean blood glucose values
were globally significantly reduced in the b-HDDC-transplanted
group (Fig. 7C). Human insulin secretion was detected at day 7 after
transplantationinthebloodstreamofb-HDDC-transplantedanimals
(131.1 6 19.2 pg/ml at time 0, n = 4) and showed a response to
acuteglucosechallengeafter15(327.46 166.3pg/ml,n=4)and
30 (696.8 6 167.7 pg/ml, n = 4) minutes (Fig. 7D). Graft analyses
showed cell clusters located under the fibrous capsule that
expressed human insulin and human MAFA (Fig. 7H–7M) without
reactivity to antiglucagon antibodies. These data suggested the in
vivo maintenance of a mature phenotype by b-HDDCs, which
allowed fast glycemic improvements in transplanted animals.
DISCUSSION
The limited supply of cadaveric donors for islet or pancreas trans-
plantation stimulated the search for new sources of functional
insulin-producing cells with potential for translational studies.
We previously showed the capacity of HDDCs to secrete human
insulin [15], and although differentiated HDDCs did not respond
to glucose challenges, several features make HDDCs appro-
priate candidates for cell therapy (e.g., ease of isolation, high
Figure 5.
Polyhormonal feature and insulin granules of differentiated human pancreatic duct-derived cells (HDDCs). (A): MAFA-transfected HDDCs
showedgeneexpressionofSSTandPP,butnotGCG(n=3–5).(B–D):ImmunostainingforSST(B)andPP(D)onb-likeHDDCsconfirmedthequantitative
polymerasechainreactiondata(n=3).(C):b-LikeHDDCscoexpressedINSandPPasshownbyimmunofluorescence.Only10.3%63.3% of the cells
showedexclusive expression pattern (arrow). (E): Enzyme-linked immunosorbentassay showing negligiblequantities ofhuman SST secreted
by b-HDDCs compared with control group (CTL + JP). (F–H): Electron microscopic images of both mature (F, G) and immature granules (H) in
differentiated HDDCs. (I): Increased signal of intrinsic light backscattering induced by insulin content on HDDCs after MAFA overexpression
comparedwith undifferentiatedcells (CTL+ JP condition insmallbox). Scale bars =500 nm(F–H), 100mm (B–D),10 mm (I),and50mm (I, small
box). Abbreviations: CTL + JP, control HDDCs incubated with transfection reagent only (jetPEI); DAPI, 49,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole; GCG,
glucagon;INS,insulin;MAFA,V-MafmusculoaponeuroticfibrosarcomaoncogenehomologA;PP,pancreaticpolypeptide;SST,somatostatin.
1532
MAFA Differentiates HDDCs Toward b Cells
©AlphaMed Press 2016
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 proliferation rate, absence of phenotypic alteration after thaw-
ing). In the current study, we developed a new RNA-based tech-
nology that allows fast, reliable, and robust b-cell differentiation
of HDDCs to functional levels with glucose-responsive insulin and
C-peptide secretion properties.
RNA-based reprogramming is regarded as a strong alterna-
tive to DNA-based techniques to generate defined cell types
for clinical application [24, 36, 37]. In 2010, Warren et al. dem-
onstrated the successful smRNA-mediated reprogramming of
human fibroblast to induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) in
vitro [27] using transcripts for KLF4, c-MYC, OCT4, and SOX2.
Their protocol was reportedly 36-fold more effective in deriv-
ing iPSCs than a similar retroviral-based procedure. The reli-
ability of the smRNA reprogramming method was also
assessed in vivo. In a mouse model of myocardial infarction,
heart function and survival of animals were improved after a
direct and single intramyocardial injection of human vascular
endothelial growth factor A (VEGF-A) smRNA [23]. After VEGF-
A overexpression, histology showed reduced infarct size and
concomitant expansion and differentiation of endogenous
heart progenitors cells. For clinical perspectives, RNA-based
reprogramming bears the advantage over DNA-based tech-
niques to be devoid of risk for insertional mutagenesis and geno-
mic integration that may disrupt cell cycle control and lead to
outgrowth of transplanted cells [24, 36, 37].
On the basis of this evidence, we evaluated the potential of
smRNA-based protocols to drive HDDCs toward functional insulin
production. Synthetic mRNAs encoding for PDX1, NGN3, and
MAFATFsweresynthesizedusingaready-to-useplasmidbecause
this strategy allows fast and large-scale production of transcripts.
TransfectionsweredispenseddailyonHDDCstoensuresustained
ectopic protein expression [25, 38, 39]. We observed peak exog-
enous smRNAs concentrations at 48 hours after transfection
without cumulative effect on cytoplasmic smRNA levels during
daily transfection protocols. Similarly, rapid decay of EGFP pro-
tein expression was demonstrated elsewhere [27] after single
smRNA transfections, motivating the use of 24-hour transfection
regimens. The delay observed in the smRNA uptake in our system
could be partly related to the nature of our cell population (ex-
panded cells generated after partial EMT) and to the transfection
reagent (i.e., jetPEI) used, which could lead to different patterns
of endosomal escape rates. Indeed, a temporal diversity was ob-
served in the way endosomes release their lipocomplex into the
cytosol [40]. This diversity might be fostered by the specific com-
binations of our reprogramming protocol.
In our system, efficient smRNA-to-protein translation was
shown in HDDCs by detection of cytoplasmic fluorescence in-
duced by EGFP smRNA and by nuclear localization of MAFA pro-
tein after MAFA smRNA transfection. According to protein
expression levels, we estimate our transfection efficiency to be
Figure 6.
MAFA overexpression drives reprogramming into functional insulin-producing cells. (A): Bioplex analysis in culture media of b-like
HDDCs showed a significant increase of insulin output between low(2.8mM) and high(20.2 mM) glucose, KCl, or IBMX conditions (n = 4–5).
p, p , .05 comparing high glucose and IBMX to low-glucose condition. (B): Secretion of C-peptide was detected in basal and stimulated
conditions with KCl,IBMX, orTol. ppp, p , .001 comparing low glucose toKCl,IBMX, and Tol;p, p , .05 comparing tolbutamidetoIBMXcondition.
(C): Total insulin content observed on b-HDDCs compared with control group. (D): Analysis of fluorescence microscopic images after Fluo-4 AM
stainingshowingsignificantincreasedlevelsofcytoplasmiccalciumconcentrationinstimulated(20.2mM)conditionsandlowersignalinlow-glucose
(2.8mM)andcontrolconditions.(E–H):FluorescenceimagesofFluo-4AMstainingincontrol(E),low-glucose(F),andhigh-glucoseconditions(G,H).
Scale bars = 400 mm (E), 200 mm (F, G), and 100 mm (H). Abbreviations: CTL, control; DAPI, 49,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole; Fluo, fluorescent; Fluo-
4AM, nonfluorescent acetoxymethyl ester; Gluc, glucose; HDDC, human pancreatic duct-derived cell; IBMX, 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine; IOD,
integrated optical density; MAFA, V-Maf musculoaponeurotic fibrosarcoma oncogene homolog A; ND, not determined; Tol, tolbutamide.
Corritore, Lee, Pasquale et al.
1533
www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
 between 35% and 50% with EGFP and MAFA smRNAs, which is
slightlylowerthanotherstudiesreportinghighertransfectionrates
(50%–100%) [23, 27, 37, 41, 42], although performed either in ro-
dentadultorhumanfetaltissues.MAFAproteinwasabletobindto
human insulin promoter in HEK293 cells that were used for their
capacity to efficiently overexpress ectopic and recombinant pro-
teins [43]. Furthermore, functionality of PDX1, NGN3, and MAFA
proteins was suggested by the activation of specific target genes
after transfection of corresponding smRNAs into HDDCs.
During IVT of smRNAs, ribonucleotides were substituted by
modified nucleotides and 59 triphosphates were capped accord-
ing to published protocols [44–46] to escape from cellular antivi-
ral responses. Exogenous single-stranded RNA were shown to
activate IFN and nuclear factor kB pathways [47]. Therefore,
the B18R molecule—a vaccinia virus decoy type I IFN receptor—
was supplemented to media during smRNA transfection to cap-
ture IFN molecules, although we could not confirm that adding
B18R improved cell viability. In our system, HDDCs showed evi-
dence for activation of innate immune response with expression
ofIFNa,PKR,andRIG-1markerswhilemaintainingacceptablelev-
els of cell viability (Fig. 3F and 3G), as compared with other reports
showing70%–80%viablecellsafterRNAtransfection [23,27,41,45].
Our investigations showed thatMAFAsmRNA wassuperior to
PDX1 and NGN3 for inducing b cell-specific gene expression in
HDDCs. Although many pancreatic TFs may be used to engineer
b-cell surrogates [48, 49], MAFA is the lead regulator of b-cell
function [50–53] and is critical to maintain glycemic control
in mice [54, 55]. Moreover, MAFA itself is responsible for b-cell
Figure 7.
b-Human pancreatic duct-derived cell function after transplantation into diabetic mice. In vivo function of b-HDDCs was assessed by
transplanting 1 3 106 differentiated cells under the kidney capsule of streptozotocin-treated SCID-beige mice (n = 8). (A): Within the first
week after transplantation, b-HDDCs induced asignificant reductionof bloodglucose levels innonfasted conditionas compared withcontrol
mice transplanted with 1 3 106 undifferentiated HDDCs (n = 2–8). p, p , .05 comparing Trp-MAFA to control group. (B): Animals treated with
b-HDDCs (n = 8) showed significant restoration of their initial body weight at 1 and 3 weeks after transplantation compared with control
animals (n = 3–7). p, p , .05 and pp, p , .01 comparing Trp-MAFA group to control group, respectively, at 1 week and 3 weeks after trans-
plantation. (C): During a follow-up period of 23 days, daily mean blood glucose values were significantly reduced in the b-HDDCs transplanted
group. ppp, p , .001 comparing Trp-MAFA group to control group. (D): Human insulin secretion was detected at day 7 after transplantation in the
bloodstreamofb-HDDC-transplantedanimals,showingaresponsetoacuteglucosechallengeafter15and30minutes(n=4).pp,p,.01comparing
insulin secretion at 15 and 30 minutes to 0 minutes. (E–K): Graft analyses showed cell clusters located under the fibrous capsule that expressed
human insulin and human MAFA. Scale bars = 400 mm (H, J), 200 mm (G), and 100 mm (I). Abbreviations: CTL, control; DAPI, 49,6-diamidino-2-
phenylindole; INS, insulin; MAFA, V-Maf musculoaponeurotic fibrosarcoma oncogene homolog A; Trp, transplanted.
1534
MAFA Differentiates HDDCs Toward b Cells
©AlphaMed Press 2016
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 maturation of endocrine progenitors or neonatal b cells, as shown
by overexpression or knockdown studies in rodent [56, 57] or hu-
man fetal islet [58] cells. Also, MAFA synergizes with other
pancreas-specific TFs (e.g., PDX1, NGN3, PAX4) for b-cell transdif-
ferentiationfrommousepancreatic[18,59]orliver[39,60]progen-
itors. For example, temporal and hierarchical overexpression of
PDX1,PAX4, andMAFAinduced b cell-likecharacteristics in human
liver cells in vitro [61], and interestingly, the omission of MAFA
from the last stage of differentiation protocols ablated b cell-like
maturation. In our system, HDDCs did not show evidence for trans-
differentiation when MAFA,NGN3,and PDX1transcriptswerecon-
comitantly or sequentially transfected, although cell viability was
preserved.Thisparticularitymaybepartlyaccountedtothespecific
phenotype of HDDCs that display partial EMT features [15].
MAFA-transfected HDDC populations contained up to 37% in-
sulin+, 36% GLUT-2+, and 46% PDX1+ cells. By comparison, state-
of-the-art b-cell differentiation strategies with embryonic stem cells
report 25%–50% insulin- or C-peptide-expressing cells [4, 6, 62, 63]
after a 14- to 18-day in vitro procedure. In these studies, an impor-
tantproportion(15%–70%)ofinsulin+cellscoexpressedGCGand/or
SST.Recentrefinementsinthe2weeklongstepwiseprotocols[7,64]
led to enrichment of monohormonal insulin+ populations (up to
50%) and to consecutive improvements of in vivo insulin secretion
capacities [7]. In our system, b-HDDC populations did not contain
GCG but yielded 13% insulin+/SST+ cells and 25% insulin+/PP+
cells. These polyhormonal cells only secreted low amounts of SST
in media (notsignificantly differentfrom controlgroups),suggesting
only negligible influences on insulin secretion or glucose homeosta-
sis. Although MAFA restricts SST expression during normal pancreas
development [54], stem cell- or progenitor-derived b-like cells may
harbor unexpected phenotypes that resemble immature endocrine
cells to some extent [62]. For example, in Zhou’s group [65] 2014
studyonadultmouseacinarcellreprogramming,theyobservedthat
Ad-Ngn3 alone induced the acquisition of SST expression by 40% of
infected cells. When combined with Ad-MAFA, both GCG+ and SST+
cellswereobtainedinculture[65].Similarly,Rezaniaetal.[66]found
insulin+/SST+-coexpressingcellsintheirNKX6.1+-enrichedfractionof
human embryonic stem cell-derived endocrine lineages. In our sys-
tem, HDDCs derive from human ductal cells that are known to ex-
press PDX1 at low levels [67], and expanded HDDCs contain PDX1
mRNA at detectable levels. Furthermore, MAFA overexpression in
HDDCsledtoupregulationofPDX1expression.Onehypothesismight
be that these basal PDX1 levels temporally combined to an increase
of MAFA-induced PDX1 expression and led to SST gene and pro-
tein induction in HDDCs. However, this hypothesis—as it is for
PP expression—would be difficult to confirm experimentally be-
cause little is known about d cell development. By comparison,
population of HDDCs differentiated with growth factors [15] did
not show expression of GCG, SST, or PP. MAFA thus induces a
deeper involvement of HDDCs into the endocrine lineage, which
is also suggested by the EMT (i.e., N-cadherin, Snail1) and mesen-
chymal (e.g., vimentin) marker downregulation shown by MAFA-
transfected cells, although differentiated HDDCs maintained the
expressionof several mesenchymal markers (e.g.,aSMA, fibronec-
tin, nestin) and upregulated FSP-1. The increased levels of FSP-1,
which is known as a cytoplasmic calcium-binding protein [68],
may partly be explained by the increased intracellular calcium con-
centrations observed in differentiated HDDCs.
A mature b cell-like phenotype was generated in b-HDDCs
with insulin content up to 33.0 ng/mg DNA and glucose-responsive
insulin (and C-peptide) secretion reaching up to 16.8 ng/ml/mg
protein in stimulating conditions. Our limited increase of insulin
secretion in stimulated conditions was also described elsewhere
with ESCs [69] and may represent the requirement for an in vivo
environment for further maturation of insulin secretion patterns.
Compared with previous studies that showed b-cell generation
in vitro after differentiation of ESCs [4, 6, 7, 33], we observed
about fourfold lower insulin release with HDDCs. However, the
difference in insulin secretion between HDDCs and ESCs is not
significant anymore when we normalize for the amount of insulin-
positive cells in both systems.
When b-HDDCsweretransplantedunder thekidneycapsuleof
immunosuppresseddiabeticmice,weobservedageneraldecrease
of blood glycemia in transplanted animals compared with control
group during a short-term follow-up of 23 days. We demonstrated
arapidglucose-responsiveinsulinsecretionbyb-HDDCswithlevels
being similar to those observed in stem cell-derived b cells [7].
Furthermore, histological analysis of the graft confirmed the
insulin+/MAFA+/GCG2 phenotype of b-HDDCs.
CONCLUSION
Our study confirms the potential of HDDCs to engineer b-like cells
with insulin secretion capacities both in vitro and in vivo. This fea-
ture, together with favorable in vitro characteristics, strengthens
theroleofHDDCsascandidatesfordiabetescelltherapy.Moreover,
our data show the efficiency of an smRNA-based overexpression
system for reprogramming of human primary cells with differenti-
ation occurring in a timely fashion (5-7 days) and via cost-effective
protocols. Although further work is required to bring smRNA-
reprogramming to clinical grade procedures, our HDDC RNA-
baseddifferentiationmodelshowstheopportunityfortranslational
studies in diabetes and may lead to applications for other diseases.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
WethankJ.RavauandF.Andr´
e (Pˆ
oleP´
ediatrie)fortheirexperttech-
nicalassistance.ThisstudywassupportedbygrantsfromtheBelgian
Society for Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetology (BESPEED),
Institut de Recherche Clinique et Exp´
erimentale (IREC), Fonds
National de la Recherche Scientifique (FNRS), and Interna-
tional Society for Pediatric and Adolescent Diabetes (ISPAD).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
E.C.:collectionand/orassemblyofdata,dataanalysisandinterpre-
tation, manuscript writing; Y.-S.L.: collection and/or assembly
of data, data analysis and interpretation; V.P. and D.L.: provision
ofstudymaterialorpatients;M.-J.H.:collectionand/orassemblyof
data; C.A.L.: technical support, review of the manuscript; P.V.D.S.:
technical support, manuscript writing; A.V. and S.B.-W.: technical
support; L.P.: provision of study material or patients, critical revi-
sion of the manuscript for important intellectual content; E.S.:
financial support, administrative support; P.A.L.: conception and
design, data analysis and interpretation, manuscript writing, ad-
ministrative support, financial support, study supervision.
DISCLOSURE OF POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
L.P. is a compensated consultant for and has received compensated
research funding from Dompe Spa and has received honoraria from
Novartis.Theotherauthorsindicatednopotentialconflictsofinterest.
Corritore, Lee, Pasquale et al.
1535
www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
 REFERENCES
1
van Belle TL, Coppieters KT, von Herrath
MG. Type 1 diabetes: Etiology, immunology,
and therapeutic strategies. Physiol Rev 2011;
91:79–118.
2
BartonFB,RickelsMR,AlejandroRetal.Im-
provement in outcomes of clinical islet trans-
plantation: 1999-2010. Diabetes Care 2012;35:
1436–1445.
3
Orlando G, Gianello P, Salvatori M et al.
Cell replacement strategies aimed at reconsti-
tution of the b-cell compartment in type 1 dia-
betes. Diabetes 2014;63:1433–1444.
4
KroonE,MartinsonLA,KadoyaKetal.Pan-
creatic endoderm derived from human embry-
onic stem cells generates glucose-responsive
insulin-secreting cells in vivo. Nat Biotechnol
2008;26:443–452.
5
Lima MJ, Docherty HM, Chen Y et al. Pan-
creatic transcription factors containing protein
transduction domains drive mouse embryonic
stem cells towards endocrine pancreas. PLoS
One 2012;7:e36481.
6
Rezania A, Bruin JE, Riedel MJ et al. Matu-
ration of human embryonic stem cell-derived
pancreatic progenitors into functional islets ca-
pable of treating pre-existing diabetes in mice.
Diabetes 2012;61:2016–2029.
7
Pagliuca FW, Millman JR, G¨
urtler M et al.
Generation of functional human pancreatic b
cells in vitro. Cell 2014;159:428–439.
8
Kelly C, Flatt CC, McClenaghan NH. Stem
cell-based approaches for the treatment of dia-
betes. Stem Cells Int 2011;2011:424986.
9
Zhou Q, Brown J, Kanarek A et al. In vivo
reprogramming of adult pancreatic exocrine
cells to beta-cells. Nature 2008;455:627–632.
10
Lysy PA, Weir GC,Bonner-WeirS. Making
bcellsfromadultcellswithinthepancreas.Curr
Diab Rep 2013;13:695–703.
11
Lemper M, Leuckx G, Heremans Y et al.
Reprogramming of human pancreatic exocrine
cells to b-like cells. Cell Death Differ 2015;22:
1117–1130.
12
Pan FC, Wright C. Pancreas organogene-
sis: From bud to plexus to gland. Dev Dyn 2011;
240:530–565.
13
Inada A, Nienaber C, Katsuta H et al. Car-
bonic anhydrase II-positive pancreatic cells are
progenitors for both endocrine and exocrine
pancreas after birth. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2008;105:19915–19919.
14
Al-Hasani K, Pfeifer A, Courtney M et al.
Adult duct-lining cells can reprogram into
b-like cells able to counter repeated cycles
of toxin-induced diabetes. Dev Cell 2013;
26:86–100.
15
Corritore E, Dugnani E, Pasquale V et al.
b-Cell differentiation of human pancreatic
duct-derived cells after in vitro expansion. Cell
Reprogram 2014;16:456–466.
16
Artner I, Hang Y, Mazur M et al. MafA and
MafB regulate genes critical to beta-cells in a
unique temporal manner. Diabetes 2010;59:
2530–2539.
17
Aguayo-Mazzucato
C,
Zavacki
AM,
Marinelarena A et al. Thyroid hormone pro-
motes postnatal rat pancreatic b-cell develop-
ment and glucose-responsive insulin secretion
through MAFA. Diabetes 2013;62:1569–1580.
18
Yamada T, Cavelti-Weder C, Caballero
F et al. Reprogramming mouse cells with a
pancreatic duct phenotype to insulin-producing
b-like cells. Endocrinology 2015;156:2029–
2038.
19
HeremansY,VanDeCasteele M,in’t Veld
Petal.Recapitulationofembryonicneuroendo-
crine differentiation in adult human pancreatic
duct cells expressing neurogenin 3. J Cell Biol
2002;159:303–312.
20
Meivar-Levy I, Sapir T, Gefen-Halevi S
et al. Pancreatic and duodenal homeobox
gene 1 induces hepatic dedifferentiation by
suppressing the expression of CCAAT/enhancer-
binding protein beta. Hepatology 2007;46:
898–905.
21
Wang H, Brun T, Kataoka K et al. MAFA
controls genes implicated in insulin biosynthe-
sis and secretion. Diabetologia 2007;50:348–
358.
22
Tavernier G, Wolfrum K, Demeester J
et al. Activation of pluripotency-associated
genes in mouse embryonic fibroblasts by non-
viral transfection with in vitro-derived mRNAs
encoding Oct4, Sox2, Klf4 and cMyc. Biomate-
rials 2012;33:412–417.
23
Zangi L, Lui KO, von Gise A et al. Modified
mRNA directs the fate of heart progenitor cells
and induces vascular regeneration after myo-
cardial infarction. Nat Biotechnol 2013;31:898–
907.
24
Bernal JA. RNA-based tools for nuclear
reprogramming and lineage-conversion: towards
clinical applications. J Cardiovasc Transl Res 2013;
6:956–968.
25
Van Pham P, Thi-My Nguyen P, Thai-
Quynh Nguyen A et al. Improved differentiation
of umbilical cord blood-derived mesenchymal
stem cells into insulin-producing cells by PDX-
1 mRNA transfection. Differentiation 2014;87:
200–208.
26
Poleganov MA, Eminli S, Beissert T et al.
Efficient reprogramming of human fibroblasts
and blood-derived endothelial progenitor cells
using non-modified RNA for reprogramming
and immune evasion. Hum Gene Ther 2015;
26:751–766.
27
Warren L, Manos PD, Ahfeldt T et al.
Highly efficient reprogramming to pluripotency
and directeddifferentiationof humancells with
synthetic modified mRNA. Cell Stem Cell 2010;
7:618–630.
28
Karik´
o K, Muramatsu H, Ludwig J et al.
Generating the optimal mRNA for therapy:
HPLC purification eliminatesimmuneactivation
andimprovestranslationofnucleoside-modified,
protein-encoding mRNA. Nucleic Acids Res 2011;
39:e142.
29
Kormann MS, Hasenpusch G, Aneja MK
et al. Expression of therapeutic proteins after
delivery of chemically modified mRNA in mice.
Nat Biotechnol 2011;29:154–157.
30
Nano R, Bosco D, Kerr-Conte JA et al.
Human islet distribution programme for basic
research: Activity over the last 5 years. Diabe-
tologia 2015;58:1138–1140.
31
Pfaffl MW. A new mathematical model
for relative quantification in real-time RT-PCR.
Nucleic Acids Res 2001;29:e45.
32
Gu M, Fabrega C, Liu SW et al. Insights in-
to the structure, mechanism, and regulation of
scavenger mRNA decapping activity. Mol Cell
2004;14:67–80.
33
D’Amour KA, Bang AG, Eliazer S et al. Pro-
duction of pancreatic hormone-expressing
endocrine cells from human embryonic stem
cells. Nat Biotechnol 2006;24:1392–1401.
34
Ilegems E, van Krieken PP, Edlund PK
et al. Light scattering as an intrinsic indicator
for pancreatic islet cell mass and secretion. Sci
Rep 2015;5:10740.
35
Kayton NS, Poffenberger G, Henske J
et al. Human islet preparations distributed for
research exhibit a variety of insulin-secretory
profiles. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2015;
308:E592–E602.
36
Quabius ES, Krupp G. Synthetic mRNAs
for manipulating cellular phenotypes: An over-
view. N Biotechnol 2015;32:229–235.
37
Avci-AdaliM, Behring A, SteinleH et al. In
vitro synthesis of modified mRNA for induction
of protein expression in human cells. J Vis Exp
2014;e51943.
38
MandalPK, RossiDJ. Reprogramming hu-
man fibroblasts to pluripotency using modified
mRNA. Nat Protoc 2013;8:568–582.
39
SimeonovKP,UppalH.Directreprogram-
ming of human fibroblasts to hepatocyte-like
cells by synthetic modified mRNAs. PLoS One
2014;9:e100134.
40
Leonhardt C, Schwake G, St¨
ogbauer TR
et al. Single-cell mRNA transfection studies: de-
livery, kinetics and statistics by numbers. Nano-
medicine (Lond) 2014;10:679–688.
41
Drews K, Tavernier G, Demeester J et al.
The cytotoxic and immunogenic hurdles associ-
ated with non-viral mRNA-mediated reprog-
ramming of human fibroblasts. Biomaterials
2012;33:4059–4068.
42
Wang XL, Hu P, Guo XR et al. Reprogram-
ming human umbilical cord mesenchymal
stromal cells to islet-like cells with the use
of in vitro-synthesized pancreatic-duodenal
homebox 1 messenger RNA. Cytotherapy 2014;
16:1519–1527.
43
Thomas P, Smart TG. HEK293 cell line: A
vehicle for the expression of recombinant pro-
teins. J Pharmacol Toxicol Methods 2005;51:
187–200.
44
Karik´
o K, Weissman D. Naturally occur-
ring nucleoside modifications suppress the
immunostimulatoryactivityofRNA:Implication
for therapeutic RNA development. Curr Opin
Drug Discov Devel 2007;10:523–532.
45
Anderson BR, Muramatsu H, Nallagatla
SR et al. Incorporation of pseudouridine into
mRNA enhances translation by diminishing
PKR activation. Nucleic Acids Res 2010;38:
5884–5892.
46
Huang CL, Leblond AL, Turner EC et al.
Synthetic chemically modified mrna-based de-
livery of cytoprotective factor promotes early
cardiomyocyte survival post-acute myocardial
infarction. Mol Pharm 2015;12:991–996.
47
Diebold SS, Kaisho T, Hemmi H et al. In-
nate antiviral responses by means of TLR7-
mediated recognition of single-stranded RNA.
Science 2004;303:1529–1531.
48
Piccand J, Strasser P, Hodson DJ et al.
Rfx6 maintains the functional identity of adult
pancreatic b cells. Cell Reports 2014;9:2219–
2232.
49
Gerace D, Martiniello-Wilks R, O’Brien
BA et al. The use of b-cell transcription fac-
tors in engineering artificial b cells from non-
pancreatic tissue. Gene Ther 2015;22:1–8.
50
Kaneto H, Matsuoka TA, Nakatani Y et al.
A crucial role of MafA as a novel therapeutic
1536
MAFA Differentiates HDDCs Toward b Cells
©AlphaMed Press 2016
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
 target for diabetes. J Biol Chem 2005;280:
15047–15052.
51
Nishimura W, Bonner-Weir S, Sharma
A. Expression of MafA in pancreatic progeni-
tors is detrimental for pancreatic develop-
ment. Dev Biol 2009;333:108–120.
52
Hang Y, Yamamoto T, Benninger RK et al.
The MafA transcription factor becomes essen-
tial to islet b-cells soon after birth. Diabetes
2014;63:1994–2005.
53
Kaneto H, Matsuoka TA.Role of pancreatic
transcription factors in maintenance of mature
b-cell function. Int J Mol Sci 2015;16:6281–6297.
54
NishimuraW,TakahashiS,YasudaK.MafAis
criticalformaintenanceofthematurebetacellphe-
notype in mice. Diabetologia 2015;58:566–574.
55
Matsuoka TA, Kaneto H, Kawashima S
et al. Preserving Mafa expression in diabetic is-
let b-cells improves glycemic control in vivo. J
Biol Chem 2015;290:7647–7657.
56
Hu HeK, Juhl K, KaradimosM et al. Differ-
entiation of pancreatic endocrine progenitors
reversibly blocked by premature induction of
MafA. Dev Biol 2014;385:2–12.
57
Aguayo-Mazzucato C, Koh A, El Khattabi I
et al. Mafa expression enhances glucose-
responsiveinsulinsecretioninneonatalratbeta
cells. Diabetologia 2011;54:583–593.
58
Aguayo-MazzucatoC,DiIennoA,Hollister-
Lock J et al. MAFA and T3 drive maturation of
both fetal human islets and insulin-producing
cells differentiated from hESC. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 2015;100:3651–3659.
59
Akinci E, Banga A, Greder LV et al.
Reprogramming of pancreatic exocrine cells to-
wards a beta (b) cell character using Pdx1, Ngn3
and MafA. Biochem J 2012;442:539–550.
60
Nagasaki H,Katsumata T, Oishi Het al.Gen-
eration of insulin-producing cells from the mouse
liver using b cell-related gene transfer including
Mafa and Mafb. PLoS One 2014;9:e113022.
61
Berneman-Zeitouni D, Molakandov K,
Elgart M et al. The temporal and hierarchical
control of transcription factors-induced liver
to pancreas transdifferentiation. PLoS One
2014;9:e87812.
62
HrvatinS,O’DonnellCW,DengFetal.Dif-
ferentiated human stem cells resemble fetal,
not adult, b cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2014;111:3038–3043.
63
Bruin JE, Erener S, Vela J et al. Character-
ization of polyhormonal insulin-producing cells
derived in vitro from human embryonic stem
cells. Stem Cell Res (Amst) 2014;12:194–208.
64
Agulnick AD, Ambruzs DM, Moorman
MA et al. Insulin-producing endocrine cells
differentiated in vitro from human embryonic
stem cells function in macroencapsulation de-
vices in vivo. STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
2015;4:1214–1222.
65
LiW,NakanishiM, Zumsteg A etal. Invivo
reprogramming of pancreatic acinar cells to
three islet endocrine subtypes. eLife 2014;3:
e01846.
66
Rezania A, Bruin JE, Xu J et al. Enrich-
ment of human embryonic stem cell-derived
NKX6.1-expressing pancreatic progenitor
cells accelerates the maturation of insulin-
secreting cells in vivo. STEM CELLS 2013;31:
2432–2442.
67
Guo L, Inada A, Aguayo-Mazzucato C
et al. PDX1 in ducts is not required for postnatal
formation of b-cells but is necessary for their
subsequent maturation. Diabetes 2013;62:
3459–3468.
68
¨
Osterreicher CH, Penz-¨
Osterreicher M,
Grivennikov SI et al. Fibroblast-specific protein
1 identifies an inflammatory subpopulation of
macrophages in the liver. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2011;108:308–313.
69
RezaniaA,BruinJE,AroraPetal.Reversal
of diabetes with insulin-producing cells derived
in vitro from human pluripotent stem cells. Nat
Biotechnol 2014;32:1121–1133.
See www.StemCellsTM.com for supporting information available online.
Corritore, Lee, Pasquale et al.
1537
www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
