 https://doi.org/10.1177/0884533617718471
Nutrition in Clinical Practice
Volume 32 Number 6 
December 2017 834 
–843
© 2017 American Society
for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition
DOI: 10.1177/0884533617718471
journals.sagepub.com/home/ncp
Special Report
Introduction
Nutrition support is defined as the provision of nutrients to treat 
or prevent malnutrition. This may be provided enterally or paren-
terally. Parenteral nutrition (PN) is the intravenous (IV) adminis-
tration of nutrients. Central PN is delivered into a large-diameter 
vein, usually the superior vena cava adjacent to the right atrium. 
Enteral nutrition (EN) is feeding provided through the gastroin-
testinal tract via a tube, catheter, or stoma that delivers nutrients 
distal to the oral cavity and is also known as tube feeding. 
Nutrition support therapy regimens are individualized to support 
the growth and development of pediatric patients. Frequently, a 
combination of methods to deliver nutrition or hydration are uti-
lized (oral, EN, PN); however, use of all methods is not always 
feasible depending on the underlying medical condition.
The use of home nutrition support and/or hydration has 
allowed for thousands of children with gastrointestinal dys-
function to receive adequate nutrition outside of a hospitalized 
setting. Home PN or EN is used for patients with conditions 
such as short bowel syndrome, intestinal malabsorption, oro-
pharyngeal-esophageal disease, gastrointestinal dysmotility, 
congenital disorders, and neurodevelopmental diseases.1,2
While the true prevalence of children receiving home nutri-
tion support is unknown, sustaining a patient on these therapies 
outside of the hospital setting is not uncommon. With advances 
in lifesaving medical and surgical techniques, many neonatal 
and pediatric patients are surviving and are being discharged to 
718471 NCPXXX10.1177/0884533617718471Nutrition in Clinical PracticeCorrigan et al
research-article2017
From the 1Home Nutrition Support and Center for Gut Rehabilitation and 
Transplantation, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio, USA; 
2Oley Foundation Board of Trustees, Newtonville, Massachusetts, USA; 
3ThriveRx, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA; 4Intestinal Rehabilitation Program, 
Children’s Mercy Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri, USA; 5Enteral 
Access Team, Children’s Mercy Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri, 
USA; 6Center for Intestinal Rehabilitation, Nationwide Children’s 
Hospital, Columbus, Ohio, USA; 7Parent Advocate of Home Parenteral 
Nutrition Schoolchildren, Vancouver, Canada; 8Feeding Tube Awareness 
Foundation, Phoenix, Arizona, USA; 9Feeding Tube Awareness 
Foundation, Merrick, New York, USA; and the 10Oley Foundation Board 
of Trustees, Levittown, Pennsylvania, USA.
Financial disclosure: A.W., employment—ThriveRx; D.K. and K.R., 
participation—NGPod Advisory Board; J.B., stockholder—Squibb, 
Glaxo Smith Kline, Proctor & Gamble; V.D., employment—ThriveRx.
Conflicts of interest: None declared.
This article originally appeared online on July 12, 2017.
Corresponding Author:
Mandy L. Corrigan, MPH, RD, CNSC, FAND, Home Nutrition Support 
and Center for Gut Rehabilitation and Transplantation, Cleveland Clinic, 
9500 Euclid Ave, Desk A100, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. 
Email: mandycorrigan1@gmail.com
Resources for the Provision of Nutrition Support to 
Children in Educational Environments
Mandy L. Corrigan, MPH, RD, CNSC, FAND1; Shirley Huang, MD2; Ann Weaver3; 
David Keeler, RN, BSN, CPN4; Katina Rahe, BSN, RN, CPN5; Jane Balint, MD6; 
Michelle Marti7; Brandis Goodman8; Traci Nagy9; Victoria DeLano3;  
and Betty Bond, RN10; for Home and Alternate Site Care Section, American Society 
for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition
Abstract
The use of nutrition support outside of institutional settings has contributed to maintaining the health, well-being, and nutrition status of 
many medically complex children. As these children grow and enter educational settings, there is a need for awareness of the care that 
these children require for nutrition support therapy. This document is designed to raise awareness to these needs, provide best practice 
educational resources for those involved in the supervision or provision of nutrition support to children in an educational environment, and 
promote safe and effective care. Care of children requiring nutrition support is an ongoing and shared partnership among the educational 
team, medical team, homecare team, and parents/caregivers. Care is individualized to the specific child and may include provision of 
nutrition support therapy while in the school setting, maintenance of a nutrition access device, and monitoring to safely prevent or act on 
signs of potential complications. Suggested roles and responsibilities of those involved with nutrition support care are discussed; however, 
all interventions and routine care must be in accordance with physician’s orders, school nurse privileges and competencies, and state and 
local regulations. (Nutr Clin Pract. 2017;32:834-843)
Keywords
pediatrics; home nutrition support; nutrition support; enteral nutrition; parenteral nutrition
Download a QR code reader on your smartphone, scan 
this image, and listen to the podcast for this article 
instantly. Or listen to this and other NCP podcasts at 
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/journal/10.1002/
(ISSN)1941-2452/homepage/podcasts.htm.
 Corrigan et al 
835
home. EN and PN in the home setting have allowed children to 
grow and thrive. As these medically complex children receiving 
nutrition support enter school systems, educators are confronted 
with the challenge of determining how to meet the child’s 
unique educational and medical needs when parents transfer 
oversight of a child to an educational team during his or her 
time at school.
Depending on the individualized nutrition regimen, chil-
dren may need to infuse nutrition support therapy while in the 
school setting. Even if the individual regimen does not require 
feeding during school hours, the presence of EN and PN access 
devices require specific care and monitoring to prevent com-
plications. In addition to the time that children spend in the 
classroom, extracurricular activities and physical education 
classes warrant special considerations for these students. 
Active partnerships between parents, the medical care team, 
and the school district representatives including administra-
tors, school nurses, and the education team can promote safe 
and successful educational experiences for children receiving 
nutrition support therapy.
Glossary
504 Plan: Section 504 is a part of the Rehabilitation Act of 
1973 that prohibits discrimination based on disability. Section 
504 is an antidiscrimination, civil rights statute that requires 
the needs of students with disabilities to be met as adequately 
as the needs of the nondisabled are met. www.greatschools.
org/gk/articles/section-504-2/
Central Venous Catheter (CVC): A CVC is a catheter placed 
into a larger vein used to give nutrients, fluids, or medicines, 
which can be kept in place for a sustained period of time.
Enteral Nutrition (EN): Feeding provided through the 
gastrointestinal tract via a tube, catheter, or stoma that deliv-
ers nutrients distal to the oral cavity. Also known as tube 
feeding.
Extravasation: Unintentional or inadvertent leakage (or 
instillation) of fluid out of a blood vessel into surrounding tis-
sue. (Management of Drug Extravasations Pediatric and 
Neonatal Lexi-Drugs 2017)
Individualized Education Program (IEP): A written docu-
ment that is developed for each public school child who is eli-
gible for special education. The IEP is created through a team 
effort and reviewed at least once a year. By federal law, a mul-
tidisciplinary team must determine that (1) a child has a dis-
ability and (2) that child requires special education and related 
services to benefit from the general education program. http://
www.greatschools.org/gk/articles/what-is-an-iep/
Individual Health Plan: A formal written agreement devel-
oped with the interdisciplinary collaboration of the school staff 
in partnership with the student’s family, the student, and the 
student’s healthcare provider(s), which ensures that the school 
has needed information and authorization, addresses family 
and school concerns, clarifies roles and responsibilities, and 
establishes a basis for ongoing teamwork, communication, and 
evaluation. http://www.spannj.org/Family2Family/individual_
health_plan.htm
Jejunostomy Tube: This is an enteral feeding tube where the 
tip is placed in the jejunum portion of the small intestine. It can 
be placed through an endoscopic, surgical, or interventional 
radiologic procedure.
Parenteral Nutrition (PN): The IV administration of nutri-
ents. Central PN is delivered into a large-diameter vein, usually 
the superior vena cava adjacent to the right atrium.
Percutaneous Endoscopic Gastrostomy: A long-term feed-
ing tube placed endoscopically with the tip in the stomach.
Percutaneous Endoscopic Gastrojejunostomy: A long-term 
feeding tube placed endoscopically with a port in the stomach, 
typically for drainage, and a second lumen with the tip in the 
jejunum for feeding.
Peripherally Inserted Central Catheter: A CVC that is 
inserted into a peripheral vein (usually antecubital vessel).
Purpose and Scope
The American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition 
(ASPEN) is an organization composed of healthcare profes-
sionals representing physicians, nurses, pharmacists, dieti-
tians, and nutrition scientists. The mission of ASPEN is to 
improve patient care by advancing the science and practice of 
clinical nutrition and metabolism. ASPEN envisions an 
 
environment in which every patient receives safe, efficacious, 
and high-quality nutrition care, and that includes the school 
environment.
This document and toolkit (available online) are intended to 
provide information to healthcare professionals involved in the 
supervision or provision of nutrition support to children in an 
educational environment. The information within this docu-
ment is intended for discussion and adoption over time by 
organizations. This information and accompanying recommen-
dations are not intended to supersede the judgment of the 
healthcare professional or employing institution based on the 
circumstances of the individual patient. The ASPEN Board of 
Directors has approved this document.
School districts function independently, resulting in a 
lack of consistency on how children requiring nutrition sup-
port therapy are cared for in educational settings. A known 
link between nutrition and cognitive function often unites 
school personnel and parents through a vested interest in 
nutrition.3 For children who require nutrition support ther-
apy, a need exists for educational settings to provide safe 
delivery of nutrition beyond the oral route, provide care for 
feeding access devices, and have a plan for when complica-
tions arise. There are children that require specialized medi-
cal foods that they may take orally; however, this paper is 
specifically addressing those children who have an enteral or 
parenteral access device (see the toolkit for resource on med-
ical foods). The purpose of this publication is to develop a 
 836 
Nutrition in Clinical Practice 32(6)
best practice document and toolkit to raise awareness and 
provide stakeholders with resources that address nutrition 
support therapy in schoolchildren.
Needs of a Child Requiring Nutrition 
Support
A child requiring nutrition support may be PN or EN depen-
dent, require hydration, or rely on a combination of all 3 thera-
pies. The access device may only be used to provide hydration. 
Some children may also take oral feedings to supplement their 
nutrition. Children requiring nutrition support in an educa-
tional setting have unique needs that should be considered to 
promote success. See Table 1.
Whether receiving PN or EN, the child will have medical 
devices at school for which the school nurse and teacher must 
be aware. A child who receives nutrition support and who does 
not have any visible disabilities often appears “typical,” as the 
devices to infuse nutrition are often covered by clothing and 
therefore unnoticeable. These devices may require special pre-
cautions during physical education activities to protect against 
damage to the devices and prevent injury to the child (refer to 
physician’s orders for precautions related to activity).
In addition, if peers are aware of the presence of a medical 
device, they may benefit from education on the various ways 
that children can receive nutrition support. This education 
should be tailored to the chronologic and developmental age of 
the students and may involve instructional books, dolls with 
devices, or illustrations. The goal would be to provide emo-
tional support for the child receiving nutrition support and 
increase his or her comfort and normalcy in the classroom set-
ting, including addressing the issue of bullying.
Parents/caregivers should collaborate with the classroom 
teachers and the school nurse to develop a plan to minimize 
time away from the classroom. Each child is unique and may or 
may not require feedings during the school day. Natural transi-
tion times between activities or academic topics should be uti-
lized as much as possible to change or reinforce dressings or 
take necessary restroom breaks to minimize missed educational 
time. Facilities should be designated and made available for the 
child to meet his or her privacy needs when receiving care.
The plan must also consider whether or not a child eats 
orally and how often she or he might need to eat. Depending on 
the circumstances, snack and lunch breaks offer an opportunity 
for socialization or serve as a time for providing care. A child 
receiving nutrition support therapy may be challenged to appro-
priately hydrate or maintain glycemic control. Dehydration or 
hypoglycemia may affect the ability to perform activities 
throughout the day. School personnel must recognize the signs 
and symptoms of these conditions and react appropriately. 
Other needs to consider include the need for a refrigerator to 
store formula, safety during physical education or recess during 
school and extracurricular activities, how lunch and snack times 
are handled for children who cannot eat, what to do if a school 
nurse or other qualified medical personnel are unavailable, and 
a location where storing medications or supplies such as 
syringes can be kept securely.
Suggested Role of Parents/Caregivers
Parents and caregivers partner with school district personnel in 
meeting with the school officials before the school year starts 
to discuss medical and nutritional needs, maintain an open line 
of communication, provide updates on medical visits, link the 
medical team with the school team, and provide appropriate 
equipment needed in the delivery of nutrition support.
Suggested School Roles and 
Responsibilities
Both state and federal laws exist that contain rules that school 
districts must follow in regard to special education. The federal 
special education law is the Individuals with Disabilities 
Education Act (http://idea.ed.gov/).4 Each state also has specific 
special education laws. All school districts must provide free 
appropriate public education to children, and this requires a 
partnership between the school district and the parents. If a 
child qualifies for special education, an IEP must be developed. 
An IEP details how instruction is adapted to the child’s unique 
needs, and for a child requiring nutrition support, that impacts 
how he or she is able to make meaningful educational progress. 
Thus, sufficient support systems can be detailed into the IEP. 
Supports that are needed to acquire skills necessary for social 
and emotional development according to appropriate chrono-
logic and developmental expectations should also be consid-
ered in an IEP. These goals will evolve, and increasing self-care 
and awareness for those on nutrition support should be consid-
ered and updated at each IEP annual review. For those children 
who require nutrition support who do not qualify for special 
education, a 504 plan may be used to detail classroom and 
school accommodations that may be needed to allow the child 
Table 1. Needs of a Child Requiring Nutrition Support in an 
Educational Setting.
• Plan to minimize time away from classroom learning
• Designated location to receive care
• Ongoing monitoring
• Special attention/planning for physical education, recess, and 
extracurricular activities
• Emotional and social support
• Proper storage conditions for nutrition support solutions and 
equipment
• Education of classmates
 Corrigan et al 
837
to attend school safely. ASPEN recommends that an IEP be 
developed for students requiring nutrition support that details 
how instruction will be adapted to her or his unique needs. This 
will ensure that the child is able to make meaningful educa-
tional progress while receiving sufficient nutrition.
An individual health plan must be written to meet each 
child’s specific needs. While an individual health plan by itself 
is not legally binding, the nutritional needs can be incorporated 
into an IEP or a 504 Plan.
School Personnel Education Needs
Homecare agency nurses and the child’s medical care team 
(physician, nurse practitioner, physician’s assistant, nurse, 
dietitian, pharmacist, etc) are resources for education on nutri-
tion orders. Nursing continuing education credit opportunities 
about nutrition support should be sought out by the school 
nurse to support lifelong learning and professional practice. 
Homecare agencies and hospital-based medical teams are a 
resource for such educational needs and for in-services. 
Abilities related to executing nutrition support orders and edu-
cation needs should be assessed for each school nurse by the 
employing district. For instances where the school nurse is able 
to delegate some of the activities to unlicensed personnel, edu-
cation on proper procedures, repeat demonstration, and contin-
ued monitoring/oversight by the school nurse are necessary 
(see toolkit for additional resources on delegation). Some chil-
dren may have their own nurse or an agency homecare nurse 
provide care in the school setting.
Delivery of Nutrition Support
Safe delivery of nutrition support begins with a set of physician 
orders that the school district keeps on file that delineates how 
care is to be administered. Before providing any nutrition sup-
port formulas to the child, the physician order should be veri-
fied against the nutrition product label/medication. Hand 
hygiene must be completed prior to starting infusion proce-
dures or care of an access device. A private area free from 
interruptions that is not a bathroom should be available for 
nutrition administration.
School-based policies, educational materials, and instruc-
tions on how to deliver nutrition support can encompass a vari-
ety of factors: hand hygiene, position for feeding (eg, sitting or 
lying down on right side, head elevated at least 30 degrees), 
reasons to hold or discontinue feedings, signs and symptoms to 
monitor, equipment needed (items provided by school and by 
parent/caregiver), documentation requirements for care (as 
determined by the parameters/policy of the school district), 
and contact information for parents/medical team should com-
plications or questions arise.
Having protocols in place for supporting the child that 
will be infusing nutrition or fluids using a CVC during the 
school day is prudent. A responsible party needs to be desig-
nated regarding the care of the child. Ultimately, the school 
nurse is responsible for the care of the child and determining 
which care duties may be delegated and to whom. Per state 
legislation and nurse practice laws, the nurse can delegate 
certain tasks to unlicensed assistive personnel (UAP) that 
have no medical background following the provision of 
training, monitoring, and supervision by the school nurse.5,6 
Decisions on delegation vary according to the child’s needs, 
type of task, circumstances to allow for delegation, state/
local regulations, scope and standards of school nursing, as 
well as factors related to the UAP. Procedural checklists for 
UAP can be a tool or strategy used to reduce risks associated 
with delegation.5,6 The organization or school district also 
has accountability in delegation. These responsibilities 
include sufficient staffing resources allowing the nurse to 
delegate appropriately and thorough organizational policies 
that are actively developed with nurse participation.7
It is important for the school district to develop and fre-
quently reevaluate delegation responsibilities, licensing 
requirements (if any by state/profession), continuing education 
requirements, procedure competency, and district documenta-
tion requirements for the provision of care. There also needs to 
be an alternate plan if the designated care provider is not avail-
able (ie, properly trained backup personnel). Additionally, it is 
important for school nurses and UAPs to support autonomy 
and participation of children in their care (as age appropriate) 
while monitoring their participation for accuracy.
Medical and Nutrition Update Form 
Annually
School districts routinely request complete medical status 
forms upon entry to the district/school, annually, or when there 
is a change in health condition. Physician statements/notes 
may provide the district further insight into the child’s medical 
condition as it relates to nutrition support needs.
Important information for school districts to request and 
obtain from physicians/parents/caregivers includes the under-
lying diagnosis, type and location of PN or EN access device, 
how long the device has been in place, uses of the access device 
(PN, EN, medications, IV hydration, enteral hydration, etc), 
name/contact information of the physician managing the 
child’s nutrition support and access device, orders for infusion 
of nutrition support and/or care of the access device during 
school hours, physical activity orders/limitations for physical 
education class or recess periods, and the parent’s preferred 
local hospital for emergencies.
Monitoring
Monitoring is a regular and ongoing task that can be a 
 
collaborative responsibility among various members of the 
 838 
Nutrition in Clinical Practice 32(6)
Table 2. Complications Associated With Central Venous Catheters (CVCs).
Complication
Signs/Symptoms8,9
Action
Infection
 Catheter-related bloodstream 
infection
 Site infection
 Tract (pocket) infection / phlebitis
• 
Fever—100.4°F axillary or 101.4°F 
oral
• 
Chills
• 
Lethargy/fatigue
• 
Change in behavior
• 
Swelling or erythema along catheter 
tract
• 
Erythema at or around site
• 
Drainage from site
• 
Pain at site
• 
Fever in some cases
• 
Tenderness/discomfort or a red line 
tracing along tract of a tunneled 
central line. (tract infection)
• 
Red line tracing the tract of the 
central line. (phlebitis)
1.  
If febrile or displaying signs/symptoms of a possible bloodstream infection, 
seek care immediately to prevent potentially life-threatening complications.
a.  
If the child has changes in behavior or level of consciousness, get 
immediate medical attention, and contact parents/caregivers.
2.  
If the child is febrile but otherwise well appearing, contact the parents or 
caregivers of the child so that they may take their child for further assessment at 
a healthcare facility.
If a site infection is suspected, contact the child’s parents/caregivers. The child will 
need immediate evaluation and treatment at a medical facility
If a tract infection/phlebitis is suspected, contact the child’s parents/caregivers. The 
child will need immediate evaluation and treatment at a medical facility.
Accidental dislodgement of access 
device
Percutaneous inserted central catheter 
(PICC)
• 
Increased length of tubing exposed 
from insertion site
• 
Complete dislodgement of PICC
• 
Bleeding at insertion site
Partial PICC Dislodgement10
1.  
Secure the PICC to prevent further dislodgement.
2.  
Do NOT attempt to advance the PICC to its original insertion position.
3.  
If the child has an intravenous (IV) infusion running, such as parenteral 
nutrition (PN), stop the infusion. See hypoglycemia precautions in toolkit 
recommendations for abrupt PN infusion stoppage.
4.  
Contact the child’s parents/caregivers. The child will need immediate 
evaluation at a medical facility.
Complete dislodgement of PICC
1.  
Apply firm pressure to the exit site of the PICC with sterile gauze for 5 
minutes or until bleeding ceases. If the bleeding does not cease after 5 minutes, 
call 911 and also contact the parent/caregivers.
2.  
While holding pressure at the site, examine the end of the PICC for jagged 
edges or the appearance that part of the PICC has broken off and been retained 
inside the child. This represents an emergency due to the risk for a catheter 
piece embolus. Place child on his or her left side and call 911 if child displays 
any of the following signs/symptoms of an emboli:
 
•
Respiratory distress
 
•
Chest pain
 
•
Changes in level of consciousness
3.  
Once bleeding has ceased, perform hand hygiene, put on a new pair of clean 
gloves, and open the child’s dressing change kit. Clean the site with the 
disinfectant included in the kit (eg, chlorhexidine, betadine).
4.  
Place sterile gauze over the site and cover with an occlusive sterile dressing.
5.  
If the child had an IV infusion of PN running at the time of dislodgement, 
assess for signs/symptoms of hypoglycemia. See hypoglycemia precautions in 
toolkit recommendations for abrupt PN infusion stoppage.
6.  
Contact the child’s parents/caregivers. The child will need immediate 
evaluation and treatment at a medical facility
7.  
Send the PICC line with the child when the parents/caregivers pick them up to 
show to the medical team.
Tunneled catheter such as Hickman® or 
Broviac®
 
•
Cuff exposed
Cuff exposed (partial dislodgement)
1.  
Secure the central line to prevent further dislodgement.
2.  
If the child has an IV infusion running, such as PN, stop the infusion if 
the cuff is completely exposed. See hypoglycemia precautions in toolkit 
recommendations for abrupt PN infusion discontinuation.
a. 
 
If burning, swelling, redness, or discomfort is noted near the exit site or along 
the tract of the central line, this is concerning for extravasation (inadvertent 
administration of a solution or medication into surrounding tissue and not 
within the vein).10 If extravasation is suspected, urgently contact medical team.
3.  
Contact the child’s parents/caregivers.
Complete dislodgement of tunneled catheter
1.  
Apply firm pressure to the exit site of the central line with sterile gauze for 5 
minutes or until bleeding ceases. If the bleeding does not cease after 5 minutes, 
call 911.
2.  
While holding pressure, examine the end of the central line for jagged edges or the 
appearance that part of the central line has broken off and represents a risk for a 
catheter piece embolus.10 Measure the central line length and compare to the length 
of the central line when it was placed (if known). If it is less than the original length, 
the child is at risk for an emboli. Place the child on her or his left side and call 911 if 
the child displays any of the following signs/symptoms concerning for an emboli:
• 
Respiratory distress
• 
Chest pain
• 
Changes in level of consciousness
 (continued)
 Corrigan et al 
839
Complication
Signs/Symptoms8,9
Action
3.  
Once bleeding has ceased, perform hand hygiene, don a new pair of clean 
gloves, and open the child’s dressing change kit. Clean the site with the 
disinfectant included in the kit (eg, chlorhexidine, betadine).
4.  
Place gauze over the site.
5.  
If the child had an IV infusion of PN running at the time of dislodgement, 
assess for signs/symptoms of hypoglycemia. See hypoglycemia precautions 
in toolkit recommendations for abrupt PN infusion stop.
6.  
Contact the child’s parents/caregivers.
Subcutaneous port (example Port-a-
cath®)
 
•
Acute swelling and pain at port 
site with infusion due to needle 
dislodgement
1.  
If the child has an IV infusion running when infiltration/extravasation 
suspected, stop the infusion.
2.  
Leave the Huber needle in place.
3.  
Disconnect IV tubing and tubing
4.  
If the infusate is PN, assess for signs/symptoms of hypoglycemia. See 
hypoglycemia precautions in toolkit recommendations for abrupt PN infusion 
stoppage.
5. Contact the child’s parents/caregivers.
Air embolism
Device
 
•
Broken central venous access device
 
•
Disconnected tubing or needleless 
connector from hub without clamp 
engaged.
 
•
Partially or completely dislodged 
central line.
Child
 
•
Respiratory distress
 
•
Chest pain
 
•
Altered mental status
1.  
Prevent additional air from entering the bloodstream by taking any necessary 
measures, including clamping or folding the central line or covering the 
puncture site with an air-occlusive dressing if the central line was removed 
entirely.
2.  
Place the child on his or her left side, in a lying position.
3.  
Call 911.
4.  
Administer 100% oxygen if available.10
Mechanical Complications
 Occlusions
 Line breakage
 
•
Difficulty flushing or infusing
 
•
Increasing pressure noted on infusion 
pump
 
•
Difficulty aspirating from line
PICC
 
•
Wet spot on clothing near central 
catheter site
 
•
Blood backing up into tubing
 
•
Visible leaking from tubing
 
•
Visibly broken components (eg, 
cracked hub)
Tunneled catheter
Internal breakage
 
•
Acute swelling and pain around the 
line with infusion.
External breakage
 
•
Wet spot on clothing near CVC site
 
•
Blood backing up into tubing
 
•
Visible leaking from tubing.
 
•
Visibly broken components (eg, 
cracked hub, separation of layers)
1.  
Assess the catheter for potential causes of mechanical obstruction10:
a.  
Catheter clamped
b.  
Kinks or sharp bends in central line or infusion tubing.
2.  
If the child has a tunneled central line, perform sterile dressing change if 
tubing under the dressing may be kinked.
3. After repositioning the external portion of the CVC (tunneled catheter 
and PICC only), attempt to flush the CVC. If unable to flush the central 
line, contact the child’s parents/caregivers. The child will need immediate 
evaluation and treatment at a medical facility.
1.  
Stop any active infusions into the central line.
2.  
Clamp above the break (closer to the child’s body) to prevent further leakage 
or hemorrhage.
3.  
If the child had an IV infusion of PN running at the time of dislodgement, 
assess for signs/symptoms of hypoglycemia. See hypoglycemia precautions 
in toolkit recommendations for abrupt PN infusion stoppage.
4.  
Contact the child’s parents/caregivers. The child will need immediate 
treatment at a medical facility.
Internal breakage
1.  
Stop any active infusion into the central line and clamp the catheter.
2.  
If the child had an IV infusion of PN running at the time of dislodgement, 
assess for signs/symptoms of hypoglycemia. See hypoglycemia precautions 
in toolkit recommendations for abrupt PN infusion stoppage.
3.  
Contact the child’s parents/caregivers. The child will need further treatment at 
a medical facility.
4.  
If burning, swelling, redness, or discomfort is noted near the exit site or along 
the tract of the central line, this is concerning for extravasation (inadvertent 
administration of a solution or medication into surrounding tissue and not 
within the vein).11 If extravasation is suspected, get immediate medical 
attention.
External breakage
1.  
Stop any active infusion into the CVC.
2.  
Clamp above the break (closer to the child’s body) to prevent further leakage 
or hemorrhage but far enough away to allow for catheter repair.
3.  
If the child had an IV infusion of PN running at the time of dislodgement, 
assess for signs/symptoms of hypoglycemia. See hypoglycemia precautions 
in toolkit recommendations for abrupt PN infusion stoppage.
4.  
Contact the child’s parents/caregivers and managing medical provider. The 
child will need immediate treatment at a medical facility.
 (continued)
Table 2. (continued)
 840 
Nutrition in Clinical Practice 32(6)
Complication
Signs/Symptoms8,9
Action
 Indications for central line 
equipment change
Subcutaneous port
Internal breakage
 
•
Acute swelling and pain around the 
line with infusion.
External breakage
 
•
Wet spot on clothing near CVC site
 
•
Blood backing up into tubing
 
•
Visible leaking from tubing.
Dressing—contact with substance
 
•
Body fluids
 
•
Liquid
 
•
Any unclean substance
Catheter and connections
1. Catheter and connections (eg, hub 
to adapter) comes into contact with 
substance.
1.  
Assess for swelling, erythema, or discomfort at or around the port reservoir, 
especially if there is an active infusion.
2.  
Stop the infusion if any of the above signs/symptoms are noted due to the risk 
for extravasation.
3.  
If the child had an IV infusion of PN running at the time of dislodgement, 
assess for signs/symptoms of hypoglycemia. See hypoglycemia precautions in 
toolkit recommendations for abrupt PN infusion stoppage.
4.  
Contact the child’s parents/caregivers. The child will need immediate 
treatment at a medical facility.
1.  
If the child’s dressing becomes soiled, it will need to be changed as soon as 
possible. Follow the recommendations for sterile central line dressing changes 
provided by the child’s managing medical provider.
(if wet, evaluate for mechanical obstruction as potential cause—see occlusion 
section) 10
2. No longer occlusive: The child’s dressing will need to be changed if it is no 
longer occlusive. This can occur if there is a hole or tear in the dressing or if 
the dressing peels enough to expose the line. 10
1.  
If the CVC or tubing connected to the catheter become soiled, immediately 
remove the substance and clean the soiled areas with alcohol wipes.
2.  
If a contaminant is noted to be inside connections (eg, between the central line 
hub and adapter threads), the adapter should be carefully changed as soon as 
possible.
A: Stop any active infusion in to the CVC.
B. See hypoglycemia precautions in toolkit recommendations for abrupt PN 
infusion stoppage.
3. Contact the child’s parents/caregivers. If the child receives an infusion 
during school hours, she or he may need to change tubing and/or medication 
depending on the level of contamination and involvement.
Table 2. (continued)
Table 3. Contents of the Central Venous Access Device 
Emergency Kit.
 
•
Central line dressing change kit
 
•
Central line dressing
 
•
Adapter
 
•
2 pairs of sterile gloves—use for sterile procedures
 
•
2 pairs of clean gloves
 
•
4 saline flush syringes
 
•
Heparin flush syringe (if heparin is part of prescribed 
regimen)
 
•
Sterile gauze 4 × 4
 
•
Masks
 
•
Alcohol wipes
 
•
Sterile gauze
 
•
Cloth tape
 
•
Clamp
educational team (teacher, administrative personnel, school 
nurse, etc), and children can take part in identifying a potential 
problem based on their developmental stage. Routine monitor-
ing aims to prevent potentially serious complications by iden-
tifying signs and symptoms of a problem early. Missed school 
due to frequent hospitalizations is a challenge in medically 
complex children, and monitoring may help prevent or shorten 
time away from the educational setting.
Knowledge of potential complications and their related signs 
and symptoms is necessary to ensure the safety of the child at 
school. For each type of access device, there are specific compli-
cations that can arise. Monitoring children with an access device 
used for nutrition support is paramount to allow medical profes-
sionals to quickly identify symptoms that are present, develop a 
differential diagnosis, and provide treatment.
Central Venous Catheters. Frequently seen CVC complica-
tions, signs and symptoms, and actions to be taken can be 
found in Table 2. For a child receiving PN through a CVC, a 
physician’s or designee’s orders are necessary for procedures 
and treatments with the CVC; an additional sterile dressing kit 
with a spare clamp and normal saline (and heparin locking 
solution, if prescribed) should be available; proper handwash-
ing technique should be used; and all fevers need to be reported. 
An action plan should be developed to determine the circum-
stances in which and how to address problems with the CVC. 
Each school with children who have CVCs in place should 
have a CVC access emergency kit supplied by the family, 
which contains all the supplies necessary to address complica-
tions commonly seen in children with CVCs. Suggested sup-
plies for CVC emergency kit can be found in Table 3. The CVC 
access emergency kit should be used by school nurses when 
problems with the CVC occur while the child is at school. Be 
sure to periodically check emergency kits for expired 
supplies.
Enteral Access Devices. Gastrostomy, gastrojejunal, and jeju-
nostomy tubes are enteral access devices placed through the 
abdominal wall into the stomach or jejunum to allow for the 
delivery of nutrition, medication, and fluids. Names of enteral 
 Corrigan et al 
841
Table 4. Complications Associated With Enteral Feeding Tubes.
Complication
Signs/Symptoms
Action
Accidental enteral access device 
removal or dislodgement (Note: 
important to replace tube to 
maintain tube tract)
Tube pulled out or removed from 
placement within the body
Replacement of a low-profile balloon gastrostomy tube (known as a G-tube) after a 
nontraumatic dislodgement
 1. Locate the emergency kit for gastrostomy tube patient.
 2. Place patient in a supine position.
 3. Assess patency of the tube site making sure the tube stoma is visible.
 4. If the patency of the site is in question or if there is significant bleeding or trauma to 
the site, contact the family/caregiver before attempting to insert a replacement tube.
 5. Assemble supplies (tube, towel, water-soluble lubricant [K-Y Jelly], water, syringe).
 6. Verify correct size of the tube.
 7. Perform hand hygiene, and put on gloves.
 8. If the G-tube has water in the balloon, with a Luer-tip syringe withdraw the instilled 
water from the balloon.
 9. Lubricate the balloon tip with a water-soluble lubricant; if a water-soluble lubricant is 
not available, use water as a lubricant.
10. Hold the G-tube perpendicular to the abdominal wall with the balloon/stem portion in 
the direction of the G-tube stoma/tract.
11. Pass the tip of the G-tube into the opening of the gastrostomy site. With steady, firm 
pressure, advance the G-tube in the direction of the stomach. If resistance is met or the 
G-tube is too big, use a smaller G-tube if one is available.
Never use force to advance the G-tube. If steady firm pressure does not advance the 
G-tube properly, stop and call the family/caregiver. If excessive bleeding occurs or 
a problem with insertion develops, stop and call the family/caregiver.
12. If the child is crying, wait until he or she stops crying and/or relaxes the abdominal 
muscles to promote comfort and ease of insertion.
13. Once the G-tube is inserted into the gastrostomy stoma/tract, adhere the G-tube to the 
patient’s abdomen with tape.
If allowed by school policy, fill the balloon with the proper amount of water using the 
Luer-tip syringe.
14. Proper notification to the parents/caregivers with a detailed description of the 
event.
Balloon PEG, GJ-tube, or J-tube nontraumatic dislodgement: Maintain the G-tube 
stoma site
1. If the PEG, GJ-tube, or J-tube is partially dislodged and still within the gastrostomy 
stoma, use tape to secure the tube to the patient’s abdomen, and contact the family/
caregivers.
2. If the J-tube has been completely dislodged, cover site with gauze and tape then 
contact the family/caregivers immediately. Do not attempt to reinsert a J-tube. Do 
not insert a G-tube to maintain the stoma site.
3. If the PEG or GJ-tube has been completely dislodged, cover the site with gauze and 
tape and contact the family/caregivers immediately. Do not attempt to reinsert a 
PEG or GJ-tube. The treating physician/caregiver may permit a G-tube from the 
emergency kit to be inserted into the stoma maintain patency until a GJ-tube can be 
replaced. If a G-tube is temporarily inserted to maintain track patency, do not inflate 
the balloon, tape G-tube to abdominal wall, and do not use tube to deliver medications 
or infusions. The French size of the G-tube should not be larger than the current 
French size to prevent causing damage to the stoma site.
Traumatic removal of any G-tube:
No attempt should be made to insert another tube into the gastrostomy stoma.
1. Cover the size with gauze and tape.
2. Immediately contact family/caregiver.
Nonballoon G-tube dislodgement:
This will be classified as a traumatic removal of a G-tube, and no attempt should be made 
to insert another tube into the gastrostomy stoma.
1. Cover the size with gauze and tape.
2. Immediately contact family/caregiver.
Verification is needed before feeding resumes
Nontraumatic removal of a G-tube
Verification that the G-tube is correctly inserted is accomplished by aspirating the stomach 
contents.
1. Attach an empty extension tube set and with a syringe, gently aspirate the stomach 
contents.
Traumatic removal of G-tube
1. School staff will not confirm placement or use the G-tube after a traumatic 
removal.
Please Note: Catheters or tubes not intended for enteral feeding, such as urinary drainage 
or gastrointestinal drainage tubes, should not be inserted in a G-tube stoma tract to 
maintain patency because they usually lack an external anchoring device. Using these 
alternative tubes may lead to stomach injury or tube migration, which may cause 
obstruction of the pylorus or small bowel.
 (continued)
 842 
Nutrition in Clinical Practice 32(6)
Complication
Signs/Symptoms
Action
Site infections
• 
Redness
• 
Warmth
• 
Purulent drainage
• 
Induration
• 
Pain
• 
Fever
1. Proper hygiene at the G-tube site; cleanse with soap and water.
2. Notify family/caregiver of any signs and symptoms of site infection
Tube feeding Intolerance
• 
Vomiting
• 
Abdominal distention
• 
Abdominal pain
• 
Increased stooling from 
baseline
1. Follow the IEP/504 plan recommendations
2. Contact family/caregivers
Alterations in hydration status
• 
Dehydration
○ 
Losses of more bodily 
fluids than input of 
fluids
○ 
Dizzy, lightheaded, 
excessive thirst, dry 
skin, sunken eyes
○ 
Dark urine/decreased 
urine quantity
○ 
Cramping in extremities
 
•
Overhydration
○ 
Edema/swelling of 
extremities
1. Follow the IEP/504 plan recommendations
2. Contact family/caregivers
GJ-tube, gastrostomy-jejunostomy tube; IEP, Individualized Education Program; J-tube, jejunostomy tube; PEG, percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy.
Table 4. (continued)
Table 5. Contents of Gastrostomy Emergency Kit.
• Backup gastrostomy tube (G-tube)—same French size or a 
size smaller than current tube
• 5- to 10-mL Luer slip tip syringe for the balloon
• Water-soluble lubricant (packets are preferable)
• Gentle tape to be used to tape the G-tube to the stomach if the 
balloon malfunctions
• Extension set (to check placement by drawing back or as 
backup for feeding)
• 60-mL enteral syringe
• Completed information form with information about the 
G-tube
○ Initial date the G-tube was placed
○ 8–12 weeks after initial placement of a G-tube, the 
stoma tract is considered a “mature tract”
○ G-tube style and brand
○ G-tube size (French and centimeters)
○ Amount of water to fill the balloon (if applicable)
○ Emergency contacts for family/caregiver and practitioner
Note: Catheters or tubes not intended for enteral feeding, such as urinary 
drainage or gastrointestinal drainage tubes, should not be inserted into 
the gastrostomy/jejunostomy stoma, as they usually lack an external 
anchoring device. Using these alternative tubes may lead to stomach 
injury or tube migration, which may cause obstruction of the pylorus or 
small bowel.
feeding tubes include the location within the gastrointestinal 
tract where the tip of the tube ends (eg, gastrostomy tubes 
[G-tubes] end in the gastric/stomach; jejunostomy tubes 
[J-tubes] end in the second portion of the intestine called the 
jejunum). Additional information on types of enteral access 
tubes can be found in the toolkit. Knowing the type of enteral 
access tube that the child has is critical to managing potential 
complications. For a child receiving EN through an enteral 
access device, physician orders are necessary; proper hand-
washing technique should be used; and all fevers need to be 
reported to the medical team and parents/caregivers. An action 
plan should be developed to identify complications and how to 
address these complications with enteral access devices. All 
actions taken and routine care must be in accordance with 
physician’s orders, school nurse privileges and competen-
cies, and state and local regulations. Frequently seen enteral 
access device complications, signs and symptoms, and actions 
to be taken can be found in Table 4.
Pursuant to the regulations in place at your school district 
and your scope of practice, please reference Table 4 for guid-
ance on complications related to enteral feeding tubes. If Table 
4 is not applicable for the regulations established at your school 
district or within your scope of practice, please proceed with 
following emergency steps: Gather emergency G-tube kit (see 
Table 5), locate contact information, and notify the listed fam-
ily/caregiver about the enteral feeding tube complications. 
Proceed as directed by family/caregiver. Please note that this is 
a timely situation to maintain the patency of the G-tube stoma 
tract.
Students who have a G-tube should have a G-tube emer-
gency kit. The G-tube emergency kit should be provided by the 
family and contain all the supplies necessary to address com-
plications commonly seen in children with this type of enteral 
access device. The G-tube emergency kit should be used when 
complications with the G-tube occur while the child is at 
school. Suggested supplies for the G-tube emergency kit can 
be found in Table 5. Be sure to periodically check emergency 
kits for expired supplies. Insurance may only provide 1 extra 
 Corrigan et al 
843
G-tube every 3 months. Families may request to purchase an 
extra G-tube from their homecare supply company so that the 
student has an emergency G-tube replacement both at home 
and at school. This kit should be with the student at all times, 
which will allow the home emergency kit to be the same as the 
school emergency kit.
Competency for Low-Profile G-Tube 
Placement and Troubleshooting
Various programs and policies exist to define competency vali-
dation process for performing low-profile G-tube replacement 
and G-tube troubleshooting. Simulation and materials to assess 
competency can be found in the toolkit. The hospital and 
homecare teams are a resource to school nurses to provide edu-
cation and in-services on tube replacement. Supplemental 
materials in the toolkit can be found to guide repeat demonstra-
tion of the necessary steps. Schools should refer to the educa-
tion and expertise of those on the medical care team who have 
been deemed competent in the procedure. G-tube replacement 
should not be an expectation of a school nurse without a dis-
trict competency in place. Additionally, G-tube replacement by 
school nursing personnel must be in accordance with local/
state regulations and physician’s orders. Physician orders on 
any tube replacement or troubleshooting should be specific to 
the child and be reviewed/updated when the type of tube that 
the child has is changed. Assessment of competency should be 
done annually, and training updates should be done quarterly to 
refresh staff to the policy and procedure, along with any 
changes that may occur throughout the year.
Conclusion/Future Recommendations
Safe and effective delivery of nutrition and care of an access 
device is a shared responsibility among parents and school per-
sonnel alike. Standardized guidelines or procedures for care of 
children requiring nutrition support in the school setting are 
lacking. The toolkit materials and shared best practices bring 
awareness and education to those involved with caring for 
these children. Establishing competencies and supporting con-
tinuing education to those delivering specialized nutrition sup-
port in the school setting is recommended.
Supplementary Material 
The toolkit is available with the article online at http://journals.
sagepub.com/home/ncp.
References
 1. Sevilla WMA, McElhanon B. Optimizing transition to home enteral nutri-
tion for pediatric patients. Nutr Clin Pract. 2016;31(6):762-768.
 2. Winkler MF, DiMaria-Ghalili RA, Guenter P, et al. Characteristics of a 
cohort of home parenteral nutrition patients at the time of enrollment in the 
Sustain Registry. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 2016;40(8):1140-1149.
 3. Mehta NM, Corkins MR, Lyman B, et al. Defining pediatric malnutrition: 
a paradigm shift toward etiology-related definitions. JPEN J Parenter 
Enteral Nutr. 2013;37(4):460-481.
 4. US Department of Education. Individuals with Disabilities Education Act 
2004 (IDEA). http://idea.ed.gov/.
 5. Shannon RA. Reducing the risks of delegation: use of procedural skills 
checklists for unlicensed assistive personnel in schools, part 1. NASN 
School Nurse. 2013;28(4):187-181.
 6. Shannon RA. Reducing the risks of delegation: use of procedural skills 
checklists for unlicensed assistive personnel in schools, part 2. NASN 
School Nurse. 2013;28(5):222-226.
 7. American Nurses Association, National Council of State Boards 
of Nursing. Joint statement on delegation. https://www.ncsbn.org/
Delegation_joint_statement_NCSBN-ANA.pdf. Accessed on October 4, 
2016.
 8. Brennan C, Wang VJ. Management of fever and suspected infection in 
pediatric patients with central venous catheters. Ped Emerg Med Practice. 
2015;12(12):1-20.
 9. Kumpf VJ, Tillman EM. Home parenteral nutrition: safe transition from 
hospital to home. Nutr Clin Pract. 2012;27(6):749-757.
 10. Gorski L, Hadaway L, Hagle ME, McGoldrick M, Orr M, Doellman D. 
Infusion therapy standards of practice. J Infus Nurs. 2016;39(suppl 1):S1-
S159.
 11. Lexicomp Online. Management of Drug Extravasations (Pediatric & 
Neonatal Lexi-Drugs). Hudson, OH: Lexi-Comp Inc. Accessed April 19, 
2017.
