 FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
PEDIATRICS Volume  
138 
, number  
2 
, August 2016 
:e 
20161298 
Virtual Violence
COUNCIL ON COMMUNICATIONS AND MEDIA
This document is copyrighted and is property of the American 
Academy of Pediatrics and its Board of Directors. All authors have 
fi
 led confl
 ict of interest statements with the American Academy 
of Pediatrics. Any confl
 icts have been resolved through a process 
approved by the Board of Directors. The American Academy of 
Pediatrics has neither solicited nor accepted any commercial 
involvement in the development of the content of this publication.
Policy statements from the American Academy of Pediatrics benefi
 t 
from expertise and resources of liaisons and internal (AAP) and 
external reviewers. However, policy statements from the American 
Academy of Pediatrics may not refl
 ect the views of the liaisons or the 
organizations or government agencies that they represent.
The guidance in this statement does not indicate an exclusive course 
of treatment or serve as a standard of medical care. Variations, taking 
into account individual circumstances, may be appropriate.
All policy statements from the American Academy of Pediatrics 
automatically expire 5 years after publication unless reaffi
 rmed, 
revised, or retired at or before that time.
DOI: 10.1542/peds.2016-1298
PEDIATRICS (ISSN Numbers: Print, 0031-4005; Online, 1098-4275).
Copyright © 2016 by the American Academy of Pediatrics
FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE: The author has indicated he has no 
fi
 nancial relationships relevant to this article to disclose. 
FUNDING: No external funding.
POTENTIAL CONFLICT OF INTEREST: The author has indicated 
he has no potential confl
 icts of interest to disclose.
COMPANION PAPER: A companion to this article can be found 
online at www.pediatrics.org/cgi/doi/10.1542/peds.2016-1358.  
abstract
In the United States, exposure to media violence is becoming an inescapable 
component of children’s lives. With the rise in new technologies, such as 
tablets and new gaming platforms, children and adolescents increasingly 
are exposed to what is known as “virtual violence.” This form of violence 
is not experienced physically; rather, it is experienced in realistic ways via 
new technology and ever more intense and realistic games. The American 
Academy of Pediatrics continues to be concerned about children’s exposure 
to virtual violence and the effect it has on their overall health and well-being. 
This policy statement aims to summarize the current state of scientifi
 c 
knowledge regarding the effects of virtual violence on children’s attitudes 
and behaviors and to make specifi
 c recommendations for pediatricians, 
parents, industry, and policy makers.
Media violence is woven into the fabric of American children’s lives. As 
recently as the year 2000, every G-rated movie contained violence, as did 
60% of prime time television shows.1 In 1998, the most comprehensive 
assessment of screen violence was completed. It estimated that the 
typical child will have seen 8000 murders and 100 000 other acts of 
violence (including rape and assault) before middle school.2 The 1998 
report was limited to television, which was appropriate at the time, 
because it was the primary platform exposing children to violence. 
Today’s children experience screen violence on many different platforms, 
including computers, video games, and touch-screen devices, in addition 
to longstanding platforms, such as televisions. Increasingly, media 
researchers and pediatricians refer to children’s “media diets” as a way 
of conveying the amount and type of media that is consumed. Like food 
diets, media diets can be healthy or unhealthy, balanced or imbalanced, 
or healthy in quality but unhealthy in quantity.
This policy statement uses the term “virtual violence” to discuss all 
forms of violence that are not experienced physically and, in particular, 
to encompass the extent to which children increasingly experience 
violence in more realistic ways than they have before. Virtual violence 
includes first-person shooter games and other realistic video games 
and applications. Furthermore, the terms “aggression” and “violence” 
POLICY STATEMENT
Organizational Principles to Guide and Define the Child Health 
Care System and/or Improve the Health of all Children
To cite: AAP COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND MEDIA. 
Virtual Violence. Pediatrics. 2016;138(1):e20161298
 by guest on June 1, 2019
www.aappublications.org/news
Downloaded from 
 FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
are not used interchangeably. 
For the purposes of this policy 
statement, human aggression is 
defined as any behavior intended 
to harm another person who does 
not want to be harmed. The harm 
can be psychological or physical. 
Violence is defined as aggression 
that has as its goal extreme physical 
harm, such as injury or death. For 
example, a snarling dog is behaving 
aggressively; once it bites, it has 
resorted to violence. A person who 
verbally abuses another would not 
be committing an act of violence by 
this definition. Thus, all violent acts 
are aggressive, but not all aggressive 
acts are violent.3 By analogy, passing 
a roaring monster as an avatar in a 
video game is experiencing virtual 
aggression and being shot to death 
in a first-person shooter game is 
experiencing virtual violence.
LEGISLATIVE ACTION
Although there is broad scientific 
consensus that virtual violence 
increases aggressive thoughts, 
feelings, and behaviors, there has 
been little public action to help 
mitigate children’s exposure to it.4 In 
fact, the single broadest legislative 
action taken by the state of California, 
which made it illegal to sell video 
games labeled for mature audiences 
to minors, was struck down by the 
US Supreme Court. It is important to 
note, however, that the ruling was 
not based on the absence of data 
linking media violence to aggression. 
Rather than rule on scientific merit, 
the Court invoked first-amendment 
protection for the games insofar as 
the Court construed their primary 
purpose to be to confer ideas and 
social messages.5 Currently, there 
is no federal authority governing 
content and ratings, which are issued 
by the Entertainment Software 
Ratings Board, compliance with 
which is optional for industry.
EVIDENCE OF THE IMPACT OF VIRTUAL 
VIOLENCE
Since the first congressional hearings 
were held on the potential linkage 
between television violence and 
homicides in 1952, hundreds of 
studies exploring the effects of media 
violence have been conducted.6 
Notably, over the ensuing decades, 
media violence has evolved to 
become both more prevalent and 
more intense.6
Some brief mention of the types of 
studies performed is necessary to 
set the stage for the conclusions 
that can be, and have been, drawn. 
Studies have been observational and 
experimental as well as laboratory 
and field based. End points have 
included aggressive thoughts, angry 
feelings, and actual observed or 
reported aggression. Finally, studies 
have assessed short- and long-term 
exposure and proximate or distant 
aggressive actions. Accordingly, 
the scientific landscape is complex, 
because researchers have used 
different methods on different 
populations over time. Although 
individual research approaches 
may have shortcomings, when 
one considers the overall body of 
research the linkage between virtual 
violence and aggression has been 
well supported and is robust.
One research challenge has been to 
conclude that laboratory aggression 
can act as a proxy for what may 
happen in the real world. Consider 
a typical laboratory study in which 
subjects are randomly assigned to 
play a violent or nonviolent video 
game. They are then assessed for 
their willingness to administer pain 
in the form of unpleasant sounds 
(eg, mixture of fingernails scratching 
on blackboards, dentist drills, blow 
horns, and fire alarms), at a decibel 
of their choice within the limits of a 
nondamaging range, to a person who, 
unbeknownst to the participants, 
is part of the research team. Those 
who played a violent video game 
administered the sounds at a higher 
level and for a longer period of time.7 
Although it is true that the situation 
of having a pain-inflicting auditory 
device at one’s disposal does not 
occur in the real world, there is no 
reason to doubt the tendency or 
willingness to inflict pain would 
be less in the real world than in 
the laboratory, especially given 
study subjects’ awareness that they 
were being observed while in the 
laboratory.
It is true that an experimental, 
real-world study that links virtual 
violence with real-world violence 
has not been conducted. Such a 
study will never be undertaken for 
several reasons, including the fact 
that actual violence is, fortunately, 
so rare that an exceedingly large 
sample size would be needed, and 
inducing and observing actual 
violence by manipulating subjects 
would never pass ethical scrutiny. 
But experimental linkages between 
virtual violence and real-world 
aggression have been found. For 
example, a recent experimental 
study conducted in the real world 
motivated parents to change their 
children’s media diet by substituting 
prosocial programs in place of violent 
ones. This study found decreases 
in aggression and improvement in 
overall behavior.8
Understanding the risks of media 
violence can be complicated when 
research studies have found mixed 
results using varying methods. 
Fortunately, meta-analyses have 
been performed to combine the 
available research findings and to 
provide an overall estimate of the 
risks.9–11 Summarizing the results 
of >400 studies including violent 
media of all types, researchers found 
there was a significant association 
between exposure to media 
violence and aggressive behavior 
(effect size: 0.19; 95% confidence 
interval [CI]: 0.19–0.20), aggressive 
thoughts (effect size: 0.18; 95% CI: 
0.17–0.19), angry feelings (effect 
size: 0.27; 95% CI: 0.24–0.30), and 
2
 by guest on June 1, 2019
www.aappublications.org/news
Downloaded from 
 PEDIATRICS Volume  
138 
, number  
2 
, August 2016 
physiologic arousal (effect size: 
0.26; 95% CI: 0.20–0.31).11 Another 
study performed a similar analysis 
focusing only on video games. The 
results, based on 140 such studies, 
found slightly larger negative effect 
sizes.10 Some contend, rightly, 
that these correlations are in the 
small to moderate range, but they 
are stronger than the associations 
between passive smoking and lung 
cancer, and many municipalities 
have banned smoking because of that 
risk.12
PUTTING THE FINDINGS INTO 
PERSPECTIVE
A national discussion regarding the 
risks of media violence is necessary 
and critical for the health of our 
children and youth. Unfortunately, 
media reports frequently present 
“both sides” of the media violence 
and aggression issue by pairing a 
research scientist with an industry 
expert or spokesperson or even 
a contrarian academic, which 
creates a false equivalency and 
the misperception that research 
data and scientific consensus are 
lacking. A sizable majority of media 
researchers both in pediatrics and 
psychology believe that existing 
data show a significant link between 
virtual violence and aggression.4 One 
might justifiably wonder why the 
contrarian position to media violence 
is so frequently presented when it 
is no longer presented for passive 
smoke exposure.
The full implications of virtual 
violence are best understood at 
a population level. Although the 
majority of Americans believe there 
is a causal relationship between 
screen violence and real-world 
aggression, most believe that they 
and their children are immune to 
these effects. The so-called third-
person effect causes people to believe 
that other people, not themselves, 
but some small, susceptible fraction 
of people, are influenced in a way 
the majority of the population is not. 
Stipulating that this belief is true, 
even if it is assumed that only 2% of 
the public is induced to behave more 
aggressively after being exposed to 
violent media, it can be expected that 
400 000 of the 20 million viewers of 
the latest violent blockbuster film 
will exhibit increased aggression 
after viewing the movie, at least for 
a short period of time. Surely, even 
that figure is large enough to warrant 
some public attention and action.
RECOMMENDATIONS
1. Pediatricians should consider 
making children’s “media diets” 
an essential part of all well-child 
examinations. In particular, 
emphasis must be placed on 
guiding the content of media 
and not only limiting quantity.13 
Impartial ratings, such as those 
issued by Common Sense Media, 
can be used to help guide 
selection.
2. Parents should be mindful of what 
shows their children watch and 
which games they play. When 
possible, they should coplay 
games with their children so as 
to have a better sense of what 
the games entail. Young children 
(under the age of 6 years) need to 
be protected from virtual violence. 
Parents should understand that 
young children do not always 
distinguish fantasy from reality. 
Cartoon violence can seem very 
real, and it can have detrimental 
effects. Furthermore, first-person 
shooter games, in which killing 
others is the central theme, are 
not appropriate for any children.
3. On state and local levels, 
policy makers should consider 
promoting legislation that 
provides caregivers and children 
better and more specific 
information about the content of 
media of all forms, especially with 
regard to violence, and should 
enact laws that prohibit easy 
access to violent media for minors.
4. Pediatricians are encouraged to 
advocate for more child-positive 
media. Pediatricians should 
support and collaborate with 
the entertainment industry to 
create more shows and games 
for children of all ages that do 
not include violence, especially 
as a central theme. The American 
Academy of Pediatrics makes the 
following recommendations for 
the entertainment industry:
 
⚬ Avoid the glamorization of 
weapon carrying and the 
normalization of violence as an 
acceptable means of resolving 
conflict.
 
⚬ Eliminate the use of violence 
in a comic or sexual context or 
in any other situation in which 
violence is amusing, titillating, or 
trivialized.
 
⚬ Eliminate gratuitous portrayals 
of interpersonal violence and 
hateful, racist, misogynistic, 
or homophobic language or 
situations unless explicitly 
portraying how destructive such 
words and actions can be. Even 
so, violence does not belong in 
media developed for very young 
children.
 
⚬ If violence is used, it should be 
used thoughtfully as serious 
drama, always showing the pain 
and loss suffered by the victims 
and perpetrators.
 
⚬ Video games should not use 
human or other living targets or 
award points for killing, because 
this teaches children to associate 
pleasure and success with 
their ability to cause pain and 
suffering to others.
5. The news and information media 
should acknowledge the proven 
scientific connection between 
virtual violence and real-world 
aggression and the current 
consensus of credentialed experts 
3
 by guest on June 1, 2019
www.aappublications.org/news
Downloaded from 
 FROM THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF PEDIATRICS
in this field and should avoid 
equating unscientific opinions 
and industry marketing tracts 
with peer-reviewed and vetted 
scientific research.
6. The federal government should 
oversee the development of a 
robust, valid, reliable, and “parent-
centric” rating system rather than 
relying on industry to do so.
LEAD AUTHOR
Dimitri Christakis, MD, MPH – Former Council on 
Communications and Media Executive Committee 
Member
COUNCIL ON COMMUNICATIONS AND MEDIA 
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE, 2014–2015
David Hill, MD, Chairperson
Nusheen Ameenuddin, MD, MPH
Yolanda (Linda) Reid Chassiakos, MD
Corinn Corss, MD
Daniel Fagbuyi, MD
Jeffrey Hutchinson, MD
Alanna Levine, MD
Claire McCarthy, MD
Robert Mendelson, MD
Megan Moreno, MD, MSEd, MPH
Wendy Sue Swanson, MD, MBE
LIAISONS
Kris Kaliebe, MD – American Academy of Child 
and Adolescent Psychiatry
Jennifer Pomeranz, JD, MPH – American Public 
Health Association
Brian Wilcox, PhD – American Psychological 
Association
STAFF
Thomas McPheron
REFERENCES
 1.  
Yokota F, Thompson KM. Violence 
in G-rated animated fi
 lms. JAMA. 
2000;283(20):2716–2720
 2.  
National Committee on Television 
Violence. National Television Violence 
Study. Vol 3. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage 
Publications; 1998
 
 3.  
Bushman BJ, Huesman LR. 
Aggression. In: Fiske ST, Gilbert DT, 
Linzey G, eds. Handbook of Social 
Psychology. New York, NY: John Wiley 
& Sons; 2010
 4.  
Bushman BJ, Anderson CA. 
Understanding causality in the effects 
of media violence. Am Behav Sci. 
2015;59(14):1807–1821 
 5.  
Brown v Entertainment Merchants 
Association, 131 SCt 2729 
(2011)
 6.  
H Res 278. Investigation of radio and 
television programs. Hearings before 
a subcommittee of the Committee on 
Interstate and Foreign Commerce, 
US House of Representatives, 82nd 
Congress, 2nd Session. Washington, 
DC: US Government Printing Offi
 ce; 
1952. Available at: http:// 
babel. 
hathitrust. 
org/ 
cgi/ 
pt? 
id= 
uc1. 
b3970806;view= 
1up;seq= 
9. Accessed 
September 21, 2015
 7.  
Bushman BJ, Jamieson PE, 
Weitz I, Romer D. Gun violence 
trends in movies. Pediatrics. 
2013;132(6):1014–1018
 8.  
Hasan Y, Begue L, Scharkow M, 
Bushman BJ. The more you play, the 
more aggressive you become: a long-
term experimental study of cumulative 
violent video game effects on hostile 
expectations and aggressive behavior. 
J Exp Soc Psychol. 2013;49(2):224–227
 9.  
Anderson CA, Bushman BJ. Effects of 
violent video games on aggressive 
behavior, aggressive cognition, 
aggressive affect, physiological 
arousal, and prosocial behavior: 
a meta-analytic review of the 
scientifi
 c literature. Psychol Sci. 
2001;12(5):353–359
 10.  
Anderson CA, Shibuya A, Ihori N, et 
al. Violent video game effects on 
aggression, empathy, and prosocial 
behavior in eastern and western 
countries: a meta-analytic review. 
Psychol Bull. 2010;136(2):151–173
 11.  
Bushman BJ, Huesmann LR. Short-
term and long-term effects of violent 
media on aggression in children and 
adults. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 
2006;160(4):348–352
 12.  
Anderson CA, Bushman BJ. 
Media violence and the American 
public revisited. Am Psychol. 
2002;57(6–7):448–450
 13.  
Christakis DA, Garrison MM, 
Herrenkohl T, et al. Modifying media 
content for preschool children: a 
randomized controlled trial. Pediatrics. 
2013;131(3):431–438
4
ABBREVIATION
CI:  
confidence interval 
 by guest on June 1, 2019
www.aappublications.org/news
Downloaded from 
 DOI: 10.1542/peds.2016-1298 originally published online July 18, 2016; 
2016;138;
Pediatrics 
COUNCIL ON COMMUNICATIONS AND MEDIA
Virtual Violence
Services
Updated Information &
http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/138/2/e20161298
including high resolution figures, can be found at: 
References
http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/138/2/e20161298#BIBL
This article cites 9 articles, 2 of which you can access for free at: 
Subspecialty Collections
http://www.aappublications.org/cgi/collection/media_sub
Media
ations_and_media
http://www.aappublications.org/cgi/collection/council_on_communic
Council on Communications and Media
http://www.aappublications.org/cgi/collection/current_policy
Current Policy
following collection(s): 
This article, along with others on similar topics, appears in the
Permissions & Licensing
http://www.aappublications.org/site/misc/Permissions.xhtml
in its entirety can be found online at: 
Information about reproducing this article in parts (figures, tables) or
Reprints
http://www.aappublications.org/site/misc/reprints.xhtml
Information about ordering reprints can be found online: 
 by guest on June 1, 2019
www.aappublications.org/news
Downloaded from 
 DOI: 10.1542/peds.2016-1298 originally published online July 18, 2016; 
2016;138;
Pediatrics 
COUNCIL ON COMMUNICATIONS AND MEDIA
Virtual Violence
 
http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/138/2/e20161298
located on the World Wide Web at: 
The online version of this article, along with updated information and services, is
1073-0397. 
ISSN:
60007. Copyright © 2016 by the American Academy of Pediatrics. All rights reserved. Print 
the American Academy of Pediatrics, 141 Northwest Point Boulevard, Elk Grove Village, Illinois,
has been published continuously since 1948. Pediatrics is owned, published, and trademarked by 
Pediatrics is the official journal of the American Academy of Pediatrics. A monthly publication, it
 by guest on June 1, 2019
www.aappublications.org/news
Downloaded from 
