 Canterbury Christ Church University’s repository of research outputs
http://create.canterbury.ac.uk
Copyright © and Moral Rights for this thesis are retained by the author and/or other 
copyright owners. A copy can be downloaded for personal non-commercial 
research or study, without prior permission or charge. This thesis cannot be 
reproduced or quoted extensively from without first obtaining permission in writing 
from the copyright holder/s. The content must not be changed in any way or sold 
commercially in any format or medium without the formal permission of the 
copyright holders. 
When referring to this work, full bibliographic details including the author, title, 
awarding institution and date of the thesis must be given e.g. Court, Alex J. (2014) 
They're NICE and neat, but are they useful?: a grounded theory of clinical 
psychologists' beliefs about, and use of NICE guidelines. D.Clin.Psychol. thesis, 
Canterbury Christ Church University. 
Contact: create.library@canterbury.ac.uk
  
 
 
 
MAJOR RESEARCH PROJECT 
 
 
ALEX JOHN COURT BSc (Hons) MBPsS PGDip 
 
 
 
 
THEY’RE NICE AND NEAT, BUT ARE THEY USEFUL? A 
GROUNDED THEORY OF CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGISTS’ 
BELIEFS ABOUT, AND USE OF NICE GUIDELINES 
 
 
 
Section A: NICE Guidelines in UK Mental Health Services: A Review of How 
They Have Been Received  
Word Count: 7,994 (76) 
 
Section B: They’re NICE and Neat, but Are They Useful? A Grounded Theory 
of Clinical Psychologists’ Beliefs About, and Use of NICE Guidelines  
Word Count: 7,987 (191) 
 
 
 
 
Overall Word Count: 15,981 (267) 
 
 
 
  
A thesis submitted in partial fulfilment of the requirements of 
Canterbury Christ Church University for the degree of 
Doctor of Clinical Psychology 
 
 
 
APRIL 2014 
 
 
 
SALOMONS 
CANTERBURY CHRIST CHURCH UNIVERSITY 
 
 
  
 
2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
3 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
First and foremost, I would like to thank the clinical psychologists who took time out of their 
busy schedules to participate in this project. I am particularly grateful to these participants for 
speaking so openly and for sharing such interesting views with me; this made the research 
interviews a pleasure to be a part of. Thanks are due to my supervisors, Ms Anne Cooke and 
Dr Amanda Scrivener, whose support and guidance has been invaluable throughout, 
particularly at the start and finish of the project. I would like to thank my friends and family 
for their understanding when I have been wrapped up in work and unable to see them. Most 
of all, I would like to thank my wife for all that she has done to support me throughout the 
last three years, especially since our daughter was born and she has still put up with me 
spending far too many weekends and annual leave days sat at my desk working. Lastly, I 
would like to thank my daughter, if ever I was struggling to switch off from work and take a 
break, all I needed to do was spend time with her and her smile would put a smile on my face 
instantly. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
4 
 
 
Summary of MRP Portfolio 
Section A is a scoping review, exploring the generic clinical guideline implementation 
literature, as well as literature specific to the use of NICE guidelines in UK mental health 
services. This review examines the proposed benefits of guidelines, highlights the 
inconsistent implementation of NICE guidelines and explores potential reasons for this. The 
theoretical assumptions underlying guideline usage are examined. The use of psychological 
theory in attempting to understand the behaviour of clinicians is also reviewed. It is proposed 
that further qualitative research is required to investigate clinicians’ beliefs about, and use of 
NICE guidelines.  
 
Section B presents the findings of a grounded theory analysis of clinical psychologists’ use of 
NICE guidelines. A theoretical framework is presented, conceptualising the participants’ 
(n=11) beliefs, decision making processes and clinical practices. The overall emerging theme 
is “considering NICE guidelines to have benefits but to be fraught with dangers”. Attention is 
drawn to the proposed benefits and limitations of guidelines and how these are managed. 
Concerns are raised about the harm that guidelines could do to service users and to the 
profession of clinical psychology. The findings are integrated with existing theory and 
research, and clinical and research implications are presented. 
 
Section C: Appendices. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
5 
 
 
Contents 
Section A: Literature Review.................................................................................. 
9 
 
Abstract.......................................................................................................... 
10 
1.  
Introduction................................................................................................... 
11 
 
1.1.  The Age of Clinical Practice Guidelines and the Rise of NICE 
11 
 
1.2.  Aims of Review 
13 
2. 
Method............................................................................................................ 13 
3. 
The Proposed Benefits of Guidelines........................................................... 
15 
4. 
The Use of NICE Guidelines in UK Mental Health Services..................... 16 
5. 
Investigating Implementation Barriers....................................................... 
18 
 
5.1.  General Research Literature on Guideline Implementation 
18 
 
5.2.  Published Criticisms of the Use of NICE Guidelines in UK Mental 
Health Services 
25 
 
5.3.  Empirical Research Focusing on Implementation of NICE Guidelines 
in UK Mental Health Services 
31 
6. 
Discussion....................................................................................................... 
37 
 
6.1.  Future Directions for Research 
38 
7. 
References....................................................................................................... 40 
 
 
Section B: Empirical Paper...................................................................................... 
 
 
55 
 
Abstract.......................................................................................................... 
56 
1. 
Introduction................................................................................................... 
57 
 
1.1.  Rationale and Aims 
59 
 
1.2.  Research Questions 
60 
  
 
6 
 
 
2. 
Method............................................................................................................ 61 
 
2.1.  Design Overview 
61 
 
2.2.  Ethical Considerations 
61 
 
2.3.  Participants 
62 
 
2.4.  Procedure 
63 
 
2.5.  Quality Assurance 
65 
3. 
Results............................................................................................................. 66 
 
3.1.  Model Summary 
68 
 
3.2.  Valuing the Benefits of NICE Guidelines 
69 
 
3.3.  Worrying That NICE Guidelines can Create an Unhelpful Illusion of 
Neatness 
69 
 
3.4.  Perceived Level of Pressure to be NICE Compliant 
72 
 
3.5.  Beliefs about the Purpose of, and Future of Clinical Psychology 
73 
 
3.6.  Having a Flexible Relationship with Guidelines 
75 
4. 
Discussion....................................................................................................... 
79 
 
4.1.  Theoretical Integration 
79 
 
4.2.  Clinical Implications 
83 
 
4.3.  Research Implications 
84 
 
4.4.  Limitations 
85 
5. 
Conclusions..................................................................................................... 86 
6. 
References....................................................................................................... 87 
 
Section C: Appendices.............................................................................................. 
 
96 
 
 
  
 
7 
 
 
List of Tables 
Section A: Literature Review 
 
 
Table 1 
Summarising the ERNIE categorisation of audits on NICE 
guideline implementation 
17 
 
Section B: Empirical Paper 
 
 
Table 1 
Participant characteristics 
63 
 
 
List of Figures 
Section B: Empirical Paper 
 
 
Figure 1 
Model conceptualising the clinical psychologists’ beliefs 
about, and use of NICE guidelines. 
67 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
8 
 
 
List of Appendices 
Appendix A 
Further Details of Literature Review Methodology 
97 
Appendix B 
Summary of Studies Focusing on Implementation of NICE 
Guidelines in UK Mental Health Services 
101 
Appendix C 
Salomons Independent Research Review Panel Approval Letter 
103 
Appendix D 
Ethics Approval Letter 
105 
Appendix E 
Anonymised Research and Development Approval Letters 
106 
Appendix F 
Information Sheet for Participants 
109 
Appendix G 
Participant Consent Form 
114 
Appendix H 
Recruitment Email 
115 
Appendix I 
Interview Questions 
116 
Appendix J 
Full transcript of First Interview with Line by Line Coding 
117 
Appendix K 
Extracts of Transcripts with Examples of Focused Coding 
158 
Appendix L 
Abridged Research Diary 
172 
Appendix M 
Pre Interview Questionnaire 
193 
Appendix N  
Interview Question Examples from Latter Interviews 
195 
Appendix O 
Reflections after the Bracketing Interview 
204 
Appendix P 
Table of Codes and Categories with Quotation Examples 
206 
Appendix Q 
Key Components of a Grounded Theory Study 
226 
Appendix R 
Table of Codes and Categories 
227 
Appendix S 
Example of Notes Made Prior to Interviews 
230 
Appendix T 
Letter to R&D and Ethics Committee 
232 
Appendix U 
End of Study Summary Report for Participants, Ethics 
Committee and R&D 
234 
Appendix V 
Journal Author Guidelines 
238 
 Running head: NICE GUIDELINES IN MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW 
9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alex John Court BSc (Hons) MBPsS PGDip 
 
 
MAJOR RESEARCH PROJECT 
SECTION A: LITERATURE REVIEW 
 
NICE Guidelines in UK Mental Health Services: A Review of How They Have 
Been Received. 
 
Word count: 7,994 (76) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APRIL 2014 
 
 
 
SALOMONS 
CANTERBURY CHRIST CHURCH UNIVERSITY 
 NICE GUIDELINES IN MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW 
 
10 
 
Abstract 
Clinical practice guidelines have become increasingly common in both physical and mental 
healthcare over the last two decades. This review examines the proposed benefits of 
guidelines, highlights the inconsistent implementation of NICE guidelines in UK mental 
health services and explores potential reasons for this. The generic research literature on 
guideline implementation is reviewed, before focussing in more detail on literature specific to 
the use of NICE guidelines in UK mental health services. The body of empirical research 
investigating this area is fairly limited. The available research suggests that external factors, 
such as resources, are key barriers to implementation of NICE recommendations. Many 
authors have published strongly worded criticisms of the use of NICE guidelines in mental 
health services. It is proposed that further qualitative research is required to investigate 
clinicians’ beliefs about NICE guidelines. Developing a better understanding of clinicians’ 
beliefs about, and use of NICE guidelines could help inform implementation strategies. 
Alternatively, it could highlight limitations of the guidelines and question the extent to, and 
the conditions under which they are more or less useful. 
Keywords: NICE, clinical guidelines, decision making, implementation, mental 
health. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NICE GUIDELINES IN MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW 
 
11 
 
 
 
1. Introduction 
1.1.  
The Age of Clinical Practice Guidelines and the Rise of NICE 
Numerous authors have highlighted the increasing role of clinical practice guidelines1 in both 
physical and mental healthcare over the last two decades (e.g. Franx, 2012; Girlanda, Fiedler, 
Ay, Barbui, & Koesters, 2013; Grimshaw et al., 2004; Nathan, 1998; Parry, Cape, & Pilling, 
2003; Pilling, 2008; Woolf, Grol, Hutchinson, Eccles, & Grimshaw, 1999). Woolf et al. 
(1999) described a developing interest in guidelines across Europe, North America, Australia, 
New Zealand and Africa. 
 
Parry et al. (2003) suggested that “health care professionals are living in the age of 
evidence-based guidance” (p. 337), highlighting a “remarkable proliferation of clinical 
practice guidelines” (p. 337). Using the example of guidelines available internationally for 
depression, Pilling (2008) demonstrated that the interest in guidelines had continued to 
increase at an extraordinary rate; he noted that Parry et al. reported that there were 170 
guidelines for depression on the National Guidelines Clearinghouse (an international 
database) and that on the 31st December 2007, the number had risen to 446.  
 
Guidelines are typically defined as “systematically developed statements to assist 
practitioner and patient decisions about appropriate healthcare for specific clinical 
circumstances” (Field & Lohr, 1990, p.38). Woolf et al. (1999) suggest that the interest in 
guidelines stems from rising healthcare costs for providers, in the context of an increased 
demand for care and an aging population. There is a recognition of variation in service 
provision and an assumption that this can be partially explained by inappropriate care. Woolf 
                                                          
 
1 Hereafter referred to as “guidelines”. 
 NICE GUIDELINES IN MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW 
 
12 
 
 
 
et al. suggest that the motivation underlying guideline production is an attempt to offer the 
best care possible in a cost effective manner. 
 
The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence2 (NICE) was established in 1999 
to produce guidelines for health professionals working in the UK National Health Service 
(NHS). The aim was to improve clinical effectiveness and reduce variations in practice across 
NHS Trusts (Department of Health (DH), 1998). The first NICE guideline for mental health 
was the schizophrenia guideline, published in 2002. Baillie, Bent, Leng, Kendall and 
Shackleton (2008) noted that in the years following this first guideline, 20 mental health 
guidelines were published, covering “all the main psychoses, substance misuse problems, 
common mental health disorders, personality disorders, childhood mental health and the 
dementias” (p. 257). 
 
In a review of NICE’s first decade in existence, focusing on mental health, Kendall, 
Glover, Taylor and Pilling (2011a) proposed that NICE had become “probably the most 
comprehensive and methodologically advanced mental health guideline programme in the 
world, covering most adults and children with mental health problems” (p. 342). Baillie et al. 
(2008) described an increasing international interest in NICE guidelines, and in 2008 “NICE 
International” was established (NICE, 2009). The NICE International Review (2012) detailed 
that since its inception, NICE International had helped develop guidelines (across physical 
and mental health) in 75 countries. 
 
                                                          
 
2Originally named “National Institute for Clinical Excellence”. In 2005, the name changed to “National Institute 
for Health and Clinical Excellence”. In 2013 the name changed to “National Institute for Health and Care 
Excellence”. 
 NICE GUIDELINES IN MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW 
 
13 
 
 
 
Despite the apparent success of NICE, there is evidence that the level of 
implementation of NICE guidelines in UK mental health services is low (e.g. Mears, Kendall 
Strathdee, Sinfield, & Aldridge, 2008; Prytys, Garety, Onwumere, & Craig, 2011). Similar 
concerns have been raised within UK physical health services (e.g. Sheldon et al., 2004; 
Spyridonidis & Calnan, 2011). 
 
1.2.  
Aims of Review 
The aim of this paper is to review the empirical, theoretical and ‘grey’ literature related to the 
use of NICE guidelines in UK mental health services. It will cover the general literature on 
guideline implementation, as well as specifically focussing on literature regarding the use of 
NICE guidelines in UK mental health services. The review attempts to address the following 
questions: 
i) 
What are the proposed benefits of guidelines? 
ii) 
To what extent are NICE guidelines followed in UK mental health services? 
iii) 
What barriers have been identified in implementing NICE guidelines in UK 
mental health services? 
iv) 
Are there arguments against the use of NICE guidelines in UK mental health 
services? 
v) 
What further research is required? 
 
2. Method 
The following electronic databases were searched: PsychINFO, Medline, Web of Knowledge, 
ASSIA, Cochrane Library, Google Scholar and Google, using the keywords: “NICE 
guidelines” OR “NICE guidance” OR “Clinical Guidelines” AND “Attitudes” OR “Clinical 
Decision Making” OR “Implementation” AND “Mental Health”. Searches were limited to 
articles produced after 1998. It was hoped that this would capture literature written in 
 NICE GUIDELINES IN MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW 
 
14 
 
 
 
anticipation of NICE guidelines and literature written about, or in the context of NICE 
guidelines. When relevant studies were found, their reference lists were inspected to identify 
other appropriate studies. The “find similar” and “find citing articles” functions on electronic 
databases were also utilised. 
 
The review utilised a mixed methodology (Grant & Booth, 2009), incorporating a 
scoping review and a systematic review. Overall, a scoping review (Grant & Booth, 2009; 
Jesson, Matheson, & Lacey, 2011) was conducted, reviewing the available literature, 
identifying gaps in knowledge and highlighting areas for future research. The generic 
literature regarding guideline usage and published views about NICE guidelines were 
reviewed in this way. This review aimed to be thorough, without claiming to be 
comprehensive. Due to the wide variety of literature covered, no formal quality assessment 
frameworks were utilised, as is typical in such reviews (Grant & Booth, 2009).  
 
Due to the limited volume of empirical research focusing on NICE guideline usage in 
UK mental health services, it was possible to conduct a systematic review (Grant & Booth, 
2009) of this material. Studies were included in this systematic review if they specifically 
investigated why guidelines were not implemented, or if they explored clinicians’ beliefs 
about guidelines as a result of investigating clinical decision making. Studies were included if 
they were written in English, published in peer reviewed journals and focused on the use of 
NICE guidelines in UK mental health services. Due to the scarcity of research available, no 
further stringent exclusion criteria were set. The critique of qualitative studies was informed 
by Reid and Gough (2000). The critique of studies utilising surveys was informed by 
Gauthier’s (2003) framework (further methodology details are included in Appendix A). 
 
 NICE GUIDELINES IN MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW 
 
15 
 
 
 
3. The Proposed Benefits of Guidelines 
Guidelines are said to provide busy clinicians with easily accessible summaries, critically 
appraising the available evidence for various interventions (Parry et al., 2003; Woolf et al., 
1999; Ruggeri, 2008). Parry et al. suggest that this is especially important for generalists such 
as general practitioners (GPs) who have to keep track of the evidence base over widely 
differing domains. Woolf et al. (1999) argue that identifying interventions that are not 
supported by science can draw attention to “ineffective, dangerous and wasteful practices” 
(p.528). Pilling (2008) suggests that guidelines could help focus future training of clinicians 
on the most effective interventions.  
 
It is proposed that guidelines can help highlight under-recognised problems and 
interventions, together with neglected patient populations (Rawlins, 2011; Woolf et al., 
1999). Woolf et al. (1999) note that guidelines can lead to new services being established to 
meet such needs. Entwistle et al. (1998) suggest another benefit to patients, highlighting that 
guidelines are often accompanied by summary versions for the general public. This can 
increase their knowledge of available interventions and empower them to take informed roles 
in shared decision making about their care. The involvement of service users in the 
production of NICE guidelines has been said to be a key development in reducing power 
imbalances between clinicians and service users in mental health services (Harding, Pettinari, 
Brown, Hayward, & Taylor, 2011; Kendall, Glover, Taylor, & Pilling, 2011b). 
 
One of the key proposed benefits of guidelines is that they aim to improve cost 
effectiveness in a time of limited funding (Shapiro, Lasker, Bindman, & Lee, 1993; Woolf et 
al., 1999). Buxton (2006) notes that “economic evaluation plays a central role” (p.1133) in 
NICE. 
 NICE GUIDELINES IN MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW 
 
16 
 
 
 
It has been suggested that guidelines can be a helpful platform for validating a 
particular profession or intervention. For example, Ruggeri (2008) acknowledges that 
psychiatry is seen by many as a “soft science” (p.272) and suggests that “the publication of 
evidence based practice guidelines helps combat such misperceptions and helps people 
realise that there are specific ways to treat mental illness and that these treatments are 
actually effective” (p.272). Shaner (2002) suggests that guidelines can be a way to defend and 
preserve the place of psychological therapies in health services. Pilling (2008) suggested that 
NICE guidelines had been helpful in demonstrating the importance of psychological 
interventions, noting that out of the 13 mental health guidelines available at the time, 
psychological interventions were identified as key recommendations in 10. Pilling (2008) and 
Rawlins (2011) highlighted that NICE recommendations had a major role in the development 
of the Increasing Access to Psychological Therapies (IAPT) programme (DH, 2007); which 
led to a significant increase in funding for the provision of psychological therapies in the UK. 
 
Kendall et al. (2011b) and Parry et al. (2003) argue that a strength of NICE is that it 
draws on input from numerous different professional groups and service users. This attempts 
to ensure that the power NICE guidelines can provide is not misused. NICE deliberately 
adopted this approach following concerns that other guidelines, created by one professional 
group, had been misused to serve the interests of the profession (e.g. Grilli, Magrini, Penna, 
Mura, & Liberati, 2000; Hollon & Shelton, 2001). 
 
4. The Use of NICE Guidelines in UK Mental Health Services 
NICE carries out regular searches of a wide range of electronic databases and collates audits3 
of guideline implementation into the Evaluation and Review of NICE Implementation 
                                                          
 
3 Single and multi-site audits. 
 NICE GUIDELINES IN MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW 
 
17 
 
 
 
Evidence (ERNIE) database, available to search on its website. NICE awards ratings ranging 
from: “Practice appears to be in line with guidance” (results reported in audits are over 70%), 
“Doubts about or mixed impact in practice” (results between 41% - 69%), to “Practice 
appears not to be in line with guidance” (results are 40% or less)4. Table 1 details the results 
for the guidelines with the most audits currently available (as of 7th November 2013). 
 
Table 1.  
Summarising the ERNIE categorisation of audits on NICE guideline implementation  
Guideline 
Number of audits showing: 
Practice appears to 
be in line with 
guidance 
Doubts about or 
mixed impact in 
practice 
Practice appears not 
to be in line with 
guidance 
CG90 Depression in 
adults 
0 
10 
9 
CG22 Depression in 
children and young 
people 
0 
5 
6 
CG113 Anxiety 
0 
4 
7 
CG123 Common 
mental health 
disorders 
0 
6 
7 
CG42 Dementia 
4 
9 
0 
CG82 Schizophrenia  
1 
6 
2 
 
                                                          
 
4 Range details were provided through personal communication with a NICE data analyst who noted that the 
percentages were chosen arbitrarily. 
 NICE GUIDELINES IN MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW 
 
18 
 
 
 
The figures in table 1 paint a clear picture of inconsistent implementation of NICE 
guidelines in UK mental health services. Only 5 out of the 76 audits (7%) demonstrated that 
“practice appears to be in line with guidance”. Audits identified by this review, that were not 
reported by ERNIE, display a similar picture. For example, Lewis, Buffham and Evenson, 
(2012) and Mankiewicz and Turner (2012) highlighted that despite NICE recommendation, 
psychological interventions were not routinely offered to individuals with a diagnosis of 
schizophrenia. Dunne and Rogers (2011) reported a series of considerable deviation from 
NICE guidelines in the treatment of individuals with a diagnosis of borderline personality 
disorder. For example, 61 per cent of patients were receiving long term medication, despite 
NICE advising against this. In summary, despite the many proposed benefits of guidelines, 
the available evidence suggests that uptake of NICE guidelines in UK mental health services 
has been inconsistent. 
 
5. Investigating Implementation Barriers  
The following sections of this review attempt to explore potential reasons for the inconsistent 
uptake of NICE guidelines in UK mental health services. The general research literature on 
guideline implementation is reviewed before focusing on literature specific to the use of 
NICE guidelines in UK mental health services.  
 
5.1.  
General Research Literature on Guideline Implementation 
The last 10 to 15 years have seen a developing research interest internationally in attempting 
to understand barriers to guideline implementation (Girlanda et al., 2013). This section begins 
by defining terminology and moves onto reviewing relevant literature. 
 
 NICE GUIDELINES IN MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW 
 
19 
 
 
 
5.1.1. Terminology. Within the literature, there appears to be a link between guideline 
implementation and evidence based medicine (EBM)5. Many of the prominent researchers 
have published in both fields and the terms have been used interchangeably (e.g. Grimshaw, 
Eccles, & Tetroe, 2004), presumably because they are seen as synonymous. The terms have 
even been combined as “evidence based medicine guidelines” (Saarni & Gylling, 2004).  
 
EBM has been defined as “the conscientious, explicit, and judicious use of current best 
evidence in making decisions about the care of individual patients” (Sackett, Rosenberg, 
Gray, Haynes, & Richardson, 1996, p. 71). Guidelines have been described as a way of 
increasing the practice of EBM, by providing clinicians with accessible summaries of the 
evidence with clear recommendations (Grimshaw, Eccles, Lavis, Hill, & Squires, 2012). 
Kendall et al. (2011b) describe guidelines as “the most elaborate and well-developed 
expression of evidence based medicine in clinical care” (p. 314). 
 
While there is clearly a link between the two terms, there are also important 
differences. For instance guidelines can quickly become out of date; if new evidence emerges 
after a guideline is produced, practice that follows the original guideline would no longer fit 
within the definition of EBM. Furthermore, the approach taken by developers of guidelines, 
such as NICE, to create recommendations has been challenged (e.g. Mollon, 2009a; 
Barkham, 2007; UKCP, 2011). For example, UKCP (2011) argue that NICE unfairly neglect 
evidence from practice based research, case studies and qualitative studies. A clinician whose 
practice is informed by evidence not included in the guidelines could therefore argue that 
they are practicing within the realms of EBM but not within guidelines. This review draws 
                                                          
 
5 Also referred to as “evidence based clinical practice”, in recognition of non-medical interventions, but EBM 
tends to be more frequently used. 
 NICE GUIDELINES IN MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW 
 
20 
 
 
 
upon literature from both fields but makes a point of highlighting whether the research is 
referring to EBM or guidelines. 
 
5.1.2. From research to clinical practice. In a systematic review of the use of EBM 
across both physical and mental health, Grimshaw et al. (2012) note that “one of the most 
consistent findings is the failure to translate research into practice” (p. 50). This has been 
reported by numerous authors (e.g. Bero et al., 1998; Eccles, Grimshaw, Walker, Johnston, & 
Pitts, 2005; Grol & Grimshaw, 1999; Haines & Donald, 1998). Guidelines are intended to 
help facilitate the practice of EBM, but the literature consistently concedes that guideline 
implementation is also low, across both mental and physical health care (e.g. Berry & 
Haddock, 2008; Cabana et al., 1999; Girlanda et al., 2013; Goldney, 2004; Michie et al., 
2005). In the context of the practice of EBM and use of guidelines being consistently low, the 
inconsistent implementation of NICE guidelines in UK mental health services is perhaps not 
unexpected.  
 
5.1.3. Implementation barriers. Cabana et al. (1999) completed a systematic review 
of barriers to physicians’ use of guidelines6 and produced a conceptual model which 
attempted to account for variations in practice. This model suggests that guideline 
implementation depends upon three categories; clinicians’ knowledge (i.e. familiarity with 
guidelines), clinicians’ beliefs (e.g. level of agreement with guidelines) and external factors 
(such as resources). However, the validity of the model is potentially open to question. It was 
constructed by manually reviewing and collating the findings of 76 studies, no formal 
quantitative or qualitative methodology was utilised to construct or test the model. The model 
highlights an interrelation between the categories of external factors and clinicians’ beliefs. 
                                                          
 
6 Including physical and mental health guidelines. 
 NICE GUIDELINES IN MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW 
 
21 
 
 
 
For example a clinician may believe that it is not possible to implement guidelines due to a 
lack of resources. However, there is no consideration of whether clinicians’ knowledge and 
beliefs are interrelated, despite this seeming likely. For example if clinicians are critical of, or 
apathetic towards guidelines, then it is hypothesised that they will invest less effort in 
increasing their knowledge of them. Despite its limitations, Cabana et al.’s model has proved 
influential, being cited over 3,700 times7, influencing future research and guideline 
implementation strategies.  
 
Robertson and Jochelson (2006)8, Weinmann, Koesters and Becker (2007)9 and 
Girlanda et al. (2013)10 systematically reviewed strategies for increasing guideline 
implementation. Strategies included the provision of educational material, large scale didactic 
training, small scale interactive training, the use of local champions, audit and feedback, 
computerised reminders and providing educational material to patients. The consistent 
finding was that the success of these strategies was modest at best. An assumption underlying 
many of these strategies appears to be that increasing clinicians’ knowledge will result in an 
increase in implementation. The fact that these strategies tend to be ineffective could suggest 
that knowledge is not a key predictor variable in understanding guideline usage.  
 
5.1.4. Use of psychological theory. Eccles et al. (2005) stressed the importance of 
research into guideline usage being based upon psychological theory. Eccles et al. noted that 
clinical practice was a form of human behaviour and could therefore be studied using general 
psychological theories relating to human behaviour. They highlighted that in a previous 
                                                          
 
7 3,772 as of 06.02.2014, source GOOGLE Scholar. 
8 Focusing on the use of NICE guidelines, both physical and mental health. 
9 Focusing on mental health guidelines. 
10 Focusing on mental health guidelines. 
 NICE GUIDELINES IN MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW 
 
22 
 
 
 
review by Grimshaw et al. (2004) fewer than 10% of the studies drew upon psychological 
theory. 
 
The theory of planned behaviour (Ajzen, 1985) is one of the most commonly used 
theories in this field (Perkins et al., 2007). This theory proposes that intention to perform a 
particular behaviour is influenced by an individual’s beliefs (i.e. about the consequences / 
acceptability of the behaviour), subjective norms (i.e. influence of others) and perceived 
behaviour control (i.e. how much control the individual feels they have to perform the 
behaviour). It has become one of the most influential and popular conceptual frameworks for 
the study of human action (Ajzen, 2001; Armitage & Connor, 2001) 
 
This theory has been utilised in a number of studies regarding guideline implementation 
(Perkins et al., 2007). For example Rashidian and Russell (2011) investigated the extent to 
which physicians followed statin guidelines and found that beliefs and perceived behaviour 
control were significant in predicting intentions to follow guidelines. However, the usefulness 
of the theory has been questioned, particularly in the light of the consistent finding that there 
is a significant gap between intention and actual behaviour (Browne & Chan, 2012; Conner 
& Norman, 2005; Sutton, 1998). Also, the use of regression models shows that the variables 
in the theory of planned behaviour tend to account for only between 20 to 40% of behaviour 
variance (Armitage & Connor, 2001; Godin & Kok, 1996). Browne and Chan (2012) suggest 
that the model is helpful but insufficient and in need of additional variables. 
 
Robertson, Baker and Hearnshaw (1996) produced a comprehensive framework of the 
ways in which psychological theory could be relevant in attempting to change the behaviour 
of doctors, including encouraging them to follow guidelines. Robertson et al. (1996) suggest 
 NICE GUIDELINES IN MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW 
 
23 
 
 
 
that the following theories are relevant: self-efficacy (Bandura, 1986), preparedness to 
change (Prochaska & DiClemente, 1986), social influence (Hovland & Weiss, 1951), 
bereavement reaction (Parkes, 1978), inverse social facilitation (Latane, 1981), social 
comparison (Festinger, 1954), groupthink (Janis, 1982), power theory (Mintzberg, 1983) and 
cultural change (Katz & Kahn, 1966). The scope of this review does not allow for a full 
description and evaluation of each theory, however the idea of utilising these particular 
theories appears to be based upon an underlying assumption that guidelines should be 
followed. For example clinicians need to improve their sense of self efficacy (Bandura, 
1986), or move from a stage of contemplation to action (Prochaska & DiClemente, 1986). 
This stance does not seem to consider the possibility that clinicians may have valid arguments 
for not utilising guidelines.  
 
Michie et al. (2005) conducted a novel project, inviting 61 professionals, to brainstorm 
which psychological theories might help understand the behaviour of clinicians. These 
theories were then deconstructed and common constructs grouped together to form 12 
domains11. The usefulness of psychological theory in this field has been questioned, noting 
that complex theories can complicate matters rather than provide understanding (Oxman, 
Fretheim, & Flottorp, 2005). A strength of Michie et al.’s approach is that it collated and 
simplified a number of theories, into one practical framework. Also, unlike the theories 
proposed by Robertson et al. (1996), Michie et al.’s framework allows for exploration of 
clinicians’ beliefs about guideline utility. Michie et al.’s framework is discussed further in 
section 5.3.2 of this review. 
 
                                                          
 
11 (1)knowledge, (2)skills, (3)social/professional identity, (4)beliefs about capabilities, (5)beliefs about 
consequences, (6)motivation and goals, (7)memory, attention and decision processes, (8)environmental 
context, (9)social influences, (10)emotion regulation, (11)behavioural regulation, (12)nature of behaviour. 
 NICE GUIDELINES IN MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW 
 
24 
 
 
 
5.1.5. ‘Setting specific’ barriers. It has been suggested that implementation barriers 
are likely to vary between settings (Cabana et al., 1999; Girlanda et al., 2013, Perkins et al., 
2007). The issue of whether guideline usage in physical and mental health services is 
comparable is a source of debate. Authors such as Bentall (2003) and Boyle (2000) highlight 
the differences between physical and mental health. Authors such as Parsons and Armstrong 
(2000) dispute the separation. This review will now turn to focus on guideline usage in 
mental health services in an attempt to investigate any potential setting specific barriers. 
 
The review will focus specifically on the use of NICE guidelines. While some studies 
highlight the similarity between guidelines for mental health conditions produced by different 
organisations (e.g. Gaebel, Riesbeck, & Wobrock, 2011) others suggest the opposite. For 
example Croghan, Schoenbaum, Sherbourne and Koegel (2006) and Tyrer and Silk (2011) 
demonstrate important differences between mental health guidelines from USA and NICE; 
with USA guidelines emphasising the use of medication more than those produced by NICE. 
It is therefore hypothesised that implementation barriers are likely to differ for clinicians 
using NICE guidelines compared to clinicians using guidelines produced by different 
organisations. The review will focus specifically on practice in the UK. While NICE 
guidelines are utilised in other countries, factors such as funding, training and service 
organisation are likely to vary significantly across different countries, which could impact 
upon ‘setting specific’ barriers. Furthermore, while the findings of this review may have 
wider relevance, the aim of this review is primarily to inform debate in UK mental health 
services. Sections 5.2 and 5.3 of this review therefore focus specifically on literature 
regarding the use of NICE guidelines in UK mental health services. 
 
 
 NICE GUIDELINES IN MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW 
 
25 
 
 
 
5.2. Published Criticisms of the Use of NICE Guidelines in UK Mental Health Services 
Numerous mental health clinicians have published comprehensive critiques both of the 
approach NICE takes to creating guidelines for UK mental health services, and regarding the 
way in which they are interpreted and utilised (e.g. Adams, 2008; Barker & Buchanan-
Barker, 2003; Barkham, 2007; Fairfax, 2008; Hammersley, 2009; McQueen, 2009; 
McDonnell, 2012; Midlands Psychology Group, 2010; Mollon, 2009a, 2009b; Nel, 2011; 
Rogers, 2011; Smail, 2006; UKCP, 2011; Waft, 2011). 
 
The arguments have been strongly worded at times. For example Mollon (2009b) 
describes NICE as “a most extraordinarily toxic and malign influence upon psychological 
therapy” (p.131). Hammersley (2009) expresses the hope that psychologists would be 
confident enough in their abilities to ignore NICE guidelines “devised for medical 
practitioners and the untrained NHS drones” (p.8). The Midlands Psychology Group (2010) 
use a controversial, yet powerful metaphor in comparing NICE to the Iraq war; noting a 
“mission creep” (p.5) where the initial objectives (removing weapons of mass direction; 
providing guidelines) gradually, yet intentionally changed over time to something more 
undesirable (invasion, even though no weapons of mass direction were found; controlling the 
practice of healthcare professionals). 
 
The key themes in these criticisms are as follows: 
5.2.1. Challenging the validity and reliability of diagnosis. The validity and 
reliability of psychiatric diagnosis has been fiercely criticised by many authors, notably 
Bentall (2003) and Boyle (2002). Recently the Division of Clinical Psychology (DCP) of the 
British Psychological Society (BPS) (2013) produced a response to the DSM-5, 
comprehensively critiquing the classification system, noting that it is not backed up by 
 NICE GUIDELINES IN MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW 
 
26 
 
 
 
empirical evidence and ignores evidence that challenges its validity. Such challenges to the 
diagnostic system on which NICE relies, brings into question the validity and reliability of 
using NICE guidelines in mental health. 
 
5.2.2. Challenging the notion that psychological therapies are akin to medication. 
Many of the critics (notably UKCP, 2011) highlight that NICE guidelines treat psychological 
therapies as if they are similar to medication. It is argued that NICE guidelines describe 
psychological therapy as if it is something that is delivered to patients, in a uniform way by 
different clinicians, in a set number of sessions. These authors criticise this approach as 
simplifying the process of psychological therapy, putting too much emphasis on therapy 
techniques. Critics highlight that representing psychological therapy in this way ignores the 
wealth of research highlighting the importance of the therapeutic relationship (e.g. Assay & 
Lambert, 1999) and varying performance of clinicians (e.g. Miller, Hubble, & Duncan, 
2008). It also presumes that therapy carried out by clinicians in routine practice is comparable 
to manualised therapy practiced in randomised controlled trials (RCTs). This notion has been 
disputed, with Barkham (2007) arguing that most psychological therapists practice 
integratively and that this approach is unlikely to ever be included in an RCT. This critique 
therefore suggests that the NICE guidelines do not capture the true essence of psychological 
therapies. 
 
5.2.3. Comparing RCTs and routine practice. Pilling (2008) concedes that RCTs do 
have limitations but proposes that they are the gold standard of research and few would 
dispute this. The current review reveals numerous authors who argue that NICE overly rely 
on RCTs, including most of the authors noted in this section. A key criticism is that the 
tightly controlled conditions in RCTs do not match the complexity of routine practice. This is 
 NICE GUIDELINES IN MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW 
 
27 
 
 
 
especially the case with individuals with comorbid difficulties, as they are usually excluded 
from RCTs, yet are common in routine practice. The argument follows that if the guidelines 
are based upon research that is not readily generalisable to routine clinical practice, then the 
guidelines will not be readily implementable. A common request of critics is that a greater 
variety of research methodologies be considered, including the use of practice based evidence 
and qualitative methods.  
 
Authors such as Pilling (personal communication, February 19, 2012) dispute this 
criticism, quoting research suggesting that RCT findings are replicable in routine practice 
(e.g. Shadish, Matt, Navarro, & Phillips, 2000; Persons, Roberts, Zalecki, & Brechwald, 
2006). However, it is questionable how generalisable the findings from these studies are. For 
example, Shadish et al. (2000) attempted to demonstrate that psychological therapies were 
effective under clinically representative conditions but still utilised numerous exclusion 
criteria12. With the Persons et al. (2006) study, there are questions over how comparable the 
sample13 of this study is to UK NHS services. Furthermore, the interventions described in the 
study appear to be more individualised14 than would be the case in an RCT, questioning the 
argument that this study demonstrates that pure, manualised interventions delivered in RCTs 
are replicable in routine practice. 
 
5.2.4. Arguing that service user choice is restricted. Critics of NICE guidelines tend 
to highlight the dominance of CBT in the guidelines. They worry that service users are 
increasingly only being offered CBT rather than considering which therapy may be of most 
assistance, or most acceptable to them. This links back to a key criticism of RCTs; due to the 
                                                          
 
12 E.g. service users taking psychotropic medication, who probably form the majority in services, were 
excluded. 
13 USA Private practice, service users described as particularly well-motivated, with above average levels of 
education. 
14 Service users were said to receive individualised formulation driven interventions. Many service users also 
received other therapies, including couples therapy and 12 step groups alongside CBT. 
 NICE GUIDELINES IN MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW 
 
28 
 
 
 
randomisation, individual circumstances or preferences cannot be taken into consideration 
(Brewin & Bradley, 1989). Placing too much emphasis on the findings of RCTs continues 
this trend of ignoring individual preferences and needs.  
 
Critics highlight that the favouritism of CBT is not in keeping with the research 
evidence. It is argued that when therapeutic modalities are compared using practice based 
evidence (e.g. Stiles et al., 2006) there are no differences between their effectiveness. This 
finding does not imply that there are no differences between modalities, because then there 
would not be a problem with just having CBT. It implies that there is value in different 
modalities. There is an assumption that different approaches will suit different individuals 
(Roth & Fonagy, 2005). While this assumption appears to have good face validity, Roth and 
Fonagy (2005) acknowledge that there has been very little research into the idea. They note 
that most psychotherapy trials would not have the statistical power to investigate this.  
 
5.2.5. Questioning whether NICE are guidelines or mandatory. NICE present 
recommendations as non-mandatory guidelines, emphasising that they should not override 
clinical autonomy. Parry et al. (2003) stress that slavish adherence to NICE guidelines is 
likely to produce poor clinical outcomes. NICE and authors such as Parry et al. presumably 
take this stance due to an acknowledgement of the limitations of guidelines, such as those 
discussed in this section. However, authors such as Littlejohns (2000) enthusiastically note 
that due to the quality of NICE guidelines, few clinicians would ever need to practice in ways 
that were not NICE concordant. Furthermore, NICE guidelines are often seen as performance 
standards, centrally prescribed and monitored (Spyridonidis & Calnan, 2011). It therefore 
seems that while it may not be NICE’s intention, some services are not recognising the 
limitations and appear to be using them as mandatory rather than guidelines. 
 NICE GUIDELINES IN MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW 
 
29 
 
 
 
5.2.6. Competing interests and professional identities. As well as the above key 
criticisms, there are also concerns between professional groups. Despite the efforts of NICE 
to include a range of professionals in guideline development, there have been concerns that 
this range of professionals is still not representative enough (e.g. UKCP, 2011; Barker & 
Buchanan-Barker, 2003). This criticism comes with an assumption that different professions 
may have different opinions towards guideline usage. The reports of the House of Commons 
Health Committee (2007, 2013) provide a unique opportunity to explore this assumption, as 
professional organisations were invited to present their views on NICE guidelines. 
 
The Royal College of Nursing (2007), the BABCP (British Association of Behavioural 
and Cognitive Psychotherapies) (2013) and the BPS (2007, 2013) presented positive views 
regarding NICE guidelines. The Royal College of Psychiatrists’ (2007) statement focused 
solely on critiquing NICE guidelines for dementia. This draws attention to the fact that not all 
mental health professionals are in support of the guidelines. However, the absence of a more 
generic statement from the College (i.e. not just focusing on dementia) and the absence of 
statements from the Colleges in 2013 might suggest a general satisfaction, or an absence of 
strong critical views about NICE guidelines. 
 
The BACP (British Association of Counsellors and Psychotherapists) (2007, 2013) and 
UKCP (UK Council for Psychotherapy) (2013) statements were critical of NICE guidelines, 
incorporating the key criticisms detailed above. This could suggest that there is a split with 
the medical professions, CBT therapists and psychologists in favour of NICE guidelines and 
counsellors and psychotherapists against them. It could be argued that this is in line with the 
amount NICE guidelines recommend the interventions offered by these professions. This 
 NICE GUIDELINES IN MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW 
 
30 
 
 
 
could suggest that as well as the differing theory bases of the professions leading to different 
conclusions, views for or against NICE guidelines may be influenced by competing interests. 
 
While the adoption of NICE guidelines certainly appears to be in line with the interests 
and theoretical bases of CBT therapists and medical professions, it is less clear whether this is 
also the case with psychologists. The BPS (2007, 2013) note that the guidelines have been 
broadly welcomed by psychologists in the NHS. However, this statement does not represent 
the viewpoints of the numerous psychologists who have published criticisms of NICE 
guidelines (e.g. Adams, 2008; Barkham, 2007; Fairfax, 2008; Hammersley, 2009; McGowan, 
2009; Midlands Psychology Group, 2010; Mollon, 2009a, 2009b; Nel, 2010; Smail, 2006). 
This discrepancy is especially apparent when considering that Barkham (2007) submitted 
comprehensive criticisms to the Commons Review also, contradicting the positive outlook of 
the BPS (2007, 2013). This discrepancy between the views of the BPS and some of its 
members suggests that the relationship between professional identity and views towards 
NICE is not straight forward. It highlights that views seem to vary within, as well as between 
professions. 
 
In summary, numerous criticisms have been voiced regarding the use of NICE 
guidelines in UK mental health services. It seems likely that these critical views held by 
clinicians will impact upon guideline usage. The next section of this review moves onto 
examine empirical research. 
 
 
 
 NICE GUIDELINES IN MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW 
 
31 
 
 
 
5.3.  
Empirical Research Focusing on Implementation of NICE Guidelines in UK 
Mental Health Services 
The systematic review of empirical research revealed nine relevant studies (Appendix B). 
The studies are reviewed thematically, grouping the information according to Cabana et al.’s 
(1999) categories of knowledge, beliefs and external factors, due to the prominence of this 
framework in the guideline implementation literature. 
 
 
5.3.1. Clinicians’ knowledge. Rhodes, Genders, Owen, O’Hanlon and Brown (2010) 
tested the hypothesis that knowledge of guidelines is a key barrier to implementation. The 
staff of four secondary care assessment and brief treatment teams were tested on their 
knowledge of NICE guidelines for depression. Thirty two staff members (mental health 
nurses, social workers, managers, psychiatrists, clinical psychologists and vocational 
specialists) were given questionnaires. They were also asked to read vignettes and specify 
what the recommended intervention would be. Rhodes et al. (2010) concluded that most staff 
had appropriate levels of knowledge. The staff were said to respond to the vignettes in a way 
that was in keeping with NICE recommendations. This suggests that knowledge did not seem 
to be a key variable impacting upon guideline usage within these teams.  
 
Turning to primary care, Gyani, Shafran and Rose (2011) and Gyani, Pumphrey, 
Parker, Shafran and Rose (2012) conducted large scale questionnaire surveys with GPs, 
enquiring about their knowledge and use of NICE guidelines. Gyani et al. (2011) reported 
that only 30% of the GPs who replied said that they had read the NICE guideline in question 
(obsessive compulsive disorder). This finding could help explain low rates of guideline 
implementation; if the majority of GPs are not reading the guidelines, then their 
recommendations are unlikely to be implemented. Gyani et al. (2012) reported a different 
 NICE GUIDELINES IN MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW 
 
32 
 
 
 
finding, with 75% of GPs stating that they had read the depression guideline. However, in 
keeping with the theory that knowledge is a key variable, they noted that concordance with 
guidelines was significantly higher amongst those who had read them.  
 
5.3.2. Clinicians’ beliefs. The Gyani et al. (2011) and Gyani et al. (2012) studies point 
to knowledge of guidelines as being a key factor affecting implementation. However, 
information from both studies highlights the relevance of clinicians’ beliefs. Gyani et al. 
(2011) reported that 80% of the GPs said that they had read at least one NICE guideline for a 
mental health condition. The corresponding percentage for physical health guidelines was 
97%. Gyani et al. (2011) did not reflect on what this discrepancy might mean, presumably 
due to a lack of data because of the limitations of a questionnaire survey. This finding could 
highlight important beliefs that impact upon guideline usage. For example it could suggest 
that the GPs see mental health as less important or relevant to them than physical health. 
Alternatively, it might be that the GPs deem NICE guidelines to be less relevant or helpful 
for mental health. 
 
As well as the main focus of the questionnaire survey, Gyani et al. (2012) also 
interviewed six GPs, obtaining qualitative information. The qualitative analysis is not 
described in great detail but the data that are available highlight some important themes. For 
example, some of the GPs questioned the validity of the research included by NICE. This 
could perhaps explain why some GPs neglected to read them. 
 
The Rhodes et al. (2010) study also appears to highlight the importance of clinicians’ 
beliefs. It was reported that clinicians felt that social problems of service users were a 
significant barrier to referring for CBT. They noted that NICE guidelines do not account for 
 NICE GUIDELINES IN MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW 
 
33 
 
 
 
such social problems. It might therefore be that clinicians believe that service users do not 
neatly fit into the guidelines and therefore do not feel that they can always follow the 
recommendations. A similar finding was noted by Kovshoff et al. (2012). Fifty child 
psychiatrists and paediatricians were interviewed about their decision making processes in 
assessing and treating ADHD. The participants questioned the practicality of guidelines. The 
following quote was provided to demonstrate this point: ‘‘[…] it boils down to it that every 
person is an individual person, and you can’t use a guideline in our profession. I’m absolutely 
against that. That doesn’t work’’ (p.93). Kovschoff et al.’s concluding paragraph to their 
article recommended further research into guideline usage in routine practice. They argued 
that guidelines needed to “more accurately capture the real-world complexity of clinical 
decision making” (p.98). 
 
It was highlighted by Kovschoff et al. that only 6 of the 50 participants reported 
drawing on NICE guidelines. Based upon the criticisms voiced, it seems likely that this 
occurrence is linked to the participants’ beliefs about the limited utility of guidelines. A 
similar finding was reported by Toner, Snape, Acton and Blenkiron (2010). In another 
questionnaire survey of GPs, Toner et al. (2010) reported that only 38% of the GPs to 
respond rated NICE as having a moderate or substantial impact upon their decision making. 
This may be due to their level of familiarity with the guidelines; if they have not read the 
guidelines then they cannot impact upon their decisions. It could however imply an appraisal 
of the usefulness of the guidelines, highlighting the beliefs of these clinicians. 
 
Prytys et al. (2011) and Michie et al. (2007) explored clinicians’ beliefs about the NICE 
guidelines for schizophrenia. Prytys et al. (2011) interviewed 20 care co-ordinators across 4 
CMHTs (Community Mental Health Teams) and analysed the results using thematic analysis. 
 NICE GUIDELINES IN MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW 
 
34 
 
 
 
Michie et al. (2007) built upon the study of Michie et al. (2005) described in section 5.1.4. 
They used the 12 domains drawn from psychological theory to guide semi structured 
interviews and a content analysis. Twenty CMHT workers (social workers, nurses, team 
managers, psychologists, and psychiatrists) from 3 NHS trusts were interviewed.   
 
Prytys et al. (2011) reported that positive views were expressed about the guidelines. 
Guidelines were said to provide direction, help prioritise interventions and improve quality of 
care. However, a consistent finding was of care co-ordinators doubting the effectiveness of 
CBT and Family Interventions. There were pessimistic expectations for the recovery of 
individuals with a diagnosis of schizophrenia. Significantly, many staff felt that 
psychological interventions were less important than medication.  
 
Prytys et al. concluded that staff knowledge was a key barrier to the implementation of 
the guidelines. While this may be the correct interpretation, there was no consideration of 
alternative explanations. The possibility that the staff could be expressing important views 
that need to be explored further was not considered. The fact that the staff doubted the 
effectiveness of psychological interventions could highlight a lack of knowledge. However, it 
could suggest that interventions that are successful in RCTs may not be as effective in routine 
clinical practice. Similarly, it might be that the outcomes viewed as important by researchers 
may not be deemed as important to care co-ordinators or service users. This could fit with the 
fact that in research, the success of interventions tend to be measured in statistical 
significance rather than clinical significance. Westen, Novotny and Thompson-Brenner 
(2004) argued that while research participants may show statistical significant change 
between pre and post interventions, they are unlikely to have “recovered” and may still have 
difficulties comparable to a clinical population. 
 NICE GUIDELINES IN MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW 
 
35 
 
 
 
Prytys et al. were transparent that the aim of their study was to find ways of increasing 
the use of NICE guidelines. Unfortunately, while this was clearly a very well conducted 
study, it may be the case that having such a focused goal prevented them from fully exploring 
any information that disputed their goal. This point is a key one, as if Prytys et al.’s 
conclusions are followed, it leads to recommendations based on increasing care co-
ordinators’ knowledge. If these beliefs of the clinicians are investigated further, it might lead 
to the same conclusion, but it might also reveal different information. For example, it might 
be that there are valid reasons why NICE guidelines are not always followed.  
 
Michie et al. (2007) were also transparent in their aim of attempting to increase 
guideline usage. They reported that clinicians’ beliefs and professional identity did not appear 
to prevent guideline implementation. Based upon the abundance of critical views from 
participants in other studies and those reported in section 5.2, it seems strange that these were 
completely absent from this study. As with Prytys et al., it seems likely that this finding may 
be due to unintentional researcher bias. This may have been to do with their coding or 
analysis. It may also have been to do with recruitment. For example the wording of the 
information sheets and recruitment material may have attracted participants who shared 
similar views to the researchers. Linked with this, the authors of the paper are prominent 
figures within the field, both in the field of psychosis and research aimed at increasing 
guideline usage. The presence of such authors may have made the research aims transparent 
to potential participants. Individuals whose views differed to the authors may have been 
reluctant to participate. Also, Michie et al. admirably provide a copy of the interview 
questions used in the study and it could be argued that the style of the questions seemed 
unlikely to reveal negative responses.  
 
 NICE GUIDELINES IN MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW 
 
36 
 
 
 
Michie et al. argued that professional identity did not seem an important factor. 
However, it may be that views vary both between and within professional groups (as 
demonstrated with psychologists in section 5.2.6). As this study interviewed a range of 
professionals, within a small sample (n=20), the number of individuals from each profession 
was very small (n=2-6). It may therefore be that studies focussing on one particular 
professional group may produce richer data. 
 
A study that did focus on one professional group is Hemsley (2013). Nine counselling 
psychologists were interviewed regarding their beliefs about NICE guidelines and a thematic 
analysis is presented. The results indicate a complex mixture of positive and negative beliefs 
about NICE guidelines. The psychologists were reported to experience NICE as powerful, 
containing and they saw a need to negotiate with the guidelines. However, the methodology 
of the study can be critiqued, particularly regarding reflexivity, a vital component of 
qualitative methods (Watt, 2007). For example it is difficult to determine what came from the 
participants and what came from the researcher. Hemsley notes that open questions were used 
but gives no indication of the content or style of the interview questions. The validity of the 
themes and sub themes reported appears questionable. Hemsley helpfully provides numerous 
quotes to back up the labelling of these themes, yet a number of these do not appear to 
provide justification. 15  
 
Overall, the findings from these studies highlight the importance of investigating 
clinicians’ beliefs when reviewing the implementation of NICE guidelines in UK mental 
health services. They highlight positive views about the guidelines and also criticisms.  
                                                          
 
15 In an attempt to clarify the questions regarding reflexivity, personal communication was made with the 
author. While Hemsley was obliging in providing a response, unfortunately it did not provide significant 
clarification. She was unable to provide a copy of the interview framework or any form of reflexivity 
exploration. 
 NICE GUIDELINES IN MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW 
 
37 
 
 
 
5.3.3. External factors. Another common finding across the studies mentioned already 
is the role of external factors as barriers to guideline implementation. Staff shortages and 
large caseloads were seen as crucial barriers to clinicians providing NICE recommended 
psychosocial interventions (Michie et al., 2007; Prytys et al., 2011; Sin & Scully, 2008). 
There were also doubts about the possibility of making referrals to other clinicians for NICE 
recommended interventions, with doubts about availability (Gyani et al., 2012; Rhodes et al., 
2010). 
 
6. Discussion 
Guidelines have become increasingly relevant in both physical and mental healthcare over the 
last two decades. NICE has produced a large number of guidelines for use in UK mental 
health services. There are many proposed benefits to guidelines, yet the uptake of NICE 
guidelines in UK mental health services has been inconsistent. The general research literature 
on EBM shows that transference of research knowledge to clinical practice is generally low. 
Guidelines were intended to assist with this, but uptake of guidelines is also low.  
 
Efforts to increase implementation tend to provide modest at best results. Barriers to 
implementation are thought to fall within three broad categories: clinicians’ knowledge, 
clinicians’ beliefs and external factors. Various psychological theories have been utilised in 
research attempting to change the behaviour of clinicians. The use of these theories tends to 
be based upon the assumption that guidelines should be followed, rather than starting from 
the position that clinicians may have valid reflections on their disadvantages as well as their 
advantages. 
 
 NICE GUIDELINES IN MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW 
 
38 
 
 
 
Numerous mental health clinicians have published strongly worded criticisms regarding 
the use of NICE guidelines in UK mental health services. These arguments challenge the 
assumptions underlying guidelines, namely that it is possible to produce standardised 
recommendations based upon diagnostic categories that will be clinically useful in routine 
practice in mental healthcare. The amount of empirical research investigating NICE guideline 
usage in UK mental health services is limited. External factors such as staffing levels are 
commonly cited as an implementation barrier. A number of studies draw attention to the 
importance of increasing clinicians’ knowledge in order to increase guideline usage. 
However, the variables of clinicians’ knowledge and beliefs appear to be interrelated. The 
empirical studies revealed positive and negative views of clinicians towards guidelines, with 
particularly rich data coming from the qualitative studies. The quality of the qualitative 
studies has been variable, with transparency and reflexivity not always clear. When 
reflexivity has been clear, there are questions of bias impacting upon the interpretations; 
specifically regarding researchers aiming to increase implementation of guidelines.  
 
6.1.  
Future Directions for Research 
The existing research base regarding the use of NICE guidelines in UK mental health services 
is small and would benefit from further studies. Clinicians’ beliefs about the use of NICE 
guidelines in UK mental health services appears to be a key area for further investigation. 
Linked with this, an exploration of how guidelines are being utilised could reveal how the 
advantages and disadvantages of guidelines are managed in routine practice. Understanding 
more about clinicians’ beliefs could help identify ways of intervening to increase 
implementation of guidelines. Alternatively, it could highlight limitations of the guidelines 
and question the extent to, and the conditions under which they are more or less useful.  
 NICE GUIDELINES IN MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW 
 
39 
 
 
 
The existing research literature shows the value of qualitative methods in generating 
rich data regarding clinicians’ beliefs. Due to suggestions of bias in previous research, it is 
proposed that future qualitative research would benefit from paying further attention to issues 
of transparency and reflexivity. While it is not possible to be truly neutral, taking a position 
of curiosity would help future researchers remain open to an increased range of findings. 
Drawing on systemic theory to help clarify this position, Anderson and Goolishian (1988) 
suggest that it is unhelpful to try to draw conclusions too quickly as this lessens the 
opportunity for further investigation and increases the opportunity for misunderstanding.  
 
It might be helpful if further research could be based upon or test the validity of Cabana 
et al.’s (1999) conceptual model that guideline adherence depends upon clinicians’ 
knowledge, clinicians’ beliefs and external factors. It would be particularly interesting to 
investigate whether Cabana et al.’s categories of clinicians’ knowledge and beliefs are indeed 
interrelated, as proposed in this review. Future research may benefit from utilising the 
theoretical domains that Michie et al. (2005) suggested would be helpful in informing 
research into guideline usage. This could inform a study utilising content analysis, like the 
Michie et al. (2007) study. Alternatively, as the existing evidence base is small, it might be 
helpful for future research to attempt to generate new theory. Such a study could utilise 
grounded theory (Glaser & Straus, 1967; Charmaz, 2006) methodology, as this is a 
qualitative approach specifically designed to generate theory rather than test existing theory 
(Willig, 2001). 
 
 
 
 
 NICE GUIDELINES IN MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW 
 
40 
 
 
 
7. References 
Adams, S. (2008). Naughty not NICE: Implications for therapy and services. Clinical 
Psychology Forum, 190, 29-32. 
Anderson, H., & Goolishian, H. (1988). Human systems as linguistic systems: preliminary 
and evolving ideas about the implications for clinical theory. Family Process, 27, 
371-393. doi: 10.1111/j.1545-5300.1988.00371.x 
Armitage, C. J., & Conner, M. (2001). Efficacy of the theory of planned behaviour: A meta-
analytic review. British Journal of Social Psychology, 40, 471-499. 
Ajzen, I. (1985). From intentions to actions: A theory of planned behavior. In J. Kuhl & J. 
Beckman (Eds.), Action-control: From cognition to behaviour (pp. 11-39). 
Heidelberg, Germany: Springer. 
Ajzen, I. (2001). Attitudes. Annual Review of Psychology, 52, 27-58. 
doi:10.1146/annurev.psych.52.1.27 
Assay, T. P., & Lambert, M. J. (1999). The empirical case for the common factors in therapy: 
Quantitative findings. In M. A. Hubble, B. L. Duncan, & S. D. Miller (Eds.), The 
heart and soul of change: What works in therapy (pp. 33-56). Washington, DC: 
American Psychological Association. 
Baillie, N., Bent, N., Leng, G., Kendall, T., & Shackleton, B. (2008). NICE guidelines series 
and the role of indicators. Epidemiologia e Psichiatria Sociale, 17, 254-257. 
Bandura A. (1986). Social Foundations of thought and action. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice-Hall. 
Barker, P., & Buchanan-Barker, P. (2003). Schizophrenia: the ‘not‐so‐nice’ guidelines. 
Psychiatric and Mental Health Nursing, 10, 374-378. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-
2850.2003.00627_2.x 
 
 NICE GUIDELINES IN MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW 
 
41 
 
 
 
Barkham, M. (2007). Evidence submitted by Professor Michael Barkham (NICE 83). House 
of commons select committee on health. Retrieved November, 4, 2013, from: 
http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200607/cmselect/cmhealth/503/503we7
7.htm  
Bentall, R.P. (2003). Madness explained. London, UK: Penguin. 
Berry, K., & Haddock, G. (2008). The implementation of the NICE guidelines for 
schizophrenia: barriers to the implementation of psychological interventions and 
recommendations for the future. Psychology and Psychotherapy: Theory, Research 
and Practice, 81(4), 419-436. doi:10.1348/147608308X329540 
Bero, L.A., Grilli, R., Grimshaw, J.M., Harvey, E., Oxman, A.D., & Thomson, M.A. (1998). 
Closing the gap between research and practice: an overview of systematic reviews of 
interventions to promote the implementation of research findings. British Medical 
Journal, 317, 465-468. 
Boyle, M. (2002). Schizophrenia: A scientific delusion? (2nd ed.). London, UK: Routledge. 
Brewin, C. R., & Bradley, C. (1989). Patient preferences and randomised clinical trials. 
British Medical Journal, 299, 313-315. 
The British Association for Behavioural & Cognitive Psychotherapies (2013). Evidence 
submitted by the British Association for Behavioural & Cognitive Psychotherapies 
(NICE 40) House of Commons select committee on health. Retrieved November, 4, 
2013, from: http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201213/cmselect/ 
cmhealth/782/782vw01.htm 
 
 
 
 NICE GUIDELINES IN MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW 
 
42 
 
 
 
The British Association for Counselling and Psychotherapy (2007). Evidence submitted by 
the British Association for Counselling and Psychotherapy (NICE 92) House of 
Commons select committee on health. Retrieved November, 4, 2013, from: 
http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200607/cmselect/cmhealth/503/503we0
1.htm 
The British Association for Counselling and Psychotherapy (2013). Evidence submitted by 
the British Association for Counselling and Psychotherapy (NICE 39) House of 
Commons select committee on health. Retrieved November, 4, 2013, from: 
http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201213/ cmselect/cmhealth 
/782/782vw01.htm 
The British Psychological Society (2007). Evidence submitted by the British Psychological 
Society (NICE 81) House of Commons select committee on health. Retrieved 
November, 4, 2013, from: http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200607/ 
cmselect/cmhealth/503/503we01.htm 
The British Psychological Society (2013). Evidence submitted by the British Psychological 
Society (NICE 63) House of Commons select committee on health. Retrieved 
November, 4, 2013, from: http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201213/ 
cmselect/ cmhealth/782/782vw01.htm 
Browne, J. L., & Chan, A. Y. (2012). Using the Theory of Planned Behaviour and 
implementation intentions to predict and facilitate upward family communication 
about mammography. Psychology & Health, 27, 655-673. 
doi:10.1080/08870446.2011.615396 
Buxton, M. J. (2006). Economic evaluation and decision making in the UK. 
Pharmacoeconomics, 24, 1133-1142. doi: 1170-7690/06/0011-1133/$39.95/0 
 NICE GUIDELINES IN MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW 
 
43 
 
 
 
Cabana, M., Rand, C.S., Powe, N.R., Wu, A.W., Wilson, M.H., Abboud, M.D., & Rubin, 
H.R. (1999). Why don't physicians follow clinical practice guidelines? American 
Medical Association, 282, 1458-1465. 
Charmaz, K. (2006). Constructing grounded theory: A practical guide through qualitative 
analysis. London, UK: Sage.  
Conner, M., & Norman, P. (2005). Predicting health behaviour: A social cognition approach. 
In M. Conner & P. Norman (Eds.), Predicting health behaviour: Research and 
practice with social cognition models (pp. 1–27). Buckingham, UK: Open University 
Press. 
Croghan, T., Schoenbaum, M., Sherbourne, C., & Koegel, P. (2006). A framework to 
improve the quality of treatment for depression in primary care. Psychiatric Services, 
57, 623-630. 
Department of Health. (1998). A first class service: Quality in the new NHS. London, UK: 
HMSO. 
Department of Health (2007). Commissioning a brighter future: Improving access to 
psychological therapies. London: Department of Health. 
The Division of Clinical Psychology (DCP) (2013). Position statement on the classification 
of behaviour and experience in relation to functional psychiatric diagnoses, time for a 
paradigm shift. Retrieved November, 4, 2013, from: http://dxrevisionwatch.files.   
wordpress.com/2013/05/position-statement-on-diagnosis-master-doc.pdf 
Dunne, E. & Rogers, B. (2011). Exploring compliance with NICE guidelines for borderline 
personality disorder. Clinical Psychology Forum, 225, 19-23. 
 
 
 NICE GUIDELINES IN MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW 
 
44 
 
 
 
Eccles, M., Grimshaw, J., Walker, A., Johnston, M., & Pitts, N. (2005). Changing the 
behavior of healthcare professionals: the use of theory in promoting the uptake of 
research findings. Clinical Epidemiology, 58, 107-112. 
doi:10.1016/j.jclinepi.2004.09.002 
Entwistle, V. A., Watt, I. S., Davis, H., Dickson, R., Pickard, D., & Rosser, J. (1998). 
Developing information materials to present the findings of technology assessments to 
consumers: the experience of the NHS Centre for Reviews and Dissemination. 
International Journal of Technology Assessment in Health Care, 14, 47-70. 
doi:10.1017/S0266462300010527 
Fairfax, H. (2008). 'CBT or not CBT', is that really the question? Re-considering the evidence 
base: The contribution of process research. Counselling Psychology Review, 23, 27–
37. 
Festinger, L. (1954). A theory of social comparison processes. Human Relations, 7, 117-40. 
Franx, G. (2012). Quality improvement in mental healthcare. The transfer of knowledge into 
practice. Netherlands institute of mental health and addiction. 
Field, M.J., & Lohr K.N. (1990). Clinical practice guidelines: directions for a new program. 
Washington, DC: National Academy Press. 
Gauthier, B. (2003). Assessing survey research a principled approach. Quebec, Canada: 
Circum Network inc. 
Gaebel, W., Riesbeck, M., & Wobrock, T. (2011). Schizophrenia guidelines across the world: 
a selective review and comparison. International Review of Psychiatry, 23, 379-387. 
doi:10.3109/09540261.2011.606801 
Girlanda, F., Fiedler, I., Ay, E., Barbui, C., & Koesters, M. (2013). Guideline implementation 
strategies for specialist mental healthcare. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 26, 369-
375. doi:10.1097/YCO.0b013e328361e7ae 
 NICE GUIDELINES IN MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW 
 
45 
 
 
 
Glaser, B. G., & Strauss, A. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory: Strategies for 
qualitative research. Chicago, IL: Aldine. 
Godin, G., & Kok, G. (1996). The theory of planned behaviour: A review of its application to 
health-related behaviours. American Journal of Health Promotion, 11, 87-97. 
Goldney, R. D. (2004). Audit of clinical practice guidelines in suicide prevention: Who is the 
auditor? Crisis: Crisis Intervention and Suicide Prevention, 25, 141-142.  
doi:10.1027/0227-5910.25.3.141 
Grant, M.J., & Booth, A. (2009). A typology of reviews: An analysis of 14 review types and 
associated methodologies. Health Information & Libraries, 26, 91-108.  
doi: 10.1111/j.1471-1842.2009.00848.x 
Grilli, R., Magrini, N., Penna, A., Mura, G., & Liberati, A. (2000). Practice guidelines 
developed by specialty societies: the need for critical appraisal. Lancet, 355,103–106. 
Grimshaw, J. M., Eccles, M. P., Walker, A. E., & Thomas, R. E. (2002). Changing 
physicians' behavior: what works and thoughts on getting more things to work. 
Continuing Education in the Health Professions, 22, 237-243. 
Grimshaw, J., Eccles, M., & Tetroe, J. (2004). Implementing clinical guidelines: current 
evidence and future implications. Continuing Education in the Health Professions, 24, 
31-S37. 
Grimshaw, J., Thomas, R., MacLennan, G., Fraser, C., Ramsay, C.R., Vale, L., ...Donaldson, 
C. (2004). Effectiveness and efficiency of guideline dissemination and 
implementation strategies. Health Technology Assessment, 8, 1-72. 
Grimshaw, J. M., Eccles, M. P., Lavis, J. N., Hill, S. J., & Squires, J. E. (2012). Knowledge 
translation of research findings. Implementation Science, 7, 50-67. 
doi:10.1186/17485908-7-50 
 NICE GUIDELINES IN MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW 
 
46 
 
 
 
Grol, R., & Grimshaw, J. (1999). Evidence-based implementation of evidence-based 
medicine. Quality Improvement, 25, 503-513. 
Gyani, A., Shafran, R., & Rose, S. (2011). Are the NICE guidelines for Obsessive 
Compulsive Disorder being used in primary care? Primary Health Care Research & 
Development, 13, 92-97. doi:10.1017/S1463423611000399 
Gyani, A., Pumphrey, N., Parker, H., Shafran, R., & Rose, S. (2012). Investigating the use of 
NICE guidelines and IAPT services in the treatment of depression. Mental Health in 
Family Medicine, 9, 149-160. 
Haines, A., & Donald, A. (1998). Making better use of research findings. British Medical 
Journal, 317, 72-75. 
Hammersley, D. (2009). Counselling psychology: What I see in the crystal ball. Counselling 
Psychology Review, 24, 5-9. 
Harding, E., Pettinari, C. J., Brown, D., Hayward, M., & Taylor, C. (2011). Service user 
involvement in clinical guideline development and implementation: Learning from 
mental health service users in the UK. International Review of Psychiatry, 23, 352-
357. doi: 10.3109/09540261.2011.606802 
Hemsley, C. (2013). A thematic analytic exploration of how counselling psychologists in the 
UK experience and position themselves in relation to the NICE guidelines. 
Counselling Psychology Review, 28, 91-106. 
Hollon, S.D., & Shelton, R.C. (2001). Treatment guidelines for major depressive disorder. 
Behavior Therapy, 32, 235–258. doi:10.1016/S0005-7894(01)80004-6 
House of Commons Health Committee (2007). National Institute for Health and Clinical 
Excellence. London, UK: The Stationery Office. 
House of Commons Health Committee (2013). National Institute for Health and Clinical 
Excellence. London, UK: The Stationery Office. 
 NICE GUIDELINES IN MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW 
 
47 
 
 
 
Hovland C., & Weiss W. (1951). The influence of source credibility on communication 
effectiveness. Public Opinion Quarterly, 15, 635-50. 
Janis, I.L. (1982). Group think: psychological studies of policy decisions and fiascoes. 
Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin. 
Jesson, J., Matheson, L., & Lacey, F.M. (2011).  Doing your literature review: Traditional 
and systematic techniques. Los Angeles, CA: SAGE. 
Katz, D., & Kahn, R. L. (1966). The social psychology of organisations. New York, NY: 
Wiley. 
Kendall, T., Glover, N., Taylor, C., & Pilling, S. (2011a). Quality, bias and service user 
experience in healthcare: 10 years of mental health guidelines at the UK National 
Collaborating Centre for Mental Health. International Review of Psychiatry, 23, 342-
351. doi: 10.3109/09540261.2011.607432 
Kendall, T., Pilling, S., Glover, N., & Taylor, C. (2011b). Guidelines in mental health-
National and international perspectives. International Review of Psychiatry, 23, 314-
317. doi: 10.3109/09540261.2011.607431 
Kovshoff, H., Williams, S., Vrijens, M., Danckaerts, M., Thompson, M., Yardley, L., ... 
Sonuga-Barke, E. J. (2012). The decisions regarding ADHD management (DRAMa) 
study: uncertainties and complexities in assessment, diagnosis and treatment, from the 
clinician’s point of view. European Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 21, 87-99. 
doi:10.1007/s00787-011-0235-8 
Latane, B. (1981). The psychology of social impact. American Psychologist, 36, 343-56. 
Lewis, C., Buffham, K., & Evenson, E. (2012). The implementation of the psychological 
recommendations in the NICE guidelines for schizophrenia (2009) across CMHTs: A 
service evaluation. Clinical Psychology Forum, 237, 31-35. 
 NICE GUIDELINES IN MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW 
 
48 
 
 
 
Littlejohns, P. (2000). NICE and psychiatry. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 6, 321-326. 
doi:10.1192/apt.6.5.321 
Mankiewicz, P. D. & Turner, C. (2012). Do Assertive Outreach clients with experiences of 
psychosis receive the NICE recommended cognitive-behavioural interventions? An 
audit. Clinical Psychology Forum, 240, 32-37. 
McQueen, D. (2009). Response to the NICE clinical guideline on depression. London, UK: 
The British Psychoanalytic Council. 
McDonnell, L. (2012). Looking at the evidence: A discussion on how NICE assesses talking 
therapies. London, UK: UKCP. 
McGowan, J. (2009). IAPT – more pertinent questions. The Psychologist. 22, 466-471. 
Mears, A., Kendall, T.L., Strathdee, G., Sinfield, R., & Aldridge, I. (2008). Progress on NICE 
guideline implementation in mental health trusts: meta-analyses. Psychiatric Bulletin, 
32, 383-387. doi:10.1192/pb.bp.108.019547 
Michie, S., Johnston, M., Abraham, C., Lawton, R., Parker, D., & Walker, A. (2005). Making 
psychological theory useful for implementing evidence based practice: a consensus 
approach. Quality and Safety in Health Care, 14, 26-33. 
doi:10.1136/qshc.2004.011155 
Michie, S., Pilling, S., Garety, P., Whitty, P., Eccles, M. P., Johnston, M., & Simmons, J. 
(2007). Difficulties implementing a mental health guideline: an exploratory 
investigation using psychological theory. Implementation Science, 2, 1-8. 
doi:10.1186/1748-5908-2-8 
The Midlands Psychology Group (2010). Welcome to NICE world. Clinical Psychology 
Forum, 212, 52-56. 
Miller, S. D., Hubble, M. A., & Duncan, B. L. (2007). Supershrinks: Learning from the 
field’s most effective practitioners. Psychotherapy Networker, 31, 36-45. 
 NICE GUIDELINES IN MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW 
 
49 
 
 
 
Mintzberg, H. (1983). Power in and around organisations. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-
Hall. 
Mollon, P. (2009a). The NICE guidelines are misleading, unscientific, and potentially impede 
good psychological care and help. Psychodynamic Practice, 15, 9–24. 
doi:10.1080/14753630802614457 
Mollon, P. (2009b). Our rich heritage–are we building upon it or destroying it? (or, ‘Why are 
counselling psychologists not angrier with clinical psychologists?’). Counselling 
Psychology Review, 24, 131-142. 
Nathan, P. E. (1998). Practice guidelines: Not yet ideal. American Psychologist, 53, 290-299. 
Nel, P. W. (2011). Clinical psychology in the noughties: The good, the bad and the NICE. 
Clinical Psychology Forum, 214, 7-11. 
NICE (2009). NICE International. London, UK: Authors. 
NICE (2012). International Review. London, UK: Authors. 
Oxman, A. D., Fretheim, A., & Flottorp, S. (2005). The OFF theory of research utilization. 
Clinical Epidemiology, 58, 113-116. doi:10.1016/j.jclinepi.2004.10.002 
Parkes, C. M. (1978). Bereavement: Studies of grief in adult life. Harmondsworth, UK: 
Penguin.  
Parry, G., Cape, J., & Pilling, S. (2003). Clinical practice guidelines in clinical psychology 
and psychotherapy. Clinical Psychology & Psychotherapy, 10, 337-351. 
doi:10.1002/cpp.381 
Parsons, S., & Armstrong, A. (2000). Psychiatric power and authority: a scientific and moral 
defence. In P. Barker & C. Stevenson (Eds.), The Construction of Power and 
Authority in Psychiatry (pp. 203-224). Oxford, UK: Butterworth Heinemann. 
 NICE GUIDELINES IN MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW 
 
50 
 
 
 
Perkins, M. B., Jensen, P. S., Jaccard, J., Gollwitzer, P., Oettingen, G., Pappadopulos, E., & 
Hoagwood, K. E. (2007). Applying theory-driven approaches to understanding and 
modifying clinicians' behavior: What do we know? Psychiatric Services, 58, 342-348. 
Persons, J. B., Roberts, N. A., Zalecki, C. A., & Brechwald, W. A. (2006). Naturalistic 
outcome of case formulation-driven cognitive-behavior therapy for anxious depressed 
outpatients. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 44, 1041-1051. 
doi:10.1016/j.brat.2005.08.005 
Pilling, S. (2008). History, context, process, and rationale for the development of clinical 
guidelines. Psychology and psychotherapy: Theory, research and practice, 81, 331-
350. doi:10.1348/147608308X324923 
Prochaska J. O., & DiClemente C. C. (1986). Towards a comprehensive model of change. In: 
W. R. Miller & N. Heather (Eds.), Treating addictive behaviors: processes of change 
(pp. 33-62). New York, NY: Plenum Press. 
Prytys, M., Garety, P. A., Jolley, S., Onwumere, J., & Craig, T. (2011). Implementing the 
NICE guideline for schizophrenia recommendations for psychological therapies: A 
qualitative analysis of the attitudes of CMHT staff. Clinical Psychology and 
Psychotherapy, 18, 48–59. doi: 10.1002/cpp.691 
Rashidian, A., & Russell, I. (2011). Intentions and statins prescribing: can the Theory of 
Planned Behaviour explain physician behaviour in following guideline 
recommendations? Evaluation in Clinical Practice, 17, 749-757. 
doi:10.1111/j.13652753.2011.01690.x 
Rawlins, M. (2011). Ten years of NICE mental health guidelines. International Review of 
Psychiatry, 23, 311-313. doi: 10.3109/09540261.2011.606804 
 NICE GUIDELINES IN MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW 
 
51 
 
 
 
Reid, A., & Gough, S. (2000). Guidelines for reporting and evaluating qualitative research: 
What are the alternatives? Environmental Education Research, 6, 59-91. 
doi:1350622/00/010059-33 
Rhodes, L., Genders, R., Owen, R., O’Hanlon, K., & Brown, J. S. L. (2010). Investigating 
barriers to implementation of the NICE guidelines for depression: a staff survey with 
community mental health teams. Psychiatric and Mental Health Nursing, 17, 147-
151. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2850.2009.01488.x 
Robertson, N., Baker, R., & Hearnshaw, H. (1996). Changing the clinical behavior of 
doctors: a psychological framework. Quality in Health Care, 5, 51-54. 
Robertson, R., & Jochelson, K. (2006). Interventions that change clinician behaviour: 
mapping the literature. London, UK: NICE. 
Rogers, A. (2011). Petition against CBT bias. Therapy Today, 22(9). 
The Royal College of Nursing (2007). Evidence submitted by the Royal College of Nursing 
(NICE 100) House of commons select committee on health. Retrieved November, 4, 
2013, from: http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200607/cmselect/ 
cmhealth/503/503we01.htm 
The Royal College of Psychiatrists (2007). Evidence submitted by the Royal College of 
Psychiatrists (NICE 22) House of Commons select committee on health. Retrieved 
November, 4, 2013, from: http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200607/ 
cmselect/cmhealth/503/503we01.htm 
Ruggeri, M. (2008). Guidelines for treating mental illness: love them, hate them. Can the 
SIEP-DIRECT’S Project serve in the search for a happy medium? Epidemiologia e 
Psichiatria Sociale, 17, 270-277. 
 NICE GUIDELINES IN MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW 
 
52 
 
 
 
Saarni, S. I., & Gylling, H. A. (2004). Evidence based medicine guidelines: a solution to 
rationing or politics disguised as science? Medical Ethics, 30, 171-175. 
doi:10.1136/jme.2003.003145 
Sackett, D. L., Rosenberg, W. M., Gray, J. A., Haynes, R. B., & Richardson, W. S. (1996). 
Evidence based medicine: what it is and what it isn't. British Medical Journal, 312, 
71-72. 
Shadish, W. R., Navarro, A. M., Matt, G. E., & Phillips, G. (2000). The effects of 
psychological therapies under clinically representative conditions: a meta-analysis. 
Psychological bulletin, 126, 512-537. doi:10.1037//0033-2909.126.4.512 
Shaner, R. (2002). How practice guidelines can rescue psychotherapy in public systems. 
Psychiatric Service, 52, 1021–1022. 
Shapiro, D. W., Lasker, R. D., Bindman, A. B., & Lee, P. R. (1993). Containing costs while 
improving quality of care: the role of profiling and practice guidelines. Annual Review 
of Public Health, 14, 219-241. doi: 10.1146/annurev.pu.14.050193.001251 
Sheldon, T.A., Cullum, N., Dawson D., Lankshear, A., Lowson, K., Watt, I., ...Wright., J. 
(2004). What’s the evidence that NICE guidance has been implemented? Results from 
a national evaluation using time series analysis, audit of patients’ notes, and 
interviews. British Medical Journal, 329, 999-1007.  
Sin, J., & Scully, E. (2008). An evaluation of education and implementation of psychosocial 
interventions within one UK mental healthcare trust. Psychiatric and Mental Health 
Nursing, 15, 161-169. 
Smail, D. (2006). Is clinical psychology selling its soul (again)? Clinical Psychology Forum, 
168, 17-20. 
 NICE GUIDELINES IN MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW 
 
53 
 
 
 
Spyridonidis, D., & Calnan, M. (2011). Opening the black box: A study of the process of 
NICE guidelines implementation. Health Policy, 102, 117-125. 
doi:10.1016/j.healthpol.2011.06.011 
Stiles, W.B., Barkham, M., Twigg, E., Mellor-Clark, J., & Cooper, M. (2006). Effectiveness 
of cognitive behavioural, person-centred, and psychodynamic therapies as practiced in 
UK National Health Service settings. Psychological Medicine, 36, 555-566. 
Sutton, S. (1998). Predicting and explaining intentions and behaviour: how well are we 
doing? Applied Social Psychology, 28, 1317-1338. 
doi:10.1111/j.15591816.1998.tb01679.x 
Toner, R., Snape, C., Acton, S., & Blenkiron, P. (2010). Do general practitioners adhere to 
NICE guidelines for depression? Systematic questionnaire survey. Primary Health 
Care Research & Development, 11, 123-131. doi:10.1017/S1463423609990363 
Tyrer, P., & Silk, K. R. (2011). A comparison of UK and US guidelines for drug treatment in 
borderline personality disorder. International Review of Psychiatry, 23, 388-394. 
doi:10.3109/09540261.2011.606540 
The UK Council for Psychotherapy (2011). NICE under scrutiny, the impact of the National 
Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence guidelines on the provision of 
psychotherapy in the UK. London, UK: Author. 
The UK Council for Psychotherapy (2013). Evidence submitted by the UK Council for 
Psychotherapy (NICE 24) House of Commons select committee on health. Retrieved 
November, 4, 2013, from: http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201213/ 
cmselect/cmhealth /782/782vw01.htm 
Watt, D. (2007). On becoming a qualitative researcher: The value of reflexivity. Qualitative 
Report, 12, 82-101. 
 NICE GUIDELINES IN MENTAL HEALTH REVIEW 
 
54 
 
 
 
Waft, Y. (2011). Is CAT in danger of being squeezed out of the NHS? Reformulation, 36, 18-
21.  
Weinmann, S., Koesters, M., & Becker, T. (2007). Effects of implementation of psychiatric 
guidelines on provider performance and patient outcome: systematic review. Acta 
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 115, 420-433. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0447.2007.01016.x 
Westen, D., Novotny, C.M., & Thompson-Brenner, H. (2004). The empirical status of 
empirically supported psychotherapies. Psychological Bulletin, 130, 631-663. 
doi:10.1037/0033-2909.130.4.631 
Willig, C. (2001). Introducing qualitative research in psychology: Adventures in theory and 
method. Buckingham, UK: Open University Press.  
Woolf, S. H., Grol, R., Hutchinson, A., Eccles, M., & Grimshaw, J. (1999). Clinical 
guidelines: potential benefits, limitations, and harms of clinical guidelines. British 
Medical Journal, 318, 527-530. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Running head: BELIEFS ABOUT, AND USE OF NICE GUIDELINES 
55 
 
 
 
 
Alex John Court BSc (Hons) MBPsS PGDip 
 
 
MAJOR RESEARCH PROJECT 
SECTION B: EMPIRICAL PAPER 
 
They’re NICE and Neat, but Are They Useful? A Grounded Theory of Clinical 
Psychologists’ Beliefs About, and Use of NICE Guidelines. 
 
 
Word count: 7,987 (191) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APRIL 2014 
 
 
 
SALOMONS 
CANTERBURY CHRIST CHURCH UNIVERSITY 
 
 BELIEFS ABOUT, AND USE OF NICE GUIDELINES 
 
56 
 
 
Abstract 
There is a growing research interest into investigating why NICE (National Institute for 
Health and Care Excellence) guidelines are not consistently followed in UK mental health 
services. The current study utilised grounded theory methodology to investigate clinical 
psychologists’ use of NICE guidelines. Eleven clinical psychologists working in routine 
practice in the NHS were interviewed. A theoretical framework was produced 
conceptualising the participants’ beliefs, decision making processes and clinical practices. 
The overall emerging theme was “considering NICE guidelines to have benefits but to be 
fraught with dangers”. Participants were concerned that guidelines can create an unhelpful 
illusion of neatness. They managed the tension between the helpful and unhelpful aspects of 
guidelines by relating to them in a flexible manner. The participants reported drawing on 
specialist skills such as idiosyncratic formulation and integration. However, as a result of 
pressure, and also the rewards that follow from being seen to comply with NICE guidelines, 
they tended to practice in ways that prevent these skills from being recognised. This led to 
fears that their professional identity was threatened, which impacted upon perceptions of the 
guidelines. This is the first theoretical framework that attempts to explain why NICE 
guidelines are not consistently utilised in UK mental health services. Attention is drawn to 
the proposed benefits and limitations of guidelines and how these are managed. This study 
highlights the importance of clinical psychologists articulating and advertising their specialist 
skills. The findings are integrated with existing theory and research, and clinical and research 
implications are presented. 
Keywords: NICE, clinical guidelines, decision making, clinical psychologists, mental 
health. 
 
 
 
 BELIEFS ABOUT, AND USE OF NICE GUIDELINES 
 
57 
 
 
The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) was established in 1999 to 
produce guidance for health professionals working in the UK National Health Service (NHS). 
The aim was that it would improve clinical effectiveness and reduce variations in practice 
across NHS Trusts (Department of Health (DH), 1998). There is evidence that the level of 
implementation of NICE guidelines in UK mental health services is low (e.g. Mears, Kendall, 
Strathdee, Sinfield, & Aldridge, 2008; Prytys, Garety, Onwumere, & Craig, 2011).  
 
It has been theorised that the barriers to the uptake of clinical practice guidelines fit into 
three broad categories: external factors (e.g. resources), clinicians’ knowledge (i.e. familiarity 
with guidelines) and clinicians’ beliefs (e.g. level of agreement with guidelines) (Cabana et 
al., 1999). Numerous mental health clinicians have published comprehensive critiques both of 
the approach NICE takes to creating guidelines for UK mental health services, and of the way 
in which guidelines are interpreted and utilised (e.g. Adams, 2008; Barker & Buchanan-
Barker, 2003; Barkham, 2007; Fairfax, 2008; Hammersley, 2009; McQueen, 2009; 
McDonnell, 2012; Midlands Psychology Group, 2010; Mollon, 2009a, 2009b; Nel, 2011; 
Rogers, 2011; Smail, 2006; UKCP, 2011; Waft, 2011). The criticisms tend to challenge the 
assumptions that underlie the guidelines. For example: challenging the validity and reliability 
of the medical model basis of NICE; arguing that NICE treats psychological therapy as if it is 
akin to medication and disputing this notion; arguing that NICE overly relies on randomised 
control trials (RCT) and questioning the transferability of such studies to routine practice. 
Another common criticism is that NICE guidelines restrict the choice of interventions for 
service users. If such views are common amongst clinicians in routine practice, this could 
explain why implementation of NICE recommendations is low.  
 
 BELIEFS ABOUT, AND USE OF NICE GUIDELINES 
 
58 
 
 
Berry and Haddock (2008) highlighted the paucity of research into factors affecting the 
use of NICE guidelines in UK mental health services and stressed the need for such research. 
A number of studies have since been published. In relation to NICE guidelines for mental 
health conditions, research has investigated  adherence to guidelines by: GPs,  (Gyani, 
Shafran, & Rose, 2011; Gyani, Pumphrey, Parker, Shafran, & Rose, 2012; Toner, Snape, 
Acton & Blenkiron, 2010), care co-ordinators (Prytys, Garety, Jolley, Onwumere, & Craig, 
2011; Sin & Scully, 2008), community mental health team staff (Michie, et al., 2007; Rhodes, 
Genders, Owen, O’Hanlon, & Brown, 2010), psychiatrists and paediatricians (Kovshoff et al., 
2012) and counselling psychologists (Hemsley, 2013).  
 
The significance of external factors, such as resource problems, has been a consistent 
finding across the existing studies. Both positive and negative views regarding the use of 
NICE guidelines have been reported across the studies, with particularly rich data coming 
from studies utilising qualitative methodology (e.g. Kovshoff et al., 2012; Prytys et al., 2011). 
However, the quality of the qualitative studies has been variable, with reflexivity not always 
clear (e.g. Hemsley, 2013) and questions of bias impacting upon the interpretations.  In 
particular, some researchers, (notably Michie et al., 2007 & Prytys et al., 2011) appear 
motivated by a desire to increase implementation of guidelines, rather than fully exploring the 
advantages and disadvantages of guideline usage. Furthermore, many of the existing studies 
(e.g. Michie et al., 2007; Prytys et al., 2011; Rhodes et al., 2010) based findings on a small 
sample of participants from a variety of professional backgrounds. If knowledge and beliefs 
of clinicians are indeed important, then it seems likely that different professions will vary on 
these factors as a result of their differing amounts and types of training and varying 
professional identities.  
 
 BELIEFS ABOUT, AND USE OF NICE GUIDELINES 
 
59 
 
 
There have been no studies to date focusing on clinical psychologists’ (CPs) beliefs 
about, and use of NICE guidelines. CPs play important roles in multidisciplinary teams in 
terms of: providing psychological therapies, consuming and disseminating new research, 
teaching, assisting others to work in psychologically informed ways and carrying out local 
audits. They are influential in contributing to the design of new services and the development 
of existing ones (e.g. Care Services Improvement Partnership, 2007). It could therefore be 
argued that CPs have a leading role to play in relation to NICE guideline adherence. 
 
Many CPs seem to be in favour of NICE guidelines (British Psychological Society: 
BPS, 2007), with numerous CPs assisting with their production and with the BPS co-
publishing some guidelines (e.g. NICE (2010) schizophrenia guideline). Yet other CPs have 
questioned the usefulness of NICE guidelines (e.g. Adams 2008; Barkham, 2007; Fairfax, 
2008; Hammersley, 2009; McGowan, 2009; Midlands Psychology Group, 2010; Mollon, 
2009a, 2009b; Nel, 2010; Smail, 2006). Smail (2006) suggests that CPs are “selling [their] 
soul” (p.17) by not challenging NICE guidelines. Mollon (2009b) argues that the fact that 
“psychologists, and the BPS, have colluded in this betrayal of our profession through an 
endorsement of the crude medical model of NICE is deeply puzzling – a phenomenon that 
itself deserves careful study” (p.130).  
 
1.1.Rationale and Aims 
It has been stressed that research into the use of clinical practice guidelines would benefit 
from drawing upon psychological theory, to help understand the beliefs and behaviour of 
clinicians (Eccles, Grimshaw, Walker, Johnston, & Pitts, 2005). However, psychological 
theory has not been utilised to any great extent in the existing evidence base (Michie, et al., 
2007, being a notable exception). The current study attempted to generate new psychological 
 BELIEFS ABOUT, AND USE OF NICE GUIDELINES 
 
60 
 
 
theory, producing a theoretical framework to help explain how NICE guidelines are utilised 
and the factors that impact upon this. The study also draws upon existing psychological 
theory to integrate the emergent theory into existing literature.  
 
Due to suggestions of possible bias in previous research, it was felt that the evidence 
base would benefit from a study that did not begin with the aim of promoting or disputing the 
use of guidelines. It was hoped that taking this stance in this present study would allow full 
exploration of the benefits and limitations of guidelines and how these are managed. 
 
It was felt that CPs were a particularly important profession to investigate. They are 
important members of UK mental health services and their use of NICE guidelines has not 
been investigated. Furthermore, there appear to be conflicting views regarding NICE 
guidelines within the profession. The position of some CPs towards NICE guidelines can 
already be assumed, as a result of either their involvement in guideline production, or the 
publication of their views. This research project aimed to investigate the views and behaviour 
of CPs in routine practice.  
 
1.2.Research Questions 
This study attempted to address the following questions: 
i) 
What beliefs do CPs hold about NICE guidelines? 
ii) 
What factors impact upon how CPs perceive NICE guidelines? 
iii) 
How do CPs describe their decision making processes regarding how they use 
NICE guidelines? 
 
 
 BELIEFS ABOUT, AND USE OF NICE GUIDELINES 
 
61 
 
 
2. Method 
2.1.Design Overview 
Semi structured interviews were conducted with CPs and the information that emerged was 
analysed using grounded theory methodology (Charmaz, 2006). Grounded theory aims to 
move beyond a descriptive level of analysis and generate theory of social or psychological 
processes (Charmaz, 2006). Grounded theory enables a researcher to develop a theory from 
the data, rather than find evidence to support an existing theory (Willig, 2001). This makes 
the method particularly helpful in areas lacking existing theory, such as this one, where there 
are no existing theories accounting for the use of NICE guidelines in UK mental health 
services. This study utilised Charmaz’s (2006) social constructivist approach which 
acknowledges the role of both researcher and participants in co-constructing data. The social 
constructivist position helps break down assumptions of what is seen as “real”. It can lead to 
the development of an interpretive frame from which to view how reality is constructed and 
acted upon (Charmaz, 2006). There are detailed procedures for how to complete grounded 
theory analyses, first outlined by Glaser and Strauss (1967) and expanded upon by Strauss 
and Corbin (1990). However, Glaser (1992) highlighted that too strict an adherence to 
grounded theory protocol “forces” the data and encourages researchers to view the 
procedures as tools to be used flexibly. This flexible approach is emphasised by Charmaz 
(2006) and is utilised in this study.  
 
2.2.Ethical Considerations 
This study complied with the BPS (2010) code of human research ethics and was approved 
by the Salomons Independent Research Review Panel (Appendix C) and the Salomons Ethics 
Panel (Appendix D). The Research and Development departments of three English NHS 
trusts provided permission for their staff to take part in this research (Appendix E).  
 BELIEFS ABOUT, AND USE OF NICE GUIDELINES 
 
62 
 
 
 
Participants were fully informed of the purpose of the study (Appendix F) prior to 
consenting to participate (Appendix G). The researcher endeavoured to maintain a stance of 
independence and curiosity in the interviews. It was hoped that this would allow participants 
to speak freely. 
 
2.3.Participants 
Participants were CPs in routine practice in the NHS. CPs who had published views about 
NICE or had been involved in guideline production were excluded, as their positions could 
already be assumed. CPs supervised or managed by this study’s supervisors were excluded 
due to concern that they might not feel able to speak honestly if their views differed to those 
of the supervisors. 
 
Recruitment included interviewing CPs who had responded to recruitment emails 
(Appendix H) (n=7) and CPs known to the principal researcher (n=4). No current colleagues 
were recruited in order to ensure that working relationships did not impact upon the research. 
Participants were recruited from three NHS trusts. Participant characteristics are presented in 
aggregated form (table 1) to help protect anonymity.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 BELIEFS ABOUT, AND USE OF NICE GUIDELINES 
 
63 
 
 
Table 1 
Participant characteristics 
Gender 
9 Women, 2 Men 
Speciality 
6 adult mental health, 2 child and adolescent mental health, 1 
learning disabilities, 1 forensic, 1 older people mental health 
Band 
2 band 7, 5 band 8a, 1 band 8b, 3 band 8c 
Country of training 
10 were trained in the UK 
Years since qualifying Range 2 – 21. Mean 8.2. Standard deviation 5.8.  
Preferred therapeutic 
modality 
3 Cognitive Behaviour Therapy (CBT), 5 Integrative, 2 Cognitive 
Analytic Therapy and 1 ‘Psychodynamic, Systemic and CBT’. 
 
2.4.Procedure 
Interviews ranged from 45 to 72 minutes. One interview took place over the telephone, all 
other interviews were held at the place of work of the CP. Initial participants were selected by 
opportunity and interviews were open, with limited direct questions. As per the 
recommendations of Glaser (1998) and Charmaz (2006) there was no preconceived interview 
schedule. All interviews began with an open question simply asking the participant if they 
would share their thoughts on NICE guidelines. After this question, the interviewer attempted 
to follow the participants’ lead, making a concerted effort to try to understand their point of 
view and actions (Charmaz, 2006). This helped “enter the participants’ world” (Charmaz, 
2006, p.19) and limit the influence of the researcher on the data (Holton, 2007). A list of 
potential open questions (Appendix I) were held in mind by the interviewer and used as 
prompts if necessary (Charmaz, 2006). The transcription of the first interview (Appendix J) 
demonstrates the researcher’s attempt to keep the participant talking, without asking 
questions.  
 BELIEFS ABOUT, AND USE OF NICE GUIDELINES 
 
64 
 
 
Interviews were audio taped and then transcribed. The first three interviews were 
analysed using initial line by line coding (Appendix J) followed by focused coding, a process 
of deciding which initial codes best describe the data (Charmaz, 2006). The subsequent 
transcripts were analysed using focused coding (Appendix K). Tentative categories and 
subcategories were then formed, attempting to seek an “underlying logic of apparently 
disparate events” (Dey, 2007, p.188). Throughout this process, theoretical memos were kept 
in the research diary (Appendix L), reflecting on the process (Charmaz, 2006). 
 
Similarities and differences between the views of participants were explored through 
constant comparison (Glaser & Straus, 1967), through sampling, interview questions and 
coding. Theoretical sampling (Glaser & Straus, 1967), with the assistance of a pre interview 
questionnaire (Appendix M), helped ensure that participants with a variety of opinions were 
recruited. In latter interviews, participants were asked questions influenced by the analysis to 
date (Morse, 2007) (Appendix N). Emerging codes and categories were constantly compared, 
testing their validity (Holton, 2007). 
 
At the theoretical coding stage, a diagrammatic representation of the categories was 
created, with bespoke linkages between them, rather than drawing on existing frameworks 
(such as Glaser’s (1978, 1998) coding families or Spradley’s (1979) semantic relationships). 
Such diagrams are considered an intrinsic component of grounded theory methodology by 
authors such as Strauss (1987) and Clarke (2005), due to their ability to give a clear picture of 
the categories and the relationships between them. To assist in this process, theoretical memo 
sorting (Charmaz, 2006) was carried out. 
 
 BELIEFS ABOUT, AND USE OF NICE GUIDELINES 
 
65 
 
 
The cyclical process of data collection, analysis, theoretical sampling and theoretical 
categorisation continued until “theoretical sufficiency” (Dey, 1999) was judged to be 
achieved; the point at which the emergent theory is held to have good explanatory power. 
This term makes no claim that the process has been exhaustive, as is often implied by the 
term “theoretical saturation” (Glaser & Straus, 1967), as it is usually unrealistic to claim this 
(Dey, 1999). This stage was reached after 11 interviews. 
 
The sample size of 11 is typical for a qualitative study of this kind, due to the depth of 
analysis (Adler & Adler, 2012). Similar studies utilising grounded theory, interviewing health 
professionals (from one profession) had sample sizes of 6 (Tweed, Salter, & Denis, 2000), 8 
(Crossley & Salter, 2005), 9 (Chaffey, Unsworth, & Fossey, 2010), 13 (Long-Sutehall et al., 
2011) and 16 (Townend, 2008).  
 
2.5.Quality Assurance 
It is acknowledged that qualitative analysis depends on the researcher’s view (Charmaz, 
2006). As such, numerous steps were taken to ensure reflexivity and transparency. A research 
diary (Appendix L) was completed, providing readers with a window into the thought 
processes of the researcher (Watt, 2007). A bracketing interview (Rolls & Relf, 2006) was 
conducted between the principal researcher and lead supervisor (Appendix O). This helped 
explore the impact of the researcher’s assumptions and experiences on the collection and 
interpretation of data. Examples of coding and category development were regularly checked 
and discussed both with the project supervisors and within a grounded theory discussion 
group. Participant quotations are presented in the results section and in further detail in 
Appendix P to ensure that the coding and categories are grounded in the data (Dey, 2007), 
enhancing the credibility of the findings (Hill et al., 2005). 
 
 BELIEFS ABOUT, AND USE OF NICE GUIDELINES 
 
66 
 
 
Due to authors such as Glaser (1992) and Charmaz (2006) emphasising a flexible 
approach, there are ongoing debates about what constitutes ‘true’ grounded theory (e.g. 
Hood, 2007; Urquhart, 2013). This present study meets the criteria that Hood (2007) 
describes as representing the key components of ‘true’ grounded theory (Appendix Q). 
 
3. Results 
The analysis led to the construction of 68 focused codes, 15 subcategories, 6 categories and 1 
overall theme. The goal of any research utilising full grounded theory methodology is to 
generate theory (Charmaz, 2006). Charmaz (2006) proposes that theories provide interpretive 
frames from which to view how and why individuals construct and act on their view of 
reality. This study presents a theory of how these participants construct their views about 
NICE guidelines, how they utilise the guidelines, why they do so and how their use of the 
guidelines impacts upon their beliefs. Urquhart (2013) and Straus and Corbin (1998) 
emphasise that demonstrating the relationships between categories moves an analysis from 
descriptive to theoretical.  Figure 1 displays in diagrammatic form the proposed relationships 
between the categories. Categories are labelled in bold, with their properties (subcategories or 
focused codes) in italic.  
 BELIEFS ABOUT, AND USE OF NICE GUIDELINES 
 
67 
 
 
Figure 1. Model conceptualising the clinical psychologists’ beliefs about, and use of NICE guidelines. 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Considering NICE guidelines to have benefits but to be fraught with dangers 
Recognising the context of the current economic climate 
+ Noting that services do not have the resources to fully deliver NICE recommendations. 
+ Stressing the importance of seeing NICE guidelines in the context of the current economic climate. 
Valuing the benefits of NICE 
guidelines 
+ Noting that guidelines can provide 
consistency. 
+ Recognising the power of NICE 
endorsement. 
+ Valuing NICE’s assistance in delivering 
evidence based practice. 
+ Feeling that the concerns about guidelines 
can be challenged. 
Worrying that NICE guidelines can create 
an unhelpful illusion of neatness 
+ Questioning the scientific integrity of the guidelines. 
+ Having a problem with the medical model basis of NICE 
guidelines. 
+ Experiencing guidelines as limiting.  
+ Feeling that guidelines can be misinterpreted. 
+ Worrying that commissioners can view the guidelines as 
a way to limit spending. 
+ Believing that NICE are doing harm to service users. 
 
Plus 
Perceived level of pressure to be NICE 
compliant 
+ Experiencing an underlying threat or pressure to be 
NICE compliant. 
+ Noting that NICE guidelines aren’t currently 
experienced as restrictive. 
+ Worrying that NICE could become more controlling. 
+ Acknowledging concerns for the future, but not being 
worried by them. 
 
Plus 
Beliefs about the purpose of, and future of 
clinical psychology 
+ Valuing individualised, collaborative interventions. 
+ Highlighting the key skills of CPs.  
+ Worrying that the jobs or identity of CPs are threatened. 
+ Arguing that the professional identity of CP is not threatened. 
+ Reflecting on the views of others towards NICE guidelines. 
+ Arguing that it is difficult to detach NICE from vested interests. 
Having a flexible relationship 
with guidelines 
+ Not advertising the way one practices. 
+ Valuing having excuses as to why not to 
follow NICE guidelines. 
+ Using NICE to suit our needs. 
+ Meeting NICE halfway. 
+ Using NICE as guidelines, not instructions. 
+ Being NICE concordant. 
 
Influences 
Influences 
Impacts 
upon 
Impacts 
upon 
Leads to 
  
 
 
68 
 
 
 
3.1.  
Model Summary 
The CPs acknowledged that NICE guidelines have to be seen in the context of the current 
climate of limited resources. The overall emerging theme was “considering NICE guidelines 
to have benefits but to be fraught with dangers”. The guidelines were seen as a useful guide 
to the evidence base, and the power of NICE endorsement was valued. However, the CPs 
worried that the guidelines can create an unhelpful illusion of neatness, highlighting that 
routine clinical practice is more complex. All of the CPs valued individualised, collaborative, 
formulation-driven interventions and highlighted a difficult fit between this approach and the 
use of guidelines.  
 
The combination of valuing the benefits, worrying that guidelines can create an 
unhelpful illusion of neatness and the perceived level of pressure to be NICE compliant led to 
the CPs having a flexible relationship with guidelines. Some CPs ignored the guidelines and 
others emphasised that they were guidelines rather than instructions. Some CPs reported 
picking up and dropping the guidelines to suit their needs. The use of the guidelines impacted 
upon the CPs’ beliefs. For example, participants who found ways of utilising the guidelines 
that were in keeping with their beliefs about the nature of distress and the role of CPs were 
more able to see the benefits of guidelines. However, the majority of the participants reported 
acting in ways that prevent others from seeing their specialist skills. For example 
purposefully not telling managers what they are doing, calling an intervention CBT when it is 
not, or integrating ideas from other modalities into CBT in a valid way, but then still labelling 
the intervention as CBT. This led to the majority of the participants fearing that if their skills 
were not recognised, then their professional identity and jobs would be threatened. In turn, 
this fear led to the majority of the CPs attending more to the concerns about guidelines rather 
than the benefits. 
  
 
 
69 
 
 
 
Full details of the coding and categories are presented in Appendix R and with 
quotation examples in Appendix P. The following information presents a detailed exploration 
of key elements of the analysis. Participant names have been changed to protect 
confidentiality. 
  
3.2.  
Valuing the Benefits16 of NICE Guidelines.  
The CPs saw many benefits of NICE guidelines, particularly seeing NICE as a useful guide to 
the evidence base. 
They provide a framework and an overarching knowledge base which summarises 
research in that particular area. And I think that’s a great strength, you know, if you 
don’t have to go through millions of literature searches to get at the same thing, NICE 
have done it for you. (Catherine) 
 
The power of NICE endorsement was valued.  
I mean I think when, I think access to psychological therapies for people with a 
diagnosis of schizophrenia has really increased as a result of NICE guidelines. (Sam) 
 
3.3.  
Worrying That NICE Guidelines can Create an Unhelpful Illusion of Neatness 
The CPs highlighted problems with the diagnostic system that NICE guidelines are based 
upon. 
You could pick apart the whole thing potentially on the basis of questioning the validity 
of diagnosis. (Morgan). 
 
                                                          
 
16 While the CPs expressed numerous benefits, due to a limited word count, it was decided to focus more 
attention of this write up on other areas of the model. It was felt that the benefits were aptly reported through 
the coding and category labelling in figure 1 (and appendix P) and require less further explanation.  
  
 
 
70 
 
 
 
Participants questioned NICE’s reliance on RCTs, arguing that they do not represent the 
complexity of routine practice. 
A lot of them are based on like RCT’s where somebody has to have pure depression in 
their sample in order to carry out the research. But, realistically, I mean that’s always a 
limitation of RCT’s is that it doesn’t paint an accurate picture of the kind of client 
groups you’re actually dealing with. (Catherine). 
 
CPs worried about the dominance of CBT in the NICE guidelines, arguing that it is simplistic 
and misguided to assume that CBT is the only therapeutic modality required. 
There could be a bit of a ticking timebomb a little bit that erm, over time I think 
managers and other kind of commissioners and people will begin to realise that CBT 
isn't this magic curing thing. (Amy). 
 
CBT was seen as fitting well with the medical model and with NICE, whereas other therapies 
do not. 
I think CBT also fits very nicely because it's the most medical of the erm therapies I 
think, and so I think it's attractive to psychiatrists and other professionals who can 
understand then, when it's in units, isn't it, it's almost like so many sessions is almost 
like a dose, of how much medication you need, erm, so it is, it's easy to communicate 
what psychology does if it's all languaged in this way. (Amy). 
 
CPs highlighted the difficulty in measuring other types of therapy. 
I can't imagine some, one of the more traditional existentialist therapies like Yalom-
based therapy, getting NICE backing because how they would define whether the 
  
 
 
71 
 
 
 
therapy is working isn't immediately measurable, and it's that question of how 
measurable it is. (Paul). 
 
Participants were concerned that if therapies were not backed by NICE then their 
development would be neglected. 
Our Trust, for instance, has got lots of training programs that have been developed over 
the last few years in various things like IPT, EMDR, MBCT, CBT, all the therapies that 
are in the NICE guidelines and only the therapies that are in the NICE guidelines. 
(Morgan). 
 
This concerned CPs as they saw value in other modalities. 
So obviously a lot of the NICE guidance, CBT is the recommended line of treatment… 
But I think that is to the detriment of the other types of work which can be incredibly 
effective for a lot of people. (Catherine) 
 
The CPs wanted NICE to acknowledge the difficulty in measuring psychological therapy. 
I think NICE needs to realise that psychological therapies are not like medication and 
you can’t evaluate them in the same way, you need a broad range of evidence. (Sam). 
 
The CPs worried that NICE guidelines could be misinterpreted or misunderstood and that 
people may believe that clinical practice is as “neat” as the guidelines can falsely imply.  
I think there’s a danger that erm, policy makers, erm, might not have the sort of full 
background understanding or the critical thinking that is necessary to assess the 
guidelines, and they might prescribe pathways for services that are too restrictive. 
(Ronda). 
  
 
 
72 
 
 
 
Overall, bearing in mind the concerns, there was a belief that NICE guidelines were doing 
harm to service users.  
Well, I think you’re onto something. And I hope that it doesn’t stop with you. This feels 
like research that needs to be picked up and be ongoing, because with best intention 
NICE are doing harm. That is the bottom line. (Jan). 
 
3.4.  
Perceived Level of Pressure to be NICE Compliant 
Some CPs noted an underlying threat to be ‘NICE compliant’. 
Yeah, yeah it can feel quite threatening actually, that there's almost an undercurrent of, 
of threat that if we're not doing what the NICE guidelines say, erm, erm, then we won't 
be commissioned, because I think NICE is quite a powerful force, and I think that erm, 
it does have an influence on everyday clinical practice definitely. (Amy). 
 
Other CPs did not currently experience a pressure to follow NICE guidelines. 
I’ve never been asked in my job to quote NICE guidance or to specifically use it. 
(Catherine). 
 
There were concerns that NICE guidelines could be used in a more controlling manner in the 
future. 
… that will get tighter and tighter as we move to payment by results and being 
commissioned to do... much more specific kind of commissioning for specific things. 
Specific problems using specific approaches. I think the area you’re focusing on is 
very relevant because this is going to come to, closer and closer focus. (Morgan). 
 
 
  
 
 
73 
 
 
 
3.5. 
Beliefs about the Purpose of, and Future of Clinical Psychology 
Linked with the concern that NICE guidelines can create an unhelpful illusion of neatness, 
participants worried that CBT therapists could be seen as a cheaper alternative to CPs as the 
skills of CPs are not being recognised. 
There's a danger of, NICE guidelines do put psychological interventions on the map… 
but there's a danger then, that it's erm, we're not fully understanding the scope of what 
psychological interventions offer, that it's not just CBT, because then there is the risk 
that the trust will just, erm I guess get rid of erm clinical psychologists who are 
expensive to train and to employ, and just employ CBT therapists, particularly as NICE 
guidelines say CBT, erm, other, rather than other, when in reality when you're doing a 
piece of work, which might be CBT orientated, as a clinical psychologist I will be 
bringing in lots of different therapy kind of techniques and models and formulations 
from different erm models of psychological therapies, so I don't think it's as purist as 
maybe NICE guidelines might encourage people to think. (Amy). 
 
CPs were keen to differentiate themselves from single modality therapists. 
I think there is a world of difference between somebody who is a trained CBT therapist 
and somebody who’s a clinical psychologist who does CBT. (Sam). 
 
NICE guidelines were seen as a threat to practicing integratively. 
There is this need to categorise how we work and have an identifiable pure model. I 
think it’s much harder to say, now, that we’re working in a sort of eclectic or 
integrative way. When I first qualified that was really common, and I don’t hear that so 
much anymore. (Jenny).  
 
  
 
 
74 
 
 
 
It’s (integration) seen as weak or a criticism, and actually I think that’s our biggest 
strength, and that’s what I mean by we’re shooting ourselves in the foot. As 
psychologists it would be nice if we actually worked to maintain our identity and what 
we have that’s special to offer. (Jan). 
 
CPs were keen to highlight that they have bigger roles than just therapy. 
But we’re only talking about therapy here. There’s a whole other things that 
psychologists do, and they’re, they’re not being valued. They’re not being valued in 
an explicit way. Erm, because they don’t fit with anything. (Naomi). 
 
It was acknowledged that it can be difficult to explain what CPs do. 
Maybe we should be better at explaining what clinical psychologists do, coming back 
to the sense of how do we evidence what we do? You know, and I think that’s fair 
enough. I think that’s a good question for us as a profession really, isn’t it? (Kim). 
 
A split was highlighted between CPs who are researchers and those who are clinicians. It was 
suggested that CPs who contribute to the development of NICE guidelines may have different 
viewpoints to CPs in routine practice. 
Maybe they're more in their ivory towers, as people call it, doing their research, you 
know, rather than being on the frontline seeing how things actually are. I think that's 
like a massive thing, isn't it? Boris Johnson doesn't know how much a loaf of bread 
and a pint of milk costs. Why would he? (Sophie). 
 
Well I think some of the researchers who I’m thinking about, they do work in very 
sort of specialised centres, and they would then see that kind of patient group who 
  
 
 
75 
 
 
 
might be also eligible for their studies… so, it might be that their clinical world is nice 
and neat like their research work, because it’s a very specialised service. (Ronda). 
 
All of the CPs were keen to stress the importance of interventions being collaborative and 
individualised. 
I think it would be a very worrying position to be in if psychologists did think that 
there was a ch-ch-ch-ch-ch, a do this, do this, do this, and that would be okay. I think 
that fundamentally misses the point about engaging with another person on a 
collaborative level, to genuinely understand what it is that they're experiencing. 
(Sophie). 
 
3.6.  
Having a Flexible Relationship with Guidelines 
The CPs described a number of ways in which they managed to practice in line with their 
beliefs about the necessary elements of psychological intervention. Some CPs simply ignore 
NICE guidelines. 
Okay. Erm, well, I don't use them. I can feel the pressure from my service and my 
managers and erm, it's in the water, isn't it. It's in the general culture now. But you 
know, I do iiiiiiiiiiiiiiii 17 with all kinds of people who fall outside of what NICE say I 
should be using. I do iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii with all kinds of people. I use other approaches that 
aren't in the NICE guidelines at all, like llllllllllllllllll. Er, I do what I see to be effective. 
I'm not against evidence-based work. I think it's important to evaluate what you're 
doing in different ways and I do that. I wouldn't want to continue doing something that 
clients were telling me was not helping but I don't feel I need NICE guidelines to do 
that. (Morgan). 
                                                          
 
17 Therapy label omitted in the interests of confidentiality. 
  
 
 
76 
 
 
 
Some CPs were secretive about their practice due to a conflict between how they wanted to 
practice and the pressures and dominant discourses within their services. 
Well I, well I certainly wouldn't advertise what I do to the managers. (Amy). 
 
The very fact that I've had to check with you about why what I said earlier was going to 
be anonymous is an indication of how tight and controlled the culture is really. 
(Morgan). 
 
CPs admitted that they often say they are offering CBT when in reality it is something 
different. 
I would probably say I’m doing CBT, even if I’m not doing, you know, even if it’s a bit 
fudgy around the edges. (Jenny). 
 
CPs valued having excuses not to follow NICE guidelines. 
So on the one hand it’s very frustrating that we’re supposed to work to NICE guidance 
that don’t really come from our client group, but on the other hand the advantage is that 
we can say ‘well, they don’t really fit our client group’, so, you know, we can retain a 
bit of protection from that, I think. (Jenny). 
 
It was admitted that CPs can use NICE to suit their needs. 
Well, it supports EMDR, but the CBT therapists will discount that, just as I discount the 
CBT promotion…Yes. That’s the problem is that we actually use it to suit ourselves. 
Yeah, I do. (Pause, then laughs) If it was more grounded in reality, it would be a good 
thing. But it doesn’t feel like it. It feels like I can just pick it up and drop it down as it 
suits me. So I use it to suit my own ends. (Jan). 
  
 
 
77 
 
 
 
So, it's almost as if, the, erm, the fact that something features in NICE is your kind of 
political doorway into, into the er heavenly realms. And you know, once you're in, you 
know, you can kind of play around a bit, kind of thing. But if you don't have the key to 
that door, you’re not in the NICE guidelines, you can't really start. It's a bit of a fudge, I 
think, because people are trained on the basis that this therapy is NICE approved, but 
they're then ending up doing it with groups of people that would not be NICE approved. 
(Morgan). 
 
A common theme was CPs reporting that they used NICE as guidelines rather than 
prescription. 
I guess, you know, I tend to see them as guidelines. I take the words kind of literally. 
So, for me, it feels like it’s useful in providing a sense of direction, or of what might 
be useful in thinking of a particular disorder/diagnosis, whatever you want to call it, 
client group. But, for me, they’re guidelines, rather than somebody telling me what to 
do. (Kim). 
 
Other CPs ensured that they were seen as NICE concordant through integrating ideas from 
other modalities into CBT. 
You can integrate – I quite often make use of psychodynamic or systemic ideas which 
I might, you know, bring into my CBT work…which I think is perfectly fine within a 
CBT model. I mean you’re talking about thoughts and feelings and you’re talking 
about it in an interpersonal context. (Sam). 
 
 
  
 
 
78 
 
 
 
The participants stressed the ability of CPs to understand the underlying principles of 
therapies and make adjustments rather than following manuals. 
You have to adapt what you do. But I think when you make those adaptations you 
have to be familiar with the manualised treatments and the kind of things that have 
been evaluated in RCT’s, and you have to know that stuff and you have to understand 
the underlying principles so that when you make those adaptations you don’t, you 
remain true to the principles of the treatment and the key elements, so you make your 
adaptation, as it were, knowingly, and don’t just drift into something that was no 
longer recognisably CBT. (Sam). 
 
Some CPs attempt to meet NICE halfway, they try to work within the language of NICE 
guidelines in order to get their perspectives across. 
We have to find a way of arguing our point, you know, about integration, about – but 
we have to use, to do that I think we have to join the language, we have to kind of 
work within NICE, with NICE guidelines, with evidence base practice and try to find 
a way. Because otherwise, again, we’re just going to be seen as very polarised. (Kim). 
 
There was a desire for NICE to review its approach and realise that routine clinical practice is 
not as “neat” as the guidelines can imply. 
I think the main criticism at this stage is that it really ought to be under review, and 
maybe NICE should apply its own methodology to itself. And so what is the evidence 
base for the diagnostic system? And what is the evidence base for, you know, 
producing guidelines using a diagnostic system that itself isn’t evidence based? (Sam) 
  
 
 
79 
 
 
 
I think it deserves further research. So perhaps I would say that I’m not sure that it 
should be there, I’m not sure it shouldn’t be there. I think it needs to be absolutely 
reviewed. (Jan). 
 
4. Discussion 
4.1  
Theoretical Integration 
4.1.1 Guideline implementation theory. This study is the first to produce a theoretical 
framework conceptualising the beliefs about, and use of NICE guidelines in UK mental 
health services18. Previous studies to investigate the use of NICE guidelines in UK mental 
health services have tended to draw upon Cabana et al.’s (1999) theoretical framework19 by 
focusing on clinicians’ knowledge, clinicians’ beliefs and external factors. By reflecting on 
the context of limited resources, the participants in this present study highlighted the 
relevance of Cabana et al.’s category of external factors. This is a consistent finding in the 
existing literature, that services do not have the resources to fully deliver what NICE 
recommend (e.g. Gyani et al., 2012; Michie et al., 2007; Prytys et al., 2011; Rhodes et al, 
2010) 
 
A number of research studies have been based upon the assumption that a greater 
knowledge of the content of guidelines would increase adherence (Gyani et al., 2011; Gyani 
et al., 2012; Rhodes et al, 2010). The results of this present study demonstrate that clinicians’ 
beliefs and knowledge appear to be interrelated, with some of the participants choosing to 
ignore NICE due to their beliefs. For example, beliefs about the questionable validity of 
diagnostic categories or the importance of interventions being based on individualised 
                                                          
 
18 While Michie et al. (2007) drew upon theory to inform their data collection and analysis, the results of the 
study did not produce a theoretical framework to help understand the use of guidelines. 
19 Developed pre NICE, investigating the use of physical and mental health guidelines. 
  
 
 
80 
 
 
 
formulations. This suggests that it might be unhelpful for theoretical models to treat 
knowledge and beliefs as separate entities. Furthermore, CPs in the current study suggested 
that in some cases adherence to guidelines could result from a lack of knowledge, in this case 
about limitations of guidelines. This difference is significant and disputes Cabana et al.’s 
suggestion that there is a broadly linear relationship between knowledge and guideline 
adherence. 
 
This study suggests that guidelines are utilised in many different ways, as opposed to a 
dichotomy of adherence versus non adherence. The theoretical model also suggests that there 
is a circular, reciprocal interaction between beliefs and guideline usage. These are important 
findings and challenge the appropriateness of viewing guideline adherence as a dichotomous, 
dependent variable in theoretical models such as Cabana et al. Furthermore, it challenges the 
usefulness of utilising models such as the theory of planned behaviour (Ajzen, 1985) to 
investigate the use of NICE guidelines in UK mental health services20. Due to the format of 
the theory of planned behaviour, studies utilising this framework (e.g. Liabsuetrakul, 
Chongsuvivatwong, Lumbiganon, & Lindmark, 2003; Limbert & Lamb, 2002; Rashidian & 
Russell, 201121) invariably view guideline adherence as a dichotomous, dependent variable. 
 
As noted in the introduction to this study, there have been numerous published 
criticisms of the use of NICE guidelines in UK mental health services. All of the key 
criticisms appearing in this literature were expressed by participants of the current study. This 
suggests that these are not just the views of the disgruntled few who choose to publish their 
opinions, but appear widespread amongst clinicians. A strength of this study is that it groups 
these concerns into categories and subcategories. It places these into a theoretical framework 
                                                          
 
20 As proposed by Prytys, et al. (2011) as an idea for future research. 
21 Each of these studies investigated guideline usage in physical health settings. 
  
 
 
81 
 
 
 
alongside the benefits and reflects upon the dynamic interplay between the formation of 
beliefs and guideline usage. 
 
4.1.2. Beliefs about the purpose of, and future of clinical psychology. While the 
participants criticised classification and other key assumptions of NICE guidelines, the 
participants valued the powerful endorsement that NICE can provide to psychological 
therapies. This is in keeping with the views of Pilgrim (2010) who argues that CPs tend to 
carry out their work in line with the dominant medical model in an attempt to gain status.  
Moncrieff (2009) argues that despite the lack of evidence supporting it, adopting the rhetoric 
of ‘specific cures’ for ‘specific psychiatric illnesses’ generates credibility and power for 
mental health professions. From a neo-Weberian framework (Freidson, 1970), this rhetoric 
can be seen as pivotal in mental health professionals managing to persuade others of the need 
for their service and exclude competitors. NICE guidelines could be seen as a powerful tool 
to enhance this notion of ‘specific cures’ for ‘specific illnesses’. The conceptual model from 
this study demonstrates that while adhering to this approach can give power, it can also lead 
to fear that specialist skills are not being fully appreciated. This results in a fear that power 
may be taken away from the profession. 
 
The chair of the Division of Clinical Psychology, Pemberton (2014) recently 
acknowledged the challenge for CPs to justify their cost and demonstrate their worth, noting 
that in many areas posts were being downgraded and CPs losing influence. The CPs in this 
study were keen to differentiate themselves from single modality therapists, even noting that 
CBT by a CP is different to CBT by a CBT therapist. There is empirical evidence to support 
this claim; with CPs scoring higher than CBT therapists when their CBT interventions are 
  
 
 
82 
 
 
 
compared through blind rating (Brosan, Reynolds, & Moore, 2007; McManus, Westbrook, 
Vazquez-Montes, Fennell, & Kennerley, 2010).  
 
The Mowbray (1989) ‘MAS report’ proposes that CPs’ skills are at ‘level 3’, 
highlighting the ability of CPs to integrate from various psychological models. Protocol 
driven therapies, delivered by single modality therapists are labelled as ‘level 2’. As noted by 
the participants in this study, level 3 skills such as psychological formulation and integrative 
practice do not fit neatly within the framework of NICE. The results of this study suggest that 
CPs in routine practice are utilising level 3 skills but these are not always advertised and in 
turn, not recognised. 
 
4.1.3. Safe uncertainty. The desire to have protocol driven therapy, reducing the need 
for clinical judgement has been criticised as naïve modernist thinking (Bohart & House, 
2008; van Ooijen, 2011). This viewpoint argues that uncertainty can never be fully 
eliminated. It notes that an unrelenting desire to reduce uncertainty is more likely to create 
problems rather than reduce risks and costs. In line with this thinking, a useful lens through 
which to view what this study’s participants are reporting might be Mason’s (1993) 
theoretical framework of ‘safe uncertainty’. NICE guidelines could be seen as a drive for 
certainty. Insisting that guidelines are rigidly followed leads to a position of ‘unsafe certainty’ 
where clinical judgement is reduced to an unsafe level. Not following the guidelines at all 
could lead to ‘unsafe uncertainty’. The desired position of ‘safe uncertainty’ could be 
achieved if clinicians are given the freedom to be informed by guidelines but have room for 
clinical judgement and collaborative, individualised interventions.  
 
 
  
 
 
83 
 
 
 
4.2.  
Clinical Implications 
4.2.1. Challenging dominant discourses. NICE appears to be experienced as a 
powerful force and there were fears that guidelines could be used in a more controlling way 
in the future. Foucault (1967) proposed that power is constructed through the use of 
discourses. Participants appeared to suggest that NICE’s power is generated through the 
discourses of: being evidence based (drawing on the powerful discourse of science), reducing 
risk, reducing uncertainty and treating psychological therapy as if it is a linear, replicable 
process, akin to medication. The CPs in this study highlighted flaws in each of these 
discourses. Challenging these dominant discourses may help counter-discourses emerge and 
allow discussion about the limitations of guidelines and how best to manage them. 
 
4.2.2. Seeing NICE as guidelines, not instructions. The participants were keen for 
guidelines to be utilised flexibly, with an awareness of their limitations. This would mean 
allowing clinicians to have room for clinical judgement and to deviate from guidelines when 
relevant. This would acknowledge that individuals seen in routine practice do not fit neatly 
into guidelines. This approach has important service organisation implications. Many of the 
participants to this study worried that the introduction of ‘Payment by Results’ (DH, 2002) 
would lead to NICE guidelines being utilised in a more prescriptive fashion. The DH (2013) 
note that care packages will not be nationally mandated, to allow flexibility in meeting 
people’s needs. This suggests that there is room for deviation from guidelines where 
appropriate. However, the DH also note that many organisations are looking at core 
interventions, based upon NICE guidance, that are to be provided to everybody in a cluster. 
This latter statement appears at odds with the views of the participants in this study and their 
conceptualisation of how guidelines are best utilised. 
 
  
 
 
84 
 
 
 
4.2.3. Demonstrating specialist skills. The majority of the CPs in this study described 
working in ways that prevent others from seeing their specialist skills. The emergent theory 
acknowledges that pressure to follow NICE guidelines can lead to this approach. The benefits 
of adhering to the rhetoric of ‘specific cures’ for ‘specific illnesses’ and thus gaining power 
through NICE endorsement is also highlighted. However, the emergent theory demonstrates 
the dangers of this approach, with the majority of participants fearing that their professional 
identity and jobs could be threatened. Numerous participants acknowledged that CPs are not 
good at explaining what they do and that this needs to change. This study draws attention to 
the importance of CPs improving the ways that they advertise their specialist skills. 
 
4.2.4. A NICE review. A common conclusion from the CPs in this study was seeing 
NICE as a work in progress and wanting it to be continuously reviewed. This would include 
reviewing how NICE guidelines are created, such as the use of a questionable diagnostic 
system and the way that psychological therapies are measured. It would also include 
reviewing how guidelines are presented and utilised. For example more acknowledgement of 
their limitations and the fact that routine clinical practice is not as neat as guidelines can 
imply. 
 
4.3.  
Research Implications 
It would be interesting to repeat this study, speaking with members from different mental 
health professions, to see if the results would be similar, or whether important differences are 
revealed. Principles of Foucauldian discourse analysis (Foucault, 1967) were utilised in the 
discussion of these results. Completing a more in-depth discourse analysis could further 
investigate how the discourses used by the creators and supporters of NICE generate the 
  
 
 
85 
 
 
 
power that NICE appears to hold. This could then be compared with the results of this study, 
to see if these discourses are the ones that have been challenged.  
 
 
This study highlighted a fear that level 3 skills such as idiosyncratic formulation and 
integration are not being recognised. It is acknowledged that integrative therapy is under 
researched due to the difficult fit with a research paradigm that favours manualisation and 
replicability of therapy (Barkham, 2007; DCP, 2011; Parry, Cape, & Pilling, 2003). It may be 
that more research is required utilising methodologies that do compliment this approach, such 
as case studies (e.g. Stenhouse & Van Kessel, 2002). Alternatively, a compromise could be 
sought where integrative practice could be included in RCTs, acknowledging that it cannot be 
manualised or replicated. The key variable to be measured would be the provision of 
individualised, collaborative therapy, drawing on a range of psychological theory and 
associated techniques, based upon psychological formulation.  
 
4.4. Limitations 
Due to its constructivist position, this study makes no attempt to claim that the findings are 
objective. The role of the principal researcher in co-constructing these data together with the 
participants is acknowledged. As such, it is possible that a different researcher may have co-
constructed the analyses differently. As detailed in the methodology, numerous steps were 
taken to make the role of the researcher as transparent as possible.  
 
There were limitations to both recruitment approaches; with CPs known to the 
researcher, it could be argued that pre-existing knowledge of the CP and their viewpoints 
may have biased the sampling. With CPs who responded to recruitment emails, the 
motivation to respond may have been influenced by particularly strong views for or against 
  
 
 
86 
 
 
 
NICE guidelines. As the aim was to speak with typical CPs from routine practice, rather than 
those with particularly strong views, it was felt that a combination of both recruitment 
strategies would help offset the limitations of each approach. In an attempt to provide 
transparency, the decision making behind the selection of participants is documented in detail 
in the research diary (Appendix L). 
 
5. Conclusions 
This study is the first to produce a theoretical framework to help explain why NICE 
guidelines are not consistently utilised in UK mental health services. The emergent theory 
details the participants’ beliefs, decision making processes and use of guidelines. The 
guidelines were seen as a useful guide to the evidence base and the power of NICE 
endorsement was valued. However, the CPs worried that guidelines could easily be 
misunderstood and used in a rigid and limiting manner. There were concerns about the harm 
that misuse of guidelines could do to service users and also to the profession of clinical 
psychology. The participants’ use of guidelines impacted upon their beliefs. CPs who were 
more able to practice in line with their beliefs about the nature of distress and the role of CPs 
were more able to see the benefits to guidelines. 
 
The emergent theory challenges the assumption that there is a simple, linear 
relationship between knowledge and guideline usage. This study highlights the importance of 
CPs finding ways to ensure that their skills are recognised. A common conclusion from the 
participants was wanting NICE to be viewed as guidelines and not instructions. The CPs 
wanted NICE to be seen as a work in progress with numerous limitations. Overall, the 
participants considered NICE guidelines to have benefits, but to be fraught with dangers. 
 
  
 
 
87 
 
 
 
6. References 
Adams, S. (2008). Naughty not NICE: Implications for therapy and services. Clinical 
Psychology Forum, 190, 29-32. 
Adler, P.A., & Adler, P. (2012).The epistemology of numbers. In S.E. Baker & R. Edwards 
(Eds.), How many qualitative interviews is enough? Expert voices and early career 
reflections on sampling and cases in qualitative research (pp. 8-11). Southampton, 
UK: National Centre for Research Methods. 
Ajzen, I. (1985). From intentions to actions: A theory of planned behavior. In J. Kuhl & J. 
Beckman (Eds.), Action-control: From cognition to behaviour (pp. 11-39). 
Heidelberg, Germany: Springer. 
Barker, P., & Buchanan-Barker, P. (2003). Schizophrenia: the ‘not‐so‐nice’ guidelines. 
Psychiatric and Mental Health Nursing, 10, 374-378. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-
2850.2003.00627_2.x 
Barkham, M. (2007). Evidence submitted by Professor Michael Barkham (NICE 83). House 
of commons select committee on health. Retrieved November, 4, 2013, from: 
http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200607/cmselect/cmhealth/503/503we77
.htm  
Berry, K., & Haddock, G. (2008). The implementation of the NICE guidelines for 
schizophrenia: Barriers to the implementation of psychological interventions and 
recommendations for the future. Psychology and Psychotherapy: Theory, Research 
and Practice, 81, 419-436. doi:10.1348/147608308X329540 
Bohart, A.C. & House, R. (2008). Empirically supported/validated treatments as modernist 
ideology, I:Dodo, manualization, and the paradigm question. In R. House & D. 
Loewenthal (Eds.), Against and for CBT. Towards a constructive dialogue? (pp. 188-
201). Herefordshire, UK: PCCS Books. 
  
 
 
88 
 
 
 
The British Psychological Society. (2007). Evidence submitted by the British Psychological 
Society (NICE 81) House of Commons select committee on health. Retrieved 
November, 4, 2013, from: http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200607/ 
cmselect/cmhealth/503/503we01.htm 
The British Psychological Society. (2010). Code of human research ethics. Leicester, UK: 
British Psychological Society. 
Brosan, L., Reynolds, S., & Moore, R. G. (2007). Factors associated with competence in 
cognitive therapists. Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 35, 179-190. 
doi.org/10.1017/S1352465806003304 
Cabana, M., Rand, C.S., Powe, N.R., Wu, A.W., Wilson, M.H., Abboud, M.D., & Rubin, 
H.R. (1999). Why don't physicians follow clinical practice guidelines? American 
Medical Association, 282, 1458-1465. 
Care Services Improvement Partnership. (2007). Good practice guide on the contribution of 
applied psychologists to improving access for psychological therapies. Leicester, UK: 
British Psychological Society. 
Chaffey, L., Unsworth, C., & Fossey, E. (2010). A grounded theory of intuition among 
occupational therapists in mental health practice. The British Journal of Occupational 
Therapy, 73, 300-308.  
Charmaz, K. (2006). Constructing grounded theory: A practical guide through qualitative 
analysis. London, UK: Sage.  
Clarke, A.E. (2005). Situational analysis: Grounded theory after the postmodern turn. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
 
 
  
 
 
89 
 
 
 
Crossley, J.P., & Salter, D.P. (2005). A question of finding harmony: A grounded theory 
study of clinical psychologists' experience of addressing spiritual beliefs in therapy. 
Psychology and Psychotherapy: Theory, Research and Practice, 78, 295-313. 
doi:10.1348/147608305X26783 
Department of Health. (1998). A first class service: Quality in the new NHS. London, UK: 
HMSO. 
Department of Health. (2002). Delivering the NHS plan. London, UK: The Stationery Office. 
Department of Health. (2013). Key steps for successful implementation of mental health 
payment by results. London, UK: The Stationery Office. 
Dey, I. (1999). Grounding grounded theory. San Diego, CA: Academic Press. 
Dey, I. (2007). Grounding categories. In A. Bryant & K. Charmaz (Eds.), The Sage handbook 
of grounded theory (pp.167-190). London, UK: Sage. 
The Division of Clinical Psychology. (2011). Good practice guidelines on the use of 
psychological formulation. Leicester, UK: The British Psychological Society. 
Eccles, M., Grimshaw, J., Walker, A., Johnston, M., & Pitts, N. (2005). Changing the 
behavior of healthcare professionals: the use of theory in promoting the uptake of 
research findings. Clinical Epidemiology, 58, 107-112. 
doi:10.1016/j.jclinepi.2004.09.002 
Fairfax, H. (2008). 'CBT or not CBT', is that really the question? Re-considering the evidence 
base: The contribution of process research. Counselling Psychology Review, 23, 27–
37. 
Foucault, M. (1967). Madness and civilization. A history of insanity in the age of reason. 
London, UK: Tavistock Publications. 
Freidson, E. (1970). Profession of medicine. New York, NY: Harper & Row. 
Glaser, B.G. (1978). Theoretical sensitivity. Mill Valley, CA: The Sociology Press. 
  
 
 
90 
 
 
 
Glaser, B.G. (1992). Basics of grounded theory analysis. Mill Valley, CA: The Sociology 
Press. 
Glaser, B.G. (1998). Doing grounded theory: Issues and discussions. Mill Valley, CA: The 
Sociology Press. 
Glaser, B. G., & Strauss, A. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory: Strategies for 
qualitative research. Chicago, IL: Aldine. 
Gyani, A., Shafran, R., & Rose, S. (2011). Are the NICE guidelines for Obsessive 
Compulsive Disorder being used in primary care? Primary Health Care Research & 
Development, 13, 92-97. doi:10.1017/S1463423611000399 
Gyani, A., Pumphrey, N., Parker, H., Shafran, R., & Rose, S. (2012). Investigating the use of 
NICE guidelines and IAPT services in the treatment of depression. Mental Health in 
Family Medicine, 9, 149-160. 
Hammersley, D. (2009). Counselling psychology: What I see in the crystal ball. Counselling 
Psychology Review, 24, 5-9. 
Hemsley, C. (2013). A thematic analytic exploration of how counselling psychologists in the 
UK experience and position themselves in relation to the NICE guidelines. 
Counselling Psychology Review, 28, 91-106. 
Hill, C. E., Knox, S., Thompson, B. J., Williams, E. N., Hess, S. A., & Ladany, N. (2005). 
Consensual qualitative research: An update. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 52, 
196-205. doi: 10.1037/0022-0167.52.2.196 
Holton, J. A. (2007). The coding process and its challenges. In A. Bryant & K. Charmaz 
(Eds.), The Sage handbook of grounded theory (pp. 265-289). London, UK: Sage. 
Hood, J.C. (2007). Orthodoxy vs. power. The defining traits of grounded theory. In A. Bryant 
& K. Charmaz (Eds.), The Sage handbook of grounded theory (pp. 151-164). London, 
UK: Sage. 
  
 
 
91 
 
 
 
Kovshoff, H., Williams, S., Vrijens, M., Danckaerts, M., Thompson, M., Yardley, L., ... 
Sonuga-Barke, E. J. (2012). The decisions regarding ADHD management (DRAMa) 
study: uncertainties and complexities in assessment, diagnosis and treatment, from the 
clinician’s point of view. European Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 21, 87-99. 
doi:10.1007/s00787-011-0235-8 
Liabsuetrakul, T., Chongsuvivatwong, V., Lumbiganon, P., & Lindmark, G. (2003). 
Obstetricians’ attitudes, subjective norms, perceived controls, and intentions on 
antibiotic prophylaxis in caesarean section. Social Science & Medicine, 57, 1665-
1674. 
Limbert, C., & Lamb, R. (2002). Doctors' use of clinical guidelines: two applications of the 
Theory of Planned Behaviour. Psychology, Health & Medicine, 7, 301-310. 
doi:10.1080/13548500220139377 
Long-Sutehall, T., Willis, H., Palmer, R., Ugboma, D., Addington-Hall, J., & Coombs, M. 
(2011). Negotiated dying: A grounded theory of how nurses shape withdrawal of 
treatment in hospital critical care units.  International Journal of Nursing Studies, 48, 
1466-1474. doi: 10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2011.06.003. 
Mason, B. (1993). Towards positions of safe uncertainty. Human Systems: Systemic 
Consultation & Management, 4, 189-200. 
McDonnell, L. (2012). Looking at the evidence: A discussion on how NICE assesses talking 
therapies. London, UK: UKCP. 
McManus, F., Westbrook, D., Vazquez-Montes, M., Fennell, M., & Kennerley, H. (2010). 
An evaluation of the effectiveness of diploma-level training in cognitive behaviour 
therapy. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 48, 1123-1132. 
doi:10.1016/j.brat.2010.08.002 
  
 
 
92 
 
 
 
McQueen, D. (2009). Response to the NICE clinical guideline on depression. London, UK: 
The British Psychoanalytic Council. 
Mears, A., Kendall, T.L., Strathdee, G., Sinfield, R., & Aldridge, I. (2008). Progress on NICE 
guideline implementation in mental health trusts: meta-analyses. Psychiatric Bulletin, 
32, 383-387. doi: 10.1192/pb.bp.108.019547 
Michie, S., Pilling, S., Garety, P., Whitty, P., Eccles, M. P., Johnston, M., & Simmons, J. 
(2007). Difficulties implementing a mental health guideline: an exploratory 
investigation using psychological theory. Implementation Science, 2, 1-8. 
doi:10.1186/1748-5908-2-8 
The Midlands Psychology Group (2010). Welcome to NICE world. Clinical Psychology 
Forum, 212, 52-56. 
Mollon, P. (2009a). The NICE guidelines are misleading, unscientific, and potentially impede 
good psychological care and help. Psychodynamic Practice, 15, 9–24. 
doi:10.1080/14753630802614457 
Mollon, P. (2009b). Our rich heritage–are we building upon it or destroying it? (or, ‘Why are 
counselling psychologists not angrier with clinical psychologists?’). Counselling 
Psychology Review, 24, 131-142. 
Moncrieff, J. (2009). The myth of the chemical cure: A critique of psychiatric drug treatment.  
Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave MacMillan. 
Morse, J.M. (2007). Sampling in grounded theory. In A. Bryant & K. Charmaz (Eds.), The 
Sage handbook of grounded theory (pp. 229-244). London, UK: Sage. 
Mowbray, D. (1989). Management advisory service. Review of clinical psychology services. 
Cheltenham, UK: Management Advisory Service. 
Nel, P. W. (2011). Clinical psychology in the noughties: The good, the bad and the NICE. 
Clinical Psychology Forum, 214, 7-11. 
  
 
 
93 
 
 
 
The National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (2010). Schizophrenia. Core 
interventions in the treatment and management of Schizophrenia in primary and 
secondary care (update). National Clinical Practice Guideline 82. London, UK: 
author. 
Parry, G., Cape, J., & Pilling, S. (2003). Clinical practice guidelines in clinical psychology 
and psychotherapy. Clinical Psychology & Psychotherapy, 10, 337-351. 
doi:10.1002/cpp.381 
Pemberton, R. (2014). New year message to DCP members. Retrieved January, 9, 2014, 
from:  http://richardpemberton.wordpress.com/2014/01/07/2014-new-year-message-
to-dcp-members/ 
Pilgrim, D. (2010). British clinical psychology and society. Psychology Learning & 
Teaching, 9, 8-12. doi: 10.2304/plat.2010.9.2.8 
Prytys, M., Garety, P. A., Jolley, S., Onwumere, J., & Craig, T. (2011). Implementing the 
NICE guideline for schizophrenia recommendations for psychological therapies: A 
qualitative analysis of the attitudes of CMHT staff. Clinical Psychology and 
Psychotherapy, 18, 48–59. doi: 10.1002/cpp.691 
Rashidian, A., & Russell, I. (2011). Intentions and statins prescribing: can the Theory of 
Planned Behaviour explain physician behaviour in following guideline 
recommendations? Evaluation in Clinical Practice, 17, 749-757. 
doi:10.1111/j.13652753.2011.01690.x 
Rhodes, L., Genders, R., Owen, R., O’Hanlon, K., & Brown, J. S. L. (2010). Investigating 
barriers to implementation of the NICE guidelines for depression: A staff survey with 
community mental health teams. Psychiatric and Mental Health Nursing, 17, 147-
151. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2850.2009.01488.x 
 
  
 
 
94 
 
 
 
Rogers, A. (2011). Petition against CBT bias. Therapy Today, 22. 
Rolls, L., & Relf, M. (2006). Bracketing interviews: Addressing methodological challenges 
in qualitative interviewing in bereavement and palliative care. Mortality, 11, 286-305. 
Sin, J., & Scully, E. (2008). An evaluation of education and implementation of psychosocial 
interventions within one UK mental healthcare trust. Psychiatric and Mental Health 
Nursing, 15, 161-169. 
Smail, D. (2006). Is clinical psychology selling its soul (again)? Clinical Psychology Forum, 
168, 17-20. 
Spradley, J. (1979). The ethnographic interview. Fort Worth, TX: Harcourt Brace 
Jovanovich. 
Stenhouse, L., & Van Kessel, K. (2002). Cognitive therapy and dialectical behaviour therapy: 
An integrative approach to the conceptualization of borderline personality disorder. 
New Zealand Journal of Psychology, 31, 87-92. 
Strauss, A.L. (1987). Qualitative analysis for social scientists. New York, NY: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Strauss, A.L. & Corbin, J. (1998). Basics of qualitative research: Grounded theory 
procedures and techniques (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Toner, R., Snape, C., Acton, S., & Blenkiron, P. (2010). Do general practitioners adhere to 
NICE guidelines for depression? Systematic questionnaire survey. Primary Health 
Care Research & Development, 11, 123-131. 
Townend, M. (2008). Clinical supervision in cognitive behavioural psychotherapy: 
Development of a model for mental health nursing through grounded theory. 
Psychiatric and Mental Health Nursing, 15, 328-339. 
doi:10.1111/j.13652850.2007.01235.x 
  
 
 
95 
 
 
 
Tweed, A.E., Salter, E. & Denis, P. (2000). A conflict of responsibilities: A grounded theory 
study of clinical psychologists' experiences of client non-attendance within the British 
National Health Service. British Journal of Medical Psychology, 73, 465-481. 
doi:10.1348/000711200160660 
The UK Council for Psychotherapy. (2011). NICE under scrutiny, the impact of the National 
Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence guidelines on the provision of 
psychotherapy in the UK. London, UK: Author. 
Urquhart, C. (2013). Grounded theory for qualitative research: A practical guide. London, 
UK: Sage. 
van Ooijen, E. (2011). What a strange world we live in. Retrieved from: 
http://www.therapytoday.net/article/show/2650/print/ 
Waft, Y. (2011). Is CAT in danger of being squeezed out of the NHS? Reformulation, 36, 18-
21.  
Watt, D. (2007). On becoming a qualitative researcher: The value of reflexivity. Qualitative 
Report, 12, 82-101. 
Willig, C. (2001). Introducing qualitative research in psychology: Adventures in theory and 
method. Buckingham, UK: Open University Press.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
96 
 
 
 
 
 
Alex John Court BSc (Hons) MBPsS PGDip 
 
 
MAJOR RESEARCH PROJECT 
SECTION C: APPENDICES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APRIL 2014 
 
 
 
SALOMONS 
CANTERBURY CHRIST CHURCH UNIVERSITY 
 
 
 
  
 
 
97 
 
 
 
Appendix A: Further Details of Literature Review Methodology 
Initial exploratory literature searches were conducted using a range of search terms in various 
electronic databases. When initial relevant papers were found, the keywords of these papers 
and relevant referenced and citing articles were studied. These keywords were then used in a 
more structured search strategy in November 2013. Searches were limited to articles 
produced after 1998, the year before NICE was formed. It was hoped that this would capture 
literature written in anticipation of NICE guidelines and literature written about, or in the 
context of NICE guidelines.  
 
Search Terms  
“NICE guidelines” OR “NICE guidance” OR “Clinical Guidelines” 
AND  
“Attitudes” OR “Clinical Decision Making” OR “Implementation” 
AND  
“Mental Health” 
 
Electronic Databases Used 
PsychINFO (to capture psychological literature), Medline (for biomedical literature), Web of 
Knowledge (for scientific (often theoretical) literature), ASSIA (for health & social science 
literature), Cochrane Library (for reviews), Google (for ‘grey’ literature) and Google Scholar 
(for a broad search to compliment the other searches). 
 
Further Manual Searching 
A number of authors who have conducted literature reviews on guideline usage (Bero et al., 
1998; Grol & Grimshaw, 1999; Robertson & Jochelson, 2006) highlighted the difficulty in 
  
 
 
98 
 
 
 
locating all the relevant literature. It has been suggested that this is due to the literature being 
in both generalist and specialist publications, having a wide range of key words and often 
being “poorly indexed in bibliographical databases” (Robertson & Jochelson, 2006, p.6).  
With this in mind, when relevant articles were found, their reference lists were inspected to 
identify other appropriate studies. The ‘find similar’ and ‘find citing articles’ functions on 
electronic databases were also utilised. 
 
Inclusion Criteria 
All literature needed to be written in English.  
For the systematic review of empirical literature on the use of NICE guidelines in UK mental 
health services, articles published in peer reviewed journals were sought. Due to the scarcity 
of research, any articles that utilised quantitative or qualitative research methodology to 
investigate the use of NICE guidelines in UK mental health services were included, no 
stringent exclusion criteria were set.  
 
For the review of generic clinical practice guideline literature and published views of NICE, 
there were no exclusion criteria other than articles needing to be written in English. Any 
relevant literature that was identified was reviewed.  
 
Results 
Titles and abstracts were reviewed and where necessary scans of the full articles were 
undertaken to review relevance of literature. 
9 peer reviewed articles were found in the systematic review of research studies investigating 
the use of NICE guidelines in UK mental health services. 
  
 
 
99 
 
 
 
159 documents including: government documents, peer reviewed journal articles, letters, 
websites and books were drawn upon in the review of the general guideline literature and the 
published views about NICE guidelines. 
 
Full details of the results generated from each separate electronic database (before checking 
results for relevance) are as follows: 
Database 
 
Number of results 
PsychINFO 
202 
 
Medline 
180 
 
Web of Knowledge 
60 
 
ASSIA*1  
 
85 
Cochrane Library*2  
 
8 
GOOGLE scholar*3  
 
83 
GOOGLE*4 
 
100 
 
The following amendments were made to the searches: 
*1 
For the database ASSIA, due to a limited return of results using all search terms, the 
search was conducted using only the terms “NICE guidelines”. This generated 85 results. 
*2 
With Cochrane Library, the search terms “NICE guidelines” produced 0 results. 
Using the terms “Guidelines” AND “Mental Health” produced 8 results. 
*3 
The GOOGLE scholar search produced 3,190 results. Due to the unmanageably large 
return, the terms “psychological theory” were added to the search to attempt to narrow down 
the findings and produce results with a theoretical basis. This produced 83 results. 
*3 
The GOOGLE search produced 120,000 results. Utilising GOOGLE’s presentation of 
results in order of “PageRank” (a measure of counts and quality of links to a page) as a crude 
  
 
 
100 
 
 
 
measure of quality and relevance, the first five pages of results (50 results) were scanned for 
relevant results. As with the GOOGLE Scholar search, the terms "psychological theory" were 
then added to the search, bringing the results down to 1,960. Weighing up the possible 
benefits of screening all the results against the time constraints of the study led to the decision 
to just review the first ten pages (100 results) for relevant results. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
101 
 
 
 
Appendix B – Summary of Studies Focusing on Implementation of NICE Guidelines in UK Mental Health Services 
Study 
Design 
Notes 
Gyani et 
al. (2011) 
Questionnaire survey 
+ descriptive 
statistics.  
795 questionnaires sent to UK GPs re their knowledge and use of OCD NICE guideline. 80 returned. 30% of GPs had read the 
guideline. Low response rate. GPs who replied may be more interested in NICE / OCD / research. 
80% of GPs read at least one NICE guideline for mental health vs 97% had read at least one NICE guideline for physical health. No 
reflection on discrepancy, this discrepancy could be indicative of important beliefs. Study implies importance of knowledge, but 
analysis is limited. 
Gyani et 
al. (2012) 
Questionnaire survey 
+ 6 interviews. 
Descriptive statistics 
+ Interpretive 
Phenomenological 
Analysis (IPA). 
830 questionnaires sent to UK GPs, re depression NICE guideline. 222 returned. 75% of GPs had read the guideline. Concordance 
with guidelines significantly higher amongst GPs who had read the guidelines. However, this is self-reported concordance. This is 
likely to be higher amongst those who have read the guidelines, as they know what they “should” say, it doesn’t mean that they 
actually do follow the guidelines. + known gap between intention and action. Limited info given on methodology and write up of IPA. 
Positive & negative views towards NICE. Guidelines clear and helpful but unnecessarily lengthy and repetitive. Doubts about validity 
of research included by NICE and whether resources available. 
Hemsley 
(2013) 
Interviews + thematic 
analysis 
Interviewed 9 counselling psychologists to investigate how they positioned themselves in relation to NICE guidelines. Reveals 
complex mix of positive and negative views towards NICE. However, concerns re reflexivity. Not sure what has come from researcher 
and what from participants. Quotes provided don’t seem to back up the theme labelling. + Lots of use of term “pluralism” by 
researcher. No mention of whether this came from participants or from researcher, were participants directly asked about pluralism? 
Taken as a given that the participants don’t agree with the medical model, but no data from participants given to support this. 
Kovshoff 
et al. 
(2012) 
Interviews + 
“thematic analysis, 
drawing on principles 
of grounded theory” 
Interviewed 50 child psychiatrists and paediatricians re decision making in assessment, diagnosis and treatment of ADHD. Excellent 
detail provided in explanation of methodology and results. Numerous quotes provided from participants to support findings. Only 6 
participants mentioned drawing on NICE guidelines. When they were discussed, emphasis was around questioning practicality of 
guidelines. 
Michie et 
al. (2007) 
Interviews + content 
analysis 
Built upon Michie et al. (2005), using the 12 domains drawn from psychological theory to guide interviews and analysis. 20 CMHT 
workers from 3 NHS trusts interviewed. Key factors identified were resources, such as staffing levels and also training and support 
needs. Absence of critical views towards guidelines. Questions of potential unintentional researcher bias, researchers wanting to 
  
 
 
102 
 
 
 
increase use of guidelines. Structure of interview schedule and content analysis affect results. + presence of researchers (key in field of 
guideline implementation and CBT/FI for schizophrenia) may have made the intentions of project clear, may have put potential 
participants off if they had views that were critical. + lots of different types of prof, within small sample, yet they concluded prof id not 
significant. Likely to need more people from each profession to fully investigate this. 
Prytys et 
al. (2011) 
Interviews + thematic 
analysis 
Semi structured interviews with 20 care co-ordinators across 4 CMHTs. The thematic analysis is described comprehensively and 
results laid out in detail, linking themes to specific quotes from participants. Positive views expressed regarding guidelines, noting they 
provide direction, help prioritise interventions and improve quality of care. Workload and time pressures = crucial barrier. Themes also 
emerged regarding care co-ordinators doubting the effectiveness of CBT and FI and having pessimistic expectations for the recovery of 
individuals with a diagnosis of schizophrenia. Researchers seemed to dismiss these views. Questions of potential unintentional 
researcher bias, researchers wanting to increase use of guidelines, not open to info that disputes this? 
Rhodes et 
al. (2010) 
Questionnaire survey 
+ vignette task. 
32 ABT staff were given questionnaires. Also asked to read vignettes and specify recommended intervention. Most staff had 
appropriate levels of knowledge. Responded to vignettes in a way that was in keeping with NICE. Lack of resources impacted upon 
referrals for CBT. Social problems of service users considered a barrier to referring for CBT. Complexity of service users, not fitting 
with NICE? 
Sin & 
Scully 
(2008) 
Questionnaire survey 
+ descriptive 
statistics 
Questionnaire survey of 15 clinicians who had undertaken a training course in psychosocial interventions (PSI) and their managers 
(n=11). Aim was that training the clinicians in PSI would help meet the need of the recommendations from the schizophrenia and 
bipolar NICE guidelines. The questionnaire was said to collect quantitative and qualitative data but only quantitative data was 
reported. The findings of this study don’t appear to provide a huge amount to the evidence base regarding the implementation of NICE 
guidelines. Main finding appears to be that staff shortages and time were key implementation barriers. 
Toner et 
al. (2010) 
Questionnaire survey 
+ descriptive 
statistics. 
Survey sent to 215 GPs. Response rate of 67%. Poor access to CBT considered greatest barrier. 38% rated NICE as having a moderate 
or substantial impact on their practice. Not much reflection on why this is low, what this could mean. The study referred to GPs 
“personally using CBT”. This appears to be techniques of CBT, such as recommending pleasurable activities, brief thought 
challenging (within the GP consultation). This doesn’t seem to be “classic CBT” as recommended by NICE. Amount of analysis is 
limited. The authors admit that the study does not “explore the merits versus drawbacks” of guidelines. + They acknowledge the gap 
between intention and action. 
 
  
 
 
103 
 
 
 
Appendix C - Salomons Independent Research Review Panel Approval Letter 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
104 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
105 
 
 
 
Appendix D - Ethics Approval Letter 
 
 
  
 
 
106 
 
 
 
Appendix E: Anonymised Research and Development Approval Letters 
 
________________________________________ 
From: iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii 
Sent: 14 December 2012 17:58 
To: Court Alex (SURREY AND BORDERS PARTNERSHIP NHS FOUNDATION 
TRUST) 
Subject: RE: authorisation for nice guidelines clinical psychologists project 
 
Hello Alex, 
 
I have reviewed your registration form for "A Grounded Theory of Clinical 
Psychologists' beliefs about, and use of NICE Guidelines." I can 
formally advise you that you have authorisation to proceed. 
 
Regards 
 
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiii 
 
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii 
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii 
jiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii 
Mobile number- 0iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii 
________________________________________ 
 
****************************************************************
**************************************************** 
 
This message may contain confidential information. If you are not the intended 
recipient please inform the sender that you have received the message in error 
before deleting it. 
Please do not disclose, copy or distribute information in this e-mail or take any 
action in reliance on its contents: to do so is strictly prohibited and may be 
unlawful. 
 
Thank you for your co-operation. 
 
NHSmail is the secure email and directory service available for all NHS staff in 
England and Scotland NHSmail is approved for exchanging patient data and 
other sensitive information with NHSmail and GSi recipients NHSmail provides an 
email address for your career in the NHS and can be accessed anywhere 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
107 
 
 
 
 
From: Aiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii 
Sent: 10 January 2013 12:27 
To: Alex Court 
Subject: RE: R&D re NICE guidelines & Clinical Psychologists research 
Hi Alex 
 
Please do start the work associated with your MRP - I will issue the formal permission in due 
course but please accept this email as an interim permission given the low-risk nature of your 
study. I've been advised that the new secretary will be in post from next week so hopefully I'll 
be able to send you a definitive list of Trust psychologists to complement any details you may 
receive from the co-ordinator. 
 
Best wishes for 2013 
 
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii 
 
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii 
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii 
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii 
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
108 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
109 
 
 
 
Appendix F: Information Sheet for Participants 
 
Faculty of Social and Applied Sciences 
Clinical Psychology Doctoral Programme 
Canterbury Christ Church University 
Salomons Campus 
 
INFORMATION SHEET FOR PARTICIPANTS 
 
Study: 
 
 Clinical Psychologists’ beliefs about, and use of NICE 
Guidelines. 
 
Researcher: 
 Mr Alex Court, clinical psychologist in training, Canterbury Christ 
Church University. 
 
You are invited to take part in a research study. Before deciding whether or not to 
take part in the study, it is important to understand why the research is being carried 
out and what it will involve. Please read the following information carefully. 
 
What is the purpose of the study? 
NICE guidelines were introduced in 1999 to attempt to improve clinical effectiveness 
and reduce variation in practice across NHS Trusts. Research suggests that 
implementation of NICE guidelines is inconsistent.  
There have been studies investigating other health professionals’ usage of NICE 
guidelines but none to date focussing on clinical psychologists (CPs). 
Many CPs appear to be in favour of NICE guidelines, with some assisting with their 
production and with the British Psychological Society co-publishing some guidelines. 
Other CPs have criticised the guidelines, arguing that they discourage psychological 
thinking.  
This study aims to investigate what CPs in routine practice think about NICE 
guidelines and how this impacts upon their use of the guidelines. The aim of the 
study is neither to promote the use of NICE guidelines nor to dispute them: rather, to 
find out about how they are being used and to generate debate about their benefits 
and limitations, and how they are best used in services. 
 
  
 
 
110 
 
 
 
How is the study being carried out? 
The researcher will travel to CPs to conduct semi structured interviews, lasting up to 
60minutes, at their place of work, on a one to one basis, to discuss their views on the 
use of NICE guidelines. These interviews will be audio taped and then transcribed. 
The data from the interviews will be analysed using the qualitative method of 
grounded theory. The researcher may contact participants after the initial analyses to 
seek clarification or validation of emerging theories. If this does occur, this will take 
the form of a brief telephone conversation, which is not expected to take up much of 
participants’ time.  
 
Why have I been invited to participate? 
The study is interested in the views of CPs working in routine clinical practice in the 
NHS. 
 
Do I have to take part? 
It is your decision whether or not to take part. If you do decide to take part you will be 
asked to sign a consent form and complete a brief questionnaire. You will still be free 
to withdraw at any time without giving a reason. You also have the right to withdraw 
retrospectively any consent given and to request that your own data, including 
recordings, be destroyed.  
 
Is anyone excluded from participating? 
The study is specifically interested in CPs, so non CPs will not be able to participate. 
CPs who are supervised or managed by either of the research project’s supervisors 
(Ms Anne Cooke and Dr Amanda Scrivener) will not be able to participate. 
CPs who have been involved in production of NICE guidelines or who have already 
published opinions on NICE guidelines will not be invited to participate as their 
positions are already known. This study attempts to establish the views of CPs in 
routine clinical practice. 
The initial questionnaire completed with the consent form will be used to assist in 
theoretical sampling, to attempt to ensure that the participants included in the study 
come from varying backgrounds, with a variety of opinions about NICE guidelines. It 
  
 
 
111 
 
 
 
is therefore possible that a participant may consent to take part and complete the 
questionnaire but not be asked to be interviewed. 
 
What are the possible disadvantages and risks of taking part? 
A disadvantage is that this study requires you to give up 60 minutes of your time. It is 
however hoped that this topic will be of interest to participants and is clinically 
relevant, so will not be seen as too much of a disadvantage. 
A potential risk is that the discussions in the interviews could lead to some 
participants feeling that they are being criticised, or that it is being implied that they 
should be using NICE guidelines more or less then they currently are. The 
researcher does not intend this to be the case. The researcher aims to approach the 
interviews from a respectful, neutral perspective, neither promoting nor disputing the 
use of NICE guidelines. If you feel that the researcher is being critical then you are 
encouraged to advise the researcher of this immediately and have the right to leave 
the interview at any time should you so choose. 
 
What are the possible benefits of taking part? 
This study could provide participants with the opportunity to reflect upon their own 
views about NICE guidelines and how they utilise them. 
Overall, the study is a chance to further our understanding of how NICE guidelines 
are used by CPs. This could be considered especially important in the current 
climate of payment by results, managed care and the tight control of resources in the 
NHS, with less costly professions competing for roles previously held by CPs. This 
study could provide valuable information on how CPs practice and the skills that the 
profession can offer to services. 
The study may also provide information that could be taken into consideration in the 
production of future NICE guidelines, or in the distribution strategies of guidelines. 
 
Will what I say in this study be kept confidential? 
All information collected about you will be kept strictly private and confidential. 
Information such as professional banding, years since qualification and specialist 
area will be recorded but names and other potentially identifying information will be 
  
 
 
112 
 
 
 
removed or altered. The audio-recordings will be kept on a password protected 
memory stick in a locked drawer. Following the conclusion of the study, the data will 
be kept according to Canterbury Christ Church University’s policy. Data will be coded 
and kept electronically on a password protected CD in the Clinical Psychology 
programme office of the Department of Applied Psychology, Canterbury Christ 
Church University, Broomhill Road, Tunbridge Wells, Kent TN3 0TG and on the 
memory stick in a locked drawer in the researcher’s residence for 10 years. After 10 
years all data will be destroyed.  
 
What should I do if I want to take part? 
If you wish to take part please e-mail Alex Court at ajc100@canterbury.ac.uk giving 
your name and contact details.  
 
What will happen to the results of the research study? 
The results of the research will be used for a thesis as part of a doctoral course in 
clinical psychology and will be submitted for publication.  If you wish to receive a 
copy of the results of the study you may request this by contacting the researcher at 
ajc100@canterbury.ac.uk. 
 
Who is organising and funding this research? 
Alex Court is conducting the research as a clinical psychologist in training on the 
Clinical Psychology Programme, Dept. Of Applied Psychology, Canterbury Christ 
Church University, Broomhill Road, Tunbridge Wells, Kent TN3 0TG. This 
organisation is funding the research. 
 
Who has approved this study? 
The research has been approved by the Salomons Independent Research Review 
Panel and has been approved by the Salomons Ethics Panel as part of the Clinical 
Psychology Programme, Department of Applied Psychology, Canterbury Christ 
Church University. 
 
  
 
 
113 
 
 
 
Concerns 
If you have any concerns or wish to make a formal complaint about the way in which 
this research has been carried out, you can do so by contacting the research 
project’s lead supervisor at:  anne.cooke@canterbury.ac.uk or by contacting 
Professor Paul Camic, the Research Director of the Clinical Psychology Programme 
at Canterbury Christ Church University, at paul.camic@canterbury.ac.uk. 
 
Contact for further information 
If you have any questions you can contact Alex Court, clinical psychologist in training 
for further information at ajc100@canterbury.ac.uk 
 
Thank you 
Thank you for taking the time to read the information sheet. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
114 
 
 
 
Faculty of Social and Applied Sciences 
Clinical Psychology Doctoral Programme 
Canterbury Christ Church University 
Salomons Campus 
 
CONSENT FORM 
 
 
Study: 
 
 Clinical Psychologists’ beliefs about, and use of NICE 
Guidelines. 
 
Researcher: 
 Mr Alex Court, clinical psychologist in training, Canterbury Christ 
Church University. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Please tick box to confirm 
 
 
 
1 
I confirm that I have read and understand the information sheet for the 
above study.  I have had the opportunity to consider the information, ask questions 
and have had these answered satisfactorily. 
 
 
 
2 
I understand that my participation is voluntary and that I am free to 
withdraw at any time, without giving any reason. 
 
 
 
3 
I understand that I may complete the pre interview questionnaire but then 
not be asked to participate in an interview. 
 
 
4           If I do take part in an interview, I agree to this interview being audio taped, 
transcribed and the information analysed using grounded theory. 
 
 
 
 
5 
I understand that the data from the interviews may be seen by responsible 
transcribers, other than the lead researcher. It will be ensured that transcribers are 
aware that the data is confidential and that they formally agree to respect this. 
 
 
6 
I agree that anonymised quotes from the interviews may be used in the 
write up and in any subsequent publication. I understand that all personal 
identifiable information will be removed from these. 
 
 
 
 
7 
I agree to take part in the above study.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
____________________ 
________________ 
_______________ 
Name of Participant 
Date 
Signature 
 
1 copy for participant;  1copy for researcher. 
 
Appendix G: Participant 
Consent Form 
  
 
 
115 
 
 
 
Appendix H: Recruitment Email 
 
 
 
From: iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii 
Sent: 31 January 2013 14:53 
Cc: ajc100@canterbury.ac.uk 
Subject: For the attention of all Clinical Psychologists 
 
Sent on behalf of Mr Alex Court: 
 
Dear iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii Clinical Psychologists 
 
For my major research project, as part of my training at Salomons, I am investigating Clinical 
Psychologists' beliefs about, and use of NICE guidelines. 
 
I have ethics approval from the Salomons Ethics Panel and approval from 
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii to interview their staff. 
 
The study involves completing a very brief questionnaire (please see attached) and then an 
interview of up to 60 minutes. I have attached an information sheet to provide further details. 
 
I would be very grateful if some of you would be willing to take part in my study. My hope is 
that participants will find this an interesting topic to discuss and that the project will produce 
interesting results.  
 
If you are interested in taking part, please could you complete the attached consent form and 
pre interview questionnaire and return these to me at ajc100@canterbury.ac.uk . If you have 
any questions, or if there is anything that you would like to discuss further, please contact 
me. 
 
Thank you very much for your time. 
 
Kind regards 
 
Alex 
 
Mr Alex Court 
Trainee Clinical Psychologist 
2nd year 
Canterbury Christ Church University 
Salomons Campus 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
116 
 
 
 
Appendix I: Interview Questions 
 
Opening statement, leading to an open question: 
“Thank you again for agreeing to speak with me today. I wonder if we could begin by you 
telling me about your thoughts on NICE guidelines?” 
 
Follow up prompt questions to be used if needed: 
“What do you think of NICE guidelines?” 
“How do you use NICE guidelines?” 
“How are NICE guidelines used in the service that you work in? Do you agree or disagree 
with this usage? Do you / have you had any influence over this?” 
“When are they helpful and when are they not helpful?” 
“Why do you think that some clinical psychologists might use them more/less than you? Is 
this a good or bad thing?” 
“Do you think other clinical psychologists might hold different opinions to you about the 
guidelines / when to use them and when not to? If so, why do you think this is?” 
“What are alternative solutions to NICE guidelines? What would be the advantages and 
disadvantages to these?” 
“How do you think your beliefs about NICE guidelines impact upon your use of the 
guidelines?” 
“Do you feel that there are pressures to use / to not use NICE guidelines? If so, what are these 
pressures / where do they come from and how do you manage them?” 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
117 
 
 
 
Appendix J: Full transcript of First Interview with Line by Line Coding 
 
 
 
This has been removed from the electronic copy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
158 
 
 
 
Appendix J: Extracts of transcripts with examples of focused 
coding 
 
Example 1 
Alex: Yeah. Ok, so we’re recording now then, so I wonder if we 
could start very very generally, very openly and if you could let me 
know what your thoughts are on NICE guidelines? 
 
Kim: I guess, you know, I tend to see them as guidelines. I take the 
words kind of literally. So, for me, it feels like it’s useful in 
providing a sense of direction, or of what might be useful in 
thinking of a particular disorder/diagnosis, whatever you want to 
call it, client group. But, for me, they’re guidelines/ 
 
Alex: Yeah. 
 
Kim: Rather than somebody telling me what to do. So, in that way, 
when I look at, you know, because they’re guidelines, I find it really 
useful/ 
 
Alex: Yeah. 
 
Kim: To look at it and think ‘ok, these are what a group of people 
that got together to look at this diagnosis thinks that people, you  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Using NICE as guidelines, not 
instructions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
159 
 
 
 
know, that might be the most effective thing to do in this 
circumstance’. 
 
Alex: Oh, ok. Yeah. 
 
Kim: And so I’d better take notice. I think that’s important to kind 
of er read them and know about them and have a sense of what the 
recommendations are from that. However, you know, as I said for 
me they’re guidelines, so when then you apply that to the clinical 
groups we’re working with, they may not fit, you know, nicely in 
the box that is described in the guidelines. They may have all other 
sorts of things going on with them that have an impact, and so we 
may have to adapt what we actually erm do that might not follow 
every single thing that the guidelines state. 
 
Alex: Yeah. 
 
Kim: And so that’s how I always looked at them. However, you 
know, I know that, there is a pressure, you know, in that 
questionnaire, you know, you asked me to do, ‘are people under 
pressure to use them?’ Yes, I think they are. I think there is a lot of 
pressure for clinicians to use what the NICE guidelines say. And, of 
course, you know, there’s all the work, you know, in this trust now  
 
Seeing NICE as a useful guide to the 
evidence base. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Arguing that routine practice is 
more complex than NICE 
guidelines. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Experiencing an underlying threat 
or pressure to be NICE compliant. 
 
 
  
 
 
160 
 
 
 
they’re developing pathways and it’s going to be about pathways 
that comply with NICE guideline, you know. But there’s all sorts of  
criticisms that you could give to - you know, first of all we’re 
psychologists and NICE guidelines are based on the diagnostic 
system, you know, where for us might make less sense at times. So 
that could be a criticism on that front. 
 
Alex: Yeah. 
 
Kim: Erm, and also, you know, does the research, you know, for 
children a lot of the time that research is very scarce, so it’s kind of 
like thinking ‘ok, they’ve given this recommendation, but actually 
the evidence for it’ – it almost makes it feel as if NICE are saying 
that so that means that that’s the best, you know, that’s the evidence 
based information. And it might be the best evidence based 
information, but actually a lot of the times for research in children 
that evidence is more patchy. I think it’s getting better, probably. 
And I’m not, you know, I’m not an expert in knowing whether the 
evidence is good quality or not. And I haven’t gone through every 
single article that the people obviously reviewed, but I’m sure that 
there’s a sense that actually there might not be a lot. And in some 
guidelines there is, you know, that’s stated clearly actually there 
isn’t a lot of evidence for this, but/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Highlighting that people may follow 
NICE guidelines without being 
familiar with the evidence they are 
based on. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
161 
 
 
 
Alex: Ok. So perhaps that message might be lost sometimes, that 
people think because it’s NICE recommended it must have really 
good evidence and it must be a really good intervention/ 
 
Kim: Yes. 
 
Alex: But actually it might be a bit more patchy. 
 
Kim: Yes. I think that. 
 
 
 
Example 2 
Alex: Yeah. And I suppose one last question I’ve got, which is 
linked with those things we’ve been talking about – and I apologise 
if I’m repeating myself, because I’ve probably asked it before. But 
with one of the limitations you mentioned was the medical model 
and the fact that it’s set up in the medical model, and you mentioned 
how it was a starting point and that it kind of made sense that it was 
done on the medical model because that is the dominant model. So it 
seems as though you’re fairly kind of ok with it being done in that 
way. Is that right, do you think? Do you think that it’s kind of the 
best option available at the moment or/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
162 
 
 
 
Sam: I’m not sure it’s the best option. I think realistically it’s 
understandable that that’s how it started. I mean I think we can 
argue as psychologists that, you know, we don’t want to categorise 
people by a diagnostic system that isn’t itself evidence based. And 
all those arguments are very legitimate, but at the same time it all 
had to start somewhere/ 
 
Alex: Yeah. 
 
Sam: And I think it’s completely understandable that it’s started 
with the diagnostic system. I think the main criticism at this stage is 
that that really ought to be under review, and maybe NICE should 
apply its own methodology to itself. And so what is the evidence 
base for the diagnostic system? And what is the evidence base for, 
you know, producing guidelines using a diagnostic system that itself 
isn’t evidence based? 
 
Alex: Yeah. 
 
Sam: And it should be that process of reflection, should be 
occurring. I’m not sure it is, but it should be, because if they’re all 
about evidence based practice, you know, where is the evidence for 
the diagnostic system? Particularly a diagnosis like schizophrenia, 
it’s so contested, and I think if you look at the evidence it makes no  
 
Understanding why the medical 
model was chosen by NICE. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wanting NICE to review its 
approach. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
163 
 
 
 
sense whatsoever and you shouldn’t be using it in an evidence based 
system. 
 
Alex: No. 
 
Sam: It makes more sense to look at – if you’re going to look at 
psychosis, which is such a broad experience, it makes more sense to  
look at phenomenologically at, you know, paranoia or voice hearing 
or whatever. That might make more sense. It would mean that you  
might have more guidelines, but there would be more focus so 
presumably they would be more concise.  
 
Alex: It seems to me like that could be possible, it could be 
something that could happen. 
 
Sam: Yes. Yes, I think it could happen, but only if NICE engage in 
that process of reflection on the, you know, the evidence base for 
the structure that they have. 
 
Alex: Yeah. 
 
Sam: And there’s been a lot of controversy recently about the new 
DSM system, hasn’t there, and the fact that, you know, that it’s not 
really based on evidence/ 
 
 
 
Suggesting that there are 
alternatives to the medical model. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Questioning the validity of 
diagnostic categories. 
 
  
 
 
164 
 
 
 
Alex: Yeah. 
 
Sam: It’s been talked about, and of course that’s good, that’s 
healthy that it’s coming up in debate. I think NICE need to take that 
on board really/ 
 
Alex: Yeah. 
 
Sam: And evolve and gradually move away from the diagnostic 
system. 
 
Alex: Yeah, that makes sense. So it was a good starting point to 
have a guideline for schizophrenia/ 
 
Sam: Well I’m not saying a good. It was an obvious starting point. 
So I’d say it was an obvious starting point because, you know, the 
diagnostic system is dominant and I can understand why they started 
there. I mean it’s an obvious starting point, but/ 
 
Alex: And then the hope is that they/ 
 
Sam: That it shouldn’t constrain them/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Understanding why the medical 
model was chosen by NICE. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
165 
 
 
 
Alex: Move on to, say, a paranoia guideline, and hearing voices 
guideline, perhaps. 
 
Sam: Yes. Indeed. It would be very sad if NICE weren’t able to 
develop in that way. 
 
Alex: Yeah. 
 
Sam: You know, they refresh their guidelines every 5 years, why 
can’t they look at, you know, the overall framework they’ve got for  
the guidelines, because it isn’t evidence based and it needs 
examination. So I wouldn’t say it was a good start or even the best 
start, but it was an obvious place to start and an understandable 
place to start/ 
 
Alex: But it’s had some benefits and it’s kind of/ 
 
Sam: It’s got the whole thing started. Yeah, but it does need to 
develop. 
 
Alex: Yeah. 
 
Sam: And I don’t think anyone should feel entirely happy with it. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wanting NICE to review its 
approach. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
166 
 
 
 
Example 3 
Morgan: Mmm, some of my colleagues would say, I can think of 
one person in particular who would say, that that's maverick and 
dangerous and that you're doing something, you know you’re 
messing with a model. You're doing something for which there's no 
evidence of its effectiveness, you know, I daren’t. That view, for 
me, comes under the naïve heading of erm, assuming that because 
something has attracted RCT funding it's the only thing that's 
effective. Erm, so you know I would be much more interested in, 
rather than just referring to the evidence, whether it's in NICE or 
not, I'd be more interested in having a collaborative conversation 
with my client about what the issue was, what they needed, what 
they thought might be helpful. I would want to get regular feedback 
in the session from them about whether they felt what I was doing, 
what we were doing was helping them or not helping them. I would 
want to tailor my approach according to that individual more than 
what may or may not have got published.  
  
Example 4 
Jan: Because, there are weaknesses, so for example, NICE 
themselves say this, that actually if something is not in the NICE 
guidelines it’s not evidence, that it is not effective, its just that there 
is a lack of evidence that it is effective/ 
 
 
 
 
 
Arguing that an absence of evidence 
is not evidence of ineffectiveness. 
 
 
 
 
 
Valuing collaborative decision 
making with service users. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Arguing that an absence of evidence 
is not evidence of ineffectiveness. 
 
 
  
 
 
167 
 
 
 
Alex: That’s right, yeah. 
 
Jan: And that different groups are better at actually creating 
evidence base than others, so that may be their strength, it doesn’t 
mean that everything they do is superior. 
 
Alex: Yeah. 
 
Jan: For example, there’s the few done at the moment with CBT 
being held up as the ultimate therapy and the only therapy. And I 
think its very divisive and actually very damaging. I think its 
damaging to clinicians and I think its damaging to patients, because 
clinicians are finding they’re fighting for ‘what’s the best way? And 
my way is better than your way is better’, because – and making the 
NICE guidelines rather than what’s actually best for the client. 
 
Alex: Ok. And so do you think that the introduction of NICE 
guidelines has assisted with that in some way? 
 
Jan: I think it has absolutely erm laid the way for it. Sorry, that’s 
not the word I’m looking for, I lose words, not dementia. Yes, I 
think the NICE guidelines have done that, and I think it’s actually 
been very harmful. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Worrying about the dominance of 
CBT in NICE. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
168 
 
 
 
Alex: Oh, ok. 
 
Jan: Erm, so now all they want, especially – well, I’m  at CAMHS 
service so that’s all I can talk about, but all they want in a CAMHS 
service is CBT, and actually if we look carefully there isn’t an 
evidence base of CBT for children or for specific difficulties, but 
it’s still being waved as this generic ‘look, look, look CBT does 
everything’ and clients are then coming in and saying ‘well I want 
CBT, whatever that may be’ and that’s what they want. And it’s 
become another name for therapy, but it’s very directive and very 
controlling/ 
 
Example 5 
Ronda: So I think that a, I think there’s a danger – I mean if the 
NICE guidelines are viewed as something as a guideline, rather than 
a prescription, and it generates discussion and it’s sort of clear that 
we haven’t reached a state of saturation where the evidence is 
concerned, you know, but we are still learning and we’re updating 
all the time, so what’s in the guidelines should not be seen as set in 
stone/ 
 
Alex: Yeah. 
 
 
 
 
 
Worrying about the dominance of 
CBT in NICE. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wanting NICE to be guidelines and 
not instruction. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
169 
 
 
 
Ronda: If it’s like more a loose sort of guideline, then I think it’s 
fine to some extent. But I think there is a danger that erm, policy 
makers, erm, might not have the sort of full background 
understanding or the critical thinking that is necessary to assess the 
guidelines, and they might prescribe pathways for services that are 
too restrictive. 
 
Alex: Yeah. Ok. So there’s some real benefits from NICE 
guidelines, but there’s also quite a lot of concerns as well. 
 
Ronda: Yeah. 
 
Alex: And I think there’s lots of things you’ve said there that I’m 
really interested in and I’d like to kind of ask lots of questions, so  
I’m perhaps trying to hold that in mind and ask kind of a few at a 
time. And I’m just thinking, as you said there’s lots of real benefits 
and concerns, and I think everybody I’ve spoken to has said 
something similar. And I’d be really interested to know how you 
manage that as a kind of individual clinician, how you kind of 
manage those pro’s and con’s in your own head and in your own 
practice? 
 
Ronda: Erm, in my own practice, in terms of working with patients, 
I think it is important to be aware of the NICE guidelines, and it is  
 
 
Feeling that managers / policy 
makers can follow NICE guidelines 
without questioning their relevance. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
170 
 
 
 
important to be aware of the evidence. But often when you actually 
sit in front of the actual patient, the problem is always that the 
model is fundamentally flawed/ 
 
Alex: Ok. 
 
Ronda: In my opinion, because it’s never as clear cut as that. So it’s 
never just OCD or just depression or just anxiety, and in practice I 
would say I go much more with the transdiagnostic approach and I 
sort of pick and take from the different guidelines. So I think it’s 
much more important to be aware, to some extent, erm, of, erm, sort 
of the different treatment models and what they’re sort of good for, 
what kind of problems seem to respond to the treatment models, and 
then very much adhere, I would say, I adhere more to the core 
philosophy of psychology, which is to er, be sort of a scientist  
practitioner and to also have several therapies at your disposal and 
then really tailor the treatment to the individual patient. So, and also 
to be aware of papers that sort of discuss, for example, if you have  
somebody with a more severe depression and a recurrent depression, 
then you need to adapt CBT and you need to sort of make it longer 
or see somebody for more sessions, or see somebody for shorter 
sessions but maybe twice a week. And I think it’s very important to 
be sort of aware/ 
 
 
Arguing that routine practice is 
more complex than NICE 
guidelines.  
 
 
 
 
 
Using NICE as guidelines, not 
instructions. 
 
 
 
 
Suggesting that CPs research skills 
put them in a position to interpret 
the evidence base. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
171 
 
 
 
Alex: Yeah. 
 
Ronda: Of much more than just the NICE guidelines. So I would 
say I’m aware of them, but in my clinical practice I would go over 
and above the NICE guidelines. I think sometimes you can use the 
NICE guidance to make an argument for certain lengths of 
treatment, you know, if there’s some sort of conflict around how 
long should this person be seen or/ 
 
Alex: Oh, I see. Yeah. 
 
Ronda: This person has already had two courses of therapy, we 
shouldn’t give them any more. Sometimes you can actually use the 
guidelines to make a case.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Using NICE to suit our needs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
172 
 
 
 
Appendix L: Abridged Research Diary 
 
 
December, 2011 – Research ideas were presented at the research fair (01.12.2011). I was interested in 
a few areas. Spent a lot of time over the Christmas break looking through different project ideas. I 
seem to be most interested in projects using qualitative methods. I have always been interested in a 
social constructionist approach rather than positivism but the majority of my experience with 
qualitative methods to date was with discursive psychology which I didn’t warm to. I have read more 
about a variety of qualitative methods and am keen to learn more about them.  
 
13.01.2012 – Met with Dr Amanda Scrivener to discuss a potential qualitative project in the area of 
psychosis, potentially thinking about why NICE guidelines for schizophrenia don’t tend to be 
followed. I found this meeting very helpful. Amanda was easy to speak to and very good at asking 
questions that encouraged me to come up with ideas. Agreed that Amanda would be my external 
supervisor. 
 
January & February, 2012 – Attempting to find an internal supervisor. Had helpful discussions with 
Anne Cooke, am very keen to have her as a supervisor, but it is a competition against other trainees. 
Can’t help but think that this is not the best way for this process to be done, but to be honest I can see 
why it is done this way and can’t think of a better alternative! I sent an anxious email to Paul Camic in 
this period late one night and got a very reassuring and helpful response minutes later, which I was 
very grateful for.  
 
During discussions with Anne, the idea came up of moving away from psychosis and thinking about 
NICE guidelines in general, interviewing clinical psychologists and using the method grounded 
theory. I really like this idea. I’m starting to move away from my original position of assuming that 
NICE guidelines should be followed to more of a position of uncertainty and wanting to find out more 
(for my own benefit!) about the benefits and limitations of NICE guidelines. 
 
29.02.2012 – Anne has agreed to be my internal supervisor. 
 
May, 2012 – Completing MRP proposal form. I am noticing the pull between course requirements 
and grounded theory methodology. Amanda is keen on using purist grounded theory methodology and 
is encouraging me to question how I will complete a literature review for the project proposal and 
hypothesise which theories my project may draw on, as this should not be done in purist grounded 
theory at this stage. I have been reading around lots of grounded theory authors, including Charmaz 
(2008), Straus & Corbin (1998), Glaser & Straus (1967), Birks (2011) and Willig (2008). Through my 
reading, talking with Amanda and Anne, I have come to the conclusion that I need to do a brief 
literature review for the proposal to satisfy course requirements. I need to acknowledge that this is a 
tentative review and once I begin the project, the emerging grounded theory may take me in a 
different direction. I have also decided that I will aim to collect the majority of my data and complete 
the analysis for section B before starting the literature review for section A of the MRP. I am not 
under any illusion that I am a blank slate as Glaser and Straus (1967) appeared to suggest, but I do see 
the point that delving into the literature too deeply can harm a researcher’s ability to generate their 
own theory, as they become distracted by the theories and findings of others. 
 
14.06.2012 – Met with the Salomons Independent Research Review Panel today. I was nervous about 
this, wondering what they might think of the project. I was pleasantly surprised that both panel 
members seemed very interested in the project, noting that it seemed particularly relevant in the 
current clinical climate. The panel gave me some helpful advice on a few areas, particularly pointing 
me in the direction of Dey (1999) and his ideas of theoretical sufficiency rather than saturation. Plus, 
the panel highlighted that if necessary it was possible to interview clinicians without R&D approval if 
they are interviewed outside of trust working hours, off work premises and not recruited through their 
  
 
 
173 
 
 
 
position in the trust. The panel didn’t criticise anything about the project and I gained full approval 
without needing to make any major amendments to the proposal. 
 
25.10.2012 – I received full ethics approval from the Salomons Ethics Panel. I feel very pleased with 
this but also a bit overwhelmed, as it means I have to begin the project now! 
 
29.11.2012 – I’ve been liaising with R&D departments over the last few weeks and getting very 
frustrated with it. Each NHS trust seems to tell me different things. One trust in particular seems 
confused that I am not conducting an RCT in a particular service and doesn’t seem to understand 
qualitative research. I have spoken to numerous different people from this trust and they tend to 
ignore what I say and keep repeating the same questions that are not relevant to my project.  
 
30.11.2012 – After discussing it with Anne and Amanda, I have decided to contact an ex colleague of 
mine to see if they will participate in my project. I contacted them through Facebook and we agreed to 
have an interview on the telephone, on a non-work day. I plan to use this interview as a pilot and will 
seek feedback at the end of the interview. If it goes well, I will use the data. If considerable changes 
are required to the interview style or approach of the project in general, then I will not use this data. 
 
14.12.2012 – R&D approval received from first NHS trust(1). It took a bit of to-ing and fro-ing to 
work out which person would be the relevant person from the department for me to speak with, but 
once I was put in contact with the appropriate person they were very helpful. 
 
27.12.2012 – Completed first interview, over the telephone, with ex-colleague (Amy). Transcribed the 
interview. The data seem rich. Issues of NICE being safe, nice and neat, came out. This seemed to 
link with my initial ideas about a drive for safe certainty. I wondered if I pushed this. After reviewing 
my comments in the interview transcript I don’t feel I did. As this was the first interview I 
purposefully tried to talk as little as possible. I barely asked any questions or made any statements, I 
just encouraged the participant to keep speaking. 
My thoughts on who to sample next (theoretical sampling): managers, people who haven’t just 
qualified. People who are more passionately for or against the guidelines. People who are more pro 
CBT. People with some of these characteristics might generate different views to the first participant, 
opening an opportunity for exploring similarities, differences and reasons for this. 
I am wondering about my recruitment of future participants, as it is likely to be people who self-
select, why do they self-select? Someone who is passionate about nice and wants to be involved in 
research may be different to just knocking on someone’s door and asking to speak with them. The risk 
of the “knocking on the door approach” is that this is likely to be with colleagues, who I already have 
a relationship with. The relationship could get in the way of the research (or help it?) and it could be 
argued that I only approached people who I knew would agree with my ideas. In defence of this, I 
don’t consider myself to have any particular ideas or bias at this stage. This is one of the reasons that I 
am doing this study, to try to learn more about my own thoughts about NICE guidelines. I’m hoping 
to have a combination of “knocking on the door approach” to recruitment and people who self-select. 
10.01.2013 – R&D approval received from another NHS trust(2). The contact person has been helpful 
and interested in the project but unfortunately needed a lot of chasing as they kept stating they would 
get back to me and then didn’t. 
 
11.01.2013 – I’m reading Moncrieff (2009) “The Myth of the Chemical Cure” and am interested by 
her thoughts that the profession of Psychiatry gained power from having a disease centred model, 
with specific treatments for specific diseases (even though the evidence behind this model is highly 
  
 
 
174 
 
 
 
questionable). I’m wondering if this might be a relevant idea in my project, power appeared to be a 
common theme in the first interview.  
 
23.01.2013 – One of the NHS trusts(3) gave me a named contact person to liaise with from R&D. 
They were helpful but needed a lot of chasing. After two months of liaising with this individual (and 
numerous lengthy paperwork completed) they emailed me to say they were not the correct person and 
I needed to complete further paperwork and send it to somebody different. Very frustrated by this! 
Am starting to see why more research doesn’t get done. 
 
25.01.2013 – I was hoping to wait for R&D approval from trust 3 before recruiting, so that I could 
make an informed decision of which order to contact each trust. After the news on the 23.01.2013 I 
have decided to just begin recruiting in the other 2 trusts. I sent out a recruitment email to the trust 
training co-ordinators in these trusts, who have now kindly agreed to circulate the email to all trust 
psychologists.  
 
01.02.2013 – I am pleasantly surprised that I have had 7 responses already of clinical psychologists 
stating that they would like to take part in the project. Some of them appear particularly interested in 
the project and keen to participate.  
 
I’ve looked through the pre interview questionnaires. After the first interview, I was keen to interview 
somebody who was more in favour of CBT and someone who is not newly qualified. One of the 
clinical psychologists fits this, so I arranged to meet them. Luckily, one of this psychologists’ 
colleagues also wanted to participate, so I arranged to meet with both of them on 14.02.2013. This 
feels like a “best of both worlds” approach, I am beginning to think about theoretical sampling with 
the selection of the 2nd participant but am also keeping the approach open and have selected the 3rd 
participant through convenience. I plan to keep both of these interviews open, following the lead of 
the participants. If any similarities or differences of opinions from the first interview emerge, I may 
raise this with the new participants to gain their views on this. I then hope to do line by line coding 
and focused coding on this data to help inform the theoretical sampling and questioning of future 
participants. If time doesn’t allow for full analysis, I will base future sampling and questioning on 
memos made in this research diary. 
 
5.2.2013 – A potential participant raised the important point of whether they would be identifiable if 
they were the only person from a particular speciality. I need to consider this further. I may need to 
tweak identifiable data slightly, without damaging data. 
15.02.2013 – Thankfully the new R&D contact from trust 3 was very efficient and full R&D approval 
has been received. Now that I have R&D approval from 3 different trusts, I have decided to give up 
on attempting to gain approval from the trust that seemed particularly difficult and inflexible. 
Discussing this with Anne and Amanda, I feel confident that I will gain enough participants. 
 
15.2.2013 - Going through emails from potential participants. Pleased and surprised at big response, 
people seeming keen to participate. Looking through pre-interview questionnaire, seeing some “sitting 
on fence” answers, hoping for more extreme views, to gain a varied sample. Noticing that they were 
largely adult mental health. Wanting other specialities. Thinking that only AMH are interested in 
NICE? Other specialities don’t feel it apples to them? I’m aware as I am writing this that grounded 
theorists might criticise what I am saying as just trying to gain a representative sample rather than 
following the data. I feel that I am trying to theoretically sample, following the ideas that emerge and 
attempting to find participants with similar and different views. By wanting to sample CPs from 
different specialities I suppose this does fit with ideas of “representative” but I think it can still be 
argued as theoretical sampling as I am wanting to test whether CPs from different specialities have 
similar of different views to the ones I have interviewed already. 
  
 
 
175 
 
 
 
21.02.2013 – Reviewing notes from interview with Naomi. There appeared to be tension, an 
uncomfortable fit where she wanted to like NICE, saw it as really helpful in places, but also saw it as 
reductionist and simplistic and not really workable. Noticing that in the first 3 interviews the CPs 
emphasised the skills of a CP, despite me not specifically asking them to do so. There seems to be 
something about NICE that encourages CPs to potentially get defensive (or precious as Naomi called 
it) about their skills. It might be that NICE gives emphasis to 1:1 therapy from one modality, after 
somebody has been assessed and given a diagnosis. This doesn’t appear to fit comfortably with the 
skills the CPs were highlighting. Naomi appeared to think it was bad to be aligned with NICE. 
 
21.02.2013 – Interview with 4th participant (Jenny), not from AMH. Felt that the conversation didn’t 
flow quite as well today. It might be due to the fact that Jenny highlighted that she tries to avoid using 
NICE, so it didn’t seem quite so relevant to her. Although this in itself is an important finding, that 
she values excuses not to use NICE. It would be good to interview other CPs not from AMH to see if 
this is the same or different for them. Plus she raised a very interesting point that before NICE it was 
expected that CPs would be integrative, since NICE everyone has to have a pure modality; integrative 
is now seen as a bad thing. 
 
24.02.2013 – Thinking of questions that I would like to explore with future participants (through 
sampling / questioning): Is there conflict between being model adherent and integrative; pros and cons 
of each?  More thoughts on pre and post introduction of NICE, more integrative in past? Now more 
classifying therapies, for x do y, can’t say integrative any more. Integrative doesn’t fit with the 
evidence base. Areas where not many NICE guidelines are available is it still possible to be flexible? 
Is this Ok? Or worrying? Can pick and chose when to use guidelines. Can use them when want power 
but say no, not based on our client group when don’t want to use. Is this ok? 
 
25.03.2013 – The importance of line by line coding. I was doing focussed coding on the 1st interview 
(that I already had line by line codes for). I wasn’t really looking at the line by line coding that I had 
already done. I was starting to wonder why I needed to do the line by line coding. Then I was stuck on 
how best to describe a focussed code for a paragraph; I looked at line by line coding, it helped point 
out something that I would never have noticed had I not done it line by line (focusing on the words 
“red herring” – NICE can be misunderstood). This made me appreciate the importance of using the 
line by line coding. 
 
26.03.2013 - Thinking of questions that I would like to explore with future participants (through 
sampling / questioning): worry about training in a nice endorsed therapy? Maybe newly qualified CPs 
do. Is this something older CPs value / feel they need to do? 
 
Finished initial focused coding on 1st interview. I was aware of quite a bit of overlap between some of 
my codes. 50 or so of them, felt quite unmanageable so sorted them into sub folders of similar codes. I 
wonder if this may be the beginnings of categories? It felt like a natural process that I didn’t even 
plan, but it does seem to be the start of emerging categories. I am sure that the number of codes will 
have to come down, I am coding too much and not “focused” enough. I remember this from one of the 
GT books that I read, that students new to the method tend to come up with too many codes to begin 
with. 
 
I sent Anne and Amanda a detailed update email on 24.02.2014 with transcriptions of the first few 
interviews and details of my plans. Haven’t heard anything back. I presume this means that they are 
happy with how things are progressing. 
27.03.2013 - Sat at home preparing for next interview, looking through research diary and notes from 
previous interviews, really helpful to remember key points that I was thinking through before and 
what to ask in new interview. I’m really starting to see the value in this research diary and all my 
notes. (See Appendix S for an example of detailed notes made before interviews) 
  
 
 
176 
 
 
 
27.03.2013 – Thoughts after interview (with Jan): NICE has introduced unhealthy competition 
between therapeutic modalities. NICE = CBT. Jan is angry about this. Saw lots of limitations in CBT. 
Can use guidelines to own end. Use them when want to get recognition and support for own therapy 
but can dispute them when it is a therapy you don’t value. Values eclectic and integrative work. 
Differentiated between them though. Shooting ourselves in the foot by abandoning this. Why have 
CPs if just do single model. Likes nice guidelines in theory but worries that they are misinterpreted. 
Don’t know how to get around, because NICE do stress that absence of evidence isn’t an evidence of 
ineffectiveness. 
Didn’t feel a need to use language of NICE and categorised therapies when talking to families and gps 
etc. used simple formulations. – different to other participant who felt that the introduction of NICE 
encouraged the use of single modalities and categorising them – ie x diagnosis needs y therapy. No 
room for integrative / eclectic. Is it that Jan is “a mini bulldog” as she described and sticking with how 
things were, using integrative / formulation driven work, whereas other participant is changing, going 
with flow of nice? Something to do with being in non adult services? Is this possible in an adult 
service? – ask others for their thoughts on this. 
28.03.2013 - Question for future interviews – How do you use nice guidelines? This has been 
neglected I think. Lots of discussions have been theoretical, not on the actual mechanics of when do 
you read them, how do you fit this with your formulation etc? If don’t like them, how get around? 
How use / try to avoid using? 
04.04.2013 – Preparing for interview with Sam. Reflecting on why I picked Sam for interview. Views 
on questionnaire seem different to others. Favoured model is CBT, strongly disagree that NICE limits 
psychological thinking of CPs. Sam may help with constant comparison, giving different views to 
other participants. Look for similarities and differences and reasons for these. 
11.04.2013 - Doing line by line coding of Paul’s interview. Paul mentioned that NHS was about 
symptom reduction. People wanting closure / personal resolution need to go for private. This doesn’t 
fit comfortably for me emotionally. Bring up more in other interviews? Key question for future 
interviews - Paul wanting to break down the barrier between MH and PH, MH is PH poorer cousin, 
breaking barrier would reduce stigma. Jan stressed MH is different to PH. What do other CPs think? 
Mh different to PH? Kept separate? Treat more similar? Advantages and disadvantages to both. 
NICE’s role in this? 
Paul valued being trained in a broad range of therapies. He used this to formulate. Treatment would 
then still be single model but formulation would have been informed by other models to pick best 
treatment. (i.e. he could refer on to a psychodynamic therapist, able to recognise when this is needed). 
Later talked about integrating other ideas into CBT framework. Sam talked about this as well. 
Paul mentioned a desire to be both integrative and model adherent. Discuss in other interviews? (Amy 
wanted to be integrative but then give illusion of model adherent. Naomi wanted to be model adherent 
and integrative, fitting other ideas into CBT. Other CPs have valued integrative and not tried to make 
model adherent. 
Thoughts coming into my head about fighting vs accepting limited scope of NHS. Can NHS be 
expected to be more than symptom reduction, short term, evidence based therapies? 
  
 
 
177 
 
 
 
28.04.2013 - Transcribing Sam’s interview. Making me think of the interview with Jan, different 
modalities fighting against each other. Are CBT trained CPs more accepting of NICE, because it 
favours their approach. I’m wondering how to reflect this in coding etc? 
Sam was pro NICE because in their service, NICE has helped established the need for psychological 
therapies for schizophrenia. Sam talked of how other modalities needed to do the research. But then 
reflected that bipolar work in routine practice is helpful but hasn’t been seen in research. Sam 
suggested that there were problems with methodology etc. Sam feared that NICE might not ever 
promote psychological therapies for bi polar, despite it being helpful (clinical opinions). I’m thinking 
again that NICE is very powerful. “I haven’t felt them (the limitations) to be limiting in my practice” 
is this the key? Everyone sees the positives and the limitations but if the limitations don’t affect you, 
then you focus on the positives. I really like the following quote: Sam: “And I think it’s completely 
understandable that it’s started with the diagnostic system. I think the main criticism at this stage is 
that that really ought to be under review, and maybe NICE should apply its own methodology to 
itself. And so what is the evidence base for the diagnostic system? And what is the evidence base for, 
you know, producing guidelines using a diagnostic system that itself isn’t evidence based?” Very 
interesting quote.  Is this what I am doing? Starting to scrutinise NICE. See how NICE is thought of? 
3.05.2013 - Coding workshop with Paul Camic. The main things that I took from this workshop were: 
Paul stressed that it is fine (and helpful) to go into coding with the questions “what am I looking for?” 
“what am I hoping to find?” he added that it is helpful to consider peoples intentions, motivations, 
discourses, beliefs, rules, values and stories when coding. Paul does not think that everything is 
codable and that it is ok to be looking for particular things and to code these and to leave other things. 
He suggested doing line by line coding for 2 interviews. 
23.05.2013 – Reading through all notes and coding etc. Some of the key thoughts in my mind at the 
moment are:  
 
 Overall – NICE is very powerful,  
i) 
It gives endorsement to therapies. Other professions take note. 
ii) 
It can create services – e.g. IAPT, CBT for psychosis etc, Dementia guidelines. If NICE 
recommends it, can support argument for setting up service. 
iii) 
It has created (or enhanced) rivalry between therapeutic modalities. (& threatening 
existence of integrative work?) 
iv) 
Majority of funding going to CBT because it fits better with NICE, philosophy behind it 
etc, more able to test it. – limits development of other therapies, newly qualified CPs 
doing training in CBT / NICE backed therapies. 
v) 
Encourages medical model thinking.  
vi) 
Gives illusion of simplicity? X diagnosis requires y therapy.  
 
30.5.13 - following the coding workshop, further reading and further practice at coding, I am 
revisiting my focused coding of 1st interview. I am finding this helpful to tweak a few of the coding 
labels, have added a couple and have removed overlapping of coding in many places. I had found that 
once I had created codes I was keen to code things many times over using lots of codes for one 
paragraph. 
I am worrying that when I create a code I may have missed previous examples that fit well in that 
code. This might not be too much of a problem? If it had been the perfect fit earlier then I would have 
come up with it earlier, something probably fitted better. Plus the earlier instance has played a part as 
  
 
 
178 
 
 
 
it has probably consciously or subconsciously influenced me into thinking about that area, which I 
have then thought of later and created a code for. 
6.6.13 - Transcribing Morgan’s interview. I am struck by Morgan noting that it feels like a turning 
point. Morgan can feel the pressure coming. They can resist at the moment, but can feel it coming 
where it will be x diagnosis needs y treatment. I am really struck by this quote: “You know, its, if you 
took out people's personal investment and bias, and the benefits to them in their particular profession, 
I'm not sure you'd have much of an argument left on any side.” How do we get around this? Is it 
possible? Is this a key thing? Everyone sees the same limitations etc but depending upon your bias 
(we all have our biases) you make different conclusions? 
7.6.2013 – I’m thinking back to a recent meeting with Amanda re initial coding. “Selective attention” 
was mentioned. All CPs see limitations of NICE but chose to attend to different things depending 
upon their own agenda? E.g. if they support CBT then happy with power nice has given to CBT, so 
don’t attend to the negatives. 
Doing focused coding for Naomi’s interview. She seems really confused about NICE, she will say one 
thing, I will agree, then she will argue with me. This maybe to do with the quality of my summarising 
and reflecting but I haven’t had this problem in other interviews. I wonder if this suggests it is more 
her issue? I think she likes the flexibility of the guidelines but worries about the integrity of the 
practice of others if they are given flexibility. 
Naomi suggested setting up guidelines by psychological processes. Showing that each process covers 
lots of people / cross diagnosis etc. e.g. rumination, fear of rejection, projective identification (social 
anxiety) etc. would this be a good alternative? Something to ask in future interviews? Is this what my 
project is about? Not really interested in ins and outs of alternatives? Just interested in if people think 
there are alternatives? 
Reflecting on others views of NICE – maybe ask this more in future interviews? Naomi said she 
thought nurses would see NICE as being brilliant as that was the model they were trained in (medical 
model). 
7.6.2013 - I’m feeling like this project is helping me with my own understanding of clinical 
psychologists’ role and ability in providing therapy. I had previously considered a CBT therapist to do 
better CBT than a CP and a psychodynamic therapist to do better psychodynamic work than a CP. But 
this project seems to be showing that CPs value being integrative and this could either be explicitly or 
in thinking in other models to help your formulation and then bringing this into your single model 
approach.  
Thinking about what Paul said about single model advocates and coding Jenny is making me reflect 
back to when I was a low intensity IAPT worker. One particular case I am thinking of, I was keen to 
help a wealthy older lady using BA when really I should have recommended private work for 
personal reflection / if I had been in a different service / different position, offered her something 
more reflective. As I was a single model advocate I was keen for it to be BA and for this to work. 
Starting to have thoughts in my head about what the key take home messages of my research might be 
– initial thoughts are – NICE should be seen as guidelines, not as strict enforcers, not all interventions 
can / have been evaluated & NICE not up to date all time, need to do some of own scientist 
practitioner work. NICE won’t fit for all clients, can draw principles but be aware this is fudging 
things. Single model therapists not the same as CPs. CPs do CBT differently to CBT therapists. 
  
 
 
179 
 
 
 
Maybe this research gives some understanding to the finding of the paper a colleague gave me re CPs 
being better at CBT than non CBT therapists.  
Another thought is that people should be aware of the power of NICE and ensure that the power is 
used appropriately. Draw attention to the fact that NICE is based on invalid diagnostic categories (& 
plenty of other questionable science) so while it can still be a helpful guide, it shouldn’t be seen as the 
bible. 
25.06.2013 – I’m thinking that over prescriptive and misinterpreted are connected. Would it be a 
problem if they are prescriptive if not misinterpreted? 
Thoughts after interview with Kim. Every CP sees the limitations of NICE. Different CPs have 
different conclusions. Kim likes to have the guidelines, to help us be scientist practitioners, helps to 
summarise the research. But Kim doesn’t want them to become too prescribed. But does see the 
rationale for prescription and categorisation etc, tries to make more efficient. Need to be wary, 
sometimes NICE is held up as definitely the right answer when sometimes the evidence isn’t clear. 
Plus sometimes it seems like a conveyor belt of y treatment for x condition can miss things. 
Reflecting on why different CPs have different conclusions – it seems to do with how much the 
limitations affect them. Kim is able to work psychodynamically and integratively (not using this term 
but drawing on different models) and also values CBT for anxiety disorders. Appreciates that other 
CPs who can’t work in this way may emphasise the limitations more. Kim is disliking being pigeon 
holed as someone who just does CBT and people referring for CBT when should be refer for CP. 
Worries about the future of more prescriptive NICE. 
Key message for this project – highlight the value and limitations of NICE. See them used wisely. 
With great power comes great responsibility! We’ve seen the power, have we seen the responsibility? 
Need to make more of an effort to show the limitations, show that they are guidelines and not 
prescriptive? 
28.06.2013 - Reading a GT study (Camic, 2010) that used 65 questionnaires. Camic quoted Straus and 
Corbin as saying 10-20 was norm for GT participants. Helpful that my study aims to be in the norm. 
Reading this paper made me realise the importance of talking in my mrp methodology / VIVA about 
the approach of interviewing. How this attempts to get into the participants world and go with what 
comes up. This can help challenge preconceptions etc (Charmaz). None of this is possible in a 
questionnaire. So although the number of participants is less, the data is so much richer. 
Reading this paper has also increased my confidence as I recognised almost every reference to GT in 
the methodology and understood everything, to the point of being in a position to reflect upon the pros 
and cons of different approaches. It has also made me wonder about the word count, 8000 is suddenly 
feeling small. 
1.07.2013 - Reading the July edition of BPS psychologist and clinical forum. Lots of articles and 
letters relevant to my project. Particularly the discussions around the dsm5 and DCP position 
statement. This reignited my interest for the project, showing how it is coming at a relevant time. It 
also made me realise how it is not possible to be in a vacuum and not be familiar with the literature 
before doing a GT study, as it is all around us in our chosen professions, we can’t avoid it. 
1.7.2013 - Use of motivational interviewing approach – I noticed when coding for Jenny that when I 
sided with her, she then gave the opposite view. E.g. she was worried about this research threatening 
  
 
 
180 
 
 
 
the freedom they have in her field. If I had said “yes, well, perhaps it should be threatened, what do 
you think the negatives of your practice are?”, she is likely to have argued her position. By valuing 
her position (“perhaps the research will help draw attention to the good sides of your practice?”), this 
allowed her to then bring up the negatives of the practice. This seemed to free her to express her 
opinions. 
5.07.2013 - Coding Jan’s interview, noticing the following information: NICE can raise people’s 
expectations unrealistically, linked with evidence base doesn’t reflect what is done in routine practice. 
Reduced funding, put money into evidence base, yes, understandable, but doesn’t take into 
consideration evidence base is single presentation. I’m thinking that people could counter this with 
evidence showing practice based evidence, but that isn’t my point, I’m merely presenting the 
viewpoints of how practicing clinicians interpret the evidence and make their decisions. 
Do I need a category re competition? Need to draw together the stuff about valuing CPs flexibility, 
range of training etc as at the moment it is all in different codes and categories. I am realising that my 
coding is not focused enough yet. 
It might be possible for other therapies to emerge and be used / become nice backed, but need big 
bulldog/flag waver now due to competition, can’t just peruse the evidence yourself and start using. 
Another goal for this project – highlighting how CPs don’t consider integrative to be a weakness 
whereas it doesn’t fit within NICE language. Question for future interviews- is NICE doing harm? 
Can this be a category? Competition, damage to integrative approach etc 
Re-read “raises expectations and then disappoints as there are limits”, this rings true with me. Setting 
CBT up as a magic cure sets us up to fail. It is not. Starting to get confused with initial categories as 
one code can appear to fit in many categories. Helpful for linking categories but will need to work out 
how to manage this. 
Wondering if dangers of NICE will be a broad category with lots underneath it?  
5.07.2013 - Reverting to line by line coding for start of Sam’s interview. Too much data to code by 
paragraph. 
19.07.2013 – Thoughts: 3 positions? Or 2? Those who experience nice as restrictive and those who 
don’t but worry that it will be?  
People thinking in different models and integrating into CBT. Like the broadening church of CBT, 
mindfulness, mentalisation, ACT etc. using language of power of CBT but then doing something quite 
different? CBT being watered down? What is CBT? 
19.07.2013 - Had a grounded theory meeting with fellow trainees doing GT at university last week. 
Found it very useful to hear others having similar ideas, difficulties and successes and also boosted 
my confidence and enthusiasm again as I understood all of what others were saying about GT. I was 
also in a position to recommend books and consider the different approaches between authors such as 
Charmaz, Straus and Corbin and Glaser. 
Had a discussion with a CP from placement yesterday about my project. She was very interested in it 
and said she would be happy to participate. 
Coding Sam. Reflecting on power again. NICE is very powerful. Important for us to acknowledge 
this, consider the use of this power, is it good, bad, being done appropriately? 
  
 
 
181 
 
 
 
Thoughts – Sam is saying if RCT showed CBT to be helpful, even if it doesn’t fit her client group, she 
can take the underlying principles of CBT, make adaptations and this would be the best approach to 
take with her clients. This could be challenged by somebody else who would say that your client 
group is completely different to the RCT, the evidence no longer applies, you’d be better off doing a 
different modality. 
Next study day, need to spend considerable time playing with categories etc rather than starting fresh 
coding. 
25.07.2013 - After coding the 6th session I feel in a position to start putting the codes into a tentative 
framework of initial categories. Up until now I have been grouping codes into categories that are 
absent of value judgements, just grouping like with like. Now I am attempting to begin the process of 
making a story from the data, moving codes into categories with values such as criticisms and benefits 
etc. 
25.07.2013 – Thoughts: Ways to manage the system – acceptance of financial climate. Put medical 
model within the lacks scientific credibility category? Whether it is experienced as limiting or not is 
key. End with 2 groups? Those who are comfortable / pleased with NICE, accept the limitations. + 
those who feel restricted by NICE and not happy with the limitations? 
Maybe the end of the model needs to be something about what conclusions are drawn. Are NICE 
guidelines ok to CPs? We all see the limitations and the benefits, what factors are important in the 
variation on conclusions? What are the worries for the future?  
Thinking of this quote by Kim: “I wonder if that’s where psychologists, you know, coming back to 
your earlier question about, you know, psychologists that are totally against NICE is that because they 
fear there is a real loss of what a clinical psychologist can offer?” I need to ask more participants 
about this in future interviews. 
Feeling that it is important to work within the dominant model – not wanting to be seen as polarised! 
Makes me think back to Naomi feeling like an outsider. Plus Sam – saying that it is understandable 
working within the dominant model. ACT therapy? Bringing in that acceptance? Of it might not be 
ideal, but it is ok, need to work with it. Can be more successful than fighting against it? 
Need something in the final model re: because of NICE guidelines we feel a need to use language of x 
therapy for y diagnosis. Go along with that on surface but do more integrative work secretly. But then 
if not advertising this, how do commissioners and managers know to use CPs rather than CBT 
therapists? 
“But maybe we should be better at explaining what clinical psychologists do, coming back to the 
sense of how do we evidence what we do?” (Kim)  -is this the final question from this research? NICE 
highlights how CPs aren’t good at evidencing what we do? 
Most interesting questions so far – how do CPs explain what they do? Does this fit with NICE? Is 
integrative practice ok? do CPs do CBT in same way as CBT therapists? 
4.08.2013 - It might be tricky highlighting what is a benefit and what is a concern. E.g. NICE 
endorsing psychological therapies seems like a benefit but if the therapy is only CBT, then this 
endorsement is not viewed as a benefit by all.  
  
 
 
182 
 
 
 
Common themes – wanting to see NICE as guideline and not prescriptive as got concerns over NICE. 
Worried that it may become more prescriptive in the future. Some are happy with current situation, 
some are not. Why are those happy? Work secretly, able to hide. Or NICE supports their model. Or 
consider NICE appropriate in current climate. Or haven’t felt NICE as personally restrictive. Why are 
some not happy? Models they value are not included. Have felt pressure. 
CPs want them to be seen as guideline rather than prescriptive (they see benefits and concerns)–. (is 
this my overarching core category?) 
Ok with the current situation  
Not found NICE to be restrictive. NICE supports their model. Lack of evidence in own field. Current 
situation justifies the situation (lack of finances etc) 
Not happy with the current situation 
Worried re threat to prof id. Model they value not included in NICE. Experience restriction from 
managers / patients / colleagues. 
10.09.2013 - Had a lecture from LGBT specialist psychologist. He noted that CBT did not work. Said 
it might do if it paid attention to attachment. This made me think back to the competition between 
modalities. Would he have said this if NICE guidelines weren’t promoting CBT and clinicians feeling 
pressure to follow this? Or was his comment linked with jealousy / rebellion etc. Trying to criticise 
the more successful sibling? 
Also thinking back to Forensic LD placement where an interesting GT study theorised that there were 
4 types of sex offender. Could my project theorise about different ways of dealing with NICE? Eg – i) 
ignore completely (& be proud of this? Or hide?), ii) follow 100%, iii) follow creatively considering it 
to be in the spirit of CBT, iv) follow creatively and hide this and pretend one is doing CBT? 
17.09.2013 - Thinking back to bracketing interview with Anne Cooke. I think I do have a desire / 
need to follow rules. There have been changes to the campus at Salomons, with a new company 
taking over. I feel uncomfortable sitting in the new café if I have not bought anything, as it seems 
“against the rules”. I don’t like parking in the local residential streets as it seems unfair on the 
residents and “against the rules”. I’m wondering if this is what led me to this interest in NICE 
guidelines, a desire to have rules to follow and wanting to understand why others don’t follow the 
rules. 
28.09.2013 –Drawing out some tentative diagrams attempting to link tentative categories. Reflecting 
on what is missed out? Fears re profession id of CP? Cover this in chapter re limitations? Fear re 
integrative practice? Cover in chapter re limitations? Fear re competition between modalities? Cover 
in chapter re limitations? Ignoring nice +/ or saying your doing CBT when not.  
Emerging stories that I want to tell –  
i) 
NICE has benefits and limitations. Need to be a guide, not prescriptive, so limitations can 
be managed. 
ii) 
NICE has a lot of power, needs to be used responsibly. 
iii) 
Integrative practice of CPs is challenged. This is still being done by many but kept a 
secret. If this is kept a secret then people wont know it is effective, then integrative 
practice will become more challenged. 
 
These are stories that I have got from the data, but I am struggling to work out how to categorise and 
show this. Maybe book apt to meet a supervisor? (I have emailed to ask for meeting). Two separate 
  
 
 
183 
 
 
 
diagrams? One for “beliefs about” and the other for “use of”? First one detailing how they come to the 
conclusion that nice should be guidelines and not prescriptive. Use of diagram showing secretive use, 
being flexible, etc etc? Ask Amanda – is it that I am thinking too broadly? Need to narrow down my 
question? 
 
10.10.2013 - Starting to think that the key story (/ core categories) is that NICE is experienced as very 
powerful and there is a conflict between this and wanting to have a flexible relationship with the 
guidelines. This can be expanded to highlight that NICE being powerful can be in CPs interests, e.g. 
when it endorses psychological therapy, but it can also be damaging, e.g. when it only tends to 
endorse manualistic CBT. Discussions could be held about whether NICE deserves to be so powerful 
and how this power is handled. Are the guidelines in danger of becoming prescriptions? How CPs 
currently use the guidelines can be demonstrated, showing that it is not just a case of CPs liking or 
disliking NICE or not knowing about the guidelines, the interplay is much more complex. 
Within all of this, sub stories emerge, such as how valid are the guidelines? Particularly bringing in 
challenges to diagnostic categories and the research that is then built on these categories. Then how 
transferable are the findings to routine practice. Also, CBT fits better with NICE than other 
approaches. Another sub story is CPs feeling that their professional identity and jobs are threatened. A 
story within this is about how integrative practice doesn’t seem to fit with NICE. Suggest an RCT 
where clients are randomised to manualised CBT or integrative, formulation driven approach? 
 
Beginning to think that these sub stories need drawing together better. How do they all connect? 
 
Interesting quote from the participant perhaps most in favour of NICE – “in the absence of a better 
way of doing it, it's probably, it’s probably the least worst, is to follow the NICE guidelines.” Hardly a 
huge endorsement! 
 
This project has helped me to start developing my own views on NICE. I’m thinking that I would like 
to do extra training in CBT (picking this stream for 3rd year options) and have CBT as my base, I will 
then use underlying principles of CBT, rather than manualistic, I will also think in a variety of models 
and translate into CBT. This feels like it is having a flexible relationship with NICE, whilst being on 
the “right” side of the power of NICE (i.e. siding with the power rather than trying to fight it). While I 
am starting to take this position, I will also keep all the criticisms of NICE in mind and attempt to 
maintain that flexible relationship with the guidelines, not taking them as prescriptions, and fighting 
this case with others, that they need to be viewed flexibly. 
 
Questions for future interviews – more info re the benefits of NICE? + how the CPs utilise NICE. 
 
Note to self - Feeling that NICE attempts to make something complicated neat is a huge category 
within having concerns about NICE. Bring in safe uncertainty theory? Drive for certainty when we 
can’t ever achieve certainty? The drive for safe certainty could be leading us into unsafe certainty? No 
NICE guidelines is unsafe uncertainty. A flexible relationship with NICE = safe uncertainty? 
 
Coding Kim’s interview – strong sense of concern re conveyor belt / mechanistic approach, losing 
touch with clinical judgement. This has come up for others too. Is this represented well enough in my 
emerging model? Thoughts for future interviews – themes from previous interviews – NICE have 
pros and cons. Big pressure to follow NICE, increasing in the future. CPs want NICE to be seen as 
guideline and not prescription. Want individual approach, not conveyor belt. How does this fit for 
you? Agree? Disagree? Are there ever times when you want to do something different to what NICE 
seems to be suggesting? How do you manage when you want to do something different to what NICE 
suggests? Or do you always follow it? 
 
12.10.2013 - Theoretical coding. Re-read Cathy Urquhart chapter on theoretical coding. Reminded me 
of the value of diagrams to link categories together.  
  
 
 
184 
 
 
 
Coding kim’s transcript. Thinking more about the discourse of evidence based practice. Should this be 
a more dominant category than I have it currently? The concern and dispute re the threat to integrative 
practice appears to fit within the topic of challenging the discourse of evidence based practice. Which 
in itself fits within nice trying to make something complicated neat. 
Kim talked about the importance of working within NICE so that we can be heard, not fighting 
against it. This fits with my thoughts on NICE being powerful, work from CBT framework and 
integrate other models in. how to code this and ask further questions of further participants? 
Is it about having two categories within how NICE is used. Working with NICE and working against 
it? Have a third category to represent valuing excuses not to use NICE? / not feeling NICE to be 
personally restricting yet?  
13.10.2013 – Reading Lucy Johnstone’s book on formulation, noticed a quote by Kinderman (2001) 
noting that CP is based on formulation. This is making me think of the importance of a category about 
professional identity of CPs. Formulation doesn’t seem to fit with NICE. Plus there has been lots of 
recent info re dsm5 and calls for formulation led practice rather than diagnosis. It feels like a very 
timely project. 
I’ve been spending a lot of time drawing diagrams trying to link codes and categories. I keep coming 
up with very complex diagrams. I feel they need to be simpler to be more effective. Out of all the GT 
papers I have read so far, the most effective ones have the most simple models. I seem to remember 
Paul Camic mentioning this in the coding workshop too. 
17.10.2013 – emergence of “contemplating professional id of CP” as central category? I merged 
“valuing the skills of CP”, “feeling that the professional id of CP is threatened” and “arguing that the 
professional id of CP is not threatened” into one category “contemplating the professional id of CP”. I 
then attempted to see where this category would fit on the initial diagrams that I had been drafting. I 
was quite surprised to see that this category seemed to link with all of the other categories and 
therefore needed to go in the centre of the diagrams. I felt uncomfortable putting it in the centre. I’m 
not sure why I felt uncomfortable with this, I think my reservation came from wondering whether this 
should be the key point that people see when they look at the diagram. I then went back to NVIVO 
and refreshed myself with the content of the categories and it reminded me that the topic of 
“contemplating the professional id of CP” was indeed a central theme in most of the interviews and 
generated a large proportion of the total codes of the project. 
I set up a GT discussion thread on Facebook to run ideas past each other. Got some really helpful 
feedback on a query I had regarding naming of some categories. I was considering merging the 
benefits and concerns into one category and was thinking of names for the category. Discussing this 
with my colleagues made me realise the categories seemed more powerful (and more simplistic in a 
model) if they were kept separate and had simple labels rather than trying to find a complicated way 
of describing them. 
18.10.2013 - I was going through the data in NVIVO today and realised that my category of feeling 
an underlying pressure to follow NICE should not have been a category, rather it is a sub category of 
a new category “viewing NICE as guidelines vs feeling pressure to be compliant” (unsure if this 
category name will remain the same). I realised that not all CPs had found NICE to be restrictive and 
felt the pressure. Many had felt the pressure and most CPs worried about the pressure in the future or 
the possibility of the pressure. It therefore felt important to have all of these views represented. This 
also fitted with a previous worry about having “feeling an underlying pressure to follow NICE” and 
  
 
 
185 
 
 
 
“wanting NICE to be guidelines and not prescription” as stand alone categories without any sub 
categories. Now they are both sub categories of the same category. The overall explanatory diagram 
doesn’t feel quite as powerful but it is more representative. 
18.10.2013 - Thoughts prior to interview with Catherine: Start with the generic question about views 
on NICE. See where it takes us. I have a knowledge in my head of the things the other participants 
have said and my thoughts on these, so even if I don’t mean to, I am likely to steer prompts / 
questions with this knowledge in mind. Then at some point, highlight the themes from previous 
interviews – NICE have pros and cons. Big pressure (for some) to follow NICE, increasing in the 
future. CPs want NICE to be seen as guideline and not prescription. Want individual approach, not 
conveyor belt. How does this fit for you? Agree? Disagree? Anything important missing? 
Then - Are there ever times when you want to do something different to what NICE seems to be 
suggesting? How do you manage when you want to do something different to what NICE suggests? 
Or do you always follow it? 
Questions around the power of NICE? Is the power justified? Are there any worries about the power? 
Good elements, bad elements. What could / should be done about it? (previous participants mentioned 
about more reflection / responsibility from NICE.) 
Definitely need focus to be more on how CPs manage seeing NICE as good and bad. Follow NICE? 
Follow creatively? If follow creatively, do they advertise this? Do they ignore NICE? 
26.10.2013 – It was helpful talking to Anne yesterday. I feel that I have become so immersed in the 
data, it was getting hard to “see the wood for the trees”. Talking through my thoughts on the emerging 
grounded theory was really helpful as Anne was able to see things from a fresh perspective and was 
able to highlight the key ideas. She also highlighted the importance of making sure that the project 
fulfilled the requirements of the course. She acknowledged that the emerging grounded theory was of 
interest to the profession of clinical psychology but for the requirements of the course, I needed to 
ensure that there was a psychological underpinning to the theory.  
I had previously acknowledged that the bulk of my data comes within the question “what are CPs 
beliefs about NICE?” Talking to Anne highlighted that it would be helpful for me to unpack this area, 
explaining what the underlying beliefs of CPs are. This would be the major emphasis of the project (in 
keeping with the fact that the majority of the data is on this), then leading into “how guidelines are 
utilised” (with the beliefs in mind), almost as a conclusion. The psychological theory is then likely to 
come in when discussing the CPs beliefs. For example, the NICE guidelines appear to be based on the 
premise of diagnosis, then a manualised treatment plan. The CPs all seemed to challenge this, 
suggesting that CPs have a different way of conceptualising psychological distress and approaches to 
intervention. This could bring in theory such as Bentall and Boyle. It also links in with the MAS 
report (1989) where Derek Mowbray highlighted 3 levels of psychological thinking, noting that single 
model therapists where at level 2, CPs at level 3. It may be that NICE focuses on level 2 and ignores 
level 3. This GT highlights that some CPs still feel able to work at level 3, but many are feeling 
pressured into moving to level 2 and others are worried that the future is moving towards a level 2 
way of thinking. 
Plus, Anne has made me realise that I don’t need to keep on conducting more and more interviews. I 
think I was aiming for 12 interviews, as I had read a quote that 12 was good for a qualitative study. 
Talking to Anne reminded me that I don’t need to aim for an arbitrary number, I need to collect what 
  
 
 
186 
 
 
 
works for my data (within reason). I have conducted 9 interviews and have 2 more booked in. The 
way things are going, it might be the case that I can stop interviewing after these 11 interviews.  
1.11.2013 - Section A - I have deliberately focused more on section B up to this point. I have 
considered a plan for section A but haven’t looked into the literature in any great depth. I have done 
this due to GT methodology of attempting not to let a literature review affect the construction of the 
grounded theory. I acknowledge that I cannot be an empty slate, as I have existing knowledge but I 
felt that completing section A would likely influence my construction of GT. Now that I have 
interviewed 8 participants and completed an initial analysis, I feel ready to work on section A and feel 
that it should not detrimentally affect my thinking and analysis of section b now.  
1.11.2013 - Looking through the MRP guidelines, I’m having thoughts around the difficult fit 
between GT and course requirements. In GT methodology it is not a case of doing a thorough 
literature review and finding some theories/ideas to test, but this seems to be how the MRP guidelines 
are set up. I was quite comfortable with my approach of having an idea – why aren’t NICE guidelines 
for psychosis implemented, then thinking this through with supervisors, doing some brief reading 
around, coming up with the idea of having a broad focus of questioning whether NICE should or 
should not be followed and investigating what CPs in routine practice think and what they are doing. I 
then focused on section b, not wanting to do a thorough literature review first, as it may impact upon 
my thinking and GT theory development. I then have come back to do section A. I feel that this can 
be done, but it just feels a bit clumsy and not linear in the way that a quantitative project would be and 
the way that the MRP guidelines seem to be set up. 
1.11.2013 - Discovery of Hemsley’s paper. I was shocked when I discovered Hemsley’s (2013) article 
re thematic analysis of counselling psychologists relationship with NICE. I was worried that this 
would make my project surplus to requirements. Reading the paper changed this view. I wonder if I 
am being especially critical as I feel threatened by the paper, but I found it easy to criticise. The 
introduction seemed confusing to me, it didn’t neatly introduce why the project was being done. The 
reflexivity that is vital to qualitative projects is missing. We have no indication of the questions that 
she asked participants. It seems to come from an assumption that NICE is bad. Did she start with the 
idea of pluralism in her head already? Were clients asked about this? Or did this emerge? Was the 
focus purely on counselling psychologists view of NICE and the threat to professional identity? Or 
did this emerge? Looking at the examples Hemsley provided of quotes and how she interpreted these 
was revealing, for example: 
“You have the kind of intellectual tools and knowledge to reassure yourself and hopefully convince 
others that this is really rather poor, low grade understanding of what constitutes good evidence, 
valid evidence. It’s not doctoral level understanding as I said. Any psychology student of an 
undergraduate course would have that kind of understanding of what constitutes evidence.” (Peter) 
This was deemed to be “counselling psychology is not seen to resist NICE guidelines but wanting to 
meet it at the ‘table’”. This seems like resistance to me. If Peter is meeting NICE anywhere it is on the 
battle field (or the playground, with belittling statements) rather than at the negotiation table. 
She also uses participants from NHS and private practice. I would assume they would be different 
populations with different interests and pressures etc. The paper is focused purely on the professional 
identity of counselling psychologists in relation to NICE. I hope that mine will have a broader focus. 
The professional id of CPs will feature heavily in mine, but mine is also highlighting strengths and 
weaknesses of NICE and highlighting the need for them to be seen as guidelines and not instructions. 
  
 
 
187 
 
 
 
Hopefully this will be helpful for other professionals and not just CPs. Highlighting the challenge to 
the medical model way of thinking (rather than assuming it as Hemsley did) may also be helpful.  
Helpful elements to arise from Hemsley’s paper is that experiencing nice as powerful was a key 
theme. Benefits and concerns of NICE were highlighted. NICE was also deemed as being containing. 
This appears to fit within my idea of NICE being a drive for safe certainty. It was also highlighted 
how CBT can be done in different ways as well as people being secretive and saying they do CBT 
when they don’t. 
4.11.2013 - After spending a couple of days on section A, I am pleased that I made the decision to 
hold off on section A until I had done the bulk of my analyses on section B. Lots of the information 
that I am finding for section A, is supporting my analyses of section B. This is great for triangulation 
(if this is the right word? Which I’m not sure it is according to a social constructivist approach) but if 
I had known this in advance then I would have been wary that I was simply putting my ideas on the 
data rather than trying to draw the information from the data. 
Thoughts re separating theory between section A and section B. Section b, reflecting on why NICE 
would want to make something complicated appear simple: safe uncertainty, defence mechanism of 
breaking work down into categories and tasks to defend against having to think about individuals and 
human suffering. Plus Moncrief, psychiatrists got power from categorisation, do CPs want as well? 
Link in with CPs contemplating profesional id / the benefit of nice endorsing psychological 
interventions. 
20.11.2013 – Completed 11th interview today. As recommended by grounded theory authors such as 
Morse (2007) the questions that I have put to participants in latter interviews have been based on 
analyses to date. This helps with constant comparison, looking for similarities and differences 
between participants. Doing this helps test the validity of codes, categories and emerging theory. 
Working through this process with the 11th participant seemed to support the validity of my analyses 
to date. We had some really interesting discussions but it felt like I had reached a stage where the 
participant wasn’t saying anything that surprised me or questioned the validity of my analyses that I 
had completed so far. Once I noticed this, as information came up that fitted with my categories and 
emerging theory, I ran my categories and emerging theory past the participant. I was pleased to hear 
that the participant seemed in agreement with all of my categories and linkages. Furthermore, the 
participant seemed really interested in my analyses. Due to the analyses completed to date, I had 
anticipated that this might be my last interview. After how things went today, I feel even more sure 
that I probably won’t need to do any more interviews, as I feel that I may have achieved “theoretical 
sufficiency” (Dey, 1999). I will only be in a position to make a formal decision on this once I have 
fully completed the analyses (and run it past supervisors and the GT group etc.) 
13.12.2013 - Looking through Sophie’s interview again, thinking about what she said about NICE 
being comforting. Is this an overarching category of many of the benefits of NICE? One of the 
simplified main findings of project is that if clinicians are not pressurised into using NICE, they treat 
NICE as guidelines, drawing on them as one justification for an intervention (not the only 
justification). If they are pressurised, they act secretly? An interesting observation is that one 
participant (Ronda) provides quotes for worrying about prof id and saying prof id is not at risk. This 
suggests that the codes and categories represent a range of views within participants as well as 
between. 
  
 
 
188 
 
 
 
15.12.2013 - Next steps. I have completed the interviews and coding. I am re-reading Charmaz, Straus 
and Corbin and Urqhalt, focusing specifically on construction of theory and write up. My next step 
will be to revisit my coding and categories and to revisit the emerging categories and hypothesised 
links between these. I envisage that now I have more data (and a refresher of GT theory) I will need 
(/want) to make some changes to the categories and how these all link together. 
15.12.2013 – Have come up with a diagram that I like. It looks very simple to me. I wonder if this is 
just because I am so familiar with the data? I want the model to come across as simple and straight 
forward to follow, but not so much that it doesn’t reflect the amount of work that has led to its 
creation. I read a fantastic (and humorous!) paper recently by Oxman, Fretheim and Flottorp (2005) 
called the “OFF theory”. They make some “tongue in cheek” critiques of the use of psychological 
theory in guideline implementation research. They note that it usually just makes things more 
complicated.  
15.12.2013 – I have been reading the MRPs of previous trainees recently to gain knowledge of 
structure and style etc. Reading the acknowledgements of other trainees has made me start to think 
about who I will acknowledge. There are some obvious ones, who will definitely go in. A thought 
popped into my head about acknowledging Glaser and Straus for “discovering” GT and then to 
Charmaz for putting a social constructivist spin on it. I’m not sure I will put them in, but the fact that 
the thought came into my head made me realise that I do really like the GT method. Glaser & Straus 
described it as a drugless trip. I’m not sure I would go that far, but I certainly am finding it enjoyable. 
19.12.2013 - I have been reading a lot of theory today, particularly focusing on power and 
sociological theory, i.e. Weberian and Marxism views on professions. I am concerned that 8,000 
words will not be enough to fully do justice to the project. 
20.12.2013 - Wondering about my “reflecting on the current financial climate” category. I like this for 
the model, it gives context. However it is a shallow category, if anything it is just a focused code. This 
feels ok, in terms of Charmaz’s flexible approach but I’m not sure how to represent this in my tables 
of codes etc in the appendix.  
20.12.2013 - Reviewing my notes and research diary, reflecting on the timing of the literature search 
for section A and my current reading around theory to help with theoretical integration of section B. I 
think this has come at a good time. I am reading Charmaz and Urqhalt who stress the importance of 
“upscaling” grounded theory so that it has theoretical integration within the literature. If I had done 
my literature searches in more detail earlier, I think it might have influenced my analysis. Doing it at 
this stage means that I have the bulk of the analysis carried out but can draw on the literature to help 
put the finishing touches to the analyses and ensure the best theoretical integration possible. 
Reading a paper by economists, about decision making theory (“The Evolutionary Economics of 
Decision Making”) and thinking that decision making appears to be an area that crosses discipline 
boundaries (especially after having read sociological theory yesterday). I am concerned as to how 
examiners may interpret this and whether the project is psychological theory or sociological or 
economic etc. To me, decision making is a psychological process that is influenced by other areas 
such as sociological and economic issues. Reading the Kenrick et al. (2009) paper adds weight to this 
as while they are discussing “economic theories” they use the word “psychological” numerous times.  
This is also making me wonder whether I need (or could benefit from) more theory regarding decision 
making in my section A. Although the more I read about economic decision making theories, the 
more I doubt that these are actually of any relevance to this project, e.g. theories such as Diminishing 
  
 
 
189 
 
 
 
Marginal Utility or Risk Aversion versus Risk Seeking do not appear relevant to CPs use of NICE 
guidelines. Or do they? Could it be that the creators of NICE guidelines see non NICE evidenced 
therapies as diminishing marginal utility, i.e. that the potential extra benefits from an experimental 
non evidenced based therapy are not deemed as significant as the initial gain a patient would get from 
a NICE backed therapy such as CBT. Linked with this, risk aversion versus risk seeking fits with this, 
that it is safer to be risk averse and go for the evidence base than it is to go for a therapy that it is 
difficult to research, even if that therapy could be more effective. 
I’m thinking again about upscaling theory, when I first read Urquhart’s thoughts on this I wasn’t 
overly impressed, I considered it more important to keep the theory grounded in the data rather than 
trying to make it more abstract and generalisable. I then thought about my emerging theory, it could 
be that when making decisions, professionals consider the pros, the cons, the impact on their 
professional identity (and job security) and the pressure that they are under when deciding upon their 
decision. Furthermore, in turn their decision and how they act impacts upon their professional identity 
(and job security) which impacts upon future decision making. This feels simplistic, but does seem to 
offer more explanatory power than other theories of decision making that simply state “beliefs” are 
important (alongside subjective norms and perceived behaviour control, theory of planned behaviour), 
or people attempt to maximise their expected satisfaction (expected utility theory). 
This is making me think that my study’s outcomes are two fold, firstly it presents a general theory on 
professionals decision making and secondly, it populates this theory with data regarding CPs beliefs 
about and use of NICE guidelines, with particular focus on how CPs experiencing NICE as a powerful 
force and the pros and cons of this, with particular concerns around believing that NICE makes 
something complicated neat. 
30.12.2013 – Reading more theory, particularly like Aronson’s ideas re cognitive dissonance in 
decision making. However, I know that I’m not going to have room to explore all of these ideas that I 
am reading about. 
27.01.2014 - I’m very aware as I am writing up this project that I could easily write a book on this 
rather than just 16,000 words. It is frustrating that I am having to leave out lots of interesting 
information. I do however see the value of attempting to convey the findings in a succinct way, to 
make them more accessible to a wider range of people (and probably more interesting, I might be the 
only person interested in reading a book about the use of NICE guidelines!). In keeping with this, I’m 
aware that I can only tell part of the whole picture of the results if I am to stay within word count. 
This is highlighting the need for transparency and reflexivity in documenting what led to the final 
write up. 
27.01.2014 – I have written 2,000 words for my methodology. Checking other MRPs using GT and 
course guidelines I realise that I am going to have to chop the method in half to about 1,000 words. I 
feel quite upset about this as I enjoyed writing the section and have utilised a lot of GT theory and 
references. It made me realise how much I have learned about GT. I have saved the 2,000 word 
version and will use this for prep for my VIVA and will probably revisit it in the future if I need to 
refresh myself of GT methodology. 
27.01.2014 – I wrote a paragraph suggesting that NICE may be a defence mechanism. I really like this 
idea, however it doesn’t really fit with the rest of the write up. Plus it doesn’t really follow the data, it 
is more my thoughts. I am therefore regrettably deleting this. I thought I would include the paragraph 
here as it adds insight into my (emerging and changing) views on NICE. 
  
 
 
190 
 
 
 
“NICE as a defence mechanism. Another hypothesis regarding why the creators and supporters of 
NICE advocate making something complex appear neat, is that this is a defence mechanism (Freud, 
1894). Jaques (1953) proposed that organisations employ defence mechanisms to help defend against 
the anxiety generated by their work. This idea has been utilised in healthcare, perhaps most notably by 
Menzies (1960) who analysed the ways in which nurses contained the difficult feelings generated by 
caring for seriously ill patients. Amongst other observations, Menzies proposed that the nurses 
attempted to deny the individuality of the patients by treating them by category of illness and avoid 
emotional contact through structured, task focused contact. This could suggest that making something 
complex appear simple, through the use of NICE guidelines, helps professionals defend against the 
pain of fully appreciating the individual nature of psychological distress. This may help staff to see a 
barrier between “sane” staff and “insane” patients (Hyde & Thomas, 2002), rather than interpreting 
psychological distress as human reactions to life situations.” 
10.02.2014 – I am checking through my initial drafts of section A and B and am thinking back to the 
difficult fit between course requirements and grounded theory methodology. In section A I suggest it 
might be helpful for future research to test Cabana’s conceptual model. In my section B discussion I 
link the results of my project to Cabana’s model. This looks as if I was using grounded theory to test a 
model. This approach is not within grounded theory protocol (and would be heavily criticised by 
grounded theorists). What actually happened is that I completed the research, then visited the 
literature (in line with grounded theory methodology) and wrote about Cabana in the section B 
discussion. I then wrote section A and Cabana’s research was a significant part of the section. As it 
influenced a lot of the structure of the section, I needed to fully explore the future research 
implications. This then leads to the uncomfortable situation, caused by course requirements, where 
readers will see section A before seeing section B. I hope that readers of my project will read the 
research diary and appreciate that I did follow grounded theory methodology (by doing the research 
before exploring the literature) and have not attempted to test theory using grounded theory.  
03.03.2014 – Anne has given me feedback on my first draft of section B. She has given positive 
feedback but has also given a lot of constructive criticism. My first response was to get defensive of 
my work. I felt that I could challenge lots of her criticisms. However, the more I think about her 
feedback, the more I am able to take from it. One key piece of feedback is that my label of “NICE 
attempting to make something complicated appear neat” does not accurately represent the views of 
the participants. While this was the language used by one of the participants, it does not convey the 
context. For example there is nothing wrong with making something complex appear neat, it seems 
helpful. Whereas the CPs were saying that it was an unhelpful, false illusion. I have thought through 
what to change the label to and have discussed this on the online forum with the grounded theory 
discussion group. I have come up with “Worrying that NICE can create an unhelpful illusion of 
neatness”. 
04.03.2014 – Received feedback from Amanda on my section b. She said that she didn’t feel that she 
should give feedback on the results and discussion section as she did not want to impose her views on 
my work. I see her point of view but am a little disappointed with this. I suppose that she must think 
the project is along the right lines or she would have highlighted that she thought it needed changing 
(even if she didn’t give specific feedback). I have emailed her back to see if I can get some overall 
feedback even if she does not wish to give specific feedback. 
07.03.2014 – Met with Anne to discuss her feedback and suggestions for changes to section B. This 
felt like a helpful meeting. I have come to the conclusion that I need to change my overall theme and 
headings of most of the categories. I feel sad to lose the overall theme of “experiencing NICE as a 
  
 
 
191 
 
 
 
powerful force” but I think that the changes improve the model. Having a new overall theme of 
“mixed views as to whether NICE guidelines are compatible with the way that CPs conceptualise 
distress” is much neater and tells a more coherent study. I was struggling to tell the take home 
messages with the old model. With the new model and new overall theme it seems much clearer. To 
be honest I probably should have always had this new theme as my overall theme. I reflected in this 
research diary earlier about how central CPs reflecting about their professional identity seemed to be 
in the model. The changes to the category labelling helps make the take home messages clearer also. 
Changing “having concerns about nice” to “worrying that NICE can create an unhelpful illusion of 
neatness” is much more powerful. I was keen for my model to be simple but I think I went too far 
with the original model. The new labelling of categories still feels simple but seems more interesting! 
This label in particular is also actually more in keeping with the data. With the original labelling, I 
was struggling to work out how the sub categories all fitted. Putting “worrying that NICE can create 
an unhelpful illusion of neatness” as the overall category label makes it much clearer what the sub 
categories are and how they link to each other. 
I get the impression that Anne would prefer my model to look something like a previous trainee’s GT 
model who looked at CPs beliefs about the power of compulsion (Parsloe, 2012). I can see her point, 
as there are similarities. However, I think the framework of my model needs to be different. One of 
the key ideas that kept coming up for me is that all CPs see the benefits and the concerns of NICE but 
they make different conclusions. My model helps explain how they get to these conclusions and what 
they do with these beliefs. I really like the model by Parsloe (2012) but I think my model is 
necessarily different. Furthermore I feel that my model is more of a “theory” in that it explains 
processes rather than just describing two positions that CPs take towards something (beliefs about 
compulsion in Parsloe’s case). 
21.03.2014 – I had been having second thoughts about the change of overall theme, so spoke with 
Anne again. We discussed how while the new theme fitted well, it is very specific to clinical 
psychologists. While this may be a good thing, it may also mean that important take home messages 
from the project are missed by other professions (if they ignore the project, thinking it is only relevant 
to clinical psychologists). Anne highlighted that the project seemed to be distinguishing between 
validity and utility, as all of the participants criticised the validity of NICE guidelines but there were 
mixed views regarding utility. I really liked this idea when speaking with Anne but when I got back to 
looking at the data and trying to redraft the model and the write up, it just didn’t seem to fit. It felt like 
I was trying to “force” the data as Glaser would say. I had a tough day struggling with this but then 
later in the day I revisited the transcripts and focused codes (rather than staring blankly at the overall 
model as I had been doing for many hours) and I re-discovered the fact that most participants had 
expressed mixed views towards NICE. I thought about having this as an overall theme. This fits the 
data and is more of a general take home message. However, it felt too general, what does “mixed 
views” mean? I then thought it would be more interesting (and closer to the data) to use an actual 
quote from one of the participants. I decided to go with “Considering NICE guidelines to have 
benefits but to be fraught with dangers”. I think each of my participants will look at this theme and 
agree that it sums up the conversations that we had. It gives a clear message about what the model 
(and rest of the write up) is going to be about. It also feels quite powerful. 
21.03.2014 – New insight? I have been re-reading Charmaz’s (2006) guidelines on judging a GT 
study. She emphasised that an effective study will have clear take home messages that offer new 
insight. I was wondering if my project does this. I think the study does have many important new 
insights, particularly the fact that CPs are utilising level 3 skills in routine practice, but tend to 
  
 
 
192 
 
 
 
practice in ways that means that these are not recognised. It also has important theoretical messages 
for researchers interested in guideline implementation research. I discussed this with Anne, I argued 
that the results of my study (particularly categorising the benefits and concerns about NICE) may not 
come as a huge surprise to her, or to me now, but they will surprise others. I argued that there are 
many clinicians, managers and researchers banging their heads against the wall in frustration, 
confused as to why people do not follow NICE guidelines. I also made the point that it is important to 
try to remember what I did not used to know. The results of my study feel obvious to me now, 
whereas 3 years ago they would have come as a revelation. I started this project to find out more 
about the pros and cons of NICE guidelines and how they are utilised as I was unclear on this. For 
example I used to get confused as to why people would ignore the guidelines. This project has given 
answers to these questions that I had. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
193 
 
 
 
Faculty of Social and Applied Sciences 
Clinical Psychology Doctoral Programme 
Canterbury Christ Church University 
Salomons Campus 
 
PRE INTERVIEW QUESTIONNAIRE 
 
Study: 
 
 Clinical Psychologists’ beliefs about, and use of NICE 
Guidelines. 
Researcher: 
 Mr Alex Court, clinical psychologist in training, Canterbury Christ 
Church University. 
The information from this questionnaire is intended to assist in theoretical sampling, 
to attempt to ensure that the participants included in the study come from varying 
backgrounds, with a variety of opinions about NICE guidelines. 
 
Please could you read through and complete the following background information 
questions: 
Name............................................................................................................. 
Address of place of work .............................................................................. 
....................................................................................................................... 
Specialism that you are currently working in (e.g. CAMHS, Adult mental health, 
Addictions etc) ............................................................................................... 
Other areas that you have specialised in during your years of qualified practice 
....................................................................................................................... 
....................................................................................................................... 
Which year did you qualify as a clinical psychologist? ................................. 
Current NHS banding ................................................................................... 
Country that you completed your clinical psychology training in .................. 
....................................................................................................................... 
What would you describe as being your preferred theoretical modality / modalities? 
(e.g. CBT, Psychodynamic, Systemic, Integrative, etc) 
....................................................................................................................... 
………............................................................................................................ 
Appendix M: Pre 
Interview Questionnaire 
  
 
 
194 
 
 
 
Have you ever been involved in NICE guideline production? (If so please state how) 
………………........................................................................................................... 
................................................................................................................................. 
Have you ever published a view on NICE guidelines? (If so please state where this 
was published and when) ....................................................................................... 
................................................................................................................................. 
 
Please could you read the following statements and rate your level of agreement 
with each, by circling a number on the scale between 0 (strongly disagree) and 10 
(strongly agree): 
NICE guidelines are helpful in informing my clinical practice. 
 
 
0,    1,    2,    3,    4,    5,    6,    7,    8,    9,    10 
(Strongly Disagree)         
 
      (Strongly Agree) 
 
I have a thorough and up to date knowledge of all available NICE guidelines that are 
appropriate for my specialist area of practice. 
 
 
0,    1,    2,    3,    4,    5,    6,    7,    8,    9,    10 
(Strongly Disagree)         
 
      (Strongly Agree) 
 
I promote the use of NICE guidelines to my colleagues in my workplace. 
 
 
0,    1,    2,    3,    4,    5,    6,    7,    8,    9,    10 
(Strongly Disagree)         
 
      (Strongly Agree) 
 
There is pressure to follow NICE guidelines. 
 
 
0,    1,    2,    3,    4,    5,    6,    7,    8,    9,    10 
(Strongly Disagree)         
 
      (Strongly Agree) 
 
I think that I utilise NICE guidelines less than other clinical psychologists. 
 
 
0,    1,    2,    3,    4,    5,    6,    7,    8,    9,    10 
(Strongly Disagree)         
 
      (Strongly Agree) 
 
The medical model basis of NICE guidelines makes them difficult for clinical 
psychologists to utilise. 
 
 
0,    1,    2,    3,    4,    5,    6,    7,    8,    9,    10 
(Strongly Disagree)         
 
      (Strongly Agree) 
 
Having NICE guidelines which should be followed limits the psychological thinking of 
clinical psychologists, which has a detrimental effect on both formulation and 
intervention. 
 
 
0,    1,    2,    3,    4,    5,    6,    7,    8,    9,    10 
(Strongly Disagree)         
 
      (Strongly Agree) 
 
 
Thank you for taking the time to complete this questionnaire. 
  
 
 
195 
 
 
 
Appendix N: Interview Question Examples from Latter Interviews 
The following examples demonstrate the interviewer drawing on ideas from previous 
interviews and analyses and using these to formulate questions. This helped with constant 
comparison of the participants and their views, helping to check the validity of emerging 
categories and their properties. 
 
Example 1 
Alex: It’s reminded me of a conversation I had with another psychologist who – he/she22 said 
that his/her opinion of the NICE guidelines was that when they came in, or in fact rather 
before they came in, he/she said that most psychologists would say that they worked 
eclectically or integratively and worked in collaboration with the client, and then after NICE 
guidelines came in, the therapies as well as the diagnosis started being categorised and started 
being prescriptive and it started being a bit less ok to say that you’re working integratively. 
 
Sam: I think that’s true… 
 
Example 2 
Alex: I suppose, there's one person who I have met who probably came the closest to those 
views, and she/he was saying that she/he could 100% see all the limitations with NICE 
guidelines, but she/he also valued the benefits of them, that it is good to stick with evidence-
based practice if you've got a limited amount of money or if you've got long waiting lists, it's 
good to stick with what we know works rather than trying out something else which may well 
be really good, but if there's not the evidence for it, then it's the taxpayers paying for it. We 
should go for what the evidence is for. 
                                                          
 
22 Gender anonymised on transcript to help protect confidentiality 
  
 
 
196 
 
 
 
Sophie: I see that point, but I think it fundamentally misses the point about how that evidence 
base is gathered and I think the limitations of the gathering of that evidence base, not just for 
medical interventions but also psychological interventions, you just can't miss the point that 
actually… 
 
Example 3 
Ronda: Which you see a lot in current job adverts where they’re looking for psychologists to 
work in long term needs services and deliver short term interventions for complex problems, 
which for me is a sort of very concerning contradiction. 
 
Alex: Yeah. And I think that seems to be – it’s making me think of lots of the different things 
people have been saying, seem to come under a category, for me, of that NICE guidelines is 
trying to make something really complicated, nice and neat.  
 
Ronda: Yep. 
 
Alex: And lots of people are saying things around that. And I was wondering, why do you 
think the people who create NICE guidelines are trying to make something complicated and 
neat? Is there a valid reason for trying to do that, or is it just a misunderstanding or/ 
 
Ronda: (interrupting) Well (deep inhalation), I mean, I think it’s because, it’s lots of 
different reasons. Erm, I think sometimes, I mean I think, you know… 
 
 
 
  
 
 
197 
 
 
 
Example 4 
Alex: … I think it is something that some of the psychologists I’ve spoken to have been 
worried about it, it being limiting, and so particularly as you’ve kind of guessed really, some 
of the people are perhaps a bit more integrative and eclectic were quite worried by the CBT 
dominance really of the guidelines. 
 
Sam: Yes. But I think also there’s widespread acknowledgement that the reasons that CBT 
dominates in psychological approaches throughout the NICE guidelines is because there’s 
been a number of prominent people who’ve done a lot of research in the last 20 years/ 
 
Alex: Yeah. 
 
Sam: And it’s not that CBT’s necessarily more effective, it’s just that people have gone out 
and done the research and that to some extent CBT lends itself to the kind of research that 
NICE guidelines likes. And I think you could say, well if you were a NICE guidelines 
proponent you could easily come back and say ‘well, you know, do your research’ and give 
that message back to other models. And I don’t think that’s a bad thing. 
 
Example 5  
Jan: … the NHS is stressed out of it’s mind at this point, who’s got time for an evidence 
base?  
 
Alex: Yeah. And I think that’s something that one of the psychologists who I’ve spoken to 
before, and he/she was quite in favour of CBT, and she/he said that he/she could see the 
benefit from lots of different approaches, but she/he said with the NHS being in the situation 
  
 
 
198 
 
 
 
it’s in at the moment we’ve got the evidence base for CBT, we can see that that works, so 
she’s/he’s quite happy to go along with that. 
 
Jan: That’s what’s happening, but I think it’s extremely dangerous. Because the evidence 
base is exactly that, it’s for single presentations. It is not for complex presentations we’re 
getting in CAMHS. And the truth is that the threshold for CAMHS is so high now that 
actually the clients we’re getting are not CBT eligible clients. So it’s a bit of a – that is a 
complete contradiction. IAPT services, yes that’s great, but that’s – and they’re going to be 
IAPT services for CAMHS. Great, that middle band. But for a CAMHS service it is foolish to 
think we can do CBT only. 
 
Example 6 
Alex: I'm just thinking about another thing that has been mentioned and links in with 
something that has come up in other interviews, as well. It's about the absence of guidelines 
for your particular clientele. I'm thinking of one particular person I've spoken with, and a 
couple of other people were a little bit similar. They were saying that there aren't guidelines 
for their clientele, but their managers still expect them to do a certain type of CBT for 
depression because that's what the NICE guidelines say. When they say, 'Well, that's not our 
client group,' the managers are still saying, 'Well, it might not be your client group, but that's 
what the evidence says.' This one particular person I spoke to was very angry about that. 
 
Sophie: I would be angry, too… 
 
 
 
  
 
 
199 
 
 
 
Example 7 
Paul: Erm, but, much of it might just be about funding.  CAT, I've always found it to be an 
effective form of therapy, I've used it many times, but Tony Ryle is just less of an effective 
flag-waver than Tim Beck, you know, the reach of Tim Beck in cognitive therapy has just 
been that much more dramatic; so it could just be about funding as well? 
 
Alex: Yeah.  That’s something that some people have mentioned to me before actually in 
these interviews, that, sometimes the NICE erm backed therapies like CBT or family 
interventions for psychosis, because they’ve got the NICE backing, they can then attract lots 
more funding.   
 
Paul:  Yeah, it can become a bit of a vicious circle, you do enough research to get yourself 
in the NICE guidelines and then you attract more research money… 
 
Example 8  
Alex:  One thing that hasn’t come up in today's conversation or not directly anyway, but has 
come up in some other conversations I've had, is about erm, comparing clinical psychologists 
to other professionals, erm so, for example comparing a CBT therapist and a clinical 
psychologist, and thinking about the intervention, say, it’s something that we touched upon a 
little bit today, but I wondered: is that something that you have any thoughts about?  Any 
positives, any negatives? 
 
Paul: It's something that’s come up a lot in this team; it's an ongoing source of debate and 
sometimes source of great tension in it…. 
 
  
 
 
200 
 
 
 
Example 9 
Alex: Yeah, what came up in the other interviews. Yeah, I suppose that’s one thing we 
haven’t talked about today too much, I don’t think, is that in some of the other interviews I’ve 
done its come up about the types of evidence that NICE look at. We touched upon that a little 
bit earlier, I think, but some people I’ve spoken to have been quite worried that NICE 
guidelines they don’t really take account of all the evidence that’s out there, they just focus 
on like the gold standard RCT’s and things, whereas other people I’ve spoken to have said 
that they’re quite happy with the way NICE does things really, that they look at all the 
different types of evidence and then they rank which they think is most important. And they 
said that they were quite happy with that approach really because they wanted to see what 
were the most effective types of therapy. I didn’t know if you had any thoughts on that? 
 
Example 10 
Catherine: I would expect a clinical psychologist to have a degree of knowledge and 
understanding of research and of the basis of the guidelines to understand, back to again, the 
limitations of them so that they weren’t thinking “oh, my manager’s throwing that set of 
Guidelines at me, I’ve got to do everything it says”… 
 
Alex: Yeah. And I’m just thinking kind of linked with that conversation, one of the things 
that seems to have come up in quite a few of the other interviews, I’m just wondering, it 
might not be quite the same for you because it seems to be that here the pressure isn’t really 
there to follow NICE. Because something that’s come up a few places where there is that 
pressure, is that people are a little bit worried that if their managers are wanting CBT for 
depression, CBT for anxiety, CBT for psychosis, then they’re thinking why don’t they just 
hire a CBT therapist rather than a psychologist/ 
  
 
 
201 
 
 
 
Catherine: Yeah. 
 
Alex: And they can get them at a lower band. 
 
Catherine: Yeah. 
 
Alex: And that seems to be something that quite a lot of the psychologists were quite worried 
about. 
 
Catherine: Yeah. I think that’s an accurate concern. It isn’t something that I suppose has 
worried me in my role, but I know colleagues, I know friends, I know teams that have been 
completely kind of either downgraded in terms of their banding or, you know, whole teams of 
psychologists being laid off and these IAPT therapists or CBT therapists coming in. 
 
Example 11 
Alex: That’s really interesting to hear though about clinical decisions perhaps not always 
being that great though, and perhaps it is good to have those guidelines to draw on as well. 
Because I think one thing I have noticed from the previous interviews I’ve had, near enough 
every psychologist I’ve spoken to have all seen kind of real limitations with NICE and have 
all been on varying levels, sometimes quite angry with NICE for the way things are going. 
But then I don’t think there’s been a single one of them that’s said ‘let’s get rid of NICE’. I 
think absolutely every one of them, even the ones who are the complete kind of anti-NICE, as 
anti as they get, they’ve all still said they’d feel uncomfortable if NICE were to go. And what 
is that about, do you think? Is it about the fact that that clinical judgement on its own 
sometimes does have its limitations? 
  
 
 
202 
 
 
 
Kim: Yes. I think that’s right. I think we’re scientist practitioners (laughs), aren’t we, so we 
should be interested in research, shouldn’t we? So I’m kind of smiling about that because in 
the end, you know, there’s probably, within psychology there’s going to be, you know, 
psychologists that actually very much want to be involved in research and are very good 
scientists, and others that are more of practitioners. You know, and I’m sure there are some 
that are equally, you know, 50/50, but probably some people sit more on one side or the 
other… 
 
Example 12 
Alex: But is that something to do with - it’s triggering a memory of some conversations I’ve 
had with other people – where there’ve been some debates about perhaps the purpose of the 
NHS, and some people have said it’s just about symptom reduction and that anything more 
than that, particularly I think we were talking about adults with one person I was talking to, 
and she/he was saying that anything further than symptom reduction has to really go for 
private therapy. And I wonder would that be different for kids, do you think, or does that fit 
within the trying to do the most efficient perhaps short term therapy to move people on? 
 
Kim: Erm, it’s a hard one, you know, because I think children are slightly different actually. 
Erm, you know, it’s the whole debate about prevention versus intervention or, you know, 
what kind of treatment or whatever, isn’t it? And I think, you know, the CAMHS could and 
should be seen as also a preventative service… 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
203 
 
 
 
Example 13 
Alex: …when you said about erm, you wanted them to be guidelines rather than something 
that you had to follow. I think that’s something that’s come up in a few of the discussions 
I’ve had, but one person in particular I spoke to, he/she was very keen on saying that he/she 
wanted them to be guidelines, he/she wanted to have flexibility, but then he/she was very 
worried about other people having flexibility and other people not sticking to the guidelines. 
And it seemed as though it’s a bit of a tricky thing to try and hold. And I wonder if that’s one 
of those things that there can’t really be an easy answer to, we either want flexibility or we 
want people to stick to the guidelines, and there’s not really a very good way of measuring 
that, in my mind. I wondered if you had any clearer thoughts on that. 
 
Kim: No. You know, there aren’t any answers. I always think that, you know, in your 
practice what I think you need to do is to be able to justify why you did what you did. Erm, 
and NICE guidelines are part of that, could be part of that justification, at times, ‘I did this 
because NICE guidelines say so’, but you could also use other things that are the basis of 
your decision-making. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
204 
 
 
 
Appendix O: Reflections after the Bracketing Interview with Anne Cooke 25.04.2013 
Anne and I discussed how I am not sure of my own views towards NICE and that these have 
changed in the past and continue to change. We discussed how I have worked at places in the 
past where the culture is that NICE guidelines are a very good thing and it is obvious that 
they should be followed. Whilst working in these places I accepted this view and promoted 
this view to others. I have also worked with people who are very critical of NICE guidelines 
and I could see their point of view.  
 
We discussed how when I started this research project my intention was to investigate why 
NICE guidelines for schizophrenia don’t tend to be followed; with a goal of improving 
adherence. After discussions with Anne and Amanda and some brief reading around the 
subject, my position changed to one of curiosity, wanting to investigate the benefits and 
limitations of NICE, mainly to help clarify my own understanding and beliefs about them. 
We discussed how I can find myself agreeing with the view point and arguments of 
participants who are pro NICE and then when I meet a participant who is very anti NICE, I 
find myself agreeing with them. Anne highlighted how this is an important observation, 
signifying how we can be influenced by those around us and that workplaces could be very 
much influenced by one person’s strong views or a strong culture. This is something I need to 
be aware of when interviewing participants and analysing the data, noticing when I am 
agreeing with one point of view, and attempting to notice other perspectives. 
 
Anne had sent me through the questions before hand. Most of the questions were expected, 
but the question about how my family background may have influenced my decision to do 
this research seemed harder to think about and perhaps didn’t feel relevant. The more I 
thought about this and discussing this with Anne in the interview, made me realise that I have 
  
 
 
205 
 
 
 
had strict parents and have been brought up to follow rules. I have generally liked the 
stability of having rules and like these to be stuck to. This may have influenced my decision 
to do my MRP on NICE guidelines. However, I don’t feel that I am particularly trying to 
promote or to dispute NICE guidelines and am genuinely interested in how best to use them. 
So I don’t feel that my tendency to like rules will affect my judgement in this analysis but I 
feel that it is something that I should be aware of. For example I may find myself siding with 
pro NICE statements due to the security of having rules to follow. Alternatively, I might find 
myself siding with anti NICE statements due to wanting to challenge the strict upbringing 
that I had. 
 
I noticed in this interview, and have noticed in previous discussions with Anne, that Anne 
appears to be viewing this project as attempting to highlight the limitations of NICE in order 
to challenge the powerful discourse of evidence based practice and NICE. I agree that it 
would be good to challenge this viewpoint, as I feel NICE and the discourse of evidence 
based practice can be limiting. I am perhaps a little more open to alternatives though. If the 
data to emerge from the analysis highlights more positives about NICE then I will be more 
than happy to highlight these codes and categories, I don’t feel particularly wed to either 
trying to promote or to dispute NICE. I hope to follow the lead of the data and see what 
emerges. It might be that the data highlights positives and negatives of NICE. If this is the 
case, I hope that this research will help those who dislike NICE to see some of their positives 
and for those who promote their use, to recognise their limitations. 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
206 
 
 
 
Appendix P: Table of Codes and Categories with Quotation Examples 
Theme 
Category 
Sub-category 
Focused Codes 
Text examples 
Considering 
NICE 
guidelines 
to have 
benefits but 
to be 
fraught 
with 
dangers 
 
Valuing 
the 
benefits 
of NICE 
Noting that 
NICE 
guidelines 
can provide 
consistency  
Noting that 
guidelines can 
help organise 
services 
“erm, and I think it is, it is really helpful that the guidelines are there, because it does provide a bit of a framework to organise your services and the 
interventions and kindof the packages of care that you're trying to offer clients.” (Amy) 
 
“Erm, I think the way I do draw on NICE guidance is I do – when we’re getting referrals direct from GP’s to secondary care, erm, because 
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii don’t tend to get referred to IAPT services, and so we do, I now have an understanding with our team manager that new referrals 
present for anxiety and depression that are requesting counselling should go to IAPT first, erm, rather than come direct to us, and that’s now happening, 
that we don’t – so we follow the stepped care model.” (Jenny) 
 
“I think what they’ve been helpful for, is in a team like mine, where the majority of people would have a diagnosis of schizophrenia, and that would be 
the NICE guideline that is most applicable, it makes it very clear what kind of kind of care pathways we should be routinely offering.” (Sam). 
Highlighting that 
NICE guidelines 
can help the 
public know what 
to expect. 
“I think it helps the public to know what they can expect. And I think that’s really helpful.” (Jenny) 
 
“They also do patient friendly guidance and things like that as well, which of course in this day and age with service user involvement is hugely 
important.” (Catherine) 
Valuing the 
shared language 
that categorisation 
and NICE 
guidelines 
provide. 
“The fact is you still need a kind of a category list, don’t you? You need some language to kind of describe or categorise behaviours in one way or 
another. And actually, you know, NICE guidelines start with a definition of what it is they are dealing with, you know, and they say what is included and 
what isn’t included in that category. So, you know, I think that’s fair enough.” (Kim) 
 
“I suppose it’s all tied up in the evidence base and finding a language, a shared language and a common understanding about what we do. Erm, and I 
suppose I view them as being a way to have those conversations. And I like the NICE guidance in that they bring about a sense of consistency and they 
invite a kind of shared understanding.” (Jenny). 
 
Recognising the 
power of NICE 
endorsement 
“I mean I think when, I think access to psychological therapies for people with a diagnosis of schizophrenia has really increased as a result of NICE 
guidelines.” (Sam) 
 
“If psychological interventions are mentioned in the NICE guidelines, it almost justifies you being there.” (Amy) 
 
“NICE guidelines do put psychological interventions on the map.” (Amy). 
 
“Erm, but, if we didn’t have them (NICE), we wouldn’t have services like this, and whilst services like this aren’t perfect by any manner or means, 
they’re a bit better than what was there before.” (Naomi) 
Valuing 
NICE’s 
assistance in 
delivering 
evidence 
based practice 
Seeing NICE as a 
useful guide to the 
evidence base. 
“I think that they’re actually doing a good job. I think it’s actually quite wonderful thing to say ‘look, we’re pulling together what works, this surgery 
works, this medication works’. I think it’s actually quite wonderful. I think it’s really, really a very helpful guidance. And I think it’s helpful for therapy 
to have that guidance.” (Jan) 
 
“People might not have time to do it all themselves (reviewing the evidence base). I can see a busy GP, for instance, is quite happy just to look something 
up (in NICE guidelines).” (Morgan) 
 
“They provide a framework and an overarching knowledge base which summarises research in that particular area. And I think that’s a great strength, 
you know, if you don’t have to go through millions of literature searches to get at the same thing, NICE have done it for you.” (Catherine) 
 
“I think they generally brought a benefit in the sense that they’ve made – they bought clarity, really, about the evidence base and how systems of care 
should work and what interventions are effective, and that clarity is helpful.” (Sam) 
  
 
 
207 
 
 
 
Feeling that NICE 
provides a 
safeguard against 
bad practice. 
“You know they provide a safeguard as well, and I think you know you can't erm, just, I guess qualify and go off and do whatever you want, because it 
could be unethical, or it could be harmful, you'd hope that if you are trained as a clinical psychologist that you aren't going to be like that, and you're very 
thoughtful and caring, but we don't know do we, there might be some people out there, who erm, so it, it is a safeguard” (Amy) 
 
“It requires practitioners to think about what they’re doing and what they’re offering, and it’s quite good that there are some overarching general national 
guidelines, so that patients, when they come to a service, can be sure that what they’re, offered is actually based on something.” (Ronda) 
Considering it 
understandable to 
go with the 
evidence base in 
the climate of 
reduced resources. 
“If you're making funding decisions in an environment of reduced finances, less money, erm, you, it's a bit of a no-brainer, that there's this thing that 
looks good, looks as though it is helpful, but there's no evidence for it, and there's this other thing, that looks just as good, just as helpful, and there is 
evidence for it. I know which I'd put my money into.” (Paul) 
 
“You know, it comes back to I think NICE is, you know, there are only so many resources, you know, and there’s all the need out there, and how do you 
decide how you allocate those resources? And so I can’t be agai…, so NICE is an attempt to kind of help with that, and I think that’s fair enough.” (Kim) 
Feeling that 
the concerns 
about 
guidelines 
can be 
challenged. 
Acknowledging 
the problems with 
NICE guidelines 
but arguing that 
we would be 
worse off without 
them. 
“You know, it needs to evolve and it needs to improve, but actually I think it’s also important not to – or just to acknowledge that it’s – I think NICE has 
done really well. I think it is an admired institution.” (Sam). 
 
“Well I think if we didn’t have the NICE guidance I think we would be worse off, actually. And although I think there are lots of problems with them and 
I don’t like the way that they can be used, I think, fundamentally, I think they’ve been helpful in trying to bring together some consistency and just a bit 
of, you know, there’s a national understanding, isn’t it, about what people should be offered, and I really like that idea, you know.” (Jenny). 
 
“Erm, the argument is certainly a fair one, it's whether, whether I would conclude the same, I think the argument is slightly more complex than that.” 
(Paul). 
Arguing that it is 
possible for other 
therapies to 
emerge and gain 
NICE backing. 
“If you get enough momentum behind research the NICE guidelines will quickly reflect it.  I would imagine that mentalization-based therapy will 
become well-evidenced in the next few years, just because of the amount of work you see in that.” (Paul). 
 
 “And there is – the greatest thing that CBT has given us, and it is a great thing, is to actually, it’s a wake-up call, listen we need an evidence base. I think 
that’s been very valuable.” (Jan). 
 
“Erm, I think also, well I hope, that one of the things that will come out of the development of the whole NICE guidelines system is an emphasis on 
research and evaluation by other models who will gradually build up their own evidence base and will be able to erm challenge the dominance of CBT. I 
see absolutely no reason why that won’t happen. I’ve every reason to think that it will.” (Sam). 
Challenging 
criticisms of CBT. 
“I think the perception of CBT as a therapy is often very different to the reality of it, and that’s basically there for the people that advocate it, it's 
something you can almost prescribe like a medication, but it also, counts for a lot of people who stand against it. Er, I think there's a notion in some of 
the courses … some of the clinical psychology courses, that CBT is a collection of techniques, or that should be taught as a collection of techniques, 
which it most certainly isn't; in fact one of the things you do with trainees is you try and get them beyond being technique-led, in order to understand the 
principle; in order to best select what they're going to do.” (Paul). 
 
 “So I think it’s true that the NICE guidelines have started to categorise therapists and, you know, if you work as I do with people with the diagnosis of 
schizophrenia you need to be able to say that you do CBT. At the same time actually it doesn’t need to be limiting, because CBT is such a broad 
approach these days, and there are certain key things you have to do. But I think you’d find them across a wide range of psychological interventions. So I 
personally don’t find it particularly limiting.” (Sam). 
Seeing value in 
CBT. 
“yes, definitely and as you say it depends on the individual and not everybody erm, you know, to play devil’s advocate, not everybody wants to explore 
their past experiences or where things have come from, and they want, they're distressed in the here and now, they want to manage that now and so it 
might be that you do a piece of CBT work and that helps to get a formulation of why the issues developed, from a CBT perspective and what's 
maintaining them in the present, erm and have some strategies to manage that distress in the present and that might be all that person wants to do and 
that's absolutely fine.” (Amy). 
 
“And for all the faults that I’ve sort of seen to talk about about CBT, the fact is patients sometimes will come and ask for CBT because they’ve heard of 
it, they know what it is, or they think they do. So if it gives somebody a language to talk about their distress or their difficulties or their issues, that’s got 
  
 
 
208 
 
 
 
to be useful. So, again, it’s about the therapist being flexible enough to adapt and tune in to what it is they think they’re saying they want, and being able 
to talk to them in a way that they understand. And CBT, once you get it, I think can be quite simple and it is quite patient friendly.” (Catherine). 
 
“There are surely approaches, even CBT, it may be very beneficial to people. Actually, I have seen that be a beneficial approach to somebody. I'm not 
saying that the things that NICE guidelines recommend may not be helpful.” (Sophie). 
 
“I feel quite comfortable with the sense that CBT is a really useful thing for anxiety disorders, a useful model, you know, and I thinks it’s useful to have 
it, you know, to use the evidence and the research on that to kind of work in that way with iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii that may present with, you know, all of 
the anxiety disorders. So – and I feel quite comfortable with that. So maybe I’m sitting on the fence even more, even though I think, you know, my 
personal view on, you know, feeling more affiliated with the psychodynamic way of thinking.” (Kim). 
Understanding 
why the medical 
model was chosen 
by NICE. 
“I’m not sure it’s the best option. I think realistically it’s understandable that that’s how it started. I mean I think we can argue as psychologists that, you 
know, we don’t want to categorise people by a diagnostic system that isn’t itself evidence based. And all those arguments are very legitimate, but at the 
same time it all had to start somewhere, and I think it’s completely understandable that it’s started with the diagnostic system.” (Sam). 
 
“I’m not dead keen on doing it by diagnostic category really, erm, but I think I’m accepting of it that it’s just one way to do it and it’s good enough.” 
(Jenny). 
 
“Erm, so I guess then you're left with: is it good enough?  Does it do enough to justify its own existence?  To that extent, I guess the answer for me, is 
probably.” (Paul)  
 
“So, you know, it’s unhelpful that the medical paradigm and the diagnostic paradigm has kind of shaped them. But, you know, I think that has been much 
debated and I can understand why they have done that, because you have to use a paradigm and I guess one has to acknowledge that the medical 
paradigm has been dominant.” (Sam). 
Worrying 
that 
NICE can 
create an 
unhelpful 
illusion of 
neatness 
 
 
Feeling that 
guidelines 
can be 
misunderstoo
d or 
misinterprete
d. 
Admitting to not 
having a clear 
understanding of 
NICE guidelines. 
“Okay. My thoughts on NICE guidelines are mixed. Erm, partly, I think I don't know the contents of them inside out.” (Sophie). 
 
“That’s an element which, see I'm not sure now if my knowledge of NICE guidelines, but I'm not sure where that's mentioned, I think it probably is 
mentioned about cognitive assessments in NICE guidelines for schizophrenia anyway.” (Amy). 
 
“Only, well, I don’t think I know enough about how NICE works to really be able to have a clear opinion about that. But my feeling is that I’m probably 
not supportive of the approach that they use. There was something on the news, wasn’t there, about the economic formula that they use or something, and 
that it’s flawed or – I don’t know. But, no, I don’t think I understand their process, or I don’t think I know their process well enough to have a confident 
opinion about it. But, no, I really don’t like the way certain information is privileged by NICE.” (Jenny). 
Worrying about 
others misuse of 
NICE guidelines. 
“I still keep coming back to I don’t think NICE are doing anything wrong really. I think it’s just a shame that it’s so open to misuse, and I think it is being 
misused.” (Jan). 
 
“I think where it perhaps gets misinterpreted is when people think it is the voice that tells you what you should do, which I think then means that 
therapeutic and er professional guidance from the individual therapist, or the individual teams looking after in-patients, that it would be wrong for them 
to be entirely guided by the guidelines, because there’s certainly limitations to the guidance, and I think that most professionals who were aware of, you 
know, how the NICE guidelines came in to being, and the point of them, would be aware of that.” (Catherine) 
Highlighting that 
people may follow 
NICE without 
being familiar 
with the evidence 
it is based on. 
“It's difficult because I don't, I honestly don't think many people read erm the evidence base that erm, that's included in the NICE guidelines, when they 
say about all the RCTs, I think they have it as an appendix at the back don't they, I don't think many people go through and read all of that research and 
that evidence so I think there is just this idea well we know it's effective, we know it works, but I think it's a little bit blurry as to know how it works and 
in what particular outcomes and what area it's effective” (Amy). 
 
“You know, for iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii a lot of the time that research is very scarce, so it’s kind of like thinking ‘ok, they’ve given this recommendation, but 
actually the evidence for it’ – it almost makes it feel as if ‘NICE are saying that, so that means that that’s the best, you know, that’s the evidence based 
information’. And it might be the best evidence based information, but actually a lot of the times for research in iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii that evidence is more 
patchy. I think it’s getting better, probably. And I’m not, you know, I’m not an expert in knowing whether the evidence is good quality or not. And I 
  
 
 
209 
 
 
 
haven’t gone through every single article that the people obviously reviewed, but I’m sure that there’s a sense that actually there might not be a lot. And 
in some guidelines there is, you know, that’s stated clearly actually there isn’t a lot of evidence for this.” (Kim) 
 
“The NICE guidelines is saying CBT, what they actually have an evidence base for is actually the behavioural aspect of CBT. There isn’t a huge 
evidence base for the cognitive aspect of CBT, and certainly not for the cognitive aspect of CBT for iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii, it comes back to behavioural. And 
people don’t know that, they think ‘oh CBT will fix everything’. So it’s exposure therapy. Wow. We’re back to that.” (Jan). 
Feeling that 
managers can 
follow NICE 
guidelines without 
questioning their 
relevance. 
“Yeah, I'm aware that there are some NICE guideline meetings that happen in the trust and we get feedback, but they're off, and there are lots of things 
like gap analysis and are we doing what it says in the guidelines without necessarily questioning how relevant or applicable that is, in my opinion.” 
(Sophie). 
 
“We are still learning and we’re updating all the time, so what’s in the guidelines should not be seen as set in stone. If it’s like more a loose sort of 
guideline, then I think it’s fine to some extent. But I think there is a danger that erm, policy makers, erm, might not have the sort of full background 
understanding or the critical thinking that is necessary to assess the guidelines, and they might prescribe pathways for services that are too restrictive.” 
(Ronda). 
 
“If you were to get a manager who was, you know, particularly now we're getting more care pathways and payment by results, this is more likely to 
happen. This is more likely to be referenced what the NICE guidelines say. You could get somebody saying that's the only time you should be doing 
MBCT is with people who have had three or more episodes of depression who are in remission. In which case, we wouldn't be doing nearly all of the 
MBCT that we have been doing, you know, successfully over the last five years with people with a whole range of other issues.” (Morgan). 
Worrying that 
service users may 
misinterpret 
NICE. 
“I think families, you know, these days may read NICE guidelines and say, you know – it’s almost like it can be empowering for families if they think 
they need, you know, a certain intervention to kind of be able to say ‘actually, I think this is what we need’. However, families are not doctors or 
specialists in whatever field, and they might not get the diagnosis right. And that can be difficult. So, you know, NICE can be a problem in that way too, 
you know, of people expecting something because they think their child has bi-polar, you know, is one of the one’s that – you know, and you assess the 
child, you assess the situation and you don’t think the child has bi-polar, and that can create a bit of a conflict.” (Kim) 
 
“I wonder if that’s the way it’s been sold as ‘this is the best thing ever, this is what will help you, definitely, no matter what’. But that isn’t the case. That 
doesn’t help everybody. So if somebody feels – I think, again, that’s the thing with IAPT. If you go through the IAPT steps and somebody, for whatever 
reason, perhaps has been assessed as mild to moderate, but actually they haven’t disclosed everything that’s gone on and they haven’t got any better, and 
they’ve had CBT, then they think “well, I’m unfixable. I’m broken, I can’t be fixed”. And I think that can lose people and they don’t want to be seen by 
another psychologist because they think they’re just going to fill in another form or ask questions from a questionnaire or something. So it’s important 
that you’re not limiting the patients understanding of what’s happening, and they’re not just in one box when actually there’s a whole load of other things 
we could use.” (Catherine) 
Arguing that an 
absence of 
evidence is not 
evidence of 
ineffectiveness.  
“It’s a wonderful idea, but it needs to be a guideline and not be a final word, because, there are weaknesses, so for example, NICE themselves say this, 
that actually if something is not in the NICE guidelines it’s not evidence, that it is not effective, it’s just that there is a lack of evidence that it is 
effective.” (Jan). 
 
“Some of my colleagues would say, I can think of one person in particular who would say, that that's maverick and dangerous and that you're doing 
something, you know you’re messing with a model. You're doing something for which there's no evidence of its effectiveness, you know, I daren’t. That 
view, for me, comes under the naïve heading of erm, assuming that because something has attracted RCT funding it's the only thing that's effective.” 
(Morgan). 
 
“And I think it's also a little bit naïve to think that because, for example, there is some evidence for ACT, but the number of RCTs that has been done on 
ACT is quite limited. Erm, now just because there's far less evidence, RCT-type evidence for ACT, than for CBT in certain areas doesn't mean that it's 
less effective. You know it could mean that it's more difficult to evaluate what ACT does, using, the kind of questionnaires that are used don't pick up so 
easily what ACT does. It could be that there are all kind of political reasons why ACT therapists haven't been in positions of power where they've been 
able to draw out the funding money to do the RCTs. You know, you know, just because something hasn't got an RCT showing its effectiveness doesn't 
mean it's not effective.” (Morgan). 
 
  
 
 
210 
 
 
 
“you know, evidence is always changing, they’re based on our current understanding of the evidence but that doesn’t mean that something else that 
hasn’t been examined isn’t working.” (Ronda). 
 
Worrying that 
commissioners 
can view NICE as 
a way to limit 
spending 
“So I think in an era of shrinking resources there is always that potential for commissioners to see, to view the NICE guidelines as a kind of way to limit 
spending. And that would always be a concern.” (Sam).  
 
“I think if we weren’t in a recession, I know NICE predates the recession, but erm, you know NICE is now being used, can be used in the service of 
restricting the amount of resources given to certain kinds of approaches because they're not in NICE. So, I think that the recession is extremely 
significant in all this.” (Morgan). 
 
Believing that 
NICE is doing 
harm to service 
users. 
“Well, I think you’re on to something. And I hope that it doesn’t stop with you. This feels like research that needs to be picked up and be ongoing, 
because with best intention NICE are doing harm. That is the bottom line.” (Jan). 
 
“I think it can harm patients if you, for example, take the example of IAPT, where, you know, some of the principles that IAPT is based on is based on 
research where they’ve taken only a certain subsample of patients. You know, they have quite strict selection criteria for the studies, and this kind of 
client group might respond very well to a fixed number of sessions, for example, and of working within this model sort of very – in my view restrictive 
CBT model – but then if you take that in to the outside worlds, most patients are a lot more messy and you can’t actually fit them in to the same kind of 
boxes. And, you know, I hear time and time again from colleagues who work in IAPT “well, you do what you can in those 6 sessions” or even 20 
sessions, but it’s often not enough and then people come back. And I think, in my opinion, that is quite harmful, because I see patients time and time 
again who have more complex problems, who talk about being seen in a sort of shorter term way and often say well it opens everything up but then 
you’re just left with all of that stuff.” (Ronda). 
 
“I worry about that (pause) for the patients. I worry about that for, the denigration of our profession. And I worry that the NICE guidelines don’t, you 
know, the evidence doesn’t demonstrate all of the evidence. There’s more evidence out there that isn’t published.” (Naomi) 
 
“it is dehumanising of clinicians, it’s deskilling of clinicians, which can’t be good for the clinician or the client. And it’s definitely dehumanising of the 
client too.” (Jan). 
Experiencing 
guidelines as 
limiting 
 
Worrying that 
NICE guidelines 
may lead to 
neglecting other 
therapies. 
 
 
“Our Trust, for instance, has got lots of training programs that have been developed over the last few years in various things like IPT, EMDR, MBCT, 
CBT, all the therapies that are in the NICE guidelines and only the therapies that are in the NICE guidelines.” (Morgan). 
 
“I think there is a worry because if all the money, erm if all the evidence is behind CBT and family work, I think a lot more funding goes into developing 
those therapies at the risk of other therapies, being neglected or, maybe they won't get the funding or the time, erm to develop them and nurture them and 
see if they could be just as effective, or, or maybe they are not effective at all, in which case why would I, why should I be doing narrative work if it's 
not, if it's not helpful.” (Amy). 
 
“Yeah, it can become a bit of a vicious circle, you do enough research to get yourself in the NICE guidelines and then you attract more research money.” 
(Paul). 
Worrying about 
the dominance of 
CBT in NICE 
guidelines. 
“I worry that someone’s going to come along and make me do CBT all day, and that would kill me! I don’t think I could do it. So, yeah, no I do. I don’t 
know if I particularly – yeah, I suppose I am a bit worried. I’m more worried that somebody will come along and make me do CBT all the time. I think 
that would be really awful. I do mean for me personally, but I also mean, because I think, you know, CBT works well for some people, but I think it 
doesn’t work well for a lot of people, and so it would be really unhelpful if we’re all doing CBT. And I think it just isn’t helpful to have a ‘one size fits 
all’ approach. You know, so I really object to that.” (Jenny). 
 
“but I think it's almost like a, erm, there could be a bit of a ticking timebomb a little bit that erm, over time I think managers and other kind of 
commissioners and people will begin to realise that CBT isn't this magic curing thing. (Amy). 
 
“That’s my view about CBT coming out rather than NICE guidelines, but it kind of really all comes together.” (Naomi). 
 
“We all want what works, so if they’ve got something that works that’s great, but there’s something competitive about it and dismissive about it to other 
clinicians. It’s obvious that I’m not CBT besotted. It’s obvious. And I’m not CBT besotted because actually I can see it’s limitations. I would charge for 
  
 
 
211 
 
 
 
it if I thought it was fantastic. So, here’s the worry of an experienced clinician who’s actually being pushed into a corner and told ‘this is what you should 
do’, and it offends every judgement. Now, I’m – the NICE guidelines have also raised up EMDR, for example, and that’s something I do promote, and I 
do encourage, so in my own way I’m saying ‘well, look, there it is’, but why are we having this fight at all? EMDR is right at times, CBT is absolutely 
right at times, and at times it’s a combination, and at times it’s family therapy. What are we doing? So I think it’s a real lack of foresight in the NICE 
guidelines.” (Jan) 
Questioning the 
effectiveness of 
just providing 
short term 
interventions 
“erm, when I worked in primary care I used to see individuals with common mental health problems, so anxiety, depression, 6 to 12 sessions and I felt it 
was kind of quite helpful to contain and manage the distress, but I never really felt it got to, erm, or offered the opportunity to get to what the root of the 
issue was in the first place, so I often saw CBT as kind of putting a bit of a plaster on the problem rather than looking at the cause, and my worry is that, 
erm, we continue to look at therapy in that way and that NICE encourages us to look at therapy in that way particularly with advocating sort of family 
work and CBT work as being, erm, managing the distress now, in the here and now rather than really exploring the past experiences, or what might have 
led to developing the psychoses for example.” (Amy) 
 
“It may or may not be cost effective. It may be cost effective. That's probably quite a difficult question to answer. Is it cost effective to give somebody 
with complex difficulties six to ten sessions of CBT? Erm, you'd have to trace that person, what happens to them five years later when a similar problem 
occurs. Maybe they haven't fully resolved it the first time. They have to come back again, and again, and again. How do you compare that with giving 
somebody 50 sessions of relational therapy, er, where they may or may not need to come back. They may have internalised something more long lasting, 
I suppose. I think it's quite difficult to make those decisions about what's really cost effective actually.” (Morgan). 
Seeing value in 
approaches not 
recommended by 
NICE. 
“It’s not in the NICE guidelines. It’s too soon. So there are a lot of people who are not getting really good therapy. Cos it’s not in the NICE guidelines 
yet.” (Jan). 
 
 “So I like the idea that, you know, that it allows some discussion around different types of approaches, but I think it can also, the NICE guidance, I 
think, also can close down discussions about working in different ways. And so I think, you know, I think it opens up discussions within psychology, I 
think there’s more of a shared understanding where it opens up people to thinking ‘oh yes, I must refer for psychological therapy’, a bit of a shame that 
they often think ‘I must refer for CBT’” (Jenny). 
 
“The CBT research does fit nicely, all the criteria that NICE Guidance will set out, so obviously a lot of the NICE Guidance CBT is the recommended 
line of treatment, and things like that, from a psychological point of view. But I think that is to the detriment of the other types of work which can be 
incredibly effective for a lot of people.” (Catherine) 
Questioning 
the scientific 
integrity of 
the guidelines 
Questioning NICE 
reliance on RCTs. 
“Erm, I guess what's problematic is, erm, the type of evidence that's allowable and included in NICE and the type of evidence that's not included, so for 
example, all the research around the importance of the therapeutic relationship rather than the model in terms of effectiveness of therapy isn't represented 
in NICE to my knowledge, in a significant way anyway.” (Morgan). 
 
“You know, a lot of the times they use, you know, very pure kind of client groups with a very pure diagnosis, and single diagnosis, a lot of the time. And 
I know that there’s been developments, you know, kind of to try to do more than that, but a lot of the time the evidence that then is presented is on those 
groups.” (Kim). 
 
“I think partly they’re not always implementable, you know, NICE Guidelines. You know, like going back to the research they’re based on, a lot of them 
are based on like RCT’s where somebody has to have pure depression in their sample in order to carry out the research. But, realistically, I mean that’s 
always a limitation of RCT’s is that doesn’t paint an accurate picture of the kind of client groups you’re actually dealing with. And, certainly in my area 
of work, very complex, all sorts of things going on, it’s not one thing or another, you’ve got to take a person as a whole and you’ve got to work with the 
difficulty that they’re bringing to you.” (Catherine). 
 
“Well, except that. I think if you look at some of the actual CBT manuals that are used in research trials, they’re interesting things to read, but that’s not 
how I do CBT. I mean CBT that’s done in RCT’s is a certain kind of CBT, but it’s not reflective of CBT generally, I think, and I think there is a 
difference between what goes on in trials and what goes on in the real world, even within CBT. And of course that would be true of other kinds of 
therapies too.” (Sam). 
 
“You could ask a hundred experienced psychotherapists who work with dissociation to tell you exactly what they used that works, and a hundred of them 
  
 
 
212 
 
 
 
will tell you independently what they do, how they do it, and how that has an impact, and yet that’s not good enough. So I think that’s where it misses out 
on the experience and the expertise of really hardworking, well meaning, well informed and intelligent therapists who have got good things to say. And I 
think they’re perhaps ignored or not taken seriously enough, somehow, when, you know, then you’ve got other struggling therapists who have got their 
presentation in the room, but there’s no guidelines, but actually if the guidelines were a little bit more flexible, there would be. Do you know what I 
mean? Like if they put more research in it could be more helpful to the greater good.” (Catherine). 
Highlighting that 
the majority of 
evidence is based 
on working age 
adults. 
“Jan: Erm, so now all they want, especially – well, I’m  at CAMHS service so that’s all I can talk about, but all they want in a CAMHS service is CBT, 
and actually if we look carefully there isn’t an evidence base of CBT for children or for specific difficulties, but it’s still being waved as this generic 
‘look, look, look CBT does everything’ and clients are then coming in and saying ‘well I want CBT, whatever that may be’ and that’s what they want.” 
(Jan). 
 
“I feel like I have quite a flexible relationship with the NICE guidance because mostly they’re based on evidence and studies with working-age adults, 
and that doesn’t necessarily means it translates in to 
. And the evidence with iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii is really scant. So I think that’s where I feel 
like, you know, yes there were probably some things that translate fairly well in to later life, you know, PTSD is very similar however old you are, in 
terms of symptomology, but depression and anxiety more generally can present quite differently.” (Jenny) 
 
“I think it's also being really aware of the discourses that are used. 'Well, these are the generic guidelines. You shouldn't discriminate against that group 
because they're not mentioned in them.' It's interesting, but also, you have to be very aware of the kind of, actually, those guidelines aren't necessarily 
designed for those people and they might not be suitable, so actually, by forcing something on them, that's, in its own way, another form of 
discrimination, so you have to be very careful about how people play those sorts of lines.” (Sophie). 
Highlighting the 
difficulty in 
researching 
psychological 
therapies. 
“yeah, and I guess, and I think it depends on erm, what outcomes people are looking for what they're deciding as being what's helpful and what isn't 
helpful and how that's all defined, erm, because I know a lot of the other research that is out there about the common factors, so actually it's not really so 
much the intervention, the er techniques, so much as the relationship which is the biggest predictor of outcome, erm and I think that idea is hard to 
conceptualise and put into NICE guidelines, I mean it's hard to say what psychologists do half the time anyway.” (Amy). 
 
“I think it’s much harder to capture some of the things I think we’re working with, so I think, you know, if you think about Erikson’s stage 8, you know, 
Integrity vs Despair, how on earth do you measure integrity? You know, so I think there’s a problem with outcome measurements.” (Jenny). 
 
“I think they are biased towards the quantitative research, and not qualitative research. And that needs to change. I think NICE needs to realise that 
psychological therapies are not like medication and you can’t evaluate them in the same way, you need a broad range of evidence.” (Sam). 
 
“I just don’t believe that therapies are simple as you come and you do it and you feel better. I just think that’s a very linear model of time and change, 
and I just don’t believe that that’s how things work.” (Jenny). 
Arguing that CBT 
fits well with 
NICE whereas 
other therapies do 
not. 
“I think CBT also fits very nicely because it's the most medical of the erm therapies I think, and so I think it's attractive to psychiatrists and other 
professionals who can understand then, when it's in units, isn't it, it's almost like so many sessions is almost like a dose, of how much medication you 
need, erm, so it is, it's easy to communicate what psychology does if it's all languaged in this way, of CBT and numbers of sessions.” (Amy). 
 
“Research is usually based around symptoms, and the NICE guidelines reflect these things, erm and CBT's success is the success built around symptom 
reduction.” (Paul). 
“CBT lends itself to the kind of research that NICE guidelines likes.” (Sam). 
 
“The problem is that NICE guidelines they’re so rigorous, which is fine, you know, there’s a lot of rigorous – the research needs to be rigorous, but the 
problem is that, you know, if you’re from a different model, if you’re working with a different model that doesn’t pathologise in the same way then 
you’re not going to get the evidence from that model because it doesn’t fit with their, with their way of looking at research.” (Naomi) 
 
“If you're asking the Department of Health to fund a, a particular intervention they're going to say: show me that it works. It makes sense from their point 
of view, it's obviously an incredibly complicated answer that you have to give about you know, how you define recovery, how you define a therapy 
working.  I can't imagine some, one of the more traditional existentialist therapies like Yalom-based therapy, getting NICE backing because how they 
would define whether the therapy is working isn't immediately measurable, and it's that question of how measurable it is.” (Paul). 
  
 
 
213 
 
 
 
Having a 
problem with 
the medical 
model basis 
of NICE 
guidelines. 
Questioning the 
validity of 
diagnostic 
categories. 
“You could pick apart the whole thing (NICE) potentially on the basis of questioning the validity of diagnosis.” (Morgan). 
 
“I feel absolutely certain, myself, that the DSM-IV categories in mental illness are flawed.” (Paul). 
 
“The problem I have it’s probably with the diagnostic categories and the way NICE guidance is based around them. So I think, you know, PTSD and 
OCD are quite – I think they’re clearer in diagnostic categories than say something like GAD and depression, which I think within it has such breadth of 
symptomology.” (Jenny). 
 
“My issues with the DSM was more about the different powerful lobbies to get to influence it in the States.  Erm, if it was an entirely academic exercise 
just driven by, I don’t know, the leading minds in the field, a sort of academic utopian ideal, it would probably look very different.” (Paul). 
 
“I think that my reservations about them is the fact that they’re based around the diagnostic system that I don’t use, and so, for instance, the one most 
relevant to my job is the NICE guidelines for schizophrenia. But I don’t really believe in schizophrenia, I don’t think it’s a thing (laugh). So, you know, 
it’s unhelpful that the medical paradigm and the diagnostic paradigm has kind of shaped them.” (Sam). 
 
“I just don’t like the fact that it’s all done by this diagnostic category which, you know, lumps together a whole lot of people that don’t necessarily have a 
huge amount in common.” (Sam) 
Arguing that the 
medical model is 
dehumanising. 
“It’s too simplistic and it’s dehumanising for the clinician and particularly the client. I am this.” (Jan). 
 
“You can present it simplistically for surgery, you can present it simplistically for medication, but you cannot apply the same reporting to something like 
mental health. Because mental health can’t be compartmentalised. Because you have to take in to account that person and that person’s experience and 
that person’s context. You can’t just say CBT, that’s a good idea.” (Jan). 
 
“It’s understanding a set of problems by what they look like, and at it’s extremist form, applying erm, a protocol-driven erm, intervention that doesn’t 
really require a great deal of psychological-thinking and it is all about housing the problem in the individual rather than in the system, their experiences, 
their interactions with other aspects of their life.” (Naomi). 
 
“I think there was a sense of ok with eating difficulties this is what we do, you know, and I think it’s very much a medical mechanistic model, I guess, 
you know, if this is present then we do this. You know, this is the illness, we do this treatment. It’s medical model, isn’t it, whereas actually I think us as 
psychologists do more than that. We don’t do this is the diagnosis, this is treatment.” (Kim). 
Suggesting that 
there are 
alternatives to the 
medical model. 
“Well, there’s alternatives to dealing with people with psychological distress that aren’t medicalised. It’s psychological distress, it’s not medical 
distress.” (Naomi). 
 
“I think it’s really important to maybe move away from this very dominant medical model and really make it clear that actually there are some other 
models and not everybody agrees with this way of practising, and I think it’s quite important then to sort of, when people are too rigid about something 
like the NICE guidelines, to sort of point out the limitations.” (Ronda).  
 
“I think it’s completely understandable that it’s started with the diagnostic system. I think the main criticism at this stage is that that really ought to be 
under review, and maybe NICE should apply its own methodology to itself. And so what is the evidence base for the diagnostic system? And what is the 
evidence base for, you know, producing guidelines using a diagnostic system that itself isn’t evidence based? And it should be that process of reflection, 
should be occurring. I’m not sure it is, but it should be, because if they’re all about evidence based practice, you know, where is the evidence for the 
diagnostic system? Particularly a diagnosis like schizophrenia, it’s so contested, and I think if you look at the evidence it makes no sense whatsoever and 
you shouldn’t be using it in an evidence based system. It makes more sense to look at – if you’re going to look at psychosis, which is such a broad 
experience, it makes more sense to look at phenomenologically at, you know, paranoia or voice hearing or whatever. That might make more sense. It 
would mean that you might have more guidelines, but there would be more focus so presumably they would be more concise.” (Sam). 
  
 
 
214 
 
 
 
Arguing that 
routine practice is 
more complex 
than NICE 
guidelines. 
“When you actually sit in front of the actual patient, the problem is always that the model is fundamentally flawed, in my opinion, because it’s never as 
clear cut as that. So it’s never just OCD or just depression or just anxiety.” (Ronda). 
 
“You know, you have to use them carefully because they don’t – when you actually start applying them to individuals, they very quickly stop making 
sense.” (Sam). 
 
“Well their primary diagnosis might be schizophrenia, but if you wanted to use the diagnostic system as its designed, they pick up 3, 4, 5, 6 diagnoses 
including ones around personality disorder, maybe ones around mood disorders like depression. Now, of course, each NICE guideline – there’s a 
different NICE guideline for all those things, so then it becomes quite confusing. If somebody has a diagnosis of schizophrenia but also meets the 
diagnostic criteria for say emotional unstable personality disorder, which one am I supposed to follow? Because the NICE guidelines on schizophrenia 
would suggest 16 sessions of CBT, but, you know, that may not be enough and it may not be the most helpful thing for somebody who also has a 
disturbance of personality. So then they become difficult to make so much sense of when people have multiple complex problems. The diagnostic system 
itself is rather stretched because it tends to think of these things as separate when in fact of course they’re all part of the person’s experience. And the 
service you offer as a psychologist is a single service to a person, not of this group sort of set of separate diagnoses but to a single person who has a 
single stream of experience.” (Sam). 
 
“Actually, the people that I work with in this particular service, who aren't unique in terms of being complex, I think lots of people have multiple 
complexities in their different areas and different services, but they don't fit neatly into any one particular box at which you could potentially throw one 
particular guideline, or even a multitude of guidelines at.” (Sophie). 
Perceived 
level of 
pressure 
to be 
NICE 
complian
t 
 
Experiencing an 
underlying threat 
or pressure to be 
NICE compliant. 
“Yeah, yeah it can feel quite threatening actually, that there's almost an undercurrent of, of threat that if we're not doing what the NICE guidelines say, 
erm, erm, then we won't be commissioned, because I think NICE is quite a powerful force, and I think that erm, it does have an influence on everyday 
clinical practice definitely. yeah, I think erm, I think for me, I'd, I feel that I need to make sure I'm offering a CBT intervention.” (Amy). 
 
“It feels increasingly like it's the Bible. You know, its sort of, erm, anything that's not the word of God is kindof not really allowable. So, not amongst 
psychologists, but among, you know, more at a kind of, higher service level.” (Morgan). 
 
“I think these days you have to be trained in a NICE recommended therapy to get a job in the NHS. I don't think you would get a job in the NHS 
otherwise.” (Morgan). 
 
“In the Trust, as a whole, there is a rhetoric of us needing to adhere to NICE guidelines. The Trust does quite a few audits on NICE guidelines and how 
well we are using them.” (Ronda). 
 
Noting that NICE 
guidelines aren’t 
currently 
experienced as 
restrictive. 
“I can see that could become so if they were implemented in the wrong way, it could become restrictive or prescriptive, but I’ve never experiences them 
like that. There’s a sort of distant worry that they could be, but I haven’t actually experienced that. And I don’t think, certainly when NICE was created, 
that was never the idea. So I have some hope that it won’t happen.” (Sam). 
 
“I’ve never been asked in my job to quote NICE Guidance or to specifically use it.” (Catherine). 
 
“I personally don't feel the pressure to follow any particular guideline in this particular service. That might be because I haven't been told that's what I'm 
meant to be doing and I'm not doing it, or I have been told and I've conveniently forgotten, I don't know.” (Sophie). 
 
“So we don’t have that much – in the psychology team here – people have quite a sensible approach to the NICE guidelines, and we’re not under a lot of 
pressure to apply them rigorously.” (Ronda). 
Worrying that 
NICE could 
become more 
controlling. 
Worrying about 
the future. 
“It's not something that's overly restricted, how I work now. But I am concerned that it may do in the future.” (Morgan). 
 
“And given that commissioners have got less resources to play with, they might be more interested in commissioning services that more tightly follow 
NICE guidelines and therefore limit the possibility of providing something different or more than the guideline suggests. So at the moment it’s a distant 
fear, but I think it’s a realistic fear.” (Sam). 
Worrying about 
“Certainly under payment by results the care packages that are starting to come through connecting with the different clusters, you start to think well it’s 
  
 
 
215 
 
 
 
PBR. 
all getting rather prescriptive, where’s our freedom of movement in this, where’s our clinical judgement?” (Sam). 
 
“Yeah, ‘here’s the booklet with the guidelines. Go away and do it’. Yeah. Terrible. That would be my view, yeah.” (Catherine). 
 
“I think, as I've said before, that will get tighter and tighter as we move to payment by results and being commissioned to do...much more specific kind 
of commissioning for specific things. Specific problems using specific approaches. I think the area you are focusing on is very relevant because this is 
going to come to, closer and closer focus.” (Morgan). 
 
Acknowledging 
concerns for the 
future, but not 
being worried by 
them. 
“So I’m not too worried about that. I can see why that’s a worry for some people, but, no, I think in practice these things look more restrictive than they 
are, well in theory.” (Jenny). 
 
“Erm, (pause), erm, I guess I can envisage situations or scenarios, if they were to occur in my service, for example where some kind of treatment wasn’t 
given and questions were asked ‘why was this not done? This is what NICE Guidelines says, why did you not do that?’, that that would bring around 
perhaps more of a pressure to be able to justify why you haven’t done certain things. But I don’t think they would be able – because I think partly 
they’re not always implementable, you know, NICE Guidelines.” (Catherine). 
Beliefs 
about the 
purpose 
of, and 
future of 
clinical 
psycholog
y 
Worrying that 
the jobs or ID 
of CPs are 
threatened. 
Worrying about 
CBT therapists 
being seen as a 
cheaper 
alternative. 
“Erm, because of NICE, I think different universities are actually promoting CBT almost as a – so it’s filtered through to the universities. And I think 
that’s very dangerous that they’re promoting CBT as the most important therapeutic method. And I think that as psychologists we’re shooting ourselves 
in the foot, because you don’t need to be a clinical psychologist, a Doctor of clinical psychology to do CBT. With IAPT you can have lots of different 
grades of people actually doing it. So, it’s just a worry. I suppose for me somehow the nice guidelines and CBT have become fused.” (Jan). 
 
“I think that's why, there's a danger of, NICE guidelines do put psychological interventions on the map and its helpful cos they’re mentioned and its erm 
evidence-based so we know that it works to an extent, but there's a danger then, that it's erm, we're not fully understanding the scope of what 
psychological interventions offer, that it's not just CBT, because then there is the risk that the trust will just, erm I guess get rid of erm clinical 
psychologists who are expensive to train and to employee, and just employ CBT therapists, particularly as NICE guidelines say CBT, erm, other, rather 
than other, when in reality when you're doing a piece of work, which might be CBT orientated, as a clinical psychologist I will be bringing in lots of 
different therapy kind of techniques and models and formulations from different erm models of psychological therapies, so I don't think it's as purist as 
maybe NICE guidelines might encourage people to think.” (Amy). 
 
“Yeah. I think that’s an accurate concern. It isn’t something that I suppose has worried me in my role, but I know colleagues, I know friends, I know 
teams that have been completely kind of either downgraded in terms of their banding or, you know, whole teams of psychologists being laid off and 
these IAPT therapists or CBT therapists coming in.” (Catherine). 
 
“The Department of Health don’t give a fuck. They just want to know that these people have got better. They don’t care who does it. Us, precious, our 
preciousness, I mean it is precious. It is precious, and we should be precious about it, but we’re just seen as being precious.” (Naomi). 
Being keen to 
differentiate from 
single modality 
therapists. 
“That's the worry that I have that managers will see clinical psychologists as equalling CBT therapists, you know psychology equals CBT, erm and I 
think you can do a lot more than that and, so I think it could limit how psychologists are seen in the team.” (Amy). 
 
“It was a while ago, they said ‘so what is your CBT training?’, and I found that deeply offensive. I’ve got much, much more to offer than that, and CBT 
methods as it’s appropriate, I wouldn’t call myself a CBT therapist though. And I don’t think I need to be at the doctoral level to be a CBT therapist. I’m 
more than that.” (Jan). 
 
“I think that’s what I’m paid for. I’m not paid to be a CBT therapist, I’m paid more, and the reason I’m paid more is because I can be more creative. So, 
yeah, if I was paid to be a CBT therapist then I should be doing only CBT.” (Jenny). 
 
“Then when erm, we put jobs out to advert, they get upset if we are only advertising for clinical psychologists, which in the past our service lead has 
caved in on and has just advertised for a psychological therapist, and in giving preference to a clinical psychologist in the interview, but the advert has 
still been in this compromised position.” (Paul). 
 
“My short answer to that is, yes.  Erm, the controversial answer is, I'd do it better.  And my basis for saying this is that there was some research done a 
  
 
 
216 
 
 
 
few years ago, where they looked at rating CBT done by different professionals, and they based it blind, and very clearly, clinical psychologists stood 
out as just doing better CBT than single-model trained CBT therapists, nurse therapists and others. 
Erm, I, my sense is that that’s probably because the 
psychologist is more likely to understand the foundation principles of the therapy they're using.  They are less likely to get tripped up by the, all the 
kindof unexpected extras that clients come with.  That aren't always evident in the assessment.  They might, also, be more realistic about what the CBT 
as a therapy can achieve. Erm, whereas if you're trained in CBT as a single-model you're probably quite an advocate of it, you'll probably be in slightly 
more danger of overstretch in the therapy, so if you're giving 16 sessions you might try and resolve every issue in the formulation, and end up then 
resolving less because you’re more widely spread, than if you're more focused.” (Paul). 
 
“I think there is a world of difference between somebody who is a trained CBT therapist and somebody who’s a clinical psychologist who does CBT.” 
(Sam). 
 
“Erm, but they are restricted in what they can do.  Now, unfortunately, with these types of professions, people aren't always aware of what they can't do. 
So in physical health, it's reasonable that, say, a very highly qualified, very experienced modern Matron on a ward, erm, would be a very, very highly-
valued member of his or her team, but they would also be aware that if a patient needed a heart bypass it wasn’t time for them to suddenly scrub up and 
reach for a scalpel.  Whereas in mental health, erm, someone who has been trained as, say, a nurse therapist using just CBT isn't as aware of the things 
that they can’t do.” (Paul). 
Seeing NICE 
guidelines as a 
threat to 
integrative 
practice. 
“I think it is about locating – because I think there is this need to categorise how we work and have an identifiable pure model. I think it’s much harder 
to say, now, that we’re working in a sort of eclectic or integrative way. When I first qualified that was really common, and I don’t hear that so much 
anymore.” (Jenny).  
 
“It’s (integrative practice) seen as weak or a criticism, and actually I think that’s our biggest strength, and that’s what I mean by we’re shooting 
ourselves in the foot. As psychologists it would be nice if we actually worked to maintain our identity and what we have that’s special to offer.” (Jan). 
 
“I think, you know, and again it comes down to the kind of clinical psychology identity and where we fit. But I think the criticism of what is integrative 
is a fair one, you know (laughs). But, again, there is the sense of why should we kind of put everybody in to boxes, isn’t it, so psychotherapists do 
psychodynamic therapy, family therapists do systemic therapy and clinical psychologists do CBT or whatever it is that we do. So, yes, I think that’s 
right, and it’s frustrating at times. I think that’s true. But it’s a much harder point to argue in this day, and, you know, that’s a fair criticism of NICE, you 
know, in this sense that it needs to be evidence based, and how do you evidence base what psychologists do, what the strengths of psychology may be, 
which I think is to integrate and to formulate and to kind of be able to bring different points of view and different factors in to play, you know, and 
understand them. And how do you bring that asset, you know, that sense of what we can offer and make it relevant enough in this day and age of 
evidence based practice.” (Kim). 
 
“So I think it’s true that the NICE guidelines have started to categorise therapists and, you know, if you work as I do with people with the diagnosis of 
schizophrenia you need to be able to say that you do CBT.” (Sam).  
Highlighting the 
difficulty 
explaining what 
CPs do. 
“Maybe we should be better at explaining what clinical psychologists do, coming back to the sense of how do we evidence what we do? You know, and 
I think that’s fair enough. I think that’s a good question for us as a profession really, isn’t it?” (Kim). 
 
“There’s something unquantifiable about what a clinical psychologist brings, and it’s very hard to demonstrate that without actually just doing it.” 
(Naomi). 
 
“I think it's mainly, I think what it is, oh, I mean when you, if you're a clinical psychologist it's more about your approach and how you view things and 
your thought processes and your view of the world if you like, that's different, erm, and to try to communicate that is really hard.” (Amy). 
 
“I wish I could have a PAT answer. I’ve heard PAT answers for it but, you know, I just think they’re a bit tripe really. It’s just a different way of being. 
It’s a different way of operating in the team. You place yourself in a different part of the system erm, and you notice thinks and you take it further.” 
(Naomi). 
Arguing that CPs 
have bigger roles 
“But we’re only talking about therapy here. There’s a whole other things that psychologists do, and they are, they’re not being valued. They’re not being 
valued in an explicit way. Erm, because they don’t fit with anything. It doesn’t (pause) – because when I’m consulting, talking to a counsellor erm, 
  
 
 
217 
 
 
 
than just therapy. 
who’s saying ‘I hate these outcome measures, they’re awful. They get in the way of the therapeutic relationship’, and I’m talking with them about 
different ways of managing that and how they might be able to use them clinically and all these things, nobody – in a way that they can accommodate, 
because I can, tap in to their way of thinking as well as the CBT therapist way of thinking. No one notices that. No one says ‘oh, I’ve noticed that so-
and-so counsellor is now using the outcome measures. How did that happen?’ Nobody – so it’s things that the way of communicating, the way of 
understanding different members of a team, the way the system works. We do that, and it’s an additional thing that we do on top of the clinical work.” 
(Naomi). 
 
“you can demonstrate that in other ways, erm, rather than just on the individual one to one work, erm, so I run formulation sessions for the team and so 
I'll sit and we'll talk about a client for an hour, a case discussion and we'll formulate from different models, so then it can, I don't know if that's a 
personal thing that I'm trying to do to demonstrate that there is more to psychology than just the CBT or family therapy approach, so I think that's quite 
helpful.” (Amy). 
 
“There are also the more softer skills around erm, being able to formulate how well a team is functioning, which comes into a bit more into the clinical 
psychologists training.  If they haven’t done it in their training directly then they will at least have been expected to get an understanding about systemic 
models and systemic theory they would be able to draw on that in order to get their team to perform, to function better, more cohesively, reduce stress in 
the team.  Erm, whereas, other professions just may not view it in that way.  They may see team stress as being purely about financial or resource 
constraints, and be less able to work within that if they don’t control those elements.” (Paul). 
 
Arguing that the 
professional 
identity of CP is 
not threatened. 
“It’s very difficult. I think there might be a slight danger more at the primary care level. At the secondary care level, I’m not so sure.” (Ronda). 
  
“I mean our training is very much broader and, I think generally speaking, as a profession we’ve managed to maintain a really high standard so that I 
think, in general, a clinical psychologist who specialises in CBT is equipped to think in terms of first principles and to make these kind of adaptations 
and to reach groups of people who probably struggle, or couldn’t, fit in to a more standardised CBT approach. So it may be that people from other 
backgrounds can be trained as CBT therapists, but I think unless you have that breadth you will only be able to work in a particular way in which you’ve 
been trained. So I think clinical psychologists will always be needed, even if services become dominated by CBT, just because our training equips us to 
think and to work and to adapt. And to integrate because, you know, there are lots of things coming in to CBT these days, from other models, and we 
know those other models because out training’s broad enough, but if someone’s just trained as a CBT therapist it’s going to take them a lot longer to 
understand and to make use of that.” (Sam). 
 
“So we just don’t have the funding to be able to have a family therapist in each service and an art therapist and a CBT therapist. Do you know what I 
mean? So that’s why you do have psychologists because between us, you know, there are people who are, who prefer family therapy, and CBT, and 
mindfulness, and CAT and MBT, so between us we do have a lot of skills, and some of us have more than one, and so I think that’s why you’ve got 
psychologists because there’s less money so you do need people to work flexibly.” (Jenny). 
Reflecting on 
the views of 
others 
towards 
NICE 
guidelines. 
Seeing other CPs 
as having similar 
views. 
“I mean, I don't think my views are radically different from many of the people I work with, many of the psychologists I work with.” (Morgan). 
 
“I'd, I'd hope that other people erm, saw it how I see it, (laughs), cos otherwise, otherwise I'd feel like I was erm kind of just, almost just doing what I 
wanted and dismissing what the evidence base said, but I think erm, I think other psychologists would agree to an extent because otherwise why bother 
having clinical psychologists if you could just employ CBT therapists and family therapists, erm and you wouldn't need clinical psychology at all as a 
profession.” (Amy). 
 
“We did have a half day recently amongst our iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii psychology service across the Trust, and we talked about how we decide what we offer 
people therapeutically, and pretty much everyone is working similarly, you know, in terms of being formulation driven, no-one was really working, you 
know, ‘if this person’s presenting with this diagnostic category, therefore I must offer them this’. No-one was working with that.” (Jenny). 
Highlighting a 
difference of 
views amongst 
CPs. 
“I think CBT therapists would view that differently. I think everybody else views it the way I do. Us and them. I actually mean a clinical psychologist 
who favours CBT and who, heaven forbid, may have been almost totally trained up in CBT, that they’re actually coming out of their training with very 
little else. Very concerning. So they would like what’s going on with NICE guidelines, but I cannot see anybody else who does.” (Jan). 
 
“I think this approach of dividing mental health problems into different categories and then saying ‘we have a treatment for all of these disorders’ is a 
very psychiatric one. And I think in psychology the discipline is a bit divided anyway. In my opinion there are some people in the discipline of 
  
 
 
218 
 
 
 
psychology who are failed psychiatrists, because they very much adhere to this kind of model, especially if you think about CBT models, yes we have 
social anxiety, this is the prescriptive treatment, if the person administering the treatment does it in the right way then the patient should get better. And 
it’s just too simplistic.” (Ronda). 
Valuing the 
difference of 
views amongst 
CPS. 
“Well I think it’s nice that there’s some people who are in favour and some who are against. That’s good, that opens discussion, it opens thinking, it 
opens opportunity to share, to – we want to be effective.” (Jan). 
 
“I think it’s fine to have different views on these things. I think what’s not fine is to not hear that there’s different views.” (Jenny). 
Highlighting a 
split between 
researchers and 
clinicians. 
“So I’m kind of smiling about that because in the end, you know, there’s probably, within psychology there’s going to be, you know, psychologists that 
actually very much want to be involved in research and are very good scientists, and others that are more of practitioners. You know, and I’m sure there 
are some that are equally, you know, 50/50, but probably some people sit more on one side or the other. And I would say I sit more on the practitioners 
side, and less research side.” (Kim). 
 
“Maybe he's not, maybe he’s not very comfortable with the chaos, I don't know. You know, I don't know. I don't know the man. I don't know, maybe 
they're kind of in their… they're prominent research figures. They're very big in their areas of panic and OCD or what have you, and maybe they’ve got, 
maybe they're more in their ivory towers, as people call it, doing their research, you know, rather than being on the front line seeing how things actually 
are. I think that's like a massive thing, isn't it? Boris Johnson doesn't know how much a loaf of bread and a pint of milk costs. Why would he? It's that 
kind of detachment from those kinds of things, and I think that's why you can't detach the context of NICE guidelines from the power structures that 
we're in.” (Sophie). 
 
“I mean in the NICE guidelines there are people who know what clients look like, but David Clarke he (laugh) – he just doesn’t see people that we see. 
In my mind, you know, when he talks about clients – I’ve seen him speak – he talks, his frame of reference is middle class, white middle class, you 
know, he talks about people with panic disorder throwing up or wanting to throw up in Marks & Spencers – our clients don’t want to fucking throw up 
in Marks & Spencers, they’re down in like a deprived area of Woolwich, like in the pound shop, haven’t got enough money to buy their kids – it’s not – 
the social circumstances are not, the same and he doesn’t – my concern is that people at the top of the profession, haven’t really seen the grit of the 
profession, and so when they’re making decision about what’s going ahead based on the research that they’ve done, erm, they’re going to be biased.” 
(Naomi). 
 
“Well I think some of the researchers who I’m thinking about, they do work in very sort of specialised centres, and they would then see that kind of 
patient group who might be also eligible for their studies. And those people respond – maybe their disorder, you could package their problem up much 
more neatly because it’s just not as complex, and then they might respond to a very narrow model, so, it might be that their clinical world is nice and 
neat like their research work, because it’s a very specialised service. Yeah, it has certain entry criteria, even in to the service.” (Ronda). 
Reflecting on the 
views of other 
professionals. 
“I’ve met a lot of clinical psychologists now and I have more in common with all the clinical psychologists even when they’re really different from me 
than I do from a CBT therapist. Especially a nurse CBT therapist.” (Naomi). 
 
“Erm, well I would say they thought they were absolutely brilliant, you know, and there’s no problems with them whatsoever and that’s what we should 
do. All the time. (laugh) Because their training and their profession has always been within that medicalised model.” (Naomi) 
 
“Yeah, I think definitely something as a guidance but I think that my view differs to maybe how erm managers and commissioners and other colleagues 
might view them.” (Amy). 
 
“I’m always really impressed that a lot of the doctors, doctors as in psychiatrists, come in to contact with, they know ‘oh, I’ve read a paper the other day 
and they said this’, and you’re kind of like ‘yeah, great’, you know, because probably, you know, that’s good they keep up with the research. But a side 
of me also does wonder whether they, yeah, kind of hold researchers as kind of ‘this is the Holy Grail, and this is, you know, this is the answer to – this 
is what we should do because this paper says so’. Erm, I think that goes with the training they had, and again coming back to the medical model, you 
know, where there’s a diagnosis, you know, and this is the treatment, you know, and this is what you do. And I think that has to do with the training and 
how it goes. So, yes, possibly (pause) less sceptical on, you know, possible doctors, medical doctors, may be less sceptical about the research than us 
psychologists are.” (Kim) 
  
 
 
219 
 
 
 
 
 
Highlighting 
the key skills 
of CPs 
Suggesting that 
CPs research 
skills put them in 
a position to 
interpret the 
evidence base. 
“I think also because we’re trained in research methods and the training is at doctorate level, most, perhaps not all, but I think (laughs) most clinical 
psychologists do like to keep in touch with the literature and the research and to remain abreast of developments in their area of interest. And I think 
that’s an enormous asset, and if you do research yourself even better, but that simply to remain in touch with it is important. And I don’t think that’s 
particularly emphasised in, in a standard CBT training, but actually it adds huge value. So, you know, my knowledge and practice now is hugely 
different from when I trained 20 years ago. I got a one hour lecture in CBT for psychosis 20 years ago, and there was no suggestion I should actually do 
any (laughs). So, you know, most of what I do now I’ve learnt since. So I think that emphasis on continuing professional development on a familiarity 
with, and regular use, of the research base, maybe doing research ourselves it’s something we bring that other, CBT practitioners who aren’t clinical 
psychologists rarely have, they might but it’s rare, I think, whereas it’s routine for us.” (Sam). 
 
“As a clinical psychologist you are much better placed to understand the research and the evidence. I think someone who has been a low intensity 
therapist and then a high intensity therapist, just hasn’t had that training in research and evidence and won't be able to unpick it.” (Paul). 
 
“I would expect a clinical psychologist to have a degree of knowledge and understanding of research and of the basis of the guidelines to understand, 
back to again, the limitations of them so that they weren’t thinking “oh, my manager’s throwing that set of Guidelines at me, I’ve got to do everything it 
says”. I think, you know, most people with the qualifications we have could argue with their manager appropriately, if necessary, or could look, you 
know, with kind of an open mind at the Guidelines and assess their opinion on their patient.” (Catherine). 
Valuing CPs 
training in a 
variety of 
therapeutic 
models. 
 
“I really think that’s a, you know, a treat because there aren’t, to my knowledge, many other types of qualified practitioners out there who are exposed to 
that level of formal training and wide and diverse models and treatment interventions on offer. And I think that is a great strength of a clinical 
psychologist working in Britain today.” (Catherine). 
 
“You need to be able to call on those different psychological theories and models in order to see which one best explained who you're in the room with.” 
(Paul). 
 
“You know, there are lots of things coming in to CBT these days, from other models, and we know those other models because out training’s broad 
enough, but if someone’s just trained as a CBT therapist it’s going to take them a lot longer to understand and to make use of that. So I think we always 
have an advantage.” (Sam). 
Valuing 
individualised 
collaborative 
interventions. 
Considering it 
important for 
interventions to be 
based on 
individualised 
formulations. 
 
“Actually, the people that I work with in this particular service, who aren't unique in terms of being complex, I think lots of people have multiple 
complexities in their different areas and different services, but they don't fit neatly into any one particular box at which you could potentially throw one 
particular guideline, or even a multitude of guidelines at. You know, you need to have that, you know, overarching perspective with some basic 
principles of how to understand what might be helpful, what's going on, the kind of assessment and formulation skills, that, obviously, the cornerstone of 
clinical psychology.” (Sophie). 
 
“you know, when I make a decision it has a thinking behind it, you know, and we do go back to the formulation, you know, so this child is presenting 
eating difficulties, but actually this is much more of an anxiety, associated with anxiety, rather than anything else, or it could associated with an 
attachment disorder rather than an eating disorder per se, or, you know, in a neglect context or whatever it is. You know, and so I can’t just then be 
making those parents feed that child, because actually I have to address the anxiety, which actually NICE guidelines say I should be doing this for 
(laughs). So even though on the surface this child is very thin and they’re not eating enough, actually there’s all this other stuff that we’d then need to 
address, and I’m justifying why I’m doing this in this way because of this.” (Kim). 
 
“As it would have come out of a psychological formulation to begin with, it would, hopefully, stand more of a chance of being the right problem to 
focus on. Thinking more about parsimony in terms of interventions.  You know, if there's one bit that’s just maintaining all the other bits that are 
happening, focusing your time on that.” (Paul). 
Highlighting the 
importance of 
evaluating 
individual 
interventions. 
“And I think understanding the evidence base means that I have an understanding of what elements are likely to be most helpful, and that’s as far as it 
goes. I mean beyond that it’s a question of the evidence of the actual individual therapy that you’re doing, and evaluating that. And it might be 
somebody’s prepared to do measures, but even if they’re not you can have a conversation about it. You know, I always build in regular reviews so that 
we pause for thought about is this helpful, is this working, is there something we need to do differently? And at the end always having a final session in 
which we think about what’s been helpful, and I ask for feedback.” (Sam). 
 
  
 
 
220 
 
 
 
“But if I were to say oh well yeah I'm doing a piece of psychodynamic work with this client dur dur dur, erm they might say well that's not mentioned in 
NICE guidelines why are you doing that and how do you know if it's working or not. Whereas you know, I know if something is working if somebody is 
continuing to see me and telling me it's helpful.” (Amy). 
 
“I'm not against evidence-based work. I think it's important to evaluate what you're doing in different ways and I do that. I wouldn't want to continue 
doing something that clients were telling me was not helping but I don't feel I need NICE guidelines to do that.” (Morgan). 
Valuing 
collaborative 
decision making 
with service users. 
“Erm, so you know I would be much more interested in, rather than just referring to the evidence, whether it's in NICE or not, I'd be more interested in 
having a collaborative conversation with my client about what the issue was, what they needed, what they thought might be helpful. I would want to get 
regular feedback in the session from them about whether they felt what I was doing, what we were doing was helping them or not helping them. I would 
want to tailor my approach according to that individual more than what may or may not have got published.” (Morgan). 
 
“And, certainly in my area of work, very complex, all sorts of things going on, it’s not one thing or another, you’ve got to take a person as a whole and 
you’ve got to work with the difficulty that they’re bringing to you. Again, you know, you can’t do psychology on someone, they have to be an active 
part of that sort of treatment, that kind of pathway, and that’s very much where I sit as a therapist.” (Catherine). 
 
“I always want to meet with them and I always want to talk to them about psychological approaches and have a discussion with them about whether they 
feel it might be a useful thing for them. But I tend to do that leaving it wide open in terms of what that might mean. I don’t think of myself as making a 
very prescriptive offer because I want them to participate in deciding what shape or form that will take.” (Sam). 
 
“I think it would be a very worrying position to be in if psychologists did think that there was a ch-ch-ch-ch-ch, a do this, do this, do this, and that would 
be okay. I think that fundamentally misses the point about engaging with another person on a collaborative level, to genuinely understand what it is that 
they're experiencing, and to be very mindful of your own assumptions and judgments about what is acceptable. What is distressing, what isn't 
distressing, and what is positive for that person. Actually, that kind of facilitation of, not even helping, because that also implies a power imbalance, but 
sometimes, just going back to some real basics about listening to what that person is going through.” (Sophie). 
 
 
 
Arguing that it is 
difficult to detach 
NICE from vested 
interests. 
“Well, I mean, you know, you can think of a lot of these kind of discussions as discussions about people shoring up their own power base can’t you. So, 
you know Psychiatrists will be in favour of diagnosis because that's what they do, and that will shore up their power base. Psychologists will talk about 
formulation because that's what they do and that will shore up their power base if that became the currency. NICE guidelines overwhelmingly support 
CBT, so it's no surprise that CBT therapists might you know be a bit more positive about them. You know, its, if you took out people's personal 
investment and bias, and the benefits to them in their particular profession, I'm not sure you'd have much of an argument left on any side.” (Morgan). 
 
“And I think you might even see more of the tension, because of the cuts to the health service, every sort of professional body needs to fight for their 
existence, it needs to fight for jobs and for jobs on higher bands and sort of the hierarchy and, you know, so people have certain investments in certain 
things being endorsed so it gets played out on a sort of political level, and it’s not necessarily always about which treatment works.” (Ronda). 
 
“Actually, at the end of the day, you're probably going to be sitting with somebody who may have come to you in some form of distress or turmoil, and 
actually, what they need is to be heard, listened to, and given some empathic kind of human contact and you know, there's no NICE guidelines that can 
say that, and there's no medication, there's no money, there's no value in selling that. That's another thing, as well, isn't it, that people kind of sell their 
approach? If NICE guidelines recommend this particular thing, 'Ooh, join this new CBT for OCD course.' It costs you £300 for a day to know and do 
this NICE-approved da-da-da-da. Yet you can't detach those sorts of things from those.” (Sophie) 
 
“'Oh, NICE guidelines recommend it.' Okay, great, yes, wonderful. We can pat ourselves on the back for doing something that people are going to be 
approving of. Okay, great. ‘Yes, you can have funding for this therapy that so-and-so is running who developed the NICE guidelines.' Wonderful. 
Where is that money going? Has it got a little TM market? (Sophie) 
 
Having a 
flexible 
relations
hip with 
Meeting 
NICE 
halfway. 
Considering it 
important to work 
within the 
language of NICE 
and 
“There’s a point that we have to find a way of arguing our point, you know, about integration, about – but we have to use, to do that I think we have to 
join the language, we have to kind of work within NICE, with NICE guidelines, with evidence base practice and try to find a way. Because otherwise, 
again, we’re just going to be seen as very polarised.” (Kim). 
 
“I mean, you know, we’re competing against drug companies, really, so, erm, and erm, trying to demonstrate that drugs don’t necessarily get to what the 
  
 
 
221 
 
 
 
guideline
s 
categorisation. 
problem is. So, if this drug is for this then we need to have a psychological therapy for this. I think it creates – I think it has erm, I think it has created 
power, but it’s also been very divisive.” (Naomi) 
 
“I think that might relate to just, a kind of scientist practitioner loop that a lot of the research is published in the States for, too, and they use DSM 
language in categories, and if we want to publish here in the U.K. erm, we probably want it to be U.S.-friendly.  For example, we'll format in APA 
guideline, and use DSM language.” (Paul). 
 
“I think this rhetoric of ‘we should work with it’ is probably – I mean you have to sort of work, because a problem is if you go work in a service, in a 
sort of everyday life, and if you go around and you make this your mission and you constantly argue against everything other people are saying, I think 
you will just create opposition and it wouldn’t get you anywhere. It’s a sort of political playing field, and I think very much that we need to work on this 
and we need to find ways of changing it, and I think some of that needs to come from within.” (Ronda). 
Considering it 
important to 
highlight the 
limitations but 
continue to use 
NICE. 
“What I think is important is just continue to be aware of the limitations of all this, of NICE guidelines and the research where these recommendations 
were based from, and all those sorts of things just continue to be sceptical, be aware of the limitations but continue to try to gather more evidence, to 
continue to try to get better research protocols.” (Kim). 
 
“But, like I say from the beginning, I think having that guidance and that framework can never be bad to have it, absolutely not, but an understanding of 
the limitations or how they can be used.” (Catherine). 
 
“I'm not saying that the things that NICE guidelines recommend may not be helpful. I guess it's the lack of thought that might go into the collection of 
the evidence. Like I said, it's not about throwing the baby out with the bathwater. It's about being very clear and honest about what you're doing, why, 
and when you're going to use it.” (Sophie). 
 
“Erm, I think, I think it’s helpful to have guidelines, and I think it would be a shame if we didn’t have something like the NICE guidelines. So I think 
it’s a good enough system. I think it is just about educating the people who use it to use it intelligently.” (Jenny). 
Wanting NICE to 
review its 
approach. 
“If there’s no guidance – I’ve a little bit of a panic about letting go of NICE, and I’m not particularly invested in it. So if I’ve a little bit of a panic, so 
would other therapists. And it does seem to be something about in these uncertain times to have least have something. Erm, on the whole though, I think 
it would be a good idea to (pause) – I mean what you’re doing is interesting because you’re doing an audit on NICE itself, which is why I responded. I 
think it’s a nice idea. NICE obviously surveying everyone, and you’re stopping and saying ‘is NICE helpful for mental health?’ And I think it deserves 
further research. So perhaps I would say that I’m not sure that it should be there, I’m not sure it shouldn’t be there. I think it needs to be absolutely 
reviewed, which is what you’re doing. And I like that a lot.” (Jan). 
 
“You know, they refresh their guidelines every 5 years, why can’t they look at, you know, the overall framework they’ve got for the guidelines, because 
it isn’t evidence based and it needs examination. So I wouldn’t say it was a good start or even the best start, but it was an obvious place to start and an 
understandable place to start. It’s got the whole thing started. Yeah, but it does need to develop. And I don’t think anyone should feel entirely happy 
with it.” (Sam). 
 
“I think the main criticism at this stage is that it really ought to be under review, and maybe NICE should apply its own methodology to itself. And so 
what is the evidence base for the diagnostic system? And what is the evidence base for, you know, producing guidelines using a diagnostic system that 
itself isn’t evidence based? And it should be that process of reflection, should be occurring. I’m not sure it is, but it should be, because if they’re all 
about evidence based practice, you know, where is the evidence for the diagnostic system? Particularly a diagnosis like schizophrenia, it’s so contested, 
and I think if you look at the evidence it makes no sense whatsoever and you shouldn’t be using it in an evidence based system.” (Sam). 
 
Using NICE to 
suit our needs. 
“Well, it supports EMDR, but the CBT therapists will discount that, just as I discount the CBT promotion…Yes. That’s the problem is that we actually 
use it to suit ourselves. Yeah, I do. (Pause, then laughs) If it was more grounded in reality, it would be a good thing. But it doesn’t feel like it, it feels 
like I can just pick it up and drop it down as it suits me. So I use it to suit my own ends.” (Jan). 
 
“So, it's almost as if, the, erm, the fact that something features in NICE is your kindof political doorway into, into the er heavenly realms. And you 
know, once you're in, you know, you can kind of play around a bit, kind of thing. But if you don't have the key to that door, you’re not in the NICE 
guidelines, you can't really start. It's a bit of a fudge, I think, because people are trained on the basis that this therapy is NICE approved, but they're then 
  
 
 
222 
 
 
 
ending up doing it with groups of people that would not be NICE approved.” (Morgan). 
 
“So I would say I’m aware of them, but in my clinical practice I would go over and above the NICE guidelines. I think sometimes you can use the NICE 
guidance to make an argument for certain lengths of treatment, you know, if there’s some sort of conflict around how long should this person be seen or, 
this person has already had two courses of therapy, we shouldn’t give them any more. Sometimes you can actually use the guidelines to make a case.” 
(Ronda). 
 
Using NICE as 
guidelines, not 
instructions. 
“So it's, it is important to, erm, to work with what NICE guidelines are saying, but in the back of my mind I'm always thinking well it is guidelines and I 
know that there is emerging evidence for other, other interventions, or maybe a combination.” (Amy). 
 
“Erm, in my own practice, in terms of working with patients, I think it is important to be aware of the NICE guidelines, and it is important to be aware 
of the evidence. But often when you actually sit in front of the actual patient, the problem is always that the model is fundamentally flawed, in my 
opinion, because it’s never as clear cut as that. So it’s never just OCD or just depression or just anxiety, and in practice I would say I go much more with 
the transdiagnostic approach and I sort of pick and take from the different guidelines.” (Ronda). 
 
“So I follow the NICE guidelines in the sense that I think all of these people should have access to psychological therapies. I’m not specifically going to 
say ‘here I am, offering you 16 sessions of CBT’, because I don’t want to start like that. It doesn’t feel collaborative, it doesn’t feel a helpful beginning. 
So whilst I know in my mind that the NICE guidelines says I should do that, I go with an open agenda and say, ‘Well, let’s think about’ – and many 
people, when I meet with them, are tentative and we might make an initial contract to meet 3 or 4 times to talk about – for some people it might be to 
talk about the fact they’ve got problems sleeping. They don’t want to talk about psychosis at all. And it’s only once they’ve got to know me and I’ve got 
to know them a little bit that the agenda changes and we agree to talk about maybe more difficult things, like a psychotic experience. So by the end, or 
10 sessions in, we might be doing something you could call CBT psychosis. But we may not have started like that.” (Sam). 
 
“erm, I see them as being quite broad, and they’re guidelines, so in my mind they're not, erm, they are something which is open to interpretation.” 
(Amy). 
 
“Erm, I mean most of the time, as far as I can ever see, its, you know, just says CBT. So it’s actually quite an unhelpful guideline in some ways, because 
what sort of CBT are we going to talk about? Third wave methods? Mainly B or are we going to talk about mainly C? It leaves it wide open to 
interpretation. That suits me, as a practitioner.” (Naomi). 
 
“I guess, you know, I tend to see them as guidelines. I take the words kind of literally. So, for me, it feels like it’s useful in providing a sense of 
direction, or of what might be useful in thinking of a particular disorder/diagnosis, whatever you want to call it, client group. But, for me, they’re 
guidelines, rather than somebody telling me what to do. So, in that way, when I look at, you know, because they’re guidelines, I find it really useful.” 
(Kim). 
 
Valuing having 
excuses as to why 
not to follow 
NICE guidelines. 
“So on the one hand it’s very frustrating that we’re supposed to work to NICE guidance that don’t really come from our client group, but on the other 
hand the advantage is that we can say ‘well, they don’t really fit our client group’, so, you know, we can retain a bit of protection from that, I think.” 
(Jenny). 
 
“I think the field in which I work, I feel quite lucky that NICE Guidance isn’t pressed upon me to use, as such.” (Catherine). 
 
“I kind of don’t want to say this because I don’t want you to publish this and it to be known, because actually it’s lovely. I think we’ve a lot of freedom 
in iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii services. Yeah, please – I kind of don’t want you to write that (laughs). Because I think it might get taken away, because I don’t think 
people realise.” (Jenny). 
 
“I personally don't feel the pressure to follow any particular guideline in this particular service. That might be because I haven't been told that's what I'm 
meant to be doing and I'm not doing it, or I have been told and I've conveniently forgotten, I don't know, but there aren't the guidelines that are 
applicable to our service users.” (Sophie). 
  
 
 
223 
 
 
 
Not 
advertising 
the way one 
practices. 
Being secretive 
about ones’ views. 
“I don't think my views are radically different from many of the people I work with, many of the psychologists I work with. Erm, I wouldn't say them 
publicly in a meeting with managers. Erm, but er, I don't think they're particularly unusual views amongst psychologists, probably.” (Morgan). 
 
“Well I, well I certainly wouldn't advertise what I do to the managers.” (Amy). 
 
“It's certainly affected the services that I work in and the culture of the services. The very fact that I've had to check with you about why what I said 
earlier was going to be anonymous is an indication of how tight and controlled the culture is really.” (Morgan). 
 
Note - before we started recording, Naomi made a point of checking that the door to the room was definitely closed and noted that she did not want 
anybody listening in on our conversation. 
Ignoring NICE. 
“Okay. Erm, well, I don't use them. I can feel the pressure from my service and my managers and erm, it's in the water, isn't it. It's in the general culture 
now. But you know, I do iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii with all kinds of people who fall outside of what NICE say I should be using. I do iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii with all kinds 
of people. I use other approaches that aren't in the NICE guidelines at all, like iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii. Er, I do what I see to be effective. I'm not 
against evidence-based work. I think it's important to evaluate what you're doing in different ways and I do that. I wouldn't want to continue doing 
something that clients were telling me was not helping but I don't feel I need NICE guidelines to do that.” (Morgan). 
 
“I think they're one of those things that I read and I might either think that it doesn't apply, or we're doing it anyway, or that kind of makes sense but I 
don't necessarily hold them internally, go, 'Oh, I'm doing what it says in the NICE guidelines.'” (Sophie). 
Labelling an 
intervention as 
CBT when its 
more fudgy 
around the edges. 
“I think – do I think it’s ok to do CBT and be…? I think I do tend to try and use one model when I formulate, but I do think I draw on different 
approaches when I work with somebody. So, I think I might – if I was formulating somebody using a CBT model, then I would probably say I’m doing 
CBT, even if I’m not doing, you know, even if it’s a bit fudgy around the edges.” (Jenny). 
 
“yeah, I think erm, I think for me I'd, I feel that I need to make sure I'm offering a CBT intervention, erm, but like I said I guess in reality what you are 
doing in the clinical room might be quite creative erm drawing on different models” (Amy) 
 
“I do use CBT for psychosis quite a lot. I’m quite familiar with that model. I know that that’s an approach that does work with a lot of people and, you 
know, I’m working with some of my assistant psychologists to give that model of treatment. So I will feed back to the team that that’s what I’m doing, 
broadly, with that person, but that doesn’t mean that I am only doing CBT for psychosis with that person, I would bring in DBT elements, for example, 
if that was thought to be necessary, or more kind of systemic or schema focused work if – because for me I guess it just depends on what language 
you’re able to use with the patient that you’re working with, and what languages they use. You know, people who like schema work will talk with their 
voices in the sense of “one part of me thinks this” or, you know, “one part of me thinks this”, and you can very quickly bring in the schema focus, things 
like that. But a lot of the therapies are also very similar to each other. So, you know, it’s not always the case that you’re just doing CBT, you’re often 
doing other things. But the broad model you might be working with, in terms of session by session might well be a CBT framework.” (Catherine). 
 
“I think, you know, you could easily then fall into the trap of saying ‘ok, let’s just call it CBT to satisfy, you know, those who make those decisions, but 
what we do in reality is actually very different’. I think there’s a danger in doing that because then you’re sort of buying in to the model and you’re 
saying ‘yeah, I’m doing the CBT and it works’ rather than saying ‘actually, no, I wasn’t doing CBT, and it still works’.” (Ronda) 
 
“you fudge, not fudge, but you just kind of make what you do fit into a particular guideline.” (Sophie). 
Being NICE 
concordant. 
Drawing on 
different models 
and integrating 
into CBT. 
“I consider myself to be pretty integrative, but kind of try and erm ground it in CBT so that I can think that I’m doing CBT.” (Naomi). 
 
“You can integrate – I quite often make use of psychodynamic or systemic ideas which I might, you know, bring in to my CBT work. So my work might 
be broadly CBT but there might be a session in which we’re, you know, talking about maybe family relationships, and I need to be thinking systemically 
and I start doing some circular questioning, or something like that, which I think is perfectly fine within a CBT model. I mean you’re talking about 
thoughts and feelings and you’re talking about it in an interpersonal context” (Sam). 
 
“It's quite hard except for pure behavioral therapy, pure classical psychoanalysis, to think of models that are pure in inverted commas.  Erm, so I think if 
you're doing good CBT you're integrating erm, the core principles of Rogerian Therapy, you're integrating the cognitive theory, behavioral theory, erm, 
  
 
 
224 
 
 
 
but you're also including ideas from systemic therapy, especially the work of people like Anna Vizor up at UEA when she started to bring in systemic 
ideas into CBT, so I wouldn’t be as close as dividing those two. But, erm, I don’t know, maybe that’s just me trying to find a get out, from the fact that I 
suspect I probably am an integrative therapist, erm, I think most clinical psychologists are more likely to call on ideas from other models and other 
therapies, in order to assess what they are, what the labels says that they're doing.  I think even if you're doing maybe systemic therapy in a child and 
adolescent team, as a clinical psychologist, you're probably using within that systemic therapy ideas from a broad-range of other models anyway. Maybe 
I'm just providing myself with an excuse, to say that I'm both model adherent and integrative.” (Paul). 
Focusing on the 
underlying 
principles to a 
therapy rather 
than following a 
manual. 
“RCT’s are generally done with a population of people who are, you know, prepared to fill out multiple measures, usually in every session, and who 
reliably attend, and who are, as it were, up for the treatment right from the off, because they have to be in order to sign the various consent forms, and 
several, so that’s a highly selective group of people. So, in the real world, where you see a much broader – some of those kind of people around – but 
you see a much broader group, you have to adapt what you do. But I think when you make those adaptations you have to be familiar with the 
manualised treatments and the kind of things that have been evaluated in RCT’s, and you have to know that stuff and you have to understand the 
underlying principles so that when you make those adaptations you don’t, you remain true to the principals of the treatment and the key elements, so you 
make your adaptation, as it were, knowingly, and don’t just drift in to something that was no longer recognisably CBT.” (Sam). 
 
“If there isn't a guideline for your client group, you need to have almost a better understanding of what it is that intervention is about in order to be able 
to… The mechanics of how that works, how that might apply to your group or not, and how to assess that rather than just kind of blindly applying 
something and going, 'Well, this is what the evidence base says.'” (Sophie). 
 
“Erm, well, I guess I wouldn’t necessarily agree that the manuals are the therapy; erm, the manuals are a broad reflection of what the creators of the 
therapy would want it to look like.  If you ever see any clips of Tim Beck doing CBT, though he calls it cognitive therapy, he doesn’t set an agenda, he 
doesn’t get out thought records, doesn’t set behavioral experiments, but he just naturally uses the underlying philosophy of it, and it works.  Erm, he 
would fail, for example, at cognitive therapy rating scale… erm, yeah,  I guess I stick more with an understanding of the foundation principle of the 
therapy in the room, rather than a cookbook approach.” (Paul). 
 
“And, you know, the NICE guidelines are just a starting point. I think there still is, and there should be, plenty of room for clinical judgement of 
adaptation and flexibility around the individual needs of the person. I have no qualms about making adaptations and moving away from manualised 
treatments, because I think to actually really increase access to psychological therapies and ensure that people have these options, you have to do that, if 
you don’t do that then only a tiny minority of people will ever receive the kind of manualised intervention that the RCT’s offer. And I, you know, I don’t 
think it should be exclusive in that way. I don’t think it should only be well educated, literate people who are happy to fill out reams of measures and 
good at keeping appointments.” (Sam). 
Having strict 
boundaries. 
“I guess if you're asking: would I end up giving CBT to someone because it's in the NICE guidelines but actually my psychological formulation has 
been pointed towards it.  No, I don’t think I would; no, but then, erm, what would I do?  I think if it seemed, if it seemed reasonable I'd have the 
conversation with the client.  Erm, I've always found that the best supervisor any therapist can have is always the patient in the room with you.  Erm, so 
I would present it as: ‘we've talked about erm, your background and how you’ve led to now have this sense of emptiness and low mood, and there seems 
to be a lot of unresolved issues to do with patterns of relationships you got into a young age, and how they're replicating themselves now.  We, here, 
offer therapies that focus more on your thoughts and behaviors, erm, so the choice would be that I could either refer you on to someone else to recap the 
sort of relationships you get into and how they relate to your childhood, or, we can see if by affecting your thoughts and behaviors that might have a 
knock-on effect to influence how you relate to others, and do you want to give it a try?’ and then be very clear about the scope of it.  Then maybe build 
in a much earlier review session in the therapy that might not otherwise have done.  They would get to session four and say, ‘We gave this a shot and we 
are not really seeing much benefit at the moment what do you think?’" (Paul). 
 
“Erm, it's, it’s a difficult balance to make.  I think if the client was coming for erm, symptom reduction, you’ve probably got a lot less of an issue, 
because your DSM categories are usually based around symptoms.  Research is usually based around symptoms, and the NICE guidelines reflect these 
things, erm and CBT's success is the success built around symptom reduction. So, if that’s what the patient is coming for then it's much less of a 
problem.  If they're coming for some sort of personal resolution, or what Americans often call closure, erm, then you're more likely to be unstuck.  Then 
it might be a case of saying that the NHS just doesn’t offer, the things that they're after, and then talking about how they would go about finding a good, 
private therapist, and different forms of accreditation in what they're in.” (Paul). 
  
 
 
225 
 
 
 
 
Recognisi
ng the 
context of 
the 
current 
economic 
climate. 
 
Noting that 
services do not 
have the resources 
to fully deliver 
NICE 
recommendations. 
“I mean, you know, you can say ‘look, this person’s got depression’, you can go back to supervision and say can I have 18 sessions because that’s what 
it says in the NICE guidelines, but then you’ve still, you know – the evidence has helped build these services, but actually we’re not delivering the 
evidence. So they’re kindof, so even if, even if I can completely sign up to a medicalised model of a disorder, which I can’t, we’re not, delivering what, 
because of budget, budget pressure.” (Naomi).  
 
“I know in some schizophrenia research erm it was highlighted that, you know, for the NICE Guidance for example, one of the recommendations is that 
anybody with a diagnosis should be offered family therapy. It’s not CBT, but it’s family therapy, so, you know, and I think that will be brilliant. I think 
if I could offer full family therapy to everyone with schizophrenia, that would be great, but I can’t. We run a county wide service, so I couldn’t work 
with every family of the people.” (Catherine). 
 
Stressing the 
importance of 
seeing NICE 
guidelines in the 
context of the 
current economic 
climate. 
“I think NICE guidelines have to be seen in the context of which you're trying to provide a service for people with limited resources. I don't think that 
what's written in those guidelines can be understood outside of that context. Because actually, there might be other things if there weren't constraints on 
resources. Other things might be more helpful, and I think that that's a massive point.” (Sophie). 
 
“But my sense is it's more around (pause) economics and kind of (pause) the need to reduce the funding or not increase the funding so much to the NHS. 
And to make sure, I suppose, that that money is well used so that less money is being stretched further. So I don't think it's badly motivated. I trust that 
they're trying to make the most of the limited money that's available.” (Morgan). 
 
“I think it’s also desperate times and people are actually reacting to things in desperate ways.” (Jan). 
 
“Sorry, let me just add something to that, because, but also clinical psychologists in this day and age need to understand that these decisions are being 
made in financial terms and by business models, and you have to adjust. You can’t be “oh, I’m just working with individuals. I’m going to do any 
therapy I want because that’s what I’m trained in”, you have to understand that there are financial consequences, and in order for you to be the most 
effective clinical psychologist in the NHS, you are going to need to make sure you’re keeping an eye on your waiting lists and that you’re not making 
people wait undue time. You have got to use your skills in the most cost effective way possible that doesn’t completely contradict everything I’ve just 
said about, you know, so it would also be naïve, yeah. It would also be naïve, I guess, for a clinical psychologist to think that the finance people and the 
business people don’t care, don’t matter, because of course they do, and politically and sociologically that’s very important, and ultimately pays our, you 
know, pays our wages.” (Catherine). 
 
“I suppose I thought there was nothing terribly wrong with the system as it was when I first qualified, before the NICE guidelines. (pause) but it requires 
you to sort of trust clinician judgment more, or to trust that an experienced clinician (pause) would make sensible reasonable decisions about what's 
effective and helpful for somebody rather than to centrally prescribe that. I don't think that's the kind of culture that we're in really at the moment. Yes, I 
think it's changed radically. I think it's become much tighter, and much more centralised, much more anxious, and much less well-resourced. All of those 
things create this sort of centralised control system.” (Morgan). 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
226 
 
 
 
Appendix Q: Hood’s (2007) Key Components of a Grounded Theory Study (influenced 
by Glaser and Straus (1967)). 
 
1) A spiral of cycles of data collection, coding, analysis, writing, design, theoretical 
categorisation and data collection. 
2) The constant comparative analysis of cases with each other and to theoretical 
categories throughout each cycle. 
3) A theoretical sampling process based upon categories developed from ongoing data 
analysis. 
4) The size of sample is determined by the theoretical saturation of categories rather than 
by the need for demographic representativeness, or simply a lack of additional 
information from new cases. 
5) The resulting theory is developed inductively from the data rather than tested by data, 
although the developing theory is continuously refined and checked by data. 
6) Codes emerge from data and are not imposed priori upon it. 
7) The substantive and / or formal theory outlined in the final report takes into account 
all the variations in the data and conditions associated with these variations. The 
report is an analytical product rather than a purely descriptive account. Theory 
development is the goal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
227 
 
 
 
Appendix R: Table of Codes and Categories 
Theme 
Category 
Sub-category 
Focused Codes 
Considering 
NICE 
guidelines to 
have benefits 
but to be 
fraught with 
dangers 
 
Valuing the 
benefits of 
NICE 
Noting that 
NICE guidelines 
can provide 
consistency  
Noting that guidelines can help organise services 
Highlighting that NICE guidelines can help the public 
know what to expect 
Valuing the shared language that categorisation and 
NICE guidelines provide 
 
Recognising the power of NICE endorsement 
 
Valuing NICE’s 
assistance in 
delivering 
evidence based 
practice 
Seeing NICE as a useful guide to the evidence base 
Feeling that NICE provides a safeguard against bad 
practice 
Considering it understandable to go with the evidence 
base in the climate of reduced resources 
Feeling that the 
concerns about 
guidelines can 
be challenged 
Acknowledging the problems with NICE guidelines 
but arguing that we would be worse off without them 
Arguing that it is possible for other therapies to emerge 
and gain NICE backing 
Challenging criticisms of CBT 
Seeing value in CBT 
Understanding why the medical model was chosen by 
NICE 
Worrying that 
NICE 
guidelines can 
create an 
unhelpful 
illusion of 
neatness 
 
Feeling that 
guidelines can 
be 
misunderstood 
or 
misinterpreted 
Admitting to not having a clear understanding of NICE 
guidelines 
Worrying about others misuse of NICE guidelines 
Highlighting that people may follow NICE without 
being familiar with the evidence it is based on 
Feeling that managers can follow NICE guidelines 
without questioning their relevance 
Worrying that service users may misinterpret NICE 
Arguing that an absence of evidence is not evidence of 
ineffectiveness 
 
Worrying that commissioners can view NICE as a way 
to limit spending 
 
 
Believing that NICE is doing harm to service users 
 
Experiencing 
guidelines as 
limiting 
 
 
 
Worrying that NICE guidelines may lead to neglecting 
other therapies 
Worrying about the dominance of CBT in NICE 
guidelines 
Questioning the effectiveness of just providing short 
term interventions 
Seeing value in approaches not recommended by NICE 
Questioning the 
scientific 
integrity of the 
guidelines 
Questioning NICE reliance on RCTs 
Highlighting that the majority of evidence is based on 
working age adults 
Highlighting the difficulty in researching psychological 
therapies 
Arguing that CBT fits well with NICE whereas other 
therapies do not 
Having a 
problem with 
Questioning the validity of diagnostic categories 
  
 
 
228 
 
 
 
the medical 
model basis of 
NICE guidelines 
Arguing that the medical model is dehumanising 
Suggesting that there are alternatives to the medical 
model 
Arguing that routine practice is more complex than 
NICE guidelines 
Perceived level 
of pressure to 
be NICE 
compliant 
 
Experiencing an underlying threat or pressure to be 
NICE compliant 
 
 
Noting that NICE guidelines aren’t currently 
experienced as restrictive 
 
Worrying that 
NICE could 
become more 
controlling 
Worrying about the future 
 
Worrying about PBR 
 
Acknowledging concerns for the future, but not being 
worried by them 
 
Beliefs about 
the purpose of, 
and future of 
clinical 
psychology 
 
Worrying that 
the jobs or ID of 
CPs are 
threatened 
Worrying about CBT therapists being seen as a cheaper 
alternative 
Being keen to differentiate from single modality 
therapists 
Seeing NICE as a threat to integrative practice 
Highlighting the difficulty explaining what CPs do 
Arguing that CPs have bigger roles than just therapy 
 
Arguing that the professional identity of CP is not 
threatened 
 
Reflecting on 
the views of 
others towards 
NICE guidelines 
Seeing other CPs as having similar views. 
Highlighting a difference of views amongst CPs 
Valuing the difference of views amongst CPs 
Highlighting a split between researchers and clinicians 
Reflecting on the views of other professionals 
 
 
Highlighting the 
key skills of 
CPs 
Suggesting that CPs research skills put them in a 
position to interpret the evidence base 
Valuing CPs training in a variety of therapeutic models 
Valuing 
individualised, 
collaborative 
interventions 
Considering it important for interventions to be based 
on individualised formulations 
Highlighting the importance of evaluating individual 
interventions 
Valuing collaborative decision making with service 
users 
 
 
 
Arguing that it is difficult to detach NICE from vested 
interests 
 
 
Having a 
flexible 
relationship 
with guidelines 
 
Not advertising 
the way one 
practices 
Being secretive about ones’ views 
Ignoring NICE 
Labelling an intervention as CBT when its more fudgy 
around the edges 
 
Valuing having excuses as to why not to follow NICE 
guidelines 
 
Using NICE to suit our needs 
 
  
 
 
229 
 
 
 
Meeting NICE 
halfway 
Considering it important to work within the language 
of NICE and categorisation 
Considering it important to highlight the limitations but 
continue to use NICE 
Wanting NICE to review its approach 
 
Using NICE as guidelines, not instructions 
Being NICE 
concordant 
Drawing on different models and integrating into CBT 
Focusing on the underlying principles to a therapy 
rather than following a manual 
Having strict boundaries 
 
Recognising 
the context of 
the current 
economic 
climate 
 
Noting that services do not have the resources to fully 
deliver NICE recommendations 
 
 
Stressing the importance of seeing NICE guidelines in 
the context of the current economic climate 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
230 
 
 
 
Appendix S: Example of Notes Made Prior to Interviews 
Writing up notes like this provided a structured way of reviewing previous transcripts, 
coding, notes, information in the research diary and the participant specific information, such 
as information from their pre interview questionnaire. Doing this before interviews helped me 
to plan what kind of information I might like to explore further with participants if the 
opportunity presented itself (whilst trying to follow the lead of the CP as much as possible – 
see Appendix N for examples of questions used in interviews). 
 
Thoughts prior to interview with ffffdddddddd 
Remember to ask if got any question before start. 
Aim to start with general conversation, see where goes. Have some notes from previous interviews, 
may bring them in, might not, see how goes. 
 
 
Working in cccccccccc do you feel that NICE guidelines fit the people you see? (are there 
instances when the evidence behind the guideline were based on a different client group? 
(this is what the Mccccccc psych said)). 
 
On questionnaire, gave 9/10 strongly agree for nice guidelines can have a detrimental effect 
on both formulation and intervention. More info on thoughts on this please? 
 
On questionnaire gave 8/10 strongly agree pressure to follow nice guidelines. More info on 
this please? 
 
Areas where not many nice guidelines available (Ccccccc/ccccccccc etc) still able to be 
flexible. Ok? Worrying? Can pick and chose when to use guidelines. Can use them when 
want power but say no, not based on our client group when don’t want to use. 
 
HOW is NICE used in ccccccccc? Similar to adults? 
 
 
worry about training in a nice endorsed therapy? Maybe newly qualified cps do. Is this 
something more experienced cps value / feel they need to do? 
Some people have mentioned that it is helpful to have a nice recommended therapy 
qualification on your CV, will help getting jobs. Others have said that this could be problematic, 
could pigeon hole you. What are your thoughts on this? What would be bad about being pigeon 
holed as following NICE? 
 pre and post introduction of nice. More integrative in past. Now more 
classifying therapies, for x do y. cant say integrative any more. Integrative doesn’t fit with 
the evidence base. 
 
Is there conflict between being model adherent and integrative. Pros and cons of each? 
 
Some Cps said cbt isn’t manualised, it is possible to integrate other modalities and it will still be cbt. 
Beck doesn’t do agenda setting etc. its just about the philosophical approach. VS Other cps appear to 
feel more uncomfortable about this, will integrate different ideas into what they call cbt but aren’t 
sure it actually is cbt anymore but hide this from managers. Others will think in different modalities 
and then translate to cbt. 
  
 
 
231 
 
 
 
 
Not worried about payment by results? Can do a v general clustering then get better 
formulation later. Agree / disagree? 
 
Not perfect but best option available. Agree / disagree? 
 
Something about If too individualised giving too much time, prevents time for others? 
something about limitations of therapy on NHS? Symptom reduction or something more? 
 
Cbt fit better with nice than other interventions? Is this ok? Or problem? Nhs can only be expected 
to treat symptoms. Or this is only scratching the surface? 
Worrying cp could be seen as a luxury? 
Difficulty in measuring change in some therapies. In financial climate, go for what has been shown 
to work. Best option. Other therapies may not work. 
Something that has come up a lot – emphasising the role of CP, how different to CBT therapists etc, 
not just indv. Why do u think this has come up from talking about NICE? Where is the link? 
 
Importance of non 1:1 work of cp. How is this measured in the service? Nice a threat to this cos 
it tends to focus on 1:1 thx? Same in CAMHS? 
CBT discussed a lot in interviews about nice. Why? 
Some cps think that nice doesn’t take account of all evidence, eg practice based evidence, other 
cps say it does take account of different types of evidence, it has a hierarchy of significance it puts on 
each, and this is appropriate. Uses best quality. What are your thoughts on this? 
People can misinterpret nice guidelines. Some people see this as worrying, others see it as a role 
for CP, to be in a good position to help interpret them – research training, training in different 
modalities etc. 
 
Is there flexibility on how to use guidelines? Or set in stone? 
Are they restricting? Is this good or bad? 
Difficulty explaining what cp do? Doesn’t fit neatly with nice? Nice trying to make a complicated 
thing neat. Best option? Or problem? Putting the problems and blame in an indv rather than 
society / relationships etc? 
Nice based on flawed categories of mental illness, but best option available? Gives shared language. 
Or real problem? 
 
Nice can be helpful in endorsing psych thx 
Tension in team between cp and other therapists? 
Some people have said that there is a discrepancy between the cbt in rcts and the cbt in routine 
practice, with rcts being pure and routine practice not being pure. Other people have disagreed, 
saying that cbt isn’t manualised, it is a philosophical approach that is by its definition an integrative 
approach. What are your thoughts on that? 
Something about evidence base being important? 
A shared language that NICE and diagnoses provides (not just thinking about diag, thinking about 
nice – ie therapies are categorised and fitted to diagnoses categories). Is this a good thing or a bad 
thing? Eg x condition needs y treatment? 
Think other cps agree  / disagree with your views on nice? Y? 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
232 
 
 
 
Appendix T – Letter to R&D and Ethics Committee  
 
Faculty of Social and Applied Sciences 
Clinical Psychology Doctoral Programme 
Canterbury Christ Church University 
Salomons Campus 
Runcie Court 
Broomhill Road  
Tunbridge Wells 
Kent 
TN3 0TF  
 
09.04.2014 
 
Dear Research and Development  
 
Study Title: A Grounded Theory of Clinical Psychologists Beliefs About, and Use of NICE 
Guidelines.  
 
I am writing to inform you that the above study has now been completed. Please find attached 
a brief summary of the findings of this research. Please do not hesitate to contact me if you 
require any further information.  
 
Yours sincerely  
 
 
 
Alex Court 
Trainee clinical psychologist 
Ajc100@canterbury.ac.uk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
233 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Faculty of Social and Applied Sciences 
Clinical Psychology Doctoral Programme 
Canterbury Christ Church University 
Salomons Campus 
Runcie Court 
Broomhill Road  
Tunbridge Wells 
Kent 
TN3 0TF  
 
09.04.2014 
 
Dear Research Ethics Committee  
 
Study Title: A Grounded Theory of Clinical Psychologists Beliefs About, and Use of NICE 
Guidelines.  
 
I am writing to inform you that the above study has now been completed. Please find attached 
a brief summary of the findings of this research. Please do not hesitate to contact me if you 
require any further information.  
 
Yours sincerely  
 
 
 
Alex Court 
Trainee clinical psychologist 
Ajc100@canterbury.ac.uk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
234 
 
 
 
Appendix U - End of Study Summary Report for Participants, Ethics Committee and 
R&D. 
 
They’re NICE and Neat, but Are They Useful? A Grounded Theory of Clinical 
Psychologists’ Beliefs About, and Use of NICE Guidelines. 
 
Background  
There is a growing research interest into investigating why NICE (National Institute 
for Health and Care Excellence) guidelines are not consistently followed in UK mental health 
services. 
It was felt that Clinical Psychologists (CPs) were a particularly important profession 
to investigate. They are important members of UK mental health services and their use of 
NICE guidelines had not been formally researched. Furthermore, there appear to be 
conflicting views regarding NICE guidelines within the profession. 
 
Aim 
The aim of this study was neither to promote the use of NICE guidelines nor to dispute 
them. The study attempted to construct a theoretical framework to help explain how NICE 
guidelines are utilised and the factors that impact upon this. 
 
Method 
 
Eleven CPs, working in routine practice in the NHS were interviewed (recruited from 
three NHS trusts). Grounded theory methodology (Charmaz, 2006) was utilised to guide the 
data collection and analysis. 
 
Findings  
 
A theoretical framework was produced conceptualising the participants’ beliefs, 
decision making processes and clinical practices (Appendix 1). The overall emerging theme 
was “considering NICE guidelines to have benefits but to be fraught with dangers”. The 
participants were concerned that guidelines can create an unhelpful illusion of neatness. They 
managed the tension between the helpful and unhelpful aspects of guidelines by relating to 
them in a flexible manner.  
  
 
 
235 
 
 
 
The CPs worried that guidelines could easily be misunderstood and used in a rigid and 
limiting manner. There were concerns about the harm that misuse of guidelines could do to 
service users and also to the profession of clinical psychology.  
The participants reported drawing on specialist skills such as idiosyncratic 
formulation and integrative practice, despite these skills not fitting comfortably within the 
NICE guidelines format. However, as a result of pressure, and also the rewards that follow 
from being seen to be “NICE compliant”, they tended to practice in ways that prevent these 
skills from being recognised. This led to many of the participants fearing that their 
professional identity was threatened. They worried that if people mistakenly believed that 
routine clinical practice was as neat as guidelines falsely imply and their specialist skills were 
not recognised, then single modality therapists would be seen as a viable, cheaper alternative 
to CPs. 
 
Clinical Implications 
 
The results of this study challenge dominant discourses around the validity and utility 
of NICE guidelines in UK mental health services. Challenging these dominant discourses 
may help counter-discourses emerge and allow discussion about the limitations of guidelines 
and how these are best managed. 
The participants of this study were keen for guidelines to be utilised flexibly, with an 
awareness of their limitations. This would mean allowing clinicians to have room for clinical 
judgement and to deviate from guidelines when relevant. This would acknowledge that 
individuals seen in routine practice do not fit neatly into guidelines. This has important 
service organisation implications, as NICE guidelines are increasingly being viewed as 
performance standards, centrally prescribed and monitored.  
This study highlights the importance of CPs finding ways to improve the way that 
they articulate and advertise their specialist skills. 
 
Mr Alex Court 
Trainee Clinical Psychologist  
Canterbury Christ Church University  
Ajc100@canterbury.ac.uk  
 
Supervised by Ms Anne Cooke and Dr Amanda Scrivener 
  
 
 
236 
 
 
 
Reference 
Charmaz, K. (2006). Constructing grounded theory: A practical guide through qualitative 
analysis. London, UK: Sage.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 237 
 
 
 
Appendix 1. Model conceptualising the clinical psychologists’ beliefs about, and use of NICE guidelines. 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Considering NICE guidelines to have benefits but to be fraught with dangers 
Recognising the context of the current economic climate 
+ Noting that services do not have the resources to fully deliver NICE recommendations. 
+ Stressing the importance of seeing NICE guidelines in the context of the current economic climate. 
Valuing the benefits of NICE 
guidelines 
+ Noting that guidelines can provide 
consistency. 
+ Recognising the power of NICE 
endorsement. 
+ Valuing NICE’s assistance in delivering 
evidence based practice. 
+ Feeling that the concerns about guidelines 
can be challenged. 
Worrying that NICE guidelines can create 
an unhelpful illusion of neatness 
+ Questioning the scientific integrity of the guidelines. 
+ Having a problem with the medical model basis of NICE 
guidelines. 
+ Experiencing guidelines as limiting.  
+ Feeling that guidelines can be misinterpreted. 
+ Worrying that commissioners can view the guidelines as 
a way to limit spending. 
+ Believing that NICE are doing harm to service users. 
 
Plus 
Perceived level of pressure to be NICE 
compliant 
+ Experiencing an underlying threat or pressure to be 
NICE compliant. 
+ Noting that NICE guidelines aren’t currently 
experienced as restrictive. 
+ Worrying that NICE could become more controlling. 
+ Acknowledging concerns for the future, but not being 
worried by them. 
 
Plus 
Beliefs about the purpose of, and future of 
clinical psychology 
+ Valuing individualised, collaborative interventions. 
+ Highlighting the key skills of CPs.  
+ Worrying that the jobs or identity of CPs are threatened. 
+ Arguing that the professional identity of CP is not threatened. 
+ Reflecting on the views of others towards NICE guidelines. 
+ Arguing that it is difficult to detach NICE from vested interests. 
Having a flexible relationship 
with guidelines 
+ Not advertising the way one practices. 
+ Valuing having excuses as to why not to 
follow NICE guidelines. 
+ Using NICE to suit our needs. 
+ Meeting NICE halfway. 
+ Using NICE as guidelines, not instructions. 
+ Being NICE concordant. 
 
Influences 
Influences 
Impacts 
upon 
Impacts 
upon 
Leads to 
 238 
 
 
 
Appendix V – Journal Author Guidelines 
Psychology and Psychotherapy: Theory, 
Research and Practice 
© The British Psychological Society 
Edited By: Andrew Gumley and Matthias Schwannauer 
Impact Factor: 1.69 
ISI Journal Citation Reports © Ranking: 2012: 44/75 (Psychology); 56/114 (Psychology 
Clinical); 58/121 (Psychiatry (Social Science)); 79/135 (Psychiatry) 
Online ISSN: 2044-8341 
 
Author Guidelines 
Psychology and Psychotherapy: Theory Research and Practice (formerly The British Journal of 
Medical Psychology) is an international scientific journal with a focus on the psychological aspects of 
mental health difficulties and well-being; and psychological problems and their psychological 
treatments. We welcome submissions from mental health professionals and researchers from all 
relevant professional backgrounds. The Journal welcomes submissions of original high quality 
empirical research and rigorous theoretical papers of any theoretical provenance provided they have 
a bearing upon vulnerability to, adjustment to, assessment of, and recovery (assisted or otherwise) 
from psychological disorders. Submission of systematic reviews and other research reports which 
support evidence-based practice are also welcomed, as are relevant high quality analogue studies. 
The Journal thus aims to promote theoretical and research developments in the understanding of 
cognitive and emotional factors in psychological disorders, interpersonal attitudes, behaviour and 
relationships, and psychological therapies (including both process and outcome research) where 
mental health is concerned. Clinical or case studies will not normally be considered except where 
they illustrate particularly unusual forms of psychopathology or innovative forms of therapy and 
meet scientific criteria through appropriate use of single case experimental designs.  
1. Circulation  
The circulation of the Journal is worldwide. Papers are invited and encouraged from authors 
throughout the world.  
2. Length  
All articles submitted to PAPT must adhere to the stated word limit for the particular article type. 
The journal operates a policy of returning any papers that are over this word limit to the authors. 
The word limit does not include the abstract, reference list, figures and tables. Appendices however 
are included in the word limit. The Editors retain discretion to publish papers beyond this length in 
cases where the clear and concise expression of the scientific content requires greater length (e.g., a 
new theory or a new method). The authors should contact the Editors first in such a case.  
 239 
 
 
 
Word limits for specific article types are as follows:  
• Research articles: 5000 words 
• Qualitative papers: 6000 words 
• Review papers: 6000 words 
• Special Issue papers: 5000 words 
3. Brief reports  
These should be limited to 1000 words and may include research studies and theoretical, critical or 
review comments whose essential contribution can be made briefly. A summary of not more than 50 
words should be provided.  
4. Submission and reviewing  
All manuscripts must be submitted via http://www.editorialmanager.com/paptrap/. The Journal 
operates a policy of anonymous peer review. Before submitting, please read the terms and 
conditions of submission and the declaration of competing interests.  
5. Manuscript requirements  
• Contributions must be typed in double spacing with wide margins. All sheets must be numbered.  
• Manuscripts should be preceded by a title page which includes a full list of authors and their 
affiliations, as well as the corresponding author's contact details. A template can be downloaded 
here.  
• Tables should be typed in double spacing, each on a separate page with a self-explanatory title. 
Tables should be comprehensible without reference to the text. They should be placed at the end of 
the manuscript with their approximate locations indicated in the text.  
• Figures can be included at the end of the document or attached as separate files, carefully labelled 
in initial capital/lower case lettering with symbols in a form consistent with text use. Unnecessary 
background patterns, lines and shading should be avoided. Captions should be listed on a separate 
sheet. The resolution of digital images must be at least 300 dpi.  
• For articles containing original scientific research, a structured abstract of up to 250 words should 
be included with the headings: Objectives, Design, Methods, Results, Conclusions. Review articles 
should use these headings: Purpose, Methods, Results, Conclusions.  
• All Articles must include Practitioner Points – these are 2-4 bullet points, in addition to the 
abstract, with the heading ‘Practitioner Points’. These should briefly and clearly outline the 
relevance of your research to professional practice.  
• For reference citations, please use APA style. Particular care should be taken to ensure that 
references are accurate and complete. Give all journal titles in full and provide DOI numbers where 
possible for journal articles.  
• SI units must be used for all measurements, rounded off to practical values if appropriate, with the 
imperial equivalent in parentheses.  
• In normal circumstances, effect size should be incorporated.  
• Authors are requested to avoid the use of sexist language.  
 240 
 
 
 
• Authors are responsible for acquiring written permission to publish lengthy quotations, 
illustrations, etc. for which they do not own copyright.  
• Manuscripts describing clinical trials must be submitted in accordance with the CONSORT 
statement on reporting randomised controlled trials (http://www.consort-statement.org).  
• Manuscripts describing systematic reviews and meta-analyses must be submitted in accordance 
with the PRISMA statement on reporting systematic reviews and meta-analyses 
(http://www.prisma-statement.org).  
For guidelines on editorial style, please consult the APA Publication Manual published by the 
American Psychological Association.  
6. Multiple or Linked submissions  
Authors considering submitting two or more linked submissions should discuss this with the Editors 
in the first instance.  
7. Supporting Information  
PAPT is happy to accept articles with supporting information supplied for online only publication. 
This may include appendices, supplementary figures, sound files, videoclips etc. These will be posted 
on Wiley Online Library with the article. The print version will have a note indicating that extra 
material is available online. Please indicate clearly on submission which material is for online only 
publication. Please note that extra online only material is published as supplied by the author in the 
same file format and is not copyedited or typeset. Further information about this service can be 
found at http://authorservices.wiley.com/bauthor/suppmat.asp 
8. Copyright and licenses  
If your paper is accepted, the author identified as the formal corresponding author for the paper will 
receive an email prompting them to login into Author Services, where via the Wiley Author Licensing 
Service (WALS) they will be able to complete the license agreement on behalf of all authors on the 
paper.  
For authors signing the copyright transfer agreement 
If the OnlineOpen option is not selected the corresponding author will be presented with the 
copyright transfer agreement (CTA) to sign. The terms and conditions of the CTA can be previewed in 
the samples associated with the Copyright FAQs below:  
CTA Terms and Conditions http://authorservices.wiley.com/bauthor/faqs_copyright.asp 
For authors choosing OnlineOpen 
If the OnlineOpen option is selected the corresponding author will have a choice of the following 
Creative Commons License Open Access Agreements (OAA):  
- Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License OAA  
- Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial -NoDerivs License OAA  
 241 
 
 
 
To preview the terms and conditions of these open access agreements please visit the Copyright 
FAQs hosted on Wiley Author Services http://authorservices.wiley.com/bauthor/faqs_copyright.asp 
and visit http://www.wileyopenaccess.com/details/content/12f25db4c87/Copyright--License.html.  
If you select the OnlineOpen option and your research is funded by The Wellcome Trust and 
members of the Research Councils UK (RCUK) you will be given the opportunity to publish your 
article under a CC-BY license supporting you in complying with Wellcome Trust and Research 
Councils UK requirements. For more information on this policy and the Journal’s compliant self-
archiving policy please visit: http://www.wiley.com/go/funderstatement.  
For RCUK and Wellcome Trust authors click on the link below to preview the terms and conditions of 
this license:  
Creative Commons Attribution License OAA  
To preview the terms and conditions of these open access agreements please visit the Copyright 
FAQs hosted on Wiley Author Services http://authorservices.wiley.com/bauthor/faqs_copyright.asp 
and visit http://www.wileyopenaccess.com/details/content/12f25db4c87/Copyright--License.html.  
9. Colour illustrations  
Colour illustrations can be accepted for publication online. These would be reproduced in greyscale 
in the print version. If authors would like these figures to be reproduced in colour in print at their 
expense they should request this by completing a Colour Work Agreement form upon acceptance of 
the paper. A copy of the Colour Work Agreement form can be downloaded here.  
10. Pre-submission English-language editing  
Authors for whom English is a second language may choose to have their manuscript professionally 
edited before submission to improve the English. A list of independent suppliers of editing services 
can be found at http://authorservices.wiley.com/bauthor/english_language.asp. All services are paid 
for and arranged by the author, and use of one of these services does not guarantee acceptance or 
preference for publication.  
11. OnlineOpen  
OnlineOpen is available to authors of primary research articles who wish to make their article 
available to non-subscribers on publication, or whose funding agency requires grantees to archive 
the final version of their article. With OnlineOpen, the author, the author's funding agency, or the 
author's institution pays a fee to ensure that the article is made available to non-subscribers upon 
publication via Wiley Online Library, as well as deposited in the funding agency's preferred archive. 
For the full list of terms and conditions, see 
http://wileyonlinelibrary.com/onlineopen#OnlineOpen_Terms 
Any authors wishing to send their paper OnlineOpen will be required to complete the payment form 
available from our website at: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/onlineOpenOrder 
Prior to acceptance there is no requirement to inform an Editorial Office that you intend to publish 
your paper OnlineOpen if you do not wish to. All OnlineOpen articles are treated in the same way as 
any other article. They go through the journal's standard peer-review process and will be accepted 
or rejected based on their own merit.  
 
 242 
 
 
 
12. Author Services  
Author Services enables authors to track their article – once it has been accepted – through the 
production process to publication online and in print. Authors can check the status of their articles 
online and choose to receive automated e-mails at key stages of production. The author will receive 
an e-mail with a unique link that enables them to register and have their article automatically added 
to the system. Please ensure that a complete e-mail address is provided when submitting the 
manuscript. Visit http://authorservices.wiley.com/bauthor/ for more details on online production 
tracking and for a wealth of resources including FAQs and tips on article preparation, submission and 
more.  
13. The Later Stages  
The corresponding author will receive an email alert containing a link to a web site. A working e-mail 
address must therefore be provided for the corresponding author. The proof can be downloaded as 
a PDF (portable document format) file from this site. Acrobat Reader will be required in order to 
read this file. This software can be downloaded (free of charge) from the following web site: 
http://www.adobe.com/products/acrobat/readstep2.html. This will enable the file to be opened, 
read on screen and annotated direct in the PDF. Corrections can also be supplied by hard copy if 
preferred. Further instructions will be sent with the proof. Hard copy proofs will be posted if no e-
mail address is available. Excessive changes made by the author in the proofs, excluding typesetting 
errors, will be charged separately.  
14. Early View  
Psychology and Psychotherapy is covered by the Early View service on Wiley Online Library. Early 
View articles are complete full-text articles published online in advance of their publication in a 
printed issue. Articles are therefore available as soon as they are ready, rather than having to wait 
for the next scheduled print issue. Early View articles are complete and final. They have been fully 
reviewed, revised and edited for publication, and the authors’ final corrections have been 
incorporated. Because they are in final form, no changes can be made after online publication. The 
nature of Early View articles means that they do not yet have volume, issue or page numbers, so 
they cannot be cited in the traditional way. They are cited using their Digital Object Identifier (DOI) 
with no volume and issue or pagination information. E.g., Jones, A.B. (2010). Human rights Issues. 
Human Rights Journal. Advance online publication. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9299.2010.00300.x  
Further information about the process of peer review and production can be found in this 
document. What happens to my paper? 
