 Treatment of Severe Adult Traumatic Brain Injury
Using Bone Marrow Mononuclear Cells
CHARLES S COX JR.,a ROBERT A HETZ,b GEORGE P LIAO,b BENJAMIN M AERTKER,c
LINDA EWING-COBBS,d,e JENIFER JURANEK,d SEAN I SAVITZ,c MARGARET L JACKSON,a
ANNA M ROMANOWSKA-PAWLICZEK,d FABIO TRIOLO,a PRAMOD K DASH,f CLAUDIA PEDROZA,g
DEAN A LEE,i LAURA WORTH,j IMOIGELE P AISIKU,k HUIMAHN A CHOI,c,h JOHN B HOLCOMB,b
RYAN S KITAGAWAh
Key Words. traumatic brain injury • bone marrow stromal cells • cellular therapy • clinical trials •
diffusion tensor imaging • adult stem cells • adult human bone marrow
ABSTRACT
Preclinical studies using bone marrow derived cells to treat traumatic brain injury have demon-
strated efficacy in terms of blood–brain barrier preservation, neurogenesis, and functional out-
comes. Phase 1 clinical trials using bone marrow mononuclear cells infused intravenously in
children with severe traumatic brain injury demonstrated safety and potentially a central ner-
vous system structural preservation treatment effect. This study sought to confirm the safety,
logistic feasibility, and potential treatment effect size of structural preservation/inflammatory
biomarker mitigation in adults to guide Phase 2 clinical trial design. Adults with severe traumat-
ic brain injury (Glasgow Coma Scale 5–8) and without signs of irreversible brain injury were
evaluated for entry into the trial. A dose escalation format was performed in 25 patients: 5
controls, followed 5 patients in each dosing cohort (6, 9, 12 3106 cells/kg body weight), then 5
more controls. Bone marrow harvest, cell processing to isolate the mononuclear fraction, and
re-infusion occurred within 48 hours after injury. Patients were monitored for harvest-related
hemodynamic changes, infusional toxicity, and adverse events. Outcome measures included
magnetic resonance imaging-based measurements of supratentorial and corpus callosal volumes
as well as diffusion tensor imaging-based measurements of fractional anisotropy and mean dif-
fusivity of the corpus callosum and the corticospinal tract at the level of the brainstem at 1
month and 6 months postinjury. Functional and neurocognitive outcomes were measured and
correlated with imaging data. Inflammatory cytokine arrays were measured in the plasma pre-
treatment, posttreatment, and at 1 and 6 month follow-up. There were no serious adverse
events. There was a mild pulmonary toxicity of the highest dose that was not clinically signifi-
cant. Despite the treatment group having greater injury severity, there was structural preserva-
tion of critical regions of interest that correlated with functional outcomes. Key inflammatory
cytokines were downregulated. Treatment of severe, adult traumatic brain injury using an intra-
venously delivered autologous bone marrow mononuclear cell infusion is safe and logistically
feasible. There appears to be a treatment signal as evidenced by central nervous system struc-
tural preservation, consistent with previous pediatric trial data. Inflammatory biomarkers are
downregulated after cell infusion. STEM CELLS 2017;35:1065–1079
SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT
This phase I/IIa study of adult severe TBI sought to confirm the safety and logistic feasibility of
autologous bone marrow mononuclear cells for severe TBI, as well as determine a potential
treatment effect size of white matter structural preservation. Our primary outcomes were MRI-
based measurements of supratentorial and corpus callosal volumes as well as DTI-based meas-
urements of fractional anisotropy (FA) and mean diffusivity (MD) of the corpus callosum and
corticospinal tract at the level of the brainstem. One limitation of our study is that since it was
phase I/IIa it was not randomized and our treatment groups had a higher injury severity profile
than our control groups. Despite this, we found that the FA and MD in the corticospinal tract
are clearly improved by bone marrow mononuclear cell (BMMNC) treatment, and the improve-
ment in FA in the corpus callosum has a treatment effect significant enough for us to calculate
power for a future phase II study.
aDepartment of Pediatric
Surgery, bDepartment of
Surgery, cDepartment of
Neurology, dDepartment of
Pediatrics, eDepartment of
Psychiatry and Behavioral
Sciences, fDepartment of
Neurobiology and Anatomy;
gCenter for Clinical Research
and Evidence-Based
Medicine, hDepartment of
Neurosurgery, The University
of Texas McGovern Medical
School, Houston, Texas, USA;
iDepartment of Hematology
and Oncology, Nationwide
Children’s, Columbus, Ohio,
USA; jDepartment of
Pediatrics, MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston,
Texas, USA; kDepartment of
Emergency Medicine,
Brigham and Women’s
Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.
Correspondence: Charles S. Cox
Jr., MD, Department of Pediatric
Surgery, University of Texas
Medical School at Houston,
6431 Fannin Street, MSB 5.234,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.
Telephone: 713-500-7307; Fax:
713-500-7296; e-mail: Charles.S.
Cox@uth.tmc.edu
Received August 1, 2016;
accepted for publication
October 16, 2016; first
published online in STEM CELLS
EXPRESS November 1, 2016.
V
C AlphaMed Press
1066-5099/2016/$30.00/0
http://dx.doi.org/
10.1002/stem.2538
STEM CELLS 2017;35:1065–1079 www.StemCells.com
V
C AlphaMed Press 2016
TRANSLATIONAL AND CLINICAL
RESEARCH
 INTRODUCTION
Approximately 1.5 million people suffer traumatic brain injury
(TBI) yearly in the United States. The annual mortality
approaches 50,000 with the remaining patients suffering from
varying levels of long-term sequelae[1]. Overall, 6.5 million
patients are burdened by the physical, cognitive, and psycho-
social deficits associated with TBI leading to a total economic
impact of approximately 60 billion dollars[2].
Numerous preclinical studies have shown that autologous
bone marrow derived mononuclear cells (BMMNCs) improve
outcomes after TBI with a positive effect on early outcomes
(blood brain barrier permeability and cerebral edema) as well
as late functional outcomes such as improved spatiotemporal
memory. These positive effects on functional outcomes have
been replicated in various animal stroke models as well[3].
Similarly, in both injury models, BMMNCs dampen the sec-
ondary neuroinflammatory response to injury[4–6]. Finally,
there appears to be a consistent treatment window of 24–72
hours[7]. In terms of translational feasibility, autologous
BMMNCs have shown potential benefit in preclinical proof-of-
concept studies in TBI and stroke, and have an excellent safe-
ty profiles in Phase 1 trials of pediatric TBI and adult
stroke[8–10].
We have pursued the use of autologous BMMNCs for a
number of reasons: (a) well-developed preclinical proof of
concept and toxicity data, (b) Phase 1 trial without observed
serious adverse events or toxicity, (b) no immune barrier con-
siderations, (d) biologically sound route of delivery due to the
5–8 micron cell size (vs. 13–19 micron size for mesenchymal
stromal
cells)
obviates
pulmonary
sequestration,
or
the
“pulmonary first pass effect” making intravenous delivery
more practical[11], (e) no in vitro culture/scaling issues for
autologous application, (f) ready availability, (g) no issues with
uncontrolled replication as with embryonic stem cells or fetal
cells, and (h) no ethically objectionable issues with cell type.
The purpose of this study was to evaluate the safety,
logistical feasibility, and potential signals of a treatment effect
in a prospective, single center, dose escalation trial in adult
patients with acute TBI. Safety was assessed by organ injury
related to infusional toxicity. The efficacy outcome measure
was based upon serial imaging data obtained early postinjury
and at 6 months, evaluating global white matter volume and
metrics of white matter integrity using diffusion tensor mag-
netic resonance imaging. Exploratory analysis of circulating
markers of the inflammatory response to injury was evaluated
sequentially before and after injury as well as at 6 months
(representing the patient’s endogenous baseline preinjury).
MATERIALS AND METHODS
The Treatment of Severe Adult Traumatic Brain Injury Using
Bone Marrow Mononuclear Cells (NCT 0157540) trial was an
open label, nonrandomized, single center clinical trial. This
phase I/IIa trial was performed under the authority of the
Federal Investigational New Drug Application BB 12620. The
trial was approved by the University of Texas Health Sciences
Center at Houston Committee for the Protection of Human
Subjects and by the Memorial Hermann Office of Research.
Patients were enrolled into the trial from March of 2012
through October of 2014. The trial was funded by the U.S.
Army Medical Research and Materials Command grant num-
ber W81XWH-11-1-0460. Safety monitoring during the trial
was provided by an independent medical monitor and a med-
ical safety monitor in coordination with the data safety moni-
toring
board. The study
was
planned
to proceed
until
completing enrollment or after one of the following stopping
rules: 4 deaths; PaO2:FiO2 < 70 with a PaCO2 > 90 mmHg
within 48 hours of infusion; Alanine Transferase/Aspartate
Transferase > 900 U/dL within 24 hours of infusion in any sub-
ject; Grade 4–5 central nervous system cerebrovascular ische-
mia event or Grade 4–5 seizure event as defined by version 4
of the National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria
for Adverse Events within 12 hours of infusion; Any Grade 4–
5 adverse event as defined by the National Cancer Institute
Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events that is
determined to be temporally-related by the data safety moni-
toring board.
Study Population
Trauma patients between the ages of 18 and 55 years of age
presenting
to
the
trauma
Emergency
Department
were
screened for enrollment into the study. Eligible patients were
those with nonpenetrating head trauma, a postresuscitation
Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) [12] of 5–8 and injury occurring
less than 24 hours prior to consent. Patients were excluded
on the basis of pre-existing serious medical comorbidities or
infection as revealed by patient history: prior moderate-
severe brain injury, major psychiatric disorders, or any neuro-
logic impairment or seizure disorder. In addition, patients
were excluded if there was evidence of hypoxic-ischemic
insult, opening intracranial pressure > 40 mmHg, continued
hemodynamic instability at the time of consent, uncorrected
coagulopathy at the time of harvest, pelvic fracture requiring
operative fixation, spinal cord injury, American Association for
the Surgery of Trauma grade IV solid or hollow visceral organ
injury, prolonged hypoxia, weight � 300 lbs. (magnetic reso-
nance imaging [MRI] limitation), pregnancy, and unwillingness
to return for follow up visits (Table 1).
Study personnel approached the patient’s legally autho-
rized representative (LAR) with information about study par-
ticipation, and the PI/Co-I obtained informed consent. A
research intermediary interviewed each LAR to confirm con-
sent and avoid therapeutic misconception. A total of 25
patients were enrolled into the study. Patients were enrolled
sequentially into one of five different groups: control group
1(n 5 5; sham intervention), low-dose treatment group (n 5 5;
6 3 106 cells/k), medium dose treatment group (n 5 5; 9 3
106 cells/kg), high-dose treatment group (n 5 5; 12 3 106
cells/kg), and control group 2 (n 5 5; sham intervention). The
additional controls were added to include patients across the
time spectrum of the study.
Patient Management
Patients were admitted to the Shock Trauma or Neurotrauma
Intensive Care Units at Memorial Hermann Hospital, which is
an American College of Surgeons Verified/Texas Department
of Health approved Level 1 Adult Trauma Center. Patients ini-
tially resuscitated according to Advanced Trauma Life Support
guidelines, and subsequently in accordance with the Guide-
lines for the Management of Severe Traumatic Brain Injury,
1066
Bone Marrow Cells for TBI
V
C AlphaMed Press 2016
STEM CELLS
 3rd Edition[13]. Central vascular catheter placement was per-
formed via either the subclavian or femoral route, as well as
radial or femoral arterial cannula placement according to stan-
dard techniques. Coagulopathy was corrected with fresh fro-
zen plasma titrated based on thromboelastography results on
arrival to the hospital and to the intensive care unit (ICU). All
patients received an intraparenchymal pressure monitor or
ventriculostomy for continuous monitoring of intracranial
pressures (ICP) and drainage of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). ICPs
were managed in accordance with Memorial Hermann Trauma
Guidelines with a goal ICP < 20. If ICP was refractory to
mechanical measures and respiratory measures (minimal stim-
ulation, head of bed elevation, PaCO2 35–40), hyperosmotic
therapy was initiated with a goal sodium 145–155. Sedation
was managed singly or in combination with infusions of mida-
zolam and fentanyl or propofol and titrated according to the
Richmond Agitation and Sedation Scale and maintaining ICP
below 20. For refractory ICP spikes a 30 ml bolus of 23.4%
NaCl was infused. Unexpected neurologic changes, ICP spikes,
or refractory-elevated ICP prompted repeat computed tomog-
raphy (CT) imaging of the brain. Each ICU-treated patients
with seven days of phenytoin for posttraumatic seizure
prophylaxis.
Study Intervention
Bone Marrow Harvest.
Patients enrolled into the low, medi-
um, and high-dose treatment arms underwent bone marrow
harvest within 36 hours of injury. The harvest was performed
aseptically using an 11 or 15 gauge trocar from the anterior
superior iliac crest of each patient. A total volume of 3 to
5 ml per kg of body weight was aspirated from each patient
with a 30 ml syringe. Pain was controlled through the use of
local anesthesia (1% lidocaine without epinephrine) and infu-
sions of fentanyl, midazolam, and/or propofol.
Blood pressure, heart rate, oxygen saturation, and intra-
cranial pressure were measured at 5 minute intervals for the
duration of the procedure. Recordings of these parameters
were continued every 15 minutes postharvest for 1 hour, then
every 30 minutes for 2 hours, and every hour until the time
of cell product infusion. Hemoglobin and hematocrit were
measured at 4 hour intervals for 12 hours after the harvest.
Harvest-related
adverse
events
were
defined
as
a
20%
decrease in either cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP) or mean
arterial pressure (MAP) that was sustained for at least 10
minutes.
Cell Processing.
Following completion of the procedure, the
bone marrow sample was transferred in an anticoagulant-
containing blood collection bag at ambient temperatures to
the processing facility in a validated cooler using a profession-
al courier service in compliance with requirements dictated by
the Code of Federal Regulations Titles 29 and 49 for both
Occupational Safety and Health Administration and Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act Medical Courier
and Biohazard training. The cell processing facility was located
at the University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston-
Medical School, Evelyn H. Griffin Stem Cell Therapeutics
Research
Laboratory.
The
facility
is
Food
and
Drug
Administration-registered, Foundation for the Accreditation of
Table 1. Trial inclusion and exclusion criteria
Inclusion criteria
Between 18 and 55 years of age on the day of injury
Postresuscitation Glasgow Coma Scale of 5–8
Initial injury occurring less than 24 hours prior to consent
English speaking
Exclusion Criteria
Known history of: prior brain injury, psychiatric disorder, neurological impairment and/or deficit,
Seizure disorder requiring anti-convulsant therapy, recently treated infection, renal disease,
Hepatic disease, cancer, substance abuse or positive urine drug screen at admission, cancer,
Immunosuppression, human immunodeficiency virus
Obliteration of perimesencephalic cistern on initial head computed tomography suggesting prolonged hypoxic ischemic
Insult
Opening intracranial pressures >40 mmHg
Hemodynamic instability at the time of consent with ongoing fluid resuscitation and/or inotropic
Supporta
Uncorrected coagulopathy at the time of bone marrow harvest defined as international normalized ratio > 1.6, partial thromboplastin time > 36s,
platelet <
100k, Fibrinogen < 100 mg/dL
Unstable pelvic fracture requiring operative fixation
Pulmonary contusions defined as a chest X-ray with nonanatomic opacification and/or partial pressure arterial oxygen: fraction of inspired
oxygen
< 250 associated with mechanism of injury
Greater than American Association for the Surgery of Trauma Grade III solid or hollow visceral injury of the abdomen and/or pelvis
Spinal cord injury
Weight � 300 lbs
Any contraindication to magnetic resonance imaging
Positive urine pregnancy test
Participation in a concurrent interventional study
Unwillingness to return for follow-up visits
The inclusion and exclusion criteria had the intent of including patients with acute, severe TBI without signs of irreversibility. Also, severe other
organ injury was excluded as defined in the exclusions with most of these being excluded due to the presence of hemorrhagic shock.
aDoes not include cerebral perfusion pressure-based inotropic support.
Abbreviation: TBI, traumatic brain injury.
Cox, Hetz, Liao et al.
1067
www.StemCells.com
V
C AlphaMed Press 2016
 Cell Therapy-accredited, and compliant with current Good
Manufacturing Practice (cGMP).
Upon its arrival at the cGMP facility, the bone marrow
was filtered through a 170–260 mm filter to remove aggre-
gates and/or spicules. The bone marrow was sampled for aer-
obic, anaerobic, and fungal sterility as well as nucleated cell
count and multiparameter flow cytometric analysis. The MNC-
enriched fraction was obtained by density gradient centrifuga-
tion of the bone marrow on Ficoll-Paque PREMIUM (GE
Healthcare Life Sciences, Pittsburgh, PA, USA) using the Bio-
safe Sepax 2 RM cell processor, the NeatCell protocol, and
the CS-900.2 kit for regenerative medicine applications (Bio-
safe America, Houston, TX, USA). Risk management methods
used for the production of clinical-grade cells were per-
formed, and all reagents used had the manufacturer’s certifi-
cate of analysis on file and maintained according to applicable
regulation. Any residual Ficoll-Paque PREMIUM was removed
during the automated washing step of the Sepax 2 RM cell
enrichment procedure and no other infusion-incompatible
reagents were added during manufacturing.
Prior to product release, aliquots of the final product
were taken for quality-control testing (nucleated cell count,
viability, gram stain, 14 day aerobic and anaerobic bacterial
and 28 day fungal cultures, endotoxin and mycoplasma con-
tent, colony forming unit assays and multiparameter flow
cytometry for an extended differential cell count and to
assess cell population identity). Only products that passed the
release acceptance criteria (negative Gram stain; >70% viabili-
ty determined with the Trypan Blue exclusion method and
endotoxin levels <5.0 EU/Kg measured using the Endosafe
PTS system by Charles River Laboratories) were authorized by
the quality team for infusion. Upon meeting the release crite-
ria, the final dose consisting of 6 3 106 cells/ml/kg, 9 3 106
cells/ml/kg or 12 3 106 cells/ml/kg in 0.9% saline containing
5% volume/volume human serum albumin was prepared in
one or two sterile syringes and transported to the infusion
site at ambient temperature in a validated cooler using a pro-
fessional courier service.
Cell Product Infusion.
The patients enrolled into the low
dose, medium dose, and high dose groups were to receive
target doses of 6 3 106 BMMNC/kg, 9 3 106 BMMNC/kg,
and 12 3 106 BMMNC/kg, respectively. The dosing range was
derived from our preclinical laboratory data[6] and our prior
phase I pediatric trial which used a similar protocol[8]. The
BMMNC infusion was performed through either peripheral or
central venous catheters approximately 7–8 hours after har-
vest. Postinfusion monitoring of postharvest hemodynamics
was performed every 15 minutes for the first hour, every 30
minutes for hours 2–3, and 1 hour for hours 3–7.
Flow
Cytometry.
A
four-color
direct
immunofluorescent
“lyse/no wash” labeling method was used in the evaluation of
progenitor cells and lymphocyte subsets. Samples of bone
marrow starting material and final product (MNCs) were
stained with the following four panels: (a) 7AAD to assess
overall viability; (b) CD45/CD14 to identify lymphocytes, lym-
phoblasts, monocytes, and granulocytes; (c) CD45/CD19/CD3/
CD16 1 56 to identify T, B, NK, and NKT subsets; (d) Lin1/
CD34/CD45/CD133 to identify hematopoietic stem cells and
other progenitor cells. The fourth panel was done in TruCount
tubes (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) to allow calculation of
absolute cell counts. The following antibodies were used at
saturated concentrations: CD45 clone 2D1 conjugated to
PerCP-Cy5.5 (BD Biosciences), CD14 clone M5E2 conjugated to
FITC (BD Biosciences), MultiTest CD3/CD16 1 56/CD45/CD19
conjugated to
FITC/PE/PerCP/APC
(BD
Biosciences),
CD34
clone 561 conjugated to APC (BioLegend, San Diego, CA),
CD133/1 clone AC133 conjugated to PE (Miltenyi Biotech, San
Diego, CA), and Lineage 1 cocktail (“Lin-1” consisting of CD3,
CD14, CD16, CD19, CD20 and CD56) conjugated to FITC (BD
Biosciences). Immediately after lysing samples for 15 minutes
with PharmLyse (BD Biosciences), data were acquired with an
LSRII cytometer equipped with FACSDiva software (BD Biosci-
ences). For the four-part differential panel 10,000 singlet cells
were acquired, for the lymphocyte subsets 10,000 singlet
CD451 lymphs were acquired, and (where possible) 100,000
singlet CD451 cells were acquired for progenitor cells. Analy-
sis was performed with FlowJo (Tree Star Inc., Ashland, OR)
and FCS Express 4 (De Novo Software, Glendale, CA). The dif-
ferential was analyzed using CD45 and light scatter gates,
with CD14 to confirm monocytes. Lymphocyte subsets were
gated using the CD3, CD19, and CD16 1 56 markers within
the low side-scatter CD451 lymphocyte population. The pro-
genitor cells were evaluated using ISHAGE gating strategy for
total CD341 progenitors, with additional gating to identify
the Lin-1[neg]CD34 1 CD1331, Lin-1[neg]CD34 1 CD133[neg],
and Lin-1[neg]CD34[neg]CD1331 subsets. Process controls
CD-Chex Plus and CD-Chex CD34 (Streck, Omaha, NE) were
used to ensure assay consistency.
Study Outcomes.
The primary aims of this study were to
evaluate safety of bone marrow harvest/infusional toxicity of
BMMNC after severe TBI, compare changes in white matter
metrics longitudinally and investigate potential changes in the
inflammatory cytokine response.
Harvest procedure safety was measured by measuring sys-
temic and cerebral hemodynamic responses to bone marrow
withdrawal as well as harvest site complications. To assess for
multiorgan dysfunction the Sequential Organ Failure Assess-
ment (SOFA) was calculated prospectively for each patient
which has been validated for use in trauma patients[14]. Evi-
dence of pulmonary infusion-related toxicity was determined
by using the Murray score which is based upon PaO2:FiO2,
chest radiograph, lung compliance, and positive end expirato-
ry pressure[15]. A basic metabolic profile and complete blood
count with differential were obtained each day in the inten-
sive care unit to monitor for renal or hematologic insults.
Hepatic transaminases were followed daily to assess for any
potential hepatic injury as a result of microthrombosis. Finally,
neurologic status was also assessed daily while in the ICU.
Intracranial pressure was recorded hourly by the nursing staff
and entered into the hospital’s electronic medical record.
With the exception of bone marrow harvest and BM-MNC
infusion monitoring, all ICP data used for analysis were
obtained from the hospital’s electronic medical record.
Whole blood was obtained at the time of consent and in
the acute period every 12 hours for 7 days following infusion
by study staff. Chronic samples were obtained at 1 month
and 6 months. Blood samples were collected in EDTA tubes
1068
Bone Marrow Cells for TBI
V
C AlphaMed Press 2016
STEM CELLS
 and immediately centrifuged to obtain a platelet poor plasma
sample. All samples were then stored at 2808C until biomark-
er analyses were performed. Cytokine levels for interleukin 1
beta (IL-1b), interleukin 4, interleukin 6, interleukin 10, inter-
feron gamma (IFN-g), and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-a)
were then assessed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(Legend MaxTM, BioLegend, San Diego, CA, USA).
Imaging Protocols.
All imaging data were acquired using a
General Electric 3.0 Tesla Sigma HD scanner with an eight
channel parallel imaging head coil. Imaging was performed at
1 month and 6 months from injury to acquire data for volu-
metric and diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) comparisons. MRI
acquisition parameters for the high-resolution anatomical and
30-direction DTI sequences quantitatively analyzed in this
study are as follows:(a) Sagittal isotropic 3D T1-weighted
spoiled gradient echo (1 3 1 3 1 mm3); repetition time
(TR) 5 7.236 ms; echo time (TE)52.968 ms; flip angle 5 11. 2)
Axial 30-direction single-shot spin-echo diffusion sensitized
echo-planar (with additional 3 b0 volumes) (2.73 3 2.73 3
2.70 mm3): TR 5 14900 ms; TE 5 85.6 ms; flip angle 5 90. The
high-resolution anatomical MRI sequence from each MRI ses-
sion was processed using Freesurfer software version 5.3.0
(www.surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu) to obtain global measures
of supratentorial and total white matter volumes. The isotro-
pic 30-direction DTI sequence from each imaging session was
processed with FMRIB’s Software Library version 5.0.7 (FSL,
Oxford, UK) to correct for eddy currents and motion before
using DTIFIT to estimate the diffusion tensor at each voxel.
Based on prior neuropathological and imaging studies report-
ing major impact of TBI on corpus callosum (CC) and cortico-
spinal tract[16], we selected these regions for analysis. To
obtain DTI metrics of white matter integrity from the CC, a
binary mask was manually created on three adjacent midsagit-
tal slices. Additionally, DTI metrics from five subregions of the
CC were obtained by creating individual binary masks for each
of five equally-spaced segments of the CC. To obtain DTI met-
rics from a region of interest at the level of the brainstem, a
single axial slice was selected for probing the cortical spinal
tract (CST) at the midpons level where the pontine crossing
tract was distinctly visible[17].
Neurocognitive Outcome Testing.
A licensed neuropsycholo-
gist blinded to treatment groups performed neurobehavioral
testing as well as functional outcome assessments at 1 month
and 6 months following injury. Assessments were determined
by direct assessment of each patient and patient or caregiver
interviews. The measures are consistent with recommenda-
tions supported by the NIH, National Institute of Disability
and Rehabilitation Research, National Institue of Mental
Health, and DoD for the use of common outcome measures
in TBI research in adults[18] as well as recommendations for
assessment of outcome in clinical trials of TBI[19]. Functional
outcomes included ratings of the global level of functioning,
independence in daily functioning, adjustment, and communi-
ty participation. Neuropsychological outcome measures tar-
geted psychological adjustment, declarative memory, working
memory, attention, fine motor skills, processing speed, and
verbal fluency. The neurocognitive testing matrix in the Sup-
porting Information figures provides descriptive information
and lists dependent variables of interest for each measure in
italics.
Data Analysis
Data are presented as mean 6 SEM. Neuroimaging metrics
were evaluated using repeated measures ANOVA used to eval-
uate within subject change over time in each group and test
for group*time interaction. Correlations of fractional anisotro-
py (FA) of the CC and neurocognitive outcomes were assessed
using Spearman’s rho. Biomarker data were analyzed in both
a pooled and dose-dependent format using ANOVA and post
hoc nonparametric analysis with Wilcoxon Rank-Sum after
confirming nonnormal distribution of data. Cohen’s d was cal-
culated to estimate treatment effect size between control and
treated groups.
RESULTS
Enrollment and Patient Characteristics
Through the course of the study 320 patients were screened
for enrollment with 90 in the control phase and 230 in the
treatment phase (Fig. 1). During the control phase, 11
patients were found to meet eligibility requirements with the
LAR agreeing to consent in 10 cases. Twenty-two out of 230
patients screened during the treatment phase met eligibility
requirements. In four cases, the patient’s LAR declined enroll-
ment, one patient had no available LAR, and patients were
unable to be enrolled due to a safety review in two cases.
The most frequent reason for not meeting study eligibility
was a postresuscitation GCS outside of the 5–8 range.
Seven of 10 patients in the control group and 14 of 15 in the
treatment group were able to complete all phases of study
follow-up. One patient in the control group was lost to follow-up
prior to the 1 month postinjury assessment. Additionally, three
control patients and one treated patient were unable to complete
the 6-month time point imaging study. No patient fatalities were
recorded during the 6-month study follow up period.
Sex distribution was similar between control and treat-
ment groups with approximately 70% of patients enrolled
male. Injury severity scores and the head component of the
abbreviated injury scale (AIS-head) were calculated and pro-
vided by the hospital trauma registry. These scores in addition
to postresuscitation GCS were similar across all patient
cohorts. With the exception of one patient in the control arm
of the study, all AIS-head scores were greater or equal to 3
and thus consistent with alternative measures of severe TBI.
Table 2 describes the patient characteristics. In the control
arm, 1 out of 10 patients underwent surgical decompression
on presentation for their injury-not after or a consequence of
treatment. Four out of 15 patients in the treated arm (one
low dose, one medium dose, two high dose) required decom-
pressive craniectomy for ICP management on presentation.
No patients in the control arm had ventriculostomy place-
ment on initial presentation or for management of refractory
ICP. In the treated arm of the study, two patients underwent
ventriculostomy placement for initial management of ICP and
three patients underwent ventriculostomy placement after
several days of admission for refractory ICP issues. Additional-
ly, the peak ICP and Therapeutic Intensity Level recorded prior
to treatment and over the first 24 hours of injury was
Cox, Hetz, Liao et al.
1069
www.StemCells.com
V
C AlphaMed Press 2016
 significantly higher in treated patients than controls (Support-
ing Information Fig. S1).
Bone Marrow Harvest
Bone marrow harvest was performed at an average of 28
hours following admission. Harvest was performed at bedside
in 14 of 15 cases and in the operating room following a
decompressive craniectomy in one case. No major adverse
events were recorded during bone marrow harvest for any of
the patients and there were no significant hemodynamic
changes during postharvest monitoring. These data are graphi-
cally displayed in Supporting Information Figure S3.
Cell Dose Characterization
The immunophenotypic characterization of the infused cell
product by dose group is shown in Supporting Information
Table S1 and Figure S2, as well as the underlying graphics
regarding progenitor cell dose infused per kilogram body
weight.
Infusion-Related Toxicity/Safety Outcomes
Adverse Events.
The adverse events are tabulated in Sup-
porting Information Table S2 and grouped according to type
and control versus treatment groups. There were no events
that triggered the stopping rules and no serious adverse
events related to the study protocol.
Hemodynamics: Central and Cerebrovascular.
Intraharvest
and postharvest hemodynamic monitoring are shown in Sup-
porting Information Figure S3. There was no drop in the MAP
or the CPP or increase in ICP.
SOFA Scoring.
No statistically significant difference in SOFA
scores was present over a 21-day follow-up period when com-
paring pooled or individual (Supporting Information Fig. S4A)
treatment groups against control patients. There was a trend
towards increased organ dysfunction in the high-dose treat-
ment group.
Figure 1.
CONSORT diagram for trial enrollment/participation. Patients were screened with a 3greater than 10:1 ratio of screened to
be enrolled. This has logistical implications for trial design. Long-term follow-up was exceptionally strong for an acute trauma study (nor-
mally approximately 30–50%). The flow diagram shows how patients are identified, enrolled, and treated within 48 hours, with a mea-
sured mean of approximately 36 hours. Abbreviations: BMMNC, bone marrow mononuclear cell; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid LAR, legally
authorized representative, TBI, traumatic brain injury.
1070
Bone Marrow Cells for TBI
V
C AlphaMed Press 2016
STEM CELLS
 Pulmonary Function-Murray Scoring.
Treated patients were
found to have a significant increase in Murray scores in the
pooled treated arm of the study when compared to control
patients (p < .05) (Supporting Information Fig. 4B). On sub-
group analysis, the high-dose treatment group remained with
a significant increase (p < .01) in Murray scores [Supporting
Information Fig. 4C).
Imaging Data and Functional Outcome Correlation.
Global
measures of volumetric changes over time.
Quantitative
analyses of the high-resolution 3D T1-weighted images yielded
longitudinal volumetric measures of the supratentorium and
cerebral white matter at 1 month and 6 months postinjury in
20 of 25 patients. These data are graphically summarized in Fig-
ure 2. In the treated group of patients, these data were avail-
able for all but 1 of 15 subjects; one subject who was in the
high-dose group of treated patients did not complete the 6
month imaging session. In the untreated group of patients,
these data were not available for 4 of 10 subjects; 3 subjects
did not complete the 6 month imaging session and 1 subject
had significant artifacts distorting the images at the 6 month
time-point.
As indicated in Figure 2 (Supratentorial Volume), pooled
comparisons of all treated versus untreated patients showed
similar supratentorial volumes at 1 month. Whereas the
treated group demonstrated a 1.87% decrease in supratento-
rial volume, the untreated group showed a 3.9% reduction.
When treated patients #19 and #20 were excluded from the
analyses, there was a significant interaction between group
and time (p 5 .0294) as the treated group demonstrated well-
preserved supratentorial volume (<0.15% decrease) at the 6
month time-point. In Figure 2, similar cerebral white matter
volumes are evident in comparisons of treated versus untreat-
ed patients at the 1 month time-point. At the 6 month time-
point, the treated group demonstrated a 2% decrease in cere-
bral white matter volume while the untreated group showed
a 3.6% reduction. After reviewing unique aspects of patients
#19 and 20, we decided to analyze the data with and without
these patients. One had a massive intracerebral contusion/
hematoma and the other had a middle cerebral artery distri-
bution stroke as imaging confounders (Fig. 2B). Representative
CT scans are shown in Figure 5B. When treated patients #19
and #20 were excluded, there was a significant group*time
interaction (p 5 .0049) as the treated group exhibited well-
preserved cerebral white matter volume (<0.65% decrease)
at the 6 month time-point. Although statistical comparisons
across dose levels did not reach significance, a trend for
greater white matter volume preservation is evident in the
low and middle dose-treated groups relative to the untreated
group of patients (see Fig. 2A).
ROI-based measures of white matter integrity changes over
time.
Quantitative analyses of the DTI data yielded mea-
sures of white matter integrity which included FA, and mean
diffusivity (MD). These data were available longitudinally in 21
of 25 patients as four subjects (one treated and three
untreated) did not complete the 6-month neuroimaging
session.
Corpus callosum.
As shown in Figure 3, FA values of the
CC in the untreated group were lower at both imaging time-
points relative to the low and middle dose groups of treated
patients. The high-dose group of treated patients exhibited
the lowest FA values of the CC at both imaging time-points
(CC-FA Fig. 3A). Inspection of individual subject’s data in the
high-dose-treated group of patients (CC-FA Fig. 3B) revealed
exceptionally low FA values of the CC at both imaging time-
points for patients #19 and #20. Pooled comparisons of all
treated versus untreated patients demonstrated a trend for
better FA values at both imaging time-points in the treated
group (CC-FA Fig. 3C). When patients #19 and #20 were
excluded, group differences approached significance (p 5 .055)
with the treated patients exhibiting higher FA values (mean-
5 0.59 and 0.57 at 1 month and 6 months, respectively) rela-
tive to the untreated patients (mean 5 0.54 and 0.53).
As shown in Figure 3, MD values of the CC in the untreat-
ed group were higher at both imaging time-points relative to
the low and middle dose groups of treated patients. The high-
dose group of treated patients showed the highest MD values
of the CC at both imaging time-points (CC-MD Fig. 3A). Evalu-
ation of individual subject’s data in the high-dose-treated
group of patients identified exceptionally high MD values of
the CC for patients #19 and #20 (CC-MD Fig. 3B). Pooled com-
parisons of all treated versus untreated patients indicated
lower MD values of the CC at both imaging time-points (CC-
MD Fig. 3C). When patients #19 and #20 were excluded,
group differences were significant (p 5 .008) with the treated
patients exhibiting lower MD values (mean 5 0.897 31023
mm2/s and 0.938 31023mm2/s) at 1 and 6 months, respec-
tively, relative to the untreated patients (mean 5 0.975 3
1023mm2/s and 0.986 3 1023mm2/s).
Table 2. Patient characteristics
Variable
Control
Low dose
Medium dose
High dose
Treated combined
Males (%)
70(7)
80(4)
80(4)
60(3)
73(11)
Mean age
34 6 5
25 6 4
31 6 4
34 6 3
30 6 2
Injury severity score
28 6 3
28 6 2
27 6 4
27 6 5
28 6 2
Postresuscitation Glasgow Coma Scale
7 6 0
7 6 1
7 6 0
7 6 0
7 6 0
Craniectomies (prior to infusion) (%)
10(1)
20(1)
20(1)
40(2)
27(4)
External ventricular Drain (%)
0(0)
0(0)
40(2)
60(3)
33(5)
Abbreviated injury scale-Head
4 6 0
4 6 0
4 6 0
4 6 0
4 6 0
1 month GOS-E
3 6 0.1
3 6 0.2
3 6 0
3 6 0
3 6 0
6 month GOS-E
5 6 1
4 6 1
5 6 1
3 6 0
4 6 0
Time of infusion (hours)
-
33 6 3
39 6 2
36 6 2
36 6 1
Time of harvest (hours)
-
25 6 3
30 6 2
28 61
28 6 1
Time of enrollment (hours)
16 6 2
13 6 1
15 6 0
19 6 1
16 6 1
There were no differences in the injury demographics. However, treated patients had a greater therapeutic intensity with decompressive cra-
niectomy and ventricular drain placement for ICP management compared to control patients. This is shown in subsequent figures as well.
Abbreviation: ICP, intracranial pressures; GOS, glasgow outcome score.
Cox, Hetz, Liao et al.
1071
www.StemCells.com
V
C AlphaMed Press 2016
 CST at the midpons level of the brainstem.
As summarized
in Figure 4, DTI metrics extracted from a region of interest of
the CST at the level of the brainstem exhibited characteristics
of better white matter integrity in the pooled group of
treated patients relative to the untreated group of patients. A
significant interaction between group and time was evident
for FA (p 5 .0137). While FA values decreased over time in
the untreated group, FA values increased over time in the
treated group of patients (Fig. 4A). Additionally, a significant
group*time interaction for analyses of radial diffusivity (RD)
(p 5 .033) indicated well-preserved RD values over time in the
treated group of patients whereas RD values increased over
time in the untreated group of patients (Fig. 4B). Analyses of
MD showed a significant group difference in MD values
(p 5 .0137). The treated group of patients demonstrated sta-
ble MD values over time, which was lower than the untreated
group at both imaging time-points (Fig. 4C). These data
include patients 19–20 as the imaging was below the anatom-
ic level of the injury.
Correlation of Callosal and Neurobehavioral Outcomes.
Cal-
losal fibers are generally topographically organized relative to
the cortical regions that they connect. Our parcellation system
is based on dividing the callosal fibers into five equal seg-
ments roughly corresponding to the following cortical termi-
nation sites: CC1-rostrum and genu, CC2-rostral and anterior
midbody,
CC3-posterior
midbody,
CC4-isthmus,
and
CC5-
splenium. Based on our prior studies, FA was selected as the
most sensitive DTI metric in relation to posttraumatic changes
in cognitive and motor abilities[20]. Consequently, neuropsy-
chological outcomes for the total sample from the 6 month
follow-up were examined in relation to FA values from the
Figure 2.
Global change in white matter volume. These data graphically represent the changes in WM volume by treatment group (A),
the individual patients in the high dose group with their corresponding computed tomography images explaining their outlier status (B),
and the pooled comparisons of treated versus controls (C). Supratentorial white matter volume is demonstrated with and without the
outlier patients 19 and 20. Treated patients show greater supratentorial WM volume preservation compared to controls. Abbreviation:
WM, white matter.
1072
Bone Marrow Cells for TBI
V
C AlphaMed Press 2016
STEM CELLS
 regional and total CC using Spearman rho or Pearson r
depending on the variable distribution (Supporting Informa-
tion Table S3). Due to the small sample size, control and
treated cases were pooled (n 5 21). FA of the splenium (CC5)
and/or the whole CC were significantly related to all major
functional outcomes, confirming that more favorable out-
comes were seen in patients with greater tissue integrity. Sim-
ilarly,
all
neuropsychological
outcomes
were
significantly
Figure 3.
Corpus callosum FA and MD. These data graphically display the changes in FA and MD in the control and treated groups in a
dose-dependent manner (A), High dose individual patients (B) and pooled comparisons (C). FA is a summary measure of microstructural
integrity. Oversimplified, high FA values are a surrogate measure of coherent, tightly packed, and myelinated fibers. Mean diffusivity is
an inverse measure of cell membrane density and is sensitive to edema and necrosis (higher FA is “good,” and lower MD is “good”). FA
is higher in the treated groups except in the outliers as demonstrated in Panel B. MD is lower in the low and medium dose groups, and
again the higher dose outliers skew those results. Abbreviations: FA fractional anisotropy; MD, mean diffusivity.
Cox, Hetz, Liao et al.
1073
www.StemCells.com
V
C AlphaMed Press 2016
 correlated with the total CC FA. Tasks with a major motor
speed component (Trail Making B, Processing Speed, Grooved
Pegboard), were significantly related to FA of CC2-5, reflecting
the adverse impact of generalized white matter injury on
tasks requiring speed and efficiency. In addition, some test
scores were significantly related to specific CC regions; verbal
fluency and working memory were related to CC2 and CC3.
Memory of a word list was related to CC1 and CC2; delayed
recall of the same list was related to CC4 and CC5.the same
list was related to CC4 and CC5.
Biomarker Analysis
The plasma concentrations of cytokines were analyzed in both a
pooled and dose-dependent format. These are graphically repre-
sented in Figure 5. The data are shown as baseline (we used the
6-month value that should represent the patient’s endogenous
level remote from injury/trauma/operation/infection/stress) to
the peak value obtained within the first 96 hours as well as a
postinjury/pretreatment to 96 hour peak. There is a dose-
dependent trend for TNF-a suppression and a statistically signifi-
cant, reduction in IL-1b, IL-10, and IFN-g in the high dose group.
DISCUSSION
This is the first controlled trial to test BMMNC as a treatment
for TBI, confirming safety in a prior trial in pediatric TBI, and
now providing signals of a treatment effect on structural pres-
ervation and the global neuroinflammatory response[8]. Spe-
cifically, (a) early, autologous BMMNC harvest and infusion
are safe and logistically feasible within a 36 hour time win-
dow of treatment, (b) there is a treatment signal of brain tis-
sue preservation measureable on DT-MRI in
a clinically
relevant setting, (c) functional outcomes correlate with brain
tissue preservation, and (d) BMMNC infusion may be altering
the global inflammatory response to injury as measured by
cytokine profiles. As a Phase 1/2a trial in TBI with small
patient numbers, this study suffers from numerous limita-
tions: (a) injury heterogeneity as exemplified by the higher
severity of injury in the treatment group as measured by ini-
tial ICPs, and statistically greater numbers of patients requir-
ing decompressive craniectomy prior to BMMNC infusion, (b)
“early” DT-MRI may actually be too late to capture much of
the FA/MD effects, (c) a nonrandomized/unblinded design
impacting patient injury severity heterogeneity and potential
for observer bias.
Rationale for Cell Type/Dosing and Route
Numerous cell types have been proposed for the treatment
of TBI: BMMNC, mesenchymal stromal cells/multipotent adult
stem cells, as well as neural stem cells from either fetal or
embryonic derivation; preclinical studies have used all of
these, as well as a variety of routes of administration (intra-
cranial, intrathecal, intra-arterial, and intravenous). At the
Figure 4.
Corticospinal tract FA, MD, and radial diffusivity. These data demonstrate the increase in FA over time in the treated group
compared to the decrease over time in the control group. (A) Conversely, the diffusivity measurements (Radial Diffusivity-Panel B; Mean
Diffusivity-Panel C) show progression in the control group and improvement in the treated group. Abbreviations: FA fractional anisotro-
py; MD, mean diffusivity.
1074
Bone Marrow Cells for TBI
V
C AlphaMed Press 2016
STEM CELLS
 Figure 5.
Inflammatory cytokine array. A panel of pro and anti-inflammatory cytokines were measured in plasma. Peak levels within
the first 96 hours postinjury were considered the physiological maximal response, and the 6 month follow-up levels were considered
“baseline.” True uninjured baseline/pretreatment cytokine data cannot be obtained. Pretreatment and peak levels were also analyzed
and presented. The data show a significant decrease in IL-1b, and IFN-g in the high dose group and an apparent dose-dependent down-
ward trend in those cytokines as well as TNF-a. The anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 was decreased in the high dose group with a
dose-dependent downward trend in IL-4. Abbreviations: IFN-g, interferon gamma; IL-1b, Interleukin-1b; TNF-a, tumor necrosis factor-a.
Cox, Hetz, Liao et al.
1075
www.StemCells.com
V
C AlphaMed Press 2016
 pathophysiologic level, the majority of traumatic brain injuries
are multifocal, and even focal injuries have areas exacerbated
by secondary neuroinflammatory processes. Thus, localized
cell replacement is impractical for a diffuse process. Addition-
ally, we have not been in favor of localized injection strategies
since these strategies require a craniotomy or multiple burr-
holes (possibly causing more damage), and also depend on
stereotactic implantation and cell migration followed by differ-
entiation and engraftment. Our preclinical data in both stroke
and TBI demonstrate efficacy with intravenous delivery, thus
we chose this low risk approach with equivalent efficacy[6, 9].
Previously, we and others attempted to track numerous cell
types post-IV infusion after TBI in preclinical models[11, 21].
Not surprisingly, most cell types lodge at least transiently in
the pulmonary circulation but later reside in the reticuloendo-
thelial system, specifically the spleen[22]. We did not track
engraftment location in our current clinical study, though this
could be attempted in future studies using superparamagnetic
iron particles.
Numerous preclinical studies demonstrate the efficacy of
mesenchymal stromal cells in TBI[23–36]. When infused intra-
venously, bone marrow derived cells (either allogeneic or
autologous) seem to have similar mechanism of action and
similar efficacy dampening the innate immune response to
injury. We and others have shown that infusion of bone mar-
row derived cells preserves the blood-brain barrier and
improves long-term outcomes by dampening the microglial
activation that occurs in response to the primary injury[3]. Of
course, the logistical constraints of the current paradigm for
infusion of autologous bone marrow mononuclear cells limits
the application of this technique to major centers. The advan-
tages of an allogeneic MSC treatment would include an “off-
the-shelf” availability and a product that has already been
thoroughly characterized and tested for release criteria and
potency. This would obviate the need for an invasive bone
marrow harvest in the acute period as well as cGMP cell proc-
essing. However, there are potential risks with MSC adminis-
tration and careful expansion is required to maintain potency.
Moll et al., have described an “instant blood-mediated inflam-
matory reaction” to MSC infusion[37]. This could be of greater
theoretical concern in acutely injured trauma patients in
whom the endothelial/coagulation cascade are upregulated to
promote thrombosis[38]. Further, Moira et al. reported loss of
immune regulatory potency of MSCs after freeze-thaw cycles,
but this has not been universally replicated[39]. With this
knowledge in mind, we proceeded with the safest and most
readily available treatment strategy: intravenous autologous
BMMNC administration.
Safety
This study demonstrates that early BMMNC harvest and infu-
sion is safe. There were no episodes of hypotension, hypoxia,
or exacerbation of ICP/CPP parameters associated with har-
vest of the bone marrow at up to 5 ml/kg body weight or
infusion of the cell product. These parameters were prospec-
tively collected and evaluated as a safety read-out. There
were no serious events in terms of organ failure. However,
there did appear to be a dose-dependent pulmonary toxicity
with an increase in the Murray score suggesting a low-level
lung injury. While a Murray score of less than 1.5 is not a clin-
ically critical/serious event, it highlights that patients with
underlying lung disease or concomitant lung injury may need
to be excluded from these protocols/treatments. No patients
developed hypoxia related to the infusion, however, since
hypoxia adversely affects TBI outcomes, it may be prudent to
avoid any potential intervention that exacerbates pulmonary
function.
Logistical Feasibility
There are a number of critical elements required to execute this
research or future treatment strategy. There must be a robust
clinical neurotrauma program that is expert in critical care of
the patient with severe TBI. The clinical neurotrauma critical
care team must have extensive experience in care of patients
with severe TBI. Standard placement of intracranial pressure
monitors/ventricular drainage catheters must occur routinely
without delay. The clinical trial infrastructure must support the
ability to rapidly identify and screen all TBI patients, thus a
research “on call” team is mandatory. The call team includes
the ability to harvest and process/infuse cells every day and
night including week-ends and holidays. This requires a signifi-
cant increase in activity and personnel that goes beyond what
is available at centers with pure oncologic stem cell laborato-
ries. The future may allow closed system, point-of-care process-
ing, which is not currently available. Allogeneic cell infusions
using a pharmacy type “off the shelf” model would obviate the
burden of the allogeneic harvest and processing, with each
approach having pros and cons. A substantial amount of coordi-
nation with the clinical care team is mandatory to obtain data
and to harmonize safe and timely imaging acquisition. Imaging
infrastructure is another important component of the logistical
requirements as these imaging data require a 3T magnet that
has flexible availability. Finally, there must be a strong follow-up
program with engaged social services to facilitate transport of
patients back to the hospital for long-term neurocognitive and
imaging evaluation. Failure of any of these points in the proto-
col can undermine the progress of the program.
Imaging Outcomes
Our study sought to examine whether there were any potential
structural changes associated with BMMNC treatment for TBI.
The rationale that this treatment may result in structural pres-
ervation is based on the proposed pleiotropic mechanisms of
action described in preclinical studies and our own Phase 1 trial
in children[40–42]. Preclinical studies in rodents demonstrate
that there was a reduction in the degree of microglial activation
with autologous BMMNC infusion in rodents and microglial
activation after TBI is associated with white matter loss over
time[3, 43]. Adult and pediatric TBI longitudinal imaging studies
have established a chronic-phase volumetric reduction in gray
and white matter[18, 44–47]. An important finding noted in
this study is the treatment effect size determination (Support-
ing Information Table S3) that has allowed us to make the best
possible sample size estimate for an upcoming Phase 2b trial.
Our imaging data show that there is a protective effect that
may have a dose-dependent relationship. Despite two con-
founding patients (19, 20) with higher injury severity requiring
decompressive surgery prior to cell infusion that altered the
imaging read-out, there were significant differences and trends
in structural preservation in global volumetric measures of the
supratentorium and cerebral white matter. Further corpus cal-
losal
tract
preservation
as
measured
by
FA
and
MD
1076
Bone Marrow Cells for TBI
V
C AlphaMed Press 2016
STEM CELLS
 demonstrated preservation with treatment and correlated
strongly with neurocognitive outcomes. We estimated the
effect size of BMMNC treatment on DTI metrics of corpus cal-
losal integrity which is important in planning a Phase 2b trial
with CC DTI metrics as an outcome measure. BMMNC treat-
ment has a moderate to strong treatment effect on FA in the
CC (Cohen’s d 0.5–0.8). These data would allow a sample size
estimation for a study powered at 0.8 with a Cohen’s d between
26 (0.8) and 64. These data are shown in detail in Table 3. Add-
ing an exclusion in future trials for hemispheric stroke/contu-
sion volume threshold value that invalidates volumetric/DTI
metrics would also make MD a powerful outcome measure.
These data and the outcome correlates (Supporting Information
Table S3) also suggest that CC DTI metrics are useful primary
outcome measures.
Neurocognitive Outcomes
Despite substantial patient heterogeneity, small sample size,
and the restricted range of TBI severity, callosal FA values
were strongly correlated with functional and neuropsychologi-
cal outcomes. The strength of this relationship provides addi-
tional rationale for using imaging variables as a primary
clinical endpoint. FA of the whole CC was significantly corre-
lated with nearly all of the functional status, motor, and cog-
nitive measures. Moreover, neuropsychological variables were
significantly related to the integrity of fibers coursing through
different callosal segments. Motor and processing speed
scores, which are sensitive markers of generalized injury, were
correlated with FA in four of five segments. Memory and ver-
bal fluency scores were more strongly related to FA from
anterior and midcallosal regions carrying fibers terminating in
frontal, parietal, and temporal cortical areas. The integration
of sensitive metrics from neuroimaging and neuropsychologi-
cal outcome domains will enhance the detection of interven-
tion effects in larger samples.
Inflammatory Markers
The cytokine/biomarker data are interesting in that there
appears to be a dose-dependent downregulation of the proin-
flammatory innate immune response to injury. Specifically, the
IL-1b and IFN-g signals show a statistically significant reduc-
tion in systemic concentrations relative to the patient’s bio-
logical baseline (chronic follow-up level used as “baseline”).
TNF-a demonstrates a similar trend. These data parallel pre-
clinical data in cell therapy models of TBI (and stroke), in
terms of dampening of the global inflammatory response to
injury[3]. However, most of the preclinical models use some
other assays such as T-cell responsiveness to stimuli, modified
mixed lymphocyte reactions, etc. that are impractical for
many clinical trials. These types of assays typically require
processing of fresh specimens for flow cytometry-based inter-
rogation of the cellular response to stimuli, thus requiring a
constantly staffed immune function facility.
CONCLUSION
Autologous BMMNC infusion for adults with severe TBI is safe
and logistically feasible. There is a potential signal of treat-
ment effects in terms of structural preservation of critical CNS
Table 3. Treatment effect size estimation (Cohen’s d)-corpus callosal DTI metrics
6 month: all patients
Untreated
Pooled treated
Untreated vs. treated
(n 5 9)
(n 5 15)
Mean
SD
Mean
SD
Cohen’s d
95% CI
Whole CC FA
0.536
0.049
0.563
0.067
0.442
20.394 to 1.278
Whole CC MD
0.986
0.049
0.969
0.100
20.200
21.028 to 0.629
Whole CC RD
0.654
0.066
0.623
0.124
20.291
21.121 to 0.540
Whole CC AD
1.650
0.053
1.661
0.080
0.154
20.673 to 0.982
GOS-E
4.444
1.509
4.200
1.320
20.175
21.003 to 0.653
DRS
4.889
4.285
5.267
2.738
0.112
20.715 to 0.939
6 month: #19 & #20 excluded
Untreated
Pooled treated
Control vs. treated
(n 5 9)
(n 5 13)
Mean
SD
Mean
SD
Cohen’s d
95% CI
Whole CC FA
0.536
0.049
0.579
0.054
0.846
20.040 to 21.732
Whole CC MD
0.986
0.049
0.938
0.052
20.944
21.839 to 20.050
Whole CC RD
0.654
0.066
0.586
0.073
20.968
21.864 to 20.071
Whole CC AD
1.650
0.053
1.643
0.064
20.117
20.968 to 0.734
GOS-E
4.444
1.509
4.308
1.377
20.095
20.945 to 0.755
DRS
4.889
4.285
4.923
2.783
0.010
20.840 to 0.860
We estimated the effect size of BMMNC treatment on DTI metrics of corpus callosal integrity as a region of interest. These data are important
in planning a Phase 2b trial with CC DTI metrics as an outcome measure. BMMNC has a moderate to strong treatment effect on FA in the CC
(Cohen’s d 0.5–0.8). These data would allow a sample size estimation for a study powered at 0.8 with a Cohen’s d between 26 (0.8) and 64.
Adding an exclusion in future trials for hemispheric stroke/contusion volume threshold value that invalidates volumetric/DTI metrics would also
make MD a powerful outcome measure. These data and the outcome correlates (Supporting Information Table S3) also suggest that CC DTI met-
rics are useful primary outcome measures.
Abbreviations: BMMNC, bone marrow mononuclear cell; DRS, disability rating scale; DTI, diffusion tensor imaging; FA, fractional anisotropy;
GOS, glasgow outcome score; MD, mean diffusivity; RD, radial diffusivity.
Cox, Hetz, Liao et al.
1077
www.StemCells.com
V
C AlphaMed Press 2016
 architecture, mimicking preclinical data in rodents[48]. These
structural data correlate with a dampening of the proinflam-
matory signaling. A Phase 2b trial has been planned to evalu-
ate structural outcomes as the primary endpoint, eliminating
the high-dose regimen.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Research Coordinators: Steven Kosmach, RN, MSN., Mary-
Clare Day, RN, BSN; Fernando Jimenez, RN, MS. Cell Process-
ing Team: Andrew Havens, Sufira Kiran, James Roye, Philippa
Smith, Suchit Sahai, Ph.D., Marysuna Wilkerson. Technical Sup-
port: Anthony Moore10. All Cellular Processing was performed
at UTHealth-Medical School, The Evelyn H. Griffin Stem Cell
Therapeutics Research Laboratory, FDA Establishment Identifi-
er 3009561521. Funding Sources: DOD Grant: W81XWH-11-1-
0460 (Cox, PI); NIH 2T32 GM 0879201-11 (Holcomb, PI);
Glassell Foundation Stem Cell Research Program (Cox, PI).
Brown Foundation (Cox, PI).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
C.S.C.: Conception and design, financial support, administra-
tive support, collection and/or assembly of data, data analysis
and interpretation, manuscript writing, final approval of man-
uscript; R.A.H.: Collection and assembly of data, data analysis
and interpretation; G.P.L.: Collection and assembly of data,
data
analysis
and
interpretation;
B.M.A.:
Collection
and
assembly of data, data analysis and interpretation; L.E.-C.:
Conception and design, collection and assembly of data, data
analysis and interpretation, manuscript writing; J.J.: Concep-
tion and design, collection and assembly of data, data analysis
and interpretation, manuscript writing; S.I.S.: Conception and
design, collection and assembly of data, data analysis and
interpretation, manuscript writing; M.J.: Collection and assem-
bly of data, data analysis and interpretation, manuscript writ-
ing; A.M.R.-P.: Collection and assembly of data, data analysis
and interpretation; F.T.: Provision of study material; collection
and assembly of data; P.K.D.: Collection and assembly of data,
data analysis and interpretation; C.P.: Conception and design
data analysis and interpretation; D.L.: Provision of study mate-
rial or patients; L.W.: Provision of study material or patients;
I.A.: Provision of study material or patients; H.M.C.: Provision
of study material or patients, administrative report, manu-
script writing; J.H.: Provision of study material or patients,
administrative support; R.K.: Provision of study material or
patients, administrative support, manuscript writing.
DISCLOSURE OF POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
Since the time of completion, review and publication of this
manuscript, Dr. Cox and UTHealth have an equity interest in
Cellvation, Inc.- a company which seeks to develop cellular
therapies for neurological injuries.
REFERENCES
1
Centers for Disease Control and Preven-
tion. (2015). Report to Congress on Traumat-
ic
Brain
Injury
in
the
United
States:
Epidemiology and Rehabilitation. Atlanta, GA:
National Center for Injury Prevention and
Control;
Division
of
Unintentional
Injury
Prevention..
2
Kraus JF McArthur DL. Epidemiologic
aspects of brain injury. Neurol Clin 1996;14:
435–450.
3
Savitz SI Cox CS. Jr., Concise review: Cell
therapies for stroke and traumatic brain inju-
ry: Targeting microglia. STEM CELLS 2016;34:
537–542.
4
Sharma S, Yang B, Strong R et al. Bone
marrow mononuclear cells protect neurons
and modulate microglia in cell culture mod-
els of ischemic stroke. J Neurosci Res 2010;
88:2869–2876.
5
Suda S, Yang B, Schaar K et al. Autolo-
gous bone marrow mononuclear cells exert
broad effects on short- and long-term biolog-
ical and functional outcomes in rodents with
intracerebral
hemorrhage.
STEM
CELLS
DEV
2015;24:2756–2766.
6
Bedi SS, Walker PA, Shah SK et al. Autol-
ogous bone marrow mononuclear cells thera-
py
attenuates
activated
microglial/
macrophage response and improves spatial
learning
after
traumatic
brain
injury.
J Trauma Acute Care Surg 2013;75:410–416.
7
Yang B, Strong R, Sharma S et al. Thera-
peutic time window and dose response of
autologous bone marrow mononuclear cells
for ischemic stroke. J Neurosci Res 2011;89:
833–839.
8
Cox CS, Jr, Baumgartner JE, Harting MT
et al. Autologous bone marrow mononucle-
ar cell therapy for severe traumatic brain
injury
in
children.
Neurosurgery
2011;68:
588–600.
9
Brenneman M, Sharma S, Harting M
et al. Autologous bone marrow mononuclear
cells enhance recovery after acute ischemic
stroke
in
young
and
middle-aged
rats.
J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2010;30:140–149.
10
Savitz SI, Misra V, Kasam M et al. Intra-
venous autologous bone marrow mononucle-
ar cells for ischemic stroke. Ann Neurol 2011;
70:59–69.
11
Fischer UM, Harting MT, Jimenez F et al.
Pulmonary passage is a major obstacle for
intravenous stem cell delivery: The pulmo-
nary first-pass effect. STEM CELLS DEV 2009;18:
683–691.
12
Teasdale G Jennett B. Assessment of
coma and impaired consciousness. A practical
scale. Lancet 1974;304:81–84.
13
Brain Trauma Foundation B, AANS, CNS,
Care ACJSoNaC. Guidelines for the manage-
ment of severe traumatic brain injury, 3rd
edition. J Neurotrauma 2007;24:S1–S106.
14
Antonelli M, Moreno R, Vincent JL et al.
Application
of
SOFA
score
to
trauma
patients. Intensive Care Med 1999;25:389–
394.
15
Murray JF, Matthay MA, Luce JM et al.
An expanded definition of the adult respira-
tory distress syndrome. Am Rev Respir Dis
1988;138:720–723.
16
Adams JH, Doyle D, Ford I et al. Diffuse
axonal injury in head injury: Definition, diag-
nosis and grading. Histopathology 1989;15:
49–59.
17
Salamon N, Sicotte N, Alger J et al. Anal-
ysis of the brain-stem white-matter tracts
with diffusion tensor imaging. Neuroradiolo-
gy 2005;47:895–902.
18
Wilde EA, Hunter JV, Newsome MR et al.
Frontal and temporal morphometric findings
on MRI in children after moderate to severe
traumatic brain injury. J Neurotrauma 2005;
22:333–344.
19
Bagiella E, Novack TA, Ansel B et al.
Measuring outcome in traumatic brain injury
treatment trials: Recommendations from the
traumatic brain injury clinical trials network.
J Head Trauma Rehabil 2010;25:375–382.
20
Ewing-Cobbs L, Prasad MR, Swank P
et al. Arrested development and disrupted
callosal
microstructure
following
pediatric
traumatic brain injury: Relation to neurobe-
havioral
outcomes.
NeuroImage
2008;42:
1305–1315.
21
Harting MT, Jimenez F, Xue H et al.
Intravenous mesenchymal stem cell therapy
for traumatic brain injury: Laboratory investi-
gation. J Neurosurg 2009;110:1189–1197.
22
Walker PA, Shah SK, Jimenez F et al.
Intravenous multipotent adult progenitor cell
therapy for traumatic brain injury: Preserving
the blood brain barrier via an interaction
with splenocytes. Exp Neurol 2010;225:341–
352.
23
Anbari F, Khalili MA, Bahrami AR et al.
Intravenous transplantation of bone marrow
mesenchymal stem cells promotes neural
regeneration
after
traumatic
brain
injury.
Neural Regen Res 2014;9:919–923.
24
Arien-Zakay H, Gincberg G, Nagler A
et al. Neurotherapeutic effect of cord blood
derived CD451 hematopoietic cells in mice
1078
Bone Marrow Cells for TBI
V
C AlphaMed Press 2016
STEM CELLS
 after traumatic brain injury. J Neurotrauma
2014;31:1405–1416.
25
Jiang J, Bu X, Liu M et al. Transplanta-
tion
of
autologous
bone
marrow-derived
mesenchymal stem cells for traumatic brain
injury. Neural Regen Res 2012;7:46–53.
26
Kim HJ, Lee JH Kim SH. Therapeutic
effects of human mesenchymal stem cells on
traumatic brain injury in rats: Secretion of
neurotrophic factors and inhibition of apo-
ptosis. J Neurotrauma 2010;27:131–138.
27
Li L, Jiang Q, Qu CS et al. Transplanta-
tion of marrow stromal cells restores cere-
bral blood flow and reduces cerebral atrophy
in rats with traumatic brain injury: In vivo
MRI study. J Neurotrauma 2011;28:535–545.
28
Lu D, Sanberg PR, Mahmood A et al.
Intravenous administration of human umbili-
cal cord blood reduces neurological deficit in
the rat after traumatic brain injury. Cell
Transplant 2002;11:275–281.
29
Mahmood A, Lu D Chopp M. Marrow
stromal cell transplantation after traumatic
brain injury promotes cellular proliferation
within
the
brain.
Neurosurgery
2004;55:
1185–1193.
30
Mahmood A, Lu D, Lu M et al. Treat-
ment of traumatic brain injury in adult rats
with intravenous administration of human
bone marrow stromal cells. Neurosurgery
2003;53:697–702. discussion 23.
31
Osanai T, Kuroda S, Sugiyama T et al.
Therapeutic effects of intra-arterial delivery
of bone marrow stromal cells in traumatic
brain injury of rats–in vivo cell tracking study
by near-infrared fluorescence imaging. Neu-
rosurgery 2012;70:435–444. discussion 44.
32
Pischiutta F, D’amico G, Dander E et al.
Immunosuppression does not affect human
bone
marrow
mesenchymal
stromal
cell
efficacy after transplantation in traumatized
mice
brain.
Neuropharmacology
2014;79:
119–126.
33
Turtzo LC, Budde MD, Dean DD et al.
Failure of intravenous or intracardiac delivery
of mesenchymal stromal cells to improve
outcomes after focal traumatic brain injury in
the female rat. PLoS One 2015;10:e0126551.
34
Watanabe J, Shetty AK, Hattiangady B
et
al.
Administration
of
TSG-6
improves
memory after traumatic brain injury in mice.
Neurobiol Dis 2013;59:86–99.
35
Zanier ER, Montinaro M, Vigano M et al.
Human umbilical cord blood mesenchymal
stem cells protect mice brain after trauma.
Crit Care Med 2011;39:2501–2510.
36
Zhang R, Liu Y, Yan K et al. Anti-inflam-
matory and immunomodulatory mechanisms
of mesenchymal stem cell transplantation in
experimental
traumatic
brain
injury.
J Neuroinflammation 2013;10:106.
37
Moll G, Rasmusson-Duprez I, Von Bahr L
et al. Are therapeutic human mesenchymal
stromal cells compatible with human blood?.
STEM CELLS 2012;30:1565–1574.
38
Cotton BA, Minei KM, Radwan ZA et al.
Admission rapid thrombelastography predicts
development of pulmonary embolism in trau-
ma patients. J Trauma Acute Care Surg 2012;
72:1470–1477.
39
Franc
¸ois M, Copland IB, Yuan S et al.
Cryopreserved
mesenchymal
stromal
cells
display impaired immunosuppressive proper-
ties as a result of heat-shock response and
impaired interferon-g licensing. Cytotherapy
2012;14:147–152.
40
Xu Y, McArthur DL, Alger JR et al. Early non-
ischemic oxidative metabolic dysfunction leads
to chronic brain atrophy in traumatic brain inju-
ry. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2010;30:883–894.
41
Ohtaki H, Ylostalo JH, Foraker JE et al.
Stem/progenitor cells from
bone marrow
decrease neuronal death in global ischemia
by
modulation
of
inflammatory/immune
responses. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008;105:
14638–14643.
42
Sanberg PR, Park D, Kuzmin-Nichols N
et al. Monocyte transplantation for neural
and cardiovascular ischemia repair. J Cell Mol
Med 2010;14:553–563.
43
Loane DJ, Kumar A, Stoica BA et al. Pro-
gressive neurodegeneration after experimen-
tal brain trauma: Association with chronic
microglial activation. J Neuropathol Exp Neu-
rol 2014;73:14–29.
44
Sidaros A, Skimminge A, Liptrot MG
et al. Long-term global and regional brain
volume changes following severe traumatic
brain injury: A longitudinal study with clinical
correlates. NeuroImage 2009;44:1–8.
45
Brezova V, Gøran Moen K, Skandsen T
et al. Prospective longitudinal MRI study of
brain volumes and diffusion changes during
the first year after moderate to severe trau-
matic brain injury. NeuroImage Clin 2014;5:
128–140.
46
Trivedi MA, Ward MA, Hess TM et al.
Longitudinal changes in global brain volume
between 79 and 409 days after traumatic
brain injury: Relationship with duration of
coma. J Neurotrauma 2007;24:766–771.
47
Ding K, De La Plata CM, Wang JY et al.
Cerebral atrophy after traumatic white matter
injury: Correlation with acute neuroimaging and
outcome. J Neurotrauma 2008;25:1433–1440.
48
Vahidy FS, Rahbar MH, Zhu H et al. Sys-
tematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Bone
Marrow-Derived Mononuclear Cells in Animal
Models of Ischemic Stroke. Stroke 2016;47:
1632–1639.
See www.StemCells.com for supporting information available online.
Cox, Hetz, Liao et al.
1079
www.StemCells.com
V
C AlphaMed Press 2016
