 Accepted Article
 
Advanced heart failure: a position statement of the Heart Failure 
Association of the European Society of Cardiology 
 
Maria G. Crespo-Leiro1*, Marco Metra2, Lars H. Lund3, Davor Milicic4, Maria Rosa Costanzo5, 
Gerasimos Filippatos6, Finn Gustafsson7, Steven Tsui8, Eduardo Barge-Caballero1, Nicolaas De 
Jonge9, Maria Frigerio10, Righab Hamdan11, Tal Hasin12, Martin Hülsmann13, Sanem 
Nalbantgil14, Luciano Potena15, Johann Bauersachs16, Theresa McDonagh17, Petar Seferovic18, 
and Frank Ruschitzka19 
 
1Complexo Hospitalario Universitario A Coruña (CHUAC), Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de A Coruña (INIBIC), 
CIBERCV, UDC, La Coruña, Spain; 2Cardiology, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy; 3Department of Medicine, Unit of 
Cardiology, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden; 4Department for Cardiovascular Diseases, University Hospital 
Center Zagreb, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia; 5Advocate Heart Institute, Naperville, IL, USA; 6Athens 
University Hospital Attikon, Athens, Greece; 7Department of Cardiology, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark; 
8Transplant Unit, Royal Papworth Hospital, Cambridge, UK; 9Department of Cardiology, University Medical Center 
Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands; 10Transplant Center and De Gasperis Cardio Center, Niguarda Hospital, Milan, Italy; 
11Department of Cardiology, Beirut Cardiac Institute, Beirut, Lebanon; 12Jesselson Integrated Heart Center, Shaare 
Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel; 13Department of Internal Medicine II, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, 
Austria; 14Department of Cardiology, Ege University Hospital, Izmir, Turkey; 15Heart and Lung Transplant Program, 
Bologna University Hospital, Bologna, Italy; 16Department of Cardiology and Angiology, Medical School Hannover, 
Hannover, Germany; 17Department of Cardiology, King’s College Hospital, London, UK; 18Department of Internal 
Medicine, Belgrade University School of Medicine and Heart Failure Center, Belgrade University Medical Center, 
Belgrade, Serbia; and 19University Heart Center, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland 
 
Received 4 May 2018; revised 17 May 2018; accepted 21 May 2018 
 
 
 
Running head 
M.G. Crespo-Leiro et al. 
Advanced heart failure: HFA position statement 
 
 
*Corresponding author. Heart Failure and Heart Transplant Program, Complexo Hospitalario Universitario 
A Coruña (CHUAC), CIBERCV, 15006 La Coruña, Spain. Tel: +34 981 178304, Fax +34 981 178299, 
Email: marisa.crespo.leiro@sergas.es 
 
 
 
 
 
This article updates the Heart Failure Association of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) 2007 
classification of advanced heart failure and describes new diagnostic and treatment options for these 
patients. Recognizing the patient with advanced heart failure is critical to facilitate timely referral to 
advanced heart failure centres. Unplanned visits for heart failure decompensation, malignant 
arrhythmias, co-morbidities, and the 2016 ESC guidelines criteria for the diagnosis of heart failure with 
preserved ejection fraction are included in this updated definition. Standard treatment is, by definition, 
insufficient in these patients. Inotropic therapy may be used as a bridge strategy, but it is only a 
palliative measure when used on its own, because of the lack of outcomes data. Major progress has 
occurred with short-term mechanical circulatory support devices for immediate management of 
cardiogenic shock and long-term mechanical circulatory support for either a bridge to transplantation or 
as destination therapy. Heart transplantation remains the treatment of choice for patients without 
contraindications. Some patients will not be candidates for advanced heart failure therapies. For these 
patients, who are often elderly with multiple co-morbidities, management of advanced heart failure to 
reduce symptoms and improve quality of life should be emphasized. Robust evidence from prospective 
studies is lacking for most therapies for advanced heart failure. There is an urgent need to develop 
evidence-based treatment algorithms to prolong life when possible and in accordance with patient 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
 
 
This article has been accepted for publication and undergone full peer review but has not 
been through the copyediting, typesetting, pagination and proofreading process, which 
may lead to differences between this version and the Version of Record. Please cite this 
article as doi: 10.1111/ejhf.1236
 
 
 Accepted Article
preferences, increase life quality, and reduce the burden of hospitalization in this vulnerable patient 
population. 
Keywords  
Heart failure ● Heart transplantation ● Heart-assist devices ● Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation 
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
Although patients with chronic heart failure have improved outcomes with implementation of evidence-
based therapies, ultimately, they still progress to an advanced stage of the disease. Patients with 
advanced heart failure comprise an estimated 1% to 10% of the overall heart failure population,1–3 and 
the prevalence is increasing due to the growing number of patients with heart failure and their better 
treatment and survival. A thorough definition of advanced heart failure is mandatory to facilitate 
appropriate application of treatment such as heart transplantation or long-term mechanical circulatory 
support (MCS) devices. 
It is often a general cardiologist who is responsible for directing patients to advanced heart failure 
resources and helping patients navigate next steps in care. Thus, clinicians need to be appropriately 
equipped to identify patients that might be candidates for advanced heart failure therapies and to 
recognize the optimal time for referral. Of equal importance, physicians should be prepared to address 
the needs of patients who are clearly not eligible for advanced heart failure therapies, engage in 
discussions about changing goals of care, and optimize management strategies to lessen the 
symptomatic burden of advanced heart failure and improve quality of life. 
The management of patients with heart failure to improve their quality of life and longevity is a 
mission of the Heart Failure Association (HFA) of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC). In this 
context, the HFA has prepared this position document to (i) describe the clinical characteristics of 
patients with advanced heart failure, (ii) inform physicians about markers of poor prognosis that indicate 
an advanced stage of disease, (iii) educate physicians on optimal short-term management strategies for 
these patients in order to improve their candidacy for heart transplantation or MCS, (iv) enable 
physicians to recognize the optimal time and processes for referring patients to advanced heart failure 
centres, and (v) ensure collaboration between advanced heart failure, palliative or symptom-focused care 
including end-of-life care teams. This position statement summarizes the best available evidence, 
practice standards, and expert opinions on the management of patients with advanced heart failure. This 
article is intended to guide general cardiologists, heart failure cardiologists and other professionals 
involved in the care of these patients such as internists, primary care physicians, and nurses through 
transitions in care.  
 
 
Definition of advanced heart failure  
 
Prior definitions for patients with advanced heart failure are shown in Table 1.3–6 The criteria suggested in 
the 2007 HFA position statement identified a stage where conventional treatments (i.e. guideline-directed 
drugs, devices, conventional surgery) are insufficient to control the patient’s symptoms, and advanced 
therapies (e.g. cardiac transplantation, MCS) or palliative therapies (e.g. inotropic infusions, ultrafiltration 
or peritoneal dialysis to control volume, or end-of-life comfort care) are needed. Overlapping terminology 
can be used to describe these patients; for the purpose of this document, we consider ‘advanced’, 
‘refractory’, and ‘end-stage’ heart failure interchangeable terms, all reflecting patients who should be 
evaluated for advanced heart failure therapies. The Interagency Registry for Mechanically Assisted 
Circulatory Support (INTERMACS) profiles are also useful to further describe clinical parameters and 
characteristics consistent with a need for advanced therapies (Table 2).7–9 However, it must be noted that 
the INTERMACS profiles were developed to classify patients to being considered for long-term MCS device 
implantation based on symptoms and haemodynamic compromise and, more important, is specific for 
heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF), whereas our classification and, in general, the term 
of advanced heart failure can be applied also to patients with heart failure with preserved ejection 
fraction (HFpEF).  
 
Limitations of the 2007 Heart Failure Association position statement for advanced chronic 
heart failure  
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
 Accepted Article
 
Advanced heart failure encompasses patients who remain severely symptomatic despite optimal 
guideline-directed management regardless of left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF), including patients 
with advanced heart failure who remain ambulatory but are essentially New York Heart Association 
(NYHA) class IV. The first HFA position statement acknowledged the importance of HFpEF and included a 
provision to diagnose advanced heart failure on the basis of high B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) or N-
terminal pro-BNP (NT-proBNP) levels independently of LVEF values.4 Despite this recognition, advanced 
symptoms in the setting of HFpEF were not emphasized sufficiently to meet current clinical practice 
needs. It is important to raise awareness that advanced heart failure does not depend on ejection 
fraction, but on the patient’s symptoms, prognostic markers, presence of end-organ damage, and goals 
for therapy. 
The treatment armamentarium has improved for HFrEF since the 2007 HFA document, with clearer 
indications for cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT) and the availability of new drugs, such as 
ivabradine and sacubitril/valsartan, although to date, no trial has specifically addressed patients with 
advanced heart failure. The need to optimize such therapies should be reflected in definitions of advanced 
heart failure, and patients must be treated according to the best available medical and device therapies 
(unless contraindicated) before advanced therapies are considered.9,10 
Further criteria must also be considered. First, outpatient visits with intravenous administration of loop 
diuretics and/or other vasoactive medications are increasingly replacing hospitalizations for heart 
failure.11 Thus, both unplanned outpatient visits and hospitalizations for worsening symptoms of heart 
failure must be considered amongst criteria for the diagnosis of advanced heart failure to reflect evolving 
clinical practice. Second, recurrent malignant arrhythmias are now well recognized contributors to and 
can be consequences of advanced heart failure.12–14 Third, co-morbidities can complicate the evaluation 
of patients with advanced heart failure, and sometimes influence candidacy for MCS or heart 
transplantation, although it should be recognized that in some cases co-morbidities may improve after 
application of advanced therapies.15–18 End-organ damage, in particular kidney or liver dysfunction and 
pulmonary hypertension, may be a consequence of acute congestion and/or low-output state, but it may 
be difficult to distinguish primary and secondary dysfunction or to predict reversibility. 
 
Updated definition of advanced heart failure 
 
To address these areas, an update to the definition of advanced heart failure is warranted. Our updated 
criteria for the identification of patients with advanced heart failure are outlined in Table 3. Compared 
with the former HFA definition of advanced heart failure, we have updated the following criteria:  
• 
Criterion 2 is now based completely on the most recent ESC heart failure guidelines.9 The ESC criteria 
are sufficient to define cardiac dysfunction, and they can be used for the definition of advanced heart 
failure when accompanied by other criteria that characterize patient severity. Using the ESC criteria 
for cardiac dysfunction gives the same importance to all patients with heart failure, independent of 
LVEF. With a few exceptions, such as patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy or restrictive 
cardiomyopathy,19 the vast majority of patients with an indication for heart transplantation or MCS 
have a reduced LVEF. However, at least 50% of patients hospitalized for acute heart failure have a 
preserved LVEF, and these patients may also be considered advanced provided the other criteria 
outlined in the definition are present. 
• 
Criterion 3 now includes heart failure hospitalization. Unplanned visits for heart failure have been 
added and given the same value as a heart failure hospitalization.20–23 Malignant arrhythmias have 
been added as a major cause of acute events. Criterion 3 acknowledges that acute events leading to 
one or more unplanned visit(s) or hospitalization(s) within 12 months are the hallmark of advanced 
heart failure, independent of treatment, with emphasis placed on the instability of the clinical course 
and resource utilization. 
 
 
Prognostic stratification  
 
Accurate prognostication is especially important in advanced heart failure to identify the ideal time for 
referral to an appropriate centre (i.e. those centres capable of providing advanced heart failure 
therapies), to properly convey expectations to patients and families, and to plan treatment and follow-up 
strategies.24,25 However, detailed prognostication is complex and difficult. It is required for selection for 
advanced heart failure therapy, but it is not required for referral to an advanced heart failure centre. 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
 Accepted Article
Referral requires only the presence of advanced heart failure. Numerous single risk markers and 
composite risk scores have been derived, validated, and are available as interactive online tools. These 
multiparametric scores can assist the heart failure team in arriving at comprehensive risk assessments to 
inform decisions.9 However, there are several important considerations and limitations that are often 
overlooked when applying these tools in clinical settings and in clinical trial design. 
First, many prognostic tools were derived and validated in selected clinical trial populations or at single 
centres and may not be generalizable to ‘real-world’ heart failure populations or individual patients. 
Second, most of the available tools for estimating prognosis were not derived from advanced heart failure 
cohorts. Third, risk markers and scores perform well for mortality but less well for cardiovascular or heart 
failure specific death or hospitalization.9,26–28 Fourth, not all risk markers are also risk factors. Thus, 
targeting a risk marker will not automatically improve outcomes. One example includes pharmacologic 
interventions targeting haemodynamics, which do not correct the underlying aetiology of heart failure 
and do not improve outcome, although an impaired haemodynamic profile is a very powerful indicator of 
poor prognosis. Finally, appropriate clinical use of any prognostic variable (biomarker) or multiparametric 
score requires understanding of discrimination (between event and non-event), calibration (predicted vs. 
actual outcome), and reclassification (how well addition of information correctly reclassifies events).24 For 
example, NT-proBNP discriminates very well (i.e. higher values accurately predict greater heart failure 
risk), but it calibrates poorly because there is no particular value of NT-proBNP that corresponds to a 
particular expected mortality rate or that can be used to list a patient for cardiac transplantation. Finally, 
it must be kept in mind that different prognostic scores may perform more or less equally in patient 
cohorts, while providing very different prognostic estimates when applied to individuals.29 
Nevertheless, objective risk markers and scores, especially as part of a comprehensive assessment 
performed by the heart failure team, are useful for prognostication, prioritization, and triage for advanced 
heart failure interventions, including selection for cardiac transplantation.25 It is useful to consider risk 
markers from multiple pathophysiological domains (Table 4).8,25,27,28,30–127 Clinical history such as 
recurrent heart failure hospitalizations, and the physician’s impression from the patient encounter are 
critical. An expanding spectrum of parameters are available from echocardiography and other imaging 
modalities, and they may serve not only for prognostication but also to guide patient management, 
gradually taking the place of right heart catheterization, though with some limitations.128,129 Invasive 
haemodynamic assessment does not improve the accuracy of heart failure prognostication, but it is a 
critical component of the work-up for potential heart transplantation or long-term MCS recipients. It 
allows an accurate estimate of important parameters, such as the pulmonary capillary wedge pressure, 
pulmonary vascular resistance, transpulmonary gradient, and adds to the assessment of right ventricular 
function.25,130,131 Invasive haemodynamic monitoring is not routinely recommended for in-hospital 
management of patients with advanced heart failure,132 but it is useful for the evaluation and treatment 
of patients in critical conditions, e.g. cardiogenic shock, not responding to standard treatment. The 
cardiopulmonary exercise test (CPET) provides a set of integrated parameters that are impacted by 
cardiac, pulmonary, peripheral and psychological factors, and it is a critical component of the work-up in 
patients with advanced heart failure who are able to perform the test. Co-morbidities are common and 
important prognostic markers in heart failure. In selecting advanced heart failure interventions, 
physicians should consider both prognosis without therapy (indication) and the potential for adverse 
outcomes with interventions (contraindications). Contraindications are often related to co-morbidities that 
cannot be modified by heart failure therapy and predispose patients to adverse outcomes after heart 
transplantation or MCS. End-organ dysfunction such as chronic kidney disease (CKD) may be intrinsic or 
secondary to heart failure. Liver dysfunction in the setting of advanced heart failure has been less 
extensively investigated than renal insufficiency. The most common indices of acute and chronic liver 
damage due to congestive and/or low-output state are increased transaminase levels (AST, ALT) and 
increased serum bilirubin, respectively.16 End-organ damage impacts outcomes, and it is important for 
the heart failure team to assess whether such damage is likely reversible after transplantation or MCS. 
Other co-morbidities, such as disordered iron metabolism, must be systematically investigated9 as 
treatment may improve quality of life and symptoms.9  
No single variable can account for all prognostic dimensions. Multivariable prognostic scores 
outperform individual markers both in terms of discrimination and calibration. Numerous scores have 
been derived and validated for both acute heart failure and outpatients. Selected prognostic scores for 
advanced but non-hospitalized heart failure include the Heart Failure Survival Score (HFSS),133 the 
Seattle Heart Failure Model (SHFM),109 the Metabolic Exercise test data combined with Cardiac and 
Kidney Indexes (MECKI) score,134–136 and the Meta-Analysis Global Group in Chronic Heart Failure 
(MAGGIC)105 (Table 5). The SHFM has been shown to underestimate the risk of decompensation and 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
 Accepted Article
indication for left ventricular assist device (LVAD) in patients with advanced heart failure.110,137,138 
Therefore, this risk score should be used cautiously in the setting of advanced heart failure. 
 
Although there are no validated studies that indicate which variables and cut-offs can be used as 
criteria for referral to advanced heart failure centres, the totality of data on heart failure prognostication 
allows for some suggested clinical, laboratory, and echocardiography criteria that may serve as triggers 
for referral. These are listed in Table 6. 
Finally, non-patient-related factors, such as organization of care and access to treatment and follow-
up, are also strongly associated with outcomes. Despite the availability of an extensive set of prognostic 
parameters, predicting outcomes both in the absence and presence of advanced heart failure 
interventions remains difficult, and patients are often referred to advanced heart failure centres too late. 
The concept of active screening for advanced intervention has been proposed to improve appropriate 
referral and treatment in advanced heart failure139,140 (Figure 1).  
 
Exercise testing  
 
Cardiopulmonary 
exercise 
testing 
is 
reproducible 
and 
provides 
important 
information 
about 
cardiovascular reserve and prognosis. Traditionally, CPET has been part of the evaluation of ambulatory 
patients with advanced heart failure if they were considered for heart transplantation or long-term MCS. 
Guidelines for listing elective patients for heart transplantation still state that a peak exercise oxygen 
consumption (pVO2) ≤12 mL/kg/min is a potential indication for heart transplantation (≤14 if beta-
blocker intolerant).25 Importantly, confirmation that peak values have been achieved is mandatory, for 
instance by ensuring a respiratory exchange rate >1.05. In addition to pVO2, other CPET findings may 
help inform the evaluation of heart transplantation candidacy. In women or patients <50 years of age, 
achieving a pVO2 ≤50% of predicted may be appropriate to determine heart transplant referral.25 
Additionally, patients with a ventilation equivalent of carbon dioxide (VE/VCO2) slope >35, particularly 
those with a submaximal CPET, have a poor prognosis, and VE/VCO2 slope may be applied in the patient 
evaluation.25 Performing high quality CPET is not a simple task and reliable results require staff skilled in 
the procedure as well as meticulous interpretation.141 However, CPET remains highly valuable to identify 
patients with potential indications for heart transplantation or long-term MCS and should be part of the 
work-up for elective patients with advanced heart failure in whom these treatments are considered, 
particularly in those patients reporting a disproportion between symptoms and objective parameters.142 
The 6-min walk test (6MWT) is easy to perform and widely used in heart failure. It should be 
emphasized that CPET and 6MWT are very different measures. Peak oxygen uptake during CPET 
expresses maximal cardiac output and the arteriovenous oxygen difference during maximal exhaustion, 
while the 6MWT is performed at submaximal exercise levels. Thus, the 6MWT does not accurately reflect 
functional capacity as assessed by pVO2,127 but it is correlated to pVO2 and predicts survival in heart 
failure in some,127 but not all studies.143–145 The 6MWT has been used as a screening tool in advanced 
heart failure (<300 m) and also as an endpoint in clinical trials. Use of the 6MWT is encouraged to give 
objective evidence of functional impairment in patients with advanced heart failure where CPET is not 
indicated as described above. In addition, the 6MWT can be a useful tool to assess frailty, which 
represents a significant risk marker and potential contraindication to non-pharmacologic strategies in 
advanced heart failure.99,146  
 
 
Management strategies for patients with advanced heart failure  
 
Short-term management of advanced heart failure 
 
Advanced heart failure therapies refer to long-term MCS or cardiac transplantation. However, in 
situations where the patient’s clinical condition deteriorates, or end-organ function is compromised, 
short-term therapies may be needed until MCS can be implanted or while the patient is waiting on the 
transplant list. Discussion of the patient and overall plan for advanced heart failure therapies with a 
specialized advanced heart failure centre (i.e. hub centre) can be helpful to select the most appropriate 
short-term management strategy. 
 
Intravenous vasoactive drugs 
 
It is well known that inotropes may improve haemodynamics and help reverse worsening end-organ 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
 Accepted Article
function in advanced heart failure (Table 7). However, inotropes studied in randomized clinical trials have 
generally not been associated with improved outcomes, and have, in some studies, worsened 
prognosis.147–149 Hence, inotropes have no place in the routine treatment of advanced heart failure. 
However, there is expert opinion that inotropic support may be necessary in refractory heart failure in 
selected patients as a bridge to temporary MCS, long-term MCS, or heart transplantation. Inotropes may 
also be used as short-term therapy in patients with low cardiac output and evidence of end-organ 
dysfunction, for instance during decongestion. Long-term (i.e. months) or chronic treatment after 
discharge with inotropes for patients waiting for transplantation, is not routinely recommended. These 
patients should probably be considered for long-term MCS if feasible.150,151 However, patient preferences 
regarding inotropic therapy or MCS for patients awaiting transplantation should be assessed. Continuous 
inotropes may be acceptable as a palliative measure for patients without other advanced treatment 
options. 
Vasopressors (dopamine, norepinephrine, epinephrine) are broadly associated with worse outcomes in 
observational studies,152 and low-dose dopamine does not improve congestion or cardiovascular 
outcomes compared to placebo in acute decompensated heart failure.153,154 Hence, these agents should 
be reserved for patients with low systolic blood pressure and evidence of organ hypoperfusion 
(cardiogenic shock) at the lowest dose that obtains the desired clinical goals, and only if the low blood 
pressure is considered a reversible condition or definitive therapy (long-term MCS or transplantation) is 
planned.  
Intermittent use of inodilators for long-term symptomatic improvement or palliation has gained 
popularity, especially use of levosimendan, since the haemodynamic effect may last for >7 days after a 
12–24 h infusion because of the pharmacologically active metabolite with a long half-life.155 While meta-
analyses of several heterogeneous small trials of a repeated infusion strategy have suggested a positive 
effect on survival156 and a reduction in hospitalizations,157 such a survival effect has not been 
demonstrated in a single, adequately sized, prospective study. The LION-HEART pilot study randomized 
69 patients with advanced heart failure to placebo or levosimendan 0.2 µg/kg/min over 6 h every 2 
weeks for 12 weeks.158 NT-proBNP over time, the primary endpoint, was significantly lower in the 
levosimendan group compared to the placebo group. Patients randomized to levosimendan were also less 
likely to be hospitalized for heart failure or experience a decline in health-related quality of life compared 
to placebo. Adverse events were similar between groups.158 More studies are needed to determine if this 
approach may be useful for patients with contraindications to transplantation or long-term MCS. 
Whether or not to implant an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) in patients listed for heart 
transplantation is still a matter of debate. This decision is usually made on an individualized basis, 
balancing the expected risks of sudden death and device-related complications, and considering the 
expected waiting time for transplantation. In the absence of randomized trials, the best evidence 
regarding this controversial topic comes from a Swiss observational study,159 in which a significant 
survival benefit was observed for ICD carriers, both as primary or secondary prevention, with a median 
waiting list time for transplantation of only 8 months. In recent years, wearable defibrillators have 
emerged as a potential effective and less invasive alternative to conventional implantable devices for this 
purpose.160  
 
Management of congestion 
 
Most of the heart failure hospitalizations are due to signs and symptoms of fluid overload.161 Recurrent 
congestion worsens patients’ outcomes. Loop diuretics remain the cornerstone for the treatment of 
congestion in the patients with heart failure. Diuretic therapy is thoroughly described in the current 
guidelines for heart failure treatment and their further discussion goes beyond the aims of this article. 
The clinical course of patients with advanced heart failure is often characterized by kidney dysfunction 
(cardiorenal syndrome) and by diuretic resistance. The first may have multiple mechanisms including 
abnormal 
haemodynamics, 
neurohormonal 
activation, 
excessive 
tubular 
sodium 
reabsorption, 
inflammation, oxidative stress, and nephrotoxic drugs.161 Loop diuretic resistance is generally due to a 
series of renal adaptations after diuretic use (‘braking phenomenon’) including hypertrophy and 
hyperfunction of other sites of the nephron and to increased renin secretion in the macula densa. 
Increased uremic anions and proteinuria also impair achievement of therapeutic concentrations at the 
diuretic’s tubular site of action.161 
Concomitant administration of thiazide diuretics or metolazone with loop diuretics is used to overcome 
the braking phenomenon. However, no evidence from clinical trials exists to guide this practice. 
Ultrafiltration (UF) might be an alternative to loop diuretic administration. It removes isotonic fluid 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
 Accepted Article
without direct activation of the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system, if fluid removal rates do not 
exceed capillary refill. Greater access to UF stems from the development of simplified devices not 
requiring specialized technicians or acute care settings.162 
The adjustment of UF rates to patients’ vital signs and renal function may provide more effective 
decongestion and fewer heart failure events than standard of care.161 The results of UF studies are 
summarized in the online supplementary Table S1.  
Practice guidelines suggest that patients with an inadequate response to oral diuretic treatment should 
receive intravenous diuretics starting with an intravenous dose greater than that of the oral treatment. 
The initial dose of the intravenous treatment should be increased in case of an inadequate response.6,9 
Persistent congestion can then be treated by adding thiazide, or thiazide-like, diuretic agents, aldosterone 
antagonists. Only if these measures fail can UF be considered.6,9 However, favourable results of trials of 
early UF underscore the need for additional investigation of UF in clinical settings as an alternative to 
high-dose diuretic treatment.163,164 
Once an initial UF rate is chosen, it should be either maintained or reduced because capillary refill 
from the interstitium decreases as fluid is removed.165 Rates of UF >250 mL/h are not recommended.164 
Patients with right-sided heart failure or HFpEF are susceptible to intravascular volume depletion and may 
only tolerate low UF rates (50 to 100 mL/h).164 Extracorporeal fluid removal is better tolerated when 
conducted with low UF rates delivered over several hours. Patients’ current weight can be compared with 
that preceding the signs and symptoms of congestion and used as the target for fluid removal.164 Inline 
haematocrit sensors permit continuous estimation of blood volume changes during UF and can be 
programmed to stop fluid removal if the haematocrit exceeds a set threshold (e.g. 5% to 7%) and 
resume therapy when the haematocrit value falls below the pre-specified level, indicating an adequate 
intravascular volume. Bioimpedance vector analysis, bioimpedance spectroscopy, electromagnetic 
technology and pulmonary artery pressure sensors all have limitations for estimation of blood volume and 
more research in this area is needed.161  
The Peripheral Ultrafiltration for the Relief from Congestion in Heart Failure (PURE-HF) trial 
(NCT03161158) will evaluate whether peripheral UF combined with low-dose intravenous diuretics result 
in fewer heart failure events and cardiovascular deaths at 90 days compared to guideline-directed 
therapy including intravenous diuretics in patients with heart failure hospitalized for congestion. 
Peritoneal dialysis is a home-based therapeutic modality than can be used in patients with refractory 
heart failure, cardiorenal syndrome and fluid overload. The peritoneum is used as the filter through which 
solute molecules can be exchanged between the dialysate (delivered to the peritoneal cavity through a 
catheter) and the blood.166 With peritoneal dialysis, removal of sodium and water by UF occurs because 
of the osmotic pressure gradient between the hypertonic dialysate and the hypotonic peritoneal capillary 
blood. Peritoneal dialysis has a role in patients with concomitant heart failure with and without advanced 
CKD (Stages IV/V) in whom peritoneal dialysis is used as an UF strategy and those with heart failure and 
end-stage renal disease in whom peritoneal dialysis is the renal replacement therapy of choice (CKD 
Stage V). Studies of peritoneal dialysis in heart failure patients with CKD and refractory fluid overload 
have shown this modality is associated with weight loss, improved quality of life, and reduction in heart 
failure hospitalizations and increase in LVEF.167–170 However, these studies lack a control group, have a 
short follow-up, and insufficient power to detect an effect on mortality.  
 
During the first 60–90 min of intraperitoneal dwell of dextrose-containing peritoneal dialysis solutions, 
rapid transport of free water across the aquaporin channels occurs, whereas the solute-rich water moves 
more slowly through the small pores of the peritoneal membrane. This results in an early drop in the 
concentration of sodium in the dialysate. This approaches the serum concentration as the diffusive 
movement of sodium continues and dwell time is sufficiently long.166 The longer dwells of continuous 
ambulatory peritoneal dialysis may be preferred when sodium removal is the primary target, as it is in 
fluid-overloaded patients with heart failure.170 Several strategies allow adequate sodium and water 
removal with automated peritoneal dialysis.169 One approach is to substitute conventional dextrose-based 
dialysis solutions with icodextrin, a high molecular weight glucose polymer which induces transcapillary 
UF.171 Another strategy is to decrease the number of nocturnal cycles to increase the dwell time. For 
patients with significant residual renal function, dietary sodium restriction and concomitant use of loop 
diuretics may enhance sodium removal by peritoneal dialysis.172 Future studies should determine if 
peritoneal dialysis is associated with improved survival. 
 
Short-term mechanical circulatory support 
 
Among patients with advanced heart failure, short-term MCS may be indicated in the setting of 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
 Accepted Article
cardiogenic shock. Several percutaneous and paracorporeal devices are available which can be used for a 
few days, up to several weeks, to allow cardiac recovery as well as recovery of other organs such as the 
kidneys, liver, and brain. Although insertion of most short-term devices is relatively simple and 
straightforward, the care of patients on short-term MCS requires specific expertise which should also 
include a plan when cardiac recovery does not occur after a period of support. In this way, short-term 
MCS can be used as a bridge-to-decision (BTD) for long-term MCS or heart transplantation.173 As there is 
no single ideal device, their use should be primarily guided by clinical judgment and local experience.174  
 
Intra-aortic balloon pump 
 
An intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) consists of a percutaneously implanted catheter with a balloon 
inflated with gas (usually helium, a low-density gas) that is positioned in the aorta between the left 
subclavian artery and the renal arteries. Intra-aortic balloon pumps have been used clinically for more 
than five decades. The mechanism of action is based on the principle of diastolic augmentation, i.e. the 
balloon is inflated during diastole and deflated during systole, thus facilitating coronary flow and 
improving oxygen supply to the myocardium and reducing afterload, thus reducing oxygen consumption. 
Its contribution to cardiac output is small, merely 0.5 L/min by some approximations. A small (n=10) 
study reported a median increase of 20% in cardiac index and significant reductions in left ventricular 
stroke work and left ventricular end-systolic pressure in patients undergoing IABP support before LVAD 
implantation.175 Currently, IABP are primarily used for cardiogenic shock in the setting of acute ischaemic 
heart disease, and for protective support during high-risk percutaneous coronary intervention, but 
scientific evidence for these applications is lacking.176,177 Intra-aortic balloon pumps are sometimes used 
to provide mechanical support to patients with cardiogenic shock prior to LVAD implantation, but the 
evidence for this practice is also limited. A small single-centre study (n=56) reported that IABP provided 
clinical stabilization in 57% of the patients who received IABP prior to LVAD implantation, whereas the 
remaining 43% had further clinical deterioration.178 Higher right ventricular and left ventricular cardiac 
power indices and higher pulmonary artery pressure may predict patients more likely to respond to 
IABP.178 In general, newer devices that generate greater support and provide better unloading of the left 
ventricle are currently preferred. 
 
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation 
 
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) is a cardiopulmonary bypass machine modified for easier 
and longer use and transport. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation devices have a centrifugal blood 
pump that can provide up to 6 L/min of flow, as well as an oxygenator to provide full respiratory support. 
Thus, ECMO provides full systemic circulatory support and can be useful to restore end-organ perfusion.  
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation can be used in either veno–arterial or veno–venous 
configurations. The veno–arterial mode provides full cardiopulmonary support, while the veno–venous 
mode provides only respiratory support, i.e. oxygenation of venous blood, and it is used primarily in 
cases of severe respiratory insufficiency with preserved cardiac output. Extracorporeal membrane 
oxygenation can be configured with central or peripheral access. Central ECMO requires surgical access 
and cannulation of the ascending aorta, and it is predominantly used for postcardiotomy short-term MCS 
in patients who fail to wean off cardiopulmonary bypass. Conversely, peripheral ECMO can be placed by 
interventional cardiologists or trained intensivists using the Seldinger technique for insertion of cannulas 
in the femoral artery and vein. 
Implantation and management of ECMO demands a dedicated team with expertise in this specific 
area. Perfusion technicians are essential for ECMO circuit priming and initiation; transoesophageal 
echocardiography or fluoroscopic guidance is advisable for cannula positioning, and vascular or cardiac 
surgeons must be available to manage possible vascular complications. Extracorporeal membrane 
oxygenation support demands anticoagulation with heparin; activated clotting time should be monitored 
frequently and maintained between 160–180 s. Complications of ECMO support are frequent and are 
mostly related to vascular complications, bleeding, thrombosis, and infections. In the case of peripheral 
ECMO, distal limb ischaemia remains relatively frequent despite the routine addition of a cannula for 
distal limb perfusion. 
Although ECMO provides full support for the patient, it may have non-physiologic and sometimes 
detrimental haemodynamic consequences on the myocardium. Draining blood from the venous side 
results in a reduction of preload to the heart, and, consequently, reduces filling pressures of both 
ventricles. On the arterial side, ECMO delivers 4–6 L/min of flow to the aorta resulting in increased 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
 Accepted Article
afterload to the left ventricle. Therefore, ECMO in itself does not necessarily decompress the heart, and 
depending on the severity of myocardial dysfunction and presence of aortic or mitral regurgitation, 
peripheral femoro–femoral ECMO may even increase left ventricular end-diastolic pressures and volumes. 
The resulting pulmonary venous congestion may lead to pulmonary oedema and compromise respiratory 
function.179 In these cases, a few modifications in the ECMO circuit can be performed to optimize support, 
such as inserting a left atrial vent for unloading the pulmonary veins/left atrium (e.g. with central ECMO) 
or the left ventricular apex (e.g. with peripheral ECMO), or adding a second device to unload the left 
ventricle [e.g. IABP, Impella Ventricular Support Systems (Abiomed Inc., Danvers, MA, USA), or other 
short- to-medium-term surgically implanted MCS device].180,181 Percutaneous left atrial septostomy has 
also been reported as a method to unload the left heart in ECMO-supported patients with refractory 
pulmonary oedema.182 Native cardiac output and ECMO flow should be carefully balanced to prevent 
hypoxic blood perfusing the brain and the well-oxygenated blood mainly perfusing the rest of the body. 
Absence of native cardiac output may even result in complete clotting of the left ventricle despite 
adequate heparin treatment. ECMO can readily be used in cardiogenic shock caused by end-stage chronic 
heart failure as a short-term bridge-to-transplantation (BTT), BTD, or bridge-to-candidacy (BTC).180,181 
The SAVE score (www.save-score.com) can be used as a tool to predict survival in patients with 
cardiogenic shock in which ECMO is considered.183 ECMO has been registered for use up to 30 days. 
A recent meta-analysis of cohort studies suggested better survival rates and neurological outcomes in 
cardiac arrest patients when treated with ECMO in comparison to controls in whom ECMO was not 
used.184 Furthermore, ECMO provided better survival in patients in cardiogenic shock when compared to 
IABP. The same effect was not observed when ECMO was compared to Impella or TandemHeart.185 
 
TandemHeart® percutaneous ventricular assist device (Cardiac Assist, Inc., Pittsburgh, PA, USA) 
 
TandemHeart is a device that connects the left atrium with the iliofemoral artery.186,187 TandemHeart 
consists of a 21 Fr inflow cannula (inserted via the femoral vein to the right atrium and trans-septally into 
the left atrium), a centrifugal continuous extracorporeal blood pump, and an outflow arterial cannula (15-
19 Fr, inserted in the iliofemoral artery). A membrane oxygenator can be added to the TandemHeart 
circuit to provide respiratory support. TandemHeart has Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval for 
6 h of support and also CE mark, which includes approval for Protec Duo veno–venous cannula up to 30 
days (www.tandemlife.com). 
The need for trans-septal puncture and positioning of the inflow cannula into the left atrium demands 
proficiency in its use. This makes the implant procedure more complex and longer as compared to other 
short-term percutaneously implanted devices.  
The main advantages of this device are the direct unloading of the left atrium which results in a 
decrease in left ventricular filling pressures, volumes and oxygen demand and that it does not require 
passage into the left ventricle. However, positioning of the cannula in the left atrium carries a risk of 
complications, such as perforation, or most frequently, cannula migration to a suboptimal position or 
back to the right atrium. Furthermore, pumping blood out of the left atrium depends on preload to the 
left ventricle. TandemHeart can be easily configured to a right ventricular support system (TandemHeart 
RVAD).188  
Other contraindications include significant peripheral vascular disease, general contraindications for 
anticoagulation therapy, presence of right or left atrial thrombi, ventricular septal defect, or severe aortic 
insufficiency. Anticoagulation therapy is mandatory due to the high risk of thromboembolic events. 
Requirements for activated clotting time are even higher than for ECMO, and should be around 300 s, 
which significantly increases the risk of bleeding complications.  
Other important complications of TandemHeart support are vascular site complications, infections, and 
thromboembolic incidents. The major disadvantage is the immobility of the supported patient; care 
providers must secure the inflow cannula since movement of the tip from the left to right atrium results 
in significant right-to-left shunting with catastrophic desaturation. 
TandemHeart improves haemodynamics by adding up to 4 L/min of cardiac output and lowering 
pulmonary capillary wedge pressure. However, a positive effect on survival has not been established in 
studies performed to date.189,190 
 
Impella® ventricular support systems (Abiomed Inc., Danvers, MA, USA) 
 
The Impella device is a small axial flow pump placed across the aortic valve, aspirating blood from the 
left ventricle and expelling it to the ascending aorta. In this way, it unloads the left ventricle, improving 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
 Accepted Article
haemodynamics combined with decreasing pulmonary capillary wedge pressure, and increasing coronary 
artery flow. Contraindications include severe aortic valve disease (both stenosis and regurgitation), 
implanted mechanical aortic valve, or existence of left ventricular thrombus. Impella is manufactured in 
three versions: 2.5 device (12 Fr, maximum flow 2.5 L/min), CP device (14 Fr, maximum flow 2–4 L/min), 
and 5.0 device (21 Fr, maximum flow 5 L/min). Impella 5.0 is not fully percutaneous and requires a 
surgical procedure to insert a 21 Fr catheter in the femoral artery. Preliminary experience with the 
transaxillary approach has been reported.191 
The distal tip of the catheter is designed as a pigtail catheter which contributes to stability in the left 
ventricular cavity and reduces suction events. Survival benefit with the 2.5 device in cardiogenic shock 
could not be demonstrated, and it is generally advised to use either the CP device or the 5.0 device in 
such cases.192 Recent results suggest that when used as part of a standardized protocol in patients with 
cardiogenic shock and isolated left ventricular failure, early active haemodynamic support with Impella CP 
may be associated with improved outcomes and lower than previously reported or predicted mortality 
rates.193  
The Impella device is FDA approved for partial support of up to 6 days, and it has a CE mark for up to 
5 days. As with all peripheral percutaneous devices, peripheral artery disease is a contraindication to its 
use, as well as the inability to anticoagulate patients for any reason. Major complications of Impella use 
are associated with vascular injury, bleeding, thrombosis, haemolysis, and device migration. Recently, 
Impella has been shown also as an option for acute right ventricular support or for left ventricular 
unloading during ECMO.181,194 
 
CentriMag acute circulatory support system (St. Jude, Minneapolis, MN, USA) 
 
The CentriMag is a magnetically levitated paracorporeal centrifugal pump which can be used for left 
ventricular, right ventricular, and biventricular support. It requires surgical implantation by way of 
sternotomy but results in full circulatory support and complete cardiac unloading. Maximal flow is 
10 L/min and duration of support is intended for up to 30 days, but longer is possible. It requires 
anticoagulation with intravenous heparin. This device can be used as a bridge-to-recovery or as a BTD for 
those patients who need a longer duration of support than is feasible by the previous mentioned devices. 
Also, the possibility of right ventricular support can be an advantage.195,196 A new approach, minimally 
invasive CentriMag support integrated with ECMO (Ec-VAD) not requiring a sternotomy has been 
reported.197 The Ec-VAD circuit is configured with left ventricular apical cannulation via mini-thoracotomy 
and femoral venous cannulation as inflows and right axillary artery cannulation as an outflow. 
 
 
Long-term management of advanced heart failure 
 
Advanced heart failure therapies are indicated when guideline-directed medical and device therapies have 
been implemented and optimized as appropriate in the individual patient but heart failure has progressed 
such that symptoms can no longer be adequately managed or end-organ function is compromised. 
Although details on guideline-directed medical and device therapies for chronic heart failure are not 
described herein, physicians should refer to existing guideline documents9 to ensure optimization prior to 
considering advanced heart failure therapies, and for guidance on the continued management of these 
patients. 
 
Conventional cardiac surgery  
 
For patients with an LVEF ≤35% and coronary artery disease amenable to surgical revascularization, 
coronary artery bypass grafting in addition to medical therapy significantly reduced the primary outcome 
of all-cause death, and the secondary outcomes of cardiovascular death and all-cause death or 
cardiovascular hospitalization compared to medical therapy alone over 10 years of follow-up in the 
Surgical Treatment for Ischemic Heart Failure (STICH) trial.198,199 Coronary artery bypass graft surgery is 
recommended for such patients with left main stenosis or left main equivalent.200 For patients with 
unacceptably high surgical risk, coronary intervention is an option and may be facilitated under protection 
using an Impella device.201 
In severe symptomatic aortic valve stenosis with mean gradient >40 mmHg, aortic valve replacement 
(AVR) is recommended irrespective of the degree of left ventricular dysfunction. In patients with 
prohibitive surgical risk due to co-morbidities but with projected survival >1 year after aortic valve 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
 Accepted Article
intervention, transcatheter aortic valve implantation should be considered. In ‘true’ low-flow, low-
gradient severe aortic stenosis202 (valve area <1 cm2, mean gradient <40 mmHg, stroke volume index 
<35 mL/m2), with a depressed LVEF, left ventricular function usually improves after AVR if left ventricular 
dysfunction is due to excessive afterload; however, outcome is less certain if left ventricular dysfunction 
is due to scarring. In severe aortic regurgitation, AVR is recommended in all symptomatic patients as well 
as asymptomatic patients with LVEF ≤50%.202 According to the most recent valvular guidelines, ‘in 
patients with severe secondary mitral regurgitation and LVEF <30% who remain symptomatic despite 
optimal medical management (including CRT if indicated) and who have no option for revascularization, 
the Heart Team may consider a percutaneous edge-to-edge procedure or valve surgery after careful 
evaluation for a ventricular assist device or heart transplant according to individual patient 
characteristics.’202 Additionally, ‘in patients with LVEF <30% and severe functional mitral regurgitation 
due to coronary artery disease, but with evidence of myocardial viability, mitral valve surgery should be 
considered with revascularization.’202 However, there is a legitimate concern that the more advanced the 
heart failure stage, the less likely that a mitral repair operation or clip procedure can benefit the patient. 
The ongoing COAPT (Cardiovascular Outcomes Assessment of the MitraClip Percutaneous Therapy for 
Heart Failure Patients with Functional Mitral Regurgitation, NCT01626079) will evaluate the safety of the 
MitraClip system in 610 patients with heart failure and its effects on death and heart failure 
hospitalization. 
 
Heart transplantation  
 
Heart transplantation is the treatment of choice for carefully selected patients with advanced or end-
stage heart failure. Although controlled trials have never been conducted, there is consensus within the 
cardiology community that heart transplantation significantly improves survival, exercise capacity, quality 
of life and return to work compared with conventional treatment, provided that proper selection criteria 
are applied (Table 8).9,25 The main limitation of heart transplantation is the limited supply of donor 
hearts, which can vary substantially by country. Availability may impact indications and contraindications 
for heart transplant applied locally. 
Since the first case of human heart transplant in 1967,203 post-transplant survival has improved 
because of developments in recipient and donor selection, immunosuppression, and management of 
infectious complications. Thus, heart transplantation is now considered the gold standard therapy for 
refractory heart failure. Data from the latest International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation 
(ISHLT) Registry shows 1-year survival of around 90% and median survival of 12.2 years.19 
Transplantation not only improves survival but also functional status and quality of life. At 1 to 3 years 
post-cardiac transplant, the proportion of survivors capable of normal activity (defined as physician-rated 
Karnofsky score 80–100%) is 90%.204 The main challenges after heart transplantation are the 
consequences of both limited effectiveness and complications of immunosuppressive therapy (e.g. 
infections, antibody-mediated rejection, cardiac allograft vasculopathy, late graft dysfunction, 
malignancy, renal dysfunction, hypertension, diabetes mellitus).204  
The patient evaluation before listing for transplant involves four main considerations. First, the 
presence of refractory heart failure should be confirmed to ensure that there are no other treatable 
aetiologies or alternative explanations for advanced symptoms. This step is important to guarantee the 
patient’s candidacy for cardiac transplant and to reserve scarce donor organs for patients with the 
greatest need. Second, prognosis should be estimated. The greatest survival benefit is achieved in 
patients with a high mortality risk without heart transplant that also have a good expected survival post-
transplant.205 Third, co-morbidities should be evaluated to detect conditions that may negatively affect 
surgical and/or post-transplant outcomes or require special management.25,204 Diagnostic and other tests 
[e.g. complete medical history, physical examination, CPET,25,88 right heart catheterization, evaluation of 
peripheral vascular disease, assessment of frailty and nutritional status,206 determination of organ 
function (lung, liver and kidney), screening for neoplasms or active infections],25 prognostic scores (e.g. 
HFSS,133 SHFM,109 IMPACT207), and other studies as indicated based on co-morbidities (Table 9)208–213 are 
used to assess these three components of the pre-cardiac transplant evaluation. Other health 
maintenance assessments should be performed (e.g. vaccination status) and addressed as clinically 
indicated. Blood group compatibility is mandatory for adult heart transplant patients. HLA antibody 
assessment is recommended; however, there is no consensus regarding the level and type of antibodies 
that contraindicate a specific donor.214 Finally, a complete psychosocial evaluation should be included in 
the evaluation of all heart transplant candidates during the initial screening process to identify social and 
behavioural factors that may cause difficulties during the waiting period, convalescence, and long-term 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
 Accepted Article
follow-up, particularly regarding substance abuse, adherence to therapy and follow-up visits.213 Assessing 
that the patient has adequate social support (i.e. family or friends able to give support and who are 
willing to make long-term commitments for the patient’s welfare) is also a critical component.215 An 
important aspect of the pre-transplant cardiac evaluation is the identification of those patients who do not 
yet need a heart transplant and should either not be listed or removed if already listed with close 
monitoring and follow-up. 
Some aetiologies of advanced heart failure (e.g. hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, restrictive 
cardiomyopathy, arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia, complex congenital heart disease, and 
infiltrative cardiomyopathies) require specific approaches to diagnosis, prognosis, and determination of 
transplant eligibility, as described elsewhere.25 Patients with restrictive cardiomyopathy and severe heart 
failure symptoms may be candidates for cardiac transplantation. Collaboration with other specialties is 
necessary to manage other organ systems impacted by these diseases. For example, in addition to heart 
transplantation, a hepatic transplant may be required for familial amyloidosis related to mutations in the 
transthyretin gene, or an autologous stem cell transplantation may be indicated for light chain 
amyloidosis.25 Special considerations are needed for patients with congenital heart disease and in 
recipients that harbour chronic infections (e.g. Chagas disease, tuberculosis, human immunodeficiency 
virus, hepatitis C, and hepatitis B).25  
 
Unstable patients 
 
Pre-operative clinical stability is a strong predictor of early post-transplant outcomes; however, clinical 
instability can also be a priority criterion in some countries for organ allocation. Mechanical circulatory 
support systems can bridge selected patients to transplantation who are extremely ill and have a high-
expected mortality while awaiting a suitable donor heart. Short-term MCS can also serve as a bridge in 
patients initially ineligible for transplantation, such as those in cardiogenic shock with end-organ damage. 
In these cases, short-term MCS may stabilize haemodynamics and end-organ perfusion and permit an 
evaluation of candidacy (e.g. determine extent of brain damage or other end-organ injury post-
resuscitation).9,173 Although urgent cardiac transplant listing is possible in many countries, the 
appropriateness of this strategy is now being debated. Among patients listed for emergent cardiac 
transplant in the Spanish National Heart Transplant Registry database, recipients meeting the 
INTERMACS profile 1 criteria (cardiogenic shock) and profile 2 criteria (progressive clinical decline despite 
treatment with inotropes) had the highest risk of primary graft failure, dialysis requirement, and in-
hospital mortality following heart transplantation.216 Therefore, in these critically ill patients, short-term 
MCS as a BTD might constitute a more reasonable initial strategy than an urgent transplant.  
 
Long-term mechanical circulatory support 
 
Long-term support with durable MCS devices like LVAD in patients with advanced heart failure has 
survival benefits and improves quality of life compared with conventional treatments in inotrope-
dependent patients or in patients with contraindications for heart transplantation.9 The Randomized 
Evaluation of Mechanical Assistance for the Treatment of Congestive Heart Failure (REMATCH) trial first 
showed improved 1-year survival in inotrope-dependent, transplant-ineligible patients with advanced 
heart failure treated with an LVAD, but 2-year survival was not statistically different.217 Since then, 
technology of LVAD and conservative management have improved.217,218 Managing patients with long-
term MCS requires a multidisciplinary Heart Team approach, and by gaining experience, centres may 
actually improve patient survival.219  
Originally considered only as a lifesaving therapy for patients who were ineligible for heart 
transplantation, the proportion of long-term MCS devices implanted for destination therapy (DT) to heart 
transplants is increasing.220 This growth is due to a growing shortage of donor hearts, increasing numbers 
of advanced heart failure patients, and continuous improvements in MCS technologies and survival rates.  
 
Patient selection for long-term durable mechanical circulatory support 
 
The INTERMACS profiles can help identify potential candidates for MCS221 (Table 2). INTERMACS profile 1 
indicates critical cardiogenic shock with very limited time for decision and intervention. Similarly, 
INTERMACS profile 2 indicates progressive decline despite inotropic support. In these patients, many 
centres prefer to use either paracorporeal or percutaneous short-term assist devices as a BTD. Long-term 
MCS devices are also an option for these patients. INTERMACS 3 patients are those who are stable on 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
 Accepted Article
inotropes and are optimal candidates for implantable MCS, as their outcomes are significantly better than 
patients categorized as INTERMACS 1 or 2, and the potential for benefit overwhelms the risks of 
complications. Data from selected retrospective studies showed that survival rates were even better in 
non-inotrope dependent NYHA class IV patients or advanced NYHA class III patients (INTERMACS profiles 
4–7).151,222,223 A prospective, non-randomized, observational, propensity-adjusted study comparing LVAD 
with optimal medical management showed that a greater proportion of patients treated with LVAD 
survived for 12 months and had improvement in 6-min walk distance, along with a higher rate of adverse 
events and hospitalizations, compared to those receiving optimal medical management.151  
Although INTERMACS profiles alone are insufficient to evaluate an individual patient for MCS, based on 
available data selected INTERMACS 1–2 patients and all INTERMACS 3 patients should be considered for 
MCS. Furthermore, carefully selected INTERMACS 4–7 patients who are willing to accept a risk of adverse 
events in exchange for potentially longer survival and better functional status can be considered for 
MCS.104,151,224 In addition to INTERMACS profiles 1–2, risk factors for early mortality after MCS system 
implantation include renal dysfunction, elevated bilirubin, advanced age, female gender, presence of right 
heart failure and need for concomitant cardiac surgery.225–227 
Patient selection for MCS overlaps with indications for heart transplantation.25 However, as heart 
transplantation is still the gold standard, the use of LVAD therapy should be projected in light of the 
possibility to offer transplant opportunity to the patient, and it would be advisable that 
indications/contraindications to transplant are ruled out by the transplant centre before a device is 
implanted. Based on this concept, LVADs may be implanted according to three major treatment 
strategies: BTT, BTC and DT. In rare circumstances, LVAD therapy may lead to a recovery of heart 
function (bridge to recovery). In this context, however, in countries with low or declining transplant rates, 
implanting an LVAD as a BTT usually becomes DT, unless pump-related complications occur such as 
chronic driveline infection, bleeding, or thrombosis. 
High pulmonary vascular resistance or transpulmonary gradient, or a recently treated cancer are 
contraindications for heart transplantation but not for MCS. On the other hand, severe right ventricular 
dysfunction228 is a contraindication for LVAD, because there are still no good long-term solutions for right 
ventricular or biventricular mechanical support. Severe renal insufficiency is a contraindication for heart 
transplantation, but renal or liver function may improve after MCS,229 as may pulmonary vascular 
resistance.230 Thus, with the exception of advanced age or other irreversible contraindications for 
transplant, MCS should primarily be considered as BTC rather than DT. However, some patients with MCS 
will develop contraindications for transplantation over time.231  
In general, early referral of patients with advanced heart failure to transplant and MCS centres can 
assure the best timing and outcomes for both transplantation or long-term MCS. Early referral applies to 
a wide spectrum of patients ranging from housebound NYHA class IV patients with poor exercise capacity 
despite optimal medical treatment plus CRT if needed, to NYHA class IV patients who are refractory to 
conventional treatments. Shared decision making is an important component of determining the 
appropriateness of long-term MCS.232 
 
Adverse events and morbidities related to mechanical circulatory support 
 
MCS-specific infections may be on the hardware itself or the body surfaces that contain them and include 
infections of the pump, cannula, anastomoses, pocket, or the percutaneous driveline or tunnel.233 
Driveline exit site infection is a common complication, occurring in 20–25% of patients (data from main 
randomized clinical trials),234,235 but the majority remain superficial and can be managed by antibiotics.236 
Exit site swabs and blood cultures are obligatory when driveline infection is suspected. Resistant and 
complicated driveline infections (i.e. ascending driveline or pump pocket infection) can be an indication 
for listing the patient for urgent heart transplantation if there are no contraindications.224 The ISHLT 
standardized definitions for MCS infections to differentiate ventricular assist device (VAD)-specific 
infections, VAD-related infections, and non-VAD infections.233 Driveline infection can be further classified 
into superficial and deep according to surgical/histology, microbiology, and clinical criteria as well as 
general wound appearance.  
Other complications include heart failure symptoms on MCS, which may be attributed to device failure, 
mechanical issues, or cannula malposition. Right ventricular dysfunction, new onset of right heart failure, 
aortic insufficiency, ascites, and cachexia are also important considerations.224 
Treatment with anticoagulation and antiplatelet agents are mandatory to minimize the risk for pump 
thrombosis. Both embolic ischaemic events and bleeding events secondary to these therapies remain 
major complications of MCS and contribute to readmission and death.237 Continuous flow devices have 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
 Accepted Article
raised 
important 
considerations 
for 
haemocompatibility.237 
Routine 
monitoring of 
plasma-free 
haemoglobin and lactate dehydrogenase as haemolysis markers are useful for early detection of pump 
thrombosis. In HeartWare HVAD carriers, routine log-file review has demonstrated its usefulness for the 
early detection of pump thrombosis. In case of clinical suspicion, the diagnosis of pump thrombosis may 
be confirmed by means of an echocardiographic ramp test.238 
 
Device selection 
 
Currently, there are several vendors and a considerable number of devices that are used for medium-
term and long-term MCS. Continuous flow implantable MCS devices of the second and third generation 
have shown significant superiority over pulsatile first-generation implantable MCS devices. Thus, in the 
last 15 years, the landscape of potential options in MCS has changed dramatically. Currently, the three 
MCS devices most often used are the HeartMate II, HeartWare HVAD, and HeartMate 3 (Table 
10).151,223,234,235,239–258 These devices have shown good durability, reasonable but still relatively high rates 
of device-related morbidity, improved functional capacity in implanted patients, and in the case of 
HeartMate 3, mid-term survival rates approaching that of post-transplant survival (overall 2-year survival 
of 83%). The incidence of adverse events with recent technological improvements (e.g. as with the fully 
magnetically-levitated HeartMate 3 potentially almost eliminating pump thrombosis) has reduced the 
rates of reoperation to replacement or removal a malfunctioning device, and disabling strokes, although 
the incidence of other adverse events is similar between newer and older devices.258 Particular concern 
exists with stroke rates, especially with the HVAD device (29% at 2 years), and the HeartMate 3 has 
demonstrated a halving of stroke rates at 2 years compared to the HeartMate II device.258 Minimally 
invasive VAD implantation methods will hopefully further benefit the overall outcome of patients, but 
structured investigation of these techniques is needed. Although minimally invasive techniques avoid the 
need for open sternotomy, they also have a greater potential for malposition, the same cumulative 
incisional length, and still require an open sternotomy if the right ventricle fails.259 New technological 
breakthroughs are expected in the future (e.g. fully implantable pumps with transcutaneous energy 
transmission).258 Importantly, appropriate long-term solutions for cases of severe right heart or 
biventricular failure remain an unmet need, as neither biventricular support with VADs or the total 
artificial heart can ensure a satisfactory quality of life and acceptable adverse event profile.  
 
Palliative care of patients with advanced heart failure  
 
Optimal care of patients with advanced heart failure includes palliative care at their end-of-life period and 
whenever appropriate during the patient journey. Conventional therapy (cardiologic therapeutic 
approach) may not sufficiently reduce patient suffering and maximize quality of life. 
Successful palliative care must involve shared care through a multidisciplinary approach. Patients and 
their caregivers should be able to easily communicate with primary care, specialist palliative care services 
and the specialized advanced heart failure service, according to the resources of each centre.9,131,260,261 
Aging, co-morbid conditions, end-organ damage, cognitive impairment, frailty and limited social support 
complicate heart failure management, and palliative care should address each of these components. End-
of-life decision making is even more challenging for patients with advanced heart failure when heart 
transplantation or long-term MCS have failed.262 The PAL-HF (Palliative Care in Heart Failure) trial, a 
single-centre study of 150 patients, showed that interdisciplinary palliative care intervention in advanced 
heart failure patients resulted in greater benefits in quality of life, anxiety, depression and spiritual 
wellbeing compared with usual care alone.263 The SWAP-HF (Social Worker-Aided Palliative Care 
Intervention in High-risk Patients with Heart Failure) trial showed that patients at high risk for mortality 
from heart failure frequently overestimate their life expectancy and a structured social worker-led 
palliative care intervention enhances prognostic understanding and patient–physician communication 
regarding goals of care.264 
Communication with advanced heart failure patients is complex. In heart failure, the trajectory of each 
patient is different. Stocker et al.265 showed that the majority of patients with heart failure reject the idea 
of heart failure as a terminal disease and prefer to focus on day-to-day management and maintenance, 
despite obvious deterioration in disease stage and needs over time. Common expectations pre- and post- 
heart transplant or MCS and potential complications should be discussed with patients and their 
caregivers, ideally, during the assessment and evaluation period for advanced heart failure therapies. 
Whenever possible, goals and preferences for end-of life issues should be discussed, especially in patients 
treated with MCS for DT. Living will and advance directive preferences are useful, and patients should be 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
 Accepted Article
encouraged to prepare the necessary documents. A comprehensive end-of life plan of care for each 
patient should be available. This plan of care should be defined before MCS implantation or heart 
transplantation and revisited during the course of care.262 
Patients with MCS as DT are particularly complex. A study at the Mayo Clinic on end-of-life care in 
long-term MCS patients showed that 78% of the patients who died were hospitalized, and of these, 88% 
died in the intensive care unit. The main causes of death were multiorgan failure, haemorrhagic stroke, 
and heart failure.266 Goals of palliative care include management of physical symptoms (e.g. heart failure 
symptoms, pain, anxiety, depression, anorexia, constipation, and insomnia). Psychosocial and spiritual 
concerns should also be addressed.  
An important aspect is deciding when to discontinue advanced therapies (e.g. MCS, ICD, or 
immunosuppressive treatment). This decision should be the patient’s whenever possible, or the patient’s 
caregiver, family, or hospital ethics committee if the patient is unable to independently convey their 
decisions. Support can be discontinued in the hospital, in hospice, or at home depending on patient and 
family preferences, feasibility, and local resources. Nurses and health care personnel involved should be 
adequately trained to correctly deactivate devices and associated alarms and to provide comfort care to 
the patient and psychological support to the family and care team. 
 
 
Organizational issues for patient referral to advanced heart failure centres: hub and spoke 
network  
 
The broad spectrum of heart failure ranges from patients in the early stages of the disease largely 
managed by primary care physicians and secondary care cardiologists, to those who progress to more 
advanced stages and require specialized tertiary care. All heart failure patients should undergo regular 
follow-up to detect progression of symptoms and disease. The criteria for referral to an advanced heart 
failure tertiary hub centre, i.e. those with capabilities for heart transplantation and MCS, must be based 
on need (i.e. indication) and eligibility (i.e. absence of contraindications) for those therapies, as well as 
the need for other advanced therapies for symptom management that may be unavailable at non-
specialized centres (e.g. UF, peritoneal dialysis). A useful mnemonic has been proposed to aid in the 
identification of patients with advanced heart failure and timely referral for consideration of advanced 
therapies (Table 11).267,268 
Ideally, secondary care centres without advanced heart failure therapies (spoke centre) should liaise 
with a tertiary hub centre to develop a strong working relationship. Heart failure patients are then 
managed within this ‘hub and spoke’ continuum of care (Figure 2). Spoke centres are responsible for 
ensuring adherence to guideline-directed therapy and that patients are referred to the tertiary hub centre 
at the appropriate time (Figure 1).  
Each country should define the standards and organizational structures for advanced heart failure 
tertiary hub centres regarding pathways for referring patients, which should be made available to every 
patient, in relation to his/her individual characteristics and needs.260,269–271 The tertiary hub centre should 
ensure that spoke centres know how to communicate in an agile way (telephones, email address) 
including urgently, if necessary. Once a patient is referred for evaluation, the hub and spoke centre 
teams should jointly agree whether the consultation can be done on an outpatient basis or requires an 
inpatient transfer between the two hospitals.  
A protocol for the immediate management and safe transfer of unstable patients in cardiogenic shock 
must be developed and available at each tertiary hub centre, both for de novo patients and those with 
chronic, deteriorating heart failure. This protocol must be individualized, taking into account geographical 
considerations and resource availability at each spoke,272–276 including in some cases a team dispatched 
from the tertiary hub centre to retrieve the patient.277,278  
While the patient is on the waiting list for heart transplantation, decisions regarding cardiovascular 
care must be guided by the advanced heart failure team at the tertiary hub. However, the spoke centre 
physician has a key role in monitoring the patient’s condition and implementing therapeutic decisions. 
Two-way communication between spoke and hub centres is key for the successful management of the 
patient.260 Tertiary hub centres must provide education on advanced heart failure therapies and share 
their experience with spoke centres. 
 
 
Principles of shared care after heart transplantation or mechanical circulatory support  
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
 Accepted Article
As the numbers of patients receiving heart transplants are plateauing or declining, there is an increasing 
need for more long-term MCS implantations. These advanced therapies should preferably be established 
within centres that offer both transplantation and MCS, although consensus has not been reached 
regarding this issue. Each hub and spoke centre should develop their own pathways for shared care. 
Follow-up of patients after heart transplantation or implantation of MCS devices consists of both 
immediate post-operative period and long-term follow-up. In the immediate post-transplant or post-MCS 
implantation, care should be shared among intensivists, surgeons and cardiologists. In the early phase, 
haemodynamic monitoring is of great importance for both therapies, allowing for more accurate titration 
of inotropic or vasodilator therapy. Haemodynamic monitoring, along with echocardiographic imaging, 
allows for early detection of some of the potential adverse events that might occur in the immediate 
post-operative period (e.g. hypovolaemia, tamponade, acute right heart failure). Echocardiography is an 
integral part of cardiac allograft evaluation as well as device optimization, which includes setting the 
pump speed of the device and adjusting medical therapy to achieve optimal unloading of the left 
ventricle, while balancing the preload provided to the right ventricle.  
Long-term follow-up of patients with advanced heart failure therapies is ideally done through the 
outpatient clinic. At each appointment for patients with long-term MCS, patient history and physical 
examination and laboratory assessment (e.g. haemolysis, anaemia, liver, renal, and infection markers) 
should be performed, with special attention to blood pressure, signs of congestion, shortness of breath, 
potential infection, bleeding, thrombosis, and the patient’s general condition. For a patient with long-term 
MCS, the driveline exit site should be meticulously inspected for potential infection. The driveline, exit 
site, and other MCS system components should be examined to ensure their integrity. Blood pressure 
should be measured (preferably assisted with a Doppler ultrasonic device in patients with low pulsatility) 
and lowered if indicated. Blood pressure control is important since the risk of stroke is closely related to 
blood pressure for some devices like the HVAD. Mean arterial pressure should be maintained <90 mmHg, 
and ideally <85 mmHg. Regular echocardiographic assessment should be performed, determining the 
need for device optimization, e.g. increasing or decreasing the device speed, depending on the position of 
the interventricular septum, opening of the aortic valve, or size of the left ventricle. Alarm history should 
be obtained at regular intervals. If possible, functional testing should be performed (e.g. 6-min walking 
distance). Special attention should be directed at maintaining adequate anticoagulation status, and if 
available self-monitoring should be encouraged. Patients should be regularly educated on proper care of 
the driveline exit site. 
Post-transplant patients should undergo a pre-defined regimen of graft biopsies, titration of 
immunosuppressive and other therapies, rejection monitoring, assessment for infections, transplant 
coronary artery disease and/or cardiac allograft vasculopathy, immunosuppression side effects, and other 
potential complications including neoplasia, and co-morbidities that require comprehensive treatment. 
Shared care with referral cardiologists and primary care physicians is needed. 
Treatment and follow-up of patients who are post-cardiac transplant or MCS recipients requires an 
interdisciplinary approach to meet the complex needs of these patients. In addition to the transplant 
cardiologist and MCS device specialist, a dedicated transplant/MCS device nurse is important to educate 
the patient and caregivers, as well as coordinate health care team members. A cardiac surgeon should 
also be included in case of surgical complications. For patients with MCS, driveline infection is primarily a 
surgical problem. Ideally, a nutritionist, physiotherapist, psychologist, psychiatrist, and general 
practitioner should also be a part of the team taking care of patients treated with advanced heart failure 
therapies. Depending on co-morbidities and complications, other specialists should participate in shared 
care as appropriate. Highly experienced tertiary centres are required to provide this multidisciplinary 
approach to shared care and address the needs of heart failure patients managed with advanced 
therapies.  
 
 
Conclusion 
 
Advanced heart failure remains a major clinical challenge. Changes in the clinical characteristics and 
clinical practice of heart failure treatment have made it necessary to develop the present update of the 
original criteria for the definition of advanced heart failure. New biomarkers and imaging tools may allow 
better prognostic stratification and the assessment of mechanisms of disease progression. However, 
robust data are lacking from prospective, controlled trials demonstrating the clinical usefulness of these 
new methods. Once guideline-directed management therapy is insufficient, the patient may benefit from 
advanced heart failure therapies. Inotropic agents have frequently been used as intermittent intravenous 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
 Accepted Article
infusions, but no definitive outcome data from prospective, randomized trials are available and some 
studies have shown an association with increased mortality. Thus, these agents provide only 
symptomatic treatment or stabilization in unstable conditions. Impressive progress has been made with 
MCS devices. At least four devices are available for the immediate treatment of cardiogenic shock. Heart 
transplantation is considered the treatment of choice for eligible patients with excellent survival and 
quality of life, but it is limited by organ availability, graft dysfunction, and side effects of 
immunosuppression. Long-term MCS can be used as a BTT or as DT. Recent improvement in the 
characteristics of MCS devices will broaden their indications and make them a valid alternative to medical 
treatment in patients with advanced heart failure. Lastly, palliative care is indicated when patients are 
ineligible for advanced heart failure therapies or after advanced therapies have been performed and 
patient progresses to end-of-life. Finally, it is important to note that no therapy in advanced heart failure 
is based on reliable prospective studies, and there is an urgent need to develop evidence-based 
treatment algorithms to prolong life, increase life quality, and reduce the burden of hospitalization in this 
vulnerable patient population. 
 
 
Supplementary Information 
 
Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online version of this article: 
Table S1. Ultrafiltration clinical trials: overview of study designs and key findings. 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
Johann Bauersachs was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, Clinical Research Group 311 
(KFO 311) ‘(Pre-)terminal heart and lung failure: Unloading and repair’ (DFG; TP1, BA 1742/9-1). 
The authors acknowledge Wendy Gattis Stough, PharmD (Campbell University College of Pharmacy and 
Health Sciences), supported by the Heart Failure Association of the European Society of Cardiology for 
contributions to the manuscript. 
Conflict of interest: M.G.C.L.: Research support from Novartis, Vifor Pharma, and FEDER Funds; 
personal fees (travel grants, lecture fees and advisory boards) from Novartis, Abbott Vascular, Astellas, 
MSD and Servier. M.M.: personal fees (consulting honoraria for advisory board and clinical trial executive 
committees) from Novartis (RELAX-AHF co-chairman), Bayer, and Vifor (executive committee member 
AFFIRM-AHF). L.H.L.: research grants from Novartis, Boehringer Ingelheim, Vifor Pharma, and 
AstraZeneca; personal fees (consulting) from Novartis, Merck, Boehringer Ingelheim, Sanofi, Vifor 
Pharma, AstraZeneca. M.R.C.: personal fees (consulting) from Respicardia (study principal investigator), 
CHF Solutions, Axon Technologies. G.F.: steering committee member for clinical trials/registries 
sponsored by Bayer, Novartis, Servier, and Medtronic. F.G.: research support as an investigator from 
Abbott, CARMAT, Corvia, and Novartis; speaker/advisor for Abbott, CARMAT, ORION Pharma, Bayer, 
Corvia, and Novartis. S.T.: advisor to Medtronic, HeartWare, CorWave, and 3R. E.B.C.: personal fees 
(travel grants, lecture fees, advisory board) from Novartis, Rovi, Abbott Vascular, Servier, MSD; 
academic grant from Abbott Vascular (PCHF Course of the ESC); research grant from Fundacion Mutua 
Madrilena. T.H.: personal fees (lecture) from Novaris, Boehringer Ingelheim. S.N.: research investigator 
for Amgen; personal fees (advisory board, speaker bureau) from Medtronic, Novartis, Actelion, Bayer, 
GlaxoSmithKline; non-financial support from Abbott. J.B.: honoraria for lectures and/or consulting from 
Novartis, Pfizer, Vifor, Bayer, Servier, Orion, CVRx, Abiomed, Abbott/St. Jude Medical/Thoratec, 
Medtronic/Heartware; research support from Zoll, CVRx, Bayer, Vifor, Abiomed, Medtronic. F.R.: research 
grants from St. Jude Medical, Novartis; personal fees (lectures, advisory board meetings, steering 
committee member) from St. Jude Medical, Servier, Zoll, AstraZeneca, Sanofi, Novartis, Amgen, BMS, 
Pfizer, Fresenius, Vifor, Roche, Bayer, Abbott. The other authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose. 
 
References 
 
1. Xanthakis V, Enserro DM, Larson MG, Wollert KC, Januzzi JL, Levy D, Aragam J, Benjamin EJ, Cheng S, Wang TJ, 
Mitchell GF, Vasan RS. Prevalence, neurohormonal correlates, and prognosis of heart failure stages in the 
community. JACC Heart Fail 2016;4:808–815. 
2. Bjork JB, Alton KK, Georgiopoulou VV, Butler J, Kalogeropoulos AP. Defining advanced heart failure: a systematic 
review of criteria used in clinical trials. J Card Fail 2016;22:569–577. 
3. Fang JC, Ewald GA, Allen LA, Butler J, Westlake Canary CA, Colvin-Adams M, Dickinson MG, Levy P, Stough WG, 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
 Accepted Article
Sweitzer NK, Teerlink JR, Whellan DJ, Albert NM, Krishnamani R, Rich MW, Walsh MN, Bonnell MR, Carson PE, Chan 
MC, Dries DL, Hernandez AF, Hershberger RE, Katz SD, Moore S, Rodgers JE, Rogers JG, Vest AR, Givertz MM. 
Advanced (stage D) heart failure: a statement from the Heart Failure Society of America Guidelines Committee. J 
Card Fail 2015;21:519–534. 
4. Metra M, Ponikowski P, Dickstein K, McMurray JJ, Gavazzi A, Bergh CH, Fraser AG, Jaarsma T, Pitsis A, Mohacsi P, 
Bohm M, Anker S, Dargie H, Brutsaert D, Komajda M. Advanced chronic heart failure: a position statement from 
the Study Group on Advanced Heart Failure of the Heart Failure Association of the European Society of Cardiology. 
Eur J Heart Fail 2007;9:684–694. 
5. Hunt SA, Abraham WT, Chin MH, Feldman AM, Francis GS, Ganiats TG, Jessup M, Konstam MA, Mancini DM, Michl 
K, Oates JA, Rahko PS, Silver MA, Stevenson LW, Yancy CW. 2009 Focused update incorporated into the ACC/AHA 
2005 Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of heart failure in adults: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines developed in collaboration 
with the International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation. J Am Coll Cardiol 2009;53:e1–e90. 
6. Yancy CW, Jessup M, Bozkurt B, Butler J, Casey DE Jr, Drazner MH, Fonarow GC, Geraci SA, Horwich T, Januzzi JL, 
Johnson MR, Kasper EK, Levy WC, Masoudi FA, McBride PE, McMurray JJ, Mitchell JE, Peterson PN, Riegel B, Sam F, 
Stevenson LW, Tang WH, Tsai EJ, Wilkoff BL. 2013 ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of heart failure: 
executive summary: a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task 
Force on practice guidelines. Circulation 2013;128:1810–1852. 
7. Kirklin JK, Naftel DC, Stevenson LW, Kormos RL, Pagani FD, Miller MA, Ulisney K, Young JB. INTERMACS database 
for durable devices for circulatory support: first annual report. J Heart Lung Transplant 2008;27:1065–1072. 
8. Stevenson LW, Pagani FD, Young JB, Jessup M, Miller L, Kormos RL, Naftel DC, Ulisney K, Desvigne-Nickens P, 
Kirklin JK. INTERMACS profiles of advanced heart failure: the current picture. J Heart Lung Transplant 
2009;28:535–541. 
9. Ponikowski P, Voors AA, Anker SD, Bueno H, Cleland JG, Coats AJ, Falk V, Gonzalez-Juanatey JR, Harjola VP, 
Jankowska EA, Jessup M, Linde C, Nihoyannopoulos P, Parissis JT, Pieske B, Riley JP, Rosano GM, Ruilope LM, 
Ruschitzka F, Rutten FH, van der Meer P. 2016 ESC Guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of acute and chronic 
heart failure: The Task Force for the diagnosis and treatment of acute and chronic heart failure of the European 
Society of Cardiology (ESC). Developed with the special contribution of the Heart Failure Association (HFA) of the 
ESC. Eur J Heart Fail 2016;18:891–975. 
10. Yancy CW, Jessup M, Bozkurt B, Butler J, Casey DE Jr, Colvin MM, Drazner MH, Filippatos G, Fonarow GC, Givertz 
MM, Hollenberg SM, Lindenfeld J, Masoudi FA, McBride PE, Peterson PN, Stevenson LW, Westlake C. 2016 
ACC/AHA/HFSA Focused update on new pharmacological therapy for heart failure: an update of the 2013 
ACCF/AHA Guideline for the management of heart failure: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American 
Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines and the Heart Failure Society of America. J Am Coll 
Cardiol 2016;68:1476–1488. 
11. Cowie MR, Filippatos GS, Alonso Garcia ML, Anker SD, Baczynska A, Bloomfield DM, Borentain M, Bruins Slot K, 
Cronin M, Doevendans PA, El-Gazayerly A, Gimpelewicz C, Honarpour N, Janmohamed S, Janssen H, Kim AM, 
Lautsch D, Laws I, Lefkowitz M, Lopez-Sendon J, Lyon AR, Malik FI, McMurray JJ, Metra M, Figueroa Perez S, 
Pfeffer MA, Pocock SJ, Ponikowski P, Prasad K, Richard-Lordereau I, Roessig L, Rosano GM, Sherman W, Stough 
WG, Swedberg K, Tyl B, Zannad F, Boulton C, De Graeff P. New medicinal products for chronic heart failure: 
advances in clinical trial design and efficacy assessment. Eur J Heart Fail 2017;19:718–727. 
12. Borne RT, Varosy PD, Masoudi FA. Implantable cardioverter-defibrillator shocks: epidemiology, outcomes, and 
therapeutic approaches. JAMA Intern Med 2013;173:859–865. 
13. Chen J, Johnson G, Hellkamp AS, Anderson J, Mark DB, Lee KL, Bardy GH, Poole JE. Rapid-rate nonsustained 
ventricular tachycardia found on implantable cardioverter-defibrillator interrogation: relationship to outcomes in the 
SCD-HeFT (Sudden Cardiac Death in Heart Failure Trial). J Am Coll Cardiol 2013;61:2161–2168. 
14. Dichtl W, Wolber T, Paoli U, Brullmann S, Stuhlinger M, Berger T, Spuller K, Strasak A, Pachinger O, Haegeli LM, 
Duru F, Hintringer F. Appropriate therapy but not inappropriate shocks predict survival in implantable cardioverter 
defibrillator patients. Clin Cardiol 2011;34:433–436. 
15. Triposkiadis F, Giamouzis G, Parissis J, Starling RC, Boudoulas H, Skoularigis J, Butler J, Filippatos G. Reframing 
the association and significance of co-morbidities in heart failure. Eur J Heart Fail 2016;18:744–758. 
16. Harjola VP, Mullens W, Banaszewski M, Bauersachs J, Brunner-La Rocca HP, Chioncel O, Collins SP, Doehner W, 
Filippatos GS, Flammer AJ, Fuhrmann V, Lainscak M, Lassus J, Legrand M, Masip J, Mueller C, Papp Z, Parissis J, 
Platz E, Rudiger A, Ruschitzka F, Schafer A, Seferovic PM, Skouri H, Yilmaz MB, Mebazaa A. Organ dysfunction, 
injury and failure in acute heart failure: from pathophysiology to diagnosis and management. A review on behalf of 
the Acute Heart Failure Committee of the Heart Failure Association (HFA) of the European Society of Cardiology 
(ESC). Eur J Heart Fail 2017;19:821–836. 
17. Yoshioka D, Takayama H, Colombo PC, Yuzefpolskaya M, Garan AR, Topkara VK, Han J, Kurlansky P, Naka Y, 
Takeda K. Changes in end-organ function in patients with prolonged continuous-flow left ventricular assist device 
support. Ann Thorac Surg 2017;103:717–724. 
18. Ross DW, Stevens GR, Wanchoo R, Majure DT, Jauhar S, Fernandez HA, Merzkani M, Jhaveri KD. Left ventricular 
assist devices and the kidney. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2018;13:348–355. 
19. Lund LH, Khush KK, Cherikh WS, Goldfarb S, Kucheryavaya AY, Levvey BJ, Meiser B, Rossano JW, Chambers DC, 
Yusen RD, Stehlik J. The Registry of the International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation: Thirty-fourth 
Adult Heart Transplantation Report–2017; Focus Theme: Allograft ischemic time. J Heart Lung Transplant 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
 Accepted Article
2017;36:1037–1046. 
20. Ezekowitz JA, Kaul P, Bakal JA, Quan H, McAlister FA. Trends in heart failure care: has the incident diagnosis of 
heart failure shifted from the hospital to the emergency department and outpatient clinics? Eur J Heart Fail 
2011;13:142–147. 
21. Skali H, Dwyer EM, Goldstein R, Haigney M, Krone R, Kukin M, Lichstein E, McNitt S, Moss AJ, Pfeffer MA, Solomon 
SD. Prognosis and response to therapy of first inpatient and outpatient heart failure event in a heart failure clinical 
trial: MADIT-CRT. Eur J Heart Fail 2014;16:560–565. 
22. Okumura N, Jhund PS, Gong J, Lefkowitz MP, Rizkala AR, Rouleau JL, Shi VC, Swedberg K, Zile MR, Solomon SD, 
Packer M, McMurray JJ. Importance of clinical worsening of heart failure treated in the outpatient setting: evidence 
from the Prospective Comparison of ARNI With ACEI to Determine Impact on Global Mortality and Morbidity in 
Heart Failure Trial (PARADIGM-HF). Circulation 2016;133:2254–2262. 
23. Greene SJ, Mentz RJ, Felker GM. Outpatient worsening heart failure as a target for therapy: a review. JAMA Cardiol 
2018;3:252–259. 
24. Lund LH, Stehlik J. Risk scores and biomarkers in heart failure: a journey to predictive accuracy and clinical utility. 
J Heart Lung Transplant 2016;35:711–713. 
25. Mehra MR, Canter CE, Hannan MM, Semigran MJ, Uber PA, Baran DA, Danziger-Isakov L, Kirklin JK, Kirk R, 
Kushwaha SS, Lund LH, Potena L, Ross HJ, Taylor DO, Verschuuren EA, Zuckermann A; International Society for 
Heart Lung Transplantation (ISHLT) Infectious Diseases Council; International Society for Heart Lung 
Transplantation (ISHLT) Pediatric Transplantation Council; International Society for Heart Lung Transplantation 
(ISHLT) Heart Failure and Transplantation Council. The 2016 International Society for Heart Lung Transplantation 
listing criteria for heart transplantation: a 10-year update. J Heart Lung Transplant 2016;35:1–23. 
26. Cleland JG, Teerlink JR, Davison BA, Shoaib A, Metra M, Senger S, Milo O, Cotter G, Bourge RC, Parker JD, Jondeau 
G, Krum H, O’Connor CM, Torre-Amione G, van Veldhuisen DJ, McMurray JJ. Measurement of troponin and 
natriuretic peptides shortly after admission in patients with heart failure–does it add useful prognostic information? 
An analysis of the Value of Endothelin Receptor Inhibition with Tezosentan in Acute heart failure Studies 
(VERITAS). Eur J Heart Fail 2017;19:739–747. 
27. Ouwerkerk W, Voors AA, Zwinderman AH. Factors influencing the predictive power of models for predicting 
mortality and/or heart failure hospitalization in patients with heart failure. JACC Heart Fail 2014;2:429–436. 
28. Rahimi K, Bennett D, Conrad N, Williams TM, Basu J, Dwight J, Woodward M, Patel A, McMurray J, MacMahon S. 
Risk prediction in patients with heart failure: a systematic review and analysis. JACC Heart Fail 2014;2:440–446. 
29. Stevenson LW, Davis RB. Model building as an educational hobby. Circ Heart Fail 2016;9:e003457. 
30. Pocock SJ, Wang D, Pfeffer MA, Yusuf S, McMurray JJ, Swedberg KB, Ostergren J, Michelson EL, Pieper KS, Granger 
CB. Predictors of mortality and morbidity in patients with chronic heart failure. Eur Heart J 2006;27:65–75. 
31. Zabarovskaja S, Gadler F, Braunschweig F, Stahlberg M, Hornsten J, Linde C, Lund LH. Women have better long-
term prognosis than men after cardiac resynchronization therapy. Europace 2012;14:1148–1155. 
32. Lund LH, Jurga J, Edner M, Benson L, Dahlstrom U, Linde C, Alehagen U. Prevalence, correlates, and prognostic 
significance of QRS prolongation in heart failure with reduced and preserved ejection fraction. Eur Heart J 
2013;34:529–539. 
33. Wang NC, Maggioni AP, Konstam MA, Zannad F, Krasa HB, Burnett JC Jr, Grinfeld L, Swedberg K, Udelson JE, Cook 
T, Traver B, Zimmer C, Orlandi C, Gheorghiade M. Clinical implications of QRS duration in patients hospitalized with 
worsening heart failure and reduced left ventricular ejection fraction. JAMA 2008;299:2656–2666. 
34. Braunschweig F, Linde C, Benson L, Stahlberg M, Dahlstrom U, Lund LH. New York Heart Association functional 
class, QRS duration, and survival in heart failure with reduced ejection fraction: implications for cardiac 
resychronization therapy. Eur J Heart Fail 2017;19:366–376. 
35. The SOLVD Investigators. Effect of enalapril on survival in patients with reduced left ventricular ejection fractions 
and congestive heart failure. N Engl J Med 1991;325:293–302. 
36. The SOLVD Investigators. Effect of enalapril on mortality and the development of heart failure in asymptomatic 
patients with reduced left ventricular ejection fractions. N Engl J Med 1992;327:685–691. 
37. The CONSENSUS Trial Study Group. Effects of enalapril on mortality in severe congestive heart failure. Results of 
the Cooperative North Scandinavian Enalapril Survival Study (CONSENSUS). N Engl J Med 1987;316:1429–1435. 
38. Lee TT, Chen J, Cohen DJ, Tsao L. The association between blood pressure and mortality in patients with heart 
failure. Am Heart J 2006;151:76–83. 
39. Schmid FA, Schlager O, Keller P, Seifert B, Huang R, Frohlich GM, Luscher TF, Ruschitzka F, Enseleit F. Prognostic 
value of long-term blood pressure changes in patients with chronic heart failure. Eur J Heart Fail 2017;19:837–
842. 
40. Domanski MJ, Mitchell GF, Norman JE, Exner DV, Pitt B, Pfeffer MA. Independent prognostic information provided 
by sphygmomanometrically determined pulse pressure and mean arterial pressure in patients with left ventricular 
dysfunction. J Am Coll Cardiol 1999;33:951–958. 
41. Jackson CE, Castagno D, Maggioni AP, Kober L, Squire IB, Swedberg K, Andersson B, Richards AM, Bayes-Genis A, 
Tribouilloy C, Dobson J, Ariti CA, Poppe KK, Earle N, Whalley G, Pocock SJ, Doughty RN, McMurray JJ. Differing 
prognostic value of pulse pressure in patients with heart failure with reduced or preserved ejection fraction: results 
from the MAGGIC individual patient meta-analysis. Eur Heart J 2015;36:1106–1114. 
42. Li SJ, Sartipy U, Lund LH, Dahlstrom U, Adiels M, Petzold M, Fu M. Prognostic significance of resting heart rate and 
use of beta-blockers in atrial fibrillation and sinus rhythm in patients with heart failure and reduced ejection 
fraction: findings from the Swedish Heart Failure Registry. Circ Heart Fail 2015;8:871–879. 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
 Accepted Article
43. Simpson J, Castagno D, Doughty RN, Poppe KK, Earle N, Squire I, Richards M, Andersson B, Ezekowitz JA, 
Komajda M, Petrie MC, McAlister FA, Gamble GD, Whalley GA, McMurray JJ. Is heart rate a risk marker in patients 
with chronic heart failure and concomitant atrial fibrillation? Results from the MAGGIC meta-analysis. Eur J Heart 
Fail 2015;17:1182–1191. 
44. Fox K, Ford I, Steg PG, Tendera M, Robertson M, Ferrari R. Heart rate as a prognostic risk factor in patients with 
coronary artery disease and left-ventricular systolic dysfunction (BEAUTIFUL): a subgroup analysis of a randomised 
controlled trial. Lancet 2008;372:817–821. 
45. Ho KK, Moody GB, Peng CK, Mietus JE, Larson MG, Levy D, Goldberger AL. Predicting survival in heart failure case 
and control subjects by use of fully automated methods for deriving nonlinear and conventional indices of heart 
rate dynamics. Circulation 1997;96:842–848. 
46. Nolan J, Batin PD, Andrews R, Lindsay SJ, Brooksby P, Mullen M, Baig W, Flapan AD, Cowley A, Prescott RJ, Neilson 
JM, Fox KA. Prospective study of heart rate variability and mortality in chronic heart failure: results of the United 
Kingdom heart failure evaluation and assessment of risk trial (UK-heart). Circulation 1998;98:1510–1516. 
47. Ponikowski P, Anker SD, Chua TP, Szelemej R, Piepoli M, Adamopoulos S, Webb-Peploe K, Harrington D, Banasiak 
W, Wrabec K, Coats AJ. Depressed heart rate variability as an independent predictor of death in chronic congestive 
heart failure secondary to ischemic or idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy. Am J Cardiol 1997;79:1645–1650. 
48. Nohria A, Tsang SW, Fang JC, Lewis EF, Jarcho JA, Mudge GH, Stevenson LW. Clinical assessment identifies 
hemodynamic profiles that predict outcomes in patients admitted with heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol 
2003;41:1797–1804. 
49. Stevenson LW. Design of therapy for advanced heart failure. Eur J Heart Fail 2005;7:323–331. 
50. Drazner MH, Rame JE, Stevenson LW, Dries DL. Prognostic importance of elevated jugular venous pressure and a 
third heart sound in patients with heart failure. N Engl J Med 2001;345:574–581. 
51. Zabarovskaja S, Hage C, Gabrielsen A, Mellbin L, Lund LH. Copeptin in heart failure, post-left ventricular assist 
device and post-heart transplantation. Heart Lung Circ 2017;26:143–149. 
52. Lee WH, Packer M. Prognostic importance of serum sodium concentration and its modification by converting-
enzyme inhibition in patients with severe chronic heart failure. Circulation 1986;73:257–267. 
53. Miller WL, Hartman KA, Burritt MF, Grill DE, Rodeheffer RJ, Burnett JC Jr, Jaffe AS. Serial biomarker measurements 
in ambulatory patients with chronic heart failure: the importance of change over time. Circulation 2007;116:249–
257. 
54. Sato Y, Yamada T, Taniguchi R, Nagai K, Makiyama T, Okada H, Kataoka K, Ito H, Matsumori A, Sasayama S, 
Takatsu Y. Persistently increased serum concentrations of cardiac troponin t in patients with idiopathic dilated 
cardiomyopathy are predictive of adverse outcomes. Circulation 2001;103:369–374. 
55. Horwich TB, Patel J, MacLellan WR, Fonarow GC. Cardiac troponin I is associated with impaired hemodynamics, 
progressive left ventricular dysfunction, and increased mortality rates in advanced heart failure. Circulation 
2003;108:833–838. 
56. Pascual-Figal DA, Manzano-Fernandez S, Boronat M, Casas T, Garrido IP, Bonaque JC, Pastor-Perez F, Valdes M, 
Januzzi JL. Soluble ST2, high-sensitivity troponin T- and N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide: complementary 
role for risk stratification in acutely decompensated heart failure. Eur J Heart Fail 2011;13:718–725. 
57. Perna ER, Macin SM, Canella JP, Augier N, Stival JL, Cialzeta JR, Pitzus AE, Garcia EH, Obregon R, Brizuela M, 
Barbagelata A. Ongoing myocardial injury in stable severe heart failure: value of cardiac troponin T monitoring for 
high-risk patient identification. Circulation 2004;110:2376–2382. 
58. Fonarow GC, Peacock WF, Phillips CO, Givertz MM, Lopatin M. Admission B-type natriuretic peptide levels and in-
hospital mortality in acute decompensated heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol 2007;49:1943–1950. 
59. de Groote P, Dagorn J, Soudan B, Lamblin N, McFadden E, Bauters C. B-type natriuretic peptide and peak exercise 
oxygen consumption provide independent information for risk stratification in patients with stable congestive heart 
failure. J Am Coll Cardiol 2004;43:1584–1589. 
60. Doust JA, Pietrzak E, Dobson A, Glasziou P. How well does B-type natriuretic peptide predict death and cardiac 
events in patients with heart failure: systematic review. BMJ 2005;330:625. 
61. Maeda K, Tsutamoto T, Wada A, Mabuchi N, Hayashi M, Tsutsui T, Ohnishi M, Sawaki M, Fujii M, Matsumoto T, 
Kinoshita M. High levels of plasma brain natriuretic peptide and interleukin-6 after optimized treatment for heart 
failure are independent risk factors for morbidity and mortality in patients with congestive heart failure. J Am Coll 
Cardiol 2000;36:1587–1593. 
62. Zabarovskaja S, Hage C, Linde C, Daubert JC, Donal E, Gabrielsen A, Mellbin L, Lund LH. Adaptive cardiovascular 
hormones in a spectrum of heart failure phenotypes. Int J Cardiol 2015;189:6–11. 
63. Anand IS, Fisher LD, Chiang YT, Latini R, Masson S, Maggioni AP, Glazer RD, Tognoni G, Cohn JN. Changes in brain 
natriuretic peptide and norepinephrine over time and mortality and morbidity in the Valsartan Heart Failure Trial 
(Val-HeFT). Circulation 2003;107:1278–1283. 
64. Hulsmann M, Stanek B, Frey B, Sturm B, Putz D, Kos T, Berger R, Woloszczuk W, Putz D, Kos T, Berger R, 
Woloszczuk W, Maurer G, Pacher R. Value of cardiopulmonary exercise testing and big endothelin plasma levels to 
predict short-term prognosis of patients with chronic heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol 1998;32:1695–1700. 
65. Lamblin N, Mouquet F, Hennache B, Dagorn J, Susen S, Bauters C, de Groote P. High-sensitivity C-reactive protein: 
potential adjunct for risk stratification in patients with stable congestive heart failure. Eur Heart J 2005;26:2245–
2250. 
66. Mueller C, Laule-Kilian K, Christ A, Brunner-La Rocca HP, Perruchoud AP. Inflammation and long-term mortality in 
acute congestive heart failure. Am Heart J 2006;151:845–850. 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
 Accepted Article
67. Sharma R, Rauchhaus M, Ponikowski PP, Varney S, Poole-Wilson PA, Mann DL, Coats AJ, Anker SD. The 
relationship of the erythrocyte sedimentation rate to inflammatory cytokines and survival in patients with chronic 
heart failure treated with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors. J Am Coll Cardiol 2000;36:523–528. 
68. Morbach C, Marx A, Kaspar M, Guder G, Brenner S, Feldmann C, Stork S, Vollert JO, Ertl G, Angermann CE, Group 
INHS, the Competence Network Heart F. Prognostic potential of midregional pro-adrenomedullin following 
decompensation for systolic heart failure: comparison with cardiac natriuretic peptides. Eur J Heart Fail 
2017;19:1166–1175. 
69. Anker SD, Doehner W, Rauchhaus M, Sharma R, Francis D, Knosalla C, Davos CH, Cicoira M, Shamim W, Kemp M, 
Segal R, Osterziel KJ, Leyva F, Hetzer R, Ponikowski P, Coats AJ. Uric acid and survival in chronic heart failure: 
validation and application in metabolic, functional, and hemodynamic staging. Circulation 2003;107:1991–1997. 
70. Pingitore A, Landi P, Taddei MC, Ripoli A, L’Abbate A, Iervasi G. Triiodothyronine levels for risk stratification of 
patients with chronic heart failure. Am J Med 2005;118:132–136. 
71. Jackson CE, Solomon SD, Gerstein HC, Zetterstrand S, Olofsson B, Michelson EL, Granger CB, Swedberg K, Pfeffer 
MA, Yusuf S, McMurray JJ. Albuminuria in chronic heart failure: prevalence and prognostic importance. Lancet 
2009;374:543–550. 
72. Quinones MA, Greenberg BH, Kopelen HA, Koilpillai C, Limacher MC, Shindler DM, Shelton BJ, Weiner DH. 
Echocardiographic predictors of clinical outcome in patients with left ventricular dysfunction enrolled in the SOLVD 
registry and trials: significance of left ventricular hypertrophy. Studies of Left Ventricular Dysfunction. J Am Coll 
Cardiol 2000;35:1237–1244. 
73. Solomon SD, Anavekar N, Skali H, McMurray JJ, Swedberg K, Yusuf S, Granger CB, Michelson EL, Wang D, Pocock 
S, Pfeffer MA. Influence of ejection fraction on cardiovascular outcomes in a broad spectrum of heart failure 
patients. Circulation 2005;112:3738–3744. 
74. Wong M, Staszewsky L, Latini R, Barlera S, Glazer R, Aknay N, Hester A, Anand I, Cohn JN. Severity of left 
ventricular remodeling defines outcomes and response to therapy in heart failure: Valsartan Heart Failure Trial 
(Val-HeFT) echocardiographic data. J Am Coll Cardiol 2004;43:2022–2027. 
75. Pinamonti B, Di Lenarda A, Sinagra G, Camerini F. Restrictive left ventricular filling pattern in dilated 
cardiomyopathy assessed by Doppler echocardiography: clinical, echocardiographic and hemodynamic correlations 
and prognostic implications. Heart Muscle Disease Study Group. J Am Coll Cardiol 1993;22:808–815. 
76. Temporelli PL, Corra U, Imparato A, Bosimini E, Scapellato F, Giannuzzi P. Reversible restrictive left ventricular 
diastolic filling with optimized oral therapy predicts a more favorable prognosis in patients with chronic heart 
failure. J Am Coll Cardiol 1998;31:1591–1597. 
77. Hawkins NM, Wang D, McMurray JJ, Pfeffer MA, Swedberg K, Granger CB, Yusuf S, Pocock SJ, Ostergren J, 
Michelson EL, Dunn FG. Prevalence and prognostic implications of electrocardiographic left ventricular hypertrophy 
in heart failure: evidence from the CHARM programme. Heart 2007;93:59–64. 
78. Rossi A, Cicoira M, Bonapace S, Golia G, Zanolla L, Franceschini L, Vassanelli C. Left atrial volume provides 
independent and incremental information compared with exercise tolerance parameters in patients with heart 
failure and left ventricular systolic dysfunction. Heart 2007;93:1420–1425. 
79. Rossi A, Cicoira M, Zanolla L, Sandrini R, Golia G, Zardini P, Enriquez-Sarano M. Determinants and prognostic value 
of left atrial volume in patients with dilated cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol 2002;40:1425. 
80. Ghio S, Gavazzi A, Campana C, Inserra C, Klersy C, Sebastiani R, Arbustini E, Recusani F, Tavazzi L. Independent 
and additive prognostic value of right ventricular systolic function and pulmonary artery pressure in patients with 
chronic heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol 2001;37:183–188. 
81. Juilliere Y, Barbier G, Feldmann L, Grentzinger A, Danchin N, Cherrier F. Additional predictive value of both left and 
right ventricular ejection fractions on long-term survival in idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy. Eur Heart J 
1997;18:276–280. 
82. Palazzini M, Dardi F, Manes A, Bacchi Reggiani ML, Gotti E, Rinaldi A, Albini A, Monti E, Galie N. Pulmonary 
hypertension due to left heart disease: analysis of survival according to the haemodynamic classification of the 
2015 ESC/ERS guidelines and insights for future changes. Eur J Heart Fail 2018;20:248–255. 
83. Paraskevaidis IA, Ikonomidis I, Simitsis P, Parissis J, Stasinos V, Makavos G, Lekakis J. Multidimensional contractile 
reserve predicts adverse outcome in patients with severe systolic heart failure: a 4-year follow-up study. Eur J 
Heart Fail 2017;19:846–861. 
84. Nagy AI, Venkateshvaran A, Merkely B, Lund LH, Manouras A. Determinants and prognostic implications of the 
negative diastolic pulmonary pressure gradient in patients with pulmonary hypertension due to left heart disease. 
Eur J Heart Fail 2017;19:88–97. 
85. Platz E, Merz AA, Jhund PS, Vazir A, Campbell R, McMurray JJ. Dynamic changes and prognostic value of 
pulmonary congestion by lung ultrasound in acute and chronic heart failure: a systematic review. Eur J Heart Fail 
2017;19:1154–1163. 
86. Cohen-Solal A, Esanu Y, Logeart D, Pessione F, Dubois C, Dreyfus G, Gourgon R, Merlet P. Cardiac 
metaiodobenzylguanidine uptake in patients with moderate chronic heart failure: relationship with peak oxygen 
uptake and prognosis. J Am Coll Cardiol 1999;33:759–766. 
87. Yamada T, Shimonagata T, Fukunami M, Kumagai K, Ogita H, Hirata A, Asai M, Makino N, Kioka H, Kusuoka H, Hori 
M, Hoki N. Comparison of the prognostic value of cardiac iodine-123 metaiodobenzylguanidine imaging and heart 
rate variability in patients with chronic heart failure: a prospective study. J Am Coll Cardiol 2003;41:231–238. 
88. Mancini DM, Eisen H, Kussmaul W, Mull R, Edmunds LH Jr, Wilson JR. Value of peak exercise oxygen consumption 
for optimal timing of cardiac transplantation in ambulatory patients with heart failure. Circulation 1991;83:778–
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
 Accepted Article
786. 
89. Lofman I, Szummer K, Dahlstrom U, Jernberg T, Lund LH. Associations with and prognostic impact of chronic 
kidney disease in heart failure with preserved, mid-range, and reduced ejection fraction. Eur J Heart Fail 
2017;19:1606–1614. 
90. Smith GL, Lichtman JH, Bracken MB, Shlipak MG, Phillips CO, DiCapua P, Krumholz HM. Renal impairment and 
outcomes in heart failure: systematic review and meta-analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol 2006;47:1987–1996. 
91. Jonsson A, Hallberg AC, Edner M, Lund LH, Dahlstrom U. A comprehensive assessment of the association between 
anemia, clinical covariates and outcomes in a population-wide heart failure registry. Int J Cardiol 2016;211:124–
131. 
92. Felker GM, Allen LA, Pocock SJ, Shaw LK, McMurray JJ, Pfeffer MA, Swedberg K, Wang D, Yusuf S, Michelson EL, 
Granger CB. Red cell distribution width as a novel prognostic marker in heart failure: data from the CHARM 
Program and the Duke Databank. J Am Coll Cardiol 2007;50:40–47. 
93. Cooper HA, Exner DV, Waclawiw MA, Domanski MJ. White blood cell count and mortality in patients with ischemic 
and nonischemic left ventricular systolic dysfunction (an analysis of the Studies Of Left Ventricular Dysfunction 
[SOLVD]). Am J Cardiol 1999;84:252–257. 
94. Allen LA, Felker GM, Pocock S, McMurray JJ, Pfeffer MA, Swedberg K, Wang D, Yusuf S, Michelson EL, Granger CB. 
Liver function abnormalities and outcome in patients with chronic heart failure: data from the Candesartan in Heart 
Failure: Assessment of Reduction in Mortality and Morbidity (CHARM) program. Eur J Heart Fail 2009;11:170–177. 
95. Horwich TB, Kalantar-Zadeh K, MacLellan RW, Fonarow GC. Albumin levels predict survival in patients with systolic 
heart failure. Am Heart J 2008;155:883–889. 
96. Rutledge T, Reis VA, Linke SE, Greenberg BH, Mills PJ. Depression in heart failure a meta-analytic review of 
prevalence, intervention effects, and associations with clinical outcomes. J Am Coll Cardiol 2006;48:1527–1537. 
97. Jiang W, Alexander J, Christopher E, Kuchibhatla M, Gaulden LH, Cuffe MS, Blazing MA, Davenport C, Califf RM, 
Krishnan RR, O’Connor CM. Relationship of depression to increased risk of mortality and rehospitalization in 
patients with congestive heart failure. Arch Intern Med 2001;161:1849–1856. 
98. Jiang W, Kuchibhatla M, Clary GL, Cuffe MS, Christopher EJ, Alexander JD, Califf RM, Krishnan RR, O’Connor CM. 
Relationship between depressive symptoms and long-term mortality in patients with heart failure. Am Heart J 
2007;154:102–108. 
99. Jha SR, Ha HS, Hickman LD, Hannu M, Davidson PM, Macdonald PS, Newton PJ. Frailty in advanced heart failure: a 
systematic review. Heart Fail Rev 2015;20:553–560. 
100. Kenchaiah S, Pocock SJ, Wang D, Finn PV, Zornoff LA, Skali H, Pfeffer MA, Yusuf S, Swedberg K, Michelson EL, 
Granger CB, McMurray JJ, Solomon SD. Body mass index and prognosis in patients with chronic heart failure: 
insights from the Candesartan in Heart failure: Assessment of Reduction in Mortality and morbidity (CHARM) 
program. Circulation 2007;116:627–636. 
101. Anker SD, Negassa A, Coats AJ, Afzal R, Poole-Wilson PA, Cohn JN, Yusuf S. Prognostic importance of weight loss 
in chronic heart failure and the effect of treatment with angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitors: an 
observational study. Lancet 2003;361:1077–1083. 
102. Cermakova P, Lund LH, Fereshtehnejad SM, Johnell K, Winblad B, Dahlstrom U, Eriksdotter M, Religa D. Heart 
failure and dementia: survival in relation to types of heart failure and different dementia disorders. Eur J Heart 
Fail 2015;17:612–619. 
103. Thorvaldsen T, Benson L, Stahlberg M, Dahlstrom U, Edner M, Lund LH. Triage of patients with moderate to 
severe heart failure: who should be referred to a heart failure center? J Am Coll Cardiol 2014;63:661–671. 
104. Stewart GC, Kittleson MM, Patel PC, Cowger JA, Patel CB, Mountis MM, Johnson FL, Guglin ME, Rame JE, 
Teuteberg JJ, Stevenson LW. INTERMACS (Interagency Registry for Mechanically Assisted Circulatory Support) 
profiling identifies ambulatory patients at high risk on medical therapy after hospitalizations for heart failure. Circ 
Heart Fail 2016;9:e003032. 
105. Pocock SJ, Ariti CA, McMurray JJ, Maggioni A, Kober L, Squire IB, Swedberg K, Dobson J, Poppe KK, Whalley GA, 
Doughty RN; Meta-Analysis Global Group in Chronic Heart Failure. Predicting survival in heart failure: a risk score 
based on 39 372 patients from 30 studies. Eur Heart J 2013;34:1404–1413. 
106. Sartipy U, Dahlstrom U, Edner M, Lund LH. Predicting survival in heart failure: validation of the MAGGIC heart 
failure risk score in 51,043 patients from the Swedish heart failure registry. Eur J Heart Fail 2014;16:173–179. 
107. Voors AA, Ouwerkerk W, Zannad F, van Veldhuisen DJ, Samani NJ, Ponikowski P, Ng LL, Metra M, Ter Maaten JM, 
Lang CC, Hillege HL, van der Harst P, Filippatos G, Dickstein K, Cleland JG, Anker SD, Zwinderman AH. 
Development and validation of multivariable models to predict mortality and hospitalization in patients with heart 
failure. Eur J Heart Fail 2017;19:627–634. 
108. Lupon J, de Antonio M, Vila J, Penafiel J, Galan A, Zamora E, Urrutia A, Bayes-Genis A. Development of a novel 
heart failure risk tool: the Barcelona Bio-Heart Failure risk calculator (BCN Bio-HF calculator). PLoS One 
2014;9:e85466. 
109. Levy WC, Mozaffarian D, Linker DT, Sutradhar SC, Anker SD, Cropp AB, Anand I, Maggioni A, Burton P, Sullivan 
MD, Pitt B, Poole-Wilson PA, Mann DL, Packer M. The Seattle Heart Failure Model: prediction of survival in heart 
failure. Circulation 2006;113:1424–1433. 
110. Lanfear DE, Levy WC, Stehlik J, Estep JD, Rogers JG, Shah KB, Boyle AJ, Chuang J, Farrar DJ, Starling RC. 
Accuracy of Seattle Heart Failure Model and HeartMate II Risk Score in non-inotrope-dependent advanced heart 
failure patients: insights from the ROADMAP study (Risk Assessment and Comparative Effectiveness of Left 
Ventricular Assist Device and Medical Management in Ambulatory Heart Failure Patients). Circ Heart Fail 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
 Accepted Article
2017;10:e003745. 
111. Goda A, Lund LH, Mancini D. The Heart Failure Survival Score outperforms the peak oxygen consumption for 
heart transplantation selection in the era of device therapy. J Heart Lung Transplant 2011;30:315–325. 
112. Goda A, Lund LH, Mancini DM. Comparison across races of peak oxygen consumption and heart failure survival 
score for selection for cardiac transplantation. Am J Cardiol 2010;105:1439–1444. 
113. Goda A, Williams P, Mancini D, Lund LH. Selecting patients for heart transplantation: comparison of the Heart 
Failure Survival Score (HFSS) and the Seattle heart failure model (SHFM). J Heart Lung Transplant 
2011;30:1236–1243. 
114. Green P, Lund LH, Mancini D. Comparison of peak exercise oxygen consumption and the Heart Failure Survival 
Score for predicting prognosis in women versus men. Am J Cardiol 2007;99:399–403. 
115. Parikh MN, Lund LH, Goda A, Mancini D. Usefulness of peak exercise oxygen consumption and the heart failure 
survival score to predict survival in patients >65 years of age with heart failure. Am J Cardiol 2009;103:998–
1002. 
116. Lund LH, Aaronson KD, Mancini DM. Predicting survival in ambulatory patients with severe heart failure on beta-
blocker therapy. Am J Cardiol 2003;92:1350–1354. 
117. Lund LH, Aaronson KD, Mancini DM. Validation of peak exercise oxygen consumption and the Heart Failure 
Survival Score for serial risk stratification in advanced heart failure. Am J Cardiol 2005;95:734–741. 
118. Sartipy U, Goda A, Mancini DM, Lund LH. Assessment of a University of California, Los Angeles 4-variable risk 
score for advanced heart failure. J Am Heart Assoc 2014;3:e000998. 
119. Komajda M, Cowie MR, Tavazzi L, Ponikowski P, Anker SD, Filippatos GS. Physicians’ guideline adherence is 
associated with better prognosis in outpatients with heart failure with reduced ejection fraction: the QUALIFY 
international registry. Eur J Heart Fail 2017;19:1414–1423. 
120. Hulsmann M, Quittan M, Berger R, Crevenna R, Springer C, Nuhr M, Mortl D, Moser P, Pacher R. Muscle strength 
as a predictor of long-term survival in severe congestive heart failure. Eur J Heart Fail 2004;6:101–107. 
121. Lund LH, Gabrielsen A. Biomarkers in advanced heart failure – pathophysiology leading to clinical use? J Heart 
Lung Transplant 2014;33:1213–1214. 
122. Neuhold S, Huelsmann M, Strunk G, Stoiser B, Struck J, Morgenthaler NG, Bergmann A, Moertl D, Berger R, 
Pacher R. Comparison of copeptin, B-type natriuretic peptide, and amino-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide 
in patients with chronic heart failure: prediction of death at different stages of the disease. J Am Coll Cardiol 
2008;52:266–272. 
123. Stoiser B, Mortl D, Hulsmann M, Berger R, Struck J, Morgenthaler NG, Bergmann A, Pacher R. Copeptin, a 
fragment of the vasopressin precursor, as a novel predictor of outcome in heart failure. Eur J Clin Invest 
2006;36:771–778. 
124. Moertl D, Berger R, Struck J, Gleiss A, Hammer A, Morgenthaler NG, Bergmann A, Huelsmann M, Pacher R. 
Comparison of midregional pro-atrial and B-type natriuretic peptides in chronic heart failure: influencing factors, 
detection of left ventricular systolic dysfunction, and prediction of death. J Am Coll Cardiol 2009;53:1783–1790. 
125. van Vark LC, Lesman-Leegte I, Baart SJ, Postmus D, Pinto YM, de Boer RA, Asselbergs FW, Wajon E, Orsel JG, 
Boersma E, Hillege HL, Akkerhuis KM. Prognostic value of serial galectin-3 measurements in patients with acute 
heart failure. J Am Heart Assoc 2017;6:e003700. 
126. Gaggin HK, Szymonifka J, Bhardwaj A, Belcher A, De Berardinis B, Motiwala S, Wang TJ, Januzzi JL Jr. Head-to-
head comparison of serial soluble ST2, growth differentiation factor-15, and highly-sensitive troponin T 
measurements in patients with chronic heart failure. JACC Heart Fail 2014;2:65–72. 
127. Alahdab MT, Mansour IN, Napan S, Stamos TD. Six minute walk test predicts long-term all-cause mortality and 
heart failure rehospitalization in African-American patients hospitalized with acute decompensated heart failure. J 
Card Fail 2009;15:130–135. 
128. Hummel YM, Liu LCY, Lam CS, Fonseca-Munoz DF, Damman K, Rienstra M, van der Meer P, Rosenkranz S, van 
Veldhuisen DJ, Voors AA, Hoendermis ES. Echocardiographic estimation of left ventricular and pulmonary 
pressures in patients with heart failure and preserved ejection fraction: a study utilizing simultaneous 
echocardiography and invasive measurements. Eur J Heart Fail 2017;19:1651–1660. 
129. Nagueh SF. Non-invasive assessment of left ventricular filling pressure. Eur J Heart Fail 2018;20:38–48. 
130. Lala A, Guo Y, Xu J, Esposito M, Morine K, Karas R, Katz SD, Hochman JS, Burkhoff D, Kapur NK. Right ventricular 
dysfunction in acute myocardial infarction complicated by cardiogenic shock: a hemodynamic analysis of the 
Should We Emergently Revascularize Occluded Coronaries for Cardiogenic Shock (SHOCK) trial and registry. J 
Card Fail 2018;24:148–156. 
131. Feldman D, Pamboukian SV, Teuteberg JJ, Birks E, Lietz K, Moore SA, Morgan JA, Arabia F, Bauman ME, Buchholz 
HW, Deng M, Dickstein ML, El-Banayosy A, Elliot T, Goldstein DJ, Grady KL, Jones K, Hryniewicz K, John R, Kaan 
A, Kusne S, Loebe M, Massicotte MP, Moazami N, Mohacsi P, Mooney M, Nelson T, Pagani F, Perry W, Potapov EV, 
Eduardo Rame J, Russell SD, Sorensen EN, Sun B, Strueber M, Mangi AA, Petty MG, Rogers J. The 2013 
International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation Guidelines for mechanical circulatory support: executive 
summary. J Heart Lung Transplant 2013;32:157–187. 
132. The ESCAPE Investigators and ESCAPE Study Coordinators. Evaluation study of congestive heart failure and 
pulmonary artery catheterization effectiveness: the ESCAPE trial. JAMA 2005;294:1625–1633. 
133. Aaronson KD, Schwartz JS, Chen TM, Wong KL, Goin JE, Mancini DM. Development and prospective validation of a 
clinical index to predict survival in ambulatory patients referred for cardiac transplant evaluation. Circulation 
1997;95:2660–2667. 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
 Accepted Article
134. Agostoni P, Corra U, Cattadori G, Veglia F, La Gioia R, Scardovi AB, Emdin M, Metra M, Sinagra G, Limongelli G, 
Raimondo R, Re F, Guazzi M, Belardinelli R, Parati G, Magri D, Fiorentini C, Mezzani A, Salvioni E, Scrutinio D, 
Ricci R, Bettari L, Di Lenarda A, Pastormerlo LE, Pacileo G, Vaninetti R, Apostolo A, Iorio A, Paolillo S, Palermo P, 
Contini M, Confalonieri M, Giannuzzi P, Passantino A, Cas LD, Piepoli MF, Passino C. Metabolic exercise test data 
combined with cardiac and kidney indexes, the MECKI score: a multiparametric approach to heart failure 
prognosis. Int J Cardiol 2013;167:2710–2718. 
135. Agostoni P, Paolillo S, Mapelli M, Gentile P, Salvioni E, Veglia F, Bonomi A, Corra U, Lagioia R, Limongelli G, 
Sinagra G, Cattadori G, Scardovi AB, Metra M, Carubelli V, Scrutinio D, Raimondo R, Emdin M, Piepoli M, Magri D, 
Parati G, Caravita S, Re F, Cicoira M, Mina C, Correale M, Frigerio M, Bussotti M, Oliva F, Battaia E, Belardinelli R, 
Mezzani A, Pastormerlo L, Guazzi M, Badagliacca R, Di Lenarda A, Passino C, Sciomer S, Zambon E, Pacileo G, 
Ricci R, Apostolo A, Palermo P, Contini M, Clemenza F, Marchese G, Gargiulo P, Binno S, Lombardi C, Passantino 
A, Filardi PP. Multiparametric prognostic scores in chronic heart failure with reduced ejection fraction: a long-term 
comparison. Eur J Heart Fail 2018;20:700–710. 
136. Corra U, Agostoni P, Giordano A, Cattadori G, Battaia E, La Gioia R, Scardovi AB, Emdin M, Metra M, Sinagra G, 
Limongelli G, Raimondo R, Re F, Guazzi M, Belardinelli R, Parati G, Magri D, Fiorentini C, Cicoira M, Salvioni E, 
Giovannardi M, Veglia F, Mezzani A, Scrutinio D, Di Lenarda A, Ricci R, Apostolo A, Iorio AM, Paolillo S, Palermo P, 
Contini M, Vassanelli C, Passino C, Giannuzzi P, Piepoli MF, Antonioli L, Segurini C, Bertella E, Farina S, Bovis F, 
Pietrucci F, Malfatto G, Roselli T, Buono A, Calabro R, De Maria R, Santoro D, Campanale S, Caputo D, Bertipaglia 
D, Berton E. The metabolic exercise test data combined with Cardiac And Kidney Indexes (MECKI) score and 
prognosis in heart failure. A validation study. Int J Cardiol 2016;203:1067–1072. 
137. Gorodeski EZ, Chu EC, Chow CH, Levy WC, Hsich E, Starling RC. Application of the Seattle Heart Failure Model in 
ambulatory patients presented to an advanced heart failure therapeutics committee. Circ Heart Fail 2010;3:706–
714. 
138. Kalogeropoulos AP, Georgiopoulou VV, Giamouzis G, Smith AL, Agha SA, Waheed S, Laskar S, Puskas J, Dunbar 
S, Vega D, Levy WC, Butler J. Utility of the Seattle Heart Failure Model in patients with advanced heart failure. J 
Am Coll Cardiol 2009;53:334–342. 
139. Zabarovskaja S, Gadler F, Gabrielsen A, Linde C, Lund LH. Identifying patients for advanced heart failure therapy 
by screening patients with cardiac resynchronization therapy or implantable cardioverter-defibrillator: a pilot 
study. J Heart Lung Transplant 2013;32:651–654. 
140. Lund LH, Trochu JN, Meyns B, Caliskan K, Shaw S, Schmitto JD, Schibilsky D, Damme L, Heatley J, Gustafsson F. 
Screening for heart transplantation and left ventricular assist system: results from the ScrEEning for advanced 
Heart Failure treatment (SEE-HF) study. Eur J Heart Fail 2018;20:152–160. 
141. Corra U, Agostoni PG, Anker SD, Coats AJS, Crespo Leiro MG, de Boer RA, Hairola VP, Hill L, Lainscak M, Lund LH, 
Metra M, Ponikowski P, Riley J, Seferovic PM, Piepoli MF. Role of cardiopulmonary exercise testing in clinical 
stratification in heart failure. A position paper from the Committee on Exercise Physiology and Training of the 
Heart Failure Association of the European Society of Cardiology. Eur J Heart Fail 2018;20:3–15. 
142. Du H, Wonggom P, Tongpeth J, Clark RA. Six-minute walk test for assessing physical functional capacity in 
chronic heart failure. Curr Heart Fail Rep 2017;14:158–166. 
143. Guazzi M, Dickstein K, Vicenzi M, Arena R. Six-minute walk test and cardiopulmonary exercise testing in patients 
with chronic heart failure: a comparative analysis on clinical and prognostic insights. Circ Heart Fail 2009;2:549–
555. 
144. Hulsmann M, Berger R, Sturm B, Bojic A, Woloszczuk W, Bergler-Klein J, Pacher R. Prediction of outcome by 
neurohumoral activation, the six-minute walk test and the Minnesota Living with Heart Failure Questionnaire in an 
outpatient cohort with congestive heart failure. Eur Heart J 2002;23:886–891. 
145. Wolsk E, Kaye D, Borlaug BA, Burkhoff D, Kitzman DW, Komtebedde J, Lam CS, Ponikowski P, Shah SJ, 
Gustafsson F. Resting and exercise haemodynamics in relation to six-minute walk test in patients with heart 
failure and preserved ejection fraction. Eur J Heart Fail 2018;20:715–722. 
146. Vidan MT, Blaya-Novakova V, Sanchez E, Ortiz J, Serra-Rexach JA, Bueno H. Prevalence and prognostic impact of 
frailty and its components in non-dependent elderly patients with heart failure. Eur J Heart Fail 2016;18:869–
875. 
147. Cuffe MS, Califf RM, Adams KF Jr, Benza R, Bourge R, Colucci WS, Massie BM, O’Connor CM, Pina I, Quigg R, 
Silver MA, Gheorghiade M. Short-term intravenous milrinone for acute exacerbation of chronic heart failure: a 
randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2002;287:1541–1547. 
148. O’Connor CM, Gattis WA, Uretsky BF, Adams KF Jr, McNulty SE, Grossman SH, McKenna WJ, Zannad F, Swedberg 
K, Gheorghiade M, Califf RM. Continuous intravenous dobutamine is associated with an increased risk of death in 
patients with advanced heart failure: insights from the Flolan International Randomized Survival Trial (FIRST). 
Am Heart J 1999;138(1 Pt 1):78–86. 
149. Packer M, Colucci W, Fisher L, Massie BM, Teerlink JR, Young J, Padley RJ, Thakkar R, Delgado-Herrera L, Salon J, 
Garratt C, Huang B, Sarapohja T. Effect of levosimendan on the short-term clinical course of patients with acutely 
decompensated heart failure. JACC Heart Fail 2013;1:103–111. 
150. Hashim T, Sanam K, Revilla-Martinez M, Morgan CJ, Tallaj JA, Pamboukian SV, Loyaga-Rendon RY, George JF, 
Acharya D. Clinical characteristics and outcomes of intravenous inotropic therapy in advanced heart failure. Circ 
Heart Fail 2015;8:880–886. 
151. Estep JD, Starling RC, Horstmanshof DA, Milano CA, Selzman CH, Shah KB, Loebe M, Moazami N, Long JW, 
Stehlik J, Kasirajan V, Haas DC, O’Connell JB, Boyle AJ, Farrar DJ, Rogers JG. Risk assessment and comparative 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
 Accepted Article
effectiveness of left ventricular assist device and medical management in ambulatory heart failure patients: 
results from the ROADMAP Study. J Am Coll Cardiol 2015;66:1747–1761. 
152. Mebazaa A, Parissis J, Porcher R, Gayat E, Nikolaou M, Boas FV, Delgado JF, Follath F. Short-term survival by 
treatment among patients hospitalized with acute heart failure: the global ALARM-HF registry using propensity 
scoring methods. Intensive Care Med 2011;37:290–301. 
153. Chen HH, Anstrom KJ, Givertz MM, Stevenson LW, Semigran MJ, Goldsmith SR, Bart BA, Bull DA, Stehlik J, 
LeWinter MM, Konstam MA, Huggins GS, Rouleau JL, O’Meara E, Tang WH, Starling RC, Butler J, Deswal A, Felker 
GM, O’Connor CM, Bonita RE, Margulies KB, Cappola TP, Ofili EO, Mann DL, Davila-Roman VG, McNulty SE, 
Borlaug BA, Velazquez EJ, Lee KL, Shah MR, Hernandez AF, Braunwald E, Redfield MM. Low-dose dopamine or 
low-dose nesiritide in acute heart failure with renal dysfunction: the ROSE acute heart failure randomized trial. 
JAMA 2013;310:2533–2543. 
154. Triposkiadis FK, Butler J, Karayannis G, Starling RC, Filippatos G, Wolski K, Parissis J, Parisis C, Rovithis D, 
Koutrakis K, Skoularigis J, Antoniou CK, Chrysohoou C, Pitsavos C, Stefanadis C, Nastas J, Tsaknakis T, Mantziari 
L, Giannakoulas G, Karvounis H, Kalogeropoulos AP, Giamouzis G. Efficacy and safety of high dose versus low 
dose furosemide with or without dopamine infusion: the Dopamine in Acute Decompensated Heart Failure II 
(DAD-HF II) trial. Int J Cardiol 2014;172:115–121. 
155. Thorvaldsen T, Benson L, Hagerman I, Dahlstrom U, Edner M, Lund LH. Planned repetitive use of levosimendan 
for heart failure in cardiology and internal medicine in Sweden. Int J Cardiol 2014;175:55–61. 
156. Silvetti S, Nieminen MS. Repeated or intermittent levosimendan treatment in advanced heart failure: an updated 
meta-analysis. Int J Cardiol 2016;202:138–143. 
157. Silvetti S, Belletti A, Fontana A, Pollesello P. Rehospitalization after intermittent levosimendan treatment in 
advanced heart failure patients: a meta-analysis of randomized trials. ESC Heart Fail 2017;4:595–604. 
158. Comin-Colet J, Manito N, Segovia-Cubero J, Delgado J, Garcia Pinilla JM, Almenar L, Crespo-Leiro MG, Sionis A, 
Blasco T, Pascual-Figal D, Gonzalez-Vilchez F, Lambert-Rodriguez JL, Grau M, Bruguera J. Efficacy and safety of 
intermittent intravenous outpatient administration of levosimendan in patients with advanced heart failure: the 
LION-HEART multicentre randomised trial. Eur J Heart Fail 2018 Feb 6. doi: 10.1002/ejhf.1145. [Epub ahead of 
print] 
159. Frohlich GM, Holzmeister J, Hubler M, Hubler S, Wolfrum M, Enseleit F, Seifert B, Hurlimann D, Lehmkuhl HB, Noll 
G, Steffel J, Falk V, Luscher TF, Hetzer R, Ruschitzka F. Prophylactic implantable cardioverter defibrillator 
treatment in patients with end-stage heart failure awaiting heart transplantation. Heart 2013;99:1158–1165. 
160. Opreanu M, Wan C, Singh V, Salehi N, Ahmad J, Szymkiewicz SJ, Thakur RK. Wearable cardioverter-defibrillator 
as a bridge to cardiac transplantation: a national database analysis. J Heart Lung Transplant 2015;34:1305–
1309. 
161. Costanzo MR, Ronco C, Abraham WT, Agostoni P, Barasch J, Fonarow GC, Gottlieb SS, Jaski BE, Kazory A, Levin 
AP, Levin HR, Marenzi G, Mullens W, Negoianu D, Redfield MM, Tang WHW, Testani JM, Voors AA. Extracorporeal 
ultrafiltration for fluid overload in heart failure: current status and prospects for further research. J Am Coll 
Cardiol 2017;69:2428–2445. 
162. Costanzo MR, Jessup M. Treatment of congestion in heart failure with diuretics and extracorporeal therapies: 
effects on symptoms, renal function, and prognosis. Heart Fail Rev 2012;17:313–324. 
163. Costanzo MR, Guglin ME, Saltzberg MT, Jessup ML, Bart BA, Teerlink JR, Jaski BE, Fang JC, Feller ED, Haas GJ, 
Anderson AS, Schollmeyer MP, Sobotka PA; UNLOAD Trial Investigators. Ultrafiltration versus intravenous 
diuretics for patients hospitalized for acute decompensated heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol 2007;49:675–683. 
164. Costanzo MR, Negoianu D, Jaski BE, Bart BA, Heywood JT, Anand IS, Smelser JM, Kaneshige AM, Chomsky DB, 
Adler ED, Haas GJ, Watts JA, Nabut JL, Schollmeyer MP, Fonarow GC. Aquapheresis versus intravenous diuretics 
and hospitalizations for heart failure. JACC Heart Fail 2016;4:95–105. 
165. Marenzi G, Grazi S, Giraldi F, Lauri G, Perego G, Guazzi M, Salvioni A, Guazzi MD. Interrelation of humoral 
factors, hemodynamics, and fluid and salt metabolism in congestive heart failure: effects of extracorporeal 
ultrafiltration. Am J Med 1993;94:49–56. 
166. Blake PG, Daugirdas JT. Physiology of peritoneal dialysis. In: Daugirdas JT, Blake PG, Ing TS, eds. Handbook of 
Dialysis. 3rd ed. Kluver: Lippincott, Williams, and Wilkins; 2001. p281–296. 
167. Courivaud C, Kazory A, Crepin T, Azar R, Bresson-Vautrin C, Chalopin JM, Ducloux D. Peritoneal dialysis reduces 
the number of hospitalization days in heart failure patients refractory to diuretics. Perit Dial Int 2014;34:100–
108. 
168. Koch M, Haastert B, Kohnle M, Rump LC, Kelm M, Trapp R, Aker S. Peritoneal dialysis relieves clinical symptoms 
and is well tolerated in patients with refractory heart failure and chronic kidney disease. Eur J Heart Fail 
2012;14:530–539. 
169. Lu R, Mucino-Bermejo MJ, Ribeiro LC, Tonini E, Estremadoyro C, Samoni S, Sharma A, Zaragoza Galvan Jde J, 
Crepaldi C, Brendolan A, Ni Z, Rosner MH, Ronco C. Peritoneal dialysis in patients with refractory congestive heart 
failure: a systematic review. Cardiorenal Med 2015;5:145–156. 
170. Nunez J, Gonzalez M, Minana G, Garcia-Ramon R, Sanchis J, Bodi V, Nunez E, Puchades MJ, Palau P, Merlos P, 
Llacer A, Miguel A. Continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis as a therapeutic alternative in patients with 
advanced congestive heart failure. Eur J Heart Fail 2012;14:540–548. 
171. Frampton JE, Plosker GL. Icodextrin: a review of its use in peritoneal dialysis. Drugs 2003;63:2079–2105. 
172. Kazory A. Fluid overload as a major target in management of cardiorenal syndrome: Implications for the practice 
of peritoneal dialysis. World J Nephrol 2017;6:168–175. 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
 Accepted Article
173. Barge-Caballero E, Almenar-Bonet L, Gonzalez-Vilchez F, Lambert-Rodriguez JL, Gonzalez-Costello J, Segovia-
Cubero J, Castel-Lavilla MA, Delgado-Jimenez J, Garrido-Bravo IP, Rangel-Sousa D, Martinez-Selles M, De la 
Fuente-Galan L, Rabago-Juan-Aracil G, Sanz-Julve M, Hervas-Sotomayor D, Mirabet-Perez S, Muniz J, Crespo-
Leiro MG. Clinical outcomes of temporary mechanical circulatory support as a direct bridge to heart 
transplantation: a nationwide Spanish registry. Eur J Heart Fail 2018;20:178–186. 
174. Rihal CS, Naidu SS, Givertz MM, Szeto WY, Burke JA, Kapur NK, Kern M, Garratt KN, Goldstein JA, Dimas V, Tu T. 
2015 SCAI/ACC/HFSA/STS Clinical expert consensus statement on the use of percutaneous mechanical circulatory 
support devices in cardiovascular care: endorsed by the American Heart Assocation, the Cardiological Society of 
India, and Sociedad Latino Americana de Cardiologia Intervencion; Affirmation of Value by the Canadian 
Association of Interventional Cardiology-Association Canadienne de Cardiologie d’Intervention. J Am Coll Cardiol 
2015;65:e7–e26. 
175. Annamalai SK, Buiten L, Esposito ML, Paruchuri V, Mullin A, Breton C, Pedicini R, O’Kelly R, Morine K, Wessler B, 
Patel AR, Kiernan MS, Karas RH, Kapur NK. Acute hemodynamic effects of intra-aortic balloon counterpulsation 
pumps in advanced heart failure. J Card Fail 2017;23:606–614. 
176. Hochman JS, Sleeper LA, Webb JG, Sanborn TA, White HD, Talley JD, Buller CE, Jacobs AK, Slater JN, Col J, 
McKinlay SM, LeJemtel TH. Early revascularization in acute myocardial infarction complicated by cardiogenic 
shock. SHOCK Investigators. Should We Emergently Revascularize Occluded Coronaries for Cardiogenic Shock. N 
Engl J Med 1999;341:625–634. 
177. Thiele H, Zeymer U, Neumann FJ, Ferenc M, Olbrich HG, Hausleiter J, Richardt G, Hennersdorf M, Empen K, 
Fuernau G, Desch S, Eitel I, Hambrecht R, Fuhrmann J, Bohm M, Ebelt H, Schneider S, Schuler G, Werdan K; 
IABP-SHOCK II Trial Investigators. Intraaortic balloon support for myocardial infarction with cardiogenic shock. N 
Engl J Med 2012;367:1287–1296. 
178. Sintek MA, Gdowski M, Lindman BR, Nassif M, Lavine KJ, Novak E, Bach RG, Silvestry SC, Mann DL, Joseph SM. 
Intra-aortic balloon counterpulsation in patients with chronic heart failure and cardiogenic shock: clinical response 
and predictors of stabilization. J Card Fail 2015;21:868–876. 
179. Napp LC, Kuhn C, Hoeper MM, Vogel-Claussen J, Haverich A, Schafer A, Bauersachs J. Cannulation strategies for 
percutaneous extracorporeal membrane oxygenation in adults. Clin Res Cardiol 2016;105:283–296. 
180. Meani P, Gelsomino S, Natour E, Johnson DM, Rocca HB, Pappalardo F, Bidar E, Makhoul M, Raffa G, Heuts S, 
Lozekoot P, Kats S, Sluijpers N, Schreurs R, Delnoij T, Montalti A, Sels JW, van de Poll M, Roekaerts P, Poels T, 
Korver E, Babar Z, Maessen J, Lorusso R. Modalities and effects of left ventricle unloading on extracorporeal life 
support: a review of the current literature. Eur J Heart Fail 2017;19 Suppl 2:84–91. 
181. Pappalardo F, Schulte C, Pieri M, Schrage B, Contri R, Soeffker G, Greco T, Lembo R, Mullerleile K, Colombo A, 
Sydow K, De Bonis M, Wagner F, Reichenspurner H, Blankenberg S, Zangrillo A, Westermann D. Concomitant 
implantation of Impella® on top of veno–arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation may improve survival of 
patients with cardiogenic shock. Eur J Heart Fail 2017;19:404–412. 
182. Alhussein M, Osten M, Horlick E, Ross H, Fan E, Rao V, Billia F. Percutaneous left atrial decompression in adults 
with refractory cardiogenic shock supported with veno–arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. J Card 
Surg 2017;32:396–401. 
183. Schmidt M, Burrell A, Roberts L, Bailey M, Sheldrake J, Rycus PT, Hodgson C, Scheinkestel C, Cooper DJ, 
Thiagarajan RR, Brodie D, Pellegrino V, Pilcher D. Predicting survival after ECMO for refractory cardiogenic shock: 
the survival after veno–arterial-ECMO (SAVE)-score. Eur Heart J 2015;36:2246–2256. 
184. Ouweneel DM, Schotborgh JV, Limpens J, Sjauw KD, Engstrom AE, Lagrand WK, Cherpanath TG, Driessen AH, de 
Mol BA, Henriques JP. Extracorporeal life support during cardiac arrest and cardiogenic shock: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Intensive Care Med 2016;42:1922–1934. 
185. Butt W, MacLaren G. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation 2016: an update. F1000Res 2016;5:750. 
186. Kar B, Basra SS, Shah NR, Loyalka P. Percutaneous circulatory support in cardiogenic shock: interventional bridge 
to recovery. Circulation 2012;125:1809–1817. 
187. Kar B, Gregoric ID, Basra SS, Idelchik GM, Loyalka P. The percutaneous ventricular assist device in severe 
refractory cardiogenic shock. J Am Coll Cardiol 2011;57:688–696. 
188. Kapur NK, Esposito ML, Bader Y, Morine KJ, Kiernan MS, Pham DT, Burkhoff D. Mechanical circulatory support 
devices for acute right ventricular failure. Circulation 2017;136:314–326. 
189. Burkhoff D, Cohen H, Brunckhorst C, O’Neill WW. A randomized multicenter clinical study to evaluate the safety 
and efficacy of the TandemHeart percutaneous ventricular assist device versus conventional therapy with 
intraaortic balloon pumping for treatment of cardiogenic shock. Am Heart J 2006;152:469.e1–8. 
190. Saffarzadeh A, Bonde P. Options for temporary mechanical circulatory support. J Thorac Dis 2015;7:2102–2111. 
191. Couto-Mallon D, Estevez-Cid F, Solla-Buceta M, Garcia-Velasco C, Crespo-Leiro MG, Cuenca-Castillo JJ. 
Transaxillary implantation of the Impella CP mechanical circulatory support device as a bridge to heart transplant. 
First experience in Spain. Rev Esp Cardiol (Engl Ed) 2017 Dec 4. doi: 10.1016/j.rec.2017.09.020. [Epub ahead of 
print] 
192. Engstrom AE, Cocchieri R, Driessen AH, Sjauw KD, Vis MM, Baan J, de JM, Lagrand WK, van der Sloot JA, Tijssen 
JG, de Winter RJ, de Mol BA, Piek JJ, Henriques JP. The Impella 2.5 and 5.0 devices for ST-elevation myocardial 
infarction patients presenting with severe and profound cardiogenic shock: the Academic Medical Center intensive 
care unit experience. Crit Care Med 2011;39:2072–2079. 
193. Sieweke JT, Berliner D, Tongers J, Napp LC, Flierl U, Zauner F, Bauersachs J, Schafer A. Mortality in patients with 
cardiogenic shock treated with the Impella CP microaxial pump for isolated left ventricular failure. Eur Heart J 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
 Accepted Article
Acute Cardiovasc Care 2018 Feb 1. doi: 10.1177/2048872618757393. [Epub ahead of print] 
194. Anderson MB, Goldstein J, Milano C, Morris LD, Kormos RL, Bhama J, Kapur NK, Bansal A, Garcia J, Baker JN, 
Silvestry S, Holman WL, Douglas PS, O’Neill W. Benefits of a novel percutaneous ventricular assist device for right 
heart failure: the prospective RECOVER RIGHT study of the Impella RP device. J Heart Lung Transplant 
2015;34:1549–1560. 
195. John R, Long JW, Massey HT, Griffith BP, Sun BC, Tector AJ, Frazier OH, Joyce LD. Outcomes of a multicenter trial 
of the Levitronix CentriMag ventricular assist system for short-term circulatory support. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 
2011;141:932–939. 
196. Worku B, Pak SW, van Patten D, Housman B, Uriel N, Colombo P, Jorde U, Takayama H, Naka Y. The CentriMag 
ventricular assist device in acute heart failure refractory to medical management. J Heart Lung Transplant 
2012;31:611–617. 
197. Takeda K, Garan AR, Ando M, Han J, Topkara VK, Kurlansky P, Yuzefpolskaya M, Farr MA, Colombo PC, Naka Y, 
Takayama H. Minimally invasive CentriMag ventricular assist device support integrated with extracorporeal 
membrane oxygenation in cardiogenic shock patients: a comparison with conventional CentriMag biventricular 
support configuration. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 2017;52:1055–1061. 
198. Velazquez EJ, Lee KL, Deja MA, Jain A, Sopko G, Marchenko A, Ali IS, Pohost G, Gradinac S, Abraham WT, Yii M, 
Prabhakaran D, Szwed H, Ferrazzi P, Petrie MC, O’Connor CM, Panchavinnin P, She L, Bonow RO, Rankin GR, 
Jones RH, Rouleau JL; STICH Investigators. Coronary-artery bypass surgery in patients with left ventricular 
dysfunction. N Engl J Med 2011;364:1607–1616. 
199. Velazquez EJ, Lee KL, Jones RH, Al-Khalidi HR, Hill JA, Panza JA, Michler RE, Bonow RO, Doenst T, Petrie MC, Oh 
JK, She L, Moore VL, Desvigne-Nickens P, Sopko G, Rouleau JL; STICHES Investigators. Coronary-artery bypass 
surgery in patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy. N Engl J Med 2016;374:1511–1520. 
200. Windecker S, Kolh P, Alfonso F, Collet JP, Cremer J, Falk V, Filippatos G, Hamm C, Head SJ, Juni P, Kappetein AP, 
Kastrati A, Knuuti J, Landmesser U, Laufer G, Neumann FJ, Richter DJ, Schauerte P, Sousa Uva M, Stefanini GG, 
Taggart DP, Torracca L, Valgimigli M, Wijns W, Witkowski A. 2014 ESC/EACTS Guidelines on myocardial 
revascularization: The Task Force on Myocardial Revascularization of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) 
and the European Association for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery (EACTS). Developed with the special contribution of the 
European Association of Percutaneous Cardiovascular Interventions (EAPCI). Eur Heart J 2014;35:2541–2619. 
201. Baumann S, Werner N, Ibrahim K, Westenfeld R, Al-Rashid F, Sinning JM, Westermann D, Schafer A, Karatolios K, 
Bauer T, Becher T, Akin I. Indication and short-term clinical outcomes of high-risk percutaneous coronary 
intervention with microaxial Impella(R) pump: results from the German Impella® registry. Clin Res Cardiol 2018 
Mar 8. doi: 10.1007/s00392–018-1230-6. [Epub ahead of print] 
202. Baumgartner H, Falk V, Bax J, De Bonis M, Hamm C, Holm PJ, Iung B, Lancellotti P, Lansac E, Munoz DR, 
Rosenhek R, Sjogren J, Mas PT, Vahanian A, Walther T, Wendler O, Windecker S, Zamorano JL; ESC Scientific 
Document Group. 2017 ESC/EACTS guidelines for the management of valvular heart disease. Eur Heart J 
2017;38:2739–2791. 
203. Barnard CN. The operation. A human cardiac transplant: an interim report of a successful operation performed at 
Groote Schuur Hospital, Cape Town. S Afr Med J 1967;41:1271–1274. 
204. Lund LH, Edwards LB, Dipchand AI, Goldfarb S, Kucheryavaya AY, Levvey BJ, Meiser B, Rossano JW, Yusen RD, 
Stehlik J. The Registry of the International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation: Thirty-third Adult Heart 
Transplantation Report–2016; Focus Theme: Primary diagnostic indications for transplant. J Heart Lung 
Transplant 2016;35:1158–1169. 
205. Deng MC, De Meester JM, Smits JM, Heinecke J, Scheld HH. Effect of receiving a heart transplant: analysis of a 
national cohort entered on to a waiting list, stratified by heart failure severity. Comparative Outcome and Clinical 
Profiles in Transplantation (COCPIT) Study Group. BMJ 2000;321:540–545. 
206. Barge-Caballero E, Garcia-Lopez F, Marzoa-Rivas R, Barge-Caballero G, Couto-Mallon D, Paniagua-Martin MJ, 
Solla-Buceta M, Velasco-Sierra C, Pita-Gutierrez F, Herrera-Norena JM, Cuenca-Castillo JJ, Vazquez-Rodriguez JM, 
Crespo-Leiro MG. Prognostic value of the nutritional risk index in heart transplant recipients. Rev Esp Cardiol 
(Engl Ed) 2017;70:639–645. 
207. Kilic A, Allen JG, Weiss ES. Validation of the United States-derived Index for Mortality Prediction After Cardiac 
Transplantation (IMPACT) using international registry data. J Heart Lung Transplant 2013;32:492–498. 
208. Wever-Pinzon O, Edwards LB, Taylor DO, Kfoury AG, Drakos SG, Selzman CH, Fang JC, Lund LH, Stehlik J. 
Association of recipient age and causes of heart transplant mortality: Implications for personalization of post-
transplant management–an analysis of the International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation Registry. J 
Heart Lung Transplant 2017;36:407–417. 
209. Raichlin E, Kushwaha SS, Daly RC, Kremers WK, Frantz RP, Clavell AL, Rodeheffer RJ, Larson TS, Stegall MD, 
McGregor C, Pereira NL, Edwards BS. Combined heart and kidney transplantation provides an excellent survival 
and decreases risk of cardiac cellular rejection and coronary allograft vasculopathy. Transplant Proc 
2011;43:1871–1876. 
210. Calabrese LH, Albrecht M, Young J, McCarthy P, Haug M, Jarcho J, Zackin R. Successful cardiac transplantation in 
an HIV-1-infected patient with advanced disease. N Engl J Med 2003;348:2323–2328. 
211. Jahangiri B, Haddad H. Cardiac transplantation in HIV-positive patients: are we there yet? J Heart Lung 
Transplant 2007;26:103–107. 
212. Benatti RD, Oliveira GH, Bacal F. Heart transplantation for Chagas cardiomyopathy. J Heart Lung Transplant 
2017;36:597–603. 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
 Accepted Article
213. Lund LH, Edwards LB, Kucheryavaya AY, Benden C, Christie JD, Dipchand AI, Dobbels F, Goldfarb SB, Levvey BJ, 
Meiser B, Yusen RD, Stehlik J. The registry of the International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation: 
Thirty-first Official Adult Heart Transplant Report–2014; Focus Theme: Retransplantation. J Heart Lung Transplant 
2014;33:996–1008. 
214. Kobashigawa J, Colvin M, Potena L, Dragun D, Crespo-Leiro MG, Delgado JF, Olymbios M, Parameshwar J, Patel J, 
Reed E, Reinsmoen N, Rodriguez ER, Ross H, Starling RC, Tyan D, Urschel S, Zuckermann A. The management of 
antibodies in heart transplantation: An ISHLT consensus document. J Heart Lung Transplant 2018;37:537–547. 
215. Mehra MR, Kobashigawa J, Starling R, Russell S, Uber PA, Parameshwar J, Mohacsi P, Augustine S, Aaronson K, 
Barr M. Listing criteria for heart transplantation: International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation 
guidelines for the care of cardiac transplant candidates–2006. J Heart Lung Transplant 2006;25:1024–1042. 
216. Barge-Caballero E, Segovia-Cubero J, Almenar-Bonet L, Gonzalez-Vilchez F, Villa-Arranz A, Delgado-Jimenez J, 
Lage-Galle E, Perez-Villa F, Lambert-Rodriguez JL, Manito-Lorite N, Arizon-Del Prado JM, Brossa-Loidi V, Pascual-
Figal D, Fuente-Galan Lde L, Sanz-Julve M, Muniz-Garcia J, Crespo-Leiro M. Preoperative INTERMACS profiles 
determine postoperative outcomes in critically ill patients undergoing emergency heart transplantation: analysis 
of the Spanish National Heart Transplant Registry. Circ Heart Fail 2013;6:763–772. 
217. Rose EA, Gelijns AC, Moskowitz AJ, Heitjan DF, Stevenson LW, Dembitsky W, Long JW, Ascheim DD, Tierney AR, 
Levitan RG, Watson JT, Meier P, Ronan NS, Shapiro PA, Lazar RM, Miller LW, Gupta L, Frazier OH, Desvigne-
Nickens P, Oz MC, Poirier VL; Randomized Evaluation of Mechanical Assistance for the Treatment of Congestive 
Heart Failure (REMATCH) Study Group. Long-term use of a left ventricular assist device for end-stage heart 
failure. N Engl J Med 2001;345:1435–1443. 
218. Adlbrecht C, Hulsmann M, Wurm R, Eskandary F, Neuhold S, Zuckermann A, Bojic A, Strunk G, Pacher R. 
Outcome of conservative management vs. assist device implantation in patients with advanced refractory heart 
failure. Eur J Clin Invest 2016;46:34–41. 
219. Lund LH, Matthews J, Aaronson K. Patient selection for left ventricular assist devices. Eur J Heart Fail 
2010;12:434–443. 
220. Birks EJ. A changing trend toward destination therapy: are we treating the same patients differently? Tex Heart 
Inst J 2011;38:552–554. 
221. Stevenson LW, Couper G. On the fledgling field of mechanical circulatory support. J Am Coll Cardiol 
2007;50:748–751. 
222. Boyle AJ, Ascheim DD, Russo MJ, Kormos RL, John R, Naka Y, Gelijns AC, Hong KN, Teuteberg JJ. Clinical 
outcomes for continuous-flow left ventricular assist device patients stratified by pre-operative INTERMACS 
classification. J Heart Lung Transplant 2011;30:402–407. 
223. Jorde UP, Kushwaha SS, Tatooles AJ, Naka Y, Bhat G, Long JW, Horstmanshof DA, Kormos RL, Teuteberg JJ, 
Slaughter MS, Birks EJ, Farrar DJ, Park SJ. Results of the destination therapy post-food and drug administration 
approval study with a continuous flow left ventricular assist device: a prospective study using the INTERMACS 
registry (Interagency Registry for Mechanically Assisted Circulatory Support). J Am Coll Cardiol 2014;63:1751–
1757. 
224. Gustafsson F, Rogers JG. Left ventricular assist device therapy in advanced heart failure: patient selection and 
outcomes. Eur J Heart Fail 2017;19:595–602. 
225. Kirklin JK, Naftel DC, Pagani FD, Kormos RL, Stevenson LW, Blume ED, Myers SL, Miller MA, Baldwin JT, Young 
JB. Seventh INTERMACS annual report: 15,000 patients and counting. J Heart Lung Transplant 2015;34:1495–
1504. 
226. Cowger J, Sundareswaran K, Rogers JG, Park SJ, Pagani FD, Bhat G, Jaski B, Farrar DJ, Slaughter MS. Predicting 
survival in patients receiving continuous flow left ventricular assist devices: the HeartMate II risk score. J Am Coll 
Cardiol 2013;61:313–321. 
227. Russell SD, Miller LW, Pagani FD. Advanced heart failure: a call to action. Congest Heart Fail 2008;14:316–321. 
228. Harjola VP, Mebazaa A, Celutkiene J, Bettex D, Bueno H, Chioncel O, Crespo-Leiro MG, Falk V, Filippatos G, Gibbs 
S, Leite-Moreira A, Lassus J, Masip J, Mueller C, Mullens W, Naeije R, Nordegraaf AV, Parissis J, Riley JP, Ristic A, 
Rosano G, Rudiger A, Ruschitzka F, Seferovic P, Sztrymf B, Vieillard-Baron A, Yilmaz MB, Konstantinides S. 
Contemporary management of acute right ventricular failure: a statement from the Heart Failure Association and 
the Working Group on Pulmonary Circulation and Right Ventricular Function of the European Society of 
Cardiology. Eur J Heart Fail 2016;18:226–241. 
229. Hasin T, Topilsky Y, Schirger JA, Li Z, Zhao Y, Boilson BA, Clavell AL, Rodeheffer RJ, Frantz RP, Edwards BS, 
Pereira NL, Joyce L, Daly R, Park SJ, Kushwaha SS. Changes in renal function after implantation of continuous-
flow left ventricular assist devices. J Am Coll Cardiol 2012;59:26–36. 
230. Mikus E, Stepanenko A, Krabatsch T, Loforte A, Dandel M, Lehmkuhl HB, Hetzer R, Potapov EV. Reversibility of 
fixed pulmonary hypertension in left ventricular assist device support recipients. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 
2011;40:971–977. 
231. Peura JL, Colvin-Adams M, Francis GS, Grady KL, Hoffman TM, Jessup M, John R, Kiernan MS, Mitchell JE, 
O’Connell JB, Pagani FD, Petty M, Ravichandran P, Rogers JG, Semigran MJ, Toole JM. Recommendations for the 
use of mechanical circulatory support: device strategies and patient selection: a scientific statement from the 
American Heart Association. Circulation 2012;126:2648–2667. 
232. Allen LA, McIlvennan CK, Thompson JS, Dunlay SM, LaRue SJ, Lewis EF, Patel CB, Blue L, Fairclough DL, Leister 
EC, Glasgow RE, Cleveland JC, Jr., Phillips C, Baldridge V, Walsh MN, Matlock DD. Effectiveness of an intervention 
supporting shared decision making for destination therapy left ventricular assist device: the DECIDE-LVAD 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
 Accepted Article
randomized clinical trial. JAMA Intern Med 2018;178:520–529. 
233. Hannan MM, Husain S, Mattner F, Danziger-Isakov L, Drew RJ, Corey GR, Schueler S, Holman WL, Lawler LP, 
Gordon SM, Mahon NG, Herre JM, Gould K, Montoya JG, Padera RF, Kormos RL, Conte JV, Mooney ML. Working 
formulation for the standardization of definitions of infections in patients using ventricular assist devices. J Heart 
Lung Transplant 2011;30:375–384. 
234. Mehra MR, Naka Y, Uriel N, Goldstein DJ, Cleveland JC, Jr., Colombo PC, Walsh MN, Milano CA, Patel CB, Jorde 
UP, Pagani FD, Aaronson KD, Dean DA, McCants K, Itoh A, Ewald GA, Horstmanshof D, Long JW, Salerno C; 
MOMENTUM 3 Investigators. A fully magnetically levitated circulatory pump for advanced heart failure. N Engl J 
Med 2017;376:440–450. 
235. Rogers JG, Pagani FD, Tatooles AJ, Bhat G, Slaughter MS, Birks EJ, Boyce SW, Najjar SS, Jeevanandam V, 
Anderson AS, Gregoric ID, Mallidi H, Leadley K, Aaronson KD, Frazier OH, Milano CA. Intrapericardial left 
ventricular assist device for advanced heart failure. N Engl J Med 2017;376:451–460. 
236. Koval CE, Thuita L, Moazami N, Blackstone E. Evolution and impact of drive-line infection in a large cohort of 
continuous-flow ventricular assist device recipients. J Heart Lung Transplant 2014;33:1164–1172. 
237. Mehra MR. The burden of haemocompatibility with left ventricular assist systems: a complex weave. Eur Heart J 
2017 Feb 23. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehx036. [Epub ahead of print] 
238. Uriel N, Morrison KA, Garan AR, Kato TS, Yuzefpolskaya M, Latif F, Restaino SW, Mancini DM, Flannery M, 
Takayama H, John R, Colombo PC, Naka Y, Jorde UP. Development of a novel echocardiography ramp test for 
speed optimization and diagnosis of device thrombosis in continuous-flow left ventricular assist devices: the 
Columbia ramp study. J Am Coll Cardiol 2012;60:1764–1775. 
239. Miller LW, Pagani FD, Russell SD, John R, Boyle AJ, Aaronson KD, Conte JV, Naka Y, Mancini D, Delgado RM, 
MacGillivray TE, Farrar DJ, Frazier OH; HeartMate II Clinical Investigators. Use of a continuous-flow device in 
patients awaiting heart transplantation. N Engl J Med 2007;357:885–896. 
240. Pagani FD, Miller LW, Russell SD, Aaronson KD, John R, Boyle AJ, Conte JV, Bogaev RC, MacGillivray TE, Naka Y, 
Mancini D, Massey HT, Chen L, Klodell CT, Aranda JM, Moazami N, Ewald GA, Farrar DJ, Frazier OH. Extended 
mechanical circulatory support with a continuous-flow rotary left ventricular assist device. J Am Coll Cardiol 
2009;54:312–321. 
241. Starling RC, Naka Y, Boyle AJ, Gonzalez-Stawinski G, John R, Jorde U, Russell SD, Conte JV, Aaronson KD, McGee 
EC, Jr., Cotts WG, DeNofrio D, Pham DT, Farrar DJ, Pagani FD. Results of the post-U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration-approval study with a continuous flow left ventricular assist device as a bridge to heart 
transplantation: a prospective study using the INTERMACS (Interagency Registry for Mechanically Assisted 
Circulatory Support). J Am Coll Cardiol 2011;57:1890–1898. 
242. Slaughter MS, Rogers JG, Milano CA, Russell SD, Conte JV, Feldman D, Sun B, Tatooles AJ, Delgado RM 3rd, Long 
JW, Wozniak TC, Ghumman W, Farrar DJ, Frazier OH; HeartMate II Investigators. Advanced heart failure treated 
with continuous-flow left ventricular assist device. N Engl J Med 2009;361:2241–2251. 
243. Starling RC, Estep JD, Horstmanshof DA, Milano CA, Stehlik J, Shah KB, Bruckner BA, Lee S, Long JW, Selzman 
CH, Kasirajan V, Haas DC, Boyle AJ, Chuang J, Farrar DJ, Rogers JG; ROADMAP Study Investigators. Risk 
assessment and comparative effectiveness of left ventricular assist device and medical management in 
ambulatory heart failure patients: the ROADMAP study 2-year results. JACC Heart Fail 2017;5:518–527. 
244. Starling RC, Moazami N, Silvestry SC, Ewald G, Rogers JG, Milano CA, Rame JE, Acker MA, Blackstone EH, 
Ehrlinger J, Thuita L, Mountis MM, Soltesz EG, Lytle BW, Smedira NG. Unexpected abrupt increase in left 
ventricular assist device thrombosis. N Engl J Med 2014;370:33–40. 
245. Smedira NG, Blackstone EH, Ehrlinger J, Thuita L, Pierce CD, Moazami N, Starling RC. Current risks of HeartMate 
II pump thrombosis: non-parametric analysis of Interagency Registry for Mechanically Assisted Circulatory 
Support data. J Heart Lung Transplant 2015;34:1527–1534. 
246. Maltais S, Kilic A, Nathan S, Keebler M, Emani S, Ransom J, Katz JN, Sheridan B, Brieke A, Egnaczyk G, Entwistle 
JW, 3rd, Adamson R, Stulak J, Uriel N, O’Connell JB, Farrar DJ, Sundareswaran KS, Gregoric I. PREVENtion of 
HeartMate II Pump Thrombosis Through Clinical Management: The PREVENT multi-center study. J Heart Lung 
Transplant 2017;36:1–12. 
247. Stahovich M, Sundareswaran KS, Fox S, Hallinan W, Blood P, Chen L, Pamboukian SV, Chinn R, Farrar DJ, Pagani 
FD, Blue L. Reduce driveline trauma through stabilization and exit site management: 30 days feasibility results 
from the multicenter RESIST study. ASAIO J 2016;62:240–245. 
248. Strueber M, O’Driscoll G, Jansz P, Khaghani A, Levy WC, Wieselthaler GM. Multicenter evaluation of an 
intrapericardial left ventricular assist system. J Am Coll Cardiol 2011;57:1375–1382. 
249. Strueber M, Larbalestier R, Jansz P, Zimpfer D, Fiane AE, Tsui S, Simon A, Schmitto JD, Khaghani A, Wieselthaler 
GM, Najarian K, Schueler S. Results of the post-market Registry to Evaluate the HeartWare Left Ventricular Assist 
System (ReVOLVE). J Heart Lung Transplant 2014;33:486–491. 
250. Slaughter MS, Pagani FD, McGee EC, Birks EJ, Cotts WG, Gregoric I, Howard FO, Icenogle T, Najjar SS, Boyce 
SW, Acker MA, John R, Hathaway DR, Najarian KB, Aaronson KD; HeartWare Bridge to Transplant ADVANCE Trial 
Investigators. HeartWare ventricular assist system for bridge to transplant: combined results of the bridge to 
transplant and continued access protocol trial. J Heart Lung Transplant 2013;32:675–683. 
251. Pulikottil-Jacob R, Suri G, Connock M, Kandala NB, Sutcliffe P, Maheswaran H, Banner NR, Clarke A. Comparative 
cost-effectiveness of the HeartWare versus HeartMate II left ventricular assist devices used in the United Kingdom 
National Health Service bridge-to-transplant program for patients with heart failure. J Heart Lung Transplant 
2014;33:350–358. 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
 Accepted Article
252. Kormos RL, McCall M, Althouse A, Lagazzi L, Schaub R, Kormos MA, Zaldonis JA, Sciortino C, Lockard K, Kuntz N, 
Dunn E, Teuteberg JJ. Left ventricular assist device malfunctions: it is more than just the pump. Circulation 
2017;136:1714–1725. 
253. Magruder JT, Grimm JC, Crawford TC, Tedford RJ, Russell SD, Sciortino CM, Whitman GJR, Shah AS. Survival 
after orthotopic heart transplantation in patients undergoing bridge to transplantation with the HeartWare HVAD 
versus the Heartmate II. Ann Thorac Surg 2017;103:1505–1511. 
254. Netuka I, Sood P, Pya Y, Zimpfer D, Krabatsch T, Garbade J, Rao V, Morshuis M, Marasco S, Beyersdorf F, 
Damme L, Schmitto JD. Fully magnetically levitated left ventricular assist system for treating advanced HF: a 
multicenter study. J Am Coll Cardiol 2015;66:2579–2589. 
255. Krabatsch T, Netuka I, Schmitto JD, Zimpfer D, Garbade J, Rao V, Morshuis M, Beyersdorf F, Marasco S, Damme 
L, Pya Y. HeartMate 3 fully magnetically levitated left ventricular assist device for the treatment of advanced 
heart failure – 1 year results from the CE mark trial. J Cardiothorac Surg 2017;12:23. 
256. Heatley G, Sood P, Goldstein D, Uriel N, Cleveland J, Middlebrook D, Mehra MR. Clinical trial design and rationale 
of the Multicenter Study of MagLev Technology in Patients Undergoing Mechanical Circulatory Support Therapy 
With HeartMate 3 (MOMENTUM 3) investigational device exemption clinical study protocol. J Heart Lung 
Transplant 2016;35:528–536. 
257. Aaronson KD, Slaughter MS, Miller LW, McGee EC, Cotts WG, Acker MA, Jessup ML, Gregoric ID, Loyalka P, 
Frazier OH, Jeevanandam V, Anderson AS, Kormos RL, Teuteberg JJ, Levy WC, Naftel DC, Bittman RM, Pagani FD, 
Hathaway DR, Boyce SW; HeartWare Ventricular Assist Device (HVAD) Bridge to Transplant ADVANCE Trial 
Investigators. Use of an intrapericardial, continuous-flow, centrifugal pump in patients awaiting heart 
transplantation. Circulation 2012;125:3191–3200. 
258. Mehra MR, Goldstein DJ, Uriel N, Cleveland JC Jr, Yuzefpolskaya M, Salerno C, Walsh MN, Milano CA, Patel CB, 
Ewald GA, Itoh A, Dean D, Krishnamoorthy A, Cotts WG, Tatooles AJ, Jorde UP, Bruckner BA, Estep JD, 
Jeevanandam V, Sayer G, Horstmanshof D, Long JW, Gulati S, Skipper ER, O’Connell JB, Heatley G, Sood P, Naka 
Y; MOMENTUM 3 Investigators. Two-year outcomes with a magnetically levitated cardiac pump in heart failure. N 
Engl J Med 2018;378:1386–1395. 
259. Hanke JS, Rojas SV, Avsar M, Haverich A, Schmitto JD. Minimally-invasive LVAD implantation: state of the art. 
Curr Cardiol Rev 2015;11:246–251. 
260. Costanzo MR, Dipchand A, Starling R, Anderson A, Chan M, Desai S, Fedson S, Fisher P, Gonzales-Stawinski G, 
Martinelli L, McGiffin D, Smith J, Taylor D, Meiser B, Webber S, Baran D, Carboni M, Dengler T, Feldman D, 
Frigerio M, Kfoury A, Kim D, Kobashigawa J, Shullo M, Stehlik J, Teuteberg J, Uber P, Zuckermann A, Hunt S, 
Burch M, Bhat G, Canter C, Chinnock R, Crespo-Leiro M, Delgado R, Dobbels F, Grady K, Kao W, Lamour J, Parry 
G, Patel J, Pini D, Towbin J, Wolfel G, Delgado D, Eisen H, Goldberg L, Hosenpud J, Johnson M, Keogh A, Lewis C, 
O’Connell J, Rogers J, Ross H, Russell S, Vanhaecke J. The International Society of Heart and Lung 
Transplantation Guidelines for the care of heart transplant recipients. J Heart Lung Transplant 2010;29:914–956. 
261. Jaarsma T, Beattie JM, Ryder M, Rutten FH, McDonagh T, Mohacsi P, Murray SA, Grodzicki T, Bergh I, Metra M, 
Ekman I, Angermann C, Leventhal M, Pitsis A, Anker SD, Gavazzi A, Ponikowski P, Dickstein K, Delacretaz E, Blue 
L, Strasser F, McMurray J. Palliative care in heart failure: a position statement from the palliative care workshop 
of the Heart Failure Association of the European Society of Cardiology. Eur J Heart Fail 2009;11:433–443. 
262. Bayoumi E, Sheikh F, Groninger H. Palliative care in cardiac transplantation: an evolving model. Heart Fail Rev 
2017;22:605–610. 
263. Rogers JG, Patel CB, Mentz RJ, Granger BB, Steinhauser KE, Fiuzat M, Adams PA, Speck A, Johnson KS, 
Krishnamoorthy A, Yang H, Anstrom KJ, Dodson GC, Taylor DH Jr, Kirchner JL, Mark DB, O’Connor CM, Tulsky JA. 
Palliative care in heart failure: the PAL-HF randomized, controlled clinical trial. J Am Coll Cardiol 2017;70:331–
341. 
264. O’Donnell AE, Schaefer KG, Stevenson LW, DeVoe K, Walsh K, Mehra MR, Desai AS. Social Worker-Aided 
Palliative Care Intervention in High-risk Patients With Heart Failure (SWAP-HF): a pilot randomized clinical trial. 
JAMA Cardiol 2018 Apr 11. doi: 10.1001/jamacardio.2018.0589. [Epub ahead of print] 
265. Stocker R, Close H, Hancock H, Hungin APS. Should heart failure be regarded as a terminal illness requiring 
palliative care? A study of heart failure patients’, carers’ and clinicians’ understanding of heart failure prognosis 
and its management. BMJ Support Palliat Care 2017;7:464–469. 
266. Dunlay SM, Strand JJ, Wordingham SE, Stulak JM, Luckhardt AJ, Swetz KM. Dying with a left ventricular assist 
device as destination therapy. Circ Heart Fail 2016;9:e003096. 
267. Baumwol J. “I Need Help”–A mnemonic to aid timely referral in advanced heart failure. J Heart Lung Transplant 
2017;36:593–594. 
268. Yancy CW, Januzzi JL Jr, Allen LA, Butler J, Davis LL, Fonarow GC, Ibrahim NE, Jessup M, Lindenfeld J, Maddox 
TM, Masoudi FA, Motiwala SR, Patterson JH, Walsh MN, Wasserman A. 2017 ACC Expert consensus decision 
pathway for optimization of heart failure treatment: answers to 10 pivotal issues about heart failure with reduced 
ejection fraction: a report of the American College of Cardiology Task Force on Expert Consensus Decision 
Pathways. J Am Coll Cardiol 2018;71:201–230. 
269. Anguita Sanchez M, Lambert Rodriguez JL, Bover Freire R, Comin Colet J, Crespo Leiro MG, Gonzalez Vilchez F, 
Manito Lorite N, Segovia Cubero J, Ruiz Mateas F, Elola Somoza FJ, Iniguez Romo A. Classification and quality 
standards of heart failure units: scientific consensus of the Spanish Society of Cardiology. Rev Esp Cardiol (Engl 
Ed) 2016;69:940–950. 
270. Aspromonte N, Gulizia MM, Di Lenarda A, Mortara A, Battistoni I, De Maria R, Gabriele M, Iacoviello M, Navazio A, 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
 Accepted Article
Pini D, Di Tano G, Marini M, Ricci RP, Alunni G, Radini D, Metra M, Romeo F. ANMCO/SIC Consensus Document: 
cardiology networks for outpatient heart failure care. Eur Heart J Suppl 2017;19(Suppl D):D89–D101. 
271. Ertl G, Angermann CE, Bekeredjian R, Beyersdorf F, Güder G, Gummert J, Katus HA, Kindermann I, Pauschinger 
M, Perings S, Raake PWJ, Störk S, Scheidt Wv, Welz S, Böhm M. Aufbau und Organisation von Herzinsuffizienz-
Netzwerken (HF‑NETs) und Herzinsuffizienz-Einheiten (“Heart Failure Units”, HFUs) zur Optimierung der 
Behandlung der akuten und chronischen Herzinsuffizienz. Der Kardiologe 2016;10:222–235. 
272. Charon C, Allyn J, Bouchet B, Nativel F, Braunberger E, Brulliard C, Martinet O, Allou N. Ten thousand kilometre 
transfer of cardiogenic shock patients on venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for emergency heart 
transplantation: Cooperation between Reunion Island and Metropolitan France. Eur Heart J Acute Cardiovasc Care 
2017 Jun 1. doi: 10.1177/2048872617719652. [Epub ahead of print] 
273. Dini CS, Lazzeri C, Chiostri M, Gensini GF, Valente S. A local network for extracorporeal membrane oxygenation in 
refractory cardiogenic shock. Acute Card Care 2015;17:49–54. 
274. Haddad M, Masters RG, Hendry PJ, Kawai A, Veinot JP, Lavallee G, Mussivand TV. Intercontinental LVAS patient 
transport. Ann Thorac Surg 2004;78:1818–1820. 
275. Lebreton G, Sanchez B, Hennequin JL, Resiere D, Hommel D, Leonard C, Mehdaoui H, Roques F. The French 
airbridge for circulatory support in the Carribean. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg 2012;15:420–425. 
276. Woolley JR, Dady S, Spinnato J, Sanchez-de-Toledo J, Miller E, Morelli B, Winowich S, Wearden PD. First Berlin 
heart EXCOR pediatric VAD interhospital transports of nonambulatory patients with the Ikus stationary driver. 
ASAIO J 2013;59:537–541. 
277. Jaroszewski DE, Kleisli T, Staley L, Pierce C, Scott R, Steidley DE, DeValeria P, Arabia FA. A traveling team 
concept to expedite the transfer and management of unstable patients in cardiopulmonary shock. J Heart Lung 
Transplant 2011;30:618–623. 
278. Beurtheret S, Mordant P, Paoletti X, Marijon E, Celermajer DS, Leger P, Pavie A, Combes A, Leprince P. 
Emergency circulatory support in refractory cardiogenic shock patients in remote institutions: a pilot study (the 
cardiac-RESCUE program). Eur Heart J 2013;34:112–120.  
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
 Accepted Article
Figure 1 Triage of patients with advanced heart failure (HF) and appropriate timing of referral. ARNI, angiotensin 
receptor–neprilysin inhibitor; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; CRT, cardiac resynchronization therapy; 
ICD, implantable cardioverter-defibrillator; LVEF, left ventricular ejection fraction; NYHA, New York Heart Association; 
RAS, renin–angiotensin system; SBP, systolic blood pressure; SCr, serum creatinine. 
 
Figure 2 Conceptual structure of a hub and spoke model of care for patients with advanced heart failure (HF). This 
figure presents a concept for the structure of a hub and spoke model of care for patients with advanced HF. The roles 
for primary care, general cardiology (yellow), specialized HF (orange), and tertiary centres (red) are described. Solid 
lines reflect main lines of communication and referral. Dashed lines indicate secondary pathways for 
referral/communication (i.e. typically patients will first be referred to a specialized HF unit, but in some circumstances 
direct referral to the tertiary hub bypassing the specialized HF centre may be appropriate.) This model depicts an 
overview of the concept, which can be tailored to the local needs of the health care system. CRT, cardiac 
resynchronization therapy; ICD, implantable cardioverter-defibrillator. 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
 Accepted Article
Table 1 Prior definitions and indicators of advanced heart failure 
Heart Failure Association4 
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association5,6 
Heart Failure Society of America3 
1. Severe symptoms of HF with dyspnoea and/or fatigue at rest or 
with minimal exertion (NYHA functional class III or IV) 
2. Episodes of fluid retention (pulmonary and/or systemic 
congestion, peripheral oedema) and/or of reduced cardiac output 
at rest (peripheral hypoperfusion) 
3. Objective evidence of severe cardiac dysfunction, shown by at 
least one of the following: 
a) A low LVEF (<30%) 
b) A severe abnormality of cardiac function on Doppler 
echocardiography with a pseudonormal or restrictive mitral 
inflow pattern 
c) High LV filing pressures (mean PCWP >16 mmHg, and/or 
mean RAP >12 mmHg by pulmonary artery catheterization) 
d) High BNP or NT-proBNP plasma levels, in the absence of non-
cardiac causes 
4. Severe impairment of functional capacity shown by one of the 
following: 
a) Inability to exercise 
b) 6MWT distance <300 m or less in females and/or patients aged 
≥75 years 
c) Peak VO2 <12 to 14 mL/kg/min 
5. History of ≥1 HF hospitalization in the past 6 months 
6. Presence of all the previous features despite ‘attempts to 
optimize’ therapy including diuretics, inhibitors of the renin–
angiotensin–aldosterone system, and beta-blockers, unless these 
are poorly tolerated or contraindicated, and CRT, when indicated 
1. Repeated (≥2) hospitalizations or ED visits for HF in the past year 
2. Progressive deterioration in renal function (e.g. rise in BUN and 
creatinine) 
3. Weight loss without other cause (e.g. cardiac cachexia) 
4. Intolerance to ACE inhibitors due to hypotension and/or worsening 
renal function 
5. Intolerance to beta-blockers due to worsening HF or hypotension 
6. Frequent systolic blood pressure <90 mmHg 
7. Persistent dyspnoea with dressing or bathing requiring rest 
8. Inability to walk 1 block on the level ground due to dyspnoea or 
fatigue 
9. Recent need to escalate diuretics to maintain volume status, often 
reaching daily furosemide equivalent dose >160 mg/day and/or 
use of supplemental metolazone therapy 
10. Progressive decline in serum sodium, usually to <133 mEq/L 
11. Frequent ICD shocks 
The presence of progressive and/or persistent severe signs 
and symptoms of HF despite optimized medical, surgical, 
and device therapy. It is generally accompanied by frequent 
hospitalization, severely limited exertional tolerance, and 
poor quality of life and is associated with high morbidity 
and mortality. Importantly, the progressive decline should 
be primarily driven by the HF syndrome. 
Indicators of advanced HF in the setting of optimal medical 
and electrical therapies that should trigger consideration of 
referral for evaluation of advanced therapies include: 
• Need for intravenous inotropic therapy for symptomatic 
relief or to maintain end-organ function 
• Peak VO2 <14 mL/kg/min or <50% of predicted 
• 6MWT distance <300 m 
• ≥2 HF admissions in the last 12 months 
• >2 unscheduled visits (e.g. ED or clinic) in the last 12 
months 
• Worsening right HF and secondary pulmonary 
hypertension 
• Diuretic refractoriness associated with worsening renal 
function 
• Circulatory–renal limitation to RAAS inhibition or beta-
blocker therapy 
• Progressive/persistent NYHA functional class III–IV 
symptoms 
• Increased 1-year mortality (e.g. 20–25%) predicted by 
HF survival models (e.g. SHFS, HFSS, etc.) 
• Progressive renal or hepatic end-organ dysfunction 
• Persistent hyponatraemia (serum sodium <134 mEq/L) 
• Recurrent refractory ventricular tachyarrhythmias; 
frequent ICD shocks 
• Cardiac cachexia 
• Inability to perform ADL 
6MWT, 6-minute walk test; ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme; ADL, activities of daily living; BNP, B-type natriuretic peptide; BUN, blood urea nitrogen; CRT, cardiac resynchronization therapy; ED, 
emergency department; HF, heart failure; HFSS, Heart Failure Survival Score; ICD, implantable cardioverter-defibrillator; LV, left ventricular; LVEF, left ventricular ejection fraction; NT-proBNP, N-terminal 
pro-B-type natriuretic peptide; NYHA, New York Heart Association; PCWP, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure; RAAS, renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system; RAP, right atrial pressure; SHFS, Seattle Heart 
Failure Score; VO2, oxygen consumption. 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
 Accepted Article
 
Table 2 Interagency Registry for Mechanically Assisted Circulatory Support (INTERMACS) profile descriptions in patients with advanced heart failure  
Profile 
Time frame for intervention 
Profile 1: Critical cardiogenic shock  
Patients with life-threatening hypotension despite rapidly escalating inotropic support, critical organ 
hypoperfusion, often confirmed by worsening acidosis and/or lactate levels. “Crash and burn.” 
Definitive intervention needed within hours. 
Profile 2: Progressive decline 
Patient with declining function despite intravenous inotropic support, may be manifest by worsening 
renal function, nutritional depletion, inability to restore volume balance. “Sliding on inotropes.” Also 
describes declining status in patients unable to tolerate inotropic therapy. 
Definitive intervention needed within few days. 
Profile 3: Stable but inotrope-dependent 
Patient with stable blood pressure, organ function, nutrition, and symptoms on continuous intravenous 
inotropic support (or a temporary circulatory support device or both), but demonstrating repeated 
failure to wean from support due to recurrent symptomatic hypotension or renal dysfunction. 
“Dependent stability.” 
Definitive intervention elective over a period of weeks to few months. 
Profile 4: Resting symptoms 
Patient can be stabilized close to normal volume status but experiences daily symptoms of congestion 
at rest or during ADL. Doses of diuretics generally fluctuate at very high levels. More intensive 
management and surveillance strategies should be considered, which may in some cases reveal poor 
compliance that would compromise outcomes with any therapy. Some patients may shuttle between 4 
and 5. 
Definitive intervention elective over a period of weeks to few months. 
Profile 5: Exertion intolerant 
Comfortable at rest and with ADL but unable to engage in any other activity, living predominantly 
within the house. Patients are comfortable at rest without congestive symptoms, but may have 
underlying refractory elevated volume status, often with renal dysfunction. If underlying nutritional 
status and organ function are marginal, patients may be more at risk than INTERMACS 4, and require 
definitive intervention. 
Variable urgency, depends upon maintenance of nutrition, organ function, and 
activity. 
Profile 6: Exertion limited 
Patient without evidence of fluid overload is comfortable at rest, and with ADL and minor activities 
outside the home but fatigues after the first few minutes of any meaningful activity. Attribution to 
cardiac limitation requires careful measurement of peak oxygen consumption, in some cases with 
haemodynamic monitoring to confirm severity of cardiac impairment. “Walking wounded.” 
Variable, depends upon maintenance of nutrition, organ function, and activity 
level. 
Profile 7: Advanced NYHA class III 
A placeholder for more precise specification in future, this level includes patients who are without 
current or recent episodes of unstable fluid balance, living comfortably with meaningful activity limited 
to mild physical exertion. 
Transplantation or circulatory support may not currently be indicated. 
 
 
Modifiers for profiles 
Possible profiles to modify 
TCS-Temporary Circulatory Support can modify only patients in hospital (other devices would be 
INTERMACS devices). This includes IABP, ECMO, TandemHeart, Levitronix, BVS 5000 or AB5000, Impella. 
1, 2, 3 in hospital. 
A-Arrhythmia can modify any profile. Recurrent ventricular tachyarrhythmias that have recently 
contributed substantially to clinical compromise. This includes frequent ICD shocks or requirement for 
external defibrillator, usually more than twice weekly. 
Any profile. 
FF-Frequent Flyer can modify only outpatients, designating a patient requiring frequent emergency visits 
or hospitalizations for diuretics, ultrafiltration, or temporary intravenous vasoactive therapy. 
3 if at home, 4, 5, 6. A Frequent Flyer would rarely be profile 7. 
ADL, activities of daily living; ECMO, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation; IABP, intra-aortic balloon pump; ICD, implantable cardioverter-defibrillator; NYHA, New York Heart Association. 
Reprinted with permission from Stevenson et al.8 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
 Accepted Article
Table 3 Updated HFA-ESC criteria for defining advanced heart failure 
All the following criteria must be present despite optimal guideline-directed treatment:  
1. Severe and persistent symptoms of heart failure [NYHA class III (advanced) or IV]. 
2. Severe cardiac dysfunction defined by a reduced LVEF ≤30%, isolated RV failure (e.g. ARVC) or non-operable severe valve 
abnormalities or congenital abnormalities or persistently high (or increasing) BNP or NT-proBNP values and data of severe diastolic 
dysfunction or LV structural abnormalities according to the ESC definition of HFpEF and HFmrEF.9 
3. Episodes of pulmonary or systemic congestion requiring high-dose intravenous diuretics (or diuretic combinations) or episodes of low 
output requiring inotropes or vasoactive drugs or malignant arrhythmias causing >1 unplanned visit or hospitalization in the last 12 
months.  
4. Severe impairment of exercise capacity with inability to exercise or low 6MWTD (<300 m) or pVO2 (<12–14 mL/kg/min), estimated to 
be of cardiac origin. 
 
In addition to the above, extra-cardiac organ dysfunction due to heart failure (e.g. cardiac cachexia, liver, or kidney dysfunction) or 
type 2 pulmonary hypertension may be present, but are not required.  
Criteria 1 and 4 can be met in patients who have cardiac dysfunction (as described in criterion #2), but who also have substantial 
limitation due to other conditions (e.g. severe pulmonary disease, non-cardiac cirrhosis, or most commonly by renal disease with mixed 
aetiology). These patients still have limited quality of life and survival due to advanced disease and warrant the same intensity of 
evaluation as someone in whom the only disease is cardiac, but the therapeutic options for these patients are usually more limited. 
ARVC, arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy; BNP, B-type natriuretic peptide; ESC, European Society of Cardiology; HFA, 
Heart Failure Association; HFmrEF, heart failure with mid-range ejection fraction; HFpEF, heart failure with preserved ejection fraction; 
LV, left ventricular; LVEF, left ventricular ejection fraction; NT-proBNP, N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide; NYHA, New York 
Heart Association; pVO2, peak exercise oxygen consumption; RV, right ventricular; 6MWTD, 6-minute walk test distance. 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
 Accepted Article
 
Table 4 Risk markers in patients with advanced heart failure 
General clinical 
Age30 
Male sex31 
↑ QRS duration32,33 
Longer HF duration30 
Higher NYHA class34–37 
Lower and labile SBP and lower DBP and MAP30,38–40 
Lower pulse pressure41 
↑ HR in sinus rhythm but not in atrial fibrillation30,42–44
Reduced HR variability45–47 
Recent /recurrent HF hospitalizations30 
Haemodynamic profiles48,49 
Cardiomegaly30 
S350 
Poor quality of life 
Reduced peripheral muscle strength120 
Rales30 
Oedema30 
JVD50 
Hepatomegaly 
Ascites 
Laboratory and biomarkers121 
Copeptin51, 122, 123 
Low sodium52 
Cardiomyocyte injury 
 
Troponin53-57 
Cardiomyocyte stress 
 
Higher BNP and/or NT-proBNP56,58–62 
 
Increased NT-proBNP over time53,63 
 
ANP64 
 
MR-proANP62,124 
Inflammation 
 
CRP65,66 
 
ESR67 
Oxidative stress and fibrosis 
 
ST256 
 
Galectin-3125 
 
GDF-15126 
 
MR-proADM68 
 
Lower LDL 
 
Uric acid69 
 
Low T370 
 
Albuminuria71 
Imaging 
Echocardiography 
 
Lower LVEF72–74 
 
Large areas of hypo/akinesis 
 
LV dilatation74 
 
Diastolic dysfunction75,76 
 
Mitral regurgitation30 
 
Aortic stenosis 
 
LV hypertrophy72,77 
 
LV mass72 
 
Left atrial enlargement72,78,79 
 
Right ventricular function80,81 
 
Pulmonary hypertension80,82 
 
Resting dobutamine stress strain83,84 
Other imaging 
 
Pulmonary congestion by lung ultrasound85 
 
Inflammation and fibrosis on CMR 
 
Poor viability on stress echo and CMR84 
 
Reduced miBG uptake86,87 
Cardiopulmonary exercise test 
pVO2
59,88 
6-min walk test127 
VE/VCO2 slope25,64 
Co-morbidity 
Cardiovascular 
 
Ischaemic heart disease/prior myocardial infarction30 
 
Prior transient ischaemic attack/stroke 
 
Peripheral arterial disease 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
 Accepted Article
 
Atrial fibrillation30 
 
Ventricular arrhythmia, sudden cardiac death, ICD shocks 
Non-cardiovascular 
 
Chronic kidney disease89,90 
 
Diabetes30 
 
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
 
Smoking30 
 
Anaemia91 
 
Higher red cell distribution width92 
 
Higher white blood cell count93 
 
Iron deficiency 
 
Liver dysfunction and low albumin94,95 
 
Sleep apnoea and Cheyne–Stokes breathing 
 
Depression96–98 
 
Frailty99 
 
Cachexia30,100,101 
 
Cognitive dysfunction102 
 
Diuretic resistance 
Composite scores27,28 
Simplified variables103 
INTERMACS8,104 
MAGGIC105,106 
BIOSTAT-CHF107 
BCN Bio-HF108 
SHFM109,110 
HFSS111–117 
UCLA score118 
Treatment and organization-related factors 
Poor guideline adherence119 
ANP, atrial natriuretic peptide; BCN Bio-HF, Barcelona Bio-Heart Failure; BIOSTAT-CHF, A Systems Biology Study to Tailored Treatment 
in Chronic Heart Failure; BNP, B-type natriuretic peptide; CMR, cardiac magnetic resonance; CRP, C-reactive protein; DBP, diastolic 
blood pressure; ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate; GDF-15, growth differentiation factor 15; HF, heart failure; HFSS, Heart Failure 
Survival Score; HR, heart rate; ICD, implantable cardioverter-defibrillator; INTERMACS, Interagency Registry for Mechanically Assisted 
Circulatory Support; JVD, jugular venous distention; LDL, low-density lipoprotein; LV, left ventricular; LVEF, left ventricular ejection 
fraction; MAGGIC, Meta-Analysis Global Group in Chronic Heart Failure; miBG, metaiodobenzylguanidine; MAP, mean arterial pressure; 
MR-proADM, mid-regional pro-adrenomedullin; MR-proANP, mid-regional pro-atrial natriuretic peptide; NT-proBNP, N-terminal pro-B-
type natriuretic peptide; NYHA, New York Heart Association; pVO2, peak exercise oxygen consumption; SHFM, Seattle Heart Failure 
Model; SBP, systolic blood pressure; UCLA, University of California, Los Angeles; VE/VCO2, minute ventilation–carbon dioxide production 
relationship. 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
 Accepted Article
Table 5 Prognostic scores 
Score 
Components 
Comments 
HFSS133 
• Presence/absence coronary artery disease 
• Resting heart rate 
• Left ventricular ejection fraction 
• Mean arterial blood pressure 
• Presence/absence of intraventricular conduction delay 
• Serum sodium 
• Peak oxygen uptake 
HFSS = [(0.0216 * resting HR) + (–0.0255 * mean BP) + (–0.0464 * LVEF) + 
(–0.047 * serum sodium) + (–0.0546 * peak VO2) + (0.608 * presence or 
absence of IVCD) + (0.6931 * presence or absence of ischaemic heart 
disease)] 
Score is based on a sum of these variables multiplied by defined 
coefficients 
 
Low risk: ≥8.1 
Medium-risk: HFSS 7.20 to 8.09 
High-risk: HFSS ≤7.1 
SHFM109 
• Demographics 
• Clinical characteristics 
• Medications 
• Laboratory data 
• Devices 
www.seattleheartfailuremodel.org  
Incorporates impact of interventions (medical and device) and provides 
estimates of 1, 2, and 5-year survival 
MECKI134–136 
• Percent predicted peak VO2 
• VE/VCO2 slope 
• Haemoglobin 
• Serum sodium 
• LVEF 
• eGFR by MDRD 
Incorporates data from the CPET as well as kidney function 
MAGGIC105 
• Age 
• Gender 
• LVEF 
• Systolic blood pressure 
• Body mass index 
• Serum creatinine 
• NYHA class 
• Smoking history 
• Co-morbidities (e.g. diabetes, COPD) 
• Length of heart failure diagnosis 
• Medications 
www.heartfailurerisk.org  
Risk model converted into integer score 
Generalizable to a broad spectrum of patients 
BP, blood pressure; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; CPET, cardiopulmonary exercise test; eGFR, estimated glomerular filtration rate; HFSS, Heart Failure Survival Score; HR, heart rate; 
IVCD, intraventricular conduction defect; LVEF, left ventricular ejection fraction; MAGGIC, Meta-Analysis Global Group in Chronic Heart Failure; MDRD, Modification of Diet in Renal Disease; MECKI, 
Metabolic Exercise test data combined with Cardiac and Kidney Indexes; NYHA, New York Heart Association; SHFM, Seattle Heart Failure Model; VE/VCO2, minute ventilation–carbon dioxide production 
relationship; VO2, oxygen consumption. 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
 Accepted Article
 
 
Table 6 Suggested clinical, laboratory, and echocardiographic criteria to trigger referral* 
Clinical 
Laboratory 
Imaging 
Risk score data 
• >1 HF hospitalization in last year 
• NYHA class III–IV 
• Intolerant of optimal dose of any GDMT HF drug 
• Increasing diuretic requirement 
• SBP ≤90 mmHg 
• Inability to perform CPET 
• 6MWT 
• CRT non-responder clinically 
• Cachexia, unintentional weight loss 
• KCCQ 
• MLHFQ 
• eGFR <45 mL/min 
• SCr ≥160 mmol/L 
• K >5.2 or <3.5 mmol/L 
• Hyponatraemia 
• Hb ≤120 g/L 
• NT-proBNP ≥1000 pg/mL 
• Abnormal liver function test 
• Low albumin 
• LVEF ≤30% 
• Large area of akinesis/dyskinesis or aneurysm 
• Moderate†-severe mitral regurgitation 
• RV dysfunction 
• PA pressure ≥50 mmHg 
• Moderate-severe tricuspid regurgitation 
• Difficult to grade aortic stenosis 
• IVC dilated or without respiratory variation 
• MAGGIC predicted survival ≤80% at 1 year 
• SHFM predicted survival ≤80% at 1 year 
6MWT, 6-min walk test; CPET, cardiopulmonary exercise test; CRT, cardiac resynchronization therapy; eGFR, estimated glomerular filtration rate; GDMT, guideline-directed medical therapy; Hb, 
haemoglobin; HF, heart failure; IVC, inferior vena cava; K, potassium; KCCQ, Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire; LVEF, left ventricular ejection fraction; MAGGIC, Meta-Analysis Global Group in 
Chronic Heart Failure; MLHFQ, Minnesota Living with Heart Failure Questionnaire; Na, sodium; NT-proBNP, N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide; NYHA, New York Heart Association; PA, pulmonary 
artery; RV, right ventricular; SBP, blood pressure; SCr, serum creatinine; SHFM, Seattle Heart Failure Model. 
*Note that this table reflects many clinically relevant but sometimes subjective and non-specific criteria. With these criteria, sensitivity has been prioritized over specificity, i.e. many criteria may be present 
in patients who do not need referral, but by considering these criteria in a comprehensive assessment, there is a lower risk that high-risk patients may be missed or referred too late. While cut-offs exist for 
transplantation listing or left ventricular assist device implantation, there are no data to support specific cut-offs for referral to a HF centre. 
†Moderate mitral regurgitation alone is not sufficient, but is one factor suggesting risk of progression and should be considered together with other variables. 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
 Accepted Article
 
Table 7 Inotropes and vasoconstrictors 
 
Mechanism of action 
Haemodynamic effect 
Comment 
Inodilators 
 
 
 
 
Dobutamine 
Beta-1 activation, slight beta-2 
vasodilatation 
CO ↑, SVR ↓
Half-life minutes 
 
Milrinone 
PDE2 inhibition 
CO ↑, SVR ↓
Half-life 2 h 
 
Levosimendan 
Calcium sensitization 
CO ↑, SVR ↓
Half-life (metabolite) days 
Inotropes/vasoconstrictors 
 
 
 
 
Dopamine 
Beta-1, alpha-adrenergic, and 
dopaminergic activation 
CO ↑, SVR ↑
2–10 µg/kg/min: beta-1 
>10 µg/kg/min: alpha, beta-1 
 
Adrenaline 
Beta-1, alpha-adrenergic, 
moderate beta-2 activation 
CO ↑, SVR ↑
 
Vasoconstrictors 
 
 
 
 
Norepinephrine 
Beta-1, alpha activation 
SVR ↑, CO ↔/↓
 
 
Vasopressin 
V1 and V2 activation 
SVR ↑, CO ↔/↓
 
CO, cardiac output; PDE2, phosphodiesterase-2; SVR, systemic vascular resistance. 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
 Accepted Article
 
Table 8 Indications and contraindications to heart transplantation 
Patients to consider 
1. End-stage HF with severe symptoms, a poor prognosis, and no 
remaining alternative treatment options 
2. Motivated, well informed, and emotionally stable 
3. Capable of complying with the intensive treatment required 
postoperatively 
Contraindications 
1. Active infection 
2. Severe peripheral arterial or cerebrovascular disease 
3. Pharmacologic irreversible pulmonary hypertension (LVAD should 
be considered with subsequent re-evaluation to establish 
candidacy) 
4. Cancer (a collaboration with oncology specialists should occur to 
stratify each patient as to their risk of tumour recurrence) 
5. Irreversible renal dysfunction (e.g. creatinine clearance <30 
mL/min) 
6. Systemic disease with multiorgan involvement 
7. Other serious co-morbidity with poor prognosis 
8. Pre-transplant BMI >35 kg/m2 (weight loss is recommended to 
achieve a BMI <35 kg/m2) 
9. Current alcohol or drug abuse 
10. Any patient for whom social supports are deemed insufficient to 
achieve compliant care in the outpatient setting 
BMI, body mass index; HF, heart failure; LVAD, left ventricular assist device. 
Adapted from Ponikowski et al.9 and Mehra et al.25  
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
 Accepted Article
 
Table 9 Considerations in assessment of co-morbidities 
Co-morbidity 
Parameters to evaluate 
Age208 
Frailty 
Co-morbidity burden 
Local organ availability and quality 
Obesity 
Body mass index 
Diabetes mellitus 
End-organ damage (e.g. neuropathy, nephropathy) 
Glycated haemoglobin 
Renal impairment 
Estimated GFR 
Renal ultrasonography 
Proteinuria estimation 
Presence of renal arterial disease 
Candidacy for combined heart/kidney transplant209 
Cancer 
Active malignancy 
Collaboration with oncologist for prior cancer previously treated 
Previous tumour type, response to therapy 
Metastatic work-up 
Cerebral or peripheral 
vascular disease 
Diagnostic work-up as indicated to assess clinical severity 
Potential to limit rehabilitation 
Substance abuse 
Tobacco (including environmental or second-hand exposure) 
Alcohol 
Recreational drugs 
HIV210,211 
Active or prior opportunistic infections 
Adherence to combination anti-retroviral therapy 
HIV RNA  
CD4 count 
Chagas disease212 
Serology testing for T. cruzi in patients at risk 
Hepatitis B and C 
Antibody/antigen testing 
HCV RNA PCR 
Liver function tests 
Viraemia 
Serology 
Liver biopsy 
Psychosocial  
Complete evaluation 
Potential for adherence to therapy213 
CD4, cluster of differentiation 4; GFR, glomerular filtration rate; HCV, hepatitis C virus; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; RNA ribonucleic acid. 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
 Accepted Article
 
Table 10 Overview of long-term mechanical circulatory support devices 
Device 
Device characteristics 
Evidence from major clinical trials 
Major risks 
Ongoing/future studies 
HeartMate II (Thoratec, St. 
Jude, Abbott)151,223,239–247 
Axial flow pump 
Implanted in pre-peritoneal pocket, 
connected via inflow cannula to left 
ventricular apex, and via outflow 
cannula to ascending aorta 
BTT strategy (prospective, single-arm, n=133): 75% 
survival 6 months, 68% survival 12 months239 
HeartMate II LVAD242 (randomized continuous flow vs. 
pulsatile): improved 2-year survival free of stroke or 
device failure for continuous flow vs. pulsatile 
ROADMAP151,243 (observational, n=97 LVAD, n=103 
OMM): LVAD associated with better survival and 
functional capacity at 2 years 
Device failure 
Pump thrombosis244–246 
Ischaemic stroke 
Driveline infection247 
Bleeding (haemorrhagic stroke) 
RV failure 
 
HeartWare (HeartWare, 
Medtronic)235,248–253,257 
Continuous flow centrifugal pump 
Implanted and positioned completely 
within pericardial space, connected via 
driveline to controller 
Single-arm (transplant candidates, NYHA class IV, 
n=50): 84% 1-year survival248 
Post-CE mark approval registry (n=254): 85% 1-year 
survival, 73% 3-year survival249 
ADVANCE (HeartWare vs. commercially available 
LVADs): non-inferior to commercially available 
devices257; continued access protocol 84% 1-year 
survival250 
ENDURANCE (randomized, open-label, n=446 advanced 
HF ineligible for transplant, HeartWare vs. HeartMate II): 
non-inferiority of HeartWare vs. other devices for 
survival at 2 years free from disabling stroke or device 
removal; higher rate of stroke, RV failure, sepsis235  
Ischaemic stroke 
Haemorrhagic stroke 
RV failure 
Infection 
Device failure252,253 
Pump thrombosis 
Driveline infection 
 
HeartMate 3 (St. Jude, 
Abbott)234,254–256,258 
Continuous flow, centrifugal pump, 
bearing-less magnetically levitated 
rotor, artificial pulse 
Single arm (n=50, BTT and DT): 98% 30-day survival, 
92% 6-month survival; 1-year survival similar to other 
devices254,255 
MOMENTUM 3 (randomized, HeartMate 3 vs. HeartMate 
II, both BTT and DT, n=294): centrifugal flow pump non-
inferior to axial-flow pump at 6 months; superiority also 
established (HR 0.55, 95% CI 0.32–0.95, P=0.04)234 
MOMENTUM 3 2-year outcomes (n=366): 
‒ Survival free of disabling stroke or survival free of 
reoperation to replace/remove device: HR 0.46, 95% 
CI 0.31–0.69, P<0.001 (superiority)258 
‒ Rate of stroke: 10.1% vs. 19.2% (HR 0.47, 95% CI 
0.27–0.84, P=0.02) 
No pump thrombosis in 
MOMENTUM 3 compared to 
10.1% in axial flow group 
RV failure 
Stroke 
Infection 
Driveline infection 
MOMENTUM 3: randomized, 
HeartMate 3 vs. HeartMate II, 
both BTT and DT (long-term 
outcomes)256 
ADVANCE, Evaluation of the HeartWare Left Ventricular Assist Device for the Treatment of Advanced Heart Failure; BTT, bridge to transplant; CI, confidence interval; DT, destination therapy; ENDURANCE, 
Evaluation of the HeartWare Ventricular Assist System for Destination Therapy of Advanced Heart Failure; HF, heart failure; HR, hazard ratio; LVAD, left ventricular assist device; MOMENTUM, Multicenter 
Study of MagLev Technology in Patients Undergoing Mechanical Circulatory Support Therapy with HeartMate 3; NYHA, New York Heart Association; OMM, optimal medical management; ROADMAP, Risk 
Assessment and Comparative Effectiveness of Left Ventricular Assist Device and Medical Management in Ambulatory Heart Failure Patients; RV, right ventricular. 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
 Accepted Article
 
Table 11 ‘I Need Help’—Markers of advanced heart failure 
I 
Inotropes 
Previous or ongoing requirement for dobutamine, milrinone, dopamine, or levosimendan 
N 
NYHA class/natriuretic peptide 
Persisting NYHA class III or IV and/or persistently high BNP or NT-proBNP 
E 
End-organ dysfunction 
Worsening renal or liver dysfunction in the setting of heart failure 
E 
Ejection fraction 
Very low ejection fraction <20% 
D 
Defibrillator shocks 
Recurrent appropriate defibrillator shocks 
H 
Hospitalizations 
More than 1 hospitalization with heart failure in the last 12 months 
E 
Edema/escalating diuretics 
Persisting fluid overload and/or increasing diuretic requirement 
L 
Low blood pressure 
Consistently low BP with systolic <90 to 100 mmHg 
P 
Prognostic medication 
Inability to up-titrate (or need to decrease/cease) ACEI, beta-blockers, ARNIs, or MRAs 
ACEI, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor; ARNI, angiotensin receptor–neprilysin inhibitor; BNP, B-type natriuretic peptide; BP, blood pressure; MRA, mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist; NT-proBNP, 
N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide; NYHA, New York Heart Association. 
Reprinted with permission from Baumwol.271 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
 Accepted Article
Figure 1.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
 Accepted Article
Figure 2.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
