 PS68CH18-Creswell
ARI
20 September 2016
10:55
R
E
V
I
E
W
S
I
N
A
D
V
A
N
C
E
Mindfulness Interventions
J. David Creswell
Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania;
email: creswell@cmu.edu
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2017. 68:18.1–18.26
The Annual Review of Psychology is online at
psych.annualreviews.org
This article’s doi:
10.1146/annurev-psych-042716-051139
Copyright c
� 2017 by Annual Reviews.
All rights reserved
Keywords
mindfulness, meditation, review, randomized controlled trial, health
Abstract
Mindfulness interventions aim to foster greater attention to and awareness
of present moment experience. There has been a dramatic increase in ran-
domized controlled trials (RCTs) of mindfulness interventions over the past
two decades. This article evaluates the growing evidence of mindfulness in-
tervention RCTs by reviewing and discussing: (a) the effects of mindfulness
interventions on health, cognitive, affective, and interpersonal outcomes;
(b) evidence-based applications of mindfulness interventions to new settings
and populations (e.g., the workplace, military, schools); (c) psychological and
neurobiological mechanisms of mindfulness interventions; (d ) mindfulness
intervention dosing considerations; and (e) potential risks of mindfulness in-
terventions. Methodologically rigorous RCTs have demonstrated that mind-
fulness interventions improve outcomes in multiple domains (e.g., chronic
pain, depression relapse, addiction). Discussion focuses on opportunities
and challenges for mindfulness intervention research and on community
applications.
18.1
Review in Advance first posted online  
on September 28, 2016. (Changes may  
still occur before final publication  
online and in print.) 
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2017.68. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Cornell University - Weill Medical College on 09/30/16. For personal use only.
 PS68CH18-Creswell
ARI
20 September 2016
10:55
Mindfulness:
a process of openly
attending, with
awareness, to one’s
experience in the
present moment
Contents
INTRODUCTION. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18.2
What Is Mindfulness?. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18.3
Types of Mindfulness Interventions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18.4
EFFECTS OF MINDFULNESS INTERVENTIONS. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18.6
Physical Health. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18.7
Mental Health. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18.9
Cognitive and Affective Outcomes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18.11
Interpersonal Outcomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .18.12
EMBEDDING MINDFULNESS INTERVENTIONS IN INSTITUTIONS
AND ACROSS THE LIFE SPAN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .18.13
MECHANISMS OF MINDFULNESS INTERVENTIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18.14
Psychological Mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .18.14
Neurobiological Mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .18.15
DOSING: HOW MUCH MINDFULNESS INTERVENTION IS NEEDED
FOR BENEFITS?. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18.16
RISKS OF PARTICIPATING IN MINDFULNESS INTERVENTIONS . . . . . . . . .18.17
DISCUSSION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .18.18
INTRODUCTION
There are few people I know on the planet who couldn’t benefit more from a greater dose of awareness.
—Jon Kabat-Zinn (on Bill Moyers, Healing and the Mind)
Readers not familiar with mindfulness meditation practices or mindfulness interventions might
try a quick exercise: close your eyes for about a minute and maintain an open awareness of the
sensations of breathing at your nostrils. There is no need to do anything special, just continuously
observe the sensations of breathing in and breathing out at the nostrils with curiosity and interest.
Even doing a one-minute mindfulness exercise like this can reveal that our minds are quick to
race off to other places. For example, you might have thought about planning dinner tonight,
drifted off, or noticed a strong desire to consciously control how you were breathing. Moreover,
there is often a rich kaleidoscope of experiences and emotional reactions, including relaxation or
agitation, occurring even in a short exercise such as this. Formal mindfulness training exercises,
such as learning how to mindfully attend to breathing, form the backbone of many mindfulness
interventions. Collectively, mindfulness interventions aim to foster greater awareness of present
moment experience, which, as Jon Kabat-Zinn suggests in the quote in the epigraph of this
review, may have manifold benefits ranging from enhancing the quality and vividness of our daily
life experience to helping us better manage life’s slings and arrows.
Interest in mindfulness interventions has increased exponentially over the past three decades.
Much of this interest has been fueled by scientific reports and corresponding media coverage
describing the potential benefits of mindfulness interventions for a broad array of outcomes,
ranging from mental and physical health outcomes (Ludwig & Kabat-Zinn 2008) to cognitive,
affective, and interpersonal outcomes (Brown et al. 2015). Mindfulness interventions are also
increasingly being integrated into institutional settings—in clinical treatment (Dimidjian & Segal
18.2
Creswell
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2017.68. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Cornell University - Weill Medical College on 09/30/16. For personal use only.
 PS68CH18-Creswell
ARI
20 September 2016
10:55
RCT: randomized
controlled trial
2015), the workplace (Good et al. 2016), schools (Sibinga et al. 2016), the military ( Johnson et al.
2014), and prisons (Samuelson et al. 2007), to name only a few. This proliferation of interest in
mindfulness interventions has been met by the scientific community with a wide range of reactions,
from skepticism to fanaticism. This review evaluates what we have learned from randomized
controlled trials (RCTs) of mindfulness interventions in terms of their effects, applications to new
populations, putative mechanisms, dosing questions, and potential risks.
What Is Mindfulness?
There has been a rich scholarly dialogue about how to define mindfulness as a construct. One
working definition of mindfulness is a process of openly attending, with awareness, to one’s present
moment experience. This process of awareness of present moment experience contrasts with
much of our daily life experience, in which we often find ourselves unintentionally letting our
minds wander (Killingsworth & Gilbert 2010), running on automatic pilot (Bargh & Chartrand
1999), or suppressing unwanted experiences (Kang et al. 2013). Moreover, the mindless states that
predominate in our daily life experience have been demonstrated to be undesirable. For example,
one study showed that our minds wander approximately 47% of the time and that mind wandering
predicts subsequent unhappiness (Killingsworth & Gilbert 2010). In contrast, the capacity to be
mindful is associated with higher wellbeing in daily life (Brown & Ryan 2003).
Mindfulness has been operationalized in many different ways in the scientific literature (for a
review, see Quaglia et al. 2015). Two features appear in most definitions of mindfulness. First,
mindfulness grounds attention and awareness in one’s present moment experience. The present
moment experience that one attends to can take many forms, including one’s body sensations,
emotional reactions, mental images, mental talk, and perceptual experiences (e.g., sounds). Schol-
ars have described this monitoring feature of mindfulness as “watchfulness” or a “lucid awareness
of each experience that presents itself ” (Bodhi 2011, Brown et al. 2007, Quaglia et al. 2015).
Second, many contemporary conceptualizations of mindfulness posit that adopting an attitude of
openness or acceptance toward one’s experience is critical. This open and accepting attitude con-
sists of attending to experience with a curious, detached, and nonreactive orientation. Importantly,
this attitude of acceptance toward experience is not one of passive resignation to one’s current
circumstances but rather one of inviting in experiences, even if they are difficult.
Althoughpsychologicalscientistshavebeen interested in mindfulness for thepast threedecades,
this is a thin slice of scholarly work relative to the 2,500-year tradition of scholarship about (and
practice of ) mindfulness interventions in many Buddhist traditions (An¯
alayo 2003). Buddhist
scholarship has thus informed a great deal of the psychological research on mindfulness and
mindfulness interventions, but mindfulness is by no means exclusive to Buddhism or Buddhist
contemplative practices. First, most of the mindfulness interventions now tested in the scientific
literature are secular in nature. Second, being mindfully aware is not synonymous with being a
Buddhist; it is instead a basic feature of being human.1 As Bhante Gunaratana (2011, p. 146) states
in his classic mindfulness training text, “Mindfulness is not limited by any condition. It exists to
some extent in every moment, in every circumstance that arises.” Similarly, Jon Kabat-Zinn (2003,
1It is possible that many cultural practices in human history have been developed to help foster mindful awareness (e.g.,
centering prayer, journaling, surfing, psychotherapy). Indeed, some work suggests that training in tango dancing increases
self-reported mindfulness (Pinniger et al. 2012). Many open questions remain about the role of various cultural practices in
fostering mindfulness or the ways in which these factors might interact with formal mindfulness training interventions. In
one intriguing case in point, cultural anthropologists have described a more mindful culture: The Amazonian Piraha tribe’s
cultural practices and language are geared toward helping individuals to be more grounded in present moment awareness,
and members report high degrees of daily wellbeing (Everett 2005).
www.annualreviews.org • Mindfulness Interventions
18.3
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2017.68. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Cornell University - Weill Medical College on 09/30/16. For personal use only.
 PS68CH18-Creswell
ARI
20 September 2016
10:55
TAU: treatment as
usual
Wait-list control:
participants who are
randomized to serve as
a no-treatment
comparison group and
placed on a wait list to
receive a mindfulness
intervention
Mindfulness-based
stress reduction
(MBSR): an 8-week
mindfulness
meditation training
program that includes
weekly classes, daily
audio-guided home
practice, and a
day-long retreat
pp. 145–46) has written, “We are all mindful to one degree or another, moment by moment.”
Thus, we all have the capacity to openly pay attention to our moment-to-moment experience, and
this capacity is something that can be developed and deepened by mindfulness interventions.
Although everyone is capable of mindfulness, formal mindfulness intervention exercises can
feel quite effortful and challenging at first. This is understandable given that our default methods of
attending to experience are commonly letting our minds wander, self-criticism, ruminating about
the past, or worrying about the future. Tellingly, one study showed that participants preferred
receiving mild electric shocks over being left alone with their thoughts (Wilson et al. 2014).
Formal mindfulness intervention exercises require one to make deliberate efforts to turn toward
and sustain attention on moment-to-moment experience. To borrow an expression from cognitive
science, this effort of attending to present moment experience may be a desirable difficulty (Bjork
& Bjork 2011) such that the effort put forth during mindfulness training exercises can foster
insight, learning, and self-regulation skills.
Types of Mindfulness Interventions
Much of the early work on mindfulness interventions used nonrandomized pretest posttest designs;
however, beginning in the early 2000s, there was a dramatic increase in RCTs that compare
mindfulness interventions to treatment as usual (TAU), wait-list control, or active comparison
interventions (see Figure 1). This section describes some of the most common types of mindfulness
and control interventions used in the scientific literature.
Mindfulness-based stress reduction and related group-based mindfulness interventions.
The 8-week mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR) program, developed by Jon Kabat-Zinn
at the University of Massachusetts Medical School, is perhaps the most well-known mindfulness
1 
6 
7 
11
40
109
216
0
50
100
150
200
250
1995–1997
1998–2000 
2001–2003 
2004–2006 
2007–2009 
2010–2012 
2013–2015 
Number of publications
Publication year 
Figure 1
A noncumulative plot of the number of mindfulness randomized controlled trials (RCTs) published during
3-year periods between 1995 and 2015. The data were gathered from a PubMed abstract/title search (in
February 2016) of human clinical trial studies using the terms mindfulness and randomized controlled trial.
18.4
Creswell
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2017.68. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Cornell University - Weill Medical College on 09/30/16. For personal use only.
 PS68CH18-Creswell
ARI
20 September 2016
10:55
Mindfulness-based
cognitive therapy
(MBCT): an 8-week
mindfulness-based
program that
combines elements of
MBSR and CBT
MBRP:
mindfulness-based
relapse prevention
intervention in the scientific literature (Kabat-Zinn 1982). MBSR consists of weekly 2–2.5-h
group-based classes with a trained teacher, daily audio-guided home practice (approximately
45 min/day), and a day-long mindfulness retreat (occurring during week six of the 8-week pro-
gram) (Kabat-Zinn 1990). Much of the MBSR program focuses on learning how to mindfully
attend to body sensations through the use of body scans, gentle stretching, and yoga mindfulness
exercises, along with discussions and practices geared toward applying mindful awareness to daily
life experiences, including dealing with stress. The MBSR program was initially used to treat
chronic pain patients (Kabat-Zinn 1982) but has been applied to many other populations of adult
patients and community members (Ludwig & Kabat-Zinn 2008).
Over the past three decades, MBSR has stimulated the development of many mindfulness
interventions that share the same basic program structure but are modified to treat specific
populations or outcomes. These interventions have focused on treating depression [mindfulness-
based cognitive therapy (MBCT), e.g., Teasdale et al. 2000] and drug addiction [mindfulness-
based relapse prevention (MBRP), e.g., Bowen et al. 2014], fostering healthy eating (Mason
et al. 2015), and improving relationship functioning [mindfulness-based relationship enhance-
ment (MBRE), Carson et al. 2004], among other applications (for a review, see Dimidjian & Segal
2015).
Mindfulness intervention retreats and brief interventions. The scientific community has of-
ten assumed MBSR and other 8–12-week mindfulness-based programs are the exclusive way to
deliver mindfulness training, but there are other evidence-based forms of mindfulness intervention
available to researchers and practitioners. Mindfulness meditation residential retreat programs
ranging from 3 days to 3 months are a powerful way to deliver intensive and well-controlled
doses of mindfulness intervention (Creswell et al. 2016, Rosenberg et al. 2015). Brief mindfulness
meditation interventions have also been developed, ranging from 2–3-week programs (Lim et al.
2015, Mrazek et al. 2013) to lab-based 3–4-day mindfulness interventions (Creswell et al. 2014,
Zeidan et al. 2011). Finally, brief experimental mindful attention inductions have been devel-
oped and tested in the literature (e.g., Broderick 2005, Papies et al. 2015, Schofield et al. 2015,
Westbrook et al. 2013). These induction approaches offer a great deal of experimental control but
have relatively small and transient effects.
Internet and smartphone application mindfulness interventions. There has been an explo-
sion of internet- and smartphone-based mindfulness programs hitting the market over the past
five years. One example of this trend, the Headspace mindfulness smartphone app, has over two
million active users worldwide. Given that so many people are using these programs (which lack,
in most cases, access to a well-trained mindfulness teacher), there are important untested ques-
tions about the safety and efficacy of these programs. However, these mindfulness intervention
programs have a tremendous advantage in that they are inexpensive, portable, and can be more
easily implemented in harder-to-reach populations that can access the Internet. Although there
has been no research on the efficacy of these programs compared to in-person group-based ap-
proaches (e.g., MBSR), initial studies suggest that these internet and smartphone mindfulness
interventions may have benefits (e.g., Boettcher et al. 2014, Lim et al. 2015).
Mindfulness-related interventions. The objective of this article is to review mindfulness-based
interventions in which the primary goal is to foster mindfulness (e.g., MBSR, MBCT, brief mind-
fulness meditation training interventions). However, there are also many mindfulness-related
interventions which incorporate mindfulness training exercises as one component of a broader
treatment program (e.g., acceptance and commitment therapy, dialectical behavior therapy,
www.annualreviews.org • Mindfulness Interventions
18.5
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2017.68. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Cornell University - Weill Medical College on 09/30/16. For personal use only.
 PS68CH18-Creswell
ARI
20 September 2016
10:55
Health enhancement
program (HEP):
an 8-week health
education and
relaxation program
developed to be a
well-matched
comparison program
to MBSR
cognitive behavioral stress management, integrative body–mind training).Initial efficacy evidence
suggests that incorporating mindfulness training exercises in these interventions can be beneficial
to patients. Space considerations preclude a careful review of these mindfulness-related interven-
tions in this article, but published reviews are available for interested readers (e.g., Hayes et al.
2011).
Control interventions. It is important to consider the comparison groups used in RCT stud-
ies of mindfulness interventions (Davidson & Kaszniak 2015), and most published mindfulness
intervention RCTs use TAU or wait-list controlled comparison groups. These studies provide a
valuable initial evaluation of whether mindfulness interventions have an impact on outcomes above
and beyond standard care or no treatment. Researchers have made impressive efforts to develop
active treatment comparison programs that control for nonmindfulness-specific treatment factors
(e.g., group support, home practice exercises, relaxation, placebo expectancies). These programs
provide opportunities to evaluate whether mindfulness interventions have unique treatment ef-
fects above and beyond nonmindfulness-specific factors and whether mindfulness interventions
can outperform gold-standard active pharmacological or behavioral treatments.
There are many different active treatment programs used as comparisons in the RCT lit-
erature on mindfulness interventions. The health enhancement program (HEP) is an 8-week
health education and relaxation program that was developed to match MBSR on program
components, including group support and education, home practice, and a day-long retreat
(MacCoon et al. 2012). Other active group-based interventions ranging from relaxation inter-
ventions (Creswell et al. 2016) to targeted health education programs (Morone et al. 2016) have
been effectively implemented. The literature on brief mindfulness interventions (consisting of
interventions that last 2 weeks or fewer) also offers a number of well-matched active control inter-
ventions ranging from attention control training programs (e.g., listening to the same guided
mindfulness exercise with the instruction to count the number of verbs) (Koole et al. 2009,
Schofield et al. 2015) to placebo conditioning (Zeidan et al. 2015) and health education inter-
ventions (Mrazek et al. 2013). One intriguing new approach to brief mindfulness interventions
offers sham mindfulness meditation training in which participants are periodically instructed “to
take a deep breath as we sit here in mindfulness meditation” without any explicit instructions on
how to foster mindful awareness (Zeidan et al. 2015, p. 15,309). This sham mindfulness procedure
has been effective in controlling for positive treatment expectancies in studies but does not pro-
vide the same pain-relief benefits as actual mindfulness meditation training (Zeidan et al. 2010b,
2015).
EFFECTS OF MINDFULNESS INTERVENTIONS
Mindfulness interventions have been shown to impact a broad range of outcomes in RCTs. De-
spite this proliferation of work, most mindfulness intervention RCTs have used small samples
and lack high-quality pretreatment, posttreatment, and follow-up measures. These methodolog-
ical limitations make it difficult to draw strong inferences about the validity and reliability of
mindfulness intervention effects on many outcomes. However, some areas show quite promis-
ing mindfulness intervention RCT effects; these effects are selectively reviewed in the following
sections with a focus on recent developments in this active area of scientific inquiry. This review
focuses on mindfulness-based intervention RCTs and not on studies of other forms of medita-
tion interventions (e.g., transcendental meditation), cross-sectional studies of expert mindfulness
meditators, or correlational studies relating self-report measures of mindfulness to outcomes (for
a more general review, see Brown et al. 2007).
18.6
Creswell
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2017.68. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Cornell University - Weill Medical College on 09/30/16. For personal use only.
 PS68CH18-Creswell
ARI
20 September 2016
10:55
CBT: cognitive
behavioral therapy
Physical Health
The earliest work with the MBSR program was focused on treating chronic pain patients who
were not responding well to traditional medical treatments (Kabat-Zinn 1982), demonstrating
the longstanding scientific interest in applying mindfulness interventions to the treatment of
physical health. Much of the interest in this physical health domain has been guided by views that
mindfulness interventions can foster greater body (interoceptive) awareness, promote relaxation,
and improve stress management and coping skills, all of which can promote physical health and
reduce disease risks. We have formalized a mindfulness stress buffering account, which posits
that stress reduction and resilience pathways explain mindfulness intervention effects on a broad
range of physical health outcomes (Creswell & Lindsay 2014). This account is based on the view
that learning how to monitor experience with acceptance is an emotion regulation skill learned in
mindfulness interventions, which fosters stress resilience and coping under stress. Furthermore,
these stress-buffering effects in turn reduce the negative impacts stress has on increasing risk
for stress-related disease outcomes (E.K. Lindsay & J.D. Creswell, unpublished manuscript).
Consistent with this account, a growing number of rigorous RCT studies show that mindfulness
interventions impact stress-related physical health outcomes ranging from chronic pain to immune
system functioning to disease-specific physical health outcomes.
Chronic pain. Stress is a powerful trigger for pain symptomatology among chronic pain patients
(Schwartz et al. 1994), and early nonrandomized studies showed that MBSR was effective in re-
ducing pain symptoms and dependence on pain-relief medication among chronic pain patients
pre-post intervention (Kabat-Zinn 1982, Ludwig & Kabat-Zinn 2008). Several independent well-
controlled studies have conceptually replicated and extended this work. Morone and colleagues
(2016) showed that MBSR, relative to an active healthy aging program, was effective in reduc-
ing self-reported pain disability posttreatment in a large RCT with adults suffering from chronic
low-back pain (N = 282), although these pain-related benefits were not sustained at the 6-month
follow-up assessment. E.L. Garland and colleagues (2014) showed that, relative to an active sup-
port group therapy program, an 8-week mindfulness-oriented recovery enhancement (MORE)
program reduced pain severity and pain interference among chronic pain opioid-abusing patients
posttreatment and at a 3-month follow-up. In a daily diary study of adults with rheumatoid arthri-
tis (N = 143), Davis and colleagues (2015) showed that an 8-week mindfulness training program
was superior to a cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) program for pain and an arthritis education
program in reducing posttreatment daily-level stress, pain-related catastrophizing, disability, and
fatigue. In one of the largest mindfulness intervention RCTs to date (N = 342), MBSR reduced
functional limitations due to pain among chronic back pain participants at both 4-month and
10-month follow-ups compared to TAU (Cherkin et al. 2016). Although this large RCT study
showed that MBSR provided a clinically meaningful improvement in pain management in a greater
percentage of participants at follow-up (61%) relative to TAU (44%), there was no evidence in
this study that MBSR was superior to a matched CBT program (58%).2
Immunity. The immune system plays a central role in protecting the body from a variety of
pathogens and infectious agents. Chronic stress impairs several aspects of the immune system’s
2Given the promising evidence for pain management effects of mindfulness intervention, one interesting question is whether
these mindfulness pain reduction effects are driven by alterations in pain sensation processing or by fostering the regulation
of one’s emotional reactivity to pain (i.e., reducing pain unpleasantness). Some initial evidence suggests that mindfulness
interventions can modulate both neural sensory and emotional reactivity pain pathways (Zeidan et al. 2011).
www.annualreviews.org • Mindfulness Interventions
18.7
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2017.68. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Cornell University - Weill Medical College on 09/30/16. For personal use only.
 PS68CH18-Creswell
ARI
20 September 2016
10:55
functional response, including its capacities to mount antibody responses and to produce lym-
phocyte proliferative and natural killer cell responses (for a review, see Segerstrom & Miller
2004). Furthermore, stress has been linked to increases in C-reactive protein and interleukin 6,
which are circulating markers of inflammation linked with morbidity and accelerated mortality.
Mindfulness interventions may potentially modulate these stress-related immune outcomes, and
initial RCTs demonstrate promising effects on some immune markers (for a review, see Black &
Slavich 2016). For example, several initial well-controlled studies show that mindfulness interven-
tions may reduce markers of proinflammation, including circulating blood markers of C-reactive
protein (Malarkey et al. 2013), interleukin 6 (Creswell et al. 2016), and the stress-induced inflam-
matory skin flare response (Rosenkranz et al. 2013) (although MBSR failed to affect stimulated
interleukin 6 responses in rheumatoid arthritis patients; see Zautra et al. 2008). In contrast to
inflammatory effects, the evidence of mindfulness intervention’s effects on antibody levels or the
antibody response to vaccination is mixed (Hayney et al. 2014, Moynihan et al. 2013).
Stress also plays an important role in the acceleration of HIV infection and the development
of AIDS, in part by attacking CD4+ T lymphocytes. Three RCTs show that mindfulness inter-
ventions can buffer declines in or increase CD4+ T lymphocyte counts in stressed HIV-positive
adults at posttreatment and at follow-up time points up to 9 months later (Creswell et al. 2009,
Gonzalez-Garcia et al. 2013, SeyedAlinaghi et al. 2012).
Clinical symptoms and disease-specific outcomes. Some of the most encouraging RCT re-
search on the relationship between mindfulness intervention and physical health focuses on
whether mindfulness interventions affect clinically relevant measures of health and disease. An
initial large RCT (N = 154) showed that MBSR may reduce the number of self-reported illness
days and the duration of illness over the course of a cold and flu season relative to a no-treatment
group (Barrett et al. 2012). However, in this trial, MBSR showed no relative advantage in illness-
related outcomes compared to a moderate aerobic exercise program, although there was some
evidence that MBSR reduced the total number of acute respiratory infection–related work days
missed (16 days) compared to the aerobic exercise (32 days) and no-treatment control (67 days)
groups. Some initial large well-controlled RCT studies have also showed that mindfulness inter-
ventions (relative to controls) reduce physical symptoms and improve quality of life in fibromyalgia
patients (Schmidt et al. 2011), in women with irritable-bowel syndrome (IBS) (Gaylord et al. 2011),
and among distressed breast cancer survivors (Carlson et al. 2013). Finally, there is some initial evi-
dence that brief audio-guided mindfulness training practices during light-booth phototherapy can
accelerate skin clearing in psoriasis patients; one trial showed a fourfold-faster clearing rate in the
mindfulness intervention group relative to TAU (Kabat-Zinn et al. 1998). Some researchers have
questioned whether the group training context is necessary for mindfulness intervention benefits,
and this psoriasis study joins others that have trained participants individually (with audio-guided
mindfulness practices only) and showed benefits independent of a group context (see also Creswell
et al. 2014, Zeidan et al. 2011).
Health behaviors. Stress is known to disrupt health behaviors such as sleep, exercise, smoking,
and diet, and these stress-related disruptions in health behaviors negatively impact physical health
and disease outcomes. Despite these established links, little rigorous empirical work has tested
whether mindfulness interventions impact health behaviors. There is some initial RCT evidence
that mindfulness interventions can reduce smoking among heavy smokers (Brewer et al. 2011),
alter dietary behaviors such as eating sweets (Arch et al. 2016, Mason et al. 2015), and improve
self-reported and polysomnographic markers of sleep (although the sleep outcomes evidence is
mixed; see Black et al. 2015; Britton et al. 2010, 2012; S.N. Garland et al. 2014).
18.8
Creswell
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2017.68. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Cornell University - Weill Medical College on 09/30/16. For personal use only.
 PS68CH18-Creswell
ARI
20 September 2016
10:55
Interim summary of physical health effects. Several large RCTs provide compelling evidence
that mindfulness interventions improve chronic pain management relative to TAU, with some
initial evidence that mindfulness interventions may be superior to some active treatments (support
groups, health education programs) but not to other treatments (CBT). There is also promising
initial evidence that mindfulness interventions may reduce immune markers of proinflammation
among stressed individuals and buffer declines in CD4+ T lymphocytes in HIV-infected adults,
although large well-controlled trials are needed to evaluate the links between mindfulness and
immunity. Mindfulness interventions may reduce symptoms and improve quality of life across a
broad range of stress-related conditions (e.g., fibromyalgia, IBS, breast cancer, psoriasis); however,
relatively little is currently known about how mindfulness interventions affect health behaviors.
Mental Health
There is a great deal of interest among clinical psychologists in using mindfulness interventions
to treat a broad range of mental health outcomes. Indeed, some clinical scientists have posited
that mindfulness and acceptance interventions are a third-wave treatment approach, following
behavioral and cognitive-behavioral treatment approaches (Hayes et al. 2004). This interest among
clinicians has in part been built on views that mindfulness interventions can help individuals notice
and regulate the maladaptive thoughts, emotional responses, and automatic behaviors that underlie
mental health problems.
Depression relapse. Some of the strongest evidence to date in the mindfulness intervention lit-
erature shows that the MBCT program is effective in reducing depression relapse during follow-up
periods in at-risk populations. Several RCTs demonstrate that 8-week MBCT is a cost-effective
treatment that significantly reduces the risk of depression relapse compared to TAU among in-
dividuals who have had three or more previous major depressive episodes in their lifetimes (e.g.,
Ma & Teasdale 2004, Teasdale et al. 2000). This impressive body of work has made use of careful
clinician condition-blinded assessment of depression during long-term follow-up periods ranging
from 12 months to 2 years, with studies demonstrating that MBCT reduces depression relapse
by approximately 50% relative to TAU during these periods. Furthermore, these MBCT benefits
seem to be most pronounced among those at the greatest risk for relapse, such as individuals with
four or more previous major depressive episodes (Ma & Teasdale 2004) or individuals who suffered
from maltreatment during childhood (Ma & Teasdale 2004, Williams et al. 2014). Many at-risk
individuals prefer not to use antidepressant medications (e.g., during pregnancy or to avoid side
effect symptoms), and two RCTs indicate that MBCT (with a 4-week taper-off of antidepressant
medications during the 8-week program) has depression relapse prevention benefits equivalent
with maintenance antidepressant medication treatments during 18–24-month follow-up periods
(Kuyken et al. 2015, Segal et al. 2010); however, a recent trial suggests that the combination of
MBCT with maintenance antidepressant medication may be optimal (Huijbers et al. 2016).
Depression and anxiety symptoms. The previous section highlights the benefits of offering
mindfulness interventions to individuals who are not currently depressed but are at risk for de-
pression relapse; might mindfulness interventions also help individuals with mood disorders who
are currently experiencing high levels of anxiety or depressive symptoms? Mindfulness inter-
ventions aim to foster an open and accepting awareness of one’s thoughts and feelings, includ-
ing an observant attitude toward the thought patterns and body experiences that occur when
one feels acutely anxious or depressed. This process of turning attention and awareness toward
these experiences has been posited to help reduce the experiential avoidance, self-judgment, and
www.annualreviews.org • Mindfulness Interventions
18.9
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2017.68. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Cornell University - Weill Medical College on 09/30/16. For personal use only.
 PS68CH18-Creswell
ARI
20 September 2016
10:55
PTSD: posttraumatic
stress disorder
rumination that are often triggered by acute depression and anxiety (Roemer & Orsillo 2009).
Some initial well-controlled studies indicate that MBCT may be effective in reducing depressive
symptoms among acutely depressed individuals (e.g., Strauss et al. 2014). In one of the best-
controlled trials to date, Eisendrath and colleagues (2016) tested a modified MBCT program for
treatment-resistant depression and showed that MBCT reduced depressive symptoms posttreat-
ment compared to a well-matched HEP comparison program in a sample of treatment-resistant
depressed patients. These mindfulness intervention effects were specific to reducing depressive
symptoms; there were no differences between the MBCT and HEP groups in the depression
remission rates posttreatment.
Meta-analyses indicate that mindfulness interventions significantly reduce anxiety among
anxiety-disordered populations pre-post intervention but are mixed about whether this effect
is greater than that of control programs (Strauss et al. 2014, Vøllestad et al. 2012). Furthermore,
current evidence that mindfulness interventions are any better for anxiety symptom reduction
than CBT interventions (Goldin et al. 2016) is inconsistent, although some work suggests that
MBSR may be more effective for participants with moderate-to-severe dysphoria whereas CBT
may be more effective for participants with mild dysphoria in anxiety disorder groups (Arch &
Ayers 2013). Trials conducted since these meta-analyses show that mindfulness training may be
effective in reducing anxiety symptoms compared to some active treatments. For example, a recent
internet-based mindfulness intervention was effective in reducing anxiety posttreatment compared
to a supervised online discussion group program (Boettcher et al. 2014). Hoge and colleagues
(2013) also showed that MBSR reduced some measures of anxiety symptoms (including anxiety
in response to a laboratory social stress challenge task) compared to an active stress-management
education program group in a sample of participants with generalized anxiety disorder (Hoge
et al. 2013). Mood disorders are prevalent among individuals with posttraumatic stress disorder
(PTSD), and initial well-controlled evidence in Vietnam War veterans indicates that MBSR re-
duces self-reported and clinician-rated PTSD symptomatology 2 months posttreatment (Polusny
et al. 2015).
Addiction and addictive disorders. All humans have experienced cravings at one time or another
and have felt the strong pull to act on them with consummatory behaviors such as eating, sex, or
using addictive substances. These behaviors can sometimes spiral out of control into addictions,
such as addictions to alcohol, gambling, smoking, or the Internet, when engaging in them interferes
with daily life functioning or causes harm to the self or others. Mindfulness interventions foster
an ability to observe the rise and fall of cravings and the behaviors they encourage and offer the
opportunity to meet these experiences with more skillful action. Thus, mindfulness interventions
have tremendous potential to address craving, addiction, and addictive disorders (Bowen et al.
2015). Alan Marlatt and colleagues developed an 8-week mindfulness-based relapse prevention
(MBRP) program, which integrates mindfulness meditation practices from MBSR with CBT
techniques for drug relapse prevention, including practices focused on mindfully attending to
cravings (e.g., urge surfing) (Bowen et al. 2009).
Several well-controlled studies suggest that mindfulness interventions impact craving, drug use,
and drug relapse rates in at-risk individuals. Mindfully attending to drug cues reduces neural and
self-reported craving among smokers (Westbrook et al. 2013), and some initial evidence indicates
that mindfulness interventions reduce cravings more than CBT treatment (Garland et al. 2016).
Moreover, mindfulness interventions can disrupt the increases in suffering and substance abuse
caused by cravings (Witkiewitz & Bowen 2010). Initial RCTs show that mindfulness interventions,
compared to TAU or other relapse-prevention programs, reduce substance abuse in at-risk pop-
ulations. For example, MBRP has been shown to reduce drug use days and reduce the number of
18.10
Creswell
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2017.68. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Cornell University - Weill Medical College on 09/30/16. For personal use only.
 PS68CH18-Creswell
ARI
20 September 2016
10:55
legal problems compared to a standard relapse prevention program at a 15-week follow-up among
substance-abusing female criminal offenders (Witkiewitz et al. 2014). A 4-week mindfulness train-
ing program, compared to a standard 4-week smoking cessation treatment, reduced cigarette use
among heavy smokers posttreatment and at 3-month follow-up (Brewer et al. 2011). Finally, in
one of the largest trials to date (N = 286), Bowen and colleagues (2014) randomly assigned
substance-abusing individuals at a treatment facility to either MBRP, a cognitive-behavioral re-
lapse prevention program, or standard treatment (a 12-step program) and monitored their reported
substance abuse during a 12-month follow-up period. Compared to the standard 12-step treat-
ment group, both the MBRP and cognitive-behavioral relapse prevention groups demonstrated
a 54% reduction in drug relapse and a 59% reduction in relapse to heavy drinking. Interestingly,
the cognitive-behavioral relapse prevention program had early advantages in delaying the time to
the first drug relapse relative to the MBRP program, but the MBRP program appeared to have
long-term advantages at the 12-month follow-up time point in reducing the number of drug use
days (Bowen et al. 2014).
Interim summary of mental health effects. Strong RCT evidence indicates that mindfulness
interventions reduce depression relapse rates in at-risk individuals and improve the treatment
of drug addiction. Specifically, multiple large RCTs indicate that MBCT reliably reduces the
risk of depression relapse during follow-up periods among at-risk individuals and that MBRP
(relative to standard relapse prevention programs) improves substance abuse outcomes. There are
also several well-controlled studies showing that mindfulness interventions can reduce anxiety,
depression, and PTSD symptomatology. In the mindfulness interventions literature, the research
on mental health outcomes has made the most progress in comparing mindfulness interventions
to other gold-standard clinical treatments, and there are some initial suggestions of contexts in
which mindfulness interventions offer similar or additional long-term benefits compared to gold-
standard treatments (e.g., antidepressant medication, relapse prevention programs, CBT).
Cognitive and Affective Outcomes
Formal mindfulness training practices focus on training multiple features of attention, such as
noticing when the mind wanders, repeatedly reorienting attention back to a focus area (e.g.,
sensations of breathing), developing sustained attention, and learning how to foster an open
accepting form of attention so as not to get caught up in thoughts, emotions, or body sensations.
One would expect these attention skills to improve attention-related cognitive outcomes, and
RCT studies in predominantly healthy young adult samples show that mindfulness interventions
improve behavioral measures of sustained attention ( Jensen et al. 2012, Jha et al. 2015, Mrazek
et al. 2012, Semple 2010, Zeidan et al. 2010a), working memory performance ( Jensen et al. 2012,
Mrazek et al. 2013, Zeidan et al. 2010a), and problem-solving performance (Mrazek et al. 2013,
Ostafin & Kassman 2012). It could be argued that mindfulness interventions might benefit all
types of attention-related outcomes (e.g., sustained attention, task switching, working memory).
However, in one of the most well-controlled trials to date, Jensen and colleagues (2012) showed
that MBSR demonstrated superior benefits on sustained attention and working memory at post-
treatment compared to a relaxation group or an incentivized (motivated) control group but no
relative advantage on some measures of set shifting or attentional vigilance and effort ( Jensen et al.
2012).
Mindfulness interventions not only train attention but also develop the skill of maintaining an
open and accepting attitude toward experience, which may be important for emotion regulation
and affective outcomes (Slutsky et al. 2016). As described in the section Mental Health, there
www.annualreviews.org • Mindfulness Interventions
18.11
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2017.68. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Cornell University - Weill Medical College on 09/30/16. For personal use only.
 PS68CH18-Creswell
ARI
20 September 2016
10:55
is mounting evidence that mindfulness interventions reduce negative affect–related outcomes,
such as depression and anxiety symptoms or risk of depression relapse in at-risk individuals.
There is also some evidence that mindfulness interventions may reduce self-reported measures of
negative affect and improve measures of positive affect in healthy populations. For example, Jain
and colleagues (2007) showed that a 4-week MBSR program reduced rumination and increased
positive states of mind compared to a 4-week somatic relaxation program during a final exam period
in students. However, both the mindfulness and relaxation programs had comparable benefits
in reducing self-reported psychological distress at postintervention relative to a no-treatment
control group. The RCT studies reviewed in this article provide some examples of the effects of
mindfulness intervention on cognitive and affective outcomes; more detailed narrative and meta-
analytic reviews of this literature has been published elsewhere (e.g., Arch & Landy 2015, Eberth
& Sedlmeier 2012, van Vugt 2015).
Interim summary of cognitive and affective outcomes. Among healthy young adult samples,
mounting RCT evidence indicates that mindfulness interventions can improve attention-related
outcomes (e.g., sustained attention, working memory) and affective outcomes (e.g., reducing
rumination).
Interpersonal Outcomes
Research on how mindfulness interventions impact social and relational outcomes is limited, which
is surprising given the extensive anecdotal reports that mindfulness training increases feelings of
compassion toward others and can enhance one’s close relationships. Indeed, some scholars have
argued that kindness and compassion toward others might be a critical marker for evaluating
whether mindfulness interventions work (e.g., Grossman 2011), and several lines of research
suggest that studies on this topic would be fruitful. First, mindfulness interventions have been
shown to improve basic processes associated with better interpersonal functioning outcomes, such
as buffering stress and increasing perspective taking (for a theoretical and empirical review, see
Karremans et al. 2016). Second, initial RCTs using wait-list control designs suggest that 8-week
mindfulness interventions impact social functioning outcomes by, for example, reducing loneliness
among older adults (Creswell et al. 2012) and improving relationship satisfaction in adult couples
(Carson et al. 2004). In the latter case, Carson and colleagues (2004) conducted one of the first
daily diary studies to show that 8-week mindfulness training improved daily reports of relationship
satisfaction. Moreover, among mindfulness intervention participants, day-level analyses showed
that home mindfulness meditation practice on the first day was significantly associated with higher
levels of lagged second- and third-day relationship satisfaction, indicating potentially important
daily carry-over benefits of home mindfulness meditation practice.
Mindfulness meditation teachers have long emphasized that mindful awareness can foster in-
sights into the nature of one’s suffering and that this understanding naturally gives rise to feelings
of compassion toward the self and others (Gunaratana 2011), but little scientific work has at-
tempted to link mindfulness interventions with compassion-related outcomes. Two small RCT
studies show that mindfulness meditation training increases compassionate prosocial behaviors
such that participants who either completed a 2-week Headspace mindfulness smartphone app
intervention or an 8-week group-based mindfulness intervention were more likely to give up their
chair to a female confederate on crutches, which was operationalized as a lab-based behavioral
measure of compassion (Condon et al. 2013, Lim et al. 2015). This work provides an initial in-
dication that mindfulness interventions increase prosocial outcomes; more research is needed to
evaluate whether feelings of compassion mediate these behavioral effects.
18.12
Creswell
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2017.68. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Cornell University - Weill Medical College on 09/30/16. For personal use only.
 PS68CH18-Creswell
ARI
20 September 2016
10:55
Decentering:
a mechanism of change
involving observing
internal experiences
from a more objective
third-person
perspective
It is important to note that mindfulness interventions can be distinguished from compassion
(or loving-kindness) meditation programs, which have been receiving more scientific interest
in recent years (e.g., Fredrickson et al. 2008). Little is known about the comparative effects
of mindfulness versus compassion interventions, but in the above study, Condon et al. (2013)
showed that the 8-week mindfulness intervention produced equivalent elevated levels of prosocial
behavior at postintervention compared to a well-matched 8-week compassion meditation inter-
vention. One intriguing possibility is that these intervention benefits occurred via dissociable
pathways. Loving-kindness meditation practices focus on the explicit generation of positive feel-
ings toward the self and others whereas mindfulness meditation practices aim to foster an open
awareness of experience (as opposed to fostering any specific positive affective states). Thus, one
hypothesis is that compassion meditation interventions affect outcomes via positive affect mecha-
nisms, whereas mindfulness interventions affect outcomes through metacognitive awareness and
decentering mechanisms (see section Mechanisms of Mindfulness Interventions, below) (Feldman
et al. 2010).
Interim summary of interpersonal outcomes. There is currently little mindfulness interven-
tion RCT research on interpersonal outcomes, but initial studies suggest that mindfulness inter-
ventions may improve relational outcomes (e.g., relationship satisfaction and prosocial behaviors).
EMBEDDING MINDFULNESS INTERVENTIONS IN INSTITUTIONS
AND ACROSS THE LIFE SPAN
First-generation mindfulness intervention studies primarily focused on treating adult patients in
clinic settings. Over the past ten years, there has been a shift toward moving mindfulness interven-
tion RCTs out of the clinic and into institutional settings (e.g., the workplace, schools, prisons, the
military, and sport settings) and populations spanning the entire life span (e.g., pregnant women,
children, and older adults). High-quality RCT studies are needed to evaluate the safety, efficacy,
and effectiveness of mindfulness interventions in these particular contexts. Some initial studies
suggest that embedding mindfulness interventions into the workplace (either with group-based
or internet-based training programs) may reduce stress and boost job satisfaction among workers
(for a review, see Good et al. 2016). Likewise, mindfulness training programs may be effective
in buffering the negative effects of stress in soldiers during high-stress periods ( Jha et al. 2010,
Johnson et al. 2014).
Initial studies of mindfulness interventions across the life span are also promising. Some pi-
lot RCT evidence shows that mindfulness interventions reduce pregnancy anxiety and depressive
symptoms during and following pregnancy (Dimidjian et al. 2016, Guardino et al. 2014). A current
trend in research is the development of adapted mindfulness interventions for children, and some
initial evidence indicates that classroom mindfulness interventions reduce stress, reduce aggres-
sive behavior, and improve cognitive performance (Flook et al. 2015, Schonert-Reichl et al. 2015,
Zenner et al. 2013). In one of the largest RCTs to date (N = 300), low-income and predomi-
nantly African American urban middle school children were randomly assigned to receive either
a classroom-adapted MBSR program or a health education program. At posttreatment, MBSR
program participants had greater self-reported improvements in mood, coping, and rumination
relative to health education program participants (Sibinga et al. 2016). Finally, in relation to late
life, wait-list controlled RCTs also suggest that mindfulness interventions have the potential to
improve markers of healthy aging among older adults (e.g., executive function, inflammation)
(Creswell et al. 2012, Moynihan et al. 2013).
www.annualreviews.org • Mindfulness Interventions
18.13
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2017.68. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Cornell University - Weill Medical College on 09/30/16. For personal use only.
 PS68CH18-Creswell
ARI
20 September 2016
10:55
MECHANISMS OF MINDFULNESS INTERVENTIONS
With high-quality mindfulness intervention RCTs demonstrating promising initial effects on
outcomes, there has been growing interest in the mechanisms driving these effects. Mindful-
ness interventions certainly change a number of processes, including both mindfulness-specific
(e.g., acceptance and emotion regulation mechanisms) and nonmindfulness-specific (e.g., positive
treatment expectancies) processes (e.g., Creswell et al. 2014). But which mechanistic processes are
critical for helping explain the effects of mindfulness intervention on outcomes? In the following
sections, I consider some of the psychological and neurobiological mechanisms of mindfulness
interventions that have been studied (for some recent reviews, see Brown et al. 2015, Creswell &
Lindsay 2014, H¨
olzel et al. 2011b, Tang et al. 2015).
Psychological Mechanisms
Although a great deal of research has focused on self-reported mindfulness (as measured by ques-
tionnaires) as a primary psychological mechanism of change, the evidence is mixed. A recent
meta-analysis indicates a moderate positive effect size in mindfulness interventions increasing self-
reported mindfulness ( g = 0.53), and initial evidence in at least 10 studies indicates that increases
in self-reported mindfulness statistically mediate improvements in self-reported outcomes, such as
reductions in perceived stress or anxiety symptoms (see Visted et al. 2014, table 2). In one example,
MBSR was shown to increase self-reported mindfulness compared to an active present-centered
group therapy program (without a mindfulness component); these improvements in self-reported
mindfulness were associated with decreases in PTSD symptomatology among veterans (Polusny
et al. 2015). However, these promising effects are offset by the fact that approximately 50% of
mindfulness intervention studies fail to show a significant increase in self-reported mindfulness
pre-post intervention (i.e., 37 out of 72 trials in a recent meta-analysis failed to show an increase)
(Visted et al. 2014). Furthermore, there is currently limited evidence of mindfulness interventions
increasing self-reported mindfulness more than active comparison treatments (e.g., relaxation in-
terventions). Some have argued that there are problems inherent with self-reporting mindfulness
that undermine the validity of these measures (e.g., self-reporting is subject to socially desirable
responding and retrospective reporting biases, it is difficult to know how attentive and aware one
is on a daily basis, the meaning of self-reported mindfulness can change with more formal mind-
fulness training experiences) (Grossman 2011). Given these concerns, investigators have recently
begun to develop and test task-based measures of mindfulness (e.g., Levinson et al. 2013) and
second-person mindfulness teacher assessments of mindfulness. Advances in the development of
mindfulness measures will likely help clarify the mechanistic role of self-report and behavioral
measures of mindfulness in the coming years (for a commentary, see Davidson & Kaszniak 2015).
Mindfulness interventions foster an ability to more objectively observe one’s moment-to-
moment experience, and this decentered mindset (also described as metacognitive awareness or
nonattachment) may be an important psychological mechanism of change. Decentering involves
observing internal experiences from a more objective third-person stance (Bernstein et al. 2015),
which may help one more effectively decide how one wants to respond to thoughts, emotions, or
behaviors (Feldman et al. 2010, Golubickis et al. 2016, Papies et al. 2015). Decentering processes
hold promise as an explanation for the mindfulness intervention effects seen in some studies.
For example, an early study showed that MBCT improved metacognitive awareness in recov-
ered depressed patients (Teasdale et al. 2002); more recently, well-controlled studies showed that
self-reported increases in decentering mediated MBSR treatment effects on anxiety reduction in
generalized anxiety disorder patients (Hoge et al. 2014) and MBCT-related decreases in depressive
symptoms among individuals at risk for depression relapse (Bieling et al. 2012).
18.14
Creswell
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2017.68. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Cornell University - Weill Medical College on 09/30/16. For personal use only.
 PS68CH18-Creswell
ARI
20 September 2016
10:55
Other psychological and behavioral mechanisms of change have been proposed to explain the
effects of mindfulness intervention RCTs, although there are currently few methodologically rig-
orous mindfulness intervention studies testing these mechanisms in statistical mediation analyses
or experiments. These include psychological processes such as acceptance and emotion regulation
skills (H¨
olzel et al. 2011b, Lindsay & Creswell 2015), exposure (Baer 2003), reducing ruminative
thoughts ( Jain et al. 2007), or changing aspects of one’s self-concept (e.g., quieting the egoic self )
(Carlson 2013, Golubickis et al. 2016). Finally, formal daily home mindfulness meditation practice
has been implicitly assumed to be a behavioral mechanism of change for mindfulness intervention
effects (considered in more detail in the section Dosing: How Much Mindfulness Intervention Is
Needed for Benefits?), although few well-controlled RCT studies have rigorously evaluated this
assumption (Carmody & Baer 2009).
Neurobiological Mechanisms
The effects of mindfulness intervention on outcomes are certainly mediated by the brain, and
some initial mindfulness intervention RCT studies have employed structural and functional neu-
roimaging to evaluate neurobiological mechanisms (for a review, see Tang et al. 2015). Formal
mindfulness meditation practices (e.g., mindful awareness of breathing) have been shown to acti-
vate a distributed network of brain regions, including the insula, putamen, somatosensory cortex,
and portions of the anterior cingulate cortex and prefrontal cortex (H¨
olzel et al. 2007, Tomasino
& Fabbro 2016, Zeidan et al. 2015). Some initial evidence also indicates that mindfulness interven-
tions might structurally alter the brain, increasing gray matter density in the hippocampus (H¨
olzel
et al. 2011a), although well-controlled mindfulness intervention studies are lacking. Despite these
advances, little is known about the neural mechanisms linking mindfulness interventions with
outcomes.
Our theory of mindfulness as a buffer against stress posits that mindfulness training inter-
ventions increase the activity and functional connectivity of prefrontal cortical regions that are
important in top-down stress regulation while decreasing the activity and functional connectivity
in neural regions that are important in gating the fight-or-flight stress response (e.g., amygdala,
subgenual anterior cingulate cortex) (Creswell & Lindsay 2014). We have provided some ini-
tial supportive evidence for this neural mechanistic account with a RCT of mindfulness versus
relaxation training in stressed unemployed adults (Creswell et al. 2016, Taren et al. 2015). Specif-
ically, we showed that a mindfulness meditation retreat (relative to a well-matched relaxation re-
treat without a mindfulness component) increased resting-state functional connectivity between
the default mode network and the stress regulatory region of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
while also decreasing stress-related resting-state functional connectivity between the amygdala and
the subgenual anterior cingulate cortex. Importantly, we found some initial associations linking
these brain changes with reduced stress biomarkers (i.e., cortisol, circulating interleukin 6) at a
4-month follow-up time point (Creswell et al. 2016, Taren et al. 2015).
In addition to neural stress health mechanisms, initial mindfulness intervention studies also
link brain changes with affective outcomes. H¨
olzel and colleagues (2013) showed that MBSR
intervention–related increases in ventrolateral prefrontal cortex activity (and amygdala–prefrontal
connectivity) during an affect-labeling task were associated with reductions in anxiety symptoms
in a sample of patients with generalized anxiety disorder. Zeidan and colleagues (2011, 2015)
showed that a brief mindfulness intervention (20 min/day for 4 days) decreased both intensity
and unpleasantness ratings given to a noxious thermal pain stimulation to the calf and that the
neural mechanisms of these mindfulness-related pain-reduction effects were dissociable from the
neural mechanisms driving placebo conditioning effects on pain reduction. In combination, these
www.annualreviews.org • Mindfulness Interventions
18.15
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2017.68. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Cornell University - Weill Medical College on 09/30/16. For personal use only.
 PS68CH18-Creswell
ARI
20 September 2016
10:55
initial studies suggest that it is possible to identify the putative brain mechanisms that are linked to
mindfulness intervention effects, although all of these studies had small sample sizes and focused
only on a small subset of the outcomes discussed in the growing mindfulness intervention literature.
DOSING: HOW MUCH MINDFULNESS INTERVENTION
IS NEEDED FOR BENEFITS?
One of the most common questions posed by individuals contemplating whether they should en-
roll in a mindfulness intervention concerns the amount of mindfulness intervention necessary to
experience benefits. The current evidence base suggests that even brief mindfulness interventions
(e.g., 5–10-min guided mindfulness inductions, 3–4-session mindfulness meditation training) can
buffer affective reactivity (e.g., negative affect, craving, pain) and reduce impulsive behaviors im-
mediately following training (Broderick 2005, Papies et al. 2015, Westbrook et al. 2013, Zeidan
et al. 2011), although a recent meta-analysis suggests that these brief training effects are small in
magnitude ( g = 0.21) (M. Schumer, E.K. Lindsay, and J.D. Creswell, unpublished manuscript).
In contrast, larger doses of mindfulness interventions, such as the 8-week MBSR program, produce
moderate-to-large overall effects pre-post training (Baer 2003, Goyal et al. 2014). One illustrative
study measured anxiety symptomatology in anxiety disorder patients weekly before, during, and
after an MBSR intervention and showed relatively linear declines in anxiety symptoms over the
course of the intervention, which were maintained at follow-up (see Figure 2)—suggesting a po-
tential dose–response relationship in interventions, with greater doses of mindfulness intervention
producing larger scalable effects over the 8-week intervention. However, few published RCTs have
tested for mindfulness intervention dose–response relationships (either by experimentally manip-
ulating the intervention dose or by relating measures of class attendance and home mindfulness
practice duration with outcomes), which is an area that is in need of more research (see Carmody
& Baer 2009).
Different mindfulness intervention teachers recommend a wide range of daily doses of formal
mindfulness practice, from 10 min to 1 h or more per day. There is no one-size-fits-all recom-
mendation for how one should dose one’s mindfulness intervention training programs. Dosing
25
20
15
10
5
0
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Pretreatment
Treatment
Posttreatment
Week
Beck Anxiety Inventory rating
Figure 2
Mean Beck Anxiety Inventory ratings of patients before, during, and after treatment in a mindfulness-based
stress reduction program. Figure adapted with permission from Kabat-Zinn et al. (1992).
18.16
Creswell
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2017.68. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Cornell University - Weill Medical College on 09/30/16. For personal use only.
 PS68CH18-Creswell
ARI
20 September 2016
10:55
Dark night
experiences:
significant adverse
events that can occur
with intensive
mindfulness
meditation
interventions
of mindfulness interventions might follow the same general rules of thumb as dosing aerobic ex-
ercise interventions. Larger doses are likely to produce larger effects, the periodicity of the dose
is probably important (with regular daily home practice producing larger effects), and there is an
upper-bound dose of formal mindfulness intervention that is probably not helpful to participants
new to mindfulness practices. Finally, although dosing is important, it is more important for par-
ticipants to learn how to apply formal mindfulness training skills to stressful or appetitive daily
life experiences so that mindfulness skill development can translate into more effective coping.
RISKS OF PARTICIPATING IN MINDFULNESS INTERVENTIONS
It is not uncommon for participants in mindfulness interventions to report various unpleasant
reactions, such as agitation, anxiety, discomfort, or confusion, during formal mindfulness training
exercises (although participants also commonly report relaxation and contentment). Indeed, these
negative reactions are viewed as an important feature of the psychotherapeutic change process in
mindfulness interventions because sustained mindful attention to one’s experience is thought to
help participants explore and understand the full embodied experience of these reactions, to learn
that the experience of these reactions is temporary, and to foster insight into how one reacts to
these uncomfortable experiences. These more benign risks aside, there have also been calls to study
whether mindfulness interventions can trigger more significant adverse events (Lustyk et al. 2009,
Shapiro 1992). For example, a participant who has a life history of trauma might experience the
resurfacing of these trauma memories during mindfulness training exercises, potentially triggering
a major depressive episode. Researchers have also voiced the concern that individuals who are at
risk for psychosis (e.g., schizophrenia) or seizures (e.g., epilepsy) might put themselves at elevated
risk for exacerbation of these symptoms if they participate in formal mindfulness exercises (e.g.,
Walsh & Roche 1979). Currently, there is little empirical published research on the prevalence,
type, and severity of these more significant “dark night” experiences with mindfulness interven-
tions. Some observational research suggests that these severe adverse events can occur (albeit
infrequently) among individuals going through more intensive residential mindfulness medita-
tion retreats lasting from 2 weeks to 3 months (e.g., Shapiro 1992). The current evidence-based
mindfulness interventions (e.g., MBSR, MBCT), which are offered in smaller-spaced doses by
trained instructors, carry minimal risks for significant adverse events; furthermore, these mind-
fulness interventions provide the greatest benefits among high trauma and high stress populations
(Creswell & Lindsay 2014, Polusny et al. 2015, Williams et al. 2014).
In addition to specific risks and adverse events, it is interesting to consider the possibility that
the conscious effort at maintaining awareness on present moment experience might have cogni-
tive costs among individuals who are new to mindfulness interventions. Some studies suggest that
training in mindfulness can be initially cognitively depleting. For example, a brief mindful aware-
ness induction was shown to decrease pain tolerance to a cold pressor challenge task, depleting
self-regulatory strength (Evans et al. 2014). We also showed that a brief mindfulness meditation
training program (25 min/day for 3 consecutive days) buffered psychological perceptions of stress
in a laboratory stress challenge task but also increased cortisol reactivity (Creswell et al. 2014). One
explanation for this finding is that brief mindfulness training helped foster emotion-regulation
skills (decreasing psychological stress perceptions) but the extra effort of using a new mindful
awareness strategy during a stress task increased cortisol reactivity.
In addition to short-term depleting effects, it is also possible that the cognitive demands of
adopting this more reflective awareness of one’s present moment experience might disrupt, slow,
or bias one’s responses on cognitive tasks. Although some initial research indicates that brief
mindfulness inductions can reduce evaluative cognitive biases such as the correspondence bias
www.annualreviews.org • Mindfulness Interventions
18.17
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2017.68. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Cornell University - Weill Medical College on 09/30/16. For personal use only.
 PS68CH18-Creswell
ARI
20 September 2016
10:55
and sunk cost bias (Hafenbrack et al. 2014, Hopthrow et al. 2016), they can also increase false-
memory recall (Wilson et al. 2015). Many open questions about how mindfulness interventions
affect cognitive processing variables remain.
DISCUSSION
Our scientific understanding of mindfulness interventions has accelerated over the past two
decades, and this review provides some selective highlights of this literature. RCTs provide promis-
ing evidence that mindfulness interventions can improve mental and physical health, cognitive and
affective factors, and interpersonal outcomes. Some of the strongest and most reliable RCT ev-
idence indicates that mindfulness interventions (and particularly 8-week mindfulness programs,
such MBSR and MBCT) improve the management of chronic pain, reduce depression relapse rates
in at-risk individuals, and improve substance abuse outcomes. In these RCT studies, there is consis-
tent evidence that mindfulness interventions improve outcomes relative to TAU or no-treatment
control groups, some evidence that mindfulness interventions can improve some outcomes relative
to other active behavioral treatments (e.g., relaxation or health education programs), and limited
evidence for a relative advantage of mindfulness interventions over other gold-standard pharma-
cological or behavioral treatments (e.g., CBT).3 However, few RCT studies have been conducted
examining mindfulness intervention effects on interpersonal outcomes (Karremans et al. 2016) or
in institutional settings beyond medical or psychological clinics, such as prisons, workplaces, or
schools; these areas are ripe for high-quality RCT research.
Although this review has focused on some of the higher-quality RCT mindfulness intervention
studies, most of the mindfulness intervention literature to date has methodological limitations (e.g.,
small samples, lack of active control groups, limited use of high-quality measures, nonblinding of
outcome assessors) that currently preclude any definitive statements about the efficacy of mind-
fulness interventions on many outcomes. Two important areas are especially in need of research
attention: measuring formal (and informal) mindfulness practices during and after mindfulness
interventions and testing for treatment effects at follow-up time points. Regarding the first point,
few mindfulness studies carefully measure and report the amount of daily formal mindfulness
practices (and the amount of informal mindful awareness practices) completed during mindful-
ness interventions, even fewer studies measure whether the amount of daily practice statistically
mediates outcomes, and almost no studies have reported how much daily practice participants
continue to do in the weeks, months, and years following the completion of formal mindfulness
intervention programs (see Barkan et al. 2016). RCT studies that include follow-up time point
assessments to measure stability of treatment effects are similarly necessary. This review has high-
lighted some trials that include follow-up assessments and that provide mixed evidence about the
maintenance of effects up to two years following intervention. It is currently unclear what fac-
tors are important for determining when beneficial effects are observed at follow-up time points
after mindfulness interventions (e.g., in 2-year follow-up periods among participants at risk for
depressive relapse) or when postintervention treatment effects disappear at follow-up time points
(e.g., pain-reduction benefits disappearing at a 6-month follow-up; see Morone et al. 2016). One
implicit assumption (that has gone untested) is that sustained daily mindfulness practices drive the
maintenance of intervention effects.
3The comparison of CBT to mindfulness interventions is conceptually curious because some mindfulness interventions are
hybridized mindfulness-CBT treatments (e.g., MBCT, MBRP), and it is certainly possible that CBT approaches, which aim
to bring awareness to automatic thoughts and their effects on behavior, may increase a form of mindful awareness as a central
mechanism of change.
18.18
Creswell
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2017.68. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Cornell University - Weill Medical College on 09/30/16. For personal use only.
 PS68CH18-Creswell
ARI
20 September 2016
10:55
I began this review by recognizing the dramatic growth in our scientific understanding of mind-
fulness and the wide range, from skepticism to fanaticism, of the response among scientists. In this
article, I aim to provide a balanced review of the current mindfulness intervention RCT evidence
base, along with a consideration of when and where mindfulness interventions demonstrate ben-
efits, an identification of some possible mechanisms for these effects, and a consideration of their
potential risks. There are certainly many contexts in which public interest in the benefits of mind-
fulness interventions has resulted in some fanaticism and characterization of mindfulness training
as a panacea treatment. For example, mindfulness interventions are being integrated into schools
and the workplace in the absence of a corpus of high-quality well-controlled RCT studies. Many
investigators are using mindfulness interventions in patient populations without regard to the
active mechanisms of change for affecting specific outcomes of interest (Dimidjian & Segal 2015).
Future research on the mechanisms of mindfulness interventions and specification of how (and for
whom) mindfulness interventions work will accelerate our basic and clinical efforts in this area.
As the literature on mindfulness interventions has grown, there have also been skeptics who
question the value of mindfulness interventions and the ways they are implemented. Some dis-
cussions have considered the risks of mindfulness interventions, such as so-called “dark night”
experiences that are potentially triggered by mindfulness training (see section Risks of Partici-
pating in Mindfulness Interventions, above). Our current understanding of 8-week mindfulness
intervention trials indicates a low prevalence of these significant adverse events, with the side effect
profile of most individuals consisting of greater insight, wellbeing, and self-regulated behavior.
Skeptics have also questioned the value of secularized forms of mindfulness interventions (such as
MBSR and MBCT) that are stripped of the ethical and compassion-related teachings that are com-
mon to many Buddhist forms of mindfulness meditation training (Grossman 2011). More research
is needed to evaluate these concerns, but initial work suggests that secular forms of mindfulness
meditation training may be just as beneficial as spiritual forms (Feuille & Pargament 2015).
As we begin to develop reliable efficacy indications for mindfulness interventions in RCT
studies, it will be important to shift our focus to translating this knowledge into effective and
sustainable community mindfulness intervention programs; however, there is currently little ef-
fectiveness research in this area (Dimidjian & Segal 2015). Epidemiological work suggests that
more affluent, healthy white adults are the ones who are most likely to seek out and use mindful-
ness practices, whereas mindfulness practices are underutilized among low-income minorities with
worse health (Olano et al. 2015). From an effectiveness standpoint, this is problematic because our
RCT evidence to date suggests that these more high-stress, low-income, and health-compromised
individuals would benefit the most from mindfulness interventions (Creswell & Lindsay 2014).
Thus, we need to develop effectiveness studies that carefully consider how we can reach out in
the coming years to communities of need with evidence-based, cost-effective, and sustainable
mindfulness interventions.
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
The author is not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might
be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I want to thank Hayley Rahl, Lauren Simicich, Kasey Creswell, Fadel Zeidan, and the members of
the Health and Human Performance Lab at Carnegie Mellon University for help and feedback.
Research reported in this publication was supported by two grants from the National Center for
www.annualreviews.org • Mindfulness Interventions
18.19
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2017.68. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Cornell University - Weill Medical College on 09/30/16. For personal use only.
 PS68CH18-Creswell
ARI
20 September 2016
10:55
Complementary and Integrative Health (NCCIH) at the National Institutes of Health (NIH)
(grants R21AT008493 and R01AT008685). The content is solely the responsibility of the author
and does not necessarily represent the official views of the NIH.
LITERATURE CITED
An¯
alayo. 2003. Satipat
.t
.h¯
ana: The Direct Path to Realization. Cambridge, UK: Windhorse Publ.
Arch JJ, Ayers CR. 2013. Which treatment worked better for whom? Moderators of group cognitive behav-
ioral therapy versus adapted mindfulness based stress reduction for anxiety disorders. Behav. Res. Ther.
51(8):434–42
Arch JJ, Brown KW, Goodman RJ, Della Porta MD, Kiken LG, Tillman S. 2016. Enjoying food without
caloric cost: the impact of brief mindfulness on laboratory eating outcomes. Behav. Res. Ther. 79:23–34
Arch JJ, Landy LN. 2015. Emotional benefits of mindfulness. See Brown et al. 2015, pp. 208–24
Baer RA. 2003. Mindfulness training as a clinical intervention: a conceptual and empirical review. Clin. Psychol.
Sci. Pract. 10(2):125–43
Bargh JA, Chartrand TL. 1999. The unbearable automaticity of being. Am. Psychol. 54(7):462–79
Barkan T, Hoerger M, Gallegos AM, Turiano NA, Duberstein PR, Moynihan JA. 2016. Personality predicts
utilization of mindfulness-based stress reduction during and post-intervention in a community sample of
older adults. J. Altern. Complement. Med. 22:390–95
Barrett B, Hayney MS, Muller D, Rakel D, Ward A, et al. 2012. Meditation or exercise for preventing acute
respiratory infection: a randomized controlled trial. Ann. Fam. Med. 10(4):337–46
Bernstein A, Hadash Y, Lichtash Y, Tanay G, Shepherd K, Fresco DM. 2015. Decentering and related
constructs: a critical review and metacognitive processes model. Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 10(5):599–617
Bieling PJ, Hawley LL, Bloch RT, Corcoran KM, Levitan RD, et al. 2012. Treatment-specific changes in
decentering following mindfulness-based cognitive therapy versus antidepressant medication or placebo
for prevention of depressive relapse. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol. 80(3):365–72
Bjork EL, Bjork RA. 2011. Making things hard on yourself, but in a good way: creating desirable difficulties to
enhance learning. In Psychology and the Real World: Essays Illustrating Fundamental Contributions to Society,
ed. MA Gernsbacher, RW Pew, LM Hough, JR Pomerantz, pp. 56–64. New York: Worth
Black DS, O’Reilly GA, Olmstead R, Breen EC, Irwin MR. 2015. Mindfulness meditation and improvement in
sleep quality and daytime impairment among older adults with sleep disturbances: a randomized clinical
trial. JAMA Intern. Med. 175(4):494–501
Black DS, Slavich GM. 2016. Mindfulness meditation and the immune system: a systematic review of ran-
domized controlled trials. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1373:13–24
Bodhi B. 2011. What does mindfulness really mean? A canonical perspective. Contemp. Buddhism 12(1):19–39
Boettcher J, A
˚ str¨
om V, Pa
˚hlsson D, Schenstr¨
om O, Andersson G, Carlbring P. 2014. Internet-based mind-
fulness treatment for anxiety disorders: a randomized controlled trial. Behav. Ther. 45(2):241–53
Bowen S, Chawla N, Collins SE, Witkiewitz K, Hsu S, et al. 2009. Mindfulness-based relapse prevention for
substance use disorders: a pilot efficacy trial. Subst. Abus. 30(4):295–305
Bowen S, Vietan C, Witkiewitz K, Carroll H. 2015. A mindfulness-based approach to addiction. See Brown
et al. 2015, pp. 387–404
A large, well-controlled
trial showing that
MBRP can improve
substance abuse
outcomes.
Bowen S, Witkiewitz K, Clifasefi SL, Grow J, Chawla N, et al. 2014. Relative efficacy of mindfulness-
based relapse prevention, standard relapse prevention, and treatment as usual for substance use
disorders: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Psychiatry 71(5):547–56
Brewer JA, Mallik S, Babuscio TA, Nich C, Johnson HE, et al. 2011. Mindfulness training for smoking
cessation: results from a randomized controlled trial. Drug Alcohol Depend. 119(1):72–80
Britton WB, Haynes PL, Fridel KW, Bootzin RR. 2010. Polysomnographic and subjective profiles of sleep
continuity before and after mindfulness-based cognitive therapy in partially remitted depression. Psycho-
som. Med. 72(6):539–48
Britton WB, Haynes PL, Fridel KW, Bootzin RR. 2012. Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy improves
polysomnographic and subjective sleep profiles in antidepressant users with sleep complaints. Psychother.
Psychosom. 81(5):296–304
18.20
Creswell
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2017.68. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Cornell University - Weill Medical College on 09/30/16. For personal use only.
 PS68CH18-Creswell
ARI
20 September 2016
10:55
Broderick PC. 2005. Mindfulness and coping with dysphoric mood: contrasts with rumination and distraction.
Cogn. Ther. Res. 29(5):501–10
Brown KW, Creswell JD, Ryan RM. 2015. Handbook of Mindfulness: Theory, Research, and Practice. New York:
Guilford Publ.
Brown KW, Ryan RM. 2003. The benefits of being present: mindfulness and its role in psychological well-
being. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 84(4):822–48
A theoretical and
narrative review of
mindfulness and its
effects.
Brown KW, Ryan RM, Creswell JD. 2007. Mindfulness: theoretical foundations and evidence for its
salutary effects. Psychol. Inq. 18(4):211–37
Carlson EN. 2013. Overcoming the barriers to self-knowledge: mindfulness as a path to seeing yourself as
you really are. Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 8(2):173–86
Carlson LE, Doll R, Stephen J, Faris P, Tamagawa R, et al. 2013. Randomized controlled trial of mindfulness-
based cancer recovery versus supportive expressive group therapy for distressed survivors of breast cancer.
J. Clin. Oncol. 31(25):3119–26
Carmody J, Baer RA. 2009. How long does a mindfulness-based stress reduction program need to be? A review
of class contact hours and effect sizes for psychological distress. J. Clin. Psychol. 65(6):627–38
Carson JW, Carson KM, Gil KM, Baucom DH. 2004. Mindfulness-based relationship enhancement. Behav.
Ther. 35(3):471–94
Cherkin DC, Sherman KJ, Balderson BH, Cook AJ, Anderson ML, et al. 2016. Effect of mindfulness-based
stress reduction versus cognitive behavioral therapy or usual care on back pain and functional limitations
in adults with chronic low back pain: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA 315(12):1240–49
Condon P, Desbordes G, Miller W, DeSteno D. 2013. Meditation increases compassionate responses to
suffering. Psychol. Sci. 24(10):2125–27
Creswell JD, Irwin MR, Burklund LJ, Lieberman MD, Arevalo JMG, et al. 2012. Mindfulness-based stress
reduction training reduces loneliness and pro-inflammatory gene expression in older adults: a small
randomized controlled trial. Brain Behav. Immun. 26(7):1095–101
Creswell JD, Lindsay EK. 2014. How does mindfulness training affect health? A mindfulness stress buffering
account. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 23(6):401–7
Creswell JD, Myers HF, Cole SW, Irwin MR. 2009. Mindfulness meditation training effects on CD4+ T lym-
phocytes in HIV-1 infected adults: a small randomized controlled trial. Brain Behav. Immun. 23(2):184–88
Creswell JD, Pacilio LE, Lindsay EK, Brown KW. 2014. Brief mindfulness meditation training alters psycho-
logical and neuroendocrine responses to social evaluative stress. Psychoneuroendocrinology 44:1–12
Creswell JD, Taren AA, Lindsay EK, Greco CM, Gianaros PJ, et al. 2016. Alterations in resting-state functional
connectivity link mindfulness meditation with reduced interleukin-6: a randomized controlled trial. Biol.
Psychiatry 80:53–61
Davidson RJ, Kaszniak AW. 2015. Conceptual and methodological issues in research on mindfulness and
meditation. Am. Psychol. 70(7):581–92
Davis MC, Zautra AJ, Wolf LD, Tennen H, Yeung EW. 2015. Mindfulness and cognitive-behavioral inter-
ventions for chronic pain: differential effects on daily pain reactivity and stress reactivity. J. Consult. Clin.
Psychol. 83(1):24–35
Dimidjian S, Goodman SH, Felder JN, Gallop R, Brown AP, Beck A. 2016. Staying well during pregnancy
and the postpartum: a pilot randomized trial of mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for the prevention
of depressive relapse/recurrence. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol. 84(2):134–45
A comprehensive review
of MBSR and MBCT
treatment studies.
Dimidjian S, Segal ZV. 2015. Prospects for a clinical science of mindfulness-based intervention. Am.
Psychol. 70(7):593–620
Eberth J, Sedlmeier P. 2012. The effects of mindfulness meditation: a meta-analysis. Mindfulness 3(3):174–89
A large RCT study
showing that MBCT
reduces depressive
symptoms in
treatment-resistant
depression.
Eisendrath SJ, Gillung E, Delucchi KL, Segal ZV, Nelson JC, et al. 2016. A randomized controlled trial
of mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for treatment-resistant depression. Psychother. Psychosom.
85(2):99–110
Evans DR, Eisenlohr-Moul TA, Button DF, Baer RA, Segerstrom SC. 2014. Self-regulatory deficits associated
with unpracticed mindfulness strategies for coping with acute pain. J. Appl. Soc. Psychol. 44(1):23–30
Everett D. 2005. Cultural constraints on grammar and cognition in Pirah˜
a: another look at the design features
of human language. Curr. Anthropol. 46(4):621–46
www.annualreviews.org • Mindfulness Interventions
18.21
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2017.68. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Cornell University - Weill Medical College on 09/30/16. For personal use only.
 PS68CH18-Creswell
ARI
20 September 2016
10:55
Feldman G, Greeson J, Senville J. 2010. Differential effects of mindful breathing, progressive muscle relaxation,
and loving-kindness meditation on decentering and negative reactions to repetitive thoughts. Behav. Res.
Ther. 48(10):1002–11
Feuille M, Pargament K. 2015. Pain, mindfulness, and spirituality: a randomized controlled trial compar-
ing effects of mindfulness and relaxation on pain-related outcomes in migraineurs. J. Health Psychol.
20(8):1090–106
Flook L, Goldberg SB, Pinger L, Davidson RJ. 2015. Promoting prosocial behavior and self-regulatory skills
in preschool children through a mindfulness-based kindness curriculum. Dev. Psychol. 51(1):44–51
Fredrickson BL, Cohn MA, Coffey KA, Pek J, Finkel SM. 2008. Open hearts build lives: Positive emotions,
induced through loving-kindness meditation, build consequential personal resources. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol.
95(5):1045–62
Garland EL, Manusov EG, Froeliger B, Kelly A, Williams JM, Howard MO. 2014. Mindfulness-oriented
recovery enhancement for chronic pain and prescription opioid misuse: results from an early-stage ran-
domized controlled trial. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol. 82(3):448–59
Garland EL, Roberts-Lewis A, Tronnier CD, Graves R, Kelley K. 2016. Mindfulness-oriented recovery
enhancement versus CBT for co-occurring substance dependence, traumatic stress, and psychiatric dis-
orders: proximal outcomes from a pragmatic randomized trial. Behav. Res. Ther. 77:7–16
Garland SN, Carlson LE, Stephens AJ, Antle MC, Samuels C, Campbell TS. 2014. Mindfulness-based stress
reduction compared with cognitive behavioral therapy for the treatment of insomnia comorbid with
cancer: a randomized, partially blinded, noninferiority trial. J. Clin. Oncol. 32:1–9
Gaylord SA, Palsson OS, Garland EL, Faurot KR, Coble RS, et al. 2011. Mindfulness training reduces
the severity of irritable bowel syndrome in women: results of a randomized controlled trial. Am. J.
Gastroenterol. 106(9):1678–88
Goldin PR, Morrison A, Jazaieri H, Brozovich F, Heimberg R, Gross JJ. 2016. Group CBT versus MBSR for
social anxiety disorder: a randomized controlled trial. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol. 84(5):427–37
Golubickis M, Tan LBG, Falben JK, Macrae CN. 2016. The observing self: diminishing egocentrism through
brief mindfulness meditation. Eur. J. Soc. Psychol. 46:521–27
Gonzalez-Garcia M, Ferrer MJ, Borras X, Mu˜
noz-Moreno JA, Miranda C, et al. 2013. Effectiveness of
mindfulness-based cognitive therapy on the quality of life, emotional status, and CD4 cell count of
patients aging with HIV infection. AIDS Behav. 18(4):676–85
Good DJ, Lyddy CJ, Glomb TM, Bono JE, Brown KW, et al. 2016. Contemplating mindfulness at work: an
integrative review. J. Manag. In press. doi: 10.1177/0149206315617003
Goyal M, Singh S, Sibinga EM, Gould NF, Rowland-Seymour A, et al. 2014. Meditation programs for
psychological stress and well-being: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA Intern. Med. 174(3):357–
68
Grossman P. 2011. Defining mindfulness by how poorly I think I pay attention during everyday awareness
and other intractable problems for psychology’s (re)invention of mindfulness: comment on Brown et al.
2011. Psychol. Assess. 23(4):1034–40
Guardino CM, Dunkel Schetter C, Bower JE, Lu MC, Smalley SL. 2014. Randomised controlled pilot trial
of mindfulness training for stress reduction during pregnancy. Psychol. Health 29(3):334–49
Gunaratana BH. 2011. Mindfulness in Plain English. New York: Simon & Schuster
Hafenbrack AC, Kinias Z, Barsade SG. 2014. Debiasing the mind through meditation: mindfulness and the
sunk-cost bias. Psychol. Sci. 25(2):369–76
Hayes SC, Follette VM, Linehan M. 2004. Mindfulness and Acceptance: Expanding the Cognitive-Behavioral
Tradition. New York: Guilford Press
Hayes SC, Villatte M, Levin M, Hildebrandt M. 2011. Open, aware, and active: contextual approaches as an
emerging trend in the behavioral and cognitive therapies. Annu. Rev. Clin. Psychol. 7:141–68
Hayney MS, Coe CL, Muller D, Obasi CN, Backonja U, et al. 2014. Age and psychological influences on
immune responses to trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine in the meditation or exercise for preventing
acute respiratory infection (MEPARI) trial. Hum. Vaccines Immunother. 10(1):83–91
Hoge EA, Bui E, Goetter E, Robinaugh DJ, Ojserkis RA, et al. 2014. Change in decentering mediates im-
provement in anxiety in mindfulness-based stress reduction for generalized anxiety disorder. Cogn. Ther.
Res. 39(2):228–35
18.22
Creswell
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2017.68. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Cornell University - Weill Medical College on 09/30/16. For personal use only.
 PS68CH18-Creswell
ARI
20 September 2016
10:55
Hoge EA, Bui E, Marques L, Metcalf CA, Morris LK, et al. 2013. Randomized controlled trial of mindfulness
meditation for generalized anxiety disorder: effects on anxiety and stress reactivity. J. Clin. Psychiatry
74(8):786–92
H¨
olzel BK, Carmody J, Vangel M, Congleton C, Yerramsetti SM, et al. 2011a. Mindfulness practice leads to
increases in regional brain gray matter density. Psychiatry Res. Neuroimaging 191(1):36–43
H¨
olzel BK, Hoge EA, Greve DN, Gard T, Creswell JD, et al. 2013. Neural mechanisms of symptom im-
provements in generalized anxiety disorder following mindfulness training. NeuroImage Clin. 2:448–58
H¨
olzel BK, Lazar SW, Gard T, Schuman-Olivier Z, Vago DR, Ott U. 2011b. How does mindfulness medi-
tation work? Proposing mechanisms of action from a conceptual and neural perspective. Perspect. Psychol.
Sci. 6(6):537–59
H¨
olzel BK, Ott U, Hempel H, Hackl A, Wolf K, et al. 2007. Differential engagement of anterior cingulate
and adjacent medial frontal cortex in adept meditators and non-meditators. Neurosci. Lett. 421(1):16–21
Hopthrow T, Hooper N, Mahmood L, Meier BP, Weger U. 2016. Mindfulness reduces the correspondence
bias. Q. J. Exp. Psychol. In press. doi: 10.1080/17470218.2016.1149498
Huijbers MJ, Spinhoven P, Spijker J, Ruh´
e HG, van Schaik DJF, et al. 2016. Discontinuation of antidepressant
medication after mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for recurrent depression: randomised controlled
non-inferiority trial. Br. J. Psychiatry 208:366–73
Jain S, Shapiro SL, Swanick S, Roesch SC, Mills PJ, Schwartz GE. 2007. A randomized controlled trial of
mindfulness meditation versus relaxation training: effects on distress, positive states of mind, rumination,
and distraction. Ann. Behav. Med. 33(1):11–21
Jensen CG, Vangkilde S, Frokjaer V, Hasselbalch SG. 2012. Mindfulness training affects attention—or is it
attentional effort? J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. 141(1):106–23
Jha AP, Morrison AB, Dainer-Best J, Parker S, Rostrup N, Stanley EA. 2015. Minds “at attention”: mindfulness
training curbs attentional lapses in military cohorts. PLOS ONE 10(2):e0116889
Jha AP, Stanley EA, Kiyonaga A, Wong L, Gelfand L. 2010. Examining the protective effects of mindfulness
training on working memory capacity and affective experience. Emotion 10(1):54–64
Johnson DC, Thom NJ, Stanley EA, Haase L, Simmons AN, et al. 2014. Modifying resilience mechanisms in
at-risk individuals: a controlled study of mindfulness training in marines preparing for deployment. Am.
J. Psychiatry 171(8):844–53
Kabat-Zinn J. 1982. An outpatient program in behavioral medicine for chronic pain patients based on the prac-
tice of mindfulness meditation: theoretical considerations and preliminary results. Gen. Hosp. Psychiatry
4(1):33–47
Kabat-Zinn J. 1990. Full Catastrophe Living: Using the Wisdom of Your Body and Mind to Face Stress, Pain, and
Illness. New York: Delta
Kabat-Zinn J, Massion AO, Kristeller J, Peterson LG, Fletcher KE, et al. 1992. Effectiveness of a meditation-
based stress reduction program in the treatment of anxiety disorders. Am. J. Psychiatry 149:936–43
Kabat-Zinn J. 2003. Mindfulness-based interventions in context: past, present, and future. Clin. Psychol. Sci.
Pract. 10(2):144–56
Kabat-Zinn J, Wheeler E, Light T, Skillings A, Scharf MJ, et al. 1998. Influence of a mindfulness meditation-
based stress reduction intervention on rates of skin clearing in patients with moderate to severe psoriasis
undergoing phototherapy (UVB) and photochemotherapy (PUVA). Psychosom. Med. 60(5):625–32
Kang Y, Gruber J, Gray JR. 2013. Mindfulness and de-automatization. Emot. Rev. 5(2):192–201
Karremans JC, Schellekens MPJ, Kappen G. 2016. Bridging the sciences of mindfulness and roman-
tic relationships: a theoretical model and research agenda. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Rev. In press. doi:
10.1177/1088868315615450
Killingsworth MA, Gilbert DT. 2010. A wandering mind is an unhappy mind. Science 330(6006):932
Koole SL, Govorun O, Cheng CM, Gallucci M. 2009. Pulling yourself together: Meditation promotes con-
gruence between implicit and explicit self-esteem. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 45(6):1220–26
Kuyken W, Hayes R, Barrett B, Byng R, Dalgleish T, et al. 2015. Effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of
mindfulness-based cognitive therapy compared with maintenance antidepressant treatment in the preven-
tion of depressive relapse or recurrence (PREVENT): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet 386(9988):63–
73
www.annualreviews.org • Mindfulness Interventions
18.23
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2017.68. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Cornell University - Weill Medical College on 09/30/16. For personal use only.
 PS68CH18-Creswell
ARI
20 September 2016
10:55
Levinson DB, Stoll EL, Kindy SD, Merry HL, Davidson RJ. 2013. A mind you can count on: validating breath
counting as a behavioral measure of mindfulness. Front. Psychol. 5:1202
Lim D, Condon P, DeSteno D. 2015. Mindfulness and compassion: an examination of mechanism and scala-
bility. PLOS ONE 10(2):e0118221
Lindsay EK, Creswell JD. 2015. Back to the basics: how attention monitoring and acceptance stimulate positive
growth. Psychol. Inq. 26(4):343–48
An early and important
review of the
mindfulness
intervention health
literature.
Ludwig DS, Kabat-Zinn J. 2008. Mindfulness in medicine. J. Am. Med. Assoc. 300(11):1350–52
Lustyk MKB, Chawla N, Nolan RS, Marlatt GA. 2009. Mindfulness meditation research: issues of participant
screening, safety procedures, and researcher training. Adv. Mind Body Med. 24(1):20–30
Ma SH, Teasdale JD. 2004. Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for depression: replication and exploration
of differential relapse prevention effects. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol. 72(1):31–40
A validation study of the
well-matched HEP
comparison program for
MBSR research studies.
MacCoon DG, Imel ZE, Rosenkranz MA, Sheftel JG, Weng HY, et al. 2012. The validation of an
active control intervention for Mindfulness Based Stress Reduction (MBSR). Behav. Res. Ther.
50(1):3–12
Malarkey WB, Jarjoura D, Klatt M. 2013. Workplace based mindfulness practice and inflammation: a ran-
domized trial. Brain. Behav. Immun. 27(1):145–54
Mason AE, Epel ES, Kristeller J, Moran PJ, Dallman M, et al. 2015. Effects of a mindfulness-based intervention
on mindful eating, sweets consumption, and fasting glucose levels in obese adults: data from the SHINE
randomized controlled trial. J. Behav. Med. 1–13
Morone NE, Greco CM, Moore CG, Rollman BL, Lane B, et al. 2016. A mind-body program for older adults
with chronic low back pain: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Intern. Med. 176(3):329–37
Moynihan JA, Chapman BP, Klorman R, Krasner MS, Duberstein PR, et al. 2013. Mindfulness-based stress
reduction for older adults: effects on executive function, frontal alpha asymmetry and immune function.
Neuropsychobiology 68(1):34–43
Mrazek MD, Franklin MS, Phillips DT, Baird B, Schooler JW. 2013. Mindfulness training improves working
memory capacity and GRE performance while reducing mind wandering. Psychol. Sci. 24(5):776–81
Mrazek MD, Smallwood J, Schooler JW. 2012. Mindfulness and mind-wandering: finding convergence
through opposing constructs. Emotion 12(3):442–48
Olano HA, Kachan D, Tannenbaum SL, Mehta A, Annane D, Lee DJ. 2015. Engagement in mindfulness
practices by U.S. adults: sociodemographic barriers. J. Altern. Complement. Med. 21(2):100–2
Ostafin BD, Kassman KT. 2012. Stepping out of history: Mindfulness improves insight problem solving.
Conscious. Cogn. 21(2):1031–36
Papies EK, Pronk TM, Keesman M, Barsalou LW. 2015. The benefits of simply observing: Mindful attention
modulates the link between motivation and behavior. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 108(1):148–70
Pinniger R, Brown RF, Thorsteinsson EB, McKinley P. 2012. Argentine tango dance compared to mindfulness
meditation and a waiting-list control: a randomised trial for treating depression. Complement. Ther. Med.
20(6):377–84
An initial well-
controlled RCT
showing that MBSR can
reduce PTSD
symptomatology in
veterans.
Polusny MA, Erbes CR, Thuras P, Moran A, Lamberty GJ, et al. 2015. Mindfulness-based stress
reduction for posttraumatic stress disorder among veterans: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA
314(5):456–65
Quaglia JT, Brown KW, Lindsay EK, Creswell JD, Goodman RJ. 2015. From conceptualization to opera-
tionalization of mindfulness. See Brown et al. 2015, pp. 151–70
Roemer L, Orsillo SM. 2009. Mindfulness- and Acceptance-Based Behavioral Therapies in Practice (Guides to
Individualized Evidence-Based Treatment). New York: Guilford Press
Rosenberg EL, Zanesco AP, King BG, Aichele SR, Jacobs TL, et al. 2015. Intensive meditation training
influences emotional responses to suffering. Emotion 15(6):775–90
Rosenkranz MA, Davidson RJ, MacCoon DG, Sheridan JF, Kalin NH, Lutz A. 2013. Brain Behav. Immun.
27:174–84
Samuelson M, Carmody J, Kabat-Zinn J, Bratt MA. 2007. Mindfulness-based stress reduction in Massachusetts
correctional facilities. Prison J. 87(2):254–68
Schmidt S, Grossman P, Schwarzer B, Jena S, Naumann J, Walach H. 2011. Treating fibromyalgia
with mindfulness-based stress reduction: results from a 3-armed randomized controlled trial. PAIN R
�.
152(2):361–69
18.24
Creswell
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2017.68. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Cornell University - Weill Medical College on 09/30/16. For personal use only.
 PS68CH18-Creswell
ARI
20 September 2016
10:55
Schofield TP, Creswell JD, Denson TF. 2015. Brief mindfulness induction reduces inattentional blindness.
Conscious. Cogn. 37:63–70
Schonert-Reichl KA, Oberle E, Lawlor MS, Abbott D, Thomson K, et al. 2015. Enhancing cognitive and
social-emotional development through a simple-to-administer mindfulness-based school program for
elementary school children: a randomized controlled trial. Dev. Psychol. 51(1):52–66
Schwartz L, Slater MA, Birchler GR. 1994. Interpersonal stress and pain behaviors in patients with chronic
pain. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol. 62(4):861–64
Segal ZV, Bieling P, Young T, MacQueen G, Cooke R, et al. 2010. Antidepressant monotherapy versus
sequential pharmacotherapy and mindfulness-based cognitive therapy, or placebo, for relapse prophylaxis
in recurrent depression. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 67(12):1256–64
Segerstrom SC, Miller GE. 2004. Psychological stress and the human immune system: a meta-analytic study
of 30 years of inquiry. Psychol. Bull. 130(4):601–30
Semple RJ. 2010. Does mindfulness meditation enhance attention? A randomized controlled trial. Mindfulness
1(2):121–30
SeyedAlinaghi S, Jam S, Foroughi M, Imani A, Mohraz M, et al. 2012. Randomized controlled trial of
mindfulness-based stress reduction delivered to human immunodeficiency virus-positive patients in
Iran: effects on CD4+ T lymphocyte count and medical and psychological symptoms. Psychosom. Med.
74(6):620–27
Shapiro DH. 1992. Adverse effects of meditation: a preliminary investigation of long-term meditators. Int. J.
Psychosom. 39(1–4):62–67
A large RCT showing
that a classroom-based
mindfulness
intervention can
improve outcomes in
at-risk children.
Sibinga EMS, Webb L, Ghazarian SR, Ellen JM. 2016. School-based mindfulness instruction: an RCT.
Pediatrics 137(1):1–8
Slutsky J, Rahl H, Lindsay EK, Creswell JD. 2016. Mindfulness, emotion regulation, and social threat. In
Mindfulness in Social Psychology, ed. JC Karremans, EK Papies. New York: Routledge. In press
Strauss C, Cavanagh K, Oliver A, Pettman D. 2014. Mindfulness-based interventions for people diagnosed
with a current episode of an anxiety or depressive disorder: a meta-analysis of randomised controlled
trials. PLOS ONE 9(4):e96110
A comprehensive
integrative review of the
neuroscience of
mindfulness meditation
interventions.
Tang Y-Y, H¨
olzel BK, Posner MI. 2015. The neuroscience of mindfulness meditation. Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 16(4):213–25
Taren AA, Gianaros PJ, Greco CM, Lindsay EK, Fairgrieve A, et al. 2015. Mindfulness meditation training
alters stress-related amygdala resting state functional connectivity: a randomized controlled trial. Soc.
Cogn. Affect. Neurosci. 10(12):1758–68
Teasdale JD, Moore RG, Hayhurst H, Pope M, Williams S, Segal ZV. 2002. Metacognitive awareness and
prevention of relapse in depression: empirical evidence. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol. 70(2):275–87
The first RCT to show
that MBCT can reduce
depression relapse in
at-risk individuals.
Teasdale JD, Segal ZV, Mark J, Ridgeway VA, Soulsby JM, Lau MA. 2000. Prevention of relapse/
recurrence in major depression by mindfulness-based cognitive therapy. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol.
68(4):615–23
Tomasino B, Fabbro F. 2016. Increases in the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and decreases the rostral
prefrontal cortex activation after-8 weeks of focused attention based mindfulness meditation. Brain Cogn.
102:46–54
van Vugt MK. 2015. Cognitive benefits of mindfulness meditation. See Brown et al. 2015, pp. 190–207
Visted E, Vøllestad J, Nielsen MB, Nielsen GH. 2014. The impact of group-based mindfulness training on
self-reported mindfulness: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Mindfulness 6(3):501–22
Vøllestad J, Nielsen MB, Nielsen GH. 2012. Mindfulness- and acceptance-based interventions for anxiety
disorders: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Br. J. Clin. Psychol. 51(3):239–60
Walsh R, Roche L. 1979. Precipitation of acute psychotic episodes by intensive meditation in individuals with
a history of schizophrenia. Am. J. Psychiatry 136:1085–86
Westbrook C, Creswell JD, Tabibnia G, Julson E, Kober H, Tindle HA. 2013. Mindful attention reduces
neural and self-reported cue-induced craving in smokers. Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci. 8:73–74
Williams M, Crane C, Barnhofer T, Brennan K, Duggan DS, et al. 2014. Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy
for preventing relapse in recurrent depression: a randomized dismantling trial. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol.
82(2):275–86
www.annualreviews.org • Mindfulness Interventions
18.25
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2017.68. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Cornell University - Weill Medical College on 09/30/16. For personal use only.
 PS68CH18-Creswell
ARI
20 September 2016
10:55
Wilson BM, Mickes L, Stolarz-Fantino S, Evrard M, Fantino E. 2015. Increased false-memory susceptibility
after mindfulness meditation. Psychol. Sci. 26(10):1567–73
Wilson TD, Reinhard DA, Westgate EC, Gilbert DT, Ellerbeck N, et al. 2014. Just think: the challenges of
the disengaged mind. Science 345(6192):75–77
Witkiewitz K, Bowen S. 2010. Depression, craving and substance use following a randomized trial of
mindfulness-based relapse prevention. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol. 78(3):362–74
Witkiewitz K, Warner K, Sully B, Barricks A, Stauffer C, et al. 2014. Randomized trial comparing mindfulness-
based relapse prevention with relapse prevention for women offenders at a residential addiction treatment
center. Subst. Use Misuse 49(5):536–46
Zautra AJ, Davis MC, Reich JW, Nicassario P, Tennen H, et al. 2008. Comparison of cognitive behavioral
and mindfulness meditation interventions on adaptation to rheumatoid arthritis for patients with and
without history of recurrent depression. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol. 76(3):408–21
Zeidan F, Emerson NM, Farris SR, Ray JN, Jung Y, et al. 2015. Mindfulness meditation-based pain relief
employs different neural mechanisms than placebo and sham mindfulness meditation-induced analgesia.
J. Neurosci. 35(46):15307–25
Zeidan F, Johnson SK, Diamond BJ, David Z, Goolkasian P. 2010a. Mindfulness meditation improves cog-
nition: evidence of brief mental training. Conscious. Cogn. 19(2):597–605
Zeidan F, Johnson SK, Gordon NS, Goolkasian P. 2010b. Effects of brief and sham mindfulness meditation
on mood and cardiovascular variables. J. Altern. Complement. Med. 16(8):867–73
Zeidan F, Martucci KT, Kraft RA, Gordon NS, McHaffie JG, Coghill RC. 2011. Brain mechanisms supporting
the modulation of pain by mindfulness meditation. J. Neurosci. 31(14):5540–48
Zenner C, Herrnleben-Kurz S, Walach H. 2013. Mindfulness-based interventions in schools—a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Front. Psychol. 5:603
18.26
Creswell
Changes may still occur before final publication online and in print
Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2017.68. Downloaded from www.annualreviews.org
 Access provided by Cornell University - Weill Medical College on 09/30/16. For personal use only.
