 A systematic review of risk of HIV transmission through
biting or spitting: implications for policy
FV Cresswell
,1,2,3 J Ellis,2,4 J Hartley,5 CA Sabin,6 C Orkin7 and DR Churchill3
1Clinical Research Department, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, UK, 2Clinical Research
Department, Infectious Diseases Institute, Kampala, Uganda, 3Lawson Unit, Royal Sussex County Hospital, Brighton, UK,
4Department of Infection and Immunity, University College London, London, UK, 5Worthing Hospital, Western Sussex
Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, West Sussex, Worthing, UK, 6Institute for Global Health, University College London,
London, UK and 7Barts Health NHS Trust and Queen Mary University London, The Royal London Hospital, London, UK
Objectives
The perceived threat of HIV transmission through spitting and biting is evidenced by the
increasing use of “spit hoods” by Police Forces in the UK. In addition, a draft parliamentary bill
has called for increased penalties for assaults on emergency workers, citing the risk of
communicable disease transmission as one justification. We aimed to review literature relating to
the risk of HIV transmission through biting or spitting.
Methods
A systematic literature search was conducted using Medline, Embase and Northern Lights databases
and conference websites using search terms relating to HIV, AIDS, bite, spit and saliva. Inclusion
and exclusion criteria were applied to identified citations. We classified plausibility of HIV
transmission as low, medium, high or confirmed based on pre-specified criteria.
Results
A total of 742 abstracts were reviewed, yielding 32 articles for full-text review and 13 case
reports/series after inclusion and exclusion criteria had been applied. There were no reported cases
of HIV transmission related to spitting and nine cases identified following a bite, in which the
majority occurred between family (six of nine), in fights involving serious wounds (three of nine),
or to untrained first-aiders placing fingers in the mouth of someone having a seizure (two of nine).
Only four cases were classified as highly plausible or confirmed transmission. None related to
emergency workers and none were in the UK.
Conclusions
There is no risk of transmitting HIV through spitting, and the risk through biting is negligible.
Post-exposure prophylaxis is not indicated after a bite in all but exceptional circumstances.
Policies to protect emergency workers should be developed with this evidence in mind.
Keywords: bite, emergency workers, HIV, spit, transmission
Accepted 4 April 2018
Introduction
Detailed epidemiological studies since the 1990s have
provided
insight
into
the
risk
of
HIV
transmission
through sexual exposure and needlestick injuries, and
have informed policy and behaviour around the use of
barrier
contraception,
universal
precautions
and
HIV
post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) [1–8]. Recent longitu-
dinal studies have also shown that HIV-positive indi-
viduals
on
antiretroviral
therapy
(ART)
with
an
undetectable plasma HIV viral load do not transmit
HIV and there is increasing acceptance of the concept
“undetectable = untransmissible” (U=U) [9,10]. National
guidelines on HIV PEP have used these data in inform-
ing their recommendations. Provision of PEP is not rec-
ommended
following
potential
exposure
from
biting
and spitting; however, the risk of HIV transmission
Correspondence: Dr Fiona Cresswell, Clinical Research Department,
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, Keppel Street, London
WC1E 7HT, UK. Tel: +256793420173; fax: +44(0)2079272739; e-mail:
fiona.cresswell@lshtm.ac.uk
This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
532
DOI: 10.1111/hiv.12625
© 2018 The Authors.
HIV Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of British HIV Association
HIV Medicine (2018), 19, 532--540
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
 from such exposures has not been systematically evalu-
ated [11].
In the UK, human bite injuries are a common presentation
to the emergency department, comprising around 0.1% of
all attendances [12]. Bites represent an occupational risk to
emergency workers such as policemen, paramedics, doctors
and nurses, and are more likely to occur when dealing with
patients with seizures, aggressive members of the public,
children and those with cognitive impairment [13]. In the
USA there are an estimated 622 bites to emergency workers
per year [14]. A retrospective 4-year review of attendees to
a single UK emergency department identified 421 presenta-
tions with human bites, amounting to one every 3 days
[12]. Bites vary in severity from petechial haemorrhage to
contusion, abrasion, laceration and avulsion [15].
Spitting represents another occupational hazard faced
by emergency workers, with the Metropolitan Police
alone reporting 264 spitting incidents between 2014 and
2016 [16]. Saliva has been shown to lyse HIV particles
in vitro as a result of hypotonicity and many salivary
proteins inhibit and inactivate HIV particles [17].
The perceived threat of HIV and other blood-borne virus
transmission through spitting and biting is evidenced by
the increasing use by police forces of “spit hoods” (which
are placed on potential assailants to reduce the risk of
exposure to arresting officers). As of November 2016, 17
out of 49 police forces in the UK now use “spit hoods” [18].
In addition, a draft parliamentary bill has called for
increased penalties for assaults on emergency workers, cit-
ing the risk of communicable disease transmission as one
justification [19]. The draft bill also recommends manda-
tory provision of “intimate samples, without reasonable
excuse” from those accused of spitting on emergency
workers, with refusal to provide such specimens punish-
able as an offence. In the USA, harsh sentencing for those
accused of spitting while knowingly HIV positive has been
carried out, with the accused charged with causing harm
by “means of a deadly weapon” [20].
We undertook a systematic literature review of HIV
transmission related to biting or spitting to ensure that
decisions about future policy and practice pertaining to
biting and spitting incidents are informed by current
medical evidence.
Methods
PICO (P, patient, problem or population; I,
intervention; C, comparison, control or comparator; O,
outcome)
The authors used the PICO framework, with the PICO
“question” being formulated and answered as follows: (1)
population: adults, adolescents and children; (2) interven-
tion: bites, spitting; (3) comparator: none; (4) outcome:
HIV transmission or documented absence of HIV trans-
mission.
Search strategy
The goal was to identify evidence relating to the risk of
transmission, or lack of transmission of HIV following a
biting or spitting incident. A systematic electronic search
was conducted using Medline, Embase and Northern
Lights databases from inception to 5 January 2018. Key
natural language and controlled vocabulary search terms
were used related to “HIV”, “human immunodeficiency
virus”, “AIDS”, “acquired immune deficiency syndrome”
AND “bites”, “bitten” OR “spit”, “spat”, “spitting”. A sec-
ond search was run using the terms relating to “HIV
transmission” AND “saliva”. For full search terms, see
Supporting Information Notes S1. We also hand searched
the British HIV Association conference abstracts from
2007
onwards
and
Conference
for
Retroviruses
and
Opportunistic Infections abstracts from 2014 onwards, as
well as the reference lists from the papers we reviewed.
Eligibility criteria
The following inclusion criteria were applied in article
selection for full-text review: (1) exposure of interest (bit-
ing, spitting or saliva) discussed and (2) outcome of inter-
est described (by documented HIV antibody testing, with
or without additional antigen testing, HIV viral load test-
ing or phylogenetic analysis) or absence of HIV serocon-
version (by documented negative HIV antibody test).
Study selection
Two reviewers (JH and TR) independently conducted
selection for full-text review by applying eligibility crite-
ria to titles and abstracts. Two reviewers (JE and FVC)
then independently assessed full-text articles for how HIV
transmission had been determined and excluded articles
that did not describe the exposure and outcome of inter-
est or did not provide original case data such as narrative
reviews. A list of studies for inclusion was finalized.
Assessment of quality and data extraction
Reviewers designed a data extraction tool and indepen-
dently applied it to each article. Data were extracted on
study design, the perpetrator (HIV status, HIV viraemia,
presence of blood in the mouth of the perpetrator,
© 2018 The Authors.
HIV Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of British HIV Association
HIV Medicine (2018), 19, 532--540
HIV transmission through biting or spitting
533
 whether medically unwell and use of ART), the nature of
the incident (whether biting or spitting, and the severity
of the wound inflicted), the timing of HIV diagnosis, the
nature of HIV testing and other HIV risk factors. Data
were compared for consistency. No formal statistical
analyses were undertaken in view of the nature of the
studies identified.
No randomized controlled trials or cohort or case–con-
trol studies were identified, so a formal tool to assess risk
of bias for the articles identified was not used. Instead,
we discussed the plausibility of HIV transmission being
attributable to the incident described based on documen-
tation of baseline HIV status, the nature of the injury, the
temporal relationship between the incident and a positive
HIV test and phylogenetic analysis, where available. The
plausibility of the incident being responsible for the sub-
sequent HIV diagnosis was then classified as low, med-
ium, high or confirmed based on pre-specified criteria
(Table 1). Any disagreements were resolved by consensus
or a third reviewer (JH).
Results
Search results and study selection
Our literature search found 1357 citations: 1342 via data-
base searches, and 15 from hand searching of conferences
and reference lists. Of these, 615 were duplicates, leaving
742 for title or abstract review. A further 710 were
removed because they clearly did not meet the inclusion
criteria based on information contained in the title or
abstract. The remaining 32 articles underwent full-text
review, of which 19 were subsequently removed because
they met the exclusion criteria (no primary data, n = 13;
exposure of interest not described, n = 1; outcome of
interest not described, n = 5), leaving 13 articles in the
final data set (Fig. 1).
Study characteristics and quality
Of the 13 studies selected, 11 were case reports and two were
case series detailing HIV transmission, or absence of HIV
transmission, following a biting episode. There were no
reported cases of HIV transmission attributable to spitting.
Several of the selected studies were published during the
1980s and 1990s prior to the availability of potent ART.
Of the 13 identified articles that reported alleged HIV
transmission related to biting, none related to a bite in the
UK and none concerned emergency care workers. The
reports included information on a total of 23 people bitten
by HIV-positive individuals, of whom nine (39%) serocon-
verted to HIV positivity following the incident and 14 (61%)
did not seroconvert (Table 2). Of these, the alleged transmis-
sions occurred between family members (six of nine), in
fights involving infliction of serious wounds (three of nine),
or as a result of untrained first-aiders placing fingers in the
mouth of someone having a seizure (two of nine).
There was significant heterogeneity in the quality of
the reports: a minority had a negative baseline HIV test
in the person bitten (two of nine) or phylogenetic analy-
sis of viruses (three of nine). Only four cases in total were
classified as having high plausibility or confirmation of
HIV infection being attributable to the bite.
Highly plausible or confirmed cases of HIV
transmission following bites
Vidmar et al. [21]
A first aider was bitten on the hand during a seizure by a
man with advanced HIV disease. The biter had confirmed
blood in his mouth and was on zidovudine monotherapy,
his HIV viral load (VL) was not known and he died
13 days after the incident of primary central nervous sys-
tem (CNS) lymphoma. The first aider had broken skin at
the site of the bite and was HIV-negative on the day of
Table 1 Criteria applied to determine plausibility of HIV transmission relating to incident
Plausibility
Low
Medium
High
Confirmed
Number of cases
3
2
1
3
Documented baseline
negative HIV test
No
No
Yes or no
Yes or no
Temporal relationship
Positive HIV test a
significant time
after the incident
Positive HIV a
significant time
after incident
HIV seroconversion
within 2 months
of incident
HIV seroconversion
within 2 months of incident
Phylogenetic analysis
Not done
Not done
Not done
Phylogenetic analysis
suggestive of transmission
Other potential source of
HIV infection
Other HIV risk factors
prior to positive HIV test
No other HIV risk
factors prior to
positive HIV test
No other HIV
risk factors
No other HIV risk factors
© 2018 The Authors.
HIV Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of British HIV Association
HIV Medicine (2018), 19, 532--540
534
FV Cresswell et al.
 the
incident.
Despite
post-exposure
prophylaxis
(zi-
dovudine 1200 mg once daily), 33 days later the recipient
developed an acute illness and antibody seroconversion
was confirmed 54 days after the incident. The recipient
had no other risk factors for HIV infection identified.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [22]
A person sustained multiple bites from an HIV-positive
woman who was reported to have bleeding gums, but
who had unknown HIV stage, VL and ART status. It is
not reported whether the bites resulted in skin breakage.
The recipient was confirmed HIV-negative immediately
after the attack and seroconverted 6 weeks later, with
RNA sequencing confirming that the perpetrator and
recipient shared the same viral strain.
Deshpande et al. [23]
A father sustained a bite from his HIV-positive son, caus-
ing avulsion of the thumb nail and leaving an exposed
bleeding nail bed. The father was not screened for HIV at
the time of the bite but presented 4 weeks later with a
meningoencephalitis and was found to have acute HIV
infection. The son had never received ART and had a VL
of
17 163
HIV-1
RNA
copies/ml
in
plasma
and
2405 copies/mL in saliva. There were no other risk factors
for HIV transmission reported. Sequencing revealed 91%
homology between perpetrator and donor HIV RNA.
Andreo et al. [24]
A mother was bitten by her son in the context of a seizure.
The son was subsequently diagnosed with neurotoxoplasmo-
sis and HIV infection. Blood from a bitten tongue was pre-
sent in the son’s mouth at the time of the incident. The
mother’s wound was deep and required suturing. She was
not screened for HIV at the time of the incident but presented
27 days later with fever and was found to be HIV-positive.
DNA sequencing demonstrated that viruses from the mother
and son belonged to the same HIV-1 quasi-species.
Medium plausibility of HIV transmission following a
bite
Bartholomew and Jones [25]
A 3-year-old child, born to an HIV-negative mother, was
bitten by her father who had dental caries and bleeding
gums. He was found to be HIV positive 3 years later (CD4
count 4 cells/lL; HIV VL not measured) and died soon
afterwards. The child was therefore tested for HIV and
Fig. 1 Flowchart illustrating outcomes of search citations.
© 2018 The Authors.
HIV Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of British HIV Association
HIV Medicine (2018), 19, 532--540
HIV transmission through biting or spitting
535
 Table 2 Summary table of articles included in final data set
Authors
[reference]
Year
Country
Exposure
(nature of
incident)
Outcome
(HIV
seroconversion)
Nature of
injury
Number
exposed
Blood in
mouth
of perpetrator
Perpetrator
HIV viraemic*
Perpetrator on
ART
Plausibility of
transmission
attributable to
bite
Comment
Tereskerz
et al. [14]
1996
USA
Bite (HCW)
No
Skin intact
1
Unknown
Unknown
Unknown
NA
50 bites; 1.7% from a known
HIV-positive individual; no
transmission reported
Tsoukas
et al. [30]
1988
Canada
Bites (HCW)
No
Skin intact
(n = 5),
skin
broken
(n = 3)
8
Yes
Yes
No
NA
2.5-year follow-up
Drummond
[31]
1986
Unknown
Bite (during
seizure)
No
Skin broken
1
Unknown
Yes
No
18-month follow-up
Shirley and
Ross [32]
1989
USA
Bite (community,
intentional)
No
Skin intact
4
Unknown
Yes
No
NA
Good follow-up of cases
Vidmar
et al. [21]
1996
Slovenia
Bite (during
seizure)
Yes
Skin broken
(nail)
1
Yes
Yes
ZDV
monotherapy
High
Blood in mouth from bitten
tongue and a deep injury
caused to nail bed. Baseline
HIV test negative and
seroconversion within 1 month
Akani et al.
[28]
2007
Nigeria
Bite (community,
intentional)
Yes
Deep bite (lip
(sutured)
1
No
Unknown
Unknown
Low
HIV test negative 1 year
previously but had been
sexually active in the interim.
Tested HIV positive during
antenatal care
Batholomew
and Jones
[25]
2006
Trinidad
Bite (community,
intentional)
Yes
Skin broken
1
Yes
Yes
No
Medium
Child tested HIV positive 4 years
after being bitten by father.
No baseline HIV test. No other
HIV risk factors reported
CDC [22]
1996
USA
Bite (community,
intentional)
Yes
Multiple bites
1†
Yes
Unknown
No
Confirmed
HIV negative at time of bite and
confirmed linkage on
phylogenetics
Deshpande
et al. [23]
2011
India
Bite (community,
intentional)
Yes
Deep bite
(nail
bed
exposed)
1
No
17 163 copies/mL
(plasma); 2405
copies/mL (saliva)
No
Confirmed
High-risk injury. 91% sequence
homology on phylogentic
analysis
Wahn et al.
[26]
1986
Germany
Bite (community,
intentional)
Yes
Skin intact
1
No
Yes
No
Medium
Child bitten by sibling 6 months
prior to his death from AIDS.
No baseline HIV test. Tested
HIV positive after death of
sibling. No other HIV risk
factors reported
© 2018 The Authors.
HIV Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of British HIV Association
HIV Medicine (2018), 19, 532--540
536
FV Cresswell et al.
 Table 2 (Continued)
Authors
[reference]
Year
Country
Exposure
(nature of
incident)
Outcome
(HIV
seroconversion)
Nature of
injury
Number
exposed
Blood in
mouth
of perpetrator
Perpetrator
HIV viraemic*
Perpetrator on
ART
Plausibility of
transmission
attributable to
bite
Comment
Anonymous
[29]
1987
Unknown
Bite (community,
intentional)
Yes
Bite to leg
1
Yes
Yes
No
Low
HIV negative 4 years before the
bite. HIV positive when tested
2 years post incident.
Untraceable sexual partner.
Higher risk injury as blood in
mouth from teeth being
knocked out
Khajotia
[27]
1997
Columbia
Bite (community,
unintentional)
Yes
Mucosa on lip
broken by
kissing
1
No
Unknown
Unknown
Low
Bite is unlikely route of
transmission: the biter was not
confirmed to be HIV positive;
recipient remained HIV
negative at 7 months after
bite and seroconverted
10 months after the bite
Andreo
et al. [24]
2004
Brazil
Bite (during
seizure)
Yes
Deep bite
(sutured)
1
Yes
Yes
No
Confirmed
Mother bitten by son during a
seizure relating to AIDS-
defining illness. Seroconversion
27 days later and phylogenetic
linkage
*Protagonist presumed viraemic if report is from pre-ART era or protagonist has AIDS-defining or critical illness in the absence of documented ART.
†Two cases described. Only one description provided original data; the other was a repetition of a case reported elsewhere.
ART, antiretroviral therapy; CDC, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; HCW, health care worker; ZDV, zidovudine.
© 2018 The Authors.
HIV Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of British HIV Association
HIV Medicine (2018), 19, 532--540
HIV transmission through biting or spitting
537
 found to be HIV positive. No other risk factors were
reported. No phylogenetic analysis was undertaken.
Wahn et al. [26]
A child was bitten by his brother who died 6 months
after the incident and was diagnosed with toxoplasmosis
and HIV infection post-mortem (having received HIV-
infected blood during prior cardiac surgery). Family
members were screened after his death and the child who
had sustained the bite was found to be HIV-positive. The
bite allegedly did not result in skin breakage and there
was no documentation of blood in the biting child’s
mouth.
Low plausibility of HIV transmission following a bite
Khajotia [27]
A man alleged that he contracted HIV infection from
kissing during which he sustained a bite on the lip with
skin breakage. He reported that the lady who bit his lip
was a commercial sexual worker, although she was never
confirmed to be HIV positive. He was not screened for
HIV at the time of the incident but self-reported multiple
negative HIV tests in the subsequent 7 months. He was
found to be HIV seropositive while undergoing investiga-
tion for gastroenteritis 10 months later. He denied any
other risk factor for HIV transmission.
Akani et al. [28]
During a fight, a woman was bitten on the lip by her
HIV-positive relative. The HIV stage and ART history of
the perpetrator were not known, nor was it known
whether she had blood in her mouth at the time of the
incident. The bite resulted in a deep lip wound requiring
suturing. The recipient was not tested for HIV at the time
of the bite, but was found to be HIV-positive during
antenatal
screening
1 year
later.
The
recipient
self-
reported a negative HIV test prior to the bite, self-
reported that her husband was HIV-negative and denied
other risk factors for HIV infection, although she had
been sexually active and fallen pregnant in the interim.
Anonymous [29]
A woman was bitten by her HIV-positive sister during a
fight. The perpetrator was known to be HIV positive and
had blood in her mouth at the time of the bite, although
her HIV stage, VL and ART status at the time of the inci-
dent were not reported. It was not reported whether the
bite resulted in breakage of the skin. The recipient was
not screened for HIV at the time of the bite, but was
found to be HIV seropositive on occupational screening
2 years later. She had a documented negative HIV test
2 years prior to the bite and disclosed three sexual part-
ners in the interim, two of whom were reportedly HIV
negative but one of whom was untraceable.
Discussion
We sought to evaluate the risk of HIV transmission from
biting or spitting incidents through a systematic review
of all English language literature published since the start
of the HIV epidemic. Of the 742 records reviewed, there
were no published cases of HIV transmission attributable
to spitting, which supports the conclusion that being spat
on by an HIV-positive individual carries no possibility of
transmitting HIV. Despite biting incidents being com-
monly reported occurrences, there were only a handful of
case reports of HIV transmission secondary to a bite, sug-
gesting that the overall risk of HIV transmission from
being bitten by an HIV-positive person is negligible. The
risk of transmission of other blood-borne viruses through
biting and spitting is beyond the scope of this review and
warrants further investigation.
There was significant heterogeneity in the quality of
the published reports detailing HIV transmission sec-
ondary to biting episodes. Poor-quality case reports that
were published as evidence of HIV transmission sec-
ondary to a bite included those in which: (1) the recipient
had no HIV-negative test at baseline; (2) the recipient
had other significant potential risk factors for HIV trans-
mission; (3) HIV seroconversion was reported to have
occurred at a time interval incompatible with transmis-
sion secondary to the bite. Therefore, of the nine reported
cases of HIV infection potentially attributable to a bite,
the scientific plausibility of the reports was variable and
in only three cases were the attributions confirmed by
RNA sequencing.
There were four cases of highly plausible HIV transmis-
sion resulting from a bite. In each case, the perpetrator
had advanced HIV infection, was not on combined ART
and was therefore likely to have high-level HIV viraemia.
In the majority of these cases, the bite resulted in a deep
wound and the perpetrator had blood in the mouth at the
time of the incident. Two cases occurred in the context of
a seizure whereby an untrained first-aid responder was
bitten while trying to protect the seizing person’s airway.
It is therefore important that both emergency workers and
first-aid responders are trained in safe seizure manage-
ment including noninvasive airway protection and use of
universal precautions. It is important to note that we
found no cases where an emergency care worker or police
officer acquired HIV infection through being bitten.
Strengths of this systematic review include the com-
prehensive
search
strategy
adopted
and
the
clear
© 2018 The Authors.
HIV Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of British HIV Association
HIV Medicine (2018), 19, 532--540
538
FV Cresswell et al.
 population, intervention and outcome criteria that were
adhered to. Data were extracted systematically by two
independent reviewers and study quality and validity
were considered and described throughout. A limitation
of this review is that we only included published English
language literature. More important limitations relate to
the limitations of the available evidence; firstly, to date
there have been no prospective studies in which the
actual number of biting or spitting incidents by HIV-
positive individuals in a given time, or associated HIV
seroconversions, have been documented. Secondly, two
sources of bias may be important. Publication bias may
potentially result in only cases of HIV seroconversion
being published (significant result) as opposed to cases of
no seroconversion, which could result in overestimation
of the risk. Conversely, ascertainment bias, whereby indi-
viduals who have HIV-seroconverted are not asked about
biting and spitting incidents and the transmission is put
down to a sexual exposure, may lead to an underestima-
tion of the risk. The overall direction of bias is difficult
to predict.
Data from England suggest that there were 89 400 peo-
ple living with HIV at the end of 2016, of whom 82%
had an undetectable VL, and were thus not capable of
transmitting infection; this proportion has increased sig-
nificantly in recent years. Current UK guidance on indi-
cations for PEP state that ‘PEP is not recommended
following a human bite from an HIV positive individual
unless in “extreme circumstances” and after discussion
with a specialist’ [11]. Necessary conditions for the trans-
mission of HIV from a human bite appear to be the pres-
ence of untreated HIV infection, severe trauma (involving
puncture of the skin), and usually the presence of blood
in the mouth of the biter. In the absence of these condi-
tions, PEP is not indicated, as there is no risk of transmis-
sion.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Tom Roper and his fellow clinical
librarians in the Medical Education Centre at Brighton
and Sussex University Hospital for their help with the
database search and sourcing of articles. FVC is supported
by the Wellcome Trust (210772/Z/18/Z). FVC is a fellow
of Makerere-UVRI Infection and Immunity Centre of
Excellence.
CAS
has
received
funding
from
Gilead
Sciences, ViiV Healthcare and Janssen-Cilag for member-
ship of Data Safety and Monitoring Boards and Advisory
Boards and for preparation of educational materials. CO
has
received
honoraria,
travel
sponsorship,
advisory
board fees and research grants from Jannsen, MSD,
Gilead and Viiv.
Conflicts of interest: The authors have no conflicts of
interest.
References
[Correction added on 29 June 2018, after first online
publication: Reference 22 was changed to “To transmit HIV,
biter must have blood in the mouth. AIDS Policy & Law.
1996; 11: 5”]
1 Quinn TC, Wawer MJ, Sewankambo N et al. Viral load and
heterosexual transmission of human immunodeficiency virus
type 1. N Engl J Med 2000; 342: 921–929.
2 Donnell D, Baeten JM, Kiarie J et al. Heterosexual HIV-1
transmission after initiation of antiretroviral therapy: a
prospective cohort analysis. Lancet 2010; 375: 2092–2098.
3 Attia S, Egger M, Muller M, Zwahlen M, Low N. Sexual
transmission of HIV according to viral load and antiretroviral
therapy: systematic review and meta-analysis. AIDS 2009;
23: 1397–1404.
4 Jin F, Jansson J, Law M et al. Per-contact probability of HIV
transmission in homosexual men in Sydney in the era of
HAART. AIDS 2010; 24: 907–913.
5 Gray RH, Wawer MJ, Brookmeyer R et al. Probability of HIV-
1 transmission per coital act in monogamous, heterosexual,
HIV-1-discordant couples in Rakai, Uganda. Lancet 2001;
357: 1149–1153.
6 Vittinghoff E, Douglas J, Judson F et al. Per-contact risk of
human immunodeficiency virus transmission between male
sexual partners. Am J Epidemiol 1999; 150: 306–311.
7 Del Romero J, Marincovich B, Castilla J et al. Evaluating the
risk of HIV transmission through unprotected orogenital sex.
AIDS 2002; 16: 1296–1297.
8 Cardo DM, Culver DH, Ciesielski CA et al. A case–control
study of HIV seroconversion in health care workers after
percutaneous exposure. N Engl J Med 1997; 337: 1485–1490.
9 Cohen MS, Chen YQ, McCauley M et al. Prevention of HIV-1
infection with early antiretroviral therapy. N Engl J Med
2011; 365: 493–505.
10 Rodger A, Bruun T, Cambiano V et al. HIV transmission risk
through condomless sex if HIV+ partner on suppressive ART:
PARTNER study. Boston, CROI, 2014.
11 Cresswell F, Waters L, Briggs E et al. UK guideline for
the use of HIV post-exposure prophylaxis following
sexual exposure, 2015. Int J STD AIDS 2016; 27: 713–738.
12 Harrison M. A 4-year review of human bite injuries
presenting to emergency medicine and proposed evidence-
based guidelines. Injury 2009; 40: 826–830.
13 Richman KM, Rickman LS. The potential for transmission of
human immunodeficiency virus through human bites. J
Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 1993; 6: 402–406.
14 Tereskerz PM, Bentley M, Jagger J. Risk of HIV-1 infection
after human bites. Lancet 1996; 348: 1512.
© 2018 The Authors.
HIV Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of British HIV Association
HIV Medicine (2018), 19, 532--540
HIV transmission through biting or spitting
539
 15 Pretty IA, Anderson GS, Sweet DJ. Human bites and the risk
of human immunodeficiency virus transmission. Am J
Forensic Medicine Pathol 1999; 20: 232–239.
16 Police M. Information Rights Unit - Various questions in
relation to spit guards/hoods. 2016.
17 Shugars DC, Sweet SP, Malamud D et al. Saliva and
inhibition of HIV-1 infection: molecular mechanisms. Oral
Dis 2002; 8 (Suppl 2): 169–175.
18 News B. ‘Cruel’ spit hoods used by third of UK police forces.
BBC. BBC Online, 2016.
19 Assaults on Emergency Workers (Offences) Bill 2017–19. In:
Parliament, 2017.
20 Exposure. Spit of HIV-positive man is considered ‘deadly
weapon’. AIDS Policy Law 2005; 20:3.
21 Vidmar L, Poljak M, Tomazic J, Seme K, Klavs I. Transmission
of HIV-1 by human bite. Lancet 1996; 347: 1762.
22 To transmit HIV, biter must have blood in the mouth. AIDS
Policy & Law 1996; 11: 5.
23 Deshpande AK, Jadhav SK, Bandivdekar AH. Possible
transmission of HIV Infection due to human bite. AIDS Res
Ther 2011; 8: 16.
24 Andreo SM, Barra LA, Costa LJ, Sucupira MCA, Souza IE,
Diaz RS. HIV type 1 transmission by human bite. AIDS Res
Hum Retroviruses 2004; 20: 349–350.
25 Bartholomew CF, Jones AM. Human bites: a rare risk factor
for HIV transmission. AIDS 2006; 20: 631–632.
26 Wahn V, Kramer HH, Voit T, Bruster HT, Scrampical B,
Scheid A. Horizontal transmission of HIV infection between
two siblings. Lancet 1986; 2: 694.
27 Khajotia RR. Transmission of human immunodeficiency virus
through saliva after a lip bite. Arch Intern Med 1997; 157: 1901.
28 Akani CI, Uzoigwe SA, Ariweriokuma B. Human bite and
HIV transmission. Malawi Med J 2007; 19: 90.
29 Transmission of HIV by human bite. Lancet 1987; 2: 522.
30 Tsoukas CM, Hadjis T, Shuster J, Theberge L, Feorino P,
O’Shaughnessy M. Lack of transmission of HIV through
human bites and scratches. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr
1988; 1: 505–507.
31 Drummond JA. Seronegative 18 months after being bitten by
a patient with AIDS. JAMA 1986; 256: 2342–2343.
32 Shirley LR, Ross SA. Risk of transmission of human
immunodeficiency virus by bite of an infected toddler. J
Pediatr 1989; 114: 425–427.
Supporting Information
Additional Supporting Information may be found in the
online version of this article at the publisher’s web-site:
Notes S1.
Notes S1. Full search description for HIV transmission by
human bite and spitting
© 2018 The Authors.
HIV Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of British HIV Association
HIV Medicine (2018), 19, 532--540
540
FV Cresswell et al.
