 REVIEW
Oxidative Priority, Meal Frequency,
and the Energy Economy of Food and Activity:
Implications for Longevity, Obesity,
and Cardiometabolic Disease
Raymond J. Cronise, BS,
1 David A. Sinclair, PhD,
2,3 and Andrew A. Bremer, MD, PhD4
Abstract
In most modern societies, the relationship that many individuals have with food has fundamentally changed
from previous generations. People have shifted away from viewing food as primarily sustenance, and rather
now seek out foods based on pure palatability or specific nutrition. However, it is far from clear what optimal
nutrition is for the general population or specific individuals. We previously described the Food Triangle as a
way to organize food based on an increasing energy density paradigm, and now expand on this model to predict
the impact of oxidative priority and both nutrient and fiber density in relation to caloric load. When combined
with meal frequency, integrated energy expenditure, macronutrient oxidative priority, and fuel partitioning
expressed by the respiratory quotient, our model also offers a novel explanation for chronic overnutrition and
the cause of excess body fat accumulation. Herein, we not only review how metabolism is a dynamic process
subject to many regulators that mediate the fate of ingested calories but also discuss how the Food Triangle
predicts the oxidative priority of ingested foods and provides a conceptual paradigm for healthy eating sup-
ported by health and longevity research.
Keywords: oxidative priority, metabolism, obesity, longevity, cardiometabolic disease
Introduction
I
n just over two centuries, we have advanced from
discovering the role of oxygen in respiration to interro-
gating a complex, molecular biology-based model of cel-
lular respiration, hormonal regulation, and bioenergetics in
human physiology and pathophysiology. Over a century ago,
food was systematically analyzed for its basic energy com-
ponents—protein, carbohydrate, and fat—and the bioavail-
ability of this energy quantified as a basis for nutritive
economic exchange. Direct and indirect calorimetry experi-
ments on individuals in both long- and short-term respiration
chamber studies involving both eating and physical activity
have also thoroughly documented energy conservation. Why,
then, do popular self-help books, scholarly articles, and media
headlines still question the validity of the dietary calorie
(technically a kilocalorie [1000 cal] or *4.2 kJ) in predicting
energy deficit and accumulated excess? And why, despite
more being known about energy management than ever be-
fore, does our society appear incapable of managing an oth-
erwise simple energy balance?
For many people in developed nations, their relationship
with food is fundamentally different than previous genera-
tions, with a shift away from sustenance and toward either
pure palatability or specific nutrition (i.e., high-protein
diets, low-fat diets, low-carbohydrate diets, or combinations
1Thermogenex, Huntsville, Alabama.
2Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
3Department of Pharmacology, School of Medical Sciences, The University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia.
4Division of Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Metabolic Diseases, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland.
� Raymond J. Cronise, et al., 2017; Published by Mary Ann Liebert, Inc. This Open Access article is distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly credited.
METABOLIC SYNDROME AND RELATED DISORDERS
Volume 15, Number 1, 2017
Mary Ann Liebert, Inc.
Pp. 6–17
DOI: 10.1089/met.2016.0108
6
 thereof). It is far from clear, however, what optimal nutrition
is for the general population or for specific individuals. And,
how does one make sense of all the claims of certain dietary
patterns in addition to the ubiquitous conflicting advertising
adjectives of fresh, organic, gluten free, low fat, low ‘‘carb,’’
or sugar free?
As we previously described,1 the Food Triangle repre-
sents a new organization of food based on an increasing
energy density paradigm. However, the Food Triangle can
further be expanded to predict the impact of oxidative pri-
ority and both nutrient and fiber density in relation to caloric
load. When combined with meal frequency, integrated en-
ergy expenditure, and fuel partitioning expressed by the
respiratory quotient (RQ), our model also offers a novel
explanation for chronic overnutrition and the cause of ex-
cess body fat accumulation.
In this short review, we will discuss four main points: (i)
nutrition is not an emergency; (ii) the Food Triangle predicts
oxidative priority; (iii) the chronically fed state is the an-
tithesis of dietary restriction (DR) and counters the favorable
metabolic effects of DR demonstrated in longevity research;
and (iv) exercise-induced shifts in RQ disrupt fat disposal and
portend an unintentional cascade of feeding events.
Calorie In, Calorie Out
One of the original tenants of human metabolism is that
ingested food can be quantified as energy exchange units
based on biological energetics and associated waste heat.
Throughout the second half of the 19th century and an early
part of the 20th century, researchers worked carefully to de-
fine this exchange equivalency, or digestive efficiency.2–6
Ingested food is broken down into components of energy that
are stored, burned, or eliminated in waste. By careful com-
parison of bomb calorimeter data for various foods with
measurements of heat and respiration components in the
hours following meals, Carl von Voit, Max Rubner, Max
Pettenkofer, Wilbur Atwater, Francis Benedict, and others
calculated the average energy conversions for protein, car-
bohydrate, fat, and alcohol.5–10 While it may be true that
isocaloric foods are not always isometabolic, food caloric
intake minus heat dissipated, respiration, and those calories
eliminated as fecal and urine waste must equal zero.
While it may appear that certain calories dominate fat loss
and gain, the discrepancy is generally attributed to an
oversimplification of energy accounting. With an exception
of rare genetic disorders, obesity is largely caused by ex-
cessive food intake, with a lesser contribution from physical
inactivity due to the tendency to increase calorie con-
sumption during exercise.4,11 However, the phenomenon of
an acquired appetite that dominates instinctual eating cues
has been recognized since the time of Hippocrates12 and the
mechanisms involved in leading some people to overeat
while leading others to reach a natural balance between
hunger and weight remain unresolved.13,14 Obesity is not
common in the animal kingdom, with the exception of an-
imals (e.g., pets) we overfeed or when excess calories are
unnaturally readily available. Moreover, in a calorically
scarce environment, a desire to overconsume is not a trait of
negative selection and may in fact assert positive benefits.
As we describe below, the tendency to store the most energy
dense portion of a meal (i.e., fat) may also be explained in
terms of an adaptive advantage.
Thermodynamics of Overnutrition
While it is arithmetically convenient to focus on a daily
calorie surplus or deficit, the specific substrate or nutrient
utilized, along with energy increases from basal require-
ments due to diet, activity, and the environment, must be
examined on a shorter time scale for a more accurate rep-
resentation of fatty acid accumulation or oxidation. Figure 1
illustrates calorie input and disposal for a typical day using
1-hr time intervals with the indicated duration, frequency,
and overlap of primary energy components. Daily total en-
ergy expenditure (TEE) is a composite of basal metabolic
rate (BMR), activity, exercise, dietary-induced thermo-
genesis (DIT), and environmentally-induced thermogenesis
(EIT). Experimentally, BMR is measured in the fasted state
upon waking in a dark room. However, BMR is often used
synonymously with resting metabolic rate (RMR), which
typically is measured less stringently and requires only
fasting and the absence of physical activity, typically 4 hr
before the test.15 Experimental tests for both BMR and
RMR are normally 15–20 min in duration, and the results
extrapolated over a 24-hr period of time.15
Early calorimeter experiments carefully measured the
heat emitted from a thermally isolated room yielding direct
calorimetry measurements over hours and even days.16
Later, in part, for practical purposes, most researchers
FIG. 1.
BMR modification and associated impact on fat oxidation. For each 1-hr interval during a 24-hr period of time,
both the MR and RQ must be evaluated to accurately calculate net loss/gain of a specific substrate (e.g., fat). While feeding,
activity, and environment may all increase BMR, RQ is dynamic (not discrete for each activity) and acts on the in-
stantaneous total MR. If the largest MR periods occur during times of highest RQ, stored fat is preserved. Use of an average
or predicted metabolic rate over a 24-hr period of time compared to calories actually ingested is insufficient to accurately
predict substrate gain/loss. BMR, basal metabolic rate; DIT, dietary-induced thermogenesis; EE, energy expenditure; MR,
metabolic rate; RQ, respiratory quotient.
OXIDATIVE PRIORITY AND ENERGY ECONOMY
7
 turned to measuring carbon dioxide (CO2) produced and
oxygen (O2) consumed to give an indirect calorimetry mea-
surement of the heat evolved from respiration. The first sys-
tematic investigation of the gross energy content of food is
credited to Rubner in Germany and Atwater in the United
States.7 By comparing indirect calorimetry of subjects with a
growing database of direct bomb calorimetry of more than
4000 analyses of 1360 different food items, Atwater improved
on Rubner’s earlier work and created a range of factors and
coefficients representing energy availability and digestibility
of foodstuffs to delineate their useful calorie content.17
However, the oversimplified and generalized notion of energy
storage being a consequence of ‘‘calories in and calories out,’’
often interpreted as diet and exercise, fails to capture the more
subtle thermodynamics of energy storage and disposal, par-
ticularly waste heat. Moreover, the human body is not a per-
fect engine and it is known that the energy liberated from the
combustion of food is not identical to the energy available to
the body from the consumption of food.18 This concept,
known as ‘‘metabolizable energy,’’ is the difference between
the gross energy of consumed food measured by bomb calo-
rimetry and the energy contained in the feces and urine.19
To address the dynamic nature of metabolism, the RQ
must be factored into this composite metabolic summary.
RQ can be estimated by the respiratory exchange ratio (RER),
or the ratio of CO2 produced and O2 consumed during res-
piration, and can be directly related to the individual substrate
being oxidized, whether it is protein, carbohydrate, fat, or
alcohol.20 A general stoichiometric solution for protein, car-
bohydrate, fat, alcohol, and other less abundant carbon sour-
ces in the diet such as acetate and ketone bodies is shown in
Fig. 2. The significance of the RER measurement is the ability
to use it to estimate the RQ of a mixture of fuel sources (i.e.,
a typical meal of mixed macronutrients).15 Generally, lipids
have an RQ of *0.7 and carbohydrates have an RQ of *1.0.
The RQ of alcohol is slightly lower than lipid at *0.67, and
while the RQ of amino acids range from 0.6 to 1.17, the
average is *0.84. In the case of proteins, since amino acids
are not completely oxidized, urine and fecal urea is collected
over a 24-hr period to calculate protein oxidation; this value is
then subtracted from RQ measurements to give nonprotein
RQ (npRQ).15 Fortuitously, because the RQ values of proteins
generally fall in the middle of the carbohydrate/fat range,
indirect calorimetry gives a relatively accurate quantitative
snapshot of carbohydrate/fat energy partitioning without ni-
trogen balance.15 For more complete and extensive assess-
ments of energy partitioning, the npRQ is used.
For an accurate interpretation of energy homeostasis, the
importance of RQ cannot be overemphasized. One must
consider not only the quantity of each ingested macronu-
trient but also, more importantly, how these fuels are stored
and utilized. A surplus or deficit of fat cannot be calculated
if one only considers a 24-hr extrapolation (TEE) of a 15-
min measurement (BMR/RMR) and compares the resulting
total predicted activity output with actual calories consumed
unless it is also accurately known how the macronutrients
are partitioned as fuel throughout the day.
Importantly, RQ captures the percentage rise and fall of
fat utilization driven by diet, activity, and environment.
And, by combining RQ with TEE, it is evident that the
utilization and storage of fat are most relevant to weight
gained or lost; this can be represented mathematically as
follows:
Z
24
0
(FAT%)EEdt
2
4
3
5 � FAT INTAKE24 hr ¼ FAT Loss/Gain
Despite numerous studies demonstrating that de novo li-
pogenesis
from
carbohydrates
does
not
significantly
FIG. 2.
Substrate oxidation and RQ. (A) General stoichiometry solutions for various fuel substrates. (B) The cellular
RQ—the ratio of CO2 produced to O2 consumed—for a wide variety of foodstuffs. (C) Individual amino acid RQ values are
summarized; the average RQ for all amino acids is an RQ = 0.84. Generally accepted RQ values for the major macronu-
trients are protein (PRO) = 0.82; carbohydrate (CHO) = 1.0; and fat (FAT) = 0.70.
8
CRONISE, SINCLAIR, AND BREMER
 contribute to the increase in whole-body adipose tissue
stores found in obesity,21–27 the notion that ‘‘sugar turns to
fat’’ abounds. Perhaps there is further confusion resulting
from the unintented consequences of aggregating whole-
food complex carbohydrates with highly refined grains and
sugars simply because they share the defining glycosidic
bond found in all carbohydrates. Not only does this detract
from the important negative metabolic effects that excess
simple sugar consumption has on hepatic steatosis and mi-
tochondrial dysfunction but it also obfuscates the role that
excess dietary protein (amino acid), alcohol, and carbohy-
drates play in driving dietary fat storage and interfering in
stored adipose disposal through normal metabolic activities
during the fasted state.
So, how can generalized notions of metabolism be re-
framed to provide a more accurate assessment of fat disposal
and accumulation? Consider the fasted and inactive BMR
during a 24-hr period as shown in Fig. 1. During each hour of
fasting, the fat deficit grows and its magnitude is determined
by the fat percentage of TEE in each unit time. Upon waking
and with nondepleted glycogen stores, a normal fasted RQ is
*0.85, or *50% oxidation both from stored fat and carbo-
hydrate. In this scenario, about half of the expected calorie
deficit for the 24-hr TEE is predicted to be from fat. Next,
consider added activity and its associated increase in energy
expenditure (EE) during the active period along with asso-
ciated increases in RQ (favoring carbohydrate oxidation)
typical with periods of increased physical activity. Note that
for each hour of activity-shifted RQ and increased EE, the
‘‘new’’ RQ not only affects the calories expended by the
added activity but also impacts the calories that would have
been expended by the BMR for that same period. This creates
a seemingly paradoxical situation, as it is possible to signif-
icantly increase EE with activity and simultaneously de-
crease fat percentage utilization to a point of diminishing
returns when compared to calorie restriction alone.
For example, as illustrated in Fig. 3, assume the BMR for
a person is 1800 kcal/day (75 kcal/hr). One hour of physical
activity (i.e., jogging at 5 miles/hr) will result in an increase
to *500 kcal/hr in EE. However, it is the utilization of fat
calories (resulting from shifts in RQ in any given time unit)
that is more relevant and important than total EE when it
comes to body weight. As demonstrated in many calorim-
eter experiments, vigorous activity will tend to raise RQ and
therefore decrease percent fat utilization during the activity
period.9,28,29 Alternatively, an individual in the fasted/rest-
ing state or during extended caloric restriction will have a
decreased RQ, thereby increasing percent fat utilization.30,31
Conceptually it might be difficult to equate 1 hr of jogging
with a little more than half a teaspoon of olive oil (*40
FIG. 3.
Fuel utilization and partitioning with physical activity versus calorie restriction. A 1-hr block of time spent sitting
is compared to a 1-hr block of time spent jogging. (A) At an RMR of 1800 kcal/day (a typical individual), a predicted
resting RQ of 0.85 (49.3% fat oxidation) results in 75 kcal/hr EE and 37 kcal/hr fat utilization. During activity, the rise in
RQ to 0.96 (12.8% fat oxidation) results in 500 kcal/hr EE and 64 kcal/hr fat utilization. For comparison, the change in fat
utilization between rest and activity equates to slightly more than a ½ teaspoon of olive oil (*40 kcal/tsp). (B) During times
of sustained calorie restriction, resting RQ may drop to an RQ of 0.78 (*74% fat oxidation) due to increased fat utilization,
resulting in *55 kcal/hr fat utilization. This is a difference of only 9 kcal (less than a ¼ teaspoon of olive oil) from the 64
kcal/hr fat utilization predicted during physical activity in a noncalorie-restricted state. EE, energy expenditure; RMR,
resting metabolic rate.
OXIDATIVE PRIORITY AND ENERGY ECONOMY
9
 kcal/tsp) with respect to energy equivalents. However, this
observation readily explains why any increase in EE in-
duced by exercise can quickly be overcome by diet. While it
is often argued that exercise preserves fat-free mass, when
calorie restriction and calorie intake plus exercise are pre-
cisely matched, there seems to be parity in loss.11 Further-
more, Redman et al. suggest that individuals are genetically
or epigenetically programmed for fat loss and accumulation,
a ‘‘first on-last off’’ response that may explain why problem
areas, such as abdominal fat, are variable among individuals
of similar fitness.11 Finlayson et al. also suggest that the
benefits of exercise may be offset in some people by an
‘‘individual reward,’’ in which an increased desire to eat
compensates for any calories lost during the activity.32 We
propose that determining the exact cause of weight change
may be additionally masked by thermodynamic shifts in fuel
partitioning through a complex interaction of activity, cal-
orie source, and environment.
Thermodynamics of Feeding
Feeding, with associated DIT and oxidative priority, adds
another level of complexity to the ‘‘is a calorie a calorie?’’
question. Figure 4 illustrates the impact of meal frequency
on the time available to dispose of ingested energy. In the
fasted state, metabolic energy is completely sourced from
body stores. If the fast continues, glycogen stores will
eventually be depleted and a shift to fat oxidation will en-
sue.33 Fatty acid-derived ketones can not only contribute to
metabolic activity but also provide up to 60%–70% of brain
energy needs during long periods of glycogen depletion;
blood glucose concentrations are maintained by gluconeo-
genesis and glucogenic amino acids sourced from protein
stores.34,35
On feeding, a complex set of digestive processes are
initiated, which result in the breakdown of the ingested
foodstuffs into their constituent macronutrients (and mi-
cronutrients) and their distribution to the tissues. Im-
portantly, by considering the fed and fasted state in a more
general conceptual model, the problem that may unfold
through chronic overnutrition becomes evident. As each
successive meal is added, it disrupts the fasted state and
obligates the body to take action on the newly ingested fuel.
And although each meal is associated with a 4–6-hr post-
prandial increase in metabolic rate,36 the fate of the ingested
fuel is discrete as it will be either metabolized, stored,
eliminated, or a combination thereof. All calories ingested
must ultimately meet one of these three ends. Since meals
consist of a mixture of macronutrients, the logical ques-
tion centers on the regulation of fuel partitioning after a meal:
how does the body decide which fuel to utilize, eliminate, or
store?
DIT and Oxidative Priority
Prentice and colleagues addressed the issue of fuel parti-
tioning with their model of oxidative priority, or oxidative
hierarchy,
based
on
individual
macronutrient
storage
(Fig. 5).37–44 Conceptually, to better understand the fate of the
molecular components of food as they begin to leave the di-
gestive tract, it may be useful to put aside the popular food
labeling and macronutrient organization scheme of protein,
carbohydrate, and fat, and recognize that whole foods, espe-
cially entire meals, are mixtures. Complex carbohydrates and
simple sugars are broken down to monosaccharides, proteins
into constituent amino acids, and lipids mobilized through
chylomicron transport. Eating thus results in a postprandial
rise in monosaccharide (glucose), amino acid, and lipid blood
levels, during which the body attempts to normalize their
concentrations by one of the three strategies: utilization,
storage, or elimination. Importantly, when storage is limited
or impossible, then two choices remain: utilize or eliminate.
For example, following the ingestion of a protein-rich
meal, a relatively larger increase in DIT is observed in the
postprandial state compared to a carbohydrate-rich meal
since amino acids have no significant inherent storage depot;
the body essentially transforms excess energy into waste heat.
Although the postprandial rise in metabolism following a
protein-rich meal may be considered advantageous and a way
to mitigate weight gain or even lose weight, little if any of this
excess energy is sourced from stored adipose tissue. As
demonstrated with the increase in metabolic rate with phys-
ical activity, it is possible and even expected that increases in
metabolism to dispose of excess calories ingested with a
protein-rich meal may actually cause a decrease in stored
adipose tissue utilization. An equally important consideration
is the following: not only may dietary fat be stored at a higher
rate in the presence of macronutrients with a higher oxidative
priority but also overall fat oxidation rates may be decreased
by shifts in fuel partitioning.45
FIG. 4.
Fed and fasted state
versus meal frequency. (A) Dif-
ferent meal frequencies and their
effects on the fed/fasted state.
(B) Postprandial fluctuations in
plasma
macronutrient
levels
based on meal frequencies.
10
CRONISE, SINCLAIR, AND BREMER
 Conversely, a greater thermogenic response to food may
not always cause excess stored energy reserves to be burned.
This concept is demonstrated by data showing the effects of
glucose and ethanol administration directly through intra-
venous infusion.45 Whereas ethanol and glucose infusions
have no significant impact on overall RMR, ethanol alone
suppresses fat oxidation by 87%. Importantly, a glucose
infusion following ethanol predictably increases carbohy-
drate oxidation by 249% and further suppresses fat oxida-
tion to almost nil for 90 min, with only a slow rise in fat
oxidation thereafter; in fact, the total 4-hr integrated oxi-
dation of fat following an ethanol-then-glucose infusion is
suppressed by 79%.
Returning to the concept of meal frequency and mixed-
meal oxidative priority, one can translate these results to
what occurs when an individual consumes a wine, cheese,
and cracker hors d’oeuvre. The post-hors d’oeuvre rise in
alcohol and glucose concentrations actually suppresses fat
oxidation and promotes storage of the dietary fat from the
meal. As such, one can easily understand how body fat
increases over time; the homeostatic drive to normalize
postprandial rises in blood nutrient levels offers a novel
conceptual framework that predicts fat accumulation.
Adaptive Thermogenesis
An additional element that influences the body’s metab-
olism is the overall environment—particularly mild cold
stress.46–49 In contrast to physical activity that increases RQ,
the body’s environment can induce the opposite effect.29,50
For example, long periods of mild cold stress from cooler
ambient temperatures can induce nonshivering thermogen-
esis, reducing RQ (favoring fat oxidation)51; this, simulta-
neously, increases fasted/resting EE and may lead to an
overall increased fat deficit.
Specifically, the activation of brown adipose tissue (BAT)
increases mitochondrial heat production in skeletal muscle
cells,50,52–54 at least, in part, by the upregulation of perox-
isome proliferator-activated receptor-g coactivator (PGC)-
1a—which is induced by low caloric intake or mild cold
stress.52,53,55–58 Why PGC-1a is upregulated in response to
both low caloric intake and mild cold stress is yet to be fully
elucidated; but, in our ‘‘Metabolic Winter Hypothesis,’’1 we
postulate that the molecular responses to these two stressors
(i.e., caloric restriction and cold temperatures) may have
evolved in tandem—both conserving energy in the fasted
state and partitioning calories to fat for warmth during times
of cold. Furthermore, as reported by both Valde
´s et al.59 and
Yang et al.60 studying relatively homogeneous genetic
populations consuming a comparable diet living at mildly
different degrees of latitude, an association exists between
ambient temperature and obesity.
In general, a discussion of ‘‘calories in and calories out’’
often includes generalized metabolic rates, DIT, energy as-
sociated with physical activity, and even BAT and mild cold
stress. However, ultimately, it is the integrated total energy
expended and fuel partitioned (metabolic rate and RQ) that
determine how much adipose tissue is depleted in a given
24-hr period. During periods of nonglycogen depleted fast-
ing, this might be a 50:50 carbohydrate:fat split (RQ *0.85).
In the postprandial/fed state, fat utilization may be signifi-
cantly
reduced;
alternatively, during an
extended
fast
(glycogen-depleted ketosis), fat utilization may dominate.
Clearly, the simple average metabolic rate summary and
ubiquitous focus on metabolic ‘‘boosting’’ diets and ex-
ercise are insufficient to explain the thermodynamics of
feeding; importantly, they may have an unintended con-
sequence in metabolic rate modification and unanticipated
RQ shifts away from fat utilization.
The Food Triangle and Whole-Food
Diet Schemes
As we explained in more detail previously,1 the Food
Triangle offers a novel way to conceptualize food in a
manner that eliminates the traditional macronutrient food
FIG. 5.
Oxidative priority of macronutrient disposal. An oxidative prioritization of macronutrients predicts the parti-
tioning hierarchy based on the inverse relationship of storage capacity. Not all macronutrients can be stored at the same
level. For example, alcohol has no long-term storage capacity, while fat has a relatively unlimited capacity. While the
postprandial DIT rise is highest for protein and lowest for fat, these metabolic increases do not necessarily reflect utilization
of stored energy reserves and are rather better explained by the need to mitigate postprandial rises in blood nutrient levels.
In nearly all cases, postprandial blood analyte levels that increase due to meals normalize within 4–6 hr as the postabsorptive
state is reached. ALC, alcohol; CHO, carbohydrate; DIT, diet-induced thermogenesis; FAT, fat; PRO, protein
OXIDATIVE PRIORITY AND ENERGY ECONOMY
11
 groupings of protein, carbohydrate, and fat that are in
widespread use. The Food Triangle organizes whole food
using an energy density paradigm. It recognizes that es-
sential amino acids (i.e., proteins) are not limiting nutrients
in any whole-food diet that meets daily energy needs. Ra-
ther, vegetable- or animal-sourced amino acids, in excess of
daily requirements, along with carbohydrates and fat, all
become fuel with oxidative priority given to that which is
not readily stored. This organization of energy density per-
mits individuals to address their micronutrient requirements
(the apex of the triangle) without driving chronic overnutri-
tion (the bottom vertices of the triangle). These foods become
the nutritional foundation of daily meals, rather than the more
energy-dense alternatives. They also provide a rich source of
phytonutrients and can be eaten in nearly unlimited quantities.
It further places emphasis on foods that are increasingly im-
portant for healthy gut microbiota.
By utilizing the Food Triangle and combining the effect
of fed/fasted periods, dietary- and activity-induced RQ
shifts, and oxidative priority, it is possible to predict sub-
strate utilization and how different diet schemes effectively
mediate preferential fat disposal (Fig. 6). While the mag-
nitude of the impact of carbohydrate consumption versus fat
consumption on fat mass gain has been deliberated for de-
cades, the Food Triangle provides a conceptual framework
of the relationship between diet and energy density and
suggests that both (i.e., dietary carbohydrates [sugars] and
dietary fats) individually and synergistically contribute to fat
mass gain. We recognize that the complex interdependent
roles of insulin, glucagon, and incretins61,62—in addition to
other hormones and regulatory molecules—in both the
fasting and postprandial states provide mechanistic insights
into how oxidative priority is managed and are not com-
prehensively addressed in this review.
However, our objective with this essay is not to provide
an extensive review of nutritional biochemistry and endo-
crinology; rather, it is to (1) focus on why social influence
and unnatural access to food have created the opportunity
for the chronic postprandial state and (2) organize food in an
understandable manner that much more readily predicts fat
accumulation. This conceptual framework also explains why
diets that eliminate one or the other (i.e., diets that eliminate
fats but permit carbohydrates or vice versa) might be ef-
fective in the short term, but are typically unsuccessful for
sustained weight loss when the eliminated food is returned.
The apex of the Food Triangle contains phytonutrient/fiber-
rich, low-calorie foods. Down each descending side of the
Food Triangle are foods of increasing energy density sepa-
rated as primarily fat- and carbohydrate-sourced food. A
notable exception is the fats sourced from whole-food plant-
based nuts, seeds, and certain fruits (e.g., avocados and
coconuts).
If one eats on the right side of the Food Triangle, pri-
marily sourcing energy from whole-food dietary starches
and fruits, dietary carbohydrate (beyond that needed to re-
plete glycogen stores) may be disposed of via increased RQ
and postprandial EE via DIT. On the contrary, a diet sourced
from the left side of the Food Triangle will lead to depleted
glycogen stores and eventually induce a ketogenic state,
lowering RQ and favoring fat utilization. Unlike excess di-
etary carbohydrates, which are disposed of through oxidation,
excess dietary lipid may be partially eliminated in the feces
after incomplete absorption. Each approach may be effective
in inducing the calorie deficit required to result in weight loss;
but, long-term lifestyle decisions to increase an individual’s
healthspan are more complex. The Food Triangle thus fun-
damentally provides a paradigm of healthy eating that extends
beyond the caloric component of foodstuffs.
Diets that emphasize the base of the Food Triangle—
perhaps even as an unintended consequence of what one
might call a ‘‘balanced meal’’—may drive excess fat storage
via the mechanisms of oxidative priority described above.
And, as shown in Fig. 6, the oxidative priority model por-
tends that the postprandial partitioning and disposal of
FIG. 6.
Energy density of popular diet schemes. Our version of the Food Triangle may be used to compare popular diet
schemes for energy density. For example, the relative energy density of a Paleo- versus vegan-style diet, which nearly
mirrors the opposite sides of the Food Triangle, is shown. Furthermore, a ‘‘Western diet,’’ which is more heavily weighted
toward foods at the base of the Food Triangle, is predicted to result in maximum energy accumulation of dietary fat. While
not considered part of the whole foods integrated into the Food Triangle, excess refined oil, sugar, and grain (e.g., flour)
adulterants may drive any of these diet schemes to unintentional chronic overnutrition. While either side of the Food
Triangle is predictive for excess energy, it may also be used to predict overnutrition of dietary amino acids and fats and
undernutrition of phytonutrients and dietary fiber.
12
CRONISE, SINCLAIR, AND BREMER
 foodstuffs from a typical ‘‘Western’’ diet (i.e., a diet em-
phasizing the base of the Food Triangle) would be obeso-
genic; this prediction matches the current reality.63 Bottom
feeding on the base of the Food Triangle, especially with the
added consumption of refined grains (e.g., flours), oil, and
sugar adulterants, yields a diet in which the most energy-
dense foods are consumed together. Many traditional meal
plans from a century or more ago aimed to mitigate eco-
nomic calorie scarcity, but may have unintentionally created
today’s widespread food culture-induced bottom feeding
(e.g., burger-fries, steak-potatoes, fish-chips, pasta-meat sauce,
curry-rice, etc). However, in an environment of unnatural
calorie availability, these meals become maladaptive.
This, combined with predictive oxidative priority and a
regulated capacity to store excess carbohydrates as glyco-
gen, favors fat storage for later use; unfortunately for most,
later never comes. Modern successes in agriculture, reduced
food cost, and availability—coupled with current sleep
patterns—enable a chronically fed state; and, with excessive
meal/snack frequency, it is possible for many individuals to
remain in the postprandial/absorptive state for most of the
day. This is a period when ingested calorie disposal, not the
utilization of energy reserves, is prioritized.
The chronically fed state is further encouraged by the
common notion that ‘‘nutrition is an emergency’’ and that
frequent feeding is beneficial, despite numerous studies sug-
gesting the beneficial effects of intermittent fasting, diets that
mimic fasting, calorie restriction, protein restriction, and
prolonged medically supervised water fasts.64 However, not
only do calorie restriction, alternate day fasting, and periodic
fasting have a long history in society, they are the only
mechanisms by which life/healthspan has been extended in
the laboratory.65–70
Researchers and dietitians alike also continue to focus on
the ‘‘eat meat versus do not eat meat’’ or ‘‘fat versus sugar’’
debate. We propose this constitutes a false ideological di-
chotomy that only loosely addresses fat accumulation over
time. For example, if one were to follow a strict vegan diet
based on the right side of the Food Triangle, thereby elim-
inating all dietary fat sourced from animal products without
limiting oils, refined grains (e.g., flours), or sugar, it is still
possible to drive dietary fat storage. Likewise, diets on the
left side of the Food Triangle can drive dietary fat storage
despite the oft-cited health benefits of maintaining a state of
relative ketosis. Why is this so? Because it does not take
much dietary carbohydrate, even from healthful sources
such as fruits and whole-food low-glycemic starches, to
eliminate ketosis and increase the postprandial RQ to favor
carbohydrate disposal. In this case, although the dietary
carbohydrate is typically viewed as the culprit for fat stor-
age, it is actually the dietary fat component of the meal that
is stored. Hall et al. have also reported that consuming an
isocaloric low-carbohydrate ketogenic diet when compared
to a high-carbohydrate baseline diet is not accompanied by
increased body fat loss despite a relatively small increase in
EE, or metabolic advantage.71
This creates a dietary stalemate; and, while energy
components are only one dimension of the Food Triangle,
they clearly predict the accumulation of excess adipose
tissue when combined with the conceptual model of oxi-
dative priority and hours spent in the fed versus fasted state.
The two primary dietary fuels, fats and carbohydrates, es-
sentially exert competing excess energy challenges: dietary
carbohydrate calories displace stored fat energy that would
have been utilized in the fasted state and dietary fat accu-
mulates, increasing the fat burden that must be used in the
future. Clearly, in the chronically fed state, these two energy
imbalances favor net accumulation of adipose tissue and in
the calorie-limited world this would be an adaptive evolu-
tionary advantage for infrequent feeding opportunities.
However, most of the inhabitants of developed countries do
not live in a calorie-limited world. Another benefit of re-
turning the discussion back to whole foods using the Food
Triangle rather than grouping dietary components in overly
general categories of protein, carbohydrates, and fats is that
one needs more specificity on each of these macronutrients
(e.g., essential vs. nonessential amino acids, simple mono-
saccharides versus complex carbohydrates and dietary fiber,
and saturated and trans-unsaturated fatty acids versus mono-
and polyunsaturated fatty acids) to study and assess their
impacts on health.
Implications for Cardiometabolic Disease
The increased prevalence of overweight and obesity over
the past several decades has paralleled the increased prev-
alence of cardiometabolic disease.69,72,73 Although the cor-
relation between excess weight and cardiometabolic disease
is not sufficient to demonstrate causality, most researchers
agree the two are tightly linked. Moreover, weight loss via
lifestyle factors such as diet and exercise remains a cor-
nerstone to therapy for cardiometabolic disease. However,
the relative contribution of diet and exercise to weight loss
remains controversial.74,75
Furthermore, while potential exercise-induced shifts in
eating habits and RQ may lead to less fat utilization in the
short term, they should not overshadow the myriad health
benefits of exercise or discourage physical activity. How-
ever, the option to delay or suspend excessive physical ac-
tivity during a period of decreased nutrient availability (e.g.,
during a period of dietary caloric restriction) is a viable
alternative to increasing nutrient intake to meet the in-
creased metabolic demands of exercise. Decreased nutrition
combined with increased physical activity may unintention-
ally limit recovery; and, depending on a person’s frame, ex-
cessive fat mass may increase the risk of injury. However,
these issues are mitigated as one approaches normal weight.
From a conceptual framework, it is also important to
recognize two important points: (1) although both caloric
restriction and exercise may lead to weight loss, the physi-
ological adaptation and responses to each differ dramatically
and (2) the weight loss-independent effects of caloric re-
striction and exercise on risk factors for cardiovascular
disease are not additive.76 However, because physical in-
activity and poor aerobic capacity are independent risk
factors for cardiovascular disease, exercise—when safely
performed at an appropriate weight—may provide a benefit
that cannot be achieved by caloric restriction alone.76
As reviewed above, the thermodynamic responses to in-
gested foodstuffs clearly differ from physical activity. Al-
though many individuals consider exercise to be an antidote
to excess calorie intake and that physical activity without
changes in dietary intake may lead to significant weight loss,
the available data suggest otherwise.11,77–79 In general, the
negative impact of modern diets exceeds the positive impact
of exercise on net weight. And, although the factors that
OXIDATIVE PRIORITY AND ENERGY ECONOMY
13
 lead to obesity and the components of the metabolic syn-
drome that often (but not necessarily) accompany obesity
are not identical, they are nonetheless associated with car-
diometabolic disease risk.80–82
Conclusion
From an evolutionary adaptive perspective, it seems un-
likely that our ancestors had such easy access to the current
socially normal and excessive meal frequency and calorie
density. Although periods of fasting for days or perhaps
even weeks may appear socially extreme today, they are
tolerable83–88 and were likely imperative to survive in an
environment that historically humans had little to no control
over. Moreover, seasonal and circadian zeitgebers exert
strong feedback mechanisms on cellular and whole-body
function, including effects on nutrient disposal.89–95 Our
‘‘Metabolic Winter Hypothesis’’ suggests that a healthful
existence requires the majority of us to reassess our rela-
tionships with food intake, sleep, and the temperature of our
environment.1 Many observations indicate that DR, mild
cold stress, and sleep all appear to have a related mecha-
nistic role of increasing health and longevity and mitigating
age-related diseases.96,97 One may conceptually frame this
by contrasting a metabolic winter (i.e., cool, dark, still, and
scarce) with a metabolic summer (i.e., warm, bright, active,
and abundant). Added to this framework are the myriad cell
signaling pathways and fundamental cellular processes
modulated by nutrient availability and nutrient signaling.
These are likely part of a larger phenology influencing all
animal and plant life, a phenomenon that humans have
successfully engineered out of their daily life.
Importantly, using the Food Triangle in place of the
traditional categorization of foods as protein, carbohydrate,
or fat allows one to more easily identify eating patterns
that will likely lead to weight gain. Moreover, food stuffs
on the right side of the Food Triangle have components
that longevity research shows can extend the healthspan,
if not the life span, of mammals and potentially humans98
by minimizing essential amino acids to decrease mTOR
and GH/IGF-I signaling, while maximizing dietary fiber,
vitamins, minerals, and micronutrients such as caroten-
oids, phytosterols, and flavonoids to activate sirtuins and
AMPK.99–101
If nutrient availability plays a critical role in seasonal
environmental signaling, it may raise the question of how
various forms of DR impact overall fuel partitioning and
disposal. For example, the restriction of methionine—found
in high concentrations in animal-based protein diets (the left
side of the Food Triangle) and low concentrations in plant-
based protein diets (the right side of the Food Triangle)—
has been associated with increased longevity and improved
age-related health.102–104 One might also ask the question
whether there is a difference in metabolic feedback to a
whole food plant-based very low-calorie diet (VLCD) that
has restricted nutrients versus the often abundantly supple-
mented modern VLCDs (e.g., liquid diets). Furthermore, it
is unclear from the standpoint of adaptive evolutionary
pressure how any human ancestor might have experienced
periods of severely scarce calories yet have had access to
abundant ‘‘supplemental’’ nutrients.
In closing, over a century ago, Carl von Voit wrote in a
memorial tribute to Max Pettenkofer after his death7:
Imagine our sensations as the picture of the remarkable
processes of the metabolism unrolled before our eyes, and a
mass of new facts became known to us! We found that in
starvation protein and fat alone were burned, that during
work more fat was burned, and that less fat was consumed
during rest, especially during sleep; that the carnivorous dog
could maintain himself on an exclusive protein diet, and if to
such a protein diet fat were added, the fat was almost entirely
deposited in the body; that carbohydrates, on the contrary,
were burned no matter how much was given, and that they,
like the fat of the food, protected the body from fat loss,
although more carbohydrates than fat had to be given to
effect this purpose; that the metabolism in the body was not
proportional to the combustibility of the substances outside
the body, but that protein, which burns with difficulty out-
side, metabolizes with the greatest ease, then carbohydrates,
while fat, which readily burns outside, is the most difficult to
combust in the organism.
Indeed, metabolism is a dynamic process subject to many
regulators that mediate the fate of ingested calories. Our
version of the Food Triangle predicts the oxidative priority
of ingested foods and provides a conceptual paradigm for
healthy eating supported by health and longevity research.
Importantly, the thermodynamics of feeding are also influ-
enced by the fed and fasted states, and exercise-induced
shifts in RQ differentially affect nutrient disposal. The
typical modern existence in the chronically fed/postprandial
state, combined with oxidative priority and the abundance of
inexpensive, calorie-dense foods, and an aversion to mild
cold stress amalgamate to predict weight gain for the ma-
jority of the developed world if current trends continue.
Acknowledgment
This work received funding support from NIH grant R01
AG028730 to D.A.S.
Disclaimer
The contents of this article represent the authors’ views
and do not constitute an official position of the National
Institutes of Health or the U.S. Government.
Author Disclosure Statement
No competing financial interests exist.
References
1. Cronise RJ, Sinclair DA, Bremer AA. The ‘‘metabolic
winter’’ hypothesis: A cause of the current epidemics of
obesity and cardiometabolic disease. Metab Syndr Relat
Disord 2014;12:355–361.
2. Atwater W. Discussion of the terms digestibility, availability,
and fuel value. 12th Annual Report. Storrs. Agricultural
Experimental Station. Storrs, Connecticut. 1900:69.
3. Secor SM. Specific dynamic action: A review of the
postprandial metabolic response. J Comp Physiol B 2009;
179:1–56.
4. Hall KD, Heymsfield SB, Kemnitz JW, et al. Energy
balance and its components: Implications for body weight
regulation. Am J Clin Nutr 2012;95:989–994.
5. Rubner M. The Laws of Energy Consumption in Nutrition:
DTIC Document; 1968.
6. Benedict FG, Carpenter TM. Food Ingestion and Energy
Transformations: With Special Reference to the Stimulating
14
CRONISE, SINCLAIR, AND BREMER
 Effect of Nutrients. Washington, DC: Carnegie Institution
of Washington; 1918.
7. Lusk G. The Elements of the Science of Nutrition. Phlia-
delphia and London: WB Saunders Company; 1909.
8. DuBois E. Basal Metabolism in Health and Disease.
Philadelphia: Lea and Febiger; 1936.
9. Benedict FG, Cathcart EP. Muscular Work: A Metabolic
Study with Special Reference to the Efficiency of the
Human Body as a Machine Washington, DC: Carnegie
Institution of Washington; 1913.
10. Benedict FG, Miles WR, Roth P, et al. Human Vitality and
Efficiency Under Prolonged Restricted Diet. Vol. 280.
Washington, DC: Carnegie Institution of Washington; 1919.
11. Redman LM, Heilbronn LK, Martin CK, et al. Effect of
calorie restriction with or without exercise on body
composition and fat distribution. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
2007;92:865–872.
12. Adams F. The Genuine Works of Hippocrates. Vol. 2.
London: The Sydenham Society; 1849.
13. Flatt J. Misconceptions in body weight regulation: Im-
plications for the obesity pandemic. Crit Rev Clin Lab Sci
2012;49:150–165.
14. Atwater WO. Food and Diet. Yearbook of Department of
Agriculture 1894. Washington DC: Government Printing
Office; 1895:357–388.
15. Lighton JR. Measuring Metabolic Rates: A Manual for
Scientists. New York: Oxford University Press; 2008.
16. Webb P., Human Calorimeters. Endocrinology and Me-
tabolism Series. Vol. 7. New York: Praeger; 1985.
17. Atwater WO, Woods CD, Bryant AP. The Chemical
Composition of American Food Materials. Washington,
DC: Government Printing Office; 1906.
18. Buchholz AC, Schoeller DA. Is a calorie a calorie? Am J
Clin Nutr 2004;79:899S–906S.
19. Moe PW. Future directions for energy requirements and
food energy values. J Nutr 1994;124:1738S–1742S.
20. Richardson HB. The respiratory quotient. Physiol Rev
1929;9:61–125.
21. Hellerstein MK. No common energy currency: De novo
lipogenesis as the road less traveled. Am J Clin Nutr 2001;
74:707–708.
22. Hellerstein MK. De novo lipogenesis in humans: Meta-
bolic and regulatory aspects. Eur J Clin Nutr 1999;53:
S53–S65.
23. Hellerstein MK, Christiansen M, Kaempfer S, et al.
Measurement of de novo hepatic lipogenesis in humans
using stable isotopes. J Clin Invest 1991;87:1841–1852.
24. Acheson KJ, Schutz Y, Bessard T, et al. Carbohydrate
metabolism and de novo lipogenesis in human obesity. Am
J Clin Nutr 1987;45:78–85.
25. Diaz EO, Prentice AM, Goldberg GR, et al. Metabolic re-
sponse to experimental overfeeding in lean and overweight
healthy volunteers. Am J Clin Nutr 1992;56:641–655.
26. Hill JO, Prentice AM. Sugar and body weight regulation.
Am J Clin Nutr 1995;62:264S–273S.
27. McDevitt RM, Bott SJ, Harding M, et al. De novo lipo-
genesis during controlled overfeeding with sucrose or
glucose in lean and obese women. Am J Clin Nutr 2001;
74:737–746.
28. Harris JA, Benedict FG. A biometric study of human
basal metabolism. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1918;4:370–
373.
29. Bouhlel E., Salhi Z., Bouhlel H., et al. Effect of Ramadan
fasting on fuel oxidation during exercise in trained male
rugby players. Diabetes Metab 2006;32:617–624.
30. Bryson J, King S, Burns C, et al. Changes in glucose and
lipid metabolism following weight loss produced by a
very low calorie diet in obese subjects. Int J Obes Relat
Metab Disord 1996;20:338–345.
31. Valtuen
˜a S, Sola
` R, Salas-Salvado
´ J. A study of the
prognostic respiratory markers of sustained weight loss in
obese subjects after 28 days on VLCD. Int J Obes 1997;
21:267–273.
32. Finlayson G, Caudwell P, Gibbons C, et al. Low fat loss
response after medium-term supervised exercise in obese
is associated with exercise-induced increase in food re-
ward. J Obes 2011;2011:pii:615624.
33. Gropper S, Smith J. Advanced Nutrition and Human
Metabolism. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Cengage Learn-
ing; 2012.
34. Cahill Jr GF. Fuel metabolism in starvation. Annu Rev
Nutr 2006;26:1–22.
35. Felig P, Owen OE, Wahren J, et al. Amino acid metabo-
lism during prolonged starvation. J Clin Invest 1969;
48:584–594.
36. McCue M. Specific dynamic action: A century of inves-
tigation. Comp Biochem Physiol A Mol Integr Physiol
2006;144:381–394.
37. Westerterp KR. Diet induced thermogenesis. Nutr Metab
2004;1:5.
38. Jebb SA, Prentice AM, Goldberg GR, et al. Changes in
macronutrient balance during over-and underfeeding as-
sessed by 12-d continuous whole-body calorimetry. Am J
Clin Nutr 1996;64:259–266.
39. Prentice AM. Alcohol and obesity. Int J Obes 1995;19:
S44–S50.
40. Prentice AM. Are all calories equal? In: Cottrell R, ed.
Weight Control. London: Chapman & Hall; 1995:8–33.
41. Stubbs RJ, Harbron CG, Murgatroyd PR, et al. Covert
manipulation of dietary fat and energy density: Effect on
substrate flux and food intake in men eating ad libitum.
Am J Clin Nutr 1995;62:316–329.
42. Shetty PS, Prentice AM, Goldberg GR, et al. Alterations
in fuel selection and voluntary food intake in response to
isoenergetic manipulation of glycogen stores in humans.
Am J Clin Nutr 1994;60:534–543.
43. Prentice AM. Macronutrients as sources of food energy.
Public Health Nutr 2005;8:932–939.
44. McDevitt RM, Poppitt SD, Murgatroyd PR, et al. Mac-
ronutrient disposal during controlled overfeeding with
glucose, fructose, sucrose, or fat in lean and obese women.
Am J Clin Nutr 2000;72:369–377.
45. Shelmet JJ, Reichard GA, Skutches CL, et al. Ethanol
causes acute inhibition of carbohydrate, fat, and protein
oxidation and insulin resistance. J Clin Invest 1988;81:
1137–1145.
46. Jessen C. Temperature regulation in humans and other
mammals. Berlin Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag; 2012.
47. Chen KY, Brychta RJ, Linderman JD, et al. Brown fat
activation mediates cold-induced thermogenesis in adult
humans in response to a mild decrease in ambient tem-
perature. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2013;98:E1218–E1223.
48. Lee P, Smith S, Linderman J, et al. Temperature-
acclimated brown adipose tissue modulates insulin sensi-
tivity in humans. Diabetes 2014;63:3686–3698.
49. Moellering DR, Smith Jr DL. Ambient temperature and
obesity. Curr Obes Rep 2012;1:26–34.
50. Wijers SL, Schrauwen P, Saris WH, et al. Human skeletal
muscle mitochondrial uncoupling is associated with cold
induced adaptive thermogenesis. PLoS One 2008;3:e1777.
OXIDATIVE PRIORITY AND ENERGY ECONOMY
15
 51. Chondronikola M, Volpi E, Børsheim E, et al. Brown
adipose tissue activation is linked to distinct systemic
effects on lipid metabolism in humans. Cell Metab 2016;
23:1200–1206.
52. Choi CS, Befroy DE, Codella R, et al. Paradoxical effects of
increased expression of PGC-1a on muscle mitochondrial
function and insulin-stimulated muscle glucose metabo-
lism. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008;105:19926–19931.
53. Bostro
¨m P, Wu J, Jedrychowski MP, et al. A PGC1-a-
dependent myokine that drives brown-fat-like develop-
ment of white fat and thermogenesis. Nature 2012;481:
463–468.
54. Harms M, Seale P. Brown and beige fat: Development,
function and therapeutic potential. Nat Med 2013;19:
1252–1263.
55. Tan DX, Manchester LC, Fuentes-Broto L, et al. Sig-
nificance and application of melatonin in the regulation of
brown adipose tissue metabolism: Relation to human
obesity. Obes Rev 2011;12:167–188.
56. Cypess AM, Lehman S, Williams G, et al. Identification
and importance of brown adipose tissue in adult humans.
N Engl J Med 2009;360:1509–1517.
57. van Marken Lichtenbelt WD, Vanhommerig JW, Smuld-
ers N., et al. Cold-activated brown adipose tissue in
healthy men. N Engl J Med 2009;360:1500–1508.
58. Handschin C, Spiegelman BM. Peroxisome proliferator-
activated receptor g coactivator 1 coactivators, energy ho-
meostasis, and metabolism. Endocr Rev 2006;27:728–735.
59. Valde
´s S, Maldonado-Araque C, Garcı
´a-Torres F, et al.
Ambient temperature and prevalence of obesity in the
Spanish population: The Di@bet.es study. Obesity 2014;
22:2328–2332.
60. Yang HK, Han K, Cho J-H, et al. Ambient temperature
and prevalence of obesity: A nationwide population-based
study in Korea. PLoS One 2015;10:e0141724.
61. Barber TM, Begbie H, Levy J. The incretin pathway as a
new therapeutic target for obesity. Maturitas 2010;67:
197–202.
62. Kim W, Egan JM. The role of incretins in glucose ho-
meostasis and diabetes treatment. Pharmacol Rev 2008;
60:470–512.
63. World Disasters Report 2011. Focus on Hunger and
Malnutrition. In: Knight L (ed). Geneva: International
Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies;
2011: 251.
64. Brandhorst S, Choi IY, Wei M, et al., A periodic diet that
mimics fasting promotes multi-system regeneration, en-
hanced cognitive performance, and healthspan. Cell Me-
tab 2015;22:86–99.
65. Schultz MB, Sinclair DA. When stem cells grow old:
Phenotypes and mechanisms of stem cell aging. Devel-
opment 2016;143:3–14.
66. Guarente L. Calorie restriction and sirtuins revisited.
Genes Dev 2013;27:2072–2085.
67. Guarente L. The resurgence of NAD+. Science 2016;352:
1396–1397.
68. Pijl H. Longevity. The allostatic load of dietary restric-
tion. Physiol Behav 2012;106:51–57.
69. Muoio DM, Neufer PD. Lipid-induced mitochondrial
stress and insulin action in muscle. Cell Metab 2012;15:
595–605.
70. Trepanowski JF, Canale RE, Marshall KE, et al. Impact of
caloric and dietary restriction regimens on markers of
health and longevity in humans and animals: A summary
of available findings. Nutr J 2011;10:107.
71. Hall KD, Chen KY, Guo J, et al., Energy expenditure and
body composition changes after an isocaloric ketogenic
diet in overweight and obese men. Am J Clin Nutr 2016;
104:324–333.
72. Weiss R, Bremer AA, Lustig RH. What is metabolic
syndrome, and why are children getting it? Ann N Y Acad
Sci 2013;1281:123–140.
73. Bremer AA, Mietus-Snyder M, Lustig R.H. Toward a
unifying hypothesis of metabolic syndrome. Pediatrics
2012;129:557–570.
74. Prentice AM, Jebb SA. Obesity in Britain: Gluttony or
sloth? BMJ 1995;311:437–439.
75. Katz D. Unfattening our children: forks over feet. Int J
Obes 2011;35:33–37.
76. Weiss EP, Albert SG, Reeds DN, et al. Effects of matched
weight loss from calorie restriction, exercise, or both on
cardiovascular disease risk factors: A randomized inter-
vention trial. Am J Clin Nutr 2016;104:576–586.
77. Pontzer H, Raichlen DA, Wood BM, et al. Hunter-
gatherer energetics and human obesity. PLoS One 2012;7:
e40503.
78. Lefevre M, Redman LM, Heilbronn LK, et al. Caloric
restriction alone and with exercise improves CVD risk in
healthy non-obese individuals. Atherosclerosis 2009;203:
206–213.
79. Larson-Meyer DE, Heilbronn LK, Redman LM, et al.
Effect of calorie restriction with or without exercise on
insulin sensitivity, b-cell function, fat cell size, and ec-
topic lipid in overweight subjects. Diabetes Care 2006;
29:1337–1344.
80. Poirier P, Giles TD, Bray GA, et al. Obesity and cardio-
vascular disease pathophysiology, evaluation, and effect
of weight loss. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2006;26:
968–976.
81. Bastien M, Poirier P, Lemieux I, et al. Overview of epi-
demiology and contribution of obesity to cardiovascular
disease. Prog Cardiovasc Dis 2014;56:369–381.
82. Galassi A, Reynolds K, He J. Metabolic syndrome and
risk of cardiovascular disease: A meta-analysis. Am J Med
2006;119:812–819.
83. Bouhlel E, Shephard RJ. Optimizing Physical Perfor-
mance During Fasting and Dietary Restriction: Implica-
tions for Athletes and Sports Medicine. Boca Raton, FL:
CRC Press; 2015.
84. Goldhamer AC, Klaper M, Foorohar A, et al. Water-only
fasting and an exclusively plant foods diet in the man-
agement of stage IIIa, low-grade follicular lymphoma.
BMJ Case Rep 2015:pii:bcr2015211582.
85. Safdie FM, Dorff T, Quinn D, et al. Fasting and cancer
treatment in humans: A case series report. Aging (Albany
NY) 2009;1:988–1007.
86. Goldhamer AC, Lisle DJ, Sultana P, et al., Medically
supervised water-only fasting in the treatment of border-
line hypertension. J Altern Complement Med 2002;8:643–
650.
87. Goldhamer AC. Initial cost of care results in medically
supervised water-only fasting for treating high blood
pressure and diabetes. J Altern Complement Med 2002;8:
696–697.
88. Stewart W, Fleming LW. Features of a successful thera-
peutic fast of 382 days’ duration. Postgrad Med J 1973;
49:203–209.
89. Eckel-Mahan KL, Patel VR, de Mateo S, et al. Repro-
gramming of the circadian clock by nutritional challenge.
Cell 2013;155:1464–1478.
16
CRONISE, SINCLAIR, AND BREMER
 90. Sahar S, Sassone-Corsi P. Regulation of metabolism: The
circadian clock dictates the time. Trends Endocrinol
Metab 2012;23:1–8.
91. Dibner C, Schibler U, Albrecht U. The mammalian cir-
cadian timing system: Organization and coordination of
central and peripheral clocks. Annu Rev Physiol 2010;
72:517–549.
92. Figueroa A, Hanzu F, Gomis R. Nutrition and the clock
gene. Acta Endo 2015;11:489–491.
93. Kantermann T, Juda M, Merrow M, et al. The human
circadian clock’s seasonal adjustment is disrupted by
daylight saving time. Curr Biol 2007;17:1996–2000.
94. Merrow M, Spoelstra K, Roenneberg T. The circadian
cycle: Daily rhythms from behaviour to genes. EMBO Rep
2005;6:930–935.
95. Roenneberg T, Wirz-Justice A, Merrow M. Life between
clocks: Daily temporal patterns of human chronotypes. J
Biol Rhythms 2003;18:80–90.
96. Prentice AM. Starvation in humans: Evolutionary back-
ground and contemporary implications. Mech Ageing Dev
2005;126:976–981.
97. Ramis MR, Esteban S, Miralles A, et al. Caloric restriction,
resveratrol and melatonin: Role of SIRT1 and implications
for aging and related-diseases. Mech Ageing Dev 2015;
146:28–41.
98. Longo VD, Antebi A, Bartke A, et al. Interventions to
slow aging in humans: Are we ready? Aging Cell 2015;14:
497–510.
99. Longo VD, Panda S. Fasting, circadian rhythms, and time-
restricted feeding in healthy lifespan. Cell Metab 2016;
23:1048–1059.
100. Mercken EM, Carboneau BA, Krzysik-Walker SM,
et al. Of mice and men: The benefits of caloric restric-
tion, exercise, and mimetics. Ageing Res Rev 2012;11:
390–398.
101. Hubbard BP, Sinclair DA. Small molecule SIRT1 acti-
vators for the treatment of aging and age-related diseases.
Trends Pharmacol Sci 2014;35:146–154.
102. Lee BC, Kaya A, Gladyshev VN. Methionine restriction and
life-span control. Ann NY Acad Sci 2016;1363:116–124.
103. McCarty MF, Barroso-Aranda J, Contreras F. The low-
methionine content of vegan diets may make methionine
restriction feasible as a life extension strategy. Med Hy-
potheses 2009;72:125–128.
104. McIsaac RS, Lewis KN, Gibney PA, et al. From yeast to
human: Exploring the comparative biology of methionine
restriction in extending eukaryotic life span. Ann N Y
Acad Sci 2016;1363:155–170.
Address correspondence to:
Andrew A. Bremer, MD, PhD
Division of Diabetes, Endocrinology
and Metabolic Diseases
National Institute of Diabetes
and Digestive and Kidney Diseases
National Institutes of Health
6707 Democracy Boulevard
Building 2DEM, Room 6067
Bethesda, MD 20892-5460
E-mail: andrew.bremer@nih.gov
OXIDATIVE PRIORITY AND ENERGY ECONOMY
17
