 Task-Specific Somatosensory Feedback via Cortical Stimulation 
in Humans
Jeneva A. Cronin [Student Member, IEEE],
Department of Bioengineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195
Jing Wu [Student Member, IEEE],
Department of Bioengineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195
Kelly L. Collins,
Department of Neurological Surgery, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98105
Devapratim Sarma [Student Member, IEEE],
Department of Bioengineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195
Rajesh P. N. Rao [Member, IEEE],
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195
Jeffrey G. Ojemann, and
Department of Neurological Surgery, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98105
Jared D. Olson
Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98104
Abstract
Cortical stimulation through electrocorticographic (ECoG) electrodes is a potential method for 
providing sensory feedback in future prosthetic and rehabilitative applications. Here we evaluate 
human subjects’ ability to continuously modulate their motor behavior based on feedback from 
direct surface stimulation of the somatosensory cortex. Subjects wore a dataglove that measured 
their hand aperture position and received one of three stimuli over the hand sensory cortex based 
on their current hand position as compared to a target aperture position. Using cortical stimulation 
feedback, subjects adjusted their hand aperture to move towards the target aperture region. One 
subject was able to achieve accuracies and R2 values well above chance (best performance: R2 = 
0.93; accuracy = 0.76/1). Performance dropped during the catch trial (same stimulus independent 
of the position) to below chance levels, suggesting that the subject had been using the varied 
sensory feedback to modulate their motor behavior. To our knowledge, this study represents one of 
the first demonstrations of using direct cortical surface stimulation of the human sensory cortex to 
perform a motor task, and is a first step towards developing closed-loop human sensorimotor 
brain-computer interfaces.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/
publications/rights/index.html for more information.
All authors are also members of the NSF Center for Sensorimotor Neural Engineering (CSNE).
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
IEEE Trans Haptics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Published in final edited form as:
IEEE Trans Haptics. 2016 ; 9(4): 515–522. doi:10.1109/TOH.2016.2591952.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Index Terms
Haptics in neuroscience; human-computer interaction; perception and psychophysics; prosthetics; 
rehabilitation
1 INTRODUCTION
Somatosensory feedback is essential for efficient and precise movement and to manipulate 
objects effectively [1], [2]. It has also been identified as a consumer design priority for 
prosthetics [3]. Incorporating such feedback into advanced prosthetics and other 
rehabilitative devices will improve their functionality and is therefore of interest to the field 
of brain-computer interfaces (BCIs), involving direct brain control of external devices [4], 
[5]. Previous research has demonstrated that somatosensory feedback improves BCI 
performance. Pistohl et al. provided proprioceptive feedback through a robotic 
manipulandum to increase human performance in a myoelectric-control task [6]. In non-
human primates, both integrating external somatosensory feedback through a robotic 
exoskeleton [7] and providing cortical sensory feedback through intracortical 
microstimulation (ICMS) [8] improved BCI task performance as compared to task 
performance without the additional sensory feedback. ICMS sensory feedback in nonhuman 
primates has also been used to deliver stimulation proportional to the force exerted on a 
sensorized prosthetic fingertip [9] and to create a closed-loop BCI, decoding motor intention 
and encoding sensory feedback [8], [10] (for a more complete review of recent BCI and 
ICMS sensory feedback research see Bensmaia and Miller, 2014 [11]).
Other sensory feedback approaches including peripheral nerve interfaces [12], [13], [14] and 
targeted muscle reinnervation [15] have shown success in providing sensory feedback to 
human users. Tan et al. were able to stimulate through peripheral nerve cuff electrodes and 
elicit tactile perceptions including pressure and tapping [12]. Still, the field lacks an 
understanding of the interfaces and their stimulation parameters that may be used to convey 
a wide range of somatosensory feedback. Sensory stimulation will need to elicit percepts 
that users can employ to form a coherent behavioral response. To use stimulation for sensory 
feedback, one needs to explore the broad space of parameters, sensory percepts (including 
biomimetic and abstract), and behavioral responses.
In non-human primates, a recent study extensively investigated the relationship between 
different ICMS stimulation parameters, the animals’ detection thresholds, and their just 
noticeable differences [16]. Ideally, similar studies will be conducted in human subjects as 
they can provide a qualitative assessment of the qualities and intensity of the stimulation 
percept. Previous research has demonstrated that human subjects can discriminate the 
intensity of abstract percepts from electrocorticography (ECoG)-based stimulation (i.e., 
electrical stimulation of the brain surface) with either varied frequency or varied amplitude 
[17]. Building upon this work, we test how subjects can utilize abstract sensory feedback in 
a motor task. We hypothesized that human subjects could use cortical sensory stimulation 
feedback to continuously modulate their motor behavior to find and follow an unknown 
target hand position. Three stimulation states (no stimulation, a low-intensity stimulation, 
Cronin et al.
Page 2
IEEE Trans Haptics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and a higher-intensity stimulation) corresponded to three hand aperture states (position of 
the hand relative to a target position). Our results show that one subject was able to 
successfully adjust his hand position in response to the ECoG stimulation feedback in order 
to follow the moving target position with above-chance performance. Two other subjects 
attempted the task but were unable to complete it; their results are presented primarily in the 
Supplemental Material.
2 METHODS
2.1 Subjects
Subjects were hospitalized for clinical monitoring of epilepsy with implanted 
electrocorticography (ECoG) grids (see, e.g., Leuthardt, et al. [18]). Clinicians determined 
their electrode locations strictly by clinical needs without consideration for research. We 
conducted stimulation studies after subjects were back on their anti-epileptic medications 
(AEDs). This experiment was approved by the Institutional Review Board of the University 
of Washington, and all subjects gave written, informed consent.
2.2 Electrode Localization
We localized electrodes using a preoperative MRI scan, a post-operative CT scan, and 
custom MATLAB processing scripts as described previously [19]. We then identified a pair 
of adjacent electrodes over the hand sensory cortex to use as the active and ground 
electrodes for stimulation (Fig. 1).
2.3 Stimulation Protocol
RZ5D BioAmp Processor, IZ2H Stimulator, and LZ48 Battery Pack (Tucker-Davis 
Technologies, Alachua, FL) were used to deliver constant-current stimulation using biphasic 
square pulses with 200 μs phase widths. The interpulse interval (IPI) was 4600 μs, yielding a 
pulse frequency of 200 Hz. Each train of pulses lasted for 200 ms and was followed by an 
inter-train interval (ITI) of 400–800 ms. We determined the perceptual threshold for 
stimulation by incrementally increasing the current amplitude in steps of 250–500 μA up to 
no more than 5000 μA. If stimulation across the pair of electrodes did not cause a sensation 
in the subject’s hand, or the stimulation caused motor activity, then a new electrode pair was 
chosen and the thresholding procedure was restarted. We defined a low-intensity stimulation 
waveform (Stim 1) with the above parameters and a current amplitude slightly above the 
perceptual threshold. We then defined a higher-intensity stimulation waveform (Stim 2) with 
the same parameters, but with a current amplitude above that of Stim 1, such that the subject, 
as self-reported, could clearly discriminate the two stimuli at rest. Stimulation current 
amplitudes and the ITI were slightly modified during the task for two subjects based on their 
feedback and are detailed in the Results. The catch trial used an amplitude that was between 
that of Stim 1 and Stim 2.
2.4 Experimental Protocol
Three subjects wore a 22 degree-of-freedom dataglove (Cyberglove II, CyberGlove Systems, 
San Jose, CA) to measure the position of their hand, which we sampled every 50 ms with a 
custom MATLAB script. To begin the task, subjects opened and closed their hand (in a 
Cronin et al.
Page 3
IEEE Trans Haptics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 palmar grasp [20], as if grasping a cylindrical object) with the dataglove for approximately 
20 seconds. We took the first vector of the singular value decomposition of these movements 
as the primary trajectory of aperture motion. During the task, every new glove sample was 
projected onto the primary trajectory, and the magnitude of the resulting vector was taken as 
the non-normalized aperture value. We then calculated the normalized aperture value 
ranging from 0 to 1 based on the subject’s minimum (closed) and maximum (open) hand 
positions. We instructed subjects that they would be asked to open and close their hand to 
find and follow a target aperture path. Cortical electrical stimulation using the waveforms 
described above provided feedback to the subjects on their current state. The subjects could 
be in one of three states (Table 1, Cases A–C). We instructed all subjects to open their hand 
before the trial and stimulation began so that they would start in the state without cortical 
stimulation (Case A, Table 1).
We describe below the specific methods and results for one subject (Subject 2) who 
performed above chance and completed a catch trial. Two other subjects participated in the 
task but were unable to complete the task with a catch trial due to poor performance (see 
Results and Supplemental Material). To help learn the relationship between the stimulation 
pattern and his hand position relative to the target position, Subject 2 was trained with 
concurrent visual feedback for three trials before receiving stimulation feedback solely. His 
single catch trial delivered the same stimulation regardless of the subject’s state. (Catch, 
Table 1).
2.5 Target Paths
We set Subject 2’s target path width to span 15% of his own aperture range from opened 
(aperture value = 1) to closed (aperture value = 0). Two types of paths were created: a 
training path and several evaluation paths, for use in training and evaluation trials, 
respectively. The training path was a simple sine wave with a frequency of approximately 
0.02 Hz. For each of the evaluation trials the subject used a different evaluation path that we 
created by summing four sinusoids with randomly selected frequencies that were no greater 
than 0.02 Hz. Fig. 2 shows example evaluation paths with the subject’s hand aperture values 
overlaid. Figs. 3 and 4 illustrate the order of Subject 2’s trial path types.
2.6 Data Acquisition and Analysis
We recorded all ECoG data at approximately 1526 Hz with Tucker Davis Technologies’ 
biosignal acquisition system (RZ5D BioAmp Processor and PZ5 NeuroDigitizer) and 
analyzed data with MATLAB.
2.7 Accuracy
We defined accuracy as the fraction of time spent inside the target region and calculated it 
as: (samples inside target range)/(total samples) over the entire trial. To determine chance 
accuracy, we simulated 1,000 random walks, calculated the accuracy of each, and then took 
the mean. Each random walk was created by drawing with replacement from that trial’s set 
of position changes and cumulatively adding these position changes to a starting position. If 
the random walk started at the first sample position, when the subject’s hand was too open, it 
may have never entered the target region. Thus, we defined the starting position as the first 
Cronin et al.
Page 4
IEEE Trans Haptics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 point that the subject’s hand entered the target region. We then calculated the chance 
accuracy only over the period beginning with the starting position to ensure that the random 
walk always started within the target range and thus calculate a more robust measurement of 
chance. We computed the resultant chance accuracy as: (samples inside target range)/(last 
sample–first sample that subject enters target range). We measured the subject’s 
performance from the beginning of the trial rather than when they first entered the target 
region, because during some trials subjects did not enter the target region quickly; therefore, 
calculating the accuracy from when they first entered the target region would result in an 
inflated value.
2.8 Line Fit: R2
As another measure of performance, we calculated the R2 values for each trial by fitting a 
least-squares linear model of the subject’s recorded hand aperture motions to the optimal 
path - the path through the center of the target region. The R2 value was defined as: R2 = 
SSreg/SStot, where 
, 
, and y is the recorded aperture data while f is 
the linear model.
The interpretation of this R2 value is similar to a traditional goodness of fit of a model to 
experimental data. In this case we are interested in assessing the goodness of fit between our 
recorded aperture data and the optimal path, as compared to random walk. We used the 
1,000 random walks created in the accuracy calculation to determine the chance R2 value for 
each trial by again calculating the R2 value of each random walk, and then taking the mean.
3 RESULTS
Three subjects who had grid coverage over their hand sensory area participated in this task. 
For each subject, cortical stimulation over the chosen electrodes (Fig. 1 for Subject 2) 
elicited an abstract sensation in their hand. None of the subjects thought that the stimulation 
felt normal. We asked them to describe the sensation to us without any guiding questions 
(Table 2). To maintain two differentiable stimuli we had to increase the amplitude of cortical 
stimulation several times during the experiment for Subjects 2 and 3 (Table 3).
As mentioned above, only Subject 2 consistently performed above chance levels and 
completed a catch trial. Subject 1’s and Subject 3’s results are detailed in the Supplemental 
Material and discussed briefly after Subject 2. Their level of engagement was much less than 
that of Subject 2 and likely contributed to their poor performances [21].
Subject 2 wore the dataglove on his right hand, the hand contralateral to the implanted 
ECoG grid, and therefore perceived a sensation from the stimulation on the same hand that 
he had to move. He used these perceived sensations as feedback on his current hand position 
relative to the target aperture position and responded by adjusting his hand position. Subject 
2 learned to respond properly to the cortical stimulation and follow the unknown target 
aperture path (Fig. 2a).
Cronin et al.
Page 5
IEEE Trans Haptics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Subject 2 completed 14 total trials: a set-up trial, 6 training trials, 6 evaluation trials, and a 
catch trial (Figs. 3 and 4). During the first three training trials he received visual feedback 
concurrent with the cortical stimulation feedback and used it to explore the state space and 
understand the stimulation feedback. During the following three training trials he received 
only cortical stimulation feedback. The first two trials lasted for 45 seconds each, while the 
remaining trials lasted for two minutes each, as the subject thought that 45 seconds was too 
short. We started with amplitudes of 1.75 mA and 2.0 mA, respectively for Stim 1 and Stim 
2 for Subject 2 based on his own qualitative report that they were discriminable. During the 
task we increased the stimulation amplitudes twice based on the subject’s feedback to 
maintain discriminable stimuli (Table 3). In one case, Subject 2 also noticed a beat or 
rhythm to the stimulation sensation and wondered if we could change the rhythm of one of 
the waveforms to make them more easily discriminable. We believe he was noticing the ITI 
and therefore decreased the ITI of Stim 2, the more intense stimulation, from 800 ms to 400 
ms while maintaining its increased amplitude over Stim 1 (trials 13 and 14, Table 3). We 
notified the subject of this change before he began Trial 13.
We defined the fraction of time spent inside the target region as the subject’s accuracy level. 
In 11 of the 13 non-catch trials Subject 2 performed above chance level in accuracy (Fig. 3), 
the two lower performances being the first two trials. During the catch trial, which used the 
same stimulation feedback regardless of the state, the subject’s accuracy dropped to below 
chance. In quantifying the subject’s path we also considered the R2 value as a measure of the 
goodness of fit of the subject’s hand motions to the ideal path. Similar to the accuracy levels, 
the subject’s R2 values generally increased during the training trials and fell below chance 
levels during the catch trial (Fig. 4). During trial 13 Subject 2’s R2 value dropped to just 
over chance, as he had trouble finding the target region for the first half of the trial and made 
large deviations out of the target region during that time (Figs. 2b and 4).
The two other subjects that participated in this task had poor performances as measured by 
accuracy and R2 values. Subject 1’s and Subject 3’s accuracies ranged from 0.1133 to 
0.6446 and 0.0945 to 0.6533, respectively (Figs. S1 and S4). Their R2 values ranged from 
0.0442 to 0.1505 and 0.0006 to 0.7927, respectively (Figs. S2 and S5). For Subject 3 these 
values include trials with visual feedback, and for both subjects their performance was often 
near chance for trials without visual feedback. Their complete results are included in the 
Supplemental Material for full disclosure.
4 DISCUSSION
Using feedback from cortical sensory stimulation alone, one of our subjects (Subject 2) was 
able to continuously modulate his motor output to follow the aperture target path and 
perform well above chance. Two other subjects (Subjects 1 and 3) were behaviorally unable 
to achieve high performances in the task, and we were not able to complete enough trials 
with them to comment on learning.
4.1 Subject 2
Subject 2’s performance, as measured by accuracy and R2 values, had a generally increasing 
trend during the training trials. The first two training trials, which included concurrent visual 
Cronin et al.
Page 6
IEEE Trans Haptics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and cortical stimulation feedback, may seem to have surprisingly low performances; 
however, the subject used these trials to explore the aperture space and stimulation states 
rather than trying to follow the exact path. This subject’s first two evaluation trials have 
lower performances than the max training performance, likely due to the use of new and 
unknown target paths for each evaluation trial. During the catch trial, when the subject 
received the same stimulation in all states, the performance levels dropped to below the 
chance values suggesting that the subject had been relying on the varied cortical sensory 
stimulation to complete the task. In the non-catch trials, the subject must have been able to 
discriminate between the two stimuli in order to find and follow the target path and achieve a 
high performance. The discriminability of stimulation waveforms was demonstrated in 
previous work that varied the current amplitude and the pulse frequency [17]. The subject’s 
performance in the post-catch trials did not jump back up to pre-catch levels, because as 
Subject 2 expressed, the catch trial confused him and he was attempting new methods of 
completing the task.
4.2 Subjects 1 and 3
Working with human subjects who have recently undergone neurosurgery presents various 
challenges, including transiently reduced attention levels and cognitive abilities. 
Additionally, our stimulation studies require that subjects be back on their anti-epileptic 
medications before participating, which limits the amount of available study time. We did 
not have time to test many stimulation patterns or stimulation to aperture state mappings 
with these subjects, so we cannot say whether the task was simply too challenging, or 
whether both Subjects 1 and 3 would have struggled with any tasks during that period of 
time. Additionally, both subjects became fatigued during this task so we were unable to 
determine whether the subjects would have learned the task with more time.
It is clear that this task requires complex attention, is not completely intuitive, and is 
sensitive to fatigue. These limitations are lessons for future somatosensory stimulation 
experiments. More research will also need to be conducted to determine how subjects can 
best learn to use cortical stimulation feedback. We also see the need for a method to assess 
task comprehension and attention. Such a validity measure would allow us to only proceed 
with a task if the subject was attentive enough to warrant participation.
4.3 Performance Measures
Taken together the two measures of performance, accuracy and R2, can highlight different 
behavioral responses. Accuracy levels reflect the percent of time that the subject remains 
within the target region, but do not capture how large the subject’s deviations are when they 
leave the target region. In contrast, R2 values take the size of the subject’s deviations into 
account, but do not directly measure whether the subject was inside the target region. One 
explanation for high R2 values with low accuracy levels (e.g., the subject follows the target 
path, but often remains just outside of the target region) is that the subject has substantial 
knowledge and expectations of the pattern of the target path, but does not completely 
understand how to use the stimulation feedback to re-enter the target region. We do not see 
such a relationship between the accuracy levels and the R2 values in Subject 2’s results. In 
fact, we see the opposite relationship (high accuracy relative to the R2 value) in trial 13 (Fig. 
Cronin et al.
Page 7
IEEE Trans Haptics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 2b). In this instance, the subject started losing the ability to discriminate Stim 1 and Stim 2 
and thus had trouble finding the target region. For the first half of the trial he opened and 
closed his hand in large motions throughout the entire aperture range ‘feeling’ for the target 
region. When he eventually found that region, he was able to follow the path for the 
remainder of the trial. This increased his accuracy level, but due to the large deviations from 
the ideal path made at the beginning of the trial, his R2 value remained low.
4.4 Adaptation
During our work with these subjects, we noticed that there appeared to be an element of 
adaptation or habituation to the stimulation signal over time, consistent with previous 
observations in cutaneous vibrotactile stimulation in humans in which the perceived 
stimulation intensity on the subjects’ fingertips decreased over time [22]. All three subjects, 
at various points in the experiment, expressed that the two stimulation sensations were 
becoming hard to discriminate, thus making the task more difficult. In response, we 
increased one or both current amplitudes and the difference between the two amplitudes for 
Subjects 2 and 3 (Table 3). The differences in stimulation amplitude that we used are similar 
to those reported in previous work which demonstrated that human subjects can qualitatively 
recognize differences in ECoG stimulation current amplitudes as small as 0.4 mA [17]. 
However, this prior work used different stimulation parameters (e.g., phase widths, pulse 
frequency, train duration, and ITI) than we did, so the results cannot be directly compared.
As in some cutaneous vibrotactile studies, one may be able to exploit adaptation to enhance 
subjects’ discrimination between two similar stimuli [23], [24]. Specific experiments to 
study the timing and nature of this adaptation and the just noticeable differences of stimuli 
will need to be considered. Due to our time limitations we chose to have subjects self-report 
discriminability, but future experiments could use established psychometric tests [25], [26], 
[27], [28] to quantitatively measure discriminability and assess changes over time and how 
the degree of discriminability affects task performance.
4.5 Pulsed Feedback
We chose pulsed feedback with an inter-train interval of 400–800 ms (Table 3) for two 
primary reasons. First, we wanted to minimize the risk of stimulation-induced seizures, and 
felt that continuous stimulation increased that risk. Secondly, we chose to use a sufficiently 
long ITI in order to potentially pull out ECoG recording data between stimulations. This 
time-division multiplexing (TDM) of the stimulation and recording periods could be used in 
a closed-loop BCI to allow for tactile feedback without obscuring all neural recordings of 
motor intention with a stimulation artifact [29]. After removing the stimulation artifact from 
the ECoG recording we believe that our ITI still leaves enough time for meaningful motor 
decoding based on our previous experiments which generally use 200 ms windows for 
decoding. We will test whether these ITIs are sufficient for quality motor decoding in future 
experiments.
4.6 Closed-loop BCI Application
Along with the use of TDM, we developed this task to resemble the tactile feedback that one 
could receive in a closed-loop BCI. For example, a prosthetic hand could have three states 
Cronin et al.
Page 8
IEEE Trans Haptics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 that signaled: Case A) when the subject was not touching an object (no stimulation, Stim 0); 
Case B) when the subject was grasping the object with enough force (Stim 1); and Case C) 
when the subject was grasping the object too tightly (Stim 2). Ideally, more positions or 
grasp states would be encoded, but they could follow this pattern of increasing stimulation 
intensity as the tactile input became more intense, as in tightening one’s grasp on an object. 
This paradigm represents a simplified feedback strategy and provides a framework for the 
development of future approaches.
4.7 Stimulation Percepts
Recently there has been a discussion of whether tactile feedback for BCIs will need to be 
biomimetic [11]. One argument holds that BCI applications may be able to use sensory 
substitution and thereby elicit abstract sensations that the user will substitute for normal 
tactile sensations. Users may map the abstract sensation to a normal sensation and no longer 
perceive it as abstract [30]. Alternatively, another argument holds that only biomimetic 
feedback will allow subjects to regain the sort of dexterous movement and tactile sensations 
that normally occur [31], [32]. The basis for this argument is that naturally occurring tactile 
and proprioceptive sensations are so varied that the only way to encode all of them in a 
meaningful way will be to create biomimetic sensations through stimulation so that users 
don’t have to create a new representation and mapping of abnormal sensations. With just 
three subjects, this study does not allow us to speculate on whether sensory substitution will 
suffice, but we did find that Subject 2 was able to use the abstract sensation (Table 2) to 
achieve performances well above chance with three defined states. Similar tasks using 
cortical sensory stimulation on human subjects will provide more insight into users’ needs 
and a better understanding of the number of states that may be encoded with abstract 
sensations before biomimicry is required.
5 CONCLUSION
To our knowledge, the results presented here represent one of the first demonstrations of 
using cortical surface (ECoG) stimulation of the human sensory cortex to perform a motor 
task. We believe ECoG stimulation will offer new avenues for investigating haptic feedback, 
as ECoG electrodes allow us to directly stimulate the somatosensory cortex of awake human 
subjects who can describe the sensation and any differences between two stimuli. Our study 
demonstrates that subjects can react to cortical sensory stimulation, and while it may require 
increased attention or cognitive abilities, one subject was able to continuously modulate his 
motor behavior in response to the stimulation feedback. Although this task was not 
optimized, the subject was able to use the abstract feedback from cortical stimulation and 
map it to a new task demonstrating a proof of concept for the use of ECoG somatosensory 
stimulation for motor task feedback. Future experiments will explore the relationship 
between stimulation parameters and humans’ perceptions of the stimulation to begin to 
establish a basis for cortical stimulation waveform development. Ideally such research will 
compile psychophysical data for human responses to ECoG stimulation just as has been 
done in non-human primates with ICMS stimulation [16]. Our results demonstrate how 
ECoG stimulation may be used as a tool to further understand tactile and proprioceptive 
encoding for closed-loop BCIs in humans.
Cronin et al.
Page 9
IEEE Trans Haptics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work supported by Award Numbers EEC-1028725 and IIS-1514790 from the National 
Science Foundation (NSF), by the NSF Graduate Research Fellowship Program under Grant Number 
DGE-1256082, and by the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development and the National Institute of 
Neurological Disorders and Stroke of the National Institutes of Health under award numbers K12HD001097, 
U10NS086525, and NS079200. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily 
represent the official views of the National Science Foundation or the National Institutes of Health.
Biographies
Jeffrey G. Ojemann is a neurosurgeon with a practice focusing on the surgical treatment of 
epilepsy in adults and children. He is Director of Epilepsy Surgery at the Harborview 
Medical Center and Seattle Children’s Hospital at the University of Washington. He received 
his MD in 1992 at Washington University in St. Louis, and remained there for residency in 
neurosurgery (1999) and fellowship in pediatric neurosurgery at St. Louis Children’s 
Hospital in 2000. He joined the faculty at the University of Washington in 2003 and holds 
the Richard G. Ellenbogen Chair in Pediatric Neurological Surgery. He has been funded by 
NIH or NSF continuously since then with present focus on electrical stimulation and current 
distribution in human and animal models of cortical surface stimulation. He has over 165 
peer-reviewed publications, primarily in neuroimaging and human cortical physiology. He is 
the co-leader of the Cortical co-adaptation with bidirectional brain-computer interface 
testbed of the Center for Sensorimotor Neural Engineering (an NSF Engineering Research 
Center).
Jared D. Olson received an MD degree from the University of Chicago in 2008 and 
completed residency in Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation at the University of 
Washington (UW) in 2012. He is faculty at the NSF Center for Sensorimotor Neural 
Engineering and a clinician-scientist at UW supported by the NIH Rehabilitation Medicine 
Scientist Training Program (RMSTP) and NIH StrokeNet, mentored by Jeffrey Ojemann. 
Jared researches basic science and translational questions in human brain-computer interface 
and neural plasticity.
Jeneva A. Cronin received a BS degree in Biomedical Engineering from the University of 
Virginia in 2011. She started pursuing her doctoral degree in Bioengineering at the 
University of Washington in 2014 where her research focuses on encoding sensory feedback 
through cortical stimulation with brain-computer interfaces. Jeneva is an NSF Graduate 
Student Research Fellow, and is highly involved with the NSF Center for Sensorimotor 
Neural Engineering.
Jing Wu received the BSc degree in Bioengineering in 2011 from University of California, 
San Diego (UCSD), where he conducted published research in functional MRI imaging of 
affective disorders. Since 2013 he has been a PhD student with the Bioengineering 
department of University of Washington. His research focus includes fundamental 
Cronin et al.
Page 10
IEEE Trans Haptics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 neuroscience of motor control, and decoding of hand and arm movement from cortical 
signals using tools from signal processing, machine learning, and control theory.
Kelly L. Collins received a BS degree in Electrical and Computer Engineering and 
Biomedical Engineering and a BS in Biology from Carnegie Mellon University in 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania in 2005 and an MD from the University of Michigan in 2011. Since 
then she has been training as a resident physician in the Department of Neurological Surgery 
at the University of Washington. Her research interests include brain-computer interfaces, 
sensorimotor systems, functional neurosurgery, and stimulation-based therapeutics for 
neurological disease.
Devapratim Sarma received the BS degrees in Bioengineering and Animal Physiology & 
Neuroscience from the University of California, San Diego in 2009. He was a research 
associate at the Swartz Center for Computational Neuroscience (2008–2011). Currently, he 
is pursuing a doctoral degree in the Department of Bioengineering at the University of 
Washington. As a member of the Center for Sensorimotor Neural Engineering, his current 
research focuses on optimizing electrocorticographic brain-computer interfaces for cognitive 
and motor rehabilitation. He is a student member of IEEE.
Rajesh P. N. Rao is the Director of the NSF Center for Sensorimotor Neural Engineering 
and a Professor of Computer Science and Engineering at the University of Washington. He 
is the recipient of a Guggenheim fellowship, a Fulbright Scholar award, an NSF CAREER 
award, an ONR Young Investigator Award, a Sloan Faculty Fellowship, and a Packard 
Fellowship for Science and Engineering. He is the author of Brain-Computer Interfacing 
(Cambridge University Press, 2013) and co-editor of Probabilistic Models of the Brain (MIT 
Press, 2002) and Bayesian Brain (MIT Press, 2007). His research spans the areas of 
computational neuroscience, artificial intelligence, and brain-computer interfacing.
References
1. Augurelle A-S. Importance of Cutaneous Feedback in Maintaining a Secure Grip During 
Manipulation of Hand-Held Objects. J Neurophysiol. Feb; 2002 89(2):665–671.
2. Sainburg RL, Poizner H, Ghez C. Loss of proprioception produces deficits in interjoint coordination. 
J Neurophysiol. Nov; 1993 70(5):2136–2147. [PubMed: 8294975] 
3. Biddiss E, Beaton D, Chau T. Consumer design priorities for upper limb prosthetics. Disabil Rehabil 
Assist Technol. Jan; 2007 2(6):346–357. [PubMed: 19263565] 
4. Rao, RPN. Brain-Computer Interfacing: An Introduction. 1. New York: Cambridge University Press; 
2013. 
5. Wolpaw, JR.; Wolpaw, EW. Brain-computer interfaces principles and practice. Oxford: Oxford; 
2012. 
6. Pistohl T, Joshi D, Ganesh G, Jackson A, Nazarpour K. Artificial proprioceptive feedback for 
myoelectric control. IEEE Trans Neural Syst Rehabil Eng. 2015; 23(3):498–507. [PubMed: 
25216484] 
7. Suminski AJ, Tkach DC, Fagg AH, Hatsopoulos NG. Incorporating Feedback from Multiple 
Sensory Modalities Enhances Brain-Machine Interface Control. J Neurosci. Dec; 2010 30(50):
16777–16787. [PubMed: 21159949] 
8. Klaes C, Shi Y, Kellis S, Minxha J, Revechkis B, Andersen RA. A cognitive neuroprosthetic that 
uses cortical stimulation for somatosensory feedback. J Neural Eng. 2014; 11(5):056024. [PubMed: 
25242377] 
Cronin et al.
Page 11
IEEE Trans Haptics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 9. Berg JA, Dammann JF, Tenore FV, Tabot GA, Boback JL, Manfredi LR, Peterson ML, Katyal KD, 
Johannes MS, Makhlin A, Wilcox R, Franklin RK, Vogelstein RJ, Hatsopoulos NG, Bensmaia SJ. 
Behavioral demonstration of a somatosensory neuroprosthesis. IEEE Trans Neural Syst Rehabil 
Eng. 2013; 21(3):500–507. [PubMed: 23475375] 
10. O’Doherty JE, Lebedev MA, Ifft PJ, Zhuang KZ, Shokur S, Bleuler H, Nicolelis MAL. Active 
tactile exploration using a brain-machine-brain interface. Nature. 2011; 479(7372):228–31. 
[PubMed: 21976021] 
11. Bensmaia SJ, Miller LE. Restoring sensorimotor function through intracortical interfaces: progress 
and looming challenges. Nat Rev Neurosci. May; 2014 15(5):313–325. [PubMed: 24739786] 
12. Tan DW, Schiefer MA, Keith MW, Anderson JR, Tyler J, Tyler DJ. A neural interface provides 
long-term stable natural touch perception. Sci Transl Med. Oct; 2014 6(257):257ra138–257ra138.
13. Raspopovic S, Capogrosso M, Petrini FM, Bonizzato M, Rigosa J, Di Pino G, Carpaneto J, 
Controzzi M, Boretius T, Fernandez E, Granata G, Oddo CM, Citi L, Ciancio AL, Cipriani C, 
Carrozza MC, Jensen W, Guglielmelli E, Stieglitz T, Rossini PM, Micera S. Restoring Natural 
Sensory Feedback in Real-Time Bidirectional Hand Prostheses. Sci Transl Med. Feb; 2014 6(222):
222ra19–222ra19.
14. Dhillon GS, Horch KW. Direct neural sensory feedback and control of a prosthetic arm. IEEE 
Trans Neural Syst Rehabil Eng. Dec; 2005 13(4):468–472. [PubMed: 16425828] 
15. Kuiken TA, Marasco PD, Lock BA, Harden RN, Dewald JPA. Redirection of cutaneous sensation 
from the hand to the chest skin of human amputees with targeted reinnervation. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
U S A. Dec; 2007 104(50):20061–20066. [PubMed: 18048339] 
16. Kim S, Callier T, Tabot GA, Gaunt RA, Tenore FV, Bensmaia SJ. Behavioral assessment of 
sensitivity to intracortical microstimulation of primate somatosensory cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 
Dec; 2015 112(49):15202–15207. [PubMed: 26504211] 
17. Johnson LA, Wander JD, Sarma D, Su DK, Fetz EE, Ojemann JG. Direct electrical stimulation of 
the somatosensory cortex in humans using electrocorticography electrodes: a qualitative and 
quantitative report. J Neural Eng. Jun.2013 10(3):036021. [PubMed: 23665776] 
18. Leuthardt EC, Miller KJ, Schalk G, Rao RPN, Ojemann JG. Electrocorticography-based brain 
computer Interface-the seattle experience. IEEE Trans Neural Syst Rehabil Eng. Jun; 2006 14(2):
194–198. [PubMed: 16792292] 
19. Wander JD, Blakely T, Miller KJ, Weaver KE, Johnson LA, Olson JD, Fetz EE, Rao RPN, 
Ojemann JG. Distributed cortical adaptation during learning of a brain–computer interface task. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci. Jun; 2013 110(26):10818–10823. [PubMed: 23754426] 
20. Kapadia N, Zivanovic V, Verrier M, Popovic M. Toronto Rehabilitation Institute–Hand Function 
Test: Assessment of Gross Motor Function in Individuals With Spinal Cord Injury. Top Spinal 
Cord Inj Rehabil. 2012; 18(2):167–186. [PubMed: 23459270] 
21. Weisz N, Wühle A, Monittola G, Demarchi G, Frey J, Popov T, Braun C. Prestimulus oscillatory 
power and connectivity patterns predispose conscious somatosensory perception. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A. 2014; 111(4):E417–25. [PubMed: 24474792] 
22. Berglund U, Berglund B. Adaptation and Recovery in Vibrotactile Perception. Percept Mot Skills. 
Jun; 1970 30(3):843–853. [PubMed: 5429335] 
23. Tannan V, Simons S, Dennis RG, Tommerdahl M. Effects of adaptation on the capacity to 
differentiate simultaneously delivered dual-site vibrotactile stimuli. Brain Res. Dec; 2007 1186(1):
164–170. [PubMed: 18005946] 
24. Goble AK, Hollins M. Vibrotactile adaptation enhances amplitude discrimination. J Acoust Soc 
Am. Jan; 1993 93(1):771–780.
25. Munson WA. Standardizing Auditory Tests. J Acoust Soc Am. Jun.1950 22(5):675.
26. Fechner, GT. Elements of psychophysics. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston; 1966. 
27. Swets, JA.; Green, DM. Signal detection theory and psychophysics. Wiley; New York: 1966. 
28. Jogan M, Stocker AA. A new two-alternative forced choice method for the unbiased 
characterization of perceptual bias and discriminability. J Vis. Mar; 2014 14(3:20):1–18.
29. Dosen S, Schaeffer M-C, Farina D. Time-division multiplexing for myoelectric closed-loop control 
using electrotactile feedback. J Neuroeng Rehabil. 2014; 11(1):138. [PubMed: 25224266] 
Cronin et al.
Page 12
IEEE Trans Haptics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 30. Dadarlat MC, O’Doherty JE, Sabes PN. A learning-based approach to artificial sensory feedback 
leads to optimal integration. Nat Neurosci. Nov; 2014 18(1):138–144. [PubMed: 25420067] 
31. Tabot GA, Dammann JF, Berg JA, Tenore FV, Boback JL, Vogelstein RJ, Bensmaia SJ. Restoring 
the sense of touch with a prosthetic hand through a brain interface. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2013; 110(45):18279–84. [PubMed: 24127595] 
32. Miller LE, Weber DJ. Brain Training: Cortical Plasticity and Afferent Feedback in Brain-Machine 
Interface Systems. IEEE Trans Neural Syst Rehabil Eng. Oct; 2011 19(5):465–467. [PubMed: 
21947530] 
Cronin et al.
Page 13
IEEE Trans Haptics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 1. 
Subject 2’s ECoG grid location. Left hemisphere implanted ECoG grid with the stimulating 
electrodes highlighted in white. The subject perceived an abstract sensation in the proximal 
and middle phalanges of his right middle finger following cortical stimulation over these 
electrodes.
Cronin et al.
Page 14
IEEE Trans Haptics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 2. 
Traces of Subject 2’s hand aperture position relative to the aperture target thresholds with 
corresponding stimulation current amplitudes (a: Trial 9, b: Trial 13). Stimulation pulses 
were biphasic, but due to the time scale only the 200 ms stimulation trains are visible not the 
individual pulses (Stim 1 = 2.0 mA, Stim 2 = 2.4 mA, ITI Trial 9 = 800/800 and ITI Trial 13 
= 800/400 for Stim 1/Stim 2, Table 3). Subjects’ aperture values could move outside of the 0 
to 1 range if they made hand movements that were outside of the range used during the 
normalization period (Section 2.4). Subjects were instructed to start each run with their hand 
open in order to begin in the no-stimulation region (Table 1, Case A). Subject 2 sometimes 
overshot the target boundaries, but responded to error feedback (Case A, no stimulation; or, 
Case C, higher-intensity stimulation) by changing his direction of motion. a) Subject 2 was 
able to follow the target pathway and stay in the target boundaries with a high performance 
of: accuracy = 0.6145, R2 = 0.8194. b) Subject 2 had trouble finding the target region at the 
beginning of the trial, resulting in lower performance values of: accuracy = 0.4023, R2 = 
0.1001.
Cronin et al.
Page 15
IEEE Trans Haptics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 3. 
Subject 2’s accuracy levels as a measure of performance. Accuracy was calculated as 
(samples inside target range)/(total samples) while chance levels were determined with 
1,000 simulated random walks. Mean chance accuracy values with error bars for the 
standard deviation are displayed. The subject’s accuracy is above chance level for 11 of the 
13 non-catch trials. During the setup trial the subject had trouble mapping the cortical 
stimulation to the necessary motor response, but used the following 3 training trials with 
concurrent visual and stimulation feedback (shaded, trials 2–4) to explore the state space and 
learn to use the feedback. His accuracy dropped to below chance levels during the catch trial 
(same stimulation feedback regardless of the state) suggesting that he was relying on the 
cortical stimulation to achieve a high performance. Table 3 lists the stimulation amplitudes 
and ITIs for each trial. *Trials 13 and 14 used a shorter ITI for Stim 2 than the previous 
trials.
Cronin et al.
Page 16
IEEE Trans Haptics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 4. 
Subject 2’s R2 values as a measure of performance. Shaded trials 2–4 used concurrent visual 
and cortical stimulation feedback. Chance values were simulated with the random walks 
used for the accuracy chance calculations. Mean chance R2 values with error bars for the 
standard deviation are displayed. The R2 values follow a trend similar to the accuracy values 
(Fig. 3), and considered together the accuracy values and the R2 values can illustrate the 
subject’s overall performance. In trials with high accuracies and high R2 values, the subject 
slowly opened and closed his hand and remained relatively close to the target region even 
when he exited it. In trial 13, with a low R2 value and higher accuracy, the subject deviated 
largely from the target region while searching for it (Fig. 2b), and then eventually found and 
followed the path increasing his accuracy but not his R2 value. Again, Table 3 lists the 
stimulation amplitudes and ITIs for each trial. *Trials 13 and 14 used a shorter ITI for Stim 
2 than the previous trials.
Cronin et al.
Page 17
IEEE Trans Haptics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Cronin et al.
Page 18
TABLE 1
Possible Hand States or Cases
Case
Hand Position
Aperture Value
Stimulation
A
Too open
> target
None (Stim 0)
B
Within target
Within target
Low (Stim 1)
C
Too closed
< target
Higher (Stim 2)
Catch
All positions
All values
Catch stim
The aperture value was calculated from the subject’s current hand position, and stimulation was dependent upon the aperture value.
IEEE Trans Haptics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Cronin et al.
Page 19
TABLE 2
Stimulation Percepts
Subject
Location of Percept
Subject’s Description
1
Left ring finger
“vibration,” and “an intention to move”
[Note: Neither we nor the subject believe that her finger actually moved.]
2
Right middle finger, proximal and middle 
phalanges
“felt like a soft line straight across the bottom”
3
Left ring finger, palmar side, middle and 
distal phalanges
“little pulse,” and “Noticeable… if I was at a ballgame it’d be noticeable like hair 
tickling your face”
Location and description of subjects’ stimulation percepts. We asked where subjects felt the stimulation and what it felt like; no further instructions 
or guiding questions were given.
IEEE Trans Haptics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Cronin et al.
Page 20
TABLE 3
Current Amplitude and Inter-train Interval Values for Stim1 and Stim2
Subject
Trials
Stim 1
Stim 2
Amplitude (mA)
ITI (ms)
Amplitude (mA)
ITI (ms)
1
All (1–3)
2.50
800
3.50
800
2
1
1.75
800
2.00
800
2–3
2.00
800
2.25
800
4–12
2.00
800
2.40
800
13–14
2.00
800
2.40
400
3
1–3
1.75
800
2.25
400
4–7
2.00
800
2.50
400
8–11
2.00
800
2.75
400
To maintain discriminable stimuli, the amplitude values had to be increased several times during the experiment for Subjects 2 and 3. The inter-train interval (ITI) was also changed during Subject 2’s trials.
IEEE Trans Haptics. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
