 Accepted Manuscript
Title: Environmental conditions in health care facilities in low-
and middle-income countries: coverage and inequalities
Authors: Ryan Cronk, Jamie Bartram
PII:
S1438-4639(17)30376-0
DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheh.2018.01.004
Reference:
IJHEH 13173
To appear in:
Received date:
8-6-2017
Revised date:
4-1-2018
Accepted date:
9-1-2018
Please
cite
this
article
as:
Cronk,
Ryan,
Bartram,
Jamie,
Environmental
conditions in health care facilities in low- and middle-income countries: coverage
and
inequalities.International
Journal
of
Hygiene
and
Environmental
Health
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheh.2018.01.004
This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication.
As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript.
The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof
before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process
errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that
apply to the journal pertain.
 1 
 
Environmental conditions in health care facilities in low- and middle-
income countries: coverage and inequalities 
 
Authors and affiliations: Ryan Cronk1 and Jamie Bartram1* 
1The Water Institute, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, United States 
 
*Corresponding author (jbartram@email.unc.edu) 
The Water Institute 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 
148 Rosenau Hall, CB #7431 
135 Dauer Drive 
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7431 
1.919.966.2480 
 
Highlights 
 
Produced estimates of environmental conditions in health care facilities (HCFs)  
 
50% of HCFs lack piped water, 33% lack improved toilets, 39% lack handwashing soap 
 
39% of HCFs lack adequate infectious waste disposal and 59% lack reliable electricity  
 
2% of HCFs provide all four water, sanitation, hygiene, and waste management services 
 
Inequalities by urban-rural, managing authority, facility type, administrative unit 
 
Abstract  
 
Safe environmental conditions and the availability of standard precaution items are important to 
prevent and treat infection in health care facilities (HCFs) and to achieve Sustainable Development Goal 
(SDG) targets for health and water, sanitation, and hygiene. Baseline coverage estimates for HCFs have 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 2 
 
yet to be formed for the SDGs; and there is little evidence describing inequalities in coverage. To address 
this, we produced the first coverage estimates of environmental conditions and standard precaution 
items in HCFs in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs); and explored factors associated with low 
coverage. Data from monitoring reports and peer-reviewed literature were systematically compiled; and 
information on conditions, service levels, and inequalities tabulated. We used logistic regression to 
identify factors associated with low coverage. Data for 21 indicators of environmental conditions and 
standard precaution items were compiled from 78 LMICs which were representative of 129,557 HCFs. 
50% of HCFs lack piped water, 33% lack improved sanitation, 39% lack handwashing soap, 39% lack 
adequate infectious waste disposal, 73% lack sterilization equipment, and 59% lack reliable energy 
services. Using nationally representative data from six countries, 2% of HCFs provide all four of water, 
sanitation, hygiene, and waste management services. Statistically significant inequalities in coverage 
exist between HCFs by: urban-rural setting, managing authority, facility type, and sub-national 
administrative unit. We identified important, previously undocumented inequalities and environmental 
health challenges faced by HCFs in LMICs. The information and analyses provide evidence for those 
engaged in improving HCF conditions to develop evidence-based policies and efficient programs, 
improve service delivery systems, and make better use of available resources. 
 
Keywords. Clinics, environmental health, hospitals, hygiene, infection prevention, monitoring and 
evaluation, sanitation, standard precautions, surveys, Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), water 
 
 
 
 
 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 3 
 
 
Introduction 
Safe and adequate environmental conditions in health care facilities (HCFs) – including the availability of 
water, sanitation, hygiene, energy, and waste management – and the availability of standard precaution 
items (e.g. disposable gloves) are essential to protect and improve the health of patients, staff, visitors, 
and the wider community. 
 
In low-income countries, the prevalence of health care acquired infection (HCAI) is estimated to be 16% 
(Allegranzi et al., 2011). Many HCAIs are attributable to inadequate environmental conditions and 
insufficient availability of standard precaution items (Anaissie et al., 2002; Borg, 2009; Galadanci et al., 
2011; Leslie et al., 2016; Li et al., 2016; Moffa et al., 2017). Inadequate environmental conditions and 
insufficient availability of standard precaution items in HCFs contribute to infection through 
contaminated water, hands, fomites, food, medical equipment, inadequate sharps and infectious waste 
disposal, and unsafe blood transfusions. Associated adverse health outcomes include gastrointestinal, 
respiratory, surgical site, burn wound, and sharps-related infections (World Health Organization, 2008).  
 
Adequate hand hygiene, such as handwashing with soap, is a cost-effective practice for preventing 
infection in health care settings (World Health Organization, 2008). However, several hundred million 
patients annually acquire infections arising from poor handwashing practices – in part to the lack of 
available handwashing materials and facilities (World Health Organization, 2009). Compliance with 
handwashing standards among health care providers is often low and health care providers often 
transmit infection (Erasmus et al., 2010). Because of these deficiencies, HCFs serve as foci for infection 
and patients seeking treatment fall ill, and potentially die, for the lack of basic elements of a safe and 
clean environment (Bartram et al., 2015).  
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 4 
 
 
Establishing and maintaining a safe health care environment is a fundamental consequence of the 
Hippocratic oath: primum non nocere (first do no harm). It is recognized in international development 
policy through the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring 
Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene (JMP) is responsible for monitoring the SDG 
targets for water, sanitation, and hygiene. These targets include both household and non-household 
settings including schools, workplaces, and health care facilities (Cronk et al., 2015; United Nations 
General Assembly, 2015; WHO/UNICEF, 2016a). Sanitation, water, and hygiene in HCFs are recognized 
through dedicated targets of SDG 6. SDG 6 calls for the “availability and sustainable management of 
water and sanitation for all” (United Nations General Assembly, 2015). SDG target 3.8 calls for “access to 
quality essential health-care services” for all (United Nations General Assembly, 2015). Stratifying data 
by important factors (e.g. rural-urban; facility type) and using these data to identify opportunities to 
progressively reduce inequalities are important components of every SDG and human rights (Meier et 
al., 2016; United Nations General Assembly, 2015). 
 
The JMP developed a set of harmonized survey questions and indicators for water, sanitation, hygiene 
and waste management in HCFs (WHO/UNICEF, 2016b). These correspond to service levels of basic, 
limited, and no service. Service levels are used to describe the proportion of HCFs receiving different 
services and to report progressive improvements.  
 
Baseline estimates of the status of environmental conditions and the availability of standard precaution 
items in HCFs have yet to be made for the SDGs. Few studies explore inequalities in coverage of 
environmental conditions and the availability of standard precaution items in HCFs by factors such as 
facility type, managing authority, and sub-national administrative area. Baseline estimates and 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 5 
 
inequality analyses are needed to benchmark progress and identify sub-national administrative areas, 
countries, and world regions in need of financial, technical, management, and human resources to make 
improvements to service delivery systems and facilities. Available studies examine maternity settings in 
a few countries of sub-Saharan Africa; a limited set of indicators of environmental conditions and 
standard precaution items; a limited set of HCF data; and/or a specific facility type (e.g. hospitals) 
(Benova et al., 2014b; Chawla et al., 2016; Gon et al., 2016; World Health Organization and UNICEF, 
2015).  
 
We produced the first coverage estimates of environmental conditions and standard precaution items in 
HCFs – including the availability of piped water in the facility premises, availability of sterilization 
equipment, safe storage and disposal of infectious and sharps waste, and the availability of guidelines 
for standard precautions. We present the most comprehensive estimates compiled to-date for 
sanitation, handwashing soap, and energy availability in HCFs. Using available nationally representative 
survey data, we approximate the SDG service levels for water, sanitation, hygiene, and waste 
management – and document sub-national inequalities in coverage with these services. We identify 
gaps in monitoring to measure and report the SDG service levels and environmental health standards in 
health care settings. We identify opportunities for harmonizing and improving HCF monitoring initiatives 
so that actors supporting HCFs can use these data to document service challenges and develop policies 
and strategies to improve service delivery systems. 
Methods 
Search strategy  
Eighteen data repositories including the Global Health Data Exchange, the International Household 
Survey Network, the World Bank Data exchange, and the International Health Facility Assessment 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 6 
 
Network were reviewed for publications, reports, and datasets relevant to environmental conditions 
and the availability of standard precaution items in health care facilities. 
 
Using a list of LMICs as defined by the World Bank, the following searches were conducted in English 
using PubMed and Google Scholar: “[country name]” AND “health facility assessment” and “[country 
name]” AND “health facility survey.” Systematic reviews that documented health care facility surveys 
were reviewed for relevant data (Adair-Rohani et al., 2013; Chawla et al., 2016; Nickerson et al., 2015).  
 
Further publications, reports, and datasets were obtained from members of the World Health 
Organization task team on water, sanitation, hygiene, and waste management in health care facilities. 
 
Websites of the Ministry of Health and the National Bureau of Statistics (or equivalent ministries and 
government agencies) for low- and middle-income countries were searched for relevant reports and 
datasets. 
 
Data assessment 
All identified publications, reports, and datasets were reviewed for data that related to the WHO 
Essential Environmental Health Standards in Health Care, the WHO standard precautions in health care 
and/or the SDG-related water, sanitation, hygiene, and waste management in HCF indicators (Table 1) 
(WHO, 2007b; WHO/UNICEF, 2016a; World Health Organization, 2008). The status of standard 
precaution items, rather than practices, were tabulated as monitoring instruments are used to collect 
data on the availability of items in HCFs. Standard precaution items comprise materials for hand 
hygiene, gloves, facial protection (eyes, nose, and mouth), gowns, sharps boxes, items for 
environmental cleaning, clean linens, waste disposal, and patient care equipment (WHO, 2007b).  
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 7 
 
 
 
Data extraction and analysis  
Estimating coverage. Data were extracted from publications and reports or from datasets if the 
datasets were publicly available.  
 
In some instances, more than one publication, report, and/or dataset was available for a single country. 
One was selected for each country for coverage estimation based on the following criteria: the most 
representative country-level data (e.g. selecting a nationally representative dataset when available; in 
the absence of nationally representative data, a sub-nationally representative dataset with the broadest 
national coverage was selected); the most comprehensive dataset in terms of indicators reported (e.g. 
reporting on all or most environmental conditions and standard precautions items); and the most recent 
dataset (by year). Comparable data from more than five countries were used to develop multi-country 
coverage estimates. Each country estimate was weighted by facility type and each facility type (e.g. 
hospital, clinic) was weighted equally.  
 
Data related to the essential environmental health standards, standard precautions items, and/or SDG 
indicator guidance with comparable data available from less than five countries were extracted and 
reported separately.  
 
Descriptive analysis of water, sanitation, hygiene, and waste management service levels. 
Approximations of the SDG service levels (Table 2) for water, sanitation, hygiene, and waste 
management were compared between countries using publicly-available datasets from the Service 
Provision Assessment (SPA) surveys available from the DHS Program (The DHS Program, 2011). The SPA 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 8 
 
datasets that were comparable and could be used to approximate the SDG service levels were available 
from six countries: Bangladesh, Haiti, Malawi, Nepal, Senegal, and Tanzania.  
 
Stata/SE 13.1 was used to perform statistical analysis. The Svyset command was used to account for 
complex survey design. The unit of analysis was the health care facility. Water sources and sanitation 
facilities were categorized using the JMP improved water source and improved sanitation facility criteria 
(WHO/UNICEF, 2014). Missing responses, and responses of “other” or “don’t know” were categorized as 
unimproved.  
 
Country-level analyses. The six SPA country datasets were used to explore factors associated with the 
availability of basic water services in those countries. The availability of a basic water service was used 
as the dependent variable in the analysis; where the outcome is binary (where each HCF either had, or 
did not have a basic water service). Independent variables depended on the country and included rural-
urban setting, facility type, and management authority. Facility types included clinics, hospitals, and 
dispensaries (where a dispensary is a small outpatient facility providing basic primary health care 
services). Management authorities included government, private for-profit, and private not-for-profit 
(e.g. NGO, faith-based management authority). Univariable logistic regression and multivariable logistic 
regression were used to analyze associations between the dependent and independent variables.  
 
Results 
Data on environmental conditions and the availability of standard precautions items in HCFs were 
identified from 78 of 170 LMICs and territories (Table 3). These 78 countries represent 58% of the total 
population of LMICs. Most data were from sub-Saharan Africa (36 countries). According to the World 
Bank income classification, 27 (35%) were low-income countries, 32 (41%) were lower middle-income 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 9 
 
countries, and 20 (24%) were upper middle-income countries. Publicly available datasets were available 
for 14 of 78 countries (18%) in the analysis. For all others, data were extracted from reports. Data from 
37 of 78 countries (47%) were nationally representative and 41 were sub-nationally representative 
(53%).   
 
 
 
Environmental conditions and standard precaution items in health care facilities in low- and 
middle-income countries 
Coverage of environmental conditions and the availability of standard precaution items in HCFs is 
presented in Table 4. Data availability varied by indicator. The most data were available for the indicator 
“use of an improved water source within 500 meters of the facility” which was representative of 
128,155 HCFs. On average, data for 6.8 indicators were available for each country with a median of 5.5. 
Data are available by country in the supplementary materials.  
 
An estimated 50% of HCFs in LMICs lack a piped water source on premises, 33% lack improved sanitation 
facilities on premise, 39% lack soap for handwashing, 39% lack adequate infectious waste disposal, 73% 
lack sterilization equipment, 74% lack guidelines for standard precautions, and 59% lack reliable 
electricity.  
 
 
 
 
 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 10 
 
 
Infrequently used questions related to environmental conditions and standard precaution items 
in HCFs 
 
Indicators for which data were available in less than five countries but are of importance to 
environmental conditions, standard precaution items, and the SDGs are presented in Table 5. For 
example, in Nepal, nearly all (93%) HCFs did not have disability-accessible toilets. In Nigeria, three in 
four staff in health care settings have not received training on health care waste management.   
Service levels for water, sanitation, hygiene, and waste management 
Service levels for water, sanitation, hygiene, and waste management were calculated using SPA survey 
data from Bangladesh, Haiti, Malawi, Nepal, Senegal, and Tanzania (Figure 1). The service levels 
approximate the SDG service levels developed by the JMP for monitoring of SDG 6 (Table 2). There are 
differences between the reported service levels and those developed by the JMP (the differences are 
described in Table 2). For example, there is insufficient data in the SPA to report a basic sanitation 
service. Therefore, the service levels in this article should not be interpreted as SDG reporting but rather 
approximations of the SDG service levels using best-available data. Of these six countries, Senegal had 
the highest proportion of HCFs with basic water services (61%) while Tanzania had the lowest (32%). 
Bangladesh had the highest proportion of facilities with sanitation piped to sewer (17%) and Nepal had 
the lowest (6%). Senegal had the highest availability of handwashing materials (86%) while Nepal had 
the lowest (55%). In a facility-weighted average of the six countries, 2% of facilities provided all four of 
water, sanitation, hygiene and waste management services (based on the service levels developed for 
this article that approximate the SDG service levels).  
 
 
 
 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 11 
 
Figure 1. Service levels for water, sanitation, hygiene, and waste management in Bangladesh, Haiti, Malawi, Nepal, Senegal, and 
Tanzania.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13%
19%
5%
16%
14%
28%
16%
37%
37%
44%
39%
24%
40%
37%
50%
44%
51%
44%
61%
32%
47%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Water services
No service
Limited service
Basic service
14%
18%
11%
11%
7%
30%
16%
69%
72%
78%
83%
81%
64%
71%
17%
10%
11%
6%
12%
7%
13%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Sanitation services
Piped to sewer
Other improved sanitation
No service
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 12 
 
1 
 
Differences in availability of basic water services in Bangladesh, Haiti, Malawi, Nepal, Senegal, 
and Tanzania  
Using the six SPA country datasets, inequalities in the availability of basic water services at HCFs were 
tabulated (Table 6). Differences between urban and rural settings were largest in Bangladesh, Senegal, 
and Tanzania (31 percentage point difference) and smallest in Malawi (18 percentage points). 
Differences between administrative units (e.g. districts, regions) were largest in Senegal (67 percentage 
points) and smallest in Malawi (eight percentage points). Differences between managing authorities 
(e.g. private-for-profit, private not-for-profit, government) were largest in Bangladesh (44 percentage 
points) and smallest in Senegal (10 percentage points). In all six countries, government-managed HCFs 
                                                          
 
1 A basic water service is an improved source, on the facility premises, and available year-round. A limited water 
service is an improved source that is either not available year-round or not on the facility premises. No water 
service is either an unimproved source or no water source; or an improved source beyond 500m of the facility. A 
limited sanitation service is an ‘other improved’ sanitation facility. No sanitation service is either an unimproved 
sanitation facility or no facility available at the HCF. Handwashing materials available is water and soap or alcohol 
based hand rub. Safe waste management is infectious waste safely stored and disposed (as defined in the SPA 
survey); and sharps waste safely stored and disposed (as defined in the SPA survey). A limited service is at least 
one of four (but less than four) of the safe service items available. No waste management and disposal service is 
none of the four items. 
 
41%
27%
28%
45%
14%
34%
37%
59%
73%
72%
55%
86%
66%
63%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Handwashing materials
Handwashing materials available
No handwashing materials available
7%
9%
8%
3%
3%
9%
7%
73%
87%
77%
93%
74%
77%
77%
21%
4%
16%
4%
23%
13%
17%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Waste management services
Safe waste management and disposal
Limited waste management and disposal
No waste management and disposal
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 13 
 
had the lowest coverage. Differences between facility types were largest in Malawi (71 percentage 
points) and smallest in Tanzania (31 percentage points). Hospitals had the highest coverage in five of the 
six countries (Tanzania was the exception where clinics had the highest coverage, 60%). Differences 
between facilities with inpatient services and those with outpatient services only were largest in Haiti 
(25 percentage points) and smallest in Bangladesh (no difference).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In univariable regression analysis, there was a significant association between the availability of a basic 
water service and urban-rural setting (except for Nepal, which did not distinguish facilities between 
urban-rural setting); in the other five countries, HCFs in rural settings had significantly lower odds of 
having a basic water service as compared to HCFs in urban settings (Table 7). The relationship was 
significant in the multivariable models of Haiti, Malawi, Senegal, and Tanzania.   
 
The significance of managing authority (i.e. authority operating the facility) differed by country.  In 
univariable regression in Bangladesh, Haiti, Malawi, and Nepal, NGO-managed HCFs had significantly 
higher odds of having a basic water service as compared to government-managed facilities (no NGO 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 14 
 
facility categorization was used in the Senegal and Tanzania datasets). In Malawi and Tanzania, mission 
and faith-based managed HCFs had significantly higher odds of having a basic water service as compared 
to government managed HCFs in both univariable and multivariable models, whereas there was no 
difference in Haiti (there was no faith-based management categorization provided in the Bangladesh, 
Nepal, and Senegal datasets). In univariable and multivariable analyses of Haiti, Nepal, and Tanzania, 
private-for-profit facilities had significantly higher odds of having a basic water service as compared to 
government-managed facilities.  
 
Across all six countries, facility types other than hospitals (e.g. clinics, dispensaries) either had no 
significant difference from hospitals or had significantly lower odds of having a basic water service. In 
univariable and multivariable analyses of Bangladesh, health and family welfare centers and clinics had 
significantly lower odds of having a basic water service as compared to hospitals. In univariable and 
multivariable analyses of Haiti, dispensaries were significantly less likely to have a basic water service as 
compared to hospitals. In univariable analysis in Malawi, health centers and dispensaries had 
significantly lower odds of having a basic water service as compared to hospitals. In univariable and 
multivariable analyses in Senegal, health centers, health posts, and health houses had significantly lower 
odds of having a basic water service as compared to hospitals. In univariable and multivariable analyses 
in Tanzania, dispensaries had significantly lower odds of having a basic water service as compared to 
hospitals. 
 
 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 15 
 
Discussion 
This study is the most comprehensive assessment of environmental conditions (including water 
sanitation, hygiene and waste management) and availability of standard precaution items in HCFs in 
LMICs conducted to-date; with 21 different indicators documented, many for the first time.  
 
Data on environmental conditions and the availability of standard precaution items in HCFs were 
available from as many as 78 LMICs and were representative of 129,557 facilities. The data are from 
countries that represent nearly 60% of the population of all LMICs. Most HCFs in LMICs have inadequate 
environmental conditions and insufficient availability of standard precaution items. An estimated 50% of 
HCFs lack piped water on-premise, 33% lack improved sanitation facilities on the facility premises, 39% 
lack soap for handwashing, 39% lack adequate infectious waste disposal, 73% lack sterilization 
equipment, 74% lack guidelines for standard precautions, and 59% lack reliable electricity. Facility-
weighted averages of comparable nationally representative facility surveys from Bangladesh, Haiti, 
Malawi, Nepal, Senegal, and Tanzania suggest that 2% of health care facilities provide all four of water, 
sanitation, hygiene, and waste management services.  
 
Significant differences in availability of basic water services exist between health care facilities in urban 
and rural settings, sub-nationally, by managing authority, and by facility type. We found that HCFs in 
rural settings had lower service levels than those in urban settings. Unsurprisingly, hospitals had 
consistently higher coverage of basic water services as compared to all other facility types. More 
resources are likely invested in hospitals as they serve a greater number of patients than smaller facility 
types (Campbell et al., 2016). In regression analysis, privately-managed facilities consistently had higher 
levels of basic water service than government managed facilities. Facilities managed by NGO and faith-
based organizations may receive more external support (e.g. financial, human resources, supplies) than 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 16 
 
public facilities which may explain why coverage is higher; though better understanding the policy 
context and resource limitations in government-managed HCFs is needed (Olivier et al., 2015).  
 
There are many data gaps. Most HCF data concern sub-Saharan Africa and few were available for Latin 
America and the Caribbean, Western Asia, South East Asia, and Oceania. Data from these regions are 
needed to understand the extent and distribution of inadequate coverage – especially in western and 
southeast Asia where a substantial proportion of the LMIC population lives.  
 
Study limitations  
Because not all LMICs were represented in this study, our estimates may be inaccurate. Inaccuracy is 
likely to occur due to countries not included in the estimates (due to data unavailability), some large 
population countries that are excluded (e.g. China); data included in the estimates that are only sub-
nationally representative (e.g. India); and data included in the estimates that are only representative of 
specific facility types in a country (e.g. facilities that provide services for HIV/AIDS patients). The 
estimates may also be inaccurate because data from some countries were older than others (e.g. Peru 
data are from 2008). However, our estimates are in broad agreement with previous estimates. For 
example, as compared to a WHO/UNICEF report on water, sanitation, and hygiene in health care 
facilities which represented 66,101 facilities in 54 LMICs, our estimate for “access to an improved source 
within 500m” is higher compared to the WHO/UNICEF report (62% in the WHO/UNICEF report; 71% in 
our estimate); sanitation is lower (81% in the WHO/UNICEF report; 67% in our estimate); and soap for 
handwashing is slightly lower (65% in the WHO/UNICEF report; 61% in our estimate) (World Health 
Organization and UNICEF, 2015).  Our findings are also comparable with a study reporting 66% of 
hospitals in LMICs as having water available in the facility (Chawla et al., 2016). 
 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 17 
 
Some countries and world regions may be under-represented because the search was conducted in 
English. Some data from peer-reviewed studies may have been missed. Government monitoring data 
are not always publicly available and may have been omitted when this was the case.  
 
The questions used in survey instruments had some differences. The design and implementation of the 
Service Provision Assessment (SPA) and Service Availability and Readiness Assessment (SARA) 
instruments (two nationally-representative facility surveys implemented by the DHS Program and the 
World Health Organization, respectively) were coordinated and harmonized to increase data 
comparability. However, assessing environmental conditions and the availability of standard precaution 
items were not the primary purpose of other assessments such as the WHO Tool for Situational Analysis 
to Assess Emergency and Essential Surgical Care. In this, questions such as “was running water available” 
was used instead of the more commonly used water source survey question on “use of an improved 
water source” (MEASURE Evaluation, 2016; World Health Organization, 2010). At present, the SPA and 
survey questions do not directly match with the JMP core indicators for the SDGs, therefore our service 
level estimates should be interpreted with caution.  
 
Few datasets were publicly available, so many of the data used to generate the coverage estimates were 
extracted from reports. This meant that much of the data could not be disaggregated beyond that 
provided in the reports, limiting our reporting of coverage by facility type, managing authority, and 
other factors. This also meant that we had to weight facility types equally in the coverage estimates, 
despite differences in size and patient volume served. 
 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 18 
 
Fewer data were available for some indicators as compared to others (e.g. data on the availability of 
alcohol-based hand disinfectant were available from 66,257 facilities versus 85,664 facilities for 
handwashing soap), which may affect the accuracy of coverage estimates.  
 
Implications for monitoring  
We reveal important new insights on the situation in HCFs and previously undocumented inequalities. 
There are several opportunities to increase value from HCF monitoring. Administrators of HCF 
monitoring initiatives should consider reviewing their monitoring instruments and refining questions to 
maximize value and include questions on essential environmental health standards, the SDG indicators, 
indicators of service quality, important stratifying factors, and questions that reflect adequacy for 
infection control. To prevent monitoring instruments from becoming more burdensome, these 
questions could either replace lower value questions in monitoring instruments or questions on 
different HCF topics could similarly be refined to reduce the total number of questions. Poor 
environmental conditions and insufficient availability of standard precaution items represent a 
substantial health risk in HCFs and more information on these would inform better decision-making and 
health protection.  
 
Present HCF monitoring instruments do not consider all essential environmental health standards, the 
SDG indicators, indicators of service quality, and/or important stratifying indicators (WHO, 2007b; 
WHO/UNICEF, 2016a; World Health Organization, 2008). For example, safely managed water and 
sanitation are important components of SDG 6 and questions to measure safely managed water and 
sanitation are recommended in JMP guidelines (Bain et al., 2014; WHO/UNICEF, 2015a, 2017). However, 
none of the nationally representative survey instruments such as the SPA or SARA measured water 
quality or safe disposal of feces. Quality health care services are an important component of SDG 3 yet 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 19 
 
no HCF-specific monitoring initiatives include questions on wastewater disposal, cleaning, laundry, or 
vector control (World Health Organization, 2008). 
 
Disaggregating HCF data by factors such as facility type, accessibility of services by gender, and disability 
status is important for SDG monitoring yet few instruments include these. Data from those that did 
include these factors suggest substantial inequalities exist. For example, in Pakistan and Bangladesh, 
many HCFs had toilets available, but few had separate toilets for women (Majrooh et al., 2015; National 
Institute of Population Research and Training (NIPORT) et al., 2016). In the Solomon Islands, few HCFs 
had toilets accessible by disabled persons (WaterAid and UNICEF, 2016). Inadequate services 
disproportionately affect certain types of people, for example, people who receive health care in rural 
areas, patients who are disabled, and patients with limited mobility (e.g. elderly and pregnant women) 
(Cronk et al., 2015). Medical waste and wastewater management is important to prevent the spread of 
infection in the wider community. These are also important stratifying factors for human rights and SDG 
reporting. 
 
Monitoring instruments should go beyond the SDGs and include questions that provide useful 
information that reflects adequacy for infection and outbreak prevention – especially for facilities 
providing specialized care. For example, a health care facility that has gender-separated, disability-
accessible, ‘improved’ toilets for patients and visitors and a separate dedicated facility for staff would 
meet the SDG criteria for basic sanitation. “Improved” sanitation facilities are not necessarily sufficient 
for managing infectious fecal wastes. Transmission of infection through waste leakage into the 
surrounding environment may contribute to larger outbreaks (Cairncross et al., 1996; Levine et al., 
1976). Safe water management is important to prevent nosocomial infection by pathogens such as 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa and nontuberculous mycobacteria in piped water in facilities (Anaissie et al., 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 20 
 
2002; Li et al., 2016). To mitigate infection, standards should be more stringent for facility types 
providing intensive patient care with a higher risk of infection (e.g. intensive care unit). For example, a 
hospital with a burn wound unit should have risk management plans in place such as building-level 
water safety plans (World Health Organization, 2011). Questions in monitoring instruments and service 
level benchmarks should reflect this. 
 
Aggregating HCFs for coverage estimates is challenging. Facilities are different sizes, serve different 
types of patients, and serve different patient volumes. Equal weighting of HCFs in coverage estimates – 
which was the approach used in every facility survey and in the calculations for this study – distort 
estimates of human exposure to low service levels. Use of facility weights (different from survey sample 
weights) may better represent the situation. For example, facilities might be weighted by the volume of 
deliveries (Gon et al., 2016), average daily or weekly patient volume, or number of patient beds 
available. Data to support such weighting are available in few survey instruments.    
 
Facilities are classified differently (e.g. clinic, health center, health post) depending on the country 
and/or survey instrument. There is no internationally-accepted typology for HCFs (WHO/UNICEF, 
2016a). A typology and the ability to assign facilities (e.g. health house; health and family welfare 
center) to a type would facilitate data pooling, sharing, comparison and benchmarking.   
 
Improvements to monitoring would increase the quality and comparability of data over space and time; 
inform burden of disease estimates at the sub-national, national, and international levels; enable 
identification of conditions represent the greatest disease burden; and provide information that can be 
used to improve to environmental conditions and the availability of standard precaution items in HCFs.  
 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 21 
 
Implications for public health practice and policy 
The health consequences of inadequate environmental conditions and insufficient availability of 
standard precaution items and the preventable illness and cost savings that could be achieved suggest 
urgent attention and prioritization of resources are needed in many LMICs. Our estimates suggest that 
half of HCFs lack piped water on the facility premises. Insufficient piped water on the facility premises 
limits handwashing, performing safe surgeries, performing safe deliveries, and cleaning (Benova et al., 
2014a; Benova et al., 2014b; Velleman et al., 2014; World Health Organization, 2010; World Health 
Organization and UNICEF, 2015).  
 
Nearly three in five facilities have unreliable electricity supplies. Reliable energy in HCFs is essential for 
functional HCFs. Intermittent electricity can create facility hazards and limit patient care: sterilization 
equipment cannot be operated, lighting is inadequate to perform procedures at night and in under-
illuminated rooms, and electrically-powered tools for procedures cannot be used (Adair-Rohani et al., 
2013).  Unreliable electricity impedes the use of information technology and communications to inform 
decision-making. 
 
Inadequate conditions were not exclusive to low-income countries – many lower-middle and upper-
middle income countries had comparatively low coverage or less than universal coverage for many 
indicators. For example, 70% of HCFs in lower-middle income countries and 64% of HCFs in upper-
middle income countries had disposable gloves available. This suggests that basic surveys, such as the 
DHS Program’s Service Provision Assessment (SPA), may be relevant in higher income countries, 
especially in rural areas where health care service delivery is a challenge.  
 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 22 
 
Government agencies and external support actors could make better use of monitoring data to properly 
benchmark services, increase accountability by facility management, make better use of available 
resources, and progressively improve services to achieve universal coverage of basic services. In some 
instances, HCF censuses were conducted which provide resource targeting opportunities as compared to 
sample surveys. For example, using censuses conducted in Haiti and Malawi, it is possible to identify the 
specific facilities that have inadequate conditions and services (Institut Haïtien de l’Enfance (IHE) et ICF 
International, 2013; Ministry of Health [Malawi] and ICF International, 2014).  
 
Many sub-national and specialized monitoring instruments provide more detail at the facility-level as 
compared to more general national monitoring instruments such as the SPA and SARA. For example, the 
Emergency Obstetric and Neonatal Care (EmONC) assessment and the WHO Tool for Situational Analysis 
to Assess Emergency and Essential Surgical Care provide data on conditions in units within HCFs (e.g. 
labor and delivery wards; surgical suites) (MEASURE Evaluation, 2016; World Health Organization, 2010). 
These can be used to identify improvement opportunities in settings within HCFs as this information is 
rarely available in nationally representative monitoring instruments.  
 
Poor data accessibility is a challenge – most data on environmental conditions and standard precaution 
items are only available in reports. The datasets used to create the reports are often not publicly 
available yet could be analyzed beyond their original use. Data accessibility and public data repositories 
are beneficial for transparency and accountability. Open access data enables sharing for pooling of data, 
comparison, and learning.  
 
Monitoring data can be used to inform facility-level improvements. Once low coverage facilities are 
identified, facility managers, infection prevention and control practitioners, and program managers 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 23 
 
might collaborate to identify simple technology and low-cost solutions to improve the situation 
progressively. For example, Bennett et al. (2015) found in Kenya that 15 months after installing low-cost, 
portable handwashing stations and simple drinking water stations with drinking water treatment, 
coupled with health care provider training, there was successful adoption and sustained use of the 
stations, despite the absence of piped water(Bennett et al., 2015).  
 
Government actors may adopt standards higher than those sought under the SDGs. Higher levels of 
service are necessary for safe patient care and to protect health care workers, visitors, and the wider 
community. For example, this study shows that many HCFs rely on water sources that are not safe, on-
site or available year-round. Governments and external support agencies should upgrade services to 
ensure that all HCFs have sufficient, continuously-available, safe piped water in the facility. Sanitation 
facilities that safely manage patient fecal wastes are imperative to prevent infection in the HCF and 
nearby communities (World Health Organization and UNICEF, 2015).  
 
Bartram et al. (2015) note that hardware interventions and the availability of standard precaution items 
are necessary but not sufficient. Improvements must also include strengthening of the enabling 
environment and the systems that support environmental health in health care facilities. Governments 
should establish national standards and policies, invest in human resources, and improve coordination 
of related health initiatives, such as universal health coverage, infection prevention, and maternal and 
child health programming. To assist with such efforts, in 2015 the World Health Organization launched 
an action plan for environmental health in health care facilities – aimed at supporting good practice and 
improving advocacy and leadership; monitoring and evaluation; evidence and operational research; and 
policy, standards, and facility improvements (WHO/UNICEF, 2015b). 
 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 24 
 
Implications and priorities for research   
There are several low-cost opportunities for exploratory research using available data to gain further 
insight on the status of HCFs and factors associated with low service levels. They include geospatial 
analysis of inequalities in coverage (and linking these data to other geospatial data to enable more 
explanatory power); detailed analyses of sub-national regions to better target resources; use of the data 
to model regional estimates of coverage (e.g. sub-Saharan Africa; South East Asia); and using the data 
for exposure estimates for burden of disease modeling.  
 
While we demonstrate that there are extensive data available describing the status of conditions and 
precautions, evidence on effectiveness of approaches and programs for improving environmental health 
in health care settings in LMICs is urgently needed. At the facility level, there are opportunities for 
researchers to collaborate with HCF practitioners to conduct qualitative research, operational research, 
and continuous quality improvement to identify and implement improvement opportunities. Qualitative 
research would provide insight into enablers and barriers of a safe health care environment and 
contribute to understanding the motivations influencing health care workers and facility staff to improve 
services. Operational research could be used to identify which approaches and programs are most 
effective in reducing infection and means to enhance beneficial impact. Continuous quality 
improvement projects help identify and overcome bottlenecks that prevent adequate environmental 
conditions and sufficient availability of standard precaution items and deliver improvement solutions. 
 
Conclusion 
 
Sufficient environmental conditions and the availability of standard precaution items in HCFs are critical 
for safe patient care and to protect health care workers, visitors and the wider community. Using 
publicly available data, our findings reveal an under-appreciated but fixable crisis – many HCFs in LMICs 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 25 
 
lack adequate environmental conditions and the most basic standard precaution items to prevent 
infection. We identified important, previously undocumented inequalities in coverage of services. The 
analyses in this study are important for those involved in improving HCF conditions to benchmark 
services, increase accountability, and develop evidence-based policies and efficient programs to make 
better use of available resources to target facilities with inadequate services. With leadership from 
health care workers, health facility administrators, local and national governments and external support 
actors, HCFs can become models of dignified, safe and people-centered care. The maxim primum non 
nocere (first do no harm) – could not be more apposite. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 26 
 
Acknowledgements 
This work was supported in part by the Wallace Genetic Foundation. Ryan Cronk was supported by a 
training grant from the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (Grant Number: 
T32ES007018). We would like to thank Clarissa Brocklehurst, Richard Johnston, Pete Kolsky, Mark 
Sobsey, and John Tomaro for their comments on a draft of this manuscript.  
 
References 
 
Abdelgader, T.M., Ibrahim, A.M., Elmardi, K.A., Githinji, S., Zurovac, D., Snow, R.W., Noor, A.M., 2012. 
Progress towards implementation of ACT malaria case-management in public health facilities in the 
Republic of Sudan: a cluster-sample survey. BMC Public Health 12, 11. 
Adair-Rohani, H., Zukor, K., Bonjour, S., Wilburn, S., Kuesel, A.C., Hebert, R., Fletcher, E.R., 2013. Limited 
electricity access in health facilities of sub-Saharan Africa: a systematic review of data on electricity 
access, sources, and reliability. Global health, science and practice 1, 249-261. 
Agence Nationale de la Statistique et de la Démographie (ANSD) [Sénégal], ICF International, 2012. 
Enquête Continue sur la Prestation des Services de Soins de Santé (ECPSS) du Sénégal 2014. ANSD and 
ICF International, Rockville, Maryland, USA. 
Allegranzi, B., Bagheri Nejad, S., Combescure, C., Graafmans, W., Attar, H., Donaldson, L., Pittet, D., 
2011. Burden of endemic health-care-associated infection in developing countries: systematic review 
and meta-analysis. Lancet 377, 228-241. 
Anaissie, E.J., Penzak, S.R., Dignani, M.C., 2002. The hospital water supply as a source of nosocomial 
infections: a plea for action. Archives of Internal Medicine 162, 1483-1492. 
Aquil, A., Avila, J., Mejia, L., Parbul, A., Plaza, B., Wilson, N., Martinez, J., Lippeveld, T., 2010. Guanajuato 
SINAIS Assessment. 
Bain, R., Cronk, R., Wright, J., Yang, H., Slaymaker, T., Bartram, J., 2014. Fecal contamination of drinking-
water in low- and middle-income countries: a systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS Med 11, 
e1001644. 
Bartram, J., Cronk, R., Montgomery, M., Gordon, B., Neira, M., Kelley, E., Velleman, Y., 2015. Lack of 
toilets and safe water in health-care facilities. Bull. World Health Organ 93, 210. 
Bennett, S.D., Otieno, R., Ayers, T.L., Odhiambo, A., Faith, S.H., Quick, R., 2015. Acceptability and Use of 
Portable Drinking Water and Hand Washing Stations in Health Care Facilities and Their Impact on Patient 
Hygiene Practices, Western Kenya. PloS one 10. 
Benova, L., Cumming, O., Campbell, O.M., 2014a. Systematic review and meta‐analysis: association 
between water and sanitation environment and maternal mortality. Tropical Medicine & International 
Health 19, 368-387. 
Benova, L., Cumming, O., Gordon, B.A., Magoma, M., Campbell, O.M., 2014b. Where there is no toilet: 
water and sanitation environments of domestic and facility births in Tanzania. PloS one 9, e106738. 
Berendes, S., Lako, R.L., Whitson, D., Gould, S., Valadez, J.J., 2014. Assessing the quality of care in a new 
nation: South Sudan's first national health facility assessment. Tropical medicine & international health : 
TM & IH 19, 1237-1248. 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 27 
 
Borg, M.A., 2009. Prevention and control of healthcare associated infections within developing 
countries. International Journal of Infection Control 6. 
Bradley, J., and Mursagulova, N, 2006. Reproductive health and services in Azerbaijan, 2005: Results of a 
baseline survey in five districts. EngenderHealth/The ACQUIRE Project, New York, NY. 
Cairncross, S., Blumenthal, U., Kolsky, P., Moraes, L., Tayeh, A., 1996. The public and domestic domains 
in the transmission of disease. Tropical medicine & international health : TM & IH 1, 27-34. 
Cameroon Ministry of Public Health, l’Institut de Formation et de Recherche Démographiques (IFORD), 
World Bank, 2013. Impact evaluation of Results-based Financing for Health Cameroon Performance-
based Financing, Results from the health facility baseline survey. 
Campbell, O.M., Calvert, C., Testa, A., Strehlow, M., Benova, L., Keyes, E., Donnay, F., Macleod, D., 
Gabrysch, S., Rong, L., Ronsmans, C., Sadruddin, S., Koblinsky, M., Bailey, P., 2016. The scale, scope, 
coverage, and capability of childbirth care. Lancet 388, 2193-2208. 
Chawla, S.S., Gupta, S., Onchiri, F.M., Habermann, E.B., Kushner, A.L., Stewart, B.T., 2016. Water 
availability at hospitals low-and middle-income countries: implications for improving access to safe 
surgical care. Journal of Surgical Research 205, 169-178. 
Cronk, R., Slaymaker, T., Bartram, J., 2015. Monitoring drinking water, sanitation, and hygiene in non-
household settings: Priorities for policy and practice. International journal of hygiene and environmental 
health 218, 694-703. 
Domashov I, K.V., Gorborukova G, Ablezova M, Kirilenko Bishkek A., 2011. Baseline assessment of Access 
to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene in Schools and Hospitals in the Northern Oblasts of Kyrgyzstan (Issyk 
Kul, Naryn and Talas). UNICEF and Ministry of Health of the Kyrgyz Republic. 
El-Zanaty & Associates, 2012. Post conflict health facility assessment (Libya). 
Elkheir, N., Sharma, A., Cherian, M., Saleh, O.A., Everard, M., Popal, G.R., Ibrahim, A.A., 2014. A cross-
sectional survey of essential surgical capacity in Somalia. BMJ Open 4, e004360. 
Environmental Health Department, M.o.H.T.L., 2011. Results Environmental Health Assessment of 
Health Facilities in Timor Leste. 
Erasmus, V., Daha, T.J., Brug, H., Richardus, J.H., Behrendt, M.D., Vos, M.C., van Beeck, E.F., 2010. 
Systematic review of studies on compliance with hand hygiene guidelines in hospital care. Infection 
control and hospital epidemiology 31, 283-294. 
Ethiopian Public Health Institute (EPHI), Federal Ministry of Health, ICF International, 2014. Ethiopia 
Service Provision Assessment Plus Survey 2014. 
Frøystad, M., Mæstad, O., Villamil, N., 2011. Health services in Angola: Availability, quality and 
utilisation. 
Galadanci, H., Kunzel, W., Shittu, O., Zinser, R., Gruhl, M., Adams, S., 2011. Obstetric quality assurance to 
reduce maternal and fetal mortality in Kano and Kaduna State hospitals in Nigeria. International journal 
of gynaecology and obstetrics: the official organ of the International Federation of Gynaecology and 
Obstetrics 114, 23-28. 
Gauthier B, W., W., 2004. Suivi Des Depenses Publiques A destination – Secteur Sante Chad. 
Ghebrehiwe, M., Sharan, M., Rogo, K., Gebreamlak, O., Haile, B., Gaim, M., Andemariam, Z., 
Gebreselasie, S., 2008. Quality of maternity care at health facilities in Eritrea in 2008. Journal of the 
Eritrean Medical Association 4, 9-14. 
Goldberg, R., Durán, R., Monterrey, J., et al, 2006. Bolivia baseline survey, 2005: Technical report. The 
ACQUIRE Project/Engender Health, New York, NY. 
Gon, G., Restrepo-Méndez, M.C., Campbell, O.M., Barros, A.J., Woodd, S., Benova, L., Graham, W.J., 
2016. Who delivers without water? A multi country analysis of water and sanitation in the childbirth 
environment. PLoS One 11, e0160572. 
Gustavo Angeles, J.F.S., Rubén Gaete, Dominic Mancini, Antonio Trujillo, Christina I. Fowler. , 1999. 
Health Care Decentralization in Paraguay: Evaluation of Impact on Cost, Efficiency, Basic Quality, and 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 28 
 
Equity. Baseline Report. MEASURE Evaluation Technical Report Series No. 4, in: Center, C.P. (Ed.). 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. 
Health Systems Trust, 2004. The National Primary Health Care Facilities Survey 2003. Health Systems 
Trust and Department of Health, Durban. 
IHME, 2011. Baseline health facility report (El Salvador). 
IHME, 2013. SM2015 Honduras Baseline Health Facility. 
IHME, 2014a. SM2015 Belize Baseline Health Facility Survey. 
IHME, 2014b. SM2015 Guatemala Baseline Health Facility Survey. 
IHME, 2014c. SM2015 Panama Baseline Health Facility Survey. 
Institut Haïtien de l’Enfance (IHE) et ICF International, 2013. Évaluation de Prestation des Services de 
Soins de Santé, Haïti. IHE and ICF International, Rockville, Maryland, USA. 
Institut Haïtien de l’Enfance (IHE) et ICF International, 2014. Évaluation de Prestation des Services de 
Soins de Santé, Haïti, 2013. IHE et ICF International.  , Rockville, Maryland, USA  
Institut National de la Statistique, UNFPA, The Global Fund, WHO, 2016. Rapport de l'evaluation de la 
disponibilite de la capacite operationnelle des services de sante avec les outils SARA et DQR. 
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME), 2015. Health Service Provision in Ghana: Assessing 
Facility Capacity and Costs of Care, Seattle, WA. 
Knowlton, L.M., Chackungal, S., Dahn, B., LeBrun, D., Nickerson, J., McQueen, K., 2013. Liberian surgical 
and anesthesia infrastructure: a survey of county hospitals. World J Surg 37, 721-729. 
Kombe Gilbert, M.S., Amy Taye, Laurel Hatt, K.P. Sinrath, Damascene Butera, Suzanne Diarra, Dyana 
Guetat, Mark Landry, Firmin Seka, Blaise Kraffa, Ebah-Aka Laurence, Moise Zanga Tuho, Oulai 
Soumahoro, Atte Boka, 2008. Côte d'Ivoire: Service Provision Assessment. Health Systems 20/20 project, 
Abt Associates Inc., Bethesda, MD. 
Leslie, H.H., Fink, G., Nsona, H., Kruk, M.E., 2016. Obstetric Facility Quality and Newborn Mortality in 
Malawi: A Cross-Sectional Study. PLoS Med 13, e1002151. 
Levine, R.J., Khan, M.R., D'Souza, S., Nalin, D.R., 1976. Cholera transmission near a cholera hospital. 
Lancet 2, 84-86. 
Li, T., Abebe, L.S., Cronk, R., Bartram, J., 2016. A systematic review of waterborne infections from 
nontuberculous mycobacteria in health care facility water systems. International journal of hygiene and 
environmental health. 
Macro International, 2009. The Impact of Collective Efforts on the Reduction of the Disease Burden of 
AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria  (Final report). 
Macro, M.o.H.a.S.S.M.N.a.I., 2010. Namibia Health Facility Census 2009. MoHSS and ICF Macro., 
Windhoek, Namibia. 
Majrooh, M.A., Hasnain, S., Akram, J., Siddiqui, A., 2015. A cross-sectional assessment of primary 
healthcare facilities for provision of antenatal care: calling for improvements in Basic Health Units in 
Punjab, Pakistan. Health Res Policy Syst 13 Suppl 1, 59. 
MEASURE Evaluation, 2006a. Barbados Caribbean Region HIV and AIDs Service Provision Assessment 
Survey 2005. MEASURE Evaluation, Chapel Hill, NC. 
MEASURE Evaluation, 2006b. Dominica Caribbean Region HIV and AIDs Service Provision Assessment 
Survey 2005. MEASURE Evaluation, Chapel Hill, NC. 
MEASURE Evaluation, 2006c. Saint Lucia Caribbean Region HIV and AIDs Service Provision Assessment 
Survey 2005. MEASURE Evaluation Chapel Hill, NC. 
MEASURE Evaluation, 2006d. St. Vincent and the Grenadines Caribbean Region HIV and AIDs Service 
Provision Assessment Survey 2005. MEASURE Evaluation, Chapel Hill, NC. 
MEASURE Evaluation, 2007a. Grenada Caribbean Region HIV and AIDs Service Provision Assessment 
Survey 2006. MEASURE Evaluation, Chapel Hill, NC. 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 29 
 
MEASURE Evaluation, 2007b. Suriname Caribbean Region HIV and AIDs Service Provision Assessment 
Survey 2006. MEASURE Evaluation, Chapel Hill, NC. 
MEASURE Evaluation, 2016. Kenya Health Facility EmONC/MNCH Assessment Tool, 2016. 
MEASURE Evaluation., 2001. Health Facility Survey, Nicaragua 2001. MEASURE Evaluation, Chapel Hill, 
NC. . 
Meier, B.M., Cronk, R., Luh, J., de Albuquerque, C., Bartram, J., 2016. Monitoring the Progressive 
Realization of Human Rights to Water and Sanitation: Frontier Analysis as a Basis to Enhance Human 
Rights Accountability, Oxford Handbook of Water Politics and Policy. 
Ministère de la Santé, 2015. Disponibilite et capacite operationnelle des services de sante. 
Ministere de la sante et de la population, World Bank, AMDD, WHO, UNFPA, 2014. Rapport d'evaluation 
des besoins en soins obstetricaux et neonataux d'urgence (Congo)  
Ministère de la Santé Publique (MSP), 2014. Enquête sur la Disponibilité et la capacité opérationnelle 
des services de santé en République Démocratique du Congo. 
Ministry of Health, 2009. Health Facility Survey for delivering services related to the diagnosis and 
management of HIV/AIDS and Sexually Transmitted Infections (STIs). Research & Epidemiology Unit, 
Ministry of Health, Thimphu: Bhutan. 
Ministry of Health, 2010. Zambia service availability and readiness assessment 2010 summary report, 
Lusanka: Republic of Zambia. 
Ministry of Health & Social Welfare, United Nations Population Fund, United Nations Children’s Fund, 
World Health Organization, Averting Maternal Death and Disability Program/Mailman School of Public 
Health/Columbia University, 2012. National Assessment for Emergency Obstetric and Newborn Care, 
The Gambia. 
Ministry of Health (MOH) [Guyana], G.R.P.A.G., and ORC Macro, 2005. Guyana HIV/AIDS Service 
Provision Assessment Survey 2004. Ministry of Health, Guyana Responsible Parenthood Association, and 
ORC Macro, Calverton, Maryland. 
Ministry of Health [Malawi] and ICF International, 2014. Malawi Service Provision Assessment 2013-
2014, Lilongwe, Malawi. . 
Ministry of Health and Population, E.-Z.A., and ORC Macro, 2005. Egypt Service Provision Assessment 
Survey 2004, Ministry of Health and Population and ORC Macro., Calverton, Maryland. 
Ministry of Health and Social Welfare (Kingdom of Swaziland), Ministry of Education (Kingdom of 
Swaziland), WHO, 2008. Service Availability Mapping (SAM) 2006-2007 Kingdom of Swaziland. 
Ministry of Health and Social Welfare (MoHSW) [Tanzania Mainland], Ministry of Health (MoH) 
[Zanzibar], National Bureau of Statistics (NBS), Office of the Chief Government Statistician (OCGS), ICF 
International, 2015. Tanzania Service Provision Assessment Survey (TSPA) 2014-15. MoHSW, MoH, NBS, 
OCGS, and ICF International, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, and Rockville, Maryland, USA. 
Ministry of Health/Nepal, New ERA/Nepal, Nepal Health Sector Support Program - NHSSP/Nepal, ICF, 
2017. Nepal Health Facility Survey 2015. Ministry of Health and ICF, Kathmandu, Nepal. 
Ministry of Public Health (Islamic Republic of Afghanistan), 2009. Report for Baseline Study on Water 
Sanitation Services and Hygiene Practices in BHC/HCF. 
Moffa, M., Guo, W., Li, T., Cronk, R., Abebe, L.S., Bartram, J., 2017. A systematic review of nosocomial 
waterborne infection in neonates and mothers. International journal of hygiene and environmental 
health. 
Molina, E., Martin G, 2016. Health Service Delivery in Mozambique. 
National Center for HIV/AIDS Dermatology and STD (NCHADS, C., National TB Program (NTP, Cambodia), 
National Malaria Center (CNM, Cambodia), Psychosocial Organization (PSO, Cambodia), Macro 
International (USA) and the World Health Organization (Switzerland). , 2009. Cambodia Health Impact 
Evaluation 2008. NCHADS, NTP, CNM, Macro International and WHO., Calverton, Maryland. 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 30 
 
National Coordinating Agency for Population and Development (NCAPD) [Kenya], M.o.M.S.M.K., 
Ministry of Public Health and Sanitation (MOPHS) [Kenya], Kenya National Bureau of Statistics (KNBS) 
[Kenya], ICF Macro., 2011. Kenya Service Provision Assessment Survey 2010. National Coordinating 
Agency for Population and Development, Ministry of Medical Services, Ministry of Public Health and 
Sanitation, Kenya National Bureau of Statistics, and ICF Macro, Nairobi, Kenya. 
National Department of Health, Environmental Health Branch (EHB), 2015. Water Supply and Sanitation 
Accessibility into Health Care Facilities Especially for Maternity Ward / Labour Wards  
National Institute of Population Research and Training (NIPORT), Associates for Community Population 
Research (ACPR), ICF International, 2016. Bangladesh Health Facility Survey 2014. NIPORT, ACPR, and ICF 
International, Dhaka, Bangladesh. 
National Institute of Statistics (NIS) [Rwanda], M.o.H.M.R., and Macro International Inc. , 2008. Rwanda 
Service Provision Assessment Survey 2007. NIS, MOH, and Macro International Inc., Calverton, 
Maryland. . 
National Population and Family Planning Board of Indonesia (BKKBN), Gadjah Mada University (UGM), 
Hasanuddin University (UNHAS), North Sumatra University (USU), Johns Hopkins University Bloomberg 
School of Public Health (JHSPH), 2015. Performance Monitoring and Accountability 2020 (PMA2020) 
Indonesia Survey, Jakarta, Indonesia and Baltimore, Maryland, USA. 
National Rural Health Mission (NHRM) India, 2009. Union Audit Reports, Performance Audit – Report 
No. 8 of 2009-10. National Rural Health Mission, India. 
Nickerson, J.W., Adams, O., Attaran, A., Hatcher-Roberts, J., Tugwell, P., 2015. Monitoring the ability to 
deliver care in low- and middle-income countries: a systematic review of health facility assessment 
tools. Health Policy Plan 30, 675-686. 
Olivier, J., Tsimpo, C., Gemignani, R., Shojo, M., Coulombe, H., Dimmock, F., Nguyen, M.C., Hines, H., 
Mills, E.J., Dieleman, J.L., Haakenstad, A., Wodon, Q., 2015. Understanding the roles of faith-based 
health-care providers in Africa: review of the evidence with a focus on magnitude, reach, cost, and 
satisfaction. Lancet 386, 1765-1775. 
Pays., O.M.d.l.S.B., 2013. Évaluation rapide de l’Accès à l’Eau, l’Hygiène et l’Assainissement dans les 
structures de soins au Mali. 
Republic of Madagascar Vice Prime Ministry in Charge of Public Health, UNFPA, UNICEF, WHO, AMDD, 
MSIS, 2010. Emergency obstetric and newborn care need assessment in Madagascar 2009-2010. 
Republique Islamique de Mauritanie, 2016. Indice de disponibilité et de capacité opérationnelle des 
services (SARA). 
Sanitation., G.o.S.L.a.t.M.o.H.a., 2012. Sierra Leone service availability and readiness assessment 2011 
report. 
Santé., M.d.l., 2014. Enquete Nationale sur les prestations des services de sante et la qualite des 
donnees sanitaires. , Burkina Faso. 
Spiegel, D.A., Choo, S., Cherian, M., Orgoi, S., Kehrer, B., Price, R.R., Govind, S., 2011. Quantifying 
surgical and anesthetic availability at primary health facilities in Mongolia. World journal of surgery 35, 
272-279. 
Sullivan T, a.B., J (Editors), 2000. Monitoring Quality of Care in Family Planning by the Quick Investigation 
of Quality (QIQ): Country Reports, Technical Report Series No. 5. MEASURE Evaluation, Carolina 
Population Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. . 
Taira, B.R., Cherian, M.N., Yakandawala, H., Kesavan, R., Samarage, S.M., DeSilva, M., 2010. Survey of 
emergency and surgical capacity in the conflict-affected regions of Sri Lanka. World J Surg 34, 428-432. 
The DHS Program, 2011. The Service Provision Assessment (SPA), Calverton, MD. . 
The Ministry of Health and Child Welfare (Zimbabwe), 2012. Zimbabwe National Integrated Health 
Facility Assessment Dec 2011 - Jan 2012. 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 31 
 
The Republic of the Union of Myanmar, UNICEF, 2014. Health Facility Assessment: Quality of Maternal 
Newborn and Child Health Care. 
United Nations General Assembly, 2015. Draft Resolution A/69/L.85: Transforming Our World: The 2030 
Agenda for Sustainable Development. 
USAID, 2011. USAID Primary Health Care Project in Iraq (PHCPI) Baseline Assessment Report 2011. 
Velleman, Y., Mason, E., Graham, W., Benova, L., Chopra, M., Campbell, O.M., Gordon, B., Wijesekera, 
S., Hounton, S., Esteves Mills, J., Curtis, V., Afsana, K., Boisson, S., Magoma, M., Cairncross, S., Cumming, 
O., 2014. From joint thinking to joint action: a call to action on improving water, sanitation, and hygiene 
for maternal and newborn health. PLoS Med 11, e1001771. 
WaterAid, UNICEF, 2016. Solomon Islands rural baseline. 
WHO, 2007a. National Health Facility Survey on the Quality of Outpatient Primary Child Health Care 
Services, IMCI Health Facility Survey Morocco  
WHO, 2007b. Standard precautions in health care. 
WHO, 2009. A review of health system barriers to implementation of the strategy of integrated 
management of childhood illnesses in Uzbekistan. 
WHO, 2010. Health Assessment for Tajikistan. 
WHO, 2012a. Indice de disponibilité et de capacité opérationnelle des services (SARA) Togo, 2012. 
WHO, 2012b. Uganda Service Availability and Readiness Assessment 2012. 
WHO/UNICEF, 2014. WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme: defintions and methods. . 
WHO/UNICEF, 2015a. Progress on sanitation and drinking water – 2015 update and MDG assessment, 
New York, New York. 
WHO/UNICEF, 2015b. WASH in health care facilities: Global Action Plan. 
WHO/UNICEF, 2016a. Expert Group Meeting on Monitoring WASH in Health Care Facilities in the 
Sustainable Development Goals. 
WHO/UNICEF, 2016b. Monitoring WASH in Health Care Facilities  
WHO/UNICEF, 2017. Safely managed drinking water. 
World Bank, 2013. Service Delivery Indicators Nigeria. 
World Health Organization, 2008. Essential environmental health standards in health care. WHO, 
Geneva, Switzerland. 
World Health Organization, 2009. WHO guidelines on hand hygiene in health care: first global patient 
safety challenge. Clean care is safer care. World Health Organization. 
World Health Organization, 2010. Tool for situational analysis to assess emergency and essential surgical 
care. 
World Health Organization, 2011. Water safety in buildings. WHO, Geneva, Switzerland. 
World Health Organization and UNICEF, 2015. Water, sanitation and hygiene in health care facilities: 
status in low and middle income countries and way forward, Geneva, Switzerland. 
Zurovac, D., Guintran, J.O., Donald, W., Naket, E., Malinga, J., Taleo, G., 2015. Health systems readiness 
and management of febrile outpatients under low malaria transmission in Vanuatu. Malar J 14, 489. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 32 
 
Tables 
 
Table 1. Guideline topics and definitions in the essential environmental health standards in health care settings and the core 
indicators for water, sanitation, hygiene, and waste management in HCF, adapted from (WHO/UNICEF, 2016a; World Health 
Organization, 2008) 
Guideline topic and definitions from the essential environmental health standards in health care settings, 
adapted from (World Health Organization, 2008)  
Guideline topic  
Definition in the guideline 
Water quality 
Water for drinking, cooking, personal hygiene, medical activities, cleaning and 
laundry is safe for the purpose intended. 
Water quantity  
Sufficient water is available at all times for drinking, food preparation, 
personal hygiene, medical activities, cleaning and laundry. 
Water facilities and access to 
water 
Sufficient water-collection points and water-use facilities are available in the 
health-care setting to allow convenient access to, and use of, water for 
medical activities, drinking, personal hygiene, food preparation, laundry and 
cleaning. 
Excreta Disposal 
Adequate, accessible and appropriate toilets are provided for patients, staff 
and carers. 
Wastewater disposal 
Wastewater is disposed of rapidly and safely. 
Health care waste disposal 
Health-care waste is segregated, collected, transported, treated and disposed 
of safely. 
Cleaning and laundry 
Laundry and surfaces in the health-care environment are kept clean. 
Food storage and preparation 
Food for patients, staff and carers is stored and prepared in a way that 
minimizes the risk of disease transmission. 
Building design, construction 
and management 
Buildings are designed, constructed and managed to provide a healthy and 
comfortable environment for patients, staff and carers. 
Control of vector-borne 
disease 
Patients, staff and carers are protected from disease vectors. 
Information and hygiene 
promotion 
Correct use of water, sanitation and waste facilities is encouraged by hygiene 
promotion and by management of staff, patients and carers. 
SDG Related water, sanitation, hygiene, and waste management in HCF indicators, adapted from 
(WHO/UNICEF, 2016b) 
Core indicators for water, 
sanitation, hygiene, and 
waste management in HCF 
for the SDGs 
Normative definitions of core indicators for basic water, sanitation, hygiene, 
and waste management services in health care facilities  
The proportion of health care 
facilities with basic water 
supply 
Facilities where the main source of water is an improved source, located on 
premises, from which water is available at the time of the survey, or if not, 
water is available from an alternative improved source. 
The proportion of health care 
facilities with basic sanitation 
Facilities with improved toilets or latrines for patients located on premises, 
that are functional at the time of visit, with at least one toilet designated for 
women/girls with facilities to manage menstrual hygiene needs, at least one 
separated for staff, and at least one meeting the needs of people with limited 
mobility. 
The proportion of health care 
facilities with basic hand 
hygiene 
Facilities with hand hygiene stations including a basin with water and soap, or 
alcohol-based hand rubs, present at critical points of care and within 5 m of 
toilets. 
The proportion of health care 
facilities practicing basic 
healthcare waste 
management 
Facilities where waste is safely segregated in the consultation area and 
infectious and sharps wastes are treated and disposed of safely. 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 33 
 
Table 2. Comparing the SDG service levels with data available in the SPA surveys. Adapted from (WHO/UNICEF, 2016a)2 
Water service (W) 
Service level 
W1 
W2 
W3 
W4 
AW1 
AW2 
AW3 
AW4 
Basic Service 
Improved 
source 
On premises 
Available from main source 
at time of survey (W3) or 
water is available from an 
alternative improved 
source (W4) 
Same as W 
Same as W 
Year-round 
availability 
Not available 
Limited 
service 
Improved 
water source 
A “No” response for ANY (W2, W3, W4) 
Same as W 
A "No response for AW2 
or AW3 
Not available 
Unimproved 
/ No facility 
An unimproved or no water source (W1)  
Same as W 
OR 
An improved water source (W1) that is more than 500m from 
the facility (W2)  
Sanitation service (S) 
Service level 
S1 
S2 
S3 
S4 
AS1 
AS2 
AS3 
AS4 
Basic Service 
Improved 
facilities 
located on 
premises and 
usable at time 
of visit 
Sex-
separated 
and have 
facilities to 
manage 
menstrual 
needs 
At least one 
toilet 
designated 
for staff 
At least 
one toilet 
meets the 
needs of 
people 
with 
limited 
mobility 
Sanitation 
piped to 
sewer 
Not 
available 
Not 
available 
Not available 
Limited 
service 
Improved 
facilities but 
not usable 
A “No” response for ANY (S2, S3, S4) 
Other 
improved 
facility  
Not 
available 
Not 
available 
Not available 
Unimproved 
/ No facility 
Unimproved 
or no facilities 
Not 
applicable 
(N/A) 
N/A 
N/A 
Unimproved 
or no 
facilities 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
Hygiene service level (H) 
Service level 
H1 
H2 
AH1 
AH2 
Basic Service 
Hand hygiene stations (water 
and soap or alcohol based 
hand rub) at points of care 
Hand hygiene (water and 
soap) available within 5m 
of toilets 
Same as H 
Not available 
Limited 
service 
Hand hygiene stations at either points of care (H1) or toilets 
(H2), but not both  
Not available 
Unimproved 
/ No facility 
No hand hygiene stations available or available but with no 
soap or water or alcohol based hand rub 
No running water and soap NOR alcohol based hand rub 
Waste management service (M) 
Service level 
M1 
M2 
M3 
AM1 
AM2 
AM3 
AM4 
Basic Service 
Waste safely 
segregated in 
consultation 
room 
Infectious 
waste 
treated and 
disposed of 
safely 
Sharps waste treated and 
disposed of safely 
Infectious 
waste safely 
stored 
Infectious 
waste 
safely 
disposed3 
Sharps 
waste 
safely 
stored 
Sharps waste 
safely 
disposed4 
Limited 
service 
Bins are in 
place but not 
used 
effectively. 
Waste is segregated but either infectious 
or sharps waste (or both) are not disposed 
of safely 
A 'No' response for one to three of ANY of AM1, AM2, AM3, 
AM4 
Unimproved 
/ No facility 
There are no 
bins for sharps 
and infectious 
waste  
Waste is not 
safely 
treated and 
disposed 
Waste is not safely treated 
and disposed 
Infectious and sharps waste are neither safely stored nor 
safely disposed 
                                                          
 
2 W1, W2, S1, etc. correspond to survey questions used to measure each service level. Those with ‘A’ (‘alternative’) represent the survey questions 
available in SPA surveys. 
3 ”The process of infectious waste disposal is incineration, and the facility has a functioning incinerator with fuel on the day of the assessment, or else 
the facility disposes of infectious waste by means of open burning in a protected area, dumping without burning in a protected area, or removal offsite 
with storage in a protected area prior to removal offsite” Ministry of Health [Malawi] and ICF International, 2014. Malawi Service Provision Assessment 
2013-2014, Lilongwe, Malawi. .  
4 ”The process of sharps waste disposal is incineration and the facility has a functioning incinerator with fuel on the day of the assessment, or else the 
facility disposes of sharps waste by means of open burning in a protected area, dumping without burning in a protected area, or removal offsite with 
storage in a protected area prior to removal offsite” ibid.  
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 34 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 35 
 
 
Table 3. Countries included in a study of environmental conditions and availability of standard precaution items in health care 
facilities in low- and middle-income countries 
World Region  
Countries 
Number of 
countries 
included in this 
study (percent of 
this study) 
Total countries 
and territories in 
each region 
(percent of 
countries 
represented in 
this study) 
Percent of 
world region 
population 
represented 
by countries 
and 
territories 
included in 
this study 
Caucasus and 
Central Asia (CCC) 
Azerbaijan (Bradley, 2006), Kyrgyzstan (Domashov I, 2011), Tajikistan (WHO, 2010), Uzbekistan 
(WHO, 2009) 
4 (5%) 
8 (50%) 
54% 
Eastern Asia (EA) 
Mongolia (Spiegel et al., 2011) 
1 (1%) 
6 (17%) 
<1% 
Latin America and 
the Caribbean 
(LAC)  
Barbados (MEASURE Evaluation, 2006a), Belize (IHME, 2014a), Bolivia (Goldberg, 2006), Dominica 
(MEASURE Evaluation, 2006b), Ecuador (Sullivan T, 2000), El Salvador (IHME, 2011), Grenada 
(MEASURE Evaluation, 2007a), Guatemala (IHME, 2014b), Guyana (Ministry of Health (MOH) 
[Guyana], 2005), Haiti (Institut Haïtien de l’Enfance (IHE) et ICF International, 2014), Honduras (IHME, 
2013), Mexico (Aquil et al., 2010), Nicaragua (MEASURE Evaluation., 2001), Panama (IHME, 2014c), 
Paraguay (Gustavo Angeles, 1999), Peru (Macro International, 2009), Saint Lucia (MEASURE 
Evaluation, 2006c), Saint Vincent and Grenadines (MEASURE Evaluation, 2006d), Suriname 
(MEASURE Evaluation, 2007b) 
19 (24%) 
46 (41%) 
39% 
Northern Africa 
(NA) 
Egypt (Ministry of Health and Population, 2005), Libya (El-Zanaty & Associates, 2012), Morocco 
(WHO, 2007a) 
3 (4%) 
6 (50%) 
70% 
Oceania (O) 
Papua New Guinea (National Department of Health and Environmental Health Branch (EHB), 2015), 
Solomon Islands (WaterAid and UNICEF, 2016), Vanuatu (Zurovac et al., 2015) 
3 (4%) 
20 (15%) 
78% 
Southern Asia (SA) 
Afghanistan (Ministry of Public Health (Islamic Republic of Afghanistan), 2009), Bangladesh (National 
Institute of Population Research and Training (NIPORT) et al., 2016), Bhutan (Ministry of Health, 
2009), India (National Rural Health Mission (NHRM) India, 2009), Nepal (Ministry of Health/Nepal et 
al., 2017), Pakistan (Majrooh et al., 2015), Sri Lanka (Taira et al., 2010) 
7 (9%) 
9 (78%) 
18% 
South-East Asia 
(SEA) 
Cambodia (National Center for HIV/AIDS Dermatology and STD (NCHADS, 2009), Indonesia (National 
Population and Family Planning Board of Indonesia (BKKBN) et al., 2015), Myanmar (The Republic of 
the Union of Myanmar and UNICEF, 2014), Timor Leste (Environmental Health Department, 2011) 
4 (5%) 
11 (36%) 
52% 
Sub-Saharan Africa 
(SSA) 
Angola (Frøystad et al., 2011), Benin (Ministère de la Santé, 2015), Burkina Faso (Santé., 2014), 
Cameroon (Cameroon Ministry of Public Health et al., 2013), Chad (Gauthier B, 2004), Cote d'Ivoire 
(Kombe Gilbert, 2008), Democratic Republic of the Congo (Ministère de la Santé Publique (MSP), 
2014), Eritrea (Ghebrehiwe et al., 2008), Ethiopia (Ethiopian Public Health Institute (EPHI) et al., 
2014), Gambia (Ministry of Health & Social Welfare et al., 2012), Ghana (Institute for Health Metrics 
and Evaluation (IHME), 2015), Kenya (National Coordinating Agency for Population and Development 
(NCAPD) [Kenya], 2011), Liberia (Knowlton et al., 2013), Madagascar (Republic of Madagascar Vice 
Prime Ministry in Charge of Public Health et al., 2010), Malawi (Ministry of Health [Malawi] and ICF 
International, 2014), Mali (Pays., 2013), Mauritania (Republique Islamique de Mauritanie, 2016), 
Mozambique (Molina and Martin G, 2016), Namibia (Macro, 2010), Niger (Institut National de la 
Statistique et al., 2016), Nigeria (World Bank, 2013), Republic of the Congo (Ministere de la sante et 
de la population et al., 2014), Rwanda (National Institute of Statistics (NIS) [Rwanda], 2008), Senegal 
(Agence Nationale de la Statistique et de la Démographie (ANSD) [Sénégal] and ICF International, 
2012), Sierra Leone (Sanitation., 2012), Somalia (Elkheir et al., 2014), South Africa (Health Systems 
Trust, 2004), South Sudan (Berendes et al., 2014), Sudan (Abdelgader et al., 2012), Swaziland 
(Ministry of Health and Social Welfare (Kingdom of Swaziland) et al., 2008), Togo (WHO, 2012a), 
Uganda (WHO, 2012b), United Republic of Tanzania (Ministry of Health and Social Welfare (MoHSW) 
[Tanzania Mainland] et al., 2015),  Zambia (Ministry of Health, 2010), Zimbabwe (The Ministry of 
Health and Child Welfare (Zimbabwe), 2012) 
36 (46%) 
51 (71%) 
97% 
Western Asia (WA) 
Iraq (USAID, 2011) 
1 (1%) 
13 (8%) 
16% 
Total 
78 
170 (45%) 
- 
 
 
 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 36 
 
 
Table 4. Coverage of environmental conditions and availability of standard precaution items in health care facilities based on 
data from 78 low- and middle-income countries 
 
Indicator 
Estimat
ed 
covera
ge 
Numb
er of 
countri
es in 
the 
estima
te 
Numb
er of 
faciliti
es in 
the 
estima
te 
Covera
ge in 
low-
incom
e 
countri
es 
Numb
er of 
low 
incom
e 
countri
es 
Covera
ge in 
lower 
middle
-
incom
e 
countri
es 
Numb
er of 
lower 
middle
-
incom
e 
countri
es 
Covera
ge in 
upper 
middle
-
incom
e 
countri
es 
Numb
er of 
upper 
middle 
incom
e 
countri
es 
Improved water source within 500 meters 
70.7% 
71 
 
129,5
57  
65.2% 
33 
70.4% 
26 
81.0% 
29 
Piped water source on premises 
50.3% 
26 
 
52,68
9  
45.7% 
11 
48.3% 
7 
100.0
% 
13 
Reliable electricity 
41.2% 
46 
 
121,3
81  
39.9% 
27 
40.4% 
21 
41.6% 
17 
Client toilet 
67.4% 
49 
 
123,6
95  
64.6% 
27 
67.9% 
20 
75.6% 
19 
Soap 
60.8% 
34 
 
85,74
2  
54.1% 
14 
60.9% 
12 
74.6% 
14 
Running water 
54.3% 
11 
 
69,74
6  
57.4% 
7 
54.3% 
5 
57.6% 
6 
Soap and running water 
44.1% 
10 
 
66,35
5  
43.2% 
6 
44.1% 
5 
50.6% 
5 
Alcohol-based hand disinfectant 
29.5% 
9 
 
66,25
7  
28.1% 
6 
29.5% 
5 
- 
4 
Soap and running water or alcohol-based 
hand disinfectant 
62.2% 
17 
 
94,67
6  
60.3% 
13 
62.2% 
12 
70.2% 
5 
Sterilization equipment 
26.8% 
25 
 
71,04
8  
27.7% 
11 
26.4% 
9 
22.7% 
7 
Equipment for high level disinfection 
46.1% 
6 
 
54,34
9  
- 
4 
- 
4 
- 
2 
Appropriate storage of infectious waste 
39.3% 
15 
 
85,11
6  
43.2% 
12 
39.6% 
11 
- 
3 
Appropriate disposal of infectious waste 
60.9% 
14 
 
82,91
5  
54.3% 
12 
63.7% 
11 
- 
3 
Disinfectant (e.g. chlorine solution for 
decontamination) 
63.6% 
35 
 
108,0
22  
63.1% 
18 
63.7% 
16 
66.4% 
11 
Latex gloves 
76.5% 
41 
 
114,0
86  
81.1% 
22 
76.7% 
16 
70.2% 
15 
Appropriate storage of sharps waste (e.g. 
sharps boxes) 
74.7% 
39 
 
113,6
28  
76.3% 
22 
74.7% 
16 
73.3% 
16 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 37 
 
Safe disposal of sharps 
63.6% 
17 
 
91,38
2  
58.7% 
14 
68.4% 
11 
80.2% 
6 
Disposable syringe 
85.2% 
30 
 
96,21
8  
86.9% 
16 
85.1% 
12 
80.6% 
9 
Guidelines for standard precautions 
26.2% 
19 
 
95,70
8  
28.6% 
16 
26.3% 
12 
22.5% 
6 
Gowns 
43.7% 
19 
 
57,98
9  
52.8% 
6 
44.2% 
5 
- 
3 
Eye protection 
6.7% 
9 
 
55,61
3  
5.3% 
5 
6.7% 
5 
- 
2 
 
 
 
 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 38 
 
Table 5. Infrequently used questions related to environmental conditions and standard precaution items in health care facilities  
Country  
Question topic 
Findings 
Bangladesh (National 
Institute of Population 
Research and Training 
(NIPORT) et al., 2016)  
Separate toilets for 
men and women 
The Bangladesh SPA reported 72% of facilities 
had access to toilets for clients; however, 
26% of facilities had separate toilets for 
female clients. 
El Salvador (IHME, 2011) 
Availability of single use 
towels 
11% of facilities had single use towels for 
hand drying after handwashing.  
El Salvador (IHME, 2011) 
Water availability 
69% of facilities reported having a water 
source. 41% of facilities with a water source 
reported a severe shortage or lack of water 
occurring last year.  
Ethiopia (Ethiopian Public 
Health Institute (EPHI) et 
al., 2014)  
Health care facilities 
connected to the 
power grid 
5% of health posts were connected to the 
power grid and 67% of other facility types 
(e.g. hospitals) were connected to the grid.  
Indonesia (National 
Population and Family 
Planning Board of 
Indonesia (BKKBN) et al., 
2015)  
Handwashing area is 
near a sanitation 
facility 
13% of facilities had no handwashing 
facilities. 57% had handwashing facilities but 
they were not near the sanitation facilities 
and 30% had handwashing facilities that were 
near sanitation facilities.  
Nepal (Ministry of 
Health/Nepal et al., 2017)  
Is the toilet disability 
accessible 
93% of facilities did not have a disability 
accessible toilet.  
Nigeria (World Bank, 2013) 
Staff received training 
in health care waste 
management 
Staff at 28% of facilities have received 
training in health care waste management; 
72% have not. 
Pakistan (Majrooh et al., 
2015) 
Separate toilets for 
men and women 
88% of HCFs had a toilet available; however, 
only 20% had separate toilets for men and 
women. 
Solomon Islands (WaterAid 
and UNICEF, 2016) 
Some or all of the toilet 
facilities are accessible 
to people with 
disabilities 
43% had at least one toilet, which was 
accessible to persons with limited mobility, 
and 57% of facilities did not. 
 
 
 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 39 
 
Table 6. Differences in availability of water services in Bangladesh, Haiti, Malawi, Nepal, Senegal, and Tanzania  
Unit of 
comparison 
Difference 
in coverage 
Bangladesh 
Haiti 
Malawi 
Nepal 
Senegal 
Tanzania 
Urban and 
rural settings 
Urban 
78% 
58% 
63% 
- 
81% 
55% 
Rural 
47% 
34% 
45% 
- 
50% 
24% 
Difference 
31 percentage 
points (p.p.) 
24 p.p. 
18 p.p. 
- 
31 p.p. 
31 p.p. 
Sub-national 
administrative 
area (e.g. 
district, 
region) 
With 
highest 
coverage 
73% (Rangpur) 
58% (Ouest) 
55% (South) 
47% (Eastern) 
82% (Louga) 
- 
With 
lowest 
coverage 
36% (Barisal) 
23% (Nord-Ouest) 
47% (Central) 
33% (mid-west) 
16% (Kédougou) 
- 
Difference 
37 p.p. 
35 p.p. 
8 p.p. 
13 p.p. 
67 p.p. 
- 
Managing 
authorities 
With 
highest 
coverage 
92% (Local 
government) 
56% (NGO/private 
not for profit) 
80% (Company) 
81% (NGO/ 
private) 
70% (Private) 
61% (private 
for-profit) 
With 
lowest 
coverage 
48% 
(Government) 
34% 
(Government) 
44% 
(Government) 
41% 
(Government) 
60% 
(Government) 
20% (Parastatal) 
Difference 
44 p.p. 
22 p.p. 
36 p.p. 
40 p.p. 
10 p.p. 
41 p.p. 
Facility types 
With 
highest 
coverage 
83% (NGO 
hospital) 
74% (Hospital) 
100% (Central 
Hospital) 
76% (Hospital) 
95% (Hospitals) 
60% (clinics) 
With 
lowest 
coverage 
46% (Community 
clinic) 
24% (Dispensary) 
29% (Health post) 
32% (sub-health 
post) 
28% (Health 
clinic, Case de 
santé) 
29% 
(dispensary) 
Difference 
37 p.p. 
50 p.p. 
71 p.p. 
44 p.p. 
67 p.p. 
31 p.p. 
Inpatient 
versus 
outpatient 
Inpatient 
service 
provided 
50% 
67% 
55% 
- 
89% 
29% 
Outpatient 
service only 
50% 
42% 
51% 
- 
67% 
32% 
Difference 
0 p.p. 
25 p.p. 
4 p.p. 
- 
22 p.p. 
3 p.p. 
 
 
 
 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 40 
 
Table 7. Unadjusted and adjusted logistic regression results for factors associated with the availability of basic water services in 
health care facilities in six countries 
Country 
Urban vs. rural 
(reference: urban) 
Managing authority (reference: public facility) 
Facility type (reference: hospital) 
Inpatient vs. no 
inpatient (reference: 
inpatient service 
provided) 
Banglad
esh 
Urban vs. rural 
NGO 
Local government 
Private for profit 
Health and family 
welfare center 
Clinic 
Dispensary 
Inpatient 
 
(N=1165) 
OR 
CI 
P 
OR 
CI 
p-value 
OR 
CI 
p-value 
OR 
CI 
p-value 
OR 
CI 
p-value 
OR 
CI 
p-value 
OR 
CI 
p-value 
OR 
CI 
p-value 
Crude 
0.
3 
(0.
2, 
0.4
) 
<0.0
01 
2.
9 
(1.
8, 
4.6
) 
<0.0
01 
12.
6 
(2.
4, 
64.
9) 
0.00
2 
6 
(3.
0, 
12.
1) 
<0.0
01 
0.
3 
(0.
2, 
0.5
) 
<0.0
01 
0.
3 
(0.
2, 
0.4
) 
<0.0
01 
0.
3 
(0.
2, 
0.5
) 
<0.0
01 
1 
(0.
6, 
1.6
) 
0.97
2 
Adjuste
d 
0.
7 
(0.
4, 
1.2
) 
0.15
7 
2.
3 
(1.
2, 
4.5
) 
0.01
5 
8.7 
(1.
5, 
50.
1) 
0.01
6 
2 
(0.
9, 
4.4
) 
0.08
2 
0.
5 
(0.
3, 
0.9
) 
0.03
2 
0.
5 
(0.
3, 
0.8
) 
0.00
4 
0.
5 
(0.
3, 
1.0
) 
0.04
3 
1.
1 
(0.
7, 
1.9
) 
0.61
7 
Haiti 
Urban vs. rural 
NGO 
Mission/faith-based 
Private for profit 
Health center with 
beds 
Health center 
without beds 
Dispensary 
Inpatient 
(N=907) 
O
R 
CI 
p-
valu
e 
O
R 
CI 
p-
valu
e 
OR 
CI 
p-
valu
e 
O
R 
CI 
p-
valu
e 
O
R 
CI 
p-
valu
e 
O
R 
CI 
p-
valu
e 
O
R 
CI 
p-
valu
e 
O
R 
CI 
p-
valu
e 
Crude 
0.
4 
(0.
3, 
0.5
) 
<0.0
01 
2.
5 
(1.
7, 
3.7
) 
<0.0
01 
1.2 
(0.
8, 
1.8
) 
0.28
6 
2.
3 
(1.
6, 
3.3
) 
<0.0
01 
0.
7 
(0.
4, 
1.2
) 
0.25
2 
0.
6 
(0.
4, 
0.9
) 
0.02
6 
0.
2 
(0.
1, 
0.3
) 
<0.0
01 
0.
4 
(0.
2, 
0.7
) 
0.00
1 
Adjuste
d 
0.
7 
(0.
2, 
0.4
) 
0.02
2 
2.
2 
(1.
5, 
3.3
) 
<0.0
01 
1.2 
(0.
8, 
1.8
) 
0.37
9 
1.
9 
(1.
3, 
2.7
) 
0.00
1 
0.
9 
(0.
5, 
1.5
) 
0.68
9 
0.
7 
(0.
4, 
1.1
) 
0.07
8 
0.
3 
(0.
1, 
0.4
) 
<0.0
01 
0.
6 
(0.
3, 
1.2
) 
0.18
8 
Malawi 
Urban vs. rural 
NGO 
Faith based 
Private for profit 
Health center 
Clinic 
Dispensary 
Inpatient 
(N=977) 
O
R 
CI 
p-
valu
e 
O
R 
CI 
p-
valu
e 
OR 
CI 
p-
valu
e 
O
R 
CI 
p-
valu
e 
O
R 
CI 
p-
valu
e 
O
R 
CI 
p-
valu
e 
O
R 
CI 
p-
valu
e 
O
R 
CI 
p-
valu
e 
Crude 
0.
5 
(0.
4, 
0.6
) 
<0.0
01 
2.
2 
(1.
2, 
3.8
) 
0.00
7 
1.7 
(1.
2, 
2.4
) 
0.00
5 
1.
7 
(1.
2, 
2.3
) 
0.00
1 
0.
6 
(0.
4, 
0.9
) 
0.00
9 
0.
8 
(0.
5, 
1.3
) 
0.44
3 
0.
4 
(0.
2, 
0.8
) 
0.00
7 
0.
8 
(0.
4, 
2) 
0.70
7 
Adjuste
d 
0.
5 
(0.
4, 
0.7
) 
<0.0
01 
1.
7 
(0.
9, 
3.4
) 
0.12
1 
1.6 
(1.
1, 
2.3
) 
0.01
3 
1.
4 
(0.
9, 
2.3
) 
0.21
6 
0.
9 
(0.
6, 
1.4
) 
0.57
3 
0.
7 
(0.
4, 
1.3
) 
0.28
6 
0.
6 
(0.
3, 
1.3
) 
0.19
9 
0.
8 
(0.
3, 
1.9
) 
0.64
0 
Nepal  
(N = 
992) 
Urban vs. rural 
NGO/ private for-
profit 
- 
Private for profit 
Primary health care 
center 
Health post 
Sub-health post 
Inpatient 
 
 
O
R 
CI 
p-
valu
e 
O
R 
CI 
p-
valu
e 
OR 
CI 
p-
valu
e 
O
R 
CI 
p-
valu
e 
O
R 
CI 
p-
valu
e 
O
R 
CI 
p-
valu
e 
O
R 
CI 
p-
valu
e 
O
R 
CI 
p-
valu
e 
Crude 
- 
- 
- 
4.
2 
(2.
3, 
7.6
) 
<0.0
01 
- 
- 
- 
6.
0 
(3.
3, 
11.
1) 
<0.0
01 
0.
4 
(0.
3, 
0.6
) 
0.00
1 
0.
2 
(0.
2, 
0.4
) 
<0.0
01 
0.
1 
(0.
1, 
0.3
) 
<0.0
01 
- 
- 
- 
Adjuste
d 
- 
- 
- 
2.
4 
(1.
3, 
5.1
) 
0.00
8 
- 
- 
- 
2.
6 
(1.
3, 
5.1
) 
0.00
8 
0.
7 
(0.
4, 
1.1
) 
0.09
3 
0.
5 
(0.
3, 
0.7
) 
0.00
2 
0.
3 
(0.
2, 
0.5
) 
<0.0
01 
- 
- 
- 
Senegal 
Urban vs. rural 
Private 
- 
- 
Health center 
Health post 
Health house 
Inpatient* 
(N=438) 
O
R 
CI 
p-
valu
e 
O
R 
CI 
p-
valu
e 
OR 
CI 
p-
valu
e 
O
R 
CI 
p-
valu
e 
O
R 
CI 
p-
valu
e 
O
R 
CI 
p-
valu
e 
O
R 
CI 
p-
valu
e 
O
R 
CI 
p-
valu
e 
Crude 
0.
2 
(0.
1, 
0.4
) 
<0.0
01 
1.
6 
(0.
8, 
3.0
) 
0.18
2 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
0.
1 
(0, 
0.5
) 
0.00
6 
0.
1 
(0, 
0.5
) 
0.00
5 
0 
(0, 
0.1
) 
<0.0
01 
0.
2 
0.1
, 
0.9
) 
0.04
2 
Adjuste
d 
0.
3 
(0.
2, 
0.6
) 
<0.0
01 
0.
7 
(0.
3, 
1.5
) 
0.33
7 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
0.
1 
(0, 
0.5
) 
0.00
8 
0.
2 
(0, 
0.9
) 
0.03
4 
0 
(0, 
0.3
) 
0.00
1 
- 
- 
- 
Tanzani
a 
Urban vs. rural 
Parastatal 
Mission/faith-based 
Private for profit 
Health centre 
Clinic 
Dispensary 
Inpatient 
(N = 
1200) 
O
R 
CI 
p-
valu
e 
O
R 
CI 
p-
valu
e 
OR 
CI 
p-
valu
e 
O
R 
CI 
p-
valu
e 
O
R 
CI 
p-
valu
e 
O
R 
CI 
p-
valu
e 
O
R 
CI 
p-
valu
e 
O
R 
CI 
p-
valu
e 
Crude 
0.
3 
(0.
2, 
0.4
) 
<0.0
01 
0.
8 
(0.
2, 
2.5
) 
0.67
2 
2.9 
(1.
7, 
4.8
) 
<0.0
01 
4.
8 
(2.
8, 
8.3
) 
<0.0
01 
0.
6 
(0.
4, 
0.9
) 
0.02
3 
1.
2 
(0.
7, 
2.3
) 
0.51
9 
0.
3 
(0.
2, 
0.5
) 
<0.0
01 
1.
2 
(0.
5, 
2.9
) 
0.74
8 
Adjuste
d 
0.
4 
(0.
2, 
0.6
) 
<0.0
01 
0.
5 
(0.
2, 
2) 
0.35
4 
2.4 
(1.
4, 
4.2
) 
0.00
2 
2.
6 
(1.
3, 
5.4
) 
0.00
7 
0.
9 
(0.
6, 
1.4
) 
0.62
4 
0.
5 
(0.
2, 
1.2
) 
0.10
7 
0.
5 
(0.
3, 
0.8
) 
0.00
7 
1.
5 
(0.
6, 
3.8
) 
0.44
1 
 
 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
