 Accepted Manuscript
Late Disseminated Lyme Disease: Associated Pathology and Spirochete Persistence
Post-Treatment in Rhesus Macaques
Nicholas A. Crossland, Xavier Alvarez, Monica E. Embers
PII:
S0002-9440(17)30894-5
DOI:
10.1016/j.ajpath.2017.11.005
Reference:
AJPA 2791
To appear in:
The American Journal of Pathology
Received Date: 7 September 2017
Revised Date:
1 November 2017
Accepted Date: 16 November 2017
Please cite this article as: Crossland NA, Alvarez X, Embers ME, Late Disseminated Lyme Disease:
Associated Pathology and Spirochete Persistence Post-Treatment in Rhesus Macaques, The American
Journal of Pathology (2018), doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2017.11.005.
This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to
our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo
copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please
note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all
legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
1 
Late Disseminated Lyme Disease: Associated Pathology and Spirochete 
Persistence Post-Treatment in Rhesus Macaques 
 
Nicholas A. Crossland1, Xavier Alvarez2 and Monica E. Embers1* 
 
Divisions of 1Bacteriology and Parasitology and 2Comparative Pathology, Tulane 
National Primate Research Center, Tulane University Health Sciences, 18703 Three 
Rivers Rd., Covington, Louisiana, 70433 
 
Text pages: 25 
Tables: 1 
Figures:  4 (2 supplemental) 
Running Title: Pathology and Spirochete Persistence in Late Stage Lyme disease 
*Corresponding author: Monica E. Embers 
18703 Three Rivers Rd. 
Covington, LA 70433 
Phone: (985) 871-6607 
Email: members@tulane.edu 
 
 
Funding: Supported by 2P20-RR020159-08 for The Louisiana Center of Biomedical 
Research Excellence (CoBRE) in Experimental Infectious Disease Research (M.E.E.), 
the TNPRC base grant (NIH) 5 P51 OD 011104-56 (L.H.), the Bay Area Lyme 
Foundation (M.E.E.), and the Steven and Alexandra Cohen Foundation (M.E.E.). 
 
 
Disclosures: None declared. 
 
 
 
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
2 
 
 
Abstract  
Non-human primates currently serve as the best experimental model for Lyme disease 
due to their close genetic homology with humans and demonstration of all three phases 
of disease following infection with Borreliella (Borrelia) burgdorferi (Bb). We investigated 
the pathology associated with late disseminated Lyme disease (12 to 13 months 
following tick inoculation) in doxycycline-treated (28 days; 5mg/kg, oral, 2x/day) and 
untreated rhesus macaques (Rm). Minimal to moderate lymphoplasmacytic 
inflammation, with a predilection for perivascular spaces and collagenous tissues, was 
observed in multiple tissues including the cerebral leptomeninges, brainstem, peripheral 
nerves from both fore and hind limbs, stifle synovium and perisynovial adipose tissue, 
urinary bladder, skeletal muscle, myocardium, and visceral pericardium. Indirect 
immunofluorescence assays (IFA) combining monoclonal (outer surface protein A) and 
polyclonal antibodies were performed on all tissue sections containing inflammation. 
Rare morphologically intact spirochetes were observed in the brains of two treated Rm, 
the heart of one treated Rm, and adjacent to a peripheral nerve of an untreated animal.  
Borrelia antigen staining of probable spirochete cross-sections was also observed in 
heart, skeletal muscle, and near peripheral nerves of both treated and untreated 
animals. These findings support the notion that chronic Lyme disease symptoms can be 
attributable to residual inflammation in and around tissues that harbor a low burden of 
persistent host-adapted spirochetes and/or residual antigen. 
 
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
3 
 
 
Introduction 
The first well-documented indication of Lyme disease (LD) in the United States 
occurred in the early 1970s manifesting as an outbreak of asymmetric large joint 
oligoarthritis in the community of Lyme, Connecticut.1, 2 Steere et al speculated that the 
tight geographical clustering in a sparsely-populated, heavily wooded area, and the 
peak incidence in the summer and early fall months were suggestive of an arthropod-
vectored disease.1 This hypothesis was later confirmed by Burgdorfer’s group, who 
isolated Treponema-like spirochete bacteria from adult Ixodes dammini (scapularis) 
ticks on Shelter Island, New York.3 The spirochetes were named Borrelia burgdorferi 
(Bb) after their discoverer.3 Lyme disease is now known to be caused by multiple 
closely related genospecies classified within the Bb sensu lato complex, representing 
the most common tick-borne human disease in the Northern Hemisphere.4, 5 Although 
approximately 30,000 physician-reported cases occur annually in the United States, the 
annual incidence has been estimated to be 10-fold higher by the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention.6
Current antibiotic therapy guidelines outlined by the Infectious Disease Society of 
America (IDSA) are successful in the treatment of LD for the majority of LD patients, 
especially when administered early in disease immediately following identification of 
erythema migrans (EM).7 Although EM is considered an early localized reaction and 
clinical hallmark of LD, EM is not pathognomonic nor is it observed in 100% of cases8, 
resulting in delayed treatment ranging from weeks to months after initial exposure. 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
4 
Chronic subjective symptoms (ie, musculoskeletal pains, cognitive dysfunction, radicular 
pain, paresthesia, dysesthesia and/or fatigue) and less commonly, objective clinical 
signs (ie, arthritis and/or neurological deficits), which remain for months to years after 
completion of recommended antibiotic therapy in patients with well-documented LD are 
classified into ‘post-treatment Lyme disease syndrome’ (PTLDS)9.  
Considerable confusion and controversy exist over the frequency and cause of 
PTLDS and even over its existence. Although progress has been made in the 
development of a standard case definition for PTLDS, the absence of an available test 
to confirm or rule out persistence of Bb adds to the quandary.10, 11 We and others have 
speculated that decreased efficacy of antibiotic treatment in LD may be attributed to 
several causes, including: i) host-adapted spirochetes that persist in the tissues, 
probably in small numbers, inaccessible or impervious to antibiotic; ii) inflammatory 
responses to residual antigens from dead organisms; iii) residual tissue damage 
following pathogen clearance; and/or iv) autoimmune responses, possibly elicited by 
antigenic mimicry.12-14 Experimental studies on immunocompetent mice, dogs, and 
rhesus macaques have provided evidence for the persistence of Bb spirochetes 
subsequent to antibiotic treatment in the form of residual spirochetes detected within 
tissue by IFA and PCR, and recovered by xenodiagnoses.14-18 These findings support 
the role of persistent, host-adapted Bb spirochetes in the etiology of PTLDS, yet these 
spirochetes may be difficult to impossible to regrow by current tissue culture methods 
following prolonged infection. This experimental dilemma is paralleled by clinical 
observations of negative culture results in confirmed cases of Lyme carditis resulting in 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
5 
sudden cardiac death, where morphologically intact spirochetes were readily observed 
in affected heart sections by immunohistochemistry.19  
Here, we utilized tick-mediated inoculation of Bb strain B31 into NHPs, followed 
by doxycycline treatment directed towards disseminated disease, thus aiming to 
accurately model chronic LD of humans whose treatment is delayed. We hypothesized 
that late stage disseminated LD in rhesus macaques infected by tick bite would display 
residual microscopic pathology in a variety of different tissues previously indicated in 
natural and experimental LD (ie, PNS, CNS, heart, skeletal muscle, and joint associated 
tissues) and that this pathology would be directly associated with residual spirochetal 
antigens and/or viable host-adapted spirochetes.  
 
Materials and Methods 
Ethical statement 
Practices in the housing and care of animals conformed to the regulations and 
standards of the Public Health Service Policy on Humane Care and Use of Laboratory 
Animals, and the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. The Tulane 
National Primate Research Center (Animal Welfare Assurance # A4499-01) is fully 
accredited by the Association for the Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory 
Animal Care-International. The Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) 
of the Tulane National Primate Research Center approved all animal-related protocols, 
including the infection, treatment, and tick-feeding procedures used with nonhuman 
primates. All animal procedures were overseen by veterinarians and performed by 
either veterinarians or trained staff. Euthanasia was conducted by anesthesia with 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
6 
ketamine hydrochloride (10 mg/kg) followed by an overdose with sodium pentobarbital. 
This method is consistent with the recommendation of the American Veterinary Medical 
Association guidelines. 
 
Animals, inoculations, and treatment 
Ten male rhesus macaques of Indian origin, three to four years of age were fed upon by 
I. scapularis nymphal ticks that harbored Bb. To ensure infection, I. scapularis nymphs 
were capillary tube–fed the spirochetes (from a mid-log phase culture of strain B31) as 
previously described.20, 21 Ten Bb-containing nymphs were placed on the backs of all 10 
monkeys in a tick containment device, as previously described.14, 21 Ticks were allowed 
to feed for four days to transmit infection. A recently developed 5-antigen Bioplex® 
assay was used to detect and quantify antibody responses.22 Skin biopsy samples were 
also used to verify infection by culture and PCR.14 Half of the animals produced positive 
skin biopsy cultures and 8/10 were PCR positive. At four months post-inoculation (p.i.), 
half (five) of the NHP received antibiotic treatment, consisting of 5 mg/kg oral 
doxycycline twice per day. The treatment lasted 28 days, and no instances of non-
compliance were observed. With the exception of IK14 (0.1 to 0.26 µg/mL), the serum 
values obtained at 12 h post-dosing (0.98 to 1.87 µg/mL) were above or consistent with 
expected trough values derived from our previous pharmacokinetic study.23  Blood was 
drawn at day 0, every two weeks for the first 5 months, then monthly thereafter. Further 
details of the serological responses, serum doxycycline concentrations, and detection of 
persistent spirochetes by multiple methods will be communicated in a separate report. 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
7 
Necropsies were performed at eight to nine months after the cessation of treatment (12 
to 13 months p.i.).  
 
Histopathology and microscopic grading  
Representative sections of brain (cerebrum, cerebellum, and brainstem), dura mater, 
spinal cord (cervical, thoracic, lumbar, and sacral) and associated dorsal root ganglia, 
peripheral nerves (radial, ulnar, tibial, and sural), joint associated tissues (shoulder and 
stifle), heart, skeletal muscle, lung, spleen, axillary and mesenteric lymph nodes, and 
urinary bladder were collected from each animal, fixed in Z-fix (Anatech Ltd., Battle 
Creek, MI) for 24 to 48 hours, embedded in paraffin, sectioned at 5 µm, and stained with 
hematoxylin and eosin (H&E). Peripheral nerves were mistakenly not collected for 
routine histopathology from one untreated animal (IP67). H&E–stained sections were 
evaluated by a light microscope and imaged with a digital camera. Two independent 
veterinary pathologists (Crossland & Didier) evaluated tissues. Initially all tissues were 
evaluated to determine the variability and severity of pathology from all samples, with 
the pathologists blinded to treatment groups. Tissues that were observed to contain 
pathology were used as a “road map” for subsequent immunofluorescent staining to 
identify Bb. Based on the range of lesions observed, an ordinal scoring system ranging 
from 0 to 3 was developed to classify inflammatory profiles. A zero (0) score indicated 
that inflammation was not observed, a one (1) indicated minimal localized 
lymphoplasmacytic inflammation, a two (2) indicated minimal lymphoplasmacytic 
inflammation with multifocal distribution or mild inflammation with either focal or 
multifocal distribution, and a three (3) indicated moderate lymphoplasmacytic 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
8 
inflammation. A score of 3 was always associated with a multifocal distribution. Control 
tissues were obtained from four male, age-matched, rhesus macaques. Two of these 
animals were control, sham-(intrathecal) inoculated subjects from a previous Lyme 
neuroborreliosis study24. The additional two rhesus macaques were humanely 
euthanized due to intractable chronic diarrhea and had not previously been on a LD 
study. Statistical analyses were conducted with GraphPad Prism version 6 software. 
 
Detection of Bb by Indirect Immunofluorescence Assay (IFA) 
An identical set of tissues as previously described in the histopathology section were 
also collected at necropsy (in addition to peripheral nerves from IP67), placed in poly-
con® containers containing OCT medium and frozen immediately in a dry ice/methanol 
bath, then stored at -80 °
C. Only sections with inf lammation confirmed through 
histopathology were evaluated by IFA. Frozen samples were processed by 
cryosectioning (at 15 µm), with four to eight sections (60 to 120µm) of each tissue 
examined depending on how much tissue could fit onto four slides. All incubations were 
performed at room temperature and all wash steps were performed for 10 minutes while 
gently rocking in Kopplin jars unless otherwise stated. Frozen sections were thawed for 
20 minutes, followed by submersion in 4% paraformaldehyde for 20 minutes at 4 °C. 
Slides were then washed twice with 1X phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and tissues 
were circled by a wax pen. Next, tissues were submerged in 100mM glycine diluted in 
PBS/0.2% fish skin gelatin (FSG)/0.1% Triton x-100 (T-X) to neutralize residual 
paraformaldehyde. Before blocking of slides, two additional wash steps were performed 
with PBS/FSG/T-X and PBS/FSG, respectively. In a dark humidified staining box, the 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
9 
slides were blocked with 10% normal goat serum (NGS)/PBS/FSG for one hour. 
Blocking agent was gently removed from the slides by tapping the glass edge onto a 
paper towel immediately before the addition of primary antibodies. Two primary 
antibodies were used simultaneously, which included a rabbit polyclonal anti-Bb 
(derived from a hyper-immunized rabbit six weeks post-inoculation with in vitro 
propagated Bb strain B3125) and an anti-Outer Surface Protein A (OspA) monoclonal 
IgG hybridoma supernatant (CB10, kindly provided by J. Benach). Polyclonal rabbit 
serum was diluted 1:300 and the monoclonal antibody hybridoma supernatant was 
diluted 1:40 in NGS/PBS/FSG, with approximately 300 µL added to each tissue section, 
followed by a one hour incubation. Slides were washed twice with PBS/FSG/T-X and a 
final rinse with PBS/FSG. Tissue sections were then incubated for one hour with 300 µL 
secondary antibodies conjugated to fluorescent dyes diluted 1:1000 in NGS/PBS/FSG 
(Goat anti-Rabbit IgG-Alexa Fluor 488-Catalog#:A32731 and Goat anti-Mouse IgG 
Alexa Fluor 568-Catalog#: A-11004;ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Three 
additional wash steps identical to those performed after incubation with primary 
antibodies were performed. After the final wash, slides were partially dried by tapping 
the glass edge onto a paper towel and immediately mounted with an in house prepared 
anti-quenching glycerol-based mounting media, cover slipped, and allowed to sit 
overnight. Pre-inoculation serum from the rabbit used to obtain hyperimmune 
serum was utilized in the primary antibody step (diluted 1:300) to serve as a 
negative control, which displayed neither red nor green fluorescence when 
applied to positive control slides. Brain sections from a rhesus macaque that 
were cut to 15 µm and incubated with Bb strain B31 ex vivo served as a 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
10
positive control.26 Additionally, the IFA assay was performed on frozen sections 
originating from one of the control animals that was euthanized due to intractable 
diarrhea. For this control animal, IFA was performed on an identical set of tissues as 
examined in experimental animals. Spirochetes were not observed in any of control 
animal sections examined. Imaging was performed with a Leica DMi8 confocal 
microscope equipped with three lasers (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany) 
utilizing a 63x objective, with a resolution of 1024 x 1024 pixels. An additional 2x 
amplification was applied with Leica LAS X version 10 software when appropriate. Start 
and stop depth was assigned for each image allowing for maximization by z stacking of 
images. Frame average was set at 2.  Laser intensity was optimized on positive control 
tissues and remained constant for all test specimens. Volocity 6.3.1 3-D image analysis 
software (Perkin Elmer, Waltham, MA) was used to render images for 3-dimensional 
display and angle rotation. Adobe Photoshop CC 2017 & InDesign software (Adobe 
Systems, San Jose, CA) were used to process and assemble the images and figures, 
respectively. When made, adjustments to brightness, contrast, or color balance were 
applied to the whole image. 
 
RNAscope In situ hybridization (ISH) Procedure 
RNAscope is commercially available from Advanced Cell Diagnostics (ACD; Newark, 
CA).27 RNA ISH was performed utilizing the RNAscope® Multiplex Fluorescent 
Detection Kit v2 according to the manufacturer’s guidelines. In brief, for each specimen 
investigated, three serial, 15 µm fresh-frozen sections were fixed in 4% 
paraformaldehyde at 4 °C for 15 minutes and dehydrated in a series of ethanol washes. 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
11
Slides were then treated with RNAscope Hydrogen Peroxide for 10 minutes and 
RNAscope Protease IV for 30 minutes at room temperature. A different probe was 
utilized for each of the three serial sections, which included the following: Bb probe (23S 
rRNA transcript; catalog #468211), positive probe (Rhesus macaque PPIB; catalog 
#457711) and negative probe (Bacillus subtillis DapB; catalog #320871). Each of the 
probes were designed and synthesized by ACD. Following the amplification process, 
TSA Cy5 was utilized to visualize the ISH reaction (Perkin Elmer; Waltham, MA # 
SAT705A001EA). Tissues were mounted with a glycerol-based anti-quenching media 
prepared in house, cover slipped, and allowed to sit overnight. Imaging was performed 
with a Leica DMi8 confocal microscope as previously described in the IFA section.   
 
Results 
For the sake of continuity, histopathologic, IFA, and ISH results are described 
together by organ system. When stated, observed fluorescence indicates a reaction 
with either rabbit hyperimmune Bb polyclonal antibodies (Figure 1A) or mouse 
hybridoma-derived anti-OspA monoclonal antibodies (Figure 1B).  Given the sectioning 
at 15 µM, spirochetes can be observed both as full-length in the lateral plane, as cross-
sections, or as fragments (Figures 1A and 1B). A merged image of green and red 
channels is provided from ex vivo brain tissue cultured with Bb strain B31 in vitro 
(Figure 1C). A summary of results can be found in Table 1. No significant gross findings 
were observed in any of the experimental animals.  
 
NERVOUS SYSTEM 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
12
Minimal and focal lymphoplasmacytic inflammation of the central nervous system 
was observed in two animals, both of which were treated with doxycycline (IH11 & 
IH22). In IH11, inflammation was observed in the leptomeninges overlying a section of 
temporal cerebral cortex (Figure 1D, Supplemental Figure S1), whereas inflammation in 
IH22 was characterized by perivascular inflammation of the brainstem adjacent to the 
fourth ventricle (Figure 1E). Green fluorescent B. burgdorferi–specific staining was 
detected free within the neuropil of both of these animals, (Figure 1F and G), and was 
not directly associated with the minimal inflammation observed histologically. Of all of 
the sections examined in this study, the greatest density of morphologically intact 
spirochetes was observed in the cerebrum of IH11, with up to six spirochetes observed 
in a single high-powered field (63x). Due to the limited number of animals tested, the 
proportion of monkeys that exhibited inflammation in the CNS between the treated (2/5) 
and untreated group (0/5) was not significantly different (Fisher’s exact test, two-tailed, 
P = 0.444). When IFA was multiplexed with RNA ISH (Supplemental Figure S2), 
colocalization of Bb immunofluorescence was not observed with a 23S rRNA Bb probe 
(Supplemental Figure S1). Minimal localized lymphoplasmacytic choroiditis was 
observed in one of the four control animals; however, no inflammation was observed in 
in representative section of cerebrum, cerebellum, brainstem, spinal cord, or dura mater 
from untreated or control animals (Table 1). 
Peripheral nerves contained minimal to moderate lymphoplasmacytic 
inflammation with a predilection for collagen-rich epineurium and perivascular spaces 
(Figure 1H-1J). Inflammation was observed in 56% (5/9) of the NHPs irrespective of 
treatment group, with 75% (3/4) of untreated and 40% (2/5) of doxycycline-treated 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
13
animals affected. Both grade 3 inflammation scores (moderate) were observed in 
untreated animals and multiple peripheral nerves were affected in all three untreated 
animals (Table 1). For all animals, inflammation was reserved to perineural tissue. No 
inflammation was observed within nerve fibers, nor was there evidence of axonal 
degeneration that would have been supported by the presence of either dilated myelin 
sheaths or axonal spheroids. The frequency of lymphoplasmacytic perineuritis (in 
decreasing order) involved the left sural (3/9), right ulnar (3/9), left tibial (1/9), right tibial 
(1/9), right sural (1/9), right median (1/9), left median (1/9), cervical spinal nerve (1/9), 
and lumbar spinal nerve (1/9). No inflammation was observed in dorsal root ganglia 
from any of the animals, nor was there histologic evidence of neuronal degeneration or 
necrosis (ie, chromatolysis and shrunken angular hypereosinophilic neurons, 
respectively). Peripheral nerves for IP67 (untreated) were mistakenly not collected for 
H&E and thus were unavailable for routine histopathologic evaluation; however, 
sections were collected from frozen specimens and immunofluorescence was 
performed. Green fluorescent staining for B. burgdorferi was observed in untreated 
animals IP55 and IP67 (Figure 1K and 1L, respectively), represented by a 
morphologically intact spirochete in the former. Minimal localized perivascular 
lymphoplasmacytic perineuritis was observed in one of the four control animals affecting 
the right sural nerve. Positive B. burgdorferi–specific fluorescence was not observed in 
representative sections of CNS and PNS tissues derived from control animals. 
 
HEART 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
14
Minimal to mild lymphoplasmacytic inflammation of either the myocardial 
interstitium (Figure 2A), pericardium (Figure 2B), or combination therein was observed 
in 60% of NHPs irrespective of treatment groups, with 40% (2/5) untreated and 80% 
(4/5) of doxycycline-treated NHPs affected. Lymphoplasmacytic inflammation of the 
pericardium was only observed in animals with myocardial involvement. Inflammation 
was not associated with histologic evidence of myocardial degeneration, necrosis, 
and/or fibrosis. A single morphologically intact spirochete, as indicated by positive red 
immunofluorescence (Figure 2C), was observed in the myocardium of one treated 
animal (IK14). Moderate lymphoplasmacytic myocarditis was observed in one of the 
four control animals; however, this animal also had marked myocardial fibrosis which 
was not observed in any of the other experimental or control animals. This animal also 
displayed evidence of systemic illness ultimately attributed to severe chronic intractable 
colitis and was the oldest of all the control animals utilized. No immunofluorescence was 
observed in representative sections of myocardium and pericardium derived from 
control animals. 
 
SKELETAL MUSCLE 
Random sections of arm and thigh skeletal muscle were obtained from each animal. Of 
all the animals examined, mild, multifocal lymphoplasmacytic inflammation was 
observed in one doxycycline-treated animal (IK66, Figure 2D), with concurrent positive 
fluorescence in the form of antigen co-localized with both Bb-specific antibodies 
observed (Figure 2E-G). When consecutive layers of confocal imagining were combined 
into three dimensions, the antigen was in the form of a cylinder, indicating that this was 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
15
indeed a cross-section of the spirochete (Supplemental Movie S1). In this animal, 
inflammation was characterized by both perivascular and interstitial distribution, but was 
not associated with concurrent histologic evidence of rhabdomyocyte degeneration, 
necrosis, and/or fibrosis. No inflammation or positive fluorescence was observed in 
representative sections of skeletal muscle derived from control animals. 
 
SYNOVIUM 
A total of three animals exhibited minimal to mild lymphoplasmacytic inflammation 
affecting joint-associated structures, all of which involved the stifle joints. In two animals, 
one untreated (IN16) and one treated (IH11), inflammation was present within the 
synovial membrane (Figure 2H). These animals also had concurrent synovial epithelial 
hyperplasia that ranged from minimal to mild. One doxycycline-treated animal (IL09), 
contained minimal perivascular lymphoplasmacytic inflammation in the perisynovial 
adipose tissue (Figure 2I). Positive red fluorescent anti-OspA staining of what appears 
to be a cross-section of the spirochete (Figure 2J) was observed in one doxycycline-
treated animal (IL09). Joint synovium was not collected from Lyme neuroborreliosis 
control animals; however, synovium (bilateral stifle and shoulder joints) was collected 
from two animals with chronic treatment-resistant diarrhea with no gross evidence of 
joint disease. Minimal localized lymphoplasmacytic inflammation was observed in the 
synovium of one animal, but synovial hyperplasia and perivascular inflammation of 
perisynovial adipose tissue was not observed nor was positive fluorescence observed.  
 
ADDITIONAL TISSUES  
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
16
Other tissues examined histologically included axillary and mesenteric lymph nodes, 
urinary bladder, lung, and spleen. Findings in these tissues were similar among 
treatment groups and control tissues. Thus, findings were interpreted as nonspecific 
and their overall significance was indeterminate. Reactive lymphoid hyperplasia was 
observed to some extent in all lymph nodes examined (not shown), and was more 
prominent in mesenteric lymph nodes, ranging from minimal to moderate. The latter was 
characterized by prominent cortical lymphoid follicles with germinal centers, variable 
degrees of sinus histiocytosis, and anthracosis in the case of axillary lymph nodes. 
Minimal to mild lymphoplasmacytic inflammation was observed within the lamina propria 
of the urinary bladder (Figure 2K), with rare discrete formation of lymphoid follicles 
(Figure 2L) observed irrespective of treatment groups and control specimens. As Bb 
has previously been cultured from the urinary bladders of experimental animals28 and all 
animals displayed some degree of inflammation, IFA was performed on all study 
animals, with one positively identified spirochete and/or spirochetal antigen observed in 
untreated animal IL75 (Figure 2M).  No positive fluorescence was detected in control 
specimens. Splenic white pulp displayed minimal to mild lymphoid hyperplasia 
irrespective of treatment group and in control specimens. Lastly, lung sections from both 
treatment groups and control animals displayed minimal to mild peribronchiolar and 
perivascular lymphoplasmacytic inflammation, with mild anthracosis, and mild alveolar 
histiocytosis (not shown). One untreated animal (IH22) displayed multifocal, mild, 
patchy granulomatous interstitial inflammation. Special stains and/or bacterial culture 
were not performed on this case, but intralesional birefringent foreign material appeared 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
17
to be associated with the granulomatous inflammation, suggestive of a foreign body 
response.  
 
DISCUSSION 
Post-treatment Lyme disease remains a poorly understood syndrome occurring 
in an estimated 10% to -20% of human patients treated under current IDSA 
guidelines.29 Multiple randomized placebo-controlled studies which evaluated sustained 
antimicrobial therapy concluded that there is no benefit in alleviating patients’ symptoms 
and indicated that long-term antibiotic therapy may even be detrimental to patients due 
to potential associated complications (ie, catheter infection and/or clostridial colitis).30-32 
A model of late disseminated borreliosis was chosen over other stages of disease due 
to a general consensus that the majority of patients treated for Lyme disease during 
early localized Lyme disease recover from the infection. 
 
In this study, we have demonstrated microscopic pathology ranging from minimal 
to moderate in multiple different tissues previously reported to be involved with LD, 
including the nervous system (central and peripheral), heart, skeletal muscle, joint-
associated tissues, and urinary bladder 12 to 13 months following tick-inoculation of 
rhesus macaques by Bb strain B31. Based on histomorphology, inflammation consisted 
predominantly of lymphocytes and plasma cells, with rare scattered histiocytes. A 
predilection for perivascular spaces and an affinity for collagenous tissue was a 
common theme among examined tissues. Furthermore, in rare instances, 
morphologically intact spirochetes were observed in inflamed brain and heart tissue 
sections from doxycycline-treated animals. As no inflammation was observed in the 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
18
CNS of untreated animals, we cannot definitely determine if spirochetes were also 
present in those cases. The ISH/IFA multiplex protocol was successfully optimized on 
ex vivo rhesus macaque brain tissues cultured with Bb strain B31 (Supplemental Figure 
S2A-D). However, colocalization of the Bb 23S rRNA probe was not observed in any of 
the sections of experimental inoculated animals shown to harbor rare persistent 
spirochetes (Supplemental Figure S1). Previous in vitro work has shown large 
decreases in Bb rRNA levels when in a stationary phase of growth despite the majority 
of spirochetes remaining viable33, and may help afford an explanation for these results 
when compared to validation results of the multiplex assay in the positive control 
tissues. In addition, the control specimens were fixed prior to freezing and the 
experimental specimens were not. The possibility that the spirochetes were intact but 
dead also exists, though this may be unlikely given the precedence for viable but non-
cultivable B. burgdorferi post-treatment17 and the rapid clearance of dead spirochetes in 
a murine model34. Future studies would benefit from the use of genes associated with 
dormancy for ISH to determine if rare host-adapted spirochetes present in late 
disseminated LD are transcriptionally active.  
 
The doxycycline dose utilized in this study (5mg/kg) was based on a previous 
pharmacokinetic analysis of oral doxycycline in rhesus macaques proven to be 
comparable to levels achieved in humans and was meant to mimic treatment of 
disseminated LD.35 The most relevant property of a bacteriostatic antibiotic such as 
doxycycline is the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC). With the exception of IK14, 
trough levels of doxycycline were found to be above  0.8 µg/mL, which is above the MIC 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
19
for the Bb strain utilized in this study.35 These results indicate that the dosage utilized in 
this study is sufficient in establishing an efficacious AUC0-24:MIC, which represents the 
best indicator of doxycycline efficacy. Although current IDSA guidelines recommend 
intravenous ceftriaxone (2g daily for 30 days) over oral doxycycline for treatment of 
neuroborreliosis, a randomized clinical trial failed to show any enhanced efficacy of I.V. 
penicillin G to oral doxycycline for treatment of Lyme neuroborreliosis (no treatment 
failures were reported in this study of 54 patients). Although we did not measure the 
doxycycline levels in the cerebrospinal fluid, they have been found to be 12% to 15% of 
the amount measured in serum36, suggesting that higher doses may be needed to 
combat neuroborreliosis.  The treatment protocol began in the early disseminated 
phase37, without objective indications of neurological impairment in the primates, and 
therefore followed the recommended course of doxycycline for 28 days. In the context 
of another study, these findings suggest that the antibiotic protocol should not represent 
a major limitation.38  
B. burgdorferi spirochetes are not known to carry any specific genes that function 
to confer resistance to the recommended antibiotics (tetracyclines and 
cephalosporins).39 We and others have demonstrated the development of a drug-
tolerant persister population when B. burgdorferi are treated with antibiotics in vitro.40, 41 
The adoption of a dormant or slow-growing phenotype likely allows the spirochetes to 
survive and re-grow following removal of antibiotic. Neutrophil calprotectin may also 
contribute to antibiotic tolerance by inhibiting the growth of B. burgdorferi near 
inflammatory lesions.42 The basic premise that antibiotic tolerance may be an 
adaptation of the sophisticated stringent response required for the enzootic cycle by the 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
20
spirochetes is described in a recent review as well.43  In 2014, a trailblazing study in 
mice demonstrated a dramatic decline in B. burgdorferi DNA in the tissues for up to 
eight months after antibiotic treatment followed by the resurgence of B. burgdorferi 
growth 12 months after treatment17. This study provides evidence that the slow-growing 
spirochetes which persist after treatment, but are not cultivable in standard growth 
media may remain viable.  
 
Inflammation of the CNS was only observed in doxycycline-treated animals, both 
of which contained low numbers of morphologically intact spirochetes that were labeled 
solely by Bb specific, rabbit-derived polyclonal antibodies (green fluorescence), and not 
by monoclonal OspA antibodies. This finding is in agreement with previous observations 
whereby decreased OspA expression is met by reciprocal OspC up-regulation 
associated with transmission of spirochetes from a tick to vertebrate host.44, 45 However, 
this finding is contradictory to other reports that suggest OspA plays a critical role in 
translocating of the blood brain barrier and neuroinvasiveness.46 With this stated, it is 
possible that OspA down-regulation occurs once the spirochetes have migrated beyond 
the blood brain barrier into the neuropil as a means of immune evasion.  
 
In addition to the brain of two treated animals, rare morphologically intact 
spirochetes immunoreactive to OspA were observed in the heart of one treated animal 
(IK14). Increased OspA serum titers have been reported in American patients with 
Lyme arthritis and indicate differential gene expression of Bb dependent on tissue 
localization.46, 47 Furthermore, experimental studies in mice have  shown enhanced 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
21
OspA expression in host-adapted spirochetes during inflammation48 and ospA 
transcription was evident post-treatment in both murine studies and our prior study in 
macaques.14, 49 Taken together, these findings illustrate that OspA down-regulation 
upon entry into mammalian hosts is reversible under certain environmental cues and 
support the use of polyclonal antibodies when trying to locate persistent Bb spirochetes 
in affected tissue sections.  
 
 
 
In this study, approximately 400 tissue sections from the experimental monkeys 
were examined. We identified rare spirochetes in several tissues known to be affected 
by Lyme disease. Although carbohydrates such as alginate50, typically associated with 
biofilms, were not stained for, the tissue was permeabilized and stained specifically for 
B. burgdorferi.  All of the spirochetes that were identified existed singly and were 
relatively sparse. No aggregates that would be suspected to have formed a biofilm, 
were observed. 
 
This is the first study in primates to comprehensively examine pathology 
associated with persistence of B. burgdorferi in the late stage of LD following antibiotic 
therapy. The non-human primate model possesses many advantages for studying 
human LD when compared to other animal models, including close genetic 
complementarity while remaining outbred (ie, approximately 93% DNA homology to 
humans51) and multiorgan involvement (ie, nervous system, central and peripheral; 
heart; skeletal muscle; and joints). 52-56 Limitations from previous studies include 
artificial routes of inoculation (ie, needle inoculation vs the natural tick-inoculated route), 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
22
high dosage of inoculum (107 to 108 spirochetes), and variable immune status of 
animals (ie, immunosuppressed vs immunocompetent). These limitations were 
abrogated in this study by use of tick-inoculation in immunocompetent animals. In the 
late disseminated stage of infection (beyond six months) neither clinical signs nor 
indications of possible symptoms, such as reduced activity or disinterest in enrichment 
items, were observed by the veterinary staff,. Taking into consideration that the majority 
of PTLDS symptoms are subjective, it is not surprising that these were not 
observed/apparent, which makes it impossible for us to definitively attribute clinical 
relevance to the histopathology findings gained from this study. However, we can 
speculate that the minimal to moderate inflammation that was observed, especially 
within the CNS and PNS can, in part, explain the breadth of symptoms experienced by 
late stage Lyme disease patients, such as cognitive impairment and neuralgia. 
Erythema migrans, the clinical hallmark of early localized Lyme disease, was observed 
in one of the rhesus macaques from this study. However, many of the more severe 
chronic manifestations of LD associated with objective morbidities, such as Lyme 
carditis resulting in atrioventricular blockage/sudden death and neuroborreliosis 
manifesting in nerve palsy, limb paresis, and painful radiculitis (potentially manifesting 
as lameness, loss of appetite, inability to jump, muscle spasms, reduced activity, and 
audible sounds of discomfort) have yet to be reproduced experimentally in any 
immunocompetent  animal model.57, 58  Taking into account that Lyme Disease is rarely 
fatal, a paucity of autopsy tissue limits opportunities to study disease pathogenesis and 
pathology associated with natural disease. Furthermore, the rare human autopsy 
reports that are available represent the most severe manifestations of LD, which greatly 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
23
limits our understanding of the disease spectrum. Future studies will include 
assessment of the ability of novel antimicrobial therapies to eliminate persistent 
spirochetal infection. Furthermore, this model may also be of great benefit in 
understanding host factors involved in the development of chronic disease following Bb 
infection and help unravel the variable manifestations observed in human cases of LD.  
 
 
Acknowledgements 
We thank Dr. Peter J. Didier for evaluation of microscopic pathology and J. Benach  for 
CB10.  
 
 
 
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
24
 
 
References 
1. 
Steere AC, Malawista SE, Snydman DR, Shope RE, Andiman WA, Ross MR, Steele FM: 
Lyme arthritis: an epidemic of oligoarticular arthritis in children and adults in three connecticut 
communities, Arthritis Rheum 1977, 20:7-17 
2. 
Steere AC, Malawista SE, Hardin JA, Ruddy S, Askenase W, Andiman WA: Erythema 
chronicum migrans and Lyme arthritis. The enlarging clinical spectrum, Ann Intern Med 1977, 
86:685-698 
3. 
Burgdorfer W, Barbour AG, Hayes SF, Benach JL, Grunwaldt E, Davis JP: Lyme 
disease-a tick-borne spirochetosis?, Science 1982, 216:1317-1319 
4. 
Bacon RM, Kugeler KJ, Mead PS, Centers for Disease C, Prevention: Surveillance for 
Lyme disease--United States, 1992-2006, MMWR Surveill Summ 2008, 57:1-9 
5. 
Stanek G, Reiter M: The expanding Lyme Borrelia complex--clinical significance of 
genomic species?, Clin Microbiol Infect 2011, 17:487-493 
6. 
Hinckley AF, Connally NP, Meek JI, Johnson BJ, Kemperman MM, Feldman KA, White 
JL, Mead PS: Lyme disease testing by large commercial laboratories in the United States, Clin 
Infect Dis 2014, 59:676-681 
7. 
Steere AC, Hutchinson GJ, Rahn DW, Sigal LH, Craft JE, DeSanna ET, Malawista SE: 
Treatment of the early manifestations of Lyme disease, Ann Intern Med 1983, 99:22-26 
8. 
Wormser GP, Dattwyler RJ, Shapiro ED, Halperin JJ, Steere AC, Klempner MS, Krause 
PJ, Bakken JS, Strle F, Stanek G, Bockenstedt L, Fish D, Dumler JS, Nadelman RB: The clinical 
assessment, treatment, and prevention of lyme disease, human granulocytic anaplasmosis, and 
babesiosis: clinical practice guidelines by the Infectious Diseases Society of America, Clin Infect 
Dis 2006, 43:1089-1134 
9. 
Aucott JN: Posttreatment Lyme Disease Syndrome, Infect Dis Clin North Am 2015, 
29:309-323 
10. 
Aucott JN: Posttreatment Lyme disease syndrome, Infect Dis Clin North Am 2015, 
29:309-323 
11. 
Aucott JN, Crowder LA, Kortte KB: Development of a foundation for a case definition of 
post-treatment Lyme disease syndrome, Int J Infect Dis 2013, 17:e443-449 
12. 
Bockenstedt LK, Gonzalez DG, Haberman AM, Belperron AA: Spirochete antigens 
persist near cartilage after murine Lyme borreliosis therapy, J Clin Invest 2012, 122:2652-2660 
13. 
Bolz DD, Weis JJ: Molecular mimicry to Borrelia burgdorferi: pathway to 
autoimmunity?, Autoimmunity 2004, 37:387-392 
14. 
Embers ME, Barthold SW, Borda JT, Bowers L, Doyle L, Hodzic E, Jacobs MB, 
Hasenkampf NR, Martin DS, Narasimhan S, Phillippi-Falkenstein KM, Purcell JE, Ratterree 
MS, Philipp MT: Persistence of Borrelia burgdorferi in rhesus macaques following antibiotic 
treatment of disseminated infection, PLoS One 2012, 7:e29914 
15. 
Bockenstedt LK, Mao J, Hodzic E, Barthold SW, Fish D: Detection of attenuated, 
noninfectious spirochetes in Borrelia burgdorferi-infected mice after antibiotic treatment, J Infect 
Dis 2002, 186:1430-1437 
16. 
Hodzic E, Feng S, Holden K, Freet KJ, Barthold SW: Persistence of Borrelia burgdorferi 
following antibiotic treatment in mice, Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2008, 52:1728-1736 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
25
17. 
Hodzic E, Imai D, Feng S, Barthold SW: Resurgence of Persisting Non-Cultivable 
Borrelia burgdorferi following Antibiotic Treatment in Mice, PLoS ONE 2014, 9:e86907 
18. 
Straubinger RK, Summers BA, Chang YF, Appel MJ: Persistence of Borrelia burgdorferi 
in experimentally infected dogs after antibiotic treatment, J Clin Microbiol 1997, 35:111-116 
19. 
Muehlenbachs A, Bollweg BC, Schulz TJ, Forrester JD, DeLeon Carnes M, Molins C, 
Ray GS, Cummings PM, Ritter JM, Blau DM, Andrew TA, Prial M, Ng DL, Prahlow JA, 
Sanders JH, Shieh WJ, Paddock CD, Schriefer ME, Mead P, Zaki SR: Cardiac Tropism of 
Borrelia burgdorferi: An Autopsy Study of Sudden Cardiac Death Associated with Lyme 
Carditis, Am J Pathol 2016, 186:1195-1205 
20. 
Indest KJ, Howell JK, Jacobs MB, Scholl-Meeker D, Norris SJ, Philipp MT: Analysis of 
Borrelia burgdorferi vlsE gene expression and recombination in the tick vector, Infect Immun 
2001, 69:7083-7090 
21. 
Embers ME, Grasperge BJ, Jacobs MB, Philipp MT: Feeding of ticks on animals for 
transmission and xenodiagnosis in Lyme disease research, J Vis Exp 2013,  
22. 
Embers ME, Hasenkampf NR, Barnes MB, Didier ES, Philipp MT, Tardo AC: Five-
Antigen Fluorescent Bead-Based Assay for Diagnosis of Lyme Disease, Clin Vaccine Immunol 
2016, 23:294-303 
23. 
Embers ME, Hasenkampf NR, Embers DG, LA. D: Pharmacokinetic analysis of oral 
doxycycline in rhesus macaques., Journal of Medical Primatology 2012, Dec. 20 [Epub ahead of 
print]: 
24. 
Ramesh G, Didier PJ, England JD, Santana-Gould L, Doyle-Meyers LA, Martin DS, 
Jacobs MB, Philipp MT: Inflammation in the pathogenesis of lyme neuroborreliosis, Am J 
Pathol 2015, 185:1344-1360 
25. 
Embers ME, Liang FT, Howell JK, Jacobs MB, Purcell JE, Norris SJ, Johnson BJ, 
Philipp MT: Antigenicity and recombination of VlsE, the antigenic variation protein of Borrelia 
burgdorferi, in rabbits, a host putatively resistant to long-term infection with this spirochete, 
FEMS Immunology & Medical Microbiology 2007, 50:421-429 
26. 
Ramesh G, Borda JT, Dufour J, Kaushal D, Ramamoorthy R, Lackner AA, Philipp MT: 
Interaction of the Lyme disease spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi with brain parenchyma elicits 
inflammatory mediators from glial cells as well as glial and neuronal apoptosis, Am J Pathol 
2008, 173:1415-1427 
27. 
Wang F, Flanagan J, Su N, Wang LC, Bui S, Nielson A, Wu X, Vo HT, Ma XJ, Luo Y: 
RNAscope: a novel in situ RNA analysis platform for formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues, 
J Mol Diagn 2012, 14:22-29 
28. 
Schwan TG, Burgdorfer W, Schrumpf ME, Karstens RH: The urinary bladder, a 
consistent source of Borrelia burgdorferi in experimentally infected white-footed mice 
(Peromyscus leucopus), J Clin Microbiol 1988, 26:893-895 
29. 
Marques A: Chronic Lyme disease: a review, Infect Dis Clin North Am 2008, 22:341-
360, vii-viii 
30. 
Berende A, ter Hofstede HJ, Vos FJ, van Middendorp H, Vogelaar ML, Tromp M, van 
den Hoogen FH, Donders AR, Evers AW, Kullberg BJ: Randomized Trial of Longer-Term 
Therapy for Symptoms Attributed to Lyme Disease, N Engl J Med 2016, 374:1209-1220 
31. 
Kaplan RF, Trevino RP, Johnson GM, Levy L, Dornbush R, Hu LT, Evans J, Weinstein 
A, Schmid CH, Klempner MS: Cognitive function in post-treatment Lyme disease: do additional 
antibiotics help?, Neurology 2003, 60:1916-1922 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
26
32. 
Klempner MS, Hu LT, Evans J, Schmid CH, Johnson GM, Trevino RP, Norton D, Levy 
L, Wall D, McCall J, Kosinski M, Weinstein A: Two controlled trials of antibiotic treatment in 
patients with persistent symptoms and a history of Lyme disease, N Engl J Med 2001, 345:85-92 
33. 
Bugrysheva JV, Godfrey HP, Schwartz I, Cabello FC: Patterns and regulation of 
ribosomal RNA transcription in Borrelia burgdorferi, BMC Microbiol 2011, 11:17 
34. 
Lazarus JJ, McCarter AL, Neifer-Sadhwani K, Wooten RM: ELISA-Based Measurement 
of Antibody Responses and PCR-Based Detection Profiles Can Distinguish between Active 
Infection and Early Clearance of Borrelia burgdorferi, Clinical and Developmental Immunology 
2012, 2012:138069 
35. 
Embers ME, Hasenkampf NR, Embers DG, Doyle LA: Pharmacokinetic analysis of oral 
doxycycline in rhesus macaques, J Med Primatol 2013, 42:57-61 
36. 
Dotevall L, Hagberg L: Penetration of doxycycline into cerebrospinal fluid in patients 
treated for suspected Lyme neuroborreliosis, Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy 1989, 
33:1078-1080 
37. 
Philipp MT, Aydintug MK, Bohm RP, Jr., Cogswell FB, Dennis VA, Lanners HN, 
Lowrie RC, Jr., Roberts ED, Conway MD, Karacorlu M: Early and early disseminated phases of 
Lyme disease in the rhesus monkey: a model for infection in humans, Infection & Immunity 
1993, 61:3047-3059 
38. 
Karlsson M, Hammers-Berggren S, Lindquist L, Stiernstedt G, Svenungsson B: 
Comparison of intravenous penicillin G and oral doxycycline for treatment of Lyme 
neuroborreliosis, Neurology 1994, 44:1203-1207 
39. 
Jackson CR, Boylan J, Frye JG, Gherardini FC: Evidence of a conjugal erythromycin 
resistance element in the Lyme disease spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi, Int J Antimicrob Agents 
2007, 30:496-504 
40. 
Caskey JR, Embers ME: Persister Development by Borrelia burgdorferi Populations In 
Vitro, Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy 2015, 59:6288-6295 
41. 
Sharma B, Brown AV, Matluck NE, Hu LT, Lewis K: Borrelia burgdorferi, the causative 
agent of Lyme disease, forms drug-tolerant persister cells, Antimicrobial Agents and 
Chemotherapy 2015,  
42. 
Montgomery RR, Schreck K, Wang X, Malawista SE: Human Neutrophil Calprotectin 
Reduces the Susceptibility of Borrelia burgdorferi to Penicillin, Infection and Immunity 2006, 
74:2468-2472 
43. 
Cabello FC, Godfrey HP, Bugrysheva JV, Newman SA: Sleeper cells: the stringent 
response and persistence in the Borreliella (Borrelia) burgdorferi enzootic cycle, Environmental 
Microbiology 2017, 19:3846-3862 
44. 
Schwan TG, Piesman J, Golde WT, Dolan MC, Rosa PA: Induction of an outer surface 
protein on Borrelia burgdorferi during tick feeding, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1995, 92:2909-
2913 
45. 
Schwan TG, Piesman J: Temporal changes in outer surface proteins A and C of the lyme 
disease-associated spirochete, Borrelia burgdorferi, during the chain of infection in ticks and 
mice, J Clin Microbiol 2000, 38:382-388 
46. 
Pulzova L, Kovac A, Mucha R, Mlynarcik P, Bencurova E, Madar M, Novak M, Bhide 
M: OspA-CD40 dyad: ligand-receptor interaction in the translocation of neuroinvasive Borrelia 
across the blood-brain barrier, Sci Rep 2011, 1:86 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
27
47. 
Li X, Strle K, Wang P, Acosta DI, McHugh GA, Sikand N, Strle F, Steere AC: Tick-
specific borrelial antigens appear to be upregulated in American but not European patients with 
Lyme arthritis, a late manifestation of Lyme borreliosis, J Infect Dis 2013, 208:934-941 
48. 
Crowley H, Huber BT: Host-adapted Borrelia burgdorferi in mice expresses OspA during 
inflammation, Infect Immun 2003, 71:4003-4010 
49. 
Barthold SW, Hodzic E, Imai DM, Feng S, Yang X, Luft BJ: Ineffectiveness of 
tigecycline against persistent Borrelia burgdorferi, Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2010, 54:643-
651 
50. 
Sapi E, Balasubramanian K, Poruri A, Maghsoudlou JS, Socarras KM, Timmaraju AV, 
Filush KR, Gupta K, Shaikh S, Theophilus PAS, Luecke DF, MacDonald A, Zelger B: Evidence 
of In Vivo Existence of Borrelia Biofilm in Borrelial Lymphocytomas, European Journal of 
Microbiology & Immunology 2016, 6:9-24 
51. 
Rhesus Macaque Genome S, Analysis C, Gibbs RA, Rogers J, Katze MG, Bumgarner R, 
Weinstock GM, Mardis ER, Remington KA, Strausberg RL, Venter JC, Wilson RK, Batzer MA, 
Bustamante CD, Eichler EE, Hahn MW, Hardison RC, Makova KD, Miller W, Milosavljevic A, 
Palermo RE, Siepel A, Sikela JM, Attaway T, Bell S, Bernard KE, Buhay CJ, Chandrabose MN, 
Dao M, Davis C, Delehaunty KD, Ding Y, Dinh HH, Dugan-Rocha S, Fulton LA, Gabisi RA, 
Garner TT, Godfrey J, Hawes AC, Hernandez J, Hines S, Holder M, Hume J, Jhangiani SN, 
Joshi V, Khan ZM, Kirkness EF, Cree A, Fowler RG, Lee S, Lewis LR, Li Z, Liu YS, Moore 
SM, Muzny D, Nazareth LV, Ngo DN, Okwuonu GO, Pai G, Parker D, Paul HA, Pfannkoch C, 
Pohl CS, Rogers YH, Ruiz SJ, Sabo A, Santibanez J, Schneider BW, Smith SM, Sodergren E, 
Svatek AF, Utterback TR, Vattathil S, Warren W, White CS, Chinwalla AT, Feng Y, Halpern 
AL, Hillier LW, Huang X, Minx P, Nelson JO, Pepin KH, Qin X, Sutton GG, Venter E, Walenz 
BP, Wallis JW, Worley KC, Yang SP, Jones SM, Marra MA, Rocchi M, Schein JE, Baertsch R, 
Clarke L, Csuros M, Glasscock J, Harris RA, Havlak P, Jackson AR, Jiang H, Liu Y, Messina 
DN, Shen Y, Song HX, Wylie T, Zhang L, Birney E, Han K, Konkel MK, Lee J, Smit AF, 
Ullmer B, Wang H, Xing J, Burhans R, Cheng Z, Karro JE, Ma J, Raney B, She X, Cox MJ, 
Demuth JP, Dumas LJ, Han SG, Hopkins J, Karimpour-Fard A, Kim YH, Pollack JR, Vinar T, 
Addo-Quaye C, Degenhardt J, Denby A, Hubisz MJ, Indap A, Kosiol C, Lahn BT, Lawson HA, 
Marklein A, Nielsen R, Vallender EJ, Clark AG, Ferguson B, Hernandez RD, Hirani K, Kehrer-
Sawatzki H, Kolb J, Patil S, Pu LL, Ren Y, Smith DG, Wheeler DA, Schenck I, Ball EV, Chen 
R, Cooper DN, Giardine B, Hsu F, Kent WJ, Lesk A, Nelson DL, O'Brien W E, Prufer K, 
Stenson PD, Wallace JC, Ke H, Liu XM, Wang P, Xiang AP, Yang F, Barber GP, Haussler D, 
Karolchik D, Kern AD, Kuhn RM, Smith KE, Zwieg AS: Evolutionary and biomedical insights 
from the rhesus macaque genome, Science 2007, 316:222-234 
52. 
Cadavid DOn, T.; Schaefer, H.; Pachner, A. R.: <Localization of Borrelia Burgdorferi in 
the Nervous System and Other Organs in a Nonhuman Primate Model of Lyme Disease.pdf>, 
Lab Invest 2000, 80:1043-1054 
53. 
Cadavid D, Bai Y, Dail D, Hurd M, Narayan K, Hodzic E, Barthold SW, Pachner AR: 
Infection and Inflammation in Skeletal Muscle from Nonhuman Primates Infected with Different 
Genospecies of the Lyme Disease Spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi, Infection and Immunity 2003, 
71:7087-7098 
54. 
Cadavid DB, Y.; Hodzic, E.; Narayan K.; Barthold, S. W.; Pachner, A. R.: <Cardiac 
involvement in non-human primates infected with the Lyme disease spirochete Borrelia 
burgdorferi.pdf>, Lab Invest 2004, 84:1439-1450 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
28
55. 
Bai Y, Narayan K, Dail D, Sondey M, Hodzic E, Barthold SW, Pachner AR, Cadavid D: 
Spinal cord involvement in the nonhuman primate model of Lyme disease, Lab Invest 2004, 
84:160-172 
56. 
Barthold SW, Cadavid Diego and Philipp Mario T.: Animal Models of Borreliosis. 
Edited by Radolf JD, Samuels DS. Norfolk, UK, Caister Academic Press, 2010, p. pp. xii, 547 
p., 544 p. of plates 
57. 
Pachner ARD, E.; O’Neill, T.; Major, E.: <Inoculation of nonhuman primates with the 
N40 strain of Borrelia burgdorferi leads to a model of lyme neuroborreliosis faithful to the 
human disease.pdf>, Neurology 1995, 45:165-172 
58. 
Philipp MTA, M. K.; Bohm, R. P. Jr.; Cogswell, F. B.; et al. : <Early and early 
disseminated phases of Lyme disease in the rhesus monkey- a model for infection in 
humans.pdf>, Infection and Immunity 1993, 61:3047-3059 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
29
Figure Legends 
Figure 1. Histologic characterization and localization of Bb within doxycycline and 
untreated Rm with late disseminated LD. A: Bb polyclonal positive control IFA; rabbit Bb 
hyperimmunized polyclonal (primary) and goat anti-rabbit IgG-Alexa Fluor 488 
(secondary) antibodies. Green fluorescence of a morphologically intact spirochete. B: 
Bb monoclonal positive control IFA; mouse OspA monoclonal (primary) and goat anti-
mouse IgG Alexa Fluor 568 (secondary) antibodies. Red fluorescence of 
morphologically intact spirochetes. C: Green and red confocal channels merged, with 
yellow indicating colocalization of monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies from positive 
control tissue. D: Cerebrum (IH11-doxycycline treated), leptomeninges are focally 
expanded by minimal localized lymphoplasmacytic inflammation. E: Brainstem (IH22-
doxycycline treated), minimal localized lymphoplasmacytic perivascular cuffing adjacent 
to the 4th ventricle. F: Green fluorescence illustrates six variably sized morphologically 
intact spirochetes within the cerebral neuropil. G: Green fluorescence reveals two 
morphologically intact spirochetes within the brainstem neuropil; DIC applied to 
enhance contrast. H: Ulnar nerve (IK66-doxycycline treated), minimal localized 
lymphoplasmacytic perivascular cuffing adjacent to the epineurium. I: Sural nerve (IL75 
untreated), mild localized lymphoplasmacytic perivascular cuffing within the epineurium. 
J: Ulnar nerve (IP55-untreated), moderate focally extensive lymphoplasmacytic 
inflammation radiating outward from a vessel and dissecting neighboring epineurium. K: 
Green fluorescence illustrates a morphologically intact spirochete within the right tibial 
epineurium (IP55-untreated). L: Localized green fluorescence adjacent to left ulnar 
axonal nerve fibers (IP67-untreated); DIC image applied to enhance contrast. L, inset: 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
30
3D imaging reveals the cylindrical shape with convex end of the structure, indicating 
that this may be a cross-section at the end/pole of the spirochete; 1 unit = 1.88 µm. 
Scale bars: 20 µm (A-B, F, and K); 10 µm (C, G, and L). Original magnification: x10 (D-
E, and H-J); x63: additional 2x amplification applied with Leica LAS X software when 
appropriate (A-C, F-G, and K-L). Bb, Borrelia burgdorferi; DIC, differential interference 
contrast; LD, Lyme disease; Rhesus macaque, Rm. 
 
Figure 2. Histologic characterization and localization of Bb within doxycycline and 
untreated Rm with late disseminated LD. A: Heart (IH22-doxycycline treated), mild 
multifocal lymphoplasmacytic interstitial inflammation. B: Visceral pericardium (IH22-
doxycycline treated), localized mild lymphoplasmacytic inflammation. C: Heart (IK14-
doxycycline treated), red fluorescence of a morphologically intact spirochete within 
myocardial interstitium; DIC image applied to enhance contrast. D: Skeletal muscle 
(IK66-doxycycline treated), mild localized lymphoplasmacytic interstitial inflammation. E-
G: Red, green, and merged images illustrate localized interstitial fluorescence within the 
skeletal muscle (IK66); DIC image applied to enhance contrast.  E: 3D imaging reveals 
the cylindrical morphology of the dual-stained specimen, with the DIC partially removed, 
indicating that this is a cross-section of a spirochete; 1 unit= 6.17 µm. F: DIC added 
back to the 3D rotated view. G: Red, green, and merged immunofluorescent staining of 
Bb within the tissue. H: Stifle synovium (IH11-doxycycline treated), mild 
lymphoplasmacytic inflammation infiltrating hyperplastic synovial epithelium. I: Stifle 
perisynovial adipose tissue (IL09-doxycycline treated), minimal localized 
lymphoplasmacytic perivascular cuffing. J: Localized red fluorescence in perisynovial 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
31
adipose tissue (IL09-doxycycline treated); J, inset: 3D imaging reveals cylindrical shape 
of the structure, indicating that this may be a cross-section of the spirochete; 1 unit = 
6.17 µm. DIC image applied to enhance contrast. K: Urinary bladder, the lamina propria 
is infiltrated by mild lymphoplasmacytic inflammation. L: Urinary bladder, a discrete 
lymphoid nodule expands the lamina propria. M: Red fluorescent staining reveals an 
object with spirochete morphology and/or associated antigen within the lamina propria 
of the urinary bladder (IL75 untreated). Scale bar: 20 µm (C and M); 10 µm (E-G, and 
J). Original magnification: x10 (A-B, D, H-I, and K-L); x63: additional 2x amplification 
applied with Leica LAS X software (C). Bb, Borrelia burgdorferi; DIC, differential 
interference contrast; LD, Lyme disease; Rhesus macaque, Rm. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
32
Table 1. Summary of histopathologic findings in Borrelia burgdorferi tick-infected 
rhesus macaques. 
 
*Multiple nerves affected simultaneously. 
†Positive by immunofluoresence. Red represents detection by anti-OspA monoclonal antibodies; green 
represents detection by rabbit anti-Borrelia polyclonal antibodies. 
NE, not examined; NA, not applicable. 
 
 
Group 
Age 
Peripheral 
Nerves 
Heart/ 
Pericardium 
Brain/ 
Leptomeninges 
Urinary 
Bladder 
Skeletal 
muscle 
Stifle 
Joint 
Untreated 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IP55 
3.73 3* (green)† 
0/0 
0 
2 
0 
0 
IP67 
3.89 NE (green)† 
0/0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
IN16 
3.83 0 
2/0  
0 
3 
0 
1 
IL75 
4.06 3* 
0/0 
0 
2 (red)† 
0 
0 
IN05 
4.11 2* 
1/0  
0 
2 
0 
0 
Ratio/(%) 
NA 
3/4 (75) 
2/5 (40) 
0/0 (0) 
4/5 (80) 
0/5 (0) 
1/5 (20) 
Treated 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IH11 
3.97 2* 
1/0 
1 (green)† 
3  
0 
2 
IK66 
3.92 1 
1/0 
0 
2  
2(green & red)† 
0 
IK14 
4.09 0 
2/0 (red)† 
0 
2 
0 
0 
IL09 
4.07 0 
0/0 
0 
2 
0 
1 (red)† 
IH22 
4.18 0 
2/2 
1 (green)† 
0 
0 
0 
Ratio/(%) 
NA 
2/5 (40) 
4/5 (80) 
2/5 (40) 
4/5 (80) 
1/5 (20) 
2/5 (40) 
Controls 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HT73 
4.16 0 
0 
0 
2 
0 
NA 
IK20 
3.99 0 
0 
0 
NA 
NA 
NA 
KB40 
5.17 1 
0 
1 
1 
0 
0 
IH80 
7.59 0 
3 (marked 
fibrosis) 
0 
2 
0 
1 
Ratio/(%) 
NA 
1/4 (25) 
1/4 (25) 
1/4 (25) 
3/3 (100) 
0/3 (0) 
1/2 (50) 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
