 Health and Public Policy to Facilitate Effective Prevention and
Treatment of Substance Use Disorders Involving Illicit and Prescription
Drugs: An American College of Physicians Position Paper
Ryan Crowley, BSJ; Neil Kirschner, PhD; Andrew S. Dunn, MD; and Sue S. Bornstein, MD; for the Health and Public Policy
Committee of the American College of Physicians*
Substance use disorders involving illicit and prescription drugs
are a serious public health issue. In the United States, millions of
individuals need treatment for substance use disorders but few
receive it. The rising number of drug overdose deaths and the
changing legal status of marijuana pose new challenges. In this
position paper, the American College of Physicians maintains
that substance use disorder is a treatable chronic medical con-
dition and offers recommendations on expanding treatment op-
tions, the legal status of marijuana, addressing the opioid
epidemic, insurance coverage of substance use disorders treat-
ment, education and workforce, and public health interventions.
Ann Intern Med. 2017;166:733-736. doi:10.7326/M16-2953
Annals.org
For author affiliations, see end of text.
This article was published at Annals.org on 28 March 2017.
S
ubstance use disorders pose a heavy societal bur-
den, endangering individual and family health and
well-being, tearing through communities, and sapping
resources from the health care system. These disorders
are common in the general population and occur at
even higher rates among those who are incarcerated.
Access to care for this condition is limited. In 2014, 22.5
million people in the United States needed treatment
for an illicit drug or alcohol use problem but only 18%
received any treatment, far below treatment receipt
rates for those with hypertension (77%), diabetes (73%),
or major depression (71%) (1).
The use of illicit drugs is a drain on the nation'
s
financial resources. In 2007, the indirect and direct cost
of illicit drug use was estimated to be about $200 bil-
lion related to lost productivity, health care, and law
enforcement ($11 billion annually) (2). The medical
complications of untreated substance use disorder also
drive health care system costs. Hospitalizations for opi-
oid use disorder rose from nearly 302 000 to more than
520 000 from 2002 to 2012, and costs for such care
quadrupled to $15 billion in 2012. Charges for hospi-
talization for opioid use disorder with serious infections
also quadrupled over the same period to $700 million
(3). Notably, evidence shows that for every dollar in-
vested in drug prevention and treatment, the nation
sees substantial savings (4, 5).
Over the past 40 years, many jurisdictions estab-
lished rigid punishments for nonviolent drug offenses,
including mandatory incarceration. However, there has
been growing support for the idea that public policy
should be reoriented to emphasize prevention and
treatment of substance use disorders through public
and individual health interventions rather than exces-
sive reliance on criminalization and incarceration. One
example of this shift is the promotion of specialized
drug courts by federal, state, and local governments.
Drug courts can offer the individual with substance use
disorders a path to treatment rather than incarceration,
in addition to supporting prevention and early interven-
tion initiatives (6–8). The United Nations has called for a
health-focused direction to the drug problem (9), and
the public is also supportive of treatment rather than
incarceration for drug users. According to a 2014 sur-
vey conducted by the Pew Research Center, 67% of
Americans say that “the government should focus more
on providing treatment for those who use illegal drugs
such as heroin and cocaine” (10).
This document focuses on substance use disorders
related to illicit drugs and misuse of prescription drugs,
particularly opioids (Appendix, available at Annals.org).
Although the American College of Physicians (ACP)
recognizes that alcohol and tobacco use disorders are
a serious public health problem, policies to address
such issues are outside the scope of this paper. Recom-
mendation 3 pertains to marijuana and recommenda-
tion 4 to opioids, whereas the other recommendations
apply to all use disorders associated with illicit and pre-
scription drugs. For purposes of this paper, the term
“illicit drug” includes the following categories based on
the National Survey on Drug Use and Health: marijuana
(including hashish); cocaine (including crack cocaine);
heroin; hallucinogens; inhalants; and the nonmedical
use of prescription-type pain relievers, stimulants, and
sedatives. Although many states have legalized or de-
criminalized use and sale of medical and/or recre-
* This paper, authored by Ryan Crowley, BSJ; Neil Kirschner, PhD; Andrew S. Dunn, MD; and Sue S. Bornstein, MD, was developed for the Health and Public
Policy Committee of the American College of Physicians. Individuals who served on the Health and Public Policy Committee at the time of its approval are
Andrew Dunn, MD (Chair)†; Sue S. Bornstein, MD (Vice Chair)†; George Abraham, MD†; James F. Bush, MD†; Heather E. Gantzer, MD†; Tracey Henry, MD†;
Gregory C. Kane, MD†; Joshua D. Lenchus, DO†; Joseph M. Li, MD†; Bridget M. McCandless, MD†; Danny Allen Newman, MD†; Sarah Ahmed‡; and Sarah
G. Candler, MD†. Approved by the Health and Public Policy Committee in October 2016 and the Board of Regents in February 2017.
† Author.
‡ Nonauthor contributor.
Annals of Internal Medicine
POSITION PAPER
© 2017 American College of Physicians 733
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 ational marijuana, it is categorized as an illicit drug for
the purposes of this paper because its use and posses-
sion remain illegal under federal law and in many
states. Furthermore, the paper offers public policy rec-
ommendations regarding the prevention and treat-
ment of substance use disorders involving illicit and
prescription drugs and not on the clinical aspect of pre-
venting and treating these disorders.
METHODS
This policy paper was drafted by the Health and
Public Policy Committee of the ACP, which is charged
with addressing issues that affect the health care of the
U.S. public and the practice of internal medicine and its
subspecialties. The authors reviewed available studies,
reports, and surveys on the prevention and treatment
of substance use disorder from PubMed, Google
Scholar, relevant news articles, policy documents, Web
sites, and other sources. The authors largely excluded
sources that were more than 10 years old, with the ex-
ception of several federal government reports that
were included for background purposes. Recommen-
dations were based on reviewed literature and input
from the ACP'
s Board of Governors, Board of Regents,
Council of Early Career Physicians, Council of Resident/
Fellow Members, Council of Student Members, and
Council of Subspecialty Societies and nonmember ex-
perts in the field. The policy paper and related recom-
mendations were reviewed and approved by the
Health and Public Policy Committee in October 2016
and the Board of Regents in February 2017. Financial
support for the development of this position paper
comes exclusively from the ACP operating budget.
RECOMMENDATIONS
1. Substance use disorder is a chronic medical con-
dition and should be managed as such.
Substance use disorders are treatable chronic
medical conditions that should be addressed through
expansion of evidence-based public and individual
health initiatives to prevent, treat, and promote recov-
ery. ACP supports appropriate and effective efforts to
reduce all substance use, including educational, pre-
vention, diagnostic, and treatment efforts. In addition,
ACP supports medical research on substance use dis-
orders, including causes and treatment. ACP empha-
sizes the importance of addressing the stigma sur-
rounding substance use disorders among the health
care community and the general public.
2. ACP supports the implementation of treatment-
focused programs as an alternative to incarceration or
other criminal penalties for persons with substance use
disorders found guilty of the sale or possession of illicit
substances.
Treatment for substance use disorders should
be made available in a timely manner, includ-
ing for those in the criminal justice system as
an alternative to incarceration and other crimi-
nal penalties.
3. Stakeholders should assess the risks and benefits
of removing or reducing criminal penalties for nonvio-
lent offenses involving illicit drugs.
ACP calls for policymakers and researchers to care-
fully assess the arguments and evidence for amending
criminal justice laws to remove or reduce criminal pen-
alties (decriminalization, legalization, or offer of treat-
ment as an alternative to criminal justice penalties) for
nonviolent users of drugs, including assessing the
following:
a. The relative risk that such drugs pose for the
individual health of the users, the potential for misuse,
and the potential effect on the overall health of the
population that might result from decriminalization or
legalization.
b. Whether criminalization acts as a barrier to pre-
venting and treating substance use disorders and re-
currence of such disorders.
c. The consequences of criminalization on the per-
son with a substance use disorder, including dispropor-
tionate adverse effects on persons based on racial, so-
cioeconomic, and ethnic characteristics.
d. Whether decriminalization or legalization leads
to more or fewer substance use disorders and the
health consequences associated with them.
ACP also calls for research on the individual and
public health effects in states that have legalized or de-
criminalized the use of marijuana and the effectiveness
of regulatory structures in those states that may mini-
mize any adverse health impacts especially on children
and adolescents.
4.
Multiple
stakeholders
should
cooperate
to
address the epidemic of prescription drug misuse,
including the following strategies: implementation of
evidence-based guidelines for pain management; ex-
pansion of access to naloxone to opioid users, law en-
forcement, and emergency medical personnel; expan-
sion of access to medication-assisted treatment of
opioid use disorders; improved training in the treatment
of substance use disorders, including buprenorphine-
based treatment; establishment of a national prescrip-
tion drug monitoring program (PDMP); and improve-
ment of existing monitoring programs.
ACP believes that physicians should work with
other stakeholders, including medical and behavioral
health care professionals, public health officials, gov-
ernment programs, patient advocacy groups, insurance
plans, and law enforcement, to address the epidemic of
prescription drug use disorder. To achieve this goal,
ACP recommends the following:
a.
Physicians
are
obligated
by
the
standards
of medical ethics and professionalism to practice
evidence-based, conscientious pain management that
prevents illness, reduces patient risk, and promotes
health. ACP strongly believes that physicians must be-
come familiar with, and follow as appropriate, clinical
guidelines related to pain management and controlled
substances,
such
as
prescription
opioids,
as
well
as nonopioid pharmacologics and nonpharmacologic
interventions.
POSITION PAPER
Substance Use Disorders Involving Illicit and Prescription Drugs
734 Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 166 No. 10 • 16 May 2017
Annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 b. Lift barriers that impede access to medications
to treat opioid use disorder (methadone, buprenor-
phine, and naltrexone) and to medications for over-
dose prevention (naloxone). The federal government
should consider lifting the cap on the number of pa-
tients who can receive buprenorphine if a physician has
been trained in proper prescribing practices. Public
and private insurers should remove onerous limits on
medications for overdose prevention and medication-
assisted treatment, including burdensome prior autho-
rization rules or lifetime limits on buprenorphine that
prevent medically necessary care. Oversight and en-
forcement efforts should be strengthened to protect
against misuse, diversion, and illegal sale of buprenor-
phine and other opioid treatment drugs. Policymakers
should evaluate and consider removing restrictions on
office-based methadone treatment provided by trained
physicians or other health care professionals.
c. Funding should be allocated to distribute nalox-
one to individuals with opioid use disorder to prevent
overdose deaths and train law enforcement and emer-
gency medical personnel in its use. Legal protections
(that is, Good Samaritan laws) should be established to
encourage use of naloxone and the reporting of opioid
overdoses in instances where an individual'
s life is in
danger. Physician standing orders to permit pharma-
cies to provide naloxone to eligible individuals without
a prescription should be explored. Insurance and cost-
related barriers that limit access to naloxone should be
addressed.
d. Pre- and postbuprenorphine training support
and education tools and resources should be made
available and widely disseminated to assist physicians
in their treatment efforts. Physician support initiatives,
such as mentor programs, shadowing experienced pro-
viders, and telemedicine, can help improve education
and support efforts around substance use treatment.
e. ACP reiterates its support for the establishment
of a national PDMP. Until such a program is imple-
mented, ACP supports efforts to standardize state
PDMPs through the federal National All Schedules Pre-
scription Electronic Reporting program. The College
strongly urges prescribers and dispensers to check
PDMPs in their own and neighboring states (as permit-
ted) before writing and filling prescriptions for medica-
tions containing controlled substances. All PDMPs
should maintain strong protections to ensure confiden-
tiality and privacy. Efforts should be made to facilitate
the use of PDMPs, such as by linking information with
electronic medical records and permitting other mem-
bers of the health care team to consult PDMPs.
5. Health insurance should be required to cover
mental health conditions, including the evidence-based
treatment of substance use disorders, and abide parity
rules.
ACP strongly supports parity of mental health and
substance use disorders and the coverage of compre-
hensive evidence-based treatment of substance use
disorders. Strong oversight must be applied to ensure
adequate coverage of medication-assisted treatment
components, counseling, and other items and services.
Components of such treatment, which includes medical
services, mental health services, educational services,
HIV/AIDS services, legal services, family services, and
vocational services, should also be extended to those
in need.
6. The workforce of professionals qualified to treat
substance use disorders should be expanded.
ACP supports policies to increase the professional
workforce engaged in treatment of substance use dis-
orders. Loan forgiveness programs, mentoring initia-
tives, and increased payment may encourage more in-
dividuals to train and practice as behavioral health
professionals.
7. Training in the treatment of substance use disor-
ders should be embedded throughout the continuum of
medical education.
Training in screening and treatment of substance
use disorders should be embedded in the continuum
of medical education. Continuing medical education
providers should offer courses to train physicians
in addiction medicine, medication-assisted therapy,
evidence-based prescribing, and the identification and
treatment of substance use disorders.
8. The effectiveness of public health interventions to
combat substance use disorders and associated health
problems should be studied.
Public health-based substance use disorder inter-
ventions, such as syringe exchange programs and safe
injection sites, that connect the user with effective treat-
ment programs should be explored and tested.
CONCLUSION
Substance use disorders have been regarded as a
moral failing for centuries, a mindset that has helped
establish a harmful and persistent stigma that affects
how the medical community confronts addiction. We
now know more about the nature of addiction and its
effects on brain function, which has led to broader ac-
ceptance of the concept that substance use disorder is
a disease, like diabetes, that can be treated. Communi-
ties across the country are confronting an opioid epi-
demic that has taken tens of thousands of lives, leading
physicians to take a more active role in managing the
condition and spurring policymakers to reassess the
nation'
s drug control policy. Physicians can help guide
their patients toward recovery by becoming educated
about substance use disorders, proper prescribing
practices, consulting prescription drug monitoring pro-
grams to reduce opioid misuse, and assisting patients
in their treatment. Policymakers can mitigate the effects
of drug use by permitting harm reduction strategies,
such as syringe exchange programs, supporting initia-
tives to increase the behavioral health workforce, test-
ing evidence-based prevention and stigma-reduction
programs, and encouraging treatment of substance
use
disorders
among
incarcerated
persons
and
diversion programs for those with nonviolent drug
arrests.
From the American College of Physicians, Washington, DC.
Substance Use Disorders Involving Illicit and Prescription Drugs
POSITION PAPER
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 166 No. 10 • 16 May 2017 735
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 Financial Support: Financial support for the development of
this guideline comes exclusively from the ACP operating budget.
Disclosures: Disclosures can be viewed at www.acponline
.org/authors/icmje/ConflictOfInterestForms.do?msNum=M16
-2953.
Requests for Single Reprints: Ryan A. Crowley, BSJ, American
College
of
Physicians,
25
Massachusetts
Avenue
NW,
Suite 700, Washington, DC 20001; e-mail, RCrowley@mail
.acponline.org.
Current author addresses and author contributions are avail-
able at Annals.org.
References
1. Han B, Hedden SL, Lipari R, Copello EA, Kroutil LA. Receipt of
services for behavioral health problems: results from the 2014 Na-
tional Survey on Drug Use and Health. NSDUH Data Review. Sub-
stance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration 2015. Ac-
cessed at www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/default/files/NSDUH-DR-FRR3
-2014/NSDUH-DR-FRR3-2014/NSDUH-DR-FRR3-2014.pdf
on
16
February 2017.
2. U.S. Department of Justice National Drug Intelligence Center. Na-
tional Drug Threat Assessment 2011. U.S. Department of Justice.
2011.
Accessed
at
www.justice.gov/archive/ndic/pubs44/44849
/44849p.pdf on 16 February 2017.
3. Ronan MV, Herzig SJ. Hospitalizations related to opioid abuse/
dependence and associated serious infections increased sharply,
2002-2012. Health Aff. 2016;35:832-837. [PMID: 27140989]
4. Rydell CP, Everingham SS. Controlling Cocaine. Supply Versus
Demand Programs. RAND Corporation. 1994. Accessed at www
.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/monograph_reports/2006/RAND
_MR331.sum.pdf on 16 February 2017.
5. National Institute on Drug Abuse. Is drug addiction treat-
ment worth its cost? In: Principles of Drug Addiction Treat-
ment: A Research Guide, 3rd ed. December 2012. Accessed at
www.drugabuse.gov/publications/principles-drug-addiction
-treatment-research-based-guide-third-edition/frequently
-asked-questions/drug-addiction-treatment-worth-its-cost
on
16 February 2017.
6. National Drug Control Strategy. Executive Office of the President
of the United States; 2015. Accessed at https://obamawhitehouse
.archives.gov/sites/default/files/ondcp/policy-and-research/2015
_national_drug_control_strategy_0.pdf on 16 February 2017
7. National Drug Control Strategy. Executive Office of the President
of the United States. 2012. Accessed at https://obamawhitehouse
.archives.gov/sites/default/files/ondcp/2012_ndcs.pdf on 16 Febru-
ary 2017.
8. Principles of effective state sentencing and corrections policy. A
report of the NCSL Sentencing and Corrections Work Group. Na-
tional Conference of State Legislatures. 2011. Accessed at www.ncsl
.org/research/civil-and-criminal-justice/principles-of-sentencing-and
-corrections-policy.aspx on 16 February 2017.
9. United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. World Drug Report
2015.
Accessed
at
www.unodc.org/documents/wdr2015/World
_Drug_Report_2015.pdf on 16 February 2017.
10. Pew Research Center. America'
s new drug policy landscape. 2
April 2014. Accessed at www.people-press.org/2014/04/02
/americas-new-drug-policy-landscape/ on 16 February 2017.
ACP CHAPTER MEETINGS
For information on upcoming ACP chapter meetings, including scientific
programs
and
registration
forms,
please
visit
www.acponline.org
/meetings/chapter.
POSITION PAPER
Substance Use Disorders Involving Illicit and Prescription Drugs
736 Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 166 No. 10 • 16 May 2017
Annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 Current Author Addresses: Mr. Crowley and Dr. Kirschner:
American College of Physicians, 25 Massachusetts Avenue
NW, Suite 700, Washington, DC 20001.
Dr. Dunn: Mount Sinai Medical Center, Box 1086, 1470 Mad-
ison Avenue, New York, NY 10029.
Dr. Bornstein: 3111 Beverly Drive, Dallas, TX 75205.
Author Contributions: Conception and design: R. Crowley,
A.S. Dunn, G.C. Kane, J.D. Lenchus.
Analysis and interpretation of the data: R. Crowley, N. Kirsch-
ner, A.S. Dunn, J.F. Bush.
Drafting of the article: R. Crowley, N. Kirschner, A.S. Dunn.
Critical revision of the article for important intellectual con-
tent: R. Crowley, A.S. Dunn, G. Abraham, T. Henry, J.D.
Lenchus, D.A. Newman.
Final approval of the article: R. Crowley, N. Kirschner, A.S.
Dunn, G. Abraham, H.E. Gantzer, T. Henry, G.C. Kane, J.D.
Lenchus, J.M. Li, B.M. McCandless, D.A. Newman, S.G.
Candler.
Statistical expertise: R. Crowley.
Collection and assembly of data: N. Kirschner.
APPENDIX
Definition of Substance Use Disorders
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Dis-
orders, 5th edition, combines the terms “substance
abuse disorder” and “substance dependence” under
an umbrella term, “substance use disorders,” and es-
tablishes a continuum of mild, moderate, and severe
designations (11). Within this category are specific sub-
categories, including alcohol use disorder and stimu-
lant use disorder. Severity is determined by the number
of criteria met by the individual. For example, an indi-
vidual who meets 6 of the opioid use disorder criteria is
diagnosed with severe opioid use disorder (12). Ac-
cording to the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Ser-
vices Administration (SAMHSA), “Substance use disor-
ders occur when the recurrent use of alcohol and/or
drugs causes clinically and functionally significant im-
pairment, such as health problems, disability, and fail-
ure to meet major responsibilities at work, school, or
home” (13). The American Society of Addiction Medi-
cine maintains that it is important to differentiate be-
tween at-risk or harmful substance use and addiction.
The Society has defined the spectrum of unhealthy sub-
stance use as including addiction, harmful use when
addiction is not present but use has already led to
health consequences, and at-risk or hazardous use only
when use increases the risk or likelihood of health con-
sequences that have not occurred and addiction is not
present (14).
What Is the Current Science on Addiction or
Severe Substance Use Disorder?
Historically, addiction has been considered by
some to be a moral disorder or character defect; this
thinking informed policies that emphasized punish-
ment rather than treatment of drug addiction. As be-
havioral science and neuroscience advanced, a differ-
ent theory about drug addiction emerged. In 1956, the
American Medical Association described alcohol as an
illness and in 1987 officially called addiction a disease
(15). Alan Leshner of the National Institute on Drug
Abuse initiated a paradigm shift by establishing that
addiction was a chronic, relapsing brain disease, with a
genetic component that affects behavior, and that
long-term use could lead to altered brain structure and
function (16, 17). A 2008 National Institute on Drug
Abuse report summarizes the evolution in thinking:
When scientists began to study addictive be-
havior in the 1930s, people addicted to drugs
were thought to be morally flawed and lacking
in willpower. Those views shaped society'
s re-
sponses to drug abuse, treating it as a moral
failing rather than a health problem, which led
to an emphasis on punishment rather than pre-
vention and treatment. Today, thanks to sci-
ence, our views and our responses to addiction
and
other
substance
use
disorders
have
changed dramatically. Groundbreaking discov-
eries about the brain have revolutionized our
understanding of compulsive drug use, en-
abling us to respond effectively to the problem
(18).
By establishing that addiction was a disease with
consequences for individual and public health, Leshner
reasoned, the response to drug addiction should not
be incarceration but treatment and management of the
disease, even if the initial decision to use the drug was
voluntary (19). In 1998, ACP (then the American Col-
lege of Physicians–American Society of Internal Medi-
cine) released the position paper “Illegal Drug Abuse
and National Drug Policy,” which included the follow-
ing position: “Drug abuse should be accepted by
health care practitioners, insurers, and employers as a
chronic condition and illness, rather than a character
weakness” (20). Other authors note that the under-
standing of addiction as a brain disease has tempered
the severity of drug policies (21). The brain disease par-
adigm has been criticized by some who believe it ab-
solves the addict from accountability, is less substanti-
ated because the disease lacks a biological marker, or
distances the problem from the social context (22).
Others pose that addictive behavior is a series of
choices, rather than a disease-triggered impulse (23,
24). Research also reflects the role of genetics, and its
interplay with social exposure, as an important compo-
nent in the manifestation of this condition (25).
Leshner acknowledged that addiction is “not just a
brain disease” and that other factors may play a role in
whether a user becomes an addict, using the oft-cited
example of low heroin relapse rates among Vietnam
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 166 No. 10 • 16 May 2017
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 veterans upon their return to the United States. Once
removed from the environment where heroin was read-
ily available and its use was relatively common, most
veterans maintained their abstinence from the drug.
Leshner said that “not only must the underlying brain
disease be treated, but the behavioral and social cue
components must also be addressed” (19). The Ameri-
can Society of Addiction Medicine, in recognition that
addiction must be viewed in a broader perspective
than solely a brain disease, reflects a biopsychosocial
perspective in its current definition of addiction (26).
Trends in Illicit Drug Use and Substance Use
Disorders
According to SAMHSA'
s 2014 National Survey on
Drug Use and Health, 27 million people (10.2%) aged
12 years or older used an illicit drug in the past 30 days,
a percentage higher than in each year from 2002 to
2013 (Table) (27). Of current illicit drug users, 22.2 mil-
lion are current marijuana users and 4.3 million report
current nonmedical use of prescription pain medica-
ton. The growth in illicit drug use is mainly the result of
rising marijuana use; the 2014 rate of nonmedical use
of prescription drugs was lower than that of most years
in the 2002–2012 period but was similar to that of 2013.
About 22.5 million people aged 12 years or older re-
quired substance use disorder treatment in the past
year, with alcohol use disorder being the most com-
mon. Less than 20% of this population received any
form of treatment, while about 10% received treatment
at a specialty treatment facility (hospitals [inpatient
only], drug or alcohol rehabilitation facilities [inpatient
or outpatient], or mental health centers) (28).
In 2004, the Bureau of Justice Statistics estimated
that about 70% of state and federal prisoners reported
regular use of an illicit drug and half of the prison pop-
ulation met clinical criteria for substance use disorder.
However, fewer than 20% received drug treatment
from a trained professional (although approximately
35% in state facilities and 41% in federal facilities par-
ticipated in “other” drug abuse program, such as self-
help groups or peer counseling) (29). More recently,
the National Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse
estimated that of the 64.5% of prison and jail inmates
who met clinical diagnostic criteria for a substance use
disorder in 2006, only 11.2% had received any type of
professional treatment since admission (30).
Especially troubling is the rising epidemic of drug
overdose deaths, particularly from opioids, such as pre-
scription pain relievers and heroin (31). According to
the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC), the rate of deaths from drug overdoses has in-
creased 137%, including a 200% increase in the rate of
overdose deaths involving opioids, since 2000 (32). In
2014, more people died of drug overdoses than in any
previous year on record. During that year, 47 055 peo-
ple died of a drug overdose in the United States;
28 647 deaths were associated with opioids, exceeding
the number of deaths attributed to automobile crashes
(32, 33). Substance use disorders have a substantial ef-
fect on health care costs. In 2016, average private
insurance claims costs were nearly $16 000 more for
patients with “opioid abuse or dependence” than the
per-patient average cost on all patients'claims (34).
Twenty-six states and the District of Columbia per-
mit some form of marijuana use. Nineteen states allow
marijuana for medical use, and 8 states plus the District
of Columbia permit recreational use (35). Some have
speculated that relaxed penalties and reduced percep-
tion of harm surrounding marijuana could result in
higher use rates (36).
Overview of Treatment Approaches for
Substance Use Disorder
Many approaches have shown at least some degree
of effectiveness in the treatment of substance use disor-
der. These include behavioral therapies, medication-
assisted therapies, and peer support/12-step fellowship
approaches. Behavioral therapy, which is available for
all substance use disorders, includes general cognitive–
behavioral therapy, contingency management, relapse
prevention, motivational enhancement therapy, and com-
binations thereof (37, 38). Evidence-based medication-
assisted therapy approaches are available for the
treatment of opioid use disorder (methadone, buprenor-
phine, naltrexone, and a buprenorphine and naloxone
combination), tobacco (nicotine replacement therapy,
bupropion, and varenicline), and alcohol (naltrexone
and acamprosate). No medication-assisted therapy has
yet been determined to be effective for the treatment
of substance use disorders related to cocaine or stimu-
lant use (37, 39). The opioid antagonist naloxone is not
a treatment for opioid use disorder but is highly effec-
tive for reversing acute opioid overdose (40). With
these evidence-based treatment approaches, success-
ful outcomes are as likely for substance use disorder as
for such chronic diseases as diabetes, hypertension,
and asthma (41).
Table. Numbers of Illicit Drug Users Among Persons
Aged ≥12 Years in the Past Month: 2014
Drug
Users, n in millions
Marijuana and hashish
22.2
Pain relievers
4.3
Tranquilizers
1.9
Stimulants
1.6
Cocaine
1.5
Hallucinogens
1.2
Inhalants
0.5
Heroin
0.4
Sedatives
0.3
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 166 No. 10 • 16 May 2017
Annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 Policies to Address the Substance Use Disorders
Federal Efforts
Substantial federal-level attention has been di-
rected to the opioid epidemic, specifically on programs
to improve access to treatment and train providers
on proper opioid prescribing. In October 2015, the
Obama administration announced it would direct rele-
vant federal agencies to train federal health care pro-
fessionals on proper prescribing of opioid medication
and identify and address barriers that impede access to
medication-assisted treatment of opioid use disorders.
In December 2015, President Obama signed a budget
agreement that would lift the longstanding federal
funding ban on syringe exchange programs, although
money cannot be spent on the needles themselves
(42). The CDC also finalized a guideline on opioid pre-
scribing for chronic pain in 2016 that was supported by
ACP (43). The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has
released an Opioids Action Plan to consult expert advi-
sory committees before approving a new drug applica-
tion for an opioid; improve opioid warning and safety
labeling; and adopt more stringent requirements for
postmarket data to better understand long-term ef-
fects, increase the number of health professionals who
receive training on proper opioids prescribing, and
consider options to expand access to naloxone and
other treatments, among other provisions (44).
In February 2016, President Obama announced
that his fiscal year 2017 budget proposal would include
$1 billion in mandatory spending for expanded access
and evaluation of medication-assisted treatment for
opioid use disorders and National Health Service Corps
funding to broaden access to behavioral health provid-
ers. The budget proposal also includes increased fund-
ing to the Department of Justice and Department of
Health and Human Services to help support state-
based programs to prevent prescription drug over-
dose, improve access to naloxone, and fund enforce-
ment programs. The budget would also support a pilot
project for nurse practitioners and physician assistants
to prescribe buprenorphine where permitted by state
law. As of 2016, the federal government permits physi-
cians with sufficient training and experience prescrib-
ing buprenorphine to treat up to 275 patients. Before
the rule change, waivered physicians were allowed to
prescribe
buprenorphine
to
a
maximum
of
100
patients.
On a broader level, the 2015 National Drug Con-
trol Strategy underscores the importance of integrating
behavioral health into the medical setting. The strategy
also outlines goals related to increasing access to treat-
ment of and long-term recovery from substance use
disorders and emphasizes the need for team-based
care, provider education on substance use disorders,
and wider access to medication-assisted treatment for
opioid use disorder. In 2014, then-U.S. Attorney Gen-
eral Eric Holder expressed support for reducing sen-
tences for nonviolent drug offenders (45).
Congress has recently taken action on legislation
for treatment of opioid use disorder. The Comprehen-
sive Addiction and Recovery Act (CARA) was passed by
Congress and signed into law by President Obama in
July 2016. CARA directs the Department of Health and
Human Services and other agencies to 1) convene a
task force to develop best practices on pain manage-
ment, 2) provide grants to increase the availability of
life-saving opioid antagonists (such as naloxone), 3) de-
velop treatment alternatives to incarceration programs,
and 4) distribute grants to states for comprehensive
opioid abuse response initiatives. The law also expands
prescription drug take-back programs, authorizes fund-
ing for family-based treatment of substance use disor-
der, and initiates demonstration projects on evidence-
based opioid and heroin treatment and interventions,
among other activities. Although the legislation autho-
rizes more than $181 million each year for 2 years in
new funding to carry out its provisions, the funds must
be appropriated every year through the regular appro-
priations process. This funding provision may prove to
be a barrier to implementation of this legislation given
the recent trend of Congress toward deficit reduction
and use of “pay-fors,” wherein appropriated funding for
new programs must be obtained through reductions in
other current funding. The 21st Century Cures Act,
signed into law in December 2016, includes $1 billion
for state efforts to fight the opioid epidemic.
Surgeon General's Report on Alcohol, Drugs,
and Health
In 2016, the Surgeon General released a report on
addiction: “Facing Addiction in America: The Surgeon
General'
s Report on Alcohol, Drugs, and Health” (46).
The report explains the evidence supporting the neu-
rologic basis of substance use disorders and explores
the genetic, social, environmental, and behavioral fac-
tors that may influence risk for addiction. The report
also describes evidence-based prevention programs;
approaches to screening, diagnosis, and treatment of
substance use disorders and the role that physicians
and other health care professionals may have in their
delivery; and recovery models, such as mutual aid
groups (for example, Narcotics Anonymous). In a chap-
ter devoted to the integration of behavioral and gen-
eral health care, the report recommends that states
adopt licensing and financing policies to incentivize
programs that offer care across the continuum of resi-
dential, outpatient, continuing care, and recovery sup-
ports. The report also calls for adequate coverage of
behavioral treatments and medications, and it recom-
mends that federal and state governments offer grants
and other financial incentives to providers that adopt
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 166 No. 10 • 16 May 2017
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 integration approaches. Other recommendations in-
clude requiring or incentivizing clinical professional
schools to provide coursework to train students in treat-
ing patients with substance use disorders and related
health problems and to encourage clinical professional
societies to develop continuing education for practic-
ing health care professionals.
Select State Efforts
Like the federal government, states have also fo-
cused attention on tackling the opioid use disorder ep-
idemic. According to the National Conference of State
Legislatures, many states have established prescription
drug monitoring programs to track controlled sub-
stance prescriptions, have sought to regulate pain man-
agement clinics, developed prescribing guidelines, en-
acted drug overdose immunity (Good Samaritan) laws
or broadened access to naloxone, and have initiated
public education and awareness campaigns (47). Flor-
ida saw a 50% decline in opioid overdose deaths after
enacting a law that regulated pain clinics (so-called pill
mills) and prohibited health professionals from dis-
pensing such drugs from their offices (48). A Kentucky
law required licensure of pain clinics and created strin-
gent recordkeeping and education requirements for
physicians and other health professionals who pre-
scribe controlled substances (49). The law increased
the number of physicians using the state'
s prescription
drug monitoring system and reduced the rate of indi-
viduals receiving prescriptions from multiple providers
(50).
Several states have recently revised sentencing
laws for nonviolent drug offenses. In 2009, New York
rewrote its mandatory minimum sentencing mandates
for certain nonviolent drug offenders and expanded
policies that provided access to substance use disorder
treatment before incarceration. New Hampshire, Missis-
sippi, and California also expanded or established
treatment as alternatives to jail time for certain drug use
offenses (51).
Washington and Oregon apply taxes on retail mari-
juana sales, and some of this revenue is devoted to
public health and health care–related activities. In Ore-
gon, the state directs 20% of revenue to mental health,
alcohol, and drug services and 5% to the Oregon
Health Authority, which works to improve health care
quality and control costs, for alcohol and drug use pre-
vention, early intervention, and treatment services (52).
Washington devotes a portion of marijuana revenue to
activities for prevention and reduction of marijuana use
among young people, development and support of a
marijuana education and public health program, re-
search into the short- and long-term effects of the
drug'
s use, the state'
s basic health plan trust fund, and
health and dental care programs.
Recommendations and Rationale
1. Substance use disorder is a chronic medical con-
dition and should be managed as such
Substance use disorders are treatable chronic
medical conditions that should be addressed
through expansion of evidence-based public
and individual health initiatives to prevent,
treat, and promote recovery. ACP supports ap-
propriate and effective efforts to reduce all
substance use, including educational, preven-
tion, diagnostic, and treatment efforts. In addi-
tion, ACP supports medical research on sub-
stance use disorders, including causes and
treatment. ACP emphasizes the importance of
addressing the stigma surrounding substance
use disorders among the health care commu-
nity and the general public.
Substance use disorders affect public safety, the
family, individual and public health, and community co-
hesion. Whereas previous generations incarcerated
drug users, the embrace of the “addiction as chronic
disease” paradigm has helped to direct attention to-
ward a therapeutic approach to tackling the problem.
Treatment of substance use disorders is similar to the
management of other complex chronic diseases and
requires coordination among providers, navigation of
care systems, and efforts to engage patients in self-
management of their illness. As with other behavioral
health conditions, a pernicious stigma discourages in-
dividuals from seeking care, physicians from treating
patients, and lawmakers from considering compassion-
ate and effective policies to addressing the problem.
As the opioid epidemic continues to take lives, more
policymakers have acknowledged that a new approach
must be adopted to suppress the scourge. Given the
complexity of addiction, addressing the problem de-
mands coordinated biological, psychological, and so-
cial approaches.
Drug use prevention efforts are often aimed at
young people and delivered in various environments,
including schools and health care settings. According
to Faggiano and colleagues, programs focused on in-
dividual development of social skills (drug knowledge,
decision making, self-esteem, and peer pressure resis-
tance) are the most effective school-based interven-
tions to prevent early drug use (53). The Good Behavior
Game, a classroom-based prevention program for ele-
mentary school children, reduced drug use when stu-
dents reached the age of 19 to 21 years (46). Primary
care–based screening and brief intervention can also
prevent substance misuse. Motivational interviewing re-
duces drug, tobacco, and alcohol use among drug-
using college students, as well as amphetamine use
among regular users (54). Tobacco use counseling and
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 166 No. 10 • 16 May 2017
Annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 interventions and alcohol misuse screening and coun-
seling are recommended by the U.S. Preventive Ser-
vices Task Force for various populations.
In its 2015 policy paper “Integration of Care for
Mental Health, Substance Abuse, and Other Behavioral
Health Conditions Into Primary Care,” ACP called for
policies to address the stigma associated with behav-
ioral health (55). In its report on stigma and behavioral
health, the National Academy of Medicine uses the
term “stigma” to “represent the complex attitudes, be-
liefs, behaviors, and structures that interact at different
levels of society (i.e., individuals, groups, organizations,
systems) and manifest in prejudicial attitudes about and
discriminatory practices against people with mental
and substance use disorders” (56). Stigma can have a
harmful effect on people with substance use disorder,
leading to social alienation and higher involvement in
risky behaviors, such as needle sharing (57). According
to the National Survey on Drug Use and Health, more
than 35% of individuals with a perceived unmet mental
health need had not received treatment because of so-
cial concerns, including not wanting others to find out
or because it might affect their job (58). One survey
found that the public has a far more negative view of
persons with substance use disorders than those with
mental illness, with respondents far less willing to sup-
port a person with drug addiction marrying into their
family, working closely with them on a job, or receiving
protection from job or housing discrimination (59).
Physicians and other health care professionals are
not immune from harboring negative beliefs toward
those with substance use disorders, and such attitudes
could potentially lead to delivery of lower-quality care
or refusal to provide certain services (for example, sy-
ringe exchange or such interventions as pharmacother-
apy) (57, 60). Evidence shows that internal medicine
physicians may hold patients with alcoholism or depen-
dence on narcotic pain medication in lower regard than
patients with pneumonia and heartburn (59). For physi-
cians, addiction medicine curricula for residents may
be effective in improving attitudes toward patients with
substance use disorders (61). Action should be taken to
reverse the structural stigma associated with substance
use disorders. The National Academy of Medicine rec-
ommends that the federal government coordinate an
evidence-based multipronged effort to reduce the
stigma around mental health and substance use disor-
ders, including developing a research agenda, commu-
nication plan, contact-based programs, peer support
programs, and other interventions.
2. ACP supports the implementation of treatment-
focused programs as an alternative to incarceration or
other criminal penalties for persons with substance use
disorders found guilty of the sale or possession of illicit
substances.
Treatment of substance use disorders should
be made available in a timely manner, includ-
ing for those in the criminal justice system, as
an alternative to incarceration and other crimi-
nal penalties.
As the “addiction-as-chronic-disease” paradigm at-
tains wider acceptance, law enforcement is reevaluat-
ing its response to substance use. Some departments
are teaming up with the health care sector to link pa-
tients who have substance use disorders with treatment
or embedding behavioral health clinicians in police
departments.
The Police Assisted Addiction and Recovery Initia-
tive was implemented in 2015 by the Gloucester, Mas-
sachusetts, police department (62). The program pro-
vides police departments with support to encourage
opioid users to seek treatment and link them with re-
sources in their community, distribute naloxone to pre-
vent opioid overdoses, and assist other law enforce-
ment departments in establishing a treatment-focused
response to the opioid epidemic. Rather than arresting
people with addictions, the police invite those seeking
help to come to the police department, where they are
taken to a local hospital, screened by an “Angel” volun-
teer, and immediately linked with a partnering treat-
ment facility (63). Although the program is in its infancy,
it has already garnered much attention, with 106 police
departments in 24 states partnering with the program.
Preliminary data on the program are positive. From
June 2015 to March 2016, 376 people accessed treat-
ment through the program, with a 95% direct referral
rate (64).
The Arlington, Massachusetts, police department
(including the department'
s mental health clinical re-
sponder) works with the local health department to
help distribute and provide education about naloxone,
has expanded existing drug disposal and take-back
programs, proactively reaches out to known people
who use opioids to provide naloxone and information
on how to access treatment, provides volunteers to
help connect addicted persons with treatment, and en-
gages in relapse prevention strategies. The program is
a community effort, with collaboration of law enforce-
ment, health department, schools, faith organizations,
and volunteers (65).
As of December 2014, 3057 drug courts were op-
erating in the United States and more than half served
adults (66). Drug courts are treatment-focused alterna-
tives to incarceration for individuals arrested for drug
violations. Instead of being sent through the traditional
criminal justice system, individuals are screened and di-
verted to closely supervised drug or alcohol treatment
programs for a designated period. Characteristics and
populations served by the courts differ by jurisdiction,
but generally, the individual's progress is monitored by
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 166 No. 10 • 16 May 2017
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 court officials and individuals who do not complete the
treatment program may be sent to prison. A 2011 Ur-
ban Institute report found that drug court participants
had lower rates of relapse, were less likely to report
committing crimes, and had slightly better psychoso-
cial outcomes (such as employment and less need for
financial support) than similar nonparticipating offend-
ers (67). To encourage the use of drug courts, the re-
port calls for funding, development of evidence-based
drug court practice standards, participation by more
serious offenders, and expansion to serve more partic-
ipants. Drug courts could be more effective if they di-
rect individuals to medication-assisted therapy, such as
methadone, buprenorphine, or naltrexone, paired with
counseling. However, many drug courts do not make
these connections. In a survey of 93 drug courts, 98%
reported having opioid-dependent participants but
only 56% provided medication-assisted therapy, in-
cluding agonists and naltrexone (68). Reasons for not
providing therapy included cost, patients undergoing
detoxification before entering supervision, lack of local
providers (particularly in rural areas), and court prohibi-
tions on medication-assisted therapy. To address these
barriers, SAMHSA recommends that drug court officials
become better educated about medication-assisted
therapy, develop working relationships and regularly
consult with medication-assisted therapy prescribers
and behavioral health treatment centers, and work with
relevant stakeholders to educate the community about
opioid use disorders and the need for this therapy (69).
A study by RTI International and Temple University
concluded that placing people who use drugs in
community-based treatment programs rather than the
criminal justice system would save billions of dollars
and reduce crime rates. The model determined that if
10% of eligible offenders were sent to community
treatment-based programs rather than prison, nearly
$5 billion would be saved compared with current prac-
tices (70). The model also showed a net reduction in
crime rates, although it did predict an immediate,
short-lived increase in crime.
3. Stakeholders should assess the risks and benefits
of removing or reducing criminal penalties for nonvio-
lent offenses involving illicit drugs.
ACP calls for policymakers and researchers to care-
fully assess the arguments and evidence for amending
criminal justice laws to remove or reduce criminal pen-
alties (decriminalization, legalization, or offering treat-
ment as an alternative to criminal justice penalties) for
nonviolent users of drugs, including assessing the
following:
a. The relative risk that such drugs pose for the
individual health of the users, the potential for misuse,
and the potential effect on the overall health of the
population that might result from decriminalization or
legalization.
b. Whether criminalization acts as a barrier to pre-
venting and treating substance use disorders and their
recurrence.
c. The consequences of criminalization on the per-
son with a substance use disorder, including dispropor-
tionate adverse effects on persons based on racial, so-
cioeconomic, and ethnic characteristics.
d. Whether decriminalization or legalization leads
to more or fewer substance use disorders and the
health consequences associated with them.
ACP also calls for research on the individual and
public health effects in states that have legalized or de-
criminalized the use of marijuana and the effectiveness
of regulatory structures in those states that may mini-
mize any adverse health effects, especially on children
and adolescents.
Many states and local jurisdictions are reevaluating
their marijuana laws because of various factors, includ-
ing changes in public perception of the risk for mari-
juana use, the increasing acceptance of medical mari-
juana, and reconsideration of the effectiveness of harsh
penalties for marijuana possession (71). A 2016 Associ-
ated Press–NORC Center for Public Affairs Research
survey found that 61% of Americans believed that mar-
ijuana should be made legal (72).
Legalization refers to the removal of legal sanctions
against the use, sale, or manufacture of a substance
(such as marijuana) if the action conforms to specified
conditions. Under decriminalization, the action remains
illegal, but enforcement or penalization is reduced un-
der the defined condition (for example, incarceration is
eliminated, and any conviction is generally considered
a misdemeanor with limited financial penalty). As of De-
cember 2016, Alaska, Colorado, Oregon, Washington,
California, Massachusetts, Nevada, Maine, and the Dis-
trict of Columbia have legalized the recreational use of
marijuana, at least for the possession of small amounts
of the substance. Twenty-one states and the District of
Columbia have decriminalized small amounts of mari-
juana. A total of 25 states, the District of Columbia,
Guam, and Puerto Rico now allow for comprehensive
public medical marijuana and cannabis programs. An
additional 17 states allow use of “low tetrahydrocan-
nabinol, high cannabidiol” products for medical rea-
sons under limited defined conditions (73).
Under federal law, all marijuana use is illegal and
the substance remains a Schedule I drug, characterized
as having no medical value and having a high potential
for misuse. A recent petition to the Drug Enforcement
Administration to reclassify marijuana was refused (74).
Nonetheless, under the Obama administration, no ac-
tions have been taken against states that have legalized
or decriminalized the use of the substance.
The effect of marijuana legalization is unclear at this
point. Use rates and attitudes about the drug have
been changing over the past decade. The percentage
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 166 No. 10 • 16 May 2017
Annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 of adults using marijuana and the share of adults who
perceive marijuana to be unharmful rose steadily from
2007 to 2014 (75). The numbers of daily or near-daily
users have also climbed and are up 7-fold since the
early 1990s (76). However, rates of adolescents who
have ever used marijuana dropped slightly from 2013
to 2015 (40.7% to 38.6%) (77). Data from a 2015 survey
from Colorado indicate that a lower percentage of ad-
olescents reported using marijuana in the past 30 days
than in 2009, before the drug was legalized (78). States
in which marijuana has been legalized had higher use
rates before legalization than states where the sub-
stance remained illegal, making it difficult to determine
the effect of legalization on use rates (79, 80). Legaliza-
tion may also have a financial effect. Colorado and
Washington, 2 states that have established retail mari-
juana systems, have generated millions of dollars in tax
revenue from marijuana sales (81). Legal marijuana may
also affect health care costs. One study found reduced
prescription medication use under Medicare Part D af-
ter states legalized medical marijuana, indicating that
therapeutic use of marijuana may help curb health care
costs (82).
In part because of cannabis'
s nebulous legal status
and federal restrictions on research funding, the evi-
dence on the health effects of marijuana use is limited
and unsettled (83). Evidence supports therapeutic
use
of
marijuana
to
treat
HIV/AIDS
cachexia,
chemotherapy-related nausea and vomiting, neuro-
pathic pain, and multiple sclerosis spasticity (79). On
the other hand, cannabis use may acutely impair mem-
ory and learning in adults, but it is unclear whether it
has lasting effects on cognitive capacity (84). Among
adolescents, evidence indicates that cannabis use may
have a negative effect on brain development. Other
possible associations include lack of motivation and in-
creased risk for psychosis. However, correlation may
not equal causation: A report from the RAND Corpora-
tion notes that “although marijuana use is correlated
with many adverse outcomes, it is much harder to as-
certain whether marijuana use causes these outcomes”
(69). Other adverse health system effects in Colorado
include an increase in the prevalence of marijuana-
related burns, cyclic vomiting syndrome from frequent
use of products with high tetrahydrocannabinol con-
centrations, and emergency department visits due to
consumption of edible cannabis products (85). In-
creased availability of recreational marijuana has led to
an uptick in the number of pediatric emergency depart-
ment visits, as more youths are unintentionally exposed
to the substance (86). Additional concerns include the
effects of cannabis use on automobile drivers. The most
recent report from the Rocky Mountain High Intensity
Drug Trafficking Area Program, part of the federal gov-
ernment'
s National Drug Control Strategy, reflects in-
creases in marijuana-related traffic deaths, driving acci-
dents, and emergency department and hospitalization
utilization since the state'
s legalization (87).
Given what little is known about the effects of mar-
ijuana use and the effect of legalization and decriminal-
ization, ACP urges caution in the consideration of pol-
icy changes. Furthermore, the federal government,
private sector, states, and others should fund and con-
duct extensive research on the health effects of mari-
juana and policies to limit use among vulnerable
populations, especially children and adolescents. In ju-
risdictions that have legalized or decriminalized mari-
juana, revenue should be earmarked for public preven-
tion and education efforts, as well as treatment for
those with cannabis use disorder. Strong product and
commercial regulations should also be put into place to
ensure product safety and to prohibit sales to minors.
4.
Multiple
stakeholders
should
cooperate
to
address the epidemic of prescription drug misuse, in-
cluding the following strategies: implementation of
evidence-based guidelines for pain management; ex-
pansion of access to naloxone to opioid users, law en-
forcement, and emergency medical personnel; expan-
sion of access to medication-assisted treatment of
opioid use disorders; improved training in the treatment
of substance use disorders, including buprenorphine-
based treatment; establishment of a national prescrip-
tion drug monitoring program (PDMP); and improve-
ment of existing monitoring programs.
ACP believes that physicians should work with
other
stakeholders,
including
medical
and
behavioral health care professionals, public
health officials, government programs, patient
advocacy groups, insurance plans, and law en-
forcement to address the prescription drug
use disorder epidemic.
To help address the prescription drug use epi-
demic, ACP makes the following recommendations:
a. Physicians are obligated by the standards of
medical
ethics
and
professionalism
to
practice
evidence-based, conscientious pain management that
prevents illness, reduces patient risk, and promotes
health. ACP strongly believes that physicians must be-
come familiar with, and follow as appropriate, clinical
guidelines related to pain management and controlled
substances, such as prescription opioids, as well as
nonopioid
pharmacologics
and
nonpharmacologic
interventions.
b. Lift barriers that impede access to medications
to treat opioid use disorder (methadone, buprenor-
phine, and naltrexone) and to medications for over-
dose prevention (naloxone). The federal government
should consider lifting the cap on the number of pa-
tients who can receive buprenorphine if a physician has
been trained in proper prescribing practices. Public
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 166 No. 10 • 16 May 2017
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 and private insurers should remove onerous limits on
medications for overdose prevention and medication-
assisted treatment, including burdensome prior autho-
rization rules or lifetime limits on buprenorphine that
prevent medically necessary care. Oversight and en-
forcement efforts should be strengthened to protect
against misuse, diversion, and illegal sale of buprenor-
phine and other opioid treatment drugs. Policymakers
should evaluate and consider removing restrictions on
office-based methadone treatment provided by trained
physicians or other health care professionals.
c. Funding should be allocated to distribute nalox-
one to individuals with opioid use disorder to prevent
overdose deaths and train law enforcement and emer-
gency medical personnel in its use. Legal protections
(that is, Good Samaritan laws) should be established to
encourage use of naloxone and the reporting of opioid
overdoses in instances where an individual'
s life is in
danger. Physician standing orders to permit pharma-
cies to provide naloxone to eligible individuals without
a prescription should be explored. Insurance and cost-
related barriers that limit access to naloxone should be
addressed.
d. Pre- and postbuprenorphine training support
and education tools and resources should be made
available and widely disseminated to assist physicians
in their treatment efforts. Physician support initiatives,
such as mentor programs, shadowing experienced pro-
viders, and telemedicine, can help improve education
and support efforts around substance use treatment.
e. ACP reiterates its support for the establishment
of a national PDMP. Until such a program is imple-
mented, ACP endorses efforts to standardize state
PDMPs through the federal National All Schedules Pre-
scription Electronic Reporting program. ACP strongly
urges prescribers and dispensers to check PDMPs in
their own and neighboring states (as permitted) before
writing and filling prescriptions for medications con-
taining controlled substances. All PDMPs should main-
tain strong protections to ensure confidentiality and
privacy. Efforts should be made to facilitate the use of
PDMPs, such as by linking information with electronic
medical records and permitting other members of the
health care team to consult PDMPs.
ACP strongly supports the integration of behavioral
health into the primary care setting (55). An integrated
practice may be better equipped to serve a patient with
behavioral and medical comorbid conditions, encour-
age treatment adherence, and reduce stigma associ-
ated with behavioral health (88). To address the rise of
opioid overdose deaths, the CDC recommends (32)
that efforts to reverse the trend include safer prescrib-
ing of prescription opioids, expanded access and use
of naloxone, better access to medication-assisted treat-
ment paired with behavioral therapies, and integrated
prevention services (including access to syringe ex-
change programs) to reduce the risk for HIV and hepa-
titis C virus transmission. The agency also calls for bet-
ter
collaboration
among
public
health
agencies,
medical examiners and coroners, and law enforcement
to track and respond to sudden increases in deaths
from illicit opioid overdose.
Naloxone
Demand for naloxone, an opioid antagonist that
can reverse a narcotic opioid overdose, has risen with
the opioid use epidemic. The CARA law authorizes
grants to local law enforcement agencies to purchase
naloxone and train law enforcement and other first re-
sponders in its use. Many states have lifted prescribing
requirements on naloxone to increase access among
nonprescribers, including family and friends of people
who use opioids, who may be present when an over-
dose occurs. As of August 2016, 37 states and the Dis-
trict of Columbia have adopted legal immunity laws
that protect people who use naloxone or call 911 to
request medical assistance for an overdosing individ-
ual. Forty-seven states and the District of Columbia
have passed laws granting immunity to medical profes-
sionals who prescribe or dispense naloxone to such
“laypeople” (89). Sensible protections should be estab-
lished to ensure that first responders and others are
able to intervene without the threat of legal action.
As the need for naloxone has grown, so has its
price. In 2014, Amphastar Pharmaceuticals increased
the list price of 10 prefilled, 2-mL syringes from $120 to
$330, drawing criticism from police departments, pub-
lic health agencies, and members of Congress (90). The
price of Evzio (Kale
´ o, Richmond, Virginia) in a user-
friendly 2-pack single-use prefilled auto-injector formu-
lation rose from $690 to $4500 from 2014 to 2016 (91).
ACP released a position paper that offers recommen-
dations on how to address the rising cost of prescrip-
tion drugs (92). Additionally, government representa-
tives and private sector entities have partnered to make
bulk purchases of naloxone at substantial discounts for
state and local jurisdictions fighting the opioid epi-
demic (93). This and other efforts must be accelerated
to ensure that naloxone continues to reach those in
need.
Medication-Assisted Treatment
Although such initiatives as the CDC'
s “Guideline
for Prescribing Opioids for Chronic Pain” may stem the
number of new patients with opioid use disorder, more
needs to be done to educate and promote therapies
for patients with existing substance use disorders (94).
Medication-assisted treatment using buprenorphine
has an impressive success rate for treating patients with
opioid use disorder. According to SAMHSA, “when pa-
tients and physicians were surveyed by SAMHSA about
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 166 No. 10 • 16 May 2017
Annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 the effectiveness of buprenorphine, they reported an
average of an 80% reduction in illicit opioid use, along
with significant increases in employment, and other in-
dices of recovery” (95). Some evidence also shows that
the outcomes rate of buprenorphine office-based opi-
oid treatment is similar to that of methadone, which is
delivered in a designated clinic setting (96).
Like other opioids, buprenorphine has misuse po-
tential. A formulation of buprenorphine contains nalox-
one to mitigate misuse. Federal law requires physicians
to take an 8-hour course on proper prescribing and
apply for a physician waiver. Once physicians are
granted the waiver, they may treat up to 30 patients
with buprenorphine in year 1 and may seek to increase
the patient cap to 100 beginning in year 2. However,
few physicians have applied for the waiver, and many
waivered physicians do not treat patients. Just over
37 000 physicians—less than 4% of prescribers—had
been waivered to prescribe buprenorphine as of Au-
gust 2016 (97, 98). In California, there are only 7 physi-
cians with buprenorphine waivers for every 100 000
residents (99). Buprenorphine barriers cited by Wash-
ington state family physicians include lack of institu-
tional support (more likely to be expressed by nonwaiv-
ered than waivered physicians), lack of mental health
and psychosocial support, time constraints, lack of spe-
cialty backup, lack of confidence in their ability to man-
age opioid addiction, and resistance from practice
partners (100). Insurers may also hinder access to bu-
prenorphine. Many Medicaid programs restrict access
because of concerns that it is more dangerous or ex-
pensive than alternative treatments, such as metha-
done. However, a study found that buprenorphine and
methadone mortality rates were similar and that mean
annual spending for buprenorphine was lower than
that for methadone. Buprenorphine was associated
with more relapse-related services than methadone
(101). Some Medicaid programs are reversing access
barriers; California'
s Medi-Cal program no longer re-
quires physicians to have a Treatment Authorization Re-
quest before using buprenorphine to treat opioid use
disorder (102). Naltrexone, including an extended-
release injectable version, is another Food and Drug
Administration–approved medication widely used to
treat opioid use disorder.
More attention is being devoted to addressing the
barriers that discourage medication-assisted treatment.
In July 2016, SAMHSA finalized a proposal to permit
qualified physicians with buprenorphine waivers to
treat up to 275 patients. More attention should be di-
rected to preparing and supporting buprenorphine-
waivered physicians to improve confidence and facili-
tate team-based care. Professional support resources,
such as Providers' Clinical Support System, and hub-
and-spoke programs, such as Project Extension for
Community Healthcare Outcome for Opioid Therapies,
can link primary care physicians to specialists and other
health care professionals experienced in substance use
disorder treatment and can improve physician confi-
dence in buprenorphine prescribing practices (103).
Additionally, policymakers should evaluate and
consider lifting restrictions on office-based distribution
of methadone. Currently, methadone treatment is ad-
ministered only by federally licensed treatment facili-
ties. In 1996, Canada began allowing office-based phy-
sicians to prescribe and dispense methadone, leading
to a substantial increase in access to treatment (104).
Stigma concerns may also be addressed if people with
opioid use disorder are more comfortable with receiv-
ing treatment from an office-based physician than from
a methadone clinic.
Finally, policymakers should address the barriers
that
contribute
to
underutilization
of
medication-
assisted therapy within the criminal justice setting, with
the goal of expanding access (105). These barriers in-
clude cost, security concerns, stigma about the use of
medication-assisted therapy, specific prohibitions re-
garding the use of medication-assisted therapy by spe-
cific agencies (such as the Federal Bureau of Prisons),
and the lack of qualified physicians in these setting to
provide the necessary treatment.
PDMPs
Use of PDMPs reduces the number of patients re-
ceiving prescriptions from multiple providers and helps
to ensure that pain medications are not diverted. A
study of PDMPs in 24 states found that PDMP imple-
mentation was associated with a 30% drop in the pre-
scribing rate for Schedule II opioids (106). Another
study found that PDMPs were associated with a de-
crease in opioid-related overdose deaths of 1.1 per
100 000 population in the year after implementation; it
also showed that states that regularly updated informa-
tion and monitored at least 4 drug schedules experi-
enced greater reductions in the rate of overdose
deaths (107). Several policies must be pursued to re-
duce administrative burdens associated with PDMPs,
including
ensuring
interoperability
with
electronic
health record systems and permitting other health care
team members to consult programs. SAMHSA and
other federal agencies have initiated pilot projects and
provided funding to states to encourage inter- and in-
traoperability of PDMPs, but more needs to be done to
enhance user-friendliness. Furthermore, physicians and
other health care professionals should be allowed to
designate other qualified health care team members to
consult PDMPs.
5. Health insurance should be required to cover
mental health conditions, including the evidence-based
treatment of substance use disorder, and abide parity
rules.
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 166 No. 10 • 16 May 2017
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 ACP strongly supports parity of mental health
and substance use disorders and the coverage
of comprehensive evidence-based treatment
of substance use disorders. Strong oversight
must be applied to ensure adequate coverage
of medication-assisted treatment components,
counseling, and other items and services.
Components of comprehensive drug addiction
treatment should also be extended to those in
need,
including
medical
services,
mental
health services, educational services, HIV/AIDS
services, legal services, family services, and vo-
cational services.
The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act
(ACA) requires all marketplace-based qualified health
plans, Medicaid managed care and alternative benefit
plans for the expansion population, and nongrandfa-
thered individual and small group health plans to cover
an essential health benefit package. Mental health and
substance use disorder services, including behavioral
health treatment, are among the mandatory coverage
categories. However, the law does not define what sub-
stance use disorder benefits must be covered; as a re-
sult, benefits vary from state to state. States select a
benchmark plan, such as 1 of the 3 largest small group
insurance plans in the state, on which health plans base
benefits. According to a National Center on Addiction
and Substance Abuse report, about half of 2017 essen-
tial health benefit benchmark plans did not comply with
the law'
s requirement for coverage of prescription
drugs for addiction treatment. None of the benchmark
plans reviewed provided comprehensive coverage for
substance use disorders that included methadone
maintenance and residential treatment without treat-
ment limitations, and 88% of plan documents for essen-
tial health benefit benchmark plans lacked sufficient
detail to determine compliance or adequacy of benefits
for substance use disorder (108). Alaska'
s benchmark
plan was particularly concerning, covering medically
necessary detoxification but no services associated with
addiction diagnosis or treatment. The Trump adminis-
tration and some members of Congress have indicated
their intent to repeal the ACA, and thus the continua-
tion of the above-referenced protections is in question.
Coverage should also be extended to evidence-
based nonopioid and nonpharmacologic pain manage-
ment services that do not involve potentially addictive
medications. The CDC guideline for prescribing opi-
oids for chronic pain states, “Nonpharmacologic ther-
apy and nonopioid pharmacologic therapy are pre-
ferred for chronic pain. Clinicians should consider
opioid therapy only if expected benefits for both pain
and function are anticipated to outweigh risks to the
patient. If opioids are used, they should be combined
with nonpharmacologic therapy and nonopioid phar-
macologic therapy, as appropriate” (43). The guideline
lists several interventions, such as cognitive behavioral
therapy, physical therapy, and weight loss for knee
osteoarthritis, that are proven to alleviate chronic pain.
A clinical practice guideline issued by ACP recom-
mends noninvasive treatments for acute, subacute, and
chronic low back pain (109).
However, public and private insurance plans often
limit coverage of nonpharmacologic or nonopioid pain
management services. For example, Medicare imposes
caps on physical therapy and does not cover massage
therapy, acupuncture, or other services mentioned in
the CDC guideline on chronic pain. Some insurance
plans establish step therapy (or “fail-first”) policies that
require alternative treatment approaches be proven in-
effective before another intervention is covered. The
evidence base to support nonpharmacologic and non-
opioid pain management interventions should be ex-
panded, and as the effectiveness of interventions is de-
termined, insurance plans must cover them so that the
lowest-risk, most effective approach is accessible to the
patient.
Under federal law, certain health plans (including
large employer-funded plans, nongrandfathered small
group plans, Medicaid managed care, and alternative
benefit plans/benchmark equivalent plans) must ensure
that financial requirements and treatment limitations
(such as quantitative visit limits) for mental health and
substance use disorder benefits are similar to medical
and surgical benefits (110). Some types of insurance,
such as self-insured plans and employer-based plans,
that demonstrate a large increase in health care costs
due to parity are exempt from federal parity laws. Tra-
ditional Medicaid fee-for-service coverage does not
have to adhere to parity requirements. In addition to
mandating parity for financial requirements, the federal
law also extends parity to nonquantitative limits, such
as prior authorization, network adequacy, and other
management techniques.
All states and the District of Columbia have en-
acted some form of mental health parity; however, the
comprehensiveness of such laws varies considerably,
and not all states extend parity to substance use disor-
ders (111). Evidence shows that state parity laws have
increased access to and use of treatment services for
substance use disorders (112).
A systematic review found that mental health ben-
efits legislation (including mental health/substance use
parity and coverage mandates) improves financial pro-
tection and increases appropriate use of mental health
services. Comprehensive mental health parity legisla-
tion was particularly effective (113). Health plan costs of
meeting federal parity requirements have been negli-
gible (114).
Despite the parity law, violations persist. Enforce-
ment of parity is under the jurisdiction of multiple fed-
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 166 No. 10 • 16 May 2017
Annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 eral agencies and state regulators. Some proponents
have expressed concern that regulators are unable to
adequately enforce parity laws. Nonquantitative treat-
ment limits, such as disproportionately burdensome
prior authorization requirements for substance use
treatment services, may be more difficult for regulators
to detect than quantitative limits. The Department of
Health and Human Services Parity Task Force has re-
ceived comments that prior authorization is often re-
quired for mental health and substance use emergency
services but is not mandatory for analogous medical or
surgical hospitalization events; in addition, prior autho-
rizations for generic medications for substance use dis-
order are often required when generics for chronic
physical diseases are not (115). Concerns about bur-
densome step therapy and utilization review require-
ments and disproportionately low provider reimburse-
ment rates for mental health and substance use
disorder treatment have also been reported to the
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (116). Such stipula-
tions add to administrative burden and patient frustra-
tion. Marketplace-based plans are not immune to parity
problems: An analysis of exchange plan documents in
2 states found substantial discrepancies with parity law
requirements pertaining to quantitative (including dif-
ferent cost-sharing requirements for out-of-network
mental health and substance use disorder services and
medical or surgical services) and nonquantitative treat-
ment limits (117).
SAMHSA worked with 7 states to develop best
practices for parity enforcement. These include open
channels of communication between regulators and
health plans; standardization of health plan materials;
creation of templates, workbooks, and other tools; im-
plementation of market conduct examinations and net-
work adequacy assessments; and collaboration with
multiple
agencies
and
stakeholder
groups
(118).
Strong enforcement can help broaden access to sub-
stance use disorder treatment. The New York attorney
general recently settled with Excellus and required
them to, among other things, remove the stipulation
that members “fail” outpatient treatment of substance
use disorders before entering inpatient treatment
(119). Regulators should also ensure that health insur-
ance plans do not use practice guidelines, such as the
2016 CDC guideline for prescribing opioids for chronic
pain, to justify arbitrary limits on pain management.
6. The workforce of professionals qualified to treat
substance use disorders should be expanded.
ACP supports policies to increase the profes-
sional workforce engaged in treatment of
substance use disorder. Loan forgiveness pro-
grams, mentoring initiatives, and increased pay-
ment may encourage more individuals to train
and practice as behavioral health professionals.
Demand for substance use disorder treatment ser-
vices is rising as a result of the opioid epidemic, the
ACA'
s coverage expansion, mental health parity, the
behavioral health needs of returning veterans, and re-
integration of formerly incarcerated persons. However,
the demand for behavioral health care has long ex-
ceeded the supply of behavioral health professionals,
such as psychiatrists, addiction medicine specialists,
psychologists, mental health counselors, and clinical
social workers. According to the Health Resources and
Services Administration, there are roughly 4500 mental
health professional shortage areas in the United States,
where the psychiatrist-to-population ratio is at least
1:30 000 (120).
In its position paper on integration of behavioral
health into primary care, ACP expressed support for
efforts to increase the supply of behavioral health pro-
fessionals (55). This includes addiction treatment per-
sonnel, such as addiction medicine subspecialists. Ac-
cording to the health care consulting firm Advocates
for Human Potential, up to 32 advanced practitioners
(psychologists and psychiatrists) and practitioners (in-
cluding social workers and substance use disorder
counselors) are potentially available for every 1000
people older than age 17 years with substance use dis-
order (121).
Counseling is a key component of whole-person–
oriented medication-assisted treatment. To provide
comprehensive care to those with substance use disor-
der, more behavioral health professionals will need to
be trained to meet the demand. The behavioral health
workforce is affected by high turnover, low compensa-
tion, an aging workforce, and stigma related to mental
health and addiction (122). Leadership of facilities for
treatment for substance use disorder has also ex-
pressed the need for more racial and ethnic diversity in
the behavioral health workforce (123). Policy interven-
tions to address this workforce shortage include en-
hanced compensation packages; loan repayment pro-
grams; and increasing training attention or changing
licensure requirements in high-need disciplines and
geographic shortage areas by, for example, training
additional master'
s degree–level behavioral health pro-
fessionals in designated shortage areas (124). Other
strategies
include
better
professional
training
for
students and early-career professionals through intern-
ships in high-need settings, encouraging use of tech-
nology, and expanded efforts to crosstrain staff in primary
and behavioral health care to encourage integrated care
for people with substance use disorder (122).
7. Training in the treatment of substance use disor-
der should be embedded throughout the continuum of
medical education.
Training in screening and treatment of sub-
stance use disorders should be embedded in
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 166 No. 10 • 16 May 2017
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 the continuum of medical education. Continu-
ing medical education providers should offer
courses to train physicians in addiction medi-
cine, medication-assisted therapy, evidence-
based prescribing, and identification and treat-
ment of substance use disorders.
The ACP Ethics Manual notes that it is the physi-
cian'
s responsibility to be professionally competent
(125). However, many physicians describe themselves
as unprepared to treat patients with substance use dis-
orders. A 2000 survey found that only about 20% of
primary care physicians said they were “very prepared”
to identify alcoholism, 17% felt very prepared to iden-
tify illegal drug use, and 30% reported themselves as
such for prescription drug misuse (126). Barriers to ad-
equate training in treatment of substance use disorder
include “lack of acceptance by faculty and physicians of
the medical model for addictive diseases, lack of faculty
and physician role models, curricular deficits in medical
schools and residencies, lack of parity and physician
advocacy in medical education, and personal and fam-
ily histories of drug and alcohol use and addiction”
(127). Polydorou and colleagues found that the litera-
ture emphasizes the importance of developing physi-
cian role models who have expertise in treatment of
substance use disorder and can provide supervised ex-
periences and drive curricula change (128). Other im-
portant characteristics of training include interactions
with patients who have benefited from treatment of
substance use disorder, reimbursement for patient as-
sessment, and providing interactive and clinically rele-
vant training.
In response to the opioid epidemic, many states
now require physicians to train in pain management or
proper prescribing of controlled substances (129). Evi-
dence shows that education programs, such as the Safe
and Competent Opioid Prescribing Education (SCOPE
of Pain) program, can improve knowledge, attitudes,
and confidence in safe opioid prescribing (130). Those
who completed the training reported increased confi-
dence in the ability to assess pain in a new patient,
assess the potential benefits and risks of opioids for
chronic pain in a new patient, communicate and collab-
orate with patients around opioid initiation, and moni-
tor patients receiving long-term opioid therapy for opi-
oid misuse (including addiction and diversion), among
other skills. However, some physicians may express
concern about mandated education and express belief
that it is too costly and burdensome and would under-
mine professional independence. One study con-
cluded that physicians are concerned about the undue
burden imposed by requirements of risk evaluation
and mitigation strategies and speculated that training
requirements could decrease opioid prescribing (131).
Physician medical societies have questioned whether
mandatory continuing medical education on pain man-
agement would be relevant to physicians who do not
prescribe controlled substances (132). ACP has histori-
cally supported voluntary training to ensure compe-
tence. Continuing medical education programs related
to opioid prescribing and pain management should be
rigorously evaluated to ensure effectiveness and con-
tinued access to care and should be designed to pre-
vent onerous burdens on patients and physicians.
8. The effectiveness of public health interventions to
combat substance use disorders and associated health
problems should be studied.
Public
health–based
interventions
for
sub-
stance use disorder, such as syringe exchange
programs and safe injection sites, that connect
the user with effective treatment programs
should be explored and tested.
Harm reduction initiatives, including syringe ex-
change programs, were once considered taboo. How-
ever, as the opioid epidemic takes more and more
lives, policymakers are slowly reconsidering their posi-
tion (133). Risky injection drug use habits, such as nee-
dle sharing, contribute to the spread of HIV, hepatitis C
virus, and other blood-borne pathogens. Nine percent
of the nearly 40 000 new HIV diagnoses in 2015 were
attributed to injection drug use (134). In 2015, Con-
gress reversed its longstanding prohibition on federal
funds for syringe exchange programs, although funds
cannot be used to buy the syringes themselves. Indiana
and Kentucky have also initiated syringe exchange pro-
grams in response to the opioid epidemic; Indiana did
so after an HIV outbreak among needle-sharing injec-
tion drug users in a rural community (135, 136). Syringe
exchange programs reduce transmission and mortality
due to infectious disease, such as HIV infection (137,
138), and public funding of syringe exchange pro-
grams is associated with low HIV incidence rates (139).
These programs may also connect individuals with
health and social services, such as referrals to sub-
stance use disorder treatment, prevention supplies,
and health screenings (140). Despite the evidence sup-
porting their success, as of May 2015 only 35 states, the
District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and the Indian Na-
tions have syringe exchange programs (141). The CDC
has expressed concern that rural and suburban areas
are underserved by syringe exchange programs. The
agency identified Kentucky, Tennessee, Virginia, and
West Virginia as having “unmet needs” for syringe ex-
change programs despite rising hepatitis C virus infec-
tion rates connected to intravenous drug use (142). As
the opioid epidemic increases the number of people
who inject drugs, federal and state funding should be
directed to communities to prevent the spread of
blood-borne diseases, such as HIV infection and hepa-
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 166 No. 10 • 16 May 2017
Annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 titis C, as well as connect people to social and health
care services that can provide necessary assistance.
Some communities especially hard hit by the opi-
oid epidemic are considering safe injection facilities
(143, 144). Because many people who inject drugs may
do so in unsafe environments or in public areas, safe
injection facilities intend to provide a supervised site
where health professionals are on hand to distribute
clean syringes and connect users to health care and
drug treatment services. Most important, health profes-
sionals are on hand to deliver naloxone if an overdose
occurs. Evidence from a safe injection facility in Van-
couver, British Columbia, shows that these facilities are
negatively associated with needle sharing and posi-
tively associated with less frequent reuse of syringes,
use of clean water for injection, and less outdoor inject-
ing; similar safe injecting practices were reported after
the opening of a safe injection facility in Sydney, Aus-
tralia (145). Clients of a safe injection facility in Copen-
hagen, Denmark, reported adopting safer behaviors
since the opening of the facility, including fewer out-
door injections, discontinuation of syringe sharing, and
more frequent cleaning of injection sites (146). HIV-
positive clients of Vancouver'
s InSite safe injection facil-
ity reported using the facility for syringe exchange,
drug and alcohol counseling, and nursing care in addi-
tion to the supervised injection room (147).
Safe injection facilities have a public health benefit
without increasing crime or drug use (145); however,
legal and political concerns may hinder the establish-
ment of safe injection facilities in the United States. Be-
letsky and colleagues argue that safe injection facilities
could be established as an incremental extension of
existing syringe exchange programs (145). Because
these have not been tested in the United States, state
and local health officials could conduct pilot tests prior
to full implementation. At press time, major cities, such
as Seattle, Washington, and Boston, Massachusetts, are
considering the idea, and safe injection facilities should
be rigorously evaluated before widespread expansion
occurs. Establishment of safe injection facilities will re-
quire a coordinated effort from health officials, govern-
ment, law enforcement, advocacy, and community
groups, among others, to ensure that a diverse array of
opinions are considered.
Additional Information on Sources
Y U.S. government resources: including relevant
reports from Substance Abuse and Mental Health Ser-
vices Administration, U.S. Department of Justice, White
House Office of National Drug Control Policy, CDC.
Y Literature
databases
and
search
engines:
PubMed and Google Scholar.
Y Policy and research firms: including RAND Cor-
poration, Urban Institute.
Y Scientific and policy journals: including Annals of
Internal Medicine, JAMA, The New England Journal of
Medicine, Health Affairs, Substance Abuse, and Morbid-
ity and Mortality Weekly Report.
Y Association reports: including National Council
of State Legislatures, American Society of Addiction
Medicine.
Web-Only References
11. American Psychiatric Association. Substance-related and addic-
tive disorders. 2013. Accessed at www.psychiatry.org/File
%20Library/Psychiatrists/Practice/DSM/APA_DSM-5-Substance-Use
-Disorder.pdf on 16 February 2017.
12. BUPPractice. DSM 5 criteria for substance use disorder. Ac-
cessed at www.buppractice.com/node/12351 on 16 February 2017.
13. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.
Substance use disorders. 27 October 2015. Accessed at www
.samhsa.gov/disorders/substance-use on 16 February 2017.
14. American Academy of Addiction Medicine. Terminology related
to the spectrum of unhealthy substance use. July 2013. Accessed
at www.asam.org/advocacy/find-a-policy-statement/view-policy
-statement/public-policy-statements/2014/08/01/terminology
-related-to-the-spectrum-of-unhealthy-substance-use on 10 March
2017.
15. Bettinardi-Angress K, Angres DH. Understanding the disease of
addiction. J Nurs Reg. 2010;1:31-7.
16. Leshner AI. Addiction is a brain disease. Issues in Science and
Technology. Spring 2001. Accessed at www.issues.org/17.3/leshner
.htm on 16 February 2017.
17. Courtwright DT. The NIDA brain disease paradigm: history, re-
sistance and spinoffs. BioSocieties. 2010;5:137-47.
18. National Institute on Drug Abuse. Drugs, Brains, and Behavior:
The Science of Addiction. 2008. Accessed at www.drugabuse.gov
/publications/drugs-brains-behavior-science-addiction/preface
on
16 February 2017
19. Leshner AI. Addiction is a brain disease, and it matters. Science.
1997;278:45-7. [PMID:9311924]
20. American College of Physicians–American Society of Internal
Medicine. Illegal drug abuse and national drug policy. ACPonline
.org. 9 October 1998. Accessed at www.acponline.org/acp_policy
/policies/illegal_drug_abuse_national_drug_policy_1998.pdf
on
9
March 2017.
21. Reuter P. Why has US drug policy changed so little over 30
years? Crime and Justice. 2013;42:75-140.
22. Hammer R, Dingel M, et al. Addiction: current criticism of the
brain disease paradigm. AJOB Neurosci. 2013;4:27-32. [PMID:
24693488]
23. Satel S, Lilienfeld SO. Addiction and the brain-disease fallacy.
Front Psychiatry. 2014;4:141. [PMID: 24624096]
24. Branch MN. Drug addiction. Is it a disease or is it based on
choice? A review of Gene Heyman'
s Addiction: A Disorder of
Choice. J Exp Anal Behav. 2011;95:263-7.
25. U.S. States Congress Office of Technology Assessment. Biologi-
cal Components of Substance Abuse and Addiction. Chapter 4.
OTA-BP-BBS-1 17. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Of-
fice; 2004.
26. American Society of Addiction Medicine. Quality & practice. Def-
inition of addiction. 2011. Accessed at www.asam.org/quality
-practice/definition-of-addiction on 16 February 2017.
27. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.
Behavioral health trends in the United States: results from the 2014
National Survey on Drug Use and Health. 2015. Accessed at
www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/default/files/NSDUH-FRR1-2014
/NSDUH-FRR1-2014.pdf on 16 February 2017.
28. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.
Receipt of services for behavioral health problems: Results from the
2014 National Survey on Drug Use and Health. NSDUH Data Review.
2015. Accessed at www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/default/files/NSDUH
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 166 No. 10 • 16 May 2017
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 -DR-FRR3-2014/NSDUH-DR-FRR3-2014/NSDUH-DR-FRR3-2014
.pdf on 16 February 2017.
29. Mumola CJ, Karberg JC. Drug use and dependence, state and
federal prisoners, 2004. Bureau of Justice Statistics, U.S. Department
of Justice. 19 January 2007. Accessed at www.bjs.gov/content/pub
/pdf/dudsfp04.pdf on 16 February 2017.
30. National Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse. Behind
bars II: substance abuse and America'
s prison population February
2010. Accessed at www.centeronaddiction.org/addiction-research
/reports/behind-bars-ii-substance-abuse-and-america%E2%80%99s
-prison-population on 16 February 2017.
31. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Injury Prevention &
Control: Opioid Overdose: Understanding the Epidemic. 16 Decem-
ber 2016. Accessed at www.cdc.gov/drugoverdose/epidemic/ on
16 February 2017.
32. Rudd RA, Aleshire N, Zibbell JE, Gladden RM. Increases in drug
and opioid overdose deaths – United States, 2000-2014. MMWR
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2016;64:1378-82. [PMID: 26720857]
33. Eilperin J. Funds sought to step up fight against opioid abuse.
Washington Post. 3 February 2016.
34. FAIR Health. The impact of the opioid crisis on the healthcare
system: a study of privately billed services. 2016. Accessed at www
.fairhealth.org/servlet/servlet.FileDownload?file=01532000001
g4i3 on 16 February 2017.
35. Governing. State marijuana laws map. 19 June 2015. Accessed at
www.governing.com/gov-data/state-marijuana-laws-map-medical
-recreational.html on 16 February 2017.
36. DuPont RL, Barthwell AG, Kraus M, Sabet K, Soper R, Teitelbaum
S. White Paper on State-Level Proposals to Legalize Marijuana.
American Society of Addiction Medicine. 25 July 2012. Accessed at
www.asam.org/docs/publicy-policy-statements/state-level-proposals
-to-legalize-marijuana-final2773DD668C2D.pdf
on
16
February
2017.
37. National Institute on Drug Abuse. Evidence-based approaches
to drug addiction treatment. principles of drug addiction treatment:
a research-based guide. 2012. Accessed at www.drugabuse.gov/
publications/principles-drug-addiction-treatment-research-based
-guide-third-edition/evidence-based-approaches-to-drug-addiction
-treatment on 16 February 2017.
38. Dutra L, Stathopolou G, Basden SL, Leyro TM, Powers MB, Otto
MW. Meta-analytic review of psychosocial interventions for sub-
stance use disorders. Am J Psychiatry 2008; 165:179-87. [PMID:
18198270]
39. Schuckit MA. Treatment of opioid-use disorders. N Engl J Med.
2016;375:357-68. [PMID: 27464203]
40. Warmeling DP. Review of naloxone safety for opioid overdose:
practical considerations for new technology and expanded public
access. Ther Adv Drug Saf. 2015;6:20-31. [PMID: 25642320]
41. National Institute on Drug Abuse. How effective is drug addiction
treatment? In: Principles of Drug Addiction Treatment: A Research-
Based Guide. 3rd ed. Bethesda, MD: National Institute on Drug
Abuse; 2012.
42. Ungar L. Funding ban on exchanges effectively lifted. USA
Today.
7
January
2016.
Accessed
at
www.usatoday.com
/story/news/nation/2016/01/07/funding-ban-needle-exchanges
-effectively-lifted/78420894/ on 16 February 2017.
43. Dowell D, Haegerich TM, Chou R. CDC guideline for prescribing
opioids for chronic pain—United States, 2016. MMWR Recomm Rep.
2016;65:1-49. [PMID: 26987082]
44. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Fact sheet—FDA opioids ac-
tion plan. February 2016. Accessed at www.fda.gov/NewsEvents
/Newsroom/FactSheets/ucm484714.htm on 16 February 2017.
45. Appuzo M. Holder endorses proposal to reduce sentences in
latest sign of shift. 13 March 2014. The New York Times. Accessed
at www.nytimes.com/2014/03/14/us/politics/holder-endorses
-proposal-to-reduce-drug-sentences.html on 16 February 2017.
46. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the
Surgeon General. Facing addiction in America: the Surgeon Gener-
al'
s report on alcohol, drugs, and health. November 2016. Accessed
at https://addiction.surgeongeneral.gov/front-matter.pdf on 16 Feb-
ruary 2017.
47. National Conference of State Legislatures. Prescription drug
overdose: strategies for prevention. 2014. Accessed at www.ncsl
.org/research/health/-prescription-drug-overdose-strategies-for
-prevention-2014.aspx on 16 February 2017.
48. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Injury prevention &
control: opioid overdose. State successes. April 2015. www.cdc.gov
/drugoverdose/policy/successes.html on 16 February 2017.
49. Grill C. State legislative update: lawmakers address prescrib-
ing practices and pill mills. Bulletin of the American College of Sur-
geons. 1 April 2013. Accessed at http://bulletin.facs.org/2013/04
/prescribing-pill-mills/ on 16 February 2017.
50. Wynn M. ‘
Pill mill’ law has cut doctor shopping. Louisville
Courier-Journal. 27 July 2015. Accessed at www.courier-journal
.com/story/news/politics/ky-legislature/2015/07/27/study-shows
-gains-pill-mill-law/30741607/ on 16 February 2017.
51. Porter ND. State of sentencing 2014: developments in policy
and practice. The Sentencing Project. 2015. Accessed at http:
//sentencingproject.org/doc/publications/sen_State_of_Sentencing
_2014.pdf on 16 February 2017.
52. Oregon Department of Revenue. Marijuana tax. Accessed at
www.oregon.gov/DOR/press/Documents/marijuana_fact_sheet.pdf
on 16 February 2017.
53. Faggiano F, Vigna-Taglianti F, Versino E, Zambon A, Borraccino
A, Lemma P. School-based prevention for illicit drugs'use (review).
Cochrane Library. 2009;4:1-100.
54. Strang J, Babor T, Caulkins J, Fischer B, Foxcraft D, Humphreys
K. Drug policy and the public good: evidence for effective interven-
tions. Lancet. 2012;379:71-83. [PMID: 22225672]
55. Crowley RA, Kirschner N. The integration of care for mental
health, substance abuse, and other behavioral health conditions into
primary care: executive summary of an American College of Physi-
cians position paper. Ann Intern Med. 2015;163:298-9. [PMID:
26121401]
56. National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine.
Ending Discrimination Against People with Mental and Substance
Use Disorders: The Evidence for Stigma Change. Washington, DC:
National Academies; 2016.
57. Livingstone JD, Milne T, Fang ML, Amari E. The effectiveness of
interventions for reducing stigma related to substance use disorders:
a systematic review. Addiction. 2012;107:39-50. [PMID: 21815959]
58. Hendriksson M. Words matter. Substance Abuse and Mental
Health Services Administration. 16 May 2016. Accessed at http:
//blog.samhsa.gov/2016/05/16/words-matter/#.V-1NNPkrLbh on 16
February 2017.
59. Barry CL, McGinty EE, Pescosolido B, Goldman HH. Stigma, dis-
crimination, treatment effectiveness and policy support: comparing
public views about drug addiction with mental illness. Psychiatr Serv.
2014;65:1269-72. [PMID: 25270497]
60. Pearson MR. Stigma and substance use: a methodological re-
view. University of New Mexico Center on Alcoholism, Substance
Abuse, & Addictions. September 2015. Accessed at http://sites
.nationalacademies.org/cs/groups/dbassesite/documents/webpage
/dbasse_170044.pdf on 16 February 2017.
61. Meltzer EC, Suppes A, Burns S, ShumanA, Orfanos A, Sturiano
CV, et al. Stigmatization of substance use disorders among internal
medicine residents. Substance Abuse. 2013;34:356-62. [PMID:
24159906]
62. The Police Assisted Addiction and Recovery Initiative. About us.
Accessed at http://paariusa.org/ on 16 February 2017.
63. Gloucester Police Department. For addicts and their friends, fam-
ilies, and caregivers. Accessed at http://gloucesterpd.com/addicts/
on 16 February 2017.
64. Schiff DM, Drainoni M, Bair-Merritt M, Rosenbloom D. A police-
led addiction treatment referral program in Massachusetts. N Engl J
Med. 2016;375:2505-3. [PMID: 28002701]
65. Wolfe R. Doing a lot with a little: how to start a police
department-based opiate outreach program. Welcome to Arlington,
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 166 No. 10 • 16 May 2017
Annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 Massachusetts.
Accessed
at
www.arlingtonma.gov/home/show
document?id=29978 on 16 February 2017.
66. National Institute of Justice. Drug Courts. May 13, 2016. Ac-
cessed
at
www.nij.gov/topics/courts/drug-courts/pages/welcome
.aspx on 16 February 2017.
67. Rossman SB, Roman JK, Zweig JM, Rempel M, Lindquist CH,
eds. The multi-state adult drug court evaluation: the impact of drug
courts. Urban Institute Justice Policy Center. 2011. Accessed at
www.urban.org/sites/default/files/alfresco/publication-pdfs/412357
-The-Multi-site-Adult-Drug-Court-Evaluation-The-Impact-of-Drug
-Courts.PDF on 16 February 2017.
68. Matusow H, Dickman SL, Rich JD, Fong C, Dumont DM, Hardin
C, et al. Medication assisted treatment in US drug courts: results from
a nationwide survey of availability, barriers and attitudes. J Subst
Abuse Treat. 2013;44:473-80. [PMID: 23217610]
69. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.
Adult drug courts and medication-assisted treatment for opioid de-
pendence. In Brief. 2014;8:1-8. Accessed at http://store.samhsa.gov
/shin/content//SMA14-4852/SMA14-4852.pdf on 16 February 2017.
70. RTI International. Study: Replacing prison terms with drug abuse
treatment could save billions in criminal justice costs [press release].
8 January 2013. Accessed at www.rti.org/news/study-replacing
-prison-terms-drug-abuse-treatment-could-save-billions-criminal
-justice-costs on 16 February 2017.
71. Caulkins JP, Kilmer B, Kleiman MAR, MacCoun RJ, Midgette G,
Oglesby P, et al. Options and issues regarding marijuana legaliza-
tion. RAND Corporation. 2015. Accessed at www.rand.org/pubs
/perspectives/PE149 on 16 February 2017.
72. Associated Press–NORC Center for Public Affairs Research.
American attitudes toward substance use in the United States. Sur-
vey. February 2016. Accessed at www.apnorc.org/PDFs/Drugs/AP
-NORC%20Drugs%20Report%20Topline.pdf on 16 February 2017.
73. National Conference of State Legislatures. Deep dive: marijuana.
Accessed
at
www.ncsl.org/bookstore/state-legislatures-magazine
/marijuana-deep-dive.aspx on 16 February 2017.
74. Drug Enforcement Agency, Department of Justice. Denial of pe-
tition to initiate proceedings to reschedule marijuana. Federal Reg-
ister. August 2016. www.federalregister.gov/documents/2016
/08/12/2016-17954/denial-of-petition-to-initiate-proceedings-to
-reschedule-marijuana on 16 February 2017.
75. Compton WM, Han B, Jones CM, Blanco C, Hughes A. Marijuana
use and use disorders in adults in the USA, 2002-14: analysis
of annual cross-sectional surveys. Lancet. 2016;3:954-64. [PMID:
27592339]
76. Kilmer B, Midgette G, Saloga C. Back in the national spotlight: an
assessment of recent changes in drug use and drug policies in the
United States. Brookings Institute. 2016. Accessed at www.brookings
.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/Kilmer-United-States-final-2
.pdf on 16 February 2017.
77. Kann L, McManus T, Harris WA, Shanklin SL, Flint KH, Hawkins J.
Youth risk behavior surveillance–United States, 2015. MMWR Morb
Mortal Wkly Rep. 2016;65:1-174. [PMID: 27280474]
78. Colorado Department of Public Health & Environment. Healthy
Kids Colorado Survey. 2015. Accessed at www.colorado.gov/cdphe
/hkcs/reports on 17 February 2017
79. Wilkinson ST, Yarnell S, Radhakrishnan R, Ball SA, S’
Souza DC.
Marijuana legalization: impact on physicians and public health. Ann
Rev Med. 2016;67:453-66. [PMID: 26515984]
80. Wall MW, Poh E, Cerda M, Keyes KM, Galea S, Hasin DS. Ado-
lescent marijuana use from 2002 to 2008: higher in states with med-
ical marijuana laws, cause still unclear. Ann Epidemiol. 2012;21:
714-6. [PMID: 21820632]
81. Henchman J, Scarboro M. Marijuana legalization and taxes: les-
sons for other states from Colorado and Washington. Tax Founda-
tion. 2016. Accessed at http://taxfoundation.org/article/marijuana
-legalization-and-taxes-lessons-other-states-colorado-and-washington
on 17 February 2017
82. Bradford AC, Bradford WD. Medical marijuana laws reduce pre-
scription medication use in Medicare Part D. Health Aff. 2016;35:
1230-6. [PMID: 27385238]
83. Kovaleski SF. Medical marijuana research hits wall of U.S. law.
The New York Times. 9 August 2014. Accessed at www.nytimes
.com/2014/08/10/us/politics/medical-marijuana-research-hits
-the-wall-of-federal-law.html?_r=0 on 17 February 2017.
84. Volkow ND, Swanson JM, Evins E, DeLisi LE, Meier MH, Gonza-
les R, et al. Effects of cannabis use on human behavior, including
cognition motivation, and psychosis: a review. JAMA Psychiatry.
2016;73:292-7. [PMID: 26842658]
85. Monte AA, Zane RD, Heard KJ. The implications of marijuana
legalization in Colorado. JAMA. 2015;313:241-2.
86. Marijuana exposure in kids rose after recreational use legalized in
Colorado [Press Release]. JAMA Pediatrics. 25 July 2016. Accessed
at http://media.jamanetwork.com/news-item/marijuana-exposure-in
-kids-rose-after-recreational-use-legalized-in-colorado/ on 17 Febru-
ary 2017.
87. Wong K, Clarke C, Harlow TG. The legalization of marijuana in
Colorado: the impact. Rocky Mountain High Intensity Drug Traffick-
ing Area. 2016. Accessed at www.rmhidta.org/html/2016%20
FINAL%20Legalization%20of%20Marijuana%20in%20Colorado%20
The%20Impact.pdf on 17 February 2017
88. O’
Connor PG. Managing substance dependence as a chronic
disease: is the glass half full or half empty? JAMA. 2013;310:1132-4.
[PMID: 24045739]
89. National Conference of State Legislatures. Drug overdose immu-
nity and Good Samaritan laws. 2016. Accessed at www.ncsl.org
/research/civil-and-criminal-justice/drug-overdose-immunity-good
-samaritan-laws.aspx on 17 February 2017
90. Silverman E. Senators ask drug makers to explain prices for
opioid overdose antidote. Stat. 7 June 2016. Accessed at www
.statnews.com/pharmalot/2016/06/07/naloxone-opioids-heroin
-drug-prices/ on 17 February 2017
91. Gupta R, Shah ND, Ross JS. The Rising Price of Naloxone—Risks
to Efforts to Stem Overdose Deaths. N Engl J Med. 2016;
375;23:2213-2215.
Accessed
at
www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056
/NEJMp1609578 on 17 February 2017
92. Daniel H. Stemming the escalating cost of prescription drugs: a
position paper of the American College of Physicians. Ann Intern
Med. 2016;165:50-2. [PMID: 27018758]
93. Namey B. Life-saving overdose drug available at deep discount.
National Association of Counties. 25 January 2016. Accessed at www
.naco.org/articles/life-saving-overdose-drug-available-deep-discount
on 17 February 2017.
94. Chaiyachati K, Hom J. Let'
s put opioids for treating addiction on
equal footing with prescribing opioids for pain. Health Affairs Blog.
10 May 2016. Accessed at http://healthaffairs.org/blog/2016
/05/10/lets-put-opioids-for-treating-addiction-on-equal-footing-with
-prescribing-opioids-for-pain/ on 17 February 2017.
95. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.
Buprenorphine waiver management. 9 February 2017. Accessed at
www.samhsa.gov/medication-assisted-treatment/buprenorphine
-waiver-management on 17 February 2017.
96. Kraus ML, Alford DP, Kotz MM, Levounis P, Mandell TW, Meyer
M, et al. Statement of the American Society of Addiction Medicine
Consensus Panel on the Use of Buprenorphine in Office-Based
Treatment of Opioid Addiction. J Addict Med. 2011;5:254-63.
[PMID: 22042215]
97. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.
Physician and program data. 17 August 2016. Accessed at www
.samhsa.gov/programs-campaigns/medication-assisted-treatment
/physician-program-data on 17 February 2017.
98. Vestal C. In fighting an opioid epidemic, medication-assisted
treatment is effective but underused. Health Aff. 2016;35:1052-7.
[PMID: 27269022]
99. Masters B, Rainwater M. Recovery within reach: medication-
assisted treatment of opioid addiction comes to primary care. Cali-
fornia Health Care Foundation. 2016. Accessed at www.chcf.org
/publications/2016/03/recovery-reach-medication-assisted
-treatmenton 17 February 2017.
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 166 No. 10 • 16 May 2017
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 100. Hutchinson E, Catlin M, Andrilla CHA, Baldwin L, Rosenblatt RA.
Barriers to primary care physicians prescribing buprenorphine. Ann
Fam Med. 2014;12:128-33. [PMID: 24615308]
101. Clark RE, Samnaliev M, Baxter JD, Leung GY. The evidence
doesn'
t justify steps by state Medicaid programs to restrict opioid
addiction treatment with buprenorphine. Health Aff. 2011;30:1425-
33. [PMID: 21821560]
102. Lavitt J. Treatment authorization request for buprenorphine and
suboxone no longer required by Medi-Cal. The Fix. 28 August 2015.
Accessed
at
www.thefix.com/treatment-authorization-request
-buprenorphine-and-suboxone-no-longer-required-medi-cal on 17
February 2017.
103. Komaromy M, Duhigg D, Metcalf A, Carlson C, Kalishman S,
Hayes L, et al. Project ECHO (Extension for Community Healthcare
Outcomes): a new model for educating primary care providers
about treatment of substance use disorders. Subst Abuse. 2016;37:
20-4. [PMID: 26848803]
104. Nosyk B, Anglin MD, Brissette S, Kerr T, Marsh DC, Schackman
BR, et al. A call for evidence-based medical treatment of opioid de-
pendence in the United States and Canada. Health Aff (Milwood).
2013;32:1462-9. [PMID: 23918492]
105. Friedman P, Hoskinson R J, Gordon M, Schwartz R, Kinlock T,
Knight K, et al. Medication-assisted treatment in criminal justice
agencies affiliated with the Criminal Justice-Drug Abuse Treatment
Studies (CJ-DATS): availability, barriers & intentions. Subst Abus.
2012;33:9-18. [PMID: 22263709]
106. Bao Y, Pan Y, Taylor A, Radakrishnan S, Luo F, Pincus HA, et al.
Prescription drug monitoring programs are associated with sus-
tained reductions in opioid prescribing by physicians. Health Aff (Mil-
wood). 2016;35:1045-51. [PMID: 27269021]
107. Patrick SW, Fry CE, Jones TF, Buntin MB. Implementation of
prescription drug monitoring programs associated with reductions
in opioid-related death rates. Health Aff (Milwood). 2016;35:1324-
32. [PMID: 27335101]
108. National Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse. Uncover-
ing coverage gaps: a review of addiction benefits in ACA Plans.
N2016. Accessed at www.centeronaddiction.org/addiction-research
/reports/uncovering-coverage-gaps-review-of-addiction-benefits-in
-aca-plans on 17 February 2017.
109. Qaseem A, Wilt TJ, McLean RM, Forciea MA. Noninvasive treat-
ments for acute, subacute, and chronic low back pain: a clinical prac-
tice guideline from the American College of Physicians. Ann Intern
Med. 2017 Feb 14. doi: 10.7326/M16-2367. [PMID: 28192789]
110. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.
Implementation of the Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act
(MHPAEA). 24 January 2017. Accessed at www.samhsa.gov/health
-financing/implementation-mental-health-parity-addiction-equity-act
on 17 February 2017.
111. Cauchi R, Hanson K, Landless S, Thangasamy A. Mental health
benefits: state laws mandating or regulating. National Conference of
State Legislatures. 2015. Accessed at www.ncsl.org/research/health
/mental-health-benefits-state-mandates.aspx on 17 February 2017.
112. Wen H, Cummings JR, Hockenberry JM, Gaydos LM, Druss BG.
State parity laws and access to treatment for substance use disorder
in the United States: implications for federal parity legislation. JAMA
Psychiatry. 2013;70:1355-62. [PMID: 24154931]
113. Sipe TA, Finnie RKC, Knopf JA, Qu S, Reynolds JA, Thota AB,
et al. Effects of mental health benefits legislation: a community guide
systematic
review.
Am
J
Prev
Med.
2015;48:755-66.
[PMID:
25998926]
114. Busch SH, Epstein AJ, Harhay MO, Fiellin Da, Un H, Leader D,
et al. The effects of federal parity on substance use disorder treat-
ment. Am J Manag Care. 2014;20:76-82. [PMID: 24512166]
115. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Parity Task
Force: summary of second stakeholder meeting. 17 May 2016. Ac-
cessed
at
www.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/PTF%20May%20
listening%20session%20notes_Remediated.pdf
on
17
February
2017.
116. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. The Mental
Health & Substance Use Disorder Parity Task Force final report.
2016.
Accessed
at
www.hhs.gov/about/agencies/advisory
-committees/parity/
117. Berry KN, Huskamp HA, Goldman HH, Barry CL. A tale of two
states: do consumers see mental health insurance parity when shop-
ping on state exchanges? Psychiatr Serv. 2015;66:565-7. [PMID:
25726986]
118. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.
Approaches in implementing the Mental Health Parity and Addiction
Equity Act: best practices from the states. HHS Publication No. SMA-
16-4983. 2016. Accessed at http://store.samhsa.gov/shin/content
//SMA16-4983/SMA16-4983.pdf on 17 February 2017.
119. New York State Office of the Attorney General. Assurance of
discontinuance under executive law section 63, subdivision 15.
Accessed at www.ag.ny.gov/pdfs/Excellus%20Parity%20AOD%20
-%20Executed.pdf on 17 February 2017.
120. Health Resources and Services Administration. Shortage desig-
nation: health professional shortage areas & medically underserved
areas/populations. Accessed at www.hrsa.gov/shortage/ on 17 Feb-
ruary 2017.
121. Advocates for Human Potential. The adequacy of the behav-
ioral health workforce to meet the need for services: overview of key
findings. 2014. Accessed at www.ahpnet.com/AHPNet/media
/AHPNetMediaLibrary/News/AHP-BH-Workforce-Paper-July-2014
.pdf on 17 February 2017.
122. Hyde PS. Report to Congress on the nation'
s substance abuse
and mental health workforce issues. Substance Abuse and Mental
Health
Services
Administration.
2013.
Accessed
at
https:
//store.samhsa.gov/shin/content/PEP13-RTC-BHWORK/PEP13-RTC
-BHWORK.pdf on 17 February 2017.
123. Ryan O, Murphy D, Krom L. Vital signs: taking the pulse of the
addiction treatment profession, version 1. Addiction Technology
Transfer Center Network. 2012. Accessed at www.nattc.org/files
/VitalSignsReport.pdf on 17 February 2017.
124. Heisler EJ, Bagalman E. The mental health workforce: a primer.
Congressional Research Service. 2015. Accessed at www.fas.org
/sgp/crs/misc/R43255.pdf on 17 February 2017.
125. Snyder L. American College of Physicians Ethics Manual: Sixth
Edition. Ann Intern Med. 2012;156:73-104. [PMID: 22213573]
126. National Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse. Missed
opportunity: National Survey of Primary Care Physicians and Patients
on Substance Abuse. 2000. Accessed at www.centeronaddiction.org
/addiction-research/reports/national-survey-primary-care-physicians
-patients-substance-abuse on 17 February 2017.
127. Miller NS, Sheppard LM, Clenda CC, Magen J. Why physicians
are unprepared to treat patients who have alcohol- and drug-related
disorders. Acad Med. 2001;7:410-18. [PMID: 11346513]
128. Polydorou S, Gunderson EW, Levin FR. Training physicians to
treat substance use disorders. Curr Psychiatry Rep. 2008;10:399-
404. [PMID: 18803913]
129. Federation of State Medical Boards. Continuing medical edu-
cation: board-by-board overview. Accessed at www.fsmb.org
/Media/Default/PDF/FSMB/Advocacy/GRPOL_CME_Overview_by
_State.pdf on 17 February 2017.
130. Alford DP, Zisblatt L, Ng P, White JL. SCOPE of Pain: an evalu-
ation of an opioid risk evaluation and mitigation strategy continuing
education program. Pain Med. 2016;17:52-63.
131. Salinas GD, Robinson CO, Abdolrasulnia M. Primary care phy-
sician attitudes and perceptions of the impact of FDA-proposed
REMS policy on prescription of extended-release and long-acting
opioids. J Pain Res. 2012;5:363-9. [PMID: 23091393]
132. Illinois State Medical Society. Recommendations for deterring
improper use of opioids. A Report to the Illinois House Task Force on
the Heroin Crisis and the Illinois General Assembly. 2015. Accessed
at www.isms.org/opioidplan/ on 17 February 2017.
133. Weinmeyer R. Needle exchange programs'status in US politics.
AMA J Ethics. 2016;18:252-7. [PMID: 27002996]
134. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. HIV and injection
drug use in the United States. 17 February 2017. Accessed at www
.cdc.gov/hiv/risk/idu.html on 17 February 2017.
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 166 No. 10 • 16 May 2017
Annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
 135. Indiana University School of Public Health. Syringe exchange:
indicators of need & success. 20 April 2015. Accessed at www.in.gov
/bitterpill/files/SEP-Indicators-Need-Success.pdf
on
17
February
2017.
136. Goodnough A. Indiana races to fight H.I.V. surge tied to drug
abuse. The New York Times. 30 March 2015. Accessed at www
.nytimes.com/2015/03/31/us/small-indiana-city-races-to-curb-hivs
-spread.html?_r=0 on 17 February 2017.
137. Aspinall EJ, Nambiar D, Goldberg DJ, Hickman M, Weir A, Van
Velzen E. Are needle and syringe programmes associated with a
reduction in HIV transmission among people who inject drugs: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Epidemiol. 2014;43:235-
48. [PMID: 24374889]
138. Normand J, Vlahov D, Moses LE, eds. Preventing HIV Transmis-
sion: The Role of Sterile Needles and Bleach. Washington, DC: Na-
tional Academy Press/National Research Council/Institute of Medi-
cine; 1995.
139. Bramson H, Des Jarlais Dc, Arasteh K, Nugent A, Guardino V,
Hodel D. A review of state laws, syringe exchange and HIV, among
persons who inject drugs in the United States: history and effective-
ness. J Public Health Policy. 2015;36:212-30. [PMID: 25590514]
140. Des Jarlais DC, McKnight C, Goldblatt C, Purchase D. Doing
harm reduction better: syringe exchange in the United States. Addic-
tion. 2009;104:1441-6. [PMID: 19215605]
141. North American Syringe Exchange Network. Accessed at https:
//nasen.org on 17 February 2017.
142. Des Jarlais DC, Nudent A, Solberg A, Feelemyer J, Mermin J,
Holtzman D. Syringe service programs for persons who inject drugs
in urban, suburban and rural areas–United States, 2013. MMWR
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2015;64:1337-41.M. [PMID: 26655918]
143. Nessoulli A. Upstate N.Y. mayor proposes nation'
s first drug
injection centers. CNN.com. 25 February 2016. Accessed at www
.cnn.com/2016/02/24/health/new-york-heroin-injection-facility/
on
17 February 2017.
144. Klepper D. Once unthinkable in US, drug shoot-up rooms get
serious look. Associated Press. 8 May 2016. Accessed at http:
//bigstory.ap.org/article/93726b5c81394e0ab787fcb92ceb3124
/once-unthinkable-us-drug-shoot-rooms-get-serious-look on 17 Feb-
ruary 2017.
145. Beletsky L, Davis CS, Anderson E, Burris S. The law (and politics)
of safe injection facilities in the United States. Am J Public Health.
2008;98:231-7. [PMID: 18172151]
146. Kinnard E, Howe CJ, Kerr T, Skjodt Hass V, Marshall BDL. Self-
reported changes in drug use behaviors and syringe disposal
methods following the opening of a supervised injecting facility in
Copenhagen, Denmark. Harm Reduct J. 2014;11:29. [PMID: 2535
2296]
147. Reddon H, Wood E, Tyndall M, Lai C, Hogg R, Montaner J, et al.
Use of North America'
s first medically supervised safer injection fa-
cility among HIV-position injection drug users. AIDS Educ Prev.
2011;23:412-2.
Annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 166 No. 10 • 16 May 2017
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/04/2019
