 Climate Change and Health: A Position Paper of the American College
of Physicians
Ryan A. Crowley, BSJ, for the Health and Public Policy Committee of the American College of Physicians*
Climate change could have a devastating effect on human and
environmental health. Potential effects of climate change on hu-
man health include higher rates of respiratory and heat-related
illness, increased prevalence of vector-borne and waterborne
diseases, food and water insecurity, and malnutrition. Persons
who are elderly, sick, or poor are especially vulnerable to these
potential consequences. Addressing climate change could have
substantial benefits to human health. In this position paper, the
American College of Physicians (ACP) recommends that physi-
cians and the broader health care community throughout the
world engage in environmentally sustainable practices that re-
duce carbon emissions; support efforts to mitigate and adapt to
the effects of climate change; and educate the public, their col-
leagues, their community, and lawmakers about the health risks
posed by climate change. Tackling climate change is an oppor-
tunity to dramatically improve human health and avert dire envi-
ronmental outcomes, and ACP believes that physicians can play
a role in achieving this goal.
Ann Intern Med. 2016;164:608-610. doi:10.7326/M15-2766
www.annals.org
For author affiliation, see end of text.
This article was published at www.annals.org on 19 April 2016.
C
limate change could pose a “catastrophic risk” to
human health and undermine the global health
gains achieved during the past half century (1, 2). The
reality of climate change and our warming planet is un-
equivocal, and although there continues to be debate
and dissenting views on whether climate change is
largely the result of human activity, the American Col-
lege of Physicians (ACP), on the basis of its review of
the evidence as described in this paper, strongly con-
curs with the finding of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC), which has stated that “human
influence on the climate system is clear” (2). The burn-
ing
of
fossil
fuels,
deforestation,
other
land-use
changes, agriculture and food production, and power
plant emissions all release carbon dioxide and other
greenhouse gases into the atmosphere, trapping heat
which then elevates global temperatures and causes
other changes to the climate system (3). Possible direct
and indirect health effects include higher rates of respi-
ratory and heat-related illness, elevated prevalence of
vector-borne diseases, increased food insecurity and
malnutrition,
and
behavioral
health
problems.
Al-
though all nations will face the negative health effects
of climate change, developing countries as well as vul-
nerable populations throughout the world—such as el-
derly persons, children, and persons with chronic
illnesses—will be disproportionately affected.
Climate change is happening now, and its effects
are expected to worsen over the next century. Anthro-
pogenic (human-caused) greenhouse gas emissions
must be substantially curbed to hold the global aver-
age temperature increase to “well below” 2 °C (3.6 °F)
(and the more ambitious target of 1.5 °C [2.7 °F]) above
preindustrial levels, as established in the Paris Agree-
ment under the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change, which was adopted by the repre-
sentatives of 195 nations in December 2015 (4). Efforts
to adapt to a changing planet and mitigate future
harmful emissions could bring about major health and
environmental cobenefits.
A sense of urgency is warranted. Under one sce-
nario, cumulative carbon dioxide emissions could
cause the global average temperature to reach the
threshold of 2 °C (3.6 °F) above preindustrial levels by
2045 (5). Although cautiously optimistic, the Lancet
Commission on Health and Climate Change warns that
“the effects of climate change are being felt today, and
future projections represent an unacceptably high and
potentially catastrophic risk to human health” (1).
The ACP is concerned about the effect that climate
change could have on individual persons and popula-
tions
in
the
United
States
and
throughout
the
world.
Although climate change poses a potentially major
threat to human and environmental health, taking ac-
tion to reduce greenhouse gas emissions could have
major benefits to human health. For example, reducing
motor vehicle use in favor of walking or cycling could
yield carbon emission reductions and health improve-
ments (6–8), and carbon pollution standards for power
See also:
Editorial comment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 626
Web-Only
Appendix: Full Position Paper
* This position paper, written by Ryan A. Crowley, BSJ, was developed for the Health and Public Policy Committee of the American College of Physicians.
Individuals who served on the Health and Public Policy Committee from initiation of the project until its approval and who authored this position paper are
Darilyn V. Moyer, MD (Chair); Douglas M. DeLong, MD (Vice Chair); Sue S. Bornstein, MD; James F. Bush, MD; Gregory A. Hood, MD; Carrie A. Horwitch, MD;
Gregory C. Kane, MD; Robert M. Lohr, MD; Kenneth E. Olive, MD; Shakaib U. Rehman, MD; Micah Beachy, DO; Mitch Biermann, BS; and Fatima Syed, MD.
Approved by the ACP Board of Regents on 16 February 2016.
POSITION PAPER
Annals of Internal Medicine
608 © 2016 American College of Physicians
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
 plants could have a positive effect on cardiovascular
and respiratory health (9). Physicians and the wider
health care community have a major stake in address-
ing climate change, not only by treating patients expe-
riencing its health effects but also by advocating for
effective climate change adaptation and mitigation
policies, educating the public about potential health
dangers posed by climate change, pushing for a low-
carbon health care sector, researching and implement-
ing public health strategies, and adopting lifestyle
changes that limit carbon emissions and may achieve
better health. The issue of climate change is often po-
sitioned as a purely environmental, economic, or polit-
ical one; however, climate change could have severe
consequences for human health and physicians can
play an important role in raising awareness.
In this position paper, the ACP explores the evi-
dence on the health effects of climate change and of-
fers recommendations on how physicians and the
broader health care sector can take action to slow
global warming and reduce the effects of climate
change on patients and the planet. The Appendix
(available at www.annals.org) contains the full position
paper, including the expanded background and policy
rationale.
METHODS
This policy paper was developed by the Health and
Public Policy Committee of the ACP, which is charged
with addressing issues that affect the health care of the
U.S. public and the practice of internal medicine and its
subspecialties. The committee reviewed available stud-
ies, reports, and surveys on climate change and its re-
lation to human health from PubMed, Google Scholar,
relevant news articles, policy documents, Web sites,
and other sources. Recommendations were based on
reviewed literature and input from the ACP'
s Board of
Governors, Board of Regents, Council of Early Career
Physicians,
Council
of
Resident/Fellow
Members,
Council of Student Members, and Council of Subspe-
cialty Societies, as well as nonmember experts in the
field. The policy paper and related recommendations
were reviewed and approved by the ACP Board of Re-
gents in February 2016.
POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS
1. A global effort is required to reduce anthropo-
genic greenhouse emissions and address the health im-
pact of climate change. The United States must commit
to taking both a leadership and collaborative role in de-
veloping, implementing, and ensuring the success of
such a global effort and in reducing its own contribu-
tions to greenhouse emissions. Climate change adapta-
tion strategies must be established, and mitigation mea-
sures must be adopted.
2. The health care sector, within the United States
and globally, must implement environmentally sustain-
able and energy-efficient practices and prepare for
the impacts of climate change to ensure continued
operations
during
periods
of
elevated
patient
demand.
3. Physicians, both individually and collectively, are
encouraged to advocate for climate change adaptation
and mitigation policies and communicate about the
health cobenefits of addressing climate change in ob-
jective, simple language to their community and policy-
makers. For its part, the American College of Physicians
is committed to working with its international chapters
and with other professional membership and public
health organizations within the United States and
globally to pursue the policies recommended in this
paper.
4. Physicians are encouraged to become educated
about climate change, its effect on human health, and
how to respond to future challenges. Medical schools
and continuing medical education providers should
incorporate climate change–related coursework into
curricula.
5. Governments should commit to providing sub-
stantial and sufficient climate change research funding
to understand, adapt to, and mitigate the human health
effects of climate change.
From the American College of Physicians, Washington, DC.
Financial Support: Financial support for the development of
this guideline comes exclusively from the ACP operating
budget.
Disclosures: Disclosures can be viewed at www.acponline
.org/authors/icmje/ConflictOfInterestForms.do?msNum=M15
-2766.
Requests for Single Reprints: Ryan A. Crowley, BSJ, American
College of Physicians, 25 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Suite
700, Washington, DC 20001; e-mail, RCrowley@mail.acp
online.org.
Author contributions are available at www.annals.org.
References
1. Watts N, Adger WN, Agnolucci P, Blackstock J, Byass P, Cai W,
et al. Health and climate change: policy responses to protect public
health. Lancet. 2015;386:1861-914. [PMID: 26111439] doi:10.1016
/S0140-6736(15)60854-6
2. Pachauri RK, Meyer LA; Core Writing Team, eds. Climate Change
2014: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III
to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change. Geneva: Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change; 2015.
3. U.S. National Academy of Sciences; Royal Society. Climate
Change: Evidence and Causes. Washington, DC: National Acade-
mies Pr; 2014. Accessed at http://nas-sites.org/americasclimate
choices/events/a-discussion-on-climate-change-evidence-and-causes
on 3 September 2015.
4. United Nations. Adoption of the Paris Agreement. 12 December
2015. Accessed at http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/2015/cop21/eng
/l09.pdf on 11 January 2016.
5. Levin K. World'
s carbon budget to be spent in three decades.
World Resources Institute. 27 September 2013. Accessed at www
.wri.org/blog/2013/09/world%E2%80%99s-carbon-budget-be-spent
-three-decades on 8 October 2015.
Climate Change and Health
POSITION PAPER
www.annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 164 No. 9 • 3 May 2016 609
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
 6. Woodcock J, Edwards P, Tonne C, Armstrong BG, Ashiru O,
Banister D, et al. Public health benefits of strategies to reduce
greenhouse-gas emissions: urban land transport. Lancet. 2009;374:
1930-43. [PMID: 19942277] doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(09)61714-1
7. Frumkin H, Hess J, Luber G, Malilay J, McGeehin M. Climate
change: the public health response. Am J Public Health. 2008;98:
435-45. [PMID: 18235058] doi:10.2105/AJPH.2007.119362
8. Maizlish N, Woodcock J, Co S, Ostro B, Fanai A, Fairley D. Health
cobenefits and transportation-related reductions in greenhouse
gas emissions in the San Francisco Bay area. Am J Public Health.
2013;103:703-9.
[PMID:
23409903]
doi:10.2105/AJPH.2012.300
939
9. Schwartz J, Buonocore J, Levy J, Driscoll C, Lambert KF, Reid S.
Health Co-benefits of Carbon Standards for Existing Power Plants:
Part 2 of the Co-Benefits of Carbon Standards Study. Boston: Har-
vard School of Public Health; 2014. Accessed at www.chgeharvard
.org/sites/default/files/userfiles2/Health%20Co-Benefits%20of%20
Carbon%20Standards.pdf on 7 January 2016.
AD LIBITUM
The latest way to make the luckiest humans in history anxious
during their short stay on Earth.
—Richard Lehman, BMJ
Precision Medicine
Oh yes, I say,
this is what I want,
precision medicine.
Let the data flow.
Mine my genome
for glitches and clues.
Retrofit what you can and
what you can'
t, well
at least I'
ll know
the condition I fear
can'
t be fixed
precisely.
My anxiety'
s high
but knowledge is prized
and much has been gained
with my help.
I might do fine.
Not all genes express
and mistakes can be made
in labs and trials
and the non-coding genome
is massive, complex
and, for all I know, the place
where luck is transcribed.
Veneta Masson, RN, MA
Washington, DC
Current Author Address: Veneta Masson, RN, MA;
e-mail, veneta.masson@gmail.com.
© 2016 American College of Physicians
POSITION PAPER
Climate Change and Health
610 Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 164 No. 9 • 3 May 2016
www.annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
 Author Contributions: Conception and design: R.A. Crowley,
D.V. Moyer, D.M. DeLong, S.S. Bornstein, R.M. Lohr, F. Syed.
Analysis and interpretation of the data: R.A. Crowley, J.F.
Bush, S.U. Rehman.
Drafting of the article: R.A. Crowley, D.V. Moyer, F. Syed.
Critical revision of the article for important intellectual con-
tent: R.A. Crowley, D.M. DeLong, G.A. Hood, G.C. Kane, R.M.
Lohr, K.E. Olive, S.U. Rehman, M. Beachy, M. Biermann,
F. Syed.
Final approval of the article: R.A. Crowley, D.V. Moyer, D.M.
DeLong, S.S. Bornstein, J.F. Bush, G.A. Hood, C.A. Horwitch,
G.C. Kane, R.M. Lohr, K.E. Olive, S.U. Rehman, M. Beachy, M.
Biermann, F. Syed.
Administrative, technical, or logistic support: R.A. Crowley,
G.A. Hood, G.C. Kane.
Collection and assembly of data: R.A. Crowley, G.A. Hood.
APPENDIX: EXPANDED BACKGROUND AND
RATIONALE
The Reality of Climate Change
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
defines climate change as “any substantial change in
measures of climate (such as temperatures or precipi-
tation) lasting for an extended period (decades or lon-
ger). Climate change may result from natural factors
and processes or from human activities” (10). An impor-
tant driver of climate change is the increased accumu-
lation of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases
that trap heat in Earth'
s atmosphere, causing warming
of the troposphere (the layer of the atmosphere closest
to Earth).
There is broad consensus among climate scientists
that Earth'
s climate is changing mainly as a result of
human activity (11, 12). Ninety-seven percent of climate
scientists agree that humans are largely causing global
warming (13). Many respected scientific organizations
have issued statements in support of the evidence on
anthropogenic climate change, including the American
Association for the Advancement of Science (14), the
National Academy of Sciences (3, 15) and other inter-
national science academies (16), the American Chemi-
cal Society (17), and the American Meteorological
Society (18). Many medical societies, including the
American Academy of Pediatrics (19) and the American
Medical Association (20), have expressed concern
about climate change and called for swift and aggres-
sive action. Religious leaders, including Pope Francis
(21) and members of the International Islamic Climate
Change Symposium (22), have cast addressing climate
change as a moral issue.
Although the vast majority of scientists affirm that
global warming is occurring, some question the degree
to which greenhouse gases are responsible for climate
change or whether mitigation policies would be effec-
tive or economically feasible (23). Climate change pro-
jections are based on observations and climate system
modeling. Precise prediction of how much carbon will
be emitted in the coming decades or how natural cli-
mate variations may affect temperature trends is diffi-
cult; however, the National Research Council states that
“there are still some uncertainties, and there always will
be in understanding a complex system like Earth'
s cli-
mate. Nevertheless, there is a strong, credible body of
evidence, based on multiple lines of research, docu-
menting that climate is changing and that these
changes are in large part caused by human activities”
(24).
Climate Change Indicators
The average surface air temperature of Earth has
increased by 0.8 °C (1.4 °F) since 1880 (25). In the
Northern Hemisphere, the period from 1983 to 2012
was likely the warmest 30-year period of the past 1400
years (2), and 2015 was Earth'
s hottest year on record
(26). The current atmospheric carbon level is unprece-
dented in the past million years (3). Atmospheric con-
centrations of carbon dioxide hovered in the range of
170 to 300 parts per million for the past 800 000 years
before the 20th century. In 2015, the global carbon di-
oxide concentration passed the 400–parts per million
threshold for the first time in recorded history (27).
Greenhouse gas emissions continue to increase: 2011
emissions exceeded 2005 rates by 43% (28). Under cur-
rent global carbon emission trends (that is, without ad-
ditional efforts to constrain emissions), the IPCC pre-
dicts that global average temperatures could increase
by up to an additional 2.6 to 4.8 °C (4.7 to 8.6 °F) by the
end of the 21st century (2, 3). However, if coordinated,
aggressive mitigation efforts are made to reduce car-
bon emissions, the planet could warm by 0.3 to 1.7 °C
(0.5 to 3.1 °F).
Climate change indicators are not limited to sur-
face temperatures; several other indicators have been
observed. First, Arctic and Antarctic sea ice and glacier
mass have dwindled. The minimum extent of Arctic sea
ice was at its smallest on record in September 2012
(10). According to the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration, satellite data show that land ice sheets
in Antarctica and Greenland have lost an estimated 420
billion metric tons of ice per year since 2002, totaling
about 5 trillion metric tons in 13 years (29). Second,
global sea levels increased by about 17 cm (6.7 in) over
the past century (30), and according to the IPCC, “the
rate of sea level rise since the mid-19th century has
been larger than the mean rate during the previous two
millennia” (2). Sea level rise is the result of melting land
ice and expansion of water as it absorbs radiant heat.
Finally, oceans have warmed and become more acidic
(28) due to absorption of carbon dioxide. Ocean heat
affects surface temperature, sea levels, and currents.
The United States has experienced a higher num-
ber of extreme weather events. According to the EPA,
www.annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 164 No. 9 • 3 May 2016
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
 trends include increased frequency of abnormally high
annual precipitation totals, higher occurrence of ex-
treme temperature conditions, an increase in tropical
cyclone activity in the past 20 years, and lower total
snowfall and decreasing snowpack (10).
Climate change may affect different areas of the
United States in different ways. The Third National Cli-
mate Assessment Report (31) outlines the following re-
gional climate change effects:
Y Northeast: From 1895 to 2011, temperatures in
the region increased by nearly 1.1 °C (2 °F) and precip-
itation increased by more than 10%. The sea level in the
Northeast has risen by more than 30.5 cm (12 in) since
1900, exceeding the global average of about 20.3 cm
(8 in). The region has also seen a disproportionately
high number of extreme precipitation events. Projected
continued heat waves, heavy precipitation, and sea
level rises may compromise the region'
s ecosystem, in-
frastructure, agriculture, and fisheries.
Y Southeast and the Caribbean: The region has ex-
perienced an increased number of high-temperature
days and fewer freezing events and a higher number of
hurricanes and heavy precipitation events in recent de-
cades. Projected outcomes include continued sea level
rise, increasing temperatures, and reduced water avail-
ability. Such effects may compromise the region'
s sea-
food and energy industries and endanger such coastal
cities as Miami, Florida; Charleston, South Carolina;
and Virginia Beach, Virginia.
Y Midwest: Projected effects of climate change in
the region include more frequent and extreme heat
waves, poorer water and air quality, and extreme rain-
fall events and flooding. The report notes that accord-
ing to one study, Chicago, Illinois, is projected to see
between 166 and 2217 excess deaths from heat wave–
related mortality per year by 2081 to 2100.
Y Great Plains: Temperatures in the region are pro-
jected to increase, causing an increased demand for
water and energy. The number of days with high tem-
peratures over 37.8 °C (100 °F) is forecasted to double
in the northern part of the region and quadruple in the
southern part. Potential effects include drought, heat
stress, and heightened demand for air conditioning
(and, with it, energy use).
Y Northwest: The average regional temperature
has increased by about 0.7 °C (1.3 °F) from 1895 to
2011. The average annual temperature is projected to
increase by 1.8 to 5.4 °C (3.2 to 9.7 °F) by 2070 to 2099,
with the largest increases expected in the summer. In-
creased snowmelt could alter the timing of streamflow
and affect water supply and demand. Drier conditions
and higher temperatures may also enhance the risk for
wildfires, leading to respiratory problems, stress from
displacement, and other issues.
Y Alaska: Alaska (and the surrounding Arctic re-
gion) is experiencing some of the most dramatic effects
of climate change. Over the past 60 years, the state has
“warmed more than twice as rapidly as the rest of the
U.S., with average annual temperature increasing by 3
degrees F and average winter temperature by 6 de-
grees F, with substantial year-to-year and regional vari-
ability.” Wildfires are more frequent as a result of thaw-
ing permafrost. Arctic summer sea ice and glaciers are
receding. Residents of coastal villages have sought to
relocate inland as a result of sea level rise and erosion.
The estimated climate change risks vary in different
regions of the world. Representative key risks around
the world, according to IPCC projections (2), are as
follows:
Polar Regions (Arctic and Antarctica): Risks for
ecosystems, human health and well-being, un-
precedented challenges especially from rate of
change.
Europe: Increased damage from river and
coastal floods, increased water restrictions, in-
creased damages from extreme heat events
and wildfires.
Asia: Increased flood damage to infrastructure,
livelihoods, and settlements; heat-related hu-
man mortality; increased drought-related wa-
ter and food shortage.
Australasia: Increased flood damage to infra-
structure
and
settlements,
increased
risks
to
coastal
infrastructure
and
low-lying
ecosystems.
Small Islands: Loss of livelihoods, settlements,
infrastructure, ecosystems, services, and eco-
nomic instability; risks for low-lying coastal
areas.
Africa:
Compounded
stress
on
water
re-
sources, reduced crop productivity, vector-
and water-borne diseases.
Central and South America: Reduced water
availability and increased flooding and land-
slides; reduced food production and quality,
spread of vector-borne diseases.
Effect of Climate Change on Human Health
In 2009, the Lancet and University College London
Institute for Global Health Commission called climate
change “the biggest global health threat of the 21st
century” (32). The World Health Organization estimates
that “climate change will cause an additional 250,000
deaths per year from 2030 to 2050,” likely the result of
malnourishment, malaria, diarrhea, and heat exposure
related to climate change effects (33). All populations
will be affected by climate change, but children, elderly
persons, and those living in economically poor and de-
veloping nations will be disproportionately impacted.
Patz and colleagues (34) outline the health effects of
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 164 No. 9 • 3 May 2016
www.annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
 climate change, including heat-related disorders, respi-
ratory disorders, infectious diseases, food in security,
and mental health. Of note, limitations exist in deter-
mining the relationship between climate change and
health, which may require laboratory studies, observa-
tional data, and modeling studies rather than tradi-
tional experimental designs. Despite this, Patz and col-
leagues state, “given that evidence over the past 20
years suggests that climate change can be associated
with adverse health outcomes, strategies to reduce cli-
mate change and avert the related adverse effects are
necessary” (34). Such limitations underscore the need
for additional research to better determine the relation-
ship between climate change and health, which is dis-
cussed further in recommendation 5.
Heat-Related Disorders, Including Heat Stress
As the climate warms, more people could be sus-
ceptible to heat-related illness. Some sources predict
that extreme heat events that currently happen every
20 years in the United States will occur about every
other year by the end of the 21st century under a
higher-emissions scenario (35). Residents of urban ar-
eas with impermeable, dry, paved surfaces are espe-
cially at risk due to the heat island effect that causes
temperatures to be considerably higher than in outly-
ing areas (36). Extreme heat is among the deadliest
weather-related phenomena in the United States (37).
Excessive heat exposure caused more than 7400
deaths in the United States from 1999 to 2010. In
France, 6 heat waves occurring from 1971 to 2003 were
associated with significant excess mortality, contribut-
ing to 13 700 deaths in 2003 alone (38). Across Europe,
about 70 000 premature deaths were attributed to the
2003 heat wave (39). Heat-related health effects in-
clude rashes, cramps, heat exhaustion, and heat stroke.
Heat exposure can exacerbate existing health prob-
lems as well. Cardiovascular and respiratory-related
deaths also increase during heat waves (40). Elderly
persons and children are especially prone to illness
due to heat (41). Heat-related illness has economic con-
sequences, decreasing the productivity of those who
work outdoors.
Respiratory Disorders, Such as Asthma and Allergies
Climate change may already be having a troubling
effect on respiratory health. In 2012, 7 million deaths
were connected to the joint effects of outdoor ambient
air pollution and household indoor air pollution, ac-
cording to the World Health Organization (42). The pol-
len season has lengthened in central North America as
temperatures have increased and the frost-free period
has lengthened (43, 44). Elevated pollen production
may be more prevalent in large cities and other densely
populated areas, and increasing temperatures and
shifting weather patterns may disperse pollen and
spore-containing dust into new areas, thus introducing
aeroallergens to new populations (45). Further, ele-
vated carbon dioxide concentrations may facilitate
the increased growth of allergen-producing weeds,
grasses, trees, and fungi (46, 47). Experimental studies
have shown that ragweed production increases as car-
bon dioxide concentrations and temperatures increase
(48, 49). Heavy rainfall and flooding can cause damp-
ness in homes, potentially leading to indoor mold and
fungal growth, which is associated with such problems
as nasal and throat symptoms, coughing, wheezing,
and asthma exacerbation (50, 51). After Hurricanes
Katrina and Rita, a report from the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC) and the Louisiana De-
partment of Health and Hospitals found that 46% of
inspected homes in the New Orleans, Louisiana, area
had visible mold growth (52).
Ozone gas irritates and inflames the respiratory
system and may be associated with increased mortality
(53, 54). Evidence suggests that higher ozone concen-
trations can temporarily decrease lung function, are
linked to respiratory-related emergency department
and hospital visits and school absenteeism, and could
increase the risk for premature death (55, 56). Because
heat and light together cause a reaction that transforms
carbon-based gases to ozone, asthma and breathing
problems could be exacerbated as hotter days lead to
increased ozone levels (57). It is estimated that by
2030, more areas could have background ozone con-
centrations of 60 parts per billion, the level at which
symptoms are triggered in children with asthma and
young healthy adults experience reduced lung function
and airway inflammation (57, 58). Particulate matter ex-
posure may also increase as a result of changing
weather patterns induced by climate change. The
threat of inhalation of smoke and related fine particu-
late matter may also increase as climate change leads
to more frequent and intense wildfires. Smoke from for-
est fires and other landscape fires causes about
339 000 premature deaths globally per year (59). Par-
ticulate matter exposure may also increase due to
drought, sandstorms, and desertification as well as
coal-derived electricity needed to power air cooling
systems (60).
Vector-borne and Waterborne Infectious Diseases
A warmer climate and changing rainfall patterns
may also create hospitable environments for mosqui-
tos, ticks, and other climate-sensitive vectors that
spread such diseases as malaria, chikungunya (61, 62),
and dengue fever. Although climate change is only one
factor that may contribute to the spread of malaria, it
has made some areas of Africa more suitable and oth-
ers less suitable for transmission of the disease (63);
www.annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 164 No. 9 • 3 May 2016
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
 however, malaria transmission may intensify in certain
areas, including highland regions of Africa, due in part
to climate and land-use changes (64, 65). Some models
predict that climate change could be a factor in spread-
ing Lyme disease into Canada (34, 66), and existing
evidence shows that 5 vector-borne diseases (including
dengue fever, malaria, and lymphatic filariasis) are now
found in previously nonendemic hill and mountain re-
gions of Nepal (67). The West Nile virus may be trans-
mitted in drought areas when birds and other vectors
seek water supplies used by humans. Waterborne dis-
eases may also thrive in flooded regions as well as
those where water is scarce. Cholera may develop and
spread in drought-stricken areas where lack of water
leads to poor sanitation (68). Water contamination may
occur during floods as overwhelmed sewage systems
and livestock waste enter the human water supply. In
the United States, downscaled climate modeling proj-
ects a 50% to 120% increase in combined sewer over-
flow in the Great Lakes region by 2100 (69).
Food Security Problems and Water Scarcity
As the population grows and food demand in-
creases, “climate change could result in an increase of
20% of people at risk of chronic hunger” (70). Changing
precipitation patterns, variable carbon dioxide and
ozone levels, and temperature extremes resulting from
climate change may cause decreased food production
and food quality in various parts of the world (71).
Aquatic life could be endangered by warming oceans
and higher carbon concentrations, and marine biodi-
versity may be compromised. Under some forecasts,
rice, maize, and wheat crop yields may suffer in areas
that do not implement adaptation plans; in high-
elevation areas, yields may increase with the tempera-
ture (2). Higher temperatures and delayed fall frost
could increase crop yields as land becomes more suit-
able for multiple-crop planting; however, these yield
increases
may
be
surpassed
by
climate
change–
connected crop losses by 2100 (72, 73).
Massive aquifers, such as the Ogallala in the mid-
western United States, are drying up, and groundwater
supplies are decreasing in southern Asia as farmers
have irrigated their cropland (74, 75). Water scarcity
may be accelerated as the climate changes and more
regions experience drought. Climate and land-use
change may also increase water shortages in some ur-
ban areas. One study estimated that about 100 million
additional urban dwellers will experience perennial wa-
ter shortages under climate change conditions (76). Cli-
mate change may also affect potable water access in
coastal regions. Freshwater aquifers are vulnerable to
encroaching saltwater as sea levels rise in places like
the southeastern coast of the United States (77).
Drought connected to climate change could lead to
agricultural collapse and subsequent migration and
strife; one study cites human interference with the cli-
mate system as a factor that exacerbated the Syrian
drought in 2007 to 2010, which contributed to civil un-
rest in the country (78). Climate change may also limit
access to groundwater sources in dry subtropical re-
gions, potentially increasing competition for potable
water.
Mental Health Disorders, Including Posttraumatic
Stress Disorder and Depression Connected to Natural
Disasters
Climate change may also exacerbate conflict and
political instability and lead to displacement and other
problems. Disasters caused by climate change may
negatively
affect
mental
health.
Extreme
weather
events can cause stress that may result in a decline in
mental health, and prolonged heat or cold events may
cause chronic stress that exacerbates health issues (79).
Reactions to traumatic events can range from insomnia
and worry to posttraumatic stress disorder and depres-
sion (80). Mental health problems can occur due to dis-
placement, relocation, and loss of property and per-
sonal finances in the aftermath of a disaster (81). Nearly
half of surveyed New Orleans residents affected by
Hurricane Katrina reported anxiety mood disorder, and
a substantial number reported posttraumatic stress dis-
order (82). Drought periods in Australia led to in-
creased distress among rural residents (83). The United
Nations has identified prolonged drought, desertifica-
tion, flash floods, and other climate change–intensified
events as factors that caused displacement among ref-
ugees in the East and Horn of Africa (84). The U.S. mil-
itary considers climate change to be a “threat multi-
plier,” a factor that exacerbates existing problems, such
as food insecurity, disease pandemics, and conflict over
resources (85). The risk analysis firm Verisk Maplecroft
states that climate change and food insecurity could
“amplify” conflict and civil unrest in developing coun-
tries and predicts that Bangladesh, Haiti, Nigeria, India,
Myanmar, and the Philippines are among the most vul-
nerable to risks associated with climate change (86).
Knowlton and colleagues estimated the lost lives
and health costs associated with 6 climate change–re-
lated events in the United States: nationwide ozone air
pollution from 2000 to 2002, the 2006 California heat
wave, the 2004 Florida hurricane season, the West Nile
virus outbreak in Louisiana in 2002, flooding of the Red
River in North Dakota in 2009, and wildfires in southern
California in 2003 (87). The events resulted in 1689 pre-
mature deaths, 8992 hospitalizations, 21 113 emer-
gency department visits, and 734 398 outpatient visits.
Estimated associated health costs totaled $14 billion.
According to surveys, many physicians believe they
are already treating patients for illnesses that may be
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 164 No. 9 • 3 May 2016
www.annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
 connected to climate change. A survey of American
Thoracic Society members found that 77% of respon-
dents believed that increases in the severity of chronic
illness resulted from increased air pollution caused by
climate change (88). In a survey of allergists in the
American Academy of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunol-
ogy, 63% indicated that their patients had increased
allergic symptoms associated with climate change (89).
A survey of members of the National Medical Associa-
tion found that 61% of respondents indicated that their
patients were already being harmed by climate change
“a great deal” or “moderately” (90).
Recommendations
1. A global effort is required to reduce anthropo-
genic greenhouse emissions and address the health im-
pact of climate change. The United States must commit
to taking both a leadership and collaborative role in de-
veloping, implementing, and ensuring the success of
such a global effort and in reducing its own contribu-
tions to greenhouse emissions. Climate change adapta-
tion strategies must be established, and mitigation mea-
sures must be adopted.
The IPCC states that surface temperatures are pro-
jected to increase under all assessed emissions scenar-
ios over the 21st century and that it is very likely that
heat waves will be more frequent, extreme precipita-
tion episodes will occur more often in certain areas, sea
levels will rise, and oceans will warm and acidify. How-
ever, with a concerted effort to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions, the likelihood of drastic consequences can
be reduced. Adaptation in this context is “adjustment in
natural or human systems to a new or changing envi-
ronment that exploits beneficial opportunities or mod-
erates negative effects” (91). Adaptation to climate
change can reduce existing and near-term risks. The
CDC has developed a public health–focused frame-
work for climate change adaptation called Building Re-
silience Against Climate Effects (BRACE). The 5 steps of
BRACE are 1) forecasting climate impacts and assess-
ing vulnerabilities, 2) projecting the disease burden, 3)
assessing public health interventions, 4) developing
and implementing a climate and health adaptation
plan, and 5) evaluating impact and improving quality of
activities (92). For example, as the risk for Lyme disease
grows, public health departments are working with
health care professionals on how to respond to and
report disease incidence. In Maine, public health offi-
cials are monitoring the threat of vector-borne disease
as ticks and other pests find the warmer climate more
hospitable (92). After the devastating 2003 heat wave,
many European countries devised and implemented
heat health warning systems that use meteorological
forecasts to launch public health interventions to mini-
mize heat-related health problems in a region or pop-
ulation. When extreme heat is forecasted, media an-
nouncements, telephone hotlines, cooling centers,
alerts to hospital emergency departments, and other
activities are initiated (93). In addition, although climate
change may contribute to malaria transmission in some
areas, public health and other interventions, such as
poverty reduction, distribution of bed nets, and invest-
ment in the health care sector, can help to curb its
spread (63, 94). Existing programs, such as the U.S. Na-
tional Flood Insurance Program; federal, state, and pro-
fessional engineering standards; and the U.S. Coastal
Zone Management program, can be amended to con-
sider and implement future climate change adaptation
needs (91).
Unless greenhouse gas emissions are curbed, the
effects of climate change may reach a threshold where
adaptation will be ineffective. Many Arctic Alaskans are
being forced to relocate inland as the rising sea en-
croaches on coastal villages and frequent storms erode
the land (91). Long-term efforts must also be made to
prevent further climate change–related harm. Climate
change mitigation is the goal of “implementing policies
to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and enhance
sinks” (95). Mitigation strategies include more efficient
use of energy and expanded use of carbon-neutral or
low-carbon energy, improved carbon sinks (including
reductions in deforestation and increases in reforesta-
tion), and lifestyle and behavioral changes (such as en-
ergy conservation and reduced energy demand). A car-
bon sink is anything that removes carbon dioxide or
other greenhouse gases from the atmosphere. This in-
cludes natural sinks, such as trees, or artificial sinks,
such as carbon sequestration technology that perma-
nently diverts gas to underground stores. Policy ex-
perts have proposed a range of mitigation options,
including increasing fuel-efficiency standards for auto-
mobiles and trucks, creating energy-efficiency stan-
dards for the built environment, establishing cap-and-
trade approaches, and creating financial incentives or
regulations related to land management (2, 31, 96).
The health benefits resulting from climate change miti-
gation policies may at least partially offset the cost of
such interventions in developed countries. According
to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development, collateral benefits from reducing local
air pollution could range from “0.7% of [gross domestic
product] in the European Union to 4.5% in China in
2050 under a 50% [greenhouse gas] emissions cut sce-
nario” (97). The EPA estimates that the economic ben-
efits to the United States of avoiding premature deaths
related to air quality are estimated to be $160 billion in
2050 and $930 billion in 2100 (98).
Climate change mitigation policies will benefit
public health as well as the environment. Cobenefits
arising from greenhouse gas emission reduction poli-
cies include improved respiratory health from better air
quality and reduced heart disease from walking and
www.annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 164 No. 9 • 3 May 2016
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
 using other environmentally friendly active transporta-
tion (99). The Lancet Commission on Health and Cli-
mate Change recommends an accelerated phaseout of
coal from the global energy mix over the next 5 years
as a way to mitigate climate change and protect human
respiratory and cardiovascular health (1). Promoting ac-
tive transportation, such as walking and cycling, as well
as urban green spaces and energy-efficient building
strategies could also have substantial cobenefits to
health and the environment (100). One study estimated
that increasing safe active transport and use of lower-
emission vehicles in London, England, could reduce
heart disease burden by 10% to 19%, cerebrovascular
disease burden by 10% to 18%, dementia by 7% to 8%,
and depression by 4% to 6% (6). The benefits were
even more pronounced for Delhi, India, including re-
duction of total ischemic heart disease burden by 11%
to 25%. In developing countries, transitioning from in-
efficient cookstoves or open fires to low-emission,
clean-burning cookstoves could reduce illness related
to indoor air pollution exposure (99). The agricultural
sector is a major source of global greenhouse gas
emissions, such as methane from livestock (101). By re-
ducing demand for greenhouse gas–intensive meat in
high-income countries and shifting to healthier diets
rich in legumes, fruits, and vegetables, environmental
and health cobenefits could be realized (102, 103). Of
note, climate change mitigation policies may carry their
own health risks. For example, increased active trans-
portation could increase the risk for accidents (99), and
replacing food crops to grow biofuels could reduce the
food supply or result in the clear-cutting of native eco-
systems (104). Therefore, to ensure that climate change
mitigation policies have a net health benefit, health im-
pact assessments should be conducted.
Health cobenefits should be a prominent part of
the climate change discussion. A 2009 statement re-
leased by the InterAcademy Medical Panel and signed
by representatives of 34 of the world'
s academies of
sciences, including the National Academy of Sciences,
recommended that “Health Ministers and ministries
should actively engage in promoting mitigation strate-
gies that result in health co-benefits in their own coun-
try and should make the case for such strategies to their
national climate change negotiators in advance of inter-
national meetings” (105).
In December 2015, the 195 nations of the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change ad-
opted the Paris Agreement of the Conference of the
Parties, in which they committed to taking the neces-
sary actions to keep the global temperature increase to
well below 2 °C (3.6 °F) above preindustrial levels and
advocated for efforts to limit the temperature increase
to 1.5 °C (2.7 °F). The agreement states that parties
should promote and consider their respective obliga-
tions on “the right to health” when taking action to ad-
dress climate change. In addition to the overall global
temperature goal, the agreement includes a global
emissions target, outlines climate financing obligations,
and mandates a review of participating countries'plans
every 5 years (4). The agreement will “enter into force
after 55 countries that account for at least 55% of
global emissions have deposited their instruments of
ratification” (106). In 2013, the Obama administration
released the Climate Action Plan, which established
goals to reduce domestic carbon pollution, prepare the
country for the effects of climate change, and position
the United States to lead international efforts to combat
climate change and prepare for its effects (107). As part
of this effort, President Obama, EPA Administrator Gina
McCarthy, and U.S. Surgeon General Vivek Murthy con-
vened a summit with medical and public health profes-
sionals to discuss the effects of and potential solutions
to problems arising from the health effects of climate
change (108). Other related activities include a CDC
guide to help public health departments assess local
climate change risks (109) and the development of a
National Integrated Heat Health Information System
(110). In 2015, the federal government finalized the
Clean Power Plan, which seeks to reduce power plant
carbon emissions by 32% below 2005 levels by 2030.
The EPA has touted the environmental and public
health cobenefits of adopting the plan'
s standards, es-
timating the prevention of up to 3600 premature
deaths, 90 000 asthma attacks, and 300 000 missed
work and school days (111). Although these steps are
important, addressing climate change will require a
concerted effort by government; the business commu-
nity; public health professionals; the health care, agri-
cultural, and energy sectors; environmental stakehold-
ers; and others throughout the global community.
Although outside the scope of this article, issues
such as trade, financing, and job displacement will also
need to be addressed as the world responds to climate
change. Attention should be given to climate financing
to provide financial resources necessary to assist devel-
oping countries in their efforts to adapt to and mitigate
climate change. Developed nations have committed to
providing funding to help developing countries transi-
tion from fossil fuel–dependent development and
growth to a low-emission future. In 2014, the United
States announced it would join 33 governments, in-
cluding Germany, France, Denmark, Mexico, and Ko-
rea, to contribute to the United Nations Green Climate
Fund, committing to providing $3 billion (112). How-
ever, as of June 2015, the United States and many
other countries had yet to allocate money to the fund.
Of the $10.2 billion pledged, only $6.8 billion in contri-
butions had been signed (113). According to the Paris
Agreement, “Governments decided that they will work
to define a clear roadmap on ratcheting up climate fi-
nance to [$]100 billion by 2020 while also before 2025
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 164 No. 9 • 3 May 2016
www.annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
 setting a new goal on the provision of finance from the
[$]100 billion floor” (106). Beyond funding acquisition,
questions remain about how best to use financing and
how to effectively track and monitor climate finance,
among many others (114).
Global trade issues are intertwined with climate
change policies. Given the potential economic havoc
that climate change could cause throughout the world,
the World Trade Organization has identified agricul-
ture, tourism, and trade infrastructure and routes as ar-
eas at the greatest risk for the effects of climate change.
Although economic expansion resulting from liberal-
ized trade could increase carbon emissions, it could
also facilitate the distribution of carbon mitigation tech-
nologies (115). Other important considerations include
the direct and indirect effect of mitigation policies on
the labor market, such as mining in the coal-rich Appa-
lachian region of the United States. Metrics to better
understand the effect of mitigation policies on the la-
bor market, efforts to track “green” job growth, and
policies to alleviate job losses in industries affected by
mitigation policies should be investigated (116).
2. The health care sector, within the United States
and globally, must implement environmentally sustain-
able and energy-efficient practices and prepare for the
impacts of climate change to ensure continued opera-
tions during periods of elevated patient demand.
The health care sector is ranked second in energy
use after the food industry (117); it spends about $9
billion annually on energy costs (118, 119). Hospitals in
the United States produce a massive amount of waste
(>2.3 million tons per year) (120). The health care sys-
tem (particularly hospitals) must adopt policies to re-
duce greenhouse gas emissions and prepare for the
inevitable effects of climate change. By increasing en-
ergy efficiency and using renewable energy sources,
the EPA estimates that 30% of the health care sector'
s
energy use could be reduced without compromising
care quality (121). Areas of focus for mitigation efforts
in the health care system include transportation, energy
conservation and efficiency, alternative energy genera-
tion, green building design, waste disposal and man-
agement, food service, and water conservation (122).
The report Addressing Climate Change in the Health
Care Setting: Opportunities for Action, published by
Health Care Without Harm and Practice Greenhealth,
recommends ways that the health care sector can re-
duce its carbon emissions in various areas (123). Rec-
ommendations include the following:
Y Transportation:
reduce
fleet
emissions,
help
commuters reduce emissions, choose suppliers with ef-
ficiency or alternate-fuel standards, prefer local suppli-
ers, purchase energy-efficient shipping.
Y Energy operations: make building operations
more energy-efficient, install on-site renewable energy
capability, purchase energy-efficient products, buy
green power.
Y Energy in the built environment: incorporate
green building principles, consider overall transporta-
tion impacts of facility siting, use native vegetation and
plant trees on site, use local and regional building ma-
terials, offset emissions from building construction, pur-
chase only lumber products certified by the Forest
Stewardship Council.
Y Waste: recycle and buy recycled products, col-
lect and recycle nitrous oxide anesthetic gases, dispose
of waste locally, prevent waste, divert at least 90% of
constructed waste.
Y Food service: reduce the amount of meat protein
on menus, buy local and seasonal food, procure or-
ganic food when possible, prevent waste in food ser-
vices, compost food waste, eliminate bottled water.
Under the direction of its Sustainability Action Plan,
the University of California San Francisco Medical Cen-
ter has established an aggressive recycling and com-
posting program, reduced its medical waste yield,
and
incorporated
an
energy-efficient
and
water
conservation–focused design at its Mission Bay campus
(124). Kaiser Permanente has reduced its purchasing
and overall waste disposal costs by recycling and reus-
ing single-use devices in accordance with federal reg-
ulations (125). Gundersen Health System has estab-
lished a goal of complete energy independence (126).
The system improved energy efficiency and decreased
energy demand, leading to a 25% improvement in en-
ergy efficiency and more than $1 million in cost savings
in 2009. Sustainability is improving in the global health
care sector. The U.K. National Health Service has set a
goal to decrease carbon dioxide equivalent emissions
across building energy use, travel, and procurement by
34% by 2020, and in Germany, hospitals participating
in the BUND energy-saving hospital project have saved
54 000 tons of carbon dioxide and reduced energy
costs by €8.2 million per year (127).
Environmentally friendly activities are not limited to
the hospital setting. The My Green Doctor Web site, a
project supported by the Florida Medical Association,
provides resources to physicians and their staffs on
how to adopt environmentally sustainable policies in
the physician practice. Project resources offer guidance
on energy and water efficiency, use of renewable en-
ergy, recycling programs, proper disposal of medica-
tions and chemicals, transportation and commuting,
and healthy foods (128). As employers, physicians may
also be able to influence their staff to help limit green-
house gas emissions. For example, physician offices
may establish energy conservation and recycling pro-
grams and encourage colleagues to commute by walk-
ing, cycling, or public transit.
www.annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 164 No. 9 • 3 May 2016
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
 The health care sector must also prepare for the
inevitable consequences of climate change to ensure
continued operations during extreme weather events
and elevated patient demand. As climate change poses
new challenges to health care sector infrastructure and
continuity, strategies must be developed to monitor
and react. The U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services has released “Primary Protection: Enhancing
Health Care Resilience for a Changing Climate,” a best
practices tool kit for health care facilities to assist them
in developing climate resilience plans to maintain es-
sential health care services (129).
3. Physicians, both individually and collectively, are
encouraged to advocate for climate change adaptation
and mitigation policies and communicate about the
health cobenefits of addressing climate change in ob-
jective, simple language to their community and policy-
makers. For its part, the American College of Physicians
is committed to working with its international chapters
and with other professional membership and public
health organizations within the United States and glob-
ally to pursue the policies recommended in this paper.
As trusted members of the community, physicians
should advocate for policies to address climate change
and its effects on human health. According to a 2014
Gallup poll, 56% of Americans believe that reports on
the seriousness of global warming are either generally
correct (23%) or generally underestimated (33%). Four
in ten believe that global warming is greatly exagger-
ated, a substantial increase since 2008 (130). The Pew
Research Center found that a majority of people in the
United States believe global warming is a threat but do
not consider it one of the top threats facing the country
(131). In the United States, disagreement over the
cause of climate change has become a political issue,
stalling movement toward a climate change action
plan. Elsewhere in the world, the idea that humans are
largely the cause of climate change is widely accepted,
with 93% in China, 84% in Argentina and Italy, and 80%
in Turkey agreeing that “the climate change we are cur-
rently seeing is largely the result of human activity”
(132). The same poll found that the United States had
the lowest percentage responding affirmatively to the
question, with 54% saying they agreed.
As clinicians, physicians have a role in combatting
climate change, especially as it relates to human health.
Physicians and other health care professionals are often
viewed as trusted sources of information, including on
environmental issues (88). The aforementioned survey
of American Thoracic Society members found that 72%
believed that physicians should inform the public about
climate change, and 75% of physicians believe that
medical societies should play an advocacy role (133).
The survey of National Medical Association members
found that 86% of respondents expressed that climate
change was relevant to direct patient care, 88% stated
that the United States should invest in efforts to protect
people from the health effects of climate change, and
93% indicated support for efforts to reduce the poten-
tial effects of climate change (90). A strong majority
agreed that “physicians have a responsibility to bring
the health effects of climate change to the attention of
their patients” and the public and believed that their
medical societies should advocate for policies to ad-
dress climate change and health.
On a broad policy level, U.S. physicians can work at
the community, state, and federal level to advocate for
efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in the en-
ergy and transportation sectors and educate their leg-
islators and policymakers about the health conse-
quences of climate change. The health risks associated
with climate change provide an opportunity for the
global health community to band together and advo-
cate for aggressive action. In 2011, health professional
organizations, including the World Medical Associa-
tion, convened in Durban, South Africa, and released
the Durban Declaration on Climate and Health. The
declaration calls on climate negotiators to create a
binding agreement that, among other things, makes
the protection of human health a primary objective, es-
tablishes a fair framework to reduce global emissions,
fosters energy efficiency and clean renewable energy,
and provides necessary resources to initiate the United
Nations Green Climate Fund as well as long-term fund-
ing to provide for adaptation and mitigation measures
necessary to address the health effects of climate
change (134, 135).
A later document, signed by the World Medical As-
sociation, the Royal College of Physicians, and other
groups, called for policies to ensure that the health ef-
fects of climate change are taken into account domes-
tically and globally, investment in climate change miti-
gation and adaptation are significantly increased on a
rapid time scale, and the health care sector is engaged
and informed on climate action (136). The world'
s
health professional societies must come together in
one voice to educate their members, their leaders, and
their nations' policymakers about the health threat
posed
by
climate
change
and
call
for
a
strong
response.
A climate change communication guide (137) sug-
gests that public health officials use the following talk-
ing points:
Y Climate change is real and human-caused.
Y Climate change is bad for us and our com-
munity in a number of ways.
Y We need to start taking action now to pro-
tect the health of our community'
s most vulner-
able members—including our children, our se-
niors, people with chronic illnesses, and the
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 164 No. 9 • 3 May 2016
www.annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
 poor—because our climate is already changing
and people are already being harmed. [Our
top priorities for protecting people'
s health
from our changing climate are (list your orga-
nization'
s top three priorities here).]
Y Taking action creates a “win-win” situation
for us because, in addition to dealing with cli-
mate change, most of these actions will benefit
our health too.
By objectively informing their patients and the pub-
lic of the human health threat posed by climate change,
physicians can help depoliticize the issue and encour-
age cooperation in the development of necessary ad-
aptation and mitigation strategies.
The federal government should also develop and
disseminate communication plans to assist state and
local public health departments in their efforts to edu-
cate the public about health risks associated with cli-
mate change (138).
4. Physicians are encouraged to become educated
about climate change, its effect on human health, and
how to respond to future challenges. Medical schools
and continuing medical education providers should in-
corporate
climate
change–related
coursework
into
curricula.
The survey of National Medical Association mem-
bers found that a substantial majority believed that con-
tinuing medical education (CME) and patient education
resources would be helpful to increase their knowledge
and better convey messages to patients about climate
change and its health effects (90). Climate change–
related coursework should be incorporated into medi-
cal school and CME coursework so that physicians can
accurately articulate the immediacy of climate change
and its potential effects on human health. The Ameri-
can Medical Association has hosted many CME courses
on climate change (139) and has approved policy en-
couraging physicians to assist in educating patients and
the public on environmentally sustainable practices
(20). Physicians can also work with public health offi-
cials to develop and familiarize themselves with disas-
ter preparation and response plans.
5. Governments should commit to providing sub-
stantial and sufficient climate change research funding
to understand, adapt to, and mitigate the human health
effects of climate change.
Since 1993, the U.S. federal government has in-
vested billions of dollars in emissions-reducing technol-
ogy, efforts to better understand climate change, and
international assistance for developing countries (140).
Many health-related federal agencies receive funding
to study climate change and health. Priority should be
given to providing such climate research funding to the
EPA, the National Institutes of Health, the National Insti-
tute of Environmental Health Sciences, the CDC, the
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, and
other related agencies. The fiscal year 2012–2017 stra-
tegic plan for the National Institute of Environmental
Health Sciences charges the agency to “identify and
respond to emerging environmental threats to human
health, on both a local and global scale” (141), includ-
ing better understanding of the health effects of cli-
mate change exposures. The National Institute of Envi-
ronmental Health Sciences also seeks to provide
research on human health effects related to climate
change and adaptation, raise awareness and create
new partnerships to advance key areas of health re-
search and knowledge development on human health
effects of climate change, and serve as an authoritative
source of information on the human health effects of
climate change, among other goals (142).
The U.S. Interagency Working Group on Climate
Change and Health outlines the extensive research
needs related to climate change and human health
(143). Ongoing and adequate funding should be made
available to carry out this agenda. Because climate
change is a global issue, the United States should con-
tinue to fund international efforts to assess and address
climate change throughout the world. From fiscal years
2001 to 2010, the United States provided a total of
$31.1 million (in 2010 dollars) to the IPCC (144). In fis-
cal year 2015, the IPCC received $10 million from the
United States. Similarly, the United States provides fi-
nancial support to the World Health Organization. Be-
cause both entities are crucial to the effort to research
and direct international efforts to understand the hu-
man health effects of climate change, the United States
should continue to financially support their efforts and
consider increasing its contributions to them.
Conclusion
There is broad consensus among climate scientists
that the planet is warming, despite the continued pub-
lic policy debate and the dissenting views of a relatively
small number of persons in the scientific community.
The ACP concurs with the scientific consensus, as sup-
ported by the evidence, that climate change is mostly
the result of human activity and unless aggressive, con-
certed efforts are made to curb greenhouse gas emis-
sions, irrevocable damage could be done, including
negative effects on human health, such as elevated risk
for cardiovascular and respiratory diseases, food and
water insecurity, infectious disease, and compromised
mental health.
Physicians, both collectively and individually, are
encouraged
to
take
action
by
adopting
lifestyle
changes that reduce environmental impact, increasing
the environmental sustainability of their practice and
the broader health system in which they work, educat-
ing the public on the potential effects and health con-
www.annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 164 No. 9 • 3 May 2016
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
 sequences of climate change, and advocating for poli-
cies in their own countries and globally to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions and address the health ef-
fects of climate change. The Lancet Commission on
Health and Climate Change states that addressing cli-
mate change could be the greatest global health op-
portunity of this century. The medical profession—by
being an objective and trusted source of information
about the effects of climate change on health—must be
at the fore of this opportunity to make Earth a sustain-
able home for future generations.
Web-Only References
10. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Climate Change Indica-
tors in the United States, 2014. 3rd ed. EPA 430-R-14-004. Washing-
ton, DC: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; 2014. Accessed at
www.epa.gov/climatechange/pdfs/climateindicators-full-2014.pdf
on 3 April 2015.
11. Oreskes N. Beyond the ivory tower. The scientific consensus on
climate change. Science. 2004;306:1686. [PMID: 15576594]
12. Anderegg WR, Prall JW, Harold J, Schneider SH. Expert credibil-
ity in climate change. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010;107:12107-9.
[PMID: 20566872] doi:10.1073/pnas.1003187107
13. Cook J, Nuccitelli D, Green SA, Richardson M, Winkler B, Paint-
ing R, et al. Quantifying the consensus on anthropogenic global
warming in the scientific literature. Environ Res Lett. 2013;8.
14. American Association for the Advancement of Science. AAAS
Board Statement on Climate Change. 18 February 2007. Accessed
at www.aaas.org/sites/default/files/migrate/uploads/aaas_climate_
statement.pdf on 3 September 2015.
15. What we know about climate change and its interactions with
people and ecosystems. In: America'
s Climate Choices: Panel on
Advancing the Science of Climate Change; Board on Atmospheric
Sciences and Climate; Division on Earth and Life Studies; National
Research Council. Advancing the Science of Climate Change. Wash-
ington, DC: National Academies Pr; 2010. Accessed at www.nap.edu
/catalog/12782/advancing-the-science-of-climate-change on 3 Sep-
tember 2015.
16. Joint science academies'statement: global response to climate
change.
2005.
Accessed
at
http://nationalacademies.org/onpi
/06072005.pdf on 15 September 2015.
17. American Chemical Society. Global Climate Change. ACS Posi-
tion Statement. Accessed at www.acs.org/content/acs/en/policy
/publicpolicies/promote/globalclimatechange.html on 13 January
2016.
18. American Meteorological Society. Climate Change: An Informa-
tion Statement of the American Meteorological Society. 20 August
2012. Accessed at www2.ametsoc.org/ams/index.cfm/about-ams
/ams-statements/statements-of-the-ams-in-force/climate-change on
13 January 2016.
19. Council on Environmental Health. Global climate change and
children'
s health. Pediatrics. 2015;136:992-7. [PMID: 26504130] doi:
10.1542/peds.2015-3232
20. American Medical Association. H-135.938 Global Climate
Change and Human Health. Chicago: American Medical Associa-
tion. Accessed at www.ama-assn.org/ssl3/ecomm/PolicyFinderForm
.pl?site=www.ama-assn.org&uri=/resources/html/PolicyFinder/policy
files/HnE/H-135.938.HTM on 3 September 2015.
21. Bergoglio JM. Encyclical Letter Lautido Si of the Holy Father
Francis on Care for Our Common Home. Vatican City: Vatican Pr;
2015.
Accessed
at
http://w2.vatican.va/content/francesco/en/en
cyclicals/documents/papa-francesco_20150524_enciclica-laudato-si
.html on 3 September 2015.
22. International Islamic Climate Change Symposium. Islamic Decla-
ration on Global Climate Change. Istanbul, Turkey: International
Islamic Climate Change Symposium; 2015. Accessed at http:
//islamicclimatedeclaration.org/islamic-declaration-on-global-climate
-change on 3 September 2015.
23. Schmidt CW. A closer look at climate change skepticism. Environ
Health Perspect. 2010;118:a536-40. [PMID: 21123146] doi:10.1289
/ehp.118-a536
24. Summary. In: America'
s Climate Choices: Panel on Advancing
the Science of Climate Change; Board on Atmospheric Sciences and
Climate; Division on Earth and Life Studies. Advancing the Science of
Climate Change. Washington, DC: National Academies Pr; 2010. Ac-
cessed
at
www.nap.edu/catalog/12782/advancing-the-science-of
-climate-change on 13 January 2016.
25. Carlowicz M. World of Change: Global Temperatures 1995–
2004. NASA Earth Observatory. Accessed at http://earthobservatory
.nasa.gov/Features/WorldOfChange/decadaltemp.php on 13 Janu-
ary 2016.
26. Brown D, McCarthy L. NASA, NOAA analyses reveal record-
shattering global warm temperatures in 2015 [Press release]. 20 Jan-
uary 2016. Accessed at www.nasa.gov/press-release/nasa-noaa
-analyses-reveal-record-shattering-global-warm-temperatures-in-2015
on 21 March 2015.
27. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Greenhouse
gas benchmark reached [Press release]. 6 May 2015. Accessed
at http://research.noaa.gov/News/NewsArchive/LatestNews/TabId
/684/ArtMID/1768/ArticleID/11153/Greenhouse-gas-benchmark
-reached-.aspx on 10 November 2015.
28. Summary for policymakers. In: Stocker TF, Qin D, Plattner GK,
Tignor M, Allen SK, Boschung J, et al, eds. Climate Change 2013:
The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the
Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ Pr; 2013.
29. National Aeronautics and Space Administration. Vital Signs:
Land Ice. Washington, DC: National Aeronautics and Space Admin-
istration. Accessed at http://climate.nasa.gov/vital-signs/land-ice on
3 September 2015.
30.
National
Aeronautics
and
Space
Administration.
Climate
Change: How Do We Know? Washington, DC: National Aeronautics
and Space Administration. Accessed at http://climate.nasa.gov
/evidence on 11 November 2015.
31. U.S. Global Change Research Program. National Climate Assess-
ment, 2014. Accessed at http://nca2014.globalchange.gov on 3
September 2015.
32. Costello A, Abbas M, Allen A, Ball S, Bell S, Bellamy R, et al.
Managing the health effects of climate change: Lancet and University
College London Institute for Global Health Commission. Lancet.
2009;373:1693-733. [PMID: 19447250] doi:10.1016/S0140-6736
(09)60935-1
33. Neira M. Climate Change: An Opportunity for Public Health. Ge-
neva: World Health Organization; 2014. Accessed at www.who.int
/mediacentre/commentaries/climate-change/en on 3 April 2015.
34. Patz JA, Frumkin H, Holloway T, Vimont DJ, Haines A. Climate
change: challenges and opportunities for global health. JAMA.
2014;312:1565-80.
[PMID:
25244362]
doi:10.1001/jama.2014
.13186
35. Karl TR, Melillo JM, Peterson TC, eds. Global Climate Change
Impacts in the United States. New York: Cambridge Univ Pr; 2009.
Accessed
at
http://downloads.globalchange.gov/usimpacts/pdfs
/climate-impacts-report.pdf on 8 April 2015.
36. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Reducing Urban Heat
Islands: Compendium of Strategies. Washington, DC: U.S. Environ-
mental Protection Agency; 2008. Accessed at www2.epa.gov/heat
-islands/heat-island-compendium on 15 September 2015.
37. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Extreme Heat Pre-
vention Guide. Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease Control and Preven-
tion;
2015.
Accessed
at
www.bt.cdc.gov/disasters/extremeheat
/heat_guide.asp on 8 April 2015.
38. Rey G, Jougla E, Fouillet A, Pavillon G, Bessemoulin P, Frayssinet
P, et al. The impact of major heat waves on all-cause and cause-
specific mortality in France from 1971 to 2003. Int Arch Occup Envi-
ron Health. 2007;80:615-26. [PMID: 17468879]
39. Dear K, Wang Z. Climate and health: mortality attributable to
heat and cold. Lancet. 2015;386:320-2. [PMID: 26003381] doi:10
.1016/S0140-6736(15)60897-2
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 164 No. 9 • 3 May 2016
www.annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
 40. Luber G, McGeehin M. Climate change and extreme heat events.
Am J Prev Med. 2008;35:429-35. [PMID: 18929969] doi:10.1016/j
.amepre.2008.08.021
41. Blum LN, Bresolin LB, Williams MA. From the AMA Council on
Scientific Affairs. Heat-related illness during extreme weather emer-
gencies. JAMA. 1998;279:1514. [PMID: 9605881]
42. World Health Organization. Burden of Disease from Household
Air Pollution for 2012. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2014.
Accessed at www.who.int/phe/health_topics/outdoorair/databases
/FINAL_HAP_AAP_BoD_24March2014.pdf on 14 January 2016.
43. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Climate Change Indica-
tors in the United States: Ragweed Pollen Season. Washington, DC:
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; 2014. Accessed at www3.epa
.gov/climatechange/pdfs/print_ragweed-2014.pdf on 12 November
2015.
44. Ziska L, Knowlton K, Rogers C, Dalan D, Tierney N, Elder MA,
et al. Recent warming by latitude associated with increased length of
ragweed pollen season in central North America. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A. 2011;108:4248-51. [PMID: 21368130] doi:10.1073/pnas
.1014107108
45. Reid CE, Gamble JL. Aeroallergens, allergic disease, and climate
change: impacts and adaptation. Ecohealth. 2009;6:458-70. [PMID:
19908096] doi:10.1007/s10393-009-0261-x
46. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. A Review of the Impact of
Climate Variability and Change on Aeroallergens and Their Associ-
ated Effects (Final Report). Washington, DC: U.S. Environmental Pro-
tection Agency; 2009. Accessed at http://cfpub.epa.gov/ncea/cfm
/recordisplay.cfm?deid=190306#Download on 10 September 2015.
47. Rogers CA, Wayne PM, Macklin EA, Muilenberg ML, Wagner CJ,
Epstein PR, et al. Interaction of the onset of spring and elevated
atmospheric CO2 on ragweed (Ambrosia artemisiifolia L.) pollen
production.
Environ
Health
Perspect.
2006;114:865-9.
[PMID:
16759986]
48. Wan S, Yuan T, Bowdish S, Wallace L, Russell SD, Luo Y. Re-
sponse of an allergenic species, Ambrosia psilostachya (Asteraceae),
to experimental warming and clipping: implications for public
health. Am J Bot. 2002;89:1843-6. [PMID: 21665612] doi:10.3732
/ajb.89.11.1843
49. Singer BD, Ziska LH, Frenz DA, Gebhard DE, Straka JG. Increas-
ing Amb a 1 content in common ragweed (Ambrosia artemisiifolia)
pollen as a function of rising atmospheric CO2 concentration. Funct
Plant Biol. 2005;32:667-70.
50. Institute of Medicine. Climate Change, the Indoor Environment,
and Health. Washington, DC: National Academies Pr; 2011. Ac-
cessed at www.nap.edu/catalog/13115/climate-change-the-indoor
-environment-and-health on 9 September 2015.
51. Institute of Medicine. Damp Indoor Spaces and Health. Washing-
ton, DC: National Academies Pr; 2004. Accessed at www.nap.edu
/read/11011/chapter/1 on 12 March 2016.
52. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Health con-
cerns associated with mold in water-damaged homes after Hurri-
canes Katrina and Rita—New Orleans area, Louisiana, October 2005.
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2006;55:41-4. [PMID: 16424858]
53. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Health Effects of Ozone
in the General Population. Washington, DC: U.S. Environmental Pro-
tection Agency; 2016. Accessed at www.epa.gov/apti/ozonehealth
/population.html on 8 April 2015.
54. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Policy Assessment for the
Review of the Ozone National Ambient Air Quality Standards. Sec-
ond External Review Draft. EPA-452/P-14-002. Washington, DC: U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency; 2014. Accessed at www3.epa.gov
/ttn/naaqs/standards/ozone/data/20140131pa.pdf
on
8
January
2015.
55. Kinney PL. Climate change, air quality, and human health. Am J
Prev Med. 2008;35:459-67. [PMID: 18929972] doi:10.1016/j.amepre
.2008.08.025
56. World Health Organization. Air Quality Guidelines. Global Up-
date 2005. Copenhagen: World Health Organization; 2006. Ac-
cessed
at
www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0005/78638
/E90038.pdf on 12 March 2016.
57. Barne C, Alexis NE, Bernstein JA, Cohn JR, Demain JG, Horner E,
et al. Climate change and our environment: the effect on respiratory
and allergic disease. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2013;1:137-41.
[PMID: 23687635]
58. Kim CS, Alexis NE, Rappold AG, Kehrl H, Hazucha MJ, Lay JC,
et al. Lung function and inflammatory responses in healthy young
adults exposed to 0.06 ppm ozone for 6.6 hours. Am J Respir Crit
Care Med. 2011;183:1215-21. [PMID: 21216881] doi:10.1164/rccm
.201011-1813OC
59. Johnston FH, Henderson SB, Chen Y, Randerson JT, Marlier M,
Defries RS, et al. Estimated global mortality attributable to smoke
from landscape fires. Environ Health Perspect. 2012;120:695-701.
[PMID: 22456494] doi:10.1289/ehp.1104422
60. D’Amato G, Cecchi L, D’Amato M, Annesi-Maesano I. Climate
change and respiratory diseases. Eur Respir Rev. 2014;23:161-9.
[PMID: 24881071] doi:10.1183/09059180.00001714
61. Meason B, Paterson R. Chikungunya, climate change, and human
rights. Health Hum Rights. 2014;16:105-12. [PMID: 25474599]
62. Fischer D, Thomas SM, Suk JE, Sudre B, Hess A, Tjaden NB, et al.
Climate change effects on Chikungunya transmission in Europe:
geospatial analysis of vector'
s climatic suitability and virus'tempera-
ture
requirements.
Int
J
Health
Geogr.
2013;12:51.
[PMID:
24219507] doi:10.1186/1476-072X-12-51
63. Campbell-Lendrum D, Manga L, Bagayoko M, Sommerfeld J.
Climate change and vector-borne diseases: what are the implica-
tions for public health research and policy? Philos Trans R Soc Lond
B Biol Sci. 2015;370. [PMID: 25688013] doi:10.1098/rstb.2013.0552
64. Ermert V, Fink AH, Morse AP, Paeth H. The impact of regional
climate change on malaria risk due to greenhouse forcing and land-
use changes in tropical Africa. Environ Health Perspect. 2012;120:
77-84. [PMID: 21900078] doi:10.1289/ehp.1103681
65. Siraj AS, Santos-Vega M, Bouma MJ, Yadeta D, Ruiz Carrascal D,
Pascual M. Altitudinal changes in malaria incidence in highlands of
Ethiopia
and
Colombia.
Science.
2014;343:1154-8.
[PMID:
24604201] doi:10.1126/science.1244325
66. Ogden NH, Radojevic M, Wu X, Duvvuri VR, Leighton PA, Wu J.
Estimated effects of projected climate change on the basic repro-
ductive number of the Lyme disease vector Ixodes scapularis. Envi-
ron Health Perspect. 2014;122:631-8. [PMID: 24627295] doi:10
.1289/ehp.1307799
67. Dhimal M, Ahrens B, Kuch U. Climate change and spatiotempo-
ral distributions of vector-borne diseases in Nepal—a systematic syn-
thesis of literature. PLoS One. 2015;10:e0129869. [PMID: 26086887]
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0129869
68. Shuman EK. Global climate change and infectious diseases.
N Engl J Med. 2010;362:1061-3. [PMID: 20335580] doi:10.1056
/NEJMp0912931
69. Patz JA, Vavrus SJ, Uejio CK, McLellan SL. Climate change and
waterborne disease risk in the Great Lakes region of the U.S. Am J
Prev Med. 2008;35:451-8. [PMID: 18929971] doi:10.1016/j.amepre
.2008.08.026
70. The Partnership for Maternal, Newborn & Child Health. PMNCH
Knowledge Summary #19 Food Security and Climate Change.
Geneva: The Partnership for Maternal, Newborn & Child Health;
2012. Accessed at www.who.int/pmnch/knowledge/publications
/summaries/ks19/en on 9 April 2015.
71. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Climate Change
2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. New York: Cambridge
Univ Pr; 2014. Accessed at www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar5
/wg2/ar5_wgII_spm_en.pdf on 9 April 2015.
72. Seifert CA, Lobell DB. Response of double cropping suitability to
climate change in the United States. Environ Res Lett. 2015;10. doi:
10.1088/1748-9326/10/2/024002
73. Stanford Woods Institute for the Environment. Climate Change
Impact on Agriculture: Implications for Food Security and Hunger.
Stanford, CA: Stanford Woods Institute for the Environment; 2015.
Accessed at https://woods.stanford.edu/sites/default/files/files/2015
-07-09-LOBELL-CLIMATE-AG-ResearchBrief-FINAL_0.pdf on 13 No-
vember 2015.
www.annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 164 No. 9 • 3 May 2016
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
 74. Hood GA. Drinking Water: A Global Medical Crisis to Resolve
Now. Medscape. 19 October 2015. Accessed at www.medscape
.com/viewarticle/852510 on 4 November 2015.
75. McKie R. Why fresh water shortages will cause the next global
crisis. The Guardian. 7 March 2015. Accessed at www.theguardian
.com/environment/2015/mar/08/how-water-shortages-lead-food
-crises-conflicts on 4 November 2015.
76. McDonald RI, Green P, Balk D, Fekete BM, Revenga C, Todd M,
et al. Urban growth, climate change, and freshwater availability. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011;108:6312-7. [PMID: 21444797] doi:10
.1073/pnas.1011615108
77. South Florida Water Management District Interdepartmental Cli-
mate Change Group. Climate Change & Water Management in
South Florida. West Palm Beach: South Florida Water Management
District; 2009. Accessed at https://my.sfwmd.gov/portal/page/portal
/xrepository/sfwmd_repository_pdf/climate_change_and_water
_management_in_sflorida_12nov2009.pdf on 4 November 2015.
78. Kelley CP, Mohtadi S, Cane MA, Seager R, Kushnir Y. Climate
change in the Fertile Crescent and implications of the recent Syrian
drought. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015;112:3241-6. [PMID:
25733898] doi:10.1073/pnas.1421533112
79. National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences. Mental
Health and Stress-Related Disorders. Research Triangle Park, NC:
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences; 2015. Accessed
at www.niehs.nih.gov/research/programs/geh/climatechange/health
_impacts/mental_health/index.cfm on 9 April 2015.
80. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Disaster Mental
Health Primer: Key Principles, Issues and Questions. Atlanta, GA:
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; 2012. Accessed at http:
//emergency.cdc.gov/mentalhealth/primer.asp on 9 April 2015.
81. Neria Y, Shultz JM. Mental health effects of Hurricane Sandy:
characteristics, potential aftermath, and response. JAMA. 2012;308:
2571-2. [PMID: 23160987]
82. Galea S, Brewin CR, Gruber M, Jones RT, King DW, King LA,
et al. Exposure to hurricane-related stressors and mental illness after
Hurricane Katrina. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2007;64:1427-34. [PMID:
18056551]
83. OBrien LV, Berry HL, Coleman C, Hanigan IC. Drought as a men-
tal health exposure. Environ Res. 2014;131:181-7. [PMID: 24727641]
doi:10.1016/j.envres.2014.03.014
84. Afifi T, Govil R, Sakdapolrak P, Warner K. Climate Change, Vul-
nerability and Human Mobility: Perspectives of Refugees from the
East and Horn of Africa. Bonn, Germany: United Nations University
Institute for Environment and Human Security; 2012. Accessed at
www.unhcr.org/4fe8538d9.html on 10 September 2015.
85. Banusiewicz JD. Hagel to address ‘
threat multiplier’ of climate
change. U.S. Department of Defense News. 13 October 2014. Ac-
cessed at www.defense.gov/News-Article-View/Article/603440 on
16 September 2015.
86. Verisk Maplecroft. Climate change and lack of food security mul-
tiply risks of conflict and civil unrest in 32 countries. 29 October
2014.
Accessed
at
http://maplecroft.com/portfolio/new-analysis
/2014/10/29/climate-change-and-lack-food-security-multiply-risks
-conflict-and-civil-unrest-32-countries-maplecroft on 16 September
2015.
87. Knowlton K, Rotkin-Ellman M, Geballe L, Max W, Solomon GM.
Six climate change-related events in the United States accounted for
about $14 billion in lost lives and health costs. Health Aff (Millwood).
2011;30:2167-76. [PMID: 22068410] doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2011.0229
88. Rice MB. Climate change at the bedside? Observations from an
ATS membership survey [Editorial]. Ann Am Thorac Soc. 2015;12:
245-6. [PMID: 25706492] doi:10.1513/AnnalsATS.201412-590ED
89. Sarfaty M, Kreslake JM, Casale TB, Maibach EW. Views of AAAAI
members on climate change and health. J Allergy Clin Immunol
Pract.2016;4:333-335.e26.[PMID:26703816]doi:10.1016/j.jaip.2015
.09.018
90. Sarfaty M, Mitchell M, Bloodhart B, Maibach EW. A survey of
African American physicians on the health effects of climate change.
Int
J
Environ
Res
Public
Health.
2014;11:12473-85.
[PMID:
25464138] doi:10.3390/ijerph111212473
91. National Research Council. Adapting to the Impacts of Climate
Change. Washington, DC: National Academies Pr; 2012. Accessed
at
http://nas-sites.org/americasclimatechoices/sample-page/panel
-reports/panel-on-adapting-to-the-impacts-of-climate-change on 15
April 2015.
92. American Public Health Association. Adaptation in Action:
Grantee Success Stories from CDC'
s Climate and Health Program.
Washington, DC: American Public Health Association; 2015. Ac-
cessed at www.cdc.gov/climateandhealth/pubs/adaptation-in-action
.pdf on 15 April 2015.
93. Kovats RS, Kristie LE. Heatwaves and public health in Europe. Eur
J Public Health. 2006;16:592-9. [PMID: 16644927]
94. World Health Organization. World Malaria Report 2014. Geneva:
World Health Organization; 2014. Accessed at www.who.int/malaria
/publications/world_malaria_report_2014/wmr-2014-no-profiles.pdf
on 16 November 2015.
95. Verbruggen A, Moomaw W, Nyboer J. Annex I: glossary, acro-
nyms, chemical symbols and prefixes. In: Edenhofer O, Pichs-
Madruga R, Sokona Y, Seyboth K, Matschoss P, Kadner S, et al, eds.
IPCC Special Report on Renewable Energy Sources and Climate
Change Mitigation. New York: Cambridge Univ Pr; 2011. Accessed
at
www.ipcc.ch/pdf/special-reports/srren/SRREN_Annex_Glossary
.pdf on 15 April 2015.
96. Environmental and Energy Study Institute. Climate Change Mit-
igation/Reduction of Greenhouse Gas Emissions. Washington, DC:
Environmental and Energy Study Institute. Accessed at www.eesi.org
/policy/mitigation on 15 April 2015.
97. Bollen J, Guay B, Jamet S, Corfee-Morlot J. Co-benefits of Cli-
mate Change Mitigation Policies: Literature Review and New
Results. Economics Department Working Papers no. 693. ECO/
WKP(2009)34. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development; 14 April 2009. Accessed at www.oecd.org/official
documents/publicdisplaydocumentpdf/?doclanguage=en&cote
=eco/wkp%282009%2934 on 11 September 2015.
98. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Climate Change in the
United States. Benefits of Global Action. Washington, DC: U.S. Envi-
ronmental Protection Agency; 2015. Accessed at www2.epa.gov
/sites/production/files/2015-06/documents/cirareport.pdf
on
11
September 2015.
99. Haines A, McMichael AJ, Smith KR, Roberts I, Woodcock J, Mar-
kandya A, et al. Public health benefits of strategies to reduce
greenhouse-gas emissions: overview and implications for policy
makers. Lancet. 2009;374:2104-14. [PMID: 19942281] doi:10.1016
/S0140-6736(09)61759-1
100. Younger M, Morrow-Almeida HR, Vindigni SM, Dannenberg
AL. The built environment, climate change, and health: opportunities
for co-benefits. Am J Prev Med. 2008;35:517-26. [PMID: 18929978]
doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2008.08.017
101. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Sources of Greenhouse
Gas Emissions: Agriculture Sector Emissions. Washington, DC: U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency. Accessed at www3.epa.gov
/climatechange/ghgemissions/sources/agriculture.html on 11 Janu-
ary 2016.
102. World Health Organization. World Health Organization Confer-
ence on Health and Climate Change, 27–29 August 2014 [Confer-
ence report]. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2014. Accessed
at www.who.int/globalchange/mediacentre/events/climate-health
-conference/whoconferenceonhealthandclimatechangefinalreport
.pdf on 15 January 2016.
103. Friel S, Dangour AD, Garnett T, Lock K, Chalabi Z, Roberts I,
et al. Public health benefits of strategies to reduce greenhouse-gas
emissions: food and agriculture. Lancet. 2009;374:2016-25. [PMID:
19942280] doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(09)61753-0
104. Tilman D, Socolow R, Foley JA, Hill J, Larson E, Lynd L, et al.
Energy. Beneficial biofuels—the food, energy, and environment
trilemma. Science. 2009;325:270-1. [PMID: 19608900] doi:10.1126
/science.1177970
105. InterAcademy Medical Panel. Statement on the Health Co-
benefits of Policies to Tackle Climate Change. Trieste, Italy: Inter-
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 164 No. 9 • 3 May 2016
www.annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
 Academy Medical Panel. Accessed at www.interacademies.net/File
.aspx?id=14748 on 14 September 2015.
106. Historic Paris agreement on climate change: 195 nations set
path to keep temperature rise well below 2 degrees Celsius. UN
Climate Change Newsroom. 12 December 2015. Accessed at http:
//newsroom.unfccc.int/unfccc-newsroom/finale-cop21 on 15 Janu-
ary 2015.
107. Executive Office of the President of the United States. The Pres-
ident'
s Climate Action Plan. Washington, DC: Executive Office of the
President of the United States; 2013. Accessed at www.whitehouse
.gov/sites/default/files/image/president27sclimateactionplan.pdf on
7 October 2015.
108. White House Blog. Your health and our environment: how can
we protect both? 18 June 2015. Accessed at www.whitehouse.gov
/blog/2015/06/18/public-health-climate-summit on 7 October 2015.
109. Manangan AP, Uejio CK, Saha S, Schramm PJ, Marinucci GD,
Brown CL, et al. Assessing Health Vulnerability to Climate Change: A
Guide for Health Departments. Climate and Health Technical Report
Series. Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention;
2015. Accessed at www.cdc.gov/climateandhealth/pubs/Assessing
HealthVulnerabilitytoClimateChange.pdf on 7 October 2015.
110. The White House. Progress Report: Highlighting Federal Ac-
tions Addressing the Recommendations of the State, Local, and
Tribal Leaders Task Force on Climate Preparedness and Resilience.
Washington, DC: The White House; 2015. Accessed at www.white
house.gov/sites/default/files/docs/climate_preparedness_report
_updated_070915.pdf on 7 October 2015.
111. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Fact Sheet: Overview of
the Clean Power Plan. Washington, DC: U.S. Environmental Protec-
tion Agency; 2015. Accessed at www2.epa.gov/cleanpowerplan/fact
-sheet-overview-clean-power-plan on 11 September 2015.
112. The White House Office of the Press Secretary. Fact Sheet:
United States support for global efforts to combat carbon pollution
and build resilience [Press release]. 15 November 2014. Accessed at
www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2014/11/15/fact-sheet-united
-states-support-global-efforts-combat-carbon-pollution- on 7 Octo-
ber 2015.
113. Green Climate Fund. Pledge Tracker. Incheon, Korea: Green
Climate
Fund;
2015.
Accessed
at
www.greenclimate.fund
/contributions/pledge-tracker on 7 October 2015.
114. Climate Policy Initiative. The Global Landscape of Climate Fi-
nance. 2015. Accessed at www.climatefinancelandscape.org/#con-
clusions on 7 October 2015.
115. Tamiotti L, Olhoff A, Teh R, Simmons B, Kulac
¸og
˘ lu V, Abaza H.
Trade and Climate Change. A report by the United Nations Environ-
ment Programme and the World Trade Organization. 2009. Ac-
cessed at www.wto.org/english/res_e/publications_e/trade_climate
_change_e.htm on 5 November 2015.
116. Bowen A, Kuralbayeva K. Looking for Green Jobs: The Impact
of Green Growth on Employment [Policy brief]. March 2015. Ac-
cessed
at
www.lse.ac.uk/GranthamInstitute/wp-content/uploads
/2015/03/Looking-for-green-jobs_the-impact-of-green-growth-on
-employment.pdf on 14 March 2016.
117. U.S. Energy Information Administration. U.S. Commercial Build-
ings Energy Intensity. August 2009. Accessed at www.eia.gov/emeu
/efficiency/cbecstrends/cbi_html/cbecs_trends_6b.html on 21 April
2016.
118. U.S. Department of Energy. Better Buildings Alliance: Health-
care. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Energy. Accessed at
www4.eere.energy.gov/alliance/sectors/private/healthcare
on
11
January 2016.
119. Rygielski L, Benz P. Going Green While Improving Environment
of Care. Sustainable Facility. March/April 2011. Accessed at http:
//digital.bnpmedia.com/article/Going+Green+While+Improving
+Environment+Of+Care/691548/0/article.html on 11 January 2016.
120. Kaiser Permanente. Excerpts from Greening Healthcare: How
Hospitals Can Heal the Planet. 12 August 2014. Accessed at http:
//share.kaiserpermanente.org/article/excerpts-from-greening-health
-care-how-hospitals-can-heal-the-planet on 14 September 2015.
121. Health Care Without Harm US. Climate and Health. Reston, VA:
Health
Care
Without
Harm
US.
Accessed
at
https://noharm
-uscanada.org/issues/us-canada/climate-and-health on 7 May 2015.
122. World Health Organization. Healthy Hospitals, Healthy Planet,
Healthy People: Addressing Climate Change in Health Care Settings.
Geneva: World Health Organization. Accessed at www.who.int
/globalchange/publications/climatefootprint_report.pdf on 16 April
2015.
123. Health Care Without Harm, Practice Greenhealth. Addressing
Climate Change in the Health Care Setting: Opportunities for Action.
Accessed
at
https://practicegreenhealth.org/pubs/toolkit/reports
/ClimateChange.pdf on 14 September 2015.
124. UCSF Office of Sustainability. Greening the Medical Center:
UCSFMC'
s Second Sustainability Report. Fiscal Years 2013 and
2014. San Francisco: UCSF Office of Sustainability; 2015. Accessed
at
http://sustainability.ucsf.edu/greening_the_medical_center/mc
_sustainability_report_fy12_14 on 16 April 2015.
125. Peregrin T. Strategies for sustainability: going green in the OR.
Bull Am Coll Surg. 2015;100:10-7. [PMID: 26031118]
126. Healthier Hospitals Initiative. Gundersen Health System:
Achieving Energy Efficiency and Cost Savings. 12 September 2003.
Accessed at www.healthierhospitals.org/get-inspired/success-stories
/gundersen-health-system-achieving-energy-efficiency-and-cost
-savings on 15 September 2015.
127. Health Care Without Harm Europe. Climate & Energy Case
Studies. Brussels, Belgium: Health Care Without Harm Europe. Ac-
cessed at https://noharm-europe.org/issues/europe/climate-change
-and-health-case-studies on 7 October 2015.
128. My Green Doctor Web site. Accessed at www.mygreendoctor
.org on 14 March 2016.
129. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Primary Pro-
tection: Enhancing Health Care Resilience for a Changing Climate.
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services;
2014. Accessed at https://toolkit.climate.gov/topics/human-health
/building-climate-resilience-health-sector on 15 September 2015.
130. Dugan A. Americans most likely to say global warming is exag-
gerated. Gallup. 17 March 2014. Accessed at www.gallup.com/poll
/167960/americans-likely-say-global-warming-exaggerated.aspx on
7 May 2015.
131. Motel S. Polls show most Americans believe in climate change,
but give it low priority. Pew Research Center. 23 September 2014.
Accessed
at
www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2014/09/23/most
-americans-believe-in-climate-change-but-give-it-low-priority
on
7
May 2015.
132. Ipsos Global Trends. Global Trends 2014: Environment. Ac-
cessed at www.ipsosglobaltrends.com/environment.html on 7 Octo-
ber 2015.
133. Sarfaty M, Bloodhart B, Ewart G, Thurston GD, Balmes JR,
Guidotti TL, et al. American Thoracic Society member survey on cli-
mate change and health. Ann Am Thorac Soc. 2015;12:274-8.
[PMID: 25535822] doi:10.1513/AnnalsATS.201410-460BC
134. Durban Declaration on Climate and Health. 4 December 2011.
Accessed at www.wma.net/en/20activities/30publichealth/30health
environment/Durban_Declaration_on_Climate_and_Health_Final
.pdf on 7 October 2015.
135. Health Care Without Harm. Protecting Public Health From Cli-
mate Change: A Global Call to Action. Buenos Aires, Argentina:
Health Care Without Harm; 2011. Accessed at https://noharm-global
.org/content/global/protecting-public-health-climate-change-global
-call-action on 7 October 2015.
136. Global Climate and Health Alliance. The Doha Declaration on
Climate,
Health
and
Wellbeing.
2012.
Accessed
at
www
.climateandhealthalliance.org/news/doha-declaration on 7 October
2015.
137. Maibach E, Nisbet M, Weathers M. Conveying the Human Im-
plications of Climate Change: A Climate Change Communication
Primer for Public Health Professionals. Fairfax, VA: George Mason
University Center for Climate Change Communication; 2011.
Accessed
at
http://publichealth.yale.edu/alumni/events/4C%20
www.annals.org
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 164 No. 9 • 3 May 2016
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
 Communication%20Primer%20-%20Conveying%20the%20Human
%20Implications%20of%20Climate%20Change_tcm223-86971
_tcm223-1087-32.pdf on 7 May 2015.
138. U.S. Government Accountability Office. Climate Change: HHS
Could Take Further Steps to Enhance Understanding of Public
Health Risks. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Accountability Of-
fice; 2015. Accessed at www.gao.gov/assets/680/672913.pdf on 13
November 2015.
139. Physicians for Social Responsibility. Climate Change and
Health. Washington, DC: Physicians for Social Responsibility; 2011.
Accessed at www.psr.org/news-events/events/climate-change-and
-health-1.html on 13 November 2015.
140. U.S. Government Accountability Office. Key Issues: Climate
Change Funding and Management. Washington, DC: U.S. Govern-
ment Accountability Office. Accessed at www.gao.gov/key_issues
/climate_change_funding_management/issue_summary on 7 May
2015.
141. The White House. Federal Climate Change Expenditures Re-
port to Congress. Washington, DC: The White House; 2013.
Accessed at www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/omb/assets
/legislative_reports/fcce-report-to-congress.pdf on 7 May 2015.
142. National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences. Climate
Change and Human Health. Research Triangle Park, NC: National
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences. Accessed at www.niehs
.nih.gov/research/programs/geh/climatechange on 7 May 2015.
143. Portier CJ, Thigpen Tart K, Carter SR, Dilworth CH, Grambsch
AE, Gohlke J, et al. A Human Health Perspective on Climate Change:
A Report Outlining the Research Needs on the Human Health Effects
of Climate Change. Research Triangle Park, NC: Environmental
Health Perspectives/National Institute of Environmental Health
Sciences;
2010.
doi:10.1289/ehp.1002272.
Accessed
at
www
.niehs.nih.gov/health/materials/a_human_health_perspective_on
_climate_change_full_report_508.pdf on 14 March 2016.
144. U.S. Government Accountability Office. International Climate
Change Assessments: Federal Agencies Should Improve Reporting
and Oversight of U.S. Funding. Washington, DC: U.S. Government
Accountability Office; 2011. Accessed at www.gao.gov/assets/590
/587130.pdf on 8 May 2015.
Annals of Internal Medicine • Vol. 164 No. 9 • 3 May 2016
www.annals.org
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
Downloaded from https://annals.org by guest on 06/02/2019
