 Washington University School of Medicine
Digital Commons@Becker
Open Access Publications
2017
Noninvasive cardiac radiation for ablation of
ventricular tachycardia
Phillip S. Cuculich
Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis
Matthew R. Schill
Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis
Rojano Kashani
Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis
Sasa Mutic
Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis
Adam Lang
Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis
See next page for additional authors
Follow this and additional works at: https://digitalcommons.wustl.edu/open_access_pubs
This Open Access Publication is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons@Becker. It has been accepted for inclusion in Open
Access Publications by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons@Becker. For more information, please contact engeszer@wustl.edu.
Recommended Citation
Cuculich, Phillip S.; Schill, Matthew R.; Kashani, Rojano; Mutic, Sasa; Lang, Adam; Cooper, Daniel; Faddis, Mitchell; Gleva, Marye;
Noheria, Amit; Smith, Timothy W.; Hallahan, Dennis; Rudy, Yoram; and Robinson, Clifford G., ,"Noninvasive cardiac radiation for
ablation of ventricular tachycardia." The New England Journal of Medicine.377,24. 2325-2236. (2017).
https://digitalcommons.wustl.edu/open_access_pubs/6445
 Authors
Phillip S. Cuculich, Matthew R. Schill, Rojano Kashani, Sasa Mutic, Adam Lang, Daniel Cooper, Mitchell
Faddis, Marye Gleva, Amit Noheria, Timothy W. Smith, Dennis Hallahan, Yoram Rudy, and Clifford G.
Robinson
This open access publication is available at Digital Commons@Becker: https://digitalcommons.wustl.edu/open_access_pubs/6445
 The new engl and jour nal of medicine
n engl j med 377;24 nejm.org December 14, 2017
2325
From the Department of Internal Medi-
cine, Cardiovascular Division (P.S.C., D.C., 
M.F., M.G., A.N., T.W.S.), and the Depart-
ments of Surgery (M.R.S.), Radiation On-
cology (R.K., S.M., D.H., C.G.R.), Patholo-
gy (A.L.), and Cell Biology and Physiology, 
Medicine, Radiology, and Pediatrics (Y.R.), 
School of Medicine, and the Department 
of Biomedical Engineering, School of En-
gineering and Applied Science (Y.R.), 
Washington University in St. Louis, St. 
Louis. Address reprint requests to Dr. 
Cuculich at Washington University School 
of Medicine, 660 S. Euclid Ave., Campus 
Box 8086, St. Louis, MO 63110, or at 
 
pcuculic@ 
wustl 
. 
edu.
N Engl J Med 2017;377:2325-36.
DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1613773
Copyright © 2017 Massachusetts Medical Society.
BACKGROUND
Recent advances have enabled noninvasive mapping of cardiac arrhythmias with 
electrocardiographic imaging and noninvasive delivery of precise ablative radiation 
with stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT). We combined these techniques to 
perform catheter-free, electrophysiology-guided, noninvasive cardiac radioablation 
for ventricular tachycardia.
METHODS
We targeted arrhythmogenic scar regions by combining anatomical imaging with 
noninvasive electrocardiographic imaging during ventricular tachycardia that was 
induced by means of an implantable cardioverter–defibrillator (ICD). SBRT simula-
tion, planning, and treatments were performed with the use of standard tech-
niques. Patients were treated with a single fraction of 25 Gy while awake. Efficacy 
was assessed by counting episodes of ventricular tachycardia, as recorded by ICDs. 
Safety was assessed by means of serial cardiac and thoracic imaging.
RESULTS
From April through November 2015, five patients with high-risk, refractory ventricular 
tachycardia underwent treatment. The mean noninvasive ablation time was 14 min-
utes (range, 11 to 18). During the 3 months before treatment, the patients had a 
combined history of 6577 episodes of ventricular tachycardia. During a 6-week posta-
blation “blanking period” (when arrhythmias may occur owing to postablation in-
flammation), there were 680 episodes of ventricular tachycardia. After the 6-week 
blanking period, there were 4 episodes of ventricular tachycardia over the next 46 
patient-months, for a reduction from baseline of 99.9%. A reduction in episodes of 
ventricular tachycardia occurred in all five patients. The mean left ventricular ejection 
fraction did not decrease with treatment. At 3 months, adjacent lung showed opaci-
ties consistent with mild inflammatory changes, which had resolved by 1 year.
CONCLUSIONS
In five patients with refractory ventricular tachycardia, noninvasive treatment with 
electrophysiology-guided cardiac radioablation markedly reduced the burden of ven-
tricular tachycardia. (Funded by Barnes–Jewish Hospital Foundation and others.)
ABSTR ACT
Noninvasive Cardiac Radiation for Ablation 
of Ventricular Tachycardia
Phillip S. Cuculich, M.D., Matthew R. Schill, M.D., Rojano Kashani, Ph.D., 
Sasa Mutic, Ph.D., Adam Lang, M.D., Daniel Cooper, M.D., 
Mitchell Faddis, M.D., Ph.D., Marye Gleva, M.D., Amit Noheria, M.B., B.S., 
Timothy W. Smith, M.D., D.Phil., Dennis Hallahan, M.D., Yoram Rudy, Ph.D., 
and Clifford G. Robinson, M.D. 
Original Article
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org at WASHINGTON UNIV SCH MED MEDICAL LIB on January 9, 2018. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
 n engl j med 377;24 nejm.org December 14, 2017
2326
The new engl and jour nal of medicine
I
n clinical electrophysiology, non­
invasive cardiac imaging methods, such as 
cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
and computed tomography (CT), help to identify 
and localize myocardial scar that may have an 
abnormal electrical substrate causing ventricular 
tachycardia.1,2 The use of multielectrode body-
surface electrocardiography to create a cardiac 
image (electrocardiographic imaging)3 in combi-
nation with standard cardiac imaging can iden-
tify in a noninvasive manner both myocardial 
scar and the arrhythmogenic region from which 
ventricular arrhythmias arise.3-6 With the use of 
this technique, it is theoretically possible to de-
velop a totally noninvasive method for ablation 
of ventricular tachycardia if the imaging is com-
bined with similarly noninvasive ablative tech-
niques.
One such technique is stereotactic body ra-
diation therapy (SBRT), which delivers precise, 
high-dose radiation to targets in the body with 
minimal damage to normal adjacent tissue.7 
SBRT is most commonly used to treat tumors, 
with high rates of tumor control and low rates of 
toxic effects. Preclinical studies that have explored 
SBRT for the ablation of cardiac arrhythmia 
have identified doses that recapitulate the effects 
of catheter radiofrequency ablation with 25 to 
35 Gy delivered in a single fraction. This ther-
apy has resulted in late myocardial fibrosis and 
elec 
trically inert tissue without evidence of acute 
or subacute injury to nearby tissues during 
6 months of follow-up.8,9 Clinical case reports have 
shown the feasibility of the use of SBRT for this 
purpose.10,11
Although catheter ablation is the current 
state-of-the-art treatment for drug-refractory ven-
tricular arrhythmias in patients with structural 
heart disease,12 it is not curative for many pa-
tients.13-22 Common reasons for catheter-ablation 
failures include inaccessible arrhythmogenic tis-
sue and an inability to deliver adequate ablative 
energy transmurally across ventricular myocar-
dium. In addition, catheter ablation of ventricu-
lar tachycardia is associated with high risks of 
procedural complication and death.23 SBRT has 
the potential to overcome these challenges.8,9 In 
this case series, we combined noninvasive map-
ping (electrocardiographic imaging) and noninva-
sive ablation (SBRT) to treat patients with refrac-
tory ventricular tachycardia.
Methods
Treatment Plan and Study Oversight
The treatment described in this article was deliv-
ered to patients on the basis of their clinical 
circumstances, without specific testing of a re-
search hypothesis. The treatment plan was de-
signed by the first and last authors. All the au-
thors participated in data collection and analysis 
and in the writing of the manuscript. (Details 
regarding the authors’ contributions are provid-
ed in the Supplementary Appendix, available with 
the full text of this article at NEJM.org.) The 
study received no industry support.
All the patients received a detailed explana-
tion of the risks of treatment from both the treat-
ing electrophysiologist (the first author) and ra-
diation oncologist (the last author); all the patients 
provided written informed consent to treatment. 
Institutional review board approval had previ-
ously been provided for the use of electrocardio-
graphic imaging. At the time of the study, the 
SBRT device had received 510(k) premarket ap-
proval from the Food and Drug Administration, 
but its use in the patients reported here was 
considered to be off-label clinical use; this infor-
mation was conveyed to the patients who were 
included in this study.
Study Patients
We evaluated patients with structural heart dis-
ease, placement of an implantable cardioverter–
defibrillator (ICD), and treatment-refractory ven-
tricular tachycardia with limited conventional 
therapeutic options for noninvasive cardiac abla-
tion of ventricular tachycardia (noninvasive radio-
ablation) on a case-by-case basis. Patients were 
considered for noninvasive radioablation if they 
had had at least three episodes of ICD-treated 
ventricular tachycardia in the preceding 3 months, 
despite having received at least two antiarrhyth-
mic medications and having undergone at least 
one catheter-ablation procedure (or having a con-
traindication to catheter ablation). Evaluation of 
the patients for cardiac transplantation was en-
couraged, according to institutional standard of 
care, but transplantation eligibility was not an 
absolute condition for consideration. Patients who 
had undergone placement of a left ventricular as-
sist device were not evaluated for inclusion in the 
study.
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org at WASHINGTON UNIV SCH MED MEDICAL LIB on January 9, 2018. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
 n engl j med 377;24 nejm.org December 14, 2017
2327
Radiation for Ablation of Ventricular Tachycardia
Procedural Workflow
The procedural workflow for noninvasive radio-
ablation is shown in Figure 1, with full details 
provided in the Supplementary Appendix. Before 
treatment, patients underwent noninvasive elec-
trocardiographic imaging during induced ven-
tricular tachycardia to precisely map the ventricu-
lar tachycardia circuit. For electrocardiographic 
imaging, patients wore a vest of 256 electrodes 
(BioSemi) and underwent chest CT scanning. 
Patients were then brought to the electrophysiol-
ogy laboratory and underwent noninvasive pro-
grammed stimulation with the use of an in-
dwelling ICD to induce ventricular tachycardia. 
Data for electrocardiographic imaging maps were 
obtained, and the ICD was used to terminate 
ventricular tachycardia with a brief overdrive-
pacing maneuver. Electrocardiographic imaging 
maps were created to identify the site of earliest 
electrical activation during ventricular tachycar-
dia (the “exit site”), as described previously.3-6
When clinically available, additional cardiac 
imaging was used to identify regions of ana-
tomical scarring with either resting single-pho-
ton emission CT (SPECT) or contrast-enhanced 
cardiac MRI with the use of standard techniques 
(Fig. 1). Electrical information from the electro-
cardiographic imaging and information from 
the anatomical scarring were combined to build 
a volumetric target for radioablation that tar-
geted the area of the first 10 msec of ventricular 
tachycardia (the exit site) and the full myocar-
dial thickness of the associated ventricular scar.
In addition, before treatment, patients under-
went a planning CT scan, which included immo-
bilization of the entire body from thorax to legs 
with the use of a vacuum-assisted device (Body-
FIX, Elekta) and acquisition of a respiration-cor-
related CT scan (four-dimensional CT) to assess 
the sum total of cardiac and pulmonary motion. 
A final target (planning target volume) was 
developed by expanding the target, as defined 
above, to account for motion, setup uncertain-
ty, and delivery uncertainty. (Details about this 
method are provided in the Supplementary Ap-
pendix.)
A total dose of 25 Gy in a single fraction was 
prescribed to be administered to the planning 
target volume with a goal of achieving maximal 
dose coverage while avoiding a dose in excess of 
calculated dose constraints to surrounding organs, 
including the esophagus, stomach, lungs, and 
spinal cord. All plans were subjected to, and 
passed, standard internal physics quality assurance 
on a calibrated phantom before delivery.
SBRT was performed with the use of an im-
age-guided radiotherapy-equipped linear accel-
erator (TrueBeam, Varian Medical Systems) that 
uses cone-beam CT to acquire images of the tho-
rax, which can be directly registered to the plan-
ning CT. This procedure results in accurate align-
ment of the heart and target volume without the 
need for invasive placement of a fiducial marker. 
During treatment, patients were placed in their 
custom immobilization device, which was aligned 
with the use of the cone-beam CT, with verifica-
tion of the alignment by means of fluoroscopy. 
All the patients were treated without the use of 
any additional imaging during treatment and 
without sedation or anesthesia.
Outcome Assessments
After treatment, patients were followed accord-
ing to our standard of care for patients undergo-
ing ablation of ventricular tachycardia. All ICDs 
were reprogrammed with a monitor-only zone at 
100 bpm to assess for slow ventricular tachycar-
dia. Patients were enrolled in a remote monitor-
ing program for devices to enhance rapid identi-
fication and interpretation of any ICD-detected 
arrhythmias. Patients were seen in the outpatient 
clinic with ICD interrogations every 2 weeks for 
 
2 months, monthly for the next 4 months, and 
then 1 year after treatment.
At each visit, an attempt was made to wean 
patients off their antiarrhythmic medications to 
mitigate known short-term and long-term toxic 
effects of these drugs. If no further ventricular 
arrhythmias were detected, doses of antiarrhyth-
mic medications were reduced or stopped, with 
the goal of discontinuing all antiarrhythmic 
medications after the 6-week visit. Patients con-
tinued to receive medical therapy (including be-
ta-blockers) for heart failure before and after 
treatment.
We tallied episodes of ventricular tachycardia 
as the sum of appropriate ICD shocks, appropri-
ate ICD antitachycardia pacing, and sustained 
(>30 seconds), nontreated ventricular tachycardia 
in the monitor zone. The treating electrophysi-
ologists adjudicated all ICD interrogations. Pa-
tients underwent echocardiography at baseline 
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org at WASHINGTON UNIV SCH MED MEDICAL LIB on January 9, 2018. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
 n engl j med 377;24 nejm.org December 14, 2017
2328
The new engl and jour nal of medicine
Visualize Anatomical Scar
Identify Arrhythmogenic
Scar Substrate
Create a contoured 
target volume
Develop Plan
Position
Treat
Image and Align
Perform EP Mapping
ECGI map
AORTA
LEFT
ATRIUM
RIGHT
VENTRICLE
LEFT
VENTRICLE
Epicardial
VT exit site
LAD
ARTERY
LAD
and
SPECT
MRI
or
Isochrones
190
180
170
160
150
140
130
120
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org at WASHINGTON UNIV SCH MED MEDICAL LIB on January 9, 2018. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
 n engl j med 377;24 nejm.org December 14, 2017
2329
Radiation for Ablation of Ventricular Tachycardia
and at 1, 6, and 12 months after treatment to 
assess for cardiac adverse events. Patients also 
underwent chest CT at baseline and at 3 and 12 
months to assess for thoracic adverse events in 
accordance with routine standard of care for 
thoracic SBRT.
Results
Patients
From April through November 2015, nine pa-
tients were evaluated for noninvasive radioabla-
tion; of these patients, five received the treatment. 
Of the four patients who did not receive treat-
ment, two declined to participate (one chose to 
enter hospice care and died from complications 
of ventricular tachycardia 1 week later, and one 
chose to undergo an invasive procedure for ven-
tricular tachycardia ablation), one died of pro-
gressive cardiogenic shock before treatment, and 
one underwent implantation of a left ventricular 
assist device, with recurrent ventricular tachycar-
dia storm after surgery.
Table 1 outlines the demographic and clinical 
data for each patient; further clinical details are 
provided in the Supplementary Appendix. The 
mean age of the five treated patients was 66 years 
(range, 60 to 83). The mean number of episodes 
of ventricular tachycardia per patient in the 3 
months before treatment was 1315 (range, 5 to 
4312). All the patients were taking two antiar-
rhythmic drugs at the time of evaluation. Previ-
ous invasive catheter-ablation procedures had 
failed in three patients. Two patients had contra-
indications to invasive catheter ablation: one (Pa-
tient 2) had a new mechanical prosthetic mitral 
valve and evidence of epicardial ventricular tachy-
cardia, and one (Patient 5) was deemed to be too 
frail for any invasive procedures. All five patients 
had New York Heart Association class III or IV 
heart-failure symptoms. The mean left ventricular 
ejection fraction was 23% (range, 15 to 37).
Noninvasive Radioablation Procedure
Procedural details for each patient are provided 
in the Supplementary Appendix. All the patients 
underwent noninvasive electrocardiographic im-
aging for mapping of their ventricular tachycar-
dia. Four patients had inducible ventricular tachy-
cardia (mean number of circuits, three; range, one 
to six). Electrocardiographic imaging was per-
formed during all induced episodes of ventricular 
tachycardia. In one patient (Patient 3), ventricular 
tachycardia could not be induced and no electro-
cardiographic imaging was obtainable, so the re-
Figure 1 (facing page). Workflow for Electrophysiology-
Guided, Noninvasive Cardiac Radioablation.
Patients undergo noninvasive visualization of the ven-
tricular scar by means of MRI, CT, single-photon emis-
sion CT (SPECT), or a combination of methods, ac-
cording to clinical routine. The zone of scarring is 
indicated by arrows on MRI and by blue regions on 
SPECT, including the base, inferior wall, and apex. 
Noninvasive electrophysiologic (EP) mapping is per-
formed with electrocardiographic imaging (ECGI) of 
induced ventricular tachycardia (VT) with programed 
stimulation from the indwelling implantable cardio-
verter–defibrillator. The color scale shows the range of 
activation times of each area of the ventricular wall 
(isochrones), ranging from 10 msec (red) to 190 msec 
(deep blue) from the onset of VT activation. The elec-
trophysiologist develops an ablation volume by target-
ing the full thickness of the ventricular wall harboring 
the first 10 msec of VT activation (the “exit site”) and 
the colocalized ventricular scar. (Details regarding 
scar imaging, EP mapping, and image fusion to devel-
op the ablation volume are provided in the Supple-
mentary Appendix.) The target volume is shown in 
light blue in the figure panel showing the arrhythmo-
genic scar substrate. This volume is transferred by the 
radiation oncologist onto a respiratory-correlated, 
four-dimensional CT scan, which allows an assess-
ment of the total cardiac and pulmonary motion. In 
this example, a dose of 25 Gy in a single fraction is 
prescribed for delivery to the enhanced treatment vol-
ume, with a goal of achieving maximal coverage inside 
the volume while avoiding exposure to the surround-
ing organs at risk. The target volume is indicated in 
light blue in the figure panel showing the treatment 
plan; red and yellow boundaries indicate the distribu-
tion of zones projected to receive 2750 cGy and 2375 
cGy of radiation, respectively; the lung is outlined in 
orange, and the yellow boundary behind the heart is 
the esophagus. If all plans pass standard internal 
physics quality assurance on a calibrated phantom, 
the patient is immobilized with the use of a vacuum-
assisted device, and stereotactic radioablation is per-
formed by means of an image-guided, radiotherapy-
equipped linear accelerator that uses a cone-beam CT 
to align the radiotherapy treatment beams with the 
target volume. The dark blue boundary indicates the 
target, which includes the total cardiac and pulmonary 
motion. The light blue boundary indicates the target 
with an additional expansion to account for motion, 
setup uncertainty, and delivery uncertainty. Treatment 
is then delivered with the use of the radiotherapy de-
livery system. LAD denotes left anterior descending.
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org at WASHINGTON UNIV SCH MED MEDICAL LIB on January 9, 2018. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
 n engl j med 377;24 nejm.org December 14, 2017
2330
The new engl and jour nal of medicine
Table 1. Demographic and Clinical Characteristics of the Patients and Treatment Details.*
Variable
Patient 1
Patient 2
Patient 3
Patient 4
Patient 5
Demographic or clinical characteristic
Age (yr)
61
60
65
62
83
Sex
Male
Male
Male
Male
Female
Type of cardiomyopathy
Nonischemic
Ischemic
Nonischemic
Nonischemic
Ischemic
NYHA class
IV
III
IV
IV
IV
Left ventricular ejection fraction (%)
37
17
22
26
15
No. of previous antiarrhythmic drugs
3
3
3
4
2
No. of previous catheter ablations
1
0
2
4
0
No. of induced episodes of ventricular 
 tachycardia
2
1
0
5
6
No. of episodes of ventricular tachycardia 3 mo 
before treatment
30
20
5
2210
4312
Treatment
Ablation target region
Anterior basal left  
ventricle
Anterolateral basal left  
ventricle
Inferior left  
ventricle
Left ventricle outflow  
and septum
Inferolateral mid left  
ventricle
Ablation volume (ml)
51.3
17.3
44.5
53.0
81.0
Treatment time (min)
12
11
14
12
18
Length of hospital stay after treatment (days)
2
1
2
2
1
Antiarrhythmic medication at discharge
Amiodarone, 
mexiletine
Amiodarone, 
mexiletine
Amiodarone, 
mexiletine
Amiodarone, 
mexiletine
Amiodarone, 
mexiletine
No. of episodes of ventricular tachycardia dur-
ing 6-wk blanking period
0
3
0
355
322
No. of episodes of ventricular tachycardia 
 10.5 mo after blanking period
3
0
1
0
NA
No. of additional ablation procedures per-
formed by 1 yr
0
0
0
1 at 4 wk
NA
Antiarrhythmic medication at 1 yr
None
None
Amiodarone 
(restarted at 
9 mo)
None
NA
*  
NA denotes not applicable because the patient died 3 weeks after treatment, and NYHA New York Heart Association.
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org at WASHINGTON UNIV SCH MED MEDICAL LIB on January 9, 2018. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
 n engl j med 377;24 nejm.org December 14, 2017
2331
Radiation for Ablation of Ventricular Tachycardia
sults of 12-lead electrocardiography and previ-
ous invasive catheter mapping were used to guide 
the creation of a volumetric target.
Treatment characteristics are provided in Ta-
ble 1. Ablation target volumes ranged from 17 to 
81 ml (mean, 49). On-table treatment times ranged 
from 11 to 18 minutes (mean, 14).
Ventricular Tachycardia Burden
At a median follow-up of 12 months, a marked 
reduction in the burden of ventricular tachycar-
dia occurred after treatment (Table 1 and Fig. 2). 
In aggregate, there were 6577 episodes of ven-
tricular tachycardia in the 15 patient-months 
before treatment. During the 6 weeks immedi-
ately after ablation (the “blanking period,” when 
arrhythmias may occur because of postablation 
inflammation), there were 680 episodes of ven-
tricular tachycardia. After the 6-week blanking 
period, there were 4 episodes of ventricular tachy-
cardia during the next 46 patient-months, for a 
relative reduction of 99.9% from baseline.
Figure 2A shows the monthly number of epi-
sodes of ventricular tachycardia on a per-patient 
basis. Every patient had a reduction in ventricu-
lar tachycardia burden. Of the four patients who 
were alive at 12 months, three were not receiving 
any antiarrhythmic medication. Patient 3 restart-
ed amiodarone 9 months after treatment after the 
first episode of antitachycardia pacing. Patient 4 
underwent an additional invasive catheter abla-
tion procedure at 4 weeks after treatment be-
cause of incomplete cessation of ventricular 
tachycardia, with no further episodes thereafter. 
Improvement was observed with respect to both 
the number of ICD shocks (an aggregate number 
of 55 ICD shocks before treatment vs. 1 shock 
after treatment) (Fig. 2B) and ICD antitachycar-
dia pacing (6577 episodes before treatment vs. 3 
episodes after treatment) (Fig. 2C).
Adverse Events
No complications occurred during the treatment 
or index hospitalization. Three patients reported 
fatigue on the day after treatment. No acute heart-
failure exacerbations occurred in the immediate 
period after treatment. Patients were discharged 
home 1 to 3 days after treatment.
No adverse effects were observed in ICD system 
performance, lead thresholds, or lead impedances 
at any point after treatment. Serial echocardiog-
raphy showed no pericardial effusions. The mean 
change in the left ventricular ejection fraction at 
the last follow-up visit was an absolute increase 
of 6 percentage points (range, −2 to 22) (Fig. 3A). 
No pulmonary symptoms occurred after treat-
ment. Serial CT at 3 months showed findings 
that were consistent with inflammatory changes 
in the adjacent lung tissue that were typical of 
thoracic SBRT, with near-complete resolution at 
12 months (Fig. 3B). At 12 months, there was no 
chest pain or apparent changes to the myocar-
dium or coronary arteries on CT in the region 
targeted for treatment.
During follow-up, after amiodarone was dis-
continued, sinus-node function recovered in three 
patients. Heart rates in sinus rhythm occasion-
ally exceeded the ICD programmed cutoff rate for 
detection (100 bpm). This situation required ICD 
reprogramming to avoid inappropriate therapy.
One patient (Patient 5) had a fatal stroke 3 
weeks after treatment. This 83-year-old woman 
had a history of atrial fibrillation, severe cardio-
myopathy, and other risk factors for stroke. Be-
cause of a risk of frailty-related bleeding, oral 
anticoagulants were not prescribed for stroke 
prevention. In the 3 weeks after treatment, her 
burden of ventricular tachycardia was reduced by 
82% (from 1777 episodes of antitachycardia pac-
ing in the month before treatment to 322 epi-
sodes after treatment). Her left ventricular ejec-
tion fraction had increased from 15% to 30%. 
No intracardiac thrombus was seen on echocar-
diography or during pathological assessment. It 
remains unclear whether the stroke was associ-
ated with SBRT or with preexisting medical con-
ditions that placed her at high risk for stroke. 
(Additional information about this patient is pro-
vided in the following section.)
Cardiac Radiobiologic Effect
Consent was obtained for postmortem cardiac 
pathological assessment in Patient 5. Prominent 
ectatic blood vessels were identified at the inter-
face of dense scar and viable myocardium (scar 
border zone) (Fig. 4A). This pattern has been 
described as a component of the acute vascular 
injury that is usually observed in the early weeks 
after radiation exposure. In such cases, the in-
jury pattern is typically accompanied by endo-
thelial-cell swelling, vacuolization, and perivas-
cular tissue edema.24 However, in this patient, 
the endothelial lining of these vessels appeared 
to be normal and nonreactive, without evidence 
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org at WASHINGTON UNIV SCH MED MEDICAL LIB on January 9, 2018. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
 n engl j med 377;24 nejm.org December 14, 2017
2332
The new engl and jour nal of medicine
No. of VT Episodes
60
40
30
10
50
20
0
B ICD Shocks
28
18
9
A Monthly Assessment of All VT Episodes per Patient
–2
–1
Treatment
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Patient 1
Patient 2
Patient 3
Patient 4
Patient 5
No. of ICD Shocks 
30
20
15
5
25
10
0
–2
–1
Treatment
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
2543
680
2290
1689
No. of Episodes of Antitachycardia Pacing
3000
2000
1500
500
2500
1000
0
–2
–1
Treatment
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
2
C ICD Antitachycardia Pacing
Months after Treatment
Months after Treatment
Months after Treatment
No antiarrhythmic medication 
No antiarrhythmic medication 
No antiarrhythmic medication 
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org at WASHINGTON UNIV SCH MED MEDICAL LIB on January 9, 2018. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
 n engl j med 377;24 nejm.org December 14, 2017
2333
Radiation for Ablation of Ventricular Tachycardia
of an acute vasculitis or tissue edema (Fig. 4B). 
We observed no evidence of acute myocyte ne-
crosis, hemorrhage, or acute inflammation. The 
relative contributions of remote myocardial in-
farction and acute cardiac SBRT to the formation 
of dense scar are unknown.
Discussion
In this case series involving five patients with 
treatment-refractory ventricular tachycardia, a 
marked reduction in the burden of ventricular 
tachycardia was achieved with a noninvasive meth-
od for mapping and treating the arrhythmogenic 
area of the heart. The patients were selected for 
this treatment because they had end-stage dis-
ease, with a low likelihood of survival free from 
further episodes of ventricular tachycardia. The 
average treatment time was under 15 minutes. 
Most of the patients were able to stop antiarrhyth-
mic medications several weeks after treatment, 
and the antiarrhythmic effect continued through-
out the first year.
Worldwide, invasive catheter ablation is in-
creasingly performed to treat ventricular tachy-
cardia.12 The procedure is largely effective in the 
absence of ventricular scar (idiopathic ventricu-
lar tachycardia). However, catheter ablation for 
cardiomyopathic ventricular tachycardia is as-
sociated with recurrence rates as high as 50% at 
6 months.13-22 Patients with recurrence of ventric-
ular tachycardia despite catheter ablation have a 
poor prognosis associated with progressive heart 
failure and irrepressible ventricular tachycardia, 
with a risk of death that is four to six times the 
risk among patients who do not have such a re-
currence.13,15,17,25
Recurrences of ventricular tachycardia occur 
for several reasons, including the presence of 
multiple coexisting ventricular tachycardia cir-
cuits, the presence of circuits that extend deep 
within the myocardium outside the reach of 
standard catheter-ablation energy, and the for-
mation of new circuits after the ablation proce-
dure. Success rates are higher with more exten-
sive ablation, including the use of combined 
endocardial and epicardial approaches in an ef-
fort to “homogenize” the scar.26-28 For patients 
with ventricular tachycardia that cannot be treat-
ed effectively with standard catheter ablation, 
investigators are developing and testing invasive 
alternative treatments with higher procedural 
risks, including surgical access to the epicardial 
space for catheter ablation, surgical sympathetic 
denervation, transcoronary ethanol injection, and 
catheter ablation with an extendable needle.29 
Thus, if a noninvasive approach to ablation of 
ventricular tachycardia is shown to be safe and 
effective, it would be a potentially important thera-
peutic advance.
Because of the novelty of noninvasive radioab-
lation, its potential for harm, and the limited 
number of patients who were included in this 
analysis, this procedure should not be consid-
ered to be suitable for clinical use, pending the 
results of further research studies. Furthermore, 
there are well-described late toxic effects of radio-
therapy to the heart for large-field fractionated-
dose treatments, as has been reported in the 
treatment of lymphoma and breast cancer.25,30 
The potential late effects of high-dose SBRT ex-
clusively to focal areas of previously injured 
heart are unknown. The volumes of myocardium 
that are subjected to radiotherapy in these pa-
tients (from 17 to 81 ml) are large enough that 
Figure 2 (facing page). Assessment of Treatment  
Efficacy.
Panel A shows the total number of episodes of ven-
tricular tachycardia (VT), including appropriate shocks 
from an implantable cardioverter–defibrillator (ICD), 
appropriate ICD antitachycardia pacing, and sustained 
untreated VT, in each of the five study patients, for  
3 consecutive months before treatment and continu-
ing for 12 months after treatment. In Patients 4 and 5, 
the numbers of VT episodes were markedly greater 
than in Patients 1, 2, and 3; therefore, the numbers 
that are shown for Patients 4 and 5 have been divided 
by 30 to allow comparisons on the same scale. Also 
shown are the total numbers of ICD shocks (Panel B) 
and numbers of episodes of antitachycardia pacing 
(Panel C) for all five patients during the same time 
frame. Six weeks after treatment, all four surviving pa-
tients were able to discontinue their antiarrhythmic 
medications, although Patient 3 restarted amiodarone 
9 months after treatment of the first episode of antit-
achycardia pacing. Four weeks after treatment, Patient 
4 underwent invasive catheter ablation because of in-
complete cessation of ventricular tachycardia, with no 
further episodes by 12 months.
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org at WASHINGTON UNIV SCH MED MEDICAL LIB on January 9, 2018. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
 n engl j med 377;24 nejm.org December 14, 2017
2334
The new engl and jour nal of medicine
effects on specialized cardiac structures (papil-
lary muscles, coronary arteries, conduction sys-
tem, and valves) are of potential concern, as is the 
risk of overall effects on ventricular function, al-
though no such effects were seen during the 
12-month follow-up period in the four surviving 
patients in our study. The risk of thromboembo-
lism, as observed in Patient 5, warrants cautious 
consideration. We have initiated a prospective 
phase 1–2 trial (ENCORE-VT) to evaluate the safety 
and efficacy of SBRT (ClinicalTrials.gov number, 
NCT02919618).
In conclusion, in five patients with intrac-
table ventricular tachycardia, the use of nonin-
Figure 3. Assessment of Adverse Effects.
Panel A shows serial evaluation of the left ventricular ejection fraction after treatment in each of the study patients, 
as assessed on echocardiography. The mean value increased by 6 percentage points (range, −2 to 22). Panel B 
shows serial thoracic CT scans after treatment in Patient 1. The treatment area is shown in blue. At 3 months, there 
were adjacent local inflammatory changes in the lung parenchyma, effects that had nearly resolved at 12 months. 
A similar pattern was observed in the other study patients.
Left Ventricular Ejection Fraction (%)
45
40
30
35
10
15
20
25
0
5
B Serial Thoracic CT Scans in Patient 1
A Serial Evaluation of Left Ventricular Ejection Fraction
Baseline
1 Mo
6 Mo
12 Mo
Baseline
3 Mo
12 Mo
Patient 1
Patient 2
Patient 3
Patient 4
Patient 5
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org at WASHINGTON UNIV SCH MED MEDICAL LIB on January 9, 2018. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
 n engl j med 377;24 nejm.org December 14, 2017
2335
Radiation for Ablation of Ventricular Tachycardia
vasive stereotactic cardiac radiotherapy as an 
ablation technique resulted in a marked reduc-
tion in the burden of ventricular tachycardia af-
ter treatment.
Supported by a grant from the Barnes–Jewish Hospital Foun-
dation (to Dr. Cuculich), by Washington University (the Depart-
ment of Radiation Oncology, to Dr. Robinson; and the Cardio-
vascular Division of the Department of Medicine, to Dr. 
Cuculich), and by a grant (R01 HL033343, to Dr. Rudy) from the 
National Institutes of Health.
Disclosure forms provided by the authors are available with 
the full text of this article at NEJM.org.
References
 
1. Cochet H, Komatsu Y, Sacher F, et al. 
Integration of merged delayed-enhanced 
magnetic resonance imaging and multi-
detector computed tomography for the 
guidance of ventricular tachycardia abla-
tion: a pilot study. J Cardiovasc Electro-
physiol 2013; 
24: 
419-26.
 
2. Dickfeld T, Tian J, Ahmad G, et al. 
MRI-guided ventricular tachycardia abla-
tion: integration of late gadolinium-
enhanced 3D scar in patients with im-
plantable cardioverter-defibrillators. Circ 
Arrhythm Electrophysiol 2011; 
4: 
172-84.
 
3. Ramanathan C, Ghanem RN, Jia P, 
Ryu K, Rudy Y. Noninvasive electrocardio-
graphic imaging for cardiac electrophysi-
ology and arrhythmia. Nat Med 2004; 
10: 
422-8.
 
4. Cuculich PS, Zhang J, Wang Y, et al. 
The electrophysiological cardiac ventricu-
lar substrate in patients after myocardial 
infarction: noninvasive characterization 
with electrocardiographic imaging. J Am 
Coll Cardiol 2011; 
58: 
1893-902.
 
5. Wang Y, Cuculich PS, Zhang J, et al. 
Noninvasive electroanatomic mapping of 
human ventricular arrhythmias with elec-
trocardiographic imaging. Sci Transl Med 
2011; 
3: 
98ra84.
 
6. Zhang J, Cooper DH, Desouza KA, et 
al. Electrophysiologic scar substrate in 
relation to VT: noninvasive high-resolu-
tion mapping and risk assessment with 
ECGI: pacing and clinical electrophysiol-
ogy. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 2016; 
39: 
781-91.
 
7. Benedict SH, Yenice KM, Followill D, 
et al. Stereotactic body radiation therapy: 
the report of AAPM Task Group 101. Med 
Phys 2010; 
37: 
4078-101.
 
8. Lehmann HI, Graeff C, Simoniello P, 
et al. Feasibility study on cardiac arrhyth-
mia ablation using high-energy heavy ion 
beams. Sci Rep 2016; 
6: 
38895.
 
9. Sharma A, Wong D, Weidlich G, et al. 
Noninvasive 
stereotactic 
radiosurgery 
(CyberHeart) for creation of ablation le-
sions in the atrium. Heart Rhythm 2010; 
7: 
802-10.
 
10. Cvek J, Neuwirth R, Knybel L, et al. 
Cardiac radiosurgery for malignant ven-
tricular tachycardia. Cureus 2014: 
6(7): 
e190.
 
11. Loo BW Jr, Soltys SG, Wang L, et al. 
Stereotactic ablative radiotherapy for the 
treatment of refractory cardiac ventricular 
arrhythmia. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol 
2015; 
8: 
748-50.
 
12. Priori SG, Blomström-Lundqvist C, 
Mazzanti A, et al. 2015 ESC Guidelines 
for the management of patients with ven-
tricular arrhythmias and the prevention 
of sudden cardiac death: the Task Force 
for the Management of Patients with Ven-
tricular Arrhythmias and the Prevention 
of Sudden Cardiac Death of the European 
Society of Cardiology (ESC) endorsed by: 
Association for European Paediatric and 
Congenital Cardiology (AEPC). Europace 
2015; 
17: 
1601-87.
 
13. Stevenson WG, Wilber DJ, Natale A, et 
al. Irrigated radiofrequency catheter abla-
tion guided by electroanatomic mapping 
for recurrent ventricular tachycardia after 
myocardial infarction: the multicenter 
thermocool ventricular tachycardia abla-
tion trial. Circulation 2008; 
118: 
2773-82.
 
14. Tokuda M, Kojodjojo P, Tung S, et al. 
Acute failure of catheter ablation for ven-
Figure 4. Histologic Assessment of Targeted 
Myocardium on Autopsy.
Panel A shows prominent small-vessel ectasis at the 
interface of dense fibrosis (upper right) and viable 
myocardium (lower left) in postmortem cardiac sam-
ples obtained from Patient 5, who had a fatal stroke 
3 weeks after treatment. There is no acute myocardial 
inflammation or acute cellular necrosis. Panel B from 
the transition region shows occasional rectangular 
“boxcar” nuclei (white arrow) and hypertrophic cardio-
myocytes, which are observed in chronic stages of 
heart failure. Endothelial cells are normal in appear-
ance (black arrows), showing long, thin, nonreactive 
nuclei. (Hematoxylin and eosin staining was used in 
both panels.)
A
B
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org at WASHINGTON UNIV SCH MED MEDICAL LIB on January 9, 2018. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
 n engl j med 377;24 nejm.org December 14, 2017
2336
Radiation for Ablation of Ventricular Tachycardia
tricular tachycardia due to structural 
heart disease: causes and significance. 
 
J Am Heart Assoc 2013; 
2(3): 
e000072.
15. Dinov B, Fiedler L, Schönbauer R, et
al. Outcomes in catheter ablation of ven-
tricular tachycardia in dilated nonisch-
emic cardiomyopathy compared with 
ischemic cardiomyopathy: results from 
the Prospective Heart Centre of Leipzig 
VT (HELP-VT) Study. Circulation 2014; 
129: 
728-36.
16. Berruezo A, Fernández-Armenta J,
Andreu D, et al. Scar dechanneling: new 
method for scar-related left ventricular 
tachycardia substrate ablation. Circ Ar-
rhythm Electrophysiol 2015; 
8: 
326-36.
17. Marchlinski FE, Haffajee CI, Beshai
JF, et al. Long-term success of irrigated 
radiofrequency catheter ablation of sus-
tained ventricular tachycardia: post-approv-
al THERMOCOOL VT Trial. J Am Coll 
Cardiol 2016; 
67: 
674-83.
18. Proietti R, Essebag V, Beardsall J, et
al. Substrate-guided ablation of haemody-
namically tolerated and untolerated ven-
tricular tachycardia in patients with 
structural heart disease: effect of cardio-
myopathy type and acute success on long-
term outcome. Europace 2015; 
17: 
461-7.
19. Sacher F, Lim HS, Derval N, et al. Sub-
strate mapping and ablation for ventricu-
lar tachycardia: the LAVA approach. J Car-
diovasc Electrophysiol 2015; 
26: 
464-71.
20. Sapp JL, Wells GA, Parkash R, et al.
Ventricular tachycardia ablation versus 
escalation of antiarrhythmic drugs. 
 
N Engl J Med 2016; 
375: 
111-21.
21. Tung R, Vaseghi M, Frankel DS, et al.
Freedom 
from 
recurrent 
ventricular 
tachycardia after catheter ablation is as-
sociated with improved survival in pa-
tients with structural heart disease: an 
International VT Ablation Center Collab-
orative Group study. Heart Rhythm 2015; 
12: 
1997-2007.
22. Tzou WS, Frankel DS, Hegeman T, et
al. Core isolation of critical arrhythmia 
elements for treatment of multiple scar-
based ventricular tachycardias. Circ Ar-
rhythm Electrophysiol 2015; 
8: 
353-61.
23. Santangeli P, Frankel DS, Tung R, et
al. Early mortality after catheter ablation 
of ventricular tachycardia in patients with 
structural heart disease. J Am Coll Cardi-
ol 2017; 
69: 
2105-15.
24. Romeo P, Miller DV. Heart explant,
radiation injury. In: 
 Romeo MP, Miller DV, 
eds. Diagnostic pathology: cardiovascu-
lar. Philadelphia: 
 Lippincott Williams & 
Wilkins, 2013: 
24-5.
25. Curigliano G, Cardinale D, Dent S, et 
al. Cardiotoxicity of anticancer treat-
ments: epidemiology, detection, and 
management. CA Cancer J Clin 2016; 
66: 
309-25.
26. Di Biase L, Burkhardt JD, Lakkireddy
D, et al. Ablation of stable VTs versus sub-
strate ablation in ischemic cardiomyopa-
thy: the VISTA randomized multicenter 
trial. J Am Coll Cardiol 2015; 
66: 
2872-82.
27. Di Biase L, Santangeli P, Burkhardt
DJ, et al. Endo-epicardial homogenization 
of the scar versus limited substrate abla-
tion for the treatment of electrical storms 
in patients with ischemic cardiomyopa-
thy. J Am Coll Cardiol 2012; 
60: 
132-41.
28. Izquierdo M, Sánchez-Gómez JM,
Ferrero de Loma-Osorio A, et al. Endo-
epicardial versus only-endocardial abla-
tion as a first line strategy for the treat-
ment of ventricular tachycardia in patients 
with ischemic heart disease. Circ Ar-
rhythm Electrophysiol 2015; 
8: 
882-9.
29. Kumar S, Barbhaiya CR, Sobieszczyk
P, et al. Role of alternative interventional 
procedures when endo- and epicardial 
catheter ablation attempts for ventricular 
arrhythmias fail. Circ Arrhythm Electro-
physiol 2015; 
8: 
606-15.
30. Yusuf SW, Sami S, Daher IN. Radia-
tion-induced heart disease: a clinical up-
date. Cardiol Res Pract 2011; 
2011: 
317659.
Copyright © 2017 Massachusetts Medical Society.
The New England Journal of Medicine 
Downloaded from nejm.org at WASHINGTON UNIV SCH MED MEDICAL LIB on January 9, 2018. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. 
 Copyright © 2017 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved. 
