 Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rapm20
Applied Mobilities
ISSN: 2380-0127 (Print) 2380-0135 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rapm20
Bike helmets – a dangerous fixation? On the bike
helmet’s place in the cycling safety discourse in
the United States
Gregg Culver
To cite this article: Gregg Culver (2018): Bike helmets – a dangerous fixation? On the bike
helmet’s place in the cycling safety discourse in the United States, Applied Mobilities, DOI:
10.1080/23800127.2018.1432088
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/23800127.2018.1432088
Published online: 01 Feb 2018.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 12
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
 Applied Mobilities, 2018
https://doi.org/10.1080/23800127.2018.1432088
Bike helmets – a dangerous fixation? On the bike helmet’s 
place in the cycling safety discourse in the United States
Gregg Culver 
institute of Geography, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany
ABSTRACT
Despite the increasing popularity of the bicycle as a mode of urban 
transport in the United States, compared to much of the industrialized 
West, the US cycling scene continues to struggle with a high fatality 
and severe injury rate, and comparatively low levels of cycling. In 
contrast to the most bicycle-friendly countries, which have achieved 
high rates of safe cycling not through widespread adoption of bicycle 
safety helmets, but through bicycle-friendly infrastructure and policy, 
the US appears to have maintained a greater fixation on, and a higher 
rate of use of, bicycle helmets. In this paper, I seek to examine whether 
there is evidence of a helmet fixation, to sketch out the broad strokes 
of such a fixation as a discourse, and to offer an explanation of the 
effects of this discourse. Using a qualitative analysis of the official 
online presence of 25 US city planning departments relating to 
bicycling and bicycle safety, I first provide evidence that the helmet 
does in fact take a central place in the US urban bike safety discourse, 
and I characterize four rhetorical strategies used to encourage helmet 
use. I then argue that this helmet fixation is ultimately tied to the (re)
production of unfettered automobility, and that it arguably hampers 
efforts to actually improve bicycle safety. I subsequently suggest 
implications for research, practice, and advocacy.
1. The helmet fixation
On 15th September, 2009, 22-year-old Sylvia Bingham was struck and killed while riding her 
bicycle. A recent Yale graduate who had newly relocated to the City of Cleveland to work at 
Hard Hatted Women, a non-profit that aspires to help lift women out of poverty by assisting 
them in securing blue-collar jobs, Sylvia was said to be passionate about the environment 
and social justice. She was traveling in the curb lane of Prospect Ave in downtown Cleveland 
when a several-ton Peterbilt truck turned in her path, knocked her off her bike, and ran her 
over. The driver fled the scene, was later caught by the police, and was reported to have had 
drugs in his system. The tragic death of Sylvia Bingham received special attention locally: a 
promising young woman with a bright future – the type of person a city like Cleveland is 
eager to attract – was, at no fault of her own, run over by a possibly inebriated hit-and-run 
© 2018 informa UK limited, trading as taylor & Francis Group
KEYWORDS
bicycle helmets; vehicular 
violence; automobility; 
discourse; bicycle safety; Us 
cities
ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 4 september 2017 
Accepted 22 January 2018
CONTACT Gregg Culver 
  culver@uni-heidelberg.de
 2 
  
G. CULVER
driver. In an article on the incident in the city’s leading newspaper, the Plain Dealer (15th 
September 2009), her father was quoted as saying:
I hope people put the accent on safety [because i]t’s very dangerous out there for people on 
bicycles and people need to be careful. I don’t know if she was wearing a bicycle helmet, but 
the doctor said it would not have made a difference anyway.
In the immediately following sentence, the journalist continued:
Police confirmed that she was not wearing a helmet at the time of the accident. There have been 
several recent fatal accidents involving bicycle riders in Northeast Ohio, including a 65-year-old 
Cleveland man and a 13-year-old Green boy. Neither wore helmets at the time of their deaths.
The causes of fatal bicycle crashes are numerous and complex. The Plain Dealer journalist 
could have emphasized factors that led to these crashes from which we could learn in the 
future, such as whether bicycle facilities were present, whether they were hit-and-runs, 
whether the streets were well maintained, or if speeding, alcohol, and/or drugs were involved 
in these cases. Instead, despite the fact that the reader had been informed in the preceding 
sentence that a helmet would have made no difference, lack of helmet use was nonetheless 
implicitly presented not only as a paramount piece of information for understanding her 
death, but also as the common connection between several cyclists’ deaths. But, if the helmet 
was, in this case, irrelevant, then how does it come to play a pivotal role in the article? From 
where does the motivation behind including this information come? What is its effect?
This is not a one-off example, but appears to fit a trend. Aside from the question of helmet 
use seeming to appear frequently in media accounts of such tragedies, within the ever-grow-
ing US bicycle scene, the helmet appears to constitute a recurring and uniquely significant 
aspect of the bicycle safety discourse. Some espouse their use, while others reject them. Yet 
irrespective of their differing positions, the question of the helmet is one that seems to 
occupy the American bicycling scene in a way that does not serve as a central question in, 
for instance, the Dutch, Danish, or German bicycling contexts, countries with much higher 
rates of utilitarian bicycling, much safer cycling, but much lower helmet use in comparison 
to the US (Buehler and Pucher 2017). And, while this is an issue discussed in the bicycling 
advocacy scene (e.g. Colville-Andersen 2010), it has received little attention in the academic 
literature.
Based on a qualitative analysis of official city planning department webpages and directly 
linked documents dealing with bicycling and bicycle safety in 25 US cities, I argue in this 
paper that the helmet does in fact occupy a special place within the “official” bicycle safety 
discourse in the US cycling scene, and that this helmet fixation helps to obscure the root of 
the problem and distract from more effective strategies to improve bike safety. This matter 
is one of life and death for cyclists, and so deserves to be treated both earnestly and cau-
tiously. I wish to make clear that I do not seek to make claims or recommendations on helmet 
use, one way or the other. Instead, my intention is to interrogate an exaggerated and arguably 
misplaced fixation with helmets in the US, to characterize its discursive effects, and to suggest 
a few implications for researchers, practitioners, and advocates toward refocusing efforts on 
strategies that are proven to be more effective in improving bike safety.
2. The US bicycle renaissance and the bike helmet
Since the turn of the millennium, the bicycle as a mode of transportation has been experi-
encing a renaissance in the United States (Pucher, Buehler, and Seinen 2011). Although it 
 APPLIED MOBILITIES 
 3
remains a marginal mode nationally, with only 0.6% of commuters in the United States 
traveling to work by bike, it has been the fastest growing means of transport in recent years 
(McKenzie 2014), with most of this growth taking place in cities. In the 50 largest cities, 
bicyclists’ proportion of commuters is, at 1.2%, twice that of the national average, with the 
most bike-friendly major cities of Portland, Washington DC, Minneapolis, and San Francisco 
reaching around 4–6% (ABW 2016). Meanwhile, bicycle-friendliness has become an increas-
ingly important planning goal in the US. From 2007 to 2016, the number of states and major 
cities with the official published goal of encouraging bicycling approximately doubled: from 
16 states and 24 cities to 36 states and 47 cities (ABW 2016, xiv).
Despite significant growth in cycling, however, a problem in the US cycling scene com-
pared to other industrialized Western countries is its persistently high fatality rate (Buehler 
and Pucher 2017). The fatality rate per kilometers travelled for US cyclists is, for instance, 
over four times higher than for cyclists in the Netherlands, and about three times higher 
than in Denmark and Germany (ITF 2013, 114). As such, much of the efforts toward encour-
aging cycling in US cities are understandably targeted at improving safety. One of the notable 
threads of the safety debate in the US and in English language literature and which contrasts 
with the considerably safer Dutch, Danish, and German bicycle scenes has been the focus 
on the bicycle helmet (Pucher and Buehler 2008). However, the case can be made that this 
focus on the helmet is misplaced.
After years of debate on the basic question of the efficacy of bicycle helmets (e.g. Attewell, 
Glase, and McFadden 2001; Elvik 2013; Thompson, Rivara, and Thompson 1989), there 
appears to be consensus that, all else equal, bicycle helmets do provide protection against 
head injuries (Olivier and Radun 2017). Figures vary, but according to an OECD report (ITF 
2013), soft-shell helmets, by far the most common type of bike helmet, may reduce up to 
41% of head injuries, while hard-shell helmets provide better protection, with up to a 64% 
reduction in head injuries.1 A logical implication of this consensus is that mandatory helmet 
laws should improve bicyclist safety. However, this point is both controversial and contested, 
particularly because there is a lack of conclusive evidence that such laws produce better 
outcomes at the societal level (Elvik 2013; Huybers et al. 2017; de Jong 2012; Markowitz and 
Chatterji 2015; Meehan 3rd et al. 2013; Robinson 2007; Walter et al. 2013).
Ultimately, the issue of mandatory helmet laws is far less clear-cut than one might assume. 
As Markowitz and Chatterji (2015, 39) argued in a case study involving the United States, “[i]
t is clear that there are offsetting behaviors and unintended consequences of these laws, 
and these need to be considered by policymakers”
. On the one hand, helmet use itself could 
encourage riskier behavior via risk compensation (Fyhri and Phillips 2013; Gamble and Walker 
2016), and on the other hand, mandatory helmet laws could discourage cycling without 
making it much safer. It is widely acknowledged that many people do not like wearing 
helmets, and so mandating their use could directly discourage cycling (de Jong 2012). Some 
evidence suggests that helmet laws could also indirectly discourage cycling by framing it 
as a more dangerous activity, thereby scaring people away from cycling (Macmillan et al. 
2016; Markowitz and Chatterji 2015, 39). By discouraging cycling, helmet laws could poten-
tially weaken the “safety in numbers” effect: simply put, as more cyclists are present in a given 
geography, motorists learn to anticipate them and are less likely to hit them in the first place 
(Aldred et al. 2017; Jacobsen 2003; Pucher and Buehler 2008; Robinson 2005, 2007). This 
pattern of higher rates of cycling being associated with lower rates of bicyclist injuries and 
fatalities is strikingly visible in major US cities (see ABW 2016, 40). Thus, if the safety in 
 4 
  
G. CULVER
numbers effect is weakened through helmet legislation, the danger to cyclists could poten-
tially increase (Robinson 2007).
However, there is a further, highly compelling reason to believe that a narrow focus on 
bicycle helmets is almost certainly not the best way to improve cycling safety, as a look at 
the Netherlands, Denmark, and Germany suggests. Cycling was not always safe in these 
three bike-friendly countries. Between 1970 and 2008, these countries achieved between a 
60 and 80% decline in fatalities and a concomitant increase in cycling (Buehler and Pucher 
2012, 37). As Pucher and Buehler (2008, 509, emphasis original) point out:
[this] is definitely not due to widespread use of safety helmets. On the contrary, in the Netherlands, 
with the safest cycling of any country, less than 1% of adult cyclists wear helmets, and even 
among children, only 3–5% wear helmets … . Dutch cycling experts and planners … adamantly 
oppose laws to require the use of helmets.
Meanwhile, in stark contrast, “much of the effort to improve cyclist safety [in the United 
States] has focused on increasing helmet use” (Pucher and Buehler 2008, 509). As of 2012, it 
was estimated that among adult cyclists in the United States, 29% always, and 15% occa-
sionally wear helmets, and among children, 40% always, and 29% occasionally wear helmets 
(Jewett et al. 2016). Despite a significantly higher rate of helmet use, the decrease of cyclist 
fatalities in the US has been among the lowest compared to developed Western countries 
(Pucher and Buehler 2017). US cyclist fatalities decreased by only 10% between 1970 and 
2008 (Buehler and Pucher 2012). Unfortunately, not only is this decline attributable to the 
sharp decrease in cycling among children, but the decline of cycling among children has 
been at least partly attributed to mandatory helmet laws (Markowitz and Chatterji 2015; 
Vargo et al. 2015). In sum, cyclists in the United States are far likelier to wear helmets and 
yet 5 times likelier to be killed and about 21 times likelier to be injured than in the Netherlands, 
where helmet use is a rarity (Buehler and Pucher 2012).
If safe cycling can be achieved without helmets, and if relatively dangerous cycling persists 
despite helmet use, then basic logic dictates that the helmet simply cannot possibly be the 
most significant factor of bicyclist safety. The most crucial factor to safety must lie elsewhere. 
Two points are significant here. First, helmets do nothing to prevent crashes from happening. 
Second, as I have argued elsewhere in greater detail (Culver, forthcoming), everyday, utili-
tarian bicycling in and of itself is not an especially dangerous activity, but becomes danger-
ous in the presence of “vehicular violence”
, or the potential for physical violence created 
through the velocity and mass of motor vehicles. Generally speaking, even though most 
cycling-related injuries are caused by single-bicycle crashes, the vast majority of fatalities 
and the most severe cyclist injuries involve motor vehicles (Pucher and Buehler 2017; 
Schepers et al. 2015). Accordingly, in stark contrast to ongoing debates and uncertainties 
regarding the helmet’s role in overall cyclist safety, there is strong and unambiguous evi-
dence that well-maintained bicycle-dedicated infrastructure (such as bicycle paths and 
intersection treatments) and reduced automobile speeds create the conditions for safe 
cycling (Chen 2015; Pucher and Buehler 2017; Reynolds et al. 2009; Thomas and DeRobertis 
2013). It is precisely through committing to building well-maintained bicycle infrastructure, 
reducing automobile speeds, and formulating other bicycle-friendly policies and regulations 
that bike-friendly cities have been able to both substantially improve bicycle safety and 
encourage bicycling as a convenient mode of transport (Buehler and Pucher 2017; Koglin 
2017; Pucher and Buehler 2008; Walter et al. 2013). Certainly, US cities have made piecemeal 
but notable progress in building bicycle infrastructure in recent years. However, on the 
 APPLIED MOBILITIES 
 5
whole, US cities still lag behind among the cities of the industrialized West (let alone within 
the bike-friendly countries) in resolutely creating the conditions for safer cycling.
If providing networks of convenient and well-maintained dedicated bicycle infrastructure 
is the best method of improving bicycle safety, then what explains the apparent fixation 
with helmets in the context of the United States?
3. Methods
In order to answer this question, I conducted a holistic qualitative analysis of official city 
planning department webpages and directly linked documents dealing with bicycling and 
bicycle safety in 25 US cities, collected in two phases, to sketch out the helmet’s place in a 
broader discourse on bicycle safety.
In this analysis, I use the notion of discourse in a particular poststructuralist sense as 
“relatively well-bounded areas of social knowledge” and something that not only constrains 
but also enables “writing, speaking and thinking within … specific historical limits” (McHoul 
and Grace 1993, 31). As a discourse becomes increasingly hegemonic (when a body of social 
knowledge, in essence, becomes “commonsense”), it is increasingly difficult to make claims 
that conflict with the hegemonic discourse. Broadly, discourse in this sense is understood 
as having its (re)production rooted in power relations (Foucault 1995). That is, discourses 
are not (re)produced completely arbitrarily, innocently, or based on objective fact (Said 1979). 
Rather, they are “the end result of a process that reflects certain interests” (Jhally 1998, n.p.). 
Essentially, they serve to benefit the particular (political-economic, social, cultural, and so 
on) power structures and interests that produce them. Discourses are not arbitrary, though 
neither are they fixed and determined. To borrow from Said (1979, 3), the existence of a 
particular relatively coherent discourse on bike helmets
is not to say that [such a discourse] unilaterally determines what can be said about [bike safety], 
but that it is the whole network of interests inevitably brought to bear on (and therefore always 
involved in) any occasion when [bike safety] is in question.
A more or less hegemonic discourse on bike helmets would thus both enable and con-
strain what can be said about helmets and bike safety in a given spatiotemporal context.
Discourses are extensive, have fuzzy edges, are never completely fixed, and are often 
contested and internally contradictory. The various threads that are woven into a given 
discourse and the sources of its (re)production expand far beyond a few city planning doc-
uments, and would likely be complemented, contradicted, or contested not only internally 
but also in, for instance, news media, bicycle industry, or bicycle activist sources. In this paper, 
I focus my analysis exclusively on the task of identifying and sketching out the discourse on 
bike helmets from the perspective of city planning and urban government, as these insti-
tutions are the most directly and immediately involved in effecting real and positive change 
for urban cyclists in any given city. I treat the city planning departments’ texts as a proxy for 
getting at a larger US urban discourse on bike helmets based on the assumption that infor-
mation presented here reflects an “officially sanctioned” position on bike safety in the US 
city – they must remain within the realm of what would be considered “normal” and “accept-
able” and thus part of a hegemonic (though not uncontested) bike safety discourse. My goal 
is thus not to categorize each city planning department or even each city in terms of their 
individual strategy of discussing helmets, but instead to sketch out a broader US urban 
 6 
  
G. CULVER
discourse by identifying general themes, patterns, and strategies for discussing bike safety 
and the helmet’s role in it.
This approach brings with it a number of methodological difficulties. An initial difficulty 
is rooted in the collection of data and the decision of whether to include a given text in the 
analysis, as these city planning departments frequently linked to other agencies and other 
third-parties who may otherwise have diverging interests, differing areas of responsibilities, 
and contradictory positions on various issues. Consequently, the guiding principle used was 
that if the city webpage redirected the reader to a third-party text on bike safety in a way 
that was both direct and uncommented, then it was considered as having been given the 
“imprimatur” of the city planning department, and was included in the analysis. If third-party 
texts were presented as being an additional information source, and therefore implying 
greater separation, they were not included in the analysis.
A further difficulty is that these data are only able to offer a snapshot of whatever given 
city officials posted or linked to at a given time, and thus can (and did) change suddenly and 
significantly. Consequently, the analysis was carried out in two phases over the course of 
two years with the goal of not only capturing the broader discourse, but also assessing 
whether there had been any shift in this discourse. Phase I was conducted in mid-2015, when 
data were collected for 16 major US cities – the core cities of the 12 largest metropolitan 
statistical areas (MSAs), as well as 4 additional cities in mid-sized MSAs to complement the 
analysis both regionally and in terms of bicycle-friendliness. Phase II was conducted in mid-
2017, which revisited these 16 cities to asses any changes in the direction of this topic, and 
9 additional cities were included to provide greater diversity in bike-friendliness, as well as 
in national region and MSA size. Having reached a point of data saturation, and having 
compiled a list of cities that span the spectrum of bike-friendliness, the final analysis was 
limited to these 25 cities (see Table 1).
Table 1. Cities, City planning departments Analyzed, and time period of data Collection.
Data collection
City
Primary online presence analyzed
2015 & 2017
Atlanta
Atlanta department of City planning
boston
boston transportation department
Chicago
Chicago department of transportation
dallas
dallas Mobility and street services department
denver
City and County of denver bicycle program
el paso
el paso office of Resilience & sustainability
Houston
City of Houston bikeways program
los Angeles
los Angeles department of transportation
Memphis
Memphis division of parks & Neighborhoods
Miami
Miami office of transportation
New York City
New York department of transportation
philadelphia
philadelphia transportation surveys & design bureau
phoenix
phoenix street transportation department
portland
portland bureau of transportation
san Francisco
san Francisco planning department
Washington dC
district department of transportation
2017
Albuquerque
Albuquerque transit department
Charleston, south Carolina
Charleston department of planning, preservation & sustainability
Cincinnati
Cincinnati bicycle transportation program
detroit
detroit planning and development department
indianapolis
indianapolis department of public Works
Kansas City
Mid-America Regional Council [Metropolitan planning organization]
Minneapolis
Minneapolis public Works
pittsburgh
pittsburgh department of City planning
salt lake City
salt lake City transportation division
 APPLIED MOBILITIES 
 7
4. Results
In this section, I first present results regarding the prominence of the bicycle helmet in the 
bicycle safety discourse, highlighting three ways in which the bicycle helmet is afforded 
special attention. I then characterize four rhetorical approaches used in recommending 
helmet use, as well as alternative approaches and shifting strategies.
4.1. Prominence of the bike helmet
Of the analyzed cities, only for Atlanta were no references to helmets found – its official web 
presence neither had a separate bicycle safety information section nor any mentions of 
helmets in its bicycle plan document, but instead focuses on bicycle infrastructure and 
planning. The remaining 24 of 25 cities have explicit references to bicycle helmets somewhere 
in the analyzed documents, providing some initial support to the notion that the bicycle 
helmet is a consistent element of the official urban bicycle safety discourse in the United 
States. However, the centrality of the bicycle helmet in this discourse is not reflected quan-
titatively, as in the number of mentions of helmets, or the number of words used to discuss 
helmets vis-à-vis other aspects of safety. Indeed, the text regarding bicycle helmets takes 
up relatively little physical space in many of the cities’ documents, and a number of these 
documents make anywhere from one single to a handful of references. Instead, it is the 
placement, emphasis, and visual representation of helmets that afford them a taken-for-
granted centrality in the context of bicycle safety. I now turn to discussing these three qual-
itative aspects in order.
4.1.1. Placement
One straightforward way in which the helmet fixation is evidenced is by the placement of 
helmet references within the material, wherein the bicycle helmet is often placed before 
other aspects of safety, such as learning how to ride properly in traffic, or using lights and 
hand signals. For example, Chicago’s (2011) Safe Cycling Guide addresses the bicycle helmet 
second only to information on the bicycle itself. Similarly, both the Salt Lake City Transportation 
Divisions (n.d.) and the Indianapolis Office of Sustainability (n.d.) discuss the helmet first in 
sections describing the equipment needed for cycling. Likewise, both the City of Memphis 
(2017) and metropolitan Kansas City (Mid-America Regional Council 2017) only have three 
points on bicycle safety, and while the other two safety tips differ between the two cities, 
both list the words “Always wear a helmet” first.
4.1.2. Emphasis
A second way in which helmets are given special prominence is through the (often moral-
izing) tone of urgency given to them relative to other aspects of bicycle safety – typically 
through the use of exclamation points, tone, capitalization or font style. For instance, the 
Los Angeles Department of Transportation 2015 page on bike safety listed 40 separate tips 
with full descriptions for each, in which “Wear your helmet!” was one of only two instances 
in which an exclamation point is used, while 83 periods were used. The same is true for 
Kansas City (Mid-America Regional Council 2017), where the phrase “Wearing a helmet may 
save your life!” has the only exclamation point within the three paragraphs of text on bike 
safety. Similarly, the 2015 El Paso Office of Resilience & Sustainability webpage offered six 
 8 
  
G. CULVER
main safety tips, each with subpoints, totaling about 250 words. Here, the statement “WEAR 
YOUR HELMET!” was not only listed first, but was the only phrase to be fully capitalized and 
end with an exclamation point.
4.1.3. Visual representation
A third way that helmets are framed as crucial elements of bicycle safety is through the 
consistent and rather narrow visual representations of helmets in photographs of cyclists, 
as well as diagrams, figures, and logos. Twenty-one of the cities have photographs of cyclists 
in which helmets (or the lack thereof) are visible. Fifteen of them exclusively have (often 
several) images of helmeted cyclists, while 6 of them have photographs of both helmeted 
cyclists and (very few, and often less prominently displayed) unhelmeted cyclists. Nearly 
ubiquitous are images of what could be called “happy and safe cyclists”
, or the smiling, hel-
meted cyclists (often parents with children, or group rides) cruising down city streets, fre-
quently in bike lanes or over sharrows – all of it suggesting the fun, ease, and family-friendliness 
of urban cycling. Nearly as common are photographs of the “professional cyclist”
, or the 
lycra-clad, geared-up, and always-helmeted cyclist. Visually, there is a prominent helmet 
orthodoxy presented in these images which ties bicycle helmets to happy, safe, and respon-
sible cycling. As an illustrative example that exudes the relationship between helmets and 
safety, the only image on City of Chicago’s (2017) page for Bike Safety & Education depicts 
two cyclists donning helmets with the caption reading: “A Bicycling Ambassador properly 
fits a cyclist’s helmet at the annual Chicago Bike to Work Day Rally”
. Aside from such photo-
graphs, the bike helmet is also positioned as essentially synonymous with bike safety 
throughout many of the cities via diagrams, figures, and logos. On the Los Angeles 
Department of Transportation (2017) bicycle webpage, for instance, there is a clickable image 
for the link to the “Safety” page, which is a simple graphic image of a helmeted head – thus, 
the helmeted head is used as the literal symbol for bicycle safety.
4.1.4. Helmet as central to bike safety
In sum, the bicycle helmet occupies a unique place in the urban cycling safety discourse in 
the US. Certainly, these documents also discuss other aspects of safety, such as the use of 
bicycle lights, reflectors, and reflective gear, as well as safe riding practices. Moreover, not 
all cities make equally strong impressions of the importance of bicycle helmet use. However, 
even if not all three of these aspects of prominence, tone, and visual representation are 
equally present in every city’s texts, it is when viewed holistically that the centrality and 
taken-for-grantedness of the bicycle helmet as a dominant feature of this discourse can be 
more clearly discerned. That is, taken together, the frequent prioritization of helmets in safety 
tips; the particular urgency attached to helmets via the use of capital letters, bold font, 
exclamation points, and moralizing tone; the dominance of pictures of helmeted cyclists; 
and the figures of disembodied helmeted heads and helmeted cyclists as logos of bicycle 
safety all work to reinforce the unique focus on the bike helmet. Consequently, even if the 
bicycle helmet is not necessarily framed in a way that suggests it is a sufficient condition for 
safe cycling, it is predominantly framed as a necessary condition of bicycle safety.
 APPLIED MOBILITIES 
 9
4.2. Beyond legality – rhetorical strategies of encouraging helmet use
There is a range of rhetorical strategies used regarding helmet use in the 24 cities with helmet 
references. Broadly, these can be placed into four categories. Ordered in increasing intensity 
of helmet promotion, these are suggestion, enticement, admonishment, and threat of 
violence.
4.2.1. Suggestion
The first of these four approaches is the suggestion, which ranges from being implicit to 
more straightforward in recommending helmet use. Regarding the former, Pittsburgh and 
San Francisco are similar in making passing statements, which, at most, implicitly suggest 
helmet use. For instance, the only reference to helmets in the Pittsburgh material was the 
outdated (and removed from the website during the period of analysis) City of Pittsburgh 
Bicycle Plan (1999), which envisions a future in which there is an “increased use of bicycle 
helmets”
. A number of other cities, including New York and Indianapolis, make direct sug-
gestions. As one example, the City of Cincinnati (n.d., 23) states that while only children are 
required to wear helmets, the Department of Transportation Program “recommends that 
adults also wear helmets”
.
4.2.2. Enticement
The strategy of enticement is encouraging in a positive sense, where helmet wearing is por-
trayed as a self-evidently hip and cool thing to do. In 2015, for instance, the since-irretrievable 
Houston Bikeways webpage encouraged cyclists to “‘Be A Helmet Head! Be Cool!’” The 
Portland Bureau of Transportation’s webpage also made use of enticement in at least two 
instances. Most notable in this regard was a directly linked YouTube video produced by 
B:C:Clettes (2008), a group of female cyclists in Vancouver, who sing a rendition of Justin 
Timberlake’s “SexyBack” – with its famous line being “I’m bringing sexy back” – while dancing 
with their helmets. The video description notably read: “I wear a helmet so you can drive like 
an idiot. And because it looks smart”
.
4.2.3. Admonishment
Many of the references to helmets fit in the category of admonishment. Here, references to 
helmets take on a much more assertive, commanding, and sometimes overtly moralizing 
tone that is largely unique to helmets compared to other elements of bicycle safety, which, 
in contrast, are mostly matter-of-fact statements. Such references demand the use helmets, 
indicating that helmet use is not a legitimate personal choice, but instead is a moral duty 
for cyclists. Some such statements are formulated in the form of a terse command, which 
are found in the bulk of the cities analyzed, but vary in tone and emphasis. The City and 
County of Denver’s (2017) webpage on bike safety states in a friendlier tone, “Wear a helmet 
– it’s just good sense!” The City of Phoenix’s (2017b) bicycle safety pledge straightforwardly 
obligates cyclists to wear a helmet. In a sterner and less patient tone, an FAQ section on the 
City of Philadelphia Streets Department (2017) webpage responds to the question “Do I 
really have to wear a helmet?” with the answer: “Yes. Everyone should wear a helmet on every 
ride, no matter how short the trip is. Children under 12 years of age are required to wear a 
helmet, but adults are strongly encouraged to wear them whenever they ride”
. Even though 
the factually correct answer to this question, according to city and state law, would be a 
 10 
  
G. CULVER
simple “No” for people over the age of 12, the assertive and curt immediate response “Yes” 
and the accompanying text strongly suggest a moral duty to do so.
4.2.4. Threat of violence
The most aggressive form of encouragement of helmet use is threat of violence, or a strategy 
in which the violence of the crash is actively used as the primary motivating force to coerce 
helmet use. A number of instances in cities such as Albuquerque, El Paso, Houston, Kansas 
City, and Miami were more mild, as in a document linked to by Miami’s Bicycle program, 
that: “There is no cure for brain injury. It is the Number 1 killer and disabler of children in 
America” (Brain Injury Association of Florida n.d.). However, the threat of violence was espe-
cially aggressive in Boston (in 2015) and Phoenix. As one illustrative example, the City of 
Phoenix (2017a) has a series of seven graphic novels on bicycle safety, each focused on a 
different topic, such as avoiding the door zone, using lights and reflectors, and riding on the 
right side of the street. The first issue, titled “PROTECT YOUR BRAIN! ALWAYS WEAR A HELMET!”
, 
is entirely devoted to wearing helmets, and features a cover with a cyclist’s face spit down 
the middle: the left side of the image depicts a smiling, helmeted cyclist, the right side of 
the image, an unhelmeted cyclist with a large section of his brain exposed, a piece of his ear 
missing, and blood pouring down his face. In similar style, the comic follows a “responsible” 
cyclist giving an unhelmeted cyclist a hard time for not wearing one, before the latter strikes 
a dog, crashes into the street, cracks his skull open, exposing his brain as on the cover, and 
bleeding profusely onto the street and down his face. In each of the six subsequent issues, 
the first thing that the protagonist does before hopping on their bike is explicitly stating 
something along the lines of (as in the second issue): “I wouldn’t even think of heading out 
on my bike without my helmet”
.
4.3. Alternatives and shifts
4.3.1. Helmet use as a personal choice
Alternatively, some cities do more directly position helmet use as a personal choice. 
Minneapolis was most notable in this regard, with its sole reference to helmets being: 
“Bicyclists are not required to wear a helmet in Minnesota”
. The same sentiment is made 
through visual representation. In the City of Minneapolis’s (2017) cartoon-style bike safety 
posters and related materials, although the great majority of the cartoon cyclists are wearing 
helmets, some of them are depicted happily cycling in everyday clothing and without a 
helmet. In the city’s poster “More Bikes, Safer Streets”
, for instance, one of the three cyclists 
is an unhelmeted female cyclist in fashionable clothing. Similarly, Boston (in 2017), Detroit, 
and San Francisco all had some images in the analyzed documents in which unhelmeted 
cyclists are more prominently shown. Such instances do appear meaningful, as the pho-
tographers, artists, and department officials involved would have to make an active decision 
to depict cyclists without helmets, embracing a vision of urban cycling that, at least to some 
degree, contests the predominant helmet orthodoxy.
4.3.2. Notable changes – shifting discourse?
Changes in two cities in particular – Los Angeles and Boston – provide some evidence of a 
shift in this discourse. Both cities updated their website within the span of these two years, 
and both – but especially Boston – became less fixated on helmets. Both cities continued 
 APPLIED MOBILITIES 
 11
to have comments supporting the use of helmets in 2017, but these were “downgraded” 
from using more aggressive admonishment and threat of violence to more mild forms of 
admonishment and suggestion.
Especially notable is the Boston update. The website overhaul featured a more diverse, 
inclusive, and positive tone. As an example, the images in 2015 on the main page featured 
an image of a large group of cyclists – all White, wearing professional cycling gear, and 
helmeted. In addition, there were several instances of admonishment and threat of violence 
regarding helmet use throughout the analyzed documents. In 2017, two prominent pictures 
of cyclists on the main page were of women of color, both wearing a hijab and casual cloth-
ing, and one of them without a helmet. Further, a number of the programs featured had as 
an official goal encouraging cycling among women, youth, and low-income communities. 
Finally, a number of sources that contained the more aggressively admonishing statements 
on bicycle helmets were no longer directly linked to the page. Meanwhile, the City of 
Bostons’s (2017) information on bicycle accessories notably suggests the use of a helmet, 
stating:
You’ll probably fall over once or twice, whether you’re a new rider or an experienced one (we all 
have). A helmet can help protect your head. … Most people riding in Boston, no matter their 
age, choose to wear a helmet.
In sum, these instances suggest a potentially softening tone on helmets, and a more 
inclusive approach to cycling as a whole.
4.3.3. Current alternatives in emphasis
A number of cities have either statements or official campaigns with the goal of highlighting 
bike safety as an issue that not only involves cyclists, but involves other traffic participants 
as well, and motorists in particular. Several cities, such as Charleston, Dallas, Denver, and Los 
Angeles, provide general etiquette for motorists driving around bicycles, or offer slogans 
such as “Safety Starts with All of Us”
, as one of Minneapolis’ bicycle safety posters states, 
which attempt to shift a discussion to safe behavior among all traffic participants. Similarly, 
metropolitan Washington’s StreetSmart (2013) program is an education and enforcement 
campaign with the goal of improving pedestrian and cyclist safety. It not only has tips for 
these two groups, but for motorists as well. Most striking is the campaign’s use of a number 
of powerful images showing people with tire marks on their faces and statements such as 
“You can’t fix a pedestrian at a body shop”
. By visualizing this violence for motorists as a 
warning and reminder of their killing power, such a move flips threat of violence on its head.
5. Discussion and concluding remarks
This analysis supports the assertion that there is a fixation with the helmet in the “official” 
bike safety discourse in the US – in fact, the helmet often functions as a synecdoche for 
bicycle safety itself. However, the helmet is not – and should not be emphasized as – the 
single most important tool in achieving greater bike safety. Instead, a much more reliable 
path to safe bicycling is through the provision of bicycle infrastructure, reducing automobile 
speeds, and by creating and enforcing laws and other regulations that hold motorists more 
accountable for the great potential for vehicular violence that they create for non-motorists 
through the use of their automobiles. If this is the case, then, what explains the fixation with 
bicycle helmets?
 12 
  
G. CULVER
5.1. The roots of the US bike helmet discourse?
Viewing the helmet fixation as a discourse – that is, as rooted in power relations and as 
ultimately reflecting certain interests (Foucault 1995; Said 1979) – assumes useful effects of 
the fixation with helmets that benefit particular interests. To understand social meanings 
around the bicycle, however, first requires the recognition that social meanings of mobilities 
are not made in isolation, but instead are made relationally (Adey 2006). Most crucially, the 
meanings bound up with bicycling in urban America must ultimately be understood within 
the larger context of the subordination of the bicycle to the automobile under the hegemonic 
regime of automobility (Furness 2010), or the political-economic, material, social, spatio-
temporal, and cultural dominance of the automobile-based transport system. Automobility 
is particularly pronounced within the United States, where it is not only locked-in through 
the rearranged spatialities of the car-based built environment that require the use of the 
automobile to negotiate basic tasks of everyday life, and undergirded by a massive network 
of political-economic and governmental interests enabling and ensuring profit and societal 
control (Böhm et al. 2006; Freund and Martin 2007; Sheller and Urry 2000), but it is also 
ideologically and culturally secured through its “essentialization” in American culture 
(Henderson 2006). That is, automobility has historically been deeply essentialized and cul-
turally hegemonic in the United States, meaning that car driving is taken as a universal given, 
and is tightly bound up with the notion of freedom (Henderson 2013, 34). As such, within 
the urban politics of mobility in the United States, alternatives to the automobile are often 
subject to intense scrutiny and suspicion, and potential hindrances to automobility are 
staunchly resisted (2016; Culver 2015).
In light of the hegemony of essentialized automobility as the context within which the 
urban bicycle safety discourse is embedded, I argue that the helmet fixation is ultimately 
tied to the (re)production of unfettered automobility:
•  
First, the helmet fixation obscures the root of the problem. Automobility is inherently 
violent, but there is virtually no collective desire to struggle against, let alone even fully 
accept this systemic and predictable violence, and so it is collectively denied (Culver, 
forthcoming). It should be obvious that most people desire to be absolved of their 
guilt in taking part in a violent system – virtually everyone involved in automobility 
has an understandable inclination to reflexively consider the death of cyclists as tragic 
accident rather than manslaughter. The helmet fixation redirects attention away from 
the overarching problem of vehicular violence, assisting in its denial.
•  
Second, it redistributes blame. By constantly reinforcing the need for cyclists to feel 
responsible for their own safety (akin to the manner in which jaywalking was invented 
in the early 20th century [Norton 2008]), this helmet fixation serves to redistribute blame 
back onto the victim of vehicular violence. Hence, as in the case of Sylvia Bingham, the 
often knee-jerk reaction: “Oh, a cyclist died. Well, were they wearing a helmet? Oh, they 
weren’t? Well, they should have been more responsible”
.
•  
Third, the helmet fixation signals a societal lack of will to make the necessary changes 
that would allow for greater cyclist safety. Technologically speaking, significantly improv-
ing bike safety is easy: establish complete bicycle networks – require bicycle accessibility 
to destinations accessible by car – as opposed to the limited and splotchy patchworks 
of bike paths as is now the case in most US cities. Doing this, however, would come 
with the cost of major socio-political and cultural change: automobility will inevitably 
 APPLIED MOBILITIES 
 13
be hampered to some degree. The lack of will to do so reflects an ugly truth – that the 
collective political-economic interests and hegemonic structures benefiting from and 
undergirding US automobility prefer the steady and predictable loss of these lives over 
the price of putting greater restraints on automobility.
•  
And fourth, the demand put on cyclists to wear helmets is both a tacit acknowledgment 
of this fact, as well as a nostrum – it is not the remedy that can solve the underlying 
problem, but, so the feeling goes, at least it is something.
The danger of the helmet fixation is that a narrow focus on debating the efficacy of hel-
mets in the context of vehicular violence is – to use an imperfect and provocative metaphor 
– akin to debating whether mandatory bullet-proof vest laws for city-dwellers would reduce 
the severity of gun violence in US cities. Presumably, such a measure would reduce gun 
deaths and severe injuries. However, this would implicitly accept gun violence as inevitable, 
rather than seeking to stop people from being shot in the first place. Recommending helmet 
use is neither wrong nor dangerous per se. Rather, a rigid fixation on the bike helmet has 
already skipped over the source of the violence threatening the cyclist – it accepts that 
vehicular violence is inevitable, and seeks only to lessen the impact of that violence by 
obligating the cyclist to accept this fate and prepare for its eventuality. Meanwhile, the 
helmet fixation distracts from proven strategies that can actually improve bicycle safety.
5.2. Implications for research, practice, and advocacy
In moving forward, applied mobilities scholars can contribute to furthering this line of 
research. For example, such contributions could examine whether and how discourses on 
bike helmets and bike safety are produced, how they are (re)shaped and contested (for 
instance, by local news media, bicycle activists, and bicycle (helmet) manufacturers), and 
how they may open or close opportunities at affecting real and positive change for cyclists’ 
safety. Further research could also examine why and how the helmet discourse developed 
differently in the Netherlands, Denmark, and Germany (among other countries), and whether 
and how the discourse on helmet use in those bicycle-friendly countries may be changing 
as well.
For their part, planners face considerable limitations, and so it is important to note that 
the intention of this analysis is not to demonize them. Planners cannot produce full-on 
societal change, but instead seek to encourage safer cycling within strict cultural, political, 
fiscal, and regulatory constraints. Despite these practical limitations, though, planners can 
avoid contributing to this problematic, arguably overly moralizing discourse. Without wishing 
to endorse one particular position, the cities in this analysis make clear that alternatives are 
possible. Atlanta demonstrates that there is no particular reason why a statement on helmets 
needs to be made at all in the context of bicycle planning. Or, as evidenced by Minneapolis, 
a simple statement of fact can be made regarding the local bicycle helmet laws. Some may 
also consider whether they want to be more actively inclusive of cyclists – either through 
overt statements or more diverse visual representations – who choose not to wear helmets, 
as suggested in San Francisco, Detroit, or Boston. Practitioners should, however, reconsider 
whether admonishment, and even more so, the threat of violence are strategies for encour-
aging bike safety that they wish to endorse and pursue.
 14 
  
G. CULVER
Perhaps most importantly, cyclists must not be told to “wear helmets so others can drive 
like idiots” (B:C:Clettes 2008). Whether they (choose to) wear a helmet or not, cyclists should 
refuse to acquiesce to vehicular violence, and push for serious bicycle infrastructure invest-
ments and policies that safeguard vulnerable traffic participants. Considering that motorists 
operate fantastically lethal machines, a greater focus on improving motorist awareness for 
and responsibility toward vulnerable traffic participants should be pursued. After all, safety 
may indeed “start with all of us”
, as current alternative approaches are increasingly declaring, 
but it is nonetheless automobility that is doing most of the killing.
Note
1.  
Initial research suggests that the airbag helmet, such as the Swedish “Hövding”
, may 
“substantially [reduce] the risks of severe head injury” compared to conventional helmets, but 
more technological innovation and research is necessary (Kurt et al. 2017).
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author.
Funding
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research 
Foundation) [CU 334/1-1].
ORCID
Gregg Culver 
 http://orcid.org/0000-0002-1939-413X
References
Culver, Gregg. 2015. “A bridge too far”: Traffic engineering science and the politics of rebuilding 
milwaukee’s hoan bridge. In Transport, Mobility, and the production of Urban Space, eds. Julie Cidell, 
and David Prytherch, 81–99. New York, NY: Routledge.
Culver, Gregg. 2016. Moving forward or taking a stand?: Discourses surrounding the politics of Wisconsin 
High-Speed Rail. Mobilities 11, no. 5: 703–722.
Culver, Gregg. Forthcoming. Death and the car: On (Auto)Mobility, Violence, and Injustice. ACME: An 
International Journal for Critical Geographies.
ABW (Alliance for Biking & Walking). 2016. Bicycling and walking in the United States: 2016 benchmarking 
report. http://www.bikewalkalliance.org/storage/documents/reports/2016benchmarkingreport_
web.pdf.
Adey, Peter. 2006. If Mobility is everything then it is nothing: Towards a relational politics of (Im)
mobilities. Mobilities 1, no. 1: 75–94.
Aldred, Rachel, Rahul Goel, James Woodcock, and Anna Goodman. 2017. Contextualising safety in 
numbers: A longitudinal investigation into change in cycling safety in Britain, 1991–2001 and 2001–
2011. Injury Prevention. doi:10.1136/injuryprev-2017-042498.
Attewell, R.G., K. Glase, and M. McFadden. 2001. Bicycle helmet efficacy: A meta-analysis. Accident 
Analysis & Prevention 33, no. 3: 345–52.
B:C:Clettes [BCClettes]. 2008, May 8. B:C:Clettes vs. Sexy back [Video File]. https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=aCPhv0uAgkw.
 APPLIED MOBILITIES 
 15
Böhm, Steffen, Campbell Jones, Chris Land, and Matthew Paterson. 2006. Introduction: Impossibilities 
of automobility. In Against automobility, eds. Steffen Böhm, Campbell Jones, Chris Land and Matthew 
Paterson, 3–16. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Brain Injury Association of Florida. n.d. How to Fit & Wear Your Bicycle Helmet [brochure]. http://www.
miamidadetpo.org/library/brochures/bike/easy-steps-to-properly-fit-a-bicycle-helmet.pdf.
Buehler, Ralph, and John Pucher. 2012. Walking and cycling in western europe and the United States: 
Trends, policies, and lessons. TR News 280 (May–June): 34–42.
Buehler, Ralph, and John Pucher. 2017. Trends in walking and cycling safety: recent evidence from 
high-income countries, with a focus on the United States and Germany. American Journal of Public 
Health 107, no. 2: 281–87.
Chen, Peng. 2015. Built environment factors in explaining the automobile-involved bicycle crash 
frequencies: A spatial statistic approach. Safety Science 79: 336–43.
Chicago Department of Transportation. 2011. Safe cycling in Chicago. 4. http://chicagocompletestreets.
org/wp-content/uploads/2014/03/Safe-Cycling-2011_Full-Booklet.pdf.
City of Chicago. 2017. Bicycling. https://www.cityofchicago.org/city/en/depts/cdot/provdrs/bike/svcs/
bike_safety_education.html.
City of Cincinnati. (n.d.). Pocket guide to cincinnati bike laws. https://www.cincinnati-oh.gov/bikes/
linkservid/F0E0B518-AC88-B041-B32B86DD807A3FC8/showMeta/0/
City and County of Denver. 2017. The street smart bicyclist. https://www.denvergov.org/content/
denvergov/en/bicycling-in-denver/bike-safety.html.
City of Minneapolis. 2017. Bicycle Safety Materials. http://www.minneapolismn.gov/bicycles/safety/
WCMS1P-138440.
City of Philadelphia Streets Department. 2017. Safety tips. http://www.philadelphiastreets.com/survey-
and-design-bureau/bicycle-network/safety-tips/.
City of Phoenix. 2017a. Bicycle safety graphic novels. https://www.phoenix.gov/streetssite/Pages/
Graphic-Novels.aspx.
City of Phoenix. 2017b. Bicycle safety pledge. https://www.phoenix.gov/streetssite/Pages/Bicycle-Safety-
Pledge.aspx.
Colville-Andersen, Mikael (TEDx Talks). 2010. Why we shouldn’t bike with a helmet [Video File]. December 
16. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=07o-TASvIxY.
de Jong, P. 2012. The health impact of mandatory bicycle helmet laws. Risk Analysis 32, no. 5: 782–90.
Elvik, Rune. 2013. Corrigendum to: “Publication bias and time-trend bias in meta-analysis of bicycle 
helmet efficacy: A re-analysis of Attewell, Glase and McFadden, 2001”
. [Accid. Anal. Prev. 43 (2011) 
1245–1251] Accident Analysis and Prevention 60: 245–53.
Foucault, Michel. 1995. Discipline and punish: The birth of the prison. New York: Vintage.
Freund, Peter, and George Martin. 2007. Hyperautomobility, the social organization of space, and 
health. Mobilities 2, no. 1: 37–49.
Furness, Z. 2010. One less car: Bicycling and the politics of automobility. Philadelphia: Temple University 
Press.
Fyhri, Aslak, and Ross O. Phillips. 2013. Emotional reactions to cycle helmet use. Accident Analysis and 
Prevention 50: 59–63.
Gamble, Tim, and Ian Walker. 2016. Wearing a bicycle helmet can increase risk taking and sensation 
seeking in adults. Psychological Science 27, no. 2: 289–94.
Henderson, Jason. 2006. Secessionist automobility: racism, anti-urbanism, and the politics of 
automobility in Atlanta, Georgia. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 30, no. 2: 
293–307.
Henderson, Jason. 2013. Street fight: The politics of mobility in San Francisco. Amherst: University of 
Massachusetts Press.
Huybers, Sherry, Lynne Fenerty, Nelofar Kureshi, Ginette Thibault-Halman, John C. LeBlanc, David B. 
Clarke, and Simon Walling. 2017. Long-term effects of education and legislation enforcement on 
all-age bicycle helmet use: A longitudinal study. Journal of Community Health 42: 83–89.
Indianapolis Office of Sustainability. n.d. Bike smart! Drive smart! safety tips [brochure]. http://www.indy.
gov/eGov/City/DPW/SustainIndy/Bikeways/Documents/0752-1379_SI-TrifoldBikeways05-12proof.
pdf.
 16 
  
G. CULVER
ITF (International Transport Forum). 2013. Cycling, health and safety. Paris: OECD Publishing. 
doi:10.1787/9789282105955-en.
Jacobsen, P.L. 2003. Safety in numbers: More walkers and bicyclist, safer walking and bicycling. Injury 
Prevention 9: 205–09.
Jewett, Amy, Laurie F. Beck, Christopher Taylor, and Grant Baldwin. 2016. Bicycle helmet use among 
persons 5 years and older in the United States, 2012. Journal of Safety Research 59: 1–7.
Jhally, Sut (Executive Producer, Director). 1998. Edward said on orientalism [Motion picture]. Northampton, 
MA: Media Education Foundation.
Koglin, Til. 2017. Urban mobilities and materialities–a critical reflection of “sustainable” urban 
development. Applied Mobilities 2, no. 1: 32–49.
Kurt, Mehmet, Kaveh Laksari, Calvin Kuo, Gerald A. Grant, and David B. Camarillo. 2017. Modeling 
and optimization of airbag helmets for preventing head injuries in bicycling. Annals of Biomedical 
Engineering 45, no. 4: 1148–60.
Los Angeles Department of Transportation. 2017. LADOT Bicycle Program. http://bike.lacity.org/.
Macmillan, Alex, Alex Roberts, James Woodcock, Rachel Aldred, and Anna Goodman. 2016. Trends in 
local newspaper reporting of London cyclist fatalities 1992–2012: the role of the media in shaping 
the systems dynamics of cycling. Accident Analysis & Prevention 86: 137–45.
Markowitz, Sara, and Pinka Chatterji. 2015. Effects of bicycle helmet laws on children’s injuries. Health 
Economics 24: 26–40.
McHoul, Alec, and Wendy Grace. 1993. A foucault primer: Discourse, power and the subject. New York: 
New York University Press.
McKenzie, Brian. 2014. Modes less traveled – bicycling and walking to work in the United States: 
2008–2012. US Census Bureau, American Community Survey Reports. http://www.census.gov/
prod/2014pubs/acs-25.pdf.
Meehan 3rd, William P., Lois K. Lee, Christopher M. Fischer, and Rebekah C. Mannix. 2013. Bicycle helmet 
laws are associated with a lower fatality rate from bicycle-motor vehicle collisions. The Journal of 
Pediatrics 163, no. 3: 726–29.
Mid-America Regional Council. 2017. Basic bicycle safety. http://www.marc.org/Transportation/Modes/
Active-Transportation/Safety/Basic-Bicycle-Safety.html.
Norton, Peter D. 2008. Fighting traffic: The dawn of the motor age in the American City. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press.
Olivier, Jake, and Igor Radun. 2017. Bicycle helmet effectiveness is not overstated. Traffic Injury Prevention 
18, no. 7: 755–60.
Pucher, John, and Ralph Buehler. 2008. Making cycling irresistible: Lessons from The Netherlands, 
Denmark and Germany. Transport Reviews 28, no. 4: 495–528.
Pucher, John, and Ralph Buehler. 2017. Cycling towards a more sustainable transport future. Transport 
Reviews 37, no. 6:689–694. doi:10.1080/01441647.2017.1340234.
Pucher, John, Ralph Buehler, and Mark Seinen. 2011. Bicycling renaissance in North America? An update 
and re-appraisal of cycling trends and policies. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice 
45, no. 6: 451–75.
Reynolds, Conor C.O., M. Anne Harris, Kay Teschke, Peter A. Cripton, and Meghan Winters. 2009. The 
impact of transportation infrastructure on bicycling injuries and crashes: a review of the literature. 
Environmental Health 8, no. 47: 1–19. doi:10.1186/1476-069X-8-47.
Robinson, Dorothy L. 2005. Safety in numbers in Australia: More walkers and bicyclists, safer walking 
and bicycling. Health Promotion Journal of Australia 16, no. 1: 47–51.
Robinson, Dorothy L. 2007. Bicycle helmet legislation: Can we reach a consensus? Accident Analysis & 
Prevention 39, no. 1: 86–93.
Said, Edward. 1979. Orientalism. New York: Vintage.
Salt Lake City, Transportation Division. n.d. Gear and Equipment. http://www.bikeslc.com/GetBiking/
Gearandequipment/Gearandequipment.html.
Schepers, Paul, Niels Agerholm, Emmanuelle Amoros, Rob Benington, Torkel Bjørnskau, Stijn Dhondt, 
Bas de Geus, Carmen Hagemeister, and Anna Niska. 2015. An international review of the frequency 
of single-bicycle crashes (SBCs) and their relation to bicycle modal share. Injury Prevention 21: 
e138–e143.
 APPLIED MOBILITIES 
 17
Sheller, Mimi, and John Urry. 2000. The city and the car. International Journal of Urban and Regional 
Research 24, no. 4: 737–57.
StreetSmart (Metropolitan Washington Council of Governments). 2013. Street safety tips [brochure]. 
http://bestreetsmart.net/docs/2013/2013-brochure-0609-safetytips.pdf.
Thomas, Beth, and Michelle DeRobertis. 2013. The safety of urban cycle tracks: A review of the literature. 
Accident Analysis & Prevention 52: 219–27.
Thompson, Robert S., Frederick P. Rivara, and Diane C. Thompson. 1989. A Case-control study of the 
effectiveness of bicycle safety helmets. New England Journal of Medicine 320, no. 21: 1361–67.
Vargo, Jason, Benjamin G. Gerhardstein, Geoffrey P. Whitfield, and Arthur Wendel. 2015. Bicyclist deaths 
associated with motor vehicle traffic – United States, 1975–2012. MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality 
Weekly Report 64, no. 31: 837–41.
Walter, Scott R., Jake Olivier, Tim Churches, and Raphael Grzebieta. 2013. The impact of compulsory 
helmet legislation on cyclist head injuries in New South Wales, Australia: A response. Accident Analysis 
& Prevention 52: 204–09.
