 Collaborative meta-analysis finds no evidence of a strong 
interaction between stress and 5-HTTLPR genotype contributing 
to the development of depression
A full list of authors and affiliations appears at the end of the article.
Abstract
The hypothesis that the S allele of the 5-HTTLPR serotonin transporter promoter region is 
associated with increased risk of depression, but only in individuals exposed to stressful situations, 
has generated much interest, research, and controversy since first proposed in 2003. Multiple 
meta-analyses combining results from heterogeneous analyses have not settled the issue. To 
determine the magnitude of the interaction and the conditions under which it might be observed, 
we performed new analyses on 31 datasets containing 38 802 European-ancestry subjects 
genotyped for 5-HTTLPR and assessed for depression and childhood maltreatment or other 
stressful life events, and meta-analyzed the results. Analyses targeted two stressors (narrow, broad) 
and two depression outcomes (current, lifetime). All groups that published on this topic prior to 
the initiation of our study and met the assessment and sample size criteria were invited to 
participate. Additional groups, identified by consortium members or self-identified in response to 
our protocol (published prior to the start of analysis1) with qualifying unpublished data were also 
invited to participate. A uniform data analysis script implementing the protocol was executed by 
each of the consortium members. Our findings do not support the interaction hypothesis. We found 
no subgroups or variable definitions for which an interaction between stress and 5-HTTLPR 
genotype was statistically significant. In contrast, our findings for the main effects of life stressors 
(strong risk factor) and 5-HTTLPR genotype (no impact on risk) are strikingly consistent across 
our contributing studies, the original study reporting the interaction, and subsequent meta-
analyses. Our conclusion is that if an interaction exists in which the S allele of 5-HTTLPR 
increases risk of depression only in stressed individuals, then it is not broadly generalizable, but 
must be of modest effect size and only observable in limited situations.
INTRODUCTION
Depression negatively impacts health more than any other chronic disease2 and is a leading 
cause of total disease burden worldwide.3 Both genetic and environmental factors influence 
depression;4 research on the etiology of depression suggests substantial heritability of 40–
50%.4–9 Only recently have genome-wide association studies (GWAS) begun to identify and 
replicate specific loci associated with depression.10–12 The findings from these studies 
suggest that (1) the effects of individual single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) on major 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Supplementary information is available at Molecular Psychiatry’s website.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 04.
Published in final edited form as:
Mol Psychiatry. 2018 January ; 23(1): 133–142. doi:10.1038/mp.2017.44.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 depressive disorder (MDD) are small in magnitude (requiring large sample sizes to detect), 
and (2) candidate genes generally do not show evidence of association in either GWAS or 
subsequent large-scale meta-analyses.13 Gene-environment interactions (G×E) (e.g., genetic 
variants whose influence on depression risk is only seen under specific environmental 
exposures) are one mechanism that may contribute to the complexity of identifying genetic 
associations with depression.14, 15
A high profile report of a G×E effect on the development of depression involves an 
interaction between stressful life events and a functional, repeat length polymorphism (5-
HTTLPR) in the promoter region of the serotonin transporter gene (SLC6A4) on 
chromosome 17.16 SLC6A4 encodes an integral membrane protein that transports the 
neurotransmitter serotonin from synaptic spaces into presynaptic neurons. The short (S) 
allele of 5-HTTLPR is associated with less transcription of the serotonin transporter 
compared to the long (L) allele.17, 18 The report found that carriers of either one or two 
copies of the S allele of 5-HTTLPR were more likely to develop major depressive disorder, 
increased depressive symptoms, and suicidality in response to childhood maltreatment or 
other stressful life events than were individuals homozygous for the L allele. Furthermore, 
there was evidence of a dose-response relationship, with risk of depression higher amongst 
those with two copies of the S allele compared to individuals with only one copy in the 
presence of stress. This G×E interaction report has had considerable influence on the field; it 
has been cited over 4000 times and over one hundred publications have investigated the 
combined impact of 5-HTTLPR variation and stress on risk for depression.
However, controversy over the robustness of this G×E interaction continues. Although it is 
likely that G×E interactions play an important role in disease, gene-by-environment studies 
are challenged by the fact that statistical power to detect interactions is typically less than for 
main effects.19 Furthermore, many candidate gene main-effect association reports appear to 
be false positives.20, 21 As Duncan and Keller22 illustrate, this indicates a need for caution 
regarding similar gene-by-environment hypotheses. Several meta-analyses have examined 
the 5-HTTLPR-by-stress hypothesis, some providing support for the interaction and others 
finding no evidence for it,23–26 with various reasons proposed for the differences.22, 25, 27–29 
Munafò et al.24 performed a literature-based meta-analysis, finding that only 5 of the 
previously published studies (N = 2 999) used phenotypes and statistical models suitably 
comparable to the original study to be included in the meta-analysis. This meta-analysis did 
not support replication of the original finding. Risch et al.23 obtained individual level data 
from 10 previously published studies (N= 14 250) that met inclusion criteria and analyzed 
the data using a common model based on number of stressful life events. This re-analysis 
found no evidence for either a main effect or interaction effect of 5-HTTLPR on depression. 
Karg et al.25 (56 studies, N= 40 749) and Sharpley et al.26 (81 studies, N= 54 996) both 
performed literature-based meta-analyses and reported strong evidence for the interaction. 
Karg et al. and Sharpley et al. criticized the previous analyses of Munafò et al. and Risch et 
al. for being too restrictive in their inclusion of studies. The approaches of Karg et al. and 
Sharpley et al., in turn, have been criticized for combining p-values too broadly by allowing 
studies with an opposite direction of effect to supply supportive evidence, by including 
results from studies with incompatible statistical and genetic models, and by including 
outcomes other than depression.22 One key issue contributing to disputes over the 
Culverhouse et al.
Page 2
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 appropriateness of the prior reports and meta-analyses is the heterogeneity of the studies.22 
Heterogeneity pervades many key factors in the prior analyses, including measurements of 
depression and stress, genetic ancestry, and statistical models.
The primary objective of the current study was to increase understanding of the role 5-
HTTLPR might play as a moderator of the response to stress as it impacts depression. To 
address the complexities of this topic, we performed a collaborative meta-analysis of data 
available from the participating studies, both published and unpublished, using consistent de 
novo analyses and variables determined a priori as described in the pre-registered protocol.1 
Our collaborative meta-analysis strategy, wherein the consortium worked to harmonize 
phenotypes across studies, to prioritize specific analyses a priori, and to apply identical de 
novo statistical analyses across all participating studies, provided a balance between 
maximizing sample size while minimizing heterogeneity. With this approach and the large 
number of contributing samples, we are well positioned to clarify the relationship between 
5-HTTLPR, stress, and depression.
METHODS
Coordinated meta-analysis process
I. Recruitment of studies—Our goal was to include data from as many pertinent studies 
as possible. However, analyses based on a small number of samples can be statistically 
unstable, a problem that is exacerbated in models involving multiple covariates and an 
interaction term. For these reasons, we required participating studies to have genotyped at 
least 300 individuals for 5-HTTLPR and to have assessed depression and stress for 
inclusion. Our recruitment started with groups that had previously published on this topic 
who met our inclusion criteria. Additional groups, identified through referral by existing 
consortium members and self-referral based on the publication of our protocol, that had not 
published on this topic, but which satisfied the inclusion criteria, were also invited to 
participate. Supplemental Table S1 shows the datasets contributing to this meta-analysis and 
how they relate to the Risch meta-analysis23 based on primary data and the three literature-
based meta-analyses of Munafò, Karg, and Sharpley.24–26 The studies contributing to each 
analysis varied, with no study contributing results for every analysis. Here we cite the 
foundational papers for the published studies that contributed results to the project.30–58
II. Development of the protocol—The consortium developed an analysis protocol that 
focused on data harmonization and analysis prioritization. The decision was made to analyze 
childhood maltreatment as a source of stress separately from other sources of life stress 
because childhood maltreatment was assumed to precede the initial onset of depression and 
to have a significant life-long impact.59–61 Life stressors other than childhood maltreatment 
include such things as physical or sexual assault, experience of life-threatening illness, loss 
of employment, loss of a spouse, or military conscription. When possible, analyses of other 
life stressors included information on the timing of both the stressful events and the 
depression assessment. For both childhood maltreatment and broadly defined stress (defined 
as experiencing either childhood maltreatment or other life stress), we examined histories of 
both lifetime depression and current depression (at the time of assessment). In addition to 
Culverhouse et al.
Page 3
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 stress exposure and genotype, sex and age were used as covariates in our analysis models. 
Subjects assessed between the ages of 21 and 30 were of particular interest because of the 
possibility that the effect might be strongest at these ages, which is a similar age range to the 
individuals in the original report.16
All analyses were stratified by genetic ancestry. An outline of the primary analyses can be 
found in Supplemental Table S2 and more detailed descriptions of the planned analyses are 
provided in our published protocol.1 All code and documents relevant for running the 
analyses and meta-analysis are available in the public repository at https://github.com/
achorton/SD_5HTTLPR.
III. Analysis script—The coordinating center at Washington University in St. Louis 
developed data coding instructions (Supplemental Table S3) based on the protocol and wrote 
an analysis script in R.62 Each participating group reformatted their data for the analysis and 
executed the analysis script locally on their own data. Results from these analyses, including 
coefficients and standard errors for the primary and secondary analyses as well as 
demographic information on the data set, were sent to the coordinating center for meta-
analysis.
IV. Quality control assessments
Data coding: To ensure high quality data, the analysis team at Washington University 
examined the submitted results for unusual values (e.g., unexpected allele frequencies, sex 
ratios, stress exposure rates, rates of depression diagnoses, missing values). When unusual 
values were found, the team worked with the data providers to ensure that the final results 
accurately reflected their data.
Poorly fitted models: For results from a study to be included in a particular meta-analysis, 
we required a minimum of 50 individuals to be phenotyped for all variables in the model and 
that the resulting | β | < 10 (corresponding to odds ratios (OR) between 1/20 000 and 20 
000). Of the results that satisfied both the minimum sample size and restriction on β, all of 
the OR for the interaction terms were within the more reasonable range of 1/20 to 20.
V. Meta-analysis—Meta-analyses of both the primary and secondary models were 
performed using the R packages rmeta63 and metafor,64 and SAS.65 Because of the great 
variability of the data sources, all meta-analysis results are based on random effects models 
even though there was little statistical evidence of heterogeneity (see Supplemental Table 
S4).
VI. Models Analyzed—In keeping with the original report,16 we tested the following 
main hypothesis:
The risk of depression displays an interaction between 5-HTTLPR genotype (LL, LS, SS) 
and exposure to stress: namely, the 5-HTTLPR genotype shows no association to depression 
in individuals not exposed to stress, but shows a dose response effect (increased risk for 
more copies of the S allele) in individuals exposed to stress. Our primary genetic coding was 
additive in the number of copies of the S allele. Our template for analysis is in the form
Culverhouse et al.
Page 4
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 That is, for a dichotomous depression diagnosis,
Support for the hypothesis that S alleles are associated with an increased risk for depression 
in stress-exposed individuals, but not in individuals who are unexposed to stress, would be 
reflected by an OR > 1 for the gene × stress interaction term. We examined this main 
hypothesis in multiple settings in an attempt to determine a range of conditions under which 
the effect might be found. We examined two types of stress (childhood maltreatment, other 
life stress), two categories of depression (depression during lifetime, current depression), 
and two age ranges (all ages, young adults between the ages of 21 and 30).
Additional secondary hypotheses (e.g., whether there is a main effect of 5-HTTLPR 
variation on depression, whether the effect is observed when using a dominant model (LL vs 
SL or SS), whether the effect would be observed more strongly in a single sex) were also 
examined to improve our understanding of this complex topic.
Our broadest analyses incorporated information from studies that could not evaluate the full 
model (e.g., a study with only female subjects, a study with only stress-exposed subjects). 
These analyses performed logistic regression on pooled genotype counts with contributing 
study coded as a class variable in the model.
We used the results for the sex and stress terms as positive controls because females and 
stress-exposed individuals are known to be at increased risk for depression.
RESULTS
Our participating groups contributed a total of 43 165 total subjects genotyped for 5-
HTTLPR and assessed for depression and childhood maltreatment and/or other stressful life 
events. Of these, 40 693 (94.3%) were of European ancestry, and after harmonization 38 802 
subjects contributed to at least one analysis. The non-European samples were distributed 
across five strata (African, African-European Admixed, Asian, Pacific Islander, and 
Hispanic) and were not meta-analyzed due to small sample size. Supplemental Table S5 
provides key demographic information about the data included in the meta-analyses (e.g., N, 
S allele frequency, frequencies of the key phenotypes). For each of the datasets in Table S5, 
Table S6 lists whether the study design was cross-sectional or longitudinal, the criteria used 
to diagnose depression, and the assessments used to determine childhood maltreatment and 
other stressful life events. Table S7 provides information about additional datasets for which 
the script was run, but whose results could not be included in any of the primary or 
secondary analyses. Further details about each participating study can be found in 
Supplemental Table S8.
Culverhouse et al.
Page 5
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Table 1 lists results from analyses across all age groups based on exposure to our two 
stressors of interest and diagnoses of our two depression outcomes. As expected, our two 
positive control factors, sex (OR < 1, indicating that males are at lower risk) and exposure to 
stress (OR > 1 indicating that exposure to stress increases risk), each have strong, consistent, 
and highly statistically significant associations to diagnoses of depression whether the 
diagnosis was for lifetime depression or current depression at the time of assessment. We do 
not see a main effect association between number of copies of the S allele and depression in 
these analyses, a finding that matches what we would expect from prior reports, including 
the study originally reporting the interaction.16
Importantly, our meta-analyses do not support the hypothesis that in subjects exposed to 
stress, carrying S alleles for 5-HTTLPR confers a differential and increased risk for either 
lifetime or current depression compared to the impact of carrying S alleles in subjects who 
were not exposed to stress. In fact, when the outcome is current depression, the point 
estimates for the interaction terms are all in the direction opposite of the hypothesis.
The broad stress analyses examined stress resulting from either childhood maltreatment or 
other life stress. The other life stress exposure was examined in two ways: including only 
subjects for whom the other life stress was documented to have occurred within the five 
years prior to depression (five years prior to assessment if no depression) or including all 
subjects. The 5-year threshold was chosen to match the original study design of Caspi et al. 
(2003).16 Most of the studies contributing to this set of analyses assessed stress over a 
shorter period, which is more in line with current beliefs about the depressogenic effects of 
acute stressors experienced in adulthood.
Forest plots illustrating how the individual studies contribute to the first meta-analysis in 
Table 1 (outcome: lifetime depression diagnosis; stress: exposure to childhood maltreatment) 
are shown in Figure 1. The protective effect of being male (Figure 1A) and the risk from 
stress (Figure 1B) are consistent across the individual studies, and correspond to overall p-
values of 1.4E–15 and 1.7E–8, respectively. The lack of a main effect for the genetic variant 
in this model is also consistent across the studies (Figure 1C). For the interaction terms 
(childhood maltreatment exposure by number of S alleles) (Figure 1D), the point estimates 
are scattered on both sides of 1, and correspond to an overall p-value of 0.49.
Forest plots for these four key factors (sex, stress, gene, and gene × stress interaction) for the 
remaining analyses summarized in Table 1 are given in Supplemental Figures S1 through 
S5. Forest plots for the interaction terms for the remaining primary and secondary analyses 
are given in Supplemental Figures S6 to S14.
Our other primary analyses and additional secondary analyses examined questions of the 
strength, robustness, and conditions required to observe the hypothesized interaction. The 
results presented in Table 1 reflect the general consensus of the findings. None of the other 
primary analyses (results in Supplemental Tables S9 through S12) or secondary analyses 
(results in Supplemental Tables S13 through S16) resulted in a statistically significant 
interaction.
Culverhouse et al.
Page 6
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 We note that a closely related pair of young adult primary analyses resulted in nominally 
significant interactions (p-value < 0.05 before correction for multiple tests) in the 
hypothesized direction (Supplemental Table S10b). Several factors caution against placing 
too much confidence in these particular results: (i) failure of positive control – the point 
estimate for exposure to stress is protective for depression in these two analyses, counter to 
our more robust analyses and to what would be expected; (ii) they are not supported by 
closely related analyses – neither the matching analysis based on childhood maltreatment 
only, nor the other young adult analyses are even nominally significant (Tables S10b, S9, 
and S10a), and the matching analysis with subjects of all ages has the point estimates of 
effect in the opposite direction (Table S11b); (iii) statistical instability – these two analyses 
only include a small number of studies (3 and 4) with a relatively small total sample size 
(N=583 and N=1142), and are primarily driven by results from a single study; and (iv) 
neither p-value survives correction for the number of primary analyses performed.
Our protocol included secondary analyses to help determine whether analytic refinements 
might strengthen the result and explain why the hypothesized interaction had not heretofore 
been found consistently. To reduce heterogeneity in depression diagnosis, we examined the 
effect of restricting meta-analyses to depression diagnoses based on DSM or ICD criteria 
(Supplemental Table S13). To determine if the interaction might be predominantly expressed 
in only one sex, we performed meta-analyses stratified by sex (Supplemental Table S14). We 
examined alternative coding of the genetic effect (dominant, recessive, haplotype) 
(Supplemental Table S15). Because the question of causation depends on temporal order of 
events, we examined whether the interaction would be stronger if the analyses were 
restricted to data from longitudinal studies that had recorded temporal order (Supplemental 
Table S16). In each case, there is a trade-off between a possible gain in power due to a 
refined phenotype versus a loss in power due to smaller sample size. For these secondary 
analyses, we observed one nominally significant interaction in the opposite direction from 
the hypothesis (Supplemental Table S13, depression diagnosis restricted to DSM or ICD, 
broad stress, current depression, OR = 0.74, p = 0.01), and one nominally significant 
interaction in the hypothesized direction (Supplemental Table S15b), S allele coded as 
recessive, broad stress, lifetime depression, OR 1.25, p = 0.02). In all other analyses, the 
interaction term was not even nominally significant.
We evaluated the heterogeneity for the interaction terms in all the previous analyses. 
Supplemental Table S4 lists the I2 and Q heterogeneity statistics along with the p-value for 
the Q statistic for all the primary and secondary meta-analyses in the subsequent tables, 
demonstrating that there is generally little evidence for heterogeneity in these analyses. In 
particular, secondary analyses refining the diagnostic criteria and the study design did not 
substantially decrease the heterogeneity.
Cumulatively, these primary and secondary results exclude a strong, broadly generalizable 
interaction effect reported in Caspi et al. 2003.16
Culverhouse et al.
Page 7
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 DISCUSSION
A hallmark of science is the ability of results to be replicated, a criterion that has been 
increasingly recognized in biological and psychological research.66 The original 2003 report 
of an interaction between 5-HTTLPR genotype and stress exposure on depression16 has 
remained controversial due to inconsistent results from replication efforts. Although some 
researchers have claimed a replication of the hypothesized interaction based on different 
stressors, different measures of depression, or different genetic models,25, 26 other attempts 
to replicate the finding have been negative.23, 24, 67 The goal of our study was to rigorously 
explore the extent to which the original report could be replicated and generalized using a 
structured collaborative meta-analysis.
This is the largest study to date to use consistent statistical analyses across all samples to 
examine the hypothesized interaction between 5-HTTLPR genotype and stress exposure 
affecting major depression. As detailed in our protocol,1 our design was based on consistent, 
de novo analyses chosen by a consensus of participating researchers in the field, with 
inclusion open to all researchers with published or unpublished data that met objective 
minimum participation criteria. The purpose was to address multiple issues of concern about 
previous meta-analyses of the topic: (i) heterogeneity of phenotypes, (ii) publication bias 
from small studies, (iii) heterogeneity of statistical models used to produce the input for the 
meta-analysis, (iv) meta-analysis models that did not take direction of effect into account.
Neither our primary nor our secondary analyses found compelling evidence that the 5-
HTTLPR S allele increases risk of major depression in individuals exposed to stress. These 
results are in marked contrast to the robust main effect signals seen for the sex and stress 
exposure, where p-values less than 10−60 were seen in our most inclusive primary analyses 
(Supplemental Table S12). In our effort to determine conditions for which the interaction 
might be reliably detected, we investigated both childhood maltreatment and other life 
experiences as stressors. Because major depression is a recurring and remitting disease 
subject to recall bias, both current depression and lifetime depression were examined. Data 
from subjects of any age and data limited to young adults were both studied. We examined 
life stress known to precede depression (thereby limiting the sample to studies that 
documented the relative timing of stress and depression) and we investigated whether the 
hypothesized interaction could be more effectively detected using all available data with 
stress and depression assessed. In secondary analyses, we also examined multiple models for 
the coding of the genotype (additive, dominant, recessive, haplotypes) as well as broad and 
narrow requirements for documentation of temporal order of the stress experience and the 
onset of depression. Despite these efforts, we were unable to uncover specific subgroups 
where the G×E interaction was clearly expressed.
The Caspi group that originally proposed the hypothesis16 raised concerns regarding this 
meta-analysis project; in particular, the decisions to exclude small studies, and to include 
lifetime depression as an outcome for analysis were criticized.68 As noted in our methods, 
although we required studies to have at least 300 participants overall, inclusion in any 
particular meta-analysis required only 50 of these subjects to be genotyped and have the 
appropriate phenotypes (ancestry, depression outcome, covariates). Although Moffitt and 
Culverhouse et al.
Page 8
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Caspi argue that small studies may be meticulously designed and have high quality data,68 
there is a case to be made that large studies are generally likely to have better design quality 
than small studies.69 In addition, small studies are subject to multiple statistical issues, 
including publication bias (exacerbated for small studies) and the winner’s curse (which 
makes it likely, even if a true effect is detected, that the magnitude will be exaggerated).70 In 
fact, a 2013 analysis of neuroscience publications concluded that small sample size studies 
were undermining the reliability of neuroscience.69
The concern Moffitt and Caspi raised regarding the inclusion of lifetime depression analyses 
was the difficulty of knowing the relative timing of stress and depression for a lifetime 
phenotype. Rather than omit these analyses of lifetime depression, as suggested by Moffitt 
and Caspi, we included analyses where timing information was specifically queried as well 
as analyses where it was not specifically queried. We recognize that these data, like all data, 
have limitations, but nonetheless we find the results informative. We note that of all the 
models examined in our de novo analyses, the only results with nominally significant 
interaction terms in the hypothesized direction were based on lifetime depression outcomes. 
Finally, based on parameter estimates provided in the supplement to their seminal paper,16 
we can estimate the impact those data would have on both our young adult and all-age 
analyses involving depression diagnoses with a quantitative life stress variable. We found 
that none of these analyses were nominally significant even after adding the Caspi et al. 
(2003) results to the meta-analyses.
The decision by some invited groups not to participate is a limitation of this project. It is 
becoming increasingly clear that large samples are an important tool for determining the role 
of genetic variation in complex phenotypes, such as depression. Combining existing data is 
an efficient tool for this purpose. We expect that in the future data sharing will become the 
rule rather than the exception. We are encouraged by the fact that data sharing is becoming a 
requirement of funding agencies and a requirement for publication by some journals. 
Although we would have preferred complete participation, several factors mitigate the 
impact that this likely had on our results. First, the phenotypes for several of the non-
participating groups turned out to be insufficient for inclusion in any of our primary or 
secondary analyses. Second, several of the non-participating groups had exclusively Asian 
samples, which would not have impacted the European ancestry results. Finally, we found 
that some data reported in the large prior meta-analyses as supportive of the interaction were 
not supportive when all were analyzed using the same statistical model for all studies.
Although our consortium tested many high-priority combinations of factors (see 
Supplemental Table S2), there remain other specific situations that we were unable to 
evaluate, such as limiting analyses to stress over a period shorter than five years, to financial 
stress,71 to persistent or recurrent depression,29, 72 or to childhood emotional abuse/neglect 
only.73 Using data from a diverse set of studies, most designed to address other questions, is 
also a limitation. However, we note that many of the participating studies, despite their 
diversity, have already been cited in the literature either in support of, or against, the 
hypothesized interaction.
Culverhouse et al.
Page 9
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Our novel contribution is to apply a consistent methodology across the participating studies 
to query a broad range of questions about the hypothesized interaction. Although these 
studies remain varied in their original design, our unified approach to phenotype 
harmonization and statistical analysis has provided a sound and comprehensive exploration 
of this challenging question. We have addressed and excluded the major objections 
(exclusion of small studies, inclusion of analyses of lifetime depression) to our protocol 
raised by Caspi and Moffitt.
Our findings do not support the interaction hypothesis. We found no subgroups or variable 
definitions for which an interaction between stress and 5-HTTLPR genotype was 
statistically significant. In contrast, our findings for the main effects of sex (strong risk 
factor), life stressors (strong risk factor) and 5-HTTLPR genotype (no impact on risk) are 
strikingly consistent across the models examined in this study. Moreover, these robust main 
effect results are consistent with the main effect results from the Caspi study that originally 
reported the interaction,16 with the re-examination of the topic using primary data by Risch 
et al.,23 and with prior meta-analyses.23–26 Based on our findings, we conclude that if an 
interaction exists in which the S allele of 5-HTTLPR increases risk of depression only in 
stressed individuals, then it is not a broadly generalizable effect, but must be of modest 
effect size and only observable in limited situations. Our lack of replication coincides with 
findings of the Christchurch Health and Developmental Study,67 a prospective longitudinal 
birth-cohort, with measures, outcomes, and sample (both size and origin on the south island 
of New Zealand) nearly identical to the original report. This lack of evidence for a strong, 
robust effect should be taken into account before planning future research on this topic.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Authors 
Robert C. Culverhouse1, Nancy L. Saccone2, Amy C. Horton3, Yinjiao Ma3, Kaarin 
J. Anstey4, Tobias Banaschewski5, Margit Burmeister6,7, Sarah Cohen-Woods8, 
Bruno Etain9,10,11, Helen L. Fisher12, Noreen Goldman13, Sébastien 
Guillaume14,15,16, John Horwood17, Gabriella Juhasz18,19,20, Kathryn J. Lester21, 
Laura Mandelli22, Christel M. Middeldorp23,24, Emilie Olié14,15,16, Sandra 
Villafuerte6, Tracy M. Air25, Ricardo Araya26, Lucy Bowes27, Richard Burns4, Enda 
M. Byrne28, Carolyn Coffey29, William L. Coventry30, Katerina Gawronski31, Dana 
Glei32, Alex Hatzimanolis33, Jouke-Jan Hottenga23,34, Isabelle Jaussent15, 
Catharine Jawahar25, Christine Jennen-Steinmetz35, John R. Kramer36, Mohamed 
Lajnef37, Keriann Little38,39, Henriette Meyer zu Schwabedissen40, Matthias 
Nauck41, Esther Nederhof42, Peter Petschner19,43, Wouter J. Peyrot44, Christian 
Schwahn45, Grant Sinnamon25, David Stacey25, Yan Tian46, Catherine Toben25, 
Sandra Van der Auwera47, Nick Wainwright48, Jen-Chyong Wang49, Gonneke 
Willemsen23,34, Ian M. Anderson20,50, Volker Arolt51, Cecilia Åslund52,53, Gyorgy 
Bagdy19,43, Bernhard T. Baune25, Frank Bellivier9,10,11, Dorret I. Boomsma23,24,34, 
Philippe Courtet14,15,16, Udo Dannlowski51,54, Eco J.C. de Geus23,34, John F
. W. 
Culverhouse et al.
Page 10
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Deakin20,50, Simon Easteal55, Thalia Eley56, David M. Fergusson17, Alison M. 
Goate49, Xenia Gonda19,43,57, Hans J. Grabe47, Claudia Holzman46, Eric O. 
Johnson58, Martin Kennedy59, Manfred Laucht5, Nicholas G. Martin60, Marcus 
Munafò61,62, Kent W. Nilsson52,53, Albertine J. Oldehinkel42, Craig Olsson39,63,64, 
Johan Ormel42, Christian Otte65, George C. Patton66, Brenda W.J.H. Penninx44, 
Karen Ritchie15, Marco Sarchiapone67, JM Scheid68, Alessandro Serretti22, 
Johannes H. Smit44, Nicholas C. Stefanis33, Paul G. Surtees48, Henry Völzke69, 
Maxine Weinstein32, Mary Whooley70, John I. Nurnberger Jr71, Naomi Breslau46, 
and Laura J. Bierut3
Affiliations
1Department of Medicine and Division of Biostatistics, Washington University in St. 
Louis School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA 2Department of Genetics and 
Division of Biostatistics, Washington University in St. Louis School of Medicine, St. 
Louis, MO, USA 3Department of Psychiatry, Washington University in St. Louis 
School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA 4Centre for Research on Ageing, Health 
and Wellbeing, The Australian National University, Canberra, Australia 5Department 
of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Central Institute of Mental 
Health, Medical Faculty Mannheim/Heidelberg University, Mannheim, Germany 
6Department of Psychiatry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA 7Department 
of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA 8Discipline of 
Psychiatry, Flinders University, Adelaide, Australia 9Sorbonne Paris Cité, Université 
Paris Diderot, UMR-S 1144, Paris, France 10AP-HP
, Groupe Saint-Louis-
Lariboisière-F
. Widal, Paris, France 11INSERM, U1144, Paris, France 12Social, 
Genetic & Developmental Psychiatry Centre, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & 
Neuroscience, King’s College London, London, UK 13Office of Population Research, 
Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA 14Université Montpellier; Montpellier, 
France 15INSERM U1061 Neuropsychiatry, Montpellier, France 16Department of 
Emergency Psychiatry and Acute Care, CHU Montpellier, Montpellier, France 
17Department of Psychological Medicine, University of Otago Christchurch, 
Christchurch, New Zealand 18MTA-SE-NAP B Genetic Brain Imaging Migraine 
Research Group, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Semmelweis University, 
Budapest, Hungary 19Department of Pharmacodynamics, Faculty of Pharmacy, 
Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary 20Neuroscience and Psychiatry Unit, 
Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, The University of Manchester, Manchester, 
UK 21School of Psychology, University of Sussex, Brighton, UK 22Department of 
Biomedical and NeuroMotor Sciences, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy 
23Department of Biological Psychology, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, 
the Netherlands 24Neuroscience Campus Amsterdam, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands 25Discipline of Psychiatry, University of Adelaide, 
Adelaide, Australia 26Centre for Global Mental Health, London School of Hygiene 
and Tropical Medicine, London, UK 27Department of Experimental Psychology, 
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK 28Queensland Brain Institute, University of 
Queensland, Brisbane, Australia 29Centre for Adolescent Health, Murdoch Childrens 
Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia 30Discipline of Psychology, University of 
Culverhouse et al.
Page 11
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 New England, Adelaide, Australia 31Department of Genetics, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA 32Center for Population 
and Health, Georgetown University, Washington, DC, USA 33University Mental 
Health Research Institute and Department of Psychiatry, University of Athens 
School of Medicine, Athens, Greece 34EMGO+ institute for Health and Care 
Research, VU Medical Center Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands 
35Department of Biostatistics, Central Institute of Mental Health, Medical Faculty 
Mannheim/Heidelberg University, Mannheim, Germany 36Department of Psychiatry, 
Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA 37INSERM U955, 
Creteil, France 38Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia 
39Department of Paediatrics and School of Psychological Sciences, University of 
Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia 40Biopharmacy, Department Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland 41Institute of Clinical Chemistry 
and Laboratory Medicine, University Medicine Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany 
42University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Interdisciplinary 
Center Psychopathology and Emotion Regulation, Groningen, the Netherlands 
43MTA-SE Neuropsychopharmacology and Neurochemistry Research Group, 
Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary 
44Department of Psychiatry, VU University Medical Center & GGZ inGeest, 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands 45Department of Prosthetic Dentistry, 
Gerostomatology and Dental Materials, University Medicine Greifswald, Greifswald, 
Germany 46Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Michigan State 
University, East Lansing, MI, USA 47Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, 
University Medicine Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany 48Department of Public Health 
and Primary Care, School of Clinical Medicine, Cambridge, UK 49Department of 
Neuroscience, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA 
50Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre, Manchester, UK 51Department of 
Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of Münster, Münster, Germany 52Centre 
for Clinical Research, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden 53Västmanland County 
Hospital Västerås, Västerås, Sweden 54Department of Psychiatry, University of 
Marburg, Marburg, Germany 55John Curtin School of Medical Research, The 
Australian National University, Canberra, Australia 56King’s College London, Institute 
of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, London, UK 57Department of Psychiatry 
and Psychotherapy, Kutvolgyi Clinical Center, Semmelweis University, Budapest, 
Hungary 58Fellow Program and Behavioral Health and Criminal Justice Division, RTI 
International, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA 59Department of Pathology, 
University of Otago Christchurch, Christchurch, New Zealand 60Genetic 
Epidemiology, QIMR Berghofer, Brisbane, Australia 61MRC Integrative Epidemiology 
Unit at the University of Bristol, Bristol, UK 62UK Centre for Tobacco and Alcohol 
Studies, School of Experimental Psychology, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK 
63Centre for Social and Early Emotional Development, School of Psychology, 
Faculty of Health, Deakin University, Geelong, Australia 64Centre for Adolescent 
Health, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia 65Charité 
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Klinik für Psychiatrie und Psychotherapie Campus 
Culverhouse et al.
Page 12
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Benjamin Franklin, Berlin, Germany 66Department of Paediatrics, Murdoch 
Childrens Research Institute, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia 
67Department of Health Sciences, University of Molise, Campobasso, Italy 
68Department of Psychiatry, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA 
69Institute for Community Medicine, University Medicine Greifswald, Greifswald, 
Germany 70Veterans Affairs Health Care System and University of California, San 
Francisco, CA, USA 71Institute of Psychiatric Research, Departments of Psychiatry 
and Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis, IN, USA
Acknowledgments
Acknowledgment of funding: Funding supporting the participation of the contributing studies was as follows:
ALSPAC: Grant 102215/2/13/2 from The Wellcome Trust and grant MC_UU_12013/6 from the UK 
Medical Research Council. The University of Bristol also provides core support for ALSPAC. MRM is a 
member of the UK Centre for Tobacco and Alcohol Studies, a UK Clinical Research Council Public Health 
Research: Centre of Excellence. Funding from British Heart Foundation, Cancer Research UK, Economic 
and Social Research Council, Medical Research Council, and the National Institute for Health Research, 
under the auspices of the UK Clinical Research Collaboration, is gratefully acknowledged.
ASPIS: EKBAN 97 from the General Secretariat of Research and Technology, Greek Ministry of 
Development.
ATP: Grants DP130101459, DP160103160 and APP1082406 from the Australian Research Council and 
The National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia.
CHDS: Grant HRC 11/792 from the Health Research Council of New Zealand.
CoFaMS: Grant APP1060524 to BTB from the National Health and Medical Research Council of 
Australia. The authors wish to acknowledge the University of Adelaide for the provision of seed funding in 
support of this project.
COGA: Grant U10AA008401 from the National Institutes of Health, NIAAA and NIDA.
COGEND: National Institutes of Health grants P01CA089392 from NCI and R01DA036583 from NIDA.
DeCC: Grant G0701420 from the UK Medical Research Council, and a UK MRC Population Health 
Scientist fellowship (G1002366) and an MQ Fellows Award (MQ14F40) to Helen L. Fisher.
EPIC-Norfolk: Grants G9502233, G0300128, C865/A2883 from the UK Medical Research Council and 
Cancer Research UK.
ESPRIT Montpellier: An unconditional grant from Novartis and from the National Research Agency (ANR 
Project 07 LVIE004).
G1219: A project grant from the WT Grant Foundation and G120/635, a Career Development Award from 
the UK Medical Research Council to Thalia Eley. The GENESiS project was supported by Grant G9901258 
from the UK Medical Research Council. This study presents independent research part- funded by the 
National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Biomedical Research Centre at South London and Maudsley 
NHS Foundation Trust and King’s College London. The views expressed are those of the author(s) and not 
necessarily those of the NHS, the NIHR or the Department of Health.
GAN12-France: Research Protocol C0829 from INSERM; Research Protocol GAN12 from Assistance 
Publique des Hôpitaux de Paris; ANR-11-IDEX- 0004 from Investissements d’Avenir program managed by 
the ANR, and RTRS Sante Mentale from Fondation FondaMental.
GENESIS: Grant PHRC UF 7653 & ANR NEURO 2007 ‘GENESIS’ from CHU Montpellier & Agence 
Nationale de la Recherche.
Heart and Soul: Epidemiology Merit Review Program from the Department of Veterans Affairs; National 
Institutes of Health grant R01HL-079235 from NHLBI; Generalist Physician Faculty Scholars Program 
from the Robert Woods Johnson foundation; Paul Beeson Faculty Scholars Program from the American 
Culverhouse et al.
Page 13
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Federation for Aging Research; and a Young Investigator Award from the Bran and Behavior Research 
Foundation.
MARS: Grant LA 733/2-1 from German Research Foundation (DFG) and the Federal Ministry for 
Education and Research as part of the “National Genome Research Network”.
MLS: National Institutes of Health grants R01 AA07065 and R37 AA07065 from NIAAA.
MoodInFlame: Grant EU-FP7-HEALTH-F2-2008-222963 from the European Union.
Muenster Neuroimaging Study: Grant FOR2107, DA1151/5-1 from the German Research Foundation 
(DFG).
NEWMOOD: Grants LSHM-CT-2004-503474 from Sixth Framework Program of the European Union; 
KTIA_NAP_13-1-2013-0001, KTIA_13_NAP-A-II/14 from National Development Agency Hungarian 
Brain Research Program; KTIA_NAP_13-2-2015-0001 from MTA-SE-NAP B Genetic Brain Imaging 
Migraine Research Group, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Semmelweis University; support from 
Hungarian Academy of Sciences, MTA-SE Neuropsychopharmacology and Neurochemistry Research 
Group; and support from the National Institute for Health Research Manchester Biomedical Research 
Centre
NESDA/NTR: The Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO) and MagW/ZonMW grants 
Middelgroot-911-09-032, Spinozapremie 56-464-14192, Geestkracht program of the Netherlands 
Organization for Health Research and Development (ZonMW 10-000-1002), Center for Medical Systems 
Biology (CSMB, NWO Genomics), Genetic influences on stability and change in psychopathology from 
childhood to young adulthood (ZonMW 912-10-020), NBIC/BioAssist/RK(2008.024), Biobanking and 
Biomolecular Resources Research Infrastructure (BBMRI -NL, 184.021.007), VU University’s Institute for 
Health and Care Research (EMGO+ ) and Neuroscience Campus Amsterdam (NCA); the European Science 
Council (ERC Advanced, 230374). Part of the genotyping and analyses were funded by the Genetic 
Association Information Network (GAIN) of the Foundation for the National Institutes of Health, Rutgers 
University Cell and DNA Repository (NIMH U24 MH068457-06), the Avera Institute, Sioux Falls, South 
Dakota (USA) and the National Institutes of Health (NIH R01 HD042157-01A1, MH081802, Grand 
Opportunity grants 1RC2 MH089951 and 1RC2 MH089995).
PATH: Program Grant Number 179805 from the National Health and Medical Research Council of 
Australia.
POUCH: Grants 20FY01-38 and 20-FY04-37 of the Perinatal Epidemiologic Research Initiative Program 
Grant from the March of Dimes Foundation; National Institutes of Health grant R01 HD34543 from 
NICHD and NINR; grant 02816-7 from the Thrasher Research Foundation; and grant U01 DP000143-01 
from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
QIMRtwin: Grants 941177, 971232, 339450, 443011 from the National Health and Medical Research 
Council of Australia; AA07535, AA07728, AA10249 from US Public Health Service; National Institutes of 
Health grant K99DA023549-01A2 from NIDA. Additional support was provided by Beyond Blue.
SALVe 2001 and SALVe 2006: Grants FO2012-0326, FO2013-0023, FO2014-0243 from The Brain 
Foundation (Hjärnfonden); SLS-559921 from Söderström-Königska Foundation; 2015-00897 from 
Swedish Council for Working Life and Social Research; and M15-0239 from Åke Wiberg’s Foundation. 
Additional funding was provided by Systembolagets Råd för Alkoholforskning, SRA and Svenska Spel 
Research Council.
SEBAS: National Institutes of Health grants R01 AG16790, R01 AG16661, and R56 AG01661 from NIA 
and grant P2CHD047879 from NICHD; and additional financial support from the Graduate School of Arts 
and Sciences at Georgetown University.
SHIP/TREND: This work was supported by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research 
within the framework of the e:Med research and funding concept (Integrament) Grant No. 01ZX1314E. 
Study of Health in Pomerania is part of the Community Medicine Research net of the University of 
Greifswald, Germany, which is funded by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research Grant Nos. 
01ZZ9603, 01ZZ0103, and 01ZZ0403; the Ministry of Cultural Affairs; and the Social Ministry of the 
Federal State of Mecklenburg-West Pomerania. Genome-wide data were supported by the Federal Ministry 
of Education and Research Grant No. 03ZIK012 and a joint grant from Siemens Healthcare, Erlangen, 
Germany, and the Federal State of Mecklenburg-West Pomerania. The Greifswald Approach to 
Individualized Medicine (GANI_MED) was funded by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research 
Grant No. 03IS2061A and the German Research Foundation Grant No. GR 1912/5-1.
TRAILS: Grants GB-MW 940-38-011, ZonMW Brainpower 100-001-004, Investment grant 
175.010.2003.005, GB-MaGW 480-07-001, and Longitudinal Survey and Panel Funding 481-08-013 from 
the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO). Additional funding was provided by the 
Culverhouse et al.
Page 14
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Dutch Ministry of Justice, the European Science Foundation, BBMRI-NL, and the participating centers 
(UMCG, RUG, Erasmus MC, UU, Radboud MC, Parnassia Bavo group):
VAHCS: Grants APP1063091,1008271, and 1019887 from Australia’s National Health and Medical 
Research Council of Australia (NHMRC).
The coordinating team: National Institutes of Health grants R21 DA033827 and R01 DA026911 from 
NIDA.
Other acknowledgments:
The authors wish to thank the following for making the participation of each group possible:
ALSPAC: All the families who took part in this study, the midwives for their help in recruiting them, and 
the whole ALSPAC team, which includes interviewers, computer and laboratory technicians, clerical 
workers, research scientists, volunteers, managers, receptionists and nurses.
ATP: All collaborators who have contributed to the Australian Temperament Project, especially Professors 
Ann Sanson, Margot Prior, Frank Oberklaid, John Toumbourou and Ms Diana Smart. We would also like to 
sincerely thank the participating families for their time and invaluable contribution to the study. The ATP 
study is located at The Royal Children’s Hospital Melbourne (Australia) and is a collaboration between 
Deakin University, The University of Melbourne, the Australian Institute of Family Studies, The University 
of New South Wales, The University of Otago (New Zealand), and the Royal Children’s Hospital; further 
information available at www.aifs.gov.au/atp. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and 
may not reflect those of their organisational affiliations, nor of other collaborating individuals or 
organisations.
CHDS: Allison L. Miller, laboratory team leader, Carney Centre for Pharmacogenomics.
CoFaMS: The authors would like to thank study participants for their time and willingness to take part in 
the study.
COGA: The Collaborative Study on the Genetics of Alcoholism (COGA), Principal Investigators B. 
Porjesz, V. Hesselbrock, H. Edenberg, L. Bierut, includes eleven different centers: University of 
Connecticut (V. Hesselbrock); Indiana University (H.J. Edenberg, J. Nurnberger Jr., T. Foroud); University 
of Iowa (S. Kuperman, J. Kramer); SUNY Downstate (B. Porjesz); Washington University in St. Louis (L. 
Bierut, J. Rice, K. Bucholz, A. Agrawal); University of California at San Diego (M. Schuckit); Rutgers 
University (J. Tischfield, A. Brooks); University of Texas Rio Grand Valley (L. Almasy), Virginia 
Commonwealth University (D. Dick), Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai (A. Goate), and Howard 
University (R. Taylor). Other COGA collaborators include: L. Bauer (University of Connecticut); J. 
McClintick, L. Wetherill, X. Xuei, Y. Liu, D. Lai, S. O’Connor, M. Plawecki, S. Lourens (Indiana 
University); G. Chan (University of Iowa; University of Connecticut); J. Meyers, D. Chorlian, C. 
Kamarajan, A. Pandey, J. Zhang (SUNY Downstate); J.-C. Wang, M. Kapoor, S. Bertelsen (Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai); A. Anokhin, V. McCutcheon, S. Saccone (Washington University); J. Salvatore, 
F. Aliev, B. Cho (Virginia Commonwealth University); and Mark Kos (University of Texas Rio Grand 
Valley). A. Parsian and M. Reilly are the NIAAA Staff Collaborators. We thank John Budde, Maribel 
Martinez, and Oliver Reyes from Alison Goate’s lab for their technical assistance in genotyping.
COGEND: COGEND is a collaborative research group and a part of the NIDA Genetics Consortium. Lead 
investigators who directed data collection include Laura Bierut, Naomi Breslau, Dorothy Hatsukami, and 
Eric Johnson. The authors thank Heidi Kromrei and Tracey Richmond for their assistance in data collection. 
We thank John Budde, Maribel Martinez, and Oliver Reyes from Alison Goate’s lab for their technical 
assistance in genotyping.
DeCC: All individuals who participated in the DeCC and BaCCs studies and were essential for their 
successful completion. Specifically, we acknowledge the leadership of Peter McGuffin and Anne Farmer, 
and the contribution of the following: Cerisse Gunasinghe, Katharine Mead, Joanna Gray, Ylva Dahlin, 
Amanda Elkin, Audrey Morgan, Joanna O’Leary, Nathan O’Neill, Nicola Reynolds, Zainab Samaan, 
Abraham Stern, Linda Southwick, Kopal Tandon, Alison Wheatley, Richard Williamson, Debra 
WoolwayJulia Woods, Sarah Ball, Ophelia Beer, Julian Childs, Sam Keating, Rachel Marsh, Penny Machin, 
and Lucy Maddox, who were involved with the data collection and management of the studies.
EPIC-Norfolk: All participants, general practitioners and the EPIC-Norfolk study team for their 
contribution to the research program.
G1219: The families of the G1219 study for their time, Robert Plomin, Ian Craig, Pak Sham, Karen 
Sugden, Alice Gregory and Alejandro Crosico, Matthew Nash, Abram Sterne, Richard Williamson and 
Maria Napolitano for their contributions to the project.
GAN12-France: Marion Leboyer, Chantal Henry, Stéphane Jamain, Jean-Pierre Kahn, Sébastien Gard. The 
GAN12-France study includes three centres : Creteil (M. Leboyer, C. Henry), Bordeaux (S. Gard) and 
Nancy (J.P. Kahn) and also the INSERM U955 Translational Psychiatry research team (S. Jamain).
Culverhouse et al.
Page 15
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 GENESIS: Catherine Genty and Aurélie Cazals for their assistance in conducting the study.
MARS: The participants and their parents for their engagement in the study. We thank Erika Hohm and 
Katrin Zohsel for their assistance in conducting the study.
MLS: Robert Zucker for allowing access to the MLS data.
NEWMOOD: Diana Chase, Emma J. Thomas, Darragh Downey, Dorottya Pap, Judit Lazary, Zoltan G. 
Toth for their assistance in the recruitment and data acquisition and Hazel Platt for her assistance in 
genotyping.
POUCH: Participants in the POUCH Study and the Project Director, Bertha Bullen, and Nicole Jones.
QIMRtwin: The staff from the Queensland Institute of Medical Research who were involved in the 
genotyping, the twins (drawn from the Australian NH&MRC Twin Registry) for their cooperation and 
Professors Ian Hickie, Grant Montgomery, and Naomi Wray for their encouragement.
SALVe 2001: Professor Lars Oreland, Professor Jerzy Leppert, Professor Leif Lindström, Professor John 
Öhrvik, associate professor Rickard L Sjöberg and PhD Per-Olof Alm
SEBAS: The staff at the Surveillance and Research Division (Health Promotion Administration at the 
Ministry of Health and Welfare in Taiwan) who were instrumental in the design and implementation of the 
SEBAS and supervised all aspects of the fieldwork and data processing.
SHIP/TREND: The participants taking part in the SHIP and TREND study. The contribution to data 
collection performed by study nurses, study physicians, interviewers, and laboratory workers is gratefully 
acknowledged. We are also appreciative of the important support of IT and computer scientists, health 
information managers, and administration staff.
TRAILS: Everyone who participated in this research and made it possible.
U Bologna: Dr. Raffaella Calati for contribution in paper writing, Dr. Elena Marino and Dr. Adele Pirovano 
for their contribution to genetic analyses, and Prof. Cristina Colombo from the Scientific institute San 
Raffaele of Milan, Department of Psychiatry, for her precious supervision of the study
U. Molise: Dr. Vladimir Carli (Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden), Dr. Leonardo Zaninotto and 
Prof. Alessandro Serretti (University of Bologna, Italy), Dr. Laura Recchia (University of Molise, 
Campobasso, Italy), Dr. Valentina Gatta and Dr. Liborio Stoppia (G. d’Annunzio University, Chieti-
Pescara, Italy) for their valuable contribution to the study.
The coordinating team: Sherri Fisher, James Childress, Brandie Thurman for administrative support and 
Katharina Domschke for contributions to the design of the analysis plan.
Conflicts of Interest and Disclosures
IM Anderson has received consultancy/speaking fees from Servier, Alkermes, Lundbeck/
Otsuka, Takeda and Janssen, and grant support from Servier and AstraZeneca.
V Arolt declares that over the last three years he has received compensations for his 
contributions as member of advisory boards and for presentations for the following 
companies: Astra-Zeneca, Eli Lilly, Janssen-Organon, Lundbeck, Otsuka, Servier, and 
Trommsdorff. These co-operations have no relevance to the work that is covered in the 
manuscript.
T Banaschewski served in an advisory or consultancy role for Hexal Pharma, Lilly, Medice, 
Novartis, Otsuka, Oxford outcomes, PCM scientific, Shire and Viforpharma. He received 
conference attendance support and conference support or received speaker’s fees from Lilly, 
Medice, Novartis and Shire. He is/has been involved in clinical trials conducted by Lilly, 
Shire & Viforpharma.
F Bellivier has received honoraria or research or educational conference grants from Bristol-
Myers Squibb, Otsuka, Eli Lilly & Co., Servier, Takeda, Sanofi Aventis, Lundbeck, 
AstraZeneca, the European Space Agency and has received peer review research funding 
Culverhouse et al.
Page 16
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 from French Ministry of research, Assistance Publique – Hôpitaux de Paris, the National 
Institute for Research (INSERM) and the NARSAD.
LJ Bierut, AM Goate, and JC Wang are listed as inventors on Issued U.S. Patent 8,080,371, 
“Markers for Addiction” covering the use of certain SNPs in determining the diagnosis, 
prognosis, and treatment of addiction. NL Saccone is the spouse of SF Saccone, who is also 
listed as an inventor on the patent.
JFW Deakin variously performed consultancy, speaking engagements, and research for 
Bristol-Myers Squibb, AstraZeneca, Eli Lilly, Schering Plough, Janssen-Cilag, and Servier 
(all fees are paid to the University of Manchester to reimburse them for the time taken); he 
has share options in P1vital.
JI Nurnberger is an investigator for Assurex and Janssen and a consultant for Janssen.
The remaining authors declare no potential conflicts of interest: TM Air, KJ Anstey, R 
Araya, C Åslund, G Bagdy, BT Baune, F Bellivier, DI Boomsma, L Bowes, M Burmeister, 
R Burns, EM Byrne, C Coffey, S Cohen-Woods, P Courtet, WF Coventry, RC Culverhouse, 
U Dannlowski, EJC de Geus, T Eley, S Easteal, B Etain, DM Fergusson, HL Fisher, K 
Gawronski, D Glei, N Goldman, X Gonda, HJ Grabe, S Guillaume, A Hatzimanolis, C 
Holzman, AC Horton, J Horwood, JJ Hottenga, I Jaussent, C Jawahar, C Jennen-Steinmetz, 
EO Johnson, G Juhasz, M Kennedy, JR Kramer, M Lajnef, M Laucht, KJ Lester, K Little, Y 
Ma, L Mandelli, NG Martin, CM Middeldorp, M Munafò, M Nauck, E Nederhof, KW 
Nilsson, AJ Oldehinkel, E Olié, C Olsson, J Ormel, C Otte, GC Patton, BWJH Penninx, P 
Petschner, WJ Peyrot, K Ritchie, M Sarchiapone, JM Scheid, C Schwahn, A Serretti, G 
Sinnamon, JH Smit, D Stacey, NC Stefanis, PG Surtees, Y Tian, C Toben, S Van der 
Auwera, S Villafuerte, H Völzke, N Wainwright, M Weinstein, M Whooley, G Willemsen, 
HM zu Schwabedissen
References
1. Culverhouse RC, Bowes L, Breslau N, Nurnberger JI Jr, Burmeister M, Fergusson DM, et al. 
Protocol for a collaborative meta-analysis of 5-HTTLPR, stress, and depression. BMC psychiatry. 
2013; 13:304. [PubMed: 24219410] 
2. Moussavi S, Chatterji S, Verdes E, Tandon A, Patel V, Ustun B. Depression, chronic diseases, and 
decrements in health: results from the World Health Surveys. Lancet. 2007; 370(9590):851–858. 
[PubMed: 17826170] 
3. Ustun TB, Ayuso-Mateos JL, Chatterji S, Mathers C, Murray CJ. Global burden of depressive 
disorders in the year 2000. The British journal of psychiatry : the journal of mental science. 2004; 
184:386–392. [PubMed: 15123501] 
4. Sullivan PF, Neale MC, Kendler KS. Genetic epidemiology of major depression: review and meta-
analysis. Am J Psychiatry. 2000; 157(10):1552–1562. [PubMed: 11007705] 
5. Bierut LJ, Heath AC, Bucholz KK, Dinwiddie SH, Madden PA, Statham DJ, et al. Major depressive 
disorder in a community-based twin sample: are there different genetic and environmental 
contributions for men and women? Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1999; 56(6):557–563. [PubMed: 
10359473] 
6. Kendler KS, Neale MC, Kessler RC, Heath AC, Eaves LJ. The lifetime history of major depression 
in women. Reliability of diagnosis and heritability. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1993; 50(11):863–870. 
[PubMed: 8215812] 
Culverhouse et al.
Page 17
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 7. Kendler KS, Gardner CO, Prescott CA. Are there sex differences in the reliability of a lifetime 
history of major depression and its predictors? Psychol Med. 2001; 31(4):617–625. [PubMed: 
11352364] 
8. McGuffin P, Katz R, Rutherford J. Nature, nurture and depression: a twin study. Psychol Med. 1991; 
21(2):329–335. [PubMed: 1876638] 
9. McGuffin P, Katz R, Watkins S, Rutherford J. A hospital-based twin register of the heritability of 
DSM-IV unipolar depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1996; 53(2):129–136. [PubMed: 8629888] 
10. Ripke S, Wray NR, Lewis CM, Hamilton SP, Weissman MM, Breen G, et al. A mega-analysis of 
genome-wide association studies for major depressive disorder. Mol Psychiatry. 2013; 18(4):497–
511. [PubMed: 22472876] 
11. Flint J, Kendler KS. The genetics of major depression. Neuron. 2014; 81(3):484–503. [PubMed: 
24507187] 
12. Hyde CL, Nagle MW, Tian C, Chen X, Paciga SA, Wendland JR, et al. Identification of 15 genetic 
loci associated with risk of major depression in individuals of European descent. Nat Genet. 2016
13. Dunn EC, Brown RC, Dai Y, Rosand J, Nugent NR, Amstadter AB, et al. Genetic determinants of 
depression: recent findings and future directions. Harv Rev Psychiatry. 2015; 23(1):1–18. 
[PubMed: 25563565] 
14. Kendler KS, Kessler RC, Walters EE, MacLean C, Neale MC, Heath AC, et al. Stressful life 
events, genetic liability, and onset of an episode of major depression in women. Am J Psychiatry. 
1995; 152(6):833–842. [PubMed: 7755111] 
15. Cohen-Woods S, Craig IW, McGuffin P. The current state of play on the molecular genetics of 
depression. Psychol Med. 2013; 43(4):673–687. [PubMed: 22687339] 
16. Caspi A, Sugden K, Moffitt TE, Taylor A, Craig IW, Harrington H, et al. Influence of life stress on 
depression: moderation by a polymorphism in the 5-HTT gene. Science. 2003; 301(5631):386–
389. [PubMed: 12869766] 
17. Lesch, KP., Greenberg, MD., Higley, JD., Bennett, A., Murphy, DL. Serotonin transporter, 
personality, and behavior: Toward a disection of gene-gene and gene-environment interaction. In: 
Benjamin, J.Ebstein, RP., Belmaker, RH., editors. Molecular Genetics and the Human Personality. 
American Psychiatric Association (APA); Washington, DC: 2002. p. 109-136.
18. Lesch KP, Bengel D, Heils A, Sabol SZ, Greenberg BD, Petri S, et al. Association of anxiety-
related traits with a polymorphism in the serotonin transporter gene regulatory region. Science. 
1996; 274(5292):1527–1531. [PubMed: 8929413] 
19. McClelland GH, Judd CM. Statistical difficulties of detecting interactions and moderator effects. 
Psychol Bull. 1993; 114(2):376–390. [PubMed: 8416037] 
20. Bosker FJ, Hartman CA, Nolte IM, Prins BP, Terpstra P, Posthuma D, et al. Poor replication of 
candidate genes for major depressive disorder using genome-wide association data. Mol 
Psychiatry. 2011; 16(5):516–532. [PubMed: 20351714] 
21. Need AC, Ge D, Weale ME, Maia J, Feng S, Heinzen EL, et al. A genome-wide investigation of 
SNPs and CNVs in schizophrenia. PLoS Genet. 2009; 5(2):e1000373. [PubMed: 19197363] 
22. Duncan LE, Keller MC. A critical review of the first 10 years of candidate gene-by-environment 
interaction research in psychiatry. Am J Psychiatry. 2011; 168(10):1041–1049. [PubMed: 
21890791] 
23. Risch N, Herrell R, Lehner T, Liang KY, Eaves L, Hoh J, et al. Interaction between the serotonin 
transporter gene (5-HTTLPR), stressful life events, and risk of depression: a meta-analysis. JAMA. 
2009; 301(23):2462–2471. [PubMed: 19531786] 
24. Munafo MR, Durrant C, Lewis G, Flint J. Gene × environment interactions at the serotonin 
transporter locus. Biol Psychiatry. 2009; 65(3):211–219. [PubMed: 18691701] 
25. Karg K, Burmeister M, Shedden K, Sen S. The serotonin transporter promoter variant (5-
HTTLPR), stress, and depression meta-analysis revisited: evidence of genetic moderation. Arch 
Gen Psychiatry. 2011; 68(5):444–454. [PubMed: 21199959] 
26. Sharpley CF, Palanisamy SK, Glyde NS, Dillingham PW, Agnew LL. An update on the interaction 
between the serotonin transporter promoter variant (5-HTTLPR), stress and depression, plus an 
exploration of non-confirming findings. Behavioural brain research. 2014; 273:89–105. [PubMed: 
25078292] 
Culverhouse et al.
Page 18
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 27. Brown GW, Harris TO. Depression and the serotonin transporter 5-HTTLPR polymorphism: a 
review and a hypothesis concerning gene-environment interaction. J Affect Disord. 2008; 111(1):
1–12. [PubMed: 18534686] 
28. Munafo MR, Flint J. Replication and heterogeneity in gene × environment interaction studies. Int J 
Neuropsychopharmacol. 2009; 12(6):727–729. [PubMed: 19476681] 
29. Uher R, Caspi A, Houts R, Sugden K, Williams B, Poulton R, et al. Serotonin transporter gene 
moderates childhood maltreatment’s effects on persistent but not single-episode depression: 
replications and implications for resolving inconsistent results. J Affect Disord. 2011; 135(1–3):
56–65. [PubMed: 21439648] 
30. Boyd A, Golding J, Macleod J, Lawlor DA, Fraser A, Henderson J, et al. Cohort Profile: the 
‘children of the 90s’--the index offspring of the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children. 
Int J Epidemiol. 2013; 42(1):111–127. [PubMed: 22507743] 
31. Stefanis NC, Mandelli L, Hatzimanolis A, Zaninotto L, Smyrnis N, Avramopoulos D, et al. 
Serotonin transporter gene variants and prediction of stress-induced risk for psychological distress. 
Genes Brain Behav. 2011; 10(5):536–541. [PubMed: 21429092] 
32. Edwards, BHM., Letcher, P., Little, K., Macdonald, J., Oberklaid, F., O’Connor, M., Olsson, CA., 
Prior, M., Sanson, A., Smart, D., Toumbourou, JW., Vassallo, S. The Australian Temperament 
Project: The first 30 years. Australian Institute of Family Studies: Commonwealth of Australia; 
2013. 
33. Fergusson, DMHL. The Christchurch Health and Development Study. In: Joyce, PGN.Thomas, K., 
Wilkinson, T., editors. The Christchurch Experience: 40 Years of Research and Teaching. 
University of Otago; Christchurch: 2013. p. 79-87.
34. Bierut LJ, Madden PA, Breslau N, Johnson EO, Hatsukami D, Pomerleau OF, et al. Novel genes 
identified in a high-density genome wide association study for nicotine dependence. Hum Mol 
Genet. 2007; 16(1):24–35. [PubMed: 17158188] 
35. Cohen-Woods S, Gaysina D, Craddock N, Farmer A, Gray J, Gunasinghe C, et al. Depression Case 
Control (DeCC) Study fails to support involvement of the muscarinic acetylcholine receptor M2 
(CHRM2) gene in recurrent major depressive disorder. Hum Mol Genet. 2009; 18(8):1504–1509. 
[PubMed: 19181679] 
36. Surtees PG, Wainwright NW, Willis-Owen SA, Luben R, Day NE, Flint J. Social adversity, the 
serotonin transporter (5-HTTLPR) polymorphism and major depressive disorder. Biol Psychiatry. 
2006; 59(3):224–229. [PubMed: 16154545] 
37. Ritchie K, Artero S, Beluche I, Ancelin ML, Mann A, Dupuy AM, et al. Prevalence of DSM-IV 
psychiatric disorder in the French elderly population. The British journal of psychiatry : the 
journal of mental science. 2004; 184:147–152. [PubMed: 14754827] 
38. Eley TC, Sugden K, Corsico A, Gregory AM, Sham P, McGuffin P, et al. Gene-environment 
interaction analysis of serotonin system markers with adolescent depression. Mol Psychiatry. 
2004; 9(10):908–915. [PubMed: 15241435] 
39. Etain B, Lajnef M, Henrion A, Dargel AA, Stertz L, Kapczinski F, et al. Interaction between 
SLC6A4 promoter variants and childhood trauma on the age at onset of bipolar disorders. Sci Rep. 
2015; 5:16301. [PubMed: 26542422] 
40. Penas-Lledo E, Guillaume S, Naranjo ME, Delgado A, Jaussent I, Blasco-Fontecilla H, et al. A 
combined high CYP2D6-CYP2C19 metabolic capacity is associated with the severity of suicide 
attempt as measured by objective circumstances. Pharmacogenomics J. 2015; 15(2):172–176. 
[PubMed: 25113522] 
41. Otte C, McCaffery J, Ali S, Whooley MA. Association of a serotonin transporter polymorphism (5-
HTTLPR) with depression, perceived stress, and norepinephrine in patients with coronary disease: 
the Heart and Soul Study. Am J Psychiatry. 2007; 164(9):1379–1384. [PubMed: 17728423] 
42. Laucht M, Treutlein J, Blomeyer D, Buchmann AF, Schmid B, Becker K, et al. Interaction between 
the 5-HTTLPR serotonin transporter polymorphism and environmental adversity for mood and 
anxiety psychopathology: evidence from a high-risk community sample of young adults. Int J 
Neuropsychoph. 2009; 12(6):737–747.
Culverhouse et al.
Page 19
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 43. Zucker RA, Ellis DA, Fitzgerald HE, Bingham CR, Sanford K. Other evidence for at least two 
alcoholisms .2. Life course variation in antisociality and heterogeneity of alcoholic outcome. Dev 
Psychopathol. 1996; 8(4):831–848.
44. Juhasz G, Gonda X, Hullam G, Eszlari N, Kovacs D, Lazary J, et al. Variability in the effect of 5-
HTTLPR on depression in a large European population: the role of age, symptom profile, type and 
intensity of life stressors. PLoS One. 2015; 10(3):e0116316. [PubMed: 25747798] 
45. Anstey KJ, Christensen H, Butterworth P, Easteal S, Mackinnon A, Jacomb T, et al. Cohort profile: 
the PATH through life project. Int J Epidemiol. 2012; 41(4):951–960. [PubMed: 21349904] 
46. Scheid JM, Holzman CB, Jones N, Friderici KH, Nummy KA, Symonds LL, et al. Depressive 
symptoms in mid-pregnancy, lifetime stressors and the 5-HTTLPR genotype. Genes Brain Behav. 
2007; 6(5):453–464. [PubMed: 16965382] 
47. Coventry WL, James MR, Eaves LJ, Gordon SD, Gillespie NA, Ryan L, et al. Do 5HTTLPR and 
stress interact in risk for depression and suicidality? Item response analyses of a large sample. Am 
J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2010; 153B(3):757–765. [PubMed: 19911410] 
48. Sjoberg RL, Nilsson KW, Nordquist N, Ohrvik J, Leppert J, Lindstrom L, et al. Development of 
depression: sex and the interaction between environment and a promoter polymorphism of the 
serotonin transporter gene. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2006; 9(4):443–449. [PubMed: 
16212676] 
49. Aslund C, Leppert J, Comasco E, Nordquist N, Oreland L, Nilsson KW. Impact of the interaction 
between the 5HTTLPR polymorphism and maltreatment on adolescent depression. A population-
based study. Behav Genet. 2009; 39(5):524–531. [PubMed: 19582567] 
50. Goldman N, Glei DA, Lin YH, Weinstein M. The serotonin transporter polymorphism (5-
HTTLPR): allelic variation and links with depressive symptoms. Depress Anxiety. 2010; 27(3):
260–269. [PubMed: 20196101] 
51. Volzke H, Alte D, Schmidt CO, Radke D, Lorbeer R, Friedrich N, et al. Cohort profile: the study of 
health in Pomerania. Int J Epidemiol. 2011; 40(2):294–307. [PubMed: 20167617] 
52. Oldehinkel AJ, Rosmalen JG, Buitelaar JK, Hoek HW, Ormel J, Raven D, et al. Cohort Profile 
Update: the TRacking Adolescents’ Individual Lives Survey (TRAILS). Int J Epidemiol. 2015; 
44(1):76–76n. [PubMed: 25431468] 
53. Mandelli L, Serretti A, Marino E, Pirovano A, Calati R, Colombo C. Interaction between serotonin 
transporter gene, catechol-O-methyltransferase gene and stressful life events in mood disorders. Int 
J Neuropsychoph. 2007; 10(4):437–447.
54. Carli V, Mandelli L, Zaninotto L, Roy A, Recchia L, Stoppia L, et al. A protective genetic variant 
for adverse environments? The role of childhood traumas and serotonin transporter gene on 
resilience and depressive severity in a high-risk population. Eur Psychiatry. 2011; 26(8):471–478. 
[PubMed: 21684723] 
55. Olsson CA, Foley DL, Parkinson-Bates M, Byrnes G, McKenzie M, Patton GC, et al. Prospects for 
epigenetic research within cohort studies of psychological disorder: a pilot investigation of a 
peripheral cell marker of epigenetic risk for depression. Biol Psychol. 2010; 83(2):159–165. 
[PubMed: 20018225] 
56. Baune BT, Air TM. Clinical, functional and biological correlates of cognitive dimensions in major 
depressive disorder - rationale, design, and characteristics of the Cognitive Function and Mood 
Study (CoFaM-Study). Frontiers Psychiatry. 2016 (in press). 
57. Peyrot WJ, Middeldorp CM, Jansen R, Smit JH, de Geus EJ, Hottenga JJ, et al. Strong effects of 
environmental factors on prevalence and course of major depressive disorder are not moderated by 
5-HTTLPR polymorphisms in a large Dutch sample. J Affect Disord. 2013; 146(1):91–99. 
[PubMed: 23021380] 
58. Reich T. A genomic survey of alcohol dependence and related phenotypes: results from the 
Collaborative Study on the Genetics of Alcoholism (COGA). Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 1996; 20(8 
Suppl):133A–137A.
59. Krug EG, Mercy JA, Dahlberg LL, Zwi AB. The world report on violence and health. Lancet. 
2002; 360(9339):1083–1088. [PubMed: 12384003] 
Culverhouse et al.
Page 20
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 60. Hovens JG, Giltay EJ, van Hemert AM, Penninx BW. Childhood Maltreatment and the Course of 
Depressive and Anxiety Disorders: The Contribution of Personality Characteristics. Depress 
Anxiety. 2016; 33(1):27–34. [PubMed: 26418232] 
61. Fergusson DM, Boden JM, Horwood LJ. Exposure to childhood sexual and physical abuse and 
adjustment in early adulthood. Child Abuse Negl. 2008; 32(6):607–619. [PubMed: 18565580] 
62. R Development Core Team. R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R 
Foundation for Statistical Computing; Vienna, Austria: 2008. 
63. Lumley, T. R package version 2.16. 2012. meta: Meta-analysis. 
64. Veichtbauer W. Conducting meta-analyses in R with the metafor package. Journal of Statistical 
Software. 2010; 36(3):48.
65. SAS/STAT. 9.1 edn. SAS Institute Inc; Cary, NC, USA: 2002–2003. 
66. Open Science C. PSYCHOLOGY. Estimating the reproducibility of psychological science. 
Science. 2015; 349(6251):aac4716. [PubMed: 26315443] 
67. Fergusson DM, Horwood LJ, Miller AL, Kennedy MA. Life stress, 5-HTTLPR and mental 
disorder: findings from a 30-year longitudinal study. The British journal of psychiatry : the journal 
of mental science. 2011; 198(2):129–135. [PubMed: 21282783] 
68. Moffitt TE, Caspi A. Bias in a protocol for a meta-analysis of 5-HTTLPR, stress, and depression. 
BMC psychiatry. 2014; 14:179. [PubMed: 24939753] 
69. Button KS, Ioannidis JP, Mokrysz C, Nosek BA, Flint J, Robinson ES, et al. Power failure: why 
small sample size undermines the reliability of neuroscience. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2013; 14(5):365–
376. [PubMed: 23571845] 
70. Ioannidis JP. Why most discovered true associations are inflated. Epidemiology. 2008; 19(5):640–
648. [PubMed: 18633328] 
71. Gonda X, Eszlari N, Kovacs D, Anderson IM, Deakin JF, Juhasz G, et al. Financial difficulties but 
not other types of recent negative life events show strong interactions with 5-HTTLPR genotype in 
the development of depressive symptoms. Transl Psychiatry. 2016; 6:e798. [PubMed: 27138797] 
72. Brown GW, Ban M, Craig TK, Harris TO, Herbert J, Uher R. Serotonin transporter length 
polymorphism, childhood maltreatment, and chronic depression: a specific gene-environment 
interaction. Depress Anxiety. 2013; 30(1):5–13. [PubMed: 22847957] 
73. Mandelli L, Petrelli C, Serretti A. The role of specific early trauma in adult depression: A meta-
analysis of published literature. Childhood trauma and adult depression. Eur Psychiatry. 2015; 
30(6):665–680. [PubMed: 26078093] 
Culverhouse et al.
Page 21
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Culverhouse et al.
Page 22
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Culverhouse et al.
Page 23
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
Forest plots for lifetime depression diagnosis in subjects of all ages based on exposure to 
childhood maltreatment as the stressor
Depression = lifetime depression diagnosis (never depressed = 0; ever depressed = 1)
Sex (female = 0; male = 1)
Stress = childhood maltreatment (not exposed = 0; exposed = 1)
Gene (additive coding in number of S alleles for 5-HTTLPR (LL = 0; LS=1; SS=2))
1a. Sex: Being male consistently and significantly protects from a lifetime diagnosis of 
depression
1b. Stress: Exposure to stress consistently and significantly increases lifetime risk for 
depression
1c. Gene: The S allele (coded additively) is not associated with risk of lifetime depression
1d. Gene x Stress: Interaction term is not significant and does not suggest a consistent 
direction of effect across studies. (Hypothesized direction of effect: OR > 1)
Culverhouse et al.
Page 24
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Culverhouse et al.
Page 25
Table 1
Meta-analysis of the impact of a stress-by-5-HTTLPR genotype interaction on depression based on new, uniform analyses of harmonized dichotomous 
phenotypes in subjects of all ages
Childhood Maltreatment
Depression
Stress
Studies
Subjects
Covariate
OR
95% CI
p-value
Lifetime
Childhood maltreatment
18
21135
Sex
0.57
(0.50, 0.66)
1.4E-15
Stress
2.16
(1.65, 2.82)
1.7E-08
Gene
1.00
(0.95, 1.05)
0.95
Gene × stress
1.05
(0.91, 1.21)
0.49
Current
Childhood maltreatment
13
13956
Sex
0.63
(0.51, 0.78)
3.5E-05
Stress
2.87
(1.87, 4.41)
1.5E-06
Gene
1.00
(0.92, 1.10)
0.97
Gene × stress
0.93
(0.76, 1.14)
0.50
Broad Stress
Depression
Stress
Studies
Subjects
Covariate
OR
95% CI
p-value
Lifetime
Broad stress (Other life stress < 5 years prior or childhood maltreatment)
19
21938
Sex
0.58
(0.51, 0.67)
2.8E-15
Stress
1.82
(1.39, 2.39)
1.4E-05
Gene
1.00
(0.95, 1.06)
0.95
Gene × stress
1.06
(0.93, 1.20)
0.40
Current
Broad stress (Other life stress < 5 years prior or childhood maltreatment)
14
13835
Sex
0.63
(0.51, 0.78)
2.4E-05
Stress
3.19
(2.08, 4.91)
1.2E-07
Gene
1.01
(0.90, 1.12)
0.91
Gene × stress
0.92
(0.76, 1.11)
0.39
Lifetime
Broad stress (Other life stress or childhood maltreatment)
21
28252
Sex
0.60
(0.53, 0.67)
6.5E-17
Stress
2.00
(1.56, 2.56)
3.8E-08
Gene
1.00
(0.94, 1.07)
0.92
Gene × stress
1.05
(0.94, 1.16)
0.38
Current
Broad stress (Other life stress or childhood maltreatment)
17
17015
Sex
0.61
(0.49, 0.75)
5.1E-06
Stress
2.60
(1.62, 4.19)
7.8E-05
Gene
1.08
(0.92, 1.27)
0.35
Gene × stress
0.85
(0.68, 1.07)
0.17
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 04.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Culverhouse et al.
Page 26
In this table the childhood maltreatment analyses represent Primary Analysis 2Ai from the hierarchy presented in Supplemental Table S2. The broad stress analyses represent Primary Analysis 2Bi from 
the hierarchy.
Sex (female = 0; male = 1)
Stress (not exposed = 0; exposed = 1)
Gene (additive coding in number of S alleles for 5-HTTLPR (LL = 0; LS=1; SS=2))
Broad stress does not require both stressors to be assessed.
Depression variable: depression diagnosis
Stress variable: dichotomous stress exposure
Age was not significant in any of the models
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 04.
