  
 
 
This is an Accepted Article that has been peer-reviewed and approved for publication in the The 
Journal of Physiology, but has yet to undergo copy-editing and proof correction. Please cite this 
article as an 'Accepted Article'; doi: 10.1113/JP275075. 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
Restoration of metabolic health by decreased consumption of branched-chain amino 
acids 
 
Nicole E. Cummings1,2,3, Elizabeth M. Williams1,2, Ildiko Kasza4, Elizabeth N. Konon1,2, 
Michael D. Schaid1,2,5, Brian A. Schmidt1,2, Chetan Poudel1,2, Dawn S. Sherman1,2, Deyang 
Yu1,2,6, Sebastian I. Arriola Apelo1,2,7, Sara E. Cottrell1,2,8, Gabriella Geiger1,2, Macy E. 
Barnes1,2, Jaclyn A. Wisinski1,2, Rachel J. Fenske1,2,5, Kristina A. Matkowskyj2,9,10, Michelle E. 
Kimple1,2,3,5,11, Caroline M. Alexander4, Matthew J. Merrins1,2,12, Dudley W. Lamming1,2,3,5,6,9,* 
1Department of Medicine, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA  
2William S. Middleton Memorial Veterans Hospital, Madison, WI, USA 
3Endocrinology and Reproductive Physiology Graduate Training Program, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 
4McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, 
USA 
5Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Nutritional Sciences, University of Wisconsin-
Madison, Madison, WI, USA 
6Molecular and Environmental Toxicology Program, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
Madison, WI, USA 
7Department of Dairy Science, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA 
8Rural and Urban Scholars in Community Health Program, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
Madison, WI 53706, USA 
9University of Wisconsin Carbone Cancer Center, Madison, Wisconsin 
10Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
Madison, Wisconsin 
11Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, 
WI, USA 
12Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, 
USA 
*Lead Contact 
 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
 
Correspondence 
Dudley W. Lamming, PhD 
Assistant Professor of Medicine 
University of Wisconsin-Madison  
2500 Overlook Terrace 
VAH C3127 Research 151 
Madison, WI 53705, USA  
dlamming@medicine.wisc.edu 
 
Running title: A Low BCAA diet restores metabolic health 
Key words: branched-chain amino acids; protein restriction; obesity; diabetes 
Table of Contents category: Integrative 
 
Key points summary 

Plasma branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs) are associated with insulin-resistance 
in both rodents and humans, and we recently found that feeding healthy mice a 
reduced BCAA diet modestly improves glucose tolerance and slows fat mass gain. 

Here, we show that a reduced BCAA diet promotes rapid fat mass loss without 
calorie restriction in obese mice. 

Selective reduction of dietary BCAAs also restores glucose tolerance and insulin 
sensitivity to obese mice, even as they continue to consume a high-fat, high-sugar 
diet. 

A Low BCAA diet transiently induces FGF21 and increases energy expenditure. 

We suggest that dietary protein quality – the precise macronutrient composition of 
dietary protein – may impact the effectiveness of weight loss diets. 
 
 
 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
Abstract 
 
Obesity and diabetes are increasing problems around the world, and while even 
moderate weight loss can improve metabolic health, reduced calorie diets are notoriously 
difficult to sustain. Branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs; leucine, isoleucine, and valine) are 
elevated in the blood of obese, insulin-resistant humans and rodents. We recently 
demonstrated that specifically reducing dietary levels of BCAAs has beneficial effects on the 
metabolic health of young, growing mice, improving glucose tolerance and modestly slowing 
fat mass gain. Here, we examine the hypothesis that reducing dietary BCAAs will promote 
weight loss, reduce adiposity, and improve blood glucose control in diet-induced obese mice 
with pre-existing metabolic syndrome. We find that specifically reducing dietary BCAAs 
rapidly reverses diet-induced obesity and improves glucoregulatory control in diet-induced 
obese mice. Most dramatically, mice eating an otherwise unhealthy high-calorie, high-sugar 
Western diet with reduced levels of BCAAs lost weight and fat mass rapidly until regaining a 
normal weight. Importantly, this normalization of weight was mediated not by caloric 
restriction or increased activity, but by increased energy expenditure, and was accompanied 
by a transient induction of the energy balance regulating hormone FGF21. Consumption of a 
Western diet reduced in BCAAs was also accompanied by a dramatic improvement in 
glucose tolerance and insulin resistance. Our results link dietary BCAAs to the regulation of 
metabolic health and energy balance in obese animals, and suggest that specifically 
reducing dietary BCAAs may represent a highly translatable option for the treatment of 
obesity and insulin resistance. 
 
 
Introduction 
Over the last 4 decades, the prevalence of obesity has increased dramatically. In the 
United States, more than 2 in 3 adults are now considered to be overweight or obese (Flegal 
et al., 2012); a similar proportion of males in the European Union are likewise afflicted 
(Janda et al., 2013). Obesity is associated with an increased risk of many diseases, most 
notably type 2 diabetes, which is also increasing around the world. While weight loss is a 
highly effective means of improving metabolic health, reduced calorie diets are notoriously 
difficult to sustain. Altering the macronutrient composition of the diet while keeping the total 
number of calories constant is an intriguing alternative that may be more sustainable 
(Fontana & Partridge, 2015).  
Several recent studies have found that high protein consumption is correlated with 
insulin resistance, diabetes, and increased mortality in both mice and humans (Lagiou et al., 
2007; Sluijs et al., 2010; Solon-Biet et al., 2014). Conversely, low protein (LP) diets are 
associated with metabolic health and increased survival (Levine et al., 2014; Solon-Biet et 
al., 2014; Simpson et al., 2017), and a recent randomized controlled trial found that a LP diet 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
promotes leanness and decreases fasting blood glucose in humans (Fontana et al., 2016). 
We and others have demonstrated that a LP diet promotes metabolic health in rodents, 
reducing the accumulation of white adipose tissue and increasing glucose tolerance and 
insulin sensitivity in animals fed a normal diet, and improving glucose homeostasis in mice 
fed a high-fat diet (Laeger et al., 2014; Solon-Biet et al., 2015; Fontana et al., 2016; Maida et 
al., 2016). 
We hypothesized that the beneficial effects of a LP diet might be driven by reduced 
consumption of specific essential amino acids. We focused on the branched-chain amino 
acids (BCAAs) – leucine, isoleucine, and valine – as blood levels of BCAAs correlate with 
insulin-resistant obesity and diabetes in humans and rodents (Felig et al., 1969; Newgard et 
al., 2009; Batch et al., 2013; Lynch & Adams, 2014; Connelly et al., 2017). BCAA levels also 
correlate well with outcomes in weight loss regimens (Shah et al., 2012), and are reduced in 
both mice and humans consuming LP diets (Solon-Biet et al., 2014; Fontana et al., 2016). 
We determined that specifically reducing dietary BCAAs by two-thirds recapitulates many 
beneficial effects of a LP diet, promoting leanness and glucose tolerance in metabolically 
normal C57BL/6J mice (Fontana et al., 2016). Reducing dietary BCAAs from a young age 
also slows the accumulation of visceral adipose tissue in Zucker-fatty rats and preserves 
insulin sensitivity (White et al., 2016).  
These results led us to hypothesize that specifically reducing dietary BCAAs might 
not only preserve the metabolic health of young animals, but also might be an effective 
strategy to restore metabolic health to animals with pre-existing diet-induced metabolic 
dysfunction. Herein, we test if specifically reducing dietary BCAAs can restore metabolic 
health to C57BL/6J mice which have been preconditioned with a high-calorie, high-fat, high-
sugar “Western” diet, a well characterized model of diet-induced obesity (DIO) and early type 
2 diabetes (Winzell & Ahren, 2004; Newberry et al., 2006; Peterson et al., 2011; Williams et 
al., 2014). We find that specifically reducing dietary BCAAs is sufficient to promote weight 
renormalization without caloric restriction in less than four weeks, primarily as a result of a 
dramatic reduction in fat mass, and improves metabolic health. Reduction of dietary BCAAs 
in the context of an otherwise Western diet transiently induces the energy balance regulating 
hormone FGF21 (fibroblast growth factor 21) and induces a sustained increase in energy 
expenditure. Our results suggest that specifically reducing dietary BCAAs, or treatment with 
pharmaceuticals that mimic this effect, could be an effective and translatable intervention to 
promote weight normalization, control of blood glucose, and overall metabolic health. 
Methods 
Ethical approval and animals 
All procedures conformed to institutional guidelines and were approved by the Institutional 
Animal Care and Use Committee of the William S. Middleton Memorial Veterans Hospital, 
Madison WI. Animals were euthanized using methods consistent with the recommendations 
of the Panel on Euthanasia of the American Veterinary Medical Association. The research 
complies with the policies of The Journal of Physiology (Grundy, 2015). 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
Animals and Diets 
Male C57BL/6J mice were purchased from The Jackson Laboratory at 5 weeks of age, and 
pre-conditioned with WD (TD.88137, Envigo, Madison, WI) starting at 6 weeks of age for 12 
weeks; chow control mice were fed Purina 5001. Mice were then switched to amino acid 
defined diets or a Western diet supplemented with additional BCAAs; all diets were obtained 
from Envigo, and diet compositions and item numbers are provided in Tables 2 and 3. Mice 
were housed in a SPF mouse facility a 12:12 hour light/dark cycle with free access to food 
and water except as noted in procedures below. Animals were group housed in static 
microisolator cages, except when temporarily housed in a Columbus Instruments 
Oxymax/CLAMS metabolic chamber system. Group sizes are provided in the figure legends. 
Randomization of obese, Western diet fed mice was performed at the cage level to ensure 
all groups had approximately the same initial starting weight. 
Procedures 
Glucose tolerance tests were performed by fasting the mice overnight for 16 hours and then 
injecting glucose (1g/kg) intraperitoneally (Arriola Apelo et al., 2016; Fontana et al., 2016). 
Insulin tolerance tests were performed by fasting mice for 4 hours starting at lights on, and 
then injecting insulin (0.75U/kg) intraperitoneally. Glucose measurements were taken using 
a Bayer Contour blood glucose meter and test strips. Blood for fasting insulin and FGF21 
was obtained following an overnight fast; insulin and FGF21 levels were determined by 
ELISA (Crystal Chem). Mouse body composition was determined using an EchoMRI 3-in-1 
Body Composition Analyzer (Houston, TX). For assay of multiple metabolic parameters (O2, 
CO2, food consumption, respiratory exchange ratio (RER), energy expenditure) and activity 
tracking, mice were acclimated to housing in a Columbus Instruments Oxymax/CLAMS 
metabolic chamber system (Columbus, OH) for approximately 24 hours, and data from a 
continuous 24 hour period was then recorded and analyzed. Triglycerides were measured by 
Triglyceride Colorimetric Assay Kit (Cayman Chemicals) in liver collected after an 
approximately 16 hour fast. Other tissues for molecular analysis were flash-frozen in liquid 
nitrogen or fixed and prepared as described below.  
Histology 
Samples of brown adipose tissue (BAT), white adipose tissue (WAT), liver, and skin were 
isolated following euthanasia. Adipose was fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde overnight, 
sectioned and H&E stained by the UWCCC Experimental Pathology Laboratory. Liver was 
embedded in OCT, and then cryosectioned and Oil-Red-O stained by the UWCCC 
Experimental Pathology Laboratory. Liver, BAT and WAT sections were imaged using an 
EVOS microscope as previously described (Linnemann et al., 2015). Skin was isolated from 
the belly and back of mice, paraformaldehyde-fixed (4%) overnight and then paraffin-
embedded for evaluation (Kasza et al., 2014). Scale bars were inserted automatically or 
manually by the investigator. For quantification of lipid droplet size, 6 independent fields 
were obtained for each tissue from each mouse and quantified using NIH ImageJ.   
 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
Quantitative PCR 
Liver or adipose RNA was extracted with Trireagent (Sigma). 1g of RNA was used to 
generate cDNA (Superscript III; Invitrogen). Oligo dT primers and primers for real-time PCR 
were obtained from Integrated DNA Technologies (IDT). Reactions were run on an Applied 
Biosystems StepOne Plus machine with Sybr Green PCR Master Mix (Invitrogen). Actin was 
used to normalize the results from gene-specific reactions. Primer sequences used for qPCR 
were from (Hagiwara et al., 2012; Fontana et al., 2016) or were designed using the IDT 
qPCR design tool, and are as follows: Acc1: F: AAGGCTATGTGAAGGATG, R: 
CTGTCTGAAGAGGTTAGG; 
Acl: 
F: 
GCCAGCGGGAGCACATC, 
R: 
CTTTGCAGGTGCCACTTCATC; 
Actb: 
F: 
ACCTTCTACAATGAGCTGCG, 
R: 
CTGGATGGCTACGTACATGG; 
Bmp8: 
F: 
TCAACACAACCCTCCACATCA, 
R: 
AGATCGGAGCGTCTGAAGATC; 
Dgat1: 
F: 
TGGTGTGTGGTGATGCTGATC, 
R: 
GCCAGGCGCTTCTCAA; 
Dgat2: 
F: 
AGTGGCAATGCTATCATCATCAT, 
R: 
TCTTCTGGACCCATCGGCCCCAGGA; 
Fasn: 
F: 
CCCCTCTGTTAATTGGCTCC, 
R: 
TTGTGGAAGTGCAGGTTAGG; 
Fgf21: 
F: 
CAAATCCTGGGTGTCAAAGC, 
R: 
CATGGGCTTCAGACTGGTAC; 
Gpat: 
F: 
CAACACCATCCCCGACATC, 
R: 
GTGACCTTCGATTATGCGATCA; 
Pparg: 
F: 
GTACTGCCGTTTTCACAAGTG, 
R: 
TCTTTCAGGTCGTGTTCACAG; 
Scd1: 
F: 
CTGACCTGAAAGCCGAGAAG, 
R: 
AGAAGGTGCTAACGAACAGG; 
Srebp1c: 
F: 
GGAGCCATGGATTGCACATT, 
R: 
GGCCCGGGAAGTCACTGT. 
Immunoblotting 
Tissue samples were lysed in cold RIPA buffer supplemented with phosphatase and 
protease inhibitor cocktail tablets. Tissues were lysed as previously described (Baar et al., 
2016) using a FastPrep 24 (M.P. Biomedicals) with bead-beating tubes (13119-500) and 
ceramic beads (13113-325) from Mo-Bio Laboratories and then centrifuged. Protein 
concentration was determined by Bradford (Pierce Biotechnology). 20g protein was 
separated by sodium dodecylsulphate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) on 
10% resolving gels (Life Technologies). Antibody for HSP90 was purchased from Cell 
Signaling Technology (#4874), antibody for UCP1 was purchased from Abcam (ab10983). 
Imaging was performed using GE ImageQuant LAS 4000 imaging station. Quantification was 
determined by densitometry using NIH ImageJ software. 
Islet isolation and ex vivo studies 
Islets were isolated and an ex vivo glucose stimulated insulin secretion assay was performed 
as previously described (Neuman et al., 2014; Truchan et al., 2015; Fontana et al., 2016). 
Briefly, mice were anesthetized with 240 mg/kg of freshly prepared avertin, a form of 
anesthesia that does not dilate the vasculature or alter blood glucose levels, and the mouse 
was then euthanized by exsanguination while the pancreas was inflated with collagenase in 
order to isolate the islets. Mitochondrial membrane potential was measured in islets pre-
loaded with Rhodamine123 (5 M, 5 min) (Sigma) and perfused with a standard external 
solution (135 mM NaCl, 4.8 mM KCl, 5 mM CaCl2, 1.2 mM MgCl2, 20 mM HEPES; pH 7.35) 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
containing 2 or 20 mM glucose, followed by a reference solution containing 20 mM glucose 
and 5 mM KCN, used to normalize the data. Excitation (500/20x) and emission (535/30m) 
filters (ET type, Chroma Technology Corporation) were used in combination with an 
FF444/521/608-Di01 dichroic (Semrock) on a Nikon Ti-Eclipse microscope; the imaging 
system was previously described  (Gregg et al., 2016). A single region of interest was used 
to quantify the average response of each islet using Nikon Elements. 
Statistics 
Statistical analysis was conducted using Prism 7 (GraphPad Software). Tests involving 
repeated measurements were analyzed with two-way repeated-measures ANOVA, followed 
by a Tukey-Kramer or Dunnett’s post-hoc test as specified. All other comparisons of three or 
more means were analyzed by one-way ANOVA followed by a Dunnett’s or Tukey-Kramer 
post-hoc test as specified in the figure legends. Additional comparisons, if any, were 
corrected for multiple comparisons using the Bonferroni method.  
Results 
Diet-induced obese mice switched to normal calorie diets with reduced branched-
chain amino acids rapidly lose weight and improve glycemic control  
We induced obesity and metabolic dysfunction by feeding C57BL/6J mice a Western 
diet (WD) for 12 weeks (DIO mice). DIO mice were then switched to one of several different 
diets of varying amino acid compositions, with an energy density and macronutrient 
composition typical of rodent chow (Fig. 1A). One group of mice was maintained on WD, 
while an additional group of mice was fed WD supplemented with branched-chain amino 
acids (BCAAs). Finally, a parallel group of mice never exposed to a Western diet was placed 
on a Control amino acid defined diet. Exact diet formulations are provided in Table 2. 
All DIO mice lost weight when switched to a normal calorie diet, while mice 
consuming a WD (with or without supplemental BCAAs) continued to gain weight (Fig. 1B). 
Mice consuming diets in which the BCAAs (ExLow BCAA) or all amino acids (ExLow AA) 
were specifically reduced lost weight very rapidly, shedding approximately 25% of their body 
weight in two weeks before eventually stabilizing at a weight lower than mice never exposed 
to a WD. In contrast, DIO mice switched to a normal calorie Control diet normalized their 
weight more slowly, over approximately two additional months. Mice fed the ExLow BCAA or 
ExLow AA diets lost fat mass, including epididymal white adipose tissue (WAT), and lean 
mass, with a net effect of greatly reduced adiposity relative to mice switched to the Control 
diet as well as to those remaining on a WD (Fig. 1C, 1D).  
The dramatic weight loss of mice consuming the ExLow BCAA and ExLow AA diets 
was not due to decreased food consumption. Indeed, the absolute caloric intake of mice 
consuming these diets was similar to that of mice switched to the normal calorie Control diet 
(data not shown), and relative to their body weight the caloric intake of mice on either the 
ExLow BCAA or ExLow AA diets was increased (Fig. 1E). Low protein and low amino acid 
diets promote energy expenditure (Laeger et al., 2014; Fontana et al., 2016). We assessed 
activity and energy expenditure via indirect calorimetry once the weights of all groups had 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
stabilized. While all mice switched to normal calorie diets had similar levels of activity, we 
observed increased energy expenditure in mice switched to the ExLow AA diet (Fig. 1F). 
DIO mice switched to any of the normal calorie diets had significantly thinner dermal 
WAT (dWAT) (Fig. 2A, 2B) than mice remaining on a WD. DIO mice fed either the ExLow 
BCAA or ExLow AA diets had thinner dWAT than DIO mice switched to the Control diet. DIO 
mice consuming WD or WD supplemented with BCAAs had evident hepatic steatosis with 
large fat droplets, but DIO mice switched to either the Control or ExLow BCAA diets had 
decreased liver droplet size and normal liver histology by the conclusion of the experiment 
(Fig. 2C, 2D). DIO mice switched to the ExLow AA diet had a trend towards reduced lipid 
droplet size (corrected p = 0.12), but hepatic steatosis was still evident. mRNA expression of 
many lipogenic genes and transcription factors was reduced in the livers of mice switched to 
Control or ExLow BCAA diets, with similar but less dramatic effects in mice switched to the 
ExLow AA diet (Fig. 2E). Surprisingly, mice fed WD supplemented with BCAAs also had 
decreased hepatic expression of many lipogenic genes and transcription factors.  
 
Glucose tolerance improved in all mice switched to normal calorie diets; after three 
weeks, mice switched to ExLow BCAA and ExLow AA diets had improved glucose tolerance 
relative to other groups, including mice never exposed to a WD (Fig. 3A), an effect 
sustained throughout the experiment. In contrast, supplementing a WD with BCAAs resulted 
in worse glucose tolerance vs. all other groups after 9 weeks (data not shown). DIO mice 
that remained on a WD were insulin resistant; all mice placed on normal calorie diets 
showed improved insulin sensitivity relative to WD mice, with mice switched to an ExLow AA 
diet showing improved insulin sensitivity relative to all groups (Fig. 3B). DIO mice that 
remained on a Western diet had fasting hyperglycemia and hyperinsulinemia, as well as 
increased HOMA2-IR (Levy et al., 1998; Mather, 2009), relative to mice never exposed to 
WD (Fig. 3C-E). In agreement with our tolerance tests, these deficits were corrected in mice 
switched to any of the normal calorie diets (Fig. 3C-E). 
Specifically reducing dietary BCAAs restores metabolic health to DIO mice continuing 
to consume a Western Diet 
While these results supported our hypothesis that reducing dietary BCAAs would 
restore metabolic health, the simultaneous alterations in energy density and macronutrient 
ratios made it difficult to elucidate the precise contribution of the BCAAs. To specifically 
address this question, we designed a new series of diets based on a novel amino acid-
defined Western diet (WD Control AA) closely matching the macronutrient profile of the 
natural sourced diet WD TD.88137. Using this WD Control AA diet as our base, we 
developed several additional isocaloric WDs with increased or decreased dietary levels of 
BCAAs (Table 1).  
As shown in Figure 4A, we induced obesity in 48 C57Bl/6J mice by feeding them a 
WD for twelve weeks; these mice were then randomized into four groups of twelve mice 
each, and each group was placed on either a WD Control AA, WD High BCAA, WD Low 
BCAA, or WD Low AA diet. In parallel, a group of 12 mice never exposed to a WD were 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
switched to the Control amino acid defined diet. Exact diet formulations are provided in 
Table 3. 
DIO mice fed either the WD Control AA or WD High BCAA diets maintained or 
gained weight, while DIO mice switched to the WD Low BCAA or the WD Low AA diets 
progressively lost weight for three weeks (Fig. 4B). The weight of mice fed a WD Low BCAA 
diet then stabilized, matching the weight of Control AA-fed mice fed never exposed to a WD; 
mice fed the WD Low AA diet continued to lose weight at a greatly reduced rate. The weight 
loss of these mice was primarily due to a dramatic decrease in fat mass, while lean mass 
was preserved (Fig. 4C), and was not associated with decreased food consumption (Fig. 
4D). Overall, the mice fed the WD Low BCAA or WD Low AA diets had improved body 
composition, with decreased adiposity and a resulting increase in the lean fraction (Fig. 4E). 
The dWAT thickness of mice fed the WD Low BCAA or WD Low AA diets was significantly 
decreased; curiously, mice fed the WD High BCAA diet also had thinner dWAT (Fig. 5A).  
Mice fed the WD Low BCAA diet had smaller hepatic lipid droplets than mice fed the 
WD Control AA diet, and cleared much of the hepatic fat deposited by WD feeding (Fig. 5B). 
Intriguingly, there was also qualitative histological improvement and a non-significant trend 
towards reduced lipid droplet size in mice consuming extra BCAAs (WD High BCAA). The 
livers of mice fed the WD Low AA diet did not have smaller lipid droplets and retained large 
lipid droplets (Fig. 5B). Mice fed the WD Low AA or WD High BCAA diets had increased 
hepatic triglyceride levels (Fig. 5C). We observed numerical decreases in the mRNA 
expression of two lipogenic genes (Fasn, Scd1) in the livers of mice fed either the WD Low 
BCAA diet or the WD High BCAA diet, and a statistically significant decrease in the 
transcription factor Pparg in the livers of mice switched to a WD Low BCAA diet (Fig. 5D).  
We examined glycemic control by conducting glucose and insulin tolerance tests, 
and by determining fasting glucose and insulin levels. Glucose tolerance was improved in 
mice eating the WD Low BCAA and WD Low AA diets 3 weeks after the diet switch – a 
timepoint at which these mice still weighed more than Control AA diet mice never exposed to 
a WD (Fig. 6A). Insulin sensitivity was similarly improved in both groups (Fig. 6B), even as 
the mice continued to consume a WD. These improvements were maintained over the 
course of the study (data not shown). Mice on WD Low BCAA and WD Low AA diets had 
decreased fasting blood glucose and insulin levels (Fig. 6C, 6D), while increasing dietary 
BCAAs resulting in fasting hyperglycemia and hyperinsulinemia. HOMA2-IR calculated from 
these values indicate that insulin sensitivity is inversely correlated with dietary BCAAs (Fig. 
6E).  
We examined pancreatic islet function by performing an ex vivo glucose-stimulated 
insulin secretion assay (Fig. 7A). Insulin secretion was decreased in mice on a WD Low AA 
diet (Fig. 7A); however, total islet insulin content was not affected (Fig. 7A). To precisely 
examine beta cell metabolic stress, we quantified mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP). 
MMP was increased in mice eating a WD Control AA diet, and was reduced and essentially 
normalized in mice consuming WD Low BCAA and WD Low AA diets (Fig. 7B). In every 
case except WD High BCAA, beta cell function was matched with insulin sensitivity, implying 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
that increased BCAA consumption negatively impacts mitochondrial function and insulin 
secretion. 
Chronic consumption of a reduced BCAA Western diet increases energy expenditure 
independently of FGF21 
 
 
In order to understand how reducing dietary BCAAs promote leanness without 
reducing calorie intake, we utilized metabolic chambers to examine food consumption, 
respiration, activity, and energy expenditure after mice had been on the diets for 
approximately 12 weeks. Mice fed diets with reduced levels of BCAAs or reduced levels of 
all AAs consumed about twice as many calories than mice fed a WD Control AA diet (data 
not shown); the increase is even greater when calculated relative to body weight (Fig. 8A). 
As expected, the respiratory exchange ratio (RER) was decreased by WD feeding and 
increased in mice consuming the high carbohydrate WD Low AA diet (Fig. 8B). Intriguingly, 
the RER of mice fed the WD Low BCAA diet, containing the same level of carbohydrates as 
the WD Control AA diet, was also increased, and was indistinguishable from the RER of 
mice consuming a WD Low AA diet.  
There was no difference in spontaneous activity between any of the groups (Fig. 8C). 
Mice consuming the WD Low BCAA and WD Low AA diets had greater energy expenditure 
during both daytime and nighttime (Fig. 8D). Mice fed a diet in which all amino acids are 
reduced (WD Low AA) had high levels of the energy balance regulating hormone FGF21 
(Fig. 8E); however, there was no increase in FGF21 in the blood of mice consuming the WD 
Low BCAA diet and no increase in liver Fgf21 gene expression (Fig. 8E, 8F).   
Reduction in dietary BCAAs in WD-fed mice is accompanied by a transient increase in 
FGF21 levels 
From the perspective of weight and body composition, the three weeks following the 
diet switch are distinctly different from the time period during which we analyzed energy 
expenditure above. In particular, rapid weight normalization occurs during the first three 
weeks, while weights are relatively stable thereafter. We therefore utilized an additional 
cohort of mice to intensively analyze weight, body composition, activity and energy 
expenditure during the twelve days immediately following the diet switch, during which mice 
fed the WD Low BCAA and WD Low AA diets progressively lost weight and fat mass (Fig. 
9A-B).  
In contrast to the increased RER seen at later time points, neither WD Low BCAA or 
WD Low AA diet fed mice had increased RER one week after the diet switch; indeed, WD 
Low BCAA diet fed mice had a lower RER (Fig. 9C). While there were no significant 
changes in spontaneous activity between groups, we observed a statistically significant 
increase in energy expenditure during daytime and nighttime in WD Low AA diet fed mice, 
but surprisingly not in WD Low BCAA fed mice (Fig. 9C). As weight loss in the absence of a 
change in energy expenditure or activity was puzzling, we examined energy expenditure 
more closely over a 24-hour period. We determined that mice fed the WD Low BCAA diet 
have a significant increase in energy expenditure for at least 20% of a 24-hour period, with 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
the most pronounced difference at night (Fig. 9D). Following completion of this analysis, we 
sacrificed mice and determined that FGF21 levels were significantly increased in the blood 
of both WD Low BCAA diet fed mice as well as in the blood of WD Low AA diet fed mice 
(Fig. 9E).  
FGF21 promotes browning of WAT and increased activation of BAT (Fisher et al., 
2012; Owen et al., 2014; Douris et al., 2015; Hill et al., 2017; Wanders et al., 2017). We 
observed decreased adipocyte size in inguinal and gonadal WAT, consistent with the 
observed loss of adipose mass; however, we did not observe morphology consistent with 
increased beiging (Fig. 10A), and expression of UCP1 was not increased in either gonadal 
or inguinal WAT (Fig. 10B, 10C). We also did not observe increased expression of Ucp1 in 
BAT (Fig. 10D); however, we did observe a significant decrease in lipid droplet size in BAT 
(Fig. 10E) and increased expression of Bmp8 (Fig. 10F), changes consistent with FGF21-
mediated activation of BAT (Whittle et al., 2012; Bendayan & Cammisotto, 2016; Quesada-
Lopez et al., 2016; Wanders et al., 2017).  
Discussion 
Building on recent studies by our laboratory and others that have shown that 
reducing dietary branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs) can promote or preserve metabolic 
health in young mice and rats (Xiao et al., 2014; Fontana et al., 2016; White et al., 2016), we 
tested the hypothesis that reducing dietary BCAAs would be a uniquely potent way to 
intervene in metabolic syndrome. Here, we find that specifically reducing dietary BCAAs, 
without altering energy density, the caloric contribution of amino acids to the diet, or the 
protein:carbohydrate ratio (Solon-Biet et al., 2014; Solon-Biet et al., 2015; Simpson et al., 
2017), is sufficient to robustly restore metabolic health.  
These studies represent the first examination of a reduced BCAA diet in a mouse 
model of preexisting diet-induced obesity and type 2 diabetes, which are not hyperphagic 
and have a gradual and reversible onset of metabolic disease (Williams et al., 2014). 
Specifically reducing BCAAs rapidly normalizes the weight of DIO mice without calorie 
restriction, even in mice continuing to consume a Western diet, promoting fat mass loss as 
well as rapid and dramatic improvements in glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity. While 
there are likely multiple mechanisms underlying the metabolic benefits of a reduced BCAA 
diet, the improvements in glucose homeostasis we observe here are likely due in part to 
weight loss and decreased adiposity resulting from increased energy expenditure.  
As summarized in Figure 11, reducing either all dietary AAs or specifically reducing 
the BCAAs improves the metabolic health of diet-induced obese mice; however, the specific 
effects of the diets on energy balance differ. During the acute phase of rapid weight loss, 
mice eating a WD Low AA diet have increased food intake and a substantial increase in 
energy expenditure, while the mice eating a WD Low BCAA diet have no change in food 
intake and a more modest increase in energy expenditure. In contrast, during the chronic 
phase energy expenditure and caloric intake are identically increased in mice consuming 
either the WD Low AA diet or WD Low BCAA diet. 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
A more dramatic difference is observed between mice fed these two diets with 
regards to the hormone FGF21, which has pleiotropic effects on glucose metabolism and 
energy expenditure (Berglund et al., 2009; Fisher et al., 2012; Emanuelli et al., 2014; Laeger 
et al., 2014; Markan et al., 2014; Owen et al., 2014; Stone et al., 2014; Laeger et al., 2016). 
FGF21 is induced in both humans and rodents in response to low protein diets, and is 
proposed to mediate many of the beneficial metabolic effects of these diets (Laeger et al., 
2014; Fontana et al., 2016; Laeger et al., 2016; Maida et al., 2016). While our previous work, 
conducted in the context of a normal calorie diet, revealed no effect of BCAA reduction on 
FGF21, here we find that specifically reducing dietary BCAAs in the context of a WD 
transiently induces FGF21.  
This is intriguing, particularly in light of a recent study which suggests that the 
increase in FGF21 in mice fed a low protein diet is mediated by the protein:carbohydrate 
ratio (Solon-Biet et al., 2016). While other groups have previously determined that restricting 
or eliminating specific essential dietary amino acids, including methionine or leucine (De 
Sousa-Coelho et al., 2012; Lees et al., 2014; Wanders et al., 2015; Lees et al., 2017; 
Wanders et al., 2017), is sufficient to induce FGF21, these studies have utilized diets in 
which either methionine or leucine levels are restricted by 80% or more. Our finding that 
FGF21 is responsive to a more physiologically relevant 67% reduction in dietary levels of 
BCAAs, at least in the context of a Western diet, suggests that the precise amino acid 
composition of the dietary protein may also play a role. Further research will be required to 
define the mechanism by which FGF21 expression is regulated by dietary BCAAs and, 
indeed by other AAs such as asparagine (Wilson et al., 2015).  
FGF21 has been shown to play a key role in the response to cold exposure and 
dietary interventions such as calorie restriction and methionine restriction, promoting the 
beiging of white adipose tissue (Fisher et al., 2012; Shabalina et al., 2013; Fabbiano et al., 
2016; Wanders et al., 2017). Dietary protein restriction also promotes the beiging of white 
adipose tissue, and increases energy expenditure via a FGF21 and UCP1-dependent 
mechanism (Laeger et al., 2016; Hill et al., 2017). We therefore hypothesized that the 
increase in FGF21 following the reduction of dietary BCAAs or all AAs promoted energy 
expenditure and weight loss through the beiging of white adipose tissue. However, while 
mice fed either the WD Low AA or WD Low BCAA diet for approximately two weeks had 
increased levels of FGF21 and increased energy expenditure, we observed no changes in 
WAT morphology consistent with beiging, and no increase in the expression of UCP1 in 
either inguinal or gonadal WAT. Ucp1 was also not increased in BAT, despite the presence 
of other changes suggestive of BAT activation. 
These results demonstrate that BCAA and AA reduction in the context of a Western 
diet does not promote energy expenditure solely by engaging the FGF21-UCP1 axis and 
promoting WAT beiging. However, as our analysis of WAT and BAT is limited to an early 
time point, we cannot rule out a role for beiged WAT in the greatly increased energy 
expenditure we observed in mice consuming a WD Low AA or WD Low BCAA diet for longer 
periods of time. Determining how UCP1 expression changes in mice fed these diets for 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
longer periods of time will be a key point for further study. FGF21 may also still play a role in 
the response to reduced dietary BCAAs, as recent research suggests that some of FGF21’s 
effects are mechanistically independent of UCP1 (Samms et al., 2015). There are also as 
yet undefined thermogenic mechanisms that act independently of FGF21 and UCP1 (Hill et 
al., 2017; Keipert et al., 2017), which could conceivably also play a role in the response to 
reduced dietary BCAAs. Understanding the molecular mechanisms leading to increased 
energy expenditure and weight loss, including the role of FGF21 and UCP1, will be key 
points for further study. 
The improvements in the regulation of blood glucose we observe in mice consuming 
diets with reduced levels of BCAAs are not exclusively the result of weight loss. Notably, 
while both glucose and insulin tolerance are improved in obese mice switched to diets with 
reduced levels of the BCAAs, obese mice switched to the WD Low BCAA and WD Low AA 
diets have better glucose tolerance than Control diet-fed mice never exposed to a Western 
diet. Based on our previous work (Fontana et al., 2016), the decrease in fasting blood 
glucose we observe here in mice switched to BCAA-reduced diets, and the minimal effects 
of BCAA-reduced diets on islet metabolism, we hypothesize that the improvement in glucose 
tolerance is most likely due to improved hepatic insulin sensitivity. This effect could be due to 
alterations in lipid metabolism; increased levels of FGF21, which promotes hepatic insulin 
sensitivity (Berglund et al., 2009); decreased BCAA catabolism, as increased hepatic BCAA 
catabolism is associated with glucose intolerance in mice (She et al., 2007; Ananieva et al., 
2017); or a combination of these effects. Identifying the physiological and molecular basis for 
the improvements in blood glucose control may suggest novel approaches to the treatment 
of prediabetes and type 2 diabetes. 
Intriguingly, increased consumption of BCAAs, at least under the conditions 
examined here, has minimal impact on weight and body composition. In agreement with 
previous studies demonstrating that supplementing either a LP diet (Maida et al., 2017) or a 
Western diet (Newgard et al., 2009) with BCAAs impairs glucose homeostasis in wild-type 
animals, there is an observable negative impact of BCAA supplementation on blood glucose 
control. Interestingly, while there is both preclinical and clinical data suggesting that BCAA 
supplementation may be therapeutic for hepatic steatosis (Garcia-Caraballo et al., 2013; 
Barb et al., 2016; Honda et al., 2017), and we observed decreased expression of several 
lipogenic genes in mice consuming additional BCAAs, we observed no statistically significant 
effect of BCAA supplementation on hepatic lipid droplet size. Indeed, we find that BCAA 
supplementation actually increases triglyceride levels. Reconciling our results with data from 
other groups suggesting a beneficial effect of BCAA supplementation on hepatic steatosis 
will require additional study.  
In contrast to these results, we observed that specifically reducing dietary BCAAs 
suppresses the expression of numerous lipogenic genes, and also decreases hepatic lipid 
droplet size. While the relationship between lipid droplet size and liver health is not clearly 
understood, smaller lipid droplets may be more metabolically available and better-stabilized 
by lipid binding proteins (Suzuki et al., 2011). Notably, reducing all dietary amino acids, as in 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
a low protein diet, did not reduce lipid droplet size and increased hepatic triglyceride levels. 
These results suggest that specifically reducing dietary BCAAs may have uniquely beneficial 
effects on hepatic lipid metabolism not achievable from the consumption of a low protein 
diet.  
Collectively, these results demonstrate that reducing dietary levels of all AAs, or 
specifically reducing dietary levels of the three BCAAs, leucine, isoleucine, and valine, can 
rapidly reverse the obesity and metabolic dysfunction resulting from consumption of a high-
fat, high-sugar diet without requiring calorie restriction. While many of these metabolic 
benefits likely result from increased energy expenditure and a resulting decrease in weight, 
changes in hormones or BCAA catabolism likely also contribute to the improved regulation of 
blood glucose we observe in mice fed diets with reduced levels of the BCAAs. While the 
direct applicability of our results to humans remains to be determined, the correlation of 
blood levels of BCAAs with obesity and insulin resistance in humans is well established 
(Newgard et al., 2009; Lynch & Adams, 2014). If dietary BCAAs have similar effects on 
energy balance and metabolism in humans, it is implicit in our findings that protein quality – 
the precise amino acid composition of dietary protein – may have a significant impact on the 
efficacy of weight loss diets. Finally, selective reduction of dietary BCAAs through the use of 
customized diet plans or BCAA-free medical food, or pharmaceuticals which mimic this 
effect, for example by altering BCAA absorption or catabolism, may represent a translatable 
and sustainable approach to promote metabolic health and treat diabetes and obesity 
without reducing caloric intake. 
 
Competing interests 
The University of Wisconsin-Madison has applied for a patent based in part on the findings 
reported here, on which authors N.E.C. and D.W.L. are inventors. 
 
Author Contributions 
Experiments were performed in the Lamming laboratory, except for the analysis of dWAT, 
which was performed in the Alexander laboratory, and analysis of pancreatic islets, which 
was performed in the Kimple and Merrins laboratories. NEC, MEK, CMA, MJM, and DWL 
conceived the experiments and secured funding. NEC, IK, EMW, ENK, MDS, BAS, CP, DY, 
SIAA, GG, DSS, SEC, MEB, JAW, RJF, and DWL performed the experiments. NEC, IK, 
EMW, MDS, BAS, CP, KAM, MEK, CMA, MJM and DWL analyzed the data. NEC and DWL 
wrote the manuscript.  
 
Funding 
The Lamming lab is supported by the NIH NIA (R00 AG041765, R21 AG051974, and R56 
AG056771), and a New Investigator Program Award from the Wisconsin Partnership 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
Program. This research was conducted while D.W.L. was an AFAR Research Grant 
recipient from the American Federation for Aging Research, and was also supported by a 
Glenn Foundation Award for Research in the Biological Mechanisms of Aging and an Early 
Career Development Award from the Central Society for Clinical and Translational Research 
(CSCTR) to D.W.L. The Merrins and Lamming labs are jointly supported by a grant from the 
NIH NIA (R21 AG050135), and both labs are supported by startup funds from the University 
of Wisconsin-Madison School of Medicine and Public Health and Department of Medicine. 
The Merrins lab is also supported by the ADA (1-16-IBS-212), the NIH/NIDDK (K01 
DK101683 and R01 DK113103), an Early Career Development Award from CSCTR, and the 
Wisconsin Partnership Program. This work was also supported by grants from the ADA (1-
14-BS-115) and the NIH/NIDDK (R01 DK102598) to M.E.K. The Alexander lab is supported 
by NIH/NIGMS (RO1 GM113142). N.E.C. is supported by a training grant from the UW 
Institute on Aging (NIA T32 AG000213). I.K. is supported in part by McArdle Departmental 
Funds. E.M.W. was supported by the Shapiro Summer Research Program and the UW-
Madison Department of Medicine. S.I.A.A. was supported in part by a fellowship from the 
ADA (1-16-PMF-001). S.E.C. was supported by the Rural and Urban Scholars in Community 
Health Program. The UWCCC Experimental Pathology Laboratory is supported by the 
University of Wisconsin Carbone Cancer Center Support Grant P30 CA014520. This work 
was supported using facilities and resources from the William S. Middleton Memorial 
Veterans Hospital. This work does not represent the views of the Department of Veterans 
Affairs or the United States Government. 
 
Acknowledgements 
We thank all the members of the Lamming, Kimple, Merrins and Alexander labs as well as 
Dr. Amelia Linnemann, Dr. Dawn B. Davis and the Davis laboratory for their assistance and 
insight. We thank Dr. Tina Herfel (Envigo) for assistance with the formulation of the amino 
acid defined diets.  
 
References 
Ananieva EA, Van Horn CG, Jones MR & Hutson SM. (2017). Liver BCATm transgenic 
mouse model reveals the important role of the liver in maintaining BCAA 
homeostasis. J Nutr Biochem 40, 132-140. 
 
Arriola Apelo SI, Neuman JC, Baar EL, Syed FA, Cummings NE, Brar HK, Pumper CP, 
Kimple ME & Lamming DW. (2016). Alternative rapamycin treatment regimens 
mitigate the impact of rapamycin on glucose homeostasis and the immune system. 
Aging Cell 15, 28-38. 
 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
Baar EL, Carbajal KA, Ong IM & Lamming DW. (2016). Sex- and tissue-specific changes in 
mTOR signaling with age in C57BL/6J mice. Aging Cell 15, 155-166. 
 
Barb D, Portillo-Sanchez P & Cusi K. (2016). Pharmacological management of nonalcoholic 
fatty liver disease. Metabolism 65, 1183-1195. 
 
Batch BC, Shah SH, Newgard CB, Turer CB, Haynes C, Bain JR, Muehlbauer M, Patel MJ, 
Stevens RD, Appel LJ, Newby LK & Svetkey LP. (2013). Branched chain amino acids 
are novel biomarkers for discrimination of metabolic wellness. Metabolism 62, 961-
969. 
 
Bendayan M & Cammisotto P. (2016). Activation of Brown Adipose Tissue by Oral 
Administration of Leptin. Austin J Endocrinol Diabetes 3, 1051. 
 
Berglund ED, Li CY, Bina HA, Lynes SE, Michael MD, Shanafelt AB, Kharitonenkov A & 
Wasserman DH. (2009). Fibroblast growth factor 21 controls glycemia via regulation 
of hepatic glucose flux and insulin sensitivity. Endocrinology 150, 4084-4093. 
 
Connelly MA, Wolak-Dinsmore J & Dullaart RPF. (2017). Branched Chain Amino Acids Are 
Associated with Insulin Resistance Independent of Leptin and Adiponectin in 
Subjects with Varying Degrees of Glucose Tolerance. Metab Syndr Relat Disord 15, 
183-186. 
 
De Sousa-Coelho AL, Marrero PF & Haro D. (2012). Activating transcription factor 4-
dependent induction of FGF21 during amino acid deprivation. Biochem J 443, 165-
171. 
 
Douris N, Stevanovic DM, Fisher FM, Cisu TI, Chee MJ, Nguyen NL, Zarebidaki E, Adams 
AC, Kharitonenkov A, Flier JS, Bartness TJ & Maratos-Flier E. (2015). Central 
Fibroblast Growth Factor 21 Browns White Fat via Sympathetic Action in Male Mice. 
Endocrinology 156, 2470-2481. 
 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
Emanuelli B, Vienberg SG, Smyth G, Cheng C, Stanford KI, Arumugam M, Michael MD, 
Adams AC, Kharitonenkov A & Kahn CR. (2014). Interplay between FGF21 and 
insulin action in the liver regulates metabolism. J Clin Invest 124, 515-527. 
 
Fabbiano S, Suarez-Zamorano N, Rigo D, Veyrat-Durebex C, Stevanovic Dokic A, Colin DJ 
& Trajkovski M. (2016). Caloric Restriction Leads to Browning of White Adipose 
Tissue through Type 2 Immune Signaling. Cell Metab 24, 434-446. 
 
Felig P, Marliss E & Cahill GF, Jr. (1969). Plasma amino acid levels and insulin secretion in 
obesity. N Engl J Med 281, 811-816. 
 
Fisher FM, Kleiner S, Douris N, Fox EC, Mepani RJ, Verdeguer F, Wu J, Kharitonenkov A, 
Flier JS, Maratos-Flier E & Spiegelman BM. (2012). FGF21 regulates PGC-1alpha 
and browning of white adipose tissues in adaptive thermogenesis. Genes Dev 26, 
271-281. 
 
Flegal KM, Carroll MD, Kit BK & Ogden CL. (2012). Prevalence of obesity and trends in the 
distribution of body mass index among US adults, 1999-2010. JAMA 307, 491-497. 
 
Fontana L, Cummings NE, Arriola Apelo SI, Neuman JC, Kasza I, Schmidt BA, Cava E, 
Spelta F, Tosti V, Syed FA, Baar EL, Veronese N, Cottrell SE, Fenske RJ, Bertozzi 
B, Brar HK, Pietka T, Bullock AD, Figenshau RS, Andriole GL, Merrins MJ, Alexander 
CM, Kimple ME & Lamming DW. (2016). Decreased Consumption of Branched-
Chain Amino Acids Improves Metabolic Health. Cell reports 16, 520-530. 
 
Fontana L & Partridge L. (2015). Promoting health and longevity through diet: from model 
organisms to humans. Cell 161, 106-118. 
 
Garcia-Caraballo SC, Comhair TM, Verheyen F, Gaemers I, Schaap FG, Houten SM, 
Hakvoort TB, Dejong CH, Lamers WH & Koehler SE. (2013). Prevention and reversal 
of hepatic steatosis with a high-protein diet in mice. Biochim Biophys Acta 1832, 685-
695. 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
 
Gregg T, Poudel C, Schmidt BA, Dhillon RS, Sdao SM, Truchan NA, Baar EL, Fernandez 
LA, Denu JM, Eliceiri KW, Rogers JD, Kimple ME, Lamming DW & Merrins MJ. 
(2016). Pancreatic beta-Cells From Mice Offset Age-Associated Mitochondrial 
Deficiency With Reduced KATP Channel Activity. Diabetes 65, 2700-2710. 
 
Grundy D. (2015). Principles and standards for reporting animal experiments in The Journal 
of Physiology and Experimental Physiology. The Journal of physiology 593, 2547-
2549. 
 
Hagiwara A, Cornu M, Cybulski N, Polak P, Betz C, Trapani F, Terracciano L, Heim MH, 
Ruegg MA & Hall MN. (2012). Hepatic mTORC2 activates glycolysis and lipogenesis 
through Akt, glucokinase, and SREBP1c. Cell Metab 15, 725-738. 
 
Hill CM, Laeger T, Albarado DC, McDougal DH, Berthoud HR, Munzberg H & Morrison CD. 
(2017). Low protein-induced increases in FGF21 drive UCP1-dependent metabolic 
but not thermoregulatory endpoints. Scientific reports 7, 8209. 
 
Honda T, Ishigami M, Luo F, Lingyun M, Ishizu Y, Kuzuya T, Hayashi K, Nakano I, Ishikawa 
T, Feng GG, Katano Y, Kohama T, Kitaura Y, Shimomura Y, Goto H & Hirooka Y. 
(2017). Branched-chain amino acids alleviate hepatic steatosis and liver injury in 
choline-deficient high-fat diet induced NASH mice. Metabolism 69, 177-187. 
 
Janda M, Zeidler D, Bohm G & Schoberberger R. (2013). An instrument to measure 
adherence to weight loss programs: the compliance praxis survey-diet (COMPASS-
Diet). Nutrients 5, 3828-3838. 
 
Kasza I, Suh Y, Wollny D, Clark RJ, Roopra A, Colman RJ, MacDougald OA, Shedd TA, 
Nelson DW, Yen MI, Yen CL & Alexander CM. (2014). Syndecan-1 is required to 
maintain intradermal fat and prevent cold stress. PLoS Genet 10, e1004514. 
 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
Keipert S, Kutschke M, Ost M, Schwarzmayr T, van Schothorst EM, Lamp D, Brachthauser 
L, Hamp I, Mazibuko SE, Hartwig S, Lehr S, Graf E, Plettenburg O, Neff F, Tschop 
MH & Jastroch M. (2017). Long-Term Cold Adaptation Does Not Require FGF21 or 
UCP1. Cell Metab 26, 437-446 e435. 
 
Laeger T, Albarado DC, Burke SJ, Trosclair L, Hedgepeth JW, Berthoud HR, Gettys TW, 
Collier JJ, Munzberg H & Morrison CD. (2016). Metabolic Responses to Dietary 
Protein Restriction Require an Increase in FGF21 that Is Delayed by the Absence of 
GCN2. Cell reports 16, 707-716. 
 
Laeger T, Henagan TM, Albarado DC, Redman LM, Bray GA, Noland RC, Munzberg H, 
Hutson SM, Gettys TW, Schwartz MW & Morrison CD. (2014). FGF21 is an 
endocrine signal of protein restriction. J Clin Invest 124, 3913-3922. 
 
Lagiou P, Sandin S, Weiderpass E, Lagiou A, Mucci L, Trichopoulos D & Adami HO. (2007). 
Low carbohydrate-high protein diet and mortality in a cohort of Swedish women. J 
Intern Med 261, 366-374. 
 
Lees EK, Banks R, Cook C, Hill S, Morrice N, Grant L, Mody N & Delibegovic M. (2017). 
Direct comparison of methionine restriction with leucine restriction on the metabolic 
health of C57BL/6J mice. Scientific reports 7, 9977. 
 
Lees EK, Krol E, Grant L, Shearer K, Wyse C, Moncur E, Bykowska AS, Mody N, Gettys TW 
& Delibegovic M. (2014). Methionine restriction restores a younger metabolic 
phenotype in adult mice with alterations in fibroblast growth factor 21. Aging Cell 13, 
817-827. 
 
Levine ME, Suarez JA, Brandhorst S, Balasubramanian P, Cheng CW, Madia F, Fontana L, 
Mirisola MG, Guevara-Aguirre J, Wan J, Passarino G, Kennedy BK, Wei M, Cohen P, 
Crimmins EM & Longo VD. (2014). Low protein intake is associated with a major 
reduction in IGF-1, cancer, and overall mortality in the 65 and younger but not older 
population. Cell Metab 19, 407-417. 
 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
Levy JC, Matthews DR & Hermans MP. (1998). Correct homeostasis model assessment 
(HOMA) evaluation uses the computer program. Diabetes Care 21, 2191-2192. 
 
Linnemann AK, Neuman JC, Battiola TJ, Wisinski JA, Kimple ME & Davis DB. (2015). 
Glucagon-Like Peptide-1 Regulates Cholecystokinin Production in beta-Cells to 
Protect From Apoptosis. Mol Endocrinol 29, 978-987. 
 
Lynch CJ & Adams SH. (2014). Branched-chain amino acids in metabolic signalling and 
insulin resistance. Nature reviews Endocrinology 10, 723-736. 
 
Maida A, Chan JSK, Sjoberg KA, Zota A, Schmoll D, Kiens B, Herzig S & Rose AJ. (2017). 
Repletion of branched chain amino acids reverses mTORC1 signaling but not 
improved metabolism during dietary protein dilution. Molecular metabolism 6, 873-
881. 
 
Maida A, Zota A, Sjoberg KA, Schumacher J, Sijmonsma TP, Pfenninger A, Christensen 
MM, Gantert T, Fuhrmeister J, Rothermel U, Schmoll D, Heikenwalder M, Iovanna 
JL, Stemmer K, Kiens B, Herzig S & Rose AJ. (2016). A liver stress-endocrine nexus 
promotes metabolic integrity during dietary protein dilution. J Clin Invest 126, 3263-
3278. 
 
Markan KR, Naber MC, Ameka MK, Anderegg MD, Mangelsdorf DJ, Kliewer SA, 
Mohammadi M & Potthoff MJ. (2014). Circulating FGF21 is liver derived and 
enhances glucose uptake during refeeding and overfeeding. Diabetes 63, 4057-
4063. 
 
Mather K. (2009). Surrogate measures of insulin resistance: of rats, mice, and men. Am J 
Physiol Endocrinol Metab 296, E398-399. 
 
Neuman JC, Truchan NA, Joseph JW & Kimple ME. (2014). A method for mouse pancreatic 
islet isolation and intracellular cAMP determination. Journal of visualized experiments 
: JoVE, e50374. 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
 
Newberry EP, Xie Y, Kennedy SM, Luo J & Davidson NO. (2006). Protection against 
Western diet-induced obesity and hepatic steatosis in liver fatty acid-binding protein 
knockout mice. Hepatology 44, 1191-1205. 
 
Newgard CB, An J, Bain JR, Muehlbauer MJ, Stevens RD, Lien LF, Haqq AM, Shah SH, 
Arlotto M, Slentz CA, Rochon J, Gallup D, Ilkayeva O, Wenner BR, Yancy WS, Jr., 
Eisenson H, Musante G, Surwit RS, Millington DS, Butler MD & Svetkey LP. (2009). 
A branched-chain amino acid-related metabolic signature that differentiates obese 
and lean humans and contributes to insulin resistance. Cell Metab 9, 311-326. 
 
Owen BM, Ding X, Morgan DA, Coate KC, Bookout AL, Rahmouni K, Kliewer SA & 
Mangelsdorf DJ. (2014). FGF21 acts centrally to induce sympathetic nerve activity, 
energy expenditure, and weight loss. Cell Metab 20, 670-677. 
 
Peterson TR, Sengupta SS, Harris TE, Carmack AE, Kang SA, Balderas E, Guertin DA, 
Madden KL, Carpenter AE, Finck BN & Sabatini DM. (2011). mTOR complex 1 
regulates lipin 1 localization to control the SREBP pathway. Cell 146, 408-420. 
 
Quesada-Lopez T, Cereijo R, Turatsinze JV, Planavila A, Cairo M, Gavalda-Navarro A, 
Peyrou M, Moure R, Iglesias R, Giralt M, Eizirik DL & Villarroya F. (2016). The lipid 
sensor GPR120 promotes brown fat activation and FGF21 release from adipocytes. 
Nature communications 7, 13479. 
 
Samms RJ, Smith DP, Cheng CC, Antonellis PP, Perfield JW, 2nd, Kharitonenkov A, 
Gimeno RE & Adams AC. (2015). Discrete Aspects of FGF21 In Vivo Pharmacology 
Do Not Require UCP1. Cell reports 11, 991-999. 
 
Shabalina IG, Petrovic N, de Jong JM, Kalinovich AV, Cannon B & Nedergaard J. (2013). 
UCP1 in brite/beige adipose tissue mitochondria is functionally thermogenic. Cell 
reports 5, 1196-1203. 
 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
Shah SH, Crosslin DR, Haynes CS, Nelson S, Turer CB, Stevens RD, Muehlbauer MJ, 
Wenner BR, Bain JR, Laferrere B, Gorroochurn P, Teixeira J, Brantley PJ, Stevens 
VJ, Hollis JF, Appel LJ, Lien LF, Batch B, Newgard CB & Svetkey LP. (2012). 
Branched-chain amino acid levels are associated with improvement in insulin 
resistance with weight loss. Diabetologia 55, 321-330. 
 
She P, Reid TM, Bronson SK, Vary TC, Hajnal A, Lynch CJ & Hutson SM. (2007). Disruption 
of BCATm in mice leads to increased energy expenditure associated with the 
activation of a futile protein turnover cycle. Cell Metab 6, 181-194. 
 
Simpson SJ, Le Couteur DG, Raubenheimer D, Solon-Biet SM, Cooney GJ, Cogger VC & 
Fontana L. (2017). Dietary protein, aging and nutritional geometry. Ageing Res Rev 
39, 78-86. 
 
Sluijs I, Beulens JW, van der AD, Spijkerman AM, Grobbee DE & van der Schouw YT. 
(2010). Dietary intake of total, animal, and vegetable protein and risk of type 2 
diabetes in the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC)-
NL study. Diabetes Care 33, 43-48. 
 
Solon-Biet SM, Cogger VC, Pulpitel T, Heblinski M, Wahl D, McMahon AC, Warren A, 
Durrant-Whyte J, Walters KA, Krycer JR, Ponton F, Gokarn R, Wali JA, Ruohonen K, 
Conigrave AD, James DE, Raubenheimer D, Morrison CD, Le Couteur DG & 
Simpson SJ. (2016). Defining the Nutritional and Metabolic Context of FGF21 Using 
the Geometric Framework. Cell Metab 24, 555-565. 
 
Solon-Biet SM, McMahon AC, Ballard JW, Ruohonen K, Wu LE, Cogger VC, Warren A, 
Huang X, Pichaud N, Melvin RG, Gokarn R, Khalil M, Turner N, Cooney GJ, Sinclair 
DA, Raubenheimer D, Le Couteur DG & Simpson SJ. (2014). The ratio of 
macronutrients, not caloric intake, dictates cardiometabolic health, aging, and 
longevity in ad libitum-fed mice. Cell Metab 19, 418-430. 
 
Solon-Biet SM, Mitchell SJ, Coogan SC, Cogger VC, Gokarn R, McMahon AC, 
Raubenheimer D, de Cabo R, Simpson SJ & Le Couteur DG. (2015). Dietary Protein 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
to Carbohydrate Ratio and Caloric Restriction: Comparing Metabolic Outcomes in 
Mice. Cell reports 11, 1529-1534. 
 
Stone KP, Wanders D, Orgeron M, Cortez CC & Gettys TW. (2014). Mechanisms of 
increased in vivo insulin sensitivity by dietary methionine restriction in mice. Diabetes 
63, 3721-3733. 
 
Suzuki M, Shinohara Y, Ohsaki Y & Fujimoto T. (2011). Lipid droplets: size matters. J 
Electron Microsc (Tokyo) 60 Suppl 1, S101-116. 
 
Truchan NA, Brar HK, Gallagher SJ, Neuman JC & Kimple ME. (2015). A single-islet 
microplate assay to measure mouse and human islet insulin secretion. Islets 7, 
e1076607. 
 
Wanders D, Forney LA, Stone KP, Burk DH, Pierse A & Gettys TW. (2017). FGF21 Mediates 
the Thermogenic and Insulin-Sensitizing Effects of Dietary Methionine Restriction but 
Not Its Effects on Hepatic Lipid Metabolism. Diabetes 66, 858-867. 
 
Wanders D, Stone KP, Dille K, Simon J, Pierse A & Gettys TW. (2015). Metabolic responses 
to dietary leucine restriction involve remodeling of adipose tissue and enhanced 
hepatic insulin signaling. Biofactors 41, 391-402. 
 
White PJ, Lapworth AL, An J, Wang L, McGarrah RW, Stevens RD, Ilkayeva O, George T, 
Muehlbauer MJ, Bain JR, Trimmer JK, Brosnan MJ, Rolph TP & Newgard CB. 
(2016). Branched-chain amino acid restriction in Zucker-fatty rats improves muscle 
insulin sensitivity by enhancing efficiency of fatty acid oxidation and acyl-glycine 
export. Molecular metabolism 5, 538-551. 
 
Whittle AJ, Carobbio S, Martins L, Slawik M, Hondares E, Vazquez MJ, Morgan D, Csikasz 
RI, Gallego R, Rodriguez-Cuenca S, Dale M, Virtue S, Villarroya F, Cannon B, 
Rahmouni K, Lopez M & Vidal-Puig A. (2012). BMP8B increases brown adipose 
tissue thermogenesis through both central and peripheral actions. Cell 149, 871-885. 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
 
Williams LM, Campbell FM, Drew JE, Koch C, Hoggard N, Rees WD, Kamolrat T, Thi Ngo 
H, Steffensen IL, Gray SR & Tups A. (2014). The development of diet-induced 
obesity and glucose intolerance in C57BL/6 mice on a high-fat diet consists of distinct 
phases. PLoS One 9, e106159. 
 
Wilson GJ, Lennox BA, She P, Mirek ET, Al Baghdadi RJ, Fusakio ME, Dixon JL, Henderson 
GC, Wek RC & Anthony TG. (2015). GCN2 is required to increase fibroblast growth 
factor 21 and maintain hepatic triglyceride homeostasis during asparaginase 
treatment. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 308, E283-293. 
 
Winzell MS & Ahren B. (2004). The high-fat diet-fed mouse: a model for studying 
mechanisms and treatment of impaired glucose tolerance and type 2 diabetes. 
Diabetes 53 Suppl 3, S215-219. 
 
Xiao F, Yu J, Guo Y, Deng J, Li K, Du Y, Chen S, Zhu J, Sheng H & Guo F. (2014). Effects 
of individual branched-chain amino acids deprivation on insulin sensitivity and 
glucose metabolism in mice. Metabolism 63, 841-850. 
 
 
Figure Legends 
Figure 1: Normal calorie diets with reduced levels of BCAAs promote rapid weight 
loss. A) Schematic representation of experimental plan; mice were preconditioned with a 
Western diet for 12 weeks and then randomized to the five experimental groups shown, 
while chow fed Control mice were placed on an amino acid defined Control diet. B) Weight 
as well as C) adipose and lean mass of mice in each experimental group was tracked (n = 
12 mice/group). D) The epididymal WAT was collected at necropsy and weighed (n=11-12 
mice/group; * = p < 0.05, Dunnett’s test following ANOVA, ** = p < 0.05, Bonferroni’s test). 
E) 2 and 10 weeks following the start of the specified dietary intervention, food intake was 
assessed over a 4 day period in home cages, calculated as kcal/day/g body weight (n = 6-7 
cages/group; means with the same letter are not significantly different from each other, 
Tukey–Kramer test following ANOVA, p < 0.05). F) Spontaneous activity and energy 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
expenditure were measured using metabolic chambers approximately 7-8 weeks after the 
start of the dietary intervention (n = 5-8 mice/group; means with the same letter are not 
significantly different from each other, Tukey–Kramer test following ANOVA, p < 0.05). Error 
bars represent standard error. 
 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
Figure 2: Consumption of an ExLow BCAA diet reduces adipose tissue and reverses 
diet-induced hepatic steatosis. A) Paraffin-embedded skin samples were collected at 
necropsy approximately 15 weeks following the start of the specified dietary intervention, 
sectioned, H&E stained and the thickness of dermal WAT was quantified B) for non-anagen 
stage skin samples, measuring from muscle to dermis; scale bar = 200µM (n=5-7 
mice/group, * = p < 0.05, Dunnett’s test following ANOVA, ** = p < 0.05, Bonferroni’s test). 
C) Liver samples were stained with Oil-Red-O, and D) droplet size was quantified; scale bar 
= 200µM (n = 3 mice/group, * = p < 0.05 vs. WD Control AA, Dunnett’s test following 
ANOVA). E) Lipogenic gene expression was measured in the livers of fasted mice (n = 5-6 
mice/group, * = p < 0.05 vs. WD Control AA, Dunnett’s test following 2-way repeated 
measures ANOVA). Error bars represent standard error. 
 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
Figure 3: Consumption of BCAAs inversely correlates with glucose tolerance and 
insulin sensitivity. A) Glucose and B) insulin tolerance tests were conducted at the 
specified times after the start of the dietary interventions (n = 10-12/group; for AUC, means 
with the same letter are not significantly different from each other, Tukey–Kramer test 
following ANOVA, p < 0.05). C-E) Mice were fasted overnight and C) blood glucose and D) 
insulin were measured, and E) the HOMA2-IR was calculated after 5 weeks on the specified 
diets (n = 5-7 mice/group; means with the same letter are not significantly different from 
each other, Tukey–Kramer test following ANOVA, p < 0.05). Error bars represent standard 
error. 
 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
Figure 4: Specifically reducing dietary BCAAs in the context of a Western diet 
promotes rapid weight loss and reduced adiposity. A) Schematic representation of 
experimental plan; mice were preconditioned with a WD for 12 weeks and then randomized 
to the four experimental groups shown, while chow fed Control mice were placed on an 
amino acid defined Control diet. B) Weight as well as C) adipose and lean mass of mice in 
each experimental group was tracked (n = 12 mice/group). D) Food intake was measured 
two weeks after special diet feeding start (n = 8 cages/group; means with the same letter are 
not significantly different from each other, Tukey–Kramer test following ANOVA, p < 0.05). 
E) Body composition at diet intervention start and 12 weeks later. Error bars represent 
standard error. 
 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
Figure 5: Specifically reducing dietary BCAAs in the context of a Western diet reduces 
adipose tissue and reverses diet-induced hepatic steatosis. A) Skin samples were 
collected after feeding mice the indicated diets for approximately 14 weeks, sectioned, H&E 
stained and the thickness of dermal WAT was quantified for non-anagen stage skin samples, 
measuring from muscle to dermis; scale bar = 200M (n= 6 mice/group, * = p < 0.05 vs. WD 
Control AA, Dunnett’s test following ANOVA). B) OCT-embedded liver samples were 
cryosectioned and stained with Oil-Red-O, and droplet size was quantified; scale bar = 
200M (n = 3 mice/group, * = p < 0.05 vs. WD Control AA, Dunnett’s test following ANOVA). 
C) Triglyceride levels in liver as mg/dL/mg of tissue assayed (n = 6 mice/group, * = p < 0.05 
vs. WD Control AA, Dunnett’s test following ANOVA). D) Lipogenic gene expression was 
measured in the livers of mice on the specified diets fasted overnight (n = 8-9 mice/group, * 
= p < 0.05, # = p < 0.1 vs. WD Control AA, Dunnett’s test following ANOVA). Error bars 
represent standard error. 
 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
Figure 6: Reduction of dietary BCAAs improves glycemic control even in mice 
continuing to consume a high-calorie, high-fat, high-sugar Western diet. A) Glucose 
and B) insulin tolerance tests were conducted 3 and 4 weeks, respectively, after the start of 
the dietary interventions (n = 12-16/group; for AUC, means with the same letter are not 
significantly different from each other Tukey–Kramer test following ANOVA, p < 0.05). C-E) 
Fasting C) blood glucose and D) insulin were measured, and E) the HOMA2-IR was 
calculated after 5 weeks on the specified diets (n = 3-7 mice/group; * = p < 0.05, # = p < 0.12 
vs. WD Control AA, Dunnett’s test following ANOVA).  
 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
Figure 7: Ex vivo analysis of the effect of altering dietary BCAAs on pancreatic beta 
cells. A) An ex vivo insulin secretion assay was performed to assess (left) insulin secretion 
per islet and (right) islet insulin content in response to low (1.7 mM) and high (16.7 mM) 
glucose in mice kept on the indicated diets for approximately 14 weeks (n = 6 mice/group, * 
= p < 0.05 vs. WD Control AA, Dunnett’s test following ANOVA). B) The mitochondrial 
membrane potential was measured in ex vivo isolated pancreatic islets stimulated with low 
(2mM) and high (20 mM) glucose levels (n = 44-74 islets per group; * = p < 0.05 vs. WD 
Control AA, Dunnett’s test following ANOVA). Error bars represent standard error. 
 
 
 
Figure 8: Metabolic impact of sustained consumption of diets with altered dietary 
BCAAs. A) Food intake over a 24-hour period (n = 2-5 mice/group; means with the same 
letter are not significantly different from each other, Bonferroni test, p < 0.05). B) Respiratory 
exchange ratio (RER), C) Spontaneous activity, and D) Energy expenditure were measured 
approximately 12 weeks after the start of the dietary intervention (n = 4-5 mice/group; means 
with the same letter are not significantly different from each other, Tukey–Kramer test 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
following ANOVA, p < 0.05). E) FGF21 was measured in the plasma of mice sacrificed 
following an overnight fast (n= 4 mice/group; means with the same letter are not significantly 
different from each other, Tukey–Kramer test following ANOVA, p < 0.05). F) Fgf21 gene 
expression was assessed by qPCR in liver of mice on specified diets after an overnight fast 
(n = 8-9 mice/group; # = p < 0.1 vs. WD Control AA, Dunnett’s test following ANOVA). Error 
bars represent standard error. 
 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
Figure 9: A Western reduced BCAA diet transiently induces FGF21 and increases 
energy expenditure. A) Weight of DIO mice switched to the indicated diet at time 0 (n = 
8/group). B) Change in fat and lean mass in mice placed on each diet for 7 days (n = 8 
mice/group, * = p < 0.05 vs. WD Control AA, Dunnett’s test following ANOVA). C) 
Respiratory exchange ratio (RER), Spontaneous activity, and Energy expenditure were 
measured 1 week after the diet switch (n = 6-8 mice/ group, * = p < 0.05 vs. WD Control AA, 
Dunnett’s test following ANOVA). D) Energy expenditure over the course of a 24 hour cycle 
starting at approximately 10 am (n = 8 mice/group; dark outline of symbol indicates p < 0.05 
vs. WD Control AA (Dunnett’s test following two-way repeated measures ANOVA). E) 
FGF21 was measured in the plasma of mice sacrificed following an overnight fast (n = 6 
mice/group; means with the same letter are not significantly different from each other, 
Tukey–Kramer test following ANOVA, p < 0.05). Error bars represent standard error. 
 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
Figure 10: A Western reduced BCAA diet does not beige WAT, but activates BAT. DIO 
mice switched to the indicated diets for twelve days were sacrificed following an overnight 
fast. A) Inguinal and gonadal WAT (iWAT and gWAT, respectively) depots were collected, 
sectioned, and H&E stained; scale bar = 200µM. B) The expression of UCP1 in iWAT and 
gWAT was determined by Western blotting. C) UCP1 expression in iWAT and gWAT was 
quantified relative to HSP90 (n = 8 mice/goup, * = p < 0.05 vs. WD Control AA, Dunnett’s 
test following ANOVA). D) Ucp1 gene expression was assessed by qPCR in the brown 
adipose tissue of mice on specified diets fasted overnight (n = 6 mice/group, * = p < 0.05 vs. 
WD Control AA, Dunnett’s test following ANOVA). E) Brown adipose tissue was collected, 
sectioned, and H&E stained, and lipid droplet size was quantified; scale bar = 200M (n = 6 
mice/group; means with the same letter are not significantly different from each other, 
Tukey–Kramer test following ANOVA, p < 0.05). F) Bmp8 gene expression was assessed by 
qPCR in the brown adipose tissue of mice on the specified diets fasted overnight (n = 6 
mice/group; * = p < 0.05 vs. WD Control AA, Dunnett’s test following ANOVA). Error bars 
represent standard error. 
 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
Figure 11: Specifically reducing dietary BCAAs or all AAs restores metabolic health to 
diet-induced obese mice. Altering dietary levels of either the BCAAs or all AAs promotes 
leanness and restores blood glucose control to diet-induced obese mice, but these two 
dietary interventions have distinct effects on energy expenditure (EE), food intake, and blood 
levels of FGF21. Further, these metabolic effects vary between an acute phase – an 
approximately 4 week long period following the diet switch characterized by rapid weight loss 
– and a chronic phase that persists once mice have reached a stable weight.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
 
Table Legends 
 
Table 1: Composition of amino acid defined Western diets. The exact formulation of 
these diets is provided in Table 3.  
Diet Name 
Description 
WD Control AA 
AA-defined "Western" diet - 41% of calories from fat, 38% of 
calories from carbohydrates (high sucrose), with cholesterol 
WD High BCAA 
Similar to WD Control AA; with 2x BCAAs 
WD Low BCAA 
Similar to WD Control AA; with 67% reduction in the BCAAs 
WD Low AA 
Similar to WD Control AA; with 67% reduction in all AAs 
Control AA 
AA defined normal calorie diet 
 
 
 
Table 2: Diet composition of diets used to investigate the effect of reduced levels of 
dietary BCAAs in the context of a normal calorie diet. Amino acid defined diets with the 
specified formulations were obtained from Envigo. These diets were used in the experiments 
outlined in Figure 1A and shown in Figures 1-3. 
Amino Acid Defined 
Diets 
Control AA ExLow AA 
ExLow 
BCAA 
Western 
(WD) 
WD 
+ 
BCAA 
Teklad Diet number 
TD.140711 
TD. 140918 TD. 150387 TD. 88137 
TD. 150386 
Color 
Red 
Orange 
Blue 
Tan 
Green 
Formula 
g/kg 
g/kg 
g/kg 
g/kg 
g/kg 
L-Alanine 
9.38 
2.18 
12.1566 
- 
- 
L-Arginine 
6.3 
1.46 
6.3 
- 
- 
L-Asparagine 
20.58 
4.79 
22.6388 
- 
- 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
L-Aspartic Acid  
20.58 
4.79 
24.729 
- 
- 
L-Cysteine 
7.2 
1.67 
7.2 
- 
- 
L-Glutamic Acid  
28.97 
6.74 
33.5548 
- 
- 
L-Glutamine  
33.77 
7.87 
36.0672 
- 
- 
Glycine 
2.96 
0.69 
5.2991 
- 
- 
L-Histidine 
HCl, 
monohydrate 
4.6 
1.07 
4.6 
- 
- 
L-Isoleucine 
7.8 
1.81 
1.81 
- 
8.8725 
L-Leucine 
25.4 
5.9 
5.9 
- 
15.6195 
L-Lysine HCl 
20.38 
4.74 
20.38 
- 
- 
L-Methionine 
6.7 
1.56 
6.7 
- 
- 
L-Phenylalanine 
6.6 
1.54 
6.6 
- 
- 
L-Proline  
7.41 
1.72 
10.9965 
- 
- 
L-Serine  
7.41 
1.72 
10.6844 
- 
- 
L-Threonine 
9.7 
2.26 
9.7 
- 
- 
L-Tryptophan 
3.4 
0.79 
3.4 
- 
- 
L-Tyrosine 
6.9 
1.61 
6.9 
- 
- 
L-Valine 
8.4 
1.95 
1.95 
- 
10.725 
DL-Methionine 
- 
- 
- 
3.0 
3.0 
Casein 
- 
- 
- 
195 
195 
Sucrose 
291.248 
291.248 
291.248 
341.46 
341.46 
Corn Starch 
150.0 
243.79 
153.4368 
150 
114.683 
Maltodextrin 
150.0 
243.79 
153.4368 
- 
- 
Anhydrous Milkfat 
- 
- 
- 
210 
210 
Cholesterol 
- 
- 
- 
1.5 
1.5 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
Corn Oil 
52.0 
52.0 
52.0 
- 
- 
Olive Oil 
29.0 
29.0 
29.0 
- 
- 
Cellulose 
30.0 
30 
30 
50 
50 
Mineral 
Mix, 
AIN-
93M-MX (94049) 
35.0 
35 
35 
- 
- 
Mineral Mix, AIN-76 
(170915) 
- 
- 
- 
35 
35 
Calcium Carbonate 
- 
- 
- 
4 
4 
Calcium 
Phosphate 
Ca(H2PO4)2 · H2O  
8.2 
8.2 
8.2 
- 
- 
Vitamin Mix, Teklad 
(40060) 
10.0 
10.0 
10.0 
10.0 
10.0 
TBHQ, antioxidant 
0.012 
0.012 
0.012 
- 
- 
Ethoxyquin, 
antioxidant 
- 
- 
- 
0.04 
0.04 
Food Coloring 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
% kcal from 
  
  
  
  
  
Protein (based on N 
x 6.25) 
22 
5.1 
21.9 
15.2 
18.3 
Carbohydrates 
59.4 
76.4 
59.6 
42.7 
39.8 
Fat 
18.6 
18.5 
18.5 
42 
41.9 
Kcal/g 
3.9 
3.9 
3.9 
4.5 
4.6 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
Table 3: Diet composition of diets used to investigate the effect of specifically altering 
dietary BCAAs in the context of a Western diet. Amino acid defined diets with the 
specified formulations were obtained from Envigo. These diets were used in the experiments 
outlined in Figure 4A and shown in Figures 4-10.  
Amino Acid Defined 
Diets 
Control AA WD 
Control AA 
WD High 
BCAA 
WD Low 
BCAA 
WD Low 
AA 
Teklad Diet number 
TD.140711 
TD. 160186 TD. 160189 TD. 160188 TD. 160187 
Color 
Red 
Aqua 
Green 
Black 
Orange 
Formula 
g/kg 
g/kg 
g/kg 
g/kg 
g/kg 
L-Alanine 
9.38 
9.38 
5.5861 
11.8183 
3.05 
L-Arginine 
6.3 
6.3 
6.3 
6.3 
2.05 
L-Asparagine 
20.58 
20.58 
17.7668 
22.388 
6.7 
L-Aspartic Acid  
20.58 
20.58 
14.9108 
24.2237 
6.7 
L-Cysteine 
7.2 
7.2 
7.2 
7.2 
2.34 
L-Glutamic Acid  
28.97 
28.97 
22.7053 
32.9963 
9.43 
L-Glutamine  
33.77 
33.77 
30.6311 
35.7873 
11.0 
Glycine 
2.96 
2.96 
0.96 
5.0141 
0.96 
L-Histidine HCl, 
monohydrate 
4.6 
4.6 
4.6 
4.6 
1.5 
L-Isoleucine 
7.8 
7.8 
15.6 
2.54 
2.54 
L-Leucine 
25.4 
25.4 
50.8 
8.27 
8.27 
L-Lysine HCl 
20.38 
20.38 
20.38 
20.38 
6.64 
L-Methionine 
6.7 
6.7 
6.7 
6.7 
2.18 
L-Phenylalanine 
6.6 
6.6 
6.6 
6.6 
2.15 
L-Proline  
7.41 
7.41 
2.5094 
10.5596 
2.41 
L-Serine  
7.41 
7.41 
2.9359 
10.2855 
2.41 
L-Threonine 
9.7 
9.7 
9.7 
9.7 
3.16 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
 
L-Tryptophan 
3.4 
3.4 
3.4 
3.4 
1.1 
L-Tyrosine 
6.9 
6.9 
6.9 
6.9 
2.25 
L-Valine 
8.4 
8.4 
16.8 
2.735 
2.735 
Sucrose 
291.248 
341.46 
341.46 
341.46 
341.46 
Corn Starch 
150.0 
49.63 
45.3573 
52.6511 
132.0625 
Maltodextrin 
150.0 
49.63 
45.3573 
52.6511 
132.0625 
Anhydrous Milkfat 
- 
210 
210 
210 
210 
Cholesterol 
- 
1.5 
1.5 
1.5 
1.5 
Corn Oil 
52.0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Olive Oil 
29.0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Cellulose 
30.0 
50 
50 
50 
50 
Mineral Mix, AIN-
93M-MX (94049) 
35.0 
35 
35 
35 
35 
Calcium Phosphate 
Ca(H2PO4)2 · H2O  
8.2 
8.2 
8.2 
8.2 
8.2 
Vitamin Mix, Teklad 
(40060) 
10.0 
10.0 
10.0 
10.0 
10.0 
TBHQ, antioxidant 
0.012 
0.04 
0.04 
0.04 
0.04 
Food Coloring 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
% kcal from 
  
  
  
  
  
Protein (based on N 
x 6.25) 
22 
20.7 
21.4 
20.2 
6.8 
Carbohydrates 
59.4 
38.5 
37.8 
39.0 
52 
Fat 
18.6 
40.9 
40.8 
40.9 
41.2 
Kcal/g 
3.9 
4.6 
4.6 
4.6 
4.6 
 
