 Age and Ageing 2018; 47: 749–753
doi: 10.1093/ageing/afy054
Published electronically 23 April 2018
© The Author(s) 2018. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the British Geriatrics
Society. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
Drug consumption and futile medication
prescribing in the last year of life: an
observational study
D. CURTIN1,2, D. O’MAHONY1,2, P. GALLAGHER1,2
1Department of Geriatric Medicine, Cork University Hospital, Wilton, Cork, T12 DC4A, Ireland
2Department of Medicine, University College Cork, Cork, T12 AK54, Ireland
Address correspondence to: D. Curtin. Tel: +353 21 4922317; Fax: +353 21 4922829. E-mail: deniscurtin@physicians.ie
Abstract
Background: the last year of life for many older people is associated with high symptom burden and frequent hospitalizations.
Hospital physicians have an opportunity to prioritize essential medications and deprescribe potentially futile medications.
Objective: to measure medication consumption during hospitalization in the last year of life and the prevalence of poten-
tially inappropriate medications (PIMs) at hospital discharge.
Design: retrospective chart review.
Setting: acute hospital.
Subjects: ≥65 years, hospitalized in the last year of life.
Methods: medication consumption was determined by examining hospital Medication Administration Records. PIMs were
defined using STOPPFrail deprescribing criteria.
Results: the study included 410 patients. The mean age of participants was 80.8, 49.3% were female, and 63.7% were
severely frail. The median number of days spent in hospital in the last year of life was 32 (interquartile range 15−59).
During all hospitalizations, the mean number of individual medications consumed was 23.8 (standard deviation 10.1). One-
in-six patients consumed 35 or more medications in their last year. Over 80% of patients were prescribed at least one PIM
at discharge and 33% had ≥3 PIMs. Lipid-lowering medications, proton pump inhibitors, anti-psychotics and calcium sup-
plements accounted for 59% of all PIMs. Full implementation of STOPPFrail recommendations would have resulted in
one-in-four long-term medications being discontinued.
Conclusion: high levels of medication consumption in the last year of life not only reflect high symptom burden experi-
enced by patients but also continued prescribing of futile medications. Physicians assisted by the STOPPFrail tool can
reduce medication burden for older people approaching end of life.
Keywords: deprescribing, frailty, medications, elderly, STOPPFrail
Background
A hospital admission in an older person with end-stage chronic
disease or progressive frailty is an appropriate time to review
medications and goals of care [1–3]. Large observational
studies have shown that hospitalizations are frequent in the
last year of life due to high symptom and illness burden [4, 5].
Hospital physicians, therefore, have an opportunity to tailor
medication regimens to the condition and prognosis of their
patients and deprescribe potentially harmful or futile drugs.
The STOPPFrail criteria (Table 1) are an explicit list of 27
indicators to assist physicians with deprescribing decisions in
frail older individuals with poor 1-year survival prognosis [6].
The STOPPFrail criteria were developed by Delphi consen-
sus of an expert panel comprising academic geriatricians, clin-
ical pharmacologists, palliative care physicians, old age psychiatrists,
general practitioners and clinical pharmacists. The tool is con-
cise, has good inter-rater reliability [7], and is designed to be
used by clinicians who commonly provide care for older peo-
ple. The relevance and applicability of the STOPPFrail criteria
749
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ageing/article-abstract/47/5/749/4982632 by guest on 04 June 2019
 Table 1. The STOPPFrail criteria
STOPPFrail is a list of potentially inappropriate prescribing indicators designed
to assist physicians with stopping such medications in older patients (≥65
years) who meet ALL of the criteria listed below:
(1) End-stage irreversible pathology
(2) Poor 1-year survival prognosis
(3) Severe functional or severe cognitive impairment or both
(4) Symptom control is the priority rather than prevention of disease
progression
The decision to prescribe/not prescribe medications to the patient, should also
be influenced by the following issues:
(1) Drug adherence/compliance is difficult
(2) Administration of the medication is challenging
(3) Monitoring of the medication effect is challenging
(4) Drug adherence/ compliance is difficult
Section A: general
A1: Any drug that the patient persistently fails to take or tolerate despite
adequate education and consideration of all appropriate formulations
A2: Any drug without clear clinical indication
Section B: cardiology system
B1. Lipid lowering therapies (statins, ezetimibe, bile acid sequestrans,
fibrates, nicotinic acid and acipimox)
These medications need to be prescribed for a long duration to be of benefit.
For short-term use, the risk of ADEs outweighs the potential benefits
B2. Alpha-blockers for hypertension
Stringent blood pressure control is not required in very frail older people. Alpha
blockers in particular can cause marked vasodilatation, which can result in
marked postural hypotension, falls and injuries
Section C: coagulation system
C1: Anti-platelets
Avoid anti-platelet agents for primary (as distinct from secondary)
cardiovascular prevention (no evidence of benefit)
Section D: Central nervous system
D1. Neuroleptic antipsychotics
Aim to reduce dose and discontinue these drugs in patients taking them for
longer than 12 weeks if there are no current clinical features of behavioural and
psychiatric symptoms of dementia (BPSD)
D2: Memantine
Discontinue and monitor in patients with moderate to severe dementia, unless
memantine has clearly improved BPSD (specifically in frail patients who meet
the criteria above)
Section E: gastrointestinal system
E1. Proton pump inhibitors
Proton pump inhibitors at full therapeutic dose ≥ 8/52, unless persistent
dyspeptic symptoms at lower maintenance dose
E2: H2 receptor antagonist
H2 receptor antagonist at full therapeutic dose for ≥ 8/52, unless persistent
dyspeptic symptoms at lower maintenance dose
E3. Gastrointestinal antispasmodics
Regular daily prescription of gastrointestinal antispasmodics agents unless the
patient has frequent relapse of colic symptoms because of high risk of anti-
cholinergic side effects
Section F: respiratory system
F1. Theophylline
This drug has a narrow therapeutic index, requires monitoring of serum levels
and interacts with other commonly prescribed drugs putting patients at an
increased risk of ADEs
F2. Leukotriene antagonists (Montelukast, Zafirlukast)
These drugs have no proven role in COPD, they are indicated only in asthma (50)
Section G: musculoskeletal system
G1: Calcium supplementation
Unlikely to be of any benefit in the short term
G2: Anti-resorptive/bone anabolic drugs FOR OSTEOPOROSIS
(bisphosphonates, strontium, teriparatide, denosumab)
G3. Selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) for osteoporosis
Benefits unlikely to be achieved within 1 year, increased short-intermediate term
risk of associated ADEs particularly venous thromboembolism and stroke
G4. Long-term oral NSAIDs
Increased risk of side effects (peptic ulcer disease, bleeding, worsening heart
failure etc.) when taken regularly for ≥ 2 months
G5. Long-term oral steroids
Increased risk of side effects (peptic ulcer disease etc.) when taken regularly for
≥ 2 months. Consider careful dose reduction and discontinuation
Section H: urogenital system
H1. 5-alpha reductase inhibitors
No benefit with long term urinary bladder catheterisation
H2. Alpha blockers
No benefit with long term urinary bladder catheterisation
H3. Muscarinic antagonists
No benefit with long-term urinary bladder catheterisation, unless clear history of
painful detrusor hyperactivity
Section I: endocrine system
I1. Diabetic oral agents
Aim for monotherapy. Target of HbA1c <8%/64mmol/mol. Stringent
glycaemic control is unnecessary
I2. ACE-inhibitors for diabetes
Stop where prescribed only for prevention and treatment of diabetic
nephropathy. There is no clear benefit in older people with advanced frailty with
poor survival prognosis
I3. Angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs)
Stop where prescribed only for prevention and treatment of diabetic
nephropathy. There is no clear benefit in older people with advanced frailty with
poor survival prognosis
I4. Systemic oestrogens for menopausal symptoms
Increases risk of stroke and VTE disease. Discontinue and only consider
recommencing if recurrence of symptoms
Section J: Miscellaneous
J1. Multi-vitamin combination supplements
Discontinue when prescribed for prophylaxis rather than treatment
J2. Nutritional supplements (other than vitamins)
Discontinue when prescribed for prophylaxis rather than treatment
J3: Prophylactic antibiotics
No firm evidence for prophylactic antibiotics to prevent recurrent cellulitis or
UTIs
Disclaimer (STOPPFrail)
While every effort has been made to ensure that the potentially inappropriate prescribing criteria listed in STOPPFrail are accurate and evidence-
based, it is emphasized that the final decision to avoid or initiate any drug referred to in these criteria rests entirely with the prescriber. It is also
to be noted that the evidence base underlying certain criteria in STOPPFrail may change after the time of publication of these criteria. Therefore,
it is advisable that prescribing decisions should take account of current published evidence in support of or against the use of drugs or drug
classes described in STOPPFrail.
D. Curtin et al.
750
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ageing/article-abstract/47/5/749/4982632 by guest on 04 June 2019
 to older people hospitalized in the last year of life has not yet
been studied.
The aims of this study were:
• To determine the prevalence of potentially inappropriate
medications (PIMs), as defined by the STOPPfrail tool, in
the discharge prescription lists of older adults hospitalized
in the last year of life.
• To measure medication consumption by older people
while in hospital in the last year of life.
Methods
Study population
We included people aged ≥65 years who were hospitalized
for ≥2 days under general medical services in our institution
in the year prior to death. The Hospital In-Patient Enquiry
system (a national database of coded discharge summaries)
was used to identify patients discharged between January
2013 to December 2014. When patients were admitted more
than once during this period, a single hospitalization was ran-
domly chosen as the index hospitalization. Patients who died
during their index hospital admission and those discharged to
a hospice, presumably in the final stages of a terminal illness,
were excluded because the primary end point was to measure
the prevalence of STOPPFrail-defined PIMs at the time of
discharge. Deaths within 1 year of hospitalization were deter-
mined by accessing the Hospital Information System and an
online death notification system (www.RIP.ie). In total, 603
patients were eligible for inclusion. We estimated that 50% of
patients would be prescribed PIMs at discharge. Using a pre-
cision of 5% and a 95% level of confidence, we calculated
that a minimum sample of 384 patients would be required for
this study. To ensure an adequate final sample size, a random
sample of 434 was generated using a randomization (RAND)
function in Microsoft Excel©. The local Clinical Research
Ethics Committee approved the study protocol.
Data collection
A retrospective chart review was conducted on all study
patients by a Geriatric Medicine trained physician using a
standardized data collection pro-forma. The prevalence of
STOPPfrail-defined PIMs was measured by accessing the dis-
charge prescriptions from the patients’ index hospitalization.
Disease burden and performance status at the time of hospital
discharge were determined using the Charlson Comorbidity
Index (CCI) [8, 9] and the Clinical Frailty Scale (CFS) [10],
respectively. The CFS is a 9-item scale and, in this study, we
categorized patients into two groups: (i) those with scores of
≥7 (indicating severe frailty and/or terminal illness and there-
fore potentially eligible for the STOPPFrail tool) and (ii) those
with scores <7 (indicating full independence, mild or moder-
ate frailty). Medication consumption was determined by
reviewing in-patient medication administration records from
all hospitalizations in the last year of life. Medications that
were prescribed but not consumed were not included, nor were
nutritional products, blood products or intravenous fluids. A
single ingredient constituted one medicine. For combination
products, each ingredient was included as one drug as long as
that ingredient was available as a medicine in the British
National Formulary.
Results
Patient characteristics
In total, 410 patients were included (24 patients were
excluded because of missing data or because they were dis-
charged to the care of community palliative services). The
principal characteristics of the decedents are summarized in
Table 2. The mean age of patients was 80.8 (standard devi-
ation [SD] 7.9) and males and females were evenly repre-
sented. Polypharmacy was highly prevalent and the mean
number of medications per patient at the time of hospital
admission was 8.4 (SD 4.3). At the time of hospital dis-
charge, 63.7% of patients were either severely frail or had
an advanced terminal diagnosis (CFS ≥ 7).
Prevalence of STOPPfrail PIMs at hospital discharge
The mean number of medications prescribed per patient did
not change significantly from index hospital admission to
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Table 2. Baseline characteristics and results
Total (n = 410)
Mean age (SD) at time of index hospitalization
80.8 (7.9)
Female (%)
202 (49.3)
Discharge health/functional status
Mean (SD) CCI score
6.2 (2.3)
CFS ≥7
261 (63.7%)
Mean number (SD) of admission medications at index
hospitalization
8.4 (4.3)
Mean number (SD) of discharge medications at index
hospitalization
8.7 (4.2)
Median number (IQR) of days between index hospital
discharge and death
124 (47–225.5)
At index hospital discharge
Mean no. of PIMs per patient (SD)
1.9 (1.4)
≥1 PIM
81.5%
≥3 PIMs
34.0%
In the last year of life
Median bed days (IQR)
32 (15–59)
Median hospital admissions (IQR)
2 (1.25–3)
Median emergency department episodes (IQR)
2 (1–3)
≥30 Bed days
53.4%
≥3 Hospital admissions
43.4%
≥3 Emergency department episodes
34.0%
Medications consumed during all hospitalizations in last year of life
Mean
23.8 (10.1)
≥25 Medications
43.6%
≥35 Medications
17.3%
Medication-types consumed during all hospitalizations in last year of life
Disease/symptom control
87.3%
Long-term preventive
9.5%
Short-term preventive
3.2%
Drug consumption and futile medication prescribing in the last year of life
751
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ageing/article-abstract/47/5/749/4982632 by guest on 04 June 2019
 discharge (8.4 [SD 4.3] versus 8.7 [SD 4.2], P = 0.275). More
than 80% of patients were prescribed at least one STOPPfrail-
defined PIM in their discharge prescription and 34% had ≥3
PIMs prescribed (Table 2). The mean number of PIMs did
not differ significantly between patients’ potentially eligible for
STOPPFrail-guided deprescribing (CFS ≥ 7) and those with
less advanced stages of frailty (2.0 [SD 1.5] versus 1.8 [SD 1.4],
P = 0.053). Full implementation of the STOPPFrail recom-
mendations for those with polypharmacy (defined here as ≥5
long-term medications) would have resulted in, on average, a
23% reduction in total medication burden. Lipid-lowering
medications, proton pump inhibitors, anti-psychotics and cal-
cium supplements accounted for 59% of all STOPPfrail-
defined PIMs (Supplementary Appendix 1).
Medication consumption while in hospital in the last
year of life
In the year prior to death, the median number of days in hos-
pital was 32 (interquartile range [IQR] 15–58). One-third of
people had three or more emergency department presenta-
tions. During all hospital stays in the last year of life, the mean
number of individual medications consumed per patient was
23.8 (SD 10.1). One-in-six patients consumed ≥35 different med-
ications (Table 2). Long-term preventive medications accounted
for 9.5% of all medications consumed during hospitalization
but 24.9% of medications prescribed at the time of hospital
discharge.
Discussion
This is the first study of its kind using recently validated
explicit deprescribing criteria designed for application in the
frailest older people. Our data show that older people in
their last year of life receive high levels of polypharmacy, a
quarter of which includes long-term preventive therapies
which are likely futile. Hospital physicians need to (i) be
able to recognize frailer older patients in their last year of
life, and (ii) be prepared to deprescribe thoughtfully where
appropriate, particularly long-term preventive drugs where
benefit is unlikely to be realized.
Symptoms at end of life are often complex. A large nation-
ally representative longitudinal survey of adults in the USA
reported that symptoms such as depression, confusion, dyspnea,
incontinence, fatigue, anorexia and vomiting were all common in
the last year of life [11]. While improvements can usually be
made regarding prescribing quality, high levels of medication
consumption may be inevitable. This is important because the
number of medications prescribed is the most important pre-
dictor of iatrogenic harm [12]. The challenge for the prescribing
physician is to strike a balance between controlling multiple
symptoms and minimizing the inherent risks of polypharmacy.
Full implementation of STOPFrail recommendations for
hospitalized patients would have resulted in almost one-in-four
long-term medications being discontinued. The process of
deprescribing, of course, must be individualized and patients’
preferences, clinical contextual factors and the potential
for adverse drug withdrawal events given due consideration.
Other deprescribing tools (e.g. CEASE [13], Good Palliative-
Geriatric Practice [14]) are ‘implicit’ and demand that the
prescriber balance risk and benefit of each medication. The
real-world applicability of these methods to all but expert pre-
scribers is doubtful. The value of STOPPFrail is that it is expli-
cit, concise, easy-to-use, and, as we have shown, highly relevant
to the practice of hospital physicians.
Recognizing when people are in the final phase of life
is key to operationalizing deprescribing. A 2012 system-
atic review by Yourman et al. [15] concluded that there was
insufficient evidence to recommend application of any of
the available prognostic models for older adults. Some
degree of uncertainty when predicting prognosis seems inev-
itable. In this study, the majority of patients were severely
frail and functional status has been shown to be a strong pre-
dictor of mortality in older people [1, 15]. In addition, func-
tional decline following hospitalization is associated with a
poor survival prognosis [16]. Perhaps then, it is patients
who are severely frail at the time of hospital admission,
and those who decline to a new frailer baseline despite adequate
rehabilitation, that should be considered appropriate candi-
dates for deprescribing.
Our study has some limitations. Firstly, the experience
described does not apply to the 18–29% of older people who
are not hospitalized in the last year of life [1, 4]. However,
symptom, disease and medication burden are presumably less
marked in this cohort. Secondly, we may have underestimated
medication exposure and acute hospital care utilization because
information about hospitalizations outside of our institution
was not captured.
In summary, hospitalizations are common and drug bur-
den is high in the last year of life and people are frequently
discharged home with prescriptions for potentially futile medi-
cations. The STOPPFrail criteria are highly relevant and may
assist physicians with deprescribing decisions.
Key points
• The last year of life is associated with frequent and pro-
longed hospital admissions.
• Medication consumption is high in the last year of life
and many patients consume medications that are poten-
tially futile.
• Hospital physicians can reduce medication burden for
older
people
approaching
end
of
life
using
the
STOPPFrail tool.
Supplementary data
Supplementary data mentioned in the text are available to
subscribers in Age and Ageing online.
D. Curtin et al.
752
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ageing/article-abstract/47/5/749/4982632 by guest on 04 June 2019
 Funding
D.C. and D.O.M. are supported by the FP7 EC-funded
SENATOR project (grant number 305930).
Conflicts of interest
D.OM. and P.G. were involved in the development of
the STOPPFrail Criteria which were used to define ‘futile
medications’.
References
1. Gill TM, Gahbauer EA, Han L, Allore HG. The role of
intervening hospital admissions on trajectories of disability in
the last year of life: prospective cohort study of older people.
BMJ 2015; 350: h2361.
2. Jansen J, Naganathan V, Carter SM et al. Too much medicine
in older people? Deprescribing through shared decision mak-
ing. BMJ 2016; 353: I2893.
3. Scott IA, Hilmer SN, Reeve E et al. Reducing inappropriate
polypharmacy: the process of deprescribing. JAMA Intern
Med 2015; 175: 827–34.
4. Goldsbury DE, O’Connell DL, Girgis A et al. Acute
hospital-based services used by adults during the last year
of life in New South Wales. In: BMC Health Serv Res; 15.
Australia: a population-based retrospective cohort study,
2015; p.537.
5. Bekelman JE, Halpern SD, Blankart CR et al. Comparison of
site of death, health care utilization, and hospital expenditures
for patients dying with cancer in 7 developed countries.
JAMA 2016; 315: 272–83.
6. Lavan AH, Gallagher P, Parsons C, O’Mahony D. STOPPFrail
(Screening Tool of Older Persons Prescriptions in Frail adults
with limited life expectancy): consensus validation. Age Ageing
2017; 46: 600–607.
7. Lavan AH, Gallagher P, O’Mahony D. Inter-rater reliability of
STOPPFrail [Screening Tool of Older Persons Prescriptions in
Frail adults with limited life expectancy] criteria amongst 12
physicians. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 2017. doi:10.1007/s00228-
017-2376-2; [Epub ahead of print].
8. Charlson ME, Pompei P, Ales KL, MacKenzie CR. A new
method of classifying prognostic comorbidity in longitudinal stud-
ies: development and validation. J Chronic Dis 1987; 40: 373–83.
9. Quan H, Li B, Couris CM et al. Updating and validating the
Charlson comorbidity index and score for risk adjustment in
hospital discharge abstracts using data from 6 countries. Am
J Epidemiol 2011; 173: 678–82.
10. Rockwood K, Song X, MacKnight C et al. A global clinical
measure of fitness and frailty in elderly people. CMAJ 2005;
2005: 489–95.
11. Singer AE, Meeker D, Teno JM, Lynn J, Lunney JR, Lorenz
KA. Symptom trends in the last year of life, 1998–2010: a
cohort study. Ann Intern Med 2015; 162: 175–83.
12. Steinman MA, Miao Y, Boscardin WJ, Komaiko KD, Schwartz
JB. Prescribing quality in older veterans: a multifocal approach.
J Gen Intern Med 2014; 29: 1379–86.
13. Scott IA, Le Couteur D. Physicians need to take the lead in
deprescribing. Intern Med J 2015; 45: 352–6.
14. Garfinkel D, Zur-Gil S, Ben-Israel J. The war against poly-
pharmacy: a new cost-effective geriatric-palliative approach
for improving drug therapy in disabled elldery people. Is Med
Assoc J 2007; 9: 430–4.
15. Yourman LC, Lee SJ, Schonberg MA, Widera EW, Smith
AK. Prognostic indices for older adults: a systematic review.
JAMA 2012; 307: 182–92.
16. Boyd CM, Landefeld SC, Counsell SR, Palmer RM, Fortinsky
RH, Kresevic D. Recovery in activities of daily living among
older adults following hospitalization for acute medical illness.
J Am Geriatr Soc 2008; 56: 2171–9.
Received 19 January 2018; editorial decision 6 March 2018
Drug consumption and futile medication prescribing in the last year of life
753
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ageing/article-abstract/47/5/749/4982632 by guest on 04 June 2019
