 By David M. Cutler
PERSPECTIVE
What Is The US Health
Spending Problem?
ABSTRACT Is increased spending on medical care harmful to the US
economy? The overall share of the gross domestic product spent on
medical care is not a problem, provided that the services bought are
worth more than their cost. However, high and rising costs expose two
often-overlooked problems. First, spending is too high because many
dollars are wasted. Estimates suggest that unnecessary medical spending
costs the typical American family thousands of dollars each year. Second,
high medical costs combined with stagnant incomes for a large share of
the population and the inability of governments at all levels to raise tax
dollars leads to increased health and economic disparities: fewer people
covered by private insurance, the rationing of care in public health
programs, and the lack of funds for other social programs. These
distribution issues, coupled with the large waste, imply that efforts to
address medical spending need to be among our highest priorities.
T
he latest national health expendi-
ture projections forecast modest
but increasing growth in medical
spending as a share of the economy
over the next decade.1 The Centers
for Medicare and Medicaid Services actuaries
suggest that cost increases will be driven by price
increases, though to a smaller extent than in the
past, and that there will be continued increases
in utilization and population aging.
Rising medical spending inevitably leads to
political concern, and these forecasts seem des-
tined to do the same. Is there some limit on what
is reasonable for a country to spend on health?
In this perspective I consider the economics of
medical spending and, in particular, whether the
US spends too much. I argue that there areharms
from spending as much as the US does but that
those harms are not what is commonly feared.
Start with the central fear about medical
spending: The US economy will suffer if we de-
vote increasing amounts of our income to just
one industry. On the contrary, there is no eco-
nomic law that governs how much money should
be spent on any industry. In fact, the shares of
different industries in economic output vary
greatly. In 1900 one-third of value added was
in agriculture. In 1950 one-quarter was in manu-
facturing. Today those two industries combined
account for only 13 percent of the gross domestic
product (GDP). At least some of medical care’s
increasing share of the GDP is a natural response
to food and manufactured goods becoming
cheaper and thus demand moving elsewhere.
There is no obvious harm in this reallocation.
However, noting that high spending on medi-
cal care is not prima facie problematic does not
imply that we needn’t worry about the level of
such spending in the United States. There are
two reasons why high and rising medical spend-
ing is problematic: It is associated with substan-
tial waste, and it makes society more unequal.
A Large Part Of Spending Is Wasteful
A large number of studies have estimated the
waste in health care. Estimates suggest that
between one-quarter and one-half of medical
doi:
10.1377/hlthaff.2017.1626
HEALTH AFFAIRS 37,
NO. 3 (2018): 493–497
©2018 Project HOPE—
The People-to-People Health
Foundation, Inc.
David M. Cutler (dcutler@
harvard.edu) is the Otto
Eckstein Professor of Applied
Economics in the Department
of Economics at Harvard
University and a research
associate at the National
Bureau of Economic Research,
both in Cambridge,
Massachusetts.
March 2018
37:3
Health Affairs
493
Considering Health Spending
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on August 07, 2018.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 spending
is
not
associated
with
improved
health,2–7although this view is not without con-
troversy.8 Waste in medical care comes in many
forms. One clear cause is misallocated treat-
ments: spending on care that is not clinically
valuable or not spending on preventive services.
Examples of overuse include preterm elective
induction of childbirth for women at low risk,9
back surgery for lower back pain,10 and excessive
end-of-life care.11 Wasteful undertreatment in-
cludes recurrent use of emergency departments
and hospitalizations for people with inadequate-
ly treated congestive heart failure.
High prices are a second form of wasteful
spending. Prices for the same services vary great-
ly across the country and between the US and
other countries.12,13 Pharmaceutical price differ-
ences are the most notable international price
differences, but physicians and hospitals are
paid more in the US as well.14 Estimates suggest
that even very valuable medications are now
priced so high in the US that the costs may ex-
ceed the clinical benefits.15
Excessive administrative costs are a third form
of wasteful spending. About one-quarter of US
medical spending is estimated to be spent on
administrative costs—twice what is spent on car-
diovascular disease, and three times what is
spent on cancer.16 Finally, fraud and abuse
may account for up to 10 percent of costs for
some payers, though the exact amount is diffi-
cult to know.17
The magnitude of wasteful spending deserves
particular attention. If one-third of medical
spending is wasteful, the aggregate waste in
medical care is about 6 percent of GDP. That is
equal to the amount collected in Social Security
and Medicare taxes, and it is two-thirds of the
amount raised by individual income taxes. It
amounts to about $3,500 per person annually.
The fact that there is so much waste in medical
care does not mean that spending more is nec-
essarily bad. If a new drug came along that ma-
terially slowed the progression of Alzheimer dis-
ease, we should not decide to pass up that drug
because we are overtreating people with lower
back pain. But neither should we assume that
all spending increases reflect value, as indicated
by the rising prices of established drugs or of
services from newly merged hospitals. Most fun-
damentally, the presence of significant waste ar-
gues that we ought to pay at least as much atten-
tion to ways of improving efficiency as we do to
whether and how people should get covered.
Rising Spending Worsens Inequality
The second problem with medical spending is
that it feeds into the already severe harms caused
by growing income inequality. The most impor-
tant fact about the income distribution in the
United States is that it is becoming increasingly
unequal: Real incomes have soared at the very
high end, risen modestly in the next few deciles,
and been stagnant or falling at the bottom.18
Rising medical costs combined with stagnant
incomes for a large share of the population mean
that more people will need help paying for medi-
cal care. A family at the median income level,
whose income is relatively constant, has had
no easy way to pay the roughly $10,000 rise in
the cost of a family health insurance policy be-
tween 1999 and 2017.19
At the same time that needs are increasing,
however, government resources are being cut.
Governments at all levels are loath to raise taxes,
and some are even cutting them. Total govern-
ment revenue as a share of GDP has been rela-
tively constant for several decades and is pro-
jected to fall with enactment of the federal tax
bill in December 2017.
This combination of increased need for help
and fewer resources to spend inevitably creates
problems. Three problems are particularly ap-
parent.
Fewer People Are Covered By Private In-
surance Rising medical costs make private in-
surance more valuable in some ways and less
valuable in others. When medicine can do more
for the sick, people naturally want to guarantee
access to the medical system. Thus, the desire for
insurance rises with spending. It is likely not a
coincidence that demand for Medicare to cover
prescription drugs rose after expensive new
drugs were launched in the 1990s.
However, not everyone wants insurance more
when medical costs rise. This is especially the
case when the benefits derived from higher
spending are concentrated in a small, isolated
share of the population. For example, high and
rising prices for drugs that treat rare diseases
such as hemophilia or multiple sclerosis will
have little effect on the value of insurance for
people without those conditions and for whom
the probability of developing them in the follow-
ing year is very low. Many medical conditions are
predictable, at least in the short run—for exam-
ple, chronic heart disease, neurological disor-
ders, and mental illness. As costs for treating
those conditions increase and insurance premi-
ums as a whole rise, the tendency is for people
without those conditions to drop insurance.
A further effect is that for low-income people,
the high cost of medical care makes being un-
insured relatively more attractive. People bear
some liability for medical care when they are
uninsured, but this liability is limited by bank-
ruptcy laws. Once people exhaust their income
Considering Health Spending
494
Health Affairs
March 2018
37:3
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on August 07, 2018.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 and assets, it doesn’t matter how much above
that limit their medical care costs.20 In contrast,
paying for health insurance means paying for all
of the care costs, above or below the person’s
assets. Thus, being uninsured is relatively more
attractive when medical care costs rise.
These latter effects seem to outweigh the cov-
erage-increasing effects, and the result has been
a steady decline in private insurance coverage
over time. For example, employer-sponsored in-
surance coverage rates among people with in-
comes of 100–250 percent of the federal poverty
level fell from 53 percent in 1999 to 38 percent in
2014.21
Estimating
how
much
private
insurance
coverage rates would rise if medical costs fell
is difficult, because there are many sources of
coverage and the residual effect of the mandate
in the Affordable Care Act (ACA) to consider. A
consensus estimate is that lowering premiums
by 25 percent would lead 2–6 percent of the
uninsured population to take up nongroup cov-
erage.22 Therefore, eliminating the one-third of
medical care that might be wasteful could be a
coverage stimulus somewhat smaller than, but
on the order of, the ACA’s subsidy for expanded
coverage.
Public Programs Turn To Rationing In the
public sector, high medical costs also lead to
reduced access, although in a somewhat differ-
ent fashion. Because of federal eligibility re-
quirements, Medicaid programs are not able to
cut enrollment as readily as private companies
can when medical costs rise, but they can and do
limit access to care.
Consider what occurred with the introduction
of new medications to treat hepatitis C. The first
of these drugs, introduced in late 2013, original-
ly cost $84,000 for a course of treatment. As
more of the drugs have entered the market, costs
have fallen, but they remain high—$30,000 or
more per treated person. The result has been
rationing: The majority of state Medicaid pro-
grams restrict use of the new medications to
people with very severe liver failure, or at least
they did so until lawsuits forced them to cover
the treatment for everyone.23 For example, in
2014 more than 90 percent of state Medicaid
programs limited access to the new medications
to people with stage 3 or 4 liver disease. Even in
2016, 52 percent of the programs limited access
to people with more advanced liver failure. So-
briety requirements are also the norm. More
than 40 percent of states require six months of
drugandalcohol sobriety beforeapproving treat-
ment for hepatitis C, and 7 percent require ab-
stention for a year. The situation is even worse in
prisons: An estimated 10 percent of prisoners
have hepatitis C, yet only 1 percent of prisoners
with hepatitis C have been treated.24
Rationing occurs in more subtle ways as well.
As resources become tight, state governments
reduce the reimbursement rates for providers.25
Thus, the more that is spent on some treatments,
the lower are reimbursement rates across the
board. This creates a situation in which not all
providers are willing to treat Medicaid patients.
About 30 percent of physicians nationally do
not accept Medicaid patients, and many others
limit the number they will accept.26
High prices for new medications limit access
under private insurance as well. It was common
for private insurers to impose restrictions such
as those in the public sector when hepatitis C
medications were new. No studies have exam-
ined how these rules have changed with the med-
ications’ reduction in prices, and a comparative
study of how high prices affect access in public
and private insurance plans would be valuable.
There is nothing inherently wrong with people
choosing to cut back on care when prices are
high. Trade-offs always have to be made when
some goods increase in cost. But several points
about this trade-off should be noted.
First, we should not necessarily presume that
the rationing choices made in the public sector
are optimal. One can readily imagine a situation
where higher-income taxpayers know they pay
more in taxes than they receive in benefits and so
push for overall taxes to remain lower than peo-
ple as a whole would want if they made decisions
for everyone in society. Or perhaps health care
providers have significant political power and
push for greater health care funding, even if that
means less spending for other goods and ser-
vices. Ultimately, how rising medical costs affect
the optimality of the coverage decisions made by
governments is an empirical question.
There are two reasons
why high medical
spending is
problematic: It is
associated with
substantial waste, and
it makes society more
unequal.
March 2018
37:3
Health Affairs
495
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on August 07, 2018.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 Second, even if health care is rationed optimal-
ly given the prices that governments face, that is
not necessarily socially optimal. The reason is
that the marginal cost of many health care ser-
vices is below the price that is charged. Consider
again the medications to treat hepatitis C. In
countries where generic versions are available
(such as India) or where the brand-name manu-
facturer has authorized steeply discounted pric-
es, the price of the medication is about $500 per
persontreated.27 At thatprice, many morepeople
in the US would be treated than are now. What
deters use is not the high cost of manufacturing
pills but rather the combination of high fixed
costs for drug development and the drive for
profits. Limiting use because of high fixed costs
is not efficient.
To put this point another way, a four-tier phar-
maceutical pricing system is evolving interna-
tionally: Prices are highest in the United States;
other rich countries pay high prices, though
somewhat lower; middle-income countries pay
between what the rich countries pay and the
manufacturing cost; and the poorest countries
pay the manufacturing cost. Relative to this pric-
ing regime, people with middle and low incomes
in the United States are probably comparable to
those in Southern Europe or East Asia in their
ability to afford medications, yet the prices they
face are closer to those paid by high-income in-
sured people in their own country. Not surpris-
ingly, access to care suffers. If pricing in the
US could more closely match that in the rest of
the world—with high prices for the wealthy and
well insured and lower prices for middle- and
low-income
people—access
would
improve,
and profits might be higher as well.
Other Social Programs Are Crowded Out
Even with both explicit and implicit rationing,
rising costs for medical caretranslate into higher
overall government spending. Given the con-
straint on raising money, this necessarily means
that less money is available for othergovernment
services—for example, spending on early child-
hood education or income subsidies for low-
income workers. If US society wants to address
issues of income inequality, we need to free up
resources invested in health care.
A further difficulty is that even program
changes that seem to be neutral between rich
and poor may disproportionately harm the poor.
For example, one proposed solution to the prob-
lem of rising Medicare and Medicaid costs is to
raise the ages of eligibility to receive Medicare
and Social Security benefits.28 This proposal has
superficial plausibility because life expectancy at
age sixty-five is rising, so that today’s typical
sixty-five-year-old will spend more years receiv-
ing benefits than the typical sixty-five-year-old
did a few decades ago.
But taking account of the growing disparity in
health by socioeconomic status shows that this
proposal is highly regressive. Essentially all of
the health improvement that occurred in the
1980s and 1990s was realized by people who
had higher levels of education (at least some
college education, and often a college degree).29
Life expectancy was stagnant for people who
dropped out of or did not go further than high
school. Between 2001 and 2014 life expectancy
rose by two to three years for people at the top of
the income distribution, but by six months or
less for people near the bottom.30 Raising the
eligibility ages for Medicare and Social Security
in response to high medical spending would thus
be a large cut in eligibility years for low-income
people and a much smaller one for high-income
people. Such regressivity is not desirable.
Conclusion
Additional medical spending brings both bene-
fits and costs to society. For this reason, the
question about how much money a country such
as the United States can afford to spend on med-
ical care is not well formulated. But that ambigu-
ity does not mean that additional medical spend-
ing is innocuous. The United States is being
pulled apart as a country, separating into rich
and poor. Every dollar that is spent on medical
careis one less dollar available for addressing the
problems of an unequal society, and one more
dollar that is difficult for much of the population
to pay. One of the goals for health policy must be
to reduce social and economic disparities, not
increase them. ▪
This research was funded through the
National Institute on Aging (Grant No.
R37AG047312). [Published online
February 14, 2018.]
Considering Health Spending
496
Health Affairs
March 2018
37:3
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on August 07, 2018.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 NOTES
1 Cuckler GA, Sisko AM, Poisal JA,
Keehan SP, Smith SD, Madison AJ,
et al. National health expenditure
projections, 2017–26: despite un-
certainty, fundamentals primarily
drive spending growth. Health Aff
(Millwood). 2018;37(3):482–92.
2 Bentley TG, Effros RM, Palar K,
Keeler EB. Waste in the U.S. health
care system: a conceptual frame-
work. Milbank Q. 2008;86(4):
629–59.
3 Farrell D, Jenson E, Kocher B,
Lovegrove N, Melham F, Mendonca
L, et al. Accounting for the cost of US
health care: a new look at why
Americans spend more [Internet].
New York (NY): McKinsey and
Company; 2008 Dec [cited 2018
Jan 11]. Available from: https://
healthcare.mckinsey.com/sites/
default/files/MGI_Accounting_
for_cost_of_US_health_care_full_
report.pdf
4 New England Healthcare Institute.
How many more studies will it take?
A collection of evidence that our
health care system can do better
[Internet]. Boston (MA): NEHI;
[cited 2018 Jan 11]. Available from:
https://www.nehi.net/writable/
publication_files/file/how_many_
more_studies_will_it_take_
introduction.pdf
5 PricewaterhouseCoopers’ Health
Research Institute. The price of ex-
cess: identifying waste in healthcare
spending. New York (NY): The In-
stitute; 2008.
6 Institute of Medicine. The healthcare
imperative: lowering costs and im-
proving outcomes: workshop series
summary. Washington (DC): Na-
tional Academies Press; 2010.
7 Berwick DM, Hackbarth AD. Elimi-
nating waste in US health care.
JAMA. 2012;307(14):1513–6.
8 Rosenbaum L. The less-is-more
crusade—are we overmedicalizing
or oversimplifying? N Engl J Med.
2017;377(24):2392–7.
9 American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists. ACOG Commit-
tee Opinion No. 394, December
2007. Cesarean delivery on maternal
request. Obstet Gynecol. 2007;
110(6):1501.
10 Deyo RA, Mirza SK, Turner JA,
Martin BI. Overtreating chronic back
pain: time to back off? J Am Board
Fam Med. 2009;22(1):62–8.
11 Wright AA, Keating NL, Ayanian JZ,
Chrischilles EA, Kahn KL, Ritchie
CS, et al. Family perspectives on
aggressive cancer care near the end
of life. JAMA. 2016;315(3):284–92.
12 Cooper Z, Craig SV, Gaynor M, Van
Reenen J. The price ain’t right?
Hospital prices and health spending
on the privately insured [Internet].
Cambridge (MA): National Bureau of
Economic Research; 2015 Dec [cited
2018 Jan 11]. (NBER Working Paper
No. 21815). Available from: http://
www.nber.org/papers/w21815.pdf
13 Anderson GF, Reinhardt UE, Hussey
PS, Petrosyan V. It’s the prices, stu-
pid: why the United States is so dif-
ferent from other countries. Health
Aff (Millwood). 2003;22(3):89–105.
14 Cutler DM, Ly DP. The (paper) work
of medicine: understanding inter-
national medical costs. J Econ Per-
spect. 2011;25(2):3–25.
15 Howard DH, Bach PB, Berndt ER,
Conti RM. Pricing in the market for
anticancer drugs. J Econ Perspect.
2015;29(1):139–62.
16 Cutler D, Wikler E, Basch P. Reduc-
ing administrative costs and im-
proving the health care system. N
Engl J Med. 2012;367(20):1875–8.
17 King KM. Medicare fraud: progress
made, but more action needed to
address Medicare fraud, waste, and
abuse. Statement of Kathleen M.
King, director, Health Care, Gov-
ernment Accountability Office, be-
fore the Subcommittee on Health,
Committee on Ways and Means,
House of Representatives [Internet].
Washington (DC): GAO; 2014 Apr 30
[cited 2018 Jan 11]. (Pub. No.: GAO-
14–560T). Available from: https://
www.gao.gov/assets/670/662845
.pdf
18 Congressional Budget Office. Trends
in the distribution of household in-
come between 1979 and 2007 [In-
ternet]. Washington (DC): CBO;
2011 Oct [cited 2018 Jan 11]. Avail-
able from: https://www.cbo.gov/
sites/default/files/112th-congress-
2011-2012/reports/10-25-household
income0.pdf
19 Claxton G, Rae M, Long M, Damico
A, Whitmore H, Foster G. Health
benefits in 2017: stable coverage,
workers faced considerable variation
in costs. Health Aff (Millwood).
2017;36(10):1838–47.
20 Mahoney N. Bankruptcy as implicit
health insurance. Am Econ Rev.
2015;105(2):710–46.
21 Long M, Rae M, Claxton G, Damico
A. Trends in employer-sponsored
insurance offer and coverage rates,
1999–2014 [Internet]. Menlo Park
(CA): Henry J. Kaiser Family Foun-
dation; 2016 Mar 21 [cited 2018 Jan
11]. Available from: https://www.kff
.org/private-insurance/issue-brief/
trends-in-employer-sponsored-
insurance-offer-and-coverage-rates-
1999-2014/
22 Congressional Budget Office. CBO’s
health insurance simulation model:
a technical description [Internet].
Washington (DC): CBO; 2007 Oct
[cited 2018 Jan 11]. (Background
Paper). Available from: https://
www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/
110th-congress-2007-2008/reports/
10-31-healthinsurmodel.pdf
23 National Viral Hepatitis Roundtable,
Harvard Law School Center for
Health Law and Policy Innovation.
Hepatitis C: the state of Medicaid
access: preliminary findings: na-
tional summary report [Internet].
Washington (DC): NVHR; 2016 Nov
14 [cited 2018 Jan 11]. Available
from: https://www.chlpi.org//wp-
content/uploads/2013/12/HCV-
Report-Card-National-Summary_
FINAL.pdf
24 Beckman AL, Bilinski A, Boyko R,
Camp GM, Wall AT, Lim JK, et al.
New hepatitis C drugs are very costly
and unavailable to many state pris-
oners. Health Aff (Millwood).
2016;35(10):1893–901.
25 Snyder L, Rudowitz R. Trends in
state Medicaid programs: looking
back and looking ahead [Internet].
Menlo Park (CA): Henry J. Kaiser
Family Foundation; 2016 Jun 21
[cited 2018 Jan 12]. Available from:
https://www.kff.org/medicaid/
issue-brief/trends-in-state-medicaid-
programs-looking-back-and-
looking-ahead/
26 Paradise J. Data note: a large ma-
jority of physicians participate in
Medicaid [Internet]. Menlo Park
(CA): Henry J. Kaiser Family Foun-
dation; 2017 May 10 [cited 2018 Jan
12]. Available from: https://www.kff
.org/medicaid/issue-brief/data-
note-a-large-majority-of-physicians-
participate-in-medicaid/
27 Gokhale K. The same pill that costs
$1,000 in the U.S. sells for $4 in
India. Chicago Tribune [serial on the
Internet]. 2016 Jan 4 [cited 2018 Jan
12]. Available from: http://www
.chicagotribune.com/business/ct-
drug-price-sofosbuvir-sovaldi-india-
us-20160104-story.html
28 The National Commission on Fiscal
Responsibility and Reform. The
moment of truth [Internet]. Wash-
ington (DC): The Commission; 2010
Dec [cited 2018 Jan 12]. Available
from: http://momentoftruthproject
.org/sites/default/files/TheMoment
ofTruth12_1_2010.pdf
29 Meara ER, Richards S, Cutler DM.
The gap gets bigger: changes in
mortality and life expectancy, by
education, 1981–2000. Health Aff
(Millwood). 2008;27(2):350–60.
30 Chetty R, Stepner M, Abraham S, Lin
S, Scuderi B, Turner N, et al. The
association between income and life
expectancy in the United States,
2001–2014. JAMA. 2016;315(16):
1750–66.
March 2018
37:3
Health Affairs
497
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on August 07, 2018.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
