 Alternatives to antibiotics-a pipeline portfolio review
Alternatives to antibiotics-a pipeline portfolio review
Czaplewski, L., Bax, R., Clokie, M., Dawson, M., Fairhead, H., Fischetti, V. A., ... Rex, J. H. (2016). Alternatives
to antibiotics-a pipeline portfolio review. The Lancet Infectious Diseases, 16(2), 239-251.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(15)00466-1
Published in:
Published in:
The Lancet Infectious Diseases
Document Version:
Document Version:
Peer reviewed version
Queen's University Belfast - Research Portal:
Queen's University Belfast - Research Portal:
Link to publication record in Queen's University Belfast Research Portal
Publisher rights
Publisher rights
© 2016 The Lancet
General rights
General rights
Copyright for the publications made accessible via the Queen's University Belfast Research Portal is retained by the author(s) and / or other
copyright owners and it is a condition of accessing these publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated
with these rights.
Take down policy
Take down policy
The Research Portal is Queen's institutional repository that provides access to Queen's research output. Every effort has been made to
ensure that content in the Research Portal does not infringe any person's rights, or applicable UK laws. If you discover content in the
Research Portal that you believe breaches copyright or violates any law, please contact openaccess@qub.ac.uk.
Download date:04. Jun. 2019
  
Revised Lancet ID Manuscript 2 November 2015 1 of 23 
Czaplewski L, et al. Alternatives to antibiotics—a pipeline portfolio review.  
The Lancet Infectious Diseases 2016; published online January 12.  
http://www.thelancet.com/journals/laninf/article/PIIS1473-3099(15)00466-1/abstract   
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(15)00466-1 
Copy of the accepted manuscript before Lancet editing: 
Alternatives to antibiotics – a pipeline portfolio review  
Lloyd Czaplewski, Richard Bax, Martha Clokie, Mike Dawson, Heather Fairhead, Vincent A. Fischetti, Simon 
Foster, Brendan F. Gilmore, Robert E.W. Hancock, David Harper, Ian R. Henderson, Kai Hilpert, Brian V Jones, 
Aras Kadioglu, David Knowles, Sigríður Ólafsdóttir, David Payne, Steve Projan, Sunil Shaunak, Jared Silverman, 
Christopher M. Thomas, Trevor J. Trust, Peter Warn, John H. Rex. 
Dr Lloyd Czaplewski PhD; Chemical Biology Ventures Ltd. Abingdon, UK, Abgentis Ltd, Birmingham, UK and 
Persica Pharmaceuticals Ltd, Canterbury, UK. Dr Richard Bax MD; Transcrip Partners LLP. Reading, UK. 
Professor Martha Clokie PhD; Dept. of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, University of Leicester, UK. Dr 
Mike Dawson PhD; Novacta Biosystems Ltd. Welwyn Garden City, UK and Cantab Anti-infectives Ltd. Welwyn 
Garden City, UK. Dr Heather Fairhead PhD; Phico Therapeutics Ltd. Babraham, UK. Professor Vincent A. 
Fischetti PhD; Laboratory of Bacterial Pathogenesis and Immunology. The Rockefeller University, New York, 
USA. Professor Simon Foster PhD; Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of Sheffield, 
Sheffield. UK and Absynth Biologics Ltd. Liverpool, UK. Professor Brendan F Gilmore PhD; School of 
Pharmacy, Queen’s University, Belfast. UK. Professor Robert E.W. Hancock PhD; Department of Microbiology 
and Immunology. University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada. Dr David Harper PhD; Evolution 
Biotechnologies, Bedfordshire, UK. Professor Ian Henderson PhD; Institute of Microbiology and Infection, 
University of Birmingham, UK. Dr Kai Hilpert PhD; Institute of Infection and Immunity, St Georges, University 
of London. UK., TiKa Diagnostics Ltd. UK. Dr Brian Jones PhD; School of Pharmacy and Biomolecular Sciences, 
University of Brighton UK and Queen Victoria Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, East Grinstead, UK. Professor 
Aras Kadioglu PhD; Institute of Infection and Global Health, University of Liverpool, UK. Dr David Knowles 
PhD; Procarta Biosystems Ltd. Norwich, UK and Absynth Biologics Ltd. Liverpool, UK. Dr Sigríður Ólafsdóttir 
PhD; Icelandic Medicines Agency, Reykjavik, Iceland. Dr David Payne PhD; GlaxoSmithKline, Collegeville, 
PA, USA. Dr Steve Projan PhD; MedImmune, LLC Gaithersburg MD. USA. Professor Sunil Shaunak MD; 
Department of Medicine. Imperial College, London. UK. Dr Jared Silverman PhD; Kaleido Biosciences, 
Cambridge MA. USA. Professor Christopher M. Thomas PhD; Institute of Microbiology and Infection, University 
of Birmingham, UK and Plasgene Ltd. UK, Dr Trevor J. Trust PhD; Pan-Provincial Vaccine Enterprise 
Inc. Canada. Dr Peter Warn PhD; Evotec Ltd, Manchester, UK. Dr John H. Rex MD; AstraZeneca, Boston, MA 
USA and F2G Ltd, Manchester, UK. 
Correspondence to: Dr Lloyd Czaplewski, Chemical Biology Ventures Ltd. 123 Alexander Close, Abingdon. 
OX14 1XD. UK. Lloyd.czaplewski@chembioventures.com 
  
Revised Lancet ID Manuscript 2 November 2015 2 of 23 
Abstract 
For 70 years antibiotics have saved countless lives and enabled the development of modern medicine, but it is 
becoming clear that the success of antibiotics may have only been temporary and we now anticipate a long-term, 
generational and perhaps never-ending challenge to find new therapies to combat antibiotic-resistant bacteria. As 
the search for new conventional antibiotics has become less productive and there are no clear strategies to improve 
success, a broader approach to address bacterial infection is needed. This review of potential alternatives to 
antibiotics (A2As) was commissioned by the Wellcome Trust, jointly funded by the Department of Health, and 
involved scientists and physicians from academia and industry. For the purpose of this review, A2As were defined 
as non-compound approaches (that is, products other than classical antibacterial agents) that target bacteria or 
approaches that target the host. In addition, the review was limited to agents that had potential to be administered 
orally, by inhalation or by injection for treatment of systemic/invasive infection. Within these criteria, the review 
has identified 19 A2A approaches now being actively progressed. The feasibility and potential clinical impact of 
each approach was considered. The most advanced approaches (and the only ones likely to deliver new treatments 
by 2025) are antibodies, probiotics, and vaccines now in Phase II and Phase III trials. These new agents will target 
infections caused by P. aeruginosa, C. difficile and S. aureus. However, other than probiotics for C. difficile, this 
first wave will likely best serve as adjunctive or preventive therapies. This suggests that conventional antibiotics 
will still be needed. The economics of pathogen-specific therapies must improve to encourage innovation, and 
greater investment into A2As with broad-spectrum activity (e.g. antimicrobial-, host defense- and, anti-biofilm 
peptides) is needed. Increased funding, estimated at >£1.5 bn over 10 years is required to validate and then develop 
these A2As. Investment needs to be partnered with translational expertise and targeted to support the validation 
of these approaches at Clinical Phase II proof of concept. Such an approach could transform our understanding of 
A2As as effective new therapies and should provide the catalyst required for both active engagement and 
investment by the pharma/biotech industry. Only a sustained, concerted and coordinated international effort will 
provide the solutions needed for the next decade. 
 
 
  
Revised Lancet ID Manuscript 2 November 2015 3 of 23 
Introduction 
Given the rise of antibacterial resistance and the challenges of conventional antibacterial agent discovery and 
development that have led to a very limited pipeline of new therapies, especially for Gram-negative bacterial 
infections, it may be prudent to consider the potential of non-conventional approaches.1-2 A review delivered by 
24 scientists from academia and industry was commissioned by the Wellcome Trust and jointly funded by the 
Department of Health to consider the prospects for alternatives to antibiotics (A2As). While there have been 
technical reviews of individual alternative approaches,3 this review seeks to define the current state of A2As at 
the portfolio level, prioritise approaches, and provide evidence-based expectations for their delivery in order to 
inform funding decisions and policy in this crucial area of healthcare. 
A2As were defined as non-compound approaches (that is, products other than classical antibacterial agents) that 
target bacteria or approaches that target the host. Thus an antibody targeting a virulence factor or quorum sensing 
would be included but a compound targeting these processes would not.4,5 Biologicals or compounds targeting the 
host were included. This review focused on therapies that could be developed to treat systemic/invasive rather 
than superficial infections and is therefore limited to therapies that are administered orally, by inhalation or by 
injection. External topical administration was beyond its scope. The primary objective was to identify and review 
prospective therapeutic replacements for antibiotics. Alternatives that could be used in combination with 
conventional antibiotics and prophylactic approaches were also considered.  
The review considered 1. Feasibility of informative clinical trials; 2. Magnitude of medical potential; 3. Likelihood 
and consequences of resistance; 4. Level of current research activity; 5. Likely timeline to registration, and 6. 
Activities that might enable validation and progression. The review process comprised (a) preparation of a ~50-
page working document summarising 19 current A2A within the scope of the review, (b) a meeting to review and 
prioritise approaches, and (c) collective preparation of a report for the funders which is summarised in this review. 
This allowed the group to compile and share broad and well-informed views on the state-of-the-art for A2As with 
a wider community.  
 
Text Box 1. Search strategy and selection criteria 
The review benefited from expert summaries and non-confidential information on approaches and 
projects provided by its members as well as comprehensive literature and database searching which was 
used to identify approaches, projects, companies and publications to inform the group. All current and 
ongoing projects identified that were within scope were included in the portfolio review. Historic projects 
informed the review but were not included in the portfolio analysis. 
Preclinical and clinical projects were identified through a series of searches of PubMed, the internet using 
Google and ClinTrials.gov up to 27 February 2015, by use of key terms such as “antibody”, “probiotic”, 
“lysin”, “bacteriophage”, “vaccines”, “antimicrobial peptide”, “lantibiotic”, “host defense peptide”, 
“innate defense peptide”, “antibiofilm peptide”, “immunomodulation”, “immune stimulation”, “immune 
suppression”, “vaccine”, “liposome”, “chelation” and, if necessary, their use with “E. coli OR P. 
aeruginosa OR K. pneumoniae OR A. baumannii OR C. difficile OR S. aureus OR infection OR bacteria” 
followed by inspection of the papers and top 30 websites listed. Once proteins or compounds (Tables 1 
and 2) and the organization developing them had been identified, their names were used for additional 
searches e.g. “Merck”. “MedImmune”, “Aridis”, “Seres”, “Rebiotix”, “Shire”, “Viropharma”, “Intron 
Biotechnology”, “ContraFect”, “Ampliphi”, “Phico”, “Akthelia”, “Sanofi Pasteur”, “Valneva”, “Pfizer”, 
“Roche”, “Novacta”, “Adenium” and the associated company website overview, pipeline and news 
pages. The state of alternative project pharmacology was assessed by searches of PubMed for articles to 
27 February 2015 by use of terms “pharmacokinetic OR safety” with “human OR mouse OR rat” in 
combination with “host defense peptide”; “antibiofilm peptide”; “lantibiotic”; “bacteriophage”; “lysin” 
and in the case of antimicrobial peptides “antimicrobial peptide” with “pharmacokinetic OR safety” and 
“E. coli OR P. aeruginosa OR C. difficile OR S. aureus” followed by inspection of the 238 papers listed. 
We also reviewed studies cited in articles identified by this search and included them when relevant. The 
primary focus of the review was on non-compound approaches that target bacteria and any approaches 
that target the host to provide alternatives to antibiotics and to address antibiotic resistance. Projects 
using compounds to directly target bacteria were excluded. This meant that compound-based approaches 
  
Revised Lancet ID Manuscript 2 November 2015 4 of 23 
targeting efflux pumps, regulators of transcription and antibiotic resistance breakers were excluded from 
this review. During the Lancet ID review process and in response to reviewer comments the searches 
were repeated and additional references added. Literature on potential modulators of innate immunity 
was identified by PubMed searching "TLR2, TLR4, NLRP3, AIM2, C5-cleavage" each in combination 
with "E. coli OR P. aeruginosa OR K. pneumoniae OR A. baumanii OR C. difficile OR S. aureus OR 
infection OR bacteria". The titles of the first 500 papers for each search were inspected for relevance and 
selected papers reviewed in detail. In addition, searches were refined by adding additional key words 
"agonist OR agonist OR inhibitor OR monoclonal OR polyclonal OR knockout" and the first 200 paper 
titles inspected for relevance. Further searches including the list of bacteria along with "innate immunity 
antibiotic resistance" with or without the keywords "TLR2, TLR4, NLRP3, AIM2, C5-cleavage" were 
performed and the first 200 paper titles inspected for relevance. Group members also provided key 
relevant references on modulating innate immunity that were known to them. 
 
The portfolio of alternative approaches 
The group identified 19 A2A approaches for consideration and recognised that the list may be incomplete (Tables 
1 and 2). Projects were not reviewed in sufficient detail to make individual funding recommendations. Technical 
feasibility and clinical potential of the approaches were considered at a high level across all the projects but the 
commercial attractiveness, potential return on investment, or potential for reimbursement of specific projects were 
not analyzed. Given the wide range of views within the group, this review does not represent a unanimous 
consensus. We recognise that perspectives differ, that there are gaps in available data, and that science will 
continue to advance. This review should be taken as a snapshot of A2As and their perceived potential. Ten 
alternatives were prioritised and considered in more detail (Table 1). The other 9 approaches were not prioritised 
at this time because (i) other projects were considered more advanced in the translational pipeline and/or (ii) there 
was insufficient peer-reviewed information to assess their potential clinical impact, feasibility, or safety (Table 
2).  
The potential of the top 10 approaches, with the exception of the recently discovered antibiofilm peptides, has 
been known for more than a decade but has not led to therapeutic breakthroughs for systemic treatments for 
reasons that are not entirely clear.104 New vaccines have been the most notable successes but are of course 
prophylatic.105  
The top 10 approaches which the group considered merited attention were placed into two tiers. The focus within 
Tier 1 was on clinical development and in Tier 2 on preclinical development over the next 5 years. The main 
reason peptides are not included in Tier 1 is that virtually all clinical trials to date were for topical usage while 
this review considers largely systemic usage. Success of Tier 1 projects in Phase II and Phase III studies could 
transform the perception of the A2As portfolio. Access to funding through key preclinical and clinical 
development steps (e.g. production and characterisation, formulation, pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics, 
toxicology and safety pharmacology) with subsequent publications showing how these data support continued 
drug development was considered to be critical to progress towards clinical validation and to build confidence in 
the field. Supported studies should define and test clear go/no-go decision points for product progression. 
Primarily in vitro programmes of work or those focused entirely on surrogate endpoints e.g. characterising 
cytokines rather than pathology or microbiology may not be competitive.  
Application of “major pharma” development resources and expertise will be critical to validation and progression 
of A2As in a timely manner. Reliance on the academic and biotech communities alone may not be sufficient to 
provide new products within a decade. Application of best practices in the definition of target product profiles, 
rigorous target validation, understanding bacterial species and strain differences, the mechanisms and 
consequences of resistance, differences in rodent and human responses, time and resources to adequately optimise 
and characterise potential products as they progress through in vitro and in vivo efficacy, safety and toxicology 
assays will all collectively contribute to a greater chance of success or at least enable definitive and evidence-
based decisions to stop exploring unproductive approaches.  
Unfortunately, and in contrast to classical antibiotics, the predictive value of preclinical studies for host-directed 
therapies may be limited. In particular, some A2As act via the immune system and this may mean that greater 
  
Revised Lancet ID Manuscript 2 November 2015 5 of 23 
preclinical use of non-human primates will be required.106 This all increases risk and averts funding. However, 
failure of the early clinical studies should not be allowed to block future exploitation.  
Based on a combination of high clinical impact and high technical feasibility, the approaches anticipated to have 
the greatest potential to provide A2As were: (a) phage lysins as replacements; (b) vaccines as prophylactics; (c) 
antibodies as prophylactics, and (d) probiotics as treatments or prophylactics for Clostridium difficile- and 
antibiotic- associated diarrhoea (CDAD/AAD). Bacteriophages (wild-type and engineered) were also considered 
to have potentially high impact as replacements but the feasibility of their entry into the market was unclear. 
Selected immune stimulation approaches were considered feasible as broad-spectrum prophylactics or adjuncts to 
conventional treatments but their clinical impact was also unclear at this time. 
Because of their potential for broad-spectrum activity, it was disappointing to find that antimicrobial peptides 
were best placed in Tier 2 rather than Tier 1. Antimicrobial peptides have been tested in clinical trials and failed 
but the tested products were focused on topical applications and, as such, are outside the scope of this review. The 
reasons for peptide “failure” at Phase III clinical trials and non-progression to product registration include lack of 
efficacy, non-superiority over standard care antibiotics and safety and it should be noted that the underlying 
reasons for these clinical outcomes have not been reported.107 We speculate that early attempts to deliver new 
therapies, and in particular peptides, were hampered by lack of investment, use of non-optimised peptides and 
insufficient development and clinical expertise.   
Some may consider past failure indicative of poor prospects for peptide-based therapies but the group took the 
longer term view that A2As, including peptides, are still an emerging field. For instance, there appear to be only 
6 published pharmacology studies (two for plectasin, two for lantibiotics and two for other peptides) in the 
antimicrobial peptide field, and two published safety studies across the fields of lysin, bacteriophage, 
antimicrobial-, host defense- and, antibiofilm- peptides.108-115 Thus, the literature base does not suggest a mature 
field. Most of the preclinical characterisation of projects remains proprietary with insufficient published peer-
reviewed evidence to understand the pharmacokinetic, pharmacodynamics, toxicology and safety strengths and 
liabilities of these approaches. Revisiting past programmes and applying new methods of PK/PD modelling could 
indicate improvements in dose regimens that could alter the outcome of new clinical trials.116Regulatory 
approaches to antibacterials also continue to evolve and may in the future permit narrowly focused programs in 
which some of these agents might better succeed.117  
A2As portfolio analysis 
To enable an evidence-based review of the current state of development and likelihood of success of the prioritised 
alternative approaches, extensive internet searching and knowledge within the working party were used to define 
the breadth (number of projects and targets) and depth (current phase of development) of the A2As portfolio. In 
particular, company websites and news releases were used to identify projects currently (Q1 2015) being actively 
progressed (Table 3). As companies quickly announce positive news but there may be a delay between companies 
halting projects and announcing project cessation in press releases or on websites, the project list is considered 
inclusive and likely to overstate rather than understate the active project portfolio. 
Industry standard timelines for clinical development phases (Phase I - 1 year, Phase II - 2 years, Phase III - 3 
years, and Registration - 1 year) were used to estimate the earliest likely date of product registration. 1, 132–133 The 
estimated year of registration will thus likely differ from a particular sponsor’s estimates or project timelines. Host 
defense peptides and antibiofilm peptides were excluded because they were too early for this analysis.  
Similarly, industry-standard probabilities of success across projects in different phases of development(preclinical 
to Phase I – 23%, Phase 1 – 45%, Phase II – 47%, Phase III – 71%, and Registration – 90%) were applied. 1, 132–
133 The estimates of the probability of success for individual projects within the class were summed. Values >100% 
for a given category indicate that there are sufficient project numbers and/or project maturity to anticipate that at 
least one product could be registered if access to sufficient funding and skilled development resources is provided.  
Industry standard costs for clinical development phases (Phase I - £6m, Phase II - £10m, Phase III - £45m, and 
Registration – £1.3m) were used to estimate the cost of portfolio projects. 1, 132–133 As with timing projections, the 
resulting estimated costs will likely differ from a particular sponsor’s estimates. 
  
Revised Lancet ID Manuscript 2 November 2015 6 of 23 
This uniform approach was taken because (a) similar levels of project planning data are not available for all 
projects, (b) when available, project-specific timelines developed by sponsors often shift, and (c) use of standard 
timelines allows uniform (re)calculation of the data as required. 
The strength of this type of analysis is that it removes any personal bias but its weakness is that it is almost always 
incorrect in the specifics of its details. 
Analysed by approach, the pipeline for antibodies, probiotics and vaccines was sufficient to anticipate success as 
the probability of registration is >100%. However, for other alternative areas there are too few projects ongoing 
and/or they are currently too early to allow for anticipated project attrition. For instance, on the basis of the current 
portfolio, we cannot assume that lysins, bacteriophages or antimicrobial peptides will contribute to new therapies. 
It is important to note that most of the current novel activity is focused on C. difficile, P. aeruginosa and S. aureus 
only. The timeline analysis suggests that if successful, registrations might be: antibodies – 2017; probiotics – 
2018; vaccines – 2019; immune stimulants 2021; lysins and antimicrobial peptides – 2022; bacteriophages – 2023; 
and host defense and antibiofilm peptides from 2027 onwards.  
When analysed by pathogen, the ‘probability of success’ analysis indicates that if the alternative portfolio is 
adequately funded, we could expect two new products (antibody, probiotic or vaccine) for CDAD/AAD by 2019; 
one for P. aeruginosa (antibody or vaccine) by 2021, and one for S. aureus (antibody, lysin, or vaccine) by 2022. 
The current portfolio lacks sufficient breadth and depth to anticipate multiple new products for these pathogens 
during this time frame. It is a matter of concern that there is little activity on the other ESKAPE pathogens (e.g., 
Enterococcus, Klebsiella, Acinetobacter or Enterobacter) or directed towards other Enterobacteriaceae. This 
indicates that it is most unlikely that A2As for these life-threatening pathogens, and others, will emerge in the 
next 10 years.  
As the portfolio advances through the later development phases, costs will increase and innovative funding 
arrangements will be required to maintain momentum given that most pharma companies have withdrawn from 
the “antibiotic arena”.  
The group recognised that by 2018/2019 we could anticipate observing success in multiple projects at Phase II 
and that this could encourage greater investment in the sector. New projects starting in 2018/2019 might be 
expected to reach registration by 2030.  
The group found that A2As have the potential to deliver clinical benefit but the scale of current activity and 
availability of funding will have to increase substantially to achieve that benefit. 
What will the portfolio cost? 
To estimate funding requirements, the named projects from Table 3 were budgeted to 2025 using industry standard 
costs for clinical development phases. Although some organisations may currently aim to deliver with smaller 
budgets, the application of standard costs serves to reflect prior reality for delivery and to remove bias.  
The funds for the current phase of the project are assumed to be in place and committed. By adding the cost of 
each subsequent stage that each project has to pass up to registration and application of the risk estimates at each 
stage of development, as described above, the risk-adjusted funds required to registration were calculated. 
Where the alternative project portfolio is too thin or early to anticipate success, additional funding is required to 
strengthen the portfolio. A key objective should be to test A2As at Phase II to validate the approach. To adequately 
understand the clinical potential of an approach it may be necessary to take several projects that represent the 
approach into Phase II. The lysins, bacteriophage and antimicrobial peptides approaches have advancing projects 
but there are currently too few projects to be able to anticipate adequate testing of the concepts. They require 
additional investment to build capacity and translational expertise to exploit their full potential.  
Allowing for anticipated project attrition, a pipeline to support the evaluation of a single project at Phase II would 
require 9 preclinical projects at £12.5 m/project over 5 years, leading to two Phase I and potentially one Phase II 
study with a total budget of £135m. Any funding should be dependent on the results being peer reviewed and 
accessible via open access publication to provide the requisite evidence-base to inform future R&D. 
  
Revised Lancet ID Manuscript 2 November 2015 7 of 23 
The host defense and antibiofilm peptide approaches are attractive because of their broad spectrum potential. It 
may be necessary to advance the first wave of these innovative projects beyond Phase II to validate the approaches 
and to convince pharma, investors and clinicians. A greater level of investment (£575m) would be required to 
build a pipeline of host defense peptide and antibiofilm peptide projects because they are currently in an early 
stage of development. An estimated 34 preclinical projects are required to provide 8 Phase I and 4 Phase II studies 
to get at least one project through to Phase III and product registration (Table 4). There are several natural and 
synthetic host defense peptides and antibiofilm peptides as potential starting points. Chemical modifications, 
hybrid peptides and chemical mimetics could be explored.134, 135 Project creation and translational research in this 
area could be accelerated by committing £85m/year for 5 years. This would provide a powerful incentive to build 
capacity and to progress towards clinical validation of these peptide based approaches. 
Our analysis assumes that funding for named projects of £227m is available to complete their progression 
through their current project phase. Additional risk adjusted funding of £48 m will be required for subsequent 
phases and should support development of one new product for each of P. aeruginosa, C. difficile and S. aureus 
by 2022. This level of investment would enable validation of antibodies, probiotics, and novel vaccines as 
A2As.  
The lysin, bacteriophage and antimicrobial peptide portfolios need to be increased in order to adequately test these 
approaches in a timely manner. This could be achieved with risk adjusted investment of £405m. Building an 
adequate host defense peptide and antibiofilm peptide portfolio will require £604m.  
The working party therefore identified ~£1.5 billion of risk-adjusted funding that will be required to validate and 
exploit the current 10 high priority A2A approaches in a timely manner. We did not forecast the funding 
requirements for the remaining 10 approaches or for additional blue-sky activity to add to the pipeline in the 
future.  
Challenges to developing and deploying A2As 
1. Innovation must be linked to translation expertise  
The innovators in this space (largely academics and biotechs) often lack industry-level development and clinical 
skills. Hence, increased funding needs to be partnered with investment in translational skills development. A2A 
programmes may benefit from greater access to PK/PD, formulation, toxicology and manufacturing expertise. 
Provision of adequate funding for the multi-disciplinary teams and costs associated with the preclinical 
characterization and delivery of competitive lead candidates for clinical development will be a critical factor for 
success. Pre-competitive partnerships and the creation of development hubs might be one way to support this area. 
Calls to tender for and purchase desired research and development activities from contract research organisations 
and pharma on behalf of the academic and SME/biotech alternative community is another innovative way to 
support this area. Such activities might encourage industry to become involved in a manner that develops both 
critical mass and sustainability. 
2. Clinical Trials 
Careful clinical trial design will be critical. Projects need to ensure that endpoints are relevant to both the patient 
and the physician, often but not necessarily exclusively based on endpoints grounded in how patients feel, function 
and survive. Unless the clinical signal is strong, there is a risk that the size and cost of the clinical trials required 
to demonstrate an incremental benefit will be too large to support. Thus, it will be important to be willing to 
terminate projects if clinical success is either low probability or likely to have low impact. This could have been 
one reason for the cessation of previous peptide trials. As with trials of new antibiotics, surrogate endpoints that 
are predictive of clinical efficacy should be included as secondary endpoints (e.g., changes in cytokine levels or 
changes in imaging of infections) but are unlikely to be acceptable as the basis for registration for life-threatening 
infections. 
3. Economic models in this therapy area must be improved 
In addition to adequate funding and expertise, development and deployment of alternative antibacterial medicines 
is dependent on a return on investment. The working party did not consider the economics of A2As but noted that 
replacing antibiotics will be a major challenge. At present, many of the A2As are pathogen- or strain-specific. By 
comparison, most modern antibiotics have a broad spectrum of activity. For example, the recently approved 
combination of ceftolozane and tazobactam, for cIAI, cUTI and pyelonephritis, has clinical efficacy data for 10 
pathogens including Klebsiella spp, Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa with clinical microbiology 
  
Revised Lancet ID Manuscript 2 November 2015 8 of 23 
suggesting potential against another 20 pathogens.136,137 Multiple alternative therapies would be required to 
provide similar spectrum of coverage. In the first instance, A2As are likely to focus on the most prevalent 
infections and may provide sufficient clinical benefit to ensure a return on investment. At best, they will be a 
partial replacement for antibiotics. 
4. Diagnostics/Theranostics 
The future role of innovative diagnostics, their use in combination with innovative targeted therapies (sometimes 
referred to as “theranostics”) and the likelihood or timescale of their delivery and costs were not within the scope 
of this review. However, the group recognised that for single species targeted therapies, these enablers will be 
critical for widespread clinical use and patient benefit and that their introduction into clinical practice would be a 
strong support as well for improved antibiotic stewardship.138  
5. Innovative regulation 
Innovative therapies may require innovative regulation.117 Bacteriophage therapies currently in development are 
an example of the kind of product driving the evolution of regulatory approaches. Broad conversations about 
options for the unique challenges of each alternative are required: a recent workshop hosted by EMA on 
bacteriophage is an example of how this work needs to be progressed.139  
6. Flexible delivery models 
Some A2As could be delivered by different mechanisms to those currently used for traditional antibiotics. Instead 
of a single global manufacturing pipeline, the development of localised services akin to blood transfusion or stem 
cell harvesting and transplantation could facilitate patient benefit and should be considered. For example, localised 
bacteriophage therapy attuned to patient need within a hospital might be an appropriate model for some products. 
7. One Health: the potential for alternatives in animal health 
All of the A2As have potential uses in animal health and demonstration of efficacy in companion and agricultural 
animals could be important steps in de-risking an approach before its clinical development in humans. The 
anticipated costs for many of the approaches may however, be prohibitive for animal use. Commitment to 
substantial subsidies may be required to incentivise alternative development for animal health where their use 
could contribute to reduction in antibiotic use. Epibiome is an example of a company targeting animal health with 
bacteriophages before human use but their programmes are too early to be included in this review.140  
8. Conventional antibiotics will still be needed 
At least initially, many of the A2As are likely to be trialled and used as adjuncts to antibiotics because their 
activities may not provide sufficient therapeutic benefit on their own. While effective antibiotics are still 
available it may prove difficult to demonstrate superiority over standard of care when comparing an antibiotic 
with an antibiotic plus an A2A adjunct treatment. If resistance to the antibiotic develops, then its use in 
combination therapies will be compromised. A2As which are primarily adjunctive therapies may have narrow 
window of opportunity in which to demonstrate benefit. In the longer term, it may be possible to demonstrate 
that combinations of A2A therapies could be used without antibiotics. 
9. We anticipate that deployment of Alternatives will: 
I. 
In some cases entail reliance on improved and faster diagnostic technology to enable targeting of 
individual bacterial species, or even strains of species, rather than clinical indications. 
II. 
Be more often used for prophylaxis than for treatment. 
III. 
Require multiple products to replace a single antibiotic. 
IV. 
Involve substantially higher costs than for traditional antibiotics. 
V. 
Require access to sufficient and sustained funding to enable timely R&D and prompt clinical 
evaluation. 
 
Future outlook 
The objective of this portfolio review was to define which Alternatives to Antibiotics are most likely to deliver 
new therapies with clinical utility. The group recognised that academic researchers and industry have successfully 
generated a diverse portfolio of potential A2As comprising projects from preclinical optimisation to Phase III 
  
Revised Lancet ID Manuscript 2 November 2015 9 of 23 
studies and prioritised 10 approaches for more detailed review. The field is still emerging and holds promise 
provided that adequate funding is available to build capacity and a preclinical evidence-base is created to enable 
prioritisation and to progress optimised drugs to critical Phase II validation.  
There was little doubt that the field might deliver new medicines for P. aeruginosa, S. aureus and C. difficile. 
However, other than probiotics for C. difficile, this first wave of new agents is likely to serve best as adjunctive 
or preventive therapy. Therefore, traditional antibiotics will still be required.  
If we have to depend on A2As in the future, we need to build capacity now and substantially increase the 
throughput of projects.141 The working party estimated that the priority A2A approaches alone require an 
investment of at least £1.5bn, committed in the next 5 years and spent within 10 years to initiate a pipeline of 
translational projects that would deliver these new therapies. An investment of this scale will enable a better 
understanding of which approaches are most likely to deliver and ideally identify those that will not. Additional 
investment will be required to bring products to market and into clinical use. Longer term significant and 
sustainable funding will be required to advance and exploit the wider A2A portfolio. Policy and funding must 
now be linked. Without adequate funding we must assume that new treatments to replace and/or supplement 
antibiotics will not be available for more than a decade, if at all, and the consequences of such a prolonged delay 
for global healthcare systems needs to be considered now.  Our analysis of just a subset of all of the activities that 
could contribute towards the fight against antimicrobial resistance suggests that funding is now the key limiting 
factor that is stalling a global response. Antimicrobial resistance has to become a major international science 
programme in order to deliver the solutions that society needs now. By comparison the Large Hadron Collider 
project cost ~£6bn and the International Space Station £96bn. 142, 143 Antimicrobial research and development to 
address the problem of antibiotic resistance probably requires an effort somewhere between the two.  
Key Messages (as a text box) 
 
Alternatives to antibiotics: Non-compound approaches that target bacteria or approaches that target the 
host to treat bacterial infection 
 
Academics and industry have created at least 19 approaches that need to be further evaluated 
 
Understanding the potential of A2As will require experimental clinical medicine and not just drug 
discovery 
 
Enhanced translational expertise must be deployed to aid validation and progression of these A2As 
 
Exemplar projects must be advanced to Clinical Phase II to enable validation of approaches 
 
Antimicrobial resistance needs to grow into big science to deliver new innovative therapies 
 
The Large Hadron Collider project cost ~£6bn and the International Space Station £96bn: antimicrobial 
research and development to address the problem of antibiotic resistance probably requires an effort 
somewhere between the two. 
 
Contributors 
LC formed the A2A working group and defined the focus of the review. LC and JHR co-chaired the group and 
prepared the first draft of the review. All members contributed to provision of literature searching, analysis and 
interpretation of findings and especially knowledge around their area(s) of expertise. A sub-group comprising LC, 
BFG, IRH, BVJ, AK, H-HK, SO, SS, TJT and JHR edited the drafting of the review before wider input from the 
group. LC and JHR finalised the manuscript taking the editorial suggestions of the group into account. 
Role of the funding source 
LC received a fee which was co-funded by the Wellcome Trust and the Department of Health to provide a review 
into alternatives to antibiotics. The fee enabled LC to reimburse working group travel, hotel and subsistence 
expenses to attend a meeting to review A2As and compensation to LC and JHR for managing the review process 
and preparation of the manuscript. LC had final responsibility for the content of the manuscript and for submitting 
it to Lancet ID. The Wellcome Trust and the Department of Health acted as observers and did not influence the 
content or conclusions of the review. 
Declaration of interests 
Given the aims of this review process, many of the contributors were selected because they had (and will continue 
to develop) conflicts of interest with respect to companies and products mentioned in this report. Connections to 
  
Revised Lancet ID Manuscript 2 November 2015 10 of 23 
related companies based on employment at the time the report was prepared are as noted in the summary of 
authors. LC is a Director of Chemical Biology Ventures Ltd, and Abgentis Ltd and an employee of Persica 
Pharmaceuticals Ltd. MC consults and collaborated with AmpliPhi Biosciences Corporation. MD is a Director/ 
Shareholder in Novacta Biosystems Ltd and a Director of Cantab Anti-infectives Ltd. HF is a Director/Shareholder 
in Phico Therapeutics Ltd. VAF Consults and is a Shareholder in ContraFect Inc.. SF is a Director/Shareholder 
and Consultant for Absynth Biologics Ltd. REWH has licensed projects to Elanco, is on the SAB of Adenium 
Pharmaceuticals and is the founder and major shareholder in ABT Innovations Inc. DH is a former employee and 
a current Shareholder in AmpliPhi Biosciences Corporation. KH is a Director of TiKa Diagnostics Ltd. BJ is on 
the SAB of Hutman Diagnostics AG. DK is Chairman of Absynth Biologics Ltd and Procarta Biosystems Ltd. 
DP is an employee/Shareholder in GSK. SP is an employee of MedImmune and a Shareholder in AstraZeneca. 
SS is a Founder/Shareholder in Abzenza plc. SO is a former Shareholder in Akthelia. CT is a Director of Plasgene 
Ltd. PW is an employee of Evotec a CRO that performs work with A2A companies. JHR is an 
employee/Shareholder in AstraZeneca, a consultant to F2G Ltd, and a consultant to Advent Life Sciences (an 
investor in F2G Ltd). Of note, AstraZeneca does own MedImmune, but SP manages the MedImmune products 
mentioned in Table 3 and JHR was not otherwise connected with them at the time of this review. Finally, JHR 
accepted an offer to become a non-Executive Director of Adenium Biotech ApS after the review had been accepted 
for publication. JS is a non-exec Director of Auspherix Ltd.  LC and JHR received remuneration from The 
Wellcome Trust and the Department of Health for chairing the Working Party and managing the preparation of 
the report and this review.  
Acknowledgments 
This review was commissioned by the Wellcome Trust and jointly funded by the ‘Department of Health’s Policy 
Research Programme’. 
  
Revised Lancet ID Manuscript 2 November 2015 11 of 23 
Tables 
Table 1. Prioritised alternative approaches 
Alternative 
Approach 
Comment 
Likely 
spectrum of 
activity and 
initial use 
Recommendation 
over the next 5 
years 
Refs 
Tier 1 (Primarily translational - funding to clinical evaluation at Phase 2) 
 
Antibodies 
Antibodies that bind to and inactivate a pathogen, its virulence factors, 
or its toxin(s) were widely considered one of the alternative 
approaches most likely to have major clinical impact. Antibodies were 
considered a relatively low risk area with strong underpinning science, 
safe history of use, and a high degree of technical feasibility. 
Prevent 
G+ and G- 
infection, 
possibly also 
adjunct use 
Basic R&D and 
Translational 
4, 
6–13 
Probiotics 
Probiotics are defined as “live microorganisms which when 
administered in adequate amounts confer a health benefit on the host 
organism”. It is considered likely that defined mixtures of bacteria or 
the use of non-toxigenic spores of C. difficile will provide therapeutic 
and prophylactic therapies that will improve on current clinical 
practice for the treatment of CDAD/AAD. Basic research to 
understand the mechanism of action of probiotics in different settings 
and how they might be used in combination with antibiotics and other 
A2As e.g. bacteriophages could enable their wider use in other 
indications. 
Prevent 
or treat 
CDAD/AAD 
Translational 
14–
18 
Lysins 
Phage lysins are enzymes used by bacteriophages to destroy the cell 
wall of a target bacterium and are potential replacements for 
antibiotics because of their direct antibacterial action, and also as 
adjuncts because they act to reduce bacterial burden and/or weaken 
biofilms. Emphasis on Lysins active against Gram-negative pathogens 
would be beneficial. 
Treat G+ 
infection 
Basic R&D and 
Translational 
19–
27 
Wild-type 
Bacteriophages 
Wild-type bacteriophage that infect and kill bacteria have the potential 
to replace antibiotics for some indications. Bacteriophage may be used 
in a comparatively small dose because they replicate when their host 
bacterium is present. During treatment of an infection they may also 
evolve to infect the strains causing the disease. This replication and 
evolution makes them unique in pharmaceutical product development. 
In terms of pharmacology, the subject experiences more product than 
was dosed and that product can change over time so that what is 
sampled after dosing is not exactly what was given to the patient. 
Treat 
G+ and G- 
infection 
Basic R&D and 
Translational 
28–
32 
Engineered 
Bacteriophages 
The ability to genetically engineer phages with new properties for 
therapeutic use is strong. Early indications are that many of the 
challenges associated with mixtures of wild-type phages, such as 
breadth of strain coverage, development of resistance, and rapid 
elimination after systemic administration could be addressed. One of 
the advantages of non-replicating phages might be in dose selection 
but there could be issues with exposure to the larger doses of non-
replicating phage required to treat infection.  
Treat 
G+ and G- 
infection 
Basic R&D and 
Translational 
33–
36 
Immune 
Stimulation 
Successful antimicrobial therapy depends on a supportive immune 
response. Immune stimulation has been proposed as a potential 
adjunct approach in conjunction with antibiotic therapy. Re-purposing 
of phenyl butyrate and vitamin D to enhance expression of innate 
antimicrobial peptides seems feasible.  
Oral bacterial extracts are registered and used clinically to reduce the 
incidence of respiratory tract infections in some at risk groups in some 
regions. If successful, additional clinical trials to confirm their 
efficacy in other populations would encourage wider use. The 
mechanisms by which these extracts might work are unclear but may 
involve Toll-Like Receptors e.g. TLR2 and TLR9. Once this is 
understood, it may be possible to devise targeted interventions. 
The working group focused on evaluation of repurposed drugs for 
immune stimulation rather than evaluation of  early translational 
research in this area. In general, there was insufficient target validation 
for bacterial infection, a high potential for side effects, variable 
responses/polymorphisms in patient populations, and bacterial species 
and strain specific responses. The clinical development path for host 
targeted therapies is also likely to require the use  of non-human 
primates during product development. 
Prevent or 
provide 
adjunct 
therapy for 
G+ and G- 
infection 
Basic R&D and 
Translational 
37–
45 
Vaccines 
With potential to substantially reduce the incidence of infection and 
therefore the need to use antibiotics, the long established investment 
Prevention, 
G+ more 
Basic R&D, esp. 
on new adjuvants 
46–
60 
  
Revised Lancet ID Manuscript 2 November 2015 12 of 23 
in vaccines for new targets should continue. Given the ageing human 
population, we need better knowledge of the potential for vaccination 
in the elderly and how to dose to achieve protection in immune 
compromised individuals. 
than G- 
infection 
Tier 2 (strong support for judicious funding while monitoring for breakthrough insights regarding systemic therapy) 
Antimicrobial 
Peptides 
(AMPs) 
 
 
The advantages of AMPs are their broad spectrum activity which 
includes most major Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria; their 
bactericidal and rapid action; low target-based resistance and their 
lack of immunogenicity. The extensive academic literature and early 
clinical trials have not yet led to a therapeutic breakthrough for 
systemic treatments. It will require studies aimed at understanding 
why they have largely not been utilized systemically (e.g. toxicity, 
cost, lability to proteases, etc) and how to overcome these deficiencies 
(e.g. formulation, redesign or use of non-natural amino acids, etc). In 
some instances topical application e.g. by aerosol might supplement 
systemic therapy. The reasons why projects were stopped are not in 
the public domain. Public-private partnerships to fund and test the 
potential of AMPs in well-designed clinical trials and to publish the 
outcomes will be necessary to inform future investment into this 
approach.  
Treat or 
Adjunct for 
G+ and G- 
infection 
Translational 
61–
72 
Host/Innate 
Defense 
Peptides 
(HDPs/IDRs) 
Host defense peptides and innate defense regulators are small natural 
peptides or synthetic peptides respectively, which have indirect 
antimicrobial effects. They act primarily by increasing expression of 
anti-inflammatory chemokines and cytokines, and by reducing the 
expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines. Additional resources are 
required to accelerate their preclinical evaluation and progression into 
clinical trials to provide clinical validation of the approach. Targeting 
host responses could carry a greater risk and introduce the 
complication of distinguishing and understanding the immunological 
differences between rodents and humans at the population level.  
Adjunct for 
G+ and G- 
infection 
Basic R&D 
36, 
73–
76 
Antibiofilm 
Peptides 
Peptides that specifically inhibit bacterial biofilm formation have been 
identified and are in preclinical development. Their use as adjunctive 
therapy could improve outcomes. 
Adjunct for 
G+ and G- 
infections 
Basic R&D 
77, 
78 
G+ = Gram-positive, G- = Gram-negative, Basic R&D = provide support for fundamental research and preclinical 
proof of concept studies to validate approaches and extend into early translational work to characterise efficacy, 
pharmacology, pharmacodynamics and preliminary toxicology so that potential liabilities can be defined. 
Translational = focus support on bringing products into the clinic.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Revised Lancet ID Manuscript 2 November 2015 13 of 23 
Table 2: Additional alternative approaches 
Alternative Approach 
Comment 
Refs 
Immune Suppression 
A bacterial infection can lead to an excessive host innate immune response (ranging from the 
systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) to septic shock) in which the injury to the 
host is made much worse by the host’s pro-inflammatory cytokine response. Selective 
manipulation of this cytokine response has the potential to be used in synergy with antibiotics 
to reduce pathogen-induced tissue damage mediated by cytokines and neutrophils, and to 
accelerate the time to patient recovery. The medical need is high but past failures of Phase III 
clinical trials, despite promising preclinical, Phase I and Phase II data, suggests that this area of 
sepsis and septic shock carries a great risk and has therefore not been prioritised. New concepts 
are needed to develop novel small as well as large molecule drugs for this high mortality area 
of infection whose incidence is increasing. In contrast to antibiotics, the healthcare sector 
would pay a large premium for a drug that was effective at reducing morbidity and mortality. 
The immune system is complex and changing the balance of pro- and anti-inflammatory 
activities in the context of bacterial infection in order to achieve a therapeutic benefit will 
require new paradigms of thinking in systems biology.  A detailed academic review of this area 
was beyond the scope of this review. 
36, 
79–82 
Anti-resistance nucleic 
acids 
Antibiotic resistance genes are frequently spread by highly transmissible plasmids, particularly 
in Gram-negative pathogens. Effective removal of resistance genes could resensitise bacteria to 
conventional antibiotics. Some perceive that this approach may not reach all of the resistance 
targets in a complex environment (e.g. gut or abscess) in the absence of selection, while 
containment of a transmissible genetically modified vector that delivers the anti-resistance 
nucleic acid in an open system could face significant regulatory challenges. 
83–88 
Antibacterial nucleic 
acids 
The use of nucleic acids to directly kill bacteria is being explored in a variety of formats in both 
academia and biotech. In terms of their therapeutic potential, studies are at an early stage. At 
the very least, these tools will continue to be developed to support fundamental microbial 
genetics studies. 
87–89 
Toxin sequestration using 
liposomes 
Pathogens often secrete toxins that damage mammalian cells and drive inflammation. 
Administration of liposomes to act as decoys for toxin binding has been shown to reduce 
damage to cells and reduce disease severity. 
90 
Antibiotic-degrading 
enzymes to reduce 
selection of resistance 
When antibiotics are eliminated via the gut, exposure of the normal gut bacteria to the 
antibiotic may lead to development of resistance and drive CDAD/AAD. Phase II studies 
demonstrate that oral beta-lactamase can destroy beta-lactams in the faeces. The perceived 
challenge of demonstrating the clinical benefit of degrading enzyme administration at Phase III 
led to this approach not being prioritised. 
91-94 
Metal Chelation 
Bacterial pathogens require zinc, manganese and iron ions to fully express their 
pathogenicity/virulence, biofilm formation and multiple essential enzymatic and metallo-beta 
lactamase activities. Metal chelation may deny pathogens these key processes. Discussion with 
pharmacologists and toxicologists suggests that this approach is speculative and could present 
safety concerns. 
95-99 
Alphamers  
Alphamers are immune modifiers comprising an α-Gal epitope fused to a bacterial pathogen 
binding aptamer to redirect endogenous anti-Gal antibodies to the pathogen and hence enhance 
immune clearance. 
100 
Apheresis of protective 
antibodies 
In some patients with P. aeruginosa lung infection, antibodies bind to the pathogen and protect 
it from serum-mediated killing. Depletion of these antibodies restores the ability of serum to 
kill bacteria and initial clinical data suggest an improved clinical outcome. 
101 
Immune Stimulation by 
P4 Peptide 
Phagocytic killing of bacteria can be enhanced by P4 Peptide, a chemically synthesised 28 
amino acid peptide derived from the S. pneumoniae surface exposed virulence factor PsaA. P4 
peptide stimulates opsonophagocytic uptake and killing in invasive disease models of S. 
pneumoniae infection in mice. The combination of P4 intranasally and i.p. IgG provided 100% 
survival in the mouse model and significantly reduced bacterial burden. A therapy based on P4, 
IgG and antibiotic is proposed. However, additional evidence may be required to support the 
use of iv IgG in severe pneumonia. The project recently received MRC DPFS funding to 
progress to Phase I studies. 
102, 
103 
 
  
Revised Lancet ID Manuscript 2 November 2015 14 of 23 
Table 3. A2A Portfolio Review as at Q1 2015 
Approach 
Probability of 
Registration by 
2025+ and Sponsor 
Risk Adjusted Cost of 
Projects  
(current/subsequent 
phases) 
and Target 
Pipeline investment to 
enable additional Phase 2 
validation#, Name and ref. 
Phase at Q1 2015 
Earliest 
Anticipated 
Registration* 
Antibodies 
183%+ 
£60m/£120m 
- 
 
 
 
Merck 
C. difficile 
Bezlotoxumab119, 120 
P3 ongoing 
2017 
 
MedImmune 
 S. aureus 
MEDI48936, 120 
P2 ongoing 
2021 
 
Aridis 
P. aeruginosa 
AR-101121 
P2a complete 
2021 
 
Aridis 
S. aureus 
AR-301121 
P2a ready 
2022 
 
MedImmune 
P. aeruginosa  
MEDI39029 
P1 ongoing 
2023 
 
XBiotech 
S. aureus 
514G313 
P1 ongoing 
2023 
 
Aridis 
P. aeruginosa 
Aerucin10 
IND ready 
2025 
Probiotics 
124%+ 
£52m/£53m 
- 
 
 
 
Seres 
C. difficile 
SER-109122 
P3 ready 
2018 
 
Rebiotix 
C. difficile 
RBX2660123 
P2 ongoing 
2019 
 
Shire (Viropharma) 
C. difficile 
VP20621124 
P2 ready 
2022 
Lysins 
26%+ 
£12m/£28m 
£135m 
 
 
 
Intron 
Biotechnology 
S. aureus 
SAL20027 
P1 ongoing 
2022 
 
ContraFect 
S. aureus 
CF-30119 
P1 ongoing 
2022 
Bacteriophages 
9%+ 
£13m/£57m 
£135m 
 
 
Wild-type 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AmpliPhi 
C. difficile 
AmpliPhage-004125 
Pre-P1 
2023 
 
AmpliPhi 
P. aeruginosa 
AmpliPhage-001125 
Pre-P1 
2023 
Engineered 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Phico Therapeutics 
P. aeruginosa 
PT-3.136 
Pre-P1 
2023 
Immune 
Stimulation 
43%+ 
£0m/£55m 
- 
 
 
 
Akthelia 
C. difficile 
Phenylbutyrate/vitD38,40 
P2 ready 
2021 
 
- 
Various 
Bacterial extracts43 
P1 ready 
2022 
Vaccines 
188%+ 
£74m/£66m 
- 
 
 
 
Sanofi Pasteur 
C. difficile 
C. difficile toxoid vaccine126 
P3 
2019 
 
Valneva 
P. aeruginosa 
IC43127, 128 
P2/P3 ongoing 
2019 
 
Valneva 
C. difficile 
IC84128 
P2 ongoing 
2021 
 
Pfizer 
S. aureus 
SA4Ag129 
P2 ready 
2021 
Antimicrobial 
Peptides 
52%+ 
£16m/£104m 
£135m 
 
 
 
Roche 
P. aeruginosa 
POL7080130 
P2 ongoing 
2022 
 
Novacta Biosystems 
C. difficile 
NVB302131 
P1 ongoing 
2022 
 
Adenium 
S. aureus 
AP-13864 
Pre-P1 
2023 
 
Adenium 
UTI 
AP-13964 
Pre-P1 
2023 
 
Adenium 
C. difficile 
AP-11464 
Pre-P1 
2023 
Other Peptides 
- 
- 
£604m 
 
 
 
- 
Gram-ve and Gram+ve 
- 
Preclinical 
2027 
The A2A portfolio contains 25 projects representing 8 alternative approaches from preclinical to Phase III 
studies at 18 companies from 6 countries. The probability of registration for a single project is estimated by 
multiplying the probabilities of success through each stage of development from its current position to 
successful registration. The probability of registration of a product from an approach is estimated by summing 
the individual project probabilities. An approach with a probability of registration greater than or equal to 100% 
suggests that if adequate funding and expertise is applied across the projects, then successful registration is 
anticipated from that category. The risk-adjusted cost of each project was estimated by applying standard project 
risks at each stage to the standard costs for each phase of development. The risk-adjusted cost for the approach 
was estimated by summing the individual project risk-adjusted costs. The cost per approach assumes that 
companies have the funds for the current phase of the project but have to justify the need for additional funds for 
further product development. The pipeline investment is an estimate of the funding required to enable new 
project activity to expand those approaches with insufficient activity to adequately test the concept of the 
approach at Phase II. The current phase of the projects, and if successful, the earliest date that registration can be 
  
Revised Lancet ID Manuscript 2 November 2015 15 of 23 
anticipated using standard metrics is shown. The group note that funding of ~£160 m into these projects has 
been secured during the last 12 months.13, 26, 122, 125 
 
Table 4: Estimate of the project pipeline cost for Host Defense and Antibiofilm peptides 
Phase 
Preclinical 
Phase I 
Phase II 
Phase III 
Registration 
Total 
Stage probability of success 
23% 
45% 
47% 
71% 
90% 
 
Number of projects 
34 
8 
4 
2 
1 
 
Cost of Phase £m 
12.5 
6 
10 
45 
1.3 
 
Portfolio cost £m 
425 
48 
40 
90 
1.3 
£604 
The calculation used to estimate the costs of funding a relatively new alternative approach to provide sufficient 
number of preclinical projects to survive standard rates of attrition and to have a reasonable chance of product 
registration is shown.  
 
 
  
Revised Lancet ID Manuscript 2 November 2015 16 of 23 
References 
1. Payne, DJ, Gwynn, MN, Holmes, DJ, Pompliano, DL. Drugs for bad bugs: confronting the challenges of 
antibacterial discovery Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2007; 6(1): 29-40 
2. Tommasi, R, Brown, DG, Walkup, HK, Manchester, JI, Miller, AA. ESKAPEing the labyrinth of antibacterial 
discovery. Nature Reviews Drug Discovery. Published online 3 July 2015; doi:10.1038/nrd4572 
3. Gill, E, Franco, OL, Hancock, REW. Antibiotic Adjuvants: Diverse Strategies for Controlling Drug-Resistant 
Pathogens. Chem Biol Drug Des 2015; 85: 56–78 
4. Palliyil, C, Downham, I, Broadbent, K et al. High-Sensitivity Monoclonal Antibodies Specific for Homoserine 
Lactones Protect Mice from Lethal Pseudomonas aeruginosa Infections. Applied and Environmental 
Microbiology 2014; 80(2): 462-4691 
5. Starkey, M, Lepine, F, Maura, D et al. Identification of anti-virulence compounds that disrupt quorum-sensing 
regulated acute and persistent pathogenicity. PLoS Pathog. 2014; 10(8):e1004321  
6. Hua, L, Hilliard, JJ, Shi, Y et al. Assessment of an Anti-Alpha-Toxin Monoclonal Antibody for Prevention and 
Treatment of Staphylococcus aureus-Induced Pneumonia. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 2014; 58(2): 1108-
1117 
7. Lu, Q, Rouby, J-J, Laterre, PF et al. Pharmacokinetics and safety of panobacumab: specific adjunctive 
immunotherapy in critical patients with nosocomial Pseudomonas aeruginosa O11 pneumonia. J Antimicrob 
Chemother 2011; 66: 1110–1116 
8. Secher, T, Fas, S, Fauconnier, L et al. The Anti-Pseudomonas aeruginosa Antibody Panobacumab Is 
Efficacious on Acute Pneumonia in Neutropenic Mice and Has Additive Effects with Meropenem. 2013; PLOS 
ONE 8(9): e73396. 
9. DiGiandomenico, A, Keller, AE, Gao, C et al. A multifunctional bispecific antibody protects against 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Science Translational Medicine 2014; 6(262): 262ra155 
10. www.arsanis.com 
11. Szijártó, V, Guachalla, LM, Visram, ZC, Hartl, K, Varga, C, Mirkina, I, Zmajkovic, J, Badarau, A, Zauner, 
G, Pleban, C, Magyarics, Z, Nagy, E, Nagy, G. Bactericidal monoclonal antibodies specific to the 
lipopolysaccharide O antigen from multidrug-resistant Escherichia coli clone ST131-O25b:H4 elicit protection in 
mice. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2015; 59(6):3109-16. 
12. http://www.bellushealth.com/English/projects/Shigamab-for-sHUS/default.aspx 
13. http://www.xbiotech.com/clinical/mrsa.html 
14. Guidelines for the evaluation of probiotics in food. Report of a Joint FAO/WHO Working Group on Drafting 
Guidelines for the Evaluation of Probiotics in Food; Ontario, Canada. April 30 - May 1, 2002 
15. Villena, J, Kitazawa, H. Modulation of Intestinal TLR4-Inflammatory Signaling Pathways by Probiotic 
Microorganisms: Lessons Learned from Lactobacillus jensenii TL2937. Front Immunol. 2013; 4: 512 
16. Kotzampassi, K, Giamarellos-Bourboulisb. EJ. Probiotics for infectious diseases: more drugs, less dietary 
supplementation. International Journal of Antimicrobial Agents 2012; 40: 288– 296 
17. Goldenberg, JZ, Ma, SSY, Saxton, JD. et al. Probiotics for the prevention of Clostridium difficile associated 
diarrhea in adults and children (Review). The Cochrane Library 2013, Issue 5. 
18. Bo, L, Li, J, Tao, T et al. Probiotics for preventing ventilator-associated pneumonia (Review) The Cochrane 
Library 2014, Issue 10. 
19. Schuch, R, Lee, HM, Schneider, BC et al. Combination therapy with lysin cf-301 and antibiotic is superior to 
antibiotic alone for treating MRS-induced murine bacteremia. J. Infect. Diseases. 2013; 209(9): 1469-1478 
  
Revised Lancet ID Manuscript 2 November 2015 17 of 23 
20. Yang, H, Yu, J, Wei, H. Engineered bacteriophage lysins as novel anti-infectives. Frontiers in Microbiology 
2014; 5 Article 542 
21. Briers, Y, Walmagh, M, Puyenbroeck, VV et al. Engineered Endolysin-Based “Artilysins” To Combat 
Multidrug-Resistant Gram-Negative Pathogens. mbio.asm.org 2014; 5(4) e01379-14 
22. Lai, MJ, Lin, NT, Hu, A et al. Antibacterial activity of Acinetobacter baumannii phage ϕAB2 endolysin 
(LysAB2) against both gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2011; 90(2): 529-
539 
23. Pastagia, M, Schuch, R, Fischetti, VA, Huang, D. Lysins: the arrival of pathogen-directed anti-infectives. J. 
Med Microbiol. 2013; 2(10): 1506-1516 
24. Lood, R, Winer, BY, Pelzek AJ et al. , Novel phage lysin capable of killing the multidrug resistant Gram-
negative bacterium Acinetobacter baumannii in a mouse bacteremia model. Antimicrob Agents Chemo. 2015; 
Published ahead of print AAC.04641-14 
25. Schuch, R, Lee, HM, Schneider, BC. Combination Therapy With Lysin CF-301 and Antibiotic Is Superior to 
Antibiotic Alone for Treating Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus aureus–Induced Murine Bacteremia. J Infect 
Dis. 2013; (9): 1469-78. 
26. www.contrafect.com 
27. Jun, SY, Jung, GM, Yoon, SJ et al Preclinical Safety Evaluation of Intravenously Administered SAL200 
Containing the Recombinant Phage Endolysin SAL-1 as a Pharmaceutical Ingredient. Antimicrobial Agents and 
Chemotherapy 2014; 58(4) 2084-2088 
28. Abedon, ST, Kuhl SJ, Blasdel, BG, Kutter, ME. “Phage Treatment of Human Infections" in Bacteriophage. 
2011; 1(2):66-85 
29. Smith, W, Huggins, MB. Successful Treatment of Experimental Escherichia coli Infections in Mice Using 
Phage: its General Superiority over Antibiotics. Journal of General Microbiology 1982; 128: 307-318 
30. Smith, W, Huggins, MB. Effectiveness of phages in treating experimental Escherichia coli diarrhoea in calves, 
piglets and lambs. J Gen Microbiology 1983; 129: 2659-2675 
31. Morgan, AD, Maclean, RC, Buckling A. Effects of antagonistic coevolution on parasite-mediated host 
coexistence. J. Evol. Biol. 2009; 2(2): 287–292 
32. Wright, A, Hawkins, CH, Anggard, EE, Harper, DR. A controlled clinical trial of a therapeutic bacteriophage 
preparation in chronic otitis due to antibiotic-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa; a preliminary report of efficacy. 
Clinical Otolaryngology 2009; 34: 349–357 
33. Fairchild, H. SASP gene delivery: a novel antibacterial approach. Drug News Perspect. 2009; 22(4): 197-203. 
34. http://www.phicotx.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2014/12/F1550.pdf.29. 
35. http://www.phicotx.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2014/12/F1548.pdf. 
36. Lu, TK, Collins. JJ. Dispersing biofilms with engineered enzymatic bacteriophage. PNAS 2007; 104: 11197-
11202 
37. Hancock, REW, Nijnik, A, Philpott, DJ. Modulating immunity as a therapy for bacterial infections. Nature 
Rev. Microbiol. 2012; 10: 243-254 
38. Raqib, R, Sarker, P, Bergman, P et al. Improved outcome in shigellosis associated with butyrate induction of 
an endogenous peptide antibiotic. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2006; 103(24): 9178-9183 
39. Sarker, P, Mily, A, Al Mamun, A et al. Ciprofloxacin Affects Host Cells by Suppressing Expression of the 
Endogenous Antimicrobial Peptides Cathelicidins and Beta-Defensin-3 in Colon Epithelia. 2014; Antibiotics 3(3): 
353-374 
  
Revised Lancet ID Manuscript 2 November 2015 18 of 23 
40. Bergman, P, Norlin, A-C, Hansen, S et al. Vitamin D3 supplementation in patients with frequent respiratory 
tract infections: a randomised and double-blind intervention study. BMJ Open 2012; 2:e001663. 
41. Kulkarni, NN, Yi, Z, Huehnken, C, Agerberth, B, Gudmundsson, GH. Phenylbutyrate induces cathelicidin 
expression via the vitamin D receptor: Linkage to inflammatory and growth factor cytokines pathways. Molecular 
immunology 2015; 63(2): 530-539 
42. Mily, A, Rekha, RS, Kamal, SM, et al. Oral intake of phenylbutyrate with or without vitamin D3 upregulates 
the cathelicidin LL-37 in human macrophages: a dose finding study for treatment of tuberculosis. BMC pulmonary 
medicine 2013; 13(1): 23 
43. Del-Rio-Navarro, BE, Espinosa-Rosales, FJ, Flenady, V, Sienra-Monge, JJL. Immunostimulants for 
preventing respiratory tract infection in children (Review). Cochrane Reviews 2006; 7: 629–717 
44. Duggan, JM, You, D, Cleaver, JO, Larson, DT, Garza, RJ, Guzmán Pruneda, FA, Tuvim, MJ, Zhang, J, 
Dickey, BF, Evans, SE. Synergistic interactions of TLR2/6 and TLR9 induce a high level of resistance to lung 
infection in mice. J Immunol. 2011; 186(10): 5916–5926 
45. BenMohamed, F, Medina, M, Wu, Y-Z, Maschalidi, S, Jouvion, G, et al. Toll-Like Receptor 9 Deficiency 
Protects Mice against Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Lung Infection. PLoS ONE 2014; 9(3): e90466 
46. Hampton, LM, Farley, MM, Schaffner, W et al. Prevention of antibiotic-nonsusceptible Streptococcus 
pneumoniae with conjugate vaccines. J. Infect. Dis. 2012; 205: 401–411 
47. Centers for Diseases Control. Progress toward eliminating Haemophilus influenzae type b disease among 
infants and children – United States, 1987–97. MMWR 1998; 47: 993–8 
48. Palmu, AA, Jokinen, J, Nieminen, H et al. Effect of pneumococcal Haemophilus influenzae protein D 
conjugate vaccine (PHiD-CV10) on outpatient antimicrobial purchases: a double-blind, cluster randomised phase 
3—4 trial. Lancet Infect. Dis. 2014; 14: 205-212 
49. MRC Review of Vaccines Research, 2014: www.mrc.ac.uk/documents/doc/mrc-review-of-vaccines-research-
2014/ 
50. Bak, H, Rathkjen, P. Reduced use of antimicrobials after vaccination of pigs against porcine proliferative 
enteropathy in a Danish SPF herd. Acta Vet. Scand. 2009; 51: 1 
51. Matthews, L, Reeve, R, Gally DL et al. Predicting the public health benefit of vaccinating cattle against 
Escherichia coli O157. PNAS. 2013; 110: 16265-16270 
52. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Antibiotic Resistance Threats in the United States, 2013. 
http://www.cdc.gov/drugresistance/threat-report-2013/. 
53. Aguiar, SI, Serrano, I, Pinto, FR et al. Changes in Streptococcus pneumoniae serotypes causing invasive 
disease with non-universal vaccination coverage of the seven-valent conjugate vaccine. Clin Microbiol Infect. 
2008; 14(9): 835-43 
54. Jones, D. Reverse vaccinology on the cusp. Nature Reviews Drug Discovery. 2012; 11: 175-176 
55. von Mentzer, A, Connor, TR, Wieler, LH et al. Identification of enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli (ETEC) 
clades with long-term global distribution. Nature Genetics. 2014; 46: 1321-1326 
56. Moriel, DG, Bertoldi, I, Spagnuolo, A et al. Identification of protective and broadly conserved vaccine antigens 
from the genome of extraintestinal pathogenic Escherichia coli. PNAS. 2010; 107: 9072-9077 
57. Cozzi, R, Scarselli, M, Ferlenghi, I. Structural vaccinology: a three-dimensional view for vaccine 
development. Curr. Top. Med. Chem. 2013; 13: 2629-37 
58. Nuccitelli, A, Cozz,i R, Gourlay, LJ et al. Structure-based approach to rationally design a chimeric protein for 
an effective vaccine against Group B Streptococcus infections. PNAS. 2011; 108: 10278-10283 
59. 
NIH 
News. 
2014. 
NIH 
Awards 
Seven 
New 
Vaccine 
Adjuvant 
Discovery 
Contracts.http://www.niaid.nih.gov/news/newsreleases/2014/Pages/vaccineadjuvantawards.aspx. 
  
Revised Lancet ID Manuscript 2 November 2015 19 of 23 
60. DiazGranados, CA, Dunning, AJ, Kimmel, M et al. Efficacy of high-dose versus standard-dose Influenza 
vaccine in older adults. N Engl J Med 2014; 371: 635-645 
61. Fjell, CD, Hiss,JA, Hancock, REW, Schneider, G. Designing antimicrobial peptides: Form follows function. 
Nature Rev. Drug Discov. 2012; 11: 37-51 
 
62. Hilchie, AL, Wuerth, K, Hancock, REW. Immune modulation by multifaceted cationic host defense 
(antimicrobial) peptides. Nature Chem. Biol. 2013; 9: 761-768  
63. Zhang, Y, Teng, D, Mao, R, et al. High expression of a plectasin-derived peptide NZ2114 in Pichia pastoris 
and its pharmacodynamics, postantibiotic and synergy against Staphylococcus aureus. Appl Microbiol 
Biotechnol. 2014; 98(2): 681-94 
64. www.adeniumbiotech.com 
65. Walter, JFM, Velden, WJ, van Iersel, TM et al. Safety and tolerability of the antimicrobial peptide human 
lactoferrin 1-11 (hLF1-11). BMC Med 2009; 7: 44 
66. Srinivas, N, Jetter, P, Ueberbacher, BJ et al. Peptidomimetic Antibiotics Target Outer-Membrane Biogenesis 
in Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Science 2010; 327: 1010-1013 
67. Sandiford, SK. Perspectives on lantibiotic discovery - where have we failed and what improvements are 
required? Expert Opin Drug Discov. 2015; 19:1-6 
68. Papareddy P, Kasetty G, Kalle, M, Bhongir, RK, Mörgelin, M, Schmidtchen, A, Malmsten, M.  NLF20: an 
antimicrobial peptide with therapeutic potential against invasive Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection. J Antimicrob 
Chemother. 2015 [Epub ahead of print] 
69. Lin, L, Nonejuie, P, Munguia, J, Hollands, A, Olson, J, Dam, Q, Kumaraswamy, M, Rivera, H Jr4, Corriden, 
R, Rohde, M, Hensler, ME, Burkart, MD, Pogliano, J, Sakoulas, G, Nizet, V. Azithromycin Synergizes with 
Cationic Antimicrobial Peptides to Exert Bactericidal and Therapeutic Activity Against Highly Multidrug-
Resistant Gram-Negative Bacterial Pathogens. EBioMedicine. 2015; 10;2(7):690-8 
70.  Soren, O, Brinch, KS, Patel, D, Liu, Y, Liu, A, Coates, A, Hu, Y. Antimicrobial Peptide Novicidin Synergizes 
with Rifampin, Ceftriaxone, and Ceftazidime against Antibiotic-Resistant Enterobacteriaceae In Vitro. 
Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2015; 59(10):6233-40 
71. Krizsan, A, Prahl, C, Goldbach, T, Knappe, D, Hoffmann, R. Short Proline-Rich Antimicrobial Peptides 
Inhibit Either the Bacterial 70S Ribosome or the Assembly of its Large 50S Subunit. Chembiochem. 2015; 
16(16):2304-8 
72. Le, CF, Yusof, MY, Hassan, MA, Lee, VS, Isa, DM, Sekaran, SD1. In vivo efficacy and molecular docking 
of designed peptide that exhibits potent antipneumococcal activity and synergises in combination with penicillin. 
Sci Rep. 2015; 9(5):11886. doi: 10.1038/srep11886. 
73. Scott, MG, Dullaghan, E, Mookherjee, N et al. (2007). An anti-infective peptide that selectively modulates 
the innate immune response. Nature Biotechnology 2007; 25(4): 465-472 
74, Neill DR, Coward WR, Gritzfeld JF, Richards L, Garcia-Garcia FJ, Dotor J, Gordon SB, Kadioglu A. Density 
and duration of pneumococcal carriage is maintained by transforming growth factor β1 and T regulatory cells. 
Am J Respir Critare Med. 2014; 189(10):1250-1259 
75. Habets MGJL, Brockhurst. MA. Therapeutic antimicrobial peptides may compromise natural immunity. Biol. 
Lett. (2012) 8, 416–418 
76. Mansour, S, de la Fuente-Núñez, C, Hancock, REW. Peptide IDR-1018: modulating the immune system and 
targeting bacterial biofilms to treat antibiotic-resistant bacterial infections. J. Pept. Res. 2014; PMID: 25358509 
77. Fuente-Núñez, C, Reffuveille, F, Haney, EF et al. Broad-spectrum anti-biofilm peptide that targets a cellular 
stress response. PLoS Pathogens 2014; 10(5): e1004152. 
  
Revised Lancet ID Manuscript 2 November 2015 20 of 23 
78. Fuente-Núñez, CF, Reffuveille, L, Fernández, Hancock, REW. Bacterial biofilm development as a 
multicellular adaptation: Antibiotic resistance and new therapeutic strategies. Curr. Opinion Microbiol. 2013; 
16:580–589 
 
79. Teo, I, Toms, SM, Marteyn, B et al. Preventing acute gut wall damage in infectious diarrhoeas with 
glycosylated dendrimers. EMBO Molecular Medicine 2012; 4: 866–881 
 
80. Seoka, J, Warren, HS, Cuencac, AG et al. Comparison of the transcriptional landscapes between human and 
mouse tissues. PNAS 2014; 111(48): 17224–17229 
81. Teleman, D, Chung, C-S, Ayala, A et al. AB103, a CD28 antagonist peptide: a new therapeutic agent in a 
model of severe sepsis. Crit Care. 2011; 15(Suppl 3): P35. 
82. Brown, KL, Cosseau, C, Gardy, JL, Hancock, REW. Complexities of targeting innate immunity to treat 
infection. TRENDS in Immunology 2007; 28(6) doi:10.1016/j.it.2007.04.005 
83. Shankar, R, He, LK, Szilagy, A et al. A novel antibacterial gene transfer treatment for multidrug-resistant 
Acinetobacter baumannii-induced burn sepsis. J Burn Care Res. 2007; 28(1): 6-12 
84. Williams, JJ, Hergenrother, PJ. Artificial activation of toxin-antitoxin systems as an antibacterial strategy. 
Trends Microbiol. 2012; 20(6): 291-8 
85. Hale, L, Lazos, O, Haines, A, Thomas, C. An efficient stress-free strategy to displace stable bacterial 
plasmids. Biotechniques 2010; 48(3): 223-228 
86. Deresinski, S. Bacteriophage therapy: exploiting smaller fleas. Clin Infect Dis. 2009; 48(8): 1096-1101 
87. RJ Citorik, RJ, Mimee, M, Lu, K. Sequence-specific antimicrobials using efficiently delivered RNA-guided 
nucleases. Nature Biotechnology 2014; 32(11): 1141-1145 
88. Bikard, D, Euler, SW, Jiang, W et al. Exploiting CRISPR-Cas nucleases to produce sequence-specific 
antimicrobials Nature Biotechnology 2014; 32(11): 1146-1150 
89. McArthur, M, Bibb, MJ. Manipulating and understanding antibiotic production in Streptomyces coelicolor 
A3(2) with decoy oligonucleotides Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008; 105(3): 1020-5 
90. Henry, BD, Neill, D, Becker, KA et al. Engineered liposomes sequester bacterial exotoxins and protect from 
severe invasive infections in mice. Nat Biotechnol. 2015; 33(1): 81-8 
91. Stiefel, U, Pultz, NJ, Harmoinen, J et al. Oral administration of beta-lactamase preserves colonization 
resistance of Piperacillin-treated mice. Journal of Infectious Diseases 2003; 188: 1605–1609 
92. Stiefel, U, Harmoinen, J, Koski, P et al. Orally administered recombinant metallo-beta -lactamase preserves 
colonization resistance of Piperacillin-Tazobactam-treated mice Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 2005; 49(12): 
5190-5191 
93. Harmoinen, J, Mentula, SM, Heikkilä, M et al. Beta-lactamase prevents Ampicillin-induced selective 
pressure on the gut microbiota: a novel approach to reducing antimicrobial resistance. Antimicrob. Agents 
Chemother. 2004; 48(1): 75-79 
94. Tarkkanen, AM, Heinonen, T, Jogi, R et al. P1A Recombinant beta-lactamase prevents emergence of 
antimicrobial resistance in gut microflora of healthy subjects during intravenous administration of Ampicillin. 
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 2009; 53(6): 2455–2462 
95. Luo, T, Spellberg, B, Gebremariam, T et al. Combination therapy with iron chelation and vancomycin in 
treating murine staphylococcemia. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 2014; 33: 845–851 
96. Moreau-Marquis, A, O’Toole, GA, Stanton, BA. Tobramycin and FDA-approved iron chelators eliminate 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilms on cystic fibrosis cells. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2009; 41: 305–313 
  
Revised Lancet ID Manuscript 2 November 2015 21 of 23 
97. Li, N, Xu, Y, Xia, Q et al. Simplified captopril analogues as NDM-1 inhibitors. BMCL 2014; 24: 386-389 
98. Aoki, N, Ishii, Y, Tateda, K et al. Efficacy of Calcium-EDTA as an Inhibitor for Metallo-beta-lactamase in a 
mouse model of Pseudomonas aeruginosa pneumonia. Anti. Micro.Agents. Chemother. 2010; 54(11): 4582–
4588 
99. Yoshizumi, A, Ishii, Y, Livermore, DM et al. Efficacies of calcium–EDTA in combination with imipenem in 
a murine model of sepsis caused by Escherichia coli with NDM-1 b-lactamase. J Infect Chemother 2013; 19: 
992–995 
100. www.altermune.com 
 
101. Wells, TJ, Whitters, D, Sevastsyanovich, YR et al. (2014) Increased severity of respiratory infections 
associated with elevated anti-LPS IgG2 which inhibits serum bactericidal killing. J. Exp. Med. 2014; 211(9): 
1893-19042 
102. Bangert, M, Bricio-Moreno, L, Gore, S et al. P4-mediated antibody therapy in an acute model of invasive 
pneumococcal disease. The Journal of Infectious Diseases 2012; 205:1399–1407 
103. Morton, B, Pennington, SH, Gordon, SB. Immunomodulatory adjuvant therapy in severe community 
acquired pneumonia. Expert Review of Respiratory Medicine 2014; 8(5): 587-596  
104. Fox, JL. Antimicrobial peptides stage a comeback. Nature Biotechnology 31; 379–382 
105. Ladhani, SN, Campbell, H, Parikh, SR, Saliba, V, Borrow, R, Ramsay, M. The introduction of the 
meningococcal B (MenB) vaccine (Bexsero®) into the national infant immunisation programme - New challenges 
for public health. J Infect. 2015; pii: S0163-4453(15)00313-8.  
106. Islam, D, Lombardini, E, Ruamsap, N, Imerbsin, R, Khantapura, P, Teo, I, Neesanant, P, Gonwong, S, 
Yongvanitchit, K, Swierczewski, BE,  Mason, CJ, Shaunak, S. Controlling the cytokine storm in severe bacterial 
diarrhea with an oral TLR4 antagonist. Immunology Accepted Article, 2015. doi: 10.1111/imm.12549 
107. Gordon, YJ, Romanowski, EG. A Review of Antimicrobial Peptides and Their Therapeutic Potential as Anti-
Infective Drugs. Curr Eye Res. 2005; 30(7): 505–515 
108. References were identified through searches of PubMed for articles to 27 February 2015, by use of terms 
“pharmacokinetic OR safety” with “human OR mouse OR rat” in combination with “host defense peptide”; 
Antibiofilm peptide”; “lantibiotic”; bacteriophage”; “lysin” and in the case of antimicrobial peptides 
“antimicrobial peptide” with “pharmacokinetic OR safety” and “E. coli OR P. aeruginosa OR C. difficile OR S. 
aureus” followed by inspection of the 238 papers listed 
109. D. Andes, D, Craig, W, Nielsen, LA, Kristensen, HH. In vivo pharmacodynamic characterization of a novel 
plectasin antibiotic, NZ2114, in a murine infection model. Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy 2009; 53(7); 
3003–3009  
110. Sidelmann Brinch, K, Sandberg, A, Baudoux, P et al. Plectasin shows intracellular activity against 
Staphylococcus aureus in human THP-1 monocytes and in a mouse peritonitis model. Antimicrobial Agents and 
Chemotherapy 2009; 53(11): 4801–4808 
111. Pouillot, F, Chomton, M, Blois, H et al. Efficacy of bacteriophage therapy in experimental sepsis and 
meningitis caused by a clone O25b:H4-ST131 Escherichia coli strain producing CTX-M-15. Antimicrobial 
Agents and Chemotherapy 2012; 56(7) 3568–3575 
112. Lepak AJ1, Marchillo K2, Craig WA1, Andes DR In Vivo Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics of the 
Lantibiotic NAI-107 in a Neutropenic Murine Thigh Infection Model Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2015 
Feb;59(2):1258-64 
113. Ghobrial O1, Derendorf H, Hillman JD Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic evaluation of the lantibiotic 
MU1140 J Pharm Sci. 2010 May;99(5):2521-8 
  
Revised Lancet ID Manuscript 2 November 2015 22 of 23 
114. Bruttin A, Brussow H. Human Volunteers Receiving Escherichia coli Phage T4 Orally: a Safety Test of 
Phage Therapy. Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy 2005; 49(7) 2874–2878 
115. Holfeld, L, Herth, N, Singer, D, Hoffmann, R, Knappe, D. Immunogenicity and pharmacokinetics of short, 
proline-rich antimicrobial peptides. Future Med Chem. 2015; 7(12):1581-96 
116. Docobo-Pérez, F, Drusano, GL, Johnson, A, Goodwin, J, Whalley, S, Ramos-Martín, V, Ballestero-Tellez, 
M, Rodriguez-Martinez, JM, Conejo, MC, van Guilder, M, Rodríguez-Baño, J, Pascual, A, Hope, WW. 
Pharmacodynamics of Fosfomycin: Insights into Clinical Use for Antimicrobial Resistance. Antimicrob Agents 
Chemother. 2015;59(9):5602-10 
117. Rex, JH, Goldberger, M, Eisenstein, BI, Harney, C. The evolution of the regulatory framework for 
antibacterial agents. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. (2014); 1323: 11–21 
118. DiMasi, JA, Feldman, L, Seckler, A, Wilson A. Trends in risks associated with new drug development: 
success rates for investigational drugs. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2010; 87(3): 272-277 
 
119. Hernandez, LD, Racine, F, Xiao, L, DiNunzio, E, Hairston, N, Sheth, PR, Murgolo, NJ, Therien, AG. Broad 
coverage of genetically diverse strains of Clostridium difficile by actoxumab and bezlotoxumab predicted by in 
vitro neutralization and epitope modeling. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2015; 59(2):1052-60.   
120. Morrison, C. Antibacterial antibodies gain traction. Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 2015; 14: 737-738.   
121. http://www.aridispharma.com/ 
122. http://www.serestherapeutics.com/pipeline/ser-109 
123. http://www.rebiotix.com/ 
124. Gerding, DN, Meyer, T, Lee, C, Cohen, SH, Murthy, UK, Poirier, A, Van Schooneveld, TC, Pardi, DS, 
Ramos, A, Barron, MA, Chen, H, Villano, S. Administration of spores of nontoxigenic Clostridium difficile strain 
M3 for prevention of recurrent C. difficile infection: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2015; 313(17):1719-27 
125. http://www.ampliphibio.com/ 
126. http://www.cdiffense.org/ 
127. Westritschnig, K, Hochreiter, R, Wallner, G, Firbas, C, Schwameis, M, Jilma, B. A randomized, placebo-
controlled phase I study assessing the safety and immunogenicity of a Pseudomonas aeruginosa hybrid outer 
membrane protein OprF/I vaccine (IC43) in healthy volunteers. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2014; 10(1):170-83. 
128. http://www.valneva.com/ 
129. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02388165 
130. http://www.polyphor.com/products/pol7080 
131. http://www.novactabio.com/ 
132. Paul, SM, Mytelka, DS, Dunwiddie, CT, et al. How to improve R&D productivity: the pharmaceutical 
industry's grand challenge. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2010; 9(3): 203-14 
133. Sertkaya, A, Eyraud, E, Birkenbach, A et al. Analytical Framework for Examining the Value of Antibacterial 
Products. (http://aspe.hhs.gov/sp/reports/2014/antibacterials/rpt_antibacterials.cfm) 
134.  Scudiero, O, Nigro, E, Cantisani, M, Colavita, I, Leone, M, Mercurio, FA, Galdiero, M, Pessi, A, Daniele, 
A, Salvatore, F, Galdiero, S. Design and activity of a cyclic mini-β-defensin analog: a novel antimicrobial tool. 
Int J Nanomedicine. 2015; 10:6523-39 
135. Pires, J, Siriwardena, TN, Stach, M, Tinguely, R, Kasraian, S, Luzzaro, F, Leib, SL, Darbre, T, Reymond, 
JL, Endimiani, A. In Vitro Activity of a Novel Antimicrobial Peptide Dendrimer (G3KL) Against Multidrug-
  
Revised Lancet ID Manuscript 2 November 2015 23 of 23 
Resistant Acinetobacter baumannii and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2015 Oct 12. 
pii: AAC.01853-15. [Epub ahead of print] 
136. http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2014/206829lbl.pdf 
137. Zhanel, GG, Chung, P, Adam, H et al. Ceftolozane/tazobactam: a novel cephalosporin/β-lactamase inhibitor 
combination with activity against multidrug-resistant gram-negative bacilli. Drugs. 2014; 74(1): 31-51 
138. Banerjee, R, Teng, CB, Cunningham, SA, Ihde, SM, Steckelberg, JM, Moriarty, JP, Shah, ND, Mandrekar, 
JN, Patel, R. Randomized Trial of Rapid Multiplex Polymerase Chain Reaction–Based Blood Culture 
Identification and Susceptibility Testing Clinical Infectious Diseases® 2015; 61(7):1071–80 
139. 
http://www.ema.europa.eu/ema/index.jsp?curl=pages/news_and_events/events/2015/05/event_detail_001155.js
p&mid=WC0b01ac058004d5c3#details) 
140. http://www.epibiome.com/ 
141. Report to the president on combating antibiotic resistance.  
 
https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/microsites/ostp/PCAST/pcast_carb_report_sept2014.pdf 
142. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Large_Hadron_Collider 
143. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_Space_Station 
 
 
